The Hidden Way Across the Threshold (John C. Street, 1887)
==========================================================
John C. Street — The Hidden Way Across the Threshold; or, The Mystery Which Hath Been Hidden for Ages and from Generations (1887), public domain. A classic American work of esoteric Christianity and spiritual initiation; the 1887 first edition. Scan via Internet Archive (Google Books).

THB  HIDDBN  WAY  ACROSS  THB  THRHHOLD.


THE    COUNT    A.    de    G^

KIBROPHANT  OF  THE  OU>BR

S.  2.  2.

Italian  bjr  birth,  ^et  with  a  warm  love  for  the  whole  world]  whose  hand
is  always  open  to  the  poor  and  the  afflicted;  whose  generous,  true  heait
is  continually  pulsating  to  uplift  Ibe  world :

To  him  whose  tcndei  aSeclion  is  like  a  mother's  solicitude;  whose
brave,  strong  heart  is  like  a  father's  right  arm;  to  him  who  infuses  into
every  circle  a  child-like  purity  and  perfect  peacej  to  him  who  lives  ever
striving  to  show  mankind  the  way  to  triumph  in  death  as  in  life ;  to  him
who  touches  nothing  which  he  does  not  adnm;  to  him  whose  noble  con-
tour of  face  and  majesty  of  form  are  only  excelled  by  the  exalted,  lovmg
Soul  within, — this  book  is  dedicated  and  affectionately  inscribed,  as  a  feeble
testimonial  of  sincere  gratitude  for  bis  great  patience  and  deep  and  ten-
der sympathy  bestowed  on  his  dutiful  student  through  the  years  of  our
wanderings.

ThB   AtTTHOK.


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  THIRD   EDITION.


This  book  b  a  compilation  containing  thoughts  from  manyminds,
from  Intelligences  in  the  form  and  out  of  it,  from  Souls  embodied  and
disembodied.  These  thoughts  have  been  gathered,  as  a  harvester
gamers  a  few  sheaves  that  shall  yield  some  seed  for  planting  when
the  seed-time  is  at  hand.

In  this  age  of  error  and  of  indifference,  intellect  and  wealth  have
been  deified,  until,  in  the  eagerness  and  keenness  of  their  pursuit,  men
and  women  turn  their  own  vital  energies  back  upon  themselves,  and
all  that  goes  to  make  life  truly  enjoyable  is  congealed.  This  b  the
age  of  intensity,  while  self-interest  and  vain-glory,  called  civilization,
in  the  abstract  b  the  guiding  star.  Humanity  seems  to  have  for-
gotten that  there  are  two  educations  —  one  of  the  mind,  and  the
other  of  far  greater  importance  —  the  education  of  the  soul.

Some  warm  and  highly  esteemed  friends,  who  deemed  that  the
experience  of  the  writer  as  a  student  and  medium  of  occult  forces,
•and  his  union  and  intercourse  with  Adepts  of  many  lands,  and  with
the  Dervishes  and  Lamas  of  the  East,  might  enable  him  to  fumbh
some  valuable  information  concerning  the  mysteries  of  the  occult
world,  have  eamestiy  solicited  him  to  prepare  tiiese  pages  for  publi'
cation.

With  the  full  assurance  from  the  Angel  world  that  many  men  and
women  and  whole  legions  of  Angels  will  appreciate  the  effort,  he
pressed  on,  and  in  a  few  short  weeks  the  first  edition  was  ex-
hausted.

The  many  expressions  of  gratitude  and  congratulations  from
entire  strangers  as  well  as  friends,  both  by  mail  and  in  personal  inter-
views, from  individuals  who  had  lost  their  hope  in  life,  since  disap-
pointment had  become  their  constant  companion,  and  who  found  the
teachings  common  to  Modern  Science  fail  utterly  when  the  heart  is
stricken  and  the  head  humbled  in  the  dust,  have  led  the  compiler  to
feel  that  another  edition  may  reach  other  sorrowing  hearts,  and  bring
them  hope  and  peace.

A  few  changes  in  the  two  concluding  chapters,  and  some  correc-


VI  INTRODUCTION.

tion  or  readjustment  of  sentences  has  been  made  since  the  first  edi-
tion was  issued.

The  Egyptians  worshipped  God  as  a  Motherhood  —  Divine  Love
—  under  the  name  of  Isis,  or  The  Female  Principle^  but  the  Mctk
Principle  was  by  no  means  ignored  in  Egyptian  Theosophy.

The  Hindus  held  that  the  Divine  Spirit  is  to  be  found  in  the  Male
Principle  only ;  that  the  Male  or  Occult  is  the  Divine  Principle.

Esoteric  Christianity  was  but  a  continuation  of  the  Esoteric  Egyp-
tian Theosophy  under  another  name.

It  was  the  Priests  of  Egypt  to  whom  Pythagoras  and  Plato  went
for  instruction.  This  book  is  based  upon  the  Pythagorean  system
and  the  principles  of  Esoteric  Christianity.  The  tenet  of  the  book  is
Pythagorean,  which  is  that  a  religion  is  only  true  which  ben0ts
humanity.  The  object  of  such  a  religious  system  is  the  love  of  all
humanity,  which  makes  it  a  special  blessing  to  the  poor,  the  down-
trodden, and  the  unhappy.  To  such  it  offers  continual  consolation ;
inspiring  them  with  infinite  courage,  it  demonstrates  that  all  truth,
all  love,  all  wisdom,  and  all  happiness  lies  within  their  own  being
through  the  Spirit.

Such  was  also  the  teaching  of  Christ,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  —  a
religion  not  for  a  few  philosophers  and  wise  men,  but  for  the  common
people.  "At  that  time,  Jesus  answered  and  said,  I  thank  thee,  O
Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes."  —
Matt.^  zi. :  25.

Feeling  that  there  is  so  much  room  for  books  of  higher  thought,
beyond  his  power  to  produce,  yet  having  the  promise  from  the  world
of  Spirit  Intelligence  of  a  directing  hand,  the  compiler  has  striven
to  collect  simple  thoughts  in  plain  words,  to  teach  the  reader  that
through  higher  thought  and  nobler  impulse  toward  the  highest  good,
Man  and  SpirU  in  this  life  are  entwined  in  one  grand,  eternal
progress.

We  are  writing  by  no  rush-light.  The  glow  that  guides  our  pen
gleams  down  from  a  higher  font  of  illumination,  —  that  of  Spirit  and
the  Divinity  which  stirs  within  us,  and  from  departed  Souls  now  in
Heaven,  that  points  out  an  eternity  hereafter;  thereby  we  have
striven  to  transcribe  from  the  folios  of  Truth  and  Love  the  tocsin  of
the  Soul  —  Line  upon  line.  Precept  upon  precept,  here  a  little

AND  THERE  A  LITTLE  OF  LoVE   AND   TrUTH    AND  WiSDOM,   which    will

bear  repetition  until  the  lesson  is  fully  learned,  that  all  may  turn
toward  the  vision  of  man's  highest  good.


INTRODUCTION.  vU

The  charge  of  Plagiarism  may  be  justly  brought  It  was  deemed
necessary  to  use  that  which  was  most  expressive  in  fewest  words,  and
desirable  to  present  that  which  seemed  relevant  to  the  subject,  from
whatever  source  obtained.

More  than  ten  years  have  elapsed  since  the  Compiler  began  to  col-
lect these  notes,  little  dreaming  that  they  would  appear  in  book  form*
Collecting  new  thoughts  and  ideas  during  his  travels  in  almost  every
part  of  the  world ;  rearranging  and  copying  during  long  sea  voyages,
the  names  of  the  original  authors  were  sometimes  lost,  and  quotation
marks  carelessly  omitted.  The  compiler,  in  his  zeal  of  research  and
want  of  knowledge  of  unwritten  law,  making  no  claim  of  original
ideas,  being  only  an  instrument  used  to  gather  sheaves  of  noble
thought  old  as  the  world  itself,  expressed  in  all  languages  for  the  com-
mon good,  gathered  out  these  Spiritual  Truths  which  give  life  while
the  letter  of  the  law  killeth.

We  have  written  from  out  the  Perpetual  Sea  of  Spirft,  and
from  the  Font  of  Light,  which  awakens  men's  Souls  to  freedom  of
thought  and  glorious  independence  of  a  mad,  conventional  world;
to  nobler  joy  and  perfect  peace,  which  comforts  God  has  made
for  us.

There  are  many  persons  who  have  become  convinced  that  there
is  a  higher,  truer,  inner  life,  and  who  desire  to  surround  themselves
with  such  conditions  as  are  most  favorable  for  its  attainment.  Many
thousands,  too,  offer  up  the  tenderest  emotions  of  the  heart  upon  the
altar  of  memory  to  the  dear  ones  who  have  journeyed  across  the
river  of  death.

For  these,  who  comprise  so  great  a  part  of  Divine  Humanity,  this
book  is  especially  written ;  also,  to  stimulate  and  help  the  great  mass
of  seekers  for  light  to  a  fuller  understanding  of  Right  Thought,
Right  Speech,  and  Right  Action.

Mental  illumination  and  knowledge  of  the  highest  truths  necessary
in  order  to  be  reborn  of  Spirit,  cannot  be  taught  as  children  learn  the
multiplication  table  or  men  study  the  various  external  sciences,  but
must  be  evolved  from  the  higher  impulses  of  the  heart  and  the  con-
cealed depths  of  our  inner  consciousness.  The  law  of  Will  or
Induction  through  man  has  a  far  higher  and  wider  range  of  action.

The  compiler  seeks  in  this  book  to  aid  the  student  to  explore  for
himself,  with  his  own  Will  and  Spiritual  development,  the  inner  realm
of  Spirit  Truth,  and  find  the  home  of  Mind  and  Sympathy  which  seems
to  extend  through  the  whole  domain  of  nature.

Thutk  can  never  he  a  forgery.    This  Work  is  presented  again  on  its


•  ••


Viii  INTRODUCTION.

own  merits,  containing  the  TVue  Essence  of  Mora!  and  Sfrfiitual
Truth  of  all  that  sacred  books  set  forth  as  a  guide  and  means  of  in-
struction for  man.

They  are  of  sufficient  importance  to  require  neither  explanation
nor  apology,  and  cannot  be  made  to  depend  on  any  claim  for  authop
ity,  or  circumstances  which  may  present  themselves  through  criticisms

based  on  ignorance  of  facts.

The  Author  was  not  ignorant  of  the  crucible  through  which  his

years  of  labor  must  pass  —  remembering  that  "Trees  which  bear

the  best  fruits  are  always  most  pelted  with  stones  "  —  but  was  ever

cheered  on  by  the  actualities  of  Spirit  Truth,  which,  in  the  order  of

the  economy  of  human  progress  and  Truth,  must  some  day  become

the  experience  and  joy  of  the  many  rather  than  the  few.

There  is  beyond  this  life  of  human  action  a  final  judgment,  where
man's  innermost  thoughts  and  acts  cannot  escape  the  Divine  scrutiny
of  Eternal  Justice ;  for  that  sublime  hour  all  true  men  are  waiting,
knowing  that  the  Spirit  of  Truth  will  triumph.

Having  regard  for  that  which  is  in  the  future,  the  Author  in  silence
and  patience  can' wait,  knowing  that  in  the  golden  age  soon  to  dawn,
the  voice  of  the  iSpirit  will  become  the  voice  of  the  People ;  for  Truth
is  perpetual,  and  in  her  sublime  grandeur  will  arise  in  triumph  over
every  antagonism.

With  a  gentle  directing  guidance  of  unseen  hands  prompting  him
onward  to  surmount  many  obstacles  through  months  of  weary  labor,
to  make  plain  the  most  accessible  pathways  for  mankind  to  climb  the
heights  of  Spirit  within  the  Temple  of  the  soul,  he  has  sought  to
place  in  simple  language,  the  truths  of  Love,  Harmony  and  Light,
within  the  possibilities  of  man's  own  Higher-Self."

"  Books  have  four  sorts  of  readers ;  sponges,  which  extract  all  with-
out any  distinguishment  as  to  quality;  hour-glasses,  which  receive
and  pour  it  out  as  fast ;  bags,  which  retain  only  the  dregs  of  the
spices  and  good,  letting  the  purer  wine  escape ;  and  sieves,  which
separate  and  sort  out  the  true  nuggets  of  pure  gold,  retaining  the
best  only."

He  who  gives  out  understandingly.  Teaches.  He  who  receives
with  comprehension,  Learns.  Therefore  if  a  man  can  communicate
himself  he  can  instruct,  but  not  alone  by  words.

Knowing  how  vast  are  the  fields  of  untrodden  worlds  and  revela-
tions yet  to  be  gleaned,  and  making  humble  confession  of  his  ineffi-
ciency to  cope  with  so  vast  a  subject,  the  writer  can  only  trust  to


INTRODUCTION.  IX

time  and  growth  to  unfold  the  great  mystery  of  life,  which  can  never
be  disclosed  in  a  single  life-time,  and  much  less  condensed  in  a  volume
which  lays  no  claim  to  great  literary  merit,  classic  style,  and  exacti-
tude of  method.  He  has  desired  to  introduce  such  thought  as  will  show
what  a  vast  amount  of  hidden  things  and  phenomena,  which  the
Spiritual  philosophy  has  scarcely  touched,  still  remains  to  be  ex-
plained ;  and  he  makes  this  effort  to  enlighten  those  who  are  familiar
with  the  Hidden  Ways  of  nature's  occult  forces,  and  to  point  out  the
most  accessible  pathways  to  hold  communion  with  the  Immortals.

Persuaded  by  numerous  calls  from  the  two  worlds,  prompted  by
large  experiences  of  wonderful  scenes  of  occult  character  witnessed
abroad,  to  place  this  effort  of  Truth  and  Love  against  the  selfish,  objec-
tive world  of  sense,  this  compilation  is  tossed  into  the  crucible  of
public  opinion,  confident  that  some  grains  of  pure  gold  will  be  gath-
ered up  and  become  current  coin  in  the  generations  to  come,  and  so
again  commit  these  precious  thoughts,  gleaned  from  both  Angeb  and
men,  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  world,  hoping  thereby  to  plant
Spiritual  Truth  and  a  seed  of  more  generous  Love  in  all  human
hearts.

J.  C.  Strxxt.
Boston,  Dkcembxr,  x888.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  I.

From  Night  to  Light — Love  the  Secret  of  Life — Andent  Templet^
Mexican  Religion  —  The  Pathway  to  Light — Gnosticism  —  The  Three
Impulses  ^Practical  Love  ^Ancient  Inspiration I


CHAPTER   IL

God  and  the  Divine  Image  —  The  Duality  of  God— Will  and  Lore^
The  Prodigal  Son  —  Harmony  with  the  Divine  Mind  —  A  Universal
Language  —  Union  of  Dual  Forces  —  Visions  of  God  —  The  Riddle  of
the  Sphinx  — The  Trinity  — Adonia


CHAPTER  IIL

Sac&sd  Symbols — The  Cross  of  Life  —  The  Solar  Prism  — The  Papal
Keys  —  The  Interlaced  Triangles — The  Serpent  —  The  Long  Face—
The  Heart  and  Feather— The  Winged  Globe  —  Ezekiel's  Wheels
The  2^odiac 44


CHAPTER   IV.

Man  and  the  Opportunities  of  His  Life.  —  Two  Great  Obstacles^
Astrology  —  Astral  Influence  —  Palmistry — The  Life  of  Eden  —  The
Hierophant's  Power — Adoration  and  Meditation  —  Modem  Justice—
Temperaments  in  Marriage —  Heredity  —  Unconscious  Well-doing .    •      54


CHAPTER  V.

Soul  and  Spirit  Soul —  The  Beatitudes  —  Jesus,  the  Initiate  and  Anchorite
—  Paul,  the  Gnostic  —  The  Song  of  Life  —  Ancient  Astronomy  —  New
Birth  —  Soul  Seeds — Sin — The  End  of  the  Journey — Memento  Vivere^      83


CHAPTER  VL

The  Astral  Body — Star  Magno  —  Process  of  Death — Amputations— A
Suggestion  in  Surgery  —  Astral  Flight  —  Astral  Photospheres  —  A
Scientific  Experiment — Trance  or  Semi-Trance  —  Elementals  and  Ele-
mentaries — The  Arch  Gift — Spirit  and  Soul  Forces — Obsessions  —

White  Magic — Human  Conscience  —  Moral  Intuition 107

xi


Xii  CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  VII.

A  World's  Religion  —  Ancient  Religions  —  Prenatal  Rights  —  The  Labor
Question  —  Indifferentism  —  Spiritualism  —  Theosophy  —  Elsoteric
Buddhism  —  Yoginism  —  Hierarchy — True  Magic  —  Swedenborg  and
the  New  Church  —  Light  of  the  School  of  the  Prophets— The  Lesson
of  life ijo

CHAPTER   VIII.

Adept,  Seer,  and  Mediumship— Trains  of  Thought — Entrancement — Seek-
ing a  Sign  —  Astral  Earth-Currents  —  True  Mediumship  —  Elementals,
Elementaries,  and  Sephiroths  —  Inspiration  —  Prophecy  and  Predic-
tion —  Adeptship  —  Black  Magic  —  Red  Magic — White  Magic   ...    191


CHAPTER   IX.

Cultivation  op  Spiritual  Gifts,  or  the  Guidance  op  the  Unseen
Hand  —  True  Education  —  Soul  Development  —  Astral  Colors  —  Bi-
Sezuality  —  True  Prayer — Animal  Food — Teachings  of  xYit  Illuminati
—  Perceptionists  and  Dogmatists  —  "  Conditions  "  —  Etherealization —
Vibration  of  Light  —  Formation  of  Circles  — The  Twelve  Senses—
Musical  Vibrations 233

CHAPTER  X.

Spirttualization  op  Matter — Transfiguration  —  Materialization  —  Home
Circles — The  Condemnation  —  The  Oracle  at  Delphi — A.  Soul*s
Awakening— 5'ftfAf(^/k' 287


CHAPTER  XL

Metaphysics,  the  Prayer  op  Thought;  or  Expression  op  Inpinitb
Mind — Latent  Forces — Mind  the  Basis  of  Being  —  Thought  Acting
Upon  Thought  —  Impulse  Created  by  Will  —  Swedenborg's  Meta-
physics —  Teachings  to  Mental  Healers  —  Pythagorean  and  Egyptian
Theories  —  Phrenopathy — Prayer  Cure  —  The  Royal  Touch — Color
Core 320


CHAPTER   XII.

Evolution  and  Involution  —  The  Darwinian  Theory  —  Haeckel's  Discov-
ery—  Involution  the  True  Growth  —  The  Principle  of  Unity  —  Evolu-
tion a  Revelation  of  God — Brahministic  Theory  —  All  Things  from
Within— Natural  and  Spiritual  Science — Inworld  and  Outworld     .    .    345


CONTENTS.  Xlll


CHAPTER  XIII.

Thb  Great  Mystery;  or,  the  Hidden  Way  —  Intaition — Unspeakable
Words  —  The  Royal  Ladder  —  Adam  and  Eve  —  Hermetic  Science  —
True  Love  —  Immaculate  Conception  —  Christos  —  Dual  Philosophy
-»  Sacred  Flame  —  Lust,  not  Love  —  Egyptian,  Greek,  and  Buddhist
Teaching — Reincarnation  —  Polarization — Unselfish  Love    •    .    •    •    ^9

CHAPTER  XIV.

The  Many  Mansions  —  Spheres  —  Spirits  in  Prison — The  Middle  Firma-
ments—  Malicious  and  False  Controls — The  Upper  Firmaments  —
Angels  and  Archangels 431

CHAPTER  XV.

Translations  or  Thoughts  prom  Other  Tongues — The  Four  Elements

—  The  Oldest  Traditions  —  Light  of  the  Cabala— The  History  of
Spirit  —  Prayer  of  Savitri — Key  of  Hermes  —  The  Divine  Pymander

—  The  Vedas  — Order  of  the  Chaldaean  Eastern  Star— Cabalistic
Names — Philo  and  Paul  —  Magus 446

CHAPTER  XVI.

The  Temple  Within  — No  Light  from  Without  — Thought-Chambers  —
Astral  Light  —  Mirrors  of  the  Soul  —  The  Morning  Gate  —  The  Torch
of  the  Angel —  Works  of  Art — Woman — Jesus  and  Christ   •    .    .    •    483

CHAPTER  XVII.

Gathered  Sheaves  —  Simple  Truth  —  Objective  Intellect  —  Bioplasm  —
True  Good-Breeding — Development  —  Homer  and  the  Bible  —  Book
Worship  —  Opportunities  in  This  Life  —  Learn  to  Know  All,  but
Keep  Thyself  Unknown  —  Where  Are  the  Dead?— God's  Great  Whis-
pering Gallery  —  The  Latent  Magnetic  Power  in  Precious  Stones  —
Precepts  and  Aphorisms — Misunderstood  by  the  World  —  Trust  m  the
Spirit — The  First  Step  Towards  Higher  Occult  Powers  —  Do  not  go
to  War  with  Evil  —  Out  from  the  Shoreless  Sea  of  the  Great  Unknown,    526

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Across  the  Threshold— The  Eternal  Now— I  Will  Pour  Out  My  Spirit

—  Faith  in  the  Absolute  Parent  —  The  Knowledge  of  Silently  Waiting

—  Under  the  Sunshine  of  Spirit  —  Welcome  Unto  Thy  Heritage  —
Flight  of  the  Adept,  or  a  Human  Soul  Visiting  the  Mansions  of  the
Blessed— To  All  Brethren 584


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Thb  Oracle  op  Delphi Frmtispiece

GoD^  THE  Eternal  Fountain  op  All  Lipb,  the  Great  Infinite  and

Eternal  Energy,  from  which  All  Things  Proceed     ....  23

The  Winged  Globe  and  Other  Gnostic  Symbols 44

The  Great  Mystery  op  God  in  Man — The  Interlaced  Triangle    .  47

The  Cross  op  Antiquity  and  Other  Sacred  Symbols 50

Illumination  op  Mentality  and  Other  Sacred  Symbols 82

Monogram  op  the  Three  Mysteries  and  Other  Symbols ijo

The  Gnostic  Amulet  —  The  Delphic  Sacred  Mysteries  —  The  Hid-

DEN  Things 379

Thb  Many  Mansions,  or  Spheres  and  Firmaments 431


XIV


THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  Tffi  THRESHOLD.


CHAPTER  L

rSOM  NIOBT  TO  UOBT.

Lovx  IS  THK  Secret  of  Life. — The  two  vital  truths  underlying
all  religions  are  the  Fatherhood  of  God  and  the  Brotherhood  of  Man«
The  two  vital  errors  ingrain  in  all  religious  systems  of  this  modem
age  are  painfully  apparent  to  every  impartial  and  imbiassed  mind,  — -
first,  the  misconception  of  God  and  misimderstanding  of  man;
second,  the  claim  of  exclusiveness  for  Divine  revelation,  and  the
infallibility  of  Inspiration.

Divine  Love  of  Spirit  I     Absolute  Wisdom  I    Universal  Harmony  I

God  has  written  these  truths  on  everything.  Halt  but  a  moment
in  this  mad  race.  Behold,  Nature  is  full  of  music  and  wisdom.
This  is  the  positive  principle.  Discord  is  negative.  Everything
which  moves,  feels,  thinks,  and  has  being  in  the  omnipresent  Spirit
of  God  is  impregnated  with  music  and  harmony.  What  a  gospel  b
thbl

Dear  reader,  stop  one  moment  for  extended  thought  Thought-
lessness is  wasted  time.  Therefore  think  of  this  silent  gospel  of  the
Divine  Spirit  of  Love  and  Harmony.  Our  mouths  and  lives  will  dis-
course sweet  music  if  we  correctly  apply  the  love  and  harmony
which  make  the  spirit  white.

Oh,  Pilgrim  on  the  Threshold,  what  great  opportunities  lie  before
you !  As  the  soul  grows,  what  worlds  beyond  worlds  open  out  be-
fore your  enraptured  gaze.

Life  is  but  a  murmuring  rivulet,  winding  in  and  out  of  the  ravines,
ever  pursuing  various  paths,  softly  flowing  through  fragrant  meadows,
gently  rippling  on  the  cool,  mossy  banks  of  the  wood;  now  strug-
gling among  rocks,  murmuring  as  it  goes ;  sometimes  conveying  a
fragrant  flower  upon  its  bosom ;  sometimes  a  dead  leaf  which  has
drifted  down  to  it;  now  leaping  to  and  fro  against  some  angular
impediment  which  checks  its  course  ;  eventually  leaping  all  barriers;

1


3        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

flowing  round  a  mountain  which  it  could  not  overleap;  singing  a
melodious  song  as  it  exerts  its  energies  in  the  effort  to  dislodge  some
obstacles  thrown  across  its  path;  ever  pressing  onward  uniting  its
energies  with  the  silent  river  hurrying  on  toward  the  sea.

Thus  flow  our  individual  lives  in  this  rudimental  state  of  being.

But  most  lives  are  like  streams  tributary  to  great  rivers :  few
indeed  like  the  rivers  themselves.  The  little  rivulet,  however,  flows
onward  still,  and,  after  filling  many  a  spring,  slaking  the  thirst  of
many  a  traveller,  refreshing  many  a  fainting  plant,  perchance  through
ignorance,  inattention,  —  or  peradventure  wrong, — causing  some-
thing to  wither  or  have  pain,  still  flows  onward,  and  Anally,  when  it
comes  to  the  verge,  leaps  the  brow  of  the  hill,  spreading  into  melo*
dious  cascades  as  it  vanishes  into  the  silent  depths  of  the  hitherto
unknown  gulf,  continuing  its  course  in  new  companionship  toward
more  harmonious  and  musical  spheres  beyond.

Let  the  thoughtful  tourist  of  to-day  who  desires  to  grasp  hands
across  the  gulf  of  centuries  with  our  Spiritual  ancestors  visit  some
of  the  colossal  stone  temples  in  the  East.  He  who  visits  Kamac
should  pay  more  than  mere  passing  attention  to  the  two  mighty
columns  in  the  immense  hall  of  columns,  and  observe  the  large,
square  capital  which  unites  these  two  massive  pillars,  where  in  deep
cuttings  he  will  And  this  hieroglyph.

The  Secret  of  Life  is  Love. — The  time-worn  appearance  and
desolate  surroundings  of  this  vast  temple  of  extreme  antiquity  can-
not be  adequately  described.  To  the  visiting  Hierophant  and  Neo-
phyte the  phantoms  of  Spirit  presence  present  themselves,  as
they  pass  down  the  long  silent  corridor,  and  speak  in  mute  accents
of  gorgeous  pageantry,  robed  priests,  and  magniflcent  procession.
These  sacred  halls  of  columns,  which  have  witnessed  the  rise  and
fall  of  empires,  the  ascension  of  kings  and  dissolution  of  nations,
still  stand  half  buried  in  the  sands,  weather-worn  and  storm-beaten,
silent  memorials  of  forgotten  kings  and  forgotten  people,  while  the
soft  winds  perfumed  by  the  sacred  Lotus  of  the  Nile  chant  a  melo-
dious diige  to  the  unknown  Souls  of  the  so-called  dead.

Love  is  the  Secret  of  Life

is  again  found  engraven  on  the  principal  Sphynx,  in  the  avenue  of
Sph3mxes.  Again,  on  a  huge  block  on  the  Island  of  Elephantine ;
near  Mount  Sinai,  in  Arabia  Petraea  are  the  caves  of  the  anchorites ;
and  here  the  observer  finds  the  same  motto,  with  the  addition  which
makes  it  read  thus :  —


FROM  NIGHT  TO  UGHT.  3

LovBy  WITH  Wisdom,  is  the  Secret  or  Life.

Again  at  the  door-way  of  the  great  rock  near  Deir,  Petreay  on  the
right  hand,  stands  engraved  the  inscription:  —

The  Torch  of  Life  is  Fed  by  the  Oil  of  Love.

And  on  the  left  hand,

Love  is  the  Oil  of  Life.

On  the  large  cube  of  cream-white  stone  which  was  presented  to  the
Order  of  Z.  Z.  by  a  Mexican  chief  is  this  significant  inscription : —

The  Torch  of  Love  is  the  Secret  of  Souu

According  to  traditions  of  the  Indians,  this  stone  is  of  great  antiq-
uity, which  its  appearance  also  indicates,  and  it  is  claimed  to  have
been  one  of  the  chief  stones  in  the  altars  of  Teocallis.  It  is  like  a
large  square  opal  in  appearance,  but  hard  as  flint,  radiating  a  torch-
like flame  of  pinkish  color  from  the  interior,  which  seems  to  change
in  different  atmospheres.  This  was  called  by  the  Mexicans  the  torch
of  the  Soul,  and  was  typical  of  their  religion,  of  which  the  following
is  an  abridged  text:  —

There  b  a  natural  fire  of  inner  Light,  whose  central  flame  is  a  cer-
tain proportion  of  the  Internal  man  toward  the  External,  glowing  and
growing  after  its  own  fashion  according  to  the  impulses  of  the  man.
From  the  inner  Temple  toward  the  outer  life  the  sacred,  Divine  flame
eternally  consumes  the  grosser  elements,  that  through  purification
may  be  radiated  the  great  sacred  Flame.

The  hope  and  desire  of  the  collector  of  this  compilation  is  that
in  the  patient  reader  may  be  excited  a  more  extended  illumination  of
thought,  which  shall  expand  into  unselfish  and  universal  love,  thereby
opening  the  Soul.

Illumination  of  mentality  brings  intuition  of  something  higher  than
the  mere  animal.  Intuition  being  the  operation  of  the  Soul,  the  knowl-
edge through  it,  which  if  from  above,  descending  into  the  Soul,  fills
it  with  the  perception  of  the  interior  cause  of  things,  and  opens  a  new
world  to  the  Pilgrim,  who  now  embraces  the  great  opportunity  of  his
life.  If  unbiassed  by  any  pet  theories  or  passions,  he  may  now  tread
the  sacred  paths  of  Nature's  mysteries  and  thus  participate  in  the
pageantry  of  the  ages.

Every  man  has  some  peculiar  train  of  thought  into  which  he  falls
when  alone.  This,  to  a  great  degree,  moulds  the  man.  If  it  is  of
the  higher  aspirations  of  unselfish  ambition  for  universal  good,  a


4  THB  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

better  man  is  moulded.  His  life  becomes  useful  to  his  age  and  gen-
eration,  and  he  awakes  to  a  knowledge  of  true  universal  harmonies,
finding  Love  is  the  true  poem,  the  Soul  of  which  is  the  dream,  the
mechanical  verse  is  but  the  garb  that  clothes  the  flesh  by  which  the
existence  of  the  Spirit  is  made  known  to  the  outer  world.

If,  reasons  man,  everything  in  this  life  is  disappointment,  and  our
fondest  hopes  are  superficial  and  deceiving,  is  the  game  of  life  worth
the  candle?  Are  human  lives  only  masquerades  and  huge  jokes,
intermingled  with  sufferings  and  inquisitions  ?  Just  here  is  the  point
where  many  weak  minds  lose  their  anchorage  and  drift  about  with
every  wind,  in  shallows  and  in  miseries,  until  the  hour  for  change  has
come.

"What,  know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  is  in  you,  which  you  have  of  God,"  says  Paul,  "  and  ye
are  not  your  own?"

The  thoughtful  man  reasons  alone  in  silence,  not  striving  to  com-
bat with  human  argument,  and  little  by  little  the  Truth  dawns  upon
him  and  illuminates  his  mind.  As  he  catches  glimpses  of  the  silent
ways  of  nature,  he  discovers  a  Divine  harmony  and  finds  he  cannot
look  upon  human  life  as  an  accident,  while  all  around  and  at  evexy
hand  he  beholds  such  evidence  of  wondrous  design.

Awake  I  arise  I  the  hour  is  late  1
Angels  are  knocking  at  thy  door  I
They  are  in  haste  and  cannot  wait,
And,  once  departed,  come  no  more.

—  A  Fragment.

Nothing  ever  exists  with  man  without  a  cause  in  the  Spiritual
world.  If  that  which  is  natural  with  man  could  be  separated  from
what  is  spiritual,  every  cause  of  existence  and  source  of  life  would  be
eliminated.  Matter  is  only  solidified  Spirit,  a  manifestation  of  that
which  in  its  original  condition  is  invisible,  viz. :  Spirit,  and  Spirit
does  not  become  evU  by  becoming  manifest.  Evil  b  only  the  result  of  the
limitation  of  Spirit.  Evil  is  but  error.  Spirit  is  Truth.  When  Spirit
dawns,  error  departs,  for  Spirit  b  God,  and  God  is  Good.  Wherefore,
error  being  the  limitation  of  God,  matter  b  the  limitation  of  good  and
is  essential  and  necessary  to  creation.

In  the  first  place  let  the  thought  be  lodged  in  the  mind  as  a  uni-
versal principle  that  every  man  is  a  duality,  a  double  being,  a  oneness
growing  out  of  the  interpenetration  of  two  natures,  male  and  female,
an  thb  terrestrial  world,  and  also  a  corresponding  duality  in  the  Soul  or


FROM  NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  5

sidereal  world.  By  dose  observation,  it  will  be  found  that  every  man
has  two  different  spheres  of  consciousness ;  one  from  the  positive
vibration  of  the  male,  and  another  from  the  passive,  negative  vibra-
tion of  the  female.  Also,  a  consciousness  from  the  external  sphere  of
the  natural  world,  and  another  from  the  interior  sphere  of  the  Soul
and  Spiritual  world.

But,  as  mankind  contents  itself  in  living,  for  the  present,  in  an
external  world,  full  of  material  magnetism,  the  Spirit  is  drawn  out-
ward and  overshadowed,  and  frequently  the  man  is  made  unconscious
and  unmindful  of  that  brighter,  interior  sphere  in  which  the  Spirit
is  the  true  life,  and  his  eyes  are  clouded  to  his  true  relations  with
that  sphere.  The  vast  majority  of  mankind  is  under  the  magnetism
of  the  external,  animal  world,  and  thus  the  lives  of  men  are  but
rounds  of  disappointment.  To  such  persons  there  is  no  immortal
hope,  no  Truth,  no  Spirit-world,  no  God.  They  believe  only  in  what
they  see  with  the  natural  eye,  and  will  dispute  even  that  if  they  can-
not fully  comprehend  it.  A  few  years  ago  the  very  possibility  of  the
telegraph,  the  railway,  and  the  steamship  was  unknown.  A  few
generations  ago,  the  very  truths  that  led  to  the  discovery  of  these
were  refused  a  hearing,  and  their  existence  denied.  The  disadvan-
tage of  this  condition  is  painfully  apparent;  for  such  persons  are  more
or  less  insane,  ignorant,  unreasonable,  and  intolerant  concerning  the
interior  light  of  the  Soul,  and  knowledge  of  a  spiritual  character.  On
the  other  hand,  the  more  we  are  absorbed  in  the  spiritual  world,  and
know  its  truth,  the  more  we  are  unmindful  of  the  multiform  relations
to  the  world  in  which  we  now  live.  We  may  be  rational  and  moral
when  measured  by  the  interior  Soul-light  and  the  Spiritual  standard,
but  irrational  and  insane  when  estimated  by  the  opinions  of  the  rail-
way conductor  or  steamship  captain,  for,  as  it  is  written,  our  eyes  are
holden  that  we  cannot  see  things  that  stare  us  in  the  face  until  the
hour  arrives  when  the  mind  is  ripened ;  then  we  behold  them.

Persons  whose  interior  sphere  is  opened  and  growing  to  the  Soul-
knowledge  and  Spiritual  light  are  extremely  sensitive  and  impressible,
and,  unless  surrounded  by  harmony  and  peace,  suffer  much  disad-
vantage to  this  condition.  They  may  be  inspired  to  give  out  many
exalted  ideas;  but  their  utterances  should  not  always  be  accepted
as  infallible,  on  account  of  the  morbid  atmospheres  which  surround
them.  Again,  such  persons  are  more  or  less  disqualified  for  the
material  world  of  our  sensuous  times,  because  people  in  this  age  are
not  living  in  harmonious  attunement  with  nature.  They  are  sensuous
and  nervous,  because  of  the  outward  inharmonies,  and  the  control-


6        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ling  power  of  the  body  has  changed  its  plane  of  activity,  having  gone
inward  for  its  true  light  through  the  Soul  life,  receiving  knowledge
through  the  region  of  the  innermost  monitor  of  the  Soul.  The
greatest  safety  lies,  therefore,  in  the  middle  path,  between  the  two
extremes.  It  will  be  found  that  all  the  devils  of  the  universe  are
living  in  the  symbols  of  the  mind,  brought  into  life  through  extreme
grounds  between  our  material  and  spiritual  organizations.

Teach  me,  then,
To  harmonize  the  discord  of  my  life.
And  stop  the  painful  jangle  of  these  wires.
Vaidesso.  "—Thzt  is  a  task  impossible,  until

You  tune  your  heart-strings  to  a  higher  key
Than  earthly  melodies.

—  Michael  Angilo,

Dear  reader,  how  we  waste  time  in  plaiting  scourges  for  ourselves.
These  hurrying  days,  these  busy,  anxious,  shrewd,  cunning,  ambitious
times  of  ours  are  wasted,  when  they  take  our  hearts  away  from  gentle
patience  and  charity,  giving  fame  for  love,  gold  for  kisses,  dissem-
bling for  friendship.

It  really  appears  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  humanity  lives
only  for  self ;  aspiring,  striving,  and  hoping  to  retain  the  animal  part
and  its  peculiarity  in  the  life  beyond  the  grave,  not  seeming  to  know
nor  even  to  care  to  know,  that  the  selfhood  of  the  animal  passions  is
not  immortal,  but  that  there  is  a  Divine  union  of  Soul  and  Spirit,  a
higher  life  of  harmonious  Wisdom  and  Love  which  alone  is  immortal.

Some  day  there  comes  a  time  when  our  hungry  Souls  will  ask  for
bread,  and  our  selfish  God  will  give  us  a  stone.  Life  is  not  a  deep,
perplexing  problem ;  it  is  a  simple,  easy  lesson,  such  as  any  child
may  read.  You  cannot  find  its  solution  in  the  tomes  of  the  old
fathers,  the  philosophers,  the  investigators,  or  the  scientists.  It  is
not  upon  your  book-shelves,  but  in  the  warmest  corner  of  the  most
unlettered  heart;  it  glows  in  symbols  that  the  blind  may  read,  a
sweet,  plain,  simple,  easy  lesson.  And  when  you  have  learned  it,
dear  brother  of  mine,  the  world  will  be  for  you  far  better  and
happier.

Let  all  thinking  minds  observe  at  times  some  of  the  noxious
things  upon  this  fair  earth ;  the  creeping  and  venomous  things,  the
swinish,  brutal  things.  Are  they  not  typical  representations  of  the
conditions  of  mind  and  thought  and  also  actions  of  many  of  the
human  kind,  who  seem  even  to  the  last  ambitious  with  longing


PROM  NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  7

solicitude  to  retain  and  carry  their  very  inharmonies  into  their  im-
mortal lives ;  who  will  not  awaken  to  receive  their  heritage ;  who,  con-
gealing their  Souls  with  coldness  of  selfishness  until  their  plane  of
life  b  but  a  frozen  sea  on  which  they  strive  only  to  make  many  slips,
finally  break  through  into  eternities  !

'*  Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than  the  Angels,"  says  the
Psalmist ;  "  thou  crownest  him  with  glory  and  honor,  and  didst  set
him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands."

Ask  of  yourself,  where  do  my  love  and  my  aspirations  lead  me  ?
It  is  unfortunately  true  that  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  people  who
seek  the  modem  Spiritual  light  do  so  for  some  selfish  purpose,  either
for  material  gain  or  some  prompting  of  vanity,  instead  of  using  the
precious  time  in  the  cultivation  of  Soul  growth,  thereby  gaining  knowl-
edge regarding  spirit  life  and  communion  of  Spirits  in  reference  to
the  ripening  of  Souls  and  the  life  beyond  the  veil.  Just  here  is
where  so  many  become  perplexed  who  seek  for  material  gain  from
such  a  source.  The  material  things  of  life  generally  prove  a  great
detriment  to  the  unfoldment  of  Soul  and  the  latent  talents  of  man,
simply  because  the  material  things  of  the  day  are  unnatural  and  there-
fore inharmonious.

Spiritual  light  and  knowledge,  to  be  practical,  should  be  sought
for  in  a  calm,  dignified  manner,  the  same  as  any  other  fact  in  nature,
as  the  research  is  liable  to  be  overdone  if  not  tempered  with  common-
sense  and  sound  reason,  which  God  has  given  his  children  to  use.

Lunacy  and  crankiness  are  often  charged  against  Pilgrims  of
Spiritual  Knowledge,  sometimes  justly,  no  doubt,  and  the  stigma  may
be  the  means  of  bringing  them  to  see  themselves  as  others  see  them,
for  none  are  perfect.  No,  not  one;  but  some,  no  doubt,  do  see
cause  and  effect  in  a  clearer  and  more  practical  manner  than  others.
It  is  not  wisdom,  therefore,  to  be  plunged  headlong  into  issues  and
ideas  which  are  against  all  harmonious  laws  of  nature,  and  even
against  all  Spiritual  law,  which  one  does  not  understand  led  simply
by  one's  vanity  or  for  selfish  ends.

The  mind  of  man  is  often  like  a  house  of  which  he  is  the  land-
lord. Bad  tenants  are  more  easily  admitted  than  removed.  Then,
again,  more  than  one-third  of  the  investigators  begin  the  study  of  the
occult  sciences  merely  for  curiosity,  which  is  detrimental  to  Truth  and
to  illumination  of  Soul.  Persons  who  possess  the  greatest  curiosity
always  investigate  the  least,  usually  forming  some  pet  theories  only.
What  appear  to  be  truths  from  the  invisible  worlds  are  often  more
deceptive  to  the  mind  of  man  than  direct  lies.    Human  theories  claim


8        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

much  for  themselves,  but  they  hold  very  many  disputed  titles.  If
the  claims  are  erroneous,  men  are  made  arrogant,  intolerant,  obnox-
ious, and  conceited.

The  middle  pathway  is  best;  both  extremes  of  existence  are
but  different  degrees  of  insanity:  more  properly  speaking,  of  igno-
rance and  discord,  because  out  of  harmony  with  nature.  Either  con-
dition is  wrong ;  because  when  one  is  indulged  in  at  the  expense  of
the  other,  it  is  a  partial  resignation  of  the  greatest  blessing  of  our
being,  viz.;  individuality  of  consciousness^  ttnU^  and  reason;  and  one
loses  his  liberty  of  mind.

Oh,  Liberty— that  knows  no  law  of  passion,  but  that  of  following
our  highest,  best,  and  noblest  impulses,  which  knows  no  fear  but  that
of  injuring  a  fellow-creature  ever  so  slightly,  and  which  knows  no
motive  but  to  benefit  the  entire  race,  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  Life.

Cast  away,  then.  Oh  Pilgrim  of  Light,  all  shackles  of  selfishness
that  impede  thy  flight,  for  thou  art  now  truly  a  child  of  nature.
Acknowledge  no  bondage  but  that  of  Love,  and  of  thine  own  higher
and  better  self.  Then,  and  only  then,  wilt  thou  be  under  the  guid-
ance of  Angels,  and  will  be  sure  to  gain  the  confidence  of  all  who
come  in  contact  with  thee.

He  who  lives  and  believes  exclusively  in  this  material  and  objective
world  is  but  half  a  man ;  he  is  a  materialist ;  his  little  world  is  lighted
only  by  the  moon,  which  is  but  a  reflex  of  the  true  sun ;  therefore  he
receives  only  the  secondary  light,  though  the  exterior  world.  He  has
not  yet  found,  nor  does  he  believe  in,  a  Spiritual  Sun.  While,  on  the
other  hand,  he  who  is  rapt  in  psychological  wonders,  and  yearns  only
for  the  spiritual  side  of  life,  is  also  but  half  a  man,  and  rapidly  be-
comes abnormal  and  unsound.  To  give  ourselves  wholly  to  the
exclusive  magnetism  of  either  of  these  is  to  violate  the  law  of  nature
and  justice.     Silent  and  patient  growth  is  healthy  growth.

Little  minds  are  apt  to  be  impatient  and  often  go  into  extremes
in  their  excitability  and  desire  for  success,  and  thereby  retard  the
very  things  for  which  they  are  so  anxious.  The  road  to  Spiritual
Light  is  silent,  to  be  traversed  step  by  step  as  a  little  child  would
climb  the  mountain  heights.  The  persevering  traveller  will  overtake
very  few,  but  will  pass  many  lounging  by  the  way,  arguing  with  much
noise,  for  many  persons  are  like  babbling  brooks  that  carry  no  mill.
But  the  calm  silence  of  growth,  with  a  harmonious  nature  filled  with
universal  love  for  every  up-reaching,  aspiring  creature,  calls  Angels
downward.    Thb  is  the  pathway  to  Light.

Thoughts  are  bubbles  continually  rising  and  coming  to  the  surface


FROM  NIGHT  TO   LIGHT.  9

in  the  fountain  of  the  Soul.  The  best  way  to  graduate  thoughts  and
impressions  which  roll  upon  our  consciousness  from  the  two  hemi-
spheres of  our  being  is  to  be  passive  or  willing  in  spirit,  ready  for
any  greater  truth  and  higher  light,  but  always  firm  in  desire  for  the
light  of  Truth  and  growth  of  the  Soul,  and  determined  in  our  opposi-
tion to  any  sensation  or  noise  that  disturbs  the  harmony  of  our  mate-
rial or  spiritual  being.  There  is  no  hesitation  in  stating  the  philo-
sophical law  by  which  we  may  adjudicate  for  ourselves,  or  whereby
others  may  judge  for  ourselves,  as  to  the  actual  condition  of  our
individuality.  And  this  law  is  that  of  Divine  Harmony  between  the
material  and  spiritual  natures.  In  either  extreme,  the  mind  is  beset
with  imaginary  devils,  hells,  and  evil  spirits.

All  men  may  be  mediums,  all  are  seers.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  infi-
nite, and  the  laborer,  the  mechanic,  the  merchant,  as  well  as  the  poet
and  philosopher,  is  to  some  extent  a  seer  of  spirits,  or,  to  speak  more
properly,  of  the  forces  or  laws  of  nature,  which  are  the  life  currents
of  Uie  universal  Spirit  Now,  be  it  remembered,  these  farces  or  laws
appear  discordant  to  the  discordant  man  and  harmonious  to  the  harmO'
nious  one,

'^The  unseen  world  is  destined  to  become  like  a  newly  discovered
continent ;  we  shall  visit  it,  we  shall  hold  communion  with  it,  we  shall
wonder  how  so  many  thousands  of  years  could  have  passed  without
our  being  introduced  to  it."

This  unseen  world  is  open  to  every  man  who  can  become  attuned
to  the  natural  harmonies  of  Divine  law.  If  a  musical  instrument  be
out  of  tune,  even  the  most  skilful  performer  cannot  elicit  music  from
the  cords.  If  a  human  brain  be  unbalanced  in  its  forces,  dispropor-
tionate in  any  department  of  its  combinations,  not  even  the  Angel  of
Light  can  impart  to  it  an  impression  of  light  altogether  consistent
and  reliable,  and  since  most  men  have  more  scars  upon  their  souls
than  on  their  bodies,  very  few  communications  through  them  are
infallible.  Even  pure  water  poured  into  the  muddy  well  does  little
but  to  disturb  the  mud.  If  we  desire  reliable  illumination,  we  roust
go  up  the  Alps  of  personal  harmony  and  purer  love.  On  the  heights
of  every  Spiritual  truth  we  find  pure  air.  If  we  would  hear  and
understand  the  voice  of  Angels,  we  must  go  up  the  mountains  of  light,
purification,  temperance,  and  simplicity.  No  man  upon  the  mountain
top  calls  for  purer  air.

If  we  would  comprehend  the  external  world,  and  subjugate  it  to
our  will,  we  must  look  upon  and  work  for  it  from  the  Spiritual  sphese,
because  all  outward  phenomena  in  nature,  seeds,  plants,  trees,  birds.


lO        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

aod  beasts;  oceans  and  continents  ;  the  successive  developments  of
human  societies,  —  all  these  flow  (rom  Spiritual  invisible  sources  of
causation,  and  if  we  are  truly  in  bondage  to  the  external,  and  to  the
merable  symbols  and  superstitions  which  grow  like  fungi  upon
its  varied  surface,  we  are  most  truly  "mediums  for  the  fantastic
impressions  of  existence."

"The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within, "and  until  that  grand  unselfish
love  for  one  universal  humanity  has  dawned  within  the  Sou!  the
inspiration  must  be  clouded,  the  truths  mere  maculalions  and  patches.
It  requires  but  little  reflection  to  see  that  this  must  be  true.  If
hunnanity  is  to  rise  out  of  its  natural  or  animal  condition,  through
the  inner  Soul  life,  into  the  Spiritual,  the  new  stale  is  in  man,  not  out-
side of  him.

I  baptize  you  with  water,  but  there  cometh  one  after  me  who  will
baptize  you  with  fire  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  kingdom  of
heaven  is  within  you.

Mind  being  the  true  atmosphere  of  the  Soul,  let  no  man  be  heed-
less of  the  atmospheres  he  calls  around  him,  which  may  congeal  and
benumb  the  inner  life.

All  students  of  Spirit  communion  will  affirm  that  good  and  true
communications  depend  upon  the  harmonies  of  the  medium  and  his
state  of  mind.

If  you  would  have  true  impressions,  live  true  lives.  Your  every
word,  your  eating,  drinking,  sleeping,  your  occupation  all  must  be
free  from  extremes,  and  consistent  always  with  the  reciprocal  laws  of
development  of  your  dual  nature.  Now,  be  it  remembered,  the  mind
is  the  greatest  and  most  fertile  source  of  perplexities.  How  can  mind
solve  mind?  Our  best  impressions,  opinions,  and  thoughts  are  the
Angel  part  of  us ;  our  selfish  acts  and  thoughts  the  earthy  part.  A
man  might  as  well  try  to  lift  himself  by  his  own  boot-slraps  as  to  solve
this  question,  and  yet  we  must  press  onward  and  analyze  as  much  of
mind  as  our  self-investigating  power  will  permit.  How  abundant  the
manufactures  and  how  numerous  the  failures  in  the  commerce  of  the
mind's  ideas.  Weak  minds  are  content  to  quaff  the  surface  waters,
while  strong  ones  seek  their  draughts  from  the  deepest  fountains  of
Spirit,  and  thus  we  find  a  few  quiet  men  who  run  ahead  of  their  age,
and  open  the  gates  of  the  future.

But  enough.  This  law  explains  all ;  that  mental  discord  and  the
symbols  of  such  discord  develop  alt  the  conceptions  of  hell  and  of
demons  that  inharmonious  human  minds  can  invent  or  that  ever
obtained  a  footing  in  this  rudimental  existence.     Then,  again,  some


FROM  NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  II

minds  are  like  sewer  pipes;  nothing  good  seems  to  pass  through  them
without  being  contaminated.  Every  brain  is  a  mint  in  which  thoughts
are  coined,  and  their  true  value  as  a  circulating  medium  is  stamped
on  them  outside  the  mint,  so  that  no  thoughtful  and  observing  person
need  be  deceived.

All  high,  pure,  and  noble  thoughts ;  all  sublime  aspirations,  ideas,
poetry,  music,  harmony,  and  all  that  belongs  to  them,  advance  the
world  when  they  are  brought  to  bear  with  nature  from  actual  sem-
blances and  take  their  immortal  birth  here.

He  who  strives  to  possess  supernal  charity  for  the  world,  throwing
out  emanations  of  love  like  billows  rippled  by  a  summer  breeze,  kiss-
ing the  pebbly  shore  in  music  attuned  with  nature,  has  attained  a
growth  whose  power  can  uplift  the  world.

This  Divine  essence  of  Love  brings  all  things  to  itself,  therefore
one  must  be  drawn  down  to  the  nature  of  the  beloved  one  or  uplift  it
to  his  own  plane.

One  who  looks  always  for  that  which  is  crooked  will  call  and  see
all  things  crooked ;  one  who  looks  always  for  the  good,  the  pure,  the
true,  and  the  straight,  will  always  find  these.  He  who  aims  to  brighten
and  uplift  the  Soul  by  the  Spirit  will  find  the  Spirit ;  he  who  looks
only  for  the  cunning  and  selfishness  of  the  animal  will  find  fellowship
only  with  the  animal.

The  selfishness  and  vanity  of  the  Ego  are  the  rocks  upon  which
human  intellect  or  human  ignorance  wrecks  its  bark.  A  headstrong
person  is  a  living  reproach  to  the  Soul,  and  Spiritual  growth  is  impos-
sible while  anger  and  passion  suppress,  congeal,  and  stifle  it.

True  virtue  consists  in  being  reasonable.  To  be  intolerant  is  a
contradiction.  Do  not  assume  to  know  too  much,  but  endeavor  to
know  thyself.     To  be  too  much  in  the  right  is  to  be  in  the  wrong.

Reason  should  always  persuade  and  never  impose  herself.  He
who  seeks  the  paths  of  the  Hidden  Way,  living  in  the  light  of  the
Absolute  Love,  loses  sight  of  all  difference  in  things  and,  passing
upward,  reaches  the  Spirit  through  the  insight  of  the  Soul  into  the
fire  of  principles.  Pilgrim  of  Light,  when  you  see  the  fire,  listen  to
the  Voice  of  Fire,  and  when  it  is  discovered  do  not  rush  out  before
the  multitude  with  noisy  announcement,  or  it  may  depart.  This
height  can  be  attained  only  through  serene^  composed^  oblivious  tranquillity^
released  from  all  physical  surroundings.

Lose  yourself  fully  into  the  Spirit;  drop  the  Ego  and  resist  no
impulse  of  thought,  word,  or  action,  but  make  yourself  as  a  pendulum
vibrating  between  the  spiritual  and  natural  world.  As  a  little  child,
be  free  to  grow  and  be  instructed  in  truth.


12       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Be  perfectly  willing  to  put  off  the  dusty  sandals  of  dogma  and
creed ;  to  lay  aside  any  favorite  theory  of  yesterday  if  you  can  replace
it  by  a  more  golden  truth  to-day.    Be  free  to  grow.

The  greatest  enemies  to  human  progress,  science,  and  art  are
dogma  and  creed ;  the  history  and  bloodshed  of  the  past  cry  out  with
terrible  warning,  proof  of  the  omnipotent  influence  a  single  idea  may
exercise  over  the  whole  life  of  a  nation  or  an  individual.  Any  pet
human  theory  of  infallibility  is  a  Bastile  to  the  soul.  Men  are  always
enclosed  in  the  surroundings  they  create,  and  live  in  the  atmosphere
to  which  they  belong,  and  this  theory  limits  their  vision  to  that  special
sphere  in  which  they  dwell.

I  sent  my  soul  through  the  invisible.
Some  lessons  of  the  after  life  to  spelL
By  and  by  it  came  and  answered,
I  myself  am  heaven  and  hell.

—  Poem  from  the  Per  Hem.

Dear  Pilgrim,  on  the  grandest  of  all  altars,  that  of  Nature,  lay  thy
heart  open  to  the  pure  creative  Light,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  left  in
thine  old  age  to  sink  alone  among  the  marshes.

Like  the  dawn  of  a  golden  morning,  life  becomes  more  and  more
bright,  the  longer  we  live ;  for  are  we  not  each  day  making  a  grand
exchange  of  ignorance  for  knowledge,  while  the  reason  for  everything
becomes  more  plain  ?  that  which  once  puzzled  us  seems  less  and  less
mysterious,  while  the  crooked  and  entangled  paths  grow  straighter  and
clearer  as  we  approach  the  end.  The  object  of  these  pages  is  to
lighten  the  pathways  of  life,  since  every  person  possesses  in  his  own
heart  a  mirror  in  which  the  very  light  of  heaven  may  be  reflected.

Arise,  O  child,  and  bathe  your  earthly  sense
In  yonder  fountain  of  eternal  light

Can  the  writer  instruct  one  in  the  path  that  leads  to  this  fountain,
and  to  cleanse  and  polish  this  mirror  of  the  Soul  ?  He  who  reads,
thinks;  he  who  thinks,  reasons;  and  he  who  reasons,  unselfishly  and
honestly,  will  advance  into  the  Light  of  Truth.  This  is  the  only
impulse  and  desire  of  the  compiler,  who  rests  his  hope  in  the  Divine
Love  with  strong  desire  and  deep  concern  that  every  reader  of  this
book  may  reach  the  still  water  on  the  glorious  mountain-heights  of  a
l*rue  Gnosticism.

A  Gnostic  b  one  who  knows  things,  Spiritually.    The  ancient


PROM  NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  I3

Gnostic  knew  the  true  nature  of  man  and  the  various  hierarchies  of
Angels,  for  in  the  Spiritual,  Angels  reveal  themselves.  The  work  of
eternity  is  to  acquire  this  knowledge  and  fit  ourselves  for  such  com-
panionship. There  are  times  when  the  Soul  spurns  the  limitations  of
the  material  body,  the  outer  world  recedes,  and  there  dawns  upon  the
vision  the  radiance  of  celestial  spheres,  when  familiar  faces  and  lov*
ing  eyes  smile  upon  us,  and  tender  loving  voices  waken  fond  memo-
ries of  by-gone  years.

Let  us  purify  ourselves  and  enter  into  the  inner  sanctuary,  the
Holy  of  Holies,  the  temple  of  the  immortals.  Let  us  study  to  quicken
our  vision  until  it  pierces  the  veil  of  the  Beyond,  or  stretches  on  into
distant  lands  across  the  threshold,  bringing  ever  before  us  the  forms
of  our  beloved.  Let  us  quicken  our  hearing  until  we  can  catch  the
music  of  the  upper  spheres,  or  sense  the  whispers  of  love  coming  to
us  in  every  direction  over  the  invisible  telephonic  wires  of  the  Soul.

Love  is  the  great  motive  power  of  the  universe ;  without  it  there
would  be  no  life,  no  light,  no  motion.  God  is  the  Father  of  Love,
Nature  our  Mother ;  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  find  our  nourishment  in
her  bosom.  It  lies  within  the  power  of  every  human  being  to  culti*
vate  the  silent  forces  through  his  duality  until  he  can  leave  the  body
and  clasp  hands  with  friends  either  in  Spirit  or  in  mortal  body,  as
well  as  to  reach  out  to  them  in  hours  of  need  or  disturbance.

If  others  desire  only  to  cultivate  and  live  in  the  outward  senses,
apparently  satisfied  in  the  outer  court  of  the  temple,  you  can  only  pity
them  and  pass  them  by;  pass  on,  and  free  yourself  from  bondage.
He  who  finds  the  hidden  way  of  Soul  into  Spirit  is  free.  Who  does  not
sigh,  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,  for  liberty,  —  Liberty  of
Soul,  Freedom  of  Spirit  in  its  truest,  purest  sense  ?  He  who,  having
enjoyed  a  certain  degree  of  freedom,  has  through  some  unfortunate
circumstance  been  deprived  of  it,  can  say  how  keenly  he  has  felt  his
loss,  not  fully  realizing  the  great  blessing  conferred  upon  him',  until
he  found  it  gone.  Oh,  Goddess  of  Liberty,  chants  the  Hierophant  of
Light,  to  thee  let  all  men  bow.  Thee  only  will  I  recognize  as  para-
mount, for  the  larger  our  share  of  thy  favors,  the  greater  our  capacity
for  conferring  them  on  others,  the  better  are  we  able  to  loosen  the
fetters  of  the  captive,  even  as  we  ourselves  have  been  set  free  by  the
knowledge  of  Spirit.

The  expression  of  a  wish,  the  trembling  of  a  lip,  the  throb  of  a
sigh  for  the  Truth  that  makes  men  free,  and  makes  them  lovers  of
Liberty,  is  enough  to  bring  myriads  of  kindred  Spirits  to  our  aid.  Are
you  a  slave  to  passion?    Become  free  from  passion.    To  Ambi<


14       tH£  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  TH£  THRSSHOLD.

tion  ?  Free  yourself  from  Ambition.  To  Vanity  and  Pride  ?  Eschew
Vanity  and  Pride.  Are  you  in  bondage  to  Avarice,  to  Anger,  to
Habit,  to  Creed  and  Dogma?  Cast  them  aside,  throw  all  away,
destroy  all  your  earthly  idols,  and  become  again  as  a  child ;  then  only
arc  you  free.  We  are  not  alone ;  it  is  the  poor  slave  who  is  lonely,  let
him  be  a  slave  to  whatever  master^  be  it  greed  of  gain,  his  own  pas-
sions, any  habit  contracted,  or  any  of  the  cadaverous  gods  that  hold
sway  over  this  lower  plane,  even  to  the  god  of  earthly  pleasure,  he  is
lonely  and  in  bondage  if  he  make  not  all  subservient  to  Liberty  pure
and  simple.

Men  have  lived  long  enough  like  beasts,  when  they  might  have
lived  like  Angels.  Reader,  do  you  prefer  to  descend  deeper  and
deeper  into  one  realm  of  confusion  after  another,  the  confusion  of  the
material  with  the  spiritual  ?  When  your  individual  selfishness,  your
great  I,  is  paramount,  you  only  turn  the  ferocity  of  your  animal  body
inward  to  prey  upon  its  own  vitals.  To  be  set  free  from  all  this  is
Liberty  that  brings  the  Perfect  Peace.

The  atmosphere
In  which  the  soul  delights  to  be,
And  finds  that  perfect  liberty
Which  Cometh  only  from  above.

—  The  Divine  Tragedy.

If  this  compilation  will  only  create  pure  aspirations  and  higher
thoughts  among  its  readers,  expanding  their  Souls  to  the  full  Illumina-
tions of  Spirit,  then  the  hopes  of  the  compiler  will  be  fully  realized.
The  writer  will  be  well  repaid  for  all  his  labor,  if  these  hurried  pages  give
a  gleam  of  light  and  hope  to  pilot  some  poor,  weary,  struggling  child
to  the  heights  of  Perfect  Peace,  and  thus  lift  some  of  the  burdens,
making  life  more  endurable  until  the  end.  Great  is  the  art  of  begin-
ning, that  of  ending  is  greater.  May  your  heart  grow  and  your  mind
be  refreshed  and  renewed  by  the  Illuminations  of  Spirit.  May  the
beginning  and  the  ending  of  each  passing  year  be  like  unto  this  book,
which  begins  and  ends  with  Love.

Oh,  build  for  yourselves  a  memorial  that  the  tempests  of  time  and
the  mosses  of  ages  cannot  obliterate.  Treasures  in  heaven ;  Charity
and  Love.

He  walked  and  talked  with  Spirit,  and  the  highest  Spirit  was
God. — Enoch.

For  the  things  that  appear  to  our  natural  eye  delight  us,  but  make
the  things  that  appear  not^  hard  to  believe ;  for  our  Spiritual  eyes,  if
not  yet  opened,  how  can  we  perceive  them  ?  —  Old  Egyptian,


FROM  NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  1 5

But  the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :
for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him ;  neither  can  he  know  them,  because
they  are  Spiritually  discerned. — i  Cor.  1 1 :  xiv.

Be  ready  for  whatever  may  happen  by  maintaining  an  inviolable
calmness,  making  that  "Pythagorean  inward  peace,  that  deep  un-
troubled calm,"  respond  to  your  call  and  command.  Strive  to  know
yourself,  and  learn  to  protect  each  defect  and  weakness  whether  in
the  physical  or  mental  part  of  your  being.  The  human  body  is
strongly  subject  to  a  double  law,  for  everything  in  nature  is  double.
All  magnetisms  have  actions  that  are  positive  and  negative,  active
and  passive,  male  and  female.  Men  or  women  who  have  made  care-
ful study  of  themselves,  and  learned  to  polarize  their  action  of  Astral
Magno  in  union  with  their  bisexual  forces,  can  wield  a  mighty  power,
and  become  the  grandest  of  magicians  with  a  tongue  of  prophetic
light  This  height  is  only  reached  up  that  pathway  of  Love  which  is
of  God ;  of  Wisdom  which  is  by  silence,  and  the  knowledge  of  it  can
be  attained  only  through  the  Divine  calm  of  silence,  which  brings
one  in  accord  with  the  infinite  energy  of  nature.

In  silence  God  speaks  to  the  heart  of  man ;  in  silence  man  com-
munes with  God,  each  living  Soul  being  a  solitary  ray  or  reflection  of
the  absolute  God,  a  gleam  of  light  from  the  Divine  Mind,  and  the
golden  fruitage  of  the  Divine  is  that  bread  of  which  if  a  man  eat  he
shall  never  die.  (St.  John  vi.  63.)  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quick-
eneth ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing ;  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,
they  are  Spirit  and  they  are  life."  The  word  is  Spirit ;  not  philos-
ophy, not  doctrine,  not  dogma  nor  creed,  but  Spirit,  the  life.  God's
life,  Spirit  truth.  Facts  spiritual  not  physical,  are  found  in  this  the
kingdom  of  Love.

The  kingdom  of  God  is  an  undeveloped  kingdom  in  every  Soul,
and  it  waits  for  the  divine  touch  before  it  can  develop.

"  Why  is  it,  then,  if  this  be  true,  why  does  not  God  do  it  ?  He  does.
Why  do  not  daisies  grow  under  an  impenetrable  shade  ?  When  the
meadow  is  spangled  with  golden  dandelions,  what  is  the  reason  that
in  some  dark  nook,  where  we  thrust  all  broken  tools  and  things  that
are  no  longer  useful,  no  dandelions  grow?  There  is  seed  enough
everywhere,  but  things  will  not  grow  where  the  light  cannot  penetrate
to  give  them  life.  Why  is  it,  then,  that  when  God  desires  the  develop-
ment of  this  spiritual  element  in  the  human  family,  it  has  developed
in  some,  but  in  most  cases  the  animal  life  of  man  and  his  physical
faculties  are  utterly  incapable  of  understanding  the  highest  truth.
There  b  a  realm  higher  than  all  that,  and  that  part  of  man  by  which


l6       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

he  understands  science  and  philosophy  cannot  understand  this  other
and  higher  realm.

Paul  says,  in  the  spirit  of  the  Greeks :  '*  The  natural  man  under-
standeth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  neither  can  he,  for  they  are  to
be  Spiritually  discerned"

You  cannot  represent  one  element  by  the  symbolization  of  another.
It  takes  for  granted  that  the  element  of  Spiritual  intelligence,  developed
or  undeveloped,  exists  in  some  degree  in  every  man,  else  he  would
not  be  blameworthy.  Christ  spoke  to  men,  as  one  who  saw  what  was
in  them,  lying  dormant,  crystallized,  unused  and  unusable,  but  exist-
ing, a  department  out  of  which  might  come  the  percipience  of  Spirit-
ual truth ;  but  that,  as  a  general  fact,  that  department  was  not  opened
in  any  way,  and  that  the  knowledge  which  could  be  obtained  only
through  that  element  in  human  nature  was  deficient  in  those  who
could  understand  as  far  as  their  senses  went,  and,  just  as  far  as  their
mere  scientific  reasoning  carried  them,  could  understand  more  or
less  clearly  and  distinctly,  but  in  regard  to  the  highest  realm  of  truth,
which  was  God's  nature  and  God's  life,  and  the  life  corresponding  to
it  in  the  human  Soul,  they  absolutely  were  ignorant,  nor  could  they,
until  some  change  took  place,  understand  those  truths.

And  he  then  teaches  that  there  exists  an  effluence  of  the  Divine
Spirit,  which  is  not  simply  illumination  —  though  it  is  that  —  but  it  is
life  power,  the  power  of  arousing  life,  and  in  that  particular  part  of  a
Soul  where  the  cognizance  of  Divine  things  resides.

He  taught  that  God,  as  a  Spirit,  may  touch  this  inward  suscepti-
bility of  men,  this  inward  life,  and  that  its  development  would  bring
to  men  true  experience  and  understanding  of  all  truths  pertaining
to  one's  own  Soul  life,  as  distinguished  from  his  bodily  life.  He
taught  further  that  this  life-truth  of  God,  or  life-effect  springing  from
contact  of  God's  nature  with  the  human  nature,  b  inoperative  gener-
ally.

It  is  influential,  not  compulsory  ;  it  b  commanded,  yet  not  imper-
ative. This  is  not  strange,  when  you  see  the  analogy  of  truth  all  the
way  through  every  step  of  human  knowledge  in  the  lower  sphere.  A
God  defined  is  a  God  dethroned.  Three  impulses  live  in  and  actuate
man.  The  first  is  the  impulse  of  the  Spirit  of  the  elements,  terrestrial
body  and  the  vital  forces  in  the  animal  or  brute  creation.

The  second  is  the  impulse  or  spirit  of  memory  and  thought,  intel-
lectual, the  sidereal  or  Astral-body  Soul,  the  Star  Magno  or  second
self.

The  third  b  the  Divbe  Essence  or  impulse  and  Spirit  from  the  God-


FROM  NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  If

head,  the  perfect  vibration  in  concord  with  the  infinite  energy
of  nature  resting  in  the  bosom  of  the  absolute  Love,  the  perfect
conL

All  these  three  impulses  or  spirits  in  or  about  man  act  only  as  the
image  on  the  mirror  of  his  monitor  and  echo  on  the  mind.  If  one
is  fully  attuned  with  the  other  a  harmonious  life  is  the  result  It  is
frequently  said  of  persons  that  they  are  "  possessed."

It  is  only  over  or  under  action  of  some  one  of  these  impulses.  The
overaction  of  the  first  two  sometimes  opens  the  door  of  mentality  to
an  obsession,  hence  what  we  term  insanity.

The  hidden  way  is  the  Infinite  way ;  the  instinct  or  natural  mind
is  the  Star  Magno  or  seed  Astral  planted  in  the  soil  of  the  body,  which
not  unlike  a  seed  planted  in  the  earth,  deposited  in  darkness,  must
first  soften,  then  enlarge,  before  bursting  forth  to  catch  the  light  of
morning ;  so  must  the  heart  of  man  be  first  softened  in  darkness  and
suffering,  enlarged  with  love  and  unselfish  charity  toward  all,  to
burst  forth  finally  into  fruitage  through  the  Divine  light

The  Overture  of  Angels  is  heard  afresh  in  new  anthems,  and  the
Heavenly  Hosts  are  marshalled  for  a  conquest  which  will  be  com-
plete and  for  all  time.  They  have  issued  their  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence that  man  be  free,  mentally  and  spiritually,  in  the  depths  of
his  Soul,  that  creed  and  dead  forms  shall  no  longer  shackle  him  ^-
free,  perfectly  free  to  do  rights  to  think  rights  to  live  righty  and  be  his
own  prophet,  priest,  and  king.  Teachers  he  shall  have,  yes,  in  abun-
dance; but  they  shall  be  animated  by  the  true  Christ  Spirit,  seeking
not  their  own  but  their  brother's  welfare,  who  are  bom  and  in  com-
munion with  the  Holy  Angels,  and  receiving  constant  revelations
from  on  high.

.  These  advanced  and  unfolded  teachers  will  so  forcibly  and  clearly
present  the  truth  that  men  will  come  to  comprehend  how  by  dwelling
in  love  they  dwell  in  God.  They  will  realize  that  to  love  the  neigh-
bor is  logical,  practical,  and  philosophical,  that  the  neglect  or  refusal
to  do  so,  all  these  thousands  of  years,  has  caused  horrible  and  devas-
tating wars,  the  sacrifice  of  millions  and  tens  of  millions  of  lives,  and
thousands  upon  thousands  of  millions  of  money.

They  will  come  to  see  that  by  want  of  this  love  the  accumulated
products  of  their  industry  have  been  consumed,  wasted,  and  destroyed.
Man  will  realize  that  nearly  all  his  troubles  and  sufferings  have  their
inception  in  want  of  love  for  his  neighbor.

The  religion  of  the  future  will  ht  practical  love  zxiA  good-will^  ad-
vancing peace  on  earth.    It  will  be  noble,  broad,  comprehensive^


l8       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

grounded  in  science,  philosophy,  the  divine  revelations  of  nature,  and
the  teaching  of  exalted  Angels.

May  you,  dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  leave  this  world  like  a  full  shock
of  com,  gathered  in  by  the  harvesters  in  its  season,  fully  ripened  by
a  universal  brotherhood,  and  your  Soul  illuminated  by  lessons  in  the
school  of  Charity  and  Love.

Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  Paul,  were  inspired ;  Socrates,  Sakya-Mundiy
Marcus  Aurelius,  Shakespeare,  says  the  orthodox  Christian,  were  un-
inspired. Inspiration  was  exclusively  the  prerogative,  that  is,  of  the
prophets  and  teachers  through  whom  God  revealed  himself  in  Jewish
and  in  early  Christian  times.  But,  accepting  that  narrow  view  of  the
Divine  Spirit's  operation  in  the  world  of  moral  intelligence  and  feel-
ing, in  what  estimate  are  we  to  hold  the  lofty  wisdom  and  the  pure
goodness  that  the  world  has  revered  in  men  who  have  lived  beyond
the  limits  within  which  orthodox  teaching  confines  the  gifts  of  inspira-
tion ?  Whence  come  words  like  these  ?  —  are  they  from  heaven,  or  of
men?

The  Supreme  One  said  :  "  I  am  made  evident  by  my  own  power ;
and  as  often  as  there  is  a  decline  of  virtue,  and  an  insurrection  of  vice
and  injustice  in  the  world,  I  make  myself  known ;  and  thus  I  appear
from  age  to  age,  for  the  preservation  of  the  just,  the  destruction  of
the  wicked,  and  the  establishment  of  virtue."

*'  Holy  acts  of  sacrifice  are  performed  by  those  who  are  devoted  to
their  own  duties,  whose  conduct  is  right  and  free  from  blemish ;  who
are  good,  and  tread  in  good  paths."

'*  When  the  intellect  is  pure  as  well  as  the  heart,  to  it  the  region  of
the  Deity  becomes  visible."

"  God  is  near  you,  is  with  you,  is  within  you."

"  A  sacred  Spirit  dwells  within  us,  the  observer  and  guardian  of  all
our  evil  and  our  good."

"  Be  self-denying,  but  do  not  boast  of  it ;  keep  a  watch  upon  your-
self, as  your  own  most  dangerous  enemy.  Do  not  plume  yourself
upon  intellectual  knowledge,  which  is  in  itself  quite  valueless,  but  on
a  consistent  nobleness  of  action.  Never  relax  your  efforts,  but  aim
at  perfection."

Where  there  is  Virtue,  there  is  Victory,

He  who  considers  all  beings  as  existing  in  the  Supreme  Spirit,
and  the  Supreme  Spirit  as  pervading  all,  is  henceforth  incapable  of
perpetrating  any  sin  whatever.  —  Isa  Upanishad  6.

"  Speak  the  Truth.  Truth  alone  conquers,  and  not  falsehood.
Truth  means  the  blissful  correspondence  of  mind,  speech,  and  action


PROM   NIGHT  TO  LIGHT.  I9

with  one  another.  No  religion  or  morality  is  greater  than  Truth,  and
no  sin  greater  than  falsehood.  Let  mortals,  therefore,  adhere  to
Truth,  and  Truth  alone,  at  all  times.  Truth  represents  a  great  devo-
tion, and  upon  Truth  depends  the  good  effect  of  our  actions.  There
is  nothing  higher  than  Truth."

*^  Do  Justice.  Justice,  being  destroyed,  will  destroy ;  being  pre-
served, will  preserve  ;  it  must  never,  therefore,  be  violated.  Beware,
lest  Justice,  being  overturned,  overturn  thee  and  us  zlV^^^Afanu,
viii :  15.

''  Do  no  injury  to  another.  By  non-injury  is  meant  the  non-caus-
ing of  pain  of  any  kind  to  any  one,  at  any  time,  in  mind,  speech,  or
action.

*'  The  principle  of  non-injury  helps  us  in  practising  the  virtues  of
mercy,  charity,  devotion,  and  worship.  It  is  our  greatest  strength,
and  greatest  friend ;  and  it  is  the  source  of  happiness,  veracity,  and
all  that  is  good."

"  Mercy  is  the  might  of  the  righteous.  Being  treated  cruelly  do
not  return  the  cruelty.  Give  blessings  for  curses.  A  good  man
thinks  only  of  benefiting  all,  and  cherishes  no  feelings  of  hostility
toward  any  one,  even  at  the  moment  of  his  being  destroyed  by  him,
just  as  the  sandal-tree  sheds  perfume  on  the  edge  of  the  axe,  at  the
time  of  its  being  cut  down."  — Hitbpadesa.

^  Be  not  selfish.  A  selfish  inclination  is  the  root  of  the  two  sets  of
evil,  and  ought  to  be  suppressed  with  diligence."

"  Strive  not  too  anxiously  for  a  subsistence ;  that  has  been  fur-
nished by  providence.  No  sooner  is  a  creature  bom  than  milk  for  its
support  streams  from  the  breast  of  the  mother."

"Anger  is  the  passion  of  fools;  it  becomes  not  a  wise  man.*'  —
Vishnu  Purana^  i.  i.  18.

"  All  undertakings  prove  successful,  if  conducted  with  prudence."
—  Id.  i.  xiii.  78.

**  Always  speak  kindly  and  pleasantly.  Do  not  maintain  unworthy
dissensions,  or  altercations,  nor  indulge  in  idle  talk." — Manu,  iv.  139.

An  Epitome  of  Aryan  Morals,  compiled  by  request  of  the  Presi-
dent of  the  Theosophical  Society,  for  the  use  of  the  Aryan  youth.  —
Om,

'*  £swara  (the  Supreme  Soul)  resideth  in  the  heart  of  every  mortal
being.

''  Oh  man,  thou  thinkest  thou  art  alone,  and  actest  as  thou  likest.
Thou  dost  not  perceive  the  Eternal  Soul  that  dwells  within  thy  breast
Whatever  is  done  by  thee,  //  sees  and  notes  it  all.    This  Soul  is  its


20        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

own  witness,  and  its  own  refuge.    It  is  the  supreme  eternal  witness
of  man.     Do  not  offend  it"

'*  Action,  either  mental,  verbal,  or  corporeal,  bears  good  or  evil  fruit
according  as  the  action  itself  is  good  or  evil ;  and  from  the  actions  of
men  proceeded  their  various  transmigrations  in  the  highest,  the  mean,
and  the  lowest  degree.  Nobody  ever  enjoys  or  suffers,  except  from
the  effects  of  his  own  action.  Every  one  reaps  the  consequences  of
hb  conduct.''

"  Therefore,  considering  the  misery  attached  to  embodied  Souls
from  a  violation  of  duty,  and  the  imperishable  bliss  attached  to  them
from  the  proper  performance  of  all  duties ;  and  considering  also  with
thy  intellectual  powers  the  migration  of  the  Soul  according  to  its
virtue  or  vice,  thou  shouldst  constantly  fix  thy  heart  on  virtue,  and  be
always  pure  in  thought,  in  word,  and  in  deed."

"Thou  shouldst  strive  to  raise  thyself  by  thyself.  Self  is  the
friend  of  Self,  and  Self  in  like  manner  is  the  enemy  of  Self."

"  The  mind  of  man  is  the  cause  both  of  his  bondage  and  of  his
liberation.  Its  attachment  to  objects  of  sense  b  the  reason  of
hb  bondage,  and  its  separation  from  objects  of  sense  is  the  means

of  his  freedom.

"  He  who  is  capable  of  discriminating  knowledge,  should,  therefore,
restrain  hb  mind  from  all  objects  of  sense ;  and  therewith  meditate
upon  Para-Bramha,  the  Supreme  Soul,  in  order  to  attain  liberation."

"  In  the  man's  passage  to  the  next  birth,  neither  his  father,  nor
mother,  nor  son,  nor  wife,  nor  kinsman  will  bear  him  company.  The
only  thing  that  adheres  to  his  Soul  is  the  effect  of  his  action  (Karma).
Continually,  therefore,  man  ought  to  heap  up  virtue,  for  the  sake  of
securing  a  good,  inseparable  companion.  With  virtue  for  hb  guide,
he  will  pass  through  a  gloom  hard  to  be  traversed."

*  His  heart  was  in  his  work,  and  the  heart
Giveth  grace  unto  every  art."

^TAe  BuUding  rfiki  Sk^

'*  Like  shadows
Our  wishes  lengthen  as  our  sun  declines.
And  death  steals  o'er  us  like  a  gentle  sleep
Soft,  mild,  oblivious  into  the  arms  of  love.

*•  O  river  of  To-morrow,  I  uplift
Mine  eyes,  and  thee  I  follow,  as  the  night
Wanes  into  morning.
Still  follow,  follow ;  sure  to  meet  the  sun*
And  confident  that  what  the  future  yields
Will  be  the  right,  unless  myself  be  wrong."


FROM   NIGHT  TO   LIGHT.  21

Mankind  are  usually  found  complaining  of  their  lot,  forgetting  to
give  thanks  for  the  blessings  received.  Human  nature  finds  it  so
much  easier  to  grumble  because  God  has  not  given  more,  than  to  be
grateful  with  a  thankful  heart  for  what  He  has  given ;  to  spend  the
day  in  lamentation  and  complaint,  with  no  friendship  or  companion-
ship with  Spirit,  Angel,  or  God.  Kind  reader,  you  will  find  it  a
solemn  truth  that  if  a  man's  religion  or  his  love  has  failed  to  sweeten
his  temper,  he  has  gotten  the  wrong  article.

^Thisis  peace;
To  conquer  love  of  self  and  lust  of  life,
To  tear  deep-rooted  passion  from  the  breast^
To  stiU  the  inward  strife."

'^Edudn  AmoUL

Patience  cometh  by  long  suffering  and  makes  men  look  like  gods.
Calm  patience  makes  a  countenance  peaceful  as  spotless  innocence,
gentle  as  the  face  of  heaven.  The  patient  man  is  not  satisfied  with
one  good  deed  or  one  victory,  but  each  day  strings  all  together  like
so  many  pearls,  and,  looking  backward  through  the  years,  finds  a
shining  pathway  of  pearls ;  a  beautiful  retrospect.

In  the  drama  of  life,  which  is  forever  repeating  itself,  though  the
actors  continually  change,  those  who  have  never  seen  the  play  are
deeply  interested,  but  few  study  its  depths  of  meaning,  looking  only
for  pleasure  until  the  curtain  drops  upon  the  closing  scene.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  strive  to  possess  patience  and  silence.

The  Truth  of  another  and  a  hotter  world
Shines  by  the  side  of  every  path  we  tread,
With  such  a  lustre  he  who  runs  may  read


^


CHAPTER  IL

OOD  AND  THE  DIVINE  IICAOI.

There  is  an  eye  that  never  sleeps,
Beneath  the  wing  of  nig^t
There  is  an  ear  that  never  shuts,
When  sink  the  beams  of  light

There  is  an  Arm  that  never  tires,
When  human  strength  gives  way;
There  is  a  bve  that  never  fails.
When  earthly  loves  decay.

God  is  everywhere  I  the  God  who  franod

Mankind  to  be  one  mighty  family,

Himself  our  Father,  and  the  world  oar  hone.

God  is  Spirit.  God  is  Love.  God  is  Life.  God  is  Mind.  God
b  the  Subject  and  Object  of  Mind.

Wherever  are  life  and  substance,  there  is  God.  Wherever  God
is,  there  is  Being,  and  wherever  God  is  not,  there  is  no  Being.  The
Universe  is  existence  and  being  wherever  God  manifests.

As  living  substance,  God  is  one.  As  Life  and  Substance  God  is
Dual  or  twain.  He  is  the  Life  and  she  the  Substance.  God  is  per-
fect will  and  perfect  love ;  perfect  knowledge  and  perfect  wisdom ;
perfect  intelligence  and  perfect  sympathy;  perfect  justice  and  per-
fect mercy;  perfect  power  and  perfect  goodness;  perfect  harmony
and  law  and  order.

It  is  a  fundamental  Truth  that  the  Love  which  prompts  creation  is
present  from  the  beginning;  but  she  reserves  the  manifestation  of
her  love  until  the  subject  of  her  impulsion  is  able  to  bear  its  part  in
the  recognition  of  her.  First,  therefore,  is  Will,  then  Love ;  first  pro-
jection, then  recall;  first  expansion,  then  contraction;  first  motor,
then  sensory ;  first  intellectual,  then  intuitional ;  first  sensible,  then
spiritual.  In  short,  first  man,  then  woman.  Such  is  invariably  the
order  in  which  the  universal  Heart  of  Love  and  Existence  manifests
its  essmtial  dualism  of  all  nature  and  operation.

The  Misconception  of  God  and  the  Misunderstanding  of  Man  are
the  two  gigantic  obstacles  in  the  way  of  human  progress  to  the  Light
of  Truth.

22


Interpretation  of  the  Chart  God.

{As  transmitted  to  Seers  and  Adepts. )

-  All  Spiritual  Influx  and  all  Life  is  from  Otie  Grand  Spiritual  Fountain^  therefore
must  be  the  origin  of  all  Life ;  all  Truth,  all  Love,  all  Wisdom  and  Understanding,
must  flow  from  this  Fountain  into  the  soul  of  man,  and  are  felt  in  his  mind ;  they
flow  forth  from  his  thoughts  into  his  speech ;  and  from  his  will  into  his  actions.

The  Seer  Swedenborg  uses  the  following  propositions  in  his  statement  of  this
problem.

I.  That  there  are  two  worlds,  the  spiritual  world,  in  which  are  spirits  and  angels,
and  the  natural  world,  in  which  are  men.  2.  That  the  spiritual  world  existed  and
continually  subsists  from  its  own  sun,  and  that  the  natural  world  existed  and  sub-
sists from  its  own  sun.  That  there  is  one  sun  of  the  spiritual  world  and  another
sun  of  the  natural  world,  is  because  those  worlds  are  altogether  distinct;  and  a
world  derives  its  origin  from  its  sun.  3.  That  the  sun  of  the  spiritual  world  is
pure  love  from  Jehovah  God,  who  is  in  the  midst  of  it.  4.  That  from  that  sun
proceeds*  heat  and  light,  and  that  the  heat  proceeding  from  it  is  in  its  essence
love,  and  that  the  light  thence  is  in  its  essence  wisdom.  5.  That  both  that  heat
and  that  light  flow  in  into  man,  the  heat  into  his  will,  where  it  produces  the  good
of  love,  and  the  light  into  his  understanding,  where  it  produces  the  truth  of  wis-
dom. 6.  That  those  two,  heat  and  light,  or  love  and  wisdom,  flow  in  conjointly
from  God  into  the  soul  of  man,  and  through  this  into  his  mind,  its  affections  and
thoughts,  and  from  these  into  the  senses,  speech  and  actions  of  the  body.  7.  That
the  sun  of  the  natural  world  is  pure  fire,  and  that  the  world  of  nature  first  existed
and  continually  subsists  by  means  of  this  sun.  8.  That  therefore  everything  which
proceeds  from  this  sun,  regarded  in  itself,  is  dead.  9.  That  which  is  spiritual
clothes  itself  with  that  which  is  natural,  as  a  man  clothes  himself  with  a  garment.
10.  That  spiritual  things  thus  clothed  in  roan  enable  him  to  live  as  a  rational  and
moral  man,  thus  a  spiritually  natural  man.  11.  That  the  reception  of  that  influx  is
according  to  the  state  of  love  and  wisdom  with  man.  [2.  That  the  understanding
in  man  is  capable  of  being  elevated  into  the  light,  that  is,  into  the  wisdom,  in  which
the  angels  of  heaven  are,  according  to  the  improvement  and  cultivation  of  his
reason,  and  that  his  will  is  capable  of  being  elevated  in  like  manner  into  heat,  that
is,  into  love,  according  to  the  deeds  of  his  life ;  but  that  the  love  of  the  will  is  not
elevated,  except  so  far  as  the  man  wills  and  does  those  things  which  the  wisdom  of
the  understanding  teaches.  13.  That  it  is  altogether  otherwise  with  beasts.  14.
That  there  are  three  degrees  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  three  degrees  in  the  natural
world,  according  to  which  all  influx  takes  place.  15.  That  ends  are  in  the  first
degree,  causes  in  the  second,  and  effects  in  the  third.  16.  That  hence  may  appear
what  is  the  quality  of  spiritual  influx  from  its  origin  to  its  effects.

•  These  principles  are  one  in  the  Fountain  of  Life,  God,  and  proceed  as  one  from  Him,  though  they
xre  variously  received.  The  reader  is  requested  to  remember  this  explanation  when  he  meets  with  this
lorm  of  expression.  The  Spiritual  world  flows  into  the  natural  world,  and  actuates  it  in  all  its  parts,
as  well  with  men  as  with  beasts,  and  also  constitutes  the  veget.itive  principles  in  trees  and  herbs.


GOD   AND    THE   DIVINE   IMAGE.  2$

So  long  as  man  believes  in  a  personal  God  who  distributes  favors
to  some  and  punishes  others  at  will ;  a  God  that  can  be  reasoned
withy  persuaded,  flattered,  and  pacified  by  ignorant  man;  he  who
believes  thus  will  keep  himself  within  the  narrow  confines  of  igno-
rance, and  his  mind  cannot  expand  sufficiently  to  cultivate  his  Soul
into  the  light  of  Truth.  If  such  a  person  desists  from  a  wicked  act,
or  denies  himself  a  material  pleasure,  it  is  not  from  any  universal
affection  or  innate  love  of  good,  but  either  because  he  expects  a
reward  for  his  ''sacrifice,"  or  fears  God's  wrath,  and  this  fear  makes
him  a  coward  and  a  cringing  sycophant.  True  love  casts  out  all
fear,  is  never  dishonest,  and  can  exist  only  under  proper  conditions
of  adaptation.

God  is  Spirit.  God  is  Love.  God  is  the  Divine  Harmony  and
the  infinite  and  eternal  Energy  from  which  all  things  proceed.

God  (the  Absolute)  is  the  interior  Nature.  His  manifestation  is  his
exterior  appearance.  God,  being  Life  itself,  it  is  living  actively  and
united  with  God,  and  inseparably  from  Him  in  the  same  sense  as
force  is  united  with  motion;  it  is  a  spiritual  substance,  being  an
Essence  of  motion  from  a  Divine  harmony  and  a  Divine  love.  The
sensorUtm  of  God  is  frequently  called  Divine  Wisdom.

In  the  beginning  (through  Wisdom)  was  the  Word.  God  is  the
source  of  all  power,  the  active  principle  of  creation ;  the  Word  be-
comes the  passive  or  feminine  principle  and  serves  Him  as  a  mirror
in  which  He  may  see  Himself  reflected  as  the  form  of  all  beings.

God  b  a  union  of  Spirit  and  Love.  God  is  the  active  principle
and  the  Word  combined.  God  is  a  union  of  the  male  and  female
principles  through  which  a  higher  idea  is  reflected  than  in  some  other
creations  of  His  handiwork.

To  conceive  correctly  or  to  come  to  a  full  sense  of  realization,
three  factors  are  necessary,  viz.:  Knowledge^  the  Knawer,  and  the
Knoum.  If  these  exist  on  entirely  different  planes,  there  can  be  no
relation  between  them,  and  will  be  no  results.

Absolute  knowledge  means  perfect  knowledge  of  the  inner  Soul
of  things.  It  is  the  light  of  perfection,  to  obtain  which  man  must
become  perfect  in  Spirit.  Imperfect  man  cannot  know  The  Absolute.
He  can  only  witness  the  manifestations  of  the  Absolute.

God  can  only  be  known  Spiritually.  God  is  not  nature,  but  nature
is  His  manifestation.  Every  man  is  himself  a  manifestation  of  God,
and  as  the  character  of  each  man  differs  from  that  of  every  other,  so
each  man's  idea  of  God  differs  from  that  of  eveiy  other  man,  and
each  has  an  ideal  God  of  his  own.


24       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

As  the  Divine  Essence  proceeds  to  manifest  itself  in  form,  it
descends  from  generalities  to  particulars,  and  as  it  again  descends  its
individual  units  expand,  grow  and  surmount  all  obstacles,  ultimately
to  mingle  with  the  whole,  finding  its  Archetype  in  the  bosom  of  the
absolute  flame,  the  Spirit's  great  central  Sun  of  Life,  the  Soul  of  Fire
abiding  in  the  eternal  Ocean  of  Light.

The  Father  is  Fire^  the  Word,  Light,  the  Holy  Ghost,  air  in
motion.  This  was  the  sacred  mystery  of  the  Egyptians,  Syrians,  Mex-
icans, and  the  chant  of  the  Hierophant  and  that  of  the  Grand  Lama
of  the  East  are  the  same.  The  Adepts  will  instruct  the  student.  The
appearance  in  the  true  light,  is  darkness  to  the  natural  man ;  the  real
inner  truth  is  directly  contrary  to  that  which  is  apparent ;  that  which
is  light  to  the  animal  man  is  darkness  to  the  supernatural ;  that  which
is  light  and  truth  to  the  supernatural  is  darkness  to  the  natural  man.
Matter  is  darkness,  yet  how  plainly  we  see  it.  Spirit  and  Soul  are
light,  yet  how  few  perceive  them.  Thus  arise  the  misconception  of
God  and  the  misunderstanding  of  Man.

The  Adept  in  India  is  taught  that  Heat  is  life,  Flame  its  substance,
and  Light  its  manifestation.  That  Spirit  Light  is  the  Soul  of  the
world,  which  is  that  inexpressible  mystery  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
flower  of  Harmony,  or  glory  of  the  latent  Divine  fire.

God  is  Spirit.  God  is  Love ;  and  man  honors  God  best  when  he
seeks  to  be  God-like.  The  darkness  of  shadow  must  correspond  in
intensity  with  the  brightness  of  light,  and  it  is  only  through  full  knowl-
edge of  the  one  that  the  other  can  be  duly  appreciated  and  appre-
hended. He  only  can  thoroughly  appreciate  God  who  has  ample
knowledge  of  Evil.  It  is  a  profound  truth  that  the  greatest  sinner  can
grow  to  become  the  greatest  saint.

Truth  alone  b  valuable  and  it  has  nothing  to  fear.  The  crucible
does  not  harm  the  gold,  the  dross  alone  falls  away  under  the  test,  and
surely  the  true  gold  is  well  rid  of  the  dross.  Because  some  impurity
obstructs  the  truth  one  is  apt  to  reject  both,  instead  of  separating  the
truth  from  the  impurity.  That  exquisite  epitome  of  the  Soul's  history,
the  story  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  is  based  upon  the  same  text.  Only
they  who  have  gone  out  from  God,  returning,  know  Him,  —  at  once
the  cause  and  consequence  of  going  out  from  Him.

Matter  is  an  indispensable  minister  to  creation,  without  which,
and  its  limitations,  creation  were  not  possible.  It  is  impossible  to
escape  from  the  conclusion  that  the  law  of  creation  which  governs
this  physical  universe  is  but  the  expression  of  a  Spiritual  idea,  and
as  the  mind  is  but  an  attribute  of  Will,  so  will  of  Thought  is  Spirit


GOD    AND   THE    DIVINE    IMAGE.  2$

Man,  and  his  creation  as  a  physical  being,  is  no  more  nor  less
than  an  expression  of  a  spiritual  idea,  for  matter,  without  the  Spirit,
is  dead,  and  all  ideas  of  life  and  motion  must  have  originated  with
Spirit  before  they  can  be  expressed  in  matter.  Though  man  had
never  been  incarnated  in  matter,  the  Seed  Idea  or  Ray  has  always
been,  and  will  ever  be  everlasting  in  the  realms  of  Spiritual  Entities
with  God.  The  law  that  rounds  a  dew-drop  shapes  a  world,  and  the
same  principles  which  constitute  the  formation  of  one  prevail  in  all
the  systems  of  resplendent  worlds.  In  the  midst  of  all  our  human
theories,  wisdom  and  enlightened  ignorance.  Spirit  communion  and
Spiritual  revelation,  each  supplements  the  other  in  assuring  us  there
is  one  grand  central  Sun  of  Being  —  God.

We  are  informed  by  all  Physical  science  that  it  must  be  so,  and  it
is  affirmed  by  all  Spiritual  communion  and  revelation  that  it  is  truly
so ;  that  God  is  as  a  Gr^at  Central  Sun  ever  radiating  His  rays  of  love
and  light  to  all  the  systems  of  worlds  and  their  inhabitants.  This  b
the  sun  of  light,  eternal  light,  dispensed  from  the  hand  of  love,  from
God's  infinitude,  which  in  His  good  time,  when  the  Soul  is  ripened  for
the  harvest,  will  be  returned  to  Him.*

To  bring  one's  self  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  absolute  Mind  does
not  mean  occasionally  to  think  of  "God  and  the  Angel  World,"  nor
to  go  through  some  prescribed  form  of  worship,  but  to  establish  a
continuity  of  communion  of  Soul  with  Spirit,  and  a  molecular  vibration
between  the  Spiritual  part  of  man  and  the  Divine  universal  Spirit ;  it
means  to  live  continually  in  one's  higher  loves  and  higher  illuminations
of  consciousness,  which  are  alone  objects  of  true  contemplation.

In  silence  God  speaks  to  the  heart  of  man ;  in  solitude  man  com-
munes with  God.  This  is  the  state  of  true  active  clairvoyance  or  illu-
mination, and  is  very  different  from  the  ordinary  clairvoyance  of  the
day,  which  is  in  use  simply  as  an  article  of  commerce.  This  true
ittumination  and  cutive  clairvoyance  is  a  pure  and  well  developed  som-
nambulism, which  has  assimilated  the  Astral  body  and  Spiritual  con-
sciousness, with  the  Absolute  and  Divine  energy,  having  been  in  a
perfect  vibration  in  accord  with  God  and  the  Angel  world.  The  stu-
dent who  has  reached  this  point  will,  on  his  return  to  his  normal  state,
remain  in  full  possession  of  the  impressions  and  words  received,  and
of  the  visions  his  soul  has  witnessed.

Such  was  the  clairvoyance  of  Swedenborg,  the  Seer,  and  of
numerous  hierophants  of  the  present  day.  In  order  to  know,  we
must  learn,  and  in  order  to  learn  must  use  such  means  as  are  adapted

*  See  iUustration.


26       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

to  our  present  condition,  and  any  instructions  at  our  command.  If
we  have  had  no  instructions  in  knowledge,  being  uninitiated  Seers,
even  if  the  veil  were  suddenly  withdrawn  from  our  eyes,  we  should  be
dazzled  by  the  Great  Lights  like  a  man  who,  having  been  bom  blind,
is  afterward  suddenly  made  to  see.  Overwhelmed  by  new  experiences
and  unfamiliar  sensations,  he  is  unable  to  discriminate  and  judge  prop-
erly, but  the  student  of  Light  has  grown  to  understand,  both  by  expe-
rience and  instruction,  and  becomes  a  co-worker  with  Nature.

Every  form  in  Nature  is  a  symbol  of  an  idea,  and  represents  a  sign,
a  letter,  or  a  word.  A  succession  of  such  symbols  forms  a  language.
Nature  is,  therefore,  the  Divine  language  in  which  the  Universal  Mind
expresses  its  ideas.  The  highest  secrets  of  nature  are  perfectly
accessible  to  him  whose  growth  of  Soul  and  illumination  of  mental
constitution  is  so  perfected  as  to  bring  the  vibrations  of  his  being  into
perfect  accord  with  nature.

This  enables  him  to  be  a  vehicle  or  instrument  for  expression  of
the  ideas  of  Spirit  or  Universal  Mind.

£veiything  in  nature  has  an  impulse  and  a  hidden  proper  name,
and  he  who  has  the  light  to  see  the  hidden  ways  has  the  power  to
call  a  thing  by  its  proper  name,  and  can  summon  it  to  his  assbtance,
even  into  existence,  by  a  mere  vibration  caused  by  pronouncing  that
name.  There  is  only  one  genuine,  interior  language  for  man  —  the
language  of  Spirit ;  and  the  symbols  which  are  natural  must  be  per-
fectly intelligible  to  all  who  learn  that  language.  The  interior  lan-
guage is  forcibly  expressed,  and  breathes  out  the  Divine  harmony  of
Spirit,  while  the  exterior  one  is  only  a  succession  of  physical  sounds.
The  key  to  the  interior  language  is  the  divine  Logos  *  and  mental  illu-
mination. The  key  to  the  exterior  one  is  the  mental  organization  and
habit  of  collective  bodies  of  men.

There  is  a  universal  light  which  contains  the  Light  of  all  beings,
and  this  is  the  Star  Magno  or  Astral  Light,  which  is  the  living  organ
of  that  universal  language,  the  universal  symbol,  sound,  types,  and
harmonies  of  which  are  expressed  in  nature.  True  language  must
express  the  harmony  of  the  Soul  with  the  nature  of  things,  and  as
long  as  there  is  distinction  of  character  and  inharmony,  there  can  be
no  universal  harmonious  language.

£ach  body  is  the  symbol  of  an  invisible  and  corresponding  power,
and  man,  in  whom  the  highest  powers  are  contained,  is  the  most  noble
symbol  in  nature,  the  first  and  most  beautiful  letter  in  the  alphabet  of
earth.

*  See  illustrating  hieroglyphic


GOD   AND  THE   DIVINE   IMAGE.  2/

*'  Learn,  Oh  man,  to  know  thyself,  and  walk  with  the  knowledge  of
the  Spirit  within  thee,"  is  the  chant  of  the  Grand  Lama.  Spiritual
illumination  teaches  man  to  know  that  it  is  better  to  live  to  help  and
love  another  than  to  destroy  and  tear  another  in  pieces.  The  mis-
sion of  man  is  to  do  good  and  to  grow ;  to  do  that  which  is  most  use-
ful for  his  ripening  and  development

Spirit  is  powerful,  matter  weak.  The  higher  rules  and  controls
the  lower.  One  who  would  control  himself  must  rise  above  his  own
selfish  desires.  One  who  would  control  another  must  identify  himself
with  the  being  and  feeling  of  that  other,  while  poised  mentally  and
spiritually  above  him.  One  who  desires  to  control  a  Soul  Spirit  must
enter  the  sphere  of  its  attractions  and  thought,  and  then  rise  spirit-
ually above  it,  with  a  higher  ideal,  and  the  Spirit  will  be  attracted  to
him  and  will  obey  his  every  command.

Man  attains  to  the  Image  of  God  just  in  proportion  to  his  com-
prehension of  the  nature  of  God,  for  man  is  that  which  he  knowSy  and
knows  only  that  which  he  is.  Hence,  the  terms  used  to  express  God
denote  both  sexes,  and  where  only  one  sex  is  designated,  it  is  not
because  the  other  is  wanting  but  because  it  is  latent

Hence  it  is,  also,  that  in  order  to  be  made  in  the  Image  of  God,
the  individual  must  have  ripened  and  grown  from  the  animal  plane
the  dual  nature  comprised  in  one  within  himself,  —  the  masculine  and
feminine  qualities,  —  and  become  Spiritual.  The  union  of  the  dual
forces  brings  a  Spiritual  illumination  of  both  man  and  woman.

Man  is  perfect  only  when  all  humanity  is  manifested  in  him,  and
this  occurs  only  when  the  whole  Spirit  of  humanity,  that  is.  Spirit,
Love,  God  is  manifest  through  him.  Thus  God  manifests  Himself,  as
is  written  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  "God  created  man  in  His  own
Image,  male  and  female."

This  is  the  supreme  mystery  called  by  St  Paul  the  "  Mystery  of
godliness,  the  truth  which  maketh  free."  Such  are  the  doctrines  of
occult  societies,  of  secret  orders,  and  of  all  Hermetic  scriptures.
This  is  that  great  mysteiy  which  hath  been  hidden  for  ages,  and  from
generation  to  generation.

It  is  that  light  of  Spirit  knowledge,  which  man  always  discerns
when  he  succeeds  in  growing  to  and  attaining  the  light  of  the  inner
and  celestial  side  of  his  nature,  where  he  is  taught  directly  of  his  own
Divine  Spirit,  and  knows  as  he  is  known.

The  attainment  of  this  Divine  knowledge  and  growth  is  that  per-
fect peace  which  the  world  does  not  understand,  which  constitutes
an  existence  of  power  over  things  in  a  harmonious  loving  Paradise ;


28       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

this  that  ever  living  fountain  he  that  drinketh  of  which  shall  nevet
thirst ;  this  is  the  conquest  of  life  ;  it  is  that  grand  exchange  of  igno-
rance for  knowledge ;  the  victory  of  understanding  over  all  doubts
and  fears.

It  is  the  philosopher's  stone ;  a  pure  Spirit ;  an  illuminated  Soul ;  a
firm  will  and  a  clear  perception  of  the  secret  mysteries  of  life  and  death,
only  attained  through  the  secret  operations  and  ripening  of  the  Soul.

God  b  the  crowning  feature  of  the  spiritual  world,  as  man  is  that
of  the  physical,  and  numerous  instances  are  recorded  of  the  actual,
sensible  vision  of  God.

Of  the  Hebrew  prophets,  Isaiah  says  he  "  saw  the  Lord  high  and
lifted  up  " ;  Ezekiel,  that  he  *'  beheld  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel,
as  a  figure  of  fire  " ;  Daniel,  that  he  beheld  God  as  a  human  form  en-
throned in  flame ;  and  John  records  in  the  Apocalypse  a  similar  vis-
ion. The  writer  of  the  book  of  Exodus  shows  the  cognizance  of  such
visions  by  ascribing  them  not  only  to  Moses,  but  to  all  the  elders  and
leaders  of  Israel  —  in  all,  seventy-four  persons.

The  sight  of  the  "  God  of  Israel "  on  thb  occasion  is  described  as
'Mike  a  devouring  fire,"  while  other  ancient  sacred  writings  are
found  wherein  the  Lord  of  the  world  exhibits  to  the  gaze  of  Arjun
*'  His  supreme  and  heavenly  form,"  shining  on  all  sides  with  the  flame
of  light  immeasurable,  "like  the  sun  a  thousandfold,"  and  con-
taining in  His  breast  all  the  Gods  or  powers,  masculine  and  feminine,
of  the  universe ;  and,  in  still  later  days,  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  in  re-
cording the  results  of  his  own  extensive  spiritual  visions  and  experi-
ences, not  only  asserts  the  fact  of  the  vision,  but  offers  an  explana-
tion of  it.  "  God,"  he  says,  "  Who  is  the  All  in  All,  appears  to  the
Angels,  only  in  human  form,  and  men  on  earth  bear  His  Divine
Image,''  and  further  he  says,  ''  He  assumed  that  image  Himself  before
making  man  in  it  The  Lord  (that  is  the  babe  of  Bethlehem)  is  God
manifest  as  man  in  the  universe,^^  His  representative  on  earth  is  our
Lord^  while  many  Hierophants  and  modem  Seers  of  great  authority
claim  that  the  "  Ix>rd  is  God  manifest  as  a  man,"  for  in  the  Lord  the
formless  assumes  a  physical  form,  the  nameless  a  name,  the  infinite
the  definite,  and  all  these  human.  ''God's  representative  on  earth"
is  intended  by  Swedenborg  in  a  historical  and  exclusive  sense,  for  he
is  always  "  Our  Lord  "  and  representative  of  God  on  earth,  in  whom
the  Divine  Spirit  finds  manifestation  ;  and  this  is  not  in  any  one  man,
but  in  eveiy  regenerate  man.  God,  Diety,  becomes  cognizable  in  and
by  the  Soul  of  man  who  has  become  sufficiently  regenerate  and  grown
to  receive  the  vision.     It  is  notzsz,  man  in  the  exclusively  physical


GOD   AND   THE    DIVINE    IMAGE.  29

sense,  but  as  a  man  who  has  united  both  masculine  and  feminine,
illuminated  by  the  Spirit  as  one  being,  or  as  humanity  itself.  The
Lord  is  God  manifested  in  substance,  and  is  dual  in  form,  because
God  is  dual  in  essence,  and  the  true  vision  of  God,  Deity  under  a  def-
inite form,  dual  and  human,  the  Androgyne^  or  Androgynous.

Herein  lies  the  famous  riddle  of  the  Sphinx,  the  Egyptian  mystery.
Little  wonder  is  it  that  between  Spirit  Truth  and  the  Materialist
should  be  a  gulf  so  impassable,  a  feud  so  irreconcilable,  seeing  that
while  one  seeks  to  grow  and  ripen  by  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  selfish
lower  nature  to  his  higher  one,  of  gentleness  and  unselfish  love,  not
alone  for  himself  but  for  all  others,  the  Materialist  cultivates  only  the
Bgo^  /,  looking  only  to  the  objective,  turning  vivisector,  becoming
actually  fiendish.  Those  who  cannot  see  God  '*  by  the  eye  of  faith  and
love  "  do  not  hear  His  voice  and  fail  to  comprehend  Him  in  His  works.

Doubts  are  infantine  realities.  The  best  way  to  determine  the
right  or  wrong  of  a  proposed  act,  when  the  Soul  does  not  respond  nor
the  mirror  reflect  the  true  way,  is  to  ask  one's  self  the  question,  '^  Will
it  honor  God  ?  "

We  cannot  think  of  God  without  being  made  better  by  the  thought,
for  God  prompts  all  good  deeds;  they  are  never  accidental.  The
knowledge  which  descends  into  the  Soul  from  above  excels  any  that
can  be  attained  by  the  mere  exercise  of  the  intellect.

Intuition  is  the  operation  of  the  Soul;  the  knowledge  received
through  it  from  Spirit,  descending  into  the  Soul,  fills  it  with  the  per-
ception of  the  interior  and  true  cause  of  Things.

The  Trinity,  from  its  original  point  of  radiation,  is  on  the  Spiritual
plane,  that  is  Love,  Wisdom,  and  the  Word.  And  on  all  planes  what-
soever, it  is,  in  some  mode,  Father,  Mother,  and  Child.  "  For  there
are  three  which  bear  record  in  heaven  "  (or  the  invisible  world),  and
these  three  are  one.  And  there  are  three  which  bear  record  on  Earth
(or  the  vbible  world),  and  these  three  agree  in  one,  being  Spirit,  Soul,
and  Body.

The  Trinity  of  antiquity  did  not  fall  from  the  mark,  —  Fire  being
the  first  operative  power  of  nature,  so  called  the  Father  of  the  world
and  men ;  Earth  the  second  operative  power  of  nature,  the  maternal ;
the  third.  Spirit.  On  the  high  altar  of  a  noble  secret  order  are  seen
the  three  double  letters  of  our  modem  alphabet,  thus :  —

id»  £s*  ""■  Jv.   JV.  "^"  O.    i^.

Z,  the  fire  principle  or  Soul  of  refreshing  vigor  to  earth,  the
grosser  part  of  love ;  R,  the  passive  and  receptive,  the  motherhood,


30       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  gentler  part  of  love ;  S,  the  invisible  sacred  Spirit,  the  higher  part
of  love.  Only  through  S.  S.  can  mortals  see  into  the  hidden  secrets
of  the  invisible  world.

The  Trinity  of  the  oldest  religion  known  was  Fire,  Air,  and  Sun,
while  that  of  the  scientific  theorist  of  to-day  is  little  better,  viz. :  Gaseous,
Liquid,  and  Solid.  Discoveries  are  not  all  new  inventions.  Far  from
it,  they  are  forgotten  things  found  again.  The  Eastern  student  finds
in  a  certain  order  this  Trinity.

The  Father  is  the  Soul  of  Fire,  that  life  which  breathes  the  gen-
erative fire ;  the  Word,  Light,  the  receptive  Motherhood ;  the  Holy
Ghost,  Spirit  of  the  Air  in  motion.

Again  it  is  found  that  planets  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  form  a
Trinity  analogous  to  Water,  Air,  and  Fire,  with  colors  of  Golden,
Purple,  and  Red.  The  Rosicrucians  had  a  Trinity  in  the  tri-color  of
a  banner.  First,  Blue,  the  baptism  by  water,  the  natural  bread  of  the
Host  of  the  body ;  second.  White,  the  air  or  light,  the  intermediate
for  good  or  for  evil ;  third,  Crimson,  the  fire  supernatural,  the  Spirit
blood  of  life,  the  fire-bom  world.

God,  as  Absolute  Being,  having  no  form  nor  name  objective,
cannot  and  may  not  be  represented  under  any  appellation ;  but
through  the  creative  love,  the  Divine  Mind  conceives  the  ideal
humanity  and  makes  the  human  Soul  a  vehicle  for  a  seed  essence  of
His  light,  in  which  to  descend  from  being  into  existence;  for  the
Spirit  of  God  is  as  a  flame  of  fire,  which  the  word  of  God  divideth
into  many,  yet  the  original  flame  is  not  decreased,  nor  the  power
thereof,  nor  is  the  brightness  thereof  lessened.  Thou  mayest  light
many  lamps  from  the  flame  of  one,  yet  thou  dost  in  no  way
diminish  that  first  flame.

It  is  Love  alone  that  redeemeth,  and  Love  hath  nothing  of  her
own.  God  withstandeth  not  God,  for  Love  and  God  are  one.  Love
redeemeth;  Love  lifteth  up;  Love  enlighteneth ;  Love  doth  not
forget,  but  advanceth  Souls,  for  she  is  of  the  Soul,  and  Love
hath  everlasting  remembrance.  These  are  the  Divine  fires  which
bum  forever  before  the  presence  of  God,  which  proceed  from  the
Great  Spirit  and  are  one  with  the  Spirit.  God  is  divided,  yet
not  diminished,  for  as  He  giveth  out  the  light,  it  lighteth  anew
other  lights  and  the  light  increaseth;  God  is  All  and  God  is
One.

In  the  promotion  of  the  development  of  knowledge  of  God
and  Spirit  Truth,  mental  illumination  is  a  prime  factor.  By  means
of  it,  the  man  is  elevated  to  that  region,  interior  and  superior.


GOD  AND  THE  DIVINE   IMAGE.  3 1

where  alone  peace  and  serenity  prevail,  and  the  perception  of
truth  is  unobstructed ;  the  Soul  thus  attaining  to  its  full  altitude,
the  mind  has  no  longer  to  reason  and  compare,  for  he  sees  and
knows,  and  his  Soul  is  content  in  the  attunement  with  the  Ab-
solute Love.  For  him  the  dual  life  in  the  Divine  order  of  his
Spiritual  system  is  carried  to  the  throne  of  God,  for  the  intellect
and  intuition  of  the  Divine  male  and  female  forces  are  one  in
the  blissful  home  of  his  parent  Spirit,  thus  forming  the  Angelic
seed  —  a  perfected  Soul.  The  uniting  of  these  dual  forces  within
forms  the  fourth  dimension  of  space,  whence  all  things  have  their
continuity  and  succession,  and  where  alone,  therefore,  they  can
be  comprehended.

Thrice  happy  is  the  man  whose  enthusiasm  for  truth  has  given
him  an  impelling  force,  without  which  he  could  never  have  left  the
outer,  nether,  and  apparent,  and  gained  the  inner,  upper,  and  real
truth  and  knowledge  of  life,  and  awakens  to  find  there  is  realfy  no
*^  invisible  world."

Dumfounded,  perhaps,  at  first,  he  soon  learns  that  the  mys-
teries of  life  overleap  and  destroy  all  human  theories  and  philoso-
phies.

Not  to  know  impulses  of  Soul  is  not  to  know  Love,  and  he  who
knows  not  Love  is  not  yet  fully  a  man,  for  he  has  yet  to  develop  in
himself  that  which  alone  contemplates  and  makes  the  true  man,  that
is,  the  dual  forces  of  his  bi-sexual  nature.

The  Materialist,  on  the  contrary,  regarding  matter  as  all,  and  its
limitations  as  inherent  in  being,  sees,  in  the  endeavor  to  transcend
those  limitations,  only  a  suicidal  attempt  to  escape  from  all  being.
He  strives,  therefore,  to  attach  himself  yet  more  closely  to  matter,
little  as  he  esteems  it,  and  is  content  when  he  has  succeeded  in  mak-
ing from  those  merely  material  things,  such  selection  as  ministers  best
to  his  bodily  gratification,  nor  can  he  comprehend  one  of  sound  mind
who  seeks  for  more.  As  St.  Paul  says,  "  The  things  of  the  Spirit  are
foolishness  to  the  natural  man."

By  the  vision  of  God  as  the  Lord,  the  clairvoyant  Seer  knows
that  the  Angel  of  this  celestial  kingdom  is  within ;  that  the  king  is  also
the  queen ;  that  in  respect  of  form,  no  less  than  substance,  man  is
created  in  God's  own  image,  male  and  female ;  and  that  in  ascend-
ing and  becoming  *'one  with  the  Father,"  man  ascends  to  and
becomes  one  with  the  Mother,  for  in  the  form  beheld  is  the  vision
of  Adonia,  the  Androgyne,  the  bi-sexual,  both  He  and  She  made
manifest


32       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

What  and  who,  then,  is  Adonia?*  This  is  a  question  which
involves  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity.

The  reader  knows  well  that  generation  is  not  of  one,  but
of  twain,  male  and  female.  And  inasmuch  as  that  which  is  gen-
erated partakes  necessarily  of  the  nature  of  the  generators,  it  there-
fore must  be  dual.  That,  then,  which  in  the  current  presenta-
tion of  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  termed  the  Father,  is  in
reality  the  Father-Mother,  and  constitutes  the  first  and  second  per-
sons of  the  Godhead;  that  which  is  begotten  of  them,  the  off-
spring, is  really  the  third  person  in  the  Godhead,  and  complet-
ing the  Trinity  is  also  a  dual  being,  not  merely  Son,  although
so  called,  but  is  prototype  of  both  sexes,  and  called  in  token
thereof,  Jehovah,  Lord,  £1  Shadi,  Adonia,  etc.,  each  of  which
names  implies  duality.  Having  for  Father  the  Spirit  of  life»  and
for  Mother  the  Great  Deep,  which  is  Substance,  Adonia  possesses  the
potentiality  of  both  sexes,  and  wields  the  dual  powers  of  all  things.
From  the  Godhead  thus  constituted  proceeds  through  Adonia,  die
uncreated,  creative  Spirit,  the  Divine  informer  and  fashioner  of  all
things,  the  Spirit  of  a  flame  of  fire,  who  is  called  the  Holy  Ghost

GoD.t

Oh  thou  eternal  One  I  whose  presence  bright
All  space  doth  occupy,  all  motion  guide ;
Unchanged  through  time's  all  devastating  flight  |
Thou  only  God  t    There  is  no  God  beside  I
Being  above  all  beings  t    Mighty  One  1
Whom  none  can  comprehend  and  none  explore^
Who  fiirst  existence  with  Thyself  ^ont, ;
Embracing  all,  ^ supporting, — ruling  o'er,—
Being  whom  we  call  God — and  know  no  more  I

Thou  from  primeval  nothingness  didst  call

First  chaos,  then  existence ;  —  Lord,  on  Thee

Eternity  had  its  foundation :-~  all

Sprung  forth  from  Thee ;  —  of  light,  joy,  harmonjrt

Sole  origin ;  —  all  life,  all  beauty  Thine.

Thy  word  created  all,  and  doth  create ;

Thy  splendor  fills  all  space  with  rays  divbe.

Thou  art,  and  wert,  and  sbalt  be  1    Glorioos  I    Gieatl

Light-giving,  life-sustaining  Potentate.

*  See  Ulostration.

t  Translated  from  the  Russian  of  Derzhaving  by  Sir  John  Bowring,  who  says  that  tUs
poem  has  been  translated  into  Japanese,  by  order  of  the  emperor,  and  is  hung  up,  embroidered
with  gold,  in  the  temple  of  Jeddo.  It  has  also  been  translated  into  the  Chinese  and  Tartar
languages,  written  on  a  piece  of  rich  silk,  and  suspended  in  the  imperial  palace  at  Pdda.


GOD  AND  THE  DIVINE   IMAGE.  33

In  its  sublime  research^  philosophy
May  measure  out  the  ocean  deep —may  count
The  sands  or  the  sun's  rays  —  but  God  I  for  thee
There  is  no  weight  nor  measure :  none  can  mount
Up  to  thy  mysteries ;  Reason's  brightest  spark.
Though  kindled  by  Thy  light,  in  vain  would  try
To  trace  Thy  counsels,  infinite  and  dark :
And  thought  is  lost,  ere  thought  can  soar  so  high.
Even  like  past  moments  in  eternity.

Thy  chains  the  unmeasured  universe  surround :

Upheld  by  Thee,  by  Thee  inspired  with  breath  I

Thou  the  beginning  with  the  end  hast  bound.

And  beautifully  mingled  life  and  death  1

As  sparks  mount  upward  from  the  fiery  blaze,

So  suns  are  bom,  so  worlds  spring  forth  from  Thet

And  as  the  spangles  in  the  sunny  rays

Shine  round  the  silver  snow,  the  pageantry

Of  heaven's  bright  army  glitters  in  Thy  praise.

A  million  torches  lighted  by  Thy  hand
Wamder  unwearied  through  the  blue  abyss :
They  own  Thy  power,  accomplish  Thy  command*
All  gay  with  life,  all  eloquent  with  bliss.
What  shall  we  call  them  ?    Piles  of  crystal  light-*
A  glorious  company  of  golden  streams  —
Lamps  of  celestial  ether  burning  bright  —
Suns  lighting  systems  with  their  joyous  beams?
But  Thou  to  these  art  as  the  noon  to  night

Yes !  as  a  drop  of  water  in  the  sea.

All  this  magnificence  in  Thee  is  lost ;  —

What  are  ten  thousand  worlds  compared  to  Thee ;

And  what  am  /  then  ?    Heaven's  unnumbered  hoft*

Though  multiplied  by  myriads,  and  arrayed

In  all  the  glory  of  sublimest  thought,

Is  but  an  atom  in  the  balance  weighed

Against  Thy  greatness,  is  a  cipher  brought

Against  infinity !    What  am  I  then  ?    Nought

Nought  t  but  the  effluence  of  Thy  light  divine,
Pervading  worlds,  hath  reach'd  my  bosom,  too;
Yes  1  in  my  spirit  doth  Thy  spirit  shine
As  shines  the  sunbeam  in  a  drop  of  dew.
Nought  t  but  I  live,  and  on  hope's  pinions  fly
Eager  towards  Thy  presence ;  for  in  Thee
I  live,  and  breathe,  and  dwell ;  aspiring  high
Even  to  the  throne  of  Thy  divinity.
I  am,  O  God  I  and  surely  TAon  must  be  f


34       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Thou  art !  directing,  guiding  adl,  Thou  art  1

Direct  my  understanding  then  to  Thee ;

Control  my  spirit,  guide  my  wandering  heart

Though  but  an  atom  'midst  immensity,

Still  I  am  something,  fashioned  by  Thy  hand  1

I  hold  a  middle  rank  'twixt  heaven  and  earth.

On  the  last  verge  of  mortal  being  stand.

Close  to  the  realms  where  angels  have  their  biitfay

Just  on  the  boundaries  of  the  spirit-land  1

The  chain  of  being  is  complete  in  me ;
In  me  is  matter's  last  gradation  lost.
And  the  next  step  is  spirit  —  Deity  I
I  can  command  the  lightning,  and  am  dust  I
A  monarch,  and  a  slave ;  a  worm,  a  god  t
Whence  came  I  here,  and  how  ?  so  marvellously
Constructed  and  conceived  ?  unknown !  this  clod
Lives  surely  through  some  higher  energy ;
For  from  itself  alone  it  could  not  be !

Creator,  yes  I  Thy  wisdom  and  Thy  word
Created  me  I  Thou  source  of  life  and  good  I
Thou  spirit  of  my  spirit,  and  my  lord  I
Thy  light.  Thy  love,  in  their  bright  plentitode
Filled  me  with  an  immortal  soul,  to  spring
Over  the  abyss  of  death,  and  bade  it  wear
The  garments  of  eternal  day,  and  wing
Its  heavenly  flight  beyond  this  little  sphere,
Even  to  its  source  —  to  Thee  —  its  Author  there.

O  thoughts  ineffable  I    O  visions  bless'd  I
Though  worthless  our  conceptions  all  of  Thee,
Yet  shall  Thy  shadowed  image  fill  our  breast,
And  waft  its  homage  to  Thy  Deity,
God  I  thus  alone  my  lowly  thoughts  can  soar ;
Thus  seek  Thy  presence — Being  wise  and  good  I
'Midst  Thy  vast  works  admire,  obey,  adore ;
And  when  the  tongue  is  eloquent  no  more,
The  soul  shall  speak  in  tears  of  gratitude.

The  doctrine  which  regards  the  universe  as  the  thought  of  God  is
a  true  one ;  but  the  universe  is  not  therefore  unsubstantial.  God  is  a
real  Being,  and  that  which  He  thinks  into  being  is  also  God.  There*
fore,  being  the  thought  or  idea  of  the  Divine  Mind,  the  universe  is  the
Substance  of  that  mind,  that  substance  which  is  God.  His  ideas,  like
Himself,  are  real  beings  and  Divine  personages.  Put  forth  by  and  in
a  certain  sense  divided  from  God,  yet  attuned  with  Him,  in  order  to
accomplish  His  purposes,  they  become  messengers  of  God,  that  is


GOD  AND  THE   DIVINE   IMAGE.  35

Angels,  among  whom  those  to  whom  is  assigned  a  condition  below
that  of  God  or  Hb  Angels,  a  condition  no  longer  one  of  Spirit  and
Love,  are  known  and  called  '*  Fallen  Angels.''

The  '*  Fall  of  the  Angels,"  therefore,  denotes  simply  the  original
and  cosmic  descent  of  Spirit  into  the  condition  of  Matter,  that  the
Angelhood  may  come  through  that  unity  of  Faith,  and  Knowledge  of
the  Son  of  God,  unto  perfect  manhood.

Pilgrims  of  the  Illuminati,  and  all  dwellers  of  the  threshold,
who  believe  in  one  God  believe  also  that  the  universe  is  filled
with  an  immense  Ocean  of  Spirit  or  of  Life ;  and  that  Spirit  b  of  the
body  of  God,  who  is  Love ;  —  a  Divine  harmony  of  wisdom  and  law,
which  sends  out  an  infinite  and  eternal  energy  from  which  all  things
proceed ;  and  that  in  this  limitless  ocean  of  Spirit  dwells  an  infinite
Mind  —  the  Divine  Mind — God,  who  is  the  great  Architect  and  the
mind  that  creates  and  builds  all  things ;  that  He  who  is  Spirit  Love
and  Wbdom  fills  the  universe ;  that  He  is  the  invisible  and  eternal
energy  of  nature,  always,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  being  the  pure
essence  of  Love,  invisible  to  this  sidereal,  terrestrial  world  ;  that  God
and  Spirit  are  one ;  that  He  is  the  Framer  of  all  worlds,  the  Father
of  all  men,  the  Author  of  all  other  beings ;  that  His  love,  His  power,
Hb  wbdom  and  goodness  are  adequate  to  this  great  end,  that  is  to
say,  infinite.

Such  a  believer  knows  that  God  and  all  His  laws  are  unchange-
able ;  that  He  made  no  blunder  or  mistake  in  His  creations  ;  that  all
Hb  ways  are  infinitely  just  and  true ;  that  mankind,  the  highest  type
of  Hb  creation  on  this  globe,  was  given  great  privileges,  so  that  with
freedom  of  thought  he  could  have  the  liberty  of  advantages  for  the
cultivation  of  his  Soul's  growth  to  ripening  by  Spirit  and  finally  to
reaching  a  reunion  of  Spirit  in  the  bosom  of  Absolute  Love,  and  that
the  Souls  of  men,  when  grown  into  Spirit,  partake  of  the  nature  of
their  Father,  and  are  Divine.  And  he  believes,  further,  that  so-called
death  is  only  a  transition,  where  the  external  body  of  man  mingles
again  with  the  elements  of  earth,  never  more  to  be  reclaimed  by  the
man  who  relinquishes  it,  but  that  the  Soul  and  Spirit  survive  the
shock  of  death  and  that  in  and  by  them  man  is  immortal ;  that,  after
death  and  the  awakening,  this  Spirit  constitutes  man's  Spiritual  body  ;
that  it  has  senses  correspondent  to  all  the  external  ones,  which  for  the
most  part  remain  dormant  in  the  present  state  of  being  although  even
in  the  present  life  they  are  sometimes  opened,  more  or  less  perfectly,
through  the  Astral,  or  Star  magno,  of  the  Soul,  which  vibrates  as  a
pendulum,  between  the  Spirit  and  the  Animal  man,  and  by  which


36        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

invisible  things  are  made  discernible  through  inner  senses,  such  as
clairvoyance,  clairaudience,  etc.

At  death  the  real  man,  that  is  to  say  the  Trinity,  Astral,  Soul,  and
Spirit,  rises  from  and  is  loosened  from  this  earthly  house,  and  that
death  works  no  change  in  the  intellectual,  affectional,  spiritual,  and
moral  nature  of  the  man ;  this  transition  is  only  the  being  let  loose
into  the  infinite ;  as  the  Angels  are  quite  free  to  choose  their  works
of  Love,  God  gave  man,  whom  He  created  only  a  little  lower  than
they,  freedom  to  choose  the  best  good  and  his  own  loves ;  this
freedom  necessarily  gave  also  the  power  to  reject  good  and  choose
evil.  The  highest  state  of  happiness  possible  for  man  consists
in  living  in  perfect  conformity  to  the  Divine  Law  of  Wisdom  and
Love.

The  Divine  law  is  so  constituted  that  selfishness  and  evil,  hate
and  revenge,  deception  and  falsehood,  want  of  charity,  and  love,
benevolence,  and  fellow-feeling,  make  a  life  of  unfruitfulness,  abound-
ing in  restless  agitation  and  miseries.

Man,  having  violated  the  Divine  law,  becomes  wretched  and  un-
happy just  in  proportion  to  the  extent  and  nature  of  that  violation ;
and  when  by  such  violation  he  becomes  thus  wretched  and  unhappy,
it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  restore  him  to  happiness,  that  he  should  be
regenerated  and  refined  by  this  fire  of  affliction  and  brought  to  a
sense  of  being  loosed  from  all  the  past  and  brought  again  to  act  in
conformity  with  the  Divine  law.  He  will  become  happy  and  at  peace
again  just  in  proportion  as  he  has  been  led  to  at-one-ment  and  con-
formity to  that  Law,  and  born  again  to  the  light  of  truth ;  and  uni-
versal Love  is  the  Divine  Truth,  leading  men  to  conform  their  lives
to  the  Divine  Law  by  the  performance  of  every  duty  to  their  fellow-
men  as  well  as  themselves.  God  requires  of  man  perfect  conformity
to  the  Divine  Law,  and  in  all  worlds  an  opportunity  is  given  him  for
progress  and  for  ripening  his  Soul  by  Spirit.  "God  does  not  willingly
afflict  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men,"  nor  does  He  punish  any  vindic-
tively. In  the  whole  universe  and  all  the  worlds  of  Divine  Creation,
there  is  a  law  that ''  whatsoever  a  man  sows,  that  shall  he  also  reap,"
and  the  true,  actual  measure  of  every  man's  religion  and  life  is  the
amount  of  good  he  unselfishly  does  in  the  world.

God  requires  no  sacrifices,  but  universal  love  to  all  things.  Inter-
course may  be  established  between  the  Souls  of  two  persons,  both
being  still  in  the  body,  no  matter  by  how  great  a  distance  their  bodies
may  be  separated,  by  and  through  the  law  of  attunement  and  har-
mony.   Disembodied  Souls  from  the  world  of  Spirit  can  and  do  com-


GOD  AND  THE  DIVINE  IMAGE.  37

municate  with  mankind  through  the  same  law,  and  on  this  proof  is
founded  the  certainty  of  future  life  and  existence.

Love  is  the  attunement  and  self-completion  of  the  dual  forces ;  it
b  union  of  corresponding  opposites  in  the  same  substance,  and  sex
has  its  origin  in  the  very  nature  of  God.  Sex,  says  the  Kabala,  b  the
true  God  of  Hosts.  Sex,  says  the  Egyptian,  b  the  true  light  of
Wbdom.

Knowledge  of  the  Bi-sexual  forces,  says  the  Adept,  b  the  only
pathway  to  Spirit,  the  inner  perception  of  which  is  that  knowledge  ot
the  Soul  of  the  universe  and  the  individual's  own  larger  self,  for  only
Soul  can  read  Soul.

All  these  theories  are  embraced  in  every  inspired  book  of  all  ages,
more  especially  in  the  Bible  and  New  Testament.  If  there  b  any
truth  in  hbtory ;  if  any  truth  in  the  Bible,  Spiritual  communion  and
Spiritual  manifestations  are  as  old  as  the  ages,  and  have  been  held
sacred  truths  by  all  races  of  men.

The  name  of  athebt  b  more  an  epithet  which  b  hurled  against  a
person  who  differs  from  us  in  religious  opinions,  than  anything  else.

It  b  doubtful  whether  there  ever  was  a  person  who  honestly  and
conscientiously  denied  the  existence  of  hb  Creator.  Athebm  b  not
consbtent  with  the  construction  of  the  human  mind,  and  it  b  hardly
credible  that  there  are  atheists  in  fact  On  the  one  hand  we  are  apt  to
suspect  a  man  of  atheism  whenever  his  conception  of  God  differs  from
ours,  and  on  the  other  there  are  persons  who,  in  a  kind  of  bravado,
say  things  with  their  lips  of  which  neither  their  head  nor  their  heart  b
cognizant.  The  collected  experience  of  mankind  pronounces  strongly
against  athebm.  From  the  north  to  the  south,  from  the  east  to  the
west ;  in  fertile  lands  and  in  deserts ;  upon  mountains  and  in  valleys ;
upon  continents  and  diminutive  blands ;  wherever  a  human  foot  has
left  an  imprint,  we  find  the  recognition  of  the  existence  of  God  ex-
pressed in  some  form.  Through  the  gloom  of  the  past,  as  far  back  as
the  human  memory  will  carry  us,  we  behold  people  acknowledging  a
supreme  being.

Whether  they  called  it  Ra  or  Ptah,  Jupiter  or  Osiris,  Jahme  or
Chemosh,  matters  little;  whether  they  expressed  their  reverence,
adoration,  and  gratitude  by  bloody  sacrifices,  by  artful  dances,  or  by
songs  and  prayers,  matters  still  less ;  the  fact  remains  that  the  God
idea  must  have  been  not  only  consistent  with  the  human  mind  but
that  it  b  ever  co-existent  with  the  human  race.  We  see  untutored
man  seek  for  that  hidden  force  behind  every  tree,  upon  mountains,
and  in  valleys;  we  see  hun  listen  for  its  voice  in  the  roll  of  the


38       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

thunder,  the  roar  of  the  sea,  the  murmur  of  the  brook,  and  the  rustle
of  the  leaf ;  we  see  him  attempt  to  verify  it  by  his  touch,  though  it
constantly  escapes  his  grasp ;  we  see  him  endeavor  to  find  a  name
for  the  unutterable.  Unable  to  remove  the  veil,  unable  to  detach  the
finite  from  the  infinite,  he  often  mistakes  one  for  the  other,  and  we
behold  him  worshipping  first  tangible  objects,  as  in  fetish  worship,
then  rise  to  the  adoration  of  semi-intangible,  finally  reaching  the
intangible.

EccLESiASTES  xli.  7  :  '<  Then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  earth,  as  it
was,  and  the  Spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave  it."  It  is  also
written  "  I  am  the  God  of  the  living  man  and  not  of  the  dead."  And
"  God  created  man  in  His  own  Image,"  which  is  only  the  inner  sub-
jective man.

This  narrow  house  returns  to  dust  again,  and  God  is  of  the  living
and  not  of  the  dead.  Men  are  so  apt  to  look  only  to  the  objective
and  external  part  of  things,  who  with  a  little  thought  would  see  the
fallacy  of  following  the  objective  in  any  science  or  religion.

Dear  reader,  strive  to  remember  that  Spirit  ways  are  always  oppo-
site to  human  ways ;  this  will  save  you  from  sinking  into  the  mire  of
human  argument  and  doubt,  finally  to  be  engulfed  in  the  dark  waters
of  the  lagoon  —  Materialism.

If  you  are  enabled  to  reach  the  object  and  Spirit  which  the  com-
piler hopes  and  desires  you  may  reach,  you  will  always  find  open
portals  to  the  true  God,  for  the  thoughts  of  God  are  expressed  in
nature's  language.

The  image  of  God  in  man  is  the  perfect  attunement  of  his  dual  being;
that  perfect  love^  male  and  female^  in  its  perfect  cord  in  the  Soul  of  the

inner  man.

On  the  physical  plane  the  animal  man  is  not  Man  but  only  a  rude
Boyy  impetuous,  turbulent,  and  headlong  in  his  gross  barbaric  mis-
judgment.  Such  is  the  Materialist,  having  all  the  deficiencies  of  a
boy  in  the  Spiritual  truth,  intellectual  or  moral,  that  the  term  implies,
until  the  hour  comes,  usually  ushered  in  by  calamity  or  disappointment,
when  he  renounces  self  and  his  own  exclusive  centrifugal  impres-
sions, and  yields  to  a  higher  invisible  centripetal  attraction,  doing
which  with  all  his  heart  he  awakes  to  a  higher  sense  of  life.  The
unfortunate  Materialist,  who,  by  his  own  act,  cuts  himself  off  from
the  intuition  of  Spirit,  takes  matter  for  substance,  and,  sharing  the
limitations  of  matter,  loses  the  capacity  for  knowledge.

Man  rose  into  his  true  life  and  attained  the  full  Image  of  God,
through  the  culture  of  the  woman  within  him,  which  cultivates  his


GOD  AND   THE    DIVINE   IMAGE.  39

Soul  and  his  intuition  of  Spirit  and  God.  She  was  and  is  his  initiator
into  the  knowledge  of  life  and  mysteries  of  Divine  things.

No  penalty  incurred  by  man  ever  is  or  can  be  remitted  by  God
alone,  since  Divine  Justice  is  Just.

Nor,  for  the  same  reason,  can  it  be  borne  by  another,  since  the
substitution  of  the  innocent  for  the  guilty  would  in  itself  be  a  viola-
tion of  justice,  an  absolute  error  and  wrong.

Therefore  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement  and  redemption  as
ordinarily  presented  and  accepted  represents  a  total  misconception  of
the  truth,  and  is  derogatory  at  once  to  the  Divine  character  and  the
Spirit  economy.

That  which  the  Christs  of  all  ages  have  done  for  man  b  but  to
teach  him  what  he  may  be  in  himself y  by  bearing,  each  for  himself  that
cross  of  renunciation  which  they  have  borne,  —  ministering  to  the
salvation  of  the  world  through  an  unselfish  and  universal  love ;  lifting
up  the  afflicted  and  broken-hearted ;  refreshing  and  bringing  hope  to
those  whose  hearts  are  heavy  with  desolation  and  despair,  —  there-
fore they  are  truly  said  to  be  Saviours  of  Souls,  whose  doctrine,  love,
and  example  have  redeemed  men  from  death,  and  made  them  heirs  of
eternal  life.  The  wisdom  they  attained  they  kept  not  secret,  but
freely  gave  as  they  had  freely  received.  And  that  which  they  gave
was  their  own  life,  and  they  gave  it  knowing  that  the  children  of  dark-
ness would  turn  on  them  and  rend  them,  in  return  for  the  gift  of  love.

But  with  the  Christs,  wisdom  and  love  are  one,  and  the  testament
of  life  is  written  in  the  blood  of  the  testator.  Here  is  the  diflFerence
between  the  Christ  and  the  mere  Adept  in  the  knowledge  of  Spirit
and  Soul.  The  Christ  gives  and  dies,  in  giving  thereby  planting
many  seeds  of  truth,  because  love  constrains  and  no  fear  withholds
him ;  the  Adept  is  prudent  in  a  worldly  sense  and  keeps  his  treasure
and  his  darling  for  himself  alone.

But,  in  this  age  of  liberty  and  first  dawning  of  the  morning  of
Light,  let  all  true  Pilgrims  of  the  holy  mysteries  give  out  to  those  who
can  receive  as  freely  as  they  have  received.  If  we  are  thus  saved  by
the  Love  of  Christ,  it  will  be  by  the  pure,  unselfish  love  we  ourselves
manifest  to  others.

Man  made  in  the  Image  of  God,  the  individual,  must  comprise
within  himself  the  perfect  masculine  and  feminine  Spiritual  qualities
of  exbtence^  a  perfect  octave  of  both  man  and  woman  vibrations.
Man  is  perfect  only  when  the  whole  Spirit  of  Humanity  —  that  is,  God
—  is  manifest  through  him,  as  is  written, "  God  created  man  in  His
own  Image^  male  and  female.    When  man  attains  this  inner  attune-


40       THE  HIDDBN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ment  of  dual  being,  he  has  found  the  celestial  Soul  region  of  his
being,  where  he  is  taught  directly  of  his  own  Divine  Spirit,  and  knows
even  as  he  is  known.

This  is  Mental  Illumination^  and  this  condition  is  that  of  truth,
understanding  and  knowledge.  This  is  the  Word  or  Spirit  of  under-
standing and  knowledge.     7^  Divine  Thought.

Thus  reign  the  Sacred  Trinity,  —  Wisdom,  Love,  and  Under-
standing.

The  Word.

When  man  reaches  this  glory,  he  is  redeemed  from  material  limita-
tions, and  again  becomes  pure  in  Spirit ;  he  is  one  in  all  and  through
the  hearts  of  all,  is  one  with  God.

Law  governs  all  things.  The  doctrine  of  chance  accounts  for
nothing.  Through  the  Law  of  the  Divine  Economy  which  governs
all  things,  the  heart  of  God  beats  in  the  slender  pulsations  of  the
jelly-fish,  as  it  does  in  the  imagination  of  the  child  who  turns  the
helpless  atom  over  with  a  stick  and  wonders  why  it  was  made.

There  are  found  among  some  ctf  the  most  thoughtful  writers,
unbiassed  minds  which  have  been  released  from  the  shackles  of  ortho-
dox dogma  and  creed.  The  highest  conception  of  God  at  the  present
time  is  that  of  an  Infinite  Being,  perfect  in  all  respects,  who  con-
sciously and  voluntarily  causes,  directs,  and  controls  all  manifestations
of  finite  being,  and  if,  as  is  sometimes  said,  all  things  manifest  are
the  thought  of  God,  then  most  assuredly  the  thoughts  of  God  are  a
tangible  something;  therefore,  inasmuch  as  there  cannot  by  any
possibility  be  two  Infinites,  it  logically  and  inevitably  follows  that  all
things  are  constituted  of  the  substance,  and  are  the  varied  expres-
sions of  this  Infinite  God,  and  we  have  the  astonishing  result  of  an
Infinite,  Self-existent  God,  fully  and  perfectly  developed  and  un-
folded in  all  directions,  consciously  and  voluntarily  assuming  an
existence  in  lower  and  imperfectly  developed  forms,  and  that  thus
each  and  every  individual  is  a  Temple  of  the  Living  God,

God,  being  the  source  of  all  good,  cannot  be  the  source  of  all  evil.
There  was  no  fore-ordination  of  evil.

God  is  seen  only  by  the  exalted  Angels  and  Archangels  as  a
Grand  Central  Spiritual  Sun.*  The  Holy  Ghost  or  flower  of  Spirit  is
man's  only  mediator,  as  we  see  imaged  and  personified  through  the
Judean  Christ.  Mankind  cannot  see  God,  but  they  can  quite  easily  see
through  the  eyes  of  Spirit,  where  His  wisdom  and  Love  illuminate  the

•  See  inastntioii.


GOD  AND  THE  DIVINB  IllAGB.  4I

inner  man.  When  man  looks  upward  with  his  Soul,  God  looks  down-
ward with  His  heart.

St.  Paul  says  (Tim.  ii :  5) :  "  For  there  is  One  God  and  One  Me-
diator between  God  and  man,  ^- the  man  Christ  Jesus/'  therefore  St
Paul  did  not  recognize  Christ  as  God,  but  calls  him  Mediator  and
man.  The  word  Mediator  comes  in  this  instance  from  mestees^  which,
fully  translated,  means  medium  of  communication.

In  Matthew  (iii :  16)  will  be  found  a  scrap  of  history  very  seldom
read  correctly,  and  by  ministers  never,  it  appears,  interpreted  cor-
rectly.    It  is  as  follows :  —

*'  And  Jesus,  when  he  was  baptized,  went  up  straightway  out  of  the
water ;  and,  lo !  the  heavens  were  opened  unto  him  and  he  saw  the
Spirit  of  God  descending  like  a  dove  and  resting  upon  him ;  and,  lo !  a
voice  from  heaven,  saying,  '  This  is  my  beloved  son,  in  whom  I  am
well  pleased.' "

This  is  usually  read  and  interpreted  as  though,  if  you  had  been
there,  you  would  have  seen  the  Holy  Ghost  descend  and  would  have
heard  a  voice  calling  Jesus  God's  son.

John  says :  —

"  But  the  onainHng  (the  christening)  which  ye  have  received  of  him,
abideth  in  you,  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you,  but  as  the
same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,  and  is  no  lie,
and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  him  "  ("  In  it "
—  margin),  —  i  Jno.  ii :  27.

When  these  texts  are  put  together,  the  following  conclusions  will
appear:  —

1.  When  Jesus  was  baptized,  a  mediumship  was  conferred  upon
him,  —  "the  heavens  were  opened  unto  him."

2.  Thb  mediumship,  conferred  at  this  time,  was  called  the  anoint-
ing— the  making  a  Christ  of  him.

3.  This  same  anointing,  christening,  or  mediumship  was  conferred
on  others,  teaching  them,  and  enabling  them  to  teach  others.

This  same  anointing,  christening,  or  mediumship — mestees -^hzs
been  and  still  can  be  conferred  on  others  teaching  through  illum-
ination.

May  this  holy  body  and  blood,  substance  and  Spirit,  Divine
Mother  and  Father,  inseparable  duality  in  unity,  given  for  all  crea-
tures, broken  and  shed  and  making  oblation  for  the  world,  be  every-
where known,  adored,  and  venerated !  May  we  by  means  of  that  blood
which  b  the  Love  of  God^  and  the  Spirit  of  eternal  life,  be  redeemed,
indrawn,  and  transmuted  into  that  body  which  b  Pure  Substance,  im-


42       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

maculate  and  ever  virgin,  express  image  of  the  Person  of  God,  that
we  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more,  and  that  *'  neither  death
nor  life,  nor  Angels  noB  principalities  nor  powers,  nor  things  present
nor  things  to  come,  nor  height  nor  depth,  nor  any  creature,  shall  be
able  to  separate  us  from  the  Love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ,"  being
made  one  through  the  at-one-ment  of  the  Spirit  of  Love,  which  only
hath  immortality,  and  inhabiteth  Light  inaccessible.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  who  hast  reached  the  portals  of  the  heav-
enly way,  may  you  also  behold  the  glory  of  God  with  the  heart  of
your  inmost  Soul,  and  may  your  open  face  be  transformed  into  the
same  Image,  from  glory  to  glory,  by  the  power  of  the  Eternal
Spirit.

God  is  the  Great  Central  Sun  of  Spirit,  the  fountain  head  of  all
things.  God  is  not  Mind  but  the  cause  which  produces  Mind ;  God
is  not  a  Soul  but  the  cause  that  Soul  is ;  God  is  not  Light  but  the
cause  which  produces  Light.  God  is  the  Love  and  Harmony,  the
everlasting  fountain  of  Cause  or  Spirit  force.  Therefore,  by  Spirit
man  lives  in  Power,  in  Acts,  and  in  Eternity.

The  Student  of  Nature,  to  rightly  comprehend  Universal  Spirit-
Action,  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  human  Soul  did  net  always  exist  as
a  personality^  but  as  an  Essence,  and  that  the  Essence  of  our  Souls
can  never  cease  to  be,  because  they  never  began  to  be,  and  nothing
can  be  immortal  and  live  on  eternally  but  that  which  hath  lived  from
eternity.     Again :  —

That  there  is  no  personal  God,  but  that  the  name  God  implies  all
that  is  collective  life  in  all  and  in  every  phase  of  existence,  which
constitutes  the  Great  Oneness  of  all  life.

Pure  originality  can  only  be  found  in  Deity,  the  Absolute  Father.

He  is  what  now  is,  what  shall  be,  and  what  has  been,  and  no  man
hath  lifted  His  veil.  He  is  the  Great  Father  Mother  of  all  Life,  the
Great  Eternal  Fountain  of  all  Life.  The  Dual  force  of  being  united
in  One,  has  been  the  God-idea  throughout  antiquity,  and  to  this  day
is  the  basis  of  all  the  great  religious  systems  of  the  earth.

On  account  of  the  limits  of  this  work,  the  author  is  able  only  to
give  a  few  thoughts  from  Egyptian  papyrus,  translated  by  the  most
reliable  translators  of  this  modem  age.

The  Egyptian  God  Shou  or  Ra  the  Great  God  whose  Divine  Being
was  symbolized  by  the  Sun  as  the  highest  manifestation  of  Divine
Power  in  Nature.  The  following  is  but  a  little  part  of  a  hymn  taken
from  the  large  book  of  Egyptian  papyrus,  which  comprise  a  few  of
the  sacred  archives  of  Thebes.     A  part  of  this  ancient  papyrus  is  now


GOD  AND  THE  DIVINE   IMAGE.  43

to  be  found  in  the  Louvre,  Paris,  marked  V.  25,  and  a  part  in  the
British  Museum,  London,  marked  Magic  Papyrus.

All  hail  to  Thee,  the  Great  Lord  of  all  tunes  I

Thou  givest  light  and  life  to  all  worlds  —  above,  below.

Both  Gods  and  men  their  faces  turn  to  Thee,

For  in  Thy  path  Thou  sheddest  light  and  joy.

And  naught  can  injure  where  Thy  face  is  seen.

O,  Mysterious  Soul,  Thou  art  the  Soul  of  the  Sun,

Thou  art  the  life  to  Gods  and  men  and  all  that  lives,

Thou  art  Maker  of  Worlds  and  all  manifold  forms,
And  the  Spirit  of  Life  in  the  dwelling  of  man*s  Soul ;
And  Thy  Love  exalts  all,  amd  was  first  over  all ;
Thy  companions  are  Stars  as  they  run  in  their  course ;
But  Thou  elidt'st  the  love  of  both  small  and  the  great.
And  with  tenderness  melts  the  most  obdurate  heart,
Dispensing  Thy  gifts  with  a  most  liberal  hand.

All  hail  the  Sun  of  Life,  the  Lord  of  radiant  beams  1

All  hail,  to  Thee,  the  Self-existent  Onel

Although  in  essence  One,  yet  thou  hast  made

Thyself  in  myriad  forms ;  which  manifest

Thy  Life ;  which  is  the  Central  Source  of  all,

How  vast  Thy  Power,  which  reaches  through  all  space  I

It  fills  immensity,  and  knows  no  bounds.

Thy  radiant  Light  and  Heat  of  Life

Extend  throughout  the  boundless  universe.

Who  can  withstand  the  force,  self-centred  in

Thy  Grand  Majestic  Form  Incomprehensible  —

For  Thou  art  the  Soul  of  Souls,  the  eternal  Life  of  Lives.

And  on  Thy  head  is  placed  the  Dual  crown.

Hail,  O  Fountain  of  the  Sun  1  Creator !  Self-created  I  —  Haj«.


CHAPTER  IIL

gACRED  SYMBOLS.


Ckux  Ansata.
7Xr  (HdiMi  Knonm  Hier^fyftL

The  Insignet  of  Life,
The  EmUem  of  Eternal  Hope.
The  Mystery  of  Life  and  Death*
The  Union,  the  good  time  yet  to  come,  anited  bj  Lov*.

THE  CROSS  OF   LIFE.

It  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  mystery  of  the  dual  nature,  male  and
female,  the  symbol  of  humanity  perfected,  and  of  the  apotheosis  of
suffering.  It  is  traced  by  our  Lord  the  Sun,  on  the  plane  of  the
heavens ;  it  is  represented  by  the  magnetic  and  diamagnetic  forces  of
the  earth.  It  is  seen  in  the  ice-crystal  and  in  the  snow-flake;  the
human  form  itself  is  modelled  upon  its  pattern ;  and  all  nature  bears
throughout  her  manifold  spheres  the  impress  of  this  sign,  at  once  the
prophecy  and  the  instrument  of  her  redemption.

Fourfold  in  meaning,  having  four  points  and  making  four  angles,
dividing  ine  circle  into  four  eqiial  parts,  the  cross  portrays  the  per-
fect union,  balance,  equality,  and  at-one  ment,  on  all  four  planes  and
in  all  four  worlds,  phenomenal,  intellectual,  physical,  and  celestial,
and  of  the  man  and  woman,  the  Spirit  and  the  Bride.  It  is  supremely,
transcendently,  and  excellently  the  symbol  of  the  Divine.  Marriage
is  consummated  only  when  the  regenerate  man  enters  the  kingdom
of  the  celestial  which  is  within.  Then  the  Without  is  as  the  Within,
and  the  twain  are  as  One  ir.  Christ.  Being  thus  the  key  of  all  the
world,  from  the  outer  to  the  inner,  the  cross  presents,  as  it  were,  four
wards  of  significations,  and  according  to  these  the  mystery  of  the  cro-
cifixion  bears  relation :  —

First,  to  the  natural  and  actual  sense,  and  typifies  the  crucifixion
of  the  Man  of  God  by  the  world ;

44


SYMBOLS   AND   HIEROGLVPHS.


Clory  Unto  Thee,  a  Ripened  and  Perfected  Soul,  Finished  of  Earlh,  the  Perfected
One,  One  with  Uod,  a  boul  Ripened  to  Nirvana.


The  principal  Hieri^lyph  over  the  dooi^
ways  and  about  the  Temple  of  Delphi.
The  Prismatic  Staircase  between  God
and  Man.  To  Thee  Who  art  the  Light
in  the  Mansions  of  the  Universe.


aV'.


/|\\


The  Fountain  of  All  Life,  the  Light  of  the  Mansions  of  the  Universe,  the  Begin
ning  of  Ail  Things.


^


+


Tm  Two  IH  Ohk


The  Triune  God,  From  Out  the  Great  Androgynal,  First  Affection,  or  Results

Deep.  of  Attiaciion.


SACRED  SYMBOLS.  45

Secondly,  the  mUttectual  and  philosophical  senses,  and  typifies  the
crudfizion  in  man  of  the  lower  nature  ;

Thirdly,  to  the  personal  and  sacrificial  sense,  and  symbolizes  the
Passion  and  Oblation  of  the  Redeemer ;

Fourthly,  to  the  celestial  and  creative  sense,  and  represents  the
oblation  of  God  to  the  universe.

The  crucified,  regenerate  man  having  made  at-one-ment  through-
out his  own  dual  and  fourfold  nature,  this  crucifixion  is  the  death  of
the  animal  body ;  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the  flesh ;  the  uniting  of
the  human  Will  with  the  Divine  Will ;  the  concord  and  attunement
with  the  Absolute  Love,  or,  as  it  b  sometimes  called,  the  Reconcilia*
tion,  which  is  only  another  name  for  the  Atonement.

It  is  the  consummation  of  the  prayer.  Thy  Will  be  done  on  earth
as  it  is  in  heaven.  It  is  the  Divine  Life,  the  vital  immortal  principle,
having  neither  beginning  nor  ending.  This  also  is  the  secret  of
transmutation  —  the  changing  of  water  into  wine,  of  Matter  into
Spirit,  man  becoming  attuned  in  concord  with  God;  this  blood  of
Christ  and  of  the  covenant ;  this  wine  within  the  holy  Chalice  of  which
all  must  drink;  that  living  fountain,  he  who  drinks  of  which  shall
never  more  thirst,  is  the  perfect,  pure  and  incorruptible  Spirit,  cleans-
ing and  making  white  the  vesture  of  the  Soul  as  no  earthly  purge  can
whiten ;  the  gift  of  God  through  Christ,  the  heritage  of  the  elect.
To  live  the  Divine  Life  is  to  be  partaker  in  the  blood  of  Christ  and
to  drink  of  Christ's  cup.  It  is  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  '^  which
passeth  understanding,"  that  Love  which  is  the  Life  of  God,  and  the
Light  of  the  Angels,  and  whose  characteristic  symbol  is  the  blood-red
ray  of  the  solar  prism.  By  this  mystical  blood,  Love,  we  are  ripened
into  Spirit  and  saved  by  being  born  again  through  this  blood,  which
is  no  other  than  the  secret  of  all  the  Christs,  whereby  man  is  trans-
muted from  the  material  to  the  spiritual  plane ;  the  mystery  of  the
Hidden  Way ;  the  union  of  the  dual  with  the  triune ;  the  secret  of
the  temple  within  and  inward  purification  by  means  of  Love.  For
this  "blood,"  spoken  of  throughout  all  the  sacred  writings  as  the
essential  principle  of  the  "  Life,"  is  the  spiritual  blood  of  the  spiritual
Hfe,  —  Life  in  its  highest,  most  intense,  most  exalted,  and  most  excel-
lent sense,  —  not  the  mere  physical  life,  understood  by  materialists,
nor  life  from  a  human  standpoint  or  theory  only,  but  the  positive,
absolute,  and  substantial  Being  Essence,  the  inward  Deity  in  man,  and
it  is  by  means  of  the  Divine  Love  only,  which  means  the  Blood  of
Christ,  that  we  are  bom  again  and  can  come  to  the  Father  and  in-
herit the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  when  it  is  said  that  the  blood  of


46        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  it  is  signified  that  sin  b  impossible  to
him  who  is  Perfect  in  Love.

The  twofold  aspect  of  the  cross  is  Wisdom  and  Love.  Though
one  in  essence,  they  are  twain  in  application,  since  Love  cannot  give
without  receiving,  nor  receive  without  giving.  We  have  therefore  in
this  double  mystery  both  the  obligation  and  uplifting  of  the  Christ  in
Man  and  the  Passion  and  Sacrifice  for  others,  of  the  man  in  whom
the  Christ  is  manifest,  for  even  as  Christ  is  One  in  us^  so  are  we  One
with  Christy  because  as  Christ  loves  and  gives  Himself  for  us,  we  abo
who  are  in  Christ  give  ourselves  for  others.

The  Crux  Ansata  or  handle  cross,  also  called  the  cross  of  Osiris,
was  the  most  sacred  symbol  of  Egyptian  antiquity,  meaning  the  path-
way to  eternal  life.     "United  by  Love  to  Love  is  to  Know,  etc."

The  sacred  cross  was  carried  in  the  high  hand,  both  of  the  Priest
and  the  Candidate,  and  was  an  indispensable  emblem  of  all  the  relig-
ious ceremonials  of  ancient  Egypt.  This  is  the  symbol  which,  when
transferred  to  Christian  hands,  became  the  model  of  the  Papal  Keys
of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.

The  character  of  perfection  is  moreover  symbolized  in  the  cross,
in  that,  being  formed  of  two  transverse  beams,  it  portrays  the  at-one-
ment  between  the  Divine  and  human  wills  and  the  loop  or  handle  is
symbolic  of  the  gloria  or  the  overshadowing  of  a  dove,  emblem  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  is  the  sacred  Spirit  to  all  saints  and  to  man  regen-
erate, overshadowing  him  at  his  baptism  of  initiation,  as  mentioned  in
the  Gospels.

One  of  the  most  important  signs  whose  realization  gives  great
power,  when  used  on  the  Astral  color  of  the  individual  for  centraliz-
ing the  Will,  is  that  of  the  double  interlaced  triangle  surrounded  by  a
snake  with  his  tail  in  his  mouth.  He  who  has  been  instructed  into  its
hidden  meanings,  and  thoroughly  comprehends  that  sign,  will  remem-
ber the  words  attributed  to  Christ :  "  All  men  cannot  receive  this  say-
ing, save  they  to  whom  it  is  given.  He  that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let
him  receive  it."  In  this  sign  are  hidden  the  law  of  involution  and
evolution,  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  into  matter,  and  the  reascension
from  matter  back  to  Spirit.  He  knows  the  never-ending  cycles  of
eternity  with  its  limitless  days  and  nights  of  creation  ;  the  involution
of  the  life  impulses  as  it  travels  from  planet  to  planet,  beginning  in
the  elementary  Kingdom  and  ending  in  the  Spirit  of  Man  blossoming
into  the  Angel.

Six  points  are  seen  in  the  star,  but  the  seventh  in  the  centre  can-
not be  seen  by  the  natural  eye.    From  this  invisible  centre,  the  great


SACRED   SYMBOLS.  47

^irituai  Sun  radiates  its  seven  primordial  rays,  .orming  a  circle  whose
periphery  is  without  limit  and  beyond  all  human  comprehension,  evolv-
ing constellations  and  systems  of  worlds,  throwing  out  and  planting  for
cycles  of  time  to  reabsorb  them  again  into  its  great  Absolute  Bosom.

This  is  thy  heritage,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  to  see  far  beyond  the  com-
prehension of  mankind  and  the  babbling  multitude  of  the  present  day.

In  this  hieroglyph  are  contained  the  great  mystery  of  God  in  man
and  the  doctrine  of  God  as  the  Lord;  the  duality  of  the  Divine
Image  ;  the  Divine  Word,  by  which  all  things  are  created,  having  for


Thb  Intbrlacbd  Trianolb.

Known  as  the  Insignet  of  Hermes;  Shidd  of  David;  Solomon's  Seal;  The  Prince  of
Peace;  The  BuSder  of  the  two  Truths ;  is  claimed  to  have  been  the  Divine  Symbol  worn  by
the  Great  Father.

its  celestial  archetype  Humanity,  which,  subsisting  eternally  in  the
Divine  Mind,  thereby  makes  the  man  in  His  own  image.  For  the
Spirit  of  God  is  a  flame  of  Fire  which  the  Word  of  God  divideth  into
many,  yet  the  original  flame  is  not  decreased,  as  a  person  may  light
many  lamps  from  the  flame  of  one  lamp  yet  nothing  is  diminished
from  the  first  flame.

This  symbolization  indicates  and  represents  the  growth  of  Human
Nature  to  its  ripening  and  perfecting.     It  must  grow  twofold  in  opera-


48       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

tioiiy  fourfold  in  constitution,  sixfold  in  manifestation,  and  as  a  cube
stand  four  square  to  all  the  winds  of  heaven.

In  virtue  of  its  two-fold-ness  this  vehicle  expresses  the  correspond-
ing opposites  positive  and  negative,  Spirit  and  Love,  Justice  and
Mercy,  Energy  and  Space,  Life  and  Substance,  in  a  word  Male  and
Female,  both  of  which  subsist  in  the  Divine  Nature  in  absolute  pleni-
tude and  perfect  equilibrium.

Expressed  in  the  Divine  idea,  the  masculine  and  feminine  quali-
ties of  existence  are,  in  their  union  and  co-operation,  the  life  and
salvation  of  the  world,  while  in  their  division  and  antagonism  it  is  a
fruitless  life,  unripened  by  Truth  and  by  Spirit,  bringing  desolation,
extinguishment,  and  destruction.

On  this  subject,  Jesus  the  Christ  has  spoken  very  explicitly  in
that  part  of  the  sacred  writings  which  are  now  called  apochryphal,
and  suppressed,  and  so  little  known  although  recorded.  One  of  these,
given  by  Clement,  declares  plainly  that  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  of
Spirit  can  come  only  when  two  shall  be  one  and  the  man  as  the
woman.

The  increase,  development,  and  growth  of  disunity  of  the  sexes,
begat  disjunction,  abstractedness,  and  disconnection  between  Spirit
and  Soul  and  between  Soul  and  Body.  This  was  the  fall  of  man
which  introduced  and  has  perpetuated  the  false  balance  of  placing
woman  as  the  inferior  part  of  humanity,  and  not  until  the  feminine
principle  in  both  is  grown  and  exalted  on  its  planes,  crowned  and
glorified,  can  humanity  whether  in  the  individual,  in  the  communities,
or  in  the  whole  race,  attain  to  Spirit  Truth,  to  Soul  Knowledge,  to
Christhood  and  to  God.  This  is  the  Heir,  the  Light  of  Spirit,  the
Reason,  the  Logos,  the  Lord.  "  Come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inherit-
ance shall  be  ours,"  say  those  ministers  of  unreason,  the  Materialistic
Scientists  and  many  orthodoxies  and  creeds  of  the  Churches  and  in
the  World.

The  mutilation  and  defacement  of  the  Spirit  of  Love  and  the
Divine  Reason  either  by  church  or  Science,  and  the  failure  to  recog-
nize the  dualism  of  the  Di^ne  nature  of  God,  minister  to  the  con-
firmation and  continuation  of  the  fall  of  man,  for  no  sooner  are
Spirit  truth  and  Reason  suppressed  or  cast  out,  than  madness,  selfish-
ness, ambition,  folly  and  evil  of  every  kind  step  in  and  take  possesr
sion,  making  the  last  state  (be  it  of  community  or  of  individual)  worse
than  the  first.

The  interlaced  triangles  symbolize  the  Great  Infinite  Mind  with-
out a  visible  body  objective,  —  being  a  dual  body  of  Spirit,  Harmony,


SACRED   SYMBOLS.  49

iiove,  Biind,  Will,  Idea,  Motion, — at  the  conception  Idea  and  endow*
ment  of  Life  for  the  Human  Race,  when  it  becomes  in  unison  with
anything  in  nature  conceives,  creates,  and  sets  in  motion  a  Being ;
for  it  is  the  Divine  Spirit  Agency  of  Action,  an  infinite  and  eternal
Energy  horn  which  all  things  proceed.  *<The  triangles  thus  combined
form  in  the  interior  space  a  six-sided  plane  figure.  This  is  the  mani-
fested world.  Six  is  the  number  of  the  world  and  666  b  the  great
mystery  which  b  related  to  the  symbol.

Su  John  talks  and  writes  of  thb  mystical  number.  Around  the
six-sided  centre  are  the  six  triangles,  projecting  into  the  Spiritual
world  and  touching  the  enclosed  serpent  of  wbdom.

In  the  old  Book  thb  b  imaged  by  the  great  head  of  the  Lord
rising  above  the  horizon  of  the  great  ocean  of  matter,  with  the  arms
just  raised  so  that  they  make  the  upper  half  of  the  triangle.  ''  Thb  b
the  long  face  "  or  macroscopos  as  it  b  called.

As  it  rises  slowly  and  majestically  above  the  surface,  the  calm
placid  water  below  reflects  it  in  reverse  as  in  a  mirror  and  thus
makes  the  whole  double  triangle.  The  lower  one  is  dark  in  its
obscure  depths  and  sombre  aspect,  but  at  the  same  time  the  upper
part  of  the  darker  one  b  itself  light,  for  it  is  formed  by  the  majestic
head  of  thb  Adam  Kadmon.  Thus  they  shade,  blending  into  a  fusion
of  a  centralization  one  into  the  other  a  united  one.  And  this  b  a  per-
fect symbolism,  for  it  clearly  figures  the  way  in  which  day  shades  into
night,  night  into  the  morning,  and  evil  into  good,  being  the  first  great
symbol  known  to  modern  man  which  indicated  that  the  Spiritual  and
natural  man  were  again  to  be  united,  after  the  long  warfare  against
each  other  on  account  of  a  selfish  unripened  condition,  so  that  we
would  we  cannot  do,  and  that  which  we  desire  not  to  be  guilty  of
doing,  the  darker  half  of  man  compels  us  to  do.

These  triangles  also  represent  the  "  manifested  universe  "  and  b
one  of  the  oldest  and  most  beautiful  of  symbols  of  antiquity,  having
had  the  most  extensive  range  among  all  nations  and  tongues ;  having
been  discovered  among  all  peoples,  not  only  those  now  inhabiting  the
earth,  but  also  in  the  monuments,  carvings,  and  other  remains  of  the
great  prehbtoric  races  of  mankind  who  have  left  us  a  few  of  their
gigantic  structures  in  stone,  whose  corridors  and  halls  are  now  silent
to  the  footsteps  and  voices  of  men,  but  resounding  with  speech  and
conception  of  thought  most  eloquent  to  those  who  care  to  listen."  ♦

In  the  writings  of  Hermes,  in  the  Kabala  and  Hindoo  books,  and
in  St  John  and  the  Christ,  will  be  found  the  seven  times  seven  mean-
ings of  the  interlaced  triangles  and  their  mysteries.    These  ancient

•  Eliphas  Levi,  etc.,  The  Path,  et&


50       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

symbols  seem  to  be  full  of  the  music  of  ideas  turned  into  stone.
What  thoughtful  student  of  to-day  has  witnessed  the  deep  carving  of
the  Egyptian  temples,  and  not  been  impressed  by  the  pathos  in  the
Souls  of  these  men  of  the  far-off  past  six  thousand  years  ago.  Witness,
for  instance,  that  one  representing  Justice  by  a  balance  in  one  scale  of
which  the  heart  of  man  is  placed,  and  evenly  balanced  by  the  feather
of  truth  in  the  other.

"The  serpent  with  his  tail  in  his  mouth  is  the  symbol  of  Wisdom
and  eternity,  because  eternity  has  neither  beginning  nor  end.  Fur-
thermore, the  scales  of  the  reptile  form  the  figures  of  facets  or  dia-
monds which  typify  the  illimitable  diversity  of  the  aspects  of  Wisdom
and  Truths  These  reflecting  facets  are  the  beings  composing  the
macrocosm.  Each  has  developed  himself  only  to  a  certain  degree
and  can  therefore  reflect  and  appreciate  only  that  amount  of  wisdom
which  has  fallen  to  his  lot.  As  he  passes  again  and  again  through
experiences  of  man  he  slowly  develops  and  ripens  various  other
powers  of  appreciating  more  truth,  and  so  at  last  may  become  one
with  the  whole  —  that  is,  ripened  into  a  perfect  man,  able  to  know
and  feel  completely  his  union  and  attunement  with  all."

This  is  when  he  has  acquired  the  knowledge  of  the  Two  Truths,
solving  the  secret  of  Life  and  Death,  the  highest  a  Perfect  Soul,  —
"  The  Winged  Globe."  ♦

As  in  the  reading  of  the  old  myth,  Adam  represents  the  Body,
Eve  the  Soul,  and  the  Divine  Voice  the  Spirit,  so  the  Serpent  rampant
typifies  the  lower  reason  and  animal  instinct,  and  the  fiery  serpent —
''  whose  food  is  the  dust  of  earthly  things,"  that  is  the  perception  of
the  five  objective  senses  which  are  concerned  with  the  things  of  time
and  matter  only  —  the  deposition  from  her  rightful  place.

The  Living  Man  is  typified  by  the  heavenly  or  dual  serpent  which  is
represented  biting  his  tail.  The  serpent  forming  a  ring  or  several
circles  typifying  there  is  no  beginning  and  no  ending,  but  ever  renew-
ing itself  through  wisdom  and  silence  by  the  knowledge  of  its  dual
forces,  which  is  to  become  one  with  the  whole  —  a  perfect  man,  illu-
minated by  Love  and  Spirit  Truth  to  be  in  accord  and  feel  completely
his  union  with  all,  —  a  ripened,  perfect,  spiritual,  Living  Man,  whose
fall  or  the  division  of  its  duality  was  brought  about  by  the  seductions
of  the  lower  instincts,  the  serpent  rampant.  Thence  ensues  the  Fall
in  Eden.  Before  the  fall,  the  Soul  was  subject  to  Spirit,  thereafter
the  Soul  is  subject  to  the  body,  intuition  to  sense.  Spirit  to  Matter,
woman  to  man.

•  See  Ulustntioo.


SYMBOLS   AND    HIEROGLYPHS.


Cri'x  An&ata.


Crux  Ansata.


The  oldest  known  hieroglyph.  According  to  Eg>'ptian,  this  symbolizes  the
good  time  coming,  United  by  Love,  the  Mystery  of  Life  and  Death,  Eternal  Hope,
the  Hidden  Knowledge  of  Nature  and  Science,  the  Mystery  of  the  Trinity  in  Man,
etc


t
q:

in

FEMALE

MALE  1

q:

Lu

q:

UJ

<
I

q:
<

UJ

RosB  Cross.


Christian  Cross.


The  Red  Cross  of  the  Rosicrucians,
Life  to  Come,  the  Cycle  of  12.


Cycle  of  10.


ay  {{1


Sacred  Vbuic  Word  Rkprbsknting  the  Divine  Inward  Breath.


SACRED  SYMBOLS.  5 1

Henceforth  the  monitions  of  the  Soul  must  be  suppressed,  her  aspi-
rations quenched,  her  conceptions  difficult  to  quicken  and  ripen.  Her
fruit  b  now  only  brought  forth  with  labor  and  sorrow.  Spirit  and
Soul  intuition  wars  with  passion,  and  every  victory  of  the  Spiritual
man  is  bought  with  anguish  and  torment,  with  sorrow  and  a  bleeding
heart.

The  law  of  life  is  not  far  away,  neither  is  it  placed  in  a  far  off
heaven ;  but  it  is  in  your  Soul,  in  your  heart,  in  your  reason,  in  your
mouth ;  for  again  it  is  written,  "  I  have  left  you  free  to  choose  between
life  and  death,  and  good  and  evil,"  and  it  is  in  your  conscience,  for  if
you  love  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  you  will  obey  its  Divine  voice  within,
where  is  found  happiness,  truth,  and  perfect  peace.

Ezekiel's  Wheel.

Among  the  sacred  symbols  of  the  Gods  of  antiquity,  none  is  more
frequently  depicted  in  Egyptian  sculpture  than  the  sphere  or  globe.
This  is  the  emblem  of  creative  motion,  because  the  manifest  force  is
rotatory,  being  in  fact  the  wheel  of  the  '*  Spirit  of  Life  "  described  by
Ezekiel  '^  as  a  wheel  within  a  wheel,"  inasmuch  as  the  whole  system
of  the  universe  from  the  planet  to  its  ultimate  particle  revolves  in  the
same  manner.  The  whole  universe  and  all  created  things  that  move
and  have  being  grow,  increase  and  advance,  having  a  movement
winding  in  form  of  a  spiral.  In  the  vision  of  Ezekiel,  there  were  four
wheels  or  circles,  each  of  which  denotes  a  region  and  a  principality  of
power.

As  if  is  above  so  it  is  below.  As  it  is  in  heaven  so  it  is  on  earth.  As
is  the  outer  so  is  the  inner.  As  is  the  small  so  is  the  great  There  is
but  one  law  and  He  that  worketh  is  One.  Nothing  is  small,  nothing
great  in  the  Divine  Economy.  Ezekiel  of  the  Jews  saw  this  wheel
when  he  was  among  the  captives  by  the  river  Chebar,  in  Chaldea.  In
a  vision  he  saw  the  four  beasts  and  the  man  of  the  Apocalypse  and
with  them  "  four  each  of  the  four  faces,"  a  wheel  of  the  color  of  a
beryl ;  it  was  "  as  a  wheel  in  the  middle  of  a  wheel "  and  they  went
wherever  the  living  creatures  went,  and  when  they  went,  says  Ezekiel,
"  I  heard  a  noise  like  the  noise  of  great  waters,  like  the  voice  of  the
Almighty,  a  noise  of  tumult  like  the  noise  of  a  host."

The  beautiful  hieroglyphic  of  the  Egyptians,  their  Winged  Globe,
represents  the  Soul  passing  back  to  its  source,  after  its  pilgrimage,
evolving  rotations,  unfolding  into  a  Perfect  Soul,  after  the  trial  in  the
Hall  of  Two  Truths ;  the  globe  being  a  symbol  of  either  the  Supreme
Soul  or  a  portion  of  it,  and  the  wings  added  represent  its  flight  to  the


52       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

upper  spheres,  ha^ng  finished  its  course  a  ripened  Soul  on  its  returning
journey  to  its  original  source  in  the  bosom  of  Absolute  Love.

There  are  many  meanings  concealed  in  this  symbol,  and  it  is  best
that  many  of  them  remain  concealed  until  man  can  be  better  trusted
with  the  power  that  is  within  him  and  at  his  command  through  the
Astral  world  and  celestial  forces  through  the  twelve  signs  of  the
Zodiac,  much  more  the  elemental  Spirits  of  these  circuli,  which  cor-
respond to  Air,  Water,  Earth,  and  Fire,  beginning  at  the  outer  and
uppermost  and  going  inward  and  downward.  For  the  magnetic  ema-
nations of  the  Astrals  are  under  the  dominion  of  the  Fire ;  they  are
not  Souls  nor  Divine  Personalities,  but  are  simply  emanations  or
phantoms  of  being,  and  have  no  real  being.

The  highest  and  uppermost  of  these  circuli  or  wheels  is  that  of
the  elemental  Spirits  or  "winged  creatures,"  the  second  is  that
of  the  Souls  and  the  seed  of  Souls,  the  third  is  that  of  the  Shades
or  manes  of  the  past  of  the  planet  and  its  life,  and  the  fourth  and
lowest  is  that  of  the  magnetic  Spirits  commonly  called  Astrals.  This
Astral  sphere,  belt,  or  circulus  is  variously  known  and  called  the  peri-
soul,  the  magnetic,  the  odic  fluid  or  body,  the  second  body,  the  book
of  record  of  thought,  the  reflector  of  the  Will.

But  one  of  the  most  important  meanings  of  this  symbol  is  the  light
of  the  dual  or  bi-sexual  forces  of  man  in  relation  to  the  different  signs
of  the  Zodiac,  the  true  light  and  knowledge  of  which  gives  man  a
mighty  power  either  for  good  or  evil.

Man's  will  is  not  free  nor  is  his  intelligence  active  in  every  part  of
his  body.  His  will  cannot  be  free  so  long  as  it  is  governed  by  his
imagination.  Man  cannot  be  free  so  long  as  his  desires  are  illusive
and  his  knowledge  deficient  His  responsibility  grows  with  his  knowl-
edge.

Man  is  a  collective  centre  of  energy,  a  solitary  ray  or  reflection  of
the  universally  present,  Divine  Light,  which  is  the  Absolute  and
common  source  of  everything  that  exists,  being  a  true  child  of  the
great  Spiritual  Sun.  But  as  Mother  Nature  is  a  true  mother  she  does
not  give  to  her  children  that  knowledge  of  power  while  they  are  still
in  their  infancy  of  selfishness,  irascibility,  and  petulance.  Well  she
knows  that  to  have  this  power  before  they  have  conquered  their  petu-
lant and  passionate  temperaments,  would  be  but  to  consimie  them-
selves. Therefore  she  is  benevolent  and  beneficent  in  her  bounteous
charity,  hiding  these  mysteries.

The  signs  of  the  Zodiac  or  of  the  wheel  of  Life,  as  the  name  signifies,
are  not  arbitrary ;  they  are  the  words  of  God,  traced  on  the  planisphere


SACRED   SYMBOLS.  53

by  the  finger  of  God,  and  the  first  expressed  in  intelligible  hierogljrphics
by  men  of  the  "  Age  of  Saturn/'  who  knew  the  truth  of  Soul  and  Spirit,
and  held  the  Key  of  the  Divine  Mysteries.  The  Wheel  of  the  Zodiac
constituted  the  earliest  Bible,  for  on  it  is  traced  the  universal  history
of  all  humanity.  History  repeats  itself  only  because  all  history  is
already  written  in  heaven,  and  the  key  to  the  interpretation  of  her
symbols  is  the  word  Now.

The  Zodiac  is  a  mirror  in  which  are  found  the  reflex  of  the  past,
present,  and  future,  but  these  are  but  modes  to  the  eternal  Now,
for  in  the  Divine  Mind  there  is  no  past  and  in  the  Divine  Economy
no  future.    The  present  is  philosophically  the  only  tense.

In  the  wheel  of  the  Zodiac  are  the  twelve  gates  of  the  heavenly
dty  of  religion,  science,  the  Kingdom  of  God  the  Father.  The  his-
toiy  of  the  Soul  of  the  Man  Regenerate  or  ripened  into  Spirit  is  cor-
respondent to  that  of  the  Sun,  the  great  vitalizing  centre  of  the  physi-
cal system,  which  has  accordingly  been  described  in  terms  derived
from  the  solar  phenomena  as  indicated  in  the  Zodiacal  planisphere.
Thus  the  history  of  the  Soul  is  written  in  the  stars,  and  the  heavens  are
her  chroniclers  and  tell  the  glory  at  once  of  herself  and  God.  A  true
bible  is  always  a  hieroglyph  of  the  Soul,  and  the  Zodiac  is  simply  the
First  and  most  stupendous  of  bibles,  which  like  all  others  was  writ-
ten by  nun  who  had  attained  to  the  knowledge  of  their  own  Souls  and  to
that  of  ail  souls  and  of  God,  who  is  the  Life  and  Substance  of  Souls.

**  May  I  reach  that  purest  heaven
And  be  to  other  Souls  the  cup  of  strength
In  their  sorrows,  or  some  great  agony —
So  shall  I  join  the  choir  invisible,
Whose  music  is  the  gladness  of  the  world."

''The  day  has  dawned — the  fair  new  day
That  weds  the  spirit  world  with  earth;
And  Error's  chains  shall  melt  away
In  the  pure  light  of  spirit  birth."


CHAPTER  IV.

MAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES  OF  HIS  LIFE.

What  a  piece  of  work  is  man !  How  noble  in  reaa<m !  how  infinite  in  Acuities  I  in  fonn  and  bio«>'
ing,  how  express  and  admirable !  in  action,  how  like  an  angel !  in  apprehension,  how  like  a  God  I  the
beauty  of  the  world  1  the  paragon  of  animals  I  —  HamUt.

Every  man,  whether  in  thb  world  or  within  the  Spiritual  world,  is
naturally  attracted  to  the  society  of  others  who  are  like  him.

Man's  way  to  his  highest  level  is  always  up-grade,  and  it  is  within
his  power  to  discover  all  the  mysteries  he  is  capable  of  understanding,
even  to  those  of  Life  and  death.

Most  men  have  inequalities  of  character  which  produce  discords.
They  thus  deprive  their  interior  of  that  harmony  which  is  the  com-
panion of  Spirit  Truths.

The  Soul  of  our  beings  being  so  easily  influenced  either  for  good
or  evil,  we  should  indeed  be  careful  not  alone  of  actions,  but  of  all
our  thoughts ;  for  as  we  do  and  think,  so  we  surround  ourselves  with
the  invisible  Spirit  power,  which  has  all  to  do  with  our  happiness  and
advancement ;  for  it  is  a  great  necessity  that  we  should  know  ourselves
and  our  Spirit  helpers,  ere  we  drive  away  the  loving  influence  about
us  for  grosser  and  lower  ones,  which  chain  us  down  to  a  miserable  ex-
istence and  blind  our  eyes  to  all  good.  Even  our  best  friends  are
forced  away  from  us  and  our  lives  made  a  lonely  waste  by  our  friend-
ship with  anger,  intolerance,  pride,  envy,  and  passion.

There  are,  as  has  been  ^aid  in  a  preceding  chapter,  two  gigantic
obstacles  in  the  way  of  progress, viz. :  The  misapprehension  of  God  and
tfu  misconception  of  Man.  So  long  as  man  believes  in  a  personal  God
who  distributes  favors  and  punishments  at  will ;  who  can  be  reasoned
with,  persuaded  and  pacified  by  selfish,  ignorant  man,  that  man  will
remain  within  the  narrow  confines  of  his  ignorance,  and  his  mind  can-
not expand  sufficiently  to  be  illuminated  by  Truth.

No  man  has  ever  understood  the  true  meaning  of  Life,  or  caught
a  glimpse  of  heaven,  until  he  has  given  up  self,  which  too  frequently
does  not  occur  until  repeated  misfortunes  have  dispelled  the  flatter-
ing dream  of  a  selfish  imagination  which  has  blinded  his  eyes  to  Truth

54


MAN   AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES   OP   HIS  LIFE.  5$

and  Light  When  selfishness  departs  and  a  universal  Love  comes,  the
blindness  is  cured  and  the  man  awakens  like  one  out  of  a  deep  sleep,
knowing,  feeling,  and  seeing  his  Spiritual  nature.

Some  lives  seem  to  the  thoughtful  observer  as  though  they  had
been  intended  only  as  huge  jokes,  simply  because  they  are  groping,
drifting  in  darkness,  refusing  to  listen  to  the  True  Voice.  Everything
contains  a  certain  deposit  of  the  jewel  of  Light,  which  can  be  found
and  reached  through  the  door  of  occult  knowledge,  by  which  one  can
command  through  the  wisdom  of  concentration  and  silence,  —  and  be
obeyed.  Every  human  being  is  the  centre  of  a  universe,  but  a  man  is
never  so  much  deceived  as  when  he  believes  too  much  in  himself,
when  he  becomes  blinded  and  can  see  nothing  else.  The  selfish  man
looks  into  the  world  as  into  his  mirror,  to  see  only  himself,  and  finds
if  he  b  thoughtful  only  a  medley  of  contradictions.  God  and  Nature
are  never  contradictions ;  man  is  seldom  anything  else.

Strive  to  possess  Love  and  grow,  for  great  energies  bring  great
opportunities,  '*  that  you  may  cross  beyond  the  sea  of  darkness."  It
is  hard  to  appreciate  a  condition  of  life  different  from  our  own.
Charity  toward  the  weaknesses  of  human  nature  is  a  virtue  we  demand
of  others,  but  which  is  not  easy  to  practise  ourselves.

"  Being  all  fashioned  of  the  self-same  dust
Let  us  be  merciful  as  well  as  just**

If  you  would  grow  strong,  learn,  oh  Pilgrim,  to  sacrifice  your  se-
cret preferences,  maintaining  calm  silence ;  if  you  would  remain  in
peace,  remain  insignificant.  Learn  to  know  all,  but  keep  thyself  un-
known, is  the  advice  of  all  Adepts.  Be  not  boisterous  nor  of  a  loud
noise.  Look  at  the  serpent  which,  coiled  in  repose,  typifies  the  Infi-
nite and  Naught,  Wisdom  and  Peace.  No  man  who  starts  out  to  find
Truth  and  pays  even  a  little  attention  to  occult  forces  can  return  to
ignorance,  but  will  make  a  definite  choice  between  Truth  and  Error,
Good  and  Evil.  The  first  step  in  Occultism  brings  the  student  to  the
tree  of  knowledge,  of  which  he  must  pluck  and  eat.  He  must  choose,
must  cross  the  Rubicon,  burning  his  ships  behind  him,  for  here  he
must  decide  and  determine  on  taking  either  the  good  or  evil  path,  for
he  is  no  longer  capable  of  the  indecision  of  ignorance,  but  is  fully
cognizant  of  which  path  he  is  going.

The  great  mass  of  mankind  walks  waveringly  and  quite  uncertain
as  to  the  good  aimed  at.  The  standard  of  life  is  quite  indefinite ;
only  self  is  known  and  loved  and  therefore  paramount    The  sweet


56       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

things  of  to-day  may  thus  become  the  bitter  things  of  eternity,  for
thb  life  is  the  alphabet  of  the  language  of  eternity.

Strive,  then,  to  grow  by  a  renewing  of  your  minds.    Ask  in  Truth
and  you  will  receive  in  Truth.

Properly  to  desire  a  blessing  is  to  deserve  it,  for  actions  are  mo-
tives let  loose  on  the  in\dsible  billows  of  the  eneigies  of  nature.
When  once  the  threshold  of  nature  is  reached,  and  the  door  of
occult  light  pushed  ever  so  little  ajar,  the  confusion  and  vacillation
about  the  initiate  begins  to  lessen  and  calm  decision  to  take  their
place.  If  this  decision  be  for  good  and  for  the  higher  ideal,  the
forces  of  will  and  mentality  increase  enormously,  for  now  all  the
forces  are  acting  in  the  same  direction  throughout  all  the  different
planes  of  nature,  as  well  as  of  our  own  being.  An  occult  student,  if
iru€^  can  never  be  faint  nor  half-hearted,  nor  can  he  return  when  once
he  has  passed  the  threshold.  These  things  are  as  impossible  as  for
the  man  to  become  a  child  again.  At  this  portal  the  Pilgrim  of  Light
has  reached  the  state  of  responsibility  by  reason  of  the  fruit  of
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  from  whose  light  and  growth  he  cannot
recede.  One  step  toward  progress  means  growth.  Earthly  life  is
often  not  worth  living  —  that  seems  very  clear.  There  is  not  enough
in  the  life  of  whole  nations  and  tribes  to  make  it  a  public  calamity
if  they  were  sunk  in  the  sea.  But  when  you  introduce  the  thought
of  an  eternal  life,  a  renewed  existence,  the  question  "  Is  life  worth
living  ? "  changes  in  all  its  aspects.  Life  may  not  be  worth  living
here,  and  may  be  transcendently  worth  living  on  account  of  the  here-
after. For  man  is  a  biennial,  and  it  takes  two  lives  to  tell  him  what
he  is.  As  when,  for  instance,  the  hollyhock  is  planted  in  one  season
but  cannot  blossom  until  the  next ;  all  the  first  season  it  has  no  come-
liness ;  it  is  coarse  in  leaf,  undeveloped  in  stem,  and  shows  no  color ;
but  when  the  winter  has  hushed  it  to  rest,  and  the  next  summer
brings  it  out,  it  lifts  itself  up  in  unimagined  beauty  as  compared  with
what  it  was  in  its  first  summer.  And  men  are  born  here,  to  come  to
themselves  only  after  death,  and,  when  another  summer  shall  find
them,  they  will  be  lifted  up  in  unimagined  glory  and  beauty,  unless  the
winter  kills  them.  The  whole  question  is  therefore  changed  at  once ;
for  if  we  should  be  led  to  doubt  whether  life  was  worth  living  on
account  of  the  physical  condition  of  things,  that  doubt  would  be  dis-
persed when  we  consider  that  a  double  and  even  a  triple  work  is  going
on  here.  Mankind  has  two  sets  of  feelings  and  attractions.  One
set  drags  him  down  to  earth  and  makes  him  cling  with  a  firm  grasp
'to  material  necessities  and  enjoyments ;  while  the  other  set  lifts  him


MAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES   OP  HIS  LIPE.  $J

up  into  the  regions  of  the  unknown,  and  he  forgets  the  allurements
and  distractions  of  matter,  being  brought  nearer  to  the  realms  of
Spirit,  and  abstract  ideas  of  the  good,  the  true,  the  harmonious,  and
the  beautiful  give  him  satisfaction  and  happiness  and  a  peace  which
the  world  does  not  give.  This  is  the  objective  and  subjective  life  of
man*

Between  the  objective  and  subjective  consciousness  is  that  which
is  the  present  state  of  involution  of  mankind,  a  state  midway  between
the  animal  and  Soul,  where  he  is  not  entirely  guided  by  his  instincts
and  impulses,  nor  entirely  by  his  conscience  and  intuition,  but  more
or  less  by  his  reason,  the  middle  ground  between  animal  instinct  and
intuition.

But  the  time  will  soon  come,  when  the  Spiritual  and  inner  Light
will  be  the  only  truth,  and  all  Brethren  should  strive  to  hasten  the
arrival  of  that  time  when  man's  Spiritual  consciousness  will  be  his
normal  life.

As  man  radiates  an  atmosphere  he  must  necessarily  grow  either  in
one  direction  or  another.  He  cannot  remain  stagnant  If  his  desires
are  selfish  they  are  false,  because  they  come  from  himself  and  not
firom  Soul  or  Spirit ;  his  thoughts  will  be  vague  and  corrupt  because
they  form  adulterous  alliances;  his  words  will  be  without  efficacy
because  he  allows  them  to  be  blunted  every  day  in  dissembling  utter-
ances from  the  lips  while  other  intentions  are  in  the  heart,  and  his
acts  are  insignificant  and  barren,  because  they  can  be  but  the  result
of  his  words.  There  is  no  Soul,  no  heart,  nothing  but  selfishness  in
them.  Mankind  to-day  is  not  guided  by  Truth,  but  is  still  groping
in  darkness,  for  his  reasoning  cannot  be  perfect  so  long  as  it  is  not
based  on  perfect  knowledge  of  Spirit,  which  knowledge  is  the  result
of  experience  only,  and  not  of  argument.

The  materials  of  which  a  superior  man  is  constructed,  are  the
emotions  of  Spirit.  The  builder  is  Love ;  Will  and  Reason  the  super-
intendent and  workman ;  Wisdom  the  supreme  architect.

In  order  to  grow  into  the  higher  manhood,  it  is  desirable  that  one
have  strong  emotions,  provided  he  has  at  the  same  time  sufficient
will-power  to  control  them.  A  person  devoid  of  emotions  is  without
virtues  and  without  vices;  he  is  without  energy;  a  shadow,  neither
cold  nor  warm,  and  necessarily  useless  for  occult  work.  The  passion-
ate man,  if  he  can  master  and  guide  his  passions,  is  nearer  to  God
than  he  who  has  nothing  to  control  and  nothing  to  conquer.

Man's  love  and  intuition  do  not  belong  to  earth.  They  create
energies  which  are  active  beyond  the  confines  of  the  grave,  and  their


58       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

activity  may  last  for  ages,  until  it  becomes  exhausted  of  its  lower  in-
stincts, when  the  purified  ray  or  reflection  is  freed  from  earth.

An  extremely  malicious  person  is  the  embodiment  of  malice  and
uncharitableness,  and  if  he  sees  the  demon  in  an  objective  form,  he
beholds  only  the  reflection  of  his  own  Soul  in  the  mirror  of  his  own
mind,  judges  all  humanity  from  his  false  standard,  and  inscribes  a
deep  scar  on  the  age  in  which  he  lives.

O  Life  and  Love  I    O  happy  throng
Of  thoughts,  whose  only  speech  is  song  I
O  heart  of  man  1  canst  thou  not  be
Blithe  as  the  air  is,  and  as  free?

In  order  to  produce  a  Spiritual  growth  in  the  Soul,  a  man  must  be
attuned  with  nature  and  in  harmony  with  himself ;  the  inner  and  outer
proportions  must  be  harmonious  ;  there  must  be  no  discord.  Wisdom
guides  the  work  and  Love  furnishes  the  cement.

An  emotion  is  either  a  virtue  or  a  vice  according  as  it  is  applied.

Misapplied  virtues  become  vices,  and  well  directed  vices  may
become  virtues.

A  man  who  acts  according  to  the  dictates  of  prudence  alone,  is  a
coward ;  one  who  exercises  his  generosity  indiscriminately  is  a  spend-
thrift ;  courage  without  caution  is  rashness ;  veneration  without  self-
esteem  produces  superstition ;  charity  without  exercise  of  judgment
produces  a  beggar.

The  highest  energies  are  latent  in  the  lower  ones ;  they  are  the
attributes  of  the  spiritual  Soul,  which  in  most  men  is  still  in  a  state
of  infancy,  so  they  have  not  learned  to  discriminate  between  the  true
and  the  false,  between  animal  and  Spirit,  nor  to  act  on  the  highest
ideal  of  Truth.

The  higher  Spiritual  Truths  cannot  be  intellectually  grasped  by  the
reasoning  powers  of  the  half-grown  man.  He  must  grow  to  them
and  into  the  light  when  he  beholds  them.

Man  is  conscious  of  being  able  to  receive  ideas  and  put  them
into  forms,  and  his  imagination  may  therefore  be  exercised  either
actively  or  passively.

He  does  not  live  entirely  in  the  objective  world,  but  possesses  an
interior  world  of  his  own.

The  interior,  like  the  outer  world,  is  one  of  its  own ;  its  horizon  may
be  either  narrow  or  expanded,  limited  in  some,  without  limit  in  others.

It  is  sometimes  dark,  sometimes  illuminated;  it  has  beautiful
scenery  and  dismal  localities,  its  sunshine  and  its  storms.


MAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES   OP   HIS   LIFE.  $9

As  man  grows  and  lives  more  in  his  spiritual  body,  he  can  control
and  subjugate  the  destiny  of  the  natural  man.  Spirit  being  absolute  over
all  things,  he  who  lives  in  the  Spirit  can  surmount  all  the  annoyances
that  aflflict  the  physical  man,  be  they  sidereal  or  terrestrial  tendencies.
The  natural  man  does  not  exist  outside  of  nature,  but  forms  an  inte-
gral part  thereof,  and  whatever  affects  the  whole  will  affect  the  indi-
vidual. On  this  simple  truth  b  based  the  much  misunderstood  science
of  Astrology.

The  Sun  and  Planets  in  space,  as  well  as  terrestrial  objects,  have
their  magnetic,  odyllic,  and  astral  emanations,  and  these  exert  influence
upon  each  other  and  upon  every  organized  being,  in  proportion  to
their  size,  their  dbtance,  and  the  velocity  of  their  revolutions.  They
modify  the  character,  the  color  of  the  leaves  and  flowers,  and  the
growth  of  the  plant.  These  forces  from  the  planets  evolve  in  the
course  of  ages,  monsters,  variously  shaped,  animals  of  different  colors,
and  various  species  of  birds,  and  also  guide  the  destiny  of  man  to  a
very  great  extent,  until  his  Soul  ripens  into  Spirit  guidance ;  for  Spirit,
being  absolute  over  all  things,  is  also  complete  in  controlling  all
Astral  forces,  while  the  Star  Magno  of  the  planets  furnishes  the  ener-
gies which  imprint  themselves  upon  the  Astral  forms  of  plants,  ani-
mals, and  men  which  find  expression  in  physical  forms.  Their
signatures  may  be  seen  in  the  open  book  of  life,  which  belongs  to,
shapes  and  gives  shade  and  color  to  every  form.

The  shape  of  features  and  limbs,  the  lines  and  shape  of  hands,  the
expression  of  the  face,  the  color  of  eyes  and  hair,  are  the  signature
of  the  planets.  These  are  the  marks  which  the  Universal  Mind
stamps  upon  every  living  thing,  the  signet  of  its  heritage,  and  those  who
open  the  book  of  nature's  truths  may  read  and  find  the  frug  history
written  on  the  face  of  every  thing,  even  upon  every  stone.

The  Astral  theory  is  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets  each  and
all  exercise  a  distinct  and  peculiar  influence  upon  man.  This  influ-
ence begins  at  conception,  continues  with  increasing  effect  during
gestation,  and  develops  its  culminating  plenitude  at  birth ;  the  ruling
planet  at  this  time  exercises  such  power  over  the  babe  as  to  stamp  its
character  upon  the  entire  life.  This  Astral  influence  extends  not  only
to  the  life  in  general,  but  likewise  to  the  particulars  of  thought  and
action  in  minutiae.  This  Astral  influence  is  conveyed  to  man,  and
acts  upon  him  through  the  Astral  light.  This,  the  palmister  tells  us.
is  composed  of  the  seven  fluids  which  emanate  from  the  seven  primary
planets  respectively.  These  fluids,  separately  and  in  their  combina-
tionsy  are  tempered  and  modified  by  the  sun  and  moon.    The  indi-


60       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

vidual  influence  of  each  planet  acts  upon  man  by  means  of  this  fluid,
which  reaches  him  through  the  mount  in  the  hand  bearing  its  particu'
lar  name.  The  combinations  of  these  fluids  exert  their  power  upon
man  as  they  reach  him  through  the  different  lines  in  the  palm.  These
different  Astral  fluids  which  act  upon  the  man  through  the  hand,  sepa-
rately and  conjointly,  determine  the  man's  life,  according  to  his  past
history  of  disease  and  fortune,  as  well  as  deciding  his  future  in  this
respect.  The  hand  is  therefore  (according  to  this  theory)  the  reflec-
tion of  the  man;  showing  his  past  history,  present  condition,  and
foretelling  his  future  fortune  and  fate.

The  past  and  future,  the  palmist  argues,  are  alike  unknown  withr
out  the  historian  and  the  prophet  The  future  is  as  clear  to  the
prophet  as  the  past  to  the  historian,  and  the  prophecy  of  the  future,
written  in  the  hand  by  nature  and  the  gods,  is  clearer  to  him  who  can
read  that  language  than  any  moral  history  can  ever  be.

It  is  no  more  wonderful,  they  say,  to  read  the  future  from  the
hand  than  to  give  a  history  of  the  past  from  the  same  source.  £ach
is  an  equally  clear  page  to  him  who  can  read  the  signs  written  there
by  the  planets.  Palmists  disclaim  any  absolute  fatality  in  the  signs
of  the  hands.  These  signs,  they  say,  are  rather  warnings  for  man's
use  and  benefit;  they  predict  the  temptation  and  the  opportunity  —
the  threat  of  one  planet,  the  favor  of  another.  It  is  still  largely  in
man's  power  to  choose  which  he  will  hear  or  accept,  or  mayhap  make
one  annul  the  other.  Hence,  every  man  may  to  a  great  extent  court
the  favor  of  the  beneficent  planets  and  thereby  thwart  the  ill  designs
of  the  malevolent  powers,  and  essentially  determine  his  happiness.
But  he  can  materially  change  his  trials  and  his  opportunities,  through
growth  and  knowledge  of  Spirit,  for  Spirit  is  absolute  over  all  things^
and  a  man  who  lives  in  the  Spirit  and  near  to  God  has  no  fears  nor
doubts.

Life  is  too  real,  too  thoroughly  momentous,  in  urgent  gravity,  to  be
travestied  in  empty  creed  or  by  flctirious  representation.  A  man  who
penetrates  only  the  world  of  mind  halts  at  the  gateway  of  mesmeric
will,  where  there  is  groping  through  the  thick  darkness  of  the  mate*
rial  world,  and,  if  unguided,  he  blindly  penetrates  the  realms  of  force.

In  this  mad  dance  of  demons,  this  age  of  avaricious  rapacity  and
sordid  covetousness,  this  age  of  hypocrisy  and  commercial  traffic, —
where  the  great  ambition  of  half  the  world  is  to  try  to  overreach  and
rob  the  other  half ;  where  on  one  side  are  avarice,  lust,  greed,  selfishr
ness,  harshness,  mercenary  cupidity,  and  the  iron  hand  of  ungenerous
power  under  the  glove  of  conventionality,  which  is  but  venial  vanity ;


HAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES  OF  HIS  LIFE.  6l

on  the  other  side,  penury,  poverty,  privation^  destitution,  hunger,
distress,  and  anguish,  smarting  upon  die  rack  of  torture,  the  crucL
fizion  and  daily  martyrdom  of  a  struggle  to  exist,  a  life  which  is  one
piteous  appeal  and  sigh  of  pain  and  want ;  —  the  common  multitude
judge  and  grade  a  man  by  the  amount  of  money  he  has  or  can  com-
mand. In  the  eyes  of  the  world  a  man  without  money  is  a  cipher,  a
nonentity,  a  shadow  of  existence,  an  effigy  of  life,  who  is  condemned
and  ignored.  Unless  he  is  illumined  by  the  companionship  of  Spirit,
his  mind  wanders  in  horror,  his  thoughts  growing  into  a  hopeless
spectre  of  abject  terror,  while  wild  promptings  to  some  desperate  act
bedcon  him  onward,  till  it  b  but  a  chance  if  he  is  not  driven  into
lawless  deeds.

The  step  from  poverty  to  crime  is  indeed  a  short  one.  The  world
calls  even  poverty  itself  a  crime,  but  if  a  poor  man,  however  low  and
deep  has  been  the  past,  succeeds  in  gaining  money,  he  is  absolved.
He  is  an  object  for  distinguished  consideration  and  admiration.  The
more  show  you  make  the  more  you  are  admired ;  but  when,  by  some
calamity,  the  gold  has  flown,  the  hand  which  grasped  yours  so  warmly
now  slaps  you  in  the  face;  the  lips  you  hastened  to  relieve  when
parched  with  thirst,  now  hurl  venom  and  spite  after  you.  The  bridge
you  builded  for  a  friend  to  cross,  receives  a  kick  from  the  feet  you
bathed  with  precious  ointment  when  they  were  weary  and  travel-worn.
Such  b  the  mad  world's  way.

Better  by  far,  take  the  pathway  of  a  kind  and  peaceful  life,  that
Hfben  the  hour  comes  for  you  to  pass  on,  you  may  apply  for  admbsion
at  the  gates  of  paradise,  bearing  with  you  the  perfumes  of  kindness
and  charity,  the  gems  of  good  deeds,  for  when  man  attains  power  and
wealth  he  grows  in  confidence  which,  if  not  guarded,  ends  in  conceit,
and  hb  epitaph  when  all  b  done  is  told  in  few  words  —  Money  and
Selfishness.  The  living  may  erect  a  shaft  to  his  memory,  but  the
angels  see  no  emblem  over  the  cold,  hard  heart,  the  life  to  them  a
mere  whited  sepulchre.

Many  an  epitaph  of  some  of  those  whom  the  world  calls  honorable
men,  when  read  in  heaven,  b  something  as  follows  :  —

Here  lies  the  body  of  a  man  who  lived  by  cunning  and  deceit,
who  never  did  one  hour's  work  for  God,  Angels,  or  men,  nor  even  for
hb  own  Soul ;  who  sinned  against  this  life  and  slighted  the  next.

Man  does  not  form  hb  own  character  entirely,  it  b  formed  by  the
circamstances  that  surround  him,  nor  can  he  escape  thb  condition
except  by  hb  union  with  Spirit,  which,  through  the  guidance  of  Angels,
opens  the  prison  doors  of  human  circumstances  into  liberty  and  light


62       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  whole  life  of  an  ungenerous,  selfish  man  is  only  one  long
frightful  mistake.  It  is  like  the  low  tolling  of  a  bell  whose  song  is  a
sigh,  like  a  dirge  at  the  grave.

Charity,  high  above  all  the  knowledge  and  highest  powers  of  man,
is  the  only  safe  anchorage  and  greatest  of  all  virtues.  Treasures  in
heaven  are  charity  and  Love.

Man,  like  any  other  creature,  is  only  content  in  the  element  to
which  he  was  bom,  unless  he  opens  his  Soul  for  growth  and  is  illumi-
nated by  Spirit.  The  frog  would  spring  from  a  golden  chair  into  bis
native  swamp,  the  captive  bird  ever  tries  to  escape  though  you  fill
his  gilded  cage  with  flowers  and  sweets.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him :
neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  —
X.  Cor.  ii :  xiv.

Small  minds  often  think  themselves  great,  —  great  ones,  never.  As
unbiassed  thought  traverses  the  universe,  active,  but  silent,  unobserved,
it  gathers  grains  of  golden  truths  and  crystal  sands  of  speculations,
with  which  it  paves  man's  way  to  his  greater  destiny.

Man  can  appreciate  many  things,  but,  on  account  of  conceit  and
conventionalities,  enjoys  but  few.  There  is  a  conceit  in  self-culture
that  must  be  cast  out,  which  also  brings  conceit  in  the  culture  of  the
Soul.  So  many  are  stranded  on  the  rock  of  Phariseeism.  Many  a
good  man  is  swamped  in  the  mire  of  his  own  atmosphere  and  charac-
ter. That  which  might  have  been  a  full  shock  of  com  in  its  season
is  ripened  out  to  Dead  Sea  fmit.

It  is  the  modest,  humble,  unassuming  man  in  whom  are  found  Tme
Godliness  and  Tme  Soul,  which  are  rarest  of  rare  things  in  this  pre-
sumptuous age ;  but  the  quiet,  unassuming  life  of  gentle  Love  is  the
greatest  of  all  greatness,  the  noblest  sublimity,  an  exaltation  and
ascension  into  the  Spirit  world  which  is  an  overflowing  fountain  for
which  human  Souls  are  favorite  reservoirs.

The  higher  and  better  nature  of  Soul  is  purely  harmonious,  and
ever  tends  to  the  equilibrium.  In  all  her  strivings,  the  possession  of
a  special  gift  or  power  reaches  grander  heights  and  nobler  ends  if
it  is  accompanied  by  an  unambitious  indifference  to  its  possession.
Never  force  talent ;  let  it  force  you.  Great  power  and  great  gifts  in
shallow  minds  are  like  richly  laden  vessels  among  breakers  or  in
shallow  waters.

The  moment  violent  anger  controls  a  man  or  the  fierce  sway  of
passion  or  even  the  lower  mental  emotions,  the  working  of  the  Spirit
is  retarded,  and  it  is  finally  compelled  to  depart  or  to  yield  fully  to  the


KAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES  OF   HIS   LIFE.  63

impulses  of  the  body.  When  Moses  smote  the  rock  in  his  wrath,  and
Christ  blasted  the  fig-tree,  their  spiritual  work  on  earth  was  ended.  All
HierophantSy  Adepts,  and  Anchorites  know  that  through  anger,  passion,
and  bitterness  of  any  kind,  all  Spirit  is  hindered,  and  the  higher  forces
are  temporarily  broken,  and  if  in  a  mood  of  passion  or  violent  anger
the  operator  or  Adept  calls  for  Spirit  and  the  higher  force  to  unite
and  give  him  their  action,  they  act  then  for  the  last  time  through  that
individual,  but  rebound  and  take  flight  from  the  adherent  inhar-
monies  of  that  soul  and  body  during  its  natural  life.  The  Spiritual
reign  with  that  Soul  so  long  as  it  remains  in  the  mortal  form  is  ended
then  and  there.  ^

Well  indeed  does  any  Adept  know  the  deep  meaning  of  those
words  of  the  Christ  at  Calvary :  '*  Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabacthani,"  that  is
to  say,  **  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me."

A  very  large  part  of  the  human  race  do  not  desire  advanced
thought,  nor  are  they  inclined  to  think  for  themselves.  One  is  moved
with  wonder  at  the  great  deficiency  of  new  thoughts  simplified,  or  of
any  aptness  and  fertility  of  mind  among  the  vast  multitude  of  the
human  race.  This  is  especially  marked  on  newer  thought  of  religious
things.  Apparently  one-half  the  world  fears  to  think,  while  the  other
half  claims  to  have  not  time.  All  are  prone  to  follow  the  bell-wether
like  a  flock  of  sheep,  no  matter  into  what  inconsistency  or  absurdity,
even  to  danger  and  to  death.

No  man  who  is  a  shedder  of  blood  or  an  eater  of  unclean  flesh
will  ever  touch  the  central  secret  of  things  nor  hold  within  his  hand
the  mystery  of  life  and  death.  No  man  who  has  not  grown  gentle
and  kind,  controlling  all  anger  and  boisterousness,  can  ever  lay  hold
of  the  Knowledge  of  the  tree  of  Life.  Hence  it  is  written  of  the
Holy  City,  "  Without  are  dogs,"  etc.,  for  the  foot  of  the  carnivorous
beast  cannot  enter  therein,  nor  shall  the  lips  polluted  with  blood  pro-
nounce the  Divine  Name.

The  Perfect  Spiritual  Living  Man,  or  humanity  in  Paradise,  made
in  the  Divine  Image,  was  given  as  meat  the  fruits  of  the  trees  and
grains  of  the  fields.  Then  men  were  content  with  the  food  which
nature  freely  bestowed,  for  the  bodily  appetites  knew  no  law  but  that
of  Spirit  and  a  healthy  intuition,  and  obeyed  the  impulses  of  the  God
within.  But,  so  soon  as  man  acquired  a  selfish  and  perverse  will,
which  grew  from  moodiness  to  resentment,  thence  to  anger,  a  new
lust  arose,  for  a  new  and  sub-human  nature  appeared  in  it,  —  the
nature  of  the  beasts  of  prey,  whose  actions  the  fallen  man  has  put  on.

Paradise  can  never  be  regained,  regeneration  never  completed,


64       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

man  never  fully  redeemed  until  his  body  is  brought  under  the  law  of
gentleness  and  love  of  Eden.  None  will  ever  know  the  joys  of  Paia^
dise  who  cannot  live  like  man  in  Paradise ;  none  will  ever  help  to
restore  the  golden  age  to  the  world  who  does  not  first  restore  himself.
He  who  will  but  live  the  Life  of  Eden  shall  find  all  its  joys  and  all  its
sacred  mysteries  within  his  grasp.  He  who  will  do  the  Will  of  God^
of  Love,  and  of  Spirit,  shall  know  the  doctrine  of  Truth,  shall  triumph
in  the  knowledge  of  the  Great  Mystery.  He  is  free,  being  bom  again
by  the  Spirit  and  made  one  with  the  Father,  his  own  Central  God.

We  say  boldly,  and  without  fear  of  contradiction  from  those  who
really  know^  that  the  Illumination  of  Soul,  the  Interior  Life  and  the
Clear  Heaven  are  not  attainable  by  men  who  are  without  warm  Love,
not  animal  but  universal  Love.  He  who  remains  unable  to  detach
himself  from  the  love  of  matter  and  from  the  attractions  of  sense
can  at  best  but  dimly  discern  the  Light  of  the  Spiritual  Sun.  Thou
man  who  art  so  heedless  and  unthinking,  look  into  this  inner  lamp  of
thine,  see  if  there  bumeth  a  light  of  harmonious  Love ;  examine  well
thy  casket  lamp,  for  if  from  it  there  come  no  flame  of  Spirit  light,
thou  canst  not  see  to  look  into  the  hidden  mysteries  of  thy  life.

How  can  a  man  reflect  upon  himself  or  hope  to  fathom  Truth,
who  neither  knows  God  nor  desires  to  know  Him  ?  Without  some
Knowledge  of  a  Divine  Entity,  or  Absolute  Energy,  life  is  so  burdened
with  ennui  and  self-contempt  that  no  refined,  thoughtful  man  would
desire  to  go  on  with  it,  and  usually  only  the  strong  animal  man,  who
lives  for  desire  and  appetite,  can  endure  to  bear  it  long.  The  longer
a  truly  unbiassed,  thoughtful  but  material  objective  man  lives,  more
and  more  is  he  lost  in  an  ocean  of  speculation ;  his  eveiy  effort  to
climb  the  heights  of  Truth  is  by  stairs  of  sand,  and  as  he  thinks  he  is
tossed  more  and  more  wildly  on  the  restless  billows  of  a  shoreless  sea.

A  man  who  does  not  believe  in  God  is  as  a  child  who  has  lost
himself,  he  knows  not  where.  Far  from  home,  he  wanders, — drift-
ing about  like  a  ship  at  sea,  without  compass  or  rudder,  which,  after
much  exertion,  tempest-tossed  and  storm-swept,  finally  enters  port,  —
till  at  last  weeping  and  weary  he  returns  to  his  mother's  breast  Such
a  man  finds  no  certainty  in  the  objective  animal  life  of  man  but  that
his  self-love  has  often  moved  his  Soul  to  a  boundless  cupidity.

Weary  of  this  fruitless  labor,  which,  even  if  its  object  were  realized,
would  not  fill  the  void  within  the  human  breast,  he  finds  that  which
has  caused  him  to  wander  so  long  in  darkness  and  disquiet  most  un-
satisfactory ;  he  awakes  to  a  knowledge  that  there  is  a  living  Truth  of
Spirit,  out  beyond  as  well  as  about  him,  which  now  illuminates  and


HAN  AND  THB  OPPORTUNITIES  OP  HIS  LIPE.  6$

gives  him  light  to  leap  all  barriers  and  break  the  chains  that  have  so
long  held  him  captive,  and,  waking,  he  is  free ;  a  child  bom  again  of
the  Sinrit,  he  has  fomid  God  and  now  learns  that  God  is  the  crowning
feature  of  the  Spiritual,  as  man  is  of  the  physical  world.

Now  for  the  first  time  he  finds  repose  and  consolation  within  the
Temple  of  Truth,  whose  eternal  gates  are  ever  open  to  invite  the
weary  and  erring  pilgrim  to  enter  in  and  refresh  himself  at  the  per-
petual fountain  of  undying  Spirit  Love.  He  who  once  drinks  of
these  waters  will  never  again  find  an  uncertainty  in  hope  of  immor
tality,  nor  are  there  strewn  about  the  court-yard  of  this  temple  the
mutilated  limbs  of  truth,  but  colonnade  and  court  are  of  purity,  har-
mony, and  crowned  by  the  blessed  virgin  of  Truth  herself.

Man  must  be  disappointed  with  the  objective  and  lesser  things  of
life  before  he  will  listen  and  stop  to  comprehend  the  true  Life  and
the  value  of  his  Soul.  This  earth  life,  with  its  noisy  ambitions,  its
selfishness,  and  its  mean  passions,  is  so  poor  and  base.

As  the  macrocosmic  will  of  the  solar  system  consciously  or  uncon-
sciously evolves  forms,  so  does  the  will  of  microcosmic  man.  If  we
form  a  concrete  or  even  an  abstract  idea  in  our  mind,  we  give  it  a
shape,  and  create  an  existence,  with  an  atmosphere,  which  may  be-
OMne  either  subjective  or  subject  and  even  material  according  to  the
means  applied  for  that  purpose.  Every  thought  creates  a  subjective
form,  which  may  be  seen  and  perceived  not  only  by  the  originator  of
diat  form  but  also  by  another  person  endowed  with  the  inner  sight  and
the  faculties  of  Soul  perception.

Forms  are  the  symbols  of  ideas.  The  objects  by  which  we  are
surrounded  are  but  the  representations  of  ideas,  either  from  God
or  Man,  representing  the  growth  of  the  world.  They  are  the  alle-
gories which  constitute  the  dream  we  call  life.  Those  who  can
understand  the  true  meaning  of  surrounding  objects  understand
nature.  As  ideas  progress,  forms  become  more  refined,  for  low
ideas  are  symbolized  by  low,  coarse  forms.  Exalted,  unselfish  ideas
are  embodied  in  refined  forms.

Every  emotion  that  arises  in  man  may  be  combined  with  the
astral  forces  of  nature  and  create  a  being,  which  may  be  perceived
by  the  persons  to  whom  it  is  sent,  if  they  have  cultivated  their
inner  sight  as  an  active  entity.  It  is  through  these  hidden  ways  that
^  Hierophant  is  enabled,  through  his  intense  emotion  and  desire,
to  see  or  give  orders  to  a  certain  person,  even  at  a  great  distance.
He  projects  himself  from  the  physical  body  and  becomes  conscious
tod  visible  at  any  distance,  with  those  he  desires  to  reach.


66       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Desire  results  from  attraction.  Attraction  from  the  separation
of  two  substances  analogous  in  their  essences  and  properties.
The  more  the  thoughts,*  desires,  selfishness  and  the  lower  propen-
sities clinging  to  the  sphere  of  desire  are  concentrated,  the  more
dim  and  shadowy  will  become  the  serene  image  and  Spirit  light
above  one,  till  it  is  lost  sight  of  altogether;  but  if  the  aspirations
and  thoughts  dwell  in  the  Love  universal,  everything  is  made  effec-
tive by  WilL  Then  life  and  action  rise  above  the  sphere  of  self,
clinging  to  the  pure  ideal  which  grows  more  distinct  and  substantial
until  the  innermost  self  and  Soul  are  united  with  and  attuned  to
Spirit,  and  are  free  from  earthly  attractions.  Now  one  can  look
down  upon  all  that  which  remains  below  and  behold  it  as  it  b
in  truth  —  only  the  shadow  of  its  own  reality.

To  recognize  the  purity  of  the  Divine  spark  within,  is  true  adora-
tion. To  attempt  to  realize  it,  true  meditation.  To  exert  this  Will
to  bring  one's  self  into  perfect  harmony  with  it,  is  inspiration  or
prayer;  to  express  that  prayer  in  acts,  is  to  make  it  effective.
True  prayer  is  always  efficacious  on  the  plane  on  which  it  is  made
to  act  Prayer  on  the  physical  plane  consists  in  physical  works.
Prayer  on  the  astral  plane  purifies  the  emotions  through  the  action
of  Will,  softening  and  thereby  illuminating  mentality  through  the
emotions  of  universal  Love.  In  the  realm  of  intellect,  study  b
prayer  and  leads  to  knowledge.  Thus  the  higher  Spiritual  aspira-
tions lift  man  out  of  the  turmoils  and  burdens  of  matter,  and  bring
him  to  an  attunement  with  Spirit  and  nearer  to  God.

This  self-satisfied  entity  called  modern  society,  which  plumes
itself  on  appearance  and  heritage,  is  like  an  old  hag  covered  with
cosmetic  to  cover  up  all  imperfections,  but  they  remain,  and  under
all  this  masquerade  of  modern  conventionalities,  falsehood  and  decep-
tion exist.  The  only  difference  in  methods  of  money-making  in
this  modern  age  is  that  some  are  more  notorious  than  others.
Banks,  Insurance,  Stocks,  Railroads,  Municipal  Governments,  in
truth,  nearly  all  modern  methods  of  conducting  business,  just  escape
being  criminal,  and  when  one  of  their  managers  is  brought  up
occasionally  before  Modern  Justice  by  some  victim  brave  enough
to  cry  out.  Modern  Justice  often  becomes  a  question  of  money.
Ambition,  vanity,  pride,  deception,  and  hatred  live  upon  the  labor
of  millions,  making  human  beings  victims  of  circumstances  beyond
their  power  to  control.  It  appears  almost  a  necessity  at  times  for
the  poor  to  become  criminals  to  live.

Friends  of  humanity,  ye  who  have  never  needed  to  steal  that  ye


MAN  AND  iTfk  OPPORTUNITIES   OP   HIS   LIPE.  67

might  live,  ye  whose  money  has  made  you  respectable  1  what
tenderness  of  heart,  what  gratitude  can  be  expected  of  a  man  who
b  holding  the  wolf  of  hunger  by  the  ears  ?  The  loaf  of  bread  first,
then  show  him  the  light

What  means  all  this  disturbance  and  unrest  ?  Is  there  any  sig-
nificance at  all  in  the  movements  of  large  bodies  of  men,  animated
by  a  common  thought,  directed  by  intelligence;  above  all  based  on
absolute  justice?

Is  a  new  deluge  coming  upon  us  ?  How  many  thousands  of  good
deeds  and  pure  thoughts  lie  cramped  and  crippled.  Behind  hot  and
weary  brows,  the  very  Soul  is  compressed  in  this  mad  rush  and
struggle  for  bread.  Oh  the  pity  of  it,  that  the  aspirations  of  life
should  wither  and  fall  so  low.  Surely  if  men  would  but  think  they
would  feel  constrained  to  give  each  other  room  on  this  fair  earth,
for  'tis  but  a  breath  of  time,  these  so-called  years,  when  the  form  of
which  men  are  so  selfishly  careful,  finds  only  a  few  feet  of  earth,  a
foigotten  mound  soon  worn  down  again  to  the  common  level.  But
this  mad  age  runs  wildly  over  everything,  building  its  own  judgment
day  to  end  in  suffering,  pain  and  death.  Oh  that  mankind  would  be
warned  in  time  lest  in  this  matter  they  be  found  warring  against  God.

It  b  neither  just  nor  philosophical  to  name  the  dejection  and
oniest  which  so  often  exist  in  the  Soul  and  are  mirrored  in  the  face
of  the  poor  man  jealousy  or  envy.  It  is  not  these,  but  it  is  the
burden  of  heavy  life,  a  perpetual  drag.  Even  to  those  who  are
placed  beyond  the  reach  of  immediate  want,  the  struggles  of  life
are  hard  enough,  but  when  to  them  is  added  the  burden  of  wrest-
ling for  the  commonest  necessities  of  life,  then  indeed  is  it  a  torture
to  live.  The  condition  of  the  ant  by  the  wayside  is  far  better,  for  he
b  conscious  of  no  neighbor  who  wallows  in  indolence  while  he  goes
hungry.  So  long  as  this  fiend  of  selfishness  stalks  abroad  in  our
midst  can  any  true  religion  or  Spiritual  light  lay  claim  to  Justice  or
right?  No  power  can  overthrow  this  monster  of  impudent  hypoc-
iby,  but  Spirit  Truth,  or  old  Father  Time,  who  is  indeed  an
honest  fellow  though  slow,  will  balance  up  the  account  of  the  last
century  by  some  great  calamity  and  deluge  of  suffering  to  all
humanity.  Even  now,  at  times.  Mother  Earth  rebels  at  the  deep
scars  men  make,  and  in  convulsions  throws  aside  her  creeping
populace.  God  is  just  and  Nature  balances  His  accounts.  It  has
been  said  that  only  through  pain  and  suffering  is  man  made  to  halt
in  hb  mad  career  to  think  and  meditate,  and  only  through  affliction
and  death  does  the  human  Soul  rise  into  eternal  Life.


68       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

We  do  not  claim  that  mankind  are  all  of  the  same  species — far
from  it;  some  are  for  one  branch  and  pathway  of  life,  some  for
another.  The  architect,  the  sailor,  the  mechanic,  the  farmer,  all
have  their  necessary  callings.  Let  all  live  in  peace,  and  not  devour
each  other,  as  the  birds  that  sing  in  the  trees,  or  the  frogs  that  croak
in  the  marshes,  each  to  his  natural  vocation  and  element.  To  ask
or  expect  the  frog  to  fly  in  the  air,  the  bird  to  lie  in  the  pool,  is  an
injustice  and  reversal  of  nature.

Misapplied  virtues  become  vices,  and  well  directed  vices  are
virtues.  An  emotion  is  either  a  virtue  or  a  vice  according  to  the
manner  in  which  it  is  applied.  Something  more  than  a  man's  nature
is  shown  in  his  acts,  and  error  is  not  always  the  result  of  want  of
education,  but  often  a  lack  of  power  to  comprehend  the  Truth.  A
profound  man  thinks  more  easily  than  he  talks ;  a  shallow,  weak  one
talks  more  easily  than  he  thinks.

Misanthropy  is  starvation  of  the  heart.  It  is  the  heritage  of
riches.  This  aversion  to  humanity  grows  and  grows  as  man  gains
possession  of  wealth  and  power,  and  is  usually  the  rock  on  which
his  bark  is  wrecked.  He  who  has  outrun  the  large  majority  of
God's  creatures  in  the  struggle  for  bread,  by  fleetness,  or  cunning,  or
the  help  of  heritage,  feels  in  his  heart,  and  shows  that  he  feels  so  in
his  acts,  that  the  great  horde  of  humanity  has  no  right  to  be  poor ;
that  poverty  is  a  crime  which  debars  them  from  the  right  to  a  little
room  in  which  to  live,  but  God  is  just  and  all  His  accounts  are
balanced  with  interest  by  dear  old  Time.

The  faith  of  man  in  man  is  broken  because  we  do  not  worship
the  True  God,  and  some  of  the  most  lamentable  errors  which  have
been  taught  mankind  are  the  misconception  of  God  and  the  mis-
understanding of  man.  General  confidence  can  only  exist  where
man  has  faith  in  Spirit.  Could  the  heart  of  humanity  beat  tenderly
toward  the  fallen  and  the  unhappy !  could  men  but  understand  each
other  I  An  unhappy  man  needs  double  love  and  charity,  and  twice
is  he  blessed  who  is  able  to  bestow  these.  At  some  time  in  earth's
history  Spirit  Light  is  coming  very  near  to  man ;  in  this  new  era  the
old  religion  of  Spirit  Truth,  the  unity  of  man,  must  not  be  lost

Dear  Pilgrim  of  the  Illuminati,  the  great  and  rich  have  plenty  of
friends ;  be  thou  the  friend  of  the  poor.

He  who  gives  but  one  drop  of  water  to  the  poor  unselfishly,  it
shall  be  unto  him  a  living  fountain  in  paradise.

Then  again  modern  society  trains  men  to  the  repression  of  the
sensibilities  and  sympathies,  the  expression  of  which  is  considered


MAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES  OF   HIS  LIFE.  69

unmanly,  which  repression  makes  them  seem  almost  brutal.  Mawk-
ish sensibility  that  weeps  puerile  tears  over  every  fancied  woe  is  not
manly  nor  to  be  cultivated,  but  a  true  soul  charity  for  the  unfortu-
nate. Crowds  may  be  swayed  before  the  footlights  by  the  passion
and  pathos  of  the  great  tragedians,  and  retire  to  live  the  old. life,
their  excited  sensibilities  dying  out  without  exercise  upon  an  appro^
priate  object  An  increased  sensitiveness  which  would  make  life  an
excruciating  pain  is  certainly  not  desirable,  but  there  is  a  certain
sensibility,  a  normal  characteristic  of  the  Spiritual,  moral,  and  intellec-
tual life,  which,  though  disguised  in  some  quarters,  is  an  important
factor  in  every  rightly  regulated  mind.  The  conventional  well  bred
composure  is  carried  too  far.  We  bury  our  te^rs  so  deep  in  the
heart  that  it  becomes  hardened  and  congealed.  "  Let  your  modera-
tion be  known  to  all  men,"  but  do  not  stifle  a  noble  impulse,  although
to  yield  to  it  is  not  "  genteel "  in  society  parlance.  Your  joys  and
sorrows  must  be  kept  in  conventional  bonds.  If  you  feel  obliged  td
weep,  weep  decorously,  is  the  mandate  of  the  sphinx  of  modem  soci-
ety, whose  dead,  expressionless  face  is  not  unlike  the  stone  one  by  the
Nile.  As  the  age  grows  older  the  sensibilities  and  sympathies  be-
come schooled ;  as  culture  and  conventionality  came  in,  feeling  and
sympathy  went  out,  until  this  age  is  in  danger  of  becoming  an  ele-
gant fossil  as  to  its  sympathy  and  emotional  nature.

That  which  was  characterized  and  condemned  as  barbaric  is  fast
becoming  the  last  result  of  fashionable  culture,  a  repression  of  the
emotions  where  real  distress,  not  the  painted  figment  of  the  stage,
should  cause  the  tear  of  sympathy  to  flow,  and  spur  the  gift  of  help-
fulness which  might  be  exercised  for  humanity,  and  which  follows
hard  on  a  noble  and  true  sensibility.

Many  disciples  of  modem  culture  imitate  the  oyster  and  live  in
a  shell  of  their  own  selfishness,  preserving  a  hard,  flinty  exterior.
To  them  emotion  and  sympathy  are  undignified,  but  they  are  not
above  committing  a  greater  sin,  perchance,  and  permit  themselves  to
retail  scandal  of  their  neighbors.

Dear  Pilgrim,  keep  a  strong  hold  on  your  emotional  life,  that
impulse  and  sympathy  may  be  your  savior,  without  which  you  might
be  easily  led  into  sin  against  God,  Nature,  Duty  and  Good  manners.

It  has  been  said,  with  some  tmth,  so  widespread  is  this  evil  that
the  children  of  the  present  day  are  losing  their  kindness  and  sym-
pathy for  their  parents,  and  are  all  miniature  men  and  women  postur-
ing as  their  elders  do  in  larger  life ;  the  bloom  and  freshness  of  child-
hood worn  off  too  early,  the  artlessness  and  unquestioning  faith  well


JO  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD

nigh  lost.  If  the  intellect  and  will  are  cultivated  at  the  expense  of
the  sensibilities,  we  have  a  growing  monster,  at  least  a  civilized
heathen,  with  great  frigidity,  a  cold  unfeeling  life,  which  may  appear
brilliant  to  some,  but  to  its  owner  full  of  bitterness.

The  intellect,  with  sympathy  and  wisdom,  should  be  the  motive
power,  the  human  will  the  lever  that  holds  it  to  the  track.  Sensibili-
ties are  the  very  vehicles  of  progress,  which  are  to  make  effective  the
other  powers  associated  with  them.  It  is  sympathy  which  has  made
great  men  so  mighty  in  their  influence  over  the  minds  of  others,  and
helped  to  sway  the  masses  to  their  will.

Others  may  be  far  more  learned  and  surpassing  in  intellectual
acumen,  but  never  in  the  wealth  of  noble  sensibility  and  sympathy,
which  impart  a  magnetic  power  over  the  will  and  thoughts  of  men
and  bend  them  as  the  needle  to  the  pole,  pervading  all  their  intellec-
tual and  moral  power  like  an  atmosphere  until  its  touch  is  felt  by  a
true  sensibility,  and  it  becomes  a  living  reality  before  which  men  must
bow,  as  the  orator^s  heart  glows  with  this  magnetic  sensibility.

The  terms  brutishness  and  modern  manliness  are  almost  synony-
mous. So  stolid  have  we  become  to  common  woes  and  misery ;  so
placidly  we  read  and  see  life's  tragedies ;  so  nonchalantly  we  march
on,  that  our  lives  appear  to  a  thoughtful  mind  like  a  childish  comedy,
empty  and  foolish.  In  the  eyes  of  God  and  all  true  men,  it  is  no
disgrace  to  have  a  warm  heart,  no  merit  to  keep  it  double-locked
behind  a  conventional  mask.  Why,  men  "  have  died  and  made  no
sign  "  because  those  around  them,  having  eyes,  saw  not,  and,  having
ears,  heard  not ;  because  they  felt  if  they  asked  for  bread  they  would
receive  only  a  stone ;  therefore  they  passed  out  into  the  shadows  of
the  night,  forgotten.  Between  the  extremes  of  poverty  and  riches,  the
great  surging  mass  of  humanity  waits  for  warm  hearts  and  loving
hands  to  lift  men  to  the  vantage-^ound  of  healthful  living.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  it  is  not  expected  of  you  to  take  on  the
burden  of  the  world  only  to  sink  under  its  weight,  but  here  a  little
and  there  a  little  if  only  to  help  one  of  God's  suffering  children.
This  is  a  leaven  which  will  leaven  the  whole  lump.  Let  us  not  be
ashamed  to  feel  a  brother's  suffering  and  woe ;  first  sensibility,  then
wisdom  and  sympathy  for  the  ideal  life  of  humanity.

Even  though  one  should  deny  the  existence  of  God,  there  is  one
absolute  certainty  —  that  one  is  always  in  the  presence  of  an  infinite
and  eternal  energy  from  which  all  things  proceed,  it  being  the  foun-
tain-head of  human  sensibilities  and  sympathy.

Sensation  is  the  only  means  of  knowledge,  whether  for  the  body


MAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES   OP   HIS  LIFE.  7 1

or  the  mind.  The  body  perceives  by  the  five  avenues  of  touch.  The
Soul,  in  like  manner,  by  the  same  corresponding  senses,  but  of  a  finer
sort,  and  put  into  action  by  more  subtile  agents  ;  while  Sacred  Spirit
responds  and  perceives  through  two  higher  senses,  a  combination  of
the  five  bodily  and  five  Soul  senses.  There  are  therefore  seven  Soul
and  Spirit  senses  for  the  animal  man  to  cultivate  in  order  to  become
an  Illuminated  Pilgrim  of  Spirit  Truth.

To  know  God,  then,  is  to  know  these  senses  and  the  substance
that  acts  upon  them.  And  to  know  this  and  only  by  knowing  these
b  to  know  ourselves.  This  and  only  this  was  the  meaning  of  the
famous  immortal  and  mystic  utterance  inscribed  on  the  porch  of  the
Temple  at  Delphi ;  Know  Thyself,  a  sentence  which  in  its  brevity
comprehends  all  wisdom.  The  system  by  which  these  supreme  ends
are  attained,  and  which  now  for  the  first  time  in  the  world's  history  is
openly  disclosed,  has  constituted  the  hidden  basis  of  all  the  world's
Divine  revelations  and  religions.  It  is  the  pathway  to  the  interior  of
the  inner  Temple  of  Soul,  Spirit  and  Reality  where  God  subsists  in
His  plenitude  and  Truth  abounds.  Only  through  the  knowledge  of
these  inner  senses  can  man  find  the  True  Light,  and  so,  from  Nature's
seeming,  he  attains  to  the  cognition  at  once  of  his  own  Being  and
that  of  God.

The  man  who  knows  himself  disdains  being  fed  only  by  the  mouth;
he  knows  there  is  no  true  feeding  except  through  his  Soul,  the  higher
self  which  is  lifting  itself  above  the  animal  and  beyond  time  to
eternity.

Spirit  Light  springing  up  in  his  Soul  as  an  everlasting  fountain,  he
learns  of  a  truth  the  words  "  Whosoever  drinketh  of  that  water  shall
never  thirst,  ...  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."
Spirit  Light  sweeps  away  the  clouds  that  hid  the  horizon ;  it  is  the
bright  and  morning  star;  the  forerunner  and  intercessor;  opening
the  portals  of  Life,  it  pleads  in  love  for  him  in  the  celestial  realms,  is
his  mediator  and  guide  through  all  worlds,  creating  about  him  an
atmosphere  which  can  come  only  from  the  loving  heart  of  Spirit.

As  Love  feeds  on  Love ;  courage  on  courage ;  heroism  on  hero-
ism ;  as  magnanimity  inspires  magnanimity ;  as  example  provokes
imitation,  such  is  the  blessed  transformation  wrought  in  the  man  who
plunges  into  the  deeper  mysteries  of  the  Soul  and  its  union  with
Spirit  and  with  God.

A  pure  but  ignorant  person,  if  thrown  into  the  highest  state  of
conscious  ecstasy,  or  even  consciously  into  his  own  astral  or  star-
magno,  would  not  comprehend  what  he  saw,  and,  if  not  quite  evenly


72        TH£  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

balanced  with  good  common-sense,  would  become  insane  ;  while  the
most  fearless  and  learned  man,  so  long  as  his  mind  is  clouded  with
selfishness  and  greed,  or  is  prejudiced  by  human  theories,  cannot
enter  the  superior  state.  For  this  reason  the  inductive  and  deductive
methods  of  reasoning  must  go  hand  in  hand.  How  is  it  possible  for
the  acorn,  buried  in  the  darkness  of  the  ground,  to  foresee  its  future
condition  as  an  oak  into  which  it  may  develop  ?  The  true  instructor
in  occult  science  will  impress  on  the  mind  of  the  student  that  the
first  step  toward  attaining  true  knowledge  of  the  inner  world  is  to
realize  fully  that  he  is  ignorant.  The  fresh  student  usually  thinks  he
knows  everything  already,  except  perhaps  a  few  details.  If  he  remain
on  this  ground,  it  is  little  use  to  occupy  valuable  time,  for  he  will  be
unable  to  learn  much  more  than  details.

Material  Science  deals  as  yet  only  with  the  lowest  two  principles
of  man  and  the  five  objective  senses,  while  the  remaining  five  higher
principles  and  seven  subjective  senses  are  ignored  and  left  unknown.

Man's  actions  are  his  writings.  By  putting  his  thoughts  into  acts
he  expresses  and  records  them  in  the  book  of  Life.  Man's  acts  are
his  creations,  and  give  form  to  his  thoughts  and  expression.  The
motive  he  vibrates  endows  them  with  life,  the  will  fumbhes  them
with  strength.

He  raises  the  magic  wand  of  his  Will  and  quiets  the  tempest  rag-
mg  in  the  Astral  world.  The  animal  or  selfish  emotions  which  were
rushing  about  in  disturbance  and  tumult,  consuming  and  driving  him
on  to  destruction,  now  obey  him  and  execute  his  orders,  while  he
walks  safely  upon  the  waters  under  whose  surface  is  hidden  the  abyss
of  death.

His  fate  may  be  to  walk  through  life  greatly  misunderstood,  and
perhaps  alone,  but  he  never  can  be  isolated,  because  he  knows  that,
wherever  he  may  be,  he  is  only  a  part  of  the  great  Absolute  Love,  the
All  in  All  which  is  united  with  him.  He  knows  that  personality  is  an
illusion,  and  that  the  Divinity  within  him  will  never  die.  He  has  de-
veloped a  far-seeing  perception  which  reaches  away  out  beyond  the
narrow  circle  of  his  material  surroundings,  and  beyond  the  short  span
of  time  which  encircles  the  all  of  this  earthly  life,  and  knows  that  it  is
in  his  power  to  control  his  own  future  destiny.

Fear  and  doubt  have  no  power  over  him,  for  he  knows  Truth  of
Spirit.  His  Will  is  power ;  his  protection,  Spirit  Truth.  His  faith  rests
in  the  bosom  of  Absolute  Love  and  his  knowledge  is  directed  by  Love
and  Wisdom.  But  most  men  who  take  an  accurate  account  of  their
moral  stock-in-trade  will  find  the  chief  assets  to  be  made  up  of  selfish-


MAN   AND  THE   OPPORTUNITIES   OF   HIS   LIFE.  73

ness,  the  principal  liability  the  debt  of  nature.  The  greedy  miser,
on  looking  at  nature,  thinks  only  of  the  money  value  represented,
while  the  Poet  and  true  man  finds  beautiful  forms  and  flowers,  music
in  the  trees  and  waterfalls,  fairies  in  the  wandering  clouds,  peace  and
rest  in  the  mountain-tops,  a  dream  of  love  in  the  shady  groves.  The
selfish  coward  wanders  and  drifts  through  life  with  a  scowl  upon  his
face ;  he  sees  in  every  comer  an  enemy,  and  for  him  the  world  has
nothing  attractive  nor  right  except  his  own  small  life.  The  man  who
cannot  be  trusted  is  ever  distrustful;  the  thief  fears  always  to  be
robbed,  and  the  slanderer  and  backbiter  is  extremely  sensitive  to  the
gossip  of  others.

Love  and  S3rmpathy,  envy,  hate  and  vindictiveness,  benevolence,
kindness,  and  amiability,  lust,  selfishness,  and  greed  are  not  persons ;
but,  becoming  assimilated  with  the  objective  part  of  the  man,  thereby
become  personified  in  the  man.  An  extremely  malicious  person  is  the
embodiment  of  malice,  and  if  he  sees  the  demon  in  an  objective  form
he  beholds  the  reflection  of  his  own  Soul  in  the  mirror  of  his  mind.

Spirit  is  everywhere,  but  Spirit  cannot  exist  without  form,  nor  can
it  anchor  without  an  attraction.

To  call  up  a  good  or  a  wicked  Spirit  we  need  not  go  in  search  of
him.  We  need  only  to  create  an  atmosphere  and  permit  him  to  come.
To  call  up  a  devil  is  to  give  way  and  create  an  atmosphere  of  selfish
desires  and  wrong-doing.

Love  is  the  Mother  of  all  emotions  and  is  of  a  dual  nature.  To
vanquish  the  devil  is  to  create  an  atmosphere  of  the  highest  Ideal  of
Love  and  Spirit  Universal;  thus  the  man  resists  all  temptation,  and
evil  departs.

Whenever  a  certain  amount  of  energy  has  accumulated,  the  time
arrives  when  it  will  be  expended,  which  must  produce  an  effect  either
great  or  small.  Man's  will  is  not  entirely  free.  Every  mental  state
is  the  necessary  result  of  previously  existing  mental  states.  Man's
Will  is  the  result  of  growth  and  involution,  and  as  such  cannot  tran-
scend its  own  powers,  but  it  is  capable  of  further  development  and
growth.  The  Divine  Spirit  principle  alone  is  free, — being  not  a  re-
sult of  material  causes,  but  Spirit  eternally  existing.

The  principal  work  of  the  universe  is  not  done  by  manual  labor,
but  through  the  Illumination  of  a  few  Minds,  Forms  are  mental
states,  and  the  Cosmos  is  the  result  of  the  state  of  the  Universal
Mind.

Man's  outward  expression  gradually  changes  according  to  the
changes  going  on  in  his  mind.    Thus  the  external  aspect  of  the  uni-


74       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

verse  changes  according  to  the  change  produced  in  the  Universal  im-
pulses. As  the  Universal  Mind  is  only  the  collective  sum  total  of  all
individual  minds,  the  Cosmos  must  be  the  result  of  the  gradual  Invo-
lutian  through  which  all  the  individual  minds  that  ever  existed  have
passed.

There  is  no  question  nor  doubt  that  the  operations  of  the  mind  of
an  individual  affect  all  other  minds  to  an  extent  proportionate  to  its
power,  and  those  operations  will  therefore  equally  aifect  the  regener-
ation of  the  Cosmos,  which  as  a  whole  is  the  result  of  the  collective
action  of  all  individual  minds ;  and  hence  it  follows  that  the  more  an
individual  mind  grows,  expands,  and  becomes  Illuminated  by  Truths
the  more  it  acts  in  harmony  with  the  Universal  whole.

Again,  the  more  power  will  that  mind  obtain  and  become  a  true
co-worker  with  Spirit  and  Nature,  while  he  who  opposes  the  law  and
resists  the  growth  of  Truth  will  become  his  own  destroyer,  for  intel-
lect must  take  the  place  of  instinct.  Besides,  the  will  becomes  more
powerful  through  the  subjective  and  more  free  to  accomplish  what  it
desires.  The  more  the  brain  is  illuminated  by  Truth,  the  more  it
becomes  developed  to  Light,  to  perfection  and  in  harmony  with  Spirit
Thus  the  more  it  will  be  able  to  receive  the  vibrations  of  the  univer-
sal Intelligence,  and  to  assimilate  them  with  its  individual  mind.  The
will,  in  order  to  become  powerful,  must  be  free,  and  the  wheels  of  lib-
erty can  revolve  only  on  the  axle  of  good  government.

Intellectual  people  are  as  variable  as  barometers,  which  only  show
a  change  in  the  weather,  they  are  so  frequently  set  on  some  human
theory  with  great  obstinacy  only  to  veer  on  the  morrow  to  another
with  greater  vehemence.

Genius  alone  is  essentially  good.  Pure  happiness  is  only  to  be
met  with  at  the  two  extremes  of  the  moral  scale,  either  in  the  good-
natured  fool  or  the  man  of  genius  and  silence,  but  never  in  the  purely
intellectual.

The  student  or  physician  who  gives  to  his  fellow-man,  in  most
comprehensive  language,  the  law  which  governs  temperaments,  and
the  bi-sexual  relations,  touches  one  of  the  fundamental  basic  founda-
tion stones  of  nature,  and  he  who  teaches  this  lesson  kindly  will  be  a
noble  savior  of  his  race  in  his  time.  ,  This  law  of  human  tempera-
ments which  shows  that  certain  temperaments  are  suited  to  each
other,  while  certain  others  are  totally  unfitted  for  each  other,  is  the
pedestal  of  happiness  or  misery.  The  men  and  women  who  practi-
cally understand  this  will  do  more  toward  making  hospitals  unneces-
sary than  all  the  Sunday  School  teachers  who  talk  about  the  Holy


MAN   AND   THE  OPPORTUNITIES  OP   HIS   LIFE.  7$

Land  and  the  lives  of  the  saints.  It  is  the  living  who  need  our  pray-
ers and  not  the  dead.  Instruct  the  children  about  the  land  of  life
which  lies  before  them.  A  right  understanding  of  the  laws  of  temper-
amenty  and  a  living  in  accordance  with  those  laws,  will  in  three  gener-
ations drive  out  from  the  world  three-fourths  of  the  disease  in  it,  and
the  doctors  into  other  business;  the  human  race  will  escape  much
calamity,  wretchedness,  and  misery.  The  only  way  to  purify  the
world  and  make  the  home  circle  more  happy  is  through  the  compre-
hension of  Spirit  and  the  understanding  of  the  natural  man^  which
must  be  ingrafted  and  entwined  in  the  lives  of  the  children  that  are
to  come.

It  is  far  too  common  nowadays  to  marry  for  convenience  and
according  to  wealth,  social  position,  etc.,  but  when  mankind  has
been  sufficiently  educated  to  understand  a  few  of  nature's  laws  and
the  true  law  of  temperaments,  such  marriage  will  be  looked  upon  as
criminal  against  the  community  and  nation.

When  this  is  brought  about,  the  world  will  be  purer  and  happier,
and  men  and  women  will  be  modest  without  prudery.  Heredity  may
be  a  thought  of  which  to  speak  with  silent  breath,  but  it  is  a  science
of  nature  made  up  of  fundamental  principles,  a  timely  knowledge  of
which  will  save  many  a  human  being  from  living  death  and  a  prema-
ture grave.

Great  facts  remain  to  be  discovered ;  they  lie  hidden  in  our
homes,  our  offices,  our  shops ;  above,  below,  around  us,  at  our  very
feet.  Let  us  not  be  idle  for  a  moment  then,  for  life's  greatest  dangers
are  often  found  in  apparently  small  risks.  We  are  all  sinners  through
ignorance  of  Spirit  in  Nature,  but  much  more  by  practice.

Men  and  women  who  are  evenly  balanced,  thoughtful,  and  with
good  common-sense,  are  looking  for  some  one  brave  enough  to  over-
come the  prudish  condemnation  of  those  who  have  little  brains,  and
wise  enough  to  look  towar^  the  improvement  of  the  races  of  mankind,
with  an  inquiring  mind  and  desire  for  the  improvement  of  children
through  the  law  of  heredity,  in  which  are  to  be  found  the  underlying
principles  of  either  the  suffering  or  the  happiness  of  the  coming  race.
Knowledge  is  purity  where  the  Soul  is  reaching  for  truth,  and  such
discussions  do  not  border  upon  nor  promote  obscenity.  The  general
aversion  to  liberal  consideration  of  the  propagation  of  the  race  and  of
sexual  matters  tending  to  its  advancement  is  not  only  prudery  but  is
criminal,  and  is  the  result  of  long  centuries  of  superstition  and  igno-
rance. There  are  two  ways  to  change  all  this ;  first,  by  ensuring  the
reproduction  of  the  best  and  healthiest  elements  of  society;  and,


^6  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

second,  by  teaching  the  youth  the  best  fonns  of  development,  and
instructing  them  in  all  matters  of  such  great  import  with  regard  to  theii
physical,  intellectual,  and  moral  condition.  The  continued  adulteration
of  human  life  is  a  great  crime,  especially  in  thb  age  of  advancement
and  knowledge,  for  we  cannot  now  claim  ignorance  of  these  facts.
While  the  rigid  conventionality  of  society  prevents  investigation  and
closes  the  door,  there  must  continue  to  be  sorrow,  suffering,  disease,
and  premature  death,  until,  on  some  golden  dawn,  generous,  kind
Mother  Nature  will  rebel.

To  the  Pure  all  things  are  Pure.  This  morbid  evil  thought  of  look-
ing for  the  impure  in  everything,  be  it  ever  so  philanthropic,  is  ingrain
in  the  very  nature  of  the  age,  and  poisons  the  atmosphere  like  a
pestilence.

"  But  if  thine  eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  darkness.
If,  therefore,  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that
darkness."  Thus  it  is  recorded,  spake  the  Christ.  Again,  St  Paul,  in
Galatians  vi :  —

"Be  not  deceived;  God  is  not  mocked:  for  whatsoever  a  man
soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap.

''  For  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption ;
but  he  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  life  ever-
lasting.

"  And  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well  doing ;  for  in  due  season  we
shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not.

"As  we  have   therefore  opportunity  let  us  do  good  unto  all


men."


Is  not  the  human  race  of  sufficient  importance  and  consequence
to  require  as  much  scientific  attention  to  breeding  as  is  given  in  the
case  of  other  animals,  which  are  bred  and  improved  on  a  scientific
basis?

Happy  the  toiler  whose  life  is  illumined  by  the  light  of  truth  and
warmed  by  human  love  for  all  his  kind,  and  a  hope  and  inspiration
for  purer  manhood  and  purer  womanhood ;  whose  only  object  through
life  is  to  bring  a  higher  state  of  being  to  mankind,  thereby  protecting
children  from  suffering,  misery,  and  early  death.

Man's  acts  are  his  creations.  They  give  form  to  his  thoughts.
The  motive  endows  them  with  life,  the  will  furnishes  them  with
strength.

Learning  may  lead  to  wisdom,  but  does  not  necessarily  make  a
man  wise ;  the  Adept  in  Occult  knowledge  cannot  be  made,  he  must
grow.    Those  who  want  the  Truth  must  rise  up  to  it  by  their  aspira-


MAN   AND   THE   OPPORTUNITIES   OF    HIS   LIFE.  //

tionSi  and,  ascending  beyond  the  sphere  of  earthly  desires,  they  will
see  that  bright  constellation  of  hallowed  light  which  illuminates  the
world  of  Spirit  forming  the  cross  of  wisdom  and  surrounded  by  the
rosy  light  of  Love,  in  which  is  inscribed  in  letters  of  gold,  "  Oh,
man,  know  thyself  and  walk  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Spirit  within
tbee."

A  man  may  have  a  large  amount  of  knowledge  and  not  much
intelligence.  Multitudes  come  out  of  our  colleges  every  year  with
great  knowledge  and  very  little  common-sense.  Men  who  have  plun-
dered right  and  left,  by  chicanery  and  cunning,  through  all  history
and  in  all  directions,  are  hailed  by  the  material  multitude  as  great
and  grand,  but  they  are  not  intelligent  men  after  all.  They  are
encumbered  by  their  knowledge  of  cunning  as  to  modem  methods,
but  they  know  less  of  the  True  secret  of  life  than  many  a  little  chUd,
and  after  they  have  attained  great  wealth  do  not  know  how  to  use
it  They  are  no  more  rich  in  the  true  knowledge  than  the  ass  that
carries  gold  from  the  mines  to  the  mint  in  panniers  knows  how  rich
he  is.

Pilgrim  of  Light,  exhort  men  to  abate  their  selfish  passions  and
learn  the  pleasure  of  development  of  Spiritual  knowledge  and  the
intellect  of  the  Soul.

In  this  free  country,  there  is  no  reason  why  men  should  be  igno-
rant except  limitation  of  capacity.  We  are  a  reading  people,  and,  if
we  were  calm  thinkers  in  the  same  ratio,  should  be  a  wise  people.

The  food  for  true  knowledge  of  Spirit  was  never  so  free  and
abundant  as  now.  But,  as  has  been  frequently  said  by  the  Italian
friends  of  the  compiler,  "  Americans  have  no  time  for  anything  in  the
silent,  loving  world.  You  run  and  plunge  into  every  science,  but  get
at  the  depths  of  nothing."

Entrance  into  this  life  is  through  the  gate  of  pain.  Every  creature
that  comes  to  birth  in  this  world  comes  crying,  and  every  step  up  in
life  is,  as  it  were,  a  new  birth  and  attended  with  more  or  less  suffering
and  trouble ;  but  when  once  the  man  has  gained  the  true  secret  of
Life,  he  reaches  the  heights  of  song,  and  his  transition  is  a  charming
melody.

While  a  man  sits  at  table  and  eats  and  a  healthy  hunger  makes
him  eat  with  relish,  though  he  does  not  continue  to  eat  merely  be-
cause of  that  relish,  his  bodily  strength  is  refreshed,  his  muscles  and
sinews  restored  to  renewed  activities,  his  body  built  up  to  manhood.
So  also  in  regard  to  his  Spiritual  food.  In  his  harmonious  child-
natuxe  he  strives  and  prays  for  higher  Spiritual  light,  for  these  emo-


78       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

tions  are  pleasing,  refreshing  his  Soul  just  as  the  material  food  re-
freshes the  Body.  He  wants  joy ;  he  desires  rapture  and  the  inner
experiences  which  bring  the  perfect  peace  that  passeth  understanding,
which  strengthen  the  True  man  (the  inner,  not  the  outer  man).  So
he  is  better  fitted  to  bear  the  burdens  of  life.  We  all  want  a  strength-
ening of  faith,  of  hope,  of  Love,  of  conscience,  for  the  grace  of  Love
which  makes  us  more  perfect  in  the  Spiritual  man.

God  legislates  for  mankind,  not  for  single  men,  and  it  is  a  living
truth  that  the  cleanest,  purest  development  of  these  higher  spiritual
affections  is  just  as  much  superior  to  the  wisdom  of  the  world  as  it
is  more  beautifully  elegant  in  the  aspects  which  it  shows.  Spiritual
Light  is  profitable  in  all  things  for  it  is  quite  apparent  that  in  the
administration  whether  of  medicine,  or  of  law,  or  merchandise,  or
enterprise  in  the  production  of  material  an3rwhere  in  the  world,  the
man  who  carries  to  these  spheres  the  highest  form  of  Spiritual  knowl-
edge  and  intelligence  will  find  his  judgment  will  be  sounder,  his  will
and  skill  finer,  than  if  he  brought  only  the  wisdom  of  his  lower  nature.
When  once  a  man  has  grown  into  the  light  of  Spirit  and  has  tasted
the  knowledge  of  Truth,  there  is  no  danger  whatever  that  he  will  ret-
rograde. Once  established  he  will  not  go  back,  for  he  finds  his  veiy
success  in  life  lies  in  the  knowledge  attained.

Such  a  man  judgeth  all  things,  and  is  himself  judged  by  no  man.
He  has  reached  the  high  moral  achievement  of  doing  right  wUhaui
knowing  it.

Following  the  vibrations  and  intuitions  of  his  Soul,  such  a  one
directs  the  forces  of  his  mind  inward  and  upward  to  Spirit.  He  is
subordinate  to  and  made  one  with  the  Absolute  Eternal  Energy.
He  passes  within  the  veil^  and  knows  even  as  he  is  known.

St.  Paul  says,  "  What  man  knoweth  the  things  of  man,  save  the
man  himself  ? "

The  uninitiated  person,  the  Materialist  or  highly  intellectual
person,  with  curious  inconsistency  (since  they  claim  liberty  and
progression  in  all  things),  usually  deny  positively  the  possibility  of
Spirit  Communion,  or  of  any  positive  knowledge  of  the  life  beyond,
or  of  the  inner  Soul  of  man,  and  declare  that  all  we  know  is  —
Nothing.

They  speak  truly  so  far  as  concerns  themselves  and  their  fellows.

Well  does  the  Apostle  Paul  declare  as  to  the  truth  of  these  very
inconsistencies.  '*  But  the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of
the  Spirit  of  God ;  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him ;  neither  can  he
know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned."


MAN  AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES   OP  HIS   LIFE.  79

The  two  orders  here  indicated  refer  to  the  inner  and  outer  man
or  the  Soul  and  body  of  each  individual.  They  refer  also  to  the  two
great  divisions  of  mankind.  The  greater  part  of  humanity  as  yet
recognizes  only  the  body,  while  those  who  have  ripened  their  Souls
to  Spirit  Light  and  become  initiated  into  the  sacred  mysteries  have  so
isLT  unfolded  their  interior  nature  as  to  recognize  the  Spirit  and  Soul
above  the  body.

So  likewise  the  things  of  God  no  man  knoweth  save  th€  Spirit  of
God  within  the  man^  and  the  Spirit  knoweth  all  things  and  revealeth
them  unto  the  man.

The  life  of  man  passes  through  five  degrees  of  existence.  The
first  is  the  infantine  or  state  of  pure  sensation.

The  second,  that  of  observation  and  understanding.  The  third,
of  argument  and  reason.  The  fourth,  the  perception  of  wisdom
through  silence  and  meditation, when  there  dawns  upon  the  man  the
knowledge  of  higher  Truths.

The  fifth  is  beyond  all  these  in  which  the  man  becomes  attuned
with  Soul  and  Spirit,  a  harmonious  trinity.  He  now  beholds  the
hidden  things,  perceives  what  has  been  and  what  will  be,  and  all
those  things  that  escape  both  the  senses  and  reason.  He  has  now
attained  his  freedom,  by  knowing  himself  well.

To  know  thyself  is  to  open  the  Divine  mysteries  and  the  hidden
things  of  earth  and  heaven  are  now  uncovered  to  thee.  Thou  canst
attune  in  absorption  with  the  Absolute,  for  the  veil  is  now  lifted
from  thine  eyes ;  thou  hast  solved  the  hidden  mysteries  of  Life  and
Death.

Oh,  liberty  of  Illumination  in  this  life !  All  hail  the  joyous  free-
dom !  —  even  if  the  body  be  imprisoned,  the  mind  enjoys  the  largest
liberty.'

Human  life  is  a  continuous  battle  between  error  and  truth,  igno-
rance and  knowledge,  darkness  and  light,  between  man's  Spiritual
aspirations  and  the  demands  of  the  animal  instincts.  But  Love  is
the  secret  of  Life.  Some  arrive  at  this  light  sooner  than  others  and
many  are  lured  away  by  some  illusive  creed  which  diffuses  a  refracted
light,  and  perish  like  the  insects  that  mistake  the  flame  of  a  candle
for  the  light  of  the  Sun,  scorching  their  wings  and  falling  into  its
fire.  But  as  the  light  of  Spirit  and  the  dawn  of  gentleness,  charity,
and  Love  becomes  the  atmosphere  of  a  man,  he  is  convinced  of  the
emptiness  of  the  shadows  in  the  path  he  has  been  pursuing,  and  like
the  winged  butterfly  emerging  from  the  chrysalis,  he  stretches  out
his  feelers  into  the  realm  of  Infinite  Spirit,  when  his  eyes  are  opened,


80       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  be  k  astonished  to  find  a  radiant  sun  where  he  expected  only
darkness  and  death.

The  impressions  made  on  the  mind  by  the  effect  of  imagination
may  be  and  frequently  are  powerful  and  lasting  upon  the  person;
they  may  change  or  distort  the  features ;  they  may  render  the  hair
white  in  a  single  hour ;  they  often  mark  and  disfigure  or  break  the
bones  of  the  unborn  child  and  sometimes  even  kill  it,  through  the
imagination  of  the  mother;  they  make  the  effects  of  malady  or
injury  received  by  one  person  visible  upon  the  body  of  another
through  the  mediumship  or  imagination  of  a  third  with  whom  that
one  is  in  close  sympathy.  The  impressions  made  on  the  human
mind  act  more  powerfully  than  drugs ;  they  are  very  frequently  the
cause  of  disease,  and  frequently  cure  the  most  violent  and  obstinate
maladies.  Imagination  performs  its  miracles,  either  consciously  or
unconsciously,  in  all  the  departments  of  nature.

The  forces  of  nature,  influenced  by  the  imagination  of  man,  act
on  the  imagination  of  nature,  and  create  tendencies  on  the  Astral
plane,  which  in  the  course  of  time  find  expression  through  material
forms.  In  this  way,  man's  vices  or  virtues  become  objective  realities.
As  the  man's  mind  becomes  refined  and  purified,  the  earth  becomes
more  beautiful  and  refined,  while  vices  and  evil  thoughts  find  their
expression  in  poisonous  reptiles  and  noxious  plants  or  may  become  as
a  vampire  prolonging  its  horrible  existence  for  a  time  by  living  off
the  life-blood  of  weak  and  sensitive  persons.

The  dream  of  life  differs  from  the  dream  after  death  only  in  thb
that  during  the  former  we  are  able  to  make  use  of  the  human  Will
to  guide  and  control  our  imagination  and  acts,  while  during  the  first
stages  after  death  that  guidance  is  wanting,  and  the  Soul  must  rely
on  and  be  guided  by  what  Spirit  Light  and  Love  it  has  gained  on
earth.  Thus  we  reap  that  which  we  have  sown,  whether  it  be
pleasant  or  unpleasant ;  for  no  effort,  whether  for  good  or  for  evil,
is  ever  lost

Those  who  have  reached  out  in  their  heart,  Soul,  and  imagina-
tion toward  a  high,  sublime,  unselfish  Ideal  on  earth  will  find
it  in  heaven ;  those  whose  life  has  been  deceit,  and  whose  animal
desires  have  dragged  them  down,  will  sink  to  the  level  of  their
desires.

Well  did  the  Persian  poet  write  "  There  is  no  heaven  nor  hell  but
that  which  man  creates  for  himself,"  but  it  is  nevertheless  real  and
enduring  to  him.  He  who  is  willing  to  sacrifice  the  world  to  save
his  own  insignificant  little  self  will  soon  shrink  to  a  mere  nothing.


HAN   AND  THE  OPPORTUNITIES   OF   HIS  LIFE.  8l

Bat  he  who  is  unselfish  and  careless  of  his  own  benefit,  seeking  only
to  amelioiate  the  condition  of  the  suffering  and  lift  up  alt  humanity ;
whose  Ix)ve  is  universal,  embracing  all  things,  expands  his  energies,
thus  accumulating  causes  whose  effects  he  will  enjoy  during  ages  of
eternal  happiness  in  a  real,  and  to  him,  a  substantial  heaven,  the
cieation  of  his  own  Love,  Life  and  his  own  imagination.

If  we  fonn  a  concrete  or  even  an  abstract  idea  in  our  minds,  we
create  an  existence ;  every  emotion  that  arises  in  man,  may  be  com-
bined with  the  Astral  forces  of  Nature  and  create  a  being;  every
c<Aerent  Ideal  based  on  Spirit,  becomes  the  Jieal  of  the  man,  thereby
Truth  becomes  manifest  through  matter.

There  are  Tliree  lands  of  loves ;  the  love  of  Heaven  which  forgets
self,  this  is  Spiritual.  The  love  of  the  World  which  is  appearance,
this  is  material ;  the  love  of  Self  which  is  animal,  this  is  corporeal.
The  man  who  is  affected  with  the  love  of  wisdom,  is  like  a  garden  in
Eden,  in  which  are  two  trees,  the  one  of  life  and  the  other  of  the
science  of  good  and  evil.  The  tree  of  life  is  the  reception  of  love
and  wisdom  from  God,  and  the  tree  of  the  science  of  good  and  evil
is  the  reception  of  them  from  self.  To  believe  in  himself  is  to  be-
lieve that  he  loves  and  is  wise  from  himself,  and  not  from  God,  and
this  is  signified  by  eating  of  the  tree  of  the  science  of  good  and  evil ;
bat  to  believe  in  God  is  to  believe  that  he  loves  and  is  wise  from
God,  and  not  from  himself,  and  this  is  signified  by  eating  of  the  tree
of  life.  —  Rev.  li.

Unselfish  Love.
"  Trui  BtiufictrU  Latu  serves  the  virtuous  mind  to  wake.

As  the  small  pebble  stirs  the  peaceful  lake ;

The  centre  moved,  a  circle  straight  succeeds,

Another  still,  and  still  another  spreads ;

Friend,  parent,  neighbor,  first  it  nill  embrace.

His  coantry  next,  and  next  all  human  race ;

Wide  and  more  wide  the  o'erflowings  of  the  mind.

Take  every  creature  in  of  every  kind."


r


CHAPTER  V.

SOX7L  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.

Yet  I  in  my  ajpant  doth  Thy  spirit  lUot
At  shines  the  sunbeam  in  a  drop  ot  dtm,

life's  little  span

Is  as  a  bark  upon  the  shoiden  an

Of  limitlrss  eternity.

Neithxb  HsiGirr  nor  Depth  can   Measure  the  Possibiutibs  op  the

Human  Soul.

In  works  of  great  antiquity,  and  from  those  of  Christnay  it  is
recorded  that  the  Soul  is  the  principle  of  life  which  Sovereign  Wisdom
employed  to  animate  bodies.  Matter  is  inert  and  perishable,  while
the  Soul  thinks,  acts,  and  is  immortal.

Of  thought  is  bom  will ;  of  the  will  is  bom  action ;  and  of  action
is  bom  understanding.  Hence  it  is  that  man  is  the  most  perfect  of
all  terrestrial  creatures,  for  he  operates  freely  as  to  his  understanding
in  his  mind  and  intellectual  nature,  and  by  meditation  knows  how  to
distinguish  the  tme  from  the  false,  the  just  from  the  unjust,  good  from
evil,  the  higher  from  the  lower  man.

Therefore  by  that  inward  knowledge  and  conscience,  that  Will
which  conveys  itself  by  the  judgment  toward  what  it  deserves  and
likes  and  withdraws  itself  from  what  it  dislikes,  comes  that  freedom
which  God  gave  to  man  alone.  Therefore  his  Soul  is  rendered  re-
sponsible for  its  desires  and  for  its  choice  and  all  his  actions.  And
for  this  cause  God  established  rewards  and  punishments.  The  Soul,
being  immortal,  came  from  God  and  must  return  to  that  Great  Soul
from  which  it  issued ;  but  as  it  was  given  to  man  pure  and  undefiled
from  all  stain  of  evil  or  error,  it  cannot  reascend  to  the  celestial
abode  until  it  shall  have  been  refined  and  purified  from  all  the  evil  it
has  'vrought  and  all  the  errors  and  faults  committed  through  its  union
with  matter.

The  Soul  being  purified  by  a  shorter  or  longer  course  of  self-illu-
mination and  strivings  according  to  its  faults  and  errors,  held  in  the
lower  infemal  heavens  or  firmaments,  the  exclusion  imposed  upon  it

8a


SYMBOLS   AND    HIEROGLYPHS.


Illumination  of  Mentality.


Eternal  Progress  of  the  Soul  by  Light  of  Spirit,  When  Souls  Aspire  for  Higher
Loves  True  Wisdom  is  Attained,  the  Interior  Form  of  True  Soul  According  to  the
Greek  Mysteries,  Incessantly  Onward  towards  the  Highest.


The  Three  Operative  Powers  of  Nature.


Sanctus  Spiritus,  or  Holy  Spirit.

The  Invisible  Sacred  Energy  Spirit.

The  Breath  of  Divinity,  the  Invisible  World.


The  Attuned  Male  Fire  Principle,  or  Soul  of  Refreshing  Vigor.
Wisdom  by  Love,  the  Conqueror.    The  Triune  God  by  Fire.
The  Guide  of  Souls  in  the  Unseen  World.

The   Receptive   Female   Principle  and  Intuitive  Vision    of    Passive
Motherhood.


To  Establish  Symbol  of  Salvation.


Begotten   of  Spirit,  to  be  Born  Again  by  Fire  and  by  Spirit,  Easter  Logos  of
Antiquity  or  True  Word,  the  Enlightener  or  Omniscient  One.


SOUL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  83

from  reunion  with  the  parent  Great  Soul,  is  the  greatest  infliction  it
can  feely  for  its  desire  and  longing  is  to  pass  upward  and  return  to  the
Primitive  fountain  and  source  of  all  Love,  to  be  again  merged  in  the
Soul  of  all  that  exists.  It  is  from  its  union  with  matter  alone  that  all
the  imperfection,  error,  and  evil  comes  to  the  Soul,  but  that  imperfec-
tion and  error  does  not  affect  its  inner  Germ  Essence^  for  they  are  not
in  its  cause,  which  is  the  Absolute  and  Supreme  Intelligence,  which  is
God.

Therefore  the  Soul  cannot  b^  imperfect  in  its  pure  essence.

The  Light  of  this  sublime  Central  Sun  does  not  draw  obscurity
from  itself.  If  a  germ  of  imperfection  and  error  existed  in  the
nature  of  the  Soul,  nothing  could  eradicate  or  destroy  that  imperfec-
tion and  error,  and  this  germ,  developing  itself  in  the  Soul,  would
render  the  Soul  perishable  and  mortal  like  the  body.

That  Christna  and  Zoroaster  arose  into  those  regions  of  Spirit,
Truth,  and  understanding,  even  to  the  subtile  illumination  of  the
Soul  and  Metaphysics,  no  thoughtful  student  can  doubt,  and  when  we
remember  these  were  tabulated  thoughts  of  men  who  lived  ages  before
Moses  was  bom,  so  much  greater  is  our  admiration  and  astonishment

The  Soul  of  man  being  between  spirits  of  such  wide  differences,
those  who  always  contemplate  the  Divine  Essence,  and  those  incapa-
ble of  such  contemplation,  our  Soul  can  raise  itself  to  one  or  sink
itself  to  the  other.

We  know  that  according  to  the  goal  which  each  Soul  has  reached
on  earth  during  its  life-pilgrimage  will  be  its  first  starting-point  in
heaven  or  ''  Spirit  Life,''  and  that  an  unripened  Soul  must  win  its
way  only  through  long  ages  of  self-elaborating  effort,  upward  and
onward  until  it  reaches  the  Archetype,  thence  passing  on  into  its
Angelhood,  becoming  a  perfected  Soul ;  a  ministering  Angel  and  guide
to  the  living ;  a  beacon  light  of  hope  to  the  so-called  dead  ;  progress-
ing ever  onward  and  upward,  a  messenger  of  Love;  reaching  out
nearer  and  nearer  toward  the  great  Central  Sun  —  Spirit ;  and  at  last
entering  this  Principality,  resting  finally  in  the  bosom  of  the  Absolute
Love  —  God.

The  philosophy  of  Spirit,  and  the  communion  with  departed  Souls,
and  the  guidance  and  guardianship  of  Angels  is  not  new.

The  philosophy  of  Love  and  Wisdom  and  that  of  Truth  by  Spirit
are  in  no  way  new,  but  date  back  to  prehistoric  man.  But  just  at
this  period  in  the  growth  of  the  world  there  comes  a  fresh  and  strong
overshadowing  of  Spirit  to  mankind,  reminding  him  that  through  all
hb  errors,  misconceptions^  and  usurpations  he  is  just  beginning  to  rise


84       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

above  the  unreason,  selfishness,  and  ferocity  in  his  animal  nature,
and  is  now  awaking  to  a  knowledge  that  he  has  a  Soul  Spirit  and
that  there  is  an  inner  man  and  life  as  well  as  the  objective  life  of  the
outer  man,  and  that  he  is  made  more  strong,  more  noble,  more  grand,
with  a  greater  power  of  potentiality  and  attributes  of  Divine  Wisdom
by  the  inner  life  of  Truth  and  Spirit  than  he  ever  conceived  possible
through  the  outer,  animal  man  ;  he  now  finds  that  his  better  part  of
being  has  been  made  more  massive,  more  grand,  more  noble  by  the
perfect  serenity  this  high  and  sacred  Dual  Love  diffuses  over  his  mind
and  heart.

He  is  now  lifted  to  such  a  height  of  ecstasy  that  he  feels  life  can
give  him  nothing  more,  being  on  the  eminence  and  altitude  of  perfect
peace,  the  Illumination  of  the  Spiritual  dawn.  He  finds  about  him
now  an  atmosphere  of  newly  organized  Spiritual  force,  and,  glancing
back  at  the  past,  he  catches  glimpses  of  development  everywhere.

But  Spirit  and  Love  had  never  been  made  the  foundation  element
until  now  that  the  day  of  involution  has  come.  Until  this  time  the
whole  world  was  organized  upon  the  animal  life,  its  forces,  craft,
avarice,  selfishness,  luxury,  and  cunning  diplomacy.  With  its  physi-
cal force  and  armies,  its  coercive  government,  the  strong  always  above
the  weak,  the  whole  world  was  near  to  the  animal  level,  and  the  suc-
cessful animal  powers  and  cunning  were  worshipped.

Who  has  not  heard  thoughts  expressed  from  the  lips  of  learned
men  on  the  fifth  chapter  of  Matthew,  which  is  so  often  read  with  vast
additions  of  loquacious  verbosity,  yet  so  little  comprehension  of  its
meaning.

''  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  Spirit."  No !  The  ambitious  and  covet-
ous ;  the  men  who  think  they  have  never  received  their  full  credit,
but  who  push  ever  onward  with  desire ;  the  men  who  think  others
spiritless,  inactive,  and  mean  if  they  are  poor  in  earthly  ambition  and
spirit,  —  how  can  they  understand :  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  Spirit"

"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn."  Why,  the  whole  world  was  in  a
scramble  to  get  away  from  mourning.

"Blessed  are  the  meek;  they  shall  inherit  the  earth."  And  of
all  thmgs,  if  ever  there  was  one  who  more  than  all  others  was  con-
sidered despicable,  who  was  compared  to  a  sheep,  and  railed  at  as  not
worthy  of  respect,  it  was  a  meek  man,  a  man  humble,  gentle,  and  mild.
Yet  what  is  this  meekness  which  to  the  animal  man  is  so  odious?
It  is  a  sense  of  superiority  in  Universal  Love;  of  patience,  good-
will, and  charity  for  all,  so  that,  when  confronted  with  insult,  ingrati-
tude, and  slights,  integrity  is  still  maintained,  and  good-will  and  love


SOUL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  85

shed  upon  the  smiter.  ''But,"  inquires  the  natural  man,  ''where,
then,  b  my  manliness  ?  "  "  All  must  be  buried,"  replies  the  Adept
The  worldly  notion  of  dignity  does  not  blend  well  with  Love.
**  Blessed  are  the  meek ;  they  shall  inherit  the  earth."

And  this  is  now  coming  to  pass.  The  dawn  of  Spirit  has  come
by  the  Illumination  of  the  Souls  of  men.  The  power  inherited
through  the  long  reign  of  brute  force  among  men  has  been  overtaken
and  conquered  by  Love  and  the  inherited  power  of  meekness  and  gentle-
ness,  which  b  slowly  beginning  to  unfold,  and  the  day  b  coming  when
not  in  the  warrior's  arm,  nor  in  the  accumulated  treasures  of  the  rich
man,  nor  in  the  theory  of  worldly  wisdom,  nor  any  of  the  ordinary  and
lower  forces  of  man  or  of  society,  —  but  in  the  accumulated  solid  pha-
lanx of  meekness  and  Love  b  generated  an  overwhelming,  silent
power,  a  "force  inflexible."

"Blessed  are  they  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness"  —
die  inner  Soul  of  Truth  and  Love  of  Spirit,  which  was  considered  the
most  worthless  thing  by  the  multitude  in  those  days,  as  it  b  the  most
useless  by  the  fashionable  society  of  these.

"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  heart."  "  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers."
"  Blessed  are  they  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake."  Now,
all  these  qualities  represent  the  Spiritual  element  in  man,  the  combin-
ing of  two  forces,  male  and  female,  as  the  organized  elements  that
had  preceded  and  do  still  exbt  so  largely  in  the  world  representing
the  corporeal  elements  of  mankind.

While  the  planet  has  been  ripening  in  the  fulness  of  time,  the
Souls  of  men  have  not  kept  pace  through  Illumination  of  Spirit,  but
a  little  cloud  of  Light  no  larger  than  a  child's  hand  burst  through  this
long  night  of  darkness  and  a  new  revelation  of  Spirit  Truth  is  disper*
ing  and  scattering  the  gloom  of  error  and  superstition.  Not  only  b
it  a  revelation  of  the  Spiritual  elements  inherent  in  human  nature,
but  a  new  and  clear  view  of  the  development  of  the  Divine  nature  in
man  b  opened  out,  and  he  is  inspired  with  renewed  hope  and  joy.
From  its  truths  has  sprung  expert  and  reliable  testimony  in  regard  to
the  reality  of  the  life  beyond,  and  the  awakening  of  the  Soul  after
death.  Through  thb  unfoldment  we  hear  echoing  down  the  ages  a
voice  that  calb  men  back  to  life ;  that  raises  the  so-called  dead,  mak-
ing them  tangible  realities ;  that  throws  aside  the  cerements  of  grief
and  mourning  of  the  past.  At  the  hour  of  man's  transition  now,  hb
friends  are  called  to  "  loose  Aim  and  let  him  go^

Now  that  thoughtful  men  and  women  are  casting  aside  the  napkin
of  theology,  multitudes  of  dear,  good,  but  narrow-minded  people  are


86       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

frightened  lest  religion  itself  shall  be  destroyed,  but  it  is  only  the
grave-cloths  being  removed,  the  things  that  have  hindered  the  power
and  life  of  truth  and  impeded  the  Light  of  Spirit  in  the  Souls  of  men.
That  which  every  one  longs  for  is  the  knowledge  that  his  whole  life
has  not  been  spent  in  vain,  only  to  be  buried  at  the  end  of  it;  that  his
dear  ones,  his  hopes,  his  loves,  his  yearnings  and  aspirations — all  are
living  truths :  that  the  result  of  all  his  heroic  struggles  will  be  a  tri-
umph ;  that  the  victory  of  the  Spiritual  over  the  animal  man  is  assured.

Remember  the  words  of  the  Judean  Prince.  '*  I  came  down  from
heaven.  I  have  power  to  lay  down  my  life  and  to  take  it  up  again.
I  go  to  make  preparation  for  you,  that  where  I  am  ye  may  be  also.
In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions,''  etc.  Surely,  if  any
man  in  this  world  had  a  right  to  speak  as  a  moral  expert  in  Soul  life,
it  was  He.

In  His  discourses  and  sermons,  He  always  spoke  in  parables,  and
continually  used  metaphor  with  his  audiences  and  disciples.  This
was  the  pronounced  peculiarity  of  the  Essenians  and  Nazarines,  while
the  Galileans,  who  dwelt  in  villages  and  cities,  never  used  allegorical
language.  Indeed,  those  of  his  dbciples  who  like  himself  were  Gali-
leans were  surprised  to  hear  him  use  such  a  form  of  expression.
*'  Why  speakest  thou  in  parables  ? "  they  frequently  inquired.  **  Be-
cause it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom
of  Heaven ;  but  to  them  it  is  not  given."  These  are  the  words
of  an  Initiate  and  Anchorite.  "  Therefore  I  speak  unto  them  in  parar
bles,  because,  seeing,  they  see  not,  and,  hearing,  they  hear  not,  neither
do  they  understand."

Occasionally  we  find  this  Prince  of  Peace  expressing  thoughts  and
sentences  purely  of  Egyptian  Cult,  and  also  Pythagorean.

"Give  not  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your
pearls  before  swine ;  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet  and  turn
again  and  rend  you."  The  student  of  Eleusinian  Mysteries  will
observe  a  like  disposition  on  the  part  of  Jesus  and  of  St.  Paul,  and
must  classify  their  doctrines  as  Esoteric  and  Exoteric,  some  being
hidden  and  others  being  communicated  and  made  known.  The  mys-
teries of  the  Kingdom  of  God  for  the  apostles,  and  parables  for  the
multitude.  "We  speak  wisdom,"  says  Paul,  "among  them  that  ar/
p^fcf "  (or  initiated).  Again  he  says,  "  And  I,  brethren,  could  not
speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto  carnal,  even  as  unto
babes  in  Christ.  I  have  fed  you  with  milk,  and  not  with  meat ;  for
hitherto  ye  were  not  able  to  bear  it,  neither  yet  now  are  ye  able."
(i  Cor.  iii :  i,  2.)


SOUL   AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  8/

In  the  Eleusinian  Greek  and  many  other  mysteries,  the  partici-
pants were  always  divided  into  Neophytes^  Anchorites^  and  the  Perfect^
and  in  the  narrative  of  Paul  in  the  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians
the  student  finds  many  descriptions  of  initiations  and  mystical  rites.
For  instance,  "These  things  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  repeat."  "A
certain  man,  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  tell,"
etc.

Not  only  have  we  this  light,  but  there  is  to  every  man  who  has
lived  in  the  higher  dual  loves,  and  believed  in  Angel  guidance  and
Spirit  communion,  an  elementary  power  transcending  any  earthly  com-
parisons. In  every  true  man  who  aspires  to  Spiritual  growth,  there  is
a  continual  struggle — a  battle  of  life,  a  war  without  banners  or
trumpets  or  sound.

Through  this  division  of  the  dual  attributes  in  man,  a  perpetual
conflict  goes  on  in  the  life  of  each,  between  the  animal  objective  and
the  Soul  subjective,  and  every  man  in  life  is  subject  to  more  or  less  of
sorrow,  disappointment,  and  defeat.  The  more  frank  and  open  the
man,  the  more  he  feels  the  thrust  of  sorrow  and  ingratitude ;  the  truer
the  faith,  the  stronger  the  love  of  a  man's  heart,  the  deeper  falls  the
bolt  in  his  household.

This  is  the  pilgrimage  of  this  world,  this  the  combat  between  earth
and  Spirit,  and  he  only  accomplishes  a  glorious  victory  who  conquers
himself.  Then  only  does  his  Soul  find  repose  amid  the  flowers  of
Spirit  that  bloom  in  the  silent  calm  which  follows  the  storm ;  then
and  not  till  then  does  he  catch  glimpses  of  the  golden  ways  of  Spirit,
or  hear  the  melodious  music  of  the  spheres  flowing  out  from  the  man-
sions of  the  blest.

Weary  Pilgrim  of  Light,  store  in  your  memory  the  melodies  you
hear,  for  it  is  the  song  of  Life,  thereby  be  refreshed  and  quickened.
Grow  as  the  flower  grows,  unconsciously  but  anxious  to  open  its  Soul
to  the  air  and  light  of  golden  day ;  open  out  your  being  to  Love  and
press  forward  in  Love.  Open  your  Soul  to  the  Eternal  Light  and  the
Eternal  Light  will  illuminate  your  Soul  to  its  ripening  and  to  perfect
peace,  which  shall  be  your  constant  companion ;  that  peace  which
nothing,  not  even  the  violence  of  impending  storm,  can  disturb,  for
through  this  peace  you  can  command  the  storm  and  it  is  stilled.  This
is  that  peace  through  which  the  Soul  grows  to  Spirit  in  the  Light  as
the  flower  grows  in  the  silence  of  the  wood.

You,  Pilgrim,  can  now  stand  upright,  Arm  as  a  rock  amid  the
turmoils  of  the  raging  storms  that  beat  about  humanity  at  times.  If
you  are  a  man  according  to  the  world's  idea,  only  fragments  of  the


88        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

great  song  of  Peace  come  to  your  ears,  but  if  you  listen  and  remenv
ber  faithfully  the  melody  which  reaches  you,  you  will  grow  and  your
being  will  be  illumined  and  you  will  learn  the  meaning  of  the  mys-
tery which  surrounds  you,  and  that  only  in  the  perfect  union  of  your
two  natures  is  harmony.  You  find  yourself  a  part  of  the  great  har-
mony from  which  springs  wisdom,  —  the  knowledge  of  the  one  Light
which  illumines  your  life  and  makes  all  that  in  the  past  appeared
mysterious  open  and  clear  to  your  eyes.  Learn  of  the  earth,  the
waters,  the  forests,  the  flowers,  the  birds  and  beasts,  for  the  dumb
creatures  make  far  less  blunders  than  mankind.  Natiure's  countless
mirrors  reflect  the  Image  of  God,  therefore  look  to  nature  and  learn
of  her  children  the  secrets  they  hold  for  you,  and  the  book  of  Life
will  be  opened  for  you.  The  true  Pilgrim  of  the  Illuminati  has  »
right  to  demand  the  secrets  of  nature  and  to  know  the  rules
which  govern  human  life.  Therefore  ye  who  desire  to  understand
the  laws  of  nature  should  first  attempt  to  free  yourselves  from  the
laws  which  seem  to  hold  you.  This  can  be  done  only  by  fixing
your  attention  on  that  which  b  unaffected  by  them  —  which  is
Spirit.  Thus  as  you  grow  in  Spirit  and  become  a  child  of  Spirit,
you  are  in  accord  with  the  Absolute  Love,  and  Love  b  God.
Inquire  of  the  calm,  silent  men  and  holy  ones  of  earth  who
have  thrown  aside  all  ambition,  of  their  secrets  and  what  they
hold  for  you,  and  as  you  grow  more  into  the  Light  you  will
find  that  out  of  peaceful  silence  shall  arise  a  resonant  voice.  In-
quire of  the  inmost,  that  Dove  of  Immortal  Love,  of  the  final
secret  it  b  holding  for  you  through  the  ages,  and  thb  melodi-
ous voice  will  say,  "It  is  not  well  that  thou  shouldst  reap  and
gather  continuously;  now  thou  must  sow,"  and  knowing  thb  voice
is  that  of  wisdom  and  the  power  of  Love,  in  silence  thou  wilt
obey,  thus  united  in  silence  with  wbdom  and  through  wisdom  with
the  power  of  Love.

Ambition  grows  to  selfishness,  and  selfishness  is  a  bottomless  pit
Desire  to  sow  no  seed  for  your  own  harvesting.  Lay  aside  self.
Strive  and  desire  to  sow  that  seed  the  fruit  of  which  shall  feed
the  whole  world,  being  a  part  of  which,  you  feed  yoursell  The
Soul  must  be  unfettered;  the  desires  universal  and  free.  Begin
at  the  earliest  moment  to  practise  unselfishness,  and  so  a  thou-
sand serpents  will  be  kept  from  your  path.

Uve  in  the  Eternal,  Listen  only  to  the  true  voice  which  b
Spirit,  and  Spirit  dwells  in  the  land  where  silence  reigns.  There-
fore Ibten  only  to  the  voice  which  is  soundless,  Spirit  first  flower


SOUL  AND   SPIRIT  SOUL.  89

of  earthy  first  gem  of  the  sea,  limitless  and  unchangeable.  The
Souls  of  good  men  are  illuminated  by  innumerable  rays  flashed
from  the  flame  of  Spirit  Love,  coming  out  from  the  Eternal  Ocean
of  Light  in  the  world  beyond,  through  which  by  and  by  men
do  ascend  to  the  skies.     Such  is  the  way  to  immortality.

A  man  who  lives  in  the  Eternal  Spirit  and  Universal  Love
is  as  a  precious  stone  set  in  a  rim  of  true  life,  a  beacon-light  and
guide.

One  Soul  is  often  the  index  by  which  another  is  directed  to
its  grandest  spiritual  triumphs,  and  it  is  the  highest  moral  achieve-
ment in  a  man  that  he  so  orders  his  life  that  he  does  right  with-
out knowing  it;  that  he  is  a  precept  and  living  example  without
sensing  it.  Example  is  a  germ  from  which  may  grow  a  tree  of
good  or  evil.  If  the  former,  the  branches  shall  reach  to  the  throne
of  the  Eternal;  if  the  latter,  it  shall  darken  the  shadows  of  the
infernal,  your  own  life,  and  the  lives  of  others.

Man  fulfils  his  mission  on  earth  only  when  the  Christ  Spirit
truly  reigns  within  him.

*'Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world.  A  city  that  is  set  on  a  hill
cannot  be  hid.

''For  there  is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed,  and  hid
that  shall  not  be  known.

Tor  it  b  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father
which  speaketh  in  you."

The  language  of  Truth  is  simple,  and  by  its  simplicity  Truth  con-
quers. This  life  is  the  great  pathway  to  glory.  If  the  eye  is  fixed
upon  the  beacon-light  of  Truth,  the  Soul  will  surely  be  borne  to  its
bright  home,  whose  glory  is  eternal.

The  attainment  of  a  pure  and  Divine  Spiritual  condition  is  the
first  object  and  last  achievement  of  him  who  seeks  to  realize  the  loft-
iest ideal  of  which  mankind  is  capable,  viz. :  a  great  Universal  Love.
He  who  attains  this  is  no  mere  adept,  who  covets  power  in  order  to
save  himself  only,  and  whose  knowledge  of  the  hidden  way  is  a  thing
apart  from  his  Love.  This  inner  Love  of  the  Soul  is  the  power  that
distinguishes  the  Christ,  the  love  which  saves  others  as  well  as  one's
self.

Wthout  self-abnegation  and  a  universal,  unselfish  Love  there  is
no  at-one-ment.  The  man  cannot  become  One  or  attuned  with  the
Spirit  within  him  until  by  his  passion  and  crucifixion  he  has  utterly
vanqubhed  the  "Old  Adam  objective"  of  hb  former  self.

Thus  he  b  bom  again ;  thus  has  he  risen  from  the  dead,  from  the


90       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

condition  of  deadness  in  regard  to  things  Spiritual,  and  out  from
among  those  who,  being  in  that  condition,  are  said  to  be  dead  in  tres-
passes and  sins.  Therefore  it  is  this  which  constitutes  the  Great
Work^  which  is  not  the  resuscitation  of  the  dead  body,  but  the  redemp-
tion of  Spirit  from  Matter,

It  is  only  through  the  Soul  that  man  learns  the  Divme  Will.  It
is  through  the  Soul  that  man  communes  with  Spirit  Souls,  and,  learn-
ing the  knowledge  of  Spirit  Truth,  saves  himself.  And  the  clearness
of  his  vision  depends  on  the  union  of  his  duality  and  the  purity  of
the  Force  or  mirror  of  the  Soul  in  which  lies  the  essence  of  all  relig-
ions.

It  is  the  burden  of  all  the  Bibles.  With  the  mirror  of  the  Soul
pure,  man  dwells  in  Eden  and  sees  God.  With  the  forces  of  his
being  disunited,  the  Soul  impure,  and  the  mirror  clouded  through  the
objective  man,  he  is  driven  forth  into  the  Wilderness.

Man  tends  toward  or  away  from  God  and  the  Tree  of  Spirit
Life  according  to  the  specific  gravity  of  his  Soul.  Salvation  and
condemnation  are  matters  of  Spiritual  gravitation,  whose  density
depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  Love  and  of  the  affections  cultivated
by  man.

And  this,  again,  depends  upon  his  own  Will,  which  is  quite  free.
Being  the  regulator  of  his  own  specific  gravity,  therefore,  he  is
the  arbiter  of  his  own  destiny,  according  to  the  atmosphere  which
he  himself  creates ;  and  as  he  himself  wills  and  acts,  he  tends  either
inward  and  upward  toward  the  Light,  or  outward  and  downward
toward  darkness  and  unripeness  of  Soul.  Yielding  to  the  tempter,
Sense,  in  the  objective  world,  and  making  of  matter,  not  merely
means  to  an  end,  but  sole  ambition,  object,  and  end,  his  Soul  loses  at
length  much  of  her  Spiritual  nature.  But  while  there  is  life  and  a
germ  of  unselfish  Love,  there  is  hope  for  him  through  a  return  to
purity  of  the  inner  life  of  the  Soul,  in  whom  the  Christ,  the
Spirit,  the  Saviour  can  only  be  born  when  she  is  immaculate.  St
Luke  viii. :  —

ID.  And  he  said,  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of
the  Kingdom  of  God:  but  to  others  in  parables;  that  seeing  they
might  not  see,  and  hearing  they  might  not  understand.

17.  For  nothing  is  secret  that  shall  not  be  made  manifest;
neither  anything  hid  that  shall  not  be  known    and  come   abroad.

18.  Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear:  for  whosoever  hath,  to
him  shall  be  given ;  and  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be
taken  even  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have.


SOUL   AND   SPIRIT   SOUL.  9 1

Then  the  heart  will  utter  words  of  understanding,  and  wisdom
will  grow  in  thy  breast,  for  the  Spirit  will  strengthen  thy  memory.

In  each  human  Soul  is  planted  a  Spiritual  seed-germ  that  in
different  periods  and  times  brings  forth  the  fruitage  of  an  AngeL
This  little  fire-germ,  a  ray  or  reflection  from  the  great  Infinite
Essence,  comes  out  to  a  material  body,  and  the  chief  aim  and  ambi-
tion  of  a  man  should  be  to  grow  and  guard  his  own  Soul  with  pro-
tecting care,  conducting  it  back  through  successive  stages  of  growth,
cleansed  and  purified,  and  returned  to  its  original  Architect,  the
Absolute  God.  These  were  the  great  Truths  of  the  Egyptians  and
the  central  doctrines  of  Plato  and  P3rthagoras.  He  who  has  grown
to  the  capacity  of  finite  perception  and  love  is  one  who  surely  has
the  right  to  say  I  know.  He  who  dwells  in  the  silent  land  of  Spirit
and  communes  with  the  immortals  has  entered  upon  a  grander  vista
of  Truth  and  he  will  reveal  the  order  of  Divine  wisdom  as  mani-
fested in  our  human  existence,  declared  by  the  departed  Souls  who
have  lived  and  struggled  behind  the  veil  of  Life,  now  growing  into
the  fuller  light  of  knowledge.  A  true  and  natural  man,  like  nature,
must  grow,  and  be  like  children  of  the  forest  who  do  not  vainly
exhaust  themselves  to  find  God,  He  comes  to  them,  and  they  simply
find  Him.  In  our  time  men  stigmatize  these  children  of  nature  as
barbarians.  It  is  because  they  are  free  and  untrammelled  by  creed,
unfettered  by  priestcraft  and  unbiassed  by  inherited  prejudices ;  not
exhausted  by  intellectual  theories,  they  do  not  seek  for  God  ;  they  go
out  into  the  forest  and  simply  find  Him,  interpreting  without  failure
His  writing  and  words  to  His  children.  Tradition  comes  wafting
down  the  ages  and  it  is  whispered  that  God  needs  no  temples  made
with  hands  but  will  respond  to  the  call  of  His  loving  children  in  the
forest  and  on  the  plain,  on  the  mountain  and  in  the  valley,  on  the  sea
and  on  the  land,  a  living  voice,  with  Ray  of  Flame  gently  leading  His
children  to  the  perfect  day.

Time  is  nothing  in  carrying  out  the  issues  of  Divine  Will  and
purp)Ose.  A  second  of  time,  a  year  or  millions  of  years  are  but
cycles  forming  a  dot  on  the  dial  plate  which  marks  the  round  of
eternal  progress,  and  in  that  long  ago  forgotten  age  when  mankind
was  young  and  natural,  men  veiled  their  adoring  eyes  in  the  passion
of  their  Souls,  communing  with  Spirit  and  worshipping  with  nature,
the  Absolute,  in  primeval  simplicity.

Then  came  the  age  when  men  of  learning,  through  years  of  prepa-
ration, were  set  apart  by  king  and  people  to  watch  the  order  and  the
pathway  of  the  marching  worlds ;  striving  to  delve  into  their  hidden


92       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

mysteries;  gazing  incessantly  night  and  mom  from  pyramid  and
tower  were  these  men  of  yesterday.  Again  Time  puts  his  sickle  in
among  the  days,  and  gathers  them  into  sheaves,  to  be  gathered  into
years  and  ages.  With  succession  of  times  and  seasons,  generation
has  followed  generation.  Still  the  world  rolls  on  gathering  some  of
her  children  each  day  to  her  bosom,  the  whole  grand  scheme  involv-
ing her  own  dissolution  when  ripened  for  the  harvest.  The  glory
and  brightness  of  the  stars;  the  silent  magnetic  motion  of  the
planets  as  they  glide  along  in  their  pathway  through  the  firmaments  ;
the  fiery  comets  in  their  wanderings ;  the  terrific  flashing  of  meteors ;
and  the  silent,  unfathomable  mystery  of  floating  nebulae,  all  have  and
do  exert  an  influence  on  this  fair  green  earth,  standing  out  alone  far
into  the  night  under  the  gentle  radiance  of  the  moon,  with  its  gentle
rivers  and  shoreless  seas ;  its  lofty  mountains  and  mysterious  valleys ;
its  sombre  forests  and  vast  prairies ;  its  natural  children  untutored  and
savage  still  and  its  refined  and  half  Divine  mankind ;  with  all  these
realms  of  power,  what  sublimity  and  what  littleness  I  Looking  up
through  the  mysterious,  solemn  silence  of  the  night ;  dwelling  but  a
moment  on  the  thought  of  boundless,  limitless  space ;  on  the  count-
less systems  of  worlds  far  beyond  the  eye  and  thought  of  man,  one
gasps  for  breath,  the  heart  leaps  up,  and  one  cries  out  with  the
PsaJmist,  "  Oh  Lord  our  God,  when  I  consider  Thy  heavens  the
work  of  Thy  fingers;  the  moon  and  the  stars  which  Thou  hast
ordained ;  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him,  and  the  son  of
man  that  Thou  visitest  him  ? "  Back  in  the  dim  ages  of  the  past,  the
ancient  mind  discovered,  through  patient  toil  and  untiring  study,  that
all,  everything  moves,  in  corresponding  order  and  oiie  continuous
motion  sweeping  both  earth  and  heaven,  "  and  all  that  in  them  is."
Throughout  all  the  regions  of  limitless  space,  all  so  harmoniously
defined,  the  grandeur  of  such  knowledge  of  the  universal  law  of
nature's  harmonies;  the  stupendous  wisdom  munificence  and  Love
manifest  the  presence  and  the  attributes  of  that  Divine  Architect
called  God^  all  in  Him  one  grand  interblending  universal  brotherhood
of  Love,  Wisdom,  and  Power.

Who  has  not  heard  the  profound  outcries  of  the  human  Soul  for
Light,  more  Light  ?

Spirit  and  Spiritual  energy,  when  viewed  from  the  highest  altitude
attainable  by  human  conception,  become  merged  into  the  great
Absolute  and  Universal  Spirit.  Not  with  the  limited  idea  derived
from  appearances  in  the  objective  life  in  the  realms  of  nature,  but
with  an  ever-expanding  Truth  as  the  inmost  Soul  becomes  illumi-


80UL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  93

natedy  the  student  will  view  the  great  universe  itself.  Then  the
mere  loss  of  what  we  now  think  is  personality  and  individuality
becomes  an  incomprehensible  and  infinite  gain.  When  the  Pilgrim
once  becomes  possessed  of  pure  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of  the
Absolute  Spirit  of  Love,  that  dread  of  death  which  causes  so  much
fear  and  suffering  to  the  living ;  that  great  dark  gulf  which  modem
ecdesiasticism  is  unable  to  light  up  with  a  Truth,  giving  only  blind
faith  and  indefinite  hope,  —  all  is  made  quite  clear  and  lovingly
attractive  when  the  Soul  has  ripened  to  its  fulness,  unfolding  its  own
mystery,  and,  laying  down  this  mortal  body,  he

"  Wraps  the  drapery  of  his  couch  about  hinia
And  lies  down  to  pleasant  dreams."

Every  human  life  is  either  a  prayer  or  blasphemy.  The  theories
of  the  average  man  and  woman  of  to-day ;  the  ferocious,  imperative
demands  of  modem  society,  are  something  like  those  of  swine  and
wolves.  The  chief,  indeed  the  only  object,  in  life,  in  youth,  is  to  make
an  independent  living.  In  riper  years,  to  accumulate  wealth,  no
matter  how,  only  being  careful  to  keep  out  of  the  clutches  of  the
law.    What  better  is  such  life  than  that  of  swine  and  wolves  ?

Avarice  is  even  stronger  than  hunger ;  the  former  has  motives,  the
latter  has  none,  and  some  men  seem  more  desirous  of  making  an  im-
pression upon  a  fool  than  upon  a  wise  man,  and  among  animals  there
are  no  fools.

It  requires  a  strong  constitution  and  well  balanced  brain  to  with-
stand repeated  attacks  of  prosperity,  for  a  man's  future  is  controlled
by  present  circumstances.

The  ambition  of  the  young  woman  is  to  be  beautiful  in  exterior
form  and  face,  or  to  appear  so  to  the  world,  no  matter  how  much  na-
ture b  abused.  A  little  later  it  is  to  find  a  mate,  to  fumish  her  with
fashionable  attire,  house,  servants,  etc.,  that  she  may  live  in  indolence,
though  thousands  should  suffer.  If  such  b  the  sole  object  of  woman-
hood, what  b  her  life  better  than  that  of  a  butterfly  or  vampire  ?  But
nature,  abused,  is  a  hard  mistress,  and  this  poor  ignorant  child  is  quite
apt  to  drag  out  an  exbtence  of  suffering,  pain,  and  death,  after  thb
masquerade  of  modem  life.  While  earthly  ambition  invariably  strives
to  reach  the  top,  it  oftener  leaves  its  victim  at  the  bottom,  and  the
sweets  of  to-day  become  the  bitter  things  of  eternity.  Fashion  is  a
fleet-footed  monstrosity,  which  often  outruns  decency,  and  generally
completely  distances  rationality.  Thoughtful  and  Spiritual  men  well
know  why  our  prisons,  almshouses,  and  insane  asylums  are  crowded  to


94       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

overflowing,  and  too  well  they  know  it  will  never  cease  to  be  so  until
the  race  is  ruled  by  the  Spirit  and  Soul  from  within.  Then  and  only
then  can  we  hope  for  the  ideal  man  and  woman  and  the  ideal  society ;
then  will  the  human  race  come  into  that  unity  of  faith  and  the  knowl*
edge  of  the  Spirit  into  a  Perfect  Man.

The  God  of  nature,  according  to  Plato,  b  exemplified  in  the  little
seed  that  produces  the  plant.  The  little  acorn,  planted  in  the  earth,
surrounded  by  darkness,  swells  and  softens  and  at  last  bursts  from  its
little  shell,  by  the  self-acting  energy  of  the  Germ  in  its  interior,
reaches  the  sunlight  in  the  tiny  plant,  then  the  tree,  passing  through
several  transmutations,  all  the  phases  illustrating  the  idea  of  so  many
potentialities.  The  plant  participates  in  an  idea  as  at  any  given  mo-
ment it  realizes  only  some  of  the  phases  of  the  idea.

Real  existence  as  we  see  it  is  thus  whirling  round  in  spiral  form
in  all  its  possibilities.

To  be  born  of  the  Spirit  requires  of  a  man  a  greater  change  than
bobterous  noise  and  ecstatic  shouts.

The  new  birth  generally  comes  in  the  change  of  a  man  after  great
affliction  and  sorrow,  when  there  is  an  entire  giving-up  of  all  earthly
ambitions  and  fond  desires.  The  heart  softens,  the  Soul  broadens,
and  the  Dual  being  becomes  more  harmonious.  Then  a  new  birth  is
effected,  in  which  the  true  union  of  the  dual  forces  of  the  animal  body
become  united  with  the  Soul  and  for  the  first  time  the  eyes  of  the
Soul  open  to  the  light  of  Spirit.  Thus  inspired  and  filled  with  God,
the  Soul  kindles  into  flame  and  the  God,  Spirit,  identifled  with  the
man,  speaks  through  him,  making  the  man  speak  in  the  name  of
God.

Hence  he  disavows  for  himself  the  authorship  of  his  utterances,  as
did  Christ.  "The  words  I  speak  unto  you  I  speak  not  of  myself.
But  the  Father  which  dwelleth  in  me,  He  doeth  Ae  works."

To  attain  to  the  perfection  of  the  Christ,  is  to  become  above  all
things  Media —  not  a  Medium  as  is  ordinarily  understood  in  the  mod-
em Spiritual  science,  but  to  become  polarized  in  Spirit  Love  through
the  Union  of  the  Dual  Nature  of  Being.

That  is  the  Divine  Spirit  without  measure,  unlimited,  and  to  be-
come a  Pivotal  Point,  a  Man  of  Power,  and  a  Medium  for  the  Highest

Although  this  development  is  open  potentially  to  all  men,  it  b  in
this  present  stage  and  character  of  civilized  man  not  actually  open  to
any  but  the  Illuminated  few,  who,  while  not  declining  the  experiences
of  life  and  the  body,  have  made  the  Spirit  and  Soul,  and  not  the
body,  their  chief  Love,  their  object  and  aim.


SOUL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  95

The  wrongs  of  others  wound  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  stripes  of
others  fall  on  His  flesh.  He  is  smitten  with  the  pains  of  all  creatures,
and  his  ear  is  pierced  by  their  cries.  There  is  no  offence  for  which
He  does  not  suffer,  nor  any  wrong  by  which  He  is  not  hurt,  for  His
Heart  is  in  the  breast  of  every  creature  and  His  blood  in  the  veins  of
all  flesh,  for  to  know  perfectly  is  to  love  perfectly  and  so  to  love  b  to
be  partaker  in  the  pain  of  the  beloved.  So,  then,  he  who  loves  and
succors  and  saves  even  the  least  of  God's  creatures  minbters  to  the
Lord.  Christ  is  the  perfect  Lover,  bearing  the  sorrows  of  all  the
poor,  oppressed,  and  broken-hearted,  and  those  wounded  in  Spirit.

The  sin,  injustice,  and  cruel  wrong;  the  ignorance,  imposition,
and  intolerance  of  the  world  are  the  nails  in  His  hands  and  feet,  and
ingratitude  the  spear  that  pierced  His  side.  Oh ;  Passion  of  Love,  that
givest  thyself  freely  even  unto  death,  for  no  man  can  do  Love's  per-
fect work  unless  Love  thrusts  him  through  and  through ;  but  if  he
love  perfectly  he  shall  be  able  to  redeem  his  beloved,  for  strong,  ener-
getic Love  is  a  net  which  draws  all  Souls  unto  him,  because  unto
Love  is  given  all  power  and  might  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth.

Seeing  that  the  Will  of  him  who  loves  perfectly  is  one  with  the  Will
and  in  concord  with  God,  and  unto  God  and  Love  all  things  are
possible,  therefore  the  secret  of  Life  is  Love.

There  is  an  interior  vitalized  life  principle  in  all  men,  peoples,  and
systems  which,  according  to  wise  and  unerring  and  omnipotent  law,
the  Economy  of  the  Absolute  Spirit,  must  ever  be  working  outward,  and
which  manifests  its  power  in  involution,  by  the  formation  of  distinct
and  different  genii  of  mankind.

"  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock ;  if  any  man  hear  my
voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him  and  sup  with  him,  and
he  with  me."

The  complaint  made  against  occult  knowledge  and  Spiritual  Light
in  the  past,  and  that  which  will  be  made  by  modem  theologians
against  this  exposition  of  the  real  and  true  nature  of  the  gospel  his-
tory, is  that  it  has  taken  away  their  Lord.  Not  so.  He  is  only
taken  away  from  the  place  wherein  the  church  has  so  long  kept  him,
the  Sepulchre.

There  with  the  dead,  bound  about  with  cerements,  a  figure  alto-
gether of  the  past,  the  Christians  of  the  past  have  laid  their  Christ,
but  at  last  the  stone  of  superstition  has  been  rolled  away  by  the  hand
of  the  Angel  of  Knowledge,  of  Spirit  Truth,  and  the  grave  so  long
concealed  is  found  to  be  empty.  No  longer  needs  the  human  Soul  to
seek  her  Lord  and  Master  among  the  dead.     Christ  is  risen  into  the


96       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

heaven  of  the  Living  Ideal,  whence  he  can  descend  into  the  hearts  of
all  who  desire  him.  None  the  less  real  and  powerful  and  not  merely
a  historical  personage  of  the  past,  but  a  real  person  in  Spirit  and
Love  of  the  present ;  no  less  mighty  to  save  because  instead  of  being
a  single  man  regenerate,  He  is  every  man  Regenerate  ten  thousand
times  ten  thousand,  the  Son  of  Man  (Himself).

The  Man  Regenerate  is  so  exclusively  under  the  influence  of  his
inner  Soul  Spirit  or  Mother  as  to  have  but  a  slender  connection  with
his  external  body,  using  it  only  for  shelter  and  nourishment  and  such
other  purposes  as  minister  to  his  Soul's  welfare  and  to  others  during
his  earthly  pilgrimage.  Thus  men  ascend  to  Spirit  Light  and  God.
Such  is  the  pathway  to  immortality.

The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  Love,  Charity,  Joy,  Peace,  Gentleness,
Long-suffering,  Benevolence,  Knowledge,  Light,  Meekness,  Temper-
ance, and  Great  Wisdom.  He  who  has  grown  to  possess  these  is  a
child  of  Spirit

''  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth  and  ye  hear  the  sound  thereof
but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth ;  so  is  every
one  that  is  bom  of  Spirit."

It  is  a  man's  Soul  growth  which  determines  what  he  may  become
and  what  fruition  is  possible  to  him.  The  man  whose  title  is  full  of
Love  and  Charity  and  magnanimity,  and  who  wears  it  with  simple
unaffected  grace  and  true  feeling,  with  that  grand  God-like  Love  bom
in  all  mankind,  —  how  can  the  outside  world  of  lesser  men  measure
him  or  have  one  tme  thought  of  judgment.

Then  let  us  hold  our  peace ;  very  often  one  word  or  look  can
efface  years  of  happiness  to  a  Spiritual,  sensitive,  or  refined  medium.
For  great  hearts  live  fast  in  a  little  while.  A  year  is  an  age  to  a  great,
pitying  heart.

**  Ye  are  not  of  the  world ;  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,
therefore  the  world  hateth  you." — Christ.  As  tall  trees  of  the  forest  are
the  first  to  be  smitten  by  the  storm  and  shattered  by  the  thunderbolt,
so  men  of  advanced  thought  are  first  assailed  by  the  tempest  of  indig-
nation.

"The  people  that  walk  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light;  they
that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  unto  them  hath  a  light
shined."  —  Isaiah  ix :  2.

The  halo  of  Peace  which  surrounds  some  men  often  excites  the
bmtbh  man  to  anger.  The  Spiritual  man  is  likened  to  the  heavenly
orbs,  which  shine  more  brightly  as  they  approach  the  mundane  world.
Strive,  therefore,  to  be  illuminated  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Living  Truth.


soul  and  spirit  soul.  9/

Spirit — The  Living  Truth.

PSALM  CXXXIX.

1.  O  LoRD^  thou  hast  searched  me,  and  know  me,

2.  Thon  knowest  my  downsitting  and  mine  oprising,  thou  understandest  my
tfimight  alar  off.

5.  Thoo  compassest  my  path  and  my  lying  down,  and  art  acquainted  witk  all
my  ways.

4.  For  tktre  it  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  hO^  lo,  O  Lord,  thou  knowest  it  alto>

gether.

5.  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before,  and  laid  thine  hand  upon  me.

6.  SucA  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me ;  it  is  high,  I  cannot  attasn  unto  it

7.  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  spirit  ?  or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  pret-
ence?

8.  If  I  ascend  up  hito  heaven,  thou  art  there :  if  I  make  my  bed  hi  hell,  behold,
thontfff  M«rr.

9.  If  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning,  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the

la  Even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me,  and  thy  right  hand  shall  hold  me.

11.  If  I  say.  Surely  the  darkness  shall  cover  me;  even  the  night  shall  be  Ught
about  me.

12.  Yea,  the  darkness  hideth  not  from  thee;  but  the  night  shineth  as  the  day:
ttut  darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike  io  thee.

ly  For  thou  hast  possessed  my  reins :  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  mother's
womb.

14.  I  will  praise  thee ;  for  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made :  marveUoos
mne  thy  works ;  and  that  my  soul  knoweth  right  well.

15.  My  substance  was  not  hid  from  thee,  when  I  was  made  in  secret,  and  curi-
ously wrought  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth.

id.  Thine  eyes  did  see  my  substance,  yet  being  unperfect ;  and  in  thy  book  all
mey  wtetnbers  were  written,  which  in  continuance  were  fashioned,  when  asyettherewas
none  of  them.

17.  How  precious  also  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  O  God  I  how  great  is  the
warn  of  tbemi

18.  If\  should  count  them,  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  sand  1  when  I
awake,  I  am  still  with  thee.

19^  Surely  thou  wilt  slay  the  wicked,  O  God  1  depart  from  me  therefore,  ye
bloody  men.

aa  For  they  speak  agamst  thee  wickedly,  ofu/ thine  enemies  take  thy  nanu  in


21.  Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  Lord,  that  hate  thee?  and  am  not  I  grieved  with
tiiose  that  rise  up  against  thee  ?

22.  I  hate  them  with  perfect  hatred:  I  count  them  mine  enemies.

23.  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart :  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts  1

24.  And  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  hi  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  ever*
bstiQg.

We  are  living  in  most  peculiarly  excited  and  exciting  times  and  in
tbe  midst  of  tunnoil  and  perplexity.    On  every  hand  a  new  light  is


98        THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

breaking,  surely  even  though  slowly,  upon  all  sorts  and  conditions  o£
persons  and  institutions.

Everywhere  man  is  confronted  by  a  Power,  a  Force,  a  Law,  an
Energy,  a  Will,  infinitely  beyond  himself ;  that  law  operates  in  all
the  elements  and  through  all  agencies,  it  is  indeed  that  perpetual
reminder  of  the  Infinite  Spirit's  presence  everywhere  which  led  the
author  of  the  139th  psalm  to  pen  that  wonderful  composition  which
must  in  every  age  and  every  country  awake  responsive  echoes  within
every  reflective  mind.  Ideas  of  Deity  change,  but  only  to  improve
and  to  enlarge ;  ideas  of  responsibility  and  duty  change,  but  only  to
grow  diviner  and  clearer,  as  age  by  age  man's  moral  sense  unfolds.
Religions  change,  but  only  to  become  purer  and  more  helpful  to
mankind.

As  each  Sabbath  dawns  upon  the  fair  earth,  what  oceans  of  ver-
biage follow  the  noonday  sun  around  the  world.  How  very  little
True  Spirit  is  to  be  found  in  it  all  1  what  dissimulation  and  artful
coloring  to  make  the  word  fit  pet  theory,  dogma,  and  creed.  How
cold,  lifeless,  and  insincere  are  the  parrot-like  prayers  of  salaried
preacher  and  hireling  priest,  as  compared  with  the  burning  appeals
and  eloquent  entreaties  of  one  who  is  overshadowed  and  inspired  by
Spirit.  The  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal,  says  Paul.
Every  man  has  a  Spirit  Soul,  therefore  Spirit  becomes  en  rapport  with
Spirit,  so  every  one  must  have  a  Soul  Spirit  within  him  or  herself,  the
latent  possibility  of  mediumship.

The  Temple  of  God  within  man  contains  the  True  Light  of  the
world.  Love  and  wisdom  in  sacred  duality  make  the  only  light  that
can  illuminate  his  pathway  or  be  shed  on  the  pathway  of  Truth.  If
one  is  unable  to  perceive  it  within  himself  it  is  useless  to  look  else-
where for  it.  It  is  yet  beyond  him  and  he  must  strive  continually  to
achieve  it,  making  it  his  purer  love.  When  he  has  reached  it  he  will
have  gained  the  heights  of  purer  day  and  lost  himself  in  the  bosom  of
Absolute  Love.  If  he  does  not  reach  these  heights  it  is  unattainable,
because  it  forever  recedes  as  it  depends  on  the  attraction  of  attune-
ment  and  Unity.  He  may  press  on  and  enter  the  halo  of  the  Light,
but  he  will  never  touch  the  flame  without  uniting  the  Soul  of  Life
with  the  Spirit  of  Life.

In  social  life  men  visit  only  where  they  are  welcomed.  Spirit  in
the  subjective  world  is  much  the  same,  visiting  only  where  there  is  an
attraction,  a  unity  of  hopes  and  fears,  a  similarity  of  thought.  The
very  Alpha  and  Omega  of  Spiritual  success  is  its  dependence  on  Lave^
Sympathy^  and  Unity.     Some  think  the  Soul  a  miracle,  they  hear  and


SOUL  AND   SPIRIT  SOUL.  99

speak  of  it  with  awe.  It  cannot  be  described  in  common  language,
for  only  those  can  comprehend  the  Soul  who  live  at  times  in  the  true
subjective  world.

**  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  will  dwell
with  them,  and  they  shall  be  Hb  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be
with  them."

From  the  Egyptian  rock  temples  that  have  withstood  the  ravages
of  time  and  the  vandalism  of  man,  and  from  the  ancient  Sanscrit  of
the  Jews,  we  find  the  human  Soul  is  an  emanation  or  seed  from  God,
and  in  its  original  Essence  is  all  purity,  innocence,  and  Truth ;  that  in
the  mansions  of  paradise,  the  home  of  Truth,  Purity,  and  Love,  Soul
flowers  spring  up  like  blossoms  in  this  the  All-Father's  garden  of
light  and  immortal  beauty ;  and  as  it  is  the  tendency  of  that  Divine
nature,  God,  whose  chief  attributes  are  Love  and  Wisdom,  whose
presence  is  Heat  and  Light,  to  repeat  itself  eternally,  and  mirror
forth  its  own  perfections  in  scintillations  from  itself,  these  sparks  of
heavenly  Fire  Seeds,  when  planted  in  the  animal  form,  become  to  us
a  living  Soul.  And  as  the  effect  must  share  in  the  nature  of  the
cause,  the  Fire  which  warms  into  Life  also  illuminates  into  Light.
Therefore,  the  Soul  Seed  emanations  from  God  are  all  Love,  Action,
and  Heat,  while  the  illumination  of  light,  which  streams  ever  from
the  great  Central  Sun  of  Being  irradiates  all  Souls  with  correspond-
ing  beams  of  light.

Bom  of  Love,  which  corresponds  to  Divine  Action  and  Heat;
brightened  with  Light,  which  is  Divine  Wisdom  and  Truth,  the  first
and  most  powerful  Soul  emanations  repeat  some  of  the  acts  of  their
Supreme  Originator,  giving  off  emanations  from  their  own  being,  some
higher,  some  lower,  the  highest  tending  upward  into  Spiritual
essences,  the  lowest  forming  particles  of  matter.

These  denser  emanations,  following  out  the  creative  law  of  God,
aggregate  into  suns,  satellites,  nebulae  and  worlds,  each  repeating  the
story  of  creation,  suns  giving  birth  to  systems,  and  every  member  of
a  system  becoming  a  theatre  for  subordinate  states  of  Spiritual  or
material  existence.

Thus  do  ideas  descend  into  forms,  and  forms  ascend  into  ideas.
Thus  is  the  growth,  development,  and  progress  of  creation  endless.
Thus  must  Spirit  originate  and  create  worlds  of  matter  for  ever,  for
the  purposes  of  its  own  progressive  unfoldment.  Thus  the  mighty
march  of  creation  never  ceases.  Thus  the  endless  cable  anchored  in
the  heart  of  the  Deity  stretches  out  for  ever.  Forever,  shout  the
blazing  suns.  Forever  echoes  back  the  anthem  of  the  stars.    Forever,


lOO  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS   THE  THRESHOLa

the  planets  and  our  world  join  in  the  chorus,  whirling  along  their  glit*
tering  pathway,  flashing  in  their  jewelled  crowns  humanity,  for  men
are  real  gems  when  they  have  grown  to  majestic  Truth  and  Love.

As  the  Soul  is  made  more  tender  through  the  refining  fire  of  Life,
and  grows  into  Love  and  gains  Wisdom  through  silence  and  contem-
plation, it  is  filled  with  indescribable  longings  for  a  change  from  the
animal  and  its  appetites,  with  a  growing  desire  for  a  broader  vista  of
knowledge,  for  peace  and  rest.  As  it  cultivates  less  of  ego,  dropping
its  selfishness  and  worldly  ambitions,  and  aspiring  for  mightier  power
to  ameliorate  the  suffering  of  others,  it  grows  more  and  more  into
Divine  Love,  and  through  this  urgent  appeal  of  the  earth  to  man  to
be  lifted  up  and  his  tender  appeal  and  yearning  for  Love  above  the
animal,  the  Divine  Love,  which  has  also  its  involuntary  sympathy  and
tender  yearnings,  is  called  into  action,  and  a  union  is  effected  between
the  two.  The  Spirit  becomes  attuned  in  harmony  with  the  Soul,
thereby  precipitating  itself  into  the  realm  of  matter  along  with  the
Soul,  to  undergo  a  pilgrimage  through  the  probationary  states  of
earth,  and  regains  its  paradise  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  pilgrimage.

The  Soul  of  man  may  have  lived  on  many  planets  or  worlds
before  he  reached  this.  Myriads  of  worlds  swarm  in  space  where
the  Soul  in  rudimental  conditions  performs  its  pilgrimage  ere  it
reaches  this  planet  called  earth,  the  glorious  function  of  which  is  to
confer  upon  Soul  the  consciousness  of  itself,  and  knowledge  of  good
and  evil.  On  this  earth  only  is  he  man ;  prior  to  this,  in  every  other
stage  of  his  vast  journey,  he  has  been  but  an  embryonic  being,  a
fleeting  temporary  form  of  matter,  gaining  here  a  little,  and  there  a
little,  a  creature  in  which  is  a  part  of  the  high  imprisoned  Soul  seed,
which  shines  forth  a  rudimental  shape  with  rudimental  functions,  as  a
butterfly  springing  up  from  the  chrysalis;  ever  going  onward  into
new  birth,  new  death,  new  incarnations,  dying  and  living  again,
stretching  and  reaching  upward,  striving  onward,  rushing  along  the
giddy,  lonely,  tiresome,  toilsome  pathways,  onward  and  upward.  It
awakens  once  more  out  of  darkness,  opens  its  eyes  once  more  to  life
to  be  for  a  time  a  thing  of  dust,  a  creature  of  flesh  and  blood  for  a
little  space  of  time —  a  man.

After  this  birth  of  the  Soul  into  humanity,  it  acquires  the  knowl-
edge of  its  own  individuality,  its  passions,  its  loves,  and  a  knowledge
of  good  and  evil ;  it  gains  self-consciousness,  and  is  closing  forever
its  career  of  material  pilgrimage  and  transformations.

With  the  death  of  this  human  body  it  gravitates  to  a  fresh  series
of  pilgrimages  and  existences  through  the  firmament  where  arr  pui^ely


SOUL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  lOI

spiritual  realms  of  being.  Here  commence  the  further  purifications
and  growths  of  the  Soul ;  now  filled  with  the  sublime  attributes  of  Love
and  Wisdom  gained  by  self-knowledge,  or  with  the  lower  attributes
of  the  Animal  by  which  it  permitted  itself  to  be  overcome  during  its

earth  life.

The  Illumination  of  Soul  gently  leads  the  natural  man  to  a  more
interior  and  pure  thought,  to  an  unselfish  and  more  elevated  stand-
point, where  fallacies  have  no  place,  but  where  pure  truth  is  dis-
played, and  spiritual  blindness  passes  away  as  fast  as  the  natural  mind
can  bear  the  gradual  unfoldment  to  the  True  Light  of  Spirit.

St.  Paul  cautions  and  admonishes  his  brethren  at  Rome  thus:  —
"  Let  every  Soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher  powers.    For  there  is
no  power  but  of  God ;  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God.

"  Whosoever,  therefore,  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance
of  God ;  and  they  that  resist  shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation."

Let  love  be  without  dissimulation.  Christ  said,  "  And  I  will  pray
the  Father  and  He  shall  give  you  another  comforter,  that  he  may
abide  with  you  forever ;  even  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  whom  the  world
cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him  ;  but
ye  know  him ;  for  he  dwelleth  with  you  and  shall  be  in  you."

Again  Paul  counsels,  ^'  Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves,  but
rather  give  place  unto  wrath ;  for  it  is  written.  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I
will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.

"  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good."

The  great  truth  that  humanity  is  brought  into  this  world  to  grow
and  ripen  the  Soul  is  set  forth  thus  in  the  analogy  of  the  fruit-bearing
vine,  where  Jesus  said  (John  xv. :  8) :  "  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,
that  ye  bear  much  fruit.  So  shall  ye  be  my  disciples."  There  is
scarcely  any  figure  which  so  abounds  in  different  forms  in  all  the
different  bibles  and  holy  scriptures  of  all  religions,  as  this  of  the  vine,
the  vineyard,  the  vintage,  and  the  gathering  of  the  ripened  fruit  It
is  found  in  every  shape,  both  as  it  refers  to  the  church  and  to  the
individual ;  to  those  who  are  good  and  those  who  are  bad  ;  in  numer-
ous analogies,  as  ripened  and  unripe  fruitage ;  while  in  the  chapter
where  the  Judean  Prince  likens  himself  to  the  vine,  and  his  disciples
to  the  branches,  it  becomes  almost  an  apologue.

More  precious  than  whole  worlds  like  this  is  the  possession  of  him
who  knows  and  feels  that  his  daily  life  is  attended  with  God's  Perfect
Love  ripening  in  the  golden  light  of  Spirit  Truth.

It  is  written,  the  more  one's  Soul  responds  to  Spirit,  the  more  is
revealed  the  nature  of  God.    It  is  through  the  development  gained  by


I02  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

•

silent  contemplation  of  purer  thought  that  men  at  large  come  to  form
gradually  a  conception  of  the  Divine  nature.  One  cannot  become
learned  by  scientific  investigation  or  human  argument,  that  b  to  say
the  cultured  investigation  one  would  bestow  upon  geology,  astronomy,
the  higher  mathematics,  and  that  class  of  studies.  It  is  not  that  sort
of  culture  that  reveals  Spirit,  although  that  culture  may  fully  recog*
nize  it,  for  that  Law  that  moulds  a  dew-drop  forms  a  world.
The  poet  says :  —

"  Nothing  that  is  shall  perish  utterly
But  perish  only  to  revive  again
In  other  forms,  as  clouds  restored  m  rain
The  exhalations  of  the  land  and  sea.**

It  is  a  revelation  of  these  qualities  and  a  recognition  of  them  in
ourselves  that  constitute  the  glory  of  the  Divine  Image,  God.  Thus
the  Illumination  of  the  human  Soul  by  Spirit  is  much  like  the  dia-
mond in  its  purity,  having  the  power  both  for  reflection  and  refrac-
tion. So  with  those  who  are  really  God's  gems  and  jewels.  The
light  that  flashes  from  their  daily  lives  reflects  Him,  and,  through  the
atmospheres  of  Wisdom  and  Love  which  surrounds  them.  He  is  made
easily  manifest  to  men.  Therefore,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  strive  continu-
ally for  Spirit  Truth,  —  Mental  Illumination,  a  full  transformation  by
the  renewing  of  the  mind  by  Spirit,  and  thou  shalt  have  the  True
Light  of  Knowledge,  out  from  the  great  Central  Sun,  that  Absolute,
Eternal  Energy  from  which  all  things  proceed.

He  who  is  brave  enough  to  rise  above  the  ostracisms  of  society,
the  sneers  of  the  babbling  multitude,  will  find  himself  more  than  a
hundredfold  repaid,  by  that  Perfect  Peace  he  finds  on  every  height
of  Spirit  Truth,  that  glorious  Light  and  calm  repose  the  world  cannot
give.

He  sees  a  new  world,  and  in  it  a  realization  of  that  ideal  of  pure
religion  which  he  had  formed  in  his  Soul.  His  vague  ideas  and
loftier  hopes  have  now  become  realities.  The  star  which  he  had
seen  glittering  at  a  great  distance  has  now  developed  into  a  glori-
ously radiant  sun  enveloping  him  like  a  halo  of  glory.

The  Perfect  Soul  lives  as  a  pure  Spirit  in  Spirit  realms,  gloriously
bright,  radiantly  happy,  strong,  powerful,  eternal,  infinite,  free  to
come  and  go  as  it  pleases,  and,  having  conceived  an  attachment
through  sympathy  for  some  of  earth's  children,  an  attachment  is  inter-
woven with  the  very  heart-strings  of  that  person.  Such  Souls  are
man's  Angel  guides,  and  Heaven  to  him  is  the  in-dwelling  with  God,


SOUL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  IO3

the  thrice-blessed  mortal  finding  an  indescribable  oneness  and  mag-
netic sympathy  which  attaches  him  to  his  invisible  friends  and
companions,  which  is,  to  the  Materialist,  simply  inexplicable  —  un-
knowable.

But  those  who  live  by  the  Spirit,  and  those  who  are  indeed  of  the
Christ  Spirit,  as  well  as  called  by  his  name,  know  by  personal  expe-
rience that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within.  They  know  that  relig-
ion which  is  .the  Science  of  Life  does  not  appeal  to  the  animal  or
bodily  senses,  but  to  the  Soul  and  Spiritual  sense,  since  no  mere
physical  phenomena  can  have  any  relation  to  Spiritual  needs.

The  Substance  of  Spirit  in  the  Soul  or  inner  being  of  man,  as  also
the  Spirit  of  all  thbgs  therein,  being  an  essence  from  the  Absolute
Mind,  is  a  part  of  the  substance  of  Deity.

Since  there  is  but  one  substance  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  which  is
always  a  Trinity  in  Unity,  that  by  which  substance  becomes  manifest
is  the  evolution  of  its  Trinity.

If  we  reckon  from  without  inward,  and  from  below  upward,  the
Trinity  b  Force,  universal  Ether,  and  their  offspring  —  the  Material
Worid.

On  the  intellectual  plane,  the  Trinity  is  Life,  Substance,  and  Phe-
nomenon.

The  fertility  of  the  earth  is  due  to  Water,  while  its  transmutory  or
chemical  power  is  due  to  Fire.  The  water  corresponds  to  the  Soul,
while  fire  is  to  the  body  what  Spirit  is  to  the  Soul,  for  wherever  there
is  motion  there  is  heat  and  consequently  fire.  As  motion  is  the  con-
dition of  Matter,  so  without  fire  there  would  be  no  matter.  In  other
words,  Matter  is  a  mode  of  life.

Blood  is  the  first  incarnation  of  the  Universal  Fluid;  it  is  the
materialized  vital  Light ;  it  lives  only  by  perpetually  transforming  it-
self, and  renewing  itself  through  the  polarization  of  its  dual  magnet
force.  The  lines  of  human  progress  are  radii  from  the  central  point
of  creation,  the  great  Central  Sun  Spirit,  diverging  ever,  yet  to  be
extended  to  the  outermost  circle  of  God's  universe.  Although  the
ways  of  Deity  may  seem  slow  to  our  short  vision,  they  are  swift  in
the  sight  of  heaven  and  the  eternal.

That  which  will  occur  at  the  expiration  of  this  cycle,  when  earth
will  take  her  rest  in  the  tomb  of  worlds,  will  not  be  a  quittance  of
mankind  from  earth  in  the  physical  sense,  as  ordinarily  supposed,  but
a  complete  withdrawal  of  the  man  into  his  own  interior  Soul  Spirit
and  celestial  region.

It  is  the  growth  and  ripening  to  the  attunement  and  unification  of


104      TI^  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  duality  occurring  within  the  individual  which  constitutes  the  At*
one-ment,  and  in  him  in  whom  this  occurs  to  the  fullest  extent  the
Soul  nature  realizes  the  ideal  to  attain  which  she  first  came  from
God.

The  process  b  one  which  each  individual  must  accomplish  for
himself,  for,  being  an  interior  process  of  ripening  and  illumination  by
inward  self-purification,  it  cannot  be  performed  or  accomplished  from
without.  It  is  according  to  the  Divine  order  of  nature  that  the  Soul
should  control  the  body,  for  as  a  manifested  entity  man  is  a  dual
being,  the  Soul  being  the  real,  permanent  individual,  the  self,  the
everlasting  substantial  Idea,  of  which  the  body  is  but  a  temporary
residence  and  phenomenal  expression.  But  the  Soul,  properly  speak-
ing, has  no  soul  of  her  own,  since  she  is  feminine  and  negative,
being  the  intuitional  mirror  of  being.  She  is,  therefore,  by  her
nature  bound  to  obey  the  reflexion  or  will  of  some  other  than  her-
self, which  other  can  only  be  the  Spirit  within  or  the  animal  body
without.  —  The  Within  and  Above  which  is  Divine  and  of  God,  or
the  Without  and  Lower  which  by  itself  and  in  its  lowest  expression
is  the  so-called  Devil.

Sin  does  not  consist  in  fulfilling  any  of  the  functions  of  nature,
but  in  acting  without  or  against  the  Spirit,  and  in  not  seeking  Divine
sanction  in  every  act,  for  sin  is  not  of  the  physical  but  the  spiritual
part  of  man,  and  by  and  through  the  act  he  is  redeemed  or  con-
demned.

Evil  in  the  world  is  but  the  friction  in  the  running  of  God's  great
machinery,  which  He  is  overcoming  more  and  more  as  time  rolls  on.
When  He  shall  have  accomplished  the  last  degree,  the  millennium
will  dawn.  In  that  unknown  silent  land  Sin  is  only  undeveloped  good.
God,  being  the  source  of  all  good,  cannot  be  a  source  of  unpardona-
ble iniquity.

"  The  souls  of  those  that  die
Are  but  sunbeams  lifted  higher.**

Death  is  only  the  loosening  of  the  Soul  into  the  infinite.  There-
fore, Pilgrim  of  Light,  let  thy  life  be  as  the  hands  of  a  good  watch
through  every  golden  moment  marking  the  progress  of  the  inner  life.
Because  of  ignorance,  the  Soul  of  man  comes  in  horror  to  its  change
by  death.  Man  fears  and  trembles  when  he  is  confronted  by  the
soul  of  nature,  because  he  is  false  to  nature,  most  men  having  more
scars  upon  their  Souls  than  on  their  bodies.

Golden  threads  of  Soul  growth  and  Spirit  knowledge  will  alwiqrs


SOUL  AND  SPIRIT  SOUL.  10$

be  found  woven  into  the  fabric  of  a  true  human  iife,  and  it  affords
one  of  the  sweetest  pastimes  of  old  age  to  sit  down  and  slowly  to
unravel  them,  recalling  the  hours  when  they  were  woven  in,  the  first
dawn  of  the  day  when  Spirit  became  to  the  man  a  truth.  Although
years  of  snowy  winters  may  have  left  their  mark  upon  his  head,  the
Eternal  Love  and  Spring  of  Spirit  are  in  his  heart.  The  more  nearly
he  approaches  the  end  of  things  earthly,  the  more  frequently  he  feels
about  him  the  immortal  presence  of  his  loved  ones,  the  more  dis-
tinctly hears  around  him  the  melodies  in  the  eternal  symphony  of  the
world  of  Spirits  who  await  him.

It  is  marvellous,  yet  so  simple;  a  fairy  tale,  yet  a  reality  and
hbtory.  He  can  await  his  transition  through  the  valley  of  the
shadow  like  one  who  lies  down  to  pleasant  dreams  with  a  full
assurance  of  a  beautiful  to-morrow.  His  day's  work  done  for
this  life,  his  hour  of  rest  has  come,  but,  the  life  being  by  no  means
ended,  next  morning  another  day's  work  will  begin.  The  tomb  is
to  him  no  blind  passage  or  darkened  lane,  but  a  great  open  thor-
oughfare where  guardian  Angels  and  loving  friends  await  hb
coming.

The  life  of  this  earthly  day  closes  in  the  twilight  which  opens
with  a  brighter  dawn  into  a  new  day.

The  Soul  of  man  is  of  God,  not  from  God,  an  exile  from  Him ;  it
lives  in  the  body  as  in  a  prison  and  banishment  from  God.  Before
its  exile  the  Soul  saw  Truth,  but  here  it  has  only  glimpses  ''to
awaken  the  slumbering  memory  of  the  past.''

The  object  of  all  Sufi  teaching  is  to  lead  the  Soul  onward  by
degrees  to  reach  that  stage  again.

You  say  "  the  sea  and  the  waves,"  but  in  that  remark  you  do  not
believe  that  you  signify  distinct  objects,  for  the  sea  when  it  heaves
produces  waves,  and  the  waves  when  they  settle  down  again  become
r'a ;  in  the  same  manner  men  are  the  waves  of  God  and  after  death
return  to  His  bosom.  Or  you  trace  with  ink  upon  paper  the  letters
of  the  alphabet,  a,  b,  c ;  but  these  letters  are  not  distinct  from  the
ink  which  enabled  you  to  write  them;  in  the  same  manner  the
creation  is  the  alphabet  of  God  and  is  lost  in  Him.

The  world  is  life  and  intellect^  as  far  as  the  mineral  kingdom ;  but
the  manifestation  of  intellect  in  everybody  is  determined  by  the
temperature  of  the  human  constitution.  Sometimes  beauty  attains
an  excellence  which  is  uttered  with  ecstasy,  and  becomes  a  modula-
tion more  powerful  than  that  which  strikes  the  ear ;  and  this  is  the
work  of  the  prophet


I06       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Human  life  is  a  journey,  and  the  seekers  after  Spirit  Truth  and
knowledge  of  the  Love  of  God  are  Pilgrims  of  the  heavenly  way.

Perfect  knowledge  of  Deity  as  diffused  through  creation  and  the
ripening  of  the  Soul  to  perfect  fruit  is  the  purpose  of  the  journey.
Spirit  Truth  is  the  guide,  and  the  end  of  the  journey  is  a  Perfect
Soul,  the  Angelhood  —  a  union  with  God.

Soul  is  finer  than  air,  thinner  and  more  ethereal  than  wind,
more  volatile  and  light  than  ether,  and  only  through  attunement  of
the  duality  of  being  can  man's  Soul  become  fine  and  pure  enough  to
sense  it.  He  who  is  just  beginning  to  see  into  the  Soul  world  some-
times finds  before  his  inner  vision  bodily  shapes  of  individuals  apart
from  the  person,  which  shape  is  the  Astral,  Double  or  Atmospheric
Spirit,  the  Star  Magno  or  covering  of  the  Soul.  Again,  at  times,  if
the  Soul  of  a  person  has  grown  a  little  toward  ripening,  it  will  be
seen  separated  entirely  from  the  body  before  it  is  quite  resolved  back
into  its  original  element  of  Spirit.

Through  silence  God  communes  with  the  hearts  of  men ;  through
Love,  Spirit  embraces  every  Soul,  and  through  this  experience  comes
Wisdom,  and  the  wise  man  builds  a  magnificent  temple,  not  made
with  hands,  whose  golden  spire  of  Truth  is  first  to  catch  the  sun-
light of  the  morning  which  proclaims  the  glory  of  God's  light  and
Love  to  all  the  world.

Has  your  night  been  full  of  song  like  those  of  the  Angels,  or  a
pathway  of  thorns,  lonely  and  dark,  a  midnight  of  despair  and
defeat?

Does  this  life  satisfy  your  soul,

This  life  of  show  and  empty  sham.
Too  late  you  find  how  vain  the  goal

For  which  you  ran.

MEMENTO  VIVERB.


^


CHAPTER  VL

THB  ASTRAL    BODY.

I  hear  a  voice  that  cries,  "  Alas !  alasl
Whatever  hath  been  written  shall  remaia.
Nor  be  erased  nor  written  o'er  again ;
The  unwritten  only  still  belongs  to  thee :
Take  heed,  and  ponder  well  what  that  shall  be.**

Guard  well  thy  thoughts;

Our  thoughts  are  heard  in  hearen.

The  Cassandras  of  life  are  never  believed  in.  Arguments  are
useless  and  as  empty  as  words.

The  things  that  are  seen  are  temporal ;  but  the  things  which  are
not  seen  are  eternal.  —  2  Cor,  iv :  18.

The  Universal  Agent  or  Star  Magno  has  been  known  and  used
by  the  mystics  of  all  ages  with  the  favored  few.  It  is  that  subtile
and  all-pervading  fluid,  of  which  the  phenomena  of  light,  heat,
electricity,  magnetism,  and  vitality  are  considered  to  be  but  the
grosser  and  more  palpable  manifestations.  It  is  the  subjective  and
one  of  the  first  great  principles  of  nature  and  of  being.

The  Jlrsf  element  of  man  is  perishable  matter ;  the  second  is  that
portion  of  this  universal  agent  which  gives  him  life  ;  the  third  is  the
reflection  of  his  perishable  substance  in  the  Star  magno  or  Astral
light,  coincident  with  him,  but  not  visible  to  his  earthly  eye ;  the
fourth  is  made  up  of  all  the  desires  he  feels  by  his  material  senses,
this  part  not  real  but  only  transitory  being,  —  a  result ;  the  fifth  is
that  which  says,  "  I  am,"  whereby  a  man  knows  himself  from  other
men,  and  with  which  there  is  an  intelligence  of  lower  but  none  of
higher  things ;  the  sixth  is  that  pure  understanding,  eternal  and  co-
extensive with  all  infinitude  of  time  and  space,  and  all  that  is  real,
imperishable,  and  invisible  to  the  eye  of  man.  The  seventh  element
is  the  true  Soul  —  itself  from  God.

The  Astral  odic  substance  is  not  the  Soul  itself,  but  is  the  medium
or  manifestor  of  the  Soul,  as  the  act  is  that  of  the  idea.  It  is  the
fiery  manifestation  of  the   Soul,  the   magnetic  factor  of  the   body.

107


I08       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

From  close  observation  we  find  this  Divine  Essence  and  Spirit  of
fire  in  the  blood  and  also  with  marked  demonstrations  we  very
frequently  see  it  in  the  eye.  As  it  is  above,  so  it  is  below ;  as  on
earth,  so  it  is  in  heaven.

The  Astral  or  Star  magno  may  be  said  to  be  the  quintessence  of
matter,  and  is  the  principle  of  organic  life.  It  is  also  the  agent  of
all  the  sensations  of  the  outer  life.  Observation  has  shown  us  that
the  Astral  body  at  death  disengages  itself  more  or  less  slowly  from
the  body.  During  the  first  few  moments  which  follow  dissolution,  a
Soul  does  not  usually  clearly  understand  its  own  situation.  One
does  not  think  himself  dead,  for  he  feels  himself  alive.  He  sees  his
body  beside  him,  knows  it  is  his,  yet  does  not  understand  that  he  is
separated  from  it,  and,  according  to  the  Spiritual  growth  of  the  Soul,
this  state  of  indecision,  or  else  a  numb  unconsciousness,  continues  so
long  as  there  remains  the  slightest  connection  between  the  body  and
the  Astral.  We  know  that  in  proportion  as  the  Soul  progresses,  the
essence  of  its  Astral,  which  is  of  the  finer  nervous  fluids,  becomes
more  and  more  etherealized,  whence  it  follows  that  the  influence  of
matter  diminishes  in  proportion  to  the  advancement  of  the  Soul ;  that
is,  the  Astral  becomes  less  and  less  gross.

A  careful  study  of  this  Astral  or  Star  magno,  which  plays  so
important  a  part  in  all  Spirit  phenomena  (for  every  effort  made  or
occult  power  reached  must  come  through  and  by  it),  makes  it  highly
essential  that  we  know  more  of  it  and  its  use.

As  it  is  the  link  that  unites  the  Soul  with  the  material  body,  and
is  drawn  from  the  surrounding  atmospheres,  from  the  planetary  fluids
of  the  universe,  it  participates  at  once  in  the  nature  of  a  more  refined
electricity,  that  which  we  receive  from  nature  being  much  grosser  in
all  its  elements,  or  of  the  magnetic  fluid  of  inert  matter.

Numerous  Occult  Societies  in  the  East,  and  also  the  Rosicrucians,
allege  that  this  material  body  is  only  a  vehicle  and  covering  for  the
invisible  Soul,  and  that  the  Astral  body  is  analogous  to  the  Spiritual
body  of  which  the  apostle  Paul  speaks.  The  magnetic  and  astral
body  are  the  same,  being  the  Dual  Agasa  or  lAfe^uid^  the  Astral
being  that  Life-fluid  vihicYi  Spirits  use  as  their  means  of  coming  in
contact  with  matter,  and  it  is  the  magnetic  Star-magno  which  they
draw  from  the  bodies  of  mediums  to  manifest  their  power  and  make
themselves  visible.

The  human  body  being  the  instrument  of  pain,  which,  if  not  the
primary  cause,  is  at  least  the  immediate  one,  the  Soul  receives  the
pain  thus  caused  through  the  Star-magno  or  Astral,  which  possesses


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  IO9

the  faculty  of  perceiving  and  transmitting  every  action  of  harmony  or
inharmony  of  the  human  body.  While  the  memory  of  pain  retained
by  the  Astral  may  be  very  acute,  it  cannot  exercise  any  physical
action.  Neither  the  Astral  body  nor  the  Soul  can  be  disorganized  by
either  heat  or  cold,  nor  can  they  freeze  or  burn,  but  we  see  constantly
among  humanity  either  the  remembrance  or  the  apprehension  of  phys-
ical pain  producing  all  the  effects  of  reality,  and  even  causing  death.

We  know,  in  cases  of  recently  amputated  limbs,  not  properly  cared
for,  that  in  almost  every  case  the  patient  is  sure  to  complain  of
cramps  or  pain  in  the  limb  he  has  lost,  even  if  he  has  not  the  slight-
est knowledge  of  the  disposal  which  has  been  made  of  it.  All  this
is  due  solely  to  the  action  of  the  Star-magno,  or  Astral,  vibrating
between  the  amputated  limb  and  the  patient.  So  frequent  and
almost  universal  are  such  occurrences  that  all  surgeons  use  the
utmost  caution  in  disposing  of  amputated  limbs.

The  writer,  having  had  a  marked  experience  of  the  same  law
through  an  accident  to  a  friend,  feels  it  may  be  of  interest  if  related
here.

While  summering  among  the  White  Mountains,  in  188 1,  with  a
party  of  friends,  a  gentleman  of  the  party,  visiting  a  saw-mill,  acci-
dentally slipped,  and  his  forearm  was  driven  against  a  rapidly  revolv-
ing saw,  and  so  mutilated  as  to  render  amputation  necessary.  Being
at  so  great  a  distance  from  any  city,  a  country  surgeon  was  called,
who  finished  the  amputation  begun  by  the  saw,  and  disposed  of  the
injured  member  by  placing  it  in  a  crude  box,  packing  saw-dust  about
it,  and  burying  it  back  of  the  mill.  Soon  after  he  recovered  from  the
shock  of  amputation,  the  gentleman  began  to  complain  of  discomfort
in  the  absent  member,  declaring  that  the  hand  was  full  of  saw-dust^
and  a  nail  sticking  in  the  finger.  His  complaints  were  so  persistent,
especially  on  awaking  from  his  disturbed  sleep,  that  many  of  his
friends  feared  his  reason  was  giving  way,  and  might  become  de-
throned. Happily,  at  one  of  our  sittings  for  occult  experiments,  some
of  his  friends  thought  to  inquire  of  the  accident  and  condition  of
our  friend,  when  we  received  through  independent  writing  the  asser-
tion that  the  hand  was  placed  as  he  declared,  and  a  nail  driven  partly
through  the  first  finger,  in  closing  the  box.

It  was  decided  at  once  that  two  of  us  should  go  to  the  place,  have
the  box  taken  up  and  see  just  how  it  was  placed  and  left  by  the  sur-
geon, which  was  done  by  the  writer  of  this  book,  and  a  personal
friend,  and,  strange  as  it  may  appear  (the  patient  being  more  than  a
hundred  miles  away  at  this  time,  and  neither  himself  nor  any  of  his


no      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

family  knowing  of  the  exhumation  taking  place),  the  armless  man
suddenly  exclaimed,  ''  They  are  pouring  warm  water  on  my  hand,  and
taking  the  nail  out.  I  think  my  arm  will  get  well  I "  His  friends
thought  this  was  imagination,  but  on  our  return,  when  we  came  to
compare  notes,  we  found  he  had  been  right  as  to  the  moment  of
every  detail,  and  every  operation  performed  by  me  was  accurately
described  by  him,  even  to  procuring  the  warm  water  with  which  to
cleanse  the  hand.

From  a  surgical  journal  the  compiler  has  copied  the  subjoined
report,  bearing  on  the  same  subject

A  SUGGESTION  IN  SURGERY.

A  similar  instance  of  pain  in  an  amputated  limb,  attributed  by  a
poorly  informed  reporter  on  a  New  York  paper  to  the  "  effect  of  the
imagination,"  was  lately  reported  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.  Samuel  Mor-
gan, an  employ^  of  the  Singer  Machine  Works,  had  his  arm  caught
in  the  machinery,  so  badly  mangling  it  as  to  necessitate  amputation.
He  afterward  complained  of  a  sensation  of  pain  in  the  shoulder,  as
if  the  amputated  limb  were  still  on,  and  the  hand  cramped  and  ach-
ing. He  caused  the  arm  to  be  dug  up,  when  it  was  found  that  it  was
bent  at  the  elbow  from  the  manner  in  which  it  had  been  buried,  and
the  hand  partly  closed.  The  arm  and  hand  were  straightened  and
reburied,  since  which  time  the  unpleasant  sensation  has  disappeared.

It  is  no  longer  a  matter  of  doubt  that  an  amputated  limb  retains  a
sensory  connection  with  the  body  of  the  individual,  and  that  any
injury  to  the  member  is  promptly  transmitted  to  the  sensorium.  This
may  occur  at  any  distance,  but  of  course  ceases  when  decomposition
takes  place.  A  few  years  ago  it  was  demonstrated  by  actual  experi-
ment in  a  case  of  amputation  of  the  hand  that  the  pain  caused  by  a
string  designedly  tied  by  the  surgeon  around  a  certain  finger  of  the
severed  member  was  promptly  transmitted  to  the  patient  in  the  next
room.  It  was  removed  to  another  finger,  and  tied  around  a  different
joint,  with  the  same  result.

We  have  been  led  to  think  that  recovery  from  amputations  would
be  more  prompt  and  satisfactory  if,  instead  of  waiting  the  slow  pro-
cess of  decomposition,  the  limbs  were  at  once  cremated.  The  physi-
cal limb  is  not  only  severed,  but  its  spiritual  counterpart  is  also
involved,  and  is  attracted  by  this  mysterious  affinity  to  the  buried
member.  When  the  amputated  limb  is  cremated  this  attraction  is
overcome,  a  readjustment  of  the  disturbed  spiritual  and  physical  ele-
ments takes  place,  promotive  of  comfort  to  the  patient  and  a  speedy


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  Ill

recovery.  It  would  be  advisable  to  place  the  patient  under  the  influ-
ence of  an  anaesthetic  to  avoid  possible  shock  to  the  system  from  the
sensation  of  burning.

We  have  made  many  inquiries  of  persons  who  have  lost  limbs  by
amputation,  and  find  in  all  a  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  the
lost  member,  the  fingers  and  toes  of  which  readily  move  in  response
to  the  will,  although  years  may  have  elapsed  since  the  operation.
Instances  are  on  record  where  this  impression  has  continued  twenty
years,  and  although  the  perception  may  be  effaced  or  blunted  in  as
many  months  in  certain  temperaments,  it  does  not  change  the  fact  of
the  existence  and  relation  of  the  spiritual  counterpart  to  the  physical
limb.

The  growth  of  the  Soul  is  also  a  growth  of  the  Astral  body,  which
becomes  more  and  more  vivid  and  etherealized  as  we  progress.

Soul  Spirits  from  other  planets  draw  from  the  atmosphere  in
which  the  Soul  finds  itself  for  the  time  being,  which  varies  according
to  the  nature  of  the  different  worlds.

In  passing  from  one  world  to  another.  Soul  Spirits  change  their
envelopes  as  we  change  a  garment  when  we  pass  from  summer  to
winter  or  from  the  pole  to  the  equator.

The  sight  of  Soul  Spirits  is  entirely  independent  of  our  light.  The
faculty  of  vision  is  an  essential  attribute  of  the  Soul  for  whom  dark-
ness has  no  existence.  The  Soul  Spirit,  therefore,  possesses  in  itself
the  faculty  of  all  perceptions.

In  this  earth-life  the  inner  monitor  or  mirror  may  be  so  defaced
by  worldliness  and  evil  that  there  seems  to  be  nothing  left  of  it ;
from  a  human  point  of  view  we  would  say  it  was  utterly  obliterated.

This  is  not  so.  Nothing  is  lost.  Man,  by  transgression  of  law,
shuts  out  God  and  his  Soul's  blossoming  for  a  time.  Going  into
Spirit-life  in  such  a  condition,  he  is  driven  and  drifts  about,  sometimes
into  numbness  and  sleep,  sometimes  into  the  dark  region  of  regrets
and  despair.

But  he  is  not  forgotten;  the  Angels  of  Love  and  Mercy  are  ever
on  the  watch  for  an  opening  by  which  they  may  operate  on  the  moni-
tor or  mirror,  the  inner  part  of  the  darkened  Soul  of  this  immortal,
and  when  this  opening  does  take  place,  as  a  result  of  the  discipline
undergone,  when  the  little  spark  appears,  the  door  of  the  Soul  is
thrown  open  for  the  influences  of  these  ministers  of  Love  and  Truth ;
the  dark  sackcloth  is  thrown  aside,  and  the  links  of  the  chain  forged
by  passion  are  broken  forever.  Light  flows  into  the  darkened  cells
of  his  inner  being,  gradually  and  slowly  at  first,  but  ever  increasing^


112      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  as  light  comes  in,  the  unripe  fruitage  of  earth  emerges,  and,  re-
freshed by  new  growth,  out  from  past  miserable  conditions  he  rises,
going  upward  and  onward,  and  in  God's  good  time  reaching  and  pass-
ing up  through  the  firmaments  a  ripened  soul.

One  who  awakes  fully  in  the  Astral  body  seems  to  stand  like  a
bird  poised  for  flight,  quite  free  of  every  clog  or  chain,  except  an  in-
visible but  quite  tangible  cord,  which  connects  the  Soul  and  its  Astral
covering  with  the  clay  form  it  has  inhabited,  which  now  lies  inert  like
a  cast-off  garment  on  the  couch  or  easy-chair  beneath,  while  the  real
living  self  is  poised  and  quietly  balanced  in  air.  Above,  below,  and
all  about  will  be  found  a  radiant,  sparkling,  and  discernible  mist  en-
closing the  whole  form,  which  will  glow  with  more  or  less  of  radiance
according  as  one  has  attained  the  duality  of  his  being.  The  vision
now  pierces  walls,  ceilings,  and  dwellings,  taking  in  an  almost  unlim-
ited area  of  space,  including  cities,  fields,  plains,  mountains,  and
valleys,  together  with  the  firmament  on  high.  One  who  has  fully
balanced  his  Soul  with  his  dual  being  can,  despite  any  obstacle  of
matter  which  may  surround  him  for  the  time,  enter  at  will  into  the
vast  realms  of  earth  and  heaven,  through  his  Soul's  perception  in  its
Astral  flight,  with  a  vision  as  clear  as  that  of  the  natural  eye.  The
objective,  opaque  obstacles  of  the  mundane  sphere  are  no  more.  He
finds  by  this  union  of  Will  and  Soul  with  the  Astral  form  which  ap-
pears to  him  like  a  singular  kind  of  bluish  vapor,  surrounding  him
like  a  second  self,  that  he  quite  readily  becomes  aUForUy  that  subtile
yet  soluble  as  a  radiant  fire-mist  could  pass  through  anything  mate-
rial. It  is  the  fire  flame  of  Soul,  loosed  from  the  body  save  by  the
invisible  cord  which  connects  the  Astral  body  with  the  material  form.

Poised  in  this  realm  of  Soul,  the  Soul  of  matter,  one  has  now  for
the  first  time  arrived  to  the  knowledge  that  the  Soul  realm  in  which
he  now  enters  is  the  real  force  which  holds  matter  together,  and  he
can  just  as  easily  break  apart  the  atoms  of  matter  and  pass  throu^^
them  as  one  can  place  a  solid  body  in  the  midst  of  air  or  water.

One  realizes  now  the  curious  phenomenon  of  atmospheres  about
other  persons,  and  observes  a  similar  aura  or  luminous  Astral  in
more  or  less  broken  shadows,  a  tangible  second  self  about  each  and
every  one,  varied  in  color  and  in  density  according  to  the  nature  of
their  lives ;  an  open  Astral  book,  which  correctly  reveals  the  character,
motives,  and  full  record  of  the  past  life  of  each  individual

Where  is  there  a  medium  or  seer  who  has  not  frequently  been
shocked,  though  he  must  remain  silent,  at  these  interior  disclosures
so  often  revealed  to  the  eye  of  the  Soul,  although  entirely  hidden


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  II3

away  or  unknown  to  the  objective  bodily  senses  ?  Where  is  there  a
seer  who  has  not  been  made  to  shrink  aghast  at  some  apparent
gentleman,  of  fine  exterior,  who  has  imprinted  on  his  Astral  photo-
sphere crime,  hate,  and  deceit,  representations  of  most  foul  and  dis-
gusting reptiles  ?

Here  are  photographed  all  the  events  of  our  past  lives,  and  the
motive  which  prompted  all  our  acts.  Now  it  becomes  clear  that  the
set  of  motives  of  man's  selfishness  produce  horrible  deformities,  and
the  motives  of  unselfish  love,  gentleness,  and  sympathy,  which  seem  to
illuminate  the  Soul  and  cast  a  halo  of  beauty  and  radiance  over  the
whole  being,  are  glorious  emanations,  making  one  appear  like  a  per-
fect Angel,  whose  atmosphere  is  redolent  with  Love.

The  Astral  body,  enclosing  the  Soul  like  an  atmosphere,  can  be
and  has  frequently  been  seen  by  attendants  and  physicians,  leaving
the  animal  body,  just  at  the  moment  of  separation  between  Soul  and
body,  known  as  death  or  dissolution.  It  has  been  found,  by  numer-
ous experiments,  that  by  having  a  strong  bluish  green  light  thrown
obliquely  from  a  window  across  the  face  of  the  patient,  an  observer
standing  a  little  to  one  side,  in  the  shadow,  will  find  as  the  death
rattle  sounds  in  the  throat  of  the  patient  a  column  of  thin  ethereal
violet  blue  vapor  vibrating  and  oscillating,  ebbing,  finally  passing  up-
ward and  fading  away.  At  times  where  there  has  been  a  violent  and
strong  desire  in  the  patient  not  to  die,  this  has  been  seen  to  return
and  settle  over  and  about  the  upper  part  of  the  corpse,  where  it  will
remain  until  the  human  form  has  entirely  returned  to  dust

It  was  on  this  account  that  the  ancient  Greek  and  other  nations
esteemed  above  all  other  things  the  privilege  of  cremation  after
death.

The  translation  reads  thus :  "  I  pray  you,  my  friends,  if  you  in-
deed love  me,  see  to  it  that  my  body  is  burned  into  dust,  that  the
vestal  fire  of  the  Soul  may  pass  on  its  way  rejoicing."  Pythagoras
says:  **This  is  that  deposit  out  of  the  jewel  of  Light,  passing  on
its  way  rejoicing.  That  it  may  be  released  unfettered,  being  one
of  the  Ibfo  Truths,  it  b  a  Holy  Necessity "  that  the  body  return  to
dust

The  compiler  gives  below  the  words  of  a  Scientist  on  the  dis-
covery of  the  departing  soul  with  its  Astral  covering.

**  In  some  way,"  he  says,  "  I  have  become  possessed  of  the  belief
that  the  Soul  of  a  man  has  a  counterpart  of  the  body,  and  in  this
theory  of  the  dual  man  I  have  long  sought  for  the  key  of  Life  and
Death.    I  have  been  forced  to  believe,  and  have  reason  to  do  so^  that


114  THE   HIDDEN   WAV   ACROSS   THE    THRESHOLD.

within  this  body  and  sinew,  as  well  as  an  outer  atmosphere  about  it,
there  is  yet  another  body  existing,  of  a  thin,  ethereal,  and  vapory  form,
which,  according  to  natural  taw,  death  alone  should  set  free,  and  felt,
after  extended  reasoning,  that  a  simple  microscopic  device  could  be
made  that  would  assist  the  dull  sight  of  human  eye  so  that  it  might
penetrate  the  most  minute  particles  of  the  air  we  breathe,  and  thus
witness  the  Soul  and  this  ethereal  form  take  flight  to  the  boundaries
of  the  other  world.  My  attention  was  first  attracted  to  these  truths
by  a  patient  of  mine  lying  upon  a  sofa  suffering  with  pain  in  his  foot,
and  yet  there  was  no  foot,  the  leg  having  been  amputated  nearly  to
the  hip,  and  the  wound  had  healed  quite  nicely.  I  found  that  not
until  I  had  the  limb  and  foot  disinterred  and  placed  in  a  natural  por-
tion (the  foot  having  been  thoughtlessly  placed  beside  the  amputated
limb  at  burial)  did  the  patient's  suffering  cease.  This  being  done,  he
gained  in  flesh,  slept  well,  grew  strong,  and  never  again  complained
of  his  foot.  For  a  long  time  this  incident  ran  in  my  mind,  until  at
last  I  resolved  upon  an  experiment  Procuring  the  most  powerful
lenses  I  could  find,  I  completed  an  invention  of  my  own,  and,  when
my  light  was  so  perfectly  arranged  that  I  could  examine  the  microbes
in  the  air,  called  upon  a  patient  who  had  lost  his  arm,  and  had  also
suilered  in  a  similar  manner,  explaining  to  him  that  I  wanted  him  to
put  his  imaginary  hand  where  I  directed.

"  He  laughingly  accompanied  me  to  my  rooms,  and  did  as  I  desiitd.
The  moment  I  adjusted  the  glass,  a  new  world  and  light  of  revelation
broke  upon  me.  The  dual  hand  lay  beneath  myglasif  I  asked  him  to
make  letters  with  his  imaginary  finger.  He  did  so,  and,  to  his  wonder
and  astonishment,  I  spelled  out  the  sentences  he  thus  wrote.  This  was
to  me  conclusive  evidence  of  an  ethereal  second  self.  Will  you  most
kindly  and  sincerely  apologize  to  the  noble  Italian,  with  a  part  for
yourself,"  continues  the  doctor  in  this  letter  to  the  compiler  of  the
present  work,  "  for  my  contradiction  and  protest  against  these  very
truths  which  you  and  your  noble  friend  were  trying  to  impart,  while  I
in  my  ignorance  and  narrowness,  disputed  and  disclaimed  these
natural  curiosities."

Then  he  continues  thus :  "  The  second  experiment  was  one  of  great
difficulty.  Remembering  your  oft-repeated  assertion  that  one  could
see  the  Soul  take  flight  at  the  moment  of  dissolution,  I  was  not
contented  in  my  past  blind  ignorance,  where  I  so  often  professed  to
know  so  much.  The  time  finally  arrived  where  I  had  proper  condi-
tions of  light,  etc.,  where  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  spirituality
was  being  called  over  to  the  silent  majority.     I  watched  the  hours  go


THE  ASTRAL   BODY.  II5

by  till  the  moment  came  when  he  was  about  to  ctzst  breathing,  and  a
sudden  tremor  passing  through  his  body  announced  his  hour  had
come.  *  Now  is  our  time/  I  whispered  to  the  friend  who  was  assisting
me.  We  passed  our  heads  under  the  black  cloth,  and  bent  our  eyes
intently  upon  the  object-glass.  Particles  of  dust  in  the  air  were
magnified  several  thousand  times,  and  for  a  time  their  motion  kept
a  perfect  dazzle  upon  the  glass.  Then  a  thin  violet  column  of  vapor
gathered  into  a  soft  cloud  apparently  formed  over  and  about  the
body.

**  Particle  seemed  to  seek  particle  as  if  by  some  molecular  attrac-
tion until  the  outline  of  an  object  was  clearly  distinguishable.

^As  it  grew  stronger,  it  seemed  the  vapory  form  of  a  man,  rapidly
assuming  a  more  perfect  shape,  pure  and  colorless  as  the  most  perfect
crystal,  having  changed  from  the  violet  tinge.

**  There  was  at  this  moment  an  awful  stillness.  An  indescribable
feeling  came  over  both  of  us;  our  hearts  seemed  to  stand  still.
Words  are  perfectly  inadequate  to  express  or  describe  our  feelings.  We
bent  our  eyes  intently  on  the  glass  until  particle  after  particle  came
into  the  shapely  form  of  the  man  we  knew  so  well.  It  lay  floating
about  a  foot  above  the  body,  apparently  moored  by  a  slender  cord  to
the  breast  of  the  corpse.  The  face  was  the  face  of  the  man,  but  far
more  peaceful  and  beautiful  in  expression  ;  the  eyes  were  closed,  and
the  new  form  apparently  seemed  asleep.  Through  some  impulse,  both
my  friend  and  myself  wished,  as  it  were  simultaneously,  that  he  might
awake,  when  the  cord  that  held  it  to  the  clay  house  parted ;  a  gentle
tremor  passed  through  the  beautiful  form,  every  limb  of  which  was  of
perfect  mould ;  a  violet  flame  was  radiating  over  the  heart,  a  kind  look
on  the  gentle  face.  He  had  lived  his  life  unselfishly,  and  was  an
unexceptionable  man  when  he  was  with  us.  As  his  beautiful  inner
life  united  with  the  outer  one,  the  perfect  mould  was  a  perfect  man.  It
arose  to  a  standing  position ;  cast  one  sorrowful  look  at  the  tenant-
less  clay  that  lay  so  still ;  extending  a  hand  as  it  were  to  say,  *  Fare-
well, thou  narrow  house  I  I  need  thee  no  more,'  gathered  its  forces
into  a  little  sphere  passed  out  into  the  sunlight  of  the  everlasting
morrow.  We  are  assured  and  know  that  our  friend  lives ;  that  mem-
ory and  thought  which  loves  and  feels,  although  no  material  eyes  ever
saw  them  during  life,  were  only  his  manifestation  through  matter ;  he
is  immortal,  a  living  presence  forever,  and  we  conclude  our  narrative
of  our  dbcovery  by  saying  that  we  are  both  changed  men.  To  us
this  life  and  this  world  appear  entirely  different  since  this  experi-

9f


Il6      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

How  truly  wise  was  the  inscription  over  the  portals  of  the  old
Grecian  temple  :—

Know  Thyself.

Meditation  in  the  quiet  calm  of  nature  is  the  poising  of  the  Soul's
wings  for  flight  The  Initiate  finds  through  his  Astral  that  perfect
Soul  and  Spirit  can  make  and  dwell  in  any  kind  of  a  body  it  chooses
and  dissolve  it  at  will.  By  and  through  this  knowledge  one  will  be
led  to  more  beautiful  scenes  and  more  beautiful  homes  than  human
thought  can  imagine.  There  are  many  mansions  and  many  homes  in
heaven  among  the  firmaments,  prepared  by  the  Angels  and  other  lov-
ing hands  of  those  who  are  waiting  patiently  to  receive  us  when  our
earth  work  b  done  and  life's  long  dream  is  over.  Mortal  eye  hath
not  seen  nor  ear  heard  of  the  wonderful  beauties  and  the  melodious
songs  of  Spirit-land.  Here  we  find  reality  that  exceeds  any  descrip-
tion that  can  be  given ;  here  in  God's  great  economy  we  learn  that
time  is  nothing ;  that  thb  life  b  but  a  moment  on  the  shoreless  sea
of  ages.  In  this  exquisite  nature  of  pure  Spirit  we  see  written  in  the
Astral  world  countless  volumes  of  the  heart ;  age  after  age,  race  after
race.

It  has  been  found  the  best  mode  of  reaching  the  Astral  world  is
by  slow  and  patient  growth,  step  by  step,  octave  after  octave,  till  the
third  state,  the  perfect  harmony  b  reached.

Man's  first  initiation  into  the  Astral  world  b  in  Trance,  or  Semi-
Trance,  or  sort  of  dream.  In  dreams  all  human  knowledge  com-
mences ;  in  dreams  one  hovers  over  measureless  space.  Thb  b  the
first  faint  bridge  between  Soul  and  Spirit  —  thb  world  and  the  world
beyond.  After  long  periods  of  renewing  the  mind  from  every-day
avocations,  there  come  times  of  silence  and  contemplation,  then
comes  that  third  state  of  being  which  all  sages  of  the  East  and  among
the  Indians  rightly  recognize  as  that  Peace  between  sleeping  and
waking,  which  is  very  imperfectly  described  by  the  name  Sani-Trance,
One  of  the  first  Eastern  Occult  Societies  names  it  Tranoz,  another  the
inner  contemplation^  another  and  the  oldest  secret  society  known,  the
Egyptian,  calls  it  C  A  B  A  /2,  meaning  the  Hidden  Way.  A  most
noble  Brahmin,  in  whose  company  the  writer  had  the  pleasure  of  pass-
ing some  months,  says  to  the  Omniscient  in  Truth,  "  Trance  b  a  third
and  co-equal  condition  of  being,  the  three  modes  of  life  being  sleej^
ing,  waking,  and  trance."

The  Astral  body  of  a  person  asleep  or  in  a  trance  may  be  at-
tracted to  certain  places  or  persons,  and  visit  them  without  being  able


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  II7

to  realize  its  surroundings ;  it  may  be  attracted,  as  is  cxften  the  case
after  separation  from  its  physical  body  by  death,  to  places  or  persons
in  a  half-conscious  condition,  and,  being  partly  magnetized  into  con-
sdoosness  by  another  person^  may  give  intelligent  answers;  or  it
may,  either  before  or  after  death,  be  fully  conscious  and  act  with
judgment  and  reason,  while  the  physical  body  is  asleep  or  uncon-
scious. This  is  that  coveted  secret  of  the  feat  of  projecting  the
Astral  body  to  a  distance,  which  the  Indian  Mahatma  performs  by
reducing  the  animal  body,  and  by  seclusion  and  fastings  producing
a  very  negative,  ecstatic  state,  neither  natural  nor  practical.

Tlie  same  beautiful  phenomenon  is  more  readily  attained  by  the
focalization  of  Will,  through  the  united  effort  of  several  persons,  as
performed  by  the  German  branch,  Occult  Egyptian  Society.  It  is
a  process  acquired  by  birth  or  learned  by  practice.  The  difficulty  in
the  way  of  development  consists  in  making  the  physical  brain  capa-
ble of  receiving  the  influence  and  atmospheres  of  the  higher  planes,
which  is  accomplished  by  the  process  of  involution,  which  may  be
slow  or  fast,  according  to  the  manner  in  which  the  life  objective  is
transferred  to  life  subjective,  the  physical  consciousness  to  the  Astral
and  Spiritual  plane,  and  the  manner  in  which  we  assist  the  process  of
nature  by  our  own  efforts.

The  Adept  forms  an  image  in  his  mind,  and  may  make  that  image
directly  visible  to  others  by  throwing  out  his  Astral  body,  either  pro-
jecting it  directly  upon  their  mental  spheres,  where  it  may  be  per-
ceived, or  he  may  send  it  into  space,  and,  by  the  power  of  the  knowl-
edge of  Spirit,  clothe  it  with  matter  and  render  it  both  visible  and
tangible.  It  is  well  known  that  the  Adept  has  power  to  part  with  the
living  waves  of  his  being,  the  vitalized  life-principle  of  dual  energy.
He  maj  send  them  to  the  shores  of  another's  life  at  will.  This  was
die  true  Love  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  I  will  give  my  life  ^  you  as  a
fori  of  yau^  to  bring  forth  the  living  fires  of  your  Soul  and  illuminate
the  temple  of  your  inner  being  with  the  Spirit  of  Everlasting  Life.
IdU  thai  you  may  live.

The  most  powerful  All-Force  known  to  Adepts  is  formed  where
the  Astral  of  two  individuals  of  the  same  sex  have  been  united,  one
of  a  positive,  calm  temperament,  the  other  a  negative,  vivacious
one.  When  these  are  attuned  with  one  accord  they  are  invincible,
leaping  every  barrier.  They  are  a  dual  force  of  Soul  in  the  realm  ol
SouL

It  has  been  found  that  the  Soul  force  generated  by  a  good  act  in
one  part  of  the  world  can,  when  a  perfect  union  of  Astral  Soul  and


Il8      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Spirit  is  a  perfect  octave,  be  used  to  prevent  crime  and  wrong-doing
in  other  places,  no  matter  at  what  distance.

In  the  finer  realms  of  exalted  being,  the  vbion  of  the  Soul  views
the  grosser  at  will ;  and  as  man  grows  and  becomes  attuned  to  Spirit
and  a  fuller  knowledge  of  the  highest,  he  becomes  a  power  and  power  is
will  and  the  secret  of  will  is  knowledge  silently  put  into  practice^  united
with  the  Astral.

This  little  world  is  one  of  God's  great  whispering  galleries,  and  b
so  constructed  as  constantly  to  bring  God's  messages  to  us  in  unaf«
fected  simplicity  or  polished  elegance  ;  in  Love's  fidelity  and  nature's
grace.  If  roan  will  but  rise  above  his  grosser  elements  and  keep  his
harp-strings  attuned  to  unselfish  universal  Love,  with  a  sincere  and
open-hearted  veracity,  he  will  read  the  messages  of  Deity  and  com-
mune with  God,  and  men  then  will  know  the  actual  reality  of  things
without  seeing  it  with  the  objective  eye.

The  inner  jewel  of  light  or  Astral  fire  is  never  absent  from  even
the  grossest  atom,  although  it  may  take  ages  to  unfold  it,  to  make  it
susceptible  to  the  Divine  Spirit  ray  which  is  ever  tending  to  uplift,
refine,  and  purify  through  chemicalization  and  physical  changes,  con-
verting gross  and  base  things  into  refined  and  ethereal.

Even  this  round  red  globe,  in  process  of  time, will  be  changed  into
a  glorious  etherealized  and  spiritualized  planet.

He  who  has  once  been  a  companion  in  a  closed  circle  of  Adepts
knows  there  are  occasions  when  the  magnetic  aura  has  united  and
combined  to  the  required  degree,  when  he  may  ascend  in  air  and  float
there  at  will.  He  does  not  fail  to  grow  and  expand  into  lofty  aspira-
tions and  soar  away  above  the  frivolities  and  petty  aims  for  which  all
the  world  runs  wild.  He  is  changed,  as  it  were,  in  an  hour;  the  habits
and  ambitions  of  yesterday  have  no  charms  for  him  to-day ;  the  whole
world  looks  so  differently  from  this  hour ;  he  is  a  changed  man,  who
can  never  again  return  to  the  unfathomable  abyss  of  ignorance  and

darkness.

The  Spirit  Soul  of  man  can  penetrate  during  entrancement  away
up  the  mountain-tops;  among  the  regions  of  eternal  snow,  away
beyond  the  paths  of  light,  cleft  only  by  soaring  eagle's  wings ;  and
down  deep  into  the  ocean  depths,  among  the  cities  of  pearl  and  coral
palaces.  The  closed  gate  of  the  mysteries  of  Life  and  Death  is
unlocked  by  his  own  hand.  When  he  has  done  all  that  was  required
of  him,  the  illumination  and  ripening  of  the  Soul  takes  place,  —
then  he  may  rest  in  peace.

Besides  Souls,  there  are  very  many  kinds  of  Essences :  Spiritual


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  tt9

Astral,  Essences,  Elementaries  and  Elementals,  of  earth  and  sea,  of
hills,  valleys,  and  running  waters,  of  primeval  forests  and  all  flowers
that  grow.     Some  even  inhabit  the  depths  of  earth.

TTieir  numerous  places  of  abode  cannot  be  named,  as  they  are
found  in  all  earth's  secret  comers.  And  these  Astrals,  Essences,  Ele-
mentaries, or  Elementals,  are  sometimes  brought  under  the  control  of
men.  Sometimes  for  good,  but  more  often  for  evil,  as  they  appear  to
grow  and  flourish  under  the  guidance  and  will  of  man,  and  take
delight  in  serving  him,  not  distinguishing  between  good  and  evil
deeds.

All  locations,  earth,  minerals,  and  water,  are  directly  governed  by
Astral  influences.  In  everything  that  has  any  life  are  found  Elemen-
tary and  Astral  forces,  be  they  planets,  bodies,  animals,  or  men,  and
Spirit  is  the  eternal  and  absolute  energy  over  all.

In  the  earth  and  vegetable  world  are  found  Matter,  Force^  and
Spirit.  In  the  animal  and  human  world  are  found  Matter,  Soul^  and
Spirit  This  is  that  grand  Trinity  of  being  which  constitutes  the
solar  universe  and  its  inhabitants.

The  Astral  body  never  forgets ;  from  it  is  generated  that  action
of  life  known  as  instinct  to  the  animal  world.  To  the  mineral  and
v^etable,  waters,  rocks,  and  gases,  it  is  that  spirit  principle  of  motion
known  as  galvanism,  magnetism,  attraction  and  repulsion,  etc.

The  Astral  influences  and  Elementals  are  as  great  a  necessity
for  the  growth  and  well-being  of  the  mineral  and  vegetable  world  as
air  is  to  the  growth  of  man.  Every  essence,  every  element,  every
plant,  element,  and  man  is  in  its  appropriate  place,  and  working  out
its  appointed  life.

An  Adept  forms  an  image  in  his  mind  and  through  the  Will,
united  with  the  Astral  body,  may  make  that  image  directly  visible  to
others,  either  by  projecting  it  directly  upon  their  mental  spheres
i^iere  it  may  be  perceived :  or  he  may  send  it  into  space,  and  by  the
power  of  his  Astral  with  Spirit  clothe  it  with  matter  and  render  it
visible  or  a  potential  force  to  direct  and  control  the  action  of  things
and  persons,  for  it  has  become  a  tangible  power.  According  to  the
amount  of  momentum  imparted  by  the  Astral  body  to  thought,  so  it
vibrates,  going  fast  or  slow,  gaining  in  its  subtle  potentiality  as  Will
b  united  with  it.

The  Astral  body  or  Star  magno  receives  impressions,  and  on  it  is
engraved  every  act  of  the  individual  to  whom  it  belongs;  all  hb
peculiar  traits  of  character;  all  his  vices,  powers,  motives,  and
virtues;  hb  hopes,  defeats,  memories,  and  thoughts  both  past  and


1^20      tHB  aiDD£N  WAY  ACkOSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

present  It  keeps  an  accurate  and  unrelenting  account  of  every  act
and  deed  the  Soul  has  woven  and  gathered  on  its  earthly  pilgrimage.
Thus  man  shall  be  his  own  judge  when  he  has  grown  enough  in
wisdom  and  true  Justice  to  look  over  the  pages  of  his  life  in  his  own
Astral  book.

Again,  the  Astral  fluids  of  the  world  are  the  element  in  which
Soul  Spirits  live,  as  our  air  is  the  atmosphere  in  which  all  animals
exist

It  b  very  often  the  case,  where  there  is  a  concentration  of
thought  by  numerous  individuals,  that  a  magnetic  battery  of  thought
has  overcharged  the  elements  and  imparted  a  certain  current  of
vibration  which  acts  on  other  persons,  who  are  impelled  to  act  in
accordance.  Thus  new  doctrines  or  ideas  "are  in  the  air"  and
spread  like  wildfire.  One  or  two  strongly  positive  minds  who  may
focalize  a  Will  thus  give  the  initiative,  and  the  impulse  flies  through
the  whole  mass  of  latent  light,  correspondingly  influencing  all  who
are  in  relation  with  it

The  Spiritual  and  Astral  forces  produce  the  Magnetic,  and  it  will
be  found  on  a  close  observation  that  the  magnetic  fluids  or  forces
are  to  the  Soul  and  Mental  body  as  the  circulation  of  the  blood  is  to
the  animal  body.

There  is  that  subtle  something  which  proclaims  a  well  rounded
individuality  affecting  pro  or  con  not  only  those  in  immediate
physical  contact  with  the  magnetizer,  but  extending  its  influence  as
the  sun  sheds  its  rays,  over  every  part  of  the  human  race  which  in
any  sense  comes  within  range.  People  often  exclaim,  "What  a
wonderful  magnetism  1 "  It  is  simply  a  harmonious  union  of  an
odyllic  vibration  or  octave  with  the  Astral  body,  which  generates
that  gigantic  magnetism  that  sways  the  multitude  and  almost  "  moves
the  world."    This  is  known  as  the  Arch  Gift

The  Spirit  and  Soul,  which  are  original  life  and  substance,  are
Divine  and  uncreated,  while  the  Astral  and  Material  bodies  are  the
created  or  manifested  part.  The  Astral,  which  is  called  the  Star
magno,  the  Sidereal,  the  Odic,  the  Magnetic,  the  Soul  of  Fire,  is
fluidic  and  constitutes  the  bond  between  the  Soul  and  the  material
body.  It  is  the  second  self  or  the  original  body,  being  that  which
makes  and  that  which  becomes.  The  original,  immortal,  permanent
individual  consists  of  Soul  and  Spirit  and  when  manifested  in  objec-
tive form  it  is  by  means  of  the  Astral  or  Fluidic  Body^  of  which  the
material  or  fixed  body  is  the  outer  manifestation.

It  is  frequently  claimed  by  old  Hierophants  that  the  Astral  body


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  121

contdns  and  holds  all  the  thought  and  memory  part  of  us.  Not
only  have  men  and  animals  their  memory,  but  each  stone,  each  plant,
and  every  physical  substance  has  its  surrounding  Akasa  in  which  is
stored  up  its  own  past  history  and  the  history  of  its  surroundings.
It  is  given  to  him  who  cultivates  his  inner  soul  senses  to  learn  to
read  all  nature  and  the  account  of  the  daily  lives  of  all  things.

What  a  curious  faculty  b  this  intuitive  perception,  thb  subtle
''something"  of  an  inner  sense.

It  is  very  marked  in  dogs  and  horses  and  b  attached  to  a
woman  as  part  of  her  daily  life  to  shun,  recoil,  and  evade  thb  or  to
seek,  court,  and  endeavor  to  attract  that

Happy  and  thrice  fortunate  b  the  man  who  has  cultivated  this
gift  of  inner  sense,  which  is  known  as  the  peculiarly  feminine  trait  —
Intuition.  It  arms  him  thrice  against  danger  and  that  which  is
&Ise ;  opens  up  to  him  a  thousand  beautiful  avenues  and  unknown
wa3rs,  that  he  had  never  seen  or  dreamed  of  during  his  single  life  of
mere  masculinity,  for  he  can  now  fathom  the  Soul  and  subjective  of
things  as  well  as  the  exterior  and  objective.

He  who  once  drinks  at  the  fountain  of  the  Astral  world  b
changed  in  all  his  hopes  and  aspirations.  He  has  become  initiated
into  the  secrets  of  that  magic  which  empty  worldly  wisdom  and
philosophy  treat  as  a  chimera  or  an  imposition.  To  argue  b  useless,
for  the  knowledge  is  gained  only  by  experience.  Therefore,  dear
Pilgrim,  hold  thy  peace.  Thou  canst  now  behold  the  immortal  shore
up  to  the  mansions  of  the  blest.  Thou  art  the  victor.  Therefore
follow  the  path  that  b  silent,  for  well  thou  knowest  that  our  eyes  are
holden,  that  we  cannot  see  things  that  stare  us  in  the  face,  until  the
boor  arrives  when  the  mind  is  ripened  —  then  we  behold  thent

*The  stranger  at  my  fireside  cannot  see

The  forms  I  see,  nor  hear  the  sounds  I  hear;
He  but  perceives  what  is ;  while  unto  me
All  that  has  been  is  visible  and  clear."

Dear  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  never  resort  to  argument.
Mountains  of  theory  often  become  mole-hills  of  fact.  Understanding
in  the  hidden  paths  of  Spirit  is  only  gained  by  experience.  Neither
must  you  claim  a  thing  is  thus  or  so,  simply  because  you  want  it  so,
nor  assume  that  which  you  do  not  know  is  false.  Study  in  silence  to
know,  know  to  comprehend,  comprehend  to  judge.  Perchance  these
pages  may  excite  a  new  conception  in  some  thoughtful  mind.  Before
judging  of  either  book  or  author,  study  calmly,  thoughtfully,  and  with


122       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

unbiassed  judgment  the  history  of  the  nations  of  antiquity,  of  old
civilization,  and  the  religions  of  the  far  East,  and  with  one  who  has
done  this  the  writer  would  shrink  from  no  discussion  on  God  or
Spirit  Truth  and  fear  no  light.

To  the  first  and  highest  circulus  belong  the  Spirits  of  the
elements  which  pervade  all  things,  not  only  of  the  Macrocosmic
planet  but  of  the  Microcosm  Man;  of  these  elementals,  the  Air-
spirits  preside  over  the  functions  of  respiration  and  the  organs
which  accomplish  it.  The  Water-spirits  preside  over  the  humors
and  secretions  of  the  body  and  the  blood  in  particular.

The  Earth-spirits  have  for  their  domain  the  various  tissues  of  the
body,  and  Animal  heat,  assimilation,  and  nutrition  are  dependent  on
the  Fire-spirits.

The  Adept  or  Initiate  of  the  highest  grade,  one  who  has  power  to
hush  the  storm  and  still  the  waves,  has  a  full  understanding  and
knowledge  of  these  forces  and  gradations,  and  can  through  the
same  agency  heal  the  disorders  of  those  who  are  ill,  and  regenerate
the  functions  of  the  body  in  those  who  are  broken  in  strength.  He
does  this  by  an  impulsion  of  Will,  acting  on  the  Astral  or  magnetic
Atmosphere,  every  particle  of  which  has  a  Spirit  capable  of  respond-
ing to  the  human  Will,  for  to  concentrate  a  thought  with  Will  forms  a
projectile.

Pythagoras  speaks  of  a  direct  mystic  intuition  of  the  Deity,
which  is  sustained  by  a  flame  like  atmosphere  that  vibrates  an
enthusiasm  without  passion,  a  still  intoxication  of  the  Soul,  in  which
man  rises  above  his  common  life  to  contemplate  the  Absolute,  rais-
ing himself  through  that  height  of  mystic  union,  knowing  himself
to  be  in  attunement  with  the  Father  of  All  Wisdom.  This  is  that
asbestos  ftdme  that  was  lighted  in  every  heart  when  once  united  with
the  white  flame  without,  the  Astral,  never  to  be  quenched,  but  to
dwell  with  the  immortals.

At  present  even  the  most  advanced  of  modem  Spiritualists  believe
that  the  phenomenon  is  produced  almost  entirely  by  disembodied
Souls,  and  cannot  believe  that  embodied  human  beings  are  more  than
passive  spectators.  Here  lies  the  most  serious  difliculty  in  modem
Spiritualism,  which  must  give  place  to  a  very  different  view,  when  it  is
learned  what  Spirit  and  Soul  forces  actually  are,  and  that  embodied
Souls  can  and  do  produce  phenomena  more  forcibly  than  disembodied
ones.

This  unquenched  thirst  for  physical  existence  is  a  great  force,  and
has  a  creative  force  in  itself  so  strong  that  it  frequently  draws  the


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  123

being  back  into  earth  life  when  it  should  have  passed  on  to  loftier
heights.

Strive,  therefore,  to  test  the  beauties  of  the  Soul  world,  the  Spirit
of  Truth  in  the  subjective  life,  that  a  creative  force  and  power  may
receive  you  and  waft  you  onward  to  the  mansions  of  the  blest

Herein  lies  one  of  the  greatest  mistakes  and  errors  of  these
modem  times.  When  the  hour  has  come  to  an  individual,  and  the
Soul  is  about  to  depart  from  its  tenement  of  clay,  through  blindness
and  cruel  ignorance,  friends  gather  about,  calling  the  Soul,  when  it  is
fluttering  like  a  chained  bird  through  its  Astral  body,  back  to  its
animal  body.  By  and  through  this  ignorance  of  nature's  law,  the
Soul  of  many  a  departed  loved  one  has  been  made  to  hover  about  his
tomb  aw^ting  release  either  by  the  resolving  of  the  body  back  to
dust,  or  by  some  kindly  hand,  which  may  be  either  embodied  or  dis-
embodied. The  writer  has  known  cases  where  the  Elementaries  have
assisted  in  the  release  of  Souls  thus  chained.

As  man  has  his  counterpart  in  his  worid  of  thought  and  his  dis-
embodied Soul,  so  do  the  vegetable,  mineral,  gaseous,  vapors,  air,
heat,  etc.,  have  their  counterparts  in  the  elementals.

In  pursuing  inquiry  into  the  forces,  nature,  power,  habit,  and  con-
dition of  the  elementaries,  or  elementals,  great  care  and  calm  judg-
ment must  be  exercised.  If  by  neglect  or  thoughtlessness,  or  from
idle  curiosity,  the  investigator  does  not  strictly  maintain  every  occult
law  of  nature,  he  frequently  Rnds  himself  adrift  upon  an  unknown  sea
without  compass  or  chart  to  guide  his  course,  and  is  most  fortunate
if  he  is  not  seized  in. the  vice-like  grip  of  some  elementary,  or  ele-
mental, pestilence,  which,  if  not  promptly  released  from  his  physical
body,  consumes  it  even  unto  death.  Even  the  most  fortunate  experi-
menter in  the  subtle  invisible  collections  of  elementary  forces  is  some-
times thrown  back  upon  the  shore  from  whence  he  started,  bewil-
dered and  astonished  at  what  he  has  encountered.

It  is  claimed  and  believed  by  most  Hierophants  and  Adepts  that
more  than  half  the  persons  who  become  insane  are  obsessed  by  a  dis-
embodied  Soul  in  its  connection  with  the  elementaries  finding  an  anchor^
age  in  the  living  person.

Thoughts  are  motions  existing  in  the  mind,  just  as  motion  exists
in  the  waves  of  the  ocean,  one  acting  on  the  other.

£motion  with  more  or  less  consciousness  exists  in  the  Astral  ele-
ments of  nature  and  in  the  Astral  body  of  man,  the  Astral  forces  of
nature  being  creators  of  form.  As  every  motion  on  the  physical
plane  may  give  rise  to  a  modification  of  forms  on  the  lower  plane,  so


124      T^S  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLa

Astral  eneigies  determine  the  constitution  of  higher  forms  of  life;
To  give  pure,  simple,  and  perfect  expression  to  thought  is  a  potential
vibration — is  white  magic.  All  our  thoughts  and  memory  rest  in  the
Astral  body  or  so-called  Star  magno,  and  everything  pertaining  to  the
Spirit  world  must  come  through  die  same.

Human  nature  reflects  herself  in  the  mirror  of  the  mind,  and,
mind  being  the  atmosphere  of  the  Soul,  men  should  surely  guard  well
their  minds  and  thoughts,  first  in  silence,  for  silence  is  the  sentinel  of
wisdom.     Remember,  kind  reader,  "  As  thou  thinkest  so  thou  art"

Selfishness  is  a  bottomless  pU^  her  home  a  whited  sepulchre,  and
minds  beclouded  with  self-conceit  and  selRshness  are  blind  to  all  truth.

When  Spirit  shall  have  gained  complete  mastery  over  matter,
death  will  be  unknown,  for  matter  is  only  solidified  Spirit  Then  the
perishable  becomes  eternal  —  the  earth  a  part  of  heaven,  and  it  is
found  that  the  tribulations  of  earth  diminish  in  proportion  to  the  ele-
vation and  illumination  of  the  Souls  of  men  to  Spirit  Truths.

Human  Conscience  is  the  vibration  of  the  Astral  body  between
the  higher  Soul  and  the  animal  man.  About  this  human  conscience
more  has  been  said  and  less  understood  than  about  almost  any  other
quality  of  the  human  mind.  It  has  hitherto  been  generally  supposed
to  be  a  kind  of  moral  intellect  infixed  in  the  constitution  of  the  human
mind,  whose  function  it  was  to  discern  the  peculiar  quality  of  right
and  wrong  in  human  feeling  and  conduct  When,  in  opposition  to
that  view,  it  was  asked :  "  How,  then,  if  there  be  a  Divinely  appointed
arbiter  of  right  and  wrong  in  the  human  Soul,  can  it  be  Aat  con-
sciences differ  so  much  ? "  To  which  it  was  replied  that  watches
differ  although  they  were  all  made  to  keep  time  aright  Watches  are
but  creatures  of  man's  construction,  and  only  objective ;  while  man  is
a  creature  of  God's  construction,  and  men  differ  in  their  individuality,
as  to  climate,  circumstance,  and  culture  of  physical  and  mental
strength ;  creating  their  own  individual  vibration  between  the  Soul
within  and  the  natural  man  without  is  conscience,  simply  the  Astral
pendulum  playing  between  the  man  higher  and  the  man  lower,  or
selfish  animal  body.

Conscience  carries  the  idea  of  discernment  Now,  consdence  is
simply  a  sentiment,  an  emotion  which  may  grow  and  gather  strength
as  Will  is  united  with  it.  Like  all  other  emotions,  it  is  without  intel-
lectual perception.  It  is  not  itself  a  percipient  faculty,  and  is  depen-
dent for  its  action  upon  the  judgment  of  that  wisdom  the  Soul  has
been  enabled  to  radiate  in  its  understanding  of  reports  of  right  and
wrong.    The  conscience,  when  it  is  in  its  normal  and  DOt  in  its  excet-


THB  ilSTRAL  BODY.  12$

shrdy  morbid  condition,  acts  as  an  appendage  to  the  inner  life  and
vibrates  like  a  pendulum  between  the  Astral  and  the  objective  and  the
Soul  the  within.  If  the  sentiment  of  emotion  is  stronger  with  the
animal  man,  this  pendulum  of  conscience  will  vibrate  to  the  Astral
body  a  mental  thought  of  merely  animal  judgment.  If  the  illumina-
tion of  Truth  in  the  Soul  is  the  stronger,  the  judgment  will  be  to  the
higher  and  better  thought  which  reaches  the  inner  man  by  each  vibra-
tion opening  his  Soul  to  the  Eay  or  reflection  of  Spirit  and  to  the
voice  of  God.  Conscience  b  a  sentiment  or  emotion,  as  has  been
said,  and  is  dependent  for  its  action  upon  the  judgment,  whatever  the
understanding  of  the  individual  reports  as  right  or  wrong.  A  piano
has  its  strings,  each  of  which  has  a  quality  of  its  own,  but  not  one  of
them  can  give  forth  a  note  of  itself.  It  is  through  the  touch  of  a
hand  that  the  cord  is  struck  and  so  resounds ;  and  conscience,  like
these  strings,  is  dependent  on  the  stroke  of  thought  to  make  it  re-
sound. Now,  when  any  emotion  is  predominant,  and  the  quality  of
Its  organs  fine  with  exalted  illumination  of  Spirit  within,  the  feelings
will  inspire  the  intellect  with  a  particular  sensibility  of  exalted  lofti-
ness which  b  one  of  the  traits  of  the  emotion.  Many  persons  go
through  life  never  seeing  any  of  the  TVue  things  in  it,  but  only  the
objective,  not  the  qualities;  while  others  go  through  life  with  the
skies  full  of  something  else  than  the  mere  objective  clouds.

They  see  about  nature  and  humanity  a  harmony  of  Spirit  and  Soul,
a  sublime  and  exalted  idea  of  some  sublime  Mind.  To  them  man-
kind is  something  else  besides  a  mere  crowd,  and  they  enter  with  kind-
ness and  harmony  into  the  flashes  of  life's  brightness  and  mirth  —
the  springs  of  life,  which  lift  one  easily  over  the  jolts  and  ruts.  The
answer  to  the  question.  Is  life  worth  living  ?  depends  entirely  on  the
man  who  b  living  it  Hb  years  may  be  many,  yet  his  life  as  an
empty  vessel.  Thought,  being  the  unconscious  and  unceasing  lan-
guage of  the  mind,  b  frequently  interrupted  by  conscience  peeping
through  the  windows  of  the  Soul,  and  our  thoughts  play  hide-and-seek
with  memory.

That  which  b  true  of  conscience  is  so  of  all  other  emotions,  simply
the  vibrations  of  the  Astral  body  between  the  Soul  higher  and  the
objective  world.  Without  the  emotion  of  benevolence  a  man  goes
through  life  seeing  little  that  touches  him  in  humanity.  Those  in
whom  benevolence  b  large  and  sensitive  can  scarcely  take  a  step
without  discovering  cause  for  pity  and  assistance  of  humanity.  The
intellect,  while  it  discerns  and  determines,  b  itself  affected  by  the
magnetism  of  emotions  in  the  astral  that  lie  behind  it


126  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

There  may  be  many  persons  whose  conscience  and  whose  judg«
ment  of  right  and  wrong  as  revealed  by  their  intellect  are  small,  whidi
is  usually  caused  through  the  influence  of  Heredity  and  wrong  in  the
beginning.  Other  men  have  consciences  large  and  sensitive,  and  the
intellect  discerns  the  sense  of  right  and  wrong  on  every  side  with
emotions  of  kindness  and  sympathy,  which  sometimes  become  even
oppressive,  for  conscience  is  one  of  those  qualities  that  man  cannot
do  without  and  often  cannot  do  with ;  while  it  is  necessary,  it  is  fre-
quently despotic  in  this  age  which  does  not  fully  recognize  the  sacred
rights  of  mine  and  thine.

This  being  the  case,  how  is  the  intellect  trained  so  that  it  may
discern  and  report  through  its  Astral  messenger  to  the  Soul  that
which  is  right  or  wrong  ?  Here  comes  the  great  necessity  of  Spirit
culture  of  the  inner  man.

In  the  beginning,  when  a  child  is  bom  into  earth  life,  it  does  not
know  one  thing  from  another,  and  when  it  begins  to  gain  knowledge
it  does  not  yet  get  it  by  experiment  (except  in  a  very  narrow  sphere)
but  by  instruction,  and,  as  it  advances  still  further,  only  learns  the
difference  between  right  and  wrong  through  the  influences,  culture,
and  instruction  thrown  around  it ;  for  those  who  have  gone  before  have
found  out  how  they  can  live  harmoniously  and  truly  in  the  culture  of
the  gentler  family  relations,  and  there  are  already  existing  certain
distinctions  in  that  immutable  law  of  Heredity,  and  the  child  is  in-
structed in  those  atmospheres  to  which  it  belongs.  We  are  in  this
respect  gathering  that  which  has  been  growing  for  thousands  of  years,
and  have  not  yet  determined  the  True  Absolute  right  and  wrong,  but
only  that  which  is  relatively  so,  for  right  and  wrong  shift  ground  as
we  rise  higher  and  higher  toward  the  octave  or  plane  of  Spirit  Truth.

Thus,  as  the  Soul  becomes  more  illuminated  with  wisdom,  a  higher
stage  in  humanity  is  reached,  when  men  determine  right  and  wrong
by  applying  Spiritual  knowledge  and  wisdom  with  the  principles  of
Truth  and  the  Genesis  of  the  man.  Therefore,  benevolence  is  right
and  affection  is  right,  and  all  the  gentler,  loving  qualities  are  right

In  all  uncertain  conduct  which  has  not  yet  been  determined  in
custom  or  law,  minds  of  a  superior  class  are  able  to  exert  their  inter-
pretive conscience.  A  higher  class  of  mind  is  continually  enlarging
the  way  of  justice,  making  it  straighter  and  picking  out  the  crooks  and
knots,  false  teachings  and  unwholesome  broodings  of  life,  and  mak-
ing of  it  far  more  than  it  was  in  the  early  conditions  of  humanity.
This  quality  of  wisdom  can  hardly  be  explained  by  mere  intuition.
One  must  look  higher  in  the  Spirit,  his  Soul,  and  his  Astral  body  to


THE  ASTRAL  BODY.  12/

solve  the  problem.  The  writer  well  knows  the  philosophers  of  the
day  have  been  veiy  shy  of  the  use  of  any  such  phrases,  but  neverthe-
less this  morai  intuition  goes  beyond  the  logical  and  scientific  pro-
cesses, and  works  upon  the  lower  grade  throughout  society  which
determines  things,  facts,  and  qualities  to  be  right  or  wrong.

Men  of  genius,  too,  have  their  vivid  intuition.  Artists  and  musi-
cians tell  of  a  certain  thing  or  atmosphere  which  comes  over  them,
they  cannot  tell  how;  a  true  orator  feels  the  overshadowing  that
comes  to  him  in  making  an  appeal  to  a  public  assembly,  though  he
does  not  know  why.  It  is  the  higher  Soul  speaking  through  the  man,
— in  Christ's  words,  "It  is  the  Father  within  me  that  speaketh," —
through  the  vibrations  of  the  Astral  body.  All  inspirational  speakers
will  tell  you  that  they  strike  the  key-note  of  thought  and  then  strive
to  get  away  from  the  objective  about  them,  when  words  come  and  do
what  it  is  desired  to  accomplish.  Striving  to  give  full  freedom  to  the
inner  man  without  thinking  of  the  outer,  their  words  will  flow  like
rippling  waters.

Now,  in  the  brain  are  organs  of  power  that  have  special  reference
to  the  human  body ;  then,  there  are  higher  organs,  the  emotional  and
intellectual  and  the  moral  sentiment, — the  kingdom  of  mind,  the
kingdom  of  heart,  and  the  kingdom  of  Spirit.  The  company  these
organs  and  attributes  keep  with  each  other  determines  a  man's
character.  At  war  within  himself,  how  can  there  be  peace  and  truth
without.  Then,  again,  things  in  this  age  may  be  moving  in  the  best
way  and  may  be  relatively  right.  The  best  in  any  age  is  relatively
right.

Creeping  is  the  best  a  child  can  do,  though  walking  is  better  than
creeping.  A  thing  which  is  right  at  one  time  may  be  wrong  at
another,  even  in  the  same  age.  When  a  man  is  ignorant,  his  con-
science is  in  bondage.  No  law  or  form  as  high  as  the  highest  thought
in  any  community  can  be  made  effectual.  No  law  can  be  enforced
that  is  higher  than  the  average  knowledge  and  common-sense  and
the  average  conscience  of  that  community,  and  to  attempt  to  take  the
ideal  of  to-morrow  and  coming  years  and  enforce  it  upon  the  present
will  always  bring  failure  and  defeat,  and  be  injurious  to  the  cause.
But  the  average  knowledge  and  common-sense  and  conscience  may  be
raised  toward  the  ideal.

What  are  the  influences  that  determine  human  character?  Hered-
ity is  one  of  the  leading  ones.  There  are  multitudes  of  men  bom  in
a  well  balanced  state,  as  to  the  animal,  who  neither  before  nor  after
birth  ever  felt  the  least  vibration  of  Spiritual  growth  or  Love  within


128       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  Soul.  Children  from  the  very  beginning  and  earliest  days  need  to
be  taught  kindness  and  loyalty  toward  others,  which  cultivates  true
wisdom  of  the  Soul.

When  men  find  what  is  light  and  what  wrong  in  every  relation  of
life,  and  what  their  own  individual  duty  to  humanity,  then  shall  follow
a  great  impulse  to  pursue  the  right  and  avoid  the  wrong.  Such  a
various  body  of  men  and  women  cannot  be  held  together  unless  they
can  be  held  to  the  law  of  rectitude,  nobleness,  and  goodness  through
the  emotions  of  the  Soul  within  the  inner  temple.  Thus  the  mes-
senger of  the  Astral  must  play  its  little  part  instructing  the  individ-
ual to  a  standing  of  conscience  on  the  plane  of  Truth  which  will  be
the  ultimate  salvation  of  the  world  when  all  truth,  wisdom,  and  jus-
tice will  be  meted  out  by  the  power  of  Spirit  vibrating  through  the
Astral  body  in  our  consciences.  The  Astral  is  the  primary  actuality
of  the  living  body  and  the  framework  upon  which  matter  builds,
the  Soul  being  simply  the  tenant  of  the  little  house,  and  Soul  ripened
by  Spirit  is  made  an  EtenuU  Thing,

*  A  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing;
Drink  deep,  or  taste  not  the  Pierian  spring.**

Thou  art  now  treading  the  heights  of  an  unknown  land,  and,  unless
under  the  guidance  and  directing  hand  of  Spirit  or  mortals,  thou  art
on  dangerous  ground,  moving  on  through  lonely  darkness,  over  an
unknown  abyss,  in  whose  depths  are  secrets  as  profound  as  death.
Thou  art  much  like  the  Neophyte  of  Ancient  Egypt  who,  attempting
to  climb  the  long,  dark,  tortuous  passage  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  when
just  on  the  point  of  entering  the  Grand  Gallery,  through  blindness  to
hb  own  radiating  atmosphere,  slipped  into  that  narrow  descending
passage,  down,  far  down,  into  the  subterraneous  pit,  never  again  to  re-
appear in  this  world,  but  passing  out  into  the  clammy  embrace  of  the
silent  Nile.  The  ancient  sages  believed  and  taught  that  every  living
creature  was  and  is  during  all  its  life  surrounded  and  enclosed  by  an
atmosphere  to  which  he  belongs,  and  to  that  special  sphere  in  which
he  dwells,  and  not  until  his  dual  forces  have  been  attuned  to  the  lower
octave  toward  Divinity  does  he  cease  to  consume  the  inner  vitals  of
his  Soul.  "Therefore  know  yourselves  and  never  unprepared  but
always  ready  advance  your  inner  growth,  for  he  who  does  not  advance
fails.  Be  faithful  as  Angel  guardian  to  your  own  Soul,  and  you  will  find
the  magnetic  Key  which  unlocks  the  gate  of  heaven.  Have  little  to
say  of  your  pilgrimage  to  any  man ;  but  impart  justice,  mercy,  and
love  to  all.   Pass  on  in  silence ;  nature  silently  keeps  her  wits,  try  you


THE  ASTRAL   BODY.  1 29

to  keep  yoaa.    No  man  can  injure  thee.    Thou  art  one  of  the  diil-
dren  of  the  Divine  Truth,"  says  Pythagoras.

Pilgrim  of  the  shadow  land,  never  despond.  Trust  in  the  God
that  made  thee  and  follow  the  sea  that  is  silent.  You  need  only  be
anxious  with  deep  solicitude  for  the  advancement  of  these  GoUat
Fiuthstwhen  reaching  and  drifting  in  the  Astral  world  becomes  fash-
ionable, and  familiar  mundane  spirits  t>ecome  popular  to  the  world  ai
large.  Then  we  indeed  tremble,  but  Mother  Nature  guards  her
secrets  well,  and  a  indeed  good  and  wise  toward  her  children,  while
be  who  has  grown  and  whose  Soul  has  ripened  into  the  Astral  world
now  finds  immortality  is  no  longer  a  name,  but  fully  knows  and  real-
izes that  after  bursting  these  barriers  the  True  man  ascends  to  that
source  of  unbounded  power  and  infinite  wisdom,  a  ripened  Soul  re-
splendent with  the

LovK  or  Gosl

"Wb  akb  ovbl  own  Childkkh."


"  Our  acts  oar  Angels  are  for  good  or  ill.
Our  fatal  *hadoira  that  walk  b]P  ni  stiU."


CHAPTER  VIL
A  world's  religion.

OifB  WITH  God  is  a  Maprtty.

•  •  **  For  if  this  oounael  or  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  come  to  nang^i
''But  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it;  lest  haply  ye  be  found  eten  to  4|^t  agaioat  God.**
"Acii  T.  38,  39.

A  GREAT  tidal  wave  of  the  Spirit  is  now  sweeping  through  the
land.  Dogma  and  creeds  are  of  the  past.  They  are  no  longer  be-
lieved in  by  the  great  majority  even  of  church-going  people.  The
greatest  change  of  this  epoch  and  age  has  been  wrought  among  think-
ing people  during  the  past  seven  years.  Never  since  the  time  of
Christ  has  there  been  so  high  regard  and  anxious  search  for  Truth  in
the  depths  of  Spirit  knowledge.

Soul  and  Spirit  are  triumphant.  In  them  are  the  kingdoms  of
the  heart,  the  realms  of  human  affection.  From  them  is  drawn  the
conclusion  that  mankind  is  universal,  immortal.

We  stand  on  the  summit  of  ages.  Our  eminence  has  cost  the
fruit  and  toil  of  centuries.  Who  shall  eventually  lift  the  veil  which
shuts  out  the  True  Light  from  the  spiritual  eyes  of  the  Masses  t  For
in  the  Word  it  is  written ;  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive."

"  Prove  all  things,"  says  St.  Paul,  *'  and  hold  fast  to  that  which  is
good."

A  World's  Religion  I  What  shall  it  be  ?  Materialistic,  Spiritu-
alistic, iEsthetic,  or  Ecstatic?  There  are  strong  tendencies  toward
the  Spiritual  or  Ecstatic.

Ecstasy  is  but  the  tasteless  foam  crowning  the  cup  of  joy  in  human
life ;  let  us  beware  lest  it  overflow  and  soil  the  white  robes  of  our
virtues.

There  is  a  great  tendency  at  this  time  toward  the  ancient  and
antique  religions,  of  which  the  compiler  mentions  the  following:-**

Religions  based  on  Nature  Worship.

The  Norse,  consecrating  Valor,
The  Greek  "  Beauty.

The  Roman  "  JustioOb

130


SYMBOLS   AND   HIEROGLYPHS.


1


^


Monogram  of  the  Threk  Mvsteriks  Delphic,

FROM  THE  School  of  Oracle  Insignia

OF  THE  Pathway  of  Holy  Love.

Emblem  of  Man*s  Dual  Being  attuned
to  Spirit,  Learn  to  Know  All,  but  Keep
Thyself  Unknown.  Mythos  of  Eros.  The
Re-bom  Soul.


I   E.  s


^


Al


K


Monogram  of  the  Fire  or  Genbrativb
Principle  of  All  Life.

The  Dual  Being  United  by  Fire,  the
Male  Principle  of  Wisdom.  According
to  the  Greek,  Only  through  Thee  can
Mortals  See  into  the  Mysteries  of  Hid-
den Things.  The  Charm  out  of  the
Invisible  Fire,  the  Gate  of  Heaven.


/TO.*

The  Greek  Divine  Logos.

The  True  Voice,  Illumination  Within,
Renewing  of  the  Mind,  the  Hidden
Way,  Glory  unto  Thee,  the  Pathway  of
Silence.


Monogram  of  Christ,  Ecce  Homo,
He  Died  for  You,  Self-Abnegation,
Universal  Love,  Divine  Humanity,
I.  N.  R.  I.,  I.  H.  S.


CfREBK   OpHIDIAL.


The  Uniter,  the  Reformer,  the  Knowl-
edge of  Eternally  Renewing  One*s  Self,
the  Female  Principle  of  Intuition  and
Perception  of  Truth,  Androgyne.


Aryan  and  CiiALDiCAN  Monogram.

Of  Elemental  Energies  in  Nature,
when  united  with  Elementary  Ener-
gies, gives  the  Buddhist  Lamh  Hand
or  Guidance  of  an  Unseen  Power,


A  world's  religion.  131

Moral  Religions,  based  on  Authority  and  Reflection.

The  Doctrine  of  Confucius,  cultivating  Reverence.
«         «  ••  Mahomet         "  Faith.

u         u         t*  Zoroaster  "         Purity.

InMeeiua/  Religions,  based  on  Science  and  Imagination.

Osirianism  characterized  by  Aspiration.
Brahmanism         **  "    Spirituality.

Buddhism  "  "    Emancipation.

That  which  is  so  much  needed  here  is  a  religion  suited  to  both
climate  and  people,  a  religion  of  Divine  Humanity,  the  Temple
Within.  As  all  the  woes  of  the  world  have  their  root  in  sin,  while  sin
and  evil  have  their  origin  in  a  depraved  heart,  the  illumination  by
Spirit  Truth  will  turn  the  heart  to  goodness.

All  ancient  or  Eastern  religions  have  but  one  Key,  one  diapason,
one  word.  In  all  the  sacred  books,  the  Veda  of  the  Brahmins,  the
Paranas  of  Siva  and  Vishnu,  the  Koran  of  the  Mohammedans,  the
Zend-Avesta  of  the  Parsees,  the  Tripitika  of  the  Buddhist,  the  main
diapason  with  one  refrain  and  one  voice  is  this ;  Salvation  of  the  Soul
is  by  works.  They  all  say.  Salvation  must  be  purchased,  bought  with
a  price,  the  sole  price  the  ripening  and  growth  of  the  Soul  through
one's  own  works.

What  we  need,  in  these  eventful  days,  is  not  a  dull  uniformity  of
thinking,  but  a  league  and  union  of  different  minds  for  a  predeter-
mined conquest  for  Truth  Absolute;  a  religion,  a  church  without
dogma  or  intolerance,  a  church  of  the  Divine  Fragments^  a  temple  for
Divine  Humanity.

The  age  demands  a  Spiritual  rostrum,  free  from  all  the  prejudices
of  the  past,  and  it  can  only  be  maintained  in  so  far  as  it  becomes  the
vanguard  of  Spiritual  things.

The  world  needs  help  and  the  Light  of  Truth,  irrespective  of  all
creed  or  dogma.  Struggling  mortals  need  help  to  attain  a  higher
Spiritual  life,  and  greater  peace  to  their  Souls.  Should  not  the  tear-
ing-down period  give  way  to  that  of  building  up  ?  We  cannot  exist
on  pulling  other  institutions  down.  We  must  build  for  ourselves.
Make  religion  broad.  Let  it  draw  into  its  current  representatives  of
every  belief  and  every  creed.  Make  its  inspirations  like  the  bounte-
ous river  of  life,  and  mould  its  members  into  one  common  brother-
hood, but  in  all  good  works  use  charity,  deal  justly,  build  wisely,  and
our  cause  will  prosper  according  to  the  abundance  of  our  faith  and
the  purity  and  elevation  of  our  work.


132      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

No  one  poor  weak  piece  of  human  clay  has  the  right  to  dictate
the  road  to  immortality  or  sit  in  judgment  on  a  fellow-being,  and
none  has  a  right  to  think  a  thing  true  simply  because  he  wants  it  so.

He  who  claims  to  have  the  whole  truth  in  any  direction  closes
the  door  to  the  reception  of  more  light  and  truth  in  that  direction.

Human  character  is  the  Key  to  everything  in  life ;  man  stands  out
alone  as  a  goal ;  everything  in  life  builds  up  to  man,  and  then  beyond ;
not  externally,  but  having  reached  man,  the  developmentgoes  on  within.
Man  must  be  developed  out  of  life.

£very  individual  possesses  certain  inalienable  rights  of  which  he
cannot  be  justly  divested  by  any  act  of  his  own,  nor  can  any  other
individual,  society,  or  government  deprive  a  person  of  or  trespass
upon  such  rights  without  committing  a  crime  against  such  person.
Among  these  inalienable  rights,  the  first  in  time  and  importance  to
the  individual  is  the  prenatal  right  to  be  well  bom^  free  from  all
ffereditary  tendencies  to  disease  of  body,  mental  aberrations,  or
iDoral  obliquities.  This  call  rises  from  millions  of  suffering  children
the  divine  right  to  be  well  bom.

This  enfant  terrible  of  the  present  age  and  time  proclaims  the
immutable  law  of  Heredity.  We  need  a  religion  that  will  make  it  a
duty  to  see  that  our  future  men  and  women  are  as  well  bom  as  our
domestic  animals,  in  the  breeding  of  which  more  care  is  now  taken
than  the  human  race  obtains,  for  circumstances  are  the  mould  in
which  characters  are  mn.

''  A  woman  who  loathes  or  fears  her  husband  will  find  that  the
children  bom  to  her  while  living  in  a  chronic  state  of  terror  or
loathing  will  inevitably  be  fretful  and  troublesome  in  their  infancy,
disobedient  and  unmanageable  during  adolescence,  and  most  likely
riotous,  treacherous,  and  criminal  in  their  maturity.''

A  very  lovely  and  high-bred  lady,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  have
a  son  hanged  for  murder,  once  said  to  us :  The  crime  of  my  boy  was
the  legitimate  outgrowth  of  my  own  criminal  weakness  in  living  with
his  father,  whose  violent  passions  made  my  life  a  torture ;  too  much
the  slave  of  my  social  position  to  give  food  for  gossip  or  scandal  by
leaving  him,  even  while  I  hated  him  as  bitterly  as  I  feared  him,  for
many  years  previous  to  his  death  I  never  saw  him  leave  the  house
without  an  involuntary  mental  prayer  that  he  might  not  live  to  return.

For  years  this  poor  lady,  as  shown  by  her  confession  to  us,  was  a
murderer  at  heart,  and  transmitted  to  her  child  the  character  that
led  to  his  death  upon  the  gallows.

Another  woman,  educated  and  well  connectedy  who  had  brought


A  world's  religion.  133

her  husband  a  large  fortune,  found  him  to  be  so  penurious  as  not
to  be  willing  to  allow  her  the  necessaries  of  life,  although  he
spent  money  without  stint  in  the  gratification  of  his  own  tastes  and
vices.

**  When  I  was  about  to  become  a  mother,"  said  she,  "  my  husband
refused  me  money  even  to  provide  necessaries  incident  to  my  condi-
tion, and  had  I  not  risen  from  my  bed  after  he  was  asleep  at  night
and  taken  the  money  I  needed  by  stealth,  from  his  pocket-book,  my
boy  would  not  have  had  a  single  garment  at  his  birth."

This  communication  was  made  to  us  by  a  broken-hearted  mother,
whose  young  son  (detected  in  stealing  from  his  employer)  we  were
endeavoring  to  save  from  the  legitimate  consequences  of  his  crime.
This  boy,  in  spite  of  light,  intellect,  and  high  culture,  had,  we  after-
ward learned,  been  an  inveterate  thief  from  infancy,  and  could  no
more  withhold  his  hands  from  that  which  pleased  him  than  he  could
prevent  his  ears  from  receiving  sweet  sounds,  or  his  eyes  from  roving
over  the  scenes  that  delight  them.

^  Had  I  known  anything  of  the  laws  governing  Hereditary  trans-
mission," said  the  mother,  "  I  would  have  wrapped  my  baby  in
swaddling  clothes  and  laid  him  in  a  manger,  or  have  taken  him  to
the  nearest  stream  and  cast  him  in,  rather  than  to  have  stamped  upon
him,  by  prenatal  impression,  a  character  that  will  forever  make
honest  living  impossible  to  him."

A  woman,  of  course,  cannot  control  the  proclivities  of  a  vicious
husband,  or  even  her  children,  altogether  from  taint  inherited  from
the  father ;  but  all  women  can  understand  that  criminal  or  dishonor-
able impulses  entertained  unchecked  by  themselves  are  likely  to  be
reproduced  in  their  offspring  and  bring  them  to  grief  and  shame.
We  do  not  believe,  at  this  stage  of  the  world's  history,  that  any
intelligent  man  or  woman  can  seriously  doubt  that  the  evil  traits  of
parents  are  transmitted  to  their  children  just  as  frequently  as  are
their  virtues  and  features.

If  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  parents  are  virtuous,  as  a
rule  we  may  look  in  vain  through  pauper  or  criminal  lists  for  their
descendants.  We  have  Christ's  own  words  as  authority  for  believing
**  a  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruits,  neither  can  a  corrupt  tree
bring  forth  good  fruit."  The  old  adage  *'  blood  will  tell "  is  but  a
more  terse  rendering  of  a  still  older  scriptural  warning :  ''  The  sins
of  the  parents  shall  be  visited  upon  their  children,  unto  the  third  and
fourth  generation."

Travellers  in  Lombardy  are  invariably  struck  with  the  astonishing


134      7HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

number  of  deformed  persons  to  be  seen  in  that  province.  Ever^
where  the  eye  falls  upon  dwarfs,  cripples,  hunchbacks,  and  such
unfortunates,  of  both  sexes.  This  is  said  to  be  the  result  of  marriages
within  the  forbidden  degrees  of  kinship.  In  Lombardy  first  cousins
usually  wed  each  other,  and  uncles  and  nieces  frequently  live  together
in  marital  relations.  The  ofiEspring  of  these  unions  are  apt  to  be  all
wrong  in  some  way,  and  the  nuisance  is  further  aggravated  by  the
fact  that  the  deformities  intermarry,  begetting  others  like  themselves.
Thus  the  people  are  fast  being  transformed  into  a  race  of  mon-
strosities.

The  coming  religion  must  of  necessity  be  one  of  perfect  charity,
pure  love,  and  unfaltering  faith,  with  a  divinely  trusting  hope  and  a
belief  that  can  be  demonstrated  beyond  a  doubt.  Based  upon  such
a  safe  foundation,  with  the  assured  aid  of  all  the  good  of  past  and
present  time,  shall  not  such  a  union  of  spiritual  strength  work
wonders  indeed  ?

A  charity  that  gives  to  each  a  perfect  right  to  individual  belief,
ready  and  willing  to  take  those  who  differ  by  the  hand  in  all  har-
mony, and  listen  to  their  mode  of  thought  in  brotherly  good  faith  and
feeling ;

A  love  so  pure  that  *'  an  injury  to  one  is  the  concern  of  all " ;
that  each  shall  help  bear  the  others'  burden,  thus  lightening  sorrows
and  sharing  together  all  joys ;  every  heart  shall  be  ready  to  respond
to  those  in  need,  poverty,  and  sickness,  or  to  rejoice  with  the  happy
and  prosperous ;

A  faith  made  sure  by  more  than  promises;  by  actual  words  of
cheer  from  departed  friends;  by  the  sight  of  beloved  ones  gone
before;  that  is  able  to  be  fully  demonstrated  by  science  and  phi-
losophy as  well  as  fact.

A  blessed  hope,  too,  that  desires  good  to  all  humanity,  and  a
Divine  aspiration  of  beholding  a  heaven  upon  earth,  which  would
certainly  be  possible  if  all  humanity  earnestly  endeavored  to  be
unselfish,  honest,  pure,  intelligent,  just,  and  industrious,  believing  in
the  fatherhood  of  God  and  brotherhood  of  man.  Then  will  every
true  man  and  woman  feel  to  say  and  each  new  day  practise,  ''The
world  is  my  Country,  and  to  do  good  my  religion."

We  need  a  religion  in  which  the  grand  conception  of  fdth  of  a
Socrates  and  the  loving  tenderness  of  a  Christ  may  be  actualized
without  fear  of  poison  cup  or  bloody  cross.

A  religion  in  which  every  man  is  free  to  develop  and  grow  his
Spiritual  life  and  utter  his  best  thoughts.


A    WORLDS    RELIGION.  1 35

A  religion  in  which  we  behold  the  fires  of  the  old  hell  quenched,
and  God's  great  Love  made  so  manifest  that  the  meanest  wretch  in
all  the  world,  if  penitent,  may  hope  through  his  own  good  deeds  to
win  another  chance.

A  new  religion,  in  which  the  voiceless  darkness  of  death  shall  be
dispelled  by  the  voices  of  the  so-called  dead  and  awakened  by  joy-
ous welcomes  of  love  to  a  land  of  light  and  everlasting  day,  while
across  the  starry  spaces  golden  threads  of  sweet  messages  from  those
we  love  make  a  reunion  of  eternity.

A  new  religion,  in  which  the  cry  of  the  oppressed  gains  a  hear-
ing; where  money  b  no  longer  the  open  sesame^  infallible  over  all,
while  goodness  and  moral  worth  stand  at  the  door  and  vainly  knock.

A  religion  where  the  new  birth  called  death  reveals  man  as  a
living  Soul  in  Spirit,  still  marching  onward  and  upward,  so  that  the
possible  greatness  in  human  nature  shall  yet  be  rounded  out  into  a
divine  reality.

A  new  religion  that  shows  all  men  that  when  we  pass  from  the
border  lines  of  life  and  this  present,  the  truth  of  the  future  means  to
man  a  continuation  of  growth ;  a  perpetuation  of  all  purer  and  nobler
joys,  and  an  eternity  of  pure  Love.

A  world's  religion  that  has  Justice,  Mercy,  and  Love  for  those  who
bear  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day  in  honest  toil.

The  labor  question  is  a  deeply  religious  one.  The  clergy  are  hap-
pily coming  to  a  keen  realization  of  this  fact.  Every  man  who  would
turn  back  the  threatening  drift  toward  civil  war  must  labor  for  the
substitution  of  co-operative  compromise,  through  peaceable  arbitra-
tion, in  place  of  the  barbarous  law  of  retaliation  now  threatening  the
peace  and  safety  of  society.  If  there  is  not  religion,  learning,  and
sense  enough  among  us  to  keep  this  malignant  ulcer,  a  settled  war  of
classes,  from  seating  itself  upon  the  body  of  society,  the  days  of  the
Republic  are  numbered.  But  it  will  be  many  a  day  yet  before  the
average  citizen  will  lose  faith  in  that  silent  but  powerful  consensus  of
the  best  thought  and  conscience  within  society,  which  will  bid  a  halt
to  imperious  greed,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  violent  sway  of  irrespon-
sible brute  force,  on  the  other.

Never  was  the  line  which  divides  the  rich  from  the  poor  more
rigidly  marked  than  now.  Side  by  side  with  the  man  of  wealth,
encased  in  sealskin  overcoat,  with  gloves  and  hat  to  match,  walks  the
poor  devil  in  shabby  coat  and  fluttering  trousers,  with  broken  shoes,
shivering  from  head  to  foot.  The  palaces  of  the  rich  absolutely  blaze
in  the  electric  light  with  regal  sumptuousness,  and  the  nuserable  tene-


136  THE   HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS   THE  THRESHOLD.

ments  of  the  very  poor  are  made  more  comfortless  than  ever  by  the
icy  winds  that  penetrate  unguarded  doors  and  windows.

Society,  says  Science,  coolly,  with  slippered  feet  before  its  open
fire,  is  a  struggle  for  existence,  the  issue  of  which  is  the  survival  of
the  fittest  Let  Science  stop  a  little  and  ponder  that  the  survival  of
the  fittest  means  also  the  despair  and  death  of  the  unfittest  Struggle
for  existence  I  Survival  of  the  fittest  I  Oh,  brothers  I  is  a  great  city
only  a  great  jungle  ?  Are  men  and  women  only  beasts  of  burden  or
beasts  of  prey  ?    God  forbid  I

The  contrast  between  the  conduct  of  some  of  our  overpaid,  high-
toned  fashionable  ministers  and  the  self-abnegating  mbsionary  work
done  by  the  street  preachers  who  harangue  throngs  of  men  upon  our
docks,  and  those  who  occupy  the  steps  of  the  City  Hall,  Sunday  in
and  Sunday  out,  paralleled  as  it  b  with  the  ceaseless  endeavor  of  the
same  strain  of  Roman  Catholic  clergy,  is  not  to  be  mentioned  in  the
same  day,  not  to  be  thought  of  in  the  same  mind  almost.  The
former  sit  literally  in  the  lap  of  luxury  among  the  votaries  of  fashion,
while  the  others,  imitating  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  seek  out  the  poor  and
suffering,  extend  the  hand  of  helpfulness  to  those  who  cannot  help
themselves,  and  never  hesitate  a  moment  to  help  a  lame  dog  over  the
stile.

That  which  passes  under  the  name  of  religion  b  not  the  religion
of  Christ.  As  we  live,  so  is  our  Christ,  and  such  our  temple  and
form  of  worship.  The  God  that  is  professedly  worshipped  b  as  far
above  the  God  actually  worshipped  as  the  infinite  b  above  the  finite
or  the  eternal  above  the  transient.  The  pure  and  transparent  word
of  Christ  is  dimmed  by  our  earthiness  and  selfishness,  but  the  light  b
constantly  there.  The  perfect  religion  of  all  ages  shines  upon  the
earth,  illuminating  the  darkness,  though  the  darkness  comprehend  it
not ;  and  the  light  b  still  there,  though  its  rays  may  be  perverted  by
the  shadows  of  our  present  condition,  and  the  whole  world  will  finally
acknowledge  the  glory  and  splendor  of  its  rays,  even  as  the  whole
earth  now  acknowledges  the  glory  of  the  light  of  the  sun.

This  religion  is  all  summed  up  in  the  one  brief  commandment  that
we  love  one  another.  In  obeying  this,  we  are  all  of  us  sure  to  keep
ourselves  ''  unspotted  from  the  world,''  and  thus  while  in  it  are  not
of  it  in  the  sense  of  being  evil.

The  perfect  release  of  a  man  from  worldly  chains  will  readily  be
acknowledged  as  the  first  and  simplest  condition.  Whitfield  asserts
that  this  alone,  without  further  need  of  form  or  ceremonial,  will  be
the  final  religion  of  earth.    God  reveab  himself  according  to  human


A    WORLDS    RELIGION.  1 37

needs,  and  the  revelation  continues  to  go  on  as  the  human  state
becomes  adapted  to  the  influx  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  increasing
measure.  We  shall  become  as  the  Angels,  in  the  ratio  of  our  release
from  the  thraldom  of  earthiness.

The  process  b  an  advancing  one,  ever  a  struggle  and  a  new  vic-
tory, with  numberless  discouragements  and  defeats.  It  b  the  Christ-
principle  that  b  at  last  to  be  all  in  all.

The  forms  of  religion  will  in  the  future  be  of  less  account  than
religion  itself — the  reverse  of  what  has  prevailed  till  now,  and  even
now  is  only  shaken,  not  overthrown.

Form  and  substance  will  become  one.  The  manner  of  expressing
it  b  wholly  secondary  to  what  is  to  be  expressed.  One  man  may
formulate  hb  religion  in  one  way,  and  one  in  another ;  but  the  vital
and  only  thing  is  to  love  one  another  and  seek  to  do  good  to  all.

The  real  measure  of  our  religion  should  be  the  measure  of  our
loving  kindness  toward  one  another.

In  America,  there  b  great  opportunity  to  make  a  religion  out  of
the  sacredness  of  the  individual.  In  every  human  being  there  b  a
Temple  of  the  Living  God.  Method  is  simply  an  adaptation  to  facts.
Law  governs  all  things.

Can  this  Republic  set  up  for  itself  without  practising  the  Divine
Beatitudes?  Can  she  afford  to  do  without  a  God?  One  of  the
great  questions  of  the  hour  b,  Does  the  Infinite  £ntity  of  Being,  in
its  primal  condition,  have  an  objective  and  manifest  existence,  fully
developed  and  unfolded  to  its  highest  and  most  perfect  condition,  or
b  its  existence  in  its  primal  state  simply  essential  in  Being  and  poten-
tial in  form  ?

*  Ah  I  if  our  soals  but  poise  and  swing
Like  the  compass  in  its  brazen  ring.
Ever  level  and  ever  tme
To  the  toil  and  task  we  have  to  do,
We  shall  sail  securely,  and  safely  reach
The  Fortunate  Isles."

"You  cannot  grow  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thbties."  Neither
can  you  obtain  brilliant  thought  from  an  audience  devoid  of  zeal  or
aspiration.  Live  thought  is  like  lightning,  it  dazzles  the  eye  and
strikes  the  heart.  Thb  age  calls  for  rapid  mental  action  and  pro-
found thought.

The  corpse  which  all  noble  effort  b  doomed  to  carry  around
lashed  to  its  back  is  Indifferentbm.  The  orthodox  pulpit  gives  it
the  name  of  ''  the  world."


138      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  decadence  or  total  loss  of  enthusiasm  is  the  greatest  calamity
that  can  overtake  human  life.  The  happiest  days  are  those  that  are
commanded  by  a  noble  passion ;  and  youth  is  happy  because  it  has
not  lost  the  power  of  dreaming  great  dreams.

The  life  which  has  forgotten  how  to  wonder  and  weep  and  exult
b  to  be  pitied  indeed.  If  life  has  been  natural,  then  what  touched  it
so  in  youth  should  touch  it  with  all  the  more  power  in  age.  The
early  music  should  then  burst  into  a  chorus.  The  Soul  can  no  more
live  without  earnestness  than  the  body  can  live  without  air  or  food.
Apathy  produces  spiritual  asphyxia.    Only  life  can  produce  life.

"  Whatever  makes  the  past  glorious  and  memorable  is  the  result  of
a  mastering  enthusiasm."

Nothing  of  worth  ever  came  of  either  vanity  or  apathy.  The  Souls
that  have  headed  every  noble  advance  have  been  fully  awakened
Souls.

*'  Those  who  have  given  the  world  its  highest  art,  its  noblest  lib-
erty ;  who  have  discovered  its  new  continents  or  its  new  planets,  or
have  reformed  its  religion,  have  been  those  who  were  strangers  to  all
indifference,  and  were  completely  enthralled  by  the  beauty  or  neces-
sity of  the  thing  to  be  done.  Everywhere  victory  awaits  earnestness,
and  everywhere  victory  waits  upon  earnestness.  Man  is  never  more
joyous  than  when  he  is  under  subjection  to  the  subtle  influences.

''  Then  he  is  capable  of  his  highest  acts ;  then  he  is  most  fearless,
then  most  self-sacrificing ;  then  most  ready  to  undertake  every  diffi-
cult, noble  task,  and  to  scout  the  very  idea  of  impossibility.''

Great  are  facts,  and  figures,  and  statistics.  Bring  to  us  nothing
—  say  these  present  days  —  that  has  not  some  fixed  data;  let  us  have
no  dreams,  hopes,  expectations,  memories :  "  If  you  have  a  veritable
planet  that  you  want  weighed  or  measured ;  if  you  have  a  rail-
road to  survey;  or  a  new  insect  to  classify;  or  a  new  theory  about
germs  and  cells ;  or  an  ore  to  be  assayed,  —  we  will  attend  to  that
But  as  for  poetry,  and  worship,  and  immortality,  and  God  —  they  are
not  in  our  line.''

But  what  is  this  wAicA  Aas  discovered  the  laws  of  all  these  solid,
measurable  things  of  earth  and  sky  ?  It  is  the  Soul.  Upon  what  do
they  rest  ultimately?  Upon  an  idea.  They  are  a  thought  realiud.
But  what  is  an  idea  ?  It  is  that  which  the  Soul  sees.  But  can  the  Soul
see  that  which  is  not  ?  No  more  than  can  the  eye.  These  things
which  the  eye  sees  —  the  atom,  the  flower,  the  tree,  the  planet — on
this  side,  are  objects ;  on  the  other  or  reverse  side  are  thought  Who
will  deny,  then,  that  these  other  ideas  which  the  Soul  sometimes  has


A   WORLDS    RELIGION.  1 39

power  to  see — God,  Immortality — but  which  the  eye  seeks  in  vain
to  see,  may  not  have  an  existence  as  well  founded  as  any  material
form  ?  Let  us  trust  that  the  pendulum  has  reached  the  further  limit
of  its  swing  toward  materialism,  and  is  about  to  begin  its  return.

Or  rather,  we  would  say,  let  us  hope  that  this  too  ready  credence
in  the  external  and  material  as  the  only  real  is  to  discover  its  supple-
mental part,  b  to  find  its  other  half  of  truth,  and  acknowledge  that,
although  it  is  noumenon  and  not  phenomenon,  it  is  capable  of  being
objectively  cognized  by  the  Soul  alone,  that  it  was  thought  before  it
was  creation,  and  that  Infinite  Being  of  necessity  precedes  finite  crea-
tion.

This  it  is  to  lift  the  vision  to  the  higher  spiritual  level,  and  in  so
doing  to  enlarge,  exalt,  and  inspire  it.  And  it  is  only  after  this  way,
too,  that  the  light  of  inspiration  pours  in  over  the  human  mind  like  a
wave,  lifting  it  to  unknown  heights  and  filling  it  with  a  truly  sacred
enthusiasm.

In  this  age  of  immense  intellectual  awakening  and  stir,  the  danger
chiefly  is  that  the  claims  of  the  heart  will  be  either  slighted  or  wholly
cast  aside.  Therefore  no  church  can  be  truly  called  a  church  that
does  not  transmit  inspiration  from  the  universal  Spirit  to  the  individ-
ual Spirit  Never  will  the  mind  expand  faster,  never  be  more  hospi-
table to  truth,  and  never  will  thought  and  action  have  more  beauty
than  when  the  Spirit  comes  in  contact  with  the  Eternal.

**  Slave  to  no  sect  nor  creed
^d  take  no  private  road.
But  walk  with  nature  up  to  nature's  God*
This  is  the  liberty  God  gave  to  man ;
Yet  few  there  be  that  find  it"

The  heaven  of  man  is  the  harmony  of  his  own  Soul.  Then  prepare
thy  heaven  now,  that  thou  mayst  enjoy  it  the  more  in  the  grand  here-
after.

This  life  is  man's  opportunity  to  illuminate  the  Temple  Within.
To  do  this  is  and  has  been  the  prayer  of  all  ages.  When  grand  old
Socrates  cried,  "  I  pray  thee,  O  God,  that  I  may  be  beautiful  within,"
he  knew  the  secret  of  Life.  Also  when  David,  in  his  51st  Psalm,  calls
on  God,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart  and  renew  a  right  Spirit  within
me,"  and  Jesus  says  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,"  there  is  little
difference,  the  essential  element  is  the  same  in  all.  They  all  knew
the  secret  of  Life.

In  gomg  back  over  the  dusty  pages  of  human  history,  we  find  the


I40      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

men  and  women  who  have  moved  the  world  upward  to  higher  Truths
have  not  been  the  learned  priests,  philosophers,  and  statesmen  who
assumed  scholastic  airs  and  adhered  to  dead  forms  and  ceremony,  but
the  deeply  and  sincerely  thoughtful  persons,  who,  filled  with  the  zeal
of  great  conviction,  have  faced  the  learning,  science,  and  religious  faith
of  the  world,  scorning  rack,  dungeon,  pillory,  and  scourge,  and  all
that  hoary-headed  bigotry  and  intolerance  could  inflict,  standing  out
alone,  even  unto  death,  that  they  might  be  honest  with  their  inmost
thoughts  and  convictions.

If  the  devotees  in  many  of  the  churches  of  to-day,  who  complain
of  absence  of  worshippers,  were  to  look  within,  they  would  see  them-
selves like  the  decayed,  standing  trunk  of  a  cold,  sapless  tree.  Empty
of  life,  vacant  and  tenantless  of  Spirit,  they  have  not  kept  pace  with
their  time  and  age.    The  Spirit  of  progress  and  growth  has  departed.

A  Parable.

A  man  was  in  the  habit  of  going  to  mill  with  a  bag  across  his
horse's  back,  with  a  grist  in  one  end  of  the  bag,  and  a  big  stone,  to
balance  the  grist,  in  the  other.  One  day  his  son,  preparing  to  go  to
mill,  forgot  to  put  in  the  stone,  and  when  he  placed  the  bag  across  the
horse  the  grist  accidentally  became  about  evenly  divided  When  he
saw  what  he  had  done,  he  called  exultantly  to  his  father,  saying,  ^  Pa,
look  here  !    We  don't  need  any  stone."

His  father  replied,  "  Stop  that  foolishness.  If  that  were  the  best
way  to  carry  a  grist,  don't  you  s'pose  I  or  my  father  or  my  father's
father  would  have  found  it  out  ? "

Like  unto  that  man  is  he  who  will  persbt  in  believing  a  lie,  merely
because  it  is  an  old  one.

Man  requires  but  one  Trxjth  — that  Truth  Spirit ;  but  one  Book
—  the  great  open  book  of  Nature  ;  but  one  Temple — the  Temple  of
God  within.  Man  stands  between  two  worlds,  one  of  light,  the  other
of  darkness.  Here  he  is  left  to  his  own  free  will,  either  to  rise  into
a  glorious  ascension  or  to  decline  into  a  subsidence.

Modem  Spiritualism  is  only  the  material  part  of  True  Spiritualism.

True  Spiritual  phenomena  are  as  the  sun-ray  of  the  morning  to  the
objective  world,  being  an  enlightener  to  the  unbiassed,  thoughtful
man.  While  the  action  of  the  Spiritual  sun-ray  is  a  new  influx  of
Truth  and  Knowledge  to  the  inner  man,  the  Soul  which  expands  to
the  True  light  from  Spiritual  sources  is  the  true  enlightener  of  the
hu'nan  intellectual  faculty.    This  is  the  difference  between  material.


A   WORLD  S    RELIGION.  I4I

phenomenal  Spiritualism  and  True  Spirituality  and  illumination  and
growth  of  the  Soul  within  man.

The  Materialistic  Spiritualist  lives  by  and  judges  from  phenomenal
appearances.  He  thinks  that  organic  forms  are  the  results  of  exter-
nal forces,  and  that  mind  with  its  rational  faculty  is  evolved  from
external  conditions  of  life,  by  what  he  calls  the  process  of  nature.
He  forgets  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  lower  order  of  form  to  generate
a  higher  one  than  its  own.

But  the  true  Spiritualist,  whose  Soul  has  grown  to  the  illumination
of  Spirit  vibrations  and  Truth,  —  of  the  Divine  Essence,  —  has  a
more  highly  enlightened  intellect  and  knowledge  of  nature.  He
knows  well  that  all  forms  of  life  are  evolved  from  within  toward  the
without ;  that  nature  is  only  the  external  appearance  or  outward  ex-
pression of  the  Truth  or  Spirit  Life,  or,  in  other  words,  Involution  is
the  True  Spirit,  Evolution  being  only  the  outward  expression.

Spiritualism  and  the  communion  with  our  so-called  dead  b  a
blessed  Divine  Truth.  It  is  that  fountain  of  living  water  which  alone
can  bring  peace,  joy,  and  hope  to  the  weary  souls  of  men.

It  is  the  only  assurance  that  we  shall  meet  our  loved  ones  on  the
other  shore.

But,  alas  I  it  has  been  converted  into  merchandise  so  much  that  it
b  continually  adulterated  cruelly  and  pitilessly,  as  it  comes  before  the
public,  thus  losing  the  confidence  and  esteem  it  merits  as  a  Divine
Truth.  Who  will  be  the  Christ  to  drive  these  hucksters  and  money-
changers out  of  its  sacred  temples?  When  will  the  pure  white
lilies  of  Spirit,  with  stamen  and  pistils  of  golden  Truth,  arise  out  of
thb  mud  of  human  selibhness,  above  the  dark  impure  waters  of  the
lagoon  of  jealousy  ?

Egotbm  appears  at  the  present  time  to  be  a  chronic  disease,  sap.
ping  the  very  life  out  of  Spiritualism.  True  Spiritualbm  does  not
make  any  one  a  fanatic,  but  it  is  painfully  apparent  that  its  crude
phenomenon  often  has  that  effect.  It  b  not  difficult  to  convince  the
modem  Spiritualist  that  the  windows  of  heaven  are  opened  for  his
own  knowledge  —  specially  to  and  for  him.  Indeed,  one  hears  on
every  side  of  modem  oracles,  of  mediums  who  have  had  revela-
tions and  manifestations  to  be  obtained  nowhere  else,  and  who  are
more  dogmatic  and  bigoted  than  the  rankest  and  most  antiquated
Calvinbt.  "  You  must,"  say  they,  "take  that  which  b  given  you  and
pay  as  you  go,  and  moreover  fully  believe  all  you  see  and  hear  from
us,"  on  pain  of  a  spiritualistic  curse,  as  arrogant  and  vindictive  as  the
curse  and  proscription  of  a  pope  or  priest     Among  these  phenome-


V

•1


142      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

nalists  one  finds  neither  toleration  nor  charity  for  those  who  cannot
feast  on  barren  platitudes  and  diluted  pap.  £ven  old  friends,  whose
friendship  has  existed  half  a  lifetime,  are  cast  out  in  the  bitterness  of
fro  and  con  of  this  frightfully  adulterated  Spiritual  phenomena.

The  great  differences  of  the  different  bodies  of  the  votaries  of
Spiritualism  bring  contumely,  continual  inharmonies  and  discords.
Some  are  still  trolling  the  muddy  waters  of  atheism,  while  others
repose  in  the  serene  calm  of  Spirit,  on  the  bosom  of  the  Infinite
Love.  A  large  number  stand  shivering  still  at  the  door  of  the
charnel-house  of  materialism,  beclouded  in  the  atmosphere  of  a
whitened  sepulchre,  and  of  an  empty  life.  Others  live  only  in  the
objective  phenomenal  world,  even  condemning  those  who  find  peace
and  repose  in  the  subjective.

It  is  really  lamentable,  too,  that  so  much  absurd  bombastic  praise
of  this  new  era  of  Spiritual  power  has  already  become  such  a  feature
on  its  rostrum,  and  oftentimes  a  public  airing  of  private  personalities
in  oceans  of  verbiage.

Where  are  Spiritualists  drifting  ?  Must  modem  Spiritualists  step
aside  and  permit  others  to  do  the  work  laid  out  by  the  Angels  for  their
hands  to  do?  What  shall  the  harvest  be?  Where  are  the  monu-
ments ?    For  it  is  written  :  ''  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them.''

Intolerance  always  follows  too  great  positiveness.  Then  comes
persecution,  with  her  cruel  bloody  hands,  soon  followed  by  disintegra-
tion and  death.  Whither  are  Spiritualists  drifting  ?  Must  the  golden
dawn  of  Spirit  commimion  be  again  obscured  by  the  adulteration  of
its  True  Phenomena  ?

Must  the  curtains  of  the  night  of  fanaticism  again  close  over  the
world  ?  Spiritualists,  awake  !  The  Angels  call.  Although  man  in  his
narrow  bigotry  may  deny  thy  heritage,  oh.  Spiritualism,  thou  art  still
an  eternal  Truth.  The  Christ  has  proclaimed  thee.  Let  the  orthodox
bigot  turn,  and  read  again  and  again  the  first  epistle  of  Paul  to  the
Corinthians,  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  fifteenth  chapters,  which  but  for
want  of  space  the  compiler  would  gladly  place  here,  that  he  who  runs
might  read.

In  the  Vedas  of  Brahma,  and  that  wonderful  code  in  the  Sanscrit
(Manon)  which  is  claimed  to  be  that  of  Moses ;  in  the  Tripitika  of
Buddha ;  the  Shaster  Zend-Avesta  and  Koran ;  the  Vulgate  Septua-
gint  and  Pentateuch ;  from  the  book  of  Two  Truths  of  Egypt ;  from
the  Cabala  and  Sastras  of  remote  antiquity ;  from  out  all  the  East
and  West,  from  the  North  and  the  South  everywhere,  communion  with
the  immortals  is  proclaimed.


A   WORLD  S   RELIGION.  I43

From  the  worship  of  Zoroaster ;  from  the  Book  of  the  Dead  and
die  symbols  of  Ancient  Egypt;  from  the  deep,  silent  mysteries  of
Eleusis,  and  the  Light  of  Truth  of  the  priestesses  of  Vesta,  with  one
accord  is  proclaimed  the  communion  with  the  immortals,  and  the
counsel  to  mortals  to  illuminate  their  Souls  in  the  higher  regions  of
purer  thought.  All  scholars  have  perceived  these  hidden  truths  of
Spirit  without  daring  to  proclaim  them.  Spiritu,  True  Spiritualism  is
only  the  old  truth  made  new.

It  puts  off  the  dusty  sandals  of  the  ages,  having  watched  the
silent  stream  of  centuries  in  its  ceaseless  flow ;  has  seen  the  rise  and
fall  of  mighty  empires  and  kings ;  has  been  obscured  at  times  by
man's  ambition  and  brutal  selfishness,  and  blossomed  out  again  in  the
light  of  the  morning  of  liberty  within  the  last  few  years.

The  truth  of  anything  is  the  vitalized  life  principle  in  the  blood  of
that  particular  thing.  He  who  destroys  the  Truths  given  for  his  guid-
ance and  light  destroys  himself.  But  striving  for  Truth  and  good-
ness is  in  itself  goodness  and  understanding,  and  man  finds  beauty  is
the  result  of  harmony.  Mother  Nature  presents  no  wrinkled  face
nor  tottering  form,  but  constantly  renews  the  bloom  of  her  youth  by
the  calm  harmony  within  and  without,  while  time  fills  up  the  volumes
of  her  history,  a  living  witness  of  Truths,  of  the  Divine  Economy  of
an  Absolute  Mind.    Truth  is  the  accurate  verity  and  reality.

Truth  is  the  understanding  and  perception  of  the  mind  of  that
which  actually  is.  It  is  the  unchangeable  amid  the  changeable  ;  the
permanent,  unfailing  fixture  in  the  transient ;  the  substance  behind
the  shadow.  Truth  knows  neither  time  nor  sex  nor  relation,  yet  it
holds  in  its  eternal  arms  all  time  and  all  relations.  Its  church
is  the  Universe ;  its  doctrines  warm  and  fraternal ;  its  light  is
wisdom  and  understanding ;  its  footstool  is  Divine  Humanity,  and  its
Temple  will  endure  throughout  limitless  eternity,  when  sun  and
moon  and   stars  and  worlds  go  out  in  night.

No  system  of  religion  can  be  wholly  true,  and  none  can  be  wholly
false  and  live.  A  falsehood  is  a  blank  —  a  cipher.  It  is  the  Truth  in
each  religion  which  has  given  them  all  vitality,  and  the  falsehood  in
each  which  gives  rise  to  their  anomalies.  They  all  rest  upon  a
reality.  They  have  their  origin  deep  in  the  Souls  of  men.  Science
and  Religion  are  born  of  the  same  mother,  but  in  the  years  of  selfish
struggle  and  selfish  theory  they  have  forgotten  their  nativity,  while
they  both  touch  the  sea  of  fundamental  Truth  at  some  point  Man
strives  through  human  theory  and  science  to  solve  the  problem  of  n^
ture,  forgetting  that  he  is  within  himself  the  Enigma  of  the  Universe^


144      ^^^  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

If  religion  were  founded  on  modem  science,  we  would  be
obliged  to  change  it  with  every  new  edition  of  the  encyclopaedia.
All  theories  and  doctrines  would  be  thrown  down,  and  new  ones
built  up  by  our  descendants,  in  consequence  of  the  invention  of  more
powerful  and  refined  instruments  for  observation.  The  scientific
world  b  in  constant  commotion.  The  conclusions  of  scientists
continually  change.  They  anchor  a  buoy  or  plant  a  milestone  in
the  path  of  the  traveller  to-day,  only  to  diange  the  direction  of  the
index  finger  to-morrow.

Ask  the  Hindoo  where  we  can  find  religious  Truth.  He  points  to
Brahma,  and  tells  us  to  study  the  sacred  Vedas,  and  drink  the  juice
of  the  Soma-plant.  His  truth  is  Caste^  and  certain  theories  of  spiritu-
ality, at  last  reaching  the  highest  state  of  felicity  in  somnific  dreams.

Ask  for  Truth  of  a  follower  of  Buddha.  He  says,  in  Emancipa-
tion of  the  Soul  from  the  natural  body.  He  will  tell  you  that  Buddha
revealed  the  sacred  Truth  to  all  men,  and  no  man  need  doubt.

Moreover,  he  will  tell  you  hb  religion  has  more  followers  and
believers  than  any  other  on  earth,  and  therefore  must  be  true.

If  you  inquire  of  the  Greek,  he  telb  you  —  Beauty  and  Grace  are
Truth.

Of  the  Roman — Justice.  Of  the  Mohammedan  —  Faith.  Of
the  followers  of  Zoroaster — Purity.    Each  has  hb  Truth.

Theosqphy  (from  the  Greek  Theos^  God,  and  sophos^  wise)  means
wbe  in  the  things  of  God.  Its  mission  b  to  teach  man  to  control
and  use  his  Will-power  for  the  higher  advancement  of  humanity.
Thb,  stripped  of  mystic  symbolbm,  oriental  phraseology,  and
abstruse  metaphysical  speculation,  b  the  real  essence  and  mean*
ing  of  theosophy.

The  divine  dwells  in  man,  manifesting  itself  in  various  fonnsi
from  the  crimson  cheek  of  virtuous  indignation  to  the  blinding  force
of  universal  truths  dawning  on  the  mind.

That  which  is  divine  in  man  b  alone  the  power  to  recognize  tliat
which  is  divine  apart  from  him.

Any  Philosophy  or  Theosophy  that  teaches  the  expanding  of  the
Spiritual  at  the  expense  of  annihilation  of  ^the  Physical  body  b  not
of  practical  import,  or  good  among  any  class  of  people,  but  b  super-
ficial and  impracticable.

A  people  whose  mundane  spiritual  vibration  has  liad  no  growA
would  soon  reach  a  condition  where  if  the  higher  forces  were  per-
mitted   to   environ,  the  physical   body  would  be  rent  in  pieces.


A    WORLD  S    RELIGION.  I45

Matter,  in  order  to  endure  Spirit  force,  must  grow  with  it.  Matter
being  only  solidified  Spirit,  to  throw  an  overplus  of  Spirit  force  at
once  upon  matter  is  much  like  pouring  water  on  a  hot  fire.  There  is
a  certain  altitude,  pitch,  or  lower  octave  of  vibration  to  which  the
physical  body  must  attain  before  the  breathing  in  and  environment
of  higher  forces  is  permitted.

Aryan  Theosophy  partakes  much  of  the  old  Aryan  religion,  much
theory  and  worship,  with  rules  and  creed,  but  little  true  religion.  Its
truest  followers  adopt  the  primitive  Semitic  theory,  whose  ancient
followers  assumed  that  in  the  beginning  nothing  existed  save  God,
and  accorded  to  Deity  the  power  of  creating  a  universe  by  the
exercise  of  His  will,  while  the  old  Aryan  thinker  assumed  that
matter  was  uncreated ;  that  it  must  always  have  existed.  Therefore
the  Aryan  Deity  was  worshipped  as  Maker  of  the  Universe,  but
never  thought  of  as  Creator  of  Matter.

As  has  been  shown,  the  word  Theosophy  is  one  thing,  while  the
Aryan  Theosophical  Society  is  quite  another.  This  society  is  trying
to  place  in  modified  form  certain  Buddhistic  principles,  as  their
entire  occult  science  has  been  derived  from  the  Mahatmas  of  India.
The  writer  is  by  no  means  antagonistic  to  the  beauties  of  Buddhism
and  of  its  occult  sciences.  But  the  question  at  once  arises,  Are
these  truths,  many  of  which  are  of  Divine  and  exalted  thought,  quite
practical  to  Americans  or  even  to  the  Caucasian  race  ?

Theosophy  calls  for  the  highest  possible  cultivation  of  the  Spirit
and  the  subjugation  of  the  self  in  man.  It  calls  for  pure  lives,  pure
thoughts,  and  noble  aims ;  for  the  love  of  doing  good  for  good's  sake,
and  it  teaches  us  that  an  unworthy  motive  or  a  mean  thought  puts  us
back  in  the  scale  of  progression  and  cripples  us  in  our  efforts  to  rise
to  the  wonderful  heights  obtained  by  those  who  are  ever  vigilant.  A
religion  or  a  science  which  rests  on  such  a  foundation  is  worthy  of
the  world's  respect,  however  meagre  and  mysterious  its  promises  and
its  rites.  There  is  no  such  thing  possible  to  the  theosophist  as  a
sudden  conversion,  a  death-bed  repentance,  or  a  vicarious  atonement.
It  is  a  matter  of  slow,  steady  growth  —  hard,  patient  climbing.  They
believe  that  Spirit  forces  aid  you  in  this  uphill  journey,  but  more
frequently  casting  rocks  and  boulders  in  your  path,  to  try  your
strength,  to  test  your  courage,  than  by  any  other  mode  of  resistance.
To  complain  of  any  misfortune,  to  be  deeply  wounded  by  an  earthly
loss  or  sorrow,  is  incompatible  with  true  theosophical  knowledge.
Not  till  you  cease  to  love  or  hate,  as  mere  mortals  love  or  hate,  can
you  hope  to  be  admitted  to  the  companionship  of  the  good.


146  THE    HIDDEN    WAY    ACROSS   THE   THRESHOLD.

What,  then,  is  Theosophy  ?  Numberless  are  the  misconceptions
to  which  the  word  has  given  rise.  Etymology  does  not  throw  any
great  light  on  it.  The  interpretation  of  "  God-wisdom  *'  can  be  spread
over  a  very  large  area.  Without  following  the  history  of  the  word,  it
may  be  stated  that  the  chief  exponents  of  the  present  revival  of
Theosophy  take  it  to  mean  Wisdom-religion.  Their  interpretation,
while  open  to  no  great  philological  objection,  is  sufficiently  precise
for  all  literary  purposes.  Theosophy  from  this  standpoint  is  synony-
mous with  Truth.

Sanscrit,  Esoteric  Buddhism,  Aryan  Theosophy.

That  a  code  of  morals  existed  six  centuries  before  the  Christian
era  all  unbiassed  scholars  must  admit,  and  that  it  was  a  perfect  phi-
losophy, and  a  code  broad  enough  to  have  anticipated  the  induction
of  modem  research  and  speculation,  is  claimed  by  its  followers.

Buddhism  teaches  right  thought,  right  speech,  right  belief,  right
doctrine,  right  means,  right  endeavor,  right  livelihood,  right  memory,
right  meditation.

Desiring  peace  fervently ;  desiring  power  ardently ;  driving  out
all  earthly  ambition ;  all  desire  for  sensation ;  all  selfishness ;  desiring
only  that  which  is  in  the  subjective  world  ;  that  which  is  within  one's
self.  He  who  enters  upon  the  path  of  power  must  tear  out  of  his
heart  and  his  very  being  all  selfishness  and  ambition.  His  whole
objective  life  seems  to  be  utterly  dissolved.  He  must  live  neither  in
the  present  nor  the  future,  but  in  the  eternal.  He  must  stand  alone,
isolated,  because  nothing  that  is  embodied,  nothing  that  is  conscious
of  separation  in  the  objective  life,  is  for  him.  Nothing  that  is  out  or
away  from  the  Eternal  can  aid  or  benefit  him.

But  it  is  the  Eternal  that  draws  forth  strength  and  beauty,  never
the  desire  for  growth  or  sensation,  for  in  the  one  case  one  desires  a
development  and  ripening  in  the  luxuriance  of  purity,  while  in  the
other  one  is  hardened  by  Ego  and  the  forcible  passion  for  personal
stature.  Seek,  therefore,  only  for  the  Eternal,  for  within  yourself  is
the  light  of  the  world,  the  only  light  that  can  be  shed  upon  the  True
Path.

Buddhism  teaches  re-incarnation  or  rebirths,  and  the  pure  doctrine
of  Karma.  Without  a  thorough  understanding  of  these  two  points  it
is  useless  to  try  to  master  its  philosophy.

The  Initiate  must  realize  the  ten  stages  of  Yoginism  much  like  an
ecstatic  dream.  At  first  there  comes  a  vapory  chilliness,  and  all  the
hairs  of  the  body  stand  on  end.    At  the  second  there  is  an  apathy  of


A  world's  religion.  147

thought  and  numbness  of  the  limbs.  At  the  third,  a  casting  away  of
everything,  a  lassitude  and  exhaustion  of  the  animal  body  and  all  its
members.  At  the  fourth,  a  quickening,  a  fascinating  rapture  and  a
fluttering  in  the  head  like  intoxication.  At  the  fifth,  a  sense  of  the
water  of  life  flowing  back  from  the  brain.  At  the  sixth  there  appears
to  be  a  vitalized  life-force,  like  vapor  or  water,  which  overshadows  and
descends  into  his  being  and  nourishes  with  a  renewed  light.  At  the
seventh,  he  becomes  master  of  a  new  vision,  that  vision  of  the  subjec-
tive world  and  astral  body.  He  sees  into  men's  hearts,  and  hears
the  most  silent  voices,  even  thoughts.  At  the  ninth,  he  finds  himself
so  subtile,  ethereal,  and  rare  that  he  can  transport  himself  at  willy
distance  being  as  nothing.  He  can  pass  and  not  be  seen,  or  poise
and  be  visible  at  will.  At  the  tenth  stage  he  becomes  attuned  with
the  universal  and  Absolute,  being  a  part  of  the  indivbible  voice,  col-
lectively embodied  with  the  Absolute  Lave^  the  Divine  Central  Sun^  —
Spirit.  This  is  the  ripening  of  Soul,  according  to  the  Egyptian  and
Yoga,  the  great  mystery  of  Krishna.

In  these  different  stages  of  Spiritual  growth,  two  are  held  very
sacred,  and  would  be  of  little  use  to  the  American  mind,  even  if  the
compiler  were  not  under  solemn  obligation  not  to  speak  more  plainly
of  them.

There  are  eight  stages  to  be  passed  through  quite  thoroughly  by
the  Novitiate,  before  the  prize  of  Mahatma  Adeptship  can  be  gained*
and  he  who  aspires  to  the  crown  of  Power  this  adeptship  professes  to
give  will  require  a  strong  physical  character  and  fortitude,  of  which
the  vast  majority  fail,  and  retire  from  the  work  in  its  earlier  stages.
In  some  instances  the  strain  is  so  very  excessive  that  physical  deatii  is
the  result.  The  requirements  of  life  being  so  vastly  different  from
the  past  mode,  this  Mahatma  discipline  is  indeed  no  child's-play,  but
mvolves  pain  and  suffering  that  is  to  the  mass  of  humanity  an  insur-
mountable barrier.

The  first  of  these  eight  stages  of  experience  is  called  Yama.  It
is  the  practice  of  certain  bodily  postures  prescribed  in  order  to  attain
a  high  state  of  quietude  and  contemplation,  the  necessity  of  cultivat-
ing which  is  enjoined  upon  him  as  a  means  of  developing  the  moral
qualities  of  gentleness,  calmness,  innocence,  honesty,  truthfulness,
chastity,  and  unselfish  disinterestedness.

The  second  stage  is  called  Niyama.  The  physical  process  is  of
quite  a  similar  nature,  with  longer  hours  of  practice,  at  times  looking
intently  for  hours  on  one  central  point  or  object,  while  the  mind  holds
in  contemplation  the  adoration  of  the  Great  Love  of  the  Absolute


148      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Supreme  Being,  and  the  initiate  is  here  enjoined  to  purity,  cleanliness,
contentment,  patience,  silence,  devotedness,  self-denial,  ever  striving
to  be  exalted  and  illuminated  by  Spirit

The  third  stage  b  called  Asana.  In  this  process,  one  must  learn
the  art  of  controlling  the  respiration  and  circulation  with  long  prac-
tice of  the  Divine  inward  breath  and  its  object  of  inward  illumina-
tion which  secures  a  concentrated  power  of  will  and  meditation,  of
both  the  inner  and  outer  man  united,  which  b  great  power  when
properly  accomplished.

In  this  stage  begins  the  inaudible  pronunciation  of  the  word  OM,
also  AUM,  a  certain  number  of  times.

Now  dawns  the  holy  rapture  of  the  celestial  fire  Gomel,


m  /T^     in


pro.-


The  True  Voice.


The  fourth  stage  is  Pranayama.  Thb  begins  with  the  semi-tranoe,
accompanied  with  profuse  perspiration  and  tremblings,  with  extreme
chilliness,  when  Self-Trance  is  produced.  And  now  as  the  neophyte
b  advanced  to  a  certain  lower  octave  of  vibration,  levitation  results.

Then  the  great  sacred  words  are  inaudibly  pronounced  for  a  cer-
tain length  of  time,  so  as  to  ensure  a  perfect  state  of  abstraction  from
all  external  surroundings.

The  fifth  stage  b  called  Pratyahara.  There  now  ensues  a  more
perfect  control  of  the  circulation  of  the  vitalized  life  principle  between
the  outer  and  inner  man,  through  the  Divine  inward  breath.  The
initiate  now  controls  hb  Astral  body,  so  that  he  partially  dwelb  in  it
He  b  anointed  with  the  sacred  oil,  and  can  repeat  the  different  sacred
names  many  thousand  times  without  breathing,  beginning  with  OM,
rising  up  to  the  unspeakable  word.

The  sixth  is  called  Dharana,  in  which  the  body  can  become  quite
rigid,  with  all  the  external  senses  perfectly  quiescent,  thb  suspension
of  all  the  outer  senses  taking  place  while  the  inner  senses  and  life  are
fully  conscious  and  awake.

The  seventh  b  called  Dhyana.  This  is  the  state  of  ecstasy.  Here
the  Soul  becomes  clairvoyant  and  clairaudient,  and  is  consciously
present  in  a  new  region  of  a  Spiritual  Sun,  or  what  b  known  as  the
Primal  Light,  and,  instead  of  receiving  its  knowledge  from  the  objec-
tive world,  receives  it  from  contact  with  the  universal  Spirit  On
these  lofty  heights,  no  wonder  the  Adepts  prefer  seclusion  and  that
nothing  is  more  repugnant  to  them  than  to  be  forced  to  dwell  among
the  babbling  multitude  and  back  again  in  thb  false  objective  world.


A  WORLD  S  REUGION.  I49

To  the  Adept  the  only  True  life  is  one  of  seclusion.  His  physical
body  is  to  him  only  a  dwelling,  from  which  he  can  pass  out  at  pleas-
ure, projecting  his  Soul  to  any  place  he  may  please,  with  the  rapidity
of  thought  But  he  well  knows  his  little  dwelling  must  not  be  dis-
turbed during  his  absence.  It  b  his  great-coat  which  he  can  put  from
him,  but  which  if  not  cared  for  by  intelligent  hands,  so  that  he  can
put  it  on  again,  a  full  separation  from  the  Soul  is  effected,  which  is
called  death.

He  who  has  not  passed  beyond  Upadana,  the  state  of  longing  for
life,  cannot  pass  on  to  the  more  exalted  glories.  How  can  man  reach
that  state  and  still  maintain  a  natural  body  in  this  cruel,  selfish
world  ?  This  is  the  great  question  before  the  exalted  secret  order  of
Hierophants,  Lamas,  and  Adepts  at  this  hour  and  stage  of  the  world.

The  eighth  stage  is  called  SamadhL  At  this  exalted  stage,  hiber-
nation is  operative  at  will.  Circulation  becomes  dormant  The
Adept  now  possesses  the  power  of  life  and  death,  and  passes  from
one  to  the  other  voluntarily ;  may  place  himself  anywhere,  at  what-
ever distance;  may  make  himself  invisible  or  visible,  and  know
idiat  he  desires  to  know.  By  practice  he  has  so  gained  the
power  of  Spirit  over  the  forces  of  Nature  that  this  little  globe  does
not  confine  him  to  its  sphere,  but  other  worlds  and  other  planets  are
ever  open  to  him.  He  has  gained  the  mystery  of  Spirit  over  all
things.  He  has  found  the  Key  of  the  Mysteries  of  Life.  He  no
longer  cares  for  a  civilization  which  rests  exclusively  upon  intellect.
He  has  passed  on,  far  beyond,  to  loftier  heights.  He  dwells  with
Love  and  Wisdom  in  Spirit  —  The  Absolute  True  Voice  of  the  Per-
fect One.

Yoga  is  the  true  science  of  Krishna,  which  is  that  impulse  and
spark  of  Illumination  when  the  startled  feeling  of  the  natural  mind
on  its  reception  of  the  first  impact  of  Spiritual  Light  is  experienced.
It  is  the  first  revelation  made  to  ignorance,  of  a  higher  and  more
sublime  and  exalted  world  —  the  subjective  world,  hitherto  unknown
to  the  objective  life.  As  the  possessor  of  Yoga  increases  in  power,
so  also  he  increases  m  Science,  Art,  Philosophy,  and  finally  a  power
over  nature  by  certain  mental  and  physical  atmospheres,  just  as  a
young  child  increases  and  cultivates  a  certain  power  of  the  objective
or  animal  life,  as  his  knowledge  and  progress  increase.

The  production  of  certain  phenomena  through  the  unconscious-
ness and  involuntary  action  of  modem  Spiritual  mediums  is  accom-
plished thus.  The  possessor  of  Yoga  remains  conscious  to  all  out-
ward appearance  in  the  active  operation  of  all  Mundane  Phenomena.


I50      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

As  the  Hierophant  or  Adept  grows  and  progresses,  all  the  different
forces  of  nature  become  subservient  to  him,  according  to  the  degrees
involved  in  the  different  processes  of  ripening  and  growth,  until  he
finally  comes  to  know  the  Divine  WilL

No  Adept  or  thoughtful  student  of  Spiritual  growth  and  Spiritual-
istic manifestations  can  fail  to  discover  that  the  Ego  of  the  Spirit  in
all  things  is  something  totally  different  from  that  which  the  natural
mind  imagines,  as  St.  Paul  has  said,  in  i.  Cor.  ii :  14.

These  Eastern  Adepts  claim  that  the  senses  of  the  normal  man
are  susceptible  of  infinite  refinement,  and  that  upon  a  greater  or  less
degree  of  acquired  acuteness  of  perception  must  depend  the  value
of  his  results.  To  attain  the  high  degree  of  sensitiveness  necessary
to  the  perception  of  very  subtle  phenomena,  these  Adepts  claim  it  is
highly  essential  to  train  their  bodily  and  mental  faculties  by  a  life  of
seclusion  and  rigid  abstinence  from  all  pleasures  and  indulgences
that  are  not  indispensable  to  the  maintenance  of  the  relation  be-
tween the  physical  and  intellectual  powers  and  the  dual  forces  of  the
individual.

According  to  Buddha,  man  must  work  out  his  own  salvation  with-
out fear  or  favor,  and  become  reincarnated  as  often  as  his  Karma
demands.  When  he  has  grown  and  ripened,  his  desire  to  return  to
earth  ceases.  He  reaches  Nirvana,  the  highest  state,  where  rebirths
are  unknown,  and  he  has  no  longer  a  desire  to  repeat  himself  in  an
earthly  objective  life.

Buddhism  is  not  a  religion  in  a  sense  in  which  this  Western  world
applies  the  term,  but  is  a  moral  philosophy  which  can  be  grasped
only  through  the  intuition  and  intellect,  and  is  entirely  remote  from
anything  emotional.  It  claims  a  noble  tolerance  and  universal
brotherhood;  free  from  all  anger,  passion,  or  cruelty;  all  extrava-
gance, selfishness,  or  ambition ;  teaching  toleration  and  charity  toward
all  men,  in  majestic  silence.

Buddhists  repudiate  the  doctrine  of  a  personal  God.  They  con-
sider such  a  belief  childish  and  utterly  absurd.

They  teach  that  redemption  is  with  one's  self,  each  individual
being  his  own  redeemer,  and  that  there  is  nowhere  an  objective
heaven,  but  that  they  have  a  pure  moral  philosophy,  which  assumes
the  universal  operation  of  the  law  of  motion  and  change  by  involu-
tion, by  which  all  things,  all  worlds,  and  all  forms  upon  them,  animate
and  inanimate,  are  governed.

It  is  impossible  in  so  little  time  and  space  to  give  a  more  ex-
tended outline  of  the  beauties  of  Nirvana  and  the  doctrines  of  Karma,


A  world's  religion.  151

or  do  much  more  than  allude  to  so  deep  a  system  of  religious  phi-
losophy.

The  great  difficulty  in  the  attainment  by  mortals  of  the  high  vibra-
tion of  these  the  upper  octaves  of  Spirit  force  is  well  known  to  all
Adepts.  Krishna  says,  ''  There  are  but  few  among  the  tens  of  thou-
sands who  in  mortal  form  can  strive  for  this  perfection."  So  Christ
also  saysy  ^'  Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen."

A  man  or  woman  in  the  ordinary  walks  of  life  can  form  no  con-
ception of  the  conditions  required  for  the  illumination  and  vibration
of  the  higher  octaves  of  Spiritual  forces,  but,  like  inquisitive  children,
they  are  continually  inquiring,  "  Why  is  this  ? "  or,  "  Why  is  not
that  ? "  out  of  mere  idle  curiosity.

The  Saviour  yet  to  .come  is  not  a  literal  historical  personage,  but
the  highest  personification  of  Spirit  in  man.  A  Condition  and  not  a
person  is  that  which  Krishna  and  all  Buddhists  look  for.

The  Duality  of  Spiritual  forces  b  most  beautifully  marked  in
Buddhism,  in  the  Mighty  One  and  the  Glorious  One.  The  first  refers
to  the  enlightened  human  intellect  and.  octave  in  Spirit  force,  such  as
is  masculine  in  its  quality.

The  second  refers  to  the  octave  of  enlightened  and  enlivened
human  will,  which  is  feminine  in  its  quality ;  when  both  combine  in
perfection  of  equilibrium  and  attunement  in  a  perfect  chord,  then  is
generated  the  greatest  of  all  sublime  forces  from  the  Perfect  One.
Such  is  the  beautiful  ancient  Trinity,  the  interior  of  all  things,  the
principle  of  Life,  the  Light  of  the  Worlds  in  sacred  books  the  great
mystic  OM.  Any  human  being  who,  after  long  years  of  patient
growth,  has  reached  these  higher  octaves  of  vibration  dwells  no
longer  in  either  intellectual  or  Spiritual  darkness,  but  lives  continually
in  the  glorious  radiance  of  the  great  Central  Sun  Spirit.

OM  b  the  silent  unspeakable  word  of  the  brotherhood  of  Theo-
sophs.    Thus  runs  the  sacred  song  of

OM.

Fhnn  Me  the  universe  has  birth

Who  am  its  Father,  Mother  too.

By  Me  it  is  sustained  in  form.

For  I  of  it  am  First  Great  Cause.

I  am  the  Dual  twofold  Trinity

Within  the  Veds  contained,  which  are  the  inmost  life.

The  inner  light ;  the  mystic  sounds  as  A  U  M  pronounced,

Which  from  deep  love  of  thee,

Oh,  valiant  one  I  and  for  thy  good,  I  breathe.


152      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Of  all  the  angels  I  am  chief  I
And  of  the  Spirits  Master  Grand*
And  those  among  the  human  race
Who  know  the  truth,  that  I  alone
Am  mighty  Lord  of  all  the  earths,
And  mmost  principle  of  Life.

--Wisdom  Cdistiai.  OM.

If  the  highest  thought  and  true  object  of  the  Aryan  Theosophical
Society  is  to  attain  self-knowledge,  and  to  employ  that  knowledge
when  gained  for  the  greatest  good  to  the  world  and  humanity,  then
indeed  it  must  succeed.  But  if  it  is  founded  only  on  Esoteric  Buddh*
ism,  can  it  reach  the  unattainable  ?  Is  it  practicable  among  Ameri-
cans, in  this  land  of  domestic  households?  Must  a  man  cease  to
engage  in  all  commercial  enterprise  ?  Must  a  woman  renounce  her
home  and  her  maternity,  to  devote  herself  to  fasting  and  seclusion  ?
For  this  ideal  ecstasy  unfits  an  individual  for  this  mundane  world.

Are  not  these  requirements  dangerous  in  an  ever  changing,  rigor-
ous climate  ?  Far  be  it  from  the  writer  in  any  way  to  misapply  or
distort  the  grandeur  and  beauty  of  the  doctrines  of  Buddha,  or  the
exalted  Spirituelle  and  Caste  of  Brahma.  These  are  immortal ;  but
the  question  is.  Are  these  doctrines  fitted  for  this  people  ?  Too  much
of  human  life  is  spent  in  preparing  for  events  which  can  never  occur^
therefore,  kind  reader,  hope  and  pray  for  nothing  you  cannot  reason-
ably expect  to  get.

The  great  antiquity  of  the  religion  of  India  establishes  its  prior-
ity over  all  others,  while  extracts  from  the  Veda  fully  demonstrate  the
inferiority  and  insignificance  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  compared  with
the  grandeur  of  idea,  the  perception  and  understanding  of  Spirit,  the
lofty  dignity  and  purity  of  thought,  which  constitute  the  sacred  Scrip*
ture  of  the  Hindoos.

The  Adept  knows  that  by  attenuating  the  bond  between  Soul  and
body,  the  Soul  can  be  liberated  and  can  temporarily  identify  itself
with  other  objects,  animate  or  inanimate,  besides  the  special  body  to
which  it  belongs,  acquiring  thus  a  direct  knowledge  of  those  objects,
which  knowledge  remains  when  once  fully  attained.

There  must  of  a  necessity  have  been  a  time  in  the  long  past
when  the  structure  of  Nations  and  character  of  people  depended  on
Caste^  and  that  a  Philosophy  of  Morals  and  Ethics  should  exist  to
bring  Ancient  Mankind  to  a  higher  sense  of  Justice  and  Equity.
Hence  the  Philosophy  of  Esoteric  Buddhism,  or  Aryan  Philosophy
known  by  its  followers  as  the  Pathway  of  Wisdom.


A  WORLDS  REUGION.  1 53

If  man  to-day  lived  for  Wisdom  only,  would  it  not  soon  nm  into
Caste,  creed,  or  seclusiveness  above  the  world  ?

According  to  Aryan  Theosophy,  which  is  purely  an  Ethics  of  an-
tiquity, it  is  to

Kill  out  all  Ambition ;

Rill  out  all  desire  for  Sensation ;

Kill  out  all  desire  for  Comfort ;

Kill  out  all  desires  of  the  Physical  body.

Desiring  only  that  which  is  within  you ;  living  and  being  entirely
stoical  to  the  outward  world,  and  seeking  only  that  pathway  of  retreat-
ing within  yourself.  Such  a  code  of  morals  surely  partakes  of  more
or  less  selfishness  in  this  advanced  age,  where  the  Christ  Principle,
Ecce  Homo,  unselfish  Love  for  Divine  Humanity  has  Illuminated  the
hearts  and  Souls  of  men  far  towards  a  Universal  Brotherhood  from
out  the  world's  Divine  Fragments  of  poor  humanity.

Therefore  the  Great  Work  yet  to  be  accomplished  is  that  Wisdom
and  Lave  shall  be  the  Light ;  that  the  leaven  shall  have  leavened  the
whole  lump ;  that  the  Seedoi  Soul  shall  have  ripened  into  a  tree ;  that
the  net  of  unselfish  Love  shall  have  gathered  all  things  unto  it

Wherefore  in  this  same  power  and  glory  which  the  jfdonia  had  in
his  Ascension ;  so  shall  the  Christ  be  manifested  from  heaven  before
Angels  and  Man.  When  this  Cycle  of  Creation  is  Completed^  whether
of  the  Macrocosm  or  of  the  Microcosm,  the  Great  Work  is  accom-
plished. Then  will  it  be  that  all  thoughts  and  action  become  con-
trolled by  the  warm  impulses  of  the  heart

The  new  Initiate,  unfortunately,  is  apt  to  experiment  only  for  the
sake  of  the  phenomena  and  wonder  part,  like  children  amused  with
toys ;  but  the  real  beauty  of  the  Soul  growth,  the  illumination  of  the
inner  man,  lies  in  the  attainment  of  True  happiness.  The  fortunate  In-
itiate who  unselfishly  reaches  that  supreme  power  and  freedom  from  the
objective  life  and  earthly  cares,  for  the  sake  of  others,  and  projects
himself  for  the  universal  good  of  mankind,  finds  that  it  is  a  daily
stimulation  of  the  vital  forces  of  his  nature  and  being,  and  brings  his
Soul  and  subjective  life  into  an  activity  that  radiates  blessings  about
all  with  whom  he  comes  in  contact.  This  is  the  true  system  of  the
Astral  Economy,  while  the  senses  of  the  normal  man  are  made  more
and  more  susceptible  of  infinite  refinement  and  lofty  will,  purer  loves
and  truer  happiness.  His  life  becomes  a  breathing  joy.  Whispering
divine  answers  to  the  wooing  breeze,  feeling  and  seeing  the  won-
derful life  all  around  him,  everything  he  touches  b  blest,  and  all  men
are  drawn  to  him,  for  he  sends  forth  the  joy  of  the  immortals.


154  THE  HIDDEir  WAT  ACROSS   THE  THRESHOLD.

The  flesh  itself  b  weariness  to  the  Spirit,  which  soon  leaves  and
wings  its  flight  untrammelled  and  untired,  free  with  the  Love  idiich
makes  the  Spirit  white.

One  of  the  greatest  errors  and  injuries  done  to  mankind  in  these
days  is  wrought  by  the  fact  that  nearly  all  our  religious  teachers  infer
and  permit  their  disciples  to  believe  that  when  the  body  is  laid  in  the
grave  the  man  b  also  laid  there ;  and  it  follows  that  liben  the  organs
of  sense  are  buried  the  sense  itself  b  destroyed.  The  most  sublime
message  ever  brought  to  man  b  hb  communion  with  the  immortab
and  the  full  knowledge  that  he  shall  live  beyond  the  grave.  Spirit-
ual truth  has  stepped  forward,  halted,  and  raised  her  torch  before  the
eyes  of  a  dying  world.  The  grave  b  the  gateway  through  which  we  are
sdl  borne  home :  the  body  to  its  final  resting-place  by  man,  the  Soul
borne  by  Spirits  and  Angeb  to  the  eternal  home  of  all  our  fondest
hopes  and  the  glorious  reunion  of  all  our  loves  and  memories.

Thb  communion  with  our  immortal  loves  speaks  out  in  one  uni-
versal language,  whose  utterance  reaches  to  the  purest  depths  of  the
human  SouL  The  silent,  reflective  man  who  has  reached  the  heights
of  wisdom  and  understanding  awakes  from  his  long  sleep  in  the  dark
to  find  indeed  there  b  no  matter ;  all  b  Spirit ;  all  b  Soul,  whUe  the
shadow  side  b  that  which  we  call  matter.  The  true  and  real  ezbting
entity  and  substance  —  the  sunny  side  —  b  Stml  The  Old  and  the
New  meet  at  last  and  mingle  as  clouds  on  the  brow  of  a  golden  dawn.
The  past  b  present ,  the  present  b  the  future.  Death  b  the  last  act
on  the  stage  of  human  life  and  the  prelude  to  the  lifting  of  the  curtain
of  eternity,  and  man  finds  that  every  atom  of  earth  and  air  contains
the  fundamental  principles  of  the  universe.

Birth  means  conflict.  It  brings  to  us  immutable  experiences.  To
be  bom  and  to  live  is  to  feel  the  sharp  pang  of  hunger,  the  sting  of
pain,  the  shaking  chill,  the  burning  fever,  the  loneliness  of  love,  the
madness  of  hate,  the  fire  of  passion,  the  shadow  of  regret,  the  brief
sunshine  of  joy,  and  at  last  the  icy  touch  of  death.  The  clock  of
Hme  is  wound  by  the  loving  hands  of  the  Infinite  Father.  Man  b
the  connecting  link  between  dust  and  Deity,  an  atom  of  God*s  unit
of  measurement  and  of  the  law  by  which  He  wrought  the  universe,  and
now  balances  the  scales  of  His  loving,  unerring  justice.

Death  is  now  life,  turning  the  true  man  loose  into  the  Infinite ;  and
at  last  poor,  blundering  humanity  drinks  at  the  fountain  of  etemat
youth.

In  order  to  gain  the  power  and  the  resurrection,  the  great  victory
over  death,  nearly  all  Adepts  teach  that  man  must  have  attained  the


A  world's  religion.  155

Magicai  age  of  thirty-three  years.  The  Ancient  E^Q^tian  claimed
fifty.

He  must  have  been  baptized  with  water  and  with  fire,  and  anointed
with  oil.  He  must,  moreover,  have  answered  the  riddle  of  the  Sphinx,
the  trinity  of  being,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  bi-sexual  forces ;  over-
come his  five  animal  or  objective  senses  and  achieved  the  knowledge
and  light  of  his  Soul  senses.  He  must  have  obtained  dominion  over
the  four  elements.  Achieving  all  that  is  implied  in  these  terms^ ''  his
warfare  is  accomplished."  He  is  free  from  matter,  and  will  never
again  have  a  phenomenal  animal  body.

He  who  attains  to  this  perfection  must  be  one  who  is  without  fear,
without  ambition,  whose  desires  must  be  all  toward  God.  It  is  not
necessary  that  he  have  nothing,  but  that  he  care  for  nothing.  Thus  it
is  said  ''  the  poor  in  spirit,"  the  voluntarily  poor,  '^  shall  inherit  the
kingdom  of  heaven."

Only  when  one  has  attained  to  the  height  of  overcoming  Self  and
all  earthly  ambition  is  he  free.  Knowing  that  nothing  is  gained  with-
out labor  or  won  without  suffering,  he  acts  ever  on  the  principle  that
prayer  is  labor,  to  lift  man  is  to  love  man,  to  ask  is  to  receive,  to
knock  b  to  have  the  door  opened.

So,  living,  and  striving  accordingly,  when  he  has  reached  his  final
victory  over  the  body,  with  its  three  true,  inner  senses,  the  process  of
the  ordeal  is  no  longer  necessary.

He  is  Hierarch  and  he  is  free ;  but  until  he  has  undergone  all  these
ordeals,  and  has  freed  his  Soul  Spirit  and  inner  being,  the  Initiate  is
under  a  vow  and  is  subject.  His  vow  is  polarization.  When  the
fixed  is  volatilized,  he  is  free  and  is  a  Hierarch.  He  who  aspires  to
Hierarchy  must  not  always  dwell  iii  cities.  He  may  begin  his  initia-
tion in  a  city,  but  cannot  complete  it  there,  for  he  must  not  breathe
the  dead  and  burnt-out  air,  the  vitality  and  light-giving  principle  of
which  has  been  quenched.  He  must  become  a  wanderer,  and  dweller
in  the  plain  and  on  the  mountains.  Only  here  on  the  hills  and  moun-
tain tops  will  he  find  the  best  repose.

He  must  commune  with  the  starry  heavens  and  maintain  direct
contact  with  the  great  electric  currents  of  life-giving  force  in  the
earth,  the  waters,  and  the  life-giving  air ;  must  recline  in  slumber  on
the  velvet  grass ;  must  roam  barefooted,  letting  the  flowers  kiss  his
feet  and  the  mountain  streams  flow  over  them.  Out  on  the  mountain
side,  alone  with  Mother  Nature,  the  magnetic  chain  between  earth
and  heaven  is  strong.  There  the  man  who  seeks  the  Power  and  his
first  attunement  with  the  enei]^es  of  nature  must  reside  at  times,  if


156      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

he  would  achieve  the  "  Great  Work,"  and  accomplish  his  full  inidft-
tion,  that  of  the  Christ  man.  The  history  of  all  human  Souls  which
attain  perfection,  or  the  Man  Regenerate,  is  typically  illustrated  in  the
fifty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah.

In  that  by-gone  age,  physical  occurrences  were  employed  as  sym-
bols, and  the  failure  to  interpret  the  mystical  Scriptures  by  the  mysti-
cal rule  was  due  to  the  loss  by  the  Church  of  the  mystical  faculty,  or
inner  spiritual  vision  through  which  they  were  written.

According  to  all  the  sacred  books  of  all  religions,  the  Bible  in-
cluded, it  is  fair,  by  the  declaration  of  each  and  by  analogy,  to  sup-
pose that  there  are  other  higher  beings  than  ourselves,  who  are
amenable  to  the  same  laws  as  ourselves,  and  that  through  these  laws
it  is  therefore  possible  for  them  to  be  attracted  even  as  are  human
beings,  by  the  allurements  and  incentive  calculations  of  the  objective,
material  world  of  sights  and  sounds.  As  Spirit  pervades  all  things,  a
True  Magic  is  probable.  If  nothing  but  matter  had  existence,  True
Magic  is  morally  certain.

All  that  now  remains  to  any  truly  rational  man  is  the  test  of  expe-
rience, for  it  has  been  applied  in  every  age  and  asserted  to  succeed.
These  methods  and  contemplative  ceremonies  with  the  dual  forces  of
nature,  we  are  fully  assured  on  every  hand,  have  never  failed,  save
through  the  selfishness,  ignorance,  or  unfitness  of  the  Neophyte.  It  is
within  the  power  of  man  to  discover  all  mysteries  which  he  is  capable
of  understanding  with  safety  and  using  judiciously.

He  who  has  heard  the  solemn  chant  of  the  Hierophant  in  the
S.S.S.  halls  of  the  Two  Truths,  and  that  long  echoing  anthem,  Lama,
''  As  it  is  in  the  heavens,  so  is  it  on  the  earth ;  as  it  is  above  on  the
loftiest  heights,  so  is  it  down  in  lowest  depths  the  Spiritual  Sun  doth
reach,"  and  the  antiphony,  "forever  and  forever,"  will  not  fail  to
remember  that  the  laws  of  harmony  between  the  Spiritual  and  the
natural  have  a  universal  correspondence  in  every  department  of
being.

He  who  has  heard  can  never  forget  that  deep  chant  of  Lamas,
swayed  by  every  emotion,  ranging  from  the  depths  of  vice  to  the
heights  of  virtue :  "  As  it  is  in  the  skies,  so  is  it  on  earth ;  as  it  is
above,  so  is  it  below,"  and  that  the  seed  of  Spirit  planted  in  the  Soul
is  analogous  to  the  germ  which  is  in  any  natural  seed  of  earth ;  that
the  celestial  Angel  is  but  the  outgrowth  coming  from  the  Soul  with  its
surrounding  Astral  and  Animal  body,  just  as  the  ripened  fruitage  and
flower  is  the  outcome  from  growth  through  the  seed,  surrounded  by
moisture,  heat,  and  earth.


A  world's  religion.  157

There  b  also  an  opposite  illustration,  familiar  to  all  who  study  the
laws  of  nature,  that  the  relative  ray-germ  of  Spirit,  that  coming  from
the  Absolute,  descends  from  its  realms  of  primeval  innocence  that  it
may  be  bom  into  matter,  and,  through  the  Soul,  grow  through  spheres
of  ripening  and  discipline  into  perfected  Spirit  or  Angelhood,  is  like
the  little  acorn,  springing  from  its  dark  earth  mould  into  a  gigantic
oak.  Even  so  in  the  Soul  planted  within  the  darkness  of  the  animal
man,  softened  through  afSiction,  warmed  by  sympathy  and  love,  the
tiny  Spirit  germ  of  light  bursts  forth.  Struggling  on  through  spheres
of  gradual  unfoldment  to  wisdom  and  knowledge,  it  is  at  last  gathered
in  as  a  ripened  Soul,  a  perfected  Spirit  —  an  Angel.

The  Ray  which  was  originally  sent  out  from  the  £den  of  inno-
cence returns  again  with  renewed  strength,  refreshed  by  its  planting
on  some  fair  planet  of  God's  universe,  through  its  ripening  into  wis-
dom, love,  and  sympathy,  which  alone  constitutes  an  Angel  of  God.
**  Forever  and  forever,"  says  the  weird  chant  of  the  Lamas,  "  As  it  is
in  heaven,  so  it  is  on  earth."

Swedenboig  affirmed  that  all  Angels,  even  the  highest  that  move
about  the  throne  of  God,  had  once  been  men.

The  only  difference  claimed  by  Eastern  Adepts  is  that  Angels
were  Rays  from  the  Absolute  planted  in  the  living  Soul  of  some  being
on  some  planet  to  grow  and  ripen  into  Angelhood.

What  man  of  thoughtful,  unbiassed  meditation,  who  has  travelled
over  and  about  this  fair  globe,  has  failed  to  observe  the  positive  indi-
cations of  changes  in  this  planet  ?  The  silent  voices  of  nations  who
left  no  history  breathe  through  the  colossal  remains  of  their  ruined
cities  and  silent  temples  half  buried  in  the  drifting  sands,  for  ages
proclaiming,  with  mute  eloquence,  what  an  axial  change  might  bring.
The  great  scars  or  roads  among  the  glaciers ;  the  upheaval  of  na-
tions ;  the  sinking  of  kingdoms  into  ocean  depths ;  the  riven  moun-
t2uns  and  empty  river-beds,  point  in  mystic  writing  and  speak  in  mute
stony  language,  whispering  and  beckoning  away  back  through  the
ages,  in  unspeakable  eloquence,  of  unrecorded  time.

Force,  whether  active  or  latent,  b  co-equal  with  substance.  We
can  conceive  of  neither  without  the  other,  while  both  are  expressed
in  and  by  Law  and  Order.  From  these  three,  co-equal  and  co-eternal,
proceeds  the  universe.  As  in  a  lake  of  pure  water  are  mirrored  the
images  of  things  above  it,  so  in  the  phenomenal  world  is  seen  the
projection  of  the  Real.  By  means  of  the  former,  we  apprehend
the  latter.  Such  is  the  basis  of  the  famous  doctrine  of  Correspon-
dence, which  has  been  handed  down  through  all  ages.    The  aphorism


158      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

of  Islam  is  a  well  known  paraphrase.    "  There  is  but  one  suhsiatue^
and  the  Law  of  Correspondence  is  its  exponent."

Materialism,  with  clever,  cultured,  mocking  words,  may  clamor  for
recognition  by  the  intellect  of  men.  But  weeping  loves  and  holy,
sacred  memories  will  not  let  one  accept  its  empty  ashes  and  frigid
mockeries.

The  wheel  of  time  never  turns  backward.  An  orthodox  can  be-
come liberal,  but  never  can  a  liberal  mind,  which  has  once  fully  real-
ized the  truths  of  Soul  and  Spirit,  return  to  orthodoxy  again,  for  the
rising  light  of  perception  and  understanding  could  not  be  repressed.

Spiritualism  is  non-sectarian.  It  has  its  followers  among  the
members  of  every  denomination,  and  every  religious  system  without
exception  b  becoming  permeated  with  its  freshening  influence.  And
still  it  grows,  silently,  for  Truth  is  mighty.  What  is  termed  strong
orthodoxy  to-day  was  but  a  few  years  ago  the  strongest  liberalism.
Spiritualism  is  not  built  upon  the  Divinity  of  a  book,  but  from  all
time  was  built  upon  the  eternal  rock  of  ages ;  having  for  its  lesson
the  great  book  of  Nature ;  for  its  temple,  the  temple  of  God  within ;
its  truths,  the  Great  absolute  God — Truth  —  forever  and  forever,
without  end.

Without  churches  or'  temples ;  without  schools  or  methods ;  with-
out funds  for  missionary  purposes;  its  societies  broken  up  into  in-
dividual fragments  by  the  softest  breath  of  dissension,  we  find
Spiritualism  propagating  itself  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  grow-
ing every  year,  with  increasing  vigor,  numbering  millions  of  mem-
bers of  the  silent  church.

Turning  back  over  the  pages  of  history,  we  find  the  remarkable
fact  that  at  all  times  there  have  been  men  who  communed  with  the
so-called  dead  and  were  guided  by  invisible  intelligences,  living
apparently  in  some  supernatural  manner.  Men  whose  thoughts  have
run  so  far  ahead  of  their  time  and  generation  that  their  contempora-
ries could  not  follow  them;  silent  men  who  in  that  very  silence
radiated  an  atmosphere  of  attraction  and  peace  or  by  some  strange,
mysterious  power  radiated  a  mentality  that  would  carry  the  multitude
to  wildness  of  ecstasy.

That  there  are  extravagances,  wild  theories,  and  moral  excres-
cences sheltering  themselves  under  the  widespread  wing  of  Spiritu-
alism is  freely  admitted.  Is  not  the  same  true  of  Christianity  ?  Let
us  be  charitable  one  toward  the  other ;  for  charity,  according  to  the
apostle,  is  greater  than  faith  or  hope.  The  spirit  of  the  age  is  this-'
Intellect — daring  to  think,  unawed  by  public  opinion.    It  is  con-


A  world's  religion.  159

science  daring  to  assert  a  higher  law,  in  the  face  of  a  corrupted
society  and  conforming  creeds.  It  b  Will  setting  at  naught  the
world's  tyrannies^  and  putting  into  action  the  private  whispers  of  the
stilly  small  voice.  It  is  Heart  resting  in  the  universal,  changeless
law  of  etemaly  transcendent  Love.

The  Commands,  the  Divinb  Gifts,  and  thx  Spiutual  Teaching  op

Jesus  Cheist.

**  God  is  a  Spirit  1  and  they  that  worship  him  most  worship  him  in  spirit  and
in  truth." — John  iv. :  24.

**  And  I  pray  God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blame-
less."  —  I  Thess.  v. :  25.

''The  spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  of  the  Lord." — Proo,  zx.:  27.

''For  I  long  to  see  you,  that  I  may  impart  unto  you  some  spiritual  gift" —

awW.  1*  *  II.

"  For  he  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  things." — i  Cor,  iL :  15.

"  All  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud.  .  .  .  And  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual
meat;  and  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink ;  for  they  drank  of  that  spiritual
Rock  that  followed  them :  and  that  Rock  was  Christ"  —  i  Cor,  x. :  i,  2,  3,  4.

"  Teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you :  and,
lo^  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."^  MaU,  xzviii. :  2a

Mark  these  emphatic  words,  "  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things
whatsoever  I  have  commanded."  What  were  those  things  that  Jesus
Christ  commanded  ?    Listen  :  — -

Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,
and  with  all  thy  mind."  ^ifotf.  xziL :  37.

"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself."  —  AfoA  zzviL :  29.

"  Have  faith  m  God."  -^Mark  i\, :  22.

"Heal  the  sick."— Z«^  x. :  9.

"Work  miracles." — i  Cor,  xii.:  la

"Your  sons  and  daughters  shall  prophesy."— ^d^  ILs  17.

"Shall  see  visions."  —  Acts  ii. :  17.

"Discerning  of  spirits."  —  Acts  i ;  Cor,  xL:  la

"Casting  out  devils."  —  Mark  xvi. :  17.

"  Shall  speak  with  new  tongues."  ^  Mark  xvL  1 17.

"Shall  dream  dreams."— i<r/j  iL:  17.

"  Raise  the  dead." — ilfa//.  x. :  8.

These  were  the  teachings  and  commands  of  Jesus  Christ  that
were  to  be  "  observed  "  to  "  the  end  of  the  world."

Great  deeds  are  natural  to  great  men,
As  mean  things  are  to  small  ones.
By  his  work  we  know  the  matter.


l6o      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Spiritual  Truth  gives  freedom  of  thought  and  liberty  to  every
Man.     It  teaches  Charity,  Wisdom,  and  Justice — Justice  to  aU.

**  New  times  demand  new  measures  and  new  men/'  says  a  modem
philosopher,  and  it  is  our  conviction,  based  upon  the  analogies  of  his-
tory, that  the  life  and  power  of  this  New  Dispensation  will,  in  God's
own  good  time,  evolve  an  organism  of  its  own  commensurate  with  its
intrinsic  capabilities  for  establishing  a  higher  civilization,  a  larger
liberty,  a  greater  equality,  a  deeper,  broader,  and  higher  education^
and  a  religion  that  shall  de — what  existing  ones  are  not  —  thewiU  of
God  ^*'done  on  earth  (is  it  is  in  Heaven,^*

No  man  or  woman  can  be  Spiritually  ripened  until  he  or  she
becomes  an  earnest  Spiritual  Worker.  We  hold  that  our  Heavenly
Father  has  bestowed  his  Divine  aptitudes  on  all^  that  they  may  labor
for  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  and  the  Salvation  of  Man.  Thus  our
constant  aim  is  to  realize  in  our  Movement  universally  a  "  School  of
the  Prophets."

All  Pilgrims  of  the  Uluminati  and  every  Dweller  on  the  Threshold
have  found  that  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive ;  and  that
boon  of  teaching  others  and  working  for  the  Father,  which  we  have
so  much  enjoyed,  we  long  to  see  bestowed  on  all  others,  so  that  they
may  enter  into  our  joy,  and  unite  with  us  in  that  most  glorious  heri-
tage of  being  pupil-teachers  in  the  School  of  Eternity.  It  is  a  con-
tinuous ''  sacrament "  without  sacerdotalism.

Spiritual  Light  and  Understanding  through  communion  with  the
immortals  has  sounded  the  knell  of  every  despotism,  sung  the  requiem
of  every  form  of  superstition  and  idolatry,  and  enthroned  Reason  as
the  arbiter  of  all  truth.  It  has  declared  nature  to  be  the  only  word
of  God,  and  all  Bibles  to  be  but  man's  fallible  inspirations,  each
adapted  to  its  time  and  place,  but  all  revealing  more  of  man's  finite
conceptions  than  of  God's  infallible  Truth.  It  has  taught  us  to  pre-
pare to  live,  not  to  die — that  a  good  life  in  this  secures  happiness  in
the  next  sphere ;  that  we  must  work  out  our  own  salvation  from  igno>
ranee  and  sin,  as  there  is  no  vicarious  means  of  grace  and  growth.
It  has  revealed  to  us  the  innate  divinity  and  infinite  possibilities  of
every  human  being,  and  that  Angelhood  will  be  evolved  out  of  univer-
sal man  and  womanhood,  through  the  law  of  progress  and  by  personal
effort.  By  its  all-pervading  influence  it  has  greatly  improved  the
preaching  of  the  pulpit  and  the  tone  of  the  religious  press.  It  has
permeated  and  spiritualized  literature,  rationalized  metaphysical  phi-
losophy, and  opened  a  new  world  of  life  and  force  for  the  investiga-
tion of  science.    It  has  inspired  and  elevated  woman,  humbled  the


A  world's  religion.  i6i

pride  and  arrogance  of  man,  and  taught  the  equality  of  both.  It  has
stimulated  thought,  inspired  invention,  hastened  progress,  energized
reform,  inculcated  honesty  and  charity,  broken  mental  shackles,  lib-
erated slaves,  spiritualized  religion ;  and  it  has  proclaimed  equality,
fustUe^  liberty^  and  lave  as  the  inalienable  rights  of  man,  and  declared
their  recognition  in  all  the  laws  and  institutions  of  the  world  as  the
only  palladium  of  individual,  social,  and  national  peace,  prosperity,
and  happiness.

Of  all  the  thousands  of  communications  that  come  to  mortals
from  disembodied  Souls,  the  chief  burden  of  their  cry  is  certainly
this,  vtM.:  that  all  the  Soul  Spirits  whose  thoughts  are  centred  on
self  are  in  an  unripe  state,  and  left  disconsolate  in  that  state  of  dark-
ness, until  they  are  willing  and  strive  to  engage  in  works  of  useful-
ness in  some  way  or  other,  so  that  their  own  self  shall  be  forgotten
in  the  desire  to  assist  unselfishly  in  the  work  of  elevating  others.

We  look  for  that  better  time  near  at  hand,  when  the  Spirit  will  be
poured  out  more  abundantly  than  ever,  and  when  all  of  us — profes-
sional or  otherwise  —  will  have  the  gratification  of  seeing  our  foot-
steps followed  by  those  more  worthy  to  take  the  more  advanced
position.  This  is  our  faith  —  not  in  our  own  poor  services,  but  in  the
laiger  capacity  which  Infinitude  holds  in  reserve,  and  which  must  yet
unfold  itself  in  the  ever  onward  labors  of  a  progressive  humanity.

The  ideal  Spiritualism  is  a  universal  Spiritual  faculty  in  all,  so
that  no  man  shdl  say  unto  his  brother :  Know  the  Lord,  but  when  all
shall  know  Him  from  the  least  even  unto  the  greatest.  Yea!  we  have
the  Spirit  of  the  writer  who  admonished  **  forbearing  one  another,"
and  invited  all  to  enter  a  divine  fraternity  in  which  there  was  "  neither
circumcision  nor  uncircumcision,  Greek  nor  Jew,  Barbarian,  Scythian,
Bond  nor  Free,"  in  which  the  brotherhood  should  "  teach  and  admon-
ish one  another  in  Psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  with
grace  in  the  heart  to  the  Lord,"  who  is  the  Divine  Teacher,  speaking
to  the  Souls  of  all,  no  platform  expositor  being  necessary.

Then  there  will  be  no  need  of  Professional  Mediums,  for  all  will
have  the  light  of  the  Spirit  within,  and  the  outward  manifestation  will
be  universal  and  spontaneous.  And  this  is  not  a  mere  speculation,
for  out  of  it  as  a  fountain  of  Truth  and  a  matrix  of  causation  have
sprung,  and  will  spring,  the  most  revolutionary  movements  in  the
faiths,  practices,  and  institutions  of  mankind  ever  recorded  in  the
annab  of  evolving  time.  Already  have  its  phenomenal  facts  done
more  to  checkmate  the  rapidly  growing  materialism  of  the  age  than
all  the  religious  agencies  of  the  world  combined.     It  has  furnished.


1 62      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

in  world-wide  exuberance,  the  only  demonstration  of  a  post-mortem
existence  extant  in  our  world  this  hour.  This  alone  entitles  it  to  the
fealty  and  homage  of  mankind.  What  personal,  social,  political,  or
national  interest  can  compare  in  importance  with  the  settling  of  the
great  question  of  man's  eternal  destiny.

There  are  organized  intelligences  to  whom  the  mightiest  worlds
of  matter  are  presented  as  objective  methods  of  spiritual  education,
just  as  the  pictured  alphabet  blocks  are  useful  in  the  infant's  exter-
nal education.

The  great  Souls  of  more  advanced  worlds  are  positively  witkin  ike
earth^s  atmosphere  as  mighty  spiritualizing  forces.

Spirit  Communion,

with  its  facts  and  philosophy,  has  done  more  rationally  and  satisfacto-
rily by  far  than  all  of  the  previous  revelations  ever  given.  Until  it
came  as  the  world's  great  spiritual  teacher  and  comforter,  death  was
the  "  king  of  terrors,"  *'  the  most  horrid  elf  of  all  that  mortals  hate  or
dread."

Forty  years  ago  it  was  as  true  as  when  St  Paul  uttered  it  that
"  the  whole  world  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  unto  this
day,  subject  unto  bondage  through  fear  of  death."

It  has  restored  spiritual  gifts  in  greater  variety  than  ever  before,
added  knowledge  unto  faith,  and  brought  a  new  inspiration  and  reve-
lation better  than  all  others.  It  has  swept  the  fire  and  brimstone  out
of  hell,  wrath  out  of  the  bosom  of  God,  and  fear  out  of  the  mind  of
man.

It  has  dethroned  the  Devil,  deposed  the  "  angry,"  "  jealous,"  and
capricious  Jehovah,  and  put  in  the  place  of  both  the  Omnipotent,
Omniscient,  Omnipresent  Spirit  "  in  whom  all  live,  move,  and  have  a
being,"  and  through  whom  "  all  shall  he  blest  from  the  least  unto  the

greatest."

"  Now,"  indeed,  as  never  before,  "  is  brought  to  pass  the  saying :
'Death  is  swallowed  up  in  Victory ! '  "     We  know  "  'tis  but  a  flower
encircled  door  opened  by  a  friendly  hand  to  show  us  those  we  love,"
and  through   which  we  pass  to  our  "  Father's  house  of  many  man-
sions "  or  spheres,  where  we  are  to  dwell  forevermore  I

It  has  been  demonstrated  that  common  air  can  be  so  disturbed  as
to  convey  intelligence  many  miles  to  the  ears  of  other  persons.  We
know  that  by  means  of  a  small  wire  we  can  send  the  human  voice
with  all  its  peculiarities  hundreds  of  miles.  How  diminutive  must  be
the  wavelets  that  speed  from  one  end  of  this  wire  to  the  other  I    The


A  world's  religion.  163

theoiy  b  that  this  is  done  through  the  atoms  that  compose  the  wire;
but  may  it  not  be  done  through  the  presence  of  some  other  atoms  —
some  other  essences  that  exist  in  the, wire  and  entirely  independent  of
it  ?  We  know,  too,  that  it  is  necessary  to  fill  a  wire  with  a  certain
kind  of  fluid,  which  we  call  electricity,  before  we  can  use  the  wire  for
distant  communication.

It  is  unquestionably  true  that  nature  requires  agents,  conditions,
and  mediums.  The  great  array  of  facts  of  spiritual,  occult,  and
psychical  phenomena  that  have  occurred  in  the  last  thirty  years,  and
those  that  are  now  transpiring,  drive  us  steadily  and  inevitably  to  the
conclusion  that  there  is  some  agent,  some  self-existing  universal  sub-
stance, through  and  by  which  all  the  modern  manifestations  of  spirits
or  invisible  intelligence  are  accomplished ;  reason,  philosophize,  and
analyze  as  we  may,  we  cannot  escape  this  conclusion.

The  burning  of  a  little  straw  may  hide  the  stars ;  but  the  stars
are  there,  and  will  reappear  as  smoke  and  mists  are  cleared  away.  If
man  will  only  bum  off  the  underbrush  of  selfishness,  bigotry,  and
habit,  the  natural  flowers  of  love,  the  oaks  and  maples  of  strength  of
Soul  will  germinate,  and  his  garden  of  life  be  illuminated  by  the
Everlasting  Sun  of  Spirit.

Thought  is  a  tangible  substance.  Thought  with  Will  is  a  projec-
tile. Hate  is  a  boomerang  that  returns  to  its  originator.  The  suicide
of  the  Soul  is  to  think  evil  and  hate  with  envy  and  revenge.

Count  each  affliction,  whether  light  or  grave,  God's  messenger
sent  down  to  thee,  and  do  thou  with  courtesy  receive  it.  Grief  should
be  like  joy,  majestic,  equable,  sedate ;  confirming,  cleansing,  raising,
making  free ;  in  purity  of  strength  consuming  small  troubles ;  com-
manding great  thoughts,  noble,  grave  thoughts,  lasting  forever  in
eternity.

Live  the  highest  now,  and  the  highest  will  be  yours  in  eternity.

The  ancient  Egyptians  taught  that  the  Astral  Soul  of  the  mummy
would  linger  about  the  body  for  the  whole  of  a  cycle  of  time  or
around  one  turn  of  the  great  spiral  three  thousand  years.

Hence  the  ever  burning  lamp  to  assist  the  material  Soul  to  part
from  its  earthly  dwelling  and  unite  with  its  Divine  self  or  Archetype
whenever  it  may  be  wakened  by  the  call  of  fire.  The  trinity  of  man,
according  to  Egyptian  light,  was :  —

I  have  given  thee  thy  Spirit  from  the  eternal  ocean  of  Fire.

I  have  given  thee  thy  Soul,  which  is  thy  mind.

I  have  given  thee  thy  force,  Body  or  house  for  them  to  dwell  in.

Trance  savors  of  great  antiquity,  being  recorded  on  Egyptian  tab-


164  THE   HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

lets  as  that  strange  exalted  condition  of  the  priesthood  four  tibousand
years  ago.

Beatitude  is  not  revealed  to  men  until  it  is  personally  experienced.
Men  can  beg  or  borrow  other  kinds  of  knowledge,  but  only  man's  own
experience  can  purchase  a  beatitude.

The  following  was  given  from  a  Spirit  Intelligence  which  fully  cor-
responds with  recent  translation  of  Egyptian  Hieroglyphics:—

The  number  1881  has  reference  to  a  Messianic  cycle,  also  o£  an  astronomical
period ;  both  are  always  found  together  in  Egyptian  symbols  and  numbers.

The  astronomical  fact  is,  1881  was  their  symbol  of  a  period  of  time,  which  it
but  the  physical  expression  of  what  really  is  the  end  of  the  "  Christian  "  dispensa-
tion, and  end  of  a  grand  solar  cycle  of  the  orient  As  Jesus  Christ  was  the  fifth
Messiah,  as  the  sixth  is  now  announced  as  approaching  (by  us)  in  the  dual  form  of
love  and  wisdom  or  angelic  harmony ;  so  the  number  five  which  is  frequently  found
in  the  great  pyramid,  expresses  the  five  points  of  harmony,  the  five  points  of  fdlow-
ship  in  freemasonry,  the  termination  of  the  fifth  grand  solar  cycle,  and  the  end  of  the
fifth  Messianic  period.  The  five-pointed  star  was  the  Star  of  Bethlehem ;  the  sixth
pointed  star  is  the  star  of  the  new  dispensation,  and  means  the  equal  balance  of
the  spiritual  with  the  material  forces  on  earth.  All  ancient  systems  end  here.  The
record  and  prophecy  of  Egypt's  pyramid  only  extends  to  1881,  where  the  new  dia-
pensation  begins.

The  new  angel  is  to  put  on  the  robes  of  mortality  when  the  period  of  prepartp
tion  is  ended.  The  heralds  are  all  ready  here.  Twelve  angels  (twenty^our  bodies),
of  the  order  we  call  angelic  messengers,  will  put  on  the  robes  of  mortal  life  before
the  Messiah  comes.    This  dual  life  will  appear  in  the  period  2250  A.  D.

The  city  of  Ton,  including  the  temple  of  the  sun,  was  the  most  splendid  of  all
the  cities  of  Egypt  (prehistoric),  and  as  there  was  no  other  recognized  power  on
earth  then  than  the  empire  of  the  sun,  now  Egypt,  so  all  the  gold  of  earth  flowed
hito  that  kingdom,  and  as  gold  could  only  be  used  by  kings  (the  sons  of  God,  or  the
angels  of  the  sun.  as  they  were  then  called),  the  gold  was  used  to  adorn  the  most
sacred  city  of  the  living  God,  the  Holy  of  Holies,  so  that  HeliopolU  or  Ion  was
literally  paved  with  gold,  the  metal  being  beaten  into  sheets  and  then  pressed  upon
the  stone  to  form  an  outer  covering.  None  but  sacred  footsteps  ever  walked  here,
namely,  the  kings  (sons  of  God),  the  Oracles  (sons  of  Osiris),  and  the  vestals,  daugh-
ters of  Tsis ;  the  literal  city  has  passed  away  twenty-two  thousand  years  ago,  but
the  spiritual  or  celestial  city  of  the  sun  remains  forever  and  ever.

The  Hebrew  tribes  and  the  High-Priest  receiving  advice  and  com-
munication  with  Spirit  through  Urim  and  Thummim,  was  on  the  same
principle  of  our  modem  crystal  communications.

The  Urim  and  Thummim  means  Divine  revelation  or  the  light  of
Divine  Truth.  This  was  a  breastplate  worn  by  the  High-Priest,  com-
posed of  twelve  stones,  used  in  communication  for  the  twelve  tribes,
a  separate  stone  representing  each  tribe  and  the  guardian  Spirit  of
each  tribe,  interested  in  their  welfare.


A  world's  religion.  165

Only  on  great  days  and  with  much  ceremony  were  the  tribes  per-
mitted to  consult  Urim  as  to  great  and  important  events.  Thummim
was  of  pure  rock-crystal,  and  the  central  stone,  from  which  the  High-
Priest  himself,  who  was  generally  a  high  medium,  obtained  replies  to
questions,  and  only  through  this  stone  or  crystal  were  received  com-
munications from  the  departed.  The  messages  were  usually  given
through  some  mediumistic  person  selected  for  the  sacred  purpose.

In  the  lamps  of  Rosicrudans,  the  fire  is  the  pure  elementary  prin-
ciple of  the  Astral  body.

The  link  which  unites  the  Soul  to  the  animal  body  is  the  Astral
body,  the  memory  and  thought  part  of  us.  A  sleeping  man  is  only  a
mass  of  flesh  and  bones,  a  helpless  being  without  intelligence.  He  is
not  the  true  man.

The  Astral  body  has  let  loose  its  vibrations,  memory  and  thought
for  the  time  cease  to  play  on  the  nerve-fibres  of  the  brain.  The  body
and  brain  needing  rest,  and  the  nerves  refreshment,  the  memory  and
thought  being  the  Astral  part  of  us  looses  itself  from  the  nerves,
passes  down,  and  anchors  to  the  solar  plexus.  The  Soul  has  released
the  lever  of  the  body,  and  thus  we  sleep  and  rest.  This,  which  we
pass  heedlessly  by  as  a  common  thing,  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful
and  remarkable  phenomena  in  nature.

SWEDENBORG.

The  Fatherhood  of  God  and  Brotherhood  of  Man  b  the  sublime
tbocight  of  the  New  Church.

The  Prayer  of  this  worthy  and  excellent  seer  of  the  North  was  for

DlVlNK  HuMAKrrY.

SwEDENBORG,

A  modem  Translator  of  Nature  into  Thought

**  Shall  we  only  trust  what  the  ear  can  hear,
What  the  hand  can  grasp  and  the  eye  make  deary
Shall  the  dearest  hopes  of  the  human  heart
In  our  inmost  being  have  no  part,
Because  we  fail  to  understand
The  movement  of  an  Unseen  Hand  ?**

Many  personal  friends  of  the  author  may  marvel  at  his  venturing
to  place  before  Occult  minds  in  higher  octaves  of  mental  Illumination
the  doctrines  of  any  modem  religious  Society.    Dear  Dwellers  on  the


1 66       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Threshold,  forbear  a  little,  and  please  peruse  the  following  from  the
mind  of  a  Swedenborgian,  one  who  never  drank  at  the  Mystic  Foun'
tain,  nor  of  the  nectar  from  the  viokt  cup  behind  the  Veil,  nor  tasted
the  Bread  of  Athene ;  neither  has  he  spent  five  years  of  his  life  as  an
Anchorite  in  S.S.S.  to  gain  the  Unutterable  Name;  nor  was  he  a
Neophyte  of  Z.Z.,  but  a  simple  American  citizen,  whose  deeply  reflec-
tive mind  became  attuned  to  nature,  and  who  penned  these  truths,
that  he  who  runs  may  read.

True  regeneration  is  a  marriage  process — the  union  of  good  and
truth  or  of  love  and  wisdom  in  the  Soul,  from  which  flows  conjugal
love,  uniting  the  sexes  together,  and  thereby  binding  the  world  and
all  its  parts  in  the  golden  chain  of  the  divine  benevolence  and  pro-
tection. Man  is  not  saved  alone,  nor  woman  alone ;  but  heaven  con-
sists of  Angels  each  of  whom  is  a  man  and  a  woman  organically
conjoined  from  inmosts  to  outmosts,  from  centres  to  circumferences.
This  is  the  marriage  of  the  Angels,  who  have  attained  the  resurrection,
or  the  evolution  of  the  new  life.  This  is  the  central  truth  and  start-
ing-point of  the  celestial  life  now  beginning  upon  earth.  As  the
celestial  church  now  being  created  in  the  interior  becomes  established
in  the  lives  and  uses  of  men,  the  conjugal  principle  will  descend  and
fall  into  every  form  receptive  of  it  with  a  new  and  wonderful  power.
Its  manifestations  will  be  infinitely  various.  It  will  stimulate  the  love
of  truth  in  every  shape  and  degree  which  will  lead  to  the  manifestation
of  good  as  revealed  in  uses.  It  will  purify  the  marriage  relation,  dis-
persing its  evils  like  an  east  wind,  intensifying  its  delights  and  vitaliz-
ing its  duties  by  the  continuous  growth  of  the  conjugal  love.  It  will
inspire  all  human  energies  with  a  new  life  and  joy,  binding  all  good
and  true  men  and  women  with  golden  bonds  of  charity,  and  making
brotherly  and  indeed  heavenly  organizations,  now  almost  inconceiva-
ble, not  only  possible  but  imperative.

Descending  into  the  sensuo-corporeal  sphere  of  the  natural  mind,
it  will  produce,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  opened  to  spiritual  sensation  or
consciousness,  the  remarkable  phenomenon  of  conjugal  unition


Again,  Out  from  the  I^wcr  Firmament,  he  writes :  "There  cannot  pos-
sibly be  an  opening  of  the  spiritual  senses  or  spiritual  consciousness
without  the  risk  of  fantasy  and  delusion.  The  old  proprium  is  so  subtile
and  persuasive,  and  so   readily  seizes  upon  everything  in  its   own


A  world's  religioh.  167

interests,  that  we  can  never  be  too  much  upon  our  guard  in  these
matters,  nor  fortify  ourselves  too  strongly  with  the  defences  of  spirit-
ual truth.  When  a  man  is  open,  the  hells  as  well  as  the  heavens  rush
in,  and  the  hells  take  on  the  spheres  of  heavenly  light  and  sweetness
and  deceive  the  very  elect,  as  was  predicted  in  the  Word."

It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  Swedenborg  had  nothing  of  the
flood  of  light  which  a  century  after  him  has  been  shed  upon  the  world ;
but  that  he  stood  alone  with  such  light  as  he  could  glean  from  the
Bible  and  the  abstract  and  unsatisfactory  teachings  of  that  time.

He  said,  '*  it  has  pleased  the  Lord  to  open  my  spiritual  sight,  and,
as  to  my  spirit,  to  elevate  me  into  heaven,  and  to  let  me  down  into
hell,  and  to  exhibit  to  my  view  the  nature  of  both.  Thus  it  was
made  evident  to  me  that  there  are  two  worlds  distinct,  from  each
other :  one  of  these  is  called  the  spiritual  world,  because  all  its  objects
are  spiritual ;  the  other  is  called  natural,  because  all  its  objects  are
natural."

Spiritualists  wish  to  be  a  little  more  precise,  and  say  that  both
worlds  are  natural ;  but  one  is  physical,  the  other  psychical.

He  claimed  that  the  Lord  opened  the  interiors  of  his  spirit  so  that
he  was  permitted  to  converse  with  all  witli  whom  he  had  been  ac-
quainted in  life,  some  for  days  some  for  months,  and  some  for  a  year,
many  of  whom  were  in  the  heavens,  and  many  in  the  hells.

He  never  outgrew  the  prevalent  idea  of  the  fixed  character  of
future  punishment.  But  let  any  one  read  Dante's  "Inferno"  and
the  "Augsburg  Confession  of  Faith,"  which  represents  the  theol-
ogy of  the  Lutheran  church,  in  which  he  was  educated,  and  which
he  sincerely  believed  until  past  middle  life,  when  his  spiritual  illu-
mination took  place,  and  it  will  at  once  be  seen  what  a  great
advance  he  made.  It  is  in  religion  as  it  is  in  science  —  one  great
man  after  another  discovers  and  illustrates  some  great  fact  or  prin-
ciple, leaving  the  infinity  of  truth  to  be  delved  at  by  others  that
come  after.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  said,  near  the  close  of  life,  "  I  feel
that  I  have  been  picking  up  a  few  pebbles  on  the  beach,  while  the
great  ocean  of  truth  lies  at  my  feet  untouched."  To  crystallize  the
sayings  of  any  one  man,  or  a  dozen  men,  and  call  that  a  final  author-
ity, is  but  to  hamper  and  limit  the  progress  of  mankind  until  they
break  the  bands  and  walk  forth  free  men  and  women.

He  taught  many  truths  not  found  in  previous  literature.  For
instance,  that  when  children  die  they  are  received  by  women,  who  act
as  teachers  and  nurses,  and  that  they  grow  in  stature  and  beauty  as
they  increase  in  wisdom,  love,  and  intelligence ;  but  those  who  die


l68      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

old  come  more  into  the  bloom  of  youth,  and  into  a  beauty  suipass-
ing  every  conception  of  beauty  formed  from  that  which  the  physical
eye  has  ever  seen.  These  truths  have  become  popularized  by  the
teachings  of  Spiritualism.

With  regard  to  the  wisdom  of  the  Angels  of  the  third  heaven,  he
says  their  interiors,  or  powers  of  spirit,  are  opened  so  that  Divine
truths  are  inscribed  on  them.  They  perceive  truths  as  if  they  were
innate,  hence  they  never  reason  about  them ;  still  less  do  they  dispute
about  any  truth.  Nor  do  they  know  what  it  is  to  have  faith  or  to
believe.

They  say,  ^  What  is  faith  ?  for  I  perceive  and  see  it  b  so '' ;  hence
they  never  name  faith  nor  have  any  idea  of  it

It  will  be  impossible  in  the  limits  of  this  chapter  to  give  more
than  a  small  part  of  the  teachings  of  the  great  seer  that  were  at  that
time  new  to  the  religious  world.

The  following  cases  may  be  given  to  show  that  he  had  clairvoyant
powers.  On  the  19th  of  June,  1759,  he  was  at  dinner  with  a  laige
party  in  Gottenburg.  At  6  o'clock  he  was  much  troubled  and  said  a
large  fire  was  burning  in  Stockholm,  three  hundred  miles  distant
He  described  the  progress  of  the  fire  and  at  8  o'clock  said  it  was
brought  under  control.  The  governor  sent  for  Swedenborg  and  re*
ceived  a  full  description  of  the  fire.  On  the  21st  a  message  arrived
describing  it  precisely  as  he  had  done.

Many  stories  are  testified  to  as  authentic  by  the  German  philoso-
pher Kant,  who  investigated  them.  One  is  that  Marteville,  ambas-
sador to  Sweden  from  Holland,  died.  A  claim  was  brought  against
the  estate  for  28,000  guilders,  which  his  widow  knew  had  been  paid,
but  the  receipt  could  not  be  found.  She  applied  to  Swedenboig  for
help  in  the  matter.  He  talked  with  the  spirit  of  Marteville,  and
ascertained  that  it  was  in  a  secret  drawer,  where  it  was  found.

The  New  Church,  as  it  is  called  by  the  followers  of  Swedenboig,
teaches  as  follows ;  as  set  forth  in  a  little  card  which  through  the
kindness  of  a  friend  has  been  presented  for  insertion  here.

What  thb  New  Church  Tkachis.

There  is  one  God,  an  infinite  Divine  man,  who  has  made  a  comprehemible
manifestation  of  himself  to  the  world  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  '*  No  man
hath  seen  God  at  any  time :  the  only  begotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the
Father,  He  hath  bnmght  him  forth  to  view:*  **  He  that  hath  seen  me  AaU  stat  thi
Father P    Hence,  we  worship  God  manifest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ

In  every  part  of  the  Divine  Word  the  Lord  speaks  to  man,  addressing  kim  ms  m
spiritual  being;  hence  that  Word,  instead  of  being  a  mere  record  of  literary  focta


A  world's  religion.  169

and  limited  tinths,  is  a  repository  of  the  infinite  treasures  of  the  Dirhie  lore  and
wisdom.  '^The  words  that  I  speak  unto  yon  they  are  Spirit  and  they  are
life.**

As  the  Lord  came  the  first  time  in  a  way  entirely  unexpected  to  the  Jewish
Chorch,  so  he  is  now  coming  a  second  time  in  a  way  unanticipated  by  the  Christian
world.  His  first  coming  was  as  /A/  IVord  madeJUsh,  His  second  coming  v^zBthi
IVordwiadi  Spirit  By  a  revelation  of  the  "  spirit  of  truth,"  i>^  by  an  unfolding  of
the  Spiritual  or  true  meaning  of  His  Divine  Word,  the  Lord  now  comes  to  the
minds  of  men, "  with  power  and  great  glory.**  "  Howbeit,  when  He,  the  spirit  of
truth,  is  come.  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth."

Salvation  is  from  sin,  and  not  merely  from  the  penalty  of  sin :  and  it  can  only
be  attained  by  obedience  to  the  Divine  commandments.  **  If  thou  wouldst  enter
faito  life,  keep  the  commandments."

The  Spiritual  world  is  not  a  world  of  shadows  but  of  realities :  and  by  the  death
of  our  material  bodies  we  become  at  once  conscious  inhabitants  of  that  world.  Tken^
and  not  hertt  is  the  scene  of  our  judgment,  which  consists  in  a  revelation  of  our  in-
ner or  motive  life.  This  revelation  being  made,  every  one  goes  to  his  ''own
place."  The  good,  of  free  choice,  seeking  the  society  of  the  good ;  and  the  evil,
with  the  same  freedom,  finding  a  home  with  their  like.  '*  Flesh  and  blood  cannot
faiberit  the  kingdom  of  God."  ''There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual
body."  *^  After  two  days  will  He  revive  us :  in  the  third  day  will  He  raise  us  up  and
we  shall  live  in  His  sight"  "  It  is  appointed  unto  man  once  to  die,  but  eftir  this
the  judgment"

In  the  writings  of  Emamuel  Swedenborg  we  have  a  key  to  the  spiritual  or  true
faiterpretation  of  the  Divine  Word,  together  with  such  disclosures  concerning  the
Dhrine  nature,  existence,  and  providence,  and  respecting  the  spiritual  world,  as  are
needful  to  an  intelligent  understanding  of  the  internal  meaning  of  the  Scriptures.

This  noted  Seer  with  an  extensive  spiritual  experience  asserts :  —

Gody  who  is  All  in  all,  appears  to  the  Angels  only  in  human  form,
and  men  on  earth  bear  His  Image.

He  assumed  that  Image  Himself  before  making  man  in  it  The
Lord  is  God  manifested  as  a  man  in  the  universe.  His  representa-
tive on  earth  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  utterance  contams  both
a  statement  and  a  misstatement  of  the  Divine  Economy.  The  truth  in
it  is  that  the  Lord  is  God  manifested  as  a  man,  for  in  the  Lord  the
Fdrmkss  to  the  objective  assumes  a  form ;  the  Nameless  assumes  a
nmH€\  the  T^ffii^  assumes  the  definite,  and  all  these  human.  Much
as  we  admire  this  capable  and  admirable  Seer  of  the  North,  with  his
rareness  of  vbion,  we  must  call  attention  to  the  most  important  fal-
lacies in  these  utterances.

The  first  error  lies  in  the  use  of  the  past  tense  in  the  word  as-
sumed. Herein  Swedenborg  was  dominated  by  the  historical  idea,
tndy  instead  of  recognizing  all  Divine  operations  as  in  perpetual  pro-
cess, referred  them  to  some  past  and  definite  period,  thereby,  in  effect,
assigning  a  historical  character  even  to  Deity.    Had  be  used  the


I/O      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

present  instead  of  the  past  tense,  and  said  of  this  human  form,  '*  God
assumes,^'  etc.,  he  would  have  enunciated  the  Supreme  Truth.

Again,  God's  representative  on  earth  is  indeed,  as  declared,  our
Lord,  but  not  in  the  sense  intended  by  Swedenborg,  i>.,  a  historical
and  exclusive  sense,  for  he  is  always  "  our  Lord  "  and  "  representa-
tive of  God  on  earth,"  in  whom  the  divine  Spirit  finds  manifestation.
And  this  is  not  any  one  man,  but  every  regenerate  and  quickened
Soul  of  humanity  as  the  Adonia.

This  admirable  Seer  has  left  no  record  of  his  vision  of  the  Spirit-
ual Christ,  viz,^  the  historical  Christ,  therefore  we  cannot  but  feel
from  our  own  individual  standpoint  that  his  works  were  not  finished,
for  this  has  been  the  blunder  of  the  Churches  in  all  the  past,  the
abandonment  of  the  True  Spiritual  for  a  historic  Christ,  and  thus
they  have  fallen  far  short  of  fulfilling  their  proper  function  of  supply-
ing the  Soul  of  men  with  the  True  Bread  of  Life, — a  perfect  S}'stem
of  Spiritual  food  for  the  inner  man.  They  have  given  instead  the  in-
digestible stones  of  dogma,  creed,  and  history  in  the  objective  world.
Some  of  the  followers  of  Swedenborg,  however,  take  a  more  extended
view  of  God  and  the  Divine  Image,  as  will  be  seen  from  a  perusal  of
the  subjoined  points  of  doctrine  of  the  American  New  Church,  by
Rev.  James  W.  Reed,  of  Boston,  Mass. :  —

"  The  human  mind  consists  of  will  and  understanding.  That  is  to  say,  all  its
operations  are  included  under  the  two  general  heads  of  loving  and  thinking.  Its
many  and  various  activities  are  rightly  designated  as  affections  and  thoughts,  the
former  comprising  desires  and  emotions  of  every  kind,  and  the  latter  all  purely  in-
tellectual processes.  The  Divine  mind,  being  uncreated  and  infinite,  is  not  a  re-
ceptacle, but  the  source  of  all  things  that  conduce  to  spiritual  life.  God's  will  is
therefore  love  itself,  and  His  understanding  is  wisdom  itself.  Moreover,  love  in
Him  is  absolute  goodness,  and  wisdom  in  Him  is  absolute  truth.  The  two  are
perfectly  united  and  constitute  His  very  essence.  Man  is  a  spiritual  and  real  image
of  Him  just  in  the  proportion  in  which  his  will  is  receptive  of  the  Divine  love  or
goodness,  and  his  understanding  is  receptive  of  the  Divine  wisdom  or  truth,  and  the
two  in  him  are  united.  Or,  in  other  words,  we  ourselves  are  fully  and  truly  men  so
far  as  we  possess,  in  our  imperfect  and  feeble  manner,  the  qualities  of  God.  That
is  most  really  human  which  is  most  godlike.  And  the  reason  is,  as  no  sincere  be-
liever in  a  personal  Deity  can  deny,  that  the  original  Man,  the  perfect  Archetype  of
humanity,  is  the  infinite  (lod  Himself.

"  Recognizing,  then,  the  fact  that  man's  happiness,  as  resulting  from  the  eter-
nal harmony  of  his  life  with  God*s  life,  is  the  very  end  and  object  of  creation,  we
come  next  to  the  proposition  that  such  consummation  is  attainable  only  in  the  world
beyond  the  present.  This  is,  indeed,  implied  in  the  word  "  eternal."  He  who  lives
for  ever  and  ever  can  have  no  temporal  plans  or  purposes.  Here  on  earth  His
great  scheme  for  humanity  begins,  but  it  can  be  completed  only  in  heaven.  There
His  infinite  love  has  its  perfect  fruition.  In  the  grand  aggregate  of  men  and  women
who  have  become  angels  He  sees  His  consummate  image  and  likeness."


A  world's  religion.  171

The  spirit  and  purpose  of  this  book  will  be  greatly  misjudged  if
it  be  construed  as  an  unqualified  onslaught  upon  the  doctrines  of  any
church  or  people.  Both  seership  and  inspiration  are  here  affirmed
and  emphasized  as  predicable  of  the  biblical  writings,  but  not  indis-
criminately. There  are  very  many  different  degrees  of  the  power  of
Spirit  communion,  Seership,  and  Inspiration  not  wholly  confined  to
men  or  to  matters  professedly  sacred.

The  impression  which  it  is  most  earnestly  desired  to  make  upon
the  readers  of  this  book  is  the  paramount  importance  of  self-knowl-
edge, and  the  duty  of  each  individual  to  seek  it  with  all  his  might.
The  most  important  questions  to  every  individual  are,  "  What  am  I  ?
Whence  come  I  ?     Whither  am  I  going  ?  "

Modem  and  Western  science  is  occupied  with  an  examination  of
nature,  but  the  investigation  is  directed  only  to  a  study  of  what  are
known  as  natural  laws,  while  many  of  the  churches  are  little  more
than  social  clubs,  usually  under  the  directing  hand  of  one  or  two  rich
men  of  the  world.

The  church  lives  in  historic  antiquity  far  back  among  the  tombs
of  dusty  ages,  while  Science  intolerantly  confines  its  researches  to
what  is  capable  of  material  proof  by  repeated  experiment.

But  man  is  deeply  concerned  with  an  inquiry  into  facts  which  lie
beyond  the  domain  of  physical  science  or  historical  antiquity.  Divine
Humanity  has  too  often  knocked  at  the  door  asking  for  bread  and  re-
ceived  only  a  stone.

With  this  digression,  the  reader  is  invited  once  more  to  the  con*
sideration  of  the  doctrine  of  Atonement  of  the  New  Church  as  set
forth  by  some  of  its  ablest  teachers :  —

**  The  doctrine  here  presented  is  direct  and  simple.  Even  the  smallest  child  can
understand  it  No  Divine  anger  needs  to  be  propitiated,  no  Divine  justice  needs  to
be  satisfied,  no  punishment  on  account  of  sins  committed  ages  ago  needs  to  be
averted ;  but  the  unutterable  love,  which  is  the  very  Father-life  of  God,  pressing  out
even  into  this  lower  world  of  nature,  performed  a  new  creative  work,  and  provided
a  suitable  temple  for  itself.  The  whole  matter  is  summed  up  in  these  words  of  tlic
apostle:  *God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,*  not,  as  some
have  seemed  to  suppose,  reconciling  Himself  unto  the  world.  No  second  person
of  the  Trinity  makes  his  appearance  as  an  intercessor  on  behalf  of  men.  There  is
no  atonement  in  any  such  sense  as  this.  But  the  one  God  Jehovah,  in  furtherance
of  His  unalterable  purpose  of  insuring  to  mankind  the  means  of  salvation,  appears
in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  end  that  He  may  bring  His  human  family  into
a  state  of  oneness  with  Himself.  At-one-ment,  not  atonement,  is  therefore  the  cor-
rect word.  Not  His  birth  alone,  nor  His  death  alone,  suggests  even  a  small  part  of
what  He  did,  but  every  moment  and  incident  of  His  earthly  life  contributed  to  His
redemptive  work.     That  life  as  a  whole,  not  any  particular  portion  of  it,  is  what


1/2      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

we  ought  to  Taliie.  The  passion  of  the  croa  was  simply  the  list  in  a  long  series  of
temptations  whereby  He  overcame  the  enemies  of  men's  sools,  and  made  His
Humanity  Divine.  In  the  strength  of  that  Divine  Humanity  He  holds  the  powers
of  evil  forever  in  subjection  for  the  lasting  benefit  of  all  who  love  Him  and  keep
His  commandments.

"  The  new  doctrine  regards  all  the  relations  of  man  to  the  Lord  as  determined
by  inmiDtable  law.  These  laws  are  of  the  same  quality  as  natural  laws.  Tliey
exist  in  the  human  mind  as  the  laws  of  vegetable  life  exist  in  the  plant,  and  they
are  entirely  beyond  human  controL  We  know  that  this  is  true  of  natural  laws.
Man  can  only  leam  what  they  are  and  conform  to  them.  It  is  the  same  with  spirit-
ual laws.  These  are  embodied  in  his  spirit  Man  cannot '  make  one  hair  white  or
black '  with  r^ard  to  them.  He  has  no  power  over  them.  He  can  only  conform
to  their  order.  There  are  methods  of  infinite  wisdom  by  which  the  Lord  accom-
plishes His  purposes  of  love.  No  change  could  be  made  in  them,  therefore^  with-
out changing  man's  nature  and  relations  to  the  Source  of  his  life.

"  According  to  this  idea  of  man's  relations  to  the  Lord,  and  of  the  nature  of  m^
the  Atonement  consists  in  restoring  man  to  the  original  order  of  his  nature,  and
consequently  to  harmony  and  union  with  the  Lord.  It  is  the  fulfilment  of  the
Divine  prayer,  *  That  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me  and  I  in  Thec^
that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us.'

**  The  old  doctrine  proposes  to  do  a  work  which  is  impossible  in  the  nature  of
things.  Its  comer-stone  is  the  substitution  of  an  innocent  person  to  bear  the
penalty  of  the  guilty.  But,  if  it  were  possible  to  remove  the  penalty  while  the  ain
remained,  which  it  is  not,  the  sinner  would  be  no  nearer  the  Lord  than  he  was
before.  It  would  not  remove  an  evil  from  his  will,  or  a  taint  from  his  affections,  or
a  falsity  from  his  understanding.  It  would  give  him  no  new  light  or  quicken  into
life  a  single  dead  affection.  It  would  leave  man  where  the  murderer  is  left  when
the  sentence  of  death  is  remitted.  He  is  as  much  a  murderer  after  the  pardon  as
before.  So  man  would  be  as  great  a  sinner  and  as  unfit  for  heaven  after  his  pardon
as  he  was  before.  The  new  doctrine  restores  man  to  spiritual  health;  the  old
leaves  him  as  vile  and  sinful  and  as  far  removed  from  heaven  as  ever.  The  new
looks  to  a  real  change  in  the  order  and  quality  of  man's  nature ;  the  old  to  a  merely
legal  one.  The  new  regards  the  change  as  taking  place  wholly  in  man;  the  old,  in
the  Lord,  though  He  declares, '  I  am  Jehovah.  I  change  not*  The  whole  theory
of  the  vicarious  Atonement  is  based  upon  the  supposition  that  the  law  can  be
broken  and  the  criminal  escape  the  penalty.  The  penalty  cannot,  therefore,  be
related  to  the  sin  as  cause  to  effect  It  also  represents  the  Lord  as  the  executiooer
of  His  own  sentence.

"There  is  one  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  a  vicarious  Atonement  which  would
be  fatal  to  it  even  if  there  were  no  others.  It  is  incompatible  with  the  fundamen-
tal doctrine  that  there  is  but  one  God.  It  necessitates  two  personally  distinct
Supreme  Beings,  who  possess  different  characters  and  sustain  different  relations  to
men.  The  Father  is  the  embodiment  of  a  cold,  hard,  inexorable  legal  justice;  the
Son  is  love  and  mercy ;  He  is  ready  to  make  any  sacrifices  for  the  happiness  of
men.  The  Father  and  Son  are  unlike  in  character,  in  office,  and  in  their  demands
upon  men.  The  Father  is  the  Lawgiver,  imposes  the  penalties  for  violating  His
laws,  demands  satisfaction,  and  makes  the  conditions  of  pardon.  He  is  the  pri-
mary, self-determining  head  of  the  Divine  government  The  Son  is  the  Pacificator,
the  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  Though  nominally  equal  to  the  Father,  he
really  occupies  a  subordinate  position,  and  does  a  subordinate  work.


A  world's  religion.  173

'*If  the  Fither  and  Son  are  equal  in  power  and  glory*  and  in  all  the  attributes
of  a  Divine  nature,  their  demands  upon  man  must  be  the  same.  The  justice  of
the  Son  must  demand  the  same  penalties  and  the  same  satisfaction  as  the  justice  of
the  Father.  The  mercy  of  the  Father,  and  His  infinite  love  for  men,  would  lead
Him  to  offer  to  lay  aside  His  glory,  and  suffer  to  appease  the  wrath  and  satisfy  the
Divine  justice  of  the  Son.  Each  Divine  person  must  demamd  and  accept,  give  and
receive,  the  same  that  the  other  does.  But  this  would  destroy  all  the  grounds  for
the  necessity  of  a  vicarious  Atonement,  and  render  it  impossible  in  the  nature  of
thmgs.  Such  an  arrangement  as  this  doctrine  demamds  is  impossible  except  be-
tween two  distinct  Beings.  There  must  be  two  distinct  and  independent  parties  to
an  agreement  or  covenant  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  God  would  punish  Him-
self to  satisfy  the  demands  of  His  own  justice.  One  person  must  give  and  another
most  receive  the  punishment  It  is  claimed  that  the  Father  and  Son  make  ona
Being,  one  God.  But  every  principle  and  point  in  the  doctrine  demands  two  Beings
who  are  distinct  from  and  independent  of  one  another ;  and  they  so  stand  in  the
thoughts  of  those  who  accept  the  doctrine.  If  the  old  doctrine  is  true,  there  is  no
practical  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  Jehovah  and  Jesus  Christ  are  two  distinct
Beings,  equal  in  all  Divine  attributes.

'"Correspondence  *  is  the  word  used  by  Swedenborg  to  designate  the  relation-
ship universally  existing  between  natural  and  spiritual  things.  Hence  it  is  not
merely  applicable  to  the  way  in  which  the  Scriptures  were  written,  but  indicates
the  order  of  creation  itself.

"Correspondences  reveal  the  internal  significance  of  outward  things,  and
bring  to  view  the  hidden  soul  of  nature.

''All  life,  as  we  have  seen,  flows  from  within  outwards.  He  who  is  the  source
is  also  the  inmost  centre  of  being.  The  life  of  man  is  communicated  from  within,
—from  the  soul  to  the  body,  not  from  the  body  to  the  soul.  Man  himself  is  a  soul
or  spirit,  living  for  a  time  in  an  earthly  body,  which  dies  and  turns  to  dust  when  the
spirit  IS  withdrawn  from  it  The  home  of  the  spirit  is  the  spiritual  world.  During
the  life  of  the  body  that  world  is  not  apparent  to  us.  We  are  placed  on  earth  for
a  specific  purpose,  which  requires  the  full  exercise  of  our  conscious  faculties.  So
the  eyes  of  our  natural  bodies  are  the  only  ones  through  which  we  now  look,  and
natural  objects  are  the  only  things  that  we  now  see.  Yet  all  the  while  we  ourselves
are  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  when  the  change  comes  which  is  called  death,  we  live
consciously  there.  The  eyes  of  our  spirits  are  opened,  and  we  behold  spiritual  things.

"  Not  man  alone,  but  the  entire  creation,  exemplifies  the  law  of  correspond-
ence. Plants  and  animals  do  not  live  of  themselves,  but  into  each  and  all  of  them  life
flows  from  within.  One  species  differs  from  another  not  merely  in  external  form  and
structure,  but  in  the  quality  of  its  inflowing  life.  Each  has  its  own  distinctive  spirit-
ual nature.  No  one  needs  to  be  told  that  there  is  a  vital  and  essential  difference
between  the  wolf  amd  the  lamb  or  between  the  dove  and  the  vulture.  It  is  no
merely  external  and  superficial  characteristic  which  distinguishes  the  rose  from  the
nightshade  or  the  orange  from  the  deadly  upas-tree.  Outward  influences  are
utterly  powerless  in  effecting  a  radical  change  in  any  species.  Let  them  prune  and
cnlthnOe  as  carefully  as  they  may,  the  sa3ring  will  be  forever  true :  '  Of  thorns  men
do  not  gather  figs,  neither  of  a  bramble-bush  gather  they  grapes.  "*

Thought  b  a  substance,  and  who  can  doubt  the  doctrine  of  corre-
spondences so  beautifully  defined  by  Swedenboig,  who  assures  us  that


174  ^H£   HIDDEN    WAY   ACROSS   THE   THRESHOLD.

it  is  the  invariable  tendency  of  evil  thoughts  to  clothe  themselves  in
action  and  operation,  the  very  being  and  shape  of  the  animals  to
which  they  correspond.  The  thoughtful  man  who  has  made  mankind
the  subject  of  his  deep  and  earnest  investigation  regrets  to  find  the
full  representation  of  man's  base  and  vicious  passions  in  the  form  of
the  lower  animals.

Swedenborg  shows  that  Nature  is  explicable  by  Spirit ;  that  the
Key  to  the  natural  world  is  the  spiritual  world;  that  nothing  can
explain  this  body  of  ours  but  Spirit.  Who  can  understand  heart,
lungs,  feet,  hands,  eyes,  ears,  nose,  and  mouth  without  the  living
Spirit?  They  are  useless  in  the  corpse,  but  when  a  living  man  is
behind  them  they  are  easily  understood  and  truly  explicable.

£arth  is  but  the  shadow  of  heaven.  This  dwelling-place  of  the
natural  man  is  but  the  shadow  of  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Spiritual
man.    Nature  is  the  simulation  and  transcription  of  Spirit

The  law  of  correspondences  is  founded  on  the  correlation  of
things  natural  with  things  Spiritual.

Thus  a  visible  natural  object,  which  is  an  effect,  corresponds  with
the  invisible  Spiritual  force,  which  is  its  True  Cause.  Therefore
natural  objective  things  are  only  the  reflex  and  shadow  of  true  Spirit-
ual things.  There  is  a  Great  Absolute  Spirit,  God,  and  things  in
nature  are  simply  His  garments  and  draperies ;  therefore  Spirit  and
nature  correspond.

Nature  is  a  book  expressive  of  the  Divine  Mind,  and  every  object
in  nature,  like  a  sentence  in  a  book,  corresponds  with  the  Love  and
Wisdom  of  Him  who  formed  it.  As  a  printed  volume  corresponds
with  the  mind  of  its  human  author,  so  the  open  book  of  nature  cor-
responds with  the  Divine  Mind  of  the  Absolute  God.  Nature  is  the
studio  of  the  Divine  Artist,  filled  with  the  specimens  of  His  skill.

The  thoughts  of  God  are  thus  expressed  in  nature's  language,
this  natural  life  being  the  alphabet.

There  is  a  greater  totality  and  substantiality  of  Soul  material  in
the  Spiritual  world  than  of  the  body  in  the  natural  world.

When  a  man  cultivates  only  the  material  organs,  they  cannot
recognize  immaterial  things,  but  these  latter  are  none  the  less  real
because  no  vision  or  sense  with  which  to  detect  them  has  yet  been
cultivated.  The  subjective  world  and  heavenly  landscapes  are  far
more  beautiful  and  fair  than  the  material,  objective  mind  can  con-
ceive. There  are  moon  and  stars,  the  glorious  sun,  and  vapory
cloud-land ;  beautiful  flowers  and  waving  trees ;  the  melody  of  falling
waters  and  gentle  murmurs  of  pure  brooks;   and  heavenly  music


A  world's  religion.  175

with  rapturous  song,  —  all,  everything  that  can  delight  the  elevated,
pure,  chaste  delicacy  of  Perfected  Souls ;  radiant  splendor,  magnifi-
cent sublimity,  peaceful  joy,  and  elevated  grace  for  the  refined  and
purified  senses  of  the  Angels.

But,  dear  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  in  these  visions  all  thoughts
of  materiality  must  be  dismissed.

Want  of  space  in  these  pages  forbids  the  insertion  of  further
extracts  from  the  doctrines  of  the  charming  and  highly  cultured  peo-
ple known  to  the  world  as  the  New  Church  Swedenborgians,  people
of  inrur  thought  and  understanding,  but  further  expositions  of  them
may  be  found  in  the  earlier  works  of  the  great  Seer,  and  a  plain  and
very  comprehensive  little  book  by  James  Spilling,  entitled  "  Me  and
Mine,"  will  be  found  of  interest  to  one  who  desires  to  go  farther  into
the  law  of  correspondences,  after  which  primary  introduction  it
would  be  well  to  read  Swedenborg's  book,  published  in  London,
entitled   "The   Future  Life;  or,   Heaven  and  its  Wonders."

The  writings  of  Swedenborg  are  without  question  exercising  a
far  wider  influence  outside  the  ecclesiastical  New  Church  than  among
the  brethren  within  its  fold.  The  great  Seer  who  modestly  and
simply  signed  his  name  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  a  Servant  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  making  his  life  a  glory  of  condescension,  lowliness,
and  humility,  left  footprints  of  sublime  truths  for  coming  genera-
tions, some  of  which  are  like  gems  of  Light.

The  New  Church,  he  says,  is  a  new  state  in  man  and  not  outside
of  him.

The  Spirit  of  prophecy  is  the  life  and  Soul  of  all  doctrine  which
cannot  be  understood  by  the  illumination  of  Spirit.  This  is  the
light  of  heaven  which  illumine^  the  understanding.  To  read  Truth
is  to  understand  from  illumination.  To  hear  the  words  of  the
prophecy  is  to  live  according  to  the  Truths  of  heaven.

All  truth  is  from  good  and  all  faith  is  from  Love  and  Charity.

The  Divine  principle  passes  through  the  heavens  into  the  natural
place  and  subsists  there  in  its  fulness,  when  there  is  an  attunement  of
harmonies.

To  be  in  the  Spirit  is  to  be  illuminated  by  Truth  and  her  atmos-
I^ere,  which  is  being  brought  into  that  state  in  which  Angels  and
spirits  are.  In  this  state  the  things  which  exist  in  the  Spiritual
world  appear  as  clearly  as  do  objects  to  the  natural  vision  in  the
objective  world.

This  sight  to  the  Spiritual  man  is  the  light  of  wisdom  and  truth,
the  illumination  of  prophecy.     Therefore,  to  be  in  the  Spirit  on  the


176      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Lord's  day  by  influx  may  reveal  to  and  instruct  His  children,  through
the  New  Church,  which  is  the  new  state  within  them.

That  Swedenborg  was  thus  illuminated  and  baptized  is  not  ques-
tioned by  Adept,  Lama,  or  Hierophant  In  his  diary  he  hastily  wrote,
the  heavens  were  again  opened  unto  the  earth,  and  that  they  would
never  again  be  closed,  but  the  new  state  in  man  would  be  united  with
the  church  in  heaven.  Thus  the  true  church  on  earth  would  become
one  with  the  church  in  heaven,  finally  enfolding  the  universal  race.

This  is  the  immediate  work  of  Divine  Humanity  out  from  the
church  of  the  Divine  Fragments.

Within  the  portals  of  the  New  Church  the  compiler  has  never
heard  a  harsh  or  unkind  utterance,  yet,  with  kindest  consideration  for
the  thoughtful  men  who  are  guiding  the  Soul  ship  of  this  church,  he
warns  them  ever  to  keep  watch  and  ward  against  the  greatest  of  all
dangers  —  the  exalting  of  speculative  opinions  and  theories,  or  super-
ficial theories  on  articles  of  faith.  The  Temple  of  God  is  within
men,  therefore,  individuals  being  so  different,  no  man  in  the  New
Church  or  state  can  dictate  to  another  the  road  to  immortality.  Tike
Temple  of  God  within  is  not  doctrine,  but  the  Life  of  Doctrine^  while
Law  and  Order  are  always  necessary,  order  being  heaven's  first  law.
Had  this  most  beautiful  and  simple  state  continued,  free  from  the
blighting  influence  of  modem  ecclesiasticism,  how  much  wider  would
the  gates  of  Spirit  Truth  have  opened,  and  how  full  to  overflowing
would  have  been  the  New  Church  of  the  Temple  Within,  with  seekers
of  the  heavenly  light.

O  Church  of  Divine  Humanity,  dost  thou  not  hear  thy  children
call  from  out  the  darkness  of  ecclesiasticism  and  creed  ?

Church  of  the  Temple  Within !  Church  of  the  Divine  Frag-
ments !  Your  children  stand  at  your  doors  and  knock,  stand  knock-
ing far  into  the  night,  waiting  to  be  admitted.  When  once  the  doors
are  opened,  with  pure  and  contrite  hearts,  bringing  to  you  their  o£Fer-
ings  of  Love — the  universal  Love  which  makes  the  Spirit  bright.

Divine  Humanity  !  Learn,  O  man,  to  hum  thyself^  and  walk  with
the  knowledge  of  the  Spirit  within  thee.


A  world's  religiom.  lyy

Sow  ye  beside  all  waters

Where  the  dew  of  heaven  may  hU ;
Ye  shall  reap  if  ye  be  not  weary.

For  the  Spirit  breathes  o'er  sdL
Sow — thodgh  the  thorns  may  wound  thee,"

One  wore  the  thorns  for  thee,  —
And  though  the  cold  world  scorns  thee^

Patient  and  hopeful  be.

Sow,  though  the  rock  repel  thee

In  its  cold  and  sterile  pride ;
Some  cleft  there  may  be  riven.

Where  the  little  seeds  may  hide.
Fear  not  1  some  will  flourish.

And  though  the  tares  abound.
Like  the  willows  by  the  water

Will  the  scattered  grain  be  foand.


S«     Sa    Oa

The  Light  op  the  School  of  the  Prophets,  as  Taught  in  the

Order  of  the  Illuminati.

**  There  is  a  tnfal  Spirit  in  the  flesh  and  blood  which  performs  the
office  of  the  Soul  to  all  mankind  who  live  in  the  outer  sense  or  objec-
tive world.  There  is  also  a  vital  Spirit  of  intuitive  perception  which
is  the  Threshold  of  the  Inner  Temple,  the  true  Soul  of  men  who  live
in  the  inner  or  subjective  world,  and  he  who  dwells  therein  has
entered  the  School  of  the  Prophets.

'^  Behold,  there  is  a  power  of  Spirit  given  thee,  which  hath  not
been  given  to  other  living  things.  There  is  something  added  to  thee
unlike  to  what  thou  seest  Something  informs  thy  body ;  higher  than
all  this  is  the  object  of  thy  senses.  Askest  thou  what  it  is  ?  Behold,
the  Spirit  of  the  Living  God.  Indeed  fearfully  and  wonderfully  art
thou  made.  Strive,  therefore,  to  know  thyself.  Therefore  frequently
contemplate  in  Silence,  that  thou  mayst  gain  Wisdom,  and  let  Pru-
dence admonish  thee.

"  Let  Temperance  restrain  thee ;  let  Justice  guide  thy  hand ;  let
Love  and  Benevolence  warm  thy  heart,  and  heartfelt  Gratitude  to
Heaven  inspire  thee  with  Truth  and  Devotion.  And  the  greatest  of
all  is  Charity.    Therefore,  if  thou  dost  follow  these  few  things,  they


1/8      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

shall  give  thee  happiness  in  thy  present  state  and  bring  thee  to  the
Mansions  of  Eternal  Peace  and  Felicity,  in  thy  home  in  Paradise  with
God.

''  Knowest  thou  not  that  the  ground  must  be  prepared  before  com
can  be  planted,  and  that  the  potter  must  build  his  furnace  for  fire
before  he  can  make  his  porcelain  ?

"  As  the  breath  of  heaven  sayeth  unto  the  waters  of  the  deep, '  This
way  shall  thy  billows  roll,  and  no  other ;  thus  high  shall  they  rise  in
their  might,  and  no  farther ' ;  so  let  thy  Spirit,  Oh  man,  actuate,  con*
trol,  and  direct  thy  flesh  ;  so  let  it  repress  its  wa^'wardness  or  wildness.
Remember  thy  Soul  is  the  Monarch  of  thy  frame  ;  suffer  not  its  sub-
jects to  direct  or  to  rebel  against  it.  Are  not  thine  eyes  the  sentinels
that  watch  the  outer  world  for  thee  ?  Yet  how  often  are  they  unable
to  distinguish  Truth  from  Error  I

"  Thou  hast  a  better  eye  than  this,  and  a  truer  vision,  that  vision  of
thy  Soul.  Therefore  keep  thy  Soul  in  moderation ;  teach  thy  Spirit
to  DC  always  attentive  to  its  good  ;  so  shall  these  ministers  be  to  thee
always,  conveyancers  of  Truth  and  faithful  guides  in  time  of  need.

"  O  Pilgrim  of  Truth,  strive  to  realize  the  Divine  Soul  within  the
Temple.  And,  if  needs  be,  be  faithful  unto  death.  In  the  tender
love  of  my  Soul,  do  I  give  to  thee

THE  LESSON  OF  LIFE.

*'  There  are  but  few,  amongst  the  tens  of  thousands,  who  in  mortal
form  for  this  perfection  strive.

*'  In  thy  dealings  with  men,  be  impartial  and  just ;  do  unto  them  as
thou  wouldst  they  should  do  unto  thee.  Thrice  happy  is  the  man
who  hath  sown  in  his  breast  the  seed  of  kindness  and  benevolence ;
for  the  fruit  and  produce  thereof  shall  be  Wisdom,  Charity,  and  Love.
From  out  the  fountains  of  his  warm  heart  shall  rise  rivers  of  love,
goodness,  and  power;  and  the  streams  shall  overflow  as  refreshing
waters  for  the  benefit  of  all  mankind.

"  He  assisteth  the  poor  in  their  trouble  ;  he  rejoiceth  in  furthering
the  prosperity  of  all  men.  He  censureth  not  his  neighbor;  he  be-
lieveth  not  the  tales  of  envy  and  malevolence,  neither  repeateth  he


A  world's  religion.  lyg

their  slanders.  For  evil  he  retumeth  not  evil ;  he  hateth  not  even
his  enemies,  but  requiteth  their  injustice  with  friendly  admonition.
He  calmeth  the  fury,  he  healeth  the  quarrels  of  angry  men,  and  pre-
venteth  the  mischief  of  strife  and  animosity.

'*  The  hand  of  the  generous  man  is  like  the  clouds  of  heaven,  which
drop  upon  the  earth  fruits,  herbage,  grain,  and  flowers.  But  the  heart
of  the  ungrateful  man  is  like  a  desert  of  sand,  or  the  darkness  of
night  without  the  moon,  while  he  blunders  along  the  pathway.  His
life  is  swallowed  up  by  the  ingratitude  and  greediness.  It  is  like  the
showers  from  heaven  that  fall  on  the  sand,  which  are  buried  in  its
bosom  and  produce  nothing.

"  But  receive  not  a  favor  from  the  hand  of  the  proud  and  conceited
man ;  to  the  vain,  the  selfish,  and  the  avaricious  have  no  obligation  ;
and  guard  well  thy  words,  for  they  will  purposely  misconstrue  thy
thoughts,  and,  through  their  vanity,  pride,  and  deceitful  tongue,  they
will  expose  thee  to  shame.  But  their  selfishness,  vanity,  and  avarice
shall  never  be  satisfied.    They  will  pass  away  as  a  tale  that  was  told.

*'  The  tongue  of  the  sincere  is  rooted  in  his  heart ;  hypocrisy,  vanity,
and  deceit  have  no  place  in  his  words.  He  is  consistent  with  him-
self ;  he  is  never  embarrassed ;  he  hath  courage  for  truth,  and  will  not
have  any  companionship  with  a  Lie.  He  is  far  above  the  meanness
of  dissimulation.  He  hath  not  two  voices,  one  of  the  heart,  another
from  the  lips,  but  the  words  of  his  mouth  are  the  thoughts  of  his
heart

«*  As  blossoms  and  flowers  are  strewed  upon  the  earth  by  the  refresh-
ing hand  of  Spring,  as  the  kindness  of  Summer  produceth  in  perfec-
tion the  bounties  of  harvest,  so  the  smiles  of  Pity  and  Sympathy  shed
blessings  on  the  children  of  misfortune.

"  O  shut  not  thine  ear  against  the  cries  of  the  poor ;  neither  harden
thine  heart  against  the  calamities  of  the  innocent.  When  thou  seest
the  naked  wanderer  of  the  street  shivering  with  cold  and  destitute  of
habitation,  let  bounty  open  thine  heart;  let  the  wings  of  charity
shelter  him  from  the  storms  and  from  death,  that  thine  own  Soul  may
live.  Then  shalt  thou  hear  the  voice  of  gratitude,  and  the  tears  of
compassion,  which  are  far  sweeter,  than  dew-drops  falling  from  roses
on  the  bosom  of  the  earth.


l80  THE   HIDDEN    WAY   ACROSS  THE  THKESHOLD.

''  Whilst  the  poor  man  groaneth  on  the  bed  of  sickness ;  while  the
unfortunate  languish  in  the  horrors  of  a  dungeon,  or  the  hoary  head
of  age  lifteth  up  a  feeble  eye  to  thee  for  pity,  Oh,  how  canst  thou  riot
in  superfluous  enjoyments,  regardless  of  their  wants,  or  unfeeling  of
their  woes  ?

**  The  soil  of  thy  inner  garden  is  thine  own ;  let  it  not  want  for
cultivation.    The  seed  which  thou  sowest,  that  also  shalt  thou  reap.

**  Also  look  thou  well  to  the  gardens  of  the  Soul  of  thy  children.
Teach  them  obedience,  and  they  shall  bless  thee ;  teach  them  modesty
of  heart,  and  they  shall  not  be  ashamed.  Teach  them  gratitude,  and
they  shall*  receive  benefits ;  teach  them  prudence,  and  fortune  shall
attend  them.  Teach  them  justice,  and  they  shall  be  honored  by  the
world.  Teach  them  sincerity,  and  their  own  hearts  shall  not  reproach
them.  Teach  them  diligence,  and  their  wealth  shall  increase.  Teach
them  truth  and  charity,  and  their  death  shall  be  happy.  Teach  them
that  the  bonds  of  warm  solicitude  and  affection  must  extend  to  Divine
Humanity.  Teach  them  sympathy  and  benevolence,  and  their  minds
shall  be  exalted.

*'  It  is  thy  duty,  and  that  of  all  thy  house,  to  be  friendly  to  all  man-
kind, as  it  is  thy  interest  that  man  should  be  friendly  to  thee.  As
the  rose  breathes  sweetness  and  peace  from  its  own  nature,  so  the
heart  of  a  benevolent  man  sweeteneth  all  life  around  him,  and  pro-
duceth  good  thoughts  and  good  works.  He  openeth  not  his  ear  unto
slander ;  neither  desires  he  to  know  the  faults  and  failings  of  men ;
for  they  give  pain  to  his  heart.  Among  men  he  is  constantly  looking
for  thegood^  but  never  for  the  evil,

^  From  the  largeness  of  his  mind  he  comprehendeth  the  JVue  in
men,  and  by  his  own  life  wishes  the  happiness  of  all  men ;  and  from
the  generosity  of  his  heart  he  endeavoreth  to  promote  it

''  How  human  Souls  aspire  for  Spirit  Light  and  hopes  of  heaven,
when  the  natural  body  languishes  and  begins  to  fade  away.  If  man
when  in  the  strength  of  his  greatest  glory  had  turned  his  eye  inward,
rather  than  outward,  could  he  have  looked  in  the  Inner  Temple  of
his  Soul,  for  true  aspirations  and  hopes,  rather  than  the  fleeting
shadows  of  the  outside  world ;  on  the  clear  mirror  of  his  inward  be-
ing he  could  have  beheld  the  streaming  sails  of  hope's  fairy  barque,


A  world's  religion.  i8i

moving  with  tireless  speed  over  that  ocean  where  the  waves  roll  on
forever ;  finding  the  true  sheet-anchor  of  Spirit,  which  would  not  let
loose  in  his  old  age,  but  carry  him  safely  within  the  vale  of  Paradise.

**  The  great  opportunity  of  thy  lifetime  is  now.  This  very  instant
is  thine  own ;  the  next  is  in  the  womb  of  futurity  and  thou  knowest  not
what  it  may  bring  forth.  Raise  thyself  from  the  dust,  whereof  thou
art  made,  and  exalt  thy  aim  to  something  that  is  praiseworthy.

**  Behold,  the  oak,  that  now  spreadeth  its  branches  toward  the
heavens,  was  once  but  an  acorn  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.

*  Why  should  I  say  '  Tis  yet  too  soon
To  seek  for  heaven  or  think  of  death '  ?

A  flower  may  fade  before  'tis  noon.
And  I  this  day  may  lose  my  breath."

"  A  noble  Soul  disdaineth  the  malice  of  fortune ;  his  greatness  of
Soul  is  not  to  be  cast  down.  He  riseth  like  the  palm-tree  in  spite  of
oppression ;  and  as  an  eagle  in  the  firmanent  of  heaven  he  soareth
aloft,  and  fixeth  his  eye  upon  the  glories  of  the  sun.  He  hath  not
suffered  his  happiness  to  depend  upon  the  smiles  of  this  world,  and
therefore  with  her  frowns  he  shall  not  be  dismayed.  He  meeteth  the
evils  of  life  as  a  man  that  goeth  forth  into  battle,  and  retumeth  with
victory  in  his  hand.  As  a  rock  on  the  sea-shore,  he  standeth  firm,
and  the  dashing  of  the  waves  disturbeth  him  not.  He  raiseth  his
head  like  a  tower  on  a  hill ;  and  the  arrows  of  fortune  drop  at  his
feet  In  the  instant  of  danger  the  courage  of  his  heart  sustaineth
him,  and  the  steadiness  of  his  mind  beareth  him  out.  Under  the
pressure  of  misfortunes  his  calmness  alleviates  their  weight ;  and  by
Us  constancy  he  shall  surmount  them  all.  The  terrors  even  of  death
are  no  terrors  to  the  good ;  he  that  committeth  no  evil  hath  nothing
to  fear.  Therefore,  terrify  not  the  Soul  with  vain  fears,  neither  let
thine  heart  sink  within  thee  from  the  phantoms  of  imagination.  From
fear  proceedeth  misfortune;  but  he  that  hopeth,  helpeth  himself.
The  promises  of  Hope  are  far  sweeter  than  roses  in  the  bud,  and  far
more  flattering  to  expectation,  but  the  threatenings  of  fear  are  a
terror  to  the  heart  Nevertheless,  let  not  hope  allure,  nor  fear  deter'
thee  from  doing  that  which  is  right  So  shalt  thou  be  prepared  to
meet  all  events  with  an  equal  mind.  If  thou  believest  a  thing  im-
possible, thy  despondency  shall  make  it  so :  but  he  that  persevereth
shall  overcome  M  difficulties.


1 82      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

'^  In  all  thy  desires,  let  silent  reason  go  along  with  thee,  and  fix  not
thy  hopes  beyond  the  bounds  of  probability ;  so  shall  success  attend
thy  undertakings,  aud  thy  heart  shall  not  be  vexed  with  disappoint-
ments.

''  The  nearest  approach  thou  canst  make  to  happiness  on  earth  is
to  enjoy  from  heaven  health,  love,  wisdom,  and  peace  of  mind.  The
poor  man  seeth  not  the  vexations  and  anxieties  of  the  rich ;  he  feeleth
not  the  difficulties  and  perplexities  of  power,  neither  knoweth  he  the
wearisomeness  of  leisure ;  and  therefore  it  b  that  he  repineth  at  his
lot.  Envy  not,  therefore,  the  appearance  of  happiness  in  any  man,
for  thou  knowest  not  his  secret  griefs.  To  be  satisfied  with  little  b
the  greatest  wisdom ;  he  who  increaseth  his  riches  increaseth  his
cares ;  but  a  contented  mind  is  a  hidden  treasure,  and  trouble  findeth
it  not.

"  Love  and  virtue  is  the  race  which  God  hath  set  for  man  to  run,
and  happiness  the  goal ;  which  none  can  arrive  at  till  he  hath  fin-
ished his  course  and  received  his  ripened  crown  in  the  mansions  of
eternity.

"  They  who  call  themselves  the  sons  of  joy,  they  laugh  and  seem
delighted  with  noise.  But  madness,  folly,  and  weakness  are  in  all
their  doings.  They  are  linked  with  mischief  and  emptiness  hand  in
hand,  and  their  steps  lead  down  to  evil.  Look  now  on  the  other  side,
and  behold,  in  that  vale  overshadowed  with  broken  trees  and  creep-
ing vines,  and  hid  from  the  sight  of  men,  the  habitation  of  Regret
and  Sorrow.  Her  bosom  heaveth  with  sighs  ;  her  mouth  is  filled  with
lamentation  ;  she  delighteth  to  dwell  on  the  subject  of  human  misery.
She  continually  looketh  on  the  common  accidents  of  life,  and  weepeth.
The  weakness  and  wickedness  of  man  is  the  theme  of  her  lips.  She
can  only  behold  the  darkness.  All  nature  to  her  teemeth  with  evil ;
every  object  she  seeth  is  tinged  with  the  gloom  of  her  own  mind,  and
the  voice  of  complaining  saddcneth  her  dwelling  day  and  night.  Oh,
come  not  near  her  cell ;  her  breath  is  contagious.  She  will  blast  the
fruits  and  wither  the  flowers  that  adorn  and  sweeten  the  garden  of
life,  for  there  is  no  warm  light  in  her.  In  avoiding  the  house  of  joy,
let  not  thy  feet  betray  thee  to  the  borders  of  this  dismal  mansion,  but
pursue  with  care  the  middle  path,  which  shall  lead  thee  by  a  gentle
ascent  to  the  bower  of  Tranquillity.  Within  her  abode  dwelleth
peace.    Within  her  mansion  dwell  safety  and  contentment.     She  is


A  world's  religion.  183

cheerful  but  not  gay;  she  b  serious  but  grave;  she  is  reason  but
not  noise ;  she  views  the  sorrows  and  the  joys  of  life  with  equal  and
steady  eye.  From  thence,  as  from  an  eminence,  shalt  thou  behold
the  folly  and  misery  of  those  who  either,  led  by  the  folly  and  gayety
of  their  hearts,  take  up  their  abode  with  the  companions  of  mischief
and  riotous  mirth ;  or  else,  infected  by  gloominess,  lamentation,  and
melancholy,  spend  all  their  days  in  complaining  of  the  woes  and
calamities  of  human  life.  Thou  shalt  view  them  both  with  pity,
and  the  error  of  their  ways  shall  keep  thy  feet  from  straying.

*'  As  the  whirlwind  in  its  fury  teareth  up  the  trees,  and  deformeth
the  face  of  nature ;  or,  as  an  earthquake  in  its  convulsions  overturn-
eth  cities ;  so  the  rage  of  an  angry  man  thro  we  th  mischief  around
him,  and  he  becomes  his  own  enemy.  Danger  and  destruction  wait
on  his  hand.

*'  Indulge  not  thyself  in  the  passion  of  anger;  for  thou  art  whetting
a  sword  to  wound  thine  own  breast,  or  perchance  murder  thy  dearest
friend.  If  thou  bearest  slight  provocations  with  patience,  it  shall  be
imputed  unto  thee  for  wisdom ;  and  if  thou  wipest  them  from  thy  re-
membrance, thy  heart  shall  feel  at  rest  and  thy  breast  shall  not  re-
proach thee.  Do  nothing  in  a  passion.  Why  wilt  thou  put  to  sea  in
the  violence  of  a  storm  ?

"  Only  a  fool  is  provoked  with  insolent  speeches.  A  wise  man
laugheth  them  to  scorn.

''  A  mild  answer  to  an  angry  man  is  like  water  cast  upon  the  fire.
It  abateth  the  heat,  and  from  an  enemy  he  shall  become  thy  friend.

''  On  the  heels  of  Folly  treadeth  Shame ;  at  the  back  of  Anger
standeth  Remorse.  Harbor  not  revenge  in  thy  breast;  it  will  tor-
ment thy  heart  and  Soul,  and  discolor  or  congeal  their  best  inclina-
tions.

*'  Say  not  the  truth  is  established  by  years ;  or  because  of  a  multi-
tude of  believers  there  is  a  certainty.

*'  Who  is  it  that  affirms  most  boldly  ?  Who  is  it  that  holds  his
opmion  most  obstinately?  Even  he  who  hath  most  ignorance;  for
he  hath  also  pride  and  conceit


184      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  tHE  THRESHOLD.

**  One  human  proposition  hath  as  much  authority  as  another  if
Soul,  Truth,  and  Reason  maketh  not  the  difference.

'*  Presumption  and  conceit  are  the  bane  of  reason ;  they  are  the
nurse  of  error ;  through  them  man  is  apt  to  judge  too  highly  of  him-
self, and  thinketh  too  meanly  of  others.

'*  Set  not  thy  judgment  above  that  of  all  the  earth ;  neither  condemn
as  falsehood  what  agreeth  not  with  thine  own  apprehension.  Who
made  thee  any  greater  than  others  ?  Who  gave  thee  the  power  of
determining  for  others?  Or  who  took  from  the  world  the  right  of
choice  ?  How  many  things  have  been  rejected  which  now  are  re-
ceived as  great  truths  ?  How  many  now  received  as  truths  shall  in
their  turn  be  despised  ?    Of  what,  then,  can  man  be  certain  ?

"  Riches  are  not  worthy  a  strong  attention ;  therefore,  an  earnest
care  of  obtaining  them  is  unjustifiable.

''  An  immoderate  desire  for  riches  is  a  poison  lodged  in  the  Soul.
It  contaminates  and  destroys  everything  that  was  good  and  true  in
it.  It  is  no  sooner  rooted  there  than  all  virtue,  all  honesty,  all  true
love,  all  natural  affection,  all  Spiritual  Light,  all  Soul  growth,  fly  be-
fore the  face  of  it;  when  covetousness  reigneth,  we  know  that  the
Soul  is  poor;  for  covetousness  burieth  under  ground  millions  of
wretches ;  these  dig  for  their  hard  masters  what  maketh  them  more
miserable  than  their  slaves.  Have  not  gold  and  riches  destroyed  the
goodness  and  virtues  of  millions  ?

"  Did  it  ever  add  to  the  goodness  of  any  man  ?  Is  it  not  more
abundant  with  the  most  evil  and  worst  of  men  ?  Wherefore,  then,
shouldst  thou  desire  to  be  distinguished  by  possessing  it  ?

*'  Have  not  the  wisest  been  those  who  have  the  least  of  it  f

"  Has  not  the  truest  love  been  with  those  who  do  not  possess  it  ?
And  are  not  wisdom  and  happiness  found  among  the  poor  in  gold  but
the  richest  in  Truth  ?  Have  not  the  very  worst  of  thy  species  pos-
sessed the  greatest  portion  of  riches  ?  And  hath  not  dieir  end  been
miserable  ?

'*  Be  industrious,  and  if  thou  attain  riches,  be  most  generous  in  the
disposal  of  them.    Man  never  is  so  happy  as  when  he  giveth  happiness


A  world's  religion.  185

to  another.    He  who  rejoiceth  in  the  happiness  of  another  increaseth
also  his  own  by  it

*'  Is  it  not  better  men  should  say, '  Why  hath  not  this  man  a  statue  ? '
than  they  should  ask  *  Why  hath  he  one  ? '  The  root  of  ambition  and
hope  is  in  every  man ;  but  it  groweth  not  nor  riseth  in  all.  Fear
keepeth  it  down  in  some ;  in  many  it  is  repressed  by  a  false  modesty,
while  in  others  it  becomes  choked  by  weakness  of  mind ;  the  ambi-
tion and  hope  of  man  are  the  inner  garment  of  the  Soul — the  first  thing
put  on  it  with  the  flesh,  and  the  last  it  layeth  down  at  its  separation
from  it  Let  not  adversity  tear  off  the  wings  of  hope ;  neither  let
prosperity  obscure  the  light  of  reason  and  prudence.

'*  As  the  water  that  passeth  from  the  mountains  kisseth  and  refresh-
eth  on  its  way  to  the  ocean  every  field  that  bordereth  on  the  rivers ;
as  it  tarrieth  not  in  any  place  ;  even  so  Fortune  vbiteth  the  sons  of
men.

^Her  motion  is  incessant ;  she  will  not  stay ;  she  is  as  unstable  as
the  winds.  How,  then,  wilt  thou  hold  her,  or  hope  to  retain  her  ?
When  she  kisseth  thee,  thou  art  blessed ;  but,  behold  !  as  thou  tumest
to  thank  her,  she  flies  away,  and  has  gone  unto  another.

**  To  bear  adversity  well  is  difficult ;  but  to  be  temperate  in  prosper-
ity is  the  height  of  wisdom.  Every  man  can  advise  his  own  Soul  in
distress,  but  prosperity  blindeth  the  truth.

*'  In  adversity  man  seeth  himself  abandoned  by  others,  who  claimed
to  be  friends.  He  findeth  that  all  his  hopes  are  centred  within  him-
self. He  rouseth  his  Soul.  He  encountereth  his  difficulties,  and
they  yield  before  him.

*'  In  prosperity,  he  fancieth  himself  safe ;  he  thinketh  he  is  beloved
by  all,  for  they  are  obsequious  who  smile  about  his  table ;  feeling  his
greatness,  he  groweth  careless  and  remiss ;  he  is  blinded  by  conceit,
and  seeth  not  the  danger  that  is  before  him.  He  trusted  to  others,
and  in  the  end  they  deceived  him.

"  The  greatest  victory  man  can  attain  is  over  himself.  He  that  dis-
daineth  to  feel  an  injury  sendeth  it  back  and  restoreth  it  upon  him
who  offered  it    As  the  tempest  and  the  thunder  affect  not  the  sun


1 86      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

nor  the  stars,  but  spend  their  fury  on  stones  and  trees  below ;  so  in-
juries ascend  not  to  the  Souls  of  the  great,  but  waste  themselves  on
such  as  those  who  offer  them.  Seldom  doth  the  axe  fall  where  he
who  lifteth  it  up  intended ;  and  lo !  he  remembereth  not  that  it  must
recoil  against  himself.  He  who  feareth  all,  striketh  at  all.  Why  are
tyrants  cruel  and  unhappy  ?  Simply  because  they  live  in  terror.  If
thou  art  prevented  of  a  benefit,  fly  not  into  a  rage.  The  loss  of  thy
reason  is  the  want  of  a  greater.  Because  thou  art  robbed  of  thy
cloak,  wouldst  thou  strip  thyself  of  thy  coat  also  ?

"  Anger,  revenge,  and  jealousy  are  the  great  enemies  of  the  race ;
therefore  drive  them  from  thy  heart

"  They  not  only  poison  the  sweets  of  thy  life,  but  overpower  and
consume  thy  true  being;  therefore,  suffer  them  not  to  enter  thy
dwelling,  for  they  will  rob  thee  of  all  thou  hast.

'*  Thou,  man  of  dust,  hast  a  Soul  which  is  eternal.  When  thou  per-
mittest  its  doors  to  open,  it  will  show  all  truths  most  plainly  unto  thee,
for  it  is  of  all  knowledge  the  most  certain.

"  Therefore,  with  deep  sense  of  meekness  be  grateful  for  it.  Strive
not  in  this  life  to  know  it  perfectly.  It  is  inscrutable.  Thinking,  un-
derstanding, reasoning,  perceptive  visions,  willingness,  —  call  not  these
thy  Soul,  for  they  are  only  its  action,  while  love  and  harmony  and
truth  are  its  essences.

"  Search  it  by  its  faculties,  know  it  by  its  virtues.  They  are  more
in  number  than  the  hairs  of  thy  head ;  and  the  stars  of  heaven  are  not
to  be  counted  with  them.

''  The  lips  of  the  wise  and  true  are  the  doors  of  the  golden  cabinet ;
no  sooner  are  they  opened  than  rich  treasures  are  poured  out  before
thee.

''  Like  ripened  fruit  on  trees  of  gold,  arranged  in  beds  of  silver,  are
true  and  wise  sentences,  uttered  in  due  season.  Canst  thou  think
too  greatly  of  thy  Soul ;  or  can  too  much  be  said  in  its  praise  ?  No,
nothing  is  too  lofty  or  great  for  it,  for  it  is  the  Image  of  Him  who
gave  it.


A  WORLD'S   RELIGION.  1 8/

"  Therefore  remember  thou  its  dignity  for  ever,  forget  not  how  great
a  precious  talent  is  committed  to  thy  charge.  Her  motion  is  perpet-
ual; her  attempts  are  universal;  her  agility  is  not  to  be  suppressed*
The  end  of  her  search  is  truth  and  love  -  her  means  to  discover  them
are  reason,  silence,  and  experience.

"  If  it  is  in  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth,  she  will  have  it  If  it  is
beyond  the  region  of  the  stars,  yet  will  her  eyes  discover  it  Inquiry
is  her  delight.  As  one  who  traverseth  the  burning  sand  in  search  of
water,  so  is  the  Soul  that  thirsteth  after  knowledge  and  truth.  There-
fore, O  man,  open  wide  her  doors  and  let  the  light  adorn  her  inner
Temple.

*•  As  Spirit  ways  are  opposite  to  man's  ways,  the  general  opinion  of
men  is  no  proof  of  truth.  For  the  generality  of  men  are  ignorant
Therefore,  learn  to  esteem  life  as  it  should  be ;  and  earnestly  seek
for  Truth.  Then  art  thou  near  the  pinnacle  of  wisdom.  When  thy
bed  is  straw,  thou  sleepest  in  security;  but  when  thou  stretchest
thyself  on  roses,  beware  of  the  thorns.  Though  thy  life's  ways  may
be  uneven,  yet  are  they  not  all  painful.  Accommodate  thyself  to  all ;
and  where  there  is  the  least  appearance  of  evil,  suspect  the  greatest
danger.  Remember,  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  God  ever  gave  to
man  is  shortness  of  Life.  To  what  end,  O  child  of  sorrow,  wouldst
thou  live  longer?  To  breathe,  to  eat,  to  see  the  world?  All  this
thou  hast  done  often  already.  Too  frequent  repetition,  is  it  not  tire-
some ?  or  is  it  not  superfluous  ?

"  Repine  not  for  the  want  of  human  knowledge ;  it  must  perish  with
thee  in  thy  grave.  But  love  all  and  be  honest  here,  and  thou  shalt
be  wise  and  have  great  joy  hereafter.  Labor  not  after  riches  first,
but  for  thy  Soul.

"  Thinkest  thou,  after  thou  hast  gained  possession  of  riches,  thou
afterward  will  enjoy  them  ?  As  the  arrow  passeth  through  the  heart,
while  the  warrior  knew  that  it  was  coming  ;  so  shall  thy  life  be  taken
away  and  thy  treasure  shall  be  despoiled  by  others,  even  before  thou
knowest  the  Truths  of  life.  What,  then,  is  outer  life,  that  man
should  desire  it  ?  What  is  breathing,  that  he  should  covet  it  ?  Is  it
not  a  scene  of  delusion,  a  series  of  defeats  and  misadventures,  a
pursuit  of  vanity  and  evils  linked  on  all  sides  together  ?  Fools  I  to
dread  as  mortals,  and  yet  to  desire  as  if  immortal.


1 88      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

''  Our  terrors  are  real  evils,  our  expectations  look  forward  into
improbabilities.  Inconstancy  is  powerful  in  the  heart  of  man ;  intem-
perance swayeth  it  whither  it  will;  despair  engrosseth  much  of  it;
and  fear  proclaimeth,  '^  Behold  I  sit  unrivalled  therein."  But  vanity
and  conceit  are  beyond  them  all.  What  blindeth  the  eye,  or  what
hideth  the  heart  of  a  man  from  himself,  like  vanity  and  conceit  ?  Lo,
when  thou  seest  not  thyself,  then  do  others  discover  thee  most
plainly.  While  the  man  who  dwells  with  his  vanity  and  conceit
feedeth  himself  with  wind,  his  bread  is  eaten  by  another.

**  Weep  not,  therefore,  at  the  calamities  of  the  human  state,  but
rather  laugh  at  its  follies;  but  thou  mayst  regret  men  are  so  foolish
and  hear  not.  In  the  hands  of  the  man  addicted  to  vanity  and
conceit,  the  labors  of  his  life  are  lost;  neither  can  gold  buy  time
back  for  thee  ;  neither  can  mines  of  diamonds  purchase  back  the
moments  thou  hast  now  lost  forever.  Thus  the  earthly  desire  of  a
man  defeateth  himself.

"  He  who  neglects  the  present  moment  throweth  away  all  that  he
hath.  Establish  unto  thyself  principles  of  action,  and  see  that  thou
ever  act  according.  But  first  know  that  thy  principles  are  justice,
wisdom,  truth,  and  love ;  and  then  be  thou  inflexible  in  the  path  of
them.  But  boast  not  of  it ;  for  it  is  only  the  vain  who  delighteth  to
speak  of  himself.  The  wise  man  is  silent  of  himself.  Let  him  who
doeth  well  beware  how  he  boasteth  of  it,  for  rarely  is  it  of  his  own
will.  Is  it  not  the  event  of  Spirit,  or  of  an  impulse  from  without,
bom  of  uncertainty,  enforced  by  accident,  dependent  on  somewhat
else?    To  all  these,  then,  and  to  accident  is  due  the  praise.

"  Beware  of  the  words  of  thy  tongue,  that  others  do  not  anticipate
thy  actions.  Beware  of  irresolution  in  the  intent  of  thy  actions;
beware  of  instability  in  the  execution.

''  Suspect  not  evil  of  any  one,  until  thou  seest  it ;  when  thou  seest
it,  say  nothing.     Hold  thy  peace,  but  forget  it  not

^*  Establish  thy  heart,  O  man !  in  that  which  is  justice,  truth,  good-
ness, and  right,  and  then  know  the  greatest  of  human  praise  is  to  be
immutable.

"  Is  there  anything  in  which  man's  weakness  appeareth  more  than
in  desiring  things  ?  It  is  in  his  possessing  them,  but  still  more  by
his  incapacity  and  shallowness  of  using  them.


A  world's  religion.  189

^  Tnith  is  one  with  God ;  thy  doubts  are  of  thy  own  raising.  He
who  made  truth  and  virtues  what  they  are  planted  also  in  thee  a
knowledge  of  their  pre-eminence.  Man!  O  open  the  door  of  thy
monitor  and  heed  its  voices.  Act  as  thy  Soul  dictates  to  thee,  and
the  end  shall  be  always  right.  Say  not  to  thyself,  "  Behold,  in  this
world,  truth  breedeth  hatred,  therefore  I  had  best  avoid  it ;  obsequi-
ousness and  dissimulation  raise  friends,  and  I  had  not  best  follow
these.''  Are  not  the  enemies  made  by  truth  far  better  than  the
friends  obtained  by  flattery?  Naturally  doth  man  desire  truth;
yet  when  it  b  before  him,  according;  to  his  own  failings  it  beareth  on
him,  and  he  will  not  apprehend  it ;  if  it  b  forced  upon  him,  he  there-
fore becomes  offended  at  it,  and  denies  it

**  The  fault  b  not  in  truth,  for  that  b  just  and  amiable  ;  but  the
selfishness  and  weakness  of  man  refuseth  to  bear  its  splendors.  Let
him  who  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear.  The  sense  of  thine  own  insuf-
ficiency commandeth  thee  to  hear ;  therefore,  to  give  justice  to  truth,
and  be  just  to  all,  thou  must  hear  without  thy  passions.

**  Remember  that  I  have  told  thee  that  man's  ways  are  opposite  to
truth,  to  Spirit,  and  to  nature.  So  strangely  doth  he  make  his  life
inconsistent,  he  who  begetteth  a  man  hideth  his  face;  but  he  who
killeth  a  thousand  b  honored.  There  is  but  one  way  for  man  to  be
produced ;  there  are  thousands  by  which  he  may  be  destroyed.  The
Prophet  hath  no  honor  who  would  bring  better  men  into  the  world,
by  purer  birth,  neither  is  there  any  prabe  or  honor  to  him  who  giveth
being  to  another ;  but  triumphs,  praise,  and  empire  are  the  rewards  of
murder.  Forget  not  that  man's  ways  are  opposite  to  Spirit  and  ways
of  truth.

**  The  greatest  bounties  given  to  man  are  wisdom,  judgment,  and
wilL  Indeed  happy  is  he  who  misapplieth  them  not  As  the  torrent
that  rolleth  down  the  mountain  destroyeth  all  that  is  borne  away  by
it,  so  doth  common  opinion  overwhelm  reason  and  truth  in  him  who
sabmitteth  to  it  without  saying  *'  What  are  thy  foundations  ? "

''See  that  what  thou  receivest  as  truth  be  not  the  shadow  of  it
What  thou  acknowledgest  as  just  or  convincing  b  often  but  plausible
words.

**  Be  firm,  be  constant,  determine  for  thyself ;  so  shalt  thou  be
answerable  only  for  thine  own  wealmess.     Be  willing  to  commend


igO  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  slow  to  censure ;  so  shall  praise  be  upon  thy  virtues,  and  the  eye
of  enmity  shall  be  blind  to  thy  imperfections.  Be  more  ready  to
love  than  to  hate ;  so  shalt  thou  be  loved  by  more  than  hate  thee.
When  thou  doest  good,  do  it  because  it  is  good,  not  because  men
esteem  it.  When  thou  avoidest  evil,  fiy  it  because  it  is  £vi],  not
because  men  speak  against  it.  Do  good  for  the  love  of  goodness.
Be  honest  for  the  love  of  honesty,  and  thou  shalt  be  uniformly  so.
He  that  doeth  it  without  principle  is  wandering.

"  It  is  injustice  to  expect  exemption  from  that  thou  wert  bom  unto ;
submit  with  modesty  to  the  laws  of  thy  condition.  The  body  was
created  to  be  subservient  to  the  Soul.  Whilst  thou  continually  afflict
thy  Soul  for  its  pains,  behold,  thou  settest  thy  body  above  it  To
suffer  is  a  necessity  entailed  upon  thy  nature.  Wouldst  thou  that
miracles  should  protect  thee  from  it  ?  Or  shalt  thou  repine  because
it  happeneth  unto  thee,  when,  lo !  it  happeneth  unto  all  ?

**  When  thy  constancy  faileth  thee,  call  in  thy  reason ;  when  thy
patience  quitteth  thee,  call  in  thy  hope ;  when  thy  strength  faileth,
call  on  the  Spirit.  As  the  production  of  the  metal  proveth  the  work
of  the  Alchemist,  so  is  death  the  test  of  our  lives ;  the  assay  which
showeth  the  standard  of  all  our  actions.

''He  hath  not  spent  his  life  ill  who  knoweth  how  to  die  well;
neither  can  he  have  lost  all  his  time  who  employeth  the  last  portion
of  it  to  his  honor.  Wouldst  thou  learn  to  die  nobly  ?  Let  all  thy
vices  die  before  thee.  Happy  is  he  who  endeth  the  business  of  his
life  before  his  death ;  who,  when  the  hour  of  it  cometh,  hath  nothing
to  do  but  to  die  ;  who  wisheth  not  delay,  because  he  hath  no  longer
use  for  time.  He  was  not  born  in  vain  who  dieth  as  he  ought ;  neither
hath  he  lived  unprofitabiy  who  dieth  happily.

"  Piety,  consecration,  and  grace  to  thy  God,  love  and  benevolence
to  thy  fellow-creattires,  —  these  are  thy  great  and  chief  duties.
Behold !  they  are  written  in  thy  heart,  and  thou  needst  only  to  be
reminded  of  them.  They  are  easy  of  conception ;  therefore  be
attentive  and  thou  shalt  retam  them,  and  they  will  be  unto  thee  as  a
lamp  unto  thy  feet  even  unto  Eternal  Life."


X


CHAPTER  VIII.

ADEPTy  SEERy  AND  MEDIUMSHIP.

**  Vfltfljr,  Terflj,  I  nj  unto  joa,  we  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  teatifj  diat  we  haife  aeen ;  and  ye
leeehre  not  our  witneas."  —  Si.  John  iiL

Thus  we  move  a  little  nearer  to  the  Master  of  all  music,  and  com-
mune with  the  Immortals.

''  And  he  said  unto  them.  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the
gospel  to  every  creature.

''And  these  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe.     In  my  name
shall  they  cast  out  devils ;  they  shall  speak  with  new  tougues ;

'*  They  shall  take  up  serpents ;  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing,
it  shall  not  hurt  them ;  they  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they
shall  recover."

The  most  elaborate  railroad  netting  is  to  be  found  within  our  own
heads.  All  human  thoughts  —  metaphorically  speaking  —  move  on
raib ;  they  are  made  up  into  long  trains,  and  flash  quicker  than  with
electric  speed  over  the  intended  route.

As  a  railroad  carriage  is  held  in  the  grooves  of  the  rails  and  can
only  be  run  along  the  road  —  but  neither  to  the  right  nor  left  —  thus,
queer  and  improbable  as  it  may  sound,  are  our  thoughts  not  at  liberty
to  roam  in  what  direction  they  please,  but  are  compelled  to  move  in
the  same  not  seldom  worn-out  ruts.

Whenever  a  train  of  thoughts  is  thrown  by  some  accident  —  such
as  a  new  discovery — from  the  accustomed  track,  it  requires  the  ut-
most exertion  of  the  propelling  force  and  the  greatest  skill  of  the
engineer  to  press  a  new  road-bed  through  the  unbroken  ground,  and
not  before  the  new  grooves  have  been  cut  and  made  smooth  by  fre-
quent use  do  our  thoughts  glide  along  the  new  line  with  comfort  and
ease.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  people  dread  to  leave  the  accus-
tomed grooves  in  which  their  thoughts  so  pleasantly  flit  up  and  down,
as  much  as  they  dread  to  be  thrown  off  the  railroad  track  while
travelling.

Mediumship  —  metaphorically  speaking — means  new  Light,  new

understanding,  new  wisdom,  travel  upon  a  new  path  entirely  off  the

191


192       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

track  of  the  objective  world.  It  means  becoming  attuned  with  the
harp-strings  of  nature,  and  instructs  the  Pilgrim  of  the  Heavenly
Way  that  the  whole  world  is  as  a  musical  instrument,  a  chromatic
sensible  thing.  In  youth,  unattuned  to  the  Light,  our  harp  chords
are  away  down  to  the  grosser  elements ;  but  by  culture  of  the  Soul
through  Spiritual  things  the  chord  attenuates,  and  under  the  hand  of
the  Spiritual  tuner  it  is  worked  into  a  perfect  vibration  in  concord
with  God.  The  two  are  in  unison,  the  perfect  chord  a  limitless  power
stretching  across  all  barriers  of  space.

Mediumship  is  that  Light  of  Prophecy  coming  out  from  the  long
night  of  time,  shining  through  the  ages.  Behold  the  TabenuuU  of  God
is  with  Men,

It  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  words  of  Christ :  —

"  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you,  ye  shall  ask  what
ye  will  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you."

He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.

To  lift  the  veil,  the  mist  of  obscurity  which  hides  the  secrets  of
nature  and  conceals  the  future  from  mankind  has  been  the  desire  of
people  in  all  ages,  but  reached  only  by  the  few  sages  and  prophets
in  the  world.  But  with  modem  mediumship  the  knowledge  of  the
possibility  of  communion  with  the  departed,  the  so-called  dead,  burst
forth  like  the  first  rising  of  the  sun,  before  which  all  lesser  lights
grow  pale.  To  become  a  medium,  is  to  learn  to  vibrate  the  Astral
body  as  a  pendulum  between  Spint  and  mortal,  and  thus  to  reach
the  third  state  of  being,  the  state  between  sleeping  and  waking,  —
Trance  —  a  condition  co-equal  with  both,  is  to  have  found  the  Key
that  unlocks  the  mysterious  place  where  actual  Soul  semblances  have
their  immortal  birth.

One  cannot  enter  into  full  entrancement  until  he  is  oblivious  to  all
outward  surroundings.

The  first  change  felt  is  in  the  forehead ;  then  heaviness  of  the
eyes  and  a  dull  sound  to  the  ears ;  then  follows  the  coma  of  the
entire  body,  when  the  habitant  Soul,  under  the  guidance  of  some
other  intelligence,  takes  its  flight.  By  many  people  the  possibility  of
this  is  denied,  but  this  denial  shows  only  ignorance  of  one  of  nature's
laws.  Numerous  animals  indulge  in  full  entrancement  during  their
long  hibernation,  but  common  minds  usually  judge  hastily  and  waken
to  thought  long  after.

One  of  the  characteristic  features  of  Modem  Spiritualism,  dis-
tinguishing it  from  other  systems  of  religious  thought,  is  its  demon-
3tration  of  man's  spiritual  nature  and  its  continued  existence,  by


ADEPT,  SEES,  AND  MEDIUMSHIP.  I93

mediumship  and  the  phenomena  produced,  both  physical  and  mental,
proving  individual  spirit-presence  and  communication.

Thus  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  are  its  indispensable  basis
and  its  most  important  factor  of  promulgation.

By  virtue  of  its  sensuous  and  mental  facts,  it  is  conquering  the
doubts  and  prejudices  of  mankind.

The  demand  of  all  thinking  and  doubting  minds  for  proof  of  im-
mortality is  legitimate  and  wholesome.

No  wise  spiritual  teacher  will  ignore  or  depreciate  the  evidences
on  which  alone  can  rest  a  certain  faith  in  a  future  existence.  Spirit-
ualism without  its  vast  array  of  phenomenal  facts  would  be  no  better
than  other  speculative  systems  of  philosophy  and  ethics  which  have
preceded  it.  Hence  all  true  teachers  welcome  every  token  that
proves  and  illustrates  the  Spiritual  Philosophy  of  the  immortality  of
the  Soul.  While  many  a  Pilgrim  on  the  pathway  toward  the  dawning
light  requires  the  object  lessons  of  phenomena,  it  is  not  well  to  let  a
morbid  condition  of  mind  grow  upon  one,  and  to  be  continually  look-
ing for  and  requiring  a  sign.  The  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  con-
stitute only  its  alpha^  not  its  omega.

They  are  its  beginning,  not  its  end  nor  aim.  Spirits  are  in  our
midst  for  something  more  than  simply  to  prove  that  fact.  They  have
come  to  do  something  more  than  merely  to  prove  their  existence  and
present  wonders  to  marvel-seekers.  They  mean  serious  and  practical
work  for  human  enlightenment  and  progress.  They  come  to  teach  a
truer  and  better  philosophy  of  life  than  the  world  has  had ;  to  aid  us
in  the  solution  of  the  great  problems  of  our  being ;  to  inspire  us  with
higher  aims  and  nobler  efforts  for  our  own  and  others'  good ;  they  come
to  give  us  the  benefit  of  their  higher  unfoldment  and  larger  experi-
ence, that  we  may  be  incited  to  make  the  most  and  best  of  our  earthly
opportunities,  and  to  do  what  they  can  to  correct  our  errors  and  edu-
cate us  for  the  practical  duties  of  both  the  present  and  future  life.  In
fact,  their  purposes  for  our  good  are  manifold,  beyond  the  demonstra-
tion of  their  presence ;  and  those  investigators  who  stop  short  with
phenomenal  manifestations,  and  do  not  make  them  stepping-stones  to
the  great  Temple  of  Spiritual  Truth  builded  upon  them,  are  but  idle
spectators  of  a  ''  dumb  show  "  that  may  amaze  and  perhaps  amuse
them  for  a  time,  without  adding  anything  to  their  mental  or  spiritual
growth.  After  receiving  tests  enough  to  convince  a  reasonable  mind
of  the  reality  of  Spirit-intercourse,  the  clamor  for  ^'  a  sign  "  should
cease,  and  where  it  continues  month  after  month  and  year  after  year,
as  is  lamentably  the  case  with  many,  it  evinces  a  morbid  condition  of


194  "^HE   HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS    THE   THRESHOLD.

mind;  and  the  constant  attendance  of  stances  to  obtain  sensuous
phenomena  becomes  a  mental  dissipation,  ending  in  fanaticism,  and
a  waste  of  time,  money,  and  vital  force,  if  nothing  worse.  The  public
needs  the  agitation  of  the  mental  powers  produced  by  the  inspired
writers  and  orators  whose  mission  is  ignored  or  rejected  by  marvel-
seekers  who  *'  reject  those  sent  unto  them  "  unless  they  can  ^*  work
miracles"  or  ''show  them  a  sign."  We  need  a  higher  spiritual cuiiure
—  to  go  onward  and  upward  in  practical  e£Forts,  cooperating  with  the
higher  intelligences  in  their  efforts  to  reform  and  ennoble  humanity,
and  spiritual  societies  should  utilize  the  highest  talent  and  "  earnestly
covet  the  best  gifts"  to  instruct  the  public  with  those  truths  and
principles  that  "  make  for  righteousness  "  and  direct  human  effort  to
true  ends  of  being.  To  become  wonder-seekers  instead  of  Spirit-
seekers  only  ends  in  becoming  fanatical  and  intolerant.

It  is  the  old,  old  story  of  the  religions  of  all  past  ages.  It  b
unhealthy  growth.  This  modem  insatiate  clamor  for  a  sign  retards
the  growth  of  mental  illumination,  often  exhausts  the  vital  forces,  and
causes  great  detriment.

Modern  phenomena  of  the  Soul's  return  is  only  the  material  part
of  true  Spiritualism.  Higher  Spiritual  culture  is  needed  in  order  to
go  on  making  Spiritualism  of  practical  use.  It  is  positively  hurtful
for  a  very  sensitive  person  to  sit  for  physical  or  lower  manifestations,
while  many  mediums  are  by  some  peculiarity  of  constitution  fully
adapted  for  this  work,  which  is  much  like  exposing  a  delicate  person
in  the  form  to  outdoor  labor  and  the  violent  changes  of  a  rigorous
northern  winter.  When  the  medium  is  too  negative  and  sensitive  for
the  work,  which  is  merely  physical,  manifestations  become  hurtful  to
him  or  her;  the  finer  susceptibilities  of  such  a  medium  become
blunted  and  destroyed;  the  animal  body  is  weakened  by  the  with
drawal  of  the  magnetism  which  has  been  received  from  the  rays  of
the  sun,  not  being  open  to  the  magnetism  of  the  earth,  like  one  who
has  a  strong,  robust  constitution.  Such  mediums  as  are  strong  and
robust  can  absorb  the  magnetism  which  passes  continually  between
the  North  and  South  poles,  and  also  of  the  strong  Astral  currents  run-
ning round  the  earth  in  the  plane  of  the  equator, — the  northern  cur-
rent running  from  east  to  west,  the  southern  from  west  to  east.  From
these  currents  others  descend  to  either  pole  which  produce  the  polar-
ity of  the  magnetic  needle,  as  well  as  its  dip.

On  the  same  principle,  mediums  gain  or  lose  their  polarity  and  are
drawn  by  or  draw  from  the  magnetism  of  those  who  sit  with  them.

A  man  who  has  once  reached  the  first  octave  of  the  inner  life


ADEPT,  SEER,   AND  MEDIUMSHIP.  I95

finds  himself  in  the  atmosphere  of  Spirit,  which  illunines  his  veiy
being.

He  has  reached  that  height  of  understanding  where  he  cannot
accept  any  other  guide  than  Spirit,  for  Man-Soul  proves  God-Soul,
and  Man-Spirit  proves  God-Spirit,  as  one  drop  of  water  proves  a
fountain  from  which  of  necessity  it  must  have  come.  The  regenerate
man  has  no  other  beacon-light  than  God's  Love,  Spirit,  and  Con-
science, his  faithful  messenger.

God  has  given  him  the  torch  of  truth,  which  he  follows.

The  past  is  but  ruin,  obscurity,  intolerance,  bigotry,  and  despotism.
Changing  his  route  to  that  of  wisdom  and  understanding  in  union
with  the  Absolute  Mind,  man  finds,  at  last,  safety  and  rest.

jyue  mediumship  is  a  silent  growth,  a  consummation  terminating
in  ascension.  The  gift  is  supposed  to  be  both  rare  and  modem.  It
is  neither.  From  the  date  of  the  first  birth  into  Spirit  life  of  the  first
man  on  our  planet,  there  was,  perhaps.  Spirit  communion  and  medium-
ship.  While  generations  have  come  and  gone  and  not  known  of  this
fact,  yet  it  has  continuously  existed.  It  is  often  asserted  that  every
person  is  more  or  less  a  medium.  It  may  be  so.  Yet  it  is  not  possi-
ble for  all  to  hold  communication  with  their  departed  friends.  We
may  have  all  the  natural  capacity  for  mediumship,  and  yet  be  so
seared  over  with  vices  and  habits  of  animality,  selfishness,  hypocrisy,
and  wrong  that  an  impenetrable  wall  is  builded.

It  is  our  own  fault,  more  than  that  of  the  Spirits,  that  we  do  not
have  their  counsel  and  cognize  their  presence.  How  unhappy  they
must  be  to  be  always  knocking  at  the  Soul  doors  of  their  earthly  loved
ones  and  never  bidden  to  enter  1  What  injustice  to  call  them  demons
when  they  do  manifest  I  Those  who  ask  why  they  do  not  see  and  con-
verse with  their  friends  and  relatives,  should  first  ask,  What  sort  of  a  life
am  I  leading  ?  and  next.  What  are  the  necessary  conditions  for  me  to
comply  with  ?  Now,  we  cannot  say  what  impressions,  thoughts,  and  acts
were  inspired  by  our  Spirit  friends.  All  men  are  acted  upon  by  the
law  permitting  Spirits  to  project  their  thoughts  and  wills  into  the
human  brain,  and  thus  creating  impulses  and  ideas,  the  birth  of  which
we  have  not  traced  back  to  their  procreative  source.  We  do  not
think  mediumship  will  rest  on  this  form  alone ;  for  external  manifes-
tations can  be  obtained  by  every  person  who  seeks  and  schools  him-
self. As  humanity  differ  in  their  various  gifts,  powers,  and  develop-
ments, so  will  mediumship.

Each  of  us  cannot  develop  any  given  phenomena.     But  what  can

do  to  develop  any  at  all  ?    This  we  shall  briefly  answer.    It  is  safe


196  THE  HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

to  say  that  in  a  devoted  circle  of  six  or  eight  persons  who  meet
regularly,  some  one  or  more  will  receive  spirit  influences,  or  be  the
media  for  the  production  of  some  kind  of  spirit  manifestations.

The  usual  seekers  after  these  manifestations  try  to  obtain  them
through  developed  mediums,  rather  than  to  develop  their  own  medium-
ship.

Evidences  from  others  are  not  so  satisfactory  as  if  occurring  with
and  from  ourselves.  In  this  age  of  deception  and  human  ingenuity
and  human  incredulity,  second-hand  evidence  is  of  no  avail  in  proof,
nor  is  the  visible  production  through  others  entirely  convincing.  If
we  are  immortal  beings,  it  is  our  right  to  know  it  positively ;  it  is  our
duty  to  seek  for  the  knowledge.  Nothing  concerns  us  more.  Why,
then,  will  people  refuse  this  investigation  ?  We  do  not  believe  that
mediumship  is  a  ''special  gift,"  bestowed  upon  a  few — it  is  a  natural
gift,  belonging  to  all.  Hence,  we  say,  cease  your  dependence  upon
others  to  demonstrate  the  fact  of  spirit  life  and  to  bring  you  into  com-
munion with  your  'Moved  ones  passed  on  to  the  life  continued";
gather  about  your  table  in  the  home  sanctuary,  and  invite  the  Spirits.
The  results  may  not  be  obtained  at  once  —  they  may  not  come  until
after  many  devoted  opportunities  are  extended.

Results  in  any  department  of  life  depend  upon  the  conditions  and
opportunities  afforded,  and  the  repetition  of  attempts  made,  with
(in  this  work,  at  least)  a  silent,  harmonious  attunement  of  the  inner
with  the  outer  man.  Throw  aside  all  human  theory  or  suppositions,
therefore,  and  illuminate  your  own  Temple,  for  the  laws  of  Spirit  con-
trol must  necessarily  be  greatly  outside  the  realm  of  the  ordinary
which  we  apply  and  use.  If  disembodied  intelligences  communicate
through  embodied  forms,  there  must  be  an  employment  of  force  not
commonly  understood  by  us.  Therefore  the  greater  difficulty  to  get
it  into  motion  and  properly  apply  it

Experience  leads  us  to  say  that  a  circle  must  be  composed  of  har^
monious  and  earnest  seekers  for  the  truth.  The  participants  should  be
those  who  will  attend  regularly  and  punctually.  The  minds  should  be
attuned  by  music  and  heartfelt  supplication.  As  a  human  magnetism
is  used  by  Spirits,  a  battery  is  made  by  alternating  positive  and  nega-
tive persons,  and  joining  hands  or  laying  them  on  a  table.

Do  not  resist  any  influences  that  come;  and  do  not  seek  to
control  the  results.  Question  the  influences  by  any  method  you  may
decide  upon  or  they  may  dictate,  if  you  do  not  obtain  direct  intelli-
gent control.  It  seems  to  us  the  requirements  are  so  simple  that
every  family  might  have  the  benefits.    The  home  circle  is  of  such


ADEPT,   SEER,   AND   HEDIUHSHIP.  I97

▼alue  that  we  are  its  earnest  advocates.  The  time  is  coming  when
these  gifts  will  be  general  — the  Spirits  are  forcing  them  upon  many,
and  they  urge  that  all  shall  seek  the  development  When  this  uni-
versal mediumship  shall  be  ushered  in,  there  will  result  incalculable
benefits  to  the  human  family.  Vice,  crime,  debauchery,  and  the  long
train  of  human  defects,  moral  and  spiritual,  will  pass  away,  and  no
Saviour  nor  church  be  needed  to  wash  away  human  sins.  For  the  all-
important  necessity  for  mediumship  is  personal  purity.  Mediumship
is  reaching  a  passive  oblivious  state  and  vibrating  die  Astral.  The
physical  body  being  at  one  end  of  nature,  the  Spiritual  body  is  only
the  other.

It  is  quite  plain  that  if  we  are  ever  to  know  anything  clearly  as
mediums,  we  must  in  our  entrancement  be  released  from  the  physical
body,  that  the  Soul  by  itself  may  see  things  as  they  really  are.

If  we  try  to  watch  the  very  moment  in  which  we  fall  asleep  we  find
our  very  attention  and  thought  will  prevent  it  In  passing  into  a  state
of  trance,  one  finds  the  same  obstacle;  we  cannot  reach  this  third
state  until  all  ideas  or  thoughts  of  ourselves  or  our  surroundings  are
lost

Three  Spirit  forces  live  in  and  actuate  man.  The  first  is  that  of
the  elements  (terrestial)  or  electric  vibrations  used  to  talk,  to  make
noises,  to  demonstrate  to  the  natural  eye,  the  vibrations  used  to  mes-
merize, psychologize,  etc.

The  second  Spirit  force  is  of  the  second  self,  the  star  magno  (side-
real) the  Astral  body,  the  mind,  memory,  and  thought  part  of  us ;  the
messenger  to  the  inner  man,  or  monitor;  the  communicator  of  the
Soul ;  the  portal  between  Deity  and  the  mirrors  of  the  Soul.

The  third  Spirit  force  or  vibration  is  the  Divine  Spirit  or  ray  or
reflection  of  the  Godhead,  the  life-germ  of  the  inner  Soul.  This  is
that  great  mystery  which  has  been  hidden  for  generations  and  for
ages.  True  mediumship  is  attained  by  arriving  at  the  knowledge  of
these  different  vibrations  and  their  proper  use.  Dear  suffering  Me-
diums, in  what  frame  of  mind  do  you  go  to  commune  with  Nature's
God  or  with  the  Souls  of  the  departed  ?

Well  the  writer  knows  of  the  turmoils  of  life  and  the  mad  rush
and  bitter  fight  for  bread,  and  how  the  cruel  world  looks  on  in  apathy
and  forgets  that  mediums  must  be  fed.  While  so  much  of  the  modem
phenomena  is  little  better  than  the  side-show  of  a  circus  or  a  feature
at  a  dime  museum,  need  we  wonder  that  the  refined,  intellectual
world  stands  aloof  ?    A  greater  wonder  is  that  people  are  so  patient.

^  Give  ye  not  which  b  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  your  pearls


198      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

before  swine,  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet  and  turn  agsdn
and  rend  you."  —  Matt,  vii :  6.

Too  many,  even  among  the  better  class  of  mankitid,  are  but
wonder-seekers,  preferring  toys  to  amuse  themselves,  rather  than  to
make  a  personal  effort  for  growth  and  enlightenment  of  their  own
Souls,  while  the  world  outside  scoffs  and  sneers  with  condemnation
and  disbelief,  rather  than  strive  as  a  few  earnest  workers  have  done
to  find  the  clew  that  might  explain  many  of  the  strange  experiences
off  all  who  enter  the  doors  of  the  great  mysteries.  And  how  quickly
science  jumps  with  hasty  conclusions  at  any  Spirit  manifestations,
only  to  be  wrecked  on  human  argument  and  theory.

But  all  these,  like  the  sudden  rise  of  the  mercury  in  the  baronn
eter,  indicate  nothing  but  the  changeableness  of  weather.  They  all
forget  that  the  Soul  or  nature's  ways  are  always  opposite  to  human
ways,  and  what  are  often  called  miracles  are  only  nature's  laws
demonstrated  and  open  to  him  who  can  open  the  door  of  his  own
Astral  body.

True  science  is  simply  a  history  of  the  Divine  operations  in  matter
and  mind,  and  demonstrates  that  the  world  with  all  its  antiquities  b
every  moment  a  new  creation,  as  we  surely  revolve  in  a  spiral  in  our
journey  onward  and  upward,  reaching  a  point  a  little  higher  than  the
former  in  each  circular  advancement.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  only  through  Nature  is  the  Hidden  Way.

In  searching  for  Spirit  communion  and  nature's  forces,  you  will
advance  with  greatest  safety  in  the  middle  path.  Use  the  reason
that  your  Mother  gave  you.  You  will  always  gain  more  rest  along  the
road  between  the  two  extremes.  The  pioneer  mediums  of  the  past,
through  want  of  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature,  the  laws  of  control,
and  the  power  of  the  minds  of  both  medium  and  investigators,  which
produced  harmony  or  discord,  sometimes  caused  sorrow,  suffering,
and  danger.  Many  were  hunted  and  malignantly  persecuted  with  all
the  vehemence  of  the  old  inquisition,  even  into  the  very  shadow  of
death.

Looking  back  over  the  field  of  toilers  among  the  departed,  one
feels  they  have  scarcely  more  claim  to  the  esteem  and  honor  of  a
world's  reverence  than  the  heroic  survivors  have  to  the  justice  of  a
world's  gratitude,  for  those  who  strive  to-day  for  the  truth  of  the
Soul  and  the  communion  with  the  immortals,  delving  into  the  mys-
teries, are  not  mere  triflers.  Is  it  not  for  the  elevation  of  mankind
from  lowest  depths  of  superstition  and  ignorance  that  the  media  of
these  days  are  toiling  and  climbing  to  reach  the  loftiest  heights  of


ADEPTi   SEER,   AND   MEDIUHSHIP.  I99

Truth,  that  the  beacon-light  of  Spirit  may  guide  men  through  all  perils
and  dangers  into  the  haven  of  rest  and  repose  ?

Can  you  not  hear  the  shriek  of  agony  that  comes  up  the  ages,
bom  of  what  men  call  religion  ?  Oh,  Liberal  man  I  awake,  **  know-
ing the  time,  that  now  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep ;  for  now
is  our  salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed."  — I^om.  xiii :  ix.

The  very  atmosphere  most  so-called  investigators  infuse  about
mediums  breaks  the  contact  of  full  Spirit  communion.  Neither  is  all
phenomena  caused  by  disembodied  or  departed  Souls,  but  much  of  it
by  the  power  of  human  thought  acting  upon  the  medium,  which,  if
not  acting  upon  directly,  calls  about  the  Souls  of  the  departed  who
are  not  truthful  nor  desired.  On  discovering  a  new  medium  who  is
just  opening  the  doors,  Evil- Soul-Spirits,  being  always  nearest  to  earth
and  hence  most  numerous,  are  sure  to  come  knocking  for  admission,
and  should  be  guarded  against,  just  as  one  would  guard  his  child  from
evil  companions.  The  human  mind  has  much  if  not  all  to  do  in  pre-
venting earth-bound,  unripened  Souls  from  entering,  and,  once  ad-
mitted, persistently  returning.

All  mediums  should  study  this  subject  carefully.  The  advanced
Soul-Spirits  teach  nothing  but  what  is  adorned  and  embellished  by
their  presences.  True  Soul-Spirits  are  not  content  with  toys  or  make-
believes,  however  gilded,  but  guide  us  always  to  the  right,  and  bring
to  us  our  own  departed  loved  ones  and  our  own  Angel-guardians.

The  Student  of  occult  forces  in  nature  must  remember  that  there
are  three  distinct  Monads  of  energy  in  the  Universal  Forces  of
Nature,  namely.  Elemental,  Elementary,  and  Sephiroth.  Elementals
are  the  powers  of  nature,  and  are  beings  of  energy  which  never  become
men.  These  forces  evolve  in  the  four  principal  kingdoms  of  Earth,
Air,  Fire,  and  Water,  they  are  those  energies  which  do  that  which
is  usually  ascribed  to  Nature,  and  are  the  blind  forces  of  Nature,  and,
according  to  Mohammedan  traditions,  are  the  forces  employed  in
erecting  the  Temple,  having  dominion  over  them  by  means  of  a  cer-
tain Magical  stone.  They  possess  extraordinary  powers,  standing  as
they  do  between  the  invisible  and  visible  worlds,  neither  have  they
any  moral  sense  or  knowledge  of  goodness  or  evil,  therefore  their
lives  are  not  centred  on  an  eternal  principle.

Elementary  Spirits  or  Monads  of  energy  are  disembodied  Souls ;
during  their  embodiment  having  been  either  on  a  more  gross  and  un-
ripened planet  than  earth,  and  have  been  attracted  to  this  globe  in
the  great  economy  of  growth,  or  have  been  depraved  gross  Souls
while  living  in  earth-life,  who  have  separated  themselves  from  the


200      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Divine  Spirits  of  Light,  choked  down  the  inner  Spirit  of  knowledge,
preferring  the  darkness  of  Selfishness  and  error  to  the  Light  of  Truth,
thereby  becoming  the  Shades  who  have  closed  the  door  of  understand-
ing against  the  interior  principles  of  Love  and  Wisdom,  which  consti-
tute the  glory  of  man,  and  on  account  of  this  disintegration  and  unripe-
ness must  await  in  the  surrounding  elements  until  they  absorb  a  renew-
ing energy,  develop  thereby,  and  be  bom  again  in  the  light  of  Spirit

Sephiroth,  or  the  Elementals  of  the  Astral  world,  are  both  infinite
and  finite,  they  partake  of  the  Divine  creating  Nature,  being  emana-
tions or  the  outside  garments  of  the  Great  Central  Sun  of  Spirit
Energy,  God ;  therefore  they  are  the  Elemental  Forces  of  Worlds  and
Suns.  They  are  the  Harmonies  Divine,  Creative  Wisdom,  and  the
Conceiving  Intellect,  known  in  the  Kabbala  as  Logos  or  knowl-
edge. They  are  the  Active  energy  which  forms  the  essence  of  all
substance,  being  the  vital  centres  of  force  acting  with  Spirit,  thereby
controlled  by  the  Divine  Mind,  being  God,  which  in  His  fulness  dwells
in  all  things.

Strive,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  to  become  your  own  medium.

In  the  long  ago,  when  Christ  was  the  mediator  and  guide  between
God  and  the  Angel  world,  and  everything  Spiritual  in  man.  He
taught  the  same.  Let  a  little  of  the  Christ  Love  dawn  within  your
Soul,  open  the  door  to  True  mediumship,  and  hold  it  sacred  with
your  truest  life,  for  on  its  altar  thousands  offer  up  the  softest  emo-
tions of  the  heart.

It  will  free  the  imprisoned  imaginations  of  youth,  and  freshen  the
fading  recollections  of  age,  and  with  true  mediumship  you  will
lighten  the  burdens  of  many  a  weary  Soul.

Mediumship  is  sure  to  be  terribly  iconoclastic  It  means  a  new
light  of  revolution  in  the  world  from  the  old  eternal  source.  And
you  cannot  have  new  light  let  in  without  seeing  many  old  acquaint-
ances with  a  new  face.  Many  aspects  of  things  will  be  changed;
and  some  things  that  we  mistook  for  living  faces  will  turn  into  the
sheerest  masks  of  mockery,  or  whiten  with  the  sweat  of  dissolution
running  down  them.  The  old  grounds  of  belief  are  breaking  up
rapidly,  no  matter  what  fresh  efforts  may  be  made  to  deceive,  delude,
and  secure  the  ignorant,  the  infants,  or  the  aborigines.

If  we  would  walk  with  the  Master  who  dwells  forever  in  the
presence  of  the  Divine  and  Infinite  Love,  we  must  look  where  we
have  been  commanded ;  in  the  sanctuaries  of  our  being,  in  the  path-
ways of  our  daily  walks;  for  there,  in  the  spiritual  nature  do  we
become  the  equal  of  all,  however  high  the  outward  station  of  life.


ADEPT,  SEER,  AND  HEDIUMSHIP.  201

Mediumship  is  a  new  world  of  truth,  understanding,  and  wisdom,
a  new  life  in  the  world ;  and  new  life  is  not  brought  forth  without  pain
and  partings,  and  the  shedding  of  old  decay.  New  ideas  are  not  bom
in  the  mind  without  the  pains  and  pangs  of  parturition  ;  and  to  get  rid
of  our  old  ingrained  errors  of  false  teaching  is  like  having  to  tear  up
by  the  root  the  snag  of  one's  own  teeth  with  one's  own  hand.  And  by
our  own  hand  and  Will  this  has  to  be  done,  for  nothing  else  can  do  it

New  light  and  life,  however,  do  not  come  to  impoverish  but  to
enrich ;  and  no  harm  can  befall  the  nature  of  that  which  is  eternally
true.  It  is  only  falsehood  that  fears  the  transfiguring  torch  of  light ;
Md/  needs  must  shrink  and  shrink  until  it  shrivels  away.

Mediumship  may  be  classed  under  two  heads,  vis. :  the  physical
and  the  mental ;  or,  the  material  and  the  spiritual.  Experienced  con-
jurers and  impartial  scientists  are  fully  capable  of  grappling  with  and
testing  the  various  forms  and  phases  of  physical  or  test-mediums ;  but
when  we  come  to  the  spiritual  or  mental  phases  of  mediumship,  the
investigator,  no  matter  how  critical,  experienced,  and  competent,  cries
"  Halt  1 "  and  demands  rime  to  take  a  few  long  breaths,  and  lubricate
hb  reasoning  faculties  by  a  **  a  few  more  stances,"  '*  a  little  more  time
to  think,"  etc.,  and  so  the  anxious  and  unenlightened  investigator
goes  on  in  his  labor  of  trying  to  "  draw  the  line  "  at  just  where  the
mind  of  the  medium  ceases  and  where  the  control  of  the  Spirit
begins.  Drawing  this  "  line  "  reminds  one  of  the  chalk  marks  and
circles  made  by  schoolboys  at  their  games,  which  last  only  for  a  day
or  two  plainly  visible,  when  fresh  chalk  lines  are  required  to  control
the  limits  of  the  game.

The  idea  that  presents  itself  of  Angel-hood  is  of  a  kind  similar  to
that  of  man  as  a  physical  being ;  it  is  an  intermediate  state.  Man  on
earth  is  the  connecting  link  between  the  animal  and  Spirit.  The
instincts  of  the  animal  are  more  perfect  in  their  kind  than  the  obser
vation  and  reason  of  man ;  and  these  instincts  are  again  reproduced
in  a  higher  form  in  the  intuitions  of  the  Spirit,  which  manifest  them-
selves frequently  and  reliably  in  spiritual  minds  still  in  the  flesh.
The  animal  state  is  one  of  Soul,  the  human  state  one  of  £^0.  The
Spiritual  state  is  another  plane  of  creation,  and  is  therefore  a  Soul
state,  as  marking  a  distinct  realm  of  the  Infinite.  In  the  Angel  the
JSgitf  or  volition  takes  another  flight ;  and  hence  the  Angel  is  specially
characterized  for  will-power,  ability  to  perform,  and  to  pass  from  one
state  to  another.  As  in  the  case  of  mankind,  we  may  expect  the
Angel  to  embrace  all  classes  of  development,  from  that  which  is
« evil "  and  "  low  '•  to  that  which  is  "good  "  and  "  high.''


202      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Angelic  ministry  opens  the  mind  to  the  most  glorious  themes  of
contemplation.  It  exhibits  love  in  moderation.  There  is  an  inces-
sant desire  on  the  part  of  the  Soul  to  uige  on  the  Ego  to  higher
missions  and  holier  motives.  This  is  so,  because  all  are  portions  ot
the  Infinite,  in  whom  exists  the  perfection  of  all  things.

Revelation  has  always  taught  of  those  who  left  more  pleasant
abodes  that  they  might  self-sacrificingly  minister  to  the  crying  needs
of  earth's  dark  and  sorrowful  ones.  Thus  it  must  ever  be.  When
any  abode  of  bliss  becomes  more  than  a  necessary  means  of  develoj^
menty  it  is  then  a  sensual  luxury,  to  enjoy  which  for  mere  pleasure
would  be  hell  itself.  The  joy  of  the  Angel  is  in  activity,  whereby
those  in  need  of  upliftment  may  be  reached  and  led  to  participate  in
that  blessedness  which  has  proved  so  salutary  to  their  predecessors
and  present  helpers.  And  this  is  the  prime  lesson  for  every  man  to
learn.

We  have  erred  in  Spiritualism  by  trying  to  do  too  much  for
others;  we  have  taken  it  upon  us  to  force  conviction  on  unwilling
minds.

Our  task  is  far  different  from  this.  All  we  can  do  is  to  exhibit  to
the  observation  of  our  fellows  the  facts  as  we  have  experienced  them,
the  phenomena  as  we  see  them,  the  teachings  as  we  have  received
them,  and  irradiate  on  all  such  elevating  influences  as  we  ourselves
possess.

That  is  just  what  our  Angel  helpers  do  for  us.  Why  don't  the
Spirits  do  this,  that,  or  the  other  thing  for  us  ?  is  the  cry  of  those  who
are  ignorant  of  spiritual  laws.  The  Spirits  can  do  nothing  for  us  but
help  us,  if  we  are  ready  and  willing  to  be  helped.  They  allow  us  to
wander  far  and  wide  in  our  hapless  plight  till  we  are  ready  to  receive
instruction.

A  new  and  higher  spiritual  baptism  is  descending  upon  us.  Let
us,  then,  always  act  in  the  light  of  this  New  Power,  and  it  will  guide  us
in  the  exercise  of  it.  The  admonition  of  the  New  Power  is  that  these
spiritual  faculties  must  be  used  for  truly  spiritual  and  religious  pur^
poses  and  for  none  other.  Under  the  proper  influence  these  gifts  are
such  a  power  for  good  that  it  is  impossible  to  overestimate  their
value.

The  investigator  who  is  always  looking  for  and  expecting  a  trick
is  very  apt  to  encounter  the  reflex  action  of  his  own  mind — the  child
of  his  own  creation  —  embodied  in  the  sensitive  aura  of  the  mediuoL

He  should  remember  that  thoughts  are  veritable  things,  palpable
to  the  sensitive  ;  and  that  in  '  exposing '  a  supposed  fraud— especially


ADEPT,   SEER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  203

in  the  case  of  some  well  known  and  reliable  medium  —  he  may  possi-
bly be  simply  exposing  his  own  ignorance  of  spiritual  laws.

A  genuine  lover  of  Truth  for  its  own  sake,  who  enters  this  do-
main of  occult  science  accepting  the  conditions  which  are  allowed,
though  beset  in  the  commencement  with  doubts  and  difficulties,  will
by  perseverance,  soon  receive  ample  proofs  and  tests  of  the  genuine-
ness of  psychometrical  manifestations  and  spiritual  agency ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  the  doubter  who  investigates  for  the  purpose  of  dis-
covering imposture  and  fraud  will  discover  what  he  or  she  thinks  is
sufficient  to  justify  the  pre-existing  doubts,  and  sooner  or  later  retires
in  disgust

The  person  who  complains  of  conditions  will  not  fail  to  give  that
oC  darkness  the  first  place  among  the  objectionable  ;  but  even  under
thb  an  honest  quest  will  not  be  without  its  reward.  There  are  fre-
quently those  who,  although  strenuously  opposed  to  dark  circles,  faith-
fully and  perseveringly  continue  their  investigations  in  the  face  of
doubts  and  discouraging  surmises,  until  some  evening  the  doubts  all
vanish,  the  mists  clear  away,  and  the  truth  is  revealed.  Some  friendly
burst  of  moonlight  lighting  up  the  whole  room  through  the  seemingly
accidental  misplacing  of  a  curtain,  perhaps,  shows  the  guitar  high  up
by  the  ceiling,  aloof  from  all  visible  support,  and  being  played  on  by
some  unknown  force  exercising  intelligence.

No  individual  can  expect  satisfactory  phenomena  while  the  mind
is  in  a  strained  or  anxious  state.  It  is  best  that  he  change  his  methods
and  as  a  commencement  that  he  stop  insisting  on  test  conditions,  that
he  sit  passively  and  accept  what  comes  for  what  it  is  worth,  unques-
tioningly,  until  his  Spirit  friends  can  break  through  the  strong  barriers
of  positive  magnetism  which  he  interposes  between  himself  and  the
Spirit  world.  He  must  lay  aside  all  arrogance  of  opinion,  all  self-con-
scious "  smartness,"  so  to  speak ;  in  other  words,  he  must  approach
the  sacred  altar  of  Spirit  communion  prayerfully,  trustingly,  and  in  a
spirit  of  child-like  simplicity  —  and  not  be  perpetually  looking  for  and
expecting  a  trick.  If  he  seek  for  the  evidence  in  this  spirit,  it  will  not
be  likely  to  be  long  before  he  will  be  made  glad  with  all  the  proof  he
needs.  He  will  have  test  after  test,  and  they  will  come  to  him  in  ways
he  little  dreams  of.

One  who  desires  to  be  of  assistance  to  mediums,  or  to  live  and
commune  with  the  Spiritual  world,  must  keep  down  the  material  as
much  as  possible,  for  mediumship  is  the  doorway  between  Spirit  and
mortals  and  the  threshold  between  Soul  and  matter.  The  sacred  fire
of  mediumship  should  be  guarded  and  tended  like  the  vestal  fires  of


204       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

andent  Rome,  not  fanned  by  the  hot  breath  of  ambition  and  lust  for
gold,  as  is  too  often  the  case.  Our  so-called  civilization  has  become  too
much  a  life  of  per  cent  and  discounts.  Everything,  even  those  which
should  be  sacred,,  begins  and  ends  with  money.  Our  very  Souls  are
compressed  in  this  mad  rush  and  confusion  of  thoughts  which  conceal
the  light  of  Spiritual  Truths.  As  man  increases  the  rush  for  wealth,
woman  keeps  apace  with  luxuriance  of  dress  and  vanity  until  nature
finally  rebels  in  some  great  convulsion.

This  is  an  age  of  traffic,  but  shall  we  traffic  in  the  Souls  of  the
dead  and  communion  with  the  departed?  Oh  hasten  that  golden
age  of  Spirit  Light  yet  to  dawn,  when  ''  all  thy  children  shall  be  taught
of  God,  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children."  —  Isaiah  liv. :  13.

Trance  is  the  bridge  over  measureless  space,  between  this  world
and  the  world  beyond,  between  Soul  and  Spirit,  and  if  one's  guiding
Spirit  is  a  wise  sage,  with  the  light  of  knowledge,  thought  can  com-
mune with  thought,  Soul  with  Spirit,  though  oceans  of  space  divide
the  forms ;  in  tokens  of  tenderest  love  one  will  receive  assurance  that
far  beyond  the  great  shadows  of  life  are  beautiful  homes  of  light  and
love.

Open  the  door  of  your  Soul  and  welcome  the  messenger  of  Light,
who  will  form  a  union  of  Spirit  with  you,  and  may  your  Soul  never
again  lose  the  sublimity  of  thought  which  will  then  fill  it.  Ask  and
pray  that  your  every-day  life  may  be  under  the  sheen  and  shadow  of
an  Angel's  loving  wings  until  your  Soul  has  finished  its  course.

When  the  sear  and  yellow  leaf  falls  from  the  tree  in  Autumn,
Nature  is  throwing  off  her  old  worn-out  clothing  and  preparing  to
don  her  new  attire  in  the  joyous  Spring,  but  that  which  is  thrown  off
and  put  aside  must  be  avoided.  Oh,  children  on  life's  pilgrimage,  can
you  not  learn  to  do  for  yourself  what  nature  does  for  the  plant :  throw
off  all  impurities  that  retard  the  growth  of  God's  Love  in  you,  and  you
will  retain  strength  and  increase  in  beauty.  Beloved,  take  lessons
from  the  school  of  nature.

Persons  of  thoughtful  minds  do  not  claim  that  Spiritualistic  doc*
trine  or  phenomena  are  of  modem  invention.

On  the  contrary,  the  communion  of  Souls  and  Spiritual  intelligence
with  mankind  occurs  by  virtue  of  natural  law.  It  must  have  existed
from  the  beginning  of  all  time,  and  traces  of  this  intercommunion  are
found  in  the  earliest  annals  of  antiquity.

The  thought  of  death  sits  easy  on  the  man  who  builds  his  hopes
on  Spirit  Truths.  He  knows  that  the  Soul  of  man  is  the  building  of
God,  that  stands  forever,  changing  only  in  its  furnishing.    We  find


ADEPT,  SEER,  AND   MEDIUHSHIP.  20$

daily  in  these  Souls  of  ours  some  new  germs  of  higher  birth.    He  who
best  commands  the  ideal  ever  enjoys  most  the  real.

The  communion  with  the  immortals  was  daily  practised  in  the
times  of  the  apostles.  Witness  Paul's  account  of  being  caught  up  to
the  third  heavens,  "  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  it ; "  Peter's  vision
at  Joppa,  etc.,  which  are  familiar  to  Bible  students.  The  state  of
semi-entrancement  was  not  uncommon.  Communion  with  Spirit  was  a
joy,  and  Mediumship  a  sacred  thing  among  the  early  Christians,  the
hallowed  communion  with  the  Angel-world,  bridging  over  all  sorrow,
pain,  and  death.

What  diviner  joy  can  there  be  than  to  hold  sweet  communion  with
the  immortals  ?  Therefore  strive  to  become  your  own  medium,  and
on  this  height  of  Spirit  communion  you  will  find  that  sweet  compo-
sure the  world  cannot  give.  The  knowledge  of  this  truth  drives  away
sorrow,  and  has  for  centuries  spoken  in  whispers  of  joy  of  the  pres-
ence of  loved  ones,  even  in  the  hour  of  death.

Through  all  arts,  science,  or  progress,  a  medium  is  highly  neces-
sary. Through  the  whole  of  the  mechanical  world  a  medium  is  required
If  we  telegraph  or  send  a  word  across  the  seas,  the  operator  or
medium  is  a  positive  necessity.  So  when  you  wish  to  communicate  with
the  so-called  dead,  if  you  have  not  grown  into  a  knowledge  of  the  pas-
sive vibrations,  you  must  employ  a  medium  who  has  gained  that
knowledge.

By  repeated  experiments  and  trials,  the  conclusion  has  been
arrived  at  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  entrancement.  First,  the
psychological  or  overshadowing.  Second,  sleeping  while  the  Soul
rests  fo)m  the  Solar  plexus,  releasing  the  brain  of  the  medium  for
other  influences  to  use ;  third,  the  Pilgrimage  or  voyage  of  the  Soul,
while  the  entire  body  may  rest  or  be  used  by  other  intelligence  either
in  human  form  or  disembodied.

In  the  first,  the  psychological  or  mesmeric  state,  the  Astral  and  Soul
of  the  mediiun  are  controlled  by  a  human  being.  In  the  third  a
full  entrancement  takes  place,  the  Soul  of  the  medium  taking  a  flight
away,  or  being  held  and  overshadowed  by  some  guiding  Spirit,  who
opens  the  door  of  the  medium's  organism  to  a  visitor  or  visitors.

The  second  the  semi-entranced  state,  is  the  inspirational  or  ecstatic
one,  where  the  Soul  of  the  medium  remains  at  home  in  its  own  body,
while  some  intelligence,  usually  of  a  high  degree,  comes  as  a  visitor
also,  and  communes  or  takes  charge  of  the  organism  by  desire  of  its
owner.

The  Soul  of  the  medium,  with  its  vibrating  door,  the  Astral  body,


206      TH£  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

opens  to  Soul-spirits  of  wide  differences,  those  who  are  unripe  and  6t
earth  most  earthy,  and  those  who  have  grown  and  ripened  into  the
light  of  Truth,  and  are  always  in  contemplation  of  the  Divine  Essence
of  Love.  The  philosophy  of  mediumship  lies  in  these  few  woids.
The  Spiritual  world  is  an  overflowing  fountain,  and  human  Souls  are
its  reservoirs,  therefore  neither  height  nor  depth  can  measure  the  pos-
sibilities of  the  human  Soul.  The  Will,  with  its  reflective  qualities,  is
the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  force  of  the  human  mind ;  hence  the
law  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  and  of  sympathy  and  antipathy,  in  the
human  economy  of  both  Spirit  and  mortal.

What  are  the  ambitions,  hopes,  desires,  and  loves  of  the  medium  ?
What  are  the  radiations  of  atmosphere  which  come  from  visitors  and
friends  immediately  surrounding  the  organism  that  b  being  used?
These  are  most  important  and  serious  questions.

So  live  your  better  life.  Let  your  worst  thoughts  die,  and  you
will  find  a  hidden  pathway  from  lowest  depths  to  loftiest  heights,  and
repose  and  peace  continual.

Thoughts  being  substance  that  surrounds  the  Soul,  and  mind  its
atmosphere,  here  is  a  very  grave  point  and  one  that  requires  the  deep-
est investigation,  if  successful  intercommunion  of  Souls  can  take
place,  or  development  and  growth  of  the  medium  be  attained,  for  it
is  an  immutable  law  that  the  Souls  of  the  departed  are  called  and  go
by  their  sympathy  and  attraction  toward  those  sounds,  lights,  colors,  or
chemical  properties  which  were  akin  to  or  symbolic  of  themselves.

It  is  only  the  unchanging  law  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  for  are
not  love  and  hatred,  sympathy  and  antipathy,  the  lay  of  the  universe  ?

Dear  honest  heart,  seeker  for  Truth  and  Light,  strive  to  contem-
plate the  works  of  nature's  God,  mysterious,  ineffable,  miraculous,
when  we  consider  that  all  the  universe,  from  the  glorious  planets  over
our  head  to  the  meanest  pebble  beneath  our  feet,  is  influenced  and
swayed  by  affinities  and  repulsions,  as  unexpected  and  as  unfathom-
able as  human  love,  will,  mind,  and  thought.  Reflecting  on  these
things,  we  as  Pilgrims  of  Light  must  realize  the  duty  we  owe  toward
true  media.

The  Souls  of  the  departed  and  the  higher  Astral  forces  are  Sacrtd
Elements  which  should  not  be  tampered  with,  as  they  too  frequently
are,  through  ignorance,  guided  by  unholy  and  selfish  desires.

Thus  the  door  is  opened  to  maleficent  Spirits  that  wreck  the
medium  for  further  growth.  An  unholy,  impure,  selfish-minded  indi-
vidual could  more  safely  play  with  lightning  than  palter  with  the
tal  fires  of  the  Soul  in  the  inner  Temple  of  Life.


ADEPT,   SEER,  AND  MEDIUMSHIP.  20/

We  do  most  solemnly  protest  against  the  merciless  crusade  and
tyranny  of  test  conditions ;  against  unfair  treatment  on  the  part  of
so-called  scientific  men,  who  claim  attention  from  the  world  as
honorable  men,  yet  pander  to  popular  prejudice  and  religious  dis-
honesty and  deceit  in  their  investigations  (?)  of  Spiritual  laws.  Shall
Negatives  and  Spiritual  mediums  continue  to  sin  and  suffer  and
become  victims  of  blind  forces  which  are  continually  operating  upon
them,  infused  into  their  Souls  by  the  very  atmosphere  brought  about
them  by  the  people  with  whom  they  come  in  contact  ?  Must  they
continue  to  suffer  until  death  takes  them  to  a  more  genial  shore,  on
account  of  intolerance  and  ignorance  ?  God  never  discloses  himself
directly  save  through  some  medium.  To  the  common  mind,  medium-
ship  may  seem  to  be  only  as  vulgar  toys  or  conjuring  tricks,  suited
only  to  the  wonder  of  the  mob,  but  to  those  who  have  ripened  into
an  illumination  of  mentality  and  been  transformed  by  a  renewal  of
their  minds,  mediumship  gives  ample  proof  of  visiting  strangers  com-
municating from  out  the  great  crowd  of  the  invisible  majority  on
the  other  side  of  life,  and  also  of  the  immortality  of  the  Soul.

It  b  quite  in  keeping  for  the  common  mind  vehemently  to  deny
the  existence  of  all  that  of  which  it  is  totally  ignorant,  or,  like  chil-
dren, cannot  comprehend ;  but :  —


"  Hands  of  invisible  spirits  touch  the  strings
Of  that  mysterious  instrument,  the  soul,
And  play  the  prelude  of  our  fate.    We  hear
The  voice  prophetic,  and  are  not  alone."


A  medium  is  a  sort  of  mirror,  reflecting  all  the  thoughts,  ideas,
and  knowledge  of  those  about  him.  It  does  not  follow,  however,
that  he  says  nothing  which  is  not  known  to  one  or  more  of  them.  So
far  from  the  medium  being  merely  an  echo  of  the  thought  of  those
visibly  around  him,  there  are  thousands  of  facts  proving  directly  the
contrary.  It  is  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  Spiritual  doc-
trifte  that  those  who  are  present  exercise  an  influence  upon  almost
all  manifestations.  The  radiation  of  thought  extends  far  beyond  the
drcle  inmiediately  around  us.  The  true  medium,  when  in  a  fully
negative  vibration,  is  only  the  reflection  of  the  human  race  in
general,  and,  if  he  does  not  derive  his  inspiration  from  those  about
him,  derives  it  from  those  further  off,  and,  if  he  be  under  the  guard
and  guidance  of  the  Angel  world,  his  mentality  is  opened  to  inhabit-
ants of  other  spheres  and  other  worlds  than  ours.    The  idea  that


208  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

universal  space  is  peopled  by  beings  who  are  in  perpetual  contact
with  US,  and  who  communicate  their  ideas  to  us,  b  certainly  no  mote
repugnant  to  reason  than  the  hypothesis  of  a  universal  radiation,
coming  from  every  point  of  the  universe  and  converging  in  the  brain
of  an  individual  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others.  By  observation  one
sees  that  the  Somnambulic  theory  and  that  which  may  be  called  the
theory  of  reflection  have  been  devised  by  the  imagination  of  men,
while,  on  the  contrary,  the  theory  of  Spirit  agency  is  not  a  concep-
tion of  the  human  mind,  for  it  was  dictated  by  the  manifesting  intel-
ligence, at  a  time  when  no  one  thought  of  Spirit  or  of  communion
with  immortals.  The  earliest  manifestations  in  Europe,  as  in  Amer-
ica, were  not  made  by  either  writing  or  speech,  but  by  raps  indicating
the  letters  of  the  alphabet  and  thus  forming  words  and  sentences.

Communion  of  the  immortals  with  mankind  and  the  knowledge
thus  conveyed  is  of  a  character  far  too  important  to  be  mastered
without  unbiassed  thought,  free  from  prejudice,  and  should  be  pur-
sued with  serious  and  persevering  attention.

The  communications  of  the  departed  Souls  with  mankind  are
either  occult  or  ostensible.  Occult  communications  are  made  through
the  good  or  bad  influences  they  exert  on  us  without  our  being  aware
of  them.  It  is  our  duty  to  distinguish  by  the  exercise  of  our  own
judgment  between  the  good  and  the  bad  inspirations  thus  brought
to  bear  upon  us.  Spirits  often  manifest  themselves  spontaneously  or  in
response  to  invocation.  All  Spirits  may  be  evoked,  —  those  who  have
animated  the  most  obscure  of  mortals  as  well  as  those  of  the  most
illustrious  personages,  and  whatever  the  epoch  in  which  they  lived ;
those  of  our  relatives  and  friends,  or  of  our  enemies,  —  and  we  may
obtain  from  them,  by  written  or  verbal  communications,  counsel  and
information  in  regard  to  us,  or  whatever  revelations  they  axe  per-
mitted to  make.  If  these  Souls  have  awakened  to  a  knowledge  of
immortality,  they  are  attracted  by  their  sympathy  with  the  moral
quality  of  the  parties  by  whom  they  are  evoked.  It  is  perfectly  easy
to  distinguish  between  good  and  bad  Spirits  who  return  to  mortals.
Those  of  a  superior  elevation  and  growth  into  the  Absolute  Light
will  in  their  manner  of  communication  through  any  language  be
dignified,  noble,  and  free  from  any  trace  of  earthly  passion;  their
teaching  characterized  by  the  highest  morality,  their  counsels  breath-
ing the  purest  wisdom,  always  aiming  at  our  improvement  and  the
good  of  mankind.  The  communications  of  unripened  Souls  and
those  of  lower  order  or  degree  are,  on  the  contrary,  full  of  discrepan-
cies, their  language  often  commonplace,  sometimes  even  coarse  and


ADEPT,   SEER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  209

gross.  They  sometimes  say  things  that  are  good  and  true,  but  more
often  make  false  and  absurd  statements,  prompted  by  ignorance  or
malice.  They  play  upon  the  credulity  of  those  who  interrogate  them,
taking  pleasure  in  flattering  their  vanity  and  fooling  them  with  false
hopes.

It  does  not  always  follow  that  mediums  are  dishonest  in  the  man-
ifestations produced  if  they  are  moved  upon  by  an  independent
intelligence  outside  of  and  beyond  themselves.  It  is  difficult  to  draw
the  line  between  the  action  of  Spirits  out  of  the  form,  and  the  Spirit
of  the  medium  being  controlled.

Without  question  it  is  detrimental  to  sensitives  to  sit  in  a  promis-
cuous physical  stance,  and  illness  is  often  the  result  of  indulging  in
the  practice  to  any  great  extent.  The  public,  if  left  alone,  soon  loses
confidence  in  mediums  who  seem  in  all  they  do  to  have  the  almighty
dollar  first  and  last  in  view,  or  if  they  do  not  live  in  harmony  with
the  higher  teachings ;  but  when  a  medium  is  puffed  up  without  merit,
confidence  in  the  whole  subject  is  destroyed,  and  the  public,  not  well
versed  in  the  law  and  philosophy  of  the  subject,  is  liable  to  say,  If
such  a  person  is  a  pattern  or  representative  of  the  cause,  deliver  us
from  it  or  its  influence.

The  mission  of  the  test  medium  is  to  convince  the  sceptic  and  the
materialist;  that  of  the  inspirational  medium  is  to  elevate  and
instruct  those  already  convinced.  It  matters  little  how  fast  the
world  becomes  converted  to  the  truths  of  Spirit  communion,  if  the
people  be  not  instructed  to  proceed  in  the  right  way.  A  heavy
responsibility  rests  on  our  public  lecturers  to  whom  thousands  look
for  instruction  and  wisdom.

One  has  only  to  read  the  questions  put  to  the  different  speakers
to  be  convinced  of  the  importance  of  the  inspirational  mission.  All
sorts  of  questions  are  sent  to  the  rostrum,  and  the  answers  are  ex-
pected to  be  at  once  lucid  and  concise.

The  same  evils  which  have  tempted  mankind  in  all  ages  tempt  us
to-day.  The  Spirit  of  Love  which  would  have  saved  mankind  from
sorrow,  and  borne  them  to  greater  joys  if  they  had  so  willed,  will  do
the  same  for  us,  if  we  will.  The  same  pride,  ambition,  envy,  selfish-
ness, jealousy,  and  wrong  that  have  existed  from  out  the  night  of  antiq-
uity exists  to-day,  though  modified  and  softened  in  form.  No  matter
what  the  nation,  kindred,  or  tongue,  whether  civilized  or  not,  these  all
are  the  same  impulse  of  error  to  all  the  world.  The  same  devil  who
tempted  the  old  Egyptians  tempts  us.  Their  sins  are  ours,  theij
errors  ours,  their  doom  ours,  their  deliverance  ours.    The  thing  which


2IO      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

has  been,  it  is  that  which  shall  be.    "  Let  him  who  is  without  sin

among  you  cast  the  first  stone."

Of  all  the  weaknesses  which  little  men  rail  against,  there  is  none
they  are  more  apt  to  ridicule  than  a  tendency  to  believe.  And  of  all
the  signs  of  a  corrupt  heart  and  a  feeble  head,  the  tendency  to  incre-
dulity is  the  surest.

Real  philosophy  seeks  rather  to  solve  than  to  deny.  While  we
hear  every  day  the  small  pretenders  to  science  talk  of  the  absurdities
of  Alchemy  and  the  dream  of  the  Philosopher's  Stone,  a  more  erudite
knowledge  is  aware  that  the  greatest  discoveries  in  science  have  been
made  by  alchemists,  and  much  which  still  seems  abstruse,  had  we  the
key  to  the  mystic  phraseology  they  were  compelled  to  adopt,  might
open  the  way  to  yet  more  noble  acquisitions.  The  Philosopher's
stone  itself  has  seemed  no  visionary  chimera  to  some  of  the  soundest
chemists  that  even  the  present  century  has  produced.  Man  cannot
contradict  the  laws  of  nature,  but  are  all  the  laws  of  nature  yet  dis-
covered? Our  modern  scientist,  with  imperfect  knowledge  of  the
laws  governing  the  mysteries  of  mediumship,  is  full  of  theory,  argu-
ment, assumption,  and  conjecture,  unconscious  and  ignorant  of  Spirit
and  the  mysteries  of  the  Soul.  Their  arguments  and  theories  axe
based  on  their  ignorance  of  facts.

To-day  the  one  thing  needful  is  cool,  calm,  dispassionate  investiga-
tion. The  bulk  of  the  people,  who  are  receiving  an  education  suffi-
cient to  fit  them  to  use  the  ballot,  are  surely  enlightened  enough  to
use  their  own  faculties  of  observation  and  powers  of  reflection  in  con-
nection with  every  event  that  challenges  public  attention.

Psychical  research  societies  cannot  do  our  work  for  us.  It  is  not
for  any  to  set  up  a  body  of  men  in  a  new  chair  of  authority  and  bow
to  their  dictum  as  though  they  were  the  special  oracles  of  heaven.

Scientists  can  be  and  often  are  as  tyrannical  as  priests,  and  many
materialists  and  agnostics  are  as  bigoted  and  intolerant  as  the  most
arrogant  and  dogmatic  churchman.

In  days  of  old,  when  prophets  had  to  show  signs  of  their  fitness  to
fill  the  prophetic  office,  works  were  demanded  of  them,  the  perform-
ance of  which  settled  the  question  as  to  the  source  whence  they
derived  their  inspiration.

This  is  emphatically  an  age  of  trying  and  testing.  Every  one
demands  a  test  of  some  kind  to  prove  his  neighbor's  trustworthiness.
Mere  assertion  will  no  longer  suffice  to  satisfy  inquirers ;  they  must
have  proof,  evidence,  demonstration.

But  while  the  tendencies  of  the  present  age  are  emphatically


ADEPT,  SEER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  211

levelling  tendendes,  we  must  not  forget  that  two  kinds  of  Ie\'elling
are  possible,  the  one  being  levelling  up,  the  other  levelling  down.

Prophec)'  may  include  prediction  or  the  foretelling  of  future  e\*ents,
but  eschortation  to  reform  is  always  the  burden  of  the  prophet*s  cry,
and  works  of  charity  are  always  performed  by  him  who  is  worthy  of
the  name  of  prophet.

Prediction  is  often  only  a  careful  and  intelligent  recognition  of
canse  and  effect,  a  nice  balancing  of  probabilities ;  and,  even  when
absolutely  the  result  of  direct  revelation  from  a  higher  realm  of  being,
is  not  for  an  instant  to  be  regarded  as  the  highest  function  of  the
prophet.  We  must  never  put  mysteries  and  miracles  on  a  par  with
moral  forces  which  testify  to  their  di\inity  by  the  power  tlicy  exert
in  elevating  mortals,  succoring  the  needy  and  vanquishing  error ;  to
foretell  the  future  is  not  always  the  way  to  prepare  persons  to  meet  it.

The  predictions  of  Joseph  and  Daniel  are  brought  forward  in  the
ffible  as  singular  proofs  of  their  fellowship  with  the  Most  High ;  and
yet  the  Bible  abounds  with  anathemas  hurled  at  the  heads  of  those
who  practise  witchcraft  and  sorcery.  Even  business  clairvoyance  is
justified,  for  no  slight  is  cast  upon  the  prophet  who  told  Samuel  how
he  could  recover  his  father's  asses.  The  truly  great  man  is  sure  to
be  something  of  a  prophet  in  the  predictive  sense  of  the  term,  as
those  who  possess  unusual  knowledge  of  cause  and  eflcct  are  like
dwellers  high  up  upon  the  hills,  who  have  a  far  more  extended  liori*
zon  and  wider  view  of  the  surrounding  country  on  all  sides  tlian
those  who  dwell  in  valleys  or  nearer  the  bases  of  the  mountains.
But  when  good  is  done,  when  the  poor  and  the  needy  arc  supported,
when  diseases  are  cured  and  devils  cast  out,  we  may  surely  exclaim
with  unfaltering  tongues,  '^  This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  glorious
in  our  eyes."

One  of  the  highest  of  the  Father's  messengers,  one  bearing  the
tender  counsel  of  the  Infinite  Mother  most  closely  to  the  human
heart,  has  said  to  all  mankind  "  Lo  I  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto
the  end."  You  who  commune  with  the  immortals  know  the  end  of
your  career  will  be  spared  the  narrow-minded  education  of  its  begin-
ning; though  the  morning  has  been  dark,  the  sunset  will  be  glorious.
In  the  first  chapter  of  Hebrews  and  fourteenth  verse  we  have  the
following  words :  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  Spirits,  sent  forth  lo
minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ? "  The  new  ver-
sion reads,  **  Sent  forth  to  do  service  for  the  sake  of  them,"  etc.

What  can  be  more  natural,  what  more  suited  to  the  yearning  heart,
or  what  can  give  more  comfort  to  those  in  dbtress,  than  the  assurance


212  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

that  those  we  love  and  those  who  have  in  life  been  so  much  inter-
ested in  our  welfare  are  ever  with  us  and  ready  and  willing  to  serve
us  ?  So  these  Angels  are  not  only  about  "  when  we  wake,  but  attend
us  while  we  sleep'';  or,  as  Longfellow  has  said:-~

**  With  a  slow  and  noiseless  footstep
Comes  that  messenger  divine.
Takes  the  vacant  chair  beside  me,^
Lays  her  gentle  hand  in  mine.

^  Oh,  though  oft  depressed  and  lonely.
All  my  fears  are  laid  aside.
If  I  but  remember  only
Such  as  these  have  lived  and  died  I  *

1 1.  And  they,  when  they  had  heard  that  he  was  alive  and  had  been  seen  cf  her,
believed  not

12.  After  that,  he  appeared  in  another  form  onto  two  of  them,  as  they  walked
and  went  into  the  country.

13.  And  they  went  and  told  it  unto  the  residue;  neither  believed  they  them.

14.  Afterward  he  appeared  unto  the  eleven  as  they  sat  at  meat  and  upbraided
them  with  their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart,  because  they  believed  not  them
which  had  seen  him  after  he  was  risen.  *  SL  AfarJk,  ziv.

So  does  the  church  and  so  do  many  people  outside  of  it  to-day,
making  loud  profession  of  belief  "  in  the  communion  of  the  saints  "
in  ages  past,  but  denying  the  possibility  of  it  in  these  days,  simply
because  it  is  not  in  their  way  and  according  to  their  narrow  ideas.

Many  different  modes  of  holding  communication  with  the  Angel
world  and  the  Souls  of  the  departed  loved  ones  have  been  used,  and
new  ones  are  frequently  being  discovered;  but  we  do  not  suppose
that  all  or  any  of  them  were  original  discoveries.  On  the  contrary,  if
there  is  any  truth  in  history,  and  the  grand  old  Bible  is  not  all  false,
the  science  of  Spirit  communion  is  founded  on  fact  and  is  as  old  as
the  races  of  men.  '*  That  which  hath  been,  is  now :  and  that  which
IS  to  be,  hath  already  been :  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  past"  —
£cc,  ill. :  15.

"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward  that  I  mil  pour  out  my  Spirit
upon  all  flesh ;  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy ;
your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams ;  your  young  men  shall  see  visions ;
and  also  upon  the  handmaids  in  those  days  will  I  pour  out  my  Spirit.''
— Joel  ii.  :  28,  29.

"  The  sluggard  is  wiser  in  his  own  conceit  than  seven  men  that
can  render  a  reason.''  —  Prov.  xxi :  i6.


ADEPT,   SEER,   AND   HEDIUMSHIP.  213

A  medium  who  is  brave  and  true  enough  to  stand  out  before  the
world  and  the  multitude  is  alone  like  a  tree  upon  a  mountain  stand-
ing solitary  and  forlorn,  assailed  on  all  sides  by  storm  and  wind  which
give  it  no  peace ;  tempest-tossed,  and  almost  uprooted,  a  harder  blow
than  usual  snaps  it  off  or  lays  it  low,  with  torn  branches  and  bleeding,
lacerated  limbs,  to  wither  and  decay.  That  which  has  been  the  strug-
gling growth  of  years  is  by  a  single  blow  laid  low  and  doomed  to
destruction  and  death ;  though,  if  the  Soul  is  sound  and  true,  the  sap
may  flow  again  and  it  may  grow  afresh ;  the  scar  remains,  crows  love
best  the  dead  branches,  and  the  world  points  at  it  in  derision  and
sneers  at  its  unsightliness.

In  spite  of  strong  prejudices  that  always  prevail  in  opposition  to
anything  new,  especially  in  the  religious  world.  Spirit  communion
with  the  departed  has  grown,  and  brought  peace  to  many  a  breaking
heart  But  if  Spiritualism  is  to  be  the  coming  religion,  the  personali-
ties and  inharmonies  and  ends  and  aims  which  are  allowed  to  prevail
in  most  Spiritual  circles  must  be  dismissed.  The  little  societies  of
to-day  are  too  much  like  a  vast  room  with  one  candle  in  the  sconce
or  at  most  two.  There  should  be  churches  that  have  so  large  a  com-
pany of  those  who  live  in  the  higher  Spiritual  state  that  their  joined
light  shall  form  an  illumination  and  their  joined  impulse  of  life  create
a  current  by  which  others  shall  be  taken  up  and  carried  on.  One  can
live  a  Spiritual  life  outside  of  any  society,  but  he  owes  a  duty  to  the
world  and  to  God,  whose  Spirit  is  poured  out  upon  him.  He  will  do
much  better  work  in  a  good,  harmonious  society  than  outside  of  it.
One  may  raise  fruit  at  the  roadside,  but  boys  will  be  apt  to  steal  it,
whereas  a  sheltered  tree,  behind  the  wall,  will  carry  its  fruit  fully
ripened,  to  be  gathered  at  the  right  time  by  the  right  hand.

To  almost  every  individual  there  comes  at  some  time  of  his
earthly  pilgrimage  a  time  when  there  are  outbursts  of  experience
which  convince  him  that  there  is  a  reality  in  what  is  called  higher
Spiritual  life;  when  the  purifying  fire  of  affliction  bums  within  his
home.  Softened  in  Spirit  by  the  struggle  through  which  he  has
passed  manfully,  his  Soul  uplifted  by  the  call  from  his  inmost  being,
an  intermittent  light  shines  upon  him  from  above,  and  at  some  unex-
pected hour  there  burst  a  glorious  radiance  and  presentation  of  Truth
within  his  Soul,  bringing  a  fulness  of  peace  and  healthful  buoyancy
greater  and  more  beautiful  than  he  had  ever  heard  or  thought  of  be-
fore. This  may  come  to  him  only  through  some  one  of  the  loved
ones  who  are  gone  before  acting  as  pilot  to  those  who  are  to  follow ;
or  maybe  the  hand  of  a  little  child  left  motherless  in  his  keeping,


214      '^^^^   HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD!.

leading  him  upward  in  its  helpless  innocence ;  or  it  may  be  a  voice
that  comes  on  the  night  wind  from  beyond  —  no  matter  what  the
cause  may  be,  there  is  a  coming  up  one  step  higher,  a  new  birth,  and
he  ponders  and  wonders  why  he  had  not  seen  all  this  before.  This  is
the  Soul's  birth  into  Spirit,  the  discovery  of  a  higher  and  ultimate
stage  of  life,  the  first  stages  of  which  are  great  peace  and  perfect
tranquillity.  While  men  are  yet  young  and  enjoy  impressions  upon
their  nerves,  racket  and  struggle  and  rebound,  echo  and  re-echo  are
not  altogether  disagreeable,  but  as  men  grow  weary  of  the  strife  ol
life,  a  thought  arises,  still  as  the  star  of  evening  over  the  horizon
"  Peace  and  Rest."  Not  lack  of  activity,  but  peace.  This  may  come
by  lowering  the  tone  of  a  man's  nerves,  but  there  is  a  peace  that
comes  by  quickening  the  tone  of  one's  nerves.  It  is  not  the  peace  of
somnolency.  It  is  that  perfect  rest  of  the  Soul  when  it  is  filled  full  of
that  for  which  it  hungers  and  thirsts.  It  is  the  rest  of  the  Soul  in  its
harmonious  union  with  Spirit,  so  great  is  the  power  of  Love  upon  the
inward  life.

It  is  also  accompanied  with  great  sympathy  and  care  for  all  men.
It  is  not  a  luxury  hoarded  and  enjoyed  by  one's  self,  nor  is  there  in
the  Soul  of  any  truly  illuminated  Pilgrim  a  selfish  satisfaction  that  he
has  gained  the  heights  beyond  some  of  his  fellows,  but  his  Soul  is
made  so  melodious  and  harmonious  that,  like  blooming  flowers,  it
radiates  a  certain  exalted  joy  and  tender  care  and  sympathy  that
softens  and  exalts  all  who  come  into  its  atmosphere.  He  awakens  to
the  knowledge  that  his  life  is  linked  with  Spirit  in  God ;  his  Soul  par-
takes of  the  Divine  nature,  and  is  effusive  and  full  of  kindness  and
sympathy  with  all  men  in  every  direction.  A  settled  joy  overshadows
him,  a  thing  not  sought  after,  but  a  peculiar,  peaceful  atmosphere.
Men  sometimes  have  a  strong  light  or  a  twilight  experience  of  this
kind,  without  understanding  it  in  their  heedless  life.  Very  few  living
men  fully  understand  the  Philosophy  of  it,  in  fact ;  but  it  is  what  may
be  called  Soul-building.  It  does  not  come  in  a  day,  but  it  comes  and
is  real.  No  marble  mansion  is  more  real,  or  so  real  as  the  Soul's
experience.  In  the  wide  range  of  nature  we  must  not  suppose  that
the  impalpable  and  invisible  things  are  fantasies;  they  are  the
only  real  things,  and  the  earth-bred  and  earth-bound  things  are  the
shadows  that  pass  away  in  the  using.  The  eternities  are  for  the  things
that  men  despise,  through  their  ignorance  and  want  of  intuidon.  But
as  long  as  there  are  love,  charity,  gentleness,  sympathy,  kindness,  and
morality^  there  is  soul-building  and  growth  in  the  Spirit.

One  might  as  well  try  to  bring  forth  a  harvest  without  soil  as  true


ADEPT,   SEER,  AND  MEDIUMSHIP.  21 5

Spirit  growth  without  morality,  which  is  right  living  toward  ourselves
and  our  fellow-men^  and  is  not  only  good  for  men  in  this  world,  but  is
the  foundation  on  which  Souls  are  built  to  receive  the  bridegroom
Spirit,  and  man  is  bom  again  into  a  new  life.  A  new  Love  dawns,  the
universal  Love  and  Charity  that  make  the  Spirit  bright.

Some  of  the  most  uncharitable  and  unspiritual  people  are  most
ardent  followers  after  Spirit  phenomena,  and  on  this  they  base  the
daim  that  they  are  Spiritualists,  as  if  this  constituted  Spiritualism.  It
does  as  much  as  the  husk  constitutes  the  golden  grain,  as  much  as
a  man's  houses  and  land  constitute  his  wealth  of  intellect  and  purity
of  Soul.  In  Spirit  communion  the  true  Spiritualist  seeks  first  of  all  to
bring  himself  into  harmony  with  the  highest  Spiritual  existence  he  can
reach.  He  will  endeavor  to  become  as  pure  as  they,  as  loving  and  as
sympathetic.

He  will  put  out  of  his  life  all  that  can  degrade  or  lower  him,  and
will  endeavor  to  bring  into  it  all  that  can  ennoble  and  elevate.  The
true  Spiritualist  seeks  to  live  a  true  life.  It  is  his  aim  to  do  the
utmost  to  develop  and  cultivate  the  higher  and  better  part  of  his
nature,  to  make  the  best  and  most  of  himself ;  to  watch  his  infirmities
and  endeavor  to  overcome  them ;  to  take  hope  from  his  good  qualities
and  seek  to  increase  them  ;  to  live  honestly  and  to  act  justly,  to  love
purely,  to  be  hopeful  that  all  wrongs  will  yet  be  righted.  Knowing
that  he  has  within  himself  the  germ  of  goodness,  a  spark  at  least  of
spiritual  life,  it  becomes  his  highest  aspiration  so  to  develop  the  germ
that  it  may  some  time  bear  fruit  fit  for  the  life  to  come.

We  judge  of  Spiritualism  by  its  fruits,  and  would  give  nothing  for
that  Spiritualism  which  does  not  make  a  man  better.  We  profess  to
have  the  grandest,  noblest,  and  best  conceptions  possible  of  the  life
here  and  hereafter.  We  speak  of  Angels  as  if  they  were  about  us  and
watching  over  us.  We  talk  of  heaven  as  if  we  were  yet  to  go  there.
We  speak  of  those  that  have  gone  before  —  of  our  mothers,  sisters,
and  brothers  in  the  land  of  bliss,  and  of  other  dear  friends  whom  \vc
hope  to  meet  there ;  aye,  of  even  more  exalted  ones,  saints  and  mar-
tyrs who  have  suffered  and  died  for  human  kind,  glorious  ones  whose
earth  lives  were  grand,  and  whose  life  beyond  we  deem  to  be  sublime ;
and  yet  what  are  we  doing  to  make  ourselves  fit  for  such  society?
Oh,  inconsistency !  Many  of  us  are  living  unworthy  lives  —  lives  that
even  here  should  bring  the  tinge  of  shame  to  our  checks.

It  is  said  we  must  live  for  to-day,  and  not  attempt  to  make  Angels
of  ourselves  before  the  time  comes.  True,  we  must  live  for  the  pres-
ent, but  the  way  to  do  that  is  to  do  the  best  we  can.    On  the  good  of


2l6      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  present,  future  good  must  be  based;  if  there  is  no  good  now,
there  can  be  little  good  then :  —

**  Heaven  is  not  reached  at  a  single  bound,
But  we  build  the  ladder  by  which  we  rise
From  the  lowly  ground  to  the  vaulted  skiety
And  we  mount  to  its  summit,  round  by  round.

"  I  count  this  thing  to  be  grandly  true,

That  a  noble  deed  is  a  step  toward  God,
Lifting  the  soul  from  the  conmion  sod
To  a  purer  air  and  a  broader  view.

"  We  rise  by  the  things  that  are  under  our  feet,
By  what  we  have  mastered  of  good  and  gain,
By  the  pride  deposed,  and  passion  slain.
And  the  vanquished  ills  that  we  hourly  meet


ff


Spiritual  growth  should  be  our  highest  aim,  and  in  character  God
has  given  to  each  the  material  to  work  with.  We  might  say  we  can
create  our  Spiritual  selves,  and  in  that  respect  we  are  God-like.  "  He
that  ruleth  himself  is  better  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."

It  is  often  said,  we  are  creatures  of  circumstances ;  so  we  are  in  a
degree,  but  in  a  greater  degree  we  can  make  our  lives.  By  learning
to  govern  our  human  nature  we  become  kings  or  queens.  The  largest
part  of  our  powers  is  latent  —  the  part  that  makes  the  best  of  cir-
cumstances. By  prayer,  and  striving  to  do  God's  Will  every  day  of
our  life,  we  will  be  educating  our  Spirit  to  return  to  God.  To  con-
quer our  human  nature  is  the  greatest  of  all  ac«omplishmets.

If  we  could  all  remember  that  supposing  we  were  all  created  alike
and  all  subject  to  the  same  circumstances,  we  should  all  make  the
same  mistakes  and  blunders,  our  judgment  of  others  would  be  differ-
ent. There  is  no  phase  of  charity  so  beautiful  as  thinking  charity.
If  you  give  all  you  have  to  the  poor,  or  act  your  charity  in  any  way,
it  availeth  nothing  so  long  as  you  think  unkindly  and  unjustly.  Char-
ity hurts  no  one  by  word  or  deed.

There  is  a  cloud  of  darkness  between  man  and  heaven  which  in-
creases or  decreases  in  proportion  as  his  animal  nature  predominates.

Truth  is  mighty  and  will  prevail.  Truth  is  within  ourselves ;  it
takes  no  rise  from  outward  things.  No  matter  what  the  world  may
say.  One  with  God  is  a  majority;  therefore,  whatever  you  have  to  do^
whatever  you  believe  to  be  right,  do  it  with  all  your  might,  and  you
will  not  be  left  alone  in  weakness  to  establish  the  truth.  To  be  one
with  Spirit  and  united  with  Soul  is  to  be  a  co-worker  with  the  Angda.


ADEPT,   SEER,   AN0   MEDIUMSHIP.  21/

Therefore  let  the  world  say  of  you  what  it  will,  you  may  defy  it  and
aD  its  rulers  for  truth's  sake.  You  have  to  establish  the  kingdom  of
God  and  the  Light  of  Spirit  in  this  fair  land.  O  Pilgrim  of  Light,
what  thou  doest,  do  well,  knowing  that  other  foundation  can  no  man
lay  than  that  which  is  laid  on  Spirit  Truth  and  the  understanding,
conception,  and  wisdom  of  God.  And,  thou  silent,  patient,  loving  Soul,
whose  earth's  ideal  love  was  doomed  to  disappointment  and  defeat ;
who  live  only  in  the  hallowed  memory  of  that  early  bliss,  and  dream
of  a  requitted  and  perfect  love  and  in  the  bright  hope  of  Spirit  reunion,
all  hail  to  thy  devotion,  which  has  its  origin  in  heaven  itself  I

Such  as  thou  carry  in  their  hearts  and  lives,  in  their  utter  loneliness,
something  from  the  Angel  world,  pure,  holy,  and  bright,  which  is  sure
to  bless  humanity  in  one  way  or  another.

How  often  do  ministering  Angels  come  to  those  noble  men  in
^hose  heart  is  enshrined  an  Angel  presence,  those  whose  lives  are  hal-
lowed by  sacred  memories  and  holy  loves,  and  sweet,  blessed  hopes
^  immortal  life  beyond  this  little  sphere  I

Thrice  blessed  mediumship !  thou  art  the  threshold  of  the  open
door  through  which  men's  longing  eyes,  looking  upward  to  the  eternal
heights  of  heaven,  discern  the  white  robes  of  the  beloved  who  wait  to
welcome  them  to  home  and  perfect  peace.

Mediumship  is  an  illumination  across  the  threshold  of  life  and
death  into  the  home  above,  where  we  shall  find  power  of  expression
for  all  the  beauty  which  our  poor  minds  have  known  but  could  not
tell  of  here.  Through  mediumship  we  find  nothing  is  lost  because  we
cannot  understand  or  use  it  here  as  we  would ;  through  mediumship
we  learn  that  all  evil  and  wrong  must  have  an  end.  By  it  the  Soul
expands  to  receive  each  new  inspiration,  each  new  unfolding  of  beauty
and  of  truth,  and  gamers  it  safely  in  the  storehouse  of  memory ;  and
when  we  enter  upon  that  better  life,  we  shall  find  stored  away  in  our
Souls  much  material  from  our  earth  lives  to  be  wrought  out,  through
the  holy  influences  and  surroundings  there,  into  heavenly  harmonies.
The  poet  uttered  a  truth  when  he  wrote  —

**  A  thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  forever.*

Everything  beautiful  and  good  is  eternal.  Good  will  never  ends
because  it  never  had  a  beginning.

It  must  be  evident  to  every  intelligent  mind  that  the  want  of  knowl-
edge of  hidden  things  is  deeply  felt.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  age.
There  is  a  desire  and  a  powerful  effort  to  enter  intellectually  into  the
laws  of  Spiritual  life.


21 8      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

We  are  indebted  to  the  scientists  for  awaking  us  to  this  want,  and
it  is  one  of  the  great  services  they  have  rendered  and  are  rendering
to  humanity.  They  have  discovered  that  all  material  substances  and
forces  are  connected  and  act  according  to  immutable  laws.  They
have  discovered  and  demonstrated  that  we  cannot  come  to  correct
conclusions  concerning  the  qualities  of  any  material  substance  or  the
presence  and  modes  of  action  of  any  force,  by  regarding  only  their  ap-
pearance to  the  senses.

That  opinions  or  theories  are  of  no  value  except  so  far  as  they
are  based  on  the  immutable  laws,  according  to  which  all  material
things  move  and  rest.  It  is  easy  and  natural  to  conclude  that  if
material  things  are  governed  according  to  laws  which  pervade  them
and  inhere  in  them,  spiritual  substances  and  forces  must  come  under
the  dominion  of  law  also.

Scientists  have  discovered  that  as  we  penetrate  further  beneath
the  surface  of  the  things,  we  come  into  the  presence  of  finer  sub-
stances and  more  powerful  forces  and  under  the  dominion  of  more
specific  and  wide-reaching  laws.  Why  should  these  laws  cease  when
we  enter  into  the  wider  and  finer  realms  of  the  Spirit  ?

Mediumship  is  an  illumination  of  the  Soul,  thereby  opening  the
inner  temple  to  Spirit  Truth  and  one  Truth  leading  to  another  shows
us  as  in  a  mirror  the  outlines  of  something  higher  and  better  than
itself,  and  woos  us  to  seek  it.  The  fact  that  there  is  an  indissoluble
chain  of  cause  and  effect  running  through  the  creation,  that  the
material  and  spiritual  worlds,  though  entirely  distinct,  are  woven
together  in  the  same  web,  gives  order  and  coherence  to  creation  and
enables  us  to  pass  from  one  province  to  another  without  losing  our
way.     It  enables  us  to  extend  our  knowledge  into  unknown  regions.

It  bridges  the  gulf  between  Nature  and  Spirit  without  confounding
them.  In  this  way  new  worlds  of  thought  are  opened  and  we  gain
access  to  new  forces  which  will  add  to  our  comfort  and  assist  us  on
our  way  to  higher  truths  and  more  precious  joys.

Know  Thyself !  There  are  times  in  men's  lives  when  they  grow
lonely  and  long  for  some  new  companionship.  This  is  good  oppor-
tunity to  introduce  and  become  acquainted  with  one's  self ;  closely
observing  thought,  action,  impulse,  and  deed,  and  the  conscience
which  continually  opens  and  shuts  its  doors  either  from  impulse  of
the  Soul  or  animal  body.  If  one  could  stand  before  one's  self  naked
soul  and  body,  —  so  as  to  see  the  heart's  impulses,  the  Soul,  and  the
deeds  of  the  human  body  in  the  full  light  of  God  and  Angels,  as  all
must  stand  at  some  time,  alone, — how  astonished  and  often  confounded


ADEPT,   SEER,  AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  2I9

one  would  be  to  see  his  works  follow  him  and  to  be  known  by  his
fruits.  Kind  reader,  will  you  know  yourself  ?  Will  the  greeting  be
one  of  joy  and  pleasure,  or  of  abhorrence  and  sorrow,  or  perchance,
for  sometimes  it  does  so  happen,  of  absolute  repudiation  of  yourself.
Dear  Pilgrim,  God  in  this  life  has  given  you  freedom  and  liberty  of
action  in  the  Soul  world  as  well  as  in  the  Natural  world.

One  year  in  this  Natural  world  for  the  ripening  of  Soul  b  as  a
hundred  in  the  Spirit  world ;  therefore,  dear  reader,  let  me  introduce
you  to  yourself y  ioT  this  is  the  object  of  this  book.  The  admonition
of  the  prophets  and  counsel  of  all  sages  of  the  past,  to  all  mankind,
ifan^  know  Thyself  is  reiterated  again  and  again  by  all  dwellers  on
the  threshold  in  our  day.

The  Greeks  taught  that  the  grandest  philosophy  in  life  was  con-
tained in  this  knowledge  and  in  the  counsel  of  Pythagoras,  "  Oh  man,
walk  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Spirit  within  thee."  If  men  only
knew  more  about  their  ^^ciencies  and  less  of  their  proficiencies,  it
would  be  far  better  for  themselves  and  for  the  world  at  large.  Pythag-
oras professed  to  visit  the  Spiritual  world,  and  converse  with  the
departed  Spirits,  described  the  condition  of  their  Souls,  and  endeav-
ored to  impress  on  all  his  followers  the  necessity  of  cultivating  the
mner  voice^  that  they  might  hold  communion  with  their  monitor.
Here,  he  claimed,  was  to  be  found  that  deep,  untroubled  calm  which
is  known  by  all  Adepts  as  the  Pythagorean  Peace.

Again,  he  says :  Between  God  and  man  are  the  silent  monitors  or
Spirits  who  are  always  near  us  though  commonly  invisible  to  us,  who
know  all  our  thoughts.

The  three  conditions,  the  caterpillar,  the  larva,  and  the  butter-
fly, have  for  ages  been  used  by  Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Persians  to
typify  the  human  being  in  terrestrial  form ;  in  trance  and  apparent
death  as  the  larva ;  resurrection  into  newness  of  life  as  the  butterfly,
and  second  death  only  to  be  reborn  of  Spirit.  Seer  and  mediumship
open  countless  door  to  limitless  new  lives  and  new  worlds.  No  man  is
ever  alone  after  having  become  a  medium.  How  exquisitely  beautiful
are  the  faces  of  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  other  planets,  especially
those  from  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Neptune  !  What  greatness  of  Soul !
what  intensity  of  excellence  I  what  refreshing  presence  !  what  ex-
quisite delicacy  of  facial  expression  1  but  withal  sad,  silent,  and  full
of  wonderfully  eloquent  pleading,  as  though  they  witness  the  ways  of
diis  world  with  pathetic  pity,  sadness,  and  sorrow.  In  their  expres-
sion is  a  whole  volume  of  prophetic  meaning,  as  they  gaze  on  the
ways  of  men.


220  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

It  is  undeniably  true  that  nature  has  her  hidden  forces  dangerous
to  selfish  humanity.  Imagine  an  intellectual  but  wicked  and  selfish
person  possessed  of  such  knowledge  of  his  Astral  forces  and  the
elementary  world  as  to  be  able  to  send  his  own  invisible  hate
and  poisonous  influence  to  any  distance  and  about  any  person  or
persons ;  to  leave  at  Will  the  prison-house  of  his  physical  body  and
go  out  in  the  invisible  Astral  form  to  kill  or  injure  those  who  have
incurred  his  jealousy  or  hatred.  The  most  disastrous  results  would
follow.  Such  forbidden  knowledge  has  been  and  is  now  some-
times possessed  by  people  of  criminal  and  vicious  tendencies,  a  fact
quite  universally  known  in  the  East,  but,  happily,  the  Hierophants  of
the  different  orders  of  occult  knowledge  refuse  to  permit  the  giving-
out  of  this  knowledge  to  humanity.  The  first  use  the  average  man
would  make  of  such  knowledge  would  be  to  produce  "  wonders  "  for
his  own  selfish  gain,  which  would  not  only  unsettle  the  reason  of
others  but  in  time  his  own  also.

Even  modem  discoveries  in  science  have  frequently  this  effect ;
how  much  more  likely  in  his  case  who  finds  his  intended  victim
surrounded  by  guardian  Spirits  and  Angeb  of  Light,  who  send  the
very  forces  of  his  own  creation  back  to  him  with  thrice  more  potency,
and  he  awakes  to  realize  that  he  has  invited  influences  he  cannot
repel,  like  the  symbolical  Adam  and  Eve  who  had  eaten  of  forbidden
fruit  and  awoke  to  find  themselves  naked  to  the  storm.  To  supply
ignorant,  selfish,  or  weak-minded  individuals  with  such  powers  of
destruction,  would  be  like  furnishing  gun-powder  and  matches  for  a
child's  toys.  Modem  science  is  stretching  out  her  hand  even  now
for  this  forbidden  fmit,  but  nature  guards  her  secret  kindly,  for  the
scientific  attainment  of  this  knowledge,  without  the  necessary  Spirit-
ual sense  of  divine  harmony  and  love,  would  bring  about  the  destruc-
tion of  the  race.    Only  "  the  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God."

Any  man  who  has  cultivated  the  Light  of  Spirit  in  his  Soul  is
permitted  and  is  able  to  dive  into  the  hidden  mysteries  of  nature,
and  he  who  has  reached  that  stage  of  Light  needs  search  for  no
Adept  to  instruct  him.

The  dealer  in  Black  Magic  does  not  obey  controlling  emotions,
but  controls  them,  and  creates  in  the  elementary  and  other  forces
such  emotions  as  may  control  them,  thus  making  all  these  accomplish
his  purpose.

His  Will,  directed  against  a  person  whom  he  hates,  if  freighted
with  evil  and  united  with  a  certain  force^  brings  disease  and  blight,
even  death,  upon  whomever  it  touches,  and  his  ''  evil  eye  "  is  poison-


ADEPT,   S£ER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  221

0U8  to  sensitive  persons.    Instead  of  expanding  his  powers,  he  con-
centrates them  into  a  focus.

The  White  magician  strengthens  and  expands  his  Will  power,
through  mental  illuminition  and  attunement  with  nature,  thereby
bringing  himself  into  harmony  with  the  Universal  Will,  Unless  he
has  a  full  knowledge  of  the  elements  with  which  he  enters  into  co-op-
eration, he  can  more  safely  deal  with  the  lightning  than  these  evil
forces  of  the  elements,  for  he  is  opposing  his  true  manhood  and  indi-
vidual Will  to  the  cosmic  Will,  and  the  result  is  unrest,  isolation,  and
death.  Hatred  is  a  fire  that  consumes  the  altar  upon  which  it  bums,
for  nature  abused  is  a  hard  mistress.

The  compiler  is  warned  by  older  and  wiser  men  that  it  is  not  wise
nor  well  to  pursue  this  subject  of  elementaries  and  Black  Magic,
only  to  inform  the  reader  that  the  great  mass  of  mankind  are  sur-
rounded by  elementary  Spirits,  with  inhabitants  of  the  first  or  second
spheres  or  firmaments  of  spiritual  existence ;  and  that  such  Spirits
walk  by  his  side  on  the  lower  plane  of  matter,  and  are  more  fre-
quently in  companionship  with  him  who  cultivates  only  his  positive
WOl  and  animal  nature  than  any  other  class  of  Spirits.

Adeptship,  according  to  the  India  idea,  as  viewed  from  a  scientific
and  physical  standpoint,  is  the  attainment  or  reward  of  the  One  who,
by  the  practice  of  the  prescribed  method,  can  control  the  respiration
and  circulation  of  the  entire  physical  organism  at  Will.  This  is
by  means  of  abstaining  from  food,  reducing  the  animality  of  the
body  thereby,  holding  the  inspired  breath  for  a  long  period  of  time,
and  an  entire  insensibility  to  any  call  from  the  physical  body  and  to
all  surroundings  and  external  things.

Adeptship,  according  to  the  Illuminati,  b  viewed  from  a  more
Spiritual  standpoint.  It  means  to  reach  the  realms  of  Seership  and
Prophecy,  by  the  ripening  of  the  Soul  through  Silent  Meditation,
interchange  of  thought  by  perception  and  Intuition.  It  means  Soul
Illumination  through  the  principle  Love  guided  by  Messengers  and
Spiritual  enlightenment  through  the  Angels.

The  first  object  to  be  attained  is  a  centralization  of  the  Soul
within,  with  the  form  without ;  this  gains  a  very  superior  state,  ecstasy
by  means  of  Self-trance,  either  a  full  entrancement  or  semi-entranced
state  according  to  the  condition  of  the  subject  as  to  temperament  and
development.  When  this  condition  has  been  reached,  the  Seer  has  a
full  perception  of  the  subjective  world  and  its  surroundings,  conditions,
powers,  and  inhabitants,  becoming  thereby  quite  conversant  with  the
forces  of  Nature ;  now,  being  a  superior  power  and  a  focalized  force.


222       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

he  renders  Nature's  forces  subservient  to  hb  Will,  guiding  them  to  do
his  bidding,  but  with  a  limited  power  according  to  his  Ripening  as  a
perfected  Soul.

The  disciplinary  processes  by  which  these  ends  are  gained  are,  first,
to  drop  all  conceit  and  forget  Self ;  the  second  is  to  centralize  the
Soul  with  the  Animal  forces  of  the  body  to  a  pivotal  point ;  the  third
is  cultivation,  perception,  and  intuition,  so  that  the  Ear  and  Eye  of
the  Monitor  within  become  more  accurate  than  the  vision  and  hear-
ing of  the  physical  body.

The  difference  between  the  Indian  of  the  East  and  the  Seer  of  the
West  is  simply  in  the  mode  of  attaining  the  same  end.  The  Eastern
school  reaches  its  end  by  reducing  the  physical  organism  and  con-
gealing all  animal  desires.

The  Western  Seer  attunes  the  Animal  body  to  Soul  by  focalizing
the  Dual  Forces  of  being  with  the  forces  of  the  Soul.

The  development  of  these  inherent  powers  by  either  mode  may  be
questioned  as  unnatural.

The  disciplinary  process  by  which  these  ends  are  gained  may  be
called  artificial,  which  is  quite  true  from  a  human  standpoint  The
Student  is  endeavoring  to  be  Illuminated  by  Spirit  before  waiting  for
all  this  work  to  be  done  after  death  of  the  physical  body,  which  is
precisely  the  difference  between  Spirituality  and  Materiality.  The
Materialist  judges  only  from  phenomenal  appearance  in  the  external
world ;  the  Spiritual  illuminated  knows  all  life-forms,  by  Spirit ;  and
Truth  is  evolved  from  the  within  towards  the  without  Therefore  the
pilgrim  strives  to  reach  the  within  by  either  the  pathway  of  Love  or
Wisdom  which  he  may  choose  to  take,  for  he  has  long  since  learned
to  know  that  Spiritual  ways  are  quite  opposite  to  human  ways.

The  difference  between  the  two  different  forms  of  development
consists  in  Wisdom's  pathways  and  the  pathways  of  Love.  Our  India
friends  think  that  by  climbing  the  paths  of  Wisdom  through  reducing
the  Animal  and  choking  down  all  physical  desires,  is  the  road  best
adapted  for  them.  Our  western  friends  feel  that  the  heights  may  be
more  readily  gained  and  powers  more  strongly  attained  by  the  Union
of  Dual  forces  concentrated  to  a  pivotal  point  under  the  control  of
the  Will,  thereby  centralizing  Spirit  with  the  Astral  and  Animal
forces  of  the  human  form.  As  has  been  before  written,  one  is  the  path-
way of  Wisdom,  the  other  the  pathway  of  Love,  making  little  differ-
ence so  the  heights  are  attained  and  the  illumination  and  ripening  of
the  Soul  is  accomplished,  which  pathway  or  road  the  student  may
climb.


ADEPT,   SEER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  223

In  the  three  great  secret  orders  of  the  world,  the  Hierophant
always  counsels  and  warns  the  Neophyte  who  is  about  to  venture  into
new  realms,  enjoining  the  need  of  great  care  in  the  use  of  the  ele-
mentaries  and  their  spheres,  admonishing  and  cautioning  as  to  the
cultivation  of  their  presence,  etc.,  with  these  closing  instructions :  —

We  give  to  you  power  if  you  choose  to  receive  it,  knowing  that  if  you
obtain  a  little  power  it  will  reveal  to  you  another  feature  of  greater  power.
Therefore^  my  chUd^  do  not  tarry  here^  but  press  on^for  here  is  danger-
ous ground.  You  will  at  this  stage  obtain  a  sufficiency  of  power  over
natures  psychic  forces  and  a  lower  Spiritual  knowledge  to  fully  realize
^uU  you  can  practise  Blcuk  Magic ^  but  in  your  halt  to  indulge  in  its  phe-
nomena^ even  if  you  do  not  use  it  for  selfish  purposes^  it  will  retard  your
advancement  and  growth^  and  may  be  more  injurious  through  its  cohe-
rence and  cohesion  than  you  will  ever  in  this  life  be  enabled  to  conquer  or
overcome.

On  this  ground  the  author  has  frequently,  to  the  astonishment  of
some  old  Spiritualists,  expressed  the  opinion  that  we  need  be  anxious
indeed  when  this  lower  Spirit  knowledge  and  lower  phases  of  medium-
ship  become  popular  in  the  world  at  large.  Then  indeed  may  we
tremble  with  anxious  solicitude,  hoping  and  praying  that  Mother
Nature,  who  in  the  past  has  been  generous  and  true  to  her  vast  family
of  children,  may  be  so  still,  and  hide  from  them  the  mysterious  psychic
force  of  the  elementaries  until  men  can  be  trusted  to  use  it  only  for
good.  But  we  tremble  still,  knowing  that  in  France  to-day  there  is  a
growing  knowledge  among  unscrupulous  and  perfidious  people  of  this
lower  mediumship.  These  treacherous  people  practise  and  measure
their  incantations  until  they  know  certain  numerical  vibrations  in
unison  with  other  things  and  can  at  meridian  and  at  midnight  call  into
their  presence  some  of  these  dark  Spirits  or  elementaries  and  bid
them  hie  away  on  their  mission  of  wrong  to  some  fellow-creature  on
the  earth  plane  who  has  incurred  their  anger.  Little  these  mischiev-
ous persons  think,  in  their  selfish  blindness,  that  such  vibrations  once
set  in  motion  always  return  to  their  source,  even  if  they  consume
victim  after  victim,  increasing  in  strength  only  to  return.  "With
what  measure  ye  meet  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again,"

Mediumship  is  like  all  human  ways;  there  are  two  paths, — one
to  good  and  truth  and  ripening  Soul,  the  other  to  evil,  wrong,  and
death,  and  almost  endless  miseries,  not  only  in  this  life,  but  for  ages
in  the  life  to  come.  These  elementaries  appear  and  disappear  swim-
ming in  the  great  abyss,  therefore  it  is  a  pathway  and  a  work  full  of
hazard  and  pregnant  with  danger.     ''Can  a  man  take  fire  in  his


224      "^HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

bosom  and  his  clothes  not  be  burned  ?    Can  one  handle  pitch  and
not  be  defiled  ?

Remember,  kind  reader,  there  b  no  retracing  one's  steps ;  it  is  dan-
ger from  which  there  is  no  retreat.

There  are  Black  Magic,  White  Magic,  and  Red  Magic ;  and  Adept-
ship  is  that  mediumship  where  the  individual  has  climbed  those  glo-
rious heights  of  understanding  and  knowledge  of  handling  and  right-
fully using  them  all.  A  true  Seer  is  not  only  a  clairvoyant  and  clair-
audient  medium  but  very  much  more.  Modem  clairvoyants  are  called
Seers,  but  they  are,  unfortunately  for  themselves,  far  from  those
heights.

All  three  of  the  great  secret  Orders  of  the  East  advise  and  in-
struct their  Pilgrims  in  Red  Magic,  and  assure  them  that  it  is  one  of
the  True  paths  to  Divine  Wisdom  when  it  is  performed  unselfishly,
and  that  at  proper  times  and  certain  stages  of  growth  there  is  an  un-
foldment  and  converting  of  lower  natures  into  higher  paths  in  which
every  true  child  of  Light  should  perform  his  duty  to  the  afflicted.

What  is  the  practice  of  Red  Magic  ?  You  have  it  typified  in  the
forms  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  in  their  sayings,  yea,  even  in  the
life  of  the  Nazarene  himself ;  and  when  you  read  of  the  exercise  of
the  power  of  Red  Magic,  it  is  here  you  are  enabled  to  form  some  idea
of  the  "  blood  "  theory.  All  your  healing  mediums  are  Red  magicians
so  were  the  healing  mediums  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome.  They
were  practisers  of  the  art  of  Red  Magic.  This  has  ever  a  beneficial
influence  upon  the  race,  manifesting  itself  in  deeds  of  kindness  and
devotion,  and  in  securing  the  good  of  others.

Then,  there  is  White  Magic,  of  which  we  have  the  record  in  con-
nection with  Hindostan  to-day.  You  will  find  that  the  cradle  of  the
race  is  Hindostan.  White  Magic  has  existed  through  all  the  ages  of  the
past,  and  it  consists  in  the  highest  Spiritual  perception.  The  highest
power  of  Will  for  the  white  magician  in  all  ages  has  ever  been  able  to
transcend  the  flesh.  The  Spirit  has  utterly  mastered  the  flesh,  and
the  white  magician  can  take  hold  of  the  plastic  material  and  do  with,
it  what  the  mind  wills  shall  be  done.

This  is  Adeptship,  being  the  ripening  and  development  of  the  Twelve
Senses  joining  man's  being  with  his  higher  Archetype;  that  bridge  of
true  understanding  that  hovers  over  measureless  space,  the  bridge
between  Soul  and  Spirit  —  this  world  and  the  world  beyond.

You  read  of  wonderful  achievememts  in  the  old-time  history  of
Athens  and  of  Rome  and  that  of  Hindostan,  but  the  power  is  manifested
to-day.    There  are  manifestations  which  utterly  transcend  the  power


ADEPT,  SEER,  AND  MEDIUliSHIP.  225

d  the  human.  You  can  read  of  one  dematerializing  himself  and  be-
coming mvisible ;  of  one  taking  some  material  form  of  substance,  say  a
flower  or  something  else,  and,  by  breathing  upon  it  and  exerting  the
Soul  or  psychic  force,  causing  it  to  dissolve  itself  into  the  primal  ele-
ments of  the  atmosphere ;  and  yet  you  shall  exercise  all  your  powers
of  judgment  or  your  ability  to  perceive  —  be  you  ever  so  circumspect
in  your  investigation  still  you  will  fail  to  discover  any  fraud,  or  the
least  semblance  of  trickery.  The  whole  operation  is  simply  the  exer-
cise of  the  Dual  forces  of  nature  united  with  those  of  the  man  and
universal  Spirit  under  the  guidance  of  the  operator's  will  upon  matter.
How  grandly  are  all  these  powers  illustrated  in  the  history  of  Brahma,
Buddha,  Moses,  Christ,  and  the  Apostles ;  also  in  the  lives  of  all
Prophets  and  Saints,  during  the  long  night  of  suffering  and  hope  of
Divine  Humanity.

A  true  Seer  is  a  true  Prophet,  one  who  lives  in  the  higher  Spiritual
firmaments ;  whose  octave  of  vibration  is  in  the  odyllic  harmonies,  who
has  forgotten  self  and  lives  only  for  Divine  Humanity ;  one  who  by
long  years  of  silent  contemplation  and  development  has  ripened  his
Jhe  subjective  senses  to  their  full;  one  whose  intuition  is  as  real  as
the  sense  of  touch,  and  whose  clairvoyance  and  clairaudience  are  as
real  as  natural  sight  and  hearing.  He  has  mastered  and  controls  at
Will  the  three  actuating  atmospheres  about  a  human  Soul.  That  is  the
Greek  mystery,  i,e, :  The  first  is  the  Spirit  of  the  elements,  terrestrial,
body,  and  vital  force  in  the  animal  condition.  The  second  is  the
Spirit  of  the  stars,  sidereal,  or  Astral  body,  the  thought  and  memory
part  The  third  is  the  Divine  Essence,  the  Absolute  Love  or  reflec-
tion and  Dual  Ray  of  Spirit  from  the  Godhead.

In  the  man  who  reaches  these  heights,  behold  a  Seer  and  Prophet.

The  man,  medium,  or  seer  who  appreciates  Spirit  and  its  means
only  according  as  they  conduce  to  his  success  and  pleasure,  soon  loses
his  perception  of  the  just  and  good,  and  the  truth  of  sound  doctrines.

It  is  frequently  said  of  modem  mediums  who  are  just  opening  the
portals  of  the  Astral  world,  either  by  clairvoyance  or  trance,  that  they
are  wonderful  Seers.  This  trance  state  of  somnambulic  sleep  is
simply  drifting  in  the  Astral  world.  When  undeveloped  and  left  un-
guided  to  itself  alone,  it  is  much  like  a  foolish  boy  who  floats  idly  in
the  silent,  sparkling  waters  of  some  strange  lagoon,  where  he  gains
but  little  knowledge  and  may  end  his  sport  in  death.  Thus  this  so-
called  modem  Seer  swims  and  flounders  in  the  Astral  world  and  be-
comes lost  in  something  strange,  which  surpasses  all  his  comprehension,
for  these  are  the  regions  of  disembodied  Souls  and  unripened  Spirit


226      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

entities  claiming  all  sorts  of  theories  and  distinguished  names  known
to  mortals.  The  very  air  is  full  of  ecstatic  nothings  and  foolish  flat-
tering promises.  It  is  by  this  flattery  in  the  Astral  world  of  light  that
our  modem  mediums  are  so  frequently  led  astray.  It  is  really  pain-
ful to  see  how  many  mediums  contend  and  honestly  believe  that  their
control  is  *'  Divine.''    Alas  I  how  unfortimate.     Argument  is  useless.

Pilgrim  of  Light,  in  sweet  companionship  with  Light,  you  can  only
await  in  silence  the  ripening  of  understanding  through  the  halls  of
truth  enlightaud  by  Time,  Well  does  every  Pilgrim  and  Seer  know
that  the  control  and  visits  of  good,  high,  and  lofty  Spirits  are  "  few
and  far  between,"  while  those  of  evil,  attracted  so  much  by  the  vanity
and  selfishness  of  mankind,  are  nearest  to  earth  and  are  quite  too  fre-
quent in  their  communion  and  promises  to  mortals,  though  it  is  some-
times surprising  to  find  how  frequently  men  and  women  prefer  to  lis-
ten to  those  who  bring  sweetest  promises  and  highest  flattery  rather
than  truth  for  pure,  unselflsh  truth's  sake.

But  such  is  the  weakness  of  poor  humanity,  and  there  b  little  to
choose  between  the  two  classes  of  dupes  —  the  medium  and  sitter  on
the  one  hand,  and  the  scientific  materialist,  with  his  human  theory
and  protoplasm  in  place  of  the  true  God,  on  the  other.

Oh,  mediumshipl  thou  doorway  between  Spirit  and  mortal,  thoa
threshold  between  Soul  and  matter,  through  and  over  which

"  From  the  world  of  Spirits  there  descends
A  bridge  of  light  connecting  it  with  this,
0*er  whose  unsteady  floor,  that  sways  and  bends,
Wander  our  thoughts  above  the  dark  abyss."

The  Eastern  Brotherhood  of  Rosicrucians  do  not  claim  supernatu-
ral force,  either  Divine  or  otherwise.  They  claim  that  for  centuries
their  Order  was  familiar  and  conversant  with  the  psychic  force  and
kindred  occult  laws  of  nature  ;  that  they  discovered  in  nature  a  force
more  subtile  than  electricity ;  which,  under  certain  conditions,  they  can
control  by  power  of  mind  and  will,  and  with  its  aid,  federation,  and
assistance  can  accomplish  much  that  is  exalted  and  good  for  mankind,
and,  through  a  psychic  power  far  beyond  the  capacity  of  man,  can  do
many  things  which  seem  to  border  on  the  miraculous.

Mediumship  is  a  true  rational  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  life  which
will  give  man  the  same  freedom  and  power  to  investigate  spiritual
truth  that  he  has  of  exploring  the  truths  of  nature.

As  spiritual  substances  and  forces  are  governed  by  immutable  law,
and  are  all  connected  in  harmonious  order,  man  will  be  able  to  pass


ADEPT.   SEER.  AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  22/

from  the  known  to  the  unknown,  and  to  explore  the  mysteries  which
environ  him.  He  will  gain  new  light  and  new  power  and  move  with  a
larger  freedom  as  he  advances.  As  Truth  is  Infinite  he  will  never  ex-
haust it  He  will  go  on  forever  rejoicing  in  the  new  glories  that  open
before  him  and  the  new  means  of  happiness  he  is  constantly  obtain-
ing. As  he  sees  relation,  order,  and  coherence  in  all  things,  he  will
gain  courage  and  assurance  at  every  step,  and  all  the  faculties  of  his
nature  will  become  enlarged  and  his  highest  wants  satisfied.  The
questions  naturally  arise,  On  what  is  this  new  knowledge  to  be  based,
and  how  is  it  to  be  gained  ?  It  must  be  based  on  Spiritual  facts  and
the  laws  of  life  as  they  exist  in  the  nature  of  God  and  man.

The  facts  will  be  interpreted  by  a  higher  light,  by  universal
truths.  They  are  the  laws  of  Spiritual  life,  clothed  in  natural  lan-
guage. They  will  be  interpreted  as  the  scientist  interprets  natural
facts.  Thb  rational  knowledge  is  to  be  gained  in  the  first  instance
as  all  rational  knowledge  has  been  gained,  by  some  man  endowed
with  faculties  equal  to  the  service.

The  great  Absolute  Father-Mother  God  has  always  communicated
His  Truth  to  humanity  by  and  through  human  instruments,  and  every
step  in  natural  Knowledge,  Soul  light  and  Spiritual  understanding
has  been  gained  to  mankind  through  the  means  of  human  instru-
ments.

Man  still  stands  on  the  shore  of  the  infinite  ocean  of  Spiritual
Truth  and  imderstanding.  The  progress  toward  the  light  has  been
made  slow  through  selfishness,  narrow-minded  bigotry,  intolerance,
cruelty,  and  wrong.

It  has  taken  thousands  of  years  to  penetrate  and  understand  there
is  another  life  and  world  beneath  the  surface  of  material  things,  and
that  these  very  material  things,  that  appear  to  us  so  substantial  and
real,  are  but  the  shadows  of  the  real,  true.  Spiritual  world  of  Soul
that  reigns  everywhere  in  the  creation.  The  thoughtful  man  of  the
day  is  just  beginning  to  catch  glimpses  of  the  golden  way  of  the
Angeb  and  waking  to  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  within  him.  This
awakening  interest  in  all  questions  concerning  man's  Spiritual  nature
and  destiny  is  one  of  the  marked  signs  of  the  times.  There  is  abun-
dant evidence  that  a  new  power  is  operating  upon  the  minds  of  men.
We  feel  it  quickening  every  human  faculty.  We  may  not  be  able
to  tell  whence  it  cometh  or  whither  it  goeth  ;  but  we  see  its  effects  in
every  phase  of  human  thought  and  every  form  of  human  activity.

There  has  never  been  a  time  when  the  desire  to  know  the  Truth
was  so  prevalent  and  strong.     The  characteristics  of  this  new  age


228      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRBSHOLa

will  be  a  new  conception  of  the  methods  and  principles  of  the  Divine
government.

There  are  two  ways  of  working;  one  b  from  within,  the  other
from  without.  There  are  two  kinds  of  law,  human  law  and  divine
law.  Man  works  from  without,  and  the  Spirit  from  within.  There  is
no  command  from  God,  Angels,  or  Spirits  for  mankind  to  stand  srill
in  the  old  ruts  of  bigotry  and  superstition.  The  age  of  ruling  men
by  fear  is  past,  and  the  day  of  rule  by  Love  has  dawned,  but  the  old
habits  of  thought  cling  tenaciously.

Dear  Pilgrim,  free  thyself  at  once.  No  monarch  is  so  well  obeyed
as  the  one  whose  name  is  Habit.  Open  the  door  of  thy  mediumship,
and  "  learn  to  walk  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Spirit  within  thee,"
and  thus  gain  the  heights  of  certain  imderstanding.  When  once  at-
tuned by  Pure  Spirit^  man  never  fails  to  accomplish  what  he  under-
takes, if  he  only  undertakes  to  try.

*'  If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit"

''  Wherefore,  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but  a  son ;  and  if  a  son,
then  an  heir  of  God."

Mediumship  is  the  open  portal  of  Soul  and  Spirit  across  whose
threshold  all  Pilgrims  must  pass.  It  was  by  revelation  of  the  Christ
within  (that  is,  the  Spiritual  Gnostic  Christ),  and  not  by  an  objective
vision  and  knowledge  of  a  personal,  historic  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  that
St  Paul  was  converted,  and  his  Soul  illuminated  to  Spiritual  under-
standing. The  Gnostic  Christ  b  the  immortal  Spirit  in  man,  which
first  demonstrated  its  existence  by  means  of  abnormal  or  Spiritualistic
phenomena ;  it  did  not  and  could  not  depend  on  any  single  manifes-
tation in  historic  personality ;  and  when  Paul  says,  "  I  knew  a  man  in
Christ,"  he  shows  that  to  be  "in  Christ  "  —  or  "in  the  Spirit,"  as  he
otherwise  calls  it — is  to  be  in  the  condition  of  trance — that  condition
in  which  he  first  received  the  revelation  of  his  mystery.  All  through
St.  Paul's  ministrations,  every  thought  of  his  ministry  and  guidance
was  a  growth  of  development  of  mediumship — being  "  transformed  by
the  renewing  of  your  minds,"  as  he  expresses  it  His  Christ  is  the
Spirit,  which  revealed  itself  abnormally  in  and  through  him,  so  that
he  spoke  the  "  wisdom  and  the  words  which  the  Spirit  teacheth ;  he
spoke  mysteries  in  the  Spirit"  His  Christ  is  the  same  Spirit  which
hath  a  diversity  of  workings  in  various  Spirit-manifestations :  to  one
it  gives  the  word  of  wisdom  ;  to  another,  the  word  of  knowledge  ;  to
another,  faith;  to  another,  gifts  of  healing;  to  another,  miraculous
power ;  to  another,  prophecy ;  to  another,  the  gift  of  tongues,  and  to
another  their  interpretation.


ADEPT^   SEER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  229

And,  as  this  was  the  Christ  that  had  always  been  so  manifested,
QOthing  depended  upon  a  historical  character.

Oh,  friends  of  the  world's  progress,  open  the  door  of  your  gene-
rous hearts,  and  receive  good  measure  of  substantial  aid  and  assist-
ance heaped  up,  shaken  together,  and  running  over.  This  Spiritual
Christ  is  ever3rwhere  and  when  men  arise  to  that  point  in  which  their
thoughts,  feelings,  and  loves  are  at  last  in  concord  with  the  Heart  of
God,  they  begin  to  receive  from  Him  as  they  enter  into  Him.  As  a
musical  chord  in  the  lower  octaves,  which  has  not  been  properly
stretched,  or  has  lost  its  tension,  under  the  hands  of  the  tuner  grows
finer  and  is  worked  until  it  is  in  perfect  accord  and  temper  with  an-
other, and  the  two  become  one  in  a  perfect  vibration  in  harmonious
gttunement  in  unison,  so  also  is  true  mediumship  a  perfect  unison  of
man  and  the  Spiritual  world.

In  trance  speaking,  the  organs  and  faculties  of  the  medium  are
used  by  the  Spirit-world  to  give  utterance  to  the  views  of  the  Spirit
upon  various  subjects.  The  impressional  medium  is  one  who  be-
comes easily  and  thoroughly  impressed  by  attendant  Spirits,  enabling
the  medium  to  think  spiritually.  The  organism  being  at  all  times  in
such  a  spiritual  condition  as  to  receive  these  impressions,  there  is  no
necessity  of  being  entranced.

The  communion  of  Spirits  and  its  Truths  are  as  evident  and  plain
as  the  light  that  shines,  and  the  knowledge  of  it  is  an  imperishable
Truth,  steady  as  the  solar  centre  of  this  glorious  world.  It  is  the
foundation  of  all  knowledge,  the  cement  of  all  societies.

The  fact  is,  the  Spirit-world  has  ever  done  its  best.  It  is  ready
and  willing  to-day  to  work  for  our  enlightenment,  and  if  we  can  have
the  patience  and  humility  to  await  its  opportunity  to  communicate,  if
we  can  accept  its  messages  through  any  instrumentality  it  may  be
able  to  use,  it  will  find  some  method  of  reaching  our  dull  eyes  and
ears  with  sights  and  sounds  which  will  make  us  know  of  the  reality  of
spiritual  things :  ^-

*•  When  the  hours  of  day  arc  numbered.
And  the  voices  of  the  night
Wake  the  better  soul  that  slumbered
To  a  holy,  calm  delight.

''Then  the  forms  of  the  departed
Enter  at  the  open  door,
The  beloved  ones,  the  true-hearted
Come  to  visit  me  once  more."


230      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

«

Let  the  Pilgrim  of  the  Shadow  look  to  his  daily  walks.  Let  him
desire  not  death,  nor  life,  but  bide  his  time  with  patience,  running  the
race  set  before  him ;  as  a  laborer  waits  at  evening  at  his  master's
door  for  his  hire,  so  let  him  wait  for  his  reward.  Renouncing  riches
and  worldly  ambition,  flying  from  all  anger,  hatred,  and  discord ;  in
all  gentleness  practising  good  with  love  for  all  men ;  evil  shall  pass
him  by,  and  he  is  preparing  a  peaceful  life  here  and  immortality  and
joys  hereafter.

As  the  most  obscure  soldier  in  an  army  may  sometimes  destroy  the
strongest  fortress  of  the  enemy  by  a  well  directed  fiery  arrow,  so  the
weakest  and  most  obscure  man,  when  he  makes  himself  the  courage-
ous champion  of  Truth,  may  overthrow  the  most  solid  ramparts  of
bigotry,  superstition,  and  error.

Thou  shalt  protect  weakness,  unselfishly  aid  each  other  without
noise,  and  never  remember  the  offences  of  an  enemy  when  misfortune
overtakes  him.  Love  of  his  fellow-creatures  in  gentleness,  should  be
the  ruling  principle  of  the  just  man  in  all  his  works,  for  such  weigh
most  in  the  celestial  balance,  while  the  wrongs  we  inflict  upon  our
neighbors  follow  us  like  our  shadows.

As  the  body  is  strengthened  by  muscles,  so  is  the  Soul  fortified
and  strengthened  by  love^  kindness^  and  virtue.  By  this  man  is
united  with  God.  He  who  is  humble  and  gentle  in  heart  and  Spirit
is  beloved  of  God  and  needs  nothing  more.  His  very  presence  brings
peace.  This  man  of  silent  wisdom  is  like  the  gigantic  banyan-tree,
whose  beneficent  shade  affords  freshness  and  renewed  life  to  the
plants  that  surround  it,  but  let  him  fear  all  worldly  honor  and  flatter-
ies more  than  poison,  and  feel  only  contempt  for  worldly  riches.

The  so-called  death  of  man  is  only  a  birth  into  new  life.  Some-
times we  catch  glimpses  of  the  golden  ways,  and  see  the  dear  faces
radiant  with  youth,  and  one  touch  of  a  gentle  hand  or  a  whisper  from
long  silent  lips  is  priceless  and  invaluable,  worth  all  our  lives  or
dreams.  All  our  tender  memories  are  comforted  with  the  blessed
consolation  that  our  dear  ones  still  live  and  still  love  us.  None  so
well  as  a  Spirit  friend  can  restore  lost  strength  and  vigor  of  the  living,
wanning  and  quickening  the  pulsations  of  the  weary  heart.

How  all  of  us  like  sometimes  to  speak  and  go  back  in  memory
to  visions  of  fair  and  loving  faces  of  bright  companions  that  have
passed  over  the  silent  river.  How  they  do  cling  and  live  in  our  mem-
ory, sublimated  in  the  crucible  of  death  from  all  imperfections  and
deficiencies ;  clothed  in  all  their  virtues  and  tender  kindnesses,  radiant
in  love.  Months  and  years  hurry  by,  and  all  the  world  is  growing  old ;
but  they  are  for  ever  young.  —


ADEPT,   SEER,   AND   MEDIUMSHIP.  23I

*  I  dreamed  a  dream  of  an  old,  old  love.
And  sweet  was  that  dream  of  bliss.
For  it  brought  me  a  hand  from  the  spirit  land
And  the  touch  of  a  spirit  kiss,
A  sense  of  happiness  pure  and  bright,
Like  a  dove  on  my  bosom  lay,
With  the  breath  of  a  wing  and  the  odor  of  spring
My  sorrow  had  passed  away.
So  I  know  my  old  love  as  an  angel  lives
Beyond  where  the  pale  stars  shine.
That  she  comes  from  above,  on  a  mission  of  love
To  bring  peace  to  this  soul  of  mine."

The  sweet  communion  of  the  immortals  with  man,  the  True  Spirit
of  the  Love  of  God,  having  survived  the  centuries,  and  seen  the  rise
and  fall  of  empires  and  kings,  puts  off  the  dusty  sandals  of  the  ages,
and  steps  out  into  the  light  of  the  morning  of  these  latter  days  a
living  Truth,  not  to  be  vanquished.  The  dawn  of  the  sunlight  of  this
new  morning  of  the  world  is  the  outbreak  of  irresistible  day.

Spirit  communion  is  a  shaking  of  hands  across  the  vast  gulf  of
the  centuries  with  our  own  Spiritual  ancestors.  The  heavens  are
opened  before  our  enraptured  eyes.  We  gaze  into  the  regions  of  the
blest  He  who  has  once  breathed  the  perfume  of  the  violets  that  bloom
on  the  golden  heights  of  Spirit  is  so  filled  with  holy  peace  and  love
that  he  is  never  again  content  with  earthly  things.  This  is  the  flower
few  mortals  have  seen  and  lived,  but  its  fragrance  fills  the  whole  fair
earth ;  the  flowers  of  the  Angels  which  gives  one  fire  enough  in  his
heart  to  warm  a  world.

The  guardian  Angels  come  to  us  like  the  serenely  setting  sun  as
he  kisses  the  earth  good-night.  If  like  a  child  you  ask  them  whence
they  come,  with  gentle  smile,  modest  as  an  AngeFs  love,  they  answer,
"  From  far  as  the  uttermost  bounds  of  creation,  and  further  than  man's
rushing  thoughts."

Spirit  Truth  and  Spirit  communion  are  priceless  gems;  pillars
built  on  the  solid,  imperishable  rocks  of  the  ages.  We  Pilgrims  of
Light  have  whole  libraries  of  facts  and  armies  of  living  witnesses.  In
this  stage  of  the  world's  history,  Spirit  is  coming  very  near  to  men
and  the  narrow  intolerant  creeds  of  the  ages  will  melt  before  it  like
snow  wreaths  in  the  morning  sun,  and  the  shower  of  wit,  ridicule,  and
sarcasm,  all  directed  by  ignorance,  which  has  beat  upon  Spiritualism
for  the  last  generation  will  soon  pass  away  and  be  forgotten  like  a
tale  that  is  told.

Oh|  may  your  higher  love  and  hope  of  heaven  keep  your  earthly


233      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

record  fair,  and  may  you  be  guided  by  the  higher  impulses  of  the  inner
being.  Otherwise,  woe  betide  you  at  the  hour  of  death,  for  in  the
land  of  Soul  and  Spirit  ideas  are  all  incarnated  and  become  living
realities,  surrounding  and  enclosing  every  creature  in  the  atmosphere
to  which  he  belongs,  restraining  his  vision  to  the  special  sphere  in
which  he  dwells.  So  on  the  first  awakening  in  Spirit  one  steps  forth
in  the  immutable  law  and  procedure  of  the  land  of  Souls.

^'And  suddenly  there  was  with  the  Angel  a  multitude  of  the
heavenly  host,  praising  God  and  saying :  —

"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace  and  good-will,
toward  men." -^  Zt^^  ii:  13,  14.

**  The  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal ;  but  the  things  which
are  not  seen  are  eternal."  —  2  Cor.  xii. :  v.  7.

Man  marks  the  earth  with  evil  troubles  and  harsh  discords,  or  else
entwined

With  ascending  light  and  good  forms  Union  with  nature's  harmoni-
ous heart-beat.

Which  wakes  the  Soul  of  man  to  throb  in  chords  of  melody  with
the  Great  — •  Central  —  Heart  of  All.

The  Truths  of  Spirit  communion  is  heaven's  best  gift ;
That  points  out  an  hereafter  and  shapes  our  ends ;
Conducts  us  to  our  homes,  and  lands  us  safe  on  the  long-wish'd-for
shore.


CHAPTER  IX.

THX  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL   GIFTS,  OR  THE  GUIDANCE  OF  THE

UNSEEN    HAND.

''Arise,  Shine ;  for  thy  Light  is  come  and  the  Gloiy  of  the  Lord  is
risen  upon  thee."

THE  true  education  OF   MAN   IS  SPIRITUAL  UNDERSTANDING  AND

SPIRITUAL    DEVELOPMENT.

'*  It  18  too  late  1    Ah,  nothing  is  too  late,
Till  the  tired  heart  shall  cease  to  palpitate."

Neither  height  nor  depth  can  measure  the  possibilities  of  the
human  Soul.  The  perfect  Love  of  God  knows  no  difference  between
the  rich  and  the  poor.  Men  usually  desire  four  things  in  life,  viz. :
Love,  Wealth,  Fame,  and  Power.  All  else  are  considered  as  amuse-
ment or  something  to  be  forgotten.  To  the  natural  man  Spirit  and
Soul  are  mere  side  issues  —  as  Paul  says,  "foolishness  unto  him."
But  when  death  comes  there  is  another  hope,  a  new  desire.  Doubts
have  existed  in  some  minds  whether  it  is  right  to  look  beyond  the
veil.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  everything  is  behind  the  veil,  till  some
daring  investigator  brings  it  to  the  front.  If  the  Great  Power  that
made  us,  and  governs  everything,  determined  we  should  not  commu-
nicate with  a  world  of  being  unseen  by  ordinary  vision,  it  would  be
impossible  for  us  to  do  so ;  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  find  the
veil  and  walk  behind  it;  but  if  such  communication  exists,  it  is  proof
positive  that  it  is  not  only  allowable  but  desirable.  All  things  are
good  with  good  men.

"Now  old  things  have  passed  away;  behold!  all  things  have
become  new."

Spiritual  Development  is  an  opening  of  the  portals  to  that  other
world,  where  "  millions  of  Spiritual  creatures  walk  unseen,  both  when
we  wake  and  when  we  sleep."

To  him  who  has  crossed  the  Rubicon  and  burned  his  ships,  count-
ing the  costs,  the  hopes,  the  joys,  is  presented  the  Truth,  as  brother

2J3


234      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

presents  to  brother,  the  living  Truth,  the  positive  absoluteness  of  the
actual  realization  and  knowledge  that  awaits  Development,  Illumina-
tion, and  Understanding.  He  will  now  fully  realize  that  man  has  a
spiritual  as  well  as  a  corporeal  nature ;  in  other  words,  that  the  real
man  is  a  spirit^  which  Spirit  has  an  organized  form,  composed  of
spiritual  substance,  with  parts  like  and  corresponding  to  those  of  the
corporeal  body ;  that  man  as  a  Spirit  is  immortal.  Being  found  to
survive  that  change  called  physical  death,  it  may  reasonably  be
supposed  he  will  survive  all  future  vicissitudes.  That  there  is  a  Spirit
world,  or  state,  with  its  substantial  realities,  objective  as  well  as  sub-
jective. That  the  process  of  death  in  no  way  essentially  transforms
the  mental  constitution,  or  the  moral  character  of  those  who  experi-
ence it.

That  happiness  or  suffering  in  the  Spirit  world,  as  in  this,  depend
not  on  arbitrary  decree  or  special  provision  but  on  character^  aspira-
tions^ and  degree  of  harmonization^  or  personal  conformity  to  universal
and  Divine  law.

As  one  grows,  and  the  Soul's  growth  makes  it  more  attuned  to
Spirit,  all  darkness  clears  away  from  the  inner  being.  The  develop-
ment of  Soul  enkindles  lofty  desires  and  spiritual  aspirations;
delivers  from  painful  fear  of  death,  and  dread  of  imaginary  evils
consequent  thereon,  as  well  as  prevents  inordinate  sorrow  and  mourn-
ing for  deceased  friends ;  it  gives  a  rational  and  inviting  conception
of  the  after  life  to  those  who  use  the  present  worthily ;  it  stimulates
to  the  highest  and  worthiest  possible  employment  of  the  present  life,
in  view  of  its  momentous  relations  to  the  future;  it  energizes  the
Soul  in  all  that  is  good  and  elevating,  and  restrains  the  passions  from
all  that  is  evil  and  impure.

Development  of  Soul  prompts  our  earnest  endeavors  by  purity  of
life,  by  unselfishness  of  aspiration,  to  live  constantly  en  rapport  with
the  highest  conditions  of  Spirit  life  and  thought,  knowing  that  charity
and  goodness,  purity  and  holiness,  precede  happiness  in  all  worlds.

It  stimulates  the  mind  to  the  largest  investigation  and  freest
thought  on  all  subjects,  especially  on  the  vital  questions  of  Truth  and
duty,  that  we  may  be  qualified  to  judge  for  ourselves  what  is  right
and  true.

It  cultivates  self-reliance  and  careful  investigation  by  taking  away
the  support  of  arbitrary  authorities,  and  leaving  each  mind  to  exercise
its  own  truth-determining  powers.

It  quickens  all  philanthropic  impulses,  by  emphasizing  the  Truth
pf  Universal  Brotherhood^  and  the  duty  of  living  for  the  good  of  all.


THE  CULTIVATION   OF   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  235

under  the  encouraging  assurance  that  the  progressed  and  exalted  of
our  race,  instead  of  resting  and  idling  away  an  eternity  of  inglorious
ease,  are  encompassing  us  about  as  a  great  *'  cloud  of  witnesses/'
inspiring  us  to  the  work,  and  urging  it  forward  to  a  great  and  glorious
issue.

He  whose  Soul  has  become  developed  knows  of  the  Infinite
Presence,  the  Absolute  and  Divine  Energy,  One  Living  and  one  True
God,  —  Spirit,  Love,  and  Wisdom,  and  upon  the  tender  loving  bosom
of  this  God  the  Soul  rests  forever.

Development  of  man's  Spiritual  gifts  to  his  own  true  knowledge
settles  three  questions  of  momentous  import.

1.  That  man  has  a  conscious  existence  beyond  the  grave.

2.  That  all  individuals  commence  that  existence  precisely  as  they
leave  this  mentally  and  morally,  retaining  their  identity  and  memory.

3.  That  this  future  existence  is  one  of  mental  progress  and  spirit-
ual unfoldment  for  all  human  intelligences.

The  Spiritual  philosophy,  while  undermining  the  false  and  over-
throwing the  Babels  of  bigotry  and  superstition,  is  constructive  in
purpose  and  eclectic  in  method.  It  gladly  conserves  the  good  and
adopts  the  right  and  true  wherever  found.

One  whose  Soul  is  thus  developed  awakens  to  the  belief  in
rewards  and  punishments,  as  links  in  the  chain  of  Cause  and  Effect
Retribution  is  inevitable.  In  all  worlds,  man  as  a  Spiritual  being  is  a
moral  actor,  subject  to  law,  and  responsible  —  reaping  anguish  from
vice,  and  happiness  from  virtue.  Memory,  the  backward-looking  eye
of  the  Soul,  accompanies  each  individual  to  the  world  of  Spirits  —
that  house  of  Many  Mansions.  Each,  when  leaving  the  mortal  body,
gravitates  by  virtue  of  fixed  law  to  his  appropriate  zone  or  Spiritual
plane  of  existence.  The  purer  the  life  on  earth,  the  more  ecstatic
will  be  the  bliss  in  the  beautiful  home-land  of  the  Angels.

Divine  Love  reaches  down  to  the  lowest  sphere.  Progress  spans
all  worlds.  Angels  are  ever  inviting  those  in  lower  spheres  to  "  come
up  higher."  Every  sweet  thought  breathed,  every  generous  word
uttered,  every  charitable  deed  wrought,  and  every  heart-beat  for
virtue,  purity,  and  peace,  will  live  forever,  to  beautify  and  bless.

The  Development  of  Soul  and  man's  Spiritual  gifts,  as  inter-
preted by  its  best  exponents,  has  given  free  thought  a  new  impetus.
It  has  severed  the  bonds  of  fear  and  superstition;  revealed  in  a
truer  light  the  law  of  compensation ;  opened  to  anxious  eyes  a
revised  geography  of  the  heavens,  and  convinced  multitudes  of
atheists  and  deists  of  a  future  conscious  existence.    Unbarring  the


236      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

gates  of  deadly  it  has  brought  the  loved  inhabitants  of  the  summer
land  into  our  cities,  our  homes,  our  chambers,  permitting  us  to  touch
their  shining  hands  and  listen  to  the  music  of  their  voices.

It  has  been  known  by  the  few  Adepts  in  all  ages  that  the  facul-
ties of  the  mind  and  will  could  be  quickened  to  a  degree  unknown
and  beyond  comprehension  to  those  who  are  aware  of  only  the  sleep-
ing and  waking  states  of  being.  Through  a  third  state,  known  as
Trance,  which  is  vision  in  the  inner  world  of  Soul,  the  thoughts  of
one  Soul,  either  in  the  body  or  disembodied,  can  be  transmitted  to
another,  and  knowledge  and  higher  understanding  can  be  thus
rapidly  interchanged.

Development  is  growth,  and  he  who  does  not  advance  fails.  De-
velopment  of  Spirit  and  illumination  of  Soul  give  man  a  better
understanding  of  the  one  living  and  true  God,  Maker  of  heaven,
earth,  and  all  things ;  and  that  the  process  of  creation  was,  and  is,  by
evolution  and  involution.  God  is  absolute  Spirit  Spirit  and  matter
are  both  eternal.  The  interstellar  ether,  spiritual  substances,  electrifi-
able  forces,  and  divine  principles  are  the  intermediates;  the  connect-
ing links  between  physical  matter  and  Spirit.

Development  of  man's  Spiritual  understanding  awakens  in  him  a
knowledge  of  his  natural  and  spiritual  body,  and  that  each  individual,
taking  with  him  memory  and  consciousness,  commences  the  life  here-
after precisely  as  he  leaves  this  mentally  and  spiritually;  and  that
all  in  the  future  world  as  here  he  is  subject  of  progression.

Such  development  also  gives  one  knowledge  and  light  in  spiritual
gifts,  prophecies,  clairvoyance,  visions,  trances,  and  Spiritualization  of
matter,  as  demonstrating  a  future  conscious  existence.  This  is  not
belief,  but  positive  knowledge,  and  thus  conditioned,  he  obeys  the
apostolic  injunction,  "  Add  to  your  faith  knowledge."  Thus  devel-
oped, his  inner  being  becomes  a  living  inspiration,  a  spiritual  outflow-
ing from  the  Divine  Fountain,  as  Prophets  and  Apostles,  martyrs
and  poets,  have  been  inspired  in  all  ages.

Development  of  the  Soul  is  the  illumination  and  stir  of  the  Divin-
ity within  us.  When  a  man  awakens  to  the  knowledge  that  Divine
Humanity  is  the  church  of  God,  and  the  true  church  of  humanity  is
the  holy  apostolic  church,  wherein  should  be  found  purity,  peace,
spiritual  gifts,  and  all  things  in  common  as  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,
he  soons  learns  that  none  of  us  has  secrets.  God,  Angels,  Spirits,
may  know  our  very  thoughts.  Our  Souls  are  like  the  leaflets  of  an
open  book.  Memory  with  its  Astral  is  the  recording  Angel,  and  a
cultured  conscience  the  approving  or  reproving  voice;  while  self-


THE  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  23/

denial,  nobleness  of  purpose,  and  purity  of  life  are  the  ascending
steps  that  lead  to  heaven  while,  of  a  truth,  **  they  who  have  sown  the
wind,  shall  reap  the  whirlwind/'

The  Manifestations  of  Spirit  are  given  to  every  man  to  profit  by.
To  one  is  given — Faith  by  the  Spirit  To  another  —  the  gift  of
Healing.  To  another  —  to  see  Spirits.  To  another — to  hear  Spirit
voices.  To  another  —  Prophecy.  To  another — Divers  kinds  of
Tongues.

The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are  Spiritual  sight  and  knowledge  to  the
Soul,  through  the  Astral  body,  wholly  independently  of  the  animal  or
material  avenues  of  sense ;  the  power  of  projecting  the  Astral  fluid
from  one  individual  to  the  body  of  another,  by  the  concentration  of
Will  and  the  power  of  impressing  the  will  by  superior  wisdom  of
silence  on  that  one.  The  Soul  also  possesses  the  power  of  so  con-
centrating its  own  Astral  body  as  temporarily  to  subjugate  the  animal
and  the  outer  senses.  It  can  also  perform  all  the  phenomena  we  call
life,  and  can  at  will  command  the  assistance  of  inferior  grades  of
man,  embodied  or  disembodied,  and  compel  the  aid  of  the  elementa-
ries  in  subjugating  the  forces  of  matter.  By  culture  and  growth,  and
knowledge  of  the  law  of  the  power  of  mind  over  the  elementaries,
the  Soul  and  its  Astral  covering  (called  by  the  Hindus  Akasa)  can
compel  the  presence  and  assistance  of  all  the  lower  Soul  Spirits,  and
effect  transformations  in  the  animate  and  inanimate  bodies  in  the
realms  of  nature,  through  union  with  the  three  great  principles  of
nature.

By  will  of  thought,  he  can  control  his  fellow-men  both  physically
and  mentally,  irrespective  of  distances,  and  can  bring  forces  to  bear
that  will  cause  changes  in  nations,  and  powers  that  will  change  the
destinies  of  societies  and  individuals.  This  lies  within  access  of
almost  every  man  and  woman.  They  who  have  naturally  a  prophetic,
mediumistic,  silent  organization  have  much  the  advantage.  Where
this  exists,  a  little  care  and  culture  will  do  the  rest.  Where  nature
has  not  bestowed  the  sensitive  vibration  of  the  Astral  Akasa,  change
of  physique  and  life  of  the  person  is  necessary.  One  must  modify
or  break  off  all  the  old  habits  and  mode  of  living,  even  associates,
ambitions,  and  pleasures,  thus  changing  all  the  inherent  tendencies  of
the  animal.  By  a  renewing  of  the  mind,  new  thoughts,  new  loves,
new  light,  new  life,  will  spring  up  and  illumine  the  Soul,  which,
through  the  culture  of  mental  illumination  and  concentration,  will
become  attuned  in  the  octave  of  the  energies  of  nature,  and  the  staff
of  power  is  within  one's  grasp.


238      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Astral  colors  assist  much  in  a  mediums'  growth  and  protection.
The  color  that  belongs  to  you^  the  color  belonging  to  the  cardinal
planet  at  the  hour  of  your  birth,  is  your  true  heritage.  Trance  opens
up  to  us  the  mysteries  of  Life  and  death,  the  knowledge  of  the
Hidden  Way,  and  gives  us  glimpses  of  the  Spirit  world  and  life  to
come.

Sometimes  the  assistance  of  the  Astral  color  will  greatly  increase
the  forces.  This  was  the  great  secret  of  the  most  powerful  Adepts,
who  had  some  gem  of  their  individual  Astral  color,  set  in  some  metal
that  was  of  their  cardinal  planet,  gaining  thus  their  color,  metal,  and
mineral  to  increase  their  powerful  mental  Will.

Those  who  have  stood  face  to  face  with  the  sunbeam  of  knowl-
edge of  the  esoteric  bi-sexual  forces  have  seen  the  clouds  of  darkness
and  ignorance  vanish  into  the  glorious  morning  which  knows  no
night

They  perceive  the  past  struggles  of  life  when  they  were  behind
the  misty  veil,  guided  only  by  the  instincts  and  desires  of  the  animal,
but  now  that  they  have  attained  that  breadth  of  vision^  and  every-
thing is  before  them  like  pearls  on  the  unbroken  thread  of  destiny,
they  awake  to  the  hour  when  they  have  full  right  to  say,  "  I  know  that
some  of  the  secrets  of  nature  are  now  revealed  to  me.''

To  be  bi-sexual  is  to  have  the  being  and  Love  of  both  sexes  in
one,  like  the  flower  which  contains  both  stamens  and  pistils  within  the
same  envelope,  —  a  perfect  flower  within  itself.  The  many  unfathom-
able mysteries  of  the  past  are  now  as  an  open  book,  and  the  future
lies  outstretched  in  a  boundless  panorama  of  a  never-beginning,
never-ending  present.  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected  now
becomes  the  head  of  the  comer.  Love  with  Wisdom  is  the  secret  of
Life.

The  great  potentiality  and  efficacy  of  Spirit  by  Faith  can  only  be
reached  by  Silence,  Courage,  and  Faith.  God  favoring  us,  we  arise
through  difficulties  to  grandeur.

Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  which  is  my  refuge,  even  the
Most  High  thy  habitation;  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither
shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy  dwelling. —  Ps,  xci :  9,  10.

Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities ;  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases.
—  Ps,  ciii :  3.

I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee  —  Ex.  xv. :  26.  But  that  ye  may
know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  upon  earth  to  forgive  sins  (he
said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy),  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise,  and  take  up
thy  couch,  and  go  into  thine  house. — Luke  v. :  24.


THE  CULTIVATION  OP   SPIRITUAL  GIPTS.  239

There  are  certain  octaves  of  Soul  vibration  which  produce  a  per-
fect attunement  with  God,  which  is  that  faith  by  the  Spirit  in  the
bealing  of  the  physical  body  through  intense  Soul-prayer  of  the  inner
being.  In  this  concord  and  attunement  of  immortal  energies  there
is  a  descent  of  Divine  Life  with  health-giving  power,  not  only  into
the  celestial  and  spiritual  planes  of  man's  life,  but  even  into  that  of
his  physical  existence.

And  the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  so  with  their  enchantments.
—  Ex.  vii. :  ii,  22.

There  is  a  certain  intensity  of  measure  in  the  plaintive  call  of  the
Soul  to  the  Absolute  Spirit,  whose  tranquil  alliance  brings  a  full  con-
sciousness to  the  individual,  which  is  truth  unspeakable  and  inexpli-
cable. This  marked  actual  point  can  only  be  gained  by  full  faith  in
silent  call,  or  True  Soul  Prayer  from  the  inmost  temple  of  our  being.
There  b  a  happy  sense  of  direct  relation  with  heaven,  a  thrill  of  con-
scious exultation  beyond  any  conception  of  the  natural  man.

The  first  step  toward  gaining  this  vibration  is  silent  meditation  out
alone  with  nature,  with  the  physical  body  in  perfect  repose,  the  mind
and  thought  away  from  self,  musing  in  silent  re  very  on  God,  Spirit,
and  Divine  Love.  The  success  depends  on  the  unselfish  purity  of
thought,  silence,  resolution,  patience,  self-denial,  prudence,  confidence,
faith,  gentleness,  love.  It  may  require  only  days  to  those  who  have
already  demonstrated  to  their  own  Souls  the  efficacy  of  silent  prayer;
of  others,  weeks  and  months ;  to  some,  even  years,  —  depending  much
on  the  life  of  the  individual.

The  chief  thing  is  to  forget  self  and  to  long  in  calm  silence  for
Divine  Truth.  For  Truth  conquers  all  things  ultimately.  He  who
does  not  freely  speak  the  truth  is  a  betrayer  of  the  truth.  In  the  dis-
charge of  your  every-day  life,  dear  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  hav-
ing charity  for  all  men,  with  few  words  and  gentle  speech,  with  utter-
ance of  simple  truth,  let  your  actions  demonstrate  that  you  were  not
bom  for  yourself  alone,  but  for  the  whole  world.  So  you  will  touch
nothing  you  do  not  adorn.

"  Remember  there  is  com  in  Egypt."  "  Awake  I  arise  I  or  be  for-
ever fallen."  "  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer  than  this  world
dreams  of."

**•  A  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing;
Drink  deep,  or  taste  not  the  Pierian  spring."

So  much  has  been  claimed  by  westem  Occultists  of  the  necessity
f»f  total  abstinence  from  animal  food,  that  much  suffering,  and  some-


240  THE   HIDDEN    WAY   ACROSS   THE   THRESHOLD.

times  prolonged  illness,  has  occurred  to  indi\dduak  who  in  this  change-
able northern  climate  have  restricted  themselves  to  vegetable  diet
There  is  an  order  in  the  East  which  exacts  from  its  anchorite  three
years'  abstinence  from  animal  food,  but  the  results  obtained  are  far
from  those  which  occur  among  the  three  older  Orders,  where  each
anchorite  is  instructed  as  follows :  Child  of  the  Vestals,  thou  roust  now
direct  thyself  with  contemplation  and  understanding.  Behold  the
trees  of  the  forest  Some  thrive  best  in  the  dry  sand,  others  in  the
wet  sand  by  the  river.  While  some  prefer  the  hills  and  rocks,  others
choose  rich  soil  upon  the  plains.  Thou  art  much  like  one  of  these
trees.  Therefore,  take  that  which  is  best  suited  for  theej  and  be  temper,
ate  in  all  things.  Permit  no  man  to  persuade  thee,  neither  do  thou
influence  any  man.  Peace  be  with  thee.  Go  now  to  thy  silent  med-
itation, and  with  thee  —  Peace.

St.  Paul  found  the  same  contention  and  strife  among  the  early
Christians,  as  we  see  by  his  recorded  words.

"  Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith,  receive  ye,  but  not  to  doubtful
disputations.  For  one  believeth  he  may  eat  all  things ;  another,  who
is  weak,  eateth  herbs.  Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise  him  that
eateth  not ;  and  let  not  him  which  eateth  not  judge  him  that  eateth ;
for  God  hath  received  him.  —  Romans  xiv :  1-3.

We  read  in  Manon  (lib.  v.) :  —  The  Great  Being  who  exists  by  His
own  Will  has  Himself  created  animals  for  sacrifice,  and  by  sacrifice
not  only  of  animals  but  also  of  man's  animal  self  b  this  universe
magnified.  Therefore  the  slaughter  of  animals  is  not  a  murder.  A
Brahmin  should  never  eat  the  flesh  of  animals  which  have  not  been  con-
secrated by  prayer  and  thanksgiving.  But  let  him  eat  conformably
to  the  eternal  law  of  life,  after  consecration  by  holy  words.  But  the
Anchorite  in  the  forest  should  never  commit  murder  upon  any  ani-
mal during  his  silent  contemplation  without  sanction  of  the  Veda,  not
even  under  great  distress,  for  it  breaks  his  contemplation  and  peace.
In  these  days  of  thy  silence,  thou  must  eat  little  of  that  which  roust
be  ^ven  thee.

The  following  extract  from  the  Sama-Veda  is  worthy  of  insertion.

"  Man  should  respect  animals,  for  their  imperfection  'is  the  work
of  Supreme  Wbdom,  which  governs  the  world.  As  man's  wisdom  is
greater  than  theirs,  he  must  bear  with  that  which  the  animals  have
not  if  he  expects  the  Great  Wisdom  to  bear  with  him.  Thou  shalt
not,  therefore,  without  great  necessity,  and  never  for  pleasure,  kill
animals  which  like  yourselves  are  of  Divine  Creation.  Neither  shalt
thou  torment  them  nor  af9ict  them  nor  overwork  them.    Neither


THE  CULTIVATION   OF   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  24I

shalt  thou  abandon  them  in  their  old  age,  but  remember  their  services
kindly  rendered  thee.

**  Man  may  kill  animals  only  for  food,  carefully  shunning  those  for-
bkiden  as  unclean.

**  Even  in  killing  them  for  food  he  may  commit  a  fault,  for  which  he
may  receive  just  punishment,  for  to  kill  is  a  solemn  thing.  For  Blood
is  the  Life  and  aii  life  in  its  extinction  should  return  to  God.

*'  Let  him  therefore  lead  his  animal  before  the  temple  and  the  priest
who  is  appointed  shall  slaughter  it  in  offering  to  the  Lord,  and  he  shall
sprinkle  the  blood  of  the  victim  upon  the  altar.  Whoever  shall  eat
of  the  flesh  without  sacrifice  shall  be  cursed  in  this  world  and  the
next,  for  in  the  Divine  Word  it  is  written  He  shall  devour  me  in  the
other  world  whose  flesh  I  shall  eat  in  this,  if  the  blood  of  his  Soul
does  not  find  peace.''

For  the  blood  of  anything  departing  is  the  life^  and  in  departing  should
return  to  God^  who  gave  it.

ILLUMINATL
^  Ariu^  shme;f9r  thy  Light  is  come^  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  theeP

Oa      Oa      Oa

''The  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  for  ages  and  from  generations.

•*  I  have  given  thee  thy  Spirit

"  I  have  given  thee  thy  Soul.

"  I  also  have  given  thee  thy  physical  house  of  Dual-being,  that  thou
mightest  form  a  casket  lamp  for  Spirit  Truth,  that  through  thee  may
be  ripened  fruits  when  I  send  my  harvesters  to  gather  them  unto  me.
Oh,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  make  thy  heart  as  a  little  child,  and  strive  to
live  out  thy  few  days  free  from  bonds  of  earth ;  to  be  and  remain  no
longer  slaves  to  these  things  only  supposed  to  be  necessities,  but  by
the  assistance  of  Angels  and  the  heavenly  love  of  Spirit  move  up  to
heaven's  original  intentions.  Remember  thou  art  a  child  of  Spirit  on
earth,  remaining  here  only  for  a  brief  space  of  time,  and  that  thou
shalt  soon  enter  thy  eternal  dwelling-place,  for  thou  art  but  a  traveller
who  shall  soon  find  rest  in  the  land  of  God,  Spirit.  No  man  ever
did  or  can  alone  govern  himself.

**  *  When  we  have  turned,  each  to  his  own  way,
Like  wayward  sheep  we  have  gone  astray.'

"Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,  and  renew  a  right  Spirit
within  me.    Give  unto  us  who  are  athirst  of  the  waters  of  Life  freely.


242      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Give  unto  us,  Father,  that  due  sense  of  all  thy  mercies  that  our  hearts
may  be  unfeignedly  thankful,  and  that  we  may  show  forth  thy  praise,
not  only  with  our  lips,  but  in  our  lives.

^'  When  thou  askest  anything  of  the  heart  of  God,  say  within  thy-
self :  "  Being  a  Ray  of  Love  from  the  Infinite  mind,  I  in  my  ignorance
and  foolishness  became  a  wayward  child,  wandering  in  far  countries,
feeling  so  great  within  myself  and  so  full  of  vanity  that  disappoint-
ments and  defeats  became  my  constant  companions.  I  beseech  Thee
to  hear  me.  Loving  Father.  Consider  and  hear  me,  O  Lord,  my  God.
Lighten  mine  eyes  lest  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  death.  Give  to  me  the
true  desires  of  my  heart,  and  do  not  withhold  the  request  of  my  SouL
O,  Lord  my  God,  unite  me  to  Thy  Heart  of  Love,  as  I  cry  unto  Thee,
and  heal  me.  Make  my  heart  as  a  little  child  to  repose  in  Thy  Love
and  look  to  Thee.  Help  me  to  make  clearer  the  mirror  of  my  moni-
tor, that  through  its  brightness  I  may  reflect  7^y  divine  image  before
men,  that  man  may  know  on  him  depends  either  to  open  or  close  his
perceptions  to  Thy  voice.  Help  me  with  all  my  heart  to  reach  up  to
Thee."  Ask  thus,  without  doubting,  and  ye  shall  know  the  Love  of  God
hsUh  come  to  thee,  and  will  fulfil  the  request  of  thy  Soul.  Through  the
passive  silence  thou  wilt  find  the  pathway,  for  silence  is  Spirit,  and
much  noise  is  pain.

''  Remove  from  thy  thoughts  all  doubtings  and  questionings ;  free
tbyself  from  the  fatal  disease  of  being  puffed  up  with  conceit,  for
vanity,  selfishness,  and  doubt  are  weeds  and  tares  that  choke  the
Spirit

*'  The  Soul  of  man  being  an  enduring  essence,  through  silence  and
harmony  man  must  gain  the  heights  and  find  repose  with  the  Father.
For,  being  immortal  and  having  power  over  all  things,  he  yet  suffers
mortal  things  in  harmony  with  nature,  for  he  is  a  part  of  the  great
essence  of  Spirit  from  the  Father  of  Spirit.  This  is  the  great  mys-
tery that  to  this  day  is  hidden,  until  man  by  fire  is  brought  to  this
ripening.

"  For  if  thou  lovest  thy  nature  body  more  than  thy  essence  body,
thy  eyes  are  holden  so  thou  canst  not  see  and  know  the  Light  of
Spirit,  for  everything  contains  a  certain  deposit  from  the  jewel  of
essences  out  from  the  great  soul  of  fire,  taken  from  the  eternal  ocean
of  light

"  Ask  thou  of  Him,  How  shall  I  be  able  to  ask  anything  of  Thee,
thou  Great  Infinite,  and  receive  it  ?  Seeing  I  feel  so  great  within  myself
and  so  full  of  vanity  and  pride.  Oh,  wilt  Thou  not  turn  again  toward
me  in  these  days  of  my  trouble,  and  be  my  Lord,  my  Light  and  lov-


THE  CULTIVATION  OF   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  243

ing  Guide,  my  Saviour,  my  Salvation.  Light  within  me  Thy  candle
of  Truth.  Enlighten  my  darkness,  O  Lord  my  God,  as  day  unto
day  uttereth  speech  and  night  unto  night  showeth  knowledge:^-

'*  Father  of  all  that  is  heard  or  hears,
Father  of  all  that  is  seen  or  sees,
Father  of  all  that  is  or  shall  arise,
Father  of  this  immeasurable  mass  of  worlds.
Whose  home  b  in  the  firmament  of  stars,
Thou  limitless  renewing  life  of  nature.
From  out  whose  loving  heart's  luxurious  growth  springs  man.
Hear  Thou  my  call.

"Thou  sendest  forth  Thy  Spirit,  and  men  are  created.  Thou
renewest  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  all  nature  leaps  with  joy.  Whom
have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee.  Help  me  to  keep  Thy  words  and  take
me  in  Thy  care.  Under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wing  lead  me  in  the  way
everlasting.

**  God  is  not  as  man,  mindful  of  injuries  He  has  received,  nor  of
the  many  times  He  has  knocked  at  your  door,  only  to  be  turned
away  by  the  vanity  and  selfishness  of  man ;  but  forgets  all,  for  He  has
great  compassion  on  all  His  creatures,  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his
children.

"  Therefore,  purify  thy  heart  from  worldly  vanity,  listen  again  to
the  commands,  He  has  given  thee,  in  His  still,  loving  voice,  calling
through  the  doorway  of  thy  monitor,  and  thou  shalt  receive  whatever
good  thing  thou  shalt  ask,  and  nothing  shall  be  wanting  unto  thee  of
all  thy  petitions,  if  thou  ask  of  Him  in  the  heart  of  Love,  without
doubting.  But  he  who  asks  not  like  a  little  child  of  its  parent,  with
full  faith,  shall  not  receive.  For  they  who  doubt  have  vanities,  sel-
fishness, or  two  voices,  —  one  of  the  heart,  another  of  the  tongue,  —
cannot  reach  unto  His  heart.  Therefore,  purify  thine  own  heart  from
all  these  things,  drive  out  all  sense  of  separateness,  expunge  all  seeds
of  jealousy  and  hatred,  and  above  all,  guard  thyself  from  anger,  which
drives  the  Spirit  of  God  afar  off.

"Ask  gently  and  lovingly  of  Him  until  thou  receivest;  for  if  thou
cease  to  ask,  thou  must  complain  of  thyself  only,  and  not  of  the  Infi-
nite. Ask  in  love,  and  truly  through  love  thou  shalt  receive,  for  love
is  the  secret  of  life,  and  this  is  the  pathway  to  God.

"The  true  secret  of  success  is  the  at-one-ment  with  God.  A  great
help  in  all  this  is  prayer.     But  it  is  good  to  have  a  correct  conception


244      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

of  what  prayer  is.  A  mere  array  of  words,  however  beautiful,  is  not
prayer,  and  is  no  avail.  A  supplication  for  things  that  a  little  seri-
ous thought  would  show  to  be  impossibilities  may  be  uttered  in  a
sincere  spirit,  but  is  not  prayer.  Anything  that  we  by  inward  serious
reflection  can  grasp,  and  by  a  conscientious  effort  of  our  will  can
effect,  need  not  be  prayed  for,  because  the  reflection  and  effort  are  in
themselves  efficient  prayer.

**  But  a  determined  Will  to  be  purer  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  for
every  day  that  comes ;  every  thought,  every  act  that  leaves  the  Soul
satisfied  and  at  peace  with  itself ;  every  aspiration  toward  the  good,
the  beautiful,  the  true ;  all  admiration  of  the  beauties  of  nature  that
elevates  the  Soul  above  the  toils  and  troubles  of  everyday  life ;  a  con-
stant and  unshakable  faith  in  the  Infinite,  and  that  we  are  surrounded
by  Spiritual  beings  who  lovingly  sympathize  with  us,  constantly  watch
our  doings,  and  always  help  us  whenever  we  make  the  right  effort  in
the  right  direction ;  all  this  b  true  prayer,  indeed,  that  never  fails  to
give  us  the  strength  we  stand  so  much  in  need  of.

'*  To  attain  a  certain  octave  of  vibration  with  the  Spiritual  powers
without  and  the  intense  desire  of  the  Soul  within,  must  be  the  sole
aim.  But  above  all  things  never  make  the  effort  out  of  idle  curiosity
nor  to  satisfy  other  individuals  who  desire  a  sign  or  test,  nor  attempt
an  experiment  to  prove  an  argument.  In  silence  learn  to  call  upon
the  Infinite,  and  guard  jealously  thy  Darling  from  the  lions.  To
reach  these  higher  octaves  of  Soul  no  one  special  definite  text  is
necessary.  It  is  simply  reaching  out  into  the  waves  of  the  eternal
fountain  of  Spirit,  the  same  efficacy  being  reached  through  the  Soul
attaining  in  Silmt  Prayer  the  true  Spirit  of  a  part  or  whole  of  the
23d,  27th,  28th,  42d,  69th,  91st,  103d  Psalms,  as  in  following  the
text  S.S.S.,  heretofore  given."

The  Hierophant  d'llluminati  frequently  instructs  the  children  of
Light,  and  all  Pilgrims  of  the  heavenly  way,  that  the  whole  world  is
as  a  musical  instrument,  a  chromatic,  sensible  thing ;  in  youth  unat-
tuned  to  the  Light.  Our  harp  chords  are  away  down  to  the  grosser
elements;  but  by  culture  of  the  Soul  through  Spiritual  things,  the
chord  grows,  and  under  the  hand  of  the  Spiritual  tuner  is  worked  into
a  perfect  vibration  in  concord  with  God.  The  two  are  one;  the
perfect  chord  a  limitless  power  leaping  all  barriers  of  space.

Not  long  since,  a  lengthy  controversy  existed  in  pulpit  and  press
regarding  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  Numerous  over-zealous  but  ignorant
divines  desired  to  come  forward  and  prove  their  argument  by  a  test
case  before  competent  judges.    But  wiser  counsels  prevailed,  and  the


THE   CULTIVATION   OF   SPIRITUAL   GIFTS.  245

trial  was  not  made.  If  mind  with  will  is  a  projectile ;  if  thought  is
the  atmosphere  of  the  Soul ;  if  in  the  subject  world  of  Soul  and
Spirit  everything  is  in  octaves  of  vibration  like  encircling  waves,
subservient  to  the  immutable  law  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  as
every  Adept  Occultist  is  aware  all  such  experiments  would  be  like
placing  a  native  of  the  South  Sea  Islands  with  his  war-club  in  the
transatlantic  telegraph  office,  and  expecting  him  to  despatch  an  intelli-
gent message  across  the  sea.  To  expect  a  psychical  research  Society
to  investigate  Spiritual  phenomena  successfully,  or  to  associate  human
judges  together  to  test  the  efficacy  of  the  powers  of  God  and  His
responsive  Love  to  His  true  children,  —  all  these  efforts  are  equally
absurd,  preposterous,  cruel,  and  unjust.

It  is  gratifying  to  see  the  increased  attention  which  is  being
bestowed  on  Mediumship.  The  incipient  investigator  perceives  no
distinction  in  the  phenomena.  To  him  it  is  all  "Spirits."  Another,
who  has  discovered  it  is  not  all  Spirits,  fails  to  see  there  are  any
Spirits  at  all  in  it !  These  two  —  both  calling  themselves  Spiritual-
bts— are  equally  unscientific.  The  one  is  a  somewhat  superficial
perceptionist,  the  other  an  equally  unsatisfactory  dogmatist.  The
ordinary  methods  of  mental  action  must  explain  mediumship;  in
other  words,  as  the  normal  mentality  operates,  so  must  that  of  the
medium,  or  rather  the  controlling  Spirit  through  the  medium.  We
must  understand  the  one  before  we  can  begin  to  discuss  the  other.
This  has  unfortunately  not  been  the  case.  Many  people  who  know
nothing  of  mental  processes  set  themselves  to  work  to  solve  the
more  complex  problem  of  Spirit  manifestation.

Body  and  mind  may  be  regarded  as  representative  of  man  during
earth  life,  in  his  two  aspects  —  physical  and  metaphysical.  Both  are
phenomenal ;  both  are  effects  —  the  products  of  something  else.  When
the  physical  phenomena  of  life  cease,  the  mental  phenomena  of  life
cease  also.  This  the  materialist  perceives,  and  he  denies  human
immortality ;  he  says  the  mental  or  metaphysical  man  is  a  phenom-
enal function  of  the  physical  man ;  when  one  disappears,  the  other
no  longer  exists ;  break  the  bell,  and  the  sounds  cease.  The  Materi-
alist is  right  so  far.

The  mind  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  body,  for  body  exists  prior
to  mind.  Mind  is  itself  an  effect^  manifested  through  body,  and
therefore  cannot  be  a  cause  at  all.  We  must  find  a  cause  both  for
mind  and  body.  Mind  may  be  defined  as  the  earthly  man,  metaphy^
sically  speaking,  just  as  the  body  is  the  earthly  man,  physically  speak-
ing.    Both  are  of  the  earth,  earthy,  and  both  perish  at  death.    This


246       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

is  a  truth  which  has  been  stated  again  and  again  in  spiritual  teach-
ings for  thousands  of  years;  but  some  Spiritualists  do  not  see  the
force  of  it  to-day.  That  interior  Essence  which  alike  produces  both
mind  and  body  alone  survives  at  death.  When  the  mind  is  not
wholly  laid  aside,  then  we  have  "earth-bound  Spirits"  —  Spirits
chained  by  their  memories  of  the  past  to  their  old  haunts  and  habits.
To  leave  all  that  behind  is  the  greatest  blessing  that  can  befall  the
time-stained  Spirit  of  man.-  Our  knowledge  of  ourselves  and  of
others  does  not  depend  on  memory  at  all.  True  Spiritual  recogni-
tion is  a  different  faculty  altogether  from  the  external  mind,  its
thoughts  and  memories.  We  err  greatly  when  yire  apply  the  thought-
methods  of  earth-life  to  those  of  Spirit-life  ;  yet,  we  must  understand
the  one  before  we  can  learn  to  know  the  other.  That  Spirits  leave
their  mind  as  well  as  their  body  behind  them  at  death  explains  why
they  can  sometimes  tell  so  little  of  their  earth-life.  See  how  vastly
important  this  inquiry  must  become  in  explaining  the  difficulties  of
mediumship.

A  Spirit  cannot  appear  physically  unless  it  can  draw  suitable
material  with  which  to  re-embody  itself.  A  Spirit  cannot  manifest
mentally  unless  it  can  be  supplied  with  suitable  mental  conditions
wherewith  to  enable  it  to  reach  the  earth-plane  as  it  did  when  it
inhabited  its  own  body  during  earth-life.  There  must  be  the  recep-
tivity, which  means  the  appropriate  conditions  for  spiritual  manifes-
tation.

The  human  mind  presents  a  thousand  and  one  obstacles  to  the
reception  of  spiritual  truth.  Unspirituality  may  be  regarded  as  a
type  of  the  whole.  We  must  intellectually  have  some  inkling  of  a
subject  before  we  can  receive  instruction  on  it ;  more  frequently  than
not  that  inkling  is  perverted  and  false,  and  all  we  permit  ourselves  to
receive  must  be  in  accordance  with  our  ignorant  and  baseless  opin-
ions. In  addition  to  intellectual  unspirituality,  we  may  be  gross
and  perverted  in  our  desires  and  habits.  Some  men  live  like  beasts,
and  expect  to  be  Spiritual  in  intellectuality  without  any  change  of  life.
This  is  sheer  folly.  It  is  the  evil  in  man's  life  more  than  his  intel-
lectual sophistries  and  vain  conceits  that  shuts  the  windows  of  heaven
against  him.  So  much  for  the  individual ;  but  the  subject  expands
much  beyond  his  narrow  limits.  Personally,  a  man  is  enclosed
within  his  skin  ;  individually,  his  senses  extend  to  distances  of  various
degrees.  As  his  mind  expands  spiritually,  he  seems  to  grasp  the
universe  in  his  embrace ;  and  as  he  becomes  pure,  and  true  to  the
higher  light  within,  he  ascends  to  loftier  eminences,  and  his  range  of


THE  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  ^47

vision  is  correspondingly  expanded.  In  these  developments  he  is
constantly  projecting  himself  into  more  advanced  Spiritual  states;
taking  and  giving  as  part  and  portion  of  them,  and  these  Spiritual
states  in  return  become  the  environment  of  the  individual.

Man  thus  becomes  the  centre  of  the  universe.  But  this  considera-
tion debars  us  from  advancing  faster  than  our  environment  will
permit.  If  we  would  soar  to  heaven,  we  must  take  our  surroundings
with  us.  We  cannot  go  alone  ;  we  cannot  become  isolated  from  the
universe.  Our  speakers,  clairvoyants,  and  even  healers  cannot  do
more  than  the  conditions  they  are  supplied  with  will  permit.

There  is  an  electro-magnetic  invisible  liquid  in  which  we  all  float
like  a  fish  in  water.  We  are  living  continually  immersed  in  this
ethereal  fluid,  which  the  world  of  disembodied  intelligence  calls  "con-
ditions," which  is  simply  the  purity  or  impurity  of  these  invisible
etherealized  liquids  which  the  medium  exhales,  and  which  produce
good  or  bad  conditions,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  atmospheric
ethereal  liquids  are  always  in  motion,  not  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,
but  in  a  whirling  vibration,  which  produces  the  polarization  of  the
instrument  for  mediumship,  as  the  whirling  vibration  of  electricity  in
spirals  about  iron  produces  the  magnet.  Upon  just  that  degree  of
harmony  and  union  of  force  and  exaltation  perfected  by  the  whirl
through  this  liquid,  with  the  Astral  and  Soul  of  the  medium  depends
the  clearness  of  the  message,  on  very  much  the  same  principle  as
the  invisible  operator  across  the  sea  sends  through  his  cable  con-
ductor a  whirl  of  intelligence  by  a  vibration  of  electricity  which
forms  his  message  of  news.  What  perfect  conditions  are  absolutely
necessary  for  him  to  produce  the  best  results  !  Alas,  what  conditions
are  given  to  mediums  who  are  to  produce  far  greater  and  grander
ones  1     Let  him  who  reads  think  and  ponder  well.

All  mediums  should  make  a  close  study  of  the  law  of  exhalation
and  the  action  of  mind  on  mind  in  the  circle,  which  is  tremendous,
frequently  operating  in  the  most  unhappy  manner  upon  the  medium
and  interfering  with  the  work  of  the  Spirits.  One  evil-minded  or
suspicious  sitter  will  tincture  a  whole  circle  with  suspicion  and
subject  a  medium  to  undeserved  reproach.  Hypocrisy  has  always
been  regarded  as  the  most  objectionable  spiritual  state.  All  things
that  come  from  mediums  are  not  of  necessity  true.  Because  of  their
very  uncertain  source,  they  should  be  looked  into  with  reason  and
understanding.  Some  of  the  communications  are  without  doubt  from
pure  and  exalted  Spirits;  some  are  the  reflex  of  the  mentality
through  the  Astral  of  the  medium,  partaking  of  the  thought  of  the


24S  TH£  dIDD&N  WAV  ACkOSd  THE  tHltESHOLD.

individuals  present  Some  are  exhalations  which  are  indeed  over-
shadowing emanations  from  things  or  individHals  that  are  about
or  concentrating  their  minds  on  the  medium  from  a  distance.  Exhala-
tions may  come  from  elementaries,  or  elementals,  or  from  vapors  or
open  pores  where  the  changes  of  nature  are  taking  place.  These
exhalations  partake  of  the  nature  of  any  or  all  those  vapors  which
are  concentrated  either  in  a  human  being  or  any  collection  infesting
the  atmosphere  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  medium.  All  media
should  strive  to  be  able  to  recognize  these  depleting  visitors.  To
escape  the  exhalations  of  persons,  withdraw  from  them  and  refuse
to  exercise  the  superior  gifts.  For  the  rest,  purify  the  whole  place  by
fire  and  change  of  air.

''  And  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven  as  of  a  rushing
mighty  wind,  and  it  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  sitting.  And
there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat
upon  each  of  them.  And  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utter-
ance." —  Acts  ii. :  2-4.

Thus  the  Bible  speaks  of  Etherealization,  where  each  and  every
medium  will  produce  a  form  and  voice  of  that  which  appears  as  fire
or  fire  balls,  some  with  faces  of  the  departed,  some  with  words  of
great  wisdom,  and  others  will  hover  over  and  about  their  selected
mediums,  filling  them  with  the  exalted  truth  in  any  language.  This
has  already  been  accomplished  in  several  places  in  America,  but  it  is
a  phenomenon  that  can  never  be  sold  for  price  nor  placed  on  exhibi-
tion for  show  and  amusement.

Etherealization  does  not  drain  the  vital  forces  of  the  medium  as
does  that  known  as  materialization,  which  should  be  called  spirituali-
zation  of  matter,  as  the  physical  elements  are  not  drawn  upon,  but
only  the  spiritual  aura  of  those  who  are  present.  Assimilating  the
various  elements  of  these  spiritual  auras^  the  operating  Spirits  may
build  up  a  form  sufficiently  distinct  and  strong  and  active  to  appear
to  discerning  eyes,  in  the  guise  of  a  departed  friend,  with  features
well  marked,  with  the  familiar  smile  upon  the  lips,  and  even  the  well
known  expression  within  the  eyes,  and  yet  through  this  form  and
through  its  drapery  may  be  seen  the  objects  in  the  room.  This,  it
has  been  predicted,  will  be  the  phase  of  Spiritual  phenomena  in  the
coming  years,  that  is  to  take  hold  of  the  hearts  and  minds  of  the  peo-
ple, which  will  challenge  investigation  and  dumfound  scepticism  at
every  turn.  The  medium  who  can  control  these  ethereal  whirlpools
and  place  them  in  unison  gathers  double  strength  by  so  doing;


THE  CULTIVATION   OF   SPIRITUAL   GIFTS.  249

thereby  assists  the  Spirit  world  in  doing  their  part,  on  the  same  prin-
ciple as  the  electrician  who  can  control  the  electrical  whirlpool  by
exciting  another  electrical  whirlpool  through  conductors,  thereby
gains  and  produces  double  and  renewed  strength.  These  little  sparks
or  streams  of  emanations  are  the  Spiritual  conductors  from  the  other
world,  and  when  augmented  with  the  Ethereal  Liquid  whirlpool  of  the
medium  become  subjected  to  the  Will  of  the  Spirit,  and  project  the
thoughts  and  mind  of  the  invisible  intelligences.  Therefore,  to
become  illuminated  and  ripened  by  Spirit,  thereby  escaping  from
these  corporeal  fetters,  is  the  Soul's  supreme  concern.

Who  elevates  himself,  isolates  himself.  Any  man  who  is  brave
enough  to  step  aside  from  all  conventionalities  of  the  time  and  age,
and,  if  need  be,  to  sever  the  ties  of  former  friendship  and  companion-
ship,—  confessing  that  he  desires  to  be  free  from  darkness  of  the
past  and  to  have  some  infallible  guide  in  matters  of  Spirit,  Soul,  and
Truth  in  the  subjective  world,  if  he  can  devote  time,  patience,  and
silent  meditation  to  the  work,  will  find  a  new  world,  a  height  of  com-
prehension and  newness  of  life  of  which  he  never  dreamed.

"  We  speak  wisdom  among  the  perfect ;  yet  wisdom  is  not  of  this
world,  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  that  come  to  naught." —  i  Car.
iL  :  6.  For  centuries  the  whole  world  has  groaned  and  travailed  in
pain,  being  subject  unto  bondage  through  ignorance  of  life  and  fear
of  death.  Mediumship  has  opened  the  portals  of  Eternal  Life,  and
makes  man  dweller  of  the  threshold  from  which  he  never  again  desires
to  return  back  to  former  days  when  ignorance,  fear  and  superstition
were  his  constant  companions.  Once  this  benign  mantle  falls  upon
an  individual,  there  it  remains.  It  takes  away  the  fear  of  death,  and
assures  us  of  everlasting  life,  and  that  progression  is  ever  onward.
But,  above  all,  it  imparts  the  blessed  knowledge  that  our  departed
friends  and  relatives  still  live,  and,  under  favorable  conditions,  can
and  do  return  to  earth  and  hold  sweet  communion  with  us.  It  is  the
religion  of  humanity,  as  it  teaches  us  to  have  charity  for  the  erring,  to
clothe  the  naked  and  feed  the  hungry  —  that  "it  is  more  blessed  to
give  than  to  receive."

The  Spiritual  gifts  of  Healing,  Sight,  Tongues,  etc.,  an  abstract  of
which  has  been  already  given,  are  developed  and  cultivated  by  numer-
ous methods.

The  natural  tendency  of  the  person  should  be  studied,  and  that
gift  which  appears  to  belong  to  the  organism  should  be  re-enforced  and
nourished  through  the  octaves  of  mental  vibration,  when  sitting  pas-
sively alone  or  with  a  small  circle  of  friends.     Both  positive  and  neg-


250      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ative  atmospheres  must  be  duly  cultivated,  exercised,  and  brought
into  practice,  it  being  the  harmonious  interblending  of  the  two  with
out  vacillation  which  produces  the  best  results.  The  positive  mental
vibration  is  best  attained  by  concentration  of  thought,  gazing  intently
on  some  small  object  in  a  dimly  lighted  room,  thus  centralizing  men-
tality to  a  pivotal  nucleus  or  focus.  But  care  should  be  taken  at  first
that  the  sitting  be  not  too  long.  Fifteen  minutes  each  day  is  usually
the  limit  during  the  first  month.  In  Europe  and  Japan,  crystals,
mirrors,  and  other  small  shining  bodies  are  used  with  the  Astral  colors
belonging  to  the  student  as  a  background  for  the  reflection  of  the
crystal  or  object  in  use.  Excellent  work  has  been  done  by  the  use  of
pure  colored  fluids  in  small  globes,  there  being  magnetic  rays  which
are  reflected  back  into  the  eye,  and,  piercing  the  brain,  the  whole  sys-
tem is  involved  in  an  action  of  Astral  light,  which  soon  brings  about  the
individual  a  self-magnetization.  .  But  great  care  should  be  taken  that
the  student  has  his  own  proper  color,  which  belongs  to  him  as  a  heri-
tage, which  is  ascertained  by  a  correct  astrological  chart,  using  the
color  of  the  cardinal  planet  at  birth.  Great  care  must  be  used  not
to  exercise  these  focal izations  too  long  at  each  sitting,  especially  in  case
of  persons  having  weak,  nervous  organisms  or  epileptic  tendencies.
The  eye  as  the  window  of  the  Soul,  and  the  hands  acting  as  the  prime
conductors  of  the  Astral  and  magnetic  fluids,  always  find  their  best
development  in  concentration  with  Astral  colors  through  silent  sittings.
It  is  well  to  have  sittings  with  one  or  two  individuals  of  opposite
temperament,  who  are  harmonious  and  willing  to  concentrate  on  a
given  point  with  the  student.

There  are  lines  of  color  rays  that  lie  beyond  the  so-called  natural
vision  of  man.  There  are  subjective  spectrum  rays,  invisible  to  all
but  the  developed  few.  Therefore  there  are  in  the  whole  solar  spec-
trum fourteen  prismatic  colors.  Scientists  will  no  doubt  object  to
these  ideas,  yet  all  Adepts  and  Seers  know  that  these  colors  are  quite
objective  enough  even  if  modem  science  knows  only  seven  prismatic
which  he  reduces  to  three  primary  colors.  It  is  well  known  that  day-
light affects  the  human  mind  quite  differently  from  any  artificial  light
This  comes  from  the  different  constitution  of  people  as  respects  the
proportions  of  color.

The  light  of  a  common  lamp  is  just  the  reverse  of  sunlight.  The
proportion  of  color  to  the  lamplight  is  Red  8,  Yellow  5,  Blue  3,
while  the  proportion  of  color  in  sunlight  is  just  the  reverse,  thus  Blue
8,  Red  5,  and  Yellow  3.

All  human  action,  Life,  Feeling,  Understanding,  Hope,  Faith,


THE   CULTIVATION   OP   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  2$  I

Love,  Peace,  are  associated  with  Light,  and  by  the  all-pervading
Spirit  Light  the  Soul  must  be  born  into  the  new  day.  The  Prome-
thean torch  has  quickened  the  cold  marble,  and  man,  without  the  con-
tinued emanations  of  Spirit  Light  from  out  a  purer  world,  would  yet
find  his  icy  tomb  in  the  darkness  of  human  life,  hopeless  of  a  resur-
rection. Ere  Light  flew  forth  like  a  pervading  Spirit,  obedient  to  the
word  of  God,  this  earth  was  unadorned,  unfinished,  lifelessly  un-
furnished. But  wherever  Light  has  penetrated,  there  also  will  be
found  beauty,  love,  order,  life,  will,  mind  and  understanding,  mani-
fested through  all  the  different  variety  of  nature's  appropriate  organ-
izations.

Thanks  to  the  loving  Father  this  link  with  heaven  is  unbroken ;
Light  still  binds  all  worlds  together,  and  its  magnetic  power  and  might
reach  and  rule  the  granite  framework  of  our  earth,  stirring  through
all  its  vitals  a  mysterious  and  glorious  harmony.

Every  color  and  every  shape  of  visible  creation  discourses  to
man's  Soul  and  inner  being,  an  all-embracing,  vivifying  power  which
can  only  be  likened  to  that  of  the  sunlight,  and  the  greater  central  sun
of  Spirit*  of  whose  nature  of  vivifying  life  and  beneficence  light  is
but  a  written  word.  There  are  abundant  facts  to  prove  that  light  and
color  cause  a  regular  succession  of  movements  in  the  medium  through
which  it  passes,  and  an  attuning  harmony  or  repulsive  discord  on
objects  where  it  may  be  focalized.

Thus  the  golden  sunlight  produces  vibration  to  the  amount  of
500,000,000  of  millions  in  a  second,  but  the  time  of  different  colors
varies  considerably.  Thus  red  has  458,000,000  of  millions  of  times
to  a  second,  while  violet  produces  727,000,000  of  millions,  and  yel-
low or  orange  542,000,000  of  millions  in  a  second.  Of  course,  there-
fore, different  colors  must  necessarily  affect  the  human  Soul,  and  it  is
because  these  color  vibrations  act  upon  the  nerves  in  our  brain  which
are  capable  of  vibration  in  a  corresponding  ratio,  that  our  Souls  and
inner  being  are  put  in  such  relation  to  Spiritual  as  well  as  natural
light  that  man  can  understand  and  enjoy  the  Light  within  and  without
All  the  cardinal  colors  produce  enjoyment  and  growth  to  all  living
creatures.

Love  comes  from  pink  and  bright  red.  Hope  and  Faith  from
violet,  Truth  of  blue,  Melancholy  of  yellow,  Epilepsy  of  pearl  white.
Anger  and  Cunning  of  dun  color  or  dark,  heavy  red,  the  odyllic  in-
spiration of  poetry  of  emerald  green,  etc.

On  the  same  principle  the  knowledge  of  certain  rules  of  harmony

*  See  illustration.


252  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOUX

in  vibrations  of  breathing  in  its  action  on  the  heart  becomes  the  basis
of  the  knowledge  of  Divine  respiration,  known  in  the  East  as  the
Sacred  breath.  To  reach  a  negative  vibration  in  mundo^  the  stu-
dent must  place  himself  in  passive  silence,  reducing  the  whole  con-
sciousness of  both  body  and  mind  to  oblivion,  finally  sinking  into  an
obliviousness,  which  is  a  superior  state  between  sleeping  and  waking.
This  composure  must  be  reached  and  held  for  a  space  of  time  without
permitting  the  mentality  to  enter  the  realms  of  the  emotions  or
ecstasy.  To  attain  this  will  at  first  be  quite  difficult  for  an  impetu-
ous, nervous  American ;  but  after  repeated  trials  he  will  not  only  be
enabled  to  reach  it,  but  also  to  hold  it  During  the  first  week  of
trial,  it  may  be  best  to  give  only  half-hour  sittings  in  silence  in  order
to  reach  the  patience  and  composure  necessary.  This  height  must  be
attained  through  serene  and  composed  oblivious  tranquillity,  entirely
released  from  all  physical  surroundings.  One  must  lose  one's  self
fully  into  the  spirit ;  drop  the  Ego^  and  resist  no  impulse  of  thought,
word,  or  action ;  be  perfectly  willing  to  put  off  the  dusty  sandals  of
all  dogma  or  creed ;  to  lay  aside  any  favorite  theory  of  yesterday  if
he  can  replace  it  by  a  more  shining  truth  of  to-day.  Be  free  to  grow.
The  ancient  Adepts  found  from  experience  that  in  order  to  develop
the  interior  or  subjective  consciousness  it  was  necessary  (allegorically
speaking)  to  "  wear  the  cloak  of  Apollonius  "  —  that  is,  to  withdraw
from  the  outer  world,  practise  self-denial  to  the  fullest  extent,  and
spend  their  wakeful  moments  in  esoteric  meditation.  In  order  to
bolate  themselves  from  society,  they  established  secret  sanctuaries,  in
which  they  met  for  mutual  communion  and  religious  exercises.  As
they  advanced  in  Spiritual  knowledge,  they  found  that  there  were
various  grades  of  harmony  in  the  subjective  or  spiritual  world,  and
each  individual,  on  leaving  this  life,  gravitated,  as  it  were,  to  the  sphere
with  which  he  was  in  harmony.  They  divided  their  sanctuaries  into
seven  degrees  to  correspond  with  the  harmonies  in  esoteric  nature,
and  to  each  degree  there  were  three  years  of  spiritual  probation.  As
harmony  results  from  the  analogy  of  contraries,  there  were  as  many
degrees  of  discord  as  there  were  of  harmonies.  The  former  they
designated  hell.  The  material  cosmos  —  that  is,  what  we  call  the  ex-
ternal world —  was,  as  it  were,  middle  ground  between  the  two,  which
they  called  Hades,  into  which  the  Soul  passed  at  death,  and  the  Spirit
was  made  cognizant  of  its  record  while  on  earth.  Physical  death,
they  claimed,  was  merely  a  change  from  a  physical  to  a  spiritual  con-
dition ;  the  Soul  or  Spiritual  body  being  formed  at  the  same  time
that  the  physical  waa^  but  in  a  different  maimer.    After  death,  the


THE  CULTIVATION   OP  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  253

Soul  either  ascended  or  descended,  depending  not  on  gravity,  but
upon  harmony.

It  will  thus  be  perceived  that  each  degree  in  the  sanctuary  re-
quired a  separate  or  distinct  initiation  for  each  one,  which  was
intended  to  represent  a  higher  state  of  moral  and  intellectual  ad-
vancement. The  last  or  seventh  degree  was  the  one  of  perfection
which  brought  about  illumination,  when  the  subjective  world  was  as
much  a  reality  to  the  inward  or  subjective  consciousness  as  the  out-
ward world  is  to  the  objective.  When  this  condition  of  moral  and
intellectual  unfoldment  was  obtained,  all  interest  in  this  life  was  gone,
and  the  Spirit  longed  for  separation  from  its  physical  casket.  The
neophyte  seeking  spiritual  knowledge  could  only  attain  to  the  wisdom
of  the  different  degrees  by  advancing  morally,  so  as  to  be  in  harmony
with  the  degrees.  The  knowledge  thus  obtained  was  never  recorded,
but  communicated  verbally  in  symbolic  language.  By  this  means  it
was  kept  a  profound  secret,  and  handed  down  traditionally.

A  person  born  bom  blind  can  have  no  conception  of  the  beauties
of  nature,  and  if  the  sense  of  touch  be  suspended  with  that  of  sight,
we  could  form  no  conception  of  solidity.  If  bom  deaf,  of  the  har-
mony and  discord  of  sound  or  of  music.  We  therefore  perceive  that
we  ccm  have  no  conception  of  the  existence  of  an  external  world  except
through  neural  activities  recorded  in  consciousness,  and  without  the  un-
foldment of  the  inner  consciousness  we  can  form  no  opinion  of  a
future  life.  In  fact,  logically  speaking,  we  have  the  same  grounds  for
denying  its  existence  as  we  would  have  of  the  extemal  world  provid-
ing objective  consciousness  was  closed.

The  very  best  practice  in  the  principles  of  esoteric  development
in  which  the  Pilgrims  of  the  heavenly  way  can  indulge  b  gained
through  the  advantages  of  silent  meditation  for  one  hour  each  day,  in
communion  with  the  Spiritual  Truth.  Through  this  silent  meditation,
man  not  only  illumes  his  own  inner  being  with  the  light  of  the  higher
world,  but  is  renewed  in  strength  as  he  breathes  the  purer  air  from
the  atmosphere  of  etemal  Life  from  the  boundless  realms  of  Spirit.
Silence  is  Wisdom,  Silence  is  Spirit,  Silence  is  Love,  Silence  is  the
bosom  of  Divine  Infinite  Life,  and  contains  the  indelible  record  of  all
the  knowledge  and  truth  that  ever  enter  the  mentality  of  man's  being,
^•^  the  true  heart  of  all  things.

^  Let  thy  soul  walk  softly  in  thee.
As  a  saint  in  heaven  unshod^
For  to  be  alone  with  Silence
la  to  be  alone  with  God."


254  ^^HK   HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

There  is  an  ecstasy  of  higher  Love,  which  seals  the  lips  in  raptu*
rous  silence.  There  is  a  wondrous  electrifying  grace  in  a  sacred  con-
secration of  tender  yearning  which  is  dumb.  In  that  unspeakable
inwardly  cherished  hope  which  words  cannot  express,  there  is  a  holier
love  that  sees  not  and  hears  not  the  outer  world,  but  turns  inward  to
iht  fountain  of  ail  love.

Thus  do  men  find  inward  peace  and  deep  unruffled  calm,  the  Soul
expanding  and  rising  toward  God,  as  flowers  turn  and  grow  toward
the  genial  sunlight.

As  thou  thinkest^  so  thou  art.

Everything  exists  for  us  in  thought.  That  of  which  we  think
exists  in  us,  and  if  we  desire  and  love  it,  we  exist  in  it,  in  either  the
objective  or  the  spiritual  world.  Tell  me,  says  the  Adept,  of  a  man's
ambition  and  love,  and  I  will  tell  you  the  true  man.  The  things  we
desire  and  love  gravitate  toward  us  and  we  toward  them.

Any  inordinate  desire  becomes  overgrown  and  spreads  in  this
objective  world  of  sense  ;  therefore,  a  life  fully  wrapped  up  in  this
world,  with  all  its  selfish  gratification,  draws  the  disembodied  Soul
back  into  these  earthly  realms  and  lower  planes,  even  after  death.  It
should  be  the  aim  of  all  men  to  free  the  living  immortal  Soul  from
its  unnatural  subjection  of  broken  duality  offorce^  thereby  bringing
it  to  material  limitations.  Familiarizing  it  to  freedom  from  the
physical  body  while  on  earth,  preparing  it  for  the  future  through  the
understanding  of  Spiritual  life,  when  it  becomes  independent  of
the  body  at  the  hour  of  dissolution.

And  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free.  —
John  viii :  32.

Through  illumination  of  man's  inner  temple  and  intuitive  percep-
tion of  the  great  truth  of  life  which  lies  above  and  beyond  the  grasp
of  the  five  animal  objective  senses,  is  the  ancient  and  royal  road
across  the  threshold  to  health,  salvation,  and  eternal  life.

There  is  a  true  doctrine,  older  than  Pythagoras  or  Plato,  which  is
an  intuitive  certainty,  that  nothing  can  have  an  objective  existence  or
be  perceived  in  the  objective  sense-world  before  the  abstract  ideal  of
form  and  entity  is  called  forth  and  formed  in  some  mind  or  mental
idea.

All  Exalted  and  enlarged  Ideas  are  immortal  semblances,  from
out  the  Spiritual  atmosphere  as  ethereal  vibrations,  and  Human
thoughts  are  merely  the  clothing  thereof.

Pure,  original  Ideas  can  be  found  in  Deity  only^  and  the  Ideas  and
Thoughts  of  God  are  best  expressed  to  man  in  Natures  language^  where


THE  CULTIVATION   OF   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS,  255

man  can  observe  the  actions  of  God  let  loose.  Behold  God  in
Nature ;  here  is  where  man's  imagination  and  thoughts  become  illu-
minated and  his  Soul  finds  a  happy  retreat.

Before  the  Architect  designs  his  house  or  the  mechanic  constructs
his  machine,  every  part  of  it  pre-exists  in  his  mind,  and  is  first  erected
in  the  objective  sense,  and  the  whole  is  but  the  materialized  exter-
nalization  of  his  ideal.  Therefore,  before  anything  can  exist  in  the
world  of  sense,  it  must  have  pre-existence  as  an  ideaL

*'  Sometimes  comes  to  soul  and  sense
The  feeling  which  is  evidence.
That  very  near  about  us  lies
The  realm  of  spiritual  mysteries.
The  sphere  of  the  supernal  powers
Impinges  on  this  world  of  ours."

If  on  earth  among  men  there  were  higher  thought  and  idea  of
man,  we  should  have  a  higher  race  of  men.  Man  is  lifted  up  by
knowledge  of  truth  and  understanding  of  his  inner  being  only.  There-
fore man  is  saved  by  the  knowledge  and  understanding  of  truth.
Millions  of  people  are  born  and  pass  through  this  life  with  no
thought  nor  understanding  of  their  celestial  and  undying  selves.
They  continually  think  downward  and  never  once  look  up.  Receiv-
ing no  light  of  truth  to  guide  them,  they  blunder  along  in  selfish
objective  existence  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave.  Man  is  so  inter-
woven into  the  very  texture  of  Spirit  and  Divine  existence  that  he
cannot  easily  be  disconnected  or  unravelled  from  it.  He  is  continu-
ally encompassed  and  embraced  by  the  atmosphere  of  Spirit,  which,
although  much  more  ethereal  is  like  the  air  we  breathe,  without
which  no  one  could  exist  in  human  form.  But  the  natural  vision
cannot  see  the  air.  We  only  know  it  by  feeling,  and  that  it  pervades
every  part  and  tissue  of  the  human  body  and  its  gases  form  a  large
portion  of  man's  corporeal  structure,  and  that  the  physical  body  when
separated  from  it  must  naturally  die.  All  this  is  analogous  to  the
Soul  and  immortal  part  of  man's  being,  which  is  being  constantly
renewed  and  refreshed  by  the  Spiritual  atmosphere  which  the  inner,
true  man  attracts  about  him,  like  the  air  man's  natural  vision  cannot
see,  but  as  the  Soul  and  inner  temple  become  illuminated,  refined,
and  developed,  Spirit  and  the  presence  of  the  Divine  Love  are  far
more  tangible  than  the  air  in  the  natural  world.  It  is  Spiritual
Illumination  and  understanding  that  delivers  the  true  man  from  the
controlling  influences  of  the  animal  body,  and  the  first  ray  of  hope


256      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

which  comes  to  the  Soul  is  a  conscious  freedom,  with  clear  intuition
of  the  sublime  truth  that  the  body  has  no  individual  power  of  its  own.

It  is  no  part  of  the  true  man  any  more  than  a  marble  statue  is  a
human  being,  for  in  its  nature  it  is  entirely  passive  and  inert,  and  its
normal  function  is  to  express  and  obey  the  Spirit  Therefore,  the
material  body  has  no  life  of  its  own  and  no  power  over  us,  except
what  the  inner  Soul  life  of  man  through  thought  and  will  ascribe  to
it.  The  man  who  can  vibrate  a  true  atmosphere  by  thinking  the
Truth  in  regard  to  his  real  being,  has  the  key  which  unlocks  the  doors
of  understanding  and  the  portals  of  the  mystery  of  life  and  death,
whereby  his  Soul  —  his  immortal  being  —  is  set  free.  There  is  no
death.  All  is  boundless,  endless,  eternal,  for  there  is  that  Divine
Law  which  is  universal  and  immutable  as  the  very  presence  of  Spirit
God  in  nature — that  out  from  what  is  falsely  called  death  is  always
evolved  an  unfoldment  of  higher  form  and  grander  order  of  life.
Therefore,  death  is  only  an  illusion  to  the  natural  eye,  a  deceptive
appearance.

Only  through  illumination  of  mentality,  understanding  of  one's
inner  temple,  and  gradual  unfoldment  of  Spirit  and  Soul  knowledge,
can  one  be  strengthened  and  refined  so  as  to  comprehend  those
mysterious  links  of  sympathy  and  inclination  between  spiritually
intelligent  men.  He  finds  the  mysterious  links  in  the  temporarily
isolated  fragments  of  the  universal  Spirit-Soul,  and  the  Cosmic
terrestrial  Soul  itself,  bringing  them  into  full  rapport — unison.

Once  this  is  established  in  the  man,  those  awakened  sympathies
and  inclinations  will  connect  the  True  Man  with  that  Infinite  and
energetic  chain  which  binds  together  the  material  and  immaterial
Kosmos,  Past,  Present,  and  Future,  and  quicken  and  illuminate  his
understanding  and  perception  so  that  he  can  clearly  and  understand-
ingly  grasp  not  merely  all  things  of  matter  and  the  natural  man,  but
of  the  Spirit  and  Soul  of  things  also.

Man  in  his  wisdom  finds  himself  so  weak,  and  his  Father  God  so
strong,  that  silent  Soul-prayer  is  simply  a  dictate  of  good  common-
sense.  It  is  not  strange  that  the  Soul  should  yearn  for  its  home  and
find  its  true  life  in  God,  for  this  was  its  original,  native  air.

True  prayer  is  a  yearning  aspiration  for  the  loftiest  good.  It  is
the  innermost  Soul  breathing  after  a  thing,  and  its  answer  is  an
inbreathing,  as  the  nursing  of  a  child  is  only  a  modified  respiration.
In  deep  silence  is  the  most  potential  prayer.  ''  Be  still,  and  know
that  I  am  God  "  is  one  of  the  hardest  lessons  for  nervous,  impetu-
ous Americans  to  learn.    Silence  and  calm  Patience  are  virtues  this


THB  CULTIVATION  OP  SPIRITUAL  GIPTS.  2$y

people  are  least  inclined  to  practise.  It  is  in  the  silent,  loving
Spiritual  condition  of  man  that  prayer  is  divested  of  the  noisy  volu-
bility of  the  Pharisee  and  resolves  itself  into  a  tranquil,  peaceful,
silent  life  of  trust  and  faith.  It  is  like  the  child  deeply  conscious  of
its  little  needs,  who  comes  softly  approaching  you  in  silence,  casts
upon  you  yearning,  eager  looks,  holding  out  its  little  hands,  imploring
to  receive  whatever  your  wisdom,  goodness,  and  love  are  disposed  to
give  it.  So  is  it  with  man.  When  he  yearningly  looks  up,  God  lov*
ingly  looks  down,  for  neither  is  ear  or  hand  of  the  Father-Mother  of
man  ever  closed  against  such  an  appeal  from  His  children.  What
man  needs  most  is  rest  for  his  weary  Soul.  This  he  can  never  attain
until  he  ceases  to  lead  a  selfish  animal  life  in  the  outer  objective
world.  He  must  lay  aside  the  toiling  oar  of  earthly  ambition,  and
silently  float  in  the  current  of  Love  of  the  Infinite  Life.  As  an  infant
tired  and  worn  by  its  fruitless  cries  and  imaginary  afflictions  finally
sinks  to  rest  in  the  arms  of  maternal  Love,  so  must  mankind  cease
from  vain  struggles  against  his  destiny,  and  find  rest  at  last  in  the
bosom  of  the  manifested  God  —  Eternal  Love.  Here  even  death
itself  stops  short  and  turns  back  on  approaching  the  confines  of  our
True  inner  temple,  unable  to  come  nearer  to  the  quenchless  light  of
Spirit  Truth  within  its  sanctuary.

God  speaks  to  man  with  gentle  loving  voice  as  certainly  as  he  ever
did,  but,  in  our  spiritual  deafness  and  stolid  conceit,  we  either  do  not
hear  or  we  mistake  His  voice.  We  pass  by  unheeding  the  7ht€  inner
Ward,  that  holy,  sacred,  soundless  speech  which  God  utters  in  the
solitude  and  silence  through  the  garden  of  our  Souls.  The  knowledge
of  the  Divine  Word,  the  coming  of  the  secret  Logos  in  the  silent  Inner
Voice,  is  the  most  important  lesson  of  our  natural  lives.  This  knowl«
edge  and  development  of  the  inner  word  is  the  priceless  gem  beyond
all  human  value.

There  is  a  pre-adamite  substance  of  unknown  antiquity  which  lies
m  absolute  subjection  to  the  Will  of  the  Spirit  This  is  the  Astral
body  or  Akasa,  which  is  that  substance  on  which  the  grosser  material
or  Animal  body  depends  for  its  existence,  being  the  shadow  or  phantom
of  the  Astral  body.  Christ  said,  "  There  is  nothing  hidden  that  shall
not  be  revealed."  The  inward  and  True  self,  the  Dual-Soul-Germ,  the
I  am,  when  illuminate  is  recognized  as  identical  with  the  Christ.  This
is  the  great  mystery  and  final  secret  which  God  holds  in  reserve  for
those  who  seek  for  Him  and  love  Him.  It  is  the  priceless  gem  of
Eternal  Life,  and  is  to  be  revealed  in  the  fulness  of  time  to  all  men
when  they  have  grown  and  progressed  into  pure  Love — the  Saviour  of


258  THE  HIDDEN  WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

men,  the  Adonai,  the  Bride  of  Heaven,  finding  peace  at  last  in  the
bosom  of  Absolute  Love,  s^^m^^  ^  when  the  rising  sun
takes  the  shining  dew-  ^^/^^^^  ^^^P  ^P  i>^to  the  eternal
shining  sea  of  light,  ^^RJR^^  where  it  is  not  lost  nor
annihilated,  but  glorified.  '^^'M^^  jn  the   development

of  Soul  and  illumination  of  man's  inner  being,  the  invisible  worlds
become  visible,  the  unknown  becomes  known,  the  impersonal  per-
sonal, the  Infinite  definite  by  self-limitation,  and  the  nameless  and
formless  take  name  and  form.  It  is  then  man  knows  God  and  sees
Him  as  He  is  seen  l^  the  Angels  in  True  man  or  human  /orpif
which  means  the  True  Soul  and  Spirit  Quality  and  not  merely  shape.
God  is  not  seen  in  the  external,  objective  form,  for  nothing  in  either
heaven  or  earth  is  ever  seen  externally  in  the  objective  sense  either
by  men  or  Angels.  The  pure  in  heart  (the  illuminated)  see  God
in  themselves  as  the  real  self,  and  thus  the  highest  expression  and  rev-
elation of  God  is  made  to  man  through  the  inmost  SelfqfMan^  as  it  is
written  "  I  and  my  Father  are  one."

The  student  of  understanding  must  expunge  from  the  mind  the
vety  hurtful  conception  and  sense  of  Separaiencss^  or  that  feeling  of
isolation  of  the  individual  Spirit  from  the  Universal  Spirit  Absolute,
of  which  it  is  only  a  limitation.  For  the  inward  temple  of  man  is  an
epitome  of  the  Christ.  His  merit  is  our  merit,  as  being  a  quality  of
the  inner  self  which  is  inseparable  from  this  Saviour,  this  Health-giver,
this  Christ.  For  within  the  True  inner  man  the  manifested  God  di-
vides Himself  without  diminishing  Himself.

The  Christ-principle  of  the  Duality  of  being  evolves  Love,  Charity,
Wisdom,  and  understanding,  and  is  the  only  principle  and  source  of
Divine  illumination  and  Spiritual  intelligence.  It  is  the  indwelling,
and  for  us  the  only  True  Word  of  Life  and  Light  of  the  World,  and  is
the  only  light  that  can  be  shed  upon  the  hidden  way^  illuminating  the
path  across  the  threshold  to  eternal  life.  It  can  be  found  only  in  the
garden  of  the  inner  man  and  must  be  sought  for,  discovered,  and  un-
covered here,  developed  and  ripened  to  the  understanding  of  eternal
Truth  and  Love,  causing  a  perfect  union  of  pure  intelligence  with
Spiritual  illumination  and  unfoldment  to  receive  and  guard  it  to  the
glorification  of  Truth  and  the  Glory  of  God.

Thrice  blessed  indeed  is  he  who  has  risen  from  out  the  objective
life  of  sense,  through  the  life  of  faith  to  that  of  trust  and  love,  the
opposite  of  fear,  which  is  the  fertile  root  of  most  diseases.

All  true  education  is  Spiritual  development,  and  such  understand-
ing and  knowledge  are  not  imparted  by  verbal  dbcourse  alone,  but


THE  CULTIVATION   OP  SPIRITUAL   GIPTS.  259

also  by  the  silent  influence  of  mind  upon  mind,  and  there  is  an  inter
communication  in  silence  which  all  initiates  must  attain  in  any  Eastern
occult  order,  this  being  one  of  the  principal  methods  of  instruction.

The  student  reclining  in  passive,  oblivious  composure  subjects
himself  to  the  psychological  influence  of  the  Adept  who  imparts  to
him  understanding  and  wisdom  by  thought  transference  through  the
Universal  mind.

The  Neophyte  waits  upon  his  master  in  an  open  Spirit  of  empti-
ness, and  the  intellectual  sphere  of  True  Conception  fills  the  vacuum.
Turning  outward  and  opening  this  receptive  passive  side  of  our  Soul
and  mental  nature  toward  the  world  of  Spiritual  Light  b  in  reality
the  true,  the  highest,  and  most  effectual  form  of  prayer.

Within  the  garden  of  the  passive,  patient  Soul  there  is  voiceless
longing  and  tranquil  waiting  in  full  faith  and  silence  as  the  flowers
turn  their  faces  to  the  sun  to  receive  its  Promethean  light  and  heat.

The  instruction  of  the  reception  of  the  Divine  inward  light  by  con-
trol of  the  inward  breathing  is  also  one  of  the  mysteries  Egyptian.
To  attain  this  height  (we  again  repeat)  there  must  be  serene  and  com-
posed oblivious  tranquillity,  entirely  released  from  all  physical  sur-
roundings. One  must  lose  himself  fully  into  the  Spirit,  drop  the  Ego,
and  resist  no  impulse  of  thought,  word,  or  action.  The  greatest  diffi-
culty at  flrst  will  be  self.  Sink  your  chin  upon  your  breast  and  fix
the  eyes  upon  the  centre  of  the  body.  Breathe  as  little  as  possible.
In  this  position  you  will  find  your  breath  impeded  by  contraction  of
the  air-passages.

Strive  mentally  to  find  the  position  of  the  Soul  where  all  the  pow-
ers reside.  At  first  you  may  discover  only  darkness  and  unyielding
density,  but  by  persistent  effort,  purifying  your  clothing  and  the  apart-
ment if  within-doors,  (which  is  not  a  necessity,  the  open  air  being
frequently  better)  by  perseverance  and  constancy,  night  and  day,  you
will  at  some  time  perceive  that  which  you  never  witnessed  before  —
the  halo,  light,  and  radiance  in  which  God  resides,  a  great  illuminated
light  between  the  Astral,  the  Animal,  and  the  Soul.  The  Hindoo  and
the  Eastern  Adepts'  instructions  are  nearly  the  same,  except  in  the
avoidance  of  contact  with  the  common  and  inferior  caste  who  only
question  and  argue  from  a  human  standpoint,  and  having  vain  thoughts
and  human  theories  all  of  which  must  be  strenuously  avoided.  Thus  the
Hierophant  says,  "Obey  without  questioning  thy  teacher  or  instructor
who  has  gone  over  the  road  before  thee,  and  follow  out  each  point  in
silence  as  in  thy  first  initiation,  even  if  thou  must  make  great  worldly
sacrifice,  for  this  world  is  nothmg  compared  with  the  SouL    Therefore,


260  THB  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

abate  not  one  hour  or  even  one  moment  of  thy  valuable  life,  nor  let
thy  sight  wander  from  the  point  where  thy  planet  rules,  or  its  shades
of  coloring,  for  this  is  of  the  beneficent  Spirits  of  the  Stars  which  do
dwell  in  thee.  Make  this  thy  love,  and  be  ever  constant  to  her  and
the  golden  light  will  dawn  and  be  ever  with  thee.  This  is  thy  illu-
mination, —  Perfect  Peace.

Throughout  all  the  Eastern  world  the  knowledge  of  the  Akasa  or  As-
tral body  is  the  key  to  occult  powers.  The  ancient  as  well  as  modem
Adepts  knew  of  and  used  it,  regarding  it  as  an  invisible  fiery  all-per-
vading fluid,  pure  and  radiant,  more  reflned  than  ether,  stronger  than
the  magnet,  more  mighty  than  the  lightning,  swift  and  fleet  as  thought
It  was  light,  motion,  force,  and  heat  combined,  the  drapery  of  the  Soul,
the  principle  of  being.  Its  power  was  life,  being,  and  motion.  It  was
the  connecting  link  between  God  and  men,  between  heaven  and
earth.

Many  of  their  rites  remain  to  this  day  in  their  primitive  purity,
having  never  been  committed  to  papyrus  or  writing,  but  handed  down
from  time  immemorial  through  the  Society  Egyptian,  communicated
by  Hierophant  to  Neophyte,  by  Adepts  to  Students,  by  Initiates  to
Anchorite,  so  that  but  few  are  lost,  as  the  writer  is  authorized  to
state.

It  has  been  deemed  highly  necessary  to  make  quiet  invocations  to
good  and  high  Spirits  ;  to  use  exorcisms  with  Will  against  all  evil  and
low  Spirit  Souls ;  to  make  careful  observations  of  the  planets  and  the
moon,  that  one  may  guard  against  or  have  assistance  from  the  ele-
mentaries  and  ele mentals.

As  long  as  one  uses  his  natural  eyes  and  ears,  initiatory  rites  in
secret  occult  societies  and  orders  will  be  of  much  value,  from  their
effect  in  quieting  the  nerves  as  well  as  the  marked  psychological
effect  upon  the  whole  being.  The  whole  performance,  in  soft  mellow
light,  with  gentle  melodious  music,  sweet  perfumes,  scenic  illusions,
and  fumigation  of  incense,  with  calm  rehearsal  of  sublime  ideas  and
lofty  thoughts,  must  produce  an  elevating  and  sublime  effect,  soften-
ing the  mentality  while  infusing  it  with  a  glow  of  sympathy  and  love
which  is  as  Spiritual  food  and  drink  to  a  growing  Soul.

The  favorite  mode  in  the  East,  which  is  effective  if  a  place  is  set
aside  and  held  secluded  for  the  work,  is  that  of  gazing  intently  on
crystals,  shining  bodies,  mirrors,  precious  stones,  or,  better,  in  liquids
of  the  Neophyte's  colors  placed  in  clear  glass.  As  has  been  already
said,  the  magnetic  ray  reflected  back  into  the  brain  through  the  eye
recharges  and  pierces  the  whole  being  with  an  Astral  magnetic  light


THE  CULTIVATION  OP  SPIRITUAL  GIPTS.  26l

preparatory  to  the  trance  and  clairvoyance,  ecstasy,  inspiration  or
prophecy.  When  Pythagoras  came  forth  from  his  initiatory  of  the
crowning  sublime  rites  of  the  Egyptian  mysteries,  on  issuing  from  the
hall  of  the  Two  Truths  he  exclaimed  in  his  enthusiasm,  "  I  have  been
in  the  presence  of  Gods  and  drank  of  the  waters  of  eternal  life."  On
his  return  to  Greece,  he  exclaimed  to  his  welcoming  friends,  ''  I  have
returned  to  you  with  youth  like  the  eagle,  having  drank  anew  of  the
waters  of  life,  from  divine  chalices  in  the  inner  temple  of  the  Egyp-
tians."

If  we  rightly  cultivate  and  esteem  the  power  of  Will  and  mind  of
man,  nothing  on  earth  would  be  impossible.  The  human  Soul  is  a
thing  so  great  that  no  man  can  express  it,  and,  when  this  inward  life
b  attuned  with  the  energy  in  nature,  it  is  a  spell  from  which  there  is
no  escape,  save  by  reversing  the  intent  of  the  operator  through  the
planetary  forces  and  fire.  Only  the  bad  and  evil-minded  would
attempt  the  wickedness  of  compelling  another  to  his  own  hurt,  and
Nature,  like  a  true  mother,  only  gives  the  full  knowledge  to  her
children  when  she  can  trust  them.

How  TO  Form  the  Spirit^I^ircls,

A  party  of  from  three  to  ten  persons,  the  sexes  being  as  equally
represented  as  possible,  should  sit  round  a  table,  placing  their  hands
lightly  on  the  top  of  it,  and  engage  in  pleasant  conversation  or
singing,  thereby  ensuring  mental  harmony.  When  the  company  b
mediumistic,  the  table  moves  in  a  few  minutes,  or  it  may  be  in  an
hour ;  but  some  circles  have  to  meet  repeatedly  before  any  manifesta-
tions are  obtained.  A  medium  is  a  person  having  a  peculiar  temper-
ament, which  throws  off  an  atmosphere,  or  "magnetism,"  through
which  the  Spirits  can  connect  themselves  with  physical  matter.  If  no
such  person  be  in  the  circle,  manifestations  cannot  be  elicited.  But,
in  cases  where  an  agreeable  party  sit  repeatedly,  the  mediumistic
power  has  a  tendency  to  become  developed.  If  the  attempt  result  in
failure,  certain  of  the  sitters  should  withdraw  from  the  circle,  and  on
the  next  evening  allow  others  to  take  their  places,  that  new  combina-
tions may  give  the  desired  conditions.  A  circle  should  not  sit  longer
than  two  hours  —  one  hour  is  better,  —  nor  oftener  than  twice  a  week.
A  truth-loving,  cheerful,  and  elevated  state  of  mind  leads  to  the  con-
trol of  Spirits  of  a  like  character,  whereas  opposite  qualities  in  the
sitters  have  a  tendency  to  attract  Spirits  in  sympathy  therewith.  No
circle  should  ever  be  attempted  unless  the  best  of  harmony  b  pre-


262      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

served,  and  after  the  company  has  gathered  and  circle  begun  flie
door  should  on  no  account  be  reopened  to  admit  a  new  or  tardy
guest

A  solemn  preparatory  invocation  to  the  Angel  guardians  and  the
good  and  wise  Spirits  to  abide  with  the  company  is  very  proper,  and  a
ceremonial  benediction  and  thanks  to  the  visiting  Spirit  and  Angeb
at  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting  manifest  the  same  courtesy  to  our
invisible  friends  that  we  give  to  and  expect  from  our  earthly  acquaint-
ances.

The  phenomena  cannot  be  successfully  elicited  in  very  warm,
sultry  weather,  in  extreme  cold,  when  thunder,  lightning,  and  mag-
netic disturbances  prevail,  when  the  atmosphere  is  very  moist,  or
when  there  is  much  rain  or  storms  of  wind.  A  warm,  dry  atmosphere
b  best,  as  it  presents  the  mean  between  all  extremes,  and  agrees  with
the  harmonious  state  of  man's  organism  which  is  proper  for  the  mani-
festation of  spiritual  phenomena.

A  subdued  light  or  total  darkness  increases  the  power  and  facili-
tates control.  Many  of  the  best  operations  of  nature  are  performed
in  the  dark.  We  might  ask  why  a  condition  of  darkness  and  of
silence  is  necessary  for  the  germination  of  a  seed  of  plant-life  or  for  a
cell  of  human  life,  yet  such  we  know  to  be  the  fact.  Why  is  a  condi-
tion of  darkness  necessary  for  the  development  of  the  photographer's
work,  so  that  it  may  be  clearly  portrayed  to  you  with  best  results  ?
We  may  not  be  able  to  clearly  define  the  reasons  why  these  condi-
tions are  necessary ;  but  we  know  the  necessity  of  them  exists.  We
realize  that  the  presence  of  light  in  the  atmosphere  acts  upon  the
various  elements  in  such  a  positive  way  as  to  set  them  in  motion,
while  we  know  also  that  in  darkness  these  elements  become  quies-
cent ;  and  Spirits  experimenting  with  the  laws  of  nature,  those  who
understand  the  various  chemical  combinations  and  elements,  declare
to  us  that  in  darkness  they  can  best  pursue  their  work,  because  then
there  is  a  quiescent  condition  of  the  atmosphere,  by  means  of  which
they  can  gather  such  elements  as  they  require,  and  combine  them  for
whatever  use  they  have  in  mind  ;  yet,  as  humanity  advances  in  chemi-
cal knowledge,  as  it  learns  to  overcome  the  conditions  of  matter  and
to  control  the  elements  of  nature  by  the  superior  power  of  its  will-
force,  we  understand  that  these  conditions,  which  are  now  so  essen-
tial to  Spirit-operators,  as  well  as  to  the  mundane  operator  on  earth  in
his  experiments  in  his  laboratory,  may  be  overcome  by  higher  knowl-
edge entertained ;  and  therefore  we  may  look  forward  to  a  time  when
the  Spiritual  chembts  will  understand  how  to  extract  and  utilize  such


THB  CULTIVATION   OP   SPIRITUAL   GIPTS.  263

elements  as  they  require  from  the  atmosphere  in  a  condition  of  light,
where  now  they  require  darkness  for  the  work.

Local  Conditions. — The  room  in  which  a  circle  k  held  for
development  or  investigation  should  be  set  apart  for  that  purpose.
It  should  be  comfortably  warmed  and  ventilated,  but  draughts  or  cur-
rents of  air  should  be  avoided.  After  each  sitting  the  room  should
be  thoroughly  cleaned  out  and  ventilated,  that  all  residues  may  be
dissipated.  Those  persons  composing  the  circle  should  meet  in  the
room  some  time  before  the  experiments  commence ;  the  same  sitters
should  attend  each  time,  and  occupy  the  same  places.  A  developing
circle  exhausts  power,  or  uses  it  up.  Certain  localities,  because  of  geo-
logical formation,  are  regarded  as  more  favorable  for  the  phenomena.

Physiological  Conditions.  —  The  phenomena  are  produced  by
a  vital  force  emanating  from  the  sitters,  which  the  Spirits  use  as  a
connecting  link  between  themselves  and  objects.  Certain  tempera-
ments give  off  this  power  ;  others  emit  an  opposite  influence.  If  the
circle  be  composed  of  persons  with  suitable  temperaments,  manifesta-
tions will  take  place  readily ;  if  the  contrary  be  the  case,  much  per-
severance will  be  necessary  to  produce  results.  If  both  kinds  of
temperament  are  present,  they  require  to  be  arranged  so  as  to  pro-
duce harmony  in  the  psychical  atmosphere  evolved  from  them.  The
physical  manifestations  especially  depend  upon  temperament  If  a
circle  do  not  succeed,  change  should  be  made  in  the  sitters  till  the
proper  conditions  are  supplied.  Sitters  should  prepare  themselves  by
cleansing  the  body,  and  a  change  of  garments.  Ailments  which
vitiate  the  fluids  and  depress  the  feelings  are  unfavorable.  Those
indisposed  should  absent  themselves.  Remember,  the  following  is  an
Immutable  Law :  As  the  persons  in  the  circle  constitute  always  one  of  the
elements  for  the  production  of  the  phenomena  which  take  place  in  presence
of  this  order  of  mediums  hip  it  is  no  unusual  thing  for  some  positive  mind
in  the  circle  to  determine  the  char  cuter  of  the  manifestations.

Mental  Conditions.  —  All  forms  of  mental  excitement  are  detri-
mental to  success.  Those  with  strong  and  opposite  opinions  should
not  sit  together:  opinionated,  dogmatic,  and  positive  people  are
better  out  of  the  circle  and  room.  Parties  between  whom  there
are  feelings  of  envy,  hate,  contempt,  or  other  inharmonious  sentiment
should  not  sit  at  the  same  circle.  The  vicious  and  crude  should  be
excluded  from  all  such  experiments.  The  minds  of  the  sitters  should
be  in  a  passive  rather  than  an  active  state,  possessed  by  the  love  of
truth  and  of  mankind.  One  harmonious  and  fully  developed  indi-
vidual is  invaluable  in  the  formation  of  a  circle.


264      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THB  THRESHOLD.

The  Circle  should  consist  of  from  three  to  ten  persons  of  both
sexes,  and  sit  round  an  oval,  oblong,  or  square  table.  Cane-bottomed
chairs,  or  those  with  wooden  seats  are  preferable  to  stuffed  chairs.
Mediums  and  sensitives  should  never  sit  on  stuffed  chairs,  cushions,
or  sofas  used  by  other  persons,  as  the  influences  which  accumulate  in
the  cushions  often  affect  the  media  unpleasantly.  The  active  and
quiet,  the  fair  and  dark,  the  ruddy  and  pale,  male  and  female  should
be  seated  alternately.  If  there  be  a  medium  present,  he  or  she  should
occupy  the  end  of  the  table  with  the  back  to  the  north.  A  lucid
mediumistic  person  should  be  placed  on  each  side  of  the  medium,
and  those  most  positive  should  be  at  the  opposite  comers.  No  per-
son should  be  placed  behind  the  medium.  A  circle  may  represent  a
horseshoe  magnet,  with  the  medium  placed  between  the  poles.  The
quality  of  messages  depends  on  the  circle.

Intercourse  with  Spirits  is  carried  on  by  various  means.  The
simplest  is  three  tips  of  the  table  or  raps  for  "  Yes,"  and  one  for
''  No."  By  this  means  the  Spirits  can  answer  in  the  affirmative  or
negative.  By  calling  over  the  alphabet  the  Spirits  will  rap  at  the
proper  letters  to  constitute  a  message.  Sometimes  the  hand  of  a
sitter  is  shaken,  then  a  pencil  should  be  placed  in  the  hand,  when  the
Spirits  may  write  by  it  automatically.  Other  sitters  may  become  en-
tranced, and  the  Spirits  use  the  vocal  organs  of  such  mediums  to
speak.  The  Spirits  sometimes  impress  mediums,  while  others  are
clairvoyant  and  see  the  Spirits,  and  messages  from  them  written  in
luminous  letters  in  the  atmosphere.  Sometimes  the  table  and  other
objects  are  lifted,  moved  from  place  to  place,  and  even  through  closed
doors.  Patiently  and  kindly  seek  for  tests  of  identity  from  loved  ones
in  the  Spirit-world,  and  exercise  caution  respecting  Spirits  who  make
extravagant  pretensions  of  any  kind.

Experience  is  the  best  teacher.  Be  guided  by  results.  Oft-
times  the  usual  conditions  will  appear  set  aside.  The  state  of  some
one's  mind  or  personal  surroundings  may  determine  matters  beyond
the  scrunity  of  the  sitters.  The  Circle  is  not  suitable  for  all.  Those
to  whom  it  is  disagreeable  or  exhausting  should  avoid  it.  Sometimes
one  or  two  gross  or  strong  sitters  may  prove  obnoxious  to  those  more
sensitive  and  delicate,  by  absorbing  the  vitality  of  the  weakest  sitters.
Such  combinations  should  be  avoided.  Do  not  sit  too  frequently,  nor
one  minute  after  the  medium  or  most  sensitive  sitters  become  weary.
Never  sit  without  a  worthy  motive,  of  a  spiritual,  religious,  or  philan-
thropic character.  Never  use  the  spirit-power  for  worldly  purposes^
and  avoid  all  who  do.    Family  circles  should  shut  out  medium-hunters


THE  CULTIVATION   OF  SPIRITUAL   GIFTS.  26$

and  intrusively  sceptical  persons.  It  is  best  for  each  family  to  pro-
duce its  own  Spiritualism.  If  any  one  have  not  the  power,  it  shows
that  nature  has  not  prepared  him  for  it.

Mediums  are  often  misunderstood  by  their  nearest  friends.  Their
feelings  should  always  be  respected  when  they  have  an  aversion  to
any  individual,  or  to  sitting  in  any  particular  place  or  at  any  given
time ;  never  urge  them  against  their  will.  Their  refusal  often  arises
from  the  impression  of  their  Spirit-friends,  as  a  means  of  protecting
them  from  impending  evil.  All  mediums  and  sitters  should  lift  up
their  Souls  to  the  Father  of  All,  previous  to  every  sitting,  asking  to  be
guided  in  all  they  do,  and  allow  no  selfish  or  inferior  consideration  to
supersede  the  guidance  that  comes  by  impression  or  manifestation.
The  light  of  conscience  within  is  the  highest  and  surest  guide.

Developed  Mediums  of  a  high  order  often  cannot  sit  in  circles  at
all.  Only  in  the  presence  of  one  or  two  congenial  friends  can  they
exercise  their  mediumship  with  advantage.  Such  persons  should
carefully  avoid  promiscuous  sittings.  In  complete  isolation  the  high-
est communications  are  most  frequently  received.  These  Rules  and
Suggestions  are  chiefly  for  Investigators.  When  sufficient  experience
has  been  obtained,  each  one  will  do  well  to  follow  such  methods  as
are  found  most  suitable,  varying  them  as  development  proceeds.
Always  aspire  toward  the  higher  forms  of  mediumship  and  more
spiritual  purposes.

Let  the  room  be  of  a  comfortable  temperature,  but  cool  rather  than
warm ;  let  arrangements  be  made  that  nobody  shall  enter  it,  and  that
there  shall  be  no  interruption  for  one  hour  or  more  during  the  sitting
of  the  circle.

The  Spirits  or  Intelligences  which  produce  the  phenomena  should
be  treated  courteously,  but  the  sitters  should  on  no  account  allow
their  judgment  to  be  warped  or  good-sense  imposed  upon  by  Spirits,
whatever  their  profession  may  be.  Reason  with  them  kindly,  firmly,
and  considerately.

Sitters  should  not  desire  anything  in  particular,  but  unite  in  being
pleased  to  receive  that  which  is  best  for  all.  The  director  of  the
circle  should  sit  opposite  the  medium,  put  all  questions  to  the  Spirit,
and  keep  order.     A  recorder  should  take  notes  of  the  proceedings.

The  first  symptom  of  the  invisible  power  at  work  is  often  a  feeling
like  a  cool  wind  sweeping  over  the  hands.

The  first  manifestation  will  probably  be  table- tippings  or  raps.

A  powerful  physical  medium  is  usually  one  of  an  impulsive,  affec-
tionate, and  genial  nature,  very  sensitive  to  mesmeric  |nflueng^3.  ThQ
majority  of  media  are  ladie§,


266      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  best  manifestations  are  obtained  when  the  medium  and  all  the
members  of  the  circle  are  strongly  bound  together  by  the  a£Eections,
and  are  thoroughly  comfortable  and  happy.  The  manifestations  are
bom  of  the  Spirit  and  shrink  somewhat  from  the  lower  mental  influ-
ences of  earth.  Family  circles,  with  no  strangers  present,  are  usually
the  best.  The  admittance  of  investigators  and  strangers  requires  cer-
tain restrictions  to  obtain  the  best  results.

First,  we  ask  that  each  investigator  shall  take  a  short  period  of
rest  before  the  sun  goes  down  on  each  circle  evening.  A  few
moments  spent  in  the  open  air,  in  the  sun  rays  if  possible,  will  give  a
purer  magnetic  influence  than  that  gathered  in  a  close  room.  Spiri(ts
partake  of  the  influence  brought,  and  if  you  feel  tired,  worn  out  with
the  day's  labors,  you  impart  that  condition,  preventing  their  control.
Angry  or  vengeful  feelings  draw  to  themselves  malicious  or  unde-
veloped Spirits.  If  you  open  the  door,  can  anything  prevent  them
from  entering  in  ?  A  feeling  of  sadness  or  despair  imparts  itself  to
those  around  you  as  well  as  to  Spirit  friends,  and  those  who  were  of
that  nature  in  earth-life  are  attracted  thereby.  Levity,  Spirits  dislike ;
but  readily  assimilate  with  that  feeling  of  pleasurable  happiness  which
is  the  natural  condition  of  out  Father's  children  while  dwellers  in  the
mundane  sphere.

When  you  enter  the  door  of  the  circle  room,  leave  all  your  earth
cares  and  troubles  outside.  Discuss  not  its  foibles  or  fashions,  but
try  and  bring  the  mind  m  rapport  with  spiritual  thoughts  and  ideas.
Spirits  care  nothing  for  fashion's  ways,  nor  for  the  various  ills  and
wants  of  the  outside  world  on  these  set  times.  All  they  can  do
through  their  mediums  to  alleviate  the  ills  of  life  they  do  cheerfully,
but  the  discussion  of  them  at  these  times  produces  conditions  that
inflict  suffering  on  the  Spirits  and  affect  the  matter  they  would  use,
rendering  it  imperfect  and  its  use  impossible.

One  of  the  most  effective  methods  of  culture  for  the  unfoldment
of  Spiritual  gifts  is  that  known  as  the  philosophy  of  the  Mystics,
which  is  growth  into  the  understanding  and  knowledge  of  the  twelve
senses,  —  that  there  are  Ave  inner  Soul  senses  corresponding  to  the
Ave  which  belong  to  the  animal  body.  These  inner  senses  were
known  to  the  Mystics  as  the  senses  of  the  Spiritual  body,  in  the  sub-
jective by  which  man  gained  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  good  or
evil.

The  flrst  sense  in  this  Soul  world,  sometimes  called  the  sixth
sense,  corresponds  with  that  of  touch.  It  is  intuition  and  understand-
ing, which  with  patience  may  in  time  become  perfect.    It  is  just  as


THE  CULTIVATION  OF   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  267

difficult  to  attain  exact  truth  through  this  sense  as  for  a  chila  to  com-
prehend all  it  touches  and  feels,  but  continues  to  grow  less  so  through
experience  and  cultivation.  The  horizon  will  widen,  and  what  we
now  acquire  as  Truth  by  this  first  sense  in  Soul  life  will  pass  into  his-
tory, into  literature,  into  axiom.

**  Sense  "  in  the  objective  is  no  more  nor  less  than  a  channel  for
desires  to  flow  through,  and  is  frequently  a  source  of  torment  to  our-
selves and  others.  Therefore,  in  the  cultivation  of  this  "  sixth  sense  "
of  which  we  speak,  great  care  and  constant  watchfulness  are  neces-
sary lest  the  new  medium  run  in  the  same  mentality.  Through  this
inner  sense  one  is  able  to  look  into  the  minds  of  others.  The  medium
b  apt  to  do  so,  and  to  be  continually  seeking  and  groping  through
these  Astral  atmospheres.  Therefore,  unless  he  grows  into  a  higher
Spiritual  desire,  and  looks  only  for  good  and  not  for  evil,  the  growth
is  like  excessive  wine-drinking,  for  the  Astral  world  is  also  material.
To  be  able  to  solve  the  mysteries  of  any  consciousness  whatever,  even
of  the  lowest  physical,  while  in  a  trance,  is  as  vain  a  boast  of  the
hunters  for  such  a  state  as  that  of  psychologists  or  mesmerists.  While
you  are  in  a  trance,  if  you  are  not  ethical  enough  in  your  nature,  you
will  be  tempted  and  forced,  by  your  powerful  lower  elements,  to  pry
into  the  secrets  of  your  neighbors,  and  then,  on  returning  to  your
normal  state,  to  slander  them.  This  is  one  of  the  frightful  habits  and
difficulties  of  modem  Astral  mediumship.  The  surest  way  to  draw
your  higher  nature  down  into  the  miry  abyss  of  your  physical  and
Astral  world,  and  thus  to  animalize  yourself,  is  to  go  into  trance  or
aspire  for  clairvoyance  and  use  the  exalted  gift  for  such  a  purpose.
True  progress  is  not  attained  by  merely  training  the  psychical  powers
for  only  the  enjoyment  of  those  powers.  This  is  only  a  sort  of  alco-
hol or  stimulant  on  the  Astral  plane,  which  results  very  unfavorably
for  Spiritual  understanding  or  Soul  growth.  The  true  path  to  Divine
Wisdom  and  illumination  by  Spirit  is  in  performing  our  duty  and
every-day  life  unselfishly,  in  all  charity  and  kindness,  with  universal
love  no  matter  in  what  station  we  are  placed.  Only  thus  can  we  con-
vert lower  nature  into  higher,  planting  seeds  of  truth,  here  a  little  and
there  a  little,  among  our  fellow-men,  whereby  they  may  wake  to  quicker
perception  of  the  Divine  inner  voice.  This  is  the  whole  duty  of  all
True  Pilgrims  of  the  heavenly  way.

If  one  with  a  highly  developed  sixth  sense  were  to  indulge  a  few
times  in  reading  the  minds  and  mental  ambition  of  others,  halting  to
examine  closely  the  evil,  he  would  surely  drain  that  development
down  to  fatten  the  mind  and  desires  for  more  evil  atmosphere.


268      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  desire  for  physical  enjoyment,  if  rightly  directed,  becomes
elevated,  as  a  desire  for  something  higher,  gradually  becoming  con-
verted into  a  desire  to  do  good  to  others,  and  thus  ascending  from  the
lowest  depths  up  a  pathway  of  Love  to  loftiest  heights.

The  ancient  Egyptians,  Hindoos,  Britains,  and  other  races,  reck-
oned that  man  had  two  interior  or  monitor  senses,  making  seven  with
the  five  objective  ones,  and  they  claimed  that  each  man  had  seven
Souls  to  correspond  with  each  sense,  which  as  they  grew  and  became
ripened  merged  into  one  Soul,  which  would  become  a  permanent,
immortal  entity.  This  doctrine  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  Egyp-
tian Cult,  although  some  modem  writer  of  books  claims  to  have  dis-
covered this  wbdom,  which  he  declares  was  unwritten  and  unknown,
and  to  have  been  appointed  to  impart  it  to  the  world.

**  The  outward  doth  from  the  inward  roll,
And  the  inward  dwells  in  the  inmost  SooL**

The  Pilgrim  of  Light  says  the  kingly  science  and  the  kingly  mys-
tery is  devotion  to  and  study  of  the  light  which  comes  from  within.

The  very  first  step  in  true  mysticism  and  true  occultism  is  to  try
to  apprehend  the  meaning  of  Universal  Brotherhood,  without  which
the  very  highest  progress  in  the  practice  of  magic  turns  to  ashes  in
the  mouth.

We  appeal,  therefore,  to  all  who  wish  to  raise  themselves  and
their  fellow-creatures — man  and  beast  —  out  of  the  thoughtless  jog-
trot of  selfish  every-day  life.  It  is  not  thought  that  Utopia  can  be
established  in  a  day,  but,  through  the  spread  of  the  idea  of  Universal
Brotherhood,  the  Truth  in  all  things  may  be  discovered.  Certainly,
if  we  say  that  it  is  useless,  that  such  highly  strung,  sentimental
notions  cannot  obtain  currency,  nothing  will  ever  be  done.  A  begin-
ning must  be  made,  and  has  been  by  the  Illuminati.

An  impulse  to  grow  into  a  Universal  Brotherhood  is  an  advance.
Try,  kind  reader,  to  be  charitable,  to  love.  To  Love  is  to  grow.
'*  Be  restrained,  be  liberal,  be  merciful,"  it  is  the  death  of  selfishness.

The  seventh  sense  brings  Clairvoyance,  Clairaudience,  Inspiration,
Semi-Entrancement.  This  state  also  implies  mental  or  Spiritual  wor-
ship, abstracted  from  the  world  terrestrial  or  the  starry  world  sidereal,
or  perchance  from  the  Divine  Essence.  The  S.  S.  S.  being  in  attune-
ment  with  the  Student  according  to  his  ripening  and  evocations,  he
now  for  the  first  time  devotes  himself  to  the  Soul's  realities.  At  thb
stage  the  ascetic  exercises  begin,  and  he  holds  communion  with  dis-
embodied Souls  or  with  the  Angelic  world.


THB  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  269

The  eighth  sense  interprets  various  languages  and  speaks  in  them,
and  translates  signs,  symbols,  and  hieroglyphs.

The  ninth  is  total  entrancement,  where  the  Soul  takes  flight  while
a  visiting  stranger  enters  the  human  habitation,  sometimes  making  a
complete  transfiguration.  The  individuality  of  the  human  body  is
changed  for  the  time  being.  Here  are  found  personation  and  rnateri*
alization  where  parts  of  the  human  body  are  used  to  produce  Spirit
forms.

With  the  tenth  sense  dawns  the  state  of  Truth  and  higher  inspira-
tion, and  opening  to  a  greater  natural  knowledge.  Now  the  student
lives  no  more  by  faith,  but  knows  and  trusts  in  subjective  truth  and
Spiritual  powers.  He  sees  the  similarity  of  the  Ray  of  God's  Nature
with  his  own.  As  that  great  warm  universal  Love  grows,  all  antino-
mies are  destroyed ;  even  sin  disappears  from  his  reflections.  Now
dawns  the  light  of  True  Prophecy,  and  here  the  student  may  well
repose  for  a  season.  This  was  the  height  of  the  school  of  the
Prophets  of  old.


Of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  senses  the  compiler  is  not  permitted
to  speak  more  fully  than  to  say  they  are  entirely  of  Spirit,  the  growth
and  blossoming-out  of  Love.  Divine  Love  fllling  the  heart  expels  all
other  love  and  brings  the  student  into  the  higher  stages  in  ecstasy
and  seclusion.  He  occupies  himself  exclusively  with  contemplation
of  God  and  the  Universal  Love  for  all  things.  His  works  are  in
silence  to  lift  up  the  suffering  world  to  hope  and  peace.  Thus  through
these  unselflsh  works  of  Love,  he  grows  to  his  Archetype,  a  perfect
union  of  Spirit  and  Soul  with  God.  *'  Union  (with  God)  is  reality,  or
the  state,  truth,  and  perception  of  things,  when  there  is  neither  lord
nor  servant."  Still,  the  man  of  God  is  not  God ;  but  he  is  not  sepa-
rate from  God.  "  At  this  stage  man's  corporeal  veil  will  be  removed
and  his  emancipated  Soul  will  mix  again  with  the  glorious  Essence,
from  which  it  had  been  separated,  though  not  divided,  and  proceeds
to  the  final  state  —  that  of  attunement  or  union  with  God."

He  has  now  finished  the  journey,  and  remains  in  the  state  he  has
come  to,  still  going  on,  however,  progressing  in  depth  of  understand-
ing. Finally  he  comes  to  '*  total  absorption  in  Deity."  Such  are  the
seven  senses  of  Soul  and  Spirit,  or  so  much  of  them  as  is  permissible
to  give,  which  the  Initiate  has  to  cultivate  and  understand.


270  THfi  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THB  THRBSHOLD.

A  true  idea  is  the  r^lex  of  a  true  suistana.  The  body  perceives
by  means  of  five  senses  or  avenues  of  touch.  The  Soul  perceives  in
like  manner  through  five  corresponding  senses,  but  of  a  finer  sort,
and  put  into  action  by  more  subtile  agents,  while  the  sacred  germ
Spirit  within  the  Soul  perceives  by  two  higher  senses,  produced  by
the  combination  of  the  five  animal  with  the  five  Soul  senseSi  acting  in
divine  harmony  upon  the  sacred  Spirit

The  Pilgrim  of  the  Illuminati  has  then  to  endeavor  to  cultivate
seven  senses ;  the  five  inner  Soul  senses  have  a  relation  and  corre-
spondence to  the  outward  senses  of  the  animal  body.  The  Adept,
fully  aware  that  the  Astral  body  and  magnetic  atmospheres  are  trans-
parent mediums  through  which  the  Soul  receives  sensation,  b  ever
striving  to  bring  them  more  perfectly  under  his  command  and  to
acquire  a  more  general  knowledge  of  the  five  inner  senses  of  the
Soul.

Sensation  on  the  Astral  body  is  the  first  step,  for  sensation  b  the
only  means  of  knowledge,  whether  for  the  body  or  for  the  SouL
Therefore,  the  True  Pilgrim  of  Light  must  climb  step  by  step  into  the
illumination  of  the  five  Soul  senses  until  he  masters  them.  When  he
can  command  these,  it  b  but  a  short  space  of  time  before  he  reaches
the  last  two  stages  of  his  journey  —  the  ecstasy  of  a  perfected  Soul,
or  Angelhood,  and  the  final  union  with  God,  the  final  Archetype  of  the
Soul,  the  total  absorption  into  Love  and  into  Deity,  God  the  Abso-
lute Love.

The  first  Soul-sense  is  Intuition  of  Psychometry,  Metaphysics,
Mesmeric  forces  or  atmospheres.  Thb  first  sense  or  vibration  into
the  Soul  world  is  the  most  difficult  for  the  beginner  to  understand  or
command,  because  he  draws  comparisons  in  hb  mind  to  things  in  the
mundane  or  animal  world.  The  objective  world  b  at  one  end  of
nature,  the  subjective  is  further  toward  the  interior  world.

At  this  first  step  into  the  Soul  world  modem  Science  builds  its
barrier,  simply  because  Science  argues  from  a  human  standpoint  only
and  builds  a  human  theory,  from  which  it  cannot  extract  itself,  forget-
ting that  Spirit  and  Matter  are  totally  opposite.  Spirit  ways  are  al-
ways opposite  to  human  ways.

Thus  modern  Science  stops  with  hostile  front  at  Spirit  mysteries.

The  opening  up  to  the  beginner  of  the  first  sense  in  the  Soul  world  b
like  wine- drinking.  It  is  often  carried  to  excess.  The  student  enlarg-
ing his  limit  of  experiences  and  knowledge  becomes  alive  to  the  inter-
est of  things  which  concern  the  Soul  and  the  larger  span  of  life.  Just
on  the  threshold  of  thb  doorway  the  Theosophs  cidl  haltl  claiming


TKE  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  2/1

that  unless  the  student  is  unselfish,  reaching  out  to  the  higher  through
universal  Love,  instead  of  curiosity  and  animality,  these  mysteries
should  not  be  unfolded  to  him.  For  the  Astral  world  is  material  in
Spirit  sense,  being  only  the  true  account-book  of  the  man.  Unless
the  student  is  ethical  and  unselfish  in  his  nature,  he  will  be  tempted  to
pry  into  the  secrets  of  his  companions  and  neighbors,  getting  at  their
true  inner  life  and  their  real  being,  and  in  his  normal  state  he  is  apt
to  slander  them  or  open  their  life-account  to  the  world,  through
thoughtlessness,  pique,  or  jealousy.  This  b  the  surest  way  to  draw  the
higher  Soul  forces  and  Spiritual  natures  into  the  miry  clay  and  dark
waters  of  the  lagoon.  Therefore,  dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  look  only  for
the  good  in  others,  not  for  the  bad.  Babbling  tongues  and  superficial
thinkers  deal  in  gossip  and  the  news  of  the  day.  A  loving  heart  and
a  deep  one  thinks  of  the  Soul  and  the  news  of  the  ages.

It  is  a  difficult  thing  for  some  to  look  upon  the  bright  side ;  they
instinctively  turn  from  the  sunlight  to  the  shadows.  But  there  are
many  things,  foreign  to  our  natures,  which  with  careful  tutelage  may
be  acquired.  Dr.  Johnson  affirmed  that  **  the  habit  of  looking  on  the
best  side  of  a  thing  is  worth  more  to  a  man  than  a  thousand  pounds  a
year."  Mind  he  did  not  say  the  gt/t,  but  the  Aadit.  If  it  be  true
that  this  habit  is  indeed  of  so  much  value,  why  do  we  not  all  strive  to
possess  it  ?

As  this  life  to  some  is  but  a  source  of  doubt,  fears,  suffering,  and
disappointment,  can  we  not  at  least  sow  a  few  seeds  of  hope  and  joy
and  love  in  the  hearts  around  us  ?

An  unpardonable  sin  is  ingratitude.  It  is  from  this  that  many
men  are  like  so-called  falling  stars.  They  suddenly  lose  their  brill-
iancy and  fall  from  the  great  eminence  to  which  they  have  attained,
with  few  or  none  to  deplore  their  disappearance.

The  first  intuition  and  culture  of  this  sixth  sense  comes  through  a
growing  knowledge  of  a  hidden  force  either  in  mesmerism,  psycho-
metry,  or  the  lower  electrical  forces  of  metaphysics  or  physiology,  also
healing  by  magnetic  forces  through  the  hands  or  body  are  all  vibra-
tion exercised  through  this  subjective  sense  of  the  inner  man.  This
first  step  checks  selfishness  in  a  degree,  for  here  the  student  learns
human  nature  and  respect  for  law  and  order.  Now,  too,  he  awakens
to  the  knowledge  that  the  God  of  mankind  and  the  God  of  nature  are
one ;  that  Nature  is  a  loving  mother  with  a  strong  arm  in  need,  when
her  children  are  in  harmony  and  attuned  with  her,  but  is  also  a  hard
mistress  when  continually  abused.

There  are  men  and  women  who  have  been  refined  by  the  fire  of


2^^  THE   HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLDp

suffering,  ignored  and  condemned  by  the  world,  but  God  knows  them
and  they  are  as  near  and  feel  Him  as  surely  as  the  little  child  who
nestles  by  its  mother's  side  in  the  night,  and  yet  cannot  see  her  face,

''  It  is  the  mystery  of  the  unknown
That  fascinates  us ;  we  are  children  itill,
Wayward  and  wistful ;  with  one  hand  we  cling
To  the  familiar  things  we  call  our  own,
And  with  the  other,  resolute  of  will.
Grope  in  the  dark  for  what  the  day  will  bring."

One  who  has  cultivated  psychometric  powers  can  touch  the  sep-
ulchre of  the  past,  and  long  mute  lips  will  speak  again,  and  those  who
have  the  advantages  of  silent  meditation  and  oblivious  composure  will
find  a  subtile  natural  gift  of  higher  intuitional  powers  that  few  mortals
dream  of,  —  a  natural  higher  gift  that  first  reports  and  notifies  what  is
to  come,  even  of  the  hurrying  feet  of  approaching  death.

All  communication  of  man's  mind  with  mind,  or  Soul  with  Spirit,
whether  in  this  world  or  across  the  threshold,  always  takes  place  by
attunement  and  attraction  in  harmony  with  it

By  development  of  intuition,  better  known  as  psychometric  powers,
the  Student  can  not  only  detect  the  mental  side  of  a  given  disease  at
once,  but  also  the  truth  of  the  physical  difficulty  with  almost  unerring
accuracy.

**  So  to  the  calmly  gathered  thought,
The  innermost  of  truth  is  taught."

Intuition  within  the  gardens  of  the  Soul  is  the  true  birth  of  involu-
tion and  evolution.  It  is  the  birth  of  the  passive,  receptive  intuition,
the  feminine  part  within  the  man.  The  growth  and  development  of
the  active,  positive,  and  intellectual  principles  within  the  woman  is
her  true  birth.  These  are  the  first  steps  toward  the  attainment  of
Spiritual  life  and  Spiritual  knowledge.

Motion  exists  in  the  mind  as  in  the  waves  of  the  ocean.  Emo-
tion exists  in  the  Astral  elements  of  nature,  and  in  the  Astral  forces
of  nature  are  the  creators  of  form.  Intuition  is  a  mental  faculty,  and
fulfils  in  respect  to  the  mind  the  part  corresponding  to  that  which  in
the  Solar  world  and  every  physical  system  is  fulfilled  by  the  centri-
petal force ;  the  same  which  in  the  social  system  is  fulfilled  by  the
woman.  The  human  mind  is  a  world  in  itself,  its  faculties  being  so
many  principalities,  regulated  and  governed  by  telegraphic  communi-
cations from  the  Soul.  It  b  the  Astral  Star  Magno  or  second  self  of
the  man.


THE  CULTIVATION  OP  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  2/3

The  most  powerful  telescope  known  to  man  b  that  interior  light
or  the  Eye  of  the  Mind.  The  interior  duality  of  man  consists  in  the
Will  which  is  the  male  and  centrifugal  force  of  the  human  mind,  and
the  reflective,  contemplative  faculties,  the  female  or  centripetal  force.
He  who  can  unite  these  two  forces  in  silence  gains  a  Soul  of  intuition
through  the  Astral  body,  whereby  through  the  operation  of  the  mind
he  is  able  to  gain  access  to  the  interior  and  permanent  region  of  his
own  nature  or  that  of  any  person  or  thing  with  which  he  b  brought  in
contact ;  even  to  control  the  esoteric  energies  of  both  nature  and  man.

As  b  the  outer,  so  is  the  inner ;  as  the  small  so  b  the  great ;  there
is  but  one  law,  the  law  of  harmonious  attunement.  He  that  worketh  m
love  is  One,    Nothing  is  small,  nothing  great  in  the  Divine  Economy.

By  intuition  we  are  able  to  possess  ourselves  of  the  knowledge  of
the  power  and  permanency  of  being,  which  in  the  long  ago  ages  of  her
past  exbtence  the  Soul  has  made  her  own.  For  that  which  she  has
experienced  through  thb  apparently  long  past  b  but  the  ripening  of
the  Soul  toward  a  Spiritual  body.  All  that  b  in  us  of  love,  and  that
which  perceives  and  permanently  remembers,  b  the  Soul.  And  all  the
Soul  has  once  learned  b  at  the  service  of  those  who  duly  cultivate
their  relation  with  her.

Inasmuch  as  in  order  to  obtain  her  full  development  she  remains
thousands  of  years  in  more  or  less  close  connection  with  matter,  until
perfected  to  full  ripening  by  experience  of  all  the  lessons  afforded  by
the  body,  she  passes  on  to  higher  conditions  of  being,  to  a  final  union
with  her  highest  Archetype.  It  follows  through  thb  law  of  reflection
that  no  knowledge  which  the  race  has  once  acquired  in  the  past  can
be  regarded  as  hopelessly  lost  to  the  present.  What  man  knoweth
the  things  of  a  man  save  the  man  himself?  So  no  man  knoweth  the
things  of  God  save  the  Spirit  of  God  within  the  man.  They  who
have  drank  of  the  cup  of  higher  lave  with  pure  hearts  see  God,  while
the  natural  man  cannot  see  God.  The  higher  Divine  man  sees  God
and  communes  with  Him.  They  who  as  yet  recognize  only  the  body
and  natural  life  of  mankind  know  very  little  indeed  as  compared  with
those  who  are  so  far  unfolded  in  their  interior  natures  as  to  recognize
the  Soul  and  its  seven  senses.  For  the  Soul  with  its  Astral  body,  when
once  opened  to  the  communion  with  the  natural  man  with  eyes  of  un-
derstanding, looks  two  ways,  inward  as  well  as  outward.  The  knowl-
edge of  the  law  is  not  in  heaven  ;  it  is  in  your  mouth  and  in  your  own
hearts.  It  is  in  your  reason,  for  it  b  written  ''  I  have  left  you  free  to
choose  between  life  and  death,  and  good  and  evil."

Each  individual  life  is  a  world  by  itself,  suspended  within  the


274      I^HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

realm  of  possibilities,  while  the  Soul  is  ever  the  centre  of  gravitation.
Here  dwells  the  Initiate  of  the  sacred  mysteries,  striving  to  unfold
the  senses  of  the  Soul,  by  living  in  love,  universal,  unselfish,  a  noble
life,  pure  in  thought  and  deed,  thus  preventing  the  interposition  of
any  barrier  between  hb  exterior  and  interior,  his  phenomenal  and  his
substantial  self.

By  steadfastly  cultivating  harmonious  relations  between  these  two
he  becomes  attuned  through  the  whole  of  his  system  and  life  to  the
Divine  Central  Will,  whose  seat  b  in  the  Soul — the  Germ  of  the
Sold,  the  S.  S.  S.,  the  Holy  Spirit.

Thus  the  true  Pilgrim  of  Light  gams  full  access  to  the  store  of
knowledge  laid  up  in  hb  Soul,  and  attains  to  the  cognition  alike  of
God  and  of  the  universe,  and  of  him  it  can  be  truly  said  there  b  noth-
ing hid  which  shall  not  be  revealed.

And  it  b  not  hb  memory  alone  which  b  so  endowed.  He  may
now  sometimes  read  and  fathom  the  very  planet  of  which  he  b  the
offspring.  Like  himself  it  b  a  Person  and  is  possessed  of  a  medium
of  memory.  He  to  whom  the  Soul  lends  her  eyes  and  ears  may  have
knowledge  not  only  of  his  own  past  history  but  that  of  the  planet  as
beheld  in  the  picture  imprinted  in  the  magnetic  light  whereof  the
planet's  memory  consists.  For  there  are  actually  ghosts  of  events,
names  of  past  circumstances,  shadows  on  the  protoplasmic  mirror
which  can  be  evoked.

**  We  must  understand  before  we  can  believe,"  says  the  world  of
thought  Quite  true;  if  ye  strive  to  understand  truthfully,  without
bias,  then  look  inward  as  well  as  outward,  become  acquainted  with
the  senses  of  the  Soul,  and  when  you  awake  to  find  that  Matter  is
only  solidified  Spirit,  overshadowed  by  a  divine  law  of  harmony,  you
have  opened  the  first  doorway.

Now  arise  in  silence  to  wisdom  and  contemplation  and  a  universal
companionship  of  harmony  and  love,  and,  lo !  the  portals  of  the
hidden  mysteries  are  forever  open  to  your  enraptured  gaze.  You
behold  ''there  are  three  which  bear  record  in  heaven  "  (the  invisible
Spirit  world)  and  these  three  are  One,  and  there  are  three  which  bear
record  on  earth  (or  about  the  natural  and  Soul-body)  and  these  three
agree  in  one.  The  first  in  this  lower  world  b  the  Spirit  of  the  ele-
ments, terrestrial  body,  and  vital  force  in  the  brute  conditions ;  the
second  b  the  Spirit  of  the  Stars,  sidereal  or  Astral  body,  the  thought
and  memory  part  of  man ;  the  third  b  the  Divine  Essence,  or  S.  S.  S.,
the  reflection  or  ray  of  Holy  Spirit  of  wisdom,  harmony,  and  Love
from  the  Godhead.


THE  CULTIVATION  OP  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  2/5

Nature  works  in  spirals  and  works  intelligently.  Truth  alone  is
valuable,  and  Truth  fears  nothing.

The  fire  under  the  crucible  does  not  harm  the  gold,  but  refines  it;
the  dross  alone  falls  away  under  the  test,  and  of  dross  we  are  well
rid,  though  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  reject  the  Truth  because  some
dross  remain,  unless  one  has  purer  Truth.  Truth  wears  no  mask,
bows  at  no  human  shrine,  seeks  neither  place  nor  applause.  She  only
asks  a  hearing.  Some  men  are  allowed  to  look  into  their  inner  selves
once  or  twice  in  a  lifetime,  and  if  their  existence  has  been  full  of
goodness  and  love,  they  feel  uplifted  and  strong  in  abiding  truth,  able
to  overcome  the  world.  But,  alas !  the  lives  of  many  are  so  barren  of
all  that  b  good  and  pure  that  the  very  acquaintance  with  their  inner
selves  makes  them  hate  truth  and  stifle  it  on  all  occasion^.

Certain  instructions  of  that  noble  Soul  Pythagoras,  received  from
the  Egyptians,  and  made  the  subject  of  much  thought,  may  perhaps
be  well  repeated  here.

From  one  Soul  of  the  Universe  are  all  those  Souls  which  in  all
the  world  are  tossed  up  and  down;  as  it  were,  and  severally  divided.
Of  these  there  are  many  changes,  some  passing  into  a  more  fortu-
nate estate,  and  some  quite  the  contrary.

And  they  which  are  creeping  things  are  changed  into  watery
things,  and  those  of  things  living  in  water,  to  those  of  things  living
on  land ;  and  airy  ones  into  men ;  and  human  Souls  that  lay  hold  on
immortality  are  changed  into  Holy  Angels,  and  so  they  go  into  the
spheres  of  the  Gods,  and  this  b  the  most  perfect  glory  of  the  Soul.
But  the  Soul  entering  into  the  body  of  man,  if  it  continue  selfish
and  evil,  shall  neither  taste  of  immortality  nor  be  a  partaker  of  the
Good,  until  it  has  passed  through  another  cycle  of  world-purifying,
but  will  be  drawn  back  through  the  same  ways.  And  this  b  the
condemnation  of  an  evil  Soul,  unripened,  awaiting  a  spiral  or  cycle
of  time,  until  it  may  go  forward  once  more  to  a  condition  of  illumi-
nation by  the  Spirit.

Clairvoyance,  or  seeing  with  the  Spiritual  eyes,  runs  like  a  silvery
thread  through  all  the  hbtory  of  the  past.  Through  clairvoyance  one
grows  into  the  vision  of  the  abodes  of  disembodied  Souls,  whose
higher  growth  of  Spirit  shows  flashes  of  wondrous  light,  as,  irradiated
with  higher  lave,  they  appear  at  times  in  the  semblance  of  Angels'
forms.  And  what  Seer  who  has  floated  out  upon  the  translucent
ether  beyond  this  little  world  is  not  spellbound  in  ecstatic  vision,
beyond  all  human  conception,  of  the  glorious  scale  of  heavenly
architecture  ?    To  see  vast  firmaments  spangled  thidc  with  suns,  and


2/6      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

systems,  and  glorious  galaxies  of  worlds,  numberless  in  regions  of
space  limitless,  wheeling,  whirling,  ever  rushing  on  their  several  path-
ways, speeding  round  and  round  some  vast,  unknoum  centre^  floating
on  forever  by  their  own  resistless  will ;  upheld  by  a  perfect.  Divine
law  of  locomotion  and  of  atmosphere  ;  magnetic  currents  both  small
and  great  being  constantly  charged  and  rebounding  between  them
and  their  fellow-worlds ;  —  all  these,  and  thousands  of  other  vbions
which  it  is  impossible  to  describe  in  human  speech,  dazzle  the  eye,
and  entrance  the  being  of  the  exalted  Seer  into  wondering  ecstasy.
Misunderstood  by  man,  but  blest  indeed  is  he  whose  glorious  privi-
lege it  is  to  roam  through  the  endless  corridors  of  space,  and  enjoy
that  fuller  knowledge  (not  mere  blind  faith)  that  there  is  a  limitless
eternity  beyond  this  little  sphere,  in  which  the  Soul  may  grow.

Shaking  off  all  the  old  errors  and  childish  superstitions,  he  strikes
out  now  into  new  paths  of  light,  becomes  illumined  to  Spirit  Truth,
and  for  the  first  time  realizes  how  '^  his  eyes  were  held  that  he  could
not  see,"  and  his  soul  perceives  and  learns  the  mystery  of  life  and
death,  and  the  glorious  truth  of  Spiritual  immortality.

In  the  process  of  Soul  development  of  Spiritual  understanding
and  vision,  there  is  a  rapture  and  abstraction  as  the  initiate  catches
the  first  glimpse  of  the  clear-cut  cameo  of  the  profile  of  some  loved
one  passed  over  to  the  silent  shore.  He  listens  until  he  hears  voices
uttering  the  music  and  language  of  a  higher  sphere,  and  catches  the
calm  ecstasy  of  heaven,  which  renews  hope  afresh,  and  vivifies  life
with  the  assurance  of  the  tangible  realities  of  another  world,  and
voices  of  the  departed  breathe  soft  love  and  bouyant  hope  to  those
who  can  unite  their  memory  with  faith.

As  one's  whole  being  grows  into  harmonious  attunement,  all
human  affections  centring  in  the  tone  object, —  Spirit,  Universal
Love, — mind  and  aspiration  will  become  equally  steadfast  and  in
earnest.  Thus  one  reaches  and  finds  the  t'olarity  of  his  being,  the
Polarity  of  the  animal  and  Spiritual  body,  and  the  light  of  wisdom
dawns  within  the  Soul.  There  is,  then  a  sense  of  vision  that  the
vulgar  sees  not,  a  sense  of  hearing  that  the  ignorant  heed  not,  and  a
loving  companionship  that  the  misanthropic  cannot  understand.

These  heights,  as  has  been  said,  can  only  be  gained  through  silent
oblivious  composure,  learning  to  concentrate  all  latent  desires  upon
exalted  objects,  until  the  Astral  body  finds  its  harmonious  vibrations,
for  as  ballast  to  a  ship  so  b  the  Astral  to  the  Soul,  and  so  are  faith
and  love  to  the  Spirit.

These  great  hidden  truths  can  no  more  be  perceived  by  the  mind


THE  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  2/7

unprepared  for  them  than  the  sun  can  dawn  upon  the  mists  of  night ;
but  he  to  whom  Illumination  has  come  has  attained  those  faculties  of
surpassing  power  by  which  he  ranks  among  the  Saviors  of  the  world,
lifting  up  and  lightening  the  burdens  of  mankind  wherever  he  goes,  and
leaving  behind  him  an  enduring  influence  of  imselfish  love,  worshipped
wherever  Spirit  Truth  and  harmonious  beauty  are  comprehended.

It  is  only  in  a  peculiarly  passive  state  of  mind,  which  must  be
cultivated,  that  it  is  possible  to  perceive  Truth  in  the  Hidden  Ways
ot  nature.  If  the  mind  has  grown  into  an  anxious  fevered  condition,
—  even  in  exalted  thought,  or  by  desire  for  these  very  truths,  —  if  the
growth  be  not  through  love  in  a  calm  state  of  profound  serenity,  illu*
mmation  will  not  be  found.  Love  cannot  compel  the  invisible  world
to  open  its  doors ;  it  must  be  done  through  attraction.  You  cannot
ask  with  success  without  responsive  growth,  and  the  ordeal  of  prepa-
ration for  these  grandest  secrets  that  exist  in  nature.

St  Paul,  who  was  a  Gnostic  and  an  Occultist,  speaks  of  man  as
constituted  of  Body,  Soul,  and  Spirit,  the  latter  being  to  him  the
Germ  Soul  of  the  Soul.  The  important  point  which  all  higher  occult*
ism  brings  out  is  the  Soul  of  man,  while  something  far  more  rarefied
and  subtile,  far  more  ethereal  and  lasting,  than  the  physical  body,  b
yet  of  itself  a  material  reality^  only  becoming  immortal  through  dual
ripening  and  growth.  The  secret  doctrine,  held  sacred  by  all  the
Hermetic  brotherhoods,  teaches  that  man,  if  he  wins  immortality,
will  remain  for  ever  the  trinity  that  he  is  in  this  life,  and  will  con-
tinue so  throughout  all  the  spheres.  The  Astral  body,  which  in  this
life  is  covered  by  a  gross,  physical  envelope  known  as  the  natural
body,  when  released  from  that  covering  by  the  process  of  corporeal
death,  is  in  its  turn  the  shell  of  another  and  more  rarefied  ethereal
body.  This  begins  developing  from  the  moment  of  death,  and
becomes  perfected  when  the  Astral  of  the  earthly  form  finally  sepa-
rates from  it.  Therefore  the  unripened  Soul  b  a  material  reality  and
is  enveloped  in  its  Astral  body,  which  is  closely  inherent,  being  the
quintessence,  pith,  and  marrow  of  the  more  grossly  material  natural
body.  The  knowledge  of  this  condition  of  things  enables  the  occult-
bt  to  speak  positively  on  the  subject,  for  the  Adept  can  demonstrate
and  satisfy  himself  at  once,  either  through  hb  mesmeric  forces  or
entrancement,  that  there  b  such  a  thing  as  a  Soul,  and  that  it  b
material  in  its  nature.

He  learns  this  by  dissociating  and  reuniting  and  restoring  his
own  from  its  natural  body.  A  calm  Adept  can  readily  do  thb
with  other  Souls  and  other  physical  bodies.    Therefore,  when  Seer  or


2/8      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Adept  positively  asserts  that  he  knows  he  has  a  living  Soul,  he  refers
to  this  power.  He  knows  it  just  as  another  man  knows  he  has  a
great-coat.  He  can  put  it  off  from  him  and  render  it  manifest  as
something  entirely  separate  from  himself,  but  to  him,  when  the  separa-
tion is  effected,  the  Adept  represents  the  Soul,  while  the  physical
body  is  the  coat  put  off.  He,  like  the  man  with  the  coat,  can  experi-
ence the  changes  of  his  existence  when  he  pleases.  Although  the
mere  art  and  knowledge  of  emancipating  himself  temporarily  from
the  physical  body  would  not  necessarily  inform  him  concerning  his
ultimate  destiny  after  that  emancipation  becomes  final  at  death,  it
gives  him,  at  least,  in  any  event,  exact  knowledge  concerning  the  con-
ditions under  which  he  will  start  on  his  journey  in  the  next  world.
But  a  fully  developed  Seer  or  Adept  does  not  rest  in  these  lower
spheres  longer  than  to  rise  through  them,  and  passes  on  to  loftier
heights  than  the  lower  Astral  world,  the  first  sphere  Across  the
Threshold.

The  ranges  of  trance  are: — first,  the  ecstatic,  in  which  the  visions
are  of  the  highest  and  most  transcendental  in  their  nature;  in  the
fulness  of  ecstasy  is  found  Prophecy.  Second,  semi-conscious  or  sleep-
waking  existence,  in  which  one  is  not  entirely  lost  to  surroundings,
but  drifts  into  the  higher  and  can  return  at  Will.  Third,  Inspiration,
when  one  is  entirely  oblivious  as  to  surroundings,  and  receives  waves
of  a  higher  mentality  than  his  own,  his  consciousness  being  at  times
stimulated  to  extraordinary  exaltation.  Fourth,  a  full  entrancement,
when  the  Soul  departs  from  the  body,  and  a  visiting  stranger  enters.

Experience  has  shown  that  mountainous  regions  or  highly  rarefied
atmospheres  constitute  the  best  physical  conditions  for  high  occult
manifestations  and  communion  with  the  immortals,  and  that  the  more
simply  and  easily  the  medium  can  pass  out  into  the  Astral  world,  the
more  accurate  will  be  the  vision  and  communication  with  the  Souls
who  yet  dwell  there.

A  Spirit  is  only  a  mind  without  a  visible  body.  And  if  an  exter-
nal Will  can  set  in  motion  physical  changes  that  work  a  cure  of  dis-
ease, why  may  not  an  external  Will  also  set  in  motion  the  changes  that
produce  thought,  speech,  vision,  hearing,  etc.  ?  This  b  precisely  what
is  claimed  on  the  part  of  mediums  of  various  classes,  who  are  instru-
ments in  giving  evidence  of  Spirit  presence  and  agency.  Mediums
are  simply  persons  specially  sensitive  to  the  action  of  external  Wills,
whether  in  or  out  of  physical  bodies,  and  mediumistic  persons  are  the
ones  most  readily  susceptible  to  mind-cure  or  faith-cure  processes  in
all  its  phasesy  because  they  are  enabled  to  radiate  higher  Spiritual


THE  CULTIVATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  2^^

atmospheres.  When  rightly  developed,  to  be  in  a  trance  is  to  be  de-
veloped in  Spirit.  No  deception,  no  untruth,  can  enter,  for  a  full
entrancement  in  the  Angelic  sphere  is  to  be  "  baptized  with  the  Holy
Ghost  and  with  Fire."

The  Soul  never  loses  its  individuality,  having  that  peculiar  fluid
which  it  draws  from  the  planetary  atmosphere,  called  by  Eastern
Cults  Perisprit,  better  known  as  the  Astral  body,  which  gives  an
individuality  that  alwajrs  remains.  The  more  it  is  advanced  in  its
degree  of  rarefaction  and  growth,  the  more  clearly  does  it  perceive
the  trifling  worthlessness  it  has  left  behind  it  upon  earth.  Who  would
turn  back  to  enjoy  the  toys  of  infancy  ?

The  separation  of  the  Soul  from  the  body  is  almost  painless.  The
body  often  suffers  far  more  during  life  than  at  the  moment  of  death,
when  the  Soul  is  usually  unconscious  of  what  is  occurring  to  the  body,
looking  eagerly  forward  like  a  child  for  the  dawn  of  morning.  The
sensations  experienced  at  the  moment  of  death  are  often  a  great
source  of  enjoyment  for  the  Soul  as  it  now  fully  realizes  that  its  term
of  exile  is  about  to  be  ended.  A  disembodied  Soul  may  remain  sta-
tionary for  years,  yes,  ages,  but  he  never  degenerates,  for  in  propor-
tion as  Souls  advance,  they  understand  what  has  retarded  their
progress.

When  a  Soul  has  finished  any  given  trial,  which  he  may  have  done
only  by  repeating  the  same  experience  many,  many  times,  the  trial
lesson  once  learned  is  never  forgotten,  but  like  a  child  he  must  learn
that  which  is  good  and  that  which  is  hurtful  for  him.

Now  with  vague  remembrance  of  much  of  the  past,  only  the
stronger  and  more  marked  ambitions,  hopes,  and  loves  appear  to
overshadow  it.  The  body  changes,  but  the  Soul  does  not,  but  only
changes  its  garments.  Now  it  is  found  that  the  conditions  of  exis*
tence  depended  on  the  Soul  itself,  and  that  it  is  happy  or  the  contrary
according  to  the  action  and  growth  attained  by  it  in  earth-life,  and  that
it  could  by  act  and  deed  and  love,  while  on  earth,  have  raised  itself
above  the  danger  of  falling  into  darkness,  and  chaotic  sleep  or  of  ex-
piation. Finding  that  dogma  and  creeds  were  all  reflexes  of  the
minds  of  selfish  men,  that  which  was  held  with  such  intolerance  and
vehemence  is  frequently  retracted  with  equal  vehemence  when  the
light  of  truth  is  received.  A  growing  Soul  soon  sees  that  he  has
much  more  to  lose  than  gain  by  persisting  in  holding  to  any  opinion
shown  to  be  erroneous,  for  all  that  is  false  must  perish,  — Truth  must
always  remain.  Nature's  God  is  just,  and  the  words  of  the  Judean
Prince  are  true,  "  Verily,  except  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot  see


28o      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  ELingdom  of  God.  That  which  b  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh ;  and
that  which  is  bom  of  Spirit  is  Spirit  Marvel  not  that  I  say  unto  thee,
Ye  must  be  born  again."  It  is  not  a  question  whether  the  Soul  is  in
a  mortal  body  or  out  of  it,  when  it  can  be  bom  of  the  Spirit.  Ele-
vated and  ripening  Souls,  on  quitting  their  bodily  envelope,  leave
behind  them  all  the  evil  passions  of  humanity,  and  retain  only  the
love  of  tmth  and  goodness;  but  inferior,  unripe  Souls  retain  their
earthly  imperfections  and  passions,  woven  in  a  web  of  selfishness,  that
retards  them  from  Spiritual  blossoming  and  fmitage.  It  depends  en-
tirely on  each  and  every  one  of  us  to  free  himself  from  the  influence
of  matter,  by  acts,  thoughts,  and  deeds  in  this  present  life.  Man
possesses  free  Will  and  consequently  the  power  of  electing  to  do  or
not  to  do.  Let  him  conquer  his  animal  passions;  rid  himself  of  hatred
and  revenge ;  free  himself  from  envy,  jealousy,  pride,  cmelty,  and
wrong ;  and,  above  all,  throw  off  the  frightful  yoke  of  selfishness  that
clings  to  most  men.

In  the  first  moments  after  death,  the  sight  of  a  Soul  is  usually  dim
and  confused,  much  confusion  being  added  to  it  by  the  lamentations
of  friends  left  behind.  It  becomes  clearer  as  the  Soul  becomes  freed
from  the  body,  while  if  there  has  been  no  growth  except  in  animality,
while  in  the  body,  it  is  held  in  impenetrable  darkness  until,  in  the  ful-
ness of  time,  some  ray  or  reflection  of  God's  light  and  Love  arouses
it  from  its  long  sleep.  But  if  there  has  been  growth  and  advance
toward  Spirit  while  on  earth,  the  Soul  sight  becomes  clearer  and  is
able  to  penetrate  bodies  which  are  opaque  to  us.  The  extension  of  a
Soul's  vision  through  space  and  into  the  future,  as  well  as  the  past,
depends  entirely  on  the  degree  of  ripening  in  Spirit  growth  and  there-
fore of  elevation.

If  one  would  attach  to  the  things  of  this  world  only  that  degree
of  importance  which  they  deserve,  under  this  earthly  corporeal  devel-
opment, a  growth  of  light  and  purification  might  be  effected,  with  a
peaceful  repose  of  mind  which  the  world  cannot  give,  and  one  would
achieve  deliverance  from  the  influence  of  matter  at  the  hour  of  disso-
lution so  that  all  hold  of  earth  would  cease  as  he  leaves  this  envelope.

Our  passions,  having  their  roots  in  nature,  are  not  evil  of  them-
selves. It  is  their  excess  which  is  wrong,  and  the  perversion  of  man's
Will  which  results  from  this  excess  is  perversion  of  God's  ideas  and
laws.  The  true  principles  of  all  man's  passions  have  been  given  him
for  his  good,  and  may  and  often  do  spur  him  on  to  the  accomplish-
ment of  greater  things.     It  is  their  abuse  which  is  harmful.

The  Soul,  before  its  union  with  the  body,  being  only  a  ray  or  re-


THE   CULTIVATION   OF   SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  28l

flection  from  the  great  Infinite  Mind,  is  as  a  little  seed  of  magnetic
fire  out  of  the  absolute  energy  of  nature.

The  union  of  Soul  and  body  begins  at  the  moment  of  conception,
but  is  complete  only  at  the  moment  of  birth.  From  the  moment  of
conception,  its  Astral  fluidic  link  begins  to  grow  and  becomes  closer
and  closer  up  to  the  instant  of  birth.  The  cry  when  uttered  by  the
infant  announces  that  memory  and  thought,  the  Astral,  has  united,  and
he  becomes  numbered  among  the  living,  but  only  by  growth  and  grad-
ual development  of  his  organs  he  learns  the  use  of  his  bodily  instru-
ments. His  individuality  of  ideas  comes  to  him  little  by  little,  as  in
the  case  of  a  man  who  wakens  out  of  slumber  and  finds  himself  in  a
different  situation  from  that  in  which  he  fell  asleep.  The  Soul  that
animates  the  body  of  a  child  may  be  more  developed  than  many  an
adult.  The  Soul  growth  of  the  parents  and  the  high  or  low  vibration
of  their  mentalily  is  to  the  little  seed  of  life  as  good  or  poor  soil  is  to
the  seed  in  the  vegetable  world.  There  is  a  law  of  nature  which  is
called  destruction.  It  is  necessary  that  things  should  be  destroyed
that  they  may  be  re-bom  and  re-generated.  What  is  called  destruo*
tion  is  only  transformation,  the  aim  of  which  is  the  renewal  and  ame-
lioration of  all  living  beings ;  and  when  great  destructive  convulsions
or  calamities  come,  mankind  always  advances  more  quickly.

True  adoration  is  in  the  heart,  and  through  adoration  the  Soul
draws  nearer  to  God,  it  being  the  elevation  of  the  thoughts  toward
Him.  Therefore,  one  who,  in  all  purity  of  thought,  adores  nature,
is  reaching  out  to  God.  To  pray  is  the  act  of  adoration,  putting
one's  self  in  communication  with  God,  praising,  asking,  or  thanking
Him,  and,  thus  opening  the  windows  of  the  Soul,  one  is  made  better
by  the  act.

The  Spirit  life  is  a  whole  world  of  varied  conditions  and  relation-
ships, of  which  the  earthly  life  is  only  the  obscure  reflex.

Through  forgetfulness  of  the  past,  a  man  is  more  fully  himself,
and  if  he  annihilates  selfishness  and  ambition  he  has  placed  one  foot
on  the  threshold  of  eternity.

People  in  this  day  and  age  are  revelling  in  a  debauch  of  real  or  pre-
tended phenomena,  many  of  them  produced  through  idle  curiosity  on
the  one  hand,  and  mercenary,  commercial  interest  on  the  other.  Hence
it  is  highly  necessary  to  keep  calm  and  prove  all  things.  "  Try  the
Spirits,''  and  all  they  say  or  promise,  before  the  bar  of  Reason.

In  order  to  exalt  the  tone  of  Soul  up  to  the  prophetic  standard,
we  must  purify  the  element  of  Fire  which  is  in  uSy  then  concentrate  the
Fire  of  Soul  in  mirrors,  cystals,  or  globes.     When  the  mind  is  fully


282      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

attuned  and  surrendered  to  purer  flre^  it  is  then  a  pure  glass,  ^nd  to  it
come  visions  of  the  great  world  of  Souls,  the  magical  world  of  Spirit
Prophets  of  the  old  dispensation  shake  hands  across  the  gulf  of  cen-
turies with  the  Trance  mediums  of  the  new  one.  Nothing  in  nature
is  lost  The  light  of  truth  and  that  which  is  beautiful  will  never  die.
All  that  b  evil,  false,  and  wrong  is  worthless  and  will  fade  away  and
perish  forever.

He  who  has  attained  the  proper  attunement  of  respiration  known
as  the  Divine  Inward  Breath  soon  possesses  an  atmosphere  of  vibra-
ting harmony  of  the  within  and  the  without  to  such  a  degree  as  to  be
at  times  almost  entranced  in  a  peculiar,  rapturous  delirium  more
dreamy  and  far  more  true  in  vision  than  the  ecstatic  dreams  of  an
opium  or  hashish-eater,  for  he  enters  into  the  higher  Astral  world,
while  the  latter  is  only  intoxicated  by  a  drug.

Music  and  harmony  were  brought  to  earth  by  the  first  Soul  that
came  from  heaven.  It  is  generally  known  that  two  instruments
tuned  to  the  same  key  and  placed  sufficiently  near  each  other  are  in
such  harmony  that  when  one  is  struck  the  corresponding  note  in  the
other  vibrates  in  unison.

Through  this  very  principle  Adepts  and  Seers  endeavor  to  reach
a  certain  octave  of  vibration  in  perfect  chord  with  the  Eternal  and
Absolute  powers  of  nature.  On  the  very  same  principle  rested  the
whole  occult  science  of  the  Rosicrucians.  Enough  to  say,  there  is  a
hidden  secret  in  the  Eastern  world  known  as  the  Divine  inward
breath,  which  consists  in  certain  respiratory  action  in  octaves  of
numerals  very  similar  to  music  as  the  thirds  and  fifths  upon  the
scales.  In  other  words,  there  is  a  chromatic  musical  scale  in  true
breathing  of  atmosphere  which  corresponds  with  musical  scales.
Some  are  as  the  major  and  some  as  the  minor  scales.  Some  run  by
numerals,  as  i,  3,  6,  9,  12,  15,  or  i,  5,  8,  14,  others  running  in  higher
octaves  of  vibration.  It  is  claimed  that  each  individual  having,  as
may  be  said,  a  different  harp,  it  would  be  impossible  to  prescribe
certain  fixed  numerals  or  beats  as  to  respiration  which  would  suit
every  one;  but  it  must  be  shown  by  experiment,  as  the  musical
instructor  studies  the  voices  of  his  pupils.  All  musicians  know  that
the  less  complicated  the  ratios,  the  more  perfect  the  harmonies,  and
any  musical  teacher  will  briefly  demonstrate  the  harmonies  of  the
fifths,  of  the  octaves,  and  note  4,  which  would  require  pages  to  explain
and  still  could  not  be  made  intelligible  by  words.

Musical  sounds  differ  very  greatly  in  their  vibrations  per  second,
the  lowest  known  being  27,  while  the  highest  b  48,000,  and  it  is  thes«


THE  CULTIVATION  OP  SPIRITUAL  GIFTS.  283

vibrations  which  cause  rapture  or  a  kind  of  abstraction  to  those  whose
hearts  have  grown  into  sympathy  of  love.  Therefore  music  expands
exquisitely  sensitive  persons  to  loftier  deeds,  advanced  thoughts,  and
sublime  and  noble  sympathy  with  the  sufferings  of  Divine  Humanity.

The  Unknown  God  comes  to  personal  manifestation  in  the  Spirit
of  man.  This  new  life  comes  through  an  effort  of  the  Will,  first
voluntary  but  afterward  as  an  involuntary  power  of  love  and  environ^
ment

All  Spiritual  culture  must  begin  at  home,  by  reconstructing  one's
self.  Power  comes  only  from  freedom ;  and,  to  be  free,  one  must  cut
loose  from  any  bond  of  slavery  which  has  held  one  in  the  past

To  find  the  third  state  of  being,  that  between  sleeping  and  wak«
ing,  is  a  grand  exchange  of  ignorance  for  knowledge,  which  gives  one
light  to  build  the  Soul  for  Spirit  truths.  Thb  is  the  mystery  of  being
bom  again.

Spiritual  repose  is  attained  by  turning  the  eyes  inward,  schooling
the  sight  from  outward  things  to  inward  ones.  It  is  the  same  as  a
state  of  semi-entrancement,  which  is  a  very  high  degree  of  conscious-
ness and  understanding,  a  full  awakening  of  the  Soul's  powers,  a
union  of  the  voluntary  with  the  involuntary,  and  is  more  easily
attained  by  a  certain  attunement  of  the  inner  man  and  the  outer,
through  certain  harmonious  respiration.

Harmonious  growth  requires  expansion  along  with  a  correspond-
ing accumulation  of  harmonious  energy.  To  become  practical  we
must  first  learn  the  thing  we  want  to  practise.  This  can  be  done
through  instruction  or  observation.  When  we  awaken  to  realization
of  the  inner  life,  as  we  expand  and  soften  our  daily  lives  to  harmoni-
ous love,  we  reach  the  domain  of  the  wisdom-religion  of  the  ages
and,  lo !  our  eyes  are  open.

In  the  fact  of  fundamental  correspondence,  the  life  blood  in  the
literal  sense,  is  the  Divine  Truth  in  the  Spiritual  sense ;  the  human
head  being  the  highest  part  of  the  body,  the  noblest  and  most  impor-
tant, it  corresponds  with  that  which  b  inmost,  the  inmost  /acuity^
whence  Spiritual  life  and  thought  emanate ;  as  the  heart,  breast,  and
lungs  are  below  the  head,  they  correspond  with  that  which  is  inferior
and  the  head  with  that  which  is  superior.  The  former  corresponds
with  the  lower  love,  the  latter  with  the  higher  and  nobler.  The
higher  love  is  that  of  God,  whose  conception,  coming  through  the
head,  corresponds  with  that  understanding  and  goodness  which  is  love.
There  is  also  an  intmtion  of  the  Spirit  coming  through  the  breast,
corresponding  with  that  knowledge  and  goodness  which  is  wisdom.


284      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Therefore  there  are  two  pathways  of  development  and  unfold*
ment  Some  people  are  good  and  spiritual  because  they  are  espe-
ically  loving  and  radiate  love  which  is  highest.  Others  are  good
because  they  are  especially  wise  and  grow  spiritual  through  silent
meditation.  In  the  first  class  the  illuminated  wiil  acts  supremely,  in
the  second  the  illuminated  intellect.

The  heart,  by  virtue  of  its  function,  corresponds  with  the  love  and
will,  and  the  lungs  by  theirs  with  understanding  and  knowledge.
In  the  human  Soul  there  are  only  will  and  understanding.  These  two
departments  of  feeling  and  intellect  constitute  the  whole  mind,  and
all  mental  action  is  included  in  them.  Respiration  and  breathing  is
the  primary  movement  of  the  body ;  therefore,  whatever  affects  the
respiration  must  influence  every  vital  action,  and  every  change  of
breathing,  or  feeling,  or  emotion  is  instantaneously  translated  into  a
bodily  expression  by  a  change  in  the  action  of  the  heart,  and  conse-
quently by  a  modification  of  the  blood,  therefore  there  is  more  in
this  Divine  Inward  Breath,  which  Adepts  of  occult  science  in  the  East
know  and  practise,  than  Western  scientists  are  willing  to  acknowledge.

But  there  are  too  many  encumbrances  in  the  English  language  for
an  Eastern  Adept  to  express  himself  satisfactorily,  and  it  b  next  to
impossible  to  frame  words  for  the  transmission  of  Spiritual  ideas,  so
that  an  Eastern  Hierophant  or  Adept  is  hardly  comprehended  or
understood  when  he  tries  to  describe  in  words  the  delicate  ethereal
machinery  of  the  True  Occult  Kosmos^  which  seems  purely  ideal  to  the
practical,  objective  mind  of  most  occidentals.  How  can  the  orient*
als  teach  us  to  read,  write,  and  understand  a  language  which  has  no
palpable  alphabet  or  audible  words  yet  known  in  our  language?
There  is  apparently  no  other  way  than  that  one  shall  be  made  con-
versant with  the  Astral  world  and  the  handling  and  use  of  his  own
Akasa.  Here  he  finds  one  common  and  universal  language,  that
will  express  everything  in  either  Kosmos  or  Spiritual  world.  Thus
being  enabled  to  surmount  all  difficulties  in  the  way  of  attaining
absolute  knowledge,  he  can  make  himself  understood,  and  by  growth
and  experience  can  command  those  semi-intelligent  forces  whose
ways  and  means  of  communication  with  mortals  are  not  through
spoken  words,  but  sounds,  octaves  of  vibrations,  colors  in  correlation
with  Will.  These  sounds,  octaves,  colors,  and  odyllic  correlations
with  Will,  are  main  factors  in  forming  those  grades  of  intelligences
and  entities  of  whose  very  existence  and  being  few  persons  in  this
country  have  any  conception,  nor  are  many  as  yet  permitted  to  be
enlightened  in  regard  to  them.


THE  CULTIVATION  OP  SPIRITUAL  GIPTS.  285

Spiritualists,  Christians,  Materialists,  and  Atheists  all  bring  for-
ward their  respective  theories  and  arguments  against  such  knowledge
while  Modem  Science  more  boisterously  and  strenuously  than  all  the
rest  condemns,  objects,  and  stigmatizes  it  as  degrading  superstition,  be-
cause scientists  cannot  tear  to  pieces  and  understand  it,  nor  with  one
leap  clear  the  boundary  walls  and  attain  the  pinnacle  of  eternity,  nor
with  one  stride  cross  the  threshold  of  Life  and  Death.  The  very  exist-
ence of  Seers,  Adepts,  and  Mahatmas  is  denied  because  they  do  not
come  forward  to  be  consumed,  and  cast  their  precious  pearls  before
the  swinish  selfishness  of  barbarous  men ;  believers  in  the  hidden  ways
of  nature  and  occult  science  are  pronounced  impostors  and  f 00b ;
the  science  which  leads  to  the  highest  goal  and  by  far  the  most  im-
portant knowledge  —  the  mystery  of  life  and  death,  and  preparation
of  the  Soul  for  its  inevitable  journey,  the  real  taste  of  the  tree  of  life
and  wisdom  —  is  trampled  under  foot,  condemned,  despised,  and  up-
braided as  the  wild  flight  of  diseased  imagination.

The  truths  and  mysteries  of  the  Astral  and  Spirit  world,  and
Nature's  hidden  forces  constitute  the  science  of  occultism,  which  is
indeed  of  the  very  highest  importance,  at  once  profound  and  yet
practical  for  the  world  at  large.  Theologians  and  wiseacres  say  the
age  of  miracles  is  past,  but  all  Occultists  know  such  an  age  never
existed.  What  men  call  miracle  in  the  past  was  simply  the  exercise  of
some  natural  law  by  one  who  understood  the  principle  of  the  economy
of  nature.  While  not  unparalleled  nor  without  their  counterpart  in
universal  history,  these  phenomena  must  and  will  come  with  an  over-
powering influence  upon  the  world  of  sceptics,  unbelievers,  and  intol-
erant bigots.  They  have  to  prove  both  destructive  and  constructive :
destructive  of  the  pernicious  errors  of  the  past,  old  crisds,  dogmas,
and  superstitions ;  and  constructive  of  new  institutions  of  a  genuine
practical  brotherhood  of  Divine  Humanity  and  a  gathering  up  of  the
Divine  fragments  among  all  nations,  kindred,  and  people  to  become
co-workers  with  Nature  and  one  with  God.  Then  will  selfishness  be
no  more  and  men  will  work  for  the  good  of  their  brother-men,  with
and  through  the  higher  planetary  Spirits  and  the  Angels  whom  the
Divine  Father  has  given  charge  concerning  us.

Phenomenal  elements  previously  unthought  and  undreamed  of
will  manifest  themselves  day  after  day  with  constantly  augmenting
power,  disclosing  at  last  the  secrets  of  their  mysterious  working.
Sickness  and  pain  will  be  no  more,  and  man  will  live  to  the  fulness
of  his  days.  Death  will  be  no  longer  a  hideous  and  repulsive  enemy,
but  a  kindly  welcome,  even  if  irresistible  messenger.    In  the  golden


286  THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

days  ideas  of  truth  will  rule  the  world,  and  ±e  world  will  advance
with  mighty  strides.  Mighty  revolutions  will  take  place ;  error,  wrong
and  even  great  powers  will  crumble  away,  crushed  by  irresistible
and  ovent^ielming  force,  for  liberty  and  truth  have  dawned  upon  the
world,  and  their  influence  is  resistless  as  the  incoming  tide.

Awake  I  arise  I  oh.  Pilgrim  of  IJght  I  for  new  ideas  have  to  be
planted  on  clean  places ;  do  not  stop  like  children  over  the  toys  of
Astral  phenomena,  for  it  is  not  these,  but  the  Univeisal,  the  Absolute,
the  Divine  Ideas  that  must  be  studied,  for  to  understand  the  former
we  must  comprehend  the  latter.  They  touch  man's  true  latitude,
aspect,  and  position  in  the  universe,  in  relation  to  his  previous  and
future  births,  his  origin,  source,  and  element,  and  his  ultimate
destiny.

This  knowledge  opens  the  vision  to  the  relation  of  the  mortal  to
the  immortal ;  of  the  finite  to  the  infinite ;  of  man  to  God.

With  ideas  larger,  loftier,  grander,  more  exalted,  comprehensive,
and  complete,  man  will  recognize  the  eternal  reign  of  immuuble  and
absolute  law,  unchanging  forever,  and  that  for  man  individually  there
is  only  an  Eternal  now.

"  We  are  out  own  Children,  vaA  bjr  onr  inner  Soul's
Conduct  o£  Action,  mould  onr  lives  ud  nuke  our  fortnnei^
And  then  we  call  them  fate."

"  Feu  not,  but  trust  in  God,  oh  I   child  of  earth,

Night's  daikest  shades  precede  the  dawning  lighL
Thjr  momiog  hour,  though  late,  shall  have  its  birtlv

And  flood  th]r  pathway  with  its  radiance  bright
Fear  not,  but  tnut  in  God ;  his  ways  are  grand,
He  holds  thee  in  the  hollow  of  hii  band."


CHAPTER  X.

SPIRITUALIZATION  OF  IfAITEIL

And  after  tizdayt  Jetnt  taketh  with  him  Peter,  James,  and  John,  and  leadeth  them  iq>into  a  U|^
mountain,  apart  by  themaelves,  and  he  was  transfigored  before  them.  And  his  raiment  became  shin*
ing,  exceeding  iN^iite  as  snow,  so  as  no  fnUer  on  earth  can  white  them.  And  there  appeared  onto  then
Elias  with  Moses,  and  they  were  talking  with  Jesus.  —  JUinl  iz. :  a,  4.

The  elements  that  go  to  make  up  the  human,  animal,  or  floral
envelopes  or  bodies  are  held  in  solution  in  the  atmosphere  and  can,
through  a  knowledge  of  the  laws  governing  it,  be  utilized  to  construct
instantaneously  any  of  the  multitudinous  forms  that  exist  in  Nature.
It  was  knowledge  of  these  laws  that  made  the  many  miracles  chron-
icled in  the  Bible  possible.  This  knowledge  is  possessed  by  the
Spirit  chemists  who  control  true  materializing  mediums  and  stances
for  spiritualization  of  matter.  The  mediums  are  but  another  source
whence  the  elements  for  the  materialized  bodies  are  drawn,  for  the
atmosphere  is  not  always  chemically  favorable.  At  times  it  is  abso-
lutely impossible  to  get  together,  even  from  both  these  sources,  suffi-
cient  material  to  build  up  a  body,  and  then,  if  forms  still  appear,  the
manifestation  ceases  to  be  materialization  and  becomes  transfigura-
tion—  that  is,  the  unconscious  medium  is  transfigured  as  a  sculptor
might  modify  an  old  statue  with  his  chisel  instead  of  forming  a  new
figure  from  fresh  materials.  In  these  cases  the  medium's  body,  changed
in  form  and  feature,  as  if  it  had  been  melted  and  run  into  a  new
mould,  is  used  to  personate  something  quite  as  honest  as  the  mate-
rialization for  which  it  is  so  often  mistaken.  When,  in  honestly  con-
ducted stances,  the  form  has  been  seized  and  the  medium  discovered
in  the  captor's  arms,  it  has  been  transfiguration,  not  materialization,
and  mediums  or  their  friends  make  a  great  mistake  in  not  explaining
this  different  phase  to  those  who  attend  their  circles.  True  knowl-
edge is  not  dangerous,  as  it  is  necessarily  connected  with  wisdom,  but
knowledge  obtained  by  curiosity,  inquisitiveness,  or  intellectual  rea-
soning only,  with  no  higher  impulse  to  govern  it  and  its  application,
is  forbidden  fruit,  of  which  it  is  dangerous  to  partake.  Let  the
student,  therefore,  take  great  care  not  to  strive  to  unite  with  super*

287


288      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

natural  forces  human  theories  or  mvestigate  merely  from  idle  curi-
osity.

Spiritualization  of  matter  is  governed  by  natural  laws,  that  are
immutable  and  cannot  be  changed.  The  work  of  the  true  Spiritualist
should  be  to  discover  the  operation  of  these  laws,  and  regulate  his
investigations  accordingly.

One  of  the  greatest  stumbling-blocks  in  this  direction  is  a  misun-
derstanding in  regard  to  the  purpose,  the  object  of  spiritualization
of  matter;  which  is  to  give  a  sensuous  evidence  of  an  invbible
presence.

The  physical  eye  can  see  only  that  which  has  a  material  form  and
substance.  It  can  see  only  through  the  medium  of  light.  Nothing
can  be  apprehended  by  the  senses  unless  it  comes  upon  a  plane  with
the  physical,  and  is  related  to  one  in  form  and  tangibility.  The  phys-
ical sense  cannot  apprehend  the  spiritual.  Spirit,  therefore,  must
express  itself  through  a  material  channel,  or  it  is  unknown.

Matter  may  be  considered  as  an  expression  of  Spirit,  and  yet
co-existent  with  it.  There  is  a  great  cosmic  energy,  in  which  and
through  which  Spirit  is  ever  expressing  itself.  This  cosmic  energy
must  not  be  confounded  with  Spirit,  but  as  secondary  to  Spirit,  which
IS  primary  or  absolute.  Matter,  then,  is  a  resultant  of  balanced
forces,  or  energy,  on  a  certain  plane,  becoming  real  to  us,  when  we
are  related  to  it,  on  a  like  plane,  possessing  bodies  through  which  we
apprehend  by  sensuous  evidence  our  surroundings  and  conditions.

When  Spirits  pass  out  from  the  physical  life,  by  the  change  of
death,  they  enter  another  sphere  or  plane  of  dynamic  energy,  more
or  less  removed  from  our  own,  consequently  invisible  to  us.  When,
therefore,  Spirits  return  with  the  object  of  giving  to  mortals  sensuous
evidence  of  their  presence,  they  must  use  the  life-forces  given  off  by
a  medium  to  produce  physical  effects.

This  they  do  by  coming  into  sympathetic  unison  (as  a  flute  played
near  a  piano,  for  illustration,  will  cause  the  strings  in  unison  with  it
to  vibrate)  with  the  vito-magnetic  and  electric  life-forces,  liberated  by
the  medium.  This  is  true  of  all  physical  mediumship,  but  especially
so  in  that  for  materialization,  the  process  of  which  is  as  follows : —

£ach  individual  has  a  conscious  and  an  unconscious  Will-power,  by
which  he  or  she  keeps  the  physical  body  upon  the  earth-plane  of
being.  The  conscious  Will  governs  all  voluntary  acts,  is  identified
with  mentality  and  thought,  or  mind,  and  holds  the  mental  forces.
The  unconscious  Will  governs  the  physical  and  life-forces ;  keeps  the
circulatory,  digestive,  assimilativci  and  secretive  organs  in  action,  and


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  289

is  concerned  in  physical  life.  The  radiation  of  the  unconscious  Will-
force  is  sometimes  called  animal  magnetism.

A  physical  or  materializing  medium  is  a  person  in  whom  the
unconscious  Will  may  be  relaxed  to  a  certain  extent,  liberating  the  life
and  the  magnetic  forces,  with  which  Spirits  come  in  sympathetic  uni-
son, producing  a  balance  or  equipoise  of  elementary  forces  on  our
plane  of  being,  and  resulting  in  a  material,  tangible  human  form,
separate  from  the  medium.  It  must  always  be  remembered,  however,
that  this  human  form  is  made  up  of  the  life-forces  of  the  medium,
and  belongs  of  right  to  him  or  her,  and  the  unconscious  Will,  but  par-
tially relaxed,  is  continually  calling  back  its  own.  For  this  reason.
Spirits  hold  this  form  only  by  an  effort,  and,  when  advancing  far  from
the  medium,  are  apparently  drawn  back  again  by  irresistible  attrac-
tion. Dematerialization  occurs  when  the  Spirit  releases  its  hold  upon
the  form ;  the  next  force  which  asserts  itself  being  gravity,  the  form
drops  and  disappears.

The  clothing  these  forms  wear  b  actual  material  substance  for  the
time  being,  procured  in  various  ways,  generally  focalized  from  the
clothing  of  the  medium  or  surrounding  objects,  and  held  on  a  physi-
cal plane  on  the  same  principle  of  a  poise  of  forces.  If  focalized
from  inanimate  objects,  it  may  remain  in  our  physical  plane  perma-
nently, and  portions  may  be  carried  away  from  the  stance.  These
are  a  few  of  the  simpler  principles  brought  into  play  in  Spirit  materi-
alizations. There  is  much  in  regard  to  it,  however,  quite  unknown  as
yet  to  mortals  and  to  many  Spirits.

Psychological  laws  and  forces  play  a  large  part  in  these  phenom-
ena, and  when  the  power  of  mental  action,  now  being  studied  so
closely  in  the  cure  of  disease,  is  extended  so  as  to  embrace  this  won-
derful phenomenon,  much  light  will  be  thrown  upon  the  subject,  and
many  perplexities  surrounding  it  removed.  Investigators  should  use
the  utmost  patience  in  their  researches,  and,  remembering  that  truth  is
priceless  when  found,  never  condemn  hastily  nor  judge  entirely  from
appearances.  The  evanescent  forms  that  appear  and  disappear  so
mysteriously  (in  stances  where  collusion,  fraud,  and  deception  are  out
of  the  question)  are  but  the  efforts  of  loving  friends,  who  have  passed
beyond  the  mystic  portals,  to  return  and  give  a  token  of  their  pres-
ence and  their  love.

It  is  certainly  time  that  a  religion  which  counts  so  many  millions
among  its  believers,  of  all  classes  and  nationalities,  should  be  hand-
led without  rancor.  There  is  fraud  in  ail  religions,  and  trickery  and
absurdities  in  whatever  quarter  we  may  turn.    There  is  imposture  in


290      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Spiritualism,  but  not  more  fraud  than  truth.  There  is  but  one  known
test  of  the  actual  truth  of  what  comes  from  controls,  and  that  is  har-
mony. It  is  a  fact  that  the  same  control,  speaking  through  diverse
mediums  to  different  people,  gives  forth  statements  that  not  only  con-
flict, but  are  diametrically  opposite.  The  ''state  of  reception ''  of  the
sitter  is  in  these  cases  the  determining  factor.

Elliott  Coues,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  D.  C,  writes
in  reference  to  Mediumship  and  Spirit  communion :  ''  Had  I  a  criti-
cism to  pass,  it  would  be  that  a  medium  once  caught  cheating  is  not
necessarily  and  always  a  fraud,  for  '  mediumship '  in  its  very  nature  is
irresponsible  in  proportion  as  it  is  genuine ;  for  it  implies  the  negation
of  individuality,  the  suspension  of  judgment,  the  abeyance  of  will-power,
and  too  often  also  the  obscuration  of  the  conscience.  Temptation
comes  to  these  peculiar  organisms  in  ways  to  which  more  normal  men
and  women  of  the  world  are  strangers,  and  I  think  that  the  ordinary
requirements  of  justice  should  never  be  tempered  with  more  mercy ;
and  that  never  can  charity  show  itself  more  divine  than  in  the  way  we
may  treat  the  class  of  persons  upon  whom  we  chiefly  rely  for  the  data
upon  which  the  science  of  psychics  must  rest

**  I  have,  as  you  know,  the  keenest  interest  in  the  whole  range  of
those  strange  phenomena,  which  are  variously  labelled  '  Spiritualism,'
*  theosophy,'  *  telepathy,*  *  humbug,'  and  *  fraud.' .  I  happen  to  be  an
organism  which  itself  illustrates  some  of  them,  and  I  have  seen  enough
besides  to  satisfy  me  of  the  actual  verity  of  most  of  the  rest  of  them —
let  their  '  explanation '  be  what  it  may.  I  also  think  that  scientific  as
well  as  public  opinion  is  just  now  undergoing  such  modification,  I  had
almost  written  such  a  revolution,  that  those  who  are  now  called  re-
spectively *  scientists '  and  *  cranks '  are  likely  to  change  places,  with
great  benefit  to  himianity  at  large.  And  as  to  religion  — which  after
all  has  got  to  stand  with  its  feet  firm  on  the  solid  ground  of  nature,  if
it  would  rear  its  head  to  the  heaven  that  is  above  all  human  ignorance
and  prejudice  —  as  to  religion,  I  repeat,  that  which  is  now  heterodoxy
will  the  more  speedily  prove  orthodoxy,  the  more  widely  the  facts  of
psychic  science  are  disseminated  and  appreciated.  The  traitor  in  the
strongholds  of  orthodox  intolerance  is  human  reason  acting  upon  stub-
bom  facts  of  human  nature ;  and  the  quarrels  now  going  on  in  several
of  these  strongholds  are  among  the  most  cheerful  signs  of  the  times ;
for  the  truth  always  comes  bringing  not  peace,  but  the  sword,  with
which  to  conquer  a  peace."

In  development  of  materialized  forms  various  methods  have  been
employed.    The  most  satisfactory  results  are  those  obtained  at  home.


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  29 1

A  little  company  of  harmonious  friends,  from  five  to  nine  persons,
who  will  drop  all  selfish  considerations  and  ambitions  out  of  their  lives,
for  at  least  five  hours  per  week  may  be  gathered  together.  Let  it  be
understood  that  each  must  be  punctually  in  his  place  at  the  hour  of  sit-
ting, three  times  a  week.  At  all  times  the  strictest  harmony  must  be
maintained.

Around  the  outer  edge  of  a  common  extension  table  let  some
heavy  black  drapery  be  tacked,  and  hang  down  to  the  fioor,  thus  form-
ing a  dark  '  cabinet '  under  the  table,  in  which  should  be  placed  a  dark
stone  vessel  filled  with  water.  Remove  the  centre  leaf  of  the  table,
leaving  the  aperture  uncovered,  and  place  the  sitters  about  tlie  table,
alternating  an  electric  and  magnetic  person  all  around.  Endeavor  to
allay  in  every  mind  all  mental  strain,  and  quiet  any  anxiety,  which  may
usually  be  done  by  gentle  music  or  singing.  In  the  quiet  harmony
thus  produced,  there  will  usually  be  a  response  of  Spirit  Intelligence,
which  will  finally  grow  strong  enough  for  them  to  give  advice  as  to
their  requirements.  As  soon  as  a  hand  or  face  appears  at  the  aperture
in  the  table,  a  cabinet  of  drapery  or  wood  may  be  prepared,  and  the
medium  or  mediums  selected  by  the  Intelligences  only  should  enter  it.
Sometimes  two,  three,  or  more  may  be  thus  chosen,  when  strong  mani-
festations will  be  likely  to  occur.  Now  l6ok  out  for  breakers  of
human  ambition  and  jealousy.  Some  of  the  sitters  may  feel  a  little
inward  jealousy  at  not  being  thus  selected,  or  vanity,  ambition,  or
mercenary  thought  may  enter  the  mind  of  the  selected  medium,  all  of
which  are  difficult  to  control.  The  manager  of  the  circle  needs  now
to  exercise  the  utmost  tact,  with  patience  and  caution  to  insure  quiet
harmony.  If  one  continues  in  a  fretful  mood,  and  thus  cannot  enter
fully  into  the  work,  quietly  drop  the  inharmonious  one  a  request  to
withdraw,  and  do  not  fill  the  empty  chair  unless  requested  by  the
Intelligences  to  do  so.  Some  difficulty  may  arise  as  to  light.  The
circle  should  be  in  a  dimly  lighted  room,  the  lamp  covered  with  a
violet  or  gold-colored  shade  to  mellow  and  soften  it.  Much  of  white
paper  or  marble  in  the  room  hinders  by  refraction  of  light  the  Spirit
formation.  Violet,  Blue,  Yellow,  and  Green  are  best  for  papering  a
circle  room.  Maroon  draped  with  emerald  green  has  been  found  a
good  combination.  Do  not  be  in  haste  in  anything.  You  may  think
the  manifestations  strong  enough  to  admit  of  allowing  other  persons  to
come  in,  and  the  Intelligences  may  not  object ;  but  it  is  best  to  pro-
ceed slowly.  Many  an  excellent  combination  has  been  spoiled  and
lost  by  hurry.  Excellent  results  have  been  attained  in  two  months  by
following  the  plan  above  recommended,  while  two  or  three  years  of


292       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

constant  sitting,  three  times  per  week,  are  not  seldom  required  to
produce  the  desired  results.  Harmony,  patience,  gentleness,  nega-
tive exertions,  and  silence  are  the  keys  that  unlock  the  door  behind
which  is  the  invisible  majority.

It  is  not  an  unusual  thing  to  hear  a  number  of  people,  each  of
whom  is  looking  at  the  same  object  at  the  same  time,  give  very
different  accounts  of  its  appearance.  This  does  not  indicate  that
some  are  truthful  in  their  statements  and  others  are  not,  but  rather  a
lack  of  observation  and  description.

Man  being  a  reflex  of  much  of  his  surroundings,  any  fresh  thought
or  new  idea  is  generally  met  in  an  adverse  and  hostile  manner,  and
we  are  liable  to  adopt  erroneous  conclusions  if  we  permit  ourselves  to
judge  from  appearances  without  correcting  their  errors  by  application
of  the  principles  of  reason.  Nor  should  we  permit  ourselves  to  form
conclusions  as  to  the  possibility  or  impossibility  of  any  action  occurring
in  nature,  unless  we  have  first  acquired  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the
laws  that  govern  such  action,  for  without  such  knowledge  we  are  not
in  a  position  to  tell  whether  what  we  see  is  in  reality  true,  or  only  an
appearance.

In  the  14th  chapter  of  John,  12th  verse,  Jesus  says,  "Verily,
verily,  I  say  imto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do
shall  he  do  also ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do,  because  I
go  to  my  Father."

"Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise  the  dead." — Matt,  x.:

The  same  voice  that  gave  the  command  to  go  and  preach,  gave
the  command  to  ^^  Raise  the  dead.**  But  this  does  not  mean  the
physical  body;  for  that,  saying  nothing  of  the  impossibility,  would
be  raising  a  body  only  to  die  again.  But  the  reference  is  to  the
raising  or  re-clothing  the  Spiritual  body,  in  such  materialized  gar-
ments as  could  be  touched  and  seen  with  the  physical  eye.  At  the
crucifixion  many  Spiritual  bodies  clothed  themselves,  or  materialized,
as  they  do  at  the  present  time,  and  appeared  in  Jerusalem.

"  And  the  graves  were  opened ;  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints
which  slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  holy  resur-
rection, and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  unto  many."  —
Matt,  xxvii. :  52,  53.

Jesus  rose  in  his  Spiritual  body,  which  Spiritual  body  was  clothed
with  a  temporarily  materialized  body,  for  the  purpose  of  recognition.
In  no  other  way  could  the  doubting  Thomas  have  identified  him.  He
walked  the  earth  forty  days  in  this  body.    Though  material,  it  was


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  293

SO  ethereal  that  he  appeared  "suddenly  in  their  midst,"  —  he  ** ap-
peared in  another  form,  the  doors  being  shut,"  and  He  also,  sa3rs  the
Evangelist,  "  vanished  out  of  their  sight."

It  is  said  that  these  Spiritual  beings  appearing  in  ancient  times
were  not  the  Spirits  of  men,  but  Angels  —  a  special  and  uncreated
order  of  beings!  Of  this  there  is  no  proof  in  the  Bible.  But,  on
the  contrary,  angels^  spirits^  mm  of  God^  and  tnm^  are  used  synony-
mously by  biblical  writers.  Surely,  Samuel,  who  appeared  to  Saul,
was  once  a  man  upon  earth ;  Moses  and  Elias  also  were  once  men ;  the
three  Angels  that  Abraham  entertained  are  called  in  the  second  verse
"  men  " :  "  and,  lo  I  three  men  stood  beside  him,"  The  wrestling
Angel  of  Jacob  was  called  a  "  man " ;  and  the  phrase,  "  the  man
Gabriel,"  was  common  to  the  prophet  Daniel.  First  the  acorn,  then
the  oak;  first  the  infant,  then  the  man,  then  the  Spirit,  then  the
Angel.  All  Angels  were  once  mortals.  That  angels  and  mm  are  used
synonymously  in  the  Gospels,  needs  no  further  proof  than  a  reference
to  the  passages  where  of  two  evangelists  writing  of  the  same  Spiritual
beings,  one  calls  them  "  men,"  and  the  other  "  Angels."

All  things  on  earth  correspond  with  states  of  men,  and  that
which  is  an  image  and  likeness  to  the  objective  vision  is  but  a
shadow  of  the  real  thing.  The  natural  man,  whatever  his  earthly
culture  or  human  theory,  is  like  a  child,  entirely  ignorant  of  Spiritual
things,  which,  as  St.  Paul  says,  "are  foolishness  unto  him."  The
chances,  therefore,  are  largely  in  favor  of  that  being  only  an  appear-
ance which  seems  to  him  a  reality,  because  the  conclusions  that  have
been  reached  in  that  domain  of  life  are  mainly  unreasoning  ones.
They  have  been  jumped  at,  in  the  endeavor  to  account  for  something
that  was  neither  comprehended  nor  understood.  We  are  accustomed
to  look  upon  that  which  we  perceive  with  our  five  animal  senses  as
real,  while  we  look  upon  the  subjective  world  as  unreal,  and  yet
every  day  of  our  lives  experience  teaches  us  that  our  five  senses
cannot  be  trusted  to  distinguish  between  the  true  and  the  false.  We
must  daily  appeal  to  our  interior  Soul-senses  to  gain  the  truth.
Nobody  ever  sees  the  real  man,  but  can  only  perceive  the  qualities
he  possesses,  and  his  exterior  form.  To  find  the  true  man  we  must
penetrate  into  the  inner  man,  the  Soul  that  actuates  his  being.
There  we  cannot  be  deceived.

One  of  the  most  cruel  evils  and  greatest  wrongs  of  modem
mediumship  is  the  constrained  enforcement  of  the  phenomena.

All  occultists  and  Adepts  know  that  to  force  phenomena  in  the
presence  of  difficulties,  magnetic,  physicali  or  other  perverse,  intract-


294      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

able  atmospheres,  is  forbidden,  and  as  frightfully  wrong  as  for  a
bank  cashier  to  disburse  money  which  is  only  entrusted  to  his  care.

As  has  been  often  said,  the  conditions  which  seem  to  be  neces-
sary for  genuine  Spirit  manifestations  are  equally  advantageous  for
the  grossest  misrepresentation  and  fraud,  and  from  this  arises  the
great  diversity  of  opinion  among  the  most  earnest  believers  in  Spirit"
ual  phenomena.  Again,  prejudice  is  more  potent  in  the  world's
religion  than  truth,  faith,  or  calm  judgment.  The  question  arises.
Are  the  controlling  Beings  speaking  from  the  plane  of  appearances,
or  from  what  they  know  of  Spirit  life  and  experiences  ?  Let  it  ever
be  borne  in  mind  that  Spirit  communications  are  subject  to  law.  The
law  is  that  all  such  are  determined  by  ''  states  of  reception,"  as  has
been  already  said.  They  take  color  and  quality  according  to  the
mental  development  of  those  to  whom  they  come.  In  plainer  terms,
they  are  re-presentations  or  re-flections  of  the  life-flow  from  the  more
or  less  immediate  Spiritual  surroundings  of  the  embodied  recipients.

Another  aspect  of  the  law  is,  —  Like  attracts  like.  The  cultured
man  will  draw  communications  of  a  refined  and  cultured  quality ;  and
the  more  literal  the  mind — which  judges  from  appearances  —  the
more  literal  and  earth-like  will  be  the  character  of  all  Spiritual  man-
ifestations, be  the  phenomenal  expression  what  it  may.  But  those
who  have  mastered,  in  part  or  wholly,  the  principles  on  which  the
philosophy  and  science  of  correspondencies  are  based,  will  certainly
gain  a  higher  knowledge  of  development  and  growth  than  modem
Spiritualism  has  yet  reached.

The  whole  Spiritualistic  phenomena  with  which  we  are  now  con-
versant are  but  the  ABC  of  the  complete  alphabet,  which  time
will  unfold.

Beyond  the  knowledge  of  the  fact  of  human  immortality,  little  is
known,  and  still  less  comprehended,  of  the  real  and  true  nature  and
character  of  disembodied  life.

An  understanding  of  Swedenborg's  system  of  philosophy  and  his
law  of  correspondences  goes  an  immense  way  toward  the  goal  at
which  we  are  now  aiming,  and  helps  to  resolve  many  of  the  problems
that,  to  the  literal  and  external  mind  are  so  perplexing.

Take  the  human  eye  for  instance.  This  organ  corresponds  to
the  interior  sight  or  understanding;  and  therefore,  whenever  it  is
mentioned  or  becomes  objective  in  any  form,  it  invariably  has  refer-
ence to  the  human  faculty  of  intelligence:  hence,  in  an  argument
between  two  individuals,  one  will  say  to  the  other  "  I  see  1 "  (that  is,
"  I  understand  ")  "  what  you  mean."  Now,  this  proves  that  the  external


SPIRITUALIZATIOH   OF   MATTER.  295

organ  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  eye  — or  the  I — that  does  see
or  understand.  As  Swedenborg  states,  "  The  eye  is  the  sight  of  the
Spirit  carried  to  externals.  The  natural  eye  could  never  discern  any
object  except  by  influx  from  interior  sight,  thus  it  is  not  the  external
eye  that  sees,  but  the  Spirit  within  "  that  takes  cognizance  of  what
transpires  outside,  by  means  of  the  mechanical  arrangement  of  the
optical  nerves,  etc.  The  eye  that  does  see  is  never  visible  to  our
external  sight,  simply  because  our  and  others'  eyes  are  buried  deep
down  in  the  physical  organism,  the  external  outline  of  which  is  alone
visible  to  the  sense  of  sight.  Of  all  the  organs  of  sense,  the  eye  is
most  liable  to  make  a  person  superficial.

A  man  at  the  equator  is  moving  through  space,  with  the  revolu-
tion of  the  earth  on  its  axis,  at  the  rate  of  a  thousand  miles  an  hour,
yet  he  has  no  evidence  of  it  from  his  senses.  He  seems  to  himself
to  be  at  rest,  which,  like  all  other  objective  sense-perceptions,  is
directly  the  reverse  of  real  truth.

Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  thou  must  observe,  yet  hold  thy
peace.  That  which  is  in  thb  age  called  education  is  no  criterion  or
authority  for  true  intelligence.  In  most  cases  it  should  be  called  Has
based  on  human  theory^  and  not  education.  The  modern  educational
system  is  selfish  and  manufactures  thousands  of  incapables  every
year.  True  education  is  to  be  able  to  understand  man  ;  to  observe
calmly  and  correctly;  to  illuminate  one's  own  mentality;  to  aspire
unselfishly  and  to  think  consistently.  It  is  perceptional,  contempla-
tive, internal  as  well  as  external ;  acutely  sensible ;  intuitionally  wise ;
morally  just ;  healthy,  sound,  and  sane.

The  cold  world's  slights  and  sneers ;  the  keen,  cruel  tooth  of  in-
gratitude ;  the  bitter  sting  of  injustice,  —  pass  all  silently.  God  and
Angels  understand  all  in  this  battle  of  truth  against  the  world.  Pilgrim
of  Light,  remember  Calvary  was  the  footstool  of  Paradise.  Mate-
rialistic mankind,  with  theories  of  ideas,  cannot  tolerate  nor  permit
the  recognition  or  even  the  entrance  of  Truth,  through  Spiritual  Light
or  thought.  It  is  not  physical  phenomena,  however  wonderful,  that
can  explain  to  man  his  origin,  or  ripen  his  Soul  to  Spirit.  While  they
may  give  him  glimpses  of  the  hidden  way,  they  do  not  show  him  his  ulti-
mate destiny,  nor  the  universal  and  eternal  reign  of  immutable  law.

There  are  some  mediums  who  see  no  good  in  anything  but  their
own  little  performances,  and  eagerly  employ  themselves  in  running
everybody  else  down.  Normal  thinkers  sometimes  exhibit  similar
tendencies.

These  are  the  first  that  will  be  submerged  in  the  surging  waters.


296      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

While  there  is  good  in  all,  there  is,  at  the  same  time,  evil  in  any  one
form  of  development  or  work  occupying  too  much  attention.  There
must  not  be  all  materialization,  all  slate-writing,  all  inspirational
speaking,  all  tests,  all  psychometry,  all  personal  delineation,  all
science,  all  study,  all  Spiritual  aspiration,  but  a  due  proportion  of  each^
and  as  much  more  as  the  Spirit-world  may  choose  to  bestow  upon  us.
There  is  a  gradual  upward  unfoldment,  and  those  who  have  gone  into
the  more  advanced  phases  must  not  cast  ridicule  on  the  novices  who
have  just  begim  the  alphabet.  Let  us  all  remember  that  still  we  are
but  children,  ignoring  or  misunderstanding  much  more  than  we  com-
prehend.

To  invoke  Planetary  Spirits  requires  most  silent  concentration  ere
they  respond.  They  should  be  invoked  only  by  Adepts  or  Hiero-
phants,  who  understand  thoroughly  the  careful  conditions  neces-
sary for  perfect  preparation  to  receive  the  communications,  and
open  a  channel  through  which  they  will  guard  and  guide  their
favored  ones.

As  modem  mediumship  grows,  jealousy  increases  painfully  among
media.  Through  want  of  understanding  the  laws  that  govern  con-
trol, they  open  their  doors  to  unripened  Souls,  who  incite  them  on
to  evil-doing.  Now,  as  such  mediumship  is  being  freed  from  enemies
without,  and  from  the  union  which  fear  compels,  it  turns  its  ferocity
inward  to  tear  itself  in  pieces,  by  a  voluntary  suicide,  by  mutual  ana-
themas, until  it  will  end  in  a  mere  chaos  of  selfishness,  intolerance,
malevolence,  and  wrong-doing.  Having  by  the  immutable  law  of  at-
traction and  repulsion  brought  evil  Spirits  about  them,  the  usefulness
of  such  mediums  is  finally  destroyed  for  either  man  or  Spirits.

The  lower,  unripened  Spirits  live  like  parasites  in  the  atmosphere
of  the  thought-force  we  evolve,  as  mortals  in  each  others'  habitations.
Pure  and  powerful  Spirits  cannot  penetrate  an  impure  thought-atmos-
phere.

Modem  mediumship  is  apt  to  halt  just  across  the  threshold  in  the
Astral  world.  Held  down  by  commerce  and  by  selfish  fear ;  dealing
in  ghostly  forms  only  for  public  show  and  the  money  it  brings, — such
Spirit  guides  are  usually  those  that  dwell  continually  in  the  lower
firmament  Their  victims  are  the  Souls  that  recently  passed  away
from  earth,  who  are  like  infants  in  their  power  and  strength  —  Souls
that  would  aspire,  but,  held  by  these,  can  only  fear.

An  atmosphere  of  kindness,  sympathy,  and  love,  which  is  the
superlative  degree  of  friendship,  is  indeed  very  necessary  for  good
results  in  the  phenomenon  of  materialization.


SPIRITUALIZATION  OF   MATTER.  297

There  are  almost  as  many  kinds  of  love  as  faculties  of  the  human
brain ;  but  self-love  and  pugnacity  dominate  and  overshadow  all
others.  This  is  usually  the  atmosphere  thrown  around  public  media,
instead  of  which  should  be  soft  low  words  of  kindness  from  true
hearts,  and  radiant  faces  beaming  with  love  and  sympathy,  which  are
as  dews  from  heaven,  distilling  sweet  hope  and  harmonious  atmos-
phere, giving  courage  to  weary  and  heavy-laden  hearts.  Mediums,
like  all  progressive  men  who  would  enlighten  and  advance  the  world,
are  at  once  made  outcasts.  The  majority  of  mankind  are  like  the
historian  who  lives  in  the  tomb  of  the  past,  while  the  medium  is  the
Prophet,  who  lives  in  the  paradise  of  the  future.

**  Vanished  are  the  thoughts,  the  dim,  unsatisfied  longings ;
Sunk  are  the  turrets  of  cloud  into  the  ocean  of  dreams ;
While  in  a  haven  of  rest  my  heart  is  riding  at  anchor,
Held  by  the  chains  of  love,  held  by  the  anchors  of  trust! "

Whoever  lays  his  inmost  thoughts  open  lays  his  Soul  open.  Since
the  world  began,  no  man  has  ever  dared  fully  to  unbosom  himself  to
his  fellows,  unless  united  under  the  strongest  bond  of  Love  and  a
higher  friendship  than  common  man.

As  with  the  Spirit  and  Soul  of  man,  so  with  God ;  —  He  will  tell
only  what  He  will,  and  that  which  He  reveals  is  only  revealed  through
Love.

There  are  in  this  world  veils  of  revelations,  wherein  God  walks  in
garments  of  light  and  majesty,  and  talks  in  that  most  glorious  voice
of  True  and  Holy  Love.

The  border-land  between  Nature  and  Spirit  is,  in  the  nature  of
things,  unfixed.  Men  who  liberate  themselves  from  these  dense,
material,  and  selfish  environments  liberate  themselves  into  that  arch-
humanity  which  includes  all  humanities.

The  law  of  Spirit  Truth  in  God  is  nature's  law  carried  into  the
arch-natural  and  the  celestial,  the  arch-humanity,  the  Christ  principle.

Truth  and  the  Hidden  way  of  Spirit  will  only  give  herself  under
these  conditions.  She  will  not  be  sold  for  a  price,  neither  give  her-
self to  be  gazed  at  with  a  prurient  intellectual  eye,  as  if  she  was  an
unveiled  opera  girl,  or  an  Eastern  Odalisque.

Truth  and  Spirit,  by  experience,  bide  their  time.  They  will  not
be  hastened,  neither  will  they  be  retarded.  Even  the  generous
Mother  Earth  knows  when  to  hide  the  living  germs  of  Nature's  forces
within  her  bosom,  and  when  to  uplift  her  glorious  children  of  the
spring.     Truth  and  Spirit  understanding  may  be  ripe  for  the  world


298      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

long  before  the  children  of  the  world  are  ready  for  Truth  and  Spirit.
To  talk  nakedly  to  men  requires  the  attunement  of  Truth  Spirit  and
arch-humanity  in  every  mind.  It  even  requires  more :  the  listeners
must  be  Illuminate  into  the  arch-natural,  and  the  celestial,  having  the
higher  Loves  than  material  self,  being  free  of  this  world's  ambitions,
possessing  height  and  depth  and  breadth  and  length,  with  an  Illu-
minated mental  structure,  so  as  to  be  able  intellectually  to  appreciate
Truth  and  Spirit  when  they  lovingly  knock  at  their  inmost  doors.
Hence  there  is  little  good  in  presenting  the  Divine  Word  of  Spirit
Truth  to  what  is  termed  the  reading  public,  whose  palled  and  jaded
intellect  is  filled  with  human  theories  and  pet  Scientific  thoughts,  which,
under  ordinary  circumstances,  merely  craves  the  stimulus  of  novelty.
In  the  economy  of  human  life  on  worlds  like  this,  God  veils  Truth
and  Spirit  till  the  fulness  of  times.  For  a  man  to  read  and  study
these  things  of  Spirit  Light,  and  intellectually  perceive  their  verity
and  truth,  and  then  not  shape  his  whole  life  in  accordance  with  their
ends,  is  simply  for  him  the  destruction  of  that  for  which  he  was
planted  on  this  fair  earth,  that  of  ripening  his  Soul.  In  so  doing,  he
drives  away  Truth,  and  congeals  the  Spirit  of  Eternal  Life  within  his
own  Soul.

While  any  man  who  can  grasp  them,  and  will  receive  them,  own
them,  and  live  by  them,  he  becomes  illuminated  and  develops  a
healthy  growth  towards  its  ripening ;  and  passes  out  from  a  diseased,
subversive  life  into  a  peaceful  liberty  of  purer  order  and  Divine  frui-
tion. Spirit  Truth  comes  not  only  to  save  men  in  themselves,  but  to
save  them  from  themselves.

The  man  of  Light  and  Truth  must  give  himself  to  the  kingdom  of
Spirit  Truth,  and  the  kingdom  of  Spirit  Truth  sets  itself  in  him,  gives
itself,  opens  itself,  and  amplifies  itself,  bringing  the  man  for  the  first
time  into  the  Light  and  conditions  of  the  Arch-Natural  Law.  Here
are  passed  the  limits  of  Mortal  knowledge.  Here  open  the  realms
of  infinite  possibilities  of  the  human  Soul,  for  here  comes  into  play
the  law  of  the  interaction  and  interpresence  of  the  kingdom  of
Spirit,  with  and  in  the  midst  of  the  kingdom  of  Nature  ;  the  order  of
the  Unfallen  Universe.

The  Initiate  knows,  having  learned  by  the  long  experiences  of  the
growth  of  his  own  Soul,  that  God,  who  is  before  all  else  Love,  is  also
before  all  else  Justice,  and  that  because  Justice  is  sympathy,  there-
fore, by  the  inexorable  law  of  Justice,  he  who  makes  the  existence  of
other  persons  a  hell  and  their  lives  a  torment  prepares  a  hell  and
fiery  scourge  for  himself,  in  which  he  will  be  his  own  consuming  devil,


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  299

the  inflicter  of  his  own  stings,  his  own  tormentor.  His  victims  will
indeed  find  compensation  at  the  Divine  hands  of  Love  and  Mercy,
but  for  him  there  will  be  no  escape,  no  alleviation  "  until  he  has  paid
the  last  farthing."  As  ye  sow  so  shall  ye  also  reap.  For  him  who  is
pitiless  alone,  there  is  no  pity.  The  atmosphere  with  which  a  man
surrounds  himself  is  his  Soul's  respiration.

Accumulated  energy  cannot  be  annihilated ;  it  must  be  transferred
to  other  forms  or  transformed  into  other  modes  of  Motion.  It  cannot
remain  for  ever  inactive  and  yet  continue  to  exist.  The  Octave  of  Will^
focalized  into  a  perfect  vibration  or  at-one-ment  as  frequently  exer-
cised in  a  certain  Eastern  Order,  if  so  focalized  by  a  thousand  indi-
viduals and  brought  before  the  scientific  world,  would  produce  wondcr
and  astonishent,  even  to  bewilderment  and  fright.  The  Black  Magi-
cian who  attempts  to  kill,  destroy,  or  injure  another  person  by  the
anger  and  intensity  of  his  hatred  in  Union  with  certain  forces^  projects
towards  that  person  a  certain  energy  which  may  kill  or  injure  not  only
that  one  individual,  but  those  who  are  brought  in  the  person's  imme-
diate surroundings,  by  the  simple  intensity  of  the  force  he  has  created
and  focalized.  If  it  was  not  sufficiently  strong  to  cling  to  and  affect
the  object  to  whom  it  was  sent,  or  if  the  person  to  whom  it  was
sent  to  injure  knows  anything  of  these  lower  natural  laws,  he  can
ward  off  the  energy,  and  as  all  these  forces  work  in  spirals,  it  will
surely  return  and  react  on  the  originator  who  collected  and  started
it.  Those  who  employ  such  powers  for  the  purpose  of  evil  and
wrong  are  known  and  called  Brothers  of  the  Black  Shadow^  or  in
France  Black  Magicians,  in  the  same  sense  as  those  who  employ
their  Spiritual  forces,  concentration  and  powers,  to  heal  the  sick  and
comfort  the  living,  dealing  with  mortals  in  this  physical  body  are
termed  Red  Magicians,  while  those  who  reach  the  realms  of  Prophecy
and  True  Seership,  doing  good  for  the  mere  sake  of  doing  good,  without
money  and  without  price,  are  called,  White  Magicians,  Brothers  of  the
Golden  Dawn,  and  Dwellers  in  the  Golden  Shadow,  The  White  Magi-
cian is  a  Silent  Spiritual  Power  of  good  and  unselfish  love  to  every
creature  or  thing  in  the  two  worlds.  The  real  Black  Magician  is  a
living  power  of  evil  selfishness  and  wrong  attached  to  a  personality
of  base,  low  principles  of  force,  that  desires  and  performs  evil  instinc-
tively and  for  the  love  of  evil  itself.

Such  an  individual  calls  into  life  an  energy  of  force  and  imper-
sonal evil  power  usually  from  the  elementals  which  is  a  part  of  him-
self, and  which  finally  destroy  his  life  here  in  this  world,  congealing
his  Soul  in  the  next.    This  energy  of  Force  continues  to  exist  as  a


300       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

force  long  after  the  collector's  personality  ceases  to  exist  on  this  phys-
ical plane,  wherefore  it  is  written  that  some  men  leave  great  scars  on
this  fair  earth  long  after  they  cease  to  exist  upon  its  surface.  Man
continually  forgets  that  every  concentrated  focalized  thought  is  the
energy  of  some  kind  of  Soul  Force^  and  is  claimed  by  some  Adepts
as  living  Soul  entity.  Many  deep  focalized  incarnations  may  be
needed  before  such  a  power  collects  and  grows,  or  even  comes  into
existence.  But  when  it  once  lives  it  will  disband  and  perish  more
slowly  than  it  collected  and  grew.  This  power  of  evil  may  kill  the
individual  to  whom  it  was  sent,  or  some  other  person  or  animal  that
never  offended  it,  and  by  the  death  of  which  the  force  of  itself  had
nothing  to  gain,  for  it  is  simply  an  energy  and  force  without  con-
science or  thought,  simply  an  energy  of  lower  Impulse  without  feel-
ing, sent  out  and  directed  by  a  little  higher  intelligence,  the  Will
Power  of  Man,  Woe  to  the  man  who  sets  these  forces  in  motion,  for
they  will  inevitably  some  time  return  in  greater  power  to  their  source
if  they  are  not  known  and  disbanded  by  a  higher  Astral  Force  sent
out  by  some  higher  and  greater  individual  grown  into  Spirit  of  Truth.

Here  is  the  condemnation  of  an  Adept  to  his  student  after  that
individual  had  sent  out  into  the  realms  of  space  an  energy  of  revenge,
united  with  certain  other  forces.

"Oh,  alas,  alas  for  thee,  thou  disobedient  and  profane  child  of
dust,  thou  hadst  within  thy  grasp  the  Elixir  of  Life,  Wisdom,  and
Love,  and  yet  so  weak  in  flesh  that  thou  hast  attracted  to  thy  presence
a  ghastly  and  remorseless  foe.  By  that  wand  of  sortilege  I  gave  thee
thou  hast  destroyed  thy  fairest  hopes  of  life,  and  thou  thyself  must
exorcise  the  Phantom  thou  hast  raised.  I  give  thee  up  and  back
again  to  poor  weak  clay ;  and  thou  must  return  to  the  world  ;  but  not
without  punishment,  for  thou  hast  abused  that  trust  of  Nature  few
men  know,  and  only  through  length  of  time,  perchance  ages,  by
strong  effort,  canst  thou  regain  that  calm  and  joy  of  the  life  thou
hast  left  behind.  This  will  I  tell  thee  in  love,  for  indeed  great  was
my  love  for  thee,  and  it  may  comfort  thee  in  some  hour  of  despair
when  all  seems  lost.  He  who  has  once  tasted  of  the  Violet  Cup
and  has  drawn  into  his  being  even  so  little  of  the  Volatile  energy  of
Spirit,  Aerial,  and  higher  Astral  as  thyself  hast  done,  can  never  sleep
or  return  back  to  the  Nomad.  Energies  of  Light  and  Truth  with
patient  humility,  silence,  and  Love,  with  a  sound  faith  in  the  Abso-
lute Love,  gaining  renewed  courage  by  Spirit  that  is  not  of  a  body
like  thine,  but  of  a  gentle  yet  resolute,  wise  yet  loving  mind,  may  yet
attain  to  the  companionship  of  loftier  Souls,  even  to  the  knowledge


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  3OI

that  reigns  above,  to  higher  achievement  in  the  career  of  Men.  But
thou  must  prepare  for  that  remorseless,  restless  energy  of  influence
thou  hast  called  in  all  that  thou  wouldst  undertake.  Never  satisfied,
thy  heart  amid  vulgar  joys  will  still  aspire  to  something  holier ;  thy
loves  and  ambition,  amid  coarse  excitement,  will  always  remain  just  be-
yond thy  reach.  But  deem  not  that  this  of  itself  will  suffice  for  life  or
glory.  Equally  with  it  may  the  craving  of  love  lead  thee  to  shame
as  Ambition  may  to  guilt  and  wrong.  For  thou  hast  brought  about
thee  an  imperfect  and  new-bom  energy,  which  will  not  suffer  thee  to
find  repose ;  thou  art  now  wedded  to  it,  and  it  is  a  part  of  thee,  and
as  thou  directest  it  so  will  it  be  the  emanation  of  thine  evil  genius  of
thy  good.  Alas,  that  I  should  have  tempted  thee  with  too  much
knowledge,  knowing  thy  weakness.  But  woe  to  thee !  thou  insect
of  clay,  meshed  now  in  the  web  of  thy  own  weaving,  in  which
thou  hast  entangled  thy  limbs,  for  with  the  Wings  of  Light  thou
couldst  have  flown  through  space  like  Angels,  but  thou  art  no  longer
free.  Thou  hast  not  only  inhaled  the  Elixir  of  Light,  and  conquered  the
lower  energies  when  thou  went  back  and  opened  thy  doorway  to  these
spectres  of  lower  Wills  of  man,  and  of  all  the  tribes  in  space  no  foe
is  so  malignant  as  these.  Ah,  thou  seest  them,  thou  canst  not  hide ;
see  they  show  thee  they  have  lifted  the  veil  from  thy  gaze.  I  cannot
restore  thee  to  the  happy  dimness  of  ignorance,  for  thy  vision  has
been  opened.  Know,  at  least,  that  all  of  us  who  have  passed  beyond
the  threshold  have  had  our  second  fearful  task  to  master  and  subdue
these  grisly,  merciless,  appalling  energies.

"Know  that  thou  canst  deliver  thyself  from  those  livid  eyes  by  the
Prayer  of  hallowed  Loves  ;  know  while  they  haunt  and  surround  thee
they  cannot  penetrate  the  veil  of  that ;  dread  them  most  when  thou
beholdest  them  not;  they  are  so  cunning  to  encumber  thee  with  baser
thought,  therefore  watch  and  resist  all  their  emanations.  And  thus,
poor  weak,  son  of  the  worm,  we  part  Vainly  would  I  undo  the  past
to  restore  the  gay  blindness  of  thy  youth,  but  it  is  too  late.  Thou
must  endure  the  influence  of  the  elixir  thou  has  inhaled ;  thou  must
wrestle  with  the  spectre  thou  hast  invoked.  Thou  didst  create  on
this  fair  earth  a  germ  of  force  so  low,  so  base,  so  cunning,  and  so
gross.  Alas,  and  I  did  show  thee  the  way.  Ah,  woe  is  me  that  I
did  not  see  that  thou  wert  weak  amidst  the  haunts  of  men.  And
thou  a  brother  to  the  Eternal  Stars,  thou  a  desired  companion  for
Perfected  Souls.  No  longer  shall  their  rapturous  songs  of  charming
melodies  greet  thee.  The  eagle  can  raise  but  the  eaglet  to  the  sun.
I  abandon  thee  to  thy  twilight.    And  now  farewell  1    Could  I  but  for


302      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

get  thee,  but  my  deep  love  shall  remain ;  I  live  to  change  thy  energies
into  other  channels  than  that  thou  hopest  for."

Base  passions,  selfish  and  vicious  habits,  violent  anger  and  crim-
faal  propensities  find  no  responsive  call  nor  returning  satisfaction  in
Spirit  land,  therefore  they  must  return  to  earthy  spheres  (for  ideas
and  aspirations  are  spheres)  and  connect  themselves  with  kind  and
kindred  to  outgrow  the  error  and  evil  they  have  outwrought.  For
this  reason  a  person  who  indulges  in  black  magic,  which  is  of  the
lower  elementaries,  can  never  reach  white  magic,  which  is  of  Love,
Wisdom,  and  Spirit.

Good  resolutions  are  never  made  in  violent  anger,  while  all  hatred
begins  with  anger,  bringing  inharmonious  instincts  and  propensities,
making  man  a  ferocious  animal.  Hate  is  a  fire  that  consumes  the  altar
upon  which  it  bums.  There  is  an  immutable  law  of  Divine  Love  and
harmony  which  cannot  unite  with  anger,  evil,  and  inharmony.  There
is  a  Divine  Justice  in  this  law  which  is  imperative.

When  Moses  smote  the  rock  in  anger,  although  one  of  the  chosen
prophets  of  God,  this  law  was  unchangeable.  Also  the  great  tragedy
on  Calvary :  who  does  not  hear  the  echo  of  that  deep,  pathetic  cry,
''  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Echoing  along
down  the  ages,  there  are  still  living  representatives  of  it,  —  mediums
whose  power  is  gone  from  them.  The  author  found  and  conversed
with  such  men  in  the  East  This  law  is  illustrated  in  the  life  and
violent  death  of  a  well  known  occultist  in  America.

Any  excitement  is  injurious,  and  so  is  the  tongue  of  fire  or  argu-
ment which  excites  passion.  While  the  author  does  not  claim  that  a
man  who  becomes  angered  can  never  hope  to  vibrate  occult  forces,  he
does  emphatically  claim  that  if  a  person  in  anger  and  passion  calls
upon  the  Divine,  Eternal  Energy  of  Spirit  to  act  with  him,  it  may  re-
spond for  that  occasion.  But  never  again  in  this  world  can  he  radiate
its  purer  atmospheres.  He  has  sealed  his  doom,  for  he  has  tried  to
unite  harmony  with  inharmony.  Love  with  grosser  anger,  and  Truth
with  error,  all  of  which  is  contrary  to  the  Divine  Elconomy  of  Spirit.

The  object  of  love  is  to  join  itself  to  the  will,  in  order  to  increase
power  to  enjoy  true  life  when  united  by  Spirit  Anger,  passion,  and
inharmony  create  an  inward  action  of  inflamed  emotions,  which  de-
stroys the  power  of  the  Soul.  To  learn  to  control  all  things  one  must
begin  at  home,  and  control  one's  self.  This  is  the  selfhood.  The  calm,
silent  man  is  the  strong  man.

Guard  well  thy  thoughts,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  for  thoughts  are  heard


8PIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  3O3

in  heaven.  In  a  certain  occult  Order,  which  shall  be  nameless,  are
three  living  men  who  lost  their  power  by  violent  anger.  The  author
is  permitted  to  give  here  the  private  instruction  given  the  Adept  who
had  personal  charge  of  them,  which  is  as  follows :  —

In  silence  now  let  him  hold  his  peace  ;  neither  should  he  call  for
Spirit  or  Angel ;  neither  shall  he  enter  within  the  veil,  nor  approach
the  altar,  for  he  hath  a  Spot  in  his  bloody  and  he  must  not  defile  my
sanctuary,  saith  the  Lord,  for  in  the  Wisdom  of  Peace  I  am  the  Lord
who  sanctifies  them.

**  Hate  is  death;  and  Love  is  life,
A  peace,  a  splendor  from  above ;
And  Hate,  a  never-ending  strife.  .  •  •
Love  is  the  Holy  Ghost  within ;
Hate,  the  unpardonable  sin  1
Who  preaches  otherwise  than  thb
Betrays  his  Master  with  a  kiss  I "

Dear  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  remember  great  power  always
dwells  in  silence  and  secrecy.  Unite  the  dual  powers  of  your  being,
then  all  things  are  easy.  The  Soul  in  its  Double  is  magical.  It
can  do  anything  and  produce  anything  if  it  has  grown  large  enough.
Clairvoyance  is  the  road  to  power,  but  grow  into  it  healthily,  and  pass
out  beyond  the  Astral  world,  or  else  strive  not  for  it.  Make  your
inner  temple  pure ;  illuminate  it  by  the  holy  Spirit  of  Love,  and  you
may  project  your  Soul  to  any  distance,  and  can  also  be  seen  and
heard,  for  by  the  perfect  attunement  of  the  Dual  man  with  Spirit,  you
can  vie  with  the  lightning  in  space,  and  not  cling  like  slime  to  objects
in  the  way.  In  order  to  penetrate  the  secrets  and  true  being  of  others,
expand  your  consciousness  to  a  higher  intuition,  so  as  to  become  en
rapport  with  their  inmost  being.  In  order  to  feel  as  others  feel,  and
know  them  as  they  are,  you  must  rise  above  and  then  descend  to  them.
To  get  en  rapport  with  another  you  must  first  draw  a  mental  picture  of
him  in  your  own  imagination.  When  he  is  thus  seen,  concentrate  a
full  focalization,  then  command  and  he  will  obey.

To  become  Divine  cultivate  a  strong  Universal  Love  until  there  is
2i  perfect  chord  in  your  dual  being;  then  comes  understanding,  wisdom,
and  perfect  peace.  There  is  no  limit  to  man's  power.  That  which  seems
a  limit  disappears  or  becomes  an  assistance  in  the  reversal  of  the  thought
concerning  it.  All  Spiritual  gifts  come  by  renewing  the  mind  through
mental  illumination,  which  lifts  the  veil  made  thick  and  opaque  by
continually  living  the  outer  life  among  objective  things.  By  the  un-
derstanding of  Spirit  one  is  enabled  by  his  inner  sight,  which  is  the


304       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

true  vision,  to  peer  under  or  through  a  rift  in  the  rolling  clouds  of
mundane  things,  and  penetrate  into  the  secrets  of  both  the  Spiritual
and  the  natural  world.

Student  of  occult  mysteries,  never  permit  scientific  investigators  or
psychical  research  committees  to  control  or  even  be  present  in  the
room  during  your  efforts  at  development  ot  mediumship.  Remember
thought  is  a  poiential  atmosphere.  Their  worldly-wise  theories  create
opposing  vibrations,  and  congeal  the  Spirit.  Even  in  large  rooms  and
at  a  distance  their  presence  is  highly  objectionable.  A  French  phy-
sicist has  constructed  a  thermometer  of  such  sensitiveness  that  the
entrance  of  a  person  into  the  room  where  it  is  placed  will  cause  the
index-needle  to  deflect  nearly  two  inches.  These  can  now  be  found
in  New  York  City,  and  it  is  interesting  to  try  the  experiment  and  sat-
isfy one's  sell  of  its  truth.

Everything  depends  on  the  Purity  of  Onetieis,  in  perfect  octaves
of  attunement  and  chord.  He  whose  Soul  and  Will  cannot  create
Love,  and  who  lives  only  on  the  exterior  culture  of  things,  is  a  mere
semblance,  a  reflex,  a  bubble,  which  cannot  endure.  II  you  desire  to
advance  in  your  Spiritual  endeavors,  do  not  permit  the  presence  or
companionship  of  such  individuals,  for  grossness  is  always  positive,
and  difficult  to  become  negative,  or  illuminated,  and  he  who  cannot
create  Love  is  gross  in  Spiritual  things.  He  who  ascends  to  the  top
of  a  high  mountain  needs  no  one  to  bring  him  into  pure  air,  for  it
surrounds  him  on  all  sides.  The  realm  of  wisdom  is  not  limited  by
space,  and  he  whose  mind  has  opened  to  universal  love  is  receptive
and  full  of  light,  nor  will  he  suiter  from  want  of  the  Divine  water  of
life  or  influx  of  light  to  feed  his  aspirations.

All  culture  must  begin  by  a  reconstruction  of  one's  self.  In  order
to  rise  above  the  common  level  one  must  be  real.  But  if  one  feels
himself  superior  to  others,  he  must  disabuse  himself  of  that  idea  at
once,  or  he  will  never  advance.  The  heart  must  be  kept  young  and
full  of  tenderness  and  love,  not  only  to  one's  companions,  but  all
God's  Divine  Humanity  and  every  living  creature.

The  deepest  Clairvoyance  is  that  in  which  objects  in  both  the  ma-
terial and  the  astral  world  are  passed  by  as  of  small  account,  while
one  goes  onward  into  the  ineffable  glories  of  wisdom-spheres  and
catches  glimpses  of  the  holy  Soul-realms  of  Love  in  Spirit.  The
ancient  prophet  Zoroaster  says,  "  Pass  onward  to  the  regions  of  Spir-
itual fire,  and  when  you  see  the  fire  listen  to  the  voice  of  fire,"  •  and
this  holy  fire  of  Spirit  always  finds  a  voice  suited  to  the  ear  of  him
■See  illustntion.


SPIRITUALIZATION   OP   MATTER.  3OS

who  will  listen.  Heaven  is  always  ready  to  shower  choicest  blessings
on  a  great  Soul  which  is  ready  to  rise  to  receive  them.

Many  who  read  these  lines  may  be  able  to  see  what  they  desire
in  the  mind,  without  physical  contact.  Such  can  develop  power
rapidly,  and  by  farther  attunement  of  the  without  and  the  within^  and
union  of  the  bi-sexual  force,  the  student  may  become  a  true  seer  and
prophet.  All  hail  to  mediums,  and  to  Spiritual  gifts,  of  all  grades
and  every  kind.  Each  breathes  a  little  truth,  and  Truth  makes  men
free.  Oh,  let  these  gifts  be  held  more  sacred,  and  be  no  longer  pros-
tituted by  individual  ambition  and  selfishness,  nor  to  the  upbuilding
of  thrones  or  a  nation's  glory,  but  let  the  universal  anthem  be,  Pecue
on  earthy  good-will  to  men.

Thine  hand,  is  it  not  a  miracle  ?  Is  there  in  the  creation  like
unto  it  ?  Wherefore  was  it  given  thee,  but  that  thou  mightest  stretch
it  out  to  the  assistance  of  thy  brother  ?

The  human  body  being  subject  to  a  double  law  of  nature,  male
and  female,  the  hands  represent  these  forces.  The  right  hand  repre-
sents the  male,  the  left  the  female  element,  and  when  one  learns  to
polarize  the  action  of  Astral-magno  in  union  with  the  silent  Will,  he  can
through  operation  with  the  hands  have  a  mighty  power  and  become  a
grand  magnetic  healer.

To  heal  the  afflicted  by  magnetic  atmospheres  is  to  radiate  or
reflect  currents  which  carry  sensation  to  the  brain.  Passes  made
downward  by  the  hands  carry  negative  forces.  Those  made  upward
carry  positive  ones.  When  the  hands  are  used  in  connection  with  a
magnetic  battery,  that  given  through  the  Negative  Pole  carries  increas-
ing vital  forces,  and  that  by  the  hand  in  connection  with  the  Positive
Pole  reduces  vital  forces.  This  is  not  always,  but  generally,  the  case,
although  in  some  few  persons  the  currents  run  in  opposite  directions.
People  of  one  class  are  illuminated  by  the  Spirit  and  drink  in  their
religious  life  from  the  fountain  of  everlasting  Love,  while  those  of
another  class  receive  their  illumination  from  that  of  everlasting
Wisdom.

In  the  first  the  Will  operates  supremely,  while  in  the  latter  it  is
the  Intellect  which  operates.  The  first  is  the  more  potential,  and  is
the  vibration  magnetic  healers  must  learn  to  use,  never  attempting  to
heal  the  sick  unless  there  is  a  bond  of  sympathy  and  feeling  between
operator  and  patient.  Be  guided  by  the  same  gentle  hand  which
closes  the  cups  of  flowers  when  the  last  sunbeam  of  genial  day  disap-
pears, and  moves  them  to  open  up  their  shining  petals  when  sunlight
returns.     The  student  must  always  be  guided  as  to  the  use  and  manip-


306      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ulations  of  the  hands,  by  the  instinct  and  intuition  from  the  inner
being,  never  from  the  outward  appearance  of  things.  In  treating  a
patient  or  asking  for  light  or  guidance,  wait  always  in  calm  silence
for  the  soundless  word,  the  silent  Spirit  voice  which  shall  arise  out  of
the  eternal  life.  In  calm  Faith  and  unshaken  Trust  await  the  true
voice,  immovable  and  silent,  like  the  immortal  rock,  which,  beaten
by  the  waves,  turns  them  all  back  into  the  abyss.  An  immovable,
calm  silence  is  more  impressive  and  more  effectual  than  all  the  noby
babbling  of  superficial  minds,  especially  if  it  b  the  eloquent  silence
of  Love  and  tranquil  Trust.

Man  is  a  microcosm  and  comprises  within  himself  all  that  appears
to  be  without.  The  without  is  always  as  the  within,  and  the  twain
should  be  one  like  cause  and  effect.

**  Atrial  spirits  by  great  Jove  designed
To  be  on  earth  the  guardians  of  mankind.
Invisible  to  mortal  eye  they  go.
And  mark  our  actions,  good  or  bad,  below.
The  immortal  spirits  with  watchful  care  preside
And  thrice  ten  thousand  round  their  charges  glide.
They  can  reward  with  glory  or  with  gold ;
A  power  they  by  Divine  permission  hold."

^  Spirits,  when  they  please
Can  either  sex  assume,  or  both."

—  Miltm  (1608).

God  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever.  So  is  it  also  in
the  realm  of  Spirit,  into  which  living  consciousness  man  can  be  trans-
lated to  a  higher  understanding.  Man  in  the  descending  scale  of  life,
has  touched  the  greatest  depths  and  is  now  rebounding.

Sickness  and  suffering  always  bring  the  Soul  nearer  to  God.  It
is  frequently  the  case  that  man  does  not  stop  to  give  even  one  thought
to  the  Divine  Father  until  some  disaster  or  the  discovery  by  the
outer  world  of  his  evil  deed  overshadows  him.

Even  death  itself  stops  short  and  turns  back,  on  approaching  the
confines  of  Spirit,  —  the  light  of  man's  true  being,  —  unable  to  ap-
proach nearer  to  its  quenchless  light  of  Truth.

Death  is,  however,  simply  the  last  act  on  the  stage  of  human  life,
the  prelude  to  the  rise  of  the  curtain  upon  eternity  and  everlasting
life.

During  the  years  of  your  development  into  these  mysteries.  Dear
Pilgrim,  keep  rigid  silence  in  public  places,  and  indulge  in  no  manner


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF    MATTER.  307

ol  argument.  Spiritual  light  and  understanding  are  never  attdned
by  argument,  which  only  retards  and  obstructs  your  own  illumination.
If  friends  who  are  in  your  immediate  surroundings  have  not  opened
their  inner  being  to  the  whispering  of  Spirit,  or  ripened  to  be  readily
kindled,  all  human  arguments  are  but  a  waste  of  valuable  time.
Leave  everybody,  therefore,  to  full  intellectual  liberty  to  disbelieve
and  to  reject  Spiritual  truths  if  they  choose.  The  truth  is  not  altered
in  the  least  by  an  argument  based  on  the  ignorance  of  facts.

Scarcely  two  hundred  years  have  passed  since  the  grand  Italian
Galileo  was  placed  in  a  dungeon,  and  put  to  the  rack  by  order  of  a
Pope  of  Rome,  for  instructing  his  pupils  that  this  world  was  a  round
globe.  Only  when  old  age  and  blindness  came  upon  him  was  he
released,  with  most  violent  threats  of  death  if  he  dared  again  promul-
gate such  a  doctrine.  The  brave  old  man,  crossing  the  threshold  of
his  prison-house,  maintained  that  the  world  was  round  no  matter  what
his  words  might  express.

Bigotry,  narrow  intolerance,  or  ignorance  can  never  alter  the  Truth
of  Spiritual  communion  and  guidance  by  any  human  thoughts  and
arguments,  nor  change  immutable  laws  or  Divine  Truth.  Be  not
afraid ;  only  believe  and  trust  in  Love.  Let  the  calm,  tranquil  vibra-
tion of  your  own  mind  be  like  oil  on  the  troubled  waves,  no  matter
how  tempestuously  they  may  beat  Peace^  be  still!  and  the  giant
billows  will  sink  like  sobbing  infants  to  their  rest.

The  final  purpose  of  development  of  the  Soul  and  knowledge  of
occult  science  is  to  show  man  what  he  is  now  and  must  journey  on  to
be,  and  also  to  gain  an  understanding  of  the  Astral  body,  or  Akase,
which  is  a  faithful  duplicate  of  the  physical  body,  but  in  a  Spiritual
sense.  It  assures  immortality  to  the  individual  Astral  being  just  in
proportion  to  the  willingness  of  the  latter  to  receive  it.

So  long  as  the  triplet  of  man's  forces  and  being  keep  within  the
limits  of  the  Divine  Law  of  Spiritual  continuity,  just  so  long  as  the
Divine  spark  lingers  in  him,  however  faint  it  may  be,  he  is  on
the  road  to  immortality  and  growth  in  the  future  state.  But  those
who  live  only  in  the  outer  objective  world,  and  resign  themselves
to  a  materialistic  state  of  life  at  the  beginning  of  their  earthly  pil-
grimage, congeal  their  monitor,  stifling  the  wammg  voice  of  that  ever
faithful  sentry  —  conscience,  and  the  knocking  of  Spirit  at  the  thresh-
old of  man's  inner  temple  must  necessarily  disjoin,  sunder,  and
diverge  the  threefold  forces  of  man,  1.  ^.,  the  dual  forces  of  man  in
the  flesh,  in  unison  with  Spirit,  which  conjointly  serves  as  a  focus  for
the  light  and  illumination  of  Soul,  and  an  anchorage  for  Spirit.     It  is


308       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

therefore  inevitable  that  he  who  has  left  behind  him  conscience,
Soul,  and  Spirit,  and  lives  only  in  the  objective,  crossing  the  bounda*
ries  of  matter,  will  have  to  follow  the  laws  of  matter.

**  Great  Souls  will  set  their  standard  high.
And,  toil'ng  on  through  storm  and  nighty
They  wake  the  nations  with  their  cry,
For  Light  I  more  Light  I

Thus  through  the  fire  and  through  the  flood.
All  bruised,  and  scarred,  and  battle-worn.

Baptized  in  tears  and  sweat,  and  blood.
Great  Souls  are  borne."

The  Illustration  and  Chart  placed  at  the  beginning  of  this  volume
is  the  famous

Insignia  Delphic  of  the  Greek  Oracle.

The  history  of  the  ancient  Greek  tells  to  this  generation,  and  to
all  men,  that  their  glorious  nation  reached  its  height  of  magnificent
sublimity  through  advice  and  knowledge  attained  either  through
the  Voice  of  the  Unseen  Oracle,  or  by  Light  and  Truth  of  Under-
standing received  from  the  High  Priests  within  some  of  their  Sacred
Temples.

Greek  Art,  Classical  Culture,  Elegance  of  Grace,  Sublimity  of
Truth,  the  grandeur  of  their  Temples,  their  achievement  of  ennobling
and  perfecting  the  physical  forms  of  their  race,  have  left  a  delicacy
and  refinement  in  every  land,  and  to  every  nation  that  followed  after.
To  us,  in  this  nineteenth  century,  these  evidences  of  the  grandeur  of
mind  in  the  Greek  nation  thirty  centuries  back,  along  the  mile-stones
of  time,  are  amazing  and  overwhelming.

The  study  of  these  ancient  systems  and  people,  whose  chaste  con-
ception of  nature  produced  the  most  refined  minds,  who  raised  and
advanced  a  nation  from  out  a  long  barbaric  past ;  the  most  glorious
that  ever  adorned  this  fair  earth,  must  cause  every  trut  man  of  to-day
to  admit  and  maintain  the  most  reverential  respect  for  those  grand  and
noble  men  and  women  whose  aspirations,  hopes,  and  desires  were  to
uplift  and  perfect  the  human  race.  The  sequent  results  and  product
of  following  higher  truths  than  that  of  man,  under  the  direction  and
Guidance  of  an  Unseen  Hand,    He  that  hath  ears  to  hear  let  him  hear.

According  to  the  tradition  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  the  Oracle  of
Wisdom,  or  The  Unseen  God,  first  spake  to  man  in  a  natural
grotta    There  is  a  legend  or  tradition  that  some  philosophers  on


SPIRITUALIZATION   OP   MATTER.  3O9

a  pilgrimage  happened  to  encamp  in  a  rock  alcove  of  one  of  their
lovely  Grecian  valleys,  and,  while  in  silent  meditation,  lo  1  behold  a
voice  of  great  wisdom  spake  to  them  from  out  the  rippling  waters,  as
it  murmured  down  the  headland  into  the  chalice  basin.  Through
advice  of  the  Oracle,  in  after  years,  temples  were  built  and  the
famous  Delphic  Voice  came  and  dwelt  there,  which  became  the  Light
of  Prophecy  to  the  civilized  world  for  ages.

The  sacred  formation  of  a  Delphic  circle  known  so  long  to
Greece,  from  which  that  nation  was  more  or  less  influenced  and  ruled
for  more  than  a  thousand  years,  was  under  the  voice  and  direction
of  the  Oracle  at  Delphi.

The  outline  of  this  cut  is  the  sacred  insignia  over  the  temple
bearing  that  name,  and  was  tessellated  in  the  floors  of  her  sacred
halls  and  corridors.  This  form  of  crescent  must  face  the  East,  hav-
ing the  two  points  of  the  crescent  exactly  North  and  South.  The
location  of  the  Hierophant  or  High  Priest  was  at  No.  i.  The  female
medium  or  Priestess  of  Delphi  was  located  at  No.  2.  Maidens  or
children  were  placed  at  Nos.  3  and  4.  In  the  North  arch  position
No.  5  was  placed  the  negative  male  medium,  usually  one  of  fair  com-
plexion. Nos.  6,  7,  8,  9  were  filled  by  males.  Magnetic  graded  down
as  to  temperament  from  the  extreme  negative  at  No.  5  to  the  passive
combination  of  magnetic  and  electric  vibration  of  the  High  Priest  or
Hierophant  at  No.  i.

The  gradation  of  male  electric  persons  of  positive  mentalities  are
positions  10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  the  latter  being  a  very  important  position
of  the  strongest  positive,  silent  electric  mentality  that  could  be
obtained.  No.  15  is  a  brazier  of  fire  and  incense.  No.  16  a  large
vase  of  pure  water.  No.  17,  The  Sacred  Shrine,  which  contains  the
Ark  of  the  covenant,  or  holy  chest  of  the  Oracles,  made  of  a  peculiar
kind  of  hard  cedar,  in  dimensions  of  construction  as  follows  :  —

About  4  feet  4  inches  long,  2  feet  8  inches  wide,  and  2  feet  8
inches  high ;  plated  with  gold  inside  and  out.  The  lid  of  the  Jewish
Ark  was  of  solid  gold,  upon  which,  facing  each  other  at  the  ends,  were
figures  of  two  cherubim.  This  beautiful  top  was  called  the  mercy
seat.  There  can  be  no  question  in  a  thoughtful  mind  that  the
Jewish  Ark  of  the  covenant  was  from  the  model  of  the  Egyptian
sacred  boat  and  its  holy  chest  of  Oracles.  That  this  chest  was  held
so  sacred  none  can  doubt.  It  held  the  collection  of  Spiritual  forces
from  the  Absolute  Father,  which  at  times  and  seasons  would  form  a
union  with  the  Akasa  or  Star-magno  of  the  High  Priests  and  give
them  communications  and  advice  for  the  government  of  the  people.


3IO      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  light,  you  who  have  trod  through  intricate  pa»
sages  and  narrow,  rough,  and  ragged  paths  to  reach  and  awaken  in
the  sunlight  of  the  glorious  dawn,  and,  welcomed  by  the  Master's
word,  now  rest  in  your  white  robe  of  Love  and  dwell  in  peace  among
the  splendors  of  the  Empyrean  heights,  know  well  the  difficulties  in
the  way  of  the  writer  in  giving  to  the  world  that  which  is  good  fot
growth  and  ripening  of  the  Soul  according  to  the  School  of  Oracky
therefore  it  has  been  deemed  best  to  stop  here.


1


i>


S)


Within  the  Jewish  Ark  were  placed  the  tables  of  the  law,  Aaron's
rod,  and  the  golden  pot  of  manna.

This  sacred  Ark  was  always  placed  in  the  innermost  apartments  of
the  tabernacle  and  temple  of  the  Jews.

The  sacred  Ark  of  the  Egyptians,  Phoenicians,  and  several  of  the
most  civilized  nations  of  antiquity,  was  a  chest  of  about  the  same
dimensions  and  held  most  sacredly  within  the  innermost  sanctuary  of
their  temples,  and  was  known  among  them  as  the  dwelling-place  of
God  among  men.  The  only  difference  was  that  in  the  Jewish  Ark
they  omitted  on  the  golden  lid,  between  the  guardian  cherubim,  the
truncated  cone,  or  symbol  of  the  generative  principle  in  nature.

It  is  written  (Ex.  xxv:  22) :  "There  will  I  meet  with  thee,  and  I
will  commune  with  thee  from  above  the  mercy  seat,  from  between  the
two  cherubim."

The  Ark  of  the  testimony  has  been  known  to  almost  all  ages.
E^ch  sacred  temple  had  its  holy  Ark,  to  which  many  names  were
given  :  The  abode  of  God,  The  Testimony,  The  Covenant  of  Jehovah,
The  Light  of  God's  Face,  etc.  To  nations  of  great  antiquity  it  was
the  holy  abode  and  tabernacle  of  their  higher  King ;  the  pedestal  of
the  loving  and  forgiving  Star  of  Heaven  —  the  One  God.

On  very  important  occasions  seventy-two  High  Priests  stood  back
of  the  circle  in  Egyptian  and  Grecian  temples,  for  renewing  batteries
of  strength,  chanting  at  intervals  the  weird  composition  known  to
occult  orders  and  others  in  this  modem  age  as  the  chant  of  the
Hierophants.

But  let  no   trifler  nor  idle  curiosity-seeker  attempt  to  form  a


8PIRITUALIZATI0N   OP   MATTER.  3II

Delphic  circle  with  the  sacred  Ark  of  the  covenant  It  is  not  a  little
toy  for  modem  science  to  ransack  and  dissect.  The  desecrating
irreverence  of  the  modern  theorist  convinces  one  that  the  know-it-
all  spirit,  either  in  theology  or  science,  is  the  worst  enemy  Truth
has  to  contend  against.  There  is  too  much  bigotry  in  human  nature
to  be  confined  to  the  churches.  It  sometimes  gets  into  scientific
associations.  The  truly  scientific  spirit  does  not  claim  to  know  the
whole  universe,  and  so  does  not  reject  any  fact  that  may  not  fit  into
the  portable  theory  that  is  all  made  ready  beforehand.

The  ancients  were  no  fools.  Greece,  Rome  and  Egypt  bear  traces
of  superior  wisdom  in  immortal  stone,  holding  up  a  Light  of  knowl-
edge that  has  shone  all  along  the  ages,  and  of  desire  that  true  men
and  noble  women  shall  investigate  in  an  unselfish  and  Spiritual  man-
ner, for  the  One  God  is  with  them  even  unto  the  end.

The  great  solvent  in  the  physical  world  is  heat.  The  great  sol-
vent in  the  mental  world  is  will^  and  the  great  Absolute  solvent  of  all
is  Spirit,  and  Spirit  is  silent

"  There  was  silence  in  heaven,"  says  John  the  Revelator.  There
is  probably  not  one  real  Adept  or  Hierophant  who  does  not  desire  and
have  his  periods  of  seclusion  from  the  world,  for  renewal  of  strength
and  silent  meditation.

Many  Adepts  and  Anchorites  look  with  greater  aversion  upon  life
in  the  outer  world  than  we  who  are  of  it  would  feel  at  the  idea  of
being  buried  alive  in  a  remote  mountain  or  forest  fastness,  where  no
human  foot  nor  voice  from  the  outer  world  could  reach  us.

No  man  can  by  sensuous  perception  apprehend  the  existence  of
his  own  Soul  but  through  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  of  man  alone  can
judge  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  Exclusive  intellectual  culture  brings
only  a  refraction  of  true  Spiritual  understanding  to  mankind.  Its
light  and  knowledge  are  not  of  the  Spiritual  Central  Sun  but  only  a
reflex  of  light,  as  the  moonlight  is  a  refracted  light  of  the  true  sun.

Through  exclusive  intellect  there  is  confusion  of  vision,  which  like
a  mirage  ends  in  fallacies.  It  is  not  progress,  but  a  countermarch.
Pass  on,  therefore,  and  remain  undisturbed  by  a  civilization  which
rests  exclusively  upon  intellect.

It  is  the  ideas  of  the  eternal  now  that  rule  the  world.  It  is  not
the  aim  of  Spiritual  development  continually  to  tell  what  was  done  in
the  past  We  may  leave  this  to  our  orthodox  fathers  whose  chief  de-
light it  has  been.  Nor  is  it  the  aim  of  Soul  development  to  tell  what
is  to  be  the  final  involution  or  evolution  of  things.  Neither  is  it  to
unfold  all  the  springs  of  hope  and  defeat  in  human  action.    But  it  b


312      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

to  awaken  an  understanding  of  one's  self.  This  development  of  Soul
and  Spirit  tells  men  of  their  nature  and  individual  character,  that  they
may  make  less  blunders ;  shows  them  the  hidden  ways  of  attraction
and  repulsion,  that  they  may  escape  evil,  error,  and  suffering,  and  be
guided  into  the  perfect  way  of  being.  All  true  Soul  development  and
Spiritual  illumination  teaches  men  how  to  live  that  they  may  have
peace  hereafter ;  that  the  full  understanding  of  the  inner  temple  of
this  life  is  the  pilot  and  guide  on  first  awaking  in  the  golden  morrow.

"  Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  king-
dom of  heaven,  but  to  them  it  is  not  given.  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,
many  prophets  and  righteous  men  have  desired  to  see  those  things
which  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen  them ;  and  to  hear  those  things  which
ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard  them."  —  Matt  xiii. :  i6,  17.

Fear  not,  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  lest  the  knowledge  of  Spirit
and  Soul  growth  and  communion  with  the  so-called  dead  shall  pass
away  from  the  sight  of  men.

It  has  come  to  remain.  The  world  is  ripe  for  it.  It  is  the  gift  of
the  loving  Father,  the  most  precious  relic  of  the  past.  The  keepers
of  these  sacred  Lights  of  Spiritual  Truth  did  not  safely  cross  so  many
ages  and  bridge  all  gulfs  only  to  be  wrecked  on  rocks  of  modem
scepticism  and  intellectual  theories.

The  Angel  pilots  of  Truth,  Love,  Soul,  and  Spirit  are  too  experi-
enced to  allow  their  children  to  fear  such  disaster.

^  Because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold,"
but  always  there  will  be  true,  faithful  volunteers  to  replace  the  tried
sentries  and  heroic  pilgrims ;  and  the  world,  cold,  selfish,  and  bad  as
it  is  in  its  present  transition  state,  can  and  will  furnish  a  few  true  men
now  and  then  to  carry  on  the  work.

^  Stronger  than  steel  is  the  sword  of  the  Spiritt
Swifter  than  arrows  the  light  of  the  truth  is ;
Greater  than  anger  is  love  that  subdueth  I  **

As  man's  Soul  gravitates  toward  the  Spirit  of  Love  and  Truth,  and
aspires  to  the  higher  communion  of  God  and  the  Angels,  it  breaks
loose  from  the  elementaries  whose  aim  ever  tends  toward  the  animal
man.  The  old  legends  of  compact  for  evil  between  man  and  the  devil
have  a  spice  of  truth  in  them.  Elementaries  grow,  collect,  and  thrive
best  where  the  strongest  animal  will  is  found  most  closely  connected
to  earth.  They  know  no  difference  between  good  and  evil,  but  will
respond  to  any  call,  and  at  once  obey  the  animal  will  with  which  the}'


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  313

are  familiar,  going  out  at  tiroes  with  a  force  that  frequently  brings
disease  upon  any  body  they  chance  to  light  upon.

This  knowledge  and  the  use  of  it  is  termed  black  art,  or  Black  Magic,
which  mankind  had  far  better  not  handle,  as  one  must  descend  to  use
and  handle  it  through  his  lower  mentality  to  his  own  injury  or  that  of
the  location  where  these  forces  are  sent.  To  attempt  their  use  for
amusement  or  gratification  of  curiosity  is  like  handling  dynamite  with-
out caution,  care,  or  knowledge.

There  would  be  infinite  grandeur  in  the  faculty  of  ascents  and  of
floating  at  Will  in  the  Astral  world,  even  supposing  this  were  the  end
of  human  occult  development.  For  while  man's  natural  body  lives,
does  it  not  prepare  the  Soul  with  understanding  and  knowledge  con-
cerning the  conditions  it  must  pass  through  and  realize  after  it  leaves
its  narrow  house  and  begins  its  immortal  journey  ?  But,  in  place  of
being  the  end  of  Adeptship,  this  b  only  the  beginning,  for  develop-
ment and  growth  of  the  Soul  mean  for  man  a  fuller  understanding  of
the  forces  in  nature,  and  familiarity  with  the  Astral  world  and  his  own
Akase  or  personal  Astral  body.

The  illustrious,  nameless  Order  in  the  far  East,*  to  which  allusion
has  already  been  made  in  these  pages,  which  has  a  long,  silently  grand
history  of  thousands  of  years,  lifts  its  head  after  the  long  night  of  time
with  renewed  freshness.

Having  been  for  ages  the  most  exclusive  organization  in  the  whole
world,  it  is  at  this  time  receiving  new  members  from  any  race,  kindred,  or
tongue,  provided  the  would-be  initiate  he  the  proper  person  with  the  nec-
essary qualifications.  The  door  has  been  open  these  last  few  years  to
the  Western  world.  If  the  right  man  will  knock,  he  will  be  heartily
welcomed ;  but  he  must  have  capacity,  prudence,  qualifications,  and
thorough  breeding.

He  who  desires  to  knock  at  this  door  and  cross  its  sacred  thresh-
old must  prepare  for  seven,  five,  and  three  years  of  initiatory  ordeals
and  revelations,  and  watch  with  infinite  care  that  he  at  no  time  be-
comes impatient  or  runs  into  frantic  curiosity.

Silence^  prudence^  patience^  courage^  and  will  are  the  requirements
necessary  to  climb  those  awful  heights  of  Eastern  Adeptship,  but
Eastern  Occult  fraternities  are  not  despotic  in  their  treatment.
Though  there  are  certain  requirements,  their  pathways  are  peace,
wisdom,  love,  and  understanding.

It  is  intense  desire  through  vibrations  of  the  Astral  or  Akasa  about
the  Soul  that  produces  Will,  and  it  is  Will  which  develops  force.    This

*  See  illustration  opposite  page  378.


314       "IHE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

generates  an  octave  of  atmosphere  and  fine  ethereal  matter,  or  an  idea
having  form.  Thus  the  disembodied  Ego  through  this  sole,  undying,
intense  desire  in  himself,  unconsciously  furnishes  the  conditions  for
his  successive  self-procreations  in  various  forms,  which  depend  on  the
condition  of  his  Soul  and  mental  state  with  all  the  good  and  evil  deeds
of  the  preceding  existence  of  the  individual,  commonly  known  as
merit  and  demerit.

There  is  a  certain  undoubted  surety  of  personal  immortality  in
the  Spirit  of  our  being,  but  not  in  the  Soul,  which  in  its  present  state
of  growth  is  a  finite  emanation  and  must  certainly  disintegrate  its
particles,  as  its  dual  forces  are  disunited  and  not  attuned.  In  its
present  state,  it  is  a  compound  of  human  sensations,  passions,  and
thrilling  electric  sufferings,  continually  yearning  for  some  objective
kind  of  existence  and  personal  advantage  before  the  immortal  Germ-
Spirit  is  quite  freed  from  the  Ego  and  Astral,  and  thus  secured
against  transmigration  and  change  in  any  form.  How,  then,  can  one
reach  a  state  of  new  birth  who  is  longing  for  more  objective  life,  of
which,  in  truth,  so  little  is  worth  saving  ?  Yet  still  there  exists  this
desire  for  life,  more  life,  although  depressed  with  care.

It  is  the  renewal  of  the  mind,  the  development  of  Soul  and  Spirit,
the  being  transformed  into  the  subjective  world,  that  St.  Paul  so
strongly  advised,  which  weans  the  Soul  and  Will  away  from  this  objec-
tive world  to  loftier  heights  and  holier  being.

This  physical  body  is  for  ordinary  mortals  the  prison  of  the  Soul.
In  it  we  can  see  merely  what  comes  before  its  windows,  and  take  cog-
nizance only  of  what  is  brought  within  its  bars.  But  the  true  Adept
and  Seer  has  found  the  key  of  this  prison,  which  becomes  henceforth
only  a  temporary  dwelling-place.

In  other  words,  these  have  learned  the  hidden  way,  and  can  pro-
ject their  Souls  out  of  their  natural  bodies,  across  the  threshold,  into
any  place  where  they  may  please  to  go,  with  the  rapidity  of  thought,
on  wings  of  Will  by  Spirit.

With  development  of  Spiritual  gifts,  one  ascends  into  the  realms
of  immateriality,  where  cognition  becomes  a  process  of  pure  percep-
tion, through  the  temple  within,  while  the  intellectual  faculties  are  in
full  play,  and  the  Spiritual  vision  centred  in  the  immaterial  man,
which  manifestly  must  be  conducive  to  an  enlarged  comprehension  of
religious.  Spiritual  Truth,  and  an  illumination  of  the  whole  mentality.

The  first  awakening  of  a  visiting  Soul  in  its  Astral  flight  in  the
upper  firmament  brings  a  thrill  of  rapturous  delight.

As  the  Soul  floats  along  with  its  guiding  Angel,  in  an  ethereal,


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  315

transparent,  bluish  fluid,  glowing  at  times  in  a  sort  of  mysterious  fire
the  impressions  created  cause  a  thrill  of  satisfaction  —  rather  of  inde
scribable  delight  over  both  body  and  Soul.  What  changes  now  take
place  in  the  feelings,  purposes,  and  perceptions  of  the  new  initiate.
He  is  the  same  individual,  but  in  no  respect  the  same  thinker.  He
is  now  experiencing  a  death  of  the  earthly  past,  a  transition  into
Soul  world  and  Spirit  realms.

Bom  again  of  Spirit,  he  loves  it  with  the  most  tender  emotions
and  associations  of  his  heart  and  inner  being.  In  the  darkness  that
veils  him,  he  sees  only  the  pure  eyes  of  the  new-bom  Soul,  hears
only  the  voice  of  Spirit.  Oh  glorious  communion  with  the  immortal
love,  to  live  and  know  that  all  shall  meet  again !  It  is  to  him  the
day  of  all  days,  the  blossoming  of  sweet  truths  of  Spirit  and  light  of
knowledge  in  his  Soul.

Spirit  communion  and  light  differ  very  much  from  the  so-called
Christianity  or  that  which  is  known  of  creeds,  and  from  the  schools
of  Theology,  which  only  presses  upon  its  followers  a  blind  faith*
Spiritual  light  offers  evidence  and  knowledge  in  place  of  faith,  and
gives  unmistakable  evidence  of  immortality  in  place  of  empty
theories.

Humanity,  Divine  Humanity,  the  orphaned  one,  is  disinherited
upon  this  fair  earth.  It  is  the  holy  duty  of  every  man  who  is  capable
of  an  unselfish  impulse  to  do  something,  however  little,  for  its  welfare.
Human  happiness  rests  mainly  on  the  improvement  of  small  opportu-
nities, and  the  kind,  unselfish  deeds  of  good  men  are  their  best  and
most  enduring  monuments.  Build  therefore,  and  cherish  those  deeds
and  thoughts  which  like  stars  will  shine  brightest  when  the  light  of
prosperity  is  dimmed.

Without  the  mysteries  of  Love  and  the  passions,  and  these  myste-
ries of  Life  and  Death,  where  would  mankind  be  ?  Would  it  not  be
a  life  of  apathy  ?  A  religion  without  its  mysteries  b  a  temple  with-
out a  God,  and  in  the  desired  ripening  and  perfection  of  the  Soul
within  lies  the  secret  of  man's  aspiration.

Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  be  ye  endued  with  Divine  qualities
in  youth,  when  hope  is  bright  and  the  world  is  fair,  and  fortune  smiles,
for  in  these  days  the  Soul  is  nearer  to  the  heaven  from  which  it
spmng,  and  its  divine  and  primal  longings  are  not  all  effaced  by  the
sordid  passions  and  petty  cares  that  are  begot  in  time  ;  who  is  there
in  youth  that  has  not  nourished  the  belief  that  the  universe  has  secrets
unknown  to  the  common  herd,  and  panted,  as  the  hart  for  the  water-
springs,  for  the  fountains  that  lie  hid  and  far  away  amid  the  broad


3l6      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

wilderness  of  trackless  science  ?  The  music  of  the  fountain  is  heard
in  the  Soul  within^  till  the  steps,  deceived  and  erring,  rove  away  from
its  waters,  and  the  wanderer  dies  in  the  desert.

Think  you  that  none  who  have  cherished  the  hope  have  found  the
Truth ;  or  that  the  yearning  after  the  ineffable  knowledge  was  given
us  in  vain  ?

There  are  truths  deep  and  very  beautiful  in  the  state  known  in
the  Eastern  occult  world  as  Sushupti.

The  Pilgrim  who  has  reached  the  higher  octaves  of  wisdom,  by
silent  meditation  and  oblivious  composure,  passing  beyond  the  mod-
em Seership,  understood  here,  finds  it  does  not  come  up  to  the  level
of  Sushupti^  which  is  the  dreamless  state  in  which  the  mystic's  high-
est consciousness —  composed  of  his  highest  intellectual  and  ethical
faculties — seeks  and  seizes  any  knowledge  he  maybe  in  need  of.  In
this  state,  his  lower  nature  is  at  rest  (paralyzed) ;  only  his  highest  nature
roams  into  the  ideal  world  in  quest  of  food.  By  lower  nature  is
meant  his  physical,  Astral,  or  psychic,  lower  emotional  and  intellectual
faculties.  Yet  even  the  knowledge  obtained  during  the  Sushupti  state
must  be  regarded,  from  this  plane,  as  theoretical,  and  liable  to  be
mixed,  upon  resuming  the  application  of  the  body,  with  falsehood  and
with  the  preconception  of  the  mystic's  ordinary  waking  state,  as  com-
pared with  the  true  knowledge  acquired  during  the  several  initiations.

There  is  no  guarantee  held  out  for  any  mystic  that  any  experience,
researches,  or  knowledge  that  may  come  within  his  reach  in  any  other
state  whatever  is  accurate,  except  in  the  mysteries  of  initiation.

But  all  these  different  states  are  necessary  to  growth.  Our  waking
state,  in  which  all  our  physical  and  vital  organs,  senses  and  faculties
find  their  necessary  exercise  and  development,  is  needed  to  prevent
the  physical  organization  from  collapsing.  Dream  state,  in  which  are
included  all  the  various  states  of  consciousness,  such  as  somnambu-
lism, trance,  dreams,  visions,  etc.,  is  necessary  for  the  physical  faculties
to  enjoy  rest,  and  for  the  lower  emotional  and  Astral  faculties  to  live,
become  active,  and  develop ;  and  the  Sushupti  state  comes  about  in
order  that  the  consciousness  of  both  the  former  states  may  enjoy  rest,
and  for  the  fifth  principle,  which  is  the  one  active  in  Sushupti,  to
develop  itself  by  appropriate  exercise.  In  the  equilibrium  of  these
three  states  lies  true  progress.  But  there  are  difficulties  by  the  way.
Never  debate  or  argue,  but  let  the  one  object  be  to  keep  calm,  self-
possessed,  and  cool.  Do  not  essay  to  control  others.  You  have  as
much  as  you  can  do  to  control  yourself.  One  of  the  gigantic  evils  of
this  life  comes  from  the  desire  to  rule  others.    The  rights  you  claim,


SPIRITUALIZATION   OF   MATTER.  317

grant  freely  to  ohers.  No  one  poor,  weak  piece  of  human  clay  has
the  right  to  dictate  the  road  to  immortality  or  sit  in  judgment  on  a
fellow-being.

Pilgrim  on  the  threshold^  whenever  you  find  minds  of  this  likeness
pass  on.  You  will  find  many  noisy  minds  condemn  others  for  the
same  thing  they  have  done  or  will  do  themselves.  Society  practises
none  of  the  virtues  it  demands  of  men.  Pass  on,  your  work  lies  not
here.  Again,  you  find  some  men  a  reflex  of  books,  painfully  cul-
tured, but  still  an  empty  man,  carefully  trained  to  look  full  on  public
occasions.  This  abnormal  unnatural  life  builds  a  formidable  barrier
against  Spirit.     Be  natural.

Kind  reader,ponder  a  few  moments  over  this  old  story  of  the  dis-
tracted CENTIPEDE  WITH  HIS  HUNDRED  LEGS.  There  is  an  instructive
story  told  about  a  centipede,  whose  mind  was  absolutely  paralyzed  by
a  critical  question  suddenly  addressed  him  by  a  frog,  as  to  how  he  knew
which  leg  ought  to  go  first,  and  the  distraction  of  mind  which  the  frog
imagined  must  consequently  ensue  from  having  too  many  feet.  This
simple  story  throws  more  light  on  some  of  the  deeper  problems  of
life  and  nature  than  all  the  modem  conventional  civilization  and  age
of  education,  or  whole  volumes  of  school  reports.  Very  naturally,
the  frog,  who  had  but  four  legs  of  his  own  to  manage,  was  lost  in
admiration  over  the  genius  of  a  creature  that  had  such  easy  and  per-
fect command  over  a  hundred,  and  asked  how  on  earth  he  contrived  to
remember  which  leg  went  first,  which  second,  etc.  So  far  in  life,
indeed,  the  centipede  had  never  given  a  moment's  thought  to  the
subject  —  any  more  than  a  poet  to  the  rhythmical  flow  of  his  verses  —
but  now  suddenly  the  age  of  conscious  reflection  set  in,  laying  an
embargo  on  his  previously  purely  instinctive  movements  —

^  That  worked  his  mind  to  such  a  pitch.
He  lay  distracted  in  a  ditch,
Considering  hew  to  ran."

Be  natural;  on  this  depends  the  whole  question  of  ripening  a
human  Soul.  But,  alas  1  our  schools  and  families  are  full  of  distracted
beings,  half  whose  native  powers  are  paralyzed  by  the  eternal  frog
question,  which  foot  ought  to  go  first,  which  second,  and  so  on.
A  dozen  intelligent  men  and  women  come  together  at  an  evening
club.  They  are  people  who  have  thought,  felt,  observed,  suffered,  and
joyed.  And  yet  how  little  talk  is  to  be  got  out  of  them  that  gives  any
vital  pleasure !    Afraid  of  one  another,  and,  worse,  afraid  of  them-


3l8      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

selves,  the  question  of  the  processes  of  conversation,  and  of  how  to
do  it,  b  paralyzing  their  minds.  They  want  to  handle  the  topic,
instead  of  letting  the  topic  handle  them.  Self-forgetfulness  and  self-
abandonment  seem  an  impossibility.

Children  of  Truth,  no  matter  what  the  world  may  say,  be  naturau
This  opens  the  door  to  Spirit,  Truth,  and  thought.  Thought  is  a  pro-
jectile, and  if  aided  by  Truth  and  Spirit  it  has  no  limit  in  space.
Hate  and  malevolence  always  return  to  their  originator,  for  time  bal-
ances all  his  accounts  with  interest.

Dear  reader,  are  you  forging  the  iron  that  is  fettering  your  limbs,
and  sharpening  more  arrows  to  tear  your  flesh  ?

Pride  is  the  sign  of  poverty  within.  Error  and  wrong  expand
human  pride,  as  heat  does  metals.

There  is  spontaneity  of  mind  as  well  as  of  earth.  That  which
springs  up  of  itself  is  generally  weeds,  but  the  most  delicious  fruits
are  produced  by  effort  and  culture.

There  is  no  place  where  weeds  do  not  grow ;  and  there  is  no  heart
where  errors  are  not  to  be  found.  Remember,  vanity  and  pride  often
supply  wings  on  which  reason  takes  her  flight.

Men  are  their  own  hard  task-masters,  not  God.  He  exacts  for
Himself  nothing  but  that  men  shall  do  those  things  and  lead  such
lives  as  bring  down  upon  themselves  the  most  precious  blessings.

Misanthropy  is  starvation  of  the  heart  It  is  the  heritage  of
riches.  When  man  grows  wealthy  and  powerful,  it  is  usually  this
rock  that  wrecks  his  barque.  The  very  rich  man  is  a  slave  who  would
strive  to  rule.  A  man  who  has  millions  of  money  is  in  no  way  free,
but  his  millions  govern  and  rule  him,  unless  he  will  free  himself.
"  For  what  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his
own  Soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  Soul  ? "
Hurry  by  these,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  lest  ye  catch  the  infection.  Their
lives  are  but  exaggerations  of  evil  and  impure  thoughts.  Their  hori-
zon is  so  very  narrow  in  all  directions ;  they  are  of  little  use  to  the
world  at  large,  and  entirely  unfit  for  Spiritual  Light  or  growth  of  Soul,
and  are  but  dark  shadows  on  this  fair  earth,  a  dead  weight  and
prophecy  of  evil.  Oh,  human  ambition  and  desire  !  oh,  modem  civi-
lization !  what  a  whited  sepulchre  it  is.  Dear  reader,  are  you  one  of
the  millions  who  walk  and  run  and  push  and  jostle,  not  one  like  to
his  fellow  save  in  the  one  common  impulse,  the  all-pervading  spring
of  action,  the  one  desire,  hope  and  end  and  aim  to  earn  money  and
to  bridge  the  space  whose  distance  is  unknown  from  birth  to  death  ?
Are  you  also  drawn  into  this  vortex  of  the  maelstrom  of  human  ex-


8PIRITUALIZATION   OF   BfATTER.  319

istence  ?  How  many  glorious,  brave  hearts,  who  are  bright,  clever,
and  reckless,  hurry  on  as  if  on  a  mission  of  life  and  death,  never
tasting  the  peace  of  Spiritual  life,  but  pass  on  to  the  world  of  Spirit,
entirely  neglectful  of  the  most  important  thing  in  this  brief  life,  -^
the  ripening  of  the  Soul,  which  is  God's  object  in  placing  man  on
earth.

Let  him  that  scoffeth  at  the  lame,  take  care  that  he  halt  not  him-
sell  Whosoever  speaketh  of  another's  failings  with  pleasure,  shall
hear  of  his  own  with  bitterness  of  heart.  Obsequiousness  begets
friends ;  truth,  hatred.  Nature  silently  keeps  her  wits.  Strive  in
silence  to  keep  yours.  Be  faithful  as  Angel  guardians  to  your  Soul,
and  you  have  found  the  magnetic  key  that  unlocks  the  gate  of
heaven.

All  along  Life's  pathway,  God  has  very  kindly  erected  guide-
boards  directing  "  Turn  to  the  Right"  In  your  habits  of  life,  be
neither  irregularly  regular,  nor  regularly  irregular,  nor  permit  your
animal  body  to  become  a  slave  to  the  cruel  monarch,  —  Habit

The  highest  knowledge  attainable  is  gained  by  perfection  of  char-
acter and  understanding  through  silent  meditation.

Even  the  smallest ^iif^  has  more  sustaining  power  than  the  strong-
est reason  for  the  future  of  the  Soul.

Nor  deem  the  irrevocable  Past

As  wholly  wasted,  wholly  vain.
If,  rising  on  its  wrecks,  at  last

To  something  nobler  we  attain.

Give  me,  O  Father,  to  thy  throne  access,
Unshaken  seat  of  endless  happiness.
Give  me,  unveiled,  the  source  of  good  to  see,'*
Oh,  give  me  light,  and  fix  my  eyes  on  Thee.


CHAPTER  XL

MnAPHYSXCSy  THS   PRAYER   OF   THOUGHT;    OR   KXPRES8I0N   OP   INFI-
NITE MIND.

The  home  where  Virtue  dwells  with  Love  casts  a  healing  fra-
grance like  the  lily  with  its  heart  of  gold

Reformation  by  any  new  thought  or  action,  has  always  been
regarded  as  treason  in  the  past

Rational  Mind  Curb,  Metaphysics,  and  Mental  Healing.

The  dominant  party  that  has  whenever  possible  assumed  control
of  the  healing  art  admits  with  reluctance  that  imagination  might  do
something  toward  curing  of  disease  without  medicine,  but  not  enough
to  make  it  worthy  of  systematic  study  and  application,  and  in  their
view  only  material  remedies  are  scientific  and  respectable.  But  if,
as  has  thus  far  been  so  often  stated  in  thb  book,  the  Soul  is  the  essen-
tial man,  the  body  only  its  clothing,  then  anything  we  do  to  the  body
is  only  effective  as  it  influences  the  living  power  within.  Food  and
medicine  do  affect  the  physical  body,  and  thereby  its  vital  energy,  and
are  potent  in  causing  or  curing  disease ;  but  if  it  is  possible  to  act
directly  upon  the  Spiritual  element,  the  eternal  man,  whose  body  b  a
subordinate  apparatus  only,  is  it  not  better  to  do  so  ?

There  are  latent  forces  in  the  mind  of  man,  but  little  understood
as  yet,  in  which  rests  a  power  yet  to  be  developed  to  the  conscious-
ness of  us  all.  This  is  a  subject  but  faintly  understood,  either  in  its
greatness,  its  Christianity,  or  its  ability  to  prove  eternal  truths  by
demonstration.  These  great  truths,  while  satisfying  to  the  most  ele-
vated minds,  are  yet  so  simple  that  even  a  child  may  be  taught  to
remember  and  bring  them  out  in  experience.  The  basis  and  principle
of  this  thought  is  God,  or,  in  other  words,  the  Supreme  Absolute
Energy  of  Nature.  From  this  principle  all  things  are  created,  brought
forth  by  this  intelligence,  this  truth,  this  life ;  it  finds  itself  expressed
to  the  material  comprehension  in  what  we  term  body.

jso


METAPHYSICS,   THE  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  321

The  great  success  that  has  been  attained  in  mental  healing  is
attracting  the  attention  of  thoughtful,  unbiassed  minds.  In  cases
which  had  been  pronounced  incurable,  where  surgical  operations  had
been  repeated,  and  all  efforts  had  resulted  in  failure,  the  application
of  the  truths  of  Mental  Healing  produced  harmony  and  health.
Whether  man  is  ruled  over  by  a  Supreme  Being  or  Life  outside  him-
self, is  sometimes  queried,  but  that  there  is  something  beyond  the
material  which  presents  itself  in  what  we  call  body  seems  a  self-
evident  fact.  But  in  the  evolution  of  thought,  and  the  lifting  our-
selves and  others  beyond  mere  mortal  limits,  we  can  see  in  relation
to  the  truth  of  mind  an  issue  by  means  of  which  it  may  be  presented
understandingly  and  demonstrated.

Thought  has  more  to  do  with  the  body  than  we  are  aware.  Our
hands  would  never  move,  our  blood  never  circulate,  and  there  would
be  no  thinking  or  power,  except  for  the  action  of  the  mind,  of  which
body  is  but  the  representative.

If  matter  cannot  move  itself,  whence  originates  disease  ?  If  we
can  learn  from  whence  the  error  arises,  we  shall  know  where  to  meet
it.  Looking  at  the  subject  from  the  mental  standpoint,  which  is
that  mind  is  the  basis  of  being,  the  conclusion  is  that  no  thought
ever  expressed  itself,  no  hand  ever  moved,  no  body  ever  walked,  —  in
short,  that  nothing  was  ever  created,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  —
except  through  the  action  of  mind.  Where  thought  presents  itself  in
discord,  decay  will  seem  to  follow.  Right  thought  will  destroy  the
error  which  we  call  disease  and  bring  out  harmony.  It  always  fot
lows  that  when  a  man  changes  the  order  of  his  thought,  the  result  is
a  change  in  the  action  of  his  body,  the  body  being  but  the  represen-
tative of  mind,  the  expression  of  thought.

Shakespeare  has  said,  "There  is  nothing  good  or  bad,  but  think-
ing makes  it  so,"  and  Starr  King  said,  ''  Never  a  thing  but  was  first
thought,"  and  the  scriptures  tell  us,  "  As  a  man  thinketh,  so  it  is  unto
him,"  and  every  great  mind  has  found  in  this  one  thought  a  world
with  countries  unexplored,  oceans  unfathomed,  and  skies  studded  with
countless  stars  that  lead  us  on  only  to  find  another  countless  number.

We  do  not  examine  the  muscles  of  a  man's  face  to  find  the
causes  of  grief  or  joy  when  we  know  they  are  produced  by  circum-
stances outside  and  independent  of  the  body.  The  mental  healer
approaches  the  sick  from  the  same  standpoint,  with  the  same  reason,
ing,  believing  that  the  disease  which  seemingly  presents  itself  to  us
does  not  proceed  from  the  body  but  from  the  mortal  mind.  Has
grief  never  destroyed  lungs?    Have  failures  in  business  never  pro-


322       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

duced  insanity  ?  Material  discords,  independent  and  outside  of  the
physical,  bring  out  in  conclusion  upon  the  body  the  action  we  have
seen.  To-day  if  the  fear  held  over  the  thought  relative  to  the  result
of  many  an  instance  in  many  a  man's  life,  could  be  removed,  healing
would  follow.

The  power  to  vibrate  one's  mentality  into  the  immaculaU  concep-
tion of  the  living  Truth-Spirit,  and  unite  the  thoughts  with  the
Divine  Light  and  Love  that  fill  all  space  is  always  awaiting  one's
call,  coming  from  the  ever-flowing  fountain  of  intelligence ;  and  the
knowledge  that  thought  acting  upon  thought  can  produce  the  change
from  discord  to  harmony  will  do  the  work.  Has  no  one  ever  come
into  your  presence  and  filled  you  with  fear  and  trembling  by  his  dis-
ordered mental  expression  ?  Has  not  joy  produced  physical  expres-
sion.^ Have  not  those  who  were  almost  dying  been  raised  by  the
home-coming  of  some  loved  one?  These  are  but  hints,  but  they
point  to  the  mighty  action  of  mind,  and  prove  that  it  needs  only  our
perseverance  in  the  lines  of  unfolding  to  open  for  us  rich  mines
which  will  be  fully  potent  in  reforming  the  sinner  and  healing  the
sick.  Let  us  know  and  teach  that  body  ever  acts  in  accordance  with
mind,  and  that  thought  acting  upon  thought  may  restore  the  body.

If  it  is  possible  to  illuminate  the  mentality  of  the  individual  into
the  sacred  mysteries  of  thought,  the  realm  of  will^  when  thought  is
united  with  Absolute  Truth,  justice,  harmony,  and  peace  will  abide
with  man.  Error  would  then  be  overcome  by  truth,  folly  overthrown
by  the  statement  that  from  the  basis  of  right  we  dissipate  the  wrong.

That  mind  has  an  effect  upon  body  is  a  long  established  fact,  and
that  one  mind  affects  another.  Whether  this  truth  can  be  utilized  to
bring  out  results,  whether  it  can  produce  the  ability  to  dissipate  pain
and  suffering,  is  the  question  of  the  hour,  and  the  best  minds  are
awakening  to  receive  it.  They  are  watching  even  as  they  did  the
bringing  out  of  the  uses  of  electricity.  Were  not  the  power  and  the
steam  always  in  the  water,  requiring  for  development  only  the  means
which  also  always  existed  >  Was  not  the  electricity  which  lights  our
streets  of  late  always  latent  ?  Is  there  any  power  or  are  there  any
forces  which  man  has  discovered  which  were  not  in  the  forever  of
creation  ?     Has  man  made  anything  new  under  the  sun  ?

Can  we  fail  to  understand  or  discriminate  whether  it  be  mind  or
matter  which  controls  the  body  ?  If  mind  controls  it,  then  by  keep-
ing the  mind  free  and  the  atmosphere  of  thought  purified  from  con-
sciousness of  disease,  the  body,  being  an  expression  of  mind,  will
present  just  what  the  mind  holds.     It  is  only  necessary  to  take  the


METAPHYSICS^  THB  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  333

position  with  the  sick  that  healing  is  in  progress,  and  man  will  con-
sciously take  the  same  line  of  thought,  and  healing  will  be  the  result
The  world  has  been  surfeited  with  theories,  but  all  men  may  learn
the  power  of  thought  in  silence,  the  action  of  mind  on  matter  in
silent  argument.

In  speaking  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  there  is  not
presented  a  mystery  or  a  thought  which  shall  be  clothed  in  darkness,
but  a  truth  each  man  or  woman  holds  in  conscious  possession.  Let
us  not  think  that  while  man  may  have  dominion  over  the  fowls  of  the
air  and  the  fish  of  the  sea  he  may  not  have  dominion  over  his  own
consciousness.  If  we  had  a  slight  knowledge  of  the  true  under-
standing of  Dual  Will,  we  could,  like  Paul,  handle  deadly  vipers.

If  one  wished  to  paint  a  picture  of  a  rough  and  stormy  scene,  he
would  first  call  up  the  thought  of  it  in  mind.  If,  instead,  he  wished
for  one  which  should  be  calm  and  peaceful,  he  would  think  of  such
a  one.  So  draw  a  mental  picture  of  the  vestal  fire  in  the  Soul
where  God  planted  harmony  and  love  in  truth  and  wisdom.  Life  is
something  which  God  made  and  continues.  There  has  never  been
continuity  of  life  excepting  as  it  freed  itself  from  the  material.  It  is
inconceivable  that  the  Deity  who  created  all  things,  who  rules  the
sun,  moon,  and  stars  to  move  together  in  harmony,  who  gave  man-
kind the  ability  to  think,  and  who  can  free  the  earth  from  this
slavery  in  matter,  would  place  His  creatures  within  the  sad  limits  of
sickness,  suffering,  and  death.  If  a  man's  thoughts  could  be  turned
to  the  right  avenue,  if  the  position  of  his  dependence  on  matter
could  be  given  up,  he  would  no  longer  be  at  the  mercy  of  invalidism
and  suffering.  Look  away  from  the  body,  and  think  of  Him  who
made  all  things ;  of  the  intelligence  that  can  fashion  earth  and  man-
kind in  symmetry  of  form,  in  beauty  of  thought,  and  do  not  attribute
to  the  Maker  thoughts  of  error,  nor  place  Him  at  the  mercy  of  man-
made  theories.

Everything  contains  a  certain  deposit  of  the  jewel  of  light,  a  ray
or  reflection  of  the  Absolute  mind ;  and  if  you  are  only  able  to  radiate
this  Truth  by  your  mentality,  you  will  rise  like  one  who  awakens  from
long  sleep  to  the  full  knowledge  that  there  is  nothing  in  matter  which
is  not  subject  to  mind,  and  to  vibrate  in  harmonious  unison  with
Spirit,  to  cause  an  expression  of  truth  through  the  wisdom  of  silent
argument  to  move  into  the  pathways  of  God's  natural  harmonious
Love.  It  is  certain  that  if  human  mind  united  with  Spirit  can  move
one  iota  of  matter,  it  can  move  all  material  things.

Great  and  noble  men  are  hampered  in  their  aspirations  by  a  belief


r:-"__


of  bodj  Hasia^  the  acdsa  of  SocL  cf  dbe  pcver  of

^Teaser.     There  is  a  lariger  freedxn  ret  to  cocae  fr

dftar  man  is  gortrzat  of  his  ovn  b

power  of  mind,  in  is  directing  a

oolj  to  be  cTxfers&aod   for  us  to  d<zi;=5traic

sveep  sackrirsa  aad  discord  ocz  of  ocr  world.     Nearly

is  q:ziet    a&d  passiTe  can  readilj  democsr-iie  this  br  o]

heart  to  the  pore  love  of  uk  cieatiTe  Spirit  Trutbi  p-'^-^g  the  p^^^r*^

in  dose  proxxmitj.  and  r^'m-ng  his  tbccigihtSw     Etcn  if  cbe  disorder

is  qmit  zcuzfL,  it  maj  be  ectirelv  relieved  in  a  fev  hoKzrs  br  the  aczioo

of  mind,  br  directing  to  :bc  padent  d^irocgb  a  coaceatiated  thoc^gfat

the  statement  opposed  u>  the  belief  which  produced  the  discord.

It  is  sorprising  to  find  bow  many  ills  of  the  body  are  enrirelr  gor-
emed  by  mind.  And  :he  healing  ccrsisa  in  changing  the  basis  of
actioa  from  fear  to  confidence,  in  changing  the  belief  that  sickaes
most  be  to  the  knowledge  that  recovery  is  prcbable.

We  have  onlv  to  place  ocrselves  in  svmDa±v  with  ocr  ovn  tme
thought  to  bring  oat  harmony.  From  the  mortal  standpcxnt  we  nerer
get  a  correct  reasoning,  bu:.  lifting  ourselves  out  of  the  limis  of  piejii-
dice  and  opinion  and  laying  them  aside,  we  come  into  the  presence  of
Truth.  If  God  is  equal  lo  the  sa\'ing  of  souls.  He  is  certainly  equal  to
the  sa^-ing  of  bodies ;  and  if  He  made  Souls.  He  also  endowed  them
with  infinite  understanding  of  self-govemmenL  If  sickness  be  a  law
of  God,  wherefore  seek  relief  even  by  means  of  medicine :  Goethe
has  said  that  a  man  who  can  master  a  difficulty  can  master  a  weak-
ness. \\Tiene\-er  we  shall  have  carried  our  thought  out  of  the  limitan
tions  of  sense  into  the  boundlessness  of  injinile  /r>>.  we  shall  have
lifted  them  out  of  the  depressing  statement  of  sin  and  sickness.  We
must  no  more  hold  ourselves  in  matter,  but  set  the  earth  to  run  its
routine  in  harmony.  Enter  your  own  consciousness  with  the  thought
of  yourself  as  a  creature  of  harmony,  as  an  expression  of  truth,  and
you  will  no  longer  find  yourself  weak  nor  at  the  mercy  of  any  of  these
man-made  theories.  The  first  move  by  which  freedom  is  won  is  the
declaration  as  to  the  side  upon  which  one  is  fighting.  If  we  raise  a
banner  with  declarations  of  truth  thereon,  we  shall  bring  out  our
results  in  accordance  with  those  resolutions.  Continual  repetitions
may  be  necessary  to  bring  ourselves  into  the  right.  In  mortal  belief
we  have  no  defence  against  sickness,  but  whenever  man  shall  array
himself  firmly  on  the  side  of  right  and  truth,  which  is  health  and  har-
mony, it  will  be  no  marvel  to  see  the  sick  arise  and  walk.  There  is
something  in  thought  which  only  requires  recognition  and  adoption  in


METAPHYSICSi   THE  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  33$

order  to  bring  potent  forces  to  our  aid  in  time  of  need.    Here  is  the
remedy  for  ills  and  ailments.

Reason  between  yourself  and  God  who  made  you,  and  be  bound
no  longer  to  the  altar  of  matter,  but  centre  the  mind  upon  Truth.  The
statement  that  there  is  a  power  of  thought  in  every  one  which  can
reform  the  sinner  and  heal  the  sick  needs  only  to  be  taken  into  con-
sideration to  prove  its  true  worth,  and  awaken  the  world  to  a  realizing
sense  that  God  never  made  His  creatures  in  mistake  and  deformity.
How  did  he  create  the  universe  ?  We  are  told,  By  His  Word  and  Will,
and  the  idea  of  the  action  of  that  all-powerful  Will  is  expressed  in  the
book  of  Genesis  thus :  ''  God  said.  Let  there  be  Light,  and  there  was
Light."  By  growth  of  Soul  toward  Spirit,  we  may  radiate  for  good
our  will  of  thought  of  this  mighty  truth  upon  the  wrongs  and  blunders,
the  mistakes  and  diseases,  of  our  fellow-men.  If  we  have  hearts
which  do  not  correspond  with  harmony,  it  is  because  our  minds  are
inharmonious.

An  impulse  created  by  the  Will  continues  until  its  energy  b  ex-
hausted. Some  persons  are  able  to  waken  at  a  given  hour,  if  before
going  to  sleep  they  firmly  concentrate  in  the  mind  a  resolve  to  do  so,
and  instances  are  not  rare  in  which  the  counterpart  of  a  person  has
been  seen  at  a  distance  while  his  physical  body  was  asleep,  after  a
promise  to  appear  at  such  a  place.  On  returning  to  consciousness,
one  may  or  may  not  remember  having  fulfilled  his  promise.  An
Adept  will  see  and  remember  the  most  minute  detail  of  the  visit
The  Mahatmas  cause  a  series  of  impulses  to  follow  the  first,  thus
making  the  effect  so  much  greater.  It  is  thus  they  affect  a  person
thousands  of  miles  away  from  them.  By  continual  thought  of  the
Adept,  a  person  may  have  his  tranquilli^  disturbed  until  he  realizes
the  desire  and  wish  of  the  sender.  The  very  simplici^  of  thb  Astral
flight  makes  a  knowledge  of  it  difficult.

The  Will  is  developed  through  action  and  strengthened  hy  faith.
Fear  and  doubt  paralyze  the  will  and  produce  impotency.  Hope  and
faith  produce  marvellous  results.  Hope  is  the  main-spring  of  human
action,  faith  seals  our  lease  of  the  Soul's  immortality,  but  Lave  or
charity  gives  the  passport  to  the  Soul's  inmost  light  and  highest
happiness.  Faith,  even  without  full  knowledge,  is  far  more  useful
than  full  knowledge  without  faith  and  so  without  action.  Faith  pro-
duces an  exalted  state  of  the  imagination,  which  strengthens  the  will,
banbhes  pain,  cures  diseases,  leads  to  herobm,  and  transforms  hell
into  a  heaven.  The  only  way  to  develop  will-power  b  to  act.  £ach
act  creates  a  new  impulse,  which,  added  to  the  already  ^y*ft^"g


326      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

energy,  vasdy  increases  its  strength.  A  person  who  acts  only  from
impulses  is  but  a  weather-vane  in  every  atmosphere.  If  he  contmnes
to  grow  and  manifest  no  will,  obeying  his  lower  impulses,  he  passively
develops  into  a  criminal  or  a  maniac.

If  we  understand  the  nature  of  the  Divine  attributes  within  uSp  it
will  not  be  difficult  to  unite  our  will  with  the  Supreme  Eneigy,  the
Will  of  God,  thus  becoming  attuned  with  the  universal  Will.  Here
we  learn  to  do  good  not  on  account  of  any  personal  consideration,
but  for  the  mere  sake  of  doing  good.  It  is  sometimes  ssud  a  num's
belief  does  not  signify  so  long  as  he  acts  rightly,  but  one  cannot  be
certain  to  act  rightly  unless  he  knows  what  is  right.  Who  has  not
seen  even  in  this  age  horrible  acts  of  injustice  committed  in  the  name
of  justice ;  errors  proclaimed  as  truths,  forms  and  theories  mistaken
for  principles  ?  The  belief  of  the  majority  is  not  always  the  correct
belief,  and  the  voice  of  truth  and  reason  is  often  drowned  in  the
clamor  of  a  superstitious  creed,  based  upon  an  erroneous  theological
doctrine.  An  erroneous  belief  is  detrimental  to  progress  and  liberty
in  proportion  as  it  is  universal ;  such  belief  rests  on  error  and  illusion.
True  knowledge  is  based  on  Truth.

Swedenborg  was  the  first  and  only  man  in  this  modem  age  who
formulated  the  principles  of  metaphysics  on  a  scientific  and  philo-
sophical basis  which  will  stand  the  test  of  all  time.  Without  a  study
and  general  understanding  and  mastery  of  these  fundamental  princi-
ples and  truths,  no  mortal  can  correctly  estimate  any  pure  occult
phenomena,  whether  natural  or  spiritual,  or  arrive  at  true  knowledge
of  the  laws  which  govern  and  operate  in  the  production  of  such  phe-
nomena. The  value  of  Swedenborg's  writings  consists  not  in  theli
theological  but  in  their  philosophic  expositions,  in  a  concise  and
rational  method,  of  the  realities  underiying  and  giving  expression  to
all  the  appearances  by  which  we  are  surrounded  on  this  physical
globe  or  earth.  The  relationship  existing  between  them  is  made  ta
appear,  and  that  which  causes  appearances  is  most  clearly  defined  by
the  "  Law  of  correspondencies  " ;  i.  e,,  that  everything  which  is  cor
responds  (this  does  not  mean  is  iike)  to  two  great  somewhats,  or  radi*
cal  forces ;  the  highest  forms  of  which,  as  mortals  can  conceive,  are
termed  Will  and  Intelligence.  The  combined  action  of  these  two
produces  the  third,  which  is  manifest  in  all  objective  forms  in  all
worlds.

This  is  Swedenborg's  grand  discovery,  and  to  him  the  world  is
indebted  for  a  true  knowledge  of  the  Law  of  Influx,  of  which  law  even
a  vast  number  of  mediumbtic  controls  appear  to  be  so  lamentably


METAPHYSICS,  THE  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  $2/

Ignorant ;  and  the  display  of  this  ignorance  to  the  ken  of  the  Adept
at  once  shows  the  plane  or  degree  of  consciousness  from  which  the
utterances  come.

The  human  organism  —  a  real  microcosm,  or  world  in  miniature —
is  built  up  on  true  mathematico-metaphysical  principles,  and  every
part  of  this  organic  structural  form  corresponds  with,  and  is  expressive
of,  interior  principles  ox  prindpta;  and  the  connection  between  these
interior  active  principles  and  the  external  visible  organism  is  as
cause  and  effect.  Seeing  that  the  organism  is  dissolved  and  lost  to
external  vision,  what  becomes  of  the  Ego,  or  the  man  or  woman,
that  so  lately  was  the  internal  real  living  actuali^  which  thought,
moved,  and  acted  ?  Only  one  class  of  individuals  can  give  a  satisfac-
tory answer  to  the  question,  and  that  is  the  Spiritualists,  for  they
alone  possess  the  evidence  on  which  their  knowledge  b  based,  that
''  Man  is  a  living  Soul,"  and  lives  on,  albeit  in  other  and  different
conditions  to  which  he  or  she  was  used  while  in  the  physical  organism.

The  power  of  the  states  of  the  Soul  over  the  health  of  the  body
has  exhibited  itself  in  all  ages  of  history ;  but  of  late  years  it  has
been  prominently  before  the  public.  Many  claim  to  have  discovered
in  the  relation  of  the  Soul  to  the  body  means  for  healing  the  infirm
in  body  and  preserving  the  strong  in  health ;  and  the  positions  of
many  have  been  deeply  influenced  by  recent  events.  The  subject  is
at  least  worthy  of  consideration.

There  is  a  peculiar  mysticism,  indigenous  to  the  East,  that  seems
never  able  to  grow  and  thrive  in  the  Western  world;  but  human
hearts  and  minds  are  essentially  the  same  the  wide  world  over,  and
it  needs  only  profundity  of  thought,  vividity  of  imagination,  and
puri^  of  ideal,  for  ancient  and  modern.  Oriental  and  Occidental,  to
arrive  at  the  same  conclusions  concerning  the  origin  and  ultimate  of
human  existence.  There  are  only  two  possible  explanations  of  exist-
ence tenable  among  thinkers ;  the  one  is  wholly  physical,  the  other
metaphysical.  The  physician  and  the  metaphysician  can  never  harmo-
nize or  blend  without  losing  their  bases  or  bewildering  their  hearers.
Theism  and  Atheism,  Spiritualism  and  Materialism,  are  antipodal ;
they  never  have  been,  and  never  can  be,  reconciled,  and  the  struggle
often  attempted  to  reconcile  the  irreconcilable  is  productive  only  of
the  strife  of  tongues,  and  produces  a  mass  of  heterogeneous  literature
which  obscures  rather  than  enlightens  reason.

The  teachings  of  the  metaphysical  to  mental  healers  are  substan-
tially as  follows :  —

Raise  yourself  above  the  immediate  circumstances  that  surround


328  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

your  condition,  up  into  the  spiritual  understanding,  by  holding  firmly
in  thought  truth  and  its  idea  as  the  only  reality,  and  Soul  the  reflec-
tion of  this  idea  of  truth  governed  by  the  Absolute  Spirit,  God  and
His  Idea,  which  is  substance,  and  the  reflection  of  that  idea  shadow.

Allay  mentally  the  fears  of  your  patients ;  assure  them  that  God
governs  all,  that  there  is  nothing  to  fear.

Fear  b  the  foundation  of  sickness,  producing  inflammation,  some
image  in  the  mind  bringing  confusion  which  quickens  the  blood  and
causes  the  heart  to  beat  out  of  harmony.  Here  arises  the  cause  of
sickness.    Always  reason  from  cause,  not  from  effect

Strive  to  produce  harmony,  and  argue  on  the  side  you  desire  to
be  victorious,  directing  by  the  action  of  your  mind  to  and  about
the  patient,  through  concentration  of  thought,  vibrations  of  mental
aigument  opposed  to  the  belief  which  produced  the  discord  called
disease.

There  is  only  Infinite  Life,  substance,  and  intelligence,  which
could  never  create,  contain,  or  convey  any  fears  or  discord.  God's
laws  are  Lave — perfect  and  harmonious.  Nothing  can  destroy  their
absolute  work.

Avoid  calling  the  name  of  the  disease  of  the  patient;  take  up  the
moral  as  well  as  physical  errors  of  your  patient,  and  cast  out  devils
when  you  heal,  thus  preaching  the  gospel  to  all  nations.  Speak  truth
to  all  error.  If  the  patient  is  susceptible  of  oral  argument,  reason
thus ;  if  not,  argue  mentally  thus :  —

All  that  is  real  and  eternal  is  God  and  His  Idea,  while  Soul,  the
reflection  of  that  idea,  is  governed  by  God.

You  exist  as  an  Idea  of  the  Infinite  Mind ;  you  live,  move,  and
have  your  being  in  Him.  Nothing  can  separate  you  from  Him.  Out-
side of  your  body  you  are  a  perfect  Spiritual  being.  Spirit  can  have
no  discord.  You  are  perfectly  well,  therefore,  and  nothing  can  make
you  otherwise.  By  arguing  the  patient's  case  mentally  at  first,  you
bring  about  a  vibration  of  truth  to  destroy  error.

You  must  endeavor  to  find  out  the  thought  that  came  to  the  uncon-
scious mind  of  the  patient,  and  produced  the  conscious  thought  or
condition  of  discord  called  disease,  for  that  which  errs  is  in  discord
and  is  ignorant  of  itself  or  the  error,  and  you  must  discover  it

It  is  not  well  to  arouse  or  excite  the  combative  mind  of  the  patient
through  oral  argument  if  he  is  not  able  to  comprehend  the  great
Truth,  but  rather  pacify  and  quiet  him  to  peaceful  repose  and  the
assurance  of  nothing  to  fear,  while  you  combat  the  discord  and  error
with  your  mental  argument  in  silence.    Argue  that  there  is  no  truth


METAPHYSICS,  THE  PRAYER  OP  THOUGHT.  329

in  so-called  disease ;  that  it  is  a  false  assumption  of  an  appearance,
an  error  through  human  ignorance.  When  reason  has  been  de-
throned, and  there  is  not  the  faintest  idea  of  the  past  or  present,  an
insane  person  being  before  you,  even  then  you  should  be  glad  to
speak  to  and  if  possible  to  help  him ;  though  you  may  not  know  how
to  minister  to  a  mind  diseased,  it  may  be  possible  through  this  law  of
mind-cure.  If  your  patient  is  intelligent  and  spiritually  bright,  you
may  be  able  to  fix  the  Truth  more  firmly  in  his  thoughts  by  speaking
audibly,  saying  that  the  principle  of  harmony  never  produced  error
or  discord,  but  that  there  is  a  belief  of  so-called  sickness,  and  if  they
will  endeavor  to  reach  the  opposite  understanding  they  will  break  the
spell  or  illusion  of  the  so-called  disease ;  that  man  is  the  offspring  of
Spirit,  not  matter  —  a  child  of  God,  not  man;  that  his  true  life  is
Spiritual,  not  material,  and  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  the  height  of  wisdom
and  love,  and  never  desired  to  destroy  man ;  that,  being  one  of  His
children  who  has  gained  a  little  knowledge  of  His  Truth,  you  are  His
servant  or  operator,  sent  to  show  the  patient  the  error  of  all  disease,
and  that  he  in  Spirit  can  in  no  way  be  ill.  That  his  little  house  being
out  of  order,  through  want  of  understanding  of  God,  you  by  simply
using  your  Ray  of  understanding  through  God's  Ray  help  to  restore
order  once  more.  Say  to  him  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  Mind  immortal.
Truth  is  real  and  eternal.  Matter  without  Spirit  has  no  life,  sub-
stance, or  intelligence.  Man,  being  the  reflection  of  the  thought  or
idea  of  God,  is  Spiritual,  not  material.  Matter  is  the  phenomenon  or
grosser  stratum  of  Soul,  and  the  belief  in  disease  is  but  a  dream,  and
not  the  reality  of  man.  Soul,  or  being.  Make  it  only  this  in  the  mind
of  your  patient,  and  you  can  cure  him.  In  treating  an  infant  or  child
you  must  use  a  mental  argument  at  first  against  error,  and  then  an
audible  one  with  the  parents  to  turn  their  thoughts  in  the  direction  of
Truth,  or,  if  they  are  not  mentally  qualified  to  reach  your  truth,  make
a  diversion  in  your  favor  by  letting  them  take  some  new  conjecture,
assuring  them  the  one  they  had  entertained  was  incorrect.  Argue
mentally  that  there  is  no  disease,  that  matter  cannot  make  its  own
condition,  nor  mind  produce  pain  in  matter,  neither  can  matter  pro-
duce pain  or  discord  in  Spirit  Avoid  talking  of  the  disease,  and
caution  nurse,  parents,  and  friends  not  to  do  so,  but  to  blot  the  whole
error  from  their  mind.  Assure  them  that  there  is  no  reality  in  dis-
cord ;  that  nothing  is  true  or  real  but  from  the  great  Absolute  mind ;
that  the  truth  of  being  is  harmonious,  therefore  the  only  true  reality
b  harmony ;  that  man  is  eternal,  never  ill,  and  no  portion  of  him  can
decay.    Man  is  shadow,  while  God  is  his  substance,  therefore  pain,


330      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

sickness,  or  death  cannot  be  in  shadows,  nor  can  the  shadow  be  lost
while  the  substance  or  Spirit,  which  is  God,  remains.

Suppose,  for  instance,  belief  in  consumption  is  to  be  destroyed.
You  must  begin  with  the  leading  points  with  a  strong,  concentrated
mental  statement  opposed  to  the  so-called  disease.  Say  that  it  is  not
inherited,  and  that  tubercles,  hemorrhage,  inflammation,  and  ulcers  are
only  ugly  names  and  beliefs,  not  Spirit  and  truth  of  man ;  that  man  being
the  offspring  of  Spirit  and  not  of  matter,  of  God  and  not  man.  Spirit-
ual and  not  material,  his  trouble  is  therefore  only  error  and  discord,
not  truth  of  matter  and  not  of  Spirit.

Sometimes  when  you  bring  truth  mentally  in  vibration  about  a
strong  positive  man  to  destroy  the  error,  a  certain  rebound  or  chem-
icalization will  occur,  as  when  two  opposites  meet  and  one  must  con-
sume or  destroy  the  other  to  form  a  new  base.  The  operator  may
feel  nervous  and  restless.  If  so,  it  is  best  to  cease  operations  for  a
time,  for  this  fermentation  should  be  painless  as  with  fluids,  and  until
the  argument  of  truth  can  be  calmly  controlled  to  continue  would  simply
distress  the  operator.  The  patient  being  a  strong  animal  body  of  a
positive  nature  can  be  overshadowed  by  the  living  truths  for  Spirit  b
absolute  when  you  as  operator  can  concentrate,  but  do  not  argue  as
formerly,  but  with  a  will  deny  the  power  of  a  chemical  to  cause  suf-
fering or  discord,  or  to  radiate  disease,  and  you  will  silently  surmount
all  obstacles  from  any  mortal  mind.  On  this  very  point  of  chemical-
ization or  a  strong  mortal  mind  comes  the  fear  of  some  metaphysi-
cians as  to  mesmerism  and  mesmeric  influence.  They  either  lack
concentration  of  thought  or  have  not  learned  fully  to  control  some  of
their  own  errors — usually  those  of  passion  and  anger.  It  is  very
necessary  to  understand  the  three  different  mortal  vibrations  that  are
about  every  human  being  and  subject  to  his  will,  as  has  been  ex-
plained already  in  the  preceding  pages  of  this  volume.

In  the  eye  of  man  or  any  animal  there  may  be  observed  a  flash  of
the  Spirit  of  Fire,  which  is  entirely  absent  in  death.  This  fire  life  is
quite  marked  in  the  blood  also,  which  is  the  first  incarnation  of  the
universal  fluid  of  the  astral  body  or  star  magno.

Blood  is  our  materialized  vital  life,  and  through  its  inoculation
most  if  not  all  diseases  arise.  The  insertion  and  change  through
some  chemical  action  produces  inharmony  in  the  life  of  the  blood.
This  inoculation  may  be  caused  by  any  of  the  following  occurrences,
—  by  objects  through  the  eye,  imaginations  of  the  mind,-  or  evil  men-
tal atmospheres  of  others ;  contact  with  persons  or  things,  ignorance
and  improper  control  of  the  animal  body.


METAPHYSICS,  THE  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  33 1

These  are  the  usual  door-ways  to  most  socalled  diseases,  which
are  chiefly  chemicallzations,  inoculations,  and  inharmony  to  the  vital*
ized  life  of  the  blood.

Two-thirds  of  so-called  diseases  come  to  the  human  body  through
the  eye,  causing  fear,  followed  by  a  physical  symptom,  inflammation.
All  this  is  a  product  of  mortal  mind  and  not  matter,  for  it  never  ap-
pears where  mind  is  not.  Fear  produces  an  increase  or  diminution
of  action.    It  paralyzes  or  overacts.

The  sick  know  little  or  next  to  nothing,  but  suppose  matter  or  the
body  is  the  cause  of  all  trouble,  while  it  will  be  found  the  whole  diffi-
culty  has  come  through  the  eye  as  a  mental  picture,  or  from  a  trans-
gression of  some  of  the  laws  of  nature.  The  patient  cannot  always
give  the  name  of  the  so-called  disease  that  you  are  to  aigue  against,
but  when  you  address  it  mentally  in  argument  you  must  call  it  by  a
name.  So  you  should  read  the  patient's  thoughts  as  much  as  possible,
and  take  up  your  argument  from  your  own  impression  and  not  from  the
patient's  lips.  Assure  him  that  God  governs  all.  Blot  out  of  the
mind  the  image  of  disease.  If  it  is  a  cold,  drive  away  the  thought  of
a  cold,  or  if  grief  argue  down  the  belief  that  sorrow  can  take  away
joy.  Give  every  rebuke  to  error  that  it  deserves.  Claim  vehemently
that  good  is  more  powerful  than  evil;  that  the  living  truth  is  im-
mortal.

Sometimes  it  may  be  necessary  to  startle  or  shock  the  mind  of
the  patient  in  order  to  stir  it  from  a  dormant  condition  and  to
remove  some  of  the  chaotic  belief.  When  this  is  necessary,  come
out  frankly  and  bluntly  with  determined  vehemence,  and  declare  that
nothing  ails  him,  and  he  is  like  an  insane  man  suffering  from  belief
alone.  After  you  have  once  aroused  him,  calmly  impress  him  with
the  feeling  that  while  you  command  the  error  to  depart,  you  are  full
of  charitable  sympathy  and  loving  kindness;  that  you  spoke  thus
boldly  to  him  for  his  good  alone  that  he  might  arouse  from  his  sleep ;
that  he  should  know  the  great  truth  of  man.  If  the  patient  does  not
know  what  to  call  his  disease,  and  expresses  a  desire  to  know  or  to
locate  it,  change  his  thoughts  and  inform  him  that  it  is  best  for  him
not  to  know ;  that  the  kind,  loving  God  governs  all  and  through  His
help  you  will  heal  him.  Never  give  a  name  to  disease,  but  unname
and  destroy  it.  When  you  are  arguing  down  a  belief  called  disease,
call  it  by  mental  thought  only,  for  thus  you  will  reach  it  sooner,  for  it
is  absolute  and  conclusive  that  mind  speaks  to  mind,  and  mind  mixed
with  matter  produces  error  and  discord,  or  illness.

Always  avoid  admitting  »  name  for  any  disease.    You  must  take


332      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

up  the  moral  as  well  as  the  physical  errors,  it  being  highly  essential
that  the  operator  takes  a  natural,  pure  life  for  his  pathway,  free  from
anger,  selfishness,  and  lust,  with  a  warm,  sympathetic  heart  full  of
charity  and  love  for  all  things,  and  of  few  words,  for  in  his  silence
comes  increase  of  power.  Remember  always  that  God  is  substance,
man  is  shadow,  and  that  God  is  man's  life  and  intelligence,  and  he
has  no  other ;  that  man  is  a  ray  or  reflection  of  the  Infinite  Mind.

If  a  sudden  relapse  of  some  of  the  old  beliefs  should  occur  to  the
patient,  meet  it  with  a  rebuke  and  courageously  as  at  first,  or  see  who
has  been  with  him,  for  the  beliefs  and  doubts  of  a  strong  individual
about  your  patient  may  cause  such  a  relapse.  Argue  down  their
arguments,  taking  the  mental  position  that  there  b  no  reaction  in
matter,  and  that  disease  cannot  change  from  one  form  to  another  or
shift  about.  If  the  relapse  is  your  own  fault,  correct  the  error,  and
calm  your  own  fears,  and  raise  yourself  to  a  higher  and  holier  being,
reaching  the  heights  of  that  perfect  peace  through  the  knowledge  of
the  Divine  silence,  and  be  ready  for  whatever  may  happen,  main-
taining an  inviolable  calmness,  and  ever  cherish  the  picture  that  all
that  is  God  and  His  love,  and  all  form  of  life  is  His  Idea.  The  poten*
tiality  and  success  lie  in  yourself  as  a  healer,  arising  into  the  true
Spirit.

Truth  loves  the  light  and  ever  flourishes  best  in  the  sunshine  and
open  air.  Truth  and  Spirit  through  the  ceremony  of  mental  illumina-
tion and  the  silent  wisdom  of  mind  will  rend  the  clouds,  which  will  gather
up  and  roll  away  from  man's  darkened  vision,  and  bring  him  out  into
the  clear  sunshine  of  noonday  brightness,  that  will  cause  the  mbts  of
superstition  and  doubt  to  pass  away  through  the  fulness  of  the  knowl-
edge of  Spirit  and  growth  of  the  Soul.

The  Pythagorean  theory,  as  well  as  the  Egyptian  one,  was  that  the
Soul  was  the  seed  of  the  Spirit  fruit,  coming  out  from  the  Divine  Love
and  Heart  of  God,  never  having  a  beginning,  therefore  no  ending.

The  Divine  Soul  itself  is  the  word  of  God;  it  is  the  first-bom  child
of  the  Most  High,  being  a  primal  derivative  from  the  Divine  nature  —
a  direct  effect  from  the  absolute  first  cause  of  all  things.

This  divine  element  in  man  which  gives  him  eternal  individuality
is  the  essential  Christ  or  child  of  God.  It  is  the  light  enlightening
all  mankind ;  it  is  the  immortal  Ego  that  can  say  to  every  power  of
intellect  and  sense,  /  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches ;  if  a  branch
abide  in  vital  union  with  this  Divine  Soul,  it  is  healthy,  vigorous,  and
fruitful;  if  it  abide  not  in  communion  with  the  source  whence  it
derived  its  being,  it  is  cut  off,  dried  up,  and  withered.


METAPHYSICSi  TRS  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  333

Pythagoras  occupies  the  only  tenable  ground  that  has  ever  been
taken  by  defenders  of  the  absolute  immortality  of  the  Soul.  He
separates  the  Soul  completely  from  its  environment ;  he  does  not  con-
found it  with  the  machinery  it  employs  to  secure  external  manifesta-
tions; he  treats  of  it  as  an  eternally  individualized  drop  in  the
unfathomable  sea  of  life  itself ;  he  speaks  of  its  eternal  past,  as  well
as  of  its  eternal  future,  and  declares  that,  having  had  no  beginning,
it  will  assuredly  have  no  end.  Plato  brings  to  his  aid  illustration
and  analogy,  but  he  relies  most  of  all  on  intuition,  the  perception  of
truth  within  the  Soul  itself.

The  five  external  senses  are  not  man,  for  these  belong  wholly  to
the  body.  The  true  man  is  the  Bride  of  the  Spirit  within ;  therefore,
when  the  external  senses  which  germinate  selfishness  are  brought
subservient  to  the  true  man,  he  first  begins  to  know  himself.  Love,
gentleness,  and  faith  soon  penetrate  within  the  veil,  the  Soul  becomes
illuminated  and  conscious  of  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  It  is  only
then  that  man  becomes  alive  to  the  good  that  is  in  mankind,  and
expels  evil  and  error,  that  is  entirely  external  to  the  real  Divine
Humanity.

When  a  man  who  has  been  suffering  from  disease,  affliction,  and
defeat  sees  through  the  windows  of  the  Soul  the  glimmering  light  of
Spiritual  Truth,  he  has  arrived  at  a  supreme  consciousness  of  knowl-
edge, that  the  external  body  is  not  the  true  self,  and  that  disease,
error,  and  affliction  are  entirely  outside  his  immortal  self,  it  is  being
bom  again.  It  is  like  returning  light  to  the  blind,  or  like  the  first
break  of  a  golden  day  after  a  long  Arctic  night  of  ignorance  and  blun-
dering.

There  is  a  fundamental  and  eternal  truth  which  all  students  of
occult  science  must  fully  engraft  within  the  mind,  that  man's  objec-
tive sense-perceptions  are  illusions  or  deceptive  appearances,  and
that  our  outward  senses  never  tell  us  the  real  truth.

A  fundamental  rule  given  to  all  initiates  in  Occult  organizations
is  that  human  ways  are  always  opposite  to  Spirit  ways,  and  it  may  be
said  with  truth  that  human  ways  are  also  opposite  to  natural  ways,
and  it  is  a  fixed  principle  that  the  things,  actions,  and  force  directly
opposite  to  the  psychical  objective  man  are  true.

Thought  and  feeling  make  the  mind,  which  is  the  true  man.  All
we  are  is  but  the  collection  and  gathering-up  into  a  personal  and
human  form  of  all  that  we  have  thought,  acted,  and  felt.  Thought
and  existence  are  absolutely  identical  and  inseparable.  To  think  is
to  exist,  to  exist  is  to  think.    As  thought  and  existence  are  one  and


334      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

inseparable,  it  follows  naturally  that  any  change  in  our  wmj  of  think*
ing  must  by  a  necessary  law  modify  our  existence.

In  our  inmost  and  true  existence  and  real  self,  we  are  not  and
cannot  be  diseased,  for  we  are  included  in  the  being  of  the  Great
Absolute,  the  Father  of  Spirits,  the  true  man  being  a  microcosm  or
little  world,  within  the  macrocosm  or  great  world,  which  is  only  a
gigantic  and  larger  human  body,  man  being  a  monad  or  little  larm
cell  of  and  in  it  The  psychical  body  is  not  man  any  more  than  a
tree  is  man,  for  the  tree  in  bearing  is  composed  of  the  same  elements.

When  a  telegraphic  message  is  sent  from  America  to  Europe,  no
imponderable  fluid  shoots  along  the  cable,  there  is  only  the  trans-
mission of  octaves  of  force,  a  vibratory  wave  in  an  elastic  and  har-
monious medium  which  modem  science  calls  ether.  So  in  a  similar
way,  when  one  mind  acts  upon  another,  influencing  its  thoughts  and
feelings,  this  takes  place  in  an  all-pervading,  all-surrounding  every-
where-present principle  of  Spirit,  a  thousand  times  more  subtile
and  vital  than  anything  known  or  even  dreamed  of  in  modem
science.

There  b  a  living  force  and  saving  energy  in  thought  It  is
thought  which  shapes  and  governs  the  worlds,  and  it  is  our  thoughts
which  mould  our  fate,  for  thought  and  existence  are  one.

It  should  be  our  aim  and  wish  not  merely  to  impress  our  thoughts
upon  a  patient's  mind,  but  to  lift  him  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  plane
of  thought  There  are  two  worlds  included  in  the  mind  of  man,  a
Spiritual  world  and  a  natural  or  psychical  world.

The  natural  world  being  the  lower  region  of  mind,  here  is  the  seat
of  all  disease,  but  the  Spiritual  realm  or  true  world,  being  the  upper
region  of  the  mind,  is  far  beyond  all  disease,  but  is  the  region  of
health  and  true  blessedness.

When  the  psychical  or  natural  man  becomes  the  Spiritual  man,  or
transformed  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  degree  of  our  being,  it  is
that  new  birth  of  the  Spirit  which  is  eternal  life.

In  accordance  with  all  principles  and  law  of  thought-transference
and  acting  on  the  principle  that  ideas  operate  as  causes,  the  tme
operator  must  form  in  his  mind  the  idea  of  the  change  to  be  efiEected
in  the  patient  in  order  to  cure  the  disease ;  therefore  a  focalization  of
the  change  desired  directly  opposite  to  the  disease  is  highly  neces*
sary.

Tlie  action  of  a  sptritucUly  attuned  mind  in  its  octaves  of  vibra-
tion upon  other  minds  is  very  marked.  The  mere  presence  of  such  an
individual  causes  high  and  lofty  refreshment,  while  to  a  low,  animal.


METAPHYSICS,   THE  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  335

sensuous  mind  there  is  combat  and  hostility  at  once,  even  if  no  word
is  spoken.  The  strong  influence  which  lofty,  pure  minds  exert
over  other  minds,  without  the  use  of  spoken  words  and  independ-
ently of  the  ordinary  channels  of  cummunication  through  any  of  the
five  senses,  is  a  subject  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  student.

There  is  a  practical  system  of  Phrenopathy  or  mental  therapeutics
which  is  the  sole  object  of  this  chapter.

Until  quite  recently,  very  few  persons  ever  realized  the  potential
influence  of  thought  and  mind,  when  directed  toward  another  person,
either  near  or  far  of!  in  space.  According  to  the  Economy  of  Spirit
and  Soul,  to  think  of  another  interiorly,  within  the  inner  temple,
occasions  a  Spiritual  presence  of  that  person,  for  distance  is  annihi-
lated and  place  is  as  nothing.  The  person's  living  image,  the  true
man,  the  inner  personality,  seems  to  stand  before  us,  and  the  very
thought-words  we  say  to  it  are  said  to  him.  When  the  thoughts  are
grounded  in  love  and  sympathy,  an  interior  conjunction  of  minds  is
effected,  a  mental  octave  of  concord,  a  true  condition  of  rapport.

The  system  of  mental  healing,  which  is  exciting  so  much  interest
in  every  land  to-day,  is  not  new  in  either  its  philosophy  or  practice.
It  is  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  Christianity,  tiie  doctrine  of
saivation  by  faith,  which  is  only  the  reappearance  of  Christ's  faith
under  a  new  name.  It  is  said  :  ''  And  all  things  whatsoever  ye  shatt
ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive,^*

Real,  true  prayer  is  not  a  repetition  of  a  form  of  words,  but  a  cer-
tain loving  receptive  state  of  faith,  a  child-like  attitude  of  the  mind
and  heart  of  man,  asking  the  Father  of  All.  The  promise  is :  ''  Ask
and  it  shall  be  given."  That  of  which  we  form  a  conception,  and
which  we  long  for  and  desire,  becomes  a  living  reality,  a  real  thing  in
the  universal  life  principle;  and  what  we  thus  ask  in  loving  faith  is
soon  reflected  back  to  us  somewhat  as  a  sound  is  returned,  or  water
in  raindrops  to  refresh  the  earth,  and  that  what  we  ask  in  love  with
an  aspiration,  or  breathing,  out  of  the  Soul  into  the  all-surrounding
Spirit  of  Life,  is  returned  to  us  as  an  inspiration  or  inbreathing.  This
is  the  economy  of  all  occult  properties,  which  is  reaction.  ''  As  ye
sow,  so  shall  ye  reap."

In  all  our  mental  and  physical  maladies,  there  is  help  at  hand,
through  Spirit,  for  the  Christ  is  not  afar  off  in  the  great  immeasurable
depths  of  space,  but  very  near  in  the  world  He  loves  so  well ;  and
comes  to  men  to  breathe  into  them  the  quickening  Spirit  of  eternal
life.  When  men  reach  up,  Christ  Love  reaches  down,  for  in  the
economy  of  mind  psychological  effects  can  be  produced,  and  thoughts


336      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  ideas  communicated  from  mind  to  mind,  from  Soul  to  Spirit^
whether  in  this  world  or  the  realms  above  it  matters  not  By  pro-
ducing the  octave  of  Spiritual  vibration  it  is  done.

While  the  Spirit  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  lower  Soul  is  the  Son  of
Man.  In  the  progress  of  the  evolutionary  process,  the  animal  Soul
or  psychical  man  is  that  which  first  comes  into  conscious  activity  and
has  a  dominating  influence  over  the  life.  The  higher  man  is  yet
latent,  and  is  the  product  of  a  later  birth  through  the  Spirit  within
which  is  the  understanding  and  development  of  a  far  higher  region
and  ripening  by  unfoldment  of  our  true  being.

St.  Paul  expressed  the  unfoldment  of  our  inner  nature  thus:  **The
first  man,  or  Adam,  became  a  living  Soul ;  the  last  Adam  b  a  life-
giving  Spirit.  Howbeit  that  is  not  first  which  is  Spiritual,  but  that
which  is  natural  (or  psychical).  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy ;
the  second  man  is  of  heaven ;  and  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the
earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly."    i  Cor,  zv. :

45-49-

A  journal  of  health  asks :  "  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  the  prayer

cure  ?  Is  there  anything  in  the  reports  which  are  constantly  coming
before  the  public,  of  the  wonderful  cures  ? "  How  many  times  have
these  questions  been  asked  of  us  by  people  who  do  not  believe  the
stories  that  are  told  of  them,  and  by  people  who  believe  all  that  is
told  them  and  only  refrain  from  believing  more  because  more  won-
derful stories  have  not  reached  them.  It  seems  strange,  indeed,  that
people  living  in  a  community  where  books  are  easily  found  to  be
referred  to,  and  where  every  means  of  gaining  knowledge  of  the  sub-
ject is  easily  to  be  attained,  do  not  take  pains  to  inform  themselves
and  arrive  at  some  fair  conclusion  upon  the  subject  If  we  had  time
or  space  in  our  present  article  to  go  back  to  India,  Greece,  and  Rome,
indeed  all  the  ancient  nations  of  the  East,  thousands  of  years  ago,  we
should  find  the  same  class  of  phenomena,  the  same  kind  of  facts  oo-
curring,  and  the  same  or  still  more  wonderful  things  thought  of  then
than  those  of  modem  times.  People  in  those  earlier  days  of  the
world  thought  they  were  the  work  of  some  of  their  numerous  gods,
the  only  power  they  supposed  available  for  such  strange  phenomena.
Many  of  them  worshipped  and  sacrificed  to  these  strange  gods ;  but
we  cannot  at  this  time  follow  their  curious  manifestations,  and  will
begin  at  a  period  less  remote,  where  the  history  can  be  traced  and  the
transaction  followed  with  some  degree  of  assurance.

The  "  Royal  Touch  "  was  commenced  during  the  reign  of  Charles
I.,  and  was  probably  just  as  much  a  mystery  to  him  as  to  those  who


KETAPHYSICS,   THE   PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  337

witnessed  it.  How  or  by  what  means  he  first  found  that  he  possessed
the  power  is  not  given.  In  those  days  of  kingcraft,  which  was  only
exceeded  by  the  priestcraft  then  existing,  anything  which  was  uncom-
mon, or  not  understood  by  people,  generally  passed  for  a  miracle,  and
so  Charles,  for  his  gift  of  healing,  was  supposed  to  have  the  Divine
grace  actually  poured  upon  him,  as  if  he  had  been  a  poor  saint  instead
of  one  of  the  common  sinners  of  his  time ;  but  then  he  was  a  king,
and  as  ignorant  of  the  power  by  which  he  cured  the  ''  King's  Evil "
as  those  who  were  cured  by  his  hand.

We  must  not  imagine  that  all  who  came  to  him  were  cured,  for
such  was  not  the  fact.  It  was  for  curing  thb  one  disease  that  he  was
most  celebrated,  but  occasionally  the  afflicted  of  others  came  to  him
and  were  benefited.  The  case  is  so  plain  as  to  lead  Mr.  Collier,  in
Ecclesiastical  History,  to  say :  ''  To  thus  dispute  a  matter  of  fact,  is  to
go  to  the  excess  of  scepticism,  to  deny  our  senses,  and  to  be  incredu-
lous even  to  ridiculousness."  This  was  said  when  giving  a  history  of
Charles  the  Second,  who,  it  is  said,  touched  during  the  twenty  years
he  continued  the  practice,  92,700  patients —  sometimes  five  or  six
hundred  during  one  sitting.  Of  course,  in  that  age,  with  the  little
knowledge  of  medicines  possessed  by  the  people,  it  was  easily  magni-
fied into  a  religious  ceremony,  having  its  Lord  Bishop  and  a  liturgy
prepared  specially  for  it  All  this  aided  in  the  healing  process,  but
thousands  were  not  healed,  and  of  them  we  get  but  little  report.

Religious  faith  was  very  universal  in  those  days,  and  very  strong.
It  was  a  very  common  belief  at  the  time  that  Charles  the  First  was
the  image  of  Christ ;  that  Cromwell,  who  killed  him  and  reigned  in
his  stead,  was  the  devil,  and  that  Charles  the  Second  was  Christ  come
again.  It  was  said  that  handkerchiefs  dipped  in  Charles'  blood  cured
many  of  the  nobility.  We  cannot  dispute  it,  for  imagination  has  cured
its  tens  of  thousands,  and  proved  a  genuine  cure  too.

But  in  time  others  came  to  cure  people  by  the  same  process.
Valentine  Greatrakes  of  England  was  found  to  be  equal  to  any  of  the
royal  healers,  and  he  healed  by  the  same  process,  of  which  we  have
abundant  testimony.  He  was,  from  all  accounts,  even  more  success-
ful than  the  royal  healers,  as  he  should  have  been,  and  as  much
sought  after.     He  was  for  a  long  time  kept  busy  at  his  healing.

These  healers  of  diseases  have  appeared  at  various  times  in  Eng-
land, France,  and  Germany,  and,  we  presume,  in  all  other  countries.

George  Fox  and  many  of  the  early  Quakers  had  the  power  of
healing  diseases.  They  did  not  know  what  gave  them  the  power,  and
thought  it  to  be  some  great  gift  that  had  been  handed  over  to  them


338  THE    HIDDEN   WAY    ACROSS   THE  THRESHOLD.

because  they  were  nearer  than  other  people  to  the  right  way.  Now,
the  Quakers  do  not  have  it  more  than  other  people.  The  prayer  cure
is  nothing  new.  It  is  as  old  as  history,  and  the  same  in  different  ages
of  the  world.  When  we  learn  more  about  prayer,  we  shall  know  more
about  the  prayer  cure :  but  we  may  rest  assured  that  there  is  nothing
mysterious  in  it,  and  that  no  religious  machinery  enters  into  it  any
more  than  into  thousands  of  other  things  whidi  we  have  come  to
understand.

John.  M.  Spear,  then  of  Boston,  was  one  day  **  impressed  "  that  he
must  get  his  horse  and  chaise  and  go  some  ten  or  fifteen  miles  in  the
country,  on  a  road  which  was  totally  unknown  to  him,  for  some  pur-
pose, he  could  not  tell  what.  He  did  not  feel  inclined  to  go,  but  the
feeling  became  so  strong  that  he  finally  hitched  up  his  horse  and
started,  riding  along  in  silence,  following  the  direction  of  his  great
impulse.  At  length  the  horse  stopped  at  a  poor-looking,  lonely
house,  and  he  went  in.  A  man  was  sitting  in  a  chair,  afflicted  with
rheumatism,  so  as  to  suffer  greatly,  and  was  unable  to  walk.  Mr.
Spear  approached,  asking  him  what  was  the  matter,  and  touched  him.
Immediately  the  man  felt  an  electric  shock  all  over  him,  and  said :
"  Who  are  you  ?  what  do  you  want  ? "  He  was  alarmed  at  the  effect
of  Mr.  Spear's  touch,  and  Mr.  Spear  repeated  it,  when  the  man  was
entirely  healed,  but  ordered  his  benefactor  away,  as  he  said  he  was
afraid  of  him.    Mr.  Spear  has  had  many  cases  of  that  kind.

Dr.  J.  R.  Newton,  of  Boston,  had  the  same  faculty  in  a  very  emi-
nent degree.  On  one  occasion  a  man  came  twenty  or  thirty  miles  in
the  night  for  him  to  go  and  see  if  he  could  cure  his  infant  boy — his
only  child  —  whom  all  the  doctors  of  his  neighborhood  had  seen  and
given  up  to  die.  The  man  begged  of  the  doctor  to  go  at  once  home
with  him.  The  doctor  stretched  out  his  hand  towards  the  man's  resi-
dence and  said :  "  Go  home  ;  your  child  is  cured."  The  man  could
not  believe  him,  and  wanted  him  to  go ;  but  the  doctor  refused,  saying :
"  Your  child  is  well."  The  father  went  home  and  found  his  child,  as
the  doctor  had  told  him,  entirely  well,  and  the  mother,  by  a  compari-
son of  time,  said  that  at  the  time  of  the  night  he  was  at  the  doctor's,
the  child  awoke  laughing  and  cured.  This  is  only  one  of  the  numer-
ous cases  equally  strong  and  well  authenticated  that  were  performed
by  the  doctor,  and  such  cases  are  occurring  in  various  parts  of  the
country  every  day.

Are  the  wonderful  cures  by  these  gifted  men  at  all  miraculous,  or
are  they  a  part  of  a  great  system  with  which  wc  have  not  become
fully  acquainted,  that  runs  in  some  way  through  all  human  society  ?


KETAPHYSICSy  THE  PRAYER  OP  THOUGHT.  339

Much  in  many  cases  is  efiEected  by  pure  imagination.  In  one  case
arrangements  were  made  by  a  physician  to  have  a  young  bed-ridden
woman  prayed  for  at  the  several  churches  on  a  certain  day,  at  a  cer-
tain hour.  At  that  hour  the  lady  arose  and  walked,  apparently  quite
cured.  She  gained  strength  rapidly.  She  had  been  informed  that
prayer  would  be  offered  up  for  her,  but  if  her  cure  was  the  result  of
imagination,  it  was  no  less  complete,  as  the  disease  never  returned.

From  mesmeric  experience  it  may  be  designated  as  the  ''  Spirit
centre  or  starting-point  of  reality."  If  there  were  no  imagination
there  would  be  no  reality,  either  Spiritual  or  material,  for  the  Spirit
must  imagine  before  it  can  create.

Every  Mesmerist  knows  that  physical  effects  may  be  produced  on
sensitives  through  the  imagination  only,  that  will  compare  in  every
respect  to  physical  effects  produced  through  physical  causes.  He
can  accelerate  or  lower  the  beatings  of  the  heart,  make  his  sensitive
hot  or  cold  —  really  not  in  imagination  but  through  the  imagination.
This  power  of  imagination  is  even  admitted  by  the  medical  profes-
sion. An  instance  is  given  in  some  well  known  medical  work  of  a
skin  disease  having  broken  out  on  a  medical  student  merely  through
the  minute  description  given  by  the  teacher,  and  he  was  cured  through
the  ordinary  medicinal  treatment.  Imagination  is  so  powerful  that
we  might  say  it  glides  or  condenses  into  materiality.

When  any  complaint  returns  after  treatment  by  faith  or  mind-cure,
it  is  caused  by  the  mind  dwelling  on  the  reminiscences  of  the  past  com-
plaint^ and  thereby  creating  the  disease  afresh^  through  the  agency  of
the  very  same  power  that  cured  them.

When  a  Faith-healer,  ignorant  of  the  elementary  laws  of  mesmer-
ism performs  a  cure,  he  always  leaves  the  imagination  at  the  very
same  exalted  pitch  which  was  necessary  when  performing  the  cure,
thus  leaving  a  door  open  for  the  return  or  creation  of  any  disease
that  the  patient  can  most  vividly  imagine,  which  is  of  course  likely  to
be  that  from  which  he  has  just  been  relieved.

The  imagination  being  left  in  this  exalted  condition,  the  patient
is  in  the  very  same  condition  as  a  sensitive  under  mesmeric  influence,
almost  at  the  mercy  of  any  operator.

After  a  cure,  therefore,  the  operator  should  extract  a  promise
from  the  patient  that  there  shall  be  no  return  of  the  complaint.  This
promise  given  Spiritual  resistance  is  awakened,  and  its  material  effect
will  follow.

The  potent  force  which  in  different  periods  has  posed  as  magic,
mesmerism,  hypnotism,  electro-biology,  psychic  force,  and  a  score  of


340      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Other  metamorphoses,  is  really  mind-force  which  plays  so  important  a
part  in  every  phase  of  existence.  And  mind-force  b  by  no  means
limited  to  minds  encased  in  mortal  bodies.  The  great  majority  of
minds  that  have  lived  on  this  earth  have  thrown  oft  the  encum-
brance of  clay,  and,  so  far  as  they  have  become  harmonized  and
united  with  the  infinite  and  all-pervading  Mind  of  the  Universe,
they  may  be  supposed  to  be  joined  with  countless  other  minds  from
other  earths  similarly  harmonized,  in  forming  a  vast  reservoir  of
mind-force  that  is  available  for  human  healing  and  uplifting  to  such
as  in  faith  and  receptivity  are  earnest  to  avail  themselves  of  it
Whether  mind  is  a  manifestation  of  matter  or  of  Spirit,  signifies
nothing  in  relation  to  the  question  of  mind-cure.  We  have  simply
to  recognize  mental  action  as  a  perfectly  human  and  natural  pro-
cess. By  imparting  Spiritual  truths  to  a  patient  to  take  the  place
of  his  psychical  or  sensational  illusions,  errors,  and  fallacies,  the
inward  man  is  re-formed,  his  inner  temple  illuminated,  and  he  reflects
the  image  of  the  heavenly.  That  which  is  truth  b  healthful  and
harmonious.

An  emotion,  to  be  kept  active,  must  be  fed  by  corresponding
emotions.  To  accomplish  the  most  potential  force  one  must  leave
the  sphere  of  self,  uniting  and  mingling  with  the  Universal,  thus
becoming  associated  with  a  permanent  principle  which  has  no  change-
able form,  but  is  enduring.

Thb  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  the  Mahatmas.  Their  emotions
were  kept  active  by  attunement  with  the  Universal  Energy.  In  the
intellectual  sphere  the  Adove  always  verifies  and  attracts  the  Behw^
so  that  every  man  receives  his  good  thoughts  and  higher  aspirations
from  the  primitive  Fountain  of  Truth.  But  in  the  realms  of  animal
or  psychical  bodies  the  opposite  law  holds  good.  The  more  life
expands  and  grows,  the  more  it  becomes  active  to  the  universal
harmony,  the  more  easily  it  escapes  perceptions  and  desires  of  the

physical  senses.

As  each  sun  has  its  systems  of  planets  revolving  around  it,  so
each  body  is  surrounded  by  smaller  centres  of  energy,  evolving  from
the  common  centre  and  partaking  of  the  attributes  of  that  centre.

As  the  sun  radiates  light  and  heat,  so  man  can  radiate  atmos-
pheres. Each  emotion  of  man  radiates  an  atmosphere  of  certain
color.  Thus  Love  is  blue  ;  Intelligence,  yellow ;  Benevolence,  green ;
Faith,  violet ;  Contentment,  pink ;  Desire,  red ;  Cunning,  dun-red  or
grayish ;  Violence,  brownish  black,  etc.

As  the  color  of  the  auras  depends  on  the  character  of  the  emo-


METAPHYSICS,   THE  PRAYER  OF  THOUGHT.  34I

tions,  SO  the  sight  and  reflection  of  certain  colors  may  produce  a
certain  emotion,  especially  where  the  emotional  element  is  unguided
by  reason.

On  this  principle,  the  Adepts  advise  their  students  as  to  the  use
of  their  Astral  colors,  for  the  Astral  emanations  from  the  ethereal
counterpart  of  the  physical  body,  which  is  the  Astral,  star-magno,  or
odylic  body  of  man.

A  person  in  his  normal  condition  may  hide  his  emotions,  but
when  under  the  influence  of  a  drug  or  an  anaesthetic,  the  intellect
loses  its  control,  and  the  emotional  nature  of  the  person  usually  mani-
fests its  peculiar  characteristics.

A  person  in  a  trance  may  be  fully  awake  on  a  much  higher
plane  of  existence,  and  be  more  wise  and  intelligent  during  that  state ;
and  when  his  physical  consciousness  returns,  and  his  attention  is
attracted  to  the  lower  plane,  he  will  usually  remember  nothing  of  what
he  said  or  did  during  entrancement,  but  is  oblivious  to  the  time  and
things  as  when  he  is  asleep.  Consciousness  begins  where  sensation
begins,  but  consciousness  does  not  necessarily  follow  sensation.  The
more  a  person  realizes  the  true  state  of  his  existence,  the  less  he  is
deluded.  The  more  fully  he  understands  himself  and  his  surround-
ings, the  better  he  can  command  them,  till,  becoming  an  Adept,  he
can  pass  into  another  state  of  existence,  in  which  he  realizes  a  new
order  of  things  and  a  new  variety  of  sensations,  as  real  to  him  as  the
physical  ones  experienced  during  the  objective  life  of  the  animal  only.

Unwelcome,  provoking,  and  noxious  thoughts  usually  make  a
merely  superficial  impression,  and  he  who  can  command  his  thoughts
may  become  oblivious  to  such  at  once.

Purely  exalted  thoughts  and  sublimely  Spiritual  ideas  penetrate
more  deeply  into  the  mind.  All  thoughts,  once  evolved,  linger  more
or  less  in  the  Astral  light.  To  remember  a  thing  is  to  read  it  in  the
Astral  light,  the  book  of  memory  upon  whose  pages  all  events  are
recorded ;  and  the  more  deeply  they  are  engraved,  the  longer  they
will  last,  even  when  physical  consciousness  has  faded  and  passed
away.

No  thoiight  can  travel  from  one  individual  to  another  without  a
corresponding  material  existing  between  them  to  act  as  a  medium  or
conductor.  There  must  be  a  harmonious  vibration.  No  sound  can
be  heard  in  a  space  from  which  the  air  has  been  exhausted.  There
being  no  vibration,  there  can  be  no  sound.  It  is  well  known  that  the
tones  produced  by  a  musical  instrument  do  not  die  within  the  instru-
ment, but  can  be  heard  at  distances  according  to  their  pitch  and


34^      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

power,  and  the  conditions  of  the  air  throiigh  which  they  vibrate.  On
the  same  principle  thought-transference  is  not  only  possible  but  is  of
every-day  occurrence,  and  can  be  brought  to  a  high  state  of  perfection
through  culture.

Only  the  ignorant  man  believes  that  he  knows  everything.  What
is  really  known  b  only  like  a  grain  of  sand  on  the  sea-shore  in  com-
parison to  what  is  still  unknown  on  the  shoreless  sea  of  eternity.

Seen  from  the  standpoint  of  the  eternal,  there  is  neither  past  nor
future,  and  nothing  exists  but  Spirit,  that  is  the  Ineffable  Name  whose
letters  are  written  in  Nature.

Metals  are  purified  and  refined  by  fire.  The  emotions  and  the
physical  man  are  purified  by  suffering  until  the  Angel  of  peace  and
Spirit  love  removes  the  stone  from  the  sepulchre,  and  man  becomes
attuned  with  the  Absolute  Love.  Then  he  is  liberated.  His  higher
nature  and  energies  arise  from  the  sphere  of  selfishness  and  darkness,
and  he  finds  the  true  life  in  peace,  and  becomes  active  in  a  new  world
of  enduring  light  and  harmony.

A  person  who  has  evil  thoughts  of  all  men,  who  has  vulgar  desires
and  tastes,  becomes  the  servant  of  them.  They  dictate  to  him,  and  he
is  obliged  to  exert  himself  to  obtain  means  for  their  gratification,  but
he  who  has  no  ignoble  desires,  and  always  looks  for  and  finds  the
good  in  mankind,  dropping  the  evil,  is  his  own  master.  He  has  con-
quered matter.  His  strife  with  the  elements  ceases.  Life  is  no
longer  a  disappointmentand  a  delusion.  His  illuminated  and  purified
Soul  finds  rest  in  the  bosom  of  its  Divine  Ideal,  the  Absolute  Love.

As  the  moon  reflects  the  light  of  the  sun,  so  the  mind  of  man
reflects  the  Universal  Mind.  The  human  Soul  is  not  a  simple  musi-
cal instrument  which  needs  only  to  be  set  going  and  plays  itself ;  but
a  compound  instrument  compared  to  various  harps  made  to  vibrate
in  unison  harmoniously,  a  perfect  chord  if  in  the  hand  of  a  harmo-
nious master,  or  touched  by  Spirit  whose  thoughts  of  the  Absolute
Love  and  the  Supreme  Idea  are  graven  in  letters  of  Light.  The  seers
and  prophets  of  all  ages  have  heard  and  understood  that  language
and  melodious  song,  which  they  can  only  reproduce  imperfectly
through  the  imperfect  language  of  their  times,  but  which  are  a
rereshment  to  their  lives.

Thus  man's  highest  Spiritual  energies  are  held  together  by  Love,
which,  pure  and  free  from  the  attraction  of  earth,  ascends  to  its  source
like  a  white-robed  Angel  of  light,  bringing  with  it  the  products  of  its
experiences  beyond  the  limits  of  matter.  This  is  human  life  when
ripened  by  growth  of  Spirit.


METAPHYSICS,   THE   PRAYER   OP  THOUGHT.  343

The  fountains  of  Spiritual  salvation,  or  the  systems  of  healing
through  faith  and  laying  on  of  hands  made  known  through  Christ,
can  never  be  drawn  dry,  but  ever  well  up  from  overflowing  springs  of
everlasting  life.

Expectant  attention  will  do  much,  but  it  often  happens  that  physir
col  changes  are  set  in  motion  by  the  operation  of  an  external  wiii^  which
shows  that  mind  is  a  force  to  be  reckoned  with  in  all  curative  pro-
cesses. This  is  the  general  principle  taught  by  Pythagoras,  and  one
of  great  antiquity.  The  key  to  all  this  is  to  establish  a  continuous
identity  of  molecular  vibration  between  the  Spiritual  part  of  man  and
the  great  Absolute  and  Infinite  energy  of  nature.  When  man  reaches
this  octave  of  vibration,  he  raises  the  magic  wand  of  his  Will  and
quiets  the  tempest.  This  is  the  true  radiation  of  atmosphere.  The
full  understanding  of  the  dual  force  i%  the  secret  of  Will,  These  are
the  higher  radiations  of  the  Will,  a  knowledge  silently  put  into  prac-
tice.   The  knowledge  of  the  highest  is  power,  and  power  is  Will.

The  human  Will  has  the  same  effect  on  the  Akcua  or  human
magno  that  the  magnet  has  on  iron,  radiating  about  the  physical
plane  of  the  patient,  calming  the  surging  billows  of  his  Astral  spheres.

If  the  dual  force  of  the  physician  is  properly  attuned,  he  can  make
the  Astral  and  the  Soul  light  to  shine  round  about,  projecting  it  with
his  commanding  Will  across  miles  of  space,  for  distance  is  nothing  in
the  Astral  world.

The  best  method  of  learning  the  true  principle  of  mental  healing
is  to  commence  the  unfoldment  of  our  Spiritual  and  Deific  powers  by
calm  and  silent  meditation ;  then,  if  possible,  to  come  under  the  guid-
ance and  oversight  of  some  Pilgrim  who  has  gone  over  the  hidden,
winding,  spiral  path  up  the  glorious  mountain-summits  and  celestial
heights  of  experience.

Many  diseases  may  be  cured  by  restoring  the  Spiritual  attunement
within  the  inner  man.  When  a  man  gains  even  a  few  glimpses  of  the
Divine  Idea  of  his  true  humanity,  and  perceives  intuitively  that  the
true  self  is  immortal  and  cannot  be  physically  diseased,  he  feels  in
himself  a  renewed  impulse  toward  the  extemalization  of  that  idea.
Thus  he  "  puts  on  Christ,"  the  Spiritual,  the  Christ  within,  which,
when  discovered  to  the  consciousness  of  the  Soul,  seeks  to  clothe
itself  with  an  atmosphere  and  a  body  that  is  harmonious  to  it,  which
is  health  and  truth,  thrusting  out  error,  which  is  disease.

When  called  to  act  upon  a  patient  with  the  Spiritual  remedy,  en
deavor  in  silence  to  calm  him  that  he  may  become  receptive  of  the
radiating  atmosphere.    Then  in  your  own  mind  silently  form  the  true


344  ''"B  HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

idea  of  the  patient,  as  he  really  is  in  Spirit ;  not  the  outer  but  the
true  man  within,  and  if  he  is  in  any  degree  receptive  you  will  inaugu-
rate a  change  within  him  and  his  whole  inner  being  which  sooner  or
later  will  work  itself  outward  into  a  bodily  expression.  Thus  the
operator  plants  in  his  unconscious  mind  the  germ  of  light  which  will
soon  illuminate  his  Soul,  bearing  a  living  seed  of  a  higher  and  better
condition,  which  will  develop  into  consciousness  within  him  and  woric
itself  outward,  dispelling  all  error  and  disease.

If  the  ideas  of  the  operator  are  of  Spirit  truth  they  will  be  transferred
to  the  Soul  of  the  patient,  who  becomes  conscious  of  them,  and  these
ideas  ultimately  become  a  physiological  impulse  in  the  direction  of
health  and  strength.

To  emancipate  the  inward,  real,  true  man  from  his  imprisonment
in  matter  is  to  cure  all  disease,  which  is  the  translation  into  a  corporeal
expression  of  a  false  idea  of  man ;  therefore  a  cure  must  commence  with
the  obliteration  of  that  false  conception  and  the  formation  of /ni«M!«/
both  of  our  own  inner  being  and  that  of  the  patient

This  is  the  economy  of  mind  and  Soul  over  matter  and  its  diseases.

And  now  abide  in  f^th,  hope,  and  chari^ ;  these  three ;  but  the
greatest  of  these  is  charity.

The  Spirit  world  around  thii  world  of  *enae
Floats  like  an  atmoaphere,  and  eveiywhere
Wafts  through  these  earthly  mists  and  vapors  deoM
A  Tital  breaUi  of  more  ethereal  air.


CHAPTER  XIL

KVOLUnON  AND  INVOLUTION.

''TIm  outward  doth  from  the  bward  roO
And  the  inward  dwells  in  the  inmoit  SooL**

What  is  evolution  ?  It  is  a  theory  of  the  steps  by  which  the  earth
has  come  to  its  present  state,  and  how  the  different  forms  of  animal  and
vegetable  life  have  succeeded  one  another  and  have  come  to  what  they
are.  It  takes  away  some  things,  but  they  are  such  as  no  clear  head
and  human  heart  would  like  to  keep.  One  who  accepts  it  will  have
to  surrender  the  belief  in  the  fall  of  man,  in  the  common  doctrine  of
heaven  and  hell,  and  the  teaching  of  the  Bible,  but  evolution  does  not
put  God  beyond  us.  It  brings  Him  unspeakably  nearer  to  us  instead,
revealing  Him  in  every  grass  blade,  in  every  nerve-thrill,  in  every  heart*
throb.  So  far  from  it  being  true  that  evolution  destroys  rel^on,  it
prepares  the  foundation  for  the  grandest  temple  of  human  worship
ever  reared.

Spirit  is  distinct  from  matter  but  not  from  energy ;  energy  b  the
source  of  matter.  It  is  therefore  through  energy  and  law  that  Crod  is
associated  with  the  universe.  The  law  is  His  word,  and  His  will  the
executive.

Never  did  a  living  being  appear  on  earth  by  the  unaided  action  of
matter,  or  mere  play  of  chemical  forces.  The  living  thing,  whether
plant  or  animal,  had  in  itself  an  element  of  life  or  spirit  which  was
not  matter,  and  that  element  was  a  portion  of  the  Infinite  sphere  of
life  and  power  which  can  never  be  seen  by  the  material  eye,  but  is
visible  to  the  opened  vision  of  the  Spirit  when  man  rises  into  the  pos-
session of  his  Spiritual  senses  unencumbered  by  the  material  of  the
earth.

Not  only  does  all  life  originate  thus  but  it  is  continually  maintained
from  the  Spirit  world,  for  as  the  body  cut  off  from  the  material  world
would  soon  cease  to  exist,  so  the  Spirit  cut  off  from  the  Spirit  world
would  perish  likewise.  Man  is  not  a  self-existent  being  —  not  a  mi-
croscopic God  sufficient  unto  himself.  He  is  but  the  confluent  centre
in  which  Spiritual  powers  assemble  —  a  vortex  of  organized  matter  on

J45


34^      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

earth,  while  from  the  higher  spheres  of  being  the  influx  is  maintained
— the  source  of  its  being  as  dimly  perceived  by  sage  and  Seer,  being
far  away  in  the  depths  of  the  Infinite.

One  great  difficulty  of  the  Soul  in  mortal  condition  arises  in  the
misunderstanding  of  conditions  as  applied  to  the  relative  positions  of
the  finite  and  the  infinite,  wheieby  the  lesser  being  ofttimes  feels  iso-
lated and  far  removed  from  the  Divine  comforter,  the  heavenly  home,
the  Soul's  rest.

But  within  the  very  circle  of  each  SouPs  observation  comes  the  oft-
repeated  ministry  of  the  Divine  presence,  the  God  made  manifest  is
no  more  mysterious  in  its  presence  than  b  the  working  of  love  and
life  everywhere.

Spirit  is  the  life,  and  Soul  the  intelligence  that  guides  and  directs
that  life.  We  detect  the  presence  of  the  Soul  by  the  manifested  life-
force  that  effects  our  condition  of  being,  that  enters  into  and  becomes
a  part  of  our  every  surrounding.

The  very  life-force  that  babbles  in  the  waters,  or  kisses  the
flowers  in  the  summer  breeze,  or  sings  a  requiem  in  the  forest  pine,  is
a  manifestation  of  an  invisible  life,  for  life,  even  in  the  keeping  of  our
own  organism,  is  ever  an  invisible  force  to  the  outer  sense,  made  man-
ifest only  in  its  results,  yet  so  closely  blended  with  our  every  effort
that  insensibly  we  see  its  currents  as  they  quicken  the  heart-throbs
with  gladness  or  muffle  them  with  the  slow,  steady  march  of  sorrow.

Upon  a  theme  so  profound  as  thb  of  the  origin  and  evolution  of
man,  the  compiler  feels  that  he  cannot  do  better  than  to  present  a  few
of  the  best  thoughts  of  some  of  the  ablest  writers  upon  this  subject,  in
as  condensed  form  as  possible.

Mr.  Oxley  says  the  true  meaning  of  the  scriptures  of  all  religions,
when  discovered,  will  end  the  conflict  between  science  and  theology,
all  Biblical  narratives  being  not  historical  but  ethical,  based  upon
solar  and  planetary  motions,  which  refer  to  subjects  that  do  not  ap-
pear on  the  surface ;  in  other  words,  symbolical.  Therefore  he  treats
of  the  subject  from  a  scientiflc  not  from  a  Biblical  standpoint.

The  sum  of  the  speculations  and  investigations  of  Darwin  upon
this  subject  is,  briefly,  this,  viz, :

Man  has  been  developed  from  the  brutes ;  who  by  chance  or  for-
tuitous conditions  have  propagated  flner  and  better  specimens  of  their
order ;  and  who  by  the  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest  have  gradu-
ally succeeded  in  establishing  themselves  as  the  dominant  represen-
tatives of  their  species.  Coming  nearest  to  human  beings,  it  is  as-
serted that  their  original  progenitors  were,  if  not  apes  of  some  kind.


EVOLUTION   AND  INVOLUTION.  34/

an  order  of  animals  now  lost,  that  constituted  the  "  missing  link ''  be-
tween the  past  or  present  monkey  and  man.

It  is  strange  that  at  this  period  in  the  history  of  the  human  race
we  know  so  little  concerning  ourselves,  and  more  strange  that  the
tendency  of  modem  thought  is  to  depreciate  the  little  knowledge  we
do  possess.

Unless  another  class  of  minds  rise  up  and  successfully  oppose  this
tendency,  the  mass  who  follow  such  leaders  as  Darwin  and  his  kind
must  become  Agnostics.

But  it  must  be  shown  that  forces  are  now  active  in  the  world
which  will  not  be  ignored  nor  stamped  out  by  the  self-sufficiency  of
learned  ignorance,  nor  by  the  very  natural  nervous  apprehensions
and  fears  of  specific  castes  of  men  who  have  vested  interests  to  up-
hold.

To  know  is  the  birthright  of  a  man,  and  the  acquisition  of  the
knowledge  of  truth  in  every  department  accessible  to  human  research
and  intelligence  will  alone  elevate  mankind  to  the  altitude  of  thought,
and  thence  of  life,  which  must  sooner  or  later  be  attained.

The  spirit  of  democracy  which  is  rushing  onward  with  irresistible
force,  is  an  important  factor  in  the  work  of  exploration.  The  enfran-
chisement of  mind  will  in  due  time  follow  the  enfranchisement  of
hody^  and  men  will  cease  to  be  hoodwinked  by  sacerdotal  or  other
castes,  who  dare  to  determine  the  limits  beyond  which  investigation  is
not  to  venture,  and  any  system  of  thought  that  cannot  meet  the
requirements  of  honest  criticism  must  yield  its  ground  to  systems
resting  upon  facts  to  demonstrate  their  truth.

The  dogmatic  claims  of  so-called  Science  to  determine  the  limits
of  human  investigation  must  be  met  with  protest;  for  "science"  is
nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  tabulation  of  facts,  and  there  are
facts  that  by  their  very  nature  cannot  be  subject  to  the  methods
usually  adopted  by  scientific  experimentalists,  but  they  are  facts
nevertheless,  and  as  such  are  subject  to  scientific  research.  If  the
Soul  of  man  be  a  fact,  —  and  who  can  deny  it  ?  —  then  the  activities  of
the  Soul  must  necessarily  be  subject  to  scientific  analysis  and  research,
if  conducted  upon  methods  suitable  for  dealing  with  the  same.

As  has  been  seen,  the  term  Evolution  of  Man,  as  used  by  natu-
ralistic scientists,  means  the  development  of  more  perfect  from  less
perfect  forms,  beginning  with  the  simple  cell  and  ending  in  man  him-
self. The  fatal  objection  to  this  theory  lies  in  the  fact  that  the
"  missing  link ''  is  wanting ;  as  so  far  as  is  known  there  are  neither
living  specimens  nor  fossilized  ones.    Another  side  question  comes


348       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

in  also,  as  to  whether  the  entire  human  race  has  descended  from  one
original  pair.  Hiere  appears  nothing  in  nature  to  support  such  a
supposition,  and  science  seems  to  be  pointing  to  the  thought,  if  not
fact,  that  racial  differences  are  due  to  the  original  variations  of
ancestry.  We  cannot  accept  a  variation  of  species  caused  by  artifi-
cial means  as  a  demonstration  of  another  and  distinct  order  of
animal  life  from  prior  existing  orders,  and  until  proof  can  be  adduced
we  may  safely  hold  to  the  perpetuation  of  kind  and  not  of  hybrids.

Having  detected  the  weakness  of  the  naturalistic  theory,  the  ques-
tion is,  Can  anything  be  known  regarding  human  origin  ?  The  word
origin,  derived  from  the  Latin  origo^  to  become  visible,  that  from
which  anything  primarily  proceeds,  etc.,  gives  a  clew,  by  following
which  we  may  perhaps  find  a  solution.  Existence  applies  to  the
external  forms  visible  to  the  bodily  eye ;  but  there  can  be  no  external
without  an  tntemal^  and  to  this  we  apply  the  term  substance^  which  is
not  of  necessity  material,  nor  cognizable  by  our  five  bodily  senses.
The  all-important  point  is  to  conceive  of  the  human  principle  as  dis-
tinguished from  the  animal,  subsisting  in  some  form  or  other  prior  to
its  becoming  externalized  in  the  being  known  as  man.

To  the  life-principle  itself  there  is,  according  to  our  philosophy,
neither  beginning  nor  end,  but  as  it  becomes  differentiated  by  assum-
ing such  an  infinite  variety  of  forms  by  which  it  expresses  itself ;  to
every  kind  of  such  forms,  organic  or  otherwise,  there  is  both  begin-
ning and  end,  illustrated  by  what  we  know  as  birth  and  death.

It  seems  hardly  reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  living  human  body
is  first  made,  and  then  supplied  with  life  by  a  special  act  of  God,  for
science  has  discovered  that  the  life-germ  or  atom  is  the  architect  of
the  body  or  temple  in  which  it  resides  for  a  time.  The  real  origin  of
man  is  not  to  be  traced  from  animals,  but  in  an  anterior  state  of  being,
and  the  connecting  link  between  the  prior  and  posterior  conditions
of  subsistence  and  existence  will  be  spoken  of  when  we  treat  of  the
evolution  of  man  as  a  physical  being.

Theology  attributes  the  working  of  natural  law  to  a  Being  to
whom  it  applies  the  term  God!  Of  this  Intelligent  Power,  which
guides  and  controls  all  laws  in  every  universe,  we  say :  There  is  One
Life  and  One  Substance,  the  Central  or  Great  Supreme  fountain  from
which  all  living  forms  originate,  unknown  and  inconceivable  by
mortals.

This  One  Life  is  manifested  in  an  infinite  variety  of  forms  on  this
planet,  from  the  simple  monad  up  to  man,  who  is  the  highest  expres-
sion of  life  known  to  us.    What  forms  of  life  may  be  on  the  other


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  349

planets  and  in  the  myriad  solar  systems  in  infinite  space  b  of  course
only  conjectural,  unless  spiritually  discerned  through  mediumship ;
but  it  is  rational  to  suppose  that  globes  such  as  ours  are  made  for
the  purpose  of  being  inhabited  by  intelligent  beings.  While  living  in
mortal  bodies  we  only  know  of  life  by  the  forms  which  manifest  its
presence.  The  same  with  the  form  of  substance  which  we  term
"  matter."  We  know  of  this  only  by  its  manifestation,  in  forms  vary-
ing from  ethereal  to  gross  and  dense  and  solid.  But  we  find  one
law  affecting  all  forms  of  life  and  substance,  and  that  is  change,
which  applies  to  the  living  human  form  equally  with  the  granite
foundation  of  the  globe  itself.

In  his  lecture  on  the  evolution  of  man  as  a  physical  being,  Mr.
William  Oxley,  whom  we  have  previously  quoted,  speaks  thus :  —

*'  I  claim  to  speak  as  an  actual  witness,  whose  researches  in  thb
domain  of  Science  have  extended  over  a  peroid  of  many  years,  and
however  strange,  and  apparently  incredible,  the  facts  may  appear  to
such  as  are  ignorant  of  them,  yet  I  know  that  my  testimony  is  true,
and  no  amount  of  non-evidence  can  invalidate  honest  and.  true  testi*
mony.  What  I  mean  by  a  human  physical  being  is  the  constituent
part  of  the  organism  that  we  call  body;  but  does  not  touch  the
internal  parts  we  think  of  as  Soul  and  Spirit.  Of  this,  then,  I  now
speak.

''I  have  positively  witnessed  the  making  of  bodies  that  were
human  to  all  intents  and  purposes.  The  law  of  propulsion,  urielded
and  utilized  by  intelligent  but  invisible  Beings,  is  distinctly  observa-
able.  The  modus  operandi  is  somewhat  as  follows.  A  man,  or
woman,  as  the  case  may  be,  known  to  scientbts  of  the  calibre  I  refer
to,  as  *'  psychic  sensitives,"  is  utilized  for  this  purpose.  While  the
sensitive  is  in  a  deep  trance  —  biblically  rendered,  a  "deep  sleep"  —
a  white  stream  of  vapor  is  seen  to  issue,  generally  from  the  right  side
under  the  ribs ;  and  gradually  this  vaporous  substance  thickens  and
forms  into  streaks,  lines,  curves,  etc.  Then  a  head  is  formed,  with
face,  mouth,  eyes,  and,  sometimes,  as  I  have  seen,  adorned  with  a
crown  set  with  what  appeared  to  be  sparkling  jewels.  Then  comes
the  robe  that  envelopes  the  body,  generally  pure  white,  but  I  have
seen  this  robe  of  various  colors.  In  short,  in  the  space,  say  of  about
two  or  three  minutes,  from  the  time  I  first  saw  the  white  vapor  issu-
ing from  the  side  of  the  sensitive,  there  stood  before  us  the  exact
resemblance  of  a  man,  woman,  or  child,  as  the  case  might  be.  These
were  not  shadowy,  but  actual,  solid,  and  tangible  forms,  for  I  have
felt  the  dress  and  grasped  their  hands :  and,  what  is  more,  in  some


3  so      TH£  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  TH£  THRESHOLD.

cases,  but  not  in  all,  I  have  actually  conversed  with  them.  The
theory  of  hallucination,  deception,  tricks,  etc.,  is  out  of  court,  for
this  and  a  great  many  other  phenomena  took  place  in  the  presence
of  many  witnesses,  whose  testimony  agrees.  The  process  of  de-
forming, or  de-materializing,  as  it  is  termed,  is  generally  as  gradual
as  the  reverse,  until  the  whole  of  the  white  vapor  is  absorbed  again,
or  drawn  back  into  the  body  of  the  sensitive.

*'  Now,  if  you  can  accept  this  as  true,  we  have  in  this  class  of
phenomena  positive  evidence  of  the  action  of  some  invisible  power ;
for  assuredly  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  unconscious  sensitive  nor
yet  of  the  wide-awake  people  who  witness  these  marvels  to  produce
them ;  and  we  have  only  to  go  back  in  thought  to  a  long,  long  past,
beginning  before  man,  as  we  know  him,  inhabited  the  earth,  and
credit  the  same  Power  with  projecting  a  human  life  germ-prindple
from  the  plane  of  internal  nature  to  that  of  external  nature,  and
rendering  it  permanently  solid,  and  the  problem  is  solved  so  far  as
the  forming  of  the  body  of  man  is  concerned.  This  suggestion,  for
it  is  nothing  more,  does  no  violence  to  the  biblical  account  when
properly  understood  and  bereft  of  its  mystic  clothing ;  and  in  it  we
have  a  higher  and  nobler  ancestry  than  that  offered  by  the  naturalis-
tic theory."

Man  as  a  Psychical  Being.

The  dictionary  meaning  of  the  word  Psychology  is  "  The  S3rstem-
atic  or  scientific  knowledge  of  the  powers  and  functions  of  the
human  Soul,  so  far  as  they  are  known  by  consciousness."  Thb
definition  will  answer  our  purpose,  as  it  admits  that  man  is  possessed
of  internal  powers  loosely  called  "  Soul  "  ;  and  we  go  to  the  length  of
stating  that  it  is  this  internal  something  called  Soul  which  is  a  part
of  the  real  man,  and  which  occupies  the  intermediate  between  the
central  life-principle  and  the  outer  physical  body.  It  is  in  short  that
which  constitutes  one  of  the  parts  that  is  immortal  and  imperishable,
and  one  of  the  factors  that  is  instrumental  in  developing  the  individ-
uality, and  makes  him  or  her  different  from  every  other  man  or
woman.  The  Soul  itself  is  scarcely  to  be  called  substantial,  /.  ^.,  in
the  sense  of  being  material,  but  it  must  be  taken  to  mean  all  the
powers  expressed  by  such  terms  as  mind,  memory,  volition,  intellect,
will,  etc.  But  the  Soul  has  an  envelope  corresponding  to  the  body  —
which  is  known  to  occult  scientists  as  the  "  Astral  body  " ;  or  more
vulgarly  speaking  the  "  double  " ;  and  it  is  this  Astral  body  which


EVOLUTION   AND   INVOLUTION,  35 1

pla3rs  such  an  important  part  in  psychic  phenomena.  The  vdthdrawal
of  this  Astral  body,  constituting  the  manifest  clothing  of  the  Soul,  is
not  unfrequently  visible  to  a  class  of  sensitives  who  are  known  as
clairvoyants,  and  it  is  not  until  the  last  spark  of  vitality  is  with-
drawn, which  builds  up  the  new  Astral  form,  that  the  work  of  decom-
position of  the  corpse  commences.

To  demonstrate  that  what  we  term  "  Soul "  is  the  active  opera-
tor in  the  making  of  the  body,  we  fall  back  on  the  discoveries  of
such  scientists  as  Haeckel  and  others,  who  have  seen  that  the  first
appearance  of  the  earth-man  or  woman  is  a  speck  so  small  that
the  microscope  only  can  detect  it.  Within  this  protoplastic  speck
lies  the  power  to  gradually  attract  to  itself  living  atoms  of  matter,
with  which  it  manipulates  and  develops  a  perfect  miniature  form  of
the  future  man  or  woman.  That  this  power  resides  in  the  original
speck  is  incontestable,  for  the  results  are  too  patent  to  be  ignored.
Thus  we  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  psychic  principle,
called  Soul,  is  the  active  although  invisible  agent  in  developing  the
organic  structural  external  form  of  the  man.

This  scientific  fact  disposes  of  the  irrational  theory  that  Matter
is  the  originator  of  Mind,  and  proves  that  the  real  life-principle,  or
that  which  is  the  true  EgOy  and  makes  the  difference  between  /and
youy  is  a  real  something,  although  //  is  never  visible  or  cognizable
to  the  outer  senses,  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  or  from  the  con-
ception and  birth  of  the  material  body  to  its  death.  The  intangible
and  un-come-at-able  Soul  is  a  veritable  fact  that  is  scientifically  de-
monstrable, though  bodily  hands  can  no  more  touch  the  Soul  than
*  they  can  grasp  the  air  or  seize  hold  of  light.  If  anything  is  to  be
known  regarding  this  subtile  but  powerful  and  intelligent  somewhat^
it  must  be  by  other  methods  than  those  which  are  applicable  to  what
comes  under  the  action  of  our  bodily  senses,  the  Soul  of  man,  coming
from  the  Intelligences,  and  so  on,  up  to  the  Grand  Supreme  Central
Fountain  from  whence  all  life-forms  originate.  This  hypothesis  sup-
plies a  chain  of  continuous  life-forms  from  centre  to  circumference,
and  at  the  point  where  the  naturalistic  theory  is  defective  by  the
absence  of  the  "  missing  link,"  this  theory  makes  man  himself — not
the  missing  but  the  continuous  and  connecting  link,  which  unites  in
one  unbroken  series  the  infinite  variety  of  living  forms  in  worlds
inhabited  by  orders  of  beings  as  real  to  them  as  ours  to  us,  perishable
as  to  their  specific  individuality,  but  crowned  with  a  form  of  life  that
is  man,  who,  although  he  parts  with  his  physical  body  at  death,  yet
continues  his  own  specific  individuality  forever.


352      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

All  the  evidence  we  possess  concerning  primeval  man  goes  to
prove  that  the  most  ancient  race,  while  perfect  as  regards  the  physical
structure,  yet  commenced  at  the  very  lowest  point  at  which  the  human
principle  was  made  manifest,  and  from  that  beginning  has  evolved
and  developed  this  human  principle  up  to  its  present  state,  which  is
by  no  means  the  culmination  of  its  power  and  perfection.  With  all
the  intelligence  and  powers  possessed  by  the  most  advanced  portions  of
the  human  race,  we  are  a  long  way  off  from  the  state  and  period  when
the  wisdom  and  lave  powers^  still  latent  in  the  Spiritual  part  of  our
forms,  shall  evolve  into  activity.  The  human  principle  has  not  yet
subjected  the  animal  principle  in  the  structural  form.  We  have  sub-
jected the  animal  kingdom  external  to  ourselves,  but  the  animal  king-
dom within  ourselves  yet  awaits  the  conquering  power  of  Spirit,
which  must  and  will  be  developed  in  due  time.

Jlie  within  is  the  Soul  and  Truth  of  the  without  Therefore  Invo-
lution is  more  than  half  the  true  science.  Refined  matter  is  being
constantly  evolved  from  grosser  matter,  which  radiates  about  and  is
constantly  returning  bringing  from  the  unknown  something  of  the
over-Soul,  emotion  and  sense,  to  combine  in  forms  of  use  and  beauty.
The  true  growth  is  Involution^  while  Evolution  is  the  shctdow.  All
things  visible  are  the  effect  of  some  hidden  cause.  The  true  Soul
cause  is  always  hidden.

The  great  end  to  be  attained  by  the  descent  of  Spirit  is  to  obtain
the  conscious  knowledge,  by  experience,  of  what  is  known  as  individ-
uality. To  attain  to  this,  it  changes  its  state  from  diffusiveness  to
the  concrete  or  atomic  form;  this  becomes  specific  or  differential
in  the  human  form,  and  when  projected  into  the  most  external  condi-
tions, builds  up  a    human    organism,    and    gains  personality.

It  is  the  fashion  in  these  days  to  contrive  in  human  minds  a  theory
which  shall  make  history  appear  the  reverse  of  what  it  is  really,  and
to  represent  man  as  perfect  from  the  first,  made  so  by  a  power  work-
ing from  without ;  the  truth  is,  on  the  contrary,  he  is  created  by  grad-
ual development  and  growth ;  ripened  from  rudimentary  being  by
a  power  —  the  Divine  Spirit — working  from  within.  Materialistic
science  discerns  only  the  outward  appearance  of  things,  and,  taking
no  account  of  qualities,  makes  the  Form  all,  but,  according  to  the  doc-
trine of  the  Mystics,  man  is  human  in  form  only,  being  but  rudimen-
tary, and  in  all  essential  respects  to  be  classed  with  the  lower  grades.
According  to  this  doctrine  man's  supreme  function  is  to  ripen  in
knowledge,  and  he  is  not  fully  man  until  he  has  gained  the  Light  and
knowSj  in  order  to  do  which  he  must  have  attained  his  Spiritual  Con-


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  353

sciousness,  and  become  illuminated  by  Spirit  Prior  to  the  attain-
ment of  the  Truths,  he  grows  only  as  to  his.  animal,  and  is  an  infant
as  to  true  manhood,  and  incompetent  to  fulfil  the  functions  of  true
manhood,  or  even  to  comprehend  God  or  man.

The  reason  of  this  is  that  man  is  a  dual  being,  man  and  woman
combined,  though  this  combination  is  not  of  his  exterior  and  physical,
but  of  his  interior  and  spiritual  nature^  and  by  means  of  its  two  sexes,
the  body  constitutes  a  symbol  of  the  humanity  which  in  being,  inte-
rior and  permanent,  is  alone  the  true  and  real  humanity.

There  is  an  interior  life  element  in  all  men,  peoples,  and  systems
which  must,  according  to  wise  and  unerring  omnipotent  law,  work  out*
ward,  and  which  manifests  its  power  by  the  formation  of  distinct  and
different  genii  of  mankind.  To  attempt  to  alter  this  were  as  idle  as
to  make  the  human  organism  all  head,  or  all  trunk,  or  all  limbs.
Every  part  is  needful  for  the  perfect  delineation  of  the  whole  and
complete  organism,  and  when  a  part  becomes  paralyzed  or  loses  its
vitality,  the  true  method  b  to  restore  it.

On  no  plane  of  being  is  it  good  for  the  man-element  to  be  alone.
For  without  Love  and  gentleness  Force  can  work  only  evil  till  it  be
spent.  Such  is  the  doom  of  selfish,  animal  man  until  he  finds  and  is
found  of  the  Soulofihe  woman  within  him.  She  is  to  him  the  mother
of  the  living  without  whom  is  no  life,  because  she  is  the  Soul  wherein
the  Divine  Life  resides.  For  as  the  Soul  is  the  life  of  the  man,  so
Spirit,  which  is  God,  is  the  life  of  the  Soul.  Thus  b  she  mediator  be-
tween man  and  God,  drawing  both  together  in  herself,  and  he  only  is
truly  alive,  and  truly  man  illuminated  with  knowledge,  made  after  the
Divine  Image  in  whom  she  thus  operates.

Nature  works  in  spirals  and  works  intelligently.  As  between  Spirit
and  matter,  so  between  the  organic  and  inorganic  there  is  no  bound-
ary line.  All  the  truth  in  respect  to  the  doctrine  of  Evolution  which
modern  science  has  now  was  anticipated  thousands  of  years  ago,  but
the  scientists  of  old  used  a  faculty  the  very  existence  of  which  the
modem  scientist  seems  only  to  ignore  or  sneer  at,  namely  the  discern-
ment of  Soul  as  the  agent  and  Spirit,  as  the  efficient  cause  of  all  pro-
gress.

The  fall  of  man  in  the  general  sense  represents  the  descent  of  Spirit
into  matter,  disuniting  the  Dual-energies  thereby,  the  Evolution  of  man.

His  becoming,  in  the  course  of  the  same,  provided  with  clothes  of
skin  and  flesh,  means  a  physical  body  as  a  protection  against  inju-
rious influences  of  his  surroundings  during  his  period  of  ripening  into
Angelhood.    The  physical  body,  if  in  good  condition,  acts  as  an  armor.


354      'l^S  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THKESHOLD.

and  moreover  man  has  the  power  of  his  Will  to  make  himself  positivei
or,  in  other  words,  so  to  concentrate  the  odic  aura  or  vibration  of  his
atmospheres  as  to  render  this  armor  impenetrable.  But  if  through  ill
health  or  carelessness  he  loses  his  vitality,  he  renders  himself  nega-
tive, or,  in  other  words,  he  disperses  the  odic  emanations  belonging  to
his  sphere,  and  his  physical  armor  becomes  weakened  and  unable  to
protect  him.

*'  The  one  whose  mind  is  filled  with  light  and  wisdom  which  to  Sonl  pertidns^
And  stands  on  such  a  pinnacle  ^  with  all  the  senses  underfoot—
The  mind  of  such  is  freed  from  bonds;
His  resolution  changeth  not"

The  unity  of  creation  has  never  been  seriously  denied  except  by
extreme  thinkers  of  the  dualistic  school.  But  the  principle  of  unity
has  not  been  recognized  until  of  late.  The  bond  or  ground  of  unity
was  justly  found  in  God  but  that  conception  merely  asserted  that
because  God  is  One  there  is  unity  in  all  created  things.  Thb  may  be
faith,  but  it  is  not  philosophy  from  a  modem  standpoint.  May  not  faith
become  also  philosophy  ?  Unity  exists  not  only  because  one  God  cre-
ated all  things,  but  because  He  works  by  one  process,  or  according
to  one  principle.  As  knowledge  broadens,  and  wider  generalizations
are  made,  we  find  a  certain  likeness  of  process  in  all  realms  that
indicates  one  law  or  method ;  namely,  that  of  development  or  invo-
lution. One  thing  comes  from  another,  assumes  a  higher  and  finer
form,  and  presses  steadily  on  towards  still  finer  and  higher  forms.
We  find  the  same  method  in  matter,  in  brute  life,  in  humanity,  in
social  institutions,  in  government,  in  religions,  in  progress  of  Chris>
tianity.

As  man  is  a  microcosm,  so  the  universe  may  be  the  analogue  of
the  human  cosmos.  In  this  direction  we  can  think  at  least  with
out  violation  of  reason,  —  if  forever  without  reaching  a  final  solution,
so  be  it.  But  so  thinking  we  escape  at  least  the  absurdity  of  picking
up  creation  at  a  point  given  by  the  senses  and  propounding  the  frag-
ment as  a  theory  of  the  universe.  By  so  thinking  we  find  that  we  are
constantly  transcending  limits.  The  simply  fact  that  we  reach  a  limit
implies  a  knowledge  beyond  it ;  and  so  we  find  at  last  that  we  are
correlated  to  the  limitless  and  have  knowledge  of  it.  Thus  we  learn
to  pronounce  easily  and  with  confidence  the  Infinite  Name ;  and,  so
naming  it,  we  find  it  a  revelation  to  us  ;  under  it  creation  gets  mean-
ing. We  no  longer  stand  on  a  headland  and  view  creation  as  a  ship
rising  out  of  the  horizon  and  sailing  past  till  it  sinks  again  beneath


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  355

the  sky,  port  whence  and  port  whither  unknown,  whether  swept  by
currents  or  guided  from  within  also  unknown.  Rather  do  we  tread
the  deck,  mark  the  hand  that  holds  the  helm,  hear  the  word  that
shapes  the  voyage,  and  so  journey  with  it  to  the  harbor.

It  is  better  in  the  end  that  a  doctrine  which  is  to  become  Truth
should  run  the  gauntlet  of  general  denial  and  opposition.  By  far  the
greater  part  of  what  is  proposed  as  true  in  every  department  turns  out  to
be  false.  Theories  more  in  number  than  the  wasted  blossoms  of  the
May  fall  fruitless  to  the  ground.  If  human  nature  as  a  whole  did  not
turn  on  the  conceits  and  dreams  that  are  offered  to  it,  Truth  itself
would  have  no  chance ;  it  could  not  extricate  itself  from  the  rubbish
of  folly  that  over-tolerance  has  suffered  to  accumulate.  Truth  be-
comes TrutA  by  its  own  achievement ;  it  must  conquer  human  nature
before  it  can  rule  it.  —  win  it  before  it  can  be  loved  of  it  This  wise
spontaneous  treatment  of  new  theories  delays  their  acceptance  even
when  proved  true,  but  always  with  advantage  to  Truth ;  for,  however
fair  the  final  form  is  to  be,  it  comes  unshaped  and  with  entangle-
ments, and  often,  like  some  animals,  it  is  bom  blind.  Its  first  need
is  criticism,  and  even  criticism  based  on  denial  rather  than  on  inquiry ;
only  it  must  be  criticism,  and  not  blank  contradiction.

A  system  that  works  by  law  or  apparent  necessity  towards  will  or
freedom  as  an  end  roust  be  grounded  in  freedom.  In  the  early  orders
of  creation,  the  Divine  Hand  held  steadily  and  evenly  the  lever  of  the
great  engine  as  it  ran  along  the  grooves  of  changing  matter ;  but  when
a  brute,  seeing  an  enemy  in  one  path,  chooses  another,  there  is  a  hint
at  least  of  self-generated  force.  And  it  is  idle  to  say  that  the  changes
wrought  by  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth  are  not  the  products  of  his
creative  Will.

But  if  man  is  involved  in  the  evolutionary  process,  where  and  when
and  how  does  the  free  tat//  come  in  with  aU  the  facts  aud  duties  of
religion  f  We  may  not  be  able  to  say  when  and  where,  but  possibly  we
can  tell  how,  viz.,  in  the  progressive  working  of  God.  To  produce  a
will  or  a  person  seems  to  be  the  end  in  view  of  the  whole  process,  and
at  last  it  is  gained.

But  we  are  cut  off  from  our  previous  history  quite  as  much  as  we
are  bound  to  it,  because  the  whole  process  being  one  of  design,  and  man
being  its  fulfilment,  he  drops  away  from  it  as  the  apple  drops  from  the
tree.  The  fruit  when  it  is  ripe  is  no  longer  related  to  the  branch  but
to  its  use ;  it  no  longer  belongs  to  the  tree  but  to  him  who  planted  the
tree,  and  he  will  use  it  as  seems  to  him  fit  It  may  be  set  down  as  an
axiom  that  the  end  of  a  process  cannot  be  identified  with  the  process.


35^      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Man  is  the  final  and  perfect  fruit  of  creation  and  belongs  to  whatever
has  the  best  claim  upon  him  —  to  morals,  if  he  is  found  chiefly  to  be-
long there.  However  he  came  about,  out  of  whatever  depths  of  seem-
ing necessity  he  has  been  drawn,  he  has  freedbm,  consciousness,  mond
sense,  personality.  He  can  obey  and  disobey,  love  and  hate,  do  right
and  wrong.

Origin  has  nothing  to  do  with  destiny ;  we  can  measure  one  as
little  as  the  other,  and  we  know  too  little  of  either  to  use  them  as
terms  of  close  argument.  I  may  be  bound  to  physical  and  brute
nature  by  the  cord  of  origin,  but  that  cord  does  not  bind  my  destiny.
A  bird  might  be  tied  to  the  earth  by  a  thread  of  infinite  length  and
the  knot  never  be  unloosed,  yet  it  might  fly  forever  into  the  heavens
and  away  from  its  source.  It  is  an  unreasonable  contempt  of  lower
nature  that  makes  us  fear  it.  As  we  find  God  in  destiny,  so  we  may
find  him  in  origin  — present  at  both  ends  of  His  own  process  and  in
equal  power.  Indeed,  our  chances  destiny-wise  may  be  all  the  better
because  we  are  thoroughly  interwoven  with  the  whole  creation.  It  b
possible  that  we  must  be  organically  connected  with  the  previous
creation  in  order  to  share  in  the  eternal  order  before  us ;  that  only
thus  can  we  be  included  in  the  circle  of  endless  existence.  If  man  is
a  sporadic  and  unrelated  creation,  his  destiny  hangs  upon  the  arbi-
trary Will  that  so  created  him,  and  gets  no  promise  or  assurance  from
the  great  order  of  the  universe  and  its  Creator.

When  evolution  is  regarded,  not  as  a  self-working  engine,  —  an
inexorable  and  unsupervised  system,  a  mysterious  section  of  creation
assumed  to  be  the  whole,  —  but  rather  as  a  process  whose  laws  are
the  methods  of  God's  Action,  and  whose  force  is  the  steady  play  of
Eternal  Will  throughout  matter,  there  need  be  no  fear  lest  man  and
religion  be  swallowed  up  in  matter  and  brute  life.  In  other  words,
man  is  not  correlated  to  the  process  of  creation,  but  to  the  Creator.
Man  may  bear  a  certain  relation  to  the  process,  but  his  real  and  abso-
lute relation  is  to  the  power  over  and  in  the  process.  We  may  have
come  to  be  what  we  are  through  a  process  of  development ;  much  of
it  may  linger  on  in  us ;  some  of  its  laws  still  play  within  us :  we  eat
and  procreate  as  do  the  brutes ;  chemical  action  builds  up  and  takes
down  our  bodies ;  analogies  of  its  processes  reappear  in  us.

It  is  felt  by  some,  especially  on  the  first  contact  with  evolution,
that  It  puts  God  at  a  distance  and  hides  him  behind  the  laws  and  pro-
cesses of  nature.  The  apprehension  is  worthy,  for  we  need  and  crave
a  near  God,  and  may  well  dispute  any  theory  that  puts  him  at  a  dis-
tance or  fences  him  off  by  impenetrable  walls.     The  universal  and


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  357

unappeasable  cravings  of  the  heart  may  always  be  opposed  to  what
seem  to  be  the  laws  of  nature ;  for  there  is  a  science  of  the  Spirit
that  is  as  imperative  and  final  in  its  word  as  the  observed  processes
of  nature.  But  evolution,  properly  considered,  not  only  does  not  put
God  at  a  distance,  nor  obscure  his  form  behind  the  order  of  nature,
but  draws  him  nearer,  and  even  goes  far  towards  breaking  down  the
walls  of  mystery  that  shut  him  out  from  human  vision.  In  other
words,  in  evolution  we  see  a  revelation  of  God,  while  in  previous  theo-
ries of  creation  we  had  only  an  assertion  of  God.  In  evolution  we
have  the  first  cause  working  by  connected  processes  in  an  orderly
way ;  in  former  theories  we  had  a  first  cause  creating  the  universe  by
one  omnipotent  fiat,  ordaining  its  laws,  and  then  leaving  it  to  its
courses  or  merely  upholding  it  by  his  power.  In  respect  of  nearness,
we  at  once  see  that  evolution  brings  God  nearer  than  do  the  other
theories.  Their  hold  upon  the  mind  is  not  at  this  point,  but  at  an-
other mistaken  for  it  The  religious  mind  delights  in  mystery ;  it  is
an  unconscious  assertion  by  the  highest  faculties  of  our  nature  that
we  transcend  the  knowable  —  that  we  belong  to,  and  live  and  have
our  destiny  in,  the  Infinite.  Hence  we  shrink  from  theories  that  seem
to  undertake  to  explain  God  and  his  working,  and  repeat  with  compla-
cence the  ancient  phrase,  *'  It  is  impossible ;  therefore,  I  believe."
It  gratifies  our  reverence  to  abuse  our  reason.

All  who  engage  in  ceremonial  forms  of  worship  are  external  wor-
shippers, and  draw  so  much  of  the  Spiritual  vitality  from  those  forms
as  is  requisite  for  the  sustenance  of  their  Spiritual  life,  and  the  fact
that  they  can  only  draw  it  by  means  of  these  forms  proves  they  have
not  developed  beyond  that  state  which  is  symbolized  by  the  externals
which  they  use.

The  poet  who  describes  the  adoring  Soul  as  "  looking  up  from
Nature  to  Nature's  God  "  has  portrayed  the  state  of  external  worship-
pers, who  are  still  in  the  fallacy  of  Spiritual  childhood  in  supposing
Nature  and  Nature's  Gdd  to  be  two  separate  and  distinct  things.

The  internal  worshipper  is  the  one  who  is  illumined  sufficiently  to
see  that  the  external  or  phenomenal  is  only  an  appearance,  or  a
shadow  of  the  substance,  which  the  phenomenal  encloses,  and  inas-
much as  that  one  discerns  the  distinctions  between  the  real  and  the
apparent^  he  dispenses  with  the  formalities  and  comes  in  contact  with
the  realities.  These  realities  are  the  knowledge  and  consciousness
that  Spirit  itself  is  one  and  the  same  in  its  principle,  however  Infinite
may  be  the  variety  of  its  manifestation  or  expression.  From  this,  suc-
cessive degrees  of  knowledge  and  consciousness  are  or  may  be  opened


358      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

until  one  stands  face  to  face  with  the  Being  or  Beings  who  to  such
are  the  real  God  or  Gods,  though  heretofore  unknown  and  unrecog-
nized. Man  stands  before  the  Eternal  One  and  not  before  a  method
of  nature.     Nature  is  all  about  him,  but  his  relation  is  to  God.

His  moral  qualities  may  have  been  evolved  through  natural  pro-
cess, but  they  do  not  originate  there.  The  flower  is  evolved  through
the  differentiation  of  leaves,  but  it  does  not  originate  in  them,  nor
can  it  be  compassed  in  their  differentiation.

A  combination  of  two  things  that  produces  an  effect  that  neither
could  produce  alone  implies  more  than  is  to  be  found  in  the  two
things ;  there  is  the  idea  or  the  proportion  of  the  combination  upon
which  the  effect  depends ;  and  this  must  come  from  some  mind  that
ordained  the  proportion  and  not  from  the  things  themselves.  An  add
and  a  base,  when  mingled,  precipitate  a  salt,  but  they  are  not  the
authors  of  the  salt ;  the  law  of  relation  between  the  acid  and  the  base
is  the  author.  The  whole  process  may  be  set  down  in  mathematical
terms,  but  all  the  more  is  it  evident  that  the  product  originates  in  the
mathematical  thought  underlying  it.

Nor  should  we  be  disturbed  to  find  that  our  moral  qualities  have
their  first  intimations  in  the  brute  world ;  that  we  find  in  the  higher
animal  hints,  forecastings  of  moral  faculty  and  actions ;  that  as  our
bodies  bear  some  organic  relation  to  the  brutes,  so  also  may  our
minds.  Body  is  not  mind,  but  they  are  organically  related ;  sensation
is  not  consciousness,  but  the  latter  is  conditional  on  the  former.

So  man  is  not  a  brute,  but  he  is  organically  related  to  the  brute,
and  the  relation  may  touch  his  whole  nature.  Our  feeling  on  this
point  should  be  determined,  not  by  the  first  look,  but  by  its  final
bearing.

The  end  of  a  process  cannot  be  identified  with  the  process.

Dust  thou  art,  and  to  dust  thou  shalt  return ;  but  the  Spirit  returns
to  God  who  gave  it.  For  the  Spirit  is  the  power  of  God  and  the
wisdom  of  God.

Matter  transmits  force,  but  does  not  originate  force.  It  is  for  a
time  the  receptacle  of  power,  but  not  the  power.  All  essence  of
power  belongs  to  Spirit.  All  pure  force  is  invisible.  Matter  and
Spirit  may  be  one  to  the  absolute  and  Infinite  Being,  but  that  one  is
Spirit.  In  human  speech,  matter  is  only  the  name  of  an  effect  whose
cause  is  wrapped  in  mystery.  It  remains  for  the  human  to  penetrate
the  veil  and  solve  the  mystery.  And  the  solution  of  this  problem  of
mind  and  matter  discovers  man  unto  himself,  and  binds  him  in  loving
union  forever  with  the  Infinite  "  I  am,"  the  Spirit  of  all.


EVOLUTION  AND   INVOLUTION.  359

According  to  Brahmanism,  the  germ  of  matter  once  fecundated
by  Brahma,  the  phenomena  of  transformation  operate  spontaneously
and  without  the  direct  participation  of  God,  but  in  accordance  with
the  eternal  and  immutable  laws  which  He  has  created.

Matter  in  precipitating  itself  from  its  centre-form.  Its  general
focus,  is  continually  working  from  its  interior  centre.  It  subdivides
and  gravitates  in  space  ;  all  particles  are  compressed ;  light  is  gene-
rated ;  the  smallest  fragments  dry,  the  vapors  which  exhale  produce
atmospheric  air  and  water,  and  in  the  fulness  of  time  these  fragments
become  habitable  worlds.

There  is  an  immutable  law  of  Nature,  that  she  must  have  periods
of  repose.  Therefore  gradually  all  the  other  particles,  according  to
their  magnitude,  become  extinguished  in  their  turn ;  but,  in  proportion
as  they  become  habitable,  heat  and  light  diminish,  until,  having
wholly  disappeared,  the  world,  ripened  to  its  fulness,  matter  de-
prived of  its  most  active  agents  of  life  and  reproduction  —  in  the  ful-
ness of  her  days  falls  back  into  chaos  and  rest  in  the  great  Night  of
Brahma,  for  it  was  written :  "  Heat  was  lAfe^  Flame  its  substance^  and
Light  its  manifestation.^^

"  To  every  seed  his  own  body,"  says  St.  Paul.  A  Soul  or  Astral
may  be  immaterial,  though  not  immortal.  The  true  germ  or  life-force
in  a  seed  is  Spirit.  It  clothes  itself  with  matter,  and  this  external
clothing  corresponds  with  the  internal  shadow  life.  The  difference
between  a  vegetable  and  animal  is  the  difference  of  the  living  Soul-
force.

The  same  natural  economy  Is  found  in  the  animal  kingdom.  A
cat-like  Soul  force  can  only  find  satisfaction  in  a  cat-like  body,  a  dog-
like Soul-force  in  a  dog-like  body.  In  every  case  the  Soul-force  or
essence  shadow  has  a  corresponding  material  body.  An  Ape  Soul-
force  could  no  more  mould  and  clothe  itself  in  a  human  body  than  a
Mouse  Soul-force  could  do  the  same  with  an  Elephant  body.  Souls
and  bodies  are  always  correlated  by  an  immutable  homogeneous  alli-
ance as  cause  and  effect,  —  the  Shadow  and  the  Correspondena^  "  to
every  seed  his  own  body^

This  is  precisely  the  difference  between  materiality  and  spirituality.
The  materialist,  who  judges  from  phenomenal  appearances,  thinks
organic  forms  are  the  resultants  of  external  forces,  and  that  mind,
with  its  rational  faculty,  is  evolved  from  external  conditions  of  life,
by  what  he  calls  the  process  of  nature  (as  if  it  were  possible  for  a
lower  to  generate  a  higher  form  than  its  own) ;  but  a  Spiritualist,  with
an  enlightened  intellect,  knows  that  all  life-forms  are  evolved  yr^^m


360      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

within  to  witkaut^  and  that  nature  is  only  the  external  or  outwaid
expression  of  Spirit.  The  real  life  is  above  matter,  moulds,  antici-
pateSy  qualifies,  and  is  the  substance  of  it  Therefore  no  dead
earth  makes  man  a  living  force.  Those  forces  of  life  must  be  sub-
stance revealing  itself  in  nature,  therefore  earth  b  the  shadow  of
heaven.

Out  from  the  great  Central  Sun  of  the  macrocosm,  there  is  ever
radiating  an  absolute,  eternal  Energy,  which,  coming  from  the  Divine
fountain  of  all  Life,  carries  motion  to  all  the  galaxies  of  constella-
tions and  systems  of  worlds.*  Therefore,  as  the  radiation  of  a  Divine
Essence  is  continually  permeating  all  realms  of  space  and  matter,  so
in  the  microcosm  and  smaller  worlds  there  is  a  central  Sun  and  point
of  Energy  from  which  emanates  the  germ  or  ray  of  Divine  Essenoe,
through  and  from  which  exists  a  grand  cooperative  harmony,  and  in
the  internal  man  a  certain  germ  of  energy  b  ever  radiating  toward  the
outer  being.

The  human  Soul  b  the  anchorage  or  plaa  of  ideas.  The  Astral
body  or  star  magna  is  the  mirror  that  reflects  and  records  them,  human
thoughts  being  simply  the  clothing  of  these  Ideas.  The  Spirit  is  iki
self-acting  energy  that  produces  the  Idea.  Nothing  b  an  Idea  that  has
not  the  form  of  self-acting  energy.  Since  self-acting  energy  or  idea
contains  other  ideas,  therefore,  according  to  the  logic  of  the  macro-
cosm and  microcosm,  there  is  a  great,  absolute,  higher  Idea,  which
contains  all  these  lesser  ones,  and  thb  sublime  glory  of  Idea  b  God.

We  come  into  the  world  as  the  result  of  a  complication  of  natural,
physical  laws,  so  marvellous,  so  intricate,  that  the  ingenuity  of  man
fails  to  account  for  the  fact  that  we  exist  at  all.  We  may  reason  it
all  out  to  our  partial  satisfaction  until  we  come  to  the  grand  motive
factor  of  our  existence  the  instinct  principle  of  life  itself.  Here  we
stop  1  Why  ?  Because  now  we  come  to  the  immortal  Soul,  which  has
been  quickened  into  life  by  a  Being  of  supernatural  powers  while  the
helpless,  unshapen  mass  of  the  future  man  lay  dormant  in  its  small,
chaotic  world,  its  first  dark  mother-cradle  of  the  flesh.

The  struggle  between  light  and  darkness,  between  good  and  evil,
is  as  old  as  the  world,  and  yet  there  b  no  principle  of  evil ;  whatever
degrades  is  evil,  whatever  elevates  is  good.  Evil  or  so-called  sin  b
simply  undeveloped  good.  Good  and  evil  are  the  light  and  shadow
of  the  one  eternal  principle  of  life,  and  each  is  necessary  for  the  exbt-
ence  of  the  other.  The  struggle  between  light  and  shadow  is  life^  and
there  can  be  no  life  without  a  struggle.

•  See  iUufltntioD  of  Great  Centxal  Son.


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  36I

Absence  of  feeling  and  of  suffering  only  shows  that  the  process  of
death  has  begun,  or  that  the  animal  has  taken  full  possession.  Pain
is  not  an  element  to  be  most  dreaded ;  for,  as  gold  is  refined  by  fire,
the  Soul  is  refined  by  pain,  and  only  through  the  death  of  suffering
does  the  human  Soul  rise  into  eternal  life.  If  selfishness  and  the
animal  instinct  have  full  sway,  the  Soul  shrivels  toward  decay,  while
all  its  noble  powers  are  congealed,  its  sensibilities  benumbed,  its  vision
blinded,  its  intellect  dimmed,  and  from  the  once  clear  minor  the
reflection  of  God's  Image  shines  no  more  where  the  innermost  temple
might  have  been  radiant  with  God's  Holy  Truth.

Forms  come  into  existence  according  to  one  universal  law.  One
kind  of  salt  produces  always  the  same  kind  of  crystal ;  a  note  struck
upon  a  musical  instrument  calls  forth  a  corresponding  note  on  a  simi-
lar instrument.  The  higher  we  arise  on  the  Spiritual  plane,  the  more
perfectly  the  attunement  of  Spirit  force  will  unite  with  our  own ;  and
as  the  mirror  of  our  monitor  is  polished  to  reflect  the  7V»M  of  Ideas^
therefore  according  to  thoughts  of  man  does  he  exalt  or  debase  the
clothing  about  pure  Ideas.

Is  death  more  to  be  feared  because  it  is  an  enigma  the  mysteries
of  which  our  dull  minds  cannot  fathom  and  our  poor  fancy  cannot
comprehend?

Spirit  and  the  growth  of  the  Soul  being  always  opposite  to  human
ways,  man  is  apt  to  feel  that  the  dawn  of  the  Soul's  new  life,  which
we  call  death,  is  a  sad  and  mournful  thing,  like  starting  out  alone  on
an  obscure  earthly  pilgrimage.  Not  so,  but  rather  like  the  budding
and  bursting  into  bloom  of  flowers  in  Spring  which  at  harvest  time
will  have  ripened  into  perfect  fruit.  Death  is  but  the  beginning  of
life,  a  joyous  reunion  of  perfect  life.

In  tracing  the  Evolution  of  man,  we  regard  him  as  an  expression
of  the  Infinite  One.  All  things  and  forms  of  life  below  man  are  like-
wise expressions  of  the  Infinite  One,  but  we  do  not  believe  that  man
was  all  these  lower  forms  before  he  became  man.  These  are  different
orders  of  creation,  related  to  but  distinctly  separated  from  one  an-
other. They  are  inter-related,  all  dependent  on  the  same  source,  but
they  can  never  blend  together  nor  become  confused  and  mixed.

Above  man  as  a  distinct  order  come  Spirits,  the  inhabitants  of  the
numberless  states  that  surround  the  earth,  and  to  attain  to  the  highest
of  which  may  take  thousands  of  years.  The  modes  of  existence  and
methods  of  thought  of  these  states  are  as  unthinkable  to  man  as  is  his
plane  of  life  to  the  animal.  But  the  Spiritual  state  is  not  the  last,  nor
are  the  Heavens  of  Earth  the  highest ;  celestial  states  beyond  conok-


362      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THSESHOLD.

prehension  exist  removed  from  earth  influenoesi  the  abodes  of  the
redeemed.  Angels  are  messengers  who  act  as  emissaries  from  hi|^ier
to  lover  states^  themselves  the  while  learning  of  that  whidi  is  above
them,  that  in  time  they  may  assume  the  celestial  d^ree.

The  animal  is  in  a  Soul-state  and  is  guided  by  unerring  instinct
Man  exercises  will-chmct^  and  this  is  in  a  state  of  transition  to  a
higher  Soul-plane.  Spirits  assume  that  Soul-plane  and  are  guided  by
iniuiium^  the  correlate  of  the  instinct  of  the  animal.  The  Angel  is  a
transitional  order  like  man,  and  by  volition  attains  what  we  would
call  knowledge  to  prepare  for  the  celestial  state,  which  is  that  oi  the
Perfect  Man — Will  and  Soul  being  One.

All  these  celestial  hosts  are  understood  to  have  been  once  inhaU-
tants  of  this  earth  or  some  other  planet,  the  highest  of  them  having
attained  to  such  power  and  knowledge  that  they  can  take  part  in  the
formation  as  well  as  the  government  of  worlds,  their  chief  being  the
Supreme  Being  of  the  planet  —  God.  Not  only  do  Angelic  messen-
gers teach  the  lower  states  externally  the  truths  of  the  higher  states,
but  the  very  life  of  those  higher  spheres  is  the  inner  and  essential  life
of  every  one,  however  low.  In  our  better  moments,  and  as  we  attain
true  development,  we  all  become  receptive  to  the  inflow  of  these
Divine  Rays ;  and  by  Spiritual  exercises  we  may  do  so  more  and
more.

The  power  to  attain  to  this  glorious  consummation  lies  with  the
Soul  of  every  man,  not  only  by  Illumination  of  Soul  to  higher  under-
standing, but  also  by  comprehension  of  and  following  out  the  direc-
tions of  Guardian  Angels  and  exalted  Spirit  Souls.  Truly  celestial
presences  and  God  as  the  most  universally  permeating  power  are
everywhere.  Just  as  all  colors  are  component  parts  of  lights  so  all
Spiritual  states  are  phases  of  the  Divine  presence,  divided,  separated
by  the  prism  of  organic  differentiation.  Color,  form,  odor  may  lie
latent  in  a  molecule,  but  invisibly  present  while  they  are  clearly  per-
ceptible in  a  molecular  aggregation.  We  know  that  there  is  a  power
beyond  us,  aud  infinitely  superior  to  our  abilities  to  control  it ;  we  can
behold  evidences  of  intelligence  and  design  in  all  the  works  of
nature.    Plato  said,  "Where  nature  geometrizes,  there  is  God."

Science  declares  that  fire  lies  latent  in  wood,  only  awaiting  some
kindling  touch  to  raise  it  to  a  fiame.  Even  so  do  Spirit,  life,  intelli-
gence, consciousness,  lie  latent  in  every  form  of  nature.  Matter  in
its  inert,  unconscious  state  does  not  display  the  life  without  which  it
could  have  no  existence.  That  latent  life  is  superior  to  all  outward
expression  of  life,  and  without  it  indeed  there  could  be  no  expression


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  363

of  life.  This  doctrine  of  latent  life  is  an  inference  of  science,  while
every  triumph  of  mind  over  matter  and  every  Spiritual  manifestation
confirms  the  truth  of  the  idea,  establishing  the  theory  by  actual  facts
confirming  it.  Once  accepted,  this  thought  shows  how  utterly  founda-
tionless  and  contrary  to  all  reason  is  the  materialistic  hypothesb  of
being.

On  the  ground  of  physical  appearances  and  scientific  facts,  the
Naturalist  occupies  an  impregnable  position;  but  when  he  leaves
this  and  enters  upon  the  theoretical  plane,  he  stands  in  a  very  differ-
ent position,  and  as  the  issues  therefrom  are  so  momentous  to  the
Spiritual  part  of  the  human  organism,  it  behooves  every  one  who
values  the  Spiritual  more  than  the  mere  phenomenal,  to  be  guarded,
lest  a  recognition  of  and  too  great  an  interest  in  the  development  of
the  physical  and  material  should  draw  the  mind  off  from  the  still
more  important  study  of  development  of  the  interior  or  Spiritual  part
of  the  human  being ;  for  while  the  one  is  dissipated  and  passes  away,
the  other,  the  Spiritual  part,  remains,  and  out  of  its  remains  b  evolved
a  Spiritual  form  that  abideth  forever.

The  True  Voice.


Involution,
all  things  come  from  wtthin.

The  departure  of  the  Soul  atom  from  the  bosom  of  Divinity  is  a  radiation
from  the  life  of  the  great  All,  who  expends  his  strength  in  order  that  he  may  grow
again  and  live  by  its  return.  God  thereby  acquires  a  new  vital  force  provided  by
all  the  transformations  that  the  Soul  atom  has  undergone.  Its  return  is  the  finad
reward.  Such  is  the  secret  of  the  evolution  of  the  great  Being  and  of  the  Supreme
Soul.  —  Book  of  Pitrts,

The  Soul  is  the  assemblage  of  the  Gods.  The  universe  rests  in  the  Supreme
Soul.  It  is  the  Soul  that  accomplishes  the  series  of  acts  emanating  from  animate
beings.  So  the  man  who  recognizes  the  Supreme  Soul  as  present  in  his  own  Soul
unders,tands  that  it  is  his  duty  to  be  kind  and  true  to  all,  and  the  most  fortunate
destiny  that  he  could  have  desired  is  that  of  being  finally  absorbed  in  Brahma.*
Manu.t  V.  12.

The  Natural  Scientist  teaches  that  Mind,  with  all  the  term
includes,  is  the  resultant  of  what  is  called  Matter.  The  Spiritual
Scientist  proclaims  that  what  b  called  Matter  is  that  by  which  mind


364      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

expresses  itself  in  physical  conditions ;  and,  further,  that  both  Mind
and  Matter  are  but  expressions  of  a  still  more  interior  prindpiate^
called  Spirit ;  and  that  all  outward  embodiments  or  expressions  are
the  infinite  variety  by  which  Life  is  made  manifest  in  all  conditions ;
in  all  worlds  and  spheres  of  being  and  existence,  such  manifestations
varying  from  ethereal  rarity  down  to  the  grossest  density.

Where  the  Natural  Scientist  stops  in  his  theory  of  evolution,  the
Spiritual  Scientist  steps  in  and  carries  forward  the  process  from  man
to  the  Angel,  from  the  Angel  to  the  God.

There  is  a  descent  of  Life  as  well  as  an  ascent,  and  in  the  descend-
ing scale  at  the  zero  point  of  humanity  in  earthly  physical  conditions,
its  commencement  is  marked  by  the  appearance  of  an  infinitesimal
point  in  a  minute  egg-cell.  In  that  point  is  involved  all  that  is  evolved
until  it  assumes  and  develops  the  full  and  majestic  structural
organism.  From  the  moment  of  the  formation  and  appearance  of
this  new  primal  life-speck,  it  begins  the  work  of  development,  and
draws  to  itself  other  atoms,  which  it  assimilates  and  uses  for  the
purpose  of  making  for  itself  a  body,  by  which  it  maintains  its  contact
with  the  outer  plane  of  Nature,  but  over  which  it  maintains  its
supremacy  to  the  end  of  its  being,  in  earthly  or  physical  condition.
The  original  primal  nucloid  is  the  master  principiate  of  lAfe^  whose
life  works  in  and  through  all,  and  is  comprised  in  the  whole  of  the
apparently  distinct  atoms  which  aid  in  building  up  the  perfect  oi|^-
ism.     It  is  this  which  forms  the  Ego,  and  makes  the  differentiation.

Few  means  were  used  in  constructing  the  Universe.  They  con-
sisted of  Energy  and  Law,  the  former  under  control  of  the  latter.
Our  best  friend  is  Nature,  our  greatest  admirer  God,  and  the  clock
of  eternity  is  wound  by  the  hand  of  Absolute  Love.  All  must  adore
the  Creator,  if  they  but  for  a  moment  consider  His  love.  His  glory,
and  His  majesty,  and  reflect  that  all  human  knowledge  is  but  a  spark
from  the  great  eternal  flame  of  Omniscience,  which  makes  in  every
human  being  a  centre  of  the  Universe,  and  the  earth  itself  but  the
embodiment  of  a  Divine  thought.

Every  seed  has  within  it  an  individual  life  energy  which  gives  to
it  when  developed  its  type  and  form.  Any  external  interference
induces  a  struggle  for  life  in  the  forces,  in  maintaining  their  ancestral
types  and  forms.  Heredity  may  produce  the  same  by  interfering
with  the  law  controlling  development.

As  the  spider  sends  forth  and  draws  its  thread,  as  plants  grow  on
the  earth,  as  from  every  man  hairs  spring  forth  on  the  head  and  body,
so  does  everything  here  arise  from  the  Indestructible.    That  whidi


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  365

cannot  be  seen  nor  seized,  which  has  no  origin  and  is  without  quali-
ties, no  eyes  nor  ears,  no  hands  nor  feet,  the  eternal,  the  all-pervad-
ing, infinite,  that  which  is  imperishable,  that  is  what  is  regarded  by
the  wise  as  the  source  of  all  beings.

Every  inch  of  earth,  of  water,  of  fire,  and  of  air  contains  the
fundamental  principles  of  the  universe,  and  man  is  the  connecting
link  between  dust  and  Deity,  and  can  bridge  the  gulf  through  the
illumination  of  his  mind.  The  most  powerful  telescope  knovm  to
man  is  the  Mind's  eye.

In  order  to  bridge  the  valleys  of  ignorance,  the  mind  must  not
stop  at  the  material,  but  must  penetrate  to  the  Spirit,  the  Cause,  and
for  this  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  the  lower  and  the  higher,  must  be
recognized.

We  find  a  foreshadowing  of  some  such  ideas  held  by  the  Greek
philosophers,  as  in  the  question  of  Pythagoras,  *'What  is  that
through  which  when  it  is  known  the  knower  thereof  knows  everything
else  ? "

Some  of  the  Greeks  said,  we  must  first  ascend  to  the  general,
from  which  descent  to  the  particular  is  easy.  Such,  however,  is
directly  opposite  to  the  modem  method  which  delights  in  going  into
comparisons  and  particulars  based  on  some  theory  formed  from  a
material  standpoint.  Humanity  in  general  looks  only  to  the  outer
and  to  effects^  seldom  to  the  causes.

True  knowledge  proceeds  from  an  endeavor  to  attain  to  the  Uhi'
versal  Soul  of  alL  By  a  true  effort  to  reach  that,  a  knowledge  of  the
particular  parts  may  be  gained.  This  may  not  be  easy,  especially
amid  the  conventionalities  of  life;  but  it  Is  worth  trying  for.  The
endeavor  produces  an  action  on  the  mind,  and  actions  are  motives  let
loose,  and  when  they  are  noble  and  unselfish,  man  looks  up,  and,  like
one  awakened  from  long  sleep,  he  finds  that  God's  infinitude  fills  all
space,  and  is  far  more  apparent  to  his  Intelligence  than  atmosphere
or  sunlight.  In  this  glorious  awakening,  he  realizes  the  meaning  of
the  words  handed  down  from  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  through
.the  long  ages.  Our  eyes  are  holden,  that  we  cannot  see  the  things
that  stare  us  in  the  face,  until  the  hour  arrives  when  the  mind  Is
ripened ;  then  we  behold  them.

The  highest  knowledge  attainable  Is  gamed  through  silence  and
purity  of  thought.  Silence  Is  wisdom's  sentineL  Purity  of  thought
cleanses  the  mirror  of  the  Soul,  but  the  windows  of  many  men's  Souls
are  far  too  dirty  to  admit  heavenly  light.  All  men  should  make  their
meditations  their  chosen  companions,  for  refined  thoughts  are* the


366       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

best  fruits  of  a  refined  and  cultivated  mind,  and  he  whose  tastes  lead
him  to  admire  nature  and  beauty  in  all  things  b  half  prepared  for
heaven.

The  doctrine  of  progression  and  migration  of  Souls  is  universally
communicated  to  all  Initiates  and  Neophytes  of  Extern  Orders  of
sacred  mysteries.  It  also  constitutes  the  foundation  of  all  those
ancient  religions  out  of  which  Christianity  was  evolved.  Various
eminent  sages,  notably  Chrishna,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  Apollonius,
Buddha,  Guatama,  the  messenger  of  the  Mystics,  and  Jesus,  the
Judean  Prince,  are  said  to  have  remembered  some  of  their  previous
incarnations.  It  is  stated  that  the  last-named  of  these  illustrious
teachers  recovered  the  recollection  of  five  hundred  and  fifty  of  his
own  incarnations,  and  the  chief  end  of  his  doctrine  is  to  induce  men
so  to  live  as  to  shorten  the  number  and  duration  of  their  earth-lives.

Josephus  asserted  the  return  of  Souls  into  new  bodies,  and  recog-
nition of  the  doctrine  is  not  wanting  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.
Thus  the  writer  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  says  of  himself,  "  Being  good,
I  came  into  a  body  undefiled."  The  Pythagorean  doctrine,  known  as
the  Egyptian  belief  in  the  Transmigration  of  Souls,  is  the  same  system
which,  expressed  in  the  famous  Hermetic  books,  translated  in  1650^
cost  the  lives  of  several  advanced  individuals  of  that  time,  and  ban-
ishment of  any  man  found  to  have  the  book  in  his  pos^ssion.

It  contained  the  esoteric  scriptures  of  the  Egyptian  and  other
ancient  religious  systems,  out  of  which  a  collection  of  only  a  few
fragments  remains  at  this  day.  The  book,  known  as  the  Dwme
Fytnandcr^  reputed  and  ascribed  to  Hermes,  the  son  of  Saturn,  is  one
of  these.

There  Is  an  old  story  written  that  the  Soul,  attracted  by  desire,
descends  into  matter,  and  Is  misled  by  illusions,  until,  through  suffer-
ing. It  turns  to  the  light  of  the  Divine  Spirit  within  and  is  saved.  As
the  eye  sees  the  expanded  sky,  so  the  wise  man  sees  the  Omnipres*
cnt  Divine  Spirit  and  learns  of  it.

Man,  or  the  Soul-seed  of  man,  may  have  lives  on  many  earths
before  it  reaches  this,  and  at  every  other  stage  of  his  vast  wandering
pilgrimage  he  has  been  but  an  embryonic  being.  During  the  various
transitional  states  of  the  Soul,  in  passing  through  the  myriads  of
forms  and  myriads  of  earths  whereon  their  probations  are  outwrought,
the  changes  are  all  effected  by  a  process  analogous  to  human  death.

During  the  period  which  subsists  between  the  death  of  one  embry-
onic existence  until  Its  birth  into  another,  or  the  time  when  the  Soul
is  expelled  from  one  material  shape,  a  drifting,  sleeping  Soul-seed,


EVOLUTION  AND   INVOLUTION.  367

enveloped  in  the  magnetic  Astral  aural  body  which  binds  it  to  the
realm  of  matter,  it  becomes  an  elementary  Soul-Spirit  in  an  interme-
diate Spiritual  existence.

Along  the  starry  pathway  which  this  night  is  vbible  to  the  inhabi-
tants of  earth,  —  the  stellar  walk  that  makes  beautiful  the  suggestion
of  Angelic  life, — multitudes  of  stars  grouped  in  constellations  and
ranged  in  solar  systems  like  ours  are  found.  Thousands  and  millions
of  years  before  the  earth  was  fashioned,  before  the  solar  system  had
being,  of  which  our  earth  forms  a  portion,  that  pathway  was  complete,
those  constellations  were  moving  in  their  courses,  and  the  systems
and  planets  performing  their  revolutions  round  mighty  centres  of
external  light  and  life.

Man,  the  offspring  of  the  dust  and  the  Spirit,  abiding  in  human
form  upon  the  earthly  planet,  vainly  imagines  what  kind  of  life  may
abide  there;  what  those  turning  and  belted  worlds  may  contain;
what  wonders  of  earth  and  air  and  sky  and  angelic  realm  may  abide
in  those  vast  constellations ;  whether  the  depths  are  filled  with
nebulae  of  worlds  yet  unformed,  or  whether  the  Soul-life  in  those  and
in  still  more  remote  systems  pulsates  with  higher  manhood ;  whether
the  angelic  powers  are  more  abundant ;  whether  life  yields  a  greater
fruitage  of  intelligence  so  feeble  is  man  on  earth,  so  mighty  is  the
universe  above  and  around  him,  so  vast  the  eternity  into  which  he  is
plunged,  so  majestic  the  laws  that  control  and  govern  the  whole  —
man  set  in  the  centre  of  a  mighty  universe  filled  with  life,  pulsating
with  planets  and  systems,  some  afar  off,  others  more  near,  all  sug-
gesting life,  without  the  capacity  to  know  wherof  that  life  may  exist
or  where  it  may  be  found.

With  glimmerings  of  light  from  within,  man,  not  bom  of  the  dust
but  of  the  immortal  part ;  with  gropings  through  scientific  pathways
and  external  observations  of  the  senses  —  man  perceives  but  dimly
the  thought  that  lies  in  the  innermost  of  the  heavenly  kingdoms.  To
him  the  outward  temple  of  clay,  to  him  the  surroundings  of  time  and
sense,  to  him  the  syllables  of  scientific  knowledge  which  form  but
the  infant  prattlings  of  his  mind  compared  to  the  thought  of  truth
that  abides  in  the  Angelic  Soul  —  all  of  these  surround  him,  and  still
he  is  in  the  dark.  What  though  he  knows  whereof  the  groupings  of
atoms  are  composed  ?  These  are  but  terms  —  the  postponing  of  the
final  solution  of  life  until  the  better  moment.  What  though  he  con-
templates and  measures  the  distances  between  planets  and  systems  ?
These  are  but  mathematical  figures,  the  results  of  his  outward  brain,
while  all  is  void  'twixt  him  and  those  worlds,  and  the  worlds  them*


368      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

selves  are  voiceless,  lifeless,  without  meaning  I  What  though  he  por^
tray  with  perfect  accuracy  and  wonderful  skill  the  evolution  of  planets
and  the  unfolding  of  generic  life  upon  the  earth  ?  Beyond  that  his
thought  does  not  reach  ;  his  scientific  knowledge  may  not  cope  with
the  Spiritual  kingdom  ;  he  is  still  in  the  dark ;  and  against  the  utter,
bare  void  and  barrenness  of  material  life  he  finds  himself  precipi-
tated, unless  the  light  from  within,  the  celestial  glory  of  inspiration,
and  the  promise  of  his  Soul,  has  told  him  of  better  things.

No  age  has  been  left  voiceless  ;  the  Spirit  of  prophecy  and  of
inspiration  has  existed  for  them.  The  Word  of  God  in  the  mouth
of  his  prophets  and  those  who  have  been  inspired  has  lived  in  every
age,  speaks  in  every  human  heart,  and  may  be  audible  to  every  human
understanding.  That  Word  properly  interpreted  not  only  gives  knowl-
edge of  man's  material  and  spiritual  life  on  earth,  but  knowledge  of
all  those  wonderful  laws  that  lie  veiled  from  materialism,  and  that
science  can  never  expect  to  probe,  and  that  human  philosophy  can
never  hope  to  fathom  ;  only  by  the  immeasurable  power  of  Spirit,  only
by  the  faculties  of  the  Soul,  only  by  that  perception  which  links  man
with  the  Infinite,  can  these  heights  be  scaled  and  this  space  be
bridged  by  the  consciousness  of  thought  and  knowledge.

As  an  archway  of  light  is  fashioned  of  the  rays  that  fall  upon  the
clouds  arising  from  earth,  so  an  archway  of  Spiritual  splendor  is
formed  of  those  thoughts  that  are  broken  to  our  understanding  from
the  Spiritual  realm,  falling  on  the  external  world  so  that  they  are
visible  to  our  vision.  This  is  the  bow  of  promise,  and  the  literal  rain-
bow in  the  heavens  (which  was  but  the  symbol)  but  the  Spiritual  arch-
way fashioned  of  the  reflection  of  Spiritual  light,  and  forming  its
glory  in  the  clouds  of  earth,  the  clouds  of  sorrow,  pain,  experiences
that  bring  consciousness  of  Spiritual  life  and  existence  here.  Through
the  long  vista  of  past  time,  through  the  numberless  ages  that  it  has
taken  to  form  the  world,  to  fit  it  for  the  habitation  of  man  and  to  make
man  understand  somewhat  of  the  external  relations  to  external  life,
these  glimmerings  of  Spiritual  life  and  truth  have  been  made  known,
but  veiled  in  the  ancient  prophecies.  Modem  interpretation  refuses
to  recognize  them,  and  upon  the  crown  which  Christ  wore,  traced  in
glorious  letters,  modem  infidelity  casts  the  blemish  of  its  doubt  and
stain,  while  the  lustre  of  Spiritual  life  gleams  brightly  from  beyond.
Has  it  ever  occurred  to  you  that  this  earth,  in  itself,  like  a  bird  of
passage,  or  like  some  barge  that  drives  the  Spirit  for  a  time  into  some
new  harbor,  is  but  a  resting-place,  and  that  the  Soul  itself,  immortal
in  its  flight  as  in  its  heritage,  endowed  with  knowledge  and  with


EVOLUTION  AND   INVOLUTION.  369

power  and  with  purpose,  must  explore  every  world,  must  understand
the  relations  of  every  star,  must  be  linked  with  planets  innumerable,
that  all  forms  and  shades  of  life  and  experience  may  be  pictured  and
fashioned  into  thought,  and  make  up  a  portion  of  its  immortal  being?
Has  it  also  never  occurred  that  the  Spiritual  states  surrounding  each
planet  move,  govern,  act  upon,  and  guide  the  destinies  of  those  plan-
ets, and  that  the  Spiritual  and  celestial  kingdoms  above  and  around
them  breathe  through  their  attributes,  waken  thoughts  of  life,  experi-
ments of  being,  pulsations  of  existence,  mathematical  and  mechanical
rules  and  powers,  until  the  planets  themselves  are  redeemed  and  per-
fected by  the  very  outgrowth  of  these  Souls  ?

Has  it  never  occurred  to  you  that  the  noxious  things  upon  earth,
the  creeping  things,  the  venomous  things,  those  that  are  unwieldy  and
unseemly,  are  but  the  typical  representations  of  the  conditions  of
mind  and  thought  here ;  and  that  when  there  shall  be  no  more  envies
nor  strivings,  no  more  wars  nor  discord,  no  more  slanders  nor  veno-
mous stings,  there  will  be  no  need  of  serpents,  no  need  of  poisonous
insects,  no  need  of  poisonous  plants  ?  —  that  the  outward  is  but  the
typical  representation  of  the  inward  ?  and  that  the  Spirit  of  all  life
flowing  through  matter  represents  the  mental  state  of  man  in  connec-
tion with  matter,  and  of  Spirit  moving  upon  man,  until  finally  he  works
out  his  redemption  through  these  means  ?  And  has  it  not  also  occur-
red to  you  that  through  the  glimpses  of  Spiritual  life  that  you  have
obtained,  these  pathways  and  experiences,  numberless  in  their  nature,
must  continue  from  world  to  world  and  star  to  star,  and  that  Spiritual
life  does  not  abide  simply  in  esse^  within  itself,  as  an  essence  and  as  a
life,  but  that  Spirit  continues  to  exercise  its  power  and  its  thought
upon  matter,  until,  through  all  those  changes  of  existence,  every  pos-
sible phase  of  expression  is  given  to  the  dust,  and  the  atom  is  trans-
formed and  transfigured  into  every  variety  of  shade,  because  man  is
eternal  ?  And  has  it  not  also  occurred  that  in  those  thoughts  and  lives
that  shall  be  multiplied  innumerably,  the  Angelic  states  also  increase
in  power  and  glory  until  every  planet  having  its  own  Angelic  state  rep-
resents a  degree  higher  and  higher  ?  All  are  but  as  a  starry  pathway
to  the  Infinite  Soul, — the  source  of  being ;  that  as  a  spiral  stairway
ascends  and  revolves,  as  suns  and  systems  move  round  their  centres,
but  also  move  through  space  round  other  and  more  distant  centres,  so
all  Souls  are  interblended  and  interlinked  by  those  wondrous  cords  of
life  that  upon  one  planet  and  another  unite,  bind,  and  link  them  to-
gether, until  they  become  as  those  wonderful  beings  for  whom  there
b  no  name  upon  earth  and  no  language  to  portraj;


370      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

When  the  awakening  of  the  Spirit  comes ;  when  the  celestial  Ii^^
finally  beams  upon  your  eye ;  when  there  is  a  dawning  of  the  fact  that
Angelic  existence  constitutes  the  eternal  pilgrimage  of  the  Soul,  and
that  the  terrestrial,  Spiritual  nature,  and  that  which  links  man  to  earth
by  his  terrestrial  appetite,  is  but  the  transient  and  the  fleeting,  and
that  this  transient  and  fleeting  existence  is  but  as  you  would  take
on  an  armor  to  descend  into  the  sea,  or  take  on  the  raiment  of  a
climate  to  protect  you  from  the  atmosphere  —  that  thus  do  you  take
on  the  outward  habitation  that  you  may  the  more  enter  into,  become
a  part  of,  and  form  an  experience  upon,  the  earth — how  great  then
will  life  become !  how  majestic  its  final  purpose  !  how  vast  the  wonders
that  unfold  it !  how  beautiful  its  solemn  import  1

The  diver  in  the  ocean's  depths  lives  there  only  for  the  treasure
that  he  shall  find ;  while  from  the  atmosphere  above,  through  the  tube
that  communicates,  he  is  encouraged  and  sustained  to  gather  the  treas-
ure for  which  he  has  descended.  So  man,  in  the  outward  life  immured,
wears  around  himself  the  armor  that  shall  protect  him  from  the  exter-
nal forces,  the  organic  body  formed  of  the  same  elements  with  which
he  has  to  contend,  and  therefore  a  protection ;  while  from  the  upper
air  all  of  the  breath,  all  of  the  encouragement,  all  of  the  vitalizing  life
must  come  to  him  while  he  is  searching  here  for  the  one  treasure  of
knowledge,  for  the  treasure  of  Truth,  for  the  one  treasure  of  human
experience  that  shall  be  a  portion  of  his  immortal  kingdom.

The  Angels  abide  forever  in  perfect  Love  ;  but  there  is  no  outward
tie,  no  bond  of  any  outward  worlds,  none  of  the  outward  states  enter
into  the  contemplation  of  those  sublime  thoughts  which  form  their
knowledge,  for  the  ties  of  earth  are  broken,  and  all  has  become  but
as  portions  of  the  external  experience.  But  whatsoever  Soul  on  any
planet,  or  in  any  state  of  life — whatsoever  thought  has  linked  them
with  any  other  Soul,  shall  abide  forever,  growing  brighter  and  brighter
as  time  fades  and  eternity  becomes  more  and  more  apparent,  as  the
revolution  of  the  Spirit  takes  the  place  of  the  external,  as  the  Soul  is
transformed  from  the  dust  and  becomes  immortal.

If  we  may  say  that  science  is  not  valuable  to  the  attainment  of
these  things  it  is  not  that  science  should  be  neglected  but  that  it
should  be  used  only  for  a  stepping-stone  for  higher  things.  If  we  say
material  life  itself  is  not  eternal,  and  that  the  fabric  we  inhabit  to-day
shall  not  abide  forever,  it  is  not  that  it  shall  be  neglected,  but  that  while
we  remain  it  shall  make  the  most  of  the  opportunities  for  knowledge
which  it  will  give  us  of  the  things  that  are  enduring,  for  the  use  we  can
employ  it  in  making  possible  a  contemplation  of  these  loftier  Spiritual


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  37 1

things.  If  we  speak  of  the  nature  of  the  human  understanding  as  being
valueless  to  the  cultivation  of  Spiritual  things,  it  is  because  we  must
cultivate  the  Spiritual  understanding  and  use  the  external  for  outward
purposes  only,  while  the  Spiritual  shall  pervade  and  permeate  for
works  and  words  of  the  Spiritual.  If  we  say  that  the  earthly  life  is
not  even  as  a  second  of  time  compared  to  eternity,  it  is  not  that  we
shall  neglect  that  time,  but  employ  it  for  the  very  best  purpose  and
highest  end,  gathering  from  each  moment  its  own  fruitage  for  eternity,
its  own  treasure  for  the  immortal  kingdom,  its  own  essential  Spirit  of
life  and  light  and  loveliness.

I  have  seen  by  the  very  gateway  of  human  life  an  Angel  pause  and
hover  on  attendant  thought,  and  seen  that  Angel's  face  grow  luminous
and  glorious  with  the  contemplation  of  a  scene  on  earth.  Was  it  of
a  crowned  king  ?  Was  it  of  the  splendor  of  a  material  pageant  ?  Was
it  of  the  glory  and  transport  of  wealth,  ambition,  warfare  ?  Was  it  an
outward  adornment  that  men  can  bring  ?  Was  it  tribute  to  intellec-
tual greatness  and  power?  Was  it  outward  beauty  ?  None  of  these.
It  was  that  upon  the  earth  the  Angel  of  Love  had  touched  some  human
heart  to  self-forgetfulness,  and  for  the  time  being  there  was  only  rap-
ture  between  earth  and  heaven.  It  was  that  some  brow  of  saint  or
some  lofty,  heroic  Soul  had  been  sunk  to  self-forgetfulness  in  redress
of  human  wrong,  had  touched  the  breath  of  Angels  with  tongue,
growing  eloquent  not  for  themselves  but  for  mankind.  It  was  when
martyred  Souls,  unconscious  of  flame  and  fire,  have  breathed  out  their
prayers  of  forgiveness  to  humanity,  while  the  brow  was  leaning  against
the  hand  of  God  and  touched  by  Angel  pinions.  It  was  when,  forget*
ting  the  outward  bond  of  flesh  and  the  tie  of  maternal  affection,  some
earthly  parent  had  yielded  up  the  treasure  of  life  to  the  immortal  king-
dom without  a  murmur  save,  "  Thy  will  be  done."

These  are  the  moments,  these  the  golden  hours  that  fill  life's  chal«
ice  and  form  the  stars  in  the  firmament  of  earthly  time.  I  gather  no
names  from  all  the  ranks  of  history  that  shall  shine  with  such  splendor;  I
gather  no  storied  treasures  from  tomes  and  volumes  of  human  lore ;  I
gather  no  inspiration  of  this  kind  from  that  power  which  ambition  has
given,  nor  from  the  pathway  of  human  kings ;  but  from  exalted  Souls
made  eloquent  by  consciousness  of  love,  from  that  purpose  which  il-
lumines and  uplifts,  I  see  many  stars  that  have  risen  above  the  night
of  time,  grown  glorious  in  their  light,  and  passed  to  the  constellations
of  eternity.

The  pathway  of  Angels  is  not  fashioned  by  those  things  that  men
most  worship  and  adore ;  is  not  won,  as  the  pathway  to  fame  is,  by


3/2      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

outward  conquest,  or  the  pathway  to  intellectual  power,  by  triumphs
over  terms  and  technicalities  of  earth ;  is  not  won  in  any  visible  way  of
outward  warfare  when  man  takes  on  the  armor  and  goes  forth  to  fight
a  given  foe,  —  but  is  won  by  those  gentle  and  silent  droppings,  the
wearing  and  the  tearing  of  daily  life,  the  perpetual  grinding  of  the
mills  of  the  gods  that  grind  away  the  dust  and  leave  the  Angel  clear
and  pure.  As  the  lapidary  from  the  rough  stone  hews  the  sparkling
gem ;  as  out  of  toil  and  pain  and  agony  of  summer  growth  comes  forth
the  burnished  lily  and  the  blooming  rose ;  as  from  the  struggling  ages
the  fruit-tree  yields  its  heritage  to  the  world,  and  the  purple  vine
crowns  the  hills  because  of  the  throes  of  pain  which  the  earth  has  en-
dured,—  so  is  man  outwrought,  so  is  the  Angel  bom,  so  is  the  daily
life  the  test  of  the  state  within ;  and  man  does  not  gain  inspiration  of
this  kind  from  that  power  which  ambition  has  given,  nor  from  the
pathway  of  human  kings;  but  from  exalted  Souls  made  eloquent
by  consciousness  of  love,  from  that  purpose  which  illumines  and
uplifts,  I  see  many  stars  that  have  risen  above  the  night  of  time,
grown  glorious  in  their  light  and  passed  to  the  constellations  of
eternity.

Even  thus  would  I  have  your  da}'s  and  moments  numbered ;  even
thus  would  I  have  your  aspirations  filled  until  life's  chalice  shall  not
be  void  and  vacant  as  now,  or  filled  with  bitter  ashes  and  the  burnt
tokens  of  regrets  —  filled  with  memories  that  have  faded,  and  passing
hopes  that  were  fleeting  as  an  outward  vision  —  but  filled  with  life-
giving  dews  and  sacred  memories  and  lofty  hopes,  each  one  an  eter-
nity, each  one  enjoyed  in  a  moment  of  time.

And  I  see  multitudes  and  multitudes  whom  no  man  can  number ;
and  these  are  the  Souls  who,  speaking  from  that  light,  could  reveal  to
you  that  not  by  any  given  day  nor  hour  of  prayer,  nor  any  set  time
of  fasting,  nor  any  voice  of  human  praise,  but  by  all  the  conquest,
the  patience,  the  unselfish  love,  the  struggling,  the  prayer,  by  the  daily
and  hourly  reaching  after  it,  the  immortal  life  has  thus  been  won ;  and
in  that  light  and  in  that  pathway  the  air  grows  luminous,  and  the
voice  of  the  Spirit  grows  hushed ;  there  is  a  silence  that  is  audible,
and  Soul  speaks  to  Soul  with  the  Divine  affection  of  the  Spirit,  and
the  breathing  is  as  the  light  of  God,  and  His  life  poured  in  throu^
every  vein ;  and  the  raiment  is  as  their  thought,  white  and  pure,  and
they  are  unconscious  of  their  brightness,  standing  arrayed  in  such
glory  that  they  are  unaware  of  its  existence,  and  are  only  seeking  for
new  knowledge  and  greater  goodness  and  loftier  power.


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  373

And  so  at  last  the  links  of  love  are  wrought;
And  so  at  last  the  angel  way  is  fraught,
Not  with  ambition  for  the  angel  light,
But  for  the  Love  that  makes  the  Spirit  white.

Far  less  depends  on  the  strength  of  the  proofs  or  arguments  that
can  be  adduced  in  support  of  any  particular  form  of  faith  than  upon
the  mental  constitution  or  development  of  faculty  in  the  individual  to
whom  such  proofs  or  arguments  are  addressed.  People  cannot  see
what  they  have  no  faculty  for  seeing.  The  beauty  and  value  of  art,
of  ornamentation,  of  music,  cannot  be  apprehended  by  those  who
have  little  or  no  perception  of  colors  or  appreciation  of  sweet  soimds.
If  they  condescend  to  use  the  word  "  God  "  in  any  sense,  they  wish
to  write  it  with  a  little  g,  and  they  know  of  nothing  greater  or  worthier
of  respect  than  big  "  I."  Whereas,  if  the  faculty  of  reverence  were
evenly  developed  and  properly  active,  it  is  plain  the  same  persons
would  see  the  whole  universe  in  a  quite  different  light.

Coupled  as  this  lack  of  veneration  often  is  with  deficient  "  Spiritu-
ality" (sometimes  miscalled  "  Marvellousness  "  ),  it  ordinarily  results
in  utter  Atheism  and  hopeless  Materialism  —  an  inability  to  form  a
rational  conception  of  either  a  Spiritual  state  of  existence,  a  Spirit-
world,  or  an  Infinite  and  All-Pervasive  Spirit-Intelligence,  the  Life  of
the  Universe.  In  other  words,  harsh  as  the  expression  may  seem,
such  persons  are  really  idiotic  as  regards  this  department  of  their
natures,  though  they  may  be  intellectual  giants  and  very  capable  and
worthy  people  in  all  other  respects.

All  this  suggests  some  important  practical  considerations.  One  is
a  lesson  of  charity  and  tolerance  toward  those  who  think  and  believe
differently  from  ourselves.  We  should  philosophically  consider  the
causes  of  such  differences.  It  may  be  neither  personal  merit  nor
blamable  fault  that  persons  believe  or  disbelieve  as  they  do.  It  may
be  the  result  of  an  organization  conferred  upon  them  by  heredity,
without  will  or  choice  of  their  own,  and  of  whose  influence  on  their
beliefs  or  perceptions  they  perhaps  have  no  knowledge  or  suspicion.
Nevertheless,  their  particular  views  may  result  from  personal  defects,
which  it  is  desirable  and  necessary  to  overcome,  if  they  would  become
well  rounded  men  and  women,  and  thus  be  able  to  see  things  truly  and
rightly.  But  we  do  not  blame  or  denounce  a  color-blind  man  because
he  sees  no  beauty  in  the  rainbow,  or  in  a  flower-garden,  or  a  picture-
gallery,  nor  because  he  cannot  rightly  interpret  a  danger-signal  at  a
railroad  switch.  We  pity  him  for  his  great  misfortune.  Yet  common-
sense  would  teach  us  not  to  employ  such  a  one  as  a  teacher  of  art  oi


374      '^HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

as  engineer  of  an  express  train.  Nor  is  it  any  more  safe  to  follow
as  guides  in  philosophy  or  religion  persons  who  are  lacking  in  either
reverence  or  spirituality,  however  brilliant  their  intellectual  attain-
ments or  acute  their  wit.

Spiritualists  and  their  opposites,  Materialists,  are  no  exception  to
this  rule.  It  hardly  need  be  said  that  they  who  most  readily  accept
the  facts  of  Spirit-existence  and  intervention  are  those  who,  by  inher-
itance or  by  culture,  have  attained  a  good  degree  of  development  of
the  faculty  by  phrenologists  termed  "Spirituality,"  which  affords,  first,
a  conception,  and,  when  more  fully  developed,  a  perception,  of  Spirit-
ual realities.  In  proportion  as  this  faculty  is  lacking  in  development
is  the  difficulty  of  believing  in  a  Spiritual  existence  or  anything  of  a
Spiritual  nature.  Where  it  has  little  or  no  expansion  or  activity,  it  b
as  impossible  for  one  to  correctly  conceive  of  Spiritual  things,  or  to
find  convincing  evidence  of  Spiritual  existence  or  agencies,  as  for  the
color-blind  to  distinguish  tints  and  harmony  of  colors,  or  the  non-
musical  to  appreciate  harmony  of  sounds.  Such  persons,  in  fact»
may  witness  the  most  demonstrative  Spiritual  phenomena,  but  they
have  no  faculty  to  perceive  the  true  meaning  of  these  phenomena  —
a  reference  to  delusion,  jugglery,  or  fraud  seeming  to  them  the  most
natural  and  probable  explanation.  Such  is  the  usual  condition  of  pro-
nounced Materialists — their  Spiritual  perceptions  are  unopened;  and
hence  their  blindness  or  want  of  perception  in  this  direction  is  no
disproof  of  what  others  perceive.  Of  course,  they  are  usually  un-
aware of  this  deficiency  in  themselves,  and  wonder  at  what  seems  the
credulity  and  delusion  of  those  who  see  what  they  cannot  see  ;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  bom  Spiritualists  are  often  amazed  at  the  apparent
stupidity,  blindness,  and  wrong-headedness  of  this  class.

Another  lesson  is  that  we  should  all  be  careful  not  to  make  our
own  defects  or  possible  overpluses  a  rule  of  absolute  truth  or  duty.
A  blind  man  who  should  insist  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  light  or
color  because  he  does  not  see  it,  or  a  deaf  man  who  should  deny  the
existence  of  sound  or  of  music  because  he  has  not  heard  it,  would  be
no  more  absurd  than  is  the  born  Materialist  (such  are  some  of  our
devotees  of  modern  science)  who  denies  the  existence  of  Spirits  be-
cause he  has  never  seen,  heard,  or  felt  them.  Equally  absurd,  on  the
other  hand,  is  it  for  any  religious  enthusiast,  or  philosophical  theorist,
or  inspirational  Spiritualist  even,  to  set  up  his  own  particular  views  of
truth  or  of  the  universe  as  a  finality  to  which  all  must  accede  or
be  —  denounced.  Every  one  of  us  sees,  as  it  were,  through  glasses
more  or  less  colored  and  distorted  —  that  is,  through  his  own  many-


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION.  37$

sided  faculties  in  states  of  greater  or  less  development  from  heredity
or  culture  —  some,  perhaps,  in  excessive  activity,  others  possibly  in
great  deficiency.  Hence  our  conceptions  of  the  universe,  of  truth,
and  of  duty  are  correspondingly  warped,  partial,  and  distorted.

As  a  race,  man  moves  slowly.  It  has  taken  him  thousands  of
years  to  penetrate  beneath  the  surface  of  material  things,  and  to  dis-
cover that  law  and  order  reign  everywhere  in  the  creation.  He  has
hardly  begun  to  recognize  the  fact  that  they  must  be  equally  omni-
present and  potent  in  the  Spiritual  world  and  in  his  own  Spiritual
nature.  There  are  infinite  things  to  learn  about  God,  about  himself
and  his  relations  to  the  uncreated  Source  of  life.  He  has  not  yet
mastered  the  alphabet  of  Spiritual  and  Divine  knowledge.  He  still
stands  on  the  shore  of  the  infinite  ocean  of  Truth.  Must  he  stand
there  forever  ?  It  was  not  said  of  man :  **  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,
and  no  farther."  He  was  made  to  advance.  The  power  of  doing  it
distinguishes  him  from  the  animal.  The  Lord's  promise  that  a  true
knowledge  of  Him  should  universally  prevail  is  written  in  man's  nature,
and  every  effort  to  know  more,  every  aspiration,  looks  to  its  fulfil-
ment.

The  awakening  interest  in  all  questions  concerning  man's  Spiritual
nature  and  destiny  is  one  of  the  marked  signs  of  the  times  which  in-
dicate the  coming  of  a  new  age  of  religious  thought  and  life.

This  new  interest  is  not  without  its  cause.  It  is  the  effect  of  a
new  and  more  powerful  influx  of  the  Divine  Truth  into  the  understand-
ings and  of  the  Divine  Love  into  the  hearts  of  men.  There  is  abun-
dant evidence  that  a  new  power  is  operating  upon  the  minds  of  men.
It  is  in  the  air.  We  feel  it  quickening  every  human  faculty  and  stim-
ulating to  more  vigorous  and  intelligent  action.  We  may  not  be  able
to  tell  whence  it  cometh  or  whither  it  goeth ;  but  we  feel  its  power
and  see  its  effects  in  every  phase  of  human  thought  and  in  every
form  of  human  activity.  It  is  to  the  human  faculties  as  the  warm
breath  of  spring  to  the  frozen  and  the  dormant  germs  of  the  vege-
table kingdom.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  God  moving  upon  the  face  of  the
waters  of  human  thought  and  affection,  separating  the  light  of  Truth
from  the  darkness  of  error,  and  revealing  in  clearer  lines  those  eter-
nal principles  which  constitute  the  ground  of  a  heavenly  character.
Such  an  influx  of  power  necessarily  causes  disturbance  and  commo-
tion, and  brings  many  evil  and  false  principles  and  customs  to  light.
But  this  is  necessary  to  their  correction  and  amendment.  There  has
never  been  an  age  when  there  was  so  deep,  lively,  and  intelligent  an
interest  in  all  questions  which  relate  to  man's  nature  and  destiny  as


376


THE   HIDDEN    WAY   ACROSS   THE  THRESHOLD.


there  is  at  the  present  time.  There  has  never  been  a  time  when  there
were  so  many  intelligent  men  and  women  who  were  not  content  with
surface  knowledge,  with  the  appearances  of  truth  or  doctrines  based
on  personal  authority.  They  seek  to  penetrate  into  the  hidden  causes
of  things.  There  has  never  been  a  time  when  the  desire  to  know  the
Truth  was  so  prevalent  and  strong.

In  this  advancement  many  mistakes  will  be  made,  much  will  be
left  behind,  but  it  will  only  be  the  chaff  which  has  served  its  purpose.
Nothing  that  is  good  and  True  will  be  lost.  In  breaking  away  from
traditions  and  learning  to  walk  alone,  man  will  meet  with  many  a
fall ;  but  that  is  not  a  fatal  evil.  As  he  can  only  learn  to  walk  by
walking,  so  he  can  only  become  a  rational  being  by  using  his  reason ;
he  can  only  know  by  learning.  The  race  has  lost  nothing  of  the  past
Its  knowledge,  and  power,  and  life  are  all  gathered  up  and  embodied
in  the  present.  The  signs  of  the  times  which  point  to  the  coming  of
a  new  age  of  Spiritual  light  and  life  are  manifest  in  every  form  of
human  activity.  The  questioning  of  old  faiths,  the  doubt  and  unbe-
lief, the  softening  of  the  hard  lines  of  prevalent  creeds,  the  desire
for  union,  the  effort  to  find  where  others  stand,  the  toleration  and
the  humane  feeling  which  is  constantly  gaining  strength,  are  all  indi-
cations that  we  are  entering  on  a  new  state  of  Love  Light,  and  Truth.

Know  that  there  is  no  enlightment  from  without ;  the  secret  of
tUngs  is  revealed  from  within.


Inworld.

[A  poem  taken  from  the  January  number  of  the  '*  The  Dial,"  1842,  the  oigan  of
the  Tnuiscendentalists,  edited  by  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson.]

Amid  the  watches  of  the  windy  night

A  poet  sat,  and  listened  to  the  flow

Of  his  own  changeful  thoughts,  until  there  passed

A  vision  by  him,  murmuring  as  it  moved,

A  wild  ana  mystic  lay  —  to  which  his  thoughts

And  pen  kept  time  —  and  thus  the  measure  ran:


All  is  hut  as  it  seems.

The  round,  green  earth.

With  river  and  glen ;

The  din  and  the  mirth

Of  the  busy,  busy  men;

The  world^s  great  fever

Throbbing  forever;

The  creed  of  the  sage,

The  hope  of  the  a^e.

All  things  we  chensh.

All  that  live  and  all  that  perish,

These  are  but  inner  dreams.


The  great  world  goeth  on

To  thy  dreaming ;

To  thee  alone

Hearts  are  making  their  moan.

Eyes  are  streaming.

Tnine  is  the  white  moon  turning  night  to

day.
Thine  is  the  dark  wood  sleepug  in  her

ray.
Thee  tne  winter  chills,
Thee  the  spring-time  thrills ;
All  things  nod  to  thee  —


EVOLUTION  AND  INVOLUTION-


377


All  things  come  to  see
If  thou  art  dreaming  on.
If  thy  dream  should  break,
And  thou  should'st  awake,
All  things  would  be  gone.

Nothing  is,  if  thou  art  not,

From  thee  as  from  a  root

The  blossoming  stars  upshoot.

The  flower  cups  drink  the  rain.

Joy  and  grief  and  weary  pain

Spring  aloft  from  thee,

And  toss  their  branches  free.

Thou  are  under,  over  all ;

Thou  dost  hold  and  cover  all ;

Thou  art  Atlas  —  thou  art  Jove  :—

The  mightiest  truth

Hath  all  its  youth

From  thy  enveloping  thought

Thy  thought  itself  lay  in  thy  earliest  love.


Nature  keeps  time  to  thee
With  voice  unbroken :
Still  doth  she  rhyme  to  thee
When  thou  hast  spoken.
When  the  sun  shines  to  thee^
Tis  thy  own  joy.
Opening  mines  to  thee
Nought  can  destroy.
When  the  blast  moans  to  thee^
Still  doth  the  wind
Echo  the  tones  to  thee
Of  thv  own  mind.
Laugnter  but  saddens  thee
When  thou  art  sad.
Life  is  not  life  to  thee,
But  as  thou  livest.
Labor  is  strife  to  thee
When  thou  least  strivest  :—


More  did  the  spirit  sing,  and  made  the  night
Most  musical  with  inward  melodies.
But  vanished  soon,  and  left  the  listening  bard
Wrapt  in  unearthly  silence  —  till  the  mom
Reared  up  the  screen  that  shuts  the  Spirit  world
From  loftiest  poet  and  from  wisest  sage.


OUTWORLD.


The  sun  was  shining  on  the  busy  earth.

All  men  and  things  were  movine  on  their  way—

The  old,  old  way  which  we  call  life.    The  Soul

Shrank  from  the  giant  grasp  of  Space  and  Time,

Yet,  for  it  was  her  dreamy  hour,  half  yielded

To  the  omnipotent  delusion — and  looked  out

On  the  broad  glare  of  things,  and  felt  itself

Dwindling  before  the  universe :    Then  came  unto  the  bard

Another  Spirit  with  another  voice,

And  sang :  —


Said  he,  that  all  but  seems  ?

Said  he,  the  world  is  void  and  lonely.
A  strange  vast  crowd  of  dreams

Coming  to  thee  only  ?

And  that  thv  feeble  soul
Hath  sucn  a  strong  control
0*er  sovereign  Space  and  sovereign  Time
And  all  their  train  sublime  ?

Said  he,  thou  art  the  eye
Reflecting  all  that  is  —

The  ear  that  hears,  while  it  creates
All  sounds  and  harmonies  —

The  central  sense  that  bides  amid
All  shows  and  tunes  and  realities?

Listen,  mortal,  while  the  sound
Of  this  life  intense  is  flowing  I

Dost  thou  find  all  things  around
Go  as  thou  art  going  ?
Dost  thou  dream  that  thou  art  free,


Making,  destroying  all  that  thoa  dost


In  the  unfettered  might  of  thy  soul's
liberty?

Lo,  an  atom  troubles  thee.

One  bodily  fibre  crushes  thee,
One  nerve  tortures  and  maddens  thee,

One  drop  of  blood  is  death  to  thee.
Art  thou  but  a  withering  leaf,
For  a  summer  season  brief

Clinging  to  the  tree,
'Till  the  winds  of  circumstance,
Whirling  in  their  hourlv  dance.

Prove  too  much  for  tnee  ?

Art  thou  but  a  speck,  a  mote
In  the  system  universal  ?
Art  thou  but  a  passing  note


378

Woven  in  the  great  reheartil  I
Canst  thou    roll    back   the    tide   of
Thought
And  unmake  the  creed  of  the  ige.

And  nnteach  the  wisdom  taught
Bf  the  prophet  and  (he  sage?
Art  thou  but  a  shadow
Chasing  o'er  a  meadow?
The  great  world  goes  on

Spite  of  th;  dreaming;
Not  to  be  alone
Hearts  are  making  their  moan
And  tear-diopa  streaming,
And  the  migiity  voice  ofNature
Is  thy  patent,  not  thji  creature,
It  no  pupil  but  (h]r  teacher :


THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.


And  the  world  would  still  move  im
Were  thy  soul  forever  Bown.

For  while  thou  dreamest  on  enfolded
In  nature's  wide  embrace,

Alt  thy  life  is  daily  moulded
By  her  informing  grace.

And  Time  and  Space  must  refgn
And  rule  o'er  thee  forever.

And  the  Outworld  tifu  it*  chain

From  off  tby  spirit  never :
Butinthe  dream  of  thy  half-wakingfenr

Thou  shalt  be  mocked  with  gleam  and


And  then  the  Spirit  fled  and  left  the  bard
Still  wondering  — for  he  felt  that  voices  twain
Had  come  from  different  spheres  with  different  tr
That  seemed  at  war  and  yet  agreed  in  one.


Cameo  Tausman


The  Amulet  of  [he  earty  Christians  and  Gnostics;  the  piincipal  gem  of  the  Greek
Mysteries :  the  Del[ihic  L.  (he  sacred  numlier  5,  or  the  five  ascending  signs  of  the
Cabalistic  Zodiac :  wiiii  ihc  Cable-tow  for  those  who  truly  enter  the  Temple,  being
born  again  into  Ihe  SiionJ Priacif'U of  Kuliire ;  (he  Saviour  of  worlds  and  of  Men;
The  Uniting,  or  the  Idea  of  Heaven;  the  Unspeakable  Things  of  which  it  was  not
lairfui  lo  utter :  the  Seleueidan  Anchor ;  the  glories  around  Ihc  sacred  person  of
Man;  Ihe  Kiiliiiihtcner  of  Hidden  Truth:  the  /F.olian  Melodies  of  Life;  the  hidden
Key  to  the  doorway  of  the  Three  Worlds— i.^.,S|)iril,  Elementary,  and  Elemental ;
the  Lord  of  all  regions ;  Talisman  of  the  famous  Wise  Men ;  Jacob's  Ladder;  the
Self-centred,  Ihe  Cumiilelcd  Energy;  Truth  addressing  ihe  Godhead;  the  Divine
Silence ;  the  Unspeakable  Light  of  Truth ;  Cameo  Insignia  of  the  Nameless  Sccr^*
Order  in  the  East


CHAPTER  XIII.

THE  GREAT  MYSTERY  ;  OR,  THE  HIDDEN  WAY.
"  And  I  w31  fffn  onto  thee  Um  kej*  oi  Um  kisfdom  of  heaTen.**

Unvefl,  O  Thou  who  giveat  snsteiuuioe  to  the  world,  that  face  of  the  true  son,  which  ia  now
hidden  by  a  rase  of  golden  light !  so  that  we  may  see  the  truth  and  know  oar  whole  duty.

In  him  who  knows  that  all  Siuritual  beings  are  the  same  in  kind  with  the  Supreme  Siurit,  what
room  can  there  be  for  delusion  of  mind,  and  what  room  for  sorrow,  when  he  reflects  on  the  identity  ol
Spirit.  —  Taj$tr  Veda,

Man  walks  upon  the  earth,  his  feet  upon  the  ground,  his  head
touching  the  firmament  above.  He  walks  with  God,  and  communes
with  Angels.  He  is  in  the  consciousness  of  the  realm  of  the  com*
munion  of  the  saints  themselves.  He  b  not  an  incarcerated  Spirit,
but  has  pent  up  in  him  the  faith  that  makes  him  a  citizen  of  God,  and
learns  in  that  higher  life  to  despise  the  things  that  make  other  men
mourn.  And  though  he  sometimes  sheds  tears,  even  tears  are
refreshing.    They  are  the  baptism  and  the  christenings  of  God.

The  life  of  exalted  experience  contains  intimations  of  God ;  the
daily  consciousness  of  His  presence.  The  Kingdom  of  God  is  not  a
thought,  but  an  experience.  It  is  not  the  lower  experience  of  mind
acting  on  matter,  nor  mind  acting  on  common  men,  nor  the  neces-
sary relations  of  society.  There  is  an  experience  that  lifts  a  man  into
a  higher  realm  than  this,  into  the  Spirit  of  Adonia  the  Christ  Himself.
And  when  one's  whole  life  has  been  developed  round  about  thb  main-
spring of  faith  and  love,  and  so  developed  that  it  is  victorious  at  last,
the  whole  character,  flow  of  thought  and  emotion  become  so  different
from  the  lower,  unregenerate  life  that  the  man  amazedly  finds  him-
self knowing  without  study  what  no  book  could  teach  him,  —  he  is
learning  from  Spiritual  intuition  what  life  is  and  what  God  is.  It  is
possible  for  a  man  to  learn  things  without  the  ordinary  auxiliaries.
One  single  faculty  may  interpret  what  three  or  four  co-ordinate  ones
will  not  recognize  in  any  degree.  A  man  may  know  by  some  single
experience  the  kingdom  of  God  and  some  of  its  profound  secrets.
He  may  know  God.

"Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart;  they  shall  see  God."  Mere
philosophy  will  never  interpret  God  to  us.     It  will  interpret  some  of

379


380       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

His  works,  but  not  Him  —  He  is  a  Spirit,  and  only  a  Spirit  can  under-
stand Him;  and  only  that  Spirit  which  is  of  Him  and  in  us  can
interpret  the  ever-present  God.  It  is  through  the  intuitions  of  our
dispositions,  rarefied,  sanctified,  impleted,  with  the  Divine  nature
opened,  that  one  can  bring  God  near.  It  can  be  done.  No  man
ever  yet  rose  into  these  sunny  heights  of  experience  who  was  not
able  to  say,  "I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth;  I  know  it.*'  Men
may  say  in  derision,  '^How  do  you  know?  By  what  test,  analysis,  or
synthesis,  or  how  can  you  make  a  logical  deduction  of  it?"

The  finest  essences  of  human  life  are  those  that  elude  all  phi-
losophy and  all  language.  I  do  not  need  to  be  told  that  a  person  is
patient,  or  gentle,  or  genial,  if  I  live  with  him.  I  see  it  forming  the
features,  inspiring  the  actions,  or  repressing  impatient  activity.  I
know  it  without  words  and  without  analysis,  and  if  this  be  true  in  the
lower  ranges  of  experience,  how  much  more  is  it  true  in  the  veiy
highest,  where  from  day  to  day  the  Soul  dwells  in  the  Imperial  con-
sciousness, "Because  He  lives,  I  live;  I  in  Him,  and  He  in  me."
This  is  the  mystic  language  of  the  higher  consciousness,  —  profound
and  elusive,  but  real  and  glorious.  This  development  of  the  higher
life  of  the  Soul  is  little  understood,  much  misunderstood,  largely
doubted  because  there  has  been  so  little  exemplification  of  it  There
have  been  single  individuals  whose  lives  indicate  that  they  have  come
into  that  state,  and  that  which  they  have  done  others  may  do.  It  is
simply  gaining  mental  light,  the  illumination  of  which  Paul  speaks
when  he  says, ''  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit
of  God,  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  sftriiualfy
discemedn^

The  illumination  of  mentality  and  Spirit  communion,  when  united
in  one  accord,  is  a  powerful  force.  It  is  like  this :  in  every  thousand
men  united  in  one  feeling  there  is  much  more  than  in  a  thousand  single
men.  They  create  an  atmosphere  and  develop  a  power  over  and  above
the  sum  total  of  their  individualism.

Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,  but  judge  righteous  judg-
ment. — John  vii. :  2-4.

I  knew  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen  years  ago  (whether  in  the
body  I  cannot  tell ;  or  whether  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell ;  God
knoweth)  such  an  one  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven.  And  I  knew
such  a  man,  how  that  he  was  caught  up  into  paradise,  and  heard  un-
speakable words,  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter.  —  n  Cor.
xii. :  2-4.

The  original  Greek  of  the  fourth  verse,  which  is  not  quite  properly


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  38I

construed,  really  signifies  that  it  is  not  possible  to  give  these  "un-
speakable words"  to  which  Paul  the  Gnostic  refers  because  it  was
against  the  laws  of  the  land  to  speak  them  outside  the  Order  where
they  were  given.  The  compiler  is  well  aware  that  to  mention  the
revival  of  any  antique  mysteries  or  ancient  secrets,  or  even  to  mani-
fest a  desire  to  learn  something  out  of  the  ordinary,  in  this  conven-
tional age,  when  such  knowledge  and  light  are  unpopular,  is  likely  to
subject  one  to  condemnation  or  sneers,  particularly  where  the  masses
are  ruled  and  held  down  by  ignorance  and  superstition.  But  we  read
in  the  Vaishnava  Scriptures  that  "  it  is  the  crown  of  devotion  to  have
these  mysteries  revealed  to  the  inner  gaze."  In  the  Bagavad-Gita  we
are  told  to  ''inquire  about  Him  by  prostration,  by  question,  and  by
service,  and  the  wise  men  who  know  the  truth  will  give  you  the
knowledge."

A  religion  without  its  mysteries  is  a  temple  without  a  God.  Let
him  who  aspires  to  power  through  the  duality  of  his  being  commence
by  a  close  and  critical  analysis  of  himself.  The  three  great  principles
of  the  Dual  selfhood  in  man^  from,  by,  and  through  which  come  all
action,  are  Love,  Intuition,  and  Will,

A  man  must  cultivate  his  loves  in  order  to  produce  will-power,  as
a  husbandman  must  till  the  soil  to  make  it  productive.  Lave,  as  we
said  in  the  very  beginning,  Lave  is  the  Secret  of  Life,  Love  is  an
emotion.  Will  is  an  emotion,  of  which  Love  is  the  reflex,  unchangeable
and  eternal.  Its  operations  are  upward,  and  its  exalted  emanations
mingle  in  the  great  essence,  Love  in  the  bosom  of  God.

The  law  of  objective  or  sex-love  b  that  love  which  is  the  reflex  of
ourselves  which  we  see  in  minor  called  woman.  This  is  not  real
Love  in  its  purity.  It  is  only  the  semblance  of  real  things,  which
change  and  die.  That  which  is  supposed  to  be  Love,  or  Will,  or
Wisdom  is  only  the  semblance  of  the  real,  for  they  all  change  or  die.
This  law  is  true  in  relation  to  sex-love,  whose  operations  being  down-
ward, we  propagate  only  our  kind  of  conditions  or  emanations  which
are  antagonistic  to  us ;  while  the  True,  real  Love  propagates  new  atoms,
which  are  parts  of  a  Divine  body.

The  road  to  power  is  in  the  attunement  and  perfection  of  man's
nature,  which  must  begin  in  the  attainment  of  a  perfect  Chord  of
his  Dual  Force,  the  union  of  two  in  one,  or  Tkuo  in  Spirit,  which  pro-
duces a  perfect  inward  and  outward  action.

Be  it  known  to  all  men  who  expect  to  grow  and  gain  the  mysteries
of  Life  and  death,  that  they  cannot  be  found,  nor  the  Spiritual  under-


382      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Standing  cnlturedy  unless  entirely  free  from  all  selfish  or  laeioeuaiy
purpose.

The  union  of  man's  dual  forces,  and  wiU-cuItme^  is  tbe  royal
ladder  for  climbling  any  height,  and  readiing  every  Soul,  being
anchored  in  God's  Throne.  Science  and  Love  united  with  Will  mdJce
the  arm  strong  for  occult  climbing  toward  Spirit  Power  expressed
physically  is  lost  to  one  spiritually,  and  modern  culture  of  the  intel-
lect is  not  Spiritual.  Firmness  and  Self-esteem  may  be  cultivated
and  increased,  but  is  not  true  culture  of  Will,  but  throws  the  WiU  out
of  balance,  which,  in  the  main,  is  destructive.

All  power,  to  be  lasting,  must  come  as  a  iescmdii^ SpirUuail^awt^
Love  from  the  higher  to  the  lower,  as  a  refreshing  baptism,  and  this
descent  is  accomplished  by  and  through  the  feminine  Love  and  D^l
in  harmonious  continuity.

Everything  contains  a  certain  deposit  of  the  Jewel  of  U^  which
can  be  found,  reached,  and  made  to  obey  your  every  command.  To
do  this  is  within  reach  of  every  one  who  can  vibrate  the  higher
emotions ;  and  the  stronger  the  octaves  of  these  emotions,  the  greater
will  be  the  corresponding  forces  of  power  produced,  providing  the
operator  has  sufficient  will-power  to  guide  and  control  them.  This
Will  is  cultivated  by  the  wisdom  gained  through  silence  and  concen-
tration,  but  without  emotion  the  student  can  do  nothing.  As  St.  Paul
says,  he  '*  must  be  transformed  by  a  renewing  of  the  mind,"  which  is
the  cultivation  of  emotions.  A  man  without  emotion  is  one  without
Virtue  and  without  vice,  but  also  without  true  energy.  He  drifts  on
every  tide  as  it  ebbs  and  flows  in  the  affairs  of  men.  He  is  only  a
reflex  and  shadow  of  his  surroundings.  This  was  the  burden  of  the
warning  in  the  Prophets  Cry.  In  their  exhortation  to  mankind,  they
are  continually  striving  to  impress  upon  thoughUess  man  that  he  is
an  action,  and  by  every  act  adds  to  or  diminishes  his  power  of  Soul
understanding,  which  alone  can  bring  him  peace  and  enjoyment,  and
that  when  the  light  within  is  diminished,  unrest,  suffering,  and  defeat
are  brought  to  him.

In  the  perfect  chord  of  the  Dual  forces  of  man  are  found  the
odyllic  Octaves  of  vibration,  which  is  the  superior  man  being  con«
structed  from  the  higher  love  emotions.  Even  as  fire  lies  latent  in  a
bit  of  wood,  awaiting  only  some  kindling  touch  to  raise  it  to  a  flame
and  power  of  heat,  so  the  superior  man  or  odyllic  force  lies  latent  in
mankind,  awaiting  only  the  attunement  of  bi-sexual  Love  to  manifest
itself  and  augment  and  increase  its  powers  by  union  with  Umversal
Spirit


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,  THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  383

How  harmonious  would  be  all  the  world  if  there  were  no  distinc-
tions !  How  easily  we  become  one  Divine  brotherhood  when  we  lose
sight  of  these  distinctions,  and  forget  our  differences,  which  make  us
enemies  to  each  other,  to  ourselves,  and  to  God.  This  is  the  path-
way to  God —  to  fix  in  one's  own  loving  heart  the  Divine  Humanity ;
caring  nothing  for  difference  of  race,  sex,  condition,  opinion,  or  name.
He  who  does  this  is  a  great  Soul-illumined  man,  and  looks  with  indif-
ference upon  all  small  things  which  disturb  and  agitate  mankind.  He
has  put  away  childish  things  and  risen  above  them  toward  the  Angel-
hood, and  can  claim  kinship  with  God,  who  loves  all  humanity  alike.
He  dwells  now  upon  the  heights  of  repose  and  holds  sweet  converse
with  God  in  the  depths  of  his  own  all-knowing  intuitive  Saul.  It  is
here  he  seeks  the  Absolute  Love,  therefore  he  must  lose  sight  of  the
differences  of  things,  passing  inward  to  reach  the  true  Spirit  thereof,
and  if  the  octaves  of  his  being  are  attuned  in  odyllic  force,    .     .     .

he  passes  deeper  still,  beyond  all  distinctions  and

differences  of  objective  things  to  the  bosom  Oneness  of  all  being.

'*  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  " ;  he  that  hath  a  mind  to  think,
let  him  think ;  and  let  him  who  can,  receive  it.

''  I  have  fed  you  with  milk  and  not  with  meat ;  for  hitherto  ye
were  not  able  to  bear  it,  neither  are  ye  yet  able."

''  Knock  and  the  door  shall  be  opened  unto  you.  Seek  and  ye
shall  find."

All  things  are  good  with  good  men.  **  To  the  pure  all  things  are
pure."  The  kind  of  Spiritual  knowledge  that  does  not  soften  a  man's
nature ;  that  does  not  take  the  harshness,  the  bitterness,  the  unchari-
tableness  out  of  his  Soul,  and  bring  him  into  more  harmonious  rela*
tions  with  himself  and  with  the  universe,  is  of  but  little  worth  to  the
world.

It  is  better  for  one  to  err  on  the  side  of  charity  than  to  wrong  in
the  mistaken  sense  of  justice.  No  matter  how  honest  one  may  be  in
his  convictions  of  right,  unless  his  nature  is  dominated  by  charity  for
all,  he  is  liable,  in  his  imperfect  judgment  of  his  fellows,  to  do  them
great  wrong.  For  no  one  is  infallible ;  and  no  one  should  be  vain  or
conceited  enough  to  imagine  he  is  in  possession  of  absolute  truth.

There  are  some  in  the  front  ranks  of  Spiritualism  and  advanced
thinkers,  some  of  the  brightest  writers  and  teachers,  intellectually,  who
seem  to  regard  themselves  as  self-constituted  censors  over  their
fellow-teachers,  and  who  are  quick  and  fierce  to  hurl  their  weapons
of  denunciation  at  all  who  do  not  square  their  lives  and  conduct  by
their  own  measure.    They  mete  out  condemnation  to  their  erring


384      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

fellow-mortals.  They  will  be  obliged  to  lift  themselves  out  of  this
condition  of  mind  before  they  can  expect  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  the
Soul,  where  only  Love  is  omnipotent

We  need  all  of  us  to  get  nearer  to  the  great  heart  of  Divine  Good-
ness. We  all  need  more  of  that  heavenly  virtue  that ''  vaunteth  not
itself,  is  not  puffed  up,  that  suffereth  long  and  is  kind  "  —  ever  blessed
charity.

Only  the  truly  good  can  feel  the  higher  influence  of  goodness  and
Spirit  Love.  "  As  thou  art  fitted  to  receive  it,  so  shall  the  light  be
given  thee."

"If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit" — Gai.
V. :  25.

The  more  we  search  and  the  longer  we  live,  the  more  we  find  our-
selves as  little  children.  As  we  strive  to  gauge  or  measure  the
Infinite  or  Eternal  with  our  finite  senses  and  our  temporary  capacity^
we  find  how  little  we  know  and  how  stupendous  appears  Spirit  Light
from  our  human  standpoint.

But  Spirit  light  and  unfoldment  and  the  mysteries  of  the  hidden
way  are  opened  by  the  key  of  little  things  frequently  passed  by
unnoticed.  To  guard  the  little  acts  and  thoughts  of  every  hour  with
care  will  bring  each  life  to  ripened  fruitage,  like  the  blossom  which
each  day  gathers  in  a  little  of  the  warm  sunlight,  and  when  Ae
harvest  comes — behold!  the  fruit

Great  things  cannot  exist  without  small  ones.  Guard  carefully
the  little  things,  lest,  aiming  at  things  too  great,  we  fail  even  of  the
small.

The  greatest  of  marvels  is  in  the  simplicity  of  nature.  The
wonder  arises  from  ignorance.  The  unlearned  savage  supposes  mira-
cles to  be  of  the  devil.  So  does  our  narrow-minded  religious  brother
to-day,  while  the  golden  light  of  truth,  the  knowledge  of  Spirit,  has
come  to  drive  away  despair  and  doubt.  We  are  constantly  rolling
onward,  returning  over  the  same  starting-point  at  times  and  periods,
progress  and  growth  being  as  a  spiral.  Nature  permits  no  one  to  for-
get the  root  from  which  he  grew.  Even  mother  earth  is  reminded
each  day  through  her  atmospheres  of  the  little  rolling  nebulae  from
which  she  came.  The  life  of  the  Soul  being  a  spiral,  upward  toward
the  Divine  Light,  its  first  circle  of  independent  liberty  of  life  being
on  this  globe,  through  the  liberty  God  gave  to  man,  we  make  our  life
a  grand  ascension  or  a  grave  mistake.  The  question  b  often  asked,
"  Why  do  Spirits  walk  about  or  return  to  earth,  and  why  do  they  come
to  you  or  me,  and  not  to  others  ?  **


THE  GREAT  MYSTERY  ;    OR.   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  385

The  law  of  attraction  first  calb  them  back.  It  is  required  by
nature's  laws  that  all  unripened  fruit  must  return  to  earth,  to  grow  up
again  into  a  ripening  of  leaflet,  tree,  or  flower.

The  same  is  true  of  every  unripened  Soul.  If  he  was  not  able  to
ripen  through  his  own  organism  during  his  earth-life,  he  also  must
return  to  earth  and  connect  himself  with  some  kindred  Soul  within
the  flesh,  to  outgrow  the  darkness  of  a  mistaken  life ;  or  else  must
walk  among  his  fellow-men,  an  invisible  being,  travelling  far  and
wide,  catching  light  at  every  step.  It  is  God's  great  law  that  if  the
Soul  of  man  does  not  receive  the  Spirit  of  Truth  during  his  life  here,
it  must  do  so  hereafter,  and  is  self-condemned  and  made  its  own
judge.  It  is  doomed  to  wander  through  this  world  of  woe,  until
humanity  at  large,  its  own  race  and  kindred,  has  grown  into  Spirit  and
so  receives  the  Light ;  or  else  it  mxist  connect  itself  with  some  one
mortal  in  the  form,  and  share  hb  growth  into  a  more  speedy  ripening.
What  might  have  grown  on  earth  and  turned  to  happiness  is  sub-
jected to  all  this  discipline,  through  ignorance,  mistakes,  or  selfishness.

''Not  tr3dng  to  control  myself,  I  forged  this  chain  you  see  me
wear.  I  made  it,  link  by  link,  and  yard  by  yard.  I  girded  it  on  my-
self by  my  own  free  will,  and  quarrelled  with  those  who  loved  me
when  they  dared  to  speak  of  it  or  mentioned  its  pattern.  By  my  own
free  will  I  forged  each  link  and  fashioned  it  with  care,  and  labored
on  it  ever  since  I  have  arrived  in  this  shadowy  world,  returning
hatred  for  good,  but  now  I  am  just  awaking  to  a  realizing  sense  of  life."

Thus  spoke  the  Soul  of  one  departed.  Oh,  if  mortals  would  but
stop  and  think  that  in  this  brief  life,  these  threescore  years,  they  have
an  opportunity  to  be  bom  into  the  Spirit,  which  woidd  take  a  thou-
sand years  within  the  shadowy  world  of  Souls.

Man  being  but  a  superior  animal,  a  certain  connection  exists
between  him  and  the  lower  animals.  Link  by  link  from  the  lowest
animal  formed  by  creative  thought  to  higher  animal  life,  man  forms
the  highest  in  the  chain.

It  is  said  in  Genesis,  Every  beast  of  the  earth,  every  fowl  of  the  air,
every  thing  that  creepeth,  wherein  there  is  life  (in  the  Hebrew  htxth  a
living  Sout)^  it  does  not  say  Spirit,  man  being  the  first  of  the  animal
kingdom  whose  Soul  can  be  ripened  to  be  bom  again  of  Spirit.

It  will  also  be  observed  that  the  law  of  nature  provides  food  for
each  order  of  animals  by  preying  on  a  lower  order  or  in  the  vegetable
world,  while  man  subsists  on  both.  Unripened  Souls  of  the  departed
prey  on  living  men.  Man,  being  the  higher  animal,  is  given  freedom
of  thought  and  action  which  attracts  to  him  Souls  who  belong  in  the


386       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

mental  atmosphere  in  which  he  belongs  here,  thought  being  a  mu>
stance  on  which  Souls  feed  and  live.

He  who  from  a  union  of  his  Dual  being  is  able  to  pierce  through
the  shadows  of  the  Astral  and  other  heavy  atmospheres  which  objeo-
tive  bodies  cast,  passes  out  and  beyond  this  little  sphere  and  sees  the
glories  of  the  Spirit  world.  He  who  can  visit  the  higher  abodes  may
hear  the  echoes  of  busy  feet  and  the  gentle  whispers  of  as  yet  incom-
prehensible and  unutterable  things.*  This  is  the  Soul-comprehendoo
of  the  Fire  of  Principles,  the  male  element  of  being.  This  power  is
the  inmost  of  all  Spiritual  powers.

As  the  Soul  is  the  inmost  of  the  man,  so  is  this  Soul-sight  the
inmost  of  intuition,  and  it  is  the  passive,  maternal,  affectionate  £emale
element  which  carries  the  Soul  on  its  journey  and  replenishes  the  Fire
principles.

The  man  who  rules  and  controls  his  passions  and  his  animal  body
by  Will  power  is  well  balanced.  The  man  who  can  put  all  his  animal
passions  to  sleep,  so  that  they  no  longer  need  watching,  has  entered
the  realms  of  power.  He  has  thereby  drawn  the  sexual  fires  from
the  lower  extremities  to  his  brain,  and  needs  only  to  go  am  step  wtare
in  unfoldment  to  become  one  of  the  True  Illuminati  —  a  Pilgrim  of
the  heavenly  way,  that  is,  if  he  is  a  passionate  man,  using  his  prind-
pies  of  being  in  the  subjective  in  place  of  the  objective.  Few  men
reach  these  octaves  of  vibration,  simply  because  the  objective  rules
them.  Among  rich,  ambitious,  and  vain  men,  these  things  rule  the
entire  man,  and  not  he  them.  Therefore  comes  the  economy  of  suf-
fering, for  humanity  is  not  apt  to  stop  in  its  selfish  career  until  trouble,
disappointment  and  defeat,  drive  one  almost  to  despair.

"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  God
chasteneth  whom  He  loveth  is  in  a  sense  quite  true.  A  great  princi'
pie  underlies  all  this,  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  history  of  mankind

The  highest  inspiration  usually  comes  from  the  wail  of  despair,
and  those  who  weep  are  often  close  upon  the  confines  of  great  Joy,
love,  peace,  and  perfect  rest.  The  great  ones  of  the  past,  who  have
pierced  the  gloom  and  handed  down  to  mankind  light  and  under-
standing and  a  higher  philosophy  of  Life,  that  helps  humanity  to
bridge  the  abyss  of  death,  have  been  lonely,  sad-hearted  men.  Jesus
wept.  He  was  "  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief."  Pythag-
oras, Apollonius,  Socrates,  Plato,  all  were  silent,  contemplative  men,
not  noisy,  laughing  ones.

No  stoic  can  be  a  true  Pilgrim  of  the  IlluminatL    It  requires  feet

•  See  iUustratioQ.


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE  HIDDEN   WAY.  387

ing  and  warm  palpitations,  doubly  intensified.  Without  these  there
are  no  initiation  or  rites  which  could  possibly  give  or  impart  that  bap-
tism of  Spirit  which  gives  birth  to  new  and  dormant  energies,  or
awakens  and  refreshes  the  Soul-germs  of  a  higher  and  better  life.
Where  Love  Will  reigns,  Wisdom  reigns  over  all,  and  matter  becomes
transmutable,  as  all  matter  is  simply  solidified  Spirit.

There  have  been  in  the  past,  and  are  now,  little  companies  of
Secret  Orders,  where  a  few  hundred  men  have  been  lifted  up  and
illuminated  until  their  Dual  being  became  a  perfect  chord.  Thus  up-
lifted into  the  higher  life  of  Divine  Love,  fully  realizing  it  of  them-
selves and  each  knowing  that  the  others  have  come  into  a  community
of  feeling,  their  refreshing  season  when  gathered  together  In  silence,
away  from  the  outer  world,  has  been  a  holy  baptism.  "  But  He  said
unto  them  all  men  cannot  receive  this  saying  save  they  to  whom  it  is
given."

As  recorded  in  our  Scriptures,  God  distinguished  the  male  force
as  the  positive  in  the  will,  by  the  strength,  shape,  and  majesty  of  the
man,  and  by  the  wisdom  which  he  strove  to  gain  in  quiet  contempla-
tion, and  named  him  Adima  (which  in  Sanscrit  "is  the  first  man),"  while
the  woman  or  female  force  is  negative.  To  her  are  given  grace,
gentleness,  love,  beauty,  and  intuition,  because  Love  and  Soul  within
produce  Intuition.  She  was  named  H^va  (in  Sanscrit,  ''  that  which
completes  Life  "  ).

To  man  was  given  power  like  that  of  Angels — Wisdom  through
Love.  To  both  were  given  not  only  the  five  organs  of  touch,  sight,
smell,  taste,  and  hearing,  but  a  sixth, which  grows  ^  through  under-
standing (in  Sanscrit  called  Mamas,  in  Greek  CU  the  Uniter,  the
reformer,  the  dawn  of  truth,  eternally  renewing  ■  itself).  This  is
the  Will  force  agent  by  which  is  produced,  by  perfect  attunement,  the
union  of  the  Bi-sexual  forces.  In  this  lies  the  mystery  of  Life  and
Death.

In  the  creation  of  man,  God  makes  one  whole  and  perfect  being,
formed  of  two  distinct  parts.  Adam  the  earthly^  exterior  man^  and
Eve  the  spiritual,  interior  one,  the  Soul  and  living  Mother.

These  two  are  joined  together  perfectly  as  one  creature  and  made
for  the  time  being  indispensable  to  each  other,  not  alone  in  the  exte-
rior objective  sense,  but  in  the  inner  Soul-sense  of  each  single  indi-
vidual.

The  first  Adam  is  of  the  earth  earthy,  and  liable  to  death;  the
second  Adam  is  from  heaven  and  triumphant  over  death,  for  sin
(that  is,  error  in  acting  against  the  Spirit)  has  no  more  donCiinion


388      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

over  him.  He  is  therefore  the  product  of  a  Soul  born  again,  purified
from  defilement  by  matter,  and  released  from  subjection  to  the  animal
body.  Such  a  Soul  is  a  ripened,  perfected  Soul  called  Virgin,  sym-
bolized in  Egyptian  sculpture  by  a  winged  globe.  She  has  for  her
spouse  no  longer  matter,  but  the  Divine  Spirit,  Love  of  the  Absolute,
which  is  God,  and  man  bom  of  this  union  is  the  image  of  God^  and  b
God-made  man,  that  is,  he  is  Chiist.  It  is  the  Christ  thus  bom  in
every  man  which  redeems  him  and  endows  him  with  eternal  Life,  for
in  Him  the  man  becomes  transmuted  from  matter  into  Spirit  He,
the  man,  by  regeneration  becomes  a  Son  at  once  of  man  and  of  God.
The  character  or  man  thus  reborn  is  only  begotten  of  God,  because  God
begets  none  of  any  other  kind.  Of  such  men  as  these  are  the  saints
who  inherit  the  earth,  and  under  their  rule  is  the  new  Jerusalem,  or
state  of  Soul  and  Spirit  perfection  which  cometh  from  heaven ;  that
city  which  has  God  for  its  Sun ;  which  has  no  temple,  because  every
man  is  himself  a  living  temple,  a  house  of  God,  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens.

The  Spiritual  possibilities  of  the  race  had,  as  it  were,  exhausted
themselves,  in  the  eons  of  years  or  cycles  of  time,  like  a  recession
of  tides  or  the  changing  of  seasons,  brought  the  period  for  change.
For  until  he  is  finally  united  to  the  Spirit  of  Love — God — by  what
is  mystically  called  the  Divine  Marriage,  mankind  is  subject  to  many
fluctuations  and  alterations  in  respect  of  his  Spiritual  conditions.  In
place  of  the  wave  of  his  Spiritual  life  remaining  always  at  high  water,
it  falls  back  to  rise  in  another  tide.  A  tide  it  may  be,  as  in  the  case
of  which  we  are  speaking,  to  culminate  only  after  another  creative
"  week  "  of  man's  Spiritual  formation,  every  day  of  which  should  be
as  a  thousand  years.

In  the  sense  and  manner  ordinarily  understood,  mankind  never
fell.  The  fall  was  as  gradual  as  the  rise.  Under  the  ripening  influ-
ence of  a  vast  wave  of  Spiritual  Light  and  Heat  and  Love,  to  the
production  of  which  man  himself  had  contributed  a  part,  that  is  his
necessary  quota,  by  voluntary  co-operation  with  the  Divine  Spirit
working  within  him,  man  reached  the  first  great  summer  of  his  per-
fection and  completeness  —  ripened  fruitage  in  the  vineyard  of  Life,
This  is  the  time  and  way  indicated  in  the  parable  of  Eden  and  the
legends  of  the  Golden  Age.

Under  the  lessening,  waning,  and  subsidence  of  this  wave  of
Spirit,  due  to  himself  alone,  he  fell  from  this  Summer  into  Spiritual
Autumn  and  the  Winter  in  which  he  has  ever  since  remained,  buried
more  or  less  deeply  under  the  congealed  frosts  of  his  own  selfish  ob-


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  389

jective  self.  Bui  out  of  the  long  Night  comes  the  faint  glimmer  of  Light
to  the  Soul  through  the  silent  ministry  of  the  so-called  decul.  Who  has
not  heard  faint  whispers  from  the  long  silent  voices  in  communion
with  Spirit  Intelligences,  which,  as  St.  Paul  reminds  us,  are  "  as  fool-
ishness to  the  natural  man  "  ?  Be  it  so,  but  what  is  more  astonishing
than  the  desire  of  thoughtful  men  and  women  to  investigate  Spirit
communion  ?  What  more  astounding  thing  could  have  been  imagined
than  the  phenomenon  known  as  Modem  Spiritualism  ?  Here  man
has  already  taken  one  whole  step  upward  toward  the  celestial  and
toward  the  growth  of  his  Soul,  for  in  accepting  the  Truths  of  Spirit-
ualism he  has  left  behind  him  the  creeds  and  dogmas  of  the  world,
and  the  exclusively  material  life,  and  has  actually  begun  his  pilgrim-
age to  Spirit  Truth,  and  entered  the  Astral  world.

As  Modern  Spiritualism  is  only  the  material  part  of  True  Spiritu
ality  and  the  growth  of  the  Soul,  if  he  is  true  to  himself  now,  the
very  depth  of  his  dissatisfaction  with  his  experiences  in  the  phenom-
ena of  the  Astral  world  will  drive  him  onward.  No  man  dares  turn
backward  to  the  merely  material  again,  for  he  who  has  tasted  of  one
drop  from  the  fountain  of  Spirit  has  drank  from  the  cup  of  knowledge
and  is,  even  though  dimly,  illuminated  sufficiently  so  to  know  that
there  is  important  life  beyond,  and  to  see  the  possibility  of  being  con.
sumed  by  his  own  lower  nature.  From  such  a  bottomless  pit  and
frightful  abyss  as  confronts  him  with  this  possibility,  he  may  well
recoil  in  holy  horror.  To  this  every  true  Spiritualist  will  testify.
Thus  the  stone  the  builders  refected  will  soon  become  the  head  of  the
comer,

A  thing  or  being  is  the  result  of  an  idea,  and  cannot  exist  except
as  such.  Thus  matter,  as  the  intensification  or  focalization  of  idea,
is  a  mode  of  the  Divine  Will,  and,  being  so,  is  capable,  through  an
exercise  of  Divine  Love,  of  reverting  back  to  its  original,  unmani-
fested  condition  of  Spirit.  The  Cabalistic  philosophy  or  science  of
Spirit  is  based  upon  the  recognition  in  nature  of  a  universal  sub-
stance which  mankind  find  and  can  complete,  and  by  virtue  of  which  he
contains  within  himself  the  seed  of  his  own  regeneration,  a  seed
which,  if  duly  cultured  and  ripened,  is  the  Angel,  and  the  finality  of
the  fruit  is  one  with  God,  because  the  seed  itself  is  also  God.

The  Hermetic  science  is  the  science  of  God.  Christ  to  the  be-
lievers in  this  doctrine  is  primarily  not  a  person  but  a  process,  a
doctrine,  a  system  of  life,  through  and  by  which  man  becomes  puri-
fied from  matter  and  transmuted  into  Spirit;  and  he  is  a  Christ,
who  by  virtue  of  his  observance  of  this  process  to  its  utmost  extent^


390      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

while  yet  in  the  body,  constitutes  a  full  manifestation  of  the  qualities
of  Spirit.  Therefore  the  aim  of  every  pilgrim  should  be  to  bring  the
objective  life  of  the  body  into  subjection  and  in  harmony  with  the
Spirit,  refining  it  by  illumination  and  sublimating  it  by  atmospheres
of  universal  Love ;  so  heightening  its  powers  as  to  make  it  sensitive
and  responsive  to  all  the  motions  of  the  Spirit.  Thus  will  he  become
polarized  in  one  direction,  that  of  the  Divine  Central  Will  of  the  sya-
teoiy  the  ''  Lord,  God  of  Hosts "  of  the  microcosmic  man,  whose
hidden  and  transcendental  name  is  Adonai,  So  far  from  suffering
his  own  vivifying  Spirit  to  step  aside  that  another  may  enter,  the
Christ  man  is  one  who  so  develops,  illuminates,  purifies,  and  perfects
his  Soul-Spirit  as  to  make  it  one  in  assimilation  with  the  Universal
Spirit,  the  absolute  and  eternal  Energy  of  the  Macrocosm — God.
So  the  God  without  and  the  God  within  may  freely  combine,  and,
mingling  in  concord,  make  the  universal  individual  and  the  individual
universal.

To  form  a  concepdon  of  a  higher  ideal,  an  Archetype  of  holy  un-
selfish Love,  is  to  kindle  a  consuming  fire  at  your  very  vitals,  a  silent
yearning  in  your  heart  of  hearts,  for  responsive  ideal  lave^  which  one
is  often  obliged  to  check  or  even  quench  by  Will,  because  no  heart
answers  to  your  own ;  because  all  fall  short  of  your  ideal  Love.

Thou  must  tread  the  wine-press  alone.  He  who  aspires  to  be
something  more  than  common  must  suffer  isolation,  for  he  is  not  of
the  animal  world.  There  is  no  true  greatness  bom,  nothing  b  bom
without  pain,  and  no  mental  pain  is  greater  than  that  of  the  bruised
and  desolate  heart  suffering  from  unrequited  love.

At  first  your  ideal  love  may  not  be  very  near  the  real^  True  Latfe.

But  your  highest  conception  of  beauty,  purity,  goodness,  truth,
grace,  and  excellence,  coupled  with  an  ideal  form  and  action,  is  your
estimate  of  it,  and  as  such  is  your  kingdom  of  power,  which  may  grow
rapidly  or  slowly,  according  to  the  octaves  of  atmosphere  you  create.

Now,  if  man  does  not  control  that  which  he  loves,  it  controls  him.
Hence  the  necessity  for  subduing  the  objective  love,  sending  its
emotions  upward  instead  of  downward.  This  is  the  beginning  of  the
road  to  understanding  and  to  power.  In  this  we  do  not  destroy  Love,
but  wean  it  from  the  sensuous,  animal,  objective.  Thus  weaned,  and
lifted  up,  it  becomes  one  with  the  Will  in  its  freedom,  assists  in  its
flights,  and  opens  the  portals  of  the  Soul  to  Spiritual  understanding.
This  is  the  At-one-ment,  called  atonement.  There  may  be  a  grosser
love,  but  there  is  really  no  impure  love.  Love  in  itself  is  honest,  but
the  objective  love  b  only  man's  pretence  to  be  what  he  is  not.     It  b


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE  HIDDEN   WAY.  39I

the  shame,  or  the  personal  affection  derived  from  the  opinions  or
feelings  of  others,  in  order  to  hide  which  God  clothed  Adam  and  Eve
in  the  skins  of  animals.  If  all  the  blush  of  shame  and  kindred  emo-
tions were  removed  from  mankind,  the  little  objective  love  left  would
be  very  small  indeed.

The  fundamental  idea  of  a  true  man  of  health  and  of  understand-
ing is  a  harmonious  wholeness  or  one-ness  in  every  individual.  This
completeness  consists  in  the  perfect  balancing  of  all  the  departments
of  intellect  and  feeling,  positive  and  negative,  active  and  passive,  or,
in  other  words,  the  male  and  female  elements  in  human  nature  —  a
perfect  Androgyne,  a  perfect  attunement  of  the  masculine  and  femi-
nine nature  in  one  personality.  Just  so  long  as  these  elements  are  out
of  due  proportion,  standing  unreconciled.  Spiritual  darkness,  unrest,
selfishness,  sorrow,  disease,  suffering,  want  and  bondage  must  exist.
This  condition  is  the  parent  of  all  error  and  evil  in  the  world  to-day,
but  when  people  are  harmoniously  attuned  to  make  a  chord  with  uni-
versal Spirit,  they  bring  Truth,  Light,  Peace,  Harmony,  and  Health.
"  A  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand,"  and  these  two  conflict-
ing elements,  if  unattuned,  mutually  consume  each  other.

It  is  understood  by  all  Occultists  that  the  male  as  he  now  exists  is
a  mere  half  body.  So  also  is  the  female,  and  the  blessing  of  Spirit
Universal  according  to  the  economy  of  Spirit  does  not  descend  upon
mutilated  or  defective  things,  but  upon  that  which  is  complete  in  it-
self.   True  blessings  cannot  reach  the  half  things.

Therefore,  through  suffering  the  human  Soul  is  refined  and  leaves
the  objective  world,  and  the  flesh  becomes  attuned  in  its  duality,  the
two  halves  becoming  one  that  it  may  be  immortal  and  be  blessed,  for
no  half  things  subsist  nor  receive  blessings  in  eternity.  The  great
unhingement  of  human  nature  known  as  the  fall  of  man  was  the  sep-
aration of  these  dual  forces  and  their  becoming  antagonistic  through
the  flesh  which  by  the  objective,  the  shadow,  the  lower  and  animal
Soul  with  its  senses  and  selfish  propensities  "warreth  against  the
Spirit  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh,"  as  is  written  in  all  sacred
books.

There  is  a  silent  chamber  of  mourning,  veiled  and  draped  in  black,
in  every  human  heart.  We  all  retire  to  it  at  times,  but  here  the
great  Soul  is  softened.  Here  the  glimmering,  lurid  world  loses  its
glare,  and  all  things  become  sombre.  That  which  was  so  eagerly
sought  for  in  the  objective  is  now  found  to  be  ashes.  We  go  forth
subdued  and  chastened.  Alas  for  him  who  does  not !  Alas  for  him
whose  experience  leaves  him  hard  and  selfish  within  I     Alas  for  him


392       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

whose  fountain  of  life  sends  out  no  waters,  no  tears,  no  dew  of  sad*
ness  and  loving  sympathy  over  weakness  and  folly  1

When  we  speak  of  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  we  mean  a  perfect
child  according  to  the  laws  of  nature.  We  are  talking  of  a  perfect
archet3rpal  son  of  a  perfect  archetypal  father,  bom  through  a  perfect
archetypal  mother,  forming  a  blending  of  perfect  conjugal  love,  whose
offspring  was  a  perfect  nature's  child.  Isaiah,  Moses,  and  all  the  proph-
ets of  the  long  past  had  announced  His  coming  from  the  seed  of  a  long
line  of  Jewish  ancestors.  He  was  to  come  from  the  direct  lineage
and  seed  of  David.  In  modem  days,  from  would-be  wise  lips,  it  is
vehemently  insisted  upon  that  this  Judean  Prince  was  bom  of  God  as
hb  natural  father  through  immaculate  conception !  If  thb  be  tme,  He
was  not  of  the  seed  of  David,  nor  of  His  lineage,  and  all  the  prophe-
cies of  the  past  are  as  naught,  for  Mary,  the  mother  of  Chrbt,  was
not  of  -this  tribe.  Her  ancestry  and  forefathers  were  descendant
through  entirely  different  lineage.  To  the  Gnostic,  the  Hermetic,  and
all  thoughtful  minds,  this  child  of  Bethlehem  was  as  all  children,  but  a
perfect  one,  whose  Soul  was  quickened  by  Spirit,  and  when  he  be-
came thirty  years  old,  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  who  through  his  ex-
alted mediumship  knew  and  had  foretold  what  was  to  come,  took  the
young  man  to  Jordan's  stream,  and  thus  it  is  recorded :  And  the
Holy  Ghost  in  a  shape  like  a  dove  descended  upon  him,  and  a  voice
came  from  heaven,  saying.  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well
pleased.  Here  was  the  immaculate  conception,  that  of  the  Spirit
No  miracle  was  done  by  Christ  until  this  hour,  and  this  great  power
of  mediumship  lasted  until  the  curse  and  blasting  of  the  fig-tree,  when
he  was  angered,  which  was  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  his  medium-
ship,  and  brought  about  the  possibility  of  Calvary,  and  the  Dove  of
the  Holy  Ghost  departed,  as  was  the  case  when  in  the  long  ago  Moses
also  forgot  himself  and  in  anger  smote  the  rock,  and  his  work  for
higher  mediumship  of  Spirit  ceased.  No  man  who  cannot  control  his
anger  can  poise  into  the  higher  firmament  with  God.  Christ's  own
word  declared  he  was  not  perfect,  and  that  he  could  not  be  and  live.
Still,  we  hold  His  name,  and  far  more  his  teaching,  a  sacred  thing,  for
none  we  have  are  higher.  So  all  names  of  those  who  have  given  to
men  the  purest  and  highest  light  for  the  growth  of  the  Soul,  and
have  brought  comfort  and  repose  to  humanity,  are  sacred  to  the
Gnostic.

Christos,  who  lived  about  six  thousand  years  ago,  was  mediator
between  God,  the  higher,  and  every  thing  Spiritual  in  man,  being
man's  great  Archangel.     It  has  been  claimed  that  he  was  the  direct*


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE  HIDDEN  WAY.  393

ing  guide  of  this  Judean  prince  during  the  three  short  years  of  his
exalted  mediumship.

Guatama  Buddha  is  also  a  sacred  name.  He  existed  on  earth
some  seven  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  gave  to  the
Eastern  world  the  same  instruction  that  we  have  from  Christ.  We
find  all  these  three,  Christos,  Buddha,  and  Judea's  Son,  come  before
the  world  clothed  in  the  same  identical  garments  as  to  their  lives,
their  miracles,  and  their  teachings.  The  immaculate  conception  of
the  two  former  came  to  one  as  a  flame  of  fire,  to  the  other  as  the
voice  of  fire,  as  stands  to  this  day  carved  in  living  stone,  that  so
silently  teaches  that  these  were  of  the  Spirit  of  Zeus,  Father  of  Gods,
of  worlds,  and  of  men,  that  which  we  call  HE,  God  —  not  gods  —
but  one  God,  and  that  God,  Spirit,  makes  all  things  live,  and  the
knowledge  of  God  humanizes  Deity,  spiritualizes  humanity,  and
makes  God  natural  with  Love  which  welcomes  the  Souls  of  men.

Dual  Philosophy.

In  all  completeness  there  is  duality.

Conception  is  dual.

Existence  is  the  seen  and  the  unseen.

Time  embraces  ihtpast  zxA  future.

Eternity  reaches  backward  ^nd  forward.

Immortality  is  material  and  ethereal.

Sensation  comprises /tf//i  2xA  pleasure.

Virtue  is  negative  and  positive.

Wisdom  is  inspired  and  acquired.

Love  vs>  primary  and  reciprocal.

Truth  is  the  incomprehensible  and  the  understood.

Light  is  original  and  reflected.

The  Godhead  is  Divinity  and  humanity.

Nature's  forces  are  centrifugal  and  centripetcU,

Our  Lives  are  dual.  The  outer  existence  is  a  creation  of  Nature,
while  man's  inner  one  is  a  creation  of  his  own  by  the  individual
thought  in  its  action  with  the  Divine  Spirit

The  Essences  of  Nature  are  dual.  One  is  a  creation  of  matter,
and  is  temporal,  while  the  other  is  a  creation  of  thought,  and  is  eternal.

The  Outer  Life  is  guided  by  Natures  laws,  while  the  Inner
Soul-Life  is  self-sustaining,  and  guided  by  its  own  conscience.

The  Great  Absolute  God  is  also  dual.  Father  and  Mother^
Male  and  Female,  in  all  attributes  znd  power.


394


THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.


Gody  in  the  manifestoHan  of  two  opposites  in  force^  created  ike
heavens,  i.  ^.,  the  upper,  or  light,  and  the  lower,  or  dark;  signifying  the
equivalents  of  heat  and  cold,  day  and  night,  expansion  and  conircuiiom^
summer  and  winter;  in  short,  the  all  embracing  cosmic  relations.*

The  idea  of  One  Power  operating  in  a  twofold  way  or  by  opposites,
will  be  found  to  be  not  only  a  key  to  the  text,  but  to  cosmic  unfold-
ment

Tablb  op  Pkinciplbs  and  Action.

[  ijSfS^'"*  {  God, Matt«}2£«-0-*

The  Real The  Blanifestation.

Spirit SouL

Love • Wisdom.

Truth Knowledge.

Fonn Shape.

Will Tbon^t

Mind Matter.

Intuition  ...•• Reason.

Subjective ObjectiTe.

Positive Negative.

Rest • Motion.

The  Fixed The  Chani^eable.

Esoteric  ..•• Exoteric.

Noumenal Phenomenal

Divine Human.

Light Darkness.

Female Male.

Eternity Tone.

Philosophy Science.

Religion Politics.

Silence Noise.


o

H

S

i


«


9C
>


H

H
S

n
o


s

I


The  HUMAN  MIND  IS  dual,  and  the  human  will  masculine  and
feminine.  There  is  a  positive  and  active  intellectual  department  and
a  negative,  passive,  and  receptive  one.  The  union  of  the  two  consti-
tutes the  mind,  while  the  more  harmonious  and  perfect  interblending
of  the  two  gives  the  mighty  power  of  the  Will.

There  is  a  tradition  that  the  Nazarene  was  asked  when  the  king,
dom  of  God  should  come,  and  he  answered,  '*  JVhen  the  two  become
CLS  one.^^  It  is  the  perfect  attunement  or  one  perfect  chord  of  our  dual
being  which  will  produce  a  perfect  union  of  that  which  is  without  and
that  which  is  within.  Let  him  who  can  receive  it  so  receive  it.  This
is  the  great  mystery  that  hath  been  hid  for  ages  and  from  genera-
tions.    He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear.

The  Spiritual  Christ  comes  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost.
It  does  not  say  man  which  is  lost,  but  that  which  is  lost,  and  to
restore  to  man  that  Spiritual  casket  lamp  that  went  out  when  his  dual
forces  became  sundered,  and  he  grew  into  the  animal,  objective  world
of  selfishness  and  outer  senses.


*  Based  on  the  Table  of  Dr.  J.  D.  Buck.


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,  THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  395

Therefore  the  Christ  principle  is  the  only  saving  principle  for  man
and  for  the  universe.

Whenever  the  Soul  feels  itself  it  feels  everlasting  life.  The  initia-
tion may  be  deferred  into  higher  atmospheres ;  the  days  and  nights
may  be  left  to  no  other  visions  than  those  with  which  a  contented
heart  is  enchanted  and  enraptured.  What  matters  a  little  space  of
time,  it  may  be  months  and  years  ?  what  matters  the  number  of  emo-
tions that  the  dream  of  the  immortal  Truth  involves  ?  Now  man  has
a  full  courage,  because  such  hearts  live  in  some  more  abstract  and
holy  life  than  their  own.  The  Oracles  of  Spirit  Truth  now  speak  a
more  miraculous  language  to  his  Soul  than  do  monuments  and  tem-
ples or  the  everlasting  hills.  But  to  live  forever  upon  this  fair  earth
is  to  live  in  nothing  more  Divine  than  the  temple  within  ourselves,
and  to  be  a  beacon-light  for  other  Souls.

Intuition  within  the  gardens  of  the  Soul  is  the  true  birth  of  invo-
lution and  evolution.  It  is  that  new  birth  of  the  passive,  receptive
intuition  which  is  the  tender  feminine  part  within  the  man.  The
growth  and  development  of  the  active^  silent^  positive  and  intellectual
principle  within  the  woman  is  her  true  birth.  The  growth  of  these
two  principles  in  man  and  woman  are  the  first  steps  toward  the  attain-
ment of  Spiritual  life  and  knowledge.  Its  development  in  man  is
symbolized  by  the  dove  descending  upon  him ;  in  woman,  by  the
crescent  moon.  This  is  the  new  birth  of  which  Angels  sung.  It
opens  the  portals  of  the  Soul  to  Spirit  Truth,  whose  silent  voice  is
guide  to  both  earth  and  heaven.  Through  and  by  it  we  gain  access
to  the  permanent  and  interior  regions  of  nature,  and  the  comprehen-
sion and  knowledge  of  the  Astral  world,  where  are  stored  all  the
truths  which  ever  were  known.  It  opens  the  doorway  to  Spirit,  and
man  can  cross  the  threshold  and  learn  all  truth  that  can  be  known,
for  it  is  the  highest  faculty  in  man  through  which  divine  revelation
comes  or  ever  has  come.  By  it  the  Soul  of  man  forms  its  inseparable
union  with  God,  and  becomes  possessed  of  God-like  wisdom  and
crowned  with  deific  powers.

For  a  healthy  body  our  material  nature  requires  suitable  meat  and
drink,  according  to  the  climate  and  to  the  temperament  of  each  indi-
vidual. No  man  can  or  should  dictate  to  another  who  has  made  his
own  animal  body  a  study,  what  he  shall  eat  and  drink.  That  which
would  be  well  for  some  would  be  entirely  wrong  for  another.  The
immense  number  and  variety  of  meats,  vegetables  and  drink,  are  to
fit  the  different  temperaments  and  conditions  of  men  for  the  contin-


39^      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ued  existence  and  propagation  of  the  species,  which  depend  on
strong,  robust  animal  bodies.

Nature,  always  thoughtful,  fits  these  different  necessary  sub-
stances to  the  climate  and  the  life  which  otherwise  would  be  im-
possible.

Our  Spiritual  natures  also  require  Spiritual  food,  through  our  men-
tality and  our  world  of  thought,  which  brings  us  peace,  hope,  love,
and  culture,  and  exchanges  ignorance  for  knowledge.  Unless  so
nourished,  our  Spiritual  nature  droops  and  sends  forth  no  ripened
fruit,  but  only  leaves.

Nature  is  a  hard  mistress  if  abused,  but  when  properly  regarded
a  loving,  kind,  indulgent  mother.

Human  life  at  the  greatest  and  best  is  but  a  wayward  child.  Ani-
mal nature  must  be  petted,  humored,  and  coaxed,  and  learns  only
through  suffering  and  disappointment  that  there  is  something  more ;
that  away  out  beyond  the  dark  shadows  is  a  beautiful  Spirit-life  of
peace  and  love,  and  that  we  grow  and  grow  in  Spirit  until  at  last  we
fall  into  that  last  sleep  where  all  worry  and  care  are  at  an  end.  The
Angels  from  the  clouds  of  golden  light  that  surrounds  this  earth  are
ever  watching  the  Souls  of  men  as  they  lay  down  the  garment  of  this
life ;  that  if  the  germ  of  the  seed  of  God's  Love  has  grown  within  their
Souls,  they  may  take  charge  of  and  direct  these  new-bom  Souk  in
Spirit  ways.  But  so  many  slip  away  into  the  shadows,  away  from  the
strong  light  of  these  Angels  of  Lovel — not  having  grown  to  Spirit
choosing  darkness  rather  than  light.

Pilgrim  of  Light,  this  life  is  your  grand  opportunity.  Our  time
has  its  charm.  The  humblest  life  has  a  meaning  that  formerly  could
hardly  have  belonged  to  the  highest.  When  our  knowledge  is  so
great,  our  interests  so  complex,  our  relations  so  broad,  when  all  the
world  is  our  home  and  every  man  our  neighbor,  who  would  wish  for
the  narrow  circumstances  of  an  earlier  age  ?  As  softly  and  imper-
ceptibly as  you  now  fall  into  the  arms  of  sleep,  you  shall  one  day  fall
into  the  arms  of  the  pale  boatman  that  carries  you  over  the  river  of
death  to  the  home  of  the  immortals.

When  he  has  become  quite  lucid,  the  Initiate  can,  through  knowl-
edge of  the  runrills  and  pathways  of  nature,  school  the  Soul  for
departure  so  that  the  moment  of  death  will  be  as  agreeable  and  calm
as  the  moment  of  falling  asleep,  for  death  is  only  being  let  loose  into
the  Infinite,  which  even  in  this  life  can  be  attained  in  some  measure
through  the  sleep  of  entrancement ;  and  the  Adept  in  his  entrance-
ment  can  at  Will  direct  the  magnetic  vibrations  in  the  mass  of  Astral


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  397

light  which  always  act  upon  those  to  whom  he  may  direct  them,  while
they  who  so  receive  the  vibration  will  and  do  obey  the  command.
The  human  Will,  when  sent  out  on  these  billows  of  Astral  light,  has  the
same  effect  on  the  Akasa  or  human  magno  as  the  magnet  has  on  iron,
and  through  this  same  law  of  nature  the  Initiate  commands  the  attrac-
tion or  repulsion  at  Will.  By  becoming  conversant  with  this  hidden
way  you  bridge  over  the  abyss  of  death.  The  Soul,  once  freed  from
its  covering  of  clay,  pure  as  a  note  of  music,  ascends  to  the  exalted
companionship  of  Spirit  and  the  loved  ones  passed  on  before.

The  creative  element  is  an  active  one,  the  receptive  a  passive  one,
but  both  are  reproductive.  One  is  not  positive  and  one  negative ;
both  are  dual  in  nature.  But  the  convergence  and  concurrence  of
both  gives  birth  to  every  excellent  and  noble  thing.  This  is  the
united  centre  with  the  Absolute.  Thb  is  the  Christ  within,  and  in  the
calm  face  of  him  who  can  attain  to  it  mankind  will  behold  the  ethereal
shadows  of  the  Eternal.  The  second  coming  of  Christ  to  this  fair
earth  is  not  the  coming  of  a  literal  historical  personage,  but  is  a  state
of  Spiritual  wisdom  and  growth  among  men,  the  highest  personifica-
tion of  Spirituality  possible  to  mankind,  which  b  yet  to  be  developed
in  humanity  at  large.

Man  is  a  representative  of  himian  reason ;  woman  that  of  faith  or
conscience ;  the  serpent  represents  the  lower  nature.  The  tree  of
knowledge  is  the  kingdom  of  this  mundane  world,  and  the  tree  of
life  is  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  and  of  God.  Man  falls  when  he  listens
to  the  suggestions  of  his  selfish  lower  nature.  Withdrawing  her
faith  and  desires  from  the  tree  of  life,  the  affections  fix  on  the  false
and  deceitful  apples  of  illusion,  which  are  pleasant  and  desirable  to
the  five  outer  senses.  She  desires,  seeks,  and  at  length  defiles  herself
with  ambitions,  vanities,  and  self-esteem,  and,  flushed  with  inflated
conceit  and  the  falsehoods  of  the  kingdom  of  this  world,  she  commu-
nicates the  poison  to  the  mind,  and  all  is  lost.  Nor  does  faith  fall
alone,  for,  ceasing  to  be  a  trustworthy  guide,  she  becomes  herself
serpent  and  seducer  to  the  human  reason,  leading  him  into  false
paths,  betraying  and  deluding  him  at  every  turn,  and,  if  she  have  her
way,  plunging  him  into  the  lowest  depths  of  abject  ignorance,  folly,
and  weakness,  there  to  be  devoured  by  the  brood  of  unreason  and
error.  Thus  man  did  eat  of  the  fruit  and  knows  indeed  but  the
knowledge  he  has  gained  is  that  of  his  own  humiliation  and  shame  at
his  nakedness.  "  Their  eyes  were  opened  and  they  knew  that  they
were  naked."  By  this  act  man  becomes  instantly  aware  of  the  body,
of  outer  senses,  of  matter,  of  appearance.    He  adores  the  shadow


398      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

instead  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  has  lost  the  faculty  of  discerning
substance,  Soul,  and  reality,  for  the  eye  of  Spirit  is  closed,  the  inner
Soul  senses  no  longer  respond.  The  outer  senses  are  now  opened,
and  he  is  immersed  in  delusion,  inaccuracy,  shadow,  and  doubt.  Mh
light  has  gone  out

The  True  Spiritual  church  has  not  fallen.  She  is  the  oil  and  lamp
of  Truth,  guarding  the  sacred  flame  within^  transmitting  unimpaired  to
her  children  the  light  received  upon  the  inner  surface.  Such  should
be  the  functions  of  the  church  and  priesthood  of  to-day,  and  to  resist
the  influence  of  error  from  the  mundane  world  upon  the  senses  and
the  side  exposed  to  it.  But  the  oil  of  Truth  has  run  low,  and  the  flame
of  the  lamp  has  become  clouded  and  casts  around  it,  in  place  of  warm,
genial  rays  of  Spirit,  ghastly  and  misleading  shadows  of  superstition.
Better  far  that  reason  should  be  master  in  the  man  than  superstition,
whose  method  is  narrow-minded  folly,  sophbm,  and  unrest,  whose  end
b  madness,  intolerance,  and  death.

When  the  church  abandons  the  inner  light  and  higher  love,  she
inclines  toward  the  outer  and  lower  elements  of  earth.  The  sacred
flame  of  Spirit  truth,  light,  and  love  within  her  shrine  becomes  choked
and  Anally  quenched,  and  the  sanctuary  is  left  in  darkness.  To  con-
fess the  fact  that  she  had  suffered  the  sacred  flame  to  expire  would,
in  respect  to  all  for  which  she  is  solicitous,  be  injurious  to  her  mate-
rial interest  and  her  sway  over  the  world,  and  fatal  to  her  life.  There-
fore, she  stands  in  hostile  front,  combating  Spirit  communion.  Spirit
knowledge,  and  Spirit  truth,  as  well  as  science  and  art,  with  the  lig^t  of
Spirit  lost  to  view,  and  the  pathway  to  the  kingdom  of  God  blocked  by
superstition  and  conventionalities.  The  rational  man,  not  finding  toe
fountain  of  love  to  fill  the  indescribable  void  within  his  bosom,  ceases
to  believe  in  her  efficacy  and  efficiency,  and  either  becomes  indiffer-
ent to  Spirit  and  love  growth,  drifts  with  the  human  tide  of  the  times,
or,  falling  in  his  turn,  plunges  into  the  gulf  of  athebm,  incredulity,
agnosticism,  and  iconoclasticism.  Thus  a  large  majority  of  mankind
is  withheld  from  attaining  the  fruition  of  the  tree  of  life,  tries  to  con-
tent itself  with  Stones  for  Breads  and  is  only  cognizant  of  outer  senses
in  the  objective  world  instead  of  the  True  Celestial  Mysteries.

Anything  truly  good  and  desirable  is  already  profoundly  super-
natural, because  it  flows  out  of  its  own  true  essence  or  springs  from
its  own  seed.  There  is  no  Divinely  ordained  disease  ;  sickness  is  simply
injured  nature,  and  the  naturalness  of  everything  b  its  Divinity.
Spirit  never  plays  tricks  with  its  own  eternal  sequence,  no  matter
what  may  be  the  chance  or  hazard,  —  life  or  death,  or  the  Spiritual


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  399

health  of  the  human  Soul — the  natural  functions  of  life  and  death
remain  untampered  with,  and  the  general  mind,  through  which  sweeps
the  tide  of  life  and  death,  will  sooner  or  later  recognize  with  wonder
and  gratitude  that  not  a  law  of  nature  has  been  meddled  with  or
changed.     In  this  sense,  the  natural  and  Spiritual  cannot  be  distinct.

The  true  method  of  development  of  the  SouPs  illumination  brings
God  to  man  through  the  legitimate  channel  of  nature's  economy,  and
also  brings  knowledge,  deductions,  emotions,  and  human  love.

Nature  holds  an  open  book  and  invites  all  to  try  to  understand  it
Nature  understands  all  language,  and  knows  the  hearts  of  all  her  chil-
dren, for  all  the  invisible  things  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood
by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  to  the  Power  and  Love  of  the
Absolute.

When  man  learns  to  produce  an  attunement  of  his  dual  being  by
silent  concentration,  he  has  reached  the  powerful  and  rational  magic
ofwill^  and  can  produce  psychological  and  magnetic  impressions  upon
individuals  or  upon  vast  multitudes,  and  the  true  science  and  success
of  magnetic  currents  or  psychological  overshadowing  depends  upon
the  entire  absence  of  intervening  obstacles  between  the  operator  and
the  person  or  persons  acted  upon.  Many  thousands  of  other  wills
and  heavy  atmospheres  of  thought  are  traversing  space  in  opposing
lines  and  numerous  contrary  currents  with  such  force  as  to  glance
aside  and  thwart  the  projected  force  of  the  operator's  magnetic  will.
He  must  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  strength  of  his  magic  will  lies
in  the  bond  of  union  which  reunites  the  several  parts  of  his  inner
being  and  dual  life,  which  is  the  true  Soul  Love,  entirely  independent
of  personal  charms  or  of  mental  acquirements.  It  is  that  which
annihilates  self  and  all  selfishness.  It  is  that  Divine  Spiritual  affinity
that  survives  death.  It  is  the  two  halves  of  the  man  united  into  one
Soul.  It  is  the  higher,  dual  being  of  nature  that  time  ripens  and
eternity  perfects  into  angelhood.

Our  work  and  our  love  belong  to  this  present  life.  It  is  the
eternal  Now  for  which  we  were  bom.  And  because  God  is  in  this
world,  in  everything  which  appears  in  it,  we  have  only  to  liberate  this
Divine  Essence  in  everything  which  will  obey  our  every  command.
For  God  gave  to  man  dominion  over  all  things  in  the  economy  of
Love,  and  the  law  of  Love  is  to  rule.  He  whose  heart  is  full  of  solici-
tude and  yearning  for  the  welfare  of  humanity  is  on  the  first  step.
The  key  to  the  doorway  is  in  the  inner  temple  of  his  dual  being.
One  only  has  true  love  for  the  things  of  the  world  when  he  forgets
self,  striving  unselfishly  for  humanity  and  God,  without  desire  of


400      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

reward  or  gain.  We  must  love  the  Divine  in  things  which  do  not
themselves  recognize  their  Divinity.  They  may  be  sunken  and  choked
in  impurity,  or,  as  the  church  says,  unredeemed,  but  it  is  for  the  true
Humanity,  the  church  of  Divine  Fragments^  to  uplift  To  that  eter-
nally pure  nature  which  is  the  highest  in  which  man  can  dwell  on  this
earth  the  noblest  prerogatives  of  man  are  Liberty  and  Labor.

Love  and  Labor  are  his  all  while  here ;  by  and  by  there  will  be
something  else,  but  to  live  for  the  eternal  now  is  the  true  life  of
man

That  only  is  a  free  and  sacred  law  which  has  become  a  living
truth  within  us.  Deep  in  every  human  Soul  there  rests  a  sleeping
child  Soul  of  hope,  of  faith,  and  Love.  And  it  is  not  well,  when  out
of  sympathy  with  the  world,  to  drive  away  the  eternal  childhood
within.

But  the  seclusiveness  of  differences  in  wealth  and  station  in  these
modem  days  makes  men  unnatural ;  this  daily  life  which  has  always
something  peculiar  in  it  that  cannot  be  competed  with ;  thb  endeavor
to  analyze  every  circumstance  in  the  profoundest  way ;  this  ever
requisite  conventional  attention  to  each  peculiar  mode  of  feeling,  not
being  of  a  light,  hopeful,  sportive  nature;  this  solemn  nonentity  of
character;  this  everlasting  enthronement  on  the  heights  of  modem
society  —  all  these  make  the  same  old  story,  through  every  age.  Only
a  few  Souls  are  benefited  by  living  such  a  life.

"  And  that  voice  still  soundeth  on
From  the  centuries  that  are  gone
To  the  centuries  that  shall  be,
And  time  receives  it  in  eternity.'*

Any  man  who  cannot  wish  that  the  whole  world  may  think  and
act  as  freely  as  he  does  himself,  has  no  right  to  call  himself  an  honest
or  a  free  man.  He  who  dislikes  mankind  and  is  continually  striving
to  rule,  is  a  poor,  ignorant,  vain,  presumptuous  man.  What  is  he
more  than  others  ?  What  is  he  other  than  they }  The  true  man  does  not
feel  for  himself  alone,  nor  must  he  permit  his  thoughts  to  dwell  con
tinually  upon  himself  when  he  is  alone  ;  he  must  live  for  the  world.
To  help  Divine  Humanity  must  be  his  aspiration.  Then,  no  matter
how  lonely  in  appearance  he  may  be,  in  his  Soul  there  is  no  ennui  and
no  isolation.

Men  who  have  no  resources  in  themselves  are  alone  wherever  they
may  be.    They  know  not  Love  and  have  no  true  companions.     Every


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  4OI

one  is  quite  alone  who  has  no  individualized  nature  of  Love,  without
which  there  is  no  completeness  in  his  being.  To  live  one's  true  nat-
ural self  is  everything.  Would  that  the  world  had  reached  this  height,
for  the  gates  of  heaven  would  swing  wide  open  to  all.

Most  men,  however,  wish  to  be  no  natural  selves ;  perhaps  they
are  better  so ;  they  do  little  good,  but  they  do  little  injury.  They
drift  from  childhood  to  age  on  the  tide.  They  live  as  custom  requires
or  habit  demands.  Nothing  in  the  present  attracts  or  approaches
them  very  nearly;  nothing  of  the  past  follows  them.  They  spring
from  mood  to  mood,  from  enjoyment  to  enjoyment,  and  call  it  life.
Like  children  they  appear  so  happy  with  each  new  toy.  If  men  wore
externally  the  loves,  the  thoughts,  the  expressions  of  what  was  pass-
ing in  their  minds,  they  would  be  natural,  but  one  could  hardly  recog-
nize the  friend  of  yesterday  or  even  of  the  previous  hour,  if  this
should  suddenly  come  to  pass.  But  the  world  would  advance  and
grow  loftier  and  better  of  necessity  if  all  strove  to  be  natural,  the
within  as  the  without,  and  not  of  two  voices,  a  living  lie.

The  Ancients  have  a  legend  that  one  can  only  show  the  way  to
the  gardens  of  the  Hesperides,  where  are  to  be  found  the  apples  of
life.  He  cannot  pluck  them  for  others  but  only  for  himself.  These
golden  apples  are  man's  dual  being.  To  be  conscious  of  this  har-
mony is  to  become  attuned  to  nature,  and  all  the  deeds  and  impulses
of  men  who  have  reached  and  governed  by  this  law  teach  that  the
true  life  of  man  is  a  Divine  principle  and  eternal  law  of  nature.  One
who  has  learned  to  comprehend  and  understand  this  law  has  opened
his  doorway  to  regeneration,  oneness  with  God,  his  inclination  and
destiny  harmonizing  fully  with  nature.  But  most  men  of  this  age
demand  from  their  belongings  and  from  all  about  them  that  they
shall  be  thought  noble  and  great,  whatever  the  deficiencies  of  their
nature.  But  nature  demands  of  man  more  than  his  outward,  objec-
tive life  of  sense.  He  must  live  for  others,  and  illuminate  his  inner
temple  by  the  Spirit.  Thus  he  ripens  his  dual  nature,  like  the  golden
apples  of  the  Hesperides.

''  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  oj
Godr

£ndure,  and  there  shall  dawn  within  thy  breast  eternal  rest.

"  Like  the  kingdom  of  Heaven,  the
Fountain  of  Youth  is  within  as;
If  we  seek  for  it  elsewhere,
Old  shall  we  grow  in  the  search."


402      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

**  Peace  is  in  the  silent  flow
Of  solitary  thought ;
In  calm,  half-meditated  dreams
And  reasonings  self-taught"

As  you  know  God,  you  have  fcuth  in  Him,  According  to  our
knowledge  so  is  our  faith.

Everything  that  exists  upon  the  earth  has  its  ethereal  counterpart
above  the  earth,  and  there  is  nothing,  however  insignificant  it  may
appear  in  the  world,  which  is  not  depending  on  something  higher;
therefore,  if  the  lower  part  acts,  its  presiding,  higher  part  reacts  by
impulse  in  reverberation  upon  it.

Luke  X  :  21. :  In  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  Spirit,  and  said,  I
thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that  Thou  hast  hid
these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto
babes ;  even  so.  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight.

The  highest  manifestation  which  can  come  to  the  comprehension
of  man  is  through  his  dual  being,  giving  him  more  supreme  wisdom
and  light.

The  male  emotion  in  man  is  the  fire  principle  of  things,  which  is
life,  and  it  is  Lave  that  feeds  thefire^ody^  in  which  death  and  destruc-
tion have  no  part.  But  here  many  men  fall  into  the  slough  of  objec-
tive sense  on  this  road,  and  never  get  out  during  natural  life.

The  female  element  in  man  is  the  procreative,  affectional  life,
which  is  also  begetting  of  Spirit  power.  Harmonious  continuity  is  that
which  produces  rest  and  satisfaction.  As  the  love  of  woman,  being
the  feminine  force  of  Will,  it  creates  by  silent  persistent  effort.  Hence
the  great  necessity  of  calmness  and  silence.  The  preparation  for
awakening  the  Soul  from  its  long  sleep  of  ages  is  in  profound,  silent
meditation.  When  Soul  and  inner  temple  become  pregnant  with
higher  Love,  the  Spirit,  no  longer  driven  by  outward  motions  and
emotions,  but  called  in  and  projected  upward  and  inward,  comes
slowly  home  to  the  Soul.  The  larger  the  Soul,  the  greater  the  agita-
tion of  the  element  within  its  radius,  with  more  potential  octaves  of
vibration,  and,  unless  a  higher  attunement  of  the  dual  forces  occurs,
the  passions  most  easily  disturbed  are  brought  into  excessive  activity.
This  is  the  reason  why  so  many  noble-souled  men  go  astray.

The  calm,  warm  sunshine  of  midsummer  brings  drought  and  over-
heat, and  creates  vast  vacuums  in  the  atmosphere  —  and  then  come
the  cyclone,  the  tornado,  and  the  lightnings.  These  are  simply
nature's  passions,  raging  till  the  vacuum  is  filled.    Thus  the  human


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  403

Soul  in  a  continuous,  absolute  calm,  when  all  things  are  calm  outside,
becomes  oppressed  with  its  own  heaviness,  and  restlessly  expands  as
if  to  burst  its  prison  walls.  It  is  then  that  error  and  unnatural
desires  rush  in  upon  the  captive  Soul  to  overcome  its  power  and
destroy  it.  A  cold,  selfish,  passionless  man  is  a  monster,  not  only  in
this  but  in  all  the  starry  worlds  of  space.  In  man's  gross,  natural
state  he  is  indifferent,  hence  to  him  there  is  no  good  nor  evil,  no
high  nor  low.  In  his  unconcern  might  makes  right.  But  man  in
his  grosser,  unnatural  state  is  seething,  boiling  over,  raving  mad
with  the  fires  of  lust.  He  knows  nothing  of  real  Love,  nor  of  its
Divinity.

That  which  is  called  Love  in  these  days  is  totally  different ;  it  is
Lust,  and  has  much  to  do  with  the  prevelant  Spiritual  blindness  of
humanity.  So  man  sneers  and  scoffs  at  the  idea  of  Soul-union  of  the
Dual  forces,  or  the  attunement  of  male  and  female  elements  in  man's
nature,  which  is  the  key  to  the  doorway  of  immortal  life  and  God-like
Energy,

The  prototypes  of  all  forms  exist  in  the  Astral  light,  which  is  the
Universal  Soul  in  which  resides  the  Universal  Mind^  while  the  Akasa
or  Universal  Matter  brings  it  more  material  substance.  This  Univer*
sal  Soul  must  of  necessity  be  dual  in  all  attributes  and  nature.  An
insufficient  degree  of  heat  will  accomplish  nothing  great;  therefore
man  must  gradually  accustom  himself  to  the  development  and  growth
of  the  Dual  Fires  of  his  sex-natures,  until  they  are  balanced  and
perfectly  united,  when  Divine  Love  is  kindled  in  his  Soul.

The  regenerate  Spiritual  man  whose  matrix  is  his  own  physical  body
draws  his  refreshment  and  nutriment  from  the  Universal  Spirit  Prin-
ciple.

The  true  Elixir  of  Life  can  only  be  found  at  the  Eternal  Fountain
of  Life,  which  is  the  Father-Mother  principle  of  all  life.  The  source
of  all  is  the  great  Spiritual  Sun  that  shines  in  objective  darkness,  yet
is  omnipresent  and  can  be  found  everywhere.  All  Hierophants  and
most  Adepts  claim  that  the  most  central  point  of  the  Soul  in  the
physical  body  is  at  the  Solar  and  Semi-lunar  Plexus^  similar  to  a
magnet,  having  a  negative  and  positive  pole ;  the  negative  pole  of
man  being  in  the  nerve  fibres  of  the  brain^  the  positive  pole  being
located  in  the  genital  organs.

This  is  no  doubt  true,  when  the  Dual  forces  are  perfectly  attuned
in  one  accord,  as  in  all  higher  adeptship  or  true  prophets  and  seers,
known  as  perfected  Souls.

The  Perfected  Soul  can,  by  Spiritual  octaves  of  vibration,  produce


404       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  dwell  in  any  kind  of  body  it  chooses.  By  simply  Spiritualizing
matter,  it  can  become  objective  and  visible  to  the  natural  eye,  and
can  dissolve  itself  again  at  will,  returning  into  the  subjective,  invisi-
ble world.  These  are  but  toys  of  true  Adeptship.  The  imperfect,
unripened  Soul  is  in  no  way  illuminated  by  the  understanding  of
Spirit,  but  is  held  fast  to  the  atoms  in  which  it  has  anchored  through
error  and  gross  indifference  which  produce  inefficiency.  In  the
present  imperfect  state  of  man,  the  Soul-forces  are  scattered  through^
out  every  atom  of  the  body,  in  no  way  focalized^  as  can  only  be  done
by  the  emotion  of  true  and  higher  Love.  Therefore,  it  can  be  truly
said  that  Love  is  the  Secret  of  Life,  but  only  Love  in  its  higher  sense.
Unless  it  be  cultivated,  developed,  and  focalized,  the  Soul  cannot  be
drawn  from  the  natural  body  except  by  death,  while  the  Perfect  Soul
can  leave  the  physical  body  at  Will,  and  fiy  to  more  vital  realms  than
this.  By  focalizing  and  concentrating  these  powers  in  man,  he  may
become  powerful  enough  to  penetrate  the  hidden  way  across  the
threshold.

The  Animal  Soul  of  will,  desire,  and  passion  is  entirely  associated
with  objective  life  and  its  existence  only.  It  has  no  upward  attrac-
tions or  aspirations,  and  no  more  passes  away  from  this  earth  until  it
has  opened  itself  to  Spirit  than  the  particles  of  the  body  consigned
to  the  grave.  At  death  the  lower  principles  of  man  are  merely  an
animal  and  physical  vitality  with  an  astral  counterpart  or  second  body
of  the  same.  In  this  state  he  is  simply  dual  —  a  thing  of  matter  and
a  force  of  Spirit,  which  must  be  finally  abandoned  if  he  desires  to
become  a  perfected,  ripened  Soul.  This  is  only  accomplished  by  a
union  of  the  love  and  wisdom  forces  contained  within  his  dual,  bi-sex-
ual  nature,  which  is  really  the  true  God-man  or  angel  in  man,  a  Spirit-
ual mentality.  Therefore  the  great  opportunity  for  man  is  in  this
life  to  begin  to  grow  into  those  conditions  that  are  so  essential  to  hb
progress  and  ripening,  which  is  the  immutable  law  of  Soul-growth.

True  Spirituality  and  Soul-growth  have  little  or  nothing  to  do
with  devout  feeling  or  purely  human  intellectual  faculties.  In  its  true
occult  sense  it  throws  aside  all  difference  in  things.  It  has  to  do
only  with  mental  illumination  and  mental  capacity  and  receptivity
for  assimilating  knowledge  and  understanding  from  the  very  foun-
tain-head of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  It  is  these  very  rocks  of
devoutness  and  human  intellectuality  that  have  caused  men  to
have  no  opportunity  to  grow  or  to  appreciate  true  Spirituality,
because  they  have  not  been  made  acquainted  with  the  range  and
power  of  their  own  inner  faculties,  all  light  and  knowledge  having


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  4OS

been  gained  through  pious  theories  or  acquired  by  outer,  objective
senses,  usually  merely  groping  blindly  in  the  dark;  though  some-
times through  some  strange  intuition  they  strive  toward  the  right
direction,  but  even  then  generally  deny  the  existence  of  any  such
inner  faculty.

The  Egyptian  and  Greek  ascribed  to  man  four  principles  or
series :  the  natural  body  and  its  vitality ;  the  Astral  body ;  the  human
Soul ;  and  Spirit.  Sanscrit  and  Buddhist  recognized  seven  of  these
principles,  as  follows:  First,  the  body,  inert  matter ;  second,  vitality,
that  force  which  changes  inert  matter  into  living  matter  (which  is
simply  Spirit);  third,  the  astral  body,  animal  desires;  fourth,  the
ANIMAL  BODY,  the  memory  and  thought,  the  vehicle  of  will, — the  temple
within,  of  which  so  few  have  yet  opened  the  portals  ;  fifth,  the  human
Soul,  the  monitor  within  the  temple,  which  has  so  long  been  kept  in
darkness  with  many ;  sixth,  the  Spiritual  Soul,  the  overshadowing
of  Truth,  Spirit^  and  the  highest  aspircUions  of  our  nature;  the
seventh,  Spirit,  the  absolute  ^^^mX,  the  Divine  Fatherhood  oi  all.

These  are  simply  the  different  Spiral  characters  of  progress  and
growth  accomplished  by  the  life  impulses  and  ripening  states  which
develop  these  various  kingdoms  of  man  in  nature,  which  account  for
the  differences  among  those  who  people  this  planet.

The  Buddhists  believe  that  the  present  age  of  the  world  is  the
fourth  round  of  the  spiral  of  man's  progression.  In  other  words,  the
present  age  finds  man  ripening  his  Animal  Soul  toward  his  Human
Soul  by  the  attuned  Duality  of  his  being,  and  that  he  must  continue
in  his  series  of  spiral  rounds  of  progression  until  he  has  accomplished
the  whole  seven  principles  of  growth,  when  he  becomes  a  perfected
Soul,  and  is  done  with  this  planetary  system.

If  a  mountain  stream  strikes  a  rock  whose  resistance  it  cannot
overcome,  and  which  it  cannot  pass  by,  the  waters  soon  swell  into  a
lake,  devastate  the  shores,  and  surge  back  toward  their  source.  Human
passions  are  like  mountain  streams.  If  accumulated  energy  is  not
led  into  other  channels,  it  will  grow  into  surging  billows,  becoming
more  powerful  than  will  and  stronger  than  reason.  Thus  human
love,  which  often  partakes  only  of  the  grosser,  selfish  passions,  being
changed  and  turned  into  true  Love  and  higher  aim,  may  turn  vice
and  error  into  virtue  and  goodness,  and  man  into  his  Angelhood.
To  control  human  passions,  error,  vice,  and  wrong,  leading  them
into  another  and  higher  channel,  is  the  key  to  human  life  and  peace.
The  channel  once  opened  toward  the  truth,  they  will  soon  learn  the
true  way,  and  dig  deep  in  the  new  channel  toward  the  Infinite.     This


I


\


406      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

once  done,  the  way  remains,  and  each  day  becomes  easier  an
smoother  until  it  is  undeviating.

So  potential  is  Spiritual  Sympathy  and  the  higher  or  Divine  Lov
that  wherever  a  hungry  Soul  exists,  whether  embodied  or  disen
bodied,  if  his  dual  being  is  united  so  that  an  anchorage  may  fa
formed,  there  becomes  a  pivotal  point  where  Spirit  can  perform  i
great  force  and  radiate  light  to  other  souls.

For  lack  of  better  word,  the  French  and  Italians  have  a  phras<
/e  nesais  quoi^  which  we  may  use  to  express  the  indefinable  somethin
far  more  tangible  than  fantasy  in  every  human  breast  When  thi
mad  rush  of  life  is  brought  to  a  sudden  halt,  then  for  the  first  tim
comes  a  call  of  the  Soul  for  home.  In  the  chambers  of  the  Soul  1
a  thirst  for  that  living  fountain,  a  desire  for  a  home  of  love  an
peace  which  has  not  yet  been  found,  and  the  heart  of  man  reache
out  in  strong  yearning  for  something  besides  this  conventions
struggle  and  burdens  of  life.  Thrice  happy  he  who  stops  not  here
but  presses  on  and  finds  home  and  rest  for  his  weary  Soul.  Th
true  home  is  not  a  locality  or  geographical  point,  but  the  Soul's  res
and  peace  and  true  love.  He  who  can  attain  it  has  gained  half  th
mystery  of  life,  the  perfect  peace  of  the  Soul  —  home  at  last

Peace  at  the  Goal.

"  From  the  soul  of  a  man  who  was  homeless
Came  the  deathless  song  of  home ;
And  the  praises  of  rest  are  chanted  best
By  those  who  are  forced  to  roam."

The  substance  of  the  Soul  is  half  lost  in  the  shadow  of  the  bod
in  which  it  becomes  clothed.  There  cannot  be  a  contact  of  min
without  a  communication  of  thought  and  affection  where  there  is  lov
and  harmony,  and  thus  it  is  that  touch  really  corresponds  with  menta
communication.

Where  is  there  an  Anchorite  who  will  ever  forget  his  exaltatioi
when  for  the  first  time  he  crosses  the  threshold  of  the  inner  tempi
to  form  one  with  other  brethren  in  the  Ladder  of  Lifef  What  Adep
ever  forgets  the  Cabalistic  Ladder  of  Jacob,  where  the  higher  lov
climbs  to  God,  drinking  from  the  fountains  of  everlasting  Love,  eac
round  of  the  ladder  a  golden  head  like  the  fire  of  Living  Love  froi
heaven  ?


m-


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  407

It  is  written  in  Isaiah  vi. :  6,  7 :  Then  flew  one  of  the  Seraphim
unto  me,  having  a  living  coal  in  his  hand,  taken  from  the  altar,  laid
it  upon  my  mouth,  and  said,  Lo,  this  hath  touched  thy  lips,  and  thine
iniquity  is  taken  away  and  thy  sin  purged.

O,  dear  Spirit,  half  lost  in  thine  own  shadow  and  in  this  fleshly
sign,  That  thou  art  Thou.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  in  thy  longing  Soul  shall  dawn  perfect
peace.  Press  on  and  grow  not  weary.  The  fountain  of  life  is  within
thy  grasp.  Let  thy  life  be  of  thy  better  thoughts,  driving  all  evil
thoughts  from  the  mind ;  for  our  best  opinion  and  thoughts  are  the
angel  part  of  us,  our  vanities  and  selfish  acts  the  earthly  part.

The  great  Absolute  Mind  can  make  all  our  contradiction  har-
monize with  His  quiet,  calm  end.  This  is  the  purifying  fire ;  have
your  aspirations  upwards  until  life's  harvesting.  For  the  mother-
earth  is  subject  to  laws  like  every  one  of  her  children.  At  her
appointed  time,  or  great  cycle  of  years,  she  brings  forth  all  created
things ;  in  the  fulness  of  her  day  she  also  is  gathered  home  to  the
tomb  of  worlds.  And  there  remains  one  absolute  certainty,  that  we
are  ever  in  the  presence  of  an  Infinite  and  eternal  energy,  from
which  all  things  proceed.  We  are  merely  halted  here  on  our  eter-
nal voyage,  to  learn  of  this  peculiar  nature-life  —  to  master  its  secrets
and  mysteries.     When  we  have  done  so,  we  will  go  on  our  way.

The  mind  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  Soul,  and  to  illuminate  the
mind  with  Spirit  is  to  receive  a  reflection  of  God's  light  and  love,
which  causes  all  differences  to  harmonize  and  a  happy  release  from
many  burdens  of  the  world.

My  Lord,  my  Father,  while  I  stray
Far  from  my  home,  on  life's  rough  way»
Oh  teach  me  from  my  heart  to  say,
Thy  will  be  done.

The  following  is  a  prayer  of  Socrates :  —

Oh,  beloved  Pan  and  all  ye  other  Gods  of  this  place,  grant  me  to
become  beautiful  in  the  inner  man,  and  that  what  ever  outward  things
I  may  have,  may  be  at  peace  with  those  within.  May  I  deem  the
wise  man  rich,  and  may  I  have  such  a  portion  of  gold  as  none  but
what  a  prudent  man  can  either  bear  or  employ.

(Do  we  need  anything  else  Phaedrus ;  for  myself,  I  have  prayed
enough.)

The  value  of  things  is  in  their  use.  The  world  has  been  as  far
advanced  in  Spiritual  things  in  the  long  ago  of  antiquity  as  to-day,  but


408       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

man's  inhumanity  to  his  fellow-man,  and  selfish  ambition  congealed
the  Spirit  of  Truth.

In  past  ages  nations  had  their  oracles^  their  sacred  temples^  their  holy
arks^  their  voices  from  firCy  and  Gods^  and  Guides^  without  number.  The
Spiritual  priesthood  must  again  be  organized,  the  sacred  temples
built  with  the  sacred  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  altars  reared,  the  vestal
fires  lighted,  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Bridegroom  may  come.

Oh  the  loving,  tender  patience  of  the  Infinite  God  I  In  vain  were
the  choicest  gifts  showered  down  upon  unthankful  and  selfish,  un-
thinking man.  The  sacred  gifts  were  all  prostituted  to  the  attainment
of  material  wealth  and  objective  grandeur,  glory,  and  fame.  All  these
powers  of  Spirit  Liove  were  bent  and  warped  to  the  creation  and  per-
petuation of  monstrous  cctste  and  distinctions  among  men,  by  reason
of  which  war,  outrage,  cruelty,  and  wrong  are  the  rule,  while  peace,
sweet,  gentle  peace  and  harmony  are  very  rare  exceptions.  One  of
the  great  curses  of  humanity  is  the  difference  held  among  mankind

In  throwing  out  his  dual  force  for  or  against  an  individual,  the
Adept  knows  that  so  long  as  it  can  reach  the  subject  without  the  in-
tervention of  cross  magnetism  of  opposing  currents  he  is  absolute  and
his  forces  will  surely  succeed.  But  if  the  subject  is  aware  of  the  work
in  hand,  with  even  limited  knowledge  of  occult  forces,  he  will  guard
against  and  thwart  the  power,  entirely  baffling  the  object ;  therefore,
silence  is  power.     Knowledge  with  silence  is  power.

Ignorance  and  noise  are  imbecility.  The  knowledge  of  the  hidden
forces  of  nature  is  occultism.  The  knowledge  of  man  and  his  dual
forces  is  the  science  of  the  Soul.

The  fall  of  man  was  not  the  result  of  any  single  act  of  disobedience
to  the  Divine  Will,  but  a  gradual  descent  of  man  in  the  scale  of  life
and  thought,  through  selfish,  objective  ideas,  which  caused  the  dual
bi-sexual  forces  to  become  finally  disjoined  and  separated.  From  an
exalted  Spiritual  altitude  man  passed  down  from  this  high  plane  of
existence  into  a  condition  of  error  and  bondage  to  the  external  senses,
and  to  the  limitations  of  both  time  and  space.

"  I  come  to  save  that  which  is  lost,"  says  the  Christ,  which  is  the
casket  lamp  of  the  virgin  dual  forces  within,  the  true  bride  of  the  Spirit^
the  Adonai,  or  Lord,  the  Bride  of  our  God,  the  Deific  Centre,  the  Divine
Spirit  in  man.  How  great  was  this  fall  and  subsidence  of  the  true
life  of  man  very  few  can  comprehend,  because  of  the  exalted  heights
from  which  human  nature  has  descended  to  its  present  sensuous  level,
heights  far  beyond  the  conception  of  the  psychical  man  of  to-day.

Spirit  and  Love  being  the  elements  masculine  and  feminine  of  the


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  409

Soul,  and  Faith  and  Reason  the  elements  masculine  and  feminine  of
man's  intellectual  system,  the  church  and  priesthood  have  striven  to
bring  divorce  between  these  subjective  elements  and  have  converted
man  into  a  state  of  superstition,  doubt,  and  religious  fear,  which  has
rendered  him  ridiculous.  Instead  of  exhibiting  God  as  the  Supreme
Reason,  they  have  depicted  Him  as  the  Supreme  Unreason,  by  which
teaching  man  has  been  subject  to  an  intellectual  suicide.

"  Male  and  Female  created  He  them,"  one  leading  downward,  the
other  outward ;  when  both  are  properly  attuned  in  their  union,  they
lead  inward  and  upward.  All  development  and  growth  are  in  expan-
sive spirals  from  one  to  many,  then  in  contractive  spirals  back  to  one
again.  If  in  octaves  of  unison,  they  pass  on  to  a  higher  order  of  being ;
if  in  discord  and  separation,  they  pass  to  a  lower  order.  If  man  can
ascend,  he  can  also  descend.  /V^gression  b  no  more  a  law  than
^^/r(?gression.

If  he  progresses  eternally,  he  cannot,  certainly,  remain  always  a
man.  The  same  is  true  if  he  continually  retrogrades.  This  was  one
of  the  great  principles  of  Egyptian  Antiquity.  As  is  a  man  here  in  all
his  mental  attributes,  so  will  he  commence  on  the  other  side.  The
opportunities  to  progress  toward  ripening  of  the  Soul  must  to  a  certain
degree  be  accomplished  by  life  on  some  planet.

God  looks  only  for  ripened  and  perfect  fruit.  Man  must  of  neces-
sity progress  or  retrograde.  If  he  progresses,  he  develops  and  ripens
upward  and  outward,  through  cycles  both  vast  and  small,  to  his  Angel-
hood, and  is  finally  absorbed  into  the  bosom  of  the  Absolute  Love,
One  God.  If  he  becomes  congealed  into  indifference,  emotions  die,
and  he  must  retrograde.

If  he  continues  to  retrograde  here,  so  will  he  be  apt  to  do  on  the
other  side.  Sometimes  Angels  find  a  little  life  of  Soul  and  bear  it  up
to  ripening  and  peace.  But  if  he  continue  to  retrograde,  he  also  passes
through  cycles  both  vast  and  small,  comes  finally  to  a  state  of  uncon-
sciousness of  all  individuality,  and  is  in  fulness  of  time  again  re-incar-
nated in  some  other  form,  it  may  be  in  this  world  or  perhaps  in  some
other  planet,  according  to  the  attraction  in  embryo  entities.  No  man
can  stand  still.  He  must  progress  or  retrograde.  Nothing  can  re-
main the  same  any  more  than  the  waves  of  the  ocean  remain  the
same  till  they  beat  upon  the  shore.  As  wave  flows  into  wave,  so  life
passes  into  forms  of  matter;  a  ripple  here,  a  wave  there;  a  tempest
here  and  a  calm  yonder ;  such  is  all  life.  The  great  waves  sink  into
the  small  ones,  or  arise  into  the  larger ;  but,  whether  great  or  small,  it
matters  but  little,  the  quiet,  calm  benediction  of  silence  levels  all.


4IO      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOUX

The  Soul  seemed  to  be  rapt  away  to  heaven  in  the  ftdl,  haimo-
nlous  chorus  as  it  swelled  onward,  doubling  and  redoubling,  and  rolling
upward  in  a  full  burst  of  rapturous  devotion.

Throughout  the  whole  creation  a  dualism  is  to  be  found ;  both  the
physical  and  the  moral  world  are  composed  of  extremes  which  sup>
plement  each  other.  Light  and  darkness,  heat  and  cold,  the  solid
and  the  liquid,  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil,  cannot  be  thought
one  without  the  other.  Without  the  offsetting  darkness  light  could
not  be  perceived,  and  darkness,  on  the  other  hand,  b  the  veiy  absence
of  light.  Cold  is  a  very  low  degree  of  warmth,  and  with  the  same
right  can  heat  be  defined  to  be  a  very  small  degree  of  cold.  By  con-
stant practice  we  have  become  accustomed  to  move  between  these
contrasts,  and  to  consider  them  necessary  to  our  well-being,  so  that
we  extend  the  same  rule  even  to  a  great  many  other  precepts  which
are  far  from  being  their  equals,  though  they  may  show  some  similar-
ity with  them.

The  contrasts  of  peace  and  war,  of  sickness  and  health,  are  samples
of  this  latter  order ;  they  are  contrasts,  but  their  existence  b  not  as
absolute  a  necessity  as  is  that  of  light  and  darkness.  It  is  no  necessity
whatsoever  that  people  must  wage  war ;  and  no  matter  what  may  be  said
in  favor  of  it,  no  matter  how  often  the  hackneyed  phrase  may  be
quoted  that  war  is  a  necessary  evil,  humanity  would  have  been  far
better  off  if  there  had  never  been  any  wars,  and  it  can  never  reach
its  highest  development  unless  wars  shall  be  abolished.

Neither  is  sickness  a  necessary  offset  to  health.  True  that  we  are
frequently  afHicted  with  diseases  without  any  apparent  fault  of  ours,
but  that  we  do  not  yet  know  the  causes  of  all  maladies  and  have  not
yet  learned  how  to  prevent  them  does  not  prove  that  humanity  may
not  finally  discover  them,  and  that  human  life,  protected  against  the
causes  of  the  various  diseases,  should  not  run  smoothly  along  its  banks
until  its  original  vitality  shall  be  exhausted.  When  we  observe  how
many  diseases  have  been  traced  already  to  their  causes  and  how  many
of  such  causes  have  been  removed  already,  we  feel  encouraged  to
hope  that  in  some  future  time — may  it  appear  to  us  ever  so  distant —
the  goal  may  be  reached.  Sickness  is  not  an  absolutely  necessary
contrast  to  health.

It  is  almost  impossible  for  any  writer  on  Occult  energies  to
make  plain  the  Esoteric  characteristic  of  man,  or  to  hope  for  a  full
comprehension  of  his  thoughts  by  the  babbling  world  at  large.  But
that  still  small  Voice  and  Entity  of  Truth,  which  has  been  a  Living
Presence  since  their  work  began,  gently  whispers,  Permit  it  to  be  so^


THE   GREAT    MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  4II

press  on,  God  understands.  We  hope  the  thoughtful  reader  will
take  iht proper  Spirit  and  True  Sense  on  this  highly  important  thought
of  Sex  and  Bi-Sexual  attuneraent,  which  is  purely  in  the  Subjective
world  of  Soul.  Heaven  and  this  Soul  world  being  so  very  close  to
us,  while  modem  civilization  knows  only  the  Objective  world  and  the
five  Animal  senses,  whereby  it  judges  all  things,  and  the  general  range
of  thought  thereby  being  low  and  sensual,  Man  does  not  know  that
the  law  of  conjugality  in  the  higher  mannerism  of  Esoteric  man  is  the
particularized  specific  and  main  basis  of  every  force  in  nature.  The  man
who  does  understand  and  fully  comprehends  these  underlying  principles
of  Nature's  laws,  gives  himself  to  the  kingdom  of  Wisdom,  Light,
and  Truth.  Now  for  the  first  time  Truth  sets  itself  in  him,  gives
itself,  opens  itself,  amplifies  itself,  bringing  the  man  into  the  condi-
tion of  Arch-Natural  law  and  Spirit,  Being  the  keys  of  the  Kingdom  of
Heaven.  Soul  now  becomes  Illuminated  by  Truth.  "  Understanding
is  a  Well-spring  of  Life  unto  him  that  hath  it."  The  finite  human
Soul  being  an  infinitesimal  image  of  the  Infinite  Divine  Soul  illumi-
nate by  the  knowledge  of  all  Life,  here  opens  to  man  the  realms  of
Infinite  possibilities,  for  here  comes  into  play  the  law  of  inter-action
and  inter-presence  of  the  kingdom  of  Soul,  with  and  in  the  midst  of
the  kingdom  of  Spirit ;  the  order  of  Truth,  Lave,  and  Wisdom  within
the  Eternal  Universe,  once  on  these  heights  no  longer  the  flesh  lusteth
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh,  neither  are  they
any  more  contrary  one  to  the  other,  as  St.  Paul  speaks  of  in  Gal.,  xvii.

It  is  very  difficult  to  frame  words  that  will  be  fully  comprehended
by  the  masses ;  humanity  being  so  cankered  with  conventional  Natu-
ralism, nearly  all  readers  are  veiy  apt  to  throw  aside  this  important
Truth,  not  being  able  to  see  anything  in  the  union  of  the  sexes  but  a
temporary  alliance  for  the  reproduction  of  the  species.

To  the  Illuminated  thoughtful  mind  the  attuned  Dual  Energies  are
a  far  loftier  love  and  marriage  in  the  subjective  sense  than  the  objec-
tive, and  their  transcendent  beauty  is  incomprehensible  to  the  sen-
sual mind ;  but  through  it  are  the  fundamental  principles  underlying
both  man  and  Nature,  which  bear  upon  their  faces  the  Divine  Image
of  God.

Heretofore  man  has  continually  formed  his  conclusions  of  God
and  the  Divine  Image  that  they  bear  outlines  of  form  likened  unto
man's  physical  body,  and  any  other  relation  was  quite  inconceivable.

The  Union  of  Sex  in  its  Dual  being  is  the  Universal  Form  of  God.
Unselfish  Love  the  Universal  Force  and  Wisdom,  the  Guiding  Hand
Marriage  of  the  Soul  with  Spirit  the  Universal  result.     Love  and  Wis-


i


r  ^


412       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

dom  are  the  two  opposite  poles  of  the  magnet,  which  always  atti
sustain,  excite,  and  intensify  each  other ;  and  that  which  constit
the  difference  between  the  two  sexes  is  that  the  poles  are  rever
The  Love  Energy,  radiating  from  out  the  Great  Central  Sun,  Sp
God,  changes  its  manifestation  according  to  the  atmosphere  and  fo
into  which  it  flows.  In  the  higher  firmaments  or  spheres  neares
the  Heart  of  God,  it  is  the  unselfish  celestial  Zove  of  the  Angels,
the  next  inferior  sphere  it  is  the  Illumination  and  ripening  of  S<
as  a  SpiritualLove  Universal,  Lower  still  it  is  but  the  natural  Lov
i  the  Sex  with  Man,  as  marriage  is  now  held  from  a  human  standp<

Below  this  rational  sphere,  it  is  simply  a  mere  passion  divestec

any  sentiment.     Farther  down  the  scale  as  an  Energy,  it  b  the  s

s  pathy  of  plants,  the  attraction  of  metals,  and  the  gravitation  of  ate

\  Therefore  Love  is  the  life  and  Soul  of  all  things,  from  the  greates

the  least.

m

"  In  thy  light,  O  Spirit  of  Love,  we  see  the  Light  of  Truth,  wl
'  is  the  renewing  life  of  man,  like  unto  the  waters  of  the  sea,  fresl

only  when  it  ascends  towards  heaven.
,  "  Life  mellowed  by  the  stealing  hours  of  time ;   memory's  1<

become  the  silver  livery  of  advised  age,  and,  in  time,  the  chrysali
:  eternity.

^  '*  Each  departed  friend  is  a  magnet  of  Love  that  attracts  us  to

next  world.     Frequently  our  holiest  memories  are  in  the  graves  of
:  worid."

s  O  Love  that  Illumes  man's  inner  temple.  Thou  satisfieth  the  lon|

Soul.     For  all  things  die  in  Love,  and  all  things  are  bom  in  Ia

therefore^

Love  is  the  Secret  of  Life,

To  point  the  way  to  a  higher  life  than  the  mere  Objective  Am
,    .  Man  is  the  object  of  this  Book.

Every  form  is  governed  by  the  laws  of  affinity  and  attract

Sex,  love,  and  marriage  are  universal  and  eternal ;  to  arise  above

Animal  and  vibrate  these  Dual  Energies  is  the  key.     Hie  Spin

Truth  in  Sex,  Love,  and  marriage,  not  used  in  their  common  ani

\  and  restricted  sense,  is  the  doorway  to  all  the  phenomena  of  S;

Mind,  and  Matter.     "  The  letter  killeth,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  but  the  s]
I  giveth  life."

I  The  beginning  of  Evil,  Sin,  and  Error  is  wonderfully  describe

4  the  true  Spiritual  sense  of  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis,  which  is

^  loss  of  the  married  harmony  of  the  Dual  energy  in  man,  that  is


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  4I3

tween  the  Love  and  Wisdom  principles  of  understanding.  The  state
of  harmonious  attunement  in  the  Bisexual  EnergUs  determines  the
state  of  conjugal  love  between  man  and  woman,  as  it  also  does  all
other  loves.  Perversion  of  the  good  and  the  true  in  the  indi-
vidual Soul  is  the  cause  of  all  corresponding  perversion,  degeneration,
misinterpretation,  and  injury  to  both  physical  and  mental  being,  as
well  as  the  cause  of  all  errors  in  man's  sexual  life.  At  last  the  cold
and  selfish  naturalist  scoffs  at  the  idea  of  a  purely  Spiritual  Love,
which  was  the  Christ  Principle  of  Lave^  the  Adonia,

The  career  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  Christ,  is  one  of  the  world's
enigmas.  He  was  the  most  aristocratic  of  men  and  the  most  demo-
cratic also ;  the  loftiest  in  self-respect  and  Justice  ;  the  least  in  silent
self-importance  ;  demanding  all  things  for  his  service  ;  claiming  noth-
ing for  His  private  personality.  Christ  worked  for  Love ;  by  Love
produced,  enriched,  uplifted,  amplified  gifts,  and  was  prepared  to
ripen  the  Souls  of  men  by  pointing  the  way.  The  Adonia,  the  Two-
in-One,  Bridegroom  and  Bride  embosomed  within  his  Perfected  Soul
whose  rapturous  melodies  of  peace  and  hope  to  man,  winged  by  im-
mortal Loves,  proclaimed  that  when  a  True  man  dies  he  lives  again  a
ripened  Soul.


Re-Incarnation.

Who  does  not  stand  with  astonishment  and  devotion  before  the
miracle  of  life }  What  an  infinity  lies  before  a  child  when  first  it
breathes  and  opens  its  eyes.  Air  and  light  are  the  first  messengers
on  earth.  The  first  breath  and  the  last,  the  first  glance  and  the  last,
how  wonderful  are  both  I

The  appearance  of  the  same  individual,  or  rather  of  his  Astral
monad,  twice  on  the  same  planet,  which  is  known  as  re-incarnation,  is
not  a  rule  but  an  exception.  It  is  preceded  by  a  violation  of  the
laws  of  harmony  of  nature,  and  only  happens  when  the  Astral  monad,
which  has  been  tossed  out  of  the  circle  of  necessity  by  crime  or  acci-
dent, is  thrown  back  into  earth-life  to  rotate  once  more.  Where  the
original  design  of  nature  to  produce  a  perfect  human  being  has  been
interrupted,  while  the  gross  matter  of  these  entities  is  suffered  to  dis-
perse itself  at  death,  the  immortal  Spirit  and  Astral  monad  or  body  of


414      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  deceased  personality  must  or  may  at  least  try  a  second  tin
carry  out  the  original  purpose  of  creative  intelligence  or  law.
averred  by  some  authors  —  though  Spirits  as  well  as  mortal  thee
differ  very  much  in  regard  to  the  subject  —  that  where  reason  has
so  far  developed  as  to  become  active  and  discriminate,  there  i
immediate  re-incarnation  on  the  earth ;  the  three  parts  of  the  ti
man  have  been  united,  and  he  is  capable  of  going  on  in  the  1
But,  in  the  case  of  an  idiot,  or  where  the  new  being  has  not  pa
beyond  the  condition  of  a  monad  body.  Soul  and  Spirit,  not  ha
been  completely  united  on  earth,  cannot  be  so  after  death,  an<
immortal  '*  spark  of  heavenly  fiame  "  has  to  re-enter  on  the  ea]
plane  in  another  body,  as  Spirit  follows  a  line  parallel  with  tha

^* '  matter,  and  the  Spiritual  evolution  goes  hand  in  hand  with  the  phys

The  Chaldean  magi  taught  that  the  Divine  Soul  would  partal
the  bliss  of  Eternal  Light,  while  the  Sensuous  Soul  would  if  gooc
gradually  dissolved,  but  if  wicked  must  wander  about  in  the  c
sphere,  assuming  at  times  the  forms  of  human  phantoms  or  of  anin
The  Greeks  also  said  the  same.  All  the  Illuminati  of  the  mi
ages  tell  of  the  Astral  Soui,  the  reflection  of  the  dead  or  his  spi
At  birth  the  pure  Spirit  remains  attached  to  the  intermediate  1
nous  body,  but  as  soon  as  its  lower  form,  the  physical  body,  b  i
the  pure  Spirit  ascends  heavenward.

"The  cause  of  re-incarnation  is  ignorance";  therefore,  thei
re-incarnation.  The  occult  doctrines  nearly  all  teach  that  there  i
immediate  re-incarnation  on  earth  for  the  monad,  nor  any  second  ii
nation  at  all  for  iht  personal  Ego,  except  as  aforesaid  in  case  of  i(
and  abortions;  but  that  there  are  re-births  or  periodical  re-ap{
ances  or  re-incarnations  for  the  immortal  Ego,  but  that  such  do
take  place  before  two  or  three  thousand  years  of  life  in  higher  sphe
or  in  Devachan  a  state  of  bliss  which  is  the  reward  for  the  undesei
miseries  of  life ;  that  man,  being  at  best  a  wretched  tool  of  evil  wi
forms  new  causes  and  circumstances,  is  not  always  (if  ever)  res]
sible  or  deserving  of  punishment,  and  hence  is  permitted  to  ei
these  periods  of  rest  and  bliss  with  utter  temporary  oblivion  of
miseries  and  sorrow  of  a  former  life  before  entering  upon  a  new  o;

»  Thus  there  is  a  regular  succession  of  death  and  birth,  the  fat

life  believed  in  by  the  Buddhists  having  been  lived  either  on  thi

\  other  planets.     The  moral  cause  of  these  re-incarnations  being

cleaving  to  existing  objects  or  evil  desires,  it  is  the  duty  of  all

*  would  be  free  from  the  sorrows  of  successive  births  to  seek  to  des

this  moral  cause  by  becoming  free  from  all  evil  desire.    Buddha  tai


THE  GREAT  MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN  WAY.  415

that  the  way  to  gain  this  freedom  was  by  poverty,  restriction  of  the
senses,  perfect  indifference  to  merely  objective  things,  control  of  or
absolute  freedom  from  passion,  and  frequent  contemplation  of  Soul,
remembering  that  nothing  but  abstract  existence  is  real  in  the  world.

No  one  can  pass  forever  out  of  this  world,  say  these  teachers,
without  becoming  physically,  morally,  and  spiritually  perfected  in  it.
Surely  no  one  human  life  can  do  this  from  one  birth ;  so  a  series  of  re-
births must  be  required  for  this  evolution  in  the  "circle  of  necessity."

It  seems  to  us  any  thoughtful  man  must  dread  transmigration  and
re-incarnation,  the  cause  of  which  is  unripeness  of  Soul  which  comes
from  ignorance.  The  doctrines  of  re-incarnation  and  transmigration
of  Soul  are  part  of  the  oldest  religions  known  to  man.  Upon  the
tombs  and  rock  temples  of  ancient  Egypt,  which  have  withstood  the
ravages  of  thousands  of  years,  are  deeply  carved  pictures  of  transmi-
grating Souls.  Sometimes  Osiris  is  seated  on  a  pyramid  or  on  a  high
throne,  with  human  beings  ascending  the  stairway  to  him,  while  close
at  hand  stands  Justice  with  her  balances,  and  the  book  with  the  record
of  man's  life  (the  Astral  body)  placed  in  the  scales,  the  recorder  stand-
ing by  to  make  a  note  of  it.  Here,  as  it  is  pictured,  those  who  have
the  fire  of  the  mystery  of  life  and  death  pass  away  to  the  right,  retain-
ing the  human  form.  Those  who  have  not  the  vestal  fire  pass  away
to  the  left  and  down  the  stairs  or  pyramid  again,  some  with  animal
heads  and  human  bodies,  some  all  animal  in  form,  even  in  some  cases
representing  reptiles  and  insects.

These  principles  were  held  most  sacred  by  the  most  civilized  na'
tions  of  great  antiquity.  We  find  from  the  Bible  that  the  Jews  fully
believed  it,  and  Christ  must  have  done  so  also,  for  he  says,  "  Elias
must  first  come  again  to  restore  things  " ;  and  on  another  occasion  he
says,  "  Elias  has  come  already,  but  they  knew  him  not."

Weak  minds  are  carried  away  and  injured  by  the  human  theories
of  re-incarnation,  and  the  compiler  hesitated  for  some  time  about
making  any  mention  of  the  principle  governing  transmigration  of
Souls  in  this  work,  nor  does  he  claim  that  the  principles  are  abso-
lutely correct.  He  bases  his  opinion  from  the  voice  of  a  Spirit  which
on  two  occasions  came  from  the  Ark  in  a  Delphic  circle,  once  in  Italy,
and  again  in  Newton,  near  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

This  voice,  which  spoke  from  the  apex  of  the  flame  used  on  such
occasions,  requested  all  present  to  strive  to  cultivate  the  inner  temple
of  the  Soul,  ever  to-day  in  the  eternal  now,  and  not  be  continually  dwell-
ing in  antiquity,  and  the  passed  possibilities  of  our  Souls.  And  so  we
leave  the  subject  of  re-incarnation  here.


4l6  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  vestal  fires  which  are  inwardly  kindled  by  the  bi-sezual  actioD
of  continuity  bum  out  the  dross  and  corruption  of  gross  natures
These  fires  of  the  Soul  are  kindled  by  the  accumulation  of  Spirit
whenever  and  wherever  attraction  overbalances  repulsion.

Man  wastes  his  powers  and  strength  in  his  works  outwardly.  He
is  so  apt  to  be  engulfed  in  the  objective  world,  losing  and  wasting  his
forces  in  ambition,  earthly  love,  hate,  selfishness,  envy,  and  pride,
that  he  makes  of  himself  an  empty  vessel,  inviting  refuse  and  fildi,
disease  and  death,  projection  and  repulsion.

Men  differ  in  their  emotions  and  senses,  yet  are  apt  to  judge  others
by  themselves,  which  is  surely  folly.  The  man  who  knows  least  of
himself  trusts  himself  least,  and  is  often  afraid  and  doubtful,  which
breeds  suspicion.  From  this  point  man  is  too  apt  to  judge  humanity.
To  judge  others  continually  by  ourselves  is  small-minded,  and  it  is
the  small-minded,  weak  man  who  quenches  the  sacred  fires  of  hb  own
Soul  by  his  incredulous  scepticism.

Right  belief  is  belief  in  Divine  Humanity.  It  not  only  inspires
hope  in  man,  but  gives  a  correct  knowledge  of  man,  which  is  the  first
step  toward  a  correct  knowledge  of  God.  How  can  one  believe  in
God  when  he  does  not  believe  in  man  ?  How  can  one  have  hope  in
Divine  Humanity  when  he  fears  and  holds  himself  aloof  from  his
fellow-men  ?  The  best  and  greatest  men  the  world  has  ever  known
have  been  lovers  of  their  fellow-men,  full  of  hope  and  faith,  and  child-
like in  their  trustful  natures.  They  were  men  who  could  love.  All
things  die  in  love,  and  all  are  born  of  love.

All  love  and  human  affection  come  from  the  celestiaL  In  purity
all  power  resides.  Fire  renders  all  things  pure,  reduces  and  leveb  all
things,  refines  and  illuminates  all.  Fire  fiow^s  from  love.  But  few
men  as  yet  know  what  love  is.  Mankind  thinks  of  it  as  that  emotion
which  has  only  one  sex  in  it,  which  is  but  half  the  truth,  as  sex  is  but
a  symbol  of  it.  Love  is  a  perfect  chord  of  the  bi-sexual  forces,  and
is  the  highest  and  most  ecstatic  emotion  the  Soul  can  feel.  It  is  the
most  nourishing  re-enforcement  of  youth  that  man  can  call.  It  is  the
loftiest  vibration  that  exalts  man  into  his  Angelhood.

There  is  a  grand  trinit}'  which  must  be  unfolded  and  opened  to  a
knowledge  of  full  realization  of  each  force  and  its  action,  viz.^  that  of
the  Spiritual  man,  the  Celestial  man,  and  the  Terrestrial  man.

Spirit  is  substance,  but  it  is  not  matter.  Substance  is  that  which
"  stands  under "  and  sustains  matter.  Matter  is  visible  or  in  some
way  perceptible  to  one  or  more  of  the  outward  senses ;  the  substance
of  things  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses.


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;     OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  4I7

Spirit  is  the  "  I  Am,"  the  creative  energy,  and  forms  all  the  eye
beholds.  It  contains  within  it  all  the  entities,  all  verities,  all  atoms,
suns,  and  stars.  Spirit  is  matter  potentialized,  while  matter  is  Spirit
solidified.

If  man  only  knew  how  to  live,  he  need  not  die  until  the  fulness
of  time  had  come  when  he  might  depart  by  his  own  will.  But  man  is
apt,  after  years  of  battling  struggle  and  defeats,  to  become  callous,
indifferent,  fossilized.     Above  all  things  beware  of  fossilization.

Cultivate  the  higher  emotions  and  impulses  and  produce  purity,
kindling  the  feminine  element  where  may  be  grown  a  junction  and
nuptial  of  man's  dual  being,  in  which  wisdom,  justice,  and  conscience
sway.     Then  will  injustice,  indifference,  and  selfishness  flee  away.

The  new  life  of  intercommunion  of  nature's  forces,  of  men  and
of  all  races  in  the  subjective  world,  the  intercommunion  of  Spirits,
Angels,  and  God,  make  constant  companionship  for  him.  Here  the
finite  mind  trembles  and  the  Soul  is  filled  as  it  crosses  the  threshold
of  truth,  found  in  the  Oneness  of  being,  and  ascends  to  the  upper
firmaments  and  roams  through  all  realms  of  space.  The  impossible
no  longer  belongs  in  his  life.  He  raises  the  magic  wand  of  his  Will,
and  it  is  done.  He  stretches  out  his  hand,  and  the  winds  and  waves
are  still.

As  he  comes  slowly  nearer  to  the  great  Central  Sun-Spirit^  he
finds  within  his  own  central  being  an  immortal  Light,  which  is  the
germ  of  another  life,  developing  and  raising  up  an  immortal  substance
known  as  the  Tree  of  Eternal  Life,

There  is  a  glorious  truth  in  the  economy  of  human  suffering.  The
swiftly  fleeting  years  rudely  tear  away  the  illusions  and  delusions  of
youth  and  the  objective  world  from  every  true  man  of  mature  age.
These  hard  experiences  have  all  a  tendency,  when  viewed  as  they
should  be,  to  wean  us  from  the  masquerade  of  this  world,  its  toys,
shows,  ambitions,  and  vanities.  Our  experiences  of  objective  facts
are  of  value  only  in  this.  The  knowledge  which  binds  men  to  this
life  only,  by  the  development  of  pride,  ambition,  power,  egotism,  and
self-sufficiency,  is  a  curse  and  a  source  of  great  weakness,  instead  of
bringing  power.

Power  does  not  come  from  one  thing  alone,  but  from  all.  Infinite
knowledge  is  necessary  to  strengthen  weakness  and  develop  man  from
his  infancy.  But  for  the  Adept  there  is  no  knowledge.  He  dwells
in  faith  and  lives  by  faith,  which  is  beyond  all  knowledge;  where
every  action  is  attuned  to  Divine  Truth.

But  think  you  this  faith  and  power  can  come  to  us?    Not  so  I  but


41 8      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

man  must  ascend  to  it,  through  regeneration  in  the  Spirit  and  by  a
new  birth  of  the  Spirit.

Therefore  knowledge  is  of  little  account  save  as  it  may  assist  one
to  become  illuminated  and  enter  into  the  Spirit.  There  are  moments
in  life  when  the  Soul  may  become  illuminated  and  expanded  to  the
outermost  being,  when  it  becomes  the  Over  Saul  of  the  man  in  place
of  the  inner.

It  is  here  that  the  Fatherhood  becomes  one  with  the  Soul  of  the
Motherhood  and  Son  the  Divine  Mind  is  thereby  produced,  known
as  the  Sun  symbol  of  Divine  Light,  understanding  and  knowledge,
which  illuminate  the  darkness  of  matter,  making  all  the  secrets  which
lurk  in  darkness  stand  out  in  their  true  nakedness  or  deformity  as
they  have  grown.

This  is  the  Trinity  and  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  Father,  Son,  and
Holy  Ghost  — ^/W/  the  Divine  Father,  Soul,  the  Divine  Mother,
Mind  the  only  begotten  Son  of  Spirit  or  of  God.

Mankind  to-day  is  far  more  curious  and  anxious  concerning  the
mysteries  of  death  than  about  the  revelations  of  life,  while  it  is  really
the  eternal  now  which  is  of  most  importance.

'*  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."
This  kingdom  of  God  is  only  another  and  higher  stage  of  life,  a  more
exalted  sphere,  and  no  man  can  enter  or  cross  its  threshold  save
through  the  gestation  and  birth  of  a  Divine  Body,  which  can  only  be
reached  by  harmonious  attunement  of  his  dual  being.

We  get  the  grossness  of  food  by  eating  it,  but  the  real  life  of  it
is  extracted  by  the  thoughts  we  have  of  it.  In  other  words,  the  ideas
we  have  in  regard  to  the  quality  of  food  and  its  use,  impart  to  it
something  akin  to  themselves.  Thus  the  body  may  be  gradually
changed  by  diet,  not  so  much  by  quantity  as  by  quality ;  for  the  will
and  mind  impart  much  of  any  desired  quality.

One  of  the  great  mistakes  of  our  modern  civilization  is  over-eat-
ing. Man  needs  very  little  food  if  he  did  but  know  it.  Just  enough
should  be  taken  to  form  a  nucleus  of  attraction  for  the  Spirit  to  mate-
rialize itself  or  condense  and  form  new  particles  of  blood,  nerves,  and
flesh.  Behold  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  and  fishes  as  an  illustration
of  this  principle.  The  glutton  has  a  weak,  lean,  selfish,  hungry  radi-
ation of  atmosphere  and  very  little  will-power.  Modem  civilization
presents  a  selfish,  ravenous  multitude,  a  standing  mockery  of  nature,
a  painful,  clamorous  revolt  against  the  wisdom  of  an  Infinite  Cre-
ator.

The  three  entities  of  Force  —  substance,  law,  and  order — are


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  419

present  throughout  the  universe,  whether  in  the  real  or  in  the  phenom-
enal world,  because  between  these  worlds  there  is  no  difference  of
essence,  but  only  of  extension  or  mode.  For  as  all  substance  is
single,  so  all  force  is  single,  and  Law  and  Order  is  the  mode  of  appli-
cation of  force  and  of  its  relation  to  substance.

Law  and  order,  therefore,  is  really  one  principle,  expressed  pretty
closely  by  the  term  Polarization,  which  is  analogous  to  Gravitation.
So  long  as  we  work  in  and  by  this  law  we  direct  force ;  when  we  vio-
late it,  force  recoils  upon  us,  and  by  the  very  nature  of  things  disorder
and  death  ensue.

The  few  men  who  understand  the  procession  of  nature,  and  act
by  and  within  its  laws,  and  know  the  conditions  for  enforcing  them,
are  a  polarization  of  power,  a  renewal  and  germination  of  the  vital-
ized life-principle.  This  renewal  and  recurrence  of  force  is  not  ful-
filled by  the  majority  of  the  race.

Every  form  of  matter  is  capable  of  magnetization,  and  every
molecule  is  capable  of  developing  a  current  of  its  own,  being  pos-
sessed of  poles  and  an  equator.

When  the  will  and  thought  of  the  Soul  are  single  and  harmo-
niously centralized  throughout,  a  latent  Spirit  force  becomes  central-
ized and  manifests  itself  in  polarization.

Neither  disease  nor  death  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  term
could  reign  in  a  perfectly  polarized  individual.  The  endeavor  to  reach
this  point  is  the  object  of  magnetization  from  the  metaphysician  and
magnetic  healer.  When  the  earthly  Soul  has  been  suffused  with  the
Divine  Light,  and  every  element  of  the  entity  and  human  personality
is  vitalized  by  Spirit,  there  will  be  no  more  delirium  and  horrible
suffering  from  disease.  The  process  of  death  will  be  a  transition,
''As  one  who  wraps  the  drapery  of  his  couch  about  him  and  lies
down  to  pleasant  dreams.''

The  basic  principles  of  all  life  are  in  its  dual  forces  of  emotion
which  are  subjective.  The  man  who  adheres  only  to  objective  facts  is
like  a  fly  in  a  spider's  web.  He  beats  the  air  in  distress  and  desola-
tion. The  man  who  believes  nothing  except  what  he  can  see  by  his
natural  eye  is  a  very  small  pattern  of  a  man,  for  in  point  of  reality
he  knows  comparatively  nothing.  The  religion  of  the  future  will  rise
logically  from  the  known  to  the  unknown,  from  the  seen  to  the
unseen,  from  "nature  up  to  nature's  God."

It  will  teach  that  the  communion  with  Angels  is  a  fixed  fact  in  the
nature  of  things,  and  that  there  is  nothing  supernatural  or  mysterious
about  it ;  that  Angels  have  walked  and  talked  with  men  throughout


420      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

all  the  ages,  and  that  the  Bible  is  one  continuous  hbtoiy  o£  such
intercourse,  from  Genesis  to  Revelations.

The  mind  is  not  a  thing  but  an  atmosphere  of  law,  a  mode  of
action  of  the  Soul.  When  well  balanced  it  is  a  duality,  two  emana-
tions in  one,  which  produces  harmonious  emotion  and  feeds  the  fire
of  principle.  The  Soul  expands  by  fire  and  its  emotions,  but  con-
tracts and  congeals  for  want  of  it.

Reason  cannot  transcend  its  own  source.  Everything  in  existence
depends  upon  something  else.  There  must  be  a  commencement,  and
that  is  the  Divine  Over  Soul  of  all,  which  must  of  necessity  be  Dual
in  its  nature.  The  circumstances  of  our  lives  and  the  possibilities  of
our  nature  are  within  us,  and  are  only  hidden  from  us  by  our  igno-
rance, which  arises  from  the  differences  and  discords  which  come
through  disconnection  of  the  two  great  primary  principles  of  man's
being.  When  man  stops  to  reflect,  goes  back  in  search  of  first
principles,  seeking  for  the  foundation  from  which  all  things  spring,
he  finds  the  Divine  and  Infinite  Principle.

There  is  such  a  thing  as  chemical  affinity.  When  two  such  are
united  they  produce,  and  the  earth  being  prepared  by  heat  or  in  any
other  manner,  make  conditions  for  new  or  old  forms  of  vegetation
and  life  to  come  into  existence.  Certain  conditions  of  bearing  pro-
duce sense  and  emotion,  and  it  is  ever  thus  that  things  gestate,
grow,  and  ripen  in  the  fulness  of  time.  The  higher  ideas  of  Love
emotion  and  sense  are  the  affinity  and  food  for  Souls.  Hence  man
grows  and  ripens  to  a  higher  creative  and  original  power  through  his
reception  of  ideas  by  his  dual  sense  and  emotions.  The  Soul  of
nature  is  emotion  and  is  that  which  produces  motion.  Hence  the
third  part  of  things,  which  is  the  most  important,  is  invisible  but  is
real  and  not  shadow,  is  in  the  subjective  world.  Man  must  look
beyond  the  mere  outward  appearance  of  life  for  his  Divine  reality.
God  is  the  all  of  man's  life,  and  the  power  of  man  is  at  the  bottom
the  power  of  God.

Ideas  are  simply  the  forms  of  the  invisible;  therefore  types,  patterns,
and  formative  causes  of  things  are  called  ideas.  God's  Ideas  of
things  are  the  cause  of  every  object  in  nature.  After  the  student  has
thoroughly  mastered  the  doctrine  of  the  bi-sexual  force  and  triune
nature  of  man,  and  learned  that  the  Spirit  of  man  is  a  personal  limi-
tation of  the  Supreme  and  Absolute  Spirit,  a  new  world  of  under-
standing  and  knowledge  opens  up  to  him,  of  which  he  never  yet  had
dreamed.  He  now  realizes  what  a  blundering  child  he  has  been,
simply  because  he  was  blind  to  love,  truth,  and  faith  of  Spirit,  in  con-


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY:    OR.   THE  HIDDEN   WAY.  42 1

sequence  of  his  Soul  being  immersed  and  overshadowed  in  the  objec-
tive life  of  sense,  hidden  from  the  perception  of  Spirit  ways,  because
he  revels  in  the  senses  of  the  physical  being  only.  It  is,  then,
highly  necessary  to  open  the  door  of  subjective  sense  and  gain  the
true  and  real,  by  the  union  of  his  dual  nature.  Only  so  can  he
become  alive  to  Spiritual  sense  and  know  how  to  use  and  control  the
forces  of  power  in  sense  and  emotion.  The  galaxy  of  worlds,  suns,
stars,  and  every  object  in  space  are  each  and  all  held  together  and
kept  in  place  by  sense.  Each  and  all  things  are  suspended  in  an
ocean  of  sense  and  emotions.  God  reveals  himself  only  to  the  sense
and  emotion  of  things,  and  of  a  truth  He  is  sense  itself.

The  Conception  is  always  superior  to  the  production  of  a  thing.
The  true  artist  fails  to  come  up  to  his  ideal ;  so  does  the  architect,  the
poet,  and  the  author.  So  long  as  man  is  attracted  to  objective  form,
he  is  not  free,  but  is  a  slave  to  form,  and  his  ideas  of  life  end  with
the  life  of  the  form.  When  he  succeeds  in  freeing  himself  fully  from
form  and  its  attractions,  he  begins  to  enter  the  realms  of  Spirit  and
the  Truth.  Form  being  only  the  objective  shadow  of  the  true  thing,
therefore,  as  be  becomes  released  from  the  world  of  appearances  and
shadow,  he  enters  the  realms  of  Infinite  Life,  which  is  enduring  and
everlasting.

What  is  man  ?  is  one  of  the  most  important  questions  propounded
by  thoughtful  minds,  sometimes  with  deep  anxiety  and  fear.

What  is  man?  was  the  question  of  the  Egyptian  Sphinx  more
than  six  thousand  years  ago,  which  stands  to-day  silent  and  solitary,
almost  engulfed  in  the  shifting  sea  of  desert  sands.  We  are  told
that  the  prophet  who  solved  her  riddle  was  put  to  death,  and  none
has  since  found  the  solution.  And  yet  the  answer  seems  very  simple.
A  wise  philosopher  has  said,  A  man  is  good  common  sense.  If  the
answer  could  be  divested  of  religious  or  scientific  prejudices,  it  might
be  said,  Man  is  an  Essence  Germ  of  the  Divine  Mind,  a  collective
focalized  centre  of  Energy,  a  shadow  of  God,  and  as  God  is  the  Infi-
nite Love  and  Wisdom,  whose  energy  is  the  great  Central  Sun  of  Spirit,
man  is  a  finite  reflection  of  that  Love,  Wisdom,  and  Energy.  The
living  force  in  a  man  is  not  matter,  but  simply  clothes  itself  in  matter,
which  external  clothing  corresponds  with  the  internal  life.

The  seed  acorn  has  not  the  external  appearance  of  the  oak,  but
if  the  acorn  be  properly  divided  in  halves,  with  a  strong  glass,  one
may  see  quite  clearly  the  outline  of  a  tree,  which  is  the  germ  Soul  of
the  oak.  If  the  seed  be  placed  in  the  ground,  this  Soul  will  work
out  a  body  of  like  character  with  itself,  the  exterior  natural  tree,  thus


422      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

being  but  a  shadow  or  manifestation  of  the  real.  EmotiotiSy  attrac*
tion,  affection,  and  thought  are  the  forces  that  use  the  dead  things  of
nature ;  therefore  so-called  life  is  simply  spirituaUzed  matUr.  Wher-
ever a  Soul  of  emotion,  attraction,  or  affection  has  been  placed,  a
visible  material  object  of  form  arises,  which  must,  by  the  immutable
law  of  effects,  correspond  with  the  invisible  Soul  force  which  is  its
cause,  which  moulds  it,  qualifies  it,  acts  objectively  through  it,  and  is
the  substance  of  it.  The  true  life  is  far  above  matter.  No  dead  earth
ever  made  or  can  make  man  or  create  a  living,  intelligent  force.
This  true  force  comes  from  the  great  Central  Sun  —  Father,  Mother,
Spirit,  who  places  a  germ  Soul-seed  in  matter,  and,  lo !  it  becomes
wrought  into  an  objective  life.  If  all  things  on  earth  are  but  the
shadows  of  living  forces,  then  those  very  forces  must  be  true  sub-
stance revealing  itself  in  nature.  Thus  this  fair  earth  is  the  shadow
of  heaven,  and  this  body,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  natural  man,  is
but  the  shadow  of  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Spiritual  man,  which
temple  is  the  Soul  and  Astral  body.

Men  speak  often  of  the  great  open  book  of  nature,  and  the  vast
knowledge  and  wisdom  to  be  gained  from  it.  Nature's  great  book
is  simply  expressions  of  the  Divine  Mind,  God,  and  every  object
in  nature  is  like  a  sentence  in  an  excellent  wise  book,  corresponding
with  the  love  and  wisdom  which  formed  it.  A  blind  man  might  as
reasonably  contend  that  a  reflection  in  a  mirror  does  not  exist,  as
we  can  contend  that  there  is  no  Spiritual  world  because  the  Creator
has  hitherto  withheld  the  Spiritual  perception.  Nor  is  that  world  a
dark  realm  of  nothingness ;  it  fulfils  all  the  wants  of  the  human  Soul.
What  is  most  essential  is  a  development  that  will  open  the  eyes  of
the  Spiritually  blind,  that  the  Soul  may  become  illuminated  to  see
and  comprehend  truth  in  all  its  purity.  This  Spiritual  light  is  per-
fect Love,  Intellect,  and  Intuition,  which  is  receptive  of  the  Spiritual
light  of  the  Great  Central  Sun,  God,  as  the  natural  sight  is  receptive
of  the  natural  light  of  the  sun.  "  Lighten  mine  eyes  lest  I  sleep  the
sleep  of  death,"  was  the  cry  of  David.

At  a  certain  stage  of  growth  and  development  the  Soul  becomes
self-sustaining  and  productive  of  all  that  is  needed.  It  becomes
magical  in  its  physical  manifestations  as  it  is  itself ;  for  the  Soul  is  a
magical  thing,  and  in  its  expansion,  which  is  the  attunement  of  dual-
ity, it  fills  the  whole  man  with  itself,  illuminating  the  inner  temple
with  understanding  and  Love.  Then  the  body  becomes  a  magic
force,  a  Divine  body,  and  man  reaches  the  all-power  and  the  great
symphonies  of  vibration  contained  in  the  attunement  of  all  physical


THE   GREAT   MVSTERV  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  423

and  Spiritual  nature  which  lie  inscribed  within  the  perfect  square
known  to  all  Adepts  as  the  unspeakable  ***4*********

That  glorious  height  of  Pythagoras  of  which  Plato  sung  would
have  been  lost  to  man  and  to  this  day  in  all  the  mystic  orders  and
remain  unutterable,  but  was  replaced  by  this  sacred  number  4  —
the  most  binding  and  solemn  oath  within  the  ancient  mysteries.

Gradually,  as  man  crosses  this  threshold,  all  objective  shadows
flee  away,  and  the  Pilgrim  becomes  illumined  with  Spirit,  Love,  and
refreshing  Hope ;  with  stronger  Faith,  renewed  Youth,  and  growing
Power  over  all  things  in  the  world ;  transformed  by  Love  into  perfect
Peace.

Resemblances  in  the  Spiritual  world  are  not  those  of  the  physical
form,  but  similitudes,  affinities,  and  semblances  of  mentality,  of  aspi-
rations, and  of  thoughts.

In  these  days  the  £soteric  is  lost  in  the  rubbish  of  the  Exoteric
as  the  Soul  is  lost  in  matter.

But  time  flows  on  in  cycles  vast  in  extent,  and  the  Divine  Princi-
ple gradually  works  out  of  the  rubbish  and  asserts  itself.

The  age  of  higher  nature  of  Spirit  Truths,  called  the  age  of  mira-
cles, is  very  near  at  hand.  The  cycle  of  the  Soul  is  almost  com-
pleted. Already  we  can  catch  glimpses  of  the  first  dim  dawning  of
the  golden  day,  when  one  may  know  the  universe  of  being ;  hiaw  the
realms  of  Spirit  and  Soul ;  know  and  feel  the  transcendental  Love,
and  fathom  the  secrets  of  life  and  the  universe,  and  the  nature  and
immensity  of  the  existences  that  people  it.  A  seeker  after  these
mysteries  must  look  within  his  own  heart  and  see  if  he  have  not
some  secret  selfish  fault  which  is  difficult  to  detect ;  and,  when  he
finds  it,  blot  it  out,  bestowing  his  love  on  others.  This  is  the  first
step  toward  that  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  for  ages  and  from
generations.  "The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  I  speak  not  of
myself,  but  the  Father,  that  dwelleth  in  me.     He  doeth  the  works."

Hope  is  based  on  belief.  It  is  the  anchor  of  the  Soul.  All  faith,
love,  belief,  trust,  and  emotion  of  hope  and  will  are  akin  to  Truth ;
and  he  who  cultivates  these  graces  shall  yet  be  filled  with  the  Spirit
of  eternal  life.

The  Divine  Central  Sun,  Spirit,  serves  to  the  Soul  the  same  uses
our  terrestrial  sun  serves  to  the  physical  body.  There  have  been
men  in  the  past,  and  are  to-day  in  the  world  some,  who  have  pos-
sessed the  control  of  life  in  the  human  body  to  such  a  degree  that
they  live  as  long  as  they  desire  a  human  existence.  Death  has  no
dominion  over  them,  for,  through  unfoldment  of  Spirit,  they  have


424      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

passed  out  from  under  the  law  —  that  is,  the  selfish  animal  body  and
the  controlling  influence  of  public  opinion.  They  live  under  the
guidance  and  grace  of  the  hidden  Spirit,  Wisdom,  through  the  illumi-
nation of  the  Christ  Love  and  Spirit,  relieved  from  the  artificial
restraints  of  conventional  society  and  the  unnatural,  heardess
demands  of  passion ;  everything  new,  free,  and  enchantingly  natural
is  about  them.

Man,  considered  from  a  reunion  of  his  duality  as  one  whole,  is
the  focus  of  all  forces  beneath  and  above  him.  Focalization  is  pro-
gression and  development.  It  is  the  destruction  of  the  old,  the  birth
of  the  new.  The  elixir  of  life  can  only  be  found  at  the  fountain  of
life,  which  is  the  Spirit  of  Duality  concentrated  in  Love.  To  be  bom
again  is  to  renounce  the  objective  attractions  to  one's  self,  to  con-
quer the  sense  of  personality,  and  free  one's  self  of  the  love  of  things
in  the  objective  which  that  personality  desires.  It  means  to  live  in
the  world,  but  not  to  cling  to  the  world ;  to  substitute  a  universal  love
for  the  objective  personal  love  ;  a  change  into  the  subjective  world,
that  one  need  not  be  forced  to  return  to  the  toys  and  ashes  of  this
world ;  for  Spirits  retain  to  a  certain  extent  the  peculiarities  of  their
earth  life,  and  every  man,  whether  in  this  world  or  within  the  Spirit-
ual world,  is  naturally  attracted  to  the  society  of  others  who  are  like
him.  Our  acts  only  are  immortal ;  every  one  of  them  starts  a  series
of  events  that  continues  always,  increasing  and  widening  forever.
He  who  has  no  gross  nor  ignoble  desires  to  serve  is  independent  and
free.  He  has  conquered  matter,  and  his  strife  with  the  Astral  ele-
ments ceases.  He  has  reached  the  true  Spirit  of  love  and  peace.
For  him  discord  can  no  longer  exist,  and  his  purified  elements  will
find  their  responsive  vibrations  in  the  eternal  life  of  the  Universal
Spirit  of  Love.

In  the  descent  of  the  human  race  from  the  Spiritual  to  the  sen-
suous, animal,  and  material  plane,  it  became  necessary,  in  order  to
preserve  the  priceless  Truths  of  Spirit,  to  enclose  them  in  sacred
symbols  addressed  to  sense.  When,  in  a  subsequent  age,  men
should  begin  to  be  unfolded  Spiritually,  the  inner  contents  of  the
symbol  would  be  disclosed,  and  a  certain  symbol  taken  from  nature
would  be  as  enduring  as  time.  On  the  development  and  unfoldment
which  begins  by  the  intuition  within  us,  "there  is  nothing  hidden
which  shall  not  be  revealed ''  to  the  higher  perception  of  Soul  and
Spirit.

Remember  the  philosophy  of  duality,  given  some  pages  back.
There  is  nothing  which  is  not  dual,  and  nothing  which  has  not  its


THE   GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,   THE   HIDDEN  WAY.  425

opposite.    When  one  is  found,  the  other  is  not  far  oft    The  third
thing  or  emotion  which  springs  from  the  chemical  change  when  the
two  forces  or  things  are  united,  is  the  hidden  key.    To  pass  into  the
nature  or  Spiritual  kingdom  of  God,  man  must  be  bom  again,  regen-
erated —  the  entire  man  remade.     Because  these  Spiritual  elements
of  the  higher  kingdom  are  incomprehensible  to  man's  phantasmal,
finite  mind,  mind  and  sense  are  that  which  determine.     This  physical
objective  body  is  of  small  account.     Man  is  full  of  darkness  and
sorrow  on  account  of  the  discord  and  want  of  balance.     He  is  scarce
able  to  generate  enough  magnetism  to  keep  the  human  machine  in
order  more  than  fifty  years  at  best.     Yet  how  easily  might  the  strong,
united  Will  throw  a  flame  across  the  darkened  threshold  of  our  being,
refreshing  and  renewing  life  !     How  easy  to  be  an  overflowing  foun-
tain of  strength  if  we  were  only  wise.     But  man  is  made  up  mainly
of  hereditary  tendencies,  acquired  habits,  and  conventional   ideas,
and  so  is  secondary  and  unnatural.    We  are  simply  creatures  of  art,
because  we  are  less  than  nature.    Nature  is  harmony  and  silence.
It  is  our  voluntary  unnatural  powers  that  ruin  us,  and  it  is  the  invol-
untary which  renews  and  gives  us  what  little  health  we  have.     Nature
must  play  second  part  in  our  daily  walk;   abnormal,  conventional
civilization  is  first  and  uppermost.     We  are  ashamed  of  our  true
natural  life  and  habits,  and  hide  them  away  as  we  cover  our  naked-
ness, and  are  unnatural  creatures  of  two  lives,  two  voices,  trying  to
deceive  even  ourselves,  sickening  and  dying  under  the  burdens  of
our  own  unnatural  nothingness  and  want  of  true  individuality.

The  Universal  and  impersonal  cannot  in  itself  alone  become
personal.  It  can  only  come  in  cantact  with  such  personalities  as  are
able  to  approach  it  harmoniously.

The  highest  does  not  suffer  by  breaking  its  connection  with  the
gross  and  low ;  this  latter  only  suffers  and  dies.  Bodies  and  associa-
tions of  men  may  be  long-lived,  and  like  some  men  compared  with
others  may  be  very  enduring.  The  true  secret  of  their  life  and  en-
durance is  Love,  for  there  is  nothing  permanent  but  the  consciousness
of  Love.  It  is  by  the  truey  higher  lave  that  organized  bodies  of  men
have  been  held  together  for  ages.  Nations  rise  in  glory  and  disap-
pear, and  races  of  men  are  blotted  out  of  existence,  yet  these  remain.
There  may  be  found  to-day  three  of  these  ancient  Orders,  which  are
steadfast  as  a  rock.  Their  Brotherhoods  are  bound  together  by  links
of  love.  While  there  exists  among  the  races  of  men  a  living  con-
sciousness of  love  and  a  consciousness  of  hate,  there  will  continue  the
old  law  of  attraction  and  repulsion.    Love  is  light  and  hate  is  dark-


426       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ness,  but  in  the  end  love  always  conquers,  because  darkness  cannot
destroy  light.

Truly,  Love  is  the  secret  of  life.  The  Pilgrim  who  vibrates  it  in
its  true  sense  fears  nothing  but  passes  silently  on  hb  way.  The
emotions  of  jealous  hatred,  which  were  rushing  to  his  destruction,
obey  him  and  execute  his  orders,  and  he  walks  safely  upon  the  waters
beneath  whose  surface  is  the  abyss  of  death.  He  raises  the  niagic
wand  of  his  Will  and  quiets  the  tempest  raging  in  the  Astral  plane,
while  above  him  shine  the  emotions  in  bright  constellations  formed  of
love,  truth,  knowledge,  and  power,  whose  centre  is  wisdom  and  whose
fountain  can  be  found  in  the  Spiritual  self-consciousness  of  every
human  being.

There  are  secret  Orders  of  true  men,  dear  friends,  friends  in  Jht
rare,  long  friendship  which  no  doubt  dare  ever  assail ;  —  a  friendship
stronger  than  life  —  a  friendship  never  wrought  in  art  nor  found  in
commerce  or  in  science ;  companions  whose  very  presence  brings  joy
and  peace,  whose  very  being  is  good-will  and  affection ;  among  these
far  away  from  the  outer  world  one  is  brought  close  to  the  gateway
that  opens  into  the  summer  land ;  so  close  that  one  catches  glimpses
of  the  beautiful  Spirit  home  across  the  threshold,  and  the  charming
fragrance  of  beautiful  companionship,  where  the  contour  of  face  was
tender  pathos  and  the  grasp  of  hands  betokened  Love.

All  Souls  require  a  sanctuary  of  pure  and  perfect  Love,  which
brings  peace  and  refuge  from  the  storm.

On  these  heights  is  found  repose,  and  on  this  altitude  of  love  the
Soul  finds  rest,  and  wisdom  through  silence  in  its  love.  As  health  b
to  the  body  so  are  wisdom  and  love  to  the  growth  of  the  Soul.  There
is  in  the  higher  companionship  of  men  a  magical  transformation  from
the  animal  to  all  the  graces  that  bloom  in  Love,  Truth,  and  Spirit,
which  the  world  does  not  dream  of.

The  sea-weed  of  the  shore  drifts  by  on  the  tide,  the  odors  of  spicy
groves  float  on  the  wind,  the  birds  come  and  go  as  from  a  near  home,
the  dim  outline  in  the  horizon  is  changing  from  cloud  to  solid  land*
The  quest  is  nearly  ended,  and  now  that  we  are  so  near  as  to  catch
the  ominous  thunder  of  the  turf,  it  is  wiser  to  look  out  for  harbor  and
anchorage  than  run  the  risk  of  breakers.  Is  it  not  time  to  take  new
bearings  from  the  sun  now  that  the  clouds  of  darkness  and  super-
stition are  rolling  away  ?  Call  the  watch  for  the  pilot  of  Love  is  sig-
nalled, who  will  guide  the  bark  safely  at  last  into  the  harbor  of  perfect
peace.


THE  GREAT  MYSTERY;    OR,   THE  HIDDEN  WAY.  42/

**  Oh  I  a  wonderful  stream  is  the  riyer  of  Time,
As  it  runs  through  the  valley  of  tears.
With  a  faultless  rhythm  and  a  musical  rhyme,
And  a  sweep  and  a  surge  sublime,
As  it  blends  with  the  ocean  of  years."

**  Ships  that  pass  in  the  night,  and  speak  each  other  in  passing,
So  on  the  ocean  of  life  we  pass  and  speak  one  another,
Only  a  look  and  a  voice,  then  darkness  again  and  silence.**

It  is  only  one  more  sand  out  of  the  mighty  hour-glass,  and  yet  the
time  neither  adds  to  nor  steals  from  an  atom  in  the  economy  of  the
Infinite.

Remember  well,  and  with  thought,  that  thou  art  to  be  bom  again,
and  strive  that  the  second  birth  may  be  an  ascension.

**  How  the  heart  leaps  up  to  think  of  that  grand  living  after  death.

**  In  beast  and  bird  and  flower  and  all  the  memories  of  Love  in
long  ago.''

For  True  Love  is  Immortal.

Dear  reader,  strive  to  know  yourself ;  to  form  higher  emotion  and
will  and  unite  your  being  in  a  chord  of  harmony,  when  you  will  need
only  to  stretch  out  your  hand  and  pass  into  realms  of  infinite  Spirit.
Meditate,  read,  and  study  in  silence ;  turn  thy  loves  within  and  fear
nothing,  for  no  man  can  injure  thee.  Trust  in  the  power  creative,
and  with  that  power  thou  shalt  command.

One  of  the  greatest  of  all  illusions  is  that  of  Self.  Material  man
looks  upon  himself  as  something  existing  apart,  forgetting  that  what
belongs  to  him  to-day  belonged  yesterday  to  another  and  in  the  con-
tinual change  may  belong  to  another  to-morrow.

Blessed  is  he  whom  the  truth  teaches,  not  by  perishable  emblems
and  words,  but  by  his  own  inherent  powers ;  not  what  may  appear  in
the  shadow,  but  what  really  is.  Illusions  create  illusions,  the  Light
of  truth  and  principle  is  lost  and  the  golden  calf  has  been  put  up  in
its  place,  through  selfishness,  avarice,  and  desire  of  worldly  power.
He  who  endeavors  to  climb  to  heaven  through  such  a  path  will  find
himself  climbing  on  stairs  of  sand,  that  will  engulf  him  soon.

The  essential  office  of  the  Soul  is  to  create,  which  it  does  by
motions  and  emotions.

Thrice  blest  is  he  who  creates  an  emotion  of  higher  Love,  which  is
the  wisdom  of  God ;  a  long  agony  terminating  in  ascension  and  in
consummation.

The  past  is  a  region  to  explore  and  learn  of  it  all  we  can.    It  b


428  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

impossible  to  understand  the  present  without  a  knowledge  of  the  past,
therefore  the  Pilgrim  of  Light  should  contemplate  the  knowledge  of
truth  that  comes  down  from  the  ages,  without  prejudice  or  bias  but
with  kindly  reason  and  pure  desire  to  gain  all  the  knowledge  that  the
past  can  give,  and  supplement  it  with  all  that  is  known  in  the  present,
but  with  face  set  steadfastly  toward  the  dawn  of  a  more  luminous  day,
of  a  larger  knowledge,  and  of  loftier  outlook  in  the  future.  Science  is
just  beginning  to  awake.  She  is  making  an  effort  to  hunt  down  the
hidden  way  of  life.  Having  denied  the  Astral  body  and  the  Astral
world  so  long,  she  is  now  spending  much  valuable  time  in  creating
new  names.

In  her  fastidious  weakness,  she  is  too  small  to  accept  the  Truth
unless  it  come  to  her  in  gorgeous  apparel.

Let  us  labor,  therefore,  to  enter  into  that  rest,  lest  any  man  fall
after  the  same  example  of  unbelief.  For  the  word  of  God  is  quick
and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to
the  dividing  asunder  of  Soul  and  Spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow,
and  is  a  discemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Neither
is  there  any  creature  that  is  not  manifest  in  His  sight ;  but  all  things
are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  da
— Heb,  iv. :  11-13.

The  Unitarian  Review  of  November,  1886,  contains  an  article  from
the  prolific  pen  of  Rev.  M.  J.  Savage  which  attracts  much  attention.
He  enters  a  strong  protest  ^  against  both  the  shallow  and  flippant
scientific  disdain  of  these  questions,  and  the  airy,  aristocratic,  dille-
tante  indifference  with  which  theologians  treat  them."

When  men  and  women  learn  these  vibrations,  then  will  humanity
indeed  become  Divine.  Then  will  the  glorious  sunshine  of  a  new,
ample,  and  inclusive  Spiritual  revelation  cause  the  mists  of  supersti-
tion on  the  one  hand,  and  those  of  doubt  and  darkness  on  the  other,
to  evaporate,  never  to  condense  again  around  the  minds  of  the  inhab-
iants  of  earth  and,  the  spheres  immediately  surrounding  it.  Like  the
blind  who  have  had  their  sight  restored,  truth  and  knowledge  flash  at
once  upon  their  minds.

They  grow  into  a  mental  illumination,  and  never  for  a  moment  de-
sire to  exchange  the  light  of  Spirit  for  a  theory  or  doctrine  of  the  past.
The  process  of  the  fire  and  crucible  of  suffering  may  have  left  deep
scars  and  bent  forms,  but  the  memory  of  all  that  is  soon  tranquillized,
chastened,  and  reconciled  in  the  gentle  luxury  and  ecstasy  of  Absolute
Love.  They  have  entered  into  the  eternal  gates  of  the  Temple  of
Truth  and  found  the  glorious  Spirit  of  Love  in  all  celestial  radiance.


THE  GREAT   MYSTERY  ;    OR,    THE   HIDDEN   WAY.  429

Love  and  Truth  conquer  all  things,  and  all  sincere  hearts  of  honest
fidelity  thirst  for  the  shadows  of  Her  Angelic  wings  and  the  guidance
of  Her  hand.

To  Her  such  an  one  may  speak  thus :  As  an  infant  that  longs  for
the  moon,  my  being  was  one  vague  desire  for  something  never  to  be
attained.  Now  I  feel  rather  as  if  to  think  of  Thee  sufficed  to  remove
every  fetter  from  my  Spirit.  I  float  in  the  still  seas  of  light,  and
nothing  seems  too  high  for  my  wings,  too  glorious  for  my  eyes.  It
was  mine  ignorance  that  made  me  fear  Thee.  A  knowledge  that  is
not  in  books  seems  to  breathe  around  Thee  as  an  atmosphere.  How
little  have  I  read !  how  little  have  I  learned !  Yet  when  Thou  art  by
my  side,  it  seems  as  if  the  veil  were  lifted  from  all  wisdom  and  all
nature.  I  marvel  even  when  I  look  at  the  words  I  have  written ;  they
seem  not  to  come  from  myself,  but  are  the  signs  of  another  language
which  Thou  hast  taught  my  heart,  and  which  my  hand  traces  rapidly
as  at  thy  dictation.  Sometimes,  while  I  write  or  muse,  I  could  fancy
that  I  heard  light  wings  hovering  around  me,  and  saw  dim  shapes
of  beauty  floating  round,  and  vanishing  as  they  smiled  upon  me.
No  unquiet  and  fearful  dream  ever  comes  to  me  now  in  sleep,  yet
sleep  and  waking  are  alike  but  as  one  dream.  In  sleep,  I  wander
with  Thee,  not  through  the  paths  of  earth,  but  through  impalpable
air — an  air  which  seems  a  music  —  upward  and  onward,  as  the  Soul
mounts  on  the  tones  of  a  lyre !  Till  I  knew  Thee,  I  was  a  slave  to
the  earth.  Thou  hast  given  me  the  liberty  of  the  universe  I  Before,
it  was  life ;  it  seems  to  me  now  as  if  I  had  commenced  eternity !

To  cultivate  and  learn  the  dual  forces  is  to  learn  how  to  die  and
be  perpetual ;  to  avoid  being  a  slave ;  to  become  a  triumph  in  death
as  in  life,  and  when  the  hour  of  transition  comes  to  pass  on  smoothly
as  the  green  ocean  in  a  silent  calm.

The  author  hopes  for  the  indulgence  of  generous  readers  of  this
chapter  in  which  were  some  blank  spaces  which  he  was  obliged  by
high  authority  to  leave  in  silence.  At  some  future  day  that  which  is
omitted  may  be  given  to  the  world,  but  at  present,  like  the  words  of
which  Paul  speaks,  they  are  not  lawful  to  utter.  Time  reveals  all
things,  therefore  be  patient.  Would  you,  Dear  Pilgrim,  approach  the
presence  of  the  Living  God  without  the  vestal  fires  kindled  within  your
lamp  J  or  near  the  confines  of  death  without  a  Guiding  hand?

If  you  were  to  have  revealed  to  you  all  these  hidden  powers  while
yet  in  an  unprepared  state,  the  ears  that  heard  and  the  tongue  that
told  them  would  feel  the  evil  result  of  rashness.


430      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Dear  Reader,  learn  to  know  thyself,  from  that  thou  canst  know
all;  then  keep  thyself  unknown  and  follow  the  path  that  is  silent
Patience!  Wouldst  thou  burst  through  the  animal  and  selfish  bar-
riers of  thy  nature  and  awake  to  find  thyself  in  a  strange  land,  know-
ing not  the  language  nor  the  way ;  through  error  and  ignorance  mak-
ing that  which  should  be  gloiy  thy  shame  ?  that  which  should  bring
strength,  produce  weakness  ?  that  which  should  bring  power  and  exal-
tation, bring  degradation  ?

Patience  and  Silence !  and  strive  to  illuminate  your  Soul  with
Spirit  understanding,  till  your  Soul  and  entity  of  being  enjoy  the
right  to  go  freely  in  and  out,  like  the  perfected  Souls  of  Angels  who
are  established  messengers  of  the  living  God.

When  the  mystic  veil  of  man's  dual  force  is  lifted  and  the  forces
of  the  Soul  revealed  as  they  really  are,  the  spell  which  has  been  so
secret  and  so  sacred,  one  of  the  profoundest  mysteries  of  ancient  and
modem  times,  will  be  broken  and  the  human  mind  be  free  to  roam
over  the  glorious  realms  of  the  Spirit  firmaments  and  the  immortal
domain  of  light  and  truth.  Then  will  the  Souls  of  humanity  be
quickly  ripened,  and  live  forever  in  the  interior  of  the  Spiritual  hem-
isphere.

All  the  teachings  of  all  the  Christs  pivot  on  the  golden  point  kA
unselfish  Love.  There  are  ten  thousand  things  of  thought  and  fancy
and  of  feeling ;  but  every  one  strikes  at  the  hour,  this  one  sovereign
note  unselfish  Love,  without  creed,  or  sect  or  regard  to  any  of  the
educational  apparatus  of  the  church  or  times.  The  only  unity  God
wishes  and  desires,  the  only  unity  the  world  will  ever  see,  is  the  unity
of  Spirit  and  Love.

In  the  Love  of  purer  day,  trust  in  the  God  that  made  thee,  and
follow  the  sea  that  is  silent.


4^#


CHAPTER  XIV.

THE  MANY  MANSIONS.

In  vaj  Father's  house  are  many  mansions.    If  it  were  not  so  I  would  hare  told  yoik    I  fo  to  pnr
pare  a  fdaoe  for  you.  -~John  xiv.:  a.

By  which  also  he  went  and  preached  unto  the  Spirits  in  prison.^  i  Pettr  in. :  19.

Out  of  the  deep,  my  child,  out  of  the  deep
From  that  true  world  within  the  world  we  see.
Whereof  our  world  is  ))ut  the  bounding  shore.

There  seems  to  be  a  confusion  of  ideas  regarding  the  spheres.
Some  Spirits  who  return  to  earth,  speaking  of  the  various  spheres  of
Spirit-life,  mean  simply  and  solely  the  various  gradations  of  Spiritual
expansion  and  development,  and,  as  they  rise  from  one  condition  of
Soul  attainment  to  a  loftier  conception  of  life,  to  a  more  expansive
view,  and  to  the  understanding  of  higher  labors,  assure  us  they  have
ascended  to  a  higher  sphere,  which  is  correct,  and  yet  such  Spirits
may  not  have  changed  the  locality  in  which  they  have  been  dwelling
since  passing  to  the  Spirit  world ;  they  have  only  increased  their
ideas  and  perceptions  of  the  life  around  them.

Others,  coming  to  us,  employ  the  term  sphere  in  speaking  of  a
change  of  location,  and  declare  they  have  passed  from  one  vicinity
to  another  in  the  Spirit  world,  taking  upon  themselves  new  surround-
ings and  conditions  of  life.

There  is,  undoubtedly,  a  Spiritual  and  Astral  counterpart,  which  is
a  land  of  reality  as  tangible  to  disembodied  Souls  as  this  earth  to
mortals,  comprising  worlds  and  waters,  hills  and  valleys,  and  furnish-
ing an  abode  to  those  departed  Spirits  who  have  ascended  from  the
mortal,  yet  we  hear  it  distinctly  declared  that  there  are  other  worlds
in  space  inhabitable  by  exalted  and  refined  intelligences.  Spirits  do  not
always  speak  of  these  worlds  as  spheres ;  they  do  not  always  say  that  such
and  such  a  Spirit  has  passed  on  to  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  or  seventh
sphere,  although  it  may  have  reaped  all  the  experience  it  is  possible
for  him  to  attain  on  the  Spiritual  counterpart  of  this  planet,  and  have
ascended  to  higher  and  more  exalted  Spiritual  worlds,  there  to  take
up  a  grander  discipline  and  a  larger  experience.    There  are  many

43"


432  THE  HIDDEN  WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

such  worlds.  They  do  not  overlap  each  other,  but  are  scattered
about  in  space.  As  a  Spirit  gains  in  power  and  in  understanding  of
its  own  possibilities,  and  learns  to  make  use  of  its  own  interior  Will
force,  it  passes  onward  to  reap  still  grander  experiences  in  some  one
of  these  worlds  of  which  we  speak.  Man  is  man  in  whatever  world
he  may  be,  and  unless  he  was  transformed  by  a  renewing  of  hb  mind
and  illumination  of  his  Soul  with  Love  while  in  this  world,  he  is  in
no  way  changed  in  feeling  or  in  nature  by  the  simple  act  of  removal

It  was  concerning  men  in  the  world  of  Spirits  known  as  the  lower
firmament  or  intermediate  state  that  the  apostle  wrote  when  he  said
Christ  preached  to  the  Spirits  in  prison.  These  were,  no  doubt,  dis-
embodied Souls  who  were  in  the  intermediate  state,  which  was  called
prison,  because  it  was  not  their  final  state,  but  one  out  of  which  they
might  be  lifted  by  instruction  in  truth  and  love.  It  is  evident  from
the  context  that  they  were  not  in  heaven,  for  it  is  said  they  were
aforetime  disobedient.  But  truth  and  love  are  the  liberating  forces
in  all  worlds,  and  into  this  glorious  sunlight  all  may  come  and  find
their  heaven,  fleeing  away  from  all  evil,  error,  and  selfishness,  on
which  the  hells  are  founded.

Spirit  friends  are  most  tender  and  loving  advisers  whose  counsel
should  be  gratefully  received  and  carefully  considered,  and  of  the
thousands  of  these  silent  visitors,  when  have  they  not  said  at  every
opportunity,  "  Love  one  another.  Drop  from  your  lives  all  selfish-
ness "  ?  Their  simple  admonition  to  cultivate  Love  in  every  breast  has
mastered  and  outgrown  all  the  lordly  human  wisdom  of  both  ancients
and  moderns.  All  philosophies  and  theosophies  have  faded  and  fallen
before  this  one  precept,  "  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that
ye  love  one  another."  Yet,  even  at  this  day  and  hour,  how  few
heed  it.    Alas !  alas !

**  As  with  deceit  and  fraud  and  lies  they  make
Chains  which  no  shackled  Soul  can  hreak."

Here  in  this  life  the  robes  of  honor  are  worn  by  dishonorable
men ;  in  the  other  life  it  will  not  be  so.  The  light  from  the  temple
within  will  clothe  itself  with  a  corresponding  exterior.  If  our  Spiritual
bodies  are  composed  of  the  substance  of  goodness  and  truth,  we  shall
be  clothed  with  pure  robes.  But  if  they  be  composed  of  selfishness,
vanity,  and  evil,  which  are  ^'t  falsehoods  of  life,  we  shall  be  clothed
with  the  filthy  rags  of  impurity.     There  is  no  variation  to  this  law.

You  have  doubtless  received  Spiritual  communications  telling  you
such  a  Spirit  was  in  the  first,  second,  third,  or,  it  may  be,  in  the


THE  MANY   MANSIONS.  433

seventh  sphere  of  Spiritual  existence.  Seven  is  always  employed  as
the  harmonic  number  of  twelve,  which  signifies  completion;  and
attunement  of  the  seventh  sphere  means  arrival  at  that  condition  of
Spiritual  advancement  or  growth  which  allows  of  the  Spirit's  perfect
control  over  the  ether  substance  which  binds  planets  together  in  the
unity  of  a  system  in  obedience  to  the  law  of  interchange  of  force,  by
means  of  which  all  planets  influence  each  other,  while  to  a  greater
degree  all  are  influenced  by  the  central  orb  or  sun.  It  is  the  voice  of
the  Soul  alone  which  can  declare  truthfully  concerning  its  own  nature
and  destiny.  In  the  busy  rush  of  external  business,  the  hurry  and
bustle  of  daily  life,  the  noise  and  jar  of  controversy,  the  voice  of  the
Soul  is  not  heard  and  never  can  be.  Therefore  the  superlative  wis-
dom of  those  wisest  of  all  the  wise  men  of  the  East,  who  declare  that
contemplation,  meditation,  or  a  state  of  mind  even  beyond  this  was
necessary  to  communion  with  life  itself,  and  to  an  understanding  of
the  laws  and  principles  of  the  universe.

An  unseen  world  lies  on  beyond  the  seen  world ;  a  higher  stage  in
the  development  of  nature,  toward  which  the  material  creation  b
pressing.  Every  most  solid  form  of  matter  is  capable  of  being  subli-
mated into  a  spiritual  matter.  The  human  body  is  the  laboratory  in
which  life  is  preparing  the  materials  for  a  finer  body.  This  unseen
world  carries  every  force  of  the  seen  world  to  a  higher  power.  We
can  scarcely  help  feeling  that  when  a  solid  body  is  volatilized  there  is
a  loss  of  energy,  but  matter,  in  passing  through  the  transformation
from  a  lower  and  sensible  form  to  a  higher  and  invisible  one,  in
reality  develops  a  higher  potency.

No  life  of  inaction  is  visioned  to  us  in  the  passing  of  life  trom  the
physical  to  the  Spiritual  body,  but  a  life  of  fuller,  mightier  activity  in
the  unseen  world  ;  studying  and  mastering  the  transcendent  energies
of  the  invisible  ethereal  spheres,  as  the  lower  powers  of  the  fleshly
body  now  study  and  master  the  lower  forces  of  the  seen  world.

Little  children  symbolize  the  receptivities  of  the  heavenly  life.
The  humble  heart  sheltered  away  from  the  storms  of  passion,  and  all
vestured  over  with  the  fragrant  blossoms  of  sweet  affection,  is  often
nearer  in  Spirit  to  the  Angels  than  is  the  cold  philosopher.  As  an
actor  conscious  or  voluntary,  a  child  is  nothing.  The  profoundest
mystery  yet  is  the  origin  of  child  life.  It  is  an  unexplored  history.
The  sublimest  results  are  often  there  and  yet  not  a  step  can  we  trace
backward  with  definiteness,  and  know  the  cause  of  which  this  is  the
little  effect.  The  future  beams  with  revelations  in  their  behalf,  but
the  past  of  each  child,  the  collected  particles,  who  can  guess  ?    The


434      '^^11^  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOUX

great  sphinx,  standing  alone  in  Egypt  half  buried  in  the  sandi  what
mind  conceived,  what  hand  carved  it  ?  What  has  it  to  say  for  itself,
and  who  shall  speak  for  it  ?  Yet  every  cradle  has  a  sphinx  nsore  un-
readable, more  mysterious  than  the  old  sphinx  of  the  desert.  The
very  moral  qualities  which  distinguish  the  good  from  the  bad,  all  the
fidelities,  the  effluences  of  love,  were  developed  in  man  ;  yea,  anterior
to  his  existence  on  earth,  the  higher  forms  of  animal  life  were  devel-
oped from  the  love  in  which  parents  care  for  their  offspring.  It  is
the  outflow  of  the  unpolluted  fountain  of  spontaneous  affection.  It  is
the  very  yeast  of  heaven,  the  one  quality  not  bom  from  below,  but
infixed  in  universal  nature.  And  there  is  no  love  so  spontaneous,  no
love  that  hath  in  it  so  little  of  the  influence  and  motive  that  actuates
every  other  part  of  life,  as  the  simple,  indispensable,  irresistible  love
which  parents  have  for  new-bom  children,  and  at  every  step  onwaid
until  they  begin  to  be  men.

'*  Except  ye  be  bom  again,"  of  the  Spirit  of  Love  and  Tmtb,  and
*' become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven."

Children  are  more  to  men  than  the  church  or  temple ;  they  are
the  very  foundation  on  which  our  religious  instmction  is  founded,  and
we  work  by  those  great  natural  instincts  and  impulses  into  a  kind  of
practical  gospel  for  the  enlightenment  and  salvation  of  mankind.  He
who  reads  the  teachings  of  the  Judean  Prince  cannot  deny  the  Script-
ure which  asserts  that  guardian  Angels  are  assigned  to  little  children
that  in  heaven  they  do  ever  behold  the  face  of  the  Father.

The  passage  from  the  seen  to  the  unseen  world  necessitates  no
loss  of  material  identity.  When  life  comes  out  from  the  unseen  into
the  seen  world,  there  is  a  continuance  of  identity.  Open  the  seed
from  which  this  mysterious  development  is  coming  forth,  and  you  will
find  therein  a  spectral  pre-formation  of  the  plant.  Wrapped  in  each
tiny  seed  is  the  ghost-like  form  which  is  to  come  to  birth  in  a  more
solid  material  shape.  Is  this  no  hint  conceming  the  second  birth?
If  these  hints  of  nature  be  not  illusions,  there  ought  to  be  further
hints  of  such  a  Spiritual  organism  in  man  as  he  now  lives  upon  earth,
and  it  seems  that  in  the  weird  and  eerie  phenomena  of  occultism,
mesmerism,  and  Spiritualism  —  all  as  old  as  man  and  widespread  as
his  presence  on  earth  —  we  have  the  indications  of  such  a  mysterious
inner  organism.  Out  of  this  strange,  bewildering  region  may  come
to  us,  perhaps  in  the  next  generation,  the  material  for  a  scientific
conception  of  man's  nature,  which  will  carry  in  it  the  promise  and
potency  of  a  life  to  come.     There  may  soon  come  a  day  when  science


THE  MANY  MANSIONS.  435

win  torn  priest,  and,  standing  before  the  veil  of  the  temple  of  life,
shall  lift  it  so  far  as  to  let  us  see  into  the  land  not  very  far  off,  mystic,
wonderful,  beautiful.

Everything  being  either  objective  or  subjective  according  to  the
state  of  development  and  consciousness,  that  which  appears  entirely
subjective  in  one  state  may  appear  objective  in  another.  Every  one
knows  what  is  meant  by  the  truth  or  falsity  of  a  doctrine ;  the  im-
morality or  morality  of  a  practice ;  the  beauty  of  good  or  the  deformity
of  evil ;  and  yet  these  are  but  abstract  ideas,  which  cannot  be  seen
with  the  natural  eye  nor  perceived  by  any  of  the  physical  senses.
They  are,  nevertheless,  as  real  as  and  much  more  enduring  than  the
attributes  of  forms  on  the  physical  plane,  having  produced  an  image  to
the  interior  sight  and  a  lasting  impression  on  the  Astral  magno.  To
him  who  can  realize  the  highest  truths  they  have  an  objective  exist-
ence, whether  seen  by  the  natural  eye  or  the  interior  Spiritual  one.
The  grossest  and  most  impure  thoughts  or  material  forms  have  no
ezbtence  for  him  who  has  grown  no  senses  to  perceive  them.  **  To
the  pure,  all  things  are  pure."

A  time  will  come  in  our  future  development  when  the  printed
book  will  be  no  longer  needed.  Man,  having  developed  his  inner
Soul  senses,  will  be  enabled  to  study  the  truths  of  all  things  without
the  assistance  of  books  or  teachers.  The  mental  vision  of  the  Gnostic
is  able  to  penetrate  the  Soul  of  things,  even  if  this  natural  body  is
bound  to  the  planet  during  his  life.  His  Astral  body  and  intellect
ascend  and  fly  through  space  like  the  flight  of  eagles.  He  will
enter  the  Truth  and  solve  the  problems  now  unknown  and  unknow-
able to  the  children  of  men.

It  is  assuredly  true,  Pilgrim  of  Light,  that  you  shall  one  day  meet
your  loved  darlings  in  the  land  of  light  They  may  perchance  be
waiting  for  your  assistance.  Therefore  press  on  for  an  entrance  into
the  Soul  world,  which  is  the  only  solace  for  which  you  have  yearned
since  you  have  looked  up  from  the  chilly  world  of  iconoclastic
materialism,  and  become  aware  that  there  are  vast  theatres  of  tran-
scendental knowledge  to  be  traversed,  into  which  few  mortals  have
as  yet  been  fully  inducted.

The  classification  of  the  growth  of  Souls  is  based  upon  their
degree  of  advancement  and  the  imperfections  from  which  they  kave
still  to  be  freed.  It  is  only  classification,  however,  and  is  by  no  means
absolute.  The  system  adopted  by  the  Bible  teachings  may  be  more
or  less  complete,  and  is  adopted  by  the  highest  occult  students  of  the
day.     It  may  be  more  or  less  rational,  but  is  more  convenient  for  the


436      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

understanding  of  the  public  at  large,  but,  however  that  may  be^  the
facts  of  the  science  which  employs  them  are  not  changed.

All  intelligences  are  not  attributes  of  the  vital  principle,  for
plants  live  and  do  not  think.  They  have  only  organic  life,  and  yet
through  their  inner  life  or  Star  magno,  the  Astral  body,  they  show
much  intelligence  in  searching  for  light  or  moisture,  as  is  frequendy
seen  by  placing  some  vessel  containing  water  near  a  thirsty  vine  in  a
dry  season,  and  observing  how  quickly  the  tendrils  will  change  their
course  and  grow  toward  the  water.

All  men  are  brothers  by  virture  of  their  common  relation  to  the
Absolute  Creator,  because  they  are  animated  by  the  same  Spirit  and
tend  toward  the  same  goal.  But  the  growths  of  Soul  and  Spirit  are
so  different  as  to  time  of  the  new  birth  and  ripening,  that  a  demar-
cation and  line  of  caste  must  necessarily  be  the  result  in  this  life.
The  human  mind  is  always  prone  to  attach  too  literal  a  meaning  to
statements  which  are  of  necessity  imperfect  and  incomplete.  Ex-
perience shows  us  that  there  is  a  gradation  or  caste  in  the  next  world,
just  as  marked  as  among  the  dwellers  here  on  earth.  Souls  of  the
departed  of  the  same  degree,  the  same  character,  and  animated  by
the  same  sentiments  are  united  in  groups  and  families;  but  the
number  of  groups  is  incalculable.

Communications  from  the  higher  intelligences  generally  adnut  the
existence  of  three  principal  categories  or  main  divisions.  In  the
lowest  of  these  is  the  imperfect  unripened  fruit.

Those  of  the  second  are  just  opening  to  the  light,  while  later  on
the  moral  nature  grows  over  the  material  instincts,  and  the  control  of
passions  over  the  selfishness  of  natural  life.

In  the  brightest  firmament  a  great  desire  to  do  good  grows  to  self-
abnegation  in  place  of  self-preservation,  and  continues  to  grow,  reach-
ing at  last  the  state  of  pure  Spiritual  ripening,  when  the  union  of  the
Soul  and  its  Archetype,  or  the  uniting  of  the  male  and  female  ele-
ment into  one,  forms  the  birth  of  Angelhood  or  the  Perfect  Spirit.

The  great  winged  globe  of  the  Egyptians  represents  this  idea,
which  is  one  of  their  Two  Truths.

Animal  bodies  or  matter  can  only  be  rendered  highly  intelligent
by  the  union  of  the  Soul  of  the  animal  with  Spirit

Souls,  embodied  or  disembodied,  are  the  work  of  God,  just  as  a
machine  is  the  work  of  mechanic.  The  machine  b  the  man's  work
but  not  the  man.

When  a  man  has  made  a  fine  or  useful  thing,  he  calls  it  his  duld.


THE  MANY   MANSIONS.  437

his  creation.  It  is  thus  with  us  in  relation  to  God.  We  are  Hi«
children  in  this  sense,  because  we  are  His  work.

The  number  of  orders  of  Souls  in  their  progression  through  Spirit
life  is  unlimited,  because  there  is  nothing  like  a  barrier  or  line  of
demarcation  between  the  different  degrees  of  elevation  or  growth,
except  the  powerful  law  of  attraction  and  repulsion.

Considering  the  general  characteristics  of  Souls  growing  into
ripening  of  Spirit,  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  classify  them  by  the
three  principal  orders  before  mentioned,  as  lower,  middle,  and  upper
firmaments*

The  lowest  orders  are  in  a  chaotic  state  of  numbness,  groping
still  in  darkness.  They  grow  in  time  to  realize  that  they  are  still
alive.  They  are  characterized  by  ignorance,  love  of  evil  and  all  the
lowest  passions,  which  retard  their  progress  upward.  Slowly  yet
surely  —  for  time  is  as  nothing — they  reach  the  middle  firmament,
where  a  full  activity  opens  out

Here  at  first  some  are  inactive  and  neutral,  like  one  who  awakens
from  long  sleep.  They  do  neither  good  nor  ill.  Others  take  pleas-
ure in  evil,  and  are  delighted  to  find  an  opportunity  for  carrying  out
their  peculiar  desires  and  pet  ideas,  no  matter  how  wrong  they  may
be.  Others  again  are  frivolous,  foolish,  fantastic,  mischievous  rather
than  wicked,  tricky  rather  than  positively  malicious,  amusing  them-
selves by  mystifying  the  human  beings  on  whom  they  are  able  to  act,
and  misleading  all  who  listen  to  them,  causing  various  petty  annoy-
ances for  their  own  diversion,  until  a  little  more  light,  let  in  by  some
Angel  opening  the  door  of  their  perceptions  and  aspirations,  until  the
Absolute  Love  reaches  them,  then  they  begin  to  grow  and  to  aspire
for  more  light.  Some  become  distinguished  by  their  scientific
knowledge,  their  wisdom,  and  their  kindness;  but  all  have  still  to
undergo  the  discipline  of  trial  through  temptation  and  suffering.

Picture  an  unripe  Soul  in  an  almost  helpless  condition,  amid  the
darkness,  black  as  midnight,  in  a  barren  wilderness  without  the
smallest  vestige  of  light,  heat,  or  vegetation.  All  is  a  barren  waste,
a  howling  wilderness.  Souls  entangled  and  hanging  together ;  groups
of  smaller  numbers  attracted  by  some  strong  and  violent  animality
that  congealed  them  while  on  earth ;  and  numerous  lonely  wanderers
groping  from  year  to  year  through  this  desert ;  some  for  short  periods,
some  even  a  thousand  years.  One  year  on  earth  gives  a  Soul  an  op-
portunity for  growth  which  takes  hundreds — aye,  thousands — of  years
in  the  lower  firmament  if  not  begun  till  then.    Imagine  the  condition

•  See  mnstratiao.


438      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

of  these.  Souls  who  were  intolerant  and  cruel  to  those  about  them;
Souls  who  lived  to  deceive  and  delude  others^  now  themselves
deceived  the  most;  for  h^-pocrisy  makes  link  by  link  a  chain  that
requires  ages  to  unloose.  One  in  whom  the  animal  passions  predom-
inate ;  who  has  never  made  an  effort  to  control  his  anger,  revenge,  or
lust,  but  living  has  left  a  scar  to  mark  his  trail  through  this  fair  earth,
is  now  attracted  to  bands  of  others  like  himself,  in  these  regions^  dari^
to  them  only  by  reason  of  the  mighty  sackcloth  and  impenetrable
covering  woven  by  their  works  during  earth-life.

The  solitary  ones  are  in  worse  state.  These  are  they  who  in  earth
life  drove  away  all  love ;  those  who  returned  the  little  kindnesses  and
friendships  of  family  and  acquaintances  with  anger  and  hatred ;  those
from  whom  they  who  were  weaker  and  more  helpless  received  only
ingratitude  and  injustice  ;  those  who  gave  a  stone  when  others  asked
for  bread.  Now  all  these  wander  about  in  their  gloomy  course  without
hope,  cursing,  despairing,  and  lamenting  their  unhappy  lot,  appar-
ently forgotten  of  God  and  man.  But  not  so.  Angels  are  ever  striv-
ing to  open  their  eyes  to  Spirit  Truth,  and  the  great  Absolute  Love.
At  last,  some  more  quickly  than  others,  they  begin  to  see  and  then  to
grow  toward  the  light  of  Truth,  This  is  the  labor  of  the  Angels.
But  not  until  there  is  a  giving  up  of  all  errors  of  the  past,  a  loosen-
ing from  the  lower  animal  nature  in  man,  can  a  breach  be  made  in
the  hitherto  impenetrable  armor  of  the  Soul,  and  the  first  drops  of
genial  rain  of  Absolute  Love  and  Spirit  influence  reach  him.  Then  he
begins  to  see  objects  around  him.  He  sees  other  forms  dimly  as  one
discerns  through  fog.  He  becomes  alive  to  sweet  sounds,  and,  with
his  new  thoughts,  new  feelings,  and  the  opening  of  his  senses,  he  first
realizes  that  he  has  been  born  again,  out  of  that  sleep  St.  Paul  men-
tions.    We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  be  changed.

Assistance  to  growth  being  more  of  an  action  upon  matter  than
for  intelligence  or  mentality,  higher  intelligences  who  desire  to  pro-
duce physical  manifestations  usually  employ  Souls  of  subaltern  degree
as  their  auxiliaries.  Thus  they  assist  the  lower  Soul  into  more  men-
tal action,  and  in  good  time  help  them  into  the  middle  firmament.

All  Soul-Spirits  arc  able  to  produce  some  kind  of  physical  phenom-
ena ;  but  Spirits  of  elevated  degree,  not  desiring  the  pain  of  contact
with  our  grosser  animal  bodies,  usually  come  as  an  overshadowing,
inspirational  light,  Infusing  into  the  mind  of  man  thoughts  beyond  his
normal  capacity.  They  usually  leave  the  grosser  phenomena  to  those
of  a  lower  order.  Much  if  not  all  the  manifestations  and  endeavors
to  make  known  their  presence  by  the  phenomena  perceptible  to  the


tHB  ItANV  liANStOHS.  439

grosser  senses,  such  as  abnormal  displacement  of  solid  bodies,  raps,
and  boisterous  noises,  are  thus  produced.  At  times  this  class  of  Souls
is  used  by  the  higher  intelligences  to  warn  mankind,  or  by  some
higher  Soul  to  reach  a  loved  one  left  behind  on  earth  for  whom  noth-
ing but  some  violent  shock  or  noise  would  suffice  to  call  attention.

Souls  on  being  roused  from  their  chaotic  sleep  are  more  attached
to  matter  and  the  animal  man  than  any  other  class.  They  seem  to
be  the  principal  agents  in  determining  the  vicissitudes  of  the  elements
of  the  globe,  and  to  act  upon  the  air,  water,  fire,  and  the  various
bodies  in  the  interior  of  the  earth.  Having  been  just  awakened  and
become  inhabitants  of  the  middle  firmament,  these  Souls  who  have
partially  thrown  off  the  coverings  and  emerged  into  a  sort  of  dreamy
unreality  of  haziness,  begin  to  see  the  clothing  with  which  they  have
been  covered  and  the  drapery  of  their  own  weaving.  Their  whole
past  becomes  as  an  open  book  before  them,  and  they  come  to  a  full
realization  of  their  immortality.

The  mortal  body  may  have  been  dissolved  into  its  original  ele-
ments, but  here  is  the  body  indestructible,  eternal  in  the  heavens,
and  here  again  they  are  free  to  grow.

It  is  not  usually  the  Souls  who  are  in  the  lowest  conditions  or
lower  firmament,  nor  the  solitary  wretched  wanderers,  who  return  to
earth.  They  are  prisoners  and  cannot  return  to  individuals  here ;
but  most  of  the  Souls  who  do  come  back  are  found  in  the  first  plane
of  the  middle  firmament,  beyond  which  no  growth  and  uplifting  influ-
ence has  yet  been  strong  enough  to  carry  them.  Souls  in  this  sphere,
by  the  law  of  attraction,  band  themselves  together  in  groups,  accord-
ingly as  they  have  secretly  striven  and  grown  on  earth.  Each  band
unites  for  the  purpose  of  working  out  some  scheme,  frequently  a  mali-
cious and  disorderly  one,  through  the  instrumentality  of  Souls  still  in
the  body.  Many  of  the  blackest  deeds  of  mischief  done  by  men  are
first  hatched  by  the  low,  unripened  Souls  who  seldom  lack  a  fitting
instrument  to  execute  their  work  on  earth.  Such  disembodied  Souls
as  these  are  at  the  bottom  of  much  of  the  misery  and  wickedness
existing  in  the  world.  They  come  to  sensitive,  negative  mediums
with  all  the  fairness  and  apparent  purity  of  Angels  of  light,  tempting
their  victims  into  confidence  by  high-sounding  honeyed  words  and
flattering  promises,  luring  them  into  crimes  against  the  world  and
their  own  Souls,  and,  their  work  being  accomplished,  leave  the  tool
to  the  consequences.

Beware,  dear  reader,  of  the  companionship  of  evil  thoughts.  Such
Souls  come  through  revenge,  anger,  hypocrisy,  and  deceit,  and  often


440      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

prompt  to  self-destruction.  He  who  deliberately  takes  his  own  life
steals  from  his  Maker,  and  destroys  the  opportunity  conferred  on
him  for  becoming  in  a  natural  way  and  through  the  discipline  of  earth
life  a  perfect  vessel  for  the  seed  of  Spirit  Light,  a  good  and  useful
member  of  the  world  of  Spirit  work  in  the  ages  to  come.

The  Soul  that  has  not  started  in  Spiritual  growth  during  earth
life,  on  first  reaching  the  middle  firmament,  finds  a  renewal  of  action
and  observation  after  its  long  chaotic  sleep.  Some  will  see  the  happi-
ness enjoyed  by  more  advanced  Souls,  and  will  be  caused  much  tor-
ment by  the  sight.  Others  experience  all  the  agonies  produced  by
envy  and  jealousy,  and  by  communion  with  this  grade  of  Souls  a
negative  medium  will  sometimes  be  overshadowed  by  the  same  pro-
pensities and  inclinations.  The  unhappy  medium  often  endures  pain-
ful suffering  and  agonies  which  are  as  real  to  himself  as  to  the  invisible
intelligence  that  controls  him.  In  this  middle  firmament,  the  Soul,
at  the  outset,  seems  to  preserve  the  remembrance  and  perception  of
the  sufferings  of  corporeal  life,  and  this  impression  is  often  more
painful  than  the  reality.  They  suffer,  in  fact,  both  from  the  ills  they
have  themselves  endured,  and  from  those  they  have  inflicted  upon
others.

Spirits,  on  first  entering  into  the  middle  firmament,  are  often  in-
clined to  evil,  and  make  it  the  object  of  all  their  thoughts  and  activi-
ties. As  advisers  they  give  to  man  perfidious  counsels,  stir  up  discords
and  distrust,  and  assume  every  sort  of  mask  in  order  the  more  effect-
ually to  deceive.  The  writer  has  had  personal  knowledge  of  these.
Communications  at  time  being  given  under  the  announcement  of  high
and  sacred  names  as  coming  from  Christ,  the  Master,  Zoroaster,  Con-
fucius, Paul,  Hiram  Abif,  etc.;  while  at  times  coarse  and  trivial
expressions  would  burst  out  at  the  least  opposition  or  obstruction  to
the  desires  of  the  Spirit  or  medium.  Words  of  malevolence  and
hatred,  malice  and  jealousy,  would  be  hurled  out  with  vehement  vitu-
peration at  the  least  question  or  provocation.  For  weeks  and  months
these  controls  would  carry  out  their  vindictive ness  to  the  utter
exhaustion  and  depletion  of  those  who  harbored  them.  They  usually
beset  one  who  is  very  negative,  whose  character  is  weak  enough  to
yield  to  their  suggestions,  and  whom  they  thus  draw  aside  from  the
path  of  progress,  rejoicing  when  they  are  able  to  prevent  all  advance-
ment and  cause  them  to  succumb  under  the  appointed  trials  of  the
corporeal  life.  Through  communications  from  such  Intelligences  medi-
ums have  dared  to  transmit  their  impulses  of  vicious  indecorum,
words  of  self-interest  and  applause,  with  vulgar  cunning,  uttered  as


THE   MANY   MANSIONS.  44 1

prophecies  from  the  lips  of  Jesus  Christ;  but  a  more  outrageous
insult  was  never  done  to  the  intelligent  faith  and  affection  of  those
who  honor  that  "  name  above  every  name."

No  truer  nor  wiser  advice  has  been  handed  down  than  this  of  the
beloved  disciple,  "  Believe  not  every  Spirit,  but  try  the  Spirits  whether
they  are  of  God,  because  many  false  prophets  have  gone  out  into  the
world."

Disembodied  Souls  of  this  class  may  be  recognized  by  their  lan-
guage. Coarse  or  trivial  expressions  by  invisible  intelligences  or  by
men  are  always  indicative  of  moral  if  not  of  gross  mental  inferiority.
The  communications  show  the  baseness  of  their  inclinations,  and
though  they  may  try  to  impose  upon  us  by  speaking  with  a  show  of
reason  and  propriety,  they  are  unable  to  keep  up  that  false  appear-
ance, and  end  by  betraying  their  real  quality.  In  their  communica-
tions with  men  they  are  often  witty  and  facetious,  but  shallow.  They
are  quick  to  seize  the  oddities  and  absurdities  of  men  and  things,
and  comment  with  sarcastic  sharpness,  but  their  words  carry  no  evi-
dence of  tender  regard  for  truth  and  Divine  Love  for  all.  **  Evil  com-
munications corrupt  good  manners."  If  those  who  care  for  the  things
of  the  Spirit,  for  the  highest  mental  life,  expect  to  save  anything  in
the  deluge  of  this  error,  they  must  make  a  united  and  stout  defence
of  the  ledge  on  which  they  stand,  which  is  yet  above  water.

Souls  growing  upward  through  the  middle  firmament  see  all  their
past  lives,  and  read  therein  as  in  a  book.  They  see  also  the  past  of
their  friends  or  enemies,  and  their  passage  out  of  earth  life,  and  fre-
quently aid  their  loved  ones  to  free  their  Souls  from  the  bonds  of  the
flesh  and  guide  them  while  still  in  the  earthly  form.

In  the  upper  firmaments,  where  the  Soul  ripens  farther  into  Spirit,
we  find  those  who  have  progressed  to  a  very  high  degree  in  scientific
knowledge,  wisdom,  and  goodness.

Their  language  is  inspired  only  by  the  purest  benevolence  and
charity,  which  is  always  noble  and  elevated,  often  sublime.

Their  superiority  renders  them  more  apt  than  others  to  impart  just
and  true  ideas  of  the  mundane  world,  within  the  limits  of  knowledge
permissible  to  mankind,  and  from  high  intelligences  in  this  class  or
sphere  come  almost  all  of  man's  higher  inspiration  and  pure  truth
and  light  of  wisdom.

They  enter  willingly  into  communication  with  those  who  are  sin-
cerely seeking  after  truth  in  simplicity  and  charity,  and  desire  that
man  shall  be  of  light  and  love  to  his  fellow-man.  With  those  who  in
sincerity  and  with  unselfish  motives  entirely  foiget  all  vanities  and


442       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLa

worldly  ambitions,  they  do  most  willingly  hold  communion  and  ins{ure
them,  but  they  turn  from  those  who  are  prompted  only  by  curiosity  to
inquire  of  them,  or  who  are  drawn  away  from  paths  of  love  by  the
attraction  of  material  things.  Under  exceptional  circumstances  they
abide  with  and  unite  themselves  to  some  mortal  here  on  earth  if  he
be  of  superior  Soul  growth.

This  is  always  for  the  accomplishment  of  some  mission  of  prog-
ress, or  some  great  and  lofty  good  to  mankind.  They  show  thus  the
highest  type  of  perfection  to  which  mortals  can  aspire  in  this  life  and
this  world.

The  most  elevated  moral  qualities  forming  their  distinctive  char-
acteristics ;  having  arrived  at  the  possession  of  almost  unlimited
knowledge,  they  are  able  to  judge  correctly  of  men  and  things.  And
as  they  grow  and  are  rounded  out  under  the  great  beneficent  absolute
Love  of  Spirit,  they  find  their  Archetype,  or  their  ideal  of  holy  Light
and  Love,  that  counterpart  that  really  exists  outside  of  all,  and,  the
male  meeting  its  ideal  counterpart  of  the  female,  and  viu  versoj  the
two  united  in  one  form  the  Angel  or  perfected  Spirit.

The  Soul  reaches  this  point  of  growth  or  ripening  only  after  hav-
ing passed  up  through  every  degree  of  the  scale  of  progress.  Having
freed  themselves  from  all  the  impurities  of  materiality  or  its  atmos-
pheres, these  Souls  have  no  longer  to  undergo  either  trials  or  expia-
tions. Entering  into  the  life  of  eternity,  the  immediate  presence  of
God,  they  are  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  beatitudes,  like  God's  laws
unalterable,  because  no  longer  subject  to  the  wants  or  the  vicissitudes
of  matter.  But  this  beatitude  is  not  the  monotonous  idleness  of  per-
petual contemplation.  They  are  messengers  and  ministers  of  grace,
the  executors  of  God's  orders,  and  helpers  in  the  growth  of  Souls
toward  light,  by  their  guidance  and  the  maintenance  of  His  Universal
Harmony  and  Love,  They  exercise  sovereign  command  over  all  Spirit-
Souls  inferior  to  themselves,  aiding  them  in  the  accomplishment  of  the
work  of  purification,  and  assign  to  each  a  mission  proportionate  to
the  progress  already  made  by  him.

They  can,  when  they  choose  to  do  so,  enter  into  communication
with  man,  or  into  any  great  project  of  mankind  in  general.  But  for
any  human  being  here  to  pretend  to  have  them  at  his  beck  and  call
would  be  presumptuous  and  insolent  indeed.  As  these  Angels
progress  and  grow  after  meeting  their  perfected  Archetype  of  Love,
they  become  Archangels,  and  have  command  over  worlds  and  systems
of  worlds,  in  union  with  God  their  Archetype.  Only  these  high  and
perfected  Spirits  of  the  highest  order  can  see  and  understand  Him


THE  MANY   MANSIONS.  443

who  is  their  Archetype,  but  Souls  and  Spirits  of  less  perfect  or  lower
order  can  feel  and  divine  Him.

Buddhists  and  Brahmins  make  the  same  division  of  the  three
firmaments,  and  the  seven  heavens  of  which  St  John  speaks  in  Reve-
lations are  similar.

Souls  from  the  first  low  spheres  cannot  return  to  men  without
assistance  of  the  elementaries  or  some  Souls  further  advanced,  unless,
under  the  guidance  of  an  Angel,  they  are  aroused  and  brought  back
to  gain  an  intuition  of  the  Love  of  God,  and  so  break  through  their
impenetrable  covering.

The  Souls  of  which  we  have  spoken  heretofore  as  being  able  to
fasten  upon  a  too  negative  medium  and  make  him  suffer  are  free  to
come  and  go  at  will  and  to  indulge  in  all  the  appetites  of  the  medium,
and  to  enjoy  as  much  pleasure  from  such  indulgence  as  when  in  the
body.  If  they  can  now  be  brought  to  a  realizing  sense  of  pure  Love,
they  will  rise  to  a  higher  condition.  Nearly  all  children  and  in  this
country  the  Indian  controls,  as  children  of  nature,  being  frank  and
open  to  Spiritual  light,  leap  over  or  pass  quickly  through  the  lower
spheres  and  reach  reason  and  intellectual  light,  throwing  off  their  bid
conditions  like  trees  in  autumn.

When  wisdom  and  love  have  drawn  Souls  into  the  higher  middle
sphere,  great  assemblages  of  musicians,  philosophers,  astronomers,
etc.,  come  together  because  of  intellectual  sympathies  or  moral  obli*
gations,  with  a  dominant  quality  of  kindness,  and  these  find  great
pleasure  in  rendering  services  to  mankind  and  in  protecting  him  and
teaching  higher  truths.

Souls  in  this  sphere,  having  progressed  in  morality  as  well  as  intel-
ligence, are  much  interested  in  all  scientific  investigations,  and  stimu-
late men  to  inventions.

Now  as  we  have  seen  in  this  hasty  sketch  of  the  Many  Mansions,
man  is  madly  weaving  in  the  loom  of  life  at  the  first  drapery  which  is
to  clothe  him  in  his  heavenly  home.

'*  Every  waking  hour  we  weave,  whether  we  will  or  no.
Every  trivial  act  or  word  into  the  warp  mutt  go."

Let  our  devotion  to  the  cause  of  Truth  and  growth  of  our  immor-
tal Souls  often  bring  these  meditations  to  our  minds.  To  be  in
heaven  is  to  be  in  love  forever.

The  true  secret  of  all  human  life  is  love,  the  original  glory  of  the
breath  of  God.  The  songs  that  Angels  sing,  the  dewdrops  of  celestial
birth,  these  are  our  heritage.     ''So  live  thy  better,  let  thy  worst


444      T<^  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

thoughts  die/'  sirwing  to  possess  love.  Spirit  Truths  gleam  cmt  like
moonlight  on  the  rippling  stream  ;  they  send  joy  into  the  shadows  of
our  life  like  the  lightning's  flash.  Our  sorrow  for  departed  loved  ones
is  driven  away,  for  we  know  the  pure  and  good  and  true  will  live
forever.

Angels  in  clouds  of  golden  light  survey  the  earth,  watdiing  the
Souls  of  men  as  they  lay  down  their  garments  of  this  life  to  appear  in
the  drapery  they  have  woven  for  the  new.  The  more  we  sink  into
the  infirmities  of  age,  the  nearer  are  we  to  immortal  youth,  for  all
hearts  are  young  and  light  in  the  exalted  spheres  of  the  other  world.
There  is  a  Love  which  sees  not  with  the  eye,  hears  not  with  the  ear,
but  in  which  Soul  is  enamoured  of  Soul.  This  is  the  perfect  Love
that  endureth  forever.  So,  toiling  each  day  to  live  in  the  hearts  of
those  whom  we  love,  there  will  be  no  death  on  this  or  the  other  shore,
but  joy  and  gladness  in  that  bright  hour  when  we  shall  meet  in  the
land  of  purer  day.

When  our  loved  ones  have  passed  away,  and  the  twilight  falls  into
shadows ;  the  purple-lighted  clouds  dying  with  the  day  in  streams  of
sapphire  and  gold ;  the  emerald  and  crimson  light  fading  from  the
darkening  waters,  a  still,  silent  voice  whispers  peace,  and  in  this
revery  the  snows  and  sunshine  of  past  years  come  back  to  memory,
we  see  the  world  with  misty  and  feeble  eyes  as  though  we  looked
through  a  veil  of  falling  tears,  and  we  pray  that  Angels  may  come  and
guide  us  on  this  rugged  path  of  life  until  it  is  ended.

Sometimes  we  catch  glimpses  of  the  golden  way.  The  faces  and
forms  of  our  loved  ones  gone  before  appear  floating  in  the  ethereal
sheen  before  our  eyes.  Oh,  how  we  look  to  heaven  through  stream-
ing tears  and  pray  God  and  the  Angel  world  to  guard  these  silent
loved  ones  and  give  their  Spirits  room  in  heaven.  Then  their  forms
fade  away  into  the  shadow,  and  we  see  the  wings  of  Angels  glistening
in  flight,  and  as  we  try  to  call  them  back  we  rouse  from  this  semi-
trance  and  pray  for  strength  to  bear  the  burdens  of  life  to  the  end,
and  guidance  through  the  devious  ways  of  our  coming  life.

Out  of  the  desolate  ashes  of  despair  a  new  hope  is  bom  to  us,
that  our  loves  await  our  coming  on  the  other  shores,  and  thus  we  pray
till  the  solemn  moon  creeps  up  to  hear,  and  all  God's  stars  come  out
and  whisper  Peace  be  thine.

It  has  been  written  of  the  aged  that  they  live  only  in  retrospection ;
that  with  them  the  present  takes  its  coloring  from  the  past.  We  do  not
know  if  this  be  always  true,  but  it  is  strangely  true  of  our  own  life.  We
live  again  each  day  the  dear  life  whose  only  legacy  was  a  blesssed,


THE   MANY   MANSIONS.  445

blessed  memory  of  love,  tried  and  true  even  unto  death.    We  know
with  full  assurance  that  they  live

Just  Across  the  Valley.

*  All  along  the  valley,  where  I  walked  tcnlay,
Dreaming  of  the  years  that  had  passed  away.
And  now  along  life's  valley,  by  rock,  and  cave,  and  tree^
The  voices  of  the  dead  are  the  living  voice  to  me.
Whispering,  be  brave,  poor  heart,  until  thy  hour  has  come;
From  just  across  the  valley  we  shall  come  to  greet  thee  home.
From  this  life  of  defeat  thou  shalt  be  set  free
To  join  thy  Loved  Ones  who  are  waiting  for  thee.
Now  all  along  life's  valley,  adown  its  rocky  bed.
The  living  voices  to  me  are  the  voices  of  the  dead,

From  just  across  the  YaUej.**

**  Beyond  the  gathering  and  the  strowing
I  shall  be  soon  ;
Beyond  the  ebbing  and  the  flowing^
Beyond  the  coming  and  the  going,
I  shall  be  soon.
Love,  rest,  and  home  I

Sweet  hope  I
Spirit,  tarry  not,  but  come.*


CHAPTER  XV.

TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.

The  Four  Elements.  —  Hearken  unto  the  voices  of  the  four
elements,  that  ye  may  be  instructed  in  the  nature  and  powers  thereof,
and  become  more  perfect  in  the  understanding  of  the  high  princi-
ple3  of  the  magic  arts.  For  the  four  elements  are  the  primal  base  of
all  corporeal  things,  and  from  these  are  compounded  all  inferior
bodies,  not  in  a  chaotic  manner,  but  through  the  transmutation  of
Fire.

Of  Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and  Water,  and  their  union,  are  all  things  com-
pounded, and  when  the  compounds  become  disintegrated  they  are
again  dissolved  into  their  elements.  For,  as  the  elements  proceed
from  an  original  unity,  they  long  eagerly  for  each  other,  but  are  also
involved  at  the  same  time  in  strife  and  adversity.  Internally  they
have  only  one  basis ;  therefore  one  must  long  for  the  others  and  seek
that  inner  basis  in  the  other.  For  of  a  certainty  even  the  lower  forms
of  nature  must  exist  in  the  eternal ;  and  especially  so,  that  the  higher
ones  may  reveal  themselves  in  full  glory.  Therefore,  the  different
elements  exist  equally  even  in  heavenly  nature  but  not  in  their  divis-
ion, nor  in  mutual  restraint,  but  rather  in  harmony,  and  are  adapted
to  their  reciprocal  glorification,  as  it  can  be  seen  that  earth,  air,  fire,
and  water,  when  separate  from  each  other,  are  not  in  harmony  with
the  eternal,  but  when  they  endure  the  companionship  of  each  other,
and  do  not  repel  each  other,  then  the  eternal  is  present

Each  of  the  elements  has  a  twofold  manifestation  of  its  eneigy ;
one  of  these  properties  being  identical  to  itself  only,  the  other  being
an  operation  in  agreement  with  that  which  comes  directly  after  it

So  after  this  manner  is  there  different  apparent  opposition  one  to
the  other.  As  fire  is  to  water  and  air  so  the  elements  themselves  are
opposite  in  nature.  Two  being  heavy,  as  earth  and  water ;  two  being
light,  as  fire  and  air.  And  so  for  these  properties  they  have  been
classed  as  actives  and  passives,  fire  and  air  being  active,  the  others
passive.

And  again  the  properties  of  them  may  be  distinguished  according
to  the  itemized  expression  of  their  force  into  three  qualities :  —

446


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  447

To  fire  is  given  — brightness,  rarity,  and  motion ;  to  earth  —  dark*
ness,  density,  and  quietness.  According  to  these  manifestations  are
the  elements  of  fire  and  earth  contrary.

Now,  the  qualities  of  air  and  water  are  secondary  or  borrowed
nature,  for  the  air  receives  from  the  fire  the  two  qualities  of  thinness
and  motion,  and  from  the  earth  one,  v».,  darkness.

Likewise,  water  receives  from  earth  darkness  and  density,  and
from  fire  motion.  But  it  is  seen  that  fire  is  twice  thinner  than  air
and  thrice  more  movable,  and  four  times  brighter.  And  air  is  twice
more  bright,  thrice  more  thin,  and  four  times  more  movable,  and  we
can  see  as  fire  is  to  air,  so  is  air  to  water  and  water  to  earth,  and  this
is  the  base  and  foundation  of  each  and  of  all  bodies.

The  understanding  of  these  elements  and  their  properties  and
compounds  produces  wonderful  things  in  the  magic  arts ;  but  no  man
can  fully  declare  their  virtues,  as  they  can  do  all  things  upon  all
things.

Of  the  second  order  are  elements  that  are  compounded,  change-
able, and  impure ;  such  as  may  by  art  be  reduced  to  pure  simplicity ;
whose  virtue,  in  a  state  of  purity,  doth  perfect  all  occult  and  common
operations  and  is  the  foundation  of  all  natural  magic.

Of  the  third  order  are  those  which  originally  were  not  elements,
but,  being  twice  compounded,  are  various  and  changeable  into
another.  These  are  the  infallible  media  and  are  called  the  middle
nature,  or  Soul  of  the  middle  nature.

Deep  are  the  mysteries  thereof,  for  through  and  from  them  pro-
ceed the  binding  and  loosing,  and  transmutation  of  all  things.

Whosoever  shall  know  how  to  reduce  those  of  one  order  into
another,  impure  into  pure,  compound  into  simple,  and  shall  under-
stand distinctly  the  nature,  power,  and  virtue  of  them,  without  divid-
ing the  substance,  shall  attain  to  the  knowledge  and  perfect  operation
of  all  natural  things  and  celestial  secrets  likewise.

Fire  is  in  all  things  and  through  all  things,  occult  and  unknown.
When  by  itself  it  is  boundless  and  invisible,  and  of  itself  sufficient
for  every  action  that  is  proper  to  it,  and  penetrates  through  all  things.
Spread  abroad  in  the  heavens  it  shines;  but  in  the  infernal  place,
straitened,  dark,  and  tormenting ;  in  the  midway  it  partakes  of  both.
It  is  drawn  from  stones  by  the  stroke  of  steel ;  it  causes  the  earth  to
smoke ;  it  heats  springs  and  swells,  and  causes  the  air  to  bum.  All
things  that  live  are  preserved  by  enclosed  heat

Fire  has  always  been  one  of  the  chosen  elements  of  God  to  appear
to  man.


448      TH£  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

In  the  form  of  the  flaming  bush  He  came  to  Moses,  on  Mount
Horeb.  He  came  in  torrents  of  flame  in  the  form  of  fire,  **  in  flam-
ing fire  taking  vengeance."  —  2  Thess,  i :  8.  He  gently  guided  the
Israelites  by  night  through  the  dreary  wilderness,  ''  a  pillar  of  fire,"
and  upon  the  apostles  He  came  with  the  form  of  tongues  of  fixe,  ac-
companied by  the  sound  of  a  rushing  wind.

The  oldest  tradition  of  time  is  this ;  I  deliver  thee  through  the
gate  of  fire.  Father  of  all  is  fire.  His  word,  light,  the  Holy  Ghost,
Spirit,  or  air  in  motion.  The  Soul  of  the  world  is  the  typical  flower
or  glory  of  Divine  latent  fire.  The  compiler  trusts  the  reader  will
never  suppose  that  real,  objective  fire  is  meant,  but  only  that  inexpres-
sible something  of  which  our  natural  fire  or  rather  its  flower  or  glory
is  typical.  "  To  bring  the  Divine  Light  through  fire,"  means  the  fire
within  the  temple  of  one's  inner  being.  To  gain  this  was  the  mystery
ofmarCs  dual  beings  and  was  held  by  all  ancient  Brotherhoods  as  one
of  the  profoundest  secrets  and  deepest  truths  of  nature.

Within  the  human  body  there  was  found,  under  certain  conditions,  a
vitalized  life-principle  which,  sent  through  the  form  of  man  by  the  fire  of
his  casket  Lamp  in  the  inner  temple  of  his  being,  gave  him  power  over
invisible  things,  thereby  producing  Adeptship.  As  it  b  written,  "  The
charms  of  the  invisible  fire,  which  is  the  gate  of  heaven,  search  till
ye  find."  Again,  ''  To  be  bom  again  by  fire,  and  to  advance  is  sun-
begotten,  light-begotten,  fire-begotten."

God  inhabits  space  in  an  inaccessible  ocean  of  light,  and  He  admits
none  into  the  bosom  of  His  truths  but  those  who  love  and  are  meek
and  lowly  and  pure  in  Spirit.  These  highest  Spiritual  Truths  are  re-
vealed only  to  those  who  have  transcended  every  ascent  of  every
height  of  duality  and  who  have  left  behind  all  noise  and  arguments
of  heavenly  discoursings,  and  have  passed  into  that  inmost  temple
where  they  climb  the  ladder  of  life,  unto  the  great  Spirit  who  b  all  in
all.  This  is  the  holy  Rapture,  the  birth  of  the  celestial  fire,  passing
up  into  the  calm  and  glory  of  victory  over  all  death,  through  the
celestial  fire  One  with  God.

The  celestial  and  bright  fire  drives  away  spirits  of  darkness.  Thb
our  fire  made  of  wood  drives  away  the  same,  as  it  is  the  vehiculum  of
the  Superior  fire  as  also  of  Him  who  said,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the
World,"  which  is  True  Fire.  The  "  Father  of  Light "  from  whom  come
all  good  things  that  are  given,  sends  forth  the  light  of  His  fire  and
conmiunicates  it  first  to  the  Sun  and  the  rest  of  the  celestial  bodies,


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  449

and  by  these  conveys  that  light  to  our  fire.     So  it  is  said,  **  Do  not
speak  of  God  without  a  lights*

The  basis  and  foundation  of  all  the  elements  is  the  earth,  for  that  is
the  object,  subject,  and  receptacle  of  all  celestial  rays  and  influences.
In  it  are  contained  the  seeds  and  seminal  virtues  of  all  things ;  and
the  earth  is  said  to  be  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  *,  it  being  made
fruitful  by  the  other  elements,  and  the  Spirit  brings  forth  all  things  of
itself.  It  receiveth  the  abundance  of  all  things,  and  is  the  first  foun-
tain from  whence  all  things  spring.  It  is  the  centre,  foundation,  and
mother  of  all  things.  In  it  are  the  great  secrets.  If  at  any  time  it
shall  be  purified,  it  will  be  by  the  help  of  the  principle  of  fire ;  and  it
is  the  first  matter  of  our  creation.

The  two  elements  water  and  air  are  no  less  efficacious  than  fire  and
earth,  nor  do  they  lack  the  working  of  wonderful  things  in  them.

Without  water  nothing  can  live ;  no  herb  nor  plant  without  moist-
ure can  bring  forth.  It  is  the  seminary  virtue  of  all  things,  especially
of  animals.  ''  Only  earth  and  water  can  bring  forth  a  living  Soul."
Such  is  the  efficacy  of  water  that  Spiritual  regeneration  is  not  possible
without  it.

Air  is  a  vital  Spirit,  passing  through  all  things,  giving  life  and  sub-
sistence to  all  things,  moving  and  filling  all  things.

It  receives  into  itself  the  influence  of  all  celestial  bodies,  and  com-
municates them  to  all  other  elements  and  mixed  bodies.  Also  U  re-
ceives into  itself,  as  if  it  were  a  mirror,  the  species  of  all  things  natural
as  well  as  artificial ;  also  all  manner  of  speeches  and  retains  them,  and,
carrying  them  with  it  and  entering  the  bodies  of  men  and  other  animals
through  their  pores,  makes  an  impression  upon  them,  as  well  when
they  are  asleep  as  when  they  are  awake.

The  elements  are  therefore  the  first  and  original  matter  of  all  things
are  of  and  according  to  them ;  and  they  in  and  through  all  things  dif-
fuse their  virtues.

Now  in  animals  the  bones  resemble  the  earth ;  vital  Spirit  the  fire ;
flesh  the  air ;  humors  the  water.  The  Soul  itself,  the  understanding,
resembles  the  fire;  Reason  the  air;  Imagination  the  water >  the
Senses  the  earth.  Sight  is  fiery,  as  it  cannot  perceive  without  help
of  fire  and  light ;  Hearing  is  airy,  for  a  sound  is  made  by  displacing
the  air ;  Smell  and  Taste  resemble  water,  without  the  moisture  of  which
is  neither  smell  nor  taste ;  and  Feeling  is  wholly  earthy,  because  it  takes
gross  bodies  for  its  object.

And  man  is  likewise  governed  by  the  operation  of  the  elements,
for  the  earth  signifies  slow  and  firm  motion ;  Air,  cheerfulness  and


450      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

amiability;  Water,  fearfulness  and  sluggishness;  and  Ilxe,  quickne8a»
fierceness,  and  suscepdbility.


The  Light  of  the  Cabala.  —  The  Physio-Astro-Mystic.

\FiremtkiSecraWrUingsoftki  Abbot  La  Camr:\

He  who  can  collect  of  Three  separate  principles  of  Fire  may  form
a  solar  powder^  which,  when  purified  by  the  Sun  and  separated  from
the  mixture  of  other  elements,  becomes,  in  a  very  little  time,  sover-
eignly proper  to  exalt  the  fire  which  is  in  us.

He  can  command  the  principle  of  fire,  for  he  has  dominion  over
fire,  be  It  in  the  lightning  or  of  wood  or  of  men.  All  three  or  one  he
can  command.

Oh  Pilgrim  of  Light,  endeavor  to  make  yourself  worthy  to  receive
the  illumination  of  Soul  which  gives  the  Cabalistic  understanding  of
life,  by  which  man  may  know  himself.

The  hour  of  your  regeneration  is  to  come.  The  fault  is  your  own
if  you  become  not  a  new  creature,  a  new  and  refreshing  element  of
being.  Pray  fervently  to  Him  who  alone  has  power  to  create  new
hearts,  to  give  you  one  that  may  be  capable  of  true  lave.  Thereby
mayest  thou  understand  great  things  which  are  unspeakable,  of  which
I  am  sent  to  teach  you ;  that  you  may  open  the  windows  of  your  un-
derstanding ;  that  I  may  be  inspired  to  tell  you  all  and  to  conceal
from  you  nothing  of  the  hidden  mysteries.  Watch  and  pray ;  strive
to  understand  \  hope  to  know,  and  in  silence  follow  the  way  which  is
silent.

If  we  would  recover  the  empire  of  elements,  we  must  gain  domin-
ion over  the  principle  of  Fire,  which  is  the  vital  spirit  of  All  Life.

'  We  must  purify  and  exalt  the  elements  of  Fire  within  us,  and  raise
the  tone  of  the  slackened  string  of  our  being,  both  outwardly  and  in-
wardly. After  this  we  need  do  no  more  but  wait  silently.  The  ele-
ments will  finish,  and,  if  they  are  not  enough,  the  Gnomes  do  assist
them.  When  you  hear  the  voice  of  the  Fire,  listen  to  it  well  and  strive
to  understand.  This  principle  may  find  thee  by  crystals,  globes  of
glass,  or  concave  mirrors  which  may  teach  thee  to  understand,  but
much  better  than  all  is  the  true  Ladder  of  Jacob.

This  ladder  of  life  is  that  which  all  the  ancients  have  so  religiously
concealed.  There  is  formed  by  It  a  certain  Solar  Elixir  which,  being
purified  by  itself  from  the  mixture  of  other  elements,  and  being  pre-
pared according  to  all  the  art  of  being,  is  that  secret  cordial  of  life,
the  elixir  or  bread  of  Life,  the  stone  of  the  sages.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  4$  I

He  who  has  gained  the  power  over  fire  can  very  easily  gain  power
over  all  other  elements  which  are  the  home  and  world  of  the  Sylphs,
Gnomes,  and  Nymphs.  These,  living  far  less  time  than  man,  have
more  need  of  mankind ;  so  their  familiarity  is  easier  to  obtain,  and
their  powers  placed  more  readily  at  our  command.  You  need  only
enclose  in  a  glass  vessel  and  seal  up  either  conglobated  air,  water,  or
earth ;  expose  it  to  the  sun  for  a  month  and  to  the  light  of  two  differ-
ent moons.  Then  separate  the  elements  according  to  the  art  of  man's
being.  Thou  mayst  prepare  the  water  or  earth  with  more  assurance
than  thou  mayst  prepare  either  fire  or  air.  Unless  thou  knowest
quite  well,  let  the  fire  alone,  lest  thou  stir  up  the  fire  which  is  in  men
and  make  them  become  a  fiery  nature,  either  in  anger  or  the  grosser
commerce  of  love.  If  thou  dost  not  know  well  of  air,  be  careful  lest
thou  stir  up  the  elements  of  air  to  greater  destruction  than  thou
mayest  control.  But  if  of  the  water  and  the  earth,  thou  mayest  do
much  good  in  thy  command  over  the  sea  and  the  ships  thereof ;  and
being  along  with  earth,  which  commands  the  harvest  and  the  business
of  men,  thou  mayest  also  have  a  great  sovereign  healing  authority  over
the  most  incurable  diseases,  doing  very  great  good  thereby.  Shouldst
thou  be  so  blessed  as  to  have  a  loving  Sage  who  should  show  thee  the
hidden  pathways  of  fire,  thou  canst  then  command  the  Spirits  of  the
third  heaven  or  from  out  the  great  deep.  This  is  very  easy  to  do  if
the  Spirit  be  of  earth  or  of  water.  If  it  be  of  air,  thou  must  have  an
opposite  to  help  thee.  When  it  is  finished  in  silence,  with  thy  Will
thou  mayest  send  it  out  on  its  mission,  or  may  call  for  its  own  powers
to  come  unto  thee,  and  thou  wilt  marvel  at  the  things  thou  seest,  at
the  virtue  of  these  elements  thou  hast  prepared  to  attract  Gnomes,
Sylphs,  and  Nymphs.  The  Sylphs  belong  to  the  republic  of  the  air,
the  Gnomes  to  the  republic  of  the  earth,  the  Nymphs  to  the  republic
of  waters.  The  True  baptism  of  all  is  by  fire,  which  gives  to  man  the
Holy  Ghost,  and  brings  to  men  new  tongues  and  gives  them  light  of
Truth  wherever  they  may  go ;  a  beacon-light  in  the  darkness  about
men,  although  the  darkness  may  not  comprehend  it.

There  is  above  the  celestial  fire  an  incorruptible  flame  always
sparkling,  which  is  the  eternal  refreshing  and  spring  of  life,  which
receives  its  strength  from  the  Great  Sun,  the  fountain  of  all  being,  the
origin  of  all  things.  This  Flame  of  Love  produces  all  things,  and  noth-
ing perisheth  but  what  it  embrace th  and  lovingly  consumes  within  Its
bosom.  It  makes  itself  known  by  Itself.  This  Fire  cannot  be  con-
tained in  any  place.  It  is  without  body  and  without  matter,  but  some-
times doth  show  itself  through  a  form,  messenger,  the  Holy  Ghost,


452       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Dove  of  Peace  and  Love.  It  encompasses  the  great  deep  and  all  the
heavens,  and  there  go  out  from  It  little  sparks  and  seed  rays  which
cause  all  the  fires  of  sun  and  all  the  stars  and  seeds  to  all  the  worlds
and  all  the  moons.  Therefore,  know  ye  that  nothing  can  hide  from
God.  No  subtlety  nor  excuse  can  disguise  anything  from  His  all-
seeing  and  piercing  Eye,  neither  can  any  unjust  and  evil  man  deceive
or  hide  from  His  presence.  For  He  knoweth  the  hearts  of  all  men,  for
all  is  full  of  God  and  God  is  in  all.  There  is  in  God  an  immense
profundity  of  flame.  Nevertheless,  the  heart  should  not  fear  to  touch
this  adorable  fire^  or  to  be  touched  by  it,  for  it  is  the  great  fountain
of  all  true  love.  It  will  never  be  consumed  by  this  sweet  fire,  whose
mild  and  tranquil  heat  makes  all  the  bonds,  the  harmony,  the  life,
and  the  duration  of  the  world.

Nothing  subsists  but  by  this  fire,  which  is  eternally  renewing  itself
by  a  renewing  love,  which  is  continually  returning  to  it  from  out  all
the  heavens.  No  person  begot  God.  He  is  without  mother.  He
knoweth  all  things  and  can  be  taught  nothing.  He  is  the  Infallible
Surety,  and  Truth  is  in  all  His  designs.  His  name  is  unspeakable  and
unutterable.  Behold  now  what  God  is,  and  strive  to  contemplate  His
grandeur  and  power.  As  for  men  who  are  His  chosen  messengers,
we  are  but  a  little  part  of  God,

The  Egyptian  Sahu  is  the  same  thing  as  the  Indian  Akasa,  the
Astral  form,  which  is  really  those  essences  or  finer  particles,  invisible
to  the  outer  eye,  but  quite  visible  to  the  inner  sight  as  that  form  which
either  hovers  about  the  physical  body  at  death,  or  ascends  into  new
form.

In  every  age  of  which  we  have  any  record  throughout  all  antiquity,
all  claim  that  until  this  Spiritual  life-essence  is  extracted  from  every
part  of  the  body,  the  new  being  in  the  world  of  Soul  is  not  perfect
This  is  the  true  key  for  the  understanding  of  the  Phoenix  rising  again
to  life  from  its  own  ashes.


FROM  THE  CABALA.

The  History  of  Spirit.

[After  the  text  of  the  Abb^  de  Villars.]

How  happy  shall  you  be,  my  son,  if  Heaven  has  the  kindness  to
put  those  dispositions  into  your  Soul  which  the  high  mysteries  require
of  you !  For  you  are  about  to  learn  how  to  command  nature.  After
knowing  yourself  you  will  be  master  of  all  on  this  earth.    God  alone


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  453

shall  be  your  master,  and  the  prophets  and  sages  only  shall  be  your
equals.  The  other  intelligences  shall  esteem  it  a  glory  to  obey  all
your  desires  and  commands.

The  evil  elements  shall  not  dare  to  approach  you  wherever  you
may  go.  Your  voice  shall  make  them  tremble  in  the  most  profound
caves  of  their  abyss.  And  all  the  invisible  people  who  inhabit  the
four  elements  shall  account  themselves  happy  to  be  the  ministers  of
your  pleasure,  and  all  the  little  people  in  the  elementaries  of  other
worlds  will  come  at  thy  command.  For  thou  hast  solved  the  problem
of  life,  which  they  know  not.

Therefore,  thou  must  pray  to  Him  who  created  thee  to  inhabit  a
body  and  gain  this  great  wisdom.

I  adore  Thee,  O  great  God !  for  having  crowned  man  with  so
much  glory ;  for  permitting  him  to  grow  wise,  and  then  Thou  estab-
lisheth  him  the  sovereign  monarch  over  all  the  works  of  Thy
hands,  giving  him  dominion  and  power  over  many  things  he  knew
not  of.

Oh,  my  son,  have  you  fully  comprehended  what  it  is  to  be  a
full  man?  Dare  you  desire  to  serve  anything  but  God  only,  and
to  rule  over  many  lower  things  which  are  not  of  and  know  not
God?

Shall  you  not  awake  and  be  free  from  slavery,  since  you  were  bom
to  be  a  sovereign  and  reign  ?  And  if  you  have  these  noble  thoughts,
as  the  figure  of  your  nativity  suffers  me  not  to  doubt,  consider  soberly.
You  must  renounce,  yes,  truly  renounce^  for  the  prophets  and  sages
will  never  admit  you  into  their  order  as  a  student  if  you  do  not  re-
nounce from  this  very  present  a  thing  which  cannot  stand  competition
with  wisdom,  light,  or  understanding,  which  are  not  of  the  bodily
sense.  Therefore,  I  must  adjure  you  to  renounce  all  carnal  commerce
with  woman.

Peace  be  with  you,  saith  the  instructor.  We  must  also  reply,  and
with  you  peace.

Here  endeth  the  first  lesson.

The  Misery  of  Man  when  his  learning  becomes  too  great  for  his
Selfish  Animal  Nature  causes  him  to  go  further  off  from  attaining  his
ends.  He  runs  into  the  mists  and  loses  himself.  Then  the  Spirit  of
contradiction  and  humor  of  thinking  contrary  to  others  does  possess
him !  These  libertines  of  much  learning  will  not  subject  man  to
substances  less  material  than  himself  and  yet  subject  the  earnest  man
to  an  exhalation.

They  will  not  allow  anything  supernatural  to  be  oracles  from


454  TH^   HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Spirit  for  fear  of  acknowledging  something  above  man  and  especially
themselves.  Tis  enough  for  them  to  deny  Spirits  and  also  to  uphold
the  power  of  them.  They  are  so  afraid  to  have  a  ladder  made  them
to  climb  up  to  understanding  and  God,  that  they  dare  not  acknowh
edge  by  degrees  these  Spiritual  creatures.  They  choose  rather  to
build  one  according  to  their  own  theory,  by  which  to  descend  into
nothingness.  Instead  of  raising  themselves  up  toward  heaven  and
truth,  they  creep  down  into  the  earth ;  and  instead  of  searching  among
superior  beings,  they  not  only  refuse  to  look  themselves,  but  strive  to
hold  other  men  from  looking  for  the  cause  of  these  transports  oft^U
which  carry  man  above  himself  and  make  him  to  know  truth  and
knowledge,  and  in  a  manner  to  become  a  power  of  Divinity  under  the
instruction  of  the  True  Father  of  All.  Instead  of  acknowledging
Spirit  and  Truth  as  guidance  for  man,  they  choose  to  weaken  his
inner  attributes  by  debilitating  mists  of  exhalations.

If  man  will  but  look  within  he  will  be  no  longer  left  in  the  mists,
but  will  find  a  great  true  force  which  penetrates  into  all  that  which  b
to  come,  and  discovers  all  things  concealed,  and  advances  him  even
to  the  highest  secrets  of  life  and  into  the  powers  of  the  Divine
Essence.

The  Prayer  of  Savitri.

O  Father,  Lord  of  the  worlds  and  of  all  creatures,  receive  my
humble  invocations.  O  turn  for  the  moment  from  the  contemplation
of  Thy  immortal  life  and  power,  and  permit  a  beam  of  light  from  Thy
glorious  radiance  to  shine  on  me.  But  one  ray,  for  Thy  single  glance
shall  purify  my  Soul.  O  come  to  me  upon  the  wind  and  from  the
cloud,  that  I  may  hear  Thy  voice  in  the  fluttering  of  the  leaves  of  the
forest,  in  the  murmuring  of  the  sacred  river,  and  in  the  sparklmg
flame  of  the  consecrated  fire.  Oh,  how  my  Soul  longs  for  Thee,  and
the  fountains  of  Thy  pure  love.  O  my  Soul  longs  to  breathe  the  air
that  emanates  from  Thy  Great  Soul.  O  Father,  hear  my  invocation ;
O  Lord  of  all  worlds  and  of  all  creatures,  teach  me  wisdom  and
understanding.  Come  to  me,  O  Thou  by  whom  the  earth  blooms
into  flowers  ;  by  whom  all  harvests  ripen ;  by  whom  all  germs  of  life
develop ;  by  whom  glitter  the  heavens,  and  the  Armaments  are  held  in
their  place ;  by  whom  mothers  produce  children,  and  sages  and  wise
men  learn  virtue  and  gain  understanding.  Thy  word  shall  be  sweeter
to  my  thirsty  Soul  than  the  tears  of  night  to  the  sandy  desert ;  sweeter
than  the  voice  of  the  young  mother  who  carresses  her  infant.  Oh,  my
Father,  Lord,  how  my  Soul  thirsteth  to  know  and  to  come  nearer


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  45$

Thee.  How  I  long  to  finish  my  course  and  escape  from  this  mortal
envelope,  to  the  enjoyment  of  celestial  bliss  in  the  bosom  of  Thy
Love,  and  be  embraced  and  absorbed  in  the  arms  of  Thy  Splendor.

Plato  in  the  Pradrus

writes :  —  Likewise,  in  consequence  of  this  Divine  mitioHany  we  be-
came spectators  of  entire,  simple,  immovable,  and  blessed  visions,
resident  in  a  pure,  gentle  light,  and  were  ourselves  pure  and  immacu-
late ;  and  after  contemplative  silence  were  liberated  from  this  sur-
rounding vestment,  which  men  denominate  body,  and  to  which  we
are  now  bound  as  an  oyster  to  its  shell."

Initiation  and  inspection  are  symbols  of  ineffable  silence  and  of
a  perfect  union  of  our  two  natural  forces,  which  gives  us  our  mystical
natures,  through  intelligible  visions.

There  are  three  keys  to  unlock  the  door  of  the  great  mysteries  of
life.  First,  the  Divine  Love,  Spirit.  Second,  the  bi-sexual  or  dual
force.  Third,  the  numerous  rebirths  or  growth  and  ripening  through
re-incarnation.  For  every  Spiritual  effort  now  made  will  find  healthy
increase,  and  will  illuminate  the  Soul  on  its  way,  not  only  now,  but  in
the  next  incarnation  as  well.


THE  KEY  OF  HERMES.

For  there  is  one  name  or  appellation  of  nature  or  the  force  of  in-
crease. The  Within  and  the  Without ;  the  Divine  and  the  Human  of
man ;  the  two  beings  of  increase,  every  one  of  which  himself  will
have  so  to  be.  The  action  and  operation  of  man  bofh  Divine  and
Human  must  here  also  be  understood.  For  man's  operation  or  act  is
his  Will  and  his  Essence-power  to  will  all  things  to  goodness.  For  it
is  possible,  O  Son  of  Truth,  to  be  deified  while  yet  it  lodgeth  in  the
body  of  man,  if  it  contemplate  the  beauty  of  the  Good.  As  it  openeth
the  eyes  of  mind  vision,  the  Soul  beholds  incorruptible  and  incompre-
hensible beauty  of  Love,  that  is  goodness,  and  when  man  sees  it  man
has  nothing  at  all  to  say  of  it,  for  it  is  the  unspeakable  light  of  Truth.*
For  the  knowledge  of  it  is  a  Divine  silence  and  the  rest  of  all  the
outer  senses.  For  the  Light  of  Truth  stands  steadfastly  upon  and
around  the  whole  mind,  whose  atmosphere  enlighteneth  all  the  Soul,
and,  loosing  it  from  the  bodily  world,  draweth  it  from  the  body  in  the
embrace  of  Love  wholly  into  the  Essence  of  God.

*  See  illustration  opposite  page  378.


456      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  Soul  of  man  is  carried  in  this  manner.  The  mind  in  reason ;
reason  in  the  Soul ;  the  Soul  in  the  Spirit ;  the  Spirit  in  the  inner
temple.  Knowest  thou  that  every  Soul  hath  the  good  mind ;  but,  the
mind  being  the  window  of  the  Soul,  therefore  the  Soul  without  the
mind  can  neither  do  nor  say  anything ;  for  many  times  the  mind  flies
away  from  the  Soul,  and  in  that  hour  the  Soul  neither  seeth  nor
heareth  but  is  in  darkness,  like  a  lost  sheep  in  confusion,  an  unrea-
sonable thing.  So  great  is  the  help  and  power  of  the  mind  I  Where-
fore, if  the  Soul  in  man  hath  no  mind,  then  must  such  an  one  not  be
called  a  man.  For  a  true  man  is  a  Divine  living  thing,  and  is  not  to
be  compared  to  any  brute  breast  that  lives  upon  earth,  but  to  them
that  are  above  in  heaven,  they  that  are  called  Angels  or  Gods.  For
none  of  the  things  of  heaven  will  come  down  upon  earth  to  live,  and
leave  the  limits  of  heaven.  But  the  true  man  ascends  into  heaven,
understands  and  measures  it,  and  by  his  wisdom  from  the  Father  he
knoweth  what  things  are  on  high  and  what  things  are  below,  and
leameth  all  things  exactly.  And,  what  is  the  greatest  of  all,  he  leaveth
not  the  earth,  and  yet  goeth  above.  So  great  is  the  Father  in  Hb
Love  to  him,  giving  him  the  nature-life  which  every  Angel  hath  not.
Wherefore  we  must  be  bold  to  say  that  an  earthly  man  is  a  mortal
God,  and  that  the  heavenly  God  is  an  immortal  man.  All  things
depend  on  one  beginning,  and  the  beginning  depends  on  that  which  is
One  and  that  alone.  And  the  beginning  is  moved  that  it  may  again
be  a  beginning ;  but  that  which  is  O^ie  standeth,  abideth^  and  b  not
moved.

There  is  therefore  a  trinity  of  these  three  —  God,  the  Father  of  all,
and  the  Good ;  the  World,  and  Man.  God  hath  the  world  and  the
world  hath  man,  and  the  world  is  the  son  of  God  and  man,  as  it
were — the  offspring  of  the  world.  For  God  is  not  ignorant  of  man,
but  knows  him  perfectly,  and  desires  to  be,  and  will  be,  known  of
man.  Therefore  this  only  is  healthful  to  man,  —  the  knowledge  and
understanding  of  his  Father,  God.  This  is  the  return  of  Olympus,
or  Adonai ;  for  by  this  only  is  the  Soul  made  good,  and  not  some-
times good  and  sometimes  evil,  but  of  necessity  always  good.

My  son,  when  man  lifts  his  hands  up  to  God,  He  also  extends
His  hand  down  to  man.  Therefore  strive  to  draw  Him  unto  thee.
Quiet  and  make  idle  the  outward  senses  of  the  body.

Purge  thyself  from  all  the  unreasonable  arrogance  of  the  brutish
element  which  only  torments  matter,  and  God  will  come  unto  thee.
Make  thyself  in  order,  and  it  shall  be  done.

Remember  there  are  many  tormentors  in  the  body  of  most  men.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  45/

One  of  the  greatest  of  these  is  Wrath,  and  with  it  is  Ignorance.  A
third  is  Intemperance  ;  fourth,  Concupiscence  ;  fifth,  Injustice ;  sixth,
Covetousness ;  seventh.  Deceit ;  eighth,  Envy ;  ninth.  Fraud  or
Guile ;  the  tenth  is  Sorrow ;  eleventh.  Rashness ;  and  twelfth,  Mali-
ciousness. From  out  these  twelve  principles  grow  very  many  more,
some  or  all  of  which,  through  the  prison  of  the  body,  do  cause  the
inwardly  true  man  and  the  Soul  to  suffer  greatly.  O  sons  of  Life,
suffer  not  yourselves  to  be  carried  away  with  these  outward  things,
with  the  great  stream  of  men  ;  but  stem  the  tide.  Through  the  in-
ward man  you  can  lay  hold  of  the  haven  of  safety,  and  make  full
course  toward  it.  Seek  the  one  that  may  lead  you  by  the  hand  and
conduct  you  to  the  door  of  truth  and  knowledge ;  for  the  God  of  all
cannot  be  heard  with  the  outward  ears,  nor  seen  with  the  outer  eye,
nor  expressed  in  the  noise  of  words,  but  only  in  the  inmost  Soul  of
mind  and  heart.  But  first  thou  must  tear  to  pieces  and  break
through  these  outer  garments  thou  wearest,  for  they  are  the  web  of
ignorance,  the  foundation  of  all  mischief,  the  bond  of  corruption,  the
living  death,  the  sensible  carcass,  the  sepulchre  which  men  carry
about  with  them.

Such  is  the  hurtful  apparel  with  which  thou  art  clothed,  my  son.
It  is  that  which  draws  and  pulls  thee  down  by  its  own  self,  lest,  look-
ing upward,  thou  shalt  see  the  beauty  of  truth  and  light  and  the  good
that  reposes  therein.

It  chooses  darkness  and  self  above  all ;  therefore  thou  shouldst
hate  the  wickedness  of  this  garment  and  understand  the  traps  and
ambushes  it  hath  laid  for  thee ;  for  it  truly  hides  and  envelopes  what
it  presents  to  thee  in  much  deceitful  promise,  filling  it  with  hateful
pleasure,  so  thou  canst  neither  hear  that  which  thou  shouldst  hear,
nor  see  that  which  thou  shouldst  see,  nor  have  the  good  things  thou
shouldst  have.

Who  hath  made  all  these  worlds  and  fashioned  so  many  arts  in
one  matter,  and  so  many  works  in  one  superscription,  all  so  exceed-
ingly beautiful,  all  done  in  measure,  and  yet  all  different?  Who
hath  made  all  these  things  ?  What  father,  what  mother,  save  only
God,  that  is  not  manifest  ?  He  hath  made  all  by  His  own  love  and
will  and  fashioned  them.

No  man  saith  a  statue  or  an  image  is  made  without  a  carver  or  a
painter ;  and  was  all  this  wonderful  workmanship  made  without  the
mind  of  a  great  workman  ?  O  great  blindness  !  O  great  impiety !
O  great  ignorance  I    God  is  the  Cause  of  life's  perpetual  motion,  of


458      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

which  motion  there  is  nothing  more  ancient ;  yet  it  b  always  fresh,
vigorous,  and  young.*

God  is  not  a  mind,  but  the  Cause  of  mind ;  not  a  Soul,  but  the
Cause  of  Soul ;  not  a  light,  but  the  Cause  of  Light  The  Spirit-Soul
of  Eternity  is  God ;  and  the  Soul  of  the  world,  eternity ;  and  of  the
earth,  heaven.  God  is  in  the  mind,  the  mind  in  the  Soul,  the  Soul  m
matter,  all  things  in  eternity.  All  this  Universal  body,  in  which  are
all  bodies,  is  full  of  Soul,  full  of  mind,  the  mind  full  of  God.  For
within  He  fills  them  with  Spirit,  and  without  He  contains  them,
quickening  the  Universe.  Without,  He  quickens  this  perfect,  living
thing,  the  world,  and  within,  He  quickeneth  all  living  creatures ;  and
above  in  heaven  He  abides  in  one  identity  or  one  Selfhood;  but
below  upon  earth  He  changeth  generation.

Notes  from  the  Divine  Pvmander  of  Hermes  Trismegistus.

[Tranlated  formerly  from  Arabic  into  Greek,  and  thence  to  LaUm^  and  now  from

the  original  to  Englisk,^

All  things  that  are  moved,  move;  only  that  which  is  not,  is
immovable.

Every  body  is  changeable  ;  not  every  body  is  dissolvable ;  some
bodies  are  dissolvable ;  that  which  may  be  dissolved  is  also  corrupt-
ible.    Not  every  body  is  ill ;  ever}'  body  that  is  ill  is  dissolvable.

Not  every  linng  thing  is  immortal.

That  which  abides  always  is  unchangeable;  that  which  is  un-
changeable is  eternal.

That  which  is  always  made  is  always  corrupted;  that  which  is
made  but  once  is  never  corrupted,  neither  becomes  any  other  thing.

First,  God  ;  second,  the  World ;  third,  Man.  The  world  for  man,
man  for  God.

Of  the  Soul,  that  part  which  is  sensible  is  mortal ;  but  that  part
which  is  reasonable  is  immortal.  Ever}'  essence  is  immortal.  Every
essence  is  unchangeable.     Everything  that  is,  is  double.

None  of  the  things  that  are,  stand  still.

Everything  that  suffers  is  sensibjfs  ;  everything  that  is  sensible
suffers.  Everything  that  is  sad  rejoiceth  also,  and  is  a  mortal,  living
creature.

*  See  illustration  opposite  page  aa.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  4S9

Not  everything  that  rejoiceth  b  also  sad,  but  is  an  eternal,  living
thing.

All  that  is  incorporeal  is  void  of  lying.

Nothing  good  upon  earth ;  nothing  evil  in  heaven.

God  is  goodness ;  man  is  evil.

Good  is  voluntary,  or  of  its  own  accord ;  evil  b  involuntary,  or
against  its  will.

The  Gods  choose  good  things,  as  good  things.

Time  is  a  Divine  thing ;  law  is  human.

Malice  is  the  nourishment  of  the  world.

Nothing  in  heaven  is  in  bonds ;  nothing  upon  earth  b  free.

Nothing  unknown  in  heaven  ;  nothing  known  on  earth.

That  which  is  sown  is  not  always  begotten ;  but  that  which  b
begotten  always  is  sown.

Of  a  dissolvable  body  there  are  two  times  :  one  for  sowing  to  gen-
eration, one  from  generation  to  death.

Of  an  everlasting  body  the  time  is  only  from  the  generation.

Dissolvable  bodies  are  increased  and  diminished;  dissolvable
matter  is  altered  into  contraries,  to  wit,  corruption  and  generation ;
but  eternal  matter  into  itself  and  its  like.

The  generation  of  man  b  corruption;  the  corruption  of  man  b
the  beginning  of  generation.  '

That  which  offsprings  or  begetteth  another  is  itself  an  offspring  or
begotten  by  another.  t

Of  things  that  are,  some  are  in  bodies,  some  in  their  ideas.  That
which  is  mortal  cometh  not  into  a  body  immortal ;  but  that  which  is
immortal  cometh  into  that  body  which  is  mortal.

Heaven  is  a  capable  and  fit  receptacle  of  everlasting  bodies,  as
the  earth  is  of  corruptible  bodies.

Those  things  that  are  in  heaven  are  subjected  or  placed  in  or
under  it;  but  the  things  of  earth  are  placed  upon  it.

Heaven  is  the  first  element.

Providence  is  Divine  order.  Necessity  b  the  minbter  or  servant
of  Providence.


460       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Fortune  or  luck  is  the  carriage  of  effect  of  that  which  is  without
order ;  the  idol  of  operation,  a  lying  fantasy  or  opinion.

What  is  God  ?  Motion  and  the  immutable  or  unalterable  Good
What  is  man  ?     Unripened  or  unchangeable  evil.

The  man  who  lives  by  destiny  or  fate,  as  bearing  rule  over  all,
will  he  not  be  much  worse  than  himself,  despising  the  whole,  because
it  was  made?  And  if  he  may  lay  the  cause  of  evil  upon  fate  or
destiny,  he  will  never  abstain  from  evil  works.  Wherefore  avoid  all
conversation  with  such,  for  we  must  look  warily  to  such  kind  of
people  that,  being  in  ignorance,  they  may  be  less  evil  for  fear  of  that
which  is  hidden  and  kept  secret.

In  the  ideal  form,  Love  is  God,  His  Word,  and  Mind,  being  both
male  and  female.  The  male,  life,  the  female,  light,  brings  forth  His
Word,  into  the  Fire  of  principle  —  Spirit,  which  is  the  Father  of  all
things,  the  dual  mind,  being  life  and  light,  which  brought  forth  man,
like  unto  Himself ;  whom  He  loved  as  his  proper  birth ;  for  he  was
all  beauteous  in  his  innocence,  having  the  Image  of  his  Father ;  being
that  Image  in  his  inmost.  But,  alas  1  man  closes  the  door  of  his  in-
most temple,  and  searches  for  his  Father  in  the  outward  things;
whereby  man,  above  all  things  that  live  upon  earth,  is  double.  Mortal
because  of  his  body,  and  immortal  because  of  the  substantial  man;
both  male  and  female  within,  because  he  is  after  the  Divine  Father.
Therefore,  being  above  all  harmony,  he  is  made  the  servant  of  har-
mony, and  being  male  and  female  and  watchful,  he  is  governed  by
and  subject  to  a  Father  who  is  both  male  and  female,  and  who
watches  over  him.  And  man  can  be  one  with  his  Father,  and  God
hath  said  to  the  Holy  Word,  Increase  and  multiply  all  ye  my
creatures  and  workmanship,  and  let  him  that  is  endowed  with  mind
know  himself  to  be  immortal  and  Hold  his  being  in  unity,  and  know
that  the  cause  of  death  is  the  love  of  the  outer  body ;  and  let  him
learn  all  things  that  are,  being  made  naked  to  all  truth  and  all  the
operations  of  harmony,  which  is  love,  wisdom,  and  understanding.

O  ye  people,  why  do  you  cause  yourselves  to  be  born  and  made  of
earth,  and  give  yourselves  over  to  selfishness,  drunkenness,  and  sleep,
and  to  ignorance  of  your  Father  —  God  ?  Be  sober,  and  cease  your
surfeit  whereunto  ye  are  allured,  and  visited  by  brutish  and  unreason-
able sleep.  Why  I  O  men,  offspring  of  earth,  why  have  you  deliv-
ered yourselves  over  unto  death,  having  power  to  partake  of  immor-


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  46 1

tality  ?  Oh,  repent ;  change  your  minds,  ye  that  have  together  walked
in  error  and  darkness^  and  have  been  overshadowed  by  the  darkness
in  ignorance.  O,  depart  from  the  darkness  of  night,  and  be  par-
takers of  light  and  immortality.

Knowledge  is  the  gift  of  God,  for  all  knowledge  is  without  body,
but  useth  the  mind  as  an  instrument,  as  the  mind  useth  a  body.
Therefore  both  intelligible  and  material  things  go  into  the  same  body,
because  of  the  law  of  dual  things,  which  is  also  the  law  of  contraposi-
tion, which  is  setting  one  against  or  to  support  another,  and  of  con-
trariety, which  is  that  all  things  must  be  two-sided.

Holy  is  God,  the  Father  of  all  things.  Holy  art  Thou  of  whom
all  nature  is  the  Image.  Holy  art  Thou  whom  nature  hath  not
formed.

O,  unspeakable,  unutterable  Father  of  all  Loves,  we  praise  with
silence,  accept  these  reasonable  sacrifices  from  the  pure  Soul  of  Thy
children,  who  have  a  single  heart  that  stretcheth  out  unto  Thee.  I
beseech  Thee  that  I  may  never  err  from  the  knowledge  of  Thee.
Look  mercifully  upon  me,  and  enable  me  to  strengthen  and  enlighten
with  this  grace  those  who  are  in  ignorance ;  the  brothers  of  my  kind,
who  are  still  in  darkness,  but  are  Thy  sons.  Being  one  with  Thee,  I
fully  rest  in  faith,  believing  Thee,  and  bear  witness,  and  go  toward  the
True  light  and  life.

Blessed  art  Thou,  O  Father-  That  man  would  be  sanctified  with
Thee  as  Thou  hast  given  him  all  power  and  dominion  over  things.

Thus,  my  son,  pray  first  to  the  Lord  and  Father,  to  the  Silent  and
Alone,  and  to  the  One,  from  whom  is  one  to  be  merciful  to  thee ;  that
thou  mayest  know  and  understand  so  great  a  loving  God;  and  that
He  would  cause  one  of  His  beams  to  shine  upon  thee  and  enfold
ihee  in  the  shadow  of  His  Wing  in  all  thy  understanding  and  all  thy
ways.  For  He  hath  set  the  bounds  of  the  sea.  Who  hath  estab-
lished the  earth  ?  For  of  necessity  there  is  some  one,  my  son,  who  is
Maker  and  Lord  of  all  these  things,  and  it  behooveth  thee  to  know
Him.

The  Soul  is  not  Astral  fluid,  but  is  manifest  by  Astral  fluid.  For
the  Soul  itself  is  like  the  idea,  invisible  and  intangible  Fire,  the
real  maker  ot  the  body,  is  not  a  true  element.    The  only  real,  true.


462  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE   THRESHCXJDl

and  permanent  mundane  elements  are  dr  and  water,  whidi  are^
respectively,  as  Spirit  and  Soul,  Will  and  Idea,  Father  and  Mother.
Out  of  these  are  made  all  the  condUians  of  matter,  which  is  interchange*
able,  heat  and  motion,  wisdom  and  justice,  and  force ;  or  Qzygeiiy
Hydrogen,  Azote  are  the  three  out  <^  which  the  two  tme  elements
are  produced

The  clearest  understanding  of  the  Soul  may  be  obtained  by  defin-
ing it  as  the  shell  of  the  Seed-Spirit  or  Divine  Idea.  Before  anything
can  exist  outwardly  and  materially,  the  idea  of  it  must  subsist  In  the
Divine  mind.

The  Soul,  therefore,  may  be  understood  to  be  the  Divine  WSL
But  it  does  not  act  directly  on  matter.  It  is  put  forth  by  the  Dhrine
Mind,  while  the  body  is  put  forth  by  the  Astral  or  fiery  body.

As  Spirit  on  the  celestial  plane  is  the  parent  of  the  Soul,  so  fire
on  the  material  plane  begets  the  body ;  while  the  plane  on  which  the
celestials  and  creatures  touch  each  other  is  the  astral piane.

The  doctrine  of  the  Soul  is  embodied  in  the  parables  of  the  viigins
and  talents.  Into  the  Soul  of  each  individual  is  breathed  the  Spirit
of  God,  Divine,  pure,  and  without  blemish.  It  is  a  part  of  God,  and
the  individual  has  in  his  earth-life  to  nourish,  befriend,  and  quicken
that  Spirit,  and  feed  it  as  one  feeds  a  lamp  with  oil.  When  we  renew
and  put  oil  in  our  lamps,  the  essence  passes  into  them  and  becomes
flame.  So  it  is  with  the  Soul  of  him  who  nourishes  the  Spirit  It
grows  gradually  pure  in  unselfish  love  and  becomes  Spirit,  and  by  this
ripening  of  Soul  by  Spirit  the  body  is  enlightened  as  a  lamp  t^  the
flame  within  it,  the  Soul  becomes  transmuted  into  the  flame  of  Sfurit
Love,  and  when  the  lamp  of  the  body  is  shattered,  and  matter  returns
to  matter,  the  Flame  mounts  and  soars  upward,  and  is  united  to  the
Divine  Fire,  in  the  bosom  of  the  Absolute.

Fragments  from  the  Hermetic  Philosophers.

All  Scriptures  which  are  the  true  word  of  God,  have  a  dual  inter-
pretation, the  intellectual  and  the  intuitional,  the  apparent  and  the
hidden.     For  nothing  can  come  forth  from  God  which  is  not  fruitful.

The  letter  alone  is  barren ;  the  Spirit  and  letter  give  life.  But
that  Scripture  is  the  more  excellent  which  is  exceeding  fruitful,  and
brings  forth  abundant  signification.

For  God  is  able  to  say  many  things  in  one;  as  the  perfect  ovary
contains  many  seeds  in  the  chalice.  There  are  in  the  Scriptures  of
God's  word  certain  writings  which,  as  richly  yielding  trees,  bear  more


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES,  463

abundantly  than  others  in  the  self -same  garden.  And  one  of  the
most  excellent  is  the  parable  of  the  fall  of  man,  which  as  a  stream
parted  into  four  branches  has  a  fourfold  head  and  is  a  word  exceed-
ing rich.

Love  is  the  secret  of  life.  Love  redeemeth.  Love  lifteth  up.
Love  enlighteneth.  Love  advanceth  Souls.  Love  dissolveth,  but  for-
getteth  not,  for  she  is  of  the  Soul,  and  hath  everlasting  remembrance.
Behold,  love  is  a  ransom ;  and  the  tears  thereof  are  a  prayer.

Praise  the  Father  of  Spirit,  who  is  the  Fountain  of  Love,  for  His
great  love;  that  thou  mayst  be  illumined  and  drawn  aloft  by  love,  and
carried  upward  by  the  chords  of  Divine  grace.  For  in  the  eyes  of
love  there  is  nothing  little  or  mean  or  poor  nor  unworthy  of  prayer.

Oh  little  Soul,  if  rich  in  love,  thou  art  mighty ;  if  a  child  of  God's
love,  yea,  thou  poor  little  Soul,  so  simple  in  thy  faith,  yet  art  thou
mighty  and  possessed  of  great  riches.  Better  is  thy  portion  than  that
of  kings,  whom  the  curses  of  the  oppressed  pursue.  For  as  love  is
strong  to  redeem,  to  ripen,  and  to  advance  a  Soul,  so  is  hatred  strong
to  deceive,  to  torment,  and  to  detain  growth.  Blessed  is  the  Soul
whom  the  pure  In  heart  and  the  just  commemorate  before  God ;  for
whose  absence  the  poor  and  the  orphan  and  the  dumb  creatures
mourn ;  for  he  who  giveth  great  love  will  have  greater  love  returned  ;
and  in  the  fulness  of  time  no  love  shall  return  empty  to  thee,  but,
according  to  the  greatness  of  her  degree,  she  shall  accomplish  thy
Will.  Thy  sorrows  and  tears  and  the  travail  of  thy  Soul  shall  all  pass
away,  and  there  shall  be  also  grace  and  blessing  to  the  Soul  thou
wouldst  redeem.  Count  not  thy  suffering  on  behalf  of  other  Souls
as  lost ;  for  every  cry  is  a  prayer,  and  all  true  prayer  is  power.  That
thou  wiliest  to  do  is  done,  for  in  thy  love  thy  pure  intention  is  united
to  the  Will  of  Divine  Love.  Nothing  is  ever  lost  of  that  which  thou
layest  out  for  God  and  for  any  of  thy  human  brethren.  It  is  love
that  redeemeth ;  and  love  hath  nothing  of  her  own.  Truly  the  secret
of  all  is  Love.

The  Song  of  the  Egyptian  Harper.

[In  the  time  of  Raiteses  ii.,  1390,  B.  C.j

Recently  discovered  at  Kamak.    The  following  literal  translation
is  but  a  part  of  the  song  :  —

The  coward,  the  brave,  the  friendless  and  proud,
Not  one  can  escape  the  embrace  of  the  grave,
When  life's  course  is  complete,  and  our  destiny  filled.
^£  thy  life  has  been  just,  then  well  it  will  be,


464      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

For  any  who  go  that  journey  to  take,

Departing  from  this  to  eternity's  shore.

Let  thy  work  be  complete  and  thy  charge  be  folfilledf

Thou  shalt  then  be  secure  in  the  pathway  of  peace.

Away  back  into  the  long  night  of  antiquity  the  books  of  the
Vedas  have  certain  positive  indisputable  precedence  over  the  most
ancient  records.  These  holy  books,  which,  according  to  the  BrahminSy
contained  the  Word  of  God  and  His  Spirit,  revealed  to  man,  were
sacred  and  honored  in  India  long  before  Persia,  Asia  Minor,  Egypt,
or  Europe  was  colonized,  or  even  inhabited.  Sir  William  Jones
claims  them  to  be  the  most  primitive  and  ancient  records  of  the
human  race.  According  to  the  Sama-Veda,  after  the  period  of  the
world's  cataclysm  these  records  were  formed,  the  thoughts  of  the  Soul
of  Him  who  exists  by  or  of  Himself.  Only  a  very  few  fragments  of
these  books  have  been  translated  and  made  known  to  the  Western
world.  The  Calcutta  society  Antiquity  Asiatic  have  been  making
great  efforts  to  collect  and  translate  copy  from  these  wonderful  books,
but  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  collect  the  different  texts,  and  is  exceed-
ingly so  without  extraordinary  intimacy  and  confidence,  to  induce  a
Brahmin  of  high  caste  to  permit  any  examination  of  the  sacred  works
of  his  pagoda,  on  account  of  the  malevolent  and  wanton  destruction
of  these  books  carried  on  by  both  Catholic  and  Protestant  missiona-
ries, when  and  wherever  they  can  lay  hands  on  them.  At  the  time
the  author  was  collecting  these  notes,  a  raid  was  set  on  foot  by  some
of  these  missionary  worthies,  which  was  happily  frustrated  by  an
American,  who  informed  a  Hindoo  Priest  of  the  intended  outrage,
thereby  saving  some  most  valuable  manuscripts,  which  finally  came
into  safe  hands  and  were  translated.  The  reader  may  wonder  at
such  vandalism,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  ferocious  zeal-
ots are  well  aware  that  these  books  contain  all  the  records  analogous
to  and  frequently  verbatim  of  our  Bible,  both  Old  and  New  Testa-
ments, and  that  all  these  records  existed  thousands  of  years  before
the  birth  of  Moses  !  The  society  before  spoken  of  have  had  almost
insurmountable  difficulties,  not  only  in  obtaining  permission  to  exam-
ine the  sacred  works,  but  in  gaining  the  full  confidence  of  Brahmins
of  high  caste  who  would  give  a  full  and  free  translation.  It  is  impos-
sible, for  want  of  space,  to  give  more  than  a  few  of  the  thoughts  from
these  sacred  books,  whose  dates  are  lost  in  the  night  of  time.  The
Vedas  are  four  in  number.

In  the  long  time  (reads  one  of  them),  when  the  Sovereign  Power
Divine  had  finished  the  work  of  creation,  He  was  absorbed  through


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  465

love  into  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  thus  exchanged  His  period  of  energy
for  a  period  of  repose.

An  important  part  of  the  Buddhist  creed  is  the  belief  in  the  alter-
nation of  periods  of  repose  with  periods  of  activity.  They  say  the
tide  wave  of  humanity  flows  on  to  each  of  the  seven  planets  seven
times,  passes  through  its  seven  races,  and  ebbs  away  again ;  but  the
great  rest  period  of  our  planetary  chain  does  not  begin  until  the
seventh  round  of  humanity  is  perfected.  At  an  incalculably  remote
period  the  whole  of  the  seven  planetary  chains  of  our  solar  system
will  pass  mto  a  period  of  rest,  and  finally  the  whole  universe  itself
will  have  its  great  cosmic  night.  After  the  long  night  of  a  planetary
chain  the  animal  and  vegetable  world  resume  their  arrested  activity ;
but  when  the  time  arrives  for  all  the  planetary  chains  of  our  system
to  pass  into  their  night,  each  planet,  as  the  seven-round  man  quits  it,
is  annihilated  instead  of  becoming  invisible,  and  there  is  an  outflow
from  every  kingdom  of  its  entities.  These  will  rest  in  lethargic  sleep
in  space  until  brought  into  life  again  at  the  next  solar  period,  and
will  then  form  the  Soul  of  the  future  globe.  We  have  every  indica-
tion that  at  this  very  moment  such  a  solar  night  is  taking  place,  while
there  are  two  minor  ones  ending  somewhere.  At  the  beginning  of  the
next  solar  day  period,  the  hitherto  subjective  elements  of  the  material
worlds,  now  scattered  in  cosmic  dust,  will  form  into  primordial  ripples
of  life,  and,  separating  into  differentiating  centres  of  activity,  com-
bine in  a  graduated  scale  of  seven  stages  of  evolution.  Every  orb
will  pass  through  seven  stages  of  density  until  its  solidification  and
desiccation  at  last  reach  a  point  when  it  becomes  a  relaxed  conglom-
erate, and  the  constituent  masses  cease  to  obey  the  laws  of  cohesion
which  hold  them  together.

Again  the  Vedas  consider  God  to  have  sacrificed  Himself  to  pro-
duce or  create  creation.  Not  only  does  God  become  incarnate  and
suffer  for  our  regeneration  and  restoration,  but  He  even  immolated
and  dismantled  Himself  to  give  us  existence.  Thus  self-sacrificing
affection  is  the  Universal  Mother,  the  first  cause  and  supreme  gener-
atrix of  the  universe.

There  are  three  qualities  of  inseparable  attributes  of  nature,  which
intrinsically  permeate  all  that  exists.  According  to  all  Hindoo  phi-
losophers they  are  not  mere  accidents  of  nature.  The  first  is  the
presence  of  all  that  is  good  and  the  absence  of  all  that  is  evil.  The
last  is  the  absence  of  all  that  is  good  and  the  presence  of  all  that  is
evil.  The  second  partakes  of  both  the  others,  partly  good  and  partly
evil,  growing  toward  one  or  the  other.


466      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  God  (say  the  Vedas)  is  always  provided  with  an  infinitude  o(
thought-creations  and  variety  of  forms,  with  all  their  organs  to  cause
difference  of  image,  which  is  but  the  more  sublime,  showing  the  vast
fertility  and  abundance  of  thought  in  the  Divine  Architect  as  also  the
mighty  power  and  supreme  wisdom  which  no  mortal  Spirit  or  Angel
can  conceive,  and  much  less  can  any  man  measure  the  extent  or
fathom  the  depth  even  of  this  world.

When  the  Absolute  Ruler  of  worlds  saw  the  surface  of  the  earth
jewelled  by  sparkling  waters  and  enamelled  with  exquisite  flowers;
the  fields,  forests,  and  meadows ;  the  mountains  and  valleys ;  all  nature
beaming  with  youth,  beauty,  and  fresh  vitality,  pouring  out  her  treas-
ures. He  sent  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Word,  His  first-begotten,  who  pro-
ceeded to  the  creation  of  animals  and  of  man.  Man  being  the  last  and
most  perfect,  He  not  only  gave  to  him  the  five  organs  of  sense,  sight,
smell,  touch,  taste,  and  hearing,  but  also  a  sixth  (called  Mamas),  by
which  he  can  commune  with  God  and  unlock  the  mysteries  of  nature.
The  sixth  sense  is  the  Dual  force  generated  by  the  attuned  union  of
the  two  sexes  within  each  individual,  which  is  admitted  by  all  Hindoo
philosophers.

The  Sastra  not  only  promises  man  an  immortal  home  in  heaven,
but  claims  for  all  animals  immortality  of  Soul  life  and  an  existence  in
the  firmaments.  This  idea  is  expressed  in  all  the  books  of  the  Vedas,
and  in  the  Book  of  Two  Truths,  the  only  difference  being  the  different
appellations  of  God  in  different  nations.

Brahma  is  at  once  both  sacrificer  and  victim,  so  that  the  priest  who
officiates  each  morning  at  the  ceremonies  of  the  Sarvameda,  the  Uni-
versal sacrifice,  in  presenting  his  offering  to  God,  identifies  himself
with  the  Divine  sacrifice,  who  is  Brahma.  Or,  rather,  1/  is  Brahma's
victim,  in  his  son,  Christna,  who  comes  to  die  on  earth  for  our  salva*
tion,  who  in  himself  accomplished  the  solemn  sacrifice.

The  following  extract  is  from  the  teachings  of  the  Chaldee  Order
of  the  Eastern  Star :  —

Now,  as  Jesus  and  his  disciples  were  walking  in  the  evening  about
the  gardens  of  Jerusalem,  one  of  his  companions  stepped  forth  from
the  rest  and  said :  '*  Lord,  if,  as  thou  hast  taught  us,  the  woman  is
the  highest  form  of  humanity,  and  the  last  to  be  assumed  in  natural
form,  how  comes  it  that  thou,  the  Christ  and  Prince  of  Peace,  art  still
in  the  lower  form  of  man?  Why  comest  thou  not  to  lead  the
true  and  perfect  life,  and  to  save  the  world  by  love,  in  the  form  of
woman  ? "


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  46/

And  Christ  answered,  ''  I  have  attained  to  womanhood  as  thou
sayesty  and  already  I  have  taken  the  form  of  woman,  both  in  the
inner  and  in  the  outer  world.  But  there  are  three  conditions  under
which  Soul  returns  to  the  form  of  man ;  First,  when  the  energy  of  the
vestal  flame  of  life,  which  is  used  in  the  work  that  the  Spirit  proposes
to  accomplish,  is  of  a  nature  unsuited  to  the  female  form.  Second,
when  the  Soul  has  failed  to  acquire  or  ripen  certain  energies  in  the
degree  necessary  to  perfection,  certain  vestal  attributes  of  the  male
character.  Third,  when  the  Soul  has  been  in  error  or  transgressed
and  gone  back  in  the  path  of  ripening  and  perfecting  of  love,  by  de-
grading the  womanhood  it  had  attained.

"  In  the  first  of  these  cases,  the  return  to  the  male  form  is  physical
and  phenomenal  only,  which  is  not  the  subjective  or  true  being.  This
is  my  own  case  now.

''  I  am  a  woman  in  all  save  the  body,  which  appears  to  you  as  man.
For  had  my  body  been  that  of  woman,  I  could  not  have  led  the  life
necessary  to  the  work  I  have  now  to  perform.  I  could  not  have  trod-
den the  rough  ways  of  the  earth,  nor  have  gone  about  from  city  to
city,  preaching  wisdom  and  truth  to  all  men,  for  the  entity  of  man  b
wisdom ;  nor  could  I  have  fasted  on  the  mountains,  nor  lived  by  the
rivers,  nor  have  fulfilled  my  mission  of  poverty  and  labor.  Therefore
am  I  a  woman  clothed  in  the  body  of  a  man  that  I  may  be  able  to
do  the  work  set  before  me.

''  The  second  case  is  that  of  one  who  has  been  a  woman,  perchance
many  times,  having  acquired  more  readily  and  effectually  the  higher
qualities  of  womanhood  than  the  lower  ones  of  manhood ;  for,  as  wo-
manhood is  love  and  intuition,  manhood  is  wisdom  and  understanding ;
therefore  in  pure  womanhood  such  a  Soul  lacketh  the  vestal  fires  of
energy  and  resoluteness,  in  that  particular  attribute  which  the  Prophet
ascribes  to  the  Lord,  when  He  says,  'The  Lord  is  a  man  of  war.'
So  the  Soul  is  placed  back  in  the  form  of  man  to  acquire  these  quali-
ties yet  lacking.

'*  The  third  case  is  that  of  the  backslider,  who,  having  almost  at-
tained ripening  and  perfection  of  Soul,  becomes  indifferent  to  growth,
and,  greatiy  carried  away  by  love,  degrades  and  soils  its  white  robe
through  this  indifference,  and  b  put  back  again  into  the  lower  form
of  man  to  grow  energy.

''  My  beloved,  these  are  the  common  cases,  for  there  are  few
women  who  are  worthy  to  be  women."

From  the  same  source  as  the  above,  we  have  also  the  following :

Now,  as  the  Prince  of  Judea  was  walking  and  talking  with  his  dis-


468      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

ciples,  in  the  fields  round  about  Jerusalem,  a  man  approached  who
looked  wistfully  upon  the  Christ  Jesus,  observing  him,  said  to  his
companions :  *'  This  man  whom  you  see  approaching  b  a  Seen  He
can  behold  the  past  lives  of  a  man  by  looking  in  his  face."  As  the
man  came  up,  Jesus  took  him  by  the  hand  and  said^  ''  What  readest
thou  in  me  ? "  And  the  man  said, ''  I  see  the  past,  and  all  the  ways
by  which  Thou  hast  come."  ''  I  bid  thee  say  on,"  spake  Jesus.  So
spake  the  man.  "  I  can  see  Thee  in  the  past,  many  long  ages  back,"
and  he  named  several  incarnations  of  Jesus,  two  of  which  had  been
known  as  Christos  and  as  Isaac.  And  as  he  went  on  speaking,  Jesus
waved  his  right  hand  twice  or  thrice  before  his  eyes,  and  said,  **  It  is
enough,"  wishing  him  not  to  reveal  more.

From  India,  from  Greece,  from  Egypt  come  these  same  doctrines
of  metempsychosis ;  that  each  Soul  is  an  emanation  from  the  Supreme
Soul  of  the  Universe,  and,  as  a  portion  of  the  Divine  Essence,  will  at
the  hour  of  decomposition  of  its  earthly  house  return  and  be  reab-
sorbed in  the  bosom  of  the  Absolute  Grod.  According  to  the  Vedas,
they  are  the  sparks  that  return  to  the  immortal  Central  Sun,  from
which  they  were  emitted.  But  only  the  Souls  of  those  unsoiled  in
both  heart  and  hand,  or  purified  from  evil  through  good  works  and
unselfish  kindness,  can  meet  and  reunite,  after  shaking  off  mortality,
with  the  great  Sun  of  Divinity.

This  b  where  the  sentiment  of  selfish  individuality  is  lost  in  the
glorious  love  of  general  beatitude,  while  the  Soul  that  was  not  purified
and  ripened  must,  if  needs  be,  undergo  several  migrations,  and  re-
enter into  the  Spiritual  nature  of  God  only  after  being  purified  from
all  selfishness  and  eviL

The  unripened  Soul,  says  the  Vandanta,  that  returns  to  animate  a
new  physical  body,  loses  its  first  form  and  individuality  like  the  rain-
drop that  traverses  the  air  to  give  strength  and  life  to  the  plant  on
which  it  falls.  It  penetrates  the  embryo-animal  it  comes  to  animate
and  vivify.

These  were  the  doctrines  of  Pythagoras  and  Plato  and  were  their
ideas  of  the  Soul's  destiny  and  future  life.  They  taught  their  pupils
that  the  Soul  of  man  was  a  Ray  from  the  Supreme  Intelligence,  to
which  it  should  return,  merging  itself  again  into  the  Divinity  which
was  the  reward  of  Souls  that  had  ripened  into  ways  of  understanding
and  purity.  But  the  impure  Souls  must  return  to  Earth  and  be
purified.    Thus  they  taught  the  Absolute  was  ever  renewing  Himself.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.     469

Zeus  in  Sanscrit  signifies  God  the  Supreme  Absolute.  It  is  the
appellation  and  term  of  Brahma.  This  expression  of  Zeus  was
accepted  without  the  slightest  modification  by  the  Greeks.  For  them
it  represented  God  in  His  pure  essence.  In  Greek  mythology  the
name  of  Zeus-pater  means  Jupiter,  Grod,  Father,  Creator,  Master  of
heaven  and  of  men.

The  old  Latin  adopted  this  Sanscrit,  and  this  Greek  word  IZeus
becomes  Deus,  whence  we  modems  derive  our  expression  of  Dieu,
with  a  signification  identical  with  that  adopted  by  the  ancient  Egyp-
tians, a  nation  that  was  a  well  regulated  civilized  monarchy,  having
ant  elaborate  religious  Ci^Zf,  with  a  high  standard  of  morals,  more  than
three  thousand  years  before  the  exodus  of  Israel  from  that  coun-
try ;  therefore,  more  than  six  thousand  years  the  Egyptians  believed
in  the  one  God  2^us,  which  appellation  they  had  borrowed  from
India.

Some  of  the  Egyptian  prayers  found  at  Memplus  and  Kamak  read
thus:^

O,  Zeus,  give  us  refreshing  life.  O,  !Zeus,  Thou  who  bearest  up
the  offerings  of  men  to  the  Gods ;  O,  Zeus,  Thou  art  the  Soul  of
refreshing  and  vigor  to  the  earth.  Thou  canst  make  mortals  hold
communion  and  be  united  with  the  immortals,  for  Thou  art  the  guide
of  Souls  in  the  unseen  world.  Thou  art  the  Prince  of  Peace  and  the
builder  of  the  Two  Truths.  Thou  art  the  Vestal  Fire,  the  Fire  Saul  of
the  world  and  men.  For  Thou  art  the  Father  of  this  fire-horn  world
and  all  that  is  therein.

Away  back  among  the  milestones  of  the  centuries,  for  six  thousand
years,  let  the  reader  cast  a  thought  and  form  some  slight  idea  of
Zeus,  the  God  of  antiquity.    Has  modem  dvilizadon  done  any  better !

Yehweh,  Jehovah,  was  the  appellation  adopted  by  Israel  for  their
one  God.  He  was  their  special  God,  a  powerful  God  of  war,  to  be
worshipped  by  sacrifice,  anointing  of  oil,  and  by  fire.  He  had  pledged
Himself  to  the  Israelites  by  a  solemn  oath  to  protect  them  and  make
of  them  a  great  nation.  The  first  bom  of  man  and  herd  were  His.
He  was  irascible,  petulant,  and  hasty,  and  would  retaliate ;  but  He
was  merciful  at  the  same  time  and  would  forgive  an  insult

Yahweh  was  not  only  the  God  of  Israel,  but  in  the  language  of
their  time  the  God  of  all .  Gods ;  for  had  He  not  shown  His  superi-
ority over  the  powerful  Egyptian  divinities  and  also  the  Gods  of  the
Canaanites?    Yahweh  was  invisible.    No  man  could  see  Him  and


470      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

live ;  but  He  spake  through  thejlawu  of  fire.  Even  His  servant  Moses
could  not  see  Him  and  li\'e.

Not  before  the  reign  of  Solomon,  fully  three  thousand  years  after
Moses,  does  the  religion  and  cult  of  Yahweh  obt^n  much  promi-
nence, for  Zeus  had  been  the  God  of  antiquity.  But  now  a  temple
of  great  magnificence  was  erected  by  ICing  Solomon  for  the  worship
of  Yahweh,  the  God  of  sacrifices.  But  at  last  the  great  calamity  fell
on  Israel.  Jerusalem  was  besieged  and  sacked,  and  the  temple  de-
stroyed. Here  Yahweh  tore  ofiF  His  Hebrew  garments  even  to  the
last  shred  of  nationality  which  still  adhered  to  Him.  Here  Yahweh
or  Jehovah  ceased  to  be  the  special  God  of  Israel  and  became  the
God  of  the  universe,  and  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the  word  the  one  God
of  all  nations,  the  common  Father  of  all  mankind.  His  name  sunk
into  oblivion.  Israel  was  scattered  and  broken.  Thus  the  unspeak-
able name  became  Adonai,  My  LiOrd.

The  altars  of  the  God  of  sacrifices  were  quenched  forever,  and
prayers  substituted  for  sacrifices.  The  God  of  Israel  thus  becomes
the  God  of  the  Christian  world  of  to-day.  The  God  of  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob,  Moses,  and  Solomon  has  received  more  full  develop-
ment than  Zeus,  the  God  of  antiquit}',  from  whom  we  receive  the
names  Deus,  Dieu,  God,  Zezeus,  Isis,  Jesus ;  while  from  Yahweh,
Jehovah  of  Israel,  are  derived  the  names  Adonai,  Lord.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  may  we  all  attain  to  and  draw  to  ourselves
a  higher  inspiration  and  understanding  and  conception  of  the  one
True  God ;  and  let  us  hope  that  in  the  centuries  yet  to  come  to  man-
kind there  shall  still  progress  and  develope  a  higher  conception  of
the  God-idea,  to  an  extent  we  now  comprehend  as  little  as  former
generations  could  have  comprehended  the  God  of  our  day  if  they  had
been  confronted  with  Him.*


The  Intuition,  Teaching  of  the  •  •  •  •  Order.

Intuition  is  inborn  experience.  That  which  the  Spirit  knoweth  of
old  when  it  was  part  of  the  great  Central  Spirit.  Therefore,  do  not
think  I  tell  you  anything  you  know  not ;  all  cometh  from  within ;  you
are  but  in  a  fog  from  without.     Clear  away  the  fog  and  you  are  in-

•  See  illustratioQ  of  Great  Ceatnd  Sun  God.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  4/1

formed.  The  Spirit  that  informeth  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Prophet  himseli
*'  What,  then/'  you  ask,  *'  is  the  medium,  and  how  are  to  be  regarded
the  utterances  of  one  speaking  in  a  trance  ? ''  Grod  speaketh  through
no  man  in  the  way  you  suppose,  but  the  Soul  of  the  Prophet  beholds
God  with  open  eyes ;  for  when  he  falls  into  a  trance  his  Soul  eyes  are
opened,  and  his  interior,  the  true  man,  knoweth  what  is  spoken  by
him.  There  is  no  knowledge  but  by  labor ;  there  is  no  intuition  but
by  experience,  which  must  be  grown  by  silence,  meditation,  and  pa-
tience. Thou  hast  attained  with  patience  and  silence,  O  Prophet
God  hath  revealed  the  truth  to  thee  from  within.  By  prayer,  by  fast-
ing, by  meditation,  by  silence,  and  by  painful  seeking,  thou  hast  at-
tained that  thou  now  knowest  well.

Ye  ask  the  method  and  nature  of  inspiration,  and  the  means
whereby  God  revealeth  the  truth.  Know  ye  that  there  is  no  enlighten-
ment from  without ;  the  secret  of  things  is  from  within.  From  with-
out Cometh  no  Divine  revelation,  but  the  Spirit  within  beareth  witness.

Inborn  knowledge  and  the  perception  of  things  are  the  forces  of
intuition;  for  the  Spirit  of  the  man  instructeth  him  that  hath  already
learned  by  experience.  The  days  of  the  covenant  of  manifestation
are  passing  away.  The  gospel  of  interpretation  cometh,  and  the  days
will  soon  come  when  women  shall  no  more  lament  their  womanhood ;
but  men  shall  rather  say,  "  Oh  that  we  had  been  bom  women ! "  For
the  strong  and  physical  force  shall  be  put  down  from  their  seat,  and
the  meek  and  lowly  shall  be  exalted  to  their  place.  And  for  a  time
there  shall  nothing  new  be  told,  but  that  which  is  ancient ;  and  the
light  of  the  past  shall  be  interpreted.

As  is  the  outer,  so  is  the  inner.     He  that  worketh  is  One,

In  the  healthy  body  every  cell  is  polarized  in  subjection  to  the
Central  Will,  the  Adonai,  the  attuned  duality  of  being  within  the
physical  system.  Perfect  health,  therefore,  is  order,  obedience,
government,  and  harmony.  Every  cell  is  a  living  entity,  whether  of
vegetable  or  animal  potency,  and  wherever  disease  is  there  are  dis-
union, error,  rebellion,  and  insubordination ;  and  the  deeper  the  seat
of  the  confusion,  the  more  dangerous  the  malady  and  the  harder  to
quell  it.  The  body  dieth  when  the  Central  Will  of  its  system  no  longer
binds  all  in  harmony  and  in  obedience  to  the  elements  of  its  sub-
stance.

When  dissolution  is  complete,  then  follow  corruption,  putrefaction,
and  ashes.  Now,  that  which  is  true  of  the  physical  is  also  true  of  its
prototype.  The  whole  world,  in  these  days,  is  full  of  revolt,  and  every
element  by  its  inharmony  hath  a  Will  divergent  from  God,  whereas


47^  ^H£  HIDD&K  WA¥  ACftOSS  TRB  THRESHOLD.

there  ought  to  be  but  One  WHl^  attractiiig  and  ruling  man.  You  have
created  a  world  of  differences,  and  there  is  no  longer  brotherhood
among  you,  nor  order,  nor  mutual  sustenance  of  harmony.  You  have
thus  made  man's  animal  nature  the  playground  of  error  and  disease*
You  have  sold  yourselves  to  error,  for  gold  doth  rule  your  being.

Gold  may  be  next  to  God  as  a  maker,  but  surely  it  is  next  to
disease  as  a  destroyer.

Through  selfishness  you  make  every  cell  its  own  arbiter;  and
every  member  becomes  a  sect

You  are  no  longer  bound  together  by  love;  but  ye  have  con-
founded your  offices  and  abandoned  your  true  functions.  Ye  have
reversed  the  direction  of  your  magnetic  currents,  breaking  3rour
polarity  thereby.  Ye  have  fallen  into  confusion  and  unrest,  for  you
have  given  place  to  /Ae  evii  Spirit  of  Misrule,  Your  wills  are  many
and  diverse,  and  every  one  of  you  is  an  Anarchy.  A  house  that  is
divided  against  itself,  falleth.

O  wretched  man,  who  shall  deliver  you  from  this  body  of  death?
Let  him  who  runs,  read ;  let  him  who  hath  an  ear,  hear.        Z.  Z.  Z.

There  is  a  power  by  means  of  which  the  outer  may  be  absorbed
in  the  inner.  There  is  a  power  by  means  of  which  matter  may  be
returned  ingested  into  its  original  substance.  This  power  is  Adonai,
the  Christ-power,  which  places  all  error  and  evil  under  foot,  for  it
reduces  chaos  to  order,  and  indraws  the  eternal  to  the  centre,  a  focal-
ization  of  harmony.  He  has  found  his  own  central  pointy  and  all
power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  And  if  any  shall
declare  that  here  or  there  the  Christ  has  appeared  as  a  person,
believe  it  not ;  for  there  shall  arise  delusive  apparitions  and  manifes-
tations, together  with  great  signs  and  marvels,  such  as  might  well
deceive  even  the  elect.    Remember,  I  have  told  you  beforehand.

Wherefore,  if  they  say  unto  you,  "  Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert,"
whether  of  the  East  or  of  the  West,  join  him  not,  neither  go  with
him.  Or  if  they  cry,  "  Behold  the  Christ  is  in  darkened  rooms  and
secret  assemblies,"  pass  thou  by,  and  pay  no  regard  to  their  words:  in
Silence  and  love  ask  for  Light,  and  when  the  Lord  comes  thou  shalt
know  his  voice.

The  gate  of  love  and  obedience  is  the  gate  of  prayer,  the  gate  of
understanding  and  discernment.

Renounce  all  doubt  Pray  always  and  faint  not ;  be  pure  of  heart
also,  and  thou  shalt  see  God.

Renounce  the  shadow  world  and  reach  upward ;  aspire  to  heaven


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  473

and  heaven  will  come  to  thee.  Labor  not  too  long  for  meat  which
perishes ;  but  ask  daily  for  guidance  and  bread  for  the  natural  body,
and  for  truth  and  love  for  the  Spiritual  body.  Beware  of  wandering
doctrines;  and  let  the  word  of  truth  and  love  of  the  Lord  be  thy
Light

In  the  days  of  hardness  of  hearts,  the  tribulations  shall  be  with-
out parallel.  And  such  as  survive  those  days  shall  be  few  in
number;  for  escape  from  the  body  would  be  impossible.  But  for  the
elect's  sake  there  shall  be  a  few  true  men  and  prophets.

Like  lightning  coming  out  of  the  East  and  illuminating  the  West
so  shall  be  the  Spiritual  awakening  of  the  world  to  the  recognition
of  all  the  Divine  in  Humanity.

The  forbidden  fruit,  communicated  by  the  Soul  to  the  body  is  the
vital  flame  or  consciousness  described  by  classical  poets  as  '*  the  Are
of  heaven."  For  as  God  is  supreme  and  original  consciousness,  the
first  manifestation  of  human  consciousness  has  its  seat  in  the  Soul.

In  the  pure  Edenic  state,  or  state  of  innocence  as  it  is  called,  the
shrine  of  this  heavenly  fire  is  in  the  Spiritual  part  of  man.


Cahalistic  Names.

Japhbth,  the  name  so  long  unspeakable ;  the  triune  Almighty  and
One  God  ;  the  name  which  expresses  His  eternal  fecundity.

Jabamiah,  the  great  powerful  name  of  the  fire  in  man.

Nehmahihah,  the  all-powerful  name  of  the  Jews,  sometimes  pro-
nounced Jeveh,  which  is  analogous  to  the  J.  A.  O.  of  the  Gnostic.

Eliel,  the  great  cabalistic  name  which  has  dominion  over  the
powers  of  darkness,  causing  all  to  take  their  flight.  Also  the  name
called  upon  to  bring  peaceable  enjoyment  to  man  and  all  that  he
loves;  the  protector  of  man's  loves.

Heath,  from  the  Chaldee,  we  have  as  the  sacred  name  of  Jehovah.

Anamzapta,  the  amulet  name,  which  means,  Have  mercy  on  us ;
comes  also  from  these  ancient  people,  as  does  the  stone  Abraxas,
which  means  to  call  the  power  of  Spirits


474  '^H^    HIDDEN   WAY    ACROSS   THE  THRESHOUD.

In  Caspar  or  Caspar,  we  find  the  sacred  letter  G,  which,  inter-
preted, means  the  Great  White  One.  Melchion  G,  the  King  of  Light,
Glory,  Grandeur,  Gomel.

This  last  word  is  Hebrew,  and  signifies, — Thanks  to  Thee,  OGod,
for  Thy  supreme  power.  It  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  word  that
Adam  spoke  of  love  and  praise.

The  Runic  words  Anani  Zafta  of  Odin  of  the  north  is  similar  to
the  Chaldee  magic  word  Anamzapta.  It  is  of  most  remote  antiquity,
and,  being  interpreted,  means.  Have  mercy  on  us.  O  Judge,  oh,
guide  our  chain  of  destiny  and  protect  us  from  all  disease.  The
word  Tau  was  usually  placed  under  the  words  Anani  Zapta,  which
was  the  obligation  or  oath  to  keep  these  things  sacred.

Pthah  was  the  sacred  magical  word  of  temples,  and  the  pro>
tecting   Divinity  of   the  ancient  city  of   Memphis.      Pthah  with


over  the  name  and  Tau  under  it  was  engraved  on  Joseph's  ring.
It  has  also  been  found  on  the  rings  of  Thothmes  Rameses.

The  Trinity  of  the  Egyptians  was  formed  by  Zeus,  Osiris,  and  Isis.
The  text  reads  thus :  —

^*  Father  and  Mother  of  heaven,  which  is  one  in  Zeus,  whose  chil-
dren are  Isis  and  Osiris,  O  stretch  Thyself  over  me  in  the  name  of  all
the  heavenly  mysteries."

And  to  the  Initiate,  **  Therefore,  /give  thee  cedar  oil  and  wrappings^
and  also  the  cord  that  binds  thee  to  thy  vestal  fires  ^  and  thou  shcUt  be  nuuU
acquainted  with  the  sacred  mysteries  of  life  and  death.

Thebaid.
S.  S.  S.  —  Bom  Again  of  Spirit.     The  Good  Shepherd.

To  Thee,  O  Sacred  Spirit,  All  Hail  I

To  Thee  who  art  the  Light  and  Bread  of

Life  in  the  Mansions  of  the  Universe,  All  Hail !

Roman  insignet  of  the  Great  Name.
I.  A.  O.  —  God  the  Father.
A«  I.  O,  —  The  Coming  One.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  4/5

J.  A.  D.  —  Same  meaning  according  to  Hebrew.
OM.  — The    Sacred   Vedic  Word,  from    the   Greek   to   throw
together.

AUM.  —  The  sound  formed  by  the  expiring  bfeath;  the  Light  of
flie  World.

From  East  India.  Krishna,  on  the  wisdom  of  Yoginism  — Spir-
itual Light

In  water  I  the  Saviour  am ;

In  sun  and  moon  I  am  the  Light

In  sacred  books  I  am  the  Mystic  OM  |

In  atmosphere  the  sound.

In  human  kind  the  strength  of  males;

And  in  the  ground  the  odor  sweet.

OM ;  of  life  I  am  vitality.

I  am,  O  Pritha's  Son.  OM.

Zoroaster's  doctrines  and  light  were  a  more  public  exposition  of
strictly  monotheistic  religions,  and  truths  hitherto  taught  only  to
the  favored  few  within  the  sacred  inner  sanctuaries.

Zoroaster  was  the  primeval  institutor  of  Sun-worship.  But  the
dualistic  system  of  Soul  growth  and  the  unity  of  God  was  what  he
had  learned  from  the  Brahmins,  it  having  been  brought  along  down
the  ages  long  before  history  began,  as  Divine  sacred  Truth,  identical
with  that  adopted  by  ancient  India  and  found  in  the  Manon  of
Zoroaster  and  Manon  of  Christna.


The  Smaragdine  Table  of  Hermes.

[Said  to  have  been  found  in  the  valley  of  Ebron  after  the  flood.]

1.  I  speak  no  fiction,  but  what  is  certain  and  most  true.

2.  What  is  below  is  like  that  which  is  above ;  and  what  is  above
is  like  that  which  is  below,  for  performing  the  miracle  of  one  thing.

3.  As  all  things  were  produced  from  one  by  the  mediation  of  One,
so  all  things  are  produced  from  this  one  thing  by  adaptation.

4.  The  Father  of  Life  is  the  Sun ;  the  Mother  b  the  Moon ;  the
wind  carried  it  in  its  belly  ;  its  nurse  b  the  Earth.

5.  It  is  the  cause  of  all  perfection  throughout  the  whole  world.

6.  Its  power  is  perfect  if  it  be  changed  into  the  earth.

7.  Separate  the  earth  from  fire,  the  subtile  from  the  gross,  gently
and  with  judgment.

8.  It  ascends  from  earth  to  heaven  and  descends  again  to  earth ;
thus  you  will  possess  the  glory  of  the  whole  world,  and  all  obscurity
will  fly  away.


47^  THE  HIDDEH  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOUX

9.  This  thing  is  the  fbrtitade  of  all  foTtitade,  became  it
all  subtile  things,  and  penetrates  every  solid  thixig.

10.  Thus  were  all  things  created.

11.  Thence  proceed  wonderful  adaptations  whkh  are  produoed  in
this  way.

12.  I  am  called  Hermes  Trism^;istus,  p<nytwng  the  tliiee  parts
of  the  philosophy  of  the  whole  world.

13.  ^liat  I  had  to  say  concerning  the  operation  of  the  Great  Sun
is  complete.

If  that  which  thou  seekest  thou  findest  not  within  thee,  thoa  wilt
never  find  it  without  thee.

Therefore,  my  son,  strive  not  too  long  with  the  stubborn  and
stiff-necked  man,  if  he  will  not  look  elsewhere  than  in  the  outward
senses.  Strive  with  him  until  the  times  niunber  seventy-two,  then
pass  on  thy  way.  If  he  does  not  then  hear,  thou  canst  not  lose  thy-
self or  thy  time.  Let  him  perish  in  his  ignorance  and  darkness ;  bat
thou,  my  child,  save  thyself  from  being  shipwrecked.

Oh,  son,  truth  is  the  most  perfect  virtue,  and  the  highest  good
itself;  not  troubled  by  matter  nor  encumbered  by  a  body,  but  is
naked,  clear,  unchangeable,  venerable,  justice,  goodness,  and  wisdom.

But,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  and  just,  I  can  say  that  trudi  is  only
in  eternal  bodies,  which  very  bodies  are  also  true.

But  every  man  doth  not  enjoy  understanding;  for  one  man  b
material  in  sense,  while  another  man  is  essential  in  being  and  fulness.
Therefore  I  say  that  senses  are  both  corporeal  and  mortal,  having  as
much  existence  as  the  body ;  for  they  are  bom  with  the  body  and  die
with  it  For  sense  can  be  no  more  than  a  corporeal  apprehension
either  of  evil  or  good  that  comes  to  the  body.

But  if  thou  shut  up  thy  Soul,  and  darken  the  windows  of  its  lig^t
by  enclosing  it  in  the  outer  senses  of  the  body,  and  abuse  and  stifle
it,  and  say,  "  I  understand  nothing.  I  can  do  nothing.  I  am  afraid
of  the  sea.  I  cannot  climb  up  to  heaven.  I  know  not  who  I  anu  I
cannot  tell  what  I  shall  be.  What  have  I  to  do  with  God  ?  I  only
desire  to  be  left  still."  Oh,  foolish  man !  what  hast  thou  to  do  with
the  Father  of  all,  thy  Mother  also — thy  God?  Thou  foolish  child,
for  thou  blindest  thine  eyes,  and  canst  not  understand  any  of  those
fair  and  good  things  that  were  prepared  for  thee ;  but  thou  desirest
to  be  a  lover  of  the  bodily  senses  and  of  error  and  evil.

Within  every  man  there  lie  concealed  the  germs  of  higher  facul-
ties that  are  never  unfolded  on  earth,  and  which  have  no  reference
to  this  state  of  love  or  knowledge.


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES.     4//

It  is  fit  that  we,  who  endeavor  to  rise  to  an  elevation  so  sublime,
should  study  first  to  leave  behind  carnal  affections,  the  frailty  of  the
senses,  the  passions  that  belong  to  matter;  secondly,  to  learn  by
what  means  we  may  ascend  to  the  climax  of  pure  intellect,  united
with  the  powers  above,  without  which  never  can  we  gain  the  lore  of
secret  things,  nor  the  magic  that  ^ects  true  wonders.  — Tritemus,
on  Secret  Things  and  Secret  Spirits.


The  Prayer  of  the  Spirtts  of  the  Principls  of  Fire.

O  Thou  Immortal,  Eternal,  Unspeakable,  and  Sacred  Father  of
all  Things !  Who  art  carried  upon  the  Chariots  of  the  Spheres  which
always  continue  to  Roll  about  the  Great  deep.  Ruler  over  the  Ethe-
real Armies,  where  the  Throne  of  thy  Power  is  raised,  from  the  high
Top  of  which  Thine  All-Piercing  Eyes  behold  All,  and  thy  Pure  and
Holy  Ears  hear  All,  Help  thy  Children,  Whom  Thou  hast  Loved
from  the  Birth  of  Ages.  For  thy  Bright,  Thy  Great,  and  Eternal
Majesty  shines  above  the  Earth,  the  Heavens,  and  the  Stars.  Thou
art  raised  above  them,  O  Thou  Sparkling  Fire  of  all  Life.  There
Thou  givest  Light  and  entertainest  Thyself  with  Thine  own  Splendor,
and  from  Thy  Essence  flow  forth  Eternal  Rivers  of  Light  and  Love,
which  nourish  thy  Infinite  Spirit  This  Infinite  Spirit  produceth  all
things ;  and  makes  this  inexhaustible  Treasure  of  Matter,  which  can
never  fail  the  Generation,  which  always  compasseth  it  about;  by
reason  of  the  numberless  Forms  with  which  it  is  pregnant,  and  with
which  Thou  hast  filled  it  at  the  beginning.  From  this  Spirit  do  these
Most  Holy  Things  also  draw  their  original  who  are  round  about  Thy
Throne,  and  who  compose  thy  Court.  O  Father  Universal  1  O  Thou
Holy  One !  O  Father  of  Blessed  Mortals  and  Immortals  1  Thou
hast  particularly  created  Powers  who  are  marvellously  like  Thine
Eternal  Thought,  and  to  Thy  Adorable  Essence ;  Thou  hast  estab-
lished them  above  the  Angels,  who  declare  Thy  Will  to  the  World.
In  fine  Thou  hast  created  us  a  Third  Sort  of  Powers  in  the  Elements.
Our  continual  Exercise  is  to  praise  Thee,  and  to  adore  Thy  Dispen-
sations. We  bum  with  the  desire  of  possessing  Thee.  O  Father !
so  full  of  kindness  !  O  Mother !  the  tenderest  of  Mothers  I  O  son
the  flower  of  all  Sons !  O  Form !  most  Lovely  of  all  Forms  I  Soul,
Spirit,  Love,  Harmony,  and  Truth  Number  of  All  Things.

Philo,  an  Alexandrian  Jew,  in  the  year  97  B.  C,  collected  the
teachings  of  Philo  the  pupil  of  EubulideSi  who  lived  300  B.  C,  and


478  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRSSHOUX

those  of  Zoroaster,  and  combined  them  together.  This  was  known
through  different  ages  as  the  Logos  of  Philo,  meaning  the  true  word.
It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  Logos  of  Philo  with  those  of  Paul
and  John,  thus: —

PhQo  says :  Ordered  all  things.
Paul  says :  Created  all  things.

Philo  says :  Was  the  f contain  of  WisdoiBt
Paul  says :  The  Wisdom  of  God.

Philo  says :  Before  all  things.
Paol  says :  Before  all  things.

Philo  says:  Divine  word  superior  to  all  things.
Paul  says :  So  much  better  than  Angels.

Philo  says :  The  mediator  standing  between  the  liTing  and  the  dead.
Paul  says :  The  mediator  between  God  and  man.

Philo  says :  Nearest  to  God.

Paul  and  John  say :  Was  with  God.

Philo  says :  Sent  from  God.

Paul  and  John  say :  The  Father  Himself  hath  sent  meii

Philo  says :  The  second  God,  the  Word.
John  says :  The  word  was  God.

Philo  says :  The  intellectual  Sun,  the  Light  of  the  world.
John  says :  The  life  that  was  the  Light  of  men,  the  true  light  whidi  Hg^tTt**
erery  man.

Philo  says :  The  heavenly  bread  of  the  Soul.

John  says :  The  bread  of  life,  the  true  bread  of  heaTen.

Philo  says :  The  shepherd  of  God's  flock.
John  says :  The  good  Shepherd.

Magus.

There  is  a  certdn  proportion  of  the  intemaivasxi  toward  the  exief^
nal  in  all  things  growing  or  glowing  after  its  own  manner,  which  is  an
appropriated  disposition  and  proportioned  property.

Wherefore  the  power  or  faculty  must  needs  be  dispersed  through-
out the  whole  man ;  in  the  Soul,  indeed,  more  vigorous,  but  in  the
flesh  far  more  remiss.

The  Vital  Spirit  in  the  flesh  and  blood  performs  the  office  of  the
Soul ;  that  is,  it  is  the  same  Spirit  in  the  outward  man  which  in  the


TRANSLATIONS   OR  THOUGHTS   FROM  OTHER  TONGUES.     4/9

seed  forms  the  whole  figure,  that  magnificent  structure  and  perfect
delineation  of  man,  and  which  hath  known  the  end  of  things  to  be
done  because  it  contains  them,  and  the  which  as  president  accompa-
nies the  new  framed  young,  even  into  the  period  of  its  life.

The  Soul,  being  wholly  a  Spirit,  could  never  move  or  stir  up  the
vital  Spirit  unless  a  certain  natural  power,  yet  magical  and  Spiritual,
did  descend  from  the  Soul  into  the  Spirit  and  body.

That  Natural  magic  of  the  Soul,  which  she  exerdseth  not  of  her-
self but  by  virtue  of  the  Image  of  God,  doth  now  lie  hid  and,  as  it
were  asleep,  and  stands  in  need  of  stirring  up ;  which  same  power,
now  drowsy,  and  as  it  were,  drunk  soever,  it  otherwise  remains  daily
in  us,  yet  it  is  sufficient  to  perform  its  offices  in  its  own  body.

There  is  inherent  in  the  Soul  a  certain  magical  virtue  given  her
by  God,  naturally  and  proper,  and  belonging  to  her,  in  as  much  as
we  are  His  Image  and  engravement ;  and  in  thb  respect  she  acts  also
in  a  peculiar  manner —  that  is  Spiritually  on  an  object  at  a  distance,
and  that  more  powerfully  than  by  any  corporeal  assistance ;  for  see-
ing the  Soul  is  the  principal  part  of  the  body,  therefore  all  action
belonging  to  her  is  Spiritual  and  of  the  greatest  validity.

High  and  sacred  is  the  force  of  the  Microcosmical  Spirit,  which
stamps  upon  the  germ  the  image  and  properties  of  a  thing  desired,
even  as  in  the  acorn  is  found  the  exact  image  and  semblance  of  the
mighty  Oak.

All  the  Spirits  and,  as  it  were,  the  essences  of  all  things  lie  hid
in  us,  and  are  bom  and  brought  forth  by  the  working  power  and
phantasy  of  man.

The  Soul,  by  conceiving,  generates  a  certain  idea  of  the  thing
conceived,  the  which,  as  it  before  lay  hid  unknown,  like  the  fire  in  the
steel,  so  by  stirring  up  the  fantasy  there  is  produced  a  certain  real
idea,  which  is  not  a  naked  quality,  but  something  like  a  substance
hanging  in  suspense  between  a  body  and  a  Spirit,  that  is  the  Soul.

That  middle  being  is  so  Spiritual  that  it  is  not  plainly  exempt
from  a  corporeal  condition,  since  the  actions  of  the  Soul  are  limited
on  the  body,  and  the  inferior  order  of  faculties  depending  upon  it ;
nor  yet  so  corporeal  that  it  may  be  enclosed  by  dimensions.


480      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

The  object  of  the  understanding  is  in  itself  a  naked  and  pore
essence,  not  an  accident ;  therefore,  thb  transferable  essence,  the  un-
derstanding, doth  put  on  and  clothe  itself  with  this  conceived  essence.

The  Soul  is  the  pure  simple  form  of  the  body,  which  turns  itseK
about  to  every  member ;  therefore,  the  acting  understanding  cannol
have  two  images  at  once,  but  first  one  and  then  the  other.

Therefore,  there  is  nothing  in  being,  no  creature  but  what  pos-
sesses a  certain  degree  of  Divine  Fire  and  life,  yet  lying  dormant  or
unexcited  until  stirred  up  by  the  art  or  power  of  Man.

Every  magical  virtue  stands  in  need  of  an  excitement  by  which  a
certain  vapor  is  stirred  up,  by  reason  whereof  the  phantasy  which  so
profoundly  sleeps  is  awakened,  and  there  begins  an  action  of  the
corporeal  Spirit  as  a  medium,  which  is  that  of  magnetism,  and  is
excited  by  a  foregoing  touch.

There  is  a  magical  virtue,  being,  as  it  were,  abstracted  from  the
body,  which  is  wrought  by  the  stirring-up  of  the  Soul's  power,  from
whence  there  are  made  most  potent  procreations,  and  strong  effects,
and  powerful  impressions,  so  that  Nature  is  on  every  side  a  magi-
cianess,  and  acts  by  her  own  phantasy ;  and  by  how  much  the  more
Spiritual  her  phantasy  is,  so  much  more  powerful  it  is.

The  highest  sort  of  magic  is  that  which  is  stirred  up  by  or  from
an  intellectual  conception  excited  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  upon  the  ifmer
man,  but  the  external  man  is  stirred  up  by  a  strong  imagination,  by
daily  heightened  speculation,  and  by  the  DeviL

Now,  it  is  manifest  that  in  man  there  is  placed  a  great  efficacy,
whereby  he  may  be  able  to  act  out  of  himself  and  imprint  a  virtue,  a
certain  influence  which  afterwards  perseveres  or  constantly  subsists
by  itself,  and  acts  upon  objects  at  a  very  great  dbtance,  being  in
reality  an  Ideal  entity  conveyed  in  a  Spiritual  jewel,  and  departing
far  from  home  to  execute  its  offices  concerning  the  magnetism  of  all
things  begotten  in  the  imagination  of  man,  in  its  relation  which  is
proper  to  everything,  and  also  showing  the  magical  superiority  of
Men  over  all  other  bodies.

But  relatively  must  this  magical  faculty  be  stirred  up^  being  it  as
every  magical  faculty  lies  dormant — for  if,  as  steel  lies  ever  ready  to


TRANSLATIONS  OR  THOUGHTS  PROM  OTHER  TONGUES.  48 1

receive  of  magnetism,  if  the  object  is  plainly  and  nearly  disposed,
then  the  patient  without  much  stirring  up,  the  phantasy  of  the  out-
ward man  alone  being  drawn  out  to  work,  and  bound  up  to  any  suita-
ble mean  being  sufficient  to  cause  such  object  so  nearly  disposed  to
yield

But  if  the  object  whereon  it  is  to  act  be  not  nearly  disposed,  and
its  internal  phantasy  does  not  wholly  conform  to  the  impression  of
the  agent,  if  there  be  equality  or  superiority  of  strength  in  the  object,
then  is  there  much  need  of  the  depth  of  Spiritual  excitation,  that  the
potent  forces  so  manifest  may  be  subdued

Therefore,  the  Magician  must  always  make  use  of  a  medium ;  for
then  the  words  or  forms  do  always  operate,  and  if  the  effort  do  not
avail  it  is  because  the  unezdted  mind  or  Spirit  of  the  exorcist  renders
the  operation  ineffectuaL

Therefore,  no  man  can  be  a  successful  magician  but  he  who
knows  how  to  stir  up  the  magical  virtues  of  the  SouL

Therefore,  let  those  who  would  attain  to  knowledge  constantly
meditate  and  desire  that  ^The  First  Cause  and  Archetype  of  all
things  would  graciously  and  mercifully  illuminate  their  minds,  with-
out which  they  grope  in  darkness  and  uncertainty,  and  are  subject  to
the  delusions  of  impure  Spirits  who  are  only  overcome  by  putting  on
the  whole  armor  of  God,"  in  whom  we  live,  move,  breathe,  and  have
our  being.

And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  light  —
Zeck.  xiv. :  7.

To  grow  in  age  is  to  come  into  everlasting  youth.  To  become  old
in  years  is  to  put  on  the  fulness  of  perpetual  prime.  We  drop  from
us  the  diMs  of  the  past,  we  breathe  the  ether  of  immortality,  and
our  cheeks  mantle  with  eternal  bloom.

Those  who  have  no  internal  resources  of  happiness  will  find  them-
selves uneasy  in  every  stage  of  human  life ;  but  to  him  who  is  accus-
tomed to  derive  happiness  from  within  himself,  no  state  will  appear
as  a  real  evil  into  which  he  is  conducted  by  the  common  and  regular
course  of  nature  ;  and  this  b  peculiarly  the  case  with  respect  to  old
age.

'^  I  consider  this  world  as  a  place  which  nature  never  intended  for
my  permanent  abode ;  and  I  look  on  my  departure  from  it,  not  as
being  driven  from  my  habitation,  but  simply  as  leaving  an  inn.


4S2  THE   HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Fruit,  before  it  is  ripe,  cannot  t>e  separated  from  the  stalk  without
some  degree  of  force ;  but  when  it  is  peifectly  mature,  it  drops  of
itself;  so  the  disunion  of  the  Soul  and  body  is  effected  in  the  young
by  violence,  but  in  the  old  it  takes  place  by  mere  fulness  and  comple-
tion of  years.  This  ripeness  for  death  I  perceive  in  myself  with
much  satisfaction;  and  I  look  forward  to  my  dissolution  as  to  a
secure  haven,  where  I  shall  at  length  find  a  happy  repose  from  the
fatigues  of  a  long  voyage." — Cicero.

Add  to  thy  faith  knowledge,  to  thy  actions  love,  and  thy  presence
amo:^  men  will  be  like  a  benediction,  while  Spirits  and  An^ls  shall
be  thy  courtiers.

Make  use  of  time  if  thou  valuest  eternity.  Yesterday  cannot  be
recalled;  to-morrow  cannot  be  assured;  to-day  only  is  thine,  which,  tf
thou  procrastinate st,  thou  losest,  —  which  loss  is  lost  forever.

The  heighta  by  great  men  reached  and  kept

Were  not  attained  by  sudden  flight;
But  the;,  while  their  companions  slept,

Wert  toiling  upward  in  the  aight.


CHAPTER  XVI.

THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN,

*'T1ioa|^  that  bretthe
And  fMvds  that  bora.*'

Through  this  life  man  is  madly  weaving  at  the  drapery  which  is
first  to  clothe  him  in  his  heavenly  home.

'*  If  that  which  thou  seekest,  thou  findest  not  within  thee,  thou  ¥dlt
never  find  it  without  thee."

Your  Bodies  are  the  Temples  of  The  Living  God.

The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation :

Neither  shall  they  say,  Lo,  here !  or  lo,  there !  for  behold,  the  king-
dom of  God  is  within  you. — Luke.  xvii. :  20,  21.

O  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  know  that  there  is  no  enlighten-
ment from  without ;  the  secret  of  all  things  is  revealed  from  within.
Therefore,  when  you  have  obtained  mastery  over  the  objective  senses,
you  will  no  longer  totter  in  your  step  nor  falter  in  your  flight  across
the  threshold  of  the  great  unknown.

Conscience  is  the  voice  of  the  Soul ;  while  passion  is  the  voice  of
the  body.

There  is  a  principle  of  the  Soul  superior  to  all  external  nature ;
and  through  this  principle  we  are  capable  of  surpassing  the  order  and
systems  of  the  world,  and  participating  in  the  immortal  life  and  the
energy  of  the  Sublime  Celestials.  W^en  the  Soul  is  elevated  to
natures  above  itself,  it  deserts  the  order  to  which  it  is  a  while  com-
pelled to  belong,  and  by  a  religious  magnetism  is  attracted  to  another
and  a  loftier  with  which  it  blends  and  mingles.

A  man's  ambitions,  hopes,  loves,  and  conscience  ;  the  doctrines  of
his  inner  life  and  practice  are  the  framework  of  his  mind  and  Soul,
and  there  must  be  something  to  which  a  man's  charity,  love,  hope,
and  faith  can  cling  and  anchor,  just  as  the  flesh  and  blood  cling  and
anchor  to  the  bones.  That  Something  is  his  idea  and  doctrine.  A
man  without  any  idea  or  doctrine  is  a  man  without  purpose,  conduct,
or  design,  drifting  with  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide,  a  lifeless  nonen-
tity, an  empty  vessel.

Charity,  love,  faith,  idea,  understanding,  and  doctrine  form  the
body  of  a  man's  Soul.    It  is  indeed  a  withered  life  if  man  has  none

483


484       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

of  these.    The  heart  of  the  Soul  is  well ;  its  strivings,  its  loves.     Is
the  body  of  our  love  less  real  than  the  body  of  our  flesh  ?

Are  the  faith  and  hope  that  enrich  and  feed  our  love  less  real
than  the  blood  that  feeds  the  natural  body  ?  Are  the  ideas,  intellect,
understanding,  and  doctrines  that  build  up  our  mental  frame  of  mem-
ory and  thought  less  sound  and  strong  than  the  bones  that  build  up
our  physical  frame  ?

This  may  appear  ideal  to  the  material  man,  here,  but  it  is  real  in
the  true  life  of  the  Spiritual  man  ;  ideal  to  the  natural  mind,  but  real
to  the  Spiritual  mind.

All  evil  and  all  offences  must  be  in  the  mind«  If  the  mouth
blasphemes,  and  the  tongue  gives  out  venom,  or  the  eye  looks  un-
chastely  for  impure  things,  the  evil  must  certainly  be  in  the  man  him-
self and  not  in  the  mouth  and  eye,  the  mere  mediums.

He  who  looks  only  for  the  evil,  will  find  the  evil ;  but  the  life  of
him  who  looks  only  for  the  good  and  the  pure,  the  unselfish  and
noble,  the  truth  and  Spirit,  of  all  things,  becomes  a  living  fountain  of
wisdom  and  understanding.  The  man  or  woman  who  looks  only  for
the  good  in  others  and  the  happiness  which  should  be  theirs,  is  a
great  benediction  ;  a  joy  and  a  perpetual  delight  to  the  world ;  while
they  who  look  continually  for  the  evil,  delighting  in  gossip  even  while
they  condemn  it,  are  as  false  as  are  the  numerous  assertions  of  God's
anger  which  are  sometimes  heard.  This  morbid,  evil  thought  of
looking  for  the  impure  in  everything  is  ingrained  into  their  very
nature,  poisoning  the  very  atmosphere  like  a  pestilence.

"The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye.  If,  therefore,  thine  eye  be
single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light ;  but  if  thine  eye  be  evil,
thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  darkness."

Wisdom,  which  is  the  sound  of  Truth  heard  by  the  Spiritual  ear —
"  which  is  the  same  ear  possessed  by  the  entranced  and  the  dead  "  —
affects  the  Will,  and  thus  impels  the  man  and  bends  him  to  obedience.
"  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me ;  hear,  and  your  Soul  shall  live,"
says  the  Prophet.     Christ  also  says,  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."

There  comes  a  time  in  every  human  life  when  love  sheds  a  halo
of  light  around  every  joy  and  every  care.  Oh,  why  could  not  this
last  forever  ?  Why  does  fate  delight  to  lift  a  cup  of  woe  to  lips  warm
with  the  dewy  kiss  of  Love  ?  Why  does  an  inexorable  law  of  destiny
push  us  on,  while  we  vainly  boast  of  our  own  free  will  ?  Why  does
silent  death  covet  life's  most  perfect  fruit?

Everything  changes  when  love  touches  the  human  heart.  Love's
first  dreams  transport  us  into  a  new  world,  where  not  a  cloud  dims


THE   TEMPLE   WITHIN.  48$

the  rays  of  the  summer's  sun,  nor  a  shadow  hides  the  sweet  face  of
moon  and  star.  It  is  indeed  a  world  fragrant  with  tropical  flowers,
and  whose  laughing,  dancing  rills,  green  meadows  and  sighing  oceans,
outrival  the  wayworn  pilgrim's  dream  of  heaven.

**  Tongue  cannot  express
The  sweet  comfort  and  peace,
Of  a  Soul  in  its  earliest  love."

But,  in  the  midst  of  his  success,  and  in  the  mellow  sunshine  of
love's  rosy  morning,  death  draws  over  the  sun  of  life  a  sombre  veil.

The  world  of  Soul  does  not  lie  on  the  bleak  waters  of  pathless
oceans,  nor  yet  afar  in  the  interstellar  space.  It  is  a  world  lying  all
about  us.  As  every  flower  has  its  aroma,  so  all  external  nature  is  but
the  materialized  expression  of  the  invisible  Soul.  What  we  call  the
real  world  is  only  the  camera  in  which  the  Soul  is  photographed.  All
external  objects  are  simply  leaves  in  the  universal  library.  The
hardest  rock,  the  frowning  mountain,  the  ancient  ruin  with  crumbling
wall  and  broken  tower,  a  chip  from  the  pyramid  or  cold,  hard  breast
of  Memnon,  —  all  are  leaves  in  Nature's  universal  library.  Sensitive
Souls  carry  the  keys  which  unlock  the  treasure-house  of  the  world.

Man  is  an  eternal  mystery,  even  to  himself.  His  own  person  b
a  house  in  which  he  never  enters,  and  of  which  he  studies  but  the  out-
side, nor  does  he  know  much  of  himself  until  he  has  suffered.  He
who  has  once  drank  of  the  *  violet  cup,'  and  sipped  its  nectar,  finds
the  all-mufliing  heaviness  of  the  sad  dark  night  is  forgotten  in  the
gladness  of  the  new  day.  Here  his  brief  time  of  darkness  and  dull
distress  perishes  forever,  and  vanishes  swiftly  at  the  first  glimpse  of  the
heavenly  dawn,  on  which  follows  no  creeping  night  of  suffering  nor
shadow  of  earthly  care.

*  Which  is  more  fair,
The  sunrise  or  the  sunset  of  the  heart  ?
The  hour  when  we  look  forth  to  the  unknown.
Or  that  when  all  the  landscape  of  our  lives
Lies  stretched  behind  us,  and  sweet  memories
Rise  like  a  tender  haze  and  magnify
The  objects  we  behold?  "

The  first  dawn  of  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  to  most  men,  and  one
of  the  most  practical  conceptions  that  man  is  enabled  to  have  of  the
God-idea,  is  in  the  form  of  the  inner  voice  or  subtle  power  known  as
"conscience."    When  man  sees  there  is  a  God,  and  a  new  heaven


486       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  a  new  earth,  he  sees  it  only  by  the  exercise  of  the  Understandings
which  grows  through  the  vibrations  of  his  Astral  Akasa^  —  the  con-
science of  the  Soul,  —  which  becomes  illuminated  into  a  receptive  and
perceptive  power  of  his  subjective  world,  as  the  natural  eye  is  to  the
objective  one.  Man  sees  only  by  his  Soul's  intellect  and  understand-
ing the  Light  of  Truth,  the  Spirit  Lamp  of  immortal  truth.

An  unbiassed,  thoughtful  man,  who  begins  to  investigate  a  new
truth  with  honest  doubt,  will  soon  fight  through  the  phalanx  of  his
foes,  winning  his  way  to  bxW  faith  and  peiiect  peace.

Then  his  silent  meditations  become  his  choicest  companions,  and
his  waking  dreams  are  foretastes  of  futurity ;  the  fruits  which  gener-
ally give  him  the  most  happiness  ripen  on  the  tree  of  his  highest  and
best  ideality.

To  the  man  who  intolerantly  begins  with  his  opinions  xnfuUfaUk
and  usually  ends  either  in  strong  doubts  or  positive  denials^  the  past  is
the  present,  and  the  present  the  future,  for  in  him  there  is  a  congealed
and  non-progressive  mind,  devoid  of  growth  or  ripening.

The  agonies  and  sufferings  of  faithful  Souls  are  God's  successes.
Far  better  is  it  to  have  some  faith  in  the  darkness  than  to  believe  an
unintelligent  chance  has  woven  around  one  a  net  of  woe,  never  to  be
broken ;  much  better  is  it  to  trust  and  be  deceived  than  to  live  in
perpetual  doubt.

Man  who  once  tastes  from  the  violet  cup  of  the  immortals  disjoins
himself  from  the  objective  things  and  flies  to  the  door  that  opens
into  the  unknown  night,  pursues  the  guiding  star  of  Spirit ;  fanned
by  the  sweet  perfumes  of  peace,  even  against  the  thrilling  touch  of
all  obstacles  until  this  night  of  all  nights  fades  away  into  the  glories
of  the  coming  dawn,  by  whose  light  he  finds  his  way  into  the  arms  ol
his  idealy  and  clasps  eternal  life  to  his  fond  heart,  instead  of  an  empty
dream,  a  tale  that  was  told.     Behold,  death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory-

Now,  every  true  impulse  is  tempered  with  love,  and  sounds  a  note
in  the  swelling  harmony  of  heaven.

Here  love  sings  the  song  which  love  appreciates  and  absorbs.
For  the  human  Soul  is  not  merely  a  string  that  vibrates  to  the  touch
of  the  musician  and  would  remain  mute  until  he  came,  but  is  in  the
Soul  of  man  and  is  latent  in  all  Souls,  otherwise  there  would  be  no  ears
to  receive  his  revelations  and  loves.  The  gift  of  appreciation  is  as
Divine  as  the  distinction  of  being  appreciated.

Character  is  a  plant  of  slow  growth,  because  it  draws  from  the  soif
and  air  without,  and  the  conscience  within.  It  has  many  elements,
and  has  to  be  deliberate  in  digesting  them.    Character  is  what  one  is;


THE  TEMPLE   WITHIN.  487

reputation  what  others  say  of  one.  Character  is  a  wood  of  dull  grain,
but  capable  of  taking  a  most  beautiful  polish.

On  reaching  a  certain  octave  one  finds  the  in-being  of  Soul  and
Spirit,  for  God  in  His  Divine  Love  is  observed  much  sooner  in  the
conscience  than  the  intellect,  because  conscience  is  from  within,  while
intellect  is  from  without

Many  a  wilful  Soul  that  has  gone  far  astray,  and  even  earned  the
detestation  of  society,  becomes  at  length  an  embodied  prayer,  a  lowly
member  of  the  church  of  Divine  Fragments.  If  all  men  were  just  the
same,  and  their  proficiency  were  absolutely  equal,  then  all  opportu-
nities would  disappear.

All  men  would  be  impartially  cursed  by  the  monotony  of  being  fac-
similes of  each  other.

When  you  look  at  the  form  of  a  man,  you  do  not  see  the  true  man.
The  true  man  is  the  shadow  of  Soul's  impulses.

With  your  natural  eyes  you  look  upon  the  body  of  flesh ;  while  the
Angels  with  their  Spiritual  eyes  look  not  upon  the  material  body,  but
the  body  of  the  Soul,  —  Love,  Goodness,  the  Temple  Within,  the  body
is  the  shadow.  If  you  had  the  Spiritual  vision  of  an  Angel,  you  would
not  look  for  the  material  form  of  the  flesh,  but  the  form  of  the  Soul  in
its  lofty  goodness.  It  would  appear  to  your  Spiritual  vision  in  all  its
symmetrical  elegance  and  pure  grace,  with  its  polished  radiance  of
refinement;  grown  into  this  magnificent  loveliness  according  to  its
virtues  and  goodness.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  shadow  had  grown
its  animality  and  selfishness,  it  would  appear  in  all  its  imperfections
and  deficiences,  deformed  and  hideous  according  to  its  vice.  The
selfish  man  looks  into  the  world  as  he  looks  into  his  mirror;  only  to
see  himself.     He  thinks  only  of  self  and  his  whole  life  of  self.

These  are  men  who  feast  Spiritually  upon  themselves,  as  in  Isaiah
ix. :  20  it  is  said, ''  They  shall  eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm.^
Divine  Truths  are  very  simple  and  easily  understood  when  the  mind  is
not  beclouded  by  selfishness,  vanity,  ambition,  and  sin.  For  this  reason
no  man  can  be  more  dependent  on  God  than  he  who  is  rich.

He  who  has  cultivated  and  learned  to  open  his  heart  to  the  touch
of  outward  nature  illuminates  his  inner  being  by  the  elevation  and  re-
finement of  his  emotional  and  imaginative  nature.  This  is  the  first
principle  in  the  objective  world  of  the  higher  education  of  mind  and
Soul.  The  first  lesson  of  Mother  Earth  is  to  instruct  her  children  to
be  softened  and  sympathetic  toward  the  moods  of  outward  nature.
Thus  mankind  softens,  broadens,  and  grows,  becoming  more  suscep-
tible to  impressions,  taking  in  the  glory  of  the  Divine  Architect,  which


488  THE   HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS   THE  THRESHOLD.

is  in  the  world  revealed,  and  the  golden  gates  of  the  Soul  are  opened
wide.  To  become  attuned  and  in  accord  with  Nature,  she  must  be
won  in  love  as  women  are  won,  by  that  which  is  within  yourself  given
out  to  her.  As  with  the  woman  and  the  man  so  with  the  beauties^
grandeur,  and  silent  forces  of  nature.  They  can  be  united  through
the  sympathetic  cord  of  universal  love  to  the  human  being,  the  twain
becoming  one,  and  thus  the  golden  gates  are  open  wide,  and  the  veiled
glory  of  Divine  Love  welcomes  the  Soul  to  Spirit  realms.  Here  in  the
tremor  of  silent  adoration  the  mind  of  man  becomes  responsive  to
nature  and  to  God.  He  now  salutes  the  Sun  of  transcendental  Love.
His  finer  vision  sees  the  glories  and  the  greater  majesty  of  the
Divine  Economy.  One  sees,  thinks,  and  feels  intensely  at  such
moments,  for  this  is  awakening  of  the  Soul  after  its  long  night  to
the  music  of  the  golden  dawn  of  morning  in  the  life  beyond  this  little
sphere.

As  your  being  opens  and  is  aroused  to  its  highest  sympathy,  a
vision  most  real  is  presented,  as  each  picture  is  hung  upon  the
chambers  of  the  Soul.  These  are  the  pictures  Christ,  Paul,  Sweden-
borg,  and  all  exalted  Seers  have  witnessed  in  their  ecstatic  visions,
when,  caught  up  out  of  their  usual  selves,  they  find  things,  not  ordi-
narily within  their  grasp,  so  tangible  that  it  now  seems  as  if  they  had
never  known  Truth  before.

These  are  the  heights  and  moods  that  Spirit,  Soul,  love,  and
nature  induce  in  the  lives  of  those  who  are  prepared  to  enter  into
their  life.  The  great  majority  of  mankind  doubt  the  realities,  or
accept  them  as  material  facts.  Hence  the  entire  yet  painful  use-
lessness  of  argument  with  those  who  have  not  the  vision  of  Spiritual
realities.  In  this  True  Soul  of  things,  and  in  this  only,  are  found  the
ascendancy  and  peace  of  human  life.

You  may  pass  away  from  this  world,  but  these  vivid  pictures  of
truth  in  nature,  lighted  up  with  the  transcendental  touches  of  the
Spirit  of  the  Soul,  will  be  forever  carried  in  the  mind  through  all
eternity.  Here  the  sorrows,  pains,  and  commonness  of  life  are  for-
gotten in  its  nobility  and  greatness ;  for  the  selfish  world  is  shrivelled
up  and  the  passions  shrink  out  of  sight  and  hearing,  for  one  is  now
lifted  out  of  his  littleness  into  the  largeness  and  absoluteness  of
being.  He  whose  tastes  lead  him  to  admire  the  beautiful,  is  half  pre-
pared for  heaven.

There  are  moments  when  a  single  stroke  builds  or  destroys  the
fair  citadel  of  the  Soul's  Spiritual  Light.  There  are  times  when  the
great  opportunities  of  a  lifetime   are   crowded  into  a  single   hour.


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  489

Awake,  O  humanity !  your  hour  has  come ;  or  will  you  remain  drift-
ing with  the  rapid,  ever  changing  course  of  the  shifting  winds  and
drifting  sands  ?

There  is  no  reality  in  matter.  All  is  Spirit,  all  is  Soul.  When  we
have  awakened  to  find  this  truth,  and  all  meet  and  mingle  as  the
clouds  meet  on  the  brow  of  night,  we  find  that  death  is  a  truer  life,
and  poor,  blundering  humanity  has  at  last  drank  at  the  fountains  of
Eternal  Youth.

Remember  always,  "it  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth;  the  flesh
profiteth  nothing.  The  words  that  are  spoken  unto  you,  they  are
Spirit  and  they  are  life."

"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  and  be  not  conformed  to  this
world,  but  be  ye  transformed  by  a  renewing  of  your  mind ,  for  that
which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh;  and  that  which  is  bom  of  the
Spirit  is  Spirit."  Marvel  not,  therefore,  when  it  is  written.  Ye  must  be
born  again,  and  also.  Make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  Spirit,  for  why
would  ye  die,  O  Israel?  Wherefore  do  ye  strive  and  spend  your
money  for  that  which  is  not  hready  and  your  strength  for  that  which  is
naught  ?

The  Divine  Fragments  of  humanity  are  all  working  together  to
one  end.  Some  few  have  found  the  happier  road  of  Divine  Spirit
Truth,  others  have  found  the  path  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  the
designs  of  nature,  but  the  vast  majority  of  humanity  live  on  and
pass  away  without  knowing  what  they  do.  "What  shall  we  do?"
hath  been  inquired  through  all  ages,  and  to-day  the  same  cry  comes
up  from  the  multitude,  "Who  can  save  us?  What  is  the  price  of
Eternal  Life?"  Alas,  that  men  should  be  so  blinded.  Each  must
save  himself,  and  he  alone,  with  the  Universal  Spirit,  can  do  so,  no
matter  what  priest  or  teacher  may  promise  to  condone  his  animal
weakness  and  error  for  a  price.

Day  after  day  the  wail  continues  to  go  up  from  the  multitude,
"  Where  are  the  dead  ?  Whither  are  we  going  ?  Oh,  tell  us  of  our
future,  in  the  world  to  come."  Dear  reader,  will  you  be  one  who  can
point  the  way  to  a  suffering  people  ?  Will  you  find  Spirit  Love,  which
is  the  magnetic  key  that  unlocks  the  gate  of  heaven,  and  makes  you
become  a  fountain  of  light,  knowledge,  and  understanding?  So
shall

'*  The  fine  sense  of  right,
And  Truth's  directness,  meeting  each  occasioiit

Straight  as  a  line  of  light,
Guide  you  by  Spirit  to  Eternal  Life.**


490      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

It  is  indeed  well  for  him  who  lives  and  acts  from  the  Spirit  of  the
Heart  of  God  ;  but  it  is  disease  and  error  for  man  when  the  Spirit  of
life  is  knocking  and  he  knows  it  not.

Human  life  is  a  prayer,  wrought  out  in  throbbing  pulses,  or  carved
in  uncontrollable  desires  and  aspiration.  The  one  thing  which  chains
cannot  bind,  dungeons  cannot  hold,  and  inquisitions  cannot  destroy,
is  human  thought.  The  greater  thing,  which  is  the  most  powerful
factor,  holding  all  things  in  abeyance,  and  uniting  all  things,  is  the
Power  of  Lave,  Gold  is  not  wealth,  in  the  true  sense.  Love  is  the  only
riches,  and  who  would  not,  after  tasting  all  the  sweets  which  wealth
can  bring,  rather  have  the  love  of  one  true  heart  than  all  the  gems
of  Golconda  or  diamonds  of  earth.

God  gives  to  large,  expansive  hearts  laige  and  lofty  views ;  and
advanced  thought  and  ideas  are  conquering  the  world.

"Take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  speak;  for  it  shall  be
given  you  in  that  same  hour  what  ye  shall  speak."  Lofty  and  exalted
ideas  move  through  this  world  as  giants  walk  among  pigmies.

Look,  for  one  moment,  at  the  ideas  of  Spiritual  understanding  and
thoughts  of  a  future  life.  How  the  whole  thought  of  humanity  has
changed  in  only  one  generation  !  How  Spirit  Light  is  breaking,  like
golden  sunlight,  over  the  dark  horizon  of  history.  The  Christian
and  the  so-called  barbarian,  having  both  felt  its  power,  shake  hands
across  the  chasm  of  difference,  and  before  it,  in  one  Divine  Univer-
sal Brotherhood,  welcoming  the  glorious  dawn  of  Spirit  Truth.  You
have  been  all  these  years  watching  and  waiting  for  the  white  sails
of  the  fairy  boats  which  carry  our  loved  ones,  which  sometimes  cast
anchor  near  this  shore  of  the  eternal  sea,  just  beyond  us ;  watching
for  a  hailing  sign  from  a  dear  friend  and  brother ;  watching  so  long
to  catch  a  glimpse  of  husband,  wife,  or  some  dear  child's  sweet  face ;
watching  for  that  dove  which  so  long  nestled  nightly  on  your  breast,
and  then  flew  out  into  the  darkness  and  left  you  weeping  sad  and
lonely ;  watching  for  your  dead ;  you  feel  a  mighty  desolation,  like
the  Prince  of  Bethlehem  left  "  to  tread  the  wine-press  alone."  But
communion  with  the  dead  has  changed  all  this,  and  now  we  know
that  the  land  of  the  blest  is  not  far  off ;  that  the  country  we  thought
so  distant  is  just  across  the  river.  Many  of  us  have  felt  the  evening
breezes  which  sweep  down  from  the  glorious  hills  of  eternity,  into  this
earthly  valley  wherein  we  dwell,  and  we  awaken  to  a  full  realization
of  their  Angelic  presence,  and  are  embraced  in  their  shining  sheen  as
the  kisses  of  moonlight  fall  on  the  fair  face  of  river  and  lake.

How  we  love  them  to  dwell  on  the  days  which  are  passed  and


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  49I

gone,  and  simple  joys  of  our  children  or  our  young  companions  send
our  thoughts  back  to  the  spring-time  of  our  life,  before  the  gloomy
shadows  of  death  had  withered  any  of  youth's  buds  and  blossoms.
But  the  sad  hour  came  when  those  we  loved  passed  over  the  river  of
death  before  us,  and  the  limitation  of  our  lives  grows  less  while  the
great  universe  of  Spirit  expands  before  us,  and  a  voice  continually
speaks  to  us  from  the  depths  of  our  own  Souls,  and  tells  us  we  are
superior  to  this  earthly  form  and  all  our  physical  environment.  We
look  into  the  thought-chambers  in  the  Temple  of  the  Soul,  and  study
our  hopes  and  aspirations  as  the  omens  of  our  destiny.  In  thb  inner
world  we  find  the  True  man,  endowed  with  Spirit  Truth  and  eternal
cousciousness.  From  the  hours  of  helpless  infancy  to  the  dim  soli-
tudes of  age,  the  immortal  star  of  Spirit,  Truth,  and  Hope  shines  over
him,  and  although  the  dews  of  heaven  and  the  snows  of  winter  fall,
year  after  year,  upon  the  mounds  that  hold  the  ashes  of  our  loved
ones,  we  know  they  are  not  there.

Seasons  may  come  and  go,  and  roses  grow  red  and  white,  by  the
columns  upon  which  the  loved  names  are  inscribed,  still  they  are  not
there,  for  we  know  of  a  truth  the  law  of  earth's  career  only  belongs
to  matter,  but  it  does  not  touch  the  inner  Empire  of  the  immortal
Soul.  O  glorious  consciousness  of  Spirit,  made  more  glorious  by  the
revelation  that  the  dead  do  live  and  are  around  us  1

On  the  mirror  of  this  inward  sea  we  have  beheld  the  streaming
sails  of  truth's  fairy  barque,  with  our  loved  ones  on  board,  moving
with  tireless  speed  on  that  eternal  ocean  of  light,  whose  waves  roll
on  forever.  O  beautiful  golden  sea !  as  we  float  out  on  thy  shining
bosom,  we  can  look  beyond  the  bows  of  life's  mysterious  ship  as  it
gently  parts  thy  crystal  waters,  and  see  ever  before  us  and  all  about,
like  a  great  benediction,  the  arched  brow  and  the  guiding  hand  of
sympathy,  radiant  with  the  splendor  of  the  Infinite  Love.

To  become  Hermetic  is  to  be  inspired,  and  as  the  Spirit  in  nature
is  the  source  of  all  inspiration,  let  us  ask  and  pray  that  we  may  be
filled  with  Spiritual  understanding  through  the  inspiring  light  of
nature.  We  are  not  born  for  ourselves  alone,  but  for  the  whole
world,  like  all  created  things.  Let  us  rest  in  the  bosom  of  nature,
and  exchange  our  large  ignorance  for  knowledge,  and  we  will  find
the  greatest  truths  are  the  simplest.

Listen  to  the  whisper  of  warning  to  his  companions  from  grand
old  Socrates,  which  has  come  echoing  down  the  ages :  "  This,  my
friends,  lay  to  heart,  I  beg  of  you.  If  the  Soul  be  immortal,  then
doth  she  stand  in  need  of  great  care ;  not  only  during  the  period


492      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

which  we  call  life,  but  for  all  time  ;  and  we  may  well  consider  that
there  is  terrible  danger  in  our  neglecting  her.  While  here  on  earth
you  have  the  liberty  of  mind.  So  do  not  neglect  to  inquiiey  for  they
who  go  uninitiated  and  unconsecrated  to  the  world  beyond  this  life
must  needs  wallow  in  the  mire  through  ignorance."

Do  what  you  believe  to  be  right,  no  matter  what  other  people
may  say.  The  common  mind  usually  condemns  one  who  has  the
audacity  to  reach  beyond.  In  silence,  lonely  Pilgrim,  press  on.
Great  ships  that  make  long  voyages  are  always  lonely  ships.  Great
men  who  have  grand  and  advanced  thoughts,  who  lead  great  lives^
have  always  lonely  lives.

Truth  always  repays  ;  if  not  in  this  life,  it  is  a  consummation  in
the  next.  So  the  downfall  of  one  individual  who  has  bravely  been
ill  slandered,  ever  only  serves  to  strengthen  Truth.  All  great  heralds
of  truths  of  the  past  have  invariably  suffered  a  martyr's  doom,  only  to
end  in  an  overwhelming  defeat  to  its  enemies;  for  God  is  just.

Everything  pertaining  to  the  Spiritual  world  must  come  to  us
through  the  Astral  body  or  Star  magno,  and  if  we  are  in  friendship  of
concentration  with  it  we  may  obtain  the  greatest  magical  effects.  It
is  vain  to  seek  in  men  for  more  than  man.  How  can  he  comprehend
Infinitude?  The  great  Absolute  energy  of  nature  is  and  will  be,
through  this  life,  the  only  common  ground.  The  trinity  of  nature  is
the  lock  of  magic.  The  trinity  of  man  is  the  key  that  fits  it  Man's
trinity  being  the  animal  and  magnetic  body^  the  Astral  and  Soul^  the
Divine  Essence  or  Spirit^  the  God  part  of  our  nature.

The  Astral  light  alone  is  the  chief  agent  in  Spirit  which  can  dis-
cover to  us  all  the  secrets  of  nature.  The  world  is  no  longer  con-
tent to  rest  in  a  blind  faith  of  repeating  beliefs.  It  must  know;
for  eighteen  centuries  there  has  been  little  else  than  mere  belief.

The  Truth  of  Spirit  and  its  communion  is  now  a  positive  knowl-
edge, and  is  the  only  truth  that  will  refine  the  rough,  fierce  life  of
mankind.  Out  of  selfishness  and  deceit,  by  Spirit,  we  may  be  polished
to  gentleness  and  softened  to  kindness  and  love.  As  beings,  we  were
never  intended  to  be  a  ship  at  anchor,  but  to  advance  through  storm
and  sunshine  and  make  our  lives  beautiful  by  being  honest  within.

Strive  to  know  yourselves.  The  secret  of  Will  is  knowledge  put
in  practice.  First,  a  full  knowledge  of  your  own  weaknesses ;  then,
knowledge  of  the  Soul  and  Astral  body ;  then,  of  the  higher,  the
Divine,  the  God  part  of  which  we  are  able  to  grow,  in  the  inner
temple  of  our  being.

Press   on,  bestowing  kindness  for  evil.     If  the   highest  Angel


THE  TEMPLE   WITHIN.  493

should  come  from  heaven  to  do  good  to  some  men,  He  would  be  only
repaid  by  ingratitude  and  wrong.  No  matter,  press  on,  and  bestow
greater  love  than  ever ;  for  unselfish  kindness  in  this  world  to  advance
and  assist  humanity  is  most  always  returned  with  imposing  wrong
and  ingratitude  from  the  recipient.  To  live  and  grow  the  light  within
the  Soul  is  to  sacrifice  and  suffer  alone.

There  are  times  in  the  history  of  worlds  when  mankind  does  not
increase  in  numbers  by  perpetuating  itself,  but  during  these  cycles  or
periods  receives  and  grows  the  germ  of  Spirit  in  the  Soul.  That  is
the  time  of  times,  between  times  spoken  of  by  the  Prophets  and
Revelators.  Christ  says  in  the  worlds  to  come  they  neither  marry  nor
are  given  in  marriage,  but  are  as  the  Angels  of  God  in  heaven.  The
Soul  has  existed  before,  and  is  merely  awakened  when  it  comes  into
earth  life,  being  borne  from  a  state  of  sleep  to  finish  its  ripening ;
and  it  may  be  equally  a  state  of  necessity  that  it  should  sleep  many
times  before  it  is  bom  again  by  Spirit,  that  it  may  reach  the  fruitage
of  perfection.  Here  we  have  grand  opportunities  to  open  the  win-
dows of  the  Soul  for  light  of  knowledge.  To  love  and  to  do  good
are  our  talents,  while  each  moment  we  are  passing  away  like  the
pageantry  of  a  day.

We  should  form  as  beautiful  a  conception  of  God  as  we  can  —  as
An  Absolute  Infinite  Energy,  if  possible.  If  an  individuality,  it  may
prove  dangerous,  although  in  a  very  small  and  certain  sense  it  is  true.
Happy  will  be  the  day  when  we  shall  learn  that  the  bodies  of  the
departed  are  no  more  than  relinquished  garments  of  living  men  and
women  who  have  simply  gone  home  to  their  Father's  house.

There  remains  the  one  absolute  certainty  that  we  are  ever  in  the
presence  of  an  Infinite  and  eternal  Energy,  from  which  all  things  pro-
ceed, and  to  which  in  the  fulness  of  time  we  must  return  again.
How  can  a  living  Soul  be  buried  ?  This  body  is  but  a  Temple  of
God  in  which  Divine  service  is  over  and  finished  for  a  season.

The  mirrors  of  the  Soul  may  reflect  the  beauties  of  the  service  of
God  to  both  earth  and  heaven ;  but  this  mirror  of  the  Soul  cannot
reflect  both  earth  and  heaven  at  once  —  the  Animal  and  Angel  part  of
us ;  one  must  vanish  from  its  surface  as  the  other  is  glazed  upon  its
depths.  It  depends  on  man  either  to  open  or  to  close  his  percep-
tions to  the  Divine  voice.  After  death  of  this  mortal  body,  when
man  awakes,  he  has  a  realizing  sense  of  some  of  the  stupendous
blunders  he  has  made.  After  death  his  Soul  commences  a  fresh
series  of  growth,  starting  from  the  exact  grade  of  progress  it  has
attained  through  its  incarnation  in  matter.     But  its  progress  now  is


494      '^HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

slow  compared  with  its  life  while  in  the  fonn.  A  returning  Spirit,
communicating  with  mortals,  says  of  the  condition  of  those  in  ihe
lower  sphere  of  Spirit  life :  —

Remorse  is  ever  the  companion  of  despair,  and  neither  one  nor
both  have  power  to  silence  the  sound  of  criminations  and  recrimina-
tions, mockeries  and  lamentations ;  nevertheless,  here  the  little  spark
of  humanity,  native  in  each  human  breast,  seemed  to  be  striving  to
rekindle  into  sympathy  each  for  another ;  and  amid  all  their  hopeless
regrets  they  gave  and  found  sad  consolation  in  recounting  to  each
other  their  many  virtues  and  good  deeds  done  on  earth,  and  the  great
pity  each  felt  for  the  other,  for  the  cruel  injustice  which  had  forced
them  down  to  such  a  deplorable  state.  This  was  a  good  beginning
for  better  things  to  follow,  and  a  few  groups  were  enjoying  a  feeling-
of  thankfulness  for  having  escaped  from  the  lower  inferno  ;  and  the
thought  that  their  condition  had  been  worse,  gave  some  of  them  a
faint  hope  that  their  future  might  be  better.  But  the  thought  that
individual  effort  could  make  that  future  state  better,  seems  never  to
occur  to  their  minds  while  in  that  low  state  of  mental  and  Spiritual
recuperation.

Whenever  they  are  roused  up  to  greater  mental  activity,  their
thoughts  all  run  wild  to  combat  the  seeming  injustice  of  their  situa-
tion ;  consequently,  they  have  to  remain  in  this  place  till  they  love  one
another,  and  a  better  state  of  feeling  gradually  comes  to  one  after
another ;  then  groups  are  removed  to  more  congenial  locations,  where
they  are  able  to  perceive  flowers,  birds,  pleasant  green  groves,  and
flowing  brooks.  Their  thankfulness  here  becomes  so  great,  they  are
able  to  forgive  all  the  injuries  and  the  great  injustice  which  had
shaped  their  lives  in  such  barren  places.  After  they  arrive  at  this
better  state  and  better  mental  perception,  they  become  willing  pupils,
and,  although  they  are  not  relieved  of  their  bad  organizations,  there  is
little  trouble  with  them ;  they  are  subdued  and  submissive,  and  become
wholly  trustful  and  to  be  trusted.

After  this  stage  of  growth  is  well  established,  groups  are  taken  to
locations  where  such  employments  are  given  as  are  best  suited  to  their
mental  and  Spiritual  growth.  Here  they  are  much  like  little  children
receiving  their  primary  lessons  from  their  employments,  which  are  so
suited  to  their  mental  states  that  the  greatest  pleasure  is  imparted  to
the  pupils.  In  these  primary  schools,  nothing  on  earth  can  equal  the
joy  of  some  poor  defrauded  artist  who  discovers  that  beautiful  possi-
bility of  his  Soul.  It  is  the  same  with  a  writer  who  had  come  to  think
himself  of  no  value  in  the  world.    This  same  feeling  of  joy  extends


THE  TEMPLE   WITHIN.  495

to  every  kind  of  industry.  Every  one  is  first  built  up  from  the  base
of  self-recognition.  To  know  the  value  and  beauty  of  self  and  self-
endeavor  and  to  make  the  self-life  appear  to  the  very  best  advantage,
is  the  beginning  of  universal  recognition  and  reciprocity.

There  is  a  law  of  comprehensive  charity  and  moral  obligation
between  man  and  his  fellow-man,  be  he  king,  free  man  or  slave,  and
there  must  be  a  certain  regard  of  cotemporaneous  co-existence  for
others,  if  the  individual  ever  hopes  to  find  peace  to  his  weary  Soul.
So  poverty  is  less  frequently  a  burden  than  riches  are  a  curse,  for
pride  and  ambition  soon  run  into  evil  deeds,  and  there  is  no  good  way
to  do  a  bad  deed.  Selfishness  expands  human  pride,  as  heat  does
metals.  The  best  climate  is  generally  found  in  the  land  of  content-
ment, of  gentle  modesty^  which  is  virtues  fortress.

The  opening  of  the  heart  to  the  response  of  Spirit  and  indwelling
of  God  is  observed,  regarded,  and  considered  very  much  sooner  in
the  conscience,  vibrating  its  silent  whispers  to  the  Soul,  than  through
or  by  the  intellect  and  culture  of  the  mind,  because  these  latter  are
but  the  reflex  of  external  egos  that  become  embarrassed  by  their  own
attempts  to  know  the  world  of  nature,  which  does  not  instantly
declare  its  secrets  in  substantiating  their  theories.

"  Peace  on  earth  and  good-will  towards  men,"  and  Jesus  Christ,
the  great  Divine  Teacher,  the  blessed  Light  which  lighteth  every  man
that  Cometh  into  the  world,  "  heralded  by  Angels,"  made  His  advent.
Such  a  life,  such  teachings,  such  deep  love,  such  self-sacrifice,  had
never  been  conceived  of  by  either  prophet,  seer,  or  philosopher.
The  Divine  philosophy  of  Christ  flowed  down  from  fountains  whose
streams  had  never  before  reached  the  earth.  To  be  pure  in  heart,
to  be  merciful  to  the  meek,  to  be  a  peacemaker,  to  hunger  and  thirst
after  that  which  was  right,  purely  right  in  itself  to  love  the  neighbor,
to  do  unto  others  as  we  would  have  them  do  unto  us,  to  refrain  from
judging  others  and  exaggerating  their  faults,  to  set  an  example  so
exalted  as  to  glorify  our  Father  in  Heaven,  to  be  perfect  as  He  was
perfect,  to  go  about  doing  good,  to  refrain  from  all  attempts  to  exhibit
our  own  superiority,  to  give  in  secret  and  pray  in  secret,  to  commune
with  the  Divine  Mind  in  Spirit  and  in  Truth  in  secret,  —  these  were  the
lessons.  The  religion  of  the  future  will  teach  that  "perfect  love
casteth  out  fear,"  and  that  consequently  man  has  nothing  to  fear  in
all  the  universe  of  God,  that  death  has  no  existence  in  reality,  that
the  laying  aside  of  the  material  body  is  a  new  and  grand  birth  into
the  celestial  world,  and  a  step  forward  on  the  homeward  stretch
towards  our  Father's  house.


496      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Love,  under  whatever  form  exerted,  is  the  most  powerful  attrac-
tion in  the  universe.  The  highest  form  of  love  is  mercy,  love  and
forgiveness  for  those  who  have  done  us  wrong.

As  the  Father  loves  every  human  being,  however  low  in  character
or  attainment,  so  man  should  love  his  fellow-man,  however  detestable
and  unworthy  in  character  and  condition.  Mercy  and  grace  have
alone  been  potent  to  lift  the  fallen  ;  and  the  Spirit  of  the  age  will  yet
become  an  unselfish  Spirit.  Love  is,  in  fact,  the  only  life^ving  and
life-saving  principle  in  nature  and  in  society.  Love  should  not  be  a
mere  sentiment,  however,  but  a  constant  longing  and  seeking  and
accomplishment  of  good.  Let  our  tokens  of  love  be  as  habitual  as
the  shining  of  the  sun.  Let  us  show  our  interest  in  the  prosperity  of
good  works,  by  giving  time,  talent,  and  money  for  the  comfort  and
uplifting  of  the  race.

Love,  in  her  truest  and  broadest  sense,  including  tenderness,
kindness,  charity,  and  affection,  is  the  capstone  or  crowning  splendor
of  a  well  developed  nature,  more  resplendent  than  the  rainbow  flush
of  glory,  more  beauteous  than  the  last  smile  of  the  setting  sun;
stronger  than  the  mailed  form  of  the  dark  angel  of  death;  more
eternal  than  the  silver  moon  who  from  the  cradle  of  time  has  marked
the  course  of  the  nations,  and  shall  not  cease  to  silently  witness  the
workings  of  the  race  till  time  shall  fall  asleep  in  the  arms  of  eternity.

**  Like  the  clouds  that  rake  the  mountain  summit,
Like  the  waves  that  know  no  guiding  hand ;
So  swift  has  brother  followed  brother,
From  this  sunshine  to  the  Spirit  land.**

One  by  one,  we  drop  into  the  abyss,  through  this  maelstrom  of
goodness  and  sin,  out  into  eternity,  where  Spirits,  Angels,  and  God
live.  One  by  one  we  go  out  into  God's  to-morrow.  We  see  them
to-night  swiftly  dropping,  as  the  millions  give  in  their  earthly  toys,
of  ambition,  hopes,  strivings,  and  impulses,  just  like  children  giving
up  their  playthings  when  the  day  is  done.  Some  were  bright ;  some
dark,  stained  with  evil,  battered  out  of  shape  and  form.  Men  dropped
in  theirs,  marred  with  hate,  ugliness,  envy,  treachery,  dishonesty,  cor-
ruption, and  unmanly  acts.  Women  dropped  in  their  toys  of  a  week,
all  unwomanly  as  they  were,  stained  by  slander,  gross  libels,  bitter,
false,  malicious  attacks,  wicked  conceptions  of  deceitful  and  ignorant
hearts,  all  to  be  looked  at  by  the  wondrous  All-Seeing  Eye.  When  we
are  so  base  and  selfish ;  when  we  have  shown,  in  our  natures  and  in
our  loves,  so  little  that  is  noble,  lofty,  and  pure,  how  indulgent  the


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  497

dear,  good  Father  of  all  must  be  to  accept  the  evil,  selfish  record  of
each  lifetime.  God  knows  all,  and  in  His  good  time  all  sin  and
evil  shall  ripen  to  perfect  fruit.  Some  of  us  strive  to  be  better  men
and  better  women ;  others  forget  that  every  day  is  a  lasting  record
for  or  against  —  that  soon  we  must  go  home,  and  death  will  drop  us
into  the  great  palm  as  we  drop  our  day's  toys  in  now,  and  people  will
remember  us  as  we  deserve.

We  hurry  over  the  road  from  childhood  to  maturity,  only  to  learn
in  after  life  that  its  most  beautiful  scenery  was  unobserved  by  us ;
and  remember  that  real  happiness  is  not  of  temporary  enjoyment,  but
is  so  interwoven  with  the  future  that  it  blesses  forever.

Strive,  then,  dear  reader,  to  forget  self  and  warm  your  heart  by
generous  acts  and  kind  deeds,  that  life  may  be  sweeter,  death  happier,
and  that  we  may  all  meet  where  there  is  no  more  night,  nor  sorrow,
nor  pain,  nor  death,  after  this  human  life,  which  is  but  a  schoolday  of
eternity.

**  For  men  must  come,  and  men  must  go»
And  the  soft,  white  snow  will  cover  al].
And  may  all  our  sorrows  vanish  so.
Just  as  the  fleeting  snowflakes  fall."

In  vain  do  men  talk  of  happiness,  who  never  subdued  an  impulse
in  obedience  to  a  principle.  He  who  never  sacrificed  a  present  to  a
future  good,  or  a  personal  to  a  general  one,  cannot  know  true  happi-
ness. He  can  only  speak  of  it  as  blind  men  do  of  colors.  All  true
religions  teach,  and  all  true  men  know,  that  the  perfecting  of  man
consists  mainly  in  the  ever-increasing  predominance  of  the  life  of  the
Soul  over  the  life  of  the  body.

"  I  once  saw  a  man  brutally  smite  to  the  ground  a  child  who  was
innocently  playing  in  a  rolling-mill.  I  cried  out  Shame,  and  sprang
forward  with  clenched  fists  to  deal  the  wretch  a  well  deserved  blow,
when,  great  God !  I  beheld  an  enormous  pair  of  tongs  swing  around
dragging  in  the  clutch  of  their  iron-toothed  jaws  a  long  bar  of  red-
hot  iron,  from  the  furnace  to  the  forge,  and  pass  like  a  fiery  Jugger-
naut ;  but  harmlessly  above  the  prostrate  child,  crying  piteously  from
the  unexpected  blow  of  the  man  whose  act  so  incensed  me.  He
alone  had  seen  the  impending  jeopardy  of  the  little  one.  There  was
not  a  moment  for  warning,  no  time  to  stay  the  course  of  the  iron-
monster,  and,  quick  as  thought,  his  presence  of  mind  forced  him  to
fell  the  child."

Many  of  the  afflictions  we  cannot  fathom  are  under  the  guidance


498      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

of  a  wiser  hand  than  our  own  blundering,  ignorant  ones.  A  man  is
never  so  badly  cheated  as  when  he  believes  too  much  in  himself;
therefore,  fill  thy  mind  with  useful  knowledge,  and  thou  shalt  avoid
empty  words.  It  is  only  through  the  morning  gate  of  the  lovely  and
beautiful  that  we  can  penetrate  into  the  realm  of  knowledge ;  that
which  we  feel  here  as  love  and  beauty,  we  shall  one  day  know  as
Truth.

Strive  to  look  for  the  good  in  others  and  not  evil,  for  our  medita-
tions should  be  our  choicest  companions.  To  prostitute  the  faculties
of  the  human  mind  to  baseness,  sneering,  reproach,  and  evil  report  is
treason  against  Angels,  Spirits,  and  heavenly  things.  We  should  get
much  nearer  to  heaven  than  we  are,  if  we  could  only  and  always
think  of  our  fellow-beings  at  their  best.  He  who  speaketh  of  anothers'
failings  with  pleasure  shall  hear  of  his  own  with  bitterness  of  heart

There  is  a  good  and  a  bad  light  in  which  to  judge  all  humanity.  In
the  former,  the  better  points  are  brought  out  and  made  conspicuous,
and  we  see  only  the  bright  side  of  our  fellow-beings.  In  the  latter
the  lights  are  all  obscured,  and  the  darker  shades  are  made  prominent

Some  people  seem  ever  to  be  groping  among  the  sewers  of  human
nature,  and  with  a  muck-rake  of  vile  imaginings  are  ever  searching
for  the  evil  there  may  be  in  their  fellows.  The  good  and  beautiful
interest  them  not ;  it  is  only  the  bad  that  they  take  a  sort  of  miserable
pleasure  in.  They  live  to  denounce  and  pull  down,  rather  than  com.
mend  and  assist  their  imperfect  and  erring  fellows  into  better  ways  of
life.

We  pity  the  man  or  woman  who  has  ever  some  unkind  suspicion
of  or  uncharitable  expression  for  some  fellow-mortal.  They  are  out
of  harmony  with  the  Divine  Spirit  of  goodness,  which  is  ever  reaching
down  to  enfold  in  its  loving  embrace  every  Soul  that  would  aspire  to
the  higher  life.  They  live  in  an  atmosphere  full  of  noisome  odors
and  poisonous  emanations :  while  just  beyond,  on  the  mountain  top,
they  could  enjoy  the  delicious  ozone  of  the  Angels.

No  man  or  woman,  however  noble  or  worthy,  is  exempt  from  the
mischievous  suspicion  of  evil  minds.  Envy  and  jealousy — those
twin  demons  of  low  and  grovelling  natures  —  are  ever  ready,  by  hint
and  innuendo,  to  pull  others  down  to  their  level.

To  repeat  a  vile  report  of  another,  is  almost  as  bad  as  to  originate
it  If  true,  nothing  is  gained  by  spreading  it,  while  great  harm  comes
to  those  who  allow  themselves  to  be  made  a  channel  for  such  moral
sewage.


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  499

A  deep,  impenetrable  gloom  is  always  hanging  between  the  live*
minded  and  the  celestial  world.

Scandalizing  others  is  one  of  those  evil  passions  which  is  like  a
demoniac  possession ;  an  atmosphere  producing  leprosy  of  the  Soul.
When  it  once  seizes  on  a  man  he  is  lost.  There  is  no  hope  for  him
in  this  life ;  thou  shouldst  leave  him  as  a  pestilence.

The  windows  of  the  Soul  of  refined  persons  are  always  too  high
and  clean  to  permit  low  thoughts  or  reflections  to  enter  in.

Above  all  things,  learn  to  control  your  anger.  Every  time  you
speak  crossly  and  impetuously,  you  are  weakening  your  nerve-force,
causing  stormy  atmospheres  about  your  Soul,  and  adding  to  the
misery  of  some  one.  In  silence  learn  to  know  yourself,  and  conquer
the  storms  which  beat  upon  your  inner  life,  the  Soul.  "  A  pitched
battle  is  better  than  a  continued  skirmish."

Like  a  diver  in  his  dress  who  is  let  down  to  the  bottom  of  the
ocean,  a  man  whose  heart  is  girt  by  faith  and  charity,  and  whose
head  is  covered  by  the  helmet  of  hope,  may  be  dropped  down  into
the  wildest  sea  of  temptation  and  worldliness,  and  yet  will  walk  dry
and  unharmed  through  the  midst  of  its  depths,  and  breathe  air  that
comes  from  a  world  above  its  restless  surges.

The  truly  wise  man,  who  has  grown  his  understanding  and  light
within  him,  is  twice  regenerated  and  enshrined  in  sacredness,  for  in
the  humility  of  his  inspiration  he  lives  in  constant  contemplation  and
knowledge  of  the  presence  of  God.  He  can  be  defiled  by  nothing  in
this  world,  for,  behold  !  all  evil  flies  away  from  him.  For  virtue  is
always  pure,  and  he  is  virtue;  charity  is  always  pure,  and  he  is
charity ;  faith  is  always  pure,  and  he  b  faith  ;  prayer  is  always  pure,
and  he  is  prayer ;  good  is  always  pure,  and  he  is  good ;  the  Divine
Essence  is  always  pure,  and  he  is  a  portion  of  the  Divine  Essence ;
the  sun's  ray  is  always  pure,  and  his  calm  presence  is  like  a  ray  of
the  sun,  that  vivifies  all  around  it.  Even  his  death  defiles  not,  for
death,  for  the  sage,  twice  regenerated,  is  his  birth  with  God.  It  can
never  be  impure,  for  it  is  his  second  birth  in  the  Bosom  of  God.

The  knowledge  of  the  communion  with  the  Father  of  all  being
gives  to  every  human  Soul  a  new  value.  When  man  is  of  such  con-
sequence to  the  Divine  Bestower  of  all  good  that  He  seeks  to  make
revelations  to  each  one  as  His  own  special  child,  and  Himself  brings
the  message  that  He  has  for  it,  if  only  the  true  ears,  the  Spiritual  Ear,
will  open  to  hear ;  he  who  looks  bravely  into  Spiritual  depths,  leaving
the  outer  superficial  life,  that  can  never  reach  below  the  surface  of
things,  finds  the  only  true  happiness  and  real  safety  of  life.    The


5CX)      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLX).

great  mass  of  mankind  never  gets  beyond  the  crust  of  things,  and
never  realizes  the  real  aim  and  meaning  of  life.  Men  are  so  stunted
in  their  Spiritual  understanding  by  the  conventional  and  very  super-
ficial nature  of  their  every-day  existence,  of  sordid  indifference  to  all
Spiritual  things,  that  their  whole  existence  lacks  the  tone  of  a  True
life.  Neither  do  men  have  the  inspiration  which  Spirit,  love,  and
faith  give  to  all  God's  creatures  who  seek  for  it.  How  long  will  man
remain  in  this  superficial  night  of  Spiritual  darkness,  finding  no  rest
nor  contentment  in  the  husks  of  a  selfish  life,  yet  too  indifferent  to
extend  the  hand  to  open  the  window  of  his  Soul  to  the  glorious  Light
of  Spirit,  which  would  be  unto  him  refreshing  as  a  breeze  which  dis-
sipates the  hot,  lifeless  air  of  a  sultry  midsummer  day  ?  Dear  reader,
tarry  no  longer,  but  seek  for  the  Spirit  of  Truth  by  plunging  into  the
mysterious,  glorious  depths  of  your  own  temple,  your  inmost  being.
Seek  it  by  testing  all  experiences  of  the  outer  with  the  inner  or  True
life,  and  by  utilizing  the  senses  in  order  to  understand  the  growth
and  meaning  of  individuality,  and  the  beauty  in  obscurity  of  those
hidden  Divine  Fragments  of  nature  which  are  struggling  side  by  side
with  you  and  the  race  to  which  you  belong.

Seek  it  by  study  of  the  laws  of  dual  being,  the  laws  of  nature,  the
laws  of  the  supernatural,  and  by  making  the  profound  obeisance  of
the  Soul  to  the  dim  star  of  truth  that  bums  within  your  inmost  being.
Steadily,  as  you  watch  and  worship,  praying  for  understanding  and
light,  this  light  of  truth  will  grow  strong  within  your  temple,  until  it
illuminates  your  whole  being.  Then  you  may  know  you  have  found
the  beginning  of  the  Hidden  Way,  and  when  you  have  found  the  end,
and  crossed  the  threshold  of  all  Truth,  whose  Light  is  the  beacon  of
systems  and  worlds,  you  will  dwell  forever  in  the  effulgence  of  the
Divine  light  of  truth,  love,  understanding,  and  wisdom,  under  the
wings  of  God's  protecting  Love.

Nature  permits  no  one  to  forget  the  root  out  of  which  he  grew,
and  it  is  as  well  a  law  of  morals  too.

One  of  the  greatest  evils  of  the  hour  is  that  unscrupulous  rich
men  usually  control  church  and  state.

One  of  the  greatest  hindrances  to  Spiritual  progress  in  the
churches  to-day  is  the  unfortunate  entrance  into  active  membership
of  a  very  rich  man.  These  considerations  force  themselves  on  every
thoughtful  man,  as  he  looks  about  him,  and  sees  modem  society  and
her  conventional  ways.  It  is  a  great  blight,  when  it  should  be  a
great  blessing.

When  the  mind  has  been  purified  and  refined  (which  is  usually


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  5OI

through  suffering),  it  grows  and  expands  into  a  gentleness  which
warms  it  into  sympathy  and  love.  All  selfishness  and  brutality
depart.  It  grows  to  desire  and  is  filled  with  a  determination  to
learn  and  know  the  truth,  and  as  it  warms  up,  reaching  out  to  the
universal,  it  is  thereby  duly  and  truly  prepared  to  enter  the  temple
of  light  and  knowledge.

Dear  Pilgrim,  you  must  struggle  for  the  light.  Take  warning  by
the  moth,  that  would  soar  to  the  star  but  through  ignorance  falls
scorched  by  the  flame  of  a  candle.  You  can  learn.  Ignorance  is
only  stupidity.     You  need  not  fail  of  the  true  light.

Those  natures  that  have  been  softened  by  love  and  gentleness,
having  grown  tuneful  here,  shall  be  the  more  melodious  there ;  and
they  who  have  kept  themselves  innocent  and  unselfish  here,  be  fully
acknowledged  there.  The  eyes  of  Spirit  can  plainly  see  the  white-
ness of  the  Soul,  and  the  tongue  of  Angels  carry  its  sweet  fame.  To
the  pure  in  heart  all  things  are  pure ;  and,  whatever  path  they  walk,  or
however  paved,  it  shall  lead  them  upward  in  the  way  of  being,  and,
whether  they  find  a  crystal  sea  or  not,  or  any  throne  reflected  from
its  depths,  within  their  hearts  there  shall  surely  be  a  throne  possessed
of  God's  great  Love  and  Peace;  and  in  the  depths  of  their  pure
being,  ever  deepening  and  becoming  purer,  the  throne  of  love,  with
the  glory  of  peace  upon  it,  shall  find  everlasting  reflection  throughout
eternity.

Mankind  is  just  beginning  to  know  that  '*  hereafter  "  and  the  *'  life
beyond  "  begin  here.  "  My  heaven  is  here  within  my  heart "  ;  of  this
there  is  no  longer  doubt.

Then,  why  not  prepare  thy  heaven  now,  and  as  thou  shalt  grow
ripened  in  Spirit  and  the  past  outgrown,  flowing  with  swiftest  flight
beyond  the  sight  of  men,  some  golden  morning  the  Soul  will  burst
away  with  dash  of  swift  wing  to  realms  of  Light  which  men  call  death.
Then  this  world  sees  it  no  more,  but  it  shall  find  voice,  and  heaven
shall  know  another  life  has  come  to  grow  and  in  Spirit  to  remain  for-
ever. "  O  fair  child,  where  is  your  heaven  ? "  the  Angels  whisper ;  and
when  the  eternal  day  has  dawned,  some  tuneful  Spirit  in  sweet  accord
with  heaven,  who  has  composed  a  charming  melody  in  His  sublimely
measured  score,  welcomes  you  home  to  the  eternal  resting-place  of
ripened  Souls.

When  the  conscious  and  voluntary  power,  now  actually  possessed
but  too  frequently  used  unconsciously,  even  involuntarily,  by  the  vast
mass  of  modern  mediums,  is  subjected  to  a  purer  and  more  healthy
growth,  then  and  not  till  then  will  be  manifested  the  highest  and


502      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

grandest  exhibition  of  Spirit  power  and  Spirit  Truths,  through  Spirit
communion.

As  human  society  is  now  constituted,  where  selfishness,  jealousy,
and  conceit  are  paramount,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  dangerous  such  a
power  would  be  in  the  hands  of  ignorant  and  unscrupulous  men  and
women.  Hence  the  wisdom  of  the  ancients,  in  withholding  the  knowl-
edge of  this  power  from  those  who  are  unworthy  and  unprepared.

So  long  as  man  is  broken  in  his  duality  of  being,  one  entirely
overshadowing  the  other,  he  is  little  higher  than  the  brute,  and  must
necessarily  lack  the  sense  to  comprehend  the  essential  nature  of  God,
just  as  a  child  lacks  sense  to  understand  or  even  comprehend  a
watch,  a  railroad,  a  ship,  or  anything  else  beyond  its  small  mentality.
Therefore,  "  Be  ye  transformed,  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind."

To  increase,  advance,  and  provoke  thought  in  the  mind  of  our
readers,  is  the  sole  end  and  aim  of  these  pages.  We  are  all  so  much
the  reflex  of  our  surroundings,  and  society  is  so  abnormal,  that  thought
is  apt  to  be  abridged  into  either  scientific  or  theological  conventional-
ity, natural  individuality  is  driven  out,  and  circumscribed  in  limita-
tion, through  ever  changing  human  judgment,  and  many  an  hour  is
wasted  in  hunting  imaginary  foes.  Wise  men,  with  cunning  words,
seeming  to  accomplbh  all,  in  reality  accomplish  nothing.  Oersted
never  wrote  a  finer  truth  than  that  *'  conception  of  the  Universe  is
incomplete  if  not  comprehended  as  a  constant  and  continuous  work
of  the  eternal,  absolute,  creating  Spirit."  Emerson,  in  relation  to  the
same  fact,  states  that  "  it  takes  as  much  life  to  conserve  as  to  create."
To  study  into  the  laws  of  nature  is  to  study  into  the  laws  of  God,
and  thereby  to  be  able  to  catch  glimpses  of  the  mode  of  God's
Action.  Losing  the  opportunity  to  advance  the  Light  of  Spirit  in  the
Soul,  through  this  life,  would  be  like  a  mariner  going  to  sea  without
chart  or  compass,  or  like  a  tree  which,  not  having  set  its  roots,  can-
not be  expected  to  blossom  and  bear  fruit  when  summer  comes.
Neither  shall  we  show  ripened  fruit  at  harvest  time  unless  the  Soul
has  grown,  the  Light  of  Divine  Truth,  Spirit,  having  taker,  root  within.
God  looks  for  perfect  fruit.    What  shall  our  harvest  be  ?  —

**  Nothing  but  leaves.
Or  golden  sheaves  ?  **

While  the  acquisition  of  intellectual  power  and  finite  knowledge
should  rise  hereafter  into  a  state  of  being,  through  its  monitor,  thy
Spirit  is  the  interpreter  between  God  and  thyself.  I  am,  O  Soul,  thy
good  and  loving,  pure  thought,  thy  good  works  and  thy  good  laws,


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  SO3

thy  Angel  and  thy  guide,  that  thy  Soul  may  reunite  with  Spirit,  which
brings  the  light  within  itself.  Far  better  this  than  being  an  aimless
wanderer  in  the  dark.  Arise  1  shine  I  this  is  that  Atonement,  at-one-
ment  or  attunement,  —  dwelling  and  uniting  forever  with  the  Divine
originator  and  higher  light.  The  life  of  the  interior  Spirit,  being  the
death  of  the  external  nature ;  the  night  of  the  physical  world,  denot-
ing the  day  of  the  Spiritual;  this  is  the  immaculate  conception  of
Spirit  Truth.

Though  the  morning  may  have  been  dark,  let  the  sunset  of  our
lives  be  glorious,  an  ornament  to  this  earthly  life,  and  an  honor  to  the
heavenly  one.

A  true  child  of  nature  must  have  God's  qualities.  You,  as  His
children,  ask  of  your  heart,  do  you  strive  to  resemble  Him,  placing
His  attributes  in  your  virtues  ?  His  simplicity  in  your  sincerity ;  His
immutability  in  your  constancy;  His  purity  in  your  chastity;  His
goodness  in  your  charity ;  His  justice  in  your  integrity  ?  Oh,  look
into  thy  heart,  and  ask  for  each  of  these.

In  all  the  laws  of  nature,  we  have  not  blind  intellectual  fatalities
but  warm  expressions  of  Divine  volition.  In  all  ages,  those  who  have
obtained  the  furthest  insight  into  nature  have  been  firm  and  stead-
fast believers  in  Spirit  Truths,  in  an  Absolute  Energy,  in  immortality
of  the  Soul  and  its  communion.  Throughout  all  time,  man  has  found
a  way  to  burst  the  barriers  of  darkness  that  overshadowed  the  temple
within  —  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet  often  lodging  demons.

By  a  renewing  of  the  mind  a  beacon  light  has  burst  through  the
mist  to  pilot ;  out  from  the  lowest  depths  is  found  a  pathway  to  the
loftiest  heights.  The  true  man  is  higher  than  his  dwelling-place  here ;
when  the  wings  of  the  Soul  unfold,  he  takes  flight  into  the  ever-
lasting morning,  and,  as  he  rises,  the  ashes  of  his  feathers  fall  back  to
earth,  while  the  unveiled  Soul,  ripened  in  love,  returns  to  the  Spirit
of  Love  who  gave  it.

The  liberty  given  to  man  through  mind  shows  the  Divine  Law,
which  is  written  in  every  human  heart,  telling  of  what  is  good  and
what  evil.  To  reason  with  thy  vicious  tendencies  opens  the  door  to
evil,  for  remember,  if  once  the  fox  hath  gotten  his  nose  in,  he  will  soon
find  means  to  make  the  body  follow.  If  men  are  bad  by  their  own  Will,
they  ought  also  to  be  able  to  be  good  by  their  own  Will,  and  if  that  is
not  the  case,  we  must  look  for  some  secret  disease,  either  from  extreme
negativeness,  receiving  the  reflex  of  every  impulse  about  them,  or
from  over  or  under  action  of  one  of  the  three  forces  that  are  about
mankind  in  common.


504      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

A  man  must  be  so  many-sided  nowadays,  if  he  wbhes  to  satisfy
all  the  demands  the  times  make  on  him,  that,  getting  into  this  vibra-
tion of  so-called  practicability,  environed  in  habit  so  imperceptible
and  subtle,  old  age  comes  on  and  finds  him  wondering  at  his  position.
To  be  practical  from  a  human  standpoint  one  sacrifices  the  fairest
flower  of  his  Spiritual  growth,  destroying  the  peace  which  would  have
helped  him  to  bear  the  heavy  burdens  of  life  to  the  end.  "  Your  ways
are  not  my  ways,"  says  the  Christ.  Because  our  natural  senses  are
not  fine  enough  to  get  at  the  true  facts,  we  must  not  deny  the  facts.
Science,  whose  Soul  is  explanation  from  a  human  standpoint,  halts
with  hostile  front  at  Spirit  mysteries,  calls  them  vulgar  toys,  and  de-
stroys them.

The  Cassandras  of  life  are  never  believed  in ;  every  man  in  this
practical  age  must  experience  a  thing  for  himself  before  he  will  ac-
knowledge it  to  be  a  fact.  One  has  no  right  to  claim  a  thing  is  thus
and  so  merely  because  it  is  his  desire  to  have  it  so.  As  he  claims  the
privilege  of  having  an  opinion  that  differs  from  others,  he  must  grant
them  a  similar  privilege.  If  he  desires  to  have  toleration  shown  his
faults,  he  must  bear  with  the  faults  of  others.

From  a  mere  human  standpoint,  Spirit  is  independent  of  all  laws.
Hence  come  so  many  combative  arguments ;  the  finite  Soul  can  never
learn  the  Infinite,  nor  be  informed  by  it,  unless  aided  by  Spirit,  which  aid
must  come  through  the  Astral  or  Star  magno  of  the  body.  Too  much
argument  from  effect  and  too  little  knowledge  of  cause  brings  on  the
most  fatal  disease,  that  of  ignorance  puffed  up  with  the  conceit  of
knowledge.  This  lower  world  is  far  from  being  the  principal  one.
The  world  of  Spirit  is  pre-existent  to  and  survives  everything  else,  and
the  corporeal  world  might  have  never  existed,  or  may  cease  to  exist,
without  changing  the  essentiality  of  the  Spirit  world.

Souls  growing  to  their  ripening  and  Angels  (Souls  Perfected)  are
everywhere.  The  infinite  and  limitless  space  is  peopled  with  them.
Unperceived  by  mortals,  they  are  incessantly  beside  us,  observing  and
acting  upon  us ;  for  growth  of  Spirit  is  one  of  the  powers  of  nature,
and  they  are  instruments  employed  by  God  for  the  accomplishment
of  His  providential  designs.  All  Spirits  or  Souls  do  not  go  every-
where ;  there  being  regions  from  which  they  do  not  come  and  other
regions  where  they  cannot  go,  as  is  shown  elsewhere  in  this  book.
This  thought  should  be  always  kept  in  mind,  and  never  lost  sight  of,
vis. ;  that  there  are  among  these  Soul  spirits,  as  well  as  among  mortals,
some  who  are  very  ignorant,  although  they  may  fully  understand  the
law  of  control  and  communication  with  mortals.


THE   TEMPLE  WITHIN.  505

We  cannot  be  too  much  on  our  guard  against  a  tendency  to  believe
that  all  disembodied  Souls  are  truthful  and  reliable  simply  because
they  are  in  the  Spirit  world.  As  seekers  for  light  and  knowledge,  do
not  confine  your  search  to  the  mere  table-turning  or  knockings,  which
were  the  starting-point  in  this  age  of  modem  manifestations ;  neither
close  your  door  of  knowledge  after  hearing  the  prattle  of  some  disem-
bodied Soul  through  a  human  organism,  and  say  this  is  all.

This  growth  of  the  Soul  while  here  on  earth  is  one  of  the  weight-
iest questions  of  all  human  life.  Brush  away  the  clouds  from  your
eyes  and  awake,  and  you  shall  gain  the  light  along  the  heights  and
paths  of  the  hidden  way.    The  purest  light  is  obscured  by  no  cloud.

As  every  germ  of  fruit  or  seed  is  surrounded  by  the  p^risperm^  so
mankind  and  Souls  are  surrounded  by  star  magna  or  Astral,  which  by
analogy  we  may  call  Sou/  perisperm,  or  perispiriU  The  mass  of  the
Christian  world  is  at  this  moment  worshipping  the  Bible  instead  of
God,  putting  the  assumed  record  of  His  Will  before  the  true  "  inward
witness  "  of  His  Spirit.

Two  ships  sail  out  upon  life's  stormy  sea,  deep  laden  with  costly
merchandise,  and  as  they  leave  port  they  part  company,  never  to  meet
again  till  they  meet  in  Paradise.

One  sails  out  into  warm,  congenial  seas,  wafted  by  balmy  breezes,
under  golden  skies ;  the  glorious  sun  by  day,  and  gentle  moon  by
night,  marking  her  course  across  the  trackless  deep,  and  the  silent
star  of  peace  pilots  her  to  the  headlands  of  the  harbor,  past  the  light-
ship and  the  dangerous  buoys,  into  a  clear  channel,  safely  to  anchor,
home  at  last  in  rest  and  peace.

The  other  ship  sails  boldly  out  into  boisterous  latitudes,  taking  a
course  marked  on  life's  chart,  pride  and  ambition.  No  sun,  no  moon
or  stars  mark  her  course,  no  companion  barque  to  keep  her  company,
for  selfishness  admits  of  no  companionship.  No  balmy,  refreshing
breeze  fills  out  the  sails,  but  continuous,  tempestuous  storms  assail  on
every  side,  while  the  mad  billows  dance  and  chase  along  its  pathway,
threatening  destruction,  until  one  more  mighty  than  the  rest  engulfs
the  ship  just  off  the  headlands  of  the  port,  and  the  crew  meet  their
doom  upon  the  rock  of  selfishness,  even  in  sight  of  the  haven  of  rest.
So  men,  like  these  ships,  take  different  routes.  One  chooses  the
happy  side  of  things,  schools  his  ambition  into  love,  and  makes  con-
tent. Wafted  by  the  perfumed  breeze,  guided  by  Spirit  Light,  he  is
piloted  by  Love  into  the  haven  of  the  summer  land.  The  other  sees
no  good  in  anything;  makes  of  his  life  one  long  complaint;  looks
only  for  the  crooked  and  dark  currentSy  and  thus  rides  tempest-tossed


506      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

through  all  life's  voyage,  schooling  his  thoughts  to  self  and  pride,  only
to  find  himself,  when  his  hour  is  come,  a  broken  wreck  upon  the
sands.

Each  individual  life  is  a  world  by  itself,  suspended  within  the
realm  of  possibilities ;  while  the  Soul  is  ever  the  centre  of  gravitation,
and  the  law  of  gravity  is  intelligence  through  Spirit.

There  can  be,  according  to  nature,  no  difference  between  it  and
matter.

Here  we  have  a  trinity  of  Spirit,  Soul,  and  Matter ;  each  one  a
functionary  in  itself,  with  one  law  governing  the  whole.  Therefore,
as  centralization  seems  to  be  the  absolute  tendency  of  all  conditions,
should  not  a  harmonious  action  of  these  three  entities  constitute  some-
thing of  a  universal  power,  and  bring  about  a  condition  above  all  othersi
where  all  sickness,  sorrow,  and  suffering  are  ended  ?

I  met  a  Soul  as  pure  and  serene

As  the  sunny  brook,  or  the  pearly  stream ;

Spotless  to  me  his  past  life  seemed.

Refreshing  to  me  as  the  sweetest  dream*

This  was  a  day  dream  all  so  clear,

No  darkened  veil  to  interfere ;

No  mystery  there  for  me  to  seek.

All  was  known  as  I  heard  him  speak.

His  Soul  was  pure.    I  looked  within^

I  saw  no  darkness  there  nor  sin ;

Pure  to  me  as  the  break  of  day,

Fresh  to  me  as  the  early  May.

Heaven  commences  here  below.

But  few,  it  would  seem,  this  knowledge  know,

Then  look  within  for  the  holy  sign,

The  spark,  the  love  of  the  Divine.

**  And  now  I  am  no  more  in  the  world,  but  these  are  in  the  world,
and  I  come  to  thee.  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own  name  those
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one  as  we  are."  — Jokn
xvii. :  II.

Pilgrim  of  Spirit  Truth,  you  must  watch  your  inner  ambitions  dil-
igently, always  striving  to  maintain  and  create  higher  atmospheres  of
kindness  and  sympathy,  fellow-feeling,  and  tenderness  for  all  things ;
practising  in  works  a  universal  charity  and  love;  that  higher  and
loftier  beneficent  compassion  which  prevents  all  evil,  selfish,  or  jealous
thoughts.  It  must  be  an  application  of  universal  brotherhood.  Christ-
like in  principle,  which  meets  the  wants  of  all  mankind.  No  man
must  assume  the  duty  of  another.


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  $0/

There  is  great  danger  in  everything  that  pertains  to  doing  the  duty
of  another.  Each  individual  must  direct  his  efforts  towards  his  own
Spiritual  growth.  He  also  learns  that  Spiritual  forces  are  dual  in
their  nature,  those  which  radiate  through  the  emotional  nature  and
those  which  radiate  through  the  silent  will  in  union  with  the  forces
of  nature.

Sentiment,  conception,  fantasy,  embracing  confidence  and  faith^
are  frequently  superior  to  the  emotional.  Therefore  the  true  illumi-
nation is  that  man  shall  gain  knowledge  of  himself,  independently  of
other  men,  thus  securing  for  himself  higher  truths,  greater  repose,  and
salvation,  with  no  other  mediation  than  Spirit  and  himself.

This  is  an  age  in  which  hypocrisy  usurps  the  place  of  sincerity.
But  Spirit  Truth  will  destroy  all  this  and  bring  about  a  humanitarian
unity,  through  the  great  depth  and  wealth  of  Absolute  Love  illumining
men's  Souls.

Every  human  Soul  has  a  celestial  affinity,  which  is  part  of  his  sys-
tem and  a  type  of  his  Spiritual  nature.  This  Angelic  counterpart  is
the  bond  of  union  between  the  man  and  God,  and  it  is  by  virtue  of
his  Spiritual  nature  that  this  Angel  is  attached  to  him.  For  every
Spirit-Soul  has  attached  to  him  a  genius,  called  by  many  different
names :  by  Jesus,  an  Angel ;  by  the  Apostles,  ministering  Angels ;  by
modem  mediums,  Guides.

The  kingdom  of  the  within  yields  not  to  indifference  nor  inaction,
but  to  enthusiasm  and  concentration.  It  is  said,  to  labor  is  to  pray ;
to  ask  is  to  receive ;  to  knock  is  to  have  the  door  opened.  The  Ge-
nius is  not  an  informing  Spirit.  He  can  tell  nothing  to  the  Soul,  for
all  that  is  received  through  him  is  already  hers,  but  in  the  darkness  of
the  night  the  pearl  of  knowledge  would  remain  undiscovered  but  for
the  Torch  of  the  Angel  who  enlightens.  "  Thus,"  says  the  Angel
Genius  to  his  client,  "I  illuminate  thee,  but  I  instruct  not;  I  warn
thee,  but  I  fight  not ;  I  attend  thee,  but  I  lead  not ;  thy  treasure  is
within  thyself ;  my  light  showeth  where  it  lieth."

True  prayer  means  the  intense  mental  energy  and  direction  of  the
Will,  with  all  desires  bent  toward  the  Highest,  with  a  deep,  unchang-
ing intent  to  know  nothing  but  the  Highest.

When  regeneration  and  growth  of  the  Soul  is  fully  attained,  the
Divine  Spirit  alone  instructs  the  Hierophant.  "For  the  gates  of
His  city  shall  never  be  shut ;  there  is  no  night  there ;  and  they  shall
not  need  the  light  of  the  lamp,  because  the  Lord  God  shall  enlighten
them."

A  Christ  is  a  man  married  to  his  Spirit    A  Prophet  is  a  man  in*


508       THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

structed  by  his  Angel ;  a  Christ  returns  to  the  world  out  of  pure  hvc^
to  redeem,  needing  no  more  to  return  to  ripen  Hb  Soul,  for  His  own
growth  and  His  own  sake,  but  is  awaiting  in  His  Illuminated  Medium-
ship  for  the  Highest  Good  to  come  to  man.

Therefore  is  He  said  to  have  come  down  from  heaven,  and  to  bap-
tize with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  the  Divine  Fire.

Pilgrim  of  Light,  from  this  hour  grow  in  the  purer  love.  Cast  aside
the  objective,  every-day  life  of  this  world.  Give  thy  heart  and  Soul
to  Spirit  illumination.

Then  the  way  shall  be  short  that  leads  thee  upward.  The  hidden
forces  of  nature  shall  lend  thee  strength.  The  stones  that  are  therein
shall  be  as  wings  to  lift  thy  feet,  instead  of  stumbling-blocks  for  thy
destruction.  Thy  Book  and  Word  shall  be  the  secret  wisdom  ol
nature.  Her  deep  springs  of  eternal  waters  shall  refresh  thee,  and
the  food  and  communion  with  Angels  shall  be  thine.  Then  thou  shalt
never  tire  in  the  way,  nor  crave  rest  by  the  wayside ;  but  be  always
in  the  refreshing  sunlight  of  Spirit.  Thy  sorrows  shall  turn  from
bitter  into  sweet  and  out  from  the  defeats  and  stings  of  thy  past
agonies  there  shall  grow  the  golden  flowers  for  thy  future  crown.
Press  onward,  look  forward,  look  upward ;  look  only  to  Spirit  Truth,
and  never  once  look  back.

Your  waiting  shall  not  be  long,  nor  your  watching  for  many  days.
You  shall  have  powerful  and  marvellous  magnetism  over  the  Souls  of
lesser  men.

The  lights  of  another  world  will  be  on  thee  and  thy  brow  and
features  as  a  glorious  halo.  Through  the  presence  of  Spirit,  thou
shalt  turn  sorrow  into  gladness,  and  defeats  into  triumphs,  by  thy
mere  word.

Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen.  But  thou  art  one  of  the
small  band  of  High  Priests,  who  in  all  ages  have  shone  out  like  the
Star  in  the  East ;  who  have  been  mediators  between  time  and  eternity;
to  cheer  and  comfort  the  broken-hearted ;  to  rebuke  him  who  would
lose  his  own  Soul,  now  to  arouse  him,  and  speed  his  awakening  Soul
in  its  heavenly  flight.

There  are  times  in  human  experiences  when  the  machinery  of
thought  runs  so  quietly  that  only  the  results  on  other  objects  indicate
its  motion  as  in  the  present.

Resignation,  in  the  arms  of  Spirit  Force,  is  that  true  Angel  who  car-
ries most  of  our  Soul's  burdens.  But  the  man  who  knows  not  Spirit  has
times  when  the  burdens  of  life  seem  greater  than  he  can  bear.  When
his  dearest  hopes  and  ambitions  have  fled,  disappointments  appear


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  5O9

to  become  his  constant  companions.  When  his  Soul  groans  and
grows  weary  under  the  burdens  of  his  own  nothingness,  he  for  the
first  time  in  his  natural  life  realizes  the  arms  of  Spirits  and  Angels.
Then  come  heartfelt  cries  and  tears  like  those  of  an  unattended  child,
the  cries  of  the  Spirit  child  newly  born  within  the  chamber  of  his  Soul
into  the  light  of  a  holier  dawn.

There  is  something  vastly  higher  than  the  ordinary  objective  life.
It  is  the  ethereal  portion  of  the  heart ;  that  which  longs  to  be  freed
from  the  animal  body  and  float  upward  to  rejoin  its  other  half,  its
Spiritual  Archetype.  This  is  the  gold  and  the  jewel  that  shall  be  thine
if  thou  art  true  to  Spirit,  to  Love.  Neither  man  nor  monarch  can  take
this  from  thee,  through  all  the  cycles  of  limitless  eternity.

These  are  the  heavy  scented  groves,  on  glorious  heights  of  Spirit-
ual blessedness  where  those  who  are  free  from  selfishness,  and  true  to
purer  loves  while  upon  earth,  walk  forth  to  perfect  peace  and  everlast-
ing Truth.  If  in  the  past  your  life  was  light  with  love,  'tis  tenfold
more  so  now,  for  you  are  with  her,  your  Archetype,  eternal  life's  duality,
light  ethereal,  and  Love,  Spiritual  the  Soul's  rest.

Action  is  Spirit  in  Motiofi^  Spirit  in  Motion  is  the  one  Universal
Life,  forming  and  creating  new  and  ever  changing  conditions  whereby
to  express  itself.  The  Indian  Chief  felt  this  truth  when  on  viewing
Niagara  he  exclaimed,  '*  God  is  Motion,  and  here  He  is  speaking  to
His  children  from  out  the  waters."

The  Prayer  of  Truth.

Oh  Thou  who  hast  now  in  thy  deep  love  revealed  to  me,  O  Holy  One  I
My  understanding  is  now  enlightened  and  I  comprehend  the  Truth.
Bewilderment  has  disappeared,  and  all  my  doubts  and  fears  are  gone.
For  now  my  days  are  perfect  peace,  and  my  delight  in  rapture  flows

In  knowing  Thee.

Oh  Thou  who  dost  sustain  the  Universe,

Oh  mighty  Lord  of  all  the  Universe ;

In  Thy  compassion  great,  oh,  look  on  me.

In  my  blind  foolish  ignorance,  O  God  of  Gods,

Can  I  discover  what  this  portends  ?

But  from  henceforth  I  will  obedient  prove

To  what  Thou  shalt  command.

Oh  let  Thy  Light  and  Love  forever  more  abide  with  me
Oh  Thou  who  art  the  worldly  senses*  conqueror.
Hast  in  Thy  loving  kindness  shown  to  me

The  realms  of  Spirit
My  mind  is  now  forever  free  from  doubt,  and  ignorance  is  now  dispelled.
Oh,  Perfect  One,  make  me  Thy  child,  and  ever  guide  me

With  Thy  hand.


5IO      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

He  who  is  brave  enough  to  think  for  himself,  and  who  hath  eyes
to  see  and  heart  to  understand,  knows  of  a  truth  that  the  old  is  passr
ing  away,  and  the  New,  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  Truth,  is  silently
but  gradually  and  surely  permeating  all  grades  of  humanity,  which
sooner  or  later  must  take  form  in  an  order  of  social  life  diverse  from
all  that  has  preceded.

The  intellect  of  man  b  a  Spiritual  faculty,  which  survives  the
death  of  the  physical  body,  and  it  cannot  thrive  nor  be  fed  forever
upon  the  literalities,  which  are  unreal ;  in  the  creed  of  a  blind  faith,
which  forms  the  '*  bread  that  perisheth,"  that  is  supplied  by  modem
sacerdotalism.  Nothing  but  pure  Truth,  which  is  alone  real  and
Spiritual,  and  that  which  man  individually  must  know  of  a  Truth  hi$i^
self  can  satisfy  the  thinkers  of  to-day,  in  the  demand  for  knowledge
made  by  the  immortal  part  of  their  human  being.  The  life-giving
element,  suited  for  the  Spiritual  and  intellectual  part  of  man's  nature,
must  be  developed  from  within,  not  from  without.

The  Souls  of  a  large  part  of  humanity  are  just  beginning  to  be-
come illumined  to  the  Spirit  Light,  and  to  feed  upon  the  living  bread  of
eternal  Truth,  which  descends  copiously  from  heaven  to  all  mankind.
The  eternal  life-giving  element  is  more  than  meat,  and  warmth  to  the
body  than  its  clothing ;  and  now  that  the  husks  of  the  blind  faith  of
extemalism  utterly  fail  to  give  food  to  the  mind  of  the  present  unless
the  knowledge  of  Spirit  and  of  Truth  is  given^  the  people  must  perish
for  lack  of  understanding,

O  Pilgrim  of  Light,  arise,  and  stand  no  longer  idle.  Hear  the
cry  of  a  dying  world,  the  wail  of  Divine  Humanity  in  its  demand  for
knowledge  of  Spirit,  of  Truth,  and  of  eternal  Life.

The  liberation  of  the  human  mind,  the  right  of  possession  and
exercise  of  the  Divine-human  faculty  of  human  intellect  and  percep-
tion through  the  Soul,  infinitely  transcends  the  vested  interests  of
any  dogma  or  creed.

These  must  all  perish,  for  so  it  is  spoken  in  the  Lamb's  book  of
Life,  and  Spirit,  Love,  Wisdom,  and  Truth  will  re-appear  in  a  far  more
beautiful  garb.  Society  will  then  be  based  upon  higher  and  nobler
principles  than  have  animated  the  past.

Then  the  worship  of  the  Supreme  Father  will  not  be  in  words
but  in  True  Spirituality  and  unselfish  deeds ;  neither  will  enlightened
human  beings  throng  the  temples  built  by  contract,  seeking  peace
and  finding  none ;  but  each  fragment  of  Divine  Humanity  will  have
a  Temple  of  the  Living  God  within  his  own  breast.  It  is  the  human
principle  of  intellect  and   Soul  that  is  also  Spiritual,  unborn,  and


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  5 II

undying.  The  animality  of  mankind  has  been  lived  out  and  almost
perfected  in  its  degree.  Now  it  b  time  for  the  principle  of  Soul  to
come  to  the  fore.  In  the  past  ages,  kings  have  ruled  the  bodies  and
priests  the  Souls  of  men.  To-day,  the  secret  spring  of  opposition  to
the  Universal  Spiritual  understanding  is  found  in  the  selfishness  of
domination  which  seeks  to  control  the  bodies  and  Souls  of  others,
and  history  has  proved  that  those  who  have  obtained  possession  of
this  power  will  not  yield  it  without  a  great  struggle.  Spirit  Light
and  Truth  throughout  all  antiquity  have  passed  through  the  same
ordeal.

So  long  as  it  was  under  the  guidance  and  dominion  of  the  best
men  and  the  unselfish  intellect  of  the  age,  it  became  the  highest  and
grandest  science  attainable  by  mortal  man.  During  these  periods
originated  and  was  formulated  that  which  is  known  to  us  modems
as  Symbolism.

So  long  as  our  Spiritual  elder  brothers  kept  their  Spiritual  Light
as  a  sacred  science,  they  flourished  and  their  nations  were  gloriously
blessed.  But  when  their  powers  and  Spirituality  were  used  for  selfish
ends,  they  became  crystallized  and  dense,  then  images,  statues,  and  even
living  animals  were  introduced,  and  sacerdotalism  begun,  from  which
the  Spirit  of  Truth  and  Life-giving  power  to  elevate  the  Soul  and
illuminate  the  intellect  of  men  fled.  History  tells  us,  only  too  truly,
how  the  Light  from  the  Great  Central  Sun  of  Life  faded,  until  during
what  are  known  to  the  present  era  as  the  dark  ages  it  became  almost
totally  extinguished.

"  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man ;  but  that
which  Cometh  out  of  the  mouth."

Our  own  words  are  the  support  of  our  Spiritual  and  mental  struc-
ture, and  are  the  framework  of  our  minds,  which  comprise  the  Truth
or  true  life  principle  within  us.  This  is  our  true  life,  which  is  appar-
ent to  God  and  the  Angel  world.  Thus  it  is  that  when  men  gain  the
Spiritual  Sight,  they  do  not  see  the  form  of  flesh,  but  the  true  man,  as
he  really  is,  either  good  or  evil.  What  God  requires  is  the  ripening
of  a  genuine  inwardly  true  man,  born  of  love  and  goodness,  which
make  a  genuine  man.  In  the  Spiritual  world,  we  are  clothed  with
honor  or  dishonor,  with  purity  or  impurity,  according  to  our  inward
states.  In  this  life,  the  robes  of  honor  are  often  worn  by  evil  and
dishonorable  men.

As  a  man  expresses  words  from  his  mouth,  if  of  goodness  and
love,  a  receptive  nature  forms  a  love  and  thought  of  a  modelled  image,
which  b  so  revealed  in  the  matter  of  nature  that  you  touch  it,  while


512      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

if  he  express  words  of  gross  and  lower  nature,  a  sensitive  persoD
meets  them  with  an  image  of  debasement  in  form.

Every  work  of  art,  statue,  picture,  building,  or  work  of  industry  was
first  produced  in  the  Soul-Spiritual  world,  the  within  of  the  author's
mind.  The  mind  is  the  standard  of  the  man.  All  the  things  on
earth  correspond  with  men's  states  as  they  are  receptive  of  God's
Love  and  Wisdom.  All  the  things  in  heaven  correspond  with  Angels'
states  as  they  are  receptive.  Thus  all  in  heaven  and  all  in  earth  are
from  God,  and  have  their  final  cause  and  correspond  in  Him.  Faith
is  ever  the  renewing  life-principle  of  our  Souls.  Love  and  Charit}'
are  the  flesh  and  drapery  of  our  Spiritual  bodies.  When  we  receive
God's  all-pervading  Light  within  our  Spiritual  bodies,  it  comes  by
faith,  which  feeds  and  nourishes  our  Love  and  Charity,  and  Divine
goodness  and  Truth  with  understanding  are  being  constantly  brought
to  and  converted  into  these  two  essentials  of  the  living  Soul,
which  is  that  AH  Kindling  Light  of  Truth  which  illuminates  the  under-
standing and  ripens  the  Soul.  Thus  comes  to  us  continually  the  Holy
Breath  or  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God,  breathing  into  our  inner
Temple  Everlasting  Life.

'*  O,  thou  whose  daily  life  anticipates
The  life  to  come,  and  in  whose  thought  and  word
The  Spiritual  world  preponderates,  thou  too  hast  heard

Voices  and  melodies  from  beyond  the  gates,
And  speakest  only  when  thy  Soul  is  stirred  I "

The  higher  Spirits  descend  to  mankind  as  gently  as  the  night
dews  fall,  softly  as  the  snowfiakes  come  to  earth,  and  are  like  dew-
drops  on  the  flowers,  cool  and  refreshing.  These  sublimely  perfected
beings  of  force  and  entity  are  the  Planetary  Spirits,  who  live  a  con-
scious life  of  supreme  knowledge,  understanding,  and  felicity,  through
aeons  of  ages  and  long  vistas  of  time  which  are  equivalent  to  what  we
human  beings  can  imagine  of  eternity.  Therefore,  when  any  man
becomes  an  Adept,  having  the  power  to  direct  and  guide  his  own
Spirit  Entity,  it  is  within  his  power,  if  he  has  attuned  his  Duality  of
being,  to  become  one  these  conscious  directing  powers  of  the  planet-
ary system  to  which  he  belongs,  and  into  this  unutterable  greatness
every  living  being  has  the  opportunity  of  passing  ultimately.  But
any  True  spiritually  illuminated  individual  who  has  become  attuned
within  himself,  may  in  one  earth  life,  by  ripening  his  Soul,  reach  that
advancement  which  brings  him  within  the  planetary  realms  of  being,
and  his  higher  Angelhood  is  merely  a  matter  of  time.    Thb  is  the


THE   TEMPLE  WITHIN.  513

Nirvana  of  esoteric  Buddhism,  the  key-note  also  of  nearly  all  Eastern
Adeptship.*

Just  as  childhood  is  irresponsible  for  its  acts,  so  were  the  earlier
races  of  humanity  irresponsible  for  theirs,  excepting  in  very  rare
cases  and  between  long  intervals  of  time,  where  some  being  was
blessed  with  superior  talent  or  Spiritual  understanding,  when  he  was
held  strictly  accountable  for  the  good  or  evil  he  wrought.  But  in
this  age  there  is  a  period  of  full  growth,  and  complete  development
of  conscience  and  intellectual  faculties  enables  the  individual  man  to
choose  between  good  and  evil  in  a  single  incarnation  or  natural  life.

Nearly  all  mankind,  at  the  present  age,  is  coming  into  the  posses-
sion of  faculties  which  render  man  a  fully  responsible  being.

He  begins  to  realize  that  he  is  a  little  world  within  himself  and  as
competent  of  judging  for  himself  as  another  man  or  any  human  theory
or  creed  can  do  for  him.  But,  unfortunately,  as  the  Temples  of  the
Soul  have  not  yet  become  illuminated  by  the  Spirit,  this  age  runs  at
once  into  the  conflict  between  intellect  and  Spirituality*  Thus  at  this
hour  the  world  stands  with  a  little  expansion  toward  Spirituality  and
Spirit,  Light,  Wisdom,  and  Truth  from  a  higher  standpoint  than  man,
which  will  tide  him  over  this  period  of  great  danger;  a  period  dangerous
because  if  he  does  not  embrace  his  opportunity  to  illuminate  his  Soul
with  Spirit,  another  iqcarnation  becomes  necessary,  and  ages  may
intervene  before  that  opportunity  again  arrives.

Every  good  deed,  every  unselfish  love  and  elevated  impulse  that  man
or  woman  ever  did  or  felt,  must  reverberate  through  aeons  of  ages  to
every  entity  of  Spiritual  existence.  During  this  short  evolutionary
life-wave  or  objective  life  on  earth.  Nature  is  continually  pointing  the
way  and  kindly  discerning  for  us.  For  the  least  effort  on  man's  part
for  Soul  growth  and  Spirit  Truth,  and  comparatively  small  expendi-
ture of  true  Love-principle  and  human  Will-power  sent  in  the  right
direction  toward  her  children  to  bless  Divine  Humanity,  Nature
makes  very  large  returns.

Many  scientific  wise  men  claim  that  Nature  is  cruel,  while  truly
the  opposite  is  the  case.  For  Nature  is  continually  warning  her  chil-
dren, and  is  in  no  hurry  to  catch  even  the  smallest  creature  in  a  trap.
It  is  that  the  living  may  become  illumined  that  man  should  pray,  and
not  for  the  so-called  dead.  One  who,  during  his  earth-life,  develops
absolutely  no  selfish  animal  affinities  for  material  existence,  but  has
illuminated  his  Soul,  as  has  been  said,  starts  it  at  the  moment  of

•  See  illustnttkm  of  Winged  Globe.


514      I'HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

death  with  all  its  attractions  tending  toward  one  path,  in  the  direction
of  Spirit  and  Eternal  Truth,  with  nothing  to  draw  it  back  to  objective
life.  So  he  does  not  come  back,  but  mounts  into  a  condition  oC
Spirituality  which  fully  corresponds  to  all  his  loves,  desires,  attrac-
tions in  the  higher  direction,  and  all  other  threads  of  attraction  or
affinities  of  connection  are  cut  off.

"Whatever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  reap."  Although  man  is
much  a  creature  of  circumstances,  he  has  control  over  his  own  destiny
within  constitutional  limits,  so  to  speak.  He  is  perfectly  free  to  make
use  of  his  natural  rights  as  far  as  they  go,  and  they  go  practically  to
infinity,  so  far  as  he,  the  individual  unit,  is  concerned.  To  be  and
remain  unripened,  then,  through  error  and  darkness,  is  to  be  immortal
in  evil  and  error,  —  one  with  darkness,  in  place  of  one  with  God.  Id
the  great  Soul  world,  these  are  the  two  poles,  one  of  good  and  one  of
error ;  and  between  these  two  poles  the  unripe,  useless  portion  of
mankind  vegetates  and  dies  without  remembrance.

At  the  so-called  death  of  this  animal  body  it  is  only  the  lower
principles  of  physical  man  which  are  abandoned  and  pass  back  to
dust;  the  higher  principles,  as  has  been  explained,  escaping  to  the
Spirit  world,  make  him  to  give  judgment  upon  himself  on  the  whole
aspect  of  his  case.

Therefore,  remember,  dear  reader,  that  if  a  man  reap  sorrow,  dis-
appointment, and  pain,  he  himself  and  no  other  must  at  some  time  in
the  past,  perhaps  during  some  former  incarnation,  have  sown  folly,
selfishness,  error,  and  sin.  That  which  he  hath  sown,  that  also  shall
he  reap,  if  not  in  this  life,  in  some  future  one.  Therefore,  now  is  his
great  opportunity.  For  his  actions  speak  from  the  heart,  and  inmost
thoughts,  and  are  his  good  and  evil,  or  that  which  he  makes  his  life,
does  not  die,  and  by  that  and  in  that  alone  are  the  basic  and  con-
stituted parts  of  his  new  birth.

It  requires  a  mental  effort  to  realize  the  difference  between  Per-
sonality, Entity,  and  Individuality.

Personality  is  simply  the  passing  weaknesses  of  the  flesh  made
manifest.

Individuality  is  the  objective  action  of  the  body,  but  not  the  True
man ;  for  this  objective  action  and  appearance  of  the  individual  is
continually  changing ;  as  the  child  becomes  changed  on  gaining
knowledge  and  worldly  understanding.  Personality  and  Individuality
change  continually  during  the  short  span  of  life,  but  the  Entity  of
man  is  the  True  principle  of  being,  simply  clothed  by  an  Individuality
and  Personality.


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  515

The  Character  of  a  man  is  what  he  really  is,  being  a  combination
of  personality,  individuality,  and  entity ;  that  is,  if  his  Soul  and
higher  conscience  take  a  part  in  governing  his  life.  Otherwise,  his
entity  is  overshadowed  and  remains  dormant,  and  the  man  is  simply  a
reflex  of  the  intellect  and  culture  of  the  times  in  which  he  lives,
a  mere  metaphysical  abstraction  of  certain  mental  quaUties,  with
animal  or  moral  propensities,  as  the  case  may  be.

*'  He  that  is  without  sin  among  you,  let  him  first  cast  a  stone  at  her."
O,  grandest  of  words  ever  spoken  of  woman !    They  divide  the
history  of  the  race  in  twain.     It  is  the  "  Let  there  be  Light,"  of  the
second  creation.     From  that  hour  woman's  release  from  being  down-
trodden was  begun.     Can  a  being  who  is  not  wholly  without  sin
admonish  others  ?    Test  your  own  heart.     What  are  you  ?
^  Let  him  that  is  without  sin  cast  the  first  stone."
O,  truest  words  of  justice  that  ever  came  from  human  lips,  and
heard  by  human  ears.    Woman  Motherhood  of  man,  behold,  where
are  thy  accusers  ?    Go  and  sin  no  more.

From  that  hour  woman  kneels  no  longer  the  naked  victim  of
man's  lust,  but  becomes  the  sacred  motherhood  of  a  dying  world,
which  in  ages  yet  to  come  she  will  fully  redeem.  She  looks  up  to  the
Infinite,  and  Angels,  spreading  their  garments  of  love  and  mercy  over
her,  whisper  "Woman,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,"  and  from  her
grave  there  arises  a  reconciled  and  glorified  Spirit.  The  understand-
ing of  Spirit  and  of  her  own  nature  will  come  to  drive  away  the  awful
sorrow  from  the  bleeding  heart  of  woman,  and  heal  the  sadness  of
the  centuries,  echoed  from  the  quivering  lips  of  the  motherhood  of  all
the  race,  through  all  these  darkened  years.  Now,  the  passions  that
should  make  man  and  woman  and  motherhood  pure,  engulfs  them  all.
The  teachings  of  the  church  to-day  make  a  woman  suffer  without
redemption,  and  condones  the  sins  of  man.  All  haU  the  dawn  of
Spirit,  for  Spiritual  understanding  brings  Truth  in  all  its  purity.
Morally,  a  sin  is  sin  whether  the  sinner  be  man  or  woman.  Spirit
humanizes  Deity  and  makes  God  and  man  natural,  and  drives  away
the  degradation  of  woman.

Spiritual  unfoldment  and  knowledge  come  to  put  aside  the  super-
stitions, the  tyranny,  and  the  passions  that  have  turned  the  sweetest,
holiest,  and  grandest  ecstasy  of  humanity,  the  Divine  Motherhood  of
man,  into  cause  for  regret  and  countless  tears.  But  the  Spiritual
Sunlight  of  Truth  illuminates  a  waiting  world.  Womanhood  shall  no
longer  be  engulfed  in  the  errors  of  past  ages.    Who  has  not  seen  the


5l6      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

agony  and  heaviness  of  heart  of  those  faces  wet  and  white  with  despair,
like  phantoms  of  their  early  selves,  almost  at  each  footstep?  of  those
who  are  fast  going  down  to  unhonored  graves  because  they  were
women,  and,  trusting,  were  deceived  and  ruined  ?  Even  the  reUgians
of  the  past  would  have  us  believe  that  in  those  pallid  faces  is  the
living  death  of  Love.  Not  so;  God  is  Love  and  God  is  Spirii.
Motherhood  of  man !  you  who  have  suffered  and  toiled  so  patiently
in  chains,  the  hour  of  your  deliverance  is  at  hand  1  Spirit  shall  illu-
mine men's  Souls  to  Truth,  and  the  dawn  of  your  emancipation  shall
come  on  the  wings  of  the  morning.    God  is  just

We  move  in  the  orbit  of  our  own  limited  law  of  ideas  which  we
form  of  nature,  and  there  remain,  when  we  might  become  like  Angels,
being  only  subservient  to  the  Divine  Father.  No  star  in  all  the  fir-
maments revolves  for  itself  alone,  or  fully  completes  its  course  with-
out deviation,  for  the  heavenly  bodies  around  attract  it  and  repel  it ;
but  it  is  permitted  to  persevere.     So  should  it  be  with  men.

All  men  should  learn  and  know  that  life  is  a  duty,  and  is  all  we
are  and  all  that  we  possess.

We  only  truly  are  and  possess  when  we  find  the  world  within  us
and  ourselves  within  the  world.  Just  as  we  have  the  world  around
and  within  us,  so  it  is,  and  none  can  take  it  from  us.  So  we  only  pos-
sess a  thing  when  we  have  it  within  us,  and  death  takes  nothing
from  us,  but  gives  us  back  again  to  the  world.

Man  may  do  everything  he  can  to  which  he  feels  impelled,  as
soon  as  he  is  a  man,  but  he  must  recognize  the  limits  of  his  Right
before  he  reaches  the  limits  of  his  power.  Forgetting  one's  self,  yet
fully  knowing  one's  self — around  these  everything  turns.  Rest  in
peace  is  not  to  be  gained  by  force.  Rest  and  peace  are  pure  gifts
from  the  heaven  withiv  us.  Rain-clouds  and  sunshine  meet  in  our
tears  and  smiles.  Nature  repeats  herself  in  law^  Man  in  duty^  and
that  duty  is  love.  Nature  works  in  silence  from  within  toward  the
without.  So  also  must  man  work,  and  his  true  life  is  never  lonely.
His  comrades  are  numberless.  He  is  like  Cicero,  over  whose  doo^
way  were  these  words :  "  When  I  am  alone,  I  am  least  alone."

He  who  is  at  One  with  himself  is  everything.  Alone,  one  can
best  and  most  purely  plunge  himself  into  Universal  Being.  When
one  reaches  this,  he  has  conquered  the  world  of  sense.  This  is  the
point  which  makes  the  science  of  Spirit  culture  sneered  at  and
denied  by  the  world.  Spirit  makes  all  men  Equal;  modem  culture
makes  them  unequal,  and  so  does  fashionable  religion ;  but  only  the


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  $1/

system  of  Spiritual  culture,  which  recognizes  all  as  Equal  in  the  sight
of  God  and  man,  can  he  be  right  and  true.

The  human  Soul  is  like  the  fruit  which  falls  from  the  tree  when
it  is  ripe,  and  the  tree  can  give  it  nothing  more.  So  when  life  in  the
form  can  give  the  Soul  nothing  more,  it  departs.  See  to  it,  Pilgrim
of  Light,  that  yours  departs  a  ripened  Soul.  May  you  need  only  to
weep  and  sorrow  for  others,  and  never  over  yourself :  —

^  On  the  road  of  life  one  milestone  more  I
In  the  book  of  life  one  leaf  tamed  o'er  I
Like  a  red  seal  is  the  setting  sun
On  the  good  and  the  evil  men  have  done.*

"  Awake  from  thy  sleep,  O  dreamer  I
The  hour  is  near,  though  late.**

He  who  has  learned  to  find  and  imbibe  understanding  and  knowl-
edge from  the  eternal  and  inexhaustible  fountain  of  Spirit,  having
given  up  the  vain  and  anxious,  restless  search  for  it  abroad,  awakens
to  find  in  his  own  Inner  Temple  the  True  the  All ;  that  heaven  is
within  his  own  Soul,  and  that  Spiritual  Truths  come  to  the  infinite
inner  depths  of  his  own  being  from  the  subjective  world,  across  the
Threshold  to  the  Soul  within ;  and  from  the  infinite  inner  depths  of
his  own  being  there  is  intercommunion  and  compassionate  sympathy
with  the  Universal  Christ,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  Wis-
dom, Understanding,  and  Knowledge.

According  to  Plato,  the  Universal  Mother-principle  in  man  is  that
nature  which  is  the  general  receptacle  of  all  bodies^  all  forces,  all
ideas,  and  from  this  world  of  truth  and  ideas  knowledge  and  under-
standing may  flow.  The  True  and  the  Good  in  Man  never  comes  from
without^  but  only  out  from  the  depths  of  the  Divine  Godhead  within.

"  But  the  anointing  which  ye  have  received  of  him  abideth  in  you,
and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you :  but  as  the  same  anointing
teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,  and  is  no  He,  and  even  as  it
hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  him."  —  i  John  ii. :  27.

The  existence  of  pain  in  the  world  is  not  a  failure  in  the  Divine  Law.
It  is  admitted  or  intended  in  the  Divine  purpose.  It  is  the  fire  in
which  the  pure  metal  of  Spirit  is  tempered  and  brought  out  and  fitted
for  the  conditions  of  existence.

Pain  is  the  signal  of  danger,  the  incentive  to  action,  to  the  acqui-
sition and  use  of  knowledge,  teaching  us  to  live  in  harmony  with  the
laws  of  nature,  and  lashing  us  within  our  inmost  selves  when  we  have


5l8      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

disobeyed.  The  physical  agonies  and  numerous  disappointments  of
this  short  life  are  slight  indeed  compared  with  the  long  despair  of  a
neglected,  selfish,  unripened  Soul.

The  more  perfect  the  Soul  of  man  becomes,  the  more  of  the
Divine  Perfections  he  can  perceive.  One  cannot  fight  for  God  out-
wardly while  he  is  fighting  against  Him  inwardly.

It  is  an  old  adage,  ''  that  falsehood  will  travel  leagues  while  truth
is  putting  on  its  boots."  Slander  b  a  criminal  offence,  and  creates
an  evil  atmosphere  about  all  who  have  to  do  with  it

The  slanderer  grows  worse  with  age ;  his  heart  hardens,  human
kindness  leaves  his  icy  breast,  he  never  releases  his  hold  upon  his
victim,  his  pursuit  is  as  implacable  as  death ;  and  even  after  his  victim
has  passed  the  bounds  of  this  world  and  sought  peace  and  refuge  in
another,  —  his  body  in  the  tomb,  —  the  slanderer,  savage  and  hyena-
like, would  dig  up  and  drag  forth  the  corpse  if  he  dared.  Many  an
honest  man  is  suffering  and  writhing  under  the  lash  of  the  vilifier.
Many  a  noble  and  good  woman  has  perished  in  the  battle  of  life,
stung  to  death  by  falsehood  and  slander  until  life  was  no  longer  bear-
able, and  at  last,  in  unutterable  anguish,  gave  up  all  hope,  and  passed
into  the  other  life  beneath,  usually  through  the  heartless  assaults  of
her  own  sex.

Oh,  how  can  they  so  easily  forget  the  peerless  words  of  the  sub-
lime Nazarene,  when  he  said,  "  Arise  1 1  do  not  condemn  thee ;  go  and
sin  no  more  "  1  These  words  alone  would  have  made  the  carpenter's
Son  Divine.

Have  those  who  pretend  to  follow  the  Great  Son  of  all  time  for-
gotten His  words  ?     It  seems  so.

We  have  implicit  confidence  in  the  law  of  correspondences  and
compensation,  and  in  the  immutability  of  justice.  We  have  faith  that
slanderers  will  here  or  hereafter  receive  their  just  and  proper  punish-
ment; and  we  are  willing  to  adopt  Bryant's  beautiful  verse,  and
believe  it  to  be  true  and  good :  —

''Truth  crushed  to  earth  shall  rise  again;

The  eternal  years  of  God  are  hers.

But  error,  wounded,  writhes  with  pain.

And  dies  among  his  worshippers.*'

And  that  beautiful  Italian  proverb !  Through  Time  God  is  Just,
and  Time  is  an  honest  fellow,  although  slow ;  he  balances  all  accounts
with  interest.

Divine  Humanity  is  God's  footstool.    Thus  speaks  the  Word.


THE  TE1IPL£  WiTHIK.  519

**  Heaven  is  My  throne,  and  the  earth  b  My  footstool.    Where  b  the
house  that  ye  build  unto  Me  ?  "

"  Therefore  I  say  unto  you,  The  Kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken
from  you,  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof."

The  most  amiable  Souls  in  men  often  cherish  secret  prejudices  or
earthly  ambitions  unrealized,  and  are  apt,  when  only  partially  attuned
to  the  higher  vibrations,  to  form  a  union  with  some  Soul  still  in  the
mortal  form,  instead  of  being  wisely  led  by  ministering  Angels,  and  to
inhale  the  breath  of  earthly  loves,  when  the  mediumship  returns  to
lower  octaves  and  mundane  vibrations.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the
oldest  two  Eastern  sacred  Orders  require  of  their  Initiates  for  a
time  the  life  of  an  Anchorite.  One  order  requires  three,  the  other
five  years  of  such  life.

*'  Uhfi/  thou  hast  eaten  of  that  Bread  of  fire  from  the  Altar ^  then
the  world  is  taken  away  and  thy  life  is  purged  and  thou  art  touched  by
the  Spirit,  and  lifted  upr

Behold  a  Prophet  goes  forth,  and  sees  and  reveals  marvellous
things  never  seen  by  earthly  eyes,  and  hears  wondrous  things  never
heard  by  earthly  ears.

He  who  is  brave  enough  to  endure  the  ostracisms  of  society  and
the  sneers  of  the  common  babbling  multitude  will  find  himself  more
than  a  hundred-fold  repaid  by  the  perfect  Peace  he  finds  on  every
height  of  Spirit  Truth.  He  sees  the  realization  of  that  ideal  of
religion  he  has  formed  in  his  Soul.  The  Star  of  Truth  which  he  saw
glittering  at  a  great  distance  develops  to  a  radiant  Sun.

Develop  in  man  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  he  becomes  the  lever,
the  instrument  for  the  conversion  of  the  world.  If  we  bear  much
fruit  we  glorify  God,  and  we  know  what  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  — •
love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffering,  gentleness,  patience,  goodness,  faith,
self-control.  Whatever  tends  to  make  men,  looking  upon  us,  revere,
esteem,  and  love  us,  whatever  lifts  their  conception  of  our  Spiritual
excellence,  gives  strength  to  our  Spirit,  and  as  we  become  in  perfect
accord  with  the  great  Eetemal  Energy  of  nature,  we  become  a  tower
of  strength  for  Spirit,  and  an  anchorage  for  growth  for  many  kin-
dred Souls.  But  if  the  maledictions  and  scorn  of  others  are  too
bitter  for  the  sensitive  mentality  of  a  medium  to  endure,  he  may
become  a  philosopher,  keeping  his  peace,  hiding  his  thoughts  within
himself,  or  withdrawing  from  a  world  which  could  or  would  not  under-
stand him.  A  turbulent  Spirit  has  often  much  ado  to  hold  his  lower
nature  in  check,  for  the  minds  and  Souls  of  men  are  vastly  different,


520      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  some  are  like  rivers  which  come  down  in  freshets,  bringing
destruction  on  the  meadows,  while  others  bring  loam,  and  refreshing,
and  increase  of  soil  to  all  the  fields.

"  He  that  dwelleth  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  shall
abide  in  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty."

If  a  man  lives  according  to  the  dictates  of  his  heart  and  oon~
science,  he  dwells  in  God's  secret  place.

The  heart  must  be  in  a  state  of  contrition  or  humility  before  the
Lord  will  dwell  in  it  We  enter  where  He  dwells  through  the  outer
door  of  repentance  and  the  inner  one  of  humility,  and  dwell  there  by
living  in  charity  and  love  in  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-men.  A
perfect  kindliness  toward  every  Soul,  an  absolute  sense  of  the  adapta-
tion of  the  means  to  the  end,  —  these  must  enter  in  before  the  life
can  be  perfect,  and  no  act  can  be  perfect  until  it  has  an  absolutely
perfect  and  pure  motive,  and  unless  faithfulness  to  principles  and  the
exercise  of  the  external  powers  enter  into  it

''Not  in  the  clamor  of  the  crowded  street,
Not  in  the  shouts  and  plaudits  of  the  throng,
But  in  ourselves,  are  triumph  and  defeat"

What  have  we  done  thus  far  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  benefit
of  mankind,  and  for  the  education  of  our  own  Soul  ?

Have  we  striven  so  to  ennoble  and  purify  it  that,  when  the  Father
of  All  wills  it,  we  may  enter  an  eternal  scholarship  in  the  higher
classes  in  heaven?

It  is  true  that  man  is  a  creature  of  circumstances ;  that  he  o\ves
all  he  is,  largely,  to  the  conditions  which  surround  him ;  but  he  has
also  within  himself  a  power  or  Spiritual  force  which  will  enable  him,
to  a  great  extent,  to  overcome  adverse  conditions  and  make  for  him-
self more  favorable  ones.  Every  intelligent  man  or  woman  may
increase  or  cultivate  this  innate  energy ;  and  every  Soul  who  faithfully
tries  to  do  his  duty  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  will  find  in  the  future
that  his  life  has  been  a  glorious  success,  even  though  his  material
gains  and  the  results  of  his  material  life  have  not  appeared  to  be  so
grand  from  the  external  standpoint

Thought  and  existence  are  identical.

I  exist  because  I  think,  and  think  because  I  exist  As  thou
thinkest,  so  thou  art.  "  Be  ye  transformed,"  says  Paul,  "  by  a  renew-
ing of  your  mind."  From  this  established  principle  it  surely  follows
that  a  change  of  thought  changes  and  modifies  our  very  existence.


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  $21

When  the  fogs  of  our  narrow  minds  pass  away,  when  peace  and
harmony  prevail  within  us,  the  lights  of  the  unseen  world  burst  upon
our  enraptured  vision,  diffusing  themselves  with  halos  of  glory.

Dear  reader,  the  call  is  sounded  from  your  Temple  Within,  again
and  again,  saluting  you  and  bidding  you  press  on,  never  weaiy  of
well  doing;  advocating  the  right  of  all  men  to  think,  to  hear,  to
believe,  and  to  judge  each  for  himself  upon  all  questions.

Heed  the  voice,  and  stand  fast  in  one  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  harmony
and  charity,  to  upbuild  True  Spiritualism,  that  through  it  you  shall
know  the  truth  and  ThitA  shall  make  you  free.

Not  in  the  knowledge  of  things  without,  but  in  the  perfection  of
the  Soul  within,  lies  the  empire  of  man.  Nature  supplies  the  mate-
rials for  the  science  in  every  element.  Everywhere  are  given  to
mortals  the  resources  and  the  libraries  of  immortal  love.  But,  though
all  earth  be  carved  over  and  inscribed  with  the  letters  of  diviner
knowledge,  he  who  does  not  pause  to  comprehend  them  and  acquire
the  language  will  find  them  valueless.

The  Love  and  Wisdom  of  the  Creator  is  the  Light  of  heaven.  He
reasoneth  not.  His  mind  is  the  fountain  of  Truth.  Justice  and  Mercy
wait  before  His  throne.  Benevolence  and  Love  enlighten  His  coun-
tenance forever.  Who  is  like  unto  the  Lord  in  glory?  Who  in
power  shall  contend  with  the  Almighty?  Hath  He  any  equal  in
wisdom  ?  Can  any  goodness  be  compared  with  Him  ?  He  it  is,  O
man  1  who  hath  created  thee.  Thy  station  on  earth  is  fixed  by  His
appointment.

The  powers  of  our  minds  are  the  gifts  of  His  goodness;  the
wonders  of  thy  frame  are  the  works  of  His  hand.  Hear,  then.  His
voice,  for  it  is  gracious ;  obey  Him,  for  He  will  enlighten  thee  in  all
it  is  proper  for  thee  to  know  of  the  Secrets  of  Nature,  and  establish
thy  Soul  in  peace.

Wouldst  thou  raise  thy  thoughts  to  Infinite*  Wisdom,  and  see
Omnipotence  displayed  before  thee  ?  Contemplate  thine  own  forma-
tion !  Fearfully  and  wonderfully  art  thou  made ;  praise,  therefore,
thy  Creator  with  reverence  and  awe,  and  rejoice  before  Him  with
thanksgiving.

Wherefore  of  all  creatures  art  thou  only  erect?  Because  thou
shouldst  behold  His  grand  works !  But  why  art  thou  to  behold  them  ?
That  thou  shouldst  admire  them !  Wherefore  to  admire  them  ?  That
thou  mayst  adore  the  Divine  Creator  of  all  Nature  and  thy
beneficent  Maker  1  Why  are  reasoning  faculties  implanted  in  thee
alone,  and  from  whence  are  they  derived  ?    It  is  not  in  flesh  to  think ;


522      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOUX

it  is  not  in  bones  to  reason.  The  lion  knoweth  not  that  worms  shall
eat  him ;  the  ox  perceiveth  not  that  he  is  fed  for  slaughter.  Some-
thing is  added  to  thee  unlike  what  thou  seest  Something  informs
thy  Soul  within  that  thou  art  higher  than  all  that  is  the  object  of  thy

Let  him  who  hath  an  ear  hear.  For  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to
ripen  and  his  True  Being  take  wings  and  fly  into  the  air,  passing  out-
ward into  the  great  deep,  and  be  taken  up  into  the  midst  of  heaven
between  the  firmaments  and  earth,  thereby  to  see  the  stability  of  this
globe,  the  fluidity  of  the  sea,  the  course  of  the  rivers,  the  largeness
of  the  air,  the  sharpness  and  swiftness  of  the  replenishing  Fire  of
Principle,  the  motion  of  this  Brotherhood  of  worlds  and  stars,  and
the  speediness  of  the  Spirit  of  Heaven  which  goeth  round  and  about
all  these,  and  is  the  Fower^  Wisdom^  and  Ughi  of  JVuth  over  all.

Z.Z.

A  man  may  lift  his  Soul  to  any  degree  of  elevation  and  find  no
end  to  an  intelligence  that  will  hear  his  prayer.  All  intelligence  in
one  grand  whole  is  the  Father  in  heaven — the  Most  High  —  infinite
in  knowledge,  —  force  of  perception;  all-mighty  in  will  power, — force
of  action ;  and  eternal  in  love,  —  force  of  penetration  ;  omniscient,
omnipotent,  and  omnipresent,  by  virtue  of  these  three  forces.

Pilgrim  on  the  heavenly  way,  you  have  but  commenced  your  im-
mortal journey.  To  live  in  the  Divine  Presence,  to  take  God's  Thought
and  do  His  Will,  guides,  inspires,  and  regenerates  the  whole  man.

When  humanity  shall  have  learned  this  wondrous  secret  of  r^n-
eration,  will  be  fulfilled  universally  the  words  of  the  beloved  disciple :
*'  He  that  keepeth  His  commandments,  dwelleth  in  Him  ....  and
hereby  we  know  that  He  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  he  hath
given  us."

Clergymen  rarely  learn  to  draw  the  line  of  distinction  between
Christ  and  Jesus ;  that  is  to  say,  between  the  anointing  effluence,  the
principle  and  the  man.  By  this  effluence  —  the  Divine  efflux — is
meant  that  aural  sphere  of  perfect  love  and  purity  in  which  dwell  the
Christ- Angels,  and  the  Arch- Angels  as  described  in  a  previous  chapter,
in  the  highest  spheres  in  the  many  mansions.

All  the  three  Great  Secret  Brotherhoods,  as  well  as  nearly  all
Adepts,  Gnostics,  and  Seers,  look  upon  the  Prince  of  Judea  as  a
Prophet  and  Adept,  and  reverence  his  name  with  great  honor  and
veneration,  and  always  consider  Jesus  as  perhaps  the  most  wonderful
medium  the  world  has  ever  seen.  He  was  a  harmonial  man,  bom
under  peculiar  circumstances,  and  into  a  home  of  love,  and  was  prob-


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  523

ably  as  nearly  a  perfect  man  as  ever  lived,  and,  as  one  of  the  Apos-
tles says,  ''  was  made  perfect  through  suffering."

Those  who  profess  to  be  followers  of  Jesus  should  be  willing  to
take  those  portions  of  the  New  Testament  which  they  believe  to  be
His  veiy  words  as  their  guide,  and  as  a  text  book  to  determine  who
are  His  true  followers.  And  He  said,  *'  These  signs  shall  follow  them
that  believe  ;  in  My  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils ;  they  shall  speak
with  new  tongues ;  they  shall  take  up  serpents ;  and  if  they  drink
any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not  hurt  them ;  they  shall  lay  hands  on  the
sick  and  they  shall  recover."

Again,  The  works  that  I  do,  he  shall  do  also ;  and  greater  works
than  these  shall  he  do ;  because  I  go  unto  My  Father."


The  Spiritual  Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  World,  thi  True
Corner-stone  of  Spiritual  Development.

And  the  re-embodiment  of  Christ  in  the  Prince  of  Peace  coiled  Jesus^
was  the  embodiment  of  purity,  love,  and  unselfishness.  His  was  a  life  of
self-abnegation  for  the  good  of  humanity,  and  through  Him  were
manifested  the  highest  and  holiest  Spiritual  influences.  He  was  the
typical  medium,  the  pure  vehicle  of  Angelic  utterances,  the  inspired
teacher,  the  model  Spiritualist,  and  it  would  seem  that  Spiritualists
alone  comprehend  and  appreciate  His  marvellous  gifts  and  virtues,
and  the  Spiritualism  we  are  so  justly  proud  of  is  but  the  renewal,  in
fiilness  of  time,  of  the  dispensation  called  the  Christian,  another  out-
burst of  Spiritual  forces,  which,  under  the  more  favorable  conditions
of  this  age,  are  uprooting  and  sweeping  away  the  structures  of  error,
and  erecting  in  their  stead  enduring,  solid  monuments  of  truth  and
knowledge.

The  church  of  the  Future,  said  the  late  Dr.  S.  P.  Brittan,  must  be
built  on  the  same  foundation  as  the  church  of  the  Past.  "  Other  foun-
dation can  no  man  lay,"  but  we  must  have  a  new  and  in  many  respects
different  superstructure.

We  must  have  a  church  whose  articles  of  faith  shall  be  the  moral
precepts  of  Jesus ;  whose  sacred  books  shall  comprehend  and  unfold
the  discovered  principles  and  concentrated  wisdom  of  all  ages;
whose  ministers  shall  be  employed  to  illustrate  the  philosophy  of  the
material  and  Spiritual  Universe,  and  instruct  the  people  in  the  True
science  of  life.

Jesus,  representing  the  outward  man,  in  whom  the  inmost  found


524      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

full  expression,  would  be  **  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,''  or  the  physical
man  attuned  to  the  Divine  purity  of  the  Image  of  the  God-head
within.

Christ  is  another  name  for  that  Image,  and  by  outward  control
over  the  natural  man  becomes  the  Saviour  and  /Redeemer  from  mortal

ills.  Christ  is  also  the  ''  .S^  e/*  ^^"  ^  ^^^  on  mdividualUatum  of
tke  Infinite  Mind  or  Father  who  ruleth  over  AIL

Christ,  then,  is  synonymous  with  the  inmost  or  Divine  Spirit  of
man,  and  Jssus  is  that  Spirit  uUimated  in  human  life,  by  the  swelling
over  from  within  of  its  holy  power,  whereby  the  organism  of  man,
both   Spiritual   and  physical,  with  all  its  faculties  ^b  anointed,"
with  Light  Divine  and  actuated  in  accord  with  the  Will  of  the  Father.

Such  is  the  truly  ripened  fully  developed  Pilgrim  of  Spirit,  who
has  attained  to  the  '*  Kingdom,"  and,  attuned  in  perfect  chord,  is  at-
One  with  the  Father,  or  who,  in  other  words,  lives  the  Truth  of  Spirit

To  become  illuminated  within  the  Temple  and  enlightened  by
Truth,  forget  Seifzxid  all  ambition  of  man's  applause.

Desire  earnestly  for  Divine  Wisdom  and  Light,  for  the  Spirit  of
Life  doth  abide  in  every  human  Soul,  and  man's  aspirations  and  loves
are  the  windows  thereof.  Thy  time  of  Temple  Building  b  now.
Truth  and  Light  are  messengers  that  never  take  a  step  backwards.
Remember,  if  thou  wilt  look  up,  God  will  look  down.

So  highly  important  was  the  care  and  guidance  of  every  human
Soul  considered  by  the  earlier  Prophets  and  Gnostics  that  they
wept  around  the  new-bom  infant,  knowing  the  dangers  and  tempta-
tions of  each  Soul  in  the  form.  While,  upon  the  death  of  a  child,
they  sang  sacred  songs  of  jubilee  in  joy  and  gladness  for  the  Soul's
escape  from  its  cage  of  clay,  bidding  it  speed  on  in  glorious  liberty.

The  Hierophant  Z.  Z.,  on  his  recent  vbit  to  America,  remained  so
long  silent  that  many  of  his  friends  began  to  feel  it  might  be  from
displeasure.  For  more  than  a  month  he  travelled  about,  the  most
profound  observer,  but  still  so  silent

Finally  he  said,  and  as  he  was  generally  so  silent,  he  commanded
great  attention  when  he  did  speak,  **  You  are  getting  on  to  the  true
philosophy  of  life  at  last  Agitation  doesn't  accomplish  half  as  much
as  people  think  it  does.  The  influences  which  really  move  the  world
are  subtle.  Your  talkers  think  they  revolutionize  the  world ;  but  the
real  power  comes  from  higher,  much  higher "  —  and  he  subsided  into
silence.

Now  may  the  Life  and  Light  of  the  Infinite  ever  sustain  you;
loving  communion  with  the  Angel  Sphere  be  your  fellowship;  and


THE  TEMPLE  WITHIN.  52$

the  heavenly  counsel  of  the  Divine  One  guide  you  into  the  priceless
fulness  of  the  New  Dispensation.  And  your  Souls  will  ring  with
jubilee  and  songs  of  loud  hosannas  from  out  an  overflowing  heart.
While  Angels  echo  back  a  glad  refrain  from  that  shoreless  sea  of
their  glorious  eternal  homes,  Peace  be  thine.

Ring  out  the  old,  ring  in  the  new,

Ring,  happy  bells,  across  the  snow ;

The  age  is  going,  let  it  go.
Ring  out  the  false,  ring  in  the  true.

Ring  out  old  shapes  of  foul  disease,

Ring  out  the  narrowing  lust  of  gold ;

Ring  out  the  thousand  years  of  old.
Ring  in  the  thousand  years  of  peace.

Ring  in  the  valiant  man,  and  free.

With  larger  heart  and  kindlier  hand|
Ring  out  the  darkness  of  the  land.

Ring  in  the  Christ  that  utobe.


CHAPTER  XVIL

GATHERED   SHEAVES.
«  Add  to  your  faith  knowledge."

Nothing  possesses  greater  magnetbm  than  simple  Thith  well
spoken.

'*The  simplest  truths  are  mightiest  in  their  force;
The  nearer  to  the  practical  men  keep,
The  less  they  deal  in  vague  and  abstract  things.
The  less  they  deal  in  huge,  mysterious  words.
The  mightier  is  their  power.    God  writes  His  thoughts
In  facts,  in  solid  orbs,  in  living  souls ;
His  revelation  is  the  concrete  world ;
He  sows  the  earth  with  flowers,  and  shines  on  man
Through  vital  Spiritual  heat  and  light
The  theories  that  scale  Empyrean  heights
Should  rest  on  granite  ledges,  solid  truths.
Touched,  seen,  felt,  comprehended  by  the  race.
Who  builds  a  pyramid  on  winter  ice  ?
Who  spans  an  arch  from  buttresses  of  sand  ?
The  obelisk  that  cleaves  the  lofty  clouds
Rises  from  bases  massive  as  the  world.
Bacon  lives  on,  while  Aristotle  dies.

Every  word
The  teacner  otters  should  find  evidence
In  fixed  realities."

Youthy  like  the  foliage  first  budding  into  Spring,  grows,  swelb^
and  bursts  into  a  leaf ;  then  lives  and  moves  with  impulse  of  eadi
gentle  breeze  or  gale  of  wind,  all  the  long  summer  through,  till
autumn-like  old  age  comes  on.  Then,  sighing  in  memory  of  the  past,
it  rocks  itself  to  sleep,  then  sways  and  falls  into  eternal  rest,  and
back  to  dust  again,  a  tiny  speck  of  earth.  Such  is  the  life  on  earth
of  man  whose  Soul  goes  on  forever.  So  swings  the  pendulum  of  our
earthly  lives.

Toil  on,  ever  struggling  to  your  highest  ideal.  The  attainment  of
Spirit  is  through  the  ideal  to  which  your  Soul  opens  the  door,  and  the
little  seed  of  Spirit  grows  and  grows  to  actual  existence.

526


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  52/

O  wayward  child,  blundering  so  heedlessly  in  darkness,  yet  so
close  to  the  noonday  Sun,  strive,  if  only  for  a  little  space  of  time,  to
open  thy  Soul.  Let  thy  highest  aspiration  be  to  unfold  the  flower  of
wisdom  and  understanding,  and  true  love  be  thy  highest  wish.  These
are  the  golden  apples  of  the  Hesperides,  whose  ripened  fruit  shall
bear  thee  to  the  garden  of  the  Gods,  with  a  glorious  knowledge,
power,  and  force  at  thy  command,  as  thy  servants.  O  ask  and  strive,
if  only  for  a  little  time,  for  higher  counsel  of  thine  own  Soul,  and
with  thy  better  self,  and  if  thou  findest  not  within  the  silence  the
answering  voice  of  Truth,  then  thou  mayest  return  to  thy  life  in  the
objective  world  of  sense,  and  again  feed  on  the  husks  the  swine  do
eat,  rather  than  to  thy  Father's  house.

Wishing  good  merely  is  only  lukewarm  charity ;  but  Mng  good
is  Divine^  and  is  one  of  the  great  proofs  of  immortality ;  for  man's
goodness  and  kindly  deeds  live  on  though  the  body  dies.

True  Good-Breeding  is  that  which  prompts  one  always  to  refrain
from  hurting  the  feelings  of  another,  and  the  man  who  speaks  always
well  makes  good  use  of  his  time  and  is  never  discontented.  Kind,
unselfish  deeds  are  often  more  powerful  than  money,  but  both  exer-
cise great  power  for  good,  when  used  to  promote  the  best  interests  of
humanity,  for  in  the  good  results  of  our  labors

*^  Others  shall  reap  from  our  furrows,
Ripened  when  we  are  gone.**

And  another  came,  saying.  Lord,  behold,  here  b  thy  pound,  which
I  have  kept  laid  up  in  a  napkin.  —  Luke  xix. :  20.

The  frivolous  habit  of  living  only  for  one's  own  sensibilities,  for
the  outward  and  evanescent,  and  not  the  real  and  substantial,  inward
development;  simply  for  a  kind  of  transient,  childish  enjoyment
which  the  conventional  world  calls  life :  which  is  not  even  standing
still  in  the  true  existence,  but  a  digression  from  truth,  if  not  contrac-
tion and  decrease,  must  end  in  callous  indifference  and  mutilation  of
the  true.  It  is  this  non-growing  which  brings  men  to  all  sorts  of
errors  and  blunders.

Men  may  be  free  from  all  vices  and  great  sins,  and  yet  break
God's  whole  Law  of  Love,  of  Divine  humanity  and  brotherhood.
**  What  wrong  have  I  done  ? "  they  inquire.  Were  you  simply  placed
on  this  fair  earth  to  exist  as  a  human  parasite,  a  sycophant  and  slave
to  this  conventional  age  ?    What  right  do  you  do  ?    The  duty  lies


528      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

upon  you  to  do  much  good.  If  you  return  your  talent  in  a  napkin,
undeveloped  by  interest,  by  use,  you  have  the  rebuke  of  the  master.

Not  to  do,  in  this  age  and  in  this  land,  is  criminal,  for  here  man
has  freedom  and  liberty  of  action,  seldom  granted  to  any  age  since
history  began.  There  never  was  a  time  when  it  was  so  mean  for  a
man  to  be  ignorant;  when  indolence  and  indifference  were  so
unmanly  as  to-day.  By  reason  of  strength  and  knowledge  and
influence,  we  are  able  to  throw  out  a  light  and  warmth  where  other-
wise would'  be  a  chill,  and  aid  where  otherwise  would  be  neglect
Whatever  man  has  now,  he  has  for  justice,  liberty,  and  truth's  sake,
and  for  truth's  sake  the  true  man  exerts  himself.  Men  are  not  to  be
content  with  their  birthright  state.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  has
simply  the  uneducated  qualities  that  are  given  him.  The  law  of
the  gospel  is  this  —  develop;  no  man  has  a  right  to  die  with  his
faculties  in  about  the  state  they  were  when  he  came  to  manhood.
Every  man  is  bound  to  build  within,  in  patience,  in  foresight,  in  self-
denial,  in  liberalities.  We  should  help  man  and  throw  cheer  as  a
garment  over  things  that  otherwise  might  seem  cold,  hard,  and  mel-
ancholy. Every  man  is  to  increase  the  qualities  that  are  in  him ;  to
increase  the  reach  and  scope  of  understanding,  and  go  on  in  life  to
engraft  truth  and  ripen  the  Soul.

The  great  mass  of  people  never  touch  the  real  reasons  and  mean-
ings of  living.  They  turn  and  hide  their  faces  or  run  away  when
these  profoundest  things  present  themselves.  They  will  not  let  God
speak  with  them.  So  all  their  lives  lack  tone ;  nothing  brave,  enter-
prising, nor  aspiring  is  in  them.  The  whole  trouble  comes  from  a
wilful  or  blind  underestimate  of  man  and  misconception  of  God.

Insist,  dear  friends,  on  having  your  Soul  get  near  Him.  Never
let  yourselves  take  refuge  in  the  superficial  things  of  faith.  Seek
great  experiences  of  the  Soul,  and  never  turn  your  back  on  them
when  God  sends  them,  as  He  surely  will.  True  religion  is  Spiritual
sympathy  with  Spiritual  obedience  to  God.  Its  voice  cries  to  man,
"  Come,  understand  your  Soul !     Come,  hear  the  voice  of  God  I"

Pilgrims  of  Light  and  Truth,  the  battle-field  is  where  the  long  roll
finds  you  standing.  That  which  you  find  to  do,  strive  to  do  with  your
best  ability,  abandoning  at  once  all  anxiety  for  the  results.

Wherever  you  see  suffering  make  an  effort  to  relieve  it,  and  the
fair  earth  will  kiss  each  footprint  of  your  pilgrimage.  Get  at  the
centre  of  every  vital  fact  and  truth,  and  dwell  there  as  light  dwells  in
the  heart  of  an  opal,  darting  forth  bright  prismatic  rays  of  love  and
faith  on  all  created  things.    The  struggle  for  eternal  light  b  not  one


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  5^9

daring  deed,  nor  hundreds  of  such,  but  a  desire  for  higher  love,  with
a  calm,  unbroken  forgetfulness  of  the  objective  lower  self,  not  only
to-day  but  for  all  time.

It  is  the  bright  oil  of  hope  which  makes  life's  machinery  run
smoothly,  and  the  fruit  which  generally  gives  the  most  happiness
ripens  on  the  tree  of  our  best  ideality  and  higher  love.  Many  of
man's  ideals  of  to-day  will  be  realities  on  some  golden  to-morrow.

Hope  is  the  mainspring  of  human  action ;  Faith  seals  our  lease
of  immortality ;  Charity  and  Love  give  the  passport  to  the  Soul's  in-
most, true,  and  lasting  happiness.

Divine  Truth  is  simple  and  easily  understood  when  the  mind  b
not  beclouded  by  selfishness  and  doubt  A  skeptic  doubts  the  best
authority,  while  an  enthusiast  is  likely  to  accept  the  poorest.

He  who  continues  to  doubt,  and  will  not  believe  the  truth,  is  gener-
ally content  with  falsehood.  Doubts  are  the  leaks  that  sink  the  ship
of  faith ;  therefore,  although  thy  years  may  be  long,  if  doubt  hath  been
thy  companion,  thou  art  an  empty  vessel.  Fully  know  a  thing
before  you  reject  it,  for  the  most  fatal  enemy  of  the  Soul  is  doubt.
The  man  who  forgets  his  doubts  rises  superior  to  himself,  but  the
man  who  doubts  his  own  powers  cripples  himself.  Krishna  says
that  for  the  indifferent  man  there  is  no  salvation  —  he  is,  as  it  were,
'^  ejected  like  a  broken  cloud  " ;  and  in  i  James  v. :  6,  7  the  doubting
man  is  declared  incapable  of  obtaining  anything,  while  in  Rev.  iii. :  16
the  Laodiceans,  being  neither  hot  nor  cold,  —  that  is,  being  indiffer-
ent, —  are  condemned  to  be  "  spewed  out  of  the  mouth."

It  is  the  objective  intellect  of  men  which,  being  unsanctified,  has
led  them  astray.  It  is  the  force  of  the  mind  in  them  which,  being
corrupt  with  selfishness  and  error,  is  the  cause  of  their  own  ruin  and
that  of  their  disciples.  As  the  outward  intellect  is  apt  to  be  the
great  traitor  against  the  Spirit,  so  also  the  forces  by  which  men
follow  their  own  inner,  rare  intuition  may  grasp  and  apprehend  the
truth.  It  b  only  the  objective  intellect  which  has  led  men  to  re-
nounce the  realities  of  Spirit,  to  propagate  false  theories,  and  to
corrupt  science,  denying  all  things  save  the  appearance  and  shadow
of  the  real,  which  can  be  apprehended  by  the  outer  senses,  and
thereby  making  themselves  as  one  with  the  dust  of  the  earth.

Not  by  any  means  that  the  objective  intellect  is  to  be  dishonored;
but  instead  of  it  controlling  the  Soul  and  higher  man,  these  must  con-
trol the  Soul ;  then  only  is  it  truly  begotten.    Thb  outer  objective


530      ^HB  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THB  THRESHOLD.

idolatiy  is  the  error,  and  the  materialism  of  humanity  —  the  disunion
of  man's  dual  forces  —  is  the  common  and  original  sin  of  men.  It
replaces  Spirit,  Love  and  its  Vestal  union  with  the  Soul,  with  outer
appearances  and  shadow;  for  substance  gives  illusion,  and  leads
both  the  moral  and  intellectual  being  into  error,  so  that  he  subsdr
tutes  the  nether  for  the  upper,  the  depth  for  height  This  is  the
false  fruit  which  attracts  the  outer  senses,  the  apple  bait  of  the  ser-
pent in  the  beginning  of  the  world.

Spiritual  Light  is  like  a  string  of  pearls.  The  last  on  the  cord  is
morality.     Loose  the  string,  and  it  is  the  first  to  fall  into  the  dust

Dear  Pilgrim,  hold  thy  house  as  pure  as  a  temple  of  light  should
be,  that  the  visits  of  immortals  may  be  joy  to  them  and  sublime  reve-
lation to  thee,  and  thou  wilt  find  that  the  end  of  thy  career  will  be
spared  the  effects  of  the  narrow,  misguided  education  of  its  begin-
ning.  Although  thy  morning  has  been  dark,  the  sunset  will  be  glo-
rious.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  light,  when  your  every  deed  and  act  is  entirely
unselfish,  you  vibrate  the  reflex  of  the  pure  Love  of  the  Absolute,  and
your  thoughts  are  the  sentiments  of  charity.  Then  you  are  indeed  a
child  of  the  illuminated.  The  warm  love  and  kindness  to  your
fellow-men,  as  shown  in  your  action,  is  nothing  but  that  ray  of  the
sublime  Love  of  God  which  binds  your  whole  being  to  Him.  The
glorious  Light  of  Spirit  will  illuminate  your  path  along  the  winding  of
the  hidden  way.

Man  is  but  an  action,  and  every  act  he  may  perform  either  adds
to  or  diminishes  his  power  to  create,  to  enjoy,  to  suffer,  to  advance
or  to  recede,  and  to  be.

The  scientific  world  has  been  again  startled  by  the  discovery  of  a
new  invisible  power,  which  is  a  most  wonderful  fluid,  which  has  been
written  about  by  Dr.  Beal  of  London,  and  also  by  Professors  Huxley,
Bain,  and  Tyndall.  Upon  the  authority  of  these  eminent  scientists
we  find  that  they  fully  agree  in  their  descriptions  that  Bioplasm  (as
they  call  it)  is  a  transparent,  structureless  fluid,  or  gelatinous  fluid,  is
the  same  wherever  found,  and  constitutes  a  large  part  of  every  living
organism.  It  absorbs  nutrient  matter,  and  instantaneously  forms  liv-
ing matter ;  it  makes  or  constructs  nerves,  arteries,  veins,  tendons,
muscles,  brain,  bone,  etc.,  and  without  visible  cells  or  molecules.  It
lives,  moves,  and  transforms  matter  into  plants,  animals,  and  human
beings,  according  to  surroundings  and  circumstances.


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  531

Dr.  Beal  admits,  however,  that  there  is  an  intelligence  behind
Bioplasm.  There  is  with  all  what  may  be  termed  a  shadow  of  self ;
at  some  period  they  will  meet  this  double  or  dual  character  face  to
face.  Then  they  will  realize  that  they  stand,  as  it  were,  gazing  on
their — Life.  They  fear  to  look  too  long,  lest  the  silver  cord  that
binds  them  to  earth  be  loosed.  A  thought  of  this  flashes  across  the
brain,  and,  lo !  instantly  the  mortal  is  in  his  normal  condition,  and  the
dual  is  once  more  drawn  into  the  animal  body.  Thus  the  life,  as  it
were,  stands  outside  the  body,  while  the  different  organs  go  on  with
their  accustomed  work,  little  thinking  that  the  motive  power  had  for  a
short  time  left  its  tenement  for  a  moment's  recreation  —  the  length
of  time  depending  on  the  power  of  the  Spirit  or  Dual  to  remain  away
from  the  organs  on  which  it  is  dependent,  and  which  are  dependent
on  it ;  as  it  is  by  concerted  action  that  they  are  both  enabled  to  fill
the  place  intended  for  them,  when  through  creation  or  evolution  they
were  first  formed.

No  Occultist  has  ever  disagreed  far  from  this,  while  a  very  large
number  have  announced  the  same  ideas.

As  the  Spirit  of  God's  Love  passes  through  the  firmaments,  the
suns,  moons,  stars,  and  planets  of  the  universe  are  His  brilliant
courtiers.

True  worship  consists  not  so  much  in  asking  God  for  more  bless*
ings  as  in  thanking  Him  with  a  full  heart  for  those  He  has  already
given.

If  God  is  Love,  then  Love  is  good.
Since  good  for  God  hath  ever  stood ;
If  Love,  then,  stands  for  God  above,
We  clearly  prove  our  right  to  love.

Pure  love  allows  no  room  for  jealousy,  for  true  love  has  no
caution  or  doubts  in  word  or  deed.

The  Soul  is  always  full.     When  evil  goes  out,  good  comes  in.

Revolving  nature,  with  all  her  countless  mysteries,  moves  through
shadowy  solitudes  of  space,  bearing  through  all  the  marks  of  true
Divinity  —  in  none  of  her  sublimities  so  much  as  in  the  single  creature
man.

There  is  no  better  way  known  to  man  for  securing  mental  and
moral  integrity  than  to  encourage  those  habits,  those  methods,  and
those  pursuits  which  tend  to  establish  truth.

Men  without  Spiritual  understanding  or  Spirit  within  the  inner


532      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

temple  have  no  light  to  guide  them.     Having  given  up  many  points
of  the  old  faith,  what  trustworthy  belief  is  left  to  them  ?

Among  the  noblest  sentences  uttered  by  the  martyred  Lincoln
was  this :  '*  With  malice  toward  none  and  charity  for  all,  I  seek  only
the  good  of  my  countrymen."

Cross  against  corselet.  Love  against  Hatred,
Peace-cry  for  war-cry,  Patience  is  powerful ;
He  that  o'ercometh  hath  power  o'er  the  nations.

Do  not  be  carried  away  by  anger.  As  it  is  written,  He  that
falleth  on  this  stone  shall  be  broken."  Opposition  to  Peace  is  sin.
When  thou  art  furious,  thou  art  strangling  thyself.  We  are  but  ship-
wrecked mariners,  drifting  about  through  the  whole  of  life,  if  we
permit  the  tempest  of  passion  to  darken  the  higher  light,  and  become
the  companions  of  low  earth-bound  Spirits.

The  first  act  of  a  living  babe  is  to  wail  a  cry  of  pain ;  the  first
expression  of  a  dead  face  is  a  smile.

Does  the  babe  unconsciously  shrink  from  the  life  before  it ;  and
the  smile  foreshadow  the  peace  following  a  life  of  toil  ?  If  so,  life  b
a  priceless  boon,  and  the  problem  will  be  solved  in  eternity.

He  who  is  tolerant  with  the  intolerant,  mild  with  the  fault-finders,
free  from  passion  among  the  passionate,  has  conquered  himself,  and
can  commune  with  the  Gods.  But  he  who  assumes  the  garb  of  the
good,  without  doing  their  works,  he  is  not  good.  If  man's  thoughts
are  pure  and  unselfish,  he  will  do  and  say  many  things  which  will
reveal,  not  him  who  speaks,  but  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  that  speaketb
within  him.  But  whatever  it  is  that  man  intuitively  strives  for,  it
must  be  something  to  which  he  is  naturally  attracted,  supernatural
or  above  nature  so-called.

Truths  always  repays  with  priceless  gems,  the  brave  hearts  who
suffer  for  her.

The  day  of  freedom  dawns  upon  the  world.

Unfurl  the  flag  of  Spirit  Truth  and  Light,
Of  victory  over  Superstition,  hurled

Into  the  darkness  of  the  bygone  night
Go  break  the  chains  of  fear,  which  creed  hath  wrought,

Go  quench  the  fire  of  Error.    Speed,  oh,  speed
Onward  for  liberty  and  Spirit  thought.

This  day  let  chains  be  riven  and  man's  Spirit  freed.

Thrones  built  on  creed  no  longer  stand  secure ;
The  thunder  tones  of  Justice  now  are  heard.


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  533

What  power  have  tyranny  and  error  to  endure,
When  the  world  cries  for  liberty  and  truth  deferred?

Who  shall  outlive  the  terrors  of  the  storm  ?
They  only  who  have  used  the  power  of  might

For  Justice,  Truth ;  for  Spirit  and  Reform,
Subservient  to  the  royal  rule  of  Right

To  the  Pilgrim  of  Light  who  gives  out  unselfish  love ;  thou  shalt
not  be  left  unattended ;  for  it  is  written,  He  shall  give  His  Angels
charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways.  Grow  not  weary.
Press  on.     Peace  be  with  you  all.

The  extremity  of  grief  is  the  beginning  of  joy.  The  last  throb  of
pain  is  the  first  throb  of  pleasure.  £cstasy  is  close  upon  the  con-
fines of  despair.

It  is  clever  to  bury  an  old  animosity,  but  not  just  the  thing  to  put
a  tombstone  over  it.

Hath  any  one  wronged  thee  ?  Be  bravely  revenged ;  by  neglect-
ing  and  slighting  it,  the  work  is  begun ;  forgive  and  absolve  it,  and
it  is  finished.     He  is  below  himself  who  is  not  above  an  injury.

A  cheerful  smile  and  kind  word  linger  long  in  memory,  gilding
with  beauty  the  darkest  hours  of  life.

lUiunined  thinkers  can  never  force  themselves  to  believe  that
evil,  as  an  end,  essential  and  absolute,  can  exist  under  the  moral
government  of  an  Infinite  God,  whose  nature  is  Goodness,  whose
essence  is  Love.

When  peace  and  joy  are  in  the  Soul,  outward  conditions  are  power,
less  to  permanently  injure.

Revelation  is  a  full  belief  in  God  through  love,  not  fear ^  which
gives  man  a  more  full  understanding  of  his  ways.  From  thence  the
man  becomes  illuminated  by  wisdom  and  knowledge  into  the  myste-
ries of  good  and  evil,  with  a  full  and  abiding  faith  in  immortality,
while  his  conscience  is  in  companionship  of  the  Angels,  and  they  are
his  instructors.

"There  is  no  death;  what  seems  so  is  transition.
This  life  of  mortal  breath
Is  but  the  suburb  of  the  life  elysian.
Whose  portal  we  call  death."

Take  the  matter  of  the  philosopher's  stone ;  if  it  is  pursued,  you
will  find  this  Divine  Truth  S3rmbolized.  The  ancient  Romans  fully  be-
lieved in  this  idea,  as  well  as  the  Grecians.  Some  sought  to  become
possessed  of  this  wondrous  stone,  and  to  possess  thereby  great  power


534  '^^^  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

and  immense  advantage  over  their  neighbors,  their  desire  being  to
make  themselves  the  richest  men  in  existence,  and  to  turn  the  world
into  a  mass  of  gold.  But  this  would  simply  upset  the  natural  order
of  things.  So  long  as  men  merely  pursue  the  idea  from  thb  stand-
point, they  will  be  liable  to  be  mistaken,  for  they  will  never  achieve  theit
object.  In  the  philosopher's  stone  is  symbolized  the  power  of  love.
And  what  is  love  ?  If  the  sweet  flower  of  love  dwells  within  the  hu-
man Soul,  it  will  affect  others,  who  will  feel  its  Divine  influence  as  it
goes  on  permeating  one's  own  being.  Those  who  cultivate  the  power
of  love  possess  this  stone  to  which  we  have  referred.  He  who  is  pure
in  love,  who  has  the  power  of  pure  love  within,  he  will  know  that  man
is  the  richest  who  can  limit  his  wants  to  hb  means.  The  true  philos-
opher's stone  is  the  science  of  all  philosophy,  to  realize  the  fact  that
man  requi^s  little  whilst  on  earth,  as  he  is  not  native  to  the  earth.
He  is  a  child  of  heaven,  a  son  of  God,  and  the  true  man  ever  seeks  to
be  in  cU-one-ment  with  God,  one  in  purpose  with  Him,  and  ever  desir-
ing the  salvation  of  all  from  ignorance  to  knowledge,  from  materiality
to  holiness  and  Spirituality,  or  the  revelation  of  the  God-Nature.

How  did  the  Spiritualists  of  Ancient  Greece  obtain  their  Light  ?  If
we  take  the  Athenians  of  the  olden  time,  we  have  their  reflex  in  the  Per-
sians, and  they  had  borrowed  what  is  called  by  the  name  of  Sun-worslup.
They  held  that  the  Sun,  the  supreme  point  of  radiance,  was  calculated
to  be  the  residence  of  a  God.  They  bowed  to  that  luminary  as  being
the  best  representative  of  Divine  effulgence,  as  being  the  best  illus-
tration of  Divine  power  and  brightness,  and  as  being  the  best  mani-
festation to  them  of  the  majesty  of  God.  Yet  they  had  in  themselves
a  species  of  Agnosticism,  as  they  did  not  know  the  whole  of  God,  and
man  never  can  know  it.  Spiritualism  is  based  on  those  esoteric  truths
which  have  been  given  to  the  world  all  down  the  ages.  Did  they  hold
communion  with  Spirits  in  olden  times  like  the  Spiritualists  of  the
present  day  ?  Did  these  Greeks  or  Athenians  do  so  i  We  believe
they  did,  for  it  is  on  record  that  they  had  their  sacred  groves,  and
that  to  these  groves  they  repaired  for  purposes  of  invocation.  Those
of  you  who  have  read  the  records  of  the  Delphic  Oracle  will  find  that
they  waited  until  the  Angel  voice  came  resounding  through  the  atmos-
phere, giving  them  the  information  they  required,  the  Spiritual  guid-
ance they  sought  for  more  than  a  thousand  years,  which  is  a  well
known  fact.    They  conversed  with  Spirits  in  that  direct  manner.

How  were  they  developed  ?  You  read  of  one  going  to  the  moun-
tain fastnesses,  where  he  remained  for  months  and  years  under  the
influence  of  God  and  Angels,  and  who  uttered  words  which  thrilled


GATHERED  SHSAVEa  535

the  Soul  of  the  nation.  They  were  developed  by  habits  of  abste-
miousness, by  communion  with  the  wilds  of  nature,  by  communion  with
the  Divine  Voice  that  ever  speaks  to  man.  The  fathers  in  old  time
drank  in  their  inspiration  from  the  wilds  of  nature.  Moses  drank  in
his  in  the  same  way,  thus  deriving  that  influx  of  power  which  should
make  him  a  lever  of  progress  in  the  world.  There  were  mighty  in-
spirational mediums  in  the  times  of  the  old  Athenians,  mediums  who
held  the  multitudes  spell-bound,  as  they  thought  they  listened  to  the
voices  of  the  very  Gods.  They  had  their  eminent  mediums,  they  held
their  Spiritual  stances,  they  consulted  their  oracles,  Delphic  or  other-
wise. Their  temples  were  numerous,  and  they  were  guided  by  the
direct  voices  of  departed  friends  and  loved  ones.  Spiritualism  is  no
new  thing :  it  has  run  all  through  the  ages ;  it  was  present  among  the
ancient  Athenians,  and  has  been  the  very  power  of  the  Living  God  and
His  ministering  Angels,  seeking  to  uplift  into  better  states  and  condi-
tions of  life,  and  higher  Spiritual  aspirations  and  perceptions.

As  a  wise  mountain-climber  leans  forward,  treads  zigzag,  counter-
acting gravity  and  the  resistance  of  the  air,  so  shall  you  walk  with
care.  The  Pilgrim  of  Light  at  first  little  realizes  what  moral  resis-
tance he  arouses,  what  unseen  and  often  malevolent  evils  lurk  near
him,  or  what  stone  he  may  thoughtlessly  loosen,  to  fall  on  those  below.
Alas,  how  little  do  we  all  know  of  the  delicate  adjustment  of  the  higher
AMai  world.  Therefore,  keep  thine  eyes  and  mind  fixed  on  the  glo-
rious heights  above,  and  look  not  back,  lest  the  yawning  abyss  from
which  you  rose  attract  you,  and  the  footsteps  slip  upon  the  road  to
peace.  Be  steadfast,  and  in  silence  press  on.  The  veil  after  veil  will
lift  before  your  Soul,  a  helping  hand  will  guide,  and,  as  veil  after  veil
closes  down  behind  you,  a  hand  will  guard.

Oh  man,  increase  thyself  into  immeasurable  greatness,  leaping  be-
yond every  animal  passion,  and,  transcending  all  time,  become  one  with
eternity,  and  thou  shalt  understand  God.  If  thou  believe  in  thyself,
that  nothing  is  impossible,  but  accountest  thyself  immortal  and  that
thou  canst  understand  all  things ;  every  art,  every  science,  and  the
manner  and  custom  of  every  living  thing ;  thou  becomest  higher  than
all,  and  passest  lower  than  all  depths.

Oh,  comprehend  in  thyself  the  qualities  of  all  the  creatures ;  of  the
fire  and  the  water ;  the  dry  and  the  moist,  and  conceive  likewise  that
thou  canst  at  once  be  everything  in  the  sea,  upon  the  earth,  within
and  over  the  earth.

Generation  b  not  a  creation  of  life,  but  a  production  of  things  to


53^       THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

sense,  and  making  them  manifest.     Neither  is  change  death,  but  a
going  out,  a  ripening,  an  occultation  or  hiding  of  that  which  was.

The  things  that  appear  delight  us,  but  make  the  things  that  appear
not,  hard  to  believe,  for  the  things  that  appear  not  to  the  natural  eye
are  hard  to  believe.

The  things  most  apparent  to  men  are  the  evil  of  things,  but  the
good  is  a  secret,  or  hid  in  the  things  that  appear,  for  it  hath  neither
form  nor  figure.

Of  this  be  quite  sure.  All  that  is  rightfully  yours  will  come  to  you
in  its  own  good  time.  So  reads  the  law.  **  Everything  comes  to  the
Man  who  in  Silence  can  Wait,^^

PATIENTLY  WAITING.

Serene,  I  fold  my  hands  and  wait.

Nor  care  for  wind,  or  tide,  or  seas
I  rave  no  more  'gainst  Time  or  Fate^

For  lo  I  my  own  shall  come  to  me.

I  stay  my  haste,  I  make  delays.

For  what  avails  this  eager  pace?
I  stand  amid  the  eternal  ways,

And  what  is  mine  shall  know  my  fiMe.

Asleep,  awake,  by  night  or  day.

The  friends  I  seek  are  seeking  me ;
No  wind  can  drive  my  barque  astray.

Nor  change  the  tide  of  destiny.

What  matter  if  I  stand  alone  ?

I  wait  with  joy  the  coming  years;
My  heart  shall  reap  where  it  has  sowiit

And  gamer  up  its  fruits  of  tears.

The  waters  know  their  own ;  and  draw
The  brook  that  springs  in  yonder  he^hl}

So  flows  the  good  with  equal  law
Unto  the  soul  of  pure  delight

The  stars  come  nightly  to  the  sky;

The  tidal  wave  unto  the  sea;
Nor  time,  nor  space,  nor  deep  nor  high

Can  keep  my  own  away  from  me.

Serene,  I  fold  my  hands  and  wait,

Whate'er  the  storms  of  life  may  be.

Faith  guides  me  up  to  heaven's  gate.

And  love  will  bring  my  own  to  me.

Jonr


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  537

When  Calif  Omar  conquered  Egypt,  and  with  it  the  city  of  Alex-
andria, he  found  therein  a  library  containing  more  than  2,000,000  books.
The  ignorant  barbarian  ordered  them  to  be  burnt,  for,  said  he,  if  they
contain  what  the  Koran  contains  they  are  useless,  and  if  they  contain
something  else  they  are  dangerous.  Many  orthodox  clergy  of  to-day
make  this  same  attack  against  any  new  or  advanced  thought

O  consistency  most  diplomatic  1  what  Wisdom  most  profound  I

"  I  am  Sir  Oracle,
And  when  I  ope  my  lips  let  no  dog  bark.**

How  books  came  to  be  worshipped  can  easily  be  understood.  At
a  time  when,  perhaps,  only  one  man  in  ten  thousand  understood  how
to  decipher  the  scratches  made  by  another  man  with  a  chisel  upon
stone,  or  with  some  dye  upon  sheepskin,  such  a  man  was  looked  at
with  admiration  and  astonishment.  Even  when  the  art  of  writing  and
reading  had  become  more  common,  the  process  of  copying  books  was
such  a  tedious,  tardy,  and  expensive  one  that  books  still  remained
costly  and  scant  articles.  Only  the  very  best  thoughts  were  there-
fore transmitted  by  writing,  and  consequently  never  a  doubt  arose  in
the  mind  of  the  reader  in  regard  to  the  truth  of  the  statements  con-
tained therein.  From  this  inclination  of  the  masses,  of  holding  books
in  high  veneration,  there  was  but  one  step  to  the  worship  of  books,  to
the  belief  that  certain  books  had  been  written  by  God  Himself,  while
the  real  tnith  is  that  the  value  of  the  new  Testament  and  the  Hebrew
Bible  increases  by  denying  its  Divine  origin,  but  its  inspiration  will
remain.

There  is  comparatively  little  difference  in  the  Spirit  manifestations
which  have  in  all  time  been  striving  to  make  the  truth  of  Spirit  com-
munion manifest  to  men.  If  you  have  this  philosopher's  stone  of
Love  burning  in  your  Soul,  it  will  bring  the  truth  to  you :  That  the
Lord  God  on  high,  the  Father  of  all,  is  the  Giver  of  all  good ;  that
that  which  God  has  done  is  good ;  and  that  which  God  hath  accom.
plished  is  best.

In  Sanscrit,  Kristna  or  Christna  signifies  messenger  of  God,
the  promise  of  God,  Sacred.  In  Sanscrit,  Jesus,  coming  from  Zezeus,
thence  Zeus,  signifies  Pure  Essence.

The  historical  Jesus  becomes  Christ  as  He  reunites  in  Himself  all
the  mysteries,  all  the  miracles,  and  all  the  prodigies  of  Christna  of
Indian  antiquity.  His  morale^  which  we  know  only  through  the  tabu-
lated words  of  His  disciples,  and  those  frightfully  distorted  by  the
Council  of  Nice,  is  that  of  the  Hindo  incarnation.     Does  not  Mary


538      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

revive  the  figure  of  Devanagany,  while  Herod  copies  Kansa  the
bloody  tyrant  of  Madura,  and  the  Jordan  plays  the  part  of  the  Ganges  ?
Again,  does  not  the  holy  water  succeed  the  waters  of  porification ;
baptism,  confirmation,  confession,  eucharist,  less  the  real  presence  of
the  Spirit ;  ordination  of  priests  by  tonsure  and  holy  consecrated  oil, —
do  not  all  these  resemble  the  ancient  rites,  and  are  they  not  all  mod-
elled from  them  ?  While  the  author  fully  accepts  the  Divine  mission
of  the  Spiritual  Christ,  and  the  providential  mission  of  His  disciples,
it  is  in  the  same  sense  as  he  accepts  that  of  Christna,  Manon,  Buddha,
Zoroaster,  Manas,  Confucius,  Mahomet,  and,  down  to  modem  days,
Luther  and  Swedenborg,  accepting  the  mission  of  every  great  heart
who  strives  to  uplift  Divine  Humanity,  and  to  erect  on  the  threshold
of  the  future,  as  the  standard  and  guide  for  modem  nations,  God,
Spirit,  Love,  Soul,  Tmth,  Faith,  Understanding,  Wisdom,  Conscience.
Death  is  the  foreshadowing  of  life.  We  die  that  we  may  die  no
more.

Every  cradle  asks  us  "  Whence  "  ?  and  every  coffin  "  Whither  "  ?
No  man,  standing  where  the  horizon  of  a  life  has  touched  a  grave,
has  any  right  to  prophesy  a  future  filled  with  pain  and  tears.

Death  itself  divides  not  the  wise.  Thou  meetest  Plato  when
thine  eyes  moisten  over  the  Phaedo.  May  Homer  live  with  all  men
forever !

What  is  the  earth  to  Infinity ;  what  its  duration  to  the  Etemal  1
The  Soul  of  one  man  is  greater  than  the  vicissitudes  of  the  whole
globe  !  The  Spirit  that  can  contemplate,  that  lives  only  in  the  intel-
lect, can  ascend  to  its  star,  even  from  the  midst  of  the  burial  ground
called  earth,  and  from  some  star  hereafter  may  look  back  on  the  ant*
hill  and  its  commotions,  from  Clovis  to  Robespierre,  from  Noah  to
the  final  Fire.

The  Spiritual  States  may  be  likened  to  the  musical  octave.  Each
note  in  the  scale  has  a  character  peculiarly  its  own,  to  be  recognized
under  all  circumstances  by  the  competent  ear.  There  are  semi-tones
and  full  tones.  There  are  dominant  sounds  and  plaintive  sounds.
Certain  notes  sounded  in  connection  produce  discord^  others  produce
harmony.  But  take  the  whole  octave,  and  a  complex  harmony  of
sound  is  the  result,  which  no  tone  could  possibly  equal  in  richness.
But  there  are  many  octaves,  repetitions  of  the  original  series,  sounded
in  relation  to  one  another  in  hundreds  of  differing  voices,  till  we  have
a  grand  and  glorious  strain,  representing  all  that  the  Soul  could  pos-
sibly desire  to  express,  though  it  might  fail  in  the  effort.


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  539

The  semi-tone,  plaintive,  discordant  "  note  **  of  man's  earth  life,
and  its  metaphysical  transitions,  is  anything  but  musical.  It  is  the
agonized,  bleating  monotone  of  a  tyro  in  Spiritual  progress.  But
take  it  in  connection  with  the  Grand  Organ  of  the  Spheres,  and  it
adds  its  own  peculiarly  touching  glory  to  the  performance,  and  its
heart-thrilling  wail  may  prove  the  holiest  incentive  in  the  Divine  Life
of  the  coming  eternities.

We  are  told  that  /ig^f  is  as  much  due  to  the  Earth  and  its  atmos-
phere as  to  the  Sun.  Without  the  earth  light  would  be  an  impossi-
bility. These  essentials  of  life  —  light,  heat,  magnetism,  etc. — are  a
compound  product  of  Earth  and  Sun.

Even  the  motes  of  dust  in  the  atmosphere  are  essential  to  human*
ity,  and  add  a  glory  to  the  radiance  of  light.

Light  itself  is  the  result  of  a  higher  cosmical  state  operating  on  a
lower,  through  an  intermediary,  and  producing  thereby  an  ever  .in-
creasing and  countless  multitude  of  new  forms  and  phenomena.

So  much  for  the  physical  plane ;  let  us  now  turn  to  the  metaphysi-
cal. Thought  is  to  man  what  matter  is  to  the  cosmos.  "  Thought "  is
subject  to  the  same  law  of  ceaseless  production  and  transformation  as
"  matter."  There  are  all  sorts  and  varieties  of  "  thought "  as  there
are  of  matter,  and  of  even  the  same  diverse  characters,  antagonistic
and  contradictory.  This  "thought'  produces  its  systems  of  strata
and  zones,  just  as  rocks  lie  in  the  crust  of  the  earth.  And  this  meta-
physical crust,  in  its  different  strata,  is  the  abode  of  different  forms  of
life,  each  kind  partaking  of  the  conditions  in  which  it  is  placed.

The  lower  forms  of  thought  are  as  essential  to  the  higher  as  the
lower  rocks  are  essential  to  the  finest  organic  products  of  Nature.
Stagnation  of  thought  is  death  and  decay,  as  it  is  in  organic  forms  of
matter.  The  Fire  of  Truth  can  annihilate  false  forms  of  thought,  even
as  the  bonfire  can  do  away  with  weeds  and  thorns.

Mental  enlightenment,  or  thought-light,  is  the  product  of  the  higher
sphere  operating  on  the  lower  sphere  through  the  thought  elements
that  intervene.  The  most  ignorant  mind  has  some  form  of  thought
or  it  would  not  be  susceptible  of  improvement  That  thought  which
it  possesses,  like  the  atmosphere  of  the  earth,  becomes  the  medium
through  which  higher  thought  can  operate  to  the  production  of  new
thought.  We  all  feel  "  enlightened  "  when  we  come  sympathetically
into  contact  with  a  superior  mind,  and  a  flow  of  new  thoughts  is  the
result.

This  process  goes  on  ceaselessly,  and  thus  the  volume  of  thought
increases  and  improves,  till  we  pass  out  of  the  spheres  of  Individuality


540  THE   HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

into  those  of  Spirituality,  Then  the  element  alters,  and  becomes
more  homogeneous.  Thought  may  be  compared  to  the  strata  of  the
earth  in  their  higher  grades,  while  the  Soul  element  may  be  likened
to  the y27^^  which  is  the  grand  result  of  the  Planets  and  their  magnetic
ability.    Hence  comes  an  Astral  Body,  the  garment  of  the  SouL

"They  Haye  Come  for  Me,"

These  were  the  last  words  of  that  grand  old  veteran  of  Spiritual-
ism, Thomas  Gales  Forster,  as  he  waved  a  brief  good-by  to  attending
friends  and  passed  on  to  his  Spirit  home.

It  is  true  that  the  famous  and  the  obscure,  the  eminent  and  the
ignoble,  *'  alike  await  the  inevitable  hour."  But  the  path  of  true  gloiy
does  not  end  in  the  grave.  It  passes  through  it  to  larger  opportuni-
ties of  service.  A  great  nature  is  a  seed.  "  It  is  sown  a  natural
body ;  it  is  raised  a  Spiritual  body."  It  germinates  thus  in  this  worid,
as  well  as  in  the  future.  .  .  .  Other  avenues  of  service  than  those  of
the  earth  are  open  for  such  as  he,  whom  we  are  waiting  to  lay  in  the
tomb.

As  we  shut  the  door  of  the  tomb  of  genius,  let  it  be  with  gratitude
to  God  for  its  splendor  here,  and  with  a  hope  for  its  future  that  swells
our  bosoms.  And  let  us  not  be  tempted,  in  view  of  the  sudden  dose
of  our  gifted  friend's  career,  in  any  sad  and  skeptical  spirit  to  say,
"  what  shadows  we  are  and  what  shadows  we  pursue."

The  Soul  is  not  a  shadow,  the  body  is ;  genius  is  not  a  shadow,  it
is  a  substance ;  patriotism  is  not  a  shadow,  it  is  Ught.  Great  pur-
poses, and  the  Spirit  counts  death  nothing,  in  contrast  with  honor
and  the  welfare  of  our  country,  —  these  are  the  witnesses  that  man  is
not  a  passing  vapor,  but  an  immortal  Spirit  1

Husband  and  father,  brother  and  friend,  senator  and  soldier,
genius  and  hero,  we  give  thee  not  to  the  grave  and  gloom,  —  we  give
thee  to  God,  to  thy  place  in  our  country's  heart,  and  to  the  great  ser-
vices that  may  await  thee  in  the  world  of  dawn  beyond  the  sunset,  —
with  tears,  with  affection,  with  gratitude,  and  with  prayer  I  and  thus
a  ripened  sheaf  of  golden  fruitage  is  gathered  to  the  Harvest  Home.

May  you,  dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  leave  this  world  like  a  full  shock
of  com  in  its  season,  fully  ripened  by  lessons  of  love  in  the  school  of
charity.  In  that  bright  hour  when  Time  puts  his  sickle  in  among  the
days  and  binds  them  into  sheaves,  may  you  be  found  a  full  measure
of  ripened  fruitage,  gathered  in  with  joy  by  the  Angelic  harvesters  to
home  and  rest.


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  54 1

This  life  is  your  great  opportunity  to  grow,  by  the  knowledge  of
Spirit.  Pray  to  that  Being  who  dwelleth  everywhere,  even  beyond
the  stars,  and  below  the  depths  of  every  human  heart,  that  you  may
catch  glimpses  of  His  Golden  Light  and  be  guided  by  His  Spirit.

In  the  world's  broad  field  of  battle

In  the  bivouac  of  Life,
Be  not  like  dumb,  driven  cattle  1

Be  a  hero  in  the  strife.

Condemn  no  man.  Look  only  for  the  good  in  others,  and  not  the
evil.  Let  him  that  scoffeth  at  the  lame,  take  care  that  he  halt  not
himself.

"  The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye :  therefore,  when  thine  eye  is
single,  thy  whole  body  also  is  full  of  light ;  but  when  thine  eye  is  evil,
thy  body  also  is  full  of  darkness.

''Take  heed,  therefore,  that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not
darkness.

''  If  thy  whole  body,  therefore,  be  full  of  light,  having  no  part
dark,  the  whole  shall  be  full  of  light,  as  when  the  bright  shining  of  a
candle  doth  give  thee  light." — 5/.  Luke  xi. :  34,  35,  36.

If  your  friend  cannot  see  light  on  the  pathway  you  are  climbing
to  Spiritual  heights,  do  not  argue  or  condemn.  Nothing  is  lost.  In
God's  good  time  all  will  be  ripened  and  called  home.  To  be  sure,  it
were  much  better  for  a  man  to  come  under  the  higher  and  more  direct
experiences,  but  he  may  be  saved  by  inferior  ones.  Would  that  every
one  might  have  the  glory  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness  on  his  way,
but  when  men,  whose  business  takes  them  to  earth,  find  the  way  even
through  their  lower  experiences  they  are  not  lost  or  in  peril  if  they
are  with  God.

"  And  he  said  unto  him.  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,

neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead." — Luke

xvi.  :3i.

^  Honor  to  those  whose  words  or  deeds
Thus  help  us  in  our  daily  needs,
And  by  their  kindly  overflow
Teach  us  to  rise  from  all  that* s  low."

Canon  Farrer  says  God  has  spoken  to  men  at  sundry  times  and
with  a  richly  variegated  wisdom.  Sometimes  He  has  taught  truth  by
the  voice  of  Hebrew  prophets;  sometimes  by  the  voice  of  Pagan
philosophers ;  and  all  His  voices  demand  our  listening  ear.  If  it  was
given  to  the  Jew  to  speak  with  Diviner  insight  and  intenser  power,  it


542      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

was  given  to  the  Gentile  also  to  speak  at  times  with  a  large  and  lofty
utterance,  and  we  may  learn  truth  from  men  of  alien  lips  and  another
tongue.  They  too  had  the  dream,  the  vision,  the  dark  saying  upon
the  harp,  the  mystic  flashes  upon  the  graven  gems.  We  cannot  afford
to  lose  these  heathen  testimonies  to  Truth,  or  hush  the  glorious  utter-
ances of  Muse  and  Sybil  which  have  outlived  ''  the  drums  and  tramp-
lings  of  a  hundred  triumphs."

Nature  has  no  secrets  from  her  true  votaries.  He  who  would
become  one  of  her  true  disciples  must  first  plant  the  tree  of  Light
within  his  own  Soul  and  culture  it  in  silence  and  patience.  In  time
it  will  yield  to  him  the  true  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.

Thrice  blessed  is  he  who  with  a  lamp  of  truths  in  union  with  nature
and  with  nature's  God,  has  a  natural  inclination  to  find  the  Light,
without  being  driven  to  it  by  suffering  and  affliction.

The  great  Absolute  Spirit  is  not  so  stem  as  to  deny  to  men  the
Divine  privilege  of  free  Will.

Each  may  carve  out  his  own  way  through  life.  The  dear  good
God  can  make  our  very  contradictions  harmonize  with  His  calm,  quiet
ends.  Try  always  to  do  better  and  better.  Go  up  higher  and  higher,
ever  trying  to  advance.  It  is  far  better  to  try  and  try,  even  if  one
make  blunders,  than  never  to  have  tried  at  all.  When  one  is  not
strong  enough  to  weather  the  gale,  one  must  bow  like  a  reed  before
it,  rising  again  after  the  storm  is  past,  more  dignified,  more  grand.
Guard  your  weaknesses  from  most  men ;  they  are  often  either  un-
worthy of  your  confidence,  or  in  their  friendship  are  very  apt  to
abuse  it.  Learn  to  know  all,  but  keep  thyself  unknown,  has  been
wisdom  handed  down  the  ages.  Let  your  confidence  and  devotion
rest  only  on  the  heights  of  Spirit  and  the  ripening  of  your  Soul,  —
God  in  man  and  you  in  Hini.

To  struggle  on  against  all  the  world  is  always  unpleasant,  even  if
you  be  a  thousand  times  right.  Do  not  strive  to  pull  against  the
whole  community  where  you  live.  In  silence  and  calmness  listen
patiently  and  do  not  argue.  You  have  your  freedom  of  thought.
Isolation  is  best.  Better  never  to  have  been  great  than,  having
been  so,  then  fall  forever  to  be  so  no  more.

A  star  that  sets  will  rise  again  to-morrow ;  a  star  that  falls  rises
no  more  forever.  Search  diligently  for  truth,  no  matter  what  the
world  may  say.  Press  on,  the  golden  Star  of  Spirit  is  on  the  heights
with  its  dawning  lights.     On  every  height  is  found  repose.    Press  on.

Lbten,  my  beloved  I  let  the  Spirit  of  Love  tell  you  what  pure
human  love  should  be.


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  543

In  the  far-off  dawn  of  the  Soul-life,  when  it  was  only  a  little  germ
in  the  ethereal  distance  of  the  outer  firmament,  before  it  became
individualized,  yet  was  an  entity  in  the  mist  of  the  star  dust,  the
Soul-Spirits  were  quickened  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  met  and
found  each  other.  Before  earth  was  for  us,  we  were  one,  even  as  we
shall  be  one  when  there  is  no  time  for  us  any  more.  Love  is  from
the  first  and  will  be  to  the  end  of  all  time  and  beyond  all  time.  This
worldly  life  of  ours  is  comparatively  nothing.  Love  is  so  eternal,  so
complete,  this  mortal  life  is  but  as  a  tiny  instant,  a  moment  of  pause
in  our  journey  through  the  firmaments  or  through  the  endless  path-  '
ways  of  heavenly  glory  from  one  star  world  to  another.

When  the  Father-Mother  God  took  our  two  Souls  from  among  the
stars,  and  planted  their  tiny  entities  on  earth,  clothed  for  a  time  in
mortal  bodies,  they  should  always  remain  in  that  Divine  harmony,
each  in  concord  of  responsive  melody  analogous  to  the  tones  of  some
musical  instruments  whose  notes  breathe  atmospheres  of  consonance
and  harmony.

Indulge  the  communion  and  interchange  of  thought  only  with
harmonious  company.  Otherwise,  seek  isolation  alone  with  nature.
She  is  always  genial  and  kind  to  her  lovers,  and  only  to  her,  and  in
your  dreams,  must  you  give  voice  to  the  yearnings  of  the  human
heart.  Nature's  ministrations  are  refreshing  like  the  sheen  of  the
moon  and  the  brightness  of  the  stars,  while  her  orchestra  is  the  chorus
of  Angels  rise  and  swell  in  rapturous  song.  With  such  companion-
ship, you  can  scale  the  heavens  and  forget  your  earthly  sorrow,  while
you  dine  at  the  table  of  the  immortals  and  find  nothing  but  pure  love
and  gentle  beauty,  that  charms  the  heart  and  intoxicates  the  senses.

A  great  man,  in  a  worldly  sense,  who  sometimes  visited  the  com-
piler of  these  pages,  remarked  to  him  one  day,  *'  When  I  dare  stop
and  contemplate  my  life,  there  arises  before  me,  like  a  ghost,  a  ques-
tion if  it  be  not  a  bitter  mockery  for  a  man  to  be  bom,  if  he  was
destined  to  suffer  agony  and  the  defeat  of  his  life's  fondest  hopes,
and  watch  them  perish  one  by  one."  A  little  disappointment  of  his
earthly  ambition  had  engulfed  him.  Yesterday  so  strong  in  power
among  his  fellow-men,  his  name  on  every  babbling  tongue  of  flatter-
ing sycophants,  he  stood  before  me  then,  a  broken  reed,  an  object
of  misery,  asking  for  death,  because  in  temporal  things  he  had  found
defeat,  and  felt  he  could  not  stem  the  tide,  and  meet  the  glances  of
the  common  multitude.  That  which  appeared  to  him  an  overwhelm-
ing wave  of  death,  proved  in.  one  short  year  the  greatest  blessing  that
had  ever  visited  him.     Looking  back  over  the  hurried  years,  the


544      '^^^  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

writer  remembers  the  pale,  wan  face,  furrowed  with  care,  thrice  pitiful
looking  in  its  agony.  Sitting  in  silence  far  into  the  night,  while  the
babbling  cit}'  slept,  a  calm,  small  voice  came  whispering  on  the  night
wind  about  us,  to  his  poor,  tired  Soul,  and  bade  him  give  up  all
earth's  ambition,  vanity,  and  pride,  and  he  should  find  peace.  Then
and  there  in  his  strong,  manly  mind  he  made  a  covenant  with  God,
that  all  earth's  ambitions  should  be  buried  forever,  and  thus  all
earthly  cares  passed  away  into  the  shadows  of  the  night,  and  as  the
golden  dawn  kissed  the  eastern  sky,  announcing  to  the  world  a  new
day,  the  man  passed  into  a  sweet,  refreshing  sleep,  in  the  repose  all
Souls  receive  as  they  first  catch  the  sunlight  of  the  golden  dawn,  a
new-born  man,  a  new-bom  heart,  a  new-bom  Soul  at  Peace  with
Etemity  and  God.

"  Hope,  child,  to-morrow  and  to-morrow  still,
And  every  morrow,  hope ;  trust  while  yon  live.
Hope  I  and  each  time  the  dawn  doth  heaven  fill.
Be  there  to  ask  as  God  is  there  to  give.**

Let  him  who  enters  into  meetings  for  communion  with  the  immor*
tal  loves,  enter  with  a  tme,  prayerful  heart.

O  holy  Spirit  of  Truth  and  Light,  when  Thou  boldest  Thy  beams
of  Truth,  we,  as  frail  children,  needs  must  languish.

Then  indeed  will  our  visitings  be  blessings  not  only  to  ourselves
but  to  Spirits  and  mortals.  This  should  be  the  trae  object  of  meet-
ing at  a  Spiritual  stance,  not  only  to  hold  communion  with  those  oi
our  friends  who  have  gone  on  before  us  to  the  higher  life,  but  to
develop  our  own  Spiritual  attributes,  to  the  end  that  while  yet  in
mortal  form  we  may  perceive  our  Spiritual  surroundings,  and
strengthen  and  invigorate  our  interior  life ;  so  that  when  we  gradu-
ate from  this  primary  school  of  existence  we  may  be  qualified,  with
fully  matured  Spiritual  bodies,  to  take  our  places  as  sentient  men
and  women  in  the  grand  seminaries  of  the  higher  life.

The  more  intently  we  cultivate  our  clairvoyant  and  clairaudient
powers,  the  more  intuitive  we  become  here,  the  better  we  shall  be
enabled,  when  we  enter  the  land  of  the  great  hereafter,  to  behold  the
beauties  of  celestial  scenes,  and  realize  the  fact  that  we  still  live.

Strive  always  to  meet  the  departed  with  love.  You  will  be  repaid
more  than  a  thousand  fold,  for  there  is  always  such  a  warm  greeting
of  love,  as  happy  Souls  m  paradise  bestow  upon  a  new  inhabitant  or
visitor  who  comes  to  taste  their  blessedness.

Every  step  above  mere  physical  existence  is  a  step  forward  in


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  545

civilization,  yet  every  movement  toward  advancement  and  freedom  is
opposed  by  the  few  who  desire  to  rule.  Therefore,  when  people
begin  to  advance  everything  makes  life  more  difficult

A  Persian  poet,  Omar  KLhayyam,  many  centuries  ago,  wrote :  —

^  I  sent  my  Soul  through  the  invisible,
Some  letter  of  the  after-time  to  spell :
And  by  and  by  my  Soul  returned  to  me,
And  answered, '  I  myself  am  heaven  and  helL'  **

**  If  the  Spirits  of  the  dead  revisit  earth  for  weal  or  woe.

We  might  fancy  they  would  join  us,  those  dear  friends  of  long  ago.
Hush,  who  knows  what  ghostly  comrades  may  have  come  with  noiseless  feet
In  the  old  familiar  friendliness,  to  make  our  band  complete  ?  "

Where  are  the  Dead  ?  The  author  and  compiler  very  much  wishes
that  the  position  he  occupies  may  be  thoroughly  understood  in  regard
to  the  subject  and  meaning  of  the  word  Death.

To  us  it  has  no  positive  meaning,  that  can  be  derived  from
Nature's  operations.  A  human  Soul  in  this  world  is  but  gold  in  the
ore ;  at  death  the  pure  gold  is  melted  out  and  separated,  and  the
dross  cast  away  and  consumed.  For  we  hold  that  the  individuality
and  characteristics  which  establish  our  existence  are  eternal,  having
no  end;  that  we  shall  always  be  the  same  beings,  and  the  change
known  as  death  is  but  a  step  from  good  to  better — an  advance,  our
True  being  let  loose  into  realms  of  Spirit.  Our  eternity  is  new.
From  this  standpoint  we  can  take  a  broad  survey  of  our  relation-
ship to  the  future.  We  are  not  creatures  of  a  moment ;  our  existence
b  not  like  that  of  a  cloud  sweeping  across  the  sky  to  be  dissolved
away.  For  ours  is  the  companionship  of  worlds  and  stars.  Friends,
relatives,  neighbors  have  preceded  you,  whom  you  will  meet  in  the
great  hereafter.

Sages  and  philosophers,  the  great  and  good  of  ages  past,  await
you  there,  where  you  shall  mature  in  the  Light  of  Angelic  wisdom.
You  who  stand  with  breaking  hearts  around  the  grave  of  some  loved
one  need  have  no  fear,  for  this  large  and  noble  faith  is  yours ;  that
Death  is  an  archway  crowned  with  hidden  flowers.  We  know
that  through  the  common  wants  of  life,  the  needs  and  duties  of  each
passing  hour,  your  grief  will  lessen  day  by  day,  until  at  last  this  little
grave  will  seem  a  place  of  rest  and  peace,  almost  of  joy.

No  man  can  know  or  be  permitted  to  know  the  worth  of  a  single
life's  experiences  of  sunshine  and  stonily  which  must  be  sacredly  held
and  unknown  to  all  but  the  Actor.


546      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

"  This  world  is  God's  great  whispering  gallery."  **  It  is  so  con-
structed as  constantly  to  bring  God's  messages  to  us."  The  words
opened  a  sublime  vista  of  thought  Life  assumed  a  new  and  deeper
significance,  a  more  permanent  and  enduring  value,  from  thb  impres-
sive hint  of  its  nearness  to  the  Divine  thought  and  purpose.  As  the
world  is  God's  great  whispering  gallery,  so  is  it  too  a  gallery  of
records.  Every  act  and  deed  is  recording  itself,  and  the  world  is  full
of  the  handwriting  on  the  wall.  The  geologist  long  since  discovered
how  creation  has  written  its  own  history  on  rock  and  universe.  With
the  alphabet  of  its  language  he  held  the  key  to  the  mighty  revolutions
and  potent  transition  periods  of  inorganic  life.  Even  as  the  archaeol-
ogist deciphers  strange  inscriptions  and  records,  so  does  the  scientist
read  the  history  which  nature  has  traced  in  its  long  ages  of  upheaval
and  change.  Science  is  now  bringing  us  face  to  face  with  a  still  more
subtle  and  marvellous  secret  of  nature:  the  fact  that  every  sound
that  is  uttered  records  itself.  Words  are  inscribed  in  the  water,  in
the  air,  and  in  the  gas  that  bums  in  the  room.  They  remain  hidden
from  ordinary  view,  silent  to  the  ordinary  ear,  but,  like  inscriptions
traced  in  sympathetic  ink,  ready  to  appear  under  the  right  conditions.
The  new  invention  of  the  phonograph  and  the  graphophone,  varia-
tions of  the  same  principle,  and  the  probable  perfection  to  which  they
will  be  brought,  mark  a  new  era  in  human  history.  It  suggests  to
the  thinker  how  marvellous  was  Emerson's  insight ;  how  unerring  his
grasp  of  a  Spiritual  Truth,  which  he  discovered  long  before  science
had  discovered  and  formulated  it,  when  he  wrote:  —

"And  all  that  nature  made  thy  own.
Floating  in  air,  or  pent  in  stone,
Shall  rive  the  hills  and  swim  the  seat
And  like  thy  shadow  follow  thee."

Words  and  deeds  that  float  in  air  have  then  recorded  themselves.
At  the  magician's  touch  they  come  forth.  It  is  hardly  an  extrava-
gance to  say  that  in  the  graphophone  we  approach  Spiritual  Omni-
science. It  is  a  marvellous  and  mighty  discovery,  and  one  that  must
have  a  potent  influence  on  life.  For  all  these  marvels  are  discoveries
rather  than  inventions.  They  exist  in  nature,  and  their  conditions  are
discovered  and  applied.  We  learn  to  read  the  handwriting  on  the
wall.

Love  is  that  quality  of  grace  and  tender  sympathy  which  shines
out  with  beneficence  on  all.  Love  is  a  compassion  and  unselfish
attachment,  a  devotion^  universal,  continuous.    It  b  the  enraptured


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  54/

fountain  of  kindness.  It  b  the  Soul's  physician.  He  b  indeed  an
exile  and  orphan  who  has  no  one  in  this  world  or  the  other  for  whom
he  can  suffer  and  love ;  for  the  test  of  love  b  the  capacity  of  suffer-
ing for  the  loved  one.  This  is  the  veil  of  God's  glory.  The  Chil-
dren of  Light  are  devoted,  silent,  self-sacrificing  men,  who  have
attained  the  mastery  of  the  mightiest  of  Spiritual  forces,  who  have
proved,  tried,  tested,  and  practised  them,  and  know  that  every  ele-
ment of  being  can  be  made  subject  to  the  human  Soul,  and  that  every
achievement  of  Spiritual  power  is  attamadle  to  num.

Educate  your  Soul  into  the  realms  of  Spirit,  while  your  earthly
cares  will  be  for  the  amelioration  of  the  sufferings  of  the  world.
You  are  indeed  your  brother's  keeper.

Love  and  Faith  are  the  great  arms  of  strength  of  all  truly  great
minds.  The  motive  power  is  the  belief  that  they  are  carrying  out  a
Divine  purpose.  UnseUbh  love  b  the  great  motive  power  of  un«
selfish  action.

Every  true  man  has  a  higher  ideal  which  he  has  fallen  short  of,
but  he  ever  strives  to  reach  it,  and  presses  on  to  do  his  duty  before
the  Living  God.  Faith  being  hb  strength,  he  acknowledges  hb  reli-
ance in  the  unseen,  directing  hand.

Renounce  all  earthly  and  vain  ambitions  of  the  pathless  wastes
and  storms  of  the  sea  of  commercial  life,  and  begin  a  new  and  bright
career  of  research  into  the  realms  of  life  and  Spiritual  exbtence.

The  refined,  intellectual  man  who  has  not  yet  found  God  is  indeed
a  wanderer  in  the  midst  of  fogs  which  skirt  a  shoreless  sea.  Hug-
ging some  pet  scientific  theory  to-day,  to  cast  it  aside  to-morrow  for
other  hopes,  his  Soul  trembles  on  the  verge  of  the  unknown.  Hb
sharpest  and  most  bitter  pangs  are  his  feeling  for  his  child,  or  one
upon  whom  all  hb  love  is  anchored.  With  yearning  aspirations  hb
fertile  mind  strives  to  reach  higher,  and  ascend  beyond  himself,  only
to  be  dashed  once  more  upon  some  human  theory  and  human  practi-
cability. Hb  Soul  reaches  out  into  the  unfathomable  ocean,  where
he  finds  no  compass,  no  beacon,  no  pilot  to  direct  and  guide  him.
With  manly  ambition  he  seeks  to  fathom  the  mysteries  of  life  and
death,  and  is  dragged  down  to  merely  rudimentary  states,  and  a
revelation  of  protoplasmic  molecule  and  evolution.  Thus  groping  amid
the  chaotic  spheres  of  twilight  intelligences  his  years  go  by.  Old
age  finds  him  weary  and  sick  of  life,  baffled  in  his  better  and  higher
aspirations,  hb  Soul  not  illuminated  by  Spirit  or  the  Love  of  God.
He  passes  out  into  the  shadow  when  hb  hour  is  come  to  join  the


548      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

great  majority  as  a  tale  that  was  told,  and  goes  into  the  wild  and  awful
solitude  of  unlightened  gloom  with  no  place  to  anchor  his  liberated
Soul.  Unfortunate  indeed  is  he  who  is  of  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees,
who  say  there  is  no  Spirit,  no  Angel,  and  no  God.  O  Thou  dear,
good  God  of  wondrous  Love,  Thou  gracious  Father  of  Angels  and
Spirits,  with  what  deep  ingratitude  and  pitiful  self-conceit  do  poor
mortals  reject  Thy  best  and  noblest  blessing  when  they  refuse  to
accept  or  receive,  but  through  weakness  and  ignorance  scoff  and
sneer  at,  the  precious  Truths  of  Spiritual  communion  and  the  guid-
ance of  an  unseen  Hand.

There  are  two  classes  of  minds  to  be  found  among  advanced
thinkers  and  liberals  all  over  the  world.  The  one  seeks  to  attain  to
knowledge,  the  other  to  acquire  it.  Broadly,  it  b  the  difference
between  analytic  and  synthetic  thoughts;  between  subjective  and
objective  views ;  between  the  finite  conception  of  a  limited  world  and
the  Infinite  Spirit  and  ideal  Soul  of  perfect  wisdom.

This  accounts  for  the  doubt,  uncertainty,  and  fear  respecting  the
future,  which  is  intensified  by  the  present  system  of  religious  teach*
ings.  The  Spiritual  world  is  as  much  a  reality  as  this ;  in  fact,  more
so,  for  it  undergoes  no  change,  as  this  one  does.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  when  you  would  do  anything  great  and
good  for  the  benefit  of  the  world,  you  must  always  do  more  than  your
immediate  vocation  demands.  The  true  Pilgrim  of  the  Illuminati,
who  with  entire  self-abnegation  has  devoted  his  life  to  the  good  of
others,  may  at  any  hour  free  himself  from  his  individuality  and
advance  his  Soul  toward  heaven,  and  hold  communion  with  the
immortals.  By  becoming  absorbed  through  concentration  of  thought,
he  is  enabled  to  vibrate  through  the  Astral  doorway  of  his  being,  the
echoing  voices  of  the  Angels.

Mesmeric  influence  b  a  force  emanating  from  certain  physi-
cal characteristics  of  the  mesmerist.  It  imparts  to  the  Soul  of  the
subject  at  a  distance,  arid  produces  an  effect  perceptible  to  him  and
demonstrable  to  others.  In  the  universe  human  and  Spiritual  mag-
netism are  combined.

By  human  magnetism  is  meant  those  physical  emanations  which
flow  from  a  healthy  physical  body,  and  become  absorbed  by  a  more
negative,  diseased  constitution.  Animal  magnetism  is  much  more
easily  produced,  and  covers  a  much  larger  area  than  its  kindred
states.  Curative  effects  can  be  produced  without  some  patients  even
feeling  any  present  sensation  whatever;  while  others  feel  strongly


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  549

every  pass  made  by  the  operator ;  even  hb  presence  or  the  simple
application  of  the  hand,  either  in  direct  contact  or  at  a  distance ;  and
even  without  any  exertion  on  the  part  of  the  operator  will  sometimes
produce  marvellous  results ;  but,  when  the  will  is  exerted,  and  this
force  put  into  activity  by  passes  or  other  means,  its  power  will  be
felt  at  the  time  or  afterward  by  the  most  positive  and  unsusceptible
person.  The  Indian  races  are  much  more  susceptible  than  Euro
peans,  and  the  American  negro  is  peculiarly  sensitive,  and  easily
brought  under  the  complete  control  of  the  operator.

Many  sensitive  persons,  when  passes  are  made,  can  distinctly  see
a  luminous  aura  passing  from  the  fingers  of  the  operator.  The  mag-
netic healer  should  ever  let  his  efforts  tend  to  the  establishment  of  an
equilibrium  of  nature's  forces ;  and  when  the  nerve-centres  are  free
from  congestion,  the  heart  will  beat  lightly,  quickly,  and  fully,  send-
ing the  warm,  rich  blood  to  every  part  of  the  body ;  then  there  is  no
longer  weariness,  pain,  or  ache.  The  wonderful  mechanism  works
with  smoothness  and  ease.  A  perfect  equilibrium  of  vital  forces  will
render  the  fortunate  possessor  proof  against  outward  causes  of  dis-
ease, and  enable  him  to  pass  through  ordinary  epidemics  with  im-
punity.

By  Spiritual  magnetism  is  meant  that  peculiar,  refined  aura  ema-
nating from  Spiritual  intelligences,  who  combine  their  influence  with
that  of  a  healer  in  mortal  form,  uniting  the  two  forces,  thus  minister-
ing to  the  Spiritual  needs  and  physical  ailments  of  the  patient  at
once.

God's  i  nfinitude  fills  all  space  and  b  more  apparent  to  human
intelligence  than  atmosphere  or  sunlight.

Colors,  crystalline,  and  all  metallic  bodies,  give  off  magnetic
forces.  The  different  varieties  of  color  absorb  different  degrees  of
light  and  heat,  and  in  their  vibration  before  the  eye  emanate  streams
of  magnetic  forces  which  are  as  refreshing  dew  to  the  Astral  and
animal  body.

All  precious  stones,  when  highly  polished,  if  gazed  upon  intently,
will  induce  clairvoyant  visions.  We  give  the  following  quaint  ideas
of  many  ancient  and  modern  Adepts,  not  as  guides  or  scientific  indi-
cations of  latent  magnetic  powers,  but  for  the  perusal  of  the  student.

The  Sapphire,  above  all  other  gems  has  been  known  by  all
Adepts  to  produce  tranquillity  and  concentration  of  mind

A  sapphire  ring  is  supposed  to  possess  very  great  moral  power


550      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

No  man  would  dare  to  wear  one  in  any  haunt  of  dissipation  if  he  had
any  knowledge  of  the  subject,  since  if  he  were  indiscreet  enough  to
do  so  his  action  will  at  once  be  known  to  the  one  he  holds  dearest.
The  sapphire  is  also  supposed  to  signify  piety  and  goodness.  It  is
the  sacred  stone  of  the  inner  temple  of  the  Eastern  S.  S.  S.,  and
when  worn  by  a  wholly  pure  and  mediumistic  person,  who  has  com-
panionship with  the  higher  intelligences,  insures  protection  against
many  diseases,  and  will  warn  him  of  hidden  dangers ;  especially  so  if
the  Astral  of  the  person  and  his  planetary  aspects  are  en  rapport  with
the  sapphire  gem.  Solomon  used  in  his  communion  sapphire,  which
impels  one  to  wisdom,  silence,  justice,  and  love.

By  many  of  the  Greeks  the  lodestone  was  used  for  the  consecra-
tion of  mentality.

They  claimed  they  heard  the  voice  of  Angels  and  learned  of
heavenly  things.

Any  traveller  who  visits  Japan  to  this  day  will  find  in  every  well
regulated  household  a  sacred  room,  where  the  family  retire  at  a  certain
hour  to  commune  with  the  Silent,  Loving  God,  by  gazing  earnestly  and
intently  on  a  large  globe  of  pure  rock-crystal,  which  is  placed  in  the
centre  of  the  room  on  a  pedestal,  the  family  sitting  around  on  their  mats
with  a  fixed,  somnolent  gaze  upon  the  stone.  That  the  answer  to  their
petitions  and  desires  is  breathed  out  through  the  stone,  they  all  de-
clare and  claim  that  their  senses  discover  and  understand  it  clearly,
and  that  the  inner  Soul  hears  the  silent  voice  of  the  oracle.  The
crystal  is  an  anchorage  for  peaceful  repose,  in  union  with  Spirit,  and
when  used  in  love  brings  calm,  sweet  sleep  and  good  dreams.

The  Opal  was  supposed  by  the  Greeks  to  possess  great  power  of
giving  the  light  of  prophecy  and  foresight  to  the  owner,  provided  he
used  it  not  for  selfish  gain.  If  he  did,  it  became  an  unfortunate  stone,
the  owner  becoming  unlucky  in  his  loves  and  desires,  and  disappoint-
ment became  his  companion.

Opals  were  the  most  sacred  stones  in  ancient  Mexico,  said  to  con-
tain the  Soul  of  Truth.  It  is  the  stone  of  the  hermits,  the  gem  of  the
Gods,  who  live  alone.  It  is  fatal  to  love  and  separates  friends.  The
Mexicans  claimed  it  was  the  Soul  of  Fire  which  created  worlds  and
men.

Rubies  are  believed  to  hold  to  the  owner  the  passionate  love  of
all  those  whose  love  may  be  desired.  It  is  the  sacred  stone  of  the
Burmese,  who  believe  the  ruby  is  a  human  Soul  about  to  enter  the


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  551

sacred  precincts  of  Buddha,  and  consequently  in  the  last  stage  of
transmigration  before  entering  the  eternal  embrace  of  Divine  Love.

A  ruby,  in  the  old  days  of  chivalry,  was  supposed  to  lead  a  knight
to  conquest,  to  cause  obstacles  to  melt  away,  and  to  inspire  him  with
bravery  and  zeal.  It  also  kept  his  honor  unstained  and  his  character
without  a  blemish.

It  was  said  also  to  quicken  the  blood  and  increase  the  will  of  the
animal  body  and  bring  vivacity.

Pearls  are  emblems  of  purity,  representing  virtue.

The  Emerald  has  been  typical  of  the  purest  and  highest  love,  and
was  always  thought  to  give  the  power  of  discovering  any  treachery  or
ingratitude  in  alleged  friends.  It  represents  growth  and  progression,
and  promotes  constancy  of  mind  and  warm,  true  friendship.  Among
the  Romans  it  was  believed  that  serpents  would  become  blind  if  they
merely  looked  upon  an  emerald,  and  that  every  other  object  of  con-
tempt and  detestation  would  fall  overwhelmed  in  its  presence.  It  is
supposed  to  bring  harmony  into  the  household,  and  to  further  domestic
joys  in  every  way.

The  Diamond  was  claimed  by  the  Hebrews  to  overshadow  the
lodestone,  and,  being  most  powerful  of  all  gems  and  stones,  would  de-
prive them  of  their  virtues.  Therefore,  the  diamond  was  the  strongest
for  high  concentration  and  best  to  promote  Spiritual  ecstasy  of  all  the
gems  in  the  school  of  the  Prophets.

Diamonds  were  claimed  to  be  the  tears  of  the  Gnomes  who  had
lost  their  best  beloved.  The  diamond  was  the  emblem  of  the  Sun,
and  was  the  charm  of  the  invisible  Fire.  It  was  either  the  ever  Giver
of  Light  to  its  owner,  or  brought  the  most  profound  darkness  to  its
possessor.  It  was  known  to  the  Greeks  as  the  Holy  Necessity,  the
Sun,  the  ethereal  Fire,  the  male  of  Being.

The  Agate  is  cooling  and  allays  fevers,  quenches  thirst  and  quiets
the  pulse  and  heart-throbs :  insures  good  health  and  long  and  pros-
perous life.

Agates  were  also  supposed  to  render  their  wearer  invisible.

The  Amethyst  promotes  chastity,  and  assists  one  to  overcome
habits  and  passions,  and  to  strengthen  the  will  power.  In  the  day  of
chivalry  it  was  believed  to  have  great  power  for  good  in  battles.  The
wearer  was  rendered  brave,  far-seeing,  and  honorable.


552  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Red  Coral  is  used  in  difficulties  of  tlie  lieart  and  lungs  and  in
indigestion,  but  excites  nerve-power,  brilliancy,  and  gladness,  and  has
always  been  supposed  to  act  as  a  health-giver.

Amber  is  excellent  for  the  fires  of  the  Soul,  for  the  eyes,  and  for
glandular  swelling  of  the  throat  and  lungs.

Garnets  bring  cheerfulness  and  ability  to  hold  one's  own  in  the
world.

The  Onyx  contains  an  imprisoned  demon  who  In  his  anger  turns
back  on  himself,  and  he  who  is  of  that  nature  is  his  own  worst  enemy.
It  comes  out  only  at  the  hour  of  midnight,  causing  terror  to  all,  while
for  man  to  wear  onyx  is  disturbance  of  slumbers  and  of  mind.

Topaz  is  favorable  for  rest  and  good  cheer,  hearty  digestion,
nerve-strength,  and  health  to  the  animal  body.

There  is  color  invisible  and  visible  In  everything.  Even  ideas  and
thoughts  are  not  without  color.  It  is  In  the  vibrations  that  produce  a
color  that  their  strength  lies.  It  it  quite  tangible  to  those  of  a  refined
nature,  though  invisible  to  others.

When  man  has  a  white,  calm  look  (for  looks  are  above  all  reflec-
tions of  the  mind),  one  feels  his  elevation  and  gentleness.  When  man
has  a  black  look,  one  knows  the  depth  of  hatred  and  cunning.

An  increasing  revelation  of  color  is  always  possible  to  persons
whose  eyesight  is  improving  or  who  are  being  constantly  supplied
with  aids  to  vision,  but  if  there  be  colors,  and  doubtless  there  are
many,  which  are  caused  by  vibrations  which  produce  no  impressions
upon  our  eyes,  either  with  or  without  instruments,  these  colors  must
be  a  portion  of  the  unknowable  to  man.  The  spectroscope  used  so
extensively  by  astronomers  in  determining  the  condition  of  other
worlds  than  this  can  only  point  out  the  proportions  in  which  elements
appear  on  other  planets  which  have  counterparts  on  earth.  Apply
this  rule  to  man's  Spiritual  discoveries  and  you  will  see  at  once  how
perfect  is  the  analogy  between  man's  moral  and  intellectual  acquisi-
tions. Physical  perceptions,  powers  of  mind,  and  moral  sensibilities
alike  increase.  As  colors  exist  in  rays  of  light  so  does  the  ideal  in
the  Soul,  and  life  is  the  mighty  prism  which  refracts  it.  It  was  the
belief  in  the  ideal  Souls,  supposed  to  be  hidden  in  gems  and  stones,
that  caused  so  much  superstition  to  be  attached  to  rings  in  the  fifteenth
and  sixteenth  centuries,  of  which  we  have  been  writing.


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  553

Man  beholds  God  through  the  Soul's  telescope,  and  seldom  re-
members that  he  may  appear  to  God  as  an  object  seen  through  the
other  end  of  the  glass

The  darkness  of  earth  is  being  illumined ;  the  change  in  political
and  religious  views  is  so  great  that  could  one  who  had  listened  to  the
average  sermon  a  hundred  years  ago  listen  to  one  of  to-day,  he  would
not  recognize  the  same  faith.

You  think  you  have  no  prophet  left,  that  the  time  of  Spiritual  gifts
is  passed^  yet  you  still  know  there  are  great  chemists,  —  if  you  are  not
a  chemist,  —  and  astronomers  and  poets,  —  if  you  are  not  an  astron-
omer or  poet ;  so  still  there  are  Spiritual  discemers,  though  you  have
not  the  power  yourself-

There  are  indications  among  men  of  a  great  enlightenment,  pre-
ceded by  a  multiplication  of  signs  and  wonders.  Indeed,  it  is  no
more  a  matter  of  prediction.  This  Spiritual  enlightenment  portends
as  great  a  change  in  man*s  Spiritual  realm  as  the  motive  power  of
steam  and  the  light  from  electricity  have  effected  in  the  physical
realm.

Nothing  happens  by  accident  in  the  Spiritual  world,  but  whatever
occurs  is  guided  by  intelligence,  and  the  impact  of  thought  from
higher  spheres  goes  on  whether  you  know  it  or  not,  whether  you  will
or  no.  There  is  being  continually  given  off  (as  we  are  told  by  re-
turning Spirits  through  many  mediums)  from  our  earth  a  fine  ethereal-
ized  or  spiritualized  substance,  so  fine  that  our  senses  cannot  per-
ceive it  Every  animal  and  vegetable  is  helping  on  the  work  of  spirit-
ualization  of  matter.  Nothing  lives  in  vain.  Not  a  day  passes  but
vast  supplies  are  eliminated  from  earth  and  sent  on  their  upward  mis-
sion '  a  continuous  stream  is  being  given  off,  which  ascends  until  it
reaches  an  altitude  of  its  own  Spiritual  density,  when  by  the  law  of  grav-
ity it  is  arrested,  and  forms  a  zone  which  extends  about  sixty  degrees  on
each  side  of  the  equator,  this  zone  being  as  subject  to  law  as  the
earth  itself.

It  is  matter  but  vastly  refined,  and  none  but  Spiritual  senses,  whose
organs  are  of  the  same  spiritualized  material,  can  perceive  them.  Bear-
ing this  fact  in  mind,  we  can  in  part  understand  the  difficulty  communi-
cating Spirits  have  to  encounter  and  grapple  with  in  trying  to  describe
their  Spirit  homes,  since,  as  they  say.  All  on  earth  b  so  crude,  gross,
and  imperfect  in  comparison  with  them*

The  refining  and  spiritualizing  process  goes  on.  The  laws  of
Nature  are  incessantly  at  work,  improving  on  their  last  efforts,  elabo-
rating zone  after  zone,  thus  making  the  three  heavens  spoken  of  in


554  THB   HIDDEN    •  'AY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  Many  Mansions,  Chapter  XIV.  As  these  zones  have  the  earth
for  their  foundation,  and  are  in  accordance  with  the  aspirations  of  its
inhabitants,  they  accompany  it  in  its  orbit  and  flight  through  space,
always  bearing  the  same  relation  to  the  countries  of  the  earth;  so
that  the  most  perfect  harmony  reigns  throughout.

The  Spiritual  bodies  of  the  denizens  of  the  Spirit  world  bear  the
same  relation  to  the  zone  they  inhabit  as  our  physical  bodies  do  to
the  earth.  Those  who  inhabit  the  first,  being  grosser  and  denser
than  the  second,  can  no  more  see  it  than  the  physical  senses  can
discern  theirs.  Thus  Spirits  from  the  higher  zones  may  stand  side
by  side  with  those  of  the  lower  without  the  latter  being  cognizant  of
the  fact.  So  at  Spirit  circles  there  may  be  a  large  company  of
Spiritual  visitants,  and  the  controlling  Spirit,  if  he  be  of  the  lower
plane,  may  be  ignorant  of  their  presence  and  communicate  to  that
effect,  and  still  be  speaking  truth  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  But  the
higher  can  always  see  the  lower.

Thus  is  given  to  the  world  a  knowledge,  through  Spiritual  com-
munion, of  the  hereafter,  its  conditions  and  surroundings,  without
miracle  or  mystery  —  a  blessing  and  consolation  the  world  has  not
hitherto  enjoyed.  The  old  command,  *^  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go  and
no  farther,"  is  supplanted  by  the  Angel  command,  "  Come  up  higher
and  learn  of  the  works  of  thy  Creator  I "

A  selfish  man  covets  that  which  he  does  not  need,  while  a  liberal
man  often  bestows  on  others  that  which  he  really  needs.

Many  men  unwittingly  enter  into  copartnership  with  error  and
evil  to  work  out  their  own  destruction.

Many  men  talk  as  easily  as  they  breathe,  and  with  quite  as  little
thought.

Meditation  in  the  quiet  calm  of  nature  is  the  poising  of  the  Soul's
wings  for  flight.  The  perfect  Soul  and  Spirit  can  make  and  dwell  in
any  kind  of  a  body  it  chooses  and  dissolve  it  at  will.

Men  fail,  sicken  and  die,  through  feebleness  of  will.  All  the
potencies  of  man  reside  in  the  will.     Will  is  God,  and  God  is  Spirit

Practicability,  from  a  human  standpoint,  congeals  the  fairest  blos-
soms of  Spiritual  flowers.

It  is  the  small-minded,  weak  man  who  quenches  the  fire  of  hb
own  Soul  by  his  doubts  and  skepticisms.

To  avoid  obsession,  keep  the  body  positive  and  the  mind  negative.

Obsequiousness  begets  friends ;  truth,  hatred.

Hippocrates  said  to  his  pupils :  The  affliction  suffered  by  the  body,
the  Soul  sees  when  we  shut  our  eyes.


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  555

If  a  man  possess  great  talents,  he  need  not  publish  them ;  they
will  generally  publish  themselves.

The  love  of  children  inspires  an  interest  in  all  humanity.

Speak  after  the  manner  of  a  whole-souled  man,  if  you  would  that
all  true  women  hear  and  give  you  credence.

Our  best  opinions  and  thoughts  are  the  Angel  part  of  us.  Our
selfishness  and  acts  are  of  the  earthly  part.

Flowers  are  the  symbols  of  the  exquisite  beauty  and  loveliness  of
the  Divine  character.

Fill  thy  mind  with  useful  knowledge,  and  thou  shalt  avoid  empty
words.  He  who  talks  more  than  his  share  of  the  time  always  shows
weakness  and  egotism.

The  disappointed  efforts  of  mankind  in  every  department  of  life,
generally  originate  and  terminate  in  secret  selfishness.

It  has  been  said,  with  all  honesty  of  heart,  that  if  any  man  believed
that  the  wicked  dying  without  belief  in  Chirst  go  to  hell,  and  that
hell  is  a  place  of  everlasting  conscious  torment,  the  man  who  believes
such  a  doctrine  and  yet  brings  a  child  into  being  is  a  monster.

Instead  of  enjoying  life  he  should  tremble,  and  live  a  compound
funeral  all  his  days.

Sometimes  the  faces  of  the  wicked  are  for  the  first  time  turned
toward  heaven  when  they  are  laid  in  the  grave.

Often  when  God  speaks  loudest  His  voice  is  least  heard.

Justice,  mercy,  and  love  are  the  three  sparkling  gems  in  the  crown
of  Jehovah.

Good  ideas  often  take  wings  and  fly  beyond  our  reach,  while  bad
ones  cling  to  us  like  barnacles  to  a  vessel.

True  reason  ripens  not  in  the  torrid  zone  of  passion  nor  amid  the
frosts  of  bigotry  which  always   congeal  truth.

The  higher,  nobler  love  was  never  dishonest;  therefore,  the
divorced  were  never  truly  married.

Evil  becomes  supreme  monarch  of  the  mind  when  seated  on  the
throne  of  human  ambition.

The  exercise  of  good  common-sense  is  the  best  remedy  known  to
prolong  human  life.

Let  thy  imagination  wander  among  the  heavenly  bodies ;  then  thou
shalt  discern  the  halo  of  God's  splendor,  equalled  only  by  the  adora-
tion it  inspires.

Calm  reason  never  seeks  to  prevail  by  unreasonable  arguments.

The  mind  of  the  truly  good  changes  often ;  the  heart  never.


556      THE  HIDDEN  WAT  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLDL

Human  faculties  are  nature's  moulds  in  nduch  ideas  axe  g^vea  fonn.
Imagination  is  the  Soul's  retreat,  when  left  in  silence.

A  few  stones  piled  together  long  ago,

Half  follen  again  to  rains,  have  a  charm

To  hallow  all  the  worid.    The  sweetest  soonds

Are  those  most  near  akin  to  silence ;

.    .    .    and  the  sweetest  thoaghts

Are  those  far  whispers  of  homanitj.

And  love,  and  death,  which  none  can  ever  hear

Amid  the  mighty  voices  of  the  world.

Spiritual  growth  is  step  by  step,  like  the  filling  of  a  dstem,  drop
by  drop.

The  human  mind  is  nature's  keyboard  on  which  her  harmonies
and  discords  are  sounded  by  the  touch  of  invisible  fingers.

A  well  cultivated  mind  makes  always  a  kindly  critic.

Inordinate  self-esteem  makes  a  balloon  of  a  man's  head ;  all  the
rest  of  him  is  simply  the  basket

An  unstable  mind  is  like  the  meteor  in  the  midnight  sky ;  it  shoots
through  space,  without  orbit  or  direction,  leaving  but  a  momentaiy
reminder  of  its  existence.

A  considerate  man's  first  impression  is  more  reliable  than  a  hasty
man's  deliberate  judgment.

Man  wisely  thinks  ten  times  as  often  as  he  wisely  acts.

Some  minds  are  like  those  auction  rooms  which  have  nothing  but
second-hand  furniture  to  offer.

Dbappointments  are  wings  that  bear  the  Soul  skyward.

Great  blessings  often  disgust  unappredative  and  discontented
minds.

As  we  place  rare  jewels  in  a  deep  setting  to  enhance  their  beauty,
so  God  sets  great  Souls  in  dark  surroundings,  that  earth  may  better
see  their  heavenly  beauty.

The  more  egotism  and  treachery  become  dangerous  to,  and  fre-
quently undermine  the  cause  of,  freedom  of  all  nations,  the  more
does  personal,  material  interest  guide  the  acts  and  endeavors  of  men.

The  man  who  in  our  era  is  penetrated  by  a  higher  idea  and
nobler  sentiment  appears  to  the  world  as  a  designing  rogue,  a  vision-
ary madman,  or  an  enthusiast

Instead  of  love  to  man,  which  as  a  religious  duty  should  lie  at  the
foundation  of  all  intercourse  with  his  fellow-man,  mistrust  has  become
the  first  condition  of  judgment  in  the  world.

Therefore,  the  man  of  noble  nature,  capable,  from  conviction,


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  557

of  any  sacrifice,  when  he  desires  to  act,  incurs  the  danger  of  being
misconceived  in  his  higher  endeavors,  and  of  being  considered  and
treated  by  egotists  as  one  of  themselves.

His  high  endeavors  are  considered  by  the  world  either  as  absurd
consequences  of  a  "  fixed  idea  "  or  of  "  boundless  vanity,"  or  as  the
sly  calculation  of  a  common  speculator,  seeking  to  carry  out  a  con-
cealed plan  of  selfishness  at  the  expense  of  others.

The  more  faith  in  the  human  heart  becomes  endangered  by  treach-
ery, the  more  suspicion  becomes  the  duty  of  the  unfortunate  who  is
exposed  to  treachery.

Egotism  judges  all  the  appearances  around  it  after  itself ;  it  mis-
takes and  despises  exalted  ideas  and  noble  sentiments,  being  unable
to  comprehend  the  one  or  entertain  the  other.

If,  from  the  seed-cup  of  the  hearts  of  some  there  did  not  pass
over  to  a  future  generation  the  seed-pollen  of  the  conception  of  a
higher  idea,  as  it  were,  mankind  would  sink  into  materialism.

Persons  who  are  penetrated  by  an  exalted  idea,  who  devote  their
lives  to  some  inward  conviction,  know  no  fear  of  death,  no  anxiety
from  surrounding  danger.  Their  faith  merges  on  fatalism,  inasmuch
as  they  feel  that  the  mission  upon  which  they  are  sent  is  not  yet  ful-
filled on  earth,  and  that  they  are  conducted  through  storms  and  dan-
gers to  the  completion  of  their  mission.

Nature  gives  to  people,  as  members  of  the  great,  sacred  league  of
humanity,  a  letter  of  recommendation  and  legitimation,  whose  seal,
impressed  upon  the  face,  is  never  forged.  It  is  the  intelligent  and
noble  expression  of  the  human  features,  the  inward  dignity  beam-
ing forth  in  the  open  countenance,  operating  on  congenial  natures,
through  the  chief  organ  of  the  Soul,  the  magnetic  fluid  of  the  eye.
An  attraction  manifests  itself  in  accordance  with  this,  which  undenia-
bly draws  a  man  in  confidence.  The  Soul  perceives  the  beneficial
influence  of  a  congenial  being  by  means  of  this  element  (the  invisi-
ble magnetic  fluid)  without  at  the  moment  being  able  to  account
for  it.

The  higher  the  degree  of  development  of  the  inward  life,  the  more
powerful  is  the  sympathy  of  congenial  or  similar  natures,  and  the
greater  the  antipathy  against  individuals  in  whom  this  life  b  either
not  at  all  unfolded  or  exists  in  an  inferior  degree.

No  man,  however  good,  can  be  our  example,  nor  can  we  walk  in
any  one's  footsteps.  It  is  the  Divine  Light  within  that  must  guide.
This  is  plain  gospel  teaching,  though  not  Christianity  nor  the  Spirit-
ualism  of  some  lecturers.


558      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Good  actions  are  the  invisible  hinges  of  the  doors  of  Heaven.

He  is  happiest  who  renders  the  greatest  number  happy.

The  fruit  of  wisdom  and  the  higher  loves  ripens  best  amid  the
foliage  of  gray  hair.

We  pay  our  highest  compliment  to  a  good  man  by  unconsciously
following  in  his  footsteps.

To  him  who  gives  but  a  drop  of  water  to  the  poor  unselfishly,  it
will  be  a  living  fountain  in  paradise.  Therefore,  seek  to  mingle  with
the  poor,  the  weak,  the  broken-hearted,  that  thou  be  not  too  great  a
stranger  to  some  of  the  Angels  who  will  greet  thee  in  heaven.

We  often  best  enjoy  that  which  we  least  understand.

A  man's  character  can  always  be  read  by  the  comparisons  he
makes.

There  are  thoughts  that  often  intrude  not  as  beggars,  but  as  true
gift-bearers.

**  I  stood  upon  the  ocean's  shore.
And  viewed  the  silent  deep ;
While  *neath  the  brightly  beaming  start
All  nature  lay  asleep.

**  As  lone  I  paced  that  pebbly  strand.
And  thought  of  those  above,
An  Angel  seemed  to  whisper  me.
There's  nothing  true  but  Love.**

The  Strongest  friendship  cannot  live  without  the  little  graces ;  for
love  subsists  on  graces  and  emotions.

The  poor  have  strewn  in  their  pathway  flowers  of  whose  fragrance
the  rich  know  nothing.  A  little  satisfies  the  poor,  while  the  rich
never  cease  longing  and  complaining.

True  philanthropy  is  the  vital  principle  of  all  Christ's  teach-
ings, and  there  can  be  no  true  Christianity  without  deep  feeling  for
humanity.

None  can  understand  the  true  location  of  heaven  better  than  they
who  appreciate  its  blessings.

In  youth  we  often  woo  and  wed  habits  and  errors  from  which  in
after  life  we  strive  in  vain  to  be  divorced.  When  men  cease  to  bend
the  knee  to  mammon  and  become  free  from  great  possessions,  they
are  in  a  more  natural  state  of  being.  Thus  it  was  that  Christ  uttered
so  many  great  promises  to  His  followers.  They  were  free  from  earthly
ambitions,  in  a  far  more  material  condition  to  receive  the  Spirit,
thereby  becoming  true  heirs  to  the  kingdom  of  God.


GATHERED  SHEAVESk  559

There  are  no  sounds  that  can  stir  the  sublime  emotions  of  men's
Souls  like  the  sighs,  songs,  and  whisperings  of  nature.

Search  for  good  in  everything,  and,  when  found,  speak  of  it  at
once  to  your  friends  and  neighbors,  that  they  may  rejoice  with  you
that  it  has  been  found.

Sordid  desires  are  the  creatures  of  indulgence  that  enslave  men  to
habits  of  error  and  wrong.

The  prevailing  sin  throughout  the  world  consists  in  placing  too
great  value  upon  wealth.

Genuine  friendship  will  always  subordinate  self-will  to  the  welfare
of  a  friend.

If  it  were  possible  for  all  the  evil,  sin,  and  error  in  God's  universe
to  gain  the  mastery  over  the  good,  the  whole  fabric  of  God's  economy
and  creation  would  fall  to  pieces  without  form  or  feature.

If  you  treat  a  man  like  a  brute,  he  is  justified  in  behaving  like  one
toward  you.

Thoughts,  like  many  persons,  are  often  more  valued  for  their  dress
and  surroundings  than  for  their  true  character.

Public  opinion  is  but  the  mist  arising  from  the  great  ocean  of
thought  and  anon  descending,  it  may  be,  in  gentle  showers  or  furious
storms.

The  planets  are  the  way  stations  on  the  road  to  heaven,  and  as-
trology is  the  geology  of  heaven,  in  whose  many  strata  are  found  the
beautiful  gems  of  the  firmaments.

Conventional  politeness  is  often  but  the  chalice  in  which  time-
servers  are  accustomed  to  offer  us  the  poison  of  hypocrisy.

A  man  who  is  always  ready  with  an  answer  seldom  gives  the  best
one.

He  who  b  a  disturber  in  his  own  affairs  will  not  prove  a  peace-
maker in  those  of  his  friends  or  neighbors.

A  profoundly  calm,  thoughtful  person  may  be  often  sad,  but  never
lonely.

A  true  man  may  ignore  the  rules  of  modem  society  and  the  dic-
tates of  fashion,  and  yet  not  always  forfeit  his  claim  to  good  common-
sense.

Truth  lies  in  a  straight  line,  following  which  a  man  may  always
stand  erect  in  the  full  dignity  of  his  manhood.  But  falsehood  and
error  ever  take  a  zigzag,  underground  course,  pursuing  which  he
must  bend  his  better  judgment,  twist  his  higher  conscience,  and  warp
his  manhood  till  he  ceases  to  be  a  man.

Self*praise,  like  a  circle,  ends  where  it  begins.    Many  persons


56o      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

revolve  around  great  centres,  while  others  turn  only  on  very  small
pivots.

From  every  comer  there  is  always  more  than  one  way  out
The  largest  trees  have  always  been  found  in  uncultivated  soiL
Endeavor  that  your  forethought  be  as  unbiassed  and  far-reaching
as  your  after-thought  must  be.

A  thought  that  does  not  command  one's  own  respect  and  admira-
tion very  seldom  commands  that  of  others.

"  Our  Lord  and  Master,
When  he  departed,  left  us  in  his  wHl,
As  our  best  legacy  on  earth,  the  poor  I
These  we  have  always  with  us ;  had  we  not,
Our  hearts  would  grow  as  hard  as  are  the  stones.*

As  a  candle  lightens  up  a  cave,  so  does  a  gentle,  kind,  and  loving
Soul  light  up  and  turn  everything  to  paradise,  wherever  that  loving
Soul  is  found.  In  it  is  that  fountain  of  light  which  b  a  thing  of
beauty  and  a  joy  forever.

Everything  on  earth  and  in  the  air  above  is  permeated  with  the
earth's  magnetic  force.  Gaus,  the  illustrious  German  astronomer,
has  computed  this  force  (taking  a  magnet  of  the  strongest  magnetic
force  possible  as  a  unit  of  measure)  that  the  attractive  force  or  lift-
ing power  of  the  earth  is  forty-two  quintillions  and  three  hundred  and
ten  quadrillions  of  tons,  which  if  equally  distributed  throughout  the
mass  of  the  earth  would  make  the  magnetic  intensity  of  every  cubic
yard  equal  to  sixty  pounds  attractive  force.

Professor  Mayer  has  shown  that  this  magnetic  influence  b  filling
space  to  an  unknown  distance,  and  radiating  in  the  lines  of  magnetic
force  like  rays  of  sunlight,  the  lines  being  from  south  to  north.

The  human  will,  with  a  silent  concentration  of  thought,  has  the
same  effect  on  the  Star-magno  or  Astral  body  as  the  magnet's  action
upon  iron.  As  iron  is  brought  near  the  magnet  it  b  at  once  imbued
with  a  subtile  principle,  capable  of  imparting  it  to  other  iron  if  brought
within  its  immediate  atmosphere,  while  it  neither  gains  weight  nor
changes  in  appearance,  yet  we  all  know  one  of  the  most  subtile  poten-
cies has  entered  into  its  substance.  All  human  bodies  are  charged
with  different  degrees  of  magnetic  forces,  whose  strength  varies  with
the  condition  and  health  of  the  person.  Very  much  if  not  all  nervous
prostration  b  either  overproduction  or  lack  of  thb  fluid  to  sustain
polarity,  the  loss  of  which  produces  imperfect  health.  Human  bodies
are  charged  also  with  the  opposite  form  of  electricity,  the  Negative;


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  $6l

The  correct  blending  of  the  two  forces,  positive  and  negative  being
permeated  with  the  Divine  essence  produces  what  we  call  Life.

Through  the  law  of  magnetic  attraction  and  repulsion  comes  the
stronger  union  or  else  the  unhappiness  of  man  and  wife.  Being
drawn  together  by  animality  and  the  fires  of  youth,  they  awaken  to  a
greater  harmony  and  peace  or  to  discord  and  misery,  which  is  only
repulsion  through  the  magno-electric  world  of  nature.

Many  suffer  in  this  way,  and,  not  suspecting  the  cause,  remain  in
the  midst  of  Spiritual  inharmony  until  the  physical  health  is  under-
mined. Many  such  martyrs  there  are  that  the  world  dreams  not  of,
and  they  themselves  have  not  the  comforting  consciousness  of  good
achieved  for  others  which  martyrdom  usually  brings.  God  pity  and
help  them  all  1  And  even  through  this  martyrdom  shall  the  sure  good
be  worked  out,  through  the  growth  and  purifying  of  the  Soul,  if  only
they  be  true  to  their  highest  light,  and  endure  patiently  to  the  end.

And  he  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  they  which  justify  yourselves
before  men ;  but  .  .  .  that  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men  is
abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  —  Zuke  xvi. :  15.

"  I  see  more  slaves  on  the  streets  than  in  the  prisons,"  writes  a
thoughtful  and  far-seeing  gentleman  who  has  been  a  careful  observer
of  this  civilization  and  age.  "  I  counted  a  hundred  artificially  manufac-
tured female  cripples  from  one  street-comer  thb  morning,  and  there
are  five  hundred  on  the  streets  to  one  in  the  hospitals.  I  meet  a
hundred  hurrying,  worn-out  men  to  one  to  whom  peace  within  and
without  is  his  surrounding  atmosphere.  Does  it  pay  ?  Not  in  the
least.  Then,  why  this  hurrying  to  a  premature,  crumbling  waste  of
the  human  system  !  What  madness  to  accumulate  money,  which  in
America  is  the  doorway  to  an  autocracy  and  caste.  Ah,  poor,  foolish
children  I "  exclaimed  oui  friend.  One  of  these  days  nature  will
assert  herself  to  the  uttermost  pound  of  flesh.  Imperious  fashion,
which  tramples  upon  all  the  laws  of  health,  true  esthetics,  and  social
chastity,  will  be  dethroned,  and  the  motherhood  of  the  coming  race
redeemed.  How  great  a  penalty  we  shall  be  called  upon  to  pay,  how-
ever, before  the  fickle  goddess  succumbs  to  dignified  propriety  and
common-sense,  is  indeed  a  very  serious  question.

As  freaks  of  fanciful  caprice,  these  abominations,  first  introduced
through  the  demi-monde  of  the  European  capitals  and  then  adopted  by
our  women  in  all  ranks,  make  an  ordinary  citizen  smile.  But  when
we  consider  their  bearing  on  motherhood,  mentality,  and  moral  and
Spiritual  growth,  we  may  well  reflect  seriously  upon  the  subject

A  civilization  planted  in  deformed,  crippled,  and  diseased  bodies,


562      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

crucified  under  abominable  fashions,  is  doomed  at  its  source.  The
duty  of  protest  lies  with  us  all,  but  more  largely  perhaps  with  the
physician  and  the  clergyman.  A  good  mother  is  the  greatest  illustra-
tion of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God.

True  pleasure  is  the  refreshment  that  cheers  us  in  the  pursuit  of
true  happiness.  It  is  in  anticipation  that  most  people  find  their
heaven  or  hell.     Happiness  knows  no  medium  of  exchange.

Patience  doth,  by  out-suffering  all,  make  men  look  like  Gods.
Gentle  patience  brings  peace  of  which  the  world  knows  little.
Patience  and  hope  are  the  strongest  companions  man  can  have  on
his  pilgrimage,  for  no  man  ever  reached  the  promised  land  without
going  through  the  desert.

Only  a  little  while,  tired  and  struggling  Soul,  and  the  anxieties
and  troubles  that  beset  thee  here  will  cease.  Poverty,  with  its  galling
chains,  —  the  constant  struggle  with  the  hard  conditions  and  necessi-
ties of  physical  life,  —  these  cruel  environments  will  vex  thy  Soul  no
more.  In  the  Spirit  world  will  be  none  to  crowd  or  oppress  —  none
to  rob  thee  of  thine  own.

Only  a  little  while,  my  brother  —  thou  whose  locks  are  whitening
with  the  frosts  of  time,  and  whose  footsteps  are  fast  trending  toward
the  silent  river,  —  and  thou  wilt  reach  the  goal,  beyond  which  lies  the
realm  and  eternal  abode  of  the  Spirit.  There  wilt  thou  find  all  thy
jewels,  —  the  loved  ones  whose  earthly  forms  thou  hast  laid  away  in
the  grave,  —  and  there  wilt  thou  reap  the  fruition  of  all  thy  good
deeds.  To  that  realm  of  eternal  verities  wilt  thou  carry  all  thy
treasures  of  character,  which  constitute  the  real  wealth  of  the  Soul.

Only  a  little  while,  sorrowing  one  of  earth,  and  the  light  of  that
better  day  will  dawn  upon  thy  Soul.  Then  will  the  heartaches  and
anguish,  the  tears  and  prayers,  of  thy  mortal  life  be  turned  into  glad-
ness, and  the  true  life  of  the  Spirit  begin.

When  the  work  of  earth  life  is  ended,  as  sooner  or  later  it  will  be
for  all,  how  sweet  to  all  who  have  lived  worthily  is  the  solace  of  death
—  the  jailer  that  opens  the  prison  doors  and  sets  the  Spirit  free.

"  The  tidal  wave  of  deeper  Souls
Into  our  inmost  being  rolls,
And  lifts  us  unawares
Out  of  all  meaner  cares.**

Below  a  certain  depth  in  the  ocean,  not  a  ruffle  nor  a  ripple  plays
across  its  placid  waters.  So  down  in  the  great  deep  of  the  human
Soul  '^  there  is  a  calm  and  sure  retreat  "  into  which  the  righteous  may


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  563

run  and  be  safe.  Here  man  comes  face  to  face  with  Jehovah.  There
the  Divine  Shekinah,  the  overshadowing  presence  of  God,  abides.
This  is  the  Holy  of  Holies.

Pilgrim  of  Light,  strive  to  bring  your  Soul  into  a  harmonious
condition  with  the  inner  as  well  as  the  outer  temple,  and  life's  cares
will  cease  to  annoy  you  ;  for  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  Soul  is  to  be
in  harmony  with  God.  Remember,  every  Soul  shall  bear  its  own
burden.  Let  yours  be  the  burden  of  good  deeds  and  charity,  not  of
evil  and  wrong.

The  beauty  of  the  Soul  is  faith  ;  as  ideal  loveliness  to  the  sculptor,
faith  is  to  the  heart ;  faith,  rightly  understood,  extends  over  all  the
works  of  the  Creator ;  it  embraces  a  calm  confidence  in  ourselves  and
a  serene  repose  as  to  our  future.

BEYOND.

Tis  hid  from  view ;  but  we  may  guess

How  beautiful  that  realm  must  be;
For  gleamings  of  its  loveliness.

In  visions  granted,  oft  we  see.
The  very  clouds  that  o*er  it  throw

Their  veil,  unraised  for  mortal  sight.
With  gold  and  purple  tintings  glow.

Reflected  from  the  glorious  light
Beyond  the  river.

And  gentle  airs,  so  sweet,  so  calm,

Steal  sometimes  from  that  viewless  sphere  y
The  mourner  feels  their  breath  of  balm.

And  soothed  sorrow  dries  the  tear.
And  sometimes  list*ning  ear  may  gain

Entrancing  sound  that  hither  floats.
The  echo  of  a  distant  strain.

Of  harps'  and  voices'  blended  notes
Beyond  the  river.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Light,  no  matter  what  the  world  may  say,  the
Infinite  Power  that  can  make  a  flower,  build  a  world,  mould  a  dew-
drop,  create  a  leaf,  produce  mankind,  and  evolve  essences  and  forces
from  a  medium,  producing  objective  Spirit  forms,  can  produce  Fire,
make  gold  and  precious  stones,  fruit,  bread,  cloth,  or  anything
desired,  can  even  pierce  the  firmaments.  All  that  is  required  are
Conditions  and  Knowledge,  Love  and  Faith,  Patience  and  Silence.
Thereby  man  can  Will  whatsoever  he  may.     It  shall  be  done.

As  has  been  handed  down  from  great  antiquity,  the  most  fatal


564      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

diseases  to  man  enter  through  the  eye,  and  thence  to  the  mind,  which
enters  into  and  deranges  the  harmonious  action  of  the  Spiritual
and  Astral   body,  which  holds  supreme  control  over  the  physical

body.

Any  disease  which  enters  through  the  eye,  no  matter  of  what  kind
or  form,  will  rarely  respond  to  a  physician  who  uses  any  chemical
medicine  or  drug.  To  cure  these  phases  of  disease  the  remedies
applied  must  be  of  a  character  that  will  directly  influence  the  subtle
Astral,  and  recall  the  Spiritual  forces  about  the  individual,  and
through  them  produce  vital  and  chemical  changes  in  the  physical
structure,  causing  a  return  to  their  True  Polarity.

There  come  to  many  nicely  poised  Souls  times  when  they  become
Soul-sick  and  weary.  Misunderstood,  their  circumstances  seem  to
load  them  down  as  with  chains  forged  of  doubt  and  unrest.  Hard  as
it  may  seem,  in  many  such  circumstances  a  change  is  necessary ;  in
fact,  for  the  usefulness  of  that  life,  a  change  among  new  faces  and
forms  is  imperative.  Alas  1  how  many  men  of  mature  years  are  held
in  doubt  and  condemnation  of  themselves  because  they  are  not  and
have  never  been  understood  by  the  little  world  about  them  !  The
very  best  part  of  themselves  has  been  hidden  simply  by  objective
circumstances.

Yet  a  little  while,  one  by  one  we  shall  all  find  and  each  go  to  his
or  her  own  place.

Great  men  of  advanced  and  lofty  thought  are  like  meteors.
They  glitter  in  brilliancy  for  a  little  moment,  but  are  consumed  to
enlighten  the  world.  Great  hearts  live  much  in  a  little  while.  A
year  is  an  age  to  a  great,  pitying  heart.  Judge  not  too  quickly  of  one
who  dips  deeper  into  the  fountain  of  Spiritual  Waters  than  thou  canst
do,  neither  judge  too  harshly  of  one  who  has  too  gross  a  SouL
Only  as  ripened  or  as  unripened  behold  thou  them,  and  hold  thy
peace.

So  you  will  hold  the  hour  of  illumination  in  everlasting  remem-
brance. On  the  wings  of  melody,  attuned  with  the  love  of  the  Abso-
lute God,  may  your  Soul  in  hope  and  peace  go  up  into  eternity,  never
to  grieve  again  forever,  and  may  the  portals  of  paradise  never  close
to  you.

Remember  always  that  God  and  the  Angels  only  look  to  loving
hearts  and  purity  of  purpose,  not  to  full  heads  nor  to  abundance  from
an  earthly  stand-point.  The  great  Supreme  Judge  and  Father  of  all
looks  to  unselfish  innocence  and  not  for  wealth.

*' These  things,"  said  Jesus,  "  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that  in  me


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  565

ye  might  have  peace.  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ;  but  be
of  good  cheer :  I  have  overcome  the  world.  Peace  I  leave  with  you.
My  peace  I  give  unto  you.  Not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you.
Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  afraid.

"Ye  have  heard  how  I  said,  I  go  away  and  come  again  unto  you.
If  ye  loved  me,  ye  would  rejoice,  because  I  said,  I  go  unto  the  Father :
for  my  Father  is  greater  than  I."

In  silence  of  the  night,  when  the  hush  is  like  a  great  amen  on  land
and  sea,  pray  to  the  Spirits  of  the  blest  for  Angel  guardianship ;  and
in  the  silence  of  the  golden  hour,  just  as  night  passes  into  the  eternal
sunlight  of  the  morning,  ask  God  for  light  and  wisdom,  and  perpetual
guidance,  for  the  purple  reflex  of  the  undying  Light  of  Spirit  for
mankind  can  never  set.    This  is  hope's  anchorage.

So  live  thy  better,  let  thy  worst  thoughts  die.  Beware  of  ambi-
tion, from  which  many  a  grand  Soul  falls.  Heaven  is  not  reached
with  foolish  pride,  but  with  submission  to  God's  natural  laws.  Ambi-
tion is  the  mind's  immodesty.  He  who  lives  to  nature  rarely  can  be
poor;  he  who  lives  to  fancy  never  can  be  rich.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  we  invoke  the  presence  of  the
Divine  Spirit,  whose  glorious  Love  and  Light  fill  out  all  space,  all
worlds,  all  life  in  man,  to  be  continually  with  you,  and  may  you  be
ever  strengthened  by  the  Divine  Beneficence  of  the  Dear  Father's
Love.  May  you  become  a  living  fountain  of  Spirit,  to  make  whole
the  afflicted,  lift  and  renew  the  broken-hearted,  and  give  of  the  waters
of  eternal  life  to  those  who  are  spiritually  hungered  and  athirst
May  you  all  be  worthy  keepers  of  the  trust  which  surpasseth  all
trusts  and  all  understanding.  Now  you  have  crossed  the  threshold
of  the  glorious  home  of  Spirit  Truth,  your  vision  being  opened  to
perceive  the  radiance  of  celestial  spheres.  Now  you  tread  in  the
pathways  of  the  Angels  in  sweet  companionship  with  all  their  ways,
whose  purer  love  and  sacred  memories  shall  beckon  you  upward
forever.

**  Now  had  the  Almighty  Father  from  above
From  out  the  pure  empyrean  where  he  sits,
High  throned  above  all  heights,  bent  down  His  eye
His  works  and  their  own  works  to  view.
About  Him,  all  the  sanctities  of  heaven
Stood  thick  as  stars,  and  from  His  sight  received
Beatitude  past  utterance."

Live,  O  man,  no  longer  to  remain  a  slave  to  things  supposed  to  be
necessities,  but  by  the  assistance  of  Spirit  move  up  to  Heaven's


566      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

original  intention,  the  great  love  and  wisdom  principle  of  thy

For  as  thou  now  art,  the  true  and  heavenly  side  is  quite  opposite  to

thy  human,  material  side.

**  So  to  the  calmly  gathered  thought
The  innermost  of  truth  is  taught.**

**£yil  is  wrought  from  want  of  thought.
As  well  as  want  of  heart"

If  you  can  but  conquer  your  inmost  enemies,  you  can  stand  against

thousands  of  outward  ones.

Dear  Pilgrim,  are  you  hungering  and  thirsting  for  something  real  ?
Have  you  grown  weary  of  the  masks  of  the  world  and  its  illusory  joys,
that  slip  through  your  fingers  in  their  grasping,  as  a  phantom  eludes
mortal  touch  ?  Oh,  strive  to  unclasp  and  let  go  all  earthly  loves,  be-
coming indifferent  to  this  masquerade  and  love  of  life,  and  gradually
the  pain,  defeats,  and  little  joys  and  pleasures  will  pass  away  as  tales
told  only  to  be  soon  forgotten.  Oh,  follow  the  dawning  light  of  true
love,  pure  emotions,  and  the  culture  of  thy  attuned  WilL  Thus  all
may  learn  the  way  across  the  threshold  to  eternal  life.

The  error  and  evil  of  things  are  always  too  apparent  to  the  vision
of  the  young,  while  the  good  and  True  are  mainly  hidden.  To  open
out  and  find  the  truly  good  in  the  soul  of  men  and  display  it  to  the
consciousness  is  to  make  it  love  and  be  loved,  and  followed  as  a
beacon  of  life.  The  human  Will  needs  a  higher  incentive  and  nobler
love  in  order  to  gain  its  growth  and  ripening,  no  matter  how  lofty
one's  own  ideal  of  himself  and  his  powers  may  be.  To  find  one's
self  understood  and  recognized  by  another,  and  that  other  a  stranger,
when  once  the  union  of  Soul  forces  is  made,  is  to  double  the  powers
and  Spiritual  forces  of  both  in  all  their  attainments.

Therefore  it  is  frequently  the  best  move  made  for  a  true  Pilgrim  to
go  out  into  the  world  at  large,  for  a  time,  that  he  may  gain  renewed
strength  thereby,  when  his  living  presence  will  permeate  every  fibre
of  the  world  about  him,  and  his  Spiritual  influence  be  felt  in  the
moral  atmosphere  of  reform,  which  in  all  its  various  phases  is  ever
active  to  exalt,  purify,  and  ennoble  humanity.

Oh,  let  all  humanity  know  and  feel  the  Truth  of  the  Spiritual  phi-
losophy of  death  and  the  immortal  Soul.  It  will  make  men  better
and  give  them  more  peaceful  lives.  It  is  the  magic  light  that  shines
behind  our  tears,  and  shows  that  death  is  but  the  gateway  to  the
everlasting  day.


GATHERED    SHEAVES.  567

The  only  true  principle  of  existence  and  understanding  b  Freedom
Liberty.  Neither  strength,  power,  God,  nor  Spirit  is  possible  with-
out freedom.  The  love  and  freedom  of  true  principle,  which  is  sub-
jective, is  to  be  released  from  and  indifferent  to  little  objects  viewed
objectively,

Bb  Thou  in  the  World,  but  not  of  It.

Modem  religion  and  modem  society  are  jostling  Antiquity  at  every
step.  The  most  thoughtful  men,  in  an  unbiassed,  religious  sense,
accept  God  as  the  Great  Central  Sun-Spirit,  out  from  which  the  Spirit
of  God  is  a  Flame  which  the  Word  of  God  divideth  into  many ;  yet
the  original  Fire  is  not  decreased,  nor  the  power  thereof,  nor  the
brightness  thereof  lessened.  God  is  now  being  acknowledged  as  the
Common  Father  of  Mankind,  not  by  empty  words  but  by  the
reception  of  all  human  beings  into  the  bonds  of  one  common  and
universal  brotherhood.  To  seek  Him  means  to  enter  into  the  dual
Spirit  of  His  Laws,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  is  expressed  in  the  Word  of
God  which  is  the  dual  Soul,  Adonai,  the  Sun,  the  Christ.  Soon  the
tmth,  the  love,  the  justice,  and  the  wisdom  of  His  Divine  Spirit  will
be  acknowledged  by  the  whole  world.

His  greatness  will  not  be  measured  by  His  utility.  He  will  not  be
expected  to  slave  for  us,  to  listen  to  our  supplications  and  execute
our  petty  wishes.  It  will  be  understood  that  His  Laws  can  never  be
annulled,  neither  in  our  favor  nor  to  our  destmction  ;  that  His  infinite
might  is  balanced  by  His  infinite  wisdom.  He  will  be  freed  from  the
office  of  avenger  of  crime  and  compensator  of  virtue.  The  good  will
carry  its  own  reward  with  itself,  and  crime  be  followed  by  its  due,  as
a  natural  consequence.  He  will  be  adored  by  silent  admiration
and  worshipped  by  deeds,  by  joyful  submission  to  His  etemal  laws
rather  than  by  a  gush  of  flattering  phrases,  by  which  He  is  usually
approached.

Our  Treasures  in  Heaven;  Charity  and  Love.

Love  is  not  a  mere  memory ^  but  a  continuous  act,  and  when  united  in
the  duality  of  forces  is  the  one  note  stmck  on  the  lyre  of  life,  which
is  the  full  key-note  of  man's  Soul  and  his  whole  being  in  Subjective
state,  and  works  out  into  numberless  harmonic  tones  and  semitones,
a  power  of  strength  and  healing  harmony  to  all  beings  and  things
that  come  within  its  radius.

There  is  only  one  great  Central  Life,  which  is  Spirit,  Love  a  har-
monious quality,  and  all  things  live  by  virtue  of  it    Even  the  evil-


568      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

minded  and  wicked  live  from  the  same  life-principle,  and  that  life
which  flows  in  acts  according  to  reception,  touching  the  Souls  of  some
with  joy  unutterable,  at  times  swinging  back  the  gates  to  life  immortal
and  letting  through  the  rapturous  melody  of  Angels,  not  bom  of  earth,
or  glimpses  of  their  shining  ways,  just  across  the  borders  of  the
Spirit  land,  "  and  old  things  are  passed  away,  and,  behold !  all  things
are  become  new."  Tarry  not,  but  press  on  under  the  guidance  of  €m
unseen  Hand;  let  your  aspiring  Soul  pass  upward  a  little  way.

On  awakening  again  after  such  an  experience  to  physical  conscious-
ness, you  find  you  lie  reclining  all  vibrating  with  estatic  rapturous
emotions,  altogether  out  of  the  ordinary  nature  of  things,  which  you
will  feel  for  days.  Your  silent  presence  will  be  the  remark  of  your
companions,  from  the  harmonious  emanations  of  sympathy  and  love
you  throw  about  you.

Now  comes  your  great  opportunity.  Strive  to  remember  and  to
follow  out  the  words  engraved  in  letters  of  fire  of  which  you  were
quite  conscious  during  your  visit  to  these  Spiritual  spheres.  The
value  of  things  is  in  their  use.  Therefore,  do  not  abuse  the  first
dawn  of  a  new  power  by  mercenary  or  selfish  prostitution.  The
impossibilities  of  our  infirmities  indicate  the  possibilities  of  those
who  are  firm  and  steadfast.  Do  not  waver,  no  matter  how  the  storms
rage,  but  keep  silent  and  steadfastly  calm.  Pass  on,  up  the  moun-
tains of  objective  difficulties.  Each  one  you  surmount  only  revealr
more  clearly  to  you  the  possibilities  of  your  nature.  Press  on  fof
more  light.

Within  you  lies  a  hidden  analogy  to  the  useless,  selfish  strivings  ol
humanity.  But  yon  fair  sea,  not  like  the  land,  retains  no  traces  ol
man's  passage.  In  all  the  immense  range  of  sunshine  and  of  shadow,
of  goodness  and  of  evil,  of  love  and  selfishness,  when  man  turns  his
living  self  into  the  open  sunlight,  it  is  little  wonder  that  we  find  him
ghastly  pale  at  sight  of  his  own  true  being  as  he  passes  on  and  out
into  the  shadows  of  dark  night  which  folds  him  in  her  silent  embrace.
But  there  are  always  to  be  found  a  few  true  men  after  God's  own
heart,  meek,  gentle,  silent,  loving  men  of  great  harmonious  natures,
not  ashamed  of  inspirational  worship,  who  never  feel  their  manhood
lowered  by  the  act  of  prayer,  or  love  for  poor  humanity  and  mingling
with  it,  surrounded  with  a  halo  of  preternatural  light,  redolent  with
the  love  of  Angels,  stimulated  by  the  stupendous  interests  of  Spirit
Truth  and  heartfelt  sympathies  for  a.  thoughtless  and  a  heartless
world.

Such  sympathy  between  Souls,  disembodied  and  embodied,  makes


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  569

all  advanced  Spiritual  circles  necessarily  exclusive  and  seclusive  from
the  craven  wonder-seekers  of  the  hour.

The  human  being  on  earth  is  Dual  in  the  sense  of  being  a  male
and  female.  In  the  spiritualized  Soul,  or  as  an  actuality  for  a  ripened
disembodied  entity,  his  dual  sex  force  is  one.  Love,  the  creative
force,  has  placed  the  living  image  of  form  before  the  human  Soul,
which  craves  for  its  presence,  and  that  objective  image  never  flies
away,  but  is  transferred  to  a  higher  image  subjectively,  which  in  ful-
ness of  time  becomes  united  in  one  perfected  Soul.

Two  sympathetic  Souls,  whether  of  the  same  sex  or  opposite,  but
both  disembodied,  will  each  work  out  its  own  union  of  dual  force  in
their  progress  and  growth  through  the  firmaments,  but,  as  it  were,
remaining  in  companionship,  making  the  other  a  sharer  in  its  prog-
ress, ripening,  and  subjective  bliss.  Here,  all  unrealized  hopes,
aspirations,  dreams  of  power,  and  higher  life  are  fully  realized,  and
the  noble  dreams  of  the  objective  become  the  realities  in  the  subjec-
tive existence.

The  greatest  difficulty  is  felt  in  bringing  to  the  western  mind,  on
account  of  a  certain  impracticability  of  practical  argument,  that
there  is  something  of  great  power  which  is  not  perceptible  through
the  five  senses ;  that  this  power  is  Soul  and  Spirit  and  its  greatest
potentiality  is  dual.  That  which  the  Eastern  mind  grasps  so  quickly
is  made  difficult  for  the  Western,  by  the  vastly  different  method  of
conveying  instruction  in  the  Orient.

There  the  student  searching  for  truth  is  directed  to  nature,  and  to
search  therein  and  in  himself.  The  teacher  in  the  East  never  takes
time  nor  trouble  to  argue,  but  simply  says,  "  This  or  that  is  fact ;
these  are  principles  of  truth.  Here  are  the  keys  of  understanding
and  knowledge.  Go  now  and  see  for  yourself  and  do  so  comprehen-
sively.   We  have  not  time  to  cavil  over  words.     Look  for  yourself."

Those  of  the  West  claim  a  practicability  of  words,  arguments,  and
scientific  statements,  which  the  student  is  forbidden  to  take  upon
authority.

As  the  student  acquires  knowledge,  he  must  learn  how  it  has  been
acquired,  and  he  is  made  to  feel  that  no  fact  is  worth  knowing  unless
with  it  he  knows  the  way  to  prove  it.

Dear  reader,  dare  to  be  wise.  In  silence  pursue  the  path  of  wis-
dom, regardless  of  the  world  or  what  it  may  say,  or  any  obstacle
which  it  may  throw  in  your  way.  We  have  endeavored  in  this  book
to  give  to  you  the  key^  the  Duality  of  your  being  and  Salient  force.
Be  wise  and  you  will  not  only  govern  your  own  destiny  but  show


SyO  THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Others  the  way.  And  you  will  possess  a  mind  foreshadowing  the
future.  By  your  prudence  and  foresight  you  will  be  able  to  counter-
act that  which  more  gross  or  vulgar  minds  have  suffered  to  pass  as
fate  or  destiny,  whereby  their  faculties  are  confined  to  a  narrow  line
of  operation.

An  Adept  or  Seer  becomes  such  only  by  growth,  progress,  and
ripening.  Step  by  step,  all  the  different  stages  of  his  journey  must
be  developed  by  himself,  his  faculties  and  attributes.  He  can  expect
but  very  little  help  beyond  guidance  and  direction  from  his  patient
instructor  or  Master.  Therefore,  dear  Pilgrim,  begin  now.  Strive  to
learn  and  understand  yourself,  then  learn  of  nature.  If  you  but
once  open  the  door  of  your  Soul  to  the  Living  Voice  of  Truths  you
will  have  a  greater  understanding  by  oral  testimony  to  the  Soul.
This  may  be  opposed  to  human  theory  or  written  evidence,  but  pass
on.  The  Light  of  Spirit  Truth  has  crossed  your  threshold,  and  your
future  footsteps  will  be  guided  by  an  Unseen  Hand.

Those  who  reach  the  chord  of  their  dual  vibration,  having  passed
the  ordeal  of  the  objective  world  and  all  its  maddening  differences  of
little  things,  have  reached  their  native  strength  of  Spirit,  and  attained
the  power  not  only  to  save  themselves  but  to  help  other  weaker  Souls
to  their  salvation ;  while  those  who  have  not  yet  gained  their  attune-
ment  of  being  are  apt  to  remain  stranded  on  their  pet  idea  of  fighting
evil  where,  if  they  continually  remain,  they  are  crushed  like  bubbles
by  the  elementary  winds,  and  disappear  never  to  be  known  on  earth
again.  Do  not  go  to  war  with  Evii,  but  use  it,  learn  of  it,  control  and
direct  it.  Then  you  will  find  a  friend  in  disguise,  in  what  the  world
calls  evil.  Set  yourself  to  learn  this  lesson :  that  evil  is  at  the  foun-
dation of  everything  in  this  world,  and  he  that  would  transcend  it
must  learn  of  it  and  build  thereon.  Do  not  fight  it  nor  ignore  it,
neither  treat  it  as  an  enemy  and  foe  to  human  happiness,  greatness,
and  power.

Evil  is  simply  undeveloped  good,  and  while  it  may  crush  those
whose  lives  are  centred  only  in  this  objective  world,  on  selfish
habits,  cruel  appetites,  and  vain  ambitions ;  to  those  whose  earthly
hopes  and  vain  desires  are  all  destroyed;  whose  lives  have  been
made  desolate ;  who  have  ripened  and  grown  in  spite  of  all,  and  are
stronger  in  Spirit  for  it  all,  it  becomes  an  Angel  of  Light,  a  holy
messenger  of  joy,  sent  from  the  inner  sanctuary  of  the  Divine  Love.

Have  faith  in  the  Absolute  Love  and  trust  in  the  Creative  Power.
Strive  to  understand  the  Truth  of  love.  Unite  your  Dual  forces  of
being,  and  become  one  of  the  Illuminated.    Then  you  can  possess


GATHERED   SHEAVl^  $7^

power  and  all  gifts ;  the  gift  of  song,  the  gift  of  eloquence,  the  gift
of  beauty.  Also  that  fascination  and  nameless  chann,  the  Secret  of
true  Love^  that  shall  lead  all  men  captive.  The  way  to  power  is  open
to  all.  ''Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen,"  —  not  that  Nature
shows  any  partiality  in  individuals,  but  because  the  toys  of  thb  world
are  so  attractive  to  the  children  of  men  that  few  choose  or  desire  to
struggle  up  the  stream,  against  the  tide  of  human  opinion,  when  it  is
so  easy  to  drift  with  it,  and  float  like  driftwood  down  it  The  key  to
the  natural  world  b  the  Spiritual  world.  As  thou  art  fitted  to  receive
it,  so  shall  the  light  be  given  thee.  ''  For,  being  mortal,  and  having
power  over  all  things,  he  yet  suffered  many  things,"  in  harmony  with
nature,  for  he,  a  part  of  the  great  £ssence  of  Spirit,  from  the  Father,
must  in  harmony  so  live,  to  be  a  ripening  fruit,  which  means  the
accord  and  union  of  hb  Dual  being.  This  is  the  great  mystery,
hidden  to  this  day,  until  man,  purified  by  Fire  of  suffering  and  disap-
pointment, gives  up  the  outer  life  of  hb  being  and  b  brought  into
the  truth  of  life.  This  b  the  ripeness  and  the  fruitage,  taught  by
the  Christ,  a  union  of  the  highest  two  mental  attributes  into  one
Spirit,  which  brings  forth  true  love^  united  with  willy  which  brings
wisdom  and  truths  which  with  understanding  is  Freedom.

The  double  man  b  the  Angel  body.  The  error  of  life  b  the  love
of  only  one  of  man's  entities,  the  outer  sense  body.  So  they  abide
in  darkness,  and  there  goeth  round  about  them  a  sad  and  dbmal
body  of  an  elemental,  dank,  moist  nature,  which  many  hide  away
from,  fearing  the  exhalations  therefrom.

The  Soul  of  man  is  an  enduring  Essence,  and  the  true  man  b  in
his  inner  temple.

Therefore,  when  men  live  only  in  the  outer,  they  are  really  divorced
from  themselves  and  their  true,  nature  powers,  being  but  one  pillar  of
strength  where  should  be  two.  For  if  they  love  their  natural  body
more  than  they  do  their  essence,  their  eyes  are  holden  so  they  cannot
see  and  know  the  Truth,  neither  the  Love  of  the  Father  Almighty.

It  is  this  faith  in  mortality  which  gives  the  completest  and
noblest  explanation  of  life.  It  gives  a  splendid  incentive  to  action,
found  in  the  assurance  that  nothing  is  in  vain,  and  that  all  life's
lessons,  so  hardly  learned,  will  go  on  with  us  into  the  new  life.  In  a
word,  a  belief  in  Immortality  honors  God  and  comforts  man :  it  ex-
plains the  past,  blesses  the  present,  and  brightens  the  future.

Traces  of  the  belief  in  an  existence  beyond  the  grave  may  be
found  among  the  lowest  grades  of  human  beings,  and  it  b  a  remark-
able fact  that  the  more  civilized,  refined,  and  wise  men  may  be-


572      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

come,  the  more  firmly  do  they  hold  by  this  belief,  associating  it  with
everything  that  makes  life  holy,  beautiful,  and  noble.

The  first  steps  toward  the  higher  occult  and  magical  powers  is  to
unclutch  and  let  go.  God  does  not  love  slaves  nor  cowards  nor  the
child  whose  will  is  congealed  or  broken  to  an  indifference  of  things.
All  the  potentialities  of  man  reside  in  his  Loves  and  WiU.  Man  fails,
sickens,  and  dies  through  feebleness  of  love  and  will.  If  you  have
disappointments  or  defeats  for  your  constant  companions,  unclasp  and
let  go.  If  earthly  friends  have  proved  ungrateful  and  false,  silently
let  go.  Even  if  you  have  many  times  unselfishly  made  effort  to  assist
others,  receiving  in  return  cruelty,  unjust  ingratitude,  and  wrong,  pass
by  and  let  it  all  go.  If  your  heart  has  been  broken  and  torn  by  un-
requited love,  unclasp  and  let  go.  If  you  have  possessions  and  great
wealth,  unclutch  and  let  go.  If  you  are  very  poor,  and  this  world  for-
sakes you,  liberate  and  let  go.  If  you  are  weary  and  footsore,  grow-
ing tired  of  the  burdens  of  this  life,  release  yourself  of  the  burdens
and  let  go.

If  you  are  continually  looking  back  along  life's  journey  with  re-
gret and  sorrow,  cast  off  and  let  go.  Liberate,  disengage,  release
your  being  from  this  world  and  escape.  Is  it  not  written,  "  He  who
would  save  his  life  shall  lose  it,  but  he  who  would  lose  his  life  shall
save  it  ? "

Man  knows  nothing  which  he  has  not  absoltitely  experienced.
Therefore  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  and  True  life  cannot  be  gained  by
human  argument  Their  conception  and  comprehension  can  only  be
attained  by  experience,  by  which  man  begins  to  learn,  to  recognize,
and  to  acknowledge  the  existence  of  other  worlds  above,  beneath,  and
around  his  own  small  sphere,  and  that  there  are  legions  of  Essences
of  Soul  and  myriads  of  tangible  beings,  who  rise  and  fall  with  him.
Thus  he  crosses  the  bridge  of  Spirit  science  that  spans  the  gulf
between  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds ;  between  the  mundane  and
the  true  life ;  the  victory  of  immortality  over  death.  All  this  must  be
learned  by  personal  experience  in  absolute  knowledge,  before  man
can  venture  to  say  he  knows  as  he  is  known.  Humanity  must  move
on,  and  it  does  grow,  with  greater  strides  toward  the  lights  each  pass-
ing year  of  time.

"  We  look  o*er  the  moaning  and  raging  sea,
Look  for  the  coming  that  may  not  be.
And  we  seem  to  hear  loved  voices  call,
When  the  sunlight  fades  and  the  day  is  done,
Sitting  alone  where  the  shadows  fall,
Beck'ning  us  back  to  days  long  gone*


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  ^^^

And  time  rolls  swiftly  baclc  again,

Through  the  years  of  our  childhood's  faded  track

And  the  tender  loves  of  the  long  ago

Are  brought  by  memory  gently  back."

Pilgrim  of  Light,  thou  art  like  the  beam  of  the  morning  sun  when
the  world  was  new  and  young,  as  it  pierced  through  the  clouds  and
mists  of  the  East,  rising  upon  a  strange  land.  Thy  /igA/  has  come,
thine  Aour  of  work  is  here.  Let  nothing  retard,  frustrate,  or  confuse
thee.  Life  to  the  Angel  worid  appears  so  short  and  fleeting  that  its
tribulations  or  its  hindrances  in  their  eyes  are  merely  the  disagree-
able incidents  of  a  short  journey.  How  many  are  the  voices  which
proclaim  the  Soul's  great  future  1  Only  a  little  while  and  we  pass  on
our  way.  Only  a  little  while  and  we  awake  some  glorious  morning  on
the  golden  sands  of  the  eternal  shore.

After  the  struggles  of  life  are  over,  and  its  long  dream  is  past,  may
Angelic  Spirits  bear  you  to  the  haven  of  bliss,  into  the  golden  Spring-
time of  the  life  beyond.

"  When  life's  long  dream  is  o'er,
Unnoted  as  the  setting  of  a  star  you  pass  away,
And  sect  and  party  scarcely  knew
When  from  their  midst  a  sage  and  seer  withdrew.
To  fitter  audience,  where  the  great  dead  are.
In  God's  republic  of  the  heart  and  mind,
Leaving  no  purer,  nobler  Soul  behind."

There  are  no  lost  workers  in  the  cause  of  Spirit  Truth,  but,  like
shining  stars,  those  who  are  great,  unselfish  Souls  and  good  on  earth
rise  in  Spirit  radiance  to  their  appointed  place,  and  are  still  orbs  of
light  and  truth  that  beam  upon  the  world.

O  Pilgrim  of  Truth  in  Spirit,  make  your  closing  hours  be  full  of
music,  like  a  poem,  and  every  pulse  beat  of  the  days  on  earth  a  dream
of  sympathy  with  all  mankind,  so  that  in  life's  autumnal  sunset  there
may  be  gathered  sheaves,  —  a  harvest  yielding  its  fully  ripened  grain
and  fruitage  to  the  earth  and  Spirit ;  thereby  an  interblending  of
mortal  and  immortal  Soul  and  Spirit ;  and  from  across  the  threshold
comes  the  Angelical  welcome  of  immortal  Loves.

Only  in  the  garden  of  the  Gods  can  perfect  flower  and  ripened
fruit  appear ;  for  here  the  Adonai  dwells  and  speaks.  If  thou  art
conscious,  His  Voice  is  Conscience.  If  thou  art  loving.  His  Heart  is
Love.  If  thou  art  wise,  His  Light  is  Wisdom.  Thou  who  hast  the
privilege  to  involve  into  thy  life  on  earth  thy  Adonai,  the  being  of


574      '^HE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Truth,  Love,  and  Wisdom,  a  lamp  of  gleaming  brightness  to  guide
thee,  O  man,  why  this  procrastination  and  delay  ?  This  is  thy  holy
mbsion  and  the  meaning  of  thy  human  form,  thy  noble  manly  powers,
thy  brilliant,  subtile  intellect,  thy  higher  intuitions  and  thy  holier
loves.  These  are  but  the  seed  eggs  of  a  more  glorious  and  larger  life,
the  White  Dove,  bird  of  promise,  which  shall  soar  away  into  a  heav-
enly paradise,  as  is  symbolized  by  Egyptians  winged  globe.

The  wise  Father-Mother,  God  of  humanity,  when  placing  mortals
on  this  fair  earth,  wisely  dropped  a  veil  between  the  past  and  future,
between  the  helpless,  infantile  thought  and  the  mighty  power  of
human  being  when  combined  with  Nature's  energy  and  the  mysteri-
ous realm  of  Spirit  force.  Men,  in  their  thoughts  and  arguments,
sometimes  grievously  mistake  the  laws  for  principles,  for  the  blind
force  in  the  great  economy  of  nature  is  inexorable  and  immovable,
whether  directed  in  the  interests  of  Yic^  or  Virtue,  and  so  the  veil  was
dropped  between  the  higher  and  lower  realms  of  being,  for  there  was
dangerous  knowledge,  too  high  and  vast  for  unripened  mortals  in
their  selfishness  to  use ;  or  too  much  tight  for  their  frail  natures  to
apprehend.

For,  lifting  the  veil  without  the  light  of  Spirit,  or  the  guardian
Angel's  hand,  was  daring  as  boyish  swimmers  venturing  into  the  bil-
lows of  an  unknown  sea  of  which  they  have  no  soundings  nor  knowl-
edge of  its  tides.

Man  must  become  dual  in  the  vibrations  of  his  nature.  Then
there  is  actual  marriage  of  the  vestal  fires  of  his  Soul  with  his  Ideal,
his  truest  love.  This  is  the  marriage  referred  to  by  Christ,  and  true
marriage  in  all  its  Divine  significance,  crowned  by  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  is  eternal.  True  Love  is  so  far  hidden  from  humanity  in  general,
even  from  the  imagination  or  conception  of  men,  that  an  effort  to
make  it  generally  understood  or  even  slightly  known  by  words  is
almost  hopeless  and  superfluous.  Man  must  grow  into  it,  by  creating
higher  octaves  of  Will  and  Emotions,  where  he  finds  the  True  Love,
immortal  because  it  is  pure.  The  higher,  supernatural  True  Love  is
an  exalted  emotion,  forced  out  by  the  constant  and  persistent  concen-
tration of  thought  of  the  IdeaL  This  higher  Archetype  or  Ideal  is
the  subjective  or  true  feminine  counterpart  of  man,  dwelling  with  him.
It  is  a  part  of  him  and  is  absolutely  inseparable  from  him,  but  lies
hidden.  He  cannot  find  his  Archetype,  and  his  Ideal  cannot  reach
his  consciousness,  until  the  grosser  animal  is  overcome,  when  the
purity  of  a  True  Love  illumines  his  Soul,  he  rises  to  the  conception


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  5^5

of  his  Dual  being,  Will  and  Mentality,  to  enter  into  the  realms  of
Light  and  Glory,  redolent  with  transcendental  Love.

You  are  now  a  welcome  visitor  to  a  world  which  but  few  mortals
have  found  or  ascended  unto.  A  world  of  bright,  resurrected  human
Souls,  upon  whom  death  had  no  power,  save  to  dissolve  the  earthly
chains  that  held  them  in  their  tenements  of  clay.  The  man  who  is  a
perfected  dual  organism  can  never  die;  only  the  mould  in  which  he  is
imprisoned  must  perish  in  order  that  the  Soul  may  gain  its  perfect
liberty,  where  it  is  forever  free,  happy,  and  immortal.  Then  and  then
only  is  death  swallowed  up  in  glorious  victory.

Physical,  intellectual  science  has  heretofore  conducted  the  human
race  up  to  the  threshold  of  Truth,  where  Spirit  Light  and  Knowledge
alone  can  open  the  door.  Here  the  true  science  of  life  begins  by
ascending  above  the  letter  of  the  law  of  science  and  intellect  which
killeth^  is  to  arise  and  mount  up  to  the  Spirit  which  giveth  life.

The  letter  of  the  law  always  ruins  Spiritual  Truth  by  placing  it  on
some  human  authoritative  pedestal,  the  very  existence  of  which  they
cannot  substantiate.  No  Spiritual  Teacher  in  any  age  of  the  world
ever  presented  SpiritucU  Truths  bcued  on  scientific  authority^  and  it  has
been  written  Spiritual  Understanding  and  Light  have  been  taken
from  the  worldly-ms^  and  superficially  learned  and  given  to  the  babes
and  sucklings.

Out  from  Thy  home  in  the  vast  world  of  stars,  O  Holy  Spirit  of
Light,  when  Thou  boldest  in  Thy  beams  of  Truth,  we,  as  frail  children,
needs  must  languish.

Oh,  lighten  our  eyes,  lest  we  sleep  the  sleep  of  death ;  for  the
time  is  near  at  hand,  even  now  is,  when  every  one  that  is  bom  again
of  Spirit  and  Truth  will  hear  Thy  Voice.

The  True  Principle  of  all  Spiritual  Understanding,  Knowledge,
and  Spiritual  Truths,  is  in  the  universal  illumination  of  every  human
Soul,  hy  personal  efforts  of  Love  and  unselfish  works,

A  hiunan  Soul  pulsating  in  the  form  of  a  bad  selfish  man  is  an
awful  ghostly  and  unique  possession  which  at  times  cannot  be  silenced
from  some  higher  whisperings.  The  lament  and  sobbing  of  the
starved  Soul  may  crush  the  man  by  the  dreadful  and  repeated  blows
of  a  higher  conscience.

Motion  being  the  basic  principle  of  our  existence,  the  true  happi-
ness and  rewards  of  this  life  are  ever  accompanied  with  right  action.
An  Indian  Chief  once  said,  when  asked  what  constituted  greatness  in
men :  "  He  is  the  Great  Chief  who  speaks  little  and  does  big."


576      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOUX

Some  Ogcult  Phrases.

The  Law  of  Nirvftna,  the  realm  of  Absolute  Good

Narv&na,  the  port  beyond  the  ocean  of  pain;  the  other  shore
beyond  the  power  of  death ;  the  city  of  blessedness  and  peace  reached
by  the  path  of  universal  knowledge.

Karma,  the  law  of  consequence  by  which  every  act  committed  in
one  life  entails  results  in  the  next,  that  Justice  is  as  sure  to  come  as
Time,  although  perchance  it  may  appear  to  be  built  upon  a  founda-
tion of  wrong.  Karma,  the  law  of  consequence  by  which  every  act
receives  its  exact  recompense  in  the  next  life,  when  the  Soul  is  bom
again.  All  that  we  are  is  the  result  of  what  we  have  thought.  As  a
man  thinketh  so  he  is.

Ath^n^,  signifying  Mental  Action  of  higher  Loves,  which  alone
can  conceive  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  thereby  bring  forth  a  perfect  man,
or  the  Divine  Soul  regenerate  in  man.

Sk&gratd,  Soul-Science,  the  intensity  attained  through  J?ual
attunement  of  Thought.  The  concentration,  focalization  and  pro-
jecting of  thought,  thereby  discerning  Absolute  Truth.

Soul-Science.  By  which  Souls  are  Ripened  from  within.  For
Men  are  saved  not  by  the  historical  but  by  the  Metaphysical.

Yoginism,  the  concentration  of  Will-force  and  mind,  in  its  higher
sense;  the  Soul-Energy  and  Will  becoming  the  medium  between
Spirit  and  Matter,  between  God  and  Nature,  between  the  Creator  and
His  creations ;  thereby  becoming  one  with  the  Universal  Mind.  Yogo
doctrine :  All  things  or  affairs  of  earthly  life  must  be  guided  by  the
Inner  lights  and  all  selfish  motives  must  be  disregarded^  unmindful  of  the
consequence,

*  A  Yogin  is  one  whose  mind  is  freed  from  all  earthly  bonds  \
Who  feels  in  lands  no  interest,  not  even  in  gold,  or  3ret  in  stone^
But  stands  on  such  a  pinnacle, — with  all  the  senses  under  foot.
He  finds  repose  alone  in  inner  thought,  seeing  his  soul,  and  is  content,

Principles.  The  First  Principle  Desire  the  principle  of  all
attraction  in  force  Motion  towards  confluence  and  sympathy.

Second  Principle,  Mobility,  unrest  in  oscillation,  evolution,  sus-
ceptibility vibrations  of  impressibility  as  in  Plants,  Water,  etc.

Third  Principle,  Spirit  of  Fire  and  Active  Energy.  The  true
essence  of  energy  a  consuming  fire.  The  Fire  Principle  of  Siar
Magno  or  Astral  Form^  on  which  the  atoms  of  matter  build  up  this
outer  animal  or  visible  form.

*  From  the  Brahman.


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  577

Fourth  Principle,  Spiritualization  of  Matter  into  Objective  form,
where  the  freedom  of  will  is  given  to  being,  and  the  Divine  volition
of  mind,  capable  of  determining  choice  and  forming  a  purpose  and
manifesting  activity.  The  Fourth  is  called  the  seat  of  Will  and
Desire  in  matter,  but  is  not  Will  of  itself,  but  the  Vehicle  of  Will,
in  the  body  of  Desire.

Fifth  Principle.  Manas,  or  the  human  Soul.  The  Motherhood,
the  receptive  to  build  up,  the  Maternal  or  Woman  Principle.

Sixth  Principle.  Two  in  One,  the  Indivisable  Duality.  The
attunement  of  bisexual  forces.  The  marriage  of  the  vestal  fires  when
there  becomes  an  actuality  of  force  with  the  Eternal  Force.

The  Seventh  Principle  Atma.  The  Eternal  Fountain  of  all  Life,
Motion,  and  Power.  The  Divine  Spirit  of  God  the  All  Power
Absolute.

The  first  Principle  of  Spirit  in  Nature  is  repose.  Matter  being
simply  solidified  Spirit,  apparently  sleeps  in  the  mineral  world,
breathes  in  the  vegetable  world,  has  impulses  and  dreams  in  the
animal  world,  and  wakens  in  emotions  and  higher  loves  in  Man,  with
the  power  of  will  and  thoughts  to  clothe  Ideas  as  they  are  reflected
on  the  mirror  of  his  Soul.

'^  Druid  Understanding  and  knowledge  of  existence.  First,  three
things  of  a  necessity  must  exist.  The  Supreme  Love  of  God  as  an
Energy  of  Motion  ;  the  Supreme  Power  and  Action  ;  and  the  Supreme
Intelligence  or  Fountain  of  all  Ideas.  The  three  Characteristics  of
God  were  complete  Love  and  Sympathy ;  complete  Wisdom  and
Knowledge ;  and  complete  Action  and  Power.  According  to  Druid
Understanding  of  existence  in  this  world  were  also  three  states ;  first,
state  of  Abred,  where  all  things  must  be.  reborn,  and  according  to,
and  by  nature ;  second,  the  state  of  Annwn,  the  liberty  given  a
human  Soul  by  its  higher  attunement  of  Love ;  third,  that  of
Gwynvyd,  the  exalted  attunement  with  God  through  higher  sympathies
and  unselfish  Love,  being  regenerate  and  reformed  by  the  Spirit  of
all  Love."

The  Cable  Tow.  ♦

Right  Thought,  Right  Speech,  Right  Action,  known  as  the  Bra-
minical  Cord  or  the  first  Triangle  of  Pythagoras,  the  three  threads  of
man's  life  rolled  into  one,  I  shall  govern  my  Acts  in  the  Body,  my
Words  and  Speech,  and  my  Thought  and  Mind ;  and  I  know  these
three  when  attuned  are  one.    Each  man  must  weave  and  make  this

*  See  Cable  Tow  opposite  page  378.


57^      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

thread  of  life  for  himself,  which,  when  harmoniously  united,  brings
Peace,  Justice,  and  Unbounded  Love  for  all,  then  man  awakes  to  a
True  Knowledge  of  Life.

Then  hearken  to  the  Spirit  of  the  Soul's  True  Love.  For  not  a
human  Soul  standing  under  the  shadow  of  great  sorrow  or  affliction,
but  is  ministered  unto  when  friendship  and  the  world  tiuns  cold,  and
all  hope  is  quenched.

Oh,  lift  up  your  head,  hear,  broken  humanity,  and  let  the  nobler
impulses  of  your  heart  be  guided  by  the  Hand  of  that  Beneficent
Father  of  All  Love.  For  no  man  who  looks  up  in  Truth  but  sees  and
feels  His  Loving  Presence,  and  hears  His  tender  tones  of  compassion*
For  the  Great  Truths  of  Spirit  harmonies,  and  God's  Great  Love
have  been  written  from  all  eternity  on  the  starry  scriptures  of  the  sky,
and  man  needs  to  only  lift  his  eyes  above  the  ground  to  behold  them,
when  the  Love  of  Spirit  enters  into  his  Soul  and  illuminates  his
being.

**  Strange  times  are  these  in  which  we  live,  forsooth  i

When  old  and  young  are  taught  in  Falsehood's  School  I

And  the  one  man  that  dares  to  tell  the  Truth

Is  called  at  once  a '  Lunatic  '  and  '  FoolM  "

(Platff.)

How  can  a  world  progress  in  Spiritual  understanding  while  money
is  the  sole  moving  power,  and  self-interest  in  the  abstract  the  guiding
star,  and  all  this  vainglory,  artfulness,  and  duplicity  are  called  civiliza-
tion. But  when  the  heart  is  stricken,  or  when  error  and  ignorance
bring  us  misfortune,  and  our  head  is  humbled  in  the  dust,  civilization
fails  us  utterly ;  much  like  meteors  over  a  storm-swept  sea,  or  like  the
northern  light,  which  only  comes  to  fade  and  leave  our  pathway  and
the  sky  more  dark.  Oh,  when  will  man  learn  to  lift  his  fevered  head
to  Spiritual  Light,  and  turn  his  streaming  eyes  to  heavenly  joys,  to
open  the  portal  of  his  Soul  and  see  through  the  casement  high  above
the  tumult  of  the  storms  of  life,  for  there  ever  gleam  some  shining
stars  called  Love,  and  Hope,  and  Truth ;  but  they  are  found  in
no  objective  earthly  sky,  fashioned  by  modem  science  or  civiliza-
tion.

To  gain  Occult  Knowledge  and  the  lights  of  Power  obtainmg  fuU
mastery  of  many  of  nature^ s  hidden  things^  man  must  devote  his  better
life  and  all  the  nobler  impulses  of  the  heart  to  it,  giving  it  full  obliga-
tion of  obedience  and  faithful  allegiance  free  from  all  conventional
life,  nor  strained  to  suit  any  material  desire.  All  Piigrims  of  the  Light
who  have  reached  that  glorious  threshold  of  Eternal  Laves  clothed  in


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  579

the  calm  of  perfect  peace,  white  and  radiant  with  the  glorious  sun-
light of  Truth,  like  a  mountain  in  its  snows  standing  out  alone  in
silence  and  repose  against  the  sunset  sky,  attained  these  heights
through  guidance  by  the  Inner  Light.

**  Ahy  well  I  the  World  is  discreet  I

There  are  many  who  pause  and  wait  I
But  here  is  a  man  who  plants  his  feet
Sometimes  in  advance  of  Fate."

(Socrata^

In  man's  true  Allegiance  to  natures  higher  part^  his  Spirit  Soul
becomes  attuned  with  things  of  Truth  in  worlds  of  Light,  and  can
float  to  the  extremest  heights  of  knowledge  and  all  nature*s  mental
atmosphere.  Here  man  grasps  a  more  enduring  end  than  that  of
earthly  ecstasy,  rising  out  of  all  mental  and  objective  chains,  a
reborn  Soul  in  human  form  made  perfect  by  its  ripening  in  Spirit.
Here  man  doth  see  what  moral  sense  hath  prompted  through  all  that
is  past,  the  good  or  evil  of  his  heart,  here  he  can  behold  and  count
those  airy  threads  that  weave  the  web  of  circumstance.  Here  are
solved  all  the  enigmas  of  the  past,  here  is  the  fulfilment  and  con-
summation for  which  this  earthly  existence  was  brought,  and  to  each
loving  Soul  grown  wise  and  pure  death  throws  wide  the  shining
portals  of  an  endless  day ;  here  the  reborn  Soul  of  man,  with  all
his  memories  of  holier  loves,  now  enters  upon  the  shoreless  sea  of
Time  an  endless  and  eternal  career,  in  which  all  hope  is  changed
into  fruition,  and  all  aspirations  into  attainments,  and  on  these
heights  man  finds  the  Truth  that  Death  is  indeed  swallowed  up  in
Victory.  Here  through  death's  portals  is  found  the  grandest  step
in  life.

Thus  the  years  come  and  go  as  they  have  come  so  many  thou-
sands of  times  since  this  globe  gave  its  first  revolution  in  space,
and  as  they  will  come  for  many  thousands  of  years  more,  till
Mother  Earth  is  gathered  home  to  the  tomb  of  worids  when
Matter  returns  again  into  recurrent  force;  in  which  after  Eons  of
Years  Natures  Revolution  is  a  return^  Disappearance  being  simply  a
renewed;  calling  Transformation  Death  is  where  most  men  are  mis-
taken, becoming  lost  in  the  mist  of  error.  Death  is  a  Transforma-
tion which  is  merely  the  revolution  of  the  passions  and  phases  of
Nature.

The  Time  of  Making  Known  has  come.    All  that  has  been  kept
secret  from  the  beginning  must  now  be  made  plain.    For  this  is  the


580      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Fulness  of  Time  when  all  men  may  dwell  in  Love  and  in  the  Wisdom
of  God,  and  still  live  in  the  physical  body;  a  uniting  of  £arth  and
Heaven,  Son  of  Man  becoming  the  Son  of  God.

Nature's  Laws  obey  only  those  who  are  at  One  with  the  Law-Giver;
the  great  lost  Secret  that  was  handed  down  the  ages  and  reflected
through  all  the  Ancient  Mysteries  was  the  knowledge  of  God  and
His  relations  to  the  Dual  Nature  in  Man  ;  and  the  knowledge  of  Man
and  his  Dual  relations  to  Nature  and  God.

The  Eternal  Verity  of  man's  dual-being  refined  by  the  process  of
Union  and  Attunement  in  the  human  Soul,  is  the  sublime  Immaculate
Conception  of  the  Living  Truth  of  Spirit,  and  the  Silent  Loves,
Impulses,  and  Words  within  are  the  keys  and  door-way  to  all  the
Sacred  Mysteries  of  Life.

When  Christianity  grew  into  Theology,  and  Theology  became
Ecclesiasticism,  it  separated  from  True  Esoteric  Spirituality ;  while  it
increased  in  quantity  and  forms,  it  greatly  decreased  in  value  as  to
Spirituality  and  Truth.  It  passed  from  the  Spirit  of  Love  and  a
Living  Saviour,  to  a  historical  and  biographical  Christ.  Its  teachers
could  no  longer  communicate  what  they  actually  knew;  finally
reaching  a  blind  faith  in  only  that  which  its  followers  merely
believed  to  be  true.  In  place  of  the  Gospel  of  Life  by  Love  and
Spirit^  there  was  invented  the  Gospel  of  Death  through  Fear  and
Rewards.

'^The  Ancient  Order  of  Essenesi  Chasidim,  Nazirim,  Chaberim.
It  is  claimed  by  most  Occultists  that  Christ  received  the  name
Nazareth  from  this  order  of  which  He  was  one  of  the  Brethren  ;
known  as  the  strange  pious  men,  the  keepers  of  the  Divine  Mysteries^
and  it  is  well  known  that  the  Order  of  Essenes  sent  Pilgrims  out  to
teach  the  Glcul  Tidings  of  Love  and  Wisdom  and  the  Science  of  Divine
Illumination,  to  all  mankind."  As  is  written,  the  Great  Work  is  yet
to  be  accomplished  to  regenerate  Man,  when  Love  and  Wisdom  shall
be  the  Light.  When  the  Leaven  shall  have  leavened  the  whole  lump,
when  the  Seed  shall  have  become  a  Tree ;  then  the  Net  shall  have
gathered  all  things  unto  it.  Then  this  Cycle  of  Creation  is  Completed,
whether  of  the  Macrocosm  or  of  the  Microcosm,  then  the  Great
Work  is  accomplished.

Mohammedanism  teaches  the  worship  of  One  God  as  Supreme
Will,  whose  law  is  fate  and  whose  service  is  submission,  and  has
moral  laws  inculcating  four  chief  duties  —  Prayer,  Almsgiving,  Fast-
ing, and  Pilgrimage.

Brahmanism  teaches  Spirituality  but  with  a  seclusive  aristocracy


GATHERED  SHEAVES.  $8 1

of  Caste.    That  one  must  be  at  One  with  God  by  seclusive  meditation
and  self-contemplation.

Buddhism  is  based  on  Emancipation  by  excessive  ascetic  practices,
that  the  Soul  becomes  choked  with  evil  unless  it  entirely  controls
the  physical  body.  That  by  excessive  practice  of  fasting,  humility,
and  the  total  annihilation  of  selfhood,  and  all  the  loves,  hopes,  and
desires  of  the  physical  body,  thereby  gaining  a  purer  and  higher
wisdom,  and  is  purely  the  Male  Vibration  in  its  Occult  sense,  being
known  as  the  Pathway  of  Wisdom.  By  it  and  through  it  no  half-way
attempt  can  accomplish  anything ;  it  requires  years  of  physical  ascetic
restraint  and  psychical  purity  and  seclusiveness,  causing  most  of  its
followers  to  become  inconsistent,  erratic,  and  petulant.  And  is  it  not
an  abnormal  and  forced  ripening  of  Soul,  in  loosening,  or  emancipat*
ing  it  from  the  Physical  House  which  God  through  Nature  so  beauti-
fuUy  fashioned  and  even  sanctified  t

The  ancient  Egyptian  religion  was  based  on  the  Female  Vibration,
the  Motherhood  in  all  things,  —  Isis,  the  Motherhood  of  all  Man-
kind, while  they  did  not  ignore  the  male,  they  recognized  the  Male
Principle  in  their  God  Osiris.

It  does  appear  that  the  Sublime  Absolute  IVuth  of  the  Great  Mys-
teries of  Life  and  Death  can  only  be  found  in  the  understanding  of
both  Male  and  Female  Principles,  for  which  the  Christ  appeared  on
this  little  globe  to  teach,  that  is  the  Pathway  of  Love  where  all
thought  and  action  become  controlled  by  the  higher  impulses  of  the
heart,  thereby  illuminating  the  Soul  into  the  Science  of  Divine  Wis-
dom. While  in  this  physical  form  man  can  never  hope  to  know  this
in  all  its  fulness.  Yet  he  may  fully  quench  his  thirst  and  find  peace
and  rest  at  the  ever-flowing  fountain  of  Eternal  Love,  "  which  if  any
man  drink,  it  shall  be  to  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into
Eternal  Life."

PsYCHOMETRY  is  instinct,  humanized,  from  the  within  to  the  with-
out. It  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  order  of  genius.  Psychometry
develops  intuition,  which  is  the  true  seed  of  the  Tree  of  Life.  A
psychometric  reader  will  describe  the  character  and  often  the  per-
sonal appearance  of  persons  who  have  come  in  contact  with  the  sub-
stance placed  in  his  hands.  Under  the  same  law  as  the  magnet  and
the  iron,  you  place  in  the  hand  of  a  clairvoyant  a  lock  of  hair  or  an
article  which  has  been  in  contact  with  a  person.  The  clairvoyant  will
come  so  into  sympathy  and  in  its  atmospheres  as  to  be  able  to  trace
through  the  whole  life  of  the  person  to  whom  the  article  originally
belonged.


$S2  THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

So  a  talisman  or  amulet,  in  itself  perhaps  a  worthless  bit  of  metal
or  scrap  of  paper,  quite  dead  in  appearance  to  the  natural  eye,  hav-
ing been  carefully  magnetized,  will  nevertheless  be  found  imbued  by
the  influences  of  the  greatest  of  all  magnets,  —  the  power  of  thought
united  with  the  human  will  —  and  will  act  and  produce  effects  like
the  bit  of  iron  that  acquired  its  forces  from  the  physical  magnet
Everything  contains  a  charm  for  some  creature.  The  atmosphere  of
the  Spirit  is  ethereal.

All  men  should  be  good  judges  of  human  life,  since  all  are  actors.

Merited  rebuke  from  an  inferior  has  a  double  sting.

Calm  hope  gives  real  moral  courage.

Far  back  in  the  past,  when  the  heart  was  young  and  the  world
was  bright ;  when  life  was  so  delicious  in  the  objective  sense ;  when
we  had  heart  and  hope  and  courage,  and  there  were  no  defeats,  it
was  our  blessed  fortune  to  be  under  the  guidance  of  one  whose  loving
gentleness  was  peace ;  one  to  whom  the  Good  Gk>d  had  given  a  silent
presence  of  kindness  and  love,  and  an  entrancing  voice,  refined  by
silent  agony  and  anguish  which  tried  his  Soul's  endurance  to  the
utmost.  In  that  long  ago  I  lived  in  childish  dreams,  drinking  in  with
eager  ear  the  exquisite  melodies  and  gentle  instructions  from  his  lips,
thinking  it  would  be  always  thus,  scarcely  appreciating  the  charming
personality  of  the  guardian  God  had  so  blessed  me  with ;  —  till  finally
he  was  called  home  to  rest  in  the  mansions  of  the  blest.  Many
weary  years  have  hurried  me  along  the  rugged  path  I  had  to  tread
before  I  could  reach  the  golden  heights  of  Spirit  to  recognize  his
pure  and  lofty  life,  or  gain  the  perfect  peace  he  so  often  strove  to
leave  me  for  a  heritage.

For  after  child-life  in  such  an  atmosphere  it  was  hard  indeed  to
awake  abruptly  among  the  multitude,  dumfounded  at  the  millions  of
men  who  walk  and  run  and  push  and  jostle ;  not  one  like  to  his
fellow-man,  save  in  one  common  impulse,  one  all-pervading  spring  of
action,  one  desire,  hope,  end,  and  aim  —  to  earn  money ;  chasing  and
climbing  stairs  of  sand ;  cursing  the  prison  walls  of  circumstances,  to
whose  height  they  continually  add ;  blundering  blindly  on,  forgetting
that  what  God  requires  of  man  while  in  this  body  can  never  be  done
after;  continually  living  in  doubt  and  fear,  far  off  from  the  land  of
contentment,  their  doubts  becoming  leaks  to  sink  the  ship  of  faith ;
affecting  to  be  and  flattering  themselves  to  be  what  they  are  not ;
deceiving  themselves  the  most;  ever  in  fear  of  death,  the  bridge
across  the  little  space  whose  distance  is  unknown.  Long  time  it
took  me  to  be  made  fully  aware  that  Soul  growth  was  slow  in  its  pure


GATHERED   SHEAVES.  583

ripening ;  that  Spirituality  is  not  attained  instantaneously  any  more
than  physical  strength  and  excellencies  are.  Learn,  he  would  say,
to  be  meek  and  lowly ;  free  from  pride.  Learn  to  be  poor  and  child-
like in  Spirit,  my  son,  if  you  would  penetrate  the  sacred  night  which
environs  Truth.  Learn  charity,  —  love  to  God  and  love  to  man,  —
which  is  the  true  source  of  all  Spiritual  perfection.

This  is  the  song  of  the  Angels,  and  only  they  who  dwell  in  love
can  make  happy  homes  on  earth,  or  enjoy  the  life  beyond,  where  all

is  love.    Go  learn,  my  son,  of  our  friend,  the  Adept  La  C ,  and

remember  his  wisdom  and  words  ;  for  the  evil  has  no  power  in  nature
where  Spirit  Truth  abounds.  Learn  always  to  look  for  natural  causes
in  all  extraordinary  events,  and  when  such  causes  are  wanting,  turn
and  look  to  God,  who  holds  the  key.

"  Peace  on  earth,  good-will  toward  men."  I  hear  its  carols  about
the  Master's  celestial  halls  in  paradise,  and  while  my  fancies  seem
attuned  to  these  charming  melodies,  I  hear  re-echoed  through  the  fir-
maments, "  ^t  is  Love  that  causeth  Peace  among  men."

So  live  that  when  thy  summons  comes  to  join
The  innumerable  caravan  that  moves
To  the  pale  realms  of  shade,  where  each  shall  take
His  chamber  in  the  silent  halls  of  death.
Thou  go  not,  like  the  quarry-slave  at  night,
Scourged  to  his  dungeon  ;  but  sustained  and  soothed
By  an  unfaltering  trust,  approach  thy  grave
Like  one  who  wraps  the  drapery  of  his  couch
About  him,  and  lies  down  to  pleasant  dreams.*


CHAPTER  XVIII.


ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.


"  Oh,  bresthe  on  me,  btpiring  Spirit-breadi  I
Oh,  flow  to  me,  ye  beart-revivmg  words  I
Freshen  this  faded  form  that  droops  and  dieii
And  lift  our  Souls  up  to  that  heavenly  rest.**

"  God  Idsaed  the  face  of  His  sleeping  eaitfa^
In  its  cradle  of  heavenly  Uae,
And  on  each  spot  where  His  kisses  toodied
A  beautiful  flower  grew."

"  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  awqr*"

From  the  veiled  glory,  through  the  shining  bars  of  firmaments,  lies
the  golden  pathway  of  the  Angels.  Their  welcoming  song  with  sweet
refrain  announces  that  heaven  is  open,  and  bids  new  Angel  Spirits
to  enter  in.

Come,  weary  Pilgrim,  to  thy  rest ;  thine  earthly  griefs  are  o'er.
The  loving  God,  the  Wise,  the  Good,  hath  called  thee  home  forever,
out  from  the  evil,  selfish  world  of  men.  Child  of  the  blest,  heaven's
holiest  place  now  welcomes  thee  to  perfect  peace.

The  time  has  come  when  revelations  must  be  made  of  this  life
and  its  possibilities ;  of  the  Eternal  Now,  and  not  of  the  eternal
future.  All  life,  growth,  and  happiness  are  of  to-day,  not  of  to-morrow,
nor  of  any  future  time  or  world,  for  the  future  never  comes.  Must
your  salvation  only  be  found  by  disease,  despair,  and  death  ?  If  you
die  of  disease  of  Soul,  you  must  wake  on  the  other  side  diseased,  for

584


ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.  585

this  is  the  economy  of  nature.  You  have  to  be  cured  and  ripened
there  before  you  can  have  the  fulness  of  Life  and  pass  on  to  your
Angelhood.

^^  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  upon  you!^

The  self-same  power  that  feeds  the  Angek  in  heaven  will  feed
you  here.  The  same  understanding  and  knowledge  which  cure  your
diseases  there  will  save  and  heal  you  here.  It  is  yours.  Then  why
not  have  knowledge  and  wisdom  ?  Why  not  open  your  Soul  to  the
reception  of  Spiritual  understanding  ?  In  it  is  eternal  Life.  Heaven
is  no  particular  place.  The  home  of  the  Soul  is  Love  and  perfect
Peace,  not  an  objective  locality.  It  is  within  your  Temple  if  you
desire  it.  There,  with  all  its  Angelic  powers,  it  is  continually  about
you.  If  you  want  a  faithful  guardian,  it  b  immortal  life.  And  when
there  can  be  a  true  union  with  others  in  the  form,  it  becomes  a  tower
of  strength,  as  is  promised  by  the  Prince  of  Peace.  "  Again  I  say
unto  you  that  if  two  or  three  shall  agree  on  earth  as  touching  any-
thing they  shall  ask,  //  shall  be  done  for  them  of  My  Father  which  is  in
Heaven^

FAITH  IN  THE  ABSOLUTE  PARENT.

The  snow-flake  that  glances  at  dawn  on  Kilatza,*
Dissolved  by  the  sunbeam,  descends  to  the  plain.
There,  mingling  with  Gunga,  it  flows  to  the  ocean.
And,  lost  in  its  waters,  returns  not  again.
It  comes  not,  it  goes  not,
It  comes  not  again.

On  the  rose-leaf,  at  dawning,  a  dew-drop  is  shining,
Which,  later  exhaled,  falls  in  nourishing  rain.
Then  in  rills  back  to  Gunga,  through  green  fields,  meanders^
Till  onward  it  flows  to  the  ocean  again.
It  comes  not,  it  goes  not.
It  comes  not  again.

A  snow-flake  still  whitens  the  peak  of  Kilatza,
But  the  snow-flake  of  yesterday  flows  to  the  main;
At  dawn  on  the  rose-leaf  still  glistens  a  dew-drop.
But  the  dew-drop  of  yesterday  comes  not  again.
It  comes  not,  it  goes  not.
It  comes  not  again.

So  the  soul  that  is  freed  from  the  bondage  of  Natore
Escapes  from  illusions  of  joy  and  of  pain,
And,  pure  as  the  flame  that  is  lost  in  the  sunbeam,
Ascends  unto  God  and  returns  not  again.
It  comes  not,  it  goes  not,
It  comes  not  again.

*  Kilatza,  a  sacred  piountain  in  India ;  Gunga,  the  sacred  river  Ganges.


586      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THSESHOLD.

He  that  keepetfa  thee  will  not  slumber.

He  shall  cover  thee  with  His  feathers,  and  under  Hb  wings  shalt
thou  trust :  His  truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler.

Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  be  upon  thee.  To  love  is  to  know,  for
love  is  the  secret  key  to  the  hidden  pathway  that  leads  to  Absolute
power  and  to  Knowledge  of  God,  as  a  Spirit  from  the  Inner  Temple
of  Universal  Love.  For  the  Absolute  is  only  found  through  love,  feel-
ing, and  knowing  which  thy  nobler  life  of  Spirit  shines  on  unquenched.
O  deathless  love  1  O  sweet  harmonious  song  of  peace  I  Soul  of  my
Soul,  heart  of  my  heart,  now  am  I  filled  with  tender,  rapturous  calm.

Kind  Reader,  the  Violet  Cup  of  Spirit  from  the  heights  of  Eternal
Peace  is  offered  thee ;  thou  hast  but  to  extend  thy  hand  and  drink.

To  drink  at  the  Spiritual  fountain  brings  an  anchored  SouL  And
thou,  to  whom  was  allotted  a  more  Divine  Spark  of  Spiritual  under-
standing and  Soul  Light,  or  to  whom  perchance  a  higher  inner  love
was  given  at  birth,  must  arise  and  show  the  way  by  nobler  works
and  by  unselfish  charity,  guiding  and  directing  men  to  higher  truth
and  love,  and  to  the  Light  of  the  Eternal  Spirit  of  Life.

Ask  and  pray  that  thou  mayest  be  filled  with  Spiritual  understanding.

Everything  comes  to  the  man  who  in  silence  can  wait

By  the  grand  tide  that  comes  to  all,  we  know  there  is  a  sea  of
time  to  rise  some  day,  before  which  all  who  wrong  us  and  oppress  us
will  be  swept  away  like  leaves.

Follow  the  seas  that  are  silent,  dear  brethren,  and  the  paths  of
wisdom  which  lie  under  the  outstretched  wings  of  Spirit,  and  Spirit
will  balance  all  your  accounts.

Therefore,  as  we  see  and  await  the  flow  of  the  silent,  rising  sea  of
justice,  we  must  keep  out  of  our  hearts  all  revenge  and  anger,  ever
keeping  before  our  eyes  the  Love  of  God  and  His  great  universal
Justice,  as  well  as  His  universal  love;  abiding  patiently,  trusting  and
hoping.  Nor  must  we  doubt  ourselves,  nor  the  good  in  one  another ;
nor  that  truth  and  goodness  may  be  found  in  all  things.  We  must
ever  ask  that  True  Spirits,  merciful  and  good,  may  be  our  guides  and
directors,  that  we  may  be  merciful  and  good  to  all  humanity.  For
there  is  love  to  be  found  in  everything.  Take  this  knowledge  home
into  your  heart,  lest  you  be  found  fighting  against  a  thing  within
some  of  your  fellow-men,  that  is  a  reflex  from  the  God  of  Light  and
Love.

*  Along  the  borders  of  the  pleasant  land,
A  river  flows  with  an  unchanging  tide ;
This  all  must  cross,  regardless  of  their  state ;
Chiefs  of  renown,  or  mortals  faint  of  heart ;


ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.  58/

The  coward  comes,  —  not  with  the  warrior's  stride,
But  creeping  slow,  with  sad,  reluctant  feet,
And  eyes  which  see  a  thousand  shapes  of  dread.
Some  haply  meet  friends  earlier  passed  from  earth.
Waiting  for  them  on  the  immortal  shore.

•  •  •  •  •

But  these  are  they  whose  earthly  records  stand
Like  balanced  books  with  all  their  fellow-men ;
A  hallowed  beauty  rounds  the  tranquil  close
Of  such  pure  lives ;  harmonious  to  the  end.
Their  footsteps  move  with  music  to  these  sands.
And  melt  like  echoes  of  sweet  sounds  away."

The  rolling  rivers  and  the  beautiful  valleys ;  the  towering  moun-
tains  and  the  everiasting  hills ;  the  mighty  rocks  and  sea-mew's
note  from  restless  billows  breaking  on  the  shore,  —  all,  all  lift
up  their  voices  in  united  praise  to  the  Great  God  who  made
them  all.

O  beautiful,  beautiful  seal  your  eternal  restlessness  and  never
ceasing  moan  are  like  the  murmuring,  unquiet  multitude  of  men.

Oh,  glorious  sunset  of  declining  day  I  Away  out  to  the  westward
are  mountain  and  plain,  hill  and  valley,  river  and  moorland,  just  be-
ginning to  be  bathed  in  a  flood  of  crimson  and  gold.  The  delicate
shadings  of  sapphire  and  pink  and  emerald  and  ruby  dance  in  fantas-
tic shadows  far  along  both  river  and  valley,  touching  each  flower  and
leaflet  with  the  whisper  of  God's  glory,  and  the  silent  mountain,
crowned  in  purple  radiance,  reflects  from  the  glowing  sky  the  pictures
of  nature  painted  by  the  loving  hand  of  the  Divine  Artist.  At  these
holy  moments,  the  aspirations  from  a  thousand  Angel  lips  become,  as
it  were,  a  cloud  of  kindnesses  wafting  one  upward.

Outside,  in  the  quiet  air,  it  is  as  though  they  were  singing  and
sounding  on  everlasting  harps  a  rapturous  song  of  charming  melo-
dies, and  within  the  room  as  though  Angel  faces  hovering  round  were
smiling  everywhere,  while  heaven  rung  with  jubilee  and  loud  hosannas
filled  all  the  glorious  eternal  regions.

Out  from  the  shoreless  sea  of  the  great  unknown,  you  will  soon
catch  the  melodious  song  of  joyous  love,  the  memories  of  which  will
remain  illuminate  and  glowing  \rithin  your  Soul,  a  heavenly  music
whose  vibration  and  presence  will  be  held  as  a  sacred  love  in  every
heart.  Overwhelmed  by  this  stupendous  chorus,  drinking  it  in  mtti
sager  ear,  you  at  times  just  catch  a  note  of  the  exquisite  melodies
carolled  forth  amid  it  all  from  the  lips  of  one  you  knew  so  well,  the
charming  personality  of  some  loved  one  departed  long  ago.    They


588      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

are  just  **  over  there  "  upon  the  other  shore,  watching  and  waiting  a
response  to  their  most  loving  call.  They  would  rejoin  the  severed
links  of  the  social  chain,  and  demonstrate  the  fact  that  they  still  live
and  love  us  as  in  days  of  yore.  They  would  come  to  our  homes  and
family  circles,  they  would  be  our  counsellors  and  guardian  Angels ;
and  through  their  experiences  in  the  higher  schools  of  life,  they
would  teach  us  how  to  improve  the  passing  moments  as  they  fly,  and
so  become  not  solemn,  sanctimonious  saints,  nor  winged  Angels,  but
noble,  thinking  men  and  women  —  just  what  nature  meant  us  for.
We  had  before  seen  those  we  loved  pass  away,  and  from  our  earliest
years  been  awed  by  the  consciousness  of  death's  fearful  presence,  but
not  till  our  Souls  had  learned  a  little  of  the  Light  of  Spirit  did  we
learn  life's  lesson,  and  that  our  friends  had  gone  up  higher.

"  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom."

''  And  in  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing.  Verily,  verily,  I  say
unto  you,  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  my  name.  He  will
give  it  you.  .  .  .  Ask  and  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full"

The  peaceful,  gentle  Light  of  God's  Love  reigns  supreme.  No
darkness  nor  shadow  shall  come  again  forever.  Thou  art  now  abiding
in  the  realms  of  eternal  Truth,  an  eternity  of  gentle  sunbeams.

Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,
except  a  man  be  bom  again  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  — -
John,  iii. :  3.

Trust  thou  ever  in  Spirit,  and  anchor  thy  faith  in  Love.  This  is
that  high  harbor,  Utopia,  where  may  rest  thy  tempest-tossed  bark  of
mortal  life,  and  when  thy  race  here  is  almost  over,  and  thou  art  almost
entering  the  eternal  port  where  truth  is  known  and  justice  cannot  fail,
then  the  retrospection  of  thy  life  will  bring  thee  perfect  peace,  with
full  assurance  of  security  under  the  guidance  of  the  Angels,  when
thine  hour  is  come  and  the  evening  shadows  are  closing  fast  around
thee.  Then,  amidst  the  deepening  of  this  world,  shines  out  the  star
of  promise,  the  "  Absolute  Love."  Then  is  it  that  thy  humbler  and
gentler  life  of  love  proves  a  perfect  tribute  for  the  speedy  dawn  of  a
better  and  brighter  day.  Then  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall
answer ;  thou  shalt  cry,  and  He  shall  say.  Here  am  I.

Out  upon  the  Spiritual  Sea  there  is  room  for  every  sail,  and  on  the
gentle  air  of  Love  there  is  space  for  every  wing.  In  Patience  with
Love  adorn  each  day,  and  thou  shalt  have  peace  on  thy  journey
towards  sunset.  Love  maketh  all  labors  light  and  Patience  is  willing
to  wait.

In  ii&&  huTTYlug  age,  the  still,  small  voice  of  wisdom  is  drowned  in


ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.  589

the  deafening  roar  of  countless  blood-stained  weary  feet,  ever  hasten-
ing  to  tread  out  the  truer  wine  of  human  life.  In  our  teeming  cities
and  great  marts  of  commerce,  human  hearts  have  no  more  pulsation
and  warmth  than  the  resounding  jingle  of  gold.  Here  firmness,  which
is  the  grosser,  external  of  will,  congeals  and  hardens  everything  till
even  human  hearts  rattle  and  clink  like  rocks  when  thrown  together.
Let  him  who  reads  ponder  well.  Suppose  love  were  to  be  the  only
immortal  thing  which  could  transcend  this  life.  How  much  would  be
left  of  mankind  after  the  Vestal  Fires  of  Truth  had  removed  the
grosser  elements  and  impurities  of  it  ?  Hardly  a  vestige  of  man
would  be  found.

O  God,  O  Thou  creating  Father,  in  what  Form  clothest  Thou  Thy-
self in  action  ?  The  works  of  Thy  magnificence  and  grandeur  and
of  Thy  powerful  Will  overwhelm  and  astonish  our  perceptions.  The
ocean  rises  in  its  tempestuous  and  furious  billows,  and  subsides.
The  thunders  resound,  the  lightnings  flash,  and  are  still.  The  wind
moans  in  solemn  monitions,  and  it  passes.  Man  b  bom,  dies,  and
passes  away  like  a  tale  that  was  told.  Everywhere  do  we  feel  Thy
presence  and  Thy  mighty  hand,  which  protects  and  guards  us  and
commands,  but  we  can  neither  comprehend  nor  see  it

He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures:  He  leadeth  me
beside  the  still  waters.

He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  unto  him  :
"  Let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue ;  but  in  deed  and  in
truth.    Then,  if  we  ask  anjrthing  according  of  His  Will,  He  heareth  us."

Neither  death,  nor  life,  .  .  .  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to
come,  •  •  •  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God.

•*  Let  thy  soul  walk  softly  in  thee,
Like  a  saint  in  heaven  unshod  |
For  to  be  alone  with  Silence
Is  to  be  alone  with  God.**

Oh,  the  solemn  and  beautiful  hour  of  silent  peace !  On  the  heights
of  Spirit  is  the  land  of  perpetual  calm,  and  in  her  wondrous  silence
are  developed  the  capacities  of  human  Souls,  in  her  is  found  that
mighty  Seed  of  Truth  which  lies  hid  in  every  human  breast  In  these
holy  moments,  the  aspirations,  loves,  and  holier  memories  from  a
thousand  Angels'  lips  become,  as  it  were,  a  cloud  of  kindnesses  wafting
us  upwards ;  this  is  that  radiant-winged  hour  of  more  than  mortal
joy  which  so  few  men  know,  yet  possible  to  all.  Here  heaven  rings
out  with  jubilee  of  song,  and  loud  hosannas  fill  all  these  glorious


590      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Eternal  Regions ;  here  thou  canst  shake  loose  thy  Spirit-wings  and
stand  upon  the  utter  verge  of  holy  contemplation.

May  you,  fair  reader,  shake  loose  at  times  the  prisoned  pinions  of
your  Soul,  and  soar  to  that  superior  height  of  peace  and  find  repose,
and  may  it  be  also  yours  to  find  higher  level  of  the  heart's  True  Love
through  the  hurrying  years  of  this  short  life.  May  you  be  doubly
blessed  by  attaining  at  times  visions  of  Spirit  Homes  and  Departed
Loves,  which  will  give  you  nobler  thoughts  to  gaze  deep  into  the
Sacred  Mysteries  of  Infinity,  where  the  new  dawn  begins  as  it  illumi-
nates the  gloom  and  comes  down  the  way  of  the  past  long  night.  Oh,
when  will  men  hear  the  lessons  of  Spirit  Truth  pregnant  with  the
echoes  of  the  warning  voices  of  many  generations  ?  Our  immortal
Loves  are  continually  beckoning  us  to  the  gateway  of  that  dim  land
we  call  the  Past,  sometimes  even  in  sorrow  looking  down  upon  the
follies  of  those  who  so  soon  must  cross  the  portals  of  life's  shoreless
sea,  or  whispering  in  council  words  of  tenderest  sympathy ;  and  man-
kind heeds  not.  Only  a  very,  very  few  find  peace  on  these  Spiritual
heights  and  hear  the  voices  of  their  beloved.  Spirit  Truth  and
communion  with  the  immortals  are  fixed  as  the  stars,  more  enduring
than  the  mountains,  and  as  unutterable  as  the  ways  of  the  Eternal.

Be  strong  and  of  good  courage :  •  •  •  for  the  Lord  thy  God  is
with  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest.

Under  the  sunshine  of  Spirit  and  holier  Loves  the  Souls  of  men
are  watered  by  Wisdom^  whose  influence  and  presence  bloom  like  a
flower  of  peace,  whose  action  flashes  out  like  a  star  filling  the  world
with  fragrance  and  light  Through  Spirit,  the  living  and  the  dead
again  unite  and  meet  across  the  gulf  of  Time,  they  still  are  one,  for
Love  is  immortal,  and  where  True  Love  has  reigned  supreme.  Time
hath  not  power  against  Identity.  Through  the  open  portals  of
Spirit,  the  silent  voices  of  the  past  now  whisper  music  of  welcomes
and  loves,  lost  hours  of  purer  joys  shall  be  heard  once  more  sweetly
echoing  up  the  cliffs  of  immeasurable  time.  There  are  times  when
the  Soul  feels  the  living  melodious  words  of  Celestial  Love,  sur-
charged with  Divine  Influence  to  uplift  a  suffering  blind  world.
Pilgrim  on  the  Threshold,  when  you  feel  the  Spirit  of  Sympathy
about  you,  go  out  amongst  men.

Be  in  the  world  for  a  season^  but  not  of  it.  It  is  then  through  you
as  an  anchorage  that  Spirit  leaps  onward  to  the  onset ;  in  Silence  your
very  presence  may  be  a  tower  of  Love  and  Truth  of  Spirit  against
the  selfish  world  of  error  and  injustice.  Here  you  with  strong  hands
may  grasp  the  very  \aws  of  destruction,  plucking  the  children  of  men


ACROSS   THE   THRESHOLD.  59I

from  the  verge  of  their  own  devouring,  rescued  from  the  sepulchres
of  selfish  greed  and  death.

When  a  man  continues  to  reach  out  his  hands  towards  the  highest
impulses  of  his  Soul,  he  cannot  know  at  first  what  attractions  or  com-
panions  these  higher  Laves  will  bring,  nor  can  he  count  that  airy  thread
which  weaves  the  web  of  future  circumstance.  Love  in  its  higher
sense  is  the  only  thing  worth  living  for^  and  in  pure,  unselfish  Love,
Truth,  and  Wisdom  shines  forth  clad  in  the  brightness  of  Eternal
Good,  and  on  these  heights  are  all  the  Possibilities  ;  out  in  the  immen-
sity of  the  Great  Deep  there  is  a  Space  laid  open  to  the  footsteps  of
the  Real  For  in  your  true  allegiance  to  Nature's  higher  part,  your
Soul-Spirit  is  attuned  with  things  of  Truth  in  worlds  of  Light,  and
there  can  float  to  the  extremest  heights  of  all  Nature's  mental  atmos-
pheres. All  this  is  thine.  Dear  Pilgrim,  and  much  more  than  poor
words  can  impart.  When  higher  Loves  thrill  the  Soul,  it  beats  against
its  mortal  bars  and  rends  the  chains  of  error  that  may  hold  it ;  still
striving  upward  and  onward  like  a  meteor  flaming  to  its  central  star,
or  a  ripened  Soul  new-loosed  seeking  the  presence  of  its  Parent  God,
or  to  pass  with  its  Archetype  and  kindred  Soul  to  the  upper  heavens
from  whence  it  came  ;  there  to  be  united  with  its  higher,  holier  life,
clothed  with  Divine  Identity,  and  within  these  glorious  realms  now  all
its  higher  aspirations  fully  satisfied.  The  Soul  that  has  so  vainly
throbbed  within  these  fleshly  walls  in  human  form  is  now  set  free
forever,  and  finds  home  at  last  united  with  memories  loves  in  the
veiled  splendors  of  perfect  peace.  To  thee,  patient  reader,  thou  shalt
find  in  that  radiant-winged  hour  of  more  than  mortal  joy,  those  hearts
that  loved  only  a  little  while  on  earth,  then  journeyed  onward  to  the
unseen  shore,  will  be  aware  of  thy  hour  and  know  thy  coming.  If
now  thou  wilt  illuminate  and  ripen  thy  Soul,  fair  Pilgrim,  it  is  only  a
little  while,  when  thy  hour  shall  come,  and  thou  shalt  shake  loose  thy
Spirit  wings  and  find  a  grand  reunion  of  Immortal  Loves,  and  stand
upon  the  utter  verge  of  holy  contemplation ;  here  the  full  measure  of
the  Eternal  Joys  are  known  and  lost  Loves  await  thy  coming.  Home
—  yes,  home  forever  —  in  that  never  ending  stream  of  Peace  that
comes  flowing  through  the  firmaments  from  a  far-off  Glorious  Sun ;
here,  also.  Faith  and  Truth  have  their  full  measure  of  realization.

It  has  been  written  in  many  tongues  that  all  that  we  are  is  the
result  of  what  we  have  thought ;  that  as  we  sow,  so  shall  we  reap,  and
as  we  subjectively  imagine  and  love,  so  shall  we  spiritually  inherit
and  be.  Mind,  being  the  atmosphere  of  the  Soul,  must  of  a  necessity
cause  in  time  a  production  of  like  effects.    Man,  therefore,  stands  in


592      THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

the  greatest  need  of  creating  higher  atmospheres  of  thought.  If  we
are  wrapped  continually  in  the  brightness  of  the  greatest  good  and
our  better  selves,  we  lay  down  all  our  littleness  and  selfish  ways,  and,
in  that  wide  glory  of  our  waking  dreams,  float  in  that  invisible  Spirit
of  surrounding  good,  from  which  all  Truth,  Love,  Wisdom,  and
Beauty  come ;  while  now  shines  out  of  our  daily  lives  a  fire  of  new
light  clothed  in  Eternal  Truth.  Dear  reader,  if  thou  wilt  open  the
portals  of  thy  Soul,  thou  wouldst  see  that  all  Truth  and  Hope  are  From
Within,  and  not  in  the  external  things.

The  IVue  Man  is  always  the  Within^  which  is  the  breath  of  life,
bringing  him  a  knowledge  of  good  and  evil ;  that  knowledge  that  he
himself  alone  must  work  out  his  own  salvation.  Here  Truth  is  found
standing  on  Nature's  pedestal,  calling  out  to  all  mankind  to  come
and  unveil  Her  face ;  here  man  finds  that  there  is  but  one  thing  worth
living  for,  and  that  is  Love  in  its  highest  sense;  here  the  objective
world  of  flesh  and  mammon  falls  from  us,  and  the  reborn  Soul  shines
forth  clad  in  the  brightness  of  Eternal  Good.  To  him  who  has  gained
these  heights  there  is  a  quiet  air  of  perfect  peace,  as  if  there  were  a
singing  and  sounding  of  everlasting  harps  in  sweet  repose  of  charming
melodies ;  while  in  his  dwelling  it  seems  as  if  Angel  faces  were  ever
hovering  round,  smiling  in  radiant  companionship.  Here  the  visions
of  men's  True  Minds  have  worn  thin  the  veil  between  that  which  we
see  and  the  great  Invisible  Truths,  the  whisper  of  whose  wings  at
times  we  hear  as  they  sweep  through  the  grosser  air  of  this  world.
With  Light,  Wisdom,  and  Truth  so  very  near,  O  Pilgrim,  build  thy
Soul's  Image  and  stand  erect  through  every  storm,  and  not  cast  thy-
self before  the  image  of  some  unknown,  objective  God;  but  turn
thee  towards  the  visions  of  the  highest  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  for
thy  common  air  to  breathe  so  rare  an  ether  of  most  noble  thoughts
that  have  ever  swept  thy  brow  on  silvery  wings  across  the  silence  of
thy  dreams,  and  the  highest  aspirations  of  thy  manhood  shall  be  a
realization,  a  triumphal  consummation.

•*  When  life's  long  dream  is  o'er,
Unnoted  as  the  setting  of  a  star  you  pass  away,
And  sect  and  party  scarcely  knew
When  from  their  midst  a  sage  and  seer  withdrew,
To  fitter  audience,  where  the  great  dead  are.
In  God's  republic  of  the  heart  and  mind.
Leaving  no  purer,  nobler  Soul  behind."

There  are  no  lost  workers  in  the  cause  of  Spirit  Truth,  but,  like
shining  stats^  thosft  ^uVio  2lI^  ^eat,  unselfish  Souls  and  good  on  earth


THE  HIDDEN   WAY   ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.  593

rise  in  Spirit  radiance  to  their  appointed  place,  and  are  still  orbs  of
light  and  truth  that  beam  upon  the  world.

O  Pilgrim  of  Truth  in  Spirit,  may  your  closing  hours  be  full  of
music,  like  a  poem,  and  every  pulse  beat  of  the  days  on  earth  a  dream
of  sympathy  with  all  mankind,  so  that  in  life's  autumnal  sunset  there
may  be  gathered  sheaves,  —  a  harvest  yielding  its  fully  ripened  grain
and  fruitage  to  the  earth  and  Spirit;  thereby  an  interblending  of
mortal  and  immortal  Soul  and  Spirit ;  and  from  across  the  threshold
comes  the  Angelic  welcome  of  immortal  Loves: —

Welcome,  our  brother,  unto  the  heritage  thou  hast  won ;  welcome
unto  the  goal  and  victory  that  thou  hast  gained  through  long  serving
and  through  faithfulness  unto  thy  trust ;  welcome  unto  the  life  im-
mortal, unto  the  companionship  of  guardian  Spirits  and  friends.  Wel-
come unto  those  ministrations  that  shall  make  for  those  thou  lovest
the  blessedness,  the  comfort,  the  peace  that  come  to  those  who  do
not  sorrow  as  though  without  hope.  Thy  loved  ones  on  earth  shall
rejoice  that  even  through  their  tears  they  can  behold  the  rainbow
arch  of  thy  immortal  inheritance.  Welcome  1  let  your  voice  be  still
a  living  voice  in  the  midst  of  mortals ;  become  thou  the  guide  of
some  work  of  ministration  unto  those  who  are  not  yet  open  to  the
Truth  on  earth,  until  your  life  shall  also  sow  its  fruitage  from  the
Spiritual  state  as  it  has  yielded  from  the  earthly.  Thrice  welcome  1
may  thy  friends  and  the  loving,  true  Souls  of  all  nations  follow  thee
triumphantly  unto  the  crown  of  life  immortal.

**  Heaven's  golden  gates  were  open  wide  one  day,
And  through  them  shot  one  glittering,  dazzling  rayi
From  the  veiled  glory  through  the  shining  bars.
While  the  glad  armies  of  the  ransomed  dead
Welcomed  a  Spirit  by  Child-angels  led,
Beneath  the  dome  of  stars."

Come  with  us,  kind  reader,  and  follow  the  flight  of  an  Adept  in
his  entrancement,  that  we  may  gain  knowledge  of  Spirit  and  Light  of
Truth,  and  our  lives  will  become  refreshed  like  flowers  of  nature
washed  by  morning  dew.  Open  wide  the  portals  of  thy  being,  that
the  Soul  may  take  its  flight.  Under  the  protection  and  guidance  of
the  Angels,  with  an  unparalleled  sense  of  our  real  selves  let  loose
from  out  the  mortal  body,  we  pass  upward  through  the  world  of  wan-
dering, unripened  Souls ;  up  past  the  horde  with  their  impenetrable
covering  of  selfishness  and  error,  now  for  the  first  time  beginning  to
see  the  Light  of  Spirit,  and  to  awaken  to  the  knowledge  of  their  im-
mortality, and  that  their  purer  loves  alone  are  lasting  and  eternal.


594  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

Here  too  they  first  become  alive  to  sweet  sounds,  and  at  times  catch
glimpses  of  the  Angels  through  their  confused  eyes.

Passing  up  and  onward  into  the  Love  and  Wisdom  spheres,  we
poise  and  rest,  leaving  behind  us  a  trail  of  golden  light  like  the  soft
shadows  on  a  gentle  stream.  Oh,  what  a  glorious  realization  of  immor-
tal life.  Oh,  joy  of  a  thousand  years,  pressed  into  one  sweet  hour  of  per-
fect peace.  The  first  impulse  of  the  heart  is  to  ask  always  to  remain,
as  in  delicious  ecstasy  you  linger  in  the  halo  of  pure  and  perfect  love,
while  all  the  air  is  redolent  of  calm  and  rest.  This  is  the  true  Home
of  the  Soul.  No  more  of  parting,  no  more  death,  and  no  more  sad-
ness now,  home  in  the  silent  loving  land  of  Spirit.  Home  where  all
the  higher  aspirations,  all  that  thou  hast  unselfishly  hoped  for  or  in
thy  nobler  love  admired  and  wished  for  in  thy  better  moods,  has
taken  shape  and  in  thy  Soul's  surroundings  now  becomes  embodied.
Here,  your  guardian  Angels  say,  "  now  rest  your  tempest-tossed  Soul.
Here,  at  home,  where  all  your  dear  loved  ones  await  you."  What  a
happy  greeting  is  now  bestowed  upon  you,  as  a  new  inhabitant,  who
has  reached  this  land  of  purer  day !  What  rapture  to  look  up  through
happy  tears  and  melting  mists  of  tenderest  love ;  to  feel  kind  hands
about  you  and  tender  loving  arms  enfolding  you,  and  voices  of  affec-
tion welcoming  you  to  the  home  where  parting  is  no  more.

What  wonder  and  delight  to  see  the  spangled  heavens,  a  galaxy
of  suns  and  worlds,  so  dim  to  earth,  yet  here  so  gorgeously  bright  to
you,  as  seen  by  Spirit  eyes ;  while  our  own  glorious  sun  appears  to
stand  so  silent  and  so  calm,  yet  ever  watchful  in  an  awful  beauty
which  no  human  words  can  venture  to  describe ;  while  the  grandeur
of  each  planet  on  its  majestic  course,  sweeping  along  its  pathway
through  the  firmaments,  fills  your  whole  being  with  bewildered
admiration  of  the  wondrous  Architect  who  made  them  and  then
framed  the  laws  that  ever  hold  them  in  each  fine  gradation  of  heav-
enly order  and  in  harmony  Divine.  And  see  I  our  own  dull,  round,
red  globe,  far,  far  below,  within  its  canopy  of  clouds  and  misty  air,
scaling  the  heavens  faster  than  the  eagle's  flight,  while  through  its
darkened  vapors  we  may  rend  the  veil  betwixt  the  things  seen  and
unseen.  Beneath  us  lie  outstretched  hills,  valleys,  plains,  and
crowded  cities,  from  all  of  which  seem  to  come  up  a  pulsating  heart-
sob  of  anguish.  "  And  is  this  our  fair  earth  ?  "  I  asked  of  my  Angel
guide,  as  I  continued  watching  the  creeping  populace  swarming  upon
its  surface,  hurrying  in  tempestuous  turmoil  in  their  greed  of  mam-
mon or  from  fleshly  appetites ;  revelling  amid  the  icy  pageantries  of
death ;  while  about  each  individual  are  seen  shadows  of  darkened


THE  HIDDEN   WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.  595

atmospheres,  lust,  selfishness,  jealousy,  and  wrong ;  revenge,  hypoc-
risy, and  deceit,  showing  the  impulses  and  strivings  of  each  himian
heart,  the  deep  environment  of  human  ambition,  the  drapery  of  each
Soul.  But  at  times  and  intervals  a  holy  light  from  some  saint  still
on  earth  flashed  out  a  pure,  bright  ray  of  charity  and  love,  like  a
bright  sunbeam  from  some  grand,  unselfish  Soul,  which  caused  the
Angel  g^ide  to  smile  again  with  hope  as  he  affirmed  with  geiltle
voice,  "  These  are  they  who  have  found  the  seed  of  God's  Love  and
have  planted  it."

Now,  for  the  first  time,  you  comprehend  and  are  aware  of  the
great  outpouring  of  Spirit  upon  all  flesh,  so  thanklessly  received  and
unacceptable  to  these,  the  living,  who,  in  their  own  conceited  folly,
reject  and  pitilessly  turn  it  aside.  Here  one  fully  realizes  that  the
true  being,  the  inner  self  of  man,  is  a  peculiar  chemical  compound,
made  up  of  the  emotions,  desires,  and  aspirations  of  the  mind,  the
thought,  and  action ;  what  had  been,  or  what  had  been  done  or  said ;
the  loves,  appetites,  and  ambitions  ;  even  the  very  air  he  breathed.

Your  immediate  surrounding  atmosphere  is  tinctured  by  yourself.
All  things  are  tangible  and  real  around  you,  but  your  capacity  to
comprehend,  to  know,  and  to  use  them  springs  from  the  knowledge
of  Truth  within  your  inner  self.

While  thus  transfixed  upon  your  own  past  life,  you  catch  the  voice
of  some  well  remembered  friend  lovingly  welcoming  you  to  the  land
of  Souls,  and  some  old  friends,  long  lost,  almost  forgotten,  come  also,
making  a  happy  throng  who  warmly  greet  you  home  ;  for  as  you  have
loved  in  earth  life,  so  shall  you  love  and  have  companionship  on  first
awaking  in  Spirit  life.

To  be  among  and  see  around  this  brilliant  throng  of  happy
friends,  and  know  and  feel  that  there  is  no  more  parting  forever,  no
bitter  separation,  no  tears  or  sadness ;  no  more  illness  nor  anxious
watching ;  ho  more  defeat  nor  hopeless  disappointment,  but  full  re-
pose and  perfect  peace,  is  to  awake  in  a  pure  day  whose  dawn  is  free
from  pain,  from  toil  and  strife  and  the  mad  rush  of  life,  the  bitter
war  for  bread.

All  this  is  ended  now.  You  are  at  home,  to  feel  no  grief,  nor
fear,  nor  cold,  nor  heat,  nor  hunger ;  never  to  weep  again,  nor  know
what  sorrow  is  in  your  eternal  dwelling-place.

No  more  heartache,  no  sob  nor  sigh,  shall  come  again  forever.
You  look  upon  life's  past  as  on  an  empty  dream,  whose  gloomy  vis-
ions can  never  more  return,  while  the  memory  of  the  purer  loves  and
joys  of  life  remain  with  you.    The  burdens  and  the  struggles  pass


59^  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.

away,  expunged  and  all  consumed  in  the  bright  sunlight  of  this
golden  dawn.  Every  emotion  and  thought  is  like  music ;  the  breath-
ing of  the  heavenly  air  is  perfect  peace  and  sweet  repose,  and  the
great  wondrous  Love  of  the  Absolute  fills  all  the  systems  of  resplen-
dent worlds,  writing  on  every  leaflet,  every  heart  and  face,  and  in
each  living  thing,  the  Spirit  message  of  God's  Light  and  Love.  So
perfect  is  the  unison  of  chords  that  a  dreamy  peace  of  holier  love
than  mortals  can  conceive  o'ershadows  all  as  the  sweet  voices  swell
and  soften  and  then  rise  again  in  one  continuous  ecstasy  of  clear
vibration  on  these  heavenly  waves  of  sound.

You  feel  no  sense  of  weight  nor  bonds  to  earth,  but  float  with
wings  on  high,  propelled  by  will  or  thought,  and  speed  like  light
through  space,  or,  like  a  bird,  sail  on  the  buoyant  waves  of  ether ;
then,  pinioned  by  concentrated  Will,  you  pass  like  lightning  through
the  shoreless  space,  finding  no  boundaries,  but  myriads  of  countless
worlds,  stars  that  are  numberless,  trackless  regions  limitless,  while
through  and  over  all  God's  presence  and  tender  love  penetrate  and
overshadow  like  a  great  benediction.

Hearken !  from  far  adown  the  grand  corridors  of  space  comes
floating  upward  a  joyous  song :  "  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.
Peace  upon  earth,  good-will  toward  men  " ;  then,  bursting  out  the
Antiphone,  "  Death  is  swallowed  in  the  Absolute  Love."  Now,  you
awaken  to  the  knowledge  that  music  has  speech,  ideas,  and  expla-
nations, which,  combined  with  Spirit,  forms  a  language  in  which  the
highest  heavenly  glories  of  the  universe  can  be  revealed.

Some  faithful  Angel  guide,  of  whom  you  had  at  times  caught
glimpses  only  while  on  earth,  comes  in  majestic  presence,  beautiful
in  noble  form  and  loving  countenance,  and  stands  beside  you,  listen-
ing to  the  heavenly  anthems.  As  the  mother  watches  her  first-bom,
so  he  watches  the  surprises  of  your  enraptured  Soul.

Lovingly  embracing  you,  he  welcomes  you  home  with  gentle  words :
This  is  thy  Soul's  rest  from  its  earthly  pilgrimage,  the  peace  that
passeth  understanding.  Now,  faithful,  weary  Pilgrim,  loose*  thy  well
worn  sandals  and  rest  in  peace ;  thou  art  at  home.  Home,  home !
how  young  and  bright  are  all  the  old  loves  and  the  dear  friends  to
you  now  !  The  very  air  makes  the  pulse  quicken  and  the  heart  leap
for  gladness,  too  full  for  utterance.  With  tears  of  thankful  love  to
the  dear  God,  who  has  given  you  the  victory,  and  with  an  overflowing
heart,  you  nestle  in  grateful  rapture  in  the  bosom  of  your  Angel
guide,  making  weak  effort  to  express  your  murmured  thanks,  for  his
guiding  hand  and  faithful  Spirit  that  has  been  the  ladder  on  which


THE  HIDDEN  WAY  ACROSS  THE  THRESHOLD.       597

your  Soul  has  risen.  You  strive  in  weakness  to  return  a  little  love
for  love  as  he  tenderly  leads  you  to  rest  amid  the  echoing  anthems
of  an  Angel's  song;  home  and  peace  at  last  for  evermore.  The
vision  of  this  one  fair  hour  remains  in  memory  through  eternity.

O  immortal  man,  may  thoughts  of  heaven  keep  thy  earthly  record
fair,  nor  pain  nor  woe  betide  thee  in  the  immutable  procedure  to
the  land  of  Souls,  and  may  Angelic  Spirits,  when  thine  hour  is  come,
bear  thee  to  that  haven  of  bliss  within  the  many  mansions  of  the  blest*

Dear  Pilgrim  of  the  heavenly  way,  go  forth  each  day  filled  with
the  Spirit  of  love  and  gladness,  radiant  with  the  sunlight  of  eternal
hope,  and  let  the  light  of  harmony  and  truth  shine  out  through  all
thy  ways.  The  same  glorious  sun  which  shines  o'er  all  and  warms
us  now  will,  when  we  cross  the  threshold,  be  our  faithful  star,  kiss-
ing us  nightly  with  its  pure,  sweet  beams.  Soon  this  shadowy  exist-
ence will  be  ended,  and  through  the  evening  mists  of  life's  sunset
we  shall  be  borne  by  Angels'  hands  on  the  ethereal  waves  of  Spirit,
out  of  the  twilight,  forth  from  the  shadow,  into  the  glory  of  eternal
day.  Heie,  in  the  bright  realms  of  starry  being,  is  the  home  of
arisen  Souls,  the  world  that  is  imperishable,  where  dwell  our  loved
ones  and  await  our  coming.  All  hail  father,  mother,  wife,  husband,
children,  brother,  sister,  friend,  mine  once  more  forever  I  Only  a
little  while  and  we  shall  meet.  We  too  are  coming  with  the  weary
tread  of  aching  feet ;  with  temples  throbbing  with  weariness  and  pain ;
battle-scarred  and  with  our  faces  stained  with  tears.  O  friends  and
brothers  doubly  blest  by  death's  sweet  kiss,  open  and  swing  wide  the
gates,  and  let  our  weeping  eyes  behold  the  garden  of  the  Soul's  bloom
and  ripening  in  the  paradise  where  we  shall  live  and  love  for  evermore.

Dear  Pilgrim  of  Truth,  seek  to  illuminate  thy  Soul  thereby,  for
it  is  the  hidden  treasure,  long  lost  In  the  caverns  of  objective  sense,
and  trust  thou  to  the  anchor  of  Spirit  Truth  that  has  ever  stayed  thy
tempest-tossed  barque  in  mortal  life,  until  it  now  is  nearing  the  eternal
port  where  justice  cannot  fail.  The  twilight  shadows  of  the  evening
are  closing  fast  around  thee.  Amid  the  deepening  gloom,  may  this
imperfect,  humble  effort  prove  a  beacon-light  of  Spirit,  and  a  Star  of
promise  for  the  speedy  dawn  of  brighter  and  more  glorious  day.

And  to  you.  Brethren  of  the

iLLXnUINATIf

who  have  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  press  on,  and  h%
not  weary  of  well  doing.  Your  hour  of  rest  and  home  is  well  nig^
come.    God  knoweth  all.


59^  ACROSS   THE   THRESHOLD.

Brethren,  through  the  short  span  of  life  yet  to  be  run  before  you
reach  the  landmark  which  separates  us  from  that  farther  country.
look  back  eveiy  evening  on  the  events,  feelings,  and  actions  of  the
day  just  past  See  if  you  are  not  able  to  improve  them  on  each  to-mor-
row. The  work  in  passive  silence  will  go  on.  Open  wide  the  portal
and  permit  the  Angels  of  Light  to  come  out  and  go  in.  How  full  of
care,  sorrow,  and  turmoil  is  this  fair  earth  t  How  men  strive  for  high
places  in  the  synagogue  I  In  political  life,  bow  they  do  slander  and
defame  each  other,  that  they  may  rise  on  such  unseemly  props  1  All
these  are  the  results  of  a  life  germinating  two  currents,  one  from  the
tongue,  another  from  the  heart,  making  this  creed-bound  world  a
medley  of  contradictions.

The  hour  has  come.  In  silence  and  humbleness  abide  your  time.
Humanity  will  soon  cry  out  to  you,  "  O  give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our
lamps  have  gone  out"    Be  ready.

Dear  silent  seeker  of  the  Light,  will  you  be  one  of  the  Souls  chosen
by  heaven  to  turn  the  sunny  side  of  things  to  human  eyes  ?  With
childlike  faith,  and  the  true  love  of  patience,  search  for  Spiritual  Light,
which  makes  the  face  of  mankind  bright  with  charity,  a  reflection  of
God,  peaceful  as  spotless  innocence  and  modest  as  an  Angel's  Love.
With  tenderness  and  an  embrace  for  every  great  heart,  we  leave  you
in  love,  resting  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  of  all  Love.

And  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes.  And  death
shall  be  no  more.  Neither  shall  there  be  mourning,  nor  crying,  nor
pain  any  more,  for  the  former  things  are  passed  away.

Our  sands  of  golden  thought  have  all  run  out,  and  the  dictating  In-
telligence b  still.  A  loving  farewell  to  all  who  have  so  patiently  fol-
lowed ffim  and  the  compiler.  May  your  Souls  become  illuminated
by  the  Spirit  of  Life  forever  more.

And  all  find  Peace  and  Home  at  last  in  the  Arms  of  the  Absolute
Love.

And  He  said  unto  m^
It  is  finished.


3  blDS  D24  357  715


STANFORD  UNIVERSITY   LIBRARIES

CECIt  H.  GREEN  LIBRARY

STANFORD,  CALIFORNIA  94305-6004

(415|  723-1493

All  books  may  be  fecoKed  after  7  days

DATE   DUE


^■■>?55^^
