The Testament of Adam (E. A. Wallis Budge translation, 1927)
============================================================
Anonymous (Syriac Christian pseudepigraphon) — The Testament of Adam (Testamentum Adami), translated into English by E. A. Wallis Budge, appended to The Book of the Cave of Treasures (London: Religious Tract Society, 1927), public domain. Adam's final discourses to Seth — the hours of day and night, the prophecy of Christ, and the heavenly powers; Budge's 1927 translation is the standard public-domain English version. Scan via Internet Archive.

TESTAMENTUM ADAMI. 


[The Ethiopic text and an Arabic version was 
published by Bezold in Nodldeke’s Fest- 
schrift, Gieszen, 1906. See also Brit. Mus. 
Add. 16251 and Add. 16217 (Dillmann, 
Catalogus, Nos. XXXIV and XXXVII.] 


THE HOURS OF THE DAY. 


And, moreover, understand thou concerning 
the hours of the day and of the night, and how 
it is seemly that ye should make supplication to 
God, and to pray to Him at each of His seasons. 
For my Creator taught me all this, and He told 
me the names of all the wild animals and 
beasts, and of the birds of heaven, and then God 
made me to understand the number of the hours 
of the day and of the night, and He told me 
how the angels praise God. Understand, then, 
O my son, that at the first hour of the day the 
prayer of my children ascendeth to God. And 
at the second hour the prayer and petition of 


TESTAMENTUM ADAMI 243 


the angels take place. At the third hour the 
birds of the heavens praise Him. And at the 
fourth hour the spiritual beings worship Him. 
And at the fifth hour all the wild beasts and 
animals salute Him. At the sixth hour the 
petition of the Kiribél (Cherubim) taketh place. 
And at the seventh hour all the angels enter the 
presence of God, and go forth therefrom, for at 
this hour the prayer of every living thing 
ascendeth to God. At the eighth hour the 
shining denizens of heaven praise Him. And 
at the ninth hour the angels of God who stand 
before the throne of the Most High do homage 
unto Him. And at the tenth hour the Holy 
Spirit overshadoweth the waters, and the devils 
flee away and remove themselves from the 
waters. And if the Holy Spirit did not over- 
shadow the waters at this hour every day, no 
one could drink of the waters, [for if he did] his 
flesh (i.e. body) would be destroyed by the evil 
devils. And if the priest taketh water at this 
hour and mixeth with it holy oil, and anointeth 
the sick and those who are possessed of foul 
spirits with the mixture, they shall be healed 
of their sickness. And at the eleventh hour the 
glorifyings of the righteous take place. And 
at the twelfth hour God, the Most High, 
receiveth the prayers and petitions of the children 


of men. 
R2 


244 THE CAVE OF TREASURES 


THE HOURS OF THE NIGHT. 


And at the first hour of the night the devils 
render thanks and praise to God Most High, 
and there is in them no evil and no harm for 
anyone until they have finished their service of 
homage. And at the second hour of the night 
the fish and every creature that is in the waters 
praise God, and the wild beasts and the whales. 
And at the third hour the fire praiseth Him— 
now it is in the lowest depth, and in that hour 
no one can address Him (?). And at the fourth 
hour the Sarafél (Seraphim) proclaim Him Holy. 
And at the fifth hour the waters which are above 
the heavens praise Him. Now long ago I sat 
and listened to the angels at this hour, and 
[marvelled] how they cried out ; [their cry] was 
like the noise of a mighty wheel, and they cried 
out like the waves of the sea with the voice of 
praise to God. And at the sixth hour the 
clouds praised God in fear and trembling. And 
at the seventh hour the earth was hushed in 
silence and every creature that was upon it, and 
the waters slumbered. And if at this hour the 
priest taketh some water and mixeth holy oil 
with it, and he anointeth therewith the sick 
and those who cannot sleep at night because of 
their] pain, those who are sick will be healed, 
and those who are wakeful will fall asleep. At 
the eighth hour the earth maketh to grow grass 


TESTAMENTUM ADAMI 245 


and green herbs, and maketh the trees to put 
forth leaves and fruit. And at the ninth hour 
the angels perform their service of homage to 
God, and the prayer of the children of men 
cometh into the presence of God the Most High. 
And at the tenth hour the gates of heaven are 
opened, and God heareth the prayer of the 
children of the believers, and the petition which 
they ask from God is granted unto them. And 
at the sound of the wings of the Seraphim at 
that time the cocks crow and praise God. And 
at the eleventh hour there is joy and gladness on 
all the earth, for the sun entereth into the 
Garden (i.e. Paradise), and his light riseth in all 
the ends of the world, and illumineth every 
created thing. And at the twelfth hour it is 
befitting for my children to stand up before God, 
and pay homage to Him, for at this hour there 
resteth a great silence on all the heavenly beings. 


ADAM FORETELLS THE COMING OF CHRIST. 


Now therefore know thou all this, and hearken 
unto my word, and understand that the Word 
of God, the Most High, shall come down upon 
the earth, even as He told me at the moment 
when He thrust me out from the Garden (Para- 
dise). For He told me that His Word in later 
days should become man from a woman who 
was a virgin whose name was Mary, and should 


246 THE CAVE OF TREASURES 


hide in her, and put on flesh, and be born like 
a man with great power, and operative skill and 
knowledge. No one shall know Him except 
Himself and him to whom He manifested [Him- 
self]. And God said that He should go about 
with people on the earth, and grow in days and 
years, and should perform signs and wonders 
openly, and should walk upon the sea as upon 
dry land, and should rebuke the sea and the 
winds openly, and they should be subject unto 
Him, and that He should cry out to the waves 
of the sea and they should make answer to Him 
speedily. And that He should make the blind 
to see, and the lepers to be cleansed, and the 
deaf to hear, and the dumb to talk, and should 
raise up the paralytics, and make the lame to 
walk, and should turn many from error to the 
knowledge of God, and should drive out the 
devils from men. 

And besides [these things] God spake unto 
me, saying, “‘ Be not sorrowful, O Adam, for 
thou didst wish to become a god and didst 
transgress my command. Behold, I will stablish 
thee, not at this present, but after a few days.” 
And again He spake unto me, saying, “I am 
God Who made thee to go forth from the Garden 
of Joy into the earth, which shall shoot forth 
thorns and brambles, and thou shalt dwell 
therein. Bend thy back, and make thy knees 


TESTAMENTUM ADAMI 247 


to totter in old age, and I will make thy flesh 
food for the worms. And after five days and 
half a day? I will have compassion upon thee, and 
shew thee mercy in the abundance of my com- 
passion and my mercy. And I will come down 
into thy house, and I will dwell in thy flesh, and 
for thy sake I will be pleased to be born like an 
[ordinary] child. And for thy sake I will be 
pleased to walk in the market place. And for 
thy sake I will be pleased to fast forty days. 
And for thy sake I will be pleased to accept 
baptism. And for thy sake I will be pleased to 
endure suffering. And for thy sake I will be 
pleased to hang on the wood of the Cross. All 
these things [will I do] for thy sake, O Adam.” 
To Him be praise, and majesty, and dominion, 
and glory, and worship, and hymns, with His 
Father and the Holy Spirit from this time 
forward and for ever and ever. Amen. 
Furthermore, thou must know, O my son, 
Seth, behold a Flood shall come and shall wash 
the whole earth because of the children of 
Kayal (Cain), the murderer, who slew his 
brother through jealousy, because of his sister 
Lid. And after the Flood and many weeks 
the latter days shall come, and everything 
shall be completed, and his time shall come 
and fire shall consume everything which is 


1 Je, five thousand five hundred years. 


Senate Ay 
fou: un id belore 


apenon ae 
And Seth wrote down ice ae ent, 
and sealed it with his seal, and with the sea 
his father Adam, which he took with him 
the Garden (Paradise), and with the seal of | 
his mother. 


oe 7 , 
ee 


=
