Burg

B

>%.

\

\

+

ji

e

her

x

;

+

£

P

}


SICH
=r  TER
Bert,

*  RAR,  5

Zu


Mitteilungen  der Vorderasiatischen  Gesellschaft,  1906,  3,

Eingetragener  Verein.

+

10.  J ahrgang.

The  nn

; Si in the Babylonian Ponpon

J ulian  Morgenstern.

£ ZN  BRASS, „en

% "  pacıric sckoor  |

Ir  Reue

Zu  beziehen  durch
Wolf  Peiser  Verlag

Berlin.

CBPac


Table  of  contents.

.

.

N

Tahle  of  Contents
.
The  Babylonian  Conception  of Si  ea
a  Eye
ra
ae  nen
Dameral  of Evil  Spirite..
00  AO
The  Gods of  the  ers:  ne  be  De  2 OO
ur  N  Rio
DEerEın.Offedugn,  Susi

Pa:
an

00.0.0000  na

Kai  nel  SA

BE  La

N

u

2

.

.

.

.  Recapitulation  .

Se kisireee  ee  ee  ek,
ER  th
A
a

.
Purification-ceremonies in  he Böra-Bitual . 5
ee  nee
General  Index  .
Index  to Barnes  Pair

EEE

5

.

.

.


Chap.  1.

The  Babylonian  Conception  of  Sin.

As  has  been  shown,  religion  was  originally  the  relation
The  duty  of  man  :o  bring
existing  between  the  gods  and  man.
sacrifices  and  to  please  the  gods  in  every  possible  way,  that
he  might  enjoy  their  favor  —  this  was  religion.
The  relation
of  man  to  man  was  entirely  foreign  to  this.
Not  until  late  do
religion  and  morals  become  one).

|

evil  as  man  deserved.

Misfortune  of all kinds  was  the  result  of  the  divine  anger.
The  gods  were  the  arbiters  of  destiny,  the  judges,  who  decreed
good  or
If  evil  came,  the  god  was
This  is  one  of
angry.  What  could  have  caused  this?
the  fundamental  prineiples  of  the  Babylonian  religion,  if  not  of
all  primitive  religions  —  whatever  incites  the  anger  of  the
gods,  is sin?).

Sin!

And  what  could  this  sin  have  been;  what  could  have  so
enraged  the  deity that  he  sent  this  evil?  -Perhaps  tke  unfortunate

ı)  C£f,  Tiele:

“Elements  of  the  Science  of  religion.”

Ii02  Relig.

Sem.  5äf.

2} Notice  that  this  is  the  argument  advanced  by  Bildad,  Job  83—4
This  principle  is especially  noticeable  in the  Babylonian  “penitential  psalms”.
There  the  afflieted  man  cries  out  in his  anguish,  “The  sin  I have  committed,
I do  not  know”  (B.  P.  IV  obrv.  19—21,  42—45  ef.  V  R.  50a  33/34).
His
‚suffering  proved  ihat  he  must  have  sinned,  although  he.  could  not  tell
wherein  the  sin  lay.  Often  he  would  accuse  himself  of  many  sins  (B.  P.
I  rev.  3/4;  IV  obv.  36—41,  rev.  45--48;  VII  obv.  18;  B.  M.  S.  VII  47),
would  regard  himself  as  a  sinner  from  childhood  (Or. II pl.  3  obv.  19—21).
Sometimes  he  did  not  eren  know  against  what  god  he  had  sinned;  who  it
was  that  was  angry.
For  this  prineiple  in  the  N.  T.
cf.  John  9, 2.

(B. P.IV  obv.3—9).

V.  A,  G.  Mitteilungen,

1905.

3.

75

at


ee

man  had  violated  the  laws  of justice;  had  wronged  a  neighbor,
whose  protecting  god  thus  exacted  vengeance.
This  answer  is
possible,  and,  as  morals  became  more  and  more  a  part  of
religion,  came  indeed  to  be  considered  a  valid  cause  of  divine
But  originally  this  lay  nearer  home.  What  could  have
anger.
aroused  this  anger,  must  have  been  some  wrong  offered  the
But  since  man  was  related  to  the  gods  only  in
god  himself.
a  religious  sense,  only  through  sacrifice,
sin  must  originally
Either  the  man  had  neglected  to  offer
have  been  purely  ritual.
his  sacrifice,  or  else  had  not  offered  it  properly!).

or

the

could

participate

sacrifice  was

could  come  upon  them.

For  not  everything  was  suitable  for  sacrifice.

uncleanliness
and  the
sacrifiee
offer
Before  the  bärü-priest

The  gods
partook  of  only  the  purest  foods,  offered  in  such  a  manner
The  least
no
that
defiled?).  And  not  every
impurity,
one
divine
in
services®).
could  perform  his  holy
duties,  he  had  to  fulfill  certain  requirements,  had  to  be  of noble,
priestly  blood,  a  descendant  of  Enmeduranki;  had  to  be  of
perfect  bodily  growth,  and  thoroughly  acquainted  with  his
:  priesily  duties®).
Without  doubt  similar  conditions  had  to  be
Before
net,  not  only by other  priests,  but  by  laymen  as  well),
the  layman  could  bring  sacrifice,  he  had  to  be  ritually  clean;
otherwise  it  would  not  be  accepted.
Therefore,  since  it  was
man’s  duty  to  offer  sacrifice,  it was  first  of  all  his  duty  to  keep
himself  ritually  pure.  Any neglect  of these  duties  was  sufficient
cause  for  the  gods’  anger;  was  sin.
Sin  was  thus  originally
merely  the  transgression  of  ritual  laws,  and  as  such  appears
throughout  the  Babylonian  religious  literature  $).

The  usual  method,  by  which  the  gods  visited  their  anger
Sickness  was  therefore  an
But  more  than  this,  it  was  also  a  state  of

upon  man,  was  through  sickness.
indication  of  sin.

_

1)  Of.  Relig.  Bem.  163.
®) C£.  IV  R.  19  No.  2  61/62;  26  No,  7  33/34;  No.  5, 10f.
°®)  Of.  Relig.  Sem.  148,  151.
*)  Beitr.  XXIV23—24.
°) G£.  below.
°) In  Surpw  alone  were  moral  transgressions  regarded  as  sin.  No

distinetion  was  there  made  between  thom  and  ritual  sin,

76


re

impurity,  unfitting  man  for  participation  in  religious  services;
of,  but  in  itself,  sin.
was  therefore,  not  only  an  indieation
Sickness  was  caused  by  evil  spirits,  the  messengers  of  the
gods’ anger.  They  entered  the  doomed  man’s  body,  and  firmly
Their
seated  there,  carried  on  their  work  of  evil,  undisturbed.
presence  was  thereforesynonymous  with sickness  and uncleanliness;
consequently  also  with  sin.
In  time  the  evil  spirits  ceased  to
be  looked  upon  as  messengers  of  the  gods’  anger;  became
independent  of  them;  the  inveterate  enemies  of  their  creature,
man.
ÜConsequently,  even  more  than  before,  was  a  sick  man,
one  possessed  by  evil  spirits,  unclean  and  distasteful  to  the
gods,  i.  e,  a  sinner.
in
Therefore

the
sickness,  possession  by  evil
expressions,  sin,  uncleanliness,
They  denote  an  evil  state  of  the
spirits,  are  pure  synonyms.
body),  the  result  of  the  divine  anger?).
It  unfitted  man  for
participation  in  religious  ceremonies;  made  him,  for  the  time
being,  an  outcast?).

the  Babylonian

literature

religious

Thus  we  read®):

Mayest  thou  be  freed  from  aranka
mämitka  hititka  gillatka  niska  muruska  tanihka  kispu  ruhü  rusü
np3asu  limnäti  Sa  ameläti,  from  thy  sin,  bann°),  transgression,
wickedness,  curse,  sickness  sighing,  witcheraft,  spell,  charm,
evil  machinations  of  men.
And  again®):

marustu  imhurannima  dina  ana  dän,
purussa  ana  paräsi  maharka  akmıs ;
dini  din  purussa  purus;

15.  usuh  mursu  limnu  3a  zumria;

kussid  mimma  limnu  3a  3eräniia  u  buändia;
limuttu  Sa  ına  zumrüa  Seraniva  u  buändia  ibbasü
ina  ümi  anne  littasima  anaku  nüra  lümur.

!) Lumnu  5a  zumri.
?) A common  expression  for  “sin”  was  Sörtu.

It also  denoted  “punish-
ment”  (for sin?)  (cf.  H.  W.  B.  6363).  According to Jensen,  (K.B.  V1,1,340),
its original  meaning  was  “anger”  (of the  gode?).

») Surpu.  I, 115—125.
*) Surpu  VII,  26—28.
°) Mämitu = “bann”  —=  “uncleanliness;”  cf.  below.
6) Sm.  1371  +  Sm.  1877  (=  K.  B.  VI.  I, 266-267).

77

jr


FIR  ee

Uncleanliness!)  has  come  aginst  me,  to judge  (my)  cause,
To  decide  (my)  deeision,  have  I knelt  down  before  thee;
Judge  my  cause,  deeide  my  dicision;
15.  Tear  out  the  evil  sickness  of  my  body;

Destroy  all  evil  of  my  flesh  and  my  sinews;
May  the  evil  in  my  body,  my  flesh,  and  my  sinews
On  this  day  come  forth,  and  may  I  see  the  light.
Again?),  we  find  ASurbanipal  praying  during  an  eclipse,

which  was  also  considered  the  work  of  the  evil  spirits:

15.  ina  lumun  idäte  pl.  ittäte  pl.  limneti  pl.  la  tabäte  pl.

ina  ekalliia  u  mätia  ibasa  (-a)

3a
as3um  üpis  limutti  (-t)  mursu  lä  täbu  arni
gillat  hititi  Sa  ina  zumrüa  ...
ekimmu  limnu  Sa  ittiia  raksuma  usah  .
amhurka  usapika
nis  gätiia  muhur  Sime  tasliti
pusur  kispiia  pusisi  hitätera
usuh  (-uh)  mimma  limnu  3a  ana  nakäs  napistüa  ülh-

.  .

20

ka  (-ka).

20.  In  the  evil  of  the  signs.and  portents,  evil  and  not  good,

Which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land;
Becguse  of  the  evil  magic,  the  disease  that  is not  good,

the  iniquity,

Ä.

The  transgressions,  the  sin,  that  are  in  my  body?)  ...
The  evil  specter  that  is  bound  to  me  and...

20.  I have  petitioned  thee,  ‚have  glorified  thee!

The  raising  of  my  hand  accept!  Hearken  to  my  prayer!
Free  me  from  my  bewitchment!
Tear  away  whatever  evil  may  come  to  cut  off  my  life!

Remove  my  sin!'

!) For  this  meaning  of  marustu,  cf.  K.B.  VL  I, 374f.
») B.M.S.L.,  15—23.
®) King  reads  here,  „The  transgression,  the  sin  that  is in my body,
ete.“.  He  seems  to  refer  the  clause,  3a  ina zumriia  to hititi alone.  However
from  analogy  with  other  passages  in  the  religious  texts,  where  all  the  evils
here  enumerated,  are  located  in  the  body,  it  is  better  to  refer  the  -clause
to  all  these  terms;  cf.  mimma  epes  limuiti  3a  ina  zumrisu  basa  (IV  R,  20
No.  2,  rev.  2);  nakma  u  nakimti  sa  zumrüa  (IV  R.  28  No.  3  obv.  11)
mursu  3a  zumrüa  (B.  M.  S.  XXX,  12);  and  Sm.  1371  ete.  (cited  above).

78


Ele

Finally  of  the  evil  spirits  it  is  said):
asakka  marsa  ina  zumrisu  i$kunu;
mämit  limuttim  ina  zumrisu  ıb3ü;

45.  umunnä  ina  zumrisu  iSkunu;

namlära  limna  ina  zunrisu  ıb3u;
imta  limutta  ina  zumrisu  iSkuni  ;
arrat  limuita  ina  zumrisu  ıbSü;
limna  arna  ina  zumrisu  iSkuni;

50.  imta  3erta  elisuw  ibsu;
limutta  iSkunu;
amelu  limnu  päni  limnu  pü  limnu  lisänu  limnu,
kıspi  ruhü  rusü  upsase  mimma  lımnu,
3a  ina  zumur  marsi  iSSak  (?)-nu  .
They  put  a  woeful  fever  in  his  body;
A  ban  of  evil  hath  settled  in  his  body?);
45.  An  evil  disease  they  have  put  in  his  body;
An  evil  plague  hath  settled  in  his  body;
An  evil  venom  they  have  put  in  his  body;
An  evil  curse  hath  settled  in  his body;
Evil  (and)  sin  they  have  put  in  his  body;

.

50.  Venom  (and)  iniquity  have  settled  upon  it;

They  have  worked  evil;
The  evil  man,  evil  face,  evil  mouth,  evil  tongue,

°  Evil  spell,  witcheraft,  sorcery,
Enchantment,  and  all  evil,

Which  have  been  put  in  the  body  of  the  sick  man.‘  .

These,  and  many  other  passages3),

prove  that  sin,
evil,  sickness,  possession  by  evil  spirits,  witcheraft,  and  mis-
fortune,  are  all  one  and  the  same  thing  in  the  Babylonian
religion*);  something  material,  that  has  entered  the  body  of  the

) U.  L.  II,  40—54.
®) Or  better,  „they  caused  to  settle;“  cf.  11.  46—47  where  ıbsü  is
not  only  in  parallelism  with  iskuni,  but  ie  also  followed  by  an  accusative.
®, Of.  IV  R.  17  obv.  47—rer.  3;  57  (=  B.  M,  S.  XII)  obr.  62ff.;

B.M.S.  I, 39—48;  II,  32-39;  XXVII,  15ff.

*) Exact!y  the  same  FR is  found  in  the  N.T.  Math.  9, 2;  Mark 2, 5;
Luke  5, 20.  Jesus  says  to  the  sick  man,  whom  he  has  cured,  .‚Go.  thy sins
are Foren. “

Of.  John  9, 2;  aleo  Relig.  Sem.  152%.

79


u

afflicted  man.  Consequently,  the  curing  of sickness,  the  expulsion
of  evil  spirits,  and  the  expiation  of  sin,  are  identical,  and  must
be  so  treated.

It  is  however  necessary  to  first  understand  thoroughly  the
manner  in  which  sin  came  upon  the  body,  and  man’s  means  of
The  following  chapter  will  therefore  treat
defense  against  this.
of  evil  spirits.

Chap.  11.

Evil  Spirits.

As  has  been  said,  sickness  was  a  manifestation  of  the
divine  anger.  To  the  lively,  pieture-building,  Semitic  imagination,
this  was  something  more  than  a  calamity  sent  by  the  gods;
it  became  their  actual  messenger,  carrying  out  their  wrathful
commands,
And  not  alone  sickness,  but  all  evils,  to  which
man  is  heir,  were  regarded  in  this  light.  And,  as  servants  of
the  gods,  they  took  on,  to  a  certain  extent,  a  divine  nature;
were,  for  all  purposes,  gods  of  inferior  rank,  fulfilling  the
destructive  orders  of  their  enraged  superiors.
However,  so  far
they  existed  only  as  mediators  of  evil  between  the  great  gods
and  men  !).

But  gradually  men  began  to  see  that  evil  comes  at  the
most  unexpected  times;  that  apparently  he  who  deserves  it  least,
suffers  most.
And  along  with  the  conception  of  unknown  sin),
came  perhaps  a  faint  presentiment,  that  the  evil  was  not  from
the  great  gods  at  all;  that  their  messengers  had  power  to  work
evil  according  to  their  own  wills.
This  view  developed,
until  finally  we  have  a  host  of  gods,  whose  only  aim  is  to
work  evil  to  mankind?).  They  are,
as  far  as  their  acts  are
concerned,  entirely  independent  of  the  great  deities,  who  now
In  this  relation,  the  two
in  turn,  become  gods  of  good  alone.

1) Of.  Tiele:  “Elements  of the  Science  of  Religion”  I 89  fi,
2) Cf.  p.  1  note  2.
®) For  evil  spiritse  in  the  European  mythology,  cf.  Höfler:

„Krank-

heits-Dämonen“,  Archiv  für  Religionswissenschaft,  Bd.  II.

80

el


ale  area

hosts  are  mutually  opposed,  are  actively  hostile;  but  the  good
In  their  presence  the  evil  ones
gods  are  the  more  powerful.
can  not  stand;  at  the  very  mention  of  their  names,  the  latter
tremble  and  disappear.

In  time  the  pantheon  of  the  gods  of evil  was  systematized.
The  different  members  were  distinguished,  and  names  given  to
each.  They  were  no  longer  misfortune  itself,  but  mighty  spirits
of  evil,  bringing  all  calamities  upon  man.
However  not  all
attained  this  stage  of development.  Some  remained  mere  demoni-
its  bringers,
sickness;
fications
Others  again  seem  to  have  represented
but  sickness  itself.
disease
destructive
in  general.
tempests,  were  demonified  in  the  same  way.

Other  calamities,

of  a  particular

such  as

were

not

But  although  independent  of,  and  hostile  to,  the  evil
spirits  never  entirely  lost  their  original  nature  as  servants,
of  the  gods.  And  as  such,  according  to  the  established  theo-
logical  system,  they were  regarded  as  of divine  birth.  Now  they
appear  as  children  of  Anut);  again  as  the  offspring  of  Ea  and
Damkina?);  and  finally  as  the  progeny  of  Bl  and  Ereskigal?).
As  gods  of  sickness,  the  cause  of  death,  it  was  only
That  is  their
natural  to  associate  them  with  the  underworld.
real  home,  from  whence  they  go  forth  to  work  their  evil  upon
man®).  They  are  the  servants  of  Ereskigal,  queen  of the  under-
 world.-  When  Nörgal  is  sent  against  her),  Ea  gives  him  as
attendants,  fourteen  spirits,  the  demonifications  of  different  sick-
nesses.
These  Nörgal  stations  at  the  various  gates  of  the
underworld,  while  he  himself  boldly  enters,  overthrows  Ere$-
kigal,  and  associates  himself  with  her  in  the  government  of
the  dead.  It  is  significant,  that  Nörgal  bears  a  twofold  relation
to  the  evil  spirits®).
On  the  one  hand,  he  is,  like  the  otber
gods,  their  enemy,  who  drives  them  forth  from  man;  on  the
“other  hand,  as  ruler  of  the  underworld,  he  is  closely  allied

PrZ

») U.  L.  V.  Col.  I  ‚1-4;  IV  R.  58  Col.  U, 33;  Maglü  IV,  45—46.
») U.L.XV,  1-5.
8) Ibid.  V  Col.  I, 5-8;  IV  R.  58  II, 34.
“4, U. L. III, 25—27;  V Col.  I, 12/13,  22/23;  Cun.  Texts  XVIl pl. 25.II, 26.
URFB.  VI  L 76  £.
®)  Of,  below,  Chap.  V.

|

81


BB

‘with  him.  As  creatures  of  the  underworld,  they  are  associated
with  darkress,  and  therefore  carry  out  their  evil  work  chiefly
at  night.

But  the  home  of  the  evil  spirits  was  not  confined  to  the
underworld.  They  were  as  much  the  oifspring  of  the  deep!),  of
These  two  conceptions  are  easily  harmonized.
Ea  and  Damkina.
The  Babylonians  regarded  the  deep,  the  apsu,  as  not  merely
surrounding,  but  also  underneath  the  earth.
In  this  sense
then,  the.  evil  spirits  were  creatures  of  both  the  underworld
and  the  deep.

And  not  only  ihese,  but  any  deserted,  or  awe-inspiring
place  was  a-  favorite  haunt  of  theirs.
Thus  ruins,  cemeteries,
mountains,  and,  above  all,  the  desert,  were  full  of evil  spirits?),
who,  without  warning,  would  sally  forth  and  attack
every
hapless,  belated  wanderer.

But  there  were  other  evil  spirits,  besides  those  of sickness.
First  of  all  were  the  ghosts  of  the  dead,  especially  those,
whose  deaths  were  associated  with  unusual  eireumstances.  Thus?):
Whether  thou  art  a  ghost  ihat  hath  come  from  out  the

earth,

Or  kla,  that  hath  no  couch,

|

45.  Or  a woman  (that  hath  died)  a  virgin,
Or  a  man  (that  hath  died)  unmarried,
Or  one  that  lieth  dead  in  the  desert,
Or one  that lieth  dead  in the  desert,  uncovered  with  earth,
er

50.  Or  one  that  in  the  desert  ..

Or  one  that...

(Some  lines  wanting.)

Col.  V.  Or  one  that  bath  been  torn  from  out  a  date-palm,

Or  one  that  hath  sunk®)  in  the  water,  irom  out  a  b»at,

5.  Or  a ghost  unburied,

Or  a  ghost  with  none  to  care  for  it,
Or 2  ghost  with  none  to  make  offerings,

N UA  LAVDCH  V,.28 _35; XVI  1-10.
2) Notice  that  this  view  was  held  by  the  Israelites  and  Arabs  aleo,
®)  U  L.IV  Col.  IV,  41--Col.  V, 58;  cf:  V Col.  I, 48-—-Col.  II,  4  and  A.

SKI LEXT  G0l.T.  8 16.

*)  From  x,2%  and  not  ya,  as  ee  translates,

82


eh

10.  Or  a  ghost  with  none  to  pour  libations,
Or  a  ghost  that  hath  no  posterity  \),

15.  Or.  the  labariu,
Or  the  labasu,
20.  Or  the  ahhazu,

Or  a  harlot  whose  body  was  sick,
Or  a  woman  (that  hath  died)  in  travail,

25.  Or  a  weeping  woman  (that  hath  died)  with  a  babe  at

the  breast,
Or  an  evil  man?),
Or  an  evil  utukku

30.  Or  one  that  haunteth  the  neighborhood,
Or  one  that  haunteth  the  vieinity,

35.  Or  one  with  whom  I have  on  some  day  eaten,
Or  with  whom  on  some  day  I  have  drunk,
Or  with  whom  on  some  day  I  have  anointed  myself,

40.  Or  with  whom  on  some  day  I  have  elothed  myself,

Or  with  whom  I  have  entered  and  eaten,
Or  with  whom  I have  entered  and  drunk,

45.  Or  with  whom  I  have  entered  and  anointed  myself,

Or  with  whom  I have  eaten  when  hungry,
Or  with  whom  I have  drunk  when  thirsty,

50.  Or with  whom  I have  anointed  myself  with  oil, when  sore,
.  Or  with  whom,  when  I was  cold,  I have  clothed  myself

with  the  garments  from  his  body 3),

Until  thou  art  removed,

55.  Until  thou  departest  from  the  body  of  the  man,  the  son

of  his  god,  ete.

In  this  list  those  ghosts  that  had  received  proper  burial
rites,  whose  bodies  had  not  been  covered  with  earth,  or  whose

!) For  the  correctness  of  Thompson’s  translation  of  zakar  Sumi  by
“posterity”  cf.  A.  8.  K.  T.  XI  Col.  III,  50—60  where  zakrat  Sumi  3a  iläni
stands  in  parallelism  with  märat  (il)  Anim.  Of.  also  Col.  IL  32—34.

2) Thompson’s  explanatory  emendation,  “or  an  evil  man  (that  hath
died)”,  is  neither  necessary  nor  correct.  That  utukku  limnu  follows,  shows
that  this  line  refers  to  the  evil  spirit,  am&lu  kimnu;  cf.  below,  p.  10.

®) Thompson  translates  this  line,  “Or  with  whom,  when  I was  cold
I have  clothed  his  nakedness  with  a  garment”.  For  the  underlying  meaning
of this  line,  ef.  Relig.  Sem.  335  f.

:


Br Al:

relatives  had  not  performed  the  usual  sacrifices  and  libations
for  the  dead,  seem  to  play  an  especially  important  role.

Another  class,

that  can  hardly  be  called  evil  spirits,
but  rather,  workers  of  evil,  were  the  witches.
Almost  the
entire  Maglü-series  is  devoted  to  them,  their  evil  deeds,  and
incantations  against  them.
They  were  both  male  and  female,
but  the  latter  seem  to  have  been  more  numerous.  They  possessed
powers  superior  to  the  average  man,  which  they  used  for  his
They  too  carried  on  their  work  chiefly  at  night.
destruction.
They  brought  all  manner  of  evil,  not  only  to  individuals,  but
also  to  families  and  to  whole  communities.
So  great  was  their
power  that  even  the  evil  spirits  were  subject  to  their  commands.
The  conception  of witches  ameng  the  Babylonians  probably
arose  from  their  innate  belief  in  omens.
Almost  everything,
certainly  everything  unusual,  was  for  them  a  portent  of  good
or  evil.
a  man  or  womar;
distinguished  perhaps  by  unusual  bodily  characteristics,  should
be  regarded  as  ominous  of  evil.  And  not  that  alone,  but
in  time  such  a  person  came  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  actual
cause  of  evil.
In  the  incantations  references  to  the  evil  man
are  not  infrequent.  He  is  kimnu  $a  päni  limnu  pü  limnu  lısänu

Therefore  it  was  but  natural  that

limnu,  “an  evil  being,  whose  face  is  evil,  whose  mouth  is evil,
whose  tongue  is  evil!)”.  Threugh  his  evil  mouth  and  tongue  he
bewitches  men?);  whoever  approaches  him  may  come  under  his
spell.

However  the  evil  spirits  most  feared,  were  those  of  the
first  class.  They  were  real  gods,  the  ones  spoken  of  as  the
children  of  Anu,  the  offspring  of Ea  and  Damkina.  Chief  among

1) Cf.  above,  p.  5,  1.  52;  also  A.S.K.T.XI  =UR.  19%)  Col.

I, 31-33:

päan  limnäüti  inu  limuttu
pa  limnu  lisan  limuttw
saptu  limuttu  imtuw  limuttu.
The  face  of  the  evil  ones,  the  evil  eye,
The  evil  mouth,  the  evil  tongue,
The  evil  lip,  the  evil  venom.

2) U.  L.  tablet.  ©.  177/178.

Pu  limnu  lisänu  limuitu  mutamü.

Cf.

V  R.  50  a  67—72  and  Cun,  Texte  XVII.  pl.  32,  19/20.

84


N  Re

them  were  “The  Seven”.
mentioned  by  name?).
seven).

Really  only  six’)  of  these  are  ever
said  to  be  twice

they  are

Often

The  six  are  the  utukku,  alü,  ekimmu,  galla,  ilu  and  rabigu.
These  six
To  each  the  epithet  limnu  is  generally  applied.
deınons  fall  naturally  into  three  groups,  utukku  and  ekimmu,
ala  and  gallü,  ilu  and  rabisu.

Ilu
Of  these,  the  last  group  had  its  origin  in  the  gods.
limnu  is  nothing  but  the  evil  god,  who  brings  calamity.  Rabıgu
(MASKIM))  is  thought  to  denote,  “The  one  who  lies  in  wait”  B),
from  the  stem  Y27%).
There  was  a  good  rubisu,  as  well  as
an  evil.
Thus  the  god,  Söru  is  called  the  rabis  ESarru?),  and
ISum  is the  rabisu  soru  Sa  iläni®).  An  (il) rabisu  biti  also  oceurs  ®).
The  work  of  these  good  spirits  is  rabigütu,  a  synonym  of  mas-
sartu,  “watch”  1%).  Of  the  iu  limnu  and  rabigu  limnu  but  little
is  known.  As  they  appear  in  the  religious  texts,  they  have  lost
all trace  of their  divine  origin,  and  become  completely  identified

1) Thompson  seems  to  regard  “The  Seven”  as  a  group,  different
from  the  six  whose  names  are  always  mentioned  together.
(“Devils  and
Evil  Spirits”  I, Introd.  pp.  XXIV  ff.  and  XL  f#.).  However,  U.  L,  V  Col.
III,  20-28,  disproves  this  theory:  —

sibit  ilani  (pl.)  limnütum,
sibit  labarti  limnütum,
sibit  labartum  %bu  limnütum,
25.  ina  Same  sibit  ina  irsitim  sibitma.

UTUG  -HUL  A-LÄ-HUL  GIDIM-HUL  MULLA-HUL  DINGIR-

HUL  MASKIM-HUL.
Here  “The  Six”  and  “The  Seven”  are  clearly  identical.

2) With  this  may  be  compared  how,  ın  the  Bible,  although  seven
nations  were  driven  out  of  Palestine  by  Israel,  no  more  than  six  are  ever
mentioned  together.

Cf.  below.

») Of.  \.  25,  above,  and  U.  L.  V  Col.  IV  60/61;  V  56/57.
4) Brün.  5659.
Dr  HWB.  611;  KB,  VI,  1,527.
6) Cf.  Genesis  4,  7, also  K.  A.  T.?  464,  3.
) VR.  52  Col.  I 20.
8)  A.  8.  K.  T.  XI  Col.  IV,  47—48;  U.  L.  tablet  K.  178—180.
®) II  R.  66  obv.  Col.  III  30,
10,  K,  111  rev.  I 28  (cf.  Maglü.  notes,  p.  127).

85

Be


a  ee

with  the  other  evil  spirits.  And  even  as  such  it  is  doubtful
if they  were  to  the  Babylonians  more  than  mere  names.  Unlike
the  other  evil
spirits,  they  have  no  especial  characteristics,
and  are  seldom  mentioned  elsewhere  than  in  the  lists  of
the  six!).

-  The  utukku  kimnu  and  ekimmu  limnu  were  originally  ghosts,
who,  unable  to  rest,  wandered  about  the  earth,  doing  harm
wherever  possible.  Ekimmu  is the  .usual  word  for  ghost?),  while
utukku  is  used  once  in  that  meaning?).  The  ideograms  for these
two  words  are  almost  identical.
That  for  ekimmu  is  GIDIM
dere ),  that  for  utukku,  UTUG  (<P-T)5),  both  com-

pounds  of  —T>-T  .r  IL or  IT.  Delitzsch  6) considers  the
first  of these  signs  a  compound  of ET (IS) and  »»-  (TAR).  The
last  two  signs  denoie  respectively  one  third  and  two  thirds.?).
In  the  Babylonian  astronomical-theological  system,  the  goddess
This  would  then  give
IStar  had  the  numerical  value,  fifteen.
the  utukku  and  ekimmu  the  values,  ten  and  five  respectively®).
The  utukku  is  mentioned  far  more  than  the  ekimmu,  oftener  in
fact  than  any  of  the  evil  spirits®)..  The  Babylonians  even  went
so  far  as  to  distinguish  between  utukkuw's  of  the  plain,  the
mountain,  the  sea,
the  grave,  the  river,  the  forest  and  the
The  spirit,  $ödu,  may  also  be  designated  by  either
street!%),

1) But  cf.  IV  R.  58  Col.  I 16—17,  where  the  labartu  is  said  to  be
surrounded  by  evil  gods  and  evil  rabisu's  (iläni  limnüti  rabise  limnüti,  3ut
päniki  5a  ina päniki  illaku).

®) C£.  H.  W.  B.  57,  In  VR.47a,  46  a  synonym  for  ekimmu,  zühm,
a  name  derived  from  the  practice  of  necromaney,  is  used.  Cf.  H.  W.  B.
66a,  N.  E.  Xil  Col.  III-IV  (K.  B.  VI,  I,  262  £.),  and  I Sam.  28,  11  ff.

®») N.  E. XII  Col.  III  24,  28  (K.  B  VI,  I, 262-263).

*) Brün.  11307.  Another  ideogram  for  ekimmu  is  GUD  (=  alpu.

ef.  below);  U.  L.  V  Col.  IV  14—16.

5) Brün:  11312.
s H.  W.B57b,  1572.
?) Cf.  Brün.  11221  and  11224,  and  H.  W.  B.  695  a  and  655  a.
6) This  hypotihesis  I owe  to  the  kindness  of Prof.  Bezold.
2207 ie series  Utukke  limnüti.

ı%)  A,  8. K.  T.  XI,  Cok  I 2—3  and  Cm.  Texts  XVII  pl.  16, 27—29.

86


EN

of  the  above  ideograms!),
rabisu?).

while  UTUG  is  once  used  for

Finally,  the  last  pair,  the  ala  (=  A—LÄ)®)  and  the  gallı
(=  MULLA)®).
The  literal  meaning  of  these  ideograms  is
unknown,  but  that  the  last  part  of  each  is  identical,  shows
perhaps  that  they  are  closely  related.
These  are  evil  spirits
proper;  they  have  no  other  origin.  They  are  apparently  ugly
apparitions,  changing  their  forms  at  will,  appearing  now  as  some
animal,  and  again  as  a  distorted,  terrifying  human  being.  There
are  in  the  Babylonian  literature  three  alü’s,  the  heavenly  steer
(GUD-AN-NA),  created  by  Anu  to  avenge  IStar  on  Gilgame$,
a  strom  demon  (GÄL-LU),  and  the  alü  above).  As  Jensen  has
shown,  these  are  merely  three  different  forms  of  the  same
spirit.  When  we  compare  the  reading  of  the  ideogram  with  that
for  the  gallä,  and  furthermore  remember,  that  a  favorite  form,
in  which  the  latter  visited  mortals,  was  a  raging  bull),  we
have  further  proof  that  the  alü  and  the  gallü  were  but  different
forms  of  one  and  the  same  demon’?).

Another  evil  spirit  often  mentioned  ip  connection  with
these  six,  and  perhaps  forming  the  unknown  seventh  of the
But  little  is  known  of  him.  He  has  his
group,  is  the  $ödu®).
counterpart  in  the  3edu  damgu,  the  god  spirit,  that  protects

_

", Cf.  Brün.

11308  and  11314.

The  note  to  the  former  is to  be
omitted,  since  in  the  second  edition  of  IV.  R.  the  ideogram  is  repeated,
and  also  oecürs  twice  in  U.  L.  tablet‘  G.  col.  I  14--17  and  Cun.  Texts,
XVII  pl.  5  35/36.
However  Brünnow’s  surmise  for  no.  11309  is  proved
eorrect  by  IV  Rand  Cun.  Texts,  XVI.  In  II  R.  17  Col.  19  and  Col.  II  60
UTUG  is  used  for  ekimmu.
Haupt  (A.  S.  K.  T.  pp.  82  and  %)  has
corrected  the  latter  passage  and  placed  an  interrogation-mark  after  the  forıner.

?) C#.  Brün.  11313.
®) Brün.  11638.
4) Ibid.  7732,  MULLA  is  a  compound  of  GÄL  (MUL?)  +  LA.  May
not  MULLA  perhaps  be  read  GALLA,  and  the  word  gallü  be  derived  from
it?  Cf.  below  n.  7.

5) C£.  H.  W.  B.  60 and K. B.  VI, I, 452 £.
®, C£.  U.  L.  V  Col.  IV,  14/15  and  Cun.  Texts.  XVII  pl.  21, 113/114.
?) It  may  be  remarked  here,  that,  with  the  exception  of Üu  and

rabisu,  these  six  names  are  of  Sumerian  origin.

8) Cf.  Maglü,  notes,  p.  127,  and  Cun.  Texts.  XVII  pl.  2, 8-16;  pl.

4, 9-11.

87


Pa  En YES

mankind.  That  he  is  closely  related  to  “The  Seven”,  is  beyond
doubt.
In  fact  the  term  sedw  is  used  collectively  for  the
entire  group?).

That  “The  Seven”  had  originally  nothing  to  do  with
That  they  were

sickness,  is  clear  from  the  above  description.
rather  storm-demons  may  be  inferred  from  the  following?):

The  evils  gods  äre  raging  storms,

5.  Ruthless  spirits,  created  in  the  vault?)  of  heaven;

Workers  of  woe  are  they,

10.  That  each  day  raise  their  evil  heads  for  evil®),

To  wreak  destruction  ...
Of  these  seven  [the  first]  is  the  South  Wind  ..

15.  The  second  is  a  dragon  with  mouth  agape,

That  none  can  .
The  third is  a  fierce  leopard  that  carries  off (?) young  .

20.  The  fourth  is  a  terrible  serpent  ...

The  fifth is a furious  beast(?)5)  after  which  no  restraint?.
The  sixth  is  a  rampant  ...

which  against  god  and

king...

25.  The  seventh  is a  cyelone,  an  evil  windstorm  which  ...
These  seven  are  the  messengers  of  Anu,  tbe  king,

30.  Bearing  gloom  from  eity  to  eity,

A  tempest  that  furiously  scours  the  heavens,
A  dense  cloud  that  brings  gloom  over  the  sky,

35.  A rushing  windgust,  casting  darkness  over  the bright day,

Foreing  their  way  with  the  baneful  windstorm.

40.  The  deluge  ofthe  Storm-God,  mighty  destroyers  are  they;

Stalking  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Storm-God.

ı) U.  L.  XVI,  3—4,
®) Ibid.  1-5;  Cf.  227—276  and  Con.  Texts.  XVII  pl.  37,  1—6;  and

K.  A.  T.?  469  f.

®, For  a  different  rendering  of  Supuk  Same  cf.  K.  B.  VL  I, 467f.
However  since  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  are  located  in  it,  and  it  is  syn-
onymous  with  elat  Same,  and  kirib  Same,  and  is  the  opposite  of  arala,  it
seems  rather  to  denote  the  whole  vault  of  heaven.

Of.  H,  W.  B.  679.

4) Since  there  was  an  evil  spirit  known  as  the  mukil  ve3  limutli  (cf.
Beitr.  XLV  Col.  I  7  note),  it  is  perhaps  better  to  consider  it  used  here
collectively,  for  all  the  evil  spirits,  like  dw  in  1.  5.

®) Of.  Thompson’s  note,  p.  89,

88


BER)

45.  In  the  foundation!)  of  heaven  like  lighting  they  flash,

To  wreak  destruction  they  lead  they  way;

50.  In  the  broad  heaven,  the  home  of  Anu,  the  king,

They take  their  stand  for  evil,  and  there  is none  to  oppose,
So  great  is  their  power  that  they  dare  to  attack  the  gods
themselves?)  and  even  by  them  are  not  easily  repulsed.  But  in
time,  perhaps  as  the  result  of  their  relations  with  other  evil
spirits,  they too  became  bringers  of  sickness.  As  such,  they  are
the  heralds  of  the  plague-god  Ura3), the  messengers  of  the
namtäru*),  the  throne-bearers  of EreskıgalÖ).

The  real  spirits  of  sickness  may  be  also  divided  into
three  classes;  labartu,  labasu  and  ahhazu;  lila,  lilitu  and  ardat
Of  these,  each
le,  namtäru,  asakku  and  sickness  in  general.
of  the  first  two  classes  are  internally  closely  related;  the  third
represents  a  sort  of  “tailing  off”’  process  to  the  end  of  which
we  never  come.

The  close  relationship  of  the  labartu,  labasu  and  ahhazu
is  shown  by  their  ideograms,  respectively  ®#  RAB-KAN-ME,
ü  RAB-KAN-ME-A  and  Ü4  RAB-KAN-ME-KIL®).  The  reading
of  the  first  name  is  uncertain,  lamastu  being  possible.
The
etymology  of  the  word  is  of  course  unknown.  Labagu  is  usually
regarded  as  coming  from  the  stem,  y25,  “to  overthrow”,  “to

!) That  Thompson’s  and  Kugler’s  renderings  of  isid  sam?  as  “the
height  of  heaven”  and  “the  milky  way”  respectively,  are  both  incorrect,
is  almost  self-evident.  Isid  same  can  mean  only “the  foundation  of  heaven”,
i.  e,  “the  horizon”.
This  is  born  out  by  IV  R.  20  No.  2,  obv.  1/2,  where
ifid  Same  is  the  place  where  the  sun  rises  (cf.  V.  R,  50,  7/8  a.)  K.  8531
(Hrozny.  M.  V.A.G.  103,  5  pp.  8—9)  13/14  speaks  of isid 3am?  as  the  place
where  Ninib  thunders,  cf. N.  E. XI, 104—106  (K. B.  VI, I, 236—237  and  note
p.  49%).
In  IV  R. 28  No.  2  23/26  isöd  ame  is  contrasted  with  elat  $am?
and  seems  also  to  be  in  parallelism  with  irsitum  while  elat  same  is  in
parallelism  with  ame.  We  must  therefore  conclude  that  sid  Jam?  can  mean
only  “the  horizon”,  perhaps  that  point  where  the  sun  rises,  and  elat  Sam?2,
elat  3am&  by  “the
“the  zenith”.
South”,  and  isid  Sam&  by  “the  North”.

Delitzsch  (H.  W.  B.  64  b)  translates

This  of  course  to  be  corrected.

2) U.  L.  XVI70  fi.;  K.  64/65.
8) C£.  K.  B.  VL,L,58  1.  7—11.
27:0,  1.-Y  Col.  III  7/8,
s)  Ibid.  9/10,
*) Brün.  42464248.

89


ee  Rn

She  see

destroy”.  Ahhasu  is  probably  derived  from  the  stem,  mx  “to
seize”.
The  last  two  demons  are  met  with  only  in  connection
with  the  labartu,  and  as  their  ideograms  show,  were  particular
forms  of  that  evil  spirit.  The  labartu  was a female  demon,  the
lso  to  have  been  in  part
daugbter_of_Anu').
identified  with  IStarr.
She,  together  with  her  two  companion-
spirits,  were  celosely  related  to  %’bu,  the  fever-demon,  and  we
may  probably  conclude  that  all  three  were  demonifications  of
different  kinds  of  fever?).  The  special  prey  of  the  labartu  was
children,  but  she  also  attacked  grown  persons  and  ceattle.
In
one  passage3)  labartu  is  used  as  a  collective  term  for  “The
Seven”.
This  shows  how  completely  the  distinction  between
the  different  classes  of  evil  spirits  was  in  time  lost  sight  of.
In  another  passage®)  ahhazu  is  mentioned  as  the  name  of  a
disease.

The  next  class  consists  likewise  of  three  members,  lila,
That  these  two  are  internally  closely
klitu,  and  ardat  lie.
related  is  shown  by  their  ideograms,  respectively,  LIL-LÄ3),
KI-EL-LIL-LÄ$)  and  KI-EL-UD-DA-KAR-RA?).  The  ideograms
show  that  the  first  two  were  storm-demons®).
LIL-LÄ  is  also
equivalent  to  Järu  and  zagiqu®).  KI-EL-LIL-LÄ  is  therefore
equivalent  to  “maid  of  the  storm”  10),  KI-EL-UD-DA-KAR-RA
on  the  contary  means  “the  maid  of him  who  oppresses  the  day” 11);
is therefore  a demon  of the  night.  The  three  however  must  have
become  related  very  early,  since  they  are  always  met  with
together  in the  incantations.  So  close  was  this  relationship,  that

!) For  a  thorough  treatment  of the  Zabartu,  cf. Myhrman,  in Z. A.  XVl,
®) In  IV  R.  No.  1  (Cun.  Texts.  XVII  pl.  25)  ohv.  5  and  51/52,

labartu  is  identified  with  tu,  a  sickness  of  the  head,

®) U.  L.  V.Col.  II  21—24.
*)A.  B  M.  II  Sp.  IV  28  #,  Küchler  suggests  that  this  ag be

equivalent  to  yellow  fever.  -»
®) Brün.  5939.
®) Ibid.  9834.
”)  Ibid.  7920.
®) C£.  KAT®  460,  7.
®) Brün.  5940-5941.
10) Ardat  zagigi  or  even  ardat  hie,
1)  Ardat  mukarrö  ümı.


ER  A

the  ideogram  for  llitu  was  often  used  for  ardat  let).
Often
the  determinative,  amölu,  stands  before  LIL-LÄ,  but  the  feminine
determinative  never?)  precedes  the  other  two  ideograms.  Probably
the  first  part  of  these,  KI-EL,  had  the  force  of a  determinative.
That  the  Babylonians  regarded  these  three  chiefly  as  storm-
demons,  is  beyond  question).
But  it  is  just  as  certain  that
they  connected  them  also  with  the  night.  This  is  no  doubt  due
to  the  close  resemblance  of  their  names  to  the  Assyrian  word
for  evening,  lilätu.
The  fact  that  all  demons  were  supposed
to  carry  on  their  work  chiefly  at  night,  must  have  furthered
As  a  demon  of  the  night  litu  passed  into  Jewish
this  idea.
traditions,  and  then  into  the  Syriac.

Of the  actual  workings  of  klü  and  klitw  nothing  is known.
The  ardat  lilö  however  was  more  troublesome.  Of  her  we  read:

The
1) An  interesting  passage  in  this  conueetion  is  U,  L.  III  197.
ideograms  there  are  MULU-LIL-LÄ,  KI-EL-LIL  and  KI-EL-LIL-DA-KAR-RA.
It  will  be  noticed  in  the  first  place,  that  the  second  ideogram  lacks  the
usual  LÄ.  To  LIL  of  the  third  ideogram  another  tablet  gives  the  expected
variant,  UD.
The  scribe  had  begun
to  write  KI-EL-LIL-LÄ,  for  ardat  lile,  but,  remembering  that  he  had  already
used  this  for  Klitu,  changed  it  to  the  customary  KI-EL-UD-DA-KAR-RA,
forgetting  however  to  substitute  UD  for  LIL.

LIL  to  be  a  mistake.

This  proves

2) Maglü  I  138  reads:  «met  LIL-LÄ  sinnis  KI-LIL-LA,  KI-EL-LIL-LÄ.
In  the  second  ideogram  the  usual  EL  is  wanting.
In  fact  one  of  the
duplicates  of  this  text  omits  KI  as  well,  and  only  sinnis  L]L-LÄ  remains.
This  is’probably  because  the  scribe,  intending  to  use  KI-EL-LIL-LÄ  for
ardat  lie,  was  forced  to  distinguish  in  some  way  between  it  and  the
But  with  EL  or  KI-EL  omitted,  it  became  necessary
ideogram  for  lihtu.
to  distinguish  between  this  ideogram  and  that  for  lila.  sinni#  LIL-LÄ  ren-
dered  into  Assyrian,  would  be  lihtu,  while  KI-EL-LIL-LÄ  would  be  ardat
lile  and  not  “the  maid  of  him  who  oppresses  the  day”.  This  is exactly  the
Babylonian  conception  of  the  two,

»)  LIL-LÄ  must  have  been  origivally  a  Sumerian  storm-demon  (cf.
Cun.  Texts,  XVII  pl.  37,  1--6,  and  KAT°  460,  7).  From  the  Sumerian  name
according  to  the  usual  process  of  lengthening  the  end  vowel,  the  Assyrian
This  became  in  turn
lila  was  derived,  and  from  this  the  feminine  Kätuw.
equivalent  to  the  Sumerian,  “*maid  of  the  storm”.
The  derivation  of  kla
from  the  Semitic  stem  „55,  “to  be  abundant’””,  proposed  by Martin  (“Textes  .
Religieuses”  p.  25)  and  half  way  accepted  by  Thompson  (“Devils  and  Evil
Spirits”  I  p.  XXXVII)  is  of  course  groundless.
The  usual  ideogram  for
Böl,  @EN-LIL  (-LÄ)  probably  points  to  him  originally  as  a  storm-god.

V.A.G  Mitteilungen.

1905.

8.

2

9


Brio

ardatu  3a  bit  zagigi  ana  ardalu  ina  apti  itanüru  ardat  lile  $a
ina  apti  biti  ana  ameli  igruru  ardatu  Sa  kima  sinnisti  ardu  la
r-{—  —  —  —  —]  11 50  kima  sinnisti  ardu  1a  ikipusi  YY 3a
ma  sün  mütisa  kuzba  lü  iputu  14 Sa  ina  sün  mütisa  subätsa  lä
iShutu  Yf 5a  idlu  damgu  Sillasa  lä  ipturu  17 3a  mussi3a  Sieba  lä
ıb3ü  N).  From  this  and  other  passages?)  it  is  clear  that  the  ardat
le  was  a  half-human,  female  spirit,  that  appeared  ehiefly  to
ınen,  and excited  their  passions,  but  did  not  always  gratify  them?).
Perhaps  we  may  see  in  her  the  demonification  of  unpleasant
sexual  dreams).

The  final  group  of  evil  spirits,  as  has  been  said,  “tails
off”  into  sicknesses  themselves.
The  chief  members  of  this
group  are  the  asakku°)  and  the  namtäru.  With  them  is  usually

2), WEB.  21987
?) Maglä,  notes  p.  128.
®) V  R.  50,  59—62a  reads  as  follows:

sa  ardat  lile  ihirusu
2
idlu  Sa  ardat  Wle  ikrimusu.

(One)  whom  the  ardat  lile  has  looked  upon  (sexually),
a  mar  whom  the  ardat  lie  has  cast  to  the  ground.

It  is  possible  with  Thorapson  (“Devils  and  Evil  Spirits”  Ipp.  XXVII
and  XXXVII)  to  translate  the  first  line,  “one  whom  the  ardat  il  has
married”,  but  comparison  with  the  next  line  seems  to  indicate  that  the
ardat  lile  has  exerted  violence  upon  the  man.  This  coupled  with  the  above
quoted  text  and  A.  S.  K.  T.  XI  Col.  TI  30/31,  ardat  (lile)  5a  mutu  la  isu,
“the  ardat  lile  that  has  no  husband”,  and  the  expression,  häru sa lile,  “being
looked  upon  by  Zu”,  (II  R.  62  Col.  III,  9  f.)  seems  sufficient  argument
for  the  above  eonception.
It  is  also  noteworthy  that  A.  S.  K.  T.  X132/33
speaks  of  the  zdiu  Kle  5a  assatu  la  ihzu,  “the  man  of Klü  who  has  taken  no
but  probably  a  fourth  of  this
wife”,
group,
of,  to  correspond  to  the
ardat  lile.

This  was
a  male  demon,  artifieially  conceived

hardly  4lü  himself,

-

The  Lilith  of  Rabinic  and  Syriac  tradition,  who  was  the  wife  of
Adam,  previous  to  Eve,  originated  from  this  ardat  ll2  rather  than  from
the  storm-demon  Äilitw.
The  tradition  recorded  in  Midrash  Ber.  Rab.  XX
and  XXIV,  that  in  the  one  hundred  and  thirty  years  after  the  expulsion
from  Eden,  when  Adam  was  separated  from  Eve,  each  had  connection  with
evil  demons  of  both  sexes,  resulting  in  various  forms  of  offspring,  all  of
course  evil,  may  also  go  back  to  our  ardat  lie  and  idiu  lile  above.
Cf
Conway:  “Demonology  and  Devil-Lore”,  Il  pp.  88,  100.

4)  C£.  U.  L.  tablet  B.  18/19.
6)  For  the  reading,  asakku,  instead  of  adakku,  ef.  K.B.  VI,  1,433

92


ur

105  9

mentioned  the  mursu  lä  täbu,  “the  sickness  not  good”,  and
sometimes  the  names  of particular  diseases!)  or  other  calamities.
Often  either  word,  asakku  or  namläru,  is  used  to  denote  sickness
or  pestilence  in  general?).

Both  names  are  derived  from  the  Sumerian;  asakku  from
AZAG?),  meaning,  “the  one  who  weakens  the  strength”,  and
namtäaru  from  NAM-TAR®),  “the  one  who  decides  the  fate”.
The  namtäru  was  the  son  of  Böl  and  Ereskigald),  and  the
latter's  messenger.  When  Nörgal  was  sent  against  her,  the
namtäru  betrayed  his  mistress®),  and  thus  became  subject  to
As  the  messenger  of  EreSkigal  the  determinative  for
Nergal.
god  stands  before  his  name”),
“The  Seven”  are  once  termed
eollectively,  “the  namtäru,  the  beloved  son  of Bel  and  EreSkigal”8),
and  again,  “the  heralds  of  the  namtäru,  tbe  throne-bearers  of
Ereskigal”®).  In  one  text  namiäru  appears  with  the  variant  galla!?).
Apparently  the  Baby-
lonians  dit  not  conceive  of  it  otherwise  than  as  a  pest-demon,
and  so  gave  it  no  definite  form  nor  attributee.  In  one  passage!t)
the  names  of  a  long  list  of  ghosts  are  summed  up  in  the
exoreism  asakku  mämit  Ü Anunnaki  utammeka,  “O asakku,  lexoreise
thee  by  the  bann  of  the  Anunnaki”.

Of  the  asakku  little  can  be  said.

It  will  thus  be  seen  tbat,  no  matter  whai  the  origin  of
to

the  different  evil  spirits,  the  Babylonians  ceased  in  time

1) Dimätu,  Wbu,  ti-u,  ete.,  cf.  also  K.  B. VI, I, 76,  6--8  and  Beitr.  XLV

Col.  I and  notes.

», U.  L.  V  Col.  III  39/40.  cf. 41/42.  Ibid.  III  164,  the  namtäru  appears

both  as  an  evil  spirit  and  as  a  sickness.

®)  =  IDH-  PA.  Brün.  6592.  Jensen  (K.  B.  VI,  1, 433.)  connects

asakku  with  the  stem,  yn.-

4) Brün.  2110.  In  U.L,.  V  Col.  II  7/8.  LIL-LA-DA-RA  =  nantäru

Does  this  indicate  a  relation  to  Ka?

5) Ibid.  Col.  I 5-7.
©), K.  B.  VI,  I, 76,  19—21  and  note  39%,
”) In  themyth  of  Istar’s  descent  to  Hell,  this  is  invariably  the  case;
in  that  of  Nörgaland  Ereskigal  on  the  contrary,  the  determinative  is always
omitted.

8) U.  L.  V  Col.
I5—8.
®) Ibid.  Col.  III  7—10.
20B,M/  8.1,  49,
4)  U.  L. V  Col.  II  3—10

95

2%*


a

make  any  distinction  between  them.  They  were  the  bringers  of
all  evil;  they  caused  eclipses;  were  raging  storms,  that  swept
over  the  land;  destroyed  the  family  life;  killed  cattle;  tore  down
buildings;  they  erawled  through  the  .cracks  in  the  door  and
brought  all  manner  of  misfortune  with.  them.  But,  as  has  been
so  often  said,  as  demons  of  sickness,  they  did  most  of  their
evil  work.
Ali  disease  was  caused  by  them.  entering  a  man’s
body.  With  proper  care  they  might  be  kept away,  but  when  once
.  they  had  forced  their  way  into  the  body,  it  was  not  so  easy  to
expel  them.
To  the  Babylonian,  an  evil  spirit.  was  something
material;  not  a  spirit  in  the  modern  sense,  but  something  that
entered  a  man  bodily,  and  had  to  be. driven  forth  in  the  same
way.  And  so  real  was  this  idea  to  him,  that  he  came  .to  regard
the  different  parts  of  the  human  body  as  apportioned  to  the
various  evil  spirits.
This  is  elear  from  two  texts  both,  alas,
very  fragmentary.

'a-sak-ku  hab-bi-lu  ana  qag-gad  (amzhi)
nam-ta-ru-  lim-nu  Sa  a-na  na-pis-ti  [ameli)
ü-tuk-ku  lim-nu  Sa  a-na  ki-Sad  [ameli]
a-lu-u  lim-nu  Sa  ana  ir-bt  |ameli)
e-kim-mu  lim-nu  3a  ana  gab-Kk  almel]
gal-lu-u  lim-nu  3a  ana  ga: -t  [amel:]
du  imm  |  —
—
The  destructive  asakku  to  the  head  of  [the  man],
The  evil  namtäru,  which  to  the  breath  (?) [of the  man],
The  evil  uiukku,  which  to  the  neck  of [the  man],
The  evil  alt,  which  to  the  breast  of  the  m/an],
‘The  evil  ekimmu,  which  to  the  waist  of  the  mian],

—  —  .—  —]!).

—

—

The  evil  gallü,  which  to  the  kand  of  [the  man]
The  evil  god  [—  —

—  —  —  —  —].
And.:  [—  —  —  —]  a-na  ir-ti-  Su  —  —  —]

e-kim-mu  lim-nu  a-na  qab-L-suw  it-te-M
gal-lu-u  lim-nu  a-na  ga-bı-su  ü-te-hi
du  kim-nu  a-na  Se-pi-Su  it-le-hi
si-bit-bi-Su-nu  istenis  (nis)  13-sab-tu-ni
zu-mur-Su  kima  i-Sa-t  Tum-mu-du-us

ı) IV  R.  29  No.  2.

9


N  >

ki-ma  e-pes  limuttim  (-tim)  [—  —  —  —]!)
[—  —  —  --]  to  [his]  breast  [—  —  —  —]
The  evil  ekimmnu  approaches  his  waist;
The  evil  gallü  approaches  his  hand;
The  evil  god  approaches  his  foot;
“The  Seven”  together.  seize  (him);
They  lay  hold  of  his  body  like  fire;
Like  the  working  of  vl  [-  —  —  — —]

In  each  of  these  texts,  the  parts  of  the  body  assigned  to
the  ekimmu  and  gallü  are  identical;  and  we  may  infer  the  same,
not  only  for  the  al@  and  the  iu  limnu,  but  for  the  rest  of the
evil  spirits  e<  weli.  However  it  is  doubtful  if  this  apportioning
the  entire  religious
the  body  would  hold  good  throughout
literature,  since  the  evil  spirits  were  not  distinguished  from  one
another  by  hard  and  fast  lines,

Accordingly,  to  the  Babylonian,  sickness  consisted  in being
possessed  by  evil  spirits,  who  had  entered  the  body  of  the
afflieted  man?).  Could  they  be  expelled,  the  man  would  recover;
if  not,  he  remained  sick,  possibly  became  worse,  and  perhaps
died3).

Ä

But  since  the  evil  spirits  were  thus  the  enemies  of  man,
and  their  attacks  so  dangerous,  man  had  to  have  some  means
of  defence  against  them;  otherwise  the  whole  human  race  would
Berttably Ba  What was  this?

FIRE  R. 18*  No,  3.
2) It is  possible  that  not  all  diseases  were  a0  considered.

In  A.  B.
M.  evil  spirits  are  but  seldom  mentioned  in  connection  with  sickness  (cf,
above  p.  16,  note  4).  However  many  of  the  remedies  prescribed  in  these
texts  were  also  used  to  driva  out  evil  spirits.
At  any  rate  there  need  not
be  the  slightest  doubt,  that  dangerous  sicknesses,  and  especially  those  but
little  understood,  implied  the  presence  of  an  evil  spirit.

.

 ®%) May  we  perhaps  infer  that  a  dead  person  was  one  over  whom  the
or  one  in  whom  an  evil  spirit

evil  spirits  had  acquired.  complete  control,
was  permanently  located?


N

Chap.  Ill.
6004  Spirits.

Whether  the  Babylonians  were  aware  of  it  or  not,  there  is
apparent  in  their  theology  a  trace  of  dualism,  a  law  of  con-
trast  as  it  were.  Whether  it  may  be  called  a  law  is  uncertain,
for  the  word  implies  consciousness  of  a  principle,  and  nowhere,
throughout  the  Babylonian  literature,  do  we  find  the  slightest
But,  as  is  the  case  with
indieation  of  such  a  consciousness,
every  Nature-religion,  this  principle  does  exist;  may  almost  be
said  to  form  the  very  basis  of  the  entire  Babylonian  theology,
They  saw  how,  during  the  winter,  vegetation  was.  dead,
only  to  be  awakened  to  a  new  life  with  the  spring.  They  saw
the  passage  of  the  sun  foreward  and  backward  from  north  to
south;  the  eycle  of  the  moon’s  phases;  the  changes  of  the
seasons,  and  the  many  other.  revolutions,  that  Nature  works.
And  for  them  it  was  not  a  mere  succession  Öf  phases,  but  a
fixed  motion  back  and  forth;  a  motion  from  one  end  to  the
other
From  this  went
forth  the  whole  doctrine  of  opposites.
Heaven  was  the  coun-
terpart  of  the  earth;  the  gods,  the  counterparts  of  men;  winter,
the  counterpart  of  summer;  death,  the  counterpart  of  life;  evil,
the  counterpart  of  good.
This  was  their  solution  of  the  great
mystery  oflife.
Life  is  a  state  of  activity,  of  “somethingness”;
The  ghosts  of
death,  on  the  contrary,  passivity,  nothingness.
the  dead  retain  their  earthly  forms,  but  they  lie  in  the  under-
world  inactive,  and  their  food  is  dust!).
The  gods  too  are  the»
opposites  of  men:  they  bear  the  latter’s  form;  have  the’ latter’s
passions;  live  among  themselves  like  men.  Only  in  relation  to,
men  are  their  powers  superhuman.

These  ends  were  direct  counterparts.

This  is  the  law  of  contrast.

The  point  however  must  be
emphasized;  to  the  Babylonians  themselves,  it  may  not  have
been  a  law;  they  may  not  have  been  at  all  conscious  of it.
And  yet  it  was  ever-present  in  their
theology
and  life.

literature,

!) N.  E.  XU  Col.  IV—VI  (K.  B.  VI,  I, 262—265).

96


—

Therefore  it need  not  be  at  all  surprising,  that,  in  contrast
to  the  evil  spirits,  good  spirits  also  existed,  whose  duty  was  to
protect  man  from  the  former’s  attacks.
What  the  origin  of
this  belief  was,  is  hard  to  say.
That  they  existed  solely  to
ward  off  evil,  points  to  a  time  when  the  evil  spirits  had  come
to  be  regarded,  no  longer  as  messengers  of  the  gods,  but  as
the  inveterate  foes  of  man.  It  is  possible  that  the  good  spirits
represent  the  remains  of  the  belief  in  spirits  as  messengers  of
the  gods’  will,  only  now  this  was  usually  to  protect  man  from
the  evil  demons.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  Babylonians  came
to  see  that  not  everybody,  who  became  sick,  died;  in  fact  that
not  everybody  became  sick;  that,  in  short,  the  power  of  the
evil  spirits  must  have  been  limited.  Hence  the  idea,  that  there
Must  be  good  spirits  guarding  man  against  evil.
It  is  also
possible,  if  any  value  may  be  attached  to  the  law  of  contrast
as  a  law,  that  the  good  spirits  were  conceived  of  as  counter-
parts  of  the  evil;  if  there  are  evil  spirits,  there  must  also  be
good.
It  is  impossible  to  say  which  of  these  three  theories  is
correct;  in  fact,  it  is  highly  probable  that  some  kernel  of  truth
lies  at  the  bottom  of  each.
At  any  rate,  whatever  the  real
origin  be,  this  much  is  certain:  the  belief  in  good  spirits  follow-
ed,  and  was  the  direct  outgrowth  of,  the  belief  in  evil  spirits.
Chief  among  the  good  spirits  were  man’s  own  deities.
Every  man  had  from  birth,  his  personal  god  and  goddess!),
who  watched  over  him  and  protected  him  from  evil.  These
were  not  new  deities  but  some  pair  from  among  the  great  gods.
Thus  ASur  and  ASuritu  were  always  the  god  and  goddess  of
It  is  possible  that
the  king.of  Assyria,  but  of  no  one  else?).

!)  This  goddess,  like  most  Babylonian  goddesses,  was  merely  ‘the
companion  and  pale  reflection  of  the  male  deity,  aud  was  seldom  referred
to  alone,

es

2) No  matter  what  his  god  and  goddess  may  have  been,  on  ascend-
ing  the  tbrone,  the  king  took  A&ur  and  Aäuritu,  the  patron  gods  of  the
Of  course  it  is  possible,  that  these  were  the  god  and
land,  as  bis  gods.
goddess,  not  only  of  the  king,  but  also  of  the  whole  royal  family.
But
this  is  not  probable,  for  then,  in  time,  all  the  king’s  brothers  would  have
had  the  same  gods  as  he.  The  oldest  son  did  not  always  succeed  to  the
throne,  and  so  the  theory  that  this  prince  may  also  have  had  Aäur  and
Besides,  in  case  the  crown-prince  died,  his
Auritu  for  gods,  is  untenable.

97


his  deities  from  his  father,  or  else  took  that
a  man  inherited
god  and  goddess  as
his  own,  in  whose  monih  he  was  born.
Or  again,  it  may  be,  that  ihe  god  and  goddess  of  the  guild  to
Or  finally,
which  he  beionged,  were  also  his  personal  deities.
a  man  could  perhaps  choose  his  god  and  goddess  at  will.
Although  belenging  to  the  great  gods,  a  man’s  personal
deities  were  looked  upon  as  something  entirely  different  from
They  were  merely  the  ılu  ame  and  Ü  istar  ameli.  the
these.
his  guardians  against  evil,  existing
man's  protecting  deities,
only  in  relation
This  is  proved  by the
many  passages  in  which  the  ilu  amäli  is  mentioned  as  an
especial  deity  in  conneetion  with  the  great  gods!).  When  a
man  became  sick,  it  showed  that  his  personal  deity,  for  some
reason  or  other,  had  not  been  able  to  keep  off  the  evil  spirits.
In  such  a  case,  the  iu  ameli  would  entreat  one  of  ihe  great
gods,  whose  power  over  the  evil  spirits  was  supreme,  to  drive
the  latter  from  the  sick  man’s  body?).
After  doing  this,  the
great  god  would  restore  the  man  in  perfect  health  to  the  pro-
tecting  hands  of  his  god  and  goddess?).  This  skows  that  these
were  deities  of  inferior  rank,  but  little  removed  from  the  actual
good  spirits,

to  that  man  alone.

Related  to  the  lu  ameli,  but  not  so  clearly  defined,  were
the  zu  bitit),  “the  god  of  the  house”,  and  the  zu  al®),  “the
Just  as  the  zlu  ameli,  each  of  these  had  his
god  of  the  eity”.

successor  would  have  had  to  change  his  gods.  Therefore  we  must  conclude,
that  at  least  in  exceptional  cases,  it  was  possible  for  a  man  to  change
his  gods.

2) C£.  Beitr.  I-XX  55-90,  127  #.  XXVI  Col.  IV  18,  V  80.
2), IV  R.  17  obv.  39.
S\B:oMi  8.  X1426:
%  IV  R.  21  No.  I (A)  Col.  I obrv.  43;  Beitr.  XLI—XLO  Col. Y.1B;
U.  L.  table.  &  6—7.  In  the  last  two  pages,  the  sedu  biti  and lamassu
diti  are  associated  with  the  sis biti  and  the  #  istar  biti.

®) Really  there  were  two  conceptions  of  the  iu  ali;  the  first,  the

remains  ofthe  old local-ceult  idea,  by  which  Marduk  was  the  god  of  Babylon,
Samas  of  Sippar,  ete:  the  second,  an  ölw  ali,  who,  like  the  ilu  ameli,  was
IV  R. 21,
merely  a  good  spirit,  protecting  the  eity  against  evil  demons.
No.  1  (A)  Col.  I  obv.  43;  Rm.  2,  159,  obv.  en II  9)  16-17.  B.M.S
IV  37,  46;  VI  88;  VII  19,  26.

98


A

They  represented  expansions  of  the  idea  of
female  associate.
the  lu  ameli,  and  so  had  absoluiely  nothing  in  common  with
the  gods,  except  their  names.
They  were  mereiy  good. spiriis,
guarding  the  house  and  the  city,  and  even  as  such,  bore  a
very  shadowy  existence,

The  real  guardians  of the  house  were  the  two  gosd  Age
the  $edu  and  lamassu.
These  were  represented  by  the  colossi,
the  so-called  “winged  bulls,”  that  stood  at  each  side  of  the
Every  house  had
entrances  of  tempies  and  other  buildings!).
its  3edu  and  lamassu?),  guarding  all  its  entrances,  so  that  no
evil  spirits  might  pass  through.  These  images  were,  of course,
mere  representations  of  the  good  spirits.
It  is  hardly  probable
that  the  Babylonians  regarded  them  as  the  3edu  and  lamassu
themselves.
These  were  actual,  active  spirits,  and,  while  their
chief  station  was  the  door,  they  were  present  throughout  the
house.
It  is  possible  that  the  image  standing  to  the  right  of
the  door  was  the  $ödu,  and  that  to  the  left,  the  lamassu,  but
this  is  not  certain)

The  etymology  of  the  words  is  uncertain.

Lamassu  may
perhaps  be  related  to  its  Sumerian  equivalent  /a-am-ma®).
"The
ideogram  for  lamassu  is  ! KAL;  that  for  Söedw  4  ALAD®).  The

1)  Other  images  could  also  be  used;  cf.  Tig.  VI  62;  Asurb.  VI  60;

Beitr.  XLI—XLI  ft.

?) By  this  is  not  meant  that  every  house  had  its  colossi.

These,  of
course,  stood  only  before  the  temples  and  palaces,  and  perhaps  the  house
Poor  people  had  to  be  content  with  small  images,  fastened
of  the  wealithy.
to  the  doorposts.
This  was  of  ecurse  the  same  idea  as  that  underlying  the
use  of  the  mn  of  the  Bible.

») U.  L,  IL  91—94;  cf  KAT®,  456,1.
*)  Sb.  176.
®) Sb.  175-176  seems  to  give  the  ideogram  :$ KAL  for  both  words,
but  as  this  ideogram  is  nowhere  else  used  for  3ödu,  and  there  are  indi-
cations  in  l.  175  that  a  wedge  has  fallen  out,  it is probably,  with  Delitzsch,
to  be  read,  ®/  ALAD,
Probabiy  on  the  basis  of  these  two  lines  King
renders  ö) KAL  by  sedu  (B.  M.  S.  VI,  32;  XIX,  29;  XXII,  8,  64.).  This  is,
of  course,  if we  accept  Delitzsch’s  emendation,  to  be  corrected.  Thompson
(“Devils  and  Evil  spirits”)  makes  just  the  opposite  mistake.  Throughout

his  work  he  has  transcribed  er  as  ALAD,  although,  wherever  the  text

is  interlinear,  it  is  always  rendered  la-mas-su.
mistake.

This  is  without  doubt  a

99


—

16  —

Sedu  may  be  an

ideogram  for  utukku  (UTUG)  is  also  used  for  3edut),  and  is  in
fact  the  usual  ideogram  for  this  word  in  the  series  Utukke
evil  spirit  as  well  as  good?2),  and
limnüti.
really  this  seems  to  have  been  its  original  meaning?).
Then,
by  law  of  contrast  again,  the  3ödu  as  a  good  spirit  was  con-
ceived  of.  The  two  are  respectively  designated  3edu  limnu  and
sedu  damqu‘).  As  such  the  ideogram  ALAD  may  be  used  for
both.  UTUG  on  the  contrary  denotes  only  the  $ödu  as  a  good
spirit),
In  four
of  the
passages”)  the  ideogram  for  ekimmu  (GIDIM)  is  also  used  for
The  lamassu  was  always  a  good  spirit,  called  either
Sedu.
lamassu  damqgu  or  ilu  musallimu.
Delitzsch  distinguishes  be-
tween  Södu  and  lamassu  as  “Trutzgott””  and  “Schutzgott’”  respec-
tively.  It is  not  clear  on  what  grounds  he  bases  this  distinetion.
As  good  spirits,  their  only  function  was  to  protect  man  and  his
property  from  evil  demons.
In  this  repect  there  was  no  differ-
ence  between  them.  ALAD  differs  from  KAL  only  in  that  it
contains  the  additional  element  BE  (»<).  Whether  one  of  the

counterpart

limnu®).

utukku

the

4)  Cf.  above  p.  13,  note  1.  The  determinative  for  god  always  stands
before  KAL  and  ALAD,  but  never  before  UTUG,  with  the  exceptions  V.
R.  51  a  29  and  Cun.

Texts  XVII  pl.  2,8...

2)  Cf.  above,  p.  13f.
s) In  Hebrew  and  Syriac  the  word  is  used  for  evil  spirits  alone,
+)  Sedu  dumqu,  damigti,  or  näsiru  also  occur.
5) One  exception  to  this  is  found  in  U.  L.  tablet  K  298/299,  where
Note  however  that  in  this  passage,
UTUG=sedu,  as  a  bringer  of  poison,
Sin,  Sama$  and  Istar,  and  other  gods,  as  well  as  the  Sedu  and  labartu,
bring  poison  to  man.
This  is  also  the  only  passage  in  this  series,  where
$edu  occurs  without  the  usual  attributes,  limnu  or  damgqu.

6)  In  U.  L.  tablet.

I,  10-11  (“Devils  and  Evil  Spirits”  I,  181)
Thompson  supplies  [u-tuk-ku  dum-gi  se-e-du  dum)-gi,  without  giving  the
passage  upon  which  he  bases  this  reading.
Until  he  does,  it  can  not,  of
course,  be  accepted.
Also  Delitzsch’s  reading  utukku  damqu  3edu  damqu
(H.  W.  B.  157  b)  is  to  be  corected  to  Södu  damgu  lamassu  damgu.  In  Can.
Texts  XVII  pl  2,  8-11  we  find  öl  utukku  (UTUG)  damgu  il lamassu  (KAL)
damqu  il  Sedu  (ALAD)  damgu  and  KA-SA  damqu.  This  shows  that  an
utukku  damqu  existed,  but  still  does  not  justify  Thompson’s  emendation.
KA-SA  was  probably  also  a  good  spirit,  although,  unlike  the  other  ideo-
grams,  it  lacks  the  determinative  for  god

Its  reading  is  unknown.

”, IV  R.  18  No.  3,  Col  I. 24/26;  U.L.  tablet.

Texts  XVII  pl.  5, 35/36;  cf.  above,  13  note  1

G.  14—17;  Cun.
..

Zt

100


usual  meanings  of  BE!)  may  be  found  in  the  BE  of  ALAD,  is
uncertain.  The  god  Papsukal  was  identified  with  the  Iamassu,
and  ISum  with  södu2).
It  is  noteworthy  that,  like  the  $3edu,
ISum  was  a  god  of  both  good  and  evil.

Although  the  lamassu  and  3ödu  were  originally  protectors
of  the  house,  they  soon  developed  into  protective  spirits  in
general,  so  that  little  distinetion  existed  between  them  and  the
This  evolution  was  just  the  opposite  to  that  of  the
du  ameli.
This  was  a  specialization  of  the  functions  of  the  ölu
iu  biti.
ameli,  while  the  conception  of  the  3ödu  and  lamassu  as  guardian
deities  of  man  himself  was  the  result  of  the  generalization  of
their  functions  as  guardians  of  the  house®).
That  they  were
elosely  related  to  the  gods  is  shown  by  the  determinative  that
always  precedes  their  ideograms.  The  goddess  IStar  is  deseribed
as  having  a  $ödu  before  her  and  a  lamassu  behind  her,  one  to
her  right,  and  one  to  her  left).
Finally,  as  a  direct  working
of  the  law  of  contrast,  just  as  the  body  of  a  sick  man  was
regarded  as  the  seat  of  an  evil  spirit,  so  the  sick  man  prayed
that  a  good  spirit  might  enter  his  body  and  dwell  there).

Another  fact,  illustrative  of  this  law  of  contrast,  was  that
One
the  evil  spirits  themselves  could  be  used  for  good®).
method  of  counteracting  the  effects  of  witcheraft  was  for  the
exorciser  to  perform  the  same  ceremonies  against  the  witch
that  she  had  employed  against  the  sick  man.
Since  the  evil
spirits  were  usually  subject  to  the  witches,  it  is not  at  all  sur-

ı)  Of.  Brün.  1494,  1499,  1512,  1518,  1519,  1527,  1528,  1533.
2)  Of.  H,  W.  B.  381  b.
3) On  the  other  hand,  a  specialization  of  the  functions  of  the  sedu
may  perhaps  be  traced  in  the  fact  that,  in  addition  to  the  sedu  of  the
house,  other  buildings  also  had  $edw’s;  Of.  IV  R.  18  No.  6, 6—8,  where  the
sedu  of  the  stable  is  referred  to.

*) B.  M.  S.  VII  12—13.

This  probably  means  a  södu  to  the  right

and  a  iamassu  to  the  left;  cf.  above,  p,  26.

5) A.S.K.T.

XI  Col.  IIL,  11—12;  Col.  IV,  44—45;  ef.  Surpu  V/VI,
11/12,  IV  R.  18  No.  3,  24/27  a,  and  Cun.  Texts  XVII,  29,  25/28  where
the  man’s  personal  deities
are  described  as,  under  normal  conditions
dwelling  in  his  body.

®) Cf.  above,  p.  11.

101


en  ee

prising  to  find  the  priest  now  sending  them  against  the  witches
themselves.  Thus?):

ina  kibsiki  rabisa  useeiz;
ekimma  pagdäti  harräniki  usassi.
In  ihy  footsteps  1  will  station  the  rabisu;
The  ekimmu  will  I  cause  to  remove  thy  guideposts.
These  were  ihe  good  spirits,  that  guarded  man  against
all  evil.  Under  their  protection  he  was  reasonably  safe  irom
the  demons’  attacks.  Only  in  exceptional  cases  could  the  latter
work  their  evil  in  spite  of  the  good  spirits?).
But  if  the  man
sinned  against  his  god  or  goddess,  or  against  any  of  the  great
gods,  they  became  angry  and  withdrew  their  protection.
The
man  was  now  defenceless  before  the  onslaught  of  the  evil
spirits.  They  entered  his  body,  bringing  with  them  all  manner
of  ills,  and  established  themselves  firmly  there.
How  expel
them?
The  answer  to  this  question  is  represented  by  the sum
of  all  tbe  magie  and  incantation  texts  of  the  Babylonian  liter-
ature.
ever-present
problem  of  the  Babylonian  religion.

of  evil  spirits  was  the

The  expulsion

Chap.  IV.
Removal  of  Evil  Spirits.

The  need  for  some  means  to  expel  the  evil  En from
Their  presence  meant  continual
the  body  was  very  urgent.
sickness  and  suffering,
Life  therefore
and  eventual
depended  upon,  and  was,  in  a certain  sense,  the  result  of, their
The  chief  means,  by  which  this  was  aecömplished,
removal.
were  water  and  fire.

death.

How  this  force  came  to  be  attached  to  these  two  elements
is  of  course  unknown.
To  all  Semitic  peoples  they  were  the
Fire  too,
great  purifiers,
associated  with  light,  was  directly  opposed  to  the  darkness  of

that  cleaned  everything  from  evil).

1) Maglü  II,  146147.
2) Of.  IV  R.  18  No.  6, 6—8,
) C£.  IV  R.  14  rev.  14ff.  and  in  the  Bible,  Mal.  3,  2;  Jer.  6, 29,

102

.


2

the  night,  when  the  evil  spirits  were  most  active.
Fire  and
water  were  also  ihe  great  benefactors  of  mar,  on  which  the
very  preservation  of his  life  depended.  Finally,  even  in  the  most
ancient  times,  a  certain  medicinal  force  must  have  been  attached
to  these  elements,  more  so  perhaps  than  to-day.
Probably  all
until
these  influences,  and  others  as  well,  worked  together,
finally,  water  and  fire  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  chief  means
employed  in  removing  evil  spirits.
'This  is  clear  from  the  fact
that  the  geds,  most  active  in  this  work,  were  those  of  water
and  light.

|

These  two  elements  were  closely  related  in the  Babylonian
mind.
They  saw  the  sun  rise  every  morning  in  the  east,  from
out  ihe  «psü!),  that  surrounded  the  earth,  and  sink  again  every
evening  in  the  upsü  to  the  west.  The  apsü  extended  underneath
the  underworld,  and  wae  in  a  vague  way  related  to  it.
Con-
seguently  when  the  gods  of  light,  IStar,  Tammuz,  Nergal,  ISum,
and  others,  spend  part  of  the  time  in  the  underworld,  they
come  into  a  certain  connection  with  the  apsü.
Before  being
restored  to  the  gods  of  heaven,  IStar  is  sprinkled  with  the  water
of  life?).  Gibil  is  mär  apse,  “the  son  of  the  deep’’°),  and  also
3a  *  NIN-GUG-SIG  tappusu,  “the  companion  of  Ea’’*);  while
Nuzku,  who  is  identical  with  Gibil,  is  called
tarbit  aspe  binüt
Ea,  “the  offspring  of the  deep,  the  child  of.Ea”5).  And  Marduk,
originally  a  sun-god,  came  to  be  looked  npon  as  the  son  and
chief  messenger  of  Ea  against  the  evil  spirits.

Of  the  two  elements,  water  was  by far  the  more  important;
was  in  fact  the  basis  of  all  ceremonies  for  ihe  removal  of  evil
Besides  fire  and  water,  many  other  means  were
epirits.
but  all  subordinate  to  the  use  of
employed  for  this  purpose,
water.
To  tihoroughly  understand  this  subject,  it  is  necessary
to  treat  each  separately.  We  precede  therefore  to  ihe  discussion
of  Water.

', Since  no  English  word  exactly  expresses  the  meaning  of  apsa,

I have  used  this  word  itself  throughout  this  work.

») K.  B.  VI,  I, 88,  34,  38.
®) IV  R.  14  rev.  8/9,
*) Ibid,  rev.  20/21.
?) Maglü  I,  124;  cf.  U,  111.

108


en.  0

The  home  of  the  Ea-cult  was  the  ancıent  eity  Eridu,  at
the  mouth  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris.  This  spot  was  especaally
sacred  in  the  Babylonian  religion

Thus  we  read):

In  Eridu  groweth  the  dark  kiskanu;
In  an  undefiled  place  it  springeth  forth.
Its  appearance  is  shining  lapis
Which  reaches  unte  the  Ocean.
"The  way  of  Ea  into  Eridu?)
Is  bountiful  in  luxuriänce.
Where  earth  is,  there  is  its  place,
And  the  couch  of  the  goddess  Id,  its  home,
Into  the  undefiled  dwelling,  whose  shadow,  like  a

forest  grove

Spreadeth  out,  no  one  enters?).
In  its  depths  are  Sama$  and  Tammuz‘).
At  the  opening  of  the  mouth  of the  two  streams
The  gods  Ka-Hegal,  Si-Dugal,  (and)  —  —  of  Eridu
Have  gathered  this  kiskanu,  and  over  the  man
Have  performed  the  incantation  of  the  deep.

Again  Marduk  is  directed  by  Ea  to  take  water  from  the
mouth  of  the  two  streams  and  with  it  sprinkle  the  sick  man).
The  waters  of  the  Euphrates  and
Tigris  were  sacred;  therefore  efficacious  in  driving  out  evil
Consequently  the  place  where  they  together  flowed
spirits®).

This  was  but  natural.

1) U.  L.  table.

I  have  taken  some  liberties  with
Thompson’s  translation,  thinking  that  a  more  literal  rendering  was  better
suited  to  the  purpose  of  this  work,

K.  183—202

»)  Sa  ü Ea  tallaktagu  ina  Eridu  can  mean  only  “the  way  of  Ea
into  Eridu”,  and  not  as  'Thompson  translates,  “from  Ea  its  way  in  Eridu.”

s) The  meaning  of  these  two  lınes  is  not  clear.

4) Although  the  tree  of  Eridu,  and  therefore  of  Ea,  two  sungods
This  again  shows  the  elose  relationship  between  fire

dwell  in  its  depths.
and  water  in  this  ritual.

5) IV  R.  22  No.  1  (=  Cun.  Texts  XVII  pl.  26),  rer

10ff.  Of.  Oun.

Texts,  38,  33/34.

°) Of.  Surpu VII,  66;  Magii  V,  132;  U.  L.  IV  Col;  V,  68—66,  V  Col.

u,  59-60,

104


ua, >

especially

the  apsü  was

into
of  the
Euphrates  were  apparently  the  more  potent;  at  any  rate  they
were  more  often  referred  tot).
However,  the  water  of  other
rivers  could  also  be  used).

The  waters

sacred.

Water  of  springs  too  was  sacred  and  often  used  in  cere-
monies?).
Every  temple  needed  pure  water  for  this  purpose.
Those  situated  on  a  river  probably  used  river-water‘),  Wherever
this  was  not  obtainable,  spring-water  had  of  course  to  be  used,
Possibly  every  temple  had  one  or  more  sacred  springs.  We
can  understand  the  significance  of  the  report,  that  a  fox  had
fallen
The
water  of  this  spring  was  thus  defiled,
Again  we  read  of  holy
water  from  the  spring  of the  temple  of Marduk®);  and  in  another
passage  ”),

a  spring  in  the  park  of  a  temple  of  Aäurd).

into

I  have  washed  my  hands,  have  cleaned  my  body,
With  pure  spring-water  that  is  in  Eridu.

Thus  even  in  Eridu,  not  only  water  from  the  mouth  of  the  two
streams  was  used,  but  also  that  from  springs.
This  shows  how
sacred  spring-water  was.
Both  Ea  and  Marduk  were  called
respectively  lord  and  god  of  the  springs®).

However  the  real  source  of  water  used  in  the  incantations
All  rivers  and  springs  were  parts  of
was  the  apsü,  the  deep.
this.
Man’s  great  benefactor  was  Ea,  the  god  of  the  apsü.
From  out  its  midst  rose  the  sun-gods,  bringing  release  from
Its  waters  were  mö  täbüti,  “good  waters,”  those  of  the
evile.

1)  Of.  IV  R.  14  No.  2;  Surpu  IX,  111
2),  Of.  Rm.  2,149  (Boiss.  Doc.  I p.  33,  9).  This  passage  is  extremely
To  eure  scorpion-bite  a  man  is  directed  to bathe  (literally,  *to

‚interesting.
dip”)  in  the  river  seven  times.

Of.  II  Ki.  5,  10.
»)  Of.  IV  R.  26  No.  7,  34,  56  Col.  I,  15,  24;  Or.  II  pl.  8  rev.  6,  U.
L.  IV Col. V, 65/66;  V  Col.  II,  60;  A.  S.K.T.  ge 35/38.  Also  Relig.  Sem.
176  ff. and  135.

4) Of  Bruce:  “Three  Inscriptions  of  Nabopolassar”  (A.  J. 8.

L.XVI,

178.)  DI  Col.  II,  7—9.

») K.  551  (=  AL  4  p.  76;  Harper’s  Leiters.  142).
©), IV  R.  60  obv.  21.
”, Maglü  VII,  115—116.
®) II  R.  38  No.  2.  rev.  54a.  Col,  III,  48.

105


ERDE...

These  terms  had  a  two-
tiämat!),  me  lmnäüh,  “evil  waters”?).
The  ideogram  HUL,  denoted  both  limnu,  “evil”;
fold  significance.
By  “bitter”  water,  the  Semites  understood
and  marru,  “bitter”.
From  the  Hömat  the  evil  spirits
all  water  unfit  to  drink?).
went  forth,  bringing  calamity  to  man.
The  water  of  the  aps“,
on  the  contrary,  was  sweet,  good  te  drink,  and  brought  release
from  these  calamities.

The  method  of applying  the  water  must  have  originally  been
very  simple.
The  priest  sprinkled  the  sick  man,  and  that  was
all.  From  the.  great  importance  attached  to  this  aet,  and  the
fact  that  it  appears  in  almost  all ceremonies,  even  the  simplest,
we  must  conelude  that  it  was  the:  original  method  of  expelling
evil  spirits.  But  thetendency  of religion,  and especially  primitive
Such  was  the
religions,  is  to  heap  np  forms  and  ceremonies.
case  here.
In  time,  in  addition  to  the  simple  sprinkling  of water,
a  prayer  was  spoken,  at  first,  no  doubt,  merely  supplementary
to  the  use  of  water.
But  gradually,  as  the  original  purpose  of
the  prayer  was  forgotten,  it  came  to  be  considered  of  imper-
tance  and  efficacy,  equal  to  that  of  water.

This  ceremony  was.  called  asäpu  (FW),  from  whieh  3tiptu,
“that  which  expels  evil  spirits”,  was  derived.
Asäpu  however
was  used  but  seldom®).  The  act  itself  was  always  Siptw  nada
(literally,  “to  cast  the  situ”).
This  is  further  proof  that  the
sprinkling  of  water  was  the  original  method  of  expelling  evil
spirits.  Sipftu  nadü  was  a  technical  term,  and  came  in  time  to
be  used  for  the  recital  of  a  spoken  Siptx,  the  prayer  accom-
The  expression  3iptu  manı
*o  recite  a  Siptw’,  was  seldom  used  except  in  the  technical
meanivg,  “at  such  and  such  a  place  in  the  ceremonies,  reecite

.  panying  the  use  of  water  as  well.

2») The  distinetion  between  apsa  and  tiämat,  which  at  best  could
never  have  been  very  clear  to  the  Babylonians,  was  in  time  almost  for-
gotten,  and  tümtu  came  to  he  used  for  both;  cf.  Surpu  VII,  67,  where
Üf.  also  K.  B.  VI,  I, 559f.  and  Z.
tämtu  is  used  for  the  customary  apsü.
A.  XVII,  398.

r

®2) U.  L.  IV  Col.  V  63/64;  V.Col.  U  59.
®) C£.  Exodus,  15,  23;  Numbers,  5,  18;  19,  24.
*) C£.  H.  W.  B.  247,  and  note  that  the  verb  was  used  only  in  tbe

forın  II,  1,  i. e.,  to  perform  the  ceremony  cf  the  &iptu.

106


ar:

the  Siptu”).
Wippütu?).

The  complete  service  was  called  äsipütu  or

It  was  however  seidom  used  for  Sipiu.

The  original  ideogram  for  asäpu  and  words  derived  from
it,  was  SIB2).
The
customary  ideograms  for  this  were  NAM-SIB  (-BA)*)  and  NAM-
SUB  (-BA)>).  Of  course  in  both  NAM  indicates  a  nominal  for-
mation.  NAM-SIB  was  therefore  the  noun  coming  from  SIB  —
asäpu,  and  NAM-SUB  that  from  SUB  =  nadü®),  in the  expression
Siptu  nadü.

In  time  Siptu  vame.to  denote  also  the  prayer  spoken  in
connection  with  the  use  of  water.
This  change  is  apparent  in
its  different  ideograms.
As  we  expeet,  NAM-SIB,  being  deriv-
3iptu  im  its  most  general
ed  from  SIB  (=  asapu),  denoted
meaning,  “that  which  expelled  evil  spirit”.  NAM-SUB  on  the
contrary,  referred  to  the  casting  of  the  water,  was  therefore
Another
used  almost  without  exception  for  that  ceremony?).

2) In  this  meaning  it  is  common  in  the  directions  for  ceremonies.
Jensen  (cf.  KAT?,  604)  sees  in  it  a  reference  to  the  metrical  form  of  the
Ziptu.  The  expression  Siptu  sarahu,  “to  call  out  the  Siptuw”,  was  extremely
rare.

Cf.  Magla  VII,  80,  85  (below).

>,  C£.H.  W.B.  247  and  147  a.  Delitzach  regards  these  words  as  coming
from  different  stems.
But  that  isippiiu  meant  just  the  same  as  äipütu  is
clear  from V R.  4, 86  fina  Sipir  ö-Sip-pu-ti  parukkesunu  ubbib);  IV  R.  25,  54/55
a  (pi-ka  ina  i-Sip-pu-ti  NAM-SIB-BA  ip-#),  and  V  R.  51,  71/7
