The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett (1923)
===========================================
A. P. Sinnett — The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, from the Mahatmas M. and K. H., transcribed, compiled and with an introduction by A. T. Barker (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1923), public domain. The foundational Theosophical correspondence, arranged in seven sections with an appendix. Scan via Internet Archive.

THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

To  A.   P.  SiNNETT 


THE 
MAHATMA  LETTERS 

To      A.      P.      SINNETT     from 
THE    MAHATMAS    M.    &    K.    H. 

Transcribed,   Compiled,    and  with  an 
Introduction    by    A.    T.    BARKER 


T.     FISHER     UNWIN     LTD 

LONDON:  ADELPHI  TERRACE 


First  published  in   ig23 


(All  rights  reserved) 


COMPILER'S  PREFACE 

It  will  be  seen,  if  reference  is  made  to  the  "  Contents  "  that  the 
letters  have  been  arranged  in  7  Sections  and  an  Appendix. 
The  former  contain  nothing  but  Mahatma  letters,  while  in  the 
latter  some  letters  have  been  added  from  three  pupils  of  The 
Mahatmas  M.  and  K.H.— :  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  T.  Subba  Row,  and 
Damodar  K.  Mavalankar,  not  only  for  their  intrinsic  merit,  but 
because  they  help  to  make  clear  questions  arising  in  the  main 
part  of  the  book  which  would  otherwise  be  left  obscure. 

The  seven  Sections  suggest  themselves  as  more  or  less  natural 
divisions,  but  it  should  be  remembered  that  as  letters  in  one 
section  often  contain  matter  which  also  relates  to  the  other 
Sections,  considerable  overlapping  is  unavoidable.  However,  an 
attempt  has  been  made  and  that  is  the  best  that  can  be  said. 

The  contents  of  each  Section  are  arranged  where  possible 
chronologically,  in  the  order  of  their  receipt.  The  reader  must 
bear  in  mind  that  with  only  one  or  two  exceptions  none  of  the 
letters  were  dated  by  the  writers  thereof.  On  many  of  them, 
however,  the  dates  and  places  of  receipt  have  been  noted  in  Mr. 
Sinnett's  handwriting,  and  these  appear  in  small  type  immediately 
under  the  Letter  Numbers. 

It  should  be  understood  clearly  that  unless  otherwise  stated: 

1.  Each  letter  has  been  transcribed  direct  from  the  original. 

2.  Every  letter  was  written  to  A.  P.  Sinnett. 

3.  All  footnotes  are  copies  of  notes  which  appear  in  and  belong 
to  the  letters  themselves,  unless  signed  (Ed.)  in  which  case  they 
have  been  added  by  the  compiler. 

Throughout  this  volume  there  are  a  great  many  words  used 
which  belong  to  Buddhist,  Hindu,  and  Theosophical  terminology. 
Those  who  are  unfamiliar  with  such  terms  are  referred  to  the  ex- 
cellent glossary  in  H.  P.  Blavatsky's  "  Key  to  Theosophy  "  and 
also  to  "  The  Theosophical  Glossary/'  a  separate  publication  by 
the  same  author.  The  reader  is  asked  to  believe  that  the  greatest 
care  has  been  taken  in  the  work  of  transcription  ;  the  whole  MS. 
has  been  checked  word  for  word  with  the  originals,   and  every- 


vi  COMPILER'S  PREFACE 

thing  possible  done  to  prevent  errors.  It  is  however  probably  too 
much  to  expect  that  the  printed  book  will  contain  no  mistakes,  they 
are  almost  inevitable.  In  case  any  doubt  should  arise  in  the 
reader's  mind  as  to  whether  any  particular  passage  has  been  cor- 
rectly copied  from  the  original,  the  compiler  wishes  to  intimate, 
that  he  will  be  happy  to  deal  with  any  correspondence  on  the  sub- 
ject addressed  to  him  care  of  the  Publishers. 

In  conclusion  the  compiler's  thanks  are  due  and  most  gratefully 
acknowledged  to  those  who  by  their  assistance  have  made  his  task 
possible  of  accomplishment. 

A.  T.  B. 


INTRODUCTION 

It  is  well  known,  among  students  of  Theosophy  and  Occultism, 
that  the  philosophical  doctrines  and  ethics  which  were  given  to 
the  world  through  the  Theosophical  Society  during  the  i6  years 
immediately  following  its  foundation  in  1875,  emanated  from 
certain  Eastern  Teachers  said  to  belong  to  an  Occult  Brotherhood 
living  in  the  trans-Himalayan  fastnesses  of  Tibet.  H.  P. 
Blavatsky  who,  together  with  Colonel  Olcott  founded  the  Theo- 
sophical Society,  acknowledged  these  Eastern  Brothers  as  her 
Teachers,  stating  not  only  that  They  existed,  but  that  she  herself 
had  received  training  and  instruction  at  their  hands  during  her 
sojourn  in  Tibet,  and  was  therefore  able  to  speak  from  her  own 
knowledge  and  personal  experience.  It  was  not  until  1880  that 
further  testim.ony  became  available.  In  that  year  the  late  A.  P. 
Sinnett,  then  living  in  India,  was  enabled  through  the  agency  of 
Madame  Blavatsky,  to  enter  into  correspondence  with  her  own 
Teachers,  whom  she  referred  to  variously  under  the  terms,  **  The 
Brothers,"  ''The  Mahatmas,"  and  later  **  The  Masters  of  the 
Wisdom."  During  the  course  of  this  correspondence  which  ex- 
tended over  the  years  1880  to  1884  Mr.  Sinnett  received  many 
letters  from  The  Mahatmas  M.  and  K.H.,  the  Teachers  in  ques- 
tion, and  it  is  these  original  communications  which  are  published 
in  the  present  volume  under  the  title  of  "  The  Mahatma  Letters." 
The  circumstances  attending  their  receipt  were  fully  dealt  with 
by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  his  "  Occult  World  "  and  they  need  not  there- 
fore be  restated  here. 

They  are  now  published  with  the  permission  of  the  Executrix 
of  the  late  A.  P.  Sinnett,  to  whom  they  were  bequeathed  solely 
and  unconditionally ;  she,  in  her  turn  at  the  suggestion  of  the 
writer  of  this  Introduction,  allowed  him  the  great  privilege  of 
undertaking  the  whole  responsibility  for  the  transcription, 
arrangement  and  publication  of  the  Letters  in  book-form. 

The  writer  undertook  the  task  with  the  fullest  sense  of  the 
grave  responsibility  attending  his  action,  convinced  that  the 
moment  had  come  when  the  highest  interests  of  The  Theosophical 


viii  INTRODUCTION 

Society  demanded  the  full  publication  of  The  Teachings  of  The 
Masters   given   to    Mr.    Sinnett.      He  feels   the   responsibility   the 
more  keenly  since  there  is  a  passage  in  one  of  the  letters  in  this 
volume  in  which  The  Master  K.H.   says  that  neither  he  nor  his 
brother  M.,  would  ever  permit  the  publication  thereof.     Though 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  letters  were  not  intended  for  pub- 
lication   at   the   time   they   were   written,    it   may    also    be    fairly 
assumed  that  the  present  impasse  in  the  affairs  of  the  Society  was 
not  anticipated   either.     At  a  time   when   there  is   so   much   con- 
troversy in  regard  to  what  was,   and  what  was  not  the  original 
Teaching  of  The  Masters,  the  publication  of  the  words  of  its  own 
Teachers  can  do  nothing  less  than  serve  the  highest  interests  of 
the  great  movement  which  claims  for  its  motto  that  "  There  is  no 
religion   higher  than   Truth."     The   Masters  are  what   they  are; 
what  they  have  written — they  have  written,  and  neither  they  nor 
their  doctrines  need  the  acclamation  or  apology  of  lesser  minds. 
It  is  almost  impossible  to  arrive  at  the  facts,  or  even  to  form  a 
trustworthy  opinion  upon  a  subject  so  far  reaching,  by  studying 
an  edited  book  of  extracts.     Therefore,  that  the  members  of  the 
Theosophical  Society  and  the  world  at  large,   should  be  enabled 
to   study  the  truth   for  themselves  concerning  The   Masters  and 
their  doctrines  as  set  forth  in  these  letters  signed  by  their  own 
hands,  has  been  the  aim  of  the  compiler.     To  this  end,  the  whole 
of  the  Mahatma  Letters  left  by  Mr.  Sinnett  have  been  transcribed 
verbatim  from  the  originals  and  without  omission. 

Mr.  Sinnett 's  books  The  Occult  World  and  Esoteric  Buddhism 
were  based  almost  entirely  on  the  material  contained  in 
Sections  I.  and  II.  of  this  volume.  A  careful  study  of  the  ex- 
position of  the  teaching  given  in  those  early  works,  as  in  that  of 
more  modern  Theosophical  writers,  yields  some  interesting  results 
when  compared  with  the  original  teaching  as  contained  in  these 
letters.  Many  theories  which  have  become  the  accepted  dogmas 
of  modern  Theosophical  doctrines,  are  clearly  shown  to  be  in- 
accurate and  misleading,  and  it  may  therefore  be  profitable  if  the 
principal  points  of  difference  are  indicated  to  the  reader. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  there  has  been  an  increasing  tendency 
in  the  Society  during  the  last  twelve  years,  to  place  an  undue 
reliance  on  ceremonial,  orders,  Churches,  creeds  and  their 
equivalent,  thereby  sacrificing  the  virility  of  individual  effort  and 
freedom  of  thought,  which  was  so  noticeable  in  the  early  days  of 
the  movement.  The  Master  K.H.  writes  in  very  clear  terms  on 
this  subject,  and  it  may  be  well  to  quote  his  own  words.  "  And 
now  after  making  allowance  for  evils  that  are  natural  and  can- 


INTRODUCTION  ix 

not  be  avoided  ...  I  will  point  out  the  greatest,  the  chief 
cause  of  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  evils  that  pursue  humanity  ever 
since  that  cause  became  a  power.  It  is  religion  under  whatever 
form  and  in  whatever  nation.  It  is  the  sacerdotal  caste,  the 
priesthood  and  the  Churches ;  it  is  in  those  illusions  that  man 
looks  upon  as  sacred,  that  he  has  to  search  out  the  source  of  that 
multitude  of  evils  which  is  the  great  curse  of  humanity,  and  that 
almost  overwhelms  mankind.  Ignorance  created  Gods,  and 
cunning  took  advantage  of  opportunity."'^  And  again  **  Far 
from  our  thoughts  may  it  ever  be  to  create  a  new  hierarchy  for 
the  future  oppression  of  a  priestridden  world.  "^  The  inference 
and  the  message  of  these  words  in  our  own  times  is  sufficiently 
clear. 

There  has  been  a  noticeable  tendency  also  for  sections  of  the 
Society  to  drift  towards  what  Master  K.H.  calls  **  that  most 
insane  and  fatal  of  superstitions — Spiritualism."^  In  another 
letter  he  says  "  a  psychic  Society  is  being  founded  .  .  .  ,  it 
will  grow  and  develop  and  expand  and  finally  the  Theos. 
Soc.  of  London  will  be  swamped  in  it,  and  lose  first  it's 
influence  then — it's  name — until  Theosophy  in  it's  very  name 
becomes  a  thing  of  the  Past."  It  is  regrettable  that  these 
words  are  as  true  to-day,  as  when  they  were  written.  The 
whole  question  is  thrashed  out  from  every  point  of  view  in 
these  letters,  so  that  no  misunderstanding  is  possible  to  the  mind 
of  the  impartial  student.  The  mischief  lies,  then  as  now,  in  the 
misunderstanding  of  the  real  nature  of  spiritualistic  phenomena. 
Those  who  adhere  to  the  methods  of  Spiritualism  claim  that 
communication  can  be  established  with  the  souls  and  spirits 
of  the  departed  by  means  of  properly  qualified  mediums.  That 
communication  of  a  kind  between  the  living  and  the  dead  can  be 
made,  is  accepted  as  a  demonstrable  fact  in  these  letters,  and  is 
not  challenged  in  any  way.  But  communication  with  what? 
Here  lies  the  crux  of  the  whole  matter.  Master  K.H.  states  not 
once,  but  over  and  over  again,  that  communication  with  the 
souls  and  spirits  of  the  dead  is  an  impossibility.  At  death,  con- 
sciousness which  pertains  to  the  seventh,  sixth,  and  fifth  prin- 
ciples of  man,  (and  in  these  are  included  the  soul,  and  spirit  and 
all  that  makes  man  human)  withdraws  into  an  unconscious  gesta- 
tion period  which  precedes  re-birth  in  the  Deva  Chan  or  heaven- 
world.  It  leaves  behind  it,  the  physical  corpse,  the  etheric 
counterpart  or  double,  and  lastly  the  emotional  and  mental  shell 
which   is   the   correspondence    in    subtler   matter   of   the   physical 

1  Letter  No.  X.  2  Letter  No.   LXXXVII. 

«  Letter  No.  XLIX. 


X  INTRODUCTION 

body,  and  which  may  be  termed  the  vehicle  of  consciousness  on 
its  own  plane,  just  as  the  physical  body  is  the  vehicle  of  con- 
sciousness in  the  physical  world.  It  must  be  understood  clearly 
however,  that  each  of  these  empty  shells  has  a  certain  illusory 
awareness  or  consciousness  of  its  own,  which  is  the  collective 
consciousness  of  the  aggregation  of  atoms  and  molecules  of  which 
they  are  composed,  and  quite  distinct  from  the  consciousness  of 
the  individual,  or  real  entity,  which  informed  them  in  life.  The 
physical  body  has  a  similar  consciousness  which  is  purely  animal 
and  instinctive  in  nature.  At  death  the  consciousness  of  even  the 
shell  leaves  it  for  a  time,  and  does  not  return  to  it  until  the  with- 
drawal of  5th,  6th,  and  7th  principles  is  complete.  Not  until  after 
that  is  accomplished,  does  a  certain  awareness  of  existence  return 
to  the  empty  shells.  It  is  these  disintegrating  corpses  which  can 
be  temporarily  galvanized  into  activity  by  the  efforts  of  a  medium  ; 
these  can  and  do  communicate,  but  only  as  it  were  from  memory 
of  what  has  been,  and  not  from  consciousness  of  present  facts. 
This  is  the  reason  for  the  often  stupid,  meaningless,  wnspiritual 
messages  from  the  other  side  of  death  which  so  disgust  the  seeker 
for  real  knowledge.  The  brief  analysis  given  above,  is  the  rule 
for  all  humanity,  with  the  exception  of  the  victims  of  accident  and 
suicide  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  those  rare  individuals 
(only  the  trained  occultist  knows  how  rare  they  are)  who  have 
won  for  themselves  immortality. 

Those  students  of  "  occultism  "  who  believe  themselves 
guided,  by  disincarnate  entities  ranging  in  degree  from  departed 
Theosophists  to  **  Adepts  who  have  relinquished  the  use  of 
physical  bodies  on  earth,"*  by  means  of  the  methods  of  mediums, 
ouija  boards  and  their  equivalent,  will  do  well  to  consider  their 
position  in  the  light  of  these  letters.  Communication  with  de- 
parted Theosophists  (i.e.  the  real  entities)  as  already  shown  is  an 
impossibility,  for  alas  !  they  cannot  be  included  among  those  who 
have  achieved  immortality,  the  exceptions  to  the  general  rule 
governing  humanity  being  so  very  few;  and  with  regard  to  the 
guidance  of  disembodied  "  Adept  Spirits  "  it  may  be  asked,  how 
those  who  have  not  deserved  individual  instruction  from  Adepts 
in  the  flesh,  can  possibly  expect  to  receive  direct  help  from  Their 
superiors — the  Planetary  Spirits,  the  Dhyan  Chohanic  Host? 
It  cannot  be  too  strongly  emphasized  that  in  thus  externalizinc^ 
the  source  from  which  he  seeks  inspiration,  the  student  sacrifices 
all  possibility  of  the  grand  realities  of  spiritual  attainment  and 
direct    knowledge.     "  The    ever     unknowable     and     incognizable 

1  Esoteric  Buddhism,  p.   133.     Eighth  Edftion. 


INTRODUCTION  xi 

K^rana  alone,  the  Causeless  Cause  of  all  causes,  should  have  its 
shrine  and  altar  on  the  holy  and  untrodden  ground  of  our  heart — 
invisible,  intangible,  unmentioned,  save  through  the  *  still  small 
voice  '  of  our  spiritual  consciousness.  Those  who  worship  before 
it,  ought  to  do  so  in  the  silence  and  the  sanctified  solitude  of  their 
Souls,  making  their  Spirit  the  sole  mediator  between  them  and 
The  Universal  Spirit,  their  good  actions  their  only  priests,  and 
their  sinful  intentions  the  only  visible  and  objective  sacrificial 
victims  to  the  "  Presence."'^ 

The  importance  of  the  correct  understanding  of  the  doctrines 
relating  to  post  mortem  conditions,  may  be  judged  by  the  sig- 
nificant phrase  of  Master  K.H.  "  that  he  who  holds  the  keys  to 
the  Secrets  of  Death  is  possessed  of  the  Keys  of  Life."  The  dual 
meaning  and  application  of  the  theosophical  doctrines  relating  to 
Death  would  seem  to  have  been  missed — passed  by.  The  entrance 
to  the  Mysteries  has  ever  been  through  the  Gate  of  Death  ;  and 
as  in  the  Egyptian  "  Book  of  The  Dead  " — under  the  symbolism 
of  the  passage  of  the  Soul  from  life  through  Death  to  Devachan, 
lies  hid  the  precious  teaching  which  rightly  understood  will  bring 
to  rebirth  the  aspirant  who  has  passed  through  the  agonies  of 
Death  in  Life. 

The  letters  in  the  Section  entitled  Probation  and  Chelaship 
make  a  profound  appeal  to  the  heart  of  both  mystic,  and 
occultist.  The  wisdom,  the  instruction,  the  many  intimate  de- 
tails, all  combine  to  throw  a  new  light  not  only  on  The 
Masters  themselves,  but  on  the  whole  question  of  discipleship. 
As  one  reads  these  pages  written  40  years  ago,  the  conviction 
is  reached  that  the  way  to  The  Masters  is  open  to-day  as  it  was 
then.  But  the  possibility  of  achievement  for  the  individual  lies 
not  in  following  and  pledging  loyalty  to  any  personal  leader,  but 
by  uncompromising  devotion  to  the  Idea, — to  principles.  Master 
K.H.  writes  on  this  subject  : — "  There  is  a  hero-worshipping  tend- 
ency clearly  showing  itself,  and  you  my  friend  are  not  quite  free 
from  it  yourself.  ...  If  you  would  go  on  with  your  occult 
studies  and  literary  work,  then  learn  to  be  loyal  to  the  Idea  rather 
than  to  my  poor  self.  When  something  is  to  be  done  never  think 
whether  I  wish  it,  before  acting;  ...  I  am  far  from  being 
perfect,  hence  infallible  in  all  I  do.  .  .  .  You  have  seen  that 
even  an  Adept  when  acting  in  his  body,  is  not  beyond  mistakes 
due  to  human  carelessness.  "^ 

In  extenuation  of  the  many  anomalies  created  by  the  unfortunate 
discrepancy  which  exists  between  the  principles  of  the  Theo- 
*   The  Secret  Doctrine,  vol.   I,  p.  301,  'Letter  No.  LV. 


xii  INTRODUCTION 

sophical    Society   and    their   practice    by    individual    members,    it 
must   be   remembered   that   as    emphasized   in    these   letters,    the 
Masters  neither  guide  nor  control  the  actions  of  their  disciples. 
By    the   rules    of   the    Brotherhood,    pupils    must   be   given    '*  the 
fullest    liberty    and    freedom    of    action,    the   liberty    of    creating 
causes,  even  if  those  causes  become  in  time  their  *  scourge  and 
public    pillory.'  "     "  Our   chelas    are   helped   but   when  they    are 
innocent     of     the     Causes     which     led     them     into     trouble."^ 
The  path   of  discipleship   leads   into   the  heart   of   Nature  itself ; 
the  condition   of   entrance — an   obedience  to   her   laws — complete 
and   absolute.     Before  those   Immutable   Laws   even   the  highest 
Adept  must  bow  in   humility.     To  the  candidate  for  discipleship 
all  things  are  permitted  which  are  natural  to  Man.     No  simple 
natural  act  can  defile.     But  **  Occult  Science  is  a  jealous  mistress, 
which  allows  not  even  the  shadow  of  self-indulgence,"  and  if  the 
higher  levels  of  spiritual  attainment  are  to  be  reached  the  disciple 
must  be  prepared  to  sacrifice  and  transcend  the  natural  desires  of 
the  body,  and  lead  a  life  which,  in  the  Master  K.H.'s  own  words 
"  is  fatal  not  only  to  the  ordinary  course  of  married  life,  but  even 
to  flesh  and  wine  drinking."^    Those  who  would  hope  to  solve  the 
problem  of  sex  by  means  of  formulae  which  contravert  laws  that 
are  obvious  and  known,  dig  with  their  own  hands  the  pit  which 
must  ultimately  engulf  all  that  is  human  in  them.     To  dare  to 
suggest    that    such    doctrines    could    have    the    sanction    of    The 
Masters  of  The  Wisdom  (who  are  one  with  Nature)  is  to  utter  not 
only  a  blasphemy,  but  a  self-evident  absurdity  which  only  a  fool 
or  a  madman  could  be  guilty  of.      If  this  question  admits  of  any 
doubt  in  the  minds  of  students  of  occultism  in  general,  the  same 
cannot  be  said  of  those  who  know  anything  of  the  inner  mysteries 
of  Astrology.     That  ancient  Science  can  and  will  prove  that  no 
such   formulae  exist   in   the  book   of   Nature,    and    any    theories 
that   are   based    on   them   can   only   be    regarded    as    Sorcery   of 
the  most  vicious  description.     That  such  doctrines  exist  is  one  of 
the    reasons    for    the    lack    of    virility    in    the    Society    to-day. 
The   consideration    of   the    inner   condition    of   The   Theosophical 
Society,   reminds  one  irresistibly  of  all  that  was  written   in  the 
Secret    Doctrine^    of    the    sublime    allegory    of    Prometheus — the 
crucified  Titan,  gazing  in  his  suffering  towards  his  own  "  heaven 
appointed  deliverer — Herakles,"  but  so  far  alas  !  in  vain.     At  this 
momentous   epoch  in  the  history  of  the   Society,   those  pages  of 
Madame  Blavatsky's  have  a  message  full  of  the  profoundest  sig- 
1  Letter  No.  LIV.  2  Letter  No.  XVIII. 

3    Vol.     II,    pp,    428-433, 


INTRODUCTION  xiii 

nificance  for  all  who  are  not  too  blind  or  too  unwilling  to  see  the 
truth  contained  in  it. 

It  is  remarkable,  more  than  thirty  years  after  her  death,  how 
Madame  Blavatsky  is  justified  at  almost  every  point  in  these 
letters.  Few  people  have  been  more  unjustly  reviled,  and  even 
some  of  those  who  knew  her  intimately  preferred  to  believe  that 
she  had  committed  every  kind  of  error  rather  than  admit  for  an 
instant  that  they  themselves  could  be  in  the  wrong.  How  far 
she  was  ever  the  deceiver  depicted  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  his  post- 
humous publication  "  The  Early  Days  of  Theosophy  in  Europe," 
may  be  judged  by  the  reader  if  he  will  study  the  letter  from  Master 
K.H.^  in  which  he  gives  his  own  opinion  on  her  delinquencies. 
Those  who  love  the  memory  of  H.  P.  Blavatsky  for  her  work 
and  the  gifts  she  gave  them,  cannot  but  feel  after  reading  that 
letter  that  after  all  she  was  worthy  of  their  high  regard ;  and 
those  who  have  tried  to  blacken  that  memory  and  minimise  the 
value  of  the  work  she  did,  will  rise  to  heights  indeed  if  the  prayer 
be  granted — that  they  may  never  deserve  worse  condemnation. 

In  nothing  is  Madame  Blavatsky  more  completely  vindicated 
than  in  the  explanation  and  refutation  she  gave  in  the  Secret 
Doctrine,  of  the  misconceived  theory  in  regard  to  Mars  and 
Mercury,  which  was  originally  published  in  Esoteric  Buddhism. 
The  details  of  that  old  controversy  are  well-known  to  Theoso- 
phists,  and  it  is  fortunate  that  the  publication  in  this  volume  of 
the  letter  originally  so  misunderstood  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  refutes 
finally  the  imputations  made  against  Madame  Blavatsky  in  regard 
to  it.  It  is  indeed  amazing  that  Theosophists  have  continued  to  per- 
mit the  promulgation  of  the  idea  that  Mars  and  Mercury  belonged 
to  the  same  planetary  chain  as  The  Earth,  for  the  facts  are 
evident  that  they  do  not.  It  is  obvious  to  the  eye  of  the 
Astrologer,  if  not  to  students  of  other  branches  of  occult  science, 
that  such  a  theory  must  throw  into  confusion  every  system  and 
scale  of  correspondence  in  the  Solar  System  a  fact  which  alone  is 
enough  to  show  that  it  must  be  false. 

But  the  mere  assertion  of  facts  is  not  suflficient,  and  it  is  neces- 
sary to  examine  the  whole  controversy  in  detail  from  the 
beginning.  Those  who  wish  to  go  further  into  the  matter  are  re- 
ferred to  the  paper  which  has  been  included  in  the  Appendix  at  the 
end  of  this  volume.  There,  all  the  facts  have  been  dealt  with 
fully  by  the  present  writer,  and  he  believes  conclusively. 

In  the  life  of  the  Theosophical  Society  a  cycle  is  closing,  and 
'ere  the  reader  opens  this  volume  it  will  have  run  to  it's  inevitable 
1  Letter  No.  LIV. 


xiv  INTRODUCTION 

conclusion.  It  leaves  behind  it  a  legacy  of  things  done  which 
had  better  have  been  left  undone,  and  a  record  of  mistaken 
zeal  and  wasted  opportunity  of  which  few  can  be  proud. 
The  vigorous  new  life  of  the  dawning  cycle  which  is  beginning 
to  course  through  the  veins  of  the  old  body,  has  of  necessity 
objectivised  and  made  apparent,  all  that  was  contained  in  it  of  a 
nature  subversive  of  true  progress.  If  Master  K.H.  has  said 
that,  ''  the  Society  can  never  perish,  though  Branches  and  indi- 
viduals in  it  may,"  the  words  of  that  other  Teacher  must  also  be 
remembered,  "  that  new  wine  cannot  be  poured  into  old  bottles 
and  that  he  who  would  find  his  life  must  first  lose  it.  Be  on  your 
guard  against  hypocrisy,  for  nothing  is  hidden  that  shall  not  be 
revealed,  and  nothing  concealed  that  shall  not  be  made  known ; 
and  all  that  has  been  uttered  in  darkness  shall  be  heard  in  the 
light,  and  what  has  been  whispered  in  chambers  shall  be  pro- 
claimed from  the  house-tops.  There  are  days  that  are  coming 
when  one  stone  shall  not  be  left  upon  another  without  being  torn 
down.  Take  care  that  you  are  not  deceived,  for  many  shall  come 
in  My  Name  saying,  "  I  am  He,  and  the  time  is  near  " — but  do 
not  go  after  them.  And  when  you  hear  of  wars  and  disturbances, 
do  not  be  scared  •  these  have  to  come  first,  but  the  end  is  not  yet. 
For  these  are  the  days  of  Divine  vengeance.  And  there  will  be 
signs  in  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  Stars,  while  on  Earth  there  will 
be  dismay  and  bewilderment  at  the  roar  of  the  sea  and  the  waves, 
men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear  and  foreboding  of  what  is  to 
befall  the  universe.  For  the  orbs  of  the  heavens  will  be  shaken, 
and  then  they  will  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  with  power  and 
great  glory.  When  these  things  begin  to  happen,  look  up — for 
your  release  is  not  far  distant." 

Out  of  the  wreck  that  is  inevitable  a  shape  shall  arise  that  may 
be  worthy  of  immortality.  Let  those  who  have  climbed  the  hill 
and  seen  the  vision,  and  in  that  clean,  sweet  air  have  heard  the 
key-note  of  the  dawning  cycle — hold  fast — and  remember  in  the 
days  that  are  coming — the  sweetness,  and  the  beauty,  and  the 
truth  they  have  seen. 

A.  TREVOR  BARKER, 
Fellow  of  the  Theosophical  Society. 

London,   September,    1923. 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Compiler's    Preface 6 

Introduction 8 

SECTION  I 
THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES 

Letter  No.  I. — London  newspaper  Test;  i.  Solomons  of  Science — experi- 
mental knowledge — vril  of  the  coming  age — skeletons  of  giants  ;  2.  Hooke 
— Newton — position  of  Science — Human  nature  the  same  for  a  million  years 
— value  of  occult  phenomena;  3.  Science  and  Copernicus — Robert  Recorde 
— Wm.  Gilbert — Galileo — Bacon — charlatans  the  shield  of  the  "  Adept  " — 
the  rewards  of  the  Goddess  Saraswati ;  4.  The  phenomenon  of  the  Ascen- 
sion ;  5. 

Letter  No.  IL — Methods  of  research  in  Occult  Science — the  mysteries  not  for 
the  public — Conditions  of  communication  with  the  Mahatmas — the  mode 
of  life  demanded  ;  6.  Motives — the  object  of  the  Theos.  Society — signific- 
ance of  selfishness — the  T.S.  and  Universal  Brotherhood — the  study  of 
occultism — path  of  occultism — Schools — Teachers,  etc.  ;  8.  Beneficent 
fKDwers  of  knowledge — seal  of  the  mysteries  ;  the  life  of  the  aspirant — 
Anglo-Indian    Branch   T.S. — conditions   for   good   test   phenomena  ;   9. 

Letter  No.  Ill, — "  Brooch  "  phenomenon — postal  address  in  N.W.P. — Pillow 
incidents  ;  10. 

Letter  No.  IV. — Crisis  in  Tibet — danger  of  invasion  by  Russia;  11.  Menac- 
ing destiny  of  T.S. — Avalanche  in  the  Karakorum  Mts. — H.P.B.  demands 
assistance  telepathically — her  condition — the  state  of  K.H.'s  countrymen; 
12.  Accelerated  modes  of  delivery — Anglo-Indian  world — agitation  caused 
by  the  Bombay  publications  ;  13.  Col.  Olcott — the  feelings  of  the  English 
to  the  Mahatmas — O.'s  devotion  and  self-sacrifice  unequalled — independent 
A.I.  Branch  an  impossibility — mortal  blow  to  T.S. — non-interference  with 
Branches  by  Parent  Society — Arbitrator  when  specially  called  upon — trust 
in  word  of  honour  ;  14.  Different  habits  of  Tibetans  and  Hindus — lack  of 
understanding — national  prejudices — learned  in  Yog-Vidya  but  unfit  for 
drawing-rooms — essentials  and  non-essentials ;  15.  Difficulties  of  the 
Mahatmas — prejudice — unwashed  Christian  Saints — responsibility  for 
Sinnett  and  Hume — interference  only  by  the  Mahatmas — policy  of  A.I. 
Society  to  be  submitted  to  Chief  ;  16.  Attitude  of  Mahatmas  to  the  aspirant 
— marriage  and  Raja  Yoga — different  ways  of  acquiring  occult  knowledge — 
encouragement  given  to  Sinnett — "  Universal  Brotheihood  "  not  an  idle 
phrase — the  paramount  claim  of  Humanity ;  only  secure  foundation  for 
universal  morality — aspiration  of  the  true  Adept ;   17. 

Letter  No.  V. — Inaccuracies  of  H.P.B. — A.L  Branch — Hume's  letter — 
haughtiness  of  English — race  prejudice — personal  habits  ;  18.  The  test  of 
the  27th — Jhelum  despatch — impossibility  of  deception  ;  19.  The  methods 
of  Hume — his  letter  a  monument  of  pride — further  encouragement  to 
Sinnett — necessity  of  Universal  Brotherhood  in  Europe  ;  20.  Position  of 
Olcott  in  relation  to  the  T.S. — a  professor  of  occultism — letter  to  Lord 
Lindsay — H.P.B.  not  to  give  practical  instruction  to  A.I.   Branch;  21. 


xvi  CONTENTS 

Letter  No.  VI. — Methods  of  correspondence — occultists  copy  nature — sugges- 
tions for  group  study ;  22.  Analysis  of  Hume's  character — truths  and 
mysteries  of  occultism — phenomena  will  prove  destructive  of  bigotry — but 
constructive  for  Brotherhood  of  Humanity ;  23.  Planetary  spirits — phe- 
nomenal manifestations — ideas  rule  the  world — revolutions — creeds  will  be 
crushed — Man's  position  in  the  Universe — The  Eternal  Now — the  choice 
— highest  philosophy  or  phenomena — the  wish  of  the  Chiefs  ;  24. 

Letter  No.  VII. — Sinnett  disappointed  in  expectations  of  training — apprecia- 
tion of  his  efforts  for  T.S. — interest  in  him  of  one  higher  than  K.H.  ;  25. 

Letter  No.  VIII. — Personal  observations  re  Sinnett — reasons  for  K.H.'s 
actions  ;  26.  Lord  Crawford — character  and  possibilities — direct  communi- 
cation refused ;  27.  Methods  of  establishing  communication — unscientific 
absurdity  ;  28.  Velocity  of  mechanical  force — Sinnett 's  inability  to  under- 
stand explanations  of  phenomena — the  only  way — Past,  Present  and  Future 
— grossness  of  western  mind  ;  29.  The  Colour  rays  beyond  visible  spectrum 
— realities  appear  absurdities — insurmountable  difficulties  ;  30.  Grades  of 
intelligence — Superstition — the  world  repudiates  what  it  cannot  grasp — the 
novice  in  occult  science  nmst  reach  the  goal  or  perish — to  doubt  is  to  risk 
insanity;  31.  The  Mahatmas  attitude  to  humanity  and  the  world — not 
dried  up  mummies;  32.  K.H.'s  personal  attachments — erroneous  ideas 
about  Mahatmas — Yogis — difference  between  Hatha  and  Raja  Yoga  ;  33. 
Advice  regarding  Occult  World — manner  of  dealing  with  letters  ;  34.  Prob- 
lems of  mystical  phenomena — the  Forlorn  Hope — uses  of  spiritualism ; 
35.  Unity  gives  strength — importance  of  co-operation — Damodar's  letter 
— value  of  concentration  ;  36.     Home,   the  medium  ;  37. 

SECTION  II 
PHILOSOPHICAL  AND   THEORETICAL   TEACHINGS  1881-1883 

Letter  No.  IX. — Observations  on  The  Occult  World;  38.  Criticism  of  mem- 
bers of  T.S.  and  others  ;  39.  Stainton  Moses  ;  40.  Planetary  spirits  and 
the  Earth — their  mission — S.M.  and  occultism — abundant  proof — new 
phase  of  Truth — explanations  re  experiences  of  S.M.  ;  41.  Imperator — 
mediumship — The  "  Dweller  on  the  Threshold  "  ;  42  and  43.  Conscious 
life  in  spirit — reply  to  Fechner  ;  44.  Psychic  Communication  with  spirits 
an  impossibility — universal  laws — cycle  of  intelligent  existences — cosmic 
matter — Anima  mundi ;  45.  The  progress  of  man — The  Great  Cycle — 
evolution  of  the  Ego — the  circle  of  necessity  ;  46-7.  The  world  of  Causes 
— and  of  Effects — Self  Conscious  Egos — hell  and  purgatory  ;  48.  The  lower 
world  of  effects— a  definition  of  Truth — Brothers  not  permitted  to  control 
the  will  of  the  neophyte — The  Brethren  of  the  Shadow;  49.  K.H.'s  rela- 
tions with  Sinnett — observations  on  the  Occult  World — its  effect  on  H.P.B. 
and  others — Wallace  and  Crookes  ;  50.  Willingness  of  Adepts  to  enlighten 
mankind — their  mission   to  reveal  Truth  ;  51. 

Letter  No.  X. — The  philosophy  of  the  Mahatmas  with  regard  to  "  God  " — 
the  God  of  the  theologians ;  52-3.  Dyan  Chohans — definition  of 
*'  nothing  " — logical  conclusions — the  Universal  Mind  ;  54.  The  belief  in 
Planetary  Spirits — matter  is  Eternal — no-one  has  ever  seen  God — cannot 
accept  an  extra-cosmic  deity ;  55.  Phlogiston — belief  in  matter  alone — 
it's  unceasing  motion  which  is  life — ideas  on  Evil ;  56.  The  cause  of  evil 
is  in  human  intelligence  and  action — natural  laws  and  necessary  evils — 
the  sacerdotal  caste  and  churches — the  chief  cause  of  evil ;  57.  Buddhist 
I>riests — God  not  worshipped  in  Buddhist  Temples — the  four  noble  truths 
— the  12  Nidanas — the  chain  of  causation;  58.  The  words  of  the  Buddha; 
58-9. 


CONTENTS  xvii 

Letter  No.  XI. — K.H.     has    misgivings    in     role    of    instructor — the    eternal 
Essence — Force — immutability  non-existent  in  Solar  System  ;  6i.     Inappro- 
priate terms  used  by  Science — this  teaching  opposed  to  all  accepted  theories 
— observations  on  the  fallacies  and  incompleteness  of  Science — energy  inde- 
structible— gravity — chemical   attraction — electricity  ;   62.     Chelas   are   mag- 
netised— only  one  element  in   Nature,    Akasa — spirit  and  matter,   one — the 
tetracktis — the  sacred  seven  ;  63  ;  the  Greek  Brother — necessity  of  serenity 
of    mind    for    occult    study ;    64.     Psychical    powers    of    hearing — our    Zoo- 
phagous  friend — questions  of  diet — transmission  of  letters  ;  65.     Schoppen- 
hauer  and  the  "  Arhat  "  doctrines. 
Letter  No.  XII. — Explanations     re     Mahayuga — Pralaya — cyclic     evolution — 
Manvantaras — dead    worlds ;    67.     An    eternity    of    action — Ethnographical 
details — Eskimaux — Neolithic    age — the    Basks   of    Spain — the   early    traces 
of  man — Geike,   Dawkins,   Fiske — five  races — evolution  of  speech  ;  69. 
I^ETTER  No.  XIII. — Cosmological    notes   and    queries — esoteric   cosmogony;   70. 
Nature  works  with  positive  and  negative  forces — the  worlds  of  effects;  71. 
Man's  principles  return  to  their  source  at  death — man  has  potentiality  of 
all  7  principles  as  a  germ  ;  72.     The  spiral  of  man's  evolution  ;  73.     Man 
becomes    fully    responsible — the     Bible — an     androgyne     ape — Veddahs     of 
Ceylon ;    74.     Volition    awakes    with    maturity    of    4th    principle — rounds, 
cycles,   races  ;  75.     The  seven  notes  of  the  musical  scale — the  octave — the 
seven  vowels  chanted  by  the  Egyptian  priests  ;  76.     Animal,  vegetable,  and 
mineral  kingdoms — "  life  "  no  responsibility  except  in  man — Buddhas  and 
Avatars — centre  of  individuality ;  77.     The  object  of  initiations  ;  78. 
Letter  No.  XIV. — 7  objective  and  7  subjective  globes ;  78.     The  7  kingdoms — 
the   descent   of   the   m.onad — occult   divisions   of   mineral    kingdom — rounds 
and  rings — divisions  and  classifications — the  whole  truth  not  permitted  to 
be  given  ;  79-81.     numbers  the  key  to  knowledge — rounds,   races,   and  the 
number  of  incarnations  in  each — the  problem  of  the  777  incarnations — Plato 
and  Confucius  5th  Round  men — Buddha  a  6th  rounder  ;  82-4.     Explanatory 
notes  of  the  diagram  "  Man  on  a  Planet  " — ascending  and  descending  arcs 
of   evolution — the   Dhyan    Chohans — Devas — increasing    intelligence   as    the 
Rounds  proceed — what  happens  in  each  Round  ;  85-8. 
Letter  No.  XV. — Germ  of  future  entity — history  of  the  human  foetus  the  key 
to   the  mysteries   of  nature — the  cosmic  atom — aggregations   of   atoms   be- 
coming man-bearing  globes  ;  89.     Their  indestructibility  and  growth — Adi- 
Buddhi,    Force,    or    Infinite    Life    in    manifestation ;    90.     One    seven-fold 
element  the  permanent  cause  of  all  manifestation — examples — the  five  cog- 
nisable   elements — the    sixth    principle;    91.     Observations    on    the   "fire" 
element — primal    igneous   principle — 7  manifestations    of   fire — the   Tree    of 
Life  ;  92.     A  mineral  contains  a  spark  of  the  One — the  Law  of  formation, 
birth,  etc.  of  a  globe  the  same  as  for  a  child — the  3  kinds  of  Manvantaras 
and  Pralayas  ;  93.     Life  impulse  and  formation  of  Globe  "  A  "—passage  of 
Essence    from    one   globe    to  another — and    one    kingdom    to    another ;    94. 
Further  observations  on  the  evolution  of  man — increased  spirituality  of  the 
5th    Race    man — kingdoms    re-entering   Globe   "A";    95.     Law   of  equili- 
brium manifesting — 6th  and  7th  senses — the  Lord  Buddha  a  6th  Race  man 
— his  appearance  a  mystery — individuals  can  only  outstrip  humanity  by  one 
Round ;    96.     Surya    Manwantaras    and    Pralayas — the   Cosmic    night ;    07. 
Elementals — Flammarion   a   Theosophist — his  splendid   intuition  ;   98.     Per- 
nicious influence  of  the  Moon — the  Sun  is  the  first  to  disintegrate  at  the 
Solar    Pralaya — the  6th   principle   of  the   Universe   and  man,    the  greatest 
of  all  mysteries  ;  99. 
Lptter  No.  XVI. — The    Devachan    Letter — Devachan    allegorically    described 

J* 


xviii  CONTENTS 

by  Buddha — who  goes  to  Devachan  ;  loo.  The  Ego  enjoys  perfect  bliss — 
Karma  stands  aside — he  is  the  dreamer  and  the  dream — souls  of  the  de- 
parted unable  to  descend  to  those  on  earth — pure,  loving  sensitives  can  be- 
come raised  in  consciousness  to  contact  those  in  Devachan — some  Subjec- 
tive spiritual  communications  real — "  rapport,"  identity  of  molecular 
vibration  ;  loi.  Great  varieties  in  the  Devachan  state — the  Dhyan-Chohans 
do  not  commit  mistakes ;  102.  Degrees  of  spirituality — "  the  planet  of 
Death  " — when  man  dies  his  2nd  and  3rd  principles  die  with  him — the 
gestation  state  ;  103.  Elementaries  and  "  angel-guides  " — Kama-Loka — a 
torn  out  page  in  the  Book  of  Lives — the  6th  and  7th  principles,  the  un- 
conscious and  eternal  Monad  ;  104.  The  ethereal  Ego — the  Monad  remains 
untainted  by  evil  for  ever — the  karma  of  evil  deeds  accrues  to  the  new 
personality — varying  periods  between  Death  and  Devachan  depending  on 
spiritual  stamina  and  karma  ;  105.  Devachan  not  solely  for  Adepts  ;  106. 
A  classification  of  Devas,  elementals,  sorcerers,  etc.  ;  107.  The  territor>' 
of  doubt — things  acceptable  and  non-acceptable  to  Spiritualists ;  108. 
Post  mortem  conditions  of  Suicides  and  those  killed  by  accident ;  109. 
Psychic  vampires — mediums  create  new  and  evil  Karma  and  Skandhas  for 
their  victims — study  deeply  the  doctrines  of  Karma  and  Nirvana;  no.  The 
Recording  Angel — meaning  of  Skandhas — identity  of  the  Ego;  in.  Justice 
of  Karma — causes  producing  the  new  being — suicide  and  violent  death  ; 
112.  How  mediums  and  Spiritualists  multiply  the  causes  of  human 
misery — the  reason  why  the  Masters  oppose  Spiritualism — indiscriminate 
mediumship  and  materialisations  especially  objectionable;  113.  Individual 
and   personal    immortality — divisions   of   the   7   principles  and   7   elements ; 

114.  Hume  and  Sinnett  receive  more  information  than  ever  given  before 
to  non-initiates — the  teaching  to   be   regarded  as  a   trust   for   the   Society  ; 

115.  The  Chohan  forbids  H.P.B.  to  go  further  than  the  Black  Rock — 
Damodar's  foolish  austerities — the  body  of  Occultists  in  Egypt — K.H. 
sighs   for  Nirvana  ;    1 16. 

Letter  No.  XVH. — Natural  seers  and  clairvoyance — 5th  round  men — the 
Buddha  a  6th  round  man — his  future  incarnations — Buddha  overshadowed 
some  chosen  individuals — sex  a  mere  accident  of  birth,  guided  by  Karma  ; 
117.  The  superior  classes — course  of  higher  Nature's  law — peoples  of  India 
belong  to  oldest  branchlet  of  the  5th  human  race — "  Ernests  "  and 
"Joeys"  and  soulless  mediums;  118.     Subba  Row's  reverence  for  H.P.B. 

Letter  No.  XVIII. — The  evolutionary  journey  of  the  monad — 7  ramifications 
of  the  7  races — man  passes  through  all  7  times — Manvantaric  chains  exist- 
ing in  and  out  of  our  Solar  System;  119.  Man's  earth  cycle  the  counter- 
part of  great  cycle — mistakes  of  Anthropologists — Pritchard  nearest  the 
mark — the  test  of  true  progress  ;  120.  The  present  5th  human  race  began 
in  Central  Asia  over  one  million  years  ago;  121.  Occult  Science  a  jealous 
mistress — fatal  to  ordinary  course  of  marriage;   122. 

Letter  No.  XIX. — Post  mortem  conditions  of  suicides  and  victims  of  acci- 
dents ;  123. 

Lktter  No.  XXa. — From  A.  O.  Hume  to  K.H.  Queries  re  spiritualistic  phe- 
nomena— shells — suicides  and  accidents;  123.  Death  by  drink — over-study 
— diseases,  etc. — suggestion  that  phenomena  of  spiritualism  may  be  pro- 
duced by  spirits,  not  by  shells — some  teach  higher  morality — Allan  Kardec's 
books;   124. 

Letter  No.  XXb. — From  A.P.S.  to  H.P.B.  Eliphas  Levi's  statements  re 
annihilation — queries  in  regard  to  survival  of  spiritual  monad — obscuration 
of  planets  and  annihilation  ;   125. 

Letter  No.  XXc. — Meaning    of    the    terms    God    and   Christ — candidates    for 


CONTENTS  xix 

Devachan — death  and  re-birth  in  Kama-Loka — love  and  hatred  the  only 
immortal  feelings — only  those  we  have  loved  exist  for  us  in  Devachan — the 
memories  which  only  affect  personality  blotted  out — duration  of  Devachan 
— no  perception  of  time — Devachan  and  Avitchi  created  by  ourselves  during 
life;  127.  Importance  of  predominant  feeling  at  moment  of  death — the 
events  of  whole  life  seen  in  vision  at  death — only  adepts  and  sorcerers  know 
they  are  dead — they  only  are  immortal — co-workers  with  nature  for  good 
or  evil — definition  of  Immortality — self-consciousness — memory  regained  by 
even  good  men  only  in  Devachan — "  soul  "  becomes  unconscious  at  death 
in  all  cases — faculties  of  perception,  cogitation  and  volition,  become  ex- 
tinct for  ever  at  death ;  128.  Apparitions — no  essential  difference 
between  doctrines  of  Eliphas  Levi  and  those  of  K.H. — what  immortality 
signifies  to  initiates  and  occultists — several  kinds  of  immortality — the  full 
adept  in  relation  to  death  ;  129.  Chohans,  Planetary  spirits  and  immor- 
tality— E.  Levi  speaks  of  personal  not  spiritual  Egos — co-workers  with 
nature — annihilation  and  the  eighth  sphere — potentiality  for  evil  in  man 
greater  than  for  good — Sorcerers  and  immortality  ;  130.  Suicides  separated 
from  higher  principles  by  a  gulf — not  so  in  victims  of  accidental  death — 
Dhyan  Chohans  do  not  guide  living  human  Egos  but  protect  victims  of 
accidental  death — victims  sleep  but  to  awake  at  the  hour  of  last  judgment 
— the  struggle  between  the  6th  and  7th  and  5th  and  4th  principles  ;  131. 
Reborn  on  earth  immediately  if  insuflRcient  material  for  Devachan — only 
shells  and  suicides  can  be  attracted  to  a  Stance — suicide  a  question  of 
motive  and  responsibility — effect  of  suicide  during  temporary  insanity — 
Guitian  ;  132.  Bulk  of  phenomena  of  spiritualists  due  to  shells — uncon- 
scious 5th  principle  (soul)  cannot  communicate  with  a  living  organism — 
Allan  Kardec  not  quite  immaculate — even  Dugpas  capable  of  teaching  the 
highest  morality — preaching  with  an  end  in  view  proves  little  ;  133.  The 
time  for  the  obscuration  of  a  planet — a  man  must  love  or  hate  well  to  be 
in  either  Devachan  or  Avichi — "  Nature  spues  the  luke  warm  out  of  her 
mouth  "  ;   134. 

Letter  No.  XXL — From  A.P.S.  to  K.H.  Queries  in  regard  to  post  mortem 
conditions  of  accidents  and  suicides ;  135.  K.H.'s  replies  to  same — the 
teaching  given  is  the  rule — exceptions  enforce  the  rule — K.H.  accused  of 
contradictions   and   inconsistencies ;    136. 

Letter  No.  XXIL— To  A.  O.  Hume.  Dual  attributes  of  Universal  and 
human  Mind — conscious  and  mechanical  functions — the  conscious  attribute 
of  Universal  Mind  a  hypothesis  only,  but  scientific  fact  in  finite  mind — 
the  human  brain — voluntary  and  involuntary  nervous  systems — man  poten- 
tially more  powerful  than  "God" — contrary  to  finite,  infinite  mind  ex- 
hibits only  mechanical  functions  of  Cerebellum  ;  137.  The  extent  of  the 
knowledge  of  an  adept  and  of  a  planetary  spirit — laws  of  Nature  mechani- 
cal— Motion  the  eternal  and  uncreated  deity;  "God"  cannot  be  both 
intelligent  and  wholly  material — a  God  with  intelligence  would  be  a  fiend 
in  view  of  the  existence  of  evil ;  138.  The  Mosaic  deity,  "  No  Being  " — 
— Vedantic  Acosmism — greatest  adepts  have  not  penetrated  beyond  the 
Solar  System — but  they  know  with  certainty  of  other  Solar  Systems — 
Motion  governs  laws  of  Nature — no  room  for  a  moral  Governor  of  the 
Universe— darkness  does  not  comprehend  light  because  it  is  annihilated  by 
it — whence  the  Immutable  Laws  and  their  supposed  Creator ;  139. 
Nepaulese  Swabbhavikas — Swabbhavat  is  force — a  force  of  limitless 
potentiality,  but  yet  not  "  God  "  because  man  can  use  it — the  multiform 
manifestations  of  life  made  perceptible  by  force ;  140.  Man  can  become 
his  own  creator  and  ruler — Immutable  Laws  eternal  and  uncreated — only 
one   law   in   the   Universe — Nature   disproves   the   theory   of   an    all-loving. 


XX  CONTENTS 

omniscient,  omnipotent  God — eternal  progressions  of  cycles  and  evolution — 
spirit  and  matter  are  one — only  distinct  in  manifestation — the  Absolute  the 
only  reality;  141.  Ice,  water,  and  vapour  as  an  illustration  of  the  Trinity 
— the  Pyramids — matter  indestructible  and  coeval  with  Spirit — matter, 
force,  and  motion  the  Trinity  of  physical  Nature — Evil — mental  attitude  of 
the  pupil — must  learn  alphabet  in  order  to  read — the  world  of  occultism  is 
the  world  of  force — only  the  initiate  can  know;  143.  The  Chela  becomes 
the  Master — mystery  and  miracle  vanish — occultism  an  exact  science — its 
methods  laid  down  in  a  code  as  old  as  humanity  ;   144. 

Letter  No.  XXIIIa. — Queries  by  A.P.S.  in  numbered  paragraphs;  (i)  cause 
of  rush  of  modern  progress — (2)  civilisation  as  great  as  our  own — (3)  what 
was  the  Fifth  Race  about  for  the  998,000  years  preceding  the  last  2,000 — 
(4)  to  what  epoch  did  the  Continent  of  Atlantis  belong — (5)  the  origin  of 
evil ;  145.  (6)  the  use  of  the  whole  cylic  process  endured  by  the  spirit — 
(8)  scientific  questions — cause  of  precipitation  of  rain — magnetic  conditions 
— (9)  the  composition  of  the  sun's  corona — (10)  photometric  value  of  light — 
— star  magnitudes — (11)  atmospheric  disturbances  in  atmosphere  of  Jupiter 
— (12)  the  Siemen's  theory  of  Solar  combustion — (13)  cause  of  magnetic 
variation — (14)  the  possibility  of  the  discovery  of  more  planets ;  146. 
(15)  a  moment  of  the  highest  bliss — (16)  Devachan  and  Avitchi — (17)  the 
effect  of  the  last  thought  in  the  mind  before  death — (18)  full  remembrance 
of  all  our  lives — (19  &  20)  nature  of  the  memory  of  the  "  shell  " — (21)  tht 
spiritual  Ego — evolution  of  its  personalities — the  shell  of  A.  P.  Sinnett  and 
the  nature  of  its  consciousness  ;  147.  (22)  the  Planet  of  Death — (23)  Mars 
and  Mercury — (24)  is  the  sun  the  habitation  of  spiritualised  beings — (25  & 
26)  the  case  of  the  Ego  who  has  not  sufficient  material  for  rebirth  in 
Devachan — (27)  the  case  of  the  murderer  Guitian — (28  &  29)  planetary 
obscurations  and  the  evolution  of  forms  ;   148. 

Letter  No.  XXIIIb. — K.H.'s  replies  to  queries  in  XXIIIa.  End  of  an  import- 
ant cycle — cyclic  law  for  race  and  sub-race — Cortez — sub-races  of  Peru  and 
Mexico  ;  149.  Zodiacal  records — civilization  an  inheritance — Europe  rejects 
testimony  of  antiquity — the  Western  Cendrillon — Eocene  Age — the  sinking 
of  Poseidonis — Lemuria — our  present  Continents  have  been  submerged  and 
will  be  again  ;  151.  Greek,  Roman  and  Egyptian  civilisations  less  than 
those  of  the  3rd  race — history  all  at  sea  ;  152.  Copernicus  avails  himself 
of  a  Pythagorean  MSS. — the  children  of  the  "  Fire  Mist  " — ancient 
civilizations ;  153  ;  the  Chinese — Ireland  strewn  with  gigantic  bones  of 
mammoths  and  monsters — Malayans,  Tibetans,  Javanese,  the  Miocene 
times ;  154.  Egyptian  priests  and  Atlantis — the  inhabitants  of  Shan\- 
ballah — Baron  d'Holbach  ;  155.  Atlantis  connected  with  the  origin  of  evil 
— obscurations  heralded  by  cataclysms  ;  the  premises  of  Science  wrong — 
the  future  Fate  of  British  Isles,  France,  etc.  ;  156.  Progress  towards 
absolute  evil  arrested  by  cataclysmic  changes — Tree  of  Knowledge  in  safe 
keeping  of  the  Mahatmas — the  Planetaries — every  race  has  its  Adepts ; 
157.  The  cyclic  process — Spirit  an  abstraction — in  union  with  matter  it 
is  life — the  mystery  and  problem  of  life  ;  158.  To  solve  the  problem  one 
must  become  an  Occultist — all  forms  mask  but  one  all-pervading  Force — 
one  life,  one  law,  one  element — the  conclusions  of  greatest  scientific  minds 
— force  can  be  infused  into  artificial  man — Spirit,  life  and  matter  do  not 
exist  independently  of  each  other ;  159.  No  phenomenon  in  Nature — dis- 
connected from  magnetism  and  electricity — phenomena  of  earth  currents 
due  to  Akasic  magnetism — rain  can  be  induced  artificially — some  calcula- 
tions    for    physcists ;     160.     Magnetic     attraction — atmospheric     changes — 


CONTENTS  xxi 

meteoric  dust;  i6i.  Meteors — sun  little  to  do  with  heat  and  nothing  with 
rain — Reichenbach's  crystals — the  sun's  corona — head  of  a  man  in  ecstatic 
condition — aureoles — hydrogen  ;  162.  Sun  spots — sun  not  the  central 
planet  of  our  Universe — the  difficulties  confronting  Scientists  in  studying 
Solar  phenomena — atmospheric  tremours — no  obstacle  to  the  Adept — sun 
full  of  iron  vapours — the  demonstration  by  the  spectroscope — cornets  ;  163. 
"  Store-house  "  of  our  system — its  blood  corpuscles — its  electro-magnetic 
aura — misconceptions  of  Science  ;  164.  Forces  of  which  the  sun  is  com- 
posed— it  feeds  the  smallest  atom  as  well  as  the  greatest  genius — the  dis- 
tance of  the  stars  from  us — no  trustworthy  basis  for  calculating  magni- 
tudes and  distances — observations  with  Pickering  Photometre — astronomi- 
cal predictions  of  Chaldees  and  Rishis  faultless ;  165.  Light  not  an 
independent  principle — every  phenomenon  the  effect  of  diversified  Akasic 
motion — velocity  of  light — methods  adopted  by  French  experimenters  ;  166. 
The  condition  of  Jupiter — the  whole  Solar  System  moving  in  space — 
Jupiter  hides  a  Raja-Sun — disturbances  in  its  atmosphere ;  167. 
Siemen's  statements — matter  in  all  its  7  states — radiant  energy — absorption 
of  Solar  forces — chemical  power  lost  in  transit ;  168.  Jenkins — Sir  James 
Ross — the  magnetic  theory — planets  not  yet  discovered — Edison's  tasimeter 
— discoverer  an  F.T.S.  ;  169.  The  moment  of  death — inlluence  of  last 
thoughts  and  desires — the  whole  life  seen  in  memory — no  man  dies  insane 
or  unconscious  ;  170.  Advice  to  those  assisting  at  a  deaLh-bcd — retributive 
justice — the  eighth  sphere — Avitchi — Nirvana — the  consciousness  of  the 
"shell";  171.  That  which  becomes  for  ever  extinct  at  death — Karma 
of  the  personality — immediate  incarnation  of  children ;  172.  Nature  of 
remembrance  of  shell — animal's  memory  not  perceptive  faculty — shell  in 
aura  of  medium — perception  through  borrowed  organs — challenge  to 
Spiritualists;  173.  The  *'  Spirit  "  of  Zollner  knows  no  more  than  in  life — 
the  recollections  of  the  "  Shell  " — complete  insanity  ;  174.  The  shell  of 
A,  P.  Sinnett  and  the  nature  of  its  consciousness;  175.  Sorcerers — Mars 
and  4  other  planets  ;  176.  Obscurations  not  Pralayas — their  duration — the 
children  5th  round  men  beget — questions  pertaining  to  the  highest 
initiations — men   become  Gods;    177. 

Letter  No.  XXIVa. — The  famous  "  Contradictions."  Sinnett's  questions  in 
regard  to  supposed  contradictions  and  inconsistencies  in  the  teaching  re- 
received ;   178-9. 

Letter  No.  XXIVb. — K.H.  states  what  an  Adept  is — his  Occult  powers  ;  180. 
Pleads  guilty  to  an  '*  omission  "  but  not  a  '*  contradiction  " — beware  of 
trusting  I  sis  Unveiled  too  implicitly — H.P.B.  herself  not  permitted  to  under- 
stand all  that  is  treated  of  in  Isis — it  conceals  but  does  not  distort — 
reincarnation  as  treated  in  Isis — Astral  monad — personal  Ego;  183.  Sin- 
nett's chilly  mental  condition — G.K.  produces  a  portrait  of  K.H.  phe- 
nomenally— M.  prefers  to  go  to  sleep ;  184.  Replies  to  the  contradictions  ; 
185.  Accusations  of  inconsistency  unjust — due  to  the  conditions  under 
which  he  writes  his  letter? — K.H.  regarded  by  his  colleagues  and  the 
Chohans  as  a  lunatic  ;  186.  What  happens  to  every  being  at  death — the 
shell — no  two  states  in  Devachan  alike ;  187.  The  Ego  in  Devachan — 
Avitcha — love  and  hatred  the  only  immortal  feelings  ;  188.  Wagner  and 
musicians — K.H.  pleads  guilty  to  one  sin;  189.  The  impossibility  of  deal- 
ing with  Hume — his  remarks — a  sentimental  Becky  Sharp  ;   190. 

Letter  No.  XXV. — Devachan — additional  explanations — Bacon — the  fruition  of 
all    aspirations;    191.     Attempting    to    describe    the    indescribable — requires 


xxii  CONTENTS 

perceptions  of  a  trained  Chela  ;  192.  Time  does  not  exist  in  Devachan — 
disapprobation  of  a  lay  Chela  ;  193.  Time  sense  created  by  ourselves — the 
bliss  of  Devachan — woes  of  Avitchi — space  and  time  according  to  Kant ; 
194.  Further  explanations  of  Devachanic  existence — pandering  to  pre- 
judices of  Western  readers ;  195.  Explanations  of  Devachanic  states — 
weary  round  of  birth  and  death — a  colourless  personality  gets  a  colourless 
Devachan — Avitchi  the  antithesis  of  Devachan  ;  196.  Hell  and  Heaven — 
misconception  of  terms — Spirit  and  Soul — individuality — personality — all 
bliss  in  Devachan — no  failure  or  disappointment ;  197.  The  Great  Reward, 
Nirvana — Rupa-Loka — Arupa-Loka — Kama-Loka — the  summer-land  of  the 
Spiritualists  ;  198.  From  Kama-Loka  to  Devachan  or  Avitchi — infinite  dif- 
ferentiation of  those  states — reviving  consciousness  ;  199.  How  to  under- 
stand the  doctrine  fully — the  reward  of  benevolent  men — social  status  the 
result  of  Karma;  200.  Lillie's  "  Buddha  and  early  Buddhism  " — proposed 
scheme  for  personal  intercourse  impracticable;  201.  Selfishness  of  T.S. 
members — sacrifices  made  by  H.P.B.  and  Olcott — money  matters;  202. 

SECTION  III 
PROBATION  AND  CHELASHIP 

Letter  No.  XXVL — Observations  regarding  H.P.B.  and  her  psychological 
condition — reasons  causing  it — one  principle  left  behind;  203.  K.H. 
strongly  disapproves  of  their  cruelty  to  H.P.B. 

Letter  No.  XXVH. — Necessity  of  frank  speech — danger  threatening  Theo- 
sophical  Society — Stainton  Moses ;  204.  The  mediumship  of  S.M. — in- 
spiration not  required  from  disembodied  Spirits — truth  stands  alone ;  205. 
Skeletons  in  family  closets  dangerous  to  handle — a  cause  once  created  can- 
not be  unmade — management  of  the  Society  difficult ;  206.  Translation  of 
the  Grand  Inquisitor  desirable — Mahatma  K.H.  disheartened  at  the  pros- 
pect before  him — the  brandy  atmosphere  in  the  house  ;  207. 

Letter  No.  XXVHL — Englishmen  incapable  of  assimilating  Hindu  thought — 
K.H.  speaks  frankly  to  Hume;  208.  Erroneous  ideas  regarding  T.S. — 
branches  of  T.S.  as  harbingers  of  Universal  Brotherhood — Occult  instruc- 
tion by  the  Brothers  ;  209.  Attempt  to  establish  secret  school  of  magic  in 
London — complete  failure — Lord  Lytton — British  T.S.,  of  the  Universal 
Brotherhood  in  name  only — gravitates  at  best  towards  Quietism;  210. 
Observations  on  the  attitude  of  Sinnett  and  Hume  towards  K.H. — His 
exposition  of  truth;  211.  Thorough  criticisms  of  statements  made  in 
Hume's  letter — distortion  of  K.H.'s  motives — complete  lack  of  understand- 
ing; 212.  Patience  and  courtesy  of  KH.  in  dealing  with  subject — a  quiet 
reproof — Hindus  will  always  be  the  Masters  of  the  West  in  Spiritual 
Sciences  ;  213.  That  which  they  value  most  highly — the  kind  of  men  the 
Masters  want  and  do  not  want — their  characteristics;  214.  The  keepers 
of  the  sacred  Light — their  knowledge  the  gift  of  the  Gods — the  Kantian 
note — Hume  the  type  of  the  Spiritual  failure  and  unconscious  egotism  of 
this  Age ;  215.  Observations  on  mesmerism — what  conscience  will  and 
will  not  do;  216.  Imagination  as  well  as  will  creates — the  monster  of 
suspicion  ;  217. 

Letter  No.  XXIX. — M.  condones  Hume's  attitude — gratitude  a  sacred  debt ; 
217;  no  quarrelling  among  the  Adepts — the  value  of  primary  facts — 
thoughts  before  words;  218.  K.H.  speaks  to  M.  of  his  pupils  before  de- 
parture— M.'s  promise — the  love  of  M.    for  his   Brother — he  watches  over 


CONTENTS  xxiii 

the  work;  219.  Hume's  feelings — misunderstood  words — but  not  by  M.  ; 
220.  Further  observations  on  Hume's  statements — injustice  of  his  treat- 
ment of  H.P.B.  ;  221.  The  necessity  of  knowing  oneself — need  of  a  clear 
understanding — Hume  the  embodiment  of  pride  ;  222.  The  standards  of 
the  Mahatmas — Hume's  words  to  M.  and  K.H. — his  constant  attitude — 
will  not  be  contradicted ;  223.  Hume  considers  himself  slighted  and 
wronged — his  defence  of  the  weak — M.'s  generous  estimate  of  his  charac- 
ter— Mahatmas  untouched  by  personal  pain  or  pleasure — M.'s  Rajput  blood 
resents  hurt  to  a  woman's  feelings;  224.  Hume  makes  further  communi- 
cation impossible  by  his  attitude — cannot  realise  the  motives  or  the  actions 
of  the  Mahatmas — blinded  by  pride ;  225.  No  permission  given  for 
phenomena — their  appreciation  of  both  Sinnett  and  Hume — hof>es  for  the 
T.S. — law  is  law — Mahatmas  will  do  their  duty  ;  226.  Phenomena  will 
never  shake  the  erroneous  beliefs  of  Western  mind — so  long  as  men  doubt 
there  will  be  curiosity  and  enquiry — trying  to  read  the  things  of  the  Spirit 
with  the  eyes  of  the  flesh  ;  227.     The  mark  of  the  Adept ;  228. 

Letter  No.  XXX. — K.H.  speaks  out — criticism  of  Hume's  letter  re  Fern; 
Hume  mistaken  from  first  to  last — Hume's  letter  to  K.H.  quoted;  229. 
Fern  endeavours  to  "  humbug  "  M. — the  ordeals  of  a  Chela — what  pro- 
bation means  ;  230.  The  freedom  of  the  Chela's  choice — his  freedom  of 
expression — methods  of  training  absolutely  opposite  to  those  of  the  Jesuits 
— the  latter  false  to  truth  and  to  humanity  ;  231.  The  searching  of  a 
Chela's  weak  points — how  the  Masters  regard  truth — examples  given — 
M.'s  method  of  expressing  himself;  232.  K.H.  makes  some  observations 
on  Mahatma  M. — also  on  Hume's  faults;  233.  A  temperate  reproof  to 
Hume  ;  234.  What  is  expected  of  a  Chela — the  true  value  of  a  man  ;  235. 
The  unworthiness  of  certain  friends — underhand  methods — the  sincerity  of 
those  who  protect  Hume — how  a  Chela  is  tested — Damodar — H.P.B. — 
Olcott — tests  applied  to  Fern — nobody  humbugged — H.P.B.'s  opinion  of 
Fern — her  advice  to  him  ;  237.  Words  of  appreciation  to  Hume — his  dis- 
satisfaction— his  claims  and  demands ;  238.  2nd  class  minds — friendly 
truths — not  to  be  resented — gratitude  of  the  Mahatmas  for  all  H.  has 
done  ;  239. 

Letter  No.  XXXI. — From  Terich-Mir.  The  key  to  the  phenomena  of  Occult 
Sciences — reason  elevated  to  supersensuous  wisdom — perfect  comprehension 
of  the  Adept — his  reward — the  culmination  of  knowledge  and  wisdom  ;  241. 
K.H.'s  years  of  labour — the  would-be  disciple  encouraged  to  pass  on  the 
truth  to  his  fellow-creatures — H.P.B.  ill;  242. 

Letter  No.  XXXH. — Hume  puts  his  foot  in  a  hornet's  nest;  242.  Unsatis- 
factory relations  between  Europeans — Hume's  insulting  expressions  to- 
wards even  K.H.'s  great  Master;  243.  Hume's  accusations — the 
Mahatmas'  patience;  244. 

Letter  No.  XXX HL — Apparent  contradiction  between  notes  from  M.  and 
K.H. — approve  of  plan  to  form  nucleus  of  honest  scientific  enquirers — no- 
one  works  in  vain — requests  Sinnett  to  work  in  sympathy  with  A.  Besant ; 

244-5- 
Letter  No.  XXXIV. — Mahatmas  complain  of  being  constantly  misunderstood 

— impossibility  of   satisfying    Hume — the   Society    will   never   perish   as    an 

Institution  ;  245. 
Letter  No.  XXXV. — Observations  on   phenomena — Sinnett 's   disappointment — 

methods  for  development  of  Occult  faculties — no  culture  will  supply  psychic 

idiosyncrasy   if   lacking  ;   247.     M.   deals   with  some  spooks. 
Letter  No.  XXXVI. — M.   refuses  to  make  puja   to   Hume;  248. 


xxiv  CONTENTS 

Letter  No.  XXX VI I. —Written  by  the  "  Disinherited  "  at  K.H.'s  bidding- 
words  of  approval  and  encouragement  to  Sinnett — the  power  of  projecting 
and  feeling  force;  249.  Observations  on  Hume's  work  and  his  unchanged 
state  of  selfishness — his  professed  love  of  humanity  ;  250. 

Letter  No.  XXXVI I L — Disappointment  in  store  for  K.H. — the  libel  law — 
reflections  on  female  branch  and  females — the  secret  cause  of  events;  251. 
The  Brothers — Brotherhood — the  love  of  humanity — essential  qualifications 
of  a  Chela — selfishness  and  exclusiveness  of  all  peoples  ;  252. 

Letter  No.  XXXIX. — The  Arhat  vows — defence  of  H.P.B. — M.  creates  his 
dinner — the  "  Disinherited  "  ;  253. 

Letter  No.  XL. — Nothing  can  help  T.S.  while  Founders  are  under  a  cloud ; 
254.  Incessant  attacks — a  devotee  of  error — forced  psychic  vision  by 
Hathayog — general  law  of  vision  determined  by  grade  of  man's  spirit  and 
soul ;  255.  A  Society  whose  Guru  was  no  initiate — idolators — permission 
to  join  them  to  study — remembering  promise  to  K.H.  ;  256. 

Letter  No.  XLI. — H.P.B.'s  condition — only  a  shell  at  times — encouragement 
to  Sinnett ;  256. 

Letter  No.  XLI  I. — M.  repeats  that  no  regular  instruction  is  possible — much 
that  can  be  done  with  K.H.'s  help — Hume  disinclined  to  disabuse  public 
mind ;  257.  A  solitary  pearl  is  soon  out-shone  in  a  heap  of  false  diamonds 
— the  trials  of  earth  life — their  conquest — "  fuller  introduction  into  the 
mysteries  depends  on  yourself  "  ;  258. 

Letter  No.  XLIII. — "  My  impatient  friend  " — M.'s  attitude — an  Adept's  duty 
not  controlled  by  social  affections — Sinnett  forced  himself  on  K.H.  ;  259. 
No  right  to  influence  one  who  is  not  a  Chela — Sinnett  the  victim  of  Maya 
— Hume's  selfishness — the  personality  and  the  Ego  ;  260.  Bennett  superior 
to  many  in  spite  of  unpolished  exterior — K.H.'s  attitude  to  Bennett — ^Jesus 
and  Magdalene — the  inner  man  alone  counts  with  the  Mahatmas — friendly 
confidences;  261.  The  dangers  of  phenomena — wisdom  gives  all  things 
in  time — food  for  the  mind  must  be  assimilated  slowly  ;  262. 

Letter  No.  XLIV.— The  Septenary  trial  of  the  T.S.— H.P.B.  and  Olcott 
begin  their  work — their  qualifications  ;  263.  Only  those  who  have  proved 
themselves  faithful  to  truth  allowed  further  intercourse  with  the  Mahatmas. 

Letter  No.  XLV. — K.H.  returns  from  a  journey;  264.  The  "  three  poisons" 
— the  five  obscurities — try  to  cherish  less  lust  and  desire — "  a  psychic 
Society  is  being  founded  in  our  midst  " — 265.  One  indiscretion  ruins 
work  of  7  years — the  danger  of  such  action  must  be  counteracted — drawing 
closer  to  the  Masters  by  purified  heart  and  developing  will — advice  and 
consolation — Sinnett  belongs  to  the  Masters — the  imperishable  record  of 
the  Master;  266.  "Your  Karma  is  ours  " — the  man  of  the  world — the 
soul  searching  for  the  Masters;  267.  The  "  Tathagata  "  light — kind 
advice — apprehensions  must  be  set  aside — regarding  his  co-worker's 
enmity  ;  268. 

Letter  No.  XLVI. — M.  comments  on  Hume's  behaviour — neither  reverence 
or  common  sense  in  his  head — abominable  attitude  towards  Mahatmas  and 
H.P.B. — what  they  desire  of  him  and  wish  him  to  know;  269.  Further 
comments  on  Hume — M.'s  ultimatum — H.P.B.'s  illness  caused  by  Hume's 
behaviour — M.'s  displeasure;  270. 

Letter  No.  XLVII. — Work  of  T.  S.  secretly  linked  on  to  other  work  through- 
out the  world — the  Greek  Brother;  271.  Crookes  and  "  radiant  matter  " — 
— H.P.B.  wrongfully  accused  of  being  untruthful — frank  opinions  and  some 
advice — cycles;  272.     Martyrdom  pleasant  to  look  at,  hard  to  bear;  273. 


CONTENTS  XXV 

Letter  No.  XLVIII. — Knowledge  and  the  path — the  Adamantine  Rocks  of 
Occult  Laws — the  heights  to  be  reached  before  the  whole  truth  can  be 
seen — the  keeping  and  the  breaking  of  the  Law — the  man  who  would 
obtain  all  must  be  cold — Oxley  has  possibilities — his  mistakes ;  274.  The 
limitations  of  the  ordinary  seers — incredible  statements  of  Maitland  and 
Mrs.  K.  ;  275.  Vegetarians  and  flesh  eaters — the  effects  of  wine  on  seers — 
effect  of  emanations  on  Mahatmas — seers  and  their  revelations — no  two 
agree — mediums  and  clairvoyance  ;  276.  We  do  not  require  a  passive  mind  ; 
277.  The  Journal  of  the  Society  worth  Sinnett's  attention — its  hidden 
beauties  and  values — our  ways  are  the  ways  of  madmen  ;  278.  Sinnett 
begins  his  studies  at  the  wrong,  end — key  to  the  writing  of  the  ancient 
Occultists  ;  279. 

Letier  No.  XLIX. — Correspondence  established  for  the  good  of  the  many — 
E.  Levi's  Haute  Magie — St.  Germain;  280.  Pythagorean  doctrines — "the 
limit  of  the  natural  " — the  "  Spiritualist  " — its  fight  against  Theosophists 
— on  Adepts;  281.  K.H.  not  annoyed  by  newspaper  ribald  notices — sacri- 
legious utterances  of  J.K. — difficulty  of  accepting  pledges — Occult  Science 
communicated  by  degrees  ;  282.  Conditions  governing  the  communication 
of  secrets — illumination  comes  from  within — means  to  this  end  known 
publicly  for  ages — self  sacrifice  of  Guru  ;  283.  Dangers  of  giving  more 
knowledge  than  man  is  ready  for — like  an  infernal  machine  in  ignorant 
hands — time  approaching  for  Triumph  of  Truth — Shammars  active  in 
Europe — Spiritualism — the  Adepts  delay  progress  to  Eternal  Rest ;  284. 
The  price  to  be  paid — the  willingness  of  K.H.  to  pay  it — pupils  would  be 
more  thankful  and  patient  if  they  knew  the  true  facts — Lamaism — power 
of  great  Adepts — Sinnett  gropes  in  the  dark  ;  285.  Occult  World  discussed 
at  Galaring-Tcho  Lamasery  ;  286. 

Letter  No.  L. — An  unreasonable  man — filled  with  pride — Mahatma  K.H.  ex- 
presses his  mind — weariness  and  disheartened  feelings  ;  287. 

Letter  No.  LL — Phenomenon  for  Colonel  Chesney  ;  287.  Further  remarks 
on  production  of  this  phenomenon — probations  hard  all  round — deception  a 
test  for  those  of  unclean  heart ;  288. 

Letter  No.  LH. — Hume's  jealousy  and  abusiveness  ;  288.  Remarks  on  his 
self-satisfaction — constant  accusations — H.P.B.  and  C.C.M. — explanation 
of  teaching  given  in  Isis — Christians  and  Spiritualists  only  mention  body 
and  soul;  289.  Two  "souls"  in  man — H.P.B.  obeyed  orders— further  re- 
marks concerning  Hume;  290.  Hume's  reasons  for  writing  offensive 
article  in  Theosophist — K.H.'s  frank  criticism  of  his  real  and  alleged 
motives;  291.  Dishonest  methods — refuses  to  recognise  powers  or  know- 
ledge of  Brotherhood — the  penalty  of  publicity  ;  292.  Facts  to  be  trans- 
mitted to  Hume — in  what  light  he  is  considered  by  the  Chelas — the  protest 
of  the  Chelas — S.  stands  far  higher  in  estimation  of  Mahatmas — M.'s 
opinion ;  293.  Hume's  punishment  must  be  complete — anti-European 
rules — Dugpas  wrote  letters  to  Fern  ;  294. 

Letter  No.  LHL — An  account  of  a  doubtful  story  and  incidents  connected 
with  Fern — his  deceptions  believed  implicitly  by  Hume ;  295.  Ways  of 
communication  with  outer  worlds — M.'s  views  do  not  agree  with  K.H.'s 
regarding  Hume — refuses  to  satisfy  his  whims — M.'s  arguments  in  detail; 
296-7.  Manner  in  which  letters  have  been  transmitted — Dugpa  methods — 
Fern's  fall — deceptions  practised  on  Hume;  298-9.  Mahatma  K.H.'s  like- 
ness— its  delivery  ;  300.  Sinnett  is  advised  not  to  judge  by  appearances — 
great  crisis  in  November;  301.  K.H.  never  trusts  women  generally — his 
reason  ;  302. 


xxvi  CONTENTS 

Letter  No.  LIV. — Hume's  deposition  and  abdication — subsequent  events;  302. 
"  good  old  Swami  " — his  tirade  against  the  Mahatmas — reasons  for  not 
wishing  his  severance  from  the  Society — Tibetan  proverb  applied  to  Hume 
— Fern  to  be  watched ;  303.  Regarding  C.  C.  Massey,  his  chief  fault, 
weakness — K.H.  objects  to  his  letters  being  circulated — Hume  disparages 
their  sacred  philosophy  ;  304.  The  European  stand-point — Western  people 
cannot  grasp  wisdom — the  wealth  of  the  mind — Massey — readiness  to  learn 
— K.H.  willing  to  help  him — much  information  in  S.'s  hands,  useful  to 
all — C.C.M.  prejudiced  against  H.P.B.  ;  305.  St.  Germain — Cagliostro — 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Hollis-Billing — traducers  of  innocent  women  ;  306.  Ex- 
posure of  dishonest  enemies — their  unworthy  conduct — wish  to  ruin 
H.P.B.  ;  307.  The  Swami's  attack  on  the  Founders — S.  Moses  and  his 
suspicions — H.P.B.  and  phenomena  produced  for  C.C.M.  ;  308;  H.P.B. 
believed  to  be  arch-plotter — deceiver,  etc. — Swami  was  an  initiated  Yogi — 
H.C.  a  Chela — preferred  left  path — system  of  the  Mahatmas  ;  309.  The 
exf>eriences  by  which  a  Chela  becomes  efficient — H.P.B.  and  her  one  fault 
C.C.M.  shaken,  suspicious  and  lacks  self-confidence — H.P.B.'s  phenomena; 
310.  C.C.M.  victim  of  wicked  plot — how  far  H.P.B.  is  really  guilty  of 
deceit;  311.  H.P.B.  over-zealous — her  desire  to  give  credit  to  the 
Mahatmas  for  all  phenomena — her  impulsive  nature — creating  causes — her 
real  powers  of  a  very  high  order;  312.  Self-abnegation  cannot  be  called 
dishonesty — her  generosity — terribly  punished — her  exalted  friends  traitors 
and  impostors — true  history  of  so-called  deception — enthusiasm  for  those 
she  loves — her  description  of  M.'s  beauty  makes  him  swear  and  break  his 
pipe — description  of  meeting  between  Mahatmas  and  H.P.B. — her  pas- 
sionate devotion — their  appreciation  of  all  her  splendid  qualities;  314. 
The  subject  of  probation  repulsive  to  Sinnett's  mind — reasons  why  certain 
men  failed  when  tested;  315.  H.P.B.  a  helpless,  broken-hearted  woman 
— the  testing  of  Fern — every  postulant  thus  tested — the  conqueror  crowns 
himself;  316.  Reform  in  which  Sinnett's  help  is  desired — impartiality  to- 
wards all  creeds  Eastern  and  Western  ;  317.  Remodelling  of  branches — 
objects  for  lodge  work — religious,  educational,  philosophical — paper  for  the 
Theosophist — solidarity  of  thought  and  action;  318.  Independent  action  in 
everything  which  does  not  clash  with  the  principles  of  the  Society — Hume 
condemns  the  faulty  system  of  the  Mahatmas;  319.  Theosophist  should 
be  made  distinctive — cyclic  crisis — a  goat  eats  Sinnett's  letter  to  K.H. — 
amusing  incident;  320.     The  Chohan   repairs  the  letter;  321. 

Letter  No.  LV. — The  ordeal  of  the  aspirant  to  occult  knowledge — the  opposi- 
tion of  the  Church  and  Anglo-Indian  officials  to  the  T.S. — Dugpas  in 
Bhootan  and  the  Vatican — personal  opposition  and  ridicule — bogus  letters 
of  H.P.B.'s — the  death  struggle  between  Truth  and  Error — the  light-bearers 
of  preceding  generations  lost  their  lives — necessity  for  courage — ultimate 
success  certain  ;  322.  Mediumislic  sensitives — elementaries — unwholesome 
influences — wood  and  incense  burning  for  fumigation  and  protection — clean 
living  the  best  protection — talismans — H.P.B.  takes  a  step — heavy  responsi- 
bility of  Olcott  and  Sinnett — Karma  of  the  Occult  World  and  Esot  > 
Buddhism — advised  to  stand  by  the  T.S. — original  policy  must  be  vindi- 
cated— the  Society  cannot  stand  based  upon  phenomena  and  Thibetan 
Brothers  alone — the  latter  should  be  kept  secret — loyalty  to  the  Idea  and 
not  to  a  personal  leader ;  323.  What  a  Mahatma  is — not  beyond  human 
mistakes — phenomena  of  thought  transference  and  precipitations — Akasic 
libraries — the    Kiddle    case  ;    324.     Christian-mission-Coulomb    conspiracy — 


CONTENTS  xxvii 

correspondence  with  the  "  Inner  Circle  " — pledge  themselves  to  K.H. — the 
Maha-Chohan — communication  through  Damodar — and  H.P.B. — her  phe- 
nomena must  be  disconnected   from   T.S. 

Letter  No.  LVI. — Condition  of  A.  O.  Hume — maddened  by  evil  powers — a 
fakir ;  325.  Evil  effects  of  Pranayan — produces  mediumship — Hume's 
selfish  vanity  and  combativeness — danger  to  the  T.S. — Dayanand  S.  ;  326. 
"  Mr.    Isaacs  " — K.H.  and  "  Ram  lal  ";  327. 

Letter  No.  LVII. — Adepts  and  their  methods  not  understood;  328;  C.C.M. 
on  the  list  of  failures — not  a  medium — the  best  of  men  but  lacking  in 
intuition  ;  4.  Europeans  on  probation — 3  fail — probation  of  societies — Anna 
Kingsford's  inspirers— TH£  PERFECT  WAY— A.K.  a  fifth  rounder— her 
vanity — latent  sense  of  Messiahship — Reincarnation  k  la  Allan  Kardec — 
A.K.'s  allegiance  to  Brothers  not  expected — danger  to  the  British  T.S. — 
C.M.'s  delusions  in  regard  to  K.H.  and  H.P.B.  ;  329.  Hume  and  Fern — 
probation  brings  out  both  virtues  and  vices — Fern's  characteristics — western 
code  of  honour — Hume's  characteristics ;  330.  Criterion  of  a  "  gentle- 
man " — vilification  of  M.  and  K.H. — a  dangerous  "  friend  " — the  struggle 
for  adeptship — the  delusions  of  self  and  vanity;  331.  Adepts  do  nothing 
without  a  purpose  ;  Hume  opposed  to  the  system  of  "  The  Brothers  " — 
finds  Them  wicked  selfish  men — their  message  tainted  by  deception  and 
sorcery — their  chelas  slaves  and  untrustworthy — their  Society  a  whited 
sepulchre,  etc.  ;  332.  Hume's  cunning  and  diplomacy — accused  of  falsifica- 
tion— T.  Subba  Row — Hume  claims  added  powers — practice  of  Pranayan 
makes  of  him  a  yogi — serious  charge  and  evidence  against  Hume  ;  334-5. 
A.P.S.  advised  to  go  to  England;  336. 

Letter  No.  LVTII. — D.K.'s  personal  interest  in  A.P.S.  ;  336.  Apathy  of 
K.H.'s  countrymen — K.H.  asks  two  favours — is  prepared  to  teach  British 
T.S.  through  agency  of  A.P.S. — but  not  to  give  proofs  of  the  existence  of 
the  Masters — ordered  to  sweep  away  every  vestige  of  such  proof ;  337. 

Letter  No.  LIX. — The  altruist  of  Rothney ;  338.  Change  of  "being"  in 
A.P.S. — difficulty  in  understanding  the  doctrines  re  Devachan — the  fickle- 
ness of  *'  Society  " — the  Theosophist's  duty  ;  339.  Chelas  who  demand 
more  power — a  necromantic  Guru — the  downfall  and  despair  of  a  Chela — 
his  condition — an  "  animated  poison  bag";  340.  Chelas  and  lay  Chelas 
in  July  Theosophist — William  Crookes  joins  the  Society — his  discoveries — 
three  additional  states  of  matter  still  to  be  found  by  Science — the  word 
*'  impossible  "  not  in  occultist's  vocabulary — no  man  living  can  make 
claims  on  Adepts — their  attractions  are  spiritual  not  intellectual — Bacon 
and  Aristotle;  341.  Spiritual  development — the  Adepts'  standard  of  great- 
ness— sincere  hunger  for  the  truth — the  work  of  the  S.P.R. — mesmeric 
cures — the  purity  of  the  psychopathist — his  motives — a  lock  of  the  hair  of 
an  Adept ;  342.  The  Buddhistic  speculations  of  Rhys  Davids — unable  to 
understand  Esotericism — his  definition  of  *'  Avalokiteshvara  "  an  absurdity 
— K.H.  explains  the  term  fully — Kwan-shai-yin  ;  343-4.  The  origin  of  the 
Christian  Trinity,  transubstantiation,  Immaculate  Conception — Buddhism 
and  a  personal  God — the  meaning  of  the  interlaced  triangles — geometri- 
cal synthesis  of  whole  occult  doctrine — contains  the  squaring  of  the  circle — 
problems  of  Life  and  Death — mystery  of  Evil ;  345.  The  6  pointed  star 
is  the  perfect  seven — the  number  6 — the  Macrocosm  and  Microcosm — the 
centre  of  a  circle  and  its  circumference — the  three  Gunas — Jivatma  the  7th 
Principle— Avalokitesvara— THE  GREAT  ACTIVE  and  THE  GREAT 
PASSIVE— Purusha  and  Prakriti— T//£  PERFECT  TF^Y— Adonai;  346. 
Pythagoras  and  the  number  2 — the  dual  monad  in  manifestation — the  per- 


xxviii  COJSTTENTS 

feet  square — the  WORD — The  Great  Deep — Maya — Mulaprakriti  the  one 
reality — Mr.  Roden  Noel — The  Unmanifested  Circle — Absolute  Life  non- 
existent outside  the  triangle  and  perfect  square — a  Gnostic  treatise ;  347; 
No  amateur  can  rival  the  proficient  in  occult  research — the  pseudo-Saviours 
of  the  world  are  legion — nothing  was  ever  lost  by  trying  ;  348. 

Letter  No.  LX. — "  Our  doubts  are  traitors  " — Chelas  of  contrary  magnetisms 
during  development — portrait  by  Schmichen — artist  helped  by  "  M.";  349. 

Letter  No.  LXi. — Mohini — a  Chela  not  a  free  man — he  suffered  from  the  cold 
— his  tour  through  European  countries — Arundales — justice  in  the  Kings- 
ford  row — personal  spite  ;  350. 

Letter  No.  LXIL — Unfit  for  practical  occultism — immutable  laws — an  effort 
to  open  the  intuition — duty,  stronger  than  friendship  or  love  to  the  Masters 
— the  indestructable  cement  of  the  Brotherhood — the  delusions  of  the  intel- 
lect— cold  spiritually  blind  reason — the  path  to  the  occult  sciences  sur- 
rounded with  pitfalls;  351.  The  furies  to  be  conquered  and  destroyed  by 
the  aspirant — the  qualities  demanded  in  the  disciple — his  freedom  for  the 
work — rigidity  of  the  regulations  never  relaxed — the  real  reason  of  the 
failure  of  the  "  Phoenix  "  newspaper  venture — the  Ilbert  Bill — the  working 
of  Karmic  Law — contempt  for  the  dark  races — no  exhibition  of  psychic 
or  occult  powers  permitted — the  London  Lodge  and  Anna  Kingsford — 
A.P.S.  finds  H.S.O.  unfit  socially  and  intellectually  for  London — 
treats  him  and  H.P.B.  cruelly — M.'s  natural  brusqueness — carelessness — 
A.P.S.  not  unjustly  treated — his  spite  against  A.K.  ;  353.  Unjust  suspicion 
of  H.P.B.  and  H.S.O. — Mohini  and  Mrs.  Gebhard ;  354.  H.S.O.  accused 
by  A.P.S.  of  falsehood  slander,  etc. — Olcott's  work  gives  good  results — 
suspicion — occult  truth  must  be  found  in  the  soul — Mrs.  H.  an  excellent  but 
untrained  clairvoyant ;  355.  A.P.S.  attempts  to  defy  occult  laws  and  gets 
hurt — intellect  alone  not  all-powerful — A.P.S.  asked  to  be  present  and 
speak  at  meeting. 

Letter  No.  LXHL — The  publication  of  these  letters — the  questions  involved — 
the  real  vital  errors  in  Esoteric  Buddhism  and  Man — much  made  purposely 
obscure  in  the  letters — they  were  not  written  for  publication  or  public  com- 
ment— neither  K.H.  or  M.  would  ever  consent  to  the  letters  being  pub- 
lished ;  357.     Would-be  Chelas  and  dangers  of  probation. 

Letter  No.  LXIV. — The  mysteries  of  Chelaship — the  uncharted  ocean  of 
occultism — necessity  of  full  confidence  in  the  Adepts — beware  of  a  preju- 
diced mind — occult  laws  often  seem  cruel  and  unjust ;  358.  Cataclysms  are 
necessary — unselfishness  physical  and  spiritual — vanity  and  conceit  more 
serious  when  harboured  in  the  higher  principles — the  shield  of  the  disciple — 
the  mass  of  human  sin  and  frailty  gathered  into  one  period  of  the  life  of  a 
Chela  ;  359.  Selfishness  in  inner  aspirations — the  Lord  Buddha  ;  360.  The 
Chela  must  not  judge  on  mere  appearances;  361. 

Letter  No.  LXV. — A.  Gebhard 's  accusation — failure  and  success — distressing 
incidents — the  attempt  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  world  fails — the  conspiracy 
of  the  Missionaries  against  theosophy — "  Christ  or  the  Founders  " — the 
S.P.R.  and  Mr.  Hodgson  ;  362.  Mr.  Lane  Fox  and  the  T.S. — Chelas  de- 
test European  Theosophists — the  end  of  projected  occult  instructions — the 
refusal  of  Europeans  to  receive  instruction  through  Damodar  and  Subba 
Row — Damodar  goes  to  Thibet — Subba  Row  suspected — Count  St.  Ger- 
main and  Cagliostro — current  ideas  of  the  Masters  and  laws  of  occultism 
inaccurate — K.H.'s  western  education — Sir  C.  Grandison — western  etiquette 
and  Thibetan  customs  ;  363.     Accused  of  plagiarism — the  dictionary  of  Pai- 


CONTENTS  xxix 

Wouen-Yen-Fu — works  of  reference — Kiddle  incident — "  Lai  Singh  "  a 
notn  de  plume — not  always  infallible  Mahatmas — knowledge  of  occult  forces 
the  fruit  of  generations  of  research — occultists  risk  their  lives — magic  and 
superstition  ;  364.  The  teaching  of  Devachan  criticised — the  keys  of  Life 
and  Death — crisis  in  T.S.  a  question  of  perdition  or  salvation  to  thousands 
— progress  or  retrogression  of  human  race — doubts  and  foul  suspicions  beset 
the  neophyte — the  old  Masonic  Lodges — tests  of  courage,  etc. — psychological 
and  other  tests — Raj-yog  tests — develop  every  germ  of  good  and  bad  ;  365. 
— the  rule  inflexible,  no-one  escapes — few  Europeans  have  stood  the  test — 
failure  in  Europe  with  few  exceptions — henceforth  neutrality  of  T.S. 
in  occult  teaching  to  be  enforced — instruction  will  be  given  only  to  indi- 
viduals from  individuals — teachings  given  must  be  under  pledge  of  secrecy 
— T.S.  not  to  be  held  responsible  or  compromised  by  phenomena — the  ship 
is  sinking — its  precious  cargo  desecrated  by  profane  handling  ;   366. 

Letter  No.  LXVL — Common  post  used  instead  of  H.P.B. — Sinnett's  relations 
with  H.P.B. — necessary  to  watch  himself — correspondence  may  have  to 
be  broken — uncharitable  spirit — narrow  sympathies — the  crisis  fanned  from 
Tchigadze — A.P.S.  laughs  at  probation — the  guardians  of  occult  know- 
ledge— M.  and  K.H.  the  only  Brothers  m  favour  of  disseminating  their 
knowledge  ;  367.  H.P.B.  sometimes  dangerous — the  best  agent  available — 
letters  will  cease  at  her  death — "  our  ways  not  your  ways  " — H.P.B.  com- 
plains of  A.P.S.  to  her  Master — A.P.S.  resents  the  personal  wishes  of  the 
Masters ;  368.  His  pride  must  be  protected  at  all  costs — dugpas  and 
psychic  shocks — pride  and  egotism — A.P.S.  denies  applying  to  be  accepted 
as  a  Chela  ;  369.  H.P.B.  and  H.S.O.  not  perfect — adversity  discovers  the 
real  man — karma  of  the  group — sinking  the  personality — higher  instruction 
only  given  to  the  true  Theosophist ;  370. 

Letter  No.  LXVU.—K.H.  to  H.S.  Olcott.     Ordered  home— the  state  of  India 
— agitations — Bishenlal's    attempt   to   cross   the    Himalayas — the   Kingsford 
Maitland  party;  371.     Dugpas  provoke  his  vanity — three  cases  of  insanity 
^         among  lay  Chelas — few  men  know  themselves — the  ordeal  of  crude  Chela- 
ship;   372. 

Letter  No.  LXVHL — Discipline  of  family  life — conquest  of  self — spiritual 
progress  the  most  important ;  372. 

Letter  No.  LXIX. — The  terms  Brahma — Pitri — Devalokas  defined — Nirvana 
— Devachan — real  knowledge  a  spiritual  state — absolute  light  and  dark- 
ness;  373. 

Letter  No.  LXX.— The  probation  of  A.P.S. 

Letter  No.  LXXL — M.'s   "  tobacco-machine  " — clouds   on   the   horizon. 

Letter  No.  LXXH. — Chelas   never  guided ;   374.     Taught  by  experience. 

Letter  No.  LXXnL— Bad   feeling   against   K.H. 

Letter  No.  LXXIV. — No-one  cares  for  real  objects  of  the  Society — personal 
devotion  only — "M  "  erases  a  part  of  one  of  his   letters;   375. 

Letter     No.  LXXV.— A.P.S.    accuses    H.P.B.    unjustly. 

Letter  No.  LXXVL — Subba  Row  and  Chela  training — initiated  Brahmin  and 
Hume — the  Genius  of  Pride  ;  376. 

SECTION  IV 
THE   PHCENIX   VENTURE   AND   THE   CONDITION   OF  INDIA 
Letter  No.  LXXVH.— Colonel    Gordon— a    Howrah    Branch— Eclectic— K.H. 
not  born   for  diplomacy  and  intrigue  ;  377.     Funds   for   the   "  Phoenix  " — 
K.H.  loses  some  of  his  optimism — Avomen  as  angels  or  furies. 


XXX  CONTENTS 

Letter  No.  LXXVIII. — The  Chohan's  views  on  the  "  Phoenix  "  project — 
the  journal  desirable — effort  must  be  made  by  outsiders — Masters  not 
separated  from  the  world  of  action  as  long  as  T.S.  exists  ;  378.  May  effect 
the  destiny  of  a  nation — questions  of  capital  and  finance — personal  re- 
muneration— control  of  the  journal ;  379.  Sir  Ashley  Eden — a  Sinkinif 
Fund — ^^the  Nizam — Holkar — Benares — Baroda  ;  380.  Questions  of  manage- 
ment— Hume  and  dugpas  ;  381. 

Letter  No.  LXXIX. — K.H.  no  business  man — Mr.  Dare — the  Brotherhood 
will  help  the  enterprise — the  attractions  of  India  to  the  mystic — A.P.S. 
wrong  in  acting  for  K.H.'s  sake — good  actions  bring  own  reward — a  new 
cycle  begins  ;   382. 

Letter  No.  LXXX. — Chance  a  squinting  jade — Hume  delineates  the  true 
character  of  the  Brothers — A.P.S.  advised  to  act  on  his  own  judgment. 

Letter  No.  LXXXL — The  condition  of  the  people  of  India  ;  383.  Govindan 
Lai — Olcott  sees  Baroda  and  Holkar — little  patriotism — rekindling  the 
beacon  of  Aryan  occultism — the  task  of  the  T.S.  impeded  by  would-be 
Chelas — the  breath  of  the  world's  furnaces  ;  384.  The  Masters  first  duty 
of  gaining  knowledge — English  prejudices — Massey — "  Ski  " — and  thfl 
Scotch  Brother — M.  sends  glove  by  occult  means — Dr.  and  Mrs.  Billing — a 
bogus  spook — a  false  "Ski  ";  385.  "  Suppressio  vert  suggestis  falsi" — 
the  Masters  judge  men  by  their  motives — no  respect  for  the  world's 
standards ;  386. 

Letter  No.  LXXXII. — Le  quart  d'heure  de  Rabelais — the  crisis  in  the  affairs 
of  the  "  Phoenix  " — Sinnett's  choice — asked  to  oppose  the  work  of  the 
Masters  apparently — the  Bengal  Rent  Bill — European  notions  of  right  and 
wrong  receive  a  shock — occult  antidotes — the  Jesuitical  "  end  justifies  the 
means  " — the  words  of  Ihe  Lord  Buddha — K.H.  explains  the  situation — 
"  Phoenix  "  to  oppose  the  Bengal  Rent  Bill ;  387.  In  the  event  of  re- 
fusal a  new  editor  to  be  found — the  Zemindars — Lord  Cornwallis  ;  388. 
The  issues  at  stake — the  future  of  the  "  Phoenix  "  and  future  relationship 
of  A.P.S.  with  K.H. — bringing  the  national  boil  to  a  head — Lord  Corn- 
wallis's  mistake — Mussulman  rulers  and  East  India  Company  ;  389.  The 
Ryots — the  Chohan  in  India — perpetual  agreement — the  real  aim  of  Lord 
Ripon's  reforms — not  meant  for  India  ;  390.  Protestant  England  aimed  at 
— the  invisible  coils  of  Rome — the  pledges  of  the  Government — Khirajee 
land — Mussulman  laws — spirit  of  Khiraj  and  Ooshr  ;  391.  The  brightest 
jewel  in  the  crown  of  England — the  Chohan  and  K.H. — the  real  Viceroy 
of  India — not  at  Simla  but  at  Rome — "  Esoteric  Buddhism  "  correct,  if 
incomplete ;  392.  Obscurations — inner  and  outer  rounds — Massey  con- 
cludes the  Masters  have  no  God — each  man's  God  within  himself. 

Letter  No.  LXXXIII. — K.H.  gives  A.P.S.  his  freedom  of  choice — success  of 
"  Phoenix  "  doubtful — A.P.S.  must  take  his  own  responsibility  ;  393.  Mis- 
understands law  of  Karma — the  strong  feelings  in  the  national  soul ;  394. 
The  good  of  humanity  the  only  consideration  of  the  Chela— personal  feel- 
ings and  reputation  not  considered — the  financial  prospects  of  the 
*'  Phoenix  "  ;  395.  Black  clouds  on  the  political  sky — further  correspond- 
ence permitted  to  H.P.B. — the   eighth  sphere  mystery;   396. 


CONTENTS  xxxi 

SECTION  V 
THE   LONDON   LODGE    OF    THE    THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY 

Letter  No,  LXXXIV. — Paralytic  calm  of  the  L.L. — C.  C.  Massey — Anna 
Kingsford — Olcott's  visit ;  397.     Mohini  a  Chela. 

Letter  No.  LXXXV. — Addressed  to  members  of  the  L.L.  A.K.  to  remain 
President  of  L.L. — the  Chohan's  wish — A.K.'s  personal  predilections  of  no 
consequence — dissemination  of  truth — Hermetic  Philosophy ;  398.  The 
boundless  ocean  of  Truth — three  centres  of  the  occult  Brotherhood — 
H.P.B.  and  Subba  Row  pupils  of  the  same  Master — the  Chaldean  Mage — 
West  requires  different  presentation  of  occult  sciences  to  the  East — the 
amelioration  of  man's  condition  the  object — Truth  has  no  ear-mark;  399. 
A.  Kingsford  and  Sinnett  opposite  poles — both  necessary  for  T.S.  in  Eng- 
land— A.K.'s  presentation  better  adapted  to  Christian  ears — her  strife 
against  anti-vivisection — the  teaching  of  Northern  Buddhist  Schools  ;  400. 
More  caution  necessary  in  exposition  of  secret  teachings — wise  toleration 
of  differing  opinions  and  beliefs  in  Indian  T.S. — harmonious  discord — the 
key  note  in  Nature — A.K.  loyal  to  Truth — "  return  good  for  good,  for  evil 
— justice  ";  401.  A.K.  and  A.P.S.  expected  to  work  on  parallel  lines — 
agree  to  disagree  in  details. 

Letter  No.  LXXXVL— A.K.'s  apologetic  letter  to  H.P.B.— L.L.  a  tail  for 
her  to  wag — her  anti-vivisection  and  vegetarianism  win  over  the  Chohan — 
personal  vanity — letter  contains  an  occult  influence — to  be  read  at  a 
General  Meeting  ;  403.  Devachan — Nirvana — the  Ego — space  is  infinity  it- 
self— the  relation  of  the  number  of  incarnations  to  the  cleverness  of  an 
individual — Darwin's  law  of  heredity;  404.  The  condition  of  C.C.M. — 
Charles  Bradlaugh  not  immoral — Mrs.  Besant — the  "  Fruits  of  Phil- 
osophy "  pernicious — the  fruits  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ;  405. 

Letter  No.  LXXXVIL — The  postponement  of  L.L.  election — the  question  of 
personal  loyalty  and  authority  of  names ;  406.  Gravest  evil  neutralised  by 
hastening  a  crisis — oppression  of  a  priest-ridden  world — psychic  growth 
accompanies  individual  effort — Massey — Ward — Kingsford — A.K.'s  mistrust 
of  appeals  to  authority  ;  407.  Too  much  talk  of  the  Masters — disloyalty  to 
principles  of  the  Society  would  not  be  tolerated — usefulness  of  a  Lodge — 
largely  depends  on   President  and  Secretary  ;  408. 

SECTION  VI 
SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA 

Letter  No.  LXXXVIIL — Magnetic  conditions  necessary  for  test  phenomena. 

Letter  No.  LXXXIX. — Objections  to  spiritualistic  phenomena  and  mediums  ; 
410.  Occult  science  the  extinguisher  of  superstitions — K.H.  arranges  to 
appear  to  the  medium  Eglinton  on  the  "  Vega  " — his  reasons. 

Letter  No.  XC. — From  Stainton  Moses  to  Sinnett.  S.M.  is  puzzled — says 
Brothers  are  mistaken  in  regard  to  him  ;  412.  His  guide  Imperator — docu- 
mentary evidence  of  communications,  etc. — Imperator  knows  nothing  of 
the  Lodge  or  Brotherhood;  413.  S.M.'s  guide  his  own  sixth  principle — 
finds  spiritualism  and  occultism'  incompatible ;  413.  Comment  by  K.H. 
What  is  a  "  Brother  "? — can  be  ignorant  of  many  things — not  so  with  an 
omniscient  Planetary  Spirit — 'Russian  child  medium — Jesus  and  John  the 
Baptist — ^Jesus  a  spiritual  abstraction — Mrs.  Kingsford  converses  with 
"  God  " — receives  a  written  communication  from  a  dog;  415. 


xxxii  CONTENTS 

Letter  No.  XCI. — C.   C.  Massey — Mrs.   Billing. 

Letter  No.  XCIL — Actions  of  Founders  and  Chelas  not  controlled  by  the 
Masters — Hurry  chund — Wimbridge — Mrs.  Billing  a  medium;  /ji6. 
Materialization  phenomena — truth  rarely  wanted — a  loyal  Theosophist — 
phenomena  the  playthings  of  the  tyro — the  Masters  offer  their  knowledge 
to  be  accepted  or  rejected  on  its  merits — "  Ski  "  used  as  a  mouth-piece  by 
the  Brothers ;  417.  H.P.B.  asks  an  exception  for  C.C.M. — "  Ski  *'  a 
medium  for  20  years — her  phenomena  pass  the  most  crucial  tests — several 
false  '*  Skis  "  ;  418.     An  occult  forger. 

Letter  No.  XCIII. — Mediums  and  Spooks  permitted  to  personate  the 
Brothers — and  forge  their  hand-writing;  419.  K.H.'s  explanation  of 
the  Kiddle  incident — "  M.A.  Oxon  " — K.H.  accused  of  plagiarism — 
the  Banner  of  Light;  420.  Woman  a  calamity  in  the  fifth  race; 
421.  K.H.  dictates  a  letter  mentally — psychic  chemistry — precipitation 
by  a  young  Chela — American  Spiritualists — experiments  of  S.P.R. 
in  "  mental  telegraphy  " ;  422.  The  modus  operandi  of  precipitation 
— psychic  printing  machine ;  423.  The  medium  and  the  Chela  dia- 
metrically dissimilar — discrepancy  in  "  Occult  World  " — H.P.B.  denies 
that  K.H.'s  first  letter  was  written  by  himself;  424.  K.H.  born  into  a 
new  and  higher  light — Omniscience  and  infallible  prevision  exist  but  for 
the  highest  Chohans — the  restored  version  of  page  139  Occult  World — 
Spiritualists  and  Spiritualism — the  Rosetta  Stone  of  the  Kiddle  incident ; 
426.  The  Kiddlites  and  the  Koothumites — an  Adept  does  not  cease  to  be 
a  man — ignorant  surmise  and  personal  insult — distrust  and  prejudice  con- 
tagious— A.K.  invokes  K.H.  in  trance;  427.  She  takes  a  fruitless  ramble 
through  space — K.H.  unaware  of  search — move  in  different  astral  circles — 
too  haughty  and  imperious — Mrs.  Gebhard  a  genuine  sterling  nature — 
K.H.  en  route  for  Madras,  Singapore  and  Burma — H.P.B.  not  in  dis- 
grace ;  428.     Subba  Row's  writings. 

Letter  No.  XCIV. — Kiddle   incident — poking   fun   at    Occult   Science ;    429. 

Letter  No.  XCV. — Preparation  and  training  of  Eglington — the  "  Vega  experi- 
ment "—bigotry  and  blindness  of  the  Spiritualists — professional  mediums — 
Hume  has  great  possibilities  in  front  of  him — reviewing  The  Perfect  Way 
— attracting  the  Chohan's  attention  and  its  significance;  430. 

Letter  No.  XCVL — M.  smokes  his  pipe — Piccadilly  spooks — phenomena — 
Karma  of  the  spiritualists — M.  prefers  Eglington 's  clairvoyance  to  Mrs. 
Kingsford's;  431-2. 

Letter  No.  XCVII. — The  defects  of  young  disciples — few  true  to  original 
programme  ;  433. 

SECTION  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS 
Letter  No.  XCVHI. — K.H.'s  comments  on  a  letter  of  Hume's — the  people  of 
Tibet    untainted    by    vices    of   civilization — A.O.H.    a    friend    of    perishing 
humanit)' — General  Schoolmaster  for  Tibet — the  Adept  the  freest  of  men  ; 

434- 

Letter  No.  XCIX. — From  A.  O.  Hume  to  K.H.  Says  K.H.  does  not  under- 
stand him — Russia  and  Tibet ;  435.  Advocates  repeated  phenomena — H.  S. 
Olcott — Jesuit  organisation — blind  obedience  ;  437. 

Letter  No.  C. — Hume  thinks  of  going  to  Tibet — insane  plan — the  Chohans 
against  him — dangers  of  every  step ;  438. 

Letter  No.  CI. — "  Blessed  is  he  who  knows  and  appreciates  Koothoomi." 


CONTENTS  xxxiii 

Letter  No.  CIl. — "  Ou  tous  Ou  rien  ";  439. 

Letter  No.  CIIL — Chelas  neglect  orders — Maharajah  of  Kashmir. 

Letter  No.  CIV. — Hume  annoys  K.H. — 440  New  Year  Festivals  in  Tibet — 
K.H.  goes  a  journey — M.  takes  his  place — "  the  Disinherited  ";  441. 

Letter  No.  CV. — Hume  accuses  the  Masters  of  being  liars — H.P.B.  quarrels 
with   D.K. — "K.H.    no  gentleman";   442.     Hume's   infallibility. 

Letter  No.  CVL — Measures   for   protecting   Tibet — the   priestly   King ;   443. 

Letter  No.  CVIL — H.P.B.'s    ill-health — mental    anxiety. 

Letter  No.  CVHL— A  Ladaku  Chela. 

Letter  No.  CIX. — K.H.   and  a  seance;   444. 

Letter  No.  CX. — Dharbagiri  Nath — the  best  punishment  for  an  accepted 
Chela — dodging  the  Masters'  eye — young  Chelas — Hume's  articles;  445. 
H.P.B.   not  safe  in  Sikkim — a  Chela's  indiscretion. 

Letter  No.  CXL— K.H.'s  two  Chelas  to  A.P.S.  :  446. 

Letter  No.  CXH. — Colonel  Chesney's  letter  to  K.H. — Fern  a  humbug — en- 
deavours to  test  the  Masters — lay  Chelas — Hume  alienates  the  Chohan 
and  M  ;  447.     W.   Oxley. 

Letter  No.  CXHL — Funny  notions  about  honour — Fern  hallucinated — Fern's 
trap  for  M.  ;  448. 

Letter  No.  CXIV. — Zenana  women  of  India  ;  449. 

Letter  No.  CXV. — A.P.S.  advised  to  act  on  his  own  judgment — Occult  in- 
fluences. 

Letter  No.  CXVI.— K.H.'s  disgust  with   Hume. 

Letter  No.  CXVIL— Mohini. 

Letter  No.  CXVIII. — Fraudulent  intrusion;  450.  Children's  diseases — K.H. 
sends  a  lock  of  his  hair. 

Letter  No.  CXIX. — Newspaper  cutting  and  K.H.'s  comment;   451. 

Letter  No.  CXX. — Action  of  hatred. 

Letter  No.  CXXI. — The  Occult   World  presented  to  the  Chohan 's  notice. 

Letter  No.  CXXII. — Eglington    at   Calcutta;    452. 

Letter  No.  CXXIII.— K.H.'s  difficulties. 

Letter  No.  CXXIV. — A.P.S.  asked  to  find  three  coloured  pebbles  in  Venice. 

Letter  No.  CXXV. — K.H.  issues  a  denial  of  the  claims  of  W.  Oxley  medium  ; 
453.     He  never  conversed  with  K.H. — three  secret  words. 

Letter  No.  CXXVI. — A  Post  Office  address  in  N.W.   Provinces ;  454. 

Letter  No.  CXXVII.— Extracts  from  letters  to  A.P.S.  and  A.O.H.— 6th  and 
7th  principles  never  were  within  man — Anaxagoras — the  "  Nous  " — Pytha- 
goras the  permanent  and  impermanent — words  of  Buddha — lucidity — too 
much  sugar  in  diet — method  of  developing  lucidity  ;  455. 

Letter  No.  CXXVI  1 1. — Telegram   announcing   Damodar's   departure. 

Letter  No.  CXXIX. — Telegram  to  Damodar. 

APPENDIX 

Letter  No.  CXXX. — From  T.  Subha  Row.  States  the  conditions  on 
which  he  will  give  .^.P.S.  instruction  in  Occult  Science — wavering  state  of 
mind  fatal ;  457. 

Letter  No.  CXXXI. — From  T.  Subha  Row.  Sinnett  gives  qualified  consent — 
impossible  to  give  him  practical  instruction — rules  inflexible — the  sacrifices 
demanded  by  Occult  Science — acquisition  of  psychic  powers  not  the  object 
of  occult  training — they  alone  will  never  secure  immortality  ;  458.  The 
true   aim  of  Occult  Science — prepared   to  give   theoretical  instruction  only. 

2 


xxxiv  CONTENTS 

Letter  No.  CXXXIL— T.   Subba   Row— the  Rishi   M.*s  system   of  training— 

the   first   three  initiations  ;   459.     K.H.'s  comment. 
Letter  No.  CXXXIIL— From    H.P.B.     Warns    A.P.S.    of   self-deception— dis- 
cusses his  attitude  to  K.H.'s  letter — "  Olcott  behaved  like  an  ass  " — why 
the  Masters  liked  Olcott;  460.     The  S.P.R.  and  its  bugbear  Theosophy. 
Letter  No.  CXXXIV. — A  dictated  letter  from  M.     All  Theosophists  endeavour 
to  correspond  with  him — do  not  deserve  such  privilege;  461.     What  is  ex- 
pected of  them — thousands  of  Fakirs,  Sannyasis,  etc.,  have  never  seen  or 
heard   of    them — they    are    on    the    path    of   error — bad    physical    magnetic 
emanations  not  insurmountable — faith  in  God  and  Gods  attract  the  worst 
influences — the  Chohans  of  darkness  preside  at  Pralayas  ;  462.     All  is  con- 
trast  in   the   Universe — the    Gods  of   the    bigoted    Hindus,    Christians,    and 
Mohammedans — the  work  of  the  Red-caps — Brothers  can  prolong  life  but 
cannot  destroy  death  or  evil — details  about  H.P.B. 's  identity;  462. 
Letter  No.  CXXXV. — From    H.P.B.     Explains    what    she    said    about    seven 

objective  planets  and  septenary  chains  ;  464. 
Letter  No.  CXXXVL — From  H.P.B.  Sinnett's  invitation  to  her — reasons  for 
refusing — what  she  endured — K.H.  and  M.  prepare  to  work — H.P.B.'s 
hour  of  triumph  approaches — Sinnett  does  not  know  the  real  H.P.B.  ;  465. 
Her  inner  real  self  imprisoned — prophecies  that  Sinnett  will  one  day  blas- 
pheme against  K.H. — their  benevolent  contempt  for  H.P.B.  ;  466. 
Letter  No.  CXXXVU.— D.K.   precipitates  a  letter  phenomenally  in   H.P.B.'s 

cabin  ;   467. 
Letter  No.  CXXXVHL— from    H.P.B.     New    battle    to   be    fought— K.H.'s 
observations    on    the    T.S. — H.P.B.     now    accused    of    fraud — Mahatmas 
dragged  before  the   public — Hodgson's   attitude — hopeless   situation — happy 
Damodar — the   land   of   Bliss  ;    468.     Hume  wants   to   save   the   Society — 
meeting   called — his    plans — his    suggestions   rejected — phenomena    must    be 
prohibited  ;   469.     Her   physical   condition — transmission   of   letters — Arthur 
Gebhard — dying  people  do  not  tell  lies — H.P.B.  never  a  deceiver — explains 
the  methods  of  occult  transmission  of  letters;   470-1.     H.P.B.    "a   fraud 
with  excellent  qualities  " — explains  what  happened  to  Gebhard 's  letter — no 
fraud  ;  472.     T.S.  will  live  in  India  but  seems  doomed  in  Europ>e — Hodg- 
son's investigation — the  opposition   of  the   Padris — her  trials — cannot  trust 
her     friends ;    473.     Propaganda     against    the     Founders — Oakleys     advise 
H.P.B.   to  resign — pledges  herself  not  to  mention  the  Masters'  names — try 
to  deserve  personal  communicaticMi   with  the   Master ;  474.     Probably   her 
last  letter. 
Letter  No.  CXXXIX.— from     H.P.B.     She    urges     Sinnett    to     develop    his 
intuition — explains  about   a   letter  of   K.H.    which   Sinnett  suspected;  475. 
S.  asked  not  to  be  ungrateful  and  not  to  misunderstand — what  H.P.B.  saw- 
in   K.H.'s  aura — Prince's   Hall   meeting   a   failure;   476.     Chelas   take   the 
left-hand  path — nearing  the  end — Gladstone — the  Jesuits  ;  477. 
Letter  No.  CXL. — From  H.P.B.     The  Countess  a  great  clairvoyant — H.P.B. 
describes  a  vision — K.H.  teaches  her  English — M.  sends  her  back  to  Europe 
— parting  words  of  K.H. — she   writes  Isis   Unveiled  at   K.H.'s  dictation — 
her  English;  479.     The  writing  of  K.H.'s  letters — did  he  write  them  him- 
self?— precipitation — either  H.P.B.  invented  the  Mahatmas  or  she  did  not; 
480.     The   Secret   Doctrine — truth   will   triumph — Hume's   lies;   481. 
Letter  No.  CXLL — H.P.B.   in    Sinnett's   hands — Mrs.    Leadbeater — Gladstone 
a   Roman   Catholic ;  482.     The  condition  of  the  T.S.   in   Europe — India — 
America — the  indestructibility  of  the  Society — the  efforts  of  the  dugpas — 


CONTENTS  XXXV 

the  T.S.  in  need  of  quality  and  not  quantity  of  members — the  two  courses 
before  the  London  Lodge — by  their  fruits  shall  ye  know  them ;  483. 
Worldly  society  in  the  L.L. — A.P.S.  incapable  of  perceiving  the  truth — no 
inner  group  consecrated  to  the  truth — the  last  trial  of  a  Chela  ;  484,  The 
necessity  of  spiritual  discernment — nothing  can  kill  the  London  Lodge  ex- 
cept passivity — human  dirt  never  sticks  ;  485.  Sinnett  urged  to  develop  his 
intuition  ;   4S6. 

Letter  No.  CXLIIa. — Memorandum  by  Damodar.  The  Theosophical  Society 
considered  a  religious  sect — if  based  upon  universal  Brotherhood  the  occult 
study  should  be  secret — sacred  knowledge  should  not  be  vulgarised — un- 
consciously misleading  the  public  as  to  management  of  the  Society — the 
Adepts  do  not  control  the  Society — admission  of  members — fees — phe- 
nomena hunters  ;  486-488. 

Letter  No.  CXLIIb. — Comment  by  K.H.   on  Damodar's  memorandum;  488. 

MARS  AND  MERCURY.  Sinnett  reopens  the  controversy — implications 
against  H.P.B. — Mrs.  Besant's  statements  in  Lucifer  on  the  subject — the 
facts  in  the  light  of  K.H.'s  letter — the  misunderstood  passage — Mrs. 
Besant's  "  categorical  statement  that  Mars  and  Mercury  belong  to  Earth 
Chain  " — quotations  "  from  the  Secret  Doctrine  " — the  whole  theory 
prove  false  ;  489-92. 


()^1  yM^UMr 


A  specimen  of  **  M.'s  "  handwriting  and  signature,  which  appears 
in  all  the  letters  either  in  red  ink,  or  red  pencil. 


/t/L4>-€(  ijutjuei    ^c/LcTt^    ^22tiZ-    O-Xutt^jtZT    ^^-'-'^'^  ^ . 


A  specimen  of  the  handwriting  of  "  K.H."  precipitated  in  blue 
ink,  beneath  a  note  from  Damodar  K.  Mavalanker.  The  majority 
of  the  "  K.H. "  Letters  are  written  either  in  blue  ink  or  blue  pencil. 


THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

SECTION  I 

"  THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES'' 
1880-1881 

LETTER  No.   I 

Received  Simla  about  October   i8th,   1880. 

Esteemed  Brother  and  Friend, 

Precisely  because  the  test  of  the  London  newspaper  would  close 
the  mouths  of  the  skeptics — it  is  unthinkable.  See  it  in  what  light 
you  will — the  world  is  yet  in  its  first  stage  of  disenthralment  if  not 
development,  hence — unprepared.  Very  true,  we  work  by  natural 
not  supernatural  means  and  laws.  But,  as  on  the  one  hand 
Science  would  find  itself  unable  (in  its  present  state)  to  account  for 
the  wonders  given  in  its  name,  and  on  the  other  the  ignorant 
masses  would  still  be  left  to  view  the  phenomenon  in  the  light  of 
a  miracle;  everyone  who  would  thus  be  made  a  witness  to  the 
occurrence  would  be  thrown  off  his  balance  and  the  results  would 
be  deplorable.  Believe  me,  it  would  be  so — especially  for  yourself 
who  originated  the  idea,  and  the  devoted  woman  who  so  foolishly 
rushes  into  the  wide  open  door  leading  to  notoriety.  This  door, 
though  opened  by  so  friendly  a  hand  as  yours,  would  prove  very 
soon  a  trap — and  a  fatal  one  indeed  for  her.  And  such  is  not 
surely  your  object? 

Madmen  are  they,  who,  speculating  but  upon  the  present,  wil- 
fully shut  their  eyes  to  the  past  when  made  already  to  remain 
naturally  blind  to  the  future  !  Far  be  it  from  me,  to  number  you 
with  the  latter — therefore  will  I  endeavour  to  explain.  Were  we 
to  accede  to  your  desires  know  you  really  what  consequences  would 
follow  in  the  trail  of  success?  The  inexorable  shadow  which  fol- 
lows all  human  innovations  moves  on,  yet  few  are  they,  who  are 
ever  conscious  of  its  approach  and  dangers.  What  are  then  to 
expect  they,  who  would  offer  the  world  an  innovation  which,  owing 
to  human  ignorance,   if  believed  in,   will  surely  be  attributed  to 

I  2* 


2  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

those  dark  agencies  the  two-thirds  of  humanity  beHeve  in  and 
dread  as  yet?  You  say — half  London  would  be  converted  if  you 
could  deliver  them  a  Pioneer  on  its  day  of  publication.  I  beg  to 
say  that  if  the  people  believed  the  thing  true  they  would  kill  you 
before  you  could  make  the  round  of  Hyde  Park;  if  it  were  not 
believed  true, — the  least  that  could  happen  would  be  the  loss  of 
your  reputation  and  good  name, — for  propagating  such  ideas. 

The  success  of  an  attempt  of  such  a  kind  as  the  one  you  pro- 
pose, must  be  calculated  and  based  upon  a  thorough  knowledge 
of  the  people  around  you.  It  depends  entirely  upon  the  social  and 
moral  conditions  of  the  people  in  their  bearing  on  these  deepest 
and  most  mysterious  questions  which  can  stir  the  human  mind — 
the  deific  powers  in  man  and  the  possibilities  contained  in  nature. 
How  many,  even  of  your  best  friends,  of  those  who  surround  you, 
who  are  more  than  superficially  interested  in  these  abstruse 
problems?  You  could  count  them  upon  the  fingers  of  your  right 
hand.  Your  race  boasts  of  having  liberated  in  their  century,  the 
genius  so  long  imprisoned  in  the  narrow  vase  of  dogmatism  and 
intolerance — the  genius  of  knowledge,  wisdom  and  freethought. 
It  says  that  in  their  turn  ignorant  prejudice  and  religious  bigotry, 
bottled  up  like  the  wicked  Jin  of  old,  and  sealed  up  by  the 
Solomons  of  science  rests  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  and  can  never, 
escaping  to  the  surface  again,  reign  over  the  world  as  it  did  in 
days  of  old ;  that  the  pubHc  mind  is  quite  free,  in  short,  and  ready 
to  accept  any  demonstrated  truth.  Aye;  but  is  it  verily  so,  my 
respected  friend?  Experimental  knowledge  does  not  quite  date 
from  1662,  when  Bacon,  Robert  Boyle  and  the  Bishop  of  Chester 
transformed  under  the  royal  charter  their  "  Invisible  College  "  into 
a  Society  for  the  promotion  of  experimental  science.  Ages  before 
the  Royal  Society  found  itself  becoming  a  reality  upon  the  plan  of 
the  **  Prophetic  Scheme  "  an  innate  longing  for  the  hidden,  a 
passionate  love  for  and  the  study  of  nature  had  led  men  in  every 
generation  to  try  and  fathom  her  secrets  deeper  than  their  neigh- 
bours did.  Roma  ante  Romulum  fuit — is  an  axiom  taught  to  us 
in  your  English  schools.  Abstract  enquiries  into  the  most 
puzzling  problems  did  not  arise  in  the  brain  of  Archimedes  as  a 
spontaneous  and  hitherto  untouched  subject,  but  rather  as  a  reflec- 
tion of  prior  enquiries  in  the  same  direction  and  by  men  separated 
from  his  days  by  as  long  a  period — and  far  longer — than  the  one 
which  separates  you  from  the  great  Syracusian.  The  vril  of  the 
*'  Coming  Age  "  was  the  common  property  of  races  now  extinct. 
And,  as  the  very  existence  of  those  gigantic  ancestors  of  ours  is 
now  questioned — though  in  the  Hiniavats,  on  the  very  territory 
belonging  to  you  we  have  a  cave  full  of  the  skeletons  of  these 
giants — and  their  huge  frames  when  found  are  invariably  regarded 
as  isolated  freaks  of  nature,  so  the  vril  or  Akds — as  we  call  it — is 


'*THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES^'  3 

looked  upon  as  an  impossibility,  a  myth.  And,  without  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  Akds,  its  combinations  and  properties,  how  can 
Science  hope  to  account  for  such  phenomena?  We  doubt  not  but 
the  men  of  your  science  are  open  to  conviction ;  yet  facts  must  be 
first  demonstrated  to  them,  they  must  first  become  their  own 
property,  have  proved  amenable  to  their  own  modes  of  investi- 
gation, before  you  find  them  ready  to  admit  them  as  facts.  If  you 
but  look  into  the  Preface  to  the  "  Micrographia  "  you  will  find  in 
Hooke's  suggestions  that  the  intimate  relations  of  objects  were  of 
less  account  in  his  eyes  than  their  external  operation  on  the  senses 
— and  Newton's  fine  discoveries  found  in  him  their  greatest 
opponent.  The  modern  Hookeses  are  many.  Like  this  learned 
but  ignorant  man  of  old  your  modern  men  of  science  are  less 
anxious  to  suggest  a  physical  connexion  of  facts  which  might  un- 
lock for  them  many  an  occult  force  in  nature,  as  to  provide  a  con- 
venient '  *  classification  of  scientific  experiments  "  ;  so  that  the  most 
essential  quality  of  an  hypothesis  is  not  that  it  should  be  true  but 
only  plausible — in  their  opinion. 

So  far  for  Science — as  much  as  we  know  of  it.     As  for  human 
nature  in  general,  it  is  the  same  now  as  it  was  a  million  of  years 
ago  :  Prejudice  based  upon  selfishness ;  a  general  unwillingness  to 
give  up  an  established  order  of  things  for  new  modes  of  life  and 
thought — and  occult  study  requires  all  that  and  much  more — ; 
pride  and  stubborn  resistance  to  Truth  if  it  but  upsets  their  pre- 
vious notions  of  things, — such  are  the  characteristics  of  your  age, 
and  especially  of  the  middle  and  lower  classes.     What  then  would 
be  the  results  of  the  most  astounding  phenomena,  supposing  we 
consented  to  have  them  produced?     However  successful,  danger 
would  be  growing  proportionately  with  success.     No  choice  would 
soon  remain  but  to  go  on,  ever  crescendo,  or  to  fall  in  this  endless 
struggle  with  prejudice  and  ignorance  killed  by  your  own  weapons. 
Test  after  test  would  be  required  and  would  have  to  be  furnished ; 
every   subsequent  phenomenon   expected   to  be  more  marvellous 
than  the  preceding  one.     Your  daily  remark  is,  that  one  cannot  be 
expected  to  believe  unless  he  becomes  an  eye-witness.     Would  the 
lifetime  of  a  man  suffice  to  satisfy  the  whole  world  of  skeptics? 
It  may  be  an   easy   matter  to   increase  the  original  number   of 
believers  at  Simla  to  hundreds  and  thousands.     But  what  of  the 
hundreds  of  millions  of  those  who  could  not  be  made  eye-wit- 
nesses?    The    ignorant — unable    to    grapple    with    the    invisible 
operators — might  some  day  vent  their  rage  on  the  visible  agents  at 
work ;  the  higher  and  educated  classes  would  go  on  disbelieving  as 
ever,  tearing  you  to  shreds  as  before.     In  common  with  many, 
you  blame  us  for  our  great  secrecy.     Yet  we  know  something  of 
human  nature  for  the  experience  of  long  centuries — aye,  ages — has 
taught  us.     And,  we  know,  that  so  long  as  science  has  anything 


4  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

to  learn,  and  a  shadow  of  religious  dogmatism  lingers  in  the  hearts 
of  the  multitudes,  the  world's  prejudices  have  to  be  conquered 
step  by  step,  not  at  a  rush.  As  hoary  antiquity  had  more  than 
one  Socrates  so  the  dim  Future  will  give  birth  to  more  than  one 
martyr.  Enfranchised  science  contemptuously  turned  away  her 
face  from  the  Copernian  opinion  renewing  the  theories  of  Aris- 
tarchus  Samius — who  "  affirmeth  that  the  earth  moveth  circularly 
about  her  own  centre  "  years  before  the  Church  sought  to  sacrifice 
Galileo  as  a  holocaust  to  the  Bible.  The  ablest  mathematician  at 
the  Court  of  Edward  VI — Robert  Recorde — was  left  to  starve  in 
jail  by  his  colleagues,  who  laughed  at  his  Castle  of  Knowledge, 
declaring  his  discoveries  "vain  phantasies."  Wm.  Gilbert  of 
Colchester — Queen  Elisabeth's  physician — died  poisoned,  only  be- 
cause this — real  founder  of  experimental  science  in  England — has 
had  the  audacity  of  anticipating  Galileo ;  of  pointing  out  Coper- 
nican's  fallacy  as  to  the  "  third  movement,"  which  was  gravely 
alleged  to  account  for  the  parallelism  of  the  earth's  axis  of  rota- 
tion !  The  enormous  learning  of  the  Paracelsi,  of  the  Agrippas 
and  the  Deys  was  ever  doubted.  It  was  science  which  laid  her 
sacrilegious  hand  upon  the  great  work  '*  De  Magnete  " — '*  The 
Heavenly  White  Virgin  "  (Akds)  and  others.  And  it  was  the 
illustrious  "Chancellor  of  England  and  of  Nature" — Lord 
Verulam-Bacon — who  having  won  the  name  of  the  Father  of  In- 
ductive Philosophy,  permitted  himself  to  speak  of  such  men  as  the 
above-named  as  the  "  Alchemicians  of  the  Fantastic  philosophy." 

All  this  is  old  history,  you  will  think.  Verily  so ;  but  the 
chronicles  of  our  modern  days  do  not  differ  very  essentially  from 
their  predecessors.  And  we  have  but  to  bear  in  mind  the  recent 
persecutions  of  mediums  in  England,  the  burning  of  supposed 
witches,  and  sorcerors  in  South  America,  Russia  and  the  frontiers 
of  Spain — to  assure  ourselves  that  the  only  salvation  of  the 
genuine  proficients  in  occult  sciences  lies  in  the  skepticism  of  the 
public  :  the  charlatans  and  the  jugglers  are  the  natural  shields  of 
the  "  adepts."  The  public  safety  is  only  ensured  by  our  keeping 
secret  the  terrible  weapons  which  might  otherwise  be  used  against 
it,  and  which,  as  you  have  been  told  became  deadly  in  the  hands 
of  the  wicked  and  selfish. 

I  conclude  by  reminding  you  that  such  phenomena  as  you  crave, 
have  ever  been  reserved  as  a  reward  for  those  who  have  devoted 
their  lives  to  serve  the  goddess  Saraswati — our  Aryan  Isis.  Were 
they  given  to  the  profanes  what  would  remain  for  our  faithful 
ones?  Many  of  your  suggestions  are  highly  reasonable  and  will 
be  attended  to.  I  listened  attentively  to  the  conversation  which 
took  place  at  Mr.  Hume's.  His  arguments  are  perfect  from  the 
standpoint  of  exoteric  wisdom.  But,  when  the  time  comes  and 
he  is  allowed  to  have  a  full  glimpse  into  the  world  of  esotericism, 


*'THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  5 

with  its  laws  based  upon  mathematically  correct  calculations  of 
the  future — the  necessary  results  of  the  causes  which  we  are 
always  at  liberty  to  create  and  shape  at  our  will  but  are  as  unable 
to  control  their  consequences  which  thus  become  our  masters — 
then  only  will,  both  you  and  he  understand  why  to  the  uninitiated 
our  acts  must  seem  often  unwise,  if  not  actually  foolish. 

Your  forthcoming  letter  I  will  not  be  able  to  fully  answer  with- 
out taking  the  advice  of  those  who  generally  deal  with  the  Euro- 
pean mystics.  Moreover  the  present  letter  must  satisfy  you  on 
many  points  you  have,  better  defined  in  your  last;  but  it  will  no 
doubt  disappoint  you  as  well.  In  regard  to  the  production  of 
newly  devised  and  still  more  startling  phenomena  demanded  of 
her  with  our  help,  as  a  man  well  acquainted  with  the  strategy  you 
must  remain  satisfied  with  the  reflection  that  there  is  little  use  in 
acquiring  new  positions  until  those  that  you  have  already  reached 
are  secured,  and  your  Enemies  full  aware  of  your  right  to  their 
possession.  In  other  words  you  had  a  greater  variety  of 
phenomena  produced  for  yourself  and  friends  than  many  a  regular 
neophyte  has  seen  in  several  years.  First,  notify  the  public  of 
the  production  of  the  note,  the  cup  and  the  sundry  experiments 
with  the  cigarette  papers,  and  let  them  digest  these.  Get  them  to 
work  for  an  explanation.  And  as  except  upon  the  direct  and 
absurd  accusation  of  deceit  they  will  never  be  able  to  account  for 
some  of  these,  while  the  skeptics  are  quite  satisfied  with  their 
present  hypothesis  for  the  production  of  the  brooch — you  will  then 
have  done  real  good  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  justice  to  the  woman 
who  is  made  to  suffer  for  it.  Isolated  as  it  is,  the  case  under 
notice  in  the  Pioneer  becomes  less  than  worthless — it  is  positively 
injurious  for  all  of  you — for  yourself  as  the  Editor  of  that  paper 
as  much  as  for  anyone  else,  if  you  pardon  me  for  offering  you  that 
which  looks  like  advice.  It  is  neither  fair  to  yourself  nor  to  her, 
that,  because  the  number  of  eye-witnesses  does  not  seem  sufficient 
to  warrant  the  public  attention  your  and  your  lady's  testimony 
should  go  for  nothing.  Several  cases  combining  to  fortify  your 
position  as  truthful  and  intelligent  witness  to  the  various  occur- 
rences, each  of  these  gives  you  an  additional  right  to  assert  what 
you  know.  It  imposes  upon  you  the  sacred  duty  to  instruct  the 
public  and  prepare  them  for  future  possibilities  by  gradually  open- 
ing their  eyes  to  the  truth.  The  opportunity  should  not  be  lost 
through  a  lack  of  as  great  confidence  in  your  own  individual  right 
of  assertion  as  that  of  Sir  Donald  Stewart.  One  witness  of  well 
known  character  outweighs  the  evidence  of  ten  strangers,  and  if, 
there  is  anyone  in  India  who  is  respected  for  his  trustworthiness  it 
is — the  Editor  of  the  Pioneer.  Remember  that  there  was  but  one 
hysterical  woman  alleged  to  have  been  present  at  the  pretended 
ascension,  and  that  the  phenomenon  has  never  been  corroborated 


6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

by  repetition.  Yet  for  nearly  2,000  years  countless  milliards  have 
pinned  their  faith  upon  the  testimony  of  that  one  woman — and  she 
not  over  trustworthy. 

Try — and  first  work  upon  the  material  you  have  and  then  we 
will  be  the  first  to  help  you  to  get  further  evidence.  Until  then, 
believe  me,  always  your  sincere  friend, 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


LETTER  No.  II 

Received  Simla,   October  19th,   1880. 

Much  Esteemed  Sir  and  Brother, 

We  will  be  at  cross  purposes  in  our  correspondence  until  it  has 
been  made  entirely  plain  that  occult  science  has  its  own  methods 
of  research  as  fixed  and  arbitrary  as  the  methods  of  its  antithesis 
physical  science  are  in  their  way.  If  the  latter  has  its  dicta  so  also 
has  the  former ;  and  he  who  would  cross  the  boundary  of  the  un- 
seen world  can  no  more  prescribe  how  he  will  proceed  than  the 
traveller  who  tries  to  penetrate  to  the  inner  subterranean  recesses 
of  L'Hassa — the  blessed,  could  show  the  way  to  his  guide.  The 
mysteries  never  were,  never  can  be,  put  within  the  reach  of  the 
general  public,  not,  at  least,  until  that  longed  for  day  when  our 
religious  philosophy  becomes  universal.  At  no  time  have  more 
than  a  scarcely  appreciable  minority  of  men  possessed  nature's 
secret,  though  multitudes  have  witnessed  the  practical  evidences 
of  the  possibility  of  their  possession.  The  adept  is  the  rare  efflor- 
escence of  a  generation  of  enquirers ;  and  to  become  one,  he  must 
obey  the  inward  impulse  of  his  soul  irrespective  of  the  prudential 
considerations  of  worldly  science  or  sagacity.  Your  desire  is  to 
be  brought  to  communicate  with  one  of  us  directly,  without  the 
agency  of  either  Mad.  B.  or  any  medium.  Your  idea  would  be, 
as  I  understand  it,  to  obtain  such  communications  either  by  letters 
— as  the  present  one — or  by  audible  words  so  as  to  be  guided  by 
one  of  us  in  the  management  and  principally  in  the  instruction  of 
the  society.  You  seek  all  this,  and  yet,  as  you  say  yourself, 
hitherto  you  have  not  found  "  sufficient  reasons  "  to  even  give  up 
your  "modes  of  life" — directly  hostile  to  such  modes  of  com- 
munications. This  is  hardly  reasonable.  He  who  would  lift  up 
high  the  banner  of  mysticism  and  proclaim  its  reign  near  at 
hand,  must  give  the  example  to  others.  He  must  be  the  first  to 
change  his  modes  of  life ;  and,  regarding  the  study  of  the  occult 
mysteries  as  the  upper  step  in  the  ladder  of  Knowledge  must 
loudly  proclaim  it  such"  despite  exact  science  and  the  opposition  of 
society.     **  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  obtained  by  force  "  say 


**THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES'^  7 

the  Christian  mystics.  It  is  but  with  armed  hand,  and  ready  to 
either  conquer  or  perish  that  the  modern  mystic  can  hope  to  achieve 
his  object. 

My  first  answer  covered,  I  believed,  most  of  the  questions  con- 
tained in  your  second  and  even  third  letter.  Having  then  ex- 
pressed therein  my  opinion  that  the  world  in  general  was  unripe 
for  any  too  staggering  proof  of  occult  power,  there  but  remains  to 
deal  with  the  isolated  individuals,  who  seek  like  yourself  to  pene- 
trate behind  the  veil  of  matter  into  the  world  of  primal  causes,  i.e., 
we  need  only  consider  now  the  cases  of  yourself  and  Mr.  Hume. 
This  gentleman  also  has  done  me  the  great  honour  to  address  me 
by  name,  offering  to  me  a  few  questions  and  stating  the  conditions 
upon  which  he  would  be  willing  to  work  for  us  seriously.  But 
your  motives  and  aspirations  being  of  diametrically  opposite 
character,  and  hence — leading  to  different  results  I  must  reply  to 
each  of  you  separately. 

The  first  and  chief  consideration  in  determining  us  to  accept  or 
reject  your  offer  lies  in  the  inner  motive  which  propels  you  to  seek 
our  instructions,  and  in  a  certain  sense — our  guidance.  The  latter 
in  all  cases  under  reserve — as  I  understand  it,  and  therefore  re- 
maining a  question  independent  of  aught  else.  Now,  what  are 
your  motives?  I  may  try  to  define  them  in  their  general  aspect, 
leaving  details  for  further  consideration.  They  are :  (i)  The 
desire  to  receive  positive  and  unimpeachable  proofs  that  there 
really  are  forces  in  nature  of  which  science  knows  nothing ;  (2)  The 
hope  to  appropriate  them  some  day — the  sooner  the  better,  for  you 
do  not  like  to  wait — so  as  to  enable  yourself — (a)  to  demonstrate 
their  existence  to  a  few  chosen  western  minds ;  (b)  to  contemplate 
future  life  as  an  objective  reality  built  upon  the  rock  of  Knowledge 
— not  of  faith  ;  and  (c)  to  finally  learn — most  important  this,  among 
all  your  motives,  perhaps,  though  the  most  occult  and  the  best 
guarded — the  whole  truth  about  our  Lodges  and  ourselves ;  to  get, 
in  short,  the  positive  assurance  that  the  **  Brothers  ** — of  whom 
everyone  hears  so  much  and  sees  so  little — are  real  entities — not 
fictions  of  a  disordered  hallucinated  brain.  Such,  viewed  in  their 
best  light  appear  to  us  your  "  motives  "  for  addressing  me.  And 
in  the  same  spirit  do  I  answer  them,  hoping  that  my  sincerity  will 
not  be  interpreted  in  a  wrong  way  or  attributed  to  anything  like 
an  unfriendly  spirit. 

To  our  minds  then,  these  motives,  sincere  and  worthy  of  every 
serious  consideration  from  the  worldly  standpoint,  appear — selfish. 
(You  have  to  pardon  me  what  you  might  view  as  crudeness  of 
language,  if  your  desire  really  is,  that  which  you  profess — to  learn 
truth  and  get  instruction  from  us — ^who  belong  to  quite  a  different 
world  from  the  one  you  move  in.)  They  are  selfish  because  you 
must  be  aware  that  the  chief  object  of  the  T.S.  is  not  so  much  to 


8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

gratify  individual  aspirations  as  to  serve  our  fellow  men  :  and  the 
real  value  of  this  term  "  selfish,"  which  may  jar  upon  your  ear, 
has  a  peculiar  significance  with  us  which  it  cannot  have  with  you ; 
therefore  and  to  begin  with,  you  must  not  accept  it  otherwise,  than 
in  the  former  sense.  Perhaps  you  will  better  appreciate  our  mean- 
ing when  told  that  in  our  view  the  highest  aspirations  for  the  wel- 
fare of  humanity  become  tainted  with  selfishness  if,  in  the  mind 
of  the  philanthropist  there  lurks  the  shadow  of  desire  for  self  bene- 
fit or  a  tendency  to  do  injustice,  even  when  these  exist  uncon- 
sciously to  himself.  Yet,  you  have  ever  discussed  but  to  put  down 
the  idea  of  a  universal  Brotherhood,  questioned  its  usefulness,  and 
advised  to  remodel  the  T.S.  on  the  principle  of  a  college  for  the 
special  study  of  occultism.  This  my  respected  and  esteemed  friend 
and  Brother — will  never  do  ! 

Having  disposed  of  "  personal  motives,"  let  us  analyze  your 
"  terms  "  for  helping  us  to  do  public  good.  Broadly  stated  these 
terms  are — first  :  that  an  independent  Anglo-Indian  Theosophical 
Society  shall  be  founded  through  your  kind  services,  in  the 
management  of  which  neither  of  our  present  representatives  shall 
have  any  voice ;  and  second,  that  one  of  us  shall  take  the  new 
body  **  under  his  patronage," — be — **  in  free  and  direct  communi- 
cation with  its  leaders,"  and  afford  them  **  direct  proof  that  he 
really  possessed  that  superior  knowledge  of  the  forces  of  nature 
and  the  attributes  of  the  human  soul  which  would  inspire  them 
with  proper  confidence  in  his  leadership."  I  have  copied  your 
own  words,  so  as  to  avoid  inaccuracy  in  defining  the  position. 

From  your  point  of  view  then,  those  terms  may  seem  so  very 
reasonable  as  to  provoke  no  dissent ;  and,  indeed,  a  majority  of 
your  countrymen — if  not  of  Europeans — might  share  that  opinion. 
What,  will  you  say,  can  be  more  reasonable  than  to  ask  that 
teacher — anxious  to  disseminate  his  knowledge,  and  pupil — offer- 
ing him  to  do  so  should  be  brought  face  to  face  and  the  one  give 
the  experimental  proofs  to  the  other  that  his  instructions  were 
correct?  Man  of  the  world,  living  in  and  in  full  sympathy  with  it — 
you  are  undoubtedly  right.  But  the  men  of  this  other  world  of 
ours,  untutored  in  your  modes  of  thought,  and  who  find  very  hard 
at  times  to  follow  and  appreciate  the  latter,  can  hardly  be  blamed 
for  not  responding  as  heartily  to  your  suggestions  as  in  your 
opinion  they  deserve.  The  first  and  most  important  of  our  objec- 
tions is  to  be  found  in  our  Rules.  True,  we  have  our  schools 
and  teachers,  our  neophytes  and  shaberons  (superior  adepts),  and 
the  door  is  always  opened  to  the  right  man  who  knocks.  And, 
we  invariably  welcome  the  new  comer ; — only,  instead  of  going 
over  to  him  he  has  to  come  to  us.  More  than  that  :  unless  he  has 
reached  that  point  in  the  path  of  occultism  from  which  return  is 
impossible,  by  his  having  irrevocably  pledged  himself  to  our  asso- 


**THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  9 

ciation,  we  never — except  in  cases  of  utmost  moment — ^visit  him 
or  even  cross  the  threshold  of  his  door  in  visible  appearance. 

Is  any  of  you  so  eager  for  knowledge  and  the  beneficent  powers 
it  confers  as  to  be  ready  to  leave  your  world  and  come  into  ours? 
Then  let  him  come ;  but  he  must  not  think  to  return  until  the  seal 
of  the  mysteries  has  locked  his  lips  even  against  the  chances  of 
his  own  weakness  or  indiscretion.  Let  him  come  by  all  means,  as 
the  pupil  to  the  master,  and  without  conditions ;  or  let  him  wait, 
as  so  many  others  have,  and  be  satisfied  with  such  crumbs  of 
knowledge  as  may  fall  in  his  way. 

And  supposing  you  were  thus  to  come — as  two  of  your  own 
countrymen  have  already — as  Mad.  B.  did,  and  Mr.  O.  will ;  sup- 
posing you  were  to  abandon  all  for  the  truth ;  to  toil  wearily  for 
years  up  the  hard  steep  road,  not  daunted  by  obstacles,  firm  under 
every  temptation ;  were  to  faithfully  keep  within  your  heart  the 
secrets  entrusted  to  you  as  a  trial ;  had  worked  with  all  your 
energy  and  unselfishly  to  spread  the  truth  and  provoke  men  to 
correct  thinking  and  a  correct  life — would  you  consider  it  just,  if, 
after  all  your  efforts,  we  were  to  grant  to  Mad.  B.  or  Mr.  O.  as 
"outsiders"  the  terms  you  now  ask  for  yourselves?  Of  these 
two  persons  one  has  already  given  three-fourths  of  a  life,  the  other 
six  years  of  manhood's  prime  to  us,  and  both  will  so  labour  to  the 
close  of  their  days.  Though  ever  working  for  their  merited  re- 
ward, yet  never  demanding  it,  nor  murmuring  when  disappointed. 
Even  though  they  respectively  could  accomplish  far  less  than  they 
do,  would  it  not  be  a  palpable  injustice  to  ignore  them  as  pro- 
posed in  an  important  field  of  Theosophical  effort?  Ingratitude  is 
not  among  our  vices,  nor  do  we  imagine  you  would  wish  to  advise 
it.     .     .     . 

Neither  of  them  has  the  least  inclination  to  interfere  with  the 
management  of  the  contemplated  Anglo-Indian  Branch,  nor  dictate 
its  officers.  But,  the  new  society,  if  formed  at  all,  must  (though 
bearing  a  distinctive  title  of  its  own)  be,  in  fact,  a  Branch  of  the 
Parent  body  as  is  the  British  Theosophical  Society  at  London  and 
contribute  to  its  vitality  and  usefulness  by  promoting  its  leading 
idea  of  a  Universal  Brotherhood,  and  in  other  practicable  ways. 

Badly  as  the  phenomena  may  have  been  shown,  there  have  still 
been — as  yourself  admit — certain  ones  that  are  unimpeachable. 
The  **  raps  on  the  table  when  no  one  touches  it,"  and  the  **  bell 
sounds  in  the  air  "  have,  you  say,  **  always  been  regarded  as 
satisfactory,"  etc.,  etc.  From  this,  you  reason  that  good  **  test 
phenomena  "  may  easily  be  multiplied  ad  infinitum/'  So  they 
can — in  any  place  where  our  magnetic  and  other  conditions  are 
constantly  offered  ;  and  where  we  do  not  have  to  act  with  and 
through  an  enfeebled  female  body  in  which,  as  we  might  say, 
a  vital  cyclone  is  raging  much  of  the  time.     But,  imperfect  as  may 


10  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

be  our  visible  agent — and  often  most  unsatisfactory  and  imperfect 
she  is — yet,  she  is  the  best  available  at  present,  and  her  phenomena 
have  for  about  half  a  century  astounded  and  baffled  some  of  the 
cleverest  minds  of  the  age.  If  ignorant  of  **  journalistic  etiquette  *' 
and  the  requirements  of  physical  science,  we  still  have  an  intuition 
of  the  effects  of  causes.  Since  you  have  written  nothing  about 
the  very  phenomena  you  properly  regard  as  so  convincing  we  have 
the  right  to  infer  that  much  precious  power  may  be  wasted  with- 
out better  results.  By  itself  the  **  brooch  **  affair  is — in  the  eyes 
of  the  world — completely  useless,  and  time  will  prove  me  right. 
Your  kind  intention  has  entirely  failed. 

To  conclude  :  we  are  ready  to  continue  this  correspondence  if 
the  view  given  of  occult  study  as  above  suits  you.  Through  the 
ordeal  described,  each  of  us,  whatever  his  country,  or  race,  has 
passed.     Meanwhile,  hoping  in  the  best — yours  faithfully  as  ever 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


LETTER  No.  IIIa. 

I  saw  K.H.  in  astral  form  on  the  night  of  igth  of  October,  1880 — waking 
up  for  a  moment  but  immediately  afterwards  being  rendered  unconscious  again 
(in  the  body)  and  conscious  out  of  the  body  in  the  adjacent  dressing-room  when 
I  saw  another  of  the  Brothers  afterwards  identified  with  one  called  '*  Serapis  " 
by  Olcott, — "  the  youngest  of  the  chohans." 

The  note  about  the  vision  came  the  following  morning,  and  during  that 
day,  the  20th,  we  went  for  a  picnic  to  Prospect  Hill,  when  the  "  pillow 
incident  "  occurred. 

My  Good  "  Brother," 

In  dreams  and  visions  at  least,  when  rightly  interpreted  there 

can  hardly  be  "an  element  of  doubt."     I  hope  to  prove  to  you 

my  presence  near  you  last  night  by  something  I  took  away  with 

me.     Your  lady  will  receive  it  back  on  the  Hill.     I  keep  no  pink 

paper  to  write  upon,  but  I  trust  modest  white  will  do  as  well  for 

what  I  have  to  say.  ^.         ,.  t        o 

^  KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


LETTER  No.  IIIb. 
My  "  Dear  Brother," 

This  brooch  No.  2  is  placed  in  this  very  strange  place  simply 
to  show  to  you  how  very  easily  a  real  phenomenon  is  produced 
and  how  still  easier  it  is  to  suspect  its  genuineness.  Make  of  it 
what  you  like  even  to  classing  me  with  confederates. 

The  difficulty  you  spoke  of  last  night  with  respect  to  the  inter- 
change of  our  letters  I  will  try  to  remove.  One  of  our  pupils  will 
shortly  visit  Lahore  and  the  N.W.P.  and  an  address  will  be  sent 
to  you  which  you  can  always  use ;  unless,  indeed,  you  really  would 


^^THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES'^  ii 

prefer  corresponding  through — pillows.     Please  to  remark  that  the 
present  is  not  dated  from  a  '*  Lodge  "  but  from  a  Kashmir  valley. 

Yours,  more  than  ever, 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


LETTER  No.  IIIc. 

A  few  words  more  :  why  should  you  have  felt  disappointed  at 
not  receiving  a  direct  reply  to  your  last  note?  It  was  received  in 
my  room  about  half  a  minute  after  the  currents  for  the  production 
of  the  pillow  dak  had  been  set  ready  and  in  full  play.  And — unless 
I  had  assured  you  that  a  man  of  your  disposition  need  have  little 
fear  of  being  "  fooled  " — there  was  no  necessity  for  an  answer. 
One  favour  I  will  certainly  ask  of  you,  and  that  is,  that  now  that 
you — the  only  party  to  whom  anything  was  ever  promised — are 
satisfied  that  you  should  endeavour  to  disabuse  the  mind  of  the 
amorous  Major  and  show  to  him  his  great  folly  and  injustice. 

Yours  faithfully, 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


LETTER  No.   IV 

Apparently  received  5th  November. 

Madam  and  Colonel  O.  arrived  at  our  house,  Allahabad,  on  December  the 
1st,  1880.  Col.  O.  went  to  Benares  on  the  3rd — Madam  joined  him  on  the  nth. 
Both  returned  to  Allahabad  on  20th  and  stayed  until  28th.  A.P.S. 

My  Dear  Brother,  ^mrita  Saras,  Oct.  29. 

I  could  assuredly  make  no  objection  to  the  style  which  you  have 
kindly  adopted,  in  addressing  me  by  name,  since  it  is,  as  you  say, 
the  outcome  of  a  personal  regard  even  greater  than  I  have  as  yet 
deserved  at  your  hands.  The  conventionalities  of  the  weary 
world,  outside  our  secluded  '*  Ashrums,"  troubles  us  but  little  at 
any  time ;  least  of  all  now,  when  it  is  men  not  ceremony-masters, 
we  seek,  devotion,  not  mere  observances.  More  and  more  a  dead 
formalism  is  gaining  ground,  and  I  am  truly  happy  to  find  so 
unexpected  an  ally  in  a  quarter  where,  hitherto  there  have  not  been 
too  many — among  the  highly  educated  classes  of  English  Society. 
A  crisis,  in  a  certain  sense,  is  upon  us  now,  and  must  be  met. 
I  might  say  two  crises — one  the  Society's,  the  other  for  Tibet. 
For,  I  may  tell  you  in  confidence,  that  Russia  is  gradually  mass- 
ing her  forces  for  a  future  invasion  of  that  country  under  the  pre- 
text of  a  Chinese  War.  If  she  does  not  succeed  it  will  be  due  to 
us ;  and  herein,  at  least  we  will  deserve  your  gratitude.  You  see 
then,  that  we  have  weightier  matters  than  small  societies  to  think 
about;  yet,  the  T.S.  must  not  be  neglected.     The  affair  has  taken 


12  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

an  impulse,  which,  if  not  well  guided,  might  beget  very  evil  issues. 
Recall  to  mind  the  avalanches  of  your  admired  Alps,  that  you  have 
often  thought  about,  and  remember  that  at  first  their  mass  is 
small  and  their  momentum  little.  A  trite  comparison  you  may 
say,  but  I  cannot  think  of  a  better  illustration,  when  viewing  the 
gradual  aggregation  of  trifling  events,  growing  into  a  menacing 
destiny  for  the  Theos.  Soc.  It  came  quite  forcibly  upon  me  the 
other  day  as  I  was  coming  down  the  defiles  of  Konenlun — Kara- 
korum  you  call  them — and  saw  an  avalanche  tumble.  I  had  gone 
personally  to  our  chief  to  submit  Mr.  Hurra's  important  offer,  and 
was  crossing  over  to  Lhadak  on  my  way  home.  What  other 
speculations  might  have  followed  I  cannot  say.  But  just  as  I  was 
taking  advantage  of  the  awful  stillness  which  usually  follows  such 
cataclysm,  to  get  a  clearer  view  of  the  present  situation  and  the 
disposition  of  the  "  mystics  "  at  Simla,  I  was  rudely  recalled  to 
my  senses.  A  familiar  voice,  as  shrill  as  the  one  attributed  to 
Saraswati's  peacock — which,  if  we  may  credit  tradition,  frightened 
off  the  King  of  the  Nagas — shouted  along  the  currents  **  Olcott 
has  raised  the  very  devil  again  !  .  .  .  the  Englishmen  are 
going  crazy.  Koot  Hoomi,  come  quicker  and  help  me  !  " — and  in 
her  excitement  forgot  she  was  speaking  English.  I  must  say, 
that  the  **  old  lady's  "  telegrams  do  strike  one  like  stones  from  a 
catapult ! 

What  could  I  do  but  come?  Argument  through  space  with  one 
who  was  in  cold  despair,  and  in  a  state  of  moral  chaos  was  useless. 
So  I  determined  to  emerge  from  the  seclusion  of  many  years  and 
spend  some  time  with  her  to  comfort  her  as  well  as  I  could.  But 
our  friend  is  not  one  to  cause  her  mind  to  reflect  the  philosophical 
resignation  of  Marcus  Aurelius.  The  fates  never  wrote  that  she 
could  say  :  **  It  is  a  royal  thing,  when  one  is  doing  good  to  hear 
evil  spoken  of  himself."  I  had  come  for  a  few  days,  but  now  find 
that  I  myself  cannot  endure  for  any  length  of  time  the  stifling 
magnetism  even  of  my  own  countrymen.  I  have  seen  some  of 
our  proud  old  Sikhs  drunk  and  staggering  over  the  marble  pave- 
ment of  their  sacred  Temple.  I  have  heard  an  English-speaking 
Vakil  declaim  against  Yog  Vidya  and  Theosophy  as  a  delusion 
and  a  lie,  declaring  that  English  Science  had  emancipated  them 
from  such  **  degrading  superstitions,"  and  saying  that  it  was  an 
insult  to  India  to  maintain  that  the  dirty  Yogees  and  Sunnyasis- 
knew  anything  about  the  mysteries  of  nature ;  or  that  any  living 
man  can  or  ever  could  perform  any  phenomena  !  I  turn  my  face 
homewards  to-morrow. 

The  delivery  of  this  letter  may  very  possibly  be  delayed  for  a 
few  days,  owing  to  causes  which  it  will  not  interest  you  for  me 
to  specify.  Meanwhile,  however,  I  have  telegraphed  you  my 
thanks  for  your  obliging  compliance  with  my  wishes  in  the  matters 


-THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  13 

you  allude  to  in  your  letter  of  the  24th  inst.  I  see  with  pleasure, 
that  you  have  not  failed  to  usher  me  before  the  world  as  a  possible 
"confederate."  That  makes  our  number  10,  I  believe?  But  I 
must  say,  that  your  promise  was  well  and  loyally  fulfilled.  Re- 
ceived at  Armitsur  on  the  27th  inst.,  at  2  p.m.,  I  got  your  letter 
about  thirty  miles  beyond  Rawul  Pindee,  five  minutes  later,  and 
had  an  acknowledgment  wired  to  you  from  Jhelum  at  4  p.m.  on 
the  same  afternoon.  Our  modes  of  accelerated  delivery  and  quick 
communications  are  not  then,  as  you  will  see,  to  be  despised  by 
the  Western  world,  or  even  the  Aryan,  English-speaking  and 
sceptical  Vakils. 

I  could  not  ask  a  more  judicial  frame  of  mind  in  an  ally  than 
that  in  which  you  are  beginning  to  find  yourself.  My  Brother, 
you  have  already  changed  your  attitude  toward  us  in  a  distinct 
degree  :  what  is  to  prevent  a  perfect  mutual  understanding  one 
day? 

Mr.  Hume's  proposition  has  been  duly  and  carefully  considered. 
He  will,  no  doubt,  advise  you  of  the  results  as  expressed  in  my 
letter,  to  him.  Whether  he  will  give  our  **  modes  of  action  "  as 
fair  a  trial  as  yourself — is  another  question.  Our  Maha  (the 
**  Chief  ")  has  allowed  me  to  correspond  with  both  of  you,  and 
even — in  case  an  Anglo-Indian  Branch  is  formed — to  come  some 
day  in  personal  contact  with  it.  It  now  depends  entirely  on  you. 
I  cannot  tell  you  more.  You  are  quite  right  as  to  the  standing  of 
our  friends  in  the  Anglo-Indian  world  having  been  materially 
improved  by  the  Simla  visit ;  and,  it  is  also  true,  though  your 
modesty  refrains  from  saying  so,  that  we  are  mainly  indebted  to 
you  for  this.  But  quite  apart  from  the  unlucky  incidents  of  the 
Bombay  publications,  it  is  not  possible  that  there  should  be  much 
more  at  best  than  a  benevolent  neutrality  shown  by  your  people 
toward  ours.  There  is  so  very  minute  a  point  of  contact  between 
the  two  civilisations  they  respectively  represent  that  one  might 
almost  say  they  could  not  touch  at  all.  Nor  would  they  but  for 
the  few — shall  I  say  eccentrics? — who,  like  you,  dream  better  and 
bolder  dreams  than  the  rest ;  and  provoking  thought,  bring  the 
two  together  by  their  own  admirable  audacity.  Has  it  occurred 
to  you  that  the  two  Bombay  publications,  if  not  influenced,  may 
at  least  have  not  been  prevented,  by  those  who  might  have  done 
so,  because  they  saw  the  necessity  for  that  much  agitation  to  effect 
the  double  result  of  making  a  needed  diversion  after  the  Broach 
Grenade,  and,  perhaps,  of  trying  the  strength  of  your  personal 
interest  in  occultism  and  theosophy?  I  do  not  say  it  was  so;  I 
but  enquire  whether  the  contingency  ever  presented  itself  to  your 
mind.  I  have  already  caused  it  to  be  intimated  to  you  that  if  the 
details  given  in  the  stolen  letter  had  been  anticipated  in  the 
Pioneer — a  much  more  appropriate  place,  and  where  they  would 

3 


14  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

have  been  handled  to  better  advantage — that  document  would  not 
have  been  worth  anyone's  while  to  purloin  for  the  Times  of  India, 
and  therefore  no  names  would  have  appeared. 

Colonel  Olcott  is  doubtless  **  out  of  time  with  the  feelings  of 
English  people  "  of  both  classes;  but  nevertheless  more  in  time 
with  us  than  either.  Him  we  can  trust  under  all  circumstances, 
and  his  faithful  service  is  pledged  to  us  come  well — come  ill.  My 
Dear  Brother,  my  voice  is  the  echo  of  impartial  justice.  Where 
can  we  find  an  equal  devotion?  He  is  one  who  never  questions, 
but  obeys;  who  may  make  innumerable  mistakes  out  of  excessive 
zeal  but  never  is  unwilling  to  repair  his  fault  even  at  the  cost  of 
the  greatest  self-humiliation ;  who  esteems  the  sacrifice  of  comfort 
and  even  life  something  to  be  cheerfully  risked  whenever  neces- 
sary ;  who  will  eat  any  food,  or  even  go  without ;  sleep  on  any 
bed,  work  in  any  place,  fraternise  with  any  outcast,  endure  any 
privation  for  the  cause.  ...  I  admit  that  his  connection  with 
an  A.I.  Branch  would  be  "an  evil  " — hence,  he  will  have  no  more 
to  do  with  it  than  he  has  with  the  British  (London  Branch).  His 
connection  will  be  purely  nominal,  and  may  be  made  more  so,  by 
framing  your  Rules  more  carefully  than  theirs ;  and  giving  your 
organization  such  a  self-acting  system  of  Government  as  would 
seldom  if  ever  require  any  outside  interference.  But  to  make  an 
independent  A. LB.  with  the  self-same  objects,  either  in  whole  or 
apart,  as  the  Parent  Society  and  with  the  same  directors  behind 
the  scenes  would  be  not  only  to  deal  a  mortal  blow  at  the  Theos. 
Soc.  but  also  put  upon  us  a  double  labour  and  anxiety  without  the 
slightest  compensating  advantage  that  any  of  us  can  perceive. 
The  Parent  S.  has  never  interfered  in  the  slightest  degree  with 
the  British  T.S.,  nor  indeed  with  any  other  Branches,  whether 
religious  or  philosophical.  Having  formed,  or  caused  to  be 
formed  a  new  branch,  the  Parent  S.  charters  it  (which  it  cannot 
now  do  without  our  Sanctions  and  Signatures),  and  then  usually 
retires  behind  the  scenes,  as  you  would  say.  Its  further  connec- 
tion with  the  subject  branches  is  limited  to  receiving  quarterly 
accounts  of  their  doings  and  lists  of  the  new  fellows,  ratifying  ex- 
pulsions— only  when  specially  called  upon  as  an  arbitrator  to 
interfere  on  account  of  the  Founders'  direct  connection  with  us — 
etc.,  etc.  ;  it  never  meddles  otherwise  in  their  affairs  except  when 
appealed  to  as  a  sort  of  appelate  court.  And  the  latter  depending 
on  you,  what  is  there  to  prevent  your  Society  from  remaining 
virtually  independent?  We  are,  even  more  generous,  than  you 
British  are  to  us.  We  will  not  force  upon,  nor  even  ask  you  to 
sanction  a  Hindu  "  resident  "  in  your  Society  to  watch  the 
interests  of  the  Parent  Paramount  Power  when  we  have  once  de- 
clared you  independent ;  but  will  implicitly  trust  to  your  loyalty 
and  word  of  honour.     But  if  you  now  so  dislike  the  idea  of  a  purely 


^^THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  15 

nominal  executive  supervision  by  Col.  Olcott — an  American  of 
your  own  race — you  would  surely  rebel  against  dictation  from  a 
Hindu,  whose  habits  and  methods  are  those  of  his  own  people,  and 
whose  race,  despite  your  natural  benevolence,  you  have  not  yet 
learnt  even  to  tolerate,  let  alone  to  love  or  respect.  Think  well 
before  you  ask  for  our  guidance.  Our  best,  most  learned,  and 
holiest  adepts  are  of  the  races  of  the  *'  greasy  Tibetans  "  ;  and  the 
Penjabi  Singhs — you  know  the  lion  is  proverbially  a  dirty  and 
offensive  beast,  despite  his  strength  and  courage.  Is  it  certain 
that  your  good  compatriots  would  more  easily  forgive  our  Hindu 
solecisms  in  manners  than  those  of  their  own  kinsmen  of 
America?  If  my  observations  have  not  misled  I  should  say  this 
was  doubtful.  National  prejudices  are  apt  to  leave  one's 
spectacles  undimmed.  You  say  "  how  glad  we  should  be,  if  that 
one  to  guide  you  were  yourself,"  meaning  your  unworthy  cor- 
respondent. My  good  brother,  are  you  certain,  that  the  pleasant 
impression  you  now  may  have  from  our  correspondence  would  not 
instantly  be  destroyed  upon  seeing  me?  And  which  of  our  holy 
Shaberons  has  had  the  benefit  of  even  the  little  university  educa- 
tion and  inkling  of  European  manners  that  has  fallen  to  my 
share?  An  instance  :  I  desired  Mad.  B.  to  select  among  the  two 
or  three  Aryan  Punjabees  who  study  Yog  Vidya,  and  our  natural 
mystics  one,  whom — without  disclosing  myself  to  him  too  much  I 
could  designate  as  a  native  between  yourself  and  us,  and  whom 
I  was  anxious  to  despatch  to  you,  with  a  letter  of  introduction, 
and  have  him  speak  to  you  of  Yoga  and  its  practical  effects.  This 
young  gentleman,  who  is  as  pure  as  purity  itself,  whose  aspirations 
and  thoughts  are  of  the  most  spiritual  ennobling  kind,  and  who 
merely  through  self-exertion  was  able  to  penetrate  into  the 
regions  of  the  formless  worlds — this  young  man  is  not  fit  for — a 
drawing-room.  Having  explained  to  him  that  the  greatest  good 
might  result  for  his  country  if  he  helped  you  to  organize  a  branch 
of  English  mystics  by  proving  to  them  practically  to  what  wonder- 
ful results  led  the  study  of  Yog,  Mad.  B.  asked  him  in  guarded 
and  very  delicate  terms  to  change  his  dress  and  turban  before 
starting  for  Allahabad — for,  though  she  did  not  give  him  this 
reason,  they  were  very  dirty  and  slovenly.  You  are  to  tell  Mr. 
Sinnett — she  said — that  you  bring  him  a  letter  from  our  Brother 
K.,  with  whom  he  corresponds.  But,  if  he  asks  you  anything 
either  of  him  or  the  other  Brothers  answer  him  simply  and  truth- 
fully that  you  are  not  allowed  to  expatiate  upon  the  subject.  Speak 
of  Yog  and  prove  to  him  what  powers  you  have  attained.  This 
young  man,  who  had  consented,  wrote  later  on  the  following 
curious  letter  :  **  Madam,"  he  said,  "  you  who  preach  the  highest 
standards  of  morality,  of  truthfulness,  etc.,  you  would  have  me 
play  the  part  of  an  impostor.     You  ask  me  to  change  my  clothes 


i6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

at  the  risk  of  giving  a  false  idea  of  my  personality  and  mystifying 
the  gentleman  you  sent  me  to.  And  what  if  he  asks  me  if  I  per- 
sonally know  Koot  Hoomi,  am  I  to  keep  silent  and  allow  him  to 
think  I  do?  This  would  be  a  tacit  falsehood,  and  guilty  of  that 
I  would  be  thrown  back  into  the  awful  whirl  of  transmigration  !  " 
Here  is  an  illustration  of  the  difficulties  under  which  we  have  to 
labour.  Powerless  to  send  to  you  a  neophyte  before  you  have 
pledged  yourself  to  us — we  have  to  either  keep  back  or  despatch 
to  you  one  who  at  best  would  shock  if  not  inspire  you  at  once 
with  disgust  !  The  letter  would  have  been  given  him  by  my  own 
hand ;  he  had  but  to  promise  to  hold  his  tongue  upon  matters  he 
knows  nothing  about  and  could  give  you  but  a  false  idea  of,  and 
to  make  himself  look  cleaner.  Prejudice  and  dead  letter  again. 
For  over  a  thousand  years, — says  Michelet, — the  Christian  Saints 
never  washed  themselves  !  For  how  long  will  our  Saints  dread 
to  change  their  clothes  for  fear  of  being  taken  for  Marmaliks  and 
the  neophytes  of  rival  and  cleaner  sects. 

But  these,  our  difficulties,  ought  not  to  prevent  you  from  begin- 
ning your  work.  Colonel  O.  and  Mad.  B.  seeming  willing  to 
become  personally  responsible  for  both  yourself  and  Mr.  Hume,  if 
you  yourself  are  ready  to  answer  for  the  fidelity  of  any  man  your 
party  may  choose  as  the  leader  of  the  A.I.T.S.,  we  are  content 
that  the  trial  shall  be  made.  The  field  is  yours  and  no  one  will 
be  allowed  to  interfere  with  you  except  myself  on  behalf  of  our 
Chiefs  when  you  once  do  me  the  honour  to  prefer  me  to  the  others. 
But  before  one  builds  the  house  he  makes  the  plan.  Suppose  you 
draft  a  memorandum  as  to  the  constitution  and  policy  of  manage- 
ment of  the  A.I.  Society  you  have  in  mind  and  submit  it  for  con- 
sideration? If  our  Chiefs  agree  to  it — and  it  is  not  surely  they 
who  would  show  themselves  obstructive  in  the  universal  onward 
march,  or  retard  this  movement  to  a  higher  goal — then  you  will  at 
once  be  chartered.  But  they  must  first  see  the  plan ;  and  I  must 
ask  you  to  remember  that  the  new  Society  shall  not  be  allowed  to 
disconnect  itself  with  the  Parent  Body,  though  you  are  at  liberty 
to  manage  your  affairs  in  your  own  way  without  fearing  the 
slightest  interference  from  its  President  so  long  as  you  do  not 
violate  the  general  Rules.  And  upon  this  point  I  refer  you  to 
Rule  9.  This  is  the  first  practical  suggestion  coming  from  a  Cis 
and  Tran5-Himalayan  **  cave-dweller  '*  whom  you  have  honoured 
with  your  confidence. 

And  now  about  yourself  personally.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  dis- 
courage one  so  willing  as  yourself  by  setting  up  impossible  barriers 
to  your  progress.  We  never  whine  over  the  inevitable  but  try  to 
make  the  best  of  the  worst.  And  though  we  neither  push  nor 
draw  into  the  mysterious  domain  of  occult  nature  those  who  are 
unwilling,   and  never  shrink  from  expressing  our  opinions  freely 


/ 


'^THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  17 

and  fearlessly,  yet  we  are  ever  as  ready  to  assist  those  who  come 
to  us ;  even  to — agnostics  who  assume  the  neg-ative  position  of 
''  knowing  nothing  but  phenomena  and  refuse  to  believe  in  any- 
thing else/*  It  is  true  that  the  married  man  cannot  become  an 
adept,  yet  without  striving^  to  become  "  a  Raja  Yogi  "  he  can 
acquire  certain  powers  and  do  as  much  good  for  mankind,  and 
often  more,  by  remaining  within  the  precincts  of  this  world  of  his. 
Therefore,  shall  we  not  ask  you  to  precipitately  change  fixed 
habits  of  life  before  the  full  conviction  of  its  necessity  and  advan- 
tage has  possessed  you.  You  are  a  man  to  be  left  to  lead  himself, 
and  may  be  so  left  with  safety.  Your  resolution  is  taken  to 
deserve  much  :  time  will  effect  the  rest.  There  are  more  ways 
than  one  for  acquiring  occult  knowledge.  "  Many  are  the  grains 
of  incense  destined  for  one  and  the  same  altar  :  one  falls  sooner 
into  the  fire,  the  other  later — the  difference  of  time  is  nothing," 
remarked  a  great  man  when  he  was  refused  admission  and 
supreme  initiation  into  the  mysteries.  There  is  a  tone  of  com- 
plaint in  your  question  whether  there  will  ever  be  a  renewal  of  the 
vision  you  had,  the  night  before  the  picnic  day.  Methinks,  were 
you  to  have  a  vision  nightly,  you  would  soon  cease  to  '*  treasure  '* 
them  at  all.  But  there  is  a  far  weightier  reason  why  you  should 
not  have  a  surfeit — it  would  be  a  waste  of  our  strength.  As  often 
as  I,  or  any  of  us  can  communicate  with  you,  whether  by  dreams, 
waking  impressions,  letters  (in  or  out  of  pillows)  or  personal  visits 
in  astral  form — it  will  be  done.  But  remember  that  Simla  is  7,000 
feet  higher  than  Allahabad,  and  the  difficulties  to  be  surmounted 
at  the  latter  are  tremendous.  I  abstain  from  encouraging  you  to 
expect  too  much,  for,  like  yourself,  I  am  loathe  to  promise  what, 
for  various  reasons,  I  may  not  be  able  to  perform. 

The  term  "  Universal  Brotherhood  "  is  no  idle  phrase. 
Humanity  in  the  mass  has  a  paramount  claim  upon  us,  as  I  tried 
to  explain  in  my  letter  to  Mr.  Hume,  which  you  had  better  ask 
the  loan  of.  It  is  the  only  secure  foundation  for  universal 
morality.  If  it  be  a  dream,  it  is  at  least  a  noble  one  for  mankind  : 
and  it  is  the  aspiration  of  the  true  adept. 

Yours  faithfully, 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


LETTER  No.  V 
My  Dear  Friend, 

I  have  your  letter  of  November  19th,  abstracted  by  our  special 
osmosis  from  the  envelope  at  Meerut,  and  yours  to  our  **  old  lady  '* 
in  its  half  empty  registered  shell  safely  sent  on  to  Cawnpore,  to 
make  her  swear  at  me.  But  she  is  too  weak  to  play  at  the  astral 
postman  just  now.     I  am  sorry  to  see  that  she  has  once  more 


1 8  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

proved  inaccurate  and  led  you  into  error ;  but  this  is  chiefly  my 
own  fault,  as  I  often  neglect  to  g-ive  her  an  extra  rub  over  her  poor 
sick  head,  now,  when  she  forgets  and  mixes  up  things  more  than 
usual.  I  did  not  ask  her  to  tell  you  "  to  give  up  the  idea  of  the 
A.I.  Branch,  as  nothing  would  come  of  it,"  but — **  to  give  up 
the  idea  of  the  Anglo-Indian  Branch  in  co-operation  with  Mr. 
Hume,  as  nothing  would  come  of  it. "  I  will  send  you  his  answer 
to  my  letter  and  my  final  epistle  and  you  will  judge  for  yourself. 
After  reading  the  latter  you  will  please  seal  and  send  it  to  him, 
simply  stating  that  you  do  so  on  my  behalf.  Unless  he  asks  the 
question  you  better  not  let  him  know  you  have  read  his  letter. 
He  may  be  proud  of  it,  but — should  not. 

My  dear,  good  friend,  you  must  not  bear  me  a  grudge  for  what 
I  say  to  him  of  the  English  in  general.  They  are  haughty.  To 
us  especially,  so  that  we  regard  it  as  a  natural  feature.  And,  you 
must  not  confound  your  own  private  views — especially  those  you 
have  now — with  those  of  your  countrymen  in  general.  Few,  if 
any — (of  course  with  such  exceptions  as  yourself,  where  intensity 
of  aspiration  makes  one  disregard  all  other  considerations) — would 
ever  consent  to  have  a  *'  nigger  "  for  a  guide  or  leader,  no  more 
than  a  modern  Desdemona  would  choose  an  Indian  Othello 
nowadays.  The  prejudice  of  race  is  intense,  and  even  in  free 
England  we  are  regarded  as  an  **  inferior  race."  And  this  same 
tone  vibrates  in  your  own  remark  about  **  a  man  of  the  people 
unused  to  refined  ways  "  and  **  a  foreigner  but  a  gentleman,"  the 
latter  being  the  man  to  be  preferred.  Nor  would  a  Hindu  be  likely 
to  have  such  a  lack  of  "  refined  ways  "  disregarded  in  him  were 
he  **  an  adept  "  twenty  times  over  again  ;  and  this  very  same  trait 
appears  prominent  in  Viscount  Amberley's  criticism  on  the 
**  underbred  Jesus."  Had  you  paraphrased  your  sentence  and 
said — "  a  foreigner  but  no  gentleman  "  (according  to  English 
notions)  you  could  not  have  added  as  you  did,  that  he  would  be 
thought  the  fittest.  Hence,  I  say  it  again,  that  the  majority  of 
our  Anglo-Indians,  among  whom  the  terms  **  Hindu  "  or 
"  Asiatic  "  is  generally  coupled  with  a  vague  yet  actual  idea  of 
one  who  uses  his  fingers  instead  of  a  bit  of  cambric,  and  who 
abjures  soap — would  most  certainly  prefer  an  American  to  **  a 
greasy  Tibetan."  But  you  need  not  tremble  for  me.  Whenever 
I  make  my  appearance — whether  astrally  or  physically — before  my 
friend  A.  P.  Sinnet,  I  will  not  forget  to  invest  a  certain  sum  in  a 
square  of  the  finest  Chinese  silk  to  carry  in  my  chogga  pocket, 
nor  to  create  an  atmosphere  of  sandal-wood  and  cashmere  roses. 
This  is  the  least  I  could  do  in  atonement  for  my  countrymen. 
But  then,  you  see,  I  am  but  a  slave  of  my  masters ;  and  if,  allowed 
to  gratify  my  own  friendly  feelings  for  you,  and  attend  to  you 
individually,   I  may  not  be  permitted  to  do  as  much  for  others. 


"THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES"  19 

Nay,  to  tell  the  truth,  I  know  I  am  not  permitted  to  do  so,  and 
Mr.  Hume's  unfortunate  letter  has  contributed  much  to  it.  There 
is  a  distinct  g"roup  or  section  in  our  fraternity  who  attend  to  our 
casual  and  very  rare  accessions  of  another  race  and  blood,  and  who 
brought  across  the  threshold  Captain  Remington  and  two  other 
Englishmen  during  this  century.  And  these  "  Brothers  " — do  not 
habitually  use  floral  essence. 

So  the  test  of  the  27th  was  no  test  phenomena?  Of  course,  of 
course.  But  did  you  try  to  get,  as  you  said  you  would,  the  original 
MSS.  of  the  Jhelum  dispatch?  Though  our  hollow  but  plethoric 
friend,  Mrs.  B.,  were  even  proved  to  be  my  multum  in  parvo,  my 
letter-writer,  and  to  manufacture  my  epistles,  yet,  unless  she  were 
ubiquitous  or  had  the  gift  of  flying  from  Amritsar  to  Jhelum — a 
distance  over  200  miles — in  two  minutes,  how  could  she  have 
written  for  me  the  dispatch  in  my  own  hand-writing  at  Jhelum 
hardly  two  hours  after  your  letter  was  received  by  her  at  Amritsar? 
This  is  why  I  was  not  sorry  that  you  said  you  would  send  for  it, 
for,  with  this  dispatch  in  your  possession,  no  "  detractors  "  would 
be  very  strong,  nor  even  the  sceptical  logic  of  Mr.  Hume  prevail. 

Naturally  you  imagine  that  the  **  nameless  revelation  " — which 
now  re-echoes  in  England — would  have  been  pounced  upon  far 
more  easily  than  even  it  was,  by  the  Times  of  India,  if  it  revealed 
the  names.  But  here  again,  I  will  prove  you  wrong.  Had  you 
first  printed  the  account,  the  T.  of  L  could  never  have  published 
'*  A  day  with  Madame  B.,'*  since  that  nice  bit  of  American 
**  sensationalism  "  would  not  have  been  written  by  Olcott  at  all. 
It  would  not  have  had  its  raison  d'etre.  Anxious  to  collect  for  his 
Society  every  proof  corroborative  of  the  occult  powers  of  what  he 
terms  the  ist  Section,  and  seeing  that  you  remained  silent,  our 
gallant  Colonel  felt  his  hand  itch  until  it  brought  everything  to 
light,  and — plunged  everything  into  darkness  and  consternation  ! — 
**  Voici  pourquoi  nous  n'irons  plus  au  bois,"  as  the  French  song 
goes. 

Did  you  write  "tune"  ?  Well,  well;  I  must  ask  you  to  buy 
me  a  pair  of  spectacles  in  London.  And  yet — out  of  "  time  "  or 
out  of  "  tune  **  is  all  one,  as  it  seems.  But  you  ought  to  adopt 
my  old-fashioned  habit  of  "  little  lines  '*  over  the  **  m's."  Those 
bars  are  useful,  even  though  "  out  of  tune  and  time  "  with  modern 
caligraphy.  Besides,  bear  in  mind,  that  these  my  letters,  are  not 
written  but  impressed  or  precipitated  and  then  all  mistakes 
corrected. 

We  will  not  discuss,  at  present,  whether  your  aims  and  objects 
are  so  widely  different  from  those  of  Mr.  Hume ;  but  if  he  may  be 
actuated  by  **  a  purer  and  broader  philanthropy,"  the  way  he  sets 
to  work  to  achieve  these  aims  will  never  carry  him  beyond  pure 
theoretical  disquisitions  upon  the  subject.     No  use  now  in  trying 


20  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

to  represent  him  in  any  other  light.  His  letter  that  you  will  soon 
read — is,  as  I  say  to  himself,  "  a  monument  of  pride  and  uncon- 
scious selfishness."  He  is  too  just  and  superior  a  man  to  be  guilty 
of  petty  vanity;  but  his  pride  climbs  like  that  of  the  mythical 
Lucifer;  and,  you  may  believe  me — if  I  have  any  experience  in 
human  nature — when  I  say,  that  this  is  Hume — au  naturel.  It  is 
no  hasty  conclusion  of  mine  based  upon  any  personal  feeling,  but 
the  decision  of  the  greatest  of  our  living  adepts — the  Shaberon  of 
Than — La.  Of  whatever  question  he  touches  his  treatment  is  the 
same  :  a  stubborn  determination  to  make  everything  either  fit  his 
own  foregone  conclusions  or — sweep  it  away  by  a  rush  of  ironical 
and  adverse  criticism.  Mr.  Hume  is  a  very  able  man  and — Hume 
to  the  core.  Such  a  state  of  mind  offers  little  attraction,  as  you 
will  understand,  to  any  of  us  who  might  be  willing  to  come  and 
help  him. 

No;  I  do  not  and  never  will  "despise"  any  "feeling"  how- 
ever it  may  clash  with  my  own  principles,  when  it  is  expressed  as 
frankly  and  openly  as  yours.  You  may  be,  and  undoubtedly  are, 
moved  by  more  egotism  than  broad  benevolence  for  mankind. 
Yet  as  you  confess  it  without  mounting  any  philanthropical  stilts, 
I  tell  you  candidly  that  you  have  far  more  chances  than  Mr.  Hume 
to  learn  a  good  bit  of  occultism.  I,  for  one,  will  do  all  I  can  for 
you,  under  the  circumstances  and  restrained  as  1  am  by  fresh 
orders.  I  will  not  tell  you  to  give  up  this  or  that,  for,  unless  you 
exhibit  beyond  any  doubt  the  presence  in  you  of  the  necessary 
germs  it  would  be  as  useless  as  it  would  be  cruel.  But  I  say — 
Try.  Do  not  despair.  Unite  to  yourself  several  determined  men 
and  women  and  make  experiments  in  mesmerism  and  the  usual 
so-called  "  spiritual  "  phenomena.  If  you  act  in  accordance  with 
prescribed  methods  you  are  sure  to  ultimately  obtain  results. 
Apart  from  this,  I  will  do  my  best  and — who  knows  !  Strong  will 
creates  and  sympathy  attracts  even  adepts,  whose  laws  arc 
antagonistic  to  their  mixing  with  the  uninitiated.  If  you  are  will- 
ing I  will  send  you  an  Essay  showing  why  in  Europe  more  than 
anywhere  else  a  Universal  Brotherhood,  i.e.,  an  Association  of 
"  affinities  "  of  strong  magnetic  yet  dissimilar  forces  and  polarities 
centred  around  one  dominant  idea,  is  necessary  for  successful 
achievements  in  occult  sciences.  What  one  will  fail  to  do — the 
combined  many  will  achieve.  Of  course  you  will  have — in  case 
you  organise — to  put  up  with  Olcott  as  the  head  of  the  Parent 
Society,  hence — nominally  the  President  of  all  the  existing 
Branches.  But  he  will  be  no  more  your  "  leader  "  than  he  is  the 
leader  of  the  British  Theos.  Society,  which  has  its  own  President, 
its  own  Rules  and  Bye-laws.  You  will  be  chartered  by  him,  and 
that*s  all.  In  some  cases  he  will  have  to  sign  a  paper  or  two — 
4  times  a  year  the  accounts  sent  in  by  your  Secretary ;  yet  he  has 


^'THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES"  21 

no  right  to  interfere  either  with  your  administration  or  mode  of 
action,  so  long*  as  these  do  not  clash  with  the  general  Rules,  and 
he  certainly  has  neither  the  ability  nor  the  desire  of  being  your 
leader.  And,  of  course,  you  (measuring  the  whole  Society)  will 
have  besides  your  own  President  chosen  by  yourselves,  **  a  quali- 
fied professor  of  occultism  "  to  instruct  you.  But,  my  good  friend, 
abandon  all  notion  that  this  **  Professor  "  can  bodily  appear  and 
instruct  you  for  years  to  come.  /  may  come  to  you  personally — 
unless  you  drive  me  off,  as  Mr.  Hume  did — I  cannot  come  to  all. 
You  may  get  phenomena  and  proofs,  but  even  were  you  to  fall  into 
the  old  error  and  attribute  them  to  '*  Spirits  "  we  could  but  show 
you  your  mistake  by  philosophical  and  logical  explanations ;  no 
adept  would  be  allowed  to  attend  your  meetings. 

Of  course  you  ought  to  write  your  book.  I  do  not  see,  why  in 
any  case  it  should  be  impracticable.  Do  so,  by  all  means,  and 
any  help  I  can  give  you  I  will.  You  ought  to  put  yourself  imme- 
diately in  correspondence  with  Lord  Lindsay,  and  take  the  Simla 
phenomena  and  your  correspondence  with  me  as  the  subject.  He 
is  intensely  interested  in  all  such  experiments,  and  being  a 
theosophist  and  upon  the  General  Council  is  sure  to  welcome  your 
overtures.  Take  the  ground  that  you  belong  to  the  T.S.,  that 
you  are  the  widely  known  Editor  of  the  "  Pioneer/'  and  that 
knowing  how  great  an  interest  he  takes  in  the  **  spiritual  " 
phenomena  you  submit  to  his  consideration  the  very  extraordinary 
things  which  took  place  at  Simla,  with  such  additional  details  as 
have  not  been  published.  The  best  of  the  British  Spiritualists 
could,  with  proper  management,  be  converted  into  Theosophists. 
But  neither  Dr.  Wyld,  nor  Mr.  Massey,  seem  to  have  the  requisite 
force.  I  advise  you  to  confer  personally  with  Lord  Lindsay  upon 
the  theosophical  situation  at  home  and  in  India.  Perhaps  you, 
too,  might  work  together  :  the  correspondence  I  now  suggest  will 
pave  the  way. 

Even  if  Madame  B.  might  "  be  induced  "  to  give  the  A.L 
Society  any  *'  practical  instruction  "  I  am  afraid  she  has  remained 
too  long  a  time  outside  the  adytum  to  be  of  much  use  for  practi- 
cal explanations.  However,  though  it  does  not  depend  upon  me, 
I  will  see  what  I  can  do  in  this  direction.  But  I  fear  she  is  sadly 
in  need  of  a  few  months  of  recuperative  villagiatura  on  the 
glaciers,  with  her  old  master  before  she  can  be  entrusted  with 
such  a  difficult  task.  Be  very  cautious  with  her  in  case  she  stops 
with  you  on  her  way  down  home.  Her  nervous  system  is  terribly 
shaken  and  she  requires  every  care.  Will  you  please  spare  me 
needless  trouble  by  informing  me  of  the  year,  date,  and  hour  of 
Mrs.   Sinnett's  birth? 

Ever  yours  sincerely, 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Singh. 


22  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  VI 

Received  at  Allahabad  about  December  loth,  1880. 

No — you  do  not  **  write  too  much."  I  am  only  sorry  to  have 
so  little  time  at  my  disposal ;  hence — to  find  myself  unable  to 
answer  you  as  speedily  as  I  otherwise  would.  Of  course,  /  have 
to  read  every  word  you  write  :  otherwise  I  would  make  a  fine 
mess  of  it.  And  whether  it  be  through  my  physical  or  spiritual 
eyes  the  time  required  for  it  is  practically  the  same.  As  much 
may  be  said  of  my  replies.  For,  whether  I  **  precipitate  "  or  dic- 
tate them  or  write  my  answers  myself,  the  difference  in  time 
saved  is  very  minute.  I  have  to  think  it  over,  to  photograph 
every  word  and  sentence  carefully  in  my  brain  before  it  can  be 
repeated  by  '*  precipitation."  As  the  fixing  on  chemically  pre- 
pared surfaces  of  the  images  formed  by  the  camera  requires  a 
previous  arrangement  within  the  focus  of  the  object  to  be  repre- 
sented, for  otherwise — as  often  found  in  bad  photographs — the 
legs  of  the  sitter  might  appear  out  of  all  proportion  with  the  head, 
and  so  on,  so  we  have  to  first  arrange  our  sentences  and  impress 
every  letter  to  appear  on  paper  in  our  minds  before  it  becomes  fit 
to  be  read.  For  the  present,  it  is  all  I  can  tell  you.  When 
science  will  have  learnt  more  about  the  mystery  of  the  lithophyl 
(or  lithobiblion)  and  how  the  impress  of  leaves  comes  originally 
to  take  place  on  stones,  then  will  I  be  able  to  make  you  better 
understand  the  process.  But  you  must  know  and  remember  one 
thing  :  we  but  follow  and  servilely  copy  nature  in  her  works. 

No ;  we  need  argue  no  longer  upon  the  unfortunate  question  of 
a  **  Day  with  Mad.  B."  It  is  the  more  useless,  since  you  say, 
you  have  no  right  to  crush  and  grind  your  uncivil  and  often 
blackguardly  opponents  in  the  "  Pioneer  " — even  in  your  own 
defence — your  proprietors  objecting  to  the  mention  of  occultism 
altogether.  As  they  are  Christians  it  is  no  matter  of  great 
wonder.  Let  us  be  charitable  and  hope  they  will  get  their  own 
reward  :  Die  and  become  angels  of  light  and  Truth — winged 
paupers  of  the  Christian  heaven. 

Unless  you  join  several,  and  organize  somehow  or  other,  I  am 
afraid  I  will  prove  but  of  little  help  for  you  practically.  My  dear 
friend,  I  have  my  **  proprietors  "  also.  For  reasons  best  known 
to  themselves  they  have  set  their  foot  upon  the  idea  of  teaching 
isolated  individuals.  I  will  correspond  with  you  and  give  you 
proofs  from  time  to  time  of  my  existence  and  presence.  To  teach 
or  instruct  you — is  altogether  another  question.  Hence  to  sit 
with  your  lady  is  more  than  useless.  Your  magnetisms  are  too 
similar  and — you  will  get  nothing. 

I  will  translate  my  Essay  and  send  it  to  you  as  soon  as  I  can. 


"  THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES ''  23 

Your  idea  of  corresponding-  with  your  friends  and  fellows  is  the 
next  best  thing-  to  do.     But  do  not  fail  to  write  to  Lord  Lindsay. 

I  am  a  little  **  too  hard  "  upon  Hume,  you  say.  Am  I?  His 
is  a  highly  intellectual  and,  I  confess,  a  spiritual  nature  too.  Yet, 
he  is  every  bit  of  him  "  Sir  Oracle."  It  may  be  that  it  is,  the 
very  exuberance  of  that  great  intellect  which  seeks  issue  throug-h 
every  chink,  and  never  loses  an  opportunity  to  relieve  the  fulness 
of  the  brain,  which  overflows  with  thought.  Finding  in  his  quiet 
daily  life  too  meagre  a  field  with  but  **  Mossy  and  Davison  to 
sow  upon — his  intellect  bursts  the  dam  and  pounces  upon  every 
imagined  event,  every  possible  though  improbable  fact  his 
imagination  can  suggest,  to  interpret  it  in  his  own  conjectural 
way.  Nor  do  I  wonder  that  such  a  skilled  workman  in  intellectual 
mosaic  as  he,  finding  suddenly,  the  most  fertile  of  quarries,  the 
most  precious  of  colour — stored  in  this  idea  of  our  Fraternity  and 
the  T.S. — should  pick  out  ingredients  from  it  to  daub  our  faces 
with.  Placing  us  before  a  mirror  which  reflects  us  as  he  finds  us 
in  his  own  fertile  imagination  he  says  :  "  Now,  you  mouldy  relics 
of  a  mouldy  Past  look  at  yourselves  how  you  really  are  !  "  A 
very,  very  excellent  man  our  friend  Mr.  Hume,  but  utterly  unfit 
for  moulding  into  an  adept. 

As  little,  and  far  less  than  yourself  does  he  seem  to  realize 
our  real  object  in  the  formation  of  an  A.  I.  Branch.  The  truths 
and  mysteries  of  occultism  constitute,  indeed,  a  body  of  the 
highest  spiritual  importance,  at  once  profound  and  practical  for 
the  world  at  large.  Yet,  it  is  not  as  a  mere  addition  to  the 
tangled  mass  of  theory  or  speculation  in  the  world  of  science  that 
they  are  being  given  to  you,  but  for  their  practical  bearing  on  the 
interests  of  mankind.  The  terms  "  unscientific,"  "  impossible," 
"hallucination,"  **  impostor,"  have  hitherto  been  used  in  a  very 
loose,  careless  way,  as  implying  in  the  occult  phenomena  some- 
thing either  mysterious  and  abnormal,  or  a  premeditated  impos- 
ture. And  this  is  why  our  chiefs  have  determined  to  shed  upon 
a  few  recipient  minds  more  light  upon  the  subject,  and  to  prove 
to  them  that  such  manifestations  are  as  reducible  to  law  as  the 
simplest  phenomena  of  the  physical  universe.  The  wiseacres  say  : 
"  the  age  of  miracles  is  past,"  but  we  answer,  "  it  never  existed  !" 
While  not  unparallelled,  or  without  their  counterpart  in  universal 
history,  these  phenomena  must  and  will  come  with  an  overpower- 
ing influence  upon  the  world  of  sceptics  and  bigots.  They  have 
to  prove  both  destructive  and  constructive — destructive  in  the 
pernicious  errors  of  the  past,  in  the  old  creeds  and  superstitions 
which  suffocate  in  their  poisonous  embrace  like  the  Mexican  weed 
nigh  all  mankind ;  but  constructive  of  new  institutions  of  a 
genuine,  practical  Brotherhood  of  Humanity  where  all  will  become 
co-workers  of  nature,  will  work  for  the  good  of  mankind  ivith  and 


24  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

through   the    hig-her    planetary   Spirits — the    only    *'  Spirits  "    we 
believe    in.       Phenomenal    elements,    previously    unthought    of — 
undreamt  of — will  soon  begin  manifesting-  themselves  day  by  day 
with  constantly  augmented  force,  and  disclose  at  last  the  secrets 
of  their  mysterious  workings.     Plato  was   right  :   ideas  rule  the 
world,  and,  as  men's  minds  will  receive  new  ideas,   laying  aside 
the  old  and  effete,  the  world  will  advance  :  mighty  revolutions  will 
spring  from  them ;  creeds  and  even  powers  will  crumble  before 
their  onward  march  crushed  by  the  irresistible  force.     It  will  be 
just  as  impossible  to  resist  their  influx,  when  the  time  comes,  as 
to  stay  the  progress  of  the  tide.     But  all  this  will  come  gradually 
on,   and  before  it  comes  we  have  a  duty  set  before  us ;  that  of 
sweeping  away  as  much  as  possible  the  dross  left  to  us  by  our 
pious  forefathers.     New  ideas  have  to  be  planted  on  clean  places, 
for  these  ideas  touch  upon  the  most  momentous  subjects.     It  is 
not  physical  phenomenon  but  these  universal  ideas  that  we  study, 
as  to  comprehend  the  former,   we  have  to   first  understand  the 
latter.     They  touch  man's  true  position  in  the  universe,  in  rela- 
tion  to  his  previous  and   future  births ;   his  origin   and    ultimate 
destiny ;  the  relation  of  the  mortal  to  the  immortal ;  of  the  tem- 
porary to  the  eternal ;  of  the  finite  to  the  infinite ;  ideas  larger, 
grander,  more  comprehensive,  recognising  the  universal  reign  of 
Immutable  Law,  unchanging  and  unchangeable  in  regard  to  which 
there  is  only  an  Eternal  Now,  while  to  uninitiated  mortals  time 
is  past  or  future  as  related  to  their  finite  existence  on  this  material 
speck  of  dirt.     This  is  what  we  study  and  what  may  have  solved. 
And  now  it  is  your  province  to  decide  which  will  you  have  :  the 
highest   philosophy   or   simple   exhibitions   of  occult  powers.     Of 
course  this  is  by  far  not  the  last  word  between  us  and — you  will 
have  time  to  think  it  over.     The  Chiefs  want  a  **  Brotherhood  of 
Humanity,"  a   real   Universal   Fraternity  started;   an   institution 
which  would  make  itself  known  throughout  the  world  and  arrest 
the  attention  of  the  highest  minds.     I  will  send  you  my  Essay. 
Will     you    be    my    co-worker     and     patiently     wait    for     minor 
phenomena?     I  think  I  foresee  the  answer.     At  all  events  the  holy 
lamp  of  spiritual  light  burning  in  you  (however  dimly)  there  is 
hope  for  you,    and — for  me,    also.     Yes ;   put  yourself  in   search 
after  natives  if  there  are  no  English  people  to  be  had.     But  think 
you,  the  spirit  and  power  of  persecution  gone  from  this  enlightened 
age?     Time  will  prove.     Meanwhile,  being  human  I  have  to  rest. 
I  took  no  sleep  for  over  60  hours. 

Ever  yours  truly, 

KOOT  HOOMI. 


^'THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES  ^^  25 

LETTER  No.   VII 

Enclosed  in  Mad.    B.'s   from   Bombay.     Received  January  30th,    1881. 

There  is  no  fault  on  your  part  in  the  whole  matter.  I  am  sorry 
you  should  think  I  am  imputing  any  fault  to  you.  If  anything, 
you  might  almost  feel  you  had  to  blame  me  for  giving  you  hopes 
without  having  the  shadow  of  such  a  right.  I  ought  to  have  been 
less  optimistic  and  then  you  would  have  been  less  sanguine  in  your 
expectations.  I  really  feel  as  if  I  had  wronged  you  !  Happy, 
thrice  happy  and  blessed  are  they,  who  have  never  consented  to 
visit  the  world  beyond  their  snow-capped  mountains ;  whose 
physical  eyes  have  never  lost  sight  of  for  one  day  of  the  endless 
range  of  hills,  and  the  long  unbroken  line  of  eternal  snows ! 
Verily  and  indeed,  do  they  live  in  and  have  found  their  Ultima 
Thule.     .     . 

Why  say,  you  are  a  victim  of  circumstances,  since  nothing  is 
yet  seriously  changed  and  that  much,  if  not  all,  depends  upon 
future  developments?  You  were  not  asked  or  expected  to  revo- 
lutionise your  life  habits,  but  at  the  same  time  you  were  warned 
not  to  expect  too  much  as  you  are.  If  you  read  between  the  lines 
you  must  have  remarked  what  I  said  about  the  very  narrow 
margin  left  to  me  for  doing  as  I  chose  in  the  matter.  But 
despond  not,  for  it  is  all  but  a  matter  of  time.  The  world  was 
not  evolved  between  two  monsoons,  my  good  friend.  If  you  had 
come  to  me  as  a  boy  of  17,  before  the  world  had  put  its  heavy 
hand  upon  you,  your  task  would  have  been  twenty-fold  easier. 
And  now,  we  must  take  you,  and  you  must  see  yourself  as  you 
are,  not  as  the  ideal  human  image  which  our  emotional  fancy 
always  projects  for  us  upon  the  glass.  Be  patient,  friend  and 
brother;  and  I  must  repeat  again — be  our  helpful,  co-worker;  but 
in  your  own  sphere,  and  according  to  your  ripest  judgment. 
Since  our  venerable  Hobilgan  has  decreed  in  his  wise  prevision 
that  I  had  no  right  to  encourage  you  to  enter  a  path,  where  you 
would  have  to  roll  the  stone  of  Sisyphus,  held  back  as  you  surely 
would  be  by  your  previous  and  most  sacred  duties — we  really 
must  wait.  I  know  your  motives  are  sincere  and  true,  and  that 
a  real  change,  and  in  the  right  direction,  has  come  over  you, 
though  even  to  yourself  that  change  is  imperceptible.  And,  the 
chiefs  know  it  too.  But  say  they — motives  are  vapours,  as 
attenuated  as  the  atmospheric  moisture  :  and,  as  the  latter  de- 
velops its  dynamic  energy  for  man's  use  only  when  concentrated 
and  applied  as  steam  or  hydraulic  power,  so  the  practical  value  of 
good  motives  is  best  seen  when  they  take  the  form  of  deeds. 
.  .  .  Yes,  we  will  wait  and  see — they  say.  And  now  I  have 
told  you  as  much  as  I  ever  had  the  right  to  say.     You  have  more 


26  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

than  once  already  helped  this  Society,  even  though  you  did  not 
care  for  it  yourself,  and  these  deeds  are  upon  record.  Nay — they 
arc  even  more  meritorious  in  you,  than  they  would  be  in  anyone 
else,  considering  your  well-grounded  ideas  of  that  poor  organiza- 
tion at  present.  And,  you  have  thereby  won  a  friend — one  far 
higher  and  better  than  myself — and  one  who  will  in  future  help 
me  to  defend  your  cause,  able  as  he  is,  to  do  it  far  more  effectu- 
ally than  I  can,  for  he  belongs  to  the  "  foreign  Section." 

I  believe  I  have  laid  down  for  you  the  general  lines  on  which 
we  wish  the  work  of  organizing — if  possible — the  Anglo-Indian 
Branch  to  proceed  :  the  details  must  be  left  to  you — if  you  are 
still  willing  to  help  me. 

If  you  have  anything  to  say  or  ask  any  questions,  you  better 
write  to  me  and  I  will  always  answer  your  letters.  But,  ask  for 
no  phenomena  for  a  while,  as  it  is  but  such  paltry  manifestations 
which  now  stand  in  your  way. 

Yours  ever  truly, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  VIII 

Received  through  Mad.   B.     About  February  20th,   i88i. 

My  dear  friend,  you  are  certainly  on  the  right  path  :  the  path  of 
deeds  and  actions,  not  mere  words — may  you  live  long  and  keep 
on  !  ...  I  hope  this  will  not  be  regarded  by  you  as  an 
encouragement  to  be  "  goody  goody  " — a  happy  expression  which 
made  me  laugh — but  you  indeed  step  in  as  a  kind  of  Kalka  Avatar 
dispelling  the  shadows  of  **  Kali-yug  " — the  black  night  of  the 
perishing  T.  S.  and  driving  away  before  you  the  fata  morgana  of 
its  Rules.  I  must  cause  the  word  fecit  to  appear  after  your 
name  in  invisible  but  indelible  characters  on  the  list  of  the  General 
Council,  as  it  may  prove  some  day  a  secret  door  to  the  heart  of 
the  sternest  of  Hobligans. 

Though  a  good  deal  occupied — alas,  as  usual,  I  must  contrive 
to  send  you  a  somewhat  lengthy  farewell  epistle  before  you  take 
up  a  journey  that  may  have  most  important  results — and  not  alone 
for  our  cause.  .  .  .  You  understand,  do  you  not,  that  it  is 
no  fault  of  mine  if  I  cannot  meet  you  as  I  would?  Nor  is  it  yours, 
but  rather  that  of  your  life-long  environment  and  a  special  delicate 
task  I  have  been  entrusted  with  since  I  knew  you.  Do  not  blame 
me  then,  if  I  do  not  show  myself  in  more  tangible  shape,  as  not 
you  alone,  but  I  myself  might  desire  !  when  I  am  not  permitted  to 
do  so  for  Olcott — who  has  toiled  for  us  these  five  years,  how  could 
I  be  for  others  who  have  undergone  none  of  his  training  as  yet? 
This  applies  equally  to  the  case  of  the  Lord  Crawford  and  Bal- 
carres,  an  excellent  gentleman — imprisoned  by  the  world.      His  is 


^^THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  27 

a  sincere  and  noble,  though  maybe  a  little  too  repressed  nature. 
He  asks  what  hope  he  may  have?  I  say — every  hope.  For  he 
has  that  within  himself  that  so  very  few  possess  :  an  exhaustless 
source  of  magnetic  fluid  which,  if  he  only  had  the  time,  he  could 
call  out  in  torrents  and  need  no  other  master  than  himself.  His 
own  powers  would  do  the  work  and  his  own  great  experience  be  a 
sure  guide  for  him.  But,  he  would  have  to  guard  against,  and 
avoid  every  foreign  influence — especially  those  antagonistic  to  the 
nobler  study  of  man  as  an  integral  Brahm,  the  microcosm  free  and 
entirely  independent  of  either  the  help  or  control  of  the  invisible 
agencies  the  **  new  dispensation  "  (bombastic  word  !)  calls 
"  Spirits."  His  Lordship  will  understand  my  meaning  without 
any  further  explanation  :  he  is  welcome  to  read  this  if  he  chooses, 
if  the  opinions  of  an  obscure  Hindoo  interests  him.  Were  he  a 
poor  man,  he  might  have  become  an  English  Dupotet,  with  the 
addition  of  great  scientific  attainments  in  exact  science.  But 
alas  !  what  the  peerage  has  gained  psychology  has  lost. 
And  yet  it  is  not  too  late.  But  see,  even  after  mastering  magnetic 
science  and  giving  his  powerful  mind  to  the  study  of  the  noblest 
branches  of  exact  science,  how  even  he  has  failed  to  lift  more  than 
a  small  corner  of  the  veil  of  mystery.  Ah  !  that  whirling,  showy, 
glittering  world,  full  of  insatiable  ambition,  where  family  and  the 
State  parcel  out  between  them  a  man's  nobler  nature,  as  two 
tigers  a  carcase,  and  leave  him  without  hope  or  light.  How  many 
recruits  could  we  not  have  from  it,  if  no  sacrifice  were  exacted  ! 
His  Lordship's  letter  to  you  exhales  an  influence  of  sincerity 
tinged  with  regret.  This  is  a  good  man  at  heart  with  latent 
capacity  for  being  a  far  better  and  a  happier  one.  Had  his  lot 
not  been  cast  as  it  has,  and  had  his  intellectual  power  all  been 
turned  upon  Soul-culture,  he  would  have  achieved  much  more  than 
he  ever  dreamt.  Out  of  such  material  were  adepts  made  in  the 
days  of  Aryan  glory.  But  I  must  dwell  no  longer  upon  this  case ; 
and  I  crave  his  Lordship's  pardon  if,  in  the  bitterness  of  my 
regret  I  over-stepped  in  any  way  the  bounds  of  propriety,  in  this 
too  free  '*  psychometrical  delineation  of  character  "  as  the 
American  mediums  would  express  it  .  .  .  full  measure  only 
bounds  excess  "  but — I  dare  go  no  further.  Ah,  my  too  positive 
and  yet  impatient  friend,  if  you  but  had  such  latent  capacities  ! 

The  "  direct  communication  "  with  me  of  which  you  write  in 
your  supplement  note,  and  the  **  enormous  advantage  "  that  it 
would  bring  "  to  the  book  itself  if  it  can  be  conceded,"  would  be 
so  conceded  at  once,  did  it  depend  but  of  me  alone.  Though  it  is 
not  often  judicious  to  repeat  oneself,  yet  I  am  so  anxious  that  you 
should  realize  the  present  impracticability  of  such  an  arrangement, 
were  it  even  conceded  by  our  Superiors,  that  I  will  indulge  in  a 
brief  retrospect  of  principles  stated. 


28  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

We  might  leave  out  of  the  question  the  most  vital  point — one 
you  would  hesitate  perhaps  to  believe — that  the  refusal  con- 
cerned as  much  your  own  salvation  (from  the  standpoint  of 
your  worldly  material  considerations)  as  my  enforced  com- 
pliance with  our  time-honoured  Rules.  Again  I  might  cite  the 
case  of  Olcott  (who,  had  he  not  been  permitted  to  communicate 
face  to  face — and  without  any  intermediary — with  us,  might  have 
subsequently  shown  less  zeal  and  devotion  but  more  discretion) 
and  his  fate  up  to  the  present.  But,  the  comparison  would  doubt- 
less appear  to  you  strained.  Olcott — would  you  say — is  an 
enthusiast,  a  stubborn,  unreasoning  mystic,  who  goes  headlong 
before  him,  blindfolded,  and  who  will  not  allow  himself  to  look 
forward  with  his  own  eyes.  While  you  are  a  sober,  matter-of- 
fact  man  of  the  world,  the  son  of  your  generation  of  cool  thinkers ; 
ever  keeping  fancy  under  the  curb,  and  saying  to  enthusiasm  : 
**  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go  and  no  farther."  .  .  .  Perhaps  you 
are  right — perhaps  not.  "  No  Lama  knows  where  the  her-chhinf 
I  will  hurt  him  until  he  puts  it  on,'*  says  a  Tibetan  proverb.  How- 
ever, let  that  pass,  for  I  must  tell  you  now  that  for  opening 
"direct  communication"  the  only  possible  means  would  be: 
(i)  For  each  of  us  to  meet  in  our  own  physical  bodies.  I  being 
where  I  am,  and  you  in  your  own  quarters,  there  is  a  material 
impediment  for  me.  (2)  For  both  to  meet  in  our  astral  form — 
which  would  necessitate  your  "  getting  out  "  of  yours,  as  well  as 
my  leaving  my  body.  The  spiritual  impediment  to  this  is  on  your 
part.  (3)  To  make  you  hear  my  voice  either  within  you  or  near 
you  as  "the  old  lady  "  does.  This  would  be  possible  in  either  of 
two  ways  :  (a)  My  chiefs  have  but  to  give  me  permission  to  set 
up  the  condition — and  this  for  the  present  they  refuse ;  or  (b)  for 
you  to  hear  my  voice,  i.e.,  my  natural  voice  without  any  psycho- 
physiological tamasha  being  employed  by  me  (again  as  we  often 
do  among  ourselves).  But  then,  to  do  this,  not  only  have  one's 
spiritual  senses  to  be  abnormally  opened,  but  one  must  himself 
have  mastered  the  great  secret — yet  undiscovered  by  science — of, 
so  to  say  abolishing  all  the  impediments  of  space ;  of  neutralising  ! 
for  the  time  being  the  natural  obstacles  of  intermediary  particles 
of  air  and  forcing  the  waves  to  strike  your  ear  in  reflected  sounds  ^ 
or  echo.  Of  the  latter  you  know  as  yet  only  enough  to  regard  I 
this  as  an  unscientific  absurdity.  Your  physicists,  not  having 
until  recently  mastered  acoustics  in  this  direction,  any  further  than 
to  acquire  a  perfect  (?)  knowledge  of  the  vibration  of  sonorous 
bodies  and  of  reverberations  through  tubes,  may  sneeringly  ask  : 
"  Where  are  your  indefinitely  continued  sonorous  bodies  to  con- 
duct through  space  the  vibrations  of  the  voice?  "  We  answer  that 
our  tubes,  though  invisible,  are  indestructible  and  far  more  per- 
fect than  those  of  modern  physicists,  by  whom  the  velocity  of  the 


^^THE  OCCULT  WOELD  SEEIES"  29 

transmission  of  mechanical  force  through  the  air  is  represented  as 
at  the  rate  of  1,100  feet  a  second  and  no  more — if  I  mistake  not. 
But  then,  may  there  not  be  people  who  have  found  more  perfect 
and  rapid  means  of  transmission,  from  being  somewhat  better 
acquainted  with  the  occult  powers  of  air  (dkas)  and  having  plus 
a  more  cultivated  judgment  of  sound?  But  of  this  we  will  argue 
later  on. 

There  is  still  more  serious  inconvenience ;  and  almost  insur- 
mountable obstacle — for  the  present,  and  one  under  which  I  my- 
self am  labouring,  while  even  I  do  no  more  than  correspond  with 
you,  a  simple  thing  that  any  other  mortal  could  do.  It  is  my 
utter  inability  to  make  you  understand  my  meaning  in  my  ex- 
planation of  even  physical  phenomena,  let  alone  the  spiritual 
rationale.  This  is  not  the  first  time  I  mention  it.  It  is,  as 
though  a  child  should  ask  me  to  teach  him  the  highest  problems  of 
Euclid  before  he  had  even  begun  studying  the  elementary  rules  of 
arithmetic.  Only  the  progress  one  makes  in  the  study  of  Arcane 
knowledge  from  its  rudimental  elements,  brings  him  gradually  to 
understand  our  meaning.  Only  thus,  and  not  otherwise,  does  it, 
strengthening  and  refining  those  mysterious  links  of  sympathy 
between  intelligent  men — the  temporarily  isolated  fragments  of 
the  universal  Soul  and  the  cosmic  Soul  itself — bring  them  into  full 
rapport.  Once  this  established,  then  only  will  these  awakened 
sympathies  serve,  indeed,  to  connect  Man  with — what  for  the  want 
of  a  European  scientific  word  more  competent  to  express  the  idea, 
I  am  again  compelled  to  describe  as  that  energetic  chain  which 
binds  together  the  material  and  Immaterial  Kosmos, — Past, 
Present,  and  Future — and  quicken  his  perceptions  so  as  to  clearly 
grasp,  not  merely  all  things  of  matter  but  of  Spirit  also.  I  feel 
even  irritated  at  having  to  use  these  three  clumsy  words — past, 
present  and  future  !  Miserable  concepts  of  the  objective  phases  of 
the  Subjective  Whole,  they  are  about  as  ill  adapted  for  the  pur- 
pose as  an  axe  for  fine  carving.  Oh,  my  poor,  disappointed 
friend,  that  you  were  already  so  far  advanced  on  THE  PATH, 
that  this  simple  transmission  of  ideas  should  not  be  encumbered 
by  the  conditions  of  matter,  the  union  of  your  mind  with  ours — 
prevented  by  its  induced  incapabilities  !  Such  is  unfortunately  the 
inherited  and  self-acquired  grossness  of  the  Western  mind  ;  and 
so  greatly  have  the  very  phrases  expressive  of  modern  thoughts 
been  developed  in  the  line  of  practical  materialism,  that  it  is  now 
next  to  impossible  either  for  them  to  comprehend  or  for  us  to 
express  in  their  own  languages  anything  of  that  delicate  seemingly 
ideal  machinery  of  the  Occult  Kosmos.  To  some  little  extent  that 
faculty  can  be  acquired  by  the  Europeans  through  study  and  medi- 
tation but  that's  all.  And  here  is  the  bar  which  has  hitherto  pre- 
vented a  conviction  of  the  Theosophical  truths  from  gaining  wider 

4 


30  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

currency  among-  Western  Nations ;  caused  Theosophical  study  to 
be  cast  aside  as  useless  and  fantastic  by  Western  philosophers. 
How  shall  I  teach  you  to  read  and  write  or  even  comprehend  a 
language  of  which  no  alphabet  palpable,  or  words  audible  to  you 
have  yet  been  invented  !  How  could  the  phenomena  of  our 
modern  electrical  science  be  explained  to  say  a  Greek  philosopher 
of  the  days  of  Ptolemy  were  he  suddenly  recalled  to  life — with 
such  an  unbridged  hiatus  in  discovery  as  would  exist  between  his 
and  our  age?  Would  not  the  very  technical  terms  be  to  him  an 
unintelligible  jargon,  an  abracadabra  of  meaningless  sounds,  and 
the  very  instruments  and  apparatuses  used,  but  "  miraculous  " 
monstrosities?  And  suppose,  for  one  instant,  I  were  to  describe 
to  you  the  hues  of  those  colour  rays  that  lie  beyond  the  so-called 
"  visible  spectrum  " — rays  invisible  to  all  but  a  very  few  even 
among  us ;  to  explain,  how  we  can  fix  in  space  any  one  of  the  so- 
called  subjective  or  accidental  colours — the  complement  (to  speak 
mathematically)  moreover,  of  any  other  given  colour  of  a  dichro- 
matic body  (which  alone  sounds  like  an  absurdity),  could  you 
comprehend,  do  you  think,  their  optical  effect  or  even  my  mean- 
ing? And,  since  you  see  them  not,  such  rays,  nor  can  know  them, 
nor  have  you  any  names  for  them  as  yet  in  Science,  if  I  were  to 
tell  you  ; — **  My  good  friend,  Sinnett,  if  you  please,  without  mov- 
ing from  your  writing  desk,  try,  search  for  and  produce  before 
your  eyes  the  whole  solar  spectrum  decomposed  into  fourteen  pris- 
matic colours  (seven  being  complementary),  as  it  is  but  with  the 
help  of  that  occult  light  that  you  can  see  me  from  a  distance  as  I 
see  you."  .  .  .  What  think  you,  would  be  your  answer? 
What  would  you  have  to  reply  ?  Would  you  not  be  likely  enough 
to  retort  by  telling  me  in  your  own  quiet,  polite  way,  that  as  there 
never  were  but  seven  (now  three)  primary  colours,  which,  more- 
over, have  never  yet  by  any  known  physical  process — ^been  seen 
decomposed  further  than  the  seven  prismatic  hues — my  invitation 
was  as  "  unscientific  "  as  it  was  **  absurd  "  ?  Adding  that  my 
offer  to  search  for  an  imaginary  solar  **  complement  "  being  no 
compliment  to  your  knowledge  of  physical  science — I  had  better, 
perhaps,  go  and  search  for  my  mythical  "  dichromatic  "  and  solar 
"  pairs  "  in  Tibet,  for  modern  science  has  hitherto  been  unable  to 
bring  under  any  theory  even  so  simple  a  phenomenon  as  the 
colours  of  all  such  dichromatic  bodies.  And  yet — truth  knows — 
1    these  colours  are  objective  enough  ! 

So  you  see,  the  insurmountable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  attain- 
ing not  only  Absolute  but  even  primary  knowledge  in  Occult 
Science,  for  one  situated  as  you  are.  How  could  you  make  your- 
self understood — command  in  fact  those  semi-intelligent  Forces, 
whose  means  of  communicating  with  us  are  not  through  spoken 
words  but  through  sounds  and  colours,  in  correlations  between  the 


^'THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES^'  31 

vibrations  of  the  two?  For  sound,  Hgfht  and  colours  are  the  main 
factors  in  forming^  these  g-rades  of  Intellig-ences,  these  being-s,  of 
whose  very  existence  you  have  no  conception,  nor  are  you  allowed 
to  believe  in  them — Atheists  and  Christians,  materialists  and 
Spiritualists,  all  bring-ing-  forward  their  respective  arg-uments 
against  such  a  belief — Science  objecting  stronger  than  either  of 
these  to  such  a  **  degrading  superstition  *'  ! 

Thus,  because  they  cannot  with  one  leap  over  the  boundary 
walls  attain  to  the  pinnacles  of  Eternity ;  because  we  cannot  take 
a  savage  from  the  centre  of  Africa  and  make  him  comprehend  at 
once  the  Principia  of  Newton  or  the  "  Sociology  "  of  Herbert 
Spencer ;  or  make  an  unlettered  child  write  a  new  Iliad  in  old 
Achaian  Greek ;  or  an  ordinary  painter  depict  scenes  in  Saturn  or 
sketch  the  inhabitants  of  Arcturus — because  of  all  this  our  very 
existence  is  denied !  Yes  ;  for  this  reason  are  believers  in  us  pro- 
nounced impostors  and  fools,  and  the  very  science  whi^gli  leads  to 
the  highest  goal  of  the  highest  knowledge,  to  the  real  tasting  of 
the  Tree  of  Life  and  Wisdom — is  scouted  as  a  wild  flight  of 
Imagination  ! 

Most  earnestly  do  I  ask  you  not  to  see  in  the  above  a  mere  ven- 
tilation of  personal  feeling.  My  time  is  precious  and  I  have  none 
to  lose.  Still  less  ought  you  to  see  in  this  an  effort  to  disgust  or 
dissuade  you  from  the  noble  work  you  have  just  begun.  Nothing 
of  the  kind  ;  for  what  I  now  say  may  avail  for  as  much  as  it  can 
and  no  more  :  but — vera  pro  gratis — I  warn  you,  and  will  say  no 
more,  apart  from  reminding  you  in  a  general  way,  that  the  task 
you  are  so  bravely  undertaking,  that  Missio  in  partis  infidelium — 
is  the  most  ungrateful,  perhaps,  of  all  tasks  !  But,  if  you  believe 
in  my  friendship  for  you,  if  you  value  the  word  of  honour  of  one 
who  never — never  during  his  whole  life  polluted  his  lips  with  an 
untruth,  then  do  not  forget  the  words  I  once  wrote  to  you  (see  my 
last  letter)  of  those  who  ens^age  themselves  in  the  occult  sciences ; 
he  who  does  it  "  must  either  reach  the  goal  or  perish.  Once 
fairly  started  on  the  way  to  the  great  Knowledge,  to  doubt  is  to 
risk  insanity ;  to  come  to  a  dead  stop  is  to  fall ;  to  recede  is  to 
tumble  backward,  headlong  into  an  abyss."  Fear  not, — if  you 
are  sincere,  and  that  you  are — now.  Are  you  as  sure  of  yourself, 
as  to  the  future? 

But  I  believe  it  quite  time  to  turn  to  less  transcendental  and 
what  you  would  call  less  gloomy  and  more  mundane  matters. 
Here,  no  doubt,  you  will  be  much  more  at  home.  Your  experi- 
ence, your  training,  your  intellect,  your  knowledge  of  the  exterior 
world,  in  short,  all  combine  to  aid  you  in  the  accomplishment  of 
the  task  you  have  undertaken.  For  they  place  you  on  an  infinitely 
higher  level  than  myself  as  regards  the  consideration  of  writing  a 
book,  after  your  Society's  own  heart.     Though  the  interest  I  take 


32  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

in  it  may  amaze  some  who  are  likely  to  retort  on  me  and  my  col- 
leagues with  our  own  arguments,  and  to  remark  that  our  "  boasted 
elevation  over  the  common  herd  "  (our  friend  Mr.  Hume's  words) 
— above  the  interests  and  passions  of  ordinary  humanity,  must 
militate  against  our  having  any  conception  of  the  ordinary  affairs 
of  life — yet  I  confess  that  I  do  take  an  interest  in  this  book  and 
its  success,  as  great  as  in  the  success  in  life  of  its  future  author. 
I  hope  that  at  least  you  will  understand  that  we  (or  most  of  us) 
are  far  being  the  heartless,  morally  dried  up  mummies  some 
would  fancy  us  to  be.  **  Mejnoor  "  is  very  well,  where  he  is — 
as  an  ideal  character  of  a  thrilling — in  many  respects  truthful 
story.  Yet,  believe  me,  few  of  us  would  care  to  play  the  part  in 
life  of  a  dessicated  pansy  between  the  leaves  of  a  volume  of  solemn 
poetry.  We  may  not  be  quite  the  **  boys  " — to  quote  Olcott's 
irreverent  expression,  when  speaking  of  us — yet  none  of  our 
degree  are  like  the  stern  hero  of  Bulwer's  romance.  While  the 
facilities  of  observation  secured  to  some  of  us  by  our  condition 
certainly  give  a  greater  breadth  of  view,  a  more  pronounced  and 
impartial,  as  a  more  widely  spread  humaneness — for  answering 
Addison,  we  might  justly  maintain  that  it  is  .  .  .  "  the 
business  of  magic  to  humanise  our  natures  with  compassion  *'  for 
the  whole  mankind  as  all  living  beings,  instead  of  concentrating 
and  limiting  our  affections  to  one  predilected  race — yet  few  of  us 
(except  such  as  have  attained  the  final  negation  of  Moksha)  can 
so  far  enfranchise  ourselves  from  the  influence  of  our  earthly  con- 
nection as  to  be  insusceptible  in  various  degrees  to  the  higher 
pleasures,  emotions,  and  interests  of  the  common  run  of  humanity. 
Until  final  emancipation  reabsorbs  the  Ego  it  must  be  conscious 
of  the  purest  sympathies  called  out  by  the  esthetic  effects  of  high 
art,  its  tenderest  cords  to  respond  to  the  call  of  the  holier  and 
nobler  human  attachments.  Of  course,  the  greater  the  progress 
towards  deliverance,  the  less  this  will  be  the  case,  until,  to  crown 
all,  human  and  purely  individual  personal  feelings — blood-ties  and 
friendship,  patriotism  and  race  predilection — all  will  give  way,  to 
become  blended  into  one  universal  feeling,  the  only  true  and  holy, 
the  only  unselfish  and  eternal  one — Love,  an  Immense  Love  for 
humanity — as  a  Whole!  For  it  is  **  humanity  "  which  is  the 
great  Orphan,  the  only  disinherited  one  upon  this  earth,  my  friend. 
And  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man  who  is  capable  of  an  unselfish 
impulse  to  do  something,  however  little,  for  its  welfare.  Poor, 
poor  humanity  !  it  reminds  me  of  the  old  fable  of  the  war  between 
the  Body  and  its  members  :  here,  too,  each  limb  of  this  huge 
"  orphan" — fatherless  and  motherless — selfishly  cares  but  for  it- 
self. The  body  uncared  for  suffers  internally,  whether  the  limbs 
are  at  war  or  at  rest.  Its  suffering  and  agony  never  ceases. 
.      .      .     And  who  can  blame  it — as  your  materialistic  philosophers 


''  THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES ''  33 

do — if,    in   this   everlasting   isolation   and   neglect   it  has   evolved 
gods,    unto  whom   "  it   ever  cries  for  help  but  is   not  heard  !  " 
.     .     Thus — 

"  Since  there  is  no  hope  for  man  only  in  man 

I  would  not  let  one  cry  whom  I  could  save  !  "     .     .     . 

Yet  I  confess  that  I,  individually,  am  not  yet  exempt  from  some 
of  the  terrestrial  attachments.  I  am  still  attracted  towards  some 
men  more  than  toward  others,  and  philanthropy  as  preached  by 
our  Great  Patron — *'  the  Saviour  of  the  World — the  Teacher  of 
Nirvana  and  the  Law  "...  has  never  killed  in  me  either 
individual  preferences  of  friendship,  love — for  my  next  of  kin — 
or  the  ardent  feeling  of  patriotism  for  the  country — in  which  I 
was  last  materially  individualized.  And,  in  this  connection  I  may 
some  day,  unasked,  offer  a  bit  of  advice  to  my  friend,  Mr.  Sinnett, 
to  whisper  into  the  ear  of  the  Editor  of  the  Pioneer,  En 
attendant — **  May  I  beg  the  former  to  inform  Dr.  Wyld,  the 
Prest.  of  the  British  T.S.,  of  the  few  truths  concerning  us  as 
shown  above?  Will  you  kindly  undertake  to  persuade  this  ex- 
cellent gentleman,  that  not  one  of  the  humble  "dew  drops" 
which,  assuming  under  various  pretexts  the  form  of  vapour,  have 
at  various  periods  disappeared  in  the  space  to  congeal  in  the  white 
Himalayan  clouds,  have  ever  tried  to  slip  back  into  the  shining 
Sea  of  Nirvana  through  the  unhealthy  process  of  hanging  by  the 
legs  or  by  making  unto  themselves  another  **  coat  of  skin  "  out 
of  the  sacred  cow-dung  of  the  "  thrice  holy  cow  "  !  The  British 
President  labours  under  the  most  original  ideas  about  us,  whom 
he  persists  in  calling  *'  Yogis,"  without  allowing  the  slightest 
margin  to  the  enormous  difference  which  exists  even  between 
**  Hatha  and  Raj  Yog."  This  mistake  must  be  laid  at  the  door 
of  Mrs.  B. — the  able  editor  of  "  The  Theosophisf ;  who  fills  up 
her  volumes  with  the  practices  of  divers  Sannyasis  and  other 
*'  blessed  ones  "  from  the  plains,  without  ever  troubling  herself 
with  a  few  additional  lines  of  explanation. 

And  now,  to  still  more  important  matters.  Time  is  precious 
and  material  (I  mean  writing  material)  is  still  more  so.  *'  Pre- 
cipitation ' ' — in  your  case  having  become  unlawful ;  lack  of 
— whether  ink  or  paper — standing  no  better  chance  for 
*  *  Tamasha, ' '  and  I  being  far  away  from  home,  and  at  a  place 
where  a  stationer's  shop  is  less  needed  than  breathing  air,  our 
correspondence  threatens  to  break  very  abruptly,  unless  I 
manage  my  stock  in  hand  judiciously.  A  friend  promises  to 
supply  me  in  case  of  great  need  with  a  few  stray  sheets,  memento 
relics  of  his  grandfather's  will,  by  which  he  disinherited  him  and 
thus  made  his  "  fortune."     But,  as  he  never  wrote  one  line  but 


34  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

once,  he  says — for  the  last  eleven  years,  except  on  such  "  double 
super  fin  glad  "  made  at  Thibet  as  you  might  irreverently  mis- 
take for  blotting  paper  in  its  primitive  days,  and  that  the  will  is 
drawn  upon  a  like  material — we  might  as  well  turn  to  your  book 
at  once.  Since  you  do  me  the  favour  of  asking  my  opinion,  I 
may  tell  you  that  the  idea  is  an  excellent  one.  Theosophy  needs 
such  help,  and  the  results  will  be  what  you  anticipate  in  England 
as  well.     It  may  also  help  our  friends  in  Europe — generally. 

I  lay  no  restrictions  upon  your  making  use  of  anything  I  may 
have  written  to  you  or  Mr.  Hume,  having  full  confidence  in  your 
tact  and  judgment  as  to  what  should  be  printed  and  how  it  should 
be  presented.  I  must  only  ask  you  for  reasons  upon  which  I 
must  be  silent  (and  I  am  sure  you  will  respect  that  silence)  not  to 
use  one  single  ivord  or  passage  from  my  last  letter  to  you — the 
one  written  after  my  long  silence,  no  date,  and  the  first  one  for- 
warded to  you  by  our  "old  lady."  I  just  quoted  from  it  at 
page  4.  Do  me  the  favour,  if  my  poor  epistles  are  worth  pre- 
serving, to  lay  it  by  in  a  separate  and  sealed  envelope.  You  may 
have  to  unseal  it  only  after  a  certain  period  of  time  has  elapsed. 
As  to  the  rest — I  relinquish  it  to  the  mangling  tooth  of  criticism. 
Nor  would  I  interfere  with  the  plan  you  have  roughly  sketched 
out  in  your  mind.  But  I  would  strongly  recommend  you  in  its 
execution  to  lay  the  greatest  stress  upon  small  circumstances — 
(could  you  oblige  me  with  some  receipt  for  blue  ink?)  which  tend 
to  show  the  impossibility  of  fraud  or  conspiracy.  Reflect  well  how 
bold  a  thing  it  is  to  endorse  phenomena  as  adeptic  which  the 
Spiritsts.  have  already  stamped  as  proofs  of  mediumship  and 
skeptics  as  legerdemain.  You  should  not  omit  one  jot  or  tittle 
of  collateral  evidence  that  support  your  position,  something  you 
have  neglected  doing  in  your  **  A  "  letter  in  the  Pioneer.  For 
instance,  my  friend  tells  me  that  it  was  a  thirteenth  cup  and  the 
pattern  unmatchable,  in  Simla  at  least.  ^  The  pillow  was 
chosen  by  yourself — and  yet  the  word  **  pillow  *'  occurs  in  my  note 
to  you,  just  as  the  word  **  tree  "  or  anything  else  would  have 
been  substituted,  had  you  chosen  another  depository,  instead  of 
the  pillow.  You  will  find  all  such  trifles  serving  you  as  the  most 
powerful  shield  for  yourself  against  ridicule  and  sneers.  Then 
you  will  of  course,  aim  to  show  that  this  Theosophy  is  no  new 
candidate  for  the  world's  attention,  but  only  the  restatement  of 

iNoTE. — So,  at  least,  Mrs.  S.  says  :  I  myself  did  not  search  the  crockery 
shops  ;  so  too,  the  bottle  filled  with  water  I  filled  with  my  own  hand,  was  one 
of  the  four  only  that  the  servants  had  in  the  baskets,  and  these  four  bottles  had 
but  just  been  brought  back  empty  by  these  peons  from  their  fruitless  search 
after  water,  when  you  sent  them  to  the  little  brewery  with  a  note.  Hoping  to 
be  excused  for  the  interference  and  with  my  most  respectful  regards  to  the  lady. 
Yours,  etc..  The  "  Disinherited." 


'^THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  35 

principles  which  have  been  recognised  from  the  very  infancy  of 
manlcind.  The  historic  sequence  ought  to  be  succinctly  yet 
graphically  traced  through  the  successive  evolutions  of  philosophi- 
cal schools,  and  illustrated  with  accounts  of  the  experimental 
demonstrations  of  occult  power  ascribed  to  various  thau- 
maturgists.  The  alternate  breakings-out  and  subsidences  of 
mystical  phenomena ;  as  well  as  their  shifting  from  one  centre  to 
another  of  population,  show  the  conflicting  play  of  the  opposing 
forces  of  spirituality  and  animalism.  And  lastly  it  will  appear 
that  the  present  tidal-wave  of  phenomena,  with  its  varied  effects 
upon  human  thought  and  feeling,  made  the  revival  of  Theosophical 
enquiry  an  indispensable  necessity.  The  only  problem  to  solve  is 
the  practical  one,  of  how  best  to  promote  the  necessary  study,  and 
give  to  the  spiritualistic  movement  a  needed  upward  impulse.  It 
is  a  good  beginning  to  make  the  inherent  capabilities  of  the  inner, 
living  man  better  comprehended.  To  lay  down  the  scientific 
proposition  that  since  akrshu  (attraction)  and  Prshu  (repulsion) 
are  the  law  of  nature,  there  can  be  no  intercourse  or  relations 
between  clean  and  unclean  Souls — embodied  or  disembodied ;  and 
hence,  ninety-nine  hundredths  of  supposed  spiritual  communica- 
tions, are,  prima  facie  false.  Here  is  as  great  a  fact  to  work 
upon  as  you  can  find,  and  it  cannot  be  made  too  plain.  So,  while 
a  better  selection  might  have  been  made  for  the  Theosophist  in 
the  way  of  illustrative  anecdotes,  as,  for  instance,  well  authenti- 
cated historical  cases,  yet  the  theory  of  turning  the  minds  of 
phenomenalists  into  useful  and  suggestive  channels  away  from 
mere  mediumistic  dogmatism  was  the  correct  one. 

What  I  meant  by  the  '*  Forlorn  Hope"  was  that  where  one  re- 
gards the  magnitude  of  the  task  to  be  undertaken  by  our  theo- 
sophical volunteers,  and  especially  the  multitudinous  agencies 
arrayed,  and  to  be  arrayed,  in  opposition,  we  may  well  compare 
it  to  one  of  those  desperate  efforts  against  overwhelming  odds 
that  the  true  soldier  glories  to  attempt.  You  have  done  well  to 
see  the  **  large  purpose  "  in  the  small  beginning  of  the  T.S.  Of 
course  if  we  had  undertaken  to  found  and  erect  it  in  propria 
persona  very  likely  it  would  have  accomplished  more  and  made 
fewer  mistakes,  but  we  could  not  do  this  nor  was  it  the  plan  :  our 
two  agents  are  given  the  task  and  left — as  you  now  are — to  do 
the  best  they  could  under  the  circumstances.  And  much  has  been 
wrought.  Under  the  surface  of  Spiritualism  runs  a  current  that 
is  wearing  a  broad  channel  for  itself.  When  it  reappears  above 
ground  its  effects  will  be  apparent.  Already,  many  minds  like 
yours  are  pondering  the  question  of  occult  law — forced  upon  the 
thinking  public  by  this  agitation.  Like  you,  they  are  dissatisfied 
with  what  has  been  hitherto  attainable  and  clamour  for  better. 
Let  this — encourage  you. 


36  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

It  is  not  quite  accurate  that  by  having  such  minds  in  the  Society 
they  would  be  "  under  conditions  more  favourable  for  observa- 
tion "  for  us.  Rather  put  it,  that  by  the  act  of  joining  other 
sympathisers  in  this  organization  they  are  stimulated  to  effort  and 
incite  each  other  to  investigate.  Unity  always  gives  strength. 
And  since  occultism  in  our  day  resembles  a  ''  Forlorn  Hope,*' 
union  and  co-operation  are  indispensable.  Union  does  indeed 
imply  a  concentration  of  vital  and  magnetic  force  against  the 
hostile  currents  of  prejudice  and  fanaticism. 

I  wrote  a  few  words  in  the  Maratha  boy's  letter,  only  to  show 
you  that  he  was  obeying  orders  in  submitting  his  views  to  you. 
Apart  from  his  exaggerated  idea  about  huge  fees,  his  letter  is  in 
a  way  worth  considering.  For  Damodar  is  a  Hindoo — and  knows 
the  mind  of  his  people  at  Bombay ;  though  the  Bombay  Hindoos 
are  about  as  unspiritual  a  group  as  can  be  found  in  all  India. 
But,  like  the  devoted  enthusiastic  lad  he  is,  he  jumped  after  the 
misty  form  of  his  own  ideas  even  before  I  could  give  them  the 
right  direction.  All  quick  thinkers  are  hard  to  impress — in  a  flash 
they  are  out  and  away  in  "  full  cry,"  before  half  understanding 
what  one  wants  to  have  them  think.  This  is  our  trouble  with 
both  Mrs.  B.  and  O.  The  frequent  failure  of  the  latter  to  carry 
out  the  suggestions  he  sometimes  receives — even  when  written,  is 
almost  wholly  due  to  his  own  active  mentality  preventing  his  dis- 
tinguishing our  impressions  from  his  own  conceptions.  And 
Missus  B.'s  trouble  is  (apart  from  physical  ailments)  that  she 
sometimes  listens  to  two  or  more  of  our  voices  at  once;  e.g.,  this 
morning  while  the  **  Disinherited,"  whom  I  have  accommodated 
with  space  for  a  footnote — was  talking  with  her  on  an  important 
matter,  she  lent  an  ear  to  one  of  ours,  who  is  passing  through 
Bombay  from  Cyprus,  on  his  way  to  Thibet — and  so  got  both  in 
an  inextricable  confusion.  Women  do  lack  the  power  of  con- 
centration. 

And  now,  my  good  friend  and  co-worker — an  irremediable  paper- 
less condition  obliges  me  to  close.  Farewell,  until  you  return, 
unless  you  will  be  content  as  hitherto  to  pass  our  correspondence 
through  the  accustomed  channel.  Neither  of  us  would  prefer  this. 
But  until  authority  is  given  to  change  it  must  be  even  so.  Were 
she  to  die  to-day — and  she  is  really  sick — you  would  not  receive 
more  than  two,  or  at  most  three  more  letters  from  me  (through 
Damodar  or  Olcott,  or  through  already  established  emergent 
agencies),  and  then,  that  reservoir  of  force  being  exhausted — our 
parting  would  be  final.  However,  I  will  not  anticipate;  events 
might  bring  us  together  somewhere  in  Europe.  But  whether  we 
meet  or  not,  during  your  trip,  be  assured  that  my  personal  good 
wishes  will  attend  you.  Should  you  actually  need  now  and  again 
the  help  of  a  happy  thought  as  your  work  progresses,   it  may, 


^^THE  OCCULT  WORLD  SERIES''  37 

very  likely  be,   osmosed  into  your  head — if  sherry  bars  not  the 
way,  as  it  has  already  done  at  Allahabad. 

May  the  "  deep  Sea  "  deal  gently  with  you  and  your  house. 

Ever  yours, 

K.  H. 

P.S. — The  **  friend  "  of  whom  the  Lord  Lindsay  speaks  in  his 
letter  to  you,  is,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  a  true  skunk  mephitis,  who 
managed  to  perfume  himself  with  ess-bouquet  in  his  presence  dur- 
ing their  palmy  days  of  friendship,  and  so  avoided  being  recog- 
nised by  his  natural  stench.  It  is  Home — the  medium,  a  convert 
to  Roman  Catholicism,  then  to  Protestantism,  and  finally  to  the 
Greek  Church.  He  is  the  bitterest  and  most  cruel  enemy  O.  and 
Mad.  B.  have,  though  he  has  never  met  either  of  them.  For  a 
certain  time  he  succeeded  in  poisoning  the  Lord's  mind,  and 
prejudiced  him  against  them.  I  do  not  like  saying  anything  be- 
hind a  man's  back,  for  it  looks  like  back-biting.  Yet  in  view  ot 
some  future  events  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  warn  you,  for  this  one  is 
an  exceptionally  bad  man — hated  by  the  Spiritualists  and  mediums 
as  much  as  he  is  despised  by  those — who  have  learned  to  know 
him.  Yours  is  a  work  which  clashes  directly  with  his.  Though 
a  poor  sickly  cripple,  a  paralysed  wretch,  his  mental  faculties  are 
as  fresh  and  as  alive  as  ever  to  mischief.  He  is  no  man  to  stop 
before  a  slanderous  accusation — however  vile  and  lying.  So — 
beware.  K.  H. 


SECTION  II 

PHILOSOPHICAL  AND  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS 

1881-1883 

LETTER  No.   IX 

From  K.H.,  first  letter  received  on  return  to  India,  July  8th,   1881,  while 
staying  with  Madame  B.  at  Bombay  for  a  few  days. 

Welcome  good  friend  and  brilliant  author,  welcome  back  ! 
Your  letter  at  hand,  and  I  am  happy  to  see  your  personal  experi- 
ence with  the  "  Elect"  of  London  proved  so  successful.  But  I 
foresee,  that  more  than  ever  now,  you  will  become  an  incarnate 
note  of  interrogation.  Beware  !  If  your  questions  are  found 
premature  by  the  powers  that  be,  instead  of  receiving  my  answers 
in  their  pristine  purity  you  may  find  them  transformed  into  yards 
of  drivel.  I  am  too  far  gone  to  feel  a  hand  on  my  throat  when- 
ever trenching  on  the  limits  of  forbidden  topics ;  not  enough  to 
avoid  feeling  myself — uncomfortably  so — like  a  worm  of  yesterday 
before  our  "  Rock  of  Ages."  My  Cho-Khan.  We  must  all  be 
blind-folded  before  we  can  pass  onward  ;  or  else,  we  have  to  re- 
main outside. 

And  now,  what  about  the  book?  Le  quart  d'heure  de  Rabelais 
is  striking,  and,  finds  me,  if  not  quite  insolvent,  yet  quasi- 
trembling  at  the  idea  that  the  first  instalment  offered  may  be  found 
below  the  mark ;  the  price  claimed — inadequate  with  my  poor 
resources ;  myself  led  pro  bono  publico  to  trespass  beyond  the 
terrible — "  hitherto  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  further,"  and  the  angry 
wave  of  the  Cho-Khan's  wrath  swamping  me  blue  ink  and  all  !  I 
fondly  hope  you  will  not  make  me  lose  *'  my  situation." 

Quite  so.  For,  I  have  a  dim  notion  that  you  will  be  very 
impatient  with  me.  I  have  a  very  clear  notion  that  you  need  not 
be.  It  is  one  of  the  unfortunate  necessities  of  life  that  imperial 
needs  do  sometimes  force  one  apparently  to  ignore  the  claims  of 
friendship,  not  to  violate  one's  word,  but  to  put  off  and  lay  aside 
for  a  while  the  too  impatient  expectations  of  neophytes  as  of 
inferior  importance.  One  such  need  that  I  call  imperial  is  the 
need  of  your  future  welfare ;  the  realization  of  the  dream  dreamt 
by  you  in  company  with  S.M.  That  dream — shall  we  call  it  a 
vision? — was,  that  you,  and  Mrs.  K. — why  forget  the  Theos. 
Soc. ? — "are  all  parts  of  a  large  plan  for  the  manifestations  of 

38 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOKETICAL  TEACHINGS    39 

occult  philosophy  to  the  world."     Yes;  the  time  must  come,  and 
it  is  not  far — when  all  of  you  will  comprehend  aright  the  appar- 
ently contradictory  phases  of  such  manifestations ;  forced  by  the 
evidence  to  reconcile  them.     The  case  not  being  so  at  present, 
meanwhile — remember  :  it  is  because  we  are  playing  a  risky  game 
and  the  stakes  are  human  souls  that  I  ask  you  to  possess  yours 
in   patience.     Bearing  in   mind   that   I   have  to  look   after   your 
*'  Soul  "   and   mine  too,    I   propose  to  do   so   at  whatever  cost. 
Even  at  the  risk  of  being  misunderstood  by  you  as  I  was  by  Mr. 
Hume.     The  work  is  made  the  more  difficult  by  my  being  a  lonely 
labourer  in  the  field,  and  that,  as  long  as  I  fail  to  prove  to  my 
superiors  that  you,  at  least — mean  business ;  that  you  are  in  right 
good  earnest.     As  I  am  refused  higher  help,  so  will  you  fail  to 
easily  find  help  in  that  Society  in  which  you  move,  and  which  you 
try  to  move.   Nor  will  you  find,  for  a  certain  time  much  joy  in  those 
directly  concerned.     Our  old  lady  is   weak   and   her   nerves  are 
worked  to  a  fiddle  string;  so  is  her  jaded  brain.     H.S.O.  is  far 
away — in  exile — fighting  his  way  back  to  salvation — compromised 
more  than  you  imagine  by  his  Simla  indiscretions — and  establish- 
ing theosoph.    schools.     Mr.    Hume — who  once  promised   to  be- 
come a  champion  fighter  in  that  Battle  of  Light  against  Darkness 
— now  preserves  a  kind  of  armed  neutrality  wondrous  to  behold. 
Having  made  the  mirific  discovery  that  we  are  a  body  of  anti- 
diluvian  Jesuits  of  fossiles — self-crowned  with  oratorial  flourishes, 
he  rested  but  to  accuse  us  of  intercepting  his  letters  to  H.P.B.  ! 
However,  he  finds  some  comfort  by  thinking  "  what  a  jolly  argu- 
ment   he    shall    have    elsewhere    (Angel    Linnean    ornithological 
Society,  perhaps)  with  the  entity  which  is  represented  by  the  name 
Koothoomi."      Verily    has    our    very    intellectual,    once    mutual 
friend,  a  flood  of  words  at  his  command  which  would  suffice  to 
float  a  troop  ship  of  oratorious  fallacies.     Nevertheless — I  respect 
him.     .     .     .     But  who  next?     C.   C.   Massey?     But  then  he  is 
the  hapless  parent  of  about  half  a  dozen  of  illegitimate  brats.     He 
is    a    most    charming,    devoted    friend ;    a    profound    mystic ;    a 
generous,    noble-minded  man,    a  gentleman — as  they   say — every 
inch    of  him ;    tried   as   gold ;    every    requisite   for   a    student   of 
occultism,  but  none  for  an  adept,   my  good  friend.     Be  it  as  it 
may,  his  secret  is  his  own,  and  I  have  no  right  to  divulge  it.     Dr. 
Wyld? — a  christian  to  the  back-bone.     Hood? — a  sweet  nature, 
as  you  say ;  a  dreamer,  and  an  idealist  in  mystic  matters,  yet — no 
worker.     S.   Moses?     Ah  !  here  we  are.     S.M.  has  nearly  upset 
the  theosoph.   ark  set  afloat  three  years  back  :   and,   he  will  do 
his  level  best  to  do  it  over  again — our  Imperator  notwithstanding. 
You  doubt?     Listen. 

His  is  a  weird,  rare  nature.     His  occult  psychical  energies  are 
tremendous ;  but  they  have  lain  dormant,  folded   up  within  him 


40  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

and  unknown  to  himself,  when,  some  eight  years  or  so,  Imperator 
threw  his  eye  upon  him  and  bid  his  spirit  soar.  Since  then,  a  new 
life  has  been  in  him,  a  dual  existence,  but  his  nature  could  not 
be  changed.  Brought  up  as  a  theological  Student,  his  mind  was 
devoured  by  doubts.  Earher,  he  betook  himself  to  Mount  Athos, 
where,  immuring  himself  in  a  monastery,  he  studied  Greek 
Eastern  religion,  and  it  is  there  that  he  was  first  noticed  by  his 
'*  Spirit  guide  "  (  !  !)  Of  course,  Greek  casuistry  failed  to  solve 
his  doubts,  and  he  hurried  on  to  Rome, — popery  satisfying  him  as 
little.  From  thence  he  wandered  to  Germany  with  the  same 
negative  results.  Giving  up  dry  christian  theology  he  did  not  give 
up  its  presumable  founder  with  all  that.  He  needed  an  ideal  and 
he  found  it  in  the  latter.  For  him  Jesus  is  a  reality,  a  once 
embodied,  now  a  disembodied  Spirit,  who,  "  furnished  him  with 
an  evidence  of  his  personal  identity  " — he  thinks, — in  no  less  a 
degree  than  other  **  Spirits  " — Imperator  among  the  rest — have. 
Nevertheless,  neither  the  religions  of  Jesus  nor  yet  his  words,  as 
recorded  in  the  Bible  and  believed  by  S.M.  authentic — are  fully 
accepted  by  that  restless  Spirit  of  his.  Imperator,  on  whom  the 
same  fate  devolved  later  on,  fares  no  better.  His  mind  is  too 
positive.  Once  impressed  it  becomes  easier  to  efface  characters 
engraved  upon  titanium  than  impressions  made  upon  his  brain. 

Whenever  under  the  influence  of  Imperator — he  is  all  alive  to 
the  realities  of  Occultism,  and  the  superiority  of  our  Science  over 
Spiritualism.  As  soon  as  left  alone  and  under  the  pernicious 
guidance  of  those  he  firmly  believes  having  identified  with  dis- 
embodied Souls — all  becomes  confusion  again  !  His  mind  will 
yield  to  no  suggestions,  no  reasonings  but  his  own,  and  those  are 
all  for  Spiritualistic  theories.  When  the  old  theological  fetters 
had  dropped  off,  he  imagined  himself  a  free  man.  Some  months 
later  he  became  the  humble  slave  and  tool  of  the  **  Spirits  "  !  It 
is  but  when  standing  face  to  face  with  his  inner  Self  that  he 
realizes  the  truth  that  there  is  something  higher  and  nobler  than 
the  prittle-prattle  of  pseudo  Spirits.  It  was  at  such  a  moment 
that  he  heard  for  the  first  the  voice  of  Imperator,  and  it  was,  as 
he  himself  puts  it  :  "as  the  voice. of  God  speaking  to  his  inner 
Self."  That  voice  has  made  itself  familiar  to  him  for  years,  and 
yet  he  very  often  heeds  it  not.  A  simple  query  :  Were  Imper. 
what  he  believes,  nay — knows  him  to  be,  he  thinks, — would  not 
he  have  made  S.M.'s  will  completely  subservient  to  his  own  by 
this  time?  Alone  the  adepts,  i.e.  the  embodied  spirits — are  for- 
bidden by  our  wise  and  intransgressible  laws  to  completely  subject 
to  themselves  another  and  weaker  will, — that  of  free  born  man. 
The  latter  mode  of  proceeding  is  the  favourite  one  resorted  to 
by  the  "  Brothers  of  the  Shadow,"  the  Sorcerers,  the  Elementary 
Spooks,  and  as  an  isolated  exception — by  the  highest  Planetary 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    41 

Spirits,  those,  who  can  no  longer  err.  But  these  appear  on 
Earth  but  at  the  origin  of  every  new  human  kind  ;  at  the  junction 
of,  and  close  of,  the  two  ends  of  the  great  cycle.  And,  they  re- 
main with  man  no  longer  than  the  time  required  for  the  eternal 
truths  they  teach  to  impress  themselves  so  forcibly  upon  the  plas- 
tic mind  of  the  new  races  as  to  warrant  them  from  being  lost  or 
entirely  forgotten  in  ages  hereafter ;  by  the  forthcoming  genera- 
tions. The  mission  of  the  planetary  Spirit  is  but  to  strike  the 
Key-Note  of  Truth.  Once  he  has  directed  the  vibration  of  the 
latter  to  run  its  course  uninterruptedly  along  the  catenation  of  that 
race  and  to  the  end  of  the  cycle — the  denizen  of  the  highest  in- 
habited sphere  disappears  from  the  surface  of  our  planet — till  the 
following  "  resurrection  of  flesh."  The  vibrations  of  the  Primi- 
tive Truth  are  what  your  philosophers  name  "  innate  ideas." 

Imperator,  then,  had  repeatedly  told  him  that  "  in  occultism 
alone  he  should  seek  for,  and  will  find  a  phase  of  truth  not  yet 
known  to  him."  But  that  did  not  prevent  S.M.  at  all  from  turn- 
ing his  back  upon  occultism  whenever  a  theory  of  it  clashed  with 
one  of  his  own  preconceived  Spiritualistic  ideas.  To  him  medium- 
ship  appeared  as  the  Charter  of  his  Soul's  freedom,  as  resurrec- 
tion from  Spiritual  death.  He  had  been  allowed  to  enjoy  it  only 
so  far  as  it  was  necessary  for  the  confirmation  of  his  faith ; 
promised  that  the  abnormal  would  yield  to  the  normal ;  ordered  to 
prepare  for  the  time  when  the  Self  within  him  will  become  con- 
scious of  its  spiritual,  independent  existence,  will  act  and  talk  face 
to  face  with  its  Instructor,  and  will  lead  its  life  in  Spiritual 
Spheres  normally  and  without  external  or  internal  mediumship  at 
all.  And  yet  once  conscious  of  what  he  terms  "  external  Spirit 
action  "  he  recognised  no  more  hallucination  from  truth,  the  false 
from  the  real  :  confounding  at  times  Elementals  and  Elementaries, 
embodied  from  disembodied  Spirits,  though  he  had  been  oft 
enough  told  of,  and  warned  against  "  those  spirits  that  hover 
about  the  Earth's  sphere" — by  his  "Voice  of  God."  With  all 
that  he  firmly  believes  to  have  invariably  acted  under  Imper's 
direction,  and  that  such  spirits  as  have  come  to  him  came  by  his 
"  guide's  "  permission.  In  such  a  case  H.P.B.  was  there  by 
Imper's  consent?  and  how  do  you  reconcile  the  following  contra- 
dictions. Ever  since  1876,  acting  under  direct  orders,  she  tried 
to  awaken  him  to  the  reality  of  what  was  going  on  around  and  in 
him.  That  she  must  have  acted  either  according  to  or  against 
Imper's  will — he  must  know,  as  in  the  latter  case  she  might  boast 
of  being  stronger,  more  powerful  than  his  **  guide  "  who  never 
yet  protested  against  the  intrusion?  Now,  what  happens? 
Writing  to  her  from  Isle  of  Wight,  in  1876,  of  a  vision  lasting  for 
over  48  consecutive  hours  he  had,  and  during  which  he  walked 
about,  talked  as  usual,  but  did  not  preserve  the  slightest  remem- 


42  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

brance  of  anything  external,  he  asks  her  to  tell  him  whether  it 
was  a  vision  or  a  hallucination.  Why  did  he  not  ask  +I-R? 
**  You  can  tell  me  for  you  were  there/'  he  says.  ..."  You 
— changed,  yet  yourself — if  you  have  a  Self.  ...  I  suppose 
you  have,  but  into  that  I  do  not  pry."  ...  At  another  time 
he  saw  her  in  his  own  library  looking  at  him,  approaching,  and 
giving  him  some  masonic  signs  of  the  Lodge  he  knows.  He 
admits  that  he  "  saw  her  as  clearly  as  he  saw  Massey — who  was 
there."  He  saw  her  on  several  other  occasions,  and  sometimes 
knowing  it  was  H.P.B.  he  could  not  recognise  her.  "  You  seem 
to  me  from  your  appearance  as  from  your  letters  so  different  at 
times,  the  mental  attitudes  so  various  that  it  is  quite  conceivable 
to  me,  as  I  am  authoritatively  told,  that  you  are  a  bundle  of 
Entities.  ...  I  have  absolute  faith  in  you."  In  every  letter 
of  his  he  clamoured  for  a  "  living  Brother  "  to  her  unequivocal 
statement  that  there  was  one  already  having  charge  of  him,  he 
strongly  objected.  When  helped  to  get  free  from  his  too  material 
body,  absent  from  it  for  hours  and  days  sometimes  his  empty 
machine  run  during  that  period  from  afar  and  by  external,  living 
influence, — as  soon  as  back,  he  would  begin  labouring  under  the 
irradicable  impression  of  having  been  all  that  time  the  vehicle  for 
another  intelligence,  a  disembodied  not  embodied  Spirit,  truth 
never  once  flashing  across  his  mind.  "  Imperator,"  he  wrote  to 
her,  **  traverses  your  idea  about  mediumship.  He  says  there 
should  be  no  real  antagonism  between  the  medium  and  the  adept." 
Had  he  used  the  word  *'  Seer  "  instead  of  "  medium  "  the  idea 
would  have  been  rendered  more  correctly,  for  a  man  becomes 
rarely  an  adept  without  being  born  a  natural  Seer.  Then  again. 
In  September,  1875,  he  knew  nothing  of  the  Brothers  of  the 
Shadow — our  greatest,  most  cruel,  and — why  not  confess  it — our 
most  potential  Enemies.  In  that  year  he  actually  asked  the  old 
lady  whether  Bulwer  had  been  eating  underdone  pork  chops  and 
dreaming  when  he  described  **  that  hideous  Dweller  of  the 
Threshold."  "  Make  yourself  ready,"  she  answered — "  in  about 
twelve  months  more  you  will  have  to  face  and  fight  with  them." 
In  October,  1876,  they  had  begun  their  work  upon  him.  "  I  am 
fighting  " — he  wrote — "  a  hand  to  hand  battle  with  all  the  legions 
of  the  Fiend  for  the  past  three  weeks  my  nights  are  made  hideous 
with  their  torments,  temptations  and  foul  suggestions.  I  see 
them  all  around  glaring  at  me,  gabbling,  howling,  grinning ! 
Every  form  of  filthy  suggestion,  of  bewildering  doubt,  of  mad  and 
shuddering  fear  is  upon  me — I  can  understand  Zanoni's  Dweller 
now — I  have  not  wavered  yet — and  their  temptations  are  fainter, 
the  presence  less  near,  the  horror  less.     .     .     ." 

One  night  she  had  prostrated  herself  before  her  Superior,  one 
of  the  few  things  they  fear,  praying  him  to  wave  his  hand  across 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    43 

the  ocean,  lest  wS.M.  should  die,  and  the  Theos.  Soc.  lose  its  best 
subject.  "  He  must  be  tried  "  was  the  answer.  He  imagines 
that  +  Imper.  had  sent  the  tempters  because  he  S.M.  was  one 
of  those  Thomases  who  must  see;  he  would  not  believe  that  + 
could  not  help  their  coming.  Watch  over  him  he  did — he  could 
not  drive  them  away  unless  the  victim,  the  neophyte  himself, 
proved  the  strongest.  But  did  these  human  fiends  in  league  with 
the  Elementaries  prepare  him  for  a  new  life  as  he  thought  they 
would  ?  Embodiments  of  those  adverse  influences  which  beset  the 
inner  Self  struggling  to  be  free  and  to  progress,  they  would  never 
have  returned  had  he  successfully  conquered  them  by  asserting  his 
own  independent  will,  by  giving  up  his  mediumship,  his  passive 
will.     Yet  they  did. 

You    say    of 1 "  Imperator — is    certainly    not    his    (S.M.'s) 

astral  soul,  and  assuredly,  also,  he  is  not  from  a  lower  world  than 
our  own — not  an  earth-bound  Spirit."  No  one  ever  said  he  was 
anything  of  the  kind.  H.P.B.  never  told  you  he  was  S.M.'s  astral 
soul,  but  that  what  he  often  mistook  for  4-  was  his  own  higher 
Self,  his  divine  atma — not  linga  Sarira  or  astral  Soul,  or  the  Kama 
rupa  the  independent  doppelganger — again.  +  cannot  contradict 
himself;  -}-  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  truth,  so  often  misrepre- 
sented by  S.M.  ;  +  cannot  preach  the  occult  Sciences  and  then 
defend  mediumship,  not  even  in  that  highest  form  described  by 
his  pupil.  Mediumship  is  abnormal.  When  in  further  develop- 
ment the  abnormal  has  given  way  to  the  natural,  the  controls  are 
shaken  off,  and  passive  obedience  is  no  longer  required,  then  the 
medium  learns  to  use  his  will,  to  exercise  his  own  power,  and  be- 
comes an  adept.  The  process  is  one  of  development  and  the 
neophyte  has  to  go  to  the  end.  As  long  as  he  is  subject  to  occa- 
sional trance — he  cannot  be  an  adept.  S.M.  passes  the  two-thirds 
of  his  life  in  Trance. 

To  your  question — Is  Imperator  "  a  Planetary  Spirit  "  and 
"  may  a  Planetary  Spirit  have  been  humanly  incarnated?  "  I  will 
first  say  that  there  can  be  no  Planetary  Spirit  that  was  not  once 
material  or  what  you  call  human.  When  our  great  Buddha — the 
patron  of  all  the  adepts,  the  reformer  and  the  codifier  of  the  occult 
system,  reached  first  Nirvana  on  earth,  he  became  a  **  Planetary 
Spirit  " ;  i.e. — his  spirit  could  at  one  and  the  same  time  rove  the 
interstellar  spaces  in  full  consciousness,  and  continue  at  will  on 
Earth  in  his  original  and  individual  body.  For  the  divine  Self  had 
so  completely  disfranchised  itself  from  matter  that  it  could  create 
at  will  an  inner  substitute  for  itself,  and  leaving  it  in  the  human 
form  for  days,  weeks,  sometimes  years,  afi^ect  in  no  wise  by  the 
change  either  the  vital  principle  or  the  physical  mind  of  its  body. 
By  the  way  that  is  the  highest  form  of  adeptship  man  can  hope 
for  on  our  planet.     But  it  is  as  rare  as  the  Buddahs  themselves, 


44  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

the  last  Khobilgan  who  reached  it  being  Sang-Ko-Pa  of  Kokonor 
(XIV  Century),  the  reformer  of  esoteric  as  well  as  of  vulgar 
Lamaism.  Many  are  those  who  "break  through  the  egg-shell," 
few  who,  once  out  are  able  to  exercise  their  Nirira  namastaka 
fully,  when  completely  out  of  the  body.  Conscious  life  in  Spirit 
is  as  difficult  for  some  natures  as  swimming,  is  for  some  bodies. 
Though  the  human  frame  is  lighter  in  its  bulk  than  water,  and 
that  every  person  is  born  with  the  faculty,  so  few  develop  in  them- 
selves the  art  of  treading  water  that  death  by  drowning  is  the 
most  frequent  of  accidents.  The  planetary  Spirit  of  that  kind  (the 
Buddah  like)  can  pass  at  will  into  other  bodies — of  more  or  less 
etherialised  matter,  inhabiting  other  regions  of  the  universe. 
There  are  many  other  grades  and  orders,  but  there  is  no  separate 
and  eternally  constituted  order  of  Planetary  Spirits.  Whether 
Iniperator  is  a  **  planetary  "  embodied  or  disembodied,  whether 
he  is  an  adept  in  flesh  or  out  of  it,  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  say,  any 
more  than  he  would  himself  be  to  tell  S.M.  who  I  am,  or  may  be, 
or  even  who  H.P.B.  is.  If  he  himself  chooses  to  be  silent  on  that 
subject  S.M.  has  no  right  to  ask  me.  But  then  our  friend,  S.M. 
ought  to  know.  Nay  :  he  firmly  believes  he  does.  For  in  his 
intercourse  with  that  personage  there  came  a  time  when  not  satis- 
fied with  -'r  assurances,  or  content  to  respect  his  wishes  that  he, 
Imperator  &  Co.  should  remain  impersonal  and  unknown  save  by 
their  assumed  titles,  S.M.  wrestled  with  him,  Jacob  like,  for 
months  on  the  point  of  that  spirit's  identity.  He  was  the  Biblical 
flim-flam  all  over  again.  **  I  pray  thee  tell  me  thy  name  " — and 
though  answered  :  **  Wherefore  is  it  that  thou  dost  ask  after  my 
name?  " — what's  in  a  name?  He  allowed  S.M.  to  label  him  like 
a  portmanteau.  And  so,  he  is  at  rest  now,  for  he  has  **  seen  God 
face  to  face  ' ' ;  who,  after  wrestling,  and  seeing  that  he  prevailed 
not,  said  **  let  me  go  "  and  was  forced  to  come  to  the  terms 
offered  by  Jacob.  S.  Moses.  I  strongly  advise  you  for  your  own 
information  to  put  that  question  to  your  friend.  Why  should  he 
be  "  anxiously  awaiting  "  my  reply,  since  he  knows  all  about  -f  ? 
Did  not  that  **  Spirit  "  tell  him  a  story  one  day, — a  queer  story, 
something  what  he  may  not  divulge  about  himself  and  forbid  him 
ever  mentioning  it?  What  more  does  he  want?  The  fact,  that 
he  seeks  to  learn  through  me  the  true  nature  of  + ,  is  a  pretty 
good  proof  in  itself  that  he  is  not  as  sure  of  his  identity  as  he 
believes  he  is,  or  rather  would  make  believe  he  is.  Or  is  the 
question  a  blind? — which? 

I  may  answer  you,  what  I  said  to  G.  H.  Fechner?  one  day, 
when  he  wanted  to  know  the  Hindoo  view  on  what  he  had  written 
"  You  are  right; — every  diamond,  every  crystal,  every  plant  and 
star  has  its  own  individual  soul,  besides  man  and  animal — "  and, 
"  there  is  a  hierarchy  of  souls  fiom  the  lowest  forms  of  matter 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    45 

up  to  the  World  Soul  ";  but  you  are  mistaken  when  adding  to 
the  above  the  assurance  that  "  the  spirits  of  the  departed  hold 
direct  psychic  communication  with  Souls  that  are  still  connected 
with  a  human  body — for,  they  do  not."  The  relative  position  of 
the  inhabited  worlds  in  our  Solar  System  would  alone  preclude 
such  a  possibility.  For  I  trust  you  have  given  up  the  queer  idea 
— a  natural  result  of  early  Xtian  training — that  there  can  pos- 
sibly be  human  intelligences  inhabiting  purely  spiritual  regions? 
You  will  then  as  readily  understand  the  fallacy  of  the  christians 
— who  would  burn  immaterial  in  a  material  physical  hell — as  the 
mistake  of  the  more  educated  spiritualists,  who  lullaby  themselves 
with  the  thought  that  any  other  but  the  denizens  of  the  two  worlds 
immediately  interlinked  with  our  own  can  possibly  communicate 
with  them?  However  etherial  and  purified  of  gross  matter  they 
may  be,  the  pure  Spirits  are  still  subject  to  the  physical  and  uni- 
versal laws  of  matter.  They  cannot  if  even  they  would  span  the 
abyss  that  separates  their  worlds  from  ours.  They  can  he  visited 
in  Spirit,  their  Spirit  cannot  descend  and  reach  us.  They  attract, 
they  cannot  be  attracted,  their  Spiritual  polarity  being  an  insuper- 
able difficulty  in  the  way.  (By-the-bye  you  must  not  trust  Isis 
literally.  The  book  is  but  a  tentative  effort  to  divert  the  atten- 
tion of  the  Spiritualists  from  their  preconceptions  to  the  true  state 
of  things.  The  author  was  made  to  hint  and  point  out  the  true 
direction,  to  say  what  things  are  not,  not  what  they  are.  Proof 
readers  helping,  a  few  real  mistakes  have  crept  in  as  on  page  i, 
chapter  i,  volume  i,  where  divine  Essence  is  made  emanating 
from  Adam  instead  of  the  reverse.) 

Once  fairly  started  upon  that  subject ;  I  will  endeavour  to  ex- 
plain to  you  still  clearer  where  lies  the  impossibility.  You  will 
thus  be  answered  in  regard  to  both  Planetary  Spirits  and — seance 
room  **  Spirits.'* 

The  cycle  of  intelligent  existences  commences  at  the  highest 
worlds  or  planets — the  term  "  highest  "  meaning  here  the  most 
spiritually  perfect.  Evoluting  from  cosmic  matter — which  is 
akasa,  the  primeval  not  the  secondary  plastic  medium,  or  Ether 
of  Science  instinctively  suspected,  unproven  as  the  rest — man 
first  evolutes  from  this  matter  in  its  most  sublimated  state, 
appearing  at  the  threshold  of  Eternity  as  a  perfectly  Etherial — 
not  Spiritual  Entity,  say — a  Planetary  Spirit.  He  is  but  one 
remove  from  the  universal  and  Spiritual  World  Essence — the 
Anima  Mundi  of  the  Greeks,  or  that  which  humanity  in  its 
spiritual  decadence  has  degraded  into  a  mythical  personal 
God.  Hence,  at  that  stage,  the  Spiritman  is  at  best  an  active 
Power,  an  immutable,  therefore,  an  unthinking  Principle  (the  term 
"  immutable  "  being  again  used  here  but  to  denote  that  state  for 
the  time  being,  the  immutability  applying  here  but  to  the  inner 


46  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

principle  which  will  vanish  and  disappear  as  soon  as  the  speck 
of  the  material  in  him  will  start  on  its  cyclic  work  of  Evolutior 
and  transformation).  In  his  subsequent  descent,  and  in  propor- 
tion of  the  increase  of  matter  he  will  assert  more  and  more  his 
activity.  Now,  the  congeries  of  the  star-worlds  (including  oui 
own  planet  inhabited  by  intelligent  beings  may  be  likened  to  ar 
orb  or  rather  an  epicycloid  formed  of  rings  like  a  chain — worlds 
inter-linked  together,  the  totaHty  representing  an  imaginary,  end- 
less ring,  or  circle.  The  progress  of  man  throughout  the  whole— 
from  its  starting  to  its  closing  points  meeting  on  the  highest 
point  of  its  circumference — is  what  we  call  the  Maha  Yug  oi 
Great  Cycle,  the  Kuklos,  whose  head  is  lost  in  a  crown  of  Absolute 
Spirit,  and  its  lowset  point  of  circumference  in  absolute  matter — 
to  viz.  the  point  of  cessation  of  action  of  the  active  principle.  IJ 
using  a  more  familiar  term  we  call  the  Great  Cycle  the  Macro- 
kosm  and  its  component  parts  or  the  inter-linked  star  worlds 
Microkosms,  the  occultists'  meaning  in  representing  each  of  the 
latter  as  perfect  copies  of  the  former  will  become  evident.  The 
Great  is  the  Prototype  of  the  smaller  cycles  :  and  as  such,  eacl 
star  world  has  in  its  turn  its  own  cycle  of  Evolution  which  starts 
with  a  purer  and  ends  with  a  grosser  or  more  material  nature, 
As  they  descend,  each  world  presents  itself  naturally  more  anc 
more  shadowy,  becoming  at  the  **  antipodes  "  absolute  matter, 
Propelled  by  the  irresistible  cyclic  impulse  the  Planetary  Spirii 
has  to  descend  before  he  can  reascend.  On  his  way  he  has  tc 
pass  through  the  whole  ladder  of  Evolution,  missing  no  rung,  tc 
halt  at  every  star  world  as  he  would  at  a  station ;  and,  besides  the 
unavoidable  cycle  of  that  particular  and  every  respective  stai 
world  to  perform  in  it  his  own  **  life  cycle  "  to,  viz. — returning 
and  reincarnating  as  many  times  as 'he  fails  to  complete  his  rounc 
of  life  in  it,  as  he  dies  on  it  before  reaching  the  age  of  reason  as 
correctly  stated  in  Isis.  Thus  far  Mrs.  Kingsford's  idea  that  the 
human  Ego  is  being  reincarnated  in  several  successive  humar 
bodies  is  the  true  one.  As  to  its  being  reborn  "  in  animal  forms 
after  human  incarnation  it  is  the  result  of  her  loose  way  of  ex- 
pressing things  and  ideas.  Another  woman — all  over  again 
Why,  she  confounds  "  Soul  and  Spirit,"  refuses  to  discriminate 
between  the  animal  and  the  spiritual  Egos  the  ]iv-atma  (or  Linga 
Sharir)  and  the  Kama-Rupa  (or  Atma-Rupa),  two  as  differen 
things  as  body  and  mind,  and^mmd  and  thought  are  !  That  ii 
what  happens.  After  circling,  so  to  say,  along  the  arc  of  the 
cycle,  circling  along  and  within  it  (the  daily  and  yearly  rotatior 
of  the  Earth  is  as  good  an  illustration  as  any)  when  the  Spirit-mar 
reaches  our  planet,  which  is  one  of  the  lowest,  having  lost  at  ever} 
station  some  of  the  etherial  and  acquired  an  increase  of  materia 
nature,   both   spirit  and   matter  have  become  pretty   much   equi 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS   47 

librized  in  him.  But  then,  he  has  the  Earth's  cycle  to  perform; 
and,  as  in  the  process  of  involution  and  evolution  downward, 
matter  is  ever  striving  to  stifle  spirit,  when  arrived  to  the  lowest 
point  of  his  pilgrimage,  the  once  pure  Planetary  Spirit  will  be 
found  dwindled  to — what  Science  agrees  to  call  a  primitive  or 
Primordial  man — amidst  a  nature  as  primordial — speaking  geo- 
logically, for  physical  nature  keeps  pace  with  the  physiological  as 
well  as  the  spiritual  man  in  her  cyclic  career.  At  that  point  the 
great  Law  begins  its  work  of  selection.  Matter  found  entirely 
divorced  from  spirit  is  thrown  over  into  the  still  lower  worlds — 
into  the  sixth  **  Gate  "  or  **  way  of  rebirth  "  of  the  vegetable  and 
mineral  worlds,  and  of  the  primitive  animal  forms.  From  thence, 
matter  ground  over  in  the  workshop  of  nature  proceeds  soulless 
back  to  its  Mother  Fount ;  while  the  Egos  purified  of  their  dross 
are  enabled  to  resume  their  progress  once  more  onward.  It  is 
here,  then,  that  the  laggard  Egos  perish  by  the  millions.  It  is 
the  solemn  moment  of  the  "  survival  of  the  fittest,'*  the  annihila- 
tion of  those  unfit.  It  is  but  matter  (or  material  man)  which  is 
compelled  by  its  own  weight  to  descend  to  the  very  bottom  of  the 
"circle  of  necessity"  to  there  assume  animal  form;  as  to  the 
winner  of  that  race  throughout  the  worlds — the  Spiritual  Ego, 
he  will  ascend  from  star  to  star,  from  one  world  to  another, 
circling  onward  to  rebecome  the  once  pure  planetary  Spirit,  then 
higher  still,  to  finally  reach  its  first  starting  point,  and  from  thence 
— to  merge  into  mystery.  No  adept  has  ever  penetrated  beyond 
the  veil  of  primitive  Kosmic  matter.  The  highest,  the  most  per- 
fect vision  is  limited  to  the  universe  of  Form  and  Matter. 

But  my  explanation  does  not  end  here.  We  want  to  know  why 
it  is  deemed  supremely  difficult  if  not  utterly  impossible  for  pure 
disembodied  Spirits  to  communicate  with  men  through  mediums 
or  Phantomosophy.     I  say,  because  : — 

(a)  On  account  of  the  antagonistic  atmospheres  respectively 
surrounding  these  worlds  ; 

(h)  Of  the  entire  dissimilarity  of  physiological  and  spiritual  con- 
ditions ;  and — 

(c)  Because  that  chain  of  worlds  I  have  just  been  telling  you 
about,  is  not  only  an  epicycloid  but  an  elliptical  orbit  of  existences, 
having,  as  every  ellipse,  not  one  but  two  points — two  focij  which 
can  never  approach  each  other ;  Man  being  at  one  focus  of  it  and 
pure  Spirit  at  the  other. 

To  this  you  might  object.  I  can  neither  help  it,  nor  change 
the  fact,  but  there  is  still  another  and  far  mightier  impediment. 
Like  a  rosary  composed  of  white  and  black  beads  alternating  with 
each  other,  so  that  concatenation  of  worlds  is  made  up  of  worlds 
of  causes  and  worlds  of  effects,  the  latter — the  direct  result  pro- 
duced by  the  former.     Thus  it  becomes  evident  that  every  sphere 


48  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

of  Causes  and  our  earth  is  one — is  not  only  inter-linked  with,  and 
surrounded  by,  but  actually  separated  from  its  nearest  neighbour 
— the  higher  sphere  of  Causality — by  an  impenetrable  atmosphere 
(in  its  spiritual  sense)  of  effects  bordering  on,  and  even  inter- 
linking, never  mixing  with — the  next  sphere ;  for  one  is  active, 
the  other — passive,  the  world  of  causes  positive,  that  of  effects — 
negative.  This  passive  resistance  can  be  overcome  but  under 
conditions,  of  which  your  most  learned  spiritualists  have  not  the 
faintest  idea.  All  movement  is,  so  to  say  polar.  It  is  very  diffi- 
cult to  convey  my  meaning  to  you  at  this  point ;  but  I  will  go  to 
the  end.  I  am  aware  of  my  failure  to  bring  before  you  these — to 
us — axiomatical  truths — in  any  other  form  but  that  of  a  simple 
logical  postulate — if  so  much — they  being  capable  of  absolute  and 
unequivocal  demonstration,  but  to  the  highest  Seers.  But,  I'll 
give  you  food  for  thought  if  nothing  else. 

The  intermediary  spheres,  being  but  the  projected  shadows  of 
the  Worlds  of  Causes — are  negatived  by  the  last.  They  are  the 
great  halting  places,  the  stations  in  which  the  new  Self -Conscious 
Egos  to  be — the  Self-begotten  progeny  of  the  old  and  disembodied 
Egos  of  our  planet — are  gestated.  Before  the  new  phoenix,  re- 
born of  the  ashes  of  its  parent  can  soar  higher,  to  a  better,  more 
spiritual,  and  perfect  world — still  a  world  of  matter — it  has  to 
pass  through  the  process  of  a  new  birth,  so  to  say ;  and,  as  on  our 
earth,  where  the  two-thirds  of  infants  are  either  still-born  or  die 
in  infancy,  so  in  our  **  worlds  of  effects."  On  earth  it  is  still  the 
physiological  and  mental  defects,  the  sins  of  the  progenitors  which 
are  visited  upon  the  issue  :  in  that  land  of  shadows,  the  new  and 
yet  unconscious  Ego — foetus  becomes  the  just  victim  of  the  trans- 
gressions of  its  old  Self,  whose  karma — merit  and  demerit — will 
alone  weave  out  its  future  destiny.  In  that  world,  my  good 
friend,  we  find  but  unconscious,  self-acting,  ex-human  machines, 
souls  in  their  transition  state,  whose  dormant  faculties  and  indi- 
viduality lie  as  a  butterfly  in  its  chrysalis ;  and  Spiritualists  would 
yet  have  them  talk  sense  !  Caught  at  times,  into  the  vortex  of 
the  abnormal  '*  mediumistic  "  current,  they  become  the  uncon- 
scious echoes  of  thoughts  and  ideas  crystallized  around  those 
present.  Every  positive,  well-directed  mind  is  capable  of 
neutralizing  such  secondary  effects  in  a  seance  room.  The  world 
below  ours  is  worse  yet.  The  former  is  harmless  at  least ;  it  is 
more  sinned  against  by  being  disturbed,  than  sinning ;  the  latter 
allowing  the  retention  of  full  consciousness  as  being  a  hundred- 
fold more  material,  is  positively  dangerous.  The  notions  of  hell 
and  purgatory,  of  paradise  and  resurrections  are  all  caricatured, 
distorted  echoes  of  the  primeval  one  Truth,  taught  humanity  in 
the  infancy  of  its  races  by  every  First  Messenger — the  Plane- 
tary Spirit  mentioned  on  the  reverse  of  page  the  third — ^aod  whose 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    49 

remembrance  lingered  in  the  memory  of  man,  as  EIu  of  the 
Chaldees,  Osiris  the  Egyptian,  Vishnu,  the  first  Buddahs  and  so 
on. 

The  lower  world  of  effects  is  the  sphere  of  such  distorted 
Thoughts ;  of  the  most  sensual  conceptions,  and  pictures ;  of 
anthropomorphic  deities,  the  out-creations  of  their  creators,  the 
sensual  human  minds  of  people  who  have  never  out-grown  their 
brutehood  on  earth.  Remembering  thoughts  are  things — have 
tenacity,  coherence,  and  life,  that  they  are  real  entities — the  rest 
will  become  plain.  Disembodied,  the  creator  is  attracted  naturally 
to  its  creation  and  creatures ;  sucked  in — by  the  Maelstrom  dug 
out  by  his  own  hands.  .  .  .  But  I  must  pause,  for  volumes 
would  hardly  suffice  to  explain  all  that  was  said  by  me  in  this 
letter. 

In  reference  to  your  wonder  that  the  views  of  the  three  mystics 
'*  are  far  from  being  identical,"  what  does  the  fact  prove?  Were 
they  instructed  by  disembodied,  pure,  and  wise  Spirits — even  by 
those  of  one  remove  from  our  earth  on  the  higher  plane — would 
not  the  teachings  be  identical?  the  question  arising:  **  May  not 
Spirits  as  well  as  men  differ  in  ideas?  "  Well,  then,  their  teach- 
ing— aye — of  the  highest  of  them  since  they  are  the  **  guides  " 
of  the  three  great  London  Seers — will  not  be  more  authoritative 
than  those  of  mortal  men.  **  But,  they  may  belong  to  different 
spheres  ?  * '  Well ;  if  in  the  different  spheres  contradictory  doc- 
trines are  propounded,  these  doctrines  cannot  contain  the  Truth, 
for  Truth  is  One,  and  cannot  admit  of  diametrically  opposite 
views ;  and  pure  Spirits  who  see  it  as  it  is  with  the  veil  of  matter 
entirely  withdrawn  from  it — cannot  err.  Now,  if  we  allow  of 
different  aspects  or  portions  of  the  Whole  Truth  being  visible  to 
different  agencies  or  intelligences,  each  under  various  conditions, 
as  for  example  various  portions  of  the  one  landscape  develop 
themselves  to  various  persons,  at  various  distances  and  from 
various  standpoints — if  we  admit  the  fact  of  various  or  different 
agencies  (individual  Brothers  for  instance)  endeavouring  to  de- 
velop the  Egos  of  different  individuals,  without  subjecting  entirely 
their  wills  to  their  own  (as  it  is  forbidden)  but  by  availing  them- 
selves of  their  physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  idiosyncracies ;  if 
we  add  to  this  the  countless  cosmical  influences  which  distort  and 
deflect  all  efforts  to  achieve  definite  purposes  :  if  we  remember, 
moreover,  the  direct  hostility  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Shadow 
always  on  the  watch  to  perplex  and  haze  the  neophyte's  brain,  I 
think  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  how  even  a 
definite  spiritual  advance  may  to  a  certain  extent  lead  different 
individuals  to  apparently  different  conclusions  and  theories. 

Having  confessed  to  you,  that  I  had  no  right  to  interfere  with 
Imperator's  secrets  and  plans,  I  must  say  that  so  far,  however, 


50  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

he  has  proved  the  wisest  of  us.     Had  our  policy  been  the  same, 
had  I,  for  instance  allowed  you  to  infer  and  then  believe  (without 
stating-    anything    positive    myself)    that    I    was    a    *'  disembodied 
angel  " — a  Spirit  of  pellucid  electroidal  essence,  from  the  Super- 
Stellar  phantasmatical  zone — we  would  both  be  happier.     You — 
you  would  not  have  worried  your  head  as  to  "  whether  agencies 
of  that  sort  will   always   remain   necessary  ' '   and    I — would   not 
find  myself  under  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  having  to  refuse 
a  friend  a  **  personal  interview  and  direct  communication."     You 
might  have  implicitly  believed  anything  coming  from  me;  and  I 
would  have  felt  less  responsible  for  you  before  my   '*  guides." 
However,  time  will  show  what  may  or  may  not  be  done  in  that 
direction.     The  book  is  out,  and  we  have  to  patiently  wait  for 
the  results  of  that  first  serious  shot  at  the  enemy.     Art  magic  and 
Isis  emanating  from  women  and  as  it  was  believed  Spiritualists — 
could  never  hope  for  a  serious  hearing.     Its  effects  will  at  first 
be  disastrous  enough,   for  the  gun  will  recoil   and  the  shot  re- 
bounding will  strike  the  author  and  his  humble  hero,  who  are  not 
likely  to  flinch.     But  it  will  also  graze  the  old  lady,  reviving  in 
the   Anglo-Indian    press    last   year's   outcry.     The    Hersites    and 
literary  Phihstines  will  go  hard  to  work,   the  flings,   squibs  and 
coups  de  bee  falling  thick  upon  her — though  aimed  at  you  alone 
as  the   Editor  of  the   Pioneer  is  far  from  being  beloved   by  his 
colleagues  of  India,  Spiritualistic  papers  have  already  opened  the 
campaign  in  London  and  the  Yankee  editors  of  the  Organs  of 
"  Angels  "  will  follow  suit,  the  heavenly  "  Controls  "  ejaculating 
their  choicest  scandalum  magnatum.     Some  men  of  science — least 
of   all   their   admirers — the  parasites   who  bask   in   the   sun   and 
dream  they   are  themselves  that   sun — are  not  likely   to   forgive 
you  the  sentence — really  much  too  flattering — which  ranges  the 
comprehension  of  a  poor,  unknown  Hindoo  "  So  far  beyond  the 
science  and  philosophy  of  Europe,  that  only  the  broadest  minded 
representatives  of  either  will  be  able  to  realize  the  existence  of 
such  powers  in  man,  etc."     But  what  of  that?     It  was  all  fore- 
seen and  was  to  be  expected.     When   the  first  hum  and   ding- 
dong  of  adverse   criticism   is   hushed,   thoughtful   men   will   read 
and  ponder  over  the  book,  as  they  have  never  pondered  over  the 
most  scientific  efforts  of  Wallace  and  Crookes  to  reconcile  modern 
science  with  Spirits,  and — the  little  seed  will  grow  and  thrive. 

In  the  meantime  I  do  not  forget  my  promises  to  you.     As  soon 
as  installed  in  your  sleeping  chamber  I  will  try  and^     .... 
I  hope  to  be  permitted  to  do  so  much  for  you.     If,  for  genera- 
tions we  have  **  shut  out  the  world  from  the  Knowledge  of  our 
Knowledge,"  it  is  on  account  of  its  absolute  unfitness;  and  if, 

1  Here  six  lines  in  the  original  letter  have  been  completely  erased  apparently 
by   the  writer  thereof. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    51 

notwithstanding-  proofs  given,  it  still  refuses  yielding  to  evidence, 
then  will  we  at  the  End  of  this  cycle  retire  into  solitude  and  our 
kingdom  of  silence  once  more.  .  .  .  We  have  offered  to 
exhume  the  primeval  strata  of  man's  being,  his  basic  nature,  and 
lay  bare  the  wonderful  complications  of  his  inner  Self — something 
never  to  be  achieved  by  physiology  or  even  psychology  in  its 
ultimate  expression — and  demonstrate  it  scientifically.  It  matters 
not  to  them,  if  the  excavations  be  so  deep,  the  rocks  so  rough 
and  sharp,  that  in  diving  into  that,  to  them,  fathomless  ocean, 
most  of  us  perish  in  the  dangerous  exploration ;  for  it  is  we  who 
were  the  divers  and  the  pioneers  and  the  men  of  science  have  but 
to  reap  where  we  have  sown.  It  is  our  mission  to  plunge  and 
bring  the  pearls  of  Truth  to  the  surface ;  theirs — to  clean  and  set 
them  into  scientific  jewels.  And,  if  they  refuse  to  touch  the  ill- 
shapen,  oyster-shell,  insisting  that  there  is,  nor  cannot  be  any 
precious  pearl  inside  it,  then  shall  we  once  more  wash  our  hands 
of  any  responsibility  before  human-kind.  For  countless  genera- 
tions hath  the  adept  builded  a  fane  of  imperishable  rocks,  a  giant's 
Tower  of  Infinite  Thought,  wherein  the  Titan  dwelt,  and  will 
yet,  if  need  be,  dwell  alone,  emerging  from  it  but  at  the  end  of 
every  cycle,  to  invite  the  elect  of  mankind  to  co-operate  with  him 
and  help  in  his  turn  enlighten  superstitious  man.  And  we  will 
go  on  in  that  periodical  work  of  ours ;  we  will  not  allow  ourselves 
to  be  baffled  in  our  philanthropic  attempts  until  that  day  when  the 
foundations  of  a  new  continent  of  thought  are  so  firmly  built  that 
no  amount  of  opposition  and  ignorant  malice  guided  by  the 
Brethren  of  the  Shadow  will  be  found  to  prevail. 

But  until  that  day  of  final  triumph  someone  has  to  be  sacrificed 
— though  we  accept  but  voluntary  victims.  The  ungrateful  task 
did  lay  her  low  and  desolate  in  the  ruins  of  misery,  misappre- 
hension, and  isolation  :  but  she  will  have  her  reward  in  the  here- 
after for  we  never  were  ungrateful.  As  regards  the  Adept — not 
one  of  my  kind,  good  friend,  but  far  higher — you  might  have 
closed  your  book  with  those  lines  of  Tennyson's  **  Wakeful 
Dreamer  " — you  knew  him  not — 

"  How  could  ye  know  him?     Ye  were  yet  within 
The  narrower  circle  ;  he  had  well  nigh  reached 
The   last,    which,  with   a   region   of   white   flame, 
Pure  without  heat  into  a  larger  air 
Up-burning,  and  an  ether  of  black  blue. 
Invests  and  ingirds  all  other  lives.     .     .     ." 

I'll  close.     Remember  then  on  the  17th  of  July  and^     .     .     . 

,  to  you  will  become  the  sublimest  of  realities. 

Farewell. 

Sincerely  yours, 

K.  H. 

1  Here  again  six  lines  in  the  original  have  been  deleted. — Ed. 


52  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.   X^ 

Notes  by  K.H.  on  a  **  Preliminary  Chapter  "  headed  "  God** 
BY  Hume,  intended  to  preface  an  exposition  of  Occult  Phil- 
osophy (abridged). 

Received  at  Simla,  1881. 

Neither  our  philosophy  nor  ourselves  believe  in  a  God,  least  of 
all  in  one  whose  pronoun  necessitates  a  capital  H.  Our 
philosophy  falls  under  the  definition  of  Hobbes.  It  is  pre- 
eminently the  science  of  effects  by  their  causes  and  of  causes  by 
their  effects,  and  since  it  is  also  the  science  of  things  deduced 
from  first  principle,  as  Bacon  defines  it,  before  we  admit  any  such 
principle  we  must  know  it,  and  have  no  right  to  admit  even  its 
possibility.  Your  whole  explanation  is  based  upon  one  solitary 
admission  made  simply  for  argument's  sake  in  October  last.  You 
were  told  that  our  knowledge  was  limited  to  this  our  solar 
system  :  ergo  as  philosophers  who  desired  to  remain  worthy  of 
the  name  we  could  not  either  deny  or  affirm  the  existence  of  what 
you  termed  a  supreme,  omnipotent,  intelligent  being  of  some  sort 
beyond  the  limits  of  that  solar  system.  But  if  such  an  existence 
is  not  absolutely  impossible,  yet  unless  the  uniformity  of  nature's 
law  breaks  at  those  limits  we  maintain  that  it  is  highly  improb- 
able. Nevertheless  we  deny  most  emphatically  the  position  of 
agnosticism  in  this  direction,  and  as  regards  the  solar  system. 
Our  doctrine  knows  no  compromises.  Neither  affirms  or  denies, 
for  it  never  teaches  but  that  which  it  knows  to  be  the  truth. 
Therefore,  we  deny  God  both  as  philosophers  and  as  Buddhists. 
We  know  there  are  planetary  and  other  spiritual  lives,  and  we 
know  there  is  in  our  system  no  such  thing  as  God,  either  personal 
or  impersonal.  Parabrahm  is  not  a  God,  but  absolute  immutable 
law,  and  Iswar  is  the  effect  of  Avidya  and  Maya,  ignorance  based 
upon  the  great  delusion.  The  word  **  God  "  was  invented  to 
designate  the  unknown  cause  of  those  effects  which  man  has 
either  admired  or  dreaded  without  understanding  them,  and  since 
we  claim  and  that  we  are  able  to  prove  what  we  claim — i.e.  the 
knowledge  of  that  cause  and  causes  we  are  in  a  position  to 
maintain   there  is   no   God   or   Gods   behind   them. 

The  idea  of  God  is  not  an  innate  but  an  acquired  notion,  and 
we  have  but  one  thing  in  common  with  theologies — we  reveal  the 
infinite.  But  while  we  assign  to  all  the  phenomena  that  proceeds 
from  the  infinite  and  limitless  space,  duration  and  motion, 
material,  natural,  sensible  and  known  (to  us  at  least)  cause,  the 
theists  assign  them  spiritual,  super-natural  and  unintelligible  and 

1  Transcribed  from  a  copy  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  handwriting. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    53 

un-known   causes.     The   God   of  the   Theologians   is   simply    an 
imaginary  power,   un  loup  garou  as  d'Holbach   expressed   it — a 
power  which  has  never  yet  manifested  itself.     Our  chief  aim  is  to 
deliver  humanity  of  this  nightmare,  to  teach  man  virtue  for  its 
own  sake,  and  to  walk  in  life  relying  on  himself  instead  of  lean- 
ing  on   a   theological   crutch,    that   for   countless    ages  was   the 
direct  cause  of  nearly  all  human  misery.     Pantheistic  we  may  be 
called — agnostic  never.     If  people  are  willing  to  accept  and  to 
regard   as  God  our  one  Life  immutable  and   unconscious   in  its 
eternity   they   may   do   so   and    thus   keep  to   one   more   gigantic 
misnomer.     But   then   they  will  have  to   say  with   Spinoza   that 
there  is  not  and  that  we  cannot  conceive  any  other  substance  than 
God ;  or  as  that  famous  and  unfortunate  philosopher  says  in  his 
fourteenth  proposition,   "  praetu  Deum  nequi  dari  nequi  concepi 
potest   substantia  " — and    thus   become   pantheists.     Who   but   a 
Theologian    nursed    on    mystery    and    the    most    absurd    super- 
naturalism  can  imagine  a  self  existent  being  of  necessity  infinite 
and  omnipresent  outside  the  manifested  boundless  universe.     The 
word  infinite  is  but  a  negative  which  excludes  the  idea  of  bounds. 
It  is  evident  that  a  being  independent  and  omnipresent  cannot  be 
limited  by  anything  which  is  outside  of  himself;  that  there  can 
be  nothing  exterior  to  himself — not  even  vacuum,  then  where  is 
there  room  for  matter?  for  that  manifested  universe  even  though 
the  latter  limited.     If  we  ask   the  theist  is  your   God   vacuum, 
space  or  matter,  they  will  reply  no.     And  yet  they  hold  that  their 
God  penetrates  matter  though  he  is  not  himself  matter.     When 
we  speak  of  our  One  Life  we  also  say  that  it  penetrates,  nay  is 
the  essence  of  every  atom  of  matter ;   and  that  therefore  it  not 
only  has  correspondence  with  matter  but  has   all  its  properties 
likewise,  etc.,  hence  is  material,  is  matter  itself.     How  can  intel- 
ligence proceed  to  ernanate  from  non-intelligence — you  kept  ask- 
ing last  year.     How  could  a  highly  intelligent  humanity,  man  the 
crown   of  reason,    be  evolved  out  of  blind   unintelligent  law   or 
force  !     But  once  we  reason  on  that  line,  I  may  ask  in  my  turn, 
how  could  congenital  idiots,  non-reasoning  animals,  and  the  rest 
of  **  creation  "  have  been  created  by  or  evoluted  from,  absolute 
Wisdom,  if  the  latter  is  a  thinking  intelligent  being,  the  author 
and    ruler    of    the    Universe?     How?    says    Dr.    Clarke    in    his 
examination  of  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  Divinity.     **  God 
who  hath  made  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see?     God  who  hath  made 
the   ear   shall   he   not  hear?  "     But   according   to   this   mode   of 
reasoning  they   would   have   to   admit  that   in   creating  an   idiot 
God  is  an  idiot ;  that  he  who  made  so  many  irrational  beings,  so 
many  physical  and  moral  monsters,  must  be  an  irrational  being. 
We  are  not  Adwaitees,  but  our  teaching  respecting  the  one  life 
is  identical  with  that  of  the  Adwaitee  with  regard  to  Parabrahm. 


54  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

And  no  true  philosophically  brained  Adwaitee  will  ever  call  him- 
self an  agnostic,  for  he  knows  that  he  is  Parabrahm  and  identical 
in  every  respect  with  the  universal  life  and  soul — the  macrocosm 
is  the  microcosm  and  he  knows  that  there  is  no  God  apart  from 
himself,  no  creator  as  no  being.  Having  found  Gnosis  we  can- 
not turn  our  backs  on  it  and  become  agnostics. 

Were  we  to  admit  that  even  the  highest  Dyan  Chohans  are 
liable  to  err  under  a  delusion,  then  there  would  be  no  reality  for 
us  indeed  and  the  occult  sciences  would  be  as  great  a  chimera  as 
that  God.  If  there  is  an  absurdity  in  denying  that  which  we  do 
not  know  it  is  still  more  extravagant  to  assign  to  it  unknown 
laws. 

According  to  logic  *'  nothing  "  is  that  of  which  everything  can 
truly  be  denied  and  nothing  can  truly  be  affirmed.  The  idea 
therefore  either  of  a  finite  or  infinite  nothing  is  a  contradiction  in 
terms.  And  yet  according  to  theologians  "  God  the  self  existent 
being  is  a  most  simple,  unchangeable,  incorruptible  being ;  with- 
out parts,  figure,  motion,  divisibility,  or  any  other  such  proper- 
ties as  we  find  in  matter.  For  all  such  things  so  plainly  and 
necessarily  imply  finiteness  in  their  very  notion  and  are  utterly 
inconsistent  with  complete  infinity."  Therefore  the  God  here 
offered  to  the  adoration  of  the  XlXth  century  lacks  every  quality 
upon  which  man's  mind  is  capable  of  fixing  any  judgment.  What 
is  this  in  fact  but  a  being  of  whom  they  can  affirm  nothing  that  is 
not  instantly  contradicted.  Their  own  Bible  their  Revelation 
destroys  all  the  moral  perceptions  they  heap  upon  him  unless  in- 
deed they  call  those  qualities  perfections  that  every  other  man's 
reason  and  common  sense  call  imperfections,  odious  vices  and 
brutal  wickedness.  Nay  more  he  who  reads  our  Buddhist  scrip- 
tures written  for  the  superstitious  masses  will  fail  to  find  in 
them  a  demon  so  vindictive,  unjust,  so  cruel  and  so  stupid  as  the 
celestial  tyrant  upon  whom  the  Christians  prodigally  lavish  their 
servile  worship  and  on  whom  their  theologians  heap  those  perfec- 
tions that  are  contradicted  on  every  page  of  their  Bible.  Truly 
and  veritably  your  theology  has  created  her  God  but  to  destroy 
him  piecemeal.  Your  church  is  the  fabulous  Saturn,  who  begets 
children  but  to  devour  them. 

(The  Universal  Mind) — A  few  reflections  and  arguments  ought 
to  support  every  new  idea — for  instance  we  are  sure  to  be  taken 
to  task  for  the  following  apparent  contradictions,  (i)  We  deny 
the  existence  of  a  thinking  conscious  God,  on  the  grounds  that 
such  a  God  must  either  be  conditioned,  limited  and  subject  to 
change,  therefore  not  infinite,  or  (2)  if  he  is  represented  to  us  as 
an  eternal  unchangeable  and  independent  being,  with  not  a  par- 
ticle of  nature  in  him,  then  we  answer  that  it  is  no  being  but  an 
immutable  blind   principle,   a  law.     And   yet,   they  will  say,   we 


I 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    55 

believe  in  Dyans,  or  Planetaries  ("  spirits  "  also),  and  endow 
them  with  a  universal  mind,  and  this  must  be  explained. 

Our  reasons  may  be  briefly  summed  up  thus  : 

(i)  We  deny  the  absurd  proposition  that  there  can  be,  even  in 
a  boundless  and  eternal  universe — two  infinite  eternal  and  omni- 
present existences. 

(2)  Matter  we  know  to  be  eternal,  i.e.,  having  had  no  begin- 
ning (a)  because  matter  is  Nature  herself  (b)  because  that  which 
cannot  annihilate  itself  and  is  indestructible  exists  necessarily — 
and  therefore  it  could  not  begin  to  be,  nor  can  it  cease  to  be 
(c)  because  the  accumulated  experience  of  countless  ages,  and  that 
of  exact  science  show  to  us  matter  (or  nature)  acting  by  her  own 
peculiar  energy,  of  which  not  an  atom  is  ever  in  an  absolute  state 
of  rest,  and  therefore  it  must  have  always  existed,  i.e.,  its 
materials  ever  changing  form,  combinations  and  properties,  but  its 
principles  or  elements  being  absolutely  indestructible. 

(3)  As  to  God — since  no  one  has  ever  or  at  any  time  seen  him 
or  it — unless  he  or  it  is  the  very  essence  and  nature  of  this  bound' 
less  eternal  matter,  its  energy  and  motion,  we  cannot  regard  him 
as  either  eternal  or  infinite  or  yet  self  existing.  We  refuse  to 
admit  a  being  or  an  existence  of  which  we  know  absolutely 
nothing,  because  (a)  there  is  no  room  for  him  in  the  presence  of 
that  matter  whose  undeniable  properties  and  qualities  we  know 
thoroughly  well  (b)  because  if  he  or  it  is  but  a  part  of  that  matter 
it  is  ridiculous  to  maintain  that  he  is  the  mover  and  ruler  of  that 
of  which  he  is  but  a  dependent  part  and  (c)  because  if  they  tell  us 
that  God  is  a  self  existent  pure  spirit  independent  of  matter — an 
extra  cosmic  deity,  we  answer  that  admitting  the  possibility  of 
such  an  impossibility,  i.e.,  his  existence,  we  yet  hold  that  a  purely 
immaterial  spirit  cannot  be  an  intelligent  conscious  ruler  nor  can 
he  have  any  of  the  attributes  bestowed  upon  him  by  theology 
and  thus  such  a  God  becomes  again  but  a  blind  force.  Intel- 
ligence as  found  in  our  Dyan  Chohans,  is  a  faculty  that  can 
appertain  but  to  organized  or  animated  being — however  imponder- 
able or  rather  invisible  the  materials  of  their  organizations.  In- 
telligence requires  the  necessity  of  thinking ;  to  think  one  must 
have  ideas ;  ideas  suppose  senses  which  are  physical  material,  and 
how  can  anything  material  belong  to  pure  spirit?  If  it  be 
objected  that  thought  cannot  be  a  property  of  matter,  we  will  ask 
the  reason  why?  We  must  have  an  unanswerable  proof  of  this 
assumption,    before   we    can    accept    it.     Of    the    theologian    we 

ould  enquire  what  was  there  to  prevent  his  God,  since  he  is  the 
alleged  creator  of  all — to  endow  matter  with  the  faculty  of 
thought ;  and  when  answered  that  evidently  it  has  not  pleased 
Him  to  do  so,  that  it  is  a  mystery  as  well  as  an  impossibility,  we 
would  insist  upon  being  told  why  it  is  more  impossible  that  matter 


56  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

should  produce  spirit  and  thought,  than  spirit  or  the  thought  of 
God  should  produce  and  create  matter. 

We  do  not  bow  our  heads  in  the  dust  before  the  mystery  of 
mind — for  we  have  solved  it  ages  ago.  Rejecting  with  contempt 
the  theistic  theory  we  reject  as  much  the  automaton  theory,  teach- 
ing that  states  of  consciousness  are  produced  by  the  marshalling 
of  the  molecules  of  the  brain ;  and  we  feel  as  little  respect  for 
that  other  hypothesis — the  production  of  molecular  motion  by 
consciousness.  Then  what  do  we  believe  in?  Well,  we  believe 
in  the  much  laughed  at  phlogiston  (see  article  "  What  is  force 
and  what  is  matter?"  Theosophist,  September),  and  in  what 
some  natural  philosophers  would  call  nisus  the  incessant  though 
perfectly  imperceptible  (to  the  ordinary  senses)  motion  or  efforts 
our  body  is  making  on  another — the  pulsations  of  inert  matter — 
its  life.  The  bodies  of  the  Planetary  spirits  are  formed  of  that 
which  Priestley  and  others  called  Phlogiston  and  for  which  we 
have  another  name — this  essence  in  its  highest  seventh  state 
forming  that  matter  of  which  the  organisms  of  the  highest  and 
purest  Dyans  are  composed,  and  in  its  lowest  and  densest  form 
(so  impalpable  yet  that  science  calls  it  energy  and  force)  serving 
as  a  cover  to  the  Planetaries  of  the  ist  or  lowest  degree.  In  other 
words  we  believe  in  matter  alone,  in  matter  as  visible  nature  and 
matter  in  its  invisibility  as  the  invisible  omnipresent  omnipotent 
Proteus  with  its  unceasing  motion  which  is  its  life,  and  which 
nature  draws  from  herself  since  she  is  the  great  whole  outside  of 
which  nothing  can  exist.  For  as  Bellinger  truly  asserts  **  motion 
is  a  manner  of  existence  that  flows  necessarily  out  of  the  essence 
of  matter ;  that  matter  moves  by  its  own  peculiar  energies ;  that 
its  motion  is  due  to  the  force  which  is  inherent  in  itself;  that  the 
variety  of  motion  and  the  phenomena  that  result  proceed  from  the 
diversity  of  the  properties  of  the  qualities  and  of  the  combinations 
which  are  originally  found  in  the  primitive  matter  "  of  which 
nature  is  the  assemblage  and  of  which  your  science  knows  less 
than  one  of  our  Tibetan  Yak-drivers  of  Kant's  metaphysics. 

The  existence  of  matter  then  is  a  fact ;  the  existence  of  motion 
is  another  fact,  their  self  existence  and  eternity  or  indestruct- 
ibility is  a  third  fact.  And  the  idea  of  pure  spirit  as  a  Being  or 
an  Existence — give  it  whatever  name  you  will — is  a  chimera,  a 
gigantic  absurdity. 

Our  ideas  on  Evil.  Evil  has  no  existence  per  se  and  is  but  the 
absence  of  good  and  exists  but  for  him  who  is  made  its  victim. 
It  proceeds  from  two  causes, — and  no  more  than  good  is  it  an 
independent  cause  in  nature.  Nature  is  destitute  of  goodness  or 
malice;  she  follows  only  immutable  laws  when  she  either  gives 
life  and  joy,  or  sends  suffering  and  death,  and  destroys  what  she 
has  created.     Nature  has  an  antidote  for  every  poison  and  her 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    57 

laws  a  reward  for  every  suffering.  The  butterfly  devoured  by  a 
bird  becomes  that  bird,  and  the  little  bird  killed  by  an  animal 
gfoes  into  a  higher  form.  It  is  the  blind  law  of  necessity  and  the 
eternal  fitness  of  things,  and  hence  cannot  be  called  Evil  in 
Nature.  The  real  evil  proceeds  from  human  intelligence  and  its 
origin  rests  entirely  with  reasoning  man  who  dissociates  himself 
from  Nature.  Humanity  then  alone  is  the  true  source  of  evil. 
Evil  is  the  exaggeration  of  good,  the  progeny  of  human  selfish- 
ness and  greediness.  Think  profoundly  and  you  will  find  that 
save  death — which  is  no  evil  but  a  necessary  law,  and  accidents 
which  will  always  find  their  reward  in  a  future  life — the  origin  of 
every  evil  whether  small  or  great  is  in  human  action,  in  man 
whose  intelligence  makes  him  the  one  free  agent  in  Nature.  It 
is  not  nature  that  creates  diseases,  but  man.  The  latter's  mission 
and  destiny  in  the  economy  of  nature  is  to  die  his  natural  death 
brought  by  old  age ;  save  accident,  neither  a  savage  nor  a  wild 
(free)  animal  die  of  disease.  Food,  sexual  relations,  drink,  are 
all  natural  necessities  of  life ;  yet  excess  in  them  brings  on 
disease,  misery,  suffering,  mental  and  physical,  and  the  latter 
are  transmitted  as  the  greatest  evils  to  future  generations,  the 
progeny  of  the  culprits.  Ambition,  the  desire  of  securing  happi- 
ness and  comfort  for  those  we  love,  by  obtaining  honours  and 
riches,  are  praiseworthy  natural  feelings  but  when  they  trans- 
form man  into  an  ambitious  cruel  tyrant,  a  miser,  a  selfish  egotist 
they  bring  manifold  misery  on  those  around  him  ;  on  nations  as 
well  as  on  individuals.  All  this  then — food,  wealth,  ambition, 
and  a  thousand  other  things  we  have  to  leave  unmentioned,  be- 
comes the  source  and  cause  of  evil  whether  in  its  abundance  or 
through  its  absence.  Become  a  glutton,  a  debauchee,  a  tyrant, 
and  you  become  the  originator  of  diseases,  of  human  suffering 
and  misery.  Lack  all  this  and  you  starve,  you  are  despised  as 
a  nobody  and  the  majority  of  the  herd,  your  fellow  men,  make  of 
you  a  sufferer  your  whole  life.  Therefore  it  is  neither  nature  nor 
an  imaginary  Deity  that  has  to  be  blamed,  but  human  nature 
made  vile  by  selfishness.  Think  well  over  these  few  words ;  work 
out  every  cause  of  evil  you  can  think  of  and  trace  it  to  its  origin 
and  you  will  have  solved  one-third  of  the  problem  of  evil.  And 
now,  after  making  due  allowance  for  evils  that  are  natural  and 
cannot  be  avoided, — and  so  few  are  they  that  I  challenge  the 
whole  host  of  Western  metaphysicians  to  call  them  evils  or  to 
trace  them  directly  to  an  independent  cause — I  will  point  out  the 
greatest,  the  chief  cause  of  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  evils  that 
pursue  humanity  ever  since  that  cause  became  a  power.  It  is 
religion  under  whatever  form  and  in  whatever  nation.  It  is  the 
sacerdotal  caste,  the  priesthood  and  the  churches.  It  is  in  those 
illusions  that  man  looks  upon  as  sacred,  that  he  has  to  search  out 


58  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

the  source  of  that  multitude  of  evils  which  is  the  great  curse  of 
humanity  and  that  almost  overwhelms  mankind.  Ignorance 
created  Gods  and  cunning  took  advantage  of  opportunity.  Look 
at  India  and  look  at  Christendom  and  Islam,  at  Judaism  and 
Fetichism.  It  is  priestly  imposture  that  rendered  these  Gods  so 
terrible  to  man ;  it  is  religion  that  makes  of  him  the  selfish  bigot, 
the  fanatic  that  hates  all  mankind  out  of  his  own  sect  without 
rendering  him  any  better  or  more  moral  for  it.  It  is  belief  in 
God  and  Gods  that  makes  two-thirds  of  humanity  the  slaves  of 
a  handful  of  those  who  deceive  them  under  the  false  pretence  of 
saving  them.  Is  not  man  ever  ready  to  commit  any  kind  of  evil 
if  told  that  his  God  or  gods  demand  the  crime?  ;  voluntary  victim 
of  an  illusionary  God,  the  abject  slave  of  his  crafty  ministers. 
The  Irish  Italian  and  Slavonian  peasant  will  starve  himself  and 
see  his  family  starving  and  naked  to  feed  and  clothe  his  padre 
and  pope.  For  two  thousand  years  India  groaned  under  the 
weight  of  caste,  Brahmins  alone  feeding  on  the  fat  of  the  land, 
and  to-day  the  followers  of  Christ  and  those  of  Mahomet  are 
cutting  each  other's  throats  in  the  names  of  and  for  the  greater 
glory  of  their  respective  myths.  Remember  the  sum  of  human 
misery  will  never  be  diminished  unto  that  day  when  the  better 
portion  of  humanity  destroys  in  the  name  of  Truth,  morality,  and 
universal  charity,  the  altars  of  these  false  gods. 

If  it  is  objected  that  we  too  have  temples  we  too  have  priests 
and  that  our  lamas  also  live  on  charity  ...  let  them  know 
that  the  objects  above  named  have  in  common  with  their  Western 
equivalents  but  the  name.  Thus  in  our  temples  there  is  neither 
a  god  nor  gods  worshipped,  only  the  thrice  sacred  memory  of  the 
greatest  as  the  holiest  man  that  ever  lived.  If  our  lamas  to 
honour  the  fraternity  of  the  Bhikkus  established  by  our  blessed 
master  himself,  go  out  to  be  fed  by  the  laity,  the  latter  often  to 
the  number  of  5  to  25,000  is  fed  and  taken  care  of  by  the 
Lamgha  (the  fraternity  of  lamaic  monks)  the  lamassery  providing 
for  the  wants  of  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  afflicted.  Our  lamas 
accept  food,  never  money,  and  it  is  in  those  temples  that  the 
origin  of  evil  is  preached  and  impressed  upon  the  people.  There 
they  are  taught  the  four  noble  truths — ariya  sakka,  and  the  chain 
of  causation,  (the  12  nid^nas)  gives  them  a  solution  of  the 
problem  of  the  origin  and  destruction  of  suffering. 

Read  the  Mahavagga  and  try  to  understand  not  with  the  pre- 
judiced Western  mind  but  the  spirit  of  intuition  and  truth  what 
the  Fully  Enlightened  one  says  in  the  ist  Khandhaka.  Allow  me 
to  translate  it  for  you. 

**  At  the  time  the  blessed  Buddha  was  at  Uruvella  on  the 
shores  of  the  river  Nerovigara  as  he  rested  under  the  Boddhi 
tree  of  wisdom  after  he  had  become  Sambuddha,  at  the  end 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    59 

I  of  the  seventh  day  having  his  mind  fixed  on  the  chain  of 
causation  he  spake  thus  :  '  from  Ignorance  spring  the  sam- 
kharas  of  threefold  nature — productions  of  body,  of  speech, 
of  thoughts.  From  the  samkharas  springs  consciousness, 
from  consciousness  springs  name  and  form,  from  this  spring 
the  six  regions  (of  the  six  senses  the  seventh  being  the 
property  of  but  the  enlightened) ;  from  these  springs  contact 
from  this  sensation ;  from  this  springs  thirst  (or  desire, 
Kama,  tanha)  from  thirst  attachment,  existence,  birth,  old 
age  and  death,  grief,  lamentation,  suffering,  dejection  and 
despair.  Again  by  the  destruction  of  ignorance,  the  Sank- 
haras  are  destroyed,  and  their  consciousness  name  and  form, 
the  six  regions,  contact,  sensation,  thirst,  attachment 
(selfishness),  existence,  birth,  old  age,  death,  grief,  lamenta- 
tion, suffering,  dejection,  and  despair  are  destroyed.  Such 
is  the  cessation  of  this  whole  mass  of  suffering." 

Knowing  this  the  blessed  one  uttered  this  solemn  utterance. 
**  When  the  real  nature  of  things  becomes  clear  to  the  meditating 
Bikshu,  then  all  his  doubts  fade  away  since  he  has  learned  what 
is  that  nature  and  what  it's  cause.  From  ignorance  spring  all  the 
evils.  From  knowledge  comes  the  cessation  of  this  mass  of 
misery,  and  then  the  meditating  Brahmana  stands  dispelling  the 
hosts  of  Mara  like  the  sun  that  illuminates  the  sky." 

Meditation  here  means  the  superhuman  (not  supernatural) 
qualities,  or  arhatship  in  its  highest  of  spiritual  powers. 

Copied  out  Simla,  Sept.  28,  1882. 


LETTER  No.  XP 
Received  by  A.O.H.,  June  30th,   1882. 

Simple  prudence  misgives  me  at  the  thought  of  entering  upon 
my  new  role  of  an  "  instructor."  If  M.  satisfied  you  but  little  I 
am  afraid  of  giving  you  still  less  satisfaction  since  besides  being 
restrained  in  my  exclamations, — for  there  are  a  thousand  things 
I  will  have  to  leave  unrevealed — by  my  vow  of  silence  I  have  far 
less  time  at  my  disposal  than  he  has.  However,  I'll  try  my 
best.  Let  it  not  be  said  that  I  failed  to  recognise  your  present 
sincere  desire  to  become  useful  to  the  Society,  hence  to  Humanity, 
for  I  am  deeply  alive  to  the  fact  that  none  better  than  yourself 
in  India  is  calculated  to  disperse  the  mists  of  superstition  and 
popular  error   by   throwing   light   on    the   darkest   problems,    but 

1  Transcribed  from  a  copy  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  handwriting. — Ed. 


6o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

before  I  answer  your  questions  and  explain  our  doctrines  any 
further,  I'll  have  to  preface  my  replies  with  a  long  introduction. 
First  of  all  and  ag-ain  I  will  draw  your  attention  to  the  tremendous 
difficulty  of  findings  appropriate  terms  in  English  which  would 
convey  to  the  educated  European  mind  even  an  approximately 
correct  notion  about  the  various  subjects  we  will  have  to  treat 
upon.  To  illustrate  my  meaning  I'll  underline  in  red  the  technical 
words  adopted  and  used  by  your  men  of  Science  and  which 
withal  are  absolutely  misleading  not  only  when  applied  to  such 
transcendental  subjects  as  on  hand  but  even  when  used  by  them- 
selves in  their  own  system  of  thought. 

To  comprehend  my  answers  you  will  have  first  of  all  to  view 
the  eternal  Essence,  the  Swab^vat  not  as  a  compound  element 
you  call  spirit-matter,  but  as  the  one  element  for  which  the  Eng- 
lish has  no  name.  It  is  both  passive  and  active,  pure  Spirit 
Essence  in  its  absolute  absoluteness,  and  repose,  pure  matter  in 
its  finite  and  conditioned  state, — even  as  an  unponderable  gas  or 
that  great  unknown  which  science  has  pleased  to  call  Force. 
When  poets  talk  of  the  **  shoreless  ocean  of  immutability  "  we 
must  regard  the  term  but  as  a  jocular  parodox,  since  we  maintain 
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  immutability — not  in  our  Solar 
system  at  least.  Immutability  say  the  theists  and  Christians  **  is 
an  attribute  of  God  "  and  forthwith  they  endow  that  God  with 
every  mutable  and  variable  quality  and  attribute,  knowable  as 
unknowable,  and  believe  that  they  have  solved  the  unsolvable  and 
squared  the  circle.  To  this  we  reply  if  that  which  the  theists  call 
God,  and  science  "  Force  "  and  "  Potential  Energy/*  were  to  be- 
come immutable  but  for  one  instant  even  during  the  Maha- 
Pralaya  a  period  when  even  Brahm  the  creative  architect  of  the 
world  said  to  have  merged  into  non-being,  then  there  could  be 
no  manwantara,  and  space  alone  would  reign  unconscious  and 
supreme  in  the  eternity  of  time.  Nevertheless,  Theism  when 
speaking  of  mutable  immutability  is  no  more  absurd  than 
materialistic  science  talking  of  "latent  potential  energy,"  and 
the  indestructibility  of  matter  and  force.  What  are  we  to 
believe  as  indestructible?  Is  it  the  invisible  something  that 
moves  matter  or  the  energy  of  moving  bodies  !  What  does 
modern  science  know  of  force  proper,  or  say  the  forces, — the 
cause  or  causes  of  motion.  How  can  there  be  such  a  thing  as 
potential  energy,  i.e.,  an  energy  having  latent  inactive  power 
since  it  is  energy  only  while  it  is  moving  matter,  and  that  if  it 
ever  ceased  to  move  matter  it  would  cease  to  he,  and  with  it 
matter  itself  would  disappear.  Is  force  any  happier  term? 
Some  thirty-five  years  back  a  Dr.  Mayer  offered  the  hypothesis 
now  accepted  as  an  axiom  that  force  in  the  sense  given  it  by 
modern    science,    like    matter    is    indestructible    namely    when    it 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS   6i 

ceases  to  be  manifest  in  one  form  it  still  exists  and  has  only 
passed  into  some  other  jorin.  And  yet  your  men  of  science  have 
not  found  a  single  instance  when  one  force  is  transformed  into 
another,  and  Mr.  Tyndall  tells  his  opponents  that  "in  no  case  is 
the  force  producing  the  motion  annihilated  or  changed  into  any- 
thing else."  Moreover  we  are  indebted  to  modern  science  for 
the  novel  discovery  that  there  exists  a  quantitative  relation 
between  the  dynamic  energy  producing  something  and  the  "  some- 
thing "  produced.  Undoubtedly  there  exists  a  quantitive  relation 
between  cause  and  effect,  between  the  amount  of  energy  used  in 
breaking  one's  neighbour's  nose,  and  the  damage  done  to  that 
nose,  but  this  does  not  solve  one  bit  more  the  mystery  of  what 
they  are  pleased  to  call  correlations,  since  it  can  be  easily  proved 
(and  that  on  the  authority  of  that  same  science)  that  neither 
motion  nor  energy  is  indestructible  and  that  the  physical  forces 
are  in  no  way  or  manner  convertible  one  into  another.  I  will 
cross-examine  them  in  their  own  phraseology  and  we  will  see 
whether  their  theories  are  calculated  to  serve  as  a  barrier  to  our 
"  astounding  doctrines."  Preparing  as  I  do  to  propound  a  teach- 
ing diametrically  opposed  to  their  own  it  is  but  just  that  I  should 
clear  the  ground  of  scientific  rubbish  lest  what  I  have  to  say 
should  fall  on  a  too  encumbered  soil  and  only  bring  forth  weeds. 
*'  This  potential  and  imaginary  materia  prima  cannot  exist  with- 
out form,"  says  Raleigh,  and  he  is  right  in  so  far  that  the  materia 
prima  of  science  exists  but  in  their  imagination.  Can  they  say 
the  same  quantity  of  energy  has  always  been  moving  the  matter 
of  the  Universe?  Certainly  not  so  long  as  they  teach  that  when 
the  elements  of  the  material  cosmos,  elements  which  had  first  to 
manifest  themselves  in  their  uncombined  gaseous  state,  were 
uniting  the  amount  of  matter-moving  energy  was  a  million  times 
greater  than  it  is  now  when  our  globe  is  cooling  off.  For  where 
did  the  heat  that  was  generated  by  this  tremendous  process  of 
building  up  a  universe  go  to?  To  the  unoccupied  chambers  of 
space  they  say.  Very  well,  but  if  it  is  gone  for  ever  from  the 
material  universe  and  the  energy  operative  on  earth  has  never 
and  at  no  time  been  the  same,  then  how  can  they  try  to  maintain 
the  *'  unchangeable  quantity  of  energy,"  that  potential  energy 
which  a  body  may  sometimes  exert,  the  force  which  passes  from 
one  body  to  another  producing  motion  and  which  is  not  yet 
*'  annihilated  or  changed  into  anything  else."  Aye,  we  are 
answered,  "  but  we  still  hold  to  its  indestructability ;  while  it  re- 
mains connected  with  matter,  it  can  never  cease  to  be,  or  less  or 
more."  Let  us  see  whether  it  is  so.  I  throw  a  brick  up  to  a 
mason  who  is  busy  building  the  roof  of  a  temple.  He  catches  it 
and  cements  it  in  the  roof.  Gravity  overcame  the  propelling 
energy  which  started  the  upward  motion  of  the  brick,   and  the 

6 


62  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

dynamic  energy  of  the  ascending  brick  until  it  ceased  to  ascend. 
At  that  moment  it  was  caught  and  fastened  to  the  roof.  No 
natural  force  could  now  move  it,  therefore  it  possesses  no  longer 
potential  energy.  The  motion  and  the  dynamic  energy  of  the 
ascending  brick  are  absolutely  annihilated.  Another  example 
from  their  own  text  books.  You  fire  a  gun  upward  from  the  foot 
of  a  hill  and  the  ball  lodges  in  a  crevice  of  the  rock  on  that  hill. 
No  natural  force  can,  for  an  indefinite  period  move  it,  so  the  ball 
as  much  as  the  brick  has  lost  its  potential  energy.  "  All  the 
motion  and  energy  which  was  taken  from  the  ascending  ball  by 
gravity  is  absolutely  annihilated,  no  other  motion  or  energy  suc- 
ceeds and  gravity  has  received  no  increase  of  energy."  Is  it 
not  true  then  that  energy  is  indestructible  !  How  then  is  it  that 
your  great  authority  teaches  the  world  that  **  in  no  case  is  the 
force  producing  the  motion  annihilated  or  changed  into  anything 
else"? 

I  am  perfectly  aware  of  your  answer  and  give  you  these  illus- 
trations but  to  show  how  misleading  are  the  terms  used  by 
scientists,  how  vacillating  and  uncertain  their  theories  and  finally 
how  incomplete  all  their  teachings.  One  more  objection  and  I 
have  done.  They  teach  that  all  the  physical  forces  rejoicing  in 
specific  names  such  as  gravity,  inertia,  cohesion,  light,  heat, 
electricity,  magnetism,  chemical  aflSnity,  are  convertible  one  into 
another?  If  so  the  force  producing  must  cease  to  be  as  the 
force  produced  becomes  manifest.  *'  A  flying  cannon  ball  moves 
only  from  its  own  inherent  force  of  inertia."  When  it  strikes  it 
produces  heat  and  other  effects  but  its  force  of  inertia  is  not  the 
least  diminished.  It  will  require  as  much  energy  to  start  it  again 
at  the  same  velocity  as  it  did  at  first.  We  may  repeat  the  pro- 
cess a  thousand  times  and  as  long  as  the  quantity  of  matter 
remains  the  same  its  force  of  inertia  will  remain  the  same  in 
quantity.  The  same  in  the  case  of  gravity.  A  meteor  falls  and 
produces  heat.  Gravity  is  to  be  held  to  account  for  this,  but  the 
force  of  gravity  upon  the  fallen  body  is  not  diminished.  Chemical 
attraction  draws  and  holds  the  particles  of  matter  together,  their 
collision  producing  heat.  Has  the  former  passed  into  the  latter? 
Not  in  the  least,  since  drawing  the  particles  again  together  when- 
ever these  are  separated  it  proves  that  the  chemical  aflfinity  is  not 
decreased.  For  it  will  hold  them  as  strongly  as  ever  together. 
Heat  they  say  generates  and  produces  electricity  yet  they  find  no 
decrease  in  the  heat  in  the  process.  Electricity  produces  heat 
we  are  told?  Electrometers  show  that  the  electrical  currents 
pass  through  some  poor  conductor,  a  platinum  wire  say  and  heats 
the  latter.  Precisely  the  same  quantity  of  electricity,  there  being 
no  loss  of  electricity,  no  decrease.  What  then  has  been  con- 
verted into  heat?     Again  electricity  is  said  to  produce  magnetism. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    63 

I  have  on  the  table  before  me  primitive  electrometers  in  whose 
vicinity  chelas  come  the  whole  day  to  recuperate  their  nascent 
powers.  I  do  not  find  the  slightest  decrease  in  the  electricity 
stored.  The  chelas  are  magnetized,  but  their  magnetism  or 
rather  that  of  their  rods  is  not  that  electricity  under  a  new  mask. 
No  more  than  the  flame  of  a  thousand  tapers  lit  at  the  flame  of 
the  lamp  is  the  flame  of  the  latter.  Therefore  if  by  the  uncertain 
twilight  of  modern  science  it's  an  axiomatic  truth  *'  that  during 
vital  processes  the  conversion  only  and  never  the  creation  of 
matter  or  force  occurs  "  (Dr.  J.  R.  Mayer's  **  Organic  Motion  in 
its  connection  with  Nutrition  ") — it  is  for  us  but  half  a  truth.  It 
is  neither  conversion  nor  creation,  but  something  for  which 
science  has  yet  no  name. 

Perhaps  now  you  will  be  prepared  to  better  understand  the 
difficulty  with  which  we  will  have  to  contend.  Modern  science 
is  our  best  ally.  Yet  it  is  generally  that  same  science  which  is 
made  the  weapon  to  break  our  heads  with.  However  you  will 
have  to  bear  in  mind  (a)  that  we  recognise  but  one  element  in 
Nature  (whether  spiritual  or  physical)  outside  which  there  can  be 
no  nature  since  it  is  Nature  itself,^  and  which  as  the  Akasa  per- 
vades our  solar  system  every  atom  being  part  of  itself  pervades 
throughout  space  and  is  space  in  fact,  which  pulsates  as  in  pro- 
found sleep  during  the  pralayas  and  the  universal  Proteus,  the 
ever  active  nature  during  the  Manwantaras ;  (b)  that  consequently 
spirit  and  matter  are  one,  being  but  a  differentiation  of  states  not 
essences,  and  that  the  Greek  philosopher  who  maintained  that  the 
Universe  was  a  huge  animal  penetrated  the  symbolical  significance 
of  the  Pythagorean  monad  (which  becomes  two,  then  three  A 
and  finally  having  become  the  tetracktis  or  the  perfect  square 
(thus  evolving  out  of  itself  four  and  involuting  three  Q^  forms 
the  sacred  seven) — and  this  is  far  in  advance  of  all  the  scientific 
men  of  the  present  time ;  (c)  that  our  notions  of  "  cosmic  matter  " 
are  diametrically  opposed  to  those  of  western  science.  Per- 
chance if  you  remember  all  this  we  will  succeed  in  imparting  to 
you  at  least  the  elementary  axioms  of  our  esoteric  philosophy 
more  correctly  than  heretofore.  Fear  not  my  kind  brother ;  your 
life  is  not  ebbing  away  and  it  will  not  be  extinct  before  you  have 
completed  your  mission.  I  can  say  no  more  except  that  the 
Chohan  has  permitted  me  to  devote  my  spare  time  to  instruct 
those  who  are  willing  to  learn  and  you  will  have  work  enough  to 
"  drop  "  your  Fragments  at  intervals  of  two  or  three  months. 
My  time  is  very  limited  yet  I  will  do  what  I  can.     Yet   I  can 

1  Not  in  the  sense  of  Natus  "  born  "  but  Nature  as  the  sum  total  of  every- 
thing visible  and  invisible,  of  forms  and  minds,  the  aggregate  of  the  known 
(and  unknown),  causes  and  effects,  the  universe  in  short  infinite  and  un- 
created and  endless,   as  it  is  without  a  beginning. 

2  This  figure  in  the  original  is  a  triangle  within  a  square. — Ed. 


64  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

promise  nothing  beyond  this.  I  will  have  to  remain  silent  as  to 
the  Dyan  Chohans  nor  can  I  impart  to  you  the  secrets  concerning 
the  men  of  the  seventh  round.  The  recognition  of  the  higher 
phases  of  man's  being  on  this  planet  is  not  to  be  attained  by  mere 
acquirement  of  knowledge.  Volumes  of  the  most  perfectly  con- 
structed information  cannot  reveal  to  man  life  in  the  higher 
regions.  One  has  to  get  a  knowledge  of  spiritual  facts  by  per- 
sonal experience  and  from  actual  observation,  for  as  Tyndall  puts 
it  **  facts  looked  directly  at  are  vital,  when  they  pass  into  words 
half  the  sap  is  taken  out  of  them."  And  because  you  recognise 
this  great  principle  of  personal  observation,  and  are  not  slow  to 
put  into  practice  what  you  have  acquired  in  the  way  of  useful 
information,  is  perhaps  the  reason  why  the  hitherto  implacable 
Chohan  my  Master  has  finally  permitted  me  to  devote  to  a  certain 
extent  a  portion  of  my  time  to  the  progress  of  the  Eclectic.  But 
I  am  but  one  and  you  are  many,  and  none  of  my  Fellow  Brothers 
with  the  exception  of  M.  will  help  me  in  this  work,  not  even  our 
semi-European  Greek  brother  who  but  a  few  days  back  remarked 
that  when  "  every  one  of  the  Eclectics  on  the  Hill  will  have  be- 
come a  Zetetic  then  he  will  see  what  he  can  do  for  them."  And 
as  you  are  aware  there  is  very  little  hope  for  this.  Men  seek  of 
the  knowledge  until  they  weary  themselves  to  death,  but  even 
they  do  not  feel  very  impatient  to  help  their  neighbours  with  their 
knowledge ;  hence  there  arises  a  coldness,  a  mutual  indifference 
which  renders  him  who  knows  inconsistent  with  himself  and 
unharmonious  with  his  surroundings.  Viewed  from  our  stand- 
point the  evil  is  far  greater  on  the  spiritual  than  on  the  material 
side  of  man  ;  hence  my  sincere  thanks  to  you  and  desire  to  urge 
your  attention  to  such  a  course  as  shall  aid  a  true  progression  and 
achieve  wider  results  by  turning  your  knowledge  into  a  permanent 
teaching  in  the  form  of  articles  and  pamphlets. 

But  for  the  attainment  of  your  supposed  object,  viz. — for  a 
clearer  comprehension  of  the  extremely  abstruse  and  at  first  in- 
comprehensible theories  of  our  occult  doctrine  never  allow  the 
serenity  of  your  mind  to  be  disturbed  during  your  hours  of  literary 
labours,  nor  before  you  set  to  work.  It  is  upon  the  serene  and 
placid  surface  of  the  unruffled  mind  that  the  visions  gathered 
from  the  invisible  find  a  representation  in  the  visible  world. 
Otherwise  you  would  vainly  seek  those  visions,  those  flashes  of 
sudden  light  which  have  already  helped  to  solve  so  many  of  the 
minor  problems  and  which  alone  can  bring  the  truth  before  the 
eye  of  the  soul.  It  is  with  jealous  care  that  we  have  to  guard 
our  mind-plane  from  all  the  adverse  influences  which  daily  arise 
in  our  passage  through  earth-life. 

Many  are  the  questions  you  ask  me  in  your  several  letters,  I 
can  answer  but  few.      Concerning  Eglinton  I  will  beg  you  to  wait 


I 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    65 

for  developments.  In  regard  to  your  kind  lady  the  question  is 
more  serious  and  I  cannot  undertake  the  responsibility  of  making 
her  change  her  diet  as  abruptly  as  you  suggest.  Flesh  and  meat 
she  can  give  up  at  any  time  as  it  can  never  hurt;  as  for  liquor 
with  which  Mrs.  H.  has  long  been  sustaining  her  system,  you 
yourself  know  the  fatal  effects  it  may  produce  in  an  enfeebled  con- 
stitution were  the  latter  to  be  suddenly  deprived  of  its  stimulant. 
Her  physical  life  is  not  a  real  existence  backed  by  a  reserve  of 
vital  force,  but  a  factitious  one  fed  upon  the  spirit  of  liquor  how- 
ever small  the  quantity.  While  a  strong  constitution  might  rally 
after  the  first  shock  of  such  a  change  as  proposed,  the  chances 
are  that  she  would  fall  into  a  decline.  So  would  she  if  opium 
or  arsenic  were  her  chief  sustenance.  Again  I  promise  nothing 
yet  will  do  in  this  direction  what  I  can.  "  Converse  with  you  and 
teach  you  through  astral  light?  "  Such  a  development  of  your 
psychical  powers  of  hearing,  as  you  name, — the  Siddhi  of  hearing 
occult  sounds  would  not  be  at  all  the  easy  matter  you  imagine. 
It  was  never  done  to  any  one  of  us,  for  the  iron  rule  is  that  what 
powers  one  gets  he  must  himself  acquire.  And  when  acquired 
and  ready  for  use  the  powers  lie  dumb  and  dormant  in  their 
potentiality  like  the  wheels  and  clockwork  inside  a  musical  box ; 
and  only  then  does  it  become  easy  to  wind  up  the  key  and  to  set 
them  in  motion.  Of  course  you  have  now  more  chances  before 
you  than  my  zoophagous  friend  Mr.  Sinnett,  who  were  he  even 
to  give  up  feeding  on  animals  would  still  feel  a  craving  for  such 
a  food,  a  craving  over  which  he  would  have  no  control  and, — 
the  impediment  would  be  the  same  in  that  case.  Yet  every 
earnestly  disposed  man  may  acquire  such  powers  practically.  That 
is  the  finality  of  it;  there  are  no  more  distinctions  of  persons  in 
this  than  there  are  as  to  whom  the  sun  shall  shine  upon  or  the 
air  give  vitality  to.  There  are  the  powers  of  all  nature  before 
you  ;  take  what  you  can. 

Your  suggestion  as  to  the  box  I  will  think  over.  There  would 
have  to  be  some  contrivance  to  prevent  the  discharge  of  power 
when  once  the  box  was  charged,  whether  during  transit  or  sub- 
sequently :  I  will  consider  and  take  advice  or  rather  permission. 
But  I  must  say  the  idea  is  utterly  repugnant  to  us  as  everything 
else  smacking  of  spirits  and  mediumship.  We  would  prefer  by 
far  using  natural  means  as  in  the  last  transmission  of  my  letter  to 
you.  It  was  one  of  M's  chelas  who  left  it  for  you  in  the  flower- 
shed,  where  he  entered  invisibly  to  all  yet  in  his  natural  body,  just 
as  he  had  entered  many  a  time  your  museum  and  other  rooms, 
unknown  to  you  all,  during  and  after  the  **  Old  Lady's  "  stay. 
But  unless  he  is  told  to  do  so  by  M.  he  will  never  do  it,  and  that 
is  why  your  letter  to  me  was  left  unnoticed.  You  have  an  unjust 
feeling  towards  my  Brother,   kind  sir,   for  he  is  better  and  more 


66  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

powerful  than  I — at  least  he  is  not  as  bound  and  restricted  as  I  am 
— I  have  asked  H.  P.  B.  to  send  you  a  number  of  philosophical 
letters  from  a  Dutch  Theosophist  at  Penangf — one  in  whom  I  take 
an  interest :  you  ask  for  more  work  and  here  is  some.  They  are 
translations,  originals  of  those  portions  of  Schopf)enhauer  which 
are  most  in  affinity  with  our  Arhat  doctrines.  The  English  is  not 
idiomatic  but  the  material  is  valuable.  Should  you  be  disposed 
to  utilise  any  fK>rtion  of  it,  I  would  recommend  your  opening  a 
direct  correspondence  with  Mr.  Sanders,  F.T.S. — the  translator. 
Schoppenhauer's  philosophical  value  is  so  well  known  in  the 
western  countries  that  a  comparison  or  connotation  of  his  teachings 
upon  will,  etc.,  with  those  you  have  received  from  ourselves  might 
be  instructive.  Yes  I  am  quite  ready  to  look  over  your  50  or  60 
pages  and  make  notes  on  the  margins  :  have  them  set  up  by  all 
means  and  send  them  to  me  either  through  little  **  Deb "  or 
Damodar  and  Djual  Kul  will  transmit  them.  In  a  very  few  days, 
perhaps  to-morrow,  your  two  questions  will  be  amply  answered  by 
me. 

Meanwhile 

Yours  sincerely, 

K.  H. 
P.S. — The  Tibetan  translation  is  not  quite  ready  yet. 


LETTER  No.  XII 

Your  hypothesis  is  far  nearer  the  truth  than  Mr.  Hume's.  Two 
factors  must  be  kept  in  view — (a)  a  fixed  period,  and  (b)  a  fixed 
rate  of  development  nicely  adjusted  to  it.  Almost  unthinkably 
long  as  is  a  Mahayug,  it  is  still  a  definite  term,  and  within  it  must 
be  accomplished  the  whole  order  of  development,  or  to  state  it  in 
occult  phraseology  :  the  descent  of  Spirit  into  matter  and  its  return 
to  the  re^emergence.  A  chain  of  beads,  and  each  bead  a  world — 
is  an  illustration  already  made  familiar  to  you.  You  have  already 
pondered  over  the  life  impulse  beginning  with  each  Manvantara 
to  evolve  the  first  of  these  worlds ;  to  perfect  it ;  to  people  it  suc- 
cessively with  all  the  aerial  forms  of  life.  And  after  completing 
on  this  first  world  seven  cycles — or  revolutions  of  development — 
in  each  kingdom  as  you  know — passing  forward  down  the  arc — 
to  similarly  evolve  the  next  world  in  the  chain,  perfect  it  and 
abandon  it.  Then  to  the  next  and  next  and  next — until  the  seven- 
fold round  of  world-evolutions  along  the  chain  is  run  through  and 
the  Mahayug  comes  to  its  end.  Then  chaos  again — the  Pralaya. 
As  this  life-impulse  (at  the  seventh  and  last  round  from  planet  to 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    67 

planet)  moves  on  it  leaves  behind  it  dying  and — ^very  soon — "  dead 
planets. '  * 

The  last  seventh  round  man  having  passed  on  to  a  subsequent 
world,  the  precedent  one  with  all  its  mineral,  vegetable  and  animal 
life  (except  man)  begins  to  gradually  die  out,  when  with  the  exit 
of  the  last  animalcula  it  is  extinguished,  or  as  H.P.B.  has  it — 
snuffed  out  {minor  or  partial  pralaya).  When  the  Spirit-man 
reaches  the  last  bead  of  the  chain  and  passes  into  final  Nirvana, 
this  last  world  also  disappears  or  passes  into  subjectivity.  Thus 
are  there  among  the  stellar  galaxies  births  and  deaths  of  worlds 
ever  following  each  other  in  the  orderly  procession  of  natural  Law. 
And — as  said  already — the  last  bead  is  strung  upon  the  thread  of 
the  "  Mahayuga." 

When  the  last  cycle  of  man-bearing  has  been  completed  by  that 
last  fecund  earth ;  and  humanity  has  reached  in  a  mass  the  stage 
of  Buddhahood  and  passed  out  of  the  objective  existence  into  the 
mystery  of  Nirvana — ^then  **  strikes  the  hour;"  the  seen  becomes 
the  unseen,  the  concrete  resumes  its  pre-cyclic  state  of  atomic 
distribution. 

But  the  dead  worlds  left  behind  the  onsweeping  impulse  do  not 
continue  dead.  Motion  is  the  eternal  order  of  things  and  affinity 
or  attraction  its  handmaid  of  all  works.  The  thrill  of  life  will 
again  re-unite  the  atom,  and  it  will  stir  again  in  the  inert  planet 
when  the  time  comes.  Though  all  its  forces  have  remained  statu 
quo  and  are  now  asleep,  yet  little  by  little  it  will — when  the  hour 
re-strikes — gather  for  a  new  cycle  of  man-bearing  maternity,  and 
give  birth  to  something  still  higher  as  moral  and  physical  types 
than  during  the  preceding  manvaniara.  And  its  "  cosmic  atoms 
already  in  a  differentiated  state  "  (differing — in  the  producing 
force  in  the  mechanical  sense  of  motions  and  effects)  remain  statu 
qua  as  well  as  globes  and  everything  else  in  the  process  of  forma- 
tion." Such  is  the  **  hypothesis  fully  in  accordance  with  (your) 
(my)  note."  For,  as  planetary  development,  is  as  progressive  as 
human  or  race  evolution,  the  hour  of  the  Pralaya's  coming  catches 
the  series  of  worlds  at  successive  stages  of  evolution;  (i.e.)  each 
has  attained  to  some  one  of  the  periods  of  evolutionary  progress — 
each  stops  there,  until  the  outward  impulse  of  the  next  manvantara 
sets  it  going  from  that  very  point — like  a  stopped  time-piece  re- 
wound.    Therefore,  have  I  used  the  word  "  differentiated." 

At  the  coming  of  the  Pralaya  no  human,  animal,  or  even 
vegetable  entity  will  be  alive  to  see  it,  but  there  will  be  the  earths 
or  globes  with  their  mineral  kingdoms ;  and  all  these  planets  will 
be  physically  disintegrated  in  the  pralaya,  yet  not  destroyed  ;  for 
they  have  their  places  in  the  sequence  of  evolution  and  their 
**  privations  "  coming  again  out  of  the  subjective,  they  will  find 
the  exact  point  from  which  they  have  to  move  on  around  the  chain 


68  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

of  "manifested  forms."  This,  as  you  know,  is  repeated  end- 
lessly throug^hout  Eternity.  Each  man  of  us  has  gone  this  cease- 
less round,  and  will  repeat  it  for  ever  and  ever.  The  deviation 
of  each  one's  course,  and  his  rate  of  progress  from  Nirvana  to 
Nirvana  is  governed  by  causes  which  he  himself  creates  out  of  the 
exigencies  in  which  he  finds  himself  entangled. 

This  picture  of  an  eternity  of  action  may  appal  the  mind  that 
has  been  accustomed  to  look  forward  to  an  existence  of  ceaseless 
repose.  But  their  concept  is  not  supported  by  the  analogies  of 
nature,  nor — and  ignorant  though  I  may  be  thought  of  your 
Western  Science,  may  I  not  say? — by  the  teachings  of  that 
Science.  We  know  that  perioils  of  action  and  rest  follow  each 
other  in  everything  in  nature  from  the  macrocosm  with  its  Solar 
System  down  to  man  and  its  parent-earth,  which  has  its  seasons 
of  activity  followed  by  those  of  sleep ;  and  that  in  short  all  nature, 
like  her  begotten  living  forms  has  her  times  for  recuperation.  So 
with  the  spiritual  individuality,  the  Monad  which  starts  on  its 
downward  and  upward  cyclic  rotation.  The  periods  which  inter- 
vene between  each  great  manvantarian  **  round  "  are  proportion- 
ately long  to  reward  for  the  thousand  of  existences  passed  on 
various  globes  ;  while  the  time  given  between  each  *  *  race  birth  * ' — 
or  rings  as  you  call  them — is  sufficiently  lengthy  to  compensate 
for  any  life  of  strife  and  misery  during  that  lapse  of  time  passed 
in  conscious  bliss  after  the  re-birth  of  the  Ego.  To  conceive  of 
an  eternity  of  bliss  or  woe,  and  to  offset  it  to  any  conceivable  deeds 
of  merit  or  demerit  of  a  being  who  may  have  lived  a  century  or 
even  a  millenium  in  the  flesh,  can  only  be  proposed  by  one  who 
has  never  yet  grasped  the  awful  reality  of  the  word  Eternity,  nor 
pondered  upon  the  law  of  perfect  justice  and  equilibrium  which 
pervades  nature.  Further  instructions  may  be  given  you,  which 
will  show  how  nicely  justice  is  done  not  to  man  only  but  also  his 
subordinates,  and  throw  some  light,  I  hope,  upon  the  vexed 
question  of  good  and  evil. 

And  now  to  crown  this  effort  of  mine  (of  writing)  I  may  as  well 
pay  an  old  debt,  and  answer  an  old  question  of  yours  concerning 
earth  incarnation.  Koot'  humi  answered  some  of  your  queries 
— at  least  began  writing  yesterday  but  was  called  off  by  duty — 
but  I  may  help  him  anyhow.  I  trust  you  will  not  find  much 
difficulty — not  as  much  as  hitherto — in  making  out  my  letter.  I 
have  become  a  very  plain  writer  since  he  reproached  me  with 
making  you  lose  your  valuable  time  over  my  scrawling.  His 
rebuke  struck  home,  and  as  you  see  I  have  amended  my  evil 
ways. 

Let  us  see  what  your  Science  has  to  tell  us  about  Ethnography 
and  other  matters.  The  latest  conclusions  to  which  your  wise 
men   of   the  West  seem  to   have  arrived  briefly    stated   are   the 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    69 

following.      The  theories  even  approximately  correct  I  venture  to 
underline  with  blue. 

(i)  The  earliest  traces  of  man  they  can  find  disappear  beyond 
the  close  of  a  period  of  which  the  rock-fossils  furnish  the  only 
clue  they  possess, 

(2)  Starting-  thence  they  find  four  races  of  men  who  have  suc- 
cessively inhabited  Euroi>e  (a)  The  race  of  the  river  drift — mighty 
hunters  (f>erchance  Nimrod?)  who  dwelt  in  the  then  sub-tropical 
climate  of  Western  Europe,  who  used  chipped  stone  implements 
of  the  most  primitive  kinds  and  were  contemporary  with  the 
rhinoceros  and  the  mammoth;  (b)  the  so-called  cave-men,  a  race 
developed  during  the  glacial  period  {the  Esquimaux  being  now, 
they  say,  its  only  type)  and  which  possessed  finer  weapons  and 
tools  of  chipped  stone  since  they  made  with  wondrous  accuracy 
pictures  of  various  animals  they  were  familiar  with,  simply  with 
the  aid  of  sharp  pointed  flints  on  the  antlers  of  reindeer  and  on 
bones  and  stones;  (c)  the  third  race — men  of  the  Neolithic  age  are 
found  already  grinding  their  stone  implements,  building  houses 
and  boats  and  making  pottery,  in  short — the  lake  dwellers  of 
Switzerland ;  and  finally  (d)  appears  the  fourth  race,  coming  from 
Central  Asia.  These  are  the  fair  complexioned  Aryans  who  inter- 
married with  the  remnant  of  the  dark  Iberians — now  represented 
by  the  swarthy  Basks  of  Spain.  This  is  the  race  which  they 
consider  as  the  progenitors  of  you  modern  peoples  of  Europe. 

(3)  They  add  moreover,  that  the  men  of  the  river  Drift,  preceded 
the  glacial  period  known  in  geology  as  the  Pleistocene  and 
originated  some  240,000  years  ago,  while  human  beings  generally 
(see  Geikie,  Dawkins,  Fiske  and  others)  inhabited  Europe  at  least 
100,000  years  earlier. 

With  one  solitary  exception  they  are  all  wrong.  They  come 
near  enough  yet  miss  the  mark  in  every  case.  There  were  not 
four  but  FIVE  races;  and  we  are  that  fifth  the  remnant  of  the 
fourth.  (A  more  perfect  evolution  or  race  with  each  mahacyclic 
round) ;  while  the  first  race  appeared  on  earth  not  half  a  million  of 
years  ago  (Fiske' s  theory) — ^but  several  millions.  The  latest 
scientific  theory  is  that  of  the  German  and  American  professors 
who  say  through  Fiske — **  we  see  man  living  on  the  earth  for 
perhaps  half  a  million  years  to  all  intents  and  purposes  dumb.** 

He  is  both  right  and  wrong.  Right  about  the  race  having 
been  "  dumb,"  for  long  ages  of  silence  were  required,  for  the 
evolution  and  mutual  comprehension  of  speech,  from  the  moans 
and  mutterings  from  the  first  remove  of  man  above  the  highest 
anthropoids  (a  race  now  extinct  since  "  nature  shuts  the  door 
behind  her"  as  she  advances,  in  more  than  one  sense) — up  to 
the  first  monosyllable  uttering  man.  But  he  is  wrong  in  saying 
all  the  rest. 


70  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

By  the  bye,  you  oug-ht  to  come  to  some  agreement  as  to  the 
terms  used  when  discussing-  upon  cyclic  evolutions.  Our  terms 
are  untranslateable  :  and  without  a  good  knowledg^e  of  our  com- 
plete system  (which  cannot  be  given  except  to  regular  initiates) 
would  suggest  nothing  definite  to  your  perception  but  only  be  a 
source  of  confusion  as  in  the  case  of  the  terms  "Soul"  and 
*'  Spirit  "  with  all  your  metaphysical  writers — especially  the 
Spiritualists. 

You  must  have  patience  with  Subba  Row.  Give  him  time.  He 
is  now  at  his  tapas  and  will  not  be  disturbed.  I  will  tell  him  not 
to  neglect  you  but  he  is  very  jealous  and  regards  teaching  an  Eng- 
lishman as  a  sacrilege. 

Yours  M. 

P.S. — My  writing  is  good  but  the  paper  rather  thin  for  p>enman- 
ship.  Cannot  write  English  with  a  brush  though ;  would  be 
worse. 


LETTER  No.   XIIP 

Cosmological    Notes   and    Queries    and    M.'s    Replies.     Received    January, 
1882.     Allahabad. 

(i)  I  conceive  that  at  the  close  of  a  pralaya  the  impulse  given 
by  the  Dhyan  Chohans  does  not  develop  from  chaos,  a  succession 
of  worlds  simultaneously,  but  seriatim.  The  comprehension  of 
the  manner  in  which  each  in  succession  ensues  from  its  predeces- 
sor as  the  impact  of  the  original  impulse  might  perhaps  be  better 
postponed  till  after  I  am  enabled  to  realize  the  working  of  the 
whole  machine — the  cycle  of  worlds — after  all  its  parts  have  come 
into  existence. 

(1)  Correctly  conceived  nothing  in  nature  springs  into  existence 
suddenly  all  being  subjected  to  the  same  law  of  gradual  evolu- 
tion. Realize  but  once  the  process  of  the  maha  cycle,  of  one 
sphere  and  you  have  realized  them  all.  One  man  is  born  like 
another  man,  one  race  evolves,  develops  and  declines  like 
another  and  all  other  races.  Nature  follows  the  same  groove 
from  the  "  creation  "  of  a  universe  down  to  that  of  a  mosquito. 
In  studying  esoteric  cosmogony,  keep  a  spiritual  eye  upon  the 
physiological   process  of  human  birth;   proceed  from  cause  to 

effect  establishing^ 

along  analogies  between  the 

1  Mr.   Sinnett's   Queries   in  ordinary   type   with   M.'s  Replies  in  bold  type. 
—Ed. 

2  The  original  letter  has  a  small   portion   missing  at  this  point,   hence  the 
incompleteness  of  the  following  lines. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    71 

man  and  that  of  a  world.     In  our  doctrine 

will  find  necessary  the  synthetic  me — 

you  will  have  to  embrace  the  whole 

— that  is  to  say  to  blend  the  macrocosm 

— cosm  together — before  you  are  ena — 

to  study  the  parts  separately  or  analyze 

them  with  profit  to  your  understanding.  Cosmology  is  the 
physiology  of  the  universe  spiritualized,  for  there  is  but  one 
law. 

(2)  Taking-  the  middle  of  a  period  of  activity  between  two 
pralayas,  i.e.,  of  a  manvantara — what  I  understand  to  happen  is 
this.  Atoms  are  polarized  in  the  highest  regfion  of  spiritual  eflux 
from  behind  the  veil  of  primitive  cosmic  matter.  The  magnetic 
impulse  which  has  accomplished  this  result  flits  from  one  mineral 
form  to  another  within  the  first  sphere  till  having-  run  the  round 
of  existence  in  that  kingdom  of  the  first  sphere  it  descends  in  a 
current  of  attraction  to  the  second  sphere. 

(2)  Polarize  themselves  during  the  process  of  motion  and 
propelled  by  the  irresistible  Force  at  work.  In  Cosmogony  and 
the  work  of  nature  the  positive  and  the  negative  or  the  active 
and  passive  forces  correspond  to  the  male  and  female  principles. 
Your  spiritual  efflux  comes  not  from  '*  behind  the  veil  *'  but  is 
the  male  seed  falling  into  the  veil  of  cosmic  matter.  TTie  active 
is  attracted  by  the  passive  principle  and  the  Great  Nag,  the 
serpent  emblem  of  the  eternity,  attracts  its  tail  to  its  mouth 
forming  thereby  a  circle  (cycles  in  the  eternity)  in  that  incessant 
pursuit  of  the  negative  by  the  positive.  Hence  the  emblem  of 
the  lingam  the  phallus  and  the  eteis  the  one  and  chief  attribute 
of  the  universal  spiritual  principle — the  unconscious  but  ever 
active  life-giver — is  to  expand  and  shed;  that  of  the  universal 
material  principle  to  gather  in  and  fecundate.  Unconscious  and 
non-existing  when  separated,  they  become  consciousness  and 
life  when  brought  together.  Hence  again  Brahma — from  the 
root  **  brih  "  the  Sanskrit  for  "  to  expand,  grow  or  to  fructify. 
Brahma  being  but  the  vivifying  expansive  force  of  nature  in  its 
eternal  evolution. 

(3)  Do  worlds  of  effects  intervene  between  the  worlds  of  activity 
in  the  series  of  descent? 

(3)  The  worlds  of  effect  are  not  lokas  or  localities.  They  are 
the  shadow  of  the  world  of  causes  their  souls — worlds  having 
like  men  their  seven  principles  which  develop  and  grow  simul- 
taneously with  the  body.  Thus  the  hodt^  of  man  is  wedded  to 
and  remains  for  ever  within  the  body  of  his  planet.  His  in- 
dividual jivatma  life-principle  that  which  is  called  in  physiology 


72  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

animal  spirits  returns  after  death  to  its  source — Fohat;  his 
linga  shariram  will  be  drawn  into  Akasa;  his  Kamarupa  will 
recommingle  with  the  Universal  Sakti — the  Will  Force,  or 
universal  energy;  his  **  animal  soul  **  borrowed  from  the  breath 
of  Universal  Mind  will  return  to  the  Dhyan-chohans;  his  sixth 
principle — whether  drawn  into  or  ejected  from  the  matrix  of 
the  Great  Passive  Principle  must  remain  in  its  own  sphere — 
either  as  part  of  the  crude  material  or  as  an  individualized  entity 
to  be  reborn  in  a  higher  world  of  causes.  The  seventh  will 
carry  it  from  the  Devachan  and  follow  the  new  Ego  to  its  place 
of  re -birth. 

(4)  The  magfnetic  impulse  which  cannot  yet  be  conceived  of  as 
an  individuality — enters  the  second  sphere  in  the  same  (the  uni- 
versal) kingdom  as  that  to  which  it  belonged  in  sphere  I  and  runs 
the  round  of  mineral  incarnations  there  passing  on  to  sphere  III. 
Our  earth  is  still  a  sphere  of  necessity  for  it.  Hence  it  passes  into 
the  upward  series — and  from  the  highest  of  these  passes  into  the 
vegetable  kingdom  of  sphere  I. 

Without  any  new  impulse  of  creative  force  from  above,  its 
career  round  the  cycle  of  worlds  as  a  mineral  principle  has  de- 
veloped some  new  attractions  and  polarization  which  cause  it  to 
assume  the  lowest  vegetable  form — in  vegetable  forms  it  passes 
successively  through  the  cycle  of  worlds,  the  whole  being  still  a 
circle  of  necessity  (as  no  responsibility  can  yet  have  accrued  to  an 
unconscious  individuality,  and  therefore  it  cannot  at  any  stage  of 
its  progress  do  anything  to  select  one  or  other  of  divergent  paths). 
Or  is  there  something  in  the  life  even  of  a  vegetable  which,  though 
not  responsibility,  may  lead  it  up  or  down  at  this  critical  stage  of 
its  progress? 

Having  completed  the  whole  cycle  as  a  vegetable  the  growing 
individuality  expands  on  the  next  circuit  into  an  animal  form. 

(4)  The  evolution  of  the  worlds  cannot  be  considered  apart 
from  the  evolution  of  everything  created. 

(5)  Where  does  it  get  the  animal  soul,  its  fifth  principle,  from? 
Has  the  potentiality  of  this  resided  from  the  first  in  the  original 
magnetic  impulse  which  constituted  the  mineral,  or  at  every 
transition  from  the  last  world  on  the  ascending  side  to  sphere  (I) 
does  it,  so  to  speak,  pass  through  an  ocean  of  spirit  and  assimilate 
some  new  principle? 

(5)  Thus  you  see  his  fifth  principle  is  evolved  from  within 
himself,  man  having  as  you  well  say  *'  the  potentiality  "  of  all 
the  seven  principles  as  a  germ,  from  the  very  instant  he  appears 
in    the    first    world    of    causes    as    a    shadowy    breath,    which 


i 


XOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    73 

coagulates    with    and    is    hardened    together    with    the    parent 
sphere. 

Spirit  or  Life  is  indivisible.  And  when  we  speak  of  the 
seventh  principle  it  is  neither  quality  nor  quantity  nor  yet  form 
that  are  meant,  but  rather  the  Space  occupied  in  that  ocean 
of  spirit  by  the  results  or  effects — (beneficent  as  are  all  those 
of  a  co-worker  with  nature) — impressed  thereon. 

(6)  From  the  highest  animal  (non-human)  form  in  sphere  I — 
how  does  it  get  to  sphere  II?  It  is  inconceivable  that  it  can 
descend  to  the  lowest  animal  form  there,  but  otherwise  how  can  it 
go  through  the  whole  circle  of  life  on  each  planet  in  turn  ? 

If  it  runs  its  cycle  in  a  spiral  (i.e.,  from  form  i  of  sphere  I  to 
form  I  of  sphere  II,  etc. — then  to  form  2  of  sphere  I,  II,  III,  etc., 
and  then  to  form  3  of  sphere  I.  .  .  .  Nth)  then  it  seems  to 
me  that  the  same  rule  must  apply  to  the  mineral  and  vegetable 
individualities  if  they  have  such,  and  yet  some  things  I  have  been 
told  seem  to  militate  against  that.  (State  them  and  they  will  be 
answered  and  explained.) 

For  the  moment  I  must  work  on  that  hypothesis  however. 

[Having  swept  through  the  cycle  in  the  highest  animal  form  the 
animal  soul  in  its  next  plunge  into  the  ocean  of  spirit  acquires]* 


I 


*  All  this  is  misconceived. 


e  seventh  principle  which  endows  it  with  a  sixth.  This  deter- 
mines its  future  on  earth,  and  at  the  close  of  the  earth  life  has. 
sufficient  vitality  to  keep  an  attraction  of  its  own  for  the  seventh 
principle,  or  loses  this  and  ceases  to  exist  as  a  separate  entity. 

(6)  Why,  **  inconceivable?  *'  The  highest  animal  form  in 
sphere  I  or  A  being  irresponsible,  there  is  no  degradation  for 
it  to  merge  into  sphere  II  or  B  as  the  most  infinitesimal  of  that 
sphere.  Which  on  its  upward  course,  as  you  were  told,  man 
finds  even  the  lowest  animal  form  there — higher  than  he  was 
himself  on  earth.  How  do  you  know  that  man  and  animals 
and  even  life  in  its  incipient  stage  is  not  a  thousand  times  higher 
there,  than  it  is  here?  Besides  which,  every  kingdom  (and  we 
have  seven — while  you  have  but  three)  is  subdivided  into  seven 
degrees  or  classes.  Man  (physically)  is  a  compound  of  all  the 
kingdoms,  and  spiritually — his  individuality  is  no  worse  for  being 
shut  up  within  the  casing  of  an  ant  than  it  is  for  being  inside 
a  king.  It  is  not  the  outward  or  physical  shape  that  dishonours 
and  pollutes  the  fifth  principle — but  the  mental  perversity. 
Then  it  is  but  at  his  fourth  round  when  arrived  at  the  full  pos- 
session of  his  Kama — energy  and  is  completely  matured,  that 


74  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

man  becomes  fully  responsible,  as  at  the  sixth  he  may  become 
a  Buddha  and  at  the  seventh  before  the  pralaya  a  Dhyan 
Chohan.  Mineral,  vegetable,  animal-man,  all  of  these  have  to 
run  their  seven  rounds  during  the  period  of  earth's  activity — 
the  Mahayug.  I  will  not  enter  here  on  the  details  of  mineral 
and  vegetable  evolution,  but  I  will  notice  only  man — or — animal 
man.  He  starts  downward  as  a  simply  spiritual  entity — an 
unconscious  seventh  principle  (a  Parabrahm  in  contradistinction 
to  Para-parabrahm) — with  the  germs  of  the  other  six  principles 
lying  latent  and  dormant  in  him.  Gathering  solidity  at  every 
sphere — his  six  principles  when  passing  through  the  worlds  of 
effects,  and  his  outward  form  in  the  worlds  of  causes  (for  these 
worlds  or  stages  on  the  descending  side  we  have  other  names) 
when  he  touches  our  planet  he  is  but  a  glorious  bunch  of  light 
upon  a  sphere  itself  yet  pure  and  undefiled  (for  mankind  and 
every  living  thing  on  it  increase  in  their  materiality  with  the 
planet).  At  that  stage  our  globe  is  like  the  head  of  a  newly 
born  babe — soft  and  with  undefined  features,  and  man — an 
Adam  before  the  breath  of  life  Was  breathed  into  his  nostrils 
(to  quote  your  own  bungled  up  Scriptures  for  your  better 
comprehension).  For  man  and  (our  planets)  nature — it  is  day 
— the  first  (see  distorted  tradition  in  your  Bible).  Man  No.  I 
makes  his  appearance  at  the  apex  of  the  circle  of  the  spheres 
on  sphere  No.  1  after  the  completion  of  the  seven  rounds  or 
periods  of  the  two  kingdoms  (known  to  you)  and  thus  he  is 
said  to  be  created  on  the  eighth  day  (see  Bible  Chapter  II;  note 
verses  5  and  6  and  think  what  is  meant  there  by  **  mist,**  and 
verse  7  wherein  Law  the  Universal  great  fashioner  is  termed 
*'  God  '  by  Christians  and  Jews,  and  understood  as  Evolution 
by  Cabalists).  During  this  first  round  **  animal  man  "  runs,  as 
you  say,  his  cycle  in  a  spiral.'*  On  the  descending  arc — whence 
he  starts  after  the  completion  of  the  seventh  round  of  animal 
life  on  his  own  individual  seven  rounds — he  has  to  enter  every 
sphere  not  as  a  lower  animal  as  you  understand  it  but  as  a  lower 
man.  Since  during  the  cycle  which  preceded  his  round  as  a 
man  he  performed  it  as  the  highest  type  of  animal.  Your 
Lord  God,"  says  Bible,  chapter  I,  verse  25  and  26 — after 
having  made  all  said  :  **  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,"  etc., 
and  creates  man  an  androgyne  ape!  (extinct  on  our  planet)  the 
highest  intelligence  in  the  animal  kingdom  and  whose  descend- 
ants you  find  in  the  anthropoids  of  to-day.  Will  you  deny  the 
possibility  of  the  highest  anthropoid  in  the  next  sphere  being 
higher  in  intelligence  than  some  men  down  here — savages,  for 
instance,  the  African — dwarf  race  and  our  own  Veddahs  of 
Ceylon.  But  man  has  no  such  "  degradation  "  to  go  through 
as  soon  as  he  has  reached  the  fourth  stage  of  his  cyclic  round. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    75 

Like  the  lower  lives  and  beings  during  his  first,  second  and 
third  round  and  while  he  is  an  irresponsible  compound  of  pure 
matter  and  pure  spirit  (none  of  them  as  yet  defiled  by  the 
consciousness  of  their  possible  purposes  and  applications)  from 
sphere  I  where  he  has  performed  his  local  seven-fold  round  of 
evolutionary  process  from  the  lowest  class  to  the  highest  species 
of — say — anthropoids  up  to  the  rudimentary  man  certainly 
enters  No.  2  as  an  ape  (the  last  word  being  used  for  your  better 
comprehension).  At  this  round  or  stage  his  individuality  is  as 
dormant  in  him  as  that  of  a  foetus  during  his  period  of  gesta- 
tion. He  has  no  consciousness,  no  sense,  for  he  begins  as  a 
rudimentary  asp'al  man  and  lands  on  our  planet  as  a  primitive 
physical  man.  So  far  it  is  a  mere  passing  on  of  mechanical 
motion.  Volition  and  consciousness  are  at  the  same  time  self- 
determining  and  determined  by  causes,  and  the  volition  of  man 
his  intelligence  and  consciousness  will  awake  but  when  his 
fourth  principle  Kama  is  matured  and  completed  by  its 
(seriatim)  contact  with  the  Kamas  or  energizing  forces  of  all  the 
forms  man  has  passed  through  in  his  previous  three  rounds. 
The  present  mankind  is  at  its  fourth  round  (mankind  as  a  genus 
or  a  k.ind  not  a  race  nota  bene)  of  the  post-pralayan  cycle  of 
evolution;  and  as  its  various  races,  so  the  individual  entities  in 
them  are  unconsciously  to  themselves  performing  their  local 
earthly  seven-fold  cycles — hence  the  vast  difference  in  the 
degree  of  their  intelligence,  energy  and  so  on.  Now  every 
individuality  will  be  followed  on  the  ascending  arc  by  the  law 
of  retribution — Karma  and  Death  accordingly.  The  perfect 
man  or  the  entity  which  reached  full  perfection  (each  of  his 
seven  principles  being  matured),  will  not  be  re-born  here. 
His  local  terrestrial  cycle  is  completed  and  he  has  to  either 
proceed  onward  or — be  annihilated  as  an  individuality.  (The 
incomplete  entities  have  to  be  re-born  or  re-incarnated).^  On 
their  fifth  round  after  a  partial  Nirvana  when  the  zenith  of  the 
grand  cycle  is  reached,  they  will  be  held  responsible  having 
being  on  these  worlds.  Your  accepted  conceptions  of 
cosmogony — whether  from  the  theological  or  scientific  stand- 
points— do  not  enable  you  to  solve  a  single  anthropological  or 
even  ethnical  problem  and  they  stand  in  your  way  whenever 
you  attempt  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  races  on  this  planet. 
When  a  man  begins  to  talk  about  creation  and  the  origin  of 
man,  he  is  butting  against  the  facts  incessantly.  Go  on  saying, 
*'  Our  planet  and  man  were  created  " — and  you  will  be  fighting 
against    hard  facts   for   ever,    analyzing   and    losing   time    over 

1  By-the-bye,   I'll  re- write  for  you  pages  345  to  357,  Vol.    I.,  of  I  sis — much 
jumbled,  and  confused  by  Olcott,   who  thought  he  was  improving  it ! 


76  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

trifling  details — unable  to  even  grasp  the  whole.  But  once 
admit  that  our  planet  and  ourselves  are  no  more  creations  than 
the  ice-berg  now  before  me  (in  our  K.H.'s  home)  but  that  both 
planets  and  man  are — states  for  a  given  time;  that  their  present 
appearance — geological  and  anthropological — is  transitory  and 
but  a  condition  concomitant  of  that  stage  of  evolution  at  which 
they  have  arrived  in  the  descending  cycle — and  all  will  become 
plain.  You  will  easily  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  **  one 
and  only  "  element  or  principle  in  the  universe  and  that 
androgynous;  the  seven-headed  serpent  Ananda  of  Vishnu,  the 
Nag  around  Buddha,  the  great  dragon  eternity  biting  with  its 
active  head,  its  passive  tail,  from  the  emanations  of  which 
spring  worlds,  beings  and  things.  You  will  comprehend  the 
reason  why  the  first  philosopher  proclaimed  all — maya — but 
that  one  principle,  which  rests  during  the  mafia-pralayas  only 
— the  **  nights  of  Brahm. "  Now  think:  the  Nag  awakes.  He 
heaves  a  heavy  breath  and  the  latter  is  sent  like  an  electric 
shock  all  along  the  wire  encircling  Space.  Go  to  your  fortepiano 
and  execute  upon  the  lower  register  of  keys  the  seven  notes 
of  the  lower  octave — up  and  down.  Begin  pianipiano: 
crescendo  from  the  first  key  and  having  struck  fortissimo  on 
the  last  lower  note  go  back  diminuendo  getting  out  of  your  last 
note  a  hardly  perceptible  sound — **  morendo  pianissimi  "  (as 
I  luckily  for  my  illustration  find  it  printed  in  one  of  the  musick 
pieces  in  K.H.'s  old  portmanteau).  The  first  and  the  last  notes 
will  represent  to  you  the  first  and  last  spheres,  in  the  cycle  of 
evolution  the  highest !  The  one  you  strike  once  is  our  planet. 
Remember  you  have  to  reverse  the  order  on  the  fortepiano  : 
begin  with  the  seventh  note,  not  with  the  first.  The  seven 
vowels  chanted  by  the  Egyptian  priests  to  the  seven  rays  of 
the  rising  sun  to  which  Memnon  responded,  meant  but  that. 
The  one  Life  principle  when  in  action  runs  in  circuits  even  as 
known  in  physical  science.  It  runs  the  round  in  human  body, 
where  the  head  represents  and  is  to  the  microcosmos  (the 
physical  world  of  matter)  what  the  summit  of  the  cycle  is  to 
the  macrocosmos  (the  world  of  Universal  Spiritual  Forces);  and 
so  with  the  formation  of  worlds  and  the  great  descending  and 
ascending  **  circle  of  necessity."  All  is  one  Law.  Man  has 
his  seven  principles,  the  germs  of  which  he  brings  with  him 
at  his  birth.  So  has  a  planet  or  a  world.  From  first  to  last 
every  sphere  has  its  world  of  effects,  the  passing  through 
which  will  afford  a  place  of  final  rest  to  each  of  the  human 
principles — the  seventh  principle  excepted.  The  world  No.  A 
is  born;  and  with  it,  clinging  like  barnacles  to  the  bottom  of 
a  ship  in  motion — evolute  from  its  first  breath  of  life,  the  living 
beings  of  its  atmosphere,  from  the  germs  hitherto  inert,  now 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    77 

awaken  into  life  with  the  first  motion  of  the  sphere.  With 
sphere  A,  begins  the  mineral  kingdom  and  runs  the  round  of 
mineral  evolution.  By  the  time  it  is  completed  sphere  B, 
comes  into  objectivity  and  draws  to  itself  the  life  which  has 
completed  its  round  in  sphere  A,  and  has  become  a  surplus. 
(The  fount  of  life  being  inexhaustible,  for  it  is  the  true  Arachnea 
doomed  to  spin  out  its  web  eternally — save  the  period  of 
pralaya).  Then  comes  vegetable  life  on  sphere  A  and  the 
same  process  takes  place.  On  its  downward  course  '*  life 
becomes  with  every  state  coarser,  more  material;  on  its  upward 
more  shadowy.  No — there  is,  nor  can  there  be  any  responsi- 
bility until  the  time  when  matter  and  spirit  are  properly 
equilibrized.  Up  to  man  **  life  "  has  no  responsibility  in  what- 
ever form;  no  more  than  has  the  foetus  who  in  his  mother's 
womb  passes  through  all  the  forms  of  life — as  a  mineral,  a 
vegetable,  an  animal  to  become  finally  Man.  Henceforth  in 
their  descents  from  sphere  to  sphere  as  they  will  have  to 
appear  on  this  earth  as  a  still  more  perfect  and  intellectual  race. 
This  downward  course  has  not  yet  begun  but  will  soon.  Only 
how  many — oh,  how  many  will  be  destroyed  on  their  way  ! 

The  above  said  is  the  rule.  The  Buddhas  and  Avatars  form 
the  exception  as  verily  we  have  yet  some  Avatars  left  to  us 
on  earth. 

Seventh  principle  always  there  as  a  latent  force  in  every  one 
of  the  principles — even  body.  As  the  macrocosmic  Whole  it 
is  present  even  in  the  lower  sphere,  but  there  is  nothing  there 
to  assimilate  it  to  itself. 

(7)  The  animal  soul  having  in  successive  passages  round  the 
cycle  lost,  so  to  speak,  the  momentum  which  previously  carried  it 
past  the  divergent  path  downward  which  strikes  off  here,  falls 
into  the  lower  world,  in  the  relatively  brief  cycle  in  which  its 
individuality  is  dissipated. 

But  this  would  only  be  the  case  with  the  animal  soul  which  had 
not,  in  its  union  with  spirit,  developed  a  durable  sixth  principle. 
If  it  had  done  this,  and  if  the  sixth  principle  drawing  to  itself  the 
individuality  of  a  complete  man,  had  withered  the  inferior  fifth 
principle  by  so  doing — as  the  aloe's  flower,  when  thrown  up, 
withers  its  leaves — then  the  animal  soul  would  not  have  cohesion 
enough  to  enter  on  another  existence  in  a  lower  world  and  would 
be  soon  dissipated  in  the  sphere  of  this  earth's  attraction. 

(7)  Reforming  your  conceptions  on  what  I  gave  you  above 
you  will  understand  now  better. 

The  whole  individuality  is  centred  in  the  three  middle  or  3rd, 
4th  and  5th  principles.     During  earthly  life  it  is  all  in  the  fourth 

7 


78  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

the  centre  of  energy,  volition — will.  Mr.  Hume  has  perfectly 
defined  the  difference  between  personality  and  individuality. 
The  former  hardly  survives — the  latter,  to  run  successfully  its 
seven-fold  and  upward  course  has  to  assimilate  to  itself  the 
eternal-life  power  residing  but  in  the  seventh  and  then  blend 
the  three  (fourth,  fifth  and  seventh)  into  one — the  sixth.  Those 
who  succeed  in  doing  so  become  Buddhas,  Dhyan  Chohans, 
etc.  The  chief  object  of  our  struggle  and  initiations  is  to 
achieve  this  union  while  yet  on  this  earth.  Those  who  will  be 
successful  have  nothing  to  fear  of  during  the  fifth,  sixth  and 
seventh  rounds.  But  this  is  a  mystery.  Our  beloved  K.H.  is 
on  his  way  to  the  goal — the  highest  of  all  beyond  us  on  this 
sphere. 

I   have   to   thank   you   for   all   you   have    done    for   our   two 
friends.     It  is  a  debt  of  gratitude  we  owe  you. 

M. 

For   some   short  time   you  will  not  hear   of,    or   from  me — 
Prepare. 


LETTER  No.  XIV^ 
Letter  from  K.H.     Answering  Queries.     Received  by  A.O.H.,  July  9th,    1882. 

(i)  We  understand  that  the  man-bearing  cycle  of  necessity  of 
our  solar  system  consists  of  thirteen  objective  globes,  of  which 
ours  is  the  lowest,  six  above  it  in  the  ascending,  and  six  in  the 
descending  cycle  with  a  fourteenth  world  lower  still  than  ours. 
Is  this  correct? 

(1)  The  number  is  not  quite  correct.  There  are  seven  ob- 
jective and  seven  subjective  globes  (I  have  been  just  permitted 
for  the  first  time  to  give  you  the  right  figure),  the  worlds  of 
causes  and  of  effects.  The  former  have  our  earth  occupying 
the  lower  turning  point  where  spirit  matter  equilibrates.  But 
do  not  trouble  yourself  to  go  into  calculations  even  on  this 
correct  basis  for  it  will  only  puzzle  you,  since  the  infinite 
ramifications  of  the  number  seven  (which  is  one  of  our  greatest 
mysteries)  being  so  closely  allied  and  interdependent  with  the 
seven  principles  of  Nature  and  man — this  figure  is  the  only  one 
I  am  permitted  (so  far)  to  give  you.  What  I  can  reveal  1  do 
so  in  a  letter  I  am  just  finishing. 

(2)  We  understand  that  below  man  you  reckon  not  three  king- 
doms as  we  do  (mineral,  vegetable  and  animal)  but  seven.  Please 
enumerate  and  explain  these. 

1  Transcribed  from  a  copy  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  handwriting. — Ed, 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOEETICAL  TEACHINGS    79 

(2)  Below  man  there  are  three  on  the  objective  and  three  in 
the  subjective  region,  with  man  a  septenary.  Two  of  the 
three  former  none  but  an  initiate  could  conceive  of;  the  third 
is  the  Inner  kingdom — below  the  crust  of  the  earth  which  we 
could  name  but  would  feel  embarrassed  to  describe.  These 
seven  kingdoms  are  preceded  by  other  and  numerous  septenary 
stages  and  combinations. 

(3)  We  understand  that  the  monad,  starting  in  the  highest 
world  of  the  descending  series,  appears  there  in  a  mineral  encase- 
ment, and  there  goes  through  a  series  of  seven  encasements  repre- 
senting the  seven  classes  into  which  the  mineral  kingdom  is 
divided,  and  that  this  done  it  passes  to  the  next  planet  and  does 
likewise  (I  purposely  say  nothing  of  the  worlds  of  results,  where  it 
takes  on  the  development  the  result  of  what  it  has  gone  through 
in  the  last  world  and  the  necessary  preparation  for  the  next)  and 
so  on  right  through  the  thirteen  spheres,  making  altogether  91 
mineral  existences,  (a)  Is  this  correct?  (b)  If  so,  what  are  the 
classes  we  are  to  reckon  in  the  mineral  kingdom?  Also  (c)  How 
does  the  monad  get  out  of  one  encasement  into  another ;  in  the 
case  of  inherbations  and  incarnations,  the  plant  and  animal  dies, 
but  so  far  as  we  know  the  mineral  does  not  die,  so  how  does  the 
monad  in  the  first  round  get  out  of  one  into  another  inmetalliation  ? 
(d)  And  has  every  separate  molecule  of  the  mineral  a  monad  or 
only  those  groups  of  molecules  where  definite  structure  is  observ- 
able such  as  crystals? 

(3)  Yes;  in  our  string  of  worlds  it  starts  at  globe  '*  A  "  of  the 
descending  series  and  passing  through  all  the  preliminary  evolu- 
tions and  combinations  of  the  first  three  kingdoms  it  finds  itself 
encased  in  its  first  mineral  form  (in  what  I  call  race  when  speak- 
ing of  man  and  what  we  may  call  class  in  general) — of  class  1  — 
there.  Only  it  passes  through  seven  instead  of  **  through  the 
thirteen  spheres  "  even  omitting  the  intermediate  **  worlds  of 
results."  Having  passed  through  its  seven  great  classes  of 
inmetalliation  (a  good  word  this)  with  their  septenary  ramifica- 
tions— the  monad  gives  birth  to  the  vegetable  kingdom  and 
moves  on  to  the  next  planet  **  B." 

(a)  As  you  now  see,  except  as  to  the  numbers,  (b)  Your 
geologists  divide,  I  believe,  stones  into  three  great  groups — of 
Sandstone,  granite  and  chalk;  or  the  sedimentary,  organic,  and 
igneous,  following  their  physical  characteristics  just  as  the 
psychologists  and  spiritualists  divide  man  into  the  trinity  of 
body,  soul,  and  spirit.  Our  method  is  totally  different.  We 
divide  minerals  (also  the  other  kingdoms)  according  to  their 
occult  properties,  i.e.,  according  to  the  relative  proportion  of 


8o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

the  seven  universal  principles  which  they  contain.  I  am  sorry 
to  refuse  you,  but  I  cannot,  am  not  permitted  to  answer  your 
question.  To  facilitate  for  you  a  question  of  simple  nomen- 
clature, however,  I  would  advise  you  to  study  perfectly  the 
seven  principles  in  man,  and  thus  to  divide  the  seven  great 
classes  of  the  minerals  correspondingly.  For  instance,  the 
group  of  the  sedimentary  would  answer  to  the  compound 
(chemically  speaking)  body  of  man  or  his  first  principle;  the 
organic  to  the  second  (some  call  it  third)  principle  or  jiva,  etc., 
etc.  You  must  exercise  your  own  intuition  in  that.  Thus  you 
might  also  intuite  certain  truths  even  as  to  their  properties.  1 
am  more  than  willing  to  help  you  but  things  have  to  be  divulged 
gradually,  (c)  By  occult  osmosis.  The  plant  and  animal  leave 
these  carcases  behind  when  life  is  extinct.  So  does  the 
mineral  only  at  longer  intervals,  as  its  rocky  body  is  more 
lasting.  It  dies  at  the  end  of  every  manwantaric  cycle,  or  at 
the  close  of  one  * '  Round  ' '  as  you  would  call  it.  It  is  explained 
in  the  letter  I  am  preparing  for  you.  (d)  Every  molecule  is 
part  of  the  universal  life.  Man's  soul  (his  fourth  and  fifth 
principle)  is  but  a  compound  of  the  progressed  entities  of  the 
lower  kingdom.  The  superabundance  or  preponderance  of  one 
over  another  compound  will  often  determine  the  instincts  and 
passions  of  a  man,  unless  these  are  checked  by  the  soothing 
and  spiritualizing  influence  of  his  sixth  principle. 

(4)  Please  note,  we  call  the  Grand  Cycle  that  the  monad  has 
performed  in  the  mineral  kingdom  a  "  round  "  which  we  under- 
stand to  contain  thirteen  (seven)  stations,  or  objective,  more  or 
less  material  worlds.  At  each  of  these  stations  it  performs  what 
we  call  a  **  world  ring,"  which  includes  seven  inmetalliations,  one 
in  each  of  the  seven  classes  of  that  kingdom.  Is  this  accepted 
for  nomenclature  and  correct? 

(4)  I  believe  it  will  lead  to  a  further  confusion.  A  Round  we 
are  agreed  to  call  the  passage  of  a  monad  from  globe  '*  A  " 
to  globe  **  Z  "  (or  **  G  *')  through  the  encasement  in  all  and 
each  of  the  four  kingdoms,  viz.,  as  a  mineral,  a  vegetable,  an 
animal  and  man  or  the  Deva  kingdom.  The  **  world  ring  "  is 
correct.  M.  advised  Mr.  Sinnett  strongely  to  agree  upon  a 
nomenclature  before  going  any  further.  A  few  stray  facts  were 
given  to  you  par  contrihande  and  on  the  smuggling  principle 
hitherto.  But  now  since  you  seem  really  and  seriously  deter- 
mined to  study  and  utilize  our  philosophy — it  is  time  we  should 
begin  to  work  seriously.  Because  w^e  are  constrained  to  deny 
to  our  friends  an  insight  into  the  higher  Mathematics  it  is  no 
reason  why  we  should  refuse  to  teach  them  arithmetic.      The 


i 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    8i 

monad  performs  not  only  **  world  rings  *'  or  seven  major  in- 
metalliations,  inherbations,  zoonizations  (?)  and  incarnations — 
but  an  infinitude  of  sub-rings  or  subordinate  whirls  all  in  series 
of  sevens.  As  tbe  geologist  divides  the  crust  of  the  earth  into 
great  divisions,  sub-divisions,  minor  compartments  and  zones; 
and  the  botanist  his  plants  into  orders,  classes  and  species,  and 
the  zoologist  his  subjects  into  classes,  orders  and  families,  so 
we  have  our  arbitrary  classifications  and  our  nomenclature. 
But  besides  all  this  being  incomprehensible  to  you,  volumes 
upon  volumes  out  of  the  Books  of  Kin-te  and  others  would 
have  to  be  written.  Their  commentaries  are  worse  still.  They 
are  filled  with  the  most  abstruse  mathematical  calculations  the 
key  to  most  of  which  are  in  the  hands  of  our  highest  adepts 
only,  since  showing  as  they  do  the  infinitude  of  the  phenomenal 
manifestations  in  the  side  projections  of  the  one  Force  they  are 
again  secret.  Therefore  I  doubt  whether  I  will  be  allowed  to 
give  you  for  the  present  anything  beyond  the  mere  unitary  or 
root  idea.     Anyhow  I  will  do  my  best. 

(5)  We  understand  that  in  each  of  your  other  six  kingdoms,  a 
monad  similarly  performs  a  complete  round,  in  each  round  stop- 
ping in  each  of  the  thirteen  stations,  and  there  performing-  in  each 
a  world  ring  of  seven  lives,  one  in  each  of  the  seven  classes  into 
hich  each  of  the  6  said  kingdoms  are  divided.  Is  this  correct, 
d,  if  so,  will  you  give  us  the  seven  classes  of  these  six 
ingdoms  ? 


(5)  If  by  kingdoms  the  seven  kingdoms  or  regions  of  the  earth 
are  meant — and  I  do  not  see  how  it  can  mean  anything  else — 
then  the  query  is  answered  in  my  reply  to  your  Question  (2) 
and  if  so  then  the  five  out  of  the  seven  are  already  enumerated. 
The  first  two  are  related  as  well  as  the  third,  to  the  evolution 
of  the  elementals  and  of  the  Inner  kingdom. 

(6)  If  we  are  right  then  the  total  existences  prior  to  the  man- 
period  is  637.  Is  this  correct?  Or  are  there  seven  existences  in 
each  class  of  each  kingdom,  4,459?  Or  what  are  the  total 
numbers  and  how  divided?  One  point  more.  In  these  lower 
kingdoms  is  the  number  of  lives,  so  to  speak,  invariable,  or  does 
it  vary,  and,  if  so,  how,  why,  and  within  what  limits? 

(6)  Not  being  permitted  to  give  you  the  whole  truth,  or  divulge 
the  number  of  isolated  fractions,  I  am  unable  to  satisfy  you  by 
giving  you  the  total  number.  Rest  assured  my  dear  Brother, 
that  to  one  who  does  not  seek  to  become  a  practical  occultist 
these  numbers  are  immaterial.  Even  our  high  chelas  are  re- 
fused these  particulars    to  the  moment  of  their  initiation  into 


82  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

adeptship.  These  figures  as  I  have  already  said  are  so  inter- 
woven with  the  profoundest  psychological  mysteries  that  to 
divulge  the  key  to  such  figures,  would  be  to  put  the  rod  of 
power  within  the  reach  of  all  the  clever  men  who  would  read 
your  book.  All  that  I  can  tell  you  is  that  within  the  Solar 
manwantara  the  number  of  existences  or  vital  activities  of  the 
monad  is  fixed,  but  there  are  local  variations  in  number  in 
minor  systems,  individual  worlds,  rounds,  and  world  rings, 
according  to  circumstances.  And  in  this  connexion  remember 
also  that  human  personalities  are  often  blotted  out,  while  the 
entities  whether  single  or  compound  complete  all  the  minor  and 
major  cycles  of  necessity  under  whatsoever  form. 

(7)  So  far  we  hope  we  are  tolerably  correct,  but  when  we  come 
to  Man  we  have  gfot  muddled. 

(7)  And  no  wonder,  since  you  were  not  given  the  correct 
information. 

(7a)  Does  the  monad  of  Man  (ape-man  and  upwards)  make  one 
or  seven  rounds  as  above  defined  ?     We  gathered  the  latter. 

(7a)  As  a  man-ape  he  performs  just  as  many  rounds  and 
rings  as  every  other  race  or  class;  i.e.,  he  performs  one  Round 
and  in  every  planet  from  '*  A  **  to  **  Z  *'  has  to  go  through 
seven  chief  races  of  ape-like  man,  as  many  sub-races,  etc.,  etc. 

(See  Supplemental  Note).     As  the  above  described  race. 

(7b)  At  each  round  does  his  world-circle  consist  of  seven  lives  in 
seven  races  (49)  or  of  only  seven  lives  in  one  race?  We  are  not 
certain  how  you  use  the  word  race,  whether  there  is  only  one 
race  to  each  station  of  each  round,  i.e.,  one  race  to  each  world- 
circle  or  whether  there  are  seven  races  (with  their  seven  branch- 
lets  and  a  life  in  each  in  either  case)  in  each  world-circle?  Nay, 
from  your  use  of  the  words  '*  and  through  each  of  these  Man  has 
to  evolute  before  he  passes  on  to  the  next  higher  race  and  that 
seven  times/*  we  are  not  sure  that  there  are  not  seven  lives  in 
each  branchlet  as  you  call  it,  suh-race  we  will,  if  you  like,  say. 
So  now  there  may  be  seven  rounds  each  with  seven  races,  each 
with  seven  sub-races,  each  with  seven  incarnations=  13  x  7  x  7  x 
7x7  =  31,  313  lives,  or  one  round  with  seven  races  and  seven  sub- 
races  and  a  life  in  each=  13  x  7  x  7  =  637  lives  or  again  4,459 
lives.  Please  set  us  right  here  stating  the  normal  number  of 
lives  (the  exact  numbers  will  vary  owing  to  idiots,  children,  etc., 
not  counting)  and  how  divided. 

(7b)  As  the  above  described  race:  i.e.,  at  each  planet — our 
earth  included — ^he  has  to  perform  seven  rings  through  seven 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    83 

races  (one  in  each)  and  seven  multiplied  by  seven  offshoots. 
There  are  seven  root-races,  and  seven  sub-races  or  offshoots. 
Our  doctrine  treats  anthropology  as  an  absurd  empty  dream  of 
the  religionists  and  confines  itself  to  ethnology.  It  is  possible 
that  my  nomenclature  is  faulty  :  you  are  at  liberty  in  such  a  case 
to  change  it.  What  I  call  '*  race  **  you  would  perhaps  term 
**  stock  '*  though  sub-race  expresses  better  what  we  mean  than 
the  word  family  or  division  of  the  genus  homo.  However,  to 
set  you  right  so  far  I  will  say — one  life  in  each  of  the  seven  root- 
races;  seven  lives  in  each  of  the  49  sub-races — or  7  x  7  x  7  =  343 
and  add  7  more.  And  then  a  series  of  lives  in  offshoot  and 
branchlet  races;  making  the  total  incarnations  of  man  in  each 
station  or  planet  777.  TTie  principle  of  acceleration  and  re- 
tardation applies  itself  in  such  a  way,  as  to  eliminate  all  the 
inferior  stocks  and  leave  but  a  single  superior  one  to  make  the 
last  ring.  Not  much  to  divide  over  some  millions  of  years  that 
man  passes  on  one  planet.  Let  us  take  but  one  million  of 
years — suspected  and  now  accepted  by  your  science — to  repre- 
sent man's  entire  term  upon  our  earth  in  this  Round;  and  al- 
lowing an  average  of  a  century  for  each  life,  we  find  that 
whereas  he  has  passed  in  all  his  lives  upon  our  planet  (on  this 
Round)  but  77,700  years  he  has  been  in  the  subjective  spheres 
922,300  years.  Not  much  encouragement  for  the  extreme 
modern  re-incarnationists  who  remember  their  several  previous 
existences  ! 

Should  you  indulge  in  any  calculations  do  not  forget  that  we 
have  computed  above  only  full  average  lives  of  consciousness 
and  responsibility.  Nothing  has  been  said  as  to  the  failures 
of  nature  in  abortions,  congenital  idiots,  death  of  children  in 
their  first  septenary  cycles,  nor  of  the  exceptions  of  which  I 
cannot  speak.  No  less  have  you  to  remember  that  average 
human  life  varies  greatly  according  to  the  Rounds.  TTiough  I 
am  obliged  to  withhold  information  about  many  points  yet  if 
you  should  work  out  any  of  the  problems  by  yourself  it  will  be 
my  duty  to  tell  you  so.  Try  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  777 
incarnations. 

(8)  **  M  '*  said  all  mankind  is  in  the  fourth  round,  the  fifth  has 
not  yet  commenced  but  soon  will.  Was  this  a  slip?  If  not,  then 
collatings  this  with  your  present  remarks  we  gather  that  all  man- 
kind is  on  the  fourth  round  (though  in  another  place  he  seemed  to 
say  we  are  on  the  fifth  round).  That  the  highest  people  now  on 
earth  belong  to  the  first  sub-race  of  the  fifth  race,  the  majority  to 
the  seventh  sub-race  of  the  fourth  race  but  with  remnants  of  the 
other  sub-races  of  the  fourth  race  and  the  seventh  sub-race  of  the 
third  race.     Pray  set  us  quite  right  on  this. 


84  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

(8)  **  M  '*  knows  very  little  English  and  hates  writing.  But 
even  I  might  have  used  very  well  the  same  expression.  A  few 
drops  of  rain  do  not  make  a  monsoon  though  they  presage  it. 
The  fifth  round  has  not  commenced  on  our  earth  and  the  races 
and  sub-races  of  one  round  must  not  be  confounded  with  those 
of  another  round.  The  fifth  round  mankind  may  be  said  to 
have  **  commenced  "  when  there  shall  not  be  left  on  the  planet 
which  precedes  ours  a  single  man  of  that  round  and  on  our 
earth  not  one  of  the  fourth  round.  You  should  know  also  that 
the  casual  fifth  round  men  (and  very  few  and  scarce  they  are) 
who  come  in  upon  us  as  avant  couriers  do  not  beget  on  earth 
fifth  round  progeny.  Plato  and  Confucius  were  fifth  round  men 
and  our  Lord  a  sixth  round  man  (the  mystery  of  his  avatar  is 
spoken  of  in  my  forthcoming  letter)  not  even  Gautama  Buddha's 
son  was  anything  but  a  fourth  round  man. 

Our  mystic  terms  in  their  clumsy  re-translation  from  the 
Sanskrit  into  English  are  as  confusing  to  us  as  they  are  to  you 
— especially  to  **  M  '*  unless  in  writing  to  you  one  of  us  takes 
his  pen  as  an  adept  and  uses  it  from  the  first  words  to  the  last, 
in  this  capacity  he  is  quite  as  liable  to  **  slips  "  as  any  other 
man.  No,  we  are  not  in  the  fifth  round,  but  fifth  round  men 
have  been  coming  in  for  the  last  few  thousand  years.  But  what 
is  such  a  petty  stretch  of  time  in  comparison  with  even  one 
million  of  the  several  millions  of  years  embraced  in  man's 
occupancy  of  earth  in  a  single  round. 

K.H. 
Please  examine  carefully  the  few  additional  things  I  give  you 
on  the  fly-leaves.     Damodar  has  received  orders  to  send  you 
No.  3  of  Terry's  letters — a  good  material  for  pamphlet  No.   3 
of  Fragments  of  Occult  Truth. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    85 


MAN  ON  A  PLANET^ 


For   explanatory    notes   see   page   86. 


86  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

This  figure  roughly  represents  the  development  of  humanity 
on  a  planet — say  our  earth.  Man  evolves  from  seven  major  or 
root-races;  49  minor  races;  and  the  subordinate  races  or  off- 
shoots, the  branchlet  races  coming  from  the  latter  are  not  shown. 

The  arrow  indicates  the  direction  taken  by  the  evolutionary 
impulse. 

I,  II,  III,  IV,  etc.,  are  the  seven  major  or  root-races. 

I,  2,  3,  etc.,  are  the  minor  races. 

a,  a,  a,  are  the  subordinate  or  offshoot  races. 

N,  the  initial  and  terminal  point  of  evolution  on  the  planet. 

S,  the  axial  point  where  the  development  equilibrates  or 
adjusts  itself  in  each  race  evolution. 

E,  the  equatorial  points  where  in  the  descending  arc  intellect 
overcomes  spirituality  and  in  the  ascending  arc  spirituality 
outstrips  intellect. 

(N.B.— The  above  in  D.K.*s  hand— the  rest  in  K.H.'s.— A.P.S.) 

P.S. — In  his  hurry  D.J.K.  has  made  his  figure  incline  some- 
what out  of  the  perpendicular  but  it  will  serve  as  a  rough 
memorandum.  He  drew  it  to  represent  development  on  a 
single  planet  but  I  have  added  a  word  or  two  to  make  it  apply 
as  well  (w^hich  it  does)  to  a  whole  manwantaric  chain  of  worlds. 

K.H. 

Supplementary  Notes. 

Whenever  any  question  of  evolution  or  development  in  any 
Kingdom  presents  itself  to  you  bear  constantly  in  mind  that 
everything  comes  under  the  Septenary  rule  of  series  in  their 
correspondence  and  mutual  relation  throughout  nature. 

In  the  evolution  of  man  there  is  a  topmost  point,  a  bottom 
point,  a  descending  arc,  and  an  ascending  arc.  As  it  is 
**  Spirit  "  which  transforms  itself  into  "  matter  "  and  (not 
*'  matter  *'  which  ascends — but)  matter  which  resolves  once 
more  into  spirit,  of  course  the  first  race  evolution  and  the  last 
on  a  planet  (as  in  each  round)  must  be  more  etherial,  more 
spiritual,  the  fourth  or  lowermost  one  most  physical  (pro- 
gressively of  course  in  each  round)  and  at  the  same  time — as 
physical  intelligence  is  the  last  manifestation  of  spiritual  intel- 
ligence— each  evoluted  race  in  the  downward  arc  must  be  more 
physically  intelligent  than  its  predecessor,  and  each  in  the 
upward  arc  have  a  more  refined  form  of  mentality  commingled 
with  spiritual  intuitiveness. 

This  (as  race  or  stock)  of  the  first  round  after  a  solar 
manwantara  (kindly  wait  for  my  forthcoming  letter  before  you 
allow  yourself  to  be  repuzzled  or  remuddled.  It  will  explain 
a  good  deal)  would  then  be  a  God-man  race  if  an  almost  im- 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    87 

palpable  shape,  and  so  it  is;  but  then  comes  the  difficulty  to 
the  student  to  reconcile  this  fact  with  the  evolution  of  man  from 
the  animal — however  high  his  form  among  the  anthropoids. 
And  yet  it  is  reconcilable,  for  whomsoever  will  hold  religiously 
to  a  strict  analogy  between  the  works  of  the  two  worlds,  the 
visible  and  the  invisible — one  world,  in  fact,  as  one  is  working 
within  itself  so  to  say.  Now  there  are — there  must  be 
**  failures  '*  in  the  etherial  races  of  the  many  classes  of  Dyan 
Chohans  or  Devas  as  well  as  among  men?  But  still  as  these 
failures  are  too  far  progressed  and  spiritualized  to  be  thrown 
back  forcibly  from  their  Dyan  Chohanship  into  the  vortex  of  a 
new  primordial  evolution  through  the  lower  kingdoms — this 
then  happens.  When  a  new  solar  system  is  to  be  evolved  these 
Dyan  Chohans  are  (remember  the  Hindu  allegory  of  the  fallen 
Devas  hurled  by  Siva  into  Hudarah  who  are  allowed  by  Para 
Brahm  to  consider  it  as  an  intermediate  state  where  they  may 
prepare  themselves  by  a  series  of  rebirths  in  that  sphere  for  a 
higher  state — a  new  regeneration).  Borne  in  by  the  influx 
"  ahead  **  of  the  elementals  and  remains  as  a  latent  or  inactive 
spiritual  force  in  the  aura  of  the  nascent  world  of  a  new  system 
until  the  stage  of  human  evolution  is  reached.  Then  Karma 
has  reached  them  and  they  will  have  to  accept  to  the  last  drop 
in  the  bitter  cup  of  retribution.  Then  they  become  an  active 
Force,  and  commingle  with  the  Elementals,  or  progressed 
entities  of  the  pure  animal  kingdom  to  develope  little  by  little 
the  full  type  of  humanity.  In  this  commingling  they  lose  their 
high  intelligence  and  spirituality  of  Devaship  to  regain  them  in 
the  end  of  the  seventh  ring  in  the  seventh  round. 

TTius  we  have  : 

]st  Round. — An  etherial  being — non-intelligent,  but  super- 
spiritual.  In  each  of  the  subsequent  races  and  sub-races  and 
minor  races  of  evolution  he  grows  more  and  more  into  an 
encased  or  incarnate  being,  but  still  preponderatingly  etherial. 
And  like  the  animal  and  vegetable  he  develops  monstrous 
bodies  correspondential  with  his  coarse  surroimdings. 

2nd  Round. — He  is  still  gigantic  and  etherial,  but  growing 
firmer  and  more  condensed  in  body — a  more  physical  man,  but 
yet  still  less  intelligent  than  spiritual;  for  mind  is  a  slower  and 
more  difficult  evolution  than  the  physical  frame  and  the  mind 
would  not  develop  as  rapidly  as  the  body. 

3rd  Round. — He  has  now  a  perfectly  concrete  or  compacted 
body;  at  first  the  form  of  a  giant  ape,  and  more  intelligent  (or 
rather  cunning)  than  spiritual.  For  in  the  downward  arc  he  has 
now  reached  the  point  where  his  primordial  spirituality  is 
ecliDsed  or  over-shadowed  by  nascent  mentality.  In  the  last 
half  of  this  third  round  his  gigantic  stature  decreases,  his  body 


88  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

improves  in  texture  (perhaps  the  microscope  might  help  to 
demonstrate  this)  and  he  becomes  a  more  rational  being — 
though  still  more  an  ape  than  a  Deva  man. 

4th  round. — Intellect  has  an  enormous  development  in  this 
round.  The  dumb  races  will  acquire  our  human  speech,  on 
our  globe,  on  which  from  the  4th  race  language  is  perfected 
and  knowledge  of  physical  things  increases.  At  this  half-way 
point  of  the  fourth  round,  Humanity  passes  the  axial  point  of 
a  minor  manwantaric  circle.  (More-over,  at  the  middle  point 
of  every  major  or  root  race  evolution  of  each  round,  man  passes 
the  equator  of  his  course  on  that  planet,  the  same  rule  applying 
to  the  whole  evolution  or  the  seven  rounds  of  the  minor 
Manwantara — 7  rounds ^2  =  3)4  rounds).  At  this  point  then  the 
world  teems  with  the  results  of  intellectual  activity  and  spiritual 
decrease.  In  the  first  half  of  the  fourth  race,  sciences,  arts, 
literature  and  philosophy  were  bom,  eclipsed  in  one  nation, 
reborn  in  another.  Civilization  and  intellectual  development 
whirling  in  septenary  cycles  as  the  rest;  while  it  is  but  in  the 
latter  half  that  the  spiritual  Ego  will  begin  its  real  struggle  with 
body  and  mind  to  manifest  its  transcendental  powers.  Who 
will  help  in  the  forthcoming  gigantic  struggle?  Who?  Happy 
the  man  who  helps  a  helping  hand. 

5th  Round. — The  same  relative  development,  and  the  same 
struggle  continues. 

6th  Round. 

7th  Round. 
Of  these  we  need  not  speak. 


LETTER  No.   XV^ 

From   K.H.   to   A.O.H.     Received  July    loth,    1882. 

(i)  Does  every  mineral  form,  vegetable,  plant,  animal,  always 
contain  within  it  that  entity  which  involves  the  potentiality  of 
development  into  a  planetary  spirit?  At  this  present  day  in  this 
present  earth  is  there  such  an  essence  or  spirit  or  soul — the  name 
is  immaterial  in  every  mineral. 

(1)  Invariably;  only  rather  call  it  the  germ  of  a  future  entity, 
which  it  has  been  for  ages.  Take  the  human  foetus.  From 
the  moment  of  its  first  planting  until  it  completes  its  seven 
months  of  gestation  it  repeats  in  miniature  the  mineral, 
vegetable,  and  animal  cycles  it  passed  through  in  its  previous 

1  Transcribed  from   a  copy   in   Mr.    Sinnett's  handwriting. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    89 

encasements,  and  only  during  the  last  two,  develops  its  future 
human  entity.  It  is  completed  but  towards  the  child's  seventh 
year.  Yet  it  existed  without  any  increase  or  decrease  aeons 
on  aeons  before  it  worked  its  way  onward,  through  and  in  the 
womb  of  mother  nature  as  it  works  now  in  its  earthly  mother's 
bosom.  Truly  said  a  learned  philosopher  who  trusts  more  to 
the  intuition  than  to  the  dicta  of  modern  science.  **  The  stages 
of  man's  intra-uterine  existence  embody  the  condensed  record 
of  some  of  the  missing  pages  in  Earth's  history."  Thus  you 
must  look  back  at  the  animal,  mineral  and  vegetable  entities. 
You  must  take  each  entity  at  its  starting  point  in  the  manvantaric 
course  as  the  primordial  cosmic  atom  already  differentiated  by 
the  first  flutter  of  the  manvantaric  life  breath.  For  the  poten- 
tiality which  develops  finally  in  a  perfected  planetary  spirit 
lurks  in,  is  in  fact  that  primordial  cosmic  atom.  Drawn  by  its 
**  chemical  affinity  "  to  coalesce  with  other  like  atoms  the 
aggregate  sum  of  such  united  atoms  will  in  time  become  a  man- 
bearing  globe  after  the  stages  of  the  cloud,  the  spiral  and  sphere 
of  fire-mist  and  of  the  condensation,  consolidation,  shrinkage 
and  cooling  of  the  planet  have  been  successively  passed 
through.  But  mind,  not  every  globe  becomes  a  **  man  bearer.'* 
I  simply  state  the  fact  without  dwelling  further  upon  it  in  this 
connection.  The  great  difficulty  in  grasping  the  idea  in  the 
above  process  lies  in  the  liability  to  form  more  or  less  incom- 
plete mental  conceptions  of  the  working  of  the  one  element. 
Of  its  inevitable  presence  in  every  imponderable  atom,  and  its 
subsequent  ceaseless  and  almost  illimitable  multiplication  of 
new  centres  of  activity  without  affecting  in  the  least  its  own 
original  quantity.  Let  us  take  such  an  aggregation  of  atoms 
destined  to  form  our  globe  and  then  follow,  throwing  a  cursory 
look  at  the  whole,  the  special  work  of  such  atoms.  We  will 
call  the  primordial  atom  A.  This  being  not  a  circumscribed 
centre  of  activity  but  one  initial  point  of  a  manwantaric  whirl 
of  evolution;  gives  birth  to  new  centres  which  we  may  term  B, 
C,  D,  etc.,  incomputably.  Each  of  these  capital  points 
gives  birth  to  minor  centres,  a,  b,  c,  etc.  And  later  in  the 
course  of  evolution  and  involution  in  their  development  into 
A's,  B's,  C's,  etc.,  and  so  form  the  roots  or  are  the  developing 
causes  of  new  genera,  species,  classes,  etc.,  ad  infinitum.  Now 
neither  the  primordial  A  and  its  companion  atoms,  nor  their 
derived  a's,  b's,  c's,  have  lost  one  tittle  of  their  original  force 
or  life  essence  by  the  evolution  of  their  derivatives.  The  force 
there,  is  not  transformed  into  something  else  as  I  have  already 
shown  in  my  letter,  but  with  each  development  of  a  new  centre 
and  acting  from  within  itself  multiplies  ad  infinitum  without 
ever  losing  a  particle  of  its  nature  in  quantity  or  quality.     Yet 


90  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

acquiring  as  it  progresses  something  plus  in  its  differentiation. 
This  *'  force  "  so-called,  shows  itself  truly  indestructible  but 
does  not  correlate  and  is  not  convertible  in  the  sense  accepted 
by  the  Fellows  of  the  R.S.  But  rather  may  be  said  to  grow 
and  expand  into  **  something  else  "  while  neither  its  own 
potentiality  nor  being  are  in  the  least  affected  by  the  trans- 
formation. Nor  can  it  well  be  called  force  since  the  latter  is  but 
the  attribute  of  Yin  Sin  (Yin  Sin  or  the  one  **  Form  of  exist- 
ence "  also  Adi-Buddhi  or  Dharmakaya  the  mystic,  universally 
diffused  essence)  when  manifesting  in  the  phenomenal  world 
of  senses  namely  only  your  old  acquaintance  Fohat.  See  in 
this  connexion  Subba  Row's  article  '  Aryan  Arhat  Esoteric 
Doctrines  "  on  the  seven-fold  principles  in  man.  His  review 
of  your  Fragments,  pp.  94  and  95.  The  initiated  Brahmins 
call  (the  Yin  Sin  and  Fohat)  Brahman  and  Sakti  when  mani- 
festing as  that  force.  We  will  perhaps  be  nearer  correct  to  call 
it  infinite  life  and  the  source  of  all  life  visible  and  invisible  an 
essence  inexhaustible  ever  present  in  short  Swabhavat  (S.  in 
its  universal  application  Fohat  when  manifesting  throughout 
our  phenomenal  world  or  rather  the  visible  universe  hence  in 
its  limitations).  It  is  pravritti  when  active,  nirvitti  when  pas- 
sive. Call  it  the  Sakti  of  Parabrahma,  if  you  like,  and  say  with 
the  Adwaitees  (Subba  Row  is  one)  that  Parabrahm  plus  Maya 
becomes  Iswar  the  creative  principle — a  power  commonly 
called  God  which  disappears  and  dies  with  the  rest  when 
pralaya  comes.  Or  you  may  hold  with  the  northern  Buddhist 
philosophers  and  call  it  Adi-buddhi  the  all-pervading  supreme 
and  absolute  intelligence  with  its  periodically  manifesting 
Divinity — **  Avalokiteshvara  "  (a  manwantaric  intelligent  nature 
crowned  with  humanity) — the  mystic  name  given  by  us  to  the 
hosts  of  the  Dyan  Chohans  (N.B.,  the  solar  Dyan  Chohans  or 
the  host  of  only  our  solar  system)  taken  collectively,  which  host 
represents  the  mother  source,  the  aggregate  amount  of  all  the 
intelligences  that  were  or  ever  will  be  within  our  own  string  of 
man-bearing  planets  or  on  any  part  or  portion  of  our  solar 
system.  And  this  will  bring  you  by  analogy  to  see  that  in  its 
turn  Adi-buddhi  (as  its  very  name  translated  literally  implies) 
is  the  aggregate  intelligence  of  the  universal  intelligences  in- 
cluding that  of  the  Dyan  Chohans  even  of  the  highest  order. 
That  is  all  I  dare  now  to  tell  you  on  this  special  subject,  as  I 
fear  I  have  already  transcended  the  limit.  Therefore  when- 
ever I  speak  of  humanity  without  specifying  it  you  must  under- 
stand that  I  mean  not  humanity  of  our  fourth  round  as  we  see 
it  on  this  speck  of  mud  in  space  but  the  whole  host  already 
e  volute  d. 

Yes  as  described  in  my  letter — there  is  but  one  element  and 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    91 

it  is  impossible  to  comprehend  our  system  before  correct  con- 
ception of  it  is  firmly  fixed  in  one's  mind.  You  must  therefore 
pardon  me  if  I  dwell  on  the  subject  longer  than  really  seems 
necessary.  But  unless  this  great  primary  fact  is  firmly  grasped 
the  rest  will  appear  unintelligible.  This  element  thus  is  the — 
to  speak  metaphysically — one  sub-stratum  or  permanent  cause 
of  all  manifestations  in  the  phenomenal  universe.  The  ancients 
speak  of  the  five  cognizable  elements  of  ether,  air,  water,  fire, 
earth,  and  of  the  one  incognizable  element  (to  the  uninitiates) 
the  6th  principle  of  the  universe — call  it  Purush  Sakti,  while  to 
speak  of  the  seventh  outside  the  sanctuary  was  punishable 
with  death.  But  these  five  are  but  the  differentiated  aspect  of 
the  one.  As  man  is  a  seven-fold  being  so  is  the  universe — the 
septenary  microcosm  being  to  the  septenary  macrocosm  but  as 
the  drop  of  rain  water  is  to  the  cloud  from  whence  it  dropped 
and  whither  in  the  course  of  time  it  will  return.  In  that  one 
are  embraced  or  included  so  many  tendencies  for  the  evolution 
of  air,  water,  fire,  etc.  (from  the  purely  abstract  down  to  their 
concrete  condition)  and  when  those  latter  are  called  elements 
it  is  to  indicate  their  productive  potentialities  for  numberless 
form  changes  or  evolution  of  being.  Let  us  represent  the  un- 
known quantity  as  X;  that  quantity  is  the  one  eternal  im- 
mutable principle — and  A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  five  of  the  six  minor 
principles  or  components  of  the  same;  viz.,  the  principles  of 
earth,  water,  air,  fire  and  ether  (akasa)  following  the  order  of 
their  spirituality  and  beginning  with  the  lowest.  There  is  a 
sixth  principle  answering  to  the  sixth  principle  Buddhi,  in  man 
(to  avoid  confusion  remember  that  in  viewing  the  question 
from  the  side  of  the  descending  scale  the  abstract  All  or  eternal 
principle  would  be  numerically  designated  as  the  first  and  the 
phenomenal  universe  as  the  seventh  and  whether  belonging  to 
man  or  to  the  universe — viewed  from  the  other  side  the 
numerical  order  would  be  exactly  reversed)  but  we  are  not 
permitted  to  name  it  except  among  the  initiates.  I  may  how- 
ever hint  that  it  is  connected  with  the  process  of  the  highest 
intellection.  Let  us  call  it  N  and  besides  these,  there  is  under 
all  the  activities  of  the  phenomenal  universe  an  energizing 
impulse  from  X,  call  this  Y.  Algebraically  stated,  our  equation 
would  therefore  read  A  +  B  +  C  +  D  +  E  +  N  +  Y=X.  Each  of 
these  six  letters  represents,  so  to  speak,  the  spirit  or  abstraction 
of  what  you  call  elements  (your  meagre  English  gives  me  no 
other  word).  This  spirit  controls  the  entire  line  of  evolution, 
around  the  whole  manwantaric  cycle  in  its  own  department. 
The  informing,  vivifying,  impelling,  evolving  cause,  behind  the 
countless  phenomenal  manifestations  in  that  department  of 
Nature.     Let  us  work  out  the  idea  with  a  single  example.     Take 


92  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

fire.  D — the  primal  igneous  principle  resident  in  X — is  the 
ultimate  cause  of  every  phenomenal  manifestation  of  fire  on 
all  the  globes  of  the  chain.  The  proximate  causes  are  the 
evoluted  secondary  igneous  agencies  which  severally  control 
the  seven  descents  of  fire  on  each  planet.  Every  element 
having  its  seven  principles  and  every  principle  its  seven  sub- 
principles  and  these  secondary  agencies  before  doing  so,  have 
in  turn  become  primary  causes.  D  is  a  septenary  compound 
of  which  the  highest  fraction  is  pure  spirit.  As  we  see  it  on 
our  globe  it  is  in  its  coarsest,  most  material  condition,  as  gross 
in  its  way  as  is  man  in  his  physical  encasement.  In  the  next 
preceding  globe  to  ours  fire  was  less  gross  than  here  :  on  the 
one  before  that  less  still.  And  so  the  body  of  flame  was  more 
and  more  pure  and  spiritual  less  and  less  gross  and  material  on 
each  antecedent  planet.  On  the  first  of  all  in  the  manwantaric 
chain,  it  appeared  as  an  almost  pure  objective  shining — the 
Mahabuddhi  sixth  principle  of  the  eternal  light.  Our  globe 
being  at  the  bottom  of  the  arc  where  matter  exhibits  itself  in 
its  grossest  form  along  with  spirit — when  the  fire  element 
manifests  itself  on  the  globe  next  succeeding  ours  in  the 
ascending  arc  it  will  be  less  dense  than  as  we  see  it.  Its 
spiritual  quality  will  be  identical  with  that  which  fire  had  on 
the  globe  preceding  ours  in  the  descending  scale;  the  second 
globe  of  the  ascending  scale  will  correspond  in  quality  with 
that  of  the  second  anterior  globe  to  ours  in  the  descending 
scale,  etc.  On  each  globe  of  the  chain  there  are  seven  mani- 
festations of  fire  of  which  the  first  in  order  will  compare  as  to 
spiritual  quality  with  the  last  manifestation  on  the  next  preceding 
planet :  the  process  being  reversed,  as  you  will  infer,  with  the 
opposite  arc.  The  myriad  specific  manifestations  of  these  six 
universal  elements  are  in  their  turn  but  one  offshoot,  branches 
or  branchlets  of  the  one  single  primordial  *'  Tree  of  Life." 

Take  Darwin's  genealogical  tree  of  life  of  the  human  race 
and  others  and  bearing  ever  in  mind  the  wise  old  adage,  '*  As 
below  so  above  " — that  is  the  universal  system  of  correspond- 
ences— try  to  understand  by  analogy.  Thus  will  you  see  that 
in  this  day  on  this  present  earth  in  every  mineral,  etc.,  there 
is  such  a  spirit.  I  will  say  more.  Every  grain  of  sand,  every 
boulder  or  crag  of  granite,  is  that  spirit  crystallized  or  petrified. 
You  hesitate.  Take  a  primer  of  geology  and  see  what  science 
affirms  there  about  the  formation,  and  growth  of  minerals. 
What  is  the  origin  of  all  the  rocks,  whether  sedimentary  or 
igneous.  Take  a  piece  of  granite  or  sandstone  and  you  find 
one  composed  of  crystals,  the  other  of  grains  of  various  stones 
(organic  rocks  or  stones  formed  out  of  the  remains  of  once 
living  plants  and  animals,  will  not  serve  our  present  purpose  : 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    93 

they  are  the  relics  of  subsequent  evolution  while  we  are  con- 
cerned but  with  the  primordial  ones).  Now  sedimentary  and 
igneous  rocks,  are  composed,  the  former  of  sand  gravel  and 
mud,  the  latter  of  lava.  We  have  then  but  to  trace  the  origin 
of  the  two.  What  do  we  find?  We  find  that  one  was  com- 
pounded of  three  elements  or  more  accurately  three  several 
manifestations  of  one  element, — earth,  water  and  fire,  and  that 
the  other  was  similarly  compounded  (though  under  different 
physical  conditions)  out  of  cosmic  matter — the  imaginary 
materia  prima  itself  one  of  the  manifestations  (6th  principle)  of 
the  one  element.  How  then  can  we  doubt  that  a  mineral 
contains  in  it  a  spark  of  the  One  as  everything  else  in  this 
objective  natures  does? 

(2)  When  the  pralaya  commences  what  becomes  of  the  Spirit 
that  has  not  worked  its  way  up  to  man? 

(2)  The  period  necessary  for  the  completion  of  the  seven  local 
or  earthly — or  shall  we  call  it — globe-rings  (not  to  speak  of  the 
seven  Rounds  in  the  minor  manwantaras  followed  by  their 
seven  minor  pralayas) — the  completion  of  the  so-called  mineral 
C5^cle  is  immeasurably  longer  than  that  of  any  other  kingdom. 
As  you  may  infer  by  analogy  every  globe  before  it  reaches  its 
adult  period,  has  to  pass  through  a  formation  period — also 
septenary.  Law  in  Nature  is  uniform  and  the  conception, 
formation,  birth,  progress  and  development  of  the  child  differs 
from  those  of  the  globe  only  in  magnitude.  The  globe  has 
two  periods  of  teeth  and  of  capillature — its  first  rocks  which  it 
also  sheds  to  make  room  for  new — and  its  ferns  and  mosses 
before  it  gets  forest.  As  the  atoms  in  the  body  change  every 
seven  years  so  does  the  globe  renew  its  strata  every  seven 
cycles.  A  section  of  a  part  of  Cape  Breton  coalfields  shows 
seven  ancient  soils  with  remains  of  as  many  forests,  and  could 
one  dig  as  deep  once  more  seven  other  sections  would  be 
found  following. 

There  are  three  kinds  of  pralayas  and  manw^antara  : — 

1 .  The  universal  or  Maha  pralaya  and  manwantara. 

2.  The  solar  pralaya  and  manw^antara. 

3.  TTie  minor  pralaya  and  manwantara. 

When  the  pralaya  No.  1  is  finished  the  universal  manwantara 
begins.  Then  the  whole  universe  must  be  re-evoluted  de  novo. 
When  the  pralaya  of  a  solar  system  comes  it  affects  that  solar 
system  only.  A  solar  prala3^a  =  7  minor  pralayas.  The  minor 
pralayas  of  No.  3  concern  but  our  little  string  of  globes  whether 
man-bearing  or  not.     To  such  a  string  our  Earth  belongs. 

Besides  this  within  a  minor  pralaya  there  is  a  condition  of 

8 


94  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

planetary  rest  or  as  the  astronomers  say  '*  death,"  Hke  that  of 
our  present  moon — in  which  the  rocky  body  of  the  planet 
survives  but  the  life  impulse  has  passed  out.  For  example. 
Let  us  imagine  that  our  earth  is  one  of  a  group  of  seven  planets 
or  man-bearing  worlds  more  or  less  eliptically  arranged.  Our 
earth  being  at  the  exact  lower  central  point  of  the  orbit  of 
evolution,  viz.,  half  way  round — ^we  will  call  the  first  globe  A, 
the  last  Z.  After  each  solar  pralaya  there  is  a  complete  de- 
struction of  our  system  and  after  each  solar  p.  begins  the 
absolute  objective  reformation  of  our  system  and  each  time 
everything  is  more  perfect  than  before. 

Now  the  life  impulse  reaches  *'  A  **  or  rather  that  which  is 
destined  to  become  *'  A  "  and  which  so  far  is  but  cosmic  dust. 
A  centre  is  formed  in  the  nebulous  matter  of  the  condensation 
of  the  solar  dust  decimated  through  space  and  a  series  of  three 
evolutions  invisible  to  the  eye  of  flesh  occur  in  succession,  viz., 
three  kingdoms  of  elementals  or  nature  forces  are  evoluted  :  in 
other  words  the  animal  soul  of  the  future  globe  is  formed;  or 
as  a  Kabalist  will  express  it,  the  gnomes,  the  salamanders,  and 
the  undines  are  created.  The  correspondence  between  a 
mother-globe  and  her  child-man  may  be  thus  worked  out. 
Both  have  their  seven  principles.  In  the  Globe,  the  elementals 
(of  which  there  are  in  all  seven  species)  form  (a)  a  gross  body, 
(b)  her  fluidic  double  (linga  sariram),  (c)  the  life  principle  (jiva); 
(d)  her  fourth  principle  kama  rupa  is  formed  by  her  creative 
impulse  working  from  centre  to  circumference;  (e)  her  fifth 
principle  (animal  soul  or  Manas,  physical  intelligence)  is  em- 
bodied in  the  vegetable  (in  germ)  and  animal  kingdoms;  (f)  her 
sixth  principle  (or  spiritual  soul  buddhi)  is  man  (g)  and  her 
seventh  principle  (atma)  is  in  a  film  of  spiritualized  akasa  that 
surrounds  her.  The  three  evolutions  completed  :  the  palpable 
globe  begins  to  form.  TTie  mineral  kingdom  fourth  in  the  whole 
series,  but  first  in  this  stage  heads  the  way.  Its  deposits  are 
at  first  vaporous  soft  and  plastic,  only  becoming  hard  and  con- 
crete in  the  seventh  ring.  When  this  ring  is  completed  it 
projects  its  essence  to  globe  B — which  is  already  passing 
through  the  preliminary  stages  of  formation  and  mineral 
evolution  begins  on  that  globe.  At  this  juncture  the  evolution 
of  the  vegetable  kingdom  commences  on  globe  A.  When  the 
latter  has  made  its  seventh  ring  its  essence  passes  on  to  globe 
B.  At  that  time  the  mineral  essence  moves  to  globe  C  and  the 
germs  of  the  animal  kingdom  enter  A.  When  the  animal  has 
seven  rings  there,  its  life  principle  goes  to  globe  B,  and  the 
essence  of  vegetable  and  mineral  move  on.  Then  comes  man 
on  A,  an  ethereal  foreshadowing  of  the  compact  being  he  is 
destined  to  become  on  our  earth.     Evolving  seven  parent  races 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    95 

with  many  offshoots  of  sub-races,  he,  like  the  preceding  king- 
doms completes  his  seven  rings  and  is  then  transferred  suc- 
cessively to  each  of  the  globes  onward  to  Z.  From  the  first 
man  has  all  the  seven  principles  included  in  him  in  germ  but 
none  are  developed.  If  we  compare  him  to  a  baby  we  will 
be  right;  no  one  has  ever,  in  the  thousands  of  ghost  stories 
current,  seen  the  ghost  of  an  infant,  though  the  imagination  of 
a  loving  mother  may  have  suggested  to  her  the  picture  of  her 
lost  babe  in  dreams.  And  this  is  very  suggestive.  In  each  of 
the  rounds  he  makes  one  of  the  principles  develop  fully.  In 
the  first  round  his  consciousness  of  our  earth  is  dull  and  but 
feeble  and  shadowy,  something  like  that  of  an  infant.  When 
he  reaches  our  earth  in  the  second  round  he  has  become  re- 
sponsible in  a  degree,  in  the  third  he  becomes  so  entirely.  At 
every  stage  and  every  round  his  development  keeps  pace,  with 
the  globe  on  which  he  is.  The  descending  arc  from  A  to  our 
earth  is  called  the  shadowy,  the  ascending  to  Z  the  "luminous." 
We  men  of  the  fourth  round  are  already  reaching  the  latter  half 
of  the  fifth  race  of  our  fourth  round  humanity,  while  the  men 
(the  few  earlier  comers)  of  the  fifth  round,  though  only  in  their 
first  race  (or  rather  class),  are  yet  immeasurably  higher  than  we 
are — spiritually  if  not  intellectually;  since  with  the  completion 
or  full  development  of  this  fifth  principle  (intellectual  soul)  they 
have  come  nearer  than  we  have,  are  closer  in  contact  with 
their  sixth  principle  Buddhi.  Of  course  many  are  the  differen- 
tiated individuals  even  in  the  fourth  race  as  germs  of  principles 
are  not  equally  developed  in  all,  but  such  is  the  rule. 

Man  comes  on  globe  "  A  "  after  the  other  kingdoms  have 
gone  on.  (Dividing  our  kingdoms  into  seven,  the  last  four  are 
what  exoteric  science  divides  into  three.  To  this  we  add  the 
kingdom  of  man  or  the  Deva  kingdom.  The  respective  entities 
of  these  we  divide  into  germinal,  instinctive,  semi-conscious, 
and  fully  conscious).  When  all  kingdoms  have  reached  globe 
Z  they  will  not  move  forward  but  re-enter  A  in  precedence  of 
man,  but  under  a  law  of  retardation  operative  from  the  central 
point — or  earth — to  Z  and  which  equilibrates  a  principle  of 
acceleration  in  the  descending  arc — they  will  have  just  finished 
their  respective  evolution  of  genera  and  species,  when  man 
reaches  his  highest  development  on  globe  Z  on  this  or  any 
round.  The  reason  for  it  is  found  in  the  enormously  greater 
time  required  by  them  to  develop  their  infinite  varieties  as 
compared  with  man;  the  relative  speed  of  development  in  the 
rings  therefore  naturally  increases  as  we  go  up  the  scale  from 
the  mineral.  But  these  different  rates  are  so  adjusted  by  man 
stopping  longer  in  the  inter-planetary  spheres  of  rest,  for  weal 
or  woe — that  all  kingdoms  finish  their  work  simultaneously  on 


96  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

the  planet  Z.  For  example,  on  our  globe  we  see  the 
equilibrating  law  manifesting.  From  the  first  appearance  of 
man  whether  speechless  or  not  to  his  present  one  as  a  fourth 
and  the  coming  fifth  round  being  the  structural  intention  of  his 
organization  has  not  radically  changed.  Ethnological  char- 
acteristics however  varied,  affecting  in  no  w^ay  man  as  a  human 
being.  The  fossil  of  man  or  his  skeleton  whether  of  the  period 
of  that  mammalian  branch  of  which  he  forms  the  crown,  whether 
cyclop  or  dwarf  can  be  still  recognised  at  a  glance  as  a  relic 
of  man.  Plants  and  animals  meanwhile  have  become  more  and 
more  unlike  what  they  were.  The  scheme  with  its  septenary 
details  would  be  incomprehensible  to  man  had  he  not  the  power 
as  the  higher  Adepts  have  proved  of  prematurely  developing 
his  6th  and  7th  senses — those  which  v/ill  be  the  natural  endow- 
ment of  all  in  the  corresponding  rounds.  Our  Lord  Buddha — 
a  6th  race  man — would  not  have  appeared  in  our  epoch,  great 
as  were  his  accumulated  merits  in  previous  rebirths  but  for  a 
mystery. 

Individuals  cannot  outstrip  the  humanity  of  their  round  any 
further  than  by  one  remove,  for  it  is  mathematically  impossible 
— you  say  (in  effect) :  if  the  fountain  of  life  flows  ceaselessly 
there  should  be  men  of  all  rounds  on  the  earth  at  all  times,  etc. 
The  hint  about  planetary  rest  may  dispel  the  misconception  on 
this  head. 

When  man  is  perfected  qua  a  given  round  on  Globe  A  he 
disappears  thence  (as  had  certain  vegetables  and  animals).  By 
degrees  this  Globe  loses  its  vitality  and  finally  reaches  the  moon 
stage,  i.e.,  death,  and  so  remains  while  man  is  making  his  seven 
rings  on  Z  and  passing  his  inter-cyclic  period  before  starting 
on  his  next  round.     So  with  each  Globe  in  turn. 

And  now  as  man  when  completing  his  seventh  ring  upon  A 
has  but  begun  his  first  on  Z  and  as  A  dies  when  he  leaves  it 
for  B,  etc.,  and  as  he  must  also  remain  in  the  inter-cyclic  sphere 
after  Z,  as  he  has  between  every  two  planets,  until  the  impulse 
again  thrills  the  chain,  clearly  no  one  can  be  more  than  one 
round  ahead  of  his  kind.  And  Buddha  only  forms  an  exception 
by  virtue  of  the  mystery.  We  have  fifth  round  men  among  us 
because  we  are  in  the  latter  half  of  our  septenary  earth  ring. 
In  the  first  half  this  could  not  have  happened.  TTie  countless 
myriads  of  our  fourth  round  humanity  who  have  outrun  us  and 
completed  their  seven  rings  on  Z,  have  had  time  to  pass  their 
inter-cyclic  periods  begin  their  new^  round  and  work  on  to  globe 
D  (ours).  But  how  can  there  be  men  of  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  6th 
and  7th  rounds?  We  represent  the  first  three  and  the  sixth 
can  only  come  at  rare  intervals  and  prematurely  like  Buddhas 
(only  under  prepared  conditions)  and  that  the  last-named  the 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOKETICAL  TEACHINGS    97 

seventh  are  not  yet  evolved  I  We  have  traced  man  out  of  a 
round  into  the  Nirvanic  state  between  Z  and  A.  A  was  left 
in  the  last  round  dead.  As  the  new  round  begins  it  catches 
the  new  influx  of  Hfe,  reawakens  to  vitality  and  begets  all  its 
kingdoms  of  a  superior  order  to  the  last.  After  this  has  been 
repeated  seven  times  comes  a  minor  pralaya;  the  chain  of  globes 
are  not  destroyed  by  disintegration  and  dispersion  of  their 
particles  but  pass  in  abscondito.  From  this  they  will  re-emerge 
in  their  turn  during  the  next  septenary  period.  Within  one 
solar  period  (of  a  p.  and  m.)  occur  seven  such  minor  periods, 
in  an  ascending  scale  of  progressive  development.  To  re- 
capitulate there  are  in  the  round  seven  planetary  or  earth  rings 
for  each  kingdom  and  one  obscuration  of  each  planet.  The 
minor  manwantara  is  composed  of  seven  rounds,  49  rings  and 
7  obscurations,  one  solar  period  of  49  rounds,  etc. 

The  periods  with  pralaya  and  manwantara  are  called  by 
Dikshita  '*  Surya  manwantaras  and  pralayas."  Thought  is 
baffled  in  speculating  how  many  of  our  solar  pralayas  must 
come  before  the  great  Cosmic  night.     But  that  will  come. 

In  the  minor  pralayas  there  is  no  starting  de  novo — only  re- 
sumption of  arrested  activity.  The  vegetable  and  animal 
kingdoms  which  at  the  end  of  the  minor  manwantara  had 
reached  only  a  partial  development  are  not  destroyed.  Their 
life  or  vital  entities,  call  some  of  them  nati  if  you  will — find  also 
their  corresponding  night  and  rest — they  also  have  a  Nirvana 
of  their  own.  And  why  should  they  not,  these  foetal  and  infant 
entities.  They  are  all  like  ourselves  begotten  of  the  one 
element.  As  we  have  our  Dyan  Chohans  so  have  they  in  their 
several  kingdoms  elemental  guardians  and  are  as  well  taken 
care  of  in  the  mass  as  is  humanity  in  the  mass.  The  one  ele- 
ment not  only  fills  space  and  is  space,  but  interpenetrates  every 
atom  of  cosmic  matter. 

When  strikes  the  hour  of  the  solar  paralaya — though  the 
process  of  man's  advance  on  his  last  seventh  round  is  precisely 
the  same,  each  planet  instead  of  merely  passing  out  of  the 
visible  into  the  invisible  as  he  quits  it  in  turn  is  annihilated. 
With  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  Round  of  the  seventh  minor 
manwantara,  every  kingdom  having  now  reached  its  last  cycle, 
there  remains  on  each  planet  after  the  exit  of  man  but  the 
maya  of  once  living  and  existing  forms.  With  every  step  he 
takes  on  the  descending  and  ascending  arcs  as  he  moves  on 
from  Globe  to  Globe  the  planet  left  behind  becomes  an  empty 
chrysaloidal  case.  At  his  departure  there  is  an  outflow  from 
every  kingdom  of  its  entities.  Waiting  to  pass  into  higher 
forms  in  due  time  they  are  nevertheless  liberated  :  for  to  the 
day  of  that  evolution  they  will  rest  in  their  lethargic  sleep  in 


98  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

space  until  again  energized  into  life  in  the  new  solar  man- 
wantara.  The  old  elementals — will  rest  until  they  are  called 
to  become  in  their  turn  the  bodies  of  mineral,  vegetable  and 
animal  entities  (on  another  and  a  higher  string  of  globes)  on 
their  way  to  become  human  entities  (see  Isis)  while  the 
germinal  entities  of  the  lowest  forms,  and  in  that  time  of 
general  perfection  there  will  remain  but  few  of  such — ^will  hang 
in  space  like  drops  of  water  suddenly  turned  to  icicles.  They 
will  thaw  at  the  first  hot  breath  of  a  solar  manwantara  and  form 
the  soul  of  the  future  globes.  .  .  .  The  slow  development 
of  the  vegetable  kingdom  provided  for  by  the  longer  inter- 
planetary rest  of  man.  .  .  .  When  the  solar  pralaya  comes 
the  whole  purified  humanity  merges  into  Nirvana  and  from  that 
inter-solar  Nirvana  will  be  reborn  in  higher  systems.  The 
string  of  worlds  is  destroyed  and  vanishes  like  a  shadow  from 
the  wall  in  the  extinguishment  of  light.  We  have  every  in- 
dication that  at  this  very  moment  such  a  solar  pralaya  is  taking 
place  while  there  are  two  minor  ones  ending  somewhere. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  solar  manwantara  the  hitherto  sub- 
jective elements  of  the  material  world  now  scattered  in  cosmic 
dust — receiving  their  impulse  from  the  new  Dyan  Chohans  of 
the  new  solar  system  (the  highest  of  the  old  ones  having  gone 
higher) — will  form  into  primordial  ripples  of  life  and  separating 
into  differentiating  centres  of  activity  combine  in  a  graduated 
scale  of  seven  stages  of  evolution.  Like  every  other  orb  of 
space  our  Earth  has  before  obtaining  its  ultimate  materiality — 
and  nothing  now  in  this  world  can  give  you  an  idea  of  what 
this  state  of  matter  is — to  pass  through  a  gamut  of  seven  stages 
of  density.  1  say  gamut  advisedly  since  the  diatonic  scale  best 
affords  an  illustration  of  the  perpetual  rythmic  motion  of  the 
descending  and  ascending  cycle  of  Swabhavat — graduated  as 
it  is  by  tones  and  semi-tones. 

You  have  among  the  learned  members  of  your  society  one 
Theosophist  who  without  familiarity  with  our  occult  doctrine 
has  yet  intuitively  grasped  from  scientific  data  the  idea  of  a 
solar  pralaya  and  its  manwantara  in  their  beginnings.  I  mean 
the  celebrated  French  astronomer  Flammarion — **  Le  Resur- 
rection et  le  Fin  des  Mondes  "  (Chapter  4  res.).  He  speaks 
like  a  true  seer.  The  facts  are  as  he  surmises  with  slight 
modifications.  In  consequence  of  the  secular  refrigeration  (old 
age  rather  and  loss  of  vital  power),  solidification  and  desicca- 
tion of  the  globes,  the  earth  arrives  at  a  point  when  it  begins 
to  be  a  relaxed  conglomerate.  The  period  of  child-bearing  is 
gone  by.  The  progeny  are  all  nurtured,  its  term  of  life  is 
finished.  Hence  "  its  constituent  masses  cease  to  obey  those 
laws  of  cohesion  and  aggregation  which  held  them  together.** 


I 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS    99 

And  becoming  like  a  cadaver  which  abandoned  to  the  work 
of  destruction  would  leave  each  molecule  composing  it  free  to 
separate  itself  from  the  body  for  ever  to  obey  in  future  the 
sway  of  new  influences.  The  attraction  of  the  moon  (would 
that  he  could  know  the  full  extent  of  its  pernicious  influence) 
would  itself  undertake  the  task  of  demolition  by  producing  a 
tidal  wave  of  earth  particles  instead  of  an  aqueous  tide. 

His  mistake  is  that  he  believes  a  long  time  must  be  devoted 
to  the  ruin  of  the  solar  system  :  we  are  told  that  it  occurs  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye  but  not  without  many  preliminary 
warnings.  Another  error  is  the  supposition  that  the  earth  will 
fall  into  the  sun.  The  sun  itself  is  first  to  distintegrate  in  the 
solar  pralaya.  .  .  .  Fathom  the  nature  and  essence  of  the 
sixth  principle  of  the  universe  and  man  and  you  will  have 
fathomed  the  greatest  mystery  in  this  our  world — and  why  not — 
are  you  not  surrounded  by  it?  What  are  its  familiar  manifesta- 
tions, mesmerism,  Odic  force,  etc. — all  different  aspects  of  one 
force  capable  of  good  and  evil  applications. 

The  degrees  of  an  Adept's  initiation  mark  the  seven  stages 
at  which  he  discovers  the  secret  of  the  sevenfold  principles  in 
nature  and  man  and  awakens  his  dormant  powers. 


L 


LETTER  No.   XVr 


(I)  The  remarks  appended  to  a  letter  in  the  last  Theosophist, 
page  226,  col.  1 ,  strike  me  as  very  important  and  as  qualifying 
— I  do  not  say  contradicting — a  good  deal  of  what  we  have 
hitherto  been  told  in  re  Spiritualism. 

We  had  heard  already  of  a  spiritual  condition  of  life  in  which 
the  redeveloped  Ego  enjoyed  a  conscious  existence  for  a  time 
before  reincarnation  in  another  world;  but  that  branch  of  the 
subject  has  hitherto  been  slurred  over.  Now  some  explicit 
statements  are  made  about  it;  and  these  suggest  further 
enquiries. 

In  the  Deva  Chan  (I  have  lent  my  Theosophist  to  a  friend; 
and  have  not  got  it  at  hand  to  refer  to  but  that  if  I  remember 
rightly  is  the  name  given  to  the  state  of  spiritual  beatitude 
described)  the  new  Ego  retains  complete  recollection  of  life  on 
earth  apparently.  Is  that  so  or  is  there  any  misunderstanding 
on  that  point  on  my  part? 

(i)  The  Deva-Chan,   or  land  of  "  Sukhavati,"   is  allegorically 

1  Mr.  Sinnett's  queries  to  which  K.H.  replies  in  this  letter  are  printed  in 
bold  type. — Ed. 


loo  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

described  by  our  Lord  Buddha  himself.       What  he  said  may  be 
found  in  the  Shan-Mun-yi-Tung.      Says  Tathagata  : — 

'*  Many  thousand  myriads  of  systems  of  worlds  beyond  this 
(ours)  there  is  a  region  of  Bliss  called  Sukhavati.  .  ,  .  This 
region  is  encircled  with  seven  rows  of  railings,  seven  rows  of  vast 
curtains,  seven  rows  of  waving  trees  ;  this  holy  abode  of  Arahats 
is  governed  by  the  Tathagatas  (Dhyan  Chohans)  and  is  possessed 
by  the  Bodhisatwas.  It  hath  seven  precious  lakes,  in  the  midst 
of  which  flow  crystaline  waters  having  '  seven  and  one  *  properties, 
or  distinctive  qualities  (the  7  principles  emanating  from  the  One). 
This,  O,  Sariputra  is  the  '  Deva  Chan.'  Its  divine  Udambara 
flower  casts  a  root  in  the  shadow  of  every  earth,  and  blossoms 
for  all  those  who  reach  it.  Those  born  in  the  blessed  region  are 
truly  felicitous,  there  are  no  more  griefs  or  sorrows  in  that  cycle 
for  them.  .  .  .  Myriads  of  Spirits  (Lha)  resort  there  for  rest 
and  then  return  to  their  own  regions.^  Again,  O,  Sariputra,  in 
that  land  of  joy  many  who  are  born  in  it  are  Avaivartyas  .  .  ."^ 
etc.,  etc. 

(2)  Now  except  in  the  fact  that  the  duration  of  existence  in 
the  Deva  Chan  is  limited,  there  is  a  very  close  resemblance 
between  that  condition  and  the  Heaven  of  ordinary  reHgion 
(omitting  anthropomorphic  ideas  of  God). 

(2)  Certainly  the  new  Ego  once  that  it  is  reborn,  retains  for  a 
certain  time — proportionate  to  its  Earth-life,  a  **  complete  recol- 
lection of  his  life  on  earth.  "^  (See  your  preceding  query.)  But 
it  can  never  return  on  earth,  from  the  Deva  Chan,  nor  has  the 
latter — even  omitting  all  "  anthropomorphic  ideas  of  God  " — any 
resemblance  to  the  paradise  or  heaven  of  any  religion,  and  it  is 
H.P.B.'s  literary  fancy  that  suggested  to  her  the  wonderful  com- 
fKarison. 

(3)  Now  the  question  of  importance — is  who  goes  to  Heaven 
— or  Deva  Chan?  Is  this  condition  only  attained  by  the  few 
who  are  very  good,  or  by  the  many  who  are  not  very  bad, — 
after  the  lapse  in  their  case  of  a  longer  unconscious  incubation 
or  gestation. 

(3)  **  Who  goes  to  Deva  Chan?  "  The  personal  Ego  of  course, 
but  beatified,  purified,  holy.  Every  Ego — the  combination  of  the 
sixth  and  seventh  principles — which,  after  the  period  of  uncon- 
scious gestation  is  reborn  into  the  Deva-Chan,  is  of  necessity  as 
innocent  and  pure  as  a  new-born  babe.       The  fact  of  his  being 

1  Those  who  have  not  ended  their  earth  rings. 

2  Literally — those  who  will  never  return — the  seventh  round  men,  etc. 

3  See  back — (1)  of  your  questions. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  loi 

reborn  at  all,  shows  the  preponderance  of  good  over  evil  in  his  old 
personality.  And  while  the  Karma  (of  evil)  steps  aside  for  the 
time  being  to  follow  him  in  his  future  earth-reincarnation,  he 
brings  along  with  him  but  the  Karma  of  his  goodi  deeds,  words, 
and  thoughts  into  this  Deva-Chan.  *'  Bad  "  is  a  relative  term  for 
us — as  you  were  told  more  than  once  before, — and  the  Law  of 
Retribution  is  the  only  law  that  never  errs.  Hence  all  those  who 
have  not  slipped  down  into  the  mire  of  unredeemable  sin  and 
bestiality — go  to  the  Deva  Chan.  They  will  have  to  pay  for  their 
sins,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  later  on.  Meanwhile,  they  are 
rewarded ;  receive  the  effects  of  the  causes  produced  by  them. 

Of  course  it  is  a  state,  one,  so  to  say,  of  intense  selfishness, 
during  which  an  Ego  reaps  the  reward  of  his  unselfishness  on 
earth.  He  is  completely  engrossed  in  the  bliss  of  all  his  personal 
earthly  affections,  preferences  and  thoughts,  and  gathers  in  the 
fruit  of  his  meritorious  actions.  No  pain,  no  grief  nor  even  the 
shadow  of  a  sorrow  comes  to  darken  the  bright  horizon  of  his 
unalloyed  happiness:  for,  it  is  a  state  of  perpetual  "Maya." 
Since  the  conscious  perception  of  one's  personality  on 
earth  is  but  an  evanescent  dream  that  sense  will  be  equally  that 
of  a  dream  in  the  Deva-Chan — only  a  hundred  fold  intensified. 
So  much  so,  indeed,  that  the  happy  Ego  is  unable  to  see  through 
the  veil  the  evils,  sorrows  and  woes  to  which  those  it  loved  on 
earth  may  be  subjected  to.  It  lives  in  that  sweet  dream  with  its 
loved  ones — whether  gone  before,  or  yet  remaining  on  earth ;  it 
has  them  near  itself,  as  happy,  as  blissful  and  as  innocent  as  the 
disembodied  dreamer  himself;  and  yet,  apart  from  rare  visions, 
the  denizens  of  our  gross  planet  feel  it  not.  It  is  in  this,  during 
such  a  condition  of  complete  Maya  that  the  Souls  or  astral  Egos 
of  pure,  loving  sensitives,  labouring  under  the  same  illusion,  think 
their  loved  ones  come  down  to  them  on  earth,  while  it  is  their 
own  Spirits  that  are  raised  towards  those  in  the  Deva-Chan. 
Many  of  the  subjective  spiritual  communications — most  of  them 
when  the  sensitives  are  pure  minded — are  real ;  but  it  is  most 
difficult  for  the  uninitiated  medium  to  fix  in  his  mind  the  true 
and  correct  pictures  of  what  he  sees  and  hears.  Some  of  the 
phenomena  called  psychography  (though  more  rarely)  are  also 
real.  The  spirit  of  the  sensitive  getting  odylised,  so  to  say,  by 
the  aura  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Deva-Chan,  becomes  for  a  few  minutes 
that  departed  personality,  and  writes  in  the  hand  writing  of  the 
latter,  in  his  language  and  in  his  thoughts,  as  they  were  during 
his  life  time.  The  two  spirits  become  blended  in  one;  and,  the 
preponderance  of  one  over  the  other  dtiring  such  phenomena 
determines  the  prepvonderance  of  personality  in  the  characteristics 
exhibited  in  such  writing  and  "trance  speaking."  What  you 
call  "  rapf>ort  "  is  in  plain  fact  an  identity  of  molecular  vibration 


102  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

between  the  astral  part  of  the  incarnate  medium  and  the  astral 
part  of  the  disincarnate  personality.  I  have  just  noticed  an  article 
on  smell  by  some  English  Professor  (which  I  will  cause  to  be 
reviewed  in  the  Theosophist  and  say  a  few  words),  and  find  in  it 
something  that  applies  to  our  case.  As,  in  music,  two  different 
sounds  may  be  in  accord  and  separately  distinguishable,  and  this 
harmony  or  discord  depends  upon  the  synchronous  vibrations  and 
complementary  periods;  so  there  is  rapport  between  medium  and 
"  control  '*  when  their  astral  molecules  move  in  accord.  And  the 
question  whether  the  communication  shall  reflect  more  of  the  one 
personal  idiosyncracy,  or  the  other,  is  determined  by  the  relative 
intensity  of  the  two  sets  of  vibrations  in  the  compound  wave  of 
Akasa.  The  less  identical  the  vibratory  impulses  the  more 
mediumistic  and  less  spiritual  will  be  the  message.  So  then, 
measure  your  medium's  moral  state  by  that  of  the  alleged  **  con- 
trolling "  Intelligence,  and  your  tests  of  genuineness  leave  nothing 
to  be  desired. 

(4)  Are  there  great  varieties  of  conditions  within  the  limits, 
so  to  speak,  of  Deva  Chan,  so  that  an  approximate  state  is 
dropped  into  by  all,  from  which  they  will  be  born  into  lower 
and  higher  conditions  in  the  next  world  of  causes.  It  is  no  use 
multiplying  hypothesis,  we  want  some  information  to  go  upon. 

(4)  Yes ;  there  are  great  varieties  in  the  Deva-Chan  states,  and, 
it  is  all  as  you  say.  As  many  varieties  of  bliss,  as  on  earth  there 
are  shades  of  perception  and  of  capability  to  appreciate  such 
reward.  It  is  an  ideated  paradise,  in  each  case  of  the  Ego's  own 
making,  and  by  him  filled  with  the  scenery,  crowded  with  the 
incidents,  and  thronged  with  the  people  he  would  expect  to  find  in 
such  a  sphere  of  comf)ensative  bliss.  And  it  is  that  variety  which 
guides  the  temf>orary  personal  Ego  into  the  current  which  will 
lead  him  to  be  reborn  in  a  lower  or  higher  condition  in  the  next 
world  of  causes.  Everything  is  so  harmoniously  adjusted  in 
nature — especially  in  the  subjective  world,  that  no  mistake  can 
be  ever  committed  by  the  Tathdgatas — or  Dhyan  Chohans — ^who 
guide  the  impulses. 

(5)  On  the  face  of  the  idea,  a  purely  spiritual  state  would 
only  be  enjoyable  to  the  entities  highly  spiritualized  in  this  life. 
But  there  are  myriads  of  very  good  people  (morally)  who  are 
not  spiritualized  at  all.  How  can  they  be  fitted  to  pass,  with 
their  recollections  of  this  life  from  a  material  to  a  spiritual 
condition  of  existence. 

(5)  It  is  '*  a  spiritual  condition  "  only  as  contrasted  with  our 
own  grossly  *'  material  condition,"  and,  as  already  stated — it  is 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOKETICAL  TEACHINGS  103 

such  degrees  of  spirituality  that  constitute  and  determine  the 
great  **  varieties  "  of  conditions  within  the  Hmits  of  Deva-Chan. 
A  mother  from  a  savage  tribe  is  not  less  happy  than  a  mother 
from  a  regal  palace,  with  her  lost  child  in  her  arms ;  and  although 
as  actual  Egos,  children  prematurely  dying  before  the  perfection 
of  their  septenary  Entity  do  not  find  their  way  to  Deva-Chan,  yet 
all  the  same  the  mother's  loving  fancy  finds  her  children  there, 
without  once  missing  that  her  heart  yearns  for.  Say — it  is  but  a 
dream,  but  after  all  what  is  objective  Ufe  itself  but  a  panorama  of 
vivid  unrealities?  The  pleasures  realized  by  a  Red  Indian  in  his 
*'  happy  hunting  ground  "  in  that  Land  of  Dreams  is  not  less 
intense  than  the  ecstasy  felt  by  a  connoiseur  who  passes  caons  in 
the  wrapt  delight  of  listening  to  divine  Symphonies  by  imaginary 
angelic  choirs  and  orchestras.  As  it  is  no  fault  of  the  former, 
if  born  a  *  *  savage  ' '  with  an  instinct  to  kill — though  it  caused  the 
death  of  many  an  innocent  animal — why,  if  with  it  all,  he  was  a 
loving  father,  son,  husband,  why  should  he  not  also  enjoy  his  share 
of  reward?  The  case  would  be  quite  different  if  the  same  cruel 
acts  had  been  done  by  an  educated  and  civilized  person,  from  a 
mere  love  of  sport.  The  savage  in  being  reborn  would  simply 
take  a  low  place  in  the  scale,  by  reason  of  his  imperfect  moral 
development ;  while  the  Karma  of  the  other  would  be  tainted  with 
moral  delinquency.     .     .     . 

Every  one  but  that  ego  which,  attracted  by  its  gross  magnetism, 
falls  into  the  current  that  will  draw  it  into  the  "  planet  of  Death  " 
— the  mental  as  well  as  physical  satellite  of  our  earth — is  fitted  to 
pass  into  a  relative  **  spiritual  "  condition  adjusted  to  his  previous 
condition  in  life  and  mode  of  thought.  To  my  knowledge  and 
recollection  H.P.B.  explained  to  Mr.  Hume  that  man's  sixth 
principle,  as  something  purely  spiritual  could  not  exist,  or  have 
conscious  being  in  the  Deva-Chan,  unless  it  assimilated  some  of 
the  more  abstract  and  pure  of  the  mental  attributes  of  the  fifth 
principle  or  animal  Soul  :  its  manas  (mind)  and  memory.  When 
man  dies  his  second  and  third  principles  die  with  him ;  the  lower 
triad  disappears,  and  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh  principles 
form  the  surviving  Quaternary.  (Read  again  page  6  in  Fragments 
of  O.T.)^  Henceforth  it  is  a  "  death  "  struggle  between  the 
Upper  and  Lower  dualities.  If  the  upper  wins,  the  sixth,  having 
attracted  to  itself  the  quintessence  of  Good  from  the  fifth — its 
nobler  affections,  its  saintly  (though  they  be  earthly)  aspirations, 
and  the  most  Spiritualised  portions  of  its  mind — follow  its  divine 
Elder  (the  7th)  into  the  "Gestation"  State;  and  the  fifth  and 
fourth  remain  in  association  as  an  empty  shell — (the  expression 
is  quite  correct) — to  roam  in  the  earth *s  atmosphere,  with  half  the 

1  O.T.  stands  for  Occult  Truth.— Ed. 


104  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

personal  memory  gone,  and  the  more  brutal  instincts  fully  alive 
for  a  certain  period — an  **  Elementary  "  in  short.  This  is  the 
**  ang-el  g^uide  "  of  the  average  medium.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  the  Upper  Duality  which  is  defeated,  there,  it  is  the  fifth 
principle  that  assimilates  all  that  there  may  be  left  of  personal 
recollection  and  perceptions  of  its  personal  individuality  in  the 
sixth.  But,  with  all  this  additional  stock,  it  will  not  remain  in 
Kama-Loka — *'  the  world  of  Desire  "  or  our  Earth's  atmosphere. 
In  a  very  short  time  like  a  straw  floating  within  the  attraction  of 
the  vortexes  and  pits  of  the  Maelstrom,  it  is  caught  up  and  drawn 
into  the  great  whirlpool  of  human  Egos;  while  the  sixth  and 
seventh — now  a  purely  Spiritual,  individual  monad,  with  nothing 
left  in  it  of  the  late  personality,  having  no  regular  **  gestation  " 
period  to  pass  through  :  (since  there  is  no  purified  personal  Ego 
to  be  reborn),  after  a  more  or  less  prolonged  period  of  uncon- 
scious Rest  in  the  boundless  Space — will  find  itself  reborn  in 
another  personality  on  the  next  planet.  When  arrives  the  period 
of  "  Full  Individual  Consciousness  " — which  precedes  that  of 
Absolute  Consciousness  in  the  Pari  Nirvana — this  lost  personal 
life  becomes  as  a  torn  out  page  in  the  Great  Book  of  Lives,  with- 
out even  a  disconnected  word  left  to  mark  its  absence.  The 
purified  monad  will  neither  perceive  nor  remember  it  in  the  series 
of  its  past  rebirths — ^which  it  would  had  it  gone  to  the  **  World  of 
Forms  "  (rupa-loka) — and  its  retrospective  glance  will  not  perceive 
even  the  slightest  sign  to  indicate  that  it  had  been.  The  light  of 
Sammd'Sambuddh — 

•*  .     .     .     that  light  which  shines  beyond  our  mortal  ken 
The  of  all  the  lives  in  all  the  worlds  " — 

throws  no  ray  upon  that  personal  life  in  the  series  of  lives  fore- 
gone. 

To  the  credit  of  mankind,  I  must  say,  that  such  an  utter  oblitera- 
tion of  an  existence  from  the  tablets  of  Universal  Being  does  not 
occur  often  enough  to  make  a  great  i>ercentage.  In  fact,  like  the 
much  mentioned  "congenital  idiot"  such  a  thing  is  a  lusus 
naturae — an  exception,  not  the  rule. 

(6)  And  how  is  a  spiritual  existence  in  which  everything  has 
merged  into  the  sixth  principle,  compatible  with  that  conscious- 
ness of  individual  and  personal  material  life  which  must  be 
attributed  to  the  Ego  in  Deva-Chan  if  he  retains  his  earthly 
consciousness  as  stated  in  the  Theosophisi  Note. 

(6)  The  question  is  now  sufficiently  explained,  I  believe  :  the 
sixth  and  seventh  principles  apart  from  the  rest  constitute  the 
eternal  imperishable,  but  also  unconscious  "  Monad."    To  awaken 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOEETICAL  TEACHINGS  105 

in  it  to  life  the  latent  consciousness,  especially  that  of  personal 
individuality,  requires  the  monad  plus  the  highest  attributes  of  the 
fifth — the  "  animal  Soul  "  ;  and  it  is  that  which  makes  the  ethereal 
Ego  that  lives  and  enjoys  bliss  in  the  Deva-Chan.  Spirit,  or  the 
unalloyed  emanations  of  the  One — the  latter  forming-  with  the 
seventh  and  sixth  principles  the  higfhest  triad — neither  of  the  two 
emanations  are  capable  of  assimilating  but  that  which  is  good, 
pure  and  holy ;  hence,  no  sensual,  material  or  unholy  recollection 
can  follow  the  purified  memory  of  the  Ego  to  the  region  of  Bliss. 
The  Karma  for  these  recollections  of  evil  deeds  and  thought  will 
reach  the  Ego  when  it  changes  its  personality  in  the  following 
world  of  causes.  The  Monad,  or  the  "  Spiritual  Individuality," 
remains  untainted  in  all  cases.  **  No  sorrow  or  Pain  for  those 
born  there  (in  the  Rupa-Loka  of  Deva-Chan) ;  for  this  is  the  pure- 
land.  All  the  regions  in  space  possess  such  lands  (Sakwald),  but 
this  land  of  Bliss  is  the  most  pure."  In  the  Djnana  Prasthdna 
Shaster,  it  is  said  :  "  by  personal  purity  and  earnest  meditation, 
we  overleap  the  limits  of  the  World  of  Desire,  and  enter  in  the 
World  of  Forms." 

(7)  The  period  of  gestation  between  Death  and  Deva-Chan 
has  hitherto  been  conceived  by  me  at  all  events  as  very  long. 
Now  it  is  said  to  be  in  some  cases  only  a  few  days,  in  no  cases 
(it  is  implied)  more  than  a  few  years.  This  seems  plainly  stated, 
but  I  ask  if  it  can  be  explicitly  confirmed  because  it  is  a  point 
on  which  so  much  turns. 

(7)  Another  fine  example  of  the  habitua^  disorder  in  which  Mrs. 
H.P.B.'s  mental  furniture  is  kept.  She  talks  of  **  Bardo  "  and 
does  not  even  say  to  her  readers  what  it  means  !  As  in  her 
writing  room  confusion  is  ten  times  confounded,  so  in  her  mind 
are  crowded  ideas  piled  in  such  a  chaos  that  when  she  wants  to 
express  them  the  tail  peeps  out  before  the  head.  **  Bardo  "  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  duration  of  time  in  the  case  you  are  referring 
to.  **  Bardo  "  is  the  period  between  death  and  rebirth — and  may 
last  from  a  few  years  to  a  kalpa.  It  is  divided  into  three  sub- 
periods  (i)  when  the  Ego  delivered  of  its  mortal  coil  enters  into 
Kama-Loka^  (the  abode  of  Elementaries) ;  (2)  when  it  enters  into 
"Gestation  State";  (3)  when  it  is  reborn  in  the  Rupa^Loka  of 
Deva-Chan.  Sub-period  (i)  may  last  from  a  few  minutes  to  a 
number  of  years — the  phrase  **  a  few  years  "  becoming  puzzling 
and  utterly  worthless  without  a  more  complete  explanation  ;  Sub- 
period  2nd  is  "very  long";  as  you  say,  longer  sometimes  than 
you  may  even  imagine,  yet  proportionate  to  the  Ego's  spiritual 
stamina ;  Sub-period  3rd  lasts  in  proportion  to  the  good  Karma, 

I  Tibetan  :    Yule-Kai. 


io6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

after  which  the  monad  is  again  reincarnated.  The  Agama  Sutra 
saying-: — **  in  all  these  Rupa-Lokas,  the  Devas  (Spirits)  are 
equally  subjected  to  birth,  decay,  old  age,  and  death,"  means 
only  that  an  Ego  is  borne  thither  then  begins  fading  out  and 
finally  **  dies,"  i.e.,  falls  into  that  unconscious  condition  which 
precedes  rebirth ;  and  ends  the  Sloka  with  these  words  ;  "As  the 
devas  emerge  from  these  heavens,  they  enter  the  lower  world 
again  :  "  i.e,  they  leave  a  world  of  bliss  to  be  reborn  in  a  world 
of  causes. 

(8)  In  that  case,  and  assuming  that  Deva-Chan  is  not  solely 
the  heritage  of  adepts  and  persons  almost  as  elevated,  there 
is  a  condition  of  existence  tantamount  to  Heaven  actually  going 
on,  from  which  the  life  of  earth  may  be  watched  by  an  immense 
number  of  those  who  have  gone  before  !  (9)  And  for  how  long? 
does  this  state  of  spiritual  beatitude  endure  for  years?  for 
decades?  for  centuries? 

(8)  Most  emphatically  "  the  Deva-Chan  is  not  solely  the 
heritage  of  adepts,"  and  most  decidedly  there  is  a  **  heaven  " — if 
you  must  use  this  astro-geographical  Christian  term — for  **  an 
immense  number  of  those  who  have  gone  before."  But  "  the  life 
of  earth  "  can  be  watched  by  none  of  these,  for  reasons  of  the 
Law  of  Bliss  plus  Maya  already  given. 

(9)  For  years,  decades,  centuries  and  milleniums,  oftentimes- 
multiplied  by  something  more.  It  all  depends  upon  the  duration 
of  Karma.  Fill  with  oil  Den's  little  cup  and  a  city  Reservoir  of 
water,  and  lighting  both  see  which  bums  the  longer,  the  Ego  is 
the  wick  and  Karma  the  oil  :  the  difference  in  the  quantity  of  the 
latter  (in  the  cup  and  the  reservoir)  suggesting  to  you  the  great 
difference  in  the  duration  of  various  Karmas.  Every  effect  must 
be  proportionate  to  the  cause.  And,  as  man's  terms  of  incarnate 
existence  bear  but  a  small  proportion  to  his  periods  of  inter-natal 
existence  in  the  manvantaric  cycle,  so  the  good  thoughts,  words, 
and  deeds  of  any  one  of  these  **  lives  "  on  a  globe  are  causative  of 
effects,  the  working  out  of  which  requires  far  more  time  than  the 
evolution  of  the  causes  occupied.  Therefore,  when  you  read  in 
the  Y^ts  and  other  fabtdous  stories  of  the  Buddhist  Scriptures  that 
this  or  the  other  good  action  was  rewarded  by  Kalpas  of  several 
figures  of  bliss,  do  not  smile  at  the  absurd  exaggeration,  but  bear 
in  mind  what  I  have  said.  From  a  small  seed,  you  know,  spring 
a  tree  whose  life  endures  now  for  22  centuries;  I  mean  the 
Aunradha-pura  Bo  tree.  Nor  must  you  laugh,  if  ever  you  come 
across  Piudha-Dhana  or  any  other  Buddhist  Sutra  and  read : 
**  Between  the  Kama-Loka  and  the  Rupa^Loka  there  is  a  locality. 


m 

PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOKETICAL  TEACHINGS  107 

the  dwelling  of  *  Mara  '  (Death).  Tliis  Mara  filled  with  passion 
and  lust,  destroys  all  virtuous  principles,  as  a  stone  grinds  corn.^ 
His  palace  is  7000  yojanas  square,  and  is  surrounded  by  a  seven 
fold  wall,"  for  you  will  feel  now  more  prepared  to  understand  the 
alleg-ory.  Also,  when  Beal,  or  Burieouf,  or  Rhys  Davids  in  the 
innocence  of  their  Christian  and  materialistic  souls  indulge  in  such 
translations  as  they  generally  do,  we  do  not  bear  them  malice 
for  their  commentaries,  since  they  cannot  know  any  better.  But 
what  can  the  following  mean  : — **  The  names  of  the  Heavens  "  (a 
mistranslation ;  Lokas  are  not  Heavens  but  localities  or  abodes) 
**  of  Desire  Kama-Loka — so  called,  because  the  beings  who  occu- 
pied them  are  subject  to  desires  of  eating,  drinking,  sleeping  and 
love.  They  are  otherwise  called  the  abodes  of  the  five  ( ?)  orders 
of  sentient  creatures — Devas,  men,  asuras,  beasts,  demons  "  (Lan- 
tan  Sutra,  trans,  by  S.  Beal).  They  mean  simply  that,  had  the 
reverend  translator  been  acquainted  with  the  true  doctrine  a  little 
better — ^he  would  have  (i)  divided  the  Devas  into  two  classes — and 
called  them  the  "  i?w/>a-Deva "  and  the  'Mn/po-Devas "  (the 
'*  form  " — or  objective,  and  the  "  formless  "  or  Subjective  Dhyan 
Chohans ;  and  (2) — would  have  done  the  same  for  his  class  of 
"men"  since  there  are  sheUs  and  *  *  Mara-Rupas  " — i.e.  bodies 
doomed  to  annihilation.      All  these  are  : 

(i)  "  Rupa-devas  " — Dhyan  Chohans,^  having  forms;]!- 

(2)  ^*  Arupa-devas  "         ,,  ,,      having  no     ^^      \) 

(3)  "  Pisdchas  " — (two-principled)  ghosts. 

(4)  "  Mara-rupa  " — Doomed  to  death  (3  principled). 

(5)  Asuras — Elementals — having  human  form  ) 

(6)  Beasts —         ,,     2nd  class — animal  Elementals  ) 

(7)  Rakshasas  (Demons)  Souls  or  Astral  Forms  of  sorcerers; 
men  who  have  reached  the  apex  of  knowledge  in  the  for- 
bidden art.  Dead  or  alive  they  have,  so  to  say  cheated 
nature ;  but  it  is  only  temp>orary — until  our  planet  goes  into 
obscuration,  after  which  they  have  nolens  volens  to  be 
annihilated. 

It  is  these  seven  groups  that  form  the  principal  divisions  of  the 
Dwellers  of  the  subjective  world  around  us.  It  is  in  stock  No.  i 
that  are  the  intelligent  Rulers  of  this  world  of  Matter,  and,  who, 

1  This  Mara,  as  you  may  well  think,  is  the  allegorical  image  of  the  sphere 
called  the  "  Planet  of  Death  " — the  whirlpool  whither  disappear  the  lives 
doomed  to  destruction.  It  is  between  Kama  and  Rupa-Lokas  that  the  struggle 
takes  place. 

2  The  Planetary  Spirits  of  our  Earth  are  not  of  the  highest,  as  you  may 
well  imagine — since,  as  Sabba  Row  says  in  his  criticism  upon  Oxley's  work 
that  no  Eastern  Adept  would  like  to  be  compared  with  an  angel  or  a  Diva. 
See   May   Theosophist. 


io8  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

with  all  this  intelligence  are  but  the  blindly  obedient  instruments 
of  the  One;  the  active  agents  of  a  Passive  Principle. 

And  thus  are  misinterpreted  and  mistranslated  nearly  all  our 
Sutras ;  yet  even  under  that  confused  jumble  of  doctrines  and 
words,  for  one  who  knows  even  superficially  the  true  doctrine, 
there  is  firm  ground  to  stand  upon.  Thus,  for  instance  in 
enumerating  the  seven  lokas  of  the  '*  Kama-Loka  "  the  Avatam- 
saka  Sutra,  gives  as  the  seventh,  the  "  Territory  of  Doubt."  I 
will  ask  you  to  remember  the  name  as  we  will  have  to  speak  of 
it  hereafter.  Every  such  * '  world  ' '  within  the  Sphere  of  Effects 
has  a  Tath^gata,  or  "  Dhyan  Chohan — to  protect  and  watch  over, 
not  to  interfere  with  it.  Of  course,  of  all  men,  spiritualists  will 
be  the  first  to  reject  and  throw  off  our  doctrines  to  **  the  limbo  of 
exploded  superstitions."  Were  we  to  assure  them  that  every  one 
of  their  **  Summerlands  "  had  seven  boarding  houses  in  it  with 
the  same  number  of  '*  vSpirit  Guides  "  to  **  boss  "  in  them,  and 
call  these  "angels,"  Saint  Peters,  Johns,  and  St.  Ernests,  they 
would  welcome  us  with  open  arms.  But  whoever  heard  of 
Tathagats  and  Dhyan  Chohans,  Asuras  and  Elementals?  pre- 
posterous !  Still,  we  are  happily  allowed,  by  our  friends  (Mr. 
Eglinton,  at  least)  to  be  possessed  **  of  a  certain  knowledge  of 
Occult  Sciences  "  (Vide  "  Light  ").  And  thus,  even  this  mete  of 
"  Knowledge  "  is  at  your  service,  and  is  now  helping  me  to 
answer  your  following  question  : 

Is  there  any  intermediate  condition  between  the  spiritual 
beatitude  of  Deva-Chan,  and  the  forlorn  shadow  life  of  the 
once  half  conscious  elementary  reliquae  of  human  beings  who 
have  lost  their  sixth  principle.  Because  if  so  that  might  give 
a  Zocus  standi  in  imagination  to  the  Earnests  and  Joeys  of  the 
spiritual  mediums — the  better  sort  of  controlling  "  spirits."  If 
so  surely  that  must  be  a  very  populous  world?  from  which  any 
amount  of  **  spiritual  *'  communications  might  come. 

Alas,  no;  my  friend;  not  that  I  know  of.  From  "  Sukhavati  " 
down  to  the  **  Territory  of  Doubt  "  there  is  a  variety  of  Spiritual 
States ;  but  I  am  not  aware  of  any  such  **  intermediate  condition." 
I  have  told  you  of  the  Sakwalas  (though  I  cannot  be  enumerating 
them  since  it  would  be  useless) ;  and  even  of  Avitchi — the  **  Hell  " 
from  which  there  is  no  return^  and  I  have  no  more  to  tell  about. 
**  The  forlorn  shadow  "  has  to  do  the  best  it  can.  As  soon  as  it 
has  stepped  outside  the  Kama-Loka,   and   crossed  the   "  Golden 

1  In  Ahidharma  Shastra  (Metaphysics)  we  read  : — "  Buddha  taught  that 
on  the  outskirts  of  all  the  Sakwalas,  there  is  a  black  interval,  without  Sun  or 
moonlight  for  him  who  falls  into  it.  There  is  no  re-birth  from  it.  It  is  the 
cold  Hell,  the  great  Naraka."     This  is  Avitchi. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  109 

Bridge  "  leading  to  the  "  Seven  Golden  Mountains  "  the  Ego  can 
confabulate  no  more,  with  easy-going  mediums.  No  *'  Earnest  " 
or  '*  Joey  "  has  ever  returned  from  the  Rupa  Loka — let  alone  the 
Arupa-Loka. — to  hold  sweet  intercourse  with  mortals. 

Of  course  there  is  a  "  better  sort  '*  of  reliquae ;  and  the 
"  shells  "  or  the  **  earth-walkers  "  as  they  are  here  called,  are 
not  necessarily  all  bad.  But  even  those  that  are  good,  are  made 
bad  for  the  time  being  by  mediums.  The  '*  shells  "  may  well  not 
care  since  they  have  nothing  to  lose,  anyhow.  But  there  is 
another  kind  of  **  Spirits,'*  we  have  lost  sight  of:  the  suicides 
and  those  killed  by  accident.  Both  kinds  can  communicate,  and 
both  have  to  pay  dearly  for  such  visits.  And  now  I  have  again 
to  explain  what  I  mean.  Well,  this  class  is  the  one  that  the 
French  Spiritists  call — "  les  Esprits  S on ff rants."  They  are  an 
exception  to  the  rule,  as  they  have  to  remain  within  the  earth's 
attraction,  and  in  its  atmosphere — The  Kama-Loka — till  the  very 
last  moment  of  what  would  have  been  the  natural  duration  of 
their  lives.  In  other  words,  that  particular  wave  of  life-evolution 
must  run  on  to  its  shore.  But  it  is  a  sin  and  cruelty  to  revive 
their  memory  and  intensify  their  suffering  by  giving  them  a 
chance  of  living  an  artificial  life ;  a  chance  to  overload  their 
Karma,  by  tempting  them  into  open  doors,  viz.,  mediums  and 
sensitives,  for  they  will  have  to  pay  roundly  for  every  such 
pleasure.  I  will  explain.  The  Suicides,  who,  foolishly  hoping  to 
escape  life,  found  themselves  still  alive, — have  suffering  enough 
in  store  for  them  from  that  very  life.  Their  punishment  is  in  the 
intensity  of  the  latter.  Having  lost  by  the  rash  act  their  seventh 
and  sixth  principles,  though  not  for  ever,  as  they  can  regain  both 
— instead  of  accepting  their  punishment,  and  taking  their  chances 
of  redemption  they  are  often  made  to  regret  life  and  tempted  to 
regain  a  hold  upon  it  by  sinful  means.  In  the  Kama-Loka,  the 
land  of  intense  desires,  they  can  gratify  their  earthly  yearnings 
but  through  a  living  proxy ;  and  by  so  doing,  at  the  expiration  of 
the  natural  term,  they  generally  lose  their  monad  for  ever.  As 
to  the  victims  of  accident — these  fare  still  worse.  Unless  they 
were  so  good  and  pure,  as  to  be  drawn  immediately  within  the 
Akasic  Sa77iadhi,  i.e.  to  fall  into  a  state  of  quiet  slumber,  a  sleep 
full  of  rosy  dreams,  during  which,  they  have  no  recollection  of 
the  accident,  but  move  and  live  among  their  familiar  friends  and 
scenes,  until  their  natural  life-term  is  finished,  when  they  find 
themselves  born  in  the  Deva-Chan — a  gloomy  fate  is  theirs.  Un- 
happy shades,  if  sinful  and  sensual  they  wander  about — (not 
shells,  for  their  connection  with  their  two  higher  principles  is  not 
quite  broken) — until  their  death-hour  comes.  Cut  off  in  the  full 
flush  of  earthly  passions  which  bind  them  to  familiar  scenes,  they 
are  enticed  by  the  opjiortunities  which  mediums  afford,  to  gratify 

9 


no  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

them  vicariously.  They  are  the  Pisachas,  the  Tucuhi,  and 
Sucenbi  of  mediaeval  times.  The  demons  of  thirst,  gluttony,  lust, 
and  avarice, — elementaries  of  intensified  craft,  wickedness  and 
cruelty ;  provoking  their  victims  to  horrid  crimes  and  revelling  in 
their  commission  !  They  not  only  ruin  their  victims,  but  these 
psychic  vampires,  borne  along  by  the  torrent  of  their  hellish 
impulses,  at  last,  at  the  fixed  close  of  their  natural  period  of  life — 
they  are  carried  out  of  the  earth's  aura  into  regions  where  for 
ages  they  endure  exquisite  suffering  and  end  with  entire  destruc- 
tion. 

But  if  the  victim  of  accident  or  violence,  be  neither  very  good 
nor  very  bad — an  average  person — then  this  may  happen  to  him. 
A  medium  who  attracts  him,  will  create  for  him  the  most  un- 
desirable things  :  a  new  combination  of  Skandhas  and  a  new  and 
evil  Karma.  But  let  me  give  you  a  clearer  idea  of  what  I  mean 
by  "  Karma  "  in  this  case. 

In  connection  with  this,  let  me  tell  you  before,  that  since  you 
seem  so  interested  with  the  subject,  you  can  do  nothing  better 
than  to  study  the  two  doctrines — of  Karma  and  Nirvana  as  pro- 
foundly as  you  can.  Unless  you  are  thoroughly  well  acquainted 
with  the  two  tenets — the  double  key  to  the  metaphysics  of  Abid- 
harma — you  will  always  find  yourself  at  sea  in  trying  to  compre- 
hend the  rest.  We  have  several  sorts  of  Karma  and  Nirvana  in 
their  various  applications  to  the  Universe,  the  world,  Devas, 
Buddhas,  Bodhisatwas,  men  and  animals,  the  second  including 
its  seven  kingdoms.  Karma  and  Nirvana  are  but  two  of  the 
seven  great  mysteries  of  Buddhist  metaphysics ;  and  but  four  of 
the  seven  are  known  to  the  best  orientalists,  and  that  very 
imperfectly. 

If  you  ask  a  learned  Buddhist  priest  what  is  Karma? — he  will 
tell  you  that  Karma  is  what  a  Christian  might  call  providence  (in 
a  certain  sense  only),  and  a  Mahomedan — Kismet,  fate  or  destiny 
(again  in  one  sense).  That  is  that  cardinal  tenet  which  teaches 
that,  as  soon  as  any  conscious  or  sentient  being,  whether  man, 
deva,  or  animal  dies,  a  new  being  is  produced  and  he  or  it  re- 
appears in  another  birth,  on  the  same  or  another  planet  under 
conditions  of  his  or  its  own  antecedent  making.  Or,  in  other 
words  that  Karma  is  the  guiding  power,  and  Trishna  (in  Pali 
Tanha)  the  thirst  or  desire  to  sentiently  live — the  proximate  force 
or  energy — the  resultant  of  human  (or  animal)  actions,  which, 
out  of  the  old  Skandhas^  produce  the  new  group  that  form  the 

1  I  remark  that  in  the  second  as  well  as  in  the  first  edition  of  your 
Occult  World  the  same  misprint  appears,  and  that  the  word  Skandha  is  spelt 
Shanha — on  page  130.  As  it  now  stands  I  am  made  to  express  myself  in  a 
very  original  way  for  a  supposed  Adept. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  iii 

new  being-  and  control  the  nature  of  the  birth  itself.  Or  to  make 
it  still  clearer,  the  new  being,  is  rewarded  and  punished  for  the 
meritorious  acts  and  misdeeds  of  the  old  one;  Karma  represent- 
ing an  Entry  Book,  in  which  ajl  the  acts  of  man,  good,  bad,  or 
indifferent,  are  carefully  recorded  to  his  debit  and  credit — by  him- 
self, so  to  say,  or  rather  by  these  very  actions  of  his.  There, 
where  Christian  poetical  fiction  created,  and  sees  a  **  Recording  " 
Guardian  Angel,  stern  and  realistic  Buddhist  logic,  perceiving 
the  necessity  that  every  cause  should  have  its  effect — shows  its 
real  presence.  The  opponents  of  Buddhism  have  laid  great  stress 
upon  the  alleged  injustice  that  the  doer  should  escape  and  an 
innocent  victim  be  made  to  suffer, — since  the  doer  and  the  suf- 
ferer are  different  beings.  The  fact  is,  that  while  in  one  sense 
they  may  be  so  considered,  yet  in  another  they  are  identical. 
The  **  old  being  "  is  the  sole  parent — father  and  mother  at  once — 
of  the  "  new  being."  It  is  the  former  who  is  the  creator  and 
fashioner,  of  the  latter,  in  reality ;  and  far  more  so  in  plain 
truth,  than  any  father  in  flesh.  And  once  that  you  have  well 
mastered  the  meaning  of  Skandhas  you  will  see  what  I  mean. 

It  is  the  group  of  Skandhas,  that  form  and  constitute  the 
physical  and  mental  individuality  we  call  man  (or  any  being). 
This  group  consists  (in  the  exoteric  teaching)  of  five  Skandhas, 
namely  :  Rupa — the  material  properties  or  attributes ;  Vedana — 
sensations  ;  Sanna — abstract  ideas  ;  Sankhara — tendencies  both 
physical  and  mental ;  and  Vinnana — mental  powers,  and  amplifi- 
cation of  the  fourth — meaning  the  mental,  physical,  and  moral 
predispositions.  We  add  to  them  two  more,  the  nature  and 
names  of  which  you  may  learn  hereafter.  Suffice  for  the  present 
to  let  you  know  that  they  are  connected  with,  and  productive  of 
Sakkayaditthi,  the  **  heresy  or  delusion  of  individuality  "  and  of 
Attavada  "  the  doctrine  of  Self,"  both  of  which  (in  the  case  of  the 
fifth  principle  the  soul)  lead  to  the  Maya  of  heresy  and  belief  in 
the  efficacy  of  vain  rites  and  ceremonies  in  prayers  and  inter- 
cession. 

Now,  returning  to  the  question  of  identity  between  the  old  and 
the  new  "  Ego."  I  may  remind  you  once  more,  that  even  your 
Science  has  accepted  the  old,  very  old  fact  distinctly  taught  by 
our  Lord,*  viz. — that  a  man  of  any  given  age,  while  sentiently 
the  same,  is  yet  physically  not  the  same  as  he  was  a  few  years 
earlier  (we  say   seven  years  and  are   prepared   to  maintain   and 

1  See  the  Abhidharena  Kosha  Vyakhya,  the  Sutta  Ptaka,  any  Northern 
Buddhist  book,  all  of  which  show  Gaama  Buddha  saying  that  none  of  these 
Skandhas  is  the  soul ;  since  the  body  is  constantly  changing,  and  that  neither 
man,  animal,  nor  plant  is  ever  the  same  for  two  consecutive  days  or  even 
minutes.  "  Mendicants  !  remember  that  there  is  within  man  no  abiding  prin- 
ciple whatever,  and  that  only  the  learned  disciple  who  acquires  wisdom,  in 
saying   "/   am" — knows   what   he  is   saying." 


112  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

prove  it)  :  Buddhistically  speaking,  his  Skandas  have  changed. 
At  the  same  time  they  are  ever  and  ceaselessly  at  work  in  prepar- 
ing the  abstract  mould,  the  **  privation  "  of  the  future  new  being. 
Well  then,  if  it  is  just  that  a  man  of  40  should  enjoy  or  suffer  for 
the  actions  of  the  man  of  20,  so  it  is  equally  just  that  the  being 
of  the  new  birth,  who  is  essentially  identical  with  the  previous 
being — since  he  is  its  outcome  and  creation — should  feel  the  con- 
sequences of  that  begetting  Self  or  personality.  Your  Western 
law  which  punishes  the  innocent  son  of  a  guilty  father  by  depriv- 
ing him  of  his  parent,  rights  and  property ;  your  civilized  Society 
which  brands  with  infamy  the  guiltless  daughter  of  an  immoral, 
criminal  mother ;  your  Christian  Church  and  Scriptures  which 
teach  that  the  **  Lord  God  visits  the  sins  of  the  Fathers  upon  the 
Children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  "  are  not  all  these 
far  more  unjust  and  cruel  than  anything  done  by  Karma?  In- 
stead of  punishing  the  innocent  together  with  the  culprit,  the 
Karma  avenges  and  rewards  the  former,  which  neither  of  your 
three  western  potentates  above  mentioned  ever  thought  of  doing. 
But  perhaps,  to  our  physiological  remark  the  objectors  may  reply 
that  it  is  only  the  body  that  changes,  there  is  only  a  molecular 
transformation,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  mental  evolu- 
tion ;  and  that  the  Skandhas  represent  not  only  a  material  but  also 
a  set  of  mental  and  moral  qualities.  But  is  there,  I  ask,  either  a 
sensation,  an  abstract  idea,  a  tendency  of  mind,  or  a  mental 
power  that  one  could  call  an  absolutely  non-molecular  phe- 
nomenon? Can  even  a  sensation  or  the  most  abstractive  thoughts 
which  is  something,  come  out  of  nothing  or  be  nothing? 

No\V,  the  causes  producing  the  "  new  being  "  and  determining 
the  nature  of  Karma  are,  as  already  said — Trishna  (or  "  Tanha  ") 
— first,  desire  for  sentient  existence  and  Upadana — which  is  the 
realization  or  consummation  of  Trishna  or  that  desire.  And  both 
of  these  the  medium  helps  to  awaken  and  to  develop  nee  plus 
ultra  in  an  Elementary,  be  he  a  suicide  or  a  victim.^  The  rule  is, 
that  a  person  who  dies  a  natural  death,  will  remain  from  **  a  few 
hours  to  several  short  years,"  within  the  earth's  attraction,  i.e., 
in  the  Kama-Loka.  But  exceptions  are,  in  the  case  of  suicides 
and  those  who  die  a  violent  death  in  general.  Hence,  one  of 
such  Egos,  for  instance,  who  is  destined  to  live — say  80  or  90 
years,  but  who  either  killed  himself  or  was  killed  by  some  acci- 
dent, let  us  suppose  at  the  age  of  20 — would  have  to  pass  in  the 
Kama  Loka  not  *'  a  few  years,"  but  in  his  case  60  or  70  years, 
as  an  Elementary,  or  rather  an  "  earth  walker  "  ;  since  he  is  not, 
unfortunately  for  him,  even  a  "shell/'     Happy,  thrice  happy,  in 

1  Alone  the  Shells  of  the  Elementals  are  left  unhurt,  though  the  morality 
of  the  sensitives  can  by  no  means  be  improved  by  the  intercourse. 


JBhi] 

CO: 

sk 

i 


HILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  113 

comparison,  are  those  disembodied  entities,  who  sleep  their  long" 
slumber  and  live  in  dream  in  the  bosom  of  space  !  And  woe  to 
ose  whose  Trishna  will  attract  them  to  mediums,  and  woe  to 
e  latter,  who  tempt  them  with  such  an  easy  Upadana.  For  in 
asping  them,  and  satisfying  their  thirst  for  life,  the  medium 
elps  to  develop  in  them — is  in  fact  the  cause  of — a  new  set  of 
Skandhas,  a  new  body,  with  far  worse  tendencies  and  passions 
than  was  the  one  they  lost.  All  the  future  of  this  new  body  will 
be  determined  thus,  not  only  by  the  Karma  of  demerit  of  the 
previous  set  or  group  but  also  by  that  of  the  new  set  of  the  future 
being.  Were  the  mediums  and  Spiritualists  but  to  know,  as  1 
said,  that  with  every  new  "  angel  guide  "  they  welcome  with 
rapture,  they  entice  the  latter  into  an  Upadana  which  will  be  pro- 
ductive of  a  series  of  untold  evils  for  the  new  Ego  that  will  be 
born  under  its  nefarious  shadow,  and  that  with  every  seance — 
especially  for  materialization — they  multiply  the  causes  for  misery, 
causes  that  will  make  the  unfortunate  Ego  fail  in  his  spiritual 
birth,  or  be  reborn  into  a  worse  existence  than  ever — they  would, 
perhaps,  be  less  lavishing  their  hospitality. 

x\nd  now,  you  may  understand  why  we  oppose  so  strongly 
Spiritualism  and  mediumship.  And,  you  will  also  see,  why  to 
satisfy  Mr.  Hume, — at  least  in  one  direction, — I  got  myself  into 
a  scrape  with  the  Chohan,  and — mirahile  dictu!  with  both  the 
sahibs,  **  the  young  men  by  the  name  of  " — Scott  and  Banon. 
To  amuse  you  I  will  ask  H.P.B.  to  send  you  with  this  a  page  of 
the  '*  Banon  papyrus,"  an  article  of  his  that  he  winds  up  with  a 
severe  literary  thrashing  of  my  humble  self.  Shadows  of  the 
Asuras,  in  what  a  passion  she  flew  upon  reading  this  rather  dis- 
respectful criticism  !  I  am  sorry  she  does  not  print  it,  upon  con- 
siderations of  "  Family  honour  "  as  the  "  Disinherited  "  ex- 
pressed it.  As  to  the  Chohan,  the  matter  is  more  serious ;  and, 
he  was  far  from  satisfied  that  I  should  have  allowed  Eglinton  to 
believe  it  was  myself.  He  had  permitted  this  proof  of  the  power 
in  living  man  to  be  given  to  the  Spiritualists  through  a  medium 
of  theirs,  but  had  left  the  programme  and  its  details  to  ourselves ; 
hence  his  displeasure  at  some  trifling  consequences.  I  tell  you, 
my  dear  friend,  that  I  am  far  less  free  to  do  as  I  like  than  you  are 
in  the  matter  of  the  Pioneer.  None  of  us  but  the  highest 
Chutuktus  are  their  full  masters.     But  I  digress. 

And  now  that  you  have  been  told  much  and  had  explained  a 
good  deal,  you  may  as  well  read  this  letter  to  our  irrepressible 
friend — Mrs.  Gordon.  The  reasons  given  may  throw  some  cold 
water  on  her  Spiritualistic  zeal,  though  I  have  my  reasons  to 
doubt  it.  Anyhow  it  may  show  her  that  it  is  not  against  true 
Spiritualism  that  we  set  ourselves,  but  only  against  indiscriminate 
mediumship    and — physical    manifestat-ions, — materializations   and 


114  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

transpossessions  especially.  Could  the  Spiritualists  be  only 
made  to  understand  the  difference  between  individuality  and  per- 
sonality, between  individual  and  personal  immortality  and  some 
other  truths,  they  would  be  more  easily  persuaded  that  Occultists 
may  be  fully  convinced  of  the  monad's  immortality,  and  yet  deny 
that  of  the  soul — the  vehicle  of  the  personal  Ego;  that  they  can 
firmly  believe  in,  and  themselves  practice  spiritual  communication 
and  intercourse  with  the  disembodied  Egos  of  the  Rupa-Loka, 
and  yet  laugh  at  the  insane  idea  of  '*  shaking  hands  "  with  a 
*' Spirit"!;  that  finally,  that  as  the  matter  stands,  it  is  the 
Occultist  and  the  Theosophists  who  are  true  Spiritualists,  while 
the  modern  sect  of  that  name  is  composed  simply  of  materialistic 
phenomenalists. 

And  once  that  we  are  discussing  '*  individuality  "  and  "  per- 
sonality," it  is  curious  that  H.P.B.  when  subjecting  poor  Mr. 
Hume's  brain  to  torture  with  her  muddled  explanations,  never 
thought — until  receiving  the  explanation  from  himself  of  the  dif- 
ference that  exists  between  individuality  and  personality — that  it 
was  the  very  same  doctrine  she  had  been  taught  :  that  of  Paccika- 
Yana,  and  of  Amita-Yana.  The  two  terms  as  above  given  by 
him  are  the  correct  and  literal  translation  of  the  Pali,  Sanskrit, 
and  even  of  the  Chino-Tibetan  technical  names  for  the  many 
personal  entities  blended  in  one  individuality — the  long  string  of 
lives  emanating  from  the  same  Immortal  monad.  You  will  have 
to  remember  them  : — 

(i)  The  Paccika  Yana — (in  Sanskrit  **  Pratyeka  ")  means 
literally  :  the  **  personal  vehicle  "  or  personal  Ego,  a  combination 
of  the  five  lov/er  principles.     While — 

(2)  The  Amita-Yana — (in  Sanskrit  *'  Amrita  ")  is  translated  : — 
"The  immortal  vehicle,"  or  the  Individuality,  the  Spiritual  Soul, 
or  the  Immortal  monad — a  combination  of  the  fifth,  sixth  and 
seventh.* 

It  appears  lo  me  that  one  of  our  great  difficulties  in  trying  to 
understand  the  progress  of  affairs  turns  on  our  ignorance  so  far 
of  the  divisions  of  the  seven  principles.  Each  has  in  turn  its 
seven  elements  we  are  told  :  can  we  be  told  something  more 
concerning  the  seven-fold  constitution  of  the  fourth  and  fifth 
principles  especially.  It  is  evidently  in  the  divisibility  of  these 
that  the  secret  of  the  future  and  of  many  psychic  phenomena 
here  during  life,  resides. 

Quite  right.  But  I  must  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether  with 
the  desired  explanations  the  difficulty  will  be  removed,  and  you 

1  To  avoid  a  fresh  surprise  and  confusion  at  the  news  of  the  fifth  keeping 
company  with  the  sixth  and  seventh,  please  turn  to  page  3,  et  sec.  p.  103. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETIC^ AL  TEACHINGS    115 

will  become  able  to  penetrate  *'  the  secret  of  psychic  phenomena." 
You,  my  good  friend,  whom  I  had  once  or  twice  the  pleasure  of 
hearing  playing  on  your  piano  in  the  quiet  intervals  between  dress- 
coating  and  a  beef-and-claret  dinner — tell  me,  could  you  favour 
me  as  readily,  as  with  one  of  your  easy  waltzes — with  one  of 
Beethoven's  Grand  Sonatas?  Pray,  have  patience  !  Yet,  I  would 
not  refuse  you  by  any  means.  You  will  find  the  fourth  and  the 
fifth  principles,  divided  into  roots  and  Branches  on  a  fly  sheet 
herein  enclosed  if  I  find  time.^  And  now,  how  long  do  you 
propose  to  abstain  from  interrogation  marks? 

Faithfully, 

K.  H. 

P.S. — I  hope  I  have  now  removed  all  cause  for  reproaches — 
my  delay  in  answering  your  queries  notwithstanding, — and  that 
my  character  is  re-established.  Yourself  and  Mr.  Hume  have 
received  now  more  information  about  the  A.E.  Philosophy  than 
was  ever  given  out  to  non-initiates  within  my  knowledge.  Your 
sagacity,  my  kind  friend,  will  have  suggested  long  ago,  that  it 
is  not  so  much  because  of  your  combined  personal  virtues — though 
Mr.  Hume  I  must  confess,  has  run  up  a  large  claim  since  his 
conversion — or  my  personal  preference  for  either  of  you,  as  for 
other  and  very  apparent  reasons.  Of  all  our  semi-chelas  you 
two  are  the  most  likely  to  utilise  for  the  general  good  the  facts 
given  you.  You  must  regard  them  received  in  trust  for  the  bene- 
fit of  the  whole  Society;  to  be  turned  over,  and  employed  and 
re-employed  in  many  ways  and  in  all  ways  that  are  good.  If 
you  (Mr.  Sinnett)  would  give  pleasure  to  your  trans-Himalayan 
friend,  do  not  suffer  any  month  to  pass  without  writing  a  Frag- 
ment, long  or  short  for  the  magazine,  and  then,  issuing  it  as  a 
pamphlet — since  you  so  call  it.  You  may  sign  them  as  **  A  Lay- 
Chela  of  K.H.,"  or  in  any  way  you  choose.  I  dare  not  ask  the 
same  favour  of  Mr.  Hume,  who  has  already  done  more  than  his 
share  in  another  direction. 

I  will  not  answer  your  query  about  your  Pioneer  connection  just 
now  :  something  may  be  said  on  both  sides.  But  at  least  take  no 
rash  decision.  We  are  at  the  end  of  the  cycle,  and  you  are  con- 
nected with  the  T.S. 

Under  favour  of  my  Karma — I  mean  to  answer  to-morrow  Mr. 
Hume's  long  and  kind  personal  letter.  The  abundance  of  MSS. 
from  me  of  late  shows  that  I  have  found  a  little  leisure,  their 
blotched,  patchy  and  mended  appearance  also  proves  that  my 
leisure  has  come  by  snatches,  by  constant  interruptions,  and  that 
my  writing  has  been  done  in  odd  places  here  and  there,  with  such 
materials  as  I  could  pick  up.     But  for  the  Rule  that  forbids  our 

1  I  did  not  find  time.     Will  send  it  a  dav  or  two  later. 


ii6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

using  one  minimum  of  power  until  every  ordinary  means  has  been 
tried  and  failed,  I  might,  of  course,  have  given  you  a  lovely 
"  precipitation  "  as  regards  chirography  and  composition.  I 
console  myself  for  the  miserable  appearance  of  my  letters  with 
the  thought  that  perhaps,  you  may  not  value  them  the  less,  for 
these  marks  of  my  personal  subjection  to  the  wayside  annoyances 
which  you  English  so  ingeniously  reduce  to  a  minimum  with  your 
appliances  of  sorts.  As  your  lady  once  kindly  remarked,  they 
take  away  most  effectually  the  flavour  of  miracle,  and  make  us  as 
human  beings,  more  thinkable  entities, — a  wise  reflection  for 
which  I  thank  her. 

H.P.B.  is  in  despair  :  the  Chohan  refused  permission  to  M.  to 
let  her  come  this  year  further  than  the  Black  Rock,  and  M.  very 
coolly  made  her  unpack  her  trunk.  Try  to  console  her,  if  you 
can.  Besides,  she  is  really  wanted  more  at  Bombay  than  Pen- 
lor.  Olcott  is  on  his  way  to  Lanka  and  Damodar  packed  up  to 
Poona  for  a  month,  his  foolish  austerities  and  hard  work  having 
broken  down  his  physical  constitution.  I  will  have  to  look  after 
him,  and  perhaps,  to  take  him  away,  if  it  comes  to  the  worst. 

Just  now  I  am  able  to  give  you  a  bit  of  information,  which 
bears  upon  the  so  often  discussed  question  of  our  allowing 
phenomena.  The  Egyptian  operations  of  your  blessed  country- 
men involves  such  local  consequences  to  the  body  of  Occultists 
still  remaining  there  and  to  what  they  are  guarding,  that  two  of 
our  adepts  are  already  there,  having  joined  some  Druze  Brethren 
and  three  more  on  their  way.  I  was  offered  the  agreeable  privi- 
lege of  becoming  an  eye-witness  to  the  human  butchery,  but — 
declined  with  thanks.  For  such  great  emergency  is  our  Force 
stored  up  and  hence — we  dare  not  waste  it  on  fashionable 
Tamasha. 

In  about  a  week — new  religious  ceremonies,  new  glittering 
bubbles  to  amuse  the  babes  with,  and  once  more  I  will  be  busy 
night  and  day,  morning,  noon,  and  evening.  At  times  I  feel  a 
passing  regret  that  the  Chohans  should  not  evolute  the  happy 
idea  of  allowing  us  also  a  **  sumptuary  allowance  "  in  the  shape 
of  a  little  spare  time.  Oh,  for  the  final  Rest !  for  that  Nirvana 
where — "to  be  one  with  Life,  yet — to  live  not."  Alas,  alas! 
having  personally  realized  that : — 

"...     the  Soul,  of  things  is  sweet, 
The  Heart  of  Being  is  celestial  Rest — ," 

One  does  long  for — eternal  Rest! 

Yours, 

K.  H. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  117 
LETTER  No.  XVIP 

Received  Simla,  June,   1882. 

(i)  Some  fifth  round  men  have  already  begun  to  appear  on 
earth.  In  what  way  are  they  distinguishable  from  fourth  round 
men  of  the  seventh  earthly  incarnation?  I  suppose  they  are  in 
the  first  incarnation  of  the  fifth  round  and  that  a  tremendous 
advance  will  be  achieved  when  the  fifth  round  people  get  to  their 
seventh  incarnation. 

(1)  The  natural-born  Seers  and  clairvoyants  of  Mrs.  A. 
Kingsford  and  Mr.  Maitland's  types;  the  great  adepts  of  what- 
soever country;  the  geniuses — whether  in  art,  politics  or  religious 
reform.  No  great  physical  distinction  yet :  too  early  and  will 
come  later  on. 

Quite  so.  If  you  turn  to  Appendix  No.  F  you  will  find  it 
explained. 

(2)  But  if  a  first-fifth  round  man  devoted  himself  to  occultism 
and  became  an  adept,  would  he  escape  further  earthly  incarna- 
tions ? 

(2)  No;  if  we  except  Buddha — a  sixth  round  being,  as  he  had 
run  so  successfully  the  race  in  his  previous  incarnations  as  to 
outrun  even  his  predecessors.  But  then  such  a  man  is  to  be 
found  in  a  billion  of  human  creatures.  He  differed  from  other 
men  as  much  in  his  physical  appearance  as  in  spirituality  and 
knowledge.  Yet  even  he  escaped  further  reincarnations  but 
on  this  earth;  and,  when  the  last  of  the  sixth  round  men  of  the 
third  ring  is  gone  out  of  this  earth,  the  Great  Teacher  will  have 
to  get  reincarnated  on  the  next  planet.  Only,  and  since  He 
sacrificed  Nirvanic  bliss  and  Rest  for  the  salvation  of  his  fellow 
creatures  He  will  be  re-born  in  the  highest — the  seventh  ring 
of  the  upper  planet.  Till  then  He  will  overshadow  every 
decimillenium  (let  us  rather  say  and  add  **  has  overshadowed 
already  "  a  chosen  individual  who  generally  overturned  the 
destinies  of  nations.  See  I  sis,  Vol.  I,  pp.  34  and  35  last  and 
first  para,  on  the  pages). 

(3)  Is  there  any  essential  spiritual  difference  between  a  man  and 
a  woman,  or  is  sex  a  mere  accident  of  each  birth — the  ultimate 
future  of  the  individual  furnishing  the  same  opportunity? 

(3)  A  mere  accident — as  you  say.  Generally  a  chance  work 
yet  guided  by  individual  Karma, — moral  aptitudes,  char- 
acteristics and  deeds  of  a  previous  birth. 

^  K.H.'s  Replies  to  Mr.  Sinnett's  queries  are  printed  in  bold  tvpe. — Ed. 
2  See  Letter   No.  XVIII.— Ed. 


ii8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

(4)  The  majority  of  the  superior  classes  of  civilized  countries  on 
earth  now,  I  understand  to  be  seventh  '*  ring  "  people  (i.e.  of  the 
seventh  earthly  incarnation)  of  the  fourth  round.  The  Australian 
aborigines  I  understand  to  be  a  low  ring?  which?  and  are  the 
lower  and  inferior  classes  of  civilized  countries  of  various  rings 
or  of  the  ring  just  below  the  seventh.  And  are  all  seventh  ring 
people  born  in  the  superior  classes  or  may  not  some  be  born 
among  the  poor? 

(4)  Not  necessarily.  Refinement,  polishedness,  and  brilliant 
education,  in  your  sense  of  these  w^ords  have  very  little  to  do 
with  the  course  of  higher  Nature's  Law.  Take  a  seventh  ring 
African  or  a  fifth  ring  Mongolian  and  you  can  educate  him — 
if  taken  from  the  cradle — save  his  physical  appearance,  and 
transform  him  into  the  most  brilliant  and  accomplished  English 
lord.  Yet,  he  will  still  remain  but  an  outwardly  intellectual 
parrot.     (See  Appendix  No.  II). 

(5)  The  Old  Lady  told  me  that  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  of  this 
country  are  in  some  respects  less  advanced  than  European  though 
more  spiritual.  Are  they  on  a  lower  ring  of  the  same  roundi — or 
does  the  difference  refer  to  some  principle  of  national  cycles  which 
has  nothing  to  do  with  individual  progress? 

(5)  Most  of  the  peoples  of  India  belong  to  the  oldest  or  the 
earliest  branchlet  of  the  fifth  human  Race.  I  have  desired  M. 
to  end  his  letter  to  you  with  a  short  summary  of  the  last  scientific 
theory  of  your  learned  Ethnographers  and  Naturalists,  to  save 
myself  work.  Read  what  he  writes  and  then  turn  to  No.  Ill 
of  my  Appendix. 

What  is  the  explanation  of  "  Ernest ''  and  Eglinton's  other 
guide?  Are  they  elementaries  drawing  their  conscious  vitality 
from  him  or  elementals  masquerading?  When  "  Ernest'*  took 
that  sheet  of  *'  Pioneer  "  notepaper  how  did  he  contrive  to  get  it 
without  mediumship  at  this  end? 

I  can  assure  you  it  is  not  worth  your  while  now  to  study  the 
true  natures  of  the  *'  Ernests  *'  and  '*  Joeys  "  and  '*  other 
guides  '*  as  unless  you  become  acquainted  with  the  evolution 
of  the  corruptions  of  elemental  dross,  and  those  of  the  seven 
principles  in  man — ^you  would  find  yourself  at  a  loss  to  under- 
stand— ^what  they  really  are;  there  are  no  written  statutes  for 
them,  and  they  can  hardly  be  expected  to  pay  their  friends  and 
admirers  the  compliment  of  truth,  silence  or  forbearing.  If 
some  are  related  to  them  as  some  soulless  physical  mediums 
are — ^they  shall  meet.  If  not — better  leave  them  alone.  They 
gravitate  but  to  their  like — the  mediums;  and  their  relation  is 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  119 
not  made  but  forced  by  foolish  and  sinful  phenomena-mongers. 
They  are  both  elementaries  and  elementals — at  best  a  low 
mischievous  degrading  jangle.  You  want  to  embrace  too 
much  knowledge  at  once,  my  dear  friend;  you  cannot  attain  at 
a  bound  all  the  mysteries.  See  however  Appendix — which  is 
in  reality  a  letter. 

I  do  not  know  Subba  Row — who  is  a  pupil  of  M.  At  least 
— he  knows  very  little  of  me.  Yet  1  know,  he  will  never  con- 
sent to  come  to  Simla.  But  if  ordered  by  Morya  will  teach 
from  Madras,  i.e.,  correct  the  MSS.  as  M.  did,  comment  upon 
them,  answer  questions,  and  be  very,  very  useful.  He  has  a 
perfect  reverence  and  adoration  for  H.P.B. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XVIH 

Received  Simla,  June,   1882. 
APPENDIX 

(I)  Every  Spiritual  Individuality  has  a  gigfantic  evolutionary 
journey  to  perform,  a  tremendous  gyratory  process  to  accomplish. 
First — at  the  very  beginning  of  the  great  Mahamanvantaric  rota- 
tion, from  first  to  last  of  the  man-bearing  planets,  as  on  each  of 
them,  the  monad  has  to  pass  through  seven  successive  races  of 
man.  From  the  dumb  offshoot  of  the  ape  (the  latter  strongly 
differentiating  from  the  now  known  specimens)  up  to  the  present 
fifth  race,  or  rather  variety,  and  through  two  more  races,  before 
he  has  done  with  this  earth  only ;  and  then  on  to  the  next,  higher 
and  higher  still.  But  we  will  confine  our  attention  but  to  this  one. 
Each  of  the  seven  races  send  seven  ramifying  branchlets  from  the 
Parent  Branch  :  and  through  each  of  these  in  turn  man  has  to 
evolute  before  he  passes  on  to  the  next  higher  race;  and  that — 
seven  times.  Well  may  you  open  wide  your  eyes,  good  friend, 
and  feel  puzzled — it  is  so.  The  branchlets  t}'pify  varying  speci- 
mens of  humanity — physically  and  spiritually — and  no  one  of  us 
can  miss  one  single  rung  of  the  ladder.  With  all  that  there  is 
no  reincarnation  as  taught  by  the  London  Seeress — ^Mrs.  A.K.,  as 
the  intervals  between  the  re-births  are  too  immeasurably  long  to 
permit  of  any  such  fantastic  ideas.  Please,  bear  in  mind,  that 
when  I  say  **  man,"  I  mean  a  human  being  of  our  type.  There 
are  other  and  innumerable  manvantaric  chains  of  globes  bearing 
intelligent  beings — both  in  and  out  of  our  solar  system — the  crowns 
or  apexes  of  evolutionary  being  in  their  respective  chains,  some — 
physically  and  intellectually — lower,  others  immeasurably  higher 
than  the  man  of  our  chain.  But  beyond  mentioning  them  we  will 
not  speak  of  these  at  present. 


I20  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Through  every  race  then,  man  has  to  pass  making  seven  suc- 
cessive entrances  and  exits  and  developing  intellect  to  degrees  from 
the  lowest  to  the  highest  in  succession.  In  short,  his  earth  cycle 
with  its  rings  and  st^b-rings  is  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  Great 
Cycle — only  in  miniature.  Bear  in  mind  again,  that  the  intervals 
even  between  these  special  *'  race  re-incarnations"  are  enormous, 
as  even  the  dullest  of  the  African  Bushmen  has  to  reap  the  reward 
of  his  Karma,  equally  with  his  brother  Bushman  who  may  be  six 
times  more  intelligent. 

Your  Ethnographers  and  anthropologists  would  do  well  to  ever 
keep  in  their  minds  this,  unvarying  septenary  law  which  runs 
throughout  the  work  of  nature.  From  Cuvier — ^the  late  grand 
master  of  Protestant  theology — whose  Bible-stuffed  brain  made 
him  divide  mankind  into  but  three  distinct  varieties  of  races — 
down  to  Blumenbach  who  divided  them  into  five — they  were  all 
wrong.  Alone  Pritchard,  who  prophetically  suggested  seven 
comes  near  the  right  mark.  I  read  in  the  Pioneer  of  June  12th 
forwarded  to  me  by  H.P.B.  a  letter  on  the  Ape  Theory  by  A.P.W. 
which  contains  a  most  excellent  exposition  of  the  Darwinian 
hypothesis.  The  last  paragraph  page  6  column  i  would  be 
regarded — barring  a  few  errors — as  a  revelation  in  a  millenium  or 
so,  were  it  to  be  preserved.  Reading  the  nine  lines  from  line  21 
(counting  from  the  bottom)  you  have  a  fact  of  which  few 
naturalists  are  yet  prepared  to  accept  the  proof.  The  Fifth  sixth 
and  seventh  races  of  the  Fifth  Round — each  succeeding  race 
evoluting  with  and  keeping  pace,  so  to  say  with  the  **  Great 
Cycle  "  rounds — and  the  fifth  race  of  the  fifth  round,  having  to 
exhibit  a  perceptible  physical  and  intellectual  as  well  as  moral 
differentiation  towards  its  fourth  *'  race  "  or  "  earthly  incarna- 
tion "  you  are  right  in  saying  that  a  **  tremendous  advance  will 
be  achieved  when  the  fifth  round  people  get  to  their  seventh 
incarnation." 

(II)  Nor  has  wealth  nor  poverty,  high  or  low  birth  any  influence 
upon  it,  for  this  is  all  a  result  of  their  Karma.  Neither  has — what 
you  call — civilization  much  to  do  with  the  progress.  It  is  the 
inner  man,  the  spirituality,  the  illumination  of  the  physical  brain 
by  the  light  of  the  spiritual  or  divine  intelligence  that  is  the  test. 
The  Australian,  the  Esquimaux,  the  Bushmen,  the  Veddahs,  etc., 
are  all  side-shooting  branchlets  of  that  Branch  which  you  call 
**  cave-men  " — the  third  race  (according  to  your  Science  the 
second)  that  evoluted  on  the  globe.  They  are  the  remnants  of  the 
seventh  ring  cave  men,  remnants  "  that  have  ceased  to  grow  and 
are  the  arrested  forms  of  life  doomed  to  eventual  decay  in  the 
struggle  for  existence  "  in  the  words  of  your  correspondent. 

See  "Isis"  Chapter  i,  page  i. — **  The  divine  Essence 
(Purusha)  like  a  luminous  arc"   proceeds  to  form   a  circle — the 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  121 

mahamanvantaric  chain  ;  and  having  attained  the  highest  (or  its 
first  starting  point)  bends  back  again  and  returns  to  earth  (the 
first  globe)  bringing  a  higher  type  of  humanity  in  its  vortex — 
**  thus  seven  times.  Approaching  our  earth  it  grows  more  and 
more  shadowy  until  uf>on  touching  ground  it  becomes  as  black  as 
night — "  i.e.  it  is  matter  outwardly,  the  Spirit  or  Purusha  being 
concealed  under  a  quintuple  armour  of  the  first  five  principles. 
Now  see  three  lines  on  page  5  for  the  word  "  mankind  "  read 
human  races,  and  for  that  of  "  civilization  "  read  Spiritual  evolu^ 
tion  of  that  partictdar  race  and  you  have  the  truth  which  had  to 
be  concealed  at  that  incipient  tentative  stage  of  the  Theosophical 
Society. 

See  again  pp.  13  last  paragraph  and  14  first  paragraph,  and 
note  the  underlined  lines  about  Plato.  Then  see  p.  32  remember- 
ing the  difference  between  the  Manvantaras  as  therein  calculated 
and  the  Mahamanvantaras  (complete  seven  round  between  two 
pralayas, — ^the  four  Yugs  returning  seven  times,  once  for  each 
race.  Having  done  so  far  take  your  pen  and  calculate.  This 
will  make  you  swear — ^^but  this  will  not  hurt  your  Karma  much  : 
lip-profanity  finds  it  deaf.  Read  attentively  in  this  connection 
(not  with  the  swearing  process  but  with  that  of  evolution)  pp.  301 
last  line  **  and  now  comes  a  mystery  .  .  ."  and  continue  on  to 
p.  304.  '*  Isis  "  was  not  unveiled  but  rents  sufficiently  large  were 
made  to  afford  flitting  glances  to  be  completed  by  the  student's 
own  intuition.  In  this  curry  of  quotations  from  various  philo- 
sophic and  esoteric  truths  purposely  veiled,  behold  our  doctrine, 
which  is  now  being  partially  taught  to  Europeans  for  the  first  time. 

(Ill)  As  said  in  my  answer  on  your  notes,  most  of  the  peoples 
of  India — ^with  the  exception  of  the  Semitic  (?)  Moguls — belong 
to  the  oldest  branchlet  of  the  present  fifth  Human  race,  which  was 
evoluted  in  Central  Asia  more  than  one  million  of  years  ago. 
Western  Science  finding  good  reasons  for  the  theory  of  human 
beings  having  inhabited  Europe  400,000  years  before  your  era — 
this  cannot  so  shock  you  as  to  prevent  your  drinking  wine  to-night 
at  your  dinner.  Yet  Asia,  has  as  well  as  Australia,  Africa, 
America  and  the  most  northward  region — its  remnant  of  the  fourth 
— even  of  the  third  race  (cave-men  and  Iberians)  at  the  same  time, 
w^e  have  more  of  the  seventh  ring  men  of  the  fourth  race  than 
Europe  and  more  of  the  first  ring  of  the  fifth  round,  as,  older 
than  the  European  branchlets,  ours  even  have  naturally  come  in 
earlier.  Their  being  '*  less  advanced  "  in  civilization  and  refine- 
ment trouble  their  spirituality  but  very  little.  Karma  being  an 
animal  which  remains  indifferent  to  pumps  and  white  kid  gloves. 
Neither  your  knives  nor  forks,  operas  and  drawing  rooms  will 
any  more  follow  you  in  your  onward  progress  than  will  the  dead- 
leaf  coloured  robes  of  the  British  Esthetics  prevent  the  proprietors 


122  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

thereof  and  wearers  from  having-  been  bom  among*  the  ranks  of 
those,  who  will  be  regarded — do  what  they  may — by  the  forth- 
coming sixth  and  seventh  round  men  as  flesh-eating-  and  liquor- 
drinking  **  savages  "  of  the  *'  Royal  Society  period."  It  depends 
on  you,  to  so  immortalize  your  name,  as  to  force  the  future  higher 
races  to  divide  our  age  and  call  the  sub-division — ^the  "  Pleisto- 
Sinnettic  Period"  but  this  can  never  be  so  long  as  you  labour 
under  the  impression  that  *'  the  purposes  we  have  now  in  view 
could  be  met  by  a  reasonable  temperance  and  self-restraint." 
Occult  Science  is  a  jealous  mistress  and  allows  not  a  shadow  of 
self-indulgence;  and  it  is  **  fatal  "  not  only  to  the  ordinary  course 
of  married  life  but  even  to  flesh  and  wine  drinking.  I  am  afraid 
that  the  archaeologists  of  the  seventh  round,  when  picking  out  and 
unearthing  the  future  Pompeii  of  Punjab — Simla,  one  day,  instead 
of  finding  the  precious  relics  of  the  Theosophical  **  Eclectic  "  will 
fish  out  but  some  petrified  or  vitreous  remains  of  the  "  Sumptuary 
allowance."      Such  is  the  latest  prophecy  current  at  Tzigadze. 

And  now  to  the  last  question.  Well,  as  I  say,  the  *'  guides  " 
are  both  elementals  and  elementaries  and  not  even  a  decent  **  half 
and  half  "  but  the  very  froth  in  the  mug  of  the  mediumistic  beer. 
The  several  "privations"  of  such  sheets  of  notepaper  were 
evoluted  during  E's  stay  in  Calcutta  in  Mrs.  G's  atmosphere — 
since  she  frequently  received  letters  from  you.  It  was  then  an 
easy  matter  for  the  creatures  in  following  E's  unconscious  desire 
to  attract  other  disintegrated  particles  from  your  box,  so  as  to 
form  a  double.  He  is  a  strong  medium,  and  were  it  not  for  an 
inherent  good  nature  and  other  good  qualities,  strongly  counter- 
acted by  vanity,  sloth,  selfishness,  greediness  for  money  and  with 
other  qualities  of  modern  civilization  a  total  absence  of  will,  he 
would  make  a  suf>erb  Dugpa  yet,  as  I  said  he  is  "a  good  fellow  " 
every  inch  of  him  ;  naturally  truthful,  under  control — the  reverse. 
I  would  if  I  could  save  him  from     .... 


Note. — The  rest  of  the  original  letter  is  missing.     It  is  in  K.H.'s  hand- 
in^. — Ed. 


writing 


LETTER  No.   XIX 

Fragments    in    K.H.'s    handwriting    attached     to    Proofs    of    Letter    on 
Theosophy.     Received  August    12th,    1882. 

Yes ;  verily  known  and  as  confidently  affirmed  by  the  adepts  from 

whom — 

"  No  curtain  hides  the  spheres  Elysian 

Nor   these   poor   shells  of  half   transparent   dust ; 
For  all  that  blinds  the  spirit's  vision 
Is  pride  and  hate  and  lust.     .     .     ." 
(Not  for  puhlication) 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  123 

Exceptional  cases  my  friend.  Suicides  can  and  generally  6oy 
but  not  so  with  the  others.  The  good  and  pure  sleep  a  quiet 
blissful  sleep,  full  of  happy  visions  of  earth-life  and  have  no  con- 
sciousness of  being  already  for  ever  beyond  that  life.  Those  who 
were  neither  good  nor  bad,  sleep  a  dreamless  still  a  quiet  sleep ; 
while  the  wicked  will  in  proportion  to  their  grossness  suffer  the 
pangs  of  a  nightmare  lasting  years  :  their  thoughts  become  living 
things,  their  wicked  passions — real  substance,  and  they  receive 
back  on  their  heads  all  the  misery  they  have  heaped  upon  others. 
Reality  and  fact  if  described  would  yield  a  far  more  terrible  inferno 
than  even  Dante  had  imagined. 


LETTER  No.  XXa^ 
My  dear  Master, 

In  speaking  of  Fragments  No.  Ill  of  which  you  will  receive 
proofs  soon,  I  said  it  was  far  from  satisfactory  though  I  had  done 
my  best. 

It  was  necessary  to  advance  the  doctrine  of  the  Society  another 
stage.  So  as  gradually  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  spiritualists — so  I 
introduced  as  the  most  pressing  matter  the  Suicide  etc.  view 
given  in  your  last  letter  to  S — . 

Well  it  is  this  that  seems  to  me  most  unsatisfactory  and  it  wiU 
lead  to  a  number  of  questions  that  I  shall  feel  puzzled  to  reply  to 
them. 

Our  first  doctrine  is  that  the  majority  of  objective  phenomena 
were  due  to  shells,  i^  and  2^  principled  shells,  i.e.  principles 
entirely  separated  from  their  sixth  and  seventh  principles. 

But  as  a  further  (i)  development  we  admit  that  there  are  some 
spirits,  i.e.  5th  and  4th  principles  not  wholly  dissevered  from  their 
sixth  and  seventh  which  also  may  be  potent  in  the  seance  room. 
These  are  the  spirits  of  suicides  and  the  victims  of  accident  or 
violence.  Here  the  doctrine  is  that  each  particular  wave  of  life 
must  run  on  to  its  appointed  shore  and  with  the  exception  of  the 
very  good,  that  all  spirits  prematurely  divorced  from  the  lower 
principles,  must  remain  on  earth,  until  the  foredestined  hour  of 
what  would  have  been  the  natural  death  strikes. 

Now  this  is  all  very  well  but  this  being  so,  it  is  clear  that  in 
opposition  to  our  former  doctrine,  shells  will  be  few  and  spirits 
many  (2). 

For  what  difference  can  there  be  to  take  the  case  of  suicides, 

1  The  original  letter  of  A.O.H.  to  K.H.  has  some  passages  numbered  and 
underlined  with  blue  pencil  by  K.H.  These  are  printed  in  the  text  in  italics. 
The  numbers  refer  to  K.H.'s  replies,  for  which  see  post  Letter  No.  XXc. — Ed. 


124  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

whether  these  be  conscious  or  unconscious,  whether  the  man  blows 
his  brains  out,  or  only  drinks  or  womanizes  himself  to  death,  or 
kills  himself  by  over-study?  In  each  case  equally  the  normal 
natural  hour  of  death  is  anticipated  and  a  spirit  and  not  a  shell 
the  result — or  again  what  difference  does  it  make  whether  a  man 
is  hung  for  murder,  killed  in  battle,  in  a  railway  train  or  a  powder 
explosion,  or  drowned  or  burnt  to  death,  or  knocked  over  by 
cholera  or  plague,  or  jungle  fever  or  any  of  the  other  thousand 
and  one  epidemic  diseases  of  which  the  seeds  were  not  ab  initio 
in  his  constitution,  but  when  introduced  there  in  consequence  of 
his  happening  to  visit  a  particular  locality  or  undergo  a  given 
experience,  both  of  which  he  might  have  avoided?  Equally  in 
all  cases  the  normal  death  hour  is  anticipated  and  a  spirit  instead 
of  a  shell  the  result. 

In  England  it  is  calculated  that  not  15%  of  the  population  reach 
their  normal  death  period — and  what  with  fevers  and  famines  and 
their  sequels,  I  fear  the  percentage  is  not  much  larger  here  even — 
where  the  people  are  mostly  vegetarian  and  as  a  rule  live  under 
less  unfavourable  sanitary  conditions. 

So  then  the  great  bulk  of  all  the  physical  phenomena  of 
spiritualists  ought  apparently  to  be  due  to  these  spirits  and  not 
to  shells.  I  should  be  glad  to  have  further  information  on  this 
p>oint. 

There  is  a  second  pK>int  (3)  very  often  as  I  understand  the  spirits 
of  very  fair  average  good  people  dying  natural  deaths  remain  some 
time  in  the  earth  atmosphere — from  a  few  days  to  a  few  years — 
why  cannot  such  as  these  communicate?  And  if  they  can  this  is 
a  most  important  point  that  should  not  have  been  overlooked. 

(4)  And  thirdly  it  is  a  fact  that  thousands  of  spirits  do  appear 
in  pure  circles  and  teach  the  highest  morality  and  moreover  tell 
very  closely  the  truths  as  to  the  unseen  world  (witness  Alan 
Kardec's  books  pages  and  pages  of  which  are  identical  with  what 
you  yourself  teach)  and  it  is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  such  are 
either  shells  or  bad  spirits.  But  you  have  not  given  us  any  open- 
ing for  any  large  number  of  pure  high  spirits — and  until  the  whole 
theory  is  properly  set  forth  and  due  place  made  for  these  which 
seem  to  me  a  thoroughly  well  established  fact,  you  will  never  win 
over  the  spiritualists.  I  dare  say  it  is  the  old  story — only  part  of 
the  truth  being  told  to  us  and  the  rest  reserved — if  so  it  is  merely 
cutting  the  Society's  throat.  Better  tell  the  outside  world  nothing 
— than  to  tell  them  half  truths  and  incompleteness  of  which  they 
detect  at  once,  the  result  being  a  contemptuous  rejection  of  what 
is  truth  and  though  they  cannot  accept  it  in  this  fragmentary  state. 
Yours  affectionately, 

A.  O.  Hume. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOEETIC AL  TEACHING  S    1 25 
LETTER  No.  XXb^ 

Received  August   1882. 

Simla,  July  25t/i. 
My  Dear  Old  Lady, 

I  began  to  try  to  answer  N.D.K.'s  letter  at  once  so  that  if 
K.  H.  really  meant  the  note  to  appear  in  this  immediately  '*  next  " 
appearing  Theosophist  for  August  it  might  just  be  in  time.  But 
I  soon  got  into  a  tangle.  Of  course  we  have  received  no  informa- 
tion that  distinctly  covers  the  question  now  raised,  though  I  sup- 
fK>se  we  ought  to  be  able  to  combine  bits  into  an  answer.  The 
difficulty  turns  on  giving  the  real  explanation  of  Eliphas  Levi's 
enigma  in  your  note  in  the  October  Theosophist. 

If  he  refers  to  the  fate  of  this,  at  present  existing  race  of  man- 
kind his  statements  that  the  intermediate  majority  of  Egos  are 
ejected  from  nature  or  annihilated  would  be  in  direct  conflict  with 
K.H.'s  teaching.  They  do  not  die  without  remembrance,  if  they 
retain  remembrance  in  Devachan  and  again  recover  remembrance 
(even  of  past  personalities  as  of  a  book's  pages)  at  the  period  of 
full  individual  consciousness  preceding  that  of  absolute  conscious- 
ness in  Pari  Nirvana. 

But  it  occurred  to  me — that  E.L.  may  have  been  dealing  with 
humanity  as  a  whole,  not  merely  with  the  fourth  round  men. 
Great  numbers  of  fifth  round  personalities  are  destined  to  perish 
J  understand  and  these  might  be  his  intermediate  useless  portion 
of  mankind.  But  then  the  individual  spiritual  monads,  as  I 
understand  the  matter,  do  not  perish  whatever  happens,  and  if  a 
monad  reaches  the  fifth  round  with  all  his  previous  personalities 
preserved  in  the  pages  of  his  book  awaiting  future  perusal,  he 
would  not  be  ejected  and  annihilated  because  some  of  his  fifth- 
round  pages  were  **  unfit  for  publication."  So  again  there  is  a 
difficulty  in  reconciling  the  two  statements. 

X.  But  again  is  it  conceivable  that  a  spiritual  monad  though 
surviving  the  rejection  of  its  third  and  fourth  round  pages,  cannot 
survive  the  rejection  of  fifth  and  sixth  round  pages.  That  failure 
to  lead  good  lives  in  these  rounds  means  the  annihilation  of  the 
whole  individual  who  will  never  then  get  to  the  seventh  round  at 
all. 

But  on  the  other  hand  if  that  were  so  the  Eliphas  Levi  case 
would  not  be  met  by  such  a  hypothesis,  for  long  before  then  the 
individuals  who  had  become  co-workers  with  nature  for  evil  would 
have  been  themselves  annihilated  by  the  obscuration  of  the  planet 

1  Letter  from  Mr.  Sinnett  to  H.P.B.  on  the  backs  of  the  pages  of  which  is 
part  of  a  long  letter  from  K.H.  (No.  XXc)  re  queries  of  Hume's. — Ed. 

10 


126  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

X.  between  the  fifth  and  sixth  rounds — if  not  by  the  obscuration 
between  the  fourth  and  the  fifth,  for  to  every  round  there  is  one 
obscuration  we  are  told.  (5)  There  is  another  difficulty  here  be- 
cause some  fifth  rounders  being  here  already  it  is  not  clear  when 
the  obscuration  comes  on.  Will  it  be  behind  the  avant  couriers  of 
the  fifth  round,  who  will  not  count  as  commencing  the  fifth,  that 
epoch  only  really  beginning  after  the  existing  race  has  totally 
decayed  out — but  this  idea  will  not  work. 

Having  got  so  far  in  my  reflections  yesterday,  I  went  up  to 
Hume  to  see  if  he  could  make  out  the  puzzle  and  so  enable  me 
to  write  what  was  wanted  for  this  post.  But  on  looking  into  it 
and  looking  back  to  the  October  Theosophist  we  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  only  possible  explanation  was  that  the  October 
Theosophist  note  was  utterly  wrong  and  totally  at  variance  with 
all  our  later  teaching.  Is  that  really  the  solution?  1  do  not 
think  so  or  K.H.  would  not  have  set  me  to  reconcile  the  two. 

But  you  will  see  that  at  present,  with  the  best  will  in  the  world 
I  am  utterly  unable  to  do  the  job  set  me,  and  if  my  dear  Guardian 
and  Master  will  kindly  look  at  these  remarks  he  will  see  the 
dilemma  in  which  I  am  placed. 

And  then  in  the  way  which  will  be  the  least  trouble  to  himself 
either  through   you  or  directly  he  will   perhaps  indicate  the  line 
which  the  required  explanation  ought  to  take.       Manifestly  it  can-' 
not  be  done  for  the  August  number,  but  I  am  inclined  to  believe 
he  never  intended  this  as  the  time  is  now  so  short. 

We  all  feel  so  sorry  for  you,  over-worked  amid  the  heat  and  the 
flies.  When  you  have  got  the  August  number  off  your  hands  you 
might  perhaps  be  able  to  take  flight  for  here,  and  get  a  little  rest 
among  us.  You  know  how  glad  at  any  time  we  should  be  to  see 
you.  Meanwhile  my  own  individual  plans  are  a  little  uncertain. 
I  may  have  to  return  to  Allahabad,  in  order  to  leave  Hensman  free 
to  go  as  sp>ecial  correspondent  to  Egypt.  I  am  fighting  my  pro- 
prietors tooth  and  nail  to  avert  this  result — but  for  a  few  days  still 
the  issue  of  the  struggle  will  be  uncertain. 

Ever  Yours, 

A.  P.  S. 

P.S. — As  you  may  want  to  print  the  letter  in  this  number,  I 
return  it  herewith,  but  hope  that  this  may  not  be  the  case  and 
that  you  will  send  it  me  back  again  so  that  I  may  duly  i>erform 
my  little  task  with  the  help  of  a  few  words  as  to  the  line  to  be 
followed. 


i 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  127 


LETTER  No.  XXc 

Except  in  so  far,  that  he  constantly  uses  the  terms  "  God  "  and 
"Christ"  which  taken  in  their  esoteric  sense  simply  mean 
"  Good  " — in  its  dual  aspect  of  the  abstract  and  the  concrete  and 
nothing  more  dogmatic,  Eliphas  Levi  is  not  in  any  direct  conflict 
with  our  teachings.  It  is  again  a  straw  blown  out  of  a  hay-stack 
and  accused  by  the  wind  to  belong  to  a  hay-rick.  Most  of  those, 
whom  you  may  call,  if  you  like,  candidates  for  Deva  Chan — die  and 
are  reborn  in  the  Kama-Loka  **  without  remembrance";  though 
(and  just  because)  they  do  get  some  of  it  back  in  the  Deva-Chan. 
Nor  can  we  call  it  a  full  but  only  a  partial  remembrance.  You 
would  hardly  call,  "remembrance"  a  dream  of  yours;  some 
particular  scene  or  scenes,  within  whose  narrow  limits  you  would 
find  enclosed  a  few  persons — those  whom  you  loved  best  with  an 
undying  love,  that  holy  feeling  that  alone  survives,  and — not  the 
slightest  recollection  of  any  other  events  or  scenes?  Love  and 
Hatred  are  the  only  immortal  feelings,  the  only  survivors  from  the 
wreck  of  Ye-Damma,  or  the  phenomenal  world.  Imagine  your- 
self then,  in  Deva-Chan  with  those  you  may  have  loved  with  such 
immortal  love;  with  the  familiar,  shadowy  scenes  connected  with 
them  for  a  background  and — a  perfect  blank  for  everything  else 
relating  to  your  interior,  social,  political,  literary  and  social  life. 
And  then,  in  the  face  of  that  spiritual,  purely  cogitative  existence, 
of  that  unalloyed  felicity  which,  in  proportion  with  the  intensity 
of  the  feelings  that  created  it,  last  from  a  few  to  several  thousand 
years, — call  it  the  "personal  remembrance  of  A.  P.  Sinnett  "  if 
you  can.  Dreadfully  monotonous  ! — ^you  may  think. — Not  in  the 
least — I  answer.  Have  you  experienced  monotony  during — say — 
that  moment  which  you  considered  then  and  now  so  consider  it — 
as  the  moment  of  the  highest  bliss  you  have  ever  felt? — Of  course 
not. — Well  no  more  will  you  experience  it  there  in  that  passage 
through  Eternity  in  which  a  million  of  years  is  no  longer  than  a 
second.  There,  where  there  is  no  consciousness  of  an  external 
world  there  can  be  no  discernment  to  mark  differences.  Hence, — 
no  perception  of  contrasts  of  monotony  or  variety ;  nothing  in 
short,  outside  that  immortal  feeling  of  love  and  sympathetic 
attraction  whose  seeds  are  planted  in  the  fifth,  whose  plants 
blossom  luxuriantly  in  and  around  the  fourth,  but  whose  roots 
have  to  penetrate  deep  into  the  sixth  principle,  if  it  would  survive 
the  lower  groups  :  (And  now  I  propose  to  kill  two  birds  with  one 
stone  to  answer  your  and  Mr.  Hume's  questions  at  the  same  time) 
— remember,  both,  that  we  create  ourselves  our  Devachan  as  our 
avitchi  while  yet  on  earth  and  mostly  during  the  latter  days  and 
even  moments  of  our  intellectual,  sentient  lives.        That  feeling 


128  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

which  is  the  strongest  in  us  at  that  supreme  hour ;  when,  as  in  a 
dream,  the  events  of  a  long-  life,  to  their  minutest  details,  are 
marshalled  in  the  greatest  order  in  a  few  seconds  in  our  vision,^ 
— ^that  feeling  will  become  the  fashioner  of  our  bliss  or  woe,  the 
life  principle  of  our  future  existence.  In  the  latter  we  have  no 
substantial  being,  but  only  a  present  momentary  existence, — 
whose  duration  has  no  bearing  upon,  as  no  effect,  no  relation  to 
its  being — which  as  every  other  effect  of  a  transitory  cause  will 
be  as  fleeting  and  in  its  turn  will  vanish  and  cease  to  be.  The 
real  full  remembrance  of  our  lives  will  come  but  at  the  end  of  the 
minor  cycle — not  before.  In  Kama  Loka  those  who  retain  their 
remembrance  will  not  enjoy  it  at  the  supreme  hour  of  recollection. 
— Those  who  know  they  are  dead  in  their  physical  bodies — can 
only  be  either  adepts  or — sorcerers ;  and  these  two  are  the  excep- 
tions to  the  general  rule.  Both  having  been  "  co-workers  with 
nature,"  the  former  for  good,  the  latter — for  bad,  in  her  work  of 
creation  and  in  that  of  destruction,  they  are  the  only  ones  who 
may  be  called  immortal — in  the  Kabalistic  and  the  esoteric  sense 
of  course.  Complete  or  true  immortality, — ^which  means  an  un- 
limited sentient  existence,  can  have  no  breaks  and  stoppages,  no 
arrest  of  5eZ/-consciousness.  And  even  the  shells  of  those  good 
men  whose  page  will  not  be  found  missing  in  the  great  Book  of 
Lives  at  the  threshold  of  the  Great  Nirvana,  even  they  will  regain 
their  remembrance  and  an  appearance  of  Self-consciousness  only, 
after  the  sixth  and  seventh  principles  with  the  essence  of  the  5th 
(the  latter  having  to  furnish  the  material  for  even  that  partial 
recollection  of  i>ersonality  which  is  necessary  for  the  object  in  Deva 
Chan) — have  gone  to  their  gestation  period,  not  before.  Even  in 
the  case  of  suicides  and  those  who  have  perished  by  violent  death, 
even  in  their  case,  consciousness  requires  a  certain  time  to  establish 
its  new  centre  of  gravity,  and  evolve,  as  Sir  W.  Hamilton  would 
have  it — its  "perception  proper"  henceforth  to  remain  distinct 
from  **  sensation  proper."  Thus,  when  man  dies,  his  "  Soul'* 
(fifth  prin.)  becomes  unconscious  and  loses  all  remembrance  of 
things  internal  as  well  as  external.  Whether  his  stay  in  Kama 
Loka  has  to  last  but  a  few  moments,  hours,  days,  weeks,  months 
or  years;  whether  he  died  a  natural  or  a  violent  death  whether  it 
occurred  in  his  young  or  old  age,  and,  whether  the  Ego  was  good, 
bad,  or  indifferent,  his  consciousness  leaves  him  as  suddenly  as 
the  flame  leaves  the  wick,  when  blown  out.  When  life  has  retired 
from  the  last  particle  in  the  brain  matter,  his  perceptive  faculties 
become  extinct  for-ever,  his  spiritual  powers  of  cogitation  and 
volition — (all  those  faculties  in  short,  which  are  neither  inherent 
in,  nor  acquirable  by  organic  matter) — for  the  time  being.       His 

1  That  vision  takes  place  when  a  person  is  already  proclaimed  dead.     The 
brain  is  the  last  organ  that  dies. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  129 

Mayavi  rupa  may  be  often  thrown  into  objectivity,  as  in  the  cases 
of  apparitions  after  death ;  but,  unless  it  is  projected  with  the 
knowledge  of  (whether  latent  or  potential),  or,  owing  to  the 
intensity  of  the  desire  to  see  or  appear  to  someone,  shooting 
through  the  dying  brain,  the  apparition  will  be  simply — ^auto- 
matical ;  it  will  not  be  due  to  any  sympathetic  attraction,  or  to  any 
act  of  volition,  and  no  more  than  the  reflection  of  a  person  passing 
unconsciously  near  a  mirror,  is  due  to  the  desire  of  the  latter. 

Having  thus  explained  the  position,  I  will  sum  up  and  ask  again 
why  it  should  be  maintained  that  what  is  given  by  Eliphas  Levi 
and  expounded  by  H.P.B.,  is  **  in  direct  conflict  with  my  teach- 
ing'* ?  E.L.  is  an  Occultist,  and  a  Kabalist,  and  writing  for 
those  who  are  supposed  to  know  the  rudiments  of  the  Kabalistic 
tenets,  uses  the  peculiar  phraseology  of  his  doctrine,  and  H.P.B. 
follows  suit.  The  only  omission  she  was  guilty  of,  was  not  to 
add  the  word  **  Western  "  between  the  two  words  **  Occult  "  and 
doctrine  (see  third  line  of  Editor's  note).  She  is  a  fanatic  in  her 
way,  and  is  unable  to  write  with  anything  like  system  and  calm- 
ness, or  to  remember  that  the  general  public  needs  all  the  lucid 
explanations  that  to  her  may  seem  superfluous.  And,  as  you  are 
sure  to  remark — **  but  this  is  also  our  case;  and  you  too  seem  to 
forget  it," — I  will  give  you  a  few  more  explanations.  As  re- 
marked on  the  margin  of  the  October  Theosophist — the  word 
"  immortality  "  has  for  the  initiates  and  occultists  quite  a  dif- 
ferent meaning.  We  call  *'  immortal  "  but  the  one  Life  in  its 
universal  collectivity  and  entire  or  Absolute  Abstraction ;  that 
which  has  neither  beginning  nor  end,  nor  any  break  in  its  con- 
tinuity. Does  the  term  apply  to  anything  else?  Certainly  it 
does  not.  Therefore  the  earliest  Chaldeans  had  several  prefixes 
to  the  word  "  immortality,"  one  of  which  is  the  Greek,  rarely- 
used  term — pan-aeonic  immortality,  i.e.  beginning  with  the  man- 
vantara  and  ending  with  the  pralaya  of  our  Solar  Universe.  It 
lasts  the  aeon,  or  "period  "  of  our  pan  or  "all  nature.'*  Im- 
mortal then  is  he,  in  the  pan-aeonic  immortality  whose  distinct 
consciousness  and  perception  of  Self  under  whatever  form — under- 
goes no  disjunction  at  any  time.  Not  for  one  second,  during  the 
period  of  his  Egoship.  Those  periods  are  several  in  number,  each 
having  its  distinct  name  in  the  secret  doctrines  of  the  Chaldeans, 
Greeks,  Egyptians  and  Aryans,  and,  were  they  but  amenable  to 
translation, — which  they  are  not,  at  least  so  long  as  the  idea  in- 
volved remains  inconceivable  to  the  Western  mind — I  could  give 
then  to  you.  Suffice  for  you,  for  the  present  to  know,  that  a  man, 
an  Ego  like  yours  or  mine,  may  be  immortal  from  one  to  the 
other  round.  Let  us  say  I  begin  my  immortality  at  the  present 
fourth  round,  i.e.,  having  become  a  full  adept  (which  unhappily  I 
am  not)   I   arrest  the  hand  of  Death   at  will,   and   when   finally 


130  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

obliged  to  submit  to  it,  my  knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  nature  put 
me  in  a  position  to  retain  my  consciousness  and  distinct  percep- 
tions of  Self  as  an  object  to  my  own  reflective  consciousness  and 
cognition  ;  and  thus  avoiding  all  such  dismemberments  of  prin- 
ciples, that  as  a  rule  take  place  after  the  physical  death  of  average 
humanity,  I  remain  as  Koot  Hoomi  in  my  Ego  throughout  the 
whole  series  of  births  and  lives  across  the  seven  worlds  and 
Arupa-lokas  until  finally  I  land  again  on  this  earth  among  the 
fifth  race  men  of  the  full  fifth  Round  beings.  I  would  have  been, 
in  such  a  case — '*  immortal  "  for  an  inconceivable  (to  you)  long 
period,  embracing  many  milliards  of  years.  And  yet  am  •'  I  " 
truly  immortal  for  all  that?  Unless  I  make  the  same  efforts  as  I 
do  now,  to  secure  for  myself  another  such  furlough  from  Nature's 
Law,  Koot  Hoomi  will  vanish  and  may  become  a  Mr.  Smith  or  an 
innocent  Babu,  when  his  leave  expires.  There  are  men  who  be- 
come such  mighty  beings,  there  are  men  among  us  who  may 
become  immortal  during  the  remainder  of  the  Rounds,  and 
then  take  their  appointed  place  among  the  highest  Chohans,  the 
Planetary  conscious  "  E go-Spirits/'  Of  course,  the  Monad 
**  never  perishes  whatever  happens,"  but  Eliphas  speaks  of  the 
personal  not  the  Spiritual  Egos,  and  you  have  fallen  into  the  same 
mistake  (and  very  naturally  too)  as  C.C.M.  ;  though  I  must  con- 
fess the  passage  in  Isis  was  very  clumsily  expressed,  as  I  had 
already  remarked  to  you,  about  this  same  paragraph  in  one  of 
my  letters  long  ago.  I  had  to  **  exercise  my  ingenuity  "  over  it 
— as  the  Yankees  express  it,  but,  succceeded  in  mending  the  hole, 
I  believe, — as  I  will  have  to  many  times  more,  I  am  afraid  before 
we  have  done  with  Isis.  It  really  ought  to  be  re-written  for  the 
sake  of  the  family  honour. 

X  It  is  certainly  inconceivable,  therefore,  there  is  no  mortal 
use  to  discuss  the  subject. 

X  You  misconceived  the  teaching,  because  you  were  not  aware 
of  what  you  are  now  told  (a)  who  are  the  true  co-workers  with 
nature;  and  (b)  that  it  is  by  no  means  all  the  evil  co-workers,  who 
drop  into  the  eighth  sphere  and  are  annihilated.^ 

The  potency  for  evil  is  as  great  in  man — aye — greater — than 
the  potentiality  for  good.  An  exception  to  the  rule  of  nature, 
that  exception,  which  in  the  case  of  adepts  and  sorcerers  becomes 
in  its  turn  a  rule,  has  again  its  own  exceptions.  Read  carefully  the 
passage  that  C.C.M.  left  unquoted — on  pp.  352-353,  Isis  Volume 
I,  Para.  3.  Again  she  omits  to  distinctly  state  that  the  case 
mentioned  relates  but  to  those  powerful  sorcerers  whose  co-part- 
nership with  nature  for  evil  affords  to  them  the  means  of  forcing 

1  Annihilated  suddenly  as  human  Egos  and  personalities,  lasting  in  that 
world  of  pure  matter  under  various  material  forms  an  inconceivable  length  of 
time  before  they  are  returned  to  primeval  matter. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  131 

her  hand,  and  thus  accords  them  also  panaeonic  immortality. 
But  oh,  what  kind  of  immortality,  and  how  preferable  is  annihila- 
tion to  their  lives  !  Don't  you  see  that  everything-  you  find  in 
Isis  is  delineated,  hardly  sketched — nothing  completed  or  fully 
revealed.  Well  the  time  has  come,  but  where  are  the  workers 
for  such  a  tremendous  task? 

Says  Mr.  Hume  (see  affixed  letter)*  marked  passages — 
and  I,  2,  j:  And  now  when  you  have  read  the  objections 
to  that  most  unsafisfactory  doctrine — as  Mr.  Hume  calls  it — a 
doctrine  which  you  had  to  learn  first  as  a  whole,  before  proceed- 
ing to  study  it  in  parts, — at  the  risk  of  satisfying  you  no  better, 
I  will  proceed  to  explain  the  latter. 

(i)  Although  not  wholly  dissevered  from  their  sixth  and  seventh 
principles  and  quite  **  potent  "  in  the  seance  room,  nevertheless  to 
the  day  when  they  would  have  died  a  natural  death,  they  are 
separated  from  the  higher  principles  by  a  gulf.  The  sixth  and 
seventh  remain  passive  and  negative,  whereas,  in  cases  of 
accidental  death  the  higher  and  the  lower  groups  mutually  attract 
each  other.  In  cases  of  good  and  innocent  Egos,  moreover,  the 
latter  gravitates  irresistibly  towards  the  sixth  and  seventh,  and 
thus — either  slumbers  surrounded  by  happy  dreams,  or,  sleeps  a 
dreamless  profound  sleep  until  the  hour  strikes.  With  a  little 
reflection,  and  an  eye  to  the  eternal  justice  and  fitness  of  things, 
you  will  see  why.  The  victim  whether  good  or  bad  is  irresponsible 
for  his  death,  even  if  his  death  were  due  to  some  action  in  a 
previous  life  or  an  antecedent  birth  ;  was  an  act,  in  short,  of  the 
Law  of  Retribution,  still,  it  was  not  the  direct  result  of  an  act 
deliberately  committed  by  the  personal  Ego  of  that  life  during 
which  he  happened  to  be  killed.  Had  he  been  allowed  to  live 
longer  he  may  have  atoned  for  his  antecedent  sins  still  more 
effectually  :  and  even  now,  the  Ego  having  been  made  to  pay  off 
the  debt  of  his  maker  (the  previous  Ego)  is  free  from  the  blows 
of  retributive  justice.  The  Dhyan  Chohans  who  have  no  hand, 
in  the  guidance  of  the  living  human  Ego,  protect  the  helpless 
victim  when  it  is  violently  thrust  out  of  its  element  into  a  new 
one,  before  it  is  matured  and  made  fit  and  ready  for  it.  We  tell 
you  what  we  know,  for  we  are  made  to  learn  it  through  personal 
experience.  You  know  what  I  mean  and  I  can  say  no  more  ! 
Yes ;  the  victims  whether  good  or  bad  sleep,  to  awake  but 
at  the  hour  of  the  last  judgment,  which  is  that  hour  of  the  supreme 
struggle  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  and  the  fifth  and  fourth 
at  the  threshold  of  the  gestation  state.  And  even  after  that, 
when  the  sixth  and  seventh  carrying  off  a  portion  of  the  fifth  have 
gone  into  their  Akasic  Samadhi,  even  then  it  may  happen  that 
the  spiritual  spoil  from  the  fifth  will  prove  too  weak  to  be  reborn 

1  See  ante  Letter  No.  XXa.— Ed. 


132  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

in  Deva-Chan ;  in  which  case  it  will  there  and  then  reclothe  itself 
in  a  new  body,  the  subjective  "  Being  "  created  from  the  Karma 
of  the  victim  (or  no-victim,  as  the  case  may  be)  and  enter  upon 
a  new  earth-existence  whether  upon  this  or  any  other  planet.  In 
no  case  then, — with  the  exception  of  suicides  and  shells,  is  there 
any  possibility  for  any  other  to  be  attracted  to  a  seance  room. 
And  it  is  clear  that  **  this  teaching  is  not  in  opposition  to  our 
former  doctrine  "  and  that  while  "  shells  "  will  be  many, — Spirits 
very  few. 

{2)  There  is  a  great  difference  in  our  humble  opinion.  We, 
who  look  at  it  from  a  stand-point  which  would  prove  very  un- 
acceptable to  Life  Insurance  Companies,  say,  that  there  are  very 
few  if  any  of  the  men  who  indulge  in  the  above  enumerated 
vices,  who  feel  perfectly  sure  that  such  a  course  of  action  will 
lead  them  eventually  to  premature  death.  Such  is  the  penalty  of 
Maya.  The  **  vices  "  will  not  escape  their  punishment;  but  it  is 
the  cause  not  the  effect  that  will  be  punished,  especially  an  un- 
foreseen though  probable  effect.  As  well  call  a  suicide  a  man 
who  meets  his  death  in  a  storm  at  sea,  as  one  who  kills  himself 
with  "over-study."  Water  is  liable  to  drown  a  man  and  too 
much  brain  work  to  produce  a  softening  of  the  brain  which  may 
carry  him  away.  In  such  a  case  no  one  ought  to  cross  the 
Kalapani  nor  even  to  take  a  bath  for  fear  of  getting  faint  in  it 
and  drowned  (for  we  all  know  of  such  cases ;)  nor  should  a  man 
do  his  duty,  least  of  all  sacrifice  himself  for  even  a  laudable  and 
highly-beneficent  cause,  as  many  of  us — (H.P.B.  for  one) — do. 
Would  Mr.  Hume  call  her  a  suicide  were  she  to  drop  down  dead 
over  her  present  work?  Motive  is  everything  and  man  is 
punished  in  a  case  of  direct  responsibility,  never  otherwise.  In 
the  victim's  case  the  natural  hour  of  death  was  anticipated  acci- 
dentally, while  in  that  of  the  suicide,  death  is  brought  on  volun- 
tarily and  with  a  full  and  deliberate  knowledge  of  its  immediate 
consequences.  Thus  a  man  who  causes  his  death  in  a  fit  of 
temporary  insanity  is  not  a  felodese  to  the  great  grief  and  often 
trouble  of  the  Life  Insurance  Companies.  Nor  is  he  left  a  prey 
to  the  temptations  of  the  Kama  Loka  but  falls  asleep  like  any 
other  victim.     A  Guitian  will  not  remain  in  the  earth's  atmosphere 

with  his  higher  principles  over  him in-active  and  paralysed, 

still  there.     Guitian   is   gone  into   a   state  during   the   period   of 
which,  he  will  be  ever  firing  at  his  President,  thereby  tossing  into 
confusion    and    shuffling    the    destinies    of    millions    of    persons ; 
where  he  will  be  ever  tried  and  ever  hung.     Bathing  in  the  reflec- 
tions of  his  deeds  and  thoughts — especially  those  he  indulged  in 
on  the  scaffold,*     .......... 

his  fate. 
1  Two  lines  in  original  have  been  deleted  here. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  133 

As  for  those  who  were  **  knocked  over  by  cholera,  or  plague,  or 
jungle  fever  '*  they  could  not  have  succumbed  had  they  not  the 
germs  for  the  development  of  such  diseases  in  them  from  birth. 

**  So  then,  the  great  bulk  of  the  physical  phenomena  of 
Spiritualists  "  my  dear  brother,  are  not  **  due  to  these  Spirits  '* 
but  indeed— to  **  shells." 

(3)  "  The  Spirits  of  very  fair  average  good  people  dying  natural 
deaths  remain  in  the  earth's  atmosphere  from  a  few  days  to  a 
few  years,"  the  period  depending  on  their  readiness  to  meet  their 
— creature  not  their  creator ;  a  very  abstruse  subject  you  will  learn 
later  on,  when  you  too  are  more  prepared.  But  why  should  they 
**  communicate  "  ?  Do  those  you  love  communicate  with  you 
during  their  sleep  objectively?  Your  Spirits,  in  hours  of  danger, 
or  intense  sympathy,  vibrating  on  the  same  current  of  thought — 
which  in  such  cases,  creates  a  kind  of  telegraphic  spiritual  wires 
between  your  two  bodies — may  meet  and  mutually  impress  your 
memories ;  but  then  you  are  living,  not  dead  bodies.  But  how 
can  an  unconscious  5th  principle  (see  supra)  impress  or  communi- 
cate with  a  living  organism,  unless  it  has  already  become  a  shell? 
If,  for  certain  reasons  they  remain  in  such  a  state  of  lethargy  for 
several  years,  the  spirits  of  the  living  may  ascend  to  them,  as 
you  were  already  told  ;  and  this  may  take  place  still  easier  than  in 
Deva  Chan,  where  the  Spirit  is  too  much  engrossed  in  his  per- 
sonal bliss  to  pay  much  attention  to  an  intruding  element.  I  say 
— they  cannot. 

(4)  I  am  sorry  to  contradict  your  statement.  I  know  of  no 
'*  thousands  of  spirits  "  who  disappear  in  circles — and  moreover 
positively  do  not  know  of  one  "perfectly  pure  circle" — and 
"  teach  the  highest  morality."  I  hope  I  may  not  be  classed  with 
slanderers  in  addition  to  other  names  lately  bestowed  upon  me, 
but  truth  compels  me  to  declare  that  Allan  Kardec  was  not  quite 
immaculate  during  his  lifetime,  nor  has  become  a  very  pure  Spirit 
since.  As  to  teaching  the  "  highest  morality,"  we  have  a  Dugpa- 
Shammar  not  far  from  where  I  am  residing.  Quite  a  remarkable 
man.  Not  very  powerful  as  a  sorcerer  but  excessively  so,  as  a 
drunkard,  a  thief,  a  liar,  and — an  orator.  In  this  latter  role  he 
could  give  points  to  and  beat  Messrs.  Gladstone,  Bradlaugh, 
and  even  the  Rev.  H.  W.  Beacher — than  whom,  there  is  no  more 
eloquent  preacher  of  morality,  and  no  greater  breaker  of  his 
Lord's  Commandments  in  the  U.S.A.  This  Shapa-tung  Lama, 
when  thirsty,  can  make  an  enormous  audience  of  "  yellow-cap  " 
laymen  weep  all  their  yearly  supply  of  tears,  with  the  narrative 
of  his  repentance  and  suffering  in  the  morning,  and  then  get 
drunk  in  the  evening  and  rob  the  whole  village  by  mesmerising 
them  into  a  dead   sleep.     Preaching  and  teaching  morality  with 


134  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

an  end  in  view  proves  very  little.     Read  *'  J.P.T.'s  "  article  in 
Light  and  what  I  say  will  be  corroborated. 

(To  A.P.S.  (5).)  The  "  obscuration  "  comes  on  only  when 
the  last  man  of  whatever  Round  has  passed  into  the  sphere 
of  effects.  Nature  is  too  well,  too  mathematically  adjusted  to 
cause  mistakes  to  happen  in  the  exercise  of  her  functions.  The 
obscuration  of  the  planet  on  which  are  now  evoluting  the  races  of 
the  fifth  Round  men — will,  of  course  "  be  behind  the  few  avant 
couriers  "  who  are  now  here.  But  before  that  time  comes  we 
will  have  to  part,  to  meet  no  more,  as  the  Editor  of  the  Pioneer 
and  his  humble  correspondent. 

And  now  having  shewn  that  the  October  Number  of  the 
Theosophist  was  not  utterly  wrong,  nor  was  it  at  "  variance  with 
the  later  teaching,"  may  K.H.  set  you  to  **  reconcile  the  two  "  ? 

To  reconcile  you  still  more  with  Eliphas,  I  will  send  you  a 
number  of  his  MSS. — that  have  never  been  published,  in  a  large, 
clear,  beautiful  handwriting  with  my  comments  all  through. 
Nothing  better  than  that  can  give  you  a  key  to  the  Kabalistic 
puzzles. 

I  have  to  write  to  Mr.  Hume  this  week ;  to  give  him  consola- 
tion, and  to  show,  that  unless  he  has  a  strong  desire  to  live,  he 
need  not  trouble  himself  about  Deva-Chan.  Unless  a  man  loves 
well  or  hates  as  well,  he  will  be  neither  in  Deva-Chan  nor  in 
Avitchi.  **  Nature  spews  the  luke-warm  out  of  her  mouth  '* 
means  only  that  she  annihilates  their  personal  Egos  (not  the 
shells,  nor  yet  the  sixth  principle)  in  the  Kama  Loka  and  the 
Deva  Chan.  This  does  not  prevent  them  from  being  immediately 
reborn — and,  if  their  lives  were  not  very  very  bad, — there  is  no 
reason  why  the  eternal  Monad  should  not  find  the  page  of  that 
life  intact  in  the  Book  of  Life. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XXP 

Received  back  22.8.82. 


August    1 2th. 


My  dear  Guardian, 

I  am  afraid  the  present  letters  on  Theosophy  are  not  worth 
much,  for  I  have  worked  on  too  literal  an  acceptance  of  some 
passages  in  your  long  letter  about  Deva-Chan.  The  bearing  of 
that  seemed  to  be  that  the  '*  accidents  "  as  well  as  the  suicides, 
were  in  danger  from  the  attraction  of  the  seance  room.  You 
wrote  : — 

1  Letter  from    Mr.    Sinnett   to  K.H.     With   K.H.'s   Comments  printed   in 
bold  type. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  135 

"  But  there  is  another  kind  of  spirit  we  have  lost  sight  of, — 
the  suicides  and  those  killed  by  accidents.  Both  kinds  can  com- 
municate and  both  have  to  pay  dearly  for  such  visits.  .  .  ." 
Correct. 

And  later  on  after  speaking  of  the  case  of  the  suicides  in  detail 
^ou  say  : — 

*  As  to  the  victims  of  accident  these  fare  still  worse     . 
unhappy    shades     .     .     .     cut    off    in    the    full    flush    of    earthly 
passions     .     .     .     they  are  the  pisachas  etc.     .     .     .     They  not 
only  ruin  their  victims  etc.     .     .     ."     Again  correct.     Bear   in 
mind  that  the  exceptions  enforce  the  rule. 

And  if  they  are  neither  very  good  nor  very  bad  the  "  victims  of 
accident  or  violence,"  derive  a  new  set  of  skandhas  from  the 
medium  who  attracts  them.  I  have  explained  the  situation  on 
the  margin  of  proofs.     See  note. 

It  was  on  this  text  that  I  have  been  working. 

If  this  is  not  to  be  maintained  or  if  in  some  way  that  as  yet  I 
cannot  understand  the  words  bear  a  different  signification  from 
that  which  seems  to  belong  to  them,  it  might  be  better  to  cancel 
these  two  letters  altogether  or  hold  them  over  for  complete 
alteration.  The  warning  is  delivered  in  too  solemn  a  tone  and  the 
danger  is  made  too  much  of  if  it  is  merely  to  apply  to  suicide,  and 
in  the  last  slip  of  the  proof  the  elimination  of  **  the  accidents  and  " 
makes  the  rest  rather  ridiculous  because  then  we  are  dividing 
suicides  only  into  the  very  pure  and  elevated  !  and  the  medium 
people  etc. 

It  seems  to  me  that  it  would  hardly  do  to  let  even  letter  (i) 
stand  alone, — though  it  does  not  include  this  mistake,  for  it  would 
have  no  raison  d'etre  unless  followed  up  by  letter  (2). 

Both  letters  have  gone  home  to  Stainton  Moses  for  trans- 
mission to  Light — the  first  by  the  mail  from  here  of  July  21,  the 
second  by  last  mail — yesterday.  Now  if  you  decide  that  it  is 
better  to  stop  and  cancel  them  I  shall  just  be  in  time  to  telegraph 
home  to  explain  to  Moses  to  that  effect,  and  will  do  this  directly 
I  receive  a  telegram  from  you  or  from  the  Old  Lady  to  that 
efi^ect. 

If  nothing  is  done  they  will  appear  in  Light  as  written — i.e.  as 
the  MS.  sent  with  the  present  proof  stood  barring  a  few  little 
mistakes  which  I  see  my  wife  has  made  in  copying  them  out. 

It  is  altogether  a  very  awkward  tangle.  I  was  precipitate 
apparently  in  sending  them  home,  but  I  thought  I  had  followed 
the  statement  of  your  long  devachan  letter  so  faithfully.  Await- 
ing orders, 

Ever  your  devoted 

A.  P.  S. 


136  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

On  margin  I  said  **  rarely  **  but  1  have  not  pronounced  the 
word  **  never.**  Accidents  occur  under  the  most  various 
circumstances;  and  men  are  not  only  killed  accidentally,  or  die 
as  suicides  but  are  also  murdered — something  v^e  have  not  even 
touched  upon.  I  can  v/ell  understand  your  perplexity  but  can 
hardly  help  you.  Bear  always  in  mind  that  there  are  exceptions 
to  every  rule,  and  to  these  again  and  other  side  exceptions, 
and  be  always  prepared  to  learn  something  new.  1  can  easily 
understand  we  are  acciised  of  contradictions  and  inconsistencies 
— aye,  even  to  writing  one  thing  and  denying  it  to-morrow. 
What  you  were  taught  is  the  rule.  Good  and  pure  "  accidents  '* 
sleep  in  the  Akasa,  ignorant  of  their  change;  very  wicked  and 
impure  suffer  all  the  tortures  of  a  horrible  nightmare.  The 
majority — neither  very  good  nor  very  bad,  the  victims  of 
accident  or  violence  (including  murder) — some  sleep,  others 
become  Nature  pisachas,  and  while  a  small  minority  may  fall 
victims  to  mediums  and  derive  a  new  set  of  skandhas  from  the 
medium  who  attracts  them.  Small  as  their  number  may  be, 
their  fate  is  to  be  the  most  deplored.  What  I  said  in  my  notes 
on  your  MSS.  was  in  reply  to  Mr.  Hume's  statistical  calculations 
which  led  him  to  infer  that  **  there  were  more  Spirits  than 
shells  in  the  seance  room  "  in  such  a  case. 

You  have  much  to  learn — and  we  have  much  to  teach  nor 
do  we  refuse  to  go  to  the  very  end.  But  we  must  really  beg 
that  you  should  not  jump  at  hasty  conclusions.  I  do  not  blame 
you,  my  dear  faithful  friend,  I  would  j^ather  blame  myself,  were 
anyone  here  to  be  blamed  except  our  respective  modes  of 
thought  and  habit  so  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other. 
Accustomed  as  we  are  to  teach  chelas  who  know  enough  to 
find  themselves  beyond  the  necessity  of  *'  if*s  **  and  *'  hut's,** 
during  the  lessons,  I  am  but  too  apt  to  forget  that  I  am  doing 
the  work  with  you  generally  entrusted  to  these  chelas.  Hence- 
forth, I  will  take  more  time  in  answering  your  questions.  Your 
letters  to  London  can  do  no  harm,  and  are  sure,  on  the  con- 
trary to  do  good.  They  are  admirably  written  and  the  excep- 
tions may  be  mentioned  and  the  whole  ground  covered  in  one 
of  the  future  letters. 

I  have  no  objection  to  your  making  extracts  for  Colonel 
Chesney — except  one — he  is  not  a  Theosophist.  Only  be  care- 
ful, and  do  not  forget  your  details  and  exceptions  whenever 
you  explain  your  rules.  Remember  still  even  in  the  case  of 
suicides  there  are  many  who  will  never  allow  themselves  to  be 
drawn  into  the  vortex  of  mediumship,  and  pray  do  not  accuse 
me  of  **  inconsistency  "  or  contradiction  when  we  come  to  that 
point.  Could  you  but  know  how  I  write  my  letters  and  the 
time  I  am  enabled  to  give  to  them,  perchance  you  would  feel 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  137 

less  critical  if  not  exacting.  Well  and  how  do  you  like  Djual 
Khool's  idea  and  art?  I  have  not  caught  a  glimpse  of  Simla 
the  last  ten  days. 

Affectionately  yours, 

K.H. 


LETTER  No.   XXIP 

Extract  from  Letter  by  K.H.  to  Hume.     Received  for  my  perusal  towards 
the  end  of  season  1882.     (A.P.S.) 

Did  it  ever  strike  you, — and  now  from  the  standpoint  of  your 
Western  science  and  the  suggestion  of  your  own  ego  which  has 
already  seized  up  the  essentials  of  every  truth,  prepare  to  deride 
the  erroneous  idea — did  you  ever  suspect  that  Universal,  like 
finite,  human  mind  might  have  two  attributes,  or  a  dual  power — 
one  the  voluntary  and  conscious,  the  other  the  involuntary  and 
unconscious  or  the  mechanical  power.  To  reconcile  the  difficulty 
of  many  theistic  and  anti-theistic  propositions,  both  these  powers 
are  a  philosophical  necessity.  The  possibility  of  the  first  or  the 
voluntary  and  conscious  attribute  in  reference  to  the  infinite  mind, 
notwithstanding  the  assertion  of  all  the  Egos  throughout  the 
living  world — will  remain  for  ever  a  mere  hypothesis,  whereas  in 
the  finite  mind  it  is  a  scientific  and  demonstrated  fact.  The 
highest  Planetary  Spirit  is  as  ignorant  of  the  first  as  we  are, 
and  the  hypothesis  will  remain  one  even  in  Nirvana,  and  it  is  a 
mere  inferential  possibility,  whether  there  or  here. 

Take  the  human  mind  in  connexion  with  the  body.  Man  has 
two  distinct  physical  brains;  the  cerebrum  with  its  two  hemi- 
spheres at  the  frontal  part  of  the  head — the  source  of  the  voluntary 
nerves ;  and  the  cerebellum,  situated  at  the  back  portion  of  the 
skull — the  fountain  of  the  involuntary  nerves  which  are  the  agents 
of  the  unconscious  or  mechanical  powers  of  the  mind  to  act 
through.  And  weak  and  uncertain  as  may  be  the  control  of  man 
over  his  involuntary,  such  as  the  blood  circulation,  the  throbbing 
of  the  heart  and  respiration,  especially  during  sleep — ^yet  how  far 
more  powerful,  how  much  more  potential  appears  man  as  master 
and  ruler  over  the  blind  molecular  motion — the  laws  which  govern 
his  body  (a  proof  of  this  being  afforded  by  the  phenomenal  powers 
of  the  Adept  and  even  the  common  Yogi)  than  that  which  you  will 
call  God,  shows  over  the  immutable  laws  of  Nature.  Contrary  in 
that  to  the  finite,  the  **  infinite  mind,"  which  we  name  so  but 
for  agreement  sake,  for  we  call  it  the  infinite  force — exhibits  but 
the  functions  of  its  cerebellium,  the  existence  of  its  supposed 
cerebrum  being  admitted  as  above  stated,   but  on  the  inferential 

1  Transcribed  from  a  copy  in  Mr.   Sinnett's  handwriting. — Ed. 


138  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

hypothesis  deduced  from  the  Kabalistic  theory  (correct  in  every 
other  relation)  of  the  Macrocosm  being  the  prototype  of  the 
Microcosm.  So  far  as  we  know  the  corroboration  of  it  by  modem 
science  receiving  but  Httle  consideration — so  far  as  the  highest 
Planetary  Spirits  have  ascertained  (who  remember  well  have  the 
same  relation  with  the  trans-cosmical  world,  penetrating  behind 
the  primitive  veil  of  cosmic  matter  as  we  have  to  go  behind  the 
veil  of  this,  our  brute  physical  world — )  the  infinite  mind  displays 
to  them  as  to  us  no  more  than  the  regular  unconscious  throbbings 
of  the  eternal  and  universal  pulse  of  Nature,  throughout  the 
myriads  of  worlds  within  as  without  the  primitive  veil  of  our  solar 
system. 

So  far — we  know.  Within  and  to  the  utmost  limit,  to  the  very 
edge  of  the  cosmic  veil  we  know  the  facts  to  be  correct — owing  to 
I>ersonal  experience ;  for  the  information  gathered  as  to  what  takes 
place  beyond — we  are  indebted  to  the  Planetary  Spirits,  to  our 
Blessed  Lord  Buddha.  This  of  course  may  be  regarded  as  second- 
hand information.  There  are  those  who  rather  than  to  yield  to 
the  evidence  of  fact  will  prefer  regarding  even  the  planetary  gods 
as  '*  erring"  disembodied  philosophers  if  not  actually  liars.  Be 
it  so.  Everyone  is  master  of  his  own  wisdom — says  a  Tibetan 
proverb  and  he  is  at  liberty  either  to  honour  or  degrade  his  slave — . 
However  I  will  go  on  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  may  yet  seize 
my  explanation  of  the  problem  and  understand  the  solution. 

It  is  the  particular  faculty  of  the  involuntary  power  of  the  infinite 
mind — ^which  no  one  could  ever  think  of  calling  God, — to  be 
eternally  involving  subjective  matter  into  objective  atoms  (you  will 
please  remember  that  the  two  adjectives  are  used  but  in  a  relative 
sense)  or  cosmic  matter  to  be  later  on  developed  into  form.  And 
it  is  likewise  that  same  involuntary  mechanical  power  that  we  see 
so  intensely  active  in  all  the  fixed  laws  of  nature — ^which  governs 
and  controls  what  is  called  the  Universe  or  the  Cosmos.  There 
are  some  modern  philosophers  who  would  prove  the  existence  of 
a  Creator  from  motion.  We  say  and  affirm  that  that  motion — 
the  universal  j>erpetual  motion  which  never  ceases  never  slackens 
nor  increases  its  speed  not  even  during  the  interludes  between  the 
pralayas,  or  "  night  of  Brahma"  but  goes  on  like  a  mill  set  in 
motion,  whether  it  has  anything  to  grind  or  not  (for  the  pralaya 
means  the  temporary  loss  of  every  form,  but  by  no  means  the 
destruction  of  cosmic  matter  which  is  eternal) — ^we  say  this  per- 
petual motion  is  the  only  eternal  and  uncreated  Deity  we  are  able 
to  recognise.  To  regard  God  as  an  intelligent  spirit,  and  accept 
at  the  same  time  his  absolute  immateriality  is  to  conceive  of  a 
nonentity,  a  blank  void ;  to  regard  God  as  a  Being,  an  Ego  and 
to  place  his  intelligence  under  a  bushel  for  some  mysterious  reason 
is  the  most  consummate  nonsense ;  to  endow  him  with  intelligence 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  139 

in  the  face  of  blind  brutal  Evil  is  to  make  of  him  a  fiend — a  most 
rascally  God.  A  being  however  gigantic,  occupying  space  and 
having  length  breadth  and  thickness  is  most  certainly  a  Mosaic 
deity;  **  No-being  "  and  a  mere  principle  lands  you  directly  in 
the  Buddhistic  atheism,  or  the  Vedantic  primitive  Acosmism. 
What  lies  beyond  and  outside  the  worlds  of  form,  and  being,  in 
worlds  and  spheres  in  their  most  spiritualized  state — (and  you  will 
perhaps  oblige  us  by  telling  us  where  that  beyond  can  be,  since 
the  Universe  is  infinite  and  limitless)  is  useless  for  anyone  to  search 
after  since  even  Planetary  Spirits  have  no  knowledge  or  perception 
of  it.  If  our  greatest  adepts  and  Boddhisatvas  have  never  pene- 
trated themselves  beyond  our  solar  system, — and  the  idea  seems 
to  suit  your  preconceived  theistic  theory  wonderfully,  my  respected 
Brother — they  should  know  of  the  existence  of  other  such  solar 
systems,  with  as  mathematical  a  certainty  as  any  western 
astronomer  knows  of  the  existence  of  invisible  stars  which  he  can 
never  approach  or  explore.  But  of  that  which  lies  within  the 
worlds  and  systems,  not  in  the  trans-infinitude — (a  queer  expres- 
sion to  use) — ^but  in  the  cis-infinitude  rather,  in  the  state  of  the 
purest  and  inconceivable  immateriality,  no  one  ever  knew  or  will 
ever  tell,  hence  it  is  something  non-existent  for  the  universe.  You 
are  at  liberty  to  place  in  this  eternal  vacuum  the  intellectual  or 
voluntary  powers  of  your  deity — if  you  can  conceive  of  such  a 
thing. 

Meanwhile  we  may  say  that  it  is  motion  that  governs  the  laws 
of  nature ;  and  that  it  governs  them  as  the  mechanical  impulse 
given  to  running  water  which  will  propel  them  either  in  a  correct 
line  or  along  hundreds  of  side  furrows  they  may  happen  to  meet 
on  their  way  and  whether  those  furrows  are  natural  grooves  or 
channels  prepared  artificially  by  the  hand  of  man.  And  we  main- 
tain that  wherever  there  is  life  and  being,  and  in  however  much 
spiritualized  a  form,  there  is  no  room  for  moral  government,  much 
less  for  a  moral  Governor — a  Being  which  at  the  same  time  has 
no  form  nor  occupies  space  !  Verily  if  light  shineth  in  darkness, 
and  darkness  comprehends  it  not,  it  is  because  such  is  the  natural 
law,  but  how  much  more  suggestive  and  pregnant  with  meaning 
for  one  who  knows,  to  say  that  light  can  still  less  comprehend 
darkness,  nor  ever  know  it  since  it  kills  wherever  it  penetrates  and 
annihilates  it  instantly.  Pure  yet  a  volitional  Spirit  is  an  absurdity 
for  volitional  mind.  The  result  of  organism  cannot  exist  inde- 
f>endently  of  an  organized  brain  and  an  organized  brain  made  out 
of  nihil  is  a  still  greater  fallacy.  If  you  ask  me  "  Whence  then 
the  immutable  laws? — laws  cannot  make  themselves  " — then  in 
my  turn  I  will  ask  you — and  whence  their  supposed  Creator? — A 
Creator  cannot  create  or  make  himself  if  the  brain  did  not  make 
itself  for  this  would  be  affirming  that  brain  acted  before  it  existed, 


I40  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

how  could  intelligence,  the  result  of  an  organized  brain,  act  before 
its  creator  was  made. 

All  this  reminds  one  of  the  wrangling  for  seniorship.  Your 
doctrines  clash  too  much  with  your  theories  then  we  can  easily 
give  up  the  subject  and  talk  of  something  else.  Study  the  laws 
and  the  doctrines  of  the  Nepaulese  Swabbhavikas,  the  principal 
Buddhist  philosophical  school  in  India,  and  you  will  find  them  the 
most  learned  as  the  most  scientifically  logical  wranglers  in  the 
world.  Their  plastic,  invisible,  eternal,  omnipresent,  unconscious 
Swabbhavat  is  Force  or  Motion  ever  generating  its  electricity 
which  is  life. 

Yes :  there  is  a  force  as  limitless  as  thought,  as  potent  as 
boundless  will,  as  subtle  as  the  essence  of  life  so  inconceivably 
awful  in  its  rending  force  as  to  convulse  the  universe  to  its  centre 
would  it  but  be  used  as  a  lever,  but  this  Force  is  not  God,  since 
there  are  men  who  have  learned  the  secret  of  subjecting  it  to  their 
will  when  necessary.  Look  around  you  and  see  the  myriad  mani- 
festations of  life,  so  infinitely  multiform ;  of  life,  of  motion,  of 
change.  What  caused  these?  From  what  inexhaustible  source 
came  they,  by  what  agency?  Out  of  the  invisible  and  subjective 
they  have  entered  our  little  area  of  the  visible  and  objective. 
Children  of  Akasa,  concrete  evolutions  from  the  ether,  it  was 
force  which  brought  them  into  perceptibility  and  Force  will  in 
time  remove  them  from  sight  of  man.  Why  should  this  plant  in 
your  garden  to  the  right,  have  been  produced  with  such  a  shape 
and  that  other  one  to  the  left  with  one  totally  dissimilar?  Are 
these  not  the  results  of  varying  actions  of  Force — unlike  correla- 
tions? Given  a  perfect  monotony  of  activities  throughout  the 
world,  and  we  would  have  a  complete  identity  of  forms,  colours, 
shapes  and  properties  throughout  all  the  kingdom  of  nature.  It 
is  the  motion  with  its  resulting  conflict,  neutralization,  equilibra- 
tion, correlation,  to  which  is  due  the  infinite  variety  which  pre- 
vails. You  speak  of  an  intelligent  and  good — (the  attribute  is 
rather  unfortunately  chosen) — Father,  a  moral  guide  and  governor 
of  the  universe  and  man.  A  certain  condition  of  things  exists 
round  us  which  we  call  normal.  Under  this  nothing  can  occur 
which  transcends  our  every-day  experience  **  God's  immutable 
laws."  But  suppose  we  change  this  condition  and  have  the  best 
of  him  without  whom  even  a  hair  of  your  head  will  not  fall,  as 
they  tell  you  in  the  West.  A  current  of  air  brings  to  me  from 
the  lake  near  which,  with  my  fingers  half  frozen  I  now  write  to 
you  this  letter — I  change  by  a  certain  combination  of  electrical 
magnetic  odyllic  or  other  influences  the  current  of  air  which 
benumbs  my  fingers  into  a  warmer  breeze ;  I  have  thwarted  the 
intention  of  the  Almighty,  and  dethroned  him  at  my  will  !  I  can 
do  that,  or  when  I  do  not  want  Nature  to  produce  strange  and  too 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOEETICAL  TEACHINGS  141 

visible  phenomena,  I  force  my  nature-seeing^,  nature-influencing 
self  within  me,  to  suddenly  awake  to  new  perceptions  and  feelings 
and  thus  am  my  own  Creator  and  ruler. 

But  do  you  think  that  you  are  right  when  saying  that  "  the  laws 
arise."  Immutable  laws  cannot  arise,  since  they  are  eternal  and 
uncreated,  propelled  in  the  Eternity  and  that  God  himself  if  such 
a  thing  existed,  could  never  have  the  power  of  stopping  them. 
And  when  did  I  say  that  these  laws  were  fortuitous  per  se.  I 
meant  their  blind  correlations,  never  the  laws,  or  rather  the  law — 
since  we  recognise  but  one  law  in  the  Universe,  the  law  of 
harmony,  of  perfect  equilibrium.  Then  for  a  man  endowed  with 
so  subtle  a  logic,  and  such  a  fine  comprehension  of  the  value  of 
ideas  in  general  and  that  of  words  especially — for  a, man  so 
accurate  as  you  generally  are  to  make  tirades  upon  an  **  all-wise, 
powerful  and  love-ful  God  "  seems  to  say  at  least  strange.  I  do 
not  protest  at  all  as  you  seem  to  think  against  your  theism,  or  a 
belief  in  an  abstract  ideal  of  some  kind,  but  I  cannot  help  asking 
you,  how  do  you  or  how  can  you  know  that  your  God  is  all-wise, 
omnipotent  and  love-ful,  when  everything  in  nature,  physical  and 
moral,  proves  such  a  being,  if  he  does  exist  to  be  quite  the  reverse 
of  all  you  say  of  him  ?  Strange  delusion  and  one  which  seems  to 
over-power  your  very  intellect. 

The  difficulty  of  explaining  the  fact  that  "  unintelligent  Forces 
can  give  rise  to  highly  intelligent  beings  like  ourselves, ' '  is  covered 
by  the  eternal  progression  of  cycles,  and  the  process  of  evolution 
ever  perfecting  it's  work  as  it  goes  along.  Not  believing  in 
cycles,  it  is  unnecessary  for  you  to  learn  that  which  will  create  but 
a  new  pretext  for  you,  my  dear  Brother,  to  combat  the  theory  and 
argue  upon  it  ad  infinitum.  Nor  did  I  ever  become  guilty  of  the 
heresy  I  am  accused  of — in  reference  to  spirit  and  matter.  The 
conception  of  matter  and  spirit  as  entirely  distinct,  and  both  eternal 
could  certainly  never  have  entered  my  head,  however  little  I  may 
know  of  them,  for  it  is  one  of  the  elementary  and  fundamental 
doctrines  of  Occultism  that  the  two  are  one,  and  are  distinct 
but  in  their  respective  manifestations,  and  only  in  the  limited 
perceptions  of  the  world  of  senses.  Far  from  "  lacking  philo- 
sophical breadth  "  then,  our  doctrines  show,  but  one  principle  in 
nature, — spirit-matter  or  matter-spirit,  the  third  the  ultimate 
Absolute  or  the  quintessence  of  the  two,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  use 
such  an  erroneous  term  in  the  present  appHcation — losing  itself 
beyond  the  view  and  spiritual  perceptions  of  even  the  **  Gods  "  or 
Planetary  Spirits.  This  third  principle  says  the  Vedantic  Philo- 
sophers— is  the  only  reality,  everything  else  being  Maya,  as  none 
of  the  Protean  manifestations  of  Spirit  and  matter  or  Purusha  and 
Prakriti  have  ever  been  regarded  in  any  other  light  than  that  of 
temporary  delusions  of  the  senses.       Even  in  the  hardly  outlined 

II 


142  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

philosophy  of  Isis  this  idea  is  clearly  carried  out.  In  the  book  of 
Kin-te,  Spirit  is  called  the  unultimate  sublimation  of  matter,  and 
matter  the  crystallization  of  spirit.  And  no  better  illustration 
could  be  afforded  than  in  the  very  simple  phenomenon  of  ice  water 
vapK>ur  and  the  final  dispersion  of  the  latter,  the  phenomenon  being 
reversed  in  it's  consecutive  manifestations  and  called  the  Spirit 
falling-  into  generations  or  matter.  This  trinity  resolving  itself 
into  unity, — a  doctrine  as  old  as  the  world  of  thought — ^was  seized 
upon  by  some  early  Christians,  who  had  it  in  the  Schools  of  Alex- 
andria, and  made  up  into  the  Father,  or  generative  spirit ;  the  Son 
or  matter, — man;  and  into  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  immaterial  essence, 
or  the  apex  of  the  equilateral  triangle,  an  idea  found  to  this  day 
in  the  pyramids  of  Egypt.  Thus  once  more  it  is  proved  that  you 
misunderstand  my  meaning  entirely,  whenever  for  the  sake  of 
brevity  I  use  the  phraseology  habitual  with  the  Western  people. 
But  in  my  turn  I  have  to  remark  that  your  idea  that  matter  is  but 
the  temporary  allotropic  form  of  spirit  differing  from  it  as  char- 
coal does  from  diamond  is  as  unphilosophical  as  it  is  unscientific 
from  both  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  points  of  view,  charcoal 
being  but  a  form  of  residue  of  matter,  while  matter  per  se  is  in- 
destructible, and  as  I  maintain  coeval  with  spirit — that  spirit 
which  we  know  and  can  conceive  of.  Bereaved  of  Prakriti, 
Purusha  (Spirit)  is  unable  to  manifest  itself, — hence  ceases  to  exist 
— becomes  nihil.  Without  spirit  or  Force,  even  that  which  Science 
styles  as  "  not  living"  matter,  the  scM:ralled  mineral  ingredients 
which  feed  plants,  could  never  have  been  called  into  form.  There 
is  a  moment  in  the  existence  of  every  molecule  and  atom  of  matter 
when,  for  one  cause  or  another,  the  last  spark  of  spirit  or  motion 
or  life  (call  it  by  whatever  name)  is  withdrawn,  and  in  the  same 
instant  with  the  swiftness  that  surpasses  that  of  the  lightning 
glance  of  thought  the  atom  or  molecule  or  an  aggregation  of  mole- 
cules is  annihilated  to  return  to  its  pristine  purity  of  intra- 
cosmic  matter.  It  is  drawn  to  the  mother  fount  with  the  velocity 
of  a  globule  of  quick-silver  to  the  central  mass.  Matter,  force, 
and  motion  are  the  trinity  of  physical  objective  nature,  as  the 
trinitarian  unity  of  spirit-matter  is  that  of  the  spiritual  or  sub- 
jective nature.  Motion  is  eternal  because  spirit  is  eternal.  But 
no  modes  of  motion  can  ever  be  conceived  unless  they  be  in  con- 
nection with  matter. 

And  now  to  your  extraordinary  hypothesis  that  evil  with  its 
attendant  train  of  sin  and  suffering  is  not  the  result  of  matter, 
but  may  be  perchance  the  wise  scheme  of  the  moral  Governor  of 
the  Universe.  Conceivable  as  the  idea  may  seem  to  you  trained 
in  the  pernicious  fallacy  of  the  Christian, — '*  the  ways  of  the  Lord 
are  inscrutable  ' ' — it  is  utterly  inconceivable  for  me.  Must  I 
repeat  again   that  the  best   Adepts  have  searched   the  Universe 


I 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOKETIOAL  TEACHINGS  143 

during  milleniums  and  found  nowhere  the  slightest  trace  of  such  a 
Maochiavelian  schemer — but  throughout,  the  same  immutable,  in- 
exorable law.  You  must  excuse  me  therefore  if  I  positively  decline 
to  waste  my  time  over  such  childish  speculations.  It  is  not  *'  the 
ways  of  the  Lord  "  but  rather  those  of  some  extremely  intelligent 
men  in  everything  but  some  particular  hobby  that  are  to  me  incom- 
prehensible. 

As  you  say  this  need  "make  no  difference  between  us" — per- 
sonally. But  it  does  make  a  world  of  difference  if  you  propose 
to  learn  and  offer  me  to  teach.  For  the  life  of  me  I  cannot  make 
out  how  I  could  ever  impart  to  you  that  which  I  know  since  the 
very  A. B.C.  of  what  I  know,  the  rock  upon  which  the  secrets  of 
the  occult  universe,  whether  on  this  or  that  side  of  the  veil,  are 
encrusted,  is  contradicted  by  you  invariably  and  a  priori.  My 
very  dear  Brother,  either  we  know  something  or  we  do  not  know 
anything.  In  the  first  case  what  is  the  use  of  your  learning,  since 
you  think  you  know  better?  In  the  second  case  why  should  you 
lose  your  time?  You  say  it  matters  nothing  whether  these  laws 
are  the  expression  of  the  will  of  an  intelligent  conscious  God  as 
you  think  or  constitute  the  inevitable  attributes  of  an  unintelligent, 
unconscious  "  God  "  as  I  hold.  I  say,  it  matters  everything,  and 
since  you  earnestly  believe  that  these  fundamental  questions  (of 
spirit  and  matter — of  God  or  no  God)  **  are  admittedly  beyond  both 
of  us  " — in  other  words  that  neither  I  nor  yet  our  greatest  adepts 
can  know  no  more  than  you  do,  then  what  is  there  on  earth  that  I 
could  teach  you?  You  know  that  in  order  to  enable  you  to  read 
you  have  first  to  learn  your  letters — yet  you  want  to  know  the 
course  of  events  before  and  after  the  Pralayas,  of  every  event  here 
on  this  globe  on  the  opening  of  a  new  cycle,  namely  a  mystery 
imparted  at  one  of  the  last  initiations,  as  Mr.  Sinnett  was  told, — 
for  my  letter  to  him  upon  the  Planetary  Spirits  was  simply  inci- 
dental— brought  out  by  a  question  of  his.  And  now  you  will  say 
I  am  evading  the  direct  issue.  I  have  discoursed  upon  colatteral 
points,  but  have  not  explained  to  you  all  you  want  to  know  and 
asked  me  to  tell  you.  I  "  dodge  "  as  I  always  do.  Pardon  me 
for  contradicting  you,  but  it  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  There  are 
a  thousands  questions  I  will  never  be  permitted  to  answer,  and  it 
would  be  dodging  were  I  to  answer  you  otherwise  than  I  do.  I 
tell  you  plainly  you  are  unfit  to  learn,  for  your  mind  is  too  full  and 
there  is  not  a  comer  vacant  from  whence  a  previous  occupant 
would  not  arise,  to  struggle  with  and  drive  away  the  newcomer. 
Therefore  I  do  not  evade,  I  only  give  you  time  to  reflect  and 
deduce  and  first  learn  well  what  was  already  given  you  before  you 
seize  on  something  else.  The  world  of  force,  is  the  world  of 
Occultism  and  the  only  one  whither  the  highest  initiate  goes  to 
probe  the  secrets  of  being.       Hence  no-one  but  such  an  initiate   « 


144  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

can  know  anything-  of  these  secrets.  Guided  by  his  Guru  the 
chela  first  discovers  this  world,  then  its  laws,  then  their  centrifugal 
evolutions  into  the  world  of  matter.  To  become  a  perfect  adept 
takes  him  long-  years,  but  at  last  he  becomes  the  master.  The 
hidden  thing-s  have  become  patent,  and  mystery  and  miracle  have 
fled  from  his  sight  forever.  He  sees  how  to  guide  force  in  this 
direction  or  that — to  produce  desirable  effects.  The  secret 
chemical,  electric  or  odic  properties  of  plants,  herbs,  roots, 
minerals,  animal  tissue,  are  as  familiar  to  him  as  the  feathers  of 
your  birds  are  to  you.  No  change  in  the  etheric  vibrations  can 
escape  him.  He  applies  his  knowledge,  and  behold  a  miracle  ! 
And  he  who  started  with  repudiation  of  the  very  idea  that  miracle 
is  possible,  is  straight-way  classed  as  a  miracle  worker  and  either 
worshipped  by  the  fools  as  a  demi-god  or  repudiated  by  still  greater 
fools  as  a  charlatan  !  And  to  show  you  how  exact  a  science  is 
occultism  let  me  tell  you  that  the  means  we  avail  ourselves  of  are 
all  laid  down  for  us  in  a  code  as  old  as  humanity  to  the  minutest 
detail,  but  everyone  of  us  has  to  begin  from  the  beginning,  not 
from  the  end.  Our  laws  are  as  immutable  as  those  of  Nature, 
and  they  were  known  to  man  and  eternity  before  this  strutting 
game-cock,  modern  science,  was  hatched.  If  I  have  not  given 
you  the  modus  operandi  or  begun  by  the  wrong  end,  I  have  at 
least  shown  you  that  we  build  our  philosophy  upon  experiment  and 
deduction — unless  you  choose  to  question  and  dispute  this  fact 
equally  with  all  others.  Learn  first  our  laws  and  educate  your 
perceptions,  dear  Brother.  Control  your  involuntary  powers  and 
develop  in  the  right  direction  your  will  and  you  will  become  a 
teacher  instead  of  a  learner.  I  would  not  refuse  what  I  have  a 
right  to  teach.  Only  I  had  to  study  for  fifteen  years  before  I  came 
to  the  doctrines  of  cycles  and  had  to  learn  simpler  things  at  first. 
But  do  what  we  may,  and  whatever  happens  I  trust  we  will  have 
no  more  arguing  which  is  as  profitless  as  it  is  painful. 


LETTER  No.  XXHIai 

Received  at  Simla  :   Oct.    1882. 

Herewith — apologizing  for  their  number,  I  send  a  few  notes  of 
interrogation.  Perhaps  you  will  be  so  kind  as  to  take  them  up 
from  time  to  time  and  answer  them  by  ones  and  twos  as  leisure 
and  time  allow. 

Memo — At  convenience  to  send  A.P.S.  those  unpublished  notes 
of  Eliphas  Levi's  with  annotations  by  K.H. 

Sent  long  ago  to  our  **  Jacko  *'  friend. 

1  K.H.'s  Comments  etc.  appear  in  bold  type. — Ed. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  145 

I 
(i)  There    is    a    very    interesting    allusion    in    your    last,    when 
speaking  of  Hume  you  speak  of  certain  characteristics  he  brought 
back  with  him  from  his  last  incarnation. 

(2)  Have  you  the  power  of  looking  back  to  the  former  lives  of 
persons  now  living,  and  identifying  them? 

(3)  In  that  case  would  it  be  improper  personal  curiosity — to  ask 
for  any  particulars  of  my  own? 

I 

(1)  All  of  us,  we  bring  some  characteristics  from  our  previous 
incarnations.     It  is  unavoidable. 

(2)  Unfortunately,  some  of  us  have.  1,  for  one  do  not  like  to 
exercise  it. 

(3)  **  Man  know  thyself,"  saith  the  Delphian  oracle.  There 
is  nothing  **  improper  " — certainly  in  such  curiosity.  Only 
would  it  not  be  still  more  proper  to  study  our  own  present 
personality  before  attempting  to  learn  anything  of  its  creator, — 
predecessor,  and  fashioner, — the  man  that  was?  Well,  some 
day  I  may  treat  you  to  a  little  story — no  time  now — only  I 
promise  no  details;  a  simple  sketch,  and  a  hint  or  two  to  test 
your  intuitional  powers. 

IP 

(i)  Is  there  any  way  of  accounting  for  what  seems  the  curious 
rush  of  human  progress  within  the  last  two  thousand  years,  as 
compared  with  the  relatively  stagnant  condition  of  the  fourth 
round  people  up  to -the  beginning  of  modern  progress? 

(2)  Or  has  there  been  at  any  former  period  during  the  habitation 
of  the  earth  by  fourth  round  men  civilizations  as  great  as  our  own 
in  regard  to  intellectual  development  that  have  utterly  passed 
away  ? 

{3)  Even  the  fifth  race  (own)  of  the  fourth  round  began  in  Asia 
a  million  years  ago.  What  was  it  about  for  the  998,000  years 
preceding  the  last  2,000?  During  that  period  have  greater 
civilizations  than  our  own  risen  and  decayed? 

(4)  To  what  epoch  did  the  existence  of  the  Continent  of  Atlantis 
belong,  and  did  the  cataclysmical  change  which  produced  its  ex- 
tinction come  into  any  appointed  place  in  the  evolution  and 
round, — corresponding  to  the  place  occupied  in  the  whole  man- 
vantaric  evolution  by  obscurations? 

(5)  I  find  that  the  most  common  question  asked  about  occult 
philosophy  by  fairly  intelligent  people  who  begin  to  enquire  about 
it  is  *'  Does  it  give  any  explanation  of  the  origin  of  evil?  "  That 
is  a  point  on  which  you  have  formerly  promised  to  touch,  and 
which  it  might  be  worth  while  to  take  up  before  long. 

(6)  Closely  allied  to  this  question  would  be  another  often  put. 

2  For  K.H.'s  replies  to  these  queries  see  post  Letter  XXIIIb, — Ed. 


146  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

"  What  is  the  good  of  the  whole  cycHc  process  if  spirit  only 
emerges  at  the  end  of  all  things  pure  and  impersonal  as  it  was  at 
first  before  its  descent  into  matter?  "  (And  the  portions  taken 
away  from  the  fifth?)  My  answer  is  that  I  am  not  at  present 
engaged  in  excusing,  but  in  investigating  the  operations  of 
Nature.     But  perhaps  there  may  be  a  better  answer  available. 

(7)  Can  you,  i.e.,  is  it  permitted  ever  to  answer  any  questions 
relating  to  matters  of  physical  science?  If  so — here  are  some 
points,  that  I  should  greatly  like  dealt  with. 

(8)  Have  magnetic  conditions  anything  to  do  with  the  precipi- 
tation of  rain,  or  is  that  due  entirely  to  atmospheric  currents  at 
different  temperatures  encountering  other  currents  of  different 
humidities,  the  whole  set  of  motions  being  established  by 
pressures,  expansions,  etc.,  due  in  the  first  instance  to  solar 
energy?  If  magnetic  conditions  are  engaged,  how  do  they 
operate  and  how  could  they  be  tested? 

(9)  Is  the  sun's  corona,  an  atmosphere?  of  any  known  gases? 
and  why  does  it  assume  the  rayed  shape  always  observed  in 
eclipses  ? 

(10)  Is  the  photometric  value  of  light  emitted  by  stars  a  safe 
guide  to  their  magnitude,*  and  is  it  true  as  astronomy  assume 
faute  de  mieux  in  the  way  of  a  theory,  that  per  square  mile  the 
sun's  surface  emits  as  much  light  as  can  be  emitted  from  any 
body? 

(11)  Is  Jupiter  a  hot  and  still  partially  luminous  body  and  to 
what  cause,  as  solar  energy  has  probably  nothing  to  do  with  the 
matter,  are  the  violent  disturbances  of  Jupiter's  atmosphere  due? 

(12)  Is  there  any  truth  in  the  new  Siemens  theory  of  solar 
combustion, — i.e.,  that  the  sun  in  its  passage  through  space 
gathers  in  at  the  poles  combustible  gas  (which  is  diffused  through 
all  space  in  a  highly  attenuated  condition),  and  throws  it  off  again 
at  the  equator  after  the  intense  heat  of  that  region  has  again  dis- 
persed the  elements  which  combustion  temporarily  united? 

(13)  Could  any  clue  be  given  to  the  causes  of  magnetic  varia- 
tions,— the  daily  changes  at  some  places,  and  the  apparently 
capricious  curvature  of  the  isogonic  lines  which  show  equal 
declinations?  For  example — why  is  there  a  region  in  Eastern 
Asia  where  the  needle  shows  no  variation  from  the  true  north, 
though  variations  are  recorded  all  round  that  space?  (Have  your 
Lordships  anything  to  do  with  this  peculiar  condition  of  things?) 

(14)  Could  any  other  planets  besides  those  known  to  modern 
astronomy  (I  do  not  mean  mere  planetoids)  be  discovered  by 
physical  instruments  if  properly  directed? 

(15)  When  you  wrote  "  Have  you  experienced  monotony  dur- 
ing that  moment  which  you  considered  then  and  now  and  so  con- 

*  Considered  of  course  in  connection  with  distance  as  guessed  by  paralaz. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  147 

sider  it, — as  the  moment  of  the  highest  bHss  you  have  ever  felt?  " 
Did  you  refer  to  any  specific  moment  and  any  specific  event  in 
my  life,  or  were  you  merely  referring  to  an  X  quantity — the  hap- 
piest moment  whatever  it  might  have  been? 

(16)  You  say  : — "  Remember  we  create  ourselves,  our  Deva 
Chan,  and  our  Avitchi  and  mostly  during  the  latter  days  and  even 
moments  of  our  sentient  lives." 

(17)  But  do  the  thoughts  on  which  the  mind  may  be  engaged  at 
the  last  moment  necessarily  hinge  on  to  the  predominant  character 
of  its  past  life?  Otherwise  it  would  seem  as  if  the  character  of 
a  person's  Deva  Chan  or  Avitchi  might  be  capriciously  and  un- 
justly determined  by  the  chance  which  brought  some  special 
thought  uppermost  at  last? 

(18)  '*  The  full  remembrance  of  our  lives  will  come  but  at  the 
end  of  the  minor  cycle/' 

Does  "  minor  cycle  "  here  mean  one  round,  or  the  whole  Man- 
vantara  of  our  planetary  chain? 

That  is,  do  we  remember  our  past  lives  in  the  Deva  Chan  of 
world  Z  at  the  end  of  each  round,  or  only  at  the  end  of  the  seventh 
round  ? 

(19)  You  say  :  *'  And  even  the  shells  of  those  good  men  whose 
pages  will  not  be  found  missing  in  the  great  book  of  lives  : — even 
they  will  regain  their  remembrance  and  an  appearance  of  self  con- 
sciousness only  after  the  sixth  and  seventh  principles  with  the 
essence  of  the  fifth  have  gone  to  their  gestation  period." 

(20)  A  little  later  on  : — "  Whether  the  personal  Ego  was  good, 
bad  or  indifferent,  his  consciousness  leaves  him  as  suddenly  as  the 
flame  leaves  the  wick — his  perceptive  faculties  become  extinct  for 
ever."  (Well?  can  a  physical  brain  once  dead  retain  its  percep- 
tive faculties  :  that  which  will  perceive  in  the  shell  is  something 
that  perceives  with  a  borrowed  or  reflected  light.     See  notes.) 

Then  what  is  the  nature  of  the  remembrance  and  self-conscious- 
ness of  the  shell  ?  This  touches  on  a  matter  I  have  often  thought 
about — wishing  for  further  explanation — the  extent  of  personal 
identity  in  elementaries. 

(21)  The  spiritual  Ego  goes  circling  through  the  worlds,  retain- 
ing what  it  possesses  of  identity  and  self-consciousness,  always 
neither  more  nor  less  (a)  But  it  is  continually  evolving  personali- 
ties, in  which  at  all  events  the  sense  of  identity  while  it  remains 
united  with  them  is  very  complete,  (b)  Now  these  personalities 
I  understand  to  be  absolutely  new  evolutions  in  each  case.  A.  P. 
Sinnett  is,  for  what  it  is  worth, — absolutely  a  new  invention. 
Now  it  will  leave  a  shell  behind  which  will  survive  for  a  time 
(c)  assuming  that  the  spiritual  monad  temporarily  engaged  in  this 
incarnation  will  find  enough  decent  material  in  the  fifth  to  lay  hold 
of.     (d)  That  shell  will  have  no  consciousness  directly  after  death, 


148  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

because  "  it  requires  a  certain  time  to  establish  its  new  centre  of 
gravity  and  evolve  its  perception  proper."  (e)  But  how  much 
consciousness  will  it  have  when  it  has  done  this?  (f)  Will  it  still 
be  A.  P.  Sinnett  of  which  the  spiritual  Ego,  will  think,  even  at 
the  last,  as  of  a  person  it  had  known — or  will  it  be  conscious  that 
the  individuality  is  gone?  Will  it  be  able  to  reason  about  itself 
at  all,  and  to  remember  anything  of  its  once  higher  interests. 
Will  it  remember  the  name  it  bore?  (g)  or  is  it  only  inflated  with 
recollections  of  this  sort  in  mediumistic  presence,  remaining 
asleep  at  other  times?  (h)  And  is  it  conscious  of  losing  anything 
that  feels  like  life  as  it  gradually  disintegrates? 

(22)  What  is  the  nature  of  the  life  that  goes  on  in  the  '  *  Planet 
of  Death?"  Is  it  a  physical  reincarnation  with  remembrance  of 
past  personality,  or  an  astral  existence  as  in  Kama  Loka?  Is  it 
an  existence  with  birth,  maturity  and  decay,  or  a  uniform  pro- 
longation of  the  old  personality  of  this  earth  under  penal  con- 
ditions ? 

(23)  What  other  planets  of  those  known  to  ordinary  science, 
besides  Mercury,  belong  to  our  system  of  worlds? 

Are  the  more  spiritual  planets— (A,  B  &  Y,  Z) — visible  bodies 
in  the  sky  or  are  all  those  known  to  astronomy  of  the  more 
material  sort? 

(24)  Is  the  Sun  (a)  as  Allan  Kardec  says  : — a  habitation  of 
highly  spiritualized  beings?  (b)  Is  it  the  vertex  of  our  Manvan- 
taric  chain?  and  of  all  the  other  chains  in  this  solar  system  also? 

(25)  You  say  : — it  may  happen  "  — that  the  spiritual  spoil  from 
the  fifth  will  prove  too  weak  to  be  reborn  in  Deva  Chan,  in  which 
case  it*s  sixth  will  then  and  there  reclothe  itself  in  a  new  body — 
and  enter  upon  a  new  earth  existence,  whether  upon  this  or  any 
other  planet." 

(26)  This  seems  to  want  further  elucidation.  Are  these  excep- 
tional cases  in  which  two  earth  lives  of  the  same  spiritual  monad 
may  occur  closer  together  than  the  thousand  years  indicated  by 
some  previous  letters  as  the  almost  inevitable  limit  of  such  suc- 
cessive lives? 

(27)  The  reference  to  the  case  of  Guitian  is  puzzling.  I  can 
understand  his  being  in  a  state  in  which  the  crime  he  committed 
is  ever  present  to  his  imagination,  but  how  does  he  "  toss  into 
confusion  and  shuffle  the  destinies  of  millions  of  persons?  " 

(28)  Obscurations  are  a  subject  at  present  wrapped  in  obscurity. 
They  take  place  after  the  last  man  of  any  given   round   has 

passed  on  to  the  next  planet.  But  I  want  to  make  out  how  the 
next  superior  round  forms  are  evolved.  When  the  fifth  round 
spiritual  monads  arrive  what  fleshly  habitations  are  ready  for 
them?  Going  back  to  the  only  former  letter  in  which  you  have 
dealt  with  obscurations  I  find  :— /aj  "  We  have  traced  man  out  of 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOKETICAL  TEACHINGS  149 

a  round  into  the  Nirvanic  state  between  Z  and  A.  '*  A  "  was  left 
in  the  last  round  dead.  (See  note.)  As  the  new  round  begins 
it  catches  the  new  influx  of  life,  reawakens  to  vitality,  and  begets 
all  the  kingdoms  of  a  superior  order  to  the  last." 

(29)  But  has  it  to  begin  at  the  beginning  again  between  each 
round,  and  evolve  human  forms  from  animal,  these  last  from  vege- 
table, etc.  If  so  to  what  round  do  the  first  imperfectly  evolved 
men  belong?  Ex  hypothesi  to  the  fifth;  but  the  fifth  should  be 
a  more  perfect  race  in  all  respects. 

|.    .„,,„„., 

(i)  The  latter  end  of  a  very  important  cycle.  Each  Round, 
each  ring,  as  every  race  has  its  great  and  its  smaller  cycles,  on 
every  planet  that  mankind  passes  through. 

Our  fourth  Round  Humanity  has  its  one  great  cycle,  and  so 
have  her  races  and  sub-races.  The  **  curious  rush  "  is  due  to 
the  double  effect  of  the  former — the  beginning  of  its  downward 
course; — and  of  the  latter  (the  small  cycle  of  your  '*  sub-race  ") 
running  on  to  its  apex.  Remember,  you  belong  to  the  fifth  Race, 
yet  you  are  but  a  Western  siib-rsice.  Notwithstanding  your 
efi^orts,  what  you  call  civilization  is  confined  only  to  the  latter  and 
its  off-shoots  in  America.  Radiating  around,  its  deceptive  light 
may  seem  to  throw  its  rays  on  a  greater  distance  than  it  does  on 
reality. — There  is  no  **  rush  "  in  China,  and  of  Japan  you  make 
but  a  caricature. 

A  student  of  occultism  ought  not  to  speak  of  the  "  stagnant 
condition  of  the  fourth  Race  people  "  since  history  knows  next 
to  nothing  of  that  condition  **  up  to  the  beginning  of  modern  pro- 
gress "  of  other  nations  but  the  Western.  What  do  you  know 
of  America,  for  instance,  before  the  invasion  of  that  country  by 
the  Spaniards?  Less  than  two  centuries  prior  to  the  arrival  of 
Cortez  there  was  as  great  a  "  rush  "  towards  progress  among 
the  sub-races  of  Peru  and  Mexico  as  there  is  now  in  Europe  and 
the  U.S.A.  Their  sub-race  ended  in  nearly  total  annihilation 
through  causes  generated  by  itself ;  so  will  yours  at  the  end  of  its 
cycle.  We  may  speak  only  of  the  "  stagnant  condition  "  into 
which,  following  the  law  of  development,  growth,  maturity  and 
decline  every  race  and  sub-race  falls  into  during  its  transition 
period.  It  is  that  latter  condition  your  Universal  History  is 
acquainted  with,  while  it  remains  superbly  ignorant  of  the  con- 
dition even  India  was  in,   some  ten  centuries  back.     Your  sub- 

1  K.H.'s  Replies  to  the  Queries  in   Letter  XXIIIa   II.— Ed. 


I50  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

races  are  now  running  to.wards  the  apex  of  their  respective  cycles, 
and  that  History  goes  no  further  back  than  the  periods  of  decline 
of  a  few  other  sub-races  belonging  most  of  them  to  the  preceding 
fourth  Race.  And  what  is  the  area  and  the  period  of  time  em- 
braced by  its  Universal  eye? — At  the  utmost  stretch — a  few, 
miserable  dozens  of  centuries.  A  mighty  horizon,  indeed  ! 
Beyond — all  is  darkness  for  it,  nothing  but  hypotheses. 

(2)  No  doubt  there  was.  Egyptian  and  Aryan  records  and 
especially  our  Zodiacal  tables  furnish  us  with  every  proof  of  it 
besides  our  inner  knowledge.  Civilization  is  an  inheritance,  a 
patrimony  that  passes  from  race  to  race  along  the  ascending  and 
descending  paths  of  cycles.  During  the  minority  of  a  sub-race, 
it  is  preserved  for  it  by  its  predecessor,  which  disappears,  dies  out 
generally,  when  the  former  ' '  comes  to  age. ' '  At  first,  most  of 
them  squander  and  mismanage  their  property,  or  leave  it  un- 
touched in  the  ancestral  coffers.  They  reject  contemptuously  the 
advices  of  their  elders  and  prefer,  boy  like  playing  in  the  streets 
to  studying  and  making  the  most  of  the  untouched  wealth  stored 
up  for  them  in  the  records  of  the  Past.  Thus  during  your 
transition  period — the  middle  ages — Europe  rejected  the  testimony 
of  Antiquity,  calling  such  sages  as  Heroditus  and  other  learned 
Greeks — the  Father  of  Lies,  until  she  knew  better  and  changed 
the  appellation  into  that  of  **  Father  of  History."  Instead  of 
neglecting,  you  now  accumulate  and  add  to  your  wealth.  As 
every  other  race  you  had  your  ups  and  downs,  your  periods  of 
honour  and  dishonour,  your  dark  mid-nights  and — you  are  now 
approaching  your  brilliant  noon.  The  youngest  of  the  fifth  race 
family  you  were  for  long  ages  the  unloved  and  the  uncared  for, 
the  Cendrillon  in  your  home.  And  now,  when  so  many  of  your 
sisters  have  died  ;  and  others  still  are  dying,  while  the  few  of  the 
old  survivors,  now  in  their  second  infancy,  wait  but  for  their 
Messiah — the  sixth  race — to  resurrect  to  a  new  life  and  start  anew 
with  the  coming  stronger  along  the  path  of  a  new  cycle — now  that 
the  Western  Cendrillon  has  suddenly  developed  into  a  proud 
wealthy  Princess,  the  beauty  we  all  see  and  admire — how  does  she 
act?  Less  kind  hearted  than  the  Princess  in  the  tale,  instead  of 
offering  to  her  elder  and  less  favoured  sister,  the  oldest  now,  in 
fact  since  she  is  nearly  "  a  million  years  old  "  and  the  only  one 
who  has  never  treated  her  unkindly,  though  she  may  have 
ignored  her, — instead  of  offering  her,  I  say,  the  **  Kiss  of  peace  " 
she  applies  to  her  the  lex  taleonis  with  a  vengeance  that  does  not 
enhance  her  natural  beauty.  This,  my  good  friend,  and  brother, 
is  not  a  far-stretched  allegory  but — history. 

(3)  Yes ;  the  fifth  race — ours — began  in  Asia  a  million  years 
ago.  What  was  it  about  for  the  998,000  years  preceding  the  last 
2,000?     A    pertinent    question;    offered     moreover    in     quite    a 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  151 

Christian  spirit  that  refuses  to  beheve  that  any  good  could  ever 
have  come  out  from  anywhere  before  and  save  Nazareth.  What 
was  it  about?  Well,  it  was  occupying  itself  pretty  well  in  the 
same  way  as  it  does  now — craving  Mr.  Grant  Allen's  pardon,  who 
would  place  our  primitive  ancestor  the  "  hedgehoggy  "  man,  in 
the  early  part  of  the  Eocene  age  !  Forsooth,  your  scientific 
writers  bestride  their  hypothesis  most  fearlessly,  I  see.  It  will 
really  be  pity  to  find  their  fiery  steed  kicking  and  breaking  their 
heads  some  day ;  something  that  is  unavoidably  in  store  for  them. 
In  the  Eoscene  age — even  in  its  "  very  first  part,"  the  great  cycle 
of  the  fourth  Race  men,  the  Atlanteans — had  already  reached  its 
highest  point,  and  the  great  continent,  the  father  of  nearly  all  the 
present  continents — showed  the  first  symptoms  of  sinking — a  pro- 
cess that  occupied  it  down  to  11,446  years  ago,  when  its  last 
island,  that,  translating  its  vernacular  name,  we  may  call  with 
propriety  Poseidonis — went  down  with  a  crash.  By  the  bye, 
whoever  wrote  the  Review  of  Donnelly's  Atlantis  is  right  : 
Lemuria  can  no  more  be  confounded  with  the  Atlantic  Continent 
than  Europe  with  America.  Both  sunk  and  were  drowned  with 
their  high  civilization  and  '*  Gods,"  yet  between  the  two  catas- 
trophies,  a  short  period  of  about  700,000  years  elapsed ;  **  Lemuria 
flourishing  and  ending  her  career  just  at  about  that  trifling  lapse 
of  time  before  the  early  part  of  the  Eocene  Age,  since  its  race 
was  the  third.  Behold,  the  relics  of  that  once  great  nation  in 
some  of  the  flat  headed  aborigines  of  your  Australia  !  No  less 
right  is  their  review  in  rejecting  the  kind  attempt  of  the  author 
to  people  India  and  Egypt  with  the  refuse  of  Atlantis.  No  doubt 
your  geologists  are  very  learned  ;  but  why  not  bear  in  mind  that, 
under  the  continents  explored  and  fathomed  by  them  in  the  bowels 
of  which  they  have  found  the  **  Eocene  Age  "  and  forced  it  to 
deliver  them  its  secrets,  there  may  be,  hidden  deep  in  the  fathom- 
less, or  rather  unfathomed  ocean  beds,  other,  and  far  older  con- 
tinents whose  stratums  have  never  been  geologically  explored  ;  and 
that  they  may  some  day  upset  entirely  their  present  theories,  thus 
illustrating  the  simplicity  and  sublimity  of  truth  as  connected  with 
inductive  "  generalization  "  in  opposition  to  their  visionary  con- 
jectures. Why  not  admit — true  no  one  of  them  has  ever  thought 
of  it — that  our  present  continents,  have — like  **  Lemuria  "  and 
**  Atlantis  " — been  several  times  already,  submerged  and  had  the 
time  to  reappear  again,  and  bear  their  new  groups  of  mankind 
and  civilization ;  and  that,  at  the  first  great  geological  upheaval, 
at  the  next  cataclysm — in  the  series  of  periodical  cataclysms  that 
occur  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  Round, — our  already 
autopsized  continents  will  go  down,  and  the  Lemurias  and  Atlan- 
tises  come  up  again.  Think  of  the  future  geologists  of  the  sixth 
and  seventh  races.     Imagine  them  digging  deep  in  the  bowels  of 


152  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

what  was  Ceylon  and  Simla,  and  finding  implements  of  the  Ved- 
dahs,    or  of  the  remote  ancestor  of  the  civilized  Pahari — every 
object  of  the  civilized  portions  of  humanity  that  inhabited  those 
regions  having  been  pulverized  to  dust  by  the  great  masses  of 
travelling  glaciers, — during  the  next  glacial  period — imagine  him 
finding  only   such   rude  implements  as   now   found   among   those 
savage  tribes ;   and  forthwith   declaring  that  during  that  period 
primitive  man   climbed   and   slept   on   the  trees,   and  sucked   the 
marrow  out  of  animal  bones   after   breaking  them — as   civilized 
Europeans  no  less  than  the  Veddahs  will  often  do — hence  jumping 
to  the  conclusion  that  in  the  year  1882  a.d.,  mankind  was  com- 
posed of  "  man-like  animals,"  black-faced  and  whiskered,  "  with 
prominent  prognathous  and  large  pointed  canine  teeth."     True,  a 
Grant  Allen  of  the  sixth  race,  may  be  not  so  far  from  fact  and 
truth  in  his  conjecture  that  during  the   "  Simla  period  " — these 
teeth  were  used  in  the  combats  of  the  "  males  "  for  grass  widows 
— but  then  metaphora  has  very  little  to  do  with  anthropology  and 
geology.     Such   is  your   Science.     To   return   to  your  questions. 
Of  course  the  fourth  race  periods  of  the  highest  civilization, 
Greek   and   Roman,    and   even   Egyptian   civilization  are  nothing 
compared    to   the   civilizations    that   began    with   the   third   race. 
Those  of  the  second  were  not  savages  but  they  could  not  be  called 
civilized.     And  now  reading  one  of  my  first  letters  on  the  races 
(a  question  first  touched  by  M.)  pray,  do  not  accuse  either  him  or 
myself  of  some  new  contradiction.      Read  it  over  and  see,  that  it 
leaves   out   the  question  of  civilizations   altogether  and   mentions 
but  the  degenerate  remnants  of  the  fourth  and  third  races,   and 
gives  you  as  a  corroboration  the  latest  conclusions  of  your  own 
Science.     Do  not  regard  an  unavoidable  incompleteness  as  incon- 
sistency.    You  now  ask  me  a  direct  question,   and,    I  answer  it. 
Greeks  and  Romans  were  small  sub-races  and  Egyptians  part  and 
parcel  of  our  own  "  Caucasian  "  stock.     Look  at  the  latter  and 
at  India.     Having  reached  the  highest  civilization  and  what  is 
more  :  learning — both  went  down.     Egypt  as  a  distinct  sub-race 
disappearing  entirely  (her  Copts  are  a  hybrid  remnant).     India — 
as  one  of  the  first  and  most  powerful  off-shoots  of  the  mother 
Race,   and  composed  of  a  number  of  sub-races,  lasting  to  these 
times,    and    struggling   once  more  to   take  her  place   in   history 
some  day.     That  History  catches  but  a  few  stray,  hazy  glimpses 
of  Egypt,  some  12,000  years  back;  when,  having  already  reached 
the  apex  of  its  cycle  thousands  of  years  before,   the  latter  had 
begun  going  down.     What  does,  or  can  it  know  of  India  5,000 
years  ago,   or  of  the  Chaldees — whom  it  confounds  most  charm- 
ingly with  the  Assyrians,  making  of  them  one  day  **  Akkadians," 
at  another  Turanians  and  what  not?     We  say  then,    that  your 
History  is  entirely  at  sea. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  153 

We  are  refused  by  the  Journal  of  Science — words  repeated  and 
quoted  by  M.A.  (Oxon)  with  a  rapture  worthy  of  a  great  medium 
— any  claim  whatever  for  "  higher  knowledge.'*  Says  the  re- 
viewer :  "  Suppose  the  Brothers  were  to  say  '  point  your  telescope 
to  such  and  such  a  spot  in  heavens,  and  you  will  find  a  planet 
yet  unknown  to  you;  or  dig  into  the  earth,  etc.,  and  you  will 
find  a  mineral,'  etc."  Very  fine,  indeed,  and  suppose  that  was 
done,  what  would  be  the  result?  Why  a  charge  of  plagiarism — 
since  everything  of  that  kind,  every  **  planet  and  mineral  "  that 
exists  in  space  or  inside  the  earth,  are  known  and  recorded  in  our 
books  thousand  of  years  ago ;  more ;  many  a  true  hypothesis  was 
timidly  brought  forward  by  their  own  scientific  men  and  as  con- 
stantly rejected  by  the  majority  with  whose  preconceptions  it 
interfered.  Your  intention  is  laudable  but  nothing  that  I  may 
give  you  in  answer  will  ever  be  accepted  from  us.  Whenever 
discovered  that  "it  is  verily  so,"  the  discovery  will  be  attributed 
to  him  who  corroborated  the  evidence — as  in  the  case  of  Coper- 
nicus and  Galileo,  the  latter  having  availed  himself  but  of  the 
Pythagorean  MSS. 

But  to  return  to  **  civilizations."  Do  you  know  that  the 
Chaldees  were  at  the  apex  of  their  Occult  fame  before  what  you 
term  as  the  "  bronze  Age  "  ?  that  the  "  Sons  of  Ad  "  or  the 
children  of  the  Fire  Mist  preceded  by  hundreds  of  centuries  the 
Age  of  Iron,  which  was  an  old  age  already,  when  what  you  now 
call  the  Historical  Period — probably  because  what  is  known  of  it 
is  generally  no  history  but  fiction — had  hardly  begun.  We  hold — 
but  then  what  warrant  can  you  give  the  world  that  we  are  right? 
— that  far  greater  civilizations  than  our  own  have  risen  and 
decayed."  It  is  not  enough  to  say  as  some  of  your  modern 
writers  do — that  an  extinct  civilization  existed  before  Rome  and 
Athens  were  founded.  We  affirm  that  a  series  of  civilizations 
existed  before,  as  well  as  after  the  Glacial  Period,  that  they 
existed  upon  various  points,  of  the  globe,  reached  their  apex  of 
glory  and — died.  Every  trace  and  memory  had  been  lost  of  the 
Assyrian  and  Phoenicean  civilizations  until  discoveries  began  to 
be  made  a  few  years  ago.  And  now  they  open  anew,  though  not 
by  far  one  of  the  earliest  pages  in  the  history  of  mankind.  And 
yet  how  far  back  do  those  civilizations  go  in  comparison  with  the 
oldest?  And  even  them,  history  is  shy  to  accept.  Archaeology 
has  sufficiently  demonstrated  that  the  memory  of  man  runs  back 
vastly  further  than  history  has  been  willing  to  accept,  and  the 
sacred  records  of  once  mighty  nations  preserved  by  their  heirs  are 
still  more  worthy  of  trust.  We  speak  of  civilizations  of  the  anti- 
glacial  period ;  and  (not  only  in  the  minds  of  the  vulgar  and  the 
profane  but  even  in  the  opinion  of  the  highly  learned  geologist) 
the  claim  sounds  preposterous.     What  would  you  say  then  to  our 


154  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

affirmation  that  the  Chinese — I  now  speak  of  the  inland,  the  true 
Chinaman,  not  of  the  hybrid  mixture  between  the  fourth  and  the 
fifth  Races  now  occupying  the  throne — the  aborigines,  who  belong 
in  their  unallied  nationality  wholly  to  the  highest  and  last  branch 
of  the  fourth  Race,  reached  their  highest  civilization  when  the  fifth 
had  hardly  appeared  in  Asia,  and  that  its  first  off-shoot  was  yet  a 
thing  of  the  future.  When  was  it?  Calculate.  You  cannot 
think  that  we,  who  have  such  tremendous  odds  against  the  accept- 
ance of  our  doctrine  would  deliberately  go  on  inventing  Races  and 
sub-races  (in  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Hume)  were  not  they  a  matter  of 
undeniable  fact.  The  group  of  islands  off  the  Siberian  coast  dis- 
covered by  Nordeneskjol  of  the  '*  Vega  "  was  found  strewn  with 
fossils  of  horses,  sheep,  oxen,  etc.,  among  gigantic  bones  of 
elephants,  mammoths,  rhinoceroses  and  other  monsters  belonging 
to  periods  when  man — says  your  science — had  not  yet  made  his 
appearance  on  earth.  How  came  horses  and  sheep  to  be  found 
in  company  with  the  huge  **  anti-diluvians  "?  The  horse,  we  are 
taught  in  schools  is  quite  a  modern  invention  of  nature,  and  no 
man  ever  saw  its  pedactyl  ancestor.  The  group  of  the  Siberian 
islands  may  give  the  lie  to  the  comfortable  theory.  The  region 
now  locked  in  the  fetters  of  eternal  winter  uninhabited  by  man — 
that  most  fragile  of  animals, — will  be  very  soon  proved  to  have 
had  not  only  a  tropical  climate — something  your  science  knows 
and  does  not  dispute, — but  having  been  likewise  the  seat  of  one 
of  the  most  ancient  civilisations  of  that  fourth  race,  whose  highest 
relics  now  we  find  in  the  degenerate  Chinaman,  and  whose  lowest 
are  hopelessly  (for  the  profane  scientist)  intermixed  with  the 
remnants  of  the  third.  I  told  you  before  now,  that  the  highest 
people  now  on  earth  (spiritually)  belong  to  the  first  sub-race  of 
the  fifth  root  Race ;  and  those  are  the  Aryan  Asiatics ;  the  highest 
race  (physical  intellectuality)  is  the  last  sub-race  of  the  fifth — 
yourselves  the  white  conquerors.  The  majority  of  mankind  be- 
longs to  the  seventh  sub-race  of  the  fourth  Root  race, — the  above 
mentioned  Chinamen  and  their  off-shoots  and  branchlets  (Malayans, 
Mongolians,  Tibetans,  Javanese,  etc.,  etc.,  etc.)  and  remnants  of 
other  sub-races  of  the  fourth — and  the  seventh  sub-race  of  the 
third  race.  All  these,  fallen  degraded  semblances  of  humanity 
are  the  direct  lineal  descendants  of  highly  civilized  nations  neither 
the  name  nor  memory  of  which  have  survived  except  in  such 
books  as  Popalvul  and  a  few  others  unknown  to  Science. 

(4)  To  the  Miocene  times.  Everything  comes  in  its  appointed 
time  and  place  in  the  evolution  of  Rounds,  otherwise  it  would  be 
impossible  for  the  best  seer  to  calculate  the  exact  hour  and  year 
when  such  cataclysms  great  and  small  have  to  occur  :  All  an  adept 
could  do  would  be  to  predict  an  approximate  time ;  whereas  now 
events  that  result  in  great  geological  changes  may  be  predicted 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  155 

with  as  mathematical  a  certainty  as  eclipses  and  other  revolutions 
in  space.  The  sinking  of  Atlantis  (the  group  of  continents  and 
isles)  begun  during  the  Miocene  period — as  certain  of  your  con- 
tinents are  now  observed  to  be  gradually  sinking — and  it  cul- 
minated— first,  in  the  final  disappearance  of  the  largest  continent 
an  event  coincident  with  the  elevation  of  the  Alps ;  and  second 
with  that  of  the  last  of  the  fair  Islands  mentioned  by  Plato.  The 
Egyptian  priests  of  Sais  told  his  ancestor  Solon,  that  Atlantis  (i.e. 
the  only  remaining  large  island)  had  perished  g,ooo  years  before 
their  time.  This  was  not  a  fancy  date,  since  they  had  for 
milleniums  preserved  most  carefully  their  records.  But  then,  as 
I  say,  they  spoke  but  of  the  **  Poseidonis  "  and  would  not  reveal 
even  to  the  great  Greek  Legislator  their  secret  chronology.  As 
there  are  no  geological  reasons  for  doubting,  but  on  the  contrary, 
a  mass  of  evidence  for  accepting  the  tradition,  Science  has  finally 
accepted  the  existence  of  the  great  continents  and  Archipelago 
and  thus  vindicated  the  truth  of  one  more  "fable."  It  now 
teaches,  as  you  know  that  Atlantis,  or  the  remnants  of  it  lingered 
down  to  post-tertiary  times,  its  final  submergency  occurring  with- 
in the  palaeozoic  ages  of  American  history  !  Well,  truth  and  fact 
ought  to  feel  thankful  even  for  such  small  favours  in  the  previous 
absence  of  any  for,  so  many  centuries.  The  deep  sea  explora- 
tions— especially  those  of  the  Challenger  have  fully  confirmed  the 
reports  of  geology  and  palaeontology.  The  great  event — the 
triumph  of  our  "  Sons  of  the  Fire  Mist "  the  inhabitants  of 
**  Shambullah  "  (when  yet  an  island  in  the  central  Asian  Sea)  over 
the  selfish  but  not  entirely  wicked  magicians  of  Poseidonis 
occurred  just  11,446  ago.  Read  in  this  connection  the  incom- 
plete and  partially  veiled  tradition  in  I  sis,  Volume  I,  p.  588-94, 
and  some  things  may  become  still  plainer  to  you.  The  corrobora- 
tion of  tradition  and  history,  brought  forward  by  Donneley  I  find 
in  the  main  correct ;  but  you  wall  find  all  this  and  much  more  in 
I  sis. 

(5)  It  certainly  does,  and  I  have  touched  upon  the  subject  long 
ago.  In  my  notes  on  Mr.  Hume's  MSS.,  **  On  God  " — that  he 
kindly  adds  to  our  Philosophy,  something  the  latter  had  never  con- 
templated before — the  subject  is  mentioned  abundantly.  Has  he 
refused  you  a  look  into  it  ?  For  you — I  may  enlarge  my  explana- 
tions, but  not  before  you  have  read  what  I  say  of  the  origin  of 
good  and  evil  on  those  margins.  Quite  enough  was  said  by  me 
for  our  present  purposes.  Strangely  enough  I  found  a  European 
author — the  greatest  materialist  of  his  times.  Baron  d'Holbach 
whose  views — coincide  entirely  with  the  views  of  our  philosophy. 
When  reading  his  Essais  sur  la  Nature,  I  might  have  imagined 
I  had  our  book  of  Kin-ti  before  me.  As  a  matter  of  course  and 
of  temperament  our  Universal  Pundit  will  try  to  catch  at  those 


156  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

views  and  pull  every  argument  to  pieces.  So  far  he  only  threatens 
me  to  alter  his  Preface  and  not  to  publish  the  philosophy  under  his 
own  name.  Cuneus  cuneutn  tradit — I  begged  him  not  to  publish 
his  essays  at  all. 

M.  thinks  that  for  your  purposes  I  better  give  you  a  few  more 
details  upon  Atlantis  since  it  is  greatly  connected  with  evil  if  not 
with  its  origin.  In  the  forthcoming  Theosophist  you  will  find  a 
note  or  two  appended  to  Hume's  translation  of  Eliphas  Levi's 
Preface  in  connection  with  the  lost  continent.  And  now,  since  I 
am  determined  to  make  of  the  present  answers  a  volume — bear 
your  cross  with  Christian  fortitude  and  then,  perhaps,  after  reading 
the  whole  you  will  ask  for  no  more  for  some  time  to  come.  But 
what  can  I  add  to  that  already  told?  I  am  unable  to  give  you 
purely  scientific  information  since  we  can  never  agree  entirely 
with  Western  conclusions;  and  that  ours  will  be  rejected  as  *'  un- 
scientific." Yet  both  geology  and  palaeontology  bear  witness  to 
much  we  have  to  say.  Of  course  your  Science  is  right  in  many 
of  her  generalities,  but  her  premises  are  wrong,  or  at  any  rate — 
very  faulty.  For  instance  she  is  right  in  saying  that  while  the 
new  America  was  forming  the  ancient  Atlantis  was  sinking,  and 
gradually  wasting  away ;  but  she  is  neither  right  in  her  given 
epochs  nor  in  the  calculations  of  the  duration  of  that  sinking.  The 
latter — is  the  future  fate  of  your  British  Islands,  the  first  on  the 
list  of  victims  that  have  to  be  destroyed  by  fire  (submarine 
volcanos)  and  water,  France  and  other  lands  will  follow  suit. 
When  they  reappear  again,  the  last  seventh  Sub-race  of  the  sixth 
Root  race  of  present  mankind  will  be  flourishing  on  **  Lemuria  " 
and  "Atlantis"  both  of  which  will  have  reappeared  also  (their 
reappearance  following  immediately  the  disappearance  of  the 
present  isles  and  continents),  and  very  few  seas  and  great  waters 
will  be  found  then  on  our  globe,  waters  as  well  as  land  appearing 
and  disappearing  and  shifting  periodically  and  each  in  turn. 

Trembling  at  the  prospect  of  fresh  charges  of  *'  contradictions  " 
at  some  future  incomplete  statement  I  rather  explain  what  I  mean 
by  this.  The  approach  of  every  new  '*  obscuration  "  is  always 
signalled  by  cataclysms — of  either  fire  or  water.  But  apart  from 
this,  every  **  Ring  "  or  Root  Race  has  to  be  cut  in  two,  so  to  say, 
by  either  one  or  the  other.  Thus,  having  reached  the  apex  of  its 
development  and  glory  the  fourth  Race — ^the  Atlanteans  were 
destroyed  by  water;  you  find  now  but  their  degenerate,  fallen 
remnants  whose  sub-races,  nevertheless,  aye — each  of  them,  had 
its  palmy  days  of  glory  and  relative  greatness.  What  they  are 
now — ^you  will  be  some  day,  the  law  of  cycles  being  one  and 
immutable.  When  your  race — the  fifth — will  have  reached  at  its 
zenith  of  physical  intellectuality,  and  developed  the  highest  civiliza- 
tion   (remember   the    difference   we    make    between    material    and 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  157 

spiriitial  civilizations) ;  unable  to  go  any  higher  in  its  own  cycle 
— its  progress  towards  absolute  evil  will  be  arrested  (as  its  pre- 
decessors in  the  Lemurians  and  Atlanteans,  the  men  of  the  third 
and  fourth  races  were  arrested  in  their  progress  towards  the  same) 
by  one  of  such  cataclysmic  changes ;  its  great  civilization  destroyed, 
and  all  the  sub-races  of  that  race  will  be  found  going  down  their 
respective  cycles,  after  a  short  period  of  glory  and  learning.  See 
the  remnants  of  the  Atlanteans, — the  old  Greeks  and  Romans  (the 
modem  belong  all  to  the  fifth  Race) ;  see  how  great  and  how  short, 
how  evanescent  were  their  days  of  fame  and  glory  !  For,  they 
were  but  sub- races  of  the  seven  off -shoots  of  the  "  root  race." 
No  mother  Race,  any  more  than  her  sub-races  and  off-shoots,  is 
allowed  by  the  one  Reigning  Law  to  trespass  upon  the  preroga- 
tives of  the  Race  or  Sub-race  that  will  follow  it ;  least  of  all — to 
encroach  upon  the  knowledge  and  powers  in  store  for  its  successor. 
"  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  the  fruit  of  Knowledge  of  Good  and  Evil, 
of  the  tree  that  is  growing  for  thy  heirs  "  we  may  say  with  more 
right  than  would  be  willing  conceded  us  by  the  Humes  of  your 
Sub-race.  This  *  *  tree  "  is  in  our  safe-keeping,  entrusted  to  us 
by  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  the  protectors  of  our  Race  and  Trustees 
for  those  that  are  coming.  Try  to  understand  the  allegory,  and 
to  never  lose  sight  of  the  hint  given  you  in  my  letter  upon  the 
Planetaries.*  At  the  beginning  of  each  Round,  when  humanity 
reappears  under  quite  different  conditions  than  those  afforded  for 
the  birth  of  each  new  race  and  its  sub-races,  a  '*  Planetary  "  has 
to  mix  with  these  primitive  men,  and  to  refresh  their  memories, 
and  reveal  to  them  the  truths  they  knew  during  the  preceding 
Round  Hence  the  confused  traditions  about  Jehovahs,  Ormazds, 
Osirises,  Brahms,  and  the  tuttu  quanti.  But  that  happens  only 
for  the  benefit  of  the  first  Race.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  latter  to 
choose  the  fit  recipients  among  its  sons,  who  are  "  set  apart  "  to 
use  a  Biblical  phrase — as  the  vessel  to  contain  the  whole  stock 
of  knowledge,  to  be  divided  among  the  future  races  and  genera- 
tions until  the  close  of  that  Round.  Why  should  I  say  more 
since  you  must  understand  my  whole  meaning;  and  that  I  dare 
not  reveal  it  in  full.  Every  race  had  its  adepts ;  and  with  every 
new  race,  we  are  allowed  to  give  them  out  as  much  of  our  know- 
ledge as  the  men  of  that  race  deserve  it.  The  last  seventh  race 
will  have  its  Buddah  as  every  one  of  its  predecessors  had ;  but,  its 
adepts  will  be  far  higher  than  any  of  the  present  race,  for  among 
them  will  abide  the  future  Planetary,  the  Dhyan  Chohan  whose 
duty  it  will  be  to  instruct  or  **  refresh  the  memory  "  of  the  first 
race  of  the  fifth  Round  men  after  this  planet's  future  obscuration. 
En  passant,  to  show  to  you  that  not  only  were  not  the  "  races  " 

*  The  letter  in   answer  to  yours   I  believe,   where  you  question  me  about 
C.C.M.,  S.M.  and  Mrs.  K. 

12 


158  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

invented  by  us,  but  that  they  are  a  cardinal  dogrna  with  the  Lama 
Buddhists  and  with  all  who  study  our  esoteric  doctrine,  I  send  you 
an  explanation  on  a  page  or  two  in  Rhys  Davids  "  Buddhism," — 
otherwise  incomprehensible,  meaningless  and  absurd.  It  is 
written  with  the  special  permission  of  the  Chohan  (my  Master) 
and — for  your  benefit.  No  Orientalist  has  ever  suspected  the 
truths  contained  in  it,  and — you  are  the  first  Western  man  (outside 
Tibet)  to  whom  it  is  now  explained. 

(6)  What  emerg-es  at  the  end  of  all  thing's  is  not  only  **  pure 
and  impersonal  spirit, ' '  but  the  collective  *  *  personal ' '  remem- 
brances skimmed  off  every  new  fifth  principle  in  the  long  series  of 
being.  And,  if  at  the  end  of  all  things — say  in  some  million  of 
millions  years  hence,  Spirit  will  have  to  rest  in  its  pure,  impersonal 
non-existence,  as  the  One  or  the  Absolute,  still  there  must  be 
"some  good  "  in  the  cyclic  process,  since  every  purified  Ego  has 
the  chance  in  the  long  interims  between  objective  being  upon  the 
planets  to  exist  as  a  Dhyan  Chohan — from  the  lowest  "  Deva- 
Chanee  "  to  the  highest  Planetary,  enjoying  the  fruits  of  its 
collective  lives. 

But  what  is  "Spirit"  pure  and  impersonal  per  se?  Is  it 
possible  that  you  should  not  have  realized  yet  our  meaning?  why 
such  a  Spirit  is  a  nonentity,  a  pure  abstraction,  an  absolute  blank 
to  our  senses — even  to  the  most  spiritual.  It  becomes  something 
only  in  union  with  matter — hence  it  is  always  something  since 
matter  is  infinite  and  indestructible  and  non-existent  without  Spirit 
which,  in  matter  is  life.  Separated  from  matter  it  becomes  the 
absolute  negation  of  life  and  being,  whereas  matter  is  inseparable 
from  it.  Ask  those  who  offer  the  objection  whether  they  know 
anything  of  "  life  "  and  **  consciousness"  beyond  what  they  now 
feel  on  earth.  What  conception  can  they  have — unless  natural 
born  seers — of  the  state  and  consciousness  of  one's  individuality 
after  it  has  separated  itself  from  gross  earthly  body?  What  is 
the  good  of  the  whole  process  of  life  on  earth — you  may  ask  them, 
in  your  turn — if,  we  are  as  good  as  **  pure  "  unconscious  entities 
before  birth,  during  sleep,  and,  at  the  end  of  our  career?  Is  not 
death,  according  to  the  teachings  of  Science,  followed  by  the  same 
state  of  unconsciousness  as  the  one  before  birth?  Does  not  life 
when  it  quits  our  body  become  as  impersonal  as  it  was  before  it 
animated  the  foetus?  Life,  after  all, — ^the  greatest  problem 
within  the  ken  of  human  conception  is  a  mystery  that  the  greatest 
of  your  men  of  Science  will  never  solve.  In  order  to  be  correctly 
comprehended  it  has  to  be  studied  in  the  entire  series  of  its  mani- 
festations, otherwise  it  can  never  be,  not  only  fathomed,  but  even 
comprehended  in  its  easiest  form — life,  as  a  state  of  being  on  this 
earth.  It  can  never  be  grasped  so  long  as  it  is  studied  separately 
and  apart  from  universal  life.       To  solve  the  great  problem  one 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  159 

has  to  become  an  occultist ;  to  analyze  and  experience  with  it  per- 
sonally, in  all  its  phases,  as  life  on  earth,  life  beyond  the  limit  of 
physical  death,  mineral,  vegetable,  animal  and  spiritual  life;  life 
in  conjunction  with  concrete  matter  as  well  as  life  present  in  the 
imponderable  atom.  Let  them  try  and  examine,  or  analyze  life 
apart  from  organism,  and  what  remains  of  it?  Simply  a  mode 
of  motion  ;  which,  unless  our  doctrine  of  the  allrPervading,  infinite, 
omnipresent  Life  is  accepted — though  it  be  accepted  on  no  better 
terms  than  a  hypothesis  only  a  little  more  reasonable  than  their 
scientific  hypotheses  which  are  all  absurd — has  to  remain  unsolved. 
Shall  they  object?  Well,  we  will  answer  them  by  using  their 
own  weapK>ns.  We  will  say  that  it  is,  and  will  remain  for  ever 
demonstrated  that  since  motion  is  all-pervading  and  absolute  rest 
inconceivable,  that  under  whatever  form  or  mask  motion  may 
app>ear,  whether  as  light,  heat,  magnetism,  chemical  affinity  or 
electricity — all  these  must  be  but  phases  of  One  and  the  same 
universal  omnipotent  Force,  a  Proteus  they  bow  to,  as  the  Great 
**  Unknown  " — (See  Herbert  Spencer)  and  we,  simply  call  the 
•*  One  Life  "  the  "  One  Law  "  and  the  **  One  Element."  The 
greatest,  the  most  scientific  minds  on  earth,  have  been  keenly 
pressing  forward  toward  a  solution  of  the  mystery,  leaving  no  bye- 
path  unexplored,  no  thread  loose  or  weak  in  this  darkest  of  laby- 
rinths for  them,  and  all  had  to  come  to  the  same  conclusion — 
that  of  the  Occultists  when  given  only  partially — namely  that  life 
in  its  concrete  manifestations  is  the  legitimate  result  and  conse- 
quence of  chemical  affinity ;  as  to  life  in  its  abstract  sense,  life 
pure  and  simple — ^well,  they  know  no  more  of  it  to-day,  than  they 
knew  in  the  incipient  stage  of  their  Royal  Society.  They  only 
know  that  organisms  in  certain  solutions  previously  free  from  life 
will  spring  up  spontaneously  (Pasteur  and  his  Biblical  piety  not- 
withstanding)— owing  to  certain  chemical  compositions  of  such 
substances.  If,  as  I  hope,  in  a  few  years,  I  am  entirely  my  own 
master — I  may  have  the  pleasure  of  demonstrating  to  you  on  your 
own  writing  table  that  life  as  life  is  not  only  transformable  into 
other  aspects  or  phases  of  the  all-pervading  Force,  but  that,  it  can 
be  actually  infused  into  an  artificial  man.  Frankenstein  is  a  myth 
only  so  far  as  he  is  the  hero  of  a  mystic  tale ;  in  nature — he  is  a 
possibility ;  and  the  physicists  and  physicians  of  the  last  sub-race 
of  the  sixth  Race  w^ill  inocculate  life  and  revive  corpses,  as  they 
now  inocculate  small-pox,  and  often  less  comely  diseases.  Spirit, 
life  and  matter,  are  not  natural  principles  existing  independently 
of  each  other,  but  the  effects  of  combinations  produced  by  eternal 
motion  in  Space ;  and  they  better  learn  it. 

(7)  Most  undoubtedly  I  am  so  permitted.  But  then  comes  the 
most  important  point :  how  far  satisfactory  will  my  answers  apj>ear 
— even  to  you?     That  not  even  every  new  law  brought  to  light 


i6o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

is  regarded  as  adding  a  link  to  the  chain  of  human  knowledge 
is  shown  by  the  ill-grace  with  which  every  fact  unwelcome  for 
some  reasons  to  science  is  received  by  its  professors.  Neverthe- 
less, whenever  I  can  answer  you — I  will  trj^-  to  do  so,  only  hoping 
that  you  will  not  send  it  as  a  contribution  from  my  pen  to  the 
Journal  of  Science. 

(8)  Most  assuredly  they  have.  Rain  can  be  brought  on  in  a 
small  area  of  space — ^artificially  and  without  any  claim  to  miracle 
or  superhuman  powers,  though  its  secret  is  no  property  of  mine 
that  I  should  divulge  it.  I  am  now  trying  to  obtain  permission 
to  do  so.  We  know  of  no  phenomenon  in  nature — entirely  un- 
connected with  either  magnetism  or  electricity — since,  where  there 
are  motion,  heat,  friction,  light,  there  magnetism  and  its  alter-ego 
(according  to  our  humble  opinion) — electricity  will  always  appear, 
as  either  cause  or  effect — or  rather  both  if  we  but  fathom  the 
manifestation  to  its  origin.  All  the  phenomena  of  earth  currents, 
terrestrial  magnetism  and  atmospheric  electricity,  are  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  earth  is  an  electrified  conductor,  whose  potential  is 
ever  changing  owing  to  its  rotation  and  its  annual  orbital  motion, 
the  successive  cooling  and  heating  of  the  air,  the  formation  of 
clouds  and  rain,  storms  and  winds,  etc.  This  you  may  perhaps, 
find  in  some  text  book.  But  then  Science  would  be  unwilling 
to  admit  that  all  these  changes  are  due  to  Akasic  magnetism  inces- 
santly generating  electric  currents  which  tend  to  restore  the  dis- 
turbed equilibrium.  By  directing  the  most  powerful  of  electric 
batteries, — ^human  frame  electrified  by  certain  process,  you  can 
stop  rain  on  some  given  pK>int  by  making  a  **  hole  in  the  rain 
cloud,"  as  the  occultists  term  it.  By  using  other  strongly 
magnetized  implements  within,  so  to  say,  an  insulated  area — rain 
can  be  produced  artificially.  I  regret  my  inability  to  explain  to 
you  the  process  more  clearly.  You  know  the  effects  produced  by 
trees,  plants  on  rain  clouds ;  and  how  their  strong  magnetic  nature 
attracts  and  even  feeds  these  clouds  over  the  tops  of  the  trees. 
Science  explains  it  otherwise,  maybe.  Well,  I  cannot  help  it,  for 
such  is  our  knowledge  and  the  fruits  of  milleniums  of  observa- 
tions and  experience.  Were  the  present  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
Hume,  he  would  be  sure  to  remark  that  I  am  vindicating  the  charge 
publicly  brought  by  him  against  us  :  **  Whenever  unable  to  answer 
your  arguments  (?)  they  (we)  calmly  reply  that  their  (our)  rules  do 
not  admit  of  this  or  that." — Charge  notwithstanding,  I  am  com- 
pelled to  answer  that  since  the  secret  is  not  mine  I  cannot  make 
of  it  a  marketable  commodity.  Let  some  physicists  calculate  the 
amount  of  heat  required  to  vaporize  a  certain  quantity  of  water. 
Then,  let  them  compute  the  quantity  of  rain  needed  to  cover  an 
area — say,  of  one  square  mile  to  a  depth  of  one  inch.  For  this 
amount  of  vaporization  they  will  require,   of  course,   an  amount 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  i6i 

of  heat  that  would  be  equal  to  at  least  five  million  tons  of  coal. 
Now  the  amount  of  energy  of  which   this  consumption   of   heat 
would  be  the  equivalent  corresponds  (as  any  mathematician  could 
tell  you) — to  that  which  would  be  required  to  raise  a  weight  of 
upwards  of  ten  million  tons,  one  mile  high.       How  can  one  man 
generate    such   an    amount  of    heat    and    energy?    preposterous, 
absurd  !      We  are  all  lunatics,  and  you  who  listen  to  us  will  be 
placed  in   the  same  category  if  you  ever  venture  to  rep^eat   this 
proposition.       Yet  I  say,  that  one  man  alone  can  do  it,  and  very 
easily  if  he  is  but  acquainted  with  a  certain   **  phys'ico- spiritual'^ 
lever  in  himself,  far  more  powerful  than  that  of  Archimedes.     Even 
simple  muscular  contraction  is  aUvays  accompanied  with  electric 
and  magnetic  phenomena,  and  there  is  the  strongest  connection 
between  the  magnetism  of  the  earth,  the  changes  of  weather  and 
man,  who  is  the  best  barometer  living,  if  he  but  knew  to  decipher 
it  properly ;  again,  the  state  of  the  sky  can  always  be  ascertained 
by  the  variations  shown   by   magnetic  instruments.        It  is  now 
several  years  that  I  had  an  opportunity  of  reading  the  deductions 
of  science  upK>n  this  subject ;  therefore,  unless  I  go  to  the  trouble 
of  catching  up  what  I  may  have  remained  ignorant  of,  I  do  not 
know  the  latest  conclusions  of  Science.        But  with  us,  it  is  an 
established  fact  that  it  is  the  earth's   magnetism   that  produces 
wind,  storms,  and  rain.      What  science  seems  to  know  of  it,  is  but 
secondary  symptoms  always  induced  by  that  magnetism  and  she 
may  very  soon  find  out  her  present  errors.        Earth's  magnetic 
attraction  of  meteoric  dust,  and  the  direct  influence  of  the  latter 
upon  the  sudden  changes  of  temperature  especially  in  the  matter 
of  heat  and  cold,  is  not  a  settled  question  to  the  present  day,  I 
believe.^     It  was  doubted  whether  the  fact  of  our  earth  passing 
through  a   region  of  space   in  which  there  are  more  or  less  of 
meteoric    masses    has    any    bearing    upK>n    the    height    of    our 
atmosphere  being  increased  or  decreased,  or  even  upon  the  state 
of  weather.       But  we  think  we  could  easily  prove  it;  and  since 
they  accept  the  fact  that  the  relative  distribution  and  proportion 
of  land  and  water  on  our  globe  may  be  due  to  the  great  accumula- 
tion upon  it  of  meteoric  dust;  snow — especially  in  our  northern 
regions — being  full  of  meteoric  iron  and  magnetic  particles;  and 
deposits  of  the  latter  being  found  even  at  the  bottom  of  seas  and 
oceans,  I  wonder  how  Science  has  not  hitherto  understood  that 
every  atmospheric  change  and  disturbance  was  due  to  the  com- 
bined magnetism   of  the  two  great  masses   between  which   our 
atmosphere  is  compressed  !     I  call  this  meteoric  dust  a  "  mass  " 
for  it  is  really  one.       High  above  our  earth's  surface  the  air  is 
impregnated  and   space  filled  with  magnetic,   or   meteoric   dust, 

_        1  Dr.  Phipson  in  1867  and  Cowper  Ranyard  in  1879  both  urged  the  theory 
■  but  it  was  rejected  then. 


1 62  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

which  does  not  even  belong  to  our  solar  system.  Science  having 
luckily  discovered,  that,  as  our  earth  with  all  the  other  planets  is 
carried  along  through  space,  it  receives  a  greater  proportion  of 
that  dust  matter  on  its  northern  than  on  its  southern  hemisphere, 
knows  that  to  this  are  due  the  preponderating  number  of  the  con- 
tinents in  the  former  hemisphere,  and  the  greater  abundance  of 
snow  and  moisture.  Millions  of  such  meteors  and  even  of  the 
finest  particles  reach  us  yearly  and  daily  and  all  our  temple  knives 
are  made  of  this  "  heavenly  "  iron,  which  reaches  us  without 
having  undergone  any  change — ^the  magnetism  of  the  earth  keep- 
ing them  in  cohesion.  Gaseous  matter  is  continually  added  to 
our  atmosphere  from  the  never  ceasing  fall  of  meteoric  strongly 
magnetic  matter,  and  yet  it  seems  with  them  still  an  open  question 
whether  magnetic  conditions  have  anything  to  do  with  the  pre- 
cipitation t>f  rain  or  not !  I  do  not  know  of  any  "  set  of  motions 
established  by  pressures,  expansions,  etc. ,  due  in  the  first  instance 
to  solar  energy."  Science  makes  too  much  and  too  little  at  the 
same  time  of  **  solar  energy  "  and  even  of  the  sun  itself ;  and  the 
sun  has  nothing  to  do  whatever  with  rain  and  very  little  with  heat. 
I  was  under  the  impression  that  science  was  aware  that  the  glacial 
periods  as  well  as  those  periods  when  temperature  is  **  like  that 
of  the  carboniferous  age  ' ' — are  due  to  the  decrease  and  increase 
or  rather  to  the  expansion  of  our  atmosphere,  which  expansion 
is  itself  due  to  the  same  meteoric  presence?  At  any  rate,  we  aU 
know,  that  the  heat  that  the  earth  receives  by  radiation  from  the 
sun  is  at  the  uttermost  one  third  if  not  less  than  the  amount 
received  by  her  directly  from  the  meteors. 

(9)  Call  it  a  chromosphere  or  atmosphere,  it  can  be  called 
neither ;  for  it  is  simply  the  magnetic  and  ever  present  order  of  the 
sun,  seen  by  astronomers  only  for  a  brief  few  moments  during 
the  eclipse  and  by  some  of  our  chelas — ^whenever  they  like — of 
course  while  in  a  certain  induced  state.  A  counterpart  of  what 
the  astronomers  call  the  red  flames  in  the  **  corona  "  may  be  seen 
in  Reichenbach's  crystals  or  in  any  other  strongly  magnetic  body. 
The  head  of  a  man — ^in  a  strong  ecstatic  condition,  when  all  the 
electricity  of  his  system  is  centred  around  the  brain,  will  represent 
— especially  in  darkness — a  f>erfect  simile  of  the  Sun  during  such 
periods.  The  first  artist  who  drew  the  aureoles  about  the  heads 
of  his  Gods  and  Saints,  was  not  inspired,  but  represented  it  on  the 
authority  of  temple  pictures  and  traditions  of  the  sanctuary  and 
the  chambers  of  initiation  where  such  phenomena  took  place. 
The  closer  to  the  head  or  to  the  aura-emitting  body — the  stronger 
and  the  more  effulgent  the  emanation  (due  to  hydrogen  science 
tells  us  in  the  case  of  the  flames) ;  hence — ^the  irregular  red  flames 
around  the  Sun  or  the  inner  corona.  The  fact  that  those  are  not 
always  present  in  equal  quantity  shows  only  the  constant  fluctua- 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  163 

tions  of  the  magnetic  matter  and  its  energy,  upon  which  also 
depends  the  variety  and  number  of  spots.  During  p>enods  of 
magnetic  inertia  the  spots  disappear,  or  rather  remain  invisible. 
The  further  the  emanation  shoots  out  the  more  it  loses  in  intensity, 
until  gradually  subsiding  it  fades  out;  hence — the  "outer 
corona,"  its  rayed  shape  being  due  entirely  to  the  latter 
phenomenon  whose  effulgence  proceeds  from  the  magnetic  nature 
of  the  matter  and  the  electric  energy  and  not  at  all  from  intensely 
hot  particles  as  asserted  by  some  astronomers.  All  this  is  terribly 
unscientific,  nevertheless  a  fact,  to  which,  I  may  add  another  by 
reminding  you  that  the  sun  we  see  is  not  at  all  the  central  planet 
of  our  little  Universe,  but  only  its  veil  or  it's  reflection.  Science 
has  tremendous  odds  against  studying  that  planet  which  luckily 
for  us  we  have  not  :  foremost  of  all — the  constant  tremours  of  our 
atmosphere  which  prevent  them  from  judging  correctly  the  little 
they  do  see.  This  impediment  was  never  in  the  way  of  the 
ancient  Chaldee  and  Egyptian  astronomers;  nor  is  it  an  obstacle 
to  us,  for  we  have  means  of  arresting,  of  counteracting  such 
tremours — acquainted  as  we  are  with  all  the  Akasic  conditions. 
No  more  than  the  rain  secret,  would  this  secret — supposing  we  do 
divulge  it — ^be  of  any  practical  use  to  your  men  of  Science  unless 
they  become  Occultists  and  sacrifice  long  years  to  the  acquire- 
men  of  powers.  Only  fancy  a  Huxley  or  a  Tyndall  studying  Yog- 
vidya!  hence  the  many  mistakes  into  which  they  fall  and  the  con- 
flicting hypotheses  of  your  best  authorities.  For  instance  :  the 
sun  is  full  of  iron  vapours — a  fact  that  was  demonstrated  by  the 
spectroscope  showing  that  the  light  of  the  corona  consisted  largely 
of  a  line  in  the  green  part  of  the  spectrum,  very  nearly  coinciding 
with  an  iron  line.  Yet  Professor  Young  and  Lockyer  rejected 
that,  under  the  witty  pretext,  if  I  remember,  that,  if  the  Corona 
were  composed  of  minute  particles  like  a  dust  cloud  (and  it  is  this 
that  we  call  "magnetic  matter")  these  particles  would  (i)  fall 
upon  the  sun's  body,  (2)  Comets  were  known  to  pass  through  this 
vap>our  without  any  visible  effect  on  them  ;  (3)  Professor  Young's 
spectroscope  showed  that  the  Coronal  line  was  not  identical  with 
the  iron  one,  etc.  Why  they  should  call  those  objections 
*'  scientific  "  is  more  than  we  can  tell. 

(i)  The  reasons  why  the  particles — since  they  call  them  so — do 
not  fall  upon  the  sun's  body,  is  self-evident.  There  are  forces 
co-existent  with  gravitation  of  which  they  know  nothing ;  besides 
that  other  fact  that  there  is  no  gravitation  properly  speaking ;  only 
attraction  and  repulsion.  (2)  How  could  comets  be  affected  by 
the  said  passage  since  their  **  passing  through  "  is  simply  an 
optical  illusion  ;  they  could  not  pass  within  the  area  of  attraction 
without  being  immediately  annihilated  by  that  force,  of  which  no 
vril  can  give  an  adequate  idea,  since  there  can  be  nothing  on  earth 


i64  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

that  can  be  compared  with  it.  Passing  as  the  comets  do  through 
a  **  reflection  "  no  wonder  that  the  said  vapour  has  **  no  visible 
effect  on  these  light  bodies."  (3)  The  coronal  line  may  not  seem 
identical  through  the  best  "  grating  spectroscoi>e,"  nevertheless, 
the  corona  contains  iron  as  well  as  other  vapours.  To  tell  you 
of  what  it  does  consist  is  idle,  since  I  am  unable  to  translate  the 
words  we  use  for  it,  and  that  no  such  matter  exists  (not  in  our 
planetary  system,  at  any  rate) — ^but  in  the  sun.  The  fact  is,  that 
what  you  call  the  sun  is  simply  the  reflection  of  the  huge  "  store- 
house "  of  our  system  wherein  all  its  forces  are  generated  and 
preserved ;  the  sun  being  the  heart  and  brain  of  our  pigmy 
Universe,  we  might  compare  its  jaculae — those  millions  of  small, 
intensely  brilliant  bodies  of  which  the  sun's  surface  away  from 
the  spots  is  made  up — ^with  the  blood  corpuscles  of  that  luminary 
— though  some  of  them  as  correctly  conjectured  by  science  are  as 
large  as  Europe.  Those  blood  corpuscles  are  the  electric  and 
magnetic  matter  in  its  sixth  and  seventh  state.  What  are  those 
long  white  filaments  twisted  like  so  many  ropes,  of  which  the 
penumbra  of  the  sun  is  made  up?  What — the  central  part  that 
is  seen  like  a  huge  flame  ending  in  fiery  spires,  and  the  transparent 
clouds,  or  rather  vapours  formed  of  delicate  threads  of  silvery 
light,  that  hang  over  those  flames — what — but  magneto-electric 
aura — the  phlogiston  of  the  sun  ?  Science  may  go  on  speculating 
for  ever,  yet  so  long  as  she  does  not  renounce  two  or  three  of  her 
cardinal  errors  she  will  find  herself  groping  for  ever  in  the  dark. 
Some  of  her  greatest  misconceptions  are  found  in  her  limited 
notions  on  the  law  of  gravitation ;  her  denial  that  matter  may  be 
imponderable ;  her  newly  invented  term  "  force"  and  the  absurd 
and  tacitly  accepted  idea,  that  force  is  capable  of  existing  per  se, 
or  of  acting  any  more  than  life,  outside,  independent  of,  or  in  any 
other  wise  than  through  matter  :  in  other  words  that  force  is  any- 
thing but  matter  in  one  of  her  highest  states, — the  last  three  on 
the  ascending  scale  being  denied  because  only  science  knows 
nothing  of  them  ;  and  her  utter  ignorance  of  the  universal  Proteus, 
its  functions  and  importance  in  the  economy  of  nature — magnetism 
and  electricity.  Tell  Science  that  even  in  those  days  of  the  decline 
of  the  Roman  Empire,  when  the  tatooed  Britisher  used  to  offer  to 
the  Emperor  Claudius  his  Nazzur  of  "  electron  "  in  the  shape  of  a 
string  of  amber  beads — that  even  then,  there  were  yet  men  re- 
maining aloof  from  the  immoral  masses,  who  knew  more  of 
electricity  and  magnetism  than  they  the  men  of  science  do  now, 
and  science  will  laugh  at  you  as  bitterly  as  she  now  does  over  your 
kind  dedication  to  me.  Verily,  when  your  astronomers  speak  of 
sun  matter,  turn  those  lights  and  flames  as  **  clouds  of  vapour  " 
and  **  gases  unknown  to  science  "  (rather)  ! — chased  by  mighty 
whirlwinds    and    cyclones — ^whereas    we    know    it    to   be    simply 


H 


HILOSOPHIOAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  165 

magnetic  matter  in  its  usual  state  of  activity — ^we  feel  inclined  to 
smile  at  the  expressions.  Can  one  imag^ine  the  **  sun's  fires  fed 
with  purely  mineral  matter  " — with  meteorites  highly  charged  with 
hydrogen  giving  the  **  sun  a  far-reaching  atmosphere  of  ignited 
?  We  know  that  the  invisible  sun  is  composed  of  that  which 
as  neither  name,  nor  can  it  be  compared  to  anything  known  by 
your  science — on  earth;  and  that  its  "reflection"  contains  still 
less  of  anything  like  **  gases,"  mineral  matter,  or  fire,  though 
even  we  when  treating  of  it  in  your  civilized  tongue  are  compelled 
to  use  such  expressions  as  **  vapK>ur  "  and  "  magnetic  matter." 
To  close  the  subject,  the  coronal  changes  have  no  effect  on  the 
earth's  climate,  though  spots  have — and  Professor  N.  Lockyer  is 
mostly  wrong  in  his  deductions.  The  sun  is  neither  a  solid  nor  a 
liquid,  nor  yet  a  gaseous  glow ;  but  a  gigantic  ball  of  electro- 
magnetic Forces,  the  store-house  of  universal  life  and  motion, 
from  which  the  latter  pulsate  in  all  directions,  feeding  the  smallest 
atom  as  the  greatest  genius  with  the  same  material  unto  the  end 
of  the  Maha  Yug. 

(10)  I  believe  not.  The  stars  are  distant  from  us,  at  least 
500,000  times  as  far  as  the  sun  and  some  as  many  times  more. 
The  strong  accumulation  of  meteoric  matter  and  the  atmospheric 
tremours  are  always  in  their  way.  If  your  astronomers  could 
climb  on  the  height  of  that  meteoric  dust,  with  their  telescopes 
and  havanahs  they  might  trust  more  than  they  can  now  in  their 
photometers.  How  can  they?  Neither  the  real  degree  of  intensity 
of  that  light  can  be  known  on  earth — hence  no  trustworthy  basis 
for  calculating  magnitudes  and  distances  can  be  had, — nor  have 
they  hitherto  made  sure  in  a  single  instance  (except  in  the  matter 
of  one  star  in  Cassiopeia)  which  stars  shine  by  reflected  and  which 
by  their  own  light.  The  working  of  the  best  double  star  photo- 
meters is  deceptive.  Of  this  I  have  made  sure,  so  far  back  as  in 
the  spring  of  1878  while  watching  the  observations  made  through 
a  Pickering  Photo-meter.  The  discrepancy  in  the  observations 
up)on  a  star  (near  Gamma  Ceti)  amounted  at  times  to  half  a  magni- 
tude. No  planets  but  one  have  hitherto  been  discovered  outside 
of  the  solar  system,  with  all  their  photometers,  while  we  know 
with  the  sole  help  of  our  spiritual  naked  eye  a  number  of  them  ; 
every  completely  matured  sun-star  having  like  in  our  own  system 
several  companion  planets  in  fact.  The  famous  *'  polarization  of 
light  "  test  is  as  about  trustworthy  as  all  others.  Of  course,  the 
mere  fact  of  their  starting  from  a  false  premise  cannot  vitiate 
either  their  conclusions  or  astronomical  prophecies,  since  both  are 
mathematically  correct  in  their  mutual  relations,  and  that  it 
answers  the  given  object.  The  Chaldees  nor  yet  our  old  Rishis 
had  either  your  telescopes  or  photo-meters ;  and  yet  their  astrono- 
mical predictions  were  faultless,  the  mistakes  very  slight  ones  in 


1 66  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

truth — fathered  upon  them  by  their  modem  rivals — proceeding 
from  the  mistakes  of  the  latter. 

You  must  not  complain  of  my  too  long  answers  to  your  very 
short  questions,  since  I  answer  you  for  your  instruction  as  a 
student  of  occultism  my  "  lay  "  chela,  and  not  at  all  with  a  view 
of  answering  the  Journal  of  Science.  I  am  no  man  of  science 
with  regard  to,  or  in  connection  with  modem  learning.  My  know- 
ledge of  your  Western  Sciences  is  very  limited  in  fact ;  and  you 
will  please  bear  in  mind  that  all  my  answers  are  based  upon,  and 
derived  from,  our  Eastern  occult  doctrines  regardless  of  their 
agreement  or  disagreement  with  those  of  exact  science.  Hence, 
I  say  : — 

'*  The  sun's  surface  emits  per  square  mile,  as  much  light  (in 
proportion)  as  can  be  emitted  from  any  body."  But  what  can 
you  mean  in  this  case  by  **  light  "?  The  latter  is  not  an  inde- 
pendent principle ;  and,  I  rejoiced  at  the  introduction  with  a  view 
to  facilitate  means  of  observation — of  the  **  difraction  spectrum;*' 
since  by  abolishing  all  these  imaginary  independent  existences, 
such  as — heat,  actinism,  light,  etc.,  it  rendered  to  Occult  Science 
the  greatest  service,  by  vindicating  in  the  eyes  of  her  modern  sister 
our  very  ancient  theory  that  every  phenomenon  being  but  the  effect 
of  the  diversified  motion  of  what  we  call  Akasa  (not  your  ether) 
there  was,  in  fact,  but  one  element,  the  causative  Principle  of  all. 
But  since  your  question  is  asked  with  a  view  to  settling  a  disputed 
point  in  modern  science  I  will  try  to  answer  it  in  the  clearest  way 
I  can.  I  say  then,  no,  and  will  give  you  my  reasons  why.  They 
cannot  know  it,  for  the  simple  reason  that  heretofore  they  have  in 
reality  found  no  sure  means  of  measuring  the  velocity  of  light. 
The  experiments  made  by  Fizean  and  Corun  known  as  the  two  best 
investigators  of  light  in  the  world  of  science,  notwithstanding  the 
general  satisfaction  at  the  results  obtained,  are  not  a  trustworthy 
data  neither  in  respect  to  the  velocity  with  which  sunlight  travels 
nor  to  its  quantity.  The  methods  adopted  by  both  these  French- 
men are  yielding  correct  results  (at  any  rate  approximately  cor- 
rect, since  there  is  a  variation  of  22'/  miles  i>er  second  between  the 
result  of  the  observations  of  both  experimenters  albeit  made  with 
the  same  apparatus) — only  as  regards  the  velocity  of  light  between 
our  earth  and  the  upper  regions  of  its  atmosphere.  Their  toothed 
wheel,  revolving  at  a  known  velocity  records,  of  course,  the  strong 
ray  of  light  which  passes  through  one  of  the  inches  of  the  wheel, 
and  then  has  its  point  of  light  obscured  whenever  a  tooth  passes — 
accurately  enough.  The  instrument  is  very  ingenious  and  can 
hardly  fail  to  give  splendid  results  on  a  joumey  of  a  few  thousand 
metres  there  and  back ;  there  being  between  the  Paris  observatory 
and  its  fortifications  no  atmosphere,  no  meteoric  masses  to  impede 
the  ray's  progress;  and  that  ray  finding  quite  a  different  quality 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOEETICAL  TEACHINGS  167 

of  a  medium  to  travel  upon  than  the  ether  of  Space,  the  ether 
between  the  Sun  and  the  meteoric  continent  above  our  heads,  the 
velocity  of  light  will  of  course  show  some  185,000  and  odd  miles 
per  second,  and  your  physicists  shout  *'  Eureka  "  !  Nor  do  any 
of  the  other  devices  contrived  by  science  to  measure  that  velocity 
since  1887  answer  any  better.  All  they  can  say  is  that  their  cal- 
culations are  so  far  correct.  Could  they  measure  light  above  our 
atmosphere  they  would  soon  find  that  they  were  wrong-. 

(11)  It  is — so  far;  but  is  fast  changing.  Your  science  has  a 
theory,  I  believe,  that  if  the  earth  were  suddenly  placed  in 
extremely  cold  regions — for  instance  where  it  would  exchange 
places  with  Jupiter — all  our  seas  and  rivers  would  be  suddenly 
transformed  into  solid  mountains ;  the  air, — or  rather  a  portion  of 
the  aeriform  substances  which  compose  it — would  be  metamor- 
phosed from  their  state  of  invisible  fluid  owing  to  the  absence  of 
heat  into  liquids  (which  now  exist  on  Jupiter,  but  of  which  men 
have  no  idiea  on  earth).  Realize,  or  try  to,  imagine  the  reverse 
condition,  and  it  will  be  that  of  Jupiter  at  the  present  moment. 

The  whole  of  our  system  is  impyerceptibly  shifting  its  position 
in  space.  The  relative  distance  between  planets  remaining  ever 
the  same,  and  being  in  no  wise  affected  by  the  displacement  of 
the  whole  system ;  and  the  distance  between  the  latter  and  the 
stars  and  other  suns  being  so  incommensurable  as  to  produce  but 
little  if  any  perceptible  change  for  centuries  and  milleniums  to 
come ; — no  astronomer  will  perceive  it  telescopicaXly ,  until  Jupiter 
and  some  other  planets  whose  little  luminous  points  hide  now 
from  our  sight  millions  upon  millions  of  stars  (all  but  some  5000 
or  6000) — ^will  suddenly  let  us  have  a  peep  at  a  few  of  the  Raja<- 
suns  they  are  now  hiding.  There  is  such  a  king  star  right  behind 
Jupiter,  that  no  mortal  physical  Eye  has  ever  seen  during  this  our 
Round.  Could  it  be  so  perceived  it  would  appear,  through  the 
best  telescope  with  a  power  of  multiplying  its  diameter  ten 
thousand  times, — still  a  small  dimensionless  point,  thrown  into 
the  shadow  by  the  brightness  of  any  planet;  nevertheless — ^this 
world  is  thousands  of  times  larger  than  Jupiter.  The  violent  dis- 
turbance of  its  atmosphere  and  even  its  red  spot  that  so  intrigues 
science  lately,  are  due — (i)  To  that  shifting  and  (2)  to  the  influence 
of  that  Raja  Star.  In  its  present  position  in  space  imperceptibly 
small  though  it  be — the  metallic  substances  of  which  it  is  mainly 
composed  are  expanding,  and  gradually  transforming  themselves 
into  aeriform  fluids — the  state  of  our  own  earth  and  its  six  sister 
globes  before  the  first  Roundi — and  becoming  part  of  its 
atmosphere.  Draw  your  inferences  and  deductions  from  this,  my 
dear  **  lay  "  chela,  but  beware  lest  in  doing  so  you  sacrifice  your 
humble  instructor  and  the  occult  doctrine  itself  on  the  altar  of  your 
wrathful  Goddess — modern  science. 


i68  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

(12)  I  am  afraid  not  much,  since  our  Sun  is  but  a  reflection. 
The  only  great  truth  uttered  by  Siemens  is  that  inter-stellar  space 
is  filled  with  highly  attenuated  matter,  such  as  may  be  put  in  air 
vacuum  tubes,  and  which  stretches  from  planet  to  planet  and  from 
star  to  star.       But  this  truth  has  no  bearing  upon  his  main  facts. 
The  sun  gives  all  and  takes  back  nothing  from  its  system.       The 
sun  g-athers  nothing-  **  at  the  poles  " — which  are  always  free  even 
from  the  famous  **  red  flames  "  at  all  times,  not  only  during  the 
eclipses.       How  is  it  that  with  their  pK>werful  telescopes  they  have 
failed  to  perceive  any  such  '*  gathering-  "  since  their  glasses  show 
them  even  the  "  superlatively  fleecy  clouds  "  on  the  photo^sphere  ? 
Nothing  can  reach  the  sun  from  without  the  boundaries  of  its  own 
system  in  the  shape  of  such  gross  matter  as  '*  attenuated  gases." 
Every  bit  of  matter  in  all  its  seven  states  is  necessary  to  the  vitality 
of  the  various  and  numberless  systems — ^worlds  in  formation,  suns 
awakening  anew  to  life,  etc.,  and  they  have  none  to  spare  even  for 
their  best  neighbours  and  next  of  kin.       They  are  mothers,  not 
stepmothers,    and   would   not    take    away    one   crumb   from    the 
nutrition  of  their  children.       The  latest  theory  of  radiant  energy 
which  shows   that  there    is  no    such    thing    in   nature,    properly 
speaking,  as  chemical  light,  or  heat  ray  is  the  only  approximately 
correct  one.      For  indeed,  there  is  but  one  thing — radiant  energy 
which  is  inexhaustible  and  knows  neither  increase  nor  decrease 
and    will    go    on    with    its    self-generating    work    to    the    end 
of  the  Solar  manvantara.      The  absorption  of  Solar  Forces  by  the 
earth  is  tremendous;  yet  it  is,  or  may  be  demonstrated  that  the 
latter  receives  hardly  25  per  cent,  of  the  chemical  power  of  its 
rays,  for  these  are  despoiled  of  75  per  cent,  during  their  vertical 
passage  through  the  atmosphere  at  the  moment  they  reach  the 
outer  boundary  of  the  **  aerial  ocean."      And  even  those  rays  lose 
about  20  i>er  cent,  in  illuminating  and  caloric  power — we  are  told. 
What  with  such  a  waste  must  then  be  the  recuperative  powers  of 
our  Father-Mother  Sun?      Yes;  call  it  "  Radiant  Energy  "  if  you 
will  :  we  call  it  Life — all-pervading,  omnipresent  life,  ever  at  work 
in  its  great  laboratory,  the  Sun. 

(13)  None  can  ever  be  given  by  your  men  of  Science  whose 
"  bumptiousness  "  makes  them  declare  that  only  to  those  for 
whom  the  word  magnetism  is  a  mysterious  agent  the  supposition 
that  the  Sun  is  a  huge  magnet  can  account  for  the  production  by 
that  body  of  light,  heat  and  the  causes  of  magnetic  variation  as 
perceived  on  our  earth.  They  are  determined  to  ignore  and  thus 
reject  the  theory  suggested  to  them  by  Jenkins  of  the  R.A.S.  of 
the  existence  of  strong  magnetic  poles  above  the  surface  of  the 
earth.  But  the  theory,  is  a  correct  one  nevertheless,  and  one  of 
these  poles  revolves  around  the  north  pole  in  a  periodical  cycle  of 
several  hundred  years.     Halley  and   Handsteen — besides  Jenkins 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOBETICAL  TEACHINGS  169 

— were  the  only  scientific  men  that  ever  suspected  it.  Your 
question  is  again  answered  by  reminding-  you  of  another  exploded 
supposition.  Jenkins  did  his  best  some  three  years  ago  to  prove 
that  it  is  the  north  end  of  the  compass  needle  that  is  the  true 
north  pole,  and  not  the  reverse  as  the  current  scientific  theory 
maintains.  He  was  informed  that  the  locality  in  Boothia  where 
Sir  James  Ross  located  the  earth's  north  magnetic  pole,  was 
purely  imaginary  :  it  is  not  there.  If  he  (and  we)  are  wrong,  then 
the  magnetic  theory  that  like  poles  repel  and  unlike  poles  attract, 
must  also  be  declared  a  fallacy ;  since  if  the  north  end  of  the  dip- 
ping needle  is  a  south  pole  then  its  pointing  to  the  ground  in 
Boothia — as  you  call  it — must  be  due  to  attraction?  And  if  there 
is  anything  there  to  attract  it,  why  is  it  that  the  needle  in  London 
is  attracted  neither  to  the  ground  in  Boothia  nor  to  the  earth's 
centre?  As  very  correctly  argued,  if  the  north  pole  of  the  needle 
pointed  almost  perpendicularly  to  the  ground  in  Boothia  it  is 
simply  because  it  was  repelled  by  the  true  north  magnetic  pole 
when  Sir  J.  Ross  was  there  about  half  a  century  ago. 

No;  our  '*  Lordships"  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  inertia  of 
the  needle.  It  is  due  to  the  presence  of  certain  metals  in  fusion 
in  that  locality.  Increase  of  temperature  diminishes  magnetic 
attraction,  and  a  sufficiently  high  temperature  destroys  it  often 
altogether.  The  temperature  I  am  speaking  of  is,  in  the  present 
case  rather  an  aura,  an  emanation  than  anything  science  knows 
of.  Of  course,  this  explanation  will  never  hold  water  with  the 
present  knowledge  of  science.  But  we  can  wait  and  see.  Study 
magnetism  with  the  help  of  occult  doctrines,  and  then  that  which 
now  will  appear  incomprehensible,  absurd  in  the  light  of  physical 
science,  will  become  all  clear. 

(14)  They  must  be.  Not  all  of  the  Intra-Mercurial  planets,  nor 
yet  those  in  the  orbit  of  Neptune,  are  yet  discovered,  although 
they  are  strongly  suspected.  We  know  that  such  exist  and 
where  they  exist;  and  that  there  are  innumerable  planets  "  burnt 
out"  they  say, — in  obscuration  we  say; — planets  in  formation 
and  not  yet  luminous,  etc.  But  then  **  we  know  "  is  of  little  use 
to  science,  when  the  Spiritualists  will  not  admit  our  knowledge. 
Edison's  tasimeter  adjusted  to  its  utmost  degree  of  sensitiveness 
and  attached  to  a  large  telescope  may  be  of  great  use  when  per- 
fected. When  so  attached  the  **  tasimeter  "  will  afford  the  pos- 
sibility not  only  to  measure  the  heat  of  the  remotest  of  visible 
stars,  but  to  detect  by  their  invisible  radiations  stars  that  are 
unseen  and  otherwise  undetectable,  hence  planets  also.  The  dis- 
coverer, an  F.T.S.,  a  good  deal  protected  by  M.  thinks  that  if,  at 
any  point  in  a  blank  space  of  heavens — a  space  that  appears  blank 
even  through  a  telescope  of  the  highest  power — the  tasimeter 
indicates  an  accession  of  temperature  and  does  so  invariably ;  this 


170  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

will  be  a  regular  proof  that  the  instrument  is  in  range  with  the 
stellar-body  either  non-luminous  or  so  distant  as  to  be  beyond 
the  reach  of  telescopic  vision.  His  tasimeter,  he  says,  **  is 
affected  by  a  wider  range  of  etheric  undulations  than  the  Eye  can 
take  cognizance  of."  Science  will  hear  sounds  from  certain 
planets  before  she  sees  them.  This  is  a  prophecy.  Unfortunately 
I  am  not  a  Planet, — not  even  a  "  planetary."  Otherwise  I  would 
advise  you  to  get  a  tasimeter  from  him  and  thus  avoid  me  the 
trouble  of  writing  to  you.  I  would  manage  then  to  find  myself 
"  in  range  "  with  you. 

(15)  No,  good  friend;  I  am  not  as  indiscreet  as  all  that,  I  left 
you  simply  to  your  own  reminiscences.  Every  mortal  creature, 
even  the  less  favoured  by  Fortune,  has  such  moments  of  relative 
happiness  at  some  time  of  his  life.     Why  shouldn't  you? 

Yes,  it  was  an  x-quantity  I  referred  to. 

(16)  It  is  a  widely  spread  belief  among  all  the  Hindus  that  a 
person's  future  pre-natal  state  and  birth  are  moulded  by  the  last 
desire  he  may  have  at  the  time  of  death.  But  this  last  desire, 
they  say,  necessarily  hinges  on  to  the  shape  which  the  person 
may  have  given  to  his  desires,  passions,  etc.,  during  his  past 
life.  It  is  for  this  very  reason,  viz. — that  our  last  desire  may  not 
be  unfavourable  to  our  future  progress — that  we  have  to  watch 
our  actions  and  control  our  passions  and  desires  throughout  our 
whole  earthly  career. 

(17)  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  The  experience  of  dying  men — by 
drowning  and  other  accidents — brought  back  to  life,  has  cor- 
roborated our  doctrine  in  almost  every  case.  Such  thoughts  are 
involuntary  and  we  have  no  more  control  over  them  than  we 
would  have  over  the  eye's  retina  to  prevent  it  perceiving  that 
colour  which  affects  it  most.  At  the  last  moment,  the  whole  life 
is  reflected  in  our  memory  and  emerges  from  all  the  forgotten 
nooks  and  corners  picture  after  picture,  one  event  after  the  other. 
The  dying  brain  dislodges  memory  with  a  strong  supreme 
impulse,  and  memory  restores  faithfully  every  impression 
entrusted  to  it  during  the  period  of  the  brain's  activity.  That 
impression  and  thought  which  was  the  strongest  naturally  be- 
comes the  most  vivid  and  survives  so  to  say  all  the  rest  which 
now  vanish  and  disappear  for  ever,  to  reappear  but  in  Deva  Chan.^ 
No  man  dies  insane  or  unconscious — as  some  physiologists  assert. 
Even  a  madman,  or  one  in  a  fit  of  delirium  tremens  will  have  his 
instant  of  perfect  lucidity  at  the  moment  of  death,  though  unable 
to  say  so  to  those  present.  The  man  may  often  appear  dead. 
Yet  from  the  last  pulsation,  from  and  between  the  last  throbbing 
of  his  heart  and  the  moment  when  the  last  spark  of  animal  heat 

1  Good  gracious  !  had  I  forgotten  in  my  hurry  to  add  the  last  5  words, 
would  not  I  have  caught  it  as  a  charge  of  flat  contradiction  ! 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  171 

leaves  the  body — the  brain  thinks  and  the  Ego  lives  over  in  those 
few  brief  seconds  his  whole  life  over  again.  Speak  in  whispers, 
ye,  who  assist  at  a  death  bed  and  find  yourselves  in  the  solemn 
presence  of  Death.  Especially  have  you  to  keep  quiet  just  after 
Death  has  laid  her  clammy  hand  upon  the  body.  Speak  in 
whispers,  I  say,  lest  you  disturb  the  quiet  ripple  of  thought,  and 
hinder  the  busy  work  of  the  Past  casting  on  its  reflections  upon 
the  veil  of  the  future. 

(18)  Yes;  the  "full"  remembrance  of  our  lives  (collective 
lives)  will  return  back  at  the  end  of  all  the  seven  rounds,  at  the 
threshold  of  the  long,  long  Nirvana  that  awaits  us  after  we 
leave  Globe  Z.  At  the  end  of  isolated  Rounds,  we  remember  but 
the  sum  total  of  our  last  impressions,  those  we  had  selected,  or 
that  have  rather  forced  themselves  upon  us  and  followed  us  in 
Deva  Chan.  Those  are  all  "  probationary  "  lives  with  large  in- 
dulgences and  new  trials  afforded  us  with  every  new  life.  But  at 
the  close  of  the  minor  cycle,  after  the  completion  of  all  the  seven 
Rounds,  there  awaits  us  no  other  mercy  but  the  cup  of  good 
deeds,  of  merit,  outweighing  that  of  evil  deeds  and  demerit  in  the 
scales  of  Retributive  Justice.  Bad,  irretrievably  bad  must  be  that 
Ego  that  yields  no  mite  from  its  fifth  Principle,  and  has  to  be 
annihilated,  to  disappear  in  the  eighth  Sphere.  A  mite,  as  I  say, 
collected  from  the  Personal  Ego  suffices  to  save  him  from  the 
dreary  Fate.  Not  so  after  the  completion  of  the  great  cycle  : 
either  a  long  Nirvana  of  Bliss  (unconscious  though  it  be  in  the, 
and  according  to,  your  crude  conceptions) ;  after  which — life  as  a 
Dhyan  Chohan  for  a  whole  Manvantara,  or  else  "  Avitchi  Nir- 
vana "  and  Manvantara  of  misery  and  horror  as  a  .  .  .  you 
must  not  hear  the  word,  nor  I  pronounce  or  write  it.  But 
"  those  "  have  nought  to  do  with  the  mortals  who  pass  through 
the  seven  spheres.  The  collective  Karma  of  a  future  Planetary 
is  as  lovely  as  the  collective  Karma  as  a  .  .  .  is  terrible. 
Enough.     I  have  said  too  much  already. 

(19)  Verily  so.  Until  the  struggle  between  the  higher  and 
middle  duad  begins — {'with  the  exception  of  suicides  who  are  not 
dead  but  have  only  killed  their  physical  triad,  and  whose  Elemen- 
tal parasites,  therefore  are  not  naturally  separated  from  the  Ego 
as  in  real  death) — until  that  struggle  I  say,  has  not  begun  and 
ended,  no  shell  can  realize  its  position.  When  the  sixth  and 
seventh  principles  are  gone,  carrying  off  with  them  the  finer, 
spiritual  portions  of  that,  which  once  was  the  personal  conscious- 
ness of  the  fifth,  then  only  does  the  shell  gradually  develop  a 
kind  of  hazy  consciousness  of  its  own  from  what  remains  in  the 
shadow  of  personality.  No  contradiction  here,  my  dear  friend, — 
only  haziness  in  your  own  perceptions. 

(20)  All  that  which  pertains  to  the  materio-psychological  attri- 


172  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

butes  and  sensations  of  the  five  lower  skandhas ;  all  that  which 
will  be  thrown  off  as  a  refuse  by  the  newly  born  Ego  in  the  Deva 
Chan,  as  unworthy  of  and  not  sufficiently  related  to  the  purely 
spiritual  perceptions,  emotions  and  feelings  of  the  sixth, 
strengthened,  and  so-to-say,  cemented  by  a  portion  of  the  fifth, 
that  portion  which  is  necessary  in  the  deva  chan  for  the  retention 
of  a  divine  spiritualized  notion  of  the  '*  I  "  in  the  Monad  which 
would  otherwise,  have  no  consciousness  in  relation  to  objects  and 
subjects  at  all — all  this  **  becomes  extinct  for  ever  "  :  namely  at 
the  moment  of  physical  death,  to  return  once  more,  marshalling 
before  the  eye  of  the  new  Ego  at  the  threshold  of  Deva  Chan  and 
to  be  rejected  by  It.  It  will  return  for  the  third  time  jidly  at  the 
end  of  the  minor  cycle,  after  the  completion  of  the  seven  Rounds 
when  the  sum  total  of  collective  existences  is  weighed — "  merit  " 
— in  one  cup,  *'  demerit  "  in  the  other  cup  of  the  scales.  But  in 
that  individual,  in  the  Ego  "  good,  bad,  or  indifferent  in  the 
isolated  personality, — consciousness  leaves  us  suddenly  as  "  the 
flame  leaves  the  wick."  Blow  out  your  candle,  good  friend. 
The  flame  has  left  that  candle  *'  for  ever  "  ;  but  are  the  particles 
that  moved,  their  motion  producing  the  objective  flame  annihilated 
or  dispersed  for  all  that?  Never.  Relight  the  candle  and  the 
same  particles  drawn  by  mutual  affinity  will  return  to  the  wick. 
Place  a  long  row  of  candles  on  your  table.  Light  one  and  blow 
it  out ;  then  light  the  other  and  do  the  same ;  a  third  and  fourth, 
and  so  on.  The  same  matter,  the  same  gaseous  particles — repre- 
senting in  our  case  the  Karma  of  the  personality — will  be  called 
forth  by  the  conditions  given  them  by  your  match,  to  produce  a 
new  luminosity ;  but  can  we  say  that  candle  No.  i  has  not  had  its 
flame  extinct  for  ever?  Not  even  in  the  case  of  the  "  failures  of 
nature  "  of  the  immediate  reincarnation  of  children  and  congenital 
idiots,  etc.,  that  so  provoked  the  wrath  of  C.C.M.,  can  we  call 
them  the  identical  ex-personalities ;  though  the  whole  of  the  same 
life-principle  and  identically  the  same  Manas  (fifth  principle)  re- 
enters  a  new  body  and  may  be  truly  called  a  **  reincarnation  of 
the  personality  " — whereas,  in  the  rebirth  of  the  Egos  from  deva- 
Chans  and  avitchis  into  Karmic  life  it  is  only  the  spiritual  attributes 
of  the  Monad  and  its  Buddhi  that  are  reborn.  All  we  can  say  of 
the  reincarnated  "  failures  "  is,  that  they  are  the  reincarnated 
Manas,  the  fifth  principle  of  Mr.  Smith  or  Miss  Grey,  but  not 
certainly  that  these  are  the  reincarnations  of  Mr.  S.  and  Miss  G. 
Therefore,  the  explanation ;  clear  and  concise  (though  perhaps  less 
literary  than  you  might  make  it)  given  to  C.C.M.  in  the 
Theosophist  in  answer  to  his  spiteful  hit  in  Light,  is  not  only  cor- 
rect but  candid  also;  and  both  yourself  and  C.C.M.  were  unjust 
to  Upasika  and  even  to  myself  who  told  her  what  to  write ;  since 
even  you  mistook  my  wail  and  lament  at  the  confused  and  tor- 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  173 

tured  explanations  in  Isis  (for  its  incompleteness  no  one  but  we, 
her  inspirers  are  responsible)  and  my  complaint  of  having  had  to 
exercise  all  my  *'  ing-enuity  "  to  make  the  thing  plain,  for  an 
avowal  of  ingeniousness  in  the  sense  of  cunning  and  craft,  where- 
as ingenuousness — a  sincere  desire  (though  very  difficult  of 
realization)  to  mend  and  clear  up  the  misconception — was  meant 
by  me.  I  do  not  know  of  anything  since  the  very  beginning  of 
our  correspondence  that  displeased  the  Chohan  so  much  as  that. 
But  we  must  not  return  to  the  subject  again. 

But  what  is  then  *'  the  nature  of  the  remembrance  and  self- 
consciousness  of  the  shell?  "  you  ask.  As  I  said  in  your  note — 
no  better  than  a  reflected  or  borrowed  light.  **  Memory  "  is  one 
thing,  and  "  perceptive  faculties  "  quite  another.  A  madman 
may  remember  very  clearly  some  portion  of  his  past  life ;  yet  he 
is  unable  to  perceive  anything  in  its  true  light  for  the  higher  por- 
tion of  his  Manas  and  his  Buddhi  are  paralysed  in  him,  have  left 
him.  Could  an  animal — a  dog,  for  instance — speak,  he  would 
prove  you  that  his  memory  in  direct  relation  to  his  canine  per- 
sonality, is  as  fresh  as  yours ;  nevertheless,  his  memory  and 
instinct  cannot  be  called  **  perceptive  faculties."  A  dog  remem- 
bers that  his  master  thrashed  him  when  the  latter  gets  hold  of  his 
stick — at  all  other  times  he  has  no  remembrance  of  it.  Thus  with 
a  shell ;  once  in  the  aura  of  a  medium,  all  he  perceives  through 
the  borrowed  organs  of  the  medium  and  of  those  in  magnetic 
sympathy  with  the  latter,  he  will  perceive  very  clearly — but  not 
further  than  what  the  shell  can  find  in  the  perceptive  faculties 
and  memories  of  circle  and  medium — hence  often  the  rational  and 
at  times  highly  intelligent  answers ;  hence  also  a  complete  oblivion 
of  things  known  to  all  but  that  medium  and  circle.  The  shell  of 
a  highly  intelligent,  learned,  but  utterly  unspiritual  man  who  died 
a  natural  death,  will  last  longer  and  the  shadow  of  his  own 
memory  helping — that  shadow  which  is  the  refuse  of  the  sixth 
principle  left  in  the  fifth — he  may  deliver  discourses  through 
trance  speakers  and  repeat  parrot-like  that  which  he  knew  of 
and  thought  much  over  it,  during  his  life-time.  But  find  me  one 
single  instance  in  the  annals  of  Spiritualism  where  a  returning 
shell  of  a  Farraday  or  a  Brewster  (for  even  they  were  made  to  fall 
into  the  trap  of  mediumistic  attraction)  said  one  word  more  than 
it  knew  during  its  life-time.  Where  is  that  scientific  shell,  that 
ever  gave  evidence  of  that,  which  is  claimed  on  behalf  of  the 
"  disembodied  Spirit  " — namely,  that  a  free  soul,  the  Spirit  dis- 
enthralled from  its  body's  fetters  perceives  and  sees  that  which  is 
concealed  from  living  mortal  eyes?  Challenge  the  Spiritualists 
fearlessly,  I  say  !  Defy  the  best,  the  most  reliable  of  mediums — 
Stainton  Moses  for  one —  to  give  you  through  that  high  dis- 
embodied  shell,   that  he   mistakes   for  the   '*  Imperator  "   of  the 

13 


174  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

early  days  of  his  mediumship,  to  tell  you  what  you  will  have 
hidden  in  your  box,  if  S.M.  does  not  know  it;  or  to  repeat  to  you 
a  line  from  a  Sanskrit  manuscript  unknown  to  his  medium,  or 
anything  of  that  kind.  Prohpudor  !  Spirits  they  call  them? 
Spirits  with  personal  remembrances?  As  well  call  personal  re- 
membrances the  sentences  screeched  out  by  a  parrot.  Why  don't 
you  ask  C.C.M.  to  test  +  ?  Why  not  settle  his  and  your  mind 
at  rest  by  sugg-esting-  to  him  to  ask  a  friend  or  an  acquaintance 
unknown  to  S.M. — to  select  an  object  the  nature  of  which  will 
remain  in  its  turn  unknown  to  C.C.M.,  and  then  see  whether  + 
will  be  able  to  name  that  object — somethings  possible  even  to  a 
g-ood  clairvoyant.  Let  the  "  Spirit  "  of  Zollner — now  that  he  is 
in  the  "fourth  dimension  of  space,"  and  has  put  up  an  appear- 
ance already  with  several  mediums — tell  them  the  last  word  of 
his  discovery,  complete  his  astro-physical  philosophy.  No ; 
Zollner  when  lecturing-  throug-h  an  intelligent  medium,  surrounded 
with  persons  who  read  his  works,  are  interested  in  them — will 
repeat  on  various  tones  that  which  is  known  to  others  (not  even 
that  which  he  alone  knew  most  probably),  the  credulous, 
ignorant  public  confounding  the  post-hoc  with  the  propter-hoc  and 
firmly  convinced  of  the  Spirit* s  identity.  Indeed,  it  will  be  worth 
your  while  to  stimulate  investigation  in  this  direction.  Yes ; 
personal  consciousness  does  leave  everyone  at  death ;  and  when 
even  the  centre  of  memory  is  re-established  in  the  shell.  It  will 
remember  and  speak  out  its  recollections  but  through  the  brain  of 
some  living  human  being.     Hence — 

(21)  — a  more  or  less  complete,  still  dim  recollection  of  its  per- 
sonality, and  of  its  purely  physical  life.  As  in  the  case  of  com- 
plete insanity  the  final  severance  of  the  two  higher  duads  (7th  6th 
and  5th  4th)  at  the  moment  of  the  former  going  into  gestation, 
digs  an  impassable  gulf  between  the  two.  It  is  not  even  a  portion 
of  the  fifth  that  is  carried  away — least  of  all  2^  principles  as  Mr. 
Hume  crudely  puts  it  in  his  Fragments  that  go  into  Deva  Chan 
leaving  but  i^  principles  behind.  The  Manas  shorn  of  its  finest 
attributes,  becomes  like  a  flower  from  which  all  the  aroma  has 
suddenly  departed,  a  rose  crushed  and  having  been  made  to  yield 
all  its  oil  for  the  attar  manufacture  purposes,  what  is  left  behind 
is  but  the  smell  of  decaying  grass,  earth  and  rottenness. 

(a)  Question  the  second  is  sufficiently  answered,  I  believe. 
(Your  second  para.)  The  Spiritual  Ego  goes  on  evolving  per- 
sonalities, in  which  the  sense  of  identity  is  very  complete  while 
living.  After  their  separation  from  the  physical  Ego,  that  sense 
returns  very  dim,  and  belongs  wholly  to  the  recollection  of  the 
physical  man.  The  shell  may  be  a  perfect  Sinnett  when  wholly 
engrossed  in  a  game  of  cards  at  his  club,  and  when  either  losing 
or  winning  a  large  sum  of  money — or  a  Babu  Smut  Murky  Dass 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  175 

trying-  to  cheat  his  principal  out  of  a  sum  of  rupees.  In  both 
cases — ex-editor  and  Babu  will — as  shells,  remind  anyone  who 
will  have  the  privilege  of  enjoying  an  hour's  chat  with  the  illus- 
trious dis-embodied  angels,  more  of  the  inmates  of  a  lunatic 
asylum  made  to  play  parts  in  private  theatricals  as  means  of 
hygienic  recreation,  than  of  the  Caesars  and  Hamlets  they  would 
represent.  The  slightest  shock  will  throw  them  off  the  track  and 
send  them  off  raving. 

(b)  An  error.  A.  P.  Sinnett  is  not  "  an  absolutely  new  inven- 
tion." He  is  the  child  and  creation  of  his  antecedent  personal 
self;  the  Karmic  progeny  for  all  he  knows,  of  Nonius,  Asprena, 
Consul  of  the  Emperor  Domitian — (94  a.d.)  together  with  Arri- 
cinius  Clementus,  and  friend  of  the  Flamen  Dealis  of  that  day 
(the  high  priest  of  Jupiter  and  chief  of  the  Flamenes)  or  of  that 
Flamens  himself — which  would  account  for  A.  P.  Sinnett's  sud- 
denly developed  love  for  mysticism.  A.P.S. — the  friend  and 
brother  of  K.H,  will  go  to  Deva  Chan;  and  A.P.S.  the  Editor  and 
the  lawn-tennis  man,  the  Don  Juan  in  a  mild  way  in  the  palmy 
days  of  **  Saints,  Sinners  and  Sceneries,"  identifying  himself  by 
mentioning  a  usually  covered  mole  or  scar, — will,  perhaps,  be 
abusing  the  Babus  through  a  medium  to  some  old  friend  in  Cali- 
fornia or  London. 

(c)  It  will  find  "  enough  decent  material  "  and  to  spare.  A  few 
years  of  Theosophy  will  furnish  it. 

(d)  Perfectly  correctly  defined. 

(e)  As  much  as  there  is  of  the  personality — in  A.P.S. 's  reflec- 
tion in  the  looking  glass  of  the  real,  living,  A.P.S. 

(f)  The  Spiritual  Ego  will  not  think  of  the  A.P.S.  the  shell, 
any  more  than  it  will  think  of  the  last  suit  of  clothes  it  wore ; 
nor  will  it  be  conscious  that  the  individuality  is  gone,  since  that 
only  individuality  and  Spiritual  personality  it  will  then  behold  in 
itself  alone.  Nosce  te  ipsum  is  a  direct  command  of  the  oracle 
to  the  Spiritual  monad  in  Deva  Chan;  and  the  **  heresy  of  Indi- 
viduality "  is  a  doctrine  propounded  by  Tathag^tha  with  an  eye 
to  the  Shell.  The  latter  whose  bumptiousness  is  as  proverbial  as 
that  of  the  medium  when  reminded  that  it  is  A.P.S. — will  echo 
out  :  "Of  course,  no  doubt,  hand  me  over  some  preserved 
peaches  I  devoured  with  such  an  appetite  for  breakfast,  and  a 
glass  of  claret!" — and  who  after  this  who  knew  A.P.S.  at 
Allahabad,  will  dare  doubt  his  identity?;  and,  when  left  alone  for 
one  short  instant  by  some  disturbance  in  the  circle,  or  the  thought 
of  the  medium  in  wandering  for  a  moment  to  some  other  person — 
that  shell  will  begin  to  hesitate  in  its  thoughts  whether  it  is  A.P.S., 
S.  Wheeler,  or  Ratigan ;  and  end  by  assuring  itself  it  is  Julius 
Caesar,     (g) — and  by  finally  "  remaining  asleep." 

(h)  No ;  it  is  not  conscious  of  this  loss  of  cohesion.     Besides, 


176  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

such  a  feeling  in  a  shell  being  quite  useless  for  nature's  purposes, 
it  could  hardly  realize  something  that  could  be  never  even  dreamed 
by  a  medium  or  its  affinities.  It  is  dimly  conscious  of  its  own 
physical  death — after  a  prolonged  period  of  time  though — that's 
all.  The  few  exceptions  to  this  rule — cases  of  half  successful 
sorcerers,  of  very  wicked  persons  passionately  attached  to  Self — 
offer  a  real  danger  to  the  living.  These  very  material  shells, 
whose  last  dying  thought  was  Self, — Self, — Self — and  to  live,  to 
live  !  will  often  feel  it  instinctively.  So  do  some  suicides — 
though  not  all.  What  happens  then  is  terrible  for  it  becomes  a 
case  of  post-mortem  licanthropy.  The  shell  will  cling  so 
tenaciously  to  its  semblance  of  life  that  it  will  seek  refuge  in  a 
new  organism  in  any  beast — in  a  dog,  a  hyaena,  a  bird  when  no 
human  organism  is  close  at  hand — rather  than  submit  to  annihila- 
tion. 

(22)  A  question  I  have  no  right  to  answer. 

{22)  Mars  and  four  other  planets  of  which  astronomy  knows 
yet  nothing.  Neither  A,  B,  nor  Y,  Z,  are  known ;  nor  can  they 
be  seen  through  physical  means  however  perfected. 

(24)  Most  decidedly  not.  Not  even  a  Dhyan  Chohan  of  the 
lower  orders  could  approach  it  without  having  its  body  consumed, 
or  rather  annihilated.  Only  the  highest  **  Planetary  "  can  scan 
it.  (b)  Not  unless  we  call  it  the  vertex  of  an  angle.  But  it  is 
the  vertex  of  all  the  "  chains  "  collectively.  All  of  us  dwellers 
of  the  chains — we  will  have  to  evolute,  live  and  run  the  up  and 
down  scale  in  that  highest  and  last  of  the  septenaries  chains  (on 
the  scale  of  perfection)  before  the  Solar  Pralaya  snuffs  out  our 
little  system. 

(25  &  26)  .  .  .  **  in  which  case  it  " — the  **  it  "  relates  to 
the  sixth  and  seventh  principles,  not  to  the  fifth,  for  the  manas 
will  have  to  remain  a  shell  in  each  case ;  only  in  the  one  in  hand  it 
will  have  no  time  to  visit  mediums  :  for  it  begins  sinking  down  to 
the  eighth  sphere  almost  immediately.  *'  Then  and  there  "  in  the 
eternity  may  be  a  mighty  long  period.  It  means  only  that  the 
monad  having  no  Karmic  body  to  guide  its  rebirth  falls  into 
non-being  for  a  certain  period  and  then  reincarnates — certainly 
not  earlier  than  a  thousand  or  two  thousand  years.  No,  it  is  not 
an  **  exceptional  "  case.  Save  a  few  exceptional  cases  in  the 
case  of  the  initiated  such  as  our  Teshu-Lamas  and  the  Boddhi- 
satwas  and  a  few  others  no  monad  gets  ever  re-incarnated  before 
its  appointed  cycle. 

(27)  "  How  does  he  toss  into  confusion."  ...  If  instead 
of  doing  to-day  something  you  have  to  do  you  put  it  off  till  the 
next  day — does  not  even  this — invisibly  and  imperceptibly  at  first, 
yet  as  forcibly — throw  into  confusion  many  a  thing,  and  in  some 
cases  even  shuffle  the  destinies  of  millions  of  persons,  for  good. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  177 

for  evil,  or  simply  in  connection  with  a  change, — may  be  unim- 
portant in  itself — still  a  change.  And  do  you  mean  to  say  that 
such  an  unexpected,  horrid  murder  has  not  influenced  the 
destinies  of  millions? 

(28)  Here  we  are,  again.  Verily  ever  since  I  had  the  folly  of 
touching  upon  this  subject — i.e.  of  harnessing  the  cart  before  the 
horse — my  nights  are  bereft  of  their  hitherto  innocent  sleep  ! — 
for  Heaven's  sake  take  into  consideration  the  following  facts,  and 
put  them  together,  if  you  can.  (i)  The  individual  units  of  man- 
kind remain  100  times  longer  in  the  transitory  spheres  of  effects 
than  on  the  globes ;  (2)  The  few  men  of  the  fifth  Round  do  not 
beget  children  of  the  fifth  but  of  your  fourth  Round.  That  the 
'*  obscurations  "  are  not  Pralayas,  and  that  they  last  in  a  pro- 
portion of  I  to  10,  i.e.,  if  a  Ring  or  whatever  we  call  it,  the  period 
during  which  the  seven  Root  races  have  to  develop  and  reach 
their  last  appearance  upon  a  globe  during  that  Round — lasts  say 
10  millions  of  years,  (of  course  it  lasts  far  longer),  then  the 
"  obscuration  "  will  last  no  longer  than  i  million.  When  our 
globe  having  got  rid  of  its  last  fourth  Round  men  and  a  few, 
very  few  of  the  fifth  goes  to  sleep  during  the  period  of  its  rest 
the  fifth  Round  men  will  be  resting  in  their  Deva  Chan  and 
Spiritual  lokas — far  longer  at  any  rate  than  the  fourth  Round 
**  angels  "  in  theirs,  since  they  are  jar  more  perfect.  A  contra- 
diction, and  a  "lapsus  calatn  of  M." — says  Hume;  because  M. 
wrote  something  quite  correct  though  he  is  no  more  infallible  than 
I  am  and  might  have  expressed  himself,  more  than  once,  very 
carelessly. 

**  I  want  to  make  out  how  the  next  superior  Round  forms 
are  evolved."  My  friend,  try  to  understand  that  you  are  putting 
me  questions  pertaining  to  the  highest  initiations.  That  I  can  give 
you  a  general  view,  but  that  I  dare  not  nor  will  I  enter  upon 
details — though  I  would  if  I  could  satisfy  you.  Do  not  you  feel 
that  it  is  one  of  the  highest  mysteries  than  which  there  is  no 
higher  one? 

(a)  '*  Dead  "  but  to  resurrect  in  greater  glory.  Is  not  what  I 
say,  plain? 

(29)  Of  course  not,  since  it  is  not  destroyed,  but  remains 
crystallized,  so  to  say — statu  quo.  At  each  Round  there  are  less 
and  less  animals — the  latter  themselves  evoluting  into  higher 
forms.  During  the  first  Round  it  is  they  that  were  the  **  kings 
of  creation.'^  During  the  seventh  men  will  have  become  Gods 
and  animals — intelligent  beings.  Draw  your  inferences.  Begin- 
ning with  the  second  round  already  evolution  proceeds  on  quite 
a  different  plan.  Everything  is  evolved  and  has  but  to  proceed 
on  its  cyclic  journey  and  get  perfected.  It  is  only  the  first  Round 
that  man  becomes  from  a  human  being  on  Globe  B.  a  mineral,  a 


178  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

plant,  an  animal  on  Planet  C.  The  method  changes  entirely  from 
the  second  Round ;  but — I  have  learned  prudence  with  you ;  and 
will  say  nothing  before  the  time  for  saying  it  has  come.  And 
now,  you  had  a  volume;  when  will  you  digest  it?  Of  how  many 
contradictions  will  I  have  to  be  suspected  before  you  understand 
the  whole  correctly? 

Yours  nevertheless,  and  very  sincerely, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XXIVa^ 

THE   FAMOUS    *'  CONTRADICTIONS  " 
Received  Simla,   Autumn   1882. 

I  hope  you  will  give  me  great  credit  for  obedience  in  having 
laboriously  and  against  my  inclination  endeavoured  to  compile  a 
case  for  the  plaintiff  in  re  the  alleged  contradiction.  As  I  have 
said  elsewhere  these  appear  to  me  not  much  worth  worrying  about ; 
though  for  the  present  they  leave  me  cloudy  in  my  ideas  about 
Deva  Chan  and  the  victims  of  accident.  It  is  because  they  do  not 
fret  me  that  I  have  never  hitherto  acted  on  your  suggestion  that 
I  should  make  notes  of  them, 

Hume  has  been  inclined  to  trace  contradictions  in  some  letters 
referring  to  the  evolution  of  man,  but  in  conversation  with  him 
I  have  always  contended  that  these  are  not  contradictions  at  all, — 
merely  due  to  a  confusion  about  rounds  and  races — a  matter  of 
language.  Then  he  has  pretended  to  think  that  you  have  built 
up  the  philosophy  as  you  have  gone  on,  and  got  out  of  the  difficulty 
by  inventing  a  great  many  more  races  than  were  contemplated  at 
first,  which  hypothesis  I  have  always  ridiculed  as  absurd. 

I  have  not  re-copied  here  the  passages  about  victims  of  accident 
quoted  in  my  letter  of  the  12th  August  and  in  apparent  conflict 
with  the  correction  on  the  proof  of  my  Letter  on  Theosophy. 
You  have  already  said  apropos  to  these  quotations,  on  back  of 
mine  dated  August  12th  : — 

(3) 

"  I  can  easily  understand  we  are  accused  of  contradictions  and 
inconsistencies  aye  even  to  writing  one  thing  to-day  and  denying 
it  to-morrow.  Could  you  but  know  how  I  write  my  letters  and 
the  time  I  am  enabled  to  give  to  them  perchance  you  would  feel 
less  critical  if  not  exacting " 

1  The  numbers   in   brackets  refer   to  K.H.'s   replies,   for  which  see   Letter 
XXIVb.  page  185  et  seq.— Ed. 


^B 


ILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  179 

This  passag-e  it  was  which  led  me  to  think  it  might  be  that 
some  of  the  earlier  letters  had  been  perhaps  the  *'  victim  of 
accident  "  itself. 

But  to  g-o  on  with  the  case  for  the  plaintiff  : — 

(5) 
**  Most  of  those  whom  you  may  call,   if  you  like,   candidates 

for  Deva  Chan  die  and  are  reborn  in  the  Kama  loka  without  re- 
membrance. .  .  .  You  can  hardly  call  remembrance  a  dream 
of  yours,  some  particular  scene  or  scenes  within  whose  narrow 
limits  you  would  find  enclosed  a  few  persons  .  .  .  etc.,  call 
it  the  personal  remembrance  of  A.  P.  Sinnett  if  you  can. ' '  Notes 
on  back  of  mine  to  Old  Lady. 

(6) 

"  Certainly,  the  new  Ego,  once  that  it  is  reborn  in  the  Deva 
Chan  retains  for  a  certain  time  proportionate  to  its  Earth  life,  a 
*  complete  recollection  of  his  spiritual  life  on  Earth. '  Long  Deva- 
chan  letter. 

(7) 

All  those  who  have  not  slipped  down  into  the  mire  of  unredeem- 
able sin  and  bestiality — go  to  the  Deva  chan,  ibid. 

(8) 

It  (Devachan)  is  an  idealed  paradise  in  each  case  of  the  Ego's 
own  making  and  by  him  filled  with  the  scenery  crowded  with  the 
incidents  and  thronged  with  the  people  he  would  expect  to  find  in 
such  a  sphere  of  compensative  bliss.      Ibid. 

(9) 

Nor  can  we  call  it  a  full  but  only  a  partial  remembrance. 
X.  Love  and  hatred  are  the  only  immortal  feelings,  the  only  sur- 
vivors from  the  wreck  of  the  Ye — Damma  or  phenomenal  world. 
Imagine  yourself  in  Devachan  then,  with  those  you  may  have 
loved  with  such  immortal  love,  with  the  familiar  shadowy  scenes 
connected  with  them  for  a  background,  and  a  perfect  blank  for 
everything  else  relating  to  your  interior  social  political  and  literary 
life — Former  letter:  i.e.  Notes. 

m 

**  Since  the  conscious  perception  of  one's  personality  on  Earth 
is  but  an  evanescent  dream,  that  sense  will  be  equally  that  of  a 
dream  in  the  Devachan — only  a  hundred  fold  intensified.  Long 
Devachan  letter, 

(11) 

'*  .  .  .  .  a  connoisseur  who  passes  aeons  in  the  rapt  delight 
of  listening  to  divine  symphonies  by  imaginary  angelic  choirs  and 
orchestras  long  letter.  See  (g)  X  ante.  See  my  notes  lo  and  ii 
about  Wagner  etc. 


i8o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

""^  **"  -■  (12a) 

"In  no  case  then,  with  the  exception  of  suicides  and  shells  is 

there  any  possibility  for  any  other  to  be  attracted  to  a  seance  room. 

Notes.  ,.^  . 

(12b) 

**  On  marg-in  I  said  rarely  but  I  have  not  pronounced  the  word 

never."       Appended  to  mine  of  12th  Aug. 


LETTER  No.  XXIVb 

[A] 

At  this  stag"e  of  our  correspondence,  misunderstood  as  we 
generally  seem  to  be,  even  by  yourself,  my  faithful  friend,  it  may 
be  worth  our  while  and  useful  for  both,  that  you  should  be  pK>sted 
on  certain  facts — and  very  important  facts — connected  with  adept- 
ship.      Bear  in  mind  then,  the  following  points. 

(i)  An  adept — the  highest  as  the  lowest — is  one  only  during  the 
exercise  of  his  occult  powers. 

(2)  Whenever  these  powers  are  needed,  the  sovereign  will  un- 
locks the  door  to  the  inner  man — (the  adept)  who  can  merge  and 
act  freely  but  on  condition  that  Jiis  jailor — the  outer  man  will  be 
either  completely  or  partially  paralyzed — as  the  case  may  require ; 
viz  :  either  (a)  mentally  and  physically ;  (b)  mentally, — ^but  not 
physically ;  (c)  physically  but  not  entirely  mentally ;  (d)  neither, — 
but  with  an  akasic  film  interix>sed  between  the  outer  and  the  inner 
man. 

(3)  The  smallest  exercises  of  occult  powers  then,  as  you  will 
now  see,  requires  an  effort.  We  may  compare  it  to  the  inner 
muscular  efforts  of  an  athlete  preparing  to  use  his  physical 
strength.  As  no  athlete  is  likely  to  be  always  amusing  himself 
at  swelling  his  veins  in  anticipation  of  having  to  lift  a  weight,  so 
no  adept  can  be  supposed  to  keep  his  will  in  constant  tension  and 
the  inner  man  in  full  function,  when  there  is  no  immediate  necessity 
for  it.  When  the  inner  man  rests  the  adept  becomes  an  ordinary 
man,  limited  to  his  physical  senses  and  the  functions  of  his 
physical  brain.  Habit  sharpens  the  intuitions  of  the  latter,  yet  is 
unable  to  make  them  supersensuous.  The  inner  adept  is  ever 
ready,  ever  on  the  alert,  and  that  suffices  for  our  purposes.  At 
moments  of  rest  then,  his  faculties  are  at  rest  also.  When  I  sit 
at  my  meals,  or  when  I  am  dressing,  reading  or  otherwise  occupied 
I  am  not  thinking  even  of  those  near  me;  and,  Djual  Khool  can 
easily  break  his  nose  to  blood,  by  running  in  the  dark  against  a 
beam,  as  he  did  the  other  night — (just  because  instead  of  throwing 
a  '*  film  "  he  had  foolishly  paralyzed  all  his  outer   senses  while 


9" 


SOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  i8i 

talking-  to  and  with  a  distant  friend) — and  I  remained  placidly 
igTiorant  of  the  fact.  /  was  not  thinking  of  him — whence  my 
ignorance; 

From  the  aforesaid,   you  may  well  infer,   that  an  adept  is  an 

dinary  mortal,  at  all  the  moments  of  his  daily  life  but  those — 
hen  the  inner  man  is  active. 

Couple  this  with  the  unpleasant  fact  that  we  are  forbidden  to 
use  one  particle  of  our  powers  in  connexion  with  the  Eclectics  (for 
which  you  have  to  thank  your  President  and  him  alone — )and  that 
the  little  that  is  done,  is,  so  to  say,  smuggled  in — and  then 
syllogize  thusly  :■ — 

K.H.  when  writing  to  us  is  not  an  adept. 

A  non-adept — is  fallible. 

Therefore,  K.H.  may  very  easily  commit  mistakes; — 

Mistakes  of  punctuation — ^that  will  often  change  entirely  the 
whole  sense  of  a  sentence ;  idiomatic  mistakes — very  likely  to  occur 
especially  when  writing  as  hurriedly  as  I  do ;  mistakes  arising  from 
occasional  confusion  of  terms  that  /  had  to  learn  from,  you — since 

it   is    you   who   are   the    author   of   "  rounds "   "  rings " 

**  earthly  rings "  etc.  etc.        Now  with  all  this,  I  beg  leave 

to  say,  that  after  having  carefully  read  over  and  over  our  **  Famous 
Contradictions  "  myself;  after  giving  them  to  be  read  to  M.  ;  and 
then  to  a  high  adept  whose  powers  are  not  in  the  Chohan's 
chancery  sequestered  by  Him  to  prevent  him  from  squandering 
them  upon  the  unworthy  objects  of  his  personal  predilections; 
after  doing  all  this  I  was  told  by  the  latter  the  following  :  *'  It  is 
all  perfectly  correct.  Knowing  what  you  mean,  no  more  than 
any  other  person  acquainted  with  the  dt>ctrine,  can  I  find  in  these 
detached  fragments  anything  that  vi^ould  really  conflict  with  each 
other.  But,  since  many  sentences  are  incomplete,  and  the  subjects 
scattered  about  without  any  order,  I  do  not  wonder  that  your 
"  lay  chelas  "  should  find  fault  with  them.  Yes;  they  do  require 
a  more  explicit  and  clear  exposition." 

Such  is  the  decree  of  an  adept — and  I  abide  by  it ;  I  will  try  to 
complete  the  information  for  your  sake. 

In  one  and  only  case — marked  on  your  pages  and  my  answers 
(i2a)  and  (i2b),  the  last — is  the  '*  plaintiff  "  entitled  to  a  hearing, 
but  not  to  a  farthing  even — for  damages;  since,  as  in  law,  no  one 
— either  plaintiff  or  defendants — has  a  right  to  plead  ignorance  of 
that  law,  so  in  Occult  Sciences,  the  lay  chelas  ought  to  be  forced 
to  give  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  to  their  gurus  in  cases,  in  which, 
owing  to  their  great  ignorance  of  that  science  they  are  likely  to 
misinterpret  the  meaning — instead  of  accusing  them  pK>int  blank 
of  contradiction!  Now  I  beg  to  state,  that,  with  regard  to  the 
two  sentences — marked  respectively  i2A  and  i2b — there  is  a  plain 
contradiction  but  for  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  that  tenet ; 


1 82  .    THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

you  were  not,  and  therefore  I  plead  "  guilty  "  of  an  omission,  but 
**  not  guilty  "  of  a  contradiction.  And  even  as  regards  the  former, 
that  omission  is  so  small  that,  like  the  girl  accused  of  infanticide, 
who  when  brought  before  the  Judge  said  in  her  excuse  that  the 
baby  was  so  very  very  little  that  it  was  not  worth  his  while  calling 
it  a  "  baby  "at  all — I  could  plead  the  same  for  my  omission,  had  I 
not  before  my  eyes  your  terrible  definition  of  my  *'  exercising 
ingenuity."  Well,  read  the  explanation  given  in  my  **  Notes  and 
Answers  "  and  judge. 

By  the  bye,  my  good  Brother,  I  have  not  hitherto  suspected  in 
you  such  a  capacity  for  defending  and  excusing  the  inexcusable 
as  exhibited  by  you  in  my  defence,  of  the  now  famous  **  exercise 
of  ingenuity."  If  the  article  (reply  to  C.  C.  Massey)  has  been 
written  in  the  spirit  you  attribute  to  me  in  your  letter;  and  if  I, 
or  any  one  of  us  has  "  an  inclination  to  tolerate  subtler  and  more 
tricksy  ways  of  pursuing  an  end  "  than  generally  admitted  as 
honourable  by  the  truth-loving,  straightforward  European  (is  Mr. 
Hume  included  in  this  category?) — indeed  you  have  no  right  to 
excuse  such  a  mode  of  dealing,  even  in  me;  nor  to  view  it  **  merely 
in  the  nature  of  spots  in  the  sun  "  since  a  spot  is  a  spot  whether 
found  in  the  bright  luminary  or  upon  a  brass  candlestick.  But 
you  are  mistaken,  my  dear  friend.  There  was  no  subtle,  no 
tricky  mode  of  dealing  to  get  her  out  of  the  difficulty  created  by 
her  ambiguous  style  and  ignorance  of  English,  not  her  ignorance 
of  the  subject  which  is  not  the  same  thing  and  alters  entirely  the 
question.  Nor  was  I  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  M.  had  written 
to  you  previously  upon  the  subject  since  it  was  in  one  of  his  letters 
(the  last  but  one  before  I  took  the  business  off  his  hands)  in  which 
he  touched  upon  the  subject  of  **  races  "  for  the  first  and  spoke 
of  reincarnation.  If  M.  told  you  to  beware  trusting  I  sis  too 
implicitly,  it  was  because  he  was  teaching  you  truth  and  fact — 
and  that  at  the  time  the  passage  was  written  we  had  not  yet 
decided  upon  teaching  the  public  indiscriminately.  He  gave  you 
several  such  instances — ^if  you  will  but  re-read  his  letter — adding 
that  were  such  and  such  sentences  written  in  such  a  way  they 
would  explain  facts  now  merely  hinted  upon,  far  better. 

Of  course  "  to  C.C.M. "  the  passage  must  seem  wrong  and  con- 
tradictory for  it  is  "misleading"  as  M.  said.  Many  are  the 
subjects  treated  upon  in  I  sis  that  even  H.P.B.  was  not  allowed  to 
become  thoroughly  acquainted  with ;  yet  they  are  not  contradictory 
if  "misleading."  To  make  her  say — as  she  was  made  by  me 
to  say — that  the  passage  criticized  was  "  incomplete,  chaotic, 
vague,  clumsy  as  many  more  passages  in  that  work"  was  a 
sufficiently  "  frank  admission  "  I  should  think,  to  satisfy  the  most 
crotchetty  critic.  To  admit  "  that  the  passage  was  wrong,"  on 
the  other  hand,  would  have  amounted  to  a  useless  falsehood,  for 


HILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  183 

maintain  that  it  is  not  wrong-;  since  if  it  concealed  the  whole 
truth  it  does  not  distort  it  in  the  fragments  of  that  proof  as  g-iven 
in  Isis.  The  point  in  C.C.M.'s  complaining  criticism  was  not 
that  the  whole  truth  had  not  been  g-iven,  but  that  the  truth  and 
facts  of  1877  were  represented  as  errors  and  contradicted  in  1882  ; 
and  it  was  that  point — damag-ing  for  the  whole  Society,  its  **  lay  " 
and  inner  chelas,  and  for  our  doctrine — that  had  to  be  shown  under 
its  true  colours ;  namely  that  of  an  entire  misconception  due  to  the 
fact  that  the  *  *  septenary  ' '  doctrine  had  not  yet  been  divulged  to 
the  world  at  the  time  when  Isis  was  written.  And  thus  it  was 
shown.  I  am  sorry  you  do  not  find  her  answer  written  under 
my  direct  inspiration  "  very  satisfactory,"  for  it  proves  to  me  only 
that  up  to  this  you  have  not  yet  grasped  very  firmly  the  difference 
between  the  sixth  and  seventh  and  the  fifth  or  the  immortal  and 
the  astral  or  personal  "  Monads  =  Egos."  The  suspicion  is  cor- 
roberated  by  what  H — X  gives  in  his  criticism  of  my  explanation 
at  the  end  of  his  **  letter  "  in  the  September  number;  your  letter 
before  me  completing  the  evidence  thereupon.  No  doubt  the 
"  real  ego  inheres  in  the  higher  principles  which  are  reincarnated  " 
periodically  every  one,  two,  or  three  or  more  thousands  of  years. 
But  the  immortal  ego  the  individual  monad,"  is  not  the  personal 
monad  which  is  the  5th ;  and  the  passage  in  Isis  did  not  answer 
Eastern  reincarnationists — ^who  maintain  in  that  same  Isis — had 
you  but  read  the  whole  of  it — that  the  individuality  or  the  immortal 
"  ego "  has  to  re-appear  in  every  cycle — but  the  Western 
especially  the  French  reincarnationists,  who  teach  that  it  is  the 
personal  or  astral  monad,  the  ''  moi  fluidique  ''  the  manas  or  the 
intellectual  mind,  the  5th  principle  in  short,  that  is  reincarnated 
each  time.  Thus  if  you  read  once  more  C.C.M.'s  quoted  passage 
from  Isis  against  the  **  Reviewer  of  the  Perfect  Way  "  you  will 
perhaps  find  that  H.P.B.  and  myself  were  perfectly  right  in  main- 
taining that  in  the  above  passage  only  the  **  astral  monad  "  was 
meant.  And,  there  is  a  far  more  **  unsatisfactory  shock  "  to  my 
mind,  upon  finding  that  you  refuse  to  recognise  in  the  astral  monad 
the  personal  ego — ^whereas  all  of  us  call  it  most  undoubtedly  by 
that  name,  and  have  so  called  it  for  millenniums — than  there  could 
ever  be  in  yours  when  meeting  with  that  monad  under  its  proper 
name  in  E.  Levi's  **  Fragment  on  Death." 

The  '*  astral  monad  "  is  the  "  personal  ego,"  and  therefore,  it 
never  reincarnates,  as  the  French  Spirites  will  have  it,  but  under 
"  exceptional  circumstances;"  in  which  case,  reincarnating  it  does 
not  become  a  shell  but,  if  successful  in  its  second  reincarnation 
will  become  one,  and  then  gradually  lose  its  personality,  after 
being  so  to  say  emptied  of  its  best  and  highest  spiritual  attributes 
by  the  immortal  monad  or  the  **  spiritual  ego,"  during  the  last 
and  supreme   struggle.        The   "jar  of  feeling"  then  ought  to 


1 84  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

be  on  my  side,  as  indeed  it  only  "  seemed  to  be  another  illustra- 
tion of  the  difference  between  eastern  and  western  methods,"  but 
was  not — not  in  this  case  at  any  rate.  I  can  readily  understand, 
my  dear  friend,  that  in  the  chilly  condition  you  find  yourself 
(mentally)  in,  you  are  prepared  to  hash  even  in  the  rays  of  a 
funereal  pile  upon  which  a  living-  sutti  is  being  performed ;  but 
why — why  call  it  a — sun,  and  excuse  its  spot — the  corpse? 

The  letter  addressed  to  me,  which  your  delicacy  would  not  permit 
you  to  read,  was  for  your  perusal  and  sent  for  that  purpose.  I 
wanted  you  to  read  it. 

Your  suggestion  concerning  G.K. 's  next  trial  in  art — is  clever, 
but  not  sufficiently,  as  to  conceal  the  white  threads  of  the 
Jesuitically  black  insinuation.  G.K.  was  however  caught  at  it  : 
**  Nous  verrons,  nous  verrons  "  !  says  the  French  song. 

G.  Khool  says — presenting  his  most  humble  salaams — that  you 
have  "  incorrectly  described  the  course  of  events  as  regards  the 
first  portrait."  What  he  says  is  this  :  (i)  **  the  day  she  came  " 
she  did  not  ask  you  *  *  to  gfive  her  a  piece  of  ' '  etc.  (page  300)  but 
after  you  had  begun  speaking  to  her  of  my  portrait,  which  she 
doubted  much  whether  you  could  have.  It  is  but  after  half-an- 
hour's  talk  over  it  in  the  front  drawing  room — ^you  two  forming 
the  two  upper  points  of  the  triangle,  near  your  office  door,  and 
your  lady  the  lower  one  (he  was  there  he  says)  that  she  told  you 
she  would  try.  It  was  then  that  she  asked  you  for  "  a  piece  of 
thick  white  paj>er  "and  that  you  gave  her  a  piece  of  a  thin  letter 
paper,  which  had  been  touched  by  some  very  anti-magnetic  person. 
However  he  did,  he  says,  the  best  he  could.  On  the  day  follow- 
ing, as  Mrs.  S.  had  looked  at  it  just  27  minutes  before  he  did  it,  he 
accomplished  his  task.  It  was  not  "  an  hour  or  two  before  "  as 
you  say  for  he  had  told  *'  the  O.L."  to  let  her  see  it  just  before 
breakfast.  After  breakfast,  she  asked  you  for  a  piece  of  Bristol 
board,  and  you  gave  her  two  pieces,  both  marked  and  not  one  as 
you  say.  The  first  time  she  brought  it  out  it  was  a  failure,  he 
says,  "with  the  eyebrow  like  a  leech  "  and  it  was  finished  only 
during  the  evening  while  you  were  at  the  Club,  at  a  dinner  at 
which  the  old  Upasika  would  not  go.  And  it  was  he  again  G.K. 
'*  great  artist  "  who  had  to  make  away  with  the  "  leech,"  and  to 
correct  cap  and  features,  and  who  made  it  "  look  like  Master  " 
(he  will  insist  giving  me  that  name  thoug'h  he  is  no  longer  my 
chela  in  reality),  since  M.  after  spoiling  it  would  not  go  to  the 
trouble  of  correcting  it  but  preferred  going  to  sleep  instead  and 
finally,  he  tells  me,  my  making  fun  of  the  portrait  notwithstanding, 
the  likeness  is  good  and  would  have  been  better  had  M.  sahib  not 
interfered  with  it,  and  he,  G.K.  allowed  to  have  his  own  *'  artistic  " 
ways.  Such  is  his  tale,  and  he  therefore,  is  not  satisfied  with  your 
description  and  so  he  said  to  Upasika  who  told  you  something 
quite  different.      Now  to  my  notes. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  185 

(I)' 

Nor  do  they  fret  me — particularly.  But  as  they  furnish  our 
mutual  friend  with  a  good  handle  against  us,  which  he  is  likely  to 
use  any  day  in  that  nasty  way,  so  pre-eminently  his  own,  I  rather 
explain  them  once  more — with  your  kind  permission. 

.  .  (2) 

Of  course  of  course  ;  it  is  our  usual  way  of  getting  out  of  difficul- 
ties. Having  been  **  invented  "  ourselves,  we  repay  the  inventors 
by  inventing  imaginary  races.  There  are  a  good  many  things 
more  we  are  charged  with  having  invented.  Well,  well,  well ; 
there's  one  thing,  at  any  rate,  we  can  never  be  accused  of  invent- 
ing ;  and  that  is  Mr.  Hume  himself.  To  invent  his  like  transcends 
the  highest  Siddhi  powers  we  know  of. 

And  now  good  friend,  before  we  proceed  any  further,  pray  read 
the  appended  No.  [A].  It  is  time  you  should  know  us  as  we  are. 
Only,  to  prove  to  you,  if  not  to  him,  that  we  have  not  invented 
those  races,  I  will  give  out  for  your  benefit  that  which  has  never 
been  given  out  before.  I  will  explain  to  you  a  whole  chapter 
out  of  Rhys  Davids  work  on  Buddhism,  or  rather  on  Lamaism, 
which,  in  his  natural  ignorance  he  regards  as  a  corruption  of 
Buddhism  !  Since  those  gentlemen — the  Orientalists — presume  to 
give  to  the  world  their  soi  disant  translations  and  commentaries 
on  our  sacred  books,  let  the  theosophists  show  the  great  ignorance 
of  those  "  world  "  pundits  by  giving  the  public  the  right  doctrines 
and  explanations  of  what  they  would  regard  as  an  absurd  fancy 
theory. 

And  because  I  admit  the  superficial  or  apparent  inconsistency — 
and  even  that  in  the  case  only  of  one  who  is  so  thoroughly 
unacquainted  with  our  dbctrines  as  you  are — is  that  a  reason  why 
they  should  be  regarded  as  conflicting  in  reality?  Suppose  I  had 
written  in  a  previous  letter — *'  the  moon  has  no  atmosphere  "  and 
then  went  on  talking  of  other  things ;  and  told  you  in  another 
letter  **  for  the  moon  has  an  atmosphere  of  its  own  "  etc.  :  no 
doubt  but  that  I  should  stand  under  the  charge  of  saying  to-day 
black  and  to-morrow  white.  But  where  could  a  cabalist  see  in 
the  two  sentences  a  contradiction?  I  can  assure  you  that  he 
would  not.  For  a  cabalist  who  knows  that  the  moon  has  no 
atmosphere  answering  in  any  respect  to  that  of  our  earth,  but  one 
of  its  own,  entirely  different  from  that  your  men  of  science  would 
call  one,  knows  also  that  like  the  Westerns  we  Easterns,  and 
Occultists  especially,  have  our  own  ways  of  expressing  thought 
as  plain  to  us  in  their  implied  meaning  as  yours  are  to  yourselves. 
Take  for  instance  into  your  head  to  teach  your  Bearer  astronomy. 

1  K.H.'s  replies  to  the  "Famous  Contradictions";  the  numbers  corre- 
spond to  those  which  appear  in  the  text  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  Queries.  See  ante 
Letter  XXIVa.— Ed, 


i86  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

Tell  him  to-day — *  *  see,  how  gloriously  the  sun  is  setting- — see  how 
rapidly  it  moves ,  how  it  rises  and  sets  etc.  ;"  and  to-morrow  try 
to  impress  him  with  the  fact  that  the  sun  is  comparatively  motion- 
less and  that  it  is  but  our  earth  that  loses  and  then  again  catches 
sight  of  the  sun  in  her  diurnal  motion  ;  and  ten  to  one,  if  your  pupil 
has  any  brains  in  his  head,  he  will  accuse  you  of  flatly  contradicting 
yourself.  Would  this  be  a  proof  of  your  ignorance  of  the  helio- 
centric system?  And  would  you  be  accused  with  anything  like 
justice  of  "  writing  one  thing  to-day  and  denying  it  to-morrow  " 
though  your  sense  of  fairness  would  prompt  you  to  admit  that  you 
**  can  easily  understand  "  the  accusation. 

Writing  my  letters,  then,  as  I  do,  a  few  lines  now  and  a  few 
words  two  hours  later ;  having  to  catch  up  the  thread  of  the  same 
subject,  perhaps  with  a  dozen  or  more  interruptions  between  the  be- 
ginning and  the  end,  I  cannot  promise  you  anything  like  western 
accuracy  for  ergo — the  only  '*  victim  of  accident  "  in  this  case  is 
myself.  The  innocent  cross  examination  to  which  I  am  subjected  by 
you — and  that  I  do  not  object  to — and  the  positively  pre-determined 
purpose  of  catching  me  tripping  whenever  he  can,  on  Mr.  Hume's 
part, — a  proceeding  regarded  as  highly  legal  and  honest  in 
w-estern  law,  but  to  which  we,  Asiatic  savages,  object  most 
emphatically,  has  given  my  colleagues  and  Brothers  a  high 
opinion  of  my  proclivities  to  martyrdom.  In  their  sight  I  have 
become  a  kind  of  Indo-Tibetan  Simon  Stylites.  Caught  by  the 
lower  hook  of  the  Simla  interrogation  mark  and  impaled  on  it,  I 
see  myself  doomed  to  equilibrize  upon  the  apex  of  the  semicircle 
for  fear  of  slipping  down  at  every  uncertain  motion  either  back- 
ward or  forward — such  is  the  present  condition  of  your  humble 
friend.  Ever  since  I  undertook  the  extraordinary  task  of  teaching 
two  grown  up  pupils  with  brains  in  which  the  methods  of  western 
science  had  crystallized  for  years ;  one  of  whom  is  willing  enough 
to  make  room  for  the  new  iconoclastic  teaching,  but  who,  never- 
theless, requires  a  careful  handling  while  the  other  will  receive 
nothing  but  on  condition  of  grouping  the  subjects  as  he  wants 
them  to  group,  not  in  their  natural  order — I  have  been  regarded 
by  all  our  Chohans  as  a  lunatic.  I  am  seriously  asked  whether 
my  early  association  with  Western  '*  Pelings  "  had  not  made  of 
me  a  half-Peling  and  turned  me  also  into  a  *' dzing  dzing " 
visionary.  All  this  had  been  expected.  I  do  not  complain  ;  I 
narrate  a  fact,  and  humbly  demand  credit  for  the  same,  only  hoping 
it  will  not  be  mistaken  again  for  a  subtle  and  tricky  way  of  getting 
out  of  a  new  difficulty. 

Every  just  disembodied  four-fold  entity — ^whether  it  dies  a 
natural  or  violent  death,  from  suicide  or  accident,  mentally  sane 
or  insane,  young  or  old,  good,  bad,  or  indifferent — loses  at  the 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  187 

instant  of  death  all  recollections,  it  is  mentally — annihilated;  it 
sleeps  it's  akasic  sleep  in  the  Kama-loka.  This  state  lasts  from  a 
few  hours,  (rarely  less)  days,  weeks,  months  : — sometimes  to 
several  years.  All  this  according  to  the  entity,  to  its  mental 
status  at  the  moment  of  death,  to  the  character  of  its  death,  etc. 
That  remembrance  will  return  slowly  and  gradually  towards  the 
end  of  the  gestation  (to  the  entity  or  ego),  still  more  slowly  but 
far  more  imperfectly  and  incompletely  to  the  shell,  and  fully  to  the 
Ego  at  the  moment  of  its  entrance  into  Deva  chan.  And  now 
the  latter  being  a  state  determined  and  brought  by  its  past  life, 
the  Ego  does  not  fall  headlong  but  sinks  into  it  gradually  and  by 
easy  stages.  With  the  first  dawn  of  that  state  appears  that  life 
(or  rather  is  once  more  lived  over  by  the  Ego)  from  its  first  day  of 
consciousness  to  its  last.  From  the  most  important  down  to  the 
most  trifling  event,  all  are  marshalled  before  the  spiritual  eye  of 
the  Ego ;  only,  unlike  the  events  of  real  life,  those  of  them  remain 
only  that  are  chosen  by  the  new  liver  (pardon  the  word)  clinging 
to  certain  scenes  and  actors,  these  remain  permanently — while  all 
the  others  fade  away  to  disappear  for  ever,  or  to  return  to  their 
creator — the  shell.  Now  try  to  understand  this  highly  important 
because  so  highly  just  and  retributive  law,  in  its  effects.  Out  of 
the  resurrected  Past  nothing  remains  but  what  the  Ego  has  felt 
spiritually — that  was  evolved  by  and  through,  and  lived  over  by 
his  spiritual  faculties — they  be  love  or  hatred.  All  that  I  am  now 
trying  to  describe  is  in  truth — indescribable.  As  no  two  men, 
not  even  two  photographs  of  the  same  person,  nor  yet  two  leaves 
resemble  line  for  line  each  other,  so  no  two  states  in  Deva-Chan 
are  like.  Unless  he  be  an  adept,  who  can  realize  such  a  state  in 
his  periodical  Deva-chan — how  can  one  be  expected  to  form  a 
correct  picture  of  the  same? 

Therefore,  there  is  no  contradiction  in  saying,  that  the  ego  once 
reborn  in  the  Devachan,  "  retains  for  a  certain  time  proportionate 
to  its  earth  life  a  complete  recollection  of  his  (Spiritual)  life  on 
earth."  Here  again  the  omission  of  the  word  **  Spiritual  "  alone, 
produced  a  misunderstanding  ! 

(7) 

All  those  that  do  not  slip  down  into  the  8th  sphere — go  to  the 
Devachan.     Where's  the  point  made  or  the  contradiction? 

(8) 

The  Devachan  State,  I  repeat,  can  be  as  little  described  or  ex- 
plained, by  giving  a  however  minute  and  graphic  description  of 
the  state  of  an  ego  taken  at  random,  as  all  the  human  lives  col- 
lectively could  be  described  by  the  **  Life  of  Napoleon  "  or  that  of 
any  other  man.  There  are  millions  of  various  states  of  happiness 
and  misery,  emotional  states  having  their  source  in  the  physical 


i88  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

as  well  as  the  spiritual  faculties  and  senses,  and  only  the  latter 
surviving.  An  honest  labourer  will  feel  differently  from  an  honest 
millionaire.  Miss  Nightingale's  state  will  differ  considerably  from 
that  of  a  young  bride  who  dies  before  the  consummation  of  what 
she  regards  as  happiness.  The  two  former  love  their  families  ;  the 
philanthropist — humanity,  the  girl  centres  the  whole  world  in  her 
future  husband  ;  the  melomanic  knows  of  no  higher  state  of  bliss 
and  happiness  than  music — the  most  divine  and  spiritual  of  arts. 
The  devachan  merges  from  its  highest  into  its  lowest  degree — ^by 
insensible  gradations ;  while  from  the  last  step  of  devachan,  the 
Ego  will  often  find  itself  in  Avicha's  faintest  state,  which,  towards 
the  end  of  the  "  spiritual  selection  "  of  events  may  become  a  bona 
fide  **  Avicha."  Remember,  every  feeling  is  relative.  There  is 
neither  good  nor  evil,  happiness  nor  misery  per  se.  The  tran- 
scendent, evanescent  bliss  of  an  adulterer,  who  by  his  act  murders 
the  happiness  of  a  husband,  is  no  less  spiritiuilly  born  for  its 
criminal  nature.  If  a  remorse  of  conscience  (the  latter  proceeding 
always  from  the  Sixth  Principle)  has  only  once  been  felt  during 
the  period  of  bliss  and  really  spiritual  love,  born  in  the  sixth  and 
fifth,  however  polluted  by  the  desires  of  the  fourth  or  Kamarupa 
— then  this  remorse  must  survive  and  will  accompany  incessantly 
the  scenes  of  pure  love.  I  need  not  enter  into  details,  since  a 
physiological  expert,  as  I  take  you  to  be,  need  hardly  have  his 
imagination  and  intuition  prompted  by  a  psychological  observer 
of  my  sort.  Search  in  the  depths  of  your  conscience  and  memory, 
and  try  to  see  what  are  the  scenes  that  are  likely  to  take  their 
firm  hold  upon  you ;  when  once  more  in  their  presence  you  find 
yourself  living  them  over  again  ;  and  that,  ensnared,  you  will  have 
forgotten  all  the  rest — this  letter  among  other  things,  since  in  the 
course  of  events  it  will  come  far  later  on  in  the  panorama  of  your 
resurrected  life.  I  have  no  right  to  look  into  your  past  life. 
Whenever  I  may  have  caught  glimpses  of  it,  I  have  invariably 
turned  my  eyes  away,  for  I  have  to  deal  with  the  present  A.  P. 
Sinnett — (also  and  by  far  more  "  a  new  invention  "  than  the  ex 
A.P.S.) — not  with  the  ancient  man. 

Yes ;  love  and  hatred  are  the  only  immortal  feelings ;  but  the 
gradations  of  tones  along  the  seven  by  seven  scales  of  the  whole 
key-board  of  life,  are  numberless  and,  since  it  is  those  two  feelings 
— (or,  to  be  correct,  shall  I  risk  being  misunderstood  again  and 
say  those  two  poles  of  man's  *'  Soul  "  which  is  a  unity?) — that 
mould  the  future  state  of  man,  whether  for  devachan  or  Avicha 
then  the  variety  of  such  states  must  also  be  inexhaustible.  And 
this  brings  us  to  your  complaint  or  charge,  number — 

(9) 

— for,  having  eliminated  from  your  past  life  the  Ratigans  and 
Reeds    who    with    you    have    never     transcended     beyond     the 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  189 

boundaries  of  the  lower  portion  of  your  fifth  principle  with  its 
vehicle — the  kama — what  is  it  but  the  "  partial  remembrance  " 
of  a  life?  The  lines  marked  with  your  reddest  pencil  are  also 
disposed  of.  For  how  can  you  dispute  the  fact  that  music  and 
harmony  are  for  a  Wagner,  a  Paganini,  the  King  of  Bavaria  and 
so  many  other  true  artists  and  melomans,  an  object  of  the  pro- 
foundest  spiritual  love  and  veneration?  With  your  permission  I 
will  not  change  one  word  in  clause  9. 

Pity  you  have  not  followed  your  quotation  with  personal  com- 
mentaries. I  fail  to  comprehend  in  what  respect  you  object  to 
the  word  "  dream  "  ?  Of  course  both  bliss  and  misery  are  but 
a  dream ;  and  as  they  are  purely  spiritual  they  are  intensified. 

(II) 

Answered. 

(I2a  &  I2b) 

Had  I  but  written, — when  answering  Mr.  Hume's  objections, 
who  after  statistical  calculations  made  with  the  evident  intention 
of  crushing  our  teaching,  maintained  that  after  all  spiritualists 
were  right  and  the  majority  of  seance  room  spooks  were 
"  Spirits  " — *'  in  no  case  then,  with  the  exception  of  suicides  and 
shells  " — and  those  accidents  who  die  full  of  some  engrossing 
earthly  passion — is  there  any  possibility  for  any  other,  etc.,  etc." 
I  would  have  been  perfectly  right  and  pukka  as  a  '*  professor  *'? 
To  think  that,  eager  as  you  are  to  accept  doctrines  that  contra- 
dict in  some  most  important  point  of  physical  science  from  first 
to  last — you  should  have  consented  at  Mr.  Hume's  suggestion  to 
split  hairs  over  a  simple  omission  !  My  dear  friend,  permit  me  to 
remark  that  simple  common  sense  ought  to  have  whispered  you 
that  one  who  says  one  day  :  "in  no  case  then  etc.  :"  and  a  few 
days  later  denies  having  ever  pronounced  the  word  never — is  not 
only  no  adept  but  must  be  either  suffering  from  softening  of  the 
brain  or  some  other  **  accident."  **  On  margin  I  said  rarely  but 
I  have  not  pronounced  the  word  never  " — refers  to  the  margin  of 
the  proof  of  your  letter  N.  H  ;  that  margin — or  rather  to  avoid  a 
fresh  accusation — the  piece  of  paper  I  had  written  upon  some 
remarks  referring  to  the  subject  and  glued  to  the  margin  of  your 
proof — you  have  cut  out  as  well  as  the  four  lines  of  poetry.  Why 
you  have  done  so  is  known  better  to  yourself.  But  the  word 
never  refers  to  that  margin. 

To  one  sin  though  I  do,  plead  "  guilty."  That  sin,  was  a  very 
acute  feeling  of  irritation  against  Mr.  Hume  upon  receiving  his 
triumphant  statistical  letter ;  the  answer  to  which  you  found  in- 
corporated in  yours  when  I  wrote  for  you  the  material  for  your 
answer  to  Mr.  Khandallawala's  letter  that  you  had  sent  back  to 
H.P.B.     Had  I  not  been  irritated  I  would  not  have  become  guilty 


190  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

of  the  omission,  perhaps.  This  now  is  my  Karma.  I  had  no 
business  to  feel  irritated,  or  lose  my  temper;  but  that  letter  of 
his  was  I  believe  the  seventh  or  the  eighth  of  that  kind  received 
by  me  during  that  fortnight.  And  I  must  say,  that  our  friend 
has  the  most  knavish  way  of  using  his  intellect  in  raising  the 
most  unexpected  sophisms  to  tickle  people's  nerves  with,  that  I 
have  ever  known  !  Under  the  pretext  of  strict  logical  reasoning, 
he  will  perform  feigned  thrusts  at  his  antagonist — whenever  un- 
able to  find  a  vulnerable  spot,  and  then,  caught  and  exposed,  he 
will  answer  in  the  most  innocent  way,  "  Why,  it  is  for  your  own 
good,  and  you  ought  to  feel  grateful !  If  I  were  an  adept  I  would 
always  know  what  my  correspondent  really  meant,  etc.  etc." 
Being  an  "  adept  "  in  some  small  matters  I  do  know  what  he 
really  means ;  and  that  his  meaning  amounts  to  this  :  were  we  to 
divulge  to  him  the  whole  of  our  philosophy  leaving  no  inconsist- 
ency unexplained,  it  would  still  do  no  good,  whatever.  For,  as 
in  the  observation  embodied  in  the  Hudibrasian  couplet  : 

"  These  fleas  have  other  fleas  to  bite   'em, 
And  these — their  fleas  ad  infinitum." 

— so  with  his  objections  and  arguments.  Explain  him  one,  and 
he  will  find  a  flaw  in  the  explanation ;  satisfy  him  by  showing 
him  that  the  latter  was  after  all  correct,  and  he  will  fly  at  the 
opponent  for  speaking  too  slow  or  too  rapidly.  It  is  an  impos- 
sible task — and  I  give  it  up.  Let  it  last  until  the  whole  breaks 
under  its  own  weight.  He  says  "  I  can  kiss  no  Pope's  toe  "  for- 
getting that  no  one  has  ever  asked  him  to  do  so ;  "I  can  love, 
but  I  cannot  worship  "  he  tells  me.  Gush — he  can  love  no  one, 
and  nobody  but  A.  O.  Hume,  and  never  has.  And  that  really, 
one  could  almost  exclaim  '*  O  Hume, — gush  is  thy  name! — "  is 
shown  in  the  following  that  I  transcribe  from  one  of  his  letters  : 
**  If  for  no  other  reason,  I  should  love  M.  for  his  entire  devotion 
to  you — and  you  I  have  always  loved  (  !).  Even  when  most  cross 
with  you — as  one  always  is  most  sensitive  with  those  one  cares 
most  about — even  when  I  was  fully  persuaded  you  were  a  myth, 
for  even  then  my  heart  yearned  to  you  as  it  often  does  to  an 
avowedly  fictitious  character/'  A  sentimental  Becky  Sharp 
writing  to  an  imaginary  lover,  could  hardly  express  her  feelings 
better  ! 

I  will  see  to  your  scientific  questions  next  week.  I  am  not  at 
home  at  present,  but  quite  near  to  Darjeeling,  in  the  Lamasery, 
the  object  of  poor  H.P.B.'s  longing.  I  thought  of  leaving  by 
the  end  of  September  but  find  it  rather  difficult  on  account  of 
Nobin's  boy.  Most  probably,  also  I  will  have  to  interview  in  my 
own  skin  the  Old  Lady  if  M.  brings  her  here.  And— he  has  to 
bring  her — or  lose  her  for  ever — at  least,   as  far  as  the  physical 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  191 

triad  is  concerned.  And  now  good-bye,  I  ask  you  again — do  not 
frighten  my  little  man ;  he  may  prove  useful  to  you  some  day — 
only  do  not  forget — he  is  but  an  appearance. 

Yours, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XXV 

Devachan    Notes    Latest    Additions.     Received    Feb.    2nd,    1883. 
ANSWERS  TO  QUERIES 

(i)  Why  should  it  be  supposed  that  deva-Chan  is  a  monotonous 
condition  only  because  someone  innocent  of  earthly  sensation  is 
indefinitely  perpetuated — stretched  so  to  say,  throughout  aeons? 
It  is  not,  it  cannot  be  so.  This  would  be  contrary  to  all 
analogy  and  antagonistic  to  the  law  of  effects  under  which  results 
are  proportioned  to  antecedent  energies.  To  make  it  clear  you 
must  keep  in  mind  that  there  are  two  fields  of  causal  manifesta- 
tion, to  wit  :  the  objective  and  subjective.  So  the  grosser 
energies,  those  which  operate  in  the  heavier  or  denser  conditions 
of  matter  manifest  objectively  in  physical  life,  their  outcome  being 
the  new  personality  of  each  birth  included  within  the  grand  cycle 
of  the  evoluting  individuality.  The  moral  and  spiritual  activities 
find  their  sphere  of  effects  in  ''devachan."  For  example:  the 
vices,  physical  attractions,  etc. — say,  of  a  philosopher  may  result 
in  the  birth  of  a  new  philosopher,  a  king,  a  merchant,  a  rich 
Epicurean,  or  any  other  personality  whose  make-up  was  inevitable 
from  the  preponderating  proclivities  of  the  being  in  the  next  pre- 
ceding birth.     Bacon,  for  inst  :  whom  a  poet  called — 

"  The  greatest,    wisest,   meanest   of  mankind  " — 

might  reappear  in  his  next  incarnation  as  a  greedy  money-getter, 
with  extraordinary  intellectual  capacities.  But  the  moral  and 
spiritual  qualities  of  the  previous  Bacon  would  also  have  to  find 
a  field  in  which  their  energies  could  expand  themselves.  Deva- 
chan is  such  a  field.  Hence — all  the  greatest  plans  of  moral 
reform  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  research  into  abstract  prin- 
ciples of  nature,  all  the  divine  aspirations,  would,  in  devachan 
come  to  fruition,  and  the  abstract  entity  previously  known  as  the 
great  Chancellor  would  occupy  itself  in  this  inner  world  of  its 
own  preparation,  living,  if  not  quite  what  one  would  call  a 
conscious  existence,  at  least  a  dream  of  such  realistic  vividness 
that  nothing  of  the  life-realities  could  ever  match  it.  And  this 
"  dream  "  lasts — until  Karma  is  satisfied  in  that  direction,  the 
ripple  of  force  reaches  the  edge  of  its  cyclic  basin,  and  the  being 


192  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

moves  into  the  next  area  of  causes.  This,  it  may  find  in  the 
same  world  as  before,  or  another,  according  to  his  or  her  stage 
of  progression  through  the  necessary  rings  and  rounds  of  human 
development. 

Then — how  can  you  think  that  *'  but  one  moment  of  earthly 
sensation  only  is  selected  for  perpetuation"?  Very  true,  that 
"  moment  "  lasts  from  the  first  to  last;  but  then  it  lasts  but  as 
the  key-note  of  the  whole  harmony,  a  definite  tone  of  appreciable 
pitch,  around  which  cluster  and  develop  in  progressive  variations 
of  melody  and  as  endless  variations  on  a  theme,  all  the  aspirations, 
desires,  hopes,  dreams,  which,  in  connection  with  that  particular 
**  moment  "  had  ever  crossed  the  dreamer's  brain  during  his  life- 
time, without  having  ever  found  their  realization  on  earth,  and 
which  he  now  finds  fully  realized  in  all  their  vividness  in  devachan, 
without  ever  suspecting  that  all  that  blissful  reality  is  but  the 
progeny  begotten  by  his  own  fancy,  the  effects  of  the  mental 
causes  produced  by  himself.  That  particular  one  moment  which 
will  be  most  intense  and  uppermost  in  the  thoughts  of  his  dying 
brain  at  the  time  of  dissolution  will  of  course  regulate  all  the 
other  "moments";  still  the  latter — minor  and  less  vivid  though 
they  be — will  be  there  also,  having  their  appointed  plan  in  this 
phantasmagoric  marshalling  of  past  dreams,  and  must  give 
variety  to  the  whole.  No  man  on  earth,  but  has  some  decided 
predilection  if  not  a  domineering  passion  ;  no  person,  however 
humble  and  poor — and  often  because  of  all  that — but  indulges  in 
dreams  and  desires  unsatisfied  though  these  be.  Is  this  monotony? 
Would  you  call  such  variations  ad  infinitum  on  the  one  theme, 
and  that  theme  modelling  itself,  on,  and  taking  colour  and  its 
definite  shape  from,  that  group  of  desires  which  was  the  most 
intense  during  life  **  a  blank  destitution  of  all  knowledge  in  the 
devachanic  mind  " — seemingly  "  in  a  measure  ignoble  "  ?  Then 
verily,  either  you  have  failed,  as  you  say,  to  take  in  my  meaning, 
or  it  is  I  who  am  to  blame.  I  must  have  sorely  failed  to  convey 
the  right  meaning,  and  have  to  confess  my  inability  to  describe 
the — indescribable.  The  latter  is  a  difficult  task,  good  friend. 
Unless  the  intuitive  perceptions  of  a  trained  chela  come  to  the 
rescue,  and  no  amount  of  description — however  graphic — will 
help.  Indeed, — no  adequate  words  to  express  the  difference 
between  a  state  of  mind  on  earth,  and  one  outside  its  sphere  of 
action  ;  no  English  terms  in  existence,  equivalent  to  ours ;  nothing 
but  unavoidable  (as  due  to  early  Western  education)  preconcep- 
tions, hence — lines  of  thought  in  a  wrong  direction  in  the 
learner's  mind  to  help  us  in  this  innoculation  of  entirely  new 
thoughts  !  You  are  right.  Not  only  *'  ordinary  people  " — your 
readers — ^but  even  such  idealists  and  highly  intellectual  units  as 
Mr.  C.  C.   M.  will  fail,   I  am  afraid,  to  seize  the  true  idea,  will 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  193 

never  fathom  it  to  its  very  depths.  Perhaps  you  may  some  day, 
realize  better  than  you  do  now,  one  of  the  chief  reasons  for  our 
unwillingness  to  impart  otir  Knowledge  to  European  Candidates. 
Only  read  Mr.  Roden  Noel's  disquisitions  and  diatribes  in  Light! 
Indeed,  indeed,  you  ought  to  have  answered  them  as  advised  by 
me  through  H.P.B.  Your  silence  is  a  brief  triumph  to  the  pious 
gentleman,  and  seems  like  a  desertion  of  poor  Mr.  Massey. 

"  A  man  in  the  way  to  learn  something  of  the  mysteries  of 
nature  seems  in  a  higher  state  of  existence  to  begin  with  on 
earth  than  that  which  nature  apparently  provides  for  him  as  a 
reward  for  his  best  deeds." 

Perhaps  "apparently" — not  so  in  reality.  When  the  modus 
operandus  of  nature  is  correctly  understood.  Then  that  other 
misconception  :  '*  The  more  merit,  the  longer  period  of  devachan. 
But  then  in  Devachan — all  sense  of  the  lapse  of  time  is  lost  :  a 
minute  is  as  a  thousand  years — d  quoi  bon  then,  etc." 

This  remark  and  such  ways  of  looking  at  things  might  as  well 
apply  to  the  whole  of  Eternity,  to  Nirvana,  Pralaya,  and  what  not. 
Say,  at  once  the  whole  system  of  being,  of  existence  separate  and 
collective,  of  nature  objective  and  subjective  are  but  idiotic,  aim- 
less facts,  a  gigantic  fraud  of  that  nature,  which  meeting  with 
little  sympathy  with  Western  philosophy,  has,  moreover,  the  cruel 
disapprobation  of  the  best  "lay-chela."  A  quoi  bon,  in  such  a 
case,  this  preaching  of  our  doctrines,  always  uphill  work  and 
swimming  in  adversutn  flumen?  Why  should  the  West  be  so 
anxious  then  to  learn  anything  from  the  East,  since  it  is  evidently 
unable  to  digest  that  which  can  never  meet  the  requirements  of 
the  special  tastes  of  its  Esthetics.  Sorry  outlook  for  us,  since 
even  you  fail  to  take  in  the  whole  magnitude  of  our  philosophy, 
or  to  even  embrace  at  one  scope  a  small  corner — the  devachan — of 
those  sublime  and  infinite  horizons  of  "  after  life."  I  do  not  want 
to  discourage  you.  I  would  only  draw  your  attention  to  the 
formidable  difficulties  encountered  by  us  in  every  attempt  we  make 
to  explain  our  metaphysics  to  Western  minds,  even  among  the 
most  intelligent.  Alas,  my  friend,  you  seem  as  unable  to 
assimilate  our  mode  of  thinking,  as  to  digest  our  food,  or  to 
enjoy  our  melodies  ! 

No ;  there  are  no  clocks,  no  timepieces  in  devachan,  my 
esteemed  chela,  though  the  whole  Cosmos  is  a  gigantic  chro- 
nometer in  one  sense.  Nor  do  we,  mortals, — ici  bas  menie — take 
much,  if  any,  cognizance  of  time  during  periods  of  happiness  and 
bliss,  and  find  them  ever  too  short ;  a  fact  that  does  not  in  the 
least  prevent  us  from  enjoying  that  happiness  all  the  same — ^when 
it  does  come.  Have  you  ever  given  a  thought  to  this  little  possi- 
bility that,  perhaps,  it  is  because  their  cup  of  bliss  is  full  to  its 
brim,  that  the  "  devachanee  "  loses  "  all  sense  of  the  lapse  of 


194  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

time  ";  and  that  it  is  something  that  those  who  land  in  Avitchi 
do  not,  though  as  much  as  the  devachanee,  the  Avitchee  has  no 
cognizance  of  time — i.e.,  of  our  earthly  calculations  of  periods  of 
time?  I  may  also  remind  you  in  this  connection  that  time  is 
something  created  entirely  hy  ourselves;  that  which  one  short 
second  of  intense  agony  may  appear,  even  on  earth,  as  an 
Eternity  to  one  man,  to  another,  more  fortunate,  hours,  days,  and 
sometimes  whole  years  may  seem  to  flit  like  one  brief  moment ; 
and  that  finally,  of  all  the  sentient  and  conscious  beings  on  earth, 
man  is  the  only  animal  that  takes  any  cognizance  of  time,  although 
it  makes  him  neither  happier  nor  wiser.  How  then,  can  I  ex- 
plain to  you  that  which  cannot  feel,  since  you  seem  unable  to 
comprehend  it?  Finite  similes  are  unfit  to  express  the  abstract 
and  the  infinite ;  nor  can  the  objective  ever  mirror  the  subjective. 
To  realize  the  bliss  in  devachan,  or  the  woes  in  Avitchi,  you  have 
to  assimilate  them — as  we  do.  Western  critical  idealism  (as 
shown  in  Mr.  Roden  Noel's  attacks)  has  still  to  learn  the  differ- 
ence that  exists  between  the  real  being  of  super-sensible  objects, 
and  the  shadowy  subjectivity  of  the  ideas  it  has  reduced  them  to. 
Time  is  not  a  predicate  conception  and  can,  therefore,  neither  be 
proved  nor  analysed,  according  to  the  methods  of  superficial 
philosophy.  And,  unless  we  learn  to  counteract  the  negative  re- 
sults of  that  method  of  drawing  our  conclusions  agreeably  to  the 
teachings  of  the  so-called  "  system  of  pure  reason,"  and  to  dis- 
tinguish between  the  matter  and  the  form  of  our  knowledge  of 
sensible  objects,  we  can  never  arrive  at  correct,  definite  con- 
clusions. The  case  in  hand,  as  defended  by  me  against  your  (very 
natural)  misconception  is  a  good  proof  of  the  shallowness  and 
even  fallacy  of  that  **  system  of  pure  (materialistic)  reason." 
Space  and  time  may  be — as  Kant  has  it — not  the  product  but  the 
regulators  of  the  sensations,  but  only  so  far,  as  our  sensations  on 
earth  are  concerned,  not  those  in  devachan.  There  we  do  not  find 
the  a  priori  ideas  of  those  "  space  and  time  "  controlling  the  per- 
ceptions of  the  denizen  of  devachan  in  respect  to  the  objects  of  his 
sense ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  discover  that  it  is  the  devachanee 
himself  who  absolutely  creates  both  and  annihilates  them  at  the 
same  time.  Thus  the  "  after  states  "  so  called  can  never  be 
correctly  judged  by  practical  reason  since  the  latter  can  have 
active  being  only  in  the  sphere  of  final  causes  or  ends,  and  can 
hardly  be  regarded  with  Kant  (with  whom  it  means  on  one  page 
reason  and  on  the  next — will)  as  the  highest  spiritual  power  in 
man,  having  for  its  sphere  that  Will.  The  above  is  not  dragged 
in — as  you  may  think — for  the  sake  of  an  (too  far  stretched,  per- 
haps) argument,  but  with  an  eye  to  a  future  discussion  "  at 
home,"  as  you  express  it,  with  students  and  admirers  of  Kant 
and  Plato  that  you  will  have  to  encounter. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  195 

In  a  plainer  language,  I  will  now  tell  you  the  following,  and, 
it  will  be  no  fault  of  mine  if  you  still  fail  to  comprehend  its  full 
meaning.     As  physical  existence  has  its  cumulative  intensity  from 
infancy  to   prime,    and   its   diminishing   energy   thenceforward   to 
dotage  and  death,  so  the  dream  life  of  devachan  is  lived  corre- 
spondentially.     Hence  you  are  right  in  saying  that  the  "  Soul  " 
can    never   awake   to   its    mistake   and    find    itself   **  cheated    by 
nature  " — the  more  so,  as  strictly  speaking,  the  whole  of  human 
life  and  its  boasted  realities,  are  no  better  than  such  *'  cheating.'* 
But  you  are  wrong  in  pandering  to  the  prejudices  and  preconcep- 
tions of  the  Western  readers  (no  Asiatic  will  ever  agree  with  you 
upon  this  point)  when  you  add  that  there  is  a  sense  of  unreality 
about  the  whole  affair  which  is  painful  to  the  mind,"  since  you 
are  the  first  one  to  feel  that,  it  is  no  doubt  due  much  more  to  *'  an 
imperfect  grasp  of  the  nature  of  the  existence  "  in  devachan — 
than  to  any  defect  in  our  system.     Hence — my  orders  to  a  chela 
to  reproduce  in   an  Appendix  to  your  article   extracts   from  this 
letter  and  explanations  calculated  to  disabuse  the  reader,  and  to 
obliterate,  as  far  as  possible,  the  painful  impression  this  confes- 
sion of  yours  is  sure  to  produce  on  him.     The  whole  paragraph  is 
dangerous.     I  do  not  feel  myself  justified  in  crossing  it  out,  since 
it  is  evidently  the  expression  of  your  real  feelings,  kindly,  though 
— pardon  me  for  saying  so — a  little  clumsily  white-washed  with 
an   apparent  defence   of  this   (to   your   mind)   weak   point  of   the 
system.     But  it  is  not  so,   believe  me.     Nature  cheats  no  more 
the  devachanee  than  she  does  the  living,  physical  man.      Nature 
provides  for  him  far  more  real  bliss  and   happiness   there,   than 
she  does  here,   where  all  the  conditions  of  evil  and   chance  are 
against    him,    and    his    inherent    helplessness — that    of    a    straw 
violently  blown  hither  and   thither  by  every   remorseless  wind — 
has  made  unalloyed  happiness  on  this  earth  an  utter  impossibility 
for  the  human  being,   whatever  his  chances  and  conditions  may 
be.     Rather   call  this    life   an    ugly,    horrid    nightmare,    and    you 
will  be  right.     To  call  the  devachan  existence  a  "  dream  "  in  any 
other  sense  but  that  of  a  conventional  term,  well  suited  to  our 
languages  all  full  of  misnomers — is  to  renounce  for  ever  the  know- 
ledge of  the  esoteric  doctrine — the  sole  custodian  of  truth.     Let 
me  then  try  once  more  to  explain  to  you  a  few  of  the  many  states 
in  Devachan  and — Avitchi. 

As  in  actual  earth-life,  so  there  is  for  the  Ego  in  devachan — 
the  first  flutter  of  psychic  life,  the  attainment  of  prime,  the  gradual 
exhaustion  of  force  passing  into  semi-unconsciousness,  gradual 
oblivion  and  lethargy,  total  oblivion  and — not  death  but  birth  : 
birth  into  another  personality,  and  the  resumption  of  action  which 
daily  begets  new  congeries  of  causes,  that  must  be  worked  out  in 
another  term  of  Devachan,  and  still  another  physical  rebirth  as  a 


196  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

new  personality.  What  the  lives  in  devachan  and  upon  Earth 
shall  be  respectively  in  each  instance  is  determined  by  Karma. 
And  this  weary  round  of  birth  upon  birth  must  be  ever  and  ever 
run  through,  until  the  being  reaches  the  end  of  the  seventh  round, 
or — attains  in  the  interim  the  wisdom  of  an  Arhat,  then  that  of  a 
Buddha  and  thus  gets  relieved  for  a  round  or  two, — having  learnt 
how  to  burst  through  the  vicious  circles — and  to  pass  periodically 
into  the  Paranirvana. 

But  suppose  it  is  not  a  question  of  a  Bacon,  a  Goethe,  a  Shelley, 
a  Howard,  but  of  some  hum-drum  person,  some  colourless,  flack- 
less  personality,  who  never  impinged  upon  the  world  enough  to 
make  himself  felt  :  what  then  ?  Simply  that  his  devachanic  state 
is  as  colourless  and  feeble  as  was  his  personality.  How  could  it 
be  otherwise  since  cause  and  effect  are  equal.  But  suppose  a 
case  of  a  monster  of  wickedness,  sensuality,  ambition,  avarice, 
pride,  deceit,  etc.  :  but  who  nevertheless  has  a  germ  or  germs  of 
something  better,  flashes  of  a  more  divine  nature — where  is  he  to 
go?  The  said  spark  smouldering  under  a  heap  of  dirt  will 
counteract,  nevertheless,  the  attraction  of  the  eighth  sphere, 
whither  fall  but  absolute  nonentities ;  **  failures  of  nature  "  to  be 
remodelled  entirely,  whose  divine  monad  separated  itself  from  the 
fifth  principles  during  their  life-time,  (whether  in  the  next  pre- 
ceding or  several  preceding  births,  since  such  cases  are  also  on 
our  records),  and  who  have  lived  as  soulless  human  beings.^ 
These  persons  whose  sixth  principle  has  left  them  (while  the 
seventh  having  lost  its  vahan  (or  vehicle)  can  exist  independently 
no  longer)  their  fifth  or  animal  Soul  of  course  goes  down  **  the 
bottomless  pit."  This  will  perhaps  make  Eliphas  Levi's  hints 
still  more  clear  to  you,  if  you  read  over  what  he  says,  and  my 
remarks  on  the  margin,  thereon  (see  Theosophist,  October,  i88t. 
Article  **  Death  '*)  and  reflect  upon  the  words  used  ;  such  as 
drones,  etc.  Well,  the  first  named  Entity  then  cannot,  with  all 
its  wickedness  go  to  the  eighth  sphere — since  his  wickedness  is  of 
a  too  spiritual,  refined,  nature.  He  is  a  monster — not  a  mere 
Soulless  brute.  He  must  not  be  simply  annihilated  but  punished  ; 
for  annihilation,  i.e.  total  oblivion,  and  the  fact  of  being  snuffed 
out  of  conscious  existence,  constitutes  per  se  no  punishment,  and 
as  Voltaire  expressed  it :  "  le  nSant  ne  laisse  pas  d'avoir  du  bon." 
Here  is  no  taper-glimmer  to  be  puffed  out  by  a  zephyr,  but  a 
strong,  positive,  maleficent  energy,  fed  and  developed  by  circum- 
stances, some  of  which  may  have  really  been  beyond  his  control. 
There  must  be  for  such  a  nature  a  state  corresponding  to  Deva- 
chan, and  this  is  found  in  Avitchi — the  perfect  antithesis  of  deva- 

1  See  I  sis  Vol.  2,  pp.  368  and  369  ..  .  the  word  Soul  standing  there 
for  "  Spiritual  "  Soul,  of  course,  which,  whenever  it  leaves  a  person  Soul- 
less "  becomes  the  cause  of  the  fifth  principle  (Animal  Soul)  sliding  down  mto 
the  eighth   sphere. 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEORETICAL  TEACHINGS  197 

chart — vulgarized  by  the  Western  Nations  into  Hell  and  Heaven, 
and  which  you  have  entirely  lost  sight  of  in  your  "  Fragment." 
Remember  :  "  To  be  immortal  in  good  one  must  identify  himself 
with  good  (or  God) ;  to  be  immortal  in  evil  : — with  evil  (or 
Satan)."  Misconceptions  of  the  true  value  of  such  terms  as 
"Spirit,"  "Soul,"  "individuality,"  "personality,"  and  "im- 
mortality "  (especially) — provoke  wordy  wars  between  a  great 
number  of  idealistic  debaters,  besides  Messrs.  C.C.M.  and  Roden 
Noel,  and,  to  complete  your  Fragment  without  risking  to  fall 
again  under  the  mangling  tooth  of  the  latter  honourable  gentle- 
man's criticism — I  found  it  necessary  to  add,  to  devachan — 
Avitchi  as  its  complement  and  applying  to  it  the  same  laws  as  to 
the  former.     This  is  done,  with  your  permission,  in  the  Appendix. 

Having  explained  the  situation  sufficiently  I  may  now  answer 
your  query  No.  i  directly.  Yes,  certainly  there  is  "a  change  of 
occupation,"  a  continual  change  in  Devachan,  just  as  much — and 
far  more — as  there  is  in  the  life  of  any  man  or  woman  who  happens 
to  follow  his  or  her  whole  life  one  sole  occupation  whatever  it  may 
be ;  with  that  difference  that  to  the  Devachanee  his  special  occupa- 
tion is  always  pleasant  and  fills  his  life  with  rapture.  Change 
then  there  must  be,  for  that  dream-life  is  but  the  fruition,  the 
harvest-time  of  those  psychic  seed-germs  dropped  from  the  tree 
of  physical  existence  in  our  moments  of  dreams  and  hopes,  fancy 
glimpses  of  bliss  and  happiness  stifled  in  an  ungrateful  social  soil, 
blooming  in  the  rosy  dawn  of  Devachan,  and  ripening  under  its 
ever  fructifying  sky.  No  failures  there,  no  disappointments  !  If 
man  had  but  one  single  moment  of  ideal  happiness  and  experience 
during  his  life — ^as  you  think — even  then,  if  Devachan  exists, — it 
could  not  be  as  you  erroneously  suppK>se,  the  indefinite  prolonga- 
tion of  that  "  single  moment,"  but  the  infinite  developments,  the 
various  incidents  and  events,  based  upK>n,  and  outflowing  from, 
that  "  one  single  moment  "  or  moments  as  the  case  may  be;  all  in 
short  that  would  suggest  itself  to  the  "  dreamer's  "  fancy.  That 
one  note,  as  I  said,  struck  from  the  lyre  of  life,  would  form  but 
the  Key-note  of  the  being's  subjected  state,  and  work  out  into 
numberless  harmonic  tones  and  semi-tones  of  psychic  phantasma- 
goria. There,  all  unrealized  hopes,  aspirations,  dreams,  become 
fully  realized,  and  the  dreams  of  the  objective  become  the  realities 
of  the  subjective  existence.  And  there  behind  the  curtain  of  Maya 
its  vapours  and  deceptive  appearances  are  perceived  by  the  adept, 
who  has  learnt  the  great  secret  how  to  penetrate  thus  deeply  into 
the  Arcana  of  being. 

Doubtless  my  question  whether  you  had  experienced  monotony 
during  what  you  consider  the  happiest  moment  of  your  life  has 
entirely  misled  you.  This  letter  thus,  is  the  just  penance  for  my 
laziness  to  amplify  the  explanation. 


198  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Query  (2)  What  cycle  is  meant? 

The  *'  minor  cycle  "  meant  is,  of  course,  the  completion  of  the 
seventh  Round  as  decided  upon  and  explained.  Besides  that  at 
the  end  of  each  of  the  seven  rounds  come  a  less  **  full  "  remem- 
brance; only  of  the  devachanic  experiences  taking  place  between 
the  numerous  births  at  the  end  of  each  personal  life.  But  the 
complete  recollection  of  all  the  lives — (earthly  and  devachanic) 
omniscience — in  short — comes  but  at  the  great  end  of  the  full 
seven  Rounds  (unless  one  had  become  in  the  interim  a  Bodhisatwa, 
an  Arhat) — the  *'  threshold  "  of  Nirvana  meaning  an  indefinite 
period.  Naturally  a  man,  a  Seventh-rounder  (who  completes  his 
earthly  migrations  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  race  and  ring)  will 
have  to  wait  longer  at  that  threshold  than  one  of  the  very  last  of 
those  rounds.  That  Life  of  the  Elect  between  the  minor  Pralaya 
and  Nirvana — or  rather  before  the  Pralaya  is  the  Great  Reward, 
the  grandest,  in  fact,  since  it  makes  of  the  Ego  (though  he  may 
never  have  been  an  adept,  but  simply  a  worthy  virtuous  man  in 
most  of  his  existences) — ^virtually  a  God,  an  omniscient,  conscious 
being,  a  candidate  for  eternities  of  aeons — for  a  Dhyan  Chohan. 
.  .  .  Enough — I  am  betraying  the  mysteries  of  initiation.  But 
what  has  Nirvana  to  do  with  the  recollections  of  objective 
existences?  That  is  a  state  still  higher  and  in  which  all  things 
objective  are  forgotten.  It  is  a  State  of  absolute  Rest  and  assimi- 
lation with  Parabrahm — it  is  Parabrahm  itself.  Oh,  for  the  sad 
ignorance  of  our  philosophical  truths  in  the  West,  and  for  the 
inability  of  your  greatest  intellects  to  seize  the  true  spirit  of  those 
teachings.      What  shall  we — ^what  can  we  do  ! 

Query  (3)  You  postulate  an  intercourse  of  entities  in  devachan 
which  applies  only  to  the  mutual  relationship  of  physical  existence. 
Two  sympathetic  souls  will  each  work  out  its  own  devachanic 
sensations  making  the  other  a  sharer  in  its  subjective  bliss,  but 
yet  each  is  dissociated  from  the  other  as  regards  actual  mutual 
intercourse.  For  what  companionship  could  there  be  between 
two  subjective  entities  which  are  not  even  as  material  as  that 
ethereal  body-shadow — ^the  Mayavi^rupa? 

Query  4.  Deva  Chan  is  a  state,  not  a  locality.  Rupa  Loka, 
Arupa-Loka,  and  Kama-Loka  are  the  three  spheres  of  ascending 
spirituality  in  which  the  several  groups  of  subjective  entities  find 
their  attractions.  In  the  Kama-Loka  (semi-physical  sphere)  dwell 
the  shells,  the  victims  and  suicides ;  and  this  sphere  is  divided  into 
innumerable  regions  and  sub-regions  corresponding  to  the  mental 
states  of  the  comers  at  their  hour  of  death.  This  is  the  glorious 
**  summer-land  "  of  the  Spiritualists,  to  whose  horizons  is  limited 
the  vision  of  their  best  seers — vision  imperfect  and  deceptive 
because    untrained    and   non-guided   by    Alaya    Vynydna    (hidden 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOEETICAL  TEACHINGS  199 

knowledge).  Who  in  the  West  knows  anything-  of  true  Sahalo 
Kadhalu,  the  mysterious  Chiliocosm  out  of  the  many  regions  of 
which  but  three  can  be  given  out  to  the  outside  world,  the 
Trihuvana  (three  worlds)  namely  :  Kama,  Rupa,  and  Arupa-Lokas. 
Yet  see  the  sadness  prod'uced  in  the  Western  minds  by  the  mention 
of  even  those  three  !      See  **  Light  "  of  January  6th  ! 

Behold  your  friend  (M.  A.  Oxon)  notifying  the  world  of  his 
readers  that  on  your  assumption  in  your  **  Secret  Doctrine" — 
"  no  graver  indictment  could  be  brought  against  any  man  by  his 
bitterest  foe  "  than  the  one  you  bring  against  us — **  these 
mysterious  unknown."  It  is  not  such  bitter  criticisms  that  are 
likely  to  draw  out  more  of  our  knowledge,  or  to  make  the 
**  unknown  "  more  known.  And  then,  the  pleasure  of  teaching  a 
public  one  of  whose  great  authorities  (Roden  Noel)  says  a  few 
pages  further  on,  that,  theosophists  are  endowing  *'  shells  "  with 
simulated  consciousness.  See  the  difference  one  word  would 
make.  If  the  word  **  assimilated  "  instead  of  "  simulated  "  had 
been  written  the  true  idea  would  have  been  conveyed  that  the  shell 
consciousness  is  assimilated  from  the  medium,  and  living  persons 

present,  whereas  now I      But  of  course,  it  is  not  our  European 

critics,  but  our  Asiatic  Chelas'  expositions  that  **  seem  absolutely 
Protean  in  their  ever-shifting  variety."  The  man  has  to  be 
answered  and  set  right  anyhow,  whether  by  yourself  or  Mr. 
Massey.  But  alas  !  the  latter  knows  but  little,  and  you, — you 
look  at  our  conception  of  devachan  with  more  than  "  discom- 
fort ' '  !      But  to  resume. 

From  Kama  Loka  then  in  the  great  Chiliocosm, — once 
awakened  from  their  post-mortem  torpor,  the  newly  translated 
"Souls"  go  (all  but  the  shells)  according  to  their  attractions, 
either  to  Devachan  or  Avitchi.  And  those  two  states  are  again 
differentiating  ad  infinitum — their  ascending  degrees  of  spirituality 
deriving  their  names  from  the  lokas  in  which  they  are  induced. 
For  instance  :  the  sensations,  perceptions  and  ideation  of  a  deva- 
chanee  in  Rupa-Loka,  will,  of  course,  be  of  a  less  subjective  nature 
than  they  would  be  in  Arupa-Loka,  in  both  of  which  the  devachanic 
experiences  will  vary  in  their  presentation  to  the  subject-entity, 
not  only  as  regards  form,  colour,  and  substance,  but  also  in  their 
formative  potentialities.  But  not  even  the  most  exalted  experi- 
ence of  a  monad  in  the  highest  devachanic  state  in  Arupa-Loka 
(the  last  of  the  seven  states) — is  comparable  to  that  perfectly 
subjective  condition  of  pure  spirituality  from  which  the  monad 
emerged  to  **  descend  into  matter,"  and  to  which  at  the  com- 
pletion of  the  grand  cycle  it  must  return.  Nor  is  Nirvana  itself 
comparable  to  Para  Nirvana. 

Query  5.  Reviving  consciousness  begins  after  the  struggle  in 
Kama-Loka  at  the  door  of  devachan,  and  only  after  the  **  gestation 


20O  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

period."  Please  turn  to  my  responses  upK>n  the  subject  in  your 
'*  Famous  contradictions." 

Qtiery  6.  Your  deductions  as  to  the  indefinite  prolong-ation  in 
Devachan  of  some  one  moment  of  earthly  bliss  having  been  un- 
warranted, your  question  in  the  last  paragraph  of  this  interrogatory 
need  not  be  considered.  The  stay  in  Devachan  is  propK>rtionate 
to  the  unfinished  psychic  impulse  originating  in  earth-life  :  those 
persons  whose  attractions  were  preponderatingly  material  will 
sooner  be  drawn  back  into  rebirth  by  the  force  of  Tanha.  As 
our  London  opponent  truly  remarks  :  these  subjects  (metaphysical) 
are  only  partly  for  understanding.  A  higher  faculty  belonging 
to  the  higher  life  must  see, — and  it  is  truly  impossible  to  force  it 
upon  one's  understanding — merely  in  words.  One  must  see  with 
his  spiritual  eye,  hear  with  his  Dharmakayic  ear,  feel  with  the 
sensations  of  his  Ashta — vijnydna  (spiritual  "  I  ")  before  he  can 
comprehend  this  doctrine  fully  ;  otherwise  it  may  but  increase  one's 
**  discomfort,"  and  add  to  his  knowledge  very  little. 

Query  7.  The  "  reward  provided  by  nature  for  men  who  are 
benevolent  in  a  large,  systematic  way  "  and  who  have  not  focussed 
their  affections  upK>n  an  individual  or  speciality  is  that — if  pure — 
they  pass  the  quicker  for  that  through  the  Kama  and  Rupa  Lokas 
into  the  higher  sphere  of  Tribuvana,  since  it  is  one  where  the 
formulation  of  abstract  ideas  and  the  consideration  of  general 
principles  fill  the  thought  of  its  occupants.  Personality  is  the 
synonym  for  limitation,  and  the  more  contracted  the  person's  ideas, 
the  closer  will  he  cling  to  the  lower  spheres  of  being,  the  longer 
loiter  on  the  plane  of  selfish  social  intercourse.  The  social  status 
of  a  being  is,  of  course,  a  result  of  Karma ;  the  law  being  that 
"  like  attracts  like."  The  renascent  being  is  drawn  into  the 
gestative  current  with  which  the  preponderating  attractions 
coming  over  from  the  last  birth  makes  him  assimilate.  Thus  one 
who  died  a  ryot  may  be  reborn  a  king,  and  the  dead  sovereign 
may  next  see  the  light  in  a  coolie's  tent.  This  law  of  attraction 
asserts  itself  in  a  thousand  *'  accidents  of  birth  "  than  which  there 
could  be  no  more  flagrant  misnomer.  When  you,  realize,  at  least, 
the  following — that  the  skandas  are  the  elements  of  limited 
existence  then  will  you  have  realized  also  one  of  the  conditions  of 
Devachan  which  has  now  such  a  profoundly  unsatisfactory  out- 
look for  you.  Nor  are  your  inferences  (as  regards  the  well-being 
and  enjoyment  of  the  upper  classes  being  due  to  a  better  Karma) 
quite  correct  in  their  general  application.  They  have  a  eudoe- 
monistic  ring  about  them  which  is  hardly  reconcilable  with  Karmic 
Law,  since  those  *'  well-beings  and  enjoyments  "  are  oftener  the 
causes  of  a  new  and  overloaded  Karma  than  the  production  or 
effects  of  the  latter.  Even  as  a  *  *  broad  rule  ' '  poverty  and  humble 
condition  in  life  are  less  a  cause  of  sorrow  than  wealth  and  high 


PHILOSOPHICAL  &  THEOBETICAL  TEACHINGS  201 

birth,  but  of  that — later  on.  My  answers  are  once  more  assuming- 
the  shape  of  a  volume  rather  than  the  decent  aspect  of  a  letter. 
*'  Writing  a  new  book,  or  for  the  Theosophist?  "  Well  do  you 
not  think  that  (since  your  desire  is  to  reach  not  merely  the  most 
but  also  the  most  receptive  minds)  you  had  better  write  the  former 
as  well  as  for  the  latter?  You  mig-ht  put  into  Esoteric  Buddhism 
— an  excellent  title  by  the  bye — such  matter  as  would  be  a  sequel 
to,  or  amplification  of  what  has  appeared  in  the  Theosophist,  a 
systematic,  thoughtful  exix>sition  of  what  was  and  will  be  given 
in  the  Journal  in  snatched  out  brief  Fragments.  I  am  specially 
anxious — on  M's  account — ^that  the  Journal  should  be  made  as 
much  as  possible  a  success;  should  be  circulated  more  than  it  is 
now  in  England.  Your  new  book  drawing  as  it  is  sure  to — the 
attention  of  the  most  educated  thoughtful  pvortion  of  the  Western 
public  to  the  organ  of  "  Esoteric  Buddhism  "  par  excellence — 
would  thus  do  it  a  world  of  good,  and  both  would  prove  of  mutual 
assistance.  Do  not  lose  sight  of  Lillie's  **  Buddha  and  Early 
Buddhism  "  when  you  write  it.  With  its  host  of  fallacies,  un- 
warranted assumptions  and  distortion  of  facts  and  even  Sanskrit 
and  Pali  words,  this  snobbish  volume  had  nevertheless  the  greatest 
success  with  Spiritualists  and  even  mystically  inclined  Christians. 
I  will  have  it  slightly  reviewed  by  Subba  Row  or  H.P.B.  furnish- 
ing them  with  notes  myself,  but  of  this  more  in  some  future  letter. 
You  have  ample  material  to  work  upon  in  my  notes  and  papers. 
You  have  given  but  a  few  of  the  many  points  touched  by  me  and 
amplified  and  re-amplified  in  heaps  of  letters,  as  I  do  now.  You 
could  work  out  of  them  any  number  of  new  articles  and  Frag- 
ments for  the  magazine,  and  have  enough  and  to  spare — left  over 
for  the  book.  And  these  in  their  turn  may  be  followed  up  in  a 
third  volume  later  on.  It  may  be  well  to  always  keep  this  plan 
in  mind. 

Your  **  wild  scheme  "  with  Darjeeling,  goodi  friend,  as  its  sub- 
jective point,  is  not  wild,  but  simply  impracticable.  The  time  is 
not  yet  come.  But  the  drift  of  your  energies  is  carrying  you 
slowly  yet  steadily  in  the  direction  of  personal  intercourse.  I 
will  not  say  that  I  desire  it  as  much  as  you  do,  for  seeing  you 
nearly  every  day  of  my  life  I  care  very  little  for  objective  inter- 
course ;  but  for  your  sake  I  would  if  I  could,  precipitate  that  inter- 
view.       However ?       Meanwhile,  be  happy  in  knowing  that 

you  have  done  more  real  good  to  your  kind  within  the  two  past 
years  than  in  many  previous  years.      And — to  yourself  also. 

I  am  quite  sure  that  you  do  not  sympathize  with  the  selfish 
feeling  that  prompts  the  London  Branch  to  wish  to  withhold  even 
their  small  proportion  of  pecuniary  support — amounting  to  a  few 
guineas  a  year — from  the  Parent  Society.  Who  of  the  members 
would  ever  think  of  refusing,  or,  trying  to  avoid  payment  of  fees 


202  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

to  any  other  Society,  Club,  or  Scientific  Association  he  may 
happen  to  belong-  to?  If  it  is  this  indifference  and  selfishness  that 
have  permitted  them  to  stand  by  idle  and  calm  from  the  first,  and 
see  the  two  in  India  grivingf  their  last  rupee  (and  the  Upasika 
actually  selling  her  jewellery — for  the  honour  of  the  Society) — 
though  many  of  the  British  Members  are  far  better  able  to  afford 
the  necessary  sacrifices  than  they.  Mr.  Olcott's  sister  is  actually 
starving  in  America,  and  the  poor  man,  loving  her  dearly  as  he 
does,  would  not  nevertheless  spare  rupees  loo  from  the  Society's, 
or  rather  the  Theosophist's  Fund  to  relieve  her  with  six  small 
children  had  not  H.P.B.  insisted  upvon,  and  M.  given  a  small  sum 
for  it. 

However,  I  have  told  Mr.  Olcott  to  send  you  the  necessary 
official  authority  to  compound  the  fees  or  make  any  other  business 
agreement  at  London  that  you  may  think  best.  But  remember, 
my  very  valued  brother,  that  if  poor  Hindu  clerks  on  rupees  20 
or  30  salaries  are  expected  to  help  pay  the  Society's  expenses  with 
that  fee,  it  is  sheer  injustice  to  totally  exempt  the  far  richer  London 
members.  Do  justice,  *'  though  the  heavens  fall."  Yet,  if  con- 
cessions are  required  to  local  prejudices,  you  are  certainly  better 
qualified  than  we  to  see,  and  hence  to  negotiate  according  to  the 
fitness  of  things.  By  all  means  put  **  the  money  relations  on  a 
better  footing  "  than  at  present,  if  the  financial  wind  has  to  be 
tempered  for  the  shorn  Peling-lamb.  I  have  faith  in  your  wisdom 
my  friend,  though  you  would  have  a  certain  right  to  be  fast  losing 
yours  in  mine,  considering  how  tight  the  negotiations  for  the 
P/ioem^-capital  prove.  You  must  have  understood  that  I  am  still, 
and  notwithstanding  the  Chohan's  approval  of  my  *'  Lay-Chela  " 
— under  last  year's  restrictions,  and  cannot  bring  to  bear  on  the 
parties  concerned  all  the  psychic  powers  that  I  otherwise  could. 
Besides,  our  laws  and  restrictions  with  regard  to  money  or  any 
financial  operations  whether  within  or  outsidte  our  Association,  are 
extremely  severe — inexorable  on  some  points.  We  have  to  pro- 
ceed very  cautiously ;  hence — the  delay.  But  I  do  hope  that  you 
yourself  think,  that  something  has  already  been  done  in  that 
direction. 

Yes;  **  K.H.  did  "  mean  that  the  review  of  **  Mr.  Isaacs  should 
appear  in  the  Theosophist/'  and  **  By  the  Author  of  the  Occult 
World,"  so  do  send  it  before  you  go.  And,  for  the  sake  of  old 
**  Sam  Ward"  I  would  like  to  see  it  noticed  in  the  '*  Pioneer." 
But  that  does  not  matter  much,  now  that  you  leave  it. 

Thereupon — Salaam,   and  best  wishes.        I  am  extremely  busy 
with  preparations  of  initiation.      Several  of  my  chelas — Gjualkhool 
among  others — are  striving  to  reach  "  the  other  shore." 
Yours  faithfully, 

K.  H. 


SECTION  III 

PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP 

LETTER  No.   XXVI 

K.H.'s  Confidential   Memo  about  Old  Lady.     Received   Simla,  Autumn,    1881. 

I  am  painfully  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  habitual  incoherence 
of  her  statements — especially  when  excited — and  her  strange  ways 
make  her  in  your  opinion  a  very  undesirable  transmitter  of  our 
messages.     Nevertheless,    kind    Brothers,    once    that    you    have 
learned    the   truth ;    once    told,    that    this    unbalanced    mind,    the 
seeming  incongruity  of  her  speeches  and  ideas,  her  nervous  ex- 
citement,  all  that  in  short,  which  is  so  calculated  to  upset  the 
feelings  of  sober  minded  people,   whose  notions  of  reserve  and 
manners   are   shocked   by   such   strange   outbursts   of  what   they 
regard  as  her  temper,  and  which  so  revolt  you, — once  that  you 
know  that  nothing  of  it  is  due  to  any  fault  of  hers  you  may,  per- 
chance, be  led  to  regard  her  in  quite  a  different  light.     Notwith- 
standing that  the  time  is  not  quite  ripe  to  let  you  entirely  into 
the  secret ;  and  that  you  are  hardly  yet  prepared  to  understand  the 
great  Mystery  even  if  told  of  it,  owing  to  the  great  injustice  and 
wrong  done,  I  am  empowered  to  allow  you  a  glimpse  behind  the 
veil.     This  state  of  hers  is  intimately  connected  with  her  occult 
training  in  Tibet,   and  due  to  her  being  sent  out  alone  into  the 
world  to  gradually  prepare  the  way  for  others.     After  nearly  a 
century  of  fruitless  search,  our  chiefs  had  to  avail  themselves  of 
the  only  opportunity  to  send  out  a  European  body  upon  European 
soil  to  serve  as  a  connecting  link  between  that  country  and  our 
own.     You   do    not    understand?     Of   course    not.     Please   then, 
remember,    what   she   tried   to    explain,    and   what  you   gathered 
tolerably  well  from  her,  namely  the  fact  of  the  seven  principles  in 
the  complete  human  being.     Now,  no  man  or  woman,  unless  he 
be  an  initiate  of  the  **  fifth  circle,"   can  leave  the  precincts  of 
Bod-Las  and  return  back  into  the  world  in  his  integral  whole — 
if  I  may  use  the  expression.     One,   at  least  of  his  seven  satel- 
lites has  to  remain  behind  for  two  reasons  :  the  first  to  form  the 
necessary  connecting  link,   the  wire  of  transmission — the  second 
as  the  safest  warranter  that  certain  things  will  never  be  divulged. 
She   is    no   exception    to  the   rule,    and    you   have   seen    another 

203 


204  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

examplar — a  highly  intellectual  man — who  had  to  leave  one  of  his 
skins  behind  ;  hence,  is  considered  highly  eccentric.  The  bearing 
and  status  of  the  remaining  six  depend  upon  the  inherent  qualities, 
the  psycho-physiological  peculiarities  of  the  person,  especially 
upon  the  idiosyncracies  transmitted  by  what  modern  science  calls 
''atavism."  Acting  in  accordance  with  my  wishes,  my  brother 
M.  made  to  you  through  her  a  certain  offer,  if  you  remember. 
You  had  but  to  accept  it,  and  at  any  time  you  liked,  you  would 
have  had  for  an  hour  or  more,  the  real  baitchooly  to  converse  with, 
instead  of  the  psychological  cripple  you  generally  have  to  deal 
with  now.  Yesterday  it  was  his  mistake.  He  ought  not  to  have 
sent  her  to  deliver  the  message  to  Mr.  Sinnett  in  the  state  she 
was  in.  But  to  hold  her  responsible  for  her  purely  physiological 
excitement,  and  to  let  her  see  your  contemptuous  smiles — was 
positively  sinful.  Pardon  me,  my  Brothers  and  good  Sirs,  my 
plain  talk.  I  act  but  in  accord  with  what  was  asked  from  me  by 
yourself  in  your  letter.  I  took  the  trouble  to  * '  ascertain  the  spirit 
and  meaning  "  with  which  everything  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  room  was 
said  and  done ;  and  though  having  no  right  to  "  condemn  "  you — 
since  you  were  ignorant  of  the  true  state  of  things — I  cannot  other- 
wise but  strongly  disapprove  of  that,  which,  however  much 
polished  outwardly  would  have  been  even  under  quite  ordinary 
circumstances — cruelty  still.     Buss  ! 


LETTER  No.  XXVII 

Received  Simla,  Autumn,   1881. 

I  foresaw  that  which  now  happens.  In  my  Bombay  letter  I 
advised  you  to  be  prudent  as  to  what  you  allowed  S.M.  to  learn 
of  +  and  his  own  mediumship,  suggesting  that  he  should  be  told 
merely  the  substance  of  what  I  said.  When,  watching  you  at 
Allahabad  I  saw  you  making  instead  copious  extracts  for  him  from 
my  letter,  I  again  saw  the  danger  but  did  not  interfere  for  several 
reasons.  One  of  them  is,  that  I  believe  the  time  fully  come  when 
social  and  moral  safety  demands  that  someone  of  the  Theos.  Soc. 
should  speak  the  truth  though  the  Himalaya  fall  on  him.  The  un- 
veiling of  the  ugly  truth  has  to  be  done  with  the  greatest  dis- 
cretion and  caution  though ;  and  I  see  that  instead  of  getting 
friends  and  supporters  in  the  camp  of  the  Philistines — whether  on 
that  or  this  side  of  the  oceans — many  of  you — yourself  with  the 
rest — breed  but  enemies  by  making  too  much  of  me  and  my  per- 
sonal opinions.  On  that  side,  the  irritation  is  great  and  you  will 
soon  find  flashes  of  it  in  the  Light  and  elsewhere ;  and,  you  "  shall 
lose  S.M."     The  copious  extracts  have  done  their  work  for  they 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  205 

were — much  too  copious.  No  powers  whether  human  or  super- 
human can  ever  open  the  eyes  of  S.M.  It  was — useless  to  tear 
them  open.  On  this  side — it  is  still  worse.  The  good  people  at 
Simla  are  not  very  metaphorically  inclined  and  allegory  will  no 
more  stick  to  their  epidermis  than  would  water  to  the  feathers  of 
a  goose.  Besides, — no  one  likes  to  be  told  that  he  "  smells  bad  " 
and  the  joke  extracted  from  a  remark  but  too  full  of  deep  psycho- 
logical meaning  has  produced  incalculable  harm  in  quarters  where 
otherwise,  the  S.E.T.S.  might  have  recruited  more  than  one  con- 
vert.    ...     I  must  return  once  more  to  the  letter. 

The  strongest  basis  of  complaint  against  me  is  the  fact  that 
my  statement  implies  (a)  a  kind  of  challenge  to  S.M.  to  prove  + 
a  **  Spirit  " — (b)  I  am  severely  denounced  by  our  friend  for  mak- 
ing outH — -a  liar.  Now,  I  mean  to  be  explanatory  but  not  apolo- 
getic. 1  most  certainly  meant  both ;  only  I  meant  it  for  you,  who 
had  asked  me  for  the  information,  by  no  means  for  him.  He  has 
not  proved  his  case,  nor  did  I  expect  he  would,  even  if  he  thought 
he  could,  as  the  claim  rests  entirely  upon  his  own  personal  asser- 
tion due  to  his  unwavering  faith  in  his  own  impressions.  It  would 
be  easy  for  me,  on  the  other  hand,  to  prove  +  no  disembodied 
spirit  at  all,  had  I  not  very  good  reasons  for  not  doing  so  at 
present.  I  had  worded  my  letter  very  carefully,  so,  that,  while 
letting  you  have  a  glimpse  of  the  truth,  I  showed  you  most  clearly 
that  I  had  no  right  to  divulge  the  "  secrets  of  a  Brother."  But, 
my  very  good  friend,  I  had  never  told  you  in  so  many  words  who 
and  what  he  was.  I  might,  perhaps,  have  advised  you  to  judge 
+  by  alleged  writings,  for  more  fortunate  in  that  than  Job  our 
**  enemies  "  all  "  write  books."  They  are  very  fond  of  dictating 
"  inspirational  "  gospels  and  so — get  caught  at  the  glue  of  their 
own  rhetorics.  And  who  of  the  most  intellectual  spiritts.  who 
have  read  the  complete  works  fathered  upon  +  would  dare  main- 
tain that  with  the  exceptions  of  a  few  extremely  remarkable  pages 
the  rest  is  not  below  what  S.M.  could  have  himself  written,  and 
far  better?  Rest  assured  that  no  intelligent,  clever  and  truthful 
medium  needs  "  inspiration  "  from  a  disembodied  **  Spirit." 
Truth  will  stand  without  inspiration  from  Gods  or  Spirits,  and 
better  still — will  stand  in  spite  of  them  all;  "  angels  "  whispering 
generally  but  falsehoods  and  adding  to  the  stock  of  superstition. 

It  is  in  view  of  such  little  unpleasantnesses  that  I  have  to  abstain 
from  satisfying  C.C.  Massey.  I  will  not  avail  myself  of  his 
"  authority,"  nor  fulfil  his  "  desire,"  and  I  refuse  most  decidedly 
to  "  communicate  his  secret  "  as  it  is  of  a  nature  which  stands  in 
his  way  for  the  attainment  of  adeptship,  but  has  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  his  private  character.  This  information  again  was 
meant  for  you,  as  an  answer  to  your  surprised  query  whether 
there  could  be  any  impediments  for  my  communicating  with  him 

15 


2o6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

and  guiding  him  to  the  Light,  but  it  was  never  intended  for  his 
ears.  He  may  have  a  page  or  two  in  his  life's  history  which  he 
would  rather  see  obliterated  ;  but,  his  loyal  and  faithful  instinct 
will  always  give  him  precedence  and  place  him  far  above  many  a 
man  who  remained  chaste  and  virtuous  only  because  he  never 
knew  what  temptation  was.  I  will  abstain,  then,  with  your 
kind  permission.  In  the  future,  my  very  dear  friend,  we  will 
have  to  limit  ourselves  entirely  to  philosophy  and  avoid — family 
gossip.  Skeletons  in  family  closets,  are  at  times,  more  dangerous 
to  meddle  with  than  even — dirty  turbans,  my  illustrious  and  dear 
friend.  And  let  not  your  too  sensitive  heart  be  troubled,  or  your 
imagination  lead  you  to  suppose  that  one  single  word  of  what  I 
have  now  said  is  meant  to  convey  a  reproach.  We,  half  savage 
Asiatics  judge  a  man  by  his  motives,  and  yours  were  all  that  is 
sincere  and  good.  But  you  have  to  remember  that  you  are  at  a 
hard  school,  and  dealing  now  with  a  world  entirely  distinct  from 
your  own.  Especially  have  you  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  slightest 
cause  produced  however  unconsciously,  and  with  whatever  motive, 
cannot  be  unmade,  or  its  effects  crossed  in  their  progress — by 
millions  of  Gods,  demons,  and  men  combined.  Therefore,  you 
must  not  think  me  too  hypercritical  when  I  say,  that  all  of  you 
have  been  more  or  less  imprudent,  when  not  indiscreet — the  latter 
word  applying — so  far — but  to  one  of  the  members.  Hence — you 
will  perhaps  see,  that  the  mistakes  and  blunders  of  H.  Steel 
Olcott,  are  of  a  lighter  hue  than  they  at  first  appear,  since  even 
Englishmen,  far  more  intelligent  and  versed  in  the  world's  ways 
than  he  is,  are  as  liable  to  err.  For  you  have  erred,  individually 
and  collectively,  as  will  be  made  apparent  in  a  very  near  future  ; 
and  the  management  and  success  of  the  Society  will  prove  as  a 
result  far  more  difficult  in  your  case,  since  none  of  you  is  as  ready 
to  admit  that  he  has  done  so,  nor  are  you  as  prepared  as  he  is,  to 
follow  any  advice  offered  you,  though  in  each  case,  it  is  based  on 
foresight  of  impending  events,  even  when  foretold  in  a  phrase- 
ology which  may  not  always  come  **  up  to  the  mark  "  of  the  adept 
— as  he  should  be  in  accordance  with  your  own  views. 

You  may  tell  Massey  what  I  now  say  of  him,  and  the  reason 
given.  You  may — though  I  would  not  advise  you — read  this 
letter  to  Mr.  Hume.  But  I  would  strongly  urge  upon  you  the 
necessity  of  a  greater  caution  than  ever.  Notwithstanding  the 
purity  of  motives,  the  Chohan  might  one  day  consider  but  the 
results,  and  these  may  threaten  to  become  too  disastrous  for  him 
to  overlook.  There  should  be  a  constant  pressure  brought  to 
bear  upon  the  members  of  the  S.E.S.  to  keep  their  tongues  and 
enthusiasm  at  bay.  And  yet  there  is  an  increasing  concern  in 
the  public  mind,  in  regard  to  your  Society  and  you  may  soon  be 
called   upon  to  define  your  position  more  clearly.     Very  soon   I 


PROBATION,  AND  OHELASHIP  207 

will  have  to  leave  you  to  yourselves  for  the  period  of  three  months. 
Whether  it  will  begin  in  October  or  January  will  depend  on  the 
impulse  given  to  the  Society  and  its  progress. 

I  would  feel  personally  obliged  to  you  were  you  to  kindly 
consent  to  examine  a  poem  written  by  Padshah,  and  give  your 
opinion  on  his  merits.  I  believe  it  too  long  for  the  Theosophical 
Journal,  nor  do  its  literary  merits  warrant  exactly  or  justify  the 
claim.  However,  I  leave  it  to  your  better  judgment.  I  am 
anxious  that  the  Journal  should  be  more  successful  this  year 
than  it  has  heretofore  been.  The  suggestion  to  translate  the 
Grand  Inquisitor  is  mine ;  for  its  author,  on  whom  the  hand  of 
Death  was  already  pressing  when  writing  it,  gave  the  most 
forcible  and  true  description  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  than  was 
ever  given  before.  There  is  a  mighty  lesson  contained  in  it  for 
many  and  even  you  might  profit  by  it. 

My  dear  friend,  you  must  not  feel  surprised  if  I  tell  you,  that 
I  really  feel  weary  and  disheartened  at  the  prospect  I  have  before 
me.  I  am  afraid  you  never  will  have  the  patience  to  wait  for  the 
day  when  I  am  permitted  to  satisfy  you.  Ages  ago  our  people 
began  to  make  certain  rules,  according  to  which  they  intended  to 
live.  All  these  rules  have  now  become  Law.  Our  predecessors 
had  to  learn  everything  they  know  by  themselves,  only  the 
foundation  was  laid  for  them.  We  offer  to  lay  for  you  such  a 
foundation  but  you  will  accept  nothing  short  of  the  complete 
edifice,  ready  for  you  to  take  possession  of.  Do  not  accuse  me 
of  indifference  or  neglect  when  not  receiving  for  days  any  reply 
from  me.  Very  often  I  have  nothing  to  say,  for  you  ask  ques- 
tions which  I  have  no  right  to  answer. 

But  I  must  conclude  here,  as  my  time  is  limited  and  I  have 
some  other  work  to  do. 

Yours  sincerely, 

K.  H. 

The  brandy  atmosphere  in  the  house  is  dreadful. 


LETTER  No.  XXVIII 

K.H.    to    A.O.    Hume    written    towards  final    break-off.     (1881  ?) 

My  dear  Sir, 

If  no  other  good  ever  came  of  our  correspondence  than  that  of 
showing  us  once  more  how  essentially  opposed  are  our  two 
antagonistic  elements — the  English  and  the  Hindu,  our  few 
letters  will  not  have  been  exchanged  in  vain.  Sooner  can  oil 
and  water  mingle  their  particles  than  an   Englishman — however 


2o8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

intelligent,  noble-minded  and  sincere  to  be  made  to  assimilate 
even  the  exoteric  Hindu  thought,  let  alone  its  esoteric  spirit. 
This  will,  of  course  provoke  you  to  a  smile.  You  will  say — "  I 
expected  this."  So-be-it.  But  if  so,  it  shows  no  more  than  the 
perspicacity  of  a  man  of  thought  and  observation  who  intuitively 
anticipated  an  event  which  his  own  attitude  must  precipitate.  .  .  . 
You  will  pardon  me  if  I  have  to  speak  frankly  and  sincerely  of 
your  long  letter.  However  cogent  its  logic,  noble  some  of  its 
ideas,  ardent  its  aspirations,  it  yet  lies  here  before  me  a  very 
mirror  of  that  spirit  of  this  age,  against  which  we  have  fought 
during  our  whole  lives  !  At  best  it  is  the  unsuccessful  endeavour 
of  an  acute  intellect  trained  in  the  ways  of  an  exoteric  world, 
to  throw  light  on,  and  judge  of  the  modes  of  life  and  thought  in 
which  it  is  unversed,  for  they  belong  to  quite  a  different  world 
from  that  it  deals  with.  You  are  no  man  of  petty  vanities.  To 
you  it  is  safe  to  say  :  "  My  dear  friend,  apart  from  all  this,  study 
your  letter  impartially  ;  weigh  some  of  its  sentences,  and  on  the 
whole  you  will  not  feel  proud  of  it."  Whether  or  not  you  will 
ever  fully  appreciate  my  motives,  or  misconceive  the  true  causes 
which  make  me  decline  for  the  present  any  further  correspond- 
ence, I  yet  am  confident  that  some  day  you  will  confess  that 
this  last  letter  of  yours  under  the  garb  of  a  noble  humility,  of 
confessions  of  **  weaknesses  and  failings,  shortcomings  and 
follies  "  was  yet — no  doubt  quite  unconsciously  to  yourself — a 
monument  of  pride,  the  loud  echo  of  that  haughty  and  imperative 
spirit  which  lurks  at  the  bottom  of  every  Englishman 's  heart.  In  your 
present  state  of  mind,  very  likely  even  after  reading  this  answer, 
you  will  hardly  perceive,  that  not  only  have  you  entirely  failed  to 
understand  the  spirit  in  which  my  last  letter  was  written  to  you, 
but  even,  in  some  instances  to  catch  its  evident  sense.  You  were 
preoccupied  by  one  single,  all-absorbing  idea  :  and,  failing  to 
detect  any  direct  reply  to  it  in  my  answer,  before  taking  time  to 
think  it  over,  and  see  its  general  not  personal  applicability,  you 
sat  down  and  accused  me  right  away  of  giving  you  a  stone  when 
you  asked  for  bread  ! ;  no  need  of  being  **  a  lawyer  "  in  this  or 
any  previous  existence  to  state  simple  facts.  No  need  to  "  make 
the  bad  appear  the  better  cause  "  when  truth  is  so  very  simple 
and  so  easily  told.  My  remark — "  you  take  up  the  position  that 
unless  a  proficient  in  arcane  knowledge  will  waste  upon  your 
embryonic  Society  an  energy,"  etc. — you  applied  to  yourself, 
whereas  it  was  never  so  meant.  It  related  to  the  expectations  of 
all  those  who  might  desire  to  join  the  Society  under  certain  con- 
ditions exacted  before-hand  and  that  were  firmly  insisted  upon, 
by  yourself  and  Mr.  Sinnett.  The  letter  as  a  whole  was  meant 
for  you  two,  and  this  special  sentence  applied  to  all  in  general. 
You  say  that  I  have  *'  to  a  certain  extent  mistaken  your  posi- 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  209 

tion,"    and    that    I    "clearly   misunderstand"    you.     This    is    so 
evidently   incorrect  that  it  will   suffice  for  me  to  quote  a   single 
paragraph    from   your    letter   to    show   that   it   is   you    who    have 
entirely    "  mistaken    my    position  *'    and    "  clearly    misunderstood 
me."     What    else    do    you    do    but    labour    under    an    erroneous 
impression,   when,    in   your   eagerness  to   repudiate   the   idea   of 
having  ever  dreamt  of  originating  a   "  school  "   you   say  of  the 
proposed   "  Anglo-Indian    Branch  " — "  it   is   no   Society   of  mine. 
.     .     .     I  understood  it  to  be  the  wish  of  yourself  and  chiefs  that 
the  Society  should  be  started  and  that  I  should  assume  a  leading 
position  in  it."     To  this  I  replied  that  if  it  has  been  constantly 
our  wish  to  spread  on  the  Western  Continent  among  the  foremost 
educated  classes  **  Branches  "  of  the  T.S.  as  the  harbingers  of  a 
Universal   Brotherhood    it   was    not  so    in    your   case.     We    (the 
Chiefs  and  I)  entirely  repudiate  the  idea  that  such  was  our  hope 
(however    we    might   wish    it)    in   regard    to    the   projected    A.I. 
Society.     The  aspiration  for  brotherhood  between  our  races  met 
no  response — nay,  it  was  pooh-poohed  from  the  first — and  so,  was 
abandoned  even  before  I  had  received  Mr.   Sinnett's  first  letter. 
On  his  part  and  from  the  start,  the  idea  w^as  solely  to  promote 
the  formation  of  a  kind  of  club  or  "  school  of  magic."     It  was 
then  no  **  proposal  "  of  ours,  nor  were  we  the  **  designers  of  the 
scheme."     Why  then  such  efforts  to  show  us  in  the  wrong?     It 
was  Mad.  B. — not  we,  who  originated  the  idea ;  and  it  was  Mr. 
Sinnett  who  took  it  up.     Notwithstanding  his  frank  and  honest 
admission  to  the  effect  that  being  unable  to  grasp  the  basic  idea 
of  Universal  Brotherhood  of  the  parent  Society,  his  aim  was  but 
to   cultivate   the   study  of  occult    Sciences,    an    admission  which 
ought  to  have  stopped  at  once  every  further  importunity  on  her 
part,  she  first  succeeded  in  getting  the  consent — a  very  reluctant 
one  I  must  say — of  her  own  direct  chief,  and  then  my  promise  of 
co-operation — as  far  as  I  could  go.     Finally,  through  my  media- 
tion, she  got  that  of  our  highest  Chief,  to  whom  I  submitted  the 
first  letter  you  honoured  me  with.     But,   this  consent,   you  will 
please  bear  in  mind,   was  obtained  solely  under  the  express  and 
unalterable  condition  that  the  new  Society  should  be  founded  as 
a  branch  of  the  Universal  Brotherhood  and  among  its  members, 
a  few  elect  men  would,  if  they  chose  to  submit  to  our  conditions, 
instead  of  dictating  theirs — be  allowed  to  begin  the  study  of  the 
occult  sciences  under  the  written  directions  of  a  *'  Brother."     But 
a  '*  hot-bed  of  magick  "  we  never  dreamt  of.     Such  an  organiza- 
tion as  mapped  out  by  Mr.   Sinnett  and  yourself  is  unthinkable 
among  Europeans  ;  and,  it  has  become  next  to  impossible  even  in 
India — unless  you  are  prepared  to  climb  to  a  height  of  18,000  to 
20,000  amidst  the  glaciers  of  the  Himalayas.    The  greatest  as  well 
as  the  most  promising  of  such  schools  in  Europe,  the  last  attempt 


2IO  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

in  this  direction, — failed  most  sig-nally  some  20  years  ago  in 
London.  It  was  the  secret  school  for  the  practical  teaching  of 
magick  founded  under  the  name  of  a  club  by  a  dozen  of 
enthusiasts  under  the  leadership  of  Lord  Lytton's  father.  He 
had  collected  together  for  the  purpose,  the  most  ardent  and  enter- 
prising as  well  as  some  of  the  most  advanced  scholars  in  mes- 
merism and  **  ceremonial  magic,'*  such  as  Eliphas  Levi,  Regaz- 
zoni,  and  the  Kopt  Zergvan — Bey.  And  yet  in  the  pestilent 
London  atmosphere  the  "  Club  *'  came  to  an  untimely  end.  I 
visited  it  about  half-a-dozen  times,  and  perceived  from  the  first 
that  there  was  and  could  be  nothing  in  it.  And  this  is  also  the 
reason  why,  the  British  T.S.  does  not  progress  one  step  prac- 
tically. They  are  of  the  Universal  Brotherhood  but  in  name,  and 
gravitate  at  best  towards  Quietism — that  utter  paralysis  of  the 
Soul.  They  are  intensely  selfish  in  their  aspirations  and  will  get 
but  the  reward  of  their  selfishness. 

Nor  did  we  begin  the  correspondence  upon  this  subject.  It 
was  Mr.  Sinnett  who,  of  his  own  motion  addressed  to  a 
"  Brother  "  two  long  letters,  even  before  Mad.  B.  had  obtained 
either  permission  or  promise  from  any  of  us  to  answer  him,  or 
knew  to  whom  of  us  to  deliver  his  letter.  Her  own  chief  having 
refused  point  blank  to  correspond,  it  was  to  me  that  she  applied. 
Moved  by  regard  for  her,  I  consented  even  telling  her  she  might 
give  you  all  my  Thibetan  mystic  name,  and — I  answered  our 
friend's  letter.  Then  came  yours — as  unexpectedly.  You  did  not 
even  know  my  name  !  But  your  first  letter  was  so  sincere,  its 
spirit  so  promising,  the  possibilities  it  opened  for  doing  general 
good  seemed  so  great,  that  if,  I  did  not  shout  Eureka  after  read- 
ing it,  and  thrown  my  Diogenes'  lantern  into  the  bushes  at  once, 
it  was  only  because  I  knew  too  well  human  and — you  must  excuse 
me — Western  nature.  Unable,  nevertheless,  to  undervalue  the 
importance  of  this  letter  I  carried  it  to  our  venerable  Chief.  All 
I  could  obtain  from  Him,  though,  was  the  permission  to  tem- 
porarily correspond,  and  let  you  speak  your  whole  mind,  before 
giving  any  definite  promise.  We  are  not  Gods,  and  even  they, 
our  chiefs — they  hope.  Human  nature  is  unfathomable,  and 
yours  is  perhaps,  more  intensely  so  than  any  other  man  I  know 
of.  Your  last  favour  was  certainly  if  not  quite  a  world  of  revela- 
tion, at  least,  a  very  profitable  addition  to  my  store  of  observa- 
tion of  the  Western  character,  especially  that  of  the  modern, 
highly  intellectual  Anglo-Saxon.  But  it  would  be  a  revelation, 
indeed,  to  Mad.  B.  who  did  not  see  it,  (and  for  various  reasons 
had  better  not)  for  it  might  knock  off  much  of  her  presumption 
and  faith  in  her  own  powers  of  observation.  It  might  prove  to 
her  among  other  things  that  she  was  as  much  mistaken  in  rela- 
tion to  Mr.   Sinnett's  attitude  in  this  matter  as  your  own  ;  and 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  211 

that  I,  who  had  never  had  the  privilege  of  your  personal  acquaint- 
ance as  she  had,  knew  you  far  better  than  she  did.  I  had  posi- 
tively foretold  to  her  your  letter.  Rather  than  have  no  Society 
at  all,  she  was  willing  to  have  it  upon  any  terms  at  first,  and  then 
take  her  chances  afterwards.  I  had  warned  her  that  you  were 
not  a  man  to  submit  to  any  conditions  but  your  own  ;  or  even 
take  one  step  towards  the  foundation  of  an  organization — however 
noble  and  great — unless  you  received  first  such  proofs  as  we 
generally  give  but  to  those,  who  by  a  trial  of  years  have  proved 
themselves  thoroughly  trustworthy.  She  rebelled  against  the 
notion  and  assured  that  were  I  but  to  give  you  one  unimpeachable 
test  of  occult  powers  you  would  be  satisfied,  whereas  Mr.  Sinnett 
never  would.  And  now,  that  both  of  you  have  had  such  proofs 
what  are  the  results?  While  Mr.  Sinnett  believes — and  will  never 
repent  of  it,  you  have  allowed  your  mind  to  become  gradually 
filled  with  odious  doubts  and  most  insulting  suspicions.  If  you 
will  kindly  remember  my  first  short  note  from  Jhelum  you  will  see 
to  what  I  then  referred  in  saying  that  you  would  find  your  mind 
poisoned.  You  misunderstood  me  then  as  you  have  ever  since ; 
for  in  it,  I  did  not  refer  to  C.  Olcott's  letter  in  the  Bombay 
Gazette  but  to  your  own  state  of  mind.  Was  I  wrong?  You  not 
only  doubt  the  * 'broach  phenomenon" — you  positively  disbelieve  it. 
You  say  to  Mad.  B. — that  she  may  be  one  of  those  who  believe 
that  bad  means  are  justified  by  good  ends  and — instead  of  crush- 
ing her  with  all  the  scorn  such  an  action  is  sure  to  awaken  in  a 
man  of  your  high  principles — you  assure  her  of  your  unalterable 
friendship.  Even  your  letter  to  me  is  full  of  the  same  suspicious 
spirit,  and  that  which  you  would  never  forgive  in  yourself — the 
crime  of  deception — you  try  to  make  yourself  believe  you  can 
forgive  in  another  person.  My  dear  Sir,  these  are  strange  con- 
tradictions !  Having  favoured  me  with  such  a  series  of  priceless 
moral  reflexions,  advice,  and  truly  noble  sentiments  you  may 
perhaps,  allow  me  in  my  turn,  to  give  you  the  ideas  of  an  humble 
apostle  of  Truth,  an  obscure  Hindu,  upon  that  point.  As  man 
is  a  creature  born  with  a  free  will  and  endowed  with  reason, 
whence  spring  all  his  notions  of  right  and  wrong,  he  does  not 
perse  represent  any  definite  moral  ideal.  The  conception  of 
morality  in  general  relates  first  of  all  to  the  object  or  motive,  and 
only  then  to  the  means  or  modes  of  action.  Hence,  if  we  do  not 
and  would  never  call  a  moral  man  him,  who  following  the  rule 
of  a  famous  religious  schemer  uses  bad  means  for  a  good  object, 
how  much  less  would  we  call  him  moral  who  uses  seemingly  good 
and  noble  means  to  achieve  a  decidedly  wicked  or  contemptible 
object?  And  according  to  your  logic,  and  once  that  you  confess 
to  such  suspicions.  Mad.  B.  would  have  to  be  placed  in  the  first 
of  these  categories,  and  I  in  the  second.     For,  while  giving  her 


212  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

to  a  certain  extent  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  with  myself  you  use 
no  such  superfluous  precautions  and,  you  accuse  me  unequivocally 
of  setting  up  a  system  of  deceit.  The  argument  used  in  my 
letter,  in  regard  to  **  the  approbation  of  the  Home  Government  " 
you  term  as  "  such  very  low  motives  "  ;  and  you  add  to  it  the  fol- 
lowing crushing  and  direct  accusation  :  *'  You  do  not  want  this 
branch  (the  Anglo-Indian)  for  work.  .  .  .  You  merely  want 
it  as  a  lure  to  your  native  brethren.  You  know  it  will  be  a  sham, 
but  it  will  look  sufficiently  like  the  real  thing,"  etc.,  etc.  This  is 
a  direct  and  positive  accusation.  I  am  shown  guilty  of  the  pur- 
suit of  a  wicked,  mean  object  through  low  and  contemptible 
means,  i.e.,  false  pretences. 

In  penning  these  accusations  did  you  stop  to  think,  that  as  the 
projected  organization  had  something  grander,  nobler  and  far 
more  important  in  view  than  the  mere  gratification  of  the  desires 
of  one  solitary  person — however  worthy — namely  in  case  of  success 
to  promote  the  security  and  welfare  of  a  tvhole  conquered  nation — 
it  is  just  barely  possible  that  that  which  to  your  individual  pride 
may  appear  a  **  low  motive  "  is  after  all  but  the  anxious  search 
for  means  which  would  be  the  salvation  of  a  whole  country  ever 
distrusted  and  suspected,  the  protection  by  the  conqueror  of  the 
conquered  !  You  pride  yourself  upon  not  being  a  *'  patriot" — 
/  do  not;  for,  in  learning  to  love  one's  country  one  but  learns  to 
love  humanity  the  more.  The  lack  of  that  you  term  "  low 
motives  "  in  1857  caused  my  country-men  to  be  blown  by  yours 
from  the  mouths  of  their  guns.  Why  then  should  I  not  fancy 
that  a  real  philanthropist  would  regard  the  aspirations  for  a  better 
understanding  between  the  Govt,  and  people  of  India  as  a  most 
commendable  instead  of  an  ignoble  one?  "A  fig  "  say  you 
"  for  the  knowledge  and  the  philosophy  on  which  it  is  based,"  if 
— *'  it  would  not  be  of  any  good  to  mankind,"  would  not  **  enable 
me  to  be  more  useful  to  my  generation,"  etc.  etc.  But  when  you 
are  offered  the  means  of  doing  such  good  you  turn  away  in  scorn 
and  taunt  us  with  a  **  lure  "  and  a  '*  sham  "  !  Truly  wonderful 
are  the  contradictions  contained  in  your  remarkable  letter.  And 
then,  you  laugh  so  heartily  at  the  idea  of  a  **  reward  "  or  the 
"  approval  "  of  your  fellow-creatures.  "  The  reward  to  which 
I  shall  look  will  be,"  you  say — **  in  earning  my  own  selj -approval.'" 
'*  Self-approval  "  which  cares  so  little  for  the  corroborative  verdict 
of  the  better  part  of  the  world  at  large,  to  which  the  good  and 
noble  deeds  of  one  serve  as  high  ideals  and  the  most  powerful 
stimulants  to  emulation,  is  little  else  than  proud  and  arrogant 
egotism.  It  is  Himself  against  all  criticism;  "  apres  moi — le 
deluge  "  ! — exclaims  the  Frenchman  with  his  usual  flippancy. 
"  Before  Jehovah  wa^,  I  am  "  !  says  Man — the  ideal  of  every 
modern  intellectual  Englishman.     Gratified  as  I  feel  at  the  idea 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  213 

of  being-  the  means  of  affording  you  so  much  merriment,  namely 
in  asking  you  to  draft  a  general  plan  for  the  formation  of  the  A.I. 
Branch,  I  yet  am  bound  to  say  again  that  your  laugh  was  prema- 
ture in  as  much  you  once  more  misunderstood  entirely  my 
meaning.  Had  I  asked  for  your  help  in  the  organization  of  a 
system  for  teaching  the  occult  sciences,  or  a  plan  for  a  **  school 
of  magick  "  the  instance  brought  by  you  of  an  ignorant  boy  asked 
to  work  out  '*  an  abstruse  problem  regarding  the  motion  of  a  fluid 
inside  another  fluid  "  might  be  a  happy  one.  As  it  is,  your  com- 
parison falls  short  of  the  mark  and  the  bit  of  irony  hits  no  one ; 
for  my  mentioning  the  subject  related  merely  to  the  general  plan 
and  outward  administration  of  the  projected  Society  and  not  in 
the  least  to  its  esoteric  studies;  to  the  Branch  of  the  Universal 
Brotherhood  not  to  the  "  School  of  Magick  " — the  formation  of  the 
former  being  the  sine  qua  non  for  the  latter.  Most  assuredly  in 
such  matters  as  this  one — ^the  organization  of  an  A.I.  Branch,  to 
be  composed  of  Englishmen  and  meant  to  serve  as  a  link  between 
the  British  and  the  natives — (the  condition  being  that  they  who 
want  to  share  in  the  secret  knowledge,  the  inheritance  of  the 
children  of  the  soil,  must  be  prepared  to  accord  at  least  some 
privileges  hitherto  refused  to  these  natives) — you  English  people 
are  far  more  competent  than  we  to  draft  a  general  plan.  You 
know  the  conditions  you  would  be  likely  to  accept  or  reject  as  we 
might  not.  I  asked  you  for  a  skeleton  plan,  and  you  imagined  I 
clamoured  for  co-operation  in  the  instructions  to  be  given  in 
spiritual  sciences  !  Most  unfortunate  qui  pro  quo — and  yet  Mr. 
Sinnett  seems  to  have  understood  my  wish  at  a  glance. 

Again  you  seem  to  show  an  unfamiliarity  with  the  Hindu  mind 
when  you  say  **  not  one  in  ten  thousand  native  minds  is  as  well 
pref>ared  to  realize  and  assimilate  transcendental  truths  as  mine." 
However  much  you  may  be  right  in  thinking  that  '*  amongst  Eng- 
lish men  of  Science  there  are  not  half  a  dozen  even  whose  minds 
are  more  capable  of  receiving  these  rudiments  (of  occult  know- 
ledge) than  mine  "  (yours) — you  are  mistaken  as  to  the  natives. 
The  Hindu  mind  is  pre-eminently  open  to  the  quick  and  clear 
perception  of  the  most  transcendental,  the  most  abstruse  meta- 
physical truths.  Some  of  the  most  unlettered  ones  will  seize  at 
a  glance  that  which  would  often  escape  the  best  Western  meta- 
physician. You  may  be,  and  most  assuredly  are  our  superiors  in 
every  branch  of  physical  knowledge  ;  in  spiritual  sciences  we  were, 
are  and  always  will  be  your — Masters. 

But  let  me  ask  you,  what  can  I,  a  half  civilized  native, — think 
of  the  charity,  modesty  and  kindness  of  one  belonging  to  a  superior 
race ;  one,  whom  I  know  as  a  noble-minded,  just,  and  kind-hearted 
man  in  most  circumstances  of  his  life,  when,  with  an  ill-disguised 
scorn  he  exclaims  :  "if  you  want  men  to  rush  on  blind-fold,  heed- 


214  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

less  of  ulterior  results^ — stick  to  your  Olcotts — if  you  want  men 
of  a  higher  class,  whose  brains  are  to  work  effectually  in  your 
cause,  remember  .  .  ."  etc.  My  dear  sir,  we  neither  want 
men  to  rush  on  blind-fold,  nor  are  we  prepared  to  abandon  tried 
friends — who  rather  pass  for  fools,  than  reveal  what  they  may 
have  learnt  under  a  solemn  pledge  of  never  revealing  it  unless 
permitted — even  for  the  chance  of  getting  men  of  the  very  highest 
class, — nor  are  we  especially  anxious  to  have  anyone  work  for 
us  except  with  entire  spvontaneity.  We  want  true  and  unselfish 
hearts ;  fearless  and  confiding  souls,  and  are  quite  willing  to  leave 
the  men  of  the  "  higher  class  "  and  far  higher  intellects  to  grope 
their  own  way  to  the  light.  Such  will  only  look  upon  us  as  sub- 
ordinates. 

I  believe  that  these  few  quotations  from  your  letter  and  the  frank 
answers  they  have  called  for,  are  sufficient  to  show  how  far  we 
are  from  anything  like  an  entente  cordiale.  You  show  a  spirit  of 
fierce  combativeness  and  a  desire — pardon  me — to  fight  shadows 
evoked  by  your  own  imagination.  I  had  the  honour  of  receiving 
three  long  letters  from  you  even  before  I  had  barely  time  to  answer 
in  general  terms  your  first  one.  I  had  never  positively  refused 
to  comply  with  your  wishes,  never  had  answered  as  yet  one  single 
question  of  yours.  How  did  you  know  what  the  Future  held  in 
store  for  you,  had  you  but  waited  one  week?  You  invite  me  to 
a  conference  only,  as  it  would  seem,  that  you  may  show  me  the 
defects  and  weaknesses  in  our  modes  of  action,  and  the  causes  for 
our  supposed  failure  to  convert  humanity  from  their  evil  ways. 
And  in  your  letter  you  show  plainly  that  you  are  the  beginning, 
the  middle  and  the  end  of  the  law  to  yourself.  Then  why  trouble 
yourself  to  write  to  me  at  all.*'  Even  that,  which  you  call  a 
"  Parthian  arrow  "  was  never  meant  as  such.  It  is  not  I,  who, 
unable  to  get  the  Absolute  will  depreciate  or  undervalue  the  rela- 
tive good.  Your  **  little  birds  "  have,  no  doubt,  since  you  so 
believe,  done  much  good  In  their  way  and  I  certainly  never  dreamt 
of  giving  offence  by  my  remark  that  the  human  race  and  its  wel- 
fare, were  at  least  as  noble  a  study,  and  the  latter  as  desirable  an 
occupation  as  ornithology.  But,  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  your 
parting  remark  as  to  our  not  being  invulnerable  as  a  body  is  quite 
free  of  that  spirit  which  animated  the  retreating  Parthians.  Be 
it  as  it  may,  we  are  content  to  live  as  we  do — unknown  and  un- 
disturbed by  a  civilization  which  rests  so  exclusively  upon  the 
intellect.  Nor  do  we  feel  in  any  way  concerned  about  the  revival 
of  our  ancient  arts  and  high  civilization,  for  these  are  as  sure  to 
come  back  in  their  time,  and  in  a  higher  form  as  the  Plesiosaurus 
and  the  Megatherium  in  theirs.  We  have  the  weakness  to  believe 
in  ever-recurrent  cycles  and  hope  to  quicken  the  resurrection  of 
1  /  never  said — /  did! 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  215 

what  is  past  and  gfone.  We  could  not  impede  it  even  if  we  would. 
The  **  new  civilization  "  will  be  but  the  child  of  the  old  one,  and 
we  have  but  to  leave  the  eternal  law  to  take  its  own  course  to 
have  our  dead  ones  come  out  of  their  graves ;  yet,  we  are  certainly 
anxious  to  hasten  the  welcome  event.  Fear  not ;  although  we  do 
**  cling  superstitiously  to  the  relics  of  the  Past"  our  knowledge 
will  not  pass  away  from  the  sight  of  man.  It  is  the  **  gift  of  the 
Gods  "  and  the  most  precious  relic  of  all.  The  keepers  of  the 
sacred  Light  did  not  safely  cross  so  many  ages  but  to  find  them- 
selves wrecked  on  the  rocks  of  modern  scepticism.  Our  pilots 
are  too  experienced  sailors  to  allow  us  to  fear  any  such  disaster. 
We  will  always  find  volunteers  to  replace  the  tired  sentries,  and 
the  world,  bad  as  it  is  in  its  present  state  of  transitory  period,  can 
yet  furnish  us  with  a  few  men  now  and  then.  You  **  do  not  pro- 
pose moving  further  in  the  matter"  unless  we  make  "some 
further  sign  "  ?  My  dear  sir,  we  have  done  our  duty  :  we  have 
resix>nded  to  your  appeal,  and  now  propose  to  take  no  further 
step.  We,  who  have  studied  a  little  Kant's  moral  teachings, 
analyzed  them  somewhat  carefully,  have  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  even  this  great  thinker's  views  on  that  form  of  duty  (das 
SoUen)  which  defines  the  method  of  moral  action — notwithstanding 
his  one-sided  affirmation  to  the  contrary — falls  short  of  a  full 
definition  of  an  unconditional  absolute  principle  of  morality — as  we 
understand  it.  And  this  Kantian  note  sounds  throughout  your 
letter.  You  so  love  mankind,  you  say,  that  were  not  your  genera- 
tion to  benefit  by  it,  you  would  reject  *'  Knowledge  "  itself.  And 
yet,  this  philanthropic  feeling  does  not  even  seem  to  inspire  you 
with  charity  towards  those  you  regard  as  of  an  inferior  intelli- 
gence. Why?  Simply  because  the  philanthropy  you  Western 
thinkers  boast  of,  having  no  character  of  universality ;  i.e.  never 
having  been  established  on  the  firm  footing  of  a  moral,  universal 
principle ;  never  having  risen  higher  than  theoretical  talk ;  and 
that  chiefly  among  the  ubiquitous  protestant  preachers,  it  is  but  a 
mere  accidental  manifestation  but  no  recognised  Law.  The  most 
superficial  analysis  will  show,  that,  no  more  than  any  other 
empirical  phenomenon  in  human  nature,  cannot  be  taken  as  an 
absolute  standard  of  moral  activity;  i.e.  one  productive  of  efficient 
action.  Since,  in  its  empirical  nature  this  kind  of  philanthropy 
is  like  love,  but  something  accidental,  exceptional,  and  like  that 
has  its  selfish  preferences  and  affinities ;  it  necessarily  is  unable  to 
warm  all  mankind  with  its  beneficent  rays.  This,  I  think  is,  the 
secret  of  the  spiritual  failure  and  unconscious  egotism  of  this  age. 
And  you,  otherwise  a  good  and  a  wise  man,  being  unconsciously 
to  yourself  the  type  of  its  spirit,  are  unable  to  understand  our  ideas 
upon  the  Society  as  a  Universal  Brotherhood,  and  hence — turn 
away  your  face  from  it. 


2i6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Your  conscience  revolts  you  say  to  be  made  **  a  stalking  horse; 
the  pupp>et  of  a  score  or  more  of  hidden  wire-pullers."       What 
do  you  know  of  us  since  you  cannot  see  us ;  what  do  you  know 
of  our  aims  and  objects;  of  us,  of  whom  you  cannot  judge?      You 
ask  strange  arguments.       And  do  you  really  suppK>se  you  would 
**  know"   us,   or  penetrate  any  better  our  **  aims  and  objects" 
were  you  to  see  me  personally?       I  am  afraid,  that  with  no  past 
experience  of  this  kind,  even  your  natural  powers  of  observation — 
however  acute — ^would  have  to  be  confessed   more  than  useless. 
Why,  my  dear  Sir,  even  our  Baharoopias  can  prove  a  match  any 
day  for   the   acutest  political    resident ;   and   never  yet   one  was 
detected  or  even  recognised  ;  and  their  mesmeric  powers  are  not 
of  the  highest  order.       However  suspicious  you  might  ever  feel 
about  the  details  of  the  **  broach  "  there  is  one  prime  feature  in 
the  case  which  your  astuteness  has  already  told  you  can  only  be 
accounted  for  on  the  theory  of  a  stronger  will  influencing  Mrs. 
Hume  to  think  after  that  particular  object  and  no  other.       And  if 
Mad.   B.,  a  sickly  woman,   must  be  credited  with   such   p>owers, 
are  you  quite  sure  that  you  yourself  would  not  also  be  made  to 
succumb  to  a  trained  will,  ten  times  stronger  than  hers?      I  could 
come  to  you  to-morrow,  and  installing  myself  in  your  house — as 
invited — ^get  an  entire  domination  over  your  whole  mind  and  body 
in  24  hours,  and  you  never  aware  of  it  for  one  moment.      I  may  be 
a  good  man,  but  so  I  may,  for  all  you  know,  as  easily  be  a  wicked, 
plotting  schemer,  hating  profoundly  your  white  race  which  sub- 
jugated and  daily  humiliates  mine,   and — take  revenge  on  you — 
one  of  the  best  representatives  of  that  race.       If  the  powers  of 
exoteric  mesmerism  alone  were  employed — a  power  acquired  with 
equal  ease  by  the  bad  as  by  the  good  man — even  then  you  could 
hardly  escape  the  snares  laid  out  for  you  were  the  man  you  invited 
but  a  good  mesmeriser,  for — you  are  a  remarkably  easy  subject — 
from     the     physical     stand-point.        **  But    my     conscience     my 
intuition  !  "  you  may  argue.       Poor  help  in  such  a  case  as  mine. 
Your  intuition  would  make  you  feel  but  that  which  really  was — 
for  the  time  being ;  and  as  to  your  conscience — you  then  accept 
Kant's  definition  of  it?       You,    perhaps,    believe  with   him   that 
under  all  circumstances,  and  even  with  the  full  absence  of  definite 
religious  notions,  and  occasionally  even  with  no  firm  notions  about 
right  and  wrong  at  all,  man  has  ever  a  sure  guide  in  his  own  inner 
moral  perceptions  or — conscience  ?       The  greatest  of  mistakes  ! 
With  all  the  formidable  importance  of  this  moral  factor,  it  has  one 
radical  defect.       Conscience  as  it  was  already  remarked  may  be 
well  compared  to  that  demon,  whose  dictates  were  so  zealously 
listened  to  and  so  promptly  obeyed  by  Socrates.      Like  that  demon, 
conscience,  may  perchance,  tell  us  what  we  must  not  do ;  yet,  it 
never  guides  us  as  to  what  we  ought  to  perform,  nor  gives  any 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  217 

definite  object  to  our  activity.  And — nothing  can  be  more  easily 
lulled  to  sleep  and  even  completely  paralyzed,  as  this  same  con- 
science by  a  trained  will  stronger  than  that  of  its  possessor.  Your 
conscience  will  never  show  you  whether  the  mesmeriser  is  a  true 
adept  or  a  very  clever  juggler,  if  he  once  has  passed  your  threshold 
and  got  control  of  the  aura  surrounding  your  person.  You  speak 
of  abstaining  from  any  but  an  innocent  work  like  birdKrollecting, 
lest  there  be  danger  of  creating  another  Frankenstein's  monster. 
.  .  .  Imagination  as  well  as  will  creates.  Suspicion  is  the 
most  powerful  provocative  agent  of  imagination.  .  .  . 
Beware  !  You  have  already  begotten  in  you  the  germ  of  a  future 
hideous  monster,  and  instead  of  the  realization  of  your  purest  and 
highest  ideals  you  may  one  day  evoke  a  phantom,  which,  barring 
every  passage  of  Light  will  leave  you  in  worse  darkness  than 
before.      And,  will  harass  you  to  the  end  of  your  days. 

Again  expressing  the  hope  that  my  candour  may  not  give  oifence, 
I  am,  dear  Sir,  as  ever, 

Your  most  obedient  Servant, 

KooT  HooMi  Lal  Sing. 

A.  O.  Hume,  Esq. 


LETTER  No.  XXIX 

In  answer  to  yours  I  will  have  to  reply  by  a  rather  lengthy 
letter.  To  begin  with  1  can  say  the  following :  Mr.  Hume 
thinks  and  speaks  of  me  in  a  way  which  need  only  be  noticed 
so  far  as  it  affects  the  frame  of  mind  with  which  he  proposes 
to  apply  to  me  for  philosophical  instruction.  For  his  respect 
I  care  as  little  as  he  for  my  displeasure.  But  passing  over  his 
superficial  disagreeableness  I  recognize  fully  his  goodness  of 
motive,  his  abilities,  his  potential  usefulness.  We  had  better 
get  to  work  again  without  further  parley,  and  while  he  per- 
severes, he  will  find  me  ready  to  help — but  not  to  flatter,  nor 
to  dispute. 

So  utterly  has  he  misunderstood  the  spirit  in  which  both  the 
Memo  and  P.S.  were  written,  that  had  he  not  placed  me  during 
the  three  last  days  under  a  debt  of  profound  gratitude  for  what 
he  is  doing  for  my  poor  old  chela,  I  would  have  never  gone  to 
the  trouble  of  doing  what  might  seem  as  an  excuse,  or  an  ex- 
planation, or  both.  However  that  may  be,  that  debt  of  grati- 
tude is  so  sacred,  that  I  now  do  for  her  sake,  what  I  might 
have  refused  doing  even  for  the  Society  :  I  crave  the  Sahibs* 
permission  to  acquaint  them  with  some  facts.  With  our  Indo- 
Tibetan   ways   the   most   sagacious    English   official   is   not   yet 


2i8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

acquainted.  The  information  now  offered  may  be  found  useful 
in  our  future  transactions.  I  will  have  to  be  sincere  and  out- 
spoken and  Mr.  Hume  will  have  to  excuse  me.  If  I  once  am 
forced  to  speak  1  must  say  all — or  say — nothing. 

1  am  not  a  fine  scholar.  Sahib,  like  my  blessed  Brother;  but 
nevertheless,  I  believe,  1  understand  the  value  of  words.  And 
if  1  do,  then  am  I  at  a  loss  to  understand,  what  in  my  P.S. 
could  have  so  provoked  the  ironical  displeasure  against  me  of 
Mr.  Hume?  We  of  the  Indo-Tibetan  hovels  never  quarrel 
(this  in  answer  to  some  expressed  thoughts  in  relation  to  the 
subject)  quarrels  and  even  discussions  we  leave  to  those,  who 
unable  to  take  in  a  situation  at  a  glance  are  thereby  forced 
before  making  up  their  final  decision  to  anything  to  analyse 
and  weigh  one  by  one,  and  over  and  over  again  every  detail. 
Whenever  we — at  least  those  of  us  who  are  dikshita — seem, 
therefore  to  an  European  not  **  quite  sure  of  our  facts  "  it  may 
be  often  due  to  the  following  peculiarity.  That  which  is  re- 
garded by  most  men  as  a  '*  fact  *'  to  us  may  seem  but  a  simple 
result,  an  after  thought  unworthy  of  our  attention,  generally 
attracted  but  to  primary  facts.  Life,  esteemed  Sahibs,  when 
even  indefinitely  prolonged,  is  too  short  to  burden  our  brains 
with  flitting  details — mere  shadows.  When  watching  the  pro- 
gress of  a  storm  we  fix  our  gaze  upon  the  producing  Cause  and 
leave  the  clouds  to  the  whims  of  the  breaze  which  shapes  them. 
Having  always  the  means  on  hand — ^whenever  absolutely 
needed — of  bringing  to  our  knowledge  minor  details  we  con- 
cern ourselves  but  with  the  main  facts.  Hence  we  can  hardly 
be  absolutely  wrong — as  we  are  often  accused  by  you,  for  our 
conclusions  are  never  drawn  from  secondary  data  but  from  the 
situation  as  a  whole. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  average  man — even  among  the  most 
intellectual — giving  all  their  attention  to  the  testimony  of  appear- 
ance and  outward  form,  and  disabled  as  they  are  from  pene- 
trating a  priori  to  the  core  of  things  are  but  too  apt  to  misjudge 
of  the  whole  situation  left  to  find  out  their  mistake  but  when 
too  late.  Owing  to  complicated  politics,  to  debates  and  what 
you  term,  if  I  mistake  not,  social  talk  and  drawing-room  con- 
troversies and  discussions,  sophistry  has  now  become  in  Europe 
(hence  among  the  Anglo-Indians)  **  the  logical  exercise  of  the 
intellectual  faculties,"  while  with  us  it  has  never  outgrown  its 
pristine  stage  of  **  fallacious  reasoning."  the  shaky,  insecure 
premises  from  which  most  of  the  conclusions  and  opinions  are 
drawn,  formed  and  forthwith  jumped  at.  Again,  we  ignorant 
Asiatics  of  Tibet,  accustomed  to  rather  follow  the  thought  of 
our  interlocutor  or  correspondent  than  the  words  he  clothes  it 
in — concern  ourselves  generally  but  little  with  the  accuracy  of 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  219 

his  expressions.  Now  this  preface  will  seem  as  unintelligible 
as  useless  to  you.  And  you  may  well  ask  :  what  is  he  driving 
at.  Patience,  pray,  for  I  have  something  more  to  say  before 
our  final  explanation. 

A  few  days  before  leaving  us,  Koot  Hoomi  speaking  of  you 
said  to  me  as  follows,  *'  I  feel  tired  and  weary  of  these  never 
ending  disputations.  The  more  I  try  to  explain  to  both  of 
them  the  circumstances  that  control  us  and  that  interpose  be- 
tween us  so  many  obstacles  to  free  intercourse,  the  less  they 
understand  me  I  Under  the  most  favourable  aspect  this  cor- 
respondence must  always  be  unsatisfactory,  even  exasperatingly 
so,  at  times;  for  nothing  short  of  personal  interviews,  at  which 
there  could  be  discussion  and  the  instant  solution  of  intellectual 
difficulties  as  they  arise,  would  satisfy  them  fully.  It  is  as 
though  we  were  hallooing  to  each  other  across  an  impassable 
ravine  and  only  one  of  us  seeing  his  interlocutor.  In  point  of 
fact,  there  is  no  where  in  physical  nature  a  mountain  abyss  so 
hopelessly  impassable  and  obstructive  to  the  traveller  as  that 
spiritual  one,  which  keeps  them  back  from  me.'* 

Two  days  later  when  his  **  retreat  '  was  decided  upon  in 
parting  he  asked  me  :  '*  Will  you  watch  over  my  work,  will  you 
see  it  falls  not  into  ruins?  "  I  promised.  What  is  there  I  would 
not  have  promised  him  at  that  hour  I  At  a  certain  spot  not  to 
be  mentioned  to  outsiders,  there  is  a  chasm  spanned  by  a  frail 
bridge  of  woven  grasses  and  with  a  raging  torrent  beneath. 
The  bravest  member  of  your  Alpine  Club  would  scarcely  dare 
to  venture  the  passage,  for  it  hangs  like  a  spider's  web  and 
seems  to  be  rotten  and  impassable,  yet  it  is  not;  and  he  who 
dares  the  trial  and  succeeds — as  he  will  if  it  is  right  that  he 
should  be  permitted — comes  into  a  gorge  of  surpassing  beauty 
of  scenery — to  one  of  our  places  and  to  some  of  our  people,  of 
which  and  whom  there  is  no  note  or  minute  among  European 
geographers.  At  a  stone's  throw  from  the  old  Lamasery  stands 
the  old  tower,  within  whose  bosom  have  gestated  generations 
of  Bodhisatwas.  It  is  there,  where  now  rests  your  lifeless  friend 
— ^my  brother,  the  light  of  my  soul,  to  whom  I  made  a  faithful 
promise  to  watch  during  his  absence  over  his  work.  And  is  it 
likely,  I  ask  you,  that  but  two  days  after  his  retirement  I,  his 
faithful  friend  and  brother  would  have  gratuitously  shown  dis- 
respect to  his  European  friend?  What  reason  was  there,  and 
what  could  have  caused  such  an  idea  in  Mr.  Hume's  and  even 
in  your  mind?  Why  a  word  or  two  entirely  misunderstood  and 
misapplied  by  him.     I'll  prove  it. 

Don't  you  think  that  had  the  expression  used  *  coming  to 
hate  the  sut-phana  "  been  changed  into  and  made  to  read 
"  coming  to   feel  again   flashes   of   dislike  "   or   of  temporary 


220  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEBS 

irritation  this  sentence  alone  would  have  wonderfully  changed 
the  results?  Had  it  been  so  phrased  Mr.  Hume  would  hardly 
have  found  an  opportunity  for  denying  the  fact  as  vigorously 
as  he  did.  For  there  he  is  right  and  the  word  is  wrong.  It  is 
a  perfectly  correct  statement  when  saying  that  such  a  feeling 
as  hatred  has  never  existed  in  him.  Whether  he  will  be  as  able 
to  protest  against  the  statement  in  general  remains  to  be  seen. 
He  confessed  to  the  fact  that  he  was  *'  irritated,"  and  to  a 
"  feeling  of  distrust  "  created  by  H.P.B.  That  **  irritation," 
as  he  will  no  longer  deny,  lasted  for  several  days?  Where  does 
he  then  find  the  misstatement?  Let  us  moreover  admit,  that 
the  word  to  use  was  an  incorrect  one.  Then,  since  he  is  so 
particular  in  the  choice  of  words,  so  desirous  that  they  should 
always  convey  the  correct  meaning,  why  not  apply  the  same 
rule  of  action  to  himself?  What  might  be  well  excused  in  an 
Asiatic  ignorant  of  English  and  one,  moreover,  who  never  was 
in  the  habit  of  choosing  his  expressions,  for  reasons  given 
above,  and  because  among  his  people  he  cannot  be  misunder- 
stood ought  to  become  inexcusable  in  an  educated,  highly 
literary  Englishman.  In  his  letter  to  Olcott  he  writes  :  *'  He 
(I)  or  she  (H.P.B.),  or  both  between  them,  so  muddled  and 
misunderstood  a  letter  written  by  Sinnett  and  myself  as  to  lead 
to  our  receiving  a  message  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  circum- 
stances and  such  as  necessarily  to  create  distrust,*'  Humbly 
soliciting  permission  to  put  a  question,  when  did  either  I,  or 
she  or  both  of  us,  see,  read  and  hence  *'  muddled  and  misunder- 
stood *'  the  letter  in  question?  How  could  she,  or  1,  have 
muddled  that,  which  she  had  never  seen  and  1,  having  neither 
inclination  nor  right  to  look  into  and  mix  myself  in  an  affair 
concerning  but  the  Chohan  and  K.H.,  never  paid  the  slightest 
attention  to?  Did  she  inform  you  on  the  day  in  question,  that 
it  was  in  consequence  of  that  letter  of  yours  that  I  had  sent  her 
into  Mr.  Sinnett's  room  with  the  message?  I  was  there  re- 
spected Sahibs,  and  can  repeat  to  you  every  word  she  said. 
**  What  is  it?  .  What  have  you  been  doing,  or  saying 

to  K.H." — she  shouted  in  her  usual  excited  nervous  way  to 
Mr.  Sinnett  w^ho  was  alone  in  the  room — "that  M.,  (naming 
me)  that  he  should  be  so  angry — should  tell  me  to  prepare  to 
go  and  settle  our  headquarters  at  Ceylon?  "  were  the  first  words 
she  said,  thus  showing  that  she  k''^ew  nothing  certain,  was  told 
still  less,  and  simply  surmised  from  what  I  had  told  her.  And 
what  I  had  told  her,  was  simply  that  she  had  better  prepare 
for  the  worse  and  depart  and  settle  in  Ceylon  than  make  a  fool 
of  herself,  trembling  so  over  every  letter  given  to  her  to  forward 
to  K.H.;  that  unless  she  learned  to  control  herself  better  than 
she  did,  I  would  put  a  stop  to  that  dak  business.     These  words 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  221 

were  said  by  me  to  her  not  because  I  had  anything  to  do  with 
your  or  any  letter,  nor  in  consequence  of  any  letter  sent,  but 
because  I  happened  to  see  the  aura  all  around  the  new  Eclectic 
and  herself,  black  and  pregnant  with  future  mischief,  and  I  sent 
her  to  say  so  to  Mr.  Sinnett  not  to  Mr.  Hume.  My  remark  and 
message  upsetting  her  (owing  to  that  unfortunate  disposition  and 
shattered  nerves)  in  the  most  ridiculous  way,  the  well  known 
scene  ensued.  Is  it  because  of  the  phantoms  of  theosophical 
ruin  evoked  by  her  unbalanced  brain  that  she  is  now  accused 
— in  my  company — to  have  muddled  and  misunderstood  a  letter 
she  had  never  seen?  Whether  there  is  in  Mr.  Hume's  state- 
ment one  single  word  that  might  be  called  correct,  the  term 
'*  correct  *'  being  now  applied  by  me  to  the  actual  meaning  of 
the  whole  sentence,  not  merely  to  isolated  words — I  leave  to 
the  judgment  of  minds  superior  to  those  of  Asiatics.  And  if 
I  am  permitted  to  question  the  correctness  of  opinion  in  one, 
so  vastly  superior  to  myself  in  education,  intelligence  and 
acuteness  in  the  perception  of  the  eternal  fitness  of  things,  in 
view  of  the  above  explanation,  why  should  I  be  held  as  **  ab- 
solutely wrong  **  for  the  following  statement :  **  I  have  also 
seen  the  growing  up  of  a  sudden  dislike  (say  irritation)  begotten 
of  distrust  (Mr.  Hume  confessing  to,  and  using  the  identical 
expression  in  his  answer  to  Olcott — please  compare  quotations 
from  his  letter  as  given  above)  on  the  day  I  sent  her  with  a 
message  to  Mr.  Sinnett*s  room.**  Is  this  incorrect?  And 
further,  **  they  know  how  excitable  and  ill  balanced  she  is,  and 
this  hostile  feeling  on  his  part  was  almost  cruel.  For  days  he 
barely  looked  at  her  let  alone  speaking  to  her — and  inflicted 
upon  her  supersensitive  nature  severe  and  unnecessary  pain  ! 
And  when  told  of  it  by  Mr.  Sinnett  he  denied  the  fact!  *'  TTiis 
last  sentence,  continued  on  page  7  with  many  other  like  truths, 
I  tore  out  with  the  rest  (as  upon  enquiry  it  was  ascertained  from 
Olcott,  who  will  tell  you  that  originally  there  were  12  pages, 
not  10,  and  that  he  had  sent  the  letter  with  far  more  details 
than  you  now  find  in  it,  for  he  is  unaware  of  what  I  have  done, 
and  why  it  was  done.  Unwilling  to  remind  Mr.  Hume  of  details 
long  forgotten  by  him  and  irrelevant  to  the  case  in  hand,  1  tore 
out  the  page  and  obliterated  much  of  the  rest.  His  feelings 
had  already  changed  and  I  was  satisfied.) 

Now  the  question  is  not  whether  Mr.  Hume  **  cares  a  two- 
pence *'  if  his  feelings  are  pleasing  to  me  or  not,  but  rather 
whether  he  was  warranted  by  facts  to  write  to  Olcott  as  he  did, 
i.e.,  that  I  had  entirely  misunderstood  his  real  feelings.  I  say 
he  was  not.  He  can  no  more  prevent  me  from  being  **  dis- 
pleased, than  I  can  go  to  the  trouble  of  making  him  feel  other- 
wise than  what  he  now  feels,  namely,  that  he  does  not  **  care 

16 


222  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

a  twopence  whether  his  feelings  are  pleasing  to  me  or  not/* 
All  this  is  childishness;  and  he  who  is  desirous  to  learn  how  to 
benefit  humanity,  and  believes  himself  able  to  read  the  char- 
acters of  other  people,  must  begin  first  of  all,  to  learn  to  ^nou) 
himself,  to  appreciate  his  own  character  at  its  true  value.     And 
this,   I  venture  to  say,  he  has  never  learned  yet.     And  he  has 
also  to  learn  in  v/hat  particular  cases  results  may  in  their  turn 
become  important  and  primary  causes,  when  the  result  becomes 
a  Kyen.       Had  he   hated  her  with  the  most  bitter  hatred,   he 
could   not   have    tortured    her    foolishly    sensitive    nerves    more 
effectually  than  he  has,  while  *'  still  loving  the  dear  old  woman.'* 
He  has  done  so  with  those  he  loved  best,  and,  unconsciously 
to  himself  he  will  do  so  more  than  once  in  the  hereafter;  and 
yet  his  first  impulse  will  be  always  to  deny  it,  for  he  is  indeed 
fully  unconscious  of  the  fact,  the  extreme  kindness  of  his  heart, 
being  in  such  cases  entirely  blinded  and  paralyzed  by  another 
feeling,  which,  if  told  of,  he  will  also  deny.     Undismayed  by 
his  epithet  of  **  goose  and  Don  Quichote,*'  true  to  my  promise 
to  my  Blessed  Brother,  I  will  tell  him  of  it  whether  he  likes  it 
or  not;  for  now  that  he  has  openly  given  expression  to  his  feel- 
ings,  we  have   either  to  understand  each   other  or  break   off. 
This  is  "  no  half  veiled  threat  **  as  he  expresses  it  for  **  a  threat 
in  a  man  is  like  the  bark  in  a  dog  *' — it  means  nothing.     I  say, 
that  unless  he  understands  how  utterly  inapplicable  to  us  is  the 
standard  according  to  which  he  is  accustomed  to  judge  western 
people  of  his  own  society,   it  would  simply  be  a  loss  of  time 
for  me  or  K.H.  to  teach  and  for  him  to  learn.     We  never  re- 
garded   a    friendly   warning    as    a    *'  threat,**    nor    do   we    feel 
irritated  w^hen  it  is  offered  to  us.     He  says  that  personally  he 
does  not  care  in  the  least,   **  were  the  Brothers  to  break  with 
him  to-morrow^,**   the  more  reason  then  that  we  should  come 
to  an  understanding.     Mr.  Hume  prides  himself  in  the  thought 
that  he  never  had  **  a  spirit  of  veneration  **  for  anything  but 
his  owm  abstract  ideals.     We  are  perfectly  aw^are   of  it.     Nor 
could  he  possibly  have  any  veneration  for  anyone  or  anything, 
as  all  the  veneration  his  nature  is  capable  of  is — concentrated 
upon   himself.      TTiis  is   a   fact   and  the   cause   of  all   his  life- 
troubles.     When  his  numerous  official  **  friends  **  and  his  own 
family   say  that,    it  is   conceit — they   misstate   and   say   a   very 
foolish  thing.       He  is  too  highly  intellectual  to  be  conceited  : 
he  is  simply  and  unconsciously  to  himself  the  embodiment  of 
pride.     He  would  have  no  veneration  for  even  his  Cod,  were 
not  that  God — of  his  own  creation  and  making:  and  that  is  why 
he  could  neither  be  made  amenable  to  any  established  doctrine, 
nor  would  he  ever  submit  to  a  philosophy  that  did  not  come  all 
armed,  like  the  Grecian  Saraswaiti  or  Minerva,  out  of  his  own 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  223 

— her  father's — brain.  This  may  throw  light  upon  the  fact  why 
I  refused  giving  him  during  the  short  period  of  my  instruction 
— anything  but  half  problems,  hints  and  puzzles  to  solve  for 
himself.  For  only  then  would  he  believe,  when  his  own  extra- 
ordinary capacity  for  grasping  at  the  nature  of  things,  would 
clearly  show  him  that  it  must  be  so,  since  it  dovetails  with  what 
he  conceives  to  be  mathematically  correct.  If  he  accuse — and 
so  unjustly ! — K.H.  whom  he  really  affections — of  feeling 
**  huffish  "  at  his  lack  of  reverence  for  him — it  is  because  he 
built  his  ideal  of  my  brother  in  his  own  image — Mr.  Hume 
accuses  us  of  teaching  him  de  haut  en  has!  If  he  but  knew 
that  in  our  sight  an  honest  bootblack  was  as  good  as  an  honest 
king,  and  an  immoral  sweeper  far  higher  and  more  excusable 
than  an  immoral  Emperor — he  would  have  never  uttered  such 
a  fallacy.  Mr.  Hume  complains  (thousand  pardons,  **  laughs  '* 
is  the  correct  term)  that  we  show  a  desire  of  sitting  upon  him. 
I  venture  to  suggest  most  respectfully  that  it  is  absolutely  vice 
versa.  It  is  Mr.  Hume  who  (again  unconsciously  and  yielding 
but  to  a  life-long  habit)  tried  that  most  unconscionable  posture 
with  my  brother  in  every  letter  he  wrote  to  Koot  Hoomi.  And 
when  certain  expressions  denoting  a  fierce  spirit  of  self-appro- 
bation and  confidence  which  reached  the  apex  of  human  pride, 
were  noted  and  mildly  contradicted  by  my  brother,  Mr.  Hume 
forthwith  gave  them  another  meaning  and  accusing  K.H.  of 
having  misunderstood  them,  called  him  to  himself  puffed  up 
and  **  huffish.*'  Do  I  accuse  him  then,  of  unfairness,  injustice 
or  worse?  Most  decidedly  not.  A  more  honest,  sincere  or  a 
kinder  man  never  breathed  on  the  Himalayas.  I  know  actions 
of  his  of  which  his  own  family  and  lady  are  utterly  ignorant 
of — so  noble,  so  kind  and  grand,  that  even  his  own  pride  re- 
mains blind  to  their  full  worth  so  that  anything  he  might  do 
or  say,  is  unable  to  diminish  my  respect  for  him;  but  with  all 
this,  I  am  forced  to  tell  him  the  truth:  and  while  that  side  of 
his  character  has  all  my  admiration,  his  pride  will  never  win 
my  approbation, — for  which  once  more,  Mr.  Hume  will  not 
care  one  twopence,  but  that  matters  very  little,  indeed.  The 
most  sincere  and  outspoken  man  in  India,  Mr.  Hume  is  unable 
to  tolerate  a  contradiction;  and,  be  that  person  Dev  or  mortal, 
he  cannot  appreciate  or  even  permit  without  protest  the  same 
qualities  of  sincerity  in  any  other  than  himself.  Nor  can  he 
be  brought  to  confess  that  anyone  in  this  world  can  know 
better  than  himself  an5^hing  that  he  has  studied  and  formed 
his  opinion  thereupon.  **  They  will  not  set  about  a  joint  work 
in  what  seems  to  me  the  best  way,'*  he  complains  of  us  in  his 
letter  to  Olcott,  and  that  sentence  above  gives  to  us  the  key 
to  his  whole  character;  it  gives  us  the  clearest  insight  into  the 


224  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

working  of  his  inner  feelings.  Having  a  right — he  thinks — to 
regard  himself  as  slighted  and  wronged,  in  consequence  of  such 
an  **  ungenerous,"  **  selfish  *'  refusal  to  work  under  his 
guidance,  he  cannot  help  thinking  himself  at  the  bottom  of  his 
heart,  as  a  most  forgiving,  generous  man,  who,  instead  of  re- 
senting our  refusal  is  nevertheless  "  willing  to  go  on  in  their 
(our)  way."  And  this  irreverence  of  ours  for  his  opinions  can- 
not be  pleasing  to  him;  and  thus  the  feeling  of  this  great  wrong 
we  do  him  rises,  and  becomes  proportional  to  the  magnitude 
of  our  "  selfishness  "  and  "  huffishness."  Hence  his  disen- 
chantment, and  the  sincere  pain  he  feels  at  finding  the  Lodge 
and  all  of  us  so  much  below  the  mark  of  his  ideal.  He  laughs, 
for  my  defending  H.P.B.;  and  giving  way  to  a  feeling  unworthy 
of  his  nature,  very  unfortunately  forgets  that  his  is  just  the 
disposition  to  warrant  friends  and  foes  at  calling  him  **  pro- 
tector of  the  poor  "  and  like  names,  and  that  his  enemies 
among  others  never  fail  to  apply  such  epithets  to  himself;  and 
yet,  far  from  falling  upon  him  as  an  insult,  that  chivalrous 
feeling  which  has  ever  prompted  him  to  take  the  defence  of 
the  weak  and  the  oppressed  and  to  redress  the  wrongs  done  by 
his  colleagues — as  in  the  last  instance  of  the  Simla  municipality 
row — it  covers  him  with  a  garment  of  undying  glory  spun  out 
of  the  gratitude  and  affection  for  him  of  the  people  he  so  fear- 
lessly defends.  Both  of  you  labour  under  the  strange  impres- 
sion that  we  can,  and  even  do  care  for  anything  that  may  be 
said  or  thought  of  us.  Disabuse  your  minds,  and  remember 
that  the  first  requisite  in  even  a  simple  fakir,  is  that  he  should 
have  trained  himself  to  remain  as  indifferent  to  moral  pain  as 
to  physical  suffering.  Nothing  can  give  us  personal  pain  or 
pleasure.  And  what  I  now  say  is,  rather  to  bring  you  to  under- 
stand us  than  yourselves  which  is  the  most  difficult  science  to 
learn.  TTiat  Mr.  Hume's  intention — prompted  by  a  feeling  as 
transient  as  it  was  hasty,  and  due  to  a  sense  of  growing  irrita- 
tion against  me  whom  he  accused  of  a  desire  "  to  sit  upon 
him  " — was  to  revenge  himself  by  an  ironical,  hence  (to  the 
European  mind)  an  insulting  fling  at  me — is  as  certain  as  that 
he  missed  the  mark.  Ignorant,  or  rather  forgetful  of  the  fact 
that  we  Asiatics,  are  utterly  devoid  of  that  sense  of  the 
ridiculous  which  prompts  the  Western  mind  to  caricature  the 
best,  the  noblest  aspirations  of  mankind — could  I  yet  feel 
offended  or  flattered  by  the  world's  opinion  I  w^ould  have  felt 
rather  complimented  than  otherwise.  My  Rajput  blood  will 
never  permit  me  to  see  a  woman  hurt  in  her  feelings — though 
she  be  a  "  visionary,"  and  the  now  called  **  imaginary  " 
wrong  but  another  of  her  **  fancies  " — without  defending  her; 
and  Mr.   Hume  knows  enough  of  our  traditions  and  customs 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  225 

to  be  sufficiently  aware  of  that  remnant  of  chivalrous  feeling 
for  our  women  in  our  otherwise  degenerated  race.  Therefore 
do  1  say,  that  whether  hoping  that  the  satirical  epithet  would 
reach  and  hurt  me,  or  aware  of  the  fact  that  he  was  apostrophiz- 
ing a  granite  pillar — the  feeling  that  prompted  him  was  un- 
worthy of  his  nobler  and  better  nature,  as  in  the  first  case  it 
was  to  be  regarded  as  a  petty  feeling  of  revenge,  and  in  the 
second  as  childishness.  Then  in  his  letter  to  O.  he  complains 
of  or  denounces  (you  must  forgive  the  limited  number  of 
English  words  1  have  at  my  command)  the  attitude  of  **  half 
threat  "  to  break  with  you  that  he  imagines  he  finds  in  our 
letters.  Nothing  could  be  more  erroneous.  We  have  no  more 
the  intention  of  breaking  with  him,  than  an  orthodox  Hindu 
has  of  leaving  the  house  he  is  visiting  until  told  that  his  com- 
pany is  no  more  wanted.  But  when  the  latter  is  hinted  to  him- 
he  leaves.  So  with  us.  Mr.  Hume  quite  prides  himself  at 
repeating  that  personally  he  has  no  desire  to  see  us,  no 
curiosity  to  meet  us;  that  our  philosophy  and  teaching  cannot 
benefit  him  in  the  least,  him  who  has  learnt  and  knows  all  that 
can  be  learnt;  that  he  cares  not  a  snap  whether  we  break  with 
him  or  not,  nor  is  he  in  the  least  concerned  whether  we  are 
pleased  with  him  or  not.  Qui  bono  then?  Between  the  (by 
him)  imagined  reverence  we  expect  from  him,  and  that  uncalled 
for  combativeness,  which  may  degenerate  at  any  day  with  him, 
into  unexpressed  yet  real  hostility,  there  is  an  abyss  and  no 
middle  ground  that  even  the  Chohan  can  see.  Though  he 
cannot  now  be  accused  of  not  making,  as  in  the  past,  any 
allowance  for  circumstances  and  our  own  peculiar  rules  and 
laws,  yet  he  is  always  hurrying  towards  that  black  borderland 
of  amity,  where  trust  is  obscured  and  dark  suspicions  and 
erroneous  impressions  cloud  the  whole  horizon.  I,  am  as  I  was; 
and  as  1  was  and  am,  so  am  1  likely  always  to  be — the  slave  of 
my  duty  to  the  Lodge  and  mankind;  not  only  taught,  but  de- 
sirous to  subordinate  every  preference  for  individuals  to  a  love 
for  the  human  race.  It  is  gratuitous,  therefore,  to  accuse  me 
or  any  one  of  us  of  selfishness,  and  desire  to  regard  or  treat 
you  as  **  paltry  pelingis  "  and  to  **  ride  donkeys,"  only 
because  we  are  unable  to  find  convenient  horses.  Neither  the 
Chohan,  nor  K.H.,  nor  myself  ever  under  valued  Mr.  Hume's 
worth.  He  has  done  invaluable  service  to  the  Th.  Soc.  and 
to  H.P.B.  and  is  alone  capable  of  making  the  Society  an 
efficient  agent  for  good.  When  the  spiritual  soul  is  left  to 
guide  him,  no  purer,  no  better,  nor  kinder  man  can  be  found. 
But,  when  his  fifth  principle  rises  in  irrepressible  pride,  we  will 
always  confront  and  challenge  it.  Unmoved  by  his  excellent 
worldly  counsel  as  to  how  you  should  be  armed  with  proofs 


226  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

of  our  reality,  or  how  you  should  set  about  the  joint  work  in 
the  way  that  seems  the  best  to  him,  I  will  remain  so  unmoved, 
till  I  receive  contrary  orders.  Referring  to  your  last  letter  (Mr. 
Sinnett's)  clothe  your  ideas  as  you  may,  in  tKe  pleasantest  of 
phrases,  you  are  nevertheless  surprised  and  as  regards  Mr. 
Sinnett  disappointed,  that  I  should  neither  accord  permission 
for  phenomena  nor  yet  any  of  us  make  one  step  towards  you. 
I  cannot  help  it,  and  whatever  the  consequences  there  will  be 
no  change  in  my  attitude  until  my  Brother's  return  among  the 
living.  You  know  both  of  us  love  our  country  and  our  race; 
that  we  regard  the  Theos.  Society  as  a  great  potentiality  for 
their  good  in  proper  hands;  that  he  has  joyfully  welcomed  Mr. 
Hume's  identification  with  the  cause  and  that  I  have  placed 
a  high — but  only  a  proper — ^value  upon  it.  And  so  you  ought 
to  realize  that  whatever  we  could  do  to  bind  you  and  him 
closer  to  us  we  would  do  with  all  our  heart.  But  still  if  the 
choice  lies  between  our  disobeying  the  lightest  injunction  of 
our  Chohan  as  to  when  we  may  see  either  of  you,  or  what  we 
may  write,  or  how,  or  where,  and  the  loss  of  your  good 
opinion,  even  the  feeling  of  your  strong  animosity  and  the 
disruption  of  the  Society,  we  should  not  hesitate  a  single  in- 
stant. It  may  be  considered  unreasonable,  selfish,  huffish  and 
ridiculous,  denounced  as  Jesuitical  and  the  blame  all  lain  at 
our  door,  but  law  is  law  with  us,  and  no  power  can  make  us 
abate  one  jot  or  tittle  of  our  duty.  We  have  given  you  a  chance 
to  obtain  all  you  desired  by  improving  your  magnetism,  by 
pointing  you  to  a  nobler  ideal  to  work  up  to  and  Mr.  Hume 
has  been  shown  what  he  already  knew  how  he  may  benefit 
immensely  some  millions  of  his  fellow  men.  Choose  according 
to  your  best  light.  Your  choice  is  made  I  know — but  Mr. 
Hume  may  yet  change  his  ideas  more  than  once;  I  shall  be  the 
same  to  my  group  and  promise  whatever  he  may  determine. 
Nor,  do  we  fail  to  appreciate  the  great  concessions  made  al- 
ready by  him;  concessions  the  more  great  in  our  sight,  as  he 
becomes  less  interested  in  our  existence,  and  makes  a  violence 
to  his  feelings  solely  in  the  hope  of  benefitting  humanity.  No 
one  in  his  place  would  have  accommodated  himself  to  his 
situation  with  such  a  good  grace  as  he  has,  or  stood  more 
strictly  upon  the  declaration  **  of  primary  objects  "  at  the 
meeting  of  21st  Aug.;  while  "  proving  to  the  native  community 
that  members  of  the  ruling  class  '*  also  are  desirous  of  pro- 
moting the  commendable  projects  of  the  T.S.,  he  bides  his 
time,  for  even  the  obtaining  of  our  metaphysical  truths.  He 
has  already  done  an  immense  good  and  has  yet  received  nothing 
in  return.  Nor  does  he  expect  anything.  Reminding  you  that 
the  present  is  an  answer  to  all  your  letters,  and  to  all  your  ob- 


L 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  227 

jections  and  suggestions,  I  may  add  that  you  are  right  and  that 
in  spite  of  all  **  your  earthiness  "  my  Blessed  Brother  certainly 
entertains  a  real  regard  for  you,  and  Mr.  Hume,  who  I  am  happy 
to  find  has  some  good  feeling  for  him,  though  he  is  not  Uke 
you  and  really  is  **  too  proud  to  look  for  his  reward  in  our 
protection."  Only  where  you  are  and  will  be  ever  wrong,  my 
dear  sir,  it  is  in  entertaining  the  idea  that  phenomena  can  ever 
become  **  a  powerful  engine  "  to  shake  the  foundations  of 
erroneous  beliefs  in  the  Western  mind.  None  but  those  who 
see  for  themselves  will  ever  believe  do  what  you  may. 
**  Satisfy  us  and  then  we  will  satisfy  the  world  "  you  once  said. 
You  were  satisfied  and  what  are  the  results?  And  I  wish  1 
could  impress  upon  your  minds  the  deep  conviction  that  we  do 
not  wish  Mr.  Hume  or  you  to  prove  conclusively  to  the  public 
that  we  really  exist.  Please  realize  the  fact  that  so  long  as 
men  doubt  there  will  be  curiosity  and  enquiry,  and  that  enquiry 
stimulates  reflection  which  begets  efforts;  but  let  our  secret  be 
once  thoroughly  vulgarized  and  not  only  will  sceptical  society 
derive  no  great  good  but  our  privacy  would  be  constantly  en- 
dangered and  have  to  be  continually  guarded  at  an  unreasonable 
cost  of  power.  Have  patience,  friend  of  my  friend,  it  took 
Mr.  Hume  years  to  kill  enough  birds  to  make  up  his  book;  and 
he  did  not  command  them  to  leave  their  leafy  retreat,  but  had 
to  wait  for  them  to  come  and  let  him  stuff  and  label  them  :  so 
must  you  be  patient  with  us.  Ah,  Sahibs,  Sahibs  I  If  you 
could  only  catalogue  and  label  us  and  set  us  up  in  the  British 
Museum,  then  indeed  might  your  world  have  the  absolute,  the 
dessicated  truth. 

And  so  it  all  comes  around  again  as  usual  to  the  starting 
point.  You  have  been  chasing  us  around  your  own  shadows, 
just  catching  a  vanishing  glimpse  of  us  now  and  again,  but 
never  coming  near  enough  to  escape  the  gaunt  skeleton  of 
suspicion  that  is  at  your  heel  and  stares  you  in  the  future.  So 
I  fear  may  be  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  as  you  not  have  the 
patience  to  read  the  volume  to  its  end.  And  you  are  trying 
to  penetrate  the  things  of  the  spirit  with  the  eyes  of  the  flesh, 
to  bend  the  inflexible  to  your  own  crude  model  of  what  should 
be,  and  finding  it  will  not  bend,  you  are  as  likely  as  not  to 
break  that  model  and — bid  good-bye  for  ever  to  the  dream. 

And  now  for  a  few  parting  words  of  explanation.  O's  memo, 
which  produced  such  disastrous  results  and  a  most  unique  qui 
proquo,  was  written  on  the  27th.  On  the  night  of  the  25th, 
my  beloved  Brother  told  me,  that  having  heard  Mr.  Hume  say 
in  H.P.B.'s  room  that  he  had  never  himself  heard  O.  state  to 
him  that  he,  O.,  had  personally  seen  us,  and  also  had  heard 
add,  that  were  Olcott  to  tell  him  so,  he  had  confidence  enough 


228  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

in  the  man  to  believe  in  what  he  said, — ^he,  K.H.  thoiight  of 
asking  me  to  go  and  tell  O.  to  do  so;  believing  it  might  please 
Mr.  Hume  to  learn  some  of  the  details.  K.H.  wishes  are — 
law  to  me.  And  that  is  why  Mr.  Hume  received  that  letter 
from  O.,  at  a  time  when  his  doubts  were  already  settled.  At 
the  same  time  as  I  delivered  my  message  to  O.,  1  satisfied  his 
curiosity  as  to  your  Society  and  told  what  I  thought  of  it.  O. 
asked  my  permission  to  send  to  you  these  notes  which  1  ac- 
corded. Now,  that  is  the  whole  secret.  For  reasons  of  my 
own  I  desired  you  should  know  what  1  thought  of  the  situation, 
a  few  hours  after  my  beloved  Brother,  went  out  of  this  world. 
When  the  letter  reached  you  my  feelings  were  somewhat 
changed  and  I  altered,  as  said  before,  the  memo  a  good  deal. 
As  O's  style  had  made  me  laugh,  I  added  my  postcriptum  which 
related  solely  to  Olcott,  but  was  nevertheless  applied  wholly 
by  Mr.  Hume  to  himself  ! 

Let  us  drop  it.  I  close  the  longest  letter  I  have  ever  written 
in  my  life;  but  as  I  do  it  for  K.H. — 1  am  satisfied.  Though  Mr. 
Hume  may  not  think  it,  the  **  mark  of  the  adept  **  is  kept  at 
.  .  .  not  at  Simla,  and  I  try  to  keep  up  to  it  however  poor 
I  may  be  as  a  writer  and  a  correspondent. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  XXX^ 
Private, 
My  dear  Brother. 

Perhaps,  a  week  ago,  I  would  have  hardly  failed  to  embrace  this 
available  opportunity  and  say  that  your  letter  concerning-  Mr.  Fern 
is  as  complete  a  misrepresentation  of  the  spirit,  and  above  all,  of 
the  attitude  of  M.  towards  the  said  young  gentleman,  as  your 
complete  ignorance  of  the  aims  he  is  pursuing  could  produce — 
and  I  would  have  said  no  more.  But  now,  things  have  changed ; 
and  though  you  have  ''  come  to  know  "  that  we  '*  did  not  really 
possess  the  power  of  reading  minds"  as  had  been  pretended, 
nevertheless,  we  know  enough  of  the  spirit  in  which  my  last  letters 
were  received,  and  of  the  dissatisfaction  produced,  to  suspect,  if 
not  to  know  that  unwelcome  as  truth  may  often  come,  yet  the  time 
has  arrived  for  me  to  speak  frankly  and  openly  with  you.  Lying 
is  a  refuge  to  the  weak,  and  we  are  sufficiently  strong,  even 
with  all  the  shortcomings  you  are  pleased  to  discover  in  us,  to 
dread  truth  very  little ;  nor  are  we  likely  to  lie,  only  because  it  is> 

1  Written  to  A.  O.  Hume.— Ed. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  229 

to  our  interest  to  appear  wise  concerning  matters  of  which  we 
are  ignorant.  Thus,  perchance  it  might  have  been  more  prudent 
to  remark  that  you  knew  that  we  did  not  really  possess  the  power 
of  reading  minds,  unless  we  brought  ourselves  thoroughly  en  rap- 
port with,  and  concentrated  an  undivided  attention  on,  the  persons 
whose  thoughts  we  wanted  to  know — since  that  would  be  an 
undeniable  fact,  instead  of  a  gratuitous  assumption  as  it  now 
stands  in  your  letter.  However  it  may  be,  I  now  find  but  two 
ways  before  us,  with  not  the  smallest  path  for  compromise. 
Henceforth,  if  your  desire  is  that  we  should  work  together,  we 
must  do  so  on  a  footing  of  perfect  understanding.  You  will  be  at 
perfect  liberty  to  tell  us — since  you  seem,  or  rather  have  brought 
yourself  to  sincerely  believe  it — that  most  of  us,  owing  to  the 
mystery  that  enshrouds  us,  live  by  getting  credit  for  knowing 
what  we  really  do  not  know ;  while  I,  for  instance,  will  be  as 
entitled  as  you  are,  to  let  you  know  what  I  may  think  of  you, 
yourself  meanwhile  promising,  that  you  will  not  laugh  at  it  out- 
wardly, and  bear  a  grudge  for  it  inwardly  (something  that  not- 
withstanding your  efforts  you  can  rarely  help)  but  that,  in  case 
I  am  mistaken  you  will  prove  it  by  some  demonstration  weightier 
than  a  mere  denial.  Unless  you  bind  yourself  by  such  a  promise, 
it  is  utterly  useless  for  any  of  us  to  be  losing  our  time  in  con- 
troversies and  correspondences.  Better  shake  hands  astrally, 
across  space,  and  wait  until  either  you  have  acquired  the  gift  of 
discerning  truth  from  falsehood  to  a  greater  degree  than  you  now 
have  it ;  or,  that  we  are  shown  to  be  no  better  than  impostors  (or 
still  worse — lying  spooks) ;  or  finally,  that  some  one  of  us  is  in  a 
position  to  demonstrate  our  existence  to  yourself  or  Mr.  Sinnett — 
not  astrally,  for  that  might  only  strengthen  the  '*  Spirit"  theory 
but — by  visiting  you  personally. 

Since  it  becomes  quite  hopeless  to  convince  you  that  even  we 
occasionally,  do  read  other  people's  thoughts,  may  I  hope  that  you 
will  credit  us,  at  least,  with  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English 
language  not  to  have  entirely  misunderstood  your  very  plain  letter? 
And,  to  believe  me,  when  I  say,  that  having  perfectly  understood 
it,  I  answer  you  as  plainly  **  My  dearest  Brother,  you  are 
egregiously  mistaken  from  first  to  last  !  "  Your  whole  letter  is 
based  upon  a  misconception,  an  entire  ignorance  of  "  missing 
links,"  which  alone  may  have  given  you  a  true  key  to  the  whole 
situation.      What  can  you  mean  by  the  following? 

My  dear  Master. 

Amongst  you  you  are  utterly  spoiling  Fern — it  is  a  thousand 
pities — for  he  is  really  a  good  fellow  at  heart  and  he  has  an 
intense  desire  for  Occult  knowledge — a  strong  will  and  great 
capacity  for  self-mortification — he  would  I  am  sure  be  useful 
for  your  purposes ;  but  his  self-conceit  is  growing  intolerable 


230  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

and  he  is  becoming-  a  confirmed  fabricator  of  fiction  and  this 
is  due  to  you  all.  He  has  thoroughly  humbugged  Morya!  ! 
from  the  first — and  he  has  gone  persistently  lying  to  Sinnett 
to  keep  up  the  delusion  he  has  got  Morya  to  entrust  him  with 
secrets  and  to  accept  him  as  a  chela  and  he  now  thinks  him- 
self a  match  for  anyone.  .  .  .  Morya  replies  quite  falling 
into  the  trap  this  fraud  .  .  .  no  doubt  commenced  in 
(y)our  interests     .      .     .     etc.  etc.   etc. 

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  repeat  once  more  what  I  have  said 
before ;  namely,  that  up  to  receiving  your  first  letter  concerning 
Mr.  Fern,  I  had  never  given  him  one  moment's  attention.  Who 
then,  **  amongst  us — spoils  that  young  gentleman?  Is  it  Morya? 
Well,  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  you  know  still  less  of  him,  than  he 
knows,  in  your  conceptions,  of  what  you  have  in  your  mind. 
"  He  has  thoroughly  humbugged  Morya."  Has  he?  I  am  sorry 
to  be  obliged  to  confess  that,  in  accordance  with  your  western 
code  it  would  look  rather  the  reverse;  that  it  was  my  beloved 
Brother  who  **  humbugged  "  Mr.  Fern — had  not  the  ill-sounding 
term  another  meaning  with  us,  as  also  another  name.  The  latter 
of  course,  may  appear  to  you  still  more  '*  revolting,"  since  even 
Mr.  Sinnett,  who  is  but  the  echo  in  that  of  every  English  Society 
man,  regards  it  as  thoroughly  revolting  to  the  feelings  of  the 
average  Englishman.  That  other  name  is — probation;  something 
every  chela  who  does  not  want  to  remain  simply  ornamental  has 
nolens  volens  to  undergo  for  a  more  or  less  prolonged  period; 
something  that — for  this  very  reason  that  it  is  undoubtedly  based 
upon  what  you  westerns  would  ever  view  as  a  system  of  humbug 
or  deception — that  I,  who  knew  European  ideas  better  than  Morya, 
have  always  refused  to  accept  or  even  to  regard  any  of  you  two 
as — chelas.  Thus,  what  you  have  now  mistaken  for  **  humbug  " 
as  coming  from  Mr.  Fern,  you  would  have  charged  M.  with  it, 
had  you  only  known  a  little  more  than  you  do  of  our  policy  ; 
whereas  the  truth  is,  that  one  is  utterly  irresponsible  for  much  he 
is  now  doing,  and  that  the  other  is  carrying  out  that  of  which  he 
has  honestly  warned  Mr.  Fern  beforehand;  that,  which, — if  you 
have  read,  as  you  say,  the  correspondence — ^you  must  have  learned 
from  H.P.B. 's  letter  to  Fern  from  Madras,  that  in  her  jealousy 
for  M.'s  favours,  she  wrote  to  him  to  Simla,  hoping  she  would 
thereby  frighten  him  off.  A  chela  under  probation  is  allowed  to 
think  and  do  whatever  he  likes.  He  is  warned  and  told  before- 
hand :  you  will  be  tempted  and  deceived  by  appearances ;  two  paths 
will  be  open  before  you,  both  leading  to  the  goal  you  are  trying  to 
attain ;  one  easy,  and  that  will  lead  you  more  rapidly  to  a  fulfil- 
ment of  orders  you  may  receive;  the  other — more  arduous,  more 
long ;  a  i>ath  full  of  stones  and  thorns  that  will  make  you  stumble 
more  than  once  on  your  way ;  and,  at  the  end  of  which  you  may. 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  231 

perhaps,  find  failure  after  all  and  be  unable  to  carry  out  the  orders 
given  for  some  particular  small  work, — but,  whereas  the  latter 
will  cause  the  hardships  you  have  undergone  on  it  to  be  all  carried 
to  the  side  of  your  credit  in  the  long  run,  the  former,  the  easy 
path,  can  offer  you  but  a  momentary  gratification,  an  easy  fulfil- 
ment of  the  task.  The  chela  is  at  perfect  liberty,  and  often  quite 
justified  from  the  standpoint  of  appearances — to  suspect  his  Guru 
of  being  *'  a  fraud  "  as  the  elegant  word  stands.  More  than  that ; 
the  greater,  the  sincerer  his  indignation — whether  expressed  in 
words  or  boiling  in  his  heart — ^the  more  fit  he  is,  the  better  qualified 
to  become  an  adept.  He  is  free  to,  and  will  not  be  held  to  account 
for  using  the  most  abusive  words  and  expressions  regarding  his 
guru's  actions  and  orders,  provided  he  comes  out  victorious  from 
the  fiery  ordeal ;  provided  he  resists  all  and  every  temptation ; 
rejects  every  allurement,  and  proves  that  nothing,  not  even  the 
promise  of  that  which  he  holds  dearer  than  life,  of  that  most 
precious  boon,  his  future  adeptship — is  unable  to  make  him  deviate 
from  the  path  of  truth  and  honesty,  or  force  him  to  become  a 
deceiver.  My  dear  Sir,  we  will  hardly  ever  agree  in  our  ideas  of 
things,  even  of  the  value  of  words.  You  have  once  upon  a  time 
called  us  Jesuits ;  and,  viewing  things  as  you  do,  perhaps,  you  were 
right  to  a  certain  extent  in  so  regarding  us,  since  apparently  our 
systems  of  training  do  not  differ  much.  But  it  is  only  externally. 
As  I  once  said  before,  they  know  that  what  they  teach  is  a  lie; 
and  we  know  that  what  we  impart  is  truth,  the  only  truth  and 
nothing  but  the  truth.  They  work  for  the  greater  power  and 
glory  (  !)  of  their  Order;  we — for  the  power  and  final  glory  of  indi- 
viduals, of  isolated  units,  of  humanity  in  general,  and  we  are  con- 
tent, nay  forced — ^to  leave  our  order  and  its  chiefs  entirely  in  the 
shade.  They  work,  and  toil,  and  deceive,  for  the  sake  of  worldly 
power  in  this  life;  we  work  and  toil,  and  allow  our  chelas  to  he 
temporarily  deceived,  to  afford  them  means  never  to  be  deceived 
hereafter,  and  to  see  the  whole  evil  of  falsity  and  untruth,  not 
alone  in  this  but  in  many  of  their  after-lives.  They — the  Jesuits 
sacrifice  the  inner  principle,  the  Spiritual  brain  of  the  ego,  to  feed 
and  develop  the  better  the  physical  brain  of  the  personal  evanescent 
man,  sacrificing  the  whole  humanity  to  offer  it  as  a  holocaust  to 
their  Society — ^the  insatiable  monster  feeding  on  the  brain  and 
marrow  of  humanity, — and  developing  an  incurable  cancer  on  every 
spot  of  healthy  flesh  it  touches.  We — the  criticized  and  misunder- 
stood Brothers — we  seek  to  bring  men  to  sacrifice  their  personality 
— a  passing  flash — for  the  welfare  of  the  whole  humanity,  hence 
for  their  own  immortal  Egos,  a  part  of  the  latter,  as  humanity  is 
a  fraction  of  the  integral  whole,  that  it  will  one  day  become. 
They  are  trained  to  deceive;  we — to  undeceive;  they  do  the 
scavenger's  work  themselves — barring  a  few  poor  sincere  tools  of 


232  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

theirs — con    amore,    and    for   selfish    ends ;    we — leave    it   to    our 
menials — the  dugpas  at  our  service,  by  g^iving  them  carte  blanche 
for  the  time  being-,   and  with  the  sole  object  of  drawing  out  the 
whole  inner  nature  of  the  chela,  most  of  the  nooks  and  corners  of 
which,  would  remain   dark  and  concealed  for  ever,  were  not  an 
opportunity  afforded  to  test  each  of  these  corners  in  turn.    Whether 
the  chela  wins  or  loses  the  prize — depends  solely  of  himself.     Only, 
you  have  to  remember  that  our  eastern  ideas  about  **  motives  " 
and  "  truthfulness  "  and  '*  honesty  "  differ  considerably  from  your 
ideas  in  the  West.       Both  we  believe  that  it  is  moral  to  tell  the 
truth  and  immoral  to  lie;  but  here  every  analogy  stops  and  our 
notions  diverge  in  a  very  remarkable  degree.       For  instance  it 
would  be  a  most  difficult  thing  for  you  to  tell  me,  how  it  is  that 
your  civilized   Western   Society,    Church   and  State,   politics  and 
commerce  have  ever  come  to  assume  a  virtue  that  it  is  quite  impos- 
sible for  either  a  man  of  education,  a  statesman,  a  trader,  or  any- 
one else  living  in  the  world — ^to  practice  in  an  unrestricted  sense? 
Can  any  one  of  the  above-mentioned  classes — the  flower  of  Eng- 
land's chivalry,  her  proudest  peers  and  most  distinguished  com- 
moners, her  most  virtuous  and  truth-speaking  ladies — can  any  of 
them   speak  the  truth,    I  ask,    whether  at  home,   or  in  Society, 
during  their  public  functions  or  in  the  family  circle?      What  would 
you  think  of  a  gentleman,  or  a  lady,  whose  affable  politeness  of 
manner  and  suavity  of  language  would  cover  no  falseness;  who, 
in  meeting  you  would  tell  you  plainly  and  abruptly  what  he  thinks 
of  you,  or  of  anyone  else?      And  where  can  you  find  that  pearl  of 
honest  tradesmen  or  that  god-fearing  patriot,  or  politician,   or  a 
simple  casual  visitor  of  yours,  but  conceals  his  thoughts  the  whole 
while,  and  is  obliged  under  the  penalty  of  being  regarded  as  a 
brute,   a  madman — to  lie  deliberately,   and  with  a  bold  face,   no 
sooner  he  is  forced  to  tell  you  what  he  thinks  of  you ;  unless  for  a 
wonder  his  real  feelings  demand  no  concealment?      All  is  lie,  aU 
falsehood,   around  and  in   us,  my  brother;  and  that  is  why  you 
seemed  so  surprised,  if  not  affected,  whenever  you  find  a  person, 
who  will  tell   you  bluntly  truth    to  your  face;  and  also  why   it 
seems  impossible  for  you  to  realize  that  a  man  may  have  no  ill 
feelings  against  you,   nay   even   like  and    respect  you   for  some 
things,  and  yet  tell  you  to  your  face  what  he  honestly  and  sincerely 
thinks  of  you.       In  noticing  M's  opinion  of  yourself  expressed  in 
some  of  his  letters — (you  must  not  feel  altogether  so  sure  that 
because  they  are  in   his  handwriting-,    they  are  written   by  him, 
though  of  course  every  word  is  sanctioned  by  him  to  serve  certain 
ends) — You  say  he  has  **  a  peculiar  mode  of  expressing  himself  to 
say  the  least."      Now,  that  '*  way  "  is  simply  the  bare  truth,  which 
he  is  ready  to  write  to  yourself,  or  even  say  and  repeat  to  your 
face,  without  the  least  concealment  or  change — (unless  he  has  pur- 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  233 

posely  allowed  the  expression;*  to  be  exaggerated  for  the  same 
purposes  as  mentioned  above) ;  and  he  is — of  all  the  men  I  know 
just  the  one  to  do  it  without  the  least  hesitation  !  And  for  this, 
you  call  him  '*  an  imperious  sort  of  chap  very  angry  if  he  is 
opposed,"  but  add,  that  you  **  bear  him  for  it  no  malice,  and  like 
him  none  the  less  for  that."  Now  this  is  not  so,  my  brother, 
and  you  know  it.  However,  I  am  prepared  to  concede  the 
definition  in  a  limited  sense,  and  to  admit  and  repeat  with  you 
(and  himself  at  my  elbow)  that  he  is  a  very  imperious  sort  of  chap, 
and  certainly  very  apt  sometimes  to  become  angry,  especially  if  he 
is  opposed  in  what  he  knows  to  be  right.  Would  you  think  more 
of  him,  were  he  to  conceal  his  anger;  to  lie  to  himself  and  the  out- 
siders, and  so  permit  them  to  credit  him  with  a  virtue  he  has  not? 
If  it  is  a  meritorious  act  to  extirpate  with  the  roots  all  feelings  of 
anger,  so  as  to  never  feel  the  slightest  paroxysm  of  a  passion  we 
all  consider  sinful,  it  is  a  still  greater  sin  with  us  to  pretend  that 
it  is  so  extirpated.  Please  read  over  the  **  Elixir  of  Life  "  No.  2 
(April,  p.  169  col.  I,  paras.  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6).  And  yet  in  the 
ideas  of  the  West,  everything  is  brought  down  to  appearances 
even  in  religion.  A  confessor  does  not  inquire  of  his  penitent 
whether  he  felt  anger,  but  whether  he  has  shown  anger  to  anyone. 
**  Thou  shalt  in  lying,  stealing,  killing,  etc.  avoid  being  detected  '' 
— seems  to  be  the  chief  commandment  of  the  Lord  gods  of  civiliza- 
tion— Society  and  Public  opinion.  That  is  the  sole  reason  why 
you,  who  belong  to  it,  will  hardly  if  ever  be  able  to  appreciate 
such  characters  as  Morya's  :  a  man  as  stern  for  himself,  as  severe 
for  his  own  shortcomings,  as  he  is  indulgent  for  the  defects  of 
other  f>eople,  not  in  words  but  in  the  innermost  feelings  of  his 
heart ;  for,  while  ever  ready  to  tell  you  to  your  face  anything  he 
may  think  of  you,  he  yet  was  ever  a  stauncher  friend  to  you  than 
myself,  who  may  often  hesitate  to  hurt  anyone's  feelings,  even  in 
speaking  the  strictest  truth.  Thus,  were  M.  one  to  ever  descend 
to  an  explanation  he  could  have  told  you  :  **  My  Brother,  in  my 
opinion  you  are  intensely  egotistical  and  haughty.  In  your  appre- 
ciation and  self-adulation  you  generally  lose  sight  of  the  rest  of 
mankind,  and  I  verily  believe  that  you  regard  the  whole  universe 
created  for  man,  and  that  man — yourself.  If  I  cannot  bear  to  be 
opposed  when  I  know  I  am  right,  you  can  bear  contradiction  still 
less,  even  when  your  conscience  plainly  tells  you  that  you  are 
wrong.  You  are  unable  to  forget — though  I  admit  that  you  are 
one  to  forgive — the  smallest  slight.  And,  sincerely  believing 
yourself  to  have  been  so  slighted,  by  me  (sat  upon — as  you  once 
expressed  it)  to  this  day  the  supposed  offence  exercises  a  silent 
influence  over  all  your  thoughts  in  connexion  with  my  humble 
individual.  And  though  your  great  intellect  will  ever  prevent  any 
vindictive  feelings  from  asserting  themselves  and  thus  over-ruling 


234  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

your  better  nature,  yet  they  are  not  without  a  certain  influence 
even  over  your  reasoning-  faculties,  since  you  find  pleasure  (though 
you  will  hardly  admit  it  to  yourself) — in  devising^  means  to  catch 
me  tripping  to  the  length  of  representing  me  in  your  imagination 
a  fool,  a  credulous  ignoramus  capable  of  falling  into  the  trap  of 
a — Fern  !  Let  us  reason,  my  Brother.  Let  us  put  entirely  aside 
the  fact  of  my  being  an  initiate,  an  adept — and  reason  out  the 
position  your  imaginative  faculties  have  created  for  me,  like  two 
common  mortals  with  a  certain  dose  of  common  sense  in  mine, 
and  a  great  dose  of  the  same  in  your  head.  If  you  are  prepared 
to  concede  me  even  so  little,  I  am  prepared  to  prove  to  you  that 
it  is  absurd  to  think  that  I  could  have  been  taken  in  in  the  meshes 
of  so  poor  a  scheme  !  You  write  that  in  order  to  test  me.  Fern 
wanted  to  know  **  if  Morya  wished  it  (his  vision)  published — and 
Morya  replied  quite  falling  into  the  trap  that  he  did  wish  it." 
Now,  to  credit  the  last  assertion  is  rather  hard ;  and  it  needs  a 
man  of  but  moderate  good  sense  and  reasoning  powers  to  p>erceive 
that  there  are  two  insuperable  difficulties  in  the  way  of  reconciling 
your  foregoing  opinion  of  myself  and  the  belief  that  I  was  actually 
caught  in  the  trap.  ist  :  The  substance  and  text  of  the  vision. 
In  that  vision  there  are  three  mysterious  beings — the  **  guru  " — 
the  ''Mighty  one"  and  the  "Father"; — ^the  latter  one  being 
your  humble  servant.  Now  it  is  hard  to  believe — that  unless  I  am 
credited  with  faculties  of  a  hallucinated  medium — ^that  I,  knowing 
well  that  I  had  never  approached,  until  then,  the  young  gentle- 
man from  within  a  mile's  distance,  nor  had  I  ever  visited  him  in 
his  dreams — that  I  should  believe  the  reality  of  the  vision 
described,  or  that,  at  least,  my  suspicions  should  not  have  been 
aroused  by  such  a  strange  assertion. 

2nd.  The  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  double  fact  of  my  being 
an  **  imperious  chap  "  who  gets  very  angry  when  opposed,  and, 
my  quiet  submission  to  the  disobedience,  the  rebellion  of  a  chela 
under  probation,  who  upon  learning  that  "  Morya  did  wish  it — 
i.e.  to  have  his  vision  published  and  had  actually  promised  to  re- 
write it,  never  thought  of  obeying  the  wish  after  that,  nor  had 
the  poor  fatuous  guru  and  "  Father  "  thought  any  more  of  the 
matter.  Now  the  whole  of  the  foregoing  would  be  madfe  quite 
plain  even  to  a  man  of  an  average  intellect.  The  reverse  having 
hapf>ened,  and  a  man  of  undoubtedly  great  intellectual  and  still 
greater  reasoning  powers,  having  been  caught  in  the  poorest  cob- 
web of  falsehood  ever  imagined — the  conclusion  is  imperative  and 
no  other  can  be  formed  :  that  man  allowed  unknown  to  himself 
to  have  his  little  vindictive  feelings  gratified  at  the  expense  of 
his  logic  and  good  sense.  Buss,  and  we  will  talk  no  more  of  it. 
With  all  that,  and  while  openly  expressing  my  dislike  for  your 
haughtiness  and  selfishness   in  many  things,   I   frankly  recognise 


I 
I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  235 

and  express  my  admiration  for  your  many  other  admirable  quali- 
ties, for  your  sterling  merits,  and  good  sense  in  everything  uncon- 
nected directly  with  yourself, — in  which  cases  you  become  as 
imperious  as  myself,  only  far  more  impatient — and  heartily  hope 
you  will  pardon  me  for  my  blunt — and  according  to  your  western 
code  of  manners  riuie  talk.  At  the  same  time,  like  yourself,  I 
will  say,  that  not  only  do  I  not  bear  you  malice,  and  like  you 
none  the  less  for  that — but  that  what  I  say  is  a  strict  reality,  the 
expression  of  my  genuine  feelings  not  merely  words  written  to 
satisfy  a  sense  of  assumed  duty." 

And  now,  that  I  have  made  myself  the  spokesman  unto  you  for 
Morya,  I  may,  perhaps  permitted  to  say  a  few  words  for  myself. 
I  will  begin  by  reminding  you,  that  at  different  times  especially 
during  the  last  two  months,  you  have  repeatedly  offered  yourself 
as  a  chela,  and  the  first  duty  of  one  is  to  hear  without  anger  or 
malice  anything  the  guru  may  say.  How  can  we  ever  teach  or 
you  learn  if  we  have  to  maintain  an  attitude  utterly  foreign  to  us 
and  our  methods  : — that  of  two  Society  men  ?  //  you  really  want 
to  be  a  chela  i.e.  to  become  the  recipient  of  our  mysteries  you  have 
to  adapt  yourself  to  our  ways,  not  we  to  yours.  Until  you  do 
so,  it  is  useless  for  you  to  expect  any  more  than  we  can  give  under 
ordinary  circumstances.  You  wanted  to  teach  Morya,  and  you 
may  find  out  (and  will  if  I  am  allowed  by  M.  to  have  my  own  way) 
that  he  has  taught  you  one,  which  will  either  make  us  friends  and 
brothers  for  ever,  or, — if  there  is  more  of  the  Western  gentleman 
than  of  the  Eastern  chela  and  future  adept  you  will  break  with 
us  in  disgust  and  perhaps  proclaim  it  all  over  the  world.  For 
this  we  are  all  prepared  and  are  trying  to  hurry  on  the  crisis  one 
way  or  the  other.  November  is  fast  approaching  and  by  that  time 
everything  has  to  be  settled.  The  second  question  :  do  not  you 
think  good  Brother,  that  the  uncivilized,  imperious  chap  who 
would  tell  you  his  mind,  honestly  and  for  your  own  good,  and, 
at  the  same  time  would  be  carefully  though  unseen — protecting 
yourself,  family  and  reputation  from  any  possible  harm — aye, 
brother,  to  the  length  of  watching  for  nights  and  days  a  ruffian 
Mussulman  menial  bent  upon  having  his  revenge  of  you  and 
actually  destroying  his  evil  plans — do  not  you  think  him  worth 
ten  times  his  weight  in  gold,  a  British  Resident,  a  gentleman,  who 
tears  down  your  reputation  to  shreds  behind  your  back  and  will 
smile  upon  and  heartily  shake  hands  with  you  whenever  he  meets 
you?  Do  not  you  think  it  is  far  nobler  to  say  what  one  thinks, 
and  having  said — that  even  which  you  naturally  regard  as  an 
impertinence — and  then  render  to  the  person  so  treated  all  manner 
of  services  of  which  he  is  never  likely  to  hear  not  only  to  find 
them  out — than  to  do  what  the  highly  civilized  Colonel  or  General 
Watson  and  especially  his  lady  have  done,  when  upon  seeing  for 


236  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

the  first  time  in  their  lives  the  two  strangers  in  their  house — 
Olcott  and  a  native  judge  in  Baroda — took  a  pretext  to  disparage 
the  Society — because  you  were  in  it  I  I  will  not  repeat  to  you  the 
lies  they  were  guilty  of,  the  exaggerations  and  slanders  directed 
against  you  by  Mrs.  Watson,  and  corroborated  by  her  husband — 
the  gallant  soldier,  so  struck  and  unruffled  was  poor  Olcott,  by 
the  unexpected  attack — he  who  feels  so  proud  of  your  belonging 
to  the  Society  that  he  appealed  in  his  dismay  to  M.  Had  you 
heard  what  was  told  by  the  latter  of  you,  how  much  he  appre- 
ciated your  present  work  and  frame  of  mind  you  would  have 
willingly  conceded  him  the  right  of  being  occasionally  apparently 
rude.  He  forbade  him  telling  any  more  than  what  he  had  already 
told  H.P.B.  and  which — ^woman-like — she  immediately  imparted 
to  Mr.  Sinnett — though  angry  as  she  was  with  you  at  the  time 
even  she  resented  the  insult  and  offence  done  to  you  deeply — and 
went  actually  to  the  trouble  of  looking  back  into  that  past  when  as 
Mrs.  Watson  said  you  were  receiving  the  hospitality  at  their  house. 
Such  is  then,  the  difference  between  alleged  well  wishers  and 
friends  of  Western  superior  origin,  and  the  as  alleged — ill-wishers 
of  the  Eastern  inferior  race.  Apart  from  this  I  concede  to  you 
the  right  of  feeling  angry  with  M.  ;  for  he  has  done  something 
that  though  it  is  in  strict  accordance  with  our  rules  and  methods, 
will,  when  known  be  deeply  resented  by  a  Western  mind,  and, 
had  I  known  it  in  time  to  stop  it,  I  would  have  certainly  prevented 
it  from  being  done.  It  is  certainly  very  kind  of  Mr.  Fern  to 
express  his  intention  "  to  catch"  us — **  not  of  course  to  expose 
the  Old  Lady,"  for  what  has  the  poor  **  Old  Lady  "  to  do  with 
all  this  ?  But  he  is  quite  welcome  to  catch  us  and  even  to  expose 
us,  not  only  for  his  and  your  protection  but  for  that  of  the  whole 
world  if  it  can  in  any  way  console  him  for  his  failure.  And 
jail  he  will,  that's  certain,  if  he  goes  on  in  that  way  playing  a 
double  game.  The  option  of  receiving  him  or  not  as  a  regular 
chela — remains  with  the  Chohan.  M.  has  simply  to  have  him 
tested,  tempted  and  examined  by  all  and  every  means,  so  as  to 
have  his  real  nature  drawn  out.  This  is  a  rule  with  us  as  inexor- 
able as  it  is  disgusting  in  your  western  sight,  and  I  could  not 
prevent  it  even  if  I  would.  It  is  not  enough  to  know  thoroughly 
what  the  chela  is  capable  of  doing  or  not  doing  at  the  time  and 
under  the  circumstances  during  the  period  of  probation.  We 
have  to  know  of  what  he  may  become  capable  under  different  and 
every  kind  of  opportunities.  Our  precautions  are  all  taken.  None 
of  our  Upasika  or  Yuposah,  neither  H.P.B.  nor  O.,  nor  even 
Damodar,  nor  any  of  them  can  be  incriminated.  He  is  welcome 
to  show  every  letter  in  his  possession,  and  to  divulge  that,  which 
was  offered  to  him  to  do,  (the  choice  between  the  two  paths  being 
left  at  his  option)  and  that  which  he  has  actually  done,  or  rathei 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  237 

not  done.  When  the  time  comes — if  it  ever  comes  to  his  mis- 
fortune— we  have  the  means  to  show  how  much  of  it  is  true,  and 
how  much  wrong-  and  invented  by  him.  In  the  meanwhile,  I  have 
an  advice  to  offer.  Watch  and  do  not  say  a  word  He  was,  is, 
and  will  be  tempted  to  do  all  manner  of  wrong  things.  As  1 
say,  I  knew  nothing  of  what  was  going  on  till  the  other  day ; 
when  learning  that  even  my  name  was  indirectly  mixed  in  the 
probation,  I  warned  whom  I  had  to  warn,  and  forbid  strictly  my 
own  business  being  mixed  up  with  it.  Yet,  he  is  a  magnificent 
subject  for  clairvoyance,  and  not  at  all  as  bad  as  you  think  him. 
He  is  conceited — but  who  is  not?  Who  of  us  is  entirely  free  from 
this  defect.  He  may  imagine  and  say  what  he  likes,  but  that  you 
should  allow  yourself  to  be  so  carried  away  with  a  prejudice  the 
existence  of  which  you  are  not  even  prepared  to  admit,  is  sur- 
passingly strange  !  You  sincerely  crediting  the  statement  that 
M.  was  humbugged  and  caught  into  the  trap  by  Mr.  Fern  is 
something  really  too  ludicrous,  when  even  O.  not  only  the  **  Old 
Lady  "  never  believed  in  it,  since  they  knew  he  was  to  be  under 
probation  and  also  knew  w^hat  the  thing  meant.  M.  took  pains 
a  few  days  ago,  to  prove  to  you  that  he  was  never  taken  in,  as 
you  hoped,  and  that  he  laughed  at  the  very  idea;  and  most 
certainly  Olcott  will  give  you  a  good  proof  of  it,  albeit  he  is  in 
the  interior  of  Ceylon  at  this  moment,  where  no  letters  let  alone 
telegrams  can  reach.  Nor  was  this  **  fraud  " — if  you  will  call 
it  so,  ever  commenced  in  our  interest,  for  the  simple  reason  that 
we  have  no  interest  in  it — but  in  that  of  Mr.  Fern  and  the  Society, 
in  the  ideas  of  H.P.B.  But  why  call  it  fraud?  He  asked  her 
advice,  he  worried  and  supplicated  her,  and  she  told  him — **  Work 
for  the  cause;  try  to  enquire  and  search  and  so  to  obtain  every 
evidence  you  can  of  the  existence  of  the  Brothers.  You  see  they 
will  not  come  this  year,  but  there  are  plenty  of  Lamas  descending 
every  year  to  Simla  and  the  neighbourhood,  and  so,  get  all  the 
evidence  you  can  for  yourself  and  Mr.  Hume,  etc."  Is  there  any- 
thing wrong  in  this?  When  she  received  the  MSS  containing 
his  vision,  she  asked  M.  and  he  who  is  called  in  it  **  the  mighty 
One  "  and  the  "  Father  "  and  what-not,  told  her  the  truth  and 
then  ordered  her  to  ask  Mr.  Fern  whether  he  would  publish  it, 
telling  her  and  O.  beforehand  that  he  woidd  not.  What  Morya 
knows  of  this  and  other  visions,  he  alone  knows  and  even  I  will 
never  interfere  in  his  ways  of  training,  however  distasteful  they 
may  be  to  me  personally.  The  **  Old  Lady  "  since  you  ask  me, 
will  of  course  know  nothing.  But  you  must  know  that  since  she 
went  to  Baroda,  she  has  a  worse  opinion  of  Fern  than  even  your- 
self. She  learned  there  certain  things  of  him  and  of  Brookes, 
and  heard  others  from  the  latter,  he  being  as  you  know  the 
Baroda  Mejnoor  of  Fern's.       She  is  a  woman  though  she  be  an 

17 


238  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Upasika  (female  disciple)  and  except  on  Occult  matters  can  hardly 
hold  her  tongue.  I  believe  we  had  enough  of  this.  Whatever 
has  or  will  yet  hapf>en  it  will  aftect  but  Fern — no  one  else. 

I  hear  of  the  projected  grand  theosophical  Conversazione — and 
if,  at  that  time  you  are  still  theosophists,  of  course  it  is  better  that 
it  should  be  in  your  house.  And  now,  I  would  like  to  say  to  you 
a  few  parting  words,  notwithstanding  the  painful  knowledge  I 
have  of  your  chief  and  almost  one  defect — one  that  you  have  your- 
self confessed  to  in  your  letter  to  me,  I  wish  you  to  believe  me, 
my  dearest  Brother,  when  I  say  that  my  regard  and  respect  for 
you  in  all  other  things  is  great  and  very  sincere.  Nor,  am  I  likely 
to  forget,  whatever  happens,  that  for  many  months  past,  with- 
out expecting  or  asking  for  any  reward  or  advantage  for  yourself 
you  have  worked  and  toiled,  day  after  day,  for  the  good  of  the 
Society  and  of  humanity  at  large  in  the  only  hope  of  doing  good. 
And,  I  pray  you,  good  Brother,  not  to  regard  as  **  reproaches" 
any  simple  remarks  of  mine.  If,  I  have  argued  with  you,  it  was 
because  I  was  forced  to  do  so,  since  the  Chohan  regarded  them 
^your  suggestions)  as  something  quite  unprecedented;  claims,  in 
his  position,  not  to  be  listened  to  for  one  moment.  Though  you 
may  now  regard  the  arguments  directed  against  you  in  the  light 
of  "  undeserved  reproaches,"  yet  you  may  recognise  some  day, 
that  you  were  really  **  wanting  unreasonable  concessions."  The 
fact  that,  your  pressing  proposals  that  you — (not  anyone  else) — 
should,  if  f>ossible  be  allowed  to  acquire  some  phenomenal  gift, 
which  would  be  used  in  convincing  others, — though  it  may  be 
accepted  as  standing  simply,  in  its  dead  letter  sense  "  as  a  sug- 
gestion for  (my)  consideration  "  and  that  "in  no  way  constituted 
a  claim  " — yet  for  anyone  who  could  read  beneath  the  surface  of 
the  lines,  it  appeared  as  a  definite  claim,  indeed.  I  have  all  your 
letters,  and  there  is  hardly  one  that  does  not  breathe  the  spirit  of  a 
determined  claim,  a  deserved  request,  i.e.,  a  demand  of  that  which 
is  due  and  the  rejection  of  which  gives  you  the  right  to  feel  your- 
self wronged.  I  doubt  not,  that  such  was  not  your  intention  in 
penning  them.  But  such  w^as  your  secret  thought  and  that  inner- 
most feeling  was  always  detected  by  the  Chohan,  whose  name 
you  several  times  use,  and  who  took  note  of  it.  You  undervalue 
what  you  got  so  far  on  the  ground  of  inconsistency  and  incom- 
pleteness? I  have  asked  you  :  take  notes  of  the  former,  beginning 
with  the  inconsistencies — as  you  regard  them — in  our  first  argu- 
ments pro  and  con,  the  existence  of  God;  and  ending  with  the  suf>- 
posed  contradiction  in  respect  to  accidents  and  suicides."  Send 
then  to  me  and  I  will  prove  to  you  that  there  is  not  one  for  him 
who  knows  weU  the  whole  doctrine.  It  is  strange  to  accuse  one, 
in  the  full  possession  of  his  brains  that  on  Wednesday  he  wrote 
one  thing,  and  on  the  Saturday  or  Sunday  next  had  all  forgotten 


PEOBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  239 

about  it  and  contradicted  himself  point  blank  !  I  do  not  think 
even  our  H.P.B.  with  her  ridiculously  impaired  memory  could  be 
guilty  of  such  a  complete  oblivion.  In  your  opinion  "it  is  not 
worth  while  to  be  working"  merely  for  the  second  class  minds 
and  you  propose  following  out  the  lines  of  such  an  argument  either 
get  all  or  leave  of  the  work  entirely  if  you  cannot  get  out 
immediately  **  a  Scheme  of  philosophy,  which  will  bear  the 
scrutiny  and  criticism  of  such  men  as  Herbert  Spencer."  To 
this  I  reply  that  you  sin  against  the  multitudes.  It  is  not  among 
the  Herbert  Spencers  and  Darwins  or  the  John  Stuart  Mills  that 
the  millions  of  Spiritualists  now  going  intellectually  to  the  dogs 
are  to  be  found,  but  it  is  they  who  form  the  majority  of  the 
"  second  class  minds."  If  you  had  but  patience,  you  would  have 
received  all  that  you  would  like  to  get  out  of  our  speculative 
philosophy — meaning  by  "speculative"  that  it  would  have  to 
remain  such,  of  course,  to  all  but  adepts.  But  really,  my  dear 
brother  you  are  not  overloaded  with  that  virtue.  However  I  still 
fail  to  see,  why  you  should  be  disheartened  with  the  situation. 

Whatever  happens,  I  hope  you  may  not  resent  the  friendly 
truths  you  have  heard  from  us.  Why  should  you?  Would  you 
resent  the  voice  of  your  conscience  whispering  to  you  that  you 
are  at  times  unreasonably  impatient,  and  not  at  all  as  forbearing 
as  you  yourself  would  like  to  be  ?  True,  you  have  been  labouring 
for  the  cause  without  intermission  for  many  months  and  in  many 
directions ;  but  you  must  not  think  that  because  we  have  never 
shown  any  knowledge  of  what  yoti  have  been  doing,  nor  that, 
because  we  have  never  acknowledged  or  thanked  you  for  it  in  our 
letters — that  we  are  either  ungrateful  for,  or  ignore  purposely  or 
otherwise  what  you  have  done,  for  it  is  really  not  so.  For, 
though  no  one  ought  to  be  expecting  thanks,  for  doing  his  duty 
by  humanity  and  the  cause  of  truth, — since,  after  all,  he  who 
labours  for  others,  labours  but  for  himself — nevertheless,  my 
Brother  I  feel  deeply  grateful  to  you  for  what  you  have  done.  I 
am  not  very  demonstrative  by  nature  but  I  do  hope  to  prove  to 
you  some  day,  that  I  am  not  an  ingrate,  as  you  think.  And  you 
yourself,  though  you  have  been,  indeed,  forbearing  in  your  letters 
to  me,  in  not  complaining  about  what  you  call  flaws  and  incon- 
sistencies in  our  letters,  yet,  you  have  not  carried  so  far  that 
forbearance,  as  to  leave  to  time  and  further  explanations  the  task 
of  deciding  whether  such  flaws  were  real  or  only  apparently  so 
upon  their  surface.  You  have  always  complained  to  Sinnett  and 
even,  in  the  beginning,  to  Fern.  If  you  but  consented  for  five 
minutes  or  so  to  fancy  yourself  in  the  position  of  a  native  guru 
and  a  European  chela,  you  would  soon  perceive  how  monstrous 
must  appear  any  such  relations  as  ours  to  a  native  mind ;  and  you 
would  blame  no  one  for  disrespect.      Now,  pray,  understand  me; 


240  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

/  do  not  complain ;  but  the  bare  fact  of  your  addressing  me  as 
**  Master  *'  in  your  letters — makes  me  the  laughing-stock  of  all 
our  Tchutukhis  who  know  anything  of  our  mutual  relation.  I 
would  never  have  mentioned  this  fact,  but  I  am  in  a  position  to 
demonstrate  to  you  by  enclosing  here  a  letter  from  Subba  Row 
to  myself  full  of  excuses,  and  another  to  H.P.B. — as  full  of  sincere 
truths,  since  they  are  both  chelas,  or  rather  disciples.  I  hope 
I  am  not  committing  an  indiscretion  in  the  Western  sense.  You 
will  please  return  to  me  both  after  reading  them  and  noting  what 
they  say.  This  is  sent  to  you  in  strict  confidence  and  only  for 
your  personal  instruction.  You  will  perceive  therein,  how  much 
you  English  have  to  undo  in  India,  before  you  can  hope  to  do  any- 
thing good  in  the  country.  Meanwhile,  I  must  close,  reiterating 
to  you  once  more  the  assurance  of  my  sincere  regards  and  esteem. 

Yours 

K.  H. 
Believe  me  you  are  too  severe  upon  and — iinjust  to  Fern. 


LETTER  No.  XXXI 

Received  London,   March  26th,    1881. 

It  is  from  the  depths  of  an  unknown  valley,  amid  the  steep 
crags  and  glaciers  of  Terich-Mir — a  vale  never  trodden  by  Euro- 
pean foot  since  the  day  its  parent  mount  was  itself  breathed  out 
from  within  our  Mother  Earth's  bosom — that  your  friend  sends 
you  these  lines.  For,  it  is  there  K.H.  received  your  "  Affec- 
tionate homages,"  and  there  he  intends  passing  his  **  summer 
vacations."  A  letter  from  the  abodes  of  eternal  snow  and 
purity  "  sent  to  and  received — "  At  the  abodes  of  vice  "  !  .  .  . 
Queer,  n'est-ce  pas?  Would,  or  rather  could  I  be  with  you  at 
those  "abodes"  No;  but  I  was  at  several  different  times, 
elsewhere,  though  neither  in  "  astral  "  nor  in  any  other  tangible 
form,  but  simply  in  thought.  Does  not  satisfy  you?  Well,  well, 
you  know  the  limitations  I  am  subjected  to  in  your  case,  and  you 
must  have  patience. 

Your  future  book  is  a  little  jewel ;  and,  small  and  tiny  as  it  is, 
it  may,  one  day,  be  found  to  soar  as  high  as  Mount  Everest  over 
your  Simla  hills.  Among  all  other  works  of  that  class,  in  the 
wild  jungle  of  Spiritualistic  literature,  it  shall  undoubtedly  prove 
the  Redeemer,  offered  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  sin  of  the  world  of 
spiritualists.  They  will  begin  by  rejecting — nay — ^villifying  it ; 
but,  it  will  find  its  faithful  twelve  and — the  seed  thrown  by  your 
hand  into  the  soil  of  speculation  will  not  grow  up  as  a  weed.     So 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  241 

far  may  be  promised.  You  are  oft  too  cautious.  You  remind 
too  often  the  reader  of  your  ignorance ;  and  presenting  but  as  a 
modest  theory,  that,  which  at  the  bottom  of  your  heart  you  know 
and  feel  to  be  an  axiom,  a  primary  truth — instead  of  helping,  you 
but  perplex  him  and — create  doubt.  But  it  is  a  spirited  and  dis- 
criminative little  memoir,  and,  as  a  critical  estimate  of  the  phe- 
nomena witnessed  by  you  personally  far  more  useful  than  Mr. 
Wallace's  work.  It  is  at  this  sort  of  springs  that  Spiritualists 
ought  to  be  compelled  to  slake  their  thirst  for  phenomena  and 
mystic  knowledge  instead  of  being  left  to  swallow  the  idiotic  gush 
they  find  in  the  Banners  of  Light  and  others.  The  world — mean- 
ing that  of  individual  existences — is  full  of  those  latent  meanings 
and  deep  purposes  which  underlie  all  the  phenomena  of  the 
Universe,  and  Occult  Sciences — i.e.,  reason  elevated  to  super- 
sensuous  wisdom — can  alone  furnish  the  key  wherewith  to  unlock 
them  to  the  intellect.  Believe  me,  there  comes  a  moment  in  the 
life  of  an  adept,  when  the  hardships  he  has  passed  through  are 
a  thousandfold  rewarded.  In  order  to  acquire  further  knowledge, 
he  has  no  more  to  go  through  a  minute  and  slow  process  of  in- 
vestigation and  comparison  of  various  objects,  but  is  accorded  an 
instantaneous,  implicit  insight  into  every  first  truth.  Having 
passed  that  stage  of  philosophy  which  maintains  that  all  funda- 
mental truths  have  sprung  from  a  blind  impulse — it  is  the  phil- 
osophy of  your  Sensationalists  or  Positivists ;  and  left  far  behind 
him  that  other  class  of  thinkers — the  Intellectualists  or — Skeptics 
— who  hold  that  fundamental  truths  are  derived  from  the  intellect 
alone,  and  that  we,  ourselves,  are  their  only  originating  causes ; 
the  adept  sees  and  feels  and  lives  in  the  very  source  of  all  funda- 
mental truths — the  Universal  Spiritual  Essence  of  Nature,  Shiva 
the  Creator,  the  Destroyer,  and  the  Regenerator.  As  Spiritualists 
of  to-day  have  degraded  **  spirit,"  so  have  the  Hindus  degraded 
Nature  by  their  Anthropomorphistic  conceptions  of  it.  Nature 
alone  can  incarnate  the  Spirit  of  limitless  contemplation. 
"  Absorbed  in  the  absolute  self-unconsciousness  of  physical  Self, 
plunged  in  the  depths  of  true  Being,  which  is  no  being  but 
eternal,  universal  Life,  his  whole  form  as  immoveable  and  white 
as  the  eternal  summits  of  snow  in  Kailasa  where  he  sits,  above 
care,  above  sorrow,  above  sin  and  worldliness,  a  mendicant,  a 
sage,  a  healer,  the  King  of  Kings,  the  Yogi  of  Yogis,"  such  is 
the  ideal  Shiva  of  Yoga-Shastras  the  culmination  of  Spiritual 
Wisdom.  .  .  .  Oh,  ye  Max  Mullers  and  Monier  Williamses, 
what  have  ye  done  with  our  Philosophy? 

But  you  can  hardly  be  expected  to  enjoy  or  even  understand  the 
above  phanerosis  of  our  teachings.  Pardon  me.  I  write  but 
seldom  letters;  and  whenever  compelled  to  do  so  follow  rather 
my  own  thoughts  than  strictly  hold   to  the  subject   I   ought  to 


242  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

have  in  view.  I  have  laboured  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury night  and  day  to  keep  my  place  within  the  ranks  of  that 
invisible  but  ever  busy  army  which  labours  and  prepares  for  a 
task  which  can  bring  no  reward  but  the  consciousness  we  are 
doing  our  duty  to  humanity ;  and,  meeting  you  on  my  way  I  have 
tried  to — do  not  fear, — not  to  enroll  you,  for  that  would  be  im- 
possible, but  to  simply  draw  your  attention,  excite  your  curiosity 
if  not  your  better  feelings  to  the  one  and  only  truth.  You 
proved  faithful  and  true,  and  have  done  your  best.  If  your  efforts 
will  teach  the  world  but  one  single  letter  from  the  alphabet  of 
Truth — that  Truth  which  once  pervaded  the  whole  world — your 
reward  will  not  miss  you.  And  now  that  you  have  met  the 
*'  mystics  "  of  Paris  and  London  what  do  you  think  of  them?  .  .  . 

Yours, 

K.  H. 

P.S. — Our  hapless  "  Old  Lady  "  is  sick.  Liver,  kidneys,  head, 
brain,  legs,  every  organ  and  limb  shows  fight  and  snaps  its  fingers 
at  her  efforts  to  ignore  them.  One  of  us  will  have  to  "fix  her  " 
as  our  worthy  Mr.  Olcott  says,  or  it  will  fare  bad  with  her. 


LETTER  No.  XXXII 

I  am  sorry  for  all  that  has  happened,  but  it  was  to  be  expected. 
Mr.  Hume  has  put  his  foot  in  a  hornet's  nest  and  must  not  com- 
plain. If  my  confession  has  not  altered  your  feelings — I  am  deter- 
mined not  to  influence  you  and  therefore  will  not  look  your  way 
to  find  out  how  the  matter  stands  with  you,  my  friend — and  if 
you  are  not  entirely  disgusted  with  our  system  and  ways ;  if  in 
short  it  is  still  your  desire  to  carry  on  a  correspondence  and  learn, 
something  must  be  done  to  check  the  irresponsible  **  Benefactor.'* 
I  prevented  her  sending  to  Hume  a  worse  letter  than  she  wrote 
to  yourself.  I  cannot  force  her  to  transmit  his  letters  to  me  nor 
mine  to  him ;  and  since  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  me  to  trust 
Fern,  and  that  G.K.  can  hardly  be  sacrificed  with  any  sense  of 
justice,  to  a  man  who  is  utterly  unable  to  appreciate  any  service 
rendered  except  his  own, — what  shall  we  do  about  it?  Since  we 
have  mixed  ourselves  with  the  outside  world,  we  have  no  right  to 
suppress  the  personal  opinion  of  its  individual  members,  nor 
eschew  their  criticisms,  however  unfavourable  to  us — hence  the 
positive  order  to  H.P.B.  to  publish  Mr.  Hume's  article.  Only,  as 
we  would  have  the  world  see  both  sides  of  the  question,  we  have 
also  allowed  the  joint  protest  of  Deb,  Subba  Row,  Damodar,  and 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  243 

a  few  other  chelas — to  follow  his  criticism  of  ourselves  and  our 
System  in  the  Theosophist. 

I  gave  you  but  hints  of  what  at  some  other  time  I  will  write 
more  at  length.  I  think  in  the  meantime  of  the  difficulties  that  be 
naturally  in  our  way,  and  let  us  not,  if  your  friendship  for  me  is 
sincere, — by  struggling  with  our  chains,  make  them  straiter 
and  heavier.  For  my  part  I  will  run  willingly  the  hazard  of  being 
thought  a  self-contradicting  ignoramus,  and  criticized  in  un- 
measured terms  by  Mr.  Hume  in  print,  provided  you  really  profit 
by  the  tuition,  and  share  from  time  to  time  your  knowledge  with 
the  world.  But  to  give  you  my  thoughts  without  disguise  I  am 
never  like  to  risk  myself  again  with  any  other  European  but  your- 
self. As  you  now  see,  connection  with  the  outside  world,  can 
bring  but  sorrow  to  those  who  so  faithfully  serve  us,  and  dis- 
credit to  our  Brotherhood.  No  Asiatic  is  ever  likely  to  be  affected 
by  Mr.  Hume's  egotistical  thrusts  against  us  (the  result  of  my  last 
letter,  and  of  the  promise  exacted  that  he  will  write  me  more 
rarely  and  less  than  he  has  done)  but  these  thrusts  and  criticisms 
that  the  European  readers  will  accept  as  a  revelation  and  a  con- 
fession, without  ever  suspecting  from  whence  they  have  arisen 
and  by  what  a  deeply  egotistical  feeling  they  have  been  generated 
— these  thrusts  are  calculated  to  do  a  great  harm — in  a  direction 
you  have  not  hitherto  dreamt  of.  Resolve  not  to  lose  so  useful  a 
tool  (useful  in  one  direction,  of  course)  the  Chohan  permitted 
himself  to  be  over-persuaded  by  us,  into  giving  sanction  to  my 
intercourse  with  Mr.  Hume.  I  had  pledged  my  word  to  him  that 
he  had  repented, — was  a  changed  man.  And  now  how  shall  I 
ever  face  my  Great  Master,  who  is  laughed  at,  made  the  object  of 
Mr.  Hume's  wit,  called  Rameses  the  Great,  and  such  like  in- 
decent remarks?  And  he  used  terms  in  his  letters,  the  brutal 
grossness  of  which  prevents  me  from  repeating  them,  which  have 
revolted  my  soul  when  I  read  them ;  words  so  filthy  as  to  pollute 
the  very  air  that  touched  them,  and  that  I  hastened  to  send  to  you 
with  the  letter  that  contained  it,  so  as  not  to  have  those  pages  in 
my  house,  full  of  young  and  innocent  chelas,  that  I  would  prevent 
from  ever  hearing  such  terms. 

Then  you  yourself,  my  friend  influenced  in  this  by  him  more 
than  you  know  or  suspect  of — you  yourself  deduce  but  too  readily 
from  incompleteness  **  contradictions."  The  novelty  or  inexplic- 
able aspect  of  any  asserted  fact  in  our  science  is  not  a  sufficient 
reason  for  setting  it  immediately  down  as  a  contradiction,  and 
proclaim  as  Hume  does  in  his  article  that  he  could  teach  in  one 
week  that  which  he  succeeded  in  drawing  out  of  us  in  eighteen 
months,  for  your  knowledge  is  as  yet  so  limited  that  it  would  be 
difficult  for  him  to  say  how  much  we  do  or  do  not  know. 

But  I  have  lingered  too  long  over  this  irrational,  unphilosophi- 


244  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

cal  and  illogical  attack  upon  ourselves  and  System.  One  day  we 
will  show  the  invalidity  of  the  objections  preferred  by  Mr.  H.  He 
may  be  regarded  as  a  sapient  councillor  in  the  municipality,  but 
he  could  hardly  be  regarded  in  such  a  light  by  us.  He  accuses 
me  of  giving  through  him  *'  false  ideas  and  facts  "  to  the  world  ; 
and  adds  that  he  would  willingly  keep  aloof  from — break  with  us 
but  for  his  desire  of  benefiting  the  world  !  Verily  a  most  easy 
method  of  burking  all  the  sciences,  for  there  is  not  one  in  which 
"  false  facts  "  and  wild  theories  do  not  abound.  Only  while  the 
Western  Sciences  make  confusion  still  more  confused  our  Science 
explains  all  the  seeming  discrepancies  and  reconciles  the  wildest 
theories. 

However,  if  you  do  not  bring  him  to  his  senses  there  will  be 
soon  an  end  to  all — this  time  irrevocable.  I  need  not  assure  you 
of  my  sincere  regard  for  you  and  our  gratitude  for  what  you  have 
for  the  Society  here — indirectly  for  us  two.  Whatever  happens, 
I  am  at  your  service.  I  would,  could  I  but  see  my  way,  do  all 
that  can  be  done  for  your  friend  Colonel  Chesney.  For  your  sake, 
if  the  crisis  is  avoided  and  the  black  cloud  blows  off — I  will  in- 
struct him  as  far  as  I  can.     But— may  it  not  be  too  late? 

Yours  in  good  faith, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XXXHl 

I  am  sincerely  afraid  that  you  may  have  been  peijy^lcvveH  ^v  the 
apparent  contradiction  between  the  notes  received  by  you  from 
my  Brother  M. — and  myself;  know  my  friend  that  in  our  world 
though  we  may  differ  in  methods  we  can  never  be  opposed  in 
principle  of  action  and  the  broadest  and  most  practical  application 
of  the  idea  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Humanity  is  not  incompatible 
with  your  dream  of  establishing  a  nucleus  of  honest  scientific 
enquirers  of  good  repute,  who  would  give  weight  to  the  TS. 
organization  in  the  eyes  of  the  multitude,  and  serve  as  a  shield 
against  the  ferocious  and  idiotic  attack  of  sceptics  and  materialists. 

There  are — even  among  English  men  of  Science — those  who  are 
already  pref>ared  to  find  our  teachings  in  harmony  with  the  results 
and  progress  of  their  own  researches,  and  who  are  not  indifferent 
to  their  application  to  the  spiritual  needs  of  humanity  at  large. 
Amongst  these  it  may  be  your  task  to  throw  the  seeds  of  Truth 
and  point  out  the  path.  Yet  as  my  brother  reminded  you,  not  one 
of  those  who  have  only  tried  to  help  on  the  work  of  the  Society, 
however  imperfect  and  faulty  their  ways  and  means,  w^ill  have  done 


PKOBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  245 

so  in  vain — the  situation  shall  be  more  fully  explained  to  you  by 
and  by. 

Meanwhile  use  every  effort  to  develop  such  relations  with  A. 
Besant  that  your  work  may  run  on  parallel  lines  and  with  full 
sympathy ;  an  easier  request  than  some  of  mine  with  which  you 
have  ever  loyally  complied.  You  may,  if  you  see  fit — show  this 
note  to  her,  only.  In  travelling  your  own  thorny  path  I  say  again 
courage  and  hope.      This  is  not  an  answer  to  your  letter. 

Yours  ever  truly, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.   XXXIV 

It  is  positively  distressing  to  find  oneself  so  systematically  mis- 
understood, one's  intentions  misconceived,  and  the  whole  plan 
imperilled  by  this  endless  hurrying  on.  Are  we  never  then  to  be 
granted  any  credit  for  knowing  what  we  are  about,  or  allowed 
the  benefit  of  the  doubt  in  the  absence  of  any  reasonable  proof 
whatever  that  we  have  determined  to  * '  bar  the  progress  ' '  of  the 
Theos  :  Society  ?  Mr.  Hume  maintains  that  he  does  not  say — 
**  K.H.  or  any  brother  is  wrong  " — ^withal  every  line  of  his 
numerous  letters  to  myself  and  H.P.B.  breathes  the  spirit  of  com- 
plaint  and  bitter  accusation.  I  tell  you,  my  good  friend,  he  will 
never  be  satisfied  do  what  we  may  !  And  as,  we  cannot  consent 
to  over  flood  the  world  at  the  risk  of  drowning  them,  with  a 
doctrine  that  has  to  be  cautiously  given  out,  and  bit  by  bit  like  a 
too  powerful  tonic  which  can  kill  as  well  as  cure — the  result  will 
be  a  reaction  in  that  insatiable  craving  of  his,  and  then — well  you 
yourself  know  the  consequences.  Enclosed  two  letters  written 
and  addressed  to  her  with  an  eye  to  myself.  Well,  we  can  do  no 
better  for  the  present.  The  Society  will  never  perish  as  an  institu- 
tion, although  branches  and  individuals  in  it  may.  I  have  done 
to  humour  him  lately  more  than  I  have  ever  done  for  you ;  and  you 
may  judge  of  the  situation  in  the  chaotic  but  on  the  whole  reason- 
able remarks  that  H.P.B.  addresses  to-day  to  Mr.   H. 

We  must  be  left  to  judge  for  ourselves  and  be  permitted  to  be 
the  best  judges.  Everything  will  be  explained  and  given  out,  m 
good  time  if  we  are  but  allowed  our  own  ways.  Otherwise,  rather 
give  up  the  Eclectic.  I  had  volumes  from  him  during  the  past 
week  !  I  send  you  a  few  notes  through  her.  Keep  this  con- 
fidential. 

Yours, 

K.H. 


246  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  XXXV 

Letter    from    K.H.     Received   Allahabad,    March    i8th,    1882. 

You  did  not  quite  apprehend  the  meaning  of  my  note,  good 
friend,  of  March  1  Ith.  I  said  it  was  easy  to  produce  phenomena, 
when  the  necessary  conditions  were  given,  but  not  that  even 
the  presence  of  Olcott  and  Mallapura  at  your  house  brought 
such  an  accession  of  force  as  would  suffice  for  the  tests  you 
propose. 

These  latter  were  reasonable  enough  from  your  point  of  view, 
I  do  not  at  all  blame  you  for  asking  them.  I,,  myself,  would 
perhaps  wish  you  to  have  them — for  your  personal  gratification, 
not  that  of  the  public  for,  as  you  know,  conviction  in  these 
cases  must  be  reached  by  individual  experience.  Secondhand 
testimony  never  really  satisfied  any  but  a  credulous  (or  rather 
non-sceptical)  mind.  No  spiritualist  who  should  read  in  your 
second  edition  even  a  narrative  of  the  very  tests  you  have 
named  to  me,  would  for  one  moment  ascribe  the  facts  to  aught 
but  mediumship;  and  your  lady  and  yourself  would  probably 
be  included  by  them  in  the  sum  of  the  mediumistic  factors. 
Fancy  that !  No — bide  your  time;  you  are  slowly  gathering 
together  the  materials  for  what  we  here  call,  as  you  know,  real 
dgin,  make  the  best  of  it.  It  is  not  physical  phenomena  that 
will  ever  bring  conviction  to  the  hearts  of  the  unbelievers  in  the 
**  Brotherhood"  but  rather  phenomena  of  intellectuality  phil- 
osophy and  logic,  if  I  may  so  express  it.  See  "Spirit  teachings" 
by  +  as  given  out  by  Oxon — ^the  most  intellectual  as  the  best 
educated  of  all  mediums.  Read  and — pity!  Do  you  not  see 
then  where  We  are  "  driving  at  "  as  O.  says?  Do  you  not 
realize  that  were  it  not  for  your  exceptional  intellect  and  the 
help  to  be  derived  therefrom  the  Chohan  would  long  ago  have 
closed  every  door  of  communication  between  us?  Yes,  read 
and  study,  my  friend;  for  there  is  an  object.  You  seemed  an- 
noyed, disappointed,  when  reading  the  words,  "  impossible  : 
no  power  here,  will  write  through  Bombay."  Those  eight 
words  have  will  cost  me  eight  days'  recuperative  work — in  the 
state  I  am  in  at  present.  But  you  ^noto  not  what  I  mean;  you 
are  absolved. 

You  will  not  disguise  from  yourself  the  difficulties  of  working 
out  your  scheme  of  "  Degrees."  I  wanted  you  to  develop  it 
at  your  leisure,  "  as  the  spirit  moved  you."  For  even  though 
you  should  not  quite  succeed  in  forming  a  scheme  that  would 
fit  the  needs  of  Asia  and  Europe,  you  might  hit  upon  something 
that  would  be  good  for  either  the  one  or  the  other,  and  another 
hand  might  supply  the  lacking  portion.  Asiatics  are  so  poor, 
as  a  rule,  and  books  are  so  inaccessible  to  them  in  these  de- 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  247 

generate  days,  that  you  can  see  plainly  how  different  a  plan 
of  intellectual  culture — in  preparation  for  practical  experiments 
to  unfold  psychic  power  in  themselves — must  be  thought.  In 
the  olden  time,  this  want  was  supplied  by  the  Guru  who  guided 
the  chela  through  the  difficulties  of  childhood  and  youth,  and 
afforded  him  an  oral  teaching  as  much,  or  more  than  through 
books  the  food  for  mental  and  psychic  growth.  The  want  of 
such  a  **  guide,  philosopher  and  friend,"  (and  who  so  well  de- 
serves the  tripartite  title?)  can  never  be  supplied,  try  as  you 
may.  All  you  can  do  is  to  prepare  the  intellect :  the  impulse 
toward  "  soul  culture  "  must  be  furnished  by  the  individual. 
Thrice  fortunate  they  who  can  break  through  the  vicious  circle 
of  modern  influence  and  come  up  above  the  vapours  I 

To  recur  to  your  Degrees  :  Are  you  not  drawing  the  lines  too 
vaguely  between  the  first  three  or  four  groups?  What  test  do 
you  apply  to  decide  their  respective  mental  states.  How  guard 
against  mere  ".cramming?  and  copying?  and  substitute  writ- 
ing?" Many  clever  Jesuits  might  pass  all  your  Degrees,  even 
up  to  the  6th  and  7th  :  would  you,  then,  admit  him  into  the 
second  section?  Remember  the  lessons  of  the  past  and  Carter 
Block.  It  is  quite  possible — as  Moorad  Ali  Bey  said  and  Olcott 
confirmed  to  you — for  one  who  had  passed  the  first  five  stages 
to  acquire  "  occult  faculties  "  in  the  6th.  Nay,  it  can  be  done 
without  the  help  of  either — by  adopting  either  the  method  of 
the  Arhats,  the  Dasturs,  the  yogis,  or  the  Sufis;  among  each  of 
which  groups  of  mystics  there  have  been  many  who  did  not 
even  read  or  write.  If  the  psychic  idiosyncracy  is  lacking,  no 
culture  will  supply  it.  And  the  highest  theoretical  as  also 
practical  school  of  this  kind,  is  that  one  in  which  we  associates 
— your  interested  correspondents — were  taught. 

All  that  precedes  has  been  said  not  for  your  discouragement 
but  as  a  stimulus.  If  you  are  a  true  Anglo-Saxon,  no  obstacle 
will  daunt  your  zeal;  and  unless  my  Eye  has  been  dimmed  this 
is  your  character — au  fond.  We  have  one  word  for  all  aspirants  : 
Try.  -*^ 

And  now,  to  your  laugh  in  September  last  as  to  the  imaginary 
dangers  to  him  who  produces  phenomena,  dangers  growing  in 
size,  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  the  phenomena — so 
produced,  and  the  impossibility  to  refute  them.  Remember 
the  proposed  test  of  the  Times  to  be  brought  here.  My  good 
friend,  if  the  trifling  phenomena  (for  they  are  trifling  in  com- 
parison with  what  could  and  might  be  done)  shown  by  Eglinton 
provoked  such  bitter  hatred  evoking  before  him  scenes  of  im- 
prisonment owing  to  false  witnesses  what  would  not  be  the  fate 
of  the  poor  "  old  lady  "  I  You  are  yet  barbarians  with  all 
your  boasted  civilization. 


248  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

And  now  to  Morya.  (This  strictly  between  us  and  you  must 
not  breathe  it  even  to  Mrs.  Gordon).  Eglington  was  preparing 
to  depart  leaving  on  poor  Mrs.  G.  mind  the  fear  that  she  had 
been  deceived;  that  there  were  no  *'  Brothers  '*  since  EgUngton 
had  denied  their  existence  and  that  the  **  Spirits  "  were  silent 
as  to  that  problem.  Last  week  then  M.,  stalking  in,  into  the 
motley  crowd  took  the  spooks  by  the  skin  of  their  throats  and, — 
the  result  was  the  unexpected  admission  of  the  Brothers,  the 
actual  existence  and  the  honour  claimed  of  a  personal  acquaint- 
ance with  the  "  Illustrious."  The  lesson  for  you  and  others, 
derived  from  the  above,  may  be  useful  in  future — events  having 
to  grow  and  to  develop. 

Yours  faithfully, 

K.H. 


LETTER  No.  XXXVI 

Received   about  January,    1882. 

My  impatient  friend — allow  me  as  one  having  some  authority  in 
your  theosophical  mella,  to  empower  you  to  **  ignore  the  rules  " 
for  a  short  time.  Make  them  fill  up  the  forms  and  initiate  the 
candidates  right  away.  Only  whatever  you  do,  do  it  without 
delay.  Remember,  you  are  the  only  one  now.  Mr.  Hume  is 
fully  engrossed  in  his  index  and  expects  me  to  write  to  him  and 
make  puja  first.  I  am  rather  too  tall  for  him  to  reach  so  easily 
as  that  my  head — if  he  has  any  intention  to  cover  it  with  the 
ashes  of  contrition.  Nor  will  I  put  on  sack-cloth  to  show  repent- 
ance for  what  I  have  done.  If  he  writes  and  puts  questions  all 
well  and  good  I'll  answer  them  if  not — I  will  keep  my  lectures 
for  someone  else.      Time  is  no  object  with  me. 

Had  your  letter.       I  know  your  difficulties.      Will  see  to  them. 

Great  will  be  the  disappointment  of  K.H.  if  upon  returning  to 
us  he  finds  so  little  progress  done.  You — you  are  sincere,  others 
— put  their  pride  above  all.  Then  those  Prayag  theosophists — the 
Pundits  and  Babus  !  They  do  naught  and  expect  us  to  correspond 
with  them.       Fools  and  arrogant  men. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  XXXVII 

Received   at  Allahabad,   January,    1882. 

Private. 
Honoured  Sir, 

The  Master  has  awaked  and  bids  me  write.      To  his  great  regret 

for  certain  reasons  He  will  not  be  able  until  a  fixed  period  has 


^^^^Ks 


PROBATIOlSr,  AND  CHELASHIP  249 

ed  to  expose  Himself  to  the  thought  currents  in-flowing  so 
strongly  from  beyond  the  Himavat.  I  am  therefore,  commanded 
to  be  the  hand  to  indite  His  message.  I  am  to  tell  you  that  He 
is  **  quite  as  friendly  to  you  as  heretofore  and  well  satisfied  with 
both  your  good  intentions  and  even  their  execution  so  far  as  it  lay 
in  your  power.  You  have  proved  your  affection  and  sincerity  by 
your  zeal.  The  impulse  you  have  personally  given  to  the  Cause 
we  love,  will  not  be  checked ;  therefore  the  fruits  of  it  (the  word 
"  reward  "  is  avoided  being  used  but  for  the  **  goody-goody  ")  will 
not  be  withheld  when  your  balance  of  causes  and  effects — your 
Karma  is  adjusted.  In  unselfishly  and  at  personal  risk  labouring 
for  your  neighbour,  you  have  most  effectually  worked  for  yourself. 
One  year  has  wrought  a  great  change  in  your  heart.  The  man 
of  1880  would  scarcely  recognise  the  man  of  1881  were  they  con- 
fronted. Compare  them,  then,  good  friend  and  Brother,  that  you 
may  fully  realize  what  time  has  done,  or  rather  what  you  have 
done  with  time.  To  do  this  meditate — alone  with  the  magic 
mirror  of  memory  to  gaze  into.  Thus  shall  you  not  only  see  the 
lights  and  shadows  of  the  Past,  but  the  possible  brightness  of  the 
Future,  as  well.  Thus,  in  time,  will  you  come  to  see  the  Ego  of 
aforetime  in  its  naked  reality.  And  thus  also  you  shall  hear  from 
me  direct  at  the  earliest,  practical  opportunity,  for  we  are  not 
ungrateful  and  even  Nirvana  cannot  obliterate  good/* 

These  are  the  Master's  words,  as  with  His  help  I  am  enabled 
to  frame  them  in  your  language,  honoured  Sir.  I  am  personally 
permitted,  at  the  same  time  to  thank  you  very  warmly  for  the 
genuine  sympathy  which  you  have  felt  for  me  at  the  time  when  a 
slight  accident  due  to  my  forgetfulness  laid  me  on  my  bed  of 
sickness. 

Though  you  may  have  read  in  the  modern  Works  on  mesmerism 
how,  that  which  we  call  "Will-essence"  and  you  **  fluid  " — is 
transmitted  from  the  operator  to  his  objective  point,  you  perhaps 
scarcely  realize  how  everyone  is  practically,  all-be-it  unconsciously, 
demonstrating  this  law  every  day  and  every  moment.  Nor,  can 
you  quite  realize  how  the  training  for  adeptship  increases  both 
one's  capacity  to  emit  and  to  feel  this  forme  of  force.  I  assure 
you  that  I,  though  but  a  humble  chela  as  yet,  felt  your  good 
wishes  flowing  to  me  as  the  convalescent  in  the  cold  mountains 
feels  from  the  gentle  breeze  that  blows  upon  him  from  the  plains 
below. 

I  have  also  to  tell  you  that  in  a  certain  Mr.  Bennett  of  America 
who  will  shortly  arrive  at  Bombay,  you  may  recognise  one,  who, 
in  spite  of  his  national  provincialism,  that  you  so  detest,  and  his 
too  infidelistic  bias,  is  one  of  our  agents  (unknown  to  himself)  to 
carry  out  the  scheme  for  the  enfranchisement  of  Western  thought 
from   superstitious  creeds.        If  you  can   see  your  way  towards 


250  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

giving  him  a  correct  idea  of  the  actual  present  and  fxytential  future 
state  of  Asiatic  but  more  particularly  of  Indian  thought,  it  will 
be  gratifying  to  my  Master.  He  desires  me  to  let  you  know,  at 
the  same  time,  that  you  should  not  feel  such  an  exaggerated 
delicacy  about  taking  on  the  work  left  undone  from  Mr.  Hume's 
hands.  That  gentleman  chooses  to  do  but  what  suits  his  personal 
fancy  without  any  regard  whatever  to  the  feelings  of  other  people. 
His  present  work  also — a  pyramid  of  intellectual  energy  misspent 
— his  objections  and  reasons,  are  all  calculated  but  to  exonerate 
himself  only.  Master  regrets  to  find  in  him  the  same  spirit  of 
utter,  unconscious  selfishness  with  no  view  to  the  good  of  the 
Cause  he  represents.  If  he  seems  interested  in  it  at  all,  it  is 
because  he  is  opposed  and  finds  himself  roused  to  combativeness. 
Thus  the  answer  to  Mr.  Terry's  letter  sent  to  him  from  Bombay 
ought  to  have  been  published  in  the  January  number.  Will  you 
kindly  to  see  to  it — Master  asks?  Master  thinks  you  can  do  it 
as  well  as  Mr.  Hume  if  you  but  tried,  as  the  metaphysical  faculty 
in  you,  is  only  dormant  but  would  fully  develop  were  you  but  to 
awake  it  to  its  full  action  by  constant  use.  As  to  our  reverent 
M  :  he  desires  me  to  assure  you  that  the  secret  of  Mr.  Hume's 
professed  love  for  Humanity  lies  in,  and  is  based  upon,  the  chance 
presence  in  that  word  of  the  first  syllable;  as  for  **  mankind  " — ^he 
has  no  sympathy  for  it. 

Since  Master  will  not  be  able  to  write  you  himself  for  a  month 
or  two  longer  (though  you  will  always  hear  of  him — He  begs  you 
to  proceed  for  his  sake  with  your  metaphysical  studies ;  and  not 
to  be  giving  up  the  task  in  despair  whenever  you  meet  with  incom- 
prehensible ideas  in  M.  .  .  Sahib's  notes,  more  so,  as  M.  .  . 
Sahib's  only  hatred  in  his  life,  is  for  writing.  In  conclusion 
Master  sends  you  his  best  wishes  and  praying  you  may  not  forget 
Him  orders  me  to  sign  myself,  your  obedient  servant. 

The  **  Disinherited." 

P.S.  Should  you  desire  to  write  to  Him  though  unable  to 
answer  Himself  Master  will  receive  your  letters  with  pleasure ;  you 
can  do  so  through  D.  K.  Mavalankar. 

**Dd." 


LETTER  No.  XXXVIII 

Received  Allahabad.     About  February,   1882. 

Your  "  illustrious  "  friend  did  not  mean  to  be  **  satirical," 
whatever  other  construction  might  be  put  on  his  words.  Your 
**  illustrious  "  friend  was  simply  feeling  sad  at  the  thought  of 
the  great  disappointment   K.H.    is   sure  to   experience  when  he 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  251 

returns  among  us.  The  first  retrospective  glance  at  the  work  he 
has  so  much  at  heart,  will  show  him  such  samples  of  mutual  feel- 
ing exchanged  as  the  two  herein  enclosed.  The  undignified, 
bitter,  sarcastic  tone  of  one  will  give  him  as  little  cause  to  rejoice 
as  the  undignified,  foolish  and  childish  tone  of  the  other.  I  would 
have  left  the  subject  untouched  had  you  not  so  misunderstood  the 
feeling  that  dictated  my  last.  It  is  better  I  should  be  frank  with 
you.  The  term  "  Highness  "  to  which  I  am  not  in  the  least 
entitled  is  far  more  suggestive  of  satire  than  anything  I  have 
hitherto  said.  Yet  as  **  no  epithet  will  hang  to  the  shirt-collar  of 
a  Bod-pa  "  I  heed  it  not  advising  you  to  do  the  same  and  see  no 
satire  where  none  is  meant  and  which  is  but  frankness  in  speech, 
and  the  correct  definition  of  the  general  state  of  your  feeHngs 
towards  the  natives. 

Your  solicitor  knows  better — of  course.  If  the  paragraph  in 
question  is  not  libellous  then  all  I  can  say  is,  that  a  complete  re- 
codification of  your  libel  law  is  very  much  needed. 

You  will  certainly  have  trouble  with  her  about  the  **  female 
branch."  Her  scorn  for  the  sex — has  no  bounds  and  she  can 
hardly  be  persuaded  that  any  good  can  ever  come  from  that 
quarter.  I  will  be  frank  with  you  again.  Neither  myself  nor 
any  of  us — K.H.  being  entirely  left  out  of  the  question — would 
consent  to  become  the  founders  let  alone  the  conductors  of  a 
female  branch — we  all  having  had  enough  of  our  anis.  Yet  we 
confess  that  a  great  good  may  result  of  such  a  movement,  the 
females  having  such  an  influence  over  their  children  and  the  men 
in  the  houses,  you  being  such  an  old  and  experienced  hand  in  that 
direction  could  with  Mr.  Hume's  help  be  of  immense  use  to  K.H., 
from  within  the  area  of  whose  "  loveable  nature,"  with  the  ex- 
ception of  his  sister  females  were  always  excluded  and  love  for 
his  country  and  humanity  reigned  alone.  He  knows  nothing  of 
the  creatures — you  do.  He  always  felt  the  need  of  enrolling 
women — yet  would  never  meddle  with  them.  There's  a  chance 
for  you  to  help  him. 

On  the  other  hand  we  claim  to  know  more  of  the  secret  Cause 
of  events  than  you  men  of  the  world  do.  I  say  then  that  it  is  the 
villification  and  abuse  of  the  founders,  the  general  misconception 
of  the  aims  and  objects  of  the  Society  that  paralyses  its  progress 
— nothing  else.  There's  no  want  of  definitiveness  in  these  objects 
were  they  but  properly  explained.  The  members  would  have 
plenty  to  do  were  they  to  pursue  reality  with  half  the  fervour  they 
do  mirage.  I  am  sorry  to  find  you  comparing  Theosophy  to  a 
painted  house  on  the  stage  whereas  in  the  hands  of  true  philan- 
thropists and  theosophists  it  might  become  as  strong  as  an 
impregnable  fort.  The  situation  is  this  :  men  who  join  the  Society 
with   the   one   selfish   object  of   reaching   power   making   occult 


252  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

science  their  only  or  even  chief  aim  may  as  well  not  join  it — they 
are  doomed  to  disappointment  as  much  as  those  who  commit  the 
mistake  of  letting  them  believe  that  the  Society  is  nothing  else. 
It  is  just  because  they  preach  too  much  *'  the  Brothers  "  and  too 
little  if  at  all  Brotherhood  that  they  fail.  How  many  times  had 
we  to  repeat,  that  he  who  joins  the  Society  with  the  sole  object  of 
coming  in  contact  with  us  and  if  not  of  acquiring  at  least  of 
assuring  himself  of  the  reality  of  such  powers  and  of  our  objec- 
tive existence — was  pursuing  a  mirage?  I  say  again  then.  It  is 
he  alone  who  has  the  love  of  humanity  at  heart,  who  is  capable 
of  grasping  thoroughly  the  idea  of  a  regenerating  practical 
Brotherhood  who  is  entitled  to  the  possession  of  our  secrets.  He 
alone,  such  a  man — will  never  misuse  his  powers,  as  there  will  be 
no  fear  that  he  should  turn  them  to  selfish  ends.  A  man  who 
places  not  the  good  of  mankind  above  his  own  good  is  not  worthy 
of  becoming  our  chela — he  is  not  worthy  of  becoming  higher  in 
knowledge  than  his  neighbour.  If  he  craves  for  phenomena  let 
him  be  satisfied  with  the  pranks  of  spiritualism.  Such  is  the  real 
state  of  things.  There  was  a  time,  when  from  sea  to  sea,  from 
the  mountains  and  deserts  of  the  north  to  the  grand  woods  and 
dow^ns  of  Ceylon  there  was  but  one  faith,  one  rallying  cry — to 
save  humanity  from  the  miseries  of  ignorance  in  the  name  of  Him 
who  taught  first  the  solidarity  of  all  man.  How  is  it  now? 
Where  is  the  grandeur  of  our  people  and  of  the  one  Truth? 
These,  you  m.ay  say,  are  beautiful  visions  which  were  once 
realities  on  earth,  but  had  flitted  away  like  the  light  of  a  summer's 
evening.  Yes;  and  now  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  conflicting 
people,  of  an  obstinate,  ignorant  people  seeking  to  know  the 
truth  yet  not  able  to  find  it  for  each  seeks  it  only  for  his  own 
private  benefit  and  gratification,  without  giving  one  thought  to 
others.  Will  you,  or  rather  they  never  see  the  true  meaning  and 
explanation  of  that  great  wTeck  of  desolation  w-hich  has  come  to 
our  land  and  threatens  all  lands — yours  first  of  all?  It  is  selfish- 
ness and  excliisiveness  that  killed  ours,  and  it  is  selfishness  and 
exclusivehess  that  will  kill  yours — which  has  in  addition  some 
other  defects  which  I  will  not  name.  The  w^orld  has  clouded  the 
light  of  true  knowledge  and  selfishness  will  not  allow  its  resur- 
rection, for  it  excludes  and  will  not  recognise  the  whole  fellow- 
ship of  all  those  who  were  born  under  the  same  immutable  natural 
law. 

You  are  mistaken  again.  I  may  blame  your  **  curiosity  "  when 
I  know  it  to  be  profitless.  I  am  unable  to  regard  as  an 
"  impertinence  "  that  which  is  but  the  free  use  of  intellectual 
capacities  for  reasoning.  You  may  see  things  in  a  false  light  and 
you  do  often  so  see  them.  But  you  do  not  concentrate  all  the 
light  in  yourself  as  some  do,  and  that's  one  superior  quality  you 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  253 

possess  over  other  Europeans  we  know.  Your  affection  for  K.H. 
is  sincere  and  warm  and  that  is  your  redeeming-  quality  in  my 
eyes.  Why  should  you  then  await  my  reply  with  any  "  nervous- 
ness "  at  all.  Whatever  happens  we  two  will  ever  remain  your 
friends,  as  we  would  not  blame  sincerity  even  when  it  is  mani- 
fested under  the  somewhat  objectionable  form  of  trampling  upon 
a  prostrated  enemy — the  hapless  Babu. 

Yours, 

M. 


LETTER  No.   XXXIX 

Received  Allahabad,    about   February,   1882. 

If  my  advice  is  sought  and  asked,  then  first  of  all  the  real  and 
true  situation  has  to  be  defined.  My  "  Arhat  '*  vows  are  pro- 
nounced, and  I  can  neither  seek  revenge  nor  help  others  to  obtain 
it.  I  can  help  her  with  cash  only  when  I  know  that  not  a  mace, 
not  a  fraction  of  a  tael  will  be  spent  upon  any  unholy  purpose : 
and  revenge  is  unholy.  But  we  have  defence  and  she  has  a  right 
to  it.  Defence  and  full  vindication  she  must  have,  and  that  is 
why  I  telegraphed  to  offer  option  before  proceeding  to  file  a  suit. 
Demand  retraction  and  threaten  with  a  law  suit  she  has  a  right ; 
and  she  can  also  institute  proceedings — for  he  will  retract.  For 
that  reason  have  I  laid  a  stress  upon  the  necessity  of  an  article 
touching  upon  no  other  subject  but  that  of  the  alleged  "  debt." 
This  alone  will  prove  sufficient  to  frighten  the  traducer  for  it  will 
reveal  him  before  the  public  as  a  **  slanderer  "  and  show  to  him- 
self that  he  was  in  the  wrong  box.  The  mistake  is  due  to  the  very 
illegible  and  ugly  handwriting  of  Macoliffe  (a  caligrapher  and 
scribe  of  my  kind)  who  sent  in  the  information  to  Statesman. 
This  was  a  lucky  mistake  for  on  that  may  be  built  the  whole  vindi- 
cation if  you  act  wisely.  But  the  most  has  to  be  made  of  it  now — 
or  you  will  lose  the  opportunity.  So,  if  you  condescend  once 
more  to  take  my  advice — since  you  have  opened  the  first  shot  in 
Pioneer,  seek  out  the  accounts  in  Theosophist  and  on  that  data 
and  the  Tuesday  article  write  for  her  a  nice  pungent  letter  sign 
with  her  name  and  Olcotts.  This  can  be  published  first  in  the 
Pioneer  or,  if  you  object  to  it  in  some  other  paper — but  at  all 
events  they  will  have  to  print  it  in  the  form  of  a  circular  letter  and 
send  it  in  to  every  paper  in  the  land.  Demand  retraction  in  it 
from  Statesman  and  threaten  with  law  suit.  If  you  do  that  I 
promise  success. 

The  Odessa  Old  Lady — the  Nadijda — is  quite  anxious  for  your 
autograph — that  of  "  a  great  and  celebrated  writer  "  she  says  she 

18 


254  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

was  very  undisposed  to  part  with  your  letter  to  the  General  but 
had  to  send  you  a  proof  of  her  own  identity.  Tell  her  I — the 
''  Khosyayin  '*  (her  niece's  Khosyayin  she  called  me  as  I  went  to 
see  her  thrice)  gossiped  the  thing  to  you  advising  you  to  write 
to  her  furnishing  her  thus  with  your  autograph — also  send  back 
through  H.P.B.  her  portraits  as  shown  to  your  lady,  for  she  at 
Odessa  is  very  anxious  to  have  them  back  especially  the  young 
face.  .  .  .  That's  her,  as  I  knew  her  first  "  the  lovely 
maiden." 

I'm  a  little  busy  just  now — but  will  furnish  you  with  explanatory 
appendix  as  soon  as  at  leisure — say  in  two  three  days.  The 
**  Illustrious  "  will  look  to  all  that  needs  watching.  What  about 
Mr.  Hume's  superb  address?  Can't  you  have  it  ready  for  your 
January  Number?  Ditto  your  editorial  answer  to  spiritualist's 
editorial.  Hope  y'll  not  accuse  me  of  any  desire  to  sit  upon  you — 
nor  will  you  view  my  humble  request  in  any  other  light  than  the 
true  one.  My  object  is  twofold — to  develop  your  metaphysical 
intuitions  and  help  the  journal  by  infusing  into  it  a  few  drops  of 
real  literary  good  blood.  Your  three  articles  are  certainly  praise- 
worthy, the  points  well  taken  and  as  far  as  I  can  judge — calcu- 
lated to  arrest  the  attention  of  every  scholar  and  metaphysician 
especially  the  ist.     Later  on  you  will  learn  more  about  creation. 

Meanwhile  I  have  to  create  my  dinner — you  would  scarcely  like 
it — I'm  afraid. 

M. 

Your  young  friend  the  Disinherited  is  on  his  legs  again. 
Would  you  really  care  for  his  writing  to  you?  In  such  case, 
better  ventilate  in  Pioneer  the  question  as  to  the  advisability  of 
coming  to  terms  with  China  in  regard  to  the  establishment  of  a 
regular  postal  service  between  Prayag  and  Tzigadzi. 


LETTER  No.  XL 

Received  about  February,  1882. 

To  your  first — there's  little  to  answer  :  "  Can  you  do  anything 
to  help  on  the  Society?  "  Want  me  to  speak  frankly?  W^ell  I 
say  No :  neither  yourself  nor  the  Lord  Sang-yias  Himself — so  long 
as  the  equivocal  position  of  the  Founders  is  not  perfectly  and 
undeniably  proved  due  to  fiendish  malice  and  a  systematic  in- 
trigue— could  help  it  on.  That's  the  situation  as  I  found  it,  as 
ordered  by  the  chiefs.  Watch  the  papers — all  except  two  or  three 
the  "  dear  old  lady  "  ridiculed  when  not  positively  libelled  Olcott 
attacked   by   all  the  hell-hounds  of  the   press   and   missions.     A 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  255 

pamphlet  headed  **  Theosophy  "  printed  and  circulated  by  the 
Christians  at  Tinevelly  October  23rd  on  the  day  of  O.'s  arrival 
there  with  the  Buddhist  delegfates — a  pamphlet  containing  the 
Saturday  Review  article  and  another  filthy — heavy  attack  by  an 
American  paper.  The  C.  and  M.  of  Lahore  hardly  missing  a  day 
without  having  some  attack  and  other  papers  reprinting  them, 
etc.,  etc.  You  English  have  your  notions — we  have  our  own 
upon  the  subject.  If  you  keep  the  clean  kerchief  in  your  pocket 
and  throw  but  the  soiled  one  into  the  crowd — who  will  pick  it  up? 
Enough.  We  must  have  patience  and  do  what,  meanwhile,  we 
can.  My  opinion  is  that  if  your  Rattigan  is  not  quite  a  scoundrel 
one  of  his  papers  having  thrown  and  throwing  daily  dishonour 
upon  an  innocent  woman  he  would  be  the  first  to  suggest  you 
the  idea  of  translating  and  publishing  her  uncle's  letters  (to  you 
and  herself)  in  the  Pioneer;  with  a  few  words  in  a  leader,  to  say, 
that  a  still  more  substantial  official  proof  is  shortly  expected  from 
the  Prince  D.  which  will  settle  the  vexed  question  as  to  her 
identity  for  ever  at  rest.  But  you  know  best.  This  idea  may 
have  struck  you ;  but  will  it  ever  be  seen  in  such  a  light  by 
others? 

Suby  Ram — a  truly  good  man — yet  a  devotee  of  another  error. 
Not  his  guru's  voice — his  own.  The  voice  of  a  pure,  unselfish, 
earnest  soul,  absorbed  in  misguided,  misdirected  mysticism.  Add 
to  it  a  chronic  disorder  in  that  portion  of  the  brain  which  responds 
to  clear  vision  and  the  secret  is  soon  told  :  that  disorder  was 
developed  by  forced  vision ;  by  hatha  yog  and  prolonged 
asceticism.  S.  Ram  is  the  chief  medium  and  at  the  same  time  the 
principal  magnetic  factor,  Vv^ho  spreads  his  disease  by  infection — 
unconsciously  to  himself;  who  innoculates  with  his  vision  all  the 
other  disciples.  There  is  one  general  law  of  vision  (physical  and 
mental  or  spiritual)  but  there  is  a  qualifying  special  law  proving 
that  all  vision  must  be  determined  by  the  quality  or  grade  of  man's 
spirit  and  soul,  and  also  by  the  ability  to  translate  divers  qualities  of 
waves  of  astral  light  into  consciousness.  There  is  but  one  general 
law  of  life,  but  innumerable  laws  qualify  and  determine  the 
myriads  of  forms  perceived  and  of  sounds  heard.  There  are  those 
who  are  willingly  and  those  who  are  unwillingly — blind.  Mediums 
belong  to  the  former,  sensitives  to  the  latter.  Unless  regularly 
initiated  and  trained — concerning  the  spiritual  insight  of  things 
and  the  supposed  revelations  made  unto  man  in  all  ages  from 
Socrates  down  to  Swedenborg  and  **  Fern  " — no  self-tutored  seer 
or  clairaudient  ever  saw  or  heard  quite  correctly. 

No  harm  and  much  instruction  may  come  to  you  by  joining  his 
Society.  Go  on  until  he  demands  what  you  will  be  obliged  to 
refuse.  Learn  and  study.  You  are  right  :  they  say  and  affirm 
that  the  one  and  only  God  of  the  Universe  was  Incarnated  in  their 


256  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

gfuru,  and  were  such  an  individual  to  exist  he  would  certainly  be 
higher  than  any  *'  planetary."  But  they  are  idolaters,  my  friend. 
Their  guru  was  no  initiate  only  a  man  of  extraordinary  purity  of 
life  and  powers  of  endurance.  He  had  never  consented  to  give 
up  his  notions  of  a  personal  god  and  even  gods  though  offered 
more  than  once.  He  was  born  an  orthodox  Hindu  and  died  a 
self-reformed  Hindu,  something  like  Rechub-Ch-Sen  but  higher 
purer  and  with  no  ambition  to  taint  his  bright  soul.  Many  of  us 
have  regretted  his  self-delusion  but  he  was  too  good  to  be  forcibly 
interfered  with.  Join  them  and  learn — but  remember  your  sacred 
promise  to  K.H.  Two  months  more  and  he  will  be  with  us.  I 
think  of  sending  her  to  you.  I  believe  you  could  persuade  her 
for  I  do  not  wish  to  use  my  authority  in  this  case. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  XLI 

Received  about  February,    1882. 

I  believe  verily  I  am  unfit  to  express  my  ideas  clearly  in  your 
language.  I  never  thought  of  giving  any  importance  to  the 
circular  letter — I  had  asked  you  to  draft  for  them — appearing  in 
the  Pioneer,  or  ever  meant  to  imply  that  it  should  so  appear.  I 
had  asked  you  to  compose  it  for  them,  send  your  drafted  copy  to 
Bombay  and  make  them  issue  it  as  a  circular  letter ;  which,  once 
out,  and  on  its  round  in  India  might  be  copied  in  your  journal  as 
other  papers  would  be  sure  to  copy  it.  Her  letter  B.G.  was 
foolish,  childish  and  silly.  I  have  overlooked  it.  But  you  must 
not  so  labour  under  the  impression  that  it  will  undo  all  the  good 
yours  has  done.  There  are  a  few  sensitive  persons  on  whose 
nerves  it  will  jar,  but  the  rest  will  never  appreciate  its  true  spirit ; 
nor  is  it  in  any  way  libellous — only  vulgar  and  foolish.  I  will 
force  her  to  stop. 

At  the  same  time  I  must  say  that  she  suffers  acutely  and  I  am 
unable  to  help  her  for  all  this  is  effect  from  causes  which  cannot 
be  undone — occultism  in  theosophy.  She  has  now  to  either  con- 
quer or  die.  When  the  hour  comes  she  will  be  taken  back  to 
Tibet.  Do  not  blame  the  poor  woman,  blame  me.  She  is  but  a 
"  shell  "  at  times  and  I,  often  careless  in  watching  her.  If  the 
laugh  is  not  turned  on  the  Statesman  the  ball  will  be  caught  up 
by  other  papers  and  flung  at  her  again. 

Do  not  feel  despondent.  Courage  my  good  friend  and  remem- 
ber you  are  working  off  by  helping  her  your  own  law  of  retri- 
bution for  more  than  one  cruel  fling  she  receives  is  due  to  K.H.'s 


PEOBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  257 

friendship  for  you,  for  his  using  her  as  the  means  of  communi- 
cation.    But — Courage. 

I  saw  the  lawyer's  papers  and  perceive  he  is  averse  to  taking 
up  the  case.  But  for  the  little  he  is  needed  for,  he  will  do.  No 
law  suit  will  help — but  publicity  in  the  matter  of  vindication  as 
much  as  in  the  question  of  accusation — 10,000  circular  letters  sent 
throughout  to  prove  the  accusation  false. 

Yours  till  the  morrow. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  XLIP 

Received  about   February,    1882. 

I  say  again  what  you  like  me  not  to  say,  namely  that  no  regular 
instruction,  no  regular  communication  is  possible  between  us 
before  our  mutual  path  is  cleared  of  its  many  impediments.  The 
greatest  being  the  public  misconception  about  the  Founders.  For 
your  impatience  you  cannot  nor  will  you  be  blamed.  But  if  you 
fail  to  make  a  profitable  use  of  your  newly-acquired  privileges, 
you  would  indeed  be  unworthy,  friend.  Three,  four  weeks  more 
— and  I  will  retire  to  give  room  with  you  all,  to  him  to  whom  that 
room  belongs,  and  whose  place  I  could  but  very  unadequately 
occupy,  for  I  am  neither  a  scribe  nor  a  Western  scholar.  Whether 
the  Chohan  finds  yourself  and  Mr.  Hume  more  qualified  than  he 
did  before  to  receive  instructions  through  us — is  another  question. 
But  you  ought  to  prepare  for  it.  For  much  remains  yet  to  break 
forth.  You  perceived,  hitherto  but  the  light  of  a  new  day — you 
may,  if  you  try,  see  with  K.H.'s  help  the  sun  of  full  noon-day 
when  it  reaches  it  meridian.  But  you  have  to  w^ork  for  it,  work 
for  the  shedding  of  light  upon  other  minds  through  yours.  How, 
will  you  say?  Hitherto  of  you  two,  Mr.  H.  was  positively 
antagonistic  to  our  advice,  you — passively  resisting  it  at  times 
often  yielding  against  what  you  conceived — your  better  judgment 
such  is  my  answer.  The  results  were — what  they  had  to  be 
expected.  No  good  or  very  little  came  out  of  a  kind  of  spas- 
modic defence — the  solitary  defence  of  a  friend  presumably  pre- 
judiced in  favour  of  those  whose  champion  he  had  come  out  and 
a  member  of  the  Society.  Mr.  Hume  would  never  listen  to 
K.H.'s  suggestion  of  a  lecture  in  his  house  during  which  he 
might  have  well  disabused  the  public  mind  of  a  part  of  the  pre- 
judice at  least,  if  not  entirely.  You  thought  it  was  unnecessary 
to  publish  and  spread  among  the  readers  as  to  who  she  was. 

1  This  letter  is  unsigned  but  is  in  M.'s  handwriting. — Ed. 


258  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Think  ye,  Prinrose  and  Rattigan  are  likely  to  spread  the  know- 
ledge and  give  out  reports  of  what  they  know  to  be  the  case? 
And  so  on.  Hints  are  all  sufficient  to  an  intelligence  like  yours. 
I  tell  you  this  for  I  know  how  profound  and  sincere  is  your  feel- 
ing for  K.H.  I  know  how  bad  y'll  feel,  if  when  among  us  again 
you  find  that  communication  between  you  has  not  improved.  And 
its  sure  to  pass  when  the  Chohan  finds  no  progress  since  he  made 
him  have  you.  See  what  the  Fragments — the  most  superb  of 
articles — has  done ;  how  little  effect  it  will  produce  unless  the 
opposition  is  stirred  up  discussion  provoked  and  spiritualists 
forced  to  defend  their  foolish  claims.  Read  editorial  Spiritualist 
in  November  i8,  **  Speculation  spinning  " — she  cannot  answer  it 
as  either  he  or  you  might  and  the  result  will  be  that  the  most 
precious  hints  will  fail  to  reach  the  minds  of  those  craving  for 
truth  for  a  solitary  pearl  is  soon  outshone  in  the  midst  of  a  heap 
of  false  diamonds,  when  there's  no  jeweller  to  point  out  its  worth. 
So  on  again.    What  can  we  do?    I  hear  already  K.H.  exclaiming. 

It  is  so,  friend.  The  pathway  through  earth — life  leads  through 
many  conflicts  and  trials,  but  he  who  does  naught  to  conquer 
them  can  expect  no  triumph.  Let  then  the  anticipation  of  a  fuller 
introduction  into  our  mysteries  under  more  congenial  circum- 
stances the  creation  of  which  depends  entirely  upon  yourself 
inspire  you  with  patience  to  wait  for,  perseverance  to  press  on  to, 
and  full  preparation  to  receive  the  blissful  consummation  of  all 
your  desires.  And  for  that  you  have  to  remember  that  when 
K.H.  shall  say  to  you.  Come  up  hither — you  should  be  ready. 
Otherwise  the  all  powerful  hand  of  our  Chohan  will  appear  once 
more  between  you  and  Him. 

Send  both  portraits  sent  to  you  from  Odessa  back  to  H.P.B., 
the  O.L.  when  you  done  with  them.  Write  a  few  lines  to  the 
Old  Generaless  to  Odessa — ^for  the  Society  wants  your  autograph 
— I  know.  Remind  her  that  both  you  belong  to  one  Society  and 
are — Brothers  and  promise  help  for  her  niece. 


LETTER  No.   XLHI 

Received  Allahabad,  February,  1882. 

Before  another  line  passes  between  us  we  must  come  to  an  agree- 
ment, my  impulsive  friend.  You  will  have  first  to  promise  me 
faithfully  never  to  judge  of  either  of  us,  nor  of  the  situation,  nor 
of  anything  else  bearing  any  relation  to  the  **  mythical  Brothers  " 
— tall  or  short — thick  or  thin — ^by  your  worldly  experience  or  you 
will  never  come  at  the  truth.       By  doing  so  until  now  you  have 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  259 

only  disturbed  the  solemn  quiet  of  my  evening  meals  several  nights 
running  and  made  my  snake-like  signature  what  with  your  writing 
it  and  thinking  about  it  to  haunt  me  even  in  my  sleep — ^as  by 
sympathy  I  felt  it  being  pulled  by  the  tail  at  the  other  side  up  the 
hills.  Why  will  you  be  so  impatient?  You  have  a  life  time  be- 
fore you  for  our  correspondence ;  though  while  the  dark  clouds 
of  the  Deva-Lok  *'  Eclectic  "  are  lowering  on  the  horizon  of  the 
**  Parent  "  it  has  to  be  a  spasmodic  and  uncertain  one.  It  may 
even  suddenly  break  off  owing  to  the  tension  given  it  by  our  too 
intellectual  friend.  Oy-hai,  Ram  Ram  !  To  think  that  our  very 
mild  criticism  upon  the  pamphlet,  a  criticism  reported  by  you  to 
Hume  Sahib — should  have  brought  the  latter  to  kill  us  at  a  blow  ! 
to  destroy,  without  giving  us  one  moment  to  call  a  Padri  in  or 
even  time  to  repent ;  to  find  ourselves  alive,  and  yet  so  cruelly 
deprived  of  our  existence  is  truly  sad,  tho'  not  quite  unexpected. 
But  it  is  all  our  own  fault.  Had  we — instead  prudently  sent  a 
laudatory  hymn  to  his  address  we  might  now  have  been  alive  and 
well  waxing  in  health  and  strength — if  not  in  wisdom — for  long 
years  to  come  and  finding  in  him  our  Ved-Vyasa  to  sing  the  occult 
prowess  of  the  Krishna  and  Arjuna  on  the  desolate  shores  of 
Tsam-pa.  Now  that  we  are  dead  and  dessicated  tho*,  I  may  as 
well  occupy  a  few  minutes  of  my  time  to  write  as  a  bhiit  to  you  in 
the  best  English  I  find  lying  idle  in  my  friend's  brain;  where  also 
I  find  in  the  cells  of  memory  the  phosphorescent  thought  of  a  short 
letter  to  be  sent  by  himself  to  the  Editor  of  the  Pioneer  to  soothe 
his  English  impatience.  My  friend's  friend — K.H.  has  not  for- 
gotten you;  K.H.  does  not  intend  breaking  off  with  you — unless 
Hume  Sahib  should  spoil  the  situation  beyond  mending.  And 
why  should  he?  You  have  done  all  you  could,  and  that  is  as 
much  as  we  ever  intend  asking  of  any  one.  And  now  we  will 
talk. 

You  must  thoroughly  put  aside  the  personal  element  if  you  would 
get  on  with  occult  study  and — for  a  certain  time — even  with  him- 
self. Realize,  my  friend,  that  the  social  affections  have  little,  if 
any,  control  over  any  true  adept  in  the  performance  of  his  duty. 
In  proportion  as  he  rises  towards  perfect  adeptship  the  fancies 
and  antipathies  of  his  former  self  are  weakened  :  (as  K.H.  in  sub- 
stance explained  to  you)  he  takes  all  mankind  into  his  heart  and 
regards  them  in  the  mass.  Your  case  is  an  exceptional  one.  You 
have  forced  yourself  upon  him,  and  stormed  the  position,  by  the 
very  violence  and  intensity  of  your  feeling  for  him — and  once  he 
accepted  he  has  to  bear  the  consequences  in  the  future.  Yet  it 
cannot  be  a  question  with  him  what  the  visible  Sinnett  may  be — 
what  his  impulses,  his  failures  or  successes  in  his  world,  his 
diminished  or  undiminished  regard  for  him.  With  the  "  visible  " 
one  we  have  nothing  to  do.     It  is  to  us  only  a  veil  that  hides 


26o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

from  profane  eyes  that  other  ego  with  whose  evolution  we  are 
concerned.  In  the  external  rupa  do  what  you  like,  think  what 
you  like  :  only  when  the  effects  of  that  voluntary  action  are  seen 
on  the  body  of  our  correspondent — is  it  incumbent  upon  us  to 
notice  it. 

We  are  neither  pleased  nor  displeased  because  you  did  not  attend 
the  Bombay  meeting".  If  you  had  gone,  it  would  have  been  better 
for  your  *'  merit  "  :  as  you  did  not  go  you  lost  that  little  paint.  I 
could  and  had  no  right  to  influence  you  any  way — precisely  because 
you  are  no  chela.  It  was  a  trial,  a  very  little  one,  tho'  it  seemed 
important  enough  to  you  to  make  you  think  of  '*  wife  and  child's 
interests. '  *  You  will  have  many  such ;  for  though  you  should 
never  be  a  chela,  still  we  do  not  give  confidences  even  to  cor- 
respondents and  "  proteges  "  whose  discretion  and  moral  pluck 
have  not  been  well  tested.  You  are  the  victim  of  Maya.  It 
will  be  a  long  struggle  for  you  to  tear  away  the  **  cataracts  "  and 
see  things  as  they  are.  Hume  Sahib  is  a  77iaya  to  you  as  great 
as  any.  You  see  only  his  mounds  of  flesh  and  bones,  his  official 
personality,  his  intellect  and  influences.  What  are  these,  pray, 
to  his  true  self  that  you  cannot  see,  do  what  you  may?  What 
has  his  ability  to  shine  in  a  Durbar  or  as  the  leader  of  a  scientific 
society  to  do  with  his  fitness  for  occult  research,  or  his  trust- 
worthiness to  keep  our  secrets?  If  we  wanted  anything  about 
our  lives  and  work  to  be  known  is  not  the  Theosophist  columns 
open  to  us?  Why  should  we  dribble  facts  thro'  him,  to  be  dressed 
for  the  public  meal  with  a  currie  of  nauseous  doubts  and  biting 
sarcasm  fit  to  throw  the  public  stomach  into  confusion.  To  him 
there  is  nothing  sacred,  either  within,  or  without  occultism.  His 
is  a  bird-killing  and  a  faith-killing  temperament ;  he  would  sacri- 
fice his  own  flesh  and  blood  as  remorselessly  as  a  singing  bulbul ; 
and  would  dessicate  yourself  and  us,  K.H.  and  the  **  dear  Old 
Lady  "  and  make  us  all  bleed  to  death  under  his  scalpel — if  he 
could — with  as  much  ease  as  he  would  an  owl,  to  put  us  away  in 
his  '*  museum  "  with  appropriate  labels  outside  and  then  recount 
our  necrologies  in  **  Stray  Feathers  "  to  the  amateurs.  No 
Sahib;  the  outside  Hume  is  as  different  (and  superior)  from  the 
inside  Hume,  as  the  outside  Sinnett  is  different  and  inferior)  to 
the  nascent  inside  *'  protege."  Learn  that  and  sit  the  latter  to 
watching  the  editor  least  he  play  him  a  bad  trick  some  day.  Our 
greatest  trouble  is  to  teach  pupils  not  to  be  befooled  by  appear- 
ances. 

As  you  have  already  been  notified  by  Damodar  thro'  the  D — ,  I 
did  not  call  you  a  chela — examine  your  letter  to  assure  yourself 
of  it — I  but  jokingly  asked  O.  the  question  whether  he  recognised 
in  you  the  stuff  of  which  chelas  are  made.  You  saw  only  that 
Bennett  had   unwashed   hands,   uncleaned  nails   and  used  coarse 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  261 

language  and  had^ — to  you — a  generally  unsavoury  aspect.  But 
if  that  sort  of  thing  is  your  criterion  of  moral  excellence  or 
potential  power,  how  many  adepts  or  wonder  producing  lamas 
would  pass  your  muster?  This  is  part  of  your  blindness.  Were 
he  to  die  this  minute — and  I'll  use  a  Christian  phraseology  to  make 
you  comprehend  me  the  better — few  hotter  tears  would  drop  from 
the  eye  of  the  recording  Angel  of  Death  over  other  such  ill-used 
men,  as  the  tear  Bennett  would  receive  for  his  share.  Few  men 
have  suffered — and  unjustly  suffered — as  he  has  :  and  as  few  have 
a  more  kind,  unselfish  and  truthful  a  heart.  That's  all  :  and  the 
unwashed  Bennett  is  morally  as  far  superior  to  the  gentlemanly 
Hume  as  you  are  superior  to  your  Bearer. 

What  H.P.B.  repeated  to  you  is  correct  :  *'  the  natives  do  not 
see  Bennett's  coarseness  and  K.H.  is  also  a  native."  What  did 
I  mean?  W^hy  simply  that  our  Buddha-like  friend  can  see  thro* 
the  varnish,  the  grain  of  the  wood  beneath  and  inside  the  slimy, 
stinking  oyster — the  **  priceless  pearl  within  !  "  B —  is  an  honest 
man  and  of  a  sincere  heart,  besides  being  one  of  tremendous  moral 
courage  and  a  martyr  to  boot.  Such  our  K.H.  loves — ^whereas 
he  would  have  only  scorn  for  a  Chesterfield  and  a  Grandison.  I 
suppose  that  the  stooping  of  the  finished  **  gentleman  "  K.  H.,  to 
the  coarse  fibred  infidel  Bennett  is  no  more  surprising  than  the 
alleged  stooping  of  the  '*  gentleman  "  Jesus  to  the  prostitute 
Magdalene  :  There's  a  moral  smell  as  well  as  a  physical  one  good 
friend.  See  how  much  K.H.  read  your  character  when  he  would 
not  send  the  Lahore  youth  to  talk  with  you  without  a  change  of 
dress.  The  sweet  pulp  of  the  orange  is  inside  the  skin — Sahib  : 
try  to  look  inside  boxes  for  jewels  and  do  not  trust  to  those  lying 
in  the  lid,  I  say  again  :  the  man  is  an  honest  man  and  a  very 
earnest  one ;  not  exactly  an  angel — they  must  be  hunted  for  in 
fashionable  churches,  parties  at  aristocrat ical  mansions,  theatres 
and  clubs  and  such  other  sanctums — but  as  angels  are  outside  our 
cosmogony  we  are  glad  of  the  help  of  even  honest  and  plucky  tho' 
dirty  men. 

All  this  I  say  to  you  without  any  malice  or  bitterness,  as  you 
erroneously  imagine.  You  have  made  progress  during  the  past 
year — and  therefore  nearer  to  us — hence  I  talk  with  you  as  with  a 
friend,  whom  I  hope  of  finally  converting  to  some  of  our  ways  of 
thinking.  Your  enthusiasm  for  our  study  has  a  tinge  of  selfish- 
ness in  it;  even  your  feeling  for  K.H.  has  a  mixed  character  :  still 
you  are  nearer.  Only  you  trusted  Hume  too  much,  and  mis- 
trusted him  too  late,  and  now  his  bad  karma  reacts  upon  yours, 
to  your  detriment.  Your  friendly  indiscretions  as  to  things  con- 
fided to  you  alone  by  H.P.B. — the  cause — produces  his  rash 
publicities — the  effect.  This  I  am  afraid  must  count  against  you. 
Be  wiser  hereafter.      If  our  rule  is  to  be  chary  of  confidences  it  is 


262  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

because  we  are  taught  from  the  first  that  each  man  is  personally 
responsible  to  the  Law  of  Compensation  for  every  word  of  his 
voluntary  production.     Mr.  Hume  would  of  course  call  it  Jesuitry. 

Also  try  to  break  thro'  that  great  maya  against  which  occult 
students,  the  world  over,  have  always  been  warned  by  their 
teachers — the  hankering  after  phenomena.  Like  the  thirst  for 
drink  and  opium,  it  grows  with  gratification.  The  Spiritualists 
are  drunken  with  it;  they  are  thaumaturgic  sots.  If  you  cannot 
be  happy  without  phenomena  you  will  never  learn  our  philosophy. 
If  you  want  healthy,  philosophic  thought,  and  can  be  satisfied  with 
such — let  us  correspond.  I  tell  you  a  profound  truth  in  saying 
that  if  you  (like  your  fabled  Shloma)  but  choose  wisdom  all  other 
things  will  be  added  unto  it — in  time.  It  adds  no  force  to  our 
metaphysical  truths  that  our  letters  are  dropped  from  space  on  to 
your  lap  or  come  under  your  pillow.  If  our  philosophy  is  wrong 
a  wonder  will  not  set  it  right.  Put  that  conviction  into  your  con- 
sciousness and  let  us  talk  like  sensible  men.  Why  should  we 
play  with  Jack-in-the-box  ;  are  not  our  beards  grown. 

And  now  it  is  time  to  put  a  stop  to  my  abominable  penmanship 
and  so  relieve  you  from  a  task.  Yes — your  *'  cosmogony  "  ! 
Well,  good  friend,  your  cosmology  is — between  the  leaves  of  my 
Khuddaka  Paiha — (my  family  l^ible)  and  making  a  supreme  effort 
I  will  try  to  answer  it  as  soon  as  I  am  relieved,  for  just  now  I 
am  on  duty.  It  is  a  Hfe  long  task  you  have  chosen,  and  some- 
how instead  of  generalizing  you  manage  always  to  rest  upon  those 
details  that  prove  the  most  difficult  to  a  beginner.  Take  warning 
my  good  Sahib.  The  task  is  difficult  and  K.  H.  in  remembrance 
of  old  times,  when  he  loved  to  quote  poetry,  asks  me  to  close  my 
letter  with  the  following  to  your  address  : 

"  Does  the  road  wind  up-hill  all  the  way?  " 

"Yes  to  the  very  end." 
"  Will  the  day's  journey  take  the  whole  long  day?  '* 

"From  morn  to  night,  my  friend." 

Knowledge  for  the  mind,  like  food  for  the  body,  is  intended  to 
feed  and  help  to  growth,  but  it  requires  to  be  well  digested  and 
the  more  thoroughly  and  slowly  the  process  is  carried  out  the 
better  both  for  body  and  mind. 

I  saw  Olcott  and  instructed  him  what  to  say  to  our  Simla  Sage. 
If  the  O.L.  rushes  into  epistolary  explanations  with  him,  stop  her 
— as  O.  covered  all  the  ground.  I  have  no  time  to  look  after  her, 
but  I  made  her  promise  never  to  write  to  him  without  showing  her 
letter  first  to  you. 

Namascar. 

Yours  M. 


PROBxVTION,  AND  CHELASHIP  263 

LETTER  No.   XLIV 

Received  Allahabad,   February,   1882. 

Your  letter  was  addressed  to  me,  as  you  were  not  aware  that 
K.H.  had  again  put  himself  in  relations  with  you.  Nevertheless, 
as  I  am  addressed  I  will  answer.  "  Do  so;  by  all  means:  go 
ahead."  The  result  may  be  disastrous  to  Spiritualism,  though 
the  reality  of  the  phenomena  be  proved ;  hence  beneficial  to 
Theosophy.  It  does  seem  cruel  to  allow  the  poor  sensitive  lad  to 
risk  himself  inside  the  lion's  den;  but  as  the  acceptance  or  the 
rejection  of  the  kind  invitation  is  with  the  medium  under  the 
counsel  and  inspiration  of  his  mighty  and  far-seeing  **  Ernest  " 
why  should  others  worry  themselves  ! 

As  we  are  not  likely,  worthy  sir,  to  correspond  very  often  now — 
I  will  tell  you  something  you  should  know,  and  may  derive  profit 
from.  On  the  17th  November  next  the  Septenary  term  of  trial 
given  the  Society  at  its  foundation  in  which  to  discreetly  **  preach 
us  "  will  expire.  One  or  two  of  us  hoped  that  the  world  had  so 
far  advanced  intellectually,  if  not  intuitionally,  that  the  Occult 
doctrine  might  gain  an  intellectual  acceptance,  and  the  impulse 
given  for  a  new  cycle  of  occult  research.  Others — ^wiser  as  it 
would  now  seem — held  differently,  but  consent  was  given  for  the 
trial.  It  was  stipulated,  however,  that  the  experiment  should  be 
made  independently  of  our  personal  management ;  that  there 
should  be  no  abnormal  interference  by  ourselves.  In  casting 
about  we  found  in  America  the  man  to  stand  as  leader — a  man 
of  great  moral  courage,  unselfish,  and  having  other  good  qualities. 
He  was  far  from  being  the  best,  but  (as  Mr.  Hume  speaks  in 
H.P.B.'s  case) — he  was  the  best  one  available.  With  him  we 
associated  a  woman  of  most  exceptional  and  wonderful  endow- 
ments. Combined  with  them  she  had  strong  personal  defects, 
but  just  as  she  was,  there  was  no  second  to  her  living  fit  for  this 
work.  We  sent  her  to  America,  brought  them  together — and  the 
trial  began.  From  the  first  both  she  and  he  were  given  clearly 
to  understand  that  the  issue  lay  entirely  with  themselves.  And 
both  ofi"ered  themselves  for  the  trial  for  certain  remuneration  in 
the  far  distant  future  as — as  K.H.  would  say — soldiers  volunteer 
for  a  Forlorn  Hope.  For  the  6^  years  they  have  been  struggling 
against  such  odds  as  would  have  driven  off  any  one  who  was  not 
working  with  the  desperation  of  one  who  stakes  a  life  and  all  he 
prizes  on  some  desperate  supreme  effort.  Their  success  has  not 
equalled  the  hopes  of  their  original  backers,  phenomenal  as  it  has 
been  in  certain  directions.  In  a  few  more  months  the  term  of 
probation  will  end.  If  by  that  time  the  status  of  the  Society  as 
regards    ourselves — the    question    of    the    **  Brothers  "    be    not 


264  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

definitely  settled  (either  dropped  out  of  the  Society's  programme 
or  accepted  on  our  own  terms)  that  will  be  the  last  of  the 
**  Brothers  "  of  all  shapes  and  colours,  sizes  or  degrees.  We  will 
subside  out  of  public  view  like  a  vapour  into  the  ocean.  Only 
those  who  have  proved  faithful  to  themselves  and  to  Truth 
through  everything,  will  be  allowed  further  intercourse  with  us. 
And  not  even  they,  unless,  from  the  President  downward  they 
bind  themselves  by  the  most  solemn  pledges  of  honour  to  keep 
an  inviolable  silence  thenceforth  about  us,  the  Lodge,  Tibetan 
affairs.  Not  even  answering  questions  of  their  nearest  friends, 
though  silence  might  seem  likely  to  throw  the  appearance  of 
'*  humbug  "  upon  all  that  has  transpired.  In  such  a  case  effort 
would  be  suspended  until  the  beginning  of  another  septenary  cycle 
when,  if  circumstances  should  be  more  auspicious,  another  attempt 
might  be  made,  under  the  same  or  another  direction. 

My  own  humble  impression  is  that  Hume  Sahib's  present 
pamphlet,  highly  intellectual  as  it  is,  might  be  improved  so  as  to 
help  enormously  in  giving  the  needed  turn  to  Society  affairs.  And 
if  he  would  trust  more  to  his  personal  intuitions — which  when  he 
heeds  them  are  strong — and  less  to  the  voice  of  one  who  neither 
represents  entirely — as  you  seem  to  think — public  opinion  nor 
would  he  believe  though  he  were  to  have  a  looo  proofs — ^the 
pamphlet  would  be  converted  into  one  of  the  most  powerful  works 
that  this  modern  movement  has  evolved. 

Your  cosmological  questions  will  be  attended  to  when  I  am 
not  harassed  with  mightier  business.      Health  and  prosperity. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  XLV 

First  received  after  revival  in  February,   1882. 

My  Brother — I  have  been  on  a  long  journey  after  supreme 
knowledge,  I  took  a  long  time  to  rest.  Then,  upon  coming  back, 
I  had  to  give  all  my  time  to  duty,  and  all  my  thoughts  to  the 
Great  Problem.  It  is  all  over  now  :  the  New  Year's  festivities 
are  at  an  end  and  I  am  "  Self  "  once  more.  But  what  is  Self? 
Only  a  passing  guest,  whose  concerns  are  all  like  a  mirage  of  the 
great  desert.     .     .     . 

Anyhow — this  is  my  first  moment  of  leisure.  I  offer  it  to  you, 
whose  inner  Self  reconciles  me  to  the  outer  man  who  but  too  often 
forgets  that  great  man  is  he  who  is  strongest  in  the  exercise  of 
patience.     Look  around  you,  my  friend  :  see  the  "  three  poisons  " 


If  PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  265 

jragfing  within  the  heart  of  man — anger,  greed,  delusion,  and  the 
ifive  obscurities — envy,  passion,  vacillation,  sloth,  and  unbelief — 
ever  preventing  their  seeing  truth.  They  will  never  get  rid  of 
the  pollution  of  their  vain,  wicked  hearts,  nor  perceive  the 
spiritual  portion  of  themselves.  Will  you  not  try — for  the  sake 
of  shortening  the  distance  between  us — to  disentangle  yourself 
from  the  net  of  life  and  death  in  which  they  are  all  caught,  to 
cherish  less,  lust  and  desire?  Young  Portman  is  seriously 
meditating  to  leave  all,  to  come  over  to  us,  and  **  become  a 
Tibetan  monk  "  as  he  puts  it.  His  ideas  are  singularly  mixed 
upon  the  two  entirely  different  characteristics  and  qualifications 
of  the  "  Monk  "  or  Lama  and  the  living  **  Lha,"  or  Brother:  but 
let  him  try  by  all  means. 

Aye — I  am  only  now  able  to  correspond  with  you.  At  the  same 
time  let  me  tell  you  that  it  is  more  difficult  than  before  to  ex- 
change letters  with  you,  though  my  regard  for  you  has  sensibly 
increased,  instead  of  being  lessened — as  you  feared — and  will  not 
diminish  unless — but  as  the  consequence  of  your  own  acts.  That 
you  will  try  to  avoid  in  raising  any  such  obstacle,  I  know  well ; 
but  man,  after  all,  is  the  victim  of  his  surroundings  while  he  lives 
in  the  atmosphere  of  society.  We  may  be  anxious  to  befriend 
such  as  we  have  an  interest  in,  and  yet  be  as  helpless  to  do  so,  as 
is  one  who  sees  a  friend  engulfed  in  a  stormy  sea  when  no  boat 
is  near  to  be  launched  and  his  personal  strength  is  paralysed  by 
a  stronger  hand  that  keeps  him  back.  Yes,  I  see  your  thought 
.  .  but  you  are  wrong.  Blame  not  the  holy  man  for  strictly 
doing  his  duty  by  humanity.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  Chohan  and 
his  restraining  influence  you  would  not  be  reading  now  again  a 
letter  from  your  trans-Himalayan  correspondent.  The  world  of 
the  Planes  is  antagonistic  to  that  of  the  mountains,  that  you 
know ;  but  what  you  do  not  know  is  the  great  harm  produced  by 
your  own  unconscious  indiscretions.  Shall  I  give  you  an  instance? 
Remember  the  wrath  produced  on  Stainton  Moses  by  your  too  im- 
prudent letter  quoting  ad  libittitn  and  with  a  freedom  pregnant  with 
the  most  disastrous  results  from  my  letter  to  you  about  him.  .  .  . 
The  cause  generated  at  that  time  has  now  developed  its  results  : 
not  only  has  S.M.  completely  estranged  himself  from  the  Society 
some  of  whose  members  believe  in  us,  but  he  has  determined  in 
his  heart  the  utter  annihilation  of  the  British  Branch.  A  psychic 
Society  is  being  founded  and  he  has  succeeded  in  bringing  over  to 
it  Wyld,  Massey  and  others.  Shall  I  also  tell  you  the  future  of 
that  new  body?  It  will  grow  and  develop  and  expand  and  finally 
the  Theos.  Soc.  of  London  will  be  swamped  in  it,  and  lose  first 
its  influence  then — its  name  until  Theosophy  in  its  very  name 
becomes  a  thing  of  the  Past.  It  is  you  alone,  the  simple  action 
of  your  swift  pen  which  will  have  produced  the  Nidana  and  the 


266  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

ten-del,  the  "  cause  "  and  its  *'  effect  "  and  thus  the  work  of 
seven  years,  the  constant  untiring  efforts  of  the  builders  of  the 
Theos.  Society  will  perish — killed  by  the  wounded  vanity  of  a 
medium. 

This  simple  act  on  your  part  is  silently  digging  out  a  chasm 
between  us.  The  evil  may  yet  be  averted — let  the  Society  exist 
but  in  name  till  the  day  it  can  get  members  with  whom  we  can 
work  de  facto — and  by  the  creation  of  another  counteracting  cause 
we  may  save  the  situation.  The  hand  of  the  Chohan  alone  can 
bridge  it,  but  it  must  be  yours  that  places  the  first  stone  for  the 
w^ork.  How  will  you  do  it?  How  can  you  do  it?  Think  of  it 
well,  if  you  care  for  further  intercourse.  They  want  something 
new.  A  Ritual  to  amuse  them.  Consult  with  Subba  Row,  with 
San  Kariah  the  Dewan  Naib  of  Cochin,  read  attentively  his 
pamphlet  extracts  from  which  you  will  find  in  the  last  Theosophist 
(see,  "  A  Flash  of  Light  upon  Occult  Free  Masonry."  Page  35). 
I  can  come  nearer  to  3'Ou,  but  you  must  draw  me  by  a  purified 
heart  and  a  gradually  developing  wull.  Like  the  needle  the  adept 
follow^s  his  attractions.  Is  this  not  the  law  of  the  disembodied 
Principles?  Why  then  not  of  the  living  also?  As  the  social  ties 
of  the  carnal  man  are  too  weak  to  call  back  the  Soul  of  the 
deceased  except  where  there  is  a  mutual  affinity  which  survives 
as  a  force  in  the  region  within  the  terrestrial  region,  so  the  calls 
of  mere  friendship  or  even  enthusiastic  regard  are  too  feeble  to 
draw  the  "Lha  "  who  has  passed  on  a  stage  of  the  journey  to 
him  he  has  left  behind,  unless  a  parallel  development  goes  on. 
M.  spoke  well  and  truthfully  w^hen  saying  that  a  love  of  collective 
humanity  is  his  increasing  inspiration ;  and  if  any  one  individual 
should  wish  to  divert  his  regards  to  himself  he  must  overpower 
the  diffusive  tendency  by  a  stronger  force. 

All  this  I  say,  not  because  its  substance  has  not  been  told  you 
before,  but  because  I  read  your  heart  and  detect  in  it  a  shade  of 
sadness,  not  to  say  disappointment,  that  hovers  there.  You  have 
had  other  correspondents  but  are  not  perfectly  satisfied.  To 
gratify,  I  write  you  therefore  with  some  effort  to  bid  you  keep  a 
cheerful  frame  of  mind.  Your  strivings,  perplexities  and  fore- 
bodings are  equally  noticed,  good  and  faithful  friend.  In  the 
imperishable  Record  of  the  Masters  you  have  written  them  all. 
There  are  registered  your  every  deed  and  thought ;  for,  though 
not  a  chela,  as  you  say,  to  my  Brother  Morya,  nor  even  a 
**  protege  " — as  you  understand  the  term — still,  you  have  stepped 
within  the  circle  of  our  work,  you  have  crossed  the  mystic  line 
which  separates  your  world  from  ours,  and  now  w^hether  you 
persevere  or  not ;  whether  we  become  later  on,  in  your  sight,  still 
more  living  real  entities  or  vanish  out  of  your  mind  like  so  many 
dream  fictions — perchance  an  ugly  night-mare — you  are  virtually 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  267 

ours.  Your  hidden  Self  has  mirrored  itself  in  our  Akasa ;  your 
nature  is — yours,  your  essence  is — ours.  The  flame  is  distinct 
from  the  log  of  wood  which  serves  it  temporarily  as  fuel ;  at  the 
end  of  your  apparitional  birth — and  whether  we  two,  meet  face  to 
face  in  our  grosser  rupas — you  cannot  avoid  meeting  us  in  Real 
Existence.  Yea,  verily  good  friend  your  Karma  is  ours,  for  you 
imprinted  it  daily  and  hourly  upon  the  pages  of  that  book  where 
the  minutest  particulars  of  the  individuals  stepping  inside  our 
circle — are  preserved  ;  and  that  your  Karma  is  your  only  per- 
sonality to  be  when  you  step  beyond.  In  thought  and  deed,  by 
day,  in  soul-struggles  by  nights,  you  have  been  writing  the  story 
of  your  desires  and  your  spiritual  development:.  This,  every  one 
does  who  approaches  us  with  any  earnestness  of  desire  to  become 
our  co-worker,  he  himself  **  precipitates  "  the  written  entries  by 
the  identical  process  used  by  us  when  we  write  inside  your  closed 
letters  and  uncut  pages  of  books  and  pamphlets  in  transit.  (See 
pp.  32,  2^^  Report  sent  by  Olcott,  once  more.)  I  will  tell  you  this 
for  your  private  information  and  it  must  not  figure  in  the  next 
pamphlet  from  Simla.  During  the  past  few  months,  especially, 
when  your  weary  brain  was  plunged  in  the  torpor  of  sleep,  your 
eager  soul  has  often  been  searching  after  me,  and  the  current  of 
your  thoughts  has  been  beating  against  my  protecting  barriers  of 
Akks  as  the  lapping  wavelets  against  a  rocky  shore.  What  that 
**  inner  Self  "  impatient,  anxious — has  longed  to  bind  itself  to, 
the  carnal  man,  the  worldlings'  master  has  not  ratified  :  the  ties 
of  life  are  still  as  strong  as  chains  of  steel.  Sacred,  indeed, 
some  of  them  are,  and  no  one  would  ask  you  to  rupture  them. 
There  below,  lies  your  long  cherished  field  of  enterprise  and  use- 
fulness. Ours  can  never  be  more  than  a  bright  phantom-world 
to  the  man  of  thorough  **  practical  sense  ";  and  if  your  case  be 
in  some  degree  exceptional,  it  is  because  your  nature  has  deeper 
inspirations  than  those  of  others,  who  are  still  more  **  business- 
like "  and  the  fountain-head  of  whose  eloquence  is  in  the  brain 
not  in  the  heart,  which  never  was  in  contact  with  the  mysteriously 
effulgent,  and  pure  heart  of  Tathagata. 

If  you  hear  seldom  from  me,  never  feel  disappointed,  my 
Brother,  but  say — "It  is  my  fault."  Nature  has  linked  all  parts 
of  her  Empire  together  by  subtle  threads  of  magnetic  sympathy, 
and  there,  there  is  a  mutual  correlation  even  between  a  star  and 
a  man ;  thought  runs  swifter  than  the  electric  fluid,  and  your 
thought  will  find  me  if  projected  by  a  pure  im.pulse,  as  mine  will 
find,  has  found,  and  often  impressed  upon  your  mind.  We  may 
move  in  cycles  of  activity  divided — not  entirely  separated  from 
each  other.  Like  the  light  in  the  sombre  valley  seen  by  the 
mountaineer  from  his  peaks,  every  bright  thought  in  your  mind, 
my  Brother,  will  sparkle  and  attract  the  attention  of  your  distant 


268  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

friend  and  correspondent.  If  thus  we  discover  our  natural  Allies 
in  the  S/ia^/ow-world — your  world  and  ours  outside  the  precincts 
— and  it  is  our  jaw  to  approach  every  such  an  one  if  even  there  be 
but  the  feeblest  glimmer  of  the  true  "  Tathagata  "  light  within 
him — then  how  far  easier  for  you  to  attract  us.  Understand  this 
and  the  admission  into  the  Society  of  persons  often  distasteful  to 
you  will  no  longer  amaze  you.  **  They  that  be  whole  need  not 
the  physician,  but  they  that  be  sick  " — is  an  axiom,  whoever  may 
have  spoken  it. 

And  now,  let  me  bid  you  farewell  for  the  present  until  the  next. 
Indulge  not  in  apprehensions  of  what  evil  might  happen  if  things 
should  not  go  as  your  worldly  wisdom  thinks  they  ought ;  doubt 
not,  for  this  complexion  of  doubt  unnerves  and  pushes  back  one's 
progress.  To  have  cheerful  confidence  and  hope  is  quite  another 
thing  from  giving  way  to  the  fool's  blind  optimism  :  the  wise 
man  never  fights  misfortune  in  advance.  A  cloud  does  lower  over 
your  path — it  gathers  about  the  hills  of  Jakko.  He  whom  you 
made  your  confident — I  advised  you  to  become  but  his  co-worker, 
not  to  divulge  things  to  him  that  you  should  have  kept  back  with- 
in your  bosom — is  under  a  baneful  influence,  and  may  become 
your  enemy.  You  do  right  to  try  to  rescue  him  from  it,  for  it 
bodes  ill  to  him,  to  you  and  to  the  Society.  His  greater  mind 
fumed  by  vanity  and  charmed  by  the  piping  of  a  weaker  but 
more  cunning  one,  is  for  the  time  under  a  spell  of  fascination. 
You  will  easily  detect  the  malign  power  that  stands  behind  both 
and  uses  them  as  tools  for  the  execution  of  its  own  nefarious 
plans.  The  intended  catastrophe  can  be  averted  by  redoubled 
vigilance  and  increased  fervour  of  pure  will  on  the  part  of  the 
friends  of  S.B.L.  Work  then,  if  you  still  will,  to  turn  the  blow 
aside ;  for  if  it  falls  you  will  not  escape  unhurt  however  great  my 
Brothers'  efforts.  The  cause  will  never  be  ruined  though  albeit 
the  Sisyphus'  rock  may  crush  a  good  many  toes.  Farewell, 
-again,  my  friend — for  longer  or  shorter,  as  you  may  determine. 
I  am  called  to  duty. 

Yours  faithfully, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.   XLVI 

Received   Simla,    1882. 

I  will  thank  you  my  dear  Sinnett  Sahib  for  a  personal  favour. 
Since  K.H.  is  too  much  of  a  perfect  Yogi-Arhat,  to  stop  the  hand 
that  undaunted  by  failure  keeps  on  trying  to  catch  the  Tibetan 
yak  by  the  neck  to  bend  it  under  its  yoke,  then  all  that  remains 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  269 

for  me  to  do  is  to  make  once  more  my  appearance  on  the  nataka- 
shala  to  put  a  stop  to  a  performance  that  threatens  to  become 
monotonous  even  to  us — well  trained  in  patience.  I  cannot  avail 
myself  of  your  kind  advice  to  write  to  Mr.  Hume  in  my  brightest 
red  since  it  would  be  opening-  a  new  door  for  an  endless  cor- 
respondence, an  honour  I  would  rather  decline.  But  I  write  to 
you  instead,  and  send  you  a  telegram  and  answer  on  back  on't, 
for  your  perusal.  What  talk  of  his  is  this?  Reverence  may  not 
be  in  his  nature,  nor  does  any  one  claim  or  care  for  it  any  way  ! 
But  I  should  have  thought  that  his  head,  that  is  capacious  enough 
to  hold  anything,  had  a  corner  in  it  for  some  common  sense. 
And  that  sense  might  have  told  him  that  either  we  are  what  we 
claim,  or  we  are  not.  That  in  the  former  case,  however  exag- 
gerated the  claims  made  on  behalf  of  our  powers  still  if  our  know- 
ledge and  foresight  do  not  transcend  his  then  we  are  no  better 
than  shams  and  impostors  and  the  quicker  he  parts  company  with 
us — the  better  for  him.  But  if  we  are  in  any  degree  what  we 
claim  to  be,  then  he  acts  like  a  wild  ass.  Let  him  remember,  that 
we  are  not  Indian  Rajahs  in  need  of  and  compelled  to  accept 
political  Ayahs,  and  nurses  to  lead  us  on  by  the  string.  That 
the  Society  was  founded,  went  on  and  will  go  on  with  or  without 
him — let  him  suit  himself  as  to  the  latter. 

So  far  his  help,  that  he  thrusts  on  us,  much  after  the  fashion 
of  Spanish  mendicant  hidalgos  who  offer  their  sword  to  protect 
the  traveller  with  one  hand  and  clutch  him  by  the  throat  with  the 
other,  has  not — as  far  as  I  can  find  very  beneficial  to  the  Society 
so  far.  Not  to  one  of  its  founders,  at  any  rate,  whom  he  has 
nigh  killed  last  year  at  Simla  and  whom  he  now  harasses,  sticking 
to  her  like  grim  death  turning  her  blood  into  water  and  eating 
her  liver  out. 

Therefore  I  expect  you  to  impress  upon  his  mind  that  all  we 
should  **  give  thanks  for  "  would  be  to  see  him  take  care  of  his 
Eclectic  and  to  leave  the  Parent  Society  to  take  care  of  itself.  His 
advice  and  help  to  the  editor  of  the  Theosophist  has  no  doubt  been 
advantageous  to  the  editor,  and  she  does  feel  grateful  to  him  for 
it  after  deducting  the  large  share  she  owes  to  yourself.  But  we 
beg  leave  to  state,  that  some  line  ought  to  be  drawn  somewhere — 
between  said  editor  and  ourselves  ;  for  we  are  not  quite  the  Tibetan 
triplets  he  takes  us  to  be.  Therefore,  whether  we  be  the  ignorant 
savages  and  Orientals  of  his  making — every  wolf  being  Master  in 
his  own  den — ^we  claim  the  right  to  know  our  own  business  best, 
and  respectfully  decline  his  services  as  a  captain  to  steer  our 
Theosophical  ship  even  on  '*  the  ocean  of  worldly  life  "  as  he 
metaphorizes  in  his  sloka.  We  have  allow^ed  him,  under  the  good 
pretext  of  saving  the  situation  with  the  British  theosophists  to 
ventilate   his   animosity   against   us   in    the   Organ    of   our  own 

19 


270  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Society  and  to  draw  our  portrait-likenesses  with  a  brush  dipped  in 
haughty  bile — what  more  does  he  want?  As  I  ordered  the  Old 
Woman  to  telegraph  him  back — he  is  not  the  only  skilful  navigator 
in  the  world ;  he  seeks  to  avoid  Western  breakers  and  we  to  steer 
our  course  clear  off  Eastern  sandbanks.  Does  he  mean  in  addi- 
tion to  this  to  dictate  from  the  Chohan  down  to  Juala  Khool  and 
Deb  what  we  shall  and  what  we  shall  not  do?  Ram,  Ram  and 
the  holy  Nagas  !  is  it  after  centuries  of  independent  existence 
that  we  have  to  fall  under  a  foreign  influence,  to  become  the 
puppets  of  a  Simla  Nabob?  Are  we  school  boys,  or  what,  in  his 
fancy  to  submit  to  the  rod  of  a  Peling  schoolmaster.     . 

Notwithstanding  his  sulks  I  beg  you  will  tell  him  that  you 
heard  from  me — ^and  that  I  have  asked  you  to  let  him  know  my 
ultimatum :  if  he  would  not  break  with  the  whole  shop  altogether, 
and  for  ever  I  will  not  suffer  him  to  interfere  with  his  wisdom 
between  our  ignorance  and  the  Parent  Society.  Nor  shall  he  ease 
his  bad  humour  on  one  who  is  not  responsible  for  anything  we 
may  do  or  say — a  woman  so  sick  that  as  in  1877  ^  ^^  again  forced 
to  carry  her  away — when  she  is  so  needed  where  she  now  is,  at 
the  Headquarters — for  fear  she  will  fall  all  to  pieces.  And  that 
this  state  of  hers  was  brought  on  lately  by  him  owing  to  constant 
anxiety  for  the  Society,  and  partially  if  not  wholly  by  his  behaviour 
at  Simla — ^you  can  take  my  word  for  it.  The  whole  situation  and 
future  of  the  Eclectic  hangs  on  Koothoomi  if  you  will  not  help 
him.  If  notwithstanding  my  advice  and  the  Chohan 's  evident 
displeasure  he  will  persist  making  a  fool  of  himself  sacrificing  him- 
self for  a  man  who  is  the  evil  genius  of  the  Society  in  one 
direction — ^u^ell  it's  his  own  business,  only  I  will  have  nothing  to 
do  with  it.  Your  true  friend  I  will  ever  remain  though  you  turn 
against  me  one  of  these  days.  Fern  was  tested  and  found  a 
thorough  Dugpa  in  his  moral  nature.  We  will  see,  we  will  see ; 
but  very  little  hope  left  notwithstanding  his  splendid  capacities. 
Had  I  hinted  to  him  to  deceive  his  own  father  and  mother  he 
would  have  thrown  in  their  fathers  and  mothers  in  the  bargain. 
Vile,  vile  nature — yet  irresponsible.  Oh  ye  Westerns,  who  boast 
of  your  morality  !  May  the  bright  Chohans  keep  you  and  all 
yours  from  the  approaching  harm  is  the  sincere  wish  of  your 
friend  M. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  271 

LETTER     No.  XLVII 

Received  Allahabad,  3rd  March,   1882. 
Reply  to  my   remonstrance  (through   Damodar)  against  treatment  of  Europe, 

Well  say  I  am  an  ignoramus  in  your  English  ways,  and  I'll  say 
you  are  one  in  our  Tibetan  customs  and  we  will  split  the  difference 
and  shake  our  astral  hands  over  Bamaway  and  square  the  discus- 
sion. The  old  woman  .'^  Of  course  she  will  be  frantic — but  who 
cares?  It's  kept  from  her  however  secret.  No  use  making  her 
more  miserable  than  what  she  is. 

Cook  is  a  pump  of  filth,  with  perpetually  working  pistons  and 
the  sooner  he  screws  them  up — the  better  for  him.  Your  last 
letter  to  me  is  less  a  **  petition  "  than  a  protest,  my  respected 
Sahib.  It's  voice  is  that  of  the  war  sankh  of  my  Rajput  ancestors, 
rather  than  the  cooing  of  a  friend.  And  I  like  it  all  the  more  I 
promise  you.  It  has  the  right  ring  of  honest  frankness.  So  let 
us  talk — for  sharp  as  your  voice  may  be,  your  heart  is  warm  and 
you  end  by  saying  **  Whether  you  decree  that  what  seems  to  me 
right  be  done  or  not  "  you  are  ever  ours  faithfully  etc.  Europe 
is  a  large  place  but  the  world  is  bigger  yet.  The  sun  of  Theosophy 
must  shine  for  all,  not  for  a  part.  There  is  more  of  this  move- 
ment than  you  have  yet  had  an  inkling  of,  and  the  work  of  the 
T.S.  is  linked  in  with  similar  work  that  is  secretly  going  on  in 
all  parts  of  the  world.  Even  in  the  T.S.  there  is  a  division, 
managed  by  a  Greek  Brother  about  which  not  a  person  in  the 
Society  has  a  suspicion  excepting  the  Old  Woman  and  Olcott; 
and  even  he  only  knows  it  is  preparing,  and  occasionally  executes 
an  order  I  send  him  in  connection  with  it.  The  cycle  I  spoke  of 
refers  to  the  whole  movement.  Europe  will  not  be  overlooked, 
never  fear ;  but  perhaps  you  even  may  not  anticipate  how  the  light 
will  be  shed  there.  Ask  your  Seraph — K.H.  to  let  you  have  details 
thereof.  You  speak  of  Massey  and  Crookes  :  do  you  not  recollect 
that  Massey  was  offered  4  years  ago,  the  chance  to  head  the  Eng- 
lish movement  and — declined?  In  his  place  was  set  up  that  old 
grim  idol  of  the  Jewish  Sinai — Wild,  who  with  his  Christian  rant 
and  fanatical  rot  shut  us  out  of  the  movement  altogether.  Our 
Chohan  forbade  us  absolutely  to  take  any  part  in  it.  Massey 
has  to  thank  but  himself  for  it,  and  you  may  tell  him  so.  You 
ought  to  have  learned  by  this  time  our  ways.  We  advise — and 
never  order.  But  we  do  influence  individuals.  Ransack  the 
Spiritualistic  literature  if  you  will  till  the  year  i8yy.  Search  and 
find  in  it — if  you  can,  one  single  word  about  occult  philosophy,  or 
esotericism  or  anything  of  that  element  now  so  largely  infused  in 
the  spiritual  movement.  Ask  and  enquire  whether  the  very  word 
of  *'  occultism  "  was  not  so  completely  unknown  in  America,  that 


272  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

we  find  Cora  of  the  7  husbands,  the  Zappan  woman  and  talking 
medium  inspired  in  her  lectures  to  say  that  the  word  was  one  just 
coined  by  the  Theosophists — then  dawning — ;  that  no  one  ever 
heard  of  elementary  spirits  and  "  astral  "  light — save  the 
petroleum  manufacturers  and  so  on  and  on.  Well  ascertain  this 
and  compare.  This  was  the  first  war  cry,  and  the  battle  kept 
raging  hot  and  fierce  to  the  very  day  of  the  departure  for  India. 
To  say  and  point  out  to  Edison  and  Crookes  and  Massey — ^would 
sound  much  like  boasting  of  that  which  can  never  be  proven.  And 
Crookes — has  he  not  brought  science  within  our  hail  in  his 
'*  radiant  matter"  discovery?  What  but  occult  research  was  it 
that  led  him  first  to  that.  You  know  K.H.  and  me — buss  !  know 
you  anything  of  the  whole  Brotherhood  and  its  ramifications? 
The  Old  Woman  is  accused  of  untruthfulness,  inaccuracy  in  her 
statements.  **  Ask  no  questions  and  you  will  receive  no  lies." 
She  is  forbidden  to  say  what  she  knows.  You  may  cut  her  to 
pieces  and  she  will  not  tell.  Nay — she  is  ordered  in  cases  of  need 
to  mislead  people;  and,  were  she  more  of  a  natural  born  liar — 
she  might  be  happier  and  won  her  day  long  since  by  this  time. 
But  that's  just  where  the  shoe  pinches,  Sahib.  She  is  too  truthful, 
too  outspoken,  too  incapable  of  dissimulation:  and  now  she  is 
being  daily  crucified  for  it.  Try  not  to  be  hasty,  respected  Sir. 
The  world  was  not  made  in  a  day ;  nor  has  the  tail  of  the  yak 
developed  in  one  year.  Let  evolution  take  its  course  naturally — 
lest  we  make  it  deviate  and  produce  monsters  by  presuming  to 
guide  it.  Massey  talks  of  coming  to  India — does  he  not?  And 
supposing  that  after  coming  here  and  doing  what  is  right  and 
spending  the  needed  time  for  disciplinary  training  he  should  be 
sent  back  with  a  message?  And  supposing  that  Crookes  and 
Edison  and  others  have  other  things  to  discover?  So  I  say 
"  Wait."  Who  knows  what  may  be  the  situation  in  November? 
You  might  think  it  such  as  to  justify  us  in  carrying  out  our 
**  threat  "  to  **  lock  the  door,"  while  it  may  seem  very  different 
to  us.  Let  us  all  do  our  best.  There  are  cycles  of  7,  11,  21,  y/, 
107,  700,  11,000,  21,000  etc.  ;  so  many  cycles  will  make  a  major 
and  so  on.  Bide  your  time  the  record  book  is  well  kept.  Only, 
look  out  sharp  :  the  Dugpas  and  the  Gelupkas  are  not  fighting  but 
in  Tibet  alone,  see  their  vile  work  in  England  among  the 
"Occultists  and  seers  ^'t  Hear — ^your  acquaintance  Wallace 
preaching  like  a  true  **  Hierophant  "  of  the  "  left  hand  "  the  mar- 
riage of  **  soul  with  the  spirit"  and  getting  the  true  definition 
topsy-turvy  seek  to  prove  that  every  practicing  Hierophant  must 
at  least  be  spiritually  married — if  for  some  reasons  he  cannot  do 
so  physically  there  being  otherwise  a  great  danger  of  Adulteration 
of  God  and  Devil  !  I  tell  you  the  Shammars  are  there  already 
and  their  pernicious  work  is  everywhere  in  our  way.        Do  not 


PROBATION,  AND  OHELASHIP  273 

regard   this  as  metaphorical  but  as  a  real   fact,   which   may   be 
demonstrated  to  you  some  day. 

Its  quite  useless  to  say  anything  more  about  Olcott's  eccen- 
tiicity  and  the  inferiority  of  America  to  England;  all  that  is  real 
in  your  point  we  recognise  and  knew  long  ago ;  but  you  do  not 
know  how  much  that  is  mere  superficial  prejudice  glares  in  your 
eyes  like  the  reflection  of  a  thin  taper  on  deep  water.  Take  care 
lest  we  should  some  day  take  you  at  your  thought  and  put  you 
in  Olcott's  place,  after  taking  him  to  our  own,  as  he  has  longed 
to  have  us  do  these  several  years.  Martyrdom  is  pleasant  to  look 
at  and  criticise,  but  harder  to  suffer.  There  never  was  a  woman 
more  unjustly  abused  than  H.B.  See  the  infamous  insulting 
letters  she  was  sent  from  England  for  publication  against  herself 
and  us  and  the  Society.  You  may  find  them  undignified  perhaps. 
But  the  **  Answers  to  Correspondents  "  in  Supplement  are  written 
by  myself.  So  do  not  blame  her.  I'm  anxious  to  know  your 
frank  opinion  on  them.  Perchance  you  might  think  she  might 
have  done  herself  better. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  XLVIII 

Received  Allahabad,    March  3rd,    1882. 

Good  friend,  I  **  know  " — of  course.  And  knowing,  without 
your  telling  me  I  would,  were  I  but  authorized  to  influence  you  in 
one  direction — answer  most  gladly  :  "  that  knowledge  thou  shalt 
share  with  me  some  day."  When,  or  how — **  is  not  for  me  to 
say,  nor  for  myself  to  know,"  as  you.  Aye,  you  alone,  have  to 
weave  your  destiny.  **  Perhaps  soon  and  perchance — never:  but 
why  feel  despairing,"  or  even  doubting?  Believe  me:  we  may 
yet  walk  along  the  arduous  path  together.  We  may  yet  meet  : 
but  if  at  all,  it  has  to  be  along  and  on — ^those  "  Adamantine  rocks 
with  which  our  occult  rules  surround  us  " — never  outside  them, 
however  bitterly  we  may  complain.  No,  never  can  we  pursue  our 
further  journey — if  hand  in  hand — along  that  high-way,  crowded 
thoroughfare,  which  encircles  them,  and  on  which  Spiritualists 
and  mystics,  prophets  and  seers  elbow  each  other  now-a-day.  Yea, 
verily,  the  motley  crowd  of  candidates  may  shout  for  an  eternity 
to  come,  for  the  Sesame  to  open.  It  never  will,  so  long  as  they 
keep  outside  those  rules.  Vainly  do  your  modern  seers  and  their 
prophetesses,  creep  into  every  cleft  and  crevice  without  outlet  or 
continuity  they  chance  to  see ;  and  still  more  vainly,  when  once 
within  do  they  lift  up  their  voices  and  loudly  cry  :  **  Eureka  ! — We 


274  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

have  gotten  a  Revelation  from  the  Lord  !  "      For  verily  have  they 
nothing  of  the  kind.     They  have  disturbed  but  bats,  less  blind  than 
their  intruders;  who,  feeling-  them  flying  about,  mistake  them  as 
often    for   angels — as  they   too,    have  wings  !       Doubt   not,    my 
friend  :  it  is  but  from  the  very  top  of  those  *'  Adamantine  rocks  " 
of  ours,  and  not  at  their  foot,  that  one  is  ever  enabled  to  perceive 
the  whole  Truth,  by  embracing  the  whole  limitless  horizon.      And 
though  they  may  seem  to  you  to  be  standing  in  your  way,  it  is 
simply  because  you  have  hitherto  failed  to  discover  or  even  so 
much  as  suspect  the  reason  and  the  operation  of  those  laws ;  hence 
they   appear   so   cold    and    merciless  and   selfish    in   your   sight ; 
although  yourself  have  intuitionally  recognised  in  them  the  out- 
come   of    ages    of    wisdom.        Nevertheless,    were    one    but    to 
obediently  follow  them  out,  they  could  be  made  to  gradually  yield 
to  one's  desire  and  give  to  him  all  he  asks  of  them.       But  no  one 
could  ever  violently  break  them,  without  becoming  the  first  victim 
to  his  guilt;  yea,  to  the  extent  of  risking  to  lose  his  own,  his  hard 
won   share   of    immortality,    here    and   there.       Remember :    too 
anxious  expectation  is  not  only  tedious,  but  dangerous  too.      Each 
warmer  and  quicker  throb  of  the  heart  wears  so  much  of  life  away. 
The  passions,   the  affections  are  not  to  be  indulged  in  by  him, 
who  seeks  to  know;  for  they  "wear  out  the  earthly  body  with 
their  own  secret  power ;  and  he,  who  would  gain  his  aim — must  he 
cold."      He  must  not  even  desire  too  earnestly  or  too  passionately 
the  object  he  would  reach  :  else,  the  very  wish  will  prevent  the 
fK>ssibility  of  its  fulfilment,   at  best — retard  and  throw   it  back. 
You  will  find  in  the  forth-coming  number,   two  articles  which 
you  must  read,  I  need  not  tell  you  why,  as  I  leave  it  with  your 
intuitions.     As  usual,  it  is  an  indiscretion,  which,  however  I  have 
allowed  to  remain  as  there  are  few,  if  any,  who  will  understand 
the   hint   contained — but  you.     There   are   more   than    one   such 
hint  though;   hence   your   attention   is  asked   to  the   "Elixir   of 
Life"    and    W.    Oxley's    "Philosophy    of   Spirit."     The   former 
contains  references  and  explanations,  the  haziness  of  which,  may 
remind  you  of  a  man  who  stealthily  approaching  one  gives  him 
a  hit  upon  his  back,  and  then  runs  away ;  as  they  most  undeniably 
belong  to  the  genus  of  those  "  Fortunes  "  that  come  to  one  like 
the  thief  by  night  and  during  one's  sleep,  and  go  back,  finding 
no  one  to  respond  to  the  offer — of  which  you  complain  in  your 
letter  to  Brother.     This  time,  you  are  warned,  good  friend,   so 
complain  no  more.     Article  No.  2,  is  penned  by  the  Manchester 
Seer — Oxley.     Having    received    no    reply    to    his    summons    to 
K.H.,     he    criticises — mildly     so    far — the    utterances     of    that 
"  Internal  Power  " — for  which  new  title  I  feel  rather  obliged  to 
him.     At  the  sight  of  the  gentle  rebuke,  our  blunderbuss  Editor 
failed  not  to  explode.     Nor  would  she  be  soothed,   until  Djwal- 


PEOBATION,  AKD  CHELASHIP  275 

Khul,  with  whom  the  famous  review  was  concocted — (one  by-the- 
bye,  which  seen  by,  ought  to  have  never  been  permitted  to  see 
the  day  by  you) — was  authorized,  under  the  safe  nom-de-plume 
of  "  Reviewer  "  to  answer  (by  correcting-  some  of  his  blunders) 
the  Seer,  in  a  few  innocent  foot-notes.  Yet,  I  must  say,  that  of 
all  the  present  English  **  prophets,"  W.  Oxley  is  the  only  one  who 
has  an  inkling  of  truth  ;  hence  the  only  one  calculated  to  effectu- 
ally help  our  movement.  The  man  runs  constantly  in  and  out  of 
the  straight  road,  deviating  from  it  every  time  he  thinks  he  per- 
ceives a  new  path ;  but  finding  himself  in  a  cul-de-sac  as  invariably 
returns  to  the  right  direction.  I  must  admit,  there  is  much 
sound  philosophy  here  and  there  in  what  he  writes ;  and,  though 
his  story  of  "  Busiris  "  in  its  anthropomorphic  presentation  is 
ridiculous  nonsense,  and,  his  rendering  of  Sanskrit  names  is  mostly 
wrong ;  and  though  he  seems  to  have  but  very  hazy  notions  about 
what  he  calls  the  **  astro-masonic  basis  of  Bhagavat  Gita'*  and 
— Mahabharata  to  both  of  which  he  evidently  attributes  the  same 
author — yet  he  is  positively  and  absolutely  the  only  one,  whose 
general  comprehension  of  Spirit,  and  its  capabilities  and  func- 
tions after  the  first  separation,  we  call  death,  are  on  the  whole  if 
not  quite  correct,  at  least  approximating  very  nearly  Truth. 
Read  it,  when  it  comes  out,  especially  Par.  3,  Col.  I,  page  152  et 
seq,  where  you  will  find  them.  You  may  then  understand,  why, 
instead  of  answering  your  direct  question  I  go  into  a  subject,  so 
far,  perfectly  indifferent  to  you.  Follow,  for  instance  his  defini- 
tion of  the  term  **  Angel  "  (it  will  be  on  line  30,)  and  try  to 
follow  and  comprehend  his  thoughts,  so  clumsily  yet  withal  so 
correctly  expressed  and  then,  compare  it  with  the  Tibetan  teach- 
ing. Poor,  poor  Humanity,  when  shall  thou  have  the  whole  and 
unadulterated  Truth  !  Behold,  each  of  the  "  privileged  "  ones 
saying:  *' I  alone  am  right!  There  is  no  Lacuna,  .  .  ." 
No ;  none  : — not  on  that  one  special  page  opened  before  him,  and 
which  he  alone  is  reading  in  the  endless  volume  of  **  Spirit 
Revelation,"  called  Seership.  But  why  such  stubborn  oblivion 
of  the  important  fact  that  there  are  other  and  inumerable  pages 
before  and  after  that  one  solitary  page  that  each  of  the  **  Seers  " 
has  so  far  hardly  learnt  to  decipher?  Why  is  it,  that  every  one 
of  these  **  Seers"  believes  himself  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of 
Truth?  Thus — S.M.  is  taught  that  there  are  no  such  "  Beings  " 
as  "  Brothers,''  and  to  reject  the  doctrine  of  frequent  annihilation 
and  that  of  the  Elementary  and  of  the  non-human  Spirits.  Mait- 
land  and  Mrs.  K.  have  revealed  to  them — by  Jesus  and  God  them- 
selves (that  alone  would  beat  +)  that  many  of  the  supposed 
**  Spirits  "  which  control  mediums  and  converse  with  visitors — 
Spiritualists,  are  no  "disembodied"  spirits  at  all,  but  only 
**  flames,"   and  the  reliquiae  of  dogs,   cats  and   pigs,   helped  to 


276  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

communicate  with  mortals  by  the  spirits  of  "  trees,"  vegetables 
and  minerals.  Though  more  hazy  than  the  human,  cautious  dis- 
courses of  the  alleged  +  those  teachings  are  nearer  to  the  mark 
than  anything  uttered  so  far  by  the  mediums,  and  I  will  tell  you 
why.  When  the  "  Seeress  "  is  made  to  reveal  that  "  immor- 
tahty  is  by  no  means  a  m.atter  of  course  for  all  "  .  .  .  that 
"  souls  shrink  away  and  expire,"  it  being  "  the  nature  of  them  to 
burn  out  and  expand  themselves  "...  etc.,  she  is  deliver- 
ing herself  of  actual,  incontrovertible  jacts.  And  why?  Be- 
cause both  Maitland  and  herself  as  well  as  their  circle — are  strict 
vegetarians,  while  S.M.  is  a  flesh-eater  and  a  wine  and  liquor 
drinker.  Never  will  the  Spiritualists  find  reliable,  trustworthy 
mediums  and  Seers  (not  even  to  a  degree)  so  long  as  the  latter 
and  their  "  circle  "  will  saturate  themselves  with  animal  blood, 
and  the  millions  of  infusoria  of  the  fermented  fluids.  Since  my 
return  I  found  it  impossible  for  me  to  breathe — even  in  the  atmos- 
phere of  the  Headquarters!  M.  had  to  interfere,  and  to  force 
the  whole  household  to  give  up  meat ;  and  they  had,  all  of  them, 
to  be  purified  and  thoroughly  cleansed  with  various  disinfecting 
drugs  before  I  could  even  help  myself  to  my  letters.  And  I  am 
not,  as  you  may  imagine,  half  as  sensitive  to  the  loathsome 
emanations  as  a  tolerably  respectable  disembodied  shell  would 
be, — leaving  out  of  question  a  real  Presence,  though  but  a  **  pro- 
jecting "  one.  In  a  year  or  so,  perchance  earlier,  I  may  find 
myself  hardened  again.  At  present  I  find  it  impossible — do  what 
I  may. 

And  now,  with  such  a  preface  instead  of  answering  I  will  put 
you  a  question.  You  know,  S.  Moses,  and  you  know  Maitland 
and  Mrs.  K.  personally.  And,  you  have  heard  of  and  read  about 
a  good  many  Seers,  in  the  past  and  present  centuries,  such  as 
Swedenborg,  Boehme,  and  others.  Not  one  among  the  number 
but  thoroughly  honest,  sincere,  and  as  intelligent,  as  well 
educated ;  aye ;  even  learned.  Each  of  them  in  addition  to  these 
qualities,  has  or  had  an  -f  of  his  own  ;  a  **  Guardian  "  and  a 
Revelator — ,  under  whatever  "  mystery  "  and  **  mystic  name  " — 
whose  mission  it  is — or  has  been  to  spin  out  to  his  spiritual  ward 
— a  new  system  embracing  all  the  details  of  the  world  of  Spirit. 
Tell  me,  my  friend,  do  you  know  of  two  that  agree?  And  why, 
since  truth  is  one,  and  that  putting  entirely  the  question  of  dis- 
crepancies in  details  aside — we  do  not  find  them  agreeing  even 
upon  the  most  vital  problems — those  that  have  either  "  to  be,  or 
not  to  be " — and  of  which  there  can  be  no  two  solutions? 
Summed  up,  it  comes  to  the  following  : — All  the  ''  Rosicrucians," 
all  the  medicBval  mystics,  Swendenborg,  P.B.  Randolf,  Oxley, 
etc.,  etc.  :  "  there  are  secret  Brotherhoods  of  Initiates  in  the  East, 
especially  in  Tibet  and  Tartary  ";  there  only  can  the  Lost  Word 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  277 

(which  is  no  Word)  be  found  "  and,  there  are  Spirits  of  the 
Elements,  and  Spirit-Flames,  that  were  never  incarnated  (in  this 
cycle),   and  immortality  1*5  conditional. 

Mediums  and  clairvoyants,  (of  the  type  of  S.  Moses)  there 
are  no  Brothers  in  Tibet  or  India,  and  the  **  Lost  Word  "  is  in 
the  sole  keeping-  of  my  **  Guardian  "  who  knows  the  word  but 
knows  of  no  Brothers.  And,  immortality  is  for  all  and  uncon- 
ditional,  there  being  no  Spirits,  but  the  human  and  the  dis- 
embodied, etc.  etc." — a  system  of  radical  denial  of  the  first  one 
and  in  complete  antagonism  with  it.  While  Oxley  and  Mrs.  H. 
Billing  are  in  direct  communication  with  the  *'  Brothers,"  S.M. 
rejects  the  very  idea  of  one.  While  "  Busiris  "  is  an  *'  angel  " 
au  pluriel,  or  the  Spirit  of  a  congeries  of  Spirits  (Dhyan  Chohans) 
the  -f  soul  of  a  disembodied  Sage  solo.  His  teachings  are 
authoritative,  yet  we  always  find  a  ring  of  uncertainty  and  hesi- 
tation in  them  :  "  We  are  not  able  to  say  now  "  .  .  .  **  It  is 
doubtful  "  .  ,  .  "  We  do  not  understand  whether  it  is  pre- 
tended "  .  .  .  it  "  seems  that  "  .  .  .  **  we  do  not  feel 
sure,"  etc.  Thus  speaketh  a  man,  conditioned  and  limited  in  his 
means  of  obtaining  absolute  knowledge;  but  why  should  a  "  Soul 
within  the  Universal  Soul  "  a  **  Spirit  Sage  "  use  such  a  cautious, 
uncertain  phraseology  if  the  truth  is  known  to  him?  Why  not, 
in  answer  to  her  direct,  fearless,  and  challenging  remark  :  **  You 
want  objective  proof  of  the  Lodge?  have  you  not  +  ?  and  can 
you  not  ask  him  whether  I  speak  the  truth  "? — why  not  answer — 
(if  it  is  +  who  answers) — either  one  way  or  the  other,  and  say  : — 
"  the  poor  wench  is  hallucinated  " ;  or,  (as  there  cannot  be  another 
or  a  third  alternative  if  S.M.  is  right)  **  she  lies  intentionally, 
with  such  and  such  an  object,  beware  of  her!  "  Why  so  hazy? — 
Aye,  verily,  because  *'  he  (  +  )  knows/'  and  "  his  name  be  blessed, 
— but  he  (S.M.  knoweth  not;  for,  as  his  **  spirits,"  +  he  thinks 
— repeatedly  reminds  him  :  **  You  do  not  appear  to  have  gathered 
rightly  what  we  said  .  .  ."  controversy  stirs  up  your  mind 
and  feeling,  and  in  place  of  a  transparent  medium,  gives  us  one 
that  is  turpid.  .  .  .  We  require  a  passive  mind,  and  cannot 
act  without  it"     .     .     .     (see  Light  February  4th)). 

As  we  do  not  "  require  a  passive  mind  "  but  on  the  contrary  are 
seeking  for  those  most  active,  which  can  put  two  and  two  to- 
gether once  that  they  are  on  the  right  scent,  we  will,  if  you  please, 
drop  the  subject.     Let  your  mind  work  out  the  problem  for  itself. 

Yes ;  I  am  indeed,  satisfied  with  your  last  article,  though  it  will 
satisfy  no  Spiritualist.  Yet  there  is  more  philosophy  and  pro- 
found logic  in  it  than  in  a  dozen  of  their  most  pretentious  publi- 
cations. Thanks — will  come  later  on.  Thus,  little  by  little,  the 
now  incomprehensible  will  become  the  self-evident ;  and  many  a 
sentence  of  mystic  meaning,  will  shine  yet  out  before  your  Soul- 


278  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

eye,  like  a  transparency  illuminating  the  darkness  of  your  mind. 
Such  is  the  course  of  gradual  progress ;  a  year  or  two  back  you 
might  have  written  a  more  brilliant,  never  a  more  profound 
article.  Neglect  then,  not,  my  good  Brother,  the  humble,  the 
derided  Journal  of  your  Society,  and  mind  not  either  its  quaint, 
pretentious  cover,  nor  the  '*  heaps  of  manure  "  contained  in  it — 
to  repeat  the  charitable,  and  to  yourself  the  too  familiar  remark 
used  often  at  Simla.  But  let  your  attention  be  rather  drawn  to 
the  few  pearls  of  Wisdom  and  occult  truths  to  be  occasionally 
discovered  under  that  **  manure."  Our  own  ways  and  manners 
are,  perchance,  as  quaint  and  as  uncouth — nay  more  so.  Subba 
Rao  is  right ;  he  who  knows  aught  of  the  ways  of  the  Siddhas 
shall  concur  with  the  views  expressed  on  the  third  page  of  his 
incomplete  letter  :  many  of  us  would  be  mistaken  for  Madmen, 
by  your  English  gentlemen.  But  he,  who  would  become  a  son 
of  Wisdom  can  always  see  beneath  the  rugged  surface.  So,  with 
the  poor  old  Journal.  Behold,  its  mystically  bumptious  clothing  !, 
its  numerous  blemishes  and  literary  defects  and  with  all  that 
cover  the  most  perfect  symbol  of  its  contents  :  The  main  portion 
of  its  original  ground,  thickly  veiled,  all  smutty  and  as  black  as 
night,  through  which  peep  out  grey  dots,  and  lines,  and  words, 
and  even — sentences.  To  the  truly  wise  those  breaks  of  grey, 
may  suggest  an  allegory  full  of  meaning,  such  as  the  streaks  of 
twilight,  upon  the  Eastern  sky,  at  morning's  early  dawn,  after  a 
night  of  intense  darkness;  the  aurora  of  a  more  "  spiritually  in- 
tellectual "  cycle.  And  who  knows,  how  many  of  those,  who, 
undismayed  by  unprepossessing  appearance,  the  hideous  intrica- 
cies of  its  style,  and  the  other  many  failures  of  the  unpopular 
magazine  will  keep  on  tearing  its  pages,  may  find  themselves 
rewarded  some  day  for  their  perseverance  !  Illuminated  sentences 
may  gleam  out  upon  them,  at  some  time  or  other,  shedding  a 
bright  light  on  some  old  puzzling  problems.  Yourself,  some  fine 
morning,  while  pouring  over  its  crooked  columns  with  the 
sharpened  wits  of  a  well  rested  brain,  peering  into  what  you  now 
view  as  hazy,  impalpable  speculations,  having  only  the  consist- 
ency of  vapour, — yourself  you  may,  perchance,  perceive  in  them 
the  unexpected  solution  of  an  old,  blurred,  forgotten  *'  dream  " 
of  yours,  which  once  recalled  will  impress  itself  in  an  indelible 
image  upon  your  outer  from  your  inner  memory,  to  never  fade 
out  from  it  again.  All  this  is  possible  and  may  happen ;  for  our 
ways  are  the  ways  of  "  Madmen  "     .     . 

Then  why  feel  **  unhappy  "  and  "  disappointed  "  my  good,  my 
faithful  friend?  remember  that  hope  deferred  is  no  hope  lost. 
'*  Conditions  "  may  change  for  the  better — for  we  too  spook-like 
need  our  conditions,  and  can  hardly  work  without  them ;  and 
then,  the  vague  depression  of  Spirit,  which  is  now  settling  down 


PROBxVTION,  AND  CHELASHIP  279 

upon  you  like  a  heavy  cloud  upon  a  landscape  may  be  blown  away 
at  the  first  favourable  breeze.     Bhavani  Shanker  is  with  O.,  and 
he  is  stronger  and  fitter  in  many  a  way  more  than  Damodar  or 
even  our  mutual  '*  female  "  friend. 

No ;  you  will  not  be  snatched  away  from  your  studies  before 
you  have  thoroughly  mastered  the  alphabet,  so  as  to  learn  to  read 
by  yourself;  and,  it  depends  but  on  you  alone  to  nail  for  ever  '*  the 
too   attractive  vision  "    which    seems   to   you   now   to   be   fading 
away.  ....  .  .  ..... 

.^  whole  situation.  That  I  am  not  a  "  Seraph  " 
yet  is  shown  by  the  fact  of  my  writing  to  you  this  endless  letter. 
When  it  is  proved  that  you  have  not  misunderstood  my  meaning 
I  may  say  more.  Morya,  to  enable  you  as  he  says  to  confront 
your  enemies,  the  believers  in  the  materialisation  of  '*  individual 
souls,"  wanted  me,  to  acquaint  you  with  the  totality  of  the  sub- 
tile bodies  and  their  collective  aggregate,  as  well  as  with  the 
distributive  aggregate  or  the  sheaths.  I  believe  it  is  premature. 
Before  the  world  can  be  made  to  understand  the  difference  between 
the  "  Sutratma  "  (thread-soul)  and  **  taijasa  "  (the  brilliant  or 
the  luminous)  they  have  to  be  taught  the  nature  of  the  grosser 
elements.  What  I  blame  him  for,  is  that  he  allowed  you  to 
begin  from  the  wrong  end — the  most  difficult  unless  one  has 
thoroughly  mastered  the  preparatory  ground.  I  have  looked  over 
you(r)  MS.  to  him  ;  and  more  than  once  have  I  detected  on  the 
white  margin  the  shadow  of  your  face,  with  its  earnest,  enquiring 
gaze  in  the  eyes  :  your  thought  having  projected  your  image  on 
the  spot  you  had  on  your  mind,  and  which  you  longed  to  receive 
back  filled — "  thirsting  '*  as  you  say — for  more  notes  and  in- 
formation. Well,  if  his  laziness  overcomes  his  good  intentions 
much  longer,  I  will  have  to  do  it  myself,  though  my  time  is 
limited.  At  all  events  to  write  for  you  is  no  ungrateful  task,  as 
you  make  the  best  use  of  the  little  you  may  pick  up  here  and 
there.  Indeed,  when  you  complain  of  being  unable  to  compre- 
hend the  meaning  of  Eliphas  Levi,  it  is  only  because  you  fail  like 
so  many  other  readers  to  find  the  key  to  their  way  of  writing.  On 
close  observation,  you  will  find  that  it  was  never  the  intention  of 
the  Occultists  really  to  conceal  what  they  have  been  writing  from 
the  earnest  determined  students,  but  rather  to  lock  up  their  in- 
formation for  safety's  sake,  in  a  secure  safe  box,  the  key  to 
which  is — intuition.  The  degree  of  diligence  and  zeal  with  which 
the  hidden  meaning  is  sought  by  the  student,  is  generally  the 
test — how  far  he  is  entitled  to  the  possession  of  the  so  buried 
treasure.  And  certainly  if  you  are  able  to  make  out  that  which 
was  concealed  under  the  red  ink  of  M. — you  need  despair  of 
nothing.      I  believe,   it  is  time  now  to  bid  you  farewell,   hoping 

1  One  whole  page  of  the  original  letter  is  misjsing  here. — Ed. 


28o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

you  will  find  less  trouble  to  read  the  blue  than  the  red  hiero- 
glyphics. O.  will  be  with  you  shortly  and  you  ought  to  make 
the  best  of  this  opportunity  which  may  be  the  last  for  both.  And 
now,  need  I  remind  you  that  this  letter  is  strictly  private? 

Yours,  whatever  may  come  of  it, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.   XLLX 
From  K.H.     Received  at  Umballa  on  the  way  to  Simla,  August  5,   1881. 

Just  home.  Received  more  letters  than  I  care  to  answer — yours 
excepted.  Have  nothing  particular  to  say,  I  will  simply  attend 
to  your  questions ;  a  task  which  may  seem  an  easy  one,  but  is  not 
so,  in  reality,  if  we  but  remember  that  similar  in  that  to  the  deity 
described  in  Upanishad  *'  Sokamayata  bahuh  syam  prajaye  yeti  " 
— they  *•  love  to  be  many  and  to  multiply."  At  any  rate,  thirst 
for  knowledge  was  never  regarded  as  a  sin  and  you  will  always 
find  me  prompt  to  answer  such  queries — that  can  be  answered. 

Certainly  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  since  our  correspondence  was 
established  for  the  good  of  the  many  it  would  prove  very  little 
profitable  to  the  world  at  large  unless  you  do  recast  the  teaching 
and  ideas  contained  therein  "  in  the  form  of  an  essay,"  not  only 
on  the  occult  philosophical  view  of  creation  but  upon  every  other 
question.  The  sooner  you  begin  your  "  future  book  '*  the  better ; 
for  who  can  answer  for  unexpected  incidents?  Our  correspondence 
may  break  off  suddenly  the  obstacle  coming  from  those  who  know 
best.  Their  mind — as  you  know,  is  a  sealed  book  for  many  of 
us,  and  which  no  amount  of  "art  magic"  can  break  open. 
Further  "aids  to  reflection"  will  however  come  in  good  time; 
and  the  little  I  am  permitted  to  explain  may,  I  hope,  prove  more 
comprehensive  than  Eliphas  Levi's  Haute  Magie.  No  wonder 
you  find  it  cloudy,  for  it  was  never  meant  for  the  uninitiated 
reader.  Eliphas  studied  from  the  Rosicrucian  MSS.  (now  reduced 
to  three  copies  in  Europe).  These  expound  our  eastern  doctrines 
from  the  teachings  of  Rosencrauz,  who,  upon  his  return  from 
Asia  dressed  them  up  in  a  semi-Christian  garb  intended  as  a  shield 
for  his  pupils,  against  clerical  revenge.  One  must  have  the  key 
to  it  and  that  key  is  a  science  per  se.  Rosencrauz  taught  orally. 
Saint  Germain  recorded  the  good  doctrines  in  figures  and  his  only 
exciphered  MS.  remained  with  his  staunch  friend  and  patron  the 
benevolent  German  Prince  from  whose  house  and  in  whose  pre- 
sence he  made  his  last  exit — Home.  Failure,  dead  failure ! 
Speaking  of  "  figures  "  and  "  numbers  "  Eliphas  addresses  those 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  281 

who  know  something-  of  the  Pythagorean  doctrines.  Yes ;  some 
of  them  do  sum  up  all  philosophy  and  include  all  doctrine.  Isaac 
Newton  understood  them  well ;  but  withheld  his  knowledge  very 
prudently  for  his  own  reputation,  and  very  unfortunately  for  the 
writers  of  Saturday  Review  and  its  contemporaries.  You  seem 
to  admire  it — I  do  not.  However  talented  from  the  literary  point 
of  view,  a  paper  which  gives  vent  to  such  unprogressive  and 
dogmatic  ideas  as  the  one  I  came  across  in  it,  lately,  ought  to 
lose  caste  among  its  more  liberal  confreres.  Scientific  men,  it 
thinks — **  do  not  make  at  all  good  observers"  at  exhibitions  of 
modern  magic,  spiritism  and  other  **  nine  days  wonders."  This 
is  certainly  not  as  it  should  be,  it  adds:  for,  '"  knowing  as  well 
as  they  do  the  limits  of  the  natural  (?  !  !)  they  should  begin  by 
assuming  that  what  they  see,  or  what  they  think  they  see,  cannot 
he  done,  and  should  next  look  for  the  fallacy  "  etc.  etc.  Circula- 
tion of  the  blood,  electric  telegraphy,  railway  and  steamer  argu- 
ment all  over  again.  They  know  **  the  limits  of  the  natural  "  !  ! 
Oh  century  of  conceit,  and  mental  obscuration  !  And  we  are 
invited  to  London,  among  these  academical  rags  whose  pre- 
decessors persecuted  Mesmer  and  branded  St.  Germain  as  an 
imposter  !  All  is  secret  for  them  as  yet  in  nature.  Of  man — 
they  know  but  the  skeleton  and  form ;  hardly  are  they  able  to  out- 
line the  paths  through  which  the  invisible  messengers  they  call 
"  senses  "  pass  on  their  way  to  man's  perception ;  their  school  of 
science  is  a  hotbed  of  doubts  and  conjectures ;  it  teaches  but  for  its 
own  sophistry,  infects  with  its  emasculation,  its  scorn  for  truth, 
its  false  morality  and  dogmatism,  and  its  representatives  would 
boast  knowing  "  the  limits  of  the  natural."  Bus — my  good 
friend;  I  would  forget  you  belonged  to  this  generation,  and  are 
an  admirer  of  your  "  modern  Science."  Her  behests  and  oracular 
verdicts  are  on  a  level  with  the  papal — non-possumus.  Yes ;  the 
Saturday  Review  has  let  us  off  easily  enough  to  be  sure.  Not  so 
the  Spiritualist.  Poor  perplexed,  wee  paper  !  You  gave  it  a 
tremendous  blow.  Losing  its  footing  on  mediumistic  ground,  it 
fights  its  death  struggle  for  supremacy  of  English  adeptship  over 
Eastern  knowledge.  I  almost  hear  its  sub  rosa  cry  :  **  If  we 
Spiritualists  are  shown  to  be  in  the  wrong  box  so  are  you — 
theosophists. "  The  great  "Adept,"  the  formidable  J.K.  is 
certainly  a  dangerous  enemy ;  and  I  am  afraid,  our  Boddhisatwas 
will  have  to  confess  some  day  their  profound  ignorance  before  his 
mighty  learning.  **  Real  Adepts  like  Gautama  Buddha  or  Jesus 
Christ  did  not  shroud  themselves  in  mystery,  but  came,  and  talked 
openly,"  quotes  our  oracle.  If  they  did  it's  news  to  us — ^the 
humble  followers  of  the  former.  Gautama  is  qualified  the  **  Divine 
Teacher"  and  at  the  same  time  ''  God's  messenger"  !  !  (See 
Spt.,  July  8th,  p.   21.   para   2.)        Buddha   has  now  become  the 


282  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

messenger  of  one,  whom  He,  Sankia  K'houtchoo,  the  precious 
wisdom,  has  dethroned  2,500  years  back,  by  unveiling  the  Taber- 
nacle and  showing  its  emptiness.  Where  did  that  cockney  adept 
learn  his  Buddhism,  I  wonder?  You  really  ought  to  advise  your 
friend  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  to  study  with  that  London  Jewel  who  so 
despises  Indian  occult  knowledge  "  The  Lotus  of  the  Good  Law," 
and  "  Atma  Boddlia  " — in  the  light  of  Jewish  Kabalism. 

I,  "annoyed  at  newspaper  ribald  notices?"  Certainly  not. 
But  I  do  feel  a  little  wrathful  at  the  sacrilegious  utterances  of  J.K.  ; 
that  I  confess.  I  felt  like  answering  the  conceited  fool — ^but 
'*  so  far  shalt  thou  go  and  no  further  " — again.  The  Hobilghan 
to  whom  I  showed  the  passage  laughed  till  the  tears  streamed 
down  his  old  cheeks.  I  wish  I  could.  When  the  "  Old  Lady  " 
reads  it,  there  will  be  a  cedar  or  two  damaged  at  Simla.  Thanks 
indeed  for  your  kind  offer  to  let  me  have  possession  of  the  Review 
scraps;  but  I  rather  you  should  preserve  them  yourself,  as  these 
notices  may  prove  unexpectedly  valuable  to  you  in  a  few  years 
hence. 

To  your  offer  to  give  a  solemn  pledge  never  to  divulge  anything 
without  permission  I  can  give  no  answer,  at  present.  Neither  its 
acceptance  nor  rejection  depend  of  me,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  since 
it  would  be  quite  an  unprecedented  event  to  pledge  an  outsider 
to  our  own  particular  form  of  oath  or  promise  and  that  no  other 
would  hold  good  in  my  Superior's  opinion.  Unfortunately  for 
both  of  us,  once — or  rather  twice — upon  a  time  you  made  use  of 
an  expression  which  was  recorded,  and  but  three  days  ago,  when 
pleading  for  some  privileges  for  you,  it  was  brought  out  before 
me  very  unexpectedly,  I  must  say.  Upon  hearing  it  repeated  and 
seeing  it  recorded,  I  had  but  to  turn,  as  gently  as  I  could,  the  other 
cheek  to  still  more  unexpected  buffets  of  fortune  dealt  out  by  the 
respected  hand  of  him  whom  I  so  revere.  Cruel  as  the  reminder 
seemed  to  me  it  was  just,  for  you  have  pronounced  these  words  at 
Simla  :  **  I  am  a  member  of  the  Theosophical  Society  but  in  no 
way  a  Theosophist,"  you  said.  I  am  not  breaking  a  confidence 
in  revealing  this  result  of  my  pled  doyer  to  you,  as  I  am  even 
advised  to  do  so.  We  have  to  travel  then,  at  the  same  slow  rate 
at  which  we  have  hitherto  gone,  or — halt  at  once  and  write  Finis 
at  the  bottom  of  our  letters.  I  hope  you  will  give  preference  to  the 
former. 

Once  we  are  upon  the  topic,  I  wish  you  would  impress  upon  your 
London  friends  some  wholesome  truths  that  they  are  but  too  apt 
to  forget,  even,  when  they  have  been  told  of  them  over  and  over 
again.  The  Occult  Science  is  not  one,  in  which  secrets  can  be 
communicated  of  a  sudden,  by  a  written  or  even  verbal  communica- 
tion. If  so,  all  the  "  Brothers  "  should  have  to  do,  would  be  to 
publish  a  Handbook  of  the  art  which  might  be  taught  in  schools 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  283 

as  grammar  is.  It  is  the  common  mistake  of  people  that  we 
willingly  wrap  ourselves  and  our  powers  in  mystery,  that  we  wish 
to  keep  our  knowledge  to  ourselves,  and  of  our  own  will  refuse — 
"  wantonly  and  deliberately  "  to  communicate  it.  The  truth  is 
that  till  the  neophyte  attains  to  the  condition  necessary  for  that 
degree  of  Illumination  to  which,  and  for  which,  he  is  entitled  and 
fitted,  most  //  not  all  of  the  Secrets  are  incommunicable.  The 
receptivity  must  be  equal  to  the  desire  to  instruct.  The  illumina- 
tion must  come  from  within.  Till  then  no  hocus  pocus  of  in- 
cautious, or  mummery  of  appliances,  no  metaphysical  lectures  or 
discussions,  no  self-imposed  penance  can  give  it.  All  these  are 
but  means  to  an  end,  and  all  we  can  do  is  to  direct  the  use  of 
such  means  as  have  been  empirically  found  by  the  experience  of 
ages  to  conduce  to  the  required  object.  And  this  was  and  has 
been  no  secret  for  thousands  of  years.  Fasting,  meditation, 
chastity  of  thought,  word,  and  deed;  silence  for  certain  periods 
of  time  to  enable  nature  herself  to  speak  to  him  who  comes  to  her 
for  information  ;  government  of  the  animal  passions  and  impulses ; 
utter  unselfishness  of  intention,  the  use  of  certain  incense  and 
fumigations  for  physiological  purposes,  have  been  published  as 
the  means  since  the  days  of  Plato  and  lamblichus  in  the  West, 
and  since  the  far  earlier  times  of  our  Indian  Rishis,  How  these 
must  be  complied  with  to  suit  each  individual  temperament  is  of 
course  a  matter  for  his  own  experiments  and  the  watchful  care  of 
his  tutor  or  Guru.  Such  is  in  fact  part  of  his  course  of  discipline, 
and  his  Guru  or  initiator  can  but  assist  him  with  his  experience 
and  will  power  but  can  do  no  more  until  the  last  and  supreme 
initiation.  I  am  also  of  opinion  that  few  candidates  imagine  the 
degree  of  inconvenience — nay  sufifering  and  harm  to  himself — the 
said  initiator  submits  to  for  the  sake  of  his  pupil.  The  peculiar 
physical,  moral,  and  intellectual  conditions  of  neophytes  and  adepts 
alike  vary  muchj  as  anyone  will  easily  understand ;  thus,  in  each 
case,  the  instructor  has  to  adapt  his  conditions  to  those  of  the 
pupil,  and  the  strain  is  terrible  for  to  achieve  success  we  have  to 
bring  ourselves  into  a  full  rapport  with  the  subject  under  training. 
And  as,  the  greater  the  powers  of  the  adept  the  less  he  is  in 
sympathy  with  the  natures  of  the  profane  who  often  come  to  him 
saturated  with  the  emanations  of  the  outside  world,  those  animal 
emanations  of  the  selfish,  brutal,  crowd  that  we  so'  dread — the 
longer  he  was  separated  from  that  world  and  the  purer  he  has 
himself  become,  the  more  difficult  the  self-imposed  task.  Then 
— knowledge,  can  only  be  communicated  gradually ;  and  some  of 
the  highest  secrets — if  actually  formulated  even  in  your  well  pre- 
pared ear — might  sound  to  you  as  insane  gibberish,  notwithstand- 
ing all  the  sincerity  of  your  present  assurance  that  **  absolute  trust 
defies  misunderstanding."      This  is  the  real  cause  of  our  reticence. 


284  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

This  is  why  people  so  often  complain  with  a  plausible  show  of 
reason  that  no  new  knowledge  is  communicated  to  them,  though 
they  have  toiled  for  it  for  two,  three  or  more  years.  Let  those 
who  really  desire  to  learn  abandon  all  and  come  to  us,  instead  of 
asking-  or  expecting-  us  to  go  to  them.  But  how  is  this  to  be  done 
in  your  world,  and  atmosphere?  **  Woke  up  sad  on  the  morning 
of  the  i8th. "  Did  you?  Well,  well  patience  my  good  brother, 
patience.  Something  has  occurred,  though  you  have  preserved 
no  consciousness  of  the  event,  but  let  this  rest.  Only  what  more 
can  I  do?  How  am  I  to  give  expression  to  ideas  for  which  you 
have  as  yet  no  language.  The  finer  and  more  susceptible  heads 
get  like  yourself,  more  than  others  do,  and  even  when  they  get 
a  little  extra  dose  it  is  lost  for  want  of  words  and  images  to  fix 
the  floating  ideas.  Perhaps,  and  undoubtedly  you  know  not  to 
what  I  now  refer  to.  You  will  know  it  one  day — patience.  To 
give  more  knowledge  to  a  man  than  he  is  yet  fitted  to  receive  is  a 
dangerous  experiment;  and  furthermore,  other  considerations  go 
to  restrain  me.  The  sudden  communication  of  facts,  so  transcend- 
ing the  ordinary,  is  in  many  instances  fatal  not  only  to  the 
neophyte  but  to  those  directly  about  him.  It  is  like  delivering  an 
infernal  machine  or  a  cocked  and  loaded  revolver  into  the  hands 
of  one  who  had  never  seen  such  a  thing.  Our  case  is  exactly 
analogous.  We  feel  that  the  time  is  approaching,  and  that  we 
are  bound  to  choose  between  the  triumph  of  Truth  or  the  Reign 
of  Error  and — ^Terror.  We  have  to  let  in  a  few  chosen  ones  into 
the  great  secret,  or — allow  the  infamous  Shammars  to  lead 
Europe's  best  minds  into  the  most  insane  and  fatal  superstitions — 
Spiritualism  ;  and  we  do  feel  as  if  we  were  delivering  a  whole  cargo 
of  dynamite  into  the  hands  of  those,  we  are  anxious  to  see  defend- 
ing themselves  against  the  Red  Capped  Brothers  of  the  Shadow. 
You  are  curious  to  know  where  I  am  travelling  about;  to  learn 
more  of  my  great  work  and  mission?  Were  I  to  tell  you,  you 
could  hardly  make  anything  of  it.  To  test  your  knowledge  and 
patience,  I  may  answer  you  though — this  once.  I  now  come  from 
Sakkya-Jung.  To  you  the  name  will  remain  meaningless. 
Repeat  it  before  the  **  Old  Lady  "  and — observe  the  result.  But 
to  return.  Having  then,  to  deliver  with  one  hand  the  much  needed 
yet  dangerous  weapon  to  the  world,  and  with  the  other  to  keep 
off  the  Shammars  (the  havoc  produced  by  them  already  being 
immense)  do  you  not  think  we  have  a  right  to  hesitate,  to  pause 
and  feel  the  necessity  of  caution,  as  we  never  did  before?  To 
sum  up  :  the  misuse  of  knowledge  by  the  pupil  always  reacts  upon 
the  initiator;  nor,  do  I  believe  you  know  yet,  that  in  sharing  the 
secrets  with  another,  the  Adept  by  immutable  Law,  is  delaying  his 
own  progress  to  the  Eternal  Rest.  Perhaps,  what  I  now  tell  you, 
may  help  you  to  a  truer  conception  of  things,  and  to  appreciate 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  285 

our  mutual  position  the  better.  Loitering-  on  the  way,  does  not 
conduce  to  a  speedy  arrival  at  the  journey's  end.  And,  it  must 
strike  you  as  a  truism  that  a  Price  must  be  paid  for  everything  and 
every  truth  by  somebody  and  in  this  case — we  pay  it.  Fear  not ; 
I  am  willing  to  pay  my  share,  and  I  told  so  those  who  put  me 
the  question.  I  will  not  desert  you ;  nor  will  I  show  myself  less 
self-sacrificing  than  the  poor,  worn  out  mortality  we  know  as  the 
'*  Old  Lady."  Tbe  above  must  remain  between  us  two.  I  expect 
you  to  regard  this  letter  as  strictly  confidential  for  it  is  neither 
for  publication  nor  your  friends.  I  want  you  alone  to  know  it. 
Only,  if  all  this  was  more  generally  known  to  candidates  for 
initiation,  I  feel  certain  that  they  would  be  both  more  thankful 
and  more  patient  as  well  as  less  inclined  to  be  irritated  at  what 
they  consider  our  reticence  and  vacillation.  Few  possess  your 
discretion  ;  fewer  still  know  to  appreciate  at  their  true  value  the 
results  obtained. — Your  two  letters  to  S.M.  will  lead  to  no  result 
whatever.  He  will  remain  as  immovable  and  your  trouble  will 
have  been  taken  in  vain.  You  will  receive  a  letter  from  him  full 
of  suspicion  and  with  no  few  unkind  remarks.  You  cannot  per- 
suade him  that  +  is  a  living  Brother  for  that  was  tried  and — 
failed ;  unless,  indeed  you  convert  him  to  popular  exoteric 
Lamaism ;  which  regards  our  **  Byang-tzyoobs  "  and  "  Tchang- 
chubs  ' ' — the  Brothers  who  pass  from  the  body  of  one  great  lama 
to  that  of  another — as  Lhas  or  disetjibodied  Spirits.  Remember 
what  I  said  in  my  last  of  Planetary  Spirits.  The  Tchang-chub 
(an  adept  who  has,  by  the  power  of  his  knowledge  and  soul 
enlightenment  become  exempt  from  the  curse  of  unconscious 
transmigration) — may,  at  his  will  and  desire  and  instead  of  re- 
incarnating himself  only  after  bodily  death,  do  so,  and  repeatedly 
— during  his  life  if  he  chooses.  He  holds  the  power  of  choosing 
for  himself  new  bodies — ^whether  on  this  or  any  other  planet — ^while 
in  possession  of  his  old  form,  that  he  generally  preserves  for  pur- 
poses of  his  own.  Read  the  book  of  Khintee  and  you  will  find  in 
it  these  laws.  She  might  translate  for  you  some  paras,  as  she 
knows  them  by  rote.     To  her  you  may  read  the  present. 

Do  I  often  laugh  at  "  the  helpless  way  in  which  you  grope  in 
the  dark?  "  Most  decidedly  not.  That  would  be  as  unkind  and 
about  as  foolish  for  me  to  do  as  for  you  to  laugh  at  a  Hindu  for  his 
pidgin  English,  in  a  district,  where  your  Government  will  not 
teach  people  English.  Whence  such  a  thought?  And  whence 
that  other  to  have  my  portrait?  Never  had  but  one  taken,  in  my 
whole  life;  a  poor  ferrotype  produced  in  the  days  of  the 
**  Gaudeamus  "  by  a  travelling  female  artist — (some  relative,  I 
suppose,  of  the  Munich  beer  hall  beauties  that  you  have  inter- 
viewed of  late) — and  from  whose  hands  I  had  to  rescue  it.  The 
ferrotype   is  there,  but  the  image  itself  has  vanished :   the  nose 

20 


286  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

peeled  off  and  one  of  the  eyes  gone.  No  other  to  offer.  I  dare 
not  promise  for  I  never  break  my  word.  Yet — I  may  try — some 
day  to  get  you  one. 

Quotation  from  Tennyson?  Really  cannot  say.  Some  stray 
lines  picked  up  in  the  astral  light  or  in  somebody's  brain  and  re- 
membered, I  never  forget  what  I  once  see  or  read.  A  bad  habit. 
So  much  so,  that  often  and  unconsciously  to  myself  I  string 
together  sentences  of  stray  words  and  phrases,  before  my  eyes 
and  which  may  have  been  used  hundreds  of  years  ago  or  will  be 
hundreds  of  years  hence,  in  relation  to  quite  a  different  subject. 
Laziness  and  real  lack  of  time.  The  "  Old  Lady  "  called  me  a 
*'  brain  pirate  "  and  a  plagiarist,  the  other  day  for  using  a  Avhole 
sentence  of  five  lines,  which,  she  is  firmly  convinced,  I  must  have 
pilfered  from  Dr.  Wilder's  brain  as  three  months  later,  he  repro- 
duced it  in  an  essay  of  his  on  prophetic  intuition.  Never  had  a 
look  into  the  old  philosopher's  brain  cells.  Got  it  somewhere  in 
the  northern  current — don't  know.  Write  this  for  your  informa- 
tion as  something  new  for  you,  I  suppose.  Thus  a  child  may  be 
born  bearing  the  greatest  resemblance  and  features  to  another 
person,  thousands  of  miles  off,  no  connexion  to  the  mother,  never 
seen  by  her,  but  whose  floating  image  was  impressed  upon  hef 
soul  memory,  during  sleep  or  even  waking  hours,  and  reproduced 
upon  the  sensitized  plate  of  living  flesh  she  carries  in  her.  Yet,  I 
believe,  the  lines  quoted,  were  written  by  Tennyson  years  ago,  and 
they  are  published.  I  hope  these  disjointed  reflections  and  explana- 
tions may  be  pardoned  in  one,  who,  remained  for  over  nine  days 
in  his  stirrups  without  dismounting.  From  Ghalaring-Tcho 
Lamasery  (where  your  Occult  World  was  discussed  and  commented 
upon) — Heaven  save  the  mark  !  will  you  think.  I  crossed  to  the 
Horpa  Pa  La  territory, — **  the  unexplored  regions  of  Turki  tribes  " 
— say  your  maps  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  there  are  no  tribes  there 
at  all — and  thence — ^home.  Yes;  I  am  tired,  and  therefore  will 
cdose. 

Yours  faithfully, 

K.  H. 

In  October  I  will  be  in  Bhutan.  I  have  a  favour  to  ask  of  you  : 
try  and  make  friends  with  Ross  Scott.      /  need  him. 


LETTER  No.  L 

Received  August,   1882. 
My  dear  friend, 

I  feel  terribly  pidled  down  (mentally)  with  this  unceasing  atti- 
tude of  unavoidable  opposition,  and  as  continual  attacks  on  our 
stronghold  !     During  the  whole  of  my  quiet,  contemplative  life,  I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  287 

have  never  met  with  a  man  more  tenacious  or  unreasonable  !  I  can- 
not go  on  Hke  that  passing  my  Hfe  in  useless  protest ;  and  if  you 
cannot  bring  to  bear  upon  him  your  friendly  influence,  we  will  have 
all  of  us  to  part  company,  at  some  not  distant  day.  I  was  with 
the  Chohan  when  I  received  the  letter  I  now  enclose,  and — the 
Chohan  was  perfectly  disgusted,  and  called  the  whole  thing  the 
Tibetan  name  for  "  comedy."  It  is  not  that  he  is  anxious  to  "  do 
good  "  or  **  help  the  progress  of  the  T.S."  It  is  simply,  believe 
me  or  not — insatiable  pride  in  him ;  a  ferocious,  intense  desire  to 
feel  and  show  to  others  that  he  is  the  '*  one  elect,"  that  he  knows 
that  which  all  others  are  barely  allowed  to  suspect.  Do  not  pro- 
test for  it  is  useless.  We  know,  and  you  do  not.  The  Chohan 
heard  the  other  day  the  idiotic  but  painfully  sincere  lamentations 
of  the  "  wife  "  and^ — took  note  of  them.  Such  is  not  a  man 
who  aims  at  becoming  a  "  perfect  soul  "  and  he  who  would  write 
of  a  brother  Theosophist  what  he  has  written  to  me  of  Fern — is  no 
theosophist.  Let  this  be  strictly  private,  and  do  not  let  him  know 
but  what  he  will  read  himself  in  my  letter.  I  want  you  to  read 
the  two  letters  before  you  take  them  to  him  and  I  beg  of  you  to  be 
present  when  he  reads  them, 

I  will  see  what  can  be  done  for  Colonel  Chesney  and  I  believe 
Djual  Khool  is  after  him.  For  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  think 
I  feel  really  disheartened.  Yet  for  the  sake  of  the  Society  I  would 
not  lose  him.  Well  I  will  do  all  I  can,  but  I  am  seriously  afraid 
that  he  will  spoil  the  broth  himself  some  day. 
Yours  with  sincere  affection, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LI 

Received  22 — 8 — 82. 
Private. 
My  good  friend, 

Remember  that  in  the  phenomenon  intended  for  Colonel  Chesney 
there  was,  is,  and  will  be  but  one  real  phenomenal  thing,  or  rather 
— an  act  of  occultism — ^the  likeness  of  your  humble  servant  the 
best  of  the  two  productions  of  D.  Khool,  I  am  sorry  to  say — for 
you.  The  rest  of  the  performance  is,  notwithstanding  its 
mysterious  character,  something  but  too  natural,  and,  of  which  I 
do  not  at  all  approve.  But  I  have  no  right  to  go  against  the 
traditional  policy  however  much  I  would  like  to  avoid  its  practical 
application. 

Keep  this  strictly  within  your  ow^n  friendly  heart  until  the  day 
comes  to  let  several  persons  know  that  you  were  warned  of  it.      I 


288  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

dare  not  say  more.  The  probations  are  hard  all  round  and  are 
sure  not  to  meet  your  European  notions  of  truthfulness  and 
sincerity.  But  reluctant  as  I  do  feel  to  use  such  means  or  even 
to  permit  them  to  be  used  in  connection  with  my  chelas,  yet  I 
must  say  that  the  deception,  the  lack  of  gfood  faith,  and  the 
traps  (  !  !)  intended  to  inveigle  the  Brothers,  have  multiplied  so 
much  of  late;  and  there  is  so  little  time  left  to  that  day  that  will 
decide  the  selection  of  the  chelas,  that  I  cannot  help  thinking-  that 
our  chiefs  and  especially  M.  may  be  after  all  right.  With  an 
enemy  one  has  to  use  either  equal  or  better  weapons.  But  do 
not  be  deceived  by  appearances.  Were  that  I  could  be  as  frank 
with  Mr.  Hume  whom  I  as  sincerely  respect  for  some  of  his 
genuine,  sterling,  qualities  as  I  cannot  help  blaming  for  some 
others.  When  will  any  of  you  know  and  understand  what  we 
really  are  instead  of  indulging  in  a  world  of  fiction  ! 

In  case  Col.  Chesney  speaks  to  you  of  certain  things  tell  him 
not  to  trust  to  appearances.  He  is  a  gentleman,  and  ought  not 
to  be  allowed  to  labour  under  a  deception,  never  meant  for  him 
but  only  as  a  test  for  those  who  would  impose  themselves  upon 
us  with  an  unclean  heart.  The  crisis  is  near  at  hand.  Who  will 
win  the  day  ! 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LH 

Received  Simla,  Autumn,   1882. 

There  is  nothing  **  below  the  surface,"  my  faithful  friend — 
absolutely  nothing.  Hume  is  simply  furiously  jealous  of  every 
one  who  received  or  is  likely  to  receive  any  information,  favours 
(?)  attention,  or  anything  of  the  sort,  emanating  from  us.  The 
word  "  jealous  "  is  ridiculous,  but  correct  unless  we  call  it 
envious,  which  is  still  worse.  He  believes  himself  wronged,  be- 
cause he  fails  to  become  our  sole  centre  of  attraction ;  he  atti- 
tudinises before  himself  and  feels  maddened  to  fury  on  finding  no 
one  who  would  admire  him,  writes  out  a  Hebrew  passage  which 
means  in  Eliphas  Levi's  book  as  I  have  rendered  it,  and  failing  to 
catch  me  in  a  new  contradiction  for  the  purpose  of  which  he  went 
to  the  trouble  of  quoting  it,  he  impresses  himself  with  the  illusion 
that  he  is  "  far  more  of  an  Adwaitee  "  than  either  M.  or  myself 
ever  were  (an  easy  thing  to  prove  since  we  never  were  Adwaitees). 
And  writes  an  abusive  letter  directed  against  our  system  and  our- 
selves to  the  O.L.  by  way  of  soothing  his  feelings. 

Are  you  really  so  generous  as  not  to  have  suspected  long  ago 
the  whole  truth  ?  and  did  I  not  warn  you ;  and  is  it  possible  that 
you  should  not  have  perceived  that  he  will  never  allow  even  an 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  289 

adept  to  know  more  or  better  than  himself  ! ;  that  his  was  a  false 
humility ;  that  he  is  an  actor  who  enacts  a  part  for  his  own  benefit, 
regardless  of  the  pleasure  or  displeasure  of  his  audience  though 
when  the  latter  is  manifested  to  the  slightest  degree,  he  turns 
round,  concealing  admirably  his  rage  and  hisses  and  spits 
internally.  Every  time  I  contradict  and  prove  him  wrong, — 
whether  in  a  question  of  Tibetan  terms,  or  in  any  other  trifle,  the 
record  he  keeps  against  me  swells,  and  he  comes  out  with  some 
new  accusation.  It  is  idle,  my  dear  brother,  to  be  always  repeat- 
ing that  there  are,  nor  can  there  be  any  contradictions  in  what 
was  given  to  you.  There  may  be  inaccuracy  of  expression,  or 
incompleteness  of  detail ;  but  to  accuse  us  of  blundering  is  really 
too  funny.  I  have  asked  you  several  times  to  make  notes  and  to 
send  them  to  me,  but  neither  Mr.  Hume  nor  you  have  thought  of 
doing  it ;  and  indeed,  I  have  very  little  time  to  explore  back  letters, 
compare  notes,  look  into  your  heads,  etc. 

I  confess  my  ignorance,  in  one  thing  at  any  rate.  I  am  per- 
fectly at  a  loss  to  understand  why  the  expression  used  by  me  with 
regard  to  H.P.B.'s  answer  to  C.C.M.  should  have  so  shocked 
you;  and  why  you  should  object  to  my  "exercising  my  in- 
genuity "?  If,  perchance,  you  give  it  another  meaning  than  I  do, 
then  we  are  again  both  at  sea — jaut  de  s' entendre.  Put  yourself 
for  a  moment  in  my  place,  and  see  whether  you  would  not  have 
to  exercise  all  the  ingenuity  you  have  at  your  command,  in  a  case 
like  that  between  C.C.M.  and  H.P.B.  In  reality,  there  is  no  con- 
tradiction between  that  passage  in  Isis  and  our  later  teaching;  to 
anyone,  w"ho  never  heard  of  the  seven  principles — constantly  re- 
ferred to  in  Isis  as  a  Trinity,  without  any  more  explanation — 
there  certainly  appeared  to  be  as  good  a  contradiction  as  could 
be.  **  You  will  write  so  and  so,  give  so  far,  and  no  more  " — she 
was  constantly  told  by  us,  when  writing  her  book.  It  was  at  the 
very  beginning  of  a  new  cycle,  in  days  when  neither  Christians 
nor  Spiritualists  ever  thought  of,  let  alone  mentioned,  more  than 
two  principles  in  man — body  and  Soid,  which  they  called  Spirit. 
If  you  had  time  to  refer  to  the  spiritualistic  literature  of  that 
day,  you  would  find  that  with  the  phenomenalists  as  with  the 
Christians,  Soul  and  Spirit  were  synonymous.  It  was  H.P.B., 
who,  acting  under  the  orders  of  Atrya  (one  whom  you  do  not 
know)  was  the  first  to  explain  in  the  Spiritualist  the  difference 
there  was  between  psyche  and  nous,  nefesh  and  ruach — Soul  and 
Spirit.  She  had  to  bring  the  whole  arsenal  of  proofs  with  her, 
quotations  from  Paul  and  Plato,  from  Plutarch  and  James,  etc. 
before  the  Spiritualists  admitted  that  the  theosophists  were  right. 
It  was  then  that  she  was  ordered  to  write  Isis — just  a  year  after 
the  Society  had  been  founded.  And,  as  there  happened  such  a 
war  over  it,   endless  polemics  and   objections   to  the  effect  that 


290  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

there  could  not  be  in  man  two  souls — we  thougfht  it  was  prema- 
ture to  give  the  public  more  than  they  could  possibly  assimilate, 
and  before  they  had  digested  the  "two  Souls"; — And  thus  the 
further  sub-division  of  the  trinity  into  7  principles  is  left  un- 
mentioned  in  Isis.  And  is  it  because  she  obeyed  our  orders,  and 
wrote,  purposely  veiling  some  of  her  facts — that  now,  when  wc 
think  the  time  has  arrived  to  give  most  of,  if  not  the  whole  truth 
— that  she  has  to  be  left  in  the  lurch?  Would  I,  or  any  of  us, 
ever  leave  her  as  a  target  for  the  Spiritualists  to  shoot  at,  and 
laugh  at  the  contradictions  when  these  were  entirely  apparent 
and  proceeded  but  from  their  own  ignorance  of  the  whole  truth  ; 
a  truth  they  would  not  listen  to,  nor  will  they  accept  it  even  now 
except  under  protest  and  with  the  greatest  reservations?  Cer- 
tainly not.  And  when  I  use  the  word  **  ingenuity  " — that  may 
be  an  American  slang  expression  for  all  I  know,  and  that  I 
suspect  has  with  the  English  another  meaning — I  meant  neither 
"  cunning  "  nor  anything  like  a  **  dodge,"  but  simply  to  show 
the  difficulty  I  had  to  labour  under,  to  explain  the  right  meaning 
with  an  endless  and  clumsy  paragraph  before  me,  that  insisted 
upon  non-reincarnation  without  inserting  one  word  in  it  to  show 
that  the  latter  had  reference  but  to  the  animal  soul,  not  Spirit,  to 
the  astral  not  the  Spiritual  monad. 

Will  you  kindly  explain  to  me  at  the  first  opportunity  what  you 
mean  by  referring  to  my  expression  as  "an  unhappy  phrase  "  ? 
If  you  asked  a  friend  to  draw  for  the  Pioneer  a  cow,  and  that 
friend  starting  with  the  intention  of  reproducing  a  cow  would 
owing  to  his  inability  in  drawing  sketch  instead  an  ox  or  a 
buffalo,  and  the  engraving  would  so  appear — perhaps,  because 
you  were  crowded  with  other  work,  and  had  no  time  to  perceive 
the  short-coming — would  you  not  "  exercise  your  ingenuity  "  and 
try  your  best  to  set  the  readers  right,  to  prove  to  them  that  in 
truth  a  cow  was  meant  by  the  artist  :  and  confessing  your  friend's 
inability,  do  whatever  you  could,  at  the  same  time,  to  screen  him 
from  unmerited  humiliation?  Yes,  you  are  right.  H.  has 
neither  delicacy  of  perception  and  feeling,  nor  any  real,  genuine 
kindness  of  heart.  He  is  one  to  sacrifice  his  own  family,  those 
nearest  and  dearest  to  him  (if  there  are  such  for  him,  something 
I  doubt) — for  any  whim  of  his  own ;  and  he  would  be  the  first  to 
allow  a  hecatomb  of  victims  if  he  needed  one  drop  of  blood  ;  to 
insist  upon  the  advisability  of  Sutee  if  it  were  the  only  thing  that 
would  keep  him  warm,  help  his  benumbed  fingers  to  do  their 
work,  and  he  diligently  writing  a  treatise  upon  some  philan- 
thropic subject  during  that  time  and  sing  sincerely  "  Hosanna  " 
to  himself  in  his  own  thought.  Exaggeration,  you  think?  Not 
so ;  for  you  have  no  conception  of  the  potential  selfishness  there  is 
in  him  ;  of  the  cruel,  remorseless  egotism  he  brought  back  with 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  291 

him  from  his  last  incarnation — a  selfishness  and  egotism  which 
remained  latent  only  owing-  to  the  uncongenial  soil  of  the  sphere 
he  is  in,  of  his  social  status  and  education — and  we  have.  Can 
you  believe  he  wrote  his  famous  article  in  the  Theosophist  simply 
for  the  reason  he  gives  you — to  help  breaking  the  unavoidable 
fall?  to  save  the  situation,  and  by  answering  Davidson  and 
C.C.M.,  etc.  to  make  the  work — of  answering  in  the  future  and 
reconciling  the  contradictions  in  the  past — easier?  Not  at  all. 
If,  he  sacrifices  in  it  remorselessly  H.P.B.,  and  the  author  of  the 
Review  of  the  "  Perfect  Way  "  and  shows  the  **  Brothers  "  as 
inferior  in  intelligence  to  the  **  educated  European  gentlemen  " 
and  devoid  of  any  correct  notions  about  honesty  or  right  and 
wrong — in  the  European  sense — selfish  and  cold,  stubborn  and 
domineering — it  is  not  at  all  because  he  cares  one  button  for 
either  of  you,  least  of  all  for  the  Society ;  but  simply  because — in 
view  of  certain  possible  events,  that  he  is  too  highly  intelligent 
not  to  have  fore-shadowed  in  his  mind — he  wants  to  screen  him- 
self; to  be  the  only  one  to  come  out  unscarred  if  not  immaculate 
in  case  of  a  crush,  and  to  dance,  if  need  be  **  the  death  dance  "  of 
the  Maccabreans  over  the  prostrate  body  of  the  T.S.  rather  than 
risk  one  little  finger  of  the  great  Simla  "  I  am  "  to  be  sneered  at. 
Knowing  him  as  we  do,  we  say  that  Mr.  Hume  is  at  perfect 
liberty  to  quote  the  "  unhappy  phrase  "  as  many  times  a  day  as 
his  breath  will  allow  him  to,  if  it  can  in  any  way  soothe  his 
ruffled  feelings.  And,  it  is  just  because  Morya  saw  through  him 
as  plainly  as  I  see  my  writing  before  me,  that  he  allowed  the 
"sell"  as  you  call  it.  Nay  more;  for  the  things  are  so  pre- 
pared, that  in  the  case  the  "  EcclecHc  *'  has  to  sink, — he  will  be 
the  only  one  to  go  down  with  it;  the  only  one  laughed  at,  and 
thus  his  selfishness  and  carefully  prepared  plans  will  prove  of  no 
avail.  Believing  he  knew  better  than  I  did,  he  was  kind  and 
considerate  enough  to  add  his  explanations  to  mine  in  H.P.B.'s 
answer  to  C.C.M. — and  with  the  exception  of  Karma — that  he 
explained  correctly  enough — made  a  mess  of  the  rest.  And  now, 
the  first  time  I  contradict  what  he  says  in  his  article,  he  will  turn 
round  in  a  fury  and  express  his  disgust  at  what  he  will  call  my 
(not  his)  contradictions.  I  am  sorry  to  have  to — what  will  appear 
to  you — denounce  him.  But  I  must  draw  your  attention  to  the 
fact,  that  nine  times  out  of  ten,  when  he  accuses  me  of  having 
entirely  misconceived  his  meaning  he  says  what  anyone  has  a 
right     to     regard     as    deliberate     falsehood.      The     instance     of 

E.  Levi's ^  is  a  good  instance.     In  order  to  prove  me  at 

fault,  he  had  to  become  an  Adwaitee  and  deny  his  **  moral 
Governor  and   Ruler  of  the   Universe,"  by  throwing  him   over- 

1  A  phrase  in  Hebrew  characters  appears  here  in  the  original,  which  trans- 
lated means  "  I  am  that  I  am." — Ed. 


292  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

board  "  for  the  last  20  years."  This  is  not  honest,  my  friend,  and 
I  do  not  see  any  help  for  it.  For  who  can  prove — when  he  says 
that  the  arguments  embodied  in  his  letters  to  me  were  not  the 
expression  of  his  own  personal  belief  and  opinions,  but  brought 
forward  simply  to  answer  the  probable  objections  of  a  theistic 
public — that  it  is  no  better  than  cheating?  With  such  an  intel- 
lectual acrobat,  ever  ready  to  perform  the  "  grand  trapeze  " 
whether  in  reference  to  what  he  states  verbally,  or — puts  on  paper 
even  we  have  to  appear  beaten.  For  the  latter  we  care  very  little 
personally.  But  then  he  is  ever  ready  to  crow  victory  in  his 
private  letters,  and  even  in  print.  He  is  willing  that  we  should 
exist — he  is  too  clever  to  risk  at  this  hour  being  caught  in  a  want 
of  sagacity,  since  he  knows  through  correspondents  who  are  dead 
against  the  *'  Founders"  of  the  actual  existence  of  our  Brother- 
hood— but,  he  will  never  submit  to  the  recognition  of  such  powers 
or  knowledge  in  us,  as  would  render  his  unasked  advice  and  inter- 
ference as  riduculous  as  they  are  useless ; — and  he  works  on  that 
line. 

I  had  no  right  to  suppress  the  **  offensive"  article — as  you  call 
it,  for  several  reasons.  Having  allowed  our  name  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  T.S.  and  ourselves  dragged  into  publicity,  we 
have  to  suffer  (the  verb,  a  simple  figure  of  speech  if  you  please) — 
as  Olcott  would  put  it  '*  the  penalty  of  our  greatness."  We  must 
permit  the  expression  of  every  opinion  whether  benevolent  or 
malevolent ;  to  feel  ourselves  picked  to  pieces — one  day ; 
"  preached  " — on  the  following, — worshipped  on  the  next;  and — 
trampled  down  in  the  mud — on  the  fourth.  Reason  No.  2 — the 
Chohan  has  so  ordained  it.  And  with  him  this  means  fresh  de- 
velopments, unexpected  results,  and  danger,  I  am  afraid.  The 
two  names  that  you  find  heading  the  signatures  of  the  12  chelas 
who  protest,  belong  to  the  confidential  chelas  of  the  Chohan  him- 
self. In  this  direction  there  is  no  more  hope  for  Mr.  Hume — 
consummatum  est.  He  has  overdone  the  thing,  and,  I  will  never 
have  any  more  opportunities  of  pronouncing  his  name  before  our 
venerable  chief.  On  the  other  hand,  the  denunciation  has  done 
good.  The  Chohan  gave  orders  that  the  young  Tyotirmoy — a 
lad  of  14,  the  son  of  Babu  Nobin  Banerjee  whom  you  know — 
should  be  accepted  as  a  pupil  in  one  of  our  lamaseries  near 
Chamto-Dong  about  100  miles  off  Tchigadze,  and  his  sister,  a 
virgin  Yoginn  of  18,  at  the  female  monastery  of  Palli.  Thus,  the 
Founders  will  have  two  witnesses  in  good  time,  and  will  not 
depend  upon  the  caprice  of  Mr.  Hume  to  kill  and  resurrect  us  at 
pleasure.  As  to  proving  whethe'  we  do,  or  do  not  know  more 
of  the  mysteries  of  nature  than  your  men  of  Science  and  your 
theologians  do,  it  rests  with  you  Jtnd  those  you  will  select  to  help 
you  in  the  important  task. 


I 


i 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  293 

I  hope  my  dear  friend  that  you  will  undertake  to  impress  upon 
Mr.  Hume  the  following  facts  : — Though  the  work  done  by  him 
for  the  Society  would  become  ultimately  most  important,  and 
although  it  might  have  borne  the  most  useful  fruits,  yet  his 
denunciatary  article  has  nigh  upset  the  labour  done  by  him. 
People  will  now  regard  him  more  than  ever  a  lunatic — Hindu 
members  will  blame  him  for  years,  and  our  chelas  can  never  be 
made  to  look  upon  him  but  in  the  light  of  a  iconoclast,  a  haughty 
intruder,  incapable  of  any  gratitude,  hence — unfit  to  be  one  of 
them.  This  you  must  give  out  as  your  personal  opinion.  Of 
course  not  unless  it  meets  your  own  views,  and  may  be  given  as 
the  expression  of  your  real  feelings  in  the  matter,  for  I,  personally 
am  ordered  not  to  break  with  him  until  the  day  of  the  crisis 
comes.  If  he  desires  to  retain  his  official  position  in  the  Eclectic, 
help  him  to  do  so.  If  not,  I  beg  you  most  urgently  to  accept  the 
position  of  President  yourself.  But  I  leave  all  this  to  your  tact 
and  discretion.  Let  him  also  know  that  the  Protest  of  the  Chelas 
is  no  work  of  ours,  but  the  result  of  a  positive  order  emanating 
from  the  Chohan.  The  protest  was  received  at  the  Headquarters, 
two  hours  before  the  postman  brought  the  famous  article,  and 
telegrams  were  received  from  several  chelas  in  India  on  the  same 
day.  Together  with  the  foot-note  sent  by  Djual  Khoul  to  be 
appended  to  W.  Oxley's  article  the  September  Number  is  calcu- 
lated to  create  a  certain  sensation  among  the  mystics  of  England 
and  America  not  only  among  our  Hindus.  The  "  Brothers  " 
question  is  kept  up  pretty  alive,  and  may  bear  its  fruit.  Mr. 
Hume's  graphic  pen  spurts  under  the  mask  of  philanthropy,  the 
bitterest  gall  assailing  us  with  the  weapon  which  for  being  repre- 
sented or  rather  imagined  as  lawful  and  legitimate,  and  used  for 
the  most  honest  of  purposes — wield  by  turns  ridicule  and  abuse. 
And,  yet  he  has  so  preserved  the  semblance  of  a  sincere  belief  in 
our  knowledge,  that  we  are  more  than  likely  to  be  thenceforth 
remembered  as  he  has  painted  us,  and  not  as  in  reality  we  are. 
What  I  once  said  of  him,  I  maintain.  He  may,  outwardly,  some- 
times sincerely  forgive,  he  can  never  forget.  He  is  that  which 
Johnson  is  said  to  have  much  admired,  **  a  good  hater." 

Oh,  my  friend,  with  all  your  faults,  and  your  rather  too  lively 
past,  how  much,  how  immeasureably  much  higher  you  stand  in 
our  sight  than  our  **  I  am,"  with  all  his  *'  high  splendid  mental 
capacity,"  and  outwardly  pathetic  nature  concealing  the  inward 
absence  of  anything  like  real  feeling  and  heart  ! 

M.  wants  me  to  tell  you  that  he  refuses  most  decidedly  to  take 
any  precaution  of  the  nature  you  suggest.  He  despises  H. 
thoroughly ;  yet  in  a  case  of  any  real  danger  would  be  the  first  to 
protect  him  for  the  pains  and  labour  given  by  him  for  the  T.S. 
He  savs  that  in  case  H.  comes  to  know  of  his  ridiculous  blunder. 


294  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

he  will  be  ready  to  prove  to  others  the  existence  of  occult  powers, 
but  will  not  leave  H.  one  leg-  to  stand  upon.  His  punishment 
must  be  allowed  to  be  complete  or  else  it  will  have  no  effect  upon 
him,  and  he  will  only  retaliate  upon  innocent  victims.  H.  has 
shewn  us  to  the  world  as  dishonest  and  lying,  before  he  ever  had 
one  single,  undeniable  proof  that  we  were  that,  and  that  he  was 
justified  in  his  denunciations  by  even  an  appearance,  a  semblance 
of  dishonesty.  If  H.  chooses  to-morrow  to  represent  us  as 
murderers  M.  will  try  to  raise  a  maya  to  make  the  words  good, 
and  then  destroy  it,  and  show  him  a  caluminator.  I  am  afraid 
he  is  right  from  the  standpoint  of  our  rules  and  customs.  They 
are  anti-European,  I  confess.  With  the  exception  of  the  telegram, 
M.  never  wrote  Fern  but  one  letter,  the  five  or  six  other  letters  in 
his  handwriting  emanating  from  the  Dugpas  who  has  charge  of 
Fern.  He  hopes  that  you  will  not  spoil  his  work,  and  that  you 
will  ever  remain  a  loyal  and  true  friend  to  him,  as  he  will  be  one 
to  you.  Fern  will  never  repeat  any  experiment  a  la  napkin  for 
the  simple  reason  that  he  will  be  trusted  with  no  more  letters. 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  Colonel  Chesney  and  will  answer 
it  in  a  few  days  with  a  young  chela  who  will  deliver  it  to  your] 
care  with  my  respectful  greeting.     Do  not  frighten  the  boy.     Hel 
is  ordered  to  answer  all  the  questions  he  can  answer  but  no  more. 
From  Simla  he  will  proceed  to  Budda  Guya  and  Bombay,  on  busi- 
ness, and  will  be  back  home  about  November. 

With  sincere  friendship, 

Yours, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LHI 
Strictly  private  and  confidential 

My  patient — friend  : — Yesterday,  I  had  a  short  note  posted  to 
you,  and  it  accompanied  a  long  letter  to  Hume — I  had  it  regis- 
tered somewhere  in  Central  P.  by  a  happy,  free  friend  ;  to-day,  it 
is  a  long  letter  to  yourself,  and  it  is  intended  to  be  accompanied 
by  a  tolling  of  jeremiades,  a  doleful  story  of  a  discomfiture,  which 
may,  or  may  not  make  you  laugh  as  it  does  that  bulky  brother  of 
mine — but  which  makes  me  feel  like  the  poet  :  who  could  not 
sleep  aright, 

"  For  his  soul  kept  up  too  much  light 
Under  his  eyelids  for  the  night." 

I  hear  you  uttering  under  breath  :  "  Now  what  in  the  world  does 
he  mean!"  Patience,  my  best  Anglo-Indian  friend,  patience; 
and    when   you   have   heard    of   the   disreputable   conduct   of  my 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  295  - 

wicked,  more  than  ever  laughing-  Brother,  you  will  plainly  see, 
why,  I  come  to  regret,  that  instead  of  tasting  in  Europe,  of  the 
fruit  of  the  Tree  of  the  Knowledge  of  good  and  evil — I  have  not 
remained  in  Asia,  in  all  the  sancto  simplicitas  of  ignorance  of 
your  ways  and  manners  for  then — I  would  be  now  grinning  too  ! 

I  wonder  what  you  will  say  when  you  will  have  learned  the 
dreadful  secret  !  I  long  to  know  it,  to  be  delivered  of  a  night- 
mare. Were  you  to  meet  me  now,  for  the  first  time  in  the 
shadowy  alleys  of  your  Simla,  and  demanded  of  me  the  whole 
truth,  you  would  hear  me  tell  it  to  you,  most  unfavourable  for 
myself.  My  answer  to  you,  would  remind  the  world — if  you  were 
cruel  enough  to  repeat  it — of  the  famous  answer  given  by  Warren 
Hastings  to  "  dog  Jennings  "  on  his  first  meeting  with  the  ex- 
governor  after  his  return  from  India  !  "  My  dear  Hastings  " — 
asked  Jennings — "  is  it  possible  you  are  the  great  rascal  Burke 
says,  and  the  whole  world  is  inclined  to  believe?  " — **  I  can 
assure  you,  Jennings,"  was  the  sad  and  mild  reply,  "  that  though 
sometimes  obliged  to  appear  rascal  for  the  company,  I  was  never 
one  for  myself."  I  am  the  W.H.  for  the  sins  of  the  Brotherhood. 
But  to  facts. 

Of  course  you  know — the  *  O.L.  '  told  you  I  think — that  when 
we  take  candidates  for  chelas,  they  take  the  vow  of  secrecy  and 
silence  respecting  every  order  they  may  receive.  One  has  to 
prove  himself  fit  for  chelaship,  before  he  can  find  out  whether  he  is 
fit  for  adeptship.  Fern  is  under  such  a  probation ;  and  a  nice  mess 
they  have  prepared  for  me  between  them  two  !  As  you  already 
know  from  my  letter  to  Hume,  he  did  not  interest  me,  I  knew 
nothing  of  him,  beyond  his  remarkable  faculties,  his  powers  for 
clariaudience  and  clairvoyance,  and  his  still  more  remarkable 
tenacity  of  purpose,  strong  will,  and  other  etcs.  A  loose,  immoral 
character  for  years, — a  tavern  Pericles  with  a  sweet  smile  for 
every  street  Aspasia,  he  had  entirely  and  suddenly  reformed  after 
joining  the  Theosoph  :  Society,  and  **  M."  took  him  seriously  in 
hand.  It  is  no  business  of  mine  to  tell  even  yourself  how  much 
of  his  visions  is  truth  and  how  much  hallucination,  or  even  per- 
chance— fiction.  That  he  bamboozled  our  friend  Hume  consider- 
ably must  be  so  since  Mr.  Hume  tells  me  the  most  marvellous 
yarns  of  him.  But  the  worst  of  all  this  business  is  the  following. 
He  bamboozled  him  so  well,  indeed,  that  whereas  H.  did  not 
believe  one  word  when  Fern  was  speaking  the  truth,  nearly  every 
lie  uttered  by  F.  was  accepted  by  our  respected  Pres.  of  the 
Eclectic — as  gospel  truth. 

Now  you  will  readily  understand,  that  it  is  impossible  for  me 
to  try  and  set  him  (H)  right,  since  F.  is  M.'s  chela  and  that  I 
have  no  right  whatever — either  legal,  or  social,  according  to  our 
code — to  interfere  between  the  two.     Of  the  several  grievances, 


296  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

however,  it  is  the  smallest.  Another  of  our  customs,  when  cor- 
responding- with  the  outside  world,  is  to  entrust  a  chela  with  the 
task  of  delivering  the  letter  or  any  other  message ;  and  if  not 
absolutely  necessary — to  never  give  it  a  thought.  Very  often  our 
very  letters — unless  something  very  important  and  secret — are 
WTitten  in  our  handwritings  by  our  chelas.  Thus,  last  year,  some 
of  my  letters  to  you  were  precipitated,  and  when  sweet  and  easy 
precipitation  was  stopped — well  I  had  but  to  compose  my  mind, 
assume  an  easy  position,  and — think,  and  my  faithful  *'  Disin- 
herited "  had  but  to  copy  my  thoughts,  making  only  occasionally 
a  blunder.  Ah,  my  friend,  I  had  an  easy  life  of  it  unto  the  very 
day  when  the  Eclectic  sprung  into  its  checkered  existence.  .  .  . 
Anyhow,  this  year,  for  reasons  we  need  not  mention,  I  have  to 
do  my  own  work — the  whole  of  it,  and  I  have  a  hard  time  of  it 
sometimes,  and  get  impatient  over  it.  As  Jean  Paul  Richter  says 
somewhere,  the  most  painful  part  of  our  bodily  pain  is  that  which 
is  bodiless  or  immaterial,  namely  our  impatience,  and  the  delusion 
that  it  will  last  for  ever.  .  .  .  Having  one  day  permitted  my- 
self to  act  as  though  I  were  labouring  under  such  a  delusion,  in 
the  innocence  of  my  unsophisticated  soul,  I  trusted  the  sacredness 
of  my  correspondence  into  the  hands  of  that  alter  ego  of  mine, 
the  wicked  and  **  imperious  "  chap,  your  "  Illustrious,"  who  took 
undue  advantage  of  my  confidence  in  him  and — placed  me  in  the 
position  I  am  now  in  !  The  wretch  laughs  since  yesterday,  and 
to  confess  the  truth  I  feel  inclined  to  do  the  same.  But  as  an 
Englishman,  I  am  afraid  you  will  be  terror-struck  at  the 
enormity  of  his  crime.  You  know,  that  notwithstanding  his  faults 
Mr.  Hume  is  absolutely  necessary,  so  far,  to  the  T.S.  I  grow 
sometimes  very  irritated  at  his  petty  feelings  and  spirit  of  vin- 
dictiveness ;  yet  withal,  I  have  to  put  up  with  his  weaknesses, 
which  lead  him  at  one  moment  to  vex  himself  that  it  is  not  yet — 
and  at  another  that  it  is  already  mid-day.  But  our  "  Illustrious  " 
is  not  precisely  of  that  opinion.  Mr.  Hume's  pride  and  self- 
opinion — he  argues — wish  as  our  saying  goes — that  all  mankind 
had  only  two  bent  knees,  to  make  puja  to  him ;  and  he  M.  is  not 
going  to  humour  him.  He  will  do  nothing,  of  course,  to  harm  or 
even  to  vex  him  purposely ;  on  the  contrary,  he  means  to  always 
protect  him  as  he  has  done  until  now ;  but — he  will  not  lift  his 
little  finger  to  disabuse  him. 

The  substance  and  pith  of  his  argument  are  summed  up  in  the 
following  : 

"  Hume  laughed  and  chuckled  at  real,  genuine  phenomena  (the 
production  of  which  have  brought  us  well  nigh  into  the  Chohan's 
disgrace) — only  and  solely  because  the  manifestations  were  not 
sketched  by  himself,  nor  were  they  produced  in  his  honour  or  for 
his  sole  benefit.  And  now  let  him  feel  happy  and  proud  over 
mysterious  manifestations  of  his  own  making  and  creation.     Let 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  297 

him  taunt  Sinnett  in  the  depths  of  his  own  proud  heart,  and  even 
by  throwing-  out  hints  to  others — that  even  he,  Sinnett,  was  hardly 
so  favoured.  No  one  has  ever  attempted  a  deliberate  deception. 
Nor  would  anyone  be  permitted  to  attempt  anything  of  the  sort. 
Everything  was  made  to  follow  its  natural,  orderly  course.  Fern 
is  in  the  hands  of  two  clever  '  dwellers  of  the  threshold  '  as 
Bulwer  would  call  them — two  dugpas  kept  by  us  to  do  our 
scavengers'  work,  and  to  draw  out  the  latent  vices — if  there  be 
any — from  the  candidates ;  and  Fern  has  shown  himself  on  the 
whole  far  better  and  more  moral  than  he  was  supposed  to  be. 
Fern  has  done  but  what  he  was  ordered  to  do ;  and  he  holds  his 
tongue  because  it  is  his  first  duty.  As  to  his  posing  with  Hume 
and  attitudinizing  before  himself  and  others  as  a  seer,  since  he 
has  brought  himself  to  believe  it,  and  that  it  is  but  certain  details 
that  can  be  really  called  a  fiction,  or  to  put  it  less  mildly  fibs — 
there  is  no  real  harm  done  but  to  himself.  Hume's  jealousy  and 
pride  will  ever  be  in  the  way,  to  prevent  him  swallowing  truth  as 
much  as  ornamental  fiction;  and  Sinnett  is  shrewd  enough  to  sift 
very  easily  Fern's  realities  and  dreams.  .  .  .  Why  then, 
should  I,  or  you  or  any  one  else  "  concludes  M.  "  offer  advice  to 
one  who  is  sure  not  to  accept  it,  or,  which  will  be  still  worse,  in 
case  he  learns  for  a  certainty  that  he  has  been  permitted  to  make 
a  fool  of  himself — is  still  more  sure  to  become  an  irreconciliable 
enemy  to  the  Society,  the  Cause,  the  much  suffering  Founders  and 
all.  Let  him,  then,  strictly  alone.  .  .  .  He  will  not  be 
thankful  for  undeceiving  him.  On  the  contrary.  He  will  forget 
that  no  one  is  to  be  blamed  but  himself;  that  no  one  had  ever 
whispered  him  one  word  that  could  have  led  him  into  his  extra 
delusions ;  but  will  turn  more  fiercely  than  ever  on  those  chaps — 
the  adepts  and  he  will  call  them  publicly  impostors,  Jesuits  and 
pretenders.  You  (I)  gave  him  one  genuine  pucka  phenomenon — 
and  that  ought  to  satisfy  him  as  to  the  possibility  of  everything 
else." 

Such  is  M. 's  reasoning;  and  were  I  not  indirectly  mixed  in  the 
quiproquo — it  would  be  also  mine.  But  now,  owing  to  the 
plants  of  that  little  double-dealing  monkey — Fern,  I  am  com- 
pelled to  disturb  you  for  a  friendly  advice,  since  our  ways  are  not 
your  ways — and  vice  versa. 

But  now  see  what  happened.  Hume  has  lately  received  a  good 
many  letters  from  me ;  and  I  hope  you  will  kindly  follow  with  me 
the  fate  and  various  fortunes  of  three  of  them,  ever  since  he  began 
to  receive  them  in  a  direct  way.  Try  also,  to  well  understand 
the  situation  and  to  thus  realize  my  position.  Since  we  had 
three  chelas  at  Simla, — two  regular  ones  and  one  an  irregular 
one — the  candidate  Fern,  I  conceived  the  unfortunate  idea  of 
saving  power,  of  economizing,  as  though  I  had  a  **  Savings 
bank."  To  tell  truth,  I  sought  to  separate  as  much  as  it  was 
possible  under  the  circumstances,  the  suspected  **  Headquarters  " 
from  every  phenomenon  produced  at  Simla ;  hence  from  the  cor- 
respondence that  passed  between  Mr.  Hume  and  myself.     Unless 


298  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

H.P.B.,  Damodar,  and  Deb — were  entirely  disconnected,  there 
was  no  saying-  what  might,  or  might  not,  happen.  The  first 
letter — the  one  found  in  the  conservatory  I  gave  to  M.  to  have 
it  left  at  Mr.  H.'s  house  by  one  of  the  two  regular  chelas.  He 
gave  it  to  Subba  Row — for  he  had  to  see  him  on  that  day ;  S.  R. 
passed  it  in  the  ordinary  way  (posted  it)  to  Fern,  with  instructions 
to  either  leave  it  at  Mr.  Hume's  house,  or  to  send  it  to  him 
through  post,  in  case  he  were  afraid  that  Mr.  H.  should  ask  him 
— since  Fern  could  not,  had  not  the  right  to  answer  him 
and  thus  would  be  led  to  telling  an  untruth.  Several  times  D.Kh. 
had  tried  to  penetrate  into  Rothney  Castle,  but  suffered  each  time 
so  acutely,  that  I  told  him  to  give  it  up.  (He  is  preparing  for 
initiation  and  might  easily  fail  as  a  consequence).  Well,  Fern 
did  not  post  it  but  sent  a  friend — his  dugpa  to  leave  it  at  the 
house  and  the  latter  placed  it  in  the  conservatory  about  2  a.m. 
This  was  half  of  a  phenomenon  but  H.  took  it  for  an  entire  thing, 
and  got  very  mad  when  M.  refused  as  he  thought  to  take  up  his 
answer  in  the  same  way.  Then  I  wrote  to  console  him,  and  told 
him  as  plainly  as  I  could  say,  without  breaking  M.'s  confidence 
in  relation  to  Fern  that  D.K.  could  do  nothing  for  him,  at 
present,  and  that  it  was  one  of  Morya's  chelas,  that  had  placed 
the  letter  there,  etc.,  etc.  I  believe  the  hint  was  quite  broad 
enough  and  no  deception  practiced?  The  second  letter,  I  think, 
was  thrown  on  his  table  by  Dj.  Khool  (the  real  spelling  of  whose 
name  is  Gjual,  but  not  so  phonetically)  and,  as  it  was  done  by 
himself  it  was  a  pucka  orthodox  phenomenon  and  Hume  has  no 
need  to  complain.  Several  were  sent  to  him  in  various  ways — 
and  he  may  be  sure  of  one  thing  :  however  ordinary  the  means 
by  which  the  letters  reached  him,  they  could  not  be  but  phe- 
nomenal in  reaching  India  from  Tibet.  But  this  does  not  seem 
to  be  taken  into  any  consideration  by  him.  And  now  we  come 
to  the  really  bad  part  of  it,  a  part  for  which  I  blame  entirely  M. — 
for  permitting  it  and  exonerate  Fern,  7vho  could  not  help  it. 

Of  course  you  understand  that  I  write  you  this  in  strict  con- 
fidence relying  upon  your  honour  that  whatever  happens  you  will 
not  betray  Fern.  Indeed  (and  I  have  looked  most  attentively  into 
the  thing)  the  boy  was  led  to  become  guilty  of  a  deliberate, 
Jesuitical  deception  rather  through  Hume's  constant  insults, 
suspicious  attitude  and  deliberate  slights  at  meals,  and  during 
the  hours  of  work,  than  from  any  motive  in  consequence  of  his 
loose  notions  of  morals.  Then  M.'s  letters  (the  production  of  the 
amiable  dug-pa,  in  reality  e%-dugpa,  whose  past  sins  will  never 
permit  him  to  fully  atone  for  his  misdeeds)  distinctly  say  : — *'  do, 
either  so  and  so,  or  in  such  a  way  ";  they  tempt  him,  and  lead 
him  to  imagine  that  in  doing  no  injury  to  any  human  being  and 
when  the  motive  is  good  every  action  becomes  legal  !  !     /  was 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  299 

thus  tempted  in  my  youth,  and  had  nearly  succumbed  twice  to  the 
temptation,  but  was  saved  by  my  uncle  from  falling  into  the 
monstrous  snare,  and  so  was  the  Illustrious — who  is  a  pucka 
orthodox  Occultist  and  holds  religiously  to  the  old  traditions  and 
methods ;  and  so  would  be  any  one  of  you  had  I  consented  to 
accept  you  for  chelas.  But  as  I  was  aware  from  the  first,  of 
what  you  have  confessed  to,  in  a  letter  to  H.P.B.,  namely  that 
there  was  something  supremely  revolting  to  the  better  class  of 
European  minds  in  that  idea  of  being  tested,  of  being  under  pro- 
bation— I  therefore  had  always  avoided  the  acceptance  of  Mr. 
Hume's  often  expressed  offer  to  become  a  chela.  This  may,  per- 
haps, give  you  the  key  to  the  whole  situation.  However  this  is 
what  happened.  Fern  had  received  a  letter  of  mine  through  a 
chela,  with  the  injunction  of  causing  it  to  reach  its  destination 
immediately.  They  were  going  to  take  breakfast,  and  there  was 
no  time  to  lose.  Fern  had  thrown  the  letter  on  a  table  and  ought 
to  have  left  it  there,  since  there  would  have  been  no  occasion  for 
him  then,  to  lie.  But  he  was  vexed  with  H.,  and  he  devised 
another  dodge.  He  placed  the  letter  in  the  folds  of  Mr.  H.'s 
napkin,  who  at  breakfast  took  it  up  and  accidentally  shook  out 
the  letter  on  to  the  floor ;  it  appears,  to  the  terrible  fright  of 
**  Moggy  "  and  the  contented  surprise  of  Hume.  But,  his  old 
suspicion  returning  to  him,  (a  suspicion  he  had  always  harboured 
since  I  wrote  to  him  that  my  first  letter  was  brought  into  the 
conservatory  by  one  of  M.'s  chelas,  and  that  my  chela  could  do 
little,  though  he  had  visited  invisibly  every  part  of  the  house 
before) — Hume  looks  at  Fern  full  and  asks  him — whether  it  was 
he  who  had  placed  it  there.  Now  I  have  the  entire  picture  be- 
fore me  of  F.'s  brain  at  that  moment.  There's  the  rapid  flash 
in  it — *'  this  saves  me  .  .  .  for  I  can  swear  I  never  put  it 
there  *'  (meaning  the  spot  on  the  floor — where  it  had  fallen) — No 
— he  boldly  answers. — **  I  have  never  put  it  there  " — he  adds 
mentally.  Then  a  vision  of  M.  and  a  feeling  of  intense  satis- 
faction and  relief  for  not  having  been  guilty  of  a  direct  lie.  Con- 
fused pictures  of  some  Jesuits  he  had  known, — of  his  little  child — 
a  disconnected  thought  of  his  room  and  beams  in  Mr.  H.'s 
garden,  etc. — not  a  thought  of  5 e //-deception  !  Truly  then ;  our 
friend  was  taken  in  but  once,  but  I  would  pay  any  price  could  I 
but  recall  the  event  and  replace  my  letter  with  somebody  else's 
message.  But  you  see  how  /  am  situated.  M.  tells  me  he  gives 
me  carte  blanche  to  tell  anything  I  like  to  you,  he  will  not  have 
me  say  a  word  to  Hume ;  nor  would  he  ever  forgive  you — he  says, 
were  you  to  interfere  between  the  punishment  of  Hume's  pride, 
and — fate.  Fern  is  not  really  to  be  blamed,  for  thinking  that  so 
long  as  the  result  is  accomplished  the  details  are  of  no  account, 
since  he  was  brought  at  such  a  school,  and  that  he  really  has  the 


300  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

welfare  of  the  Cause  at  heart,  whereas,  with  Hume — it  is  really 
bona  fide  Selfishness,  egotism — the  chief  and  only  motive  power. 
'*  Egotistic  philanthropist  "  is  a  word  which  paints  his  portrait 
at  full  length. 

Now  for  Col.  Chesney.  Since  he  really  and  sincerely  was  kind 
enough,  it  appears,  to  discern  something  in  the  outlines  of  your 
poor,  humble  friend's  face;  an  impression  drawn,  most  probably, 
from  the  depths  of  his  imagination  rather  than  from  any  real 
presence  of  such  an  expression  as  you  say,  in  Dj.  Khool's  or  M.*s 
production — the  former  felt  quite  proud  and  begged  my  permis- 
sion to  precipitate  another  such  likeness,  for  Col.  Chesney.  Of 
course,  the  permission  was  granted,  though  I  laughed  at  the  idea, 
and  M.  told  D.K.  that  the  Col.  would  also  laugh  at  what  he 
will  suspect  as  my  conceit.  But  D.K.  would  try  and  then  went 
and  begged  permission  to  present  it  himself  to  Col.  Chesney ;  a 
permission  which  was,  as  a  matter  of  course,  refused  by  the 
Chohan  and  he  himself  reprimanded.  But  the  picture  was  ready 
three  minutes  after  I  had  consented  to  it,  and  D.K.  seemed 
enormously  proud  of  it.  He  says — and  he  is  right,  I  think,  that 
this  likeness  is  the  best  of  the  three.  Well,  it  went  the  usual 
way,  via  Djual  Khool,  Deb  and  Fern — the  H.P.B.  and  Damodar 
being  both  at  Poona  at  that  time.  M.  was  training  and  testing 
Fern  for  a  phenomenon — of  course  a  genuine  one — so  that  a 
pucka  manifestation  could  be  produced  in  Col.  Chesney's  house 
by  Fern ;  but,  while  Fern  swore  he  needed  but  three  months' 
preparation,  M.  knew  he  would  never  be  ready  for  this  season — 
nor  do  I  think  he  will  be  ready  next  year.  Anyhow,  he  entrusted 
the  new  picture  to  Fern,  telling  him  again  to  better  send  it  by 
post,  for  were  the  Colonel  to  ever  learn  that  Fern  was  concerned 
in  it,  he  would  disbelieve  even  in  its  precipitated  production.  But 
D.K.  wanted  it  delivered  immediately  and  while  the  Col.  as  he 
said — **  had  Master  hot  in  his  head  still  " — and  Fern,  the  con- 
ceited young  fool  answers — "No;  before  I  do  anything  in  con- 
nection with  the  '  packet  '  I  must  study  him  (Col.  Chesney)  more 
fully  (  !  !)  I  want,  this  time,  to  obtain  the  highest  possible  re- 
sults at  the  first  onset.  From  what  I  have  seen  of  the  author  of 
the  *  Battle  of  Dorkin  '  I  have  not  been  able  to  satisfy  myself 
about  him.  .  .  .  Father  told  me  to  be  his  '  eyes  '  and  '  ears  * 
— he  not  having  always  the  time — I  must  find  out  the  character 
we  have  to  deal  with  I  !  " 

In  the  interval,  I,  fearing  that  Master  Fern  may,  perhaps, 
place  the  portrait  in  the  folds  of  Col.  Chesney's  "  napkin,"  and 
produce  some  "spiritual  manifestation  with  his  foot" — I  wrote 
to  you  from  Poona  through  Damodar,  giving  you  a  very  broad 
hint  I  believe,  which,  of  course,  you  did  not  understand  but  will 
now.     Meanwhile,   yester  morning  D.K.   came  and  told  me  that 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  301 

Fern  still  had  his  picture  and  that  he  feared  that  some  trick  had 
or  would  be  played.  Then  I  immediately  aroused  my  too  indif- 
ferent Brother  from  his  apathy.  I  showed  to  him  how  dangerous 
was  the  situation  left  in  the  unscrupulous  hands  of  a  boy,  whose 
sense  of  morality  was  still  more  blunted,  by  the  **  probation  " 
tests  and  deceit  which  he  regarded  nigh  as  legal  and  permissible 
and — aroused  him  finally  into  action.  A  telegram  was  sent  to  Fern 
in  M.'s  own  handwriting,  this  time,  from  the  Central  Provinces 
— (Bussawla,  I  believe — where  lives  a  chela)  ordering  Fern  to 
send  on  immediately  the  packet  he  had  for  the  Colonel  to  his 
address  by  post — and  Fern,  as  I  see  received  it,  yesterday,  in  the 
forenoon  by  our  time  (Tuesday,  22).  And  thus  when  you  hear  of 
it,  you  will  know  the  whole  truth. 

I  have  strictly  forbidden  my  letters  or  anything  connected 
with  my  business  to  ever  be  given  to  Fern.  Thus  Mr.  H.  and 
yourself  or  anyone  else  at  Simla  may  take  my  word  of  honour 
that  Fern  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  my  business.  But 
my  dearest  friend,  you  must  promise  me  faithfully,  and  for  my 
sake,  never  to  breathe  one  word  of  what  I  told  you  to  anyone — 
least  of  all  to  Hume  or  Fern ;  unless  Fern  forces  you  by  his  fibs 
to  stop  him,  in  which  case  you  may  use  what  you  think  proper 
of  it,  to  force  him  to  shut  up,  yet,  without  ever  allowing  him  to 
know  how  and  from  whom  you  have  learnt  it.  Apart  from  this, 
use  of  the  knowledge,  at  your  discretion.  Read  my  letter,  regis- 
tered and  sent  to  your  name  from  Bussawla  yesterday — or  rather 
my  letter  to  Hume  carefully  and  think  well  over  before  sending  it 
to  him ;  for  this  letter  may  provoke  him  to  a  fit  of  madness  and 
hurt  pride  and  make  him  quit 'the  Society  at  once.  Better  keep 
it,  as  means  for  future  emergency  to  prove  to  him  that  at  least, 
I,  am  one,  who  will  not  permit  even  my  enemies  to  be  won  over 
by  unfair  means.  At  least,  I  so  regard  the  means  that  Mr.  Fern 
seems  but  too  ready  to  use.  But  above  all,  good  and  faithful 
friend,  do  not  allow  your  self  to  misconceive  the  real  position  of 
our  Great  Brotherhood.  Dark  and  tortuous  as  may  seem  to  your 
Western  mind  the  paths  trodden,  and  the  ways  by  which  our 
candidates  are  brought  to  the  great  Light — you  will  be  the  first 
to  approve  of  them  when  you  know  all.  Do  not  judge  on  appear- 
ances— for  you  may  thereby  do  a  great  wrong  and  lose  your  own 
personal  chances  to  learn  more.  Only  be  vigilant  and — watch. 
If  Mr.  Hume  but  consents  to  wait  he  will  have  more,  and  far 
more  extraordinary  phenomena  to  silence  the  critics  than  he 
hitherto  had.  Exercise  your  influence  with  him.  Remember  in 
November  comes  the  great  crisis,  and  September  will  be  full  of 
dangers.  Save  at  least  our  personal  relations  from  the  wreck. 
Fern  is  the  queerest  psychological  subject  I  have  ever  met.  The 
pearl  is  inside,   and  truly  profoundly  hidden  by  the  unattractive 

21 


302  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

oyster-shell.  We  cannot  break  it  at  once ;  nor  can  we  afford  to 
lose  such  subjects.  While  protecting  yourself — protect  him  from 
Hume.  Generally  I  never  trust  a  woman,  any  more  than  I  would 
an  echo ;  both  are  of  the  female  gender  because  the  goddess  Echo 
like  woman — will  always  have  the  last  word.  But  with  your  lady 
it  is  otherwise,  and  I  firmly  believe  that  you  can  trust  her  with 
the  above — if  you  think  proper.  But  beware  of  poor  Mrs. 
Gordon.  An  excellent  lady  but  would  talk  Death  herself  to  death. 
And  now  I  have  done. 

Yours  ever  faithfully, 

K.  H. 

Please  do  not  regard  it  as  a  compliment — but  believe  me  when 
I  say  that  your  two  letters  and  especially  *'  The  Evolution  of 
Man  "  is  simply  superb.  Do  not  fear  any  contradictions  or  incon- 
sistencies. 

I  say  again — make  notes  of  them  and  send  them  to  me — & — 
you  will  see. 

1  pray  you,  kind  sir,  to  lock  the  foolish  letter  sent  on  yesterday 
to  Hume-Sahib  into  your  trunk  and  leave  it  there  to  roost  until 
in  demand.  I  tell  you  it  will  create  mischief  and  no  better. 
K.H.  is  too  sensitive  by  far — he  is  becoming  in  your  Western 
Society  a  regular  Miss. 

Yours, 

M. 


LETTER  No.  LIV 

Received  Simla,  October,   1882. 

My  dear  friend  : — the  deposition  and  abdication  of  our  great 
**  I  am  **  is  one  of  the  most  agreeable  events  of  the  season  for 
your  humble  servant.  Mea  culpa! — I  exclaim,  and  willingly 
place  my  guilty  head  under  a  shower  of  ashes — from  the  Simla 
cigars  if  you  like — for  it  was  my  doing  !  Some  good  has  come 
of  it  in  the  shape  of  excellent  literary  work — (though,  indeed,  I 
prefer  your  style) — for  the  Parent  body,  but  none  whatever  for 
the  hapless  "  Eclectic."  What  has  he  done  for  it?  He  com- 
plains in  a  letter  to  Shishir  Koomar  Gosh  (of  the  A.B.  Patrika) 
that  owing  to  his  (?)  Hume's  incessant  efforts,  he  had  nearly 
*'  converted  Chesney  to  Theosophy  "  when  the  great  anti- 
Christian  spirit  of  the  Theosophist  threw  the  Colonel  violently 
back.  This  is  what  we  may  call — tampering  with  historical  facts. 
I  send  you  his  last  letter  to  me,  in  which  you  will  find  him 
entirely  under  the  influence  of  his  new  guru — **  the  good  Vedantic 
Swami  "  (who  offers  to  teach  him  the  Adwaita  philosophy  with  a 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  303 

god  in  it  by  way  of  improvement) — and  of  the  Sandaram  Spirit. 
His  argument  is,  as  you  will  find,  that  with  the  '*  good  old 
Swami  "  he  will  at  any  rate  learn  something,  while  with  us,  it  is 
impossible  for  him  to  "ever  learn  anything."  I — **  never  gave 
him  the  assurance  that  all  the  letters  were  not  evolved  out  of  the 
Old  Lady's  fertile  brain."  Even  now,  he  adds,  when  he  has 
obtained  subjective  certainty,  that  we  are  distinct  entities  from 
Mad.  B — '*  I  cannot  tell  what  you  are — you  might  be  Djual  Kul, 
or  a  spirit  of  the  high  Eastern  plane  " — etc.  in  like  strain.  In 
the  letter  enclosed  he  says — we  "  may  be  tantrikists  "  (better 
ascertain  the  value  of  the  compliment  paid) — and,  he  is  preparing, 
nay — all  prepared — to  plunge  from  extreme  Ad'waitism  into 
transcendental  theism,  once  more.  Amen.  I  hand  him  over  to 
the  Salvation  Army. 

I  would  not  like  to  see  him  sever  his  connection  with  the 
Society  altogether,  though ;  first  for  his  intrinsic  literary  worth, 
and  then — because  you  would  be  sure  to  have  an  indefatigable 
though  a  secret  enemy,  who  would  pass  his  time  in  writing  out 
his  ink  dry  against  theosophy,  denouncing  all  and  everyone  in 
the  Society  to  all  and  everyone  outside  of  it,  and  making  himself 
disagreeable  in  a  thousand  ways.  As  I  once  said  before,  he  may 
seem  to  forgive,  and  he  is  just  the  man  to  bamboozle  himself 
before  his  own  reflection  in  the  looking-glass  into  magnanimous 
forgiveness,  but  in  reality  he  neither  forgives  nor  ever  forgets.  It 
was  pleasant  news  for  M.  and  all  of  us  to  hear  how  unanimously 
and  quietly  you  were  elected  President,  and  we  all — *'  masters  " 
and  chelas — greet  fraternally  and  warmly  your  ascension  to  the 
office ;  an  accomplished  fact  which  reconciles  us  even  with  the  sad 
and  humiliating  tidings  that  Mr.  Hume  expressed  his  utter  indif- 
ference to  chelas  and  even  to  their  masters,  adding  that  he  cared 
very  little  to  meet  either.  But  enough  of  him  who  may  be  better 
described  in  the  words  of  the  Tibetan  proverb  : 

"  .  .  .  Like  the  bird  of  night  :  by  day  a  graceful  cat,  in 
darkness  an  ugly  rat." 

One  word  of  advice — an  earnest  warning  from  both  of  us  : 
trust  not  little  Fern — beware  of  him.  His  placid  serenity  and 
smiles  when  talking  to  you  of  the  **  mild  scolding  tempered  with 
mercy,"  and  that  it  is  better  to  be  scolded  than  cast  off — are  all 
assumed.  His  letter  of  penitence  and  remorse  to  M — which  he 
sends  you  to  keep — is  not  sincere.  If  you  do  not  watch  him 
closely,  he  will  mix  the  cards  for  you  in  a  way  that  may  lead  the 
Society  to  ruin,  for  he  swore  a  great  oath  to  himself  that  the 
Society  will  either  fall  or  rise  with  himself.  If  he  fails  next  year 
again — and  with  all  his  great  gifts,  how  can  such  an  incurable 
little  Jesuit  and  liar  help  failing? — he  will  do  his  best  to  pull  down 
the  Society  with  him — as  regards  belief  in  the  "  Brothers  "   at 


304  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

least.  Try  to  save  him,  if  possible,  my  dearest  friend ;  do  your 
best  to  convert  him  to  truth  and  unselfishness.  It  is  real  pity  that 
such  gifts  should  be  drowned  in  a  mire  of  vice — so  strongly 
engrafted  upon  him  by  his  early  tutors.  Meanwhile,  beware  of 
ever  allowing  him  to  see  any  of  my  letters. 

And  now  to  C.  C.  Massey  and  your  letters.  Both  answer  and 
your  reply  are  excellent.  Doubless  a  more  sincere,  truthful  or  a 
more  noble  minded  man  (S.  Moses  not  excepted)  could  hardly  be 
found  among  the  British  theosophists.  His  only  and  chief  fault 
is — weakness.  Were  he  to  learn  some  day  how  deeply  he  has 
wronged  H.P.B.  in  thought — no  man  would  feel  more  miserable 
over  it  than  himself.  But  of  this  anon.  If  you  remember  in  my 
letter  to  H.  upon  the  subject  I  **  forbade  all  arrangements  "  for 
the  simple  reason  that  the  Bsh.  Theos.  Soc.  had  collapsed,  and 
virtually  was  no  more.  But,  if  I  remember  right  I  added — that 
if  they  re-established  it  on  a  firm  basis  with  such  members  as  Mrs. 
K.  and  her  scribe — that  we  would  have  no  objection  to  teach  them 
through  you — or  words  to  that  effect.  I  certainly  objected  having 
my  letters  printed  and  circulated  like  those  of  Paul  in  the  bazaar 
of  Ephesus — for  the  benefit  (or  perchance  derision  and  criticism) 
of  isolated  members  who  hardly  believed  in  our  existence.  But  I 
have  no  objection,  in  case  of  an  arrangement,  as  proposed  by 
C.C.M.  Only  let  them  first  organize,  leaving  out  such  bigots  as 
Wyld — strictly  out  in  the  cold.  He  refused  to  admit  Mr.  Hume's 
sister  Mrs.  B.  because,  having  never  seen  any  mesmeric  phe- 
nomena she  disbelieved  in  mesmerism ;  and  refused  to  admit 
Crookes,  recommended  by  C.C.M.,  as  I  was  told.  I  will  never 
refuse  my  help  and  co-operation  to  a  group  of  men  sincere  and 
ardent  to  learn ;  for  if  again,  such  men  as  Mr.  Hume  are  to  be 
admitted,  men  who  generally  delight  in  playing  in  every  organized 
system  they  get  into,  the  parts  played  by  Typhon  and  Ahriman 
in  the  Egyptian  and  Zoroastrian  systems — then  the  plan  had 
better  be  left  aside.  I  dread  the  appearance  in  print  of  our 
philosophy  as  expounded  by  Mr.  H.  I  read  his  three  essays  or 
chapters  on  God  (?)cosmogony  and  glimpses  of  the  origin  of 
things  in  general,  and  had  to  cross  out  nearly  all.  He  makes  of 
us  Agnostics!  !  We  do  not  believe  in  God  because  so  far,  we 
have  no  proof,  etc.  This  is  preposterously  ridiculous  :  if  he  pub- 
lishes what  I  read,  I  will  have  H.P.B.  or  Djual  Khool  deny  the 
whole  thing ;  as  I  cannot  permit  our  sacred  philosophy  to  be  so 
disfigured.  He  says  that  people  will  not  accept  the  whole  truth ; 
that  unless  we  humour  them  with  a  hope  that  there  may  be  a 
*•  loving  Father  and  creator  of  All  in  heaven  "  our  philosophy  will 
be  rejected  a  priori.  In  such  a  case  the  less  such  idiots  hear  of 
our  doctrines  the  better  for  both.  If  they  do  not  want  the  whole 
truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  they  are  welcome.     But  never 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  305 

will  they  find  us — (at  any  rate) — compromising  with,  and  pander- 
ing- to  public  prejudices.  Do  you  call  this  "  candid  "  and — honest 
**  from  a  European  standpoint  "  ?  Read  his  letter  and  judge. 
The  truth  is  my  dear  friend,  that  notwithstanding  the  great  tidal 
wave  of  mysticism  that  is  now  sweeping  over  a  portion  of  the 
intellectual  classes  of  Europe,  the  Western  people  have  as  yet 
scarcely  learned  to  recognise  that  which  we  term  wisdom  in  its 
loftiest  sense.  As  yet,  he  only  is  esteemed  truly  wise  in  his 
world,  who  can  most  cleverly  conduct  the  business  of  life,  so 
that  it  may  yield  the  largest  amount  of  material  profit — honours 
or  money.  The  quality  of  wisdom,  ever  was,  and  will  be  yet  for 
a  long  time — to  the  very  close  of  the  fifth  race — denied  to  him 
who  seeks  the  wealth  of  the  mind  for  its  own  sake,  and  for  its 
own  enjoyment  and  result  without  the  secondary  purpose  of 
turning  it  to  account  in  the  attainment  of  material  benefits.  By 
most  of  your  gold  worshipping  countrymen  our  facts  and 
theorems  would  be  denominated  fancy-flights,  the  dreams  of  mad- 
men. Let  the  Fragments  and  even  your  own  magnificent  letters 
now  published  in  Light,  fall  into  the  hands,  and  be  read  by  the 
general  public — whether  materialists  or  theists  or  Christians ; 
and  ten  to  one  every  average  reader  will  curl  his  lip  with  a  sneer ; 
and  with  the  remark — **  all  this  may  be  very  profound  and 
learned  but  of  what  use  is  it  in  practical  life?  " — and  dismiss 
letters  and  Fragments  from  his  thoughts  for  ever. 

But  now  your  position  with  C.C.M.  seems  changing,  and  you 
are  gradually  bringing  him  round.  He  longs  sincerely  to  give 
Occultism  another  trial  and — is  **  open  to  conviction  "  ;  we  must 
not  disappoint  him.  But,  I  cannot  undertake  to  furnish  either 
them  or  even  yourself  with  new  facts  until  all  I  have  already 
given  is  put  into  shape  from  the  beginning,  (vide  Mr.  Hume's 
Essays)  and  taught  to  them  systematically,  and  by  them  learned 
and  digested.  I  am  now  answering  your  numerous  series  of 
questions — scientific  and  psychological — and  you  will  have 
material  enough  for  a  year  or  two.  Of  course  I  will  be  always 
ready  with  further  explanations,  hence  unavoidably  additions — ^but 
I  positively  refuse  to  teach  any  further  before  you  have  under- 
stood and  learned  all  that  is  already  given.  Nor  do  I  want  you 
to  print  anything  from  my  letters  unless  previously  edited  by  you, 
and  put  into  shape  and  form.  I  have  no  time  for  writing  regular 
"papers,"  nor  does  my  literary  ability  extend  so  far  as  that. 

Only  how,  about  C.C.M. 's  mind  so  prejudiced  against  the 
author  of  Isis  and  ourselves,  who  have  dared  an  attempt  to  intro- 
duce Eglinton  into  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  B.T.S.  and  to 
denominate  +  a  "Brother"?  Shall  not  our  joint  sins  and 
transgressions  *'  from  a  European  standpoint  " — be  sorely  in  the 
way   of  mutual   confidence,    and   will   they    not   lead   to   endless 


3o6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

suspicions  and  misconceptions?  I  am  not  prepared  just  now  to 
afford  the  British  Theosophists  the  proof  of  our  existence  in  flesh 
and  bones,  or  that  I  am  not  altogether  H.P.B.'s  *'  confederate  "  ; 
for  all  this  is  a  question  of  time  and — Karma.  But,  even  sup- 
posing it  very  easy  to  disprove  the  former,  it  would  be  far  less 
easy  to  disprove  the  latter.  A  **  K.H.,"  i.e.  a  mortal  of  very 
ordinary  appearance  and  acquainted  tolerably  well  with  the  Eng- 
lish, Vedanta  and  Buddhist  philosophy,  and  with  even  a  bit  of 
drawing-room  juggling — is  easily  found  and  furnished,  so  as  to 
demonstrate  his  objective  existence  beyond  doubt  or  cavil.  But 
how  about  giving  the  positive,  moral  certitude  that  the  individual, 
who  may  thus  make  his  appearance  is  not  a  bogus  K.H.,  a  "  con- 
federate "  of  H.P.B.?  Were  not  St.  Germain,  and  Cagliostro, 
both  gentlemen  of  the  highest  education  and  achievements — and 
presumably  Europeans — not  **  niggers  "  of  my  sort — regarded  at 
the  time,  and  still  so  regarded  by  posterity — as  impostors,  con- 
federates, jugglers  and  what  not?  Yet  I  am  morally  bound  to 
set  his  mind  at  rest — through  your  kind  agency — with  regard  to 
H.P.B.  deceiving  and  imposing  upon  him.  He  seems  to  think  he 
has  obtained  proofs  of  it  absolutely  unimpeachable.  I  say  he  has 
not.  What  he  has  obtained  is  simply  proof  of  the  villainy  of 
some  men,  and  ex-theosophists  such  as  Hurrychund  Chinta- 
mon  of  Bombay  now  of  Manchester  and  elsewhere ;  the  man 
who  robbed  the  Founders  and  Dayanand  of  Rs.  4,000,  deceived 
and  imposed  upon  them  from  the  first  (so  far  back  as  New 
York),  and  then  exposed  and  expelled  from  the  Society  ran 
away  to  England  and  is  ever  since  seeking  and  thirsting  for  his 
revenge.  And  such  other  as  Dr.  Billing,  the  husband  of  that 
good,  honest  woman,  the  only  really  and  thoroughly  reliable  and 
honest  medium  I  know  of — Mrs.  M.  Hollis-Billing ;  whom  he 
married  for  her  few  thousands  pounds,  ruined  her  during  the  first 
year  of  his  married  life,  went  into  concubinage  with  another 
medium;  and  when  vehemently  reproached  by  H.P.B.  and  Olcott, 
— left  his  wife  and  Society  and  turned  with  bitter  hatred  against 
both  women,  and  since  then  is  ever  seeking  to  secretly  poison  the 
minds  of  the  British  Theosophists  and  Spiritualists  against  his  wife 
and  H.P.B.  Let  C.C.M.  put  all  those  facts  together;  fathom 
the  mystery  and  trace  the  connection  between  his  informants  and 
the  two  traducers  of  the  two  innocent  women.  Let  him  investi- 
gate thoroughly  and  patiently,  before  he  believes  in  certain  reports 
— and  even  proofs  brought  forward — lest  he  overloads  his  Karma 
with  a  heavier  sin  than  any.  There  is  not  a  stone  these  two  men 
have  unturned  in  order  to  succeed  in  their  evil  design.  While 
Hurrychund  Chintamon  never  failed  once  during  the  last  three 
years  to  take  into  his  confidence  every  theosophist  he  met,  pour- 
ing into  his  ears  pretended  news  from  Bombay  about  the  duplicity 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  307 

of  the  Founders;  and  to  spread  reports  among-  the  spiritualists 
about  Mad.  B's  pretended  phenomena,  showing-  them  all  as  simply 
**  impudent  tricks" — since  she  has  no  real  idea  of  the  Yog-a 
powers ;  or  again  showing-  letters  from  her,  received  by  him  while 
she  was  in  America ;  and  in  which  she  is  made  to  advise  him  to 
pretend — he  is  a  **  Brother  "  and  thus  deceive  the  British  theoso- 
phists  the  better;  while  H.C.  is  doing  all  this  and  much  more, 
Billing  is  "working"  the  London  mystics.  He  attitudinizes 
before  them  as  a  victitn  of  his  over  confidence  in  a  wife  who  he 
found  out  as  a  false  tricky  medium,  helped  and  supported  in  this 
by  H.P.B.  and  H.S.O.  ;  he  complains  of  his  cruel  fate  and  swears 
on  his  honour  (  !)  he  left  her  only  because  he  had  found  her  an 
impostor  his  honesty  revolting  at  such  a  union.  Thus,  it  is  on 
the  strength  and  authority  of  the  reports  of  such  men,  and  the 
too  confiding  persons,  who,  believing  in  them  help  them  that 
C.C.M.  came  gradually  to  disown  and  repudiate  the  disgusting 
and  deformed  changeling  which  was  imposed  upon  him  under  the 
guise  of  H.P.B.  Believe  me — it  is  not  so.  If  he  tells  you  he 
was  shown  documentary  proof — answer  him  that  a  letter  in  his 
own  handwriting  and  over  his  own  signature  which,  if  placed  in 
the  hands  of  law  would  send  him  in  24  hours  on  the  bench  of 
criminals,  may  be  forged  as  easily  as  any  other  dbcument.  A 
man  who  was  capable  of  forging  on  a  bogus  will  the  signature  of 
the  testator  and  then  getting  hold  of  the  hand  of  the  already  dead 
man,  put  a  pen  into  it  and  guide  it  over  the  ready  signature,  to 
afford  the  witnesses  a  chance  of  taking  their  oath  that  they  had 
seen  the  man  sign  it — is  ready  to  do  more  serious  work  than  simply 
slandering  an  unpopular  foreigner. 

When,  smarting  under  the  exposure  and  bent  upon  revenge  H. 
Ch.  arrived  three  years  ago  from  Bombay,  C.C.M.  would  neither 
receive  nor  see  him,  nor  would  he  listen  to  his  justification,  for 
Dayanand — ^whom  he  recognised  and  accepted  at  that  time  as  his 
spiritual  chief — had  sent  him  word  to  hold  no  communication  with 
the  thief  and  traitor.  Then  it  was  that  the  latter  and  C.  Carter 
Black,  the  Jesuit  expelled  from  the  Society  for  slandering  in  the 
PaZl  Mall  Gazette  both  Swami  and  Hurrychund — became  fast 
friends.  Carter  Black  had  for  over  two  years  moved  heaven  and 
earth  to  get  readmitted  into  the  Society  but  H.P.B.  had  proved  a 
Chinese  Wall  against  such  readmission.  Both  the  ex-fellows  made 
peace,  put  their  heads  together  and  worked  since  then  in  a  most 
charming  accord.  This  made  secret  enemy — No.  3.  C.C.M. 's 
devotion  was  in  their  way — they  went  to  work  to  break  the  object 
of  that  devotion — H.P.B. — by  shaking  his  confidence  in  her. 
Billing  who  could  never  hope  to  achieve  success  in  that  direction 
— for  C.C.M.  knew  him  too  well,  having  legally  defended  his  ruined 
and  forsaken  wife — succeeded  to  arouse  his  suspicions  against  Mrs. 


3o8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Billing-  as  a  medium  and  against  her  friend  H.P.B.  who  had 
defended  and  supported  her  against  him.  Thus  was  the  ground 
well  prepared  for  sowing  in  it  any  kind  of  weed.  Then  came — 
like  a  thunderbolt  Swami's  unexpected  attack  upon  the  Founders 
and  proved  the  death-blow  to  C.C.M.'s  friendship.  Because 
Swami  had  been  represented  by  her  to  them  as  a  high  chela,  an 
initiate,  he  imagined  he  had  never  been  one,  and  that  in  her  mis- 
guided zeal  to  advance  the  cause  H.P.B.  had  deceived  them  all ! 
After  the  April  row,  his  and  her  enemies  made  an  easy  prey  of 
him.  Take  Light;  compare  dates  and  the  various  cautious  and 
covered  attacks.  Behold  C.C.M.'s  hesitation,  and  then  his  sudden 
pouncing  upon  her.       Cannot  you  read  between  the  lines,  friend? 

But  what  of  S.  Moses?  Ah — he  at  least,  is  never  the  man  to 
utter  a  deliberate  falsehood,  much  less  repeat  a  slanderous  report. 
He,  at  least,  as  well  as  C.C.M.,  is  a  gentleman,  every  inch  of 
him  and  an  honest  man.  Well;  and  what  of  that?  You  forget 
his  profound,  sincere  irritation  with  us  and  H.P.B.,  as  a 
Spiritualist  the  chosen  vessel  of  election  of  Imperator?  C.C.M. 
is  ignorant  of  the  laws  and  mysteries  of  mediumship  and  he  is  his 
staunch  friend.  Take  again  Light  and  see,  how  plainly  his  irrita- 
tion grows  and  becomes  louder  in  his  Notes  By  The  Way.  He 
has  entirely  misconceived  your  meaning,  or  rather  quotations  (fol- 
lowed by  no  explanations)  from  a  letter  of  mine  to  yourself,  who, 
in  your  turn  have  never  correctly  understood  the  situation.  What 
I  then  said  I  now  repeat : — There  is  an  abyss  between  the  highest 
and  lowest  degrees  of  Planetaries  (this  to  your  query — Is  +  a  Plane- 
tary Spirit?)  and  then  my  assertion  that — **+  is  a  Brother."  But 
what  is  a  **  Brother,"  in  reality — do  you  know?  For  what  H.P.B. 
has  added  out  of  the  depths  of  her  own  consciousness,  perhaps,  I 
do  not  hold  myself  responsible ;  for  she  knows  nothing  for  a  dead 
certainty  about  +,  and  often  *'  dreaming  dreams  "  she  draws  her 
own  original  conclusions  therefrom.  Result:  S.M.  regards  us  as 
impostors  and  liars,  unless  we  be  but  a  fiction;  in  which  case  the 
compliment  returns  to  H.P.B. 

Now  what  are  the  facts  and  what  the  accusations  against  H.P.B. 
Many  are  the  shadowy  points  against  her  in  C.C.M's  mind  and, 
with  every  day  they  become  blacker  and  uglier.  I  will  give  you 
an  instance.  While  in  London,  at  the  Billings,  Jan.  1879,  H.P.B. 
who  had  produced  a  china  pot  from  under  the  table,  was  asked 
by  C.C.M.  to  give  him  some  phenomenally  produced  object  too. 
Consenting  she  caused  a  small  card-case,  as  carved  in  Bombay  to 
appear  in  the  pocket  of  his  overcoat  hung  in  the  hall.  Inside — 
whether  then  or  later  in  the  evening,  was  found  a  slip  of  paper, 
with  the  facsimile  of  Hurrychund  C's  signature  on  it.  At  the 
time,  no  suspicion  entered  his  mind,  since  there  really  was  no 
ground  for  any.       But  now  you  see  he  believes  it — if  not  all  a 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  309 

trick,  at  any  rate  a  half-deception.  Why?  Because  at  that  time 
he  beheved  H.C.  a  chela,  all  but  a  great  adept,  as  allowed  and  led 
to  suppose  by  H.P.B.  ;  and  now  he  knows  that  H.C.  was  never 
a  chela — since  he  himself  denies  it ;  that,  he  never  had  any  powers, 
denies  any  knowledge  of,  or  belief  in  such ;  and  tells  to  everyone 
that  even  Dayanand  has  never  been  a  Yogi  but  is  simply  **  an 
ambitious  impostor  "  like  Mohamet.  In  short  so  many  lies 
brought  and  left  at  the  Founders'  door.  And  then  her  letters, 
and  the  reports  by  trustworthy  witnesses  of  her  confederacy  with 
Mrs.  Billing.  Hence — confederacy  between  her  and  Eglinton. 
She  is  proved,  at  any  rate  an  arch  plotter,  a  deceiver,  a  crafty 
character;  either  that — or  a  visionary  lunatic,  an  obsessed  medium  ! 
European,  western  logic.  Letters?  Very  easy  to  alter  words, 
mix  the  whole  meaning  of  a  sentence  in  letters.  So  has  the  Swami 
letters  from  her,  which  he  freely  translates,  quotes  from  and  com- 
ments upon  in  the  face  of  the  July  Supplement.  Now  pray,  oblige 
me  by  carefully  reading  over  again  the  **  Defence."  Note  the 
bare-faced  lies  of  India's  '*  great  Reformer."  Remember  what 
was  admitted  to  you  and  then  denied.  And  if  my  word  of  honour 
has  any  weight  with  you,  then  know  that  D.  Swami  was  an 
initiated  Yogi,  a  very  high  chela  at  Badrinath,  endowed  some 
years  back  with  great  pK>wers  and  a  knowledge  he  has  since  for- 
feited, and  that  H.P.B.  told  you  but  the  truth,  as  also  that  H.C. 
was  a  chela  of  his,  who  preferred  to  follow  the  '*  left  path."  And 
now  see  what  has  become  of  this  truly  great  man,  whom  we  all 
knew  and  placed  our  hopes  in  him  :  There  he  is — a  moral  wreck, 
ruined  by  his  ambition  and  panting  for  breath  in  his  last  struggle 
for  supremacy,  which,  he  knows  we  will  not  leave  in  his  hands. 
And  now,  if  this  man — ten  times  greater  morally  and  intellectually 
than  Hurrychund — could  fall  so  low,  and  resort  to  such  a  mean 
course,  of  what  his  ex-friend  and  pupil  Hurrychund  may  not  be 
capable  to  satisfy  his  thirst  for  revenge  !  The  former  has  at 
least  an  excuse — his  ferocious  ambition  that  he  mistakes  for 
patriotism  ;  his  once  alter  ego  has  no  excuse  but  his  desire  to  harm 
those  who  exposed  him.  And,  to  achieve  such  results  he  is  pre- 
pared to  do  anything.  But  you  will  perhaps  enquire,  why  we 
have  not  interfered?  Why  we,  the  natural  protectors  of  the 
Founders,  if  not  of  the  Society,  have  not  put  a  stop  to  the  shame- 
ful conspiracies?  A  pertinent  question;  only  I  doubt  whether 
my  answer  with  all  its  sincerity  will  be  clearly  understood.  You 
are  thoroughly  unacquainted  with  our  system,  and  could  I  succeed 
in  making  it  clear  to  you,  ten  to  one  your  **  better  feelings  " — the 
feeling  of  a  European — ^would  be  ruffled,  if  not  worse,  with  such 
a  "  shocking  "  discipline.  The  fact  is,  that  to  the  last  and  supreme 
initiation  every  chela — (and  even  some  adepts) — is  left  to  his  own 
device  and  counsel.       We  have  to  fight  our  own  battles,  and  the 


310  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

familiar  adag-e — '*  the  adept  becomes,  he  is  not  made  "  is  true  to 
the  letter.  Since  every  one  of  us  is  the  creator  and  producer  of  the 
causes  that  lead  to  such  or  some  other  results,  we  have  to  reap  but 
what  we  have  sown.  Our  chelas  are  helped  but  when  they  are 
innocent  of  the  causes  that  lead  them  into  trouble;  when  such 
causes  are  generated  by  foreign,  outside  influences.  Life  and 
the  struggle  for  adeptship  would  be  too  easy,  had  we  all 
scavengers  behind  us  to  sweep  away  the  effects  we  have  generated 
through  our  own  rashness  and  presumption.  Before  they  are 
allowed  to  go  into  the  world  they, — the  chelas — are  everyone  of 
them  endowed  with  more  or  less  clairvoyant  powers ;  and,  with 
the  exception  of  that  faculty  that,  unless  paralyzed  and  watched 
would  lead  them  perchance  to  divulge  certain  secrets  that  must 
not  be  revealed — they  are  left  in  the  full  exercise  of  their  powers — 
whatever  these  may  be  : — why  don't  they  exercise  them?  Thus, 
step  by  step,  and  after  a  series  of  punishments,  is  the  chela  taught 
by  bitter  experience  to  suppress  and  guide  his  impulses ;  he  loses 
his  rashness,  his  self  sufficiency  and  never  falls  into  the  same 
errors.  All  that  now  happens  is  brought  on  by  H.P.B.  herself; 
and  to  you,  my  friend  and  brother,  I  will  reveal  her  shortcomings, 
for  you  were  tested  and  tried,  and  you  alone  have  not  hitherto 
failed — at  any  rate  not  in  one  direction — that  of  discretion  and 
silence.  But  before  I  reveal  her  one  great  fault  to  you — (a  fault, 
indeed,  in  its  disastrous  results,  yet  withal  a  virtue)  I  must  remind 
you  of  that,  which  you  so  heartily  hate :  namely,  that  no  one 
comes  in  contact  with  us,  no  one  show^s  a  desire  to  know  more  of 
us,  but  has  to  submit  being  tested  and  put  by  us  on  probation. 
Thus,  C.C.M.  could  not  more  than  any  other  escape  his  fate.  He 
has  been  tempted  and  allowed  to  be  deceived  by  appearances,  and 
to  fall  but  too  easily  a  prey  to  his  weakness — suspicion  and  lack 
of  self-confidence.  In  short  he  is  found  wanting  in  the  first 
element  of  success  in  a  candidate — unshaken  faith,  once  that  his 
conviction  rests  upon,  and  has  taken  root  in  knowledge,  not  simple 
belief  in  certain  facts.  Now  C.C.M.  knows  that  certain 
phenomena  of  hers  are  undeniably  genuine ;  his  position  with 
regard  to  that  being  precisely  the  position  of  yourself  and  your 
lady,  in  reference  to  the  yellow  ring-stone.  Thinking  you  had 
reasons  to  believe  the  stone  in  question  was  simply  brought  (like 
the  doll)  not  doubled — as  she  asserted,  and  disliking  in  the  depths 
of  your  soul  such  a  useless  deception — as  you  always  thought — on 
her  part,  you  have  not  repudiated  her  for  all  that,  nor  exposed 
or  complained  of  her  in  the  papers  as  he  has.  In  short,  even 
when  refusing  her  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  in  your  own  hearts,  you 
have  not  doubted  the  phenomenon  but  only  her  accurac>'  in  ex- 
plaining it;  and  while  being  utterly  wrong,  you  were  undeniably 
right  in  acting  with  such  a  discretion  in  that  matter.      Not  so,  in 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  311 

his  case.  After  entertaining  during-  the  period  of  three  years  a 
blind  faith,  in  her,  amounting-  almost  to  a  feehng  of  veneration, 
at  the  first  breath  of  successful  calumny,  he,  a  staunch  friend  and 
an  excellent  lawyer  falls  a  victim  to  a  wicked  plot,  and,  his  regard 
for  her  is  changed  into  positive  contempt  and  a  conviction  of  her 
guilt  !  Instead  of  acting  as  you  would  have  acted  in  such  a  case, 
namely  either  never  mentioning  the  fact  to  her  or  else,  asking  her 
for  an  explanation,  giving  the  accused  the  opportunity  of  defend- 
ing herself,  and  thus  acting  consistently  with  his  honest  nature, 
he  preferred  giving  vent  to  his  feelings  in  public  print  and  to 
satisfy  his  rancour  against  herself  and  us  by  adopting  an  indirect 
means  of  attacking  her  statements  in  I  sis.  By  the  by,  and 
begging  your  pardon  for  this  digression,  he  does  not,  it  seems 
regard  her  answer  in  the  Theosophist — '*  candid  "?  Funny  logic, 
when  coming  from  such  an  acute  logician.  Had  he  proclaimed 
in  all  the  pap>er5  and  at  the  top  of  his  voice  that  the  author  or 
authors  of  Isis  have  not  been  candid  while  writing  the  book ;  that 
they  often  and  purposely  mislead  the  reader  by  withholding  the 
necessary  explanations  and  have  given  but  portions  of  the  truth, 
had  he  even  declared,  as  Mr.  Hume  does — that  the  work  teems 
with  "practical  errors"  and  deliberate  misstatements — ^he  would 
have  been  gloriously  acquitted,  because  he  would  have  been  right 
— **  from  a  European  standpoint,"  and  heartily  excused  by  us — 
again  because  of  his  European  way  of  judging — something  innate 
in  him  and  that  he  cannot  help.  But  to  call  a  correct  and  truthful 
explanation — not  '*  candid  "  is  something  I  can  hardly  realize, 
though  I  am  quite  aware  that  his  view  is  shared  even  by  yourself. 
Alas,  my  friends,  I  am  very  much  afraid  that  our  respective 
standards  of  right  and  wrong  will  never  agree  together,  since 
motive  is  everything  for  us,  and  that  you  will  never  go  beyond 
appearances.       However,  to  return  to  the  main  question. 

Thus  C.C.M.  knows  ;  he  is  too  intelligent,  too  acute  an  observer 
of  human  nature  to  have  remained  ignorant  of  that,  most  important 
of  facts,  namely  that  the  woman  has  no  possible  motive  for  decep- 
tion. There  is  a  sentence  in  his  letter  which,  framed  in  a  little 
kinder  spirit  would  go  far  to  show  how  well  he  could  appreciate 
and  recognise  the  real  motives,  had  not  his  mind  been  poisoned 
by  prejudice,  due,  perhaps,  more  to  S.  Moses'  irritation,  than  to 
the  efforts  of  her  three  above  enumerated  enemies.  He  remarks 
en  passant — that  the  system  of  deception  may  be  due  to  her  zeal, 
but  regards  it  as  a  dishonest  zeal,  And  now,  do  you  want  to  know 
how  far  she  is  guilty?  Know  then,  that  if  she  ever  became  guilty 
of  real,  deliberate  deception,  owing  to  that  "  zeal,"  it  was  when 
in  the  presence  of  phenomena  produced,  she  kept  constantly  deny- 
ing— except  in  the  matter  of  such  trifles  as  bells  and  raps — that 
she  had  anything  to  do  with  their  production  personally.       From 


312  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

your  **  European  standpoint"  it  is  downrig-ht  deception,  a  big 
thundering  lie;  from  our  Asiatic  standpoint,  though  an  imprudent, 
blamable  zeal,  an  untruthful  exaggeration,  or  what  a  Yankee 
would  call  *  *  a  blazing  cock-a-hoop  ' '  meant  for  the  benefit  of  the 
**  Brothers," — yet  withal,  if  we  look  into  the  motive — a  sublime, 
self-denying,  noble  and  meritorious — not  dishonest — zeal.  Yes; 
in  that,  and  in  that  alone,  she  became  constantly  guilty  of 
deceiving  her  friends.  She  could  never  be  made  to  realize  the 
utter  uselessness,  the  danger  of  such  a  zeal ;  and  how  mistaken 
she  was  in  her  notions  that  she  was  adding  to  our  glory,  whereas, 
by  attributing  to  us  very  often  phenomena  of  the  most  childish 
nature,  she  but  lowered  us  in  the  public  estimation  and  sanctioned 
the  claim  of  her  enemies  that  she  was  '*  but  a  medium  "  !  But 
it  was  of  no  use.  In  accordance  with  our  rules,  M.  was  not  per- 
mitted to  forbid  her  such  a  course,  in  so  many  words.  She  had 
to  be  allowed  full  and  entire  freedom  of  action,  the  liberty  of 
creating  causes  that  became  in  due  course  of  time  her  scourge, 
her  public  pillory.  He  could  at  best  forbid  her  producing 
phenomena,  and  to  this  last  extremity  he  resorted  as  often  as  he 
could,  to  her  friends  and  theosophists  great  dissatisfaction.  Was, 
or  rather  is,  it  lack  of  intellectual  perceptions  in  her?  Certainly 
not.  It  is  a  psychological  disease,  over  which  she  has  little  if 
any  control  at  all.  Her  impulsive  nature — as  you  have  correctly 
inferred  in  your  reply — is  always  ready  to  carry  her  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  truth,  into  the  regions  of  exaggeration  ;  neverthe- 
less without  a  shadow  of  suspicion  that  she  is  thereby  deceiving 
her  friends  or  abusing  of  their  great  trust  in  her.  The  stereotyped 
phrase  :  *'  It  is  not  7;  I  can  do  nothing  by  myself  .  .  .  it  is 
all  they — the  Brothers.  ...  I  am  but  their  humble  and 
devoted  slave  and  instrument  "  is  a  downright  fib.  She  can  and 
did  produce  phenomena,  owing  to  her  natural  powers  combined 
with  several  long  years  of  regular  training  and  her  phenomena  are 
sometimes  better,  more  wonderful  and  far  more  perfect  than  those 
of  some  high,  initiated  chelas,  whom  she  surpasses  in  artistic 
taste  and  purely  western  appreciation  of  art — as  for  instance  in 
the  instantaneous  production  of  pictures  :  witness — her  portrait  of 
the  "fakir"  Tiravalla  mentioned  in  Hints,  and  compared  with 
my  portrait  by  Djual  Khool.  Notwithstanding  all  the  superiority 
of  his  powers,  as  compared  with  hers;  his  youth  as  contrasted 
w^ith  her  old  age;  and  the  undeniable  and  important  advantages 
he  possesses  of  having  never  brought  his  pure  unalloyed  mag- 
netism in  direct  contact  with  the  great  impurity  of  your  world 
and  society — yet  do  what  he  may,  he  will  never  be  able  to  produce 
such  a  picture,  simply  because  he  is  unable  to  conceive  it  in  his 
mind  and  Tibetan  thought.  Thus,  while  fathering  upon  us  all 
manner  of  foolish,   often  clumsy  and  suspected  phenomena,  she 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  313 

has  most  undeniably  been  helping  us  in  many  instances ;  saving  us 
sometimes  as  much  as  two-thirds  of  the  power  used,  and  when 
remonstrated — for  often  we  are  unable  to  prevent  her  doing  it  on 
her  end  of  the  line — answering  that  she  had  no  need  of  it,  and 
that  her  only  joy  was  to  be  of  some  use  to  us.  And  thus  she  kept 
on  killing  herself  inch  by  inch,  ready  to  give — for  our  benefit  and 
glory,  as  she  thought — her  life-blood  drop  by  drop,  and  yet  in- 
variably denying  before  witnesses  that  she  had  anything  to  do 
with  it.  Would  you  call  this  sublime,  albeit  foolish  self-abnega- 
tion— **  dishonest  "?  We  do  not;  nor  shall  we  ever  consent  to 
regard  it  in  such  a  light.  To  come  to  the  point  :  moved  by  that 
feeling,  and  firmly  believing  at  the  time  (because  allowed  to)  that 
Hurrychund  was  a  worthy  chela^ — of  the  Yogee  Dayanand,  she 
allowed  C.C.M.  and  all  those  who  were  present  to  labour  under 
the  impression  that  it  was  Hurrychund  who  had  produced  the 
phenomena;  and  then  went  on  rattling  for  a  fortnight  of  Swami's 
great  powers  and  of  the  virtues  of  Hurrychund,  his  prophet.  How 
terribly  she  was  punished,  every  one  in  Bombay  (as  you  your- 
self)— well  knows.  First — the  **  chela  "  turning  a  traitor  to  his 
Master  and  his  allies,  and — a  common  thief;  then  the  "great 
Yogin,*'  the  *'  Luther  of  India  "  sacrificing  her  and  H.S.O.  to  his 
insatiable  ambition.  Very  naturally,  while  Hurrychund' s  treason 
— shocking  as  it  appeared  at  the  time  to  C.C.M.  and  other  theoso- 
phists — left  her  unscarred,  for  Swami  himself  having  been  robbed 
took  the  defence  of  the  **  Founders  "  in  hand,  the  treachery  of  the 
•'  Supreme  Chief  of  the  Theosophists  of  the  Arya  Samaj  "  was  not 
regarded  in  its  true  light ;  it  was  not  he  that  had  played  false,  but 
the  whole  blame  fell  upK>n  the  unfortunate  and  too  devoted  woman, 
who,  after  extolling  him  to  the  sky,  was  compelled  in  self-defence 
to  expose  his  mala  fides  and  true  motives  in  the  Theosophist. 

Such  is  the  true  history,  and  facts  with  regard  to  her  '*  decep- 
tion "  or,  at  best — "  dishonest  zeal."  No  doubt  she  has  merited 
a  ix>rtion  of  the  blame ;  most  undeniably  she  is  given  to  exaggera- 
tion in  general,  and  when  it  becomes  a  question  of  *'  puffing  up" 
those  she  is  devoted  to,  her  enthusiasm  knows  no  limits.  Thus 
she  has  made  of  M.  an  Apollo  of  Belvedere,  the  glowing  descrip- 
tion of  whose  physical  beauty,  made  him  more  than  once  start  in 
anger,  and  break  his  pipe  while  swearing  like  a  true — Christian  ; 
and  thus,  under  her  eloquent  phraseology,  I,  myself  had  the 
pleasure  of  hearing  myself  metamorphosed  into  an  "  angel  of 
purity  and  light  " — shorn  of  his  wings.  We  cannot  help  feeling 
at  times  angry,  with,  oftener — laughing  at,  her.  Yet  the  feeling 
that  dictates  all  this  ridiculous  effusion,  is  too  ardent,  too  sincere 
and  true,   not  to  be  respected  or  even  treated  with  indifference. 

1  The  latter  he  certainly  was,   though  never  very  "  worthy  "     for  he  had 
always  been  a  selfish,  plotting  rascal,  in  the  secret  pay  of  the  late  Gyeckwar. 


314  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

I  do  not  believe  I  was  ever  so  profoundly  touched  by  anything 
I  witnessed  in  all  my  life,  as  I  was  with  the  poor  old  creature's 
ecstatic  rapture,  when  meeting  us  recently  both  in  our  natural 
bodies,  one — after  three  years  the  other — nearly  two  years  absence 
and  separation  in  flesh.  Even  our  phlegmatic  M.  was  thrown 
off  his  balance,  by  such  an  exhibition — of  which  he  was  chief 
hero.  He  had  to  use  his  power,  and  plunge  her  into  a  profound 
sleep,  otherwise  she  would  have  burst  some  blood-vessel  including 
kidneys,  liver  and  her  '*  interiors  " — to  use  our  friend  Oxley's 
favourite  expression — in  her  delirious  attempts  to  flatten  her  nose 
against  his  riding  mantle  besmeared  with  the  Sikkim  mud  !  We 
both  laughed ;  yet  could  we  feel  otherwise  but  touched  ?  Of 
course,  she  is  utterly  unfit  for  a  true  adept  :  her  nature  is  too 
passionately  aff^ectionate  and  we  have  no  right  to  indulge  in 
personal  attachments  and  feelings.  You  can  never  know  her  as 
we  do,  therefore — none  of  you  will  ever  be  able  to  judge  her 
impartially  or  correctly.  You  see  the  surface  of  things ;  and  what 
you  would  term  '*  virtue,"  holding  but  to  appearances,  we — judge 
but  after  having  fathomed  the  object  of  its  profoundest  depth,  and 
generally  leave  the  ap{>earances  to  take  care  of  themselves.  In 
your  opinion  H.P.B.  is,  at  best,  for  those  who  like  her  despite 
herself — a  quaint,  strange  woman,  a  psychological  riddle  :  impul- 
sive and  kindhearted,  yet  not  free  from  the  vice  of  untruth.  We, 
on  the  other  hand,  under  the  garb  of  eccentricity  and  folly — ^we 
find  a  profounder  wisdom  in  her  inner  Self  than  you  will  ever  find 
yourselves  able  to  perceive.  In  the  superficial  details  of  her 
homely,  hard-working  common-place  daily  life  and  affairs,  you 
discern  but  unpracticality,  womanly  impulses,  often  absurdity  and 
folly ;  we,  on  the  contrary,  light  daily  upon  traits  of  her  inner 
nature  the  most  delicate  and  refined,  and  which  would  cost  an 
uninitiated  psychologist  years  of  constant  and  keen  observation, 
and  many  an  hour  of  close  analysis  and  eff^orts  to  draw  out  of  the 
depth  of  that  most  subtle  of  mysteries — human  mind — one  of  her 
most  complicated  machines, — ^H.P.B.'s  mind^ — and  thus  learn  to 
know  her  true  inner  Self. 

All  this  you  are  at  liberty  to  tell  C.C.M.  I  have  closely  watched 
him,  and  feel  pretty  certain  that  what  you  will  tell  him  will  have 
far  more  effect  upon  him  than  what  a  dozen  "  K.H.'s  "  might  tell 
him  personally.  **  Imperator  "  stands  between  us  two,  and  will, 
I  am  afraid,  stand  thus  for  ever.  His  loyalty  to,  and  faith  in 
the  assertions  of  a  European  living  friend  can  never  be  shaken  by 
the  assurances  to  the  contrary,  made  by  Asiatics,  who  to  him — if 
not  mere  figments,  are  unscruplous  **  confederates."  But  I  would, 
if  possible,  show  to  you  his  great  injustice,  and  the  wrong  done 
by  him  to  an  innocent  woman — at  any  rate — comparatively  inno- 
cent.      However  crazy  an  enthusiast,   I  pledge  to  you  my  word 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  315 

of  honour,  she  was  never  a  deceiver;  nor  has  she  ever  wilfully 
uttered  an  untruth,  though  her  position  often  becomes  untenable, 
and  that  she  has  to  conceal  a  number  of  things,  as  pledged  to  by 
her  solemn  vows.       And  now  I  have  done  with  the  question. 

I  am  now  going  to  approach  once  more  a  subject,  good  friend, 
I  know  is  very  repulsive  to  your  mind,  for  you  have  told  and 
written  so  repeatedly.  And  yet,  in  order  to  make  some  things  clear 
to  you,  I  am  compelled  to  speak  of  it.  You  have  often  put  the 
question  "why  should  the  Brothers  refuse  turning  their  attention 
to  such  worthy,  sincere  theosophists  as  C.C.M.  and  Hood,  or  such 
a  precious  subject  as  S.  Moses?  Well,  I  now  answer  you  very 
clearly,  that  we  have  done  so — ever  since  the  said  gentleman  came 
into  contact  and  communication  with  H.P.B.  They  were  all 
tried  and  tested  in  various  ways,  and,  not  one  of  them  came  up 
the  desired  mark.  M.  gave  a  special  attention  to  **  C.C.M."  for 
reasons  I  will  now  explain,  and,  with  results  as  at  present — known 
to  you.  You  may  say  that  such  a  secret  way  of  testing  people 
is  dishonest ;  that  we  ought  to  have  warned  him,  etc.  Well, 
all  I  can  say  is,  that  it  may  be  so  from  your  European  standpoint, 
but  that,  being  Asiatics,  we  cannot  depart  from  our  rules.  A 
man's  character,  his  true  inner  nature  can  never  be  thoroughly 
drawn  out  if  he  believes  himself  watched,  or  strives  for  an  object. 
Besides,  Col.  O.  had  never  made  a  secret  of  that  way  of  ours,  and 
all  the  Bsh.  theosophists  ought  to — if  they  did  not — know  that 
their  body  was,  since  we  had  sanctioned  it,  under  a  regular  pro- 
bation. As  for  C.C.M. — of  all  the  theosophists,  he  Was  the  one 
selected  by  M.  and  with  a  definite  purpose,  owing  to  H.P.B.'s 
importunities  and  his  special  promise, — **  He  will  turn  back  on 
you  some  day,  pumo !  "  M.  repeatedly  told  her,  in  answer  to  her 
prayers  to  accept  him  as  a  regular  chela  with  Olcott — '*  That  he 
never,  never  will !  "  she  exclaimed  in  answer.  **  C.C.M.  is  the 
best,  most  noble,  etc.,  etc.,  etc." — a  string  of  laudatory  and 
admiring  adjectives.  Two  years  later,  she  said  the  same  of  Ross 
Scott.  *'  Such  two  staunch,  devoted  friends — I  never  had  !  "  she 
assured  her  **  Boss  " — who  only  laughed  in  his  beard,  and  bid 
me  arrange  the  **  theosophical  "  marriage.  Well ;  one  was  tested 
and  tried  for  three  years,  the  other  for  three  months,  with  what 
results  I  hardly  need  remind  you.  Not  only  no  temptations  were 
ever  put  in  the  way  of  either,  but  the  latter  was  furnished  with 
a  wife  amply  sufficient  for  his  happiness,  and  connections  that 
will  prove  beneficent  to  him  some  day.  C.C.M.  had  but  objective, 
undoubted  phenomena  to  stand  upon  ;  R.  Scott  had  moreover,  a 
visit  in  astral  shape  from  M.  In  the  case  of  one — the  revenge 
of  three  unprincipled  men  ;  in  the  case  of  the  other — the  jealousy 
of  a  petty-minded  fool  made  short  work  of  the  boasted  friendship, 
and  showed  the  "  O.L."  what  it  was  worth.        Oh,  the  poor. 


3i6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

trusting-,  credulous  nature  !  Take  away  from  her  her  clairvoyant 
powers,  plug-  up  in  a  certain  direction  her  intuitions — as  in  duty 
bound  was  done  by  M. — and  what  remains?  A  helpless,  broken- 
hearted woman! 

Take  another  case,  that  of  Fern.  His  development,  as  occurring 
under  your  eye,  affords  you  a  useful  study  and  a  hint  as  to  even 
more  serious  methods  adopted  in  individual  cases  to  thoroughly 
test  the  latent  moral  qualities  of  the  man.  Every  human  being 
contains  within  himself  vast  potentialities,  and  it  is  the  duty  of 
the  adepts  to  surround  the  would-be  chela  with  circumstances 
which  shall  enable  him  to  take  the  "right-hand  path," — if  he 
have  the  ability  in  him.  We  are  no  more  at  liberty  to  withhold 
the  chance  from  a  postulant  than  we  are  to  guide  and  direct  him 
into  the  proper  course.  At  best,  we  can  only,  show  him  after  his 
probation  period  was  successfully  terminated — that  if  he  does  this 
he  will  go  right ;  if  the  other,  wrong.  But  until  he  has  passed 
that  period,  we  leave  him  to  fight  out  his  battles  as  best  he  may ; 
and  have  to  do  so  occasionally  with  higher  and  initiated  chelas 
such  as  H.P.B.,  once  they  are  allowed  to  work  in  the  world,  that 
all  of  us  more  or  less  avoid.  More  than  that — and  you  better  learn 
it  at  once,  if  my  previous  letters  to  you  about  Fern  have  not 
sufficiently  opened  your  eyes — ^we  allow  our  candidates  to  be 
tempted  in  a  thousand  various  ways,  so  as  to  draw  out  the  whole 
of  their  inner  nature  and  allow  it  the  chance  of  remaining  con- 
queror either  one  way  or  the  other.  What  has  happened  to  Fern 
has  befallen  every  one  else  who  has  preceded,  will  befall  with 
various  results  every  one  who  succeeds  him.  We  were  all  so 
tested ;  and  while  a  Moorad  Ali — failed — I,  succeeded.  The 
victor's  crown  is  only  for  him  who  proves  himself  worthy  to  wear 
it;  for  him  who  attacks  Mara  single  handed  and  conquers  the 
demon  of  lust  and  earthly  passions ;  and  not  we  but  he  himself 
puts  it  on  his  brow.  It  was  not  a  meaningless  phrase  of  the 
Tathagata  that  *'  he  who  masters  Self  is  greater  than  he  who  con- 
quers thousands  in  battle  "  :  there  is  no  such  other  difficult 
struggle.  If  it  were  not  so,  adeptship  would  be  but  a  cheap 
acquirement.  So,  my  good  brother,  be  not  surprised,  and  blame 
us  not,  as  readily  as  you  have  already  done,  at  any  development 
of  our  policy  towards  the  aspirants  past,  present  or  future.  Only 
those  who  can  look  ahead  at  the  far  remote  consequences  of 
things  are  in  a  position  to  judge  as  to  the  expediency  of  our  own 
actions,  or  those  we  permit  in  others.  What  may  seem  present 
bad  faith  may  in  the  end  prove  the  truest,  most  benevolent 
loyalty.  Let  time  show  who  was  right  and  who  faithless.  One, 
who  is  true  and  approved  to-day,  may  to-morrow  prove,  under 
a  new  concatenation  of  circumstances  a  traitor,  an  ingrate,  a 
coward,  an  imbecile.       The  reed,  bent  beyond  its  limit  of  flexi- 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  317 

bility,  will  have  snapped  in  twain.  Shall  we  accuse  it?  No;  but 
because  we  can,  and  do  pity  it,  we  cannot  select  it  as  part  of  those 
reeds  that  have  been  tried  and  found  strong,  hence  fit  to  be 
accepted  as  material  for  the  indestructible  fane  we  are  so  care- 
fully building. 

And  now — to  other  matters. 

We  have  a  reform  in  head,  and  I  look  to  you  to  help  me.  Mr. 
H.'s  annoying  and  indiscreet  interference  with  the  Parent  Society, 
and  his  passion  of  domineering  all  and  everything,  have  made  us 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be  worth  our  while  to  attempt 
the  following.  Let  it  be  made  known  "  to  all  concerned  "  through 
the  Theosophist  and  circulars  issued  to  every  Branch  that  hitherto 
they  have  looked  too  often  and  too  unnecessarily  to  the  Parent 
Body  for  guidance  and  as  an  examplar  to  follow.  This  is  quite 
impracticable.  Besides  the  fact,  that  the  Founders  have  to  show 
themselves  and  try  earnestly  to  be  all  to  everyone  and  all  things 
— since  there  is  such  a  great  variety  of  creeds,  opinions  and 
expectations  to  satisfy,  they  cannot  p>ossibly  and  at  the  same 
time  satisfy  all  as  they  would  like  to.  They  try  to  be  impartial, 
and  never  to  refuse  one  what  they  may  have  accorded  to  another 
party.  Thus  they  have  repeatedly  published  criticisms  upon 
Vedantism,  Buddhism  and  Hinduism  in  its  various  branches,  upon 
the  Veda  Bashya  of  Swami  Dayanand — their  staunchest  and  at 
that  time  most  valued  ally ;  but,  because  such  criticisms  were  all 
directed  against  non-Christian  faiths^  no  one  ever  paid  the  slightest 
attention  to  it.  For  over  a  year  and  more,  the  journal  came  out  regu- 
larly with  an  advertisement  inimical  to  that  of  the  Veda  Bashya 
and  was  printed  side  by  side  with  it  to  satisfy  the  Benares 
Vedantin.  And  now  Mr.  Hume  comes  out  with  his  public  castiga- 
tion  of  the  Founders  and  seeks  to  prohibit  the  advertisement  of 
anti-Christian  pamphlets.  I  want  you,  therefore,  to  please  bear 
this  in  mind,  and  point  out  these  facts  to  Col.  Chesney,  who  seems 
to  imagine  that  theosophy  is  hostile  but  to  Christianity ;  whereas 
it  is  but  impartial,  and  whatever  the  personal  views  of  the  two 
Founders  the  journal  of  the  Society  has  nothing  to  do'  with  them, 
and  will  publish  as  willingly  criticism  directed  against  Lamaism  as 
against  Christianism.  At  all  events,  willing  as  we  both  are,  that 
H.P.  B.  should  always  and  gratefully  accept  your  advice  in  the 
matter,  it  was  I,  who  advised  her  to  '*  kick  "  as  she  says  against 
Mr.  H's  attempts  at  authority,  and  you  are  at  liberty  to  inform 
him  of  the  fact. 

Now  in  view  to  mending  matters,  what  do  you  think  of  the  idea 
of  placing  the  Branches  on  quite  a  different  footing?  Even 
Christendom,  with  its  divine  pretensions  to  a  Universal  Brother- 
hood has  its  thousand  and  one  sects,  which,  united  as  they  all 
may  be  under  one  banner  of  the  Cross  are  yet  essentially  inimical 

22 


3i8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

to  each  other,  and  the  authority  of  the  Pope  is  set  at  naught  by 
the  Protestants,  while  the  decrees  of  the  Synods  of  the  latter  are 
laughed  at  by  the  Roman  Catholics.  Of  course,  I  would  never 
contemplate,  even  in  the  worst  of  cases  such  a  state  of  things 
among  the  theosophical  bodies.  What  I  want,  is  simply  a  paper 
on  the  advisability  of  remodelling  the  present  formation  of 
Branches  and  their  privileges.  Let  them  be  all  chartered  and 
initiated  as  heretofore  by  the  Parent  Society,  and  depend  of  it 
nominally.  At  the  same  time,  let  every  Branch  before  it  is  char- 
tered, choose  some  one  object  to  work  for,  an  object  naturally,  in 
sympathy  with  the  general  principles  of  the  T.S. — yet  a  distinct 
and  definite  object  of  its  own,  whether  in  the  religious,  educational 
or  philosophical  line.  This  would  allow  the  Society  a  broader 
margin  for  its  general  operations ;  more  real,  useful  work  would 
be  done ;  and,  as  every  Branch  would  be  so  to  say,  independent 
in  its  modus  operandus,  there  would  remain  less  room  for  com- 
plaint and  par  consequence — for  interference.  At  any  rate,  this 
hazy  sketch,  I  hope,  will  find  an  excellent  soil  to  germinate  and 
thrive  in,  in  your  business-like  head ;  and  if  you  could,  meanwhile, 
write  a  paper  based  on  the  aforesaid  explanations  of  the  The o so- 
phist's true  position,  giving  all  the  reasons  as  above-mentioned 
and  many  more  for  the  December  number  if  not  for  the  November 
number  you  would,  indeed,  oblige  M.  and  myself.  It  is  impos- 
sible, and  dangerous,  to  entrust  with  such  a  subject,  which 
requires  the  most  delicate  handling — either  one  or  the  other  of  our 
Editors.  H.P.B.,  would  never  fail  to  break  the  padrVs  heads 
on  such  a  good  opportunity,  or  H.S.O.  to  turn  a  neat  extra  com- 
pliment or  two  to  the  Founders  address,  which  would  be  useless, 
for  I  strive  to  show  the  two  entities  of  Editor  and  Founder  quite 
distinct  and  apart  from  each  other  blended  though  they  be  in  one 
and  same  person.  I  am  no  practical  business  man  and  there- 
fore, I  feel  utterly  unable  for  the  task.  Will  you  help  me,  friend? 
It  would  be  better,  of  course,  if  the  **  feeler  "  would  be  made  to 
appear  in  the  November,  as  though  in  answer  to  Mr.  Hume's  very 
impolite  letter,  which,  of  course,  I  will  not  permit  to  be  published. 
But  you  could  take  it  for  your  ground-work  and  basis  to  frame 
your  editorial  answer  upon.  To  return  to  the  reform  of  Branches 
this  question  will  have  of  course  to  be  seriously  considered  and 
weighed  before  it  is  finally  settled.  There  must  be  no  more  dis- 
appointment in  members  once  they  have  joined.  Each  Branch 
has  to  choose  its  well  defined  mission  to  work  for,  and  the  greatest 
care  should  be  taken  in  the  selection  of  Presidents.  Had  the 
•'  Eclectic"  been  placed  from  the  first,  on  such  a  footing  of  dis- 
tinct independence,  it  might  have  fared  better.  Solidarity  of 
thought  and  action  within  the  broad  outline  of  the  chief  and 
general  principles  of  the  Society  there  must  always  be  between 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  319 

the  Parent  and  Branch  bodies ;  yet  the  latter  must  be  allowed  each 
their  own  independent  action  in  everything-  that  does  not  clash 
with  those  principles.  Thus  a  Branch  composed  of  mild  Christians 
sympathizing-  with  the  objects  of  the  Society  might  remain  neutral 
in  the  question  of  every  other  religion,  and  utterly  indifferent  to 
and  unconcerned  with  the  private  beliefs  of  the  **  Founders,"  the 
Theosophist  making-  room  as  willingly  for  hymns  on  the  Lamb  as 
for  slokas  on  the  sacredness  of  the  cow.  Could  you  but  work  out 
this  idea,  I  would  submit  it  to  cur  venerable  Chohan,  who  now 
gently  smiles  from  the  corner  of  an  eye,  instead  of  frowning  as 
usual — ever  since  he  saw  you  become  President.  Had  I  not,  last 
year,  owing  to  the  ex-President's  truculence,  been  "  sent  to  bed  " 
earlier  than  at  first  contemplated,  I  was  going  to  propose  it.  I 
have  a  letter  of  lofty  reproach,  dated  October  8th,  from  the  "  I 
am."  In  it,  he  sends  for  you  on  the  5th  and  explains  his  *'  un- 
willingness to  continue  to  hold  office  "  and  his  **  great  desire  "  that 
you  should  take  his  place.  He  condemns  '*  altogether  the  system 
and  policy,"  of  our  order.  It  seems  to  him  **  quite  wrong."  He 
winds  up  by  :  **  Of  course  I  shall  ask  you  to  get  the  O.L.  to  refrain 
from  proposing  me  for  the  council  of  the  Society."  No  fear,  no 
fear  of  this;  he  may  sleep  soundly  and  undisturBed  and  see  him- 
self in  dream  the  Dalai  Lama  of  the  Theosophists.  But  I  must 
hasten  to  enter  my  indignant  and  emphatic  protest  against  his 
definition  of  our  **  faulty  "  system.  Because,  he  succeeded  in 
catching  but  a  few  stray  sparks  of  the  principles  of  our  Order, 
and  could  not  be  allowed  to  examine  and  remodel  the  whole  we 
must  all  need  be — what  he  would  represent  us  !  If  we  could 
hold  such  doctrines  as  he  would  impose  upon  us;  if  we  in  ought 
resembled  the  picture  he  has  drawn  ;  if  we  could  submit  for  a 
single  hour  to  stand  silently  under  the  load  of  such  imputations 
as  he  has  thrown  upon  us  in  his  September  letter ;  verily  we  should 
deserve  to  lose  all  credit  with  the  Theosophists  !  We  ought  to 
be  dismissed  and  hunted  out  of  the  Society  and  people's  thoughts 
as  charlatans  and  impostors — wolves  in  sheep's  clothing,  who 
come  to  steal  away  men's  hearts  with  mystic  promises,  entertain- 
ing all  the  while  the  most  despotic  intentions,  seeking  to  enslave 
our  confiding  chelas  and  turn  the  masses  away  from  truth  and 
the  **  divine  revelation  of  nature's  voice  "  to  blank  and  **  dreary 
atheism  "  ; — i.e.  a  thorough  disbelief  in  the  "  kind,  merciful  Father 
and  Creator  of  all  "  (evil  and  misery,  we  must  suppose?)  who 
lolls  from  the  eternity,  reclining  with  his  backbone  supported  on  a 
bed  of  incandescent  meteors,  and  picks  his  teeth  with  a  lightning 
fork.     .     .     . 

Indeed,  indeed,  we  have  enough  of  this  incessant  jingle  on  the 
Jew's  harp  of  Christian  revelation  ! 

M.  thinks  that  the  Supplement  ought  to  be  enlarged  if  neces- 


320  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

sary,  and  made  to  furnish  room  for  the  expression  of  thought  of 
every  Branch,  however  diametrically  opposed  these  may  be.  The 
Theosophist  ought  to  be  made  to  assume  a  distinct  colour  and 
become  a  unique  specimen  of  its  own.  We  are  ready  to  furnish 
the  necessary  extra  sums  for  it.  I  know  you  will  catch  my  idea 
however  hazily  expressed.  I  leave  our  plan  entirely  in  your  own 
hands.  Success  in  this  will  counteract  the  effects  of  the  cyclic 
crisis.  You  ask  what  you  can  do?  Nothing  better  or  more 
efficient  than  the  proposed  plan. 

I  cannot  close  without  telling  you  of  an  incident  which,  how- 
ever ludicrous,  has  led  to  something  that  makes  me  thank  my 
stars  for  it,  and  will  please  you  also.  Your  letter,  enclosing  that 
of  C.C.M.  was  received  by  me  on  the  morning  following  the 
date  you  had  handed  it  over  to  the  *'  little  man."  I  was  then  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Pari-Yong,  at  the  gun-pa  of  a  friend,  and 
was  very  busy  with  important  affairs.  When  I  received  intima- 
tion of  its  arrival,  I  was  just  crossing  the  large  inner  courtyard 
of  the  monastery ;  bent  upon  listening  to  the  voice  of  Lama  Ton- 
dhijb  Gyatcho,  I  had  no  time  to  read  the  contents.  So,  after 
mechanically  opening  the  thick  packet,  I  merely  glanced  at  it,  and 
put  it,  as  I  thought,  into  the  travelling  bag  I  wear  across  the 
shoulder.  In  reality  though,  it  had  dropped  on  the  ground  ;  and 
since  I  had  broken  the  envelope  and  emptied  it  of  its  contents, 
the  latter  were  scattered  in  their  fall.  There  was  no  one  near  me  at 
the  time,  and  my  attention  being  wholly  absorbed  with  the  conver- 
sation, I  had  already  reached  the  staircase  leading  to  the  library 
door,  when  I  heard  the  voice  of  a  young  gyloong  calling  out  from 
a  window,  and  expostulating  with  someone  at  a  distance.  Turn- 
ing round  I  understood  the  situation  at  a  glance ;  otherwise  your 
letter  would  never  have  been  read  by  me  for  I  saw  a  venerable 
old  goat  in  the  act  of  making  a  morning  meal  of  it.  The  creature 
had  already  devoured  part  of  C.C.M. 's  letter,  and  was  thought- 
fully preparing  to  have  a  bite  at  yours,  more  delicate  and  easy  for 
chewing  with  his  old  tooth  than  the  tough  envelope  and  paper  of 
your  correspondents  epistle.  To  rescue  what  remained  of  it  took 
me  but  one  short  instant,  disgust  and  opposition  of  the  animal 
notwithstanding — but  there  remained  mighty  little  of  it  !  The 
envelope  with  your  crest  on  had  nearly  disappeared,  the  contents 
of  the  letters  made  illegible — in  short  I  was  perplexed  at  the  sight 
of  the  disaster.  Now  you  know  why  I  felt  embarrassed  :  /  had 
no  right  to  restore  it,  the  letters  coming  from  the  *'  Eclectic  "  and 
connected  directly  with  the  hapless  **  Pelings  "  on  all  sides. 
What  could  I  do  to  restore  the  missing  parts  !  I  had  already 
resolved  to  humbly  crave  permission  from  the  Chohan  to  be 
allowed  an  exceptional  privilege  in  this  dire  necessity,  when  I  saw 
his  holy  face  before  me,  with  his  eye  twinkling  in  quite  an  unusual 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  321 

manner,  and  heard  his  voice  :  "  Why  break  the  rule?  I  will  do 
it  myself."  These  simple  words  Kam  mi  ts'har — "  I'll  do  it," 
contain  a  world  of  hope  for  me.  He  has  restored  the  missings 
parts  and  done  it  quite  neatly  too,  as  you  see,  and  even  trans- 
formed a  crumpled  broken  envelope,  very  much  damag^ed,  into  a 
new  one — crest  and  all.  Now  I  know  what  great  power  had  to 
be  used  for  such  a  restoration,  and  this  leads  me  to  hope  for  a 
relaxation  of  severity  one  of  these  days.  Hence  I  thanked  the 
goat  heartily ;  and  since  he  does  not  belong  to  the  ostracised 
Peling  race,  to  show  my  gratitude  I  strengthened  what  remained 
of  teeth  in  his  mouth,  and  set  the  dilapidated  remains  firmly  in 
their  sockets,  so  that  he  may  chew  food  harder  than  English 
letters  for  several  years  yet  to  come. 

And  now  a  few  words  about  the  chela.  Of  course  you  must 
have  suspected  that  since  the  Master  was  prohibited  the  slightest 
tamasha  exhibition,  so  was  the  disciple.  Why  should  you  have 
expected  then,  or  *'  felt  a  little  disappointed  "  with  his  refusing 
to  forward  to  me  your  letters  via  Space — in  your  presence?  The 
little  man  is  a  promising  chap,  far  older  in  years  than  he  looks, 
but  young  in  European  wisdom  and  manners  and  hence  commit- 
ting his  several  indiscretions,  which,  as  I  told  you  put  me  to  the 
blush  and  made  me  feel  foolish  for  the  two  savages.  The  idea  of 
coming  to  you  for  money  was  absurd  in  the  extreme  !  Any  other 
Englishman  but  you  would  have  regarded  them  after  that  as  two 
travelling  charlatans.  I  hope  you  have  received  by  this  time  the 
loan  I  returned  with  many  thanks. 

Nath  is  right  about  the  phonetic  (vulgar)  pronunciation  of  the 
word  **  Kin-ti  "  ;  people  usually  pronounce  it  as  Kin-to,  but  it  is 
not  correct ;  and  he  is  wTong  in  his  view  about  Planetary  Spirits. 
He  does  not  know  the  word,  and  thought  you  meant  the  **  devas  " 
— the  servants  of  the  Dhyan-Chohans.  It  is  the  latter  who  are 
the  **  Planetary  "  and  of  course  it  is  illogical  to  say  that  Adepts 
are  greater  than  they,  since  we  all  strive  to  become  Dhyan- 
Chohans  in  the  end.  Still  there  have  been  adepts  "  greater  '* 
than  the  lower  degrees  of  the  Planetary.  Thus  your  views  are 
not  against  our  doctrines,  as  he  told  you,  but  would  be  had  you 
meant  the  "  devas  "  or  angels,  *'  little  gods."  Occultism  is  cer- 
tainly not  necessary  for  a  good,  pure  Ego  to  become  an  **  Angel  " 
or  Spirit  in,  or  out  of  the  Devachan  since  Angelhood  is  the  result 
of  Karma.  I  believe  you  will  not  complain  of  my  letter  being 
too  short.  It  is  going  to  be  soon  followed  by  another  voluminous 
correspondence  "Answers  to  your  many  Questions."  H.P.B.  is 
mended,  if  not  thoroughly  at  least  for  some  time  to  come. 
With  real  affectionate  regard, 

Yours, 

K.H. 


322  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  LV 

And  now,  friend,  you  have  completed  one  of  your  minor  cycles ; 
have  suffered,  struggled,  triumphed.  Tempted,  you  have  not 
failed,  weak  you  have  gained  strength,  and  the  hard  nature  of 
the  lot  and  ordeal  of  every  aspirant  after  occult  knowledge  is  now 
better  comprehended  by  you,  no  doubt.  Your  flight  from  London 
from  yourself  was  necessary ;  as  was  also  your  choice  of  the 
localities  where  you  could  best  shake  off  the  bad  influences  of 
your  social  *'  season  "  and  of  your  own  house.  It  was  not  best 
that  you  should  have  come  to  Elberfeld  sooner ;  it  is  best  that 
you  should  have  come  now.  For  you  are  better  able  now  to  bear 
the  strain  of  the  present  situation.  The  air  is  full  of  the  pestilence 
of  treachery ;  unmerited  opprobrium  is  showering  upon  the 
Society  and  falsehood  and  forgery  have  been  used  to  overthrow 
it.  Ecclesiastical  England  and  official  Anglo  India  have  secretly 
joined  hands  to  have  their  worst  suspicions  verified  if  possible  and 
at  the  first  plausible  pretext  to  crush  the  movement.  Every  in- 
famous device  is  to  be  employed  in  the  future  as  it  has  in  the 
present  to  discredit  us — as  its  promoters  and  yourselves  as  its 
supporters.  For  the  opposition  represents  enormous  vested 
interests,  and  they  have  enthusiastic  help  from  the  Dugpas — in 
Bhootan  and  the  Vatican  ! 

Among  the  **  shining  marks"  at  which  the  conspirators  aim, 
you  stand.  Tenfold  greater  pains  than  heretofore  will  be  taken 
to  cover  you  with  ridicule  for  your  credulity,  your  belief  in  me — 
especially,  and  to  refute  your  arguments  in  support  of  the  esoteric 
teaching.  They  may  try  to  shake  still  more  than  they  already 
have  your  confidence  with  pretended  letters  alleged  to  have  come 
from  H.P.B.'s  laboratory,  and  others,  or  with  forged  documents 
showing  and  confessing  fraud  and  planning  to  repeat  it.  It  has 
ever  been  thus.  Those  who  have  watched  mankind  through  the 
centuries  of  this  cycle,  have  constantly  seen  the  details  of  this 
death-struggle  between  Truth  and  Error  repeating  themselves. 
Some  of  you  Theosophists  are  now  only  wounded  in  your 
**  honour  "  or  your  purses,  but  those  who  held  the  lamp  in  pre- 
ceding generations  paid  the  penalty  of  their  lives  for  their  know- 
ledge. 

Courage  then,  you  all,  who  would  be  warriors  of  the  one  divine 
Verity ;  keep  on  boldly  and  confidently ;  husband  your  moral 
strength  not  wasting  it  upon  trifles  but  keeping  it  against  great 
occasions  like  the  present  one.  I  warned  you  all  through  Olcott 
in  April  last  of  what  was  ready  to  burst  at  Adyar,  and  told  him 
not  to  be  surprised  when  the  mine  should  be  fired.  All  will  come 
right  in  time — only  you,   the  great  and  prominent  heads  of  the 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  323 

movement  be  steadfast,  wary  and  united.  We  have  gained  our 
object  as  regards  L.C.H.  She  is  much  improved,  and  her  whole 
life  hereafter  will  be  benefited  by  the  training  she  is  passing  thro'. 
To  have  stopped  with  you  would  have  been  to  her  an  irreparable 
psychic  loss.  She  had  this  shown  her,  before  I  actually  consented 
to  interfere  at  her  own  passionate  prayer,  between  you ;  she  was 
ready  to  fly  to  America,  and  but  for  my  intervention  would  have 
done  so.  Worse  than  that ;  her  mind  was  being  rapidly  unsettled 
and  made  useless  as  an  occult  instrument.  False  teachers  were 
getting  her  into  their  power  and  false  revelations  misled  her  and 
those  who  consulted  her.  Your  house,  good  friend,  has  a  colony 
of  Elementaries  quartering  in  it,  and  to  a  sensitive  like  her,  it  was 
as  dangerous  an  atmosphere  to  exist  in  as  would  be  a  fever  ceme- 
tery to  one  subject  to  morbific  physical  influences.  You  should 
be  more  than  ordinarily  careful  when  you  get  back  not  to 
encourage  sensitiveness  in  your  household,  not  to  admit  more  than 
can  he  helped  the  visits  of  known  mediumistic  sensitives.  It 
would  be  well  also  to  burn  wood-fires  in  the  rooms  now  and  then, 
and  carry  about  as  fumigators  open  vessels  (braziers?)  with  burn- 
ing wood.  You  might  also  ask  Damodar  to  send  you  some 
bundles  of  incense-stick  for  you  to  use  for  this  purpose.  These 
are  helps,  but  the  best  of  all  means  to  drive  out  unwelcome  guests 
of  this  sort,  is  to  live  purely  in  deed  and  thought.  The  talismans 
you  have  had  given  you,  will  also  powerfully  aid  you  if  you  keep 
your  confidence  in  them  and  in  us  unbroken.      ( ?) 

You  have  heard  of  the  step  H.P.B.  was  permitted  to  take.  A 
fearful  responsibility  is  cast  upon  Mr.  Olcott ;  a  still  greater — 
owing  to  0,W.  and  Esot:  Buddhisin — upon  you.  For  this  step 
of  hers  is  in  direct  relation  with  and  as  direct  a  result  of  the 
appearance  of  these  two  works.  Your  Karma,  good  friend,  this 
time.  I  hope  you  will  understand  my  meaning  rightly.  But  if 
you  remain  true  to  and  stand  faithfully  by  the  T.S.  you  may  count 
upon  our  aid  and  so  may  all  others  to  the  full  extent  that  they 
shall  deserve  it.  The  original  policy  of  the  T.S.  must  be  vindi- 
cated, if  you  would  not  see  it  fall  into  ruin  and  bury  your  reputa- 
tions under  it.  I  have  told  you  long  ago.  For  years  to  come  the 
Soc.  will  be  unable  to  stand,  when  based  upon  "Tibetan 
Brothers  "  and  phenomena  alone.  All  this  ought  to  have  been 
limited  to  an  inner  and  very  secret  circle.  There  is  a  hero-wor- 
shipping tendency  clearly  showing  itself,  and  you,  my  friend,  are 
not  quite  free  from  it  yourself.  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  change 
that  has  lately  come  over  you,  but  this  does  not  change  the  main 
question.  If  you  would  go  on  with  your  occult  studies  and  literary 
work — then  learn  to  be  loyal  to  the  Idea,  rather  than  to  my  poor 
self.  When  something  is  to  be  done  never  think  whether  I  wish 
it,  before  acting :   I  wish  everything  that  can,  in  great  or  small 


324  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

degree,  push  on  this  agitation.  But  I  am  far  from  being  perfect 
hence  infallible  in  all  I  do;  tho'  it  is  not  quite  as  you  imagine 
having  now  discovered.  For  you  know — or  think  you  know,  of 
one  K.H. — and  can  know  but  of  one,  whereas  there  are  two  dis- 
tinct personages  answering  to  that  name  in  him  you  know.  The 
riddle  is  only  apparent  and  easy  to  solve,  were  you  only  to  know 
what  a  real  Mahatma  is.  You  have  seen  by  the  Kiddle  incident — 
perchance  allowed  to  develop  to  its  bitter  end  for  a  purpose — that 
even  an  '*  adept  "  when  acting  in  his  body  is  not  beyond  mistakes 
due  to  human  carelessness.  You  now  understand  that  he  is  as 
likely  as  not  to  make  himself  look  absurd  in  the  eyes  of  those 
who  have  no  right  understanding  of  the  phenomena  of  thought- 
transference  and  astral  precipitations — and  all  this,  thro'  lack  of 
simple  caution.  There  is  always  that  danger  if  one  has  neglected 
to  ascertain  whether  the  words  and  sentences  rushing  into  the 
mind  have  come  all  from  within  or  whether  some  may  have  been 
impressed  from  without.  I  feel  sorry  to  have  brought  you  into 
such  a  false  position  before  your  many  enemies  and  even  your 
friends.  That  was  one  of  the  reasons  why,  I  had  hesitated  to 
give  my  consent  to  print  my  private  letters  and  specifically  excluded 
a  few  of  the  series  from  the  prohibition.  I  had  no  time  to  verify 
their  contents — nor  have  I  now.  I  have  a  habit  of  often  quoting, 
minus  quotation  marks — from  the  maze  of  what  I  get  in  the 
countless  folios  of  our  Akasic  libraries,  so  to  say — with  eyes  shut. 
Sometimes  I  may  give  out  thoughts  that  will  see  light  years  later ; 
at  other  times  what  an  orator,  a  Cicero  may  have  pronounced  ages 
earlier,  and  at  others,  what  was  not  only  pronounced  by  modern 
lips  but  already  either  written  or  printed — as  in  the  Kiddle  case. 
All  this  I  do  (not  being  a  trained  writer  for  the  Press)  without  the 
smaller  concern  as  to  where  the  sentences  and  strings  of  words 
may  have  come  from,  so  long  as  they  sen^e  to  express,  and  fit  in 
with  my  own  thoughts.  I  have  received  a  lesson  now  on  the 
European  plane  on  the  danger  of  corresponding  with  western 
literati!  But  my  **  inspirer  "  Mr.  Kiddle  is  none  the  less  un- 
grateful, since  to  me  alone  he  owes  the  distinguished  honour  of 
having  become  known  by  name,  and  having  his  utterances 
repeated  even  by  the  grave  lips  of  Cambridge  **  Dons."  If  fame 
is  sweet  to  him  why  will  he  not  be  consoled  with  the  thought,  that 
the  case  of  the  "Kiddle — K.H.  parallel  passages"  has  now 
become  as  much  a  cause  celehre  in  the  department  of  "  who  is 
who  '* — and  *'  which  plagiarized  from  the  other?  "  as  the  Bacon- 
Shakespeare  mystery ;  that  in  intensity  of  scientific  research  if  not 
of  value,  our  case  is  on  a  par  with  that  of  our  two  great  pre- 
decessors. 

But   the    situation — however    amusing    in    one    way — is   more 
serious  for  the  Society;  and  the  "  parallel  passages  "  must  yield 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  325 

first  place  to  the  "  Christian-mission-Coulomb  "  conspiracy.  Turn 
then  to  the  latter  all  your  thoughts,  good  friend — if  friend  all  not- 
withstanding. You  are  very  wrong  to  contemplate  absence  from 
London  the  coming  winter.  But  I  shall  not  urge  you,  if  you  do 
not  feel  equal  to  the  situation.  At  any  rate,  if  you  do  desert  the 
'•  Inner  Circle"  some  other  arrangement  has  to  be  mad^:  it  is 
out  of  question  for  me  to  be  corresponding  with,  and  teaching 
both.  Either  you  have  to  be  my  mouthpiece  and  secretary  in  the 
Circle,  or  I  shall  have  to  use  somebody  else  as  my  delegate,  and 
thus  have  positively  no  time  to  correspond  with  you.  They  have 
pledged  themselves — (most  of  them)  to  me  for  life  and  death — the 
copy  of  the  pledge  is  in  the  hands  of  Maha-Chohan — and  I  am 
bound  to  them. 

I  can  now  send  my  occasional  instructions  and  letters  with  any 
certainty  only  thro'  Damodar.  But  before  I  can  do  even  so  much 
the  Soc.  especially  the  H.Qrs,  will  have  to  pass  first  thro'  the 
coming  crisis.  If  you  still  care  to  renew  the  occult  teachings 
save  first  our  post-office.  H.P.B. — ^I  say  again  is  not  to  be 
approached  any  longer  without  her  full  consent.  She  has  earned 
so  much,  and  has  to  be  left  alone.  She  is  permitted  to  retire  for 
three  reasons  (i)  to  disconnect  the  T.S.  from  her  phenomena  now 
tried  to  be  represented  all  fraudulent ;  (2)  to  help  it  by  removing 
the  chief  cause  of  the  hatred  against  it ;  (3)  to  try  and  restore 
the  health  of  the  body,  so  it  may  be  used  for  some  years  longer. 
And  now  as  to  the  details  consult  all  of  you  together  :  for  that  I 
have  asked  them  to  send  for  you.  The  sky  is  black  now,  but  for- 
get not  the  hopeful  motto  ''Post  nubila  Phoebus!"  Blessings 
uf>on  you,  and  your  ever  loyal  lady. 

K.H. 


LETTER  No.  LVI 

Received  January,   1883,  Allahabad. 

It  is  my  turn,  kind  friend,  to  intercede  for  lenient  treatment, 
especially  a  very  prudent  one  of  Mr.  Hume,  and  I  ask  you  to  give 
me  a  hearing.  You  must  not  overlook  an  element  which  has 
much  to  do  with  his  moral  turpitude,  one,  which  certainly  does 
not  excuse  though  it  mitigates  in  a  degree  his  offence.  He  is 
pushed  on  and  half  maddened  by  evil  powers,  which  he  has 
attracted  to  himself  and  come  under  subjection  to  by  his  innate 
moral  turbulence.  Near  him  lives  a  fakir  who  has  an  animalizing 
aura  about  him ;  the  parting  curses — I  dare  not  say  they  were 
unjust  or  unprovoked — of  Mr.  Fern — have  produced  their  effect ; 
and  while  his  own  self-painted  adeptship  is  entirely  imaginary,  he 


326  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

has  nevertheless,  by  the  injudicious  practice  of  pranayan,  de- 
veloped in  himself  to  some  extent  mediumship — and  is  tainted  for 
life  with  it.  He  has  opened  wide  the  door  to  influences  from  the 
wrong  quarter,  and  is,  henceforth  almost  impervious  to  those 
from  the  right.  So,  he  must  not  be  sweepingly  judged  as  one 
who  has  sinned  with  thorough  and  entire  unmixed  deliberation. 
Avoid  him,  but  do  not  madden  him  still  more,  for  he  is  more  than 
dangerous  now,  to  one,  who  is  unable  like  yourself,  to  fight  him 
with  his  own  weapons.  Suffice  that  you  should  know  him — as 
he  is,  and  so  be  forewarned  and  prudent  in  future,  since  for  the 
present  he  has  succeeded  in  spoiling  our  plans  in  the  most  hopeful 
quarters.  He  is  now  in  his  days — which  will  extend  for  weeks 
and  perhaps  months — of  the  most  selfish  vanity  and  combative- 
ness — during  which  he  is  capable  of  doing  most  desperate  things. 
So,  think  twice,  my  good  friend  before  you  precipitate  a  crisis 
the  result  of  which  might  thus  be  very  severe. 

As    regards   his   connection   with   Theosophical    matters,    he  is 
largely  your  chela,  the  captive  of  your  spear  and  bow;  but,  since 
you  have  thus  acted  under  my  own  instructions — I  take  the  blame 
upon  myself — the  whole  blame,  understand  me  well ;  and  I  would 
not  allow  a  single  speck  of  the  present  disastrous  results  to  taint 
your  Karma.     But  the  latter  is  a  thing  of  the  future,  and  in  the 
meanwhile  he  can  play  the  deuce  with  yourself  and  Society.     It 
cost  you  no  little  trouble  to  get  him  in  and  now  you  must  beware 
how  you  prematurely  hurl  him  out.     For,  you  have  seen  from  his 
correspondence,   what  malice  he   is  capable  of,   and  how   indus- 
triously he  can  work  to  breed  suspicion  and  discontent  so  as  to 
centre  interest  and  loyalty  upon  himself.     The  T.S.  has  just  tided 
safely  through  a  tempest  raised  by  another  vain  and  ambitious 
malcontent — Dayanand  S. — and  if  the  issue  has  been  favourable 
it  is  because  D.S.  had  a  short  memory  and  was  made  to  forget 
all  about  the  documents  he  had  issued.     It  is  the  prudent  part, 
therefore,  to  wait,   and  watch,   and  lay  by  the  materials  for  the 
defence  against  the  time  when  this  new  iconoclast  shall  '*  charge 
upon  your  entrenchment"; — if  he  ever  does,    which   up  to   this 
moment,  is  not  determined,  but  which  would  be  almost  inevitable 
if  he  were  suddenly  denounced  by  yourself.     I  do  not  ask  you  to 
evince  friendship  for  him,  (nay,  I  would  strongly  advise  you  not 
to  even  write  to  him  yourself  for  some  time  to  come,  and  when 
pressed  for  an  explanation,   ask  your  good  lady  of  whom  he  is 
afraid  and  whom  he  is  forced  to  respect  to  tell  him  bluntly  and 
honestly  the  truth — in   a  way  only  women  are  capable  of) — but 
simply  to  postpone  an  open  breach   until  the  hour  comes  when 
longer   delay   would   be   unpardonable.     Neither   of   us   ought   to 
imperil  a  cause  whose  promotion   is  a  duty  paramount  to  con- 
sideration of  Self. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  327 

I  must  not  close  my  letter  with  this  black  image,  but  tell  you 
that  in  Madras  there  are  fairer  prospects  of  success  than  at  Cal- 
cutta. In  a  few  days  you  will  hear  the  results  of  Subba  Row's 
work. 

How  do  you  like  "  Mr.  Isaacs  "?  As  you  will  see  (for  you 
must  read  and  review  it)  the  book  is  the  Western  echo  of  the 
Anglo-Indian  "Occult  world."  The  ex-editor  of  the  "Indian 
Herald  "  has  not  quite  grown  up  to  the  size  of  the  editor 
of  the  Pioneer,  but  something  is  being  done  in  the  same 
direction.  The  cruel  enemy  of  1880-1  is  turned  in  quasi  an 
admirer  in  1882.  I  think  it  rather  hard  to  see  people  finding 
K.H.  "  Lai  Singh  "—mirrored  in  "  Ram  Lai  "—the  "  all-grey  " 
adept,  of  Mr.  Marion  Crawford.  Had  the  book  been  written  a 
year  ago  I  might  have  said  the  author  was  himself  gris  when 
making  "  Ram  Lai  "  talk  of  eternal  love  and  bliss  in  the  realms 
of  the  world  of  Spirit.  But  since  a  certain  vision  procured  for 
him  by  the  famous  "  Ski  "  in  whom  Mr.  C.  C.  M.  does  not 
believe — the  man  gave  up  entirely  drinking.  One  man  more 
saved.  I  forgive  him  my  very  "  grey  "  appearance  and  even 
Shere-Ali ! 

Yours  affectionately, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LVII 

Received  6/1/83. 
My  dear  friend, 

I  approach  a  subject  which  I  have  purposely  avoided  for  several 
months,  until  furnished  with  proofs  that  would  appear  conclusive 
even  in  your  sight.  We  are  not — as  you  know — always  of  the  same 
way  of  thinking,  nor  has  that  which  to  us  is — fact — any  weight  in 
your  opinion  unless  it  violates  in  no  way  the  Western  methods  of 
judging  it.  But  now  the  time  has  come  for  us,  to  try  to  have 
you,  at  least,  understand  us  better  than  we  hitherto  have  been 
even  by  some  of  the  best  and  most  earnest  amongst  western 
Theosophists — such  for  instance  as  C.  C.  Massey.  And  though  I 
would  be  the  last  man  living  to  seek  to  make  you  follow  in  my 
wake  as  your  *'  prophet  "  and  "  inspirer,"  I  would,  nevertheless, 
feel  truly  sorry  were  you  ever  brought  to  regard  me  as  a  "  moral 
paradox,"  having  to  suffer  me  either  as  one  guilty  of  a  false 
assumption  of  power  I  never  had,  or — of  misusing  them  to  screen 
unworthy  objects  and,  as  unworthy  persons.  Mr.  Massey 's  letter 
explains  to  you  what  I  mean  ;  that  which  seems  conclusive  proof 
to  him  and  unimpeachable  evidence,  is  neither  for  me — who  knows 
the  whole  truth.     On  this  last  day  of  your  year,   1882,  his  name 


328  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

comes  third  on  the  list  of  failures, — somethings  (I  hasten  to  say 
for  fear  of  a  new  misconception)  that  has  nothing  to  do  whatever 
with  the  present  arrangement  regarding  the  proposed  new  Branch 
in  London,  yet  everything  with  his  personal  progress.  I  deeply 
regret  it,  but  have  no  right  to  bind  myself  so  securely  to  any 
person  or  persons  by  ties  of  personal  sympathy  and  esteem  that 
my  movements  shall  be  crippled,  and  I,  unable  to  lead  the  rest  to 
something  grander  and  nobler  than  their  present  faith.  There- 
fore, I  chose  to  leave  him  in  his  present  errors.  The  brief  mean- 
ing of  this  is  the  following :  Mr.  Massey  labours  under  the 
strangest  misconceptions,  and  (latterly)  **  dreams  dreams  " — 
though  no  medium,  as  his  friend,  Mr.  S.  Moses.  With  all  he  is 
the  noblest,  purest,  in  short,  one  of  the  best  men  I  know,  though 
occasionally  too  trusting  in  wrong  directions.  But  he  lacks 
entirely — correct  intuition.  It  will  come  to  him  later  on,  when 
neither  H.P.B.  or  Olcott  will  be  there.  Until  then — remember 
and  tell  him  so  :  we  demand  neither  allegiance,  recognition 
(whether  public  or  private)  nor  will  we  have  anything  to  do  with 
or  say  to  the  British  Branch, — except  through  you.  Four  Euro- 
peans were  placed  on  probation  twelve  months  ago ;  of  the  four — 
only  one,  yourself,  was  found  worthy  of  our  trust.  This  year  it 
will  be  Societies  instead  of  individuals  that  will  be  tested.  The 
result  will  depend  on  their  collective  work  and  Mr.  Massey  errs 
when  hoping  that  I  am  prepared  to  join  the  motley  crowd  of  Mrs. 
K. 's  "inspirers."  Let  them  remain  under  their  masks  of  St. 
John  the  Baptist  and  like  Biblical  aristocrats.  Provided  the  latter 
teach  our  doctrines — however  muddled  up  with  foreign  chaff — a 
great  point  will  be  gained.  C.C.M.  wants  light — he  is  welcome 
to  it — through  you.  Since  it  is  all  he  wants  what  matters  it 
whether  he  regards  the  *'  light-bearer  "  handing  his  torch  to  you 
— as  a  man  of  clean  or  unclean  hands,  so  long  as  light  itself  is  not 
affected  by  it?  Only  let  me  give  you  a  warning.  An  affair  now 
so  trivial  as  to  seem  but  the  innocent  expression  of  feminine 
vanity  may,  unless  at  once  set  aright,  produce  very  evil  conse- 
quences. In  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Kingsford  to  Mr.  Massey  con- 
ditionally accepting  the  presidentship  of  the  British  T.S.  she  ex- 
presses her  belief — nay,  points  it  out  as  an  undeniable  fact — that 
before  the  appearance  of  the  **  Perfect  Way  "  no  one  '*  knew 
what  the  Oriental  school  really  held  about  Reincarnation";  and 
adds  that  "  seeing  how  much  has  been  told  in  that  book  the 
adepts  are  hastening  to  unlock  their  own  treasures,  so  *  grudg- 
ingly doled  out  hitherto  '  (as  H.X.  puts  it)."  Mr.  Massey,  there- 
upon gives  in  reply  a  full  adherence  to  this  theory,  and  blossoms 
into  an  adroit  compliment  to  the  lady  that  would  not  discredit  a 
plenipotentiary.  "Probably,"  says  he,  "it  is  felt  (by  the 
Brothers)  that  a  community  among  whom  such  a  work  as  '*  The 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  329 

Perfect  Way  "  can  be  produced  and  find  acceptance  is  ready  for 
the  light  !  !  Now,  let  this  idea  gain  currency,  and  it  will  tend 
to  convert  into  a  sect  the  school  of,  the  highly  estimable 
authoress,  who,  albeit  a  fifth  rounder,  is  not  exempt  from  quite  a 
considerable  dose  of  vanity  and  despotism,  hence  bigotry.  Thus, 
elevate  the  misconception  into  an  undue  importance ;  impair  there- 
by her  own  spiritual  condition  by  feeding  the  latent  sense  of 
Messiahship ;  and  you  will  have  obstructed  the  cause  of  free  and 
general  independent  enquiry  which  her  **  Initiators  "  as  well  as 
we  would  wish  promoted.  Write  then,  good  friend,  to  Mr. 
Massey  the  truth.  Tell  him  that  you  were  possessed  of  the 
Oriental  views  of  reincarnation  several  months  before  the  work  in 
question  had  appeared — since  it  is  in  July  (18  months  ago)  that, 
you  began  being  taught  the  difference  between  Reincarnation  k 
la  Allan  Kardec,  or  personal  rebirth — and  that  of  the  Spiritual 
monad  ;  a  difference  first  pointed  out  to  you  on  July  5th  at  Bom- 
bay. And  to  allay  another  uneasiness  of  hers,  say  that  no 
allegiance  by  her  to  the  *'  Brothers  "  will  be  expected,  (nor  even 
accepted  if  offered)  in  so  much  as  we  have  no  present  intention  of 
making  any  further  experiments  with  Europeans  and  will  use  no 
other  channel  than  yourself  to  impart  our  Arhat  philosophy.  The 
intended  experiment  with  Mr.  Hume  in  1882  failed  most  sadly. 
Better  than  your  Wren  are  we  entitled  to  the  motto  festina  lente ! 
And  now,  you  will  please  follow  me  into  still  deeper  waters. 
An  unsteady,  wavering,  suspicious  candidate  at  one  end  of  the 
line ;  a  declared  unprincipled^  (I  say  the  word  and  maintain  it) 
vindictive  enemy  at  the  other  end ;  and  you  will  agree  that 
between  London  and  Simla  we  are  not  very  likely  to  appear  in 
either  a  very  attractive  or  anything  like  a  true  light.  Personally 
such  a  state  of  things  is  hardly  calculated  to  deprive  us  of  sleep ; 
as  regards  the  future  progress  of  the  British  T.S.  and  a  few  other 
Theosophists,  the  current  of  enmity  travelling  between  the  two 
places  is  sure  to  affect  all  those  who  will  find  themselves  on  its 
way — even  yourself,  in  the  long  run,  perchance.  Who  of  you 
could  disbelieve  the  explicit  statements  of  two  **  gentlemen  "  both 
noted  for  their  intellectual  eminence,  and  one  of  whom,  at  least, 
is  as  incapable  of  uttering  an  untruth  as  of  flying  in  the  air. 
Thus,  end  of  the  cycle  notwithstanding,  there  is  a  great  personal 
danger  for  the  Bsh.T.S.  as  for  yourself.  No  harm  can  come  now 
to  the  Society ;  much  mischief  is  in  store  for  its  proposed  Branch 
and  its  supporters,  unless  yourself  and  Mr.  Massey  are  furnished 
with  some  facts  and  a  key  to  the  true  situation.  Now,  if  for 
certain  and  very  good  reasons,  I  have  to  leave  C.C.M.  to  his 
delusions  of  guilt,  regarding  H.P.B.,  and  my  own  moral 
shakiness,  the  time  is  ripe  to  show  to  you  Mr.  Hume  in  his  true 
light,  thus  making  way  with  one  false  witness  against  us,  while 


330  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

deeply  regrettingf  the  fact  that  I  am  bound  by  the  rules  of  our 
Order  and  my  own  sense  of  honour  (however  little  it  may  be 
worth  in  the  eyes  of  a  European)  not  to  divulge  at  present  certain 
facts  that  would  show  C.C.M.  at  once,  how  deeply  he  is  in  error. 
I  may  tell  you  no  news  if  I  say  that  it  was  Mr.  Hume's  attitude 
when  the  Eclectic  was  formed  that  caused  our  chiefs  to  bring  Mr. 
Fern  and  Mr.  Hume  together.  The  latter  reproached  us 
vehemently  for  refusing  to  take  in  as  chelas — himself,  and  that, 
sweet,  handsome,  spiritual  and  truth  aspiring  boy — Fern.  We 
were  daily  dictated  laws  and  as  daily  taken  to  task  for  being  un- 
able to  realize  our  own  interests.  And  it  will  be  no  news  though 
it  may  disgust  and  shock  you,  to  learn  that  the  two  were  brought 
into  the  closest  relationship  in  order  to  bring  out  their  mutual 
virtues  and  defects — each  to  shine  in  his  own  true  light.  Such 
are  the  laws  of  Eastern  probation.  Fern  was  a  most  remarkable 
psychic  subject,  naturally — very  spiritually  inclined,  but  cor- 
rupted by  Jesuit  masters,  and  with  his  sixth  and  seventh  Prin- 
ciples completely  dormant  and  paralysed  within  him.  No  idea  of 
right  and  wrong  whatever ;  in  short — irresponsible  for  anything 
but  the  direct  and  voluntary  actions  of  the  animal  man.  I  would 
not  have  burdened  myself  with  such  a  subject  knowing  before- 
hand that  he  was  sure  to  fail.  M.  consented,  for  the  chiefs  have 
so  wished  it ;  and  he  deemed  it  useful  and  good  to  show  to  you 
the  moral  stamina  and  worth  of  him  whom  you  regarded  and 
called  a  friend.  Mr.  H. — you  think,  though  lacking  the  finer, 
better  feelings  of  a  gentleman  is  yet  one  by  his  instincts  as  well 
as  by  birth.  I  do  not  pretend  to  be  thoroughly  well  acquainted 
with  the  code  of  honour  of  Western  nations.  Yet,  I  doubt, 
whether  a  man  who,  during  the  absence  of  the  proprietor  of 
certain  private  letters,  avails  himself  of  the  Key  from  the  pocket 
of  a  waistcoat  carelessly  left  on  the  verandah  during  work,  opens 
with  it  the  drawer  of  the  writing  desk,  reads  the  private  letters 
of  that  person,  takes  notes  from  them  and  then  uses  those  con- 
tents as  a  weapon  to  satisfy  his  hatred  and  vindictiveness  against 
their  writer — I  doubt,  I  say,  whether  even  in  the  West  such  a 
man  would  be  regarded  as  the  ideal  of  even  the  average  gentle- 
man. And  this,  and  much  more  /  maintain,  was  done  by  Mr. 
Hume.  Had  I  told  you  of  it  last  August  you  would  have  never 
believed  me.  And  now  I  am  prepared  to  prove  it  over  his  own 
signature.  Having  been  caught  in  the  same  honest  occupation 
by  M.  twice,  my  Brother  wTote  purposely  (or  rather  caused 
Damodar  purposely  to  write)  a  certain  letter  to  Fern  enclosing  a 
copy  of  a  letter  of  Mr.  H.'s  to  me.  The  knowledge  of  their 
contents  was  to  bring  out  to  light,  when  the  time  came,  the  true 
gentlemanly  instincts  and  the  honesty  of  him,  who  sets  himself 
so  high  above  humanity.     He  is  now  caught  in  his  own  meshes. 


PKOBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  331 

Hatred,  and  the  irresistible  thirst  of  abusing  and  viHfying  in  a 
letter  to  Olcott  one,  who  is  so  immeasurably  higher  than  all  his 
detractors,  have  led  Mr.  Hume  into  an  imprudent  confession. 
When  caught  and  cornered — he  resorts  to  a  down-right,  bare- 
faced lie, 

I  am  going,  after  this  preliminary  entree  en  matidre  and  neces- 
sary explanation  to   make   you   acquainted   with  certain   extracts 
from  private  letters  not  intended  for  your  eye,   nevertheless,   far 
from  *'  confidential  "  since  in  nearly  every  one  of  them  Mr.    H. 
begs  the  addressee  to  have  them  read  by  other  theosophists.     I 
hope  this  will  not  be  imputed  to  me  as  a  mark  of  **  ungentlemanly 
instincts  "  by  you.     As  to  every  other  man,  since,  now-a-days,  a 
man   universally   recognised   as   a   "gentleman"   is   often   a   low 
wretch,  and  gentlemanly  externals  often  hide  the  soul  of  a  villain 
— he  is  welcome  to  regard  me  in  any  light  he  pleases.     These 
extracts  I  give  you  because  it  becomes  absolutely  necessary  that 
you  should  be  correctly  informed  of  the  true  nature  of  him,  who 
now  passes  his  time  in  writing  letters  to  the  London  theosophists 
and   candidates  for   membership — with   the  determined   object  of 
setting    every    mystic    in    the    West    against    a    Brotherhood    of 
**  atheists,  hypocrites,  and  sorcerers."     It  will  help  to  guide  your 
actions  in  the  event  of  possible  contingencies,  and  mischief  caused 
by  your  friend  and  our  well-wisher,   who,   while  denouncing  my 
Brother,  my  more  than  friend,  as  a  pilferer,  coward,  liar,  and  the 
incarnation  of  baseness,  insults  me  with  words  of  pitying  praise 
which    he   thinks    I    am    traitor    enough    to    accept    and    imbecile 
enough  not  to  weigh  at  their  value.     Remember — such  a  friend 
is  to   be   guarded    against   as    one    takes    precautions    against   a 
duellist  who  wears  a  corslet  beneath  his  shirt.     His  good  actions 
are  many,  vices  far  more  numerous ;  the  former  have  always  been 
largely   controlled  and  promoted  by   his   inordinate   self-love   and 
combativeness ;  and  if  it  is  not  yet  determined  which  will  finally 
control  the  impetus  whose  outcome  will  be  his  next  birth,  we  may 
prophesy  with  a  degree  of  perfect  assurance,   that  he  will  never 
become  an  adept  either  in  this  or  his  future  life.     His  *'  Spiritual  " 
aspirations  received  a  full  chance  to  develop.     He  was  tested,  as 
all  have  to  be — as  the  poor  moth  was,  who  was  scorched  in  the 
candle  of  Rothney  Castle  and  its  associations — but  the  victor  in 
the   struggle  for  adeptship  was   ever   Self  and   Self  alone.     His 
cerebral  visions  have  always  painted  for  him  the  image  of  a  new 
Regenerator    of    Mankind    in    place    of    the    "  Brothers  "    whose 
ignorance  and  black  magical  dealings  he  has  found  out.     That 
new  Avatar  does  not  live  at  Almorah  but  on  Jakko.     And  so  the 
demon — Vanity — which    has    ruined     Dayanand    is    ruining    our 
quondam  friend  "  and  preparing  him  to  make  an  assault  upon  us 
and   the  T.S.   far   more   savage  than   the   Swami's.     The  future 


332  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

however  may  take  care  of  itself;  I  shall  only  have  to  trouble  you 
now  with  the  data  above  indicated.  You  will  now  realize,  per- 
chance, why  I  was  made  to  collect  evidence  of  his  untruthful, 
cunning  nature  in  October  last.  Nothing,  my  friend, — even 
apparently  absurd  and  reprehensible  actions — is  done  by  us  with- 
out a  purpose. 

On  the  ist  of  December,  Mr.  H.  writing  to  Colonel  O.  said  of 
us  :  "As  for  the  Brothers,  I  have  a  sincere  affection  for  K.H.  and 
always  shall  have,  and  as  for  the  others  /  have  no  doubt  that  they 
are  very  good  men,  and  acting  according  to  their  lights.  But  as 
to  their  system,  I  am,  of  course,  entirely  opposed,  .  .  .  but 
that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  exoteric  practical  aims  of  the 
T.S.  in  which  and  in  their  furtherance  I  can  as  cordially  and 
cheerfully  co-operate  with  your  good  Brothers  as  etc.  etc." 

Eight  days  earlier  (22nd  November,)  he  had  written  to  P. 
Sreenevas  Row,  Judge  S.C.C.  at  Madras, — "  I  find  the  Brother- 
hood a  set  of  wicked  selfish  men,  caring  as  a  body  for  nothing 
but  their  own  spiritual  development  (mind,  in  this  respect  K.H. 
is  an  exception  but  he  is  I  believe  the  only  one)  and  their  system 
one  of  deception  and  tainted  largely  with  sorcery  (!)  in  that  they 
employ  spooks,  i.e.  elementals  to  perform  their  phenomena.  As 
to  deception,  once  a  man  has  become  a  chela  and  bound  himself 
by  the  vows  they  exact,  you  cannot  believe  a  word  he  says; 
he  will  lie  systematically ;  as  for  sorcery,  the  fact  is  that 
until  the  time  of  Sonkapa,  .  .  .  they  were  a  set  of  unmiti- 
gated, vile  sorcerers.  .  .  .  Every  chela  is  a  slave — a  slave  of 
the  most  abject  description — a  sham  in  thought,  as  well  as  in 
word  and  deed  .  .  .  ;  our  Society  .  .  .  is  an  edifice 
noble  in  outside  show — but  built  not  on  the  rock  of  ages,  but  on 
the  shifting  sands  of  atheism,  a  whited  sepulchre  all  bright 
.  .  .  inside  full  of  deceit  and  the  dead  bones  of  a  pernicious, 
Jesuitical  system.  .  .  .  You  are  at  liberty  to  make  what  use 
you  please  of  this  letter  inside  the  Society,''  etc. 

On  the  9th  of  the  same  month  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Olcott  of  the 
"  manifest  selfishness  of  the  Brotherhood,  intent  solely  on  their 
spiritual  development." 

On  the  8th  of  September  in  a  letter  to  12  chelas  (the  very  ones 
he  w^as  referring  to  in  the  letter  to  Judge  Sreenavas  Row  of 
November  22nd — after  having  received  from  them  an  exasperat- 
ingly  candid  joint  reply  to  the  aforesaid  diplomatic  letter — as  liars 
and  bound  slaves) — he  said,  as  you  know,  he  **  should  not  have 
expected  any  European  to  read  between  the  lines,"  of  his  plot  in 
the  HX  letter  in  the  Theosophist ;  but  "a  set  of  Brahmins — the 
subtlest  minds,  in  the  world — not  ordinary  Brahmins,  but  men  of 
the  highest,  noblest  training,  etc"  (!  !).  They— "  may  rest 
assured  that  I  (he)  shall  never  say  or  do  anything  that  is  not  for 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  333 

the  advantage  of  the  Brothers,  the  Society  and  all  its  objects." 
.  .  .  (Thus  it  seems  the  charges  of  sorcery  and  dishonesty  is 
to  the  "  advantage  "  of  Asiatic  adepts).  In  this  same  letter,  if 
you  remember,  he  adds  that  it  **  is  the  most  efficient  vi^eapon  for 
the  conversion  of  the  infidels  at  home  yet  forged,"  and  that  he 
"of  course  expected  "  (by  writing  this  letter  in  the  Theosophist) 
*'  to  take  our  dear  old  lady  in — /  could  not  take  her  into  the 
plot/'  etc.  etc. 

With  all  his  cunning  and  diplomacy  he  really  seems  to  suffer 
from  a  loss  of  memory.  Not  only  had  he  taken  the  *'  dear  old 
lady  "  into  the  plot  in  a  long  private  letter  written  to  her  a  few 
hours  after  the  said  "  efficient  weapon  "  had  been  sent  for. 
publication,  (a  letter  sent  by  her  to  you  and  which  you  lost  in 
your  packing  up  at  Simla  to  come  down)  but  he  had  actually  gone 
out  of  his  way  to  put  a  few  words  of  explanation  on  the  back  of 
the  said  "  Letter/'  It  is  preserved  as  every  other  MSS.  by 
Damodar  and  the  note  runs  thus  : — **  Please  print  this  carefully 
and  without  alteration.  It  answers  admirably  Davidson's  and 
other  letters  from  home."  .  .  .  (Extracts  from  these  letters 
were  enclosed  in  his  manuscript). — **  We  can't  long,  I  fear, 
bolster  up — ^but  hints  like  these  will  help  to  break  the  fall  " 
etc.     .     .     . 

Having  thus  himself  forged  the  most  efficient  weapon  for  the 
conversion  of  the  infidels  at  home,  as  to  our  actual  existence,  and 
unable  henceforth  to  deny  it,  what  better  antidote  than  to  add 
to  the  hints  therein  contained  full  and  well  defined  charges  of 
sorcery,  etc.  ? 

When  accused  by  the  12  Chelas  in  their  joint  answer  to  his 
letter  to  them,  of  a  deliberate  falsification  of  facts  with  reference 
to  the  *'  dear  old  lady  "  whom  he  had,  notwithstanding  all  he 
could  say  to  the  contrary,  taken  into  the  plot  he  writes  in  a  letter 
to  Subba  Row  that  he  had  never  done  so.  That  his  letter  to  the 
•'  Madam  "  explaining  to  her  the  whys  and  reasons  for  that 
**  Letter"  of  his  by  "  H.X." — ^was  written  and  sent  to  her  long 
after  the  said  denunciatory  Letter  **  was  already  in  print/'  To  this 
Subba  Row,  in  his  letter  to  whom  he  had  bitterly  abused  and 
vilified  M.  answered  by  quoting  to  him  the  very  words  he  had 
written  on  the  back  of  the  manuscript  thus  showing  to  him  how 
useless  was  any  further  falsehood.  And  now  you  may  judge  of 
his  love  for  Subba  Row  ! 

And  now  comes  the  bouquet.  Writing  on  the  ist  of  December 
to  Mr.  Olcott  (letter  first  above  referred  to),  he  distinctly  claims 
adept  powers.  '*  I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  join  you  in  the  body 
in  Bombay — but — if  allowed  I  may  nevertheless  perhaps  assist  you 
there — "  Yet  in  Fern's  case  he  says  "it  is  a  perfect  chaos 
and  no  one  can  tell  what  is  really  owing  and  what  is  not;  "  and 

23 


334  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

several  letters  upon  the  same  topic  teem  with  acknowledgfrnent 
that  he  had  no  power  to  see  what  was  g^oing  on  * '  during  the  past 
six  months."  Quite  the  contrary,  it  would  seem,  since  in  a  letter 
to  me  within  this  period  he  describes  himself  as  '*  not  on  a  level 
spiritually  with  him  (Fern)  Sinnett  "  and  others.  He  did  not 
dare  brag"  to  me  of  his  spiritual  clairvoyancy ;  but  now,  having 
"  broken  forever  with  the  Tibetan  Sorcerers  "  his  potential  adept 
powers  have  suddenly  developed  into  monstrous  proportions. 
They  must  have  been  from  birth  marvellously  great  since,  he  in- 
forms Olcott  (same  letter)  that  '*  a  certain  amount  of  Pranayam 
for  a  few  months  (six  weeks  in  all)  was  necessary  to  ensure  con- 
centration— at  first.     .     .     .     /  have  passed  that  stage  and — I  am 

A  YOGI.'' 

The  charge  preferred  now  against  him  is  of  so  grave  a 
character  that  I  would  have  never  asked  you  to  believe  it  on  my 
simple  assertion.  Hence — ^this  long  letter,  and  the  following 
evidence  which,  please  read  with  the  utmost  care  and  drawing 
your  conclusions  solely  on  that  evidence. 

In  his  July  letter  to  me  he  imputes  to  us  the  blame  for  Fern's 
course  of  falsehood,  his  pretended  visions  and  pretended  inspira- 
tions from  us;  and  in  the  letter  to  Mr.  Olcott  (December  ist)  he 
charges  Morya,  my  beloved  brother,  with  acting  **  in  a  most  dis- 
honourable manner,"  adding  that  he  has  **  never  since  looked 
upon  him  as  a  gentleman,  for  having  caused  Damodar  .  .  . 
to  send  Fern  a  transcript  of  my  confidential  report  on  him. 
.  ."  This  he  regards  as  **  a  dishonourable  breach  of  con- 
fidence "  so  gross  that  "  Mortar  was  afraid  (  !  ! )  to  let  even  K.H. 
know  how  he  had  stolen  and  made  a  bad  use  of  my  letter  to  him. 
K.H.  is  a  gentleman  I  believe  and  would  scorn  so  base  an  act." 
No  doubt,  I  would  had  it  been  done  without  my  knowledge  and 
were  it  not  absolutely  necessary — in  view  of  clearly  foreseen 
events  to  bring  Mr.  Hume  to  betray  himself  and  thus  counteract 
the  influence  and  authority  of  his  vindictive  nature.  The  letter  so 
transcribed  was  not  marked  confidential,  and  the  words  **  I  am 
ready  to  say  so  to  Fern's  face,  at  any  day  " — are  there.  How- 
ever— ^the  unmeasured  abuse  and  his  truly  saintly  and  gentlemanly 
indignation  at  M.'s  treachery  are  followed  by  these  words  of  con- 
fession ;^  very  startling  as  you  will  see  : — **  Fern  does  not,  let  me 
do  him  that  justice,  know  to  this  day  that  I  knew  of  this  "  i.e.  of 
the  letter  pilfered  by  M.  and  sent  to  Fern  through  Damodar.  In 
short,  then  Mr.  Hume  had  means  of  reading  the  contents  of  a 
private  letter  addressed  to  Fern  registered,  sent  to  his  (Mr. 
Hume's)  care,  kept  in  a  drawer  of  a  table  belonging  to  the  house. 
The  proof  is  complete  since  it  is  himself  who  furnishes  it.       How 

1  Fern  was  at  Bombay  and  he  dreaded  the  just  denial  of  even  a  "  rascal." 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  335 

then?  Of  course,  either  by  reading  its  physical  substance  with 
his  natural  eyes,  or,  its  astral  essence  by  transcendental  power. 
If  the  latter,  then  by  what  brief  forcing-  system  was  the  psychic 
power  of  this  "yogi,"  who,  in  July  last,  was  "not  on  a  level 
spiritually  "  with  yourself,  or  even  with  Fern,  suddenly  shot  out 
into  such  full  flower  and  fruitage,  whereas  it  takes  even  us, 
trained  "  sorcerers  "  ten  or  fifteen  years  to  acquire  it?  Besides, 
if,  this  and  other  letters  to  Fern,  were  presented  to  him  in  the 
*'  astral  light  "  (as  he  maintains  in  his  letter  in  reply  to  Colonel 
O.'s  query,  herein  enclosed),  how  comes  it  that  the  benevolent 
Almorah  genius  (through  whose  help  he  suddenly  acquired  such 
tremendous  pK>wers)  could  cause  him  to  take  note  of  the  contents, 
to  read  word  for  word  and  to  remember  only  such  letters  as  were 
kept  by  Fern — in  accordance  with  M's  positive  orders — in  his 
desk  in  Mr.  Hume's  house?  While,  we  defy  him  to  repeat  one 
word  of  other  and  (for  him)  far  more  important  letters  sent  by  my 
Brother  to  the  '*  probationary  chela  "  in  which  the  latter  was  for- 
bidden to  keep  them  at  Rothney  Castle,  but  had  them  securely 
shut  up  in  a  locked  desk  at  his  own  house?  These  queries, 
arising  at  M.'s  will  in  Olcott's  mind  he  flatly  put  the  question  to 
Mr.  Hume.  As  M.'s  chela  revering  him,  of  course,  as  a  Father 
as  well  as  Teacher  he  very  properly  put  to  this  Censor  Elegan- 
tiarum.  the  direct  question  whether  he  had  been  himself  guilty  of 
the  very  "dishonourable"  breach  of  gentlemanlike  conduct  of 
which  he  was  complaining  in  Morya's  case.  (And  unjustly  as  you 
now  see ;  for  what  he  did  had  my  approval,  since  it  was  a  neces- 
sary part  of  a  preconceived  plan  to  bring  out — besides  Mr.  H.'s 
true  nature, — of  a  disgraceful  situation,  itself  developed  by  the 
wicked  api>etites,  follies  and  Karma  of  sundry  weak  men — 
ultimate  good  as  you  will  find). 

We  have  no  gentlemen — now  at  all  events,  that  would  come  up 
to  the  Simla  standard! — in  Tibet,  though  many  honest  and  truthful 
men.  To  Mr.  Olcott's  question  came  a  reply  so  reeking  with 
deliberate,  bare  falsehood,  foolish  vanity,  and  so  miserable  an 
attempt  to  explain  away  the  only  possible  theory  that  without  the 
owner's  knowledge  he  had  read  his  private  correspondence,  that 
I  have  asked  Morya  to  procure  it  for  me  for  yoii  to  read.  After 
doing  this  you  will  kindly  return  it  to  me  through  Dharbagiri 
Nath  who  will  be  at  Madras  within  this  week. 

I  have  done  an  unpleasant  and  distasteful  task,  but  a  great 
point  will  be  achieved  if  it  helps  you  to  know  us  better — ^whether 
your  European  standards  of  right  and  wrong  inclines  the  scales 
in  your  opinion  either  one  way  or  the  other.  Perchance,  you  may 
find  yourself  in  C.C.M.'s  attitude  deploring  to  find  yourself 
obliged  to  either  accept  or  reject  for  ever  such  a  "  distressing 
moral  paradox  "  as  myself.      No  one  would  regret  it  more  deeply 


33^  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

than  I ;  but  our  Rules  have  proved  wise  and  beneficient  to  the 
world  in  the  long  run,  and  the  world  in  general  and  its  individual 
units  especially  are  so  terribly  wicked  that  one  has  to  fight  each 
one  with  his  or  her  own  weai>ons. 

As  the  situation  stands  at  present,  and  though  we  would  not 
allow  too  much  *'  procrastination,"  it  does  seem  desirable  that 
you  should  go  for  a  few  months  home — say  till  June.  But  unless 
you  go  to  London  and  with  C.C.M.'s  help  explain  the  true  situa- 
tion and  establish  the  Society  youfself,  Mr.  Hume's  letters  will 
have  done  too  much  harm  to  undo  the  mischief.  Thus  your 
temporary  absence  will  have  achieved  a  dual  good  purpK>se  :  the 
foundation  of  a  true  theosophical  occult  Society,  and  the  salvation 
of  a  few  promising  individuals  for  future  careers,  now  jeopardized. 
Besides,  your  absence  from  India  will  not  be  an  unmixed  evil, 
since  the  friends  of  the  country  will  feel  your  loss,  and  perhaps 
be  all  the  more  ready  for  your  recall  :  especially  if  the  "  Pioneer  " 
changes  its  tone.  Some  of  your  holiday  time  it  might  be  agree- 
able to  you  to  utilize  in  one  form  or  another  of  theosophical 
writing.  You  have  now  a  large  store  of  materials,  and  if  you 
would  contrive  to  get  copies  of  the  didactic  papers  given  to  Mr. 
Hume  it  would  be  a  timely  precaution.  He  is  a  prolific  letter 
writer  and  now  that  he  has  disburdened  himself  of  all  restraints 
he  will  bear  close  watching.  Remember  the  Chohan's  prophesy. 
Yours  ever  sincerely,  K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LVHI 

Received  March,    1883. 
My  Dear  *♦  Ward," 

We  will  not,  if  you  please,  deal  at  present  with  the  situation 
concerning  **  stars  and  obscurations  " — for  reasons  very  plainly 
told  to  you  this  morning  by  H.P.B.  My  task  becomes  with  every 
letter  more  dangerous.  It  becomes  exceedingly  difficult  to  teach 
you  and  hold  at  the  same  time  strictly  to  the  original  programme  : 
*  *  so  far  shall  we  go  and  no  further. ' '  Yet — hold  to  it  we  must 
and  ivill. 

You  have  entirely  mistaken  my  meaning  in  the  telegram.  The 
words  :  *'  more  at  Adyar  "  related  to  the  true  explanation  of  your 
vision,  not  by  any  means,  to  a  promise  of  some  further  psycho- 
logical experiments  made  in  that  direction  by  myself.  The  vision 
was  due  to  an  attempt  by  D.K.  who  is  extremely  interested  in 
your  progress.  While  he  succeeded  in  getting  you  out,  of  your 
body,   he  failed  entirely  in  his  effort  to  open  your  inner  vision. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  337 

for  reasons  correctly  surmised  at  the  time  by  yourself.  I  took  no 
personal  active  part  in  the  attempt.  Hence  my  answer  **  sur- 
mises correct — more  at  Adyar. "  I  am  in  a  very  false  position 
just  now,  and  have — in  order  not  to  jeopardise  the  possibilities  of 
the  future — to  be  doubly  cautious. 

The  probable  date  of  your  departure?  Well — on  or  about 
April  7th.  If  your  impatience  disagrees  with  this  desire  of  mine 
you  are  free  to  do  as  you  like.  Yet,  I  would  look  upon  it  as  a 
personal  favour.  I  am  profoundly  disgusted  with  the  apathy  of 
my  countrymen  in  general.  More  than  ever  I  trust  but  in  the 
few  staunch  workers  of  the  luckless  and  hapless  T.S.  The 
Viceroy's  letter  would  be  of  the  greatest  help  if  it  could  be  but 
judiciously  used.  But  in  such  matters,  I  see  I  am  no  judge,  as  I 
now  augur  from  the  impression  left  on  your  mind  by  R.  Srinavasa 
Rao  and  others. 

The  incident  of  February  the  7th  being  explained,  your  ques- 
tion relating  to  **  earlier  restrictions  "  is  already  covered. 

May  I  beg  of  you  two  more  personal  and  important  favours? 
First — to  ever  bear  in  mind  that  whenever  and  whatever  is  pos- 
sible will  be  always  done  for  you  unurged  ;  hence  never  to  either 
ask  for,  or  suggest  it,  yourself — since  it  will  amount  to  simply 
avoiding  to  me  the  supremely  disagreeable  task  of  having  to 
refuse  a  friend's  request  without,  moreover,  being  in  a  position 
to  explain  the  reason  why ;  and  second — to  remember  that 
though  personally  and  for  your  own  sake  I  may  be  prepared 
to  do  a  great  deal  I  have  in  no  way  bound  myself  to 
do  anything  of  the  sort  for  the  Fellows  of  the  British 
T.S.  I  have  pledged  my  word  to  you  to  teach  them  through 
your  kind  agency — our  philosophy  and  whether  they  accept 
it  or  not.  But  I  have  never  undertaken  to  convince  any 
of  them  of  the  extent  of  our  powers  nor  even  of  our  personal 
existence.  Their  belief  or  disbelief  in  the  latter  is  a  matter  of 
very  trifling  imjx>rtance  to  us  indeed.  If  they  are  ever  to  be 
benefitted  by  our  promise,  it  must  be  through  you,  alone  and  your 
own  personal  efforts.  Nor  can  you  ever  see  me  (in  flesh), — not 
even  in  a  clearly  defined  vision — unless  you  are  prepared  to  pledge 
your  honour  never  to  reveal  the  fact  to  anyone,  so  long  as  you  live, 
(save  you  receive  permission  to  that  effect).  That  the  consequence 
of  such  a  pledge  will  be  a  never  satisfied  as  an  ever  recurring 
doubt  in  the  minds  of  your  British  Fellows — is  just  what  we  want 
for  the  present.  Too  much,  or  too  little  was  said  and  proved  of 
us  as  M.A.  (Oxon)  justly  remarked.  We  are  ordered  to  set  our- 
selves to  work  to  sweep  away  the  few  vestiges — for  which  fresh 
policy  you  are  indebted  to  the  incessant  underground  intrigues  of 
our  ex-friend  Mr.  Hume — (now  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the 
Brothers  of  the  Shadow) — and  the  more  our  actual  existence  be 


338  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

doubted — the  better.  As  to  tests  and  convincing  proof  to  the 
Sadducees  of  Europe  generally  and  those  of  England  especially — 
this  is  something  to  be  left  entirely  out  of  our  future  programme. 
Unless  allowed  to  use  our  own  judgment  and  means — the  course 
of  future  events  will  by  no  means  run  smooth.  Thus  you  should 
never  use  such  phrases  as  "  for  the  sake  of  strength  with  friends 
at  home  * '  as  they  would  be  sure  to  do  no  good  and  would  simply 
irritate  the  more  the  other  **  powers  that  be  " — to  use  the  ridicu- 
lous phrase.  It  is  not  always  flattering,  good  friend,  to  be  placed 
even  by  those  one  likes  the  best — on  the  same  level  with  shells 
and  mediums — for  the  purpose  of  tests.  I  thought  you  had 
luckily  outgrown  that  stage.  Let  us  hold  at  present  to  the  simply 
intellectual  aspect  of  our  intercourse  and  busy  ourselves  but  with 
philosophy  and — your  future  paper  and  leave  the  rest  to  time  and 
its  unforeseen  developments. 

It  is  precisely  because  I  follow  and  perceive  the  dual  working 
of  your  mind  in  making  such  requests  that  I  sign  myself  invari- 
ably 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LIX 

Received  London  about  July,   1883. 

With  whatever  shortcomings  my  always  indulgent  **  lay-chela  " 
may  have  to  charge  me,  he  will,  it  appears,  credit  me  with  having 
given  him  a  new  source  of  enjoyment.  For  even  the  sombre 
prophecy  of  Sir  Charles  Turner  (a  recent  obscuration  of  his)  that 
you  would  fall  into  Roman  Catholicism  as  the  inevitable  outcome 
of  your  dabbling  in  Theosophy  and  believing  in  the  **  K.H."  maya 
— has  not  dampened  the  ardour  of  your  propaganda  in  the  gay 
world  of  London.  If  this  zeal  should  be  cited  by  the  Altruist  of 
Rothney,  in  support  of  his  declaration  that  your  grey  vesicles  are 
surcharged  with  Tzigadze  AkAsa,  it  will  still  doubtless  be  balm 
to  your  wounded  feelings  to  know  that  you  are  essentially  able 
to  build  the  bridge  over  which  the  British  metaphysicians  may 
come  within  thinking  distance  of  us  ! 

It  is  the  custom  among  some  good  people  to  glance  back  at 
their  life's  path  from  the  hillocks  of  time  they  annually  surmount. 
So,  if  my  hope  has  not  betrayed  me  you  must  have  been  mentally 
comparing  your  present  **  greatest  pleasure  "  and  *'  constant  occu- 
pation ' '  with  that  which  was  so  in  the  olden  time,  when  you 
threaded  the  streets  of  your  metropolis,  where  the  houses  are  as 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  339 

if  *'  painted  in  Indian  ink,"  and  a  day's  sunshine  is  an  event  to 
remember.  You  have  measured  yourself  against  yourself,  and 
found  the  Theosophist  an  **  Anak  "  morally  as  compared  with  the 
**  old  man  "  (the  beau  valseur) ;  is  it  not  so?  Well,  this  is,  per- 
haps, your  reward — the  beg-inning-  of  it  :  the  end  you  will  realize 
in  Devachan,  when  **  floating  along  "  in  the  circumambient  ether, 
instead  of  the  circummuded  British  Channel — foggy  though  that 
state  may  now  appear  to  your  mind's  eye.  Then  only  will  you 
*'  see  thyself  by  thyself  "  and  learn  the  true  meaning  of  AtmAnam, 
AtmanA  Pasya  : — 

"  To  know  itself  e'en  as  a  shining  light 

Requires  no  light  to  make  itself  perceived.     .     .     ." 

of  the  great  Vedanta  Philosophy. 

Again  and  once  more,  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  dispel  some 
of  that  great  mist  that  I  find  in  Mr.  Massey's  Devachan.  It  will 
appear  as  a  contribution  to  the  August  number  of  the  Theosophist, 
and  to  that  I  shall  refer  Mr.  Massey  and  yourself.  Quite  possibly 
even  then  the  **  Obscuration  "  will  not  be  removed  and  it  may  be 
thought  that  the  intended  explanation  is  nothing  of  the  kind;  and 
that,  instead  of  winding  the  clock,  a  clumsy  hand  has  but  broken 
out  some  cogs.  This  is  our  misfortune,  and  I  doubt  if  we  shall 
ever  get  quite  free  of  these  obscurities  and  alleged  contradictions ; 
since  there  is  no  way  to  bring  the  askers  and  respondents  face  to 
face.  Still  at  the  worst  it  must  be  conceded  that  there  is  some 
satisfaction  in  the  fact  that  there  is  now  a  ford  across  this  river 
and  you  are  building  spans  for  a  royal  bridge.  It  is  quite  right 
that  you  should  baptize  your  new  brain-babe  with  the  water  of 
Hope;  and,  within  the  limits  of  possibility  that  by  it  "a  further 
and  very  sensible  impulse  will  be  imparted  to  the  present  move- 
ment." But,  friend,  even  the  "green  cheese"  of  the  shining 
moon  is  periodically  lunched  upon  by  RaJiu;  so  do  not  think  your- 
self altogether  above  the  contingency  of  popular  fickleness,  that 
would  put  out  your  light  in  favour  of  some  new  man's  '*  farthing 
dip."  The  culture  of  Society  more  often  inclines  to  lawn-tennis 
philosophy  than  to  that  of  the  banned  **  adepts,"  whose  wider 
game  has  world's  for  balls,  and  etheric  space  for  its  shaven  lawn. 
The  pldt  of  your  first  book  was  spiced  with  phenomena  to  tickle 
the  spiritualistic  pallet  :  this  second  one  is  a  dish  of  cold 
philosophy,  and  in  your  "  large  section  of  London  Society  "  you 
will  scarcely  find  enough  of  the  wine  of  sympathy  to  wash  it  down. 
Many,  who  now  think  you  mildly  mad  will  buy  the  book  to  find 
out  if  a  commission  De  lunatico  should  issue  to  prevent  your  doing 
more  damage ;  but  of  all  your  readers  few  are  likely  to  follow  your 
lead  towards  our  ashrum.  Still  the  theosophist's  duty  is  like  that 
of  the  husbandman's;  to  turn  his  furrows  and  sow  his  grains  as 


340  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

best  he  can  :  the  issue  is  with  nature,  and  she,  the  slave  of  law. 
I  shall  waste  no  condolences  upon  the  f>oor  "  lay-chelas " 
because  of  the  '*  delicate  weapons  "  they  can  alone  work  with. 
A  sorry  day  it  would  be  to  mankind  if  any  sharper  or  deadlier  one 
were  put  in  their  unaccustomed  hands  !  Ah  !  you  would  concur 
with  me,  my  faithful  friend,  if  you  could  but  see  the  plaint  one 
of  them  has  just  made  on  account  of  the  agonizing-  results  of  the 
poisoned  weapons  he  got  the  wielding  of,  in  an  evil  hour,  through 
the  help  of  a  sorcerer.  Crushed  morally,  by  his  own  selfish 
impetuosity ;  rotting  physically  from  diseases  engendered  by  the 
animal  gratifications  he  snatched  with  "demon"  help;  behind 
him  is  a  black  memory  of  wasted  chances  and  hellish  successes; 
before  him  a  pall  of  dark  despair, — of  avitchi, — this  wretched  man 
turns  his  impotent  rage  against  our  '*  starry  science"  and  our- 
selves, and  hurls  his  ineffectual  curses  at  those  he  vainly  besieged 
for  more  powers  in  chelaship,  and  whom  he  deserted  for  a  necro- 
mantic **  Guru  "  who  now  leaves  the  victim  to  his  fate.  Be 
satisfied,  friend,  with  your  "  delicate  weapons  "  ;  if  not  as  lethal 
as  the  discus  of  Vishnu,  they  can  break  dbwn  many  barriers  if 
plied  with  power.  The  poor  wretch  in  question  confesses  to  a 
course  of  '*  lies,  breaches  of  faith,  hatreds,  temptings  or  mislead- 
ings  of  others,  injustices,  calumnies,  perjuries,  false  pretences, 
etc."  The  "  risk  "  he  '*  voluntarily  took,"  but  he  adds,  **  if  they 
(we)  had  been  good  and  kind  as  well  as  wise  and  ix>werful,  they 
(we)  would  have  certainly  prevented  me  from  taking  a  task  to 
which  they  knew  I  was  unequal."  In  a  word,  we,  who  have 
gained  our  knowledge,  such  as  it  is,  by  the  only  practicable 
method,  and  who  have  no  right  to  hinder  any  fellow  man  from 
making  the  attempt  (though  we  have  the  right  to  warn,  and  we 
do  warn  every  candidate),  we  are  expected  to  take  upon  our  own 
heads  the  penalty  of  such  interference,  or  try  to  save  ourselves 
from  the  same  by  making  incompetents  into  adepts  in  spite  of 
themselves!  Because  we  did  not  do  this,  he  is  *'  left  to  linger 
out  a  wretched  existence  as  an  animated  poison  bag,  full  of  mental, 
moral,  and  physical  corruption."  This  man  has,  in  despair, 
turned  from  a  "  heathen,  an  athiest  and  a  free-thinker — a 
Christian,  or  rather  a  theist,  and  now  humbly  *'  submits  "  to  Him 
(an  extra  cosmical  God  for  whom  he  has  even  discovered  a  local) 
and  to  all  delegated  by  Him  with  lawful  authority."  And  we, 
poor  creatures,  are  "  traitors,  liars,  devils,  and  all  my  (his)  crimes 
(as  enumerated  above)  are  as  a  shining  robe  of  glory  compared  to 
Theirs  :  ' ' — His  capitals  and  underscorings  being  quoted  as  well 
as  his  words  !  Now  friend,  put  away  that  thought  that  I  ought 
not  to  compare  your  case  with  his,  for  I  do  not.  I  have  only  given 
you  a  glimpse  into  the  hell  of  this  lost  soul,  to  show  you  what 
disaster  may  come  upon  the  "lay-chela"  who  snatches  at  for- 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  341 

bidden  power  before  his  moral  nature  is  developed  to  the  point  of 
fitness  for  its  exercise.  You  must  think  well  over  the  article 
"  Chelas  and  Lay-chelas  "  which  you  will  find  in  the  Supplement 
of  the  July  Theosophist. 

So  the  g-reat  Mr.  Crookes  has  placed  one  foot  across  the  thres- 
hold for  the  sake  of  reading-  the  Society's  papers?  Well  and 
wisely  done,  and  really  brave  of  him.  Heretofore  he  was  bold 
enoug-h  to  take  a  similar  step  and  loyal  enough  to  truth  to  dis- 
appoint his  colleagues  by  making  his  facts  public.  When  he  was 
reading  his  invaluable  paper  smothered  in  the  **  Sections  "  and  the 
whole  Royal  Society  trying  to  cough  him  down,  metaphorically 
if  not  actually,  as  its  Sister  Society  in  America  did  to  that  martyr, 
Hare — he  little  thought  how  perfect  a  revenge  Karma  had  in  store 
for  him.  Let  him  know  that  its  cornucopia  is  not  yet  emptied 
and  that  Western  Science  has  still  three  additional  states  of  matter 
to  discover.  But  he  should  not  wait  for  us  to  condense  ourselves 
to  the  stethescopic  standard  as  his  Katy  did ;  for  we  men  are  sub- 
ject to  laws  of  molecular  affinity  and  polaric  attraction  which  that 
sweet  simulacrum  was  not  hampered  with.  We  have  no 
favourites,  break  no  rules.  If  Mr.  Crookes  would  penetrate 
Arcana  beyond  the  corridors,  the  tools  of  modern  science  have 
already  excavated  let  him — Try.  He  tried  and  found  the  Radio- 
meter;  tried  again,  and  found  Radiant  matter;  may  try  again  and 
find  the  *'  Kama-rupa  "  of  matter — its  fifth  state.  But  to  find  it's 
Manas  he  would  have  to  pledge  himself  stronger  to  secrecy  than 
he  seems  inclined  to.  You  know  our  motto,  and  that  its  practical 
application  has  erased  the  word  "  impvossible  "  from  the  occultists 
vocabulary.  If  he  wearies  not  of  trying,  he  may  discover  that 
that  most  noble  of  all  facts,  his  true  Self.  But  he  will  have  to 
penetrate  many  strata  before  he  comes  to  It.  And  to  begin  with 
let  him  rid  himself  of  the  may  a  that  any  man  living  can  set  up 
"claims"  upon  Adepts.  He  may  create  irresistible  attractions 
and  compel  their  attention,  but  they  will  be  spiritual,  not  mental 
or  intellectual.  And  this  bit  of  advice  applies  and  is  directed  to 
several  British  theosophists,  and  it  may  be  well  for  them  to  know 
it.  Once  separated  from  the  common  influences  of  Society, 
nothing  draws  us  to  any  outsider  save  his  evolving  spirituality. 
He  may  be  a  Bacon  or  an  Aristotle  in  knowledge,  and  still  not 
even  make  his  current  felt  a  feather's  weight  by  us,  if  his  power 
is  confined  to  the  Manas.  The  supreme  energy  resides  in  the 
Buddhi;  latent — when  wedded  to  Atman  alone,  active  and  irre- 
sistible when  galvanized  by  the  essence  of  *'  Manas  "  and  when 
none  of  the  dross  of  the  latter  commingles  with  that  pure  essence  to 
weigh  it  down  by  its  finite  nature.  Manas,  pure  and  simple,  is  of 
a  lower  degree,  and  of  the  earth  earthly  :  and  so  your  greatest 
m.en  count  but  as  nonentities  in  the   arena  where  greatness  is 


342  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

measured  by  the  standard  of  spiritual  development.  When  the 
ancient  founders  of  your  philosophical  schools  came  East,  to 
acquire  the  lore  of  our  predecessors,  they  filed  no  claims,  except 
the  single  one  of  a  sincere  and  unselfish  hunger  for  the  truth.  If 
any  now  aspire  to  found  new  schools  of  science  and  philosophy 
the  same  plan  will  win — if  the  seekers  have  in  them  the  elements 
of  success. 

Yes ;  you  are  right  about  the  Society  for  Psychic  Research  :  its 
work  is  of  a  kind  to  tell  upon  public  opinion  by  experimentally 
demonstrating  the  elementary  phases  of  Occult  Science.  H.  S. 
Olcott  has  been  trying  to  convert  each  of  the  Indian  Branches 
into  such  a  school  of  research,  but  the  capacity  for  sustained  inde- 
I>endent  study  for  knowledg-e's  sake  is  lacking,  and  must  be 
developed.  The  success  of  the  S.P.R.  will  greatly  aid  in  this 
direction  and  we  wish  it  well. 

I  also  go  with  you  in  your  views  as  to  the  choice  of  the  new 
President  of  the  B.T.S.  ;  in  fact  I  concurred,  I  believe,  before  the 
choice  was  made. 

There  is  no  reason  why  you  should  not  '*  attempt  mesmeric 
cures  ' '  by  the  help  not  of  your  locket  but  the  power  of  your  own 
will.  Without  this  latter,  in  energetic  function,  no  locket  will  do 
much  good.  The  hair  in  it  is  in  itself  but  an  **  accumulator  "  of 
the  energy  of  him,  who  grew  it,  and  can  no  more  cure  of  itself 
than  stored  electricity  can  turn  a  wheel  until  liberated  and  con- 
ducted to  the  objective  point.  Set  your  will  in  motion  and  you 
at  once  draw  upon  the  person  upon  whose  head  it  (the  hair  not 
the  will)  grew,  through  the  psychic  current  whichever  runs  between 
himself  and  his  severed  tress.  To  heal  diseases  it  is  not  indis- 
pensable, however  desirable,  that  the  psychopathist  should  be  abso- 
lutely pure ;  there  are  many  in  Europe  and  elsewhere  who  are  not. 
If  the  healing  be  done  under  the  impulse  of  perfect  benevolence, 
unmixed  with  any  latent  selfishness,  the  philanthropist  sets  up  a 
current  which  runs  like  a  fine  thrill  through  the  sixth  condition  of 
matter,  and  is  felt  by  him  whom  you  summon  to  your  help,  if  not 
at  that  moment  engaged  in  some  work  which  compels  him  to  be 
repellent  to  all  extraneous  influences.  The  possession  of  a  lock 
of  any  adept's  hair  is  of  course,  a  decided  advantage ;  as  a  better 
tempered  sword  is  to  the  soldier  in  battle ;  but  the  measure  of  its 
actual  help  to  the  psychopathist  will  be  in  ratio  with  the  degree 
of  w  ill  power  he  excites  in  himself  and  the  degree  of  psychic  purity 
in  his  motive.      The  talisman  and  his  Buddhi  are  in  sympathy. 

Now  that  you  are  at  the  centre  of  modem  Buddhistic  exegesis, 
in  personal  relation  with  some  of  the  clever  commentators  (from 
whom  the  holy  Devas  deliver  us !)  I  shall  draw  your  attention  to 
a  few  things  which  are  really  as  discreditable  to  the  perceptions 
of  even  non-initiates,  as  they  are  misleading  to  the  general  public. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  343 

The  more  one  reads  such  speculations  as  those  of  Messrs.  Rhys 
Davids,  Lillie,  etc. — the  less  can  one  bring  himself  to  believe  that 
the  unreg-enerate  Western  mind  can  ever  get  at  the  core  of  our 
abstruse  doctrines.  Yet  hopeless  as  their  cases  may  be,  it  would 
api>ear  well  worth  the  trouble  of  testing  the  intuitions  of  your 
London  members — of  some  of  them,  at  any  rate — ^by  half  exp>ouiid- 
ing  through  you  one  or  two  mysteries  and  leaving  them  to  com- 
plete the  chain  themselves.  Shall  we  take  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  as 
our  first  subject,  and  show  that  indirectly  as  he  has  done  it  yet 
it  is  himself  who  strengthened  the  absurd  ideas  of  Mr.  Lillie,  who 
fancies  to  have  proved  belief  in  a  personal  God  in  ancient 
Buddhism.  Mr.  Rhys  Davids*  "'  Buddhism  "  is  full  of  the  sparkle 
of  our  most  impK>rtant  esotericism,  but  always,  as  it  would  seem, 
beyond  not  only  his  reach  but  apparently  even  his  powers  of  intel- 
lectual perception.  To  avoid  **  absurd  metaphysics"  and  its 
inventions ,  he  creates  unnecessary  difficulties  and  falls  headlong 
into  inextricable  confusion.  He  is  like  the  Cape  Settlers  who 
lived  over  diamond  mines  without  suspecting  it.  I  shall  only 
instance  the  definition  of  "  Avalokitesvara  "  on  p.p.  202  and  203. 
There,  we  find  the  author  saying  that  to  which  any  occultist  seems 
a  palpable  absurdity  : — 

**  The  name  Avalokitesvara,  which  means  *  the  Lord  who  looks 
down  from  on  high,*  is  a  purely  metaphysical  invention.  The 
curious  use  of  the  past  particle  passive  *  avalokita '  in  an  active 
sense  is  clearly  evident  from  the  translation  into  Tibetan  and 
Chinese. '  * 

Now  saying  that  it  means  :  *'  the  Lord  who  looks  down  from 
on  high,'*  or,  as  he  kindly  explains  further — "  the  Spirit  of  the 
Buddhas  present  in  the  church,*'  is  to  completely  reverse  the  sense. 
It  is  equivalent  to  saying  **  Mr.  Sinnett  looks  down  from  on  high 
(his  Fragment  of  Occult  Truth?)  on  the  British  Theos.  Society," 
whereas  it  is  the  latter  that  looks  up  to  Mr.  Sinnett,  or  rather  to 
his  Fragments  as  the  (in  their  case  only  possible)  expression  and 
culmination  of  the  knowledge  sought  for.  This  is  no  idle  simile 
and  defines  the  exact  situation.  In  short,  Avalokita  Isvar  literally 
interpreted  means  **  the  Lord  that  is  seen/*  **  Iswara  **  implying 
moreover,  rather  the  adjective  than  the  noun,  lordly,  self-existent 
lordliness,  not  Lord.  It  is,  when  correctly  interpreted,  in  one 
sense  '*  the  divine  Self  perceived  or  seen  by  Self,"  the  Atman  or 
seventh  principle  ridded  of  its  mayavic  distinction  from  its 
Universal  Source — which  becomes  the  object  of  perception  for,  and 
by  the  individuality  centred  in  Buddhi,  the  sixth  principle, — some- 
thing that  hapf>ens  only  in  the  highest  state  of  Samadhi.  This  is 
applying  it  to  the  microcosm.  In  the  other  sense  Avalokitesvara 
implies  the  seventh  Universal  Principle,  as  the  object  perceived 
by  the  Universal  Buddhi  **  Mind"  or   Intelligence  which  is  the 


344  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

synthetic  agfgfreg-ation  of  all  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  as  of  all  other 
intelligfences  whether  great  or  small,  that  ever  were,  are,  or  will 
be.  Nor  is  it  the  '*  Spirit  of  Buddhas  present  in  the  Church," 
but  the  Omnipresent  Universal  Spirit  in  the  temple  of  nature — in 
one  case;  and  the  seventh  Principle — the  Atman  in  the  temple — 
man — in  the  other.  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  mig^ht  have,  at  least  re- 
membered, the  (to  him)  familiar  simile  made  by  the  Christian 
Adept ;  the  Kabalistic  Paul  :  *  *  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple 
of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you'* — and  thus 
avoided  to  have  made  a  mess  of  the  name.  Though  as  a  gram- 
marian he  detected  the  use  of  the  **  past  particle  passive  "  yet  he 
shows  himself  far  from  an  inspired  *'  Panini  "  in  overlooking  the 
true  cause  and  saving  his  grammar  by  raising  the  hue  and  cry 
against  metaphysics.  And  yet,  he  quotes  Beale's  Catena  as  his 
authority,  for  the  invention,  when,  in  truth,  this  work  is  perhaps 
the  only  one  in  English  that  gives  an  approximately  correct 
explanation  of  the  word,  at  any  rate,  on  page  374.  "  Self-mani- 
fested " — How?  it  is  asked.  **  Speech  or  Vdch  was  regarded  as 
the  Son  or  the  manifestation  of  the  Eternal  Self,  and  was  adored 
under  the  name  of  Avalokitesvara,  the  manifested  God."  This 
shows  as  clearly  as  can  be — ^that  Avalokitesvara  is  both  the  un- 
manifested  Father  and  the  manifested  Son,  the  latter  proceeding 
from,  and  identical  with,  the  other ; — namely,  the  Parahrahm  and 
Jivdiman,  the  Universal  and  the  individualized  seventh  Principle, 
— the  Passive  and  the  Active,  the  latter  the  Word,  Logos,  the 
Verb.  Call  it  by  whatever  name,  only  let  these  unfortunate, 
deluded  Christians  know  that  the  real  Christ  of  every  Christian 
is  the  Vdch,  the  **  mystical  Voice,"  while  the  man — Jeshu  was 
but  a  mortal  like  any  of  us,  an  adept  more  by  his  inherent  purity 
and  ignorance  of  real  Evil,  than  by  what  he  had  learned  with  his 
initiated  Rabbis  and  the  already  (at  that  period)  fast  degenerating 
Egyptian  Hierophants  and  priests.  A  great  mistake  is  also  made 
by  Beale  who  says  :  **  this  name  (Avalokiteswara)  in  Chinese  took 
the  form  of  Kwan-Shai-yin,  and  the  divinity  worshipped  under  that 
name  (was)  generally  regarded  as  a  female."  (374)  Kwan-shai- 
yin — or  the  universally  manifested  voice  "  is  active — male;  and 
must  not  be  confounded  with  Kwan-yin,  or  Buddhi  the  Spiritual 
Soul  (the  sixth  Pr.)  and  the  vehicle  of  its  "  Lord."  It  is  Kwan- 
ym  that  is  the  female  principle  or  the  manifested  passive,  mani- 
festing itself  **  to  every  creature  in  the  universe,  in  order  to  deliver 
all  men  from  the  consequences  of  sin  " — as  rendered  by  Beale, 
this  once  quite  correctly  (383),  while  Kwan-shai-yin,  **  the  son 
identical  with  his  father"  is  the  absolute  activity,  hence — having 
no  direct  relation  to  objects  of  sense  is — Passivity. 

What  a   common  ruse   it    is  of  your  Aristoteleans !    with  the 
sleuth  hound's  persistence  they  track  an  idea  to  the  very  verge 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  345 

of  the  impassable  chasm  ;  and  then  brought  to  bay  leave  the  meta- 
physicians to  take  up  the  trail  if  they  can,  or  let  it  be  lost.  It  is 
but  natural  that  a  christian  theologian,  a  missionary,  should  act 
upon  this  line,  since — as  easily  perceived  even  in  the  little  I  gave 
out  just  now — a  too  correct  rendering  of  our  Avalokitesvara  and 
Kwan-Shai-yin  might  have  very  disastrous  effects.  It  would 
simply  amount  to  showing  Christendom,  the  true  and  undeniable 
origin  of  the  '*  awful  and  incomprehensible  "  mysteries  of  its 
Trinity,  Transubstantiation,  Immaculate  conception,  as  also 
whence  their  ideas  of  the  Father,  son,  Spiritus  and — Mother.  It 
is  less  easy  to  shuffle  al  piaccere  the  cards  of  Buddhistic 
chronology  than  those  of  Chrishna  and  Christ.  They  cannot  place 
— however  much  they  would — the  birth  of  our  Lord  Sangyas 
Buddha  A.D.  as  they  have  contrived  to  place  that  of  Chrishna. 
But  why  should  an  atheist  and  a  materialist  like  Mr.  Rhys  Davids 
so  avoid  the  correct  rendering  of  our  dogmas — even  when  he 
happens  to  understand  them, — which  does  not  happen  every  day — 
is  something  surpassingly  curious  !  In  this  instance  the  blind 
and  guilty  Rhys  Davids  leads  the  blind  and  innocent  Mr.  Lillie 
into  the  ditch ;  where  the  latter  catching  at  the  proffered  straw 
rejoices  in  the  idea  that  Buddhism  teaches  in  reality — a  personal 
God  !  ! 

Does  your  B.T.S.  know  the  meaning  of  the  white  and  black 
interlaced  triangles,  of  the  Parent  Society's  seal  that  it  has  also 
adopted?  Shall  I  explain? — the  double  triangle  viewed  by  the 
Jewish  Kabalists  as  Solomon's  Seal,  is,  as  many  of  you  doubt- 
less know  the  Sri^antara  of  the  archaic  Aryan  Temple,  the 
**  mystery  of  Mysteries,"  a  geometrical  synthesis  of  the  whole 
occult  doctrine.  The  two  interlaced  triangles  are  the  Buddhan^ 
gums  of  Creation.  They  contain  the  "  squaring  of  the  circle," 
the  **  Philosophical  Stone,"  the  great  problems  of  Life  and  Death, 
and — the  Mystery  of  Evil.  The  chela  who  can  explain  this  sign 
from  every  one  of  its  aspects — is  virtually  an  adept.  How  is  it 
then  that  the  only  one  among  you,  who  has  come  so  near  to 
unravelling  the  mystery  is  also  the  only  one  who  got  none  of  her 
ideas  from  books?  Unconsciously  she  gives  out — to  him  who 
has  the  key — the  first  syllable  of  the  Ineffable  name !  Of  course 
you  know  that  the  double  triangle— the  Satkiri  Chakram  of 
Vishuu — or  the  six-pointed  star,  is  the  perfect  seven.  In  all  the 
old  Sanskrit  works — Vedic  and  Tantrik — you  find  the  number  6 
mentioned  more  often  than  7 — this  last  figure,  the  central  point 
being  implied,  for  it  is  the  germ  of  the  six  and  their  matrix.  It  is 
then  thus     .     .     .^     — the  central  point  standing  for  seventh,  and 


1  At  this  point  in  the  original  there  is  a  rough  drawing  of  the  interlaced 
triangles  inscribed  in  a  circle. — Ed. 


346  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

the  circle,  the  Mahakdsha — endless  space — ^for  the  seventh  Uni- 
versal Principle.  In  one  sense,  both  are  viewed  as  Avalokitesvara, 
for  they  are  respectively  the  Macrocosm  and  the  microcosm.  The 
interlaced  triangles — ^the  upper  pointing  one — is  Wisdom  Con- 
cealed, and  the  downward  pointing-  one — Wisdom  Revealed  (in 
the  phenomenal  world).  The  circle  indicates  the  bounding-,  cir- 
cumscribing quality  of  the  All,  the  Universal  Principle  which,  from 
any  given  point  expands  so  as  to  embrace  all  things,  while 
embodying  the  potentiality  of  every  action  in  the  Cosmos.  As 
the  point  then  is  the  centre  round  which  the  circle  is  traced — they 
are  identical  and  one,  and  though  from  the  standpoint  of  Maya 
and  Avidya — (illusion  and  ignorance) — one  is  separated  from  the 
other  by  the  manifested  triangle,  the  3  sides  of  which  represent 
the  three  gunas — finite  attributes.  In  symbology  the  central  point 
is  Jivdttna  (the  7th  principle),  and  hence  Avalokitesvara,  the 
Kwan-Shai-yin,  the  manifested  '*  Voice  "  (or  Logos),  the  germ 
point  of  manifested  activity ; — hence — in  the  phraseology  of  the 
Christian  Kabalists  "the  Son  of  the  Father  and  Mother,"  and 
agreeably  to  ours — **  the  Self  manifested  in  Self — Yih-Sin,  the 
**  one  form  of  existence,"  the  child  of  Dharmakaya  (the  universally 
diffused  Essence),  both  male  and  female.  Parabrahm  or  **  Adi- 
Buddha  "  while  acting  through  that  germ  point  outwardly  as  an 
active  force,  reacts  from  the  circumference  inwardly  as  the 
Supreme  but  latent  Potency.  The  double  triangles  symbolize  the 
Great  Passive  and  the  Great  Active  ;  the  male  and  female ;  Purusha 
and  Prakriti.  Each  triangle  is  a  Trinity  because  presenting  a 
triple  aspect.  The  white  represents  in  its  straight  lines  :  Gnanam 
— (Knowledge) ;  Gnata — (the  Knower) ;  and  Gnayam — (that  which 
is  known).  The  black — form,  colour,  and  substance,  also  the 
creative,  preservative,  and  destructive  forces  and  are  mutually 
correlating,  etc.,  etc. 

Well  may  you  admire  and  more  should  you  wonder  at  the  mar- 
vellous lucidity  of  that  remarkable  seeress,  who  ignorant  of 
Sanskrit  or  Pali,  and  thus  shut  out  from  their  metaphysical 
treasures,  has  yet  seen  a  great  light  shining  from  behind  the  dark 
hills  of  exoteric  religions.  How,  think  you,  did  the  "  Writers  of 
the  Perfect  Way  "  come  to  know  that  Adonai  was  the  Son  and 
not  the  Father;  or  that  the  third  person  of  the  Christian  Trinity 
is — female?  Verily,  they  lay  in  that  work  several  times  their 
hands  upon  the  keystone  of  Occultism.  Only  does  the  lady — 
who  persists  using  without  an  explanation  the  misleading  term 
'*  God  "  in  her  writings — know  how  nearly  she  comes  up  to  our 
doctrine  when  saying  : — *'  Having  for  Father,  Spirit  which  is  Life 
(the  endless  Circle  or  Parabrahm)  and  for  Mother  the  Great  Deep, 
which  is  Substance  (Prakriti  in  its  undifferentiated  condition) — 
Adonai  possesses  the  potency  of  both  and  wields  the  dtud  powers 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  347 

of  all  things."  We  would  say  triple,  but  in  the  sense  as  given 
this  will  do.  Pythagoras  had  a  reason  for  never  using  the  finite, 
useless  figure — 2,  and  for  altogether  discarding  it.  The  One, 
can,  when  manifesting,  become  only  3.  The  unmanifested  when 
a  simple  duality  remains  passive  and  concealed.  The  dual  monad 
(the  7th  and  6th  principles)  has,  in  order  to  manifest  itself  as  a 
logos,  the  "  Kwan-shai-yin  "  to  first  become  a  triad  (7th,  6th  and 
half  of  the  5th);  then,  on  the  bosom  of  the  ''Great  Deep" 
attracting  within  itself  the  One  Circle — form  out  of  it  the  perfect 
Square,  thus  "  squaring  the  circle  " — the  greatest  of  all  the  mys- 
teries, friend — and  inscribing  within  the  latter  the — Word  (the 
Ineffable  name) — otherwise  the  duality  could  never  tarry  as  such, 
and  would  have  to  be  reabsorbed  into  the  One.  The  "  Deep  "  is 
Space — both  male  and  female.  *'  Punish  (as  Brahma)  breathes 
in  the  Eternity  :  when  **  he  "  in-breathes — Prakriti  (as  manifested 
substance)  disappears  in  his  bosom ;  when  * '  he  "  owi-breathes 
she  reappears  as  Maya,'*  says  the  Sloka.  The  One  reality  is 
Mulaprakriti  (undifferentiated  Substance) — the  "  Rootless  root," 
the  .  .  .  But  we  have  to  stop,  lest  there  should  remain  but 
little  to  tell  for  your  own  intuition. 

Well  may  the  Geometer  of  the  R.S.  not  know  that  the  apparent 
absurdity  of  attempting  to  square  the  circle  covers  a  mystery  in- 
effable. It  would  hardly  be  found  among  the  foundation  stones 
of  Mr.  Roden  Noel's  speculations  upon  the  **  pneumatical  body," 
**  of  our  Lord,"  nor  among  the  debris  of  Mr.  Farmer's  **  A 
New  Basis  of  Belief  in  Immortality  " ;  and  to  many  such 
metaphysical  minds  it  would  be  worse  than  useless  to  divulge 
the  fact,  that  the  Unmanifested  Circle — the  Father,  or  Abso- 
lute Life — is  non-existent  outside  the  triangle  and  Perfect 
Square,  and — is  only  manifested  in  the  Son;  and  that  it 
is  when,  reversing  the  action  and  returning  to  its  Absolute 
State  of  Unity,  and  the  square  expands  once  more  into 
the  Circle — that  "  the  Son  returns  to  the  bosom  of  the  Father." 
There  it  remains  until  called  back  by  His  Mother — the  "  Great 
Deep,"  to  remanifest  as  a  triad — the  Son  partaking  at  once, 
of  the  Essence  of  the  Father,  and  of  that  of  the  Mother — 
the  active  Substance,  Prakriti  in  its  differentiated  condition.  '*  My 
Mother — (Sophia — the  manifested  Wisdom)  took  me  " — says 
Jesus  in  a  Gnostic  Treatise;  and  He  asks  His  Disciples  to  tarry 
till  he  comes.  .  .  .  The  true  **  Word  "  may  only  be  found 
by  tracing  the  mystery  of  the  passage  inward  and  outward  of  the 
Eternal  Life,  through  the  states  typified  in  these  three  geometric 
figures. 

The  criticism  of  a  "  Student  of  Occultism  "  (whose  wits  are 
sharpened  by  the  mountain  air  of  his  home)  and  the  answer  of 
'*  S.T.K.     .     .     .     Chary  "    (June   Theosophist)  upon   a  part   of 


348  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

your  annular  and  circular  expositions  need  not  annoy  or  disturb 
in  any  way  your  philosophic  calm.  As  our  Pondichery  chela 
sigfnificanlly  says,  neither  you  nor  any  other  man  across  the  thres- 
hold has  had  or  ever  will  have  the  **  complete  theory  "  of  Evolu- 
tion taug-ht  him ;  or  get  it  unless  he  guesses  it  for  himself.  If 
anyone  can  unravel  it  from  such  tangled  threads  as  are  given  him, 
very  well ;  and  a  fine  proof  it  would  be  indeed  of  his  or  her  spiritual 
insight.  Some — have  come  very  near  it.  But  yet  there  is  always 
with  the  best  of  them  just  enough  error, — colouring  and  mis- 
conception ;  the  shadow  of  Manas  projecting  across  the  field  of 
Buddhi — to  prove  the  eternal  law  that  only  the  unshackled  Spirit 
shall  see  the  things  of  the  Spirit  without  a  veil.  No  untaught 
amateur  could  ever  rival  the  proficient  in  this  branch  of  research ; 
yet  the  world's  Real  revelators  have  been  few,  and  its  pseudo- 
Saviours  legion ;  and  fortunate  it  is  if  their  half-glimpses  of  the 
light  are  not,  like  Islam,  enforced  at  the  sword's  point,  or  like 
Christian  Theology,  amid  blazing  faggots  and  in  torture  chambers. 
Your  Fragments  contain  some — still  very  few  errors,  due  solely 
to  your  two  preceptors  of  Adyar,  one  of  whom  would  not,  and  the 
other  could  not  tell  you  all.  The  rest  could  not  be  called  mistakes 
— rather  incomplete  explanations.  These  are  due,  partly  to  your 
own  imperfect  education  in  your  last  theme — I  mean  the  ever- 
threatening  obscurations — partly  to  the  poor  vehicles  of  language 
at  our  disposal,  and  in  part  again,  to  the  reserve  imposed  upon 
us  by  rule.  Yet,  all  things  considered,  they  are  few  and  trivial ; 
while  as  to  those  noticed  by  '  *  A  Student,  etc. ' '  (the  Marcus  Aure- 
lius  of  Simla)  in  your  No.  VII,  it  will  be  pleasant  to  you  to  know 
that  every  one  of  them,  however  now  seeming  to  you  contradictory, 
can  (and  if  it  should  seem  necessary  shall)  be  easily  reconciled 
with  facts.  The  trouble  is  that  (a)  you  cannot  be  given  the  real 
figures  and  difference  in  the  Rounds,  and  (b)  that  you  do  not  open 
doors  enough  for  explorers.  The  bright  luminary  of  the  B.T.S. 
and  the  Intelligences  that  surround  her  (embodied  I  mean)  may 
help  you  to  see  the  flaws  :  at  all  events  Try.  *'  Nothing  was  ever 
lost  by  trying."  You  share  with  all  beginners  the.  tendency  to 
draw  too  absolutely  strong  inferences  from  partly  caught  hints, 
and  to  dogmatize  thereupon  as  though  the  last  word  had  been 
spK>ken.  You  will  correct  this  in  due  time.  You  may  misunder- 
stand us,  are  more  than  likely  to  do  so,  for  our  language  must 
always  be  more  or  less  that  of  parable  and  suggestion,  when 
treading  upon  forbidden  ground ;  we  have  our  own  peculiar  modes 
of  expression  and  what  lies  behind  the  fence  of  words  is  even 
more  important  than  what  you  read.  But  still — Try.  Perhaf>s 
if  Mr.  S.  Moses  could  know  just  what  was  meant  by  what  was 
said  to  him,  and  about  his  Intelligences,  he  would  find  all  strictly 
true.      As  he  is  a  man  of  interior  growth,  his  d^y  may  come  and 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  349 

his   reconciliation   with    **  the    Occultists "    be  complete.       Who 
knows  ? 

i Meanwhile,  I  shall,  with  your  permission,  close  this  first  volume. 
K.  H. 

My  g-ood  friend — Shakespeare  said  truly  that  *'  our  doubts  are 
traitors."  Why  should  you  doubt  or  create  in  your  mind  ever 
growing  monsters  ?  A  little  more  knowledge  in  occult  laws  would 
have  set  your  mind  at  rest  long  ago,  avoided  many  a  tear  to  your 
gentle  lady  and  pang  to  yourself.  Know  then  that  even  the 
chelas  of  the  same  guru  are  often  made  to  separate  and  keep 
apart  for  long  months  while  the  process  of  development  is  g*oing 
on — simply  on  account  of  the  two  contrary  magnetisms  that 
attracting  each  other  prevent  mutual  and!  individualized  develop- 
ment in  some  one  direction.  There  is  no  offence  meant  or  even 
possible.  This  ignorance  has  caused  of  late  immense  suffering 
on  all  sides.  When  shall  you  trust  implicitly,  in  my  heart  if  not  in 
my  wisdom  for  which  I  claim  no  recognition  on  your  part?  It  is 
extremely  painful  to  see  you  wandering  about  in  a  dark  labyrinth 
created  by  your  own  doubts  every  issue  of  which,  moreover,  you 
close  with  your  own  hands.  I  believe  you  are  now  satisfied  with 
my  portrait  made  by  Herr  Schmiechen  and  as  dissatisfied  with  the 
one  you  have?  Yet  all  are  like  in  their  way.  Only  while  the 
others  are  the  productions  of  chelas,  the  last  one  was  painted  with 
M.'s  hand  on  the  artist's  head  and  often  on  his  arm. 

K.  H. 

Pray  remain  for  the  Wednesday  meeting- — if  you  feel  you  are 
not  to  leave  the  inner  circle.  Otherwise — go,  remembering  my 
friendship  had  warned  you.  Only  avoid,  if  you  do,  hurting  the 
feelings  of  those  who  sin  thro'  an  excess,  not  lack  of  devotion. 


LETTER  No.   LXI 

Sinnett  Sahib  is,  my  respectful  salaams — informed  that  his 
*•  guardian  "  is  occupied  upon  official  business  that  he  cannot  give 
even  a  moment's  consideration  to  the  L.L.  or  its  members;  nor  to 
write  him  individually  whether  by  pen  or  precipitation — the  more 
difficult,  not  to  say  costly,  method  of  the  twO' — to  our  reputations 
in  the  west  anyhow. 

^4 


350  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Mohini  cannot  stop  in  London  indefinitely  nor  for  any  g^reater 
length  of  time  as  he  has  duties  to  perform  elsewhere — duties  to 
his  family  as  well  as  others  to  the  Theosophical  Society.  Besides 
being  a  Chela  and  so  not  a  free  m.an — in  the  ordinary  acceptation 
of  the  term,  he  has  numerous  mouths  to  feed  at  Calcutta  and  more- 
over must  earn  enough  more  to  repay  the  friend  who  advanced 
him  £i2^  money  towards  the  expenses  of  his  present  mission, 
whatever  K.H.  may  or  may  not  do  for  him  something  he  is  pro- 
hibited counting  upon  as  every  other  Chela.  At  the  same  time 
let  it  be  known  to  you  that  he  needs  temporary  change  of  climate. 
He  suffered  greatly  from  cold  in  that  high  room  where  there  is  no 
fireplace  in  your  house  and  K.H.  had  to  surround  him  with  a  double 
shell  against  a  death  cold  that  threatened  him.  Remember 
Hindoos  are  exotic  plants  in  your  inclement  pays  and  cold,  and 
those  who  need  them  have  to  take  care  of  them.  (If  when  annoy- 
ing Olcott  on  Sunday  last  to  tell  you  this  information,  I  did  not 
make  him  tell  you,  and  add  this  it  is,  because  I  wanted  to  spare 
him  in  your  mind  already  prejudiced  against  him  and  inclining 
towards  a  belief  that  he  spoke  out  of  his  head.) 

Again  if  you  need  Mohini's  help  at  London  the  Theosophists 
at  Paris  require  it  even  more  since  their  Occult  education  is  inferior 
to  yours.  It  is  planned  that  he  should  divide  his  time  equally 
among  all  the  European  "  centres  of  spiritual  activity  "  and  if  he 
is  now  required  at  Paris  on  the  i  ith  inst.  he  will  also  be  allowed 
to  come  back  to  London  when  the  Continental  movement  is  fairly 
inaugurated.  In  any  event  you  will  have  Olcott  the  better  part 
of  the  time.  But  fear  not,  if  Henry  is  allowed  to  prolong  his 
stay  in  London  he  will  not  ''  worry  "  either  of  you  by  coming 
down  in  his  extravagant  Asiatic  undresses — for  he  will  not  stop 
with  you  but  with  the  Arundales  ladies — as  ordered  before  now, 
the  order  being  reiterated  by  me  when  Madame  Sahib  remarked 
it  was  better  he  should  stop  where  he  was  after  Upasika  had  left. 
Nor  is  Olcott  worse  than  many  others.  And  though  some  persons 
may  not  concede  it  there  are  worse  wranglers  than  he.  I  must 
not  close  without  letting  you  know  that  in  the  Kingsford  row 
justice  is  no  longer  on  your  side.  Though  unwilling  to  confess — 
you  show  spite  Sahib  personal  spite.  You  have  defeated  her  and 
you  would  now  mortify  and  punish  her.  This  is  not  right.  You 
ought  to  learn  to  dissociate  your  consciousness  from  your  external 
self  more  than  you  do  if  ye  wotdd  not  lose  K.H.  For  he  is  much 
annoyed  at  what  goes  on.  Excuse  mv  remarks  but  it  is  for  your 
own  benefit.       I  beg  your  pardon. 

M. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  351 

LETTER  No.  LXII 

Received    18.7.84. 

My  poor,  blind  friend — you  are  entirely  unfit  for  practical 
occultism  !  Its  laws  are  immutable ;  and  no  one  can  go  back  on 
an  order  once  given.  She  can  send  on  no  letters  to  me,  and  the 
letter  ought  to  have  been  given  to  Mohini.  However  I  have  read 
it ;  and  I  am  determined  to  make  one  more  effort — (the  last  that 
I  am  permitted) — to  open  your  inner  intuition.  If  my  voice,  the 
voice  of  one  who  was  ever  friendly  to  you  in  the  human  principle 
of  his  being — fails  to  reach  you  as  it  has  often  before,  then  our 
separation  in  the  present  and  for  all  times  to  come — becomes  un- 
avoidable. It  pains  me  for  you,  whose  heart  I  read  so  well — 
every  protest  and  doubt  of  your  purely  intellectual  nature,  of  your 
cold  Western  reason — notwithstanding.  But  my  first  duty  is  to 
my  Master,  and  duty,  let  me  tell  you,  is  for  us,  stronger  than  any 
friendship  or  even  love ;  as  without  this  abiding  principle  which  is 
the  indestructible  cement  that  has  held  together  for  so  many 
milleniums,  the  scattered  custodians  of  nature's  grand  secrets — 
our  Brotherhood,  nay,  our  doctrine  itself — would  have  crumbled 
long  ago  into  unrecognisable  atoms.  Unfortunately,  however 
great  your  purely  human  intellect,  your  spiritual  intuitions  are 
dim  and  hazy,  having  been  never  developed.  Hence,  whenever 
you  find  yourself  confronted  by  an  apparent  contradiction  by  a 
difficulty,  a  kind  of  inconsistency  of  occult  nature,  one  that  is 
caused  by  our  time  honoured  laws  and  regulations — (of  which  you 
know  nothing,  for  your  time  has  not  yet  come) — forthwith  your 
doubts  are  aroused,  your  suspicions  bud  out — and  one  finds  that 
they  have  made  mock  at  your  better  nature,  which  is  finally 
crushed  down  by  all  these  deceptive  appearances  of  outward 
things  !  You  have  not  the  faith  required  to  allow  your  Will  to 
arouse  itself  in  defiance  and  contempt  against  your  purely  worldly 
intellect,  and  give  you  a  better  understanding  of  things  hidden 
and  laws  unknown.  You  are  unable  I  see,  to  force  your  better 
aspirations — fed  at  the  stream  of  a  real  devotion  to  the  Maya  you 
have  made  yourself  of  me — (a  feeling  in  you,  that  has  always 
profoundly  touched  me) — to  lift  up  the  head  against  cold, 
spiritically  blind  reason ;  to  allow  your  heart  to  pronounce  loudly 
and  proclaim  that,  which  it  has  hitherto  only  been  allowed  to 
whisper  :  **  Patience,  patience.  A  great  design  has  never  been 
snatched  at  once."  You  were  told,  however,  that  the  path  to 
Occult  Sciences  has  to  be  trodden  laboriously  and  crossed  at  the 
danger  of  life ;  that  every  new  step  in  it  leading  to  the  final  goal, 
is  surrounded  by  pit-falls  and  cruel  thorns ;  that  the  pilgrim  who 
ventures    upon    it    is    made    first    to    confront    and    conquer    the 


352  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

thousand  and  one  furies  who  keep  watch  over  its  adamantine 
gates  and  entrance — furies  called  Doubt,  Skepticism,  Scorn, 
Ridicule,  Envy  and  finally  Temptation — especially  the  latter ;  and 
that  he,  who  would  see  beyond  had  to  first  destroy  this  living 
wall ;  that  he  must  be  possessed  of  a  heart  and  soul  clad  in  steel, 
and  of  an  iron,  never  failing  determination  and  yet  be  meek  and 
gentle,  humble  and  have  shut  out  from  his  heart  every  human 
passion,  that  leads  to  evil.  Are  you  all  this?  Have  you  ever 
begun  a  course  of  training  which  would  lead  to  it?  No;  you 
know  it  as  I  do.  You  are  not  born  for  it ;  nor  are  you  in  a  posi- 
tion,— a  family  man  with  his  wife  and  child  to  support,  with  work 
to  do — fitted  in  any  way  for  the  life  of  an  ascetic,  not  even  of  a — 
Mohini.  Then  why  should  you  complain  that  powers  are  not 
given  you,  that  even  proof  of  our  own  powers  begins  to  fail  you, 
etc.  Eh?  True  you  have  offered  several  times  to  give  up  meat 
and  drink,  and  I  have  refused.  Since  you  cannot  become  a 
regular  chela  why  should  you?  I  thought  you  had  understood  all 
this  long  ago ;  that  you  had  resigned  yourself,  satisfied  to  wait 
patiently  for  future  developments  and  for  my  personal  freedom. 
You  know  I  was  the  only  one  to  attempt  and  persevere  in  my  idea 
of  the  necessity  of,  at  least,  a  small  reform,  of  however  slight  a 
relaxation  from  the  extreme  rigidity  of  our  regulations  if  we 
would  see  European  theosophists  increase  and  work  for  the 
enlightenment  and  good  of  humanity.  I  failed  in  my  attempt, 
as  you  know.  All  I  could  obtain  was  to  be  allowed  to  communi- 
cate with  a  few — you,  foremost  of  all,  since  I  had  chosen  you  as 
the  exponent  of  our  doctrine  that  we  had  determined  to  give  out 
to  the  world — to  some  extent  at  least.  Unable  on  account  of 
work  to  continue  my  teaching  regularly,  I  was  decided  to  resume 
it  after  my  work  had  been  done,  and  I  had  a  few  hours  of  leisure 
at  my  disposal.  I  w^as  tied  hand  and  foot  when  I  made  that 
attempt  to  let  you  have  a  paper  of  your  own.  I  was  not  per- 
mitted to  use  any  psychical  powers  in  that  matter.  You  know 
the  results.  Yet,  I  would  have  succeeded  even  with  the  small 
means  of  action  I  had  at  my  disposal  had  it  not  been  for  the 
Ilbert  Bill  excitement.  Have  you  ever  given  a  thought,  or  ever 
suspected  the  real  reason  of  my  failure  ?  No ;  for  you  know 
nothing  of  the  ins  and  outs  of  the  work  of  karma — of  the  **  side- 
blows  "  of  this  terrible  Law.  But  you  do  know  that  there  was  a 
time  when  you  felt  the  profoundest  contempt  for  us  all,  of  the 
dark  races ;  and  had  regarded  the  Hindus  as  an  inferior  race.  I 
will  say  no  more.  If  you  have  any  intuition,  you  will  work  out 
cause  and  effect  and  perhaps  realize  whence  the  failure.  There 
again  you  had  against  you  the  command  of  our  Supreme  Chief — 
not  to  interfere  with  the  natural  growth  of  the  L.L.  and  the  de- 
velopment psychic  and  spiritual  of  its  members — especially  with 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  353 

yours.  You  know  that  even  to  write  to  you  occasionally,  has 
been  permitted  only  as  a  special  favour  after  the  Phoenix  failure. 
As  to  the  exhibition  of  any  psychic  or  occult  powers — that  was, 
and  still  is,  entirely  out  of  question.  You  felt  astonished  at  the 
interference  in  the  quarrel  between  the  L.L.  and  Kingsford?  And 
you  are  unable  yet  to  realize,  why  we  did  this  and  that?  Believe 
me  that  you  will  learn  some  day  when  you  know  better — that  it 
Tvas  all  brought  on  by  yourself. 

You  also  resent  the  apparent  absurdity  of  entrusting  H.S.O. 
with  a  mission  you  find  him  unfit  for  in  London  at  any  rate, — 
socially  and  intellectually.  Well — some  day,  perchance,  you  may 
also  learn  that  you  were  equally  wrong  in  this,  as  in  many  other 
things.     Coming  results  may  teach  you  a  better  lesson. 

And  now  to  the  latest  development,  to  the  proof  that  you  were 
not  **  unjustly  treated  " — as  you  complain  in  your  letter  tho* 
you  have  treated  both  H.S.O.  and  H.P.B.  in  a  very  cruel  way. 
Your  greatest  grievance  is  caused  by  your  perplexity.  It  is 
agonizing — you  say — to  be  ever  kept  in  the  dark,  etc.  You  feel 
profoundly  hurt  at  what  you  choose  to  call  an  evident  and  grow- 
ing **  unfriendliness,  the  change  of  tone  "  and  so  on.  You  are 
mistaken  from  first  to  last.  There  was  neither  "  unfriendliness," 
nor  any  change  of  feeling.  You  simply  mistook  M.'s  natural 
brusqueness  whenever  he  speaks  or  writes  seriously. 

As  for  my  short  remarks  about  you  to  H.P.B.  who  appealed  to 
me  and  who  was  in  her  right — you  never  thought  of  the  real  and 
true  reason  :  I  had  no  time ;  I  could  hardly  give  a  passing  thought 
to  yourself  or  the  L.L.  As  well  said  by  her  **  No  one  has  ever 
thought  of  accusing  you  of  any  intentional  wrong  " — to  either 
ourselves  or  chelas.  As  to  an  unintentional  one — happily  pre- 
vented in  time  by  me — there  was  one  certainly  :  carelessness. 
You  never  thought  of  the  difference  between  the  constitution  of  a 
Bengali  and  that  of  an  Englishman,  the  power  of  endurance  of 
one,  and  the  same  power  in  the  other.  Mohini  was  left  for  days 
in  a  very  cold  room  without  a  fireplace.  He  never  uttered  one 
word  of  complaint  and  I  had  to  protect  him  from  a  serious  illness, 
to  give  him  my  time  and  attention,  to  him  I  so  needed  to  bring 
about  certain  results,  to  him  who  had  sacrificed  everything  for 
me.  .  .  .  Hence,  M.'s  tone  you  complain  of.  Now  you  have 
it  explained,  that  you  were  not  **  unjustly  treated  "  but  simply  had 
to  submit  to  a  remark  which  it  was  impossible  for  you  to  avoid, 
since  the  mistake  might  have  happened  again.  Then  you  deny 
there  ever  was  any  spite  in  you  against  K.  Very  well ;  call  it  by 
any  other  name  you  like ;  yet  it  was  a  feeling  that  interfered  with 
strict  justice,  and  made  O.  commit  a  still  worse  blunder  than  he 
had  already  committed — but  which  was  allowed  to  take  its  course 
for  it  suited  our  purposes  and  did  no  great  harm  except  to  him- 


354  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

self — alone,  who  was  so  ungenerously  snubbed  for  it.  You 
accuse  him  of  having  done  mischief  to  your  Society  and  perhaps, 
**  irretrievably  "  ?  Where  is  the  harm  done?  .  .  .  You  are 
again  mistaken.  It  is  your  nerves  that  made  you  write  to  H.P.B. 
words  I  would  you  had  never  uttered — for  your  own  sake.  Shall 
I  prove  to  you — at  any  rate  in  one  case — how  utterly  unjust  you 
have  been  in  suspecting  either  of  them,  of  having  either  complained 
or  told  falsehoods  "to  us  about  you  "  ?  I  trust,  however,  that 
you  will  never  repeat  what  I  will  tell  you  :  i.e.  who  it  was  (or 
might  have  been  but  was  not,  for  she  came  too  late) — my  innocent 
informer  about  Mohini.  You  are  at  liberty  to  verify  it  one  day, 
but  I  would  not  have  that  most  excellent  woman  feel  discomforted 
or  miserable  on  my  account.  It  was  Mme.  Gehhard  whom  I  had 
promised  to  visit  subjectively.  I  saw  her  one  morning,  when  I 
was  busy  with  Mohini  making  him  impermeable — descending  the 
stairs.  She  had  heard  his  teeth  chatter,  as  he  was  also  coming 
down  from  the  floor  above.  She  knew  he  was  still  in  his  little 
fireless  room  days  after  Olcott  had  gone  and  when  he  might  have 
been  easily  placed  in  the  next  room.  She  had  stopped  to  wait 
for  him  and  as  I  looked  into  her  I  heard  the  words  pronounced 
mentally:  "Well,  well  ...  if  his  Master  only  knew! 
.  .  ."  and  then  stopping  on  the  landing  she  asked  him  if  he 
would  not  have  some  additional  warm  clothing  and  such  other 
kind  words.  "  His  master  knew  "  and  had  already  remedied  the 
evil;  and  knowing  also,  that  it  was  unintentional — felt  no  un- 
friendliness "  at  the  time  for  he  knows  Europeans  too  well  to 
expect  from  them  more  than  they  can  give.  Nor  was  it  the  only 
mute  reproach  I  found  addressed  to  you  in  Mme.  Gebhard's  heart, 
as  in  the  minds  of  several  others  of  your  friends  : — and  it  is  but 
right  that  you  should  know  it — remembering  that  like  yourself 
they  judge  nearly  everything  on  appearance. 

I  will  say  no  more.  But,  if  you  would  have  another  look  at 
Karma  ponder  over  the  above,  and  remember  that  it  ever  works 
in  the  most  unexpected  ways.  And  now  put  yourself  the  question 
how  far  you  were  justified  in  entertaining  suspicions  against 
Olcott  who  knew  nothing  of  the  circumstances  whatever,  and 
against  H.P.B.  who  was  at  Paris  and  knew  still  less.  Never- 
theless, were  suspicion  degenerated  into  conviction  (  !)  and  became 
objectivised  in  written  reproaches  and  very  ungenerous  expres- 
sions which  were,  moreover,  from  first  to.  last,  undeserved.  All 
this  notwithstanding,  you  complained  bitterly  yesterday  to  Miss 
A.  of  Mme.  B.'s  answer  to  you — which  was — making  every  allow- 
ance for  the  peculiar  circumstances,  and  her  own  temper  was  sur- 
prisingly mild  when  confronted  with  your  letter  to  her.  Nor  can 
I  approve  of  your  attitude  to  Olcott — if  my  advice  and  opinion  are 
wanted.     Had  you  been  in  his  place  and  guilty  you  would  have 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  355 

hardly  permitted  him  to  accuse  you  in  such  terms  of  falsification, 
slandering,  lies,  falsehoods  and  the  most  idiotic  incompetency  for 
his  work.  And  Olcott  is  entirely  innocent  of  any  such  sin  !  As 
to  his  work — we  really  must  be  permitted  to  know  better.  What 
we  want  is  good  results  and  you  will  find  that  we  have  them. 

Verily  **  suspicion  overturns  what  confidence  builds  "  !  And 
if,  on  the  one  hand,  you  have  some  reasons  to  quote  Bacon 
against  us,  and  say  that  **  there  is  nothing  that  makes  a  man 
suspect  much,  more  than  to  know  little,"  on  the  other  hand  you 
ought  also  to  remember  that  our  Knowledge  and  Science  cannot 
be  pursued  altogether  on  the  Baconian  methods.  We  are  not  per- 
mitted— come  what  may  to  offer  it  as  a  remedy  against,  or  to 
cure  people  from  suspicion.  They  have  to  earn  it  for  themselves, 
and  he  who  will  not  find  our  truths  in  his  soul  and  within  himself 
— has  poor  chances  of  success  in  Occultism.  It  is  certainly  not 
suspicion  that  will  mend  the  situation  for  it  is — 

.  I---.—      -HitxJf 

"  .     .     .     a   heavy   armour,    and 

with  its  own  weight  impedes  more  than  it  protects." 

With  this  last  remark  we  may,  I  think,  let  this  matter  drop  for 
ever.  You  have  brought  suffering  upon  yourself,  upon  your  lady 
and  many  others — which  was  quite  useless  and  might  have  been 
avoided  had  you  only  abstained  from  creating  yourself  most  of  its 
causes.  All  that  Miss  Arundale  told  you  was  right  and  well  said. 
You  are  yourself  ruining  that  which  you  have  so  laboriously 
erected — ;  but  then,  the  strange  idea  that  we  are  quite  unable  to 
see  for  ourselves  that  our  only  data  is  that,  which  we  find  in  our 
chela's  minds;  hence — that  we  are  not  the  "powerful  beings" 
you  have  represented  us,  seems  to  haunt  you  with  every  day 
more.  Hume  has  begun  in  the  same  way.  I  would  gladly  help 
you  and  protect  you  from  his  fate,  but  unless  you  shake  off  your- 
self the  ghastly  influence  that  is  upon  you  I  can  do  very  little. 

You  ask  me  if  you  can  tell  Miss  Arundale  what  /  told  you  thro* 
Mrs.  H.  You  are  quite  at  liberty  to  explain  to  her  the  situation, 
and  thereby  justify  in  her  eyes  your  seeming  disloyalty  and  re- 
bellion against  us  as  she  thinks.  You  can  do  so  the  more  since 
I  have  never  bound  you  to  anything  thro'  Mrs.  H.  ;  never  com- 
municated with  you  or  any  one  else  thro'  her — nor  have  any 
of  my,  or  M.'s  chelas,  to  my  knowledge  except  in  America,  once 
at  Paris  and  another  time  at  Mrs.  A.'s  house.  She  is  an  ex- 
cellent but  quite  undeveloped  clairvoyant.  Had  she  not  been 
imprudently  meddled  with,  and  had  you  followed  the  old  woman's 
and  Mohini's  advice  indeed,  by  this  time  I  might  have  spoken 
with  you  thro'  her — and  such  was  our  intention.  It  is  again  your 
own  fault,  my  good  friend.  You  have  proudly  claimed  the  privi- 
lege  of   exercising   your    own,    uncontrolled    judgment   in    occult 


356  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

matters  you  could  know  nothing  about — and  the  occult  laws — ^you 
believe  you  can  defy  and  play  with,  with  impunity — have  turned 
round  upon  you  and  have  badly  hurt  you.  It  is  all  as  it  should 
be.  If,  throwing  aside  every  preconceived  idea,  you  could  try 
and  impress  yourself  with  this  profound  truth  that  intellect  is  not 
all  powerful  by  itself;  that  to  become  "  a  mover  of  mountains  *' 
it  has  first  to  receive  life  and  light  from  its  higher  principle — 
Spirit,  and  then  would  fix  your  eyes  upon  everything  occult 
spiritually  trying  to  develop  the  faculty  according  to  the  rules, 
then  you  would  soon  read  the  mystery  right.  You  need  not  tell 
Mrs.  H.  that  she  has  never  seen  correctly,  for  it  is  not  so.  Many 
a  time  she  saw  correctly — when  left  alone  to  herself,  never  has 
she  left  one  single  statement  undisfigured. 

And  now  I  have  done.  You  have  two  roads  lying  before  you; 
one  leading  thro'  a  very  dreary  path  toward  knowledge  and 
truth — the  other  .  .  .  but  really  I  must  not  influence  your 
mind.  If  you  are  not  prepared  to  break  with  us  altogether  then 
I  would  ask  you — not  only  to  be  present  at  the  meeting  but  also 
to  speak — as  it  will  otherwise  produce  a  very  unfavourable 
impression.  This  I  ask  you  to  do  jor  my  sake  and  also  for  your 
own. 

Only  whatever  you  do  let  me  advise  you  not  to  stop  midway :  it 
may  prove  disastrous  to  you. 

So  far  my  friendship  for  you  remains  the  same  as  ever — for  we 
never  were  yet  ungrateful  for  services  rendered. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXIII 

Received  London,  Summer,   1884. 
Good  friend — 

When  our  first  correspondence  began,  there  was  no  Idea  then  of 
any  publications  being  issued  on  the  basis  of  the  replies  you  might 
receive.  You  went  on  putting  questions  at  random  and  the 
answers  being  given  at  different  times  to  disjointed  queries,  and 
so  to  say,  under  a  semi-protest,  were  necessarily  imperfect,  often 
from  different  standpoints.  When  the  publication  of  some  of 
these  were  permitted  for  the  Occult  World,  it  was  hoped  that 
among  your  readers  some  may  be  able,  like  yourself,  to  put  all  the 
different  pieces  together  and  evolve  out  of  them  the  skeleton  or  a 
shadow  of  our  system  which,  although  not  exactly  the  original— 
this  would  be  an  impossibility — would  be  as  near  an  approach  to 
it  as  could  be  made  by  a  non-initiate.  But  the  results  have  proved 
quasi-disastrous  !     We  had  tried  an  experiment  and  sadly  failed  ! 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  357 

Now  we  see  that  none  but  those  who  have  passed  at  least  their 
third  initiation  are  able  to  write  upon  those  subjects  compre- 
hensively. A  Herbert  Spencer  would  have  made  a  mess  of  it 
under  your  circumstances.  Mohini  is  certainly  not  quite  right,  in 
some  details  he  is  positively  wrong,  but  so  are  you  my  old  friend, 
though  the  outside  reader  is  none  the  wiser  for  it  and  no  one,  so 
far,  has  noticed  the  real  vital  errors  in  Esoteric  Buddhism  and 
Man;  nor  are  they  likely  to.  We  can  give  no  further  information 
on  the  subject  already  approached  by  you  and  have  to  leave  the 
facts  already  communicated  to  be  woven  into  a  consistent  and 
systematic  philosophy  by  the  chelas  at  the  headquarters.  The 
Secret  Doctrine  will  explain  many  things,  set  to  right  more  than 
one  perplexed  student. 

Therefore,  to  put  before  the  world  all  the  crude  and  compli- 
cated materials  in  your  possession  in  the  shape  of  old  letters,  in 
which,  I  confess,  much  was  purposely  made  obscure,  would  only 
be  making  confusion  worse  confounded.  Instead  of  doing  any 
good  thereby  to  yourself  and  others  it  would  only  place  you  in  a 
still  more  difficult  position,  bring  criticism  upon  the  heads  of  the 
Masters  and  thus  have  a  retarding  influence  on  human  progress 
and  the  T.S.  Hence  I  protest  most  strongly  against  your  new 
idea.  Leave  to  the  Secret  Doctrine  the  task  of  avenging  you. 
My  letters  must  not  be  published,  in  the  manner  you  suggest,  but 
on  the  contrary  if  you  save  Djual  K.  trouble  copies  of  some 
should  be  sent  to  the  literary  Committee  at  Adyar — about  which 
Damodar  has  written  to  you — so  that  with  the  assistance  of 
S.Y.K.  Charya,  Djual  K.,  Subba  Row  and  the  Secret  Committee 
(from  which  H.P.B.  was  purposely  excluded  by  us  to  avoid  new 
suspicions  and  calumnies)  they  might  be  able  to  utilise  the  in- 
formation for  the  realization  of  the  object  with  which  the  Com- 
mittee was  started,  as  explained  by  Damodar  in  the  letter  written 
by  him  under  orders.  It  is  neither  new  *'  Kiddle  developments  " 
that  I  seek  to  avoid  nor  criticism  directed  against  my  personality, 
which  indeed  can  hardly  be  reached  ;  but  I  rather  try  to  save  your- 
self and  Society  from  new  troubles  which  would  be  serious  this 
time.  The  letters,  in  short,  were  not  written  for  publication  or 
public  comment  upon  them,  but  for  private  use,  and  neither  M. 
nor  I  would  ever  give  our  consent  to  see  them  thus  handled.  As 
regards  your  first  letter  D.J.K.  has  been  instructed  to  attend  to  it. 
In  such  delicate  matters  I  am  still  less  competent  to  give  advice 
than  to  satisfy  aspiring  **  chelas  "  of  the  **  L.C.H."  sort.  I  am 
afraid  the  **  poor,  dear  Mrs.  Holloway  "  is  showing  her  white 
teeth  and  would  hardly  be  found  now  **  a  charming  companion." 
Under  instructions  Olcott  wrote  a  letter  to  Finch — which  gives 
the  key  to  the  little  problem.  It  is  Fern,  Moorad  Ali,  Bishen 
Lall    and    other    wrecks,    over    again.     Why    shall    "  would-be  " 


358  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

chelas  with  such  intense,  self-personalities,  enforce  themselves 
within  the  enchanted  and  dangerous  circle  of  probation  !  Pardon- 
ing- my  short  letter,  I  am  very  busy  just  now  with  the  coming 
new  year. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXIV 

Received  London,  Summer,  1884. 

Entirely  private  except  for  Mohini  and  F.A. 
Good  friend, — 

This  is  not  an  answer  to  your  last.  The  letter  to  my  address 
sent  by  you  through  Mohini  was  never  written  by  yourself. 
Verily  it  was  penned  by  one,  at  that  time,  entirely  under  the  in- 
fluence of  a  creature  of  Atta  V^da — 

"  The  sin  of  self,  who  in  the  Universe 

As  in  a  mirror  sees  her  fond  face  shewn  " 

— and  only  hers  ;  whose  every  word  he  then  implicitly  trusted  ;  per- 
haps, (this  is  to  a  certain  extent  a  justification)  because  there  came 
no  half  expected  interference,  no  word  of  warning  from  our  quar- 
ters.    Thus — no  response  to  it,  for  we  rather  turn  a  new  page. 

Ah,  how  long  shall  the  mysteries  of  chelaship  overpower  and 
lead  astray  from  the  path  of  truth  the  wise  and  perspicacious,  as 
much  as  the  foolish  and  the  credulous  !  How  few  of  the  many 
pilgrims  who  have  to  start  without  chart  or  compass  on  that 
shoreless  Ocean  of  Occultism  reach  the  wished  for  land.  Believe 
me,  faithful  friend,  that  nothing  short  of  full  confidence  in  us,  in 
our  good  motives  if  not  in  our  wisdom,  in  our  foresight,  if  not 
omniscience — which  is  not  to  be  found  on  this  earth — can  help  one 
to  cross  over  from  one's  land  of  dream  and  fiction  to  our  Truth 
land,  the  region  of  stern  reality  and  fact.  Otherwise  the  ocean 
will  prove  shoreless  indeed ;  its  weaves  will  carry  one  no  longer  on 
waters  of  hope,  but  will  turn  every  ripple  into  doubt  and 
suspicion ;  and  bitter  shall  they  prove  to  him  who  starts  on  that 
dismal,  tossing  sea  of  the  unknown,  with  a  prejudiced  mind  ! 

Nevertheless,  feel  not  too  much  perplexed.  The  hour  of  trial 
is  half  over;  try  rather  to  understand  the  "  whys  and  whatfors  " 
of  the  situation,  to  study  more  seriously  the  laws  that  govern  our 
"  Occult  World."  I  grant  you,  those  law^s  do  seem  very  often 
unjust,  even,  at  times  cruel.  But  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  they 
were  never  meant  either  for  the  immediate  redress  of  wrongs,  or 
the  direct  help  of  those  who  offer  at  random  their  allegiance  to 
the  legislators.  Still,  the  seemingly  real,  the  evanescent  and 
quick-passing    evils    they    bring    about    are    as    necessary    to    the 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  359 

growth,  progress  and  final  establishment  of  your  small  Th. 
Society  as  those  certain  cataclysms  in  nature,  which  often  deci- 
mate whole  populations,  are  necessary  to  mankind.  An  earth- 
quake may,  for  all  the  world  knows,  be  a  bliss  and  a  tidal  wave 
prove  salvation  to  the  many  at  the  expense  of  the  few.  The 
•'  fittest  "  were  seen  to  survive  in  the  destruction  of  every  old 
race  and  made  to  merge  into,  and  assimilate  with  the  new,  for 
nature  is  older  than  Darwin.  Say  rather,  then,  to  yourself 
"  whatever  happened  there  can  be  no  cause  for  regret  "  ;  for  it  is 
not  so  much  that  new  facts  should  be  revealed  to  the  '*  inner 
group  "  as  that  old  puzzles  and  mysteries  should  have  been  ex- 
plained and  made  clear  to  it's  few  entirely  staunch  members. 
Even  an  innocent  quotation  mark  fallen  from  under  my  pencil  and 
by  you  objected  to,  would  have  had  a  world  of  meaning  for  one 
less  beclouded  than  you  were  in  writing  your  last  letter — based 
entirely  on  the  crafty  insinuations  of  your  would-be  sybil.  It  was 
absolutely  necessary  that  within  the  personal  experience  of  those 
few  staunch  members  (yourself  included)  the  secret  working  of 
Karma  should  take  place ;  that  its  deeper  meaning  should  be  prac- 
tically illustrated  (as  also  its  effects) — on  those  self-opinionated 
volunteers  and  candidates  for  chelaship  who  will  rush  under  the 
dark  shadow  of  her  wheels. 

As  against  the  above  some  will  say — how  then  about  her  great 
clairvoyance,  her  chelaship,  her  selection  among  the  many  by  the 
Masters  ? 

Her  clairvoyance  is  a  fact,  her  selection  and  chelaship  another. 
However,  well  fitted  psychically  and  physiologically  to  answer 
such  selection,  unless  possessed  of  spiritual,  as  well  as  of  physical 
unselfishness  a  chela  whether  selected  or  not,  must  perish,  as  a 
chela  in  the  long  run.  Self-personality,  vanity  and  conceit  har- 
boured in  the  higher  principles  are  enormously  more  dangerous 
than  the  same  defect  inherent  only  in  the  lower  physical  nature 
of  man.  They  are  the  breakers  against  which  the  cause  of  chela- 
ship, in  its  probationary  stage,  is  sure  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  un- 
less the  would-be  disciple  carries  with  him  the  white  shield 
of  perfect  confidence  and  trust  in  those  he  would  seek  out 
through  mount  and  vale  to  guide  him  safely  toward  the  light  of 
Knowledge.  The  world  moves  an  lives  under  the  shadow  of  the 
deadly  upas-tree  of  evil ;  yet  its  dripping  is  dangerous  to,  and  can 
reach  only  those  whose  higher  and  middle  natures  are  as  much 
susceptible  of  infection  as  their  lower  one.  Its  venomous  seed 
can  germinate  but  in  a  willing,  well-prepared  soil.  Bring  to  your 
memory  the  cases  of  Fern,  Moorad  Ali  and  Bishamlal,  good 
friend,  and  remember  what  you  have  learnt.  The  mass  of  human 
sin  and  frailty  is  distributed  throughout  the  life  of  man  who  is 
content    to   remain    an    average   mortal.     It   is   gathered    in    and 


36o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

centred,  so  to  say,  within  one  period  of  the  Hfe  of  a  chela — the 
period  of  probation.  That,  which  is  generally  accumulating  to 
find  its  legitimate  issue  only  in  the  next  rebirth  of  an  ordinary 
man,  is  quickened  and  fanned  into  existence  in  the  chela — especi- 
ally in  the  presumptuous  and  selfish  candidate  who  rushes  in 
without  having  calculated  his  forces. 

"  One  who  dug  so  many  and  deep  pit-falls  for  her  friends  and 
brothers  fell  into  them  herself" — said  M.  to  H.P.B.  on  the  night 
of  the  mutual  revelations.  I  tried  to,  but  could  not  save  her.  She 
had  entered,  or  rather  I  should  say — forced  herself  into  the 
dangerous  path  with  a  double  purpose  in  view  : 

(i)  To  upset  the  whole  structure  in  which  she  had  no  part,  and 
thus  obstruct  the  path  to  all  others,  if  she  did  not  find  the  system 
and  Society  at  the  level  of  her  expectations ;  and 

(2)  To  remain  true  and  work  out  her  chelaship  and  natural 
gifts,  that  are  considerable  indeed,  only  if  those  expectations  were 
all  answered.  It  is  the  intensity  of  that  resolution  that  first 
attracted  my  attention.  Led  on  gradually  and  gently  into  the 
right  direction  the  acquisition  of  such  an  individuality  would  have 
been  invaluable.  But  there  are  persons,  who,  without  ever  hav- 
ing any  external  sign  of  selfishness,  are  intensely  selfish  in  their 
inner  spiritual  aspirations.  These  will  follow  the  path  once 
chosen  by  them  with  their  eyes  closed  to  the  interest  of  all  but 
themselves,  and  see  nothing  outside  the  narrow  pathway  filled 
with  their  own  personality.  They  are  so  intensely  absorbed  in  the 
contemplation  of  their  own  supposed  **  righteousness  that  nothing 
can  ever  appear  right  to  them  outside  the  focus  of  their  own  vision 
distorted  by  their  self-complacent  contemplation,  and  their  judg- 
ment of  the  right  and  wrong.  Alas,  such  an  one  is  our  new, 
mutual  friend  L.C.H.  **  The  right  in  thee  is  base,  the  wrong  a 
curse,"  was  said  by  our  Lord  Buddha  for  such  as  she;  for  right 
and  wrong  **  cheat  such  as  love  themselves,"  and  the  others  only 
in  proportion  to  the  benefits  derived — though  these  benefits  be 
purely  spiritual.  Aroused  some  18  months  ago  to  spasmodic, 
hysterical  curiosity  by  the  perusal  of  your  Occult  World  and  later 
on  by  that  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  to  enthusiastic  envy,  she  deter- 
mined to  **  find  out  the  truth  "  as  she  expressed  it.  She  would 
either  become  a  chela  herself — first  and  foremost,  to  write  hooks, 
thus  eclipsing  her  **  lay  "  rival  or  upset  the  whole  imposture  in 
which  she  had  no  concern.  She  decided  to  go  to  Europe  and 
seek  you  out.  Her  surexcited  fancy  putting  a  mask  on  every 
stray  spook,  created  the  "  Student  "  and  made  him  serve  her  pur- 
pose and  desire.  She  believed  in  it  sincerely.  At  this  juncture 
foreseeing  the  new  danger  I  interfered.  Darb  :  Nath  was 
despatched  and  made  to  impress  her  thrice  in  my  name.  Her 
thoughts  were  for  a  certain  period  guided,  her  clairvoyance  made 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  361 

to  serve  a  purpose.  Had  her  sincere  aspirations  conquered  the 
intense  personality  of  her  lower  self  I  would  have  given  the  T.S. 
an  excellent  help  and  worker.  The  poor  woman  is  naturally 
good  and  moral ;  but  that  very  purity  is  of  so  narrow  a  kind,  of  so 
Presbyterian  a  character,  if  I  may  use  the  word,  as  to  be  unable 
to  see  itself  reflected  in  any  other  but  her  own  Self.  She  alone 
is  good  and  pure.  All  others  must  and  shall  be  suspected.  One 
great  boon  was  offered  her — her  wayward  spirit  would  allow  her 
to  accept  of  none  that  was  not  shaped  in  accordance  with  her  own 
model. 

And  now  she  will  receive  a  letter  from  me  which  will  contain 
my  ultimatum  and  conditions.  She  will  not  accept  them,  but  will 
complain  bitterly  to  several  among  you,  suggesting  new  hints  and 
insinuations  against  one  whom  she  professes  to  adore.  Prepare. 
A  plank  of  salvation  is  offered  to  her  but  there  is  very  little  hope 
that  she  will  accept  it.  However,  I  will  try  once  more ;  but  I 
have  no  right  to  influence  her  either  way.  If  you  will  accept  my 
advice,  abstain  from  any  serious  correspondence  with  her  until 
some  fresh  developments.  Try  to  save  **  Man  "  by  looking  it 
over  with  Mohini,  and  by  erasing  from  it  the  alleged  inspirations 
and  dictation  by  **  Student."  Having  had  also  **  an  object  and  a 
purpose  "  in  view,  I  had  to  leave  her  under  her  self-delusion  that 
this  new  book  was  written  with  the  view  of  **  correcting  the 
mistakes"  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  ( — of  killing  it — ^was  the  true 
thought) ;  and  it  was  only  on  the  eve  of  her  departure  that 
Upasika  was  ordered  to  see  that  Mohini  should  carefully  expunge 
from  it  all  the  objectionable  passages.  During  her  stay  in  Eng- 
land Mrs.  H.  would  have  never  permitted  you  to  see  her  book 
before  the  final  publication.  But  I  would  save  five  months  labour 
of  Mohini  and  will  not  permit  it  to  remain  unpublished. 

Much  as  remains  unexplained,  the  little  you  may  have  gathered 
from  this  letter  may  serve  its  purpose.  It  will  start  your  thoughts 
in  a  new  direction  and  will  have  unveiled  another  corner  in  the 
domain  of  psychological  Isis. 

If  you  would  learn  and  acquire  Occult  Knowledge,  you  have, 
my  friend,  to  remember  that  such  tuition  opens  in  the  stream  of 
chelaship  many  an  unforeseen  channel  to  whose  current  even  a  lay 
chela  must  perforce  yield,  or  else  strand  upon  the  shoals ;  and 
knowing  this  to  abstain  for-ever  judging  on  mere  appearance. 
The  ice  is  broken  once  more.     Profit  by  it  if  you  may. 

K.  H. 


362  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 


LETTER  No.  LXV 

Received  London,  Summer,  1884. 
My  friend  : 

You  ask  me  "  to  throw  lig'ht  "  upon  the  "  new  distressing 
event  '*  arising  from  Mr.  A.  Gebhard*s  fanciful  accusation?  For 
the  matter  of  that,  dozens  of  events  of  a  far  more  distressing 
character,  each  of  them  calculated  to  crush  the  hapless  woman 
chosen  as  victim,  are  ripe  and  ready  to  burst  over  her  head  wound- 
ing as  badly  the  Society.  Again,  I  should  have  imagined  that, 
after  my  signal  failure  to  satisfy  your  rigorous  logicians  in  the 
**  Billing — Massey  "  and  "  Kiddle — Light  "  incidents,  my  personal 
opinions  and  explanations  were  held  in  small  honour  at  the  West? 
You  seem,  however,  to  think  with  Whenell  that  "  every  failure  is 
a  step  to  success  "  and  your  confidence  in  me  must  alarm 
seriously  your  friends? 

With  your  permission,  I  have  left  the  explanation  of  the  **  dis- 
tressing incidents  "  to  Mad.  B.  herself.  As  she  wrote  to  you, 
however,  only  simple  truth,  there  is  very  little  chance  for  her  of 
being  believed,  save  perhaps,  by  her  few  immediate  friends — if 
she  has  any  left  by  the  time  this  reaches  you. 

You  must  have  understood  by  this  time  my  friend,  that  the 
continual  attempt  made  by  us  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  world 
— has  nearly  failed  :  in  India — partially,  in  Europe — ^with  a  few 
exceptions — absolutely.  There  is  but  one  chance  of  salvation 
for  those  who  still  believe  :  to  rally  together  and  face  the  storm 
bravely.  Let  the  eyes  of  the  most  intellectual  among  the  public 
be  opened  to  the  foul  conspiracy  against  theosophy  that  is  going 
on  in  the  missionary  circles  and  in  one  year's  time  you  will  have 
gained  your  footing.  In  India  it  is  :  "  either  Christ  or  the 
Founders  (  !  ! )  Let  us  stone  them  to  death  !  "  They  have 
nearly  finished  killing  one — they  are  now  attacking  the  other 
victim — Olcott.  The  padris  are  as  busy  as  bees.  The  P.R.S. 
has  given  them  an  excellent  opportunity  of  making  capital  of 
their  ambassador. — Mr.  Hodgson  fell  quite  easily  a  victim  to 
false  evidence ;  and  the  scientific  a  priori  impossibility  of  such 
phenomena  helping  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  he  was  sent  to 
investigate  and  report  upon  is  utterly  and  totally  discredited. 
He  may  plead  as  an  excuse  the  personal  disappointment  he  felt, 
which  made  him  turn  in  a  fury  against  the  alleged  authors  of  the 
*'  gigantic  swindle  "  ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  if  the  Society 
collapses  it  will  be  due  to  him.  We  may  add  that  the  praise- 
worthy efforts  of  our  mutual  friend  of  Simla  (A.  O.  Hume)  who 
has  not,  however,  resigned, — and  those  of  Mr.  Lane  Fox.  What 
Society  could  withstand  in  its  integrality  the  effects  of  two  such 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  363 

tongues  as  those  of  Messrs.  H.  and  L.  F.  !  While  the  former 
taking-  into  his  confidence  every  theosophist  of  note,  assures  him 
that  since  the  beginning  of  the  Society  not  one  of  the  letters 
alleged  to  have  come  from  the  Masters  was  genuine,  Mr.  L.  Fox 
goes  about  preaching  that  he  is  only  carrying  out  the  wishes  of 
the  Master  (M.)  in  acquainting  the  theosophists  with  all  the 
defects  of  the  T.S.  and  the  mistakes  of  its  Founders  whose 
Karma  it  is  to  betray  the  sacred  trust  they  had  received  from 
their  Gurus. 

After  this  you  will,  perhaps,  blame  less  our  chelas  for  detesting 
the  Europeans  at  H.Q.,  and  saying  that  it  is  they  who  have 
ruined  the  Society. 

Thus,  my  friend,  there  comes  a  forcible  end  to  the  projected 
occult  instructions.  Everything  was  settled  and  prepared.  The 
secret  Committee,  appointed  to  receive  our  letters  and  teachings 
and  to  convey  them  to  the  Oriental  group,  was  ready,  when  a 
few  Europeans — for  reasons  I  prefer  not  mentioning — ^took  upon 
themselves  the  authority  of  reversing  the  decision  of  the  whole 
Council.  They  declined  (though  the  reason  they  gave  was 
another  one) — to  receive  our  instructions  through  Subba  Row  and 
Damodar,  the  latter  of  whom  is  hated  by  Messrs.  L,  Fox  and 
Hartmann.  Subba  R.  resigned  and  Damodar  went  to  Tibet. 
Are  our  Hindus  to  be  blamed  for  this? 

And  now,  Hume  and  Hodgson  have  goaded  Subba  Row  to 
fury  by  telling  him,  that  as  a  friend  and  fellow  occultist  of 
Madam  B.'s  he  was  suspected  by  the  Government  of  being  also 
a  spy.  It  is  the  history  of  the  **  Count  St.  Germain,"  and 
Cagliostro  told  over  again.  But  I  may  tell  to  you,  who  have 
ever  been  faithful  and  true  to  me  that  the  fruits  of  your  devotion 
shall  not  be  allowed  to  decay  and  crumble  down  into  dust  from 
the  tree  of  action.  And  now,  may  I  not  say  a  few  words  that 
may  prove  useful? 

It  is  an  old  truism  that  none  of  you  have  ever  formed  an 
accurate  idea  of  either  the  "  Masters  "  or  the  laws  of  Occultism 
they  are  guided  by.  For  instance,  I,  because  I  had  received  a 
bit  of  Western  education — must  needs  be  fancied  as  the  type  of 
a  **  gentleman  "  who  strictly  conforms  his  action  to  the  laws  of 
etiquette  and  regulates  his  intercourse  with  Europeans,  after  the 
regulations  of  your  world  and  Society  !  Nothing  could  be  more 
erroneous  :  the  absurd  picture  of  an  Indo-Tibetan  ascetic  playing 
at  Sir  C.  Grandison  need  hardly  be  noticed.  Nevertheless,  hav- 
ing failed  to  answer  to  the  said  description,  I  was  hung  in  effigy, 
and  publicly  branded  and  degraded,  as  Mad.  B.  would  say. 
What  a  poor  parody  !  When  shall  you  realize  that  I  am  nothing 
of  the  kind?  That  if,  to  a  certain  extent,  I  may  be  familiar  with 
your  (to  me)  peculiar  notions  about  the  propriety  of  this  thing 


364  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

or  another,  and  the  obHgations  of  a  Western  gentleman,  so  are 
you,  to  a  degree,  acquainted  with  the  manners  and  customs  of 
China  and  Tibet.  For  all  that,  as  you  would  decline  to  conform 
yourself  to  our  habits  and  live  according  to  our  customs — so  do 
I,  preferring  our  modes  of  life  to  yours,  and  our  ideas  to  those 
of  the  West.  I  am  accused  of  "  plagiarism/'  We,  of  Tibet  and 
China,  know  not  what  you  mean  by  the  word.  /  do,  but  this  is 
no  reason,  perhaps,  why  I  should  accept  your  literary  laws.  Any 
writer  has  the  privilege  of  taking  out  whole  sentences  from  the 
dictionary  of  Pai — Wouen — Yen — Fu  the  greatest  in  the  world, 
full  of  quotations  from  every  known  writer,  and  containing  all 
the  phrases  ever  used — and  to  frame  them  to  express  his  thought. 
This  does  not  apply  to  the  Kiddle  case  which  happened  just  as 
I  told  you.  But  you  may  find,  perchance  throughout  my  letters 
twenty  detached  sentences  which  may  have  been  already  used  in 
books  or  MSS.  When  you  write  upon  some  subject  you  sur- 
round yourself  with  books  of  references  etc.  :  when  we  write  upon 
something  the  Western  opinion  about  which  is  unknown  to  us, 
we  surround  ourselves  with  hundreds  of  paras  :  upon  this  particu- 
lar topic  from  dozens  of  different  works — impressed  upon  the 
Akasa.  What  wonder  then,  that  not  only  a  chela  entrusted  with 
the  work  and  innocent  of  any  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of 
plagiarism,  but  even  myself — should  use  occasionally  a  whole 
sentence  already  existent  applying  it  only  to  another — our  own 
idea?  I  have  told  you  of  this  before  and  it  is  no  fault  of  mine 
if  your  friends  and  enemies  will  not  remain  satisfied  with  the 
explanation.  When  I  shall  undertake  to  write  an  original  prize- 
essay  I  may  be  more  careful.  For  the  Kiddle  business  it  is  your 
own  fault.  Why  have  you  printed  the  Occult  World  before  send- 
ing it  to  me  for  revision?  I  would  have  never  allowed  the 
passage  to  pass;  nor  the  *' Lai  Sing"  either  foolishly  invented 
as  half  a  nam  de  plume  by  Djwal  K.  and  carelessly  allowed  by  me 
to  take  root  without  thinking  of  the  consequences.  We  are  not 
infallible,  all-foreseeing  "  Mahatmas  "  at  every  hour  of  the  day, 
good  friend  :  none  of  you  have  even  learned  to  remember  so 
much.     And   now  for   Occultism. 

We  were  expected  to  allow  the  Occult  forces  to  be  treated  in 
the  same  manner  as  their  rind — physical  forces  in  nature.  We 
are  taken  to  task  for  not  giving  out  to  every  man  of  learning  who 
had  joined  the  T.S.  the  fruits  of  the  researches  of  generations  of 
occultists  who  had  all  devoted  their  lives  to  it,  and  who  had  as 
often  lost  them  in  the  great  struggle  of  wrenching  her  secrets 
from  the  heart  of  Nature.  Unless  we  did  that — Occultism  would 
not  be  recognised  : — it  has  to  remain  within  the  limbo  of  magic 
and  superstition,  spiritualism — in  the  sight  of  some — fraud  in  the 
opinion  of  others.     Who  thought  for  one  instant  that  an  occult 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  365 

law  revealed  ceased  to  be  occult  to  become  public  property,  unless 
it  was  given  to  an  Occultist  who  dies  before  he  betrays  the  secret. 

What  grumbling-s,  what  criticisms  on  Devachan  and  kindred 
subjects  for  their  incompleteness  and  many  a  seeming  contradic- 
tion !  Oh  blind  fools  !  They  forget — or  never  knew  that  he 
who  holds  the  keys  to  the  secrets  of  Death  is  possessed  of  the 
keys  of  Life?  That  could  everyone  become  a  creative  God  in 
this  race,  acquiring  knowledge  so  easily  that  there  would  be  no 
necessity  for  a  6th  and  7th  races?  And  that  we,  we  should  have 
perverted  the  programme  of  Being,  garbled  the  accounts  in  the 
Book  of  Life,  defeated  in  a  word  the  Eternal  Will ! 

My  Friend,  I  have  little  if  anything  more  to  say.  I  regret 
deeply  my  inability  to  satisfy  the  honest,  sincere  aspirations  of  a 
few  chosen  ones  among  your  group — at  least,  for  the  present. 
Could  but  your  L.L.  understand,  or  so  much  as  suspect,  that  the 
present  crisis  that  is  shaking  the  T.S.  to  its  foundation  is  a  ques- 
tion of  perdition  or  salvation  to  thousands ;  a  question  of  the  pro- 
gress of  the  Human  Race  or  its  retrogression,  of  its  glory  or 
dishonour,  and  for  the  majority  of  this  race — of  being  or  not  being 
of  annihilation,  in  fact — perchance  many  of  you  would  look  into 
the  very  root  of  evil,  and  instead  of  being  guided  by  false  appear- 
ances and  scientific  decisions,  you  would  set  to  work  and  save 
the  situation  by  disclosing  the  dishonourable  doings  of  your  mis- 
sionary world. 

Meanwhile — accept  my  best  wishes. 

K.  H. 

I  believe  I  had  better  tell  you  once  more  what  I  would  have  you 
remember  always.  I  should  be  glad  if  every  question  could  be 
answered  as  easily  as  your  query  about  the  "  distressing  event." 
Why  is  it  that  doubts  and  foul  suspicions  seem  to  be-set  every 
aspirant  for  chelaship?  My  friend  in  the  Masonic  Lodges  of  old 
times  the  neophyte  was  subjected  to  a  series  of  frightful  tests  of 
his  constancy,  courage  and  presence  of  mind.  By  psychological 
impressions  supplemented  by  machinery  and  chemicals,  he  was 
made  to  believe  himself  falling  down  precipices,  crushed  by  rocks, 
walking  spider-web  bridges  in  mid-air,  passing  through  fire, 
drowned  in  water  and  attacked  by  wild  beasts.  This  was  a 
reminiscence  of  and  a  programme  borrowed  from  the  Egyptian 
Mysteries.  The  West  having  lost  the  secrets  of  the  East  had,  as 
I  say,  to  resort  to  artifice.  But  in  these  days  the  vulgarization  of 
science  has  rendered  such  trifling  tests  obsolete.  The  aspirant  is 
now  assailed  entirely  on  the  psychological  side  of  his  nature.  His 
course  of  testing — in  Europe  and  India — is  that  of  Raj-yog  and 
its  result  is — as  frequently  explained — to  develop  every  germ  good 
and  bad  in  him  in  his  temperament.       The  rule  is  inflexible,  and 

25 


366  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

not  one  escapes  whether  he  but  writes  to  us  a  letter,  or  in  the 
privacy  of  his  own  heart's  thought  formulates  a  strong-  desire  for 
occult  communication  and  knowledge.  As  the  shower  cannot 
fructify  the  rock,  so  the  occult  teaching  has  no  effect  upon  the 
unreceptive  mind ;  and  as  the  water  develops  the  heat  of  caustic 
lime  so  does  the  teaching  bring  into  fierce  action  every  unsuspected 
potentiality  latent  in  him. 

Few  Europeans  have  stood  this  test.  Suspicion  followed  by  self- 
woven  conviction  of  fraud  seems  to  have  become  the  order  of  the 
day.  I  tell  you  with  a  very  few  exceptions — we  have  failed  in 
Europe.  Henceforth,  the  policy  of  absolute  neutrality  of  the  T.S. 
in  occult  teachings  and  phenomena  will  be  rigidly  enforced  : 
whatever  is  imparted  will  be  to  individual  members  from 
individuals.  For  inst  :  if  Mad.  B.  finds  the  necessary  strength 
to  live  (and  this  depends  entirely  on  her  will  and  its  powers  of 
exertion)  and  is  willing  under  the  guidance  of  her  guru  or  even 
myself  to  serve  us  as  an  amanuensis  for  you,  (Sinnett  not  for 
the  group)  she  can,  if  she  likes,  send  you  weekly  or  monthly  in- 
structions. Mohini  could  do  the  same — ^but  under  the  pledge 
that  neither  our  names,  or  that  of  the  sender  will  be  ever  made 
public;  nor  shall  the  T.S.  be  made  responsible  for  these  teach- 
ings. If  the  Oriental  group  survives,  something  could  be  yet 
done  for  it.  But  never,  henceforth,  shall  the  Society  in  India  be 
allowed  to  be  compromised  again  by  phenomena,  that  are  de- 
nounced wholesale  as  fraud.  The  good  ship  is  sinking,  friend, 
because  its  precious  cargo  has  been  offered  to  the  public  at  large ; 
because  some  of  its  contents  have  been  desecrated  by  profane 
handling  and  its  gold — received  as  brass.  Henceforth,  I  say,  no 
such  profane  eye  will  see  its  treasures  and  its  outer  decks  and 
rigging,  must  be  cleansed  of  the  impurity  and  dross  that  was 
accumulated  on  them  by  the  indiscretion  of  its  own  members. 
Try  to  remedy  the  evil  done.  Every  step  made  by  one  in  our 
direction  will  force  us  to  make  one  toward  him.  But  it  is  not  by 
going  to  Ladak  that  one  shall  find  us,  as  Mr.  Lane  Fox  imagines. 

Once  more,  accept  my  blessing  and  parting  greeting  if  they 
have  to  be  my  last. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXVI 

Received  London,  Oct.   loth,   1884. 
For  reasons  perfectly  valid  though  not  necessary  for  me  to  enter 
into  in  detail,  I  could  neither  answer  your  letter  at  Elberfeld,  nor 
transmit  it  to  you  through  L.  C.  H.      Since  it  has  become  impos- 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  367 

sible  to  utilize  the  main  channel — H.P.B.  thro'  which  I  have 
hitherto  reached  you,  because  of  your  personal  and  mutual  rela- 
tions with  her  I  employed  the  common  pK>st.  Even  this  required 
more  expenditure  of  power  from  a  friend  than  you  can  imagine. 

It  would  not  be  the  part  of  a  friend  to  withhold  the  truth  when 
the  speaking  of  it  can  do  good,  so  I  must  tell  you  that  you  ought 
to  put  a  close  watch  upon  yourself,  if  you  would  not  put  an  end 
for  ever  to  my  letters.  Insensibly  to  yourself  you  are  encourag- 
ing a  tendency  to  dogmatism  and  unjust  misconception  of  persons 
and  motives.  I  am  well  aware  of  your  ideas  upyon  that  which  you 
call  the  **  goody  goody  "  absurdity;  and  I  feel  as  painfully  con- 
fident that  since  in  your  world  no  one  is  allowed  to  moralize  the 
other  and  that  you  are  very  likely  to  resent  it,  these  words  are 
probably  written  in  vain.  But  I  also  know  your  sincere  desire 
that  our  correspondence  should  not  be  broken  ;  and  knowing  this, 
I  point  out  to  your  notice  that  which  is  certain  to  have  that  result. 

Beware  then,  of  an  uncharitable  spirit,  for  it  will  rise  up  like 
a  hungry  wolf  in  your  path,  and  devour  the  better  qualities  of  your 
nature  which  have  been  springing  into  life.  Broaden  instead  of 
narrowing  your  sympathies;  try  to  identify  yourself  with  your 
fellows,  rather  than  to  contract  your  circle  of  affinity.  However 
caused — whether  by  faults  at  Adyar,  or  Allahabad,  or  by  way  of 
negligence,  or  H.P.B.'s  viciousness — a  crisis  is  here,  and  it  is  the 
time  for  the  utmost  practicable  expansion  of  your  moral  power. 
It  is  not  the  moment  for  reproaches  or  vindictive  recriminations, 
but  for  united  struggle.  Whomsoever  has  sown  the  seeds  of  the 
present  tempest,  the  whirlwind  is  strong,  the  whole  Society  is 
reaping  it  and  it  is  rather  fanned  than  weakened  from  Tchigadze. 
You  laugh  at  probation — the  word  seems  ridiculous  as  applied  to 
you?  You  forget  that  he  who  approaches  our  precincts  even  in 
thought,  is  drawn  into  the  vortex  of  probation.  At  any  rate  your 
temple  totters,  and  unless  you  put  your  strong  shoulders  against 
its  wall  you  may  share  the  fate  of  Samson.  Pride  and  "  dignified 
contempt ' '  will  not  help  you  in  the  present  difficulties.  There 
is  such  a  thing  when  understood  allegorically — as  treasures 
guarded  by  faithful  gnomes  and  fiends.  The  treasure  is  our  occult 
knowledge  that  many  of  you  are  after — you  foremost  of  all ;  and 
it  may  not  be  H.P.B.  or  Olcott  or  anyone  else  individually  who 
have  awakened  the  guardians  thereof,  but  yourself,  more  than 
they  and  the  Society  collectively.  Such  books  as  the  Occult  World 
and  Estoric  Btiddhism  do  not  pass  unnoticed  under  the  eyes  of 
those  faithful  guardians,  and  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  those 
who  would  have  that  knowledge  should  be  thoroughly  tried  and 
tested.  Infer  from  this  what  you  will ;  but  remember  that  my 
Brother  and  I,  are  the  only  among  the  Brotherhood  who  have  at 
heart  the  dissemination  (to  a  certain  limit)  of  our  doctrine,   and 


368  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

H.P.B.  was  hitherto  our  sole  machinery,  our  most  docile  agent. 
Granting  that  she  is  all  you  describe  her — and  I  have  already 
told  you  that  the  ricketty  old  body  becomes  sometimes  positively 
dangerous — still  it  does  not  excuse  in  you  the  smallest  relaxation 
of  effort  to  save  the  situation  and  push  on  the  work  (and  especially 
protect  our  correspondence)  all  the  faster.  Deem  it,  what  it  is, 
a  positive  advantage  to  the  rest  of  you  that  she  should  have  been 
what  she  is,  since  it  has  thrown  upon  you  the  greater  stimulus  to 
accomplish  in  spite  of  the  difficulties  you  believe  she  has  created. 
I  do  not  say  we  should  have  preferred  her  had  a  more  tractable 
agent  been  available,  still,  so  far  as  yourselves  are  concerned  it 
has  been  an  advantage,  yet  you  have  alienated  her  for  a  long  time 
if  not  for  ever  and  thereby  thrown  tremendous  difficulties  in  my 
way.  Remember  what  I  said  to  you  some  two  years  ago  **  were 
H.P.B.  to  die  before  we  found  a  substitute  "  the  powers  through 
which  we  work  in  our  communications  with  the  outside  world  may 
permit  the  transmission  of  two  or  three  letters  more,  then  it  would 
die  out  and  you  would  have  no  more  letters  from  me.  Well — she 
is  virtually  dead  ;  and  it  is  yourself — pardon  me  this  one  more 
truth — who  have  killed  the  rude  but  faithful  agent,  one  moreover 
who  was  really  devoted  to  you  personally.  Let  us  drop  the  sub- 
ject if  it  is  distasteful  to  you.  I  have  done  my  best  to  stop  the 
evil  but  I  have  neither  jurisdiction  or  control  over  her,  nor  shall  I 
have  any  better  chance  with  Mrs.  H.  She  is  a  magnificent  subject 
naturally  but  so  distrustful  of  herself  and  others,  so  apt  to  take 
the  real  for  hallucination  and  vice  versa  that  it  will  require  a  long 
time  before  she  becomes  thoroughly  controllable  even  by  herself. 
She  is  far,  far  from  being  ready  ;  moreover  she  understands  neither 
herself,  nor  us.  Verily  our  ways  are  not  your  ways,  hence  there 
remains  but  little  hope  for  us  in  the  West. 

Do  not,  I  pray  you,  attribute  the  above  to  any  influence  from 
H.P.B.  She  has  doubtless  complained  bitterly  to  her  Master 
and  says  so  openly,  but  this  does  not  alter  his  opinion  nor  affect 
my  own  attitude  towards  you  in  the  least.  Not  alone  we  two, 
but  even  she  knows  how  impK>rtant  to  the  Society's  welfare  are 
your  services,  and  no  personal  grievance  of  hers  would  be  allowed 
to  stand  in  the  way  of  your  receiving  strict  justice ;  or  to  prevent 
our  according  it  to  her  either.  Her  Master  and  I  directed  her  to 
do  and  say  all  that  she  did  concerning  Mrs.  H.  Any  unpleasant- 
ness resulting,  was  due  to  the  execution  of  her  orders.  We  had 
found  Mrs.  H.  in  America,  we  impressed  her  to  prepare  for  the 
writing  of  the  book  she  has  produced  with  the  aid  of  Mohini.  Had 
she  consented  to  stop  at  Paris,  as  requested,  a  few  days  longer 
and  come  over  to  England  with  H.P.B.  the  later  complication 
could  have  been  averted.  The  effect  of  her  coming  to  your  house 
has  been  described  to  you  by  her  before;  and  in  resenting  what 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  369 

Mohini  and  H.P.B.  were  saying  to  you  and  Mrs.  H.  you  have  been 
simply  resenting  our  personal  wishes.  You  will  resent  my  words 
even  now  when  I  tell  you  that  you  have  been — unconsciously,  I 
agree — in  my  way,  in  her  development.  Yet  you  would  have 
been  the  first  one  to  profit  thereby.  But  not  understanding  our 
ways  and  the  occult  methods  you  insisted  upon  knowing  the  cause 
and  reason  for  everj'thing  done — especially  things  that  did  not  suit 
you.  You  even  demanded  that  the  reason  why  you  have  been 
asked  to  come  to  Elberfield  should  be  thoroughly  explained  to  you. 
This  is  unreasonable  from  the  occult  point  of  view,  good  friend. 
You  either  trust  in  me,  or  do  not.  And  I  must  frankly  tell  you 
that  my  friendly  regard  suffered  a  shock  from  the  hearing  of  your 
**  ultimatum  "  which  may  be  condensed  thus  : — "  Either  Mrs.  H., 
passes  a  week  or  so  at  our  house,  or  I  (you)  leave  the  L.L.  to 
get  on  as  best  it  can."  It  almost  meant  this;  **  Masters  "  or  no 
Masters  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  I  must  and  shall  show 
the  L.L.  that  anything  they  may  have  heard  about  this  affair  was 
false,  and  that  the  "  Masters"  would  never  consent  to  any  action 
hurtful  to  my  pride  :  that  must  be  protected  in  any  event. ' '  My 
friend,  this  is  treading  upon  dangerous  ground.  In  our  mountains 
here,  the  Dugpas  lay  at  dangerous  points,  in  paths  frequented  by 
our  Chelas,  bits  of  old  rag,  and  other  articles  best  calculated  to 
attract  the  attention  of  the  unwary,  which  have  been  impregnated 
with  their  evil  magnetism.  If  one  be  stepped  upon  a  tremendous 
psychic  shock  may  be  communicated  to  the  wayfarer  so  that  he 
may  lose  his  footing  and  fall  down  the  precipice  before  he  can 
recover  himself.  Friend,  beware  of  Pride  and  Egoism,  two  of 
the  worst  snares  for  the  feet  of  him  who  aspires  to  climb  the 
high  paths  of  Knowledge  and  Spirituality.  You  have  opened  a 
joint  of  your  armour  for  the  Dugpas — do  not  complain  if  they 
have  found  it  out  and  wounded  you  there.  Mrs.  H.  did  not 
really  want  to  go  to  your  house,  for,  as  she  said  to  you  very 
truthfully  I  had  told  her  not  to  do  so  for  reasons  that  you  must 
know  yourself  by  this  time ;  you  also  should  have  known,  that  if 
we  were  worth  anything  in  our  individuality,  and  not  mere  power- 
less puppets,  we  were  not  to  be  influenced  by  H.P.B.,  nor  driven 
by  threats  to  do  anything  contrary  to  our  light  and  the  necessities 
of  Karma.  I  am  sorry  that  you  did  not  recall  these  facts  before 
speaking,  as  this  makes  my  position  still  more  embarrassing  before 
my  chief,  who,  of  course  has  had  the  **  ultimatum  "  put  on  record. 
You  deny,  having  ever  applied  to  be  accepted  as  a  chela  :  Ah  !  my 
friend,  with  such  failings  smouldering  in  your  heart,  you  could 
not  be  even  a  **  lay  chela."  But  once  more  I  say  let  us  drop  the 
subject.  Words  will  not  obliterate  deeds,  and  what  is  done  is 
done.  My  brother  M.  who  has  more  authority  than  I,  has  just 
written    the    promised    letter    to    the     "  Inner    Circle."       Your 


370  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

*'  honour  "  good  friend,  is  saved — at  what  price — read  and  you 
shall  see. 

You  do  not  find  certain  recent  letters  and  notes  of  mine — includ- 
ing the  one  to  the  treasurer  of  the  L.L.  '*  philosophical  "  and  in 
my  usual  style.  It  could  scarcely  be  helped  :  I  wrote  but  on  the 
business  of  the  moment — as  I  am  doing  now — and  had  no  time 
for  philosophy.  With  the  L.L.  and  most  of  the  other  Western 
Branches  of  the  T.S.  in  a  deplorable  state,*  philosophy  may  be 
invoked  to  restrain  one's  impatience,  but  the  chief  thing  called  for 
at  present,  is  some  practical  scheme  for  dealing  with  the  situation. 
Some,  most  unjustly,  try  to  make  H.S.O.  and  H.P.B.,  solely 
responsible  for  the  state  of  things,  those  two  are,  say,  far  from 
perfect — in  some  respects,  quite  the  opposite.  But  they  have 
that  in  them  (pardon  the  eternal  repetition  but  it  is  being  as  con- 
stantly overlooked)  which  we  have  but  too  rarely  found  elsewhere 
— Unselfishness,  and  an  eager  readiness  for  self-sacrifice  for  the 
good  of  others;  what  a  **  multitude  of  sins  "  does  not  this  cover  ! 
It  is  but  a  truism,  yet  I  say  it,  that  in  adversity  alone  can  we 
discover  the  real  man.  It  is  a  true  manhood  when  one  boldly 
accepts  one's  share  of  the  collective  Karma  of  the  group  one 
works  with,  and  does  not  permit  oneself  to  be  embittered,  and  to 
see  others  in  blacker  colours  than  reality,  or  to  throw  all  blame 
upon  some  one  "  black  sheep,"  a  victim,  specially  selected.  Such 
a  true  man  as  that  we  will  ever  protect  and  despite  his  short- 
comings, assist  to  develop  the  good  he  has  in  him.  Such  an  one 
is  sublimely  unselfish;  he  sinks  his  personalty  in  his  cause,  and 
takes  no  heed  of  discomforts  or  personal  obloquy  unjustly 
fastened  upon  him. 

I  have  done,  my  good  friend,  and  have  nothing  more  to  say. 
You  have  too  much  intelligence  not  to  see  clearly,  as  the  Americans 
would  say — the  fix  /  am  in,  and  that  I,  personally  can  do  very 
little.  The  present  situation,  as  you  will  find  from  M's  letter 
has  been  gradually  created  by  all  of  you  as  much  as  by  the 
wretched  **  Founder."  Yet  without  at  least  one  of  them  we  can 
hardly  do,  for  several  years  more  to  come.  You  have  treated  the 
old  body  too  cruelly  and  it  now  has  its  day.  You  will  never  agree 
in  this  fully  w4th  me — but  it  is  a  fact,  nevertheless.  All  I  can  do 
for  you  personally — ^I  will  do  it,  unless  you  make  the  situation 
still  worse  by  not  changing  your  policy.  One  who  would  have 
higher  instruction  given  to  him  has  to  be  a  true  theosophist,  in 
heart  and  soul,  not  merely  in  appearance. 

Meanwhile,  receive  my  poor  blessing. 

K.  H. 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  371 


L 

■HpH  LETTER  No.  LXMI 

I^H  Written  to  Colonel  Olcott. 

You  have  been  ordered  home  for  a  rest  that  you  need^ — so,  you 
should  decline  any  further  dealings  until  you  hear  from  M.  The 
Maha-Chohan  will  intimate  when,  you  are  to  go  to  the  Punjab. 
As  the  English  mail  goes  to-morrow,  you  might  do  as  well  to  give 
Mr.  Sinnett  a  friendly  caution  against  being  surprised  if  his  paper 
project  should  have  checks  upon  checks.  The  state  of  India  is 
just  now  almost  comparable  to  a  great  body  of  dry  matter  in 
which  sparks  are  smouldering.  Agitators  of  both  races  have  been 
and  are  doing  their  best  to  stir  up  a  great  flame.  In  the  mad 
fanaticism  of  the  hour  there  is  hardly  patience  enough  to  think 
soberly  upon  any  matter,  least  of  all  one  that  appears  like  this  to 
conservative  men.  Capitalists  are  more  ready — like  Holkar — to 
horde  away  their  rupees  than  put  them  into  share  companies. 
So — **  miracles  "  being  barred  from  the  first  as  you  say  and  Mr. 
Sinnett  know — I  see  delays,  disappointments,  trials  of  patience, 
but — (as  yet)  no  failure.  The  lamentable  issue  of  Bishenlal's 
rapid  scramble  up  the  Himalayas  as  would  be  chela  has  sadly  com- 
plicated matters.  And  your  eminent  Simla  correspondent  has 
made  matters  worse.  Tho'  unaware  of  it  he  has  helped  precipi- 
tate Bishenlal's  insanity  and  (here,  consciously)  is  plotting  and 
scheming  in  many  ways  to  make  us  all  into  a  holocaust  from  out 
whose  vapours  may  loom  the  giant  spectre  of  the  Jakko.  Already 
he  tells  you  that  Sinnett  is  a  credulous  imbecile  to  be  led  by  the 
nose  (pardon  my  worthy  friend  the  bad  taste  which  compelled  me 
to  duplicate  for  my  *'  ward  "A.  P.  Sinnett  that  last  long  letter  of 
Mr.  H.  to  yourself  which  you  have  at  the  bottom  of  your  dispatch 
box  and  did  not  intend  H.P.B.  to  see  in  full).  I  had  it  neatly 
copied  and  for  your  fiery  colleague  he  has  had  a  deadly  mine  long 
prepared.  Mr.  Sinnett  is  now  able  to  verify  my  old  warning  that 
he  meant  to  set  all  your  friends  in  London  against  the  Society. 
The  turn  of  the  Kingsford-Maitland  party  has  come.  The 
diabolical  malice  which  breathes  thro'  his  present  letter  comes 
straight  from  Dugpas  who  provoke  his  vanity  and  blind  his  reason. 
When  you  open  M.'s  letter  of  1881  you  will  find  the  key  to  many 
mysteries — this  included.  Intuititve  as  you  naturally  are — chela- 
ship  is  yet  almost  a  complete  puzzle  for  you — as  for  my  friend 
Sinnett  and  the  others  they  have  scarcely  an  inkling  of  it  yet. 
Why  must  I  even  now  (to  put  your  thoughts  in  the  right  channel) 
remind  you  of  the  three  casies  of  insanity  within  seven  months 
among  '*  lay  chelas,"  not  to  mention  one's  turning  a  thief?  Mr. 
Sinnett  may  consider  himself  lucky  that  his  lay  chelaship  is  in 
"  fragments"  only,  and  that  I  have  so  uniformly  discouraged  his 


372  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEES 

desires  for  a  closer  relationship  as  an  accepted  chela.  Few  men 
know  their  inherent  capacities — only  the  ordeal  of  crude  chelaship 
develops  them.  (Remember  these  words  :  they  have  a  deep 
meaning.) 

M.  sends  you  thro'  me  these  vases  as  a  home  greeting. 

You  had  better  say  plainly  to  Mr.  Sinnett  that  his  quondam 
friend  of  Simla  has — no  matter  under  what  influence — distinctly 
injured  the  newspaper  project  not  only  with  the  Maharajah  of 
Cashmere  but  with  many  more  in  India.  All  he  hints  at  in  his 
letter  to  you  and  more  he  has  done  or  is  preparing  to  do. 

This  is  ''a  K.H.  letter"  and  you  may  say  to  Mr.   S.  from — 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXVUI 

I  have  just  taken  your  note  from  where  it  was  placed  by  her  as, 
although  I  might  take  cognisance  of  its  contents  otherwise,  you 
will  prefer  that  the  paper  itself  should  pass  into  my  own  hand. — 
Does  it  seem  to  you  a  small  thing  that  the  past  year  has  been 
spent  only  in  your  **  family  duties  "?  Nay  but  what  better  cause 
for  reward,  what  better  discipline,  than  the  daily  and  hourly  per- 
formance of  duty?  Believe  me  my  *'  pupil,"  the  man  or  woman 
who  is  placed  by  Karma  in  the  midst  of  small  plain  duties  and 
sacrifices  and  loving-kindness,  will  through  these  faithfully  fulfilled 
rise  to  the  larger  measure  of  Duty,  Sacrifice,  and  Charity  to  all 
Humanity — what  better  paths  towards  the  enlightenment  you  are 
striving  after  than  the  daily  conquest  of  Self,  the  perseverence  in 
spite  of  want  of  visible  psychic  progress,  the  bearing  of  ill-fortune 
with  that  serene  fortitude  which  turns  it  to  spiritual  advantage — 
since  good  and  evil  are  not  to  be  measured  by  events  on  the  lower 
or  physical  plane. — Be  not  discouraged  that  your  practice  falls 
below  your  aspirations,  yet  be  not  content  with  admitting  this, 
since  you  clearly  recognise  that  your  tendency  is  too  often  towards 
mental  and  moral  indolence,  rather  inclining  to  drift  with  the 
currents  of  life,  than  to  steer  a  direct  course  of  your  own.  Your 
spiritual  progress  is  far  greater  than  you  know  or  can  realize,  and 
you  do  well  to  believe  that  such  development  is  in  itself  more 
important  than  its  realization  by  your  physical  plane  conscious- 
ness. I  will  not  now  enter  into  other  subjects  since  this  is  but  a 
line  of  sympathetic  recognition  of  your  efforts,  and  of  earnest 
encouragement  to  hold  a  calm  and  brave  spirit  toward  outward 
events  in  the  present,  and  a  hopeful  spirit  for  the  future  on  all 
planes — ^truly  yours,  K.  H. 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  373 

LETIER  No.  LXIX 

I  am  sincerely  pleased  my  **  pupil  "  that  you  should  write  to 
me  as  agreed — whether  you  have — or  have  not — any  special  ques- 
tion to  put  to  me. — It  is  impossible  under  your  present  health  con- 
ditions that  you  should  bring-  back  to  your  physical  brain  the 
consciousness  of  Hig^her  planes  of  existence,  yet  remember,  that 
the  sense  of  magnetic  refreshment  is  no  true  measure  of  spiritual 
benefit,  and  you  may  even  attain  greater  spiritual  progress  while 
your  psychic  development  appears  to  stand  still. 

Now  to  answer  your  questions. 

(i)  In  esoteric  teachings  *'  Brahma,"  ''  Pitri,"  and  "  Deva- 
lokas, "  are  states  of  consciousness  belonging  to  the  various 
ethereal  hierachies  or  classes  of  Dhyanis  and  Pitris  (the 
*'  creators  "  and  '*  ancestors  "  of  humanity)  and  of  Devas — some 
far  higher  than  man  (spiritually)  some — among  the  Deva  classes — 
far  behind  on  the  descending  arc  of  evolution,  and  only  destined 
to  reach  the  human  stage  in  a  future  Manvantara. — Esoterically 
these  lokas  represent  Nirvana,  Devachan  and  the  astral  world. 
The  meaning  of  the  terms  "Devachan"  and  "  Deva-loka,"  is 
identical ;  "  chan "  and  "  loka "  equally  signifying  place  or 
abode.  Deva  is  a  word  too  indiscriminately  used  in  Eastern 
writings,  and  is  at  times  merely  a  blind. 

(2)  You  will  be  right  in  referring  the  "  Real  Knowledge"  and 
**  True  Cause  "  of  the  verses  quoted  to  the  highest  plane  of 
spiritual  enlightenment;  the  "greater  darkness  "  into  which  the 
perfected  *'  Siddha  "  is  finally  merged  thereby,  is  that  Absolute 
Darkness y  which  is  Absolute  Light.  The  Real  Knowledge  here 
spoken  of  is  not  a  mental  but  a  spiritual  state,  implying  full  union 
between  the  Knower  and  the  Known. 

I  hope  that  these  brief  replies  may  throw  all  the  light  you  needed 
upon  these  points. 

With  sincere  good-will, 

Yours  truly,  K.  H. 

LETTER  No.  LXX 

You  will  have  learned  ere  now  my  friend  that  I  was  not  deaf 
to  your  appeal  to  me,  altho'  I  was  unable  to  answer  it  as  you — 
and  I  too — could  have  wished,  by  lifting  for  a  moment  the  ever- 
thinning  veil  between  us — **  When?  "  do  you  ask  me?  I  can 
but  reply  "  not  yet."  Your  probation  is  not  ended  patience  a  little 
longer. — Meanwhile  you  know  the  path  to  travel,  it  lies  plainly 
before  you  for  the  present;  tho'  the  choice  of  an  easier  if  longer 
way  may  await  you  in  the  distant  future. 

Farewell  my  Brother. 

Ever  your  in  sympathy  K.  H. 


374  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 


LETTER  No.  LXXI 

Very  kind  Sinnett  Sahib — many  thanks  and  salams  for  the 
tobacco-machine.  Our  frenchified  and  Peling-jzed  Pundit  tells  me 
the  little  short  thing  has  to  be  cooloted — whatever  he  may  mean 
by  this — and  so  I  will  proceed  to  do  so.  The  pipe  is  short  and  my 
nose  long-,  so  we  will  agree  very  well  together  I  hope.  ITianks — 
many  thanks. 

The  situation  is  more  serious  than  you  may  imagine  and  we 
will  want  our  best  forces  and  hands  to  work  at  pushing  away  bad 
luck.  But  our  Chohan  willing  and  you  helping  we  will  scramble 
out  somehow  or  another.  There  are  clouds  which  are  below  your 
horizon  and  K.H.  is  right — ^the  storm  is  threatening.  Could  you 
but  go  to  Bombay  to  the  Anniversary  you  would  confer  upon  K.H. 
and  myself  a  great  obligation  a  lasting  one^ — but  that  you  know 
best.  This  meeting  will  be  either  the  triumph  or  the  downfall 
of  the  Society  and  a — gulf.  You  are  wrong  too  about  the  Peling 
Sahib — he  is  as  dangerous  as  a  friend  as  an  enemy  very  very  bad 
as  both  I  know  him  best.  Anyhow  you  Sinnett  Sahib  reconciled 
me  to  a  good  many  things  you  are  true  and  true  I  will  be. 

Yours  always 

M. 


LETTER  No.  LXXII 

My  good  Brother — the  little  Doctor  and  the  chela  Mohini  will 
explain  to  you  the  object  of  their  visit  and  a  serious  conference 
which  I  believe  necessary.  The  objections  of  last  year  are  creeping 
out  also,  you  have  a  letter  from  me  in  which  I  explain  why  we 
never  guide  our  chelas  (the  most  advanced  even) ;  nor  do  we  fore- 
warn them  leaving  the  effects  produced  by  causes  of  their  own 
creation  to  teach  them  better  experience.  Please  bear  in  mind 
that  particular  letter.  Before  the  cycle  ends  every  misconception 
ought  to  be  swept  away.  I  trust  in  and  rely  upon  you  to  clear 
them  entirely  in  the  minds  of  the  Prayag  Fellows.  They  are  a 
troublesome  lot — especially  Adityaram,  who  influences  the  whole 
group.  But  what  they  say  of  last  night  is  right.  You  were  a 
little  bit  too  much  carried  away  with  your  enthusiasm  for  occultism 
and  mixed  it  up  very  imprudently  with  Universal  Brotherhood. 
They  will  explain  to  you  all. 

Yours  K.  H. 


I 


PROBATION,  AND  CHELASHIP  375 

LETTER  No  LXXIII 

Mr.  Sinnett — you  will  receive  a  long  letter — posted  Sunday  at 
Bombay — from  the  Brahmin  boy.  Koot-hoomi  went  to  see  him 
(as  he  is  his  chela)  before  going  into  "  Tong-pa-ngi  " — the  state 
in  which  he  now  is — and  left  with  him  certain  orders.  The  boy 
has  a  little  bungled  up  the  message  so  be  very  careful  before  you 
show  it  to  Mr.  Hume  lest  he  should  again  misunderstand  my 
Brother's  real  meaning.  I  will  not  stand  any  more  nonsense,  or 
bad  feeling  against  him  but  retire  at  once. 

We  do  the  best  we  can.  j^ 


LETTER  No.  LXXIV 

you  are  so  anxious  to  find  out  the  particular  spot  where  I 
erased  and  precipitated  instead  another  sentence  last  night  at 
post-office  I  can  satisfy  your  curiosity  Mr.  Sinnett  !  !  but  that  it 
was  the  Chohan's  knowledge  that  neither  you  nor  anyone  cared 
for  the  real  object  of  the  Society,  nor  had  any  respect  for  the 
Brotherhood  but  only  a  personal  feeling  for  a  few  of  the  Brothers. 
So  you  cared  only  for  K.H.  personally  and  phenomena;  Mr.  Hume 
to  get  at  the  secrets  of  their  philosophy  and  to  assure  himself  that 
the  Tibetan  Mahatmas — the  Lhas — if  at  all  existing  outside  of 
Mme.  B.'s  imagination — were  connected  any  way  with  certain 
adepts  he  had  in  his  mind. 

All  this  is  what  K.H.  said,  what  I  had  to  write  and  precipitate 
instead  of  that  which  stood  then  written  by  the  boy  in  a 
phraseology  which  would  have  called  out  from  Mr.  Hume  a  whole 
torrent  of  fine  words  and  the  word  **  ignorance  "  applied  to  my 
Brother.  I  would  not  have  even  the  desert  wind  listen  to  a  word 
said  at  low  breath  against  him  who  now  sleeps.  Such  is  the 
cause  of  the  tamacha  produced  by  me  and  for  no  other  cause. 

Yours  j^ 


LETTER  No.   LXXV 

The  right  is  on  her  side.  Your  accusations  are  extremely  unjust, 
and  coming  from  you  pain  me  the  more.  If  after  this  distinct 
statement  you  still  maintain  the  same  attitude — I  shall  have  to 
express  my  deep  regret  at  this  new  failure  of  ours — and  wish  you 
with  all  my  heart  better  success  with  more  worthy  teachers.  She 
certainly  lacks  charity,  but  indeed,  you  lack  discrimination. 
Regretfully  yours 

K.  H. 


376  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.   LXXVP 

Chela  training.  Poor  Subba  Row  is  "in  a  fix  " — > 
that  is  why  he  does  not  answer  you.  On  one  hand  he  has  the 
indomitable  H.P.B.  who  plagues  Morya's  life  to  reward  you  and 
M.  himself  who  would  if  he  could  gratify  your  aspirations ;  on  the 
other  he  encounters  the  unpassable  Chinese  wall  of  rules  and 
Law.  Believe  me,  good  friend,  learn  what  you  can  under  the 
circumstances — to  viz. — the  philosophy  of  the  phenomena  and  our 
doctrines  on  Cosmogony,  inner  man,  etc.  This  Subba  Row  will 
help  you  to  learn,  though  his  terms — he  being  an  initiated 
Brahmin  and  holding  to  the  Brahmanical  esoteric  teaching — will 
be  different  from  those  of  the  "  Arhat  Buddhist  "  terminology. 
But  essentially  both  are  the  same — identical  in  fact.  My  heart 
melts  when  I  read  Mr.  Hume's  sincere  noble  letter — especially 
what  I  perceive  between  the  lines.  Yes,  to  one  from  his  stand- 
point our  policy  must  seem  selfish  and  cruel.  I  wish  I  were  the 
Master  !  In  five  or  six  years  I  hope  to  become  my  own  "  guide  " 
and  things  will  have  somewhat  to  change  then.  But  even 
Caesar  in  irons  cannot  shuffle  off  the  irons  and  transfer  them  to 
Hippo  or  Thraso  the  turnkey.  Let  us  wait.  I  cannot  think  of 
Mr.  Hume  without  remembering  each  time  an  allegory  of  my 
own  country  :  the  genius  of  Pride  watching  over  a  treasure,  an 
inexhaustible  wealth  of  every  human  virtue,  the  divine  gift  of 
Brahma  to  man.  The  Genius  has  fallen  asleep  over  its  treasure 
now,  and  one  by  one  the  virtues  are  peeping  out.  .  .  .  Will 
he  awake  before  they  are  all  freed  from  their  life  long  bonds? 
That  is  the  question — 

K.  H. 


1  The  beginning  of  this  letter  is  missing  —Ed. 


SECTION  IV 


I .^,._^. 

^ft  OF  INDIA 

^K^  LETTER  No.  LXXVII 

^^^^If  Received   March,    18S3. 

^B  Pray,  convey  to  Col.  Gordon  the  expression  of  my  sympathy 
^^  and  friendly  esteem.  He  is  indeed  a  loyal  friend  and  a  trust- 
worthy ally.  Tell  him  that  with  every  allowance  for  the  motives 
given  and  his  own  quiet  modesty  I  yet  believe  he  may  yet  do 
much  good  in  his  own  unassuming  way.  A  Howrah  Branch  is 
really  needed  and  he  alone  can  create  the  nucleus.  Why  not  try? 
He  cares  not  for  the  service  and  is  ready  at  any  moment  to  throw 
it  up.  But  this  is  unnecessary  so  long  as  it  lasts  and  gives  him 
a  strength  and  authority  with  some  native  members  which  other- 
wise he  would  not  have.  At  any  rate  then  he  is  going  to  be 
taken  to  Simla  and  will  have  plenty  of  **  nothing  to  do  "  time. 
Why  not  use  his  opportunities  for  putting  the  Eclectic  and  Hima- 
layan in  order — of  course  in  his  official  capacit}^  as  a  member  of 
Council  and  Vice-President  of  the  Eclectic.  I  will  have  Olcott 
send  him  an  official  paper  to  that  effect  and  write  instructions  for 
him  myself.  I  am  anxious  to  remove  the  Anglo-Indian 
"  Eclectic  "  to  Calcutta,  and  have  its  Headquarters  (though  it  be 
nominal  for  a  while)  announced  through  the  journal  hitherto  as 
established  in  the  capital — the  native  members  of  the  Eclectic 
incorporated  in  the  Himalayan  and  a  para  :  inserted  to  notify  all 
those  who  would  join  the  Anglo-Indian  Branch  that  in  your 
absence  they  w^ould  have  to  address  themselves  to  Col.  W. 
Gordon  Acting  President  in  your  place.  Some  are  born  for 
diplomacy  and  intrigue  :  I  rather  think  that  it  is  not  my  particular 
province.  Withal,  I  believe  the  arrangement  calculated  to 
impede  the  disastrous  effects  of  Mr.  Hume's  intrigue  and  his 
endeavours  to  have  the  Society  (Eclectic)  dead  and  buried,  thus 
showing  those  concerned  with  it,  that  he  was  its  Creator  and 
Preserver,  and  that  his  retirement  was  its  death-knell.  Thanks 
for  Col  :  G.  's  letter. 

The  30th  is  as  good  as  any  other  day  after  the  27th.  No ;  a 
Branch  at  Madras  is  not  absolutely  necessary  from  the  very 
starting.  But  it  does  stand  to  reason  that  if  it  is  Madras  that  is 
to  furnish  the  largest  share  of  the  funds  that  it  would  also  have 

377 


378  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

the  preference  after  Calcutta.  So  long-  as  the  money  is  not  in 
it  is  useless  to  fix  any  date.  Our  paper  once  established  I  will 
never  concern  myself  any  more  with  any  worldly  enterprise.  Yes 
I  have  worry  and  annoyance  indeed  ;  but  then  it  had  to  be  ex- 
pected, and  no  fish  undertaking  a  ramble  on  the  river's  bank  and 
outside  its  own  element  need  complain  of  catching  a  lumbago. 
We  are  near  the  end  now  one  way  or  the  other,  and  once  I  take 
my  leap  back  into  the  crystal  wave — few  will  ever  have  a  chance 
of  seeing  me  peeping  out  again.  Mankind  are  not  always  what 
they  seem  and  I  have  lost  much  of  my  optimism  in  the  late 
affray.  Mankind  was  somewhere  named  the  poetry  of  creation 
and  woman  the  poetry  of  earth.  When  she  is  not  an  angel  she 
must  be  a  fury.  It  is  in  the  latter  capacity  that  I  have  ever  met 
her  on  my  way  when  Rajahs  and  Zemindars  were  quite  ready  to 
disburse  the  necessary  funds.  Well  well,  the  affray  is  still 
raging  and  we  may  yet  win  brilliantly  the  day. 

Yours  truly, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXXVIII 

My  dear  friend  : — do  not  accuse  me — after  having  started  it 
myself — of  indiiference  to,  or  oblivion  of,  our  little  speculation. 
The  Chohan  is  not  to  be  consulted  every  day  on  such  **  worldly  " 
matters,  and  that  is  my  excuse  for  the  unavoidable  delay. 

And  now,  I  am  permitted  by  my  venerated  Chief  to  convey  to 
you  a  memorandum  of  His  views  and  ideas  upon  the  fortune  and 
destinies  of  a  certain  paper  upon  which  his  foresight  was  asked 
by  your  humble  friend  and  his  servant.  Putting  them  into  busi- 
ness shape  I  have  noted  his  views  as  follows. 

I.  The  establishment  of  a  new  journal  of  the  kind  described  is 
desirable,   and  very  feasible — with  proper  effort. 

II.  That  effort  must  be  made  by  your  friends  in  the  world, 
and  every  Hindu  theosophist  who  has  the  good  of  his  country  at 
heart,  and  not  very  afraid  to  spend  energy  and  his  time.  It  has 
to  be  made  by  outsiders — i.e.  those  who  do  not  belong  to  our 
Order  irretrievably ;  as  for  ourselves. 

III.  We  can  direct  and  guide  their  efforts  and  the  movement, 
in  general.  Tho'  separated  from  your  world  of  action  we  are  not 
yet  entirely  severed  from  it  so  long  as  the  Theosophical  Society 
exists.  Hence,  while  we  cannot  inaugurate  it  publicly  and  to  the 
knowledge  of  all  theosophists  and  those  concerned,  we  may,  and 
will  so  far  as  practicable,  aid  the  enterprise.  In  fact,  we  have 
begun  already  to  do  so.  Moreover,  we  are  permitted  to  reward 
those  who  will   have   helped   the  most  effectually  to  realize  this 


THE  ^^PHCENIX'-  VENTURE  379 

grand  idea  (which  promises  in  the  end  to  change  the  destiny  of  a 
whole  nation,  if  conducted  by  one  like  yourself). 

IV.  In  proposing  to  capitalists,  especially  to  natives,  the  risk 
(as  they  are  likely  to  think)  of  so  large  a  sum,  special  inducements 
should  be  held  out  to  them.  Therefore,  we  are  of  opinion  that 
you  should  ask  no  more  compensation  than  you  now  receive,  until 
your  exertions  have  made  the  journal  a  decided  success — some- 
thing that  must  and  shall  happen,  if  I  am  good  for  anything.  For 
a  certain  time,  then,  it  is  desirable  that  the  affair  should  be 
stripped  in  the  eyes  of  the  future  shareholders  of  every  objection- 
able feature.  Capital  may  now  be  invested  in  various  ways  so  as 
to  secure  moderate  interest  with  little  or  no  risk.  But  for  the 
ordinary  speculator,  there  is  much  risk  in  founding  a  new  journal 
of  high  cost,  which  is  to  favour  the  side  of  just  native  interests  in 
those  too  frequent  cases  of  injustice  (which  can  hardly  be  proven 
to  you  under  ordinary  circumstances,  but  that  will) — which  always 
occur  when  a  country  is  held  by  foreign  conquerors.  Cases 
which,  as  regards  India,  tend  to  multiply  with  the  gradual 
entrance  of  officials  of  a  lower  social  origin  under  the  competitive 
system  of  appointment ;  and  increased  friction  due  to  a  selfish  re- 
sentment of  the  admission  of  natives  to  Civil  Service.  To  your 
capitalists,  therefore,  you  should  hold  out  the  inducement  that  you 
will  unselfishly  labour,  for  the  same  emolument  as  at  your  dis- 
posal now — to  make  their  venture  more  than  ordinarily  profitable, 
and  only  claim  a  share  of  profits — as  delineated  by  yourself  with 
a  slight  change — when  that  point  will  be  reached.  I  am  ready  to 
offer  myself  as  a  guarantee  that  it  speedily  will. 

V.  My  suggestion  is  therefore,  agreeably  with  the  Chohan's 
opinion,  that  you  should  offer  to  accept  the  consolidated  monthly 
pay  you  mention,  (with  the  usual  and  necessary  personal  expenses 
of  travel  when  on  business  for  the  journal)  until  the  capital  shall 
be  earning  8  per  cent.  Of  the  profits  between  8  and  12  per  cent 
you  should  have  the  quarter  share.  Of  all  above  12  per  cent., 
one  half  share. 

VI.  You  should  have  certainly  entire  control  over  the  journal ; 
with  some  reassuring  provisos  that  that  power  should  not  be 
transferable  to  a  successor  without  the  consent  of  a  majority  of 
the  capital  represented  in  the  ownership ;  and  that  it  should  cease 
when  it  became  apparent  that  the  journal  was  being  used  against 
the  interests  to  promote  which  it  was  founded.  Without  some 
such  reservation  my  venerable  Chohan,  and  we  too,  think  that 
deep-seated  prejudices  and  suspicions  would  cause  native 
capitalists — especially  the  rajahs — to  hesitate — not  for  fear  to 
make  the  large  risks  of  this  undertaking,  but  owing  to  doubts  as 
to  its  success.  The  whole  Anglo-European  community  now 
suffers    in   native   opinion   for   the   commercial    sins   of   dishonest 


38o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

houses  who  have  heretofore  broken  faith  with  the  capitalists ;  and 
there  are  several  Rajahs,  who  now  follow  in  pensive  gloom  the 
far  distant  form  of  Sir  Ashley  Eden,  who  walks  off  with  one 
pocket  full  of  never  fulfilled  promises  and  the  other  loaded  with 
the  remembrance  of  several  lakhs  of  rupees  borrowed  from  and 
never  returned  to  his  friends — the  rajahs.  At  the  same  time, 
these  provisos  should  be  so  framed  as  to  protect  your  interests  as 
well.  Some  offer  on  your  part,  spontaneous  of  course,  inviting 
the  occasional  inspection  of  books  and  papers  at  reasonable  times 
for  the  verification  of  accounts  rendered,  should  be  given,  since 
your  personal  integrity  cannot  be  guaranteed  for  all  your  servants. 
But  this  is  not  to  diminish  your  authority  over  the  management  of 
the  journal  in  all  departments. 

VII.  It  is  better  that  the  whole  capital  should  be  paid  in  before 
the  journal  is  begun,  as  it  is  always  unpleasant  and  troublesome 
to  call  in  assessments  on  top  of  original  losses.  But  it  should  be 
provided  that  so  much  as  was  not  immediately  needed  should  be 
kept  at  interest ;  and  that  a  Sinking  Fund  should  be  created  out 
of  the  income  of  the  journal,  to  provide  for  any  unforseen 
exigency.  The  surplus  capital  as  well  as  the  earnings,  to  be  dis- 
tributed from  time  to  time. 

VIII.  The  usual  contracts  and  copartnership  papers  might  be 
executed  from  the  beginning,  but  deposited  in  confidential  hands 
mutually  agreeable  and  their  nature  kept  secret  until  the  arrival 
of  a  certain  specified  contingency.  This  would  show  good  faith 
on  both  sides  and  inspire  confidence. 

IX.  No  remark  upon  the  other  features  of  your  programme 
seems  called  for.     Therefore — to  something  else  now. 

Two  or  three  nights  ago,  the  following  conversation,  or  rather, 
profession  of  independent  opinion  was  listened  to  by  myself,  and 
approved,  as  far  as  wordly  reasoning  goes.  Olcott  was  talking 
with  several  influential  theosophists  concerned  with,  and  in- 
terested in  our  future  journalistic  operations.  Your  colleague  and 
brother  the  good  and  sincere  Norendro  Babu  of  the  Mirror  said 
wise  words  to  this  effect  : 

"  Of  the  several  princes,  whom  Mr.  Sinnett's  friends  have  in 
view  in  India,  probably  not  one  would  be  influenced  to  subscribe 
the  capital  from  patriotic  motives.  The  Nizam  wants  the  Berars, 
and  is  hoping  that  England  will  be  as  generous  to  him  as  she  is  to 
Cetewayo.  Holkar  wants  cent  per  cent  or  as  nearly  that  as  pos- 
sible. Kashmir  fears  the  C.  and  M.  Gazette  and  the  cupidity  that 
has  long  yearned  to  annex  his  rich  province  (to  this,  my  conserva- 
tive and  patriotic  friend  A.P.S.  is  sure  to  demur);  Benares  is 
orthodox  and  would  spend  freely  to  abolish  cow-  (not  ox-)  killing. 
Baroda  is  a  boy,  with  a  colt's  restiveness  and  no  clear  idea,  as 
yet,    about   life.     With   proper   agents   and   discreet   negotiations 


THE  ^^PHCENIX"  VENTURE  381 

the  5  lakhs  may  (?)  be  raised,  but  it  cannot  be  said  how  soon; 
(right,  there,  especially  he  who  has  little  if  any  faith  in  our  help- 
ing them). 

H.P.B.  forwarded  me  since  then  your  letter.  In  case  my, 
advice  is  asked  I  should  counsel —  (i)  the  keeping  of  your  Pro- 
prietors in  suspense  as  to  your  actual  chances,  so  as  to  give  you 
the  option  of  doing  what  may  develop  into  the  best  thing.  I,  for 
one,  confess  to  you  now  that  I  have  two  strings  to  my  bow. 
When  the  new  capital  is  raised,  in  case  even  it  is  so  very  soon — 
it  will  make  no  very  great  difference  whether  your  paper  be 
started  next  cold  weather  or  the  following  so  long  as  you  are  at 
the  head  of  the  Pioneer.  You  would  be  at  it's  helm  until  Novem- 
ber and  meanwhile  your  friends  would  have  time  to  manage  their 
difficult  and  delicate  negotiations,  and  provisions  might  be  made 
for  you  to  receive  an  equitable  proportion  of  salary  while  perfect- 
ing your  arrangements  at  home,  to  begin  in  the  cold  weather  of 
1884.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  capital  could  be  secured  shortly 
you  could  put  it  at  interest,  and  draw  no  pay  until  you  leave  the 
Pioneer.  Of  course,  without  forcing  the  events — in  violation  ot 
our  laws,  save  the  Chohan's  permission — all  this  is  an  uncertainty 
and  a  dilemma  in  some  sort.  Yet  I  can  help  your  friends,  and 
they  will  find  it  out  very  quick  no  sooner  they  begin.  No  :  I 
would  not  promise  if  I  were  you,  not  to  start  another  paper ;  for, 
to  begin  with,  you  do  not  know  what  might  turn  up ;  and  then  it 
is  always  useful  to  have  a  sword  of  Damocles  hanging  over  such 
heads  as  Rattigan's  and  Walker's.  They  are  frightened  to 
death — I  tell  you.  They  might  even  make  it  pleasant  and  profit- 
able to  you  to  continue  directing  the  Pioneer,  with  increased 
editorial  powers  and  salary,  for  this  they  could  better  afford  than 
to  have  you  compete  with  them  with  5  lakhs  at  your  back.  As  to 
the  advisability  of  such  a  thing — time  will  show.  As  advised  at 
present  I  still  hold  to  the  original  programme.  You  must  be  com- 
plete and  sole  master  of  a  paper  devoted  to  the  interests  of  my 
benighted  countrymen.  The  '*  Indo-British  nation  "  is  the  pulse 
I  go  by.     More — anon. 

I  enclose  a  letter  kindly  lent  to  me — without  his  knowledge  tho* 
— ^by  the  Colonel.  Our  friend  foams  with  rage  in  the  most  un- 
yogi  like  manner,  and  Subba  Row  is  right  in  his  opinions  of  him. 
Such  letters  and  worse  will  be  received  by  C.  C.  M.,  S.M.  and 
others.  And  this  is  the  man  who  swore  his  word  of  honour  but 
the  other  day  that  he  would  never  injure  the  Society,  whatever 
may  be  his  opinion  of  us  personally  !  The  close  of  the  cycle  good 
friend — the  very  last  efforts.  .  .  .  Who  will  win  the  day? 
Of  the  Dugpas,  under  whose  influence  he  has  now  placed  himself 

altogether,  whom  he  attracts  in  every  way  and  manner  or 

But  that  will  do !  Yours  sincerely, 

K.  H. 
26 


382  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  LXXIX 

Since  you  did  not  "  deal  exhaustively  with  the  case  "  in  your 
previous  note  I  said  only  what  I  did,  for  I  am  no  business  man. 
One  used  to  mercantile  affairs  would  doubtless  have  deduced  the 
entire  plan  from  even  smaller  fragments  than  you  have.  But  now 
that  you  have  opened  out  the  question  I  may  say  (holding  at  the 
same  time  my  amateur  opinion  in  very  light  esteem)  that  your 
scheme  appears  reasonable  and  just  enough.  Mr.  Dare,  no  less 
than  yourself  should  be  substantially  rewarded  for  his  valuable 
and  devoted  services.  Your  proposal  that  the  alienated  4-1 2th 's 
of  shares  shall  not  participate  in  profits  until  their  respective 
owners  have  made  the  remaining  8-i2th's  yield  fair  remuneration 
to  capital — is  a  fair  one  to  both  parties. 

Whether  you  shall  or  shall  not  eventually  issue  a  duplex  or 
quadruplex  journal  I  still  think  that  if  practicable,  the  larger 
amount  of  capital  should  be  sought  after,  for,  when  you  are  fully 
equipped  for  any  emergency  you  may  deliberately  adopt  such  plan 
as  cool  judgment  and  a  calculation  of  all  the  chances  may  indi- 
cate as  best. 

And  now,  before  quitting  my  novel  relation  of  a  business 
adviser,  I  must  repeat  that  while  we  will  help  the  enterprise  from 
first  to  last  as  fully  as  possible  within  our  rules,  the  initiative 
must  be  taken  by  your  friends  and  ought  to  be  guided  and  sympa- 
thised with  by  yourself,  and  I  will  just  tell  you  why.  While  the 
greatest  good  ought  to  result  from  the  successful  establishment  of 
such  a  journal  the  strict  law  of  justice  forbids  us  to  do  aught  to 
lessen  in  the  slightest  degree  the  merit  to  which  he  who  shall 
make  the  dream  a  reality  will  be  entitled.  Few  are  those  who 
know  their  future  or  what  is  best  for  them.  No  doubt,  life  on  the 
European  continent  and  in  England  possesses  charms  lacked  by 
poor,  dull  India.  But  the  latter  can,  on  the  other  hand,  offer 
privileges  and  attractions  undreamt  of  by  the  average  mystic.  I 
dare  not  say  more ;  but,  you  are  wrong,  very,  very  wrong  in  con- 
senting to  stop  here  only  for  my  sake.  I,  at  least,  do  not  feel 
myself  selfish  enough  to  accept  the  sacrifice,  had  I  not  known 
what  I  do. 

For  your  obliging  compliance  with  our  wishes  that  you  should 
attend  the  anniversary  celebration  accept  our  best  thanks.  The 
effects  of  your  presence  and  speech  will  be  greater  and  better  than 
you  can  now  conceive.  And,  like  all  good  actions,  they  will  bring 
abundant  reward  for  yourself — here  and  hereafter.  Let  it  be  a 
consolation  to  you  that  you  helped  in  a  positive  degree  to 
neutralize  the  evil  influences  which  the  enemies  of  Truth  had  con- 
centrated upon  the  Society.  The  dead  point  of  the  revolving  cycle 
is  past  :  a  new  one  begins  for  the  Theosophical  Society — on  the 
17th  of  December.     Watch  and  see.  Ever  your  friend, 

K.  H. 


THE  ^'PHCENIX''  VENTURE  383 

LETTER  No.  LXXX 

M.  "  Son's  impression  convexing  lens  being  not  yet  ground 
to  a  perfect  surface,  he  puts  the  matter  in  a  somewhat  crooked 
shape.  M.  did  not  want  him  to  say  there  was  anything  like  a 
possibility  of  failure,  but  just  the  usual  possibility  of  delay  in  every 
business  transaction  left  with  our  countrymen  alone  :  plus,  the 
malevolent  (or  if  you  prefer  eccentric)  meddling  of  the  Rothney 
Swedenborg  and  other  artists  in  calamity.  From  all  I  know  of  the 
situation — and  I  claim  to  watch  it  as  closely  as  I  am  permitted  to 
— the  chances  are  that  the  money  will  be  raised  by  the  end  of 
March;  but  Chance  being  a  squinting  jade,  according  to  report 
the  time  of  collection  is  not  yet  written  in  the  memorandum  book 
of  Fate.  Much  depends  upon  contingencies  but  still  more  upon 
the  Simla  Yogi  leaving  us  for  awhile  alone.  3  lakhs  of  rupees 
have  been  just  as  good  as  lost,  owing  to  a  letter  written  by  him 
to  an  editor  at  Calcutta  with  a  delineation  of  our  true  character 
(Jesuits,  sorcerers,  a  deceitful,  selfish  set,  etc.)  and  by  that  editor 
shown  to  a  rajah,  hitherto  well-disposed  and  ready  to  do  the 
bidding  of  the  **  Mahatma  Brothers  " — of  patriotism  in  this  trans- 
action there  will  be  very  little  if  any.  I  will  send  you  in  a  day 
or  two,  facts  which  will  show  to  you  persons  in  their  true  light. 

Meanwhile  if  I  advise  your  acting  entirely  upon  your  own  judg- 
ment as  to  your  departure,  it  is  because  of  the  false  light  in  which 
nearly  all  our  actions  are  viewed  by  the  Europeans  who  are  how- 
ever indirectly  concerned  with  us.  I  do  not  want  to  be  misjudged 
by  you  even  for  one  moment.  But  strange  and  crooked  as  our 
ways  may  appear  at  first  sight  I  hope  you  will  never  allow  your 
European  mind  to  get  influenced  by  your  Rothney  friend.  Well 
more  anon, 

Yours  ever  faithfully, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXXXI 

Received  London  about  July,    1883. 

Private  but  not  very  Confidential. 
I  have,  you  observed,  left  for  a  separate  private  letter — in  case 
you  should  like  to  read  the  other  to  your  British  **  brethren  and 
sisters — "  and  to  the  last  any  reference  to  the  propK>sed  new 
journal,  about  whose  prospects  Col.  Gordon  has  written  you  so 
encouragingly.  I  scarcely  knew  until  I  had  begun  to  watch  the 
development  of  this  effort  to  erect  a  bulwark  for  Indian  interests, 
how  deeply  my  poor  people  had  sunk.  As  one  who  watches  the 
signs  of  fluttering  life  beside  a  dying  bed,  and  counts  the  feeble 


384  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

breaths  to  learn  if  there  may  still  be  room  for  hope,  so  we  Aryan 
exiles  in  our  snowy  retreat  have  been  attentive  to  this  issue. 
Debarred  from  using  any  abnormal  powers  that  might  interfere 
with  the  nation's  Karma,  yet  by  all  lawful  and  normal  means 
trying  to  stimulate  the  zeal  of  those  who  care  for  our  regard,  we 
have  seen  weeks  grow  into  months  without  the  object  having  been 
achieved.  Success  is  nearer  than  ever  before,  yet  still  in  doubt. 
The  letter  of  Gwindan  Lai,  which  I  shall  ask  Upasika  to  send  you, 
shows  that  there  is  progress.  In  a  few  days  a  meeting  of  native 
capitalists  is  to  be  held  at  Madras,  which  Mr.  Olcott  is  to  attend 
and  from  which  there  may  be  fruits.  He  will  see  the  Geikwar  at 
Baroda  and  Holkar  at  Indore,  and  do  his  best — as  he  has  already 
at  Behar  and  in  Bengal.  There  was  never  a  time  when  the  help 
of  a  man  like  yourself  was  more  needed  by  India.  We  foresaw 
it,  as  you  know  and  patriotically  tried  to  make  your  way  easy  for 
a  speedy  return.  But, — alas  !  that  it  must  be  confessed; — ^the  word 
patriotism  has  now  scarcely  any  electric  power  over  the  Indian 
heart.  The  "Cradle  Land  of  Arts  and  Creeds"  swarms  with 
unhappy  beings,  precariously  provided  for,  and  vexed  by  dema- 
gogues who  have  everything  to  gain  by  chicane  and  impudence. 
We  knew  all  this  in  the  mass,  but  not  one  of  us  Aryans  had 
sounded  the  depths  of  the  Indian  question  as  we  have  of  late.  If 
it  be  permissible  to  symbolize  things  subjective  by  phenomena 
objective,  I  should  say  that  to  the  psychic  sight  India  seems 
covered  with  a  stifling  grey  fog — a  moral  meteor — the  odic  emana- 
tion from  her  vicious  social  state.  Here  and  there  twinkles  a 
point  of  light  which  mark  a  nature  still  somewhat  spiritual,  a 
person  who  aspires  and  struggles  after  the  higher  knowledge.  If 
the  beacon  of  Aryan  occultism  shall  ever  be  kindled  again,  these 
scattered  sparks  must  be  combined  to  make  it's  flame.  And  this 
is  the  task  of  the  T.S.,  this  the  pleasant  part  of  it's  work  in  which 
we  would  so  gladly  assist,  were  we  not  impeded  and  thrown  back 
by  the  would-be  chelas  themselves.  I  stepped  outside  our  usual 
limits  to  aid  your  particular  project  from  a  conviction  of  its  neces- 
sity and  its  potential  usefulness  :  having  begun  I  shall  continue 
until  the  result  is  known.  But  in  this  uncongenial  experience 
of  meddling  in  a  business  affair,  I  have  ventured  within  the  very 
breath  of  the  world's  furnace.  I  have  suffered  so  much  from 
the  enforced  insight  at  short  distance  into  the  moral  and  spiritual 
condition  of  my  people ;  and  been  so  shocked  by  this  nearer  view 
of  the  selfish  baseness  of  human  nature  (the  concomitant,  always, 
of  the  passage  of  humanity  through  our  stage  of  the  evolutionary 
circuit)  :  I  have  seen  so  distinctly  the  certainty  that  it  cannot  be 
helped — that  I  shall  henceforth  abstain  from  any  repetition  of  the 
unbearable  experiment.  Whether  your  pap>er  should  succeed  or 
not — and  if  the  latter,  it  will  be  due  to  yourself  exclusively,  to  the 


THE  ^^PHCENIX"  VENTURE  385 

unfortunate  inspiration  on  the  17th,  published  in  the  Times — I 
shall  have  no  more  to  do  with  the  financial  side  of  these  worldly 
affairs ;  but  confine  myself  to  our  prime  duty  of  gaining  know- 
ledge and  disseminating  through  all  available  channels  such  frag- 
ments as  mankind  in  the  mass  may  be  ready  to  assimilate.  I 
shall,  of  course,  be  interested  in  your  journalistic  career  here — if 
I  am  able  to  overcome  and  soothe  the  bitter  feelings  you  have  just 
awakened  in  those  who  confided  in  you  most, — by  that  unfortunate 
and  untimely  confession,  honest  as  its  object  may  have  been — and 
you  may  always  depend  upon  my  practical  sympathy ;  but  the 
genius  of  Mr.  Dare  must  preside  in  your  Counting  Room  as  your 
own  in  the  Editor's  office.  The  great  pain  you  have  inflicted 
upon  me,  shows  clearly  that  either  I  understand  nothing  in  the 
fitness  of  political  duties  and  therefore,  could  hardly  hope  to  be  a 
wise  business  and  political  "control"  or  that  the  man  whom  I 
regard  as  a  true  friend,  however  honest  and  willing  will  never 
rise  above  English  prejudices  and  the  sinful  antipathy  towards  our 
race  and  colour.       "  Madame  "  will  tell  you  more. 

Though  you  do  not  **  ask  me  to  deal  with  it  afresh  "  yet  I  will 
say  two  words  more  about  Mr.  Massey's  difficulty  as  regards  the 

letter  from  our  Brother  H then   in    Scotland,   sent  him   cir- 

cuituously  through  **  Ski."  Be  just  and  charitable  to — a  Euro- 
pean at  least.  If  Mr.  Massey  had  **  declared  to  the  English 
spiritualists  that  he  was  in  communication  with  the  Brothers  by 
Occult  means  "  he  would  have  spoken  the  simple  truth.  For  not 
only  once  but  twice  had  he  such  occult  relationship — once  with 
his  father's  glove,  sent  him  by  M.  through  "  Ski "  and  again  with 
the  note  in  question,  for  the  delivery  of  which  the  same  practical 
agency  was  employed,  though  without  an  equal  expenditure  of 
power.  His,  you  see,  is  one  more  example  of  the  ease  with  which 
even  a  superior  intellect  may  deceive  itself  in  occult  matters,  by 
the  Maya  of  its  own  engendering.  And,  as  regards  the  other  case 
may  it  not  be  noted — I  am  no  barrister  and  therefore  I  speak 
under  reserve — as  a  mitigating  circumstance  for  the  accused  that 
Mr.  Massey  is  not  even  to  this  day  sure  that  Dr.  Billing  did  not 
intercept  the  Simpson  letter  to  his  wife,  keep  it  to  use  against 
her  at  a  fortunate  time  and  actually  so  use  it  in  this  instance?  Or, 
even  allowing  the  letter  to  have  been  delivered  to  the  addressee, 
know  what  was  the  answer — if  any  written  ?  Has  the  idea  struck 
your  observant  friend  that,  at  that  very  time  there  was  a  womanly 
— ^worse  than  that — medium  spite  far  worse  than  the  odium 
theologitim  between  the  Simpson  and  Hollis-Billing,  concerning 
their  respective  claims  to  the  favours  shown  by  Ski?  That  Mrs. 
Billing  called  the  Ski  of  her  "  friend  "  Simpson  **  a  bogus  spook  ;'* 
that  Dr.  Billing  complained  bitterly  to  Olcott  and  H.P.B.  of  the 
fraud  perpetrated  by  the  Simpson  who  tried  to  palm  off  a  false  Ski 


386  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

as  the  g-enuine  one — the  oldest  as  the  most  faithful  "  control  "  of 
his  wife.  The  row  g-ot  even  into  the  papers.  Strange,  that  at 
the  time  when  she  was  publicly  reproached  by  Mrs.  B.  with  pre- 
tending to  be  controlled  by  her  Ski  Mrs.  S.  should  have  asked 
her  for  such  a  delicate  and  dangerous  service  !  I  say  again — I 
speak  under  reserve — 'I  have  never  looked  into  the  accusation 
seriously,  and  know  of  it  by  having  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  situa- 
tion in  Olcott's  head  when  reading  Mr.  C.  C.  M.'s  letter.  But 
the  hint  may,  perchance,  be  of  some  service.  But  this  I  do  know, 
and  say ;  the  long  and  short  of  the  matter  is,  that  your  friend  has 
hastily  suspected  and  unjustly  condemned  the  innocent  and  done 
himself  harm  spiritually.  He  really  has  no  right  to  accuse  even 
H.P.B.  of  deliberate  deceit.  I  protest  most  emphatically  against 
the  woman  being  dealt  with  so  uncharitably.  She  had  no  inten- 
tion to  deceive — unless  withholding  a  fact  be  a  direct  deceit  and  lie, 
on  the  theory  suppressio  veri,  suggestis  falsi — a  legal  maxim 
which  she  knows  nothing  about.  But  then  on  this  theory  we  all 
(Brothers  and  Chelas)  ought  to  be  regarded  as  liars.  She  was 
ordered  to  see  that  the  letter  should  be  delivered ;  she  had  no 
other  means  of  doing  so  at  that  time  but  through  "  Ski."  She 
had  no  power  of  sending  it  direct,  as  was  the  glove ;  M.  would 
not  help  her,  for  certain  reasons  of  his  and  very  weighty  too — as 
I  have  found  out  later — ;  she  knew  Mr.  C.  C.  M.  distrusted  Ski 
and  was  foolish  enough  to  believe  that  Mr.  Massey  separated  the 
medium  from  the  "spirit"  as  proved  by  her  letter;  she  was 
anxious  out  of  pure  and  unselfish  devotion  for  him  that  he  should 
see  that  he  was  noticed  at  last  by  a  real  Brother.  Hence — she 
tried  to  conceal  the  fact  that  Ski  had  a  hand  in  it.  Moreover,  an 
hour  after  having  sent  her  letter  to  Mrs.  B.  to  be  delivered  by 
Ski,  a  letter  read  at  the  time  not  found  accidentally  as  alleged — 
she  forgot  all  about  it  as  she  forgets  everything.  No  idea,  no 
thought  of  the  slightest  deceit  on  her  part  had  ever  crossed  her 
mind.  Had  Mr.  Massey  asked  her  to  tell  him  honestly  the  truth, 
after  the  letter  had  been  shown  to  him  she  would  have  probably, 
either  sent  him  to  a  very  hot  place,  and  said  nothing,  or  honestly 
confessed  the  truth.  She  simply  thought  it  best  that  the  intended 
good  effect  of  the  Brother's  message  should  not  be  cancelled  by 
arousing  in  Mr.  C.  C.  M.'s  mind  a  hostile  disposition  the  fruits  of 
such  unwarranted  suspicion.  We,  my  dear  sirs,  always  judge 
men  by  their  motives  and  the  moral  effects  of  their  actions  :  for 
the  world's  false  standards  and  prejudice  we  have  no  respect. 

K.  H. 


THE  ^^PHCENIX'^  VENTURE  387 

LETTER  No.  LXXXII 

Strictly  Confidential 

The  '*  quart  d'heure  de  Rabelais  "  has  come.  On  your  answer- 
consent  or  refusal — depends  the  resurrection  of  the  Phoenix — 
prostrated  in  a  death-like  Samadhi,  if  not  in  actual  death.  If  you 
believe  in  my  word,  and,  leaving  the  Ryots  to  our  care  are  pre- 
pared for  a  somewhat  unclean  work — from  the  European  stand- 
point though — and  consent  to  oppose  our  work  apparently,  serv- 
ing- our  ends  in  reality  and  thus  saving  our  respective  countries 
from  a  great  evil  that  overhangs  both — then  consent  to  the  pro- 
posal that  will  be  made  to  you  from  India. 

You  may  work  to  all  intents  and  purposes  to  oppose  The 
Bengal  Rent-Bill,  for  do  whatever  you  or  others  may,  you  will 
never  be  able  to  impede  our  work  in  the  opposite  direction. 
Therefore, — one  scruple  less  as  one  non-permitted  confidence 
more.     A  riddle,  verily. 

And  now  good  friend,  I  must  explain.  Only  you  have  to  pre- 
pare your  European,  cultured  notions  of  right  and  wrong  to  re- 
ceive a  shock.  A  plan  of  action  of  a  purely  Asiatic  character  is 
laid  bare  before  you ;  and  since  I  may  not  move  one  finger — nor 
would  I  if  I  could  in  this  case — to  guide  your  understanding  or 
feelings  it  may  be  found  too  Jesuitical,  to  suit  your  taste.  Alas 
for  all  !  that  you  should  be  so  little  versed  in  the  knowledge  of 
occult  antidotes  as  not  to  be  able  to  perceive  the  difference 
between  the  Jesuitical  "  tout  chemin  est  bon  qui  mene  k  Rome  ** 
added  to  the  cunning  and  crafty — "  the  end  justifies  the  means  " 
— and  the  necessity  of  the  practical  application  of  these  sublime 
words  of  our  Lord  and  Master  : — "  O  ye  Bhikkhus  and  Arhats — 
be  friendly  to  the  race  of  men — our  brothers  !  Know  ye  all,  that 
he,  who  sacrifices  not  his  one  life  to  save  the  life  of  his  fellow- 
being  ;  and  he  who  hesitates  to  give  up  more  than  life — his  fair 
name  and  honour  to  save  the  fair  name  and  honour  of  the  many, 
is  unworthy  of  the  sin-destroying,  immortal,  transcendent  Nir- 
vana."    Well,  it  cannot  be  helped. 

Allow  me  to  explain  to  you  the  situation.  It  is  very  compli- 
cated ;  but  to  him  who,  without  any  previous  training  was  able  to 
assimilate  so  well  some  of  our  doctrines  as  to  write  Esoteric 
Buddhism — the  inner  springs  that  we  have  to  use  ought  to  become 
intelligible. 

(r)  The  Behar  Chiefs  propose  one  and  a  half  lakhs  down  for  the 
Phoenix;  as  much  when  they  see  you  back  to  India,  if  the  Bengal 
Rent-Bill  is  opposed  by  the  new  paper  and  you  promise  to  give 
them  your  support.  Unless  the  proposition  is  accepted  by  you  we 
may  prepare  for  the  final  incremation  of  our  Phoenix — and  for 


388  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

good.  Exclusive  of  this  sum — Rs.  150,000 — we  can  count  but 
upon  Rs.  45,000  in  shares — so  far.  But  let  the  Races  put  down 
cash  and  all  will  follow. 

(2)  If  you  refuse  they  will  secure  another  editor  :  were  there 
any  danger  for  the  ryots  and  the  Bill  they — the  Races  or 
Zemindars  would  lose  nothing  thereby,  except  in  the  degree  of 
cleverness  of  their  editor ;  but  they  hope  and  are  thoroughly  un- 
aware of  being  doomed — in  the  long  run.  The  only  and  real  loser 
in  the  case  of  refusal  will  be — India  and  your  own  country — 
eventually.     This  is  prophecy. 

(3)  The  resistance  to,  and  the  intrigue  set  on  foot  by  the 
Zemindars  against  the  Bill  are  infamous  in  their  nature,  yet  very 
natural.  Those  who  examine  things  at  the  core,  perceive  the  real 
culprit  in  Lord  Cornwallis  and  the  long  line  of  his  successors. 
However  it  may  be  infamous,  as  I  say,  there  it  is  and  cannot  be 
helped  for  it  is  human  nature  itself;  and,  there  is  no  more  dis- 
honour to  support  their  claims  from  a  legal  standpoint  on  the 
part  of  an  Editor,  who  knows  them  to  be  doomed,  than  there  is 
for  a  Counsel  to  defend  his  client — a  great  criminal  sentenced  to 
be  hung.  I  am  now  trying  to  argue  from  your  European  stand- 
point for  fear,  and  lest  you  should  not  be  able  to  see  things  from 
our  Asiatic  point  of  view,  or  rather  in  the  light  we,  who  are 
enabled  to  discern  future  events — see  them. 

(4)  A  conservative  Editor  whose  field  of  action  will  be  found  to 
run  on  parallel  lines  with  that  of  a  conservative  Viceroy,  will  find 
himself  having  lost  nothing  in  fact,  for  a  slight  opposition  that 
cannot  last  long  after  all.  There  are  great  flaws  in  the  present 
Bill,  examined  from  its  legal,  dead  letter  aspect. 

(5)  Owing  to  the  idiotically  untimely  **  Ilbert's  Bill,"  and  the 
still  more  idiotic  **  Saligram-surendro  "  Contempt  case,  the  agita- 
tion is  carrying  the  population  of  India  to  the  verge  of  self- 
destruction.  You  must  not  feel  as  tho*  I  were  exaggerating  if  I 
say  more  : — the  English  and  especially  Anglo-Indians  are  running 
the  same  course  from  an  opposite  direction.  You  are  at  liberty 
to  refuse  my  warning:  you  will  show  yourself  wise  if  you  do  not. 
To  return  to  our  direct  object — 

(6)  There  are  several  Englishmen  of  great  intellect  and  ability, 
who  feel  ready  to  defend — (and  even  to  ally  themselves — with)  the 
Zemindars — and  oppose  the  Bill,  against  their  own  principles  and 
feelings — simply  because  the  Races  hate  and  oppose  the  man 
whom  the  rest  of  the  Hindus  profess,  for  the  time  being,  to 
adore,  and  whom  they  are  exalting  with  all  the  ardour  of  simple- 
minded,  short-sighted  savages.  Thus  the  ryots  cannot  escape 
their  fate  for  a  few  months  longer  whether  you  accept  the  offer 
or  not.  In  the  latter  case,  of  course  the  paper  scheme  is  at  an 
end. 


r 


THE  ^^PHCENIX'^  VENTURE  389 

(7)  At  the  same  time  it  is  better  that  you  should  be  prepared  to 
know  the  unavoidable  results ;  there  are  ninety-nine  chances 
against  one,  that — if  the  offer  of  the  Zemindars  is  rejected,  the 
Phoenix  will  ever  come  into  existence ;  not  so  long  at  any  rate  as 
the  present  agitation  is  going  on.  And  when  it  finally  fails  as  the 
project  is  bound  to  unless  we  become  masters  of  the  situation, 
then  we  will  have  to  part.  In  order  to  obtain  from  the  Chohan 
permission  to  defend  the  teeming  millions  of  the  poor  and  the 
oppressed  in  India  bringing  on  to  bear  all  our  knowledge  and 
powers — I  had  to  pledge  myself,  in  case  of  the  Phoenix's  failure 
to  interfere  no  more  with  such  worldly  matters  and — to  bid  an 
eternal  farewell  to  the  European  element.  M.  and  Djwal  Khool 
would  have  to  take  my  place.  On  the  other  hand,  should  you 
consent  to  the  offer  your  opposition  to  the  Rent  Bill  would  have 
no  more  effect  on  our  work — for  the  Ryots  than  a  straw — to  save 
a  vessel  from  sinking,  whereas,  if  another  editor  is  selected  we 
would  have  no  pretext  to  exercise  our  influence  on  their  behalf. 
Such  is  the  situation.  It  is  a  curious  medley  with  no  raison 
d'etre  in  your  opinion.  You  can  hardly  be  expected  by  us  to  see 
clearly  through  it  at  present,  nor  is  there  much  likelihood  that 
you  will  judge  it  fairly  owing  to  this  Egyptian  darkness  of  cross 
purposes ;  nor  is  there  any  special  need  you  should,  if  the  offer 
has  to  fall  to  the  ground.  But,  if  your  answer  is  favourable,  I 
may  perhaps  as  well  add  a  few  particulars.  Know  then,  that 
opposition  notwithstanding,  and  just  because  of  it,  you  will  bring 
the  great  national  boil  to  a  head  sooner  than  it  could  be  other- 
wise expected.  Thus,  while  carrying  out  strictly  your  pro- 
gramme and  promise  made  to  the  Races,  you  will  be  helping  the 
events  that  have  to  be  brought  about  to  save  the  unfortunate 
population  that  has  been  sat  upon  ever  since  1793 — the  year  of 
Lord  Cornwallis's  great  political  mistake.  At  the  same  time  you 
may  be  doing  immense  good  in  every  other  direction.  Recall  the 
past  and  this  will  help  you  to  see  clearer  into  our  intentions. 
When  you  took  over  Bengal  from  the  native  Rulers,  there  were 
a  number  of  men  who  exercised  the  calling  of  Tax  Collectors 
under  their  Government.  These  men  received,  as  you  are  aware, 
a  percentage  for  collecting  the  rents.  The  spirit  of  the  letter  of 
the  tithe  and  tribute  under  the  Mussulman  Rulers  was  never 
understood  by  the  East  India  Company ;  least  of  all  the  rights  of 
the  ryots  to  oppose  an  arbitrary  interchange  of  the  Law  of 
Wuzeefa  and  Mookassimah.  Well,  when  the  Zemindars  found 
that  the  British  did  not  exactly  understand  their  position  they 
took  advantage  of  it  as  the  English  had  taken  advantage  of  their 
force  :  they  claimed  to  be  Landlords.  Weekly  enough,  you  con- 
sented to  recognise  the  claim,  and  admitting  it  notwithstanding 
the  warning  of  the  Moossulman  who  understood  the  real  situation 


390  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

and  were  not  bribed  as  most  of  the  Company  were — you  played 
into  the  hands  of  the  few  against  the  many,  the  result  being  the 
"  perpetual  settlement  "  documents.  It  is  this  that  led  to  every 
subsequent  evil  in  Bengal.  Seeing  how  the  unfortunate  Ryots 
are  regarded  by  your  proud  nation  in  the  full  progress  of  the 
19th  Century,  being  in  your  sight  of  far  less  value  than  a  horse 
or  cattle,  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  how  they  were  regarded  by 
your  countrymen  then — a  century  ago — when  every  Englishman 
was  a  pious  Christian  at  heart  and  ordered  by  the  Bible  to  draw 
a  distinction  between  the  descendants  of  Ham  and  themselves — 
the  heirs  of  the  chosen  people.  The  agreement  drawn  between 
Lord  Cornwallis  and  the  Races  which  stipulated  that  the  "  black 
human  cattle  "  should  be  treated  by  the  Zemindars  kindly  and 
justly,  and  that  they  should  not  raise  the  rents  of  the  Ryots,  etc. 
was  a  legal  farce.  The  Chohan  was  then  in  India  and  he  was  an 
eye-witness  to  the  beginning  of  horrors.  No  sooner  had  they 
secured  the  Perpetual  Settlement  Agreement  than  the  Races  began 
to  disregard  their  engagements.  Failing  to  fulfil  any  of  these 
they  brought  yearly  ruin  and  starvation  on  the  miserable  Ryots. 
They  exacted  tribute,  sold  them  up,  and  trumped  up  false  charges 
against  them  under  the  name  of  Ahwab.  These  '*  doors  "  and 
*'  openings  "  led  them  wherever  they  wanted  and  they  levied  for 
over  50  years  most  extraordinary  taxes.  All  this  the  Zemindars 
have  done  and  much  more  and  they  will  be  surely  made  to  account 
for  it.  Things  too  horrible  to  mention  were  done  under  the  eyes 
and  often  with  the  sanction  of  the  Company's  servants,  when  the 
Mutiny  put  a  certain  impediment  by  bringing  as  its  result  another 
form  of  Government.  It  is  to  redress  the  great  wrong  done,  to 
remedy  to  the  now  irremediable  that  Lord  Ripon  took  it  into  his 
head  to  bring  forward  the  new  Bill.  It  was  not  thought  expedient 
by  his  Councillors  (not  those  you  know  of)  to  crush  the  Zemindary 
system  without  securing  at  the  same  time  popularity  among  the 
majority  in  another  direction  :  hence  **  Ilbert's  Bill  "  and  some 
other  trifles.  We  say  then  that  to  all  appearances  it  is  to  redress 
the  wrongs  of  the  Past,  that  is  the  object  of  the  present  Bengal 
Rent  Bill.  My  friend  you  are  a  remarkably  clever  Editor  and  an 
astute  and  observant  politician  ;  and  no  one,  perhaps,  in  all  India 
goes  as  deep  as  you  do  into  the  inner  constitution  of  the  Anglo- 
Indian  coup  d'etat.  Still  you  do  not  go  far  enough  and  the 
original  primitive  layers  of  the  political  soil  as  the  genesis  of  some 
acts  of  my  Lord  Ripon  were  and  are  terra  incognita  to  yourself  as 
to  so  many  others  perhaps  still  older  hands  in  politics  than  you 
are.  Neither  Lord  Ripon  nor  his  Councillors  (those  behind  the 
veil)  anticipate  any  great  results  during  his  power  in  India.  They 
are  more  Occultists  than  you  may  imagine.  Their  liberal  reforms 
are  not  meant  for  India,  to  the  weal  or  woes  of  which  they  arc 


I 


THE  ^^PHCENIX^^  VENTURE  391 

quite  indifferent  :  they  look  far  off  to  future  results  and — Press 
acts,  Ilbert's  Bills,  Bengal  Rent  Bills  and  the  rest  are  aimed  at 
Protestant  England  which,  very  soon,  too  soon  if  Somebody  or 
Something  does  not  interfere,  will   find   itself  suffocating  in  the 

invisible  coils  of  the  Romish .*     Friend  and  Brother,  the 

only  one  of  your  race  whom  I  regard  with  a  warm,  sincere,  affec- 
tion, take  care  !  Do  not  reject  too  lightly  my  warning  for  it  is  a 
solemn  one,  and  but  a  hint  I  am  permitted  to  make.  Political 
scepticism,  like  every  other,  scorns  and  laughs  at  the  observations 
of  those  who  do  not  belong  to  its  factions.  It  finds  out  its  mis- 
takes when  in  a  ditch.  Beware  for  it  is  no  more  a  simple  ditch, 
but  an  abyss  that  is  being  prepared  for  you  ! 

But  let  us  see  on  what  grounds  an  honest  Englishman  can 
oppose  the  Rent  Bill.  However  great  the  misery  of  the  Ryots 
even  at  present,  however  just  the  reprisals  that  are  in  store  for 
the  Zemindars,  however  human  and  generous,  in  short,  on  its 
surface  the  object  of  the  Rent  Bill,  yet  no  honest  Government 
strictly  speaking  has  the  right  to  break  at  will  and  its  own  pleasure 
solemn  pledges  and  engagements.  Because,  it  is  found  that  the 
Races  have  not  fulfilled  their  part  of  the  agreement,  it  gives  no 
right  to  the  other  party  to  make  away  with  their  signature  and 
tear  in  shreds  the  perpetual  settlement  agreement.  The  sins  of 
the  few  cannot  well  be  visited  upon  the  many.  There  are  heavy 
flaws  in  the  present  Rent  Bill  as  there  were  in  the  old  System  ; 
and,  there  is  no  clause  in  the  old  document  stipulated  to  the  effect 
that  the  Settlement  becomes  nil  at  the  will  of  the  British.  I  will 
not  enter  upon  the  defects  of  the  dead-letter  meaning  in  either  the 
one  or  other,  but  will  limit  myself  by  telling  you  that  there  are 
such  flaws  and  that,  until  modified  you  have  a  perfect  right  to 
object  to  them.  You  are  not  expected  to  cause  the  Bill  to  be  with- 
drawn but  to  simply  support  the  Zemindars  analysis  of  its  defects. 
And  this  you  can  freely  promise.  However  I  must  not  seem  try- 
ing to  influence  you  one  way  or  the  other.  Some  of  the  claims  of 
the  Races  are  infamous  and  no  honest  man  can  be  made  to  sup- 
port them ;  while  others  are  not  without  a  strong  legal  foundation 
in  their  favour.  The  Ruling  power,  for  instance,  was  never  yet 
and  in  no  case  the  proprietor  of  the  Khirajee  land — not  even 
under  the  Moossulman  laws  and  sway.  You  have  thus  the  Spirit 
of  Khiraj  and  Ooshr  to  work  upon,  in  order  to  redeem  your 
promise  to  the  landowners  and  amuse  them  for  a  few  months  unto 
the  day  of  the  "  Almighty  Smash  "  that  is  in  store  for  them.  All 
that  you  are  asked  to  do  for  the  benefit  of  {your  as  well  as)  my 
country  is,  to  overlook  the  ugly  frontispiece  of  the  edifice,  taking 
into  consideration  only  the  real  nature  of  the  situation  and  the 
future  good  results,  in  case  you  should  get  over  your  very  natural 

I  This  word  is  undecipherable. — Ed. 


392  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

squeamishness.  In  a  few  days  you  may  receive  a  formal  pro- 
posal. Think  well  over  it.  Do  not  allow  yourself  to  be  influenced 
by  any  consideration  in  connection  with  my  desires.  If  you 
honestly  believe  the  offer  inconsistent  with  your  European  notions 
and  criterion  of  truth  and  honour  refuse  its  acceptance  without 
any  hesitation  and  let  me  bid  you  a  sad  though  ever  grateful  and 
friendly  farewell.  I  cannot  expect  to  see  you  looking  at  things 
from  my  own  standpoint.  You  look  without,  I  see  within.  This 
is  no  hour  for  sentimentalities.  The  whole  future  of  the 
**  brightest  (  !)  jewel  " — oh,  what  a  dark  satire  in  that  name  ! — 
in  the  crown  of  England  is  at  stake,  and  I  am  bound  to  devote 
the  whole  of  my  powers  as  far  as  the  Chohan  will  permit  me  to 
help  my  country  at  this  eleventh  hour  of  her  misery.  I  cannot 
work  except  with  those  who  will  work  with  us.  Accuse  me  not, 
my  friend,  for  you  do  not  know  you  cannot  know,  the  extent  of 
the  limitations  I  am  placed  under.  Think  not,  that  I  am  seeking 
to  place  a  bait — an  inducement  for  you  to  accept  that  which  would 
refuse  under  other  circumstances  for  I  am  not.  Having  pledged 
my  solemn  word  of  honour  to  Him  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for 
everything  I  am  and  know  I  am  simply  helpless  in  case  of  your 
refusal  and — we  will  have  to  part.  Had  not  the  Rent  Bill  been 
accompanied  by  the  din  and  clash  of  the  Ilbert  Bill  and  **  con- 
tempt case  "  I  would  have  been  the  first  to  advise  you  to  refuse. 
As  the  situation  stands  now,  however,  and  prohibited  as  I  am  to 
use  any  but  ordinary  powers — I  am  powerless  to  do  both,  and  am 
constrained  to  choose  between  helping  my  hapless  mother-country, 
and  our  future  intercourse.  It  is  for  you  to  decide.  And  if  this 
letter  is  fated  to  be  my  last,  I  beg  you  to  remember — for  your 
sake,  not  mine — the  message  I  sent  at  Simla  to  yourself  and  Mr. 
Hume  through  H.P.B. — **  Lord  RipK>n  is  not  a  free  agent;  the 
real  Viceroy  and  ruler  of  India  is  not  at  Simla  but  at  Rome;  and 
the  effective  weapon  used  by  the  latter  is — ^the  Viceroy's  con- 
fessor." 

Give,  pray,  my  best  wishes  to  your  lady  and  the  "  Morsel."  Be 
certain,  that  with  a  few  undetectable  mistakes  and  omissions  not- 
withstanding, your  "  Esoteric  Buddhism  "  is  the  only  right  exposi- 
tion— however  incomplete — of  our  Occult  doctrines.  You  have 
made  no  cardinal,  fundamental  mistakes;  and  whatever  may  be 
given  to  you  hereafter  will  not  clash  with  a  single  sentence  in  your 
book  but  on  the  contrary  will  explain  away  any  seeming  contra- 
diction. How  greatly  mistaken  was  Mr.  Hume's  theory  was 
shown  by  the  "  Chela  "  in  the  Theosophist,  With  all  that,  you 
may  feel  sure  that  neither  M.  nor  I  have  contradicted  each  other 
in  our  respective  statements.  He  was  sp>eaking  of  the  inner — I 
of  the  outer  Round.  There  are  many  things  that  you  have  not 
learned  but  may  some  day ;  nor  will  you  be  able  to  ever  compre- 


THE  ^^PHCENIX'^  VENTURE  393 

hend  the  process  of  the  obscurations  until  you  have  mastered  the 
mathematical  progress  of  the  inner  and  the  outer  rounds  and 
learned  more  about  the  specific  difference  between  the  seven.  And 
thus  according  to  Mr.  Massey's  philosophical  conclusion  we  have 
no  God?  He  is  right — since  he  applies  the  name  to  an  extra- 
cosmic  anomaly,  and  that  we,  knowing  nothing  of  the  latter,  find 
— each  man  his  God — within  himself  in  his  own  personal,  and  at 
the  same  time, — impersonal  Avalokitesvvara.  And  now — farewell. 
And  if  it  is  so  decreed  that  we  should  correspond  no  more,  remem- 
ber me  with  the  same  sincere  good  feeling  as  you  will  ever  be 
remembered  by, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXXXIII 

Received  London,  October  8th,  1883, 

A  temporary  absence  upyon  imperative  business,  prevented  for  a 
few  days  my  even  knowing  anything  about  your  affairs,  and  it 
was  not  until  to-day  that  I  had  the  leisure  to  give  them  a  thought. 
Upon  reading  your  letter,  the  situation  presented  itself  to  me  in 
such  colours  that  I  concluded  to  have  you  immediately  given  your 
freedom  and  so  sent  you  a  cable  despatch.  This  was  with  the 
object  of  removing  from  your  mind  any  feeling  of  compulsion, 
moral  or  otherwise,  and  of  leaving  you  to  either  take  or  reject 
the  further  proposals  which  may  come  to  you  from  any  part  of 
India,  at  your  option.  If  any  consideration  could  have  prompted 
a  different  course,  it  would  have  been  entirely  removed  by  the 
tone  of  your  letter  of  August  the  i6th.  The  advocacy  of  the 
Bengal  measure  in  the  present  aspect  of  affairs  you  think  would 
ruin  every  prospect  of  the  commercial  success  of  the  proposed 
journal,  "  The  Phoenix  cannot  possibly  as  now  designed  prove  a 
commercial  success.  And  a  paper  which  is  a  commercial  failure 
can  have  very  little  political  weight."  To  persist  then,  would  as 
you  see  it,  be  to  lead  a  certain  number  of  persons  to  fruitlessly 
waste  a  large  sum  of  money.  For  **the  project  thus  crippled  is 
pretty  effectually  stripped  of  its  grand  financial  possibilities." 
Still  despite  all  this,  you  are  disposed  to  go  on  if  I  wish  it,  cast 
the  moral  responsibility  on  me  and  swallow  the  somewhat  repulsive 
pledge. 

My  friend,  you  shall  do  nothing  of  the  sort.  The  responsibility, 
notwithstanding  all  I  could,  and  am  willing  to  do,  would  fall  upon 
you  since  you  have  been  given  plainly  the  option  in  my  last  letter 
to  you.  If  henceforth,  you  have  anything  more  to  do  with  this 
unfortunate  affair,  it  must  be  entirely  upon  your  own  judgment 


394  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

and  responsibility.  You  have  ill  comprehended  the  Law  of  Karma 
— (and  my  letter) — if  you  could  have  imagined  that  I  would  dare 
to  provoke  its  awful  retaliation  by  forcing-  you  or  anyone  to  take 
up  a  line  of  action  with  such  feelings  in  his  heart.  Knowing  you, 
it  was  easy  to  foresee  your — (nay,  the  feelings  of  any  honourable 
man  having  to  face  such  a  situation) — repulsion  for  the  work  con- 
templated. Therefore,  had  I  taken  great  care  to  impress  up>on 
you,  in  my  letter  that  you  were  entirely  and  absolutely  free  in 
your  choice.  I  blame  myself  for  but  one  thing,  viz.,  my  having 
hinted  at  the  probable  consequence  of  your  refusal, — as  implied 
in  my  pledge  to  the  Chohan  to  thenceforward  abstain  from  col- 
laboration with  Europeans  until  some  future  more  favourable  time. 
It  was  that  which  caused  you  **  to  swallow  the  repulsive  pledge  ** 
more  than  anything  said.  This  goes  to  my  Karma.  But,  this 
aside,  by  referring  to  my  last  letter,  you  will  perceive  that  the 
necessity  for  independent,  unbiased  action  on  your  part  was 
strongly  urged.  I  hoped — even  against  the  disheartening  moral 
condition  of  my  countr}'men  and  forced  myself  almost  to  believe 
it  possible  to  found  a  journal  so  obviously  necessary  at  this  great 
crisis,  upon  a  basis  thoroughly  satisfactory  to  you  and  to  all  who 
might  be  concerned.  I  had  forgotten  that  external  appearance 
is  everything  in  your  world  and  that  I  was  simply  subjecting  you 
to  be  regarded  with  contempt.  But  rest  assured  :  had  the  money 
been  collected  as  first  attempted,  and  no  pressure  of  working  in  a 
certain  direction  had  been  offered  to  you ;  and  had  you  been  left 
entirely  your  own  master  in  the  line  of  policy  pursued ;  yet  at  this 
hour  of  bitter  hatred,  of  mutual  malice  and  contempt,  the  mere 
fact  that  you  were  advocating  the  cause  of  the  despised,  and  now 
more  than  ever  hated  and  crushed  down  **  nigger  " — ^would  have 
stripp>ed  The  Phoenix  of  even  a  shadow  of  any  '*  grand  financial 
possibility."  Still  hardly  a  month  ago  I  was  so  confident — from 
seeing  the  still  deep,  strong  feelings  lurking  in  the  National  Soul — 
that  I  allowed  you  to  grow  equally  and  even  more  confident  than 
myself.  Others,  whose  intuition  and  foresight  had  not  been 
blinded  by  their  superiors,  thought  differently  and  some  would 
have  dissuaded  me ;  yet,  the  aim  being  so  worthy,  and  the  possi- 
bility really  existing,  I  was  permitted  to  watch  the  project  and  use 
natural  external  means  to  aid  its  consumation.  If  indefinite  wait- 
ing were  practicable  for  you,  the  original  scheme  could  be  realized, 
but  this  is  not  so,  and  I  must,  therefore,  withdraw  the  last  appear- 
ance of  constraint  upon  your  free  judgment,  and  thank  you  for 
having  so  loyally  seconded  the  attempt  to  do  good  to  India,  even 
at  the  cost  of  your  feelings  and  pecuniary  interests.  I  should  be 
most  unwilling,  apart  from  the  rule  of  our  Order  as  regards  Karma, 
to  draw  you  into  a  position  where  I  could  not  recompense  you  in 
any  way  for  loss  of  social  prestige  or  financial  disappointments. 


THE  ^a>n(ENIX^^  VENTURE  395 

To  do  that  is  beyond  my  power.  I  could  not  look  at  you,  if  you 
were  hourly  feeling  that  you  were  regarded  no  better  than  a 
•'  blackguard,  and  had  no  political  weight  with  Society  at  large  on 
the  score  of  Character."  If  your  lot  was  to  be  cast  in  with  ours, 
such  considerations  would  not  weigh  one  moment.  To  all, 
whether  Chohan  or  Chela,  who  are  obligated  workers  among  us 
the  first  and  last  consideration  is  whether  we  can  do  good  to  our 
neighbour,  no  matter  how  humble  he  may  be ;  and  we  do  not 
permit  ourselves  to  even  think  of  the  danger  or  any  contumely 
abuse  or  injustice  visited  upon  ourselves.  We  are  ready  to  be 
*'  spat  upon  and  crucified  "  daily — not  once — if  real  good  to 
another  can  come  of  it.  But  the  case  is  totally  different  with  you ; 
you  have  your  path  to  tread  in  the  more  *'  practical  "  world,  and 
your  standing  in  it  must  not  be  jeopardized. 

Again,  besides  yourself  the  contributors  to  capital  must  be  justly 
dealt  by.  Among  them  are  wealthy  Jemindars,  but  there  are  also 
poor  patriots,  who  have  made  great  exertions  to  subscribe  their 
small  sums  from  pure  reverence  to  us  and  love  of  mother-land. 
At  least  fifty  such  are  waiting  the  latest  turn  of  events,  and  hus- 
banding their  resources  until  the  last  moment  before  sending  on 
their  remittances  to  Calcutta.  Devoted  Theosophists  in  various 
parts  of  India  have  been  actually  soliciting  for  subscriptions,  uf)on 
the  theory  of  possible  profit  to  capital  set  forth  in  Mr.  Morgan's 
circular ;  the  project  has  been  warmly  advocated  by  Olcott,  Colonel 
Gordon,  Norendro,  and  others  known  and  unknown  to  you  :  a 
financial  disaster  to  The  Phoenix  of  the  nature  you  anticipate 
would  compromise  the  personal  influence  of  all.  With  such  pros- 
pects, moreover,  your  late  co-adjutor  Mr.  Dare,  would  not  care 
to  help  you  even  though  Mr.  Allen  should  permit  him.  And, 
finally,  unless  your  personal  faith  in  it  were  so  blind  as  to  swallow 
up  your  last  instinct  of  prudence,  you  would  not  risk  your  own 
hard-earned  capital  in  a  fore-doomed  failure,  and  so  could  not  in 
conscience  allow  anyone  else  to  do  it.  Except — except  you  were 
allowed  to  **  cast  the  moral  responsibility  upon  me  "  ;  in  short,  to 
make  me  by  miracle — were  that  p>ossible — force  a  success.  If  that 
had  been  permitted,  the  journal  would  have  been  already  founded, 
and  its  voice  have  made  itself  heard  amid  the  harsh  din  of  con- 
temporary Indian  affairs. 

I  would  have  phrased  my  dispatch  of  to-day  even  stronger  but 
that  I  should,  by  telling  you  to  abandon  the  affair,  again  assume 
the  responsibility  of  blocking  your  free-will.  It  is  best  that  you 
should  give  the  Bengal  party  the  chance  to  state  their  conditions 
definitely  and  finally,  and  thereupon  answer  **yes"  or  **no. " 
To  save  your  time  and  expense  I  asked  Olcott  to  write  Norendro 
Babu  to  send  him  the  Landholders'  Proposals,  that  he  may,  upon 
the  instant — knowing  your  views  and  character — say  whether  they 


396  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

are  fit  to  lay  before  you  or  not.  And  if  not,  that  he  will  imme- 
diately communicate  with  your  Calcutta  Solicitors,  as  you 
requested. 

This  is  the  present  situation  of  affairs  and  very  bad  it  is  for 
India.  It  is  premature  as  yet  to  tell  you  more  of  the  secret 
influence  that  has  brought  it  on,  but  you  may  hear  of  it  later. 
Nor  may  I  forecast  the  future,  except  so  far  as  to  draw  more  than 
ever  your  attention  to  the  black  clouds  that  are  gathering  over  the 
political  sky.  You  know  I  told  you  long  ago  to  expect  many  and 
great  disturbances  of  all  kinds  as  one  cycle  was  closing  and  the 
other  beginning  its  fateful  activities.  You  already  see  in  the 
seismological  phenomena  of  late  occurrence  some  of  the  proof; 
you  will  see  a  great  many  more  and  shortly.  And  if  we  have  to 
regret  the  blasting  of  a  humanitarian  project,  it  should  at  least 
mitigate  the  severity  of  your  disappointment  to  feel  that  in  a  bad 
time  like  this  one  has  to  contend  against  seen  and  unseen  influences 
of  the  most  hostile  nature. 

And  now,  a  pleasanter  word  before  concluding.  Your  decision 
to  follow  my  lead  into  the  Phoenix  matter  even  with  the  to  you 
certainty  of  social  degradation  and  pecuniary  loss,  had  the  reward 
of  its  Karma  already.  So  I  conclude,  at  any  rate,  by  the  results. 
Though  there  was  no  test — (so  odious  to  you) — meant,  yet  you  were 
as  good  as  tested  and  have  not  quailed.  The  fiat  of  contingent 
non-intercourse  between  us  has  been  partially  revoked.  The  pro- 
hibition with  regard  to  other  Europeans  is  as  strict  as  ever,  but  in 
your  case  it  is  removed.  And  this  consent,  I  know,  has  a  direct 
bearing  on  your  consent — ^the  great  sacrifice  of  your  personal  feel- 
ing in  the  present  situation.  '*  This  Peling  "  was  found  to  have 
*'  really  redeeming  qualities  "  !  But  be  warned,  my  friend,  that 
this  is  not  the  last  of  your  probations.  It  is  not  I  who  create 
them,  but  yourself — by  your  struggle  for  light  and  truth  against 
the  world's  dark  influences.  Be  more  careful  as  to  what  you  say 
upon  forbidden  topics.  The  "  eighth  sphere  "  mystery  is  a  very 
confidential  subject,  and  you  are  far  from  understanding  even  its 
general  aspect.  You  were  repeatedly  warned  and  should  not  have 
mentioned  it.  You  have  unintentionally  brought  ridicule  upon  a 
solemn  matter.  I  have  nought  to  do  with  the  Replies  to  Mr. 
Myers,  but,  you  may  recognise  in  them,  perhaps,  the  brusque 
influence  of  M. 

K.  H. 

I  am  advised  to  request  that,  for  the  future,  communications 
intended  for  me  may  be  sent  to  either  Damodar  or  Henry  Olcott. 
Madam  B's  discretion  is  not  improving  in  ratio  with  her  physio- 
logical enfeeblement. 


SECTION  V 

THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY 

LETTER  No.  LXXXIV 

Private 
My  dear  friend, — 

The  enclosure  is  to  be  transmitted  to  the  L.L.T.S,  through  you 
in  your  capacity  of  Vice-president  of  the  Parent  Society  and  there- 
fore representative  of  the  President  Founder,  not  as  member  of 
the  Branch  at  London. 

The  recent  occurrences  in  which  you  have  borne  a  part  not 
altogether  pleasant,  may  be  distressing  to  some  and  tiresome  to 
others,  yet  it  is  better  so  than  that  the  old  paralytic  calm  should 
have  continued.  An  outbreak  of  fever  in  the  human  body  is 
nature's  evidence  that  she  is  trying  to  expel  the  seeds  of  disease 
and  perhaps  death  anteriorily  absorbed.  As  things  were,  the 
London  Branch  was  but  vegetating  and  the  vast  possibilities  of 
psychic  evolution  in  Britain  were  completely  untried.  Karma 
evidently  required  that  the  repose  should  be  broken  by  the  agency 
of  the  one  most  responsible  for  it — C.  C.  Massey,  and  so  it  was  he 
who  brought  Mrs.  K.  to  her  present  position.  She  has  not 
accomplished  her  object,  but  Karma  has  its  own;  henceforth  the 
London  group  aroused,  stimulated  and  warned,  have  a  clear  field 
in  which  to  exercise  their  activities.  Your  own  karma  my  friend, 
destines  you  to  play  a  still  more  conspicuous  part  in  European 
theosophical  affairs  than  you  have  yet.  Olcott's  forthcoming  visit 
will  result  in  important  developments,  in  whose  out-working  you 
are  to  have  a  hand.  My  desire  is  that  you  should  be  gathering 
together  all  the  reserve  forces  of  your  being  so  that  you  may  rise 
to  the  dignity  and  importance  of  the  crisis.  However  little  you 
may  seem  to  achieve — psychically — in  this  birth,  remember  that 
your  interior  growth  proceeds  every  instant,  and  that  toward  the 
end  of  your  life  as  in  your  next  birth  your  accumulated  merit  shall 
bring  you  all  you  aspire  to. 

It  is  not  politic  that  H.  S.  Olcott  should  be  exclusively  your 
guest  during  his  whole  stay  in  Britain ;  his  time  should  be  divided 
between  yourself  and  others  of  various  opinions — should  they  wish 
to    invite   him   for   a   short   time.     He   will   be   accompanied   by 

397  ■  ^7 


398  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Mohini  whom  I  have  chosen  as  my  chela  and  with  whom  I  some- 
times communicate  directly.  Treat  the  boy  kindly,  forgetting  he 
is  a  Bangalee,  and  only  remembering  he  is  now  my  Chela.  Do 
what  you  can  to  dignify  Olcott's  office;  for  he  represents  the 
entire  Society,  and  by  reason  of  his  official  position,  if  for  no 
other,  stands  with  Upasika,  closest  to  ourselves  in  the  chain  of 
Theosophical  work.     Assirvaclam. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  LXXXV 

To  On-e  of  the  Vice-Presidents  or  Councillors  of  "  The  Lcmdon   Lodge," 
Theosophical  Society,  from  K.H. 

To  the  Members  of  the  '*  London  Lodge,"  Theosophical  Society, — 
Friends  and  Opponents, 

I  have  just  ordered  two  telegrams  to  be  sent  to  Mrs.  A.  Kings- 
ford  and  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett  to  notify  both  that  the  former  should 
continue  to  be  the  President  of  the  ' '  London  Lodge  ' '  Theos. 
Society. 

This  is  not  the  desire  alone  of  either  of  us  two,  known  to  Mr. 
Sinnett,  or  of  both,  but  the  express  wish  of  the  Chohan  Himself. 
Mrs.  Kingsford's  election  is  not  a  matter  of  personal  feeling 
between  ourselves  and  that  lady  but  rests  entirely  on  the  advisa- 
bility of  having  at  the  head  of  the  Society,  in  a  place  like  London, 
a  person  well  suited  to  the  standard  and  aspirations  of  the  (so 
far)  ignorant  (of  esoteric  truths)  and  therefore,  malicious  pubhc. 
Nor  is  it  a  matter  of  the  slightest  consequence  whether  the  gifted 
President  of  the  **  London  Lodge  "  Theos.  Soc.  entertains  feel- 
ings of  reverence  or  disrespect  toward  the  humble  and  unknown 
individuals  at  the  head  of  the  Tibetan  Good  Law, — or  the  writer 
of  the  present,  or  any  of  his  Brothers — but  rather  a  question 
whether  the  said  lady  is  fitted  for  the  purpose  we  have  all  at  heart, 
namely  the  dissemination  of  Truth  through  Esoteric  doctrines, 
conveyed  by  whatever  religious  channel,  and  the  effacement  of 
crass  materialism  and  blind  prejudice  and  scepticism.  As  the 
lady  has  rightly  observed,  the  Western  public  should  understand 
the  Theosophical  Society  to  be  "a  Philosophical  School  consti- 
tuted on  the  ancient  Hermetic  basis  " — that  public  having  never 
heard  of  the  Tibetan,  and  entertaining  very  perverted  notions  of 
the  Esoteric  Buddhist  System.  Therefore,  and  so  far,  we  agree 
with  the  remarks  embodied  in  the  letter  written  by  Mrs.  K.  to 
Madam  B.  and  which  the  latter  was  asked  to  **  submit  to  K.H."; 
and,  we  would  remind  our  members  of  the  "  L.L. "  in  this  refer- 
ence, that  Hermetic  Philosophy  is  universal  and  unsectarian,  while 


THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  T.S.  399 

the  Tibetan   School,   will  ever  be  regarded  by  those  who  know 
little,  if  anything  of  it,  as  coloured  more  or  less  with  sectarianism. 
The  former  knowing  neither  caste,  nor  colour,  nor  creed,  no  lover 
of  Esoteric  wisdom  can  have  any  objection  to  the  name,   which 
otherwise  he  might  feel  were  the  Society  to  which  he  belongs  to 
be  placarded  with  a  specific  denomination  pertaining  to  a  distinct 
religion.     Hermetic  Philosophy  suits  every  creed  and  philosophy 
and  clashes  with  none.      It  is  the  boundless  ocean  of  Truth,  the 
central  point  whither  Hows  and  wherein  meet  every  river,  as  every 
stream — whether  its  source  be  in  the  East,  West,  North,  or  South. 
As  the  course  of  the  river  depends  upon  the  nature  of  its  basin, 
so  the  channel  for  communication  of  Knowledge  must  conform  it- 
self  to    surrounding   circumstances.     The    Egyptian    Hierophant, 
the  Chaldean  Mage,  the  Arhat,  and  the  Rishi,  were  bound  in  days 
of  yore  on  the  same  voyage  of  discovery  and  ultimately  arrived 
at   the   same  goal  though   by   different   tracks.     There   are  even 
at  the  present  moment  three  centres  of  the  Occult  Brotherhood  in 
existence,  widely  separated  geographically,  and  as  widely  exoteri- 
cally — the    true    esoteric    doctrine    being    identical    in    substance 
though  differing  in  terms ;  all  aiming  at  the  same  grand  object, 
but  no  two  agreeing  seemingly  in  the  details  of  procedure.     It 
is  an  every  day  occurrence  to  find  students  belonging  to  different 
schools  of  occult  thought  sitting  side  by  side  at  the  feet  of  the 
same  Guru.     Upasika  (Madam  B.)  and  Subba  Row,  though  pupils 
of  the  same  Master,  have  not  followed  the  same  Philosophy — the 
one  is  Buddhist  and  the  other  an  Adwaitee.     Many  prefer  to  call 
themselves  Buddhists  not  because  the  word  attaches  itself  to  the 
ecclesiastical    system    built    upon    the    basic    ideas    of   our    Lord 
Gautama  Buddha's  philosophy  but  because  of  the  Sanskrit  word 
**  Buddhi  " — wisdom,    enlightenment;   and   as  a  silent   protest  to 
the  vain  rituals  and  empty  ceremonials,  which  have  in  too  many 
cases  been  productive  of  the  greatest  calamities.     Such   also  is 
the  origin  of  the  Chaldean  term  Mage, 

Thus  it  is  plain  that  the  methods  of  Occultism,  though  in  the 
main  unchangeable,  has  yet  to  conform  to  altered  times  and  cir- 
cumstances. The  state  of  the  general  Society  of  England — quite 
different  from  that  of  India,  where  our  existence  is  a  matter  of 
common  and,  so  to  say,  of  inherent  belief  among  the  population, 
and  in  a  number  of  cases  of  positive  knowledge — requires  quite  a 
different  policy  in  the  presentation  of  Occult  Sciences.  The  only 
object  to  be  striven  for  is  the  amelioration  of  the  condition  of  man 
by  the  spread  of  truth  suited  to  the  various  stages  of  his  develop- 
ment and  that  of  the  country  he  inhabits  and  belongs  to.  Truth 
has  no  ear-mark  and  does  not  suffer  from  the  name  under  which  it 
is  promulgated — if  the  said  object  is  attained.  The  constitution 
of  the  "  L.   Lodge,  Theos.    Society,"  affords  ground  of  a  hope 


400  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

for  the  right  method  being  put  in  operation  before  long.  It  is 
well  known  that  a  magnet  would  cease  to  be  a  magnet  if  it's 
poles  ceased  to  be  antagonistic.  Heat  on  one  side  should  be 
met  by  frost  on  the  other,  and  the  resulting  temperature  will  be 
healthy  to  all  people.  Mrs.  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Sinnett  are  both 
useful,  both  needed  and  appreciated  by  our  revered  Chohan  and 
Master, — just  because  they  are  the  two  poles  calculated  to  keep 
the  whole  body  in  magnetic  harmony,  as  the  judicious  disposal 
of  both  will  make  an  excellent  middle  ground  to  be  attained  by 
no  other  means ;  one  correcting  and  equilibrising  the  other.  The 
direction  and  good  services  of  both  is  necessary  for  the  steady 
progress  of  the  Theosophical  Society  in  England.  But  both  can- 
not be  Presidents.  Mrs.  Kingsford 's  views  being  at  the  bottom 
(minus  the  details)  identical  with  those  of  Mr.  Sinnett  in  matters 
of  Occult  philosophy  and,  by  reason  of  their  association  with  the 
names  and  symbols  familiar  to  Christian  ears  and  eyes,  they  fall- 
ing in  better  than  those  of  Mr.  Sinnett  with  the  actual  bent  of 
English  national  intelligence  and  spirit  of  Conservatism.  Mrs.  K. 
is  thus  more  adapted  to  lead  the  movement  successfully  in  Eng- 
land. Therefore,  if  our  advice  and  desire  are  of  any  account  with 
the  Members  of  the  **  London  Lodge  " — she  will  have  to  occupy 
the  Presidential  Chair  for  the  ensuing  year,  at  any  rate.  Let  the 
members  under  her  leadership  resolutely  try  to  live  down  the  un- 
popularity which  all  esoteric  teaching  and  all  reform  are  sure  to 
attract  at  the  outset  and  they  will  succeed.  The  Society  will  be 
a  great  help  to,  and  a  great  power  in,  the  world,  as  well  as  a 
secure  channel  for  the  flow  of  its  President's  philanthropy.  Her 
constant  and  not  altogether  unsuccessful  strife  in  the  cause  of 
anti-vivisection  and  her  staunch  advocacy  of  vegetarianism  are 
alone  sufficient  to  entitle  her  to  the  consideration  of  our  Chohans 
as  of  all  true  Buddhists  and  Adwaitees — hence  our  Maha-Chohan's 
preference  in  this  direction.  But,  as  the  services  of  Mr.  Sinnett 
in  the  good  cause  are  great  indeed — far  greater,  so  far,  than  of 
any  Western  Theosophist — therefore,  a  new  arrangement  is  found 
advisable. 

It  seems  necessary  for  a  proper  study  and  correct  understand- 
ing of  our  Philosophy  and  the  benefit  of  those  whose  inclination 
leads  them  to  seek  esoteric  knowledge  from  the  Northern 
Buddhist  Source ;  and  in  order  that  such  teaching  should  not  be 
even  virtually  imposed  or  offered  to  those  Theosophists  who  may 
differ  from  our  views,  that  an  exclusive  group  composed  of  those 
members  who  desire  to  follow  absolutely  the  teachings  of  the 
school  to  which  we,  of  the  Tibetan  Brotherhood,  belong,  should 
be  formed  under  Mr.  Sinnett's  direction  and  within  the  "  London 
Lodge  T.S."  Such  is,  in  fact,  the  desire  of  the  Maha  Chohan. 
Our  last  year's  experience  amply  shows  the  danger  of  so  reck- 


THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  T.S.  401 

lessly  submittingf  our  sacred  doctrines  to  the  unprepared  world. 
We  expect,  therefore,  and  are  resolved  to  urge,  if  necessary  more 
caution  than  ever  from  our  followers  in  the  exposition  of  our 
secret  teachings.  Consequently  many  of  the  latter  which  Mr. 
Sinnett  and  his  fellow-students  may  from  time  to  time  receive 
from  us,  will  have  to  be  kept  entirely  secret  from  the  world — if 
they  would  have  us  give  them  our  help  in  that  direction. 

I  need  hardly  point  out  how  the  proposed  arrangement  is  cal- 
culated to  lead  to  a  harmonious  progress  of  the  **  L.L.  T.S."  It 
is  a  universally  admitted  fact  that  the  marvellous  success  of  the 
Theosophical  Society  in  India  is  due  entirely  to  its  principle  of 
wise  and  respectful  toleration  of  each  other's  opinions  and  beliefs. 
Not  even  the  President-Founder  has  the  right  directly  or  in- 
directly to  interfere  with  the  freedom  of  thought  of  the  humblest 
member,  least  of  all  to  seek  to  influence  his  personal  opinion.  It 
is  only  in  the  absence  of  this  generous  consideration,  that  even 
the  faintest  shadow  of  difference  arms  seekers  after  the  same 
truth,  otherwise  earnest  and  sincere,  with  the  scorpion-whip  of 
hatred  against  their  Brothers, — equally  sincere  and  earnest.  De- 
luded victims  of  distorted  truth,  they  forget,  or  never  knew,  that 
discord  is  the  harmony  of  the  Universe.  Thus  in  the  Theos. 
Society,  each  part,  as  in  the  glorious  fugues  of  the  immortal 
Mozart,  ceaselessly  chases  the  other  in  harmonious  discord  on  the 
paths^  of  eternal  Progress  to  meet  and  finally  blend  at  the 
threshold  of  the  pursued  goal  in  one  harmonious  whole,  the 
keynote  in  nature.  Absolute  Justice  makes  no  difference  be- 
tween the  many  and  the  few.  Therefore,  while  thanking  the 
majority  of  the  **  L.L."  Theosophists  for  their  **  loyalty  "  to  us 
their  invisible  teachers,  we  must  at  the  same  time,  remind  them 
that  their  President,  Mrs.  Kingsford,  is  loyal  and  true  also — ^to 
that  which  she  believes  to  be  the  Truth.  And,  as  she  is  thus  loyal 
and  true  to  her  convictions,  however  small  the  minority  that  may 
side  with  her  at  present,  the  majority  led  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  our 
representative  in  London,  cannot  with  justice  charge  her  with  the 
guilt,  which — since  she  has  emphatically  disclaimed  all  intention 
of  breaking  the  letter  or  the  Spirit  of  Article  VI  of  the  Rules  of 
the  Parent  Theos.  Society  (which  please  see  and  read) — is  one 
only  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  would  be  rather  too  severe.  Every 
Western  Theosophist  should  learn  and  remember,  especially  those 
of  them  who  would  be  our  followers — that  in  our  Brotherhood,  all 
personalities  sink  into  one  idea — abstract  right  and  absolute  prac- 
tical justice  for  all.  And  that,  though  we  may  not  say  with  the 
Christians,  **  return  good  for  evil  " — we  repeat  with  Confucius — 
'*  return  good  for  good,  for  evil — justice/*  Thus,  the  Theoso- 
phists of  Mrs.  K.'s  way  of  thinking, — were  they  even  to  oppose 
some  of  us  personally  to  the  bitter  end, — are  entitled  to  as  much 


402  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

respect  and  consideration  (so  long  as  they  are  sincere)  from  us 
and  their  fellow-members   of  opposite  views,    as  those  who  are 
ready  with  Mr.  Sinnett  to  follow  absolutely  but  our  special  teach- 
ing.    A  dutiful  regard  for  these  rules  in  life  will  always  promote 
the   best    interests    of    all    concerned.     It    is    necessary    for    the 
parallel  progress  of  the  groups  under  Mrs.   K.  and  Mr.   S.  that 
neither  should  interfere  with  the  beliefs  and  rights  of  the  other. 
And  it  is  seriously  expected  that  both  of  them  will  be  actuated  by 
an  earnest  and  sleepless  desire  to  respect  the  philosophical  inde- 
pendence of  each  other,  while  preserving  at  the  same  time  their 
unity  as  a  whole — namely  the  objects  of  the  Parent  Theos.  Society 
in  their  integrity — and  those  of  the  London  Lodge,  in  their  slight 
modification.     We  wish  the  London  Society  should  preserve  its 
harmony  in  division  like  the   Indian   Branches  where  the  repre- 
sentatives of  all  the  different  schools  of  Hinduism  seek  to  study 
Esoteric  Sciences   and  the  Wisdom   of  old,    without,    necessarily 
giving   up   for    it   their   respective   beliefs.     Each    Branch,    often 
members  of  the  same  branch — Christian  converts  included  in  some 
cases — study  esoteric  philosophy  each  in  his  own  way,  yet  always 
knitting    together    brotherly    hands    for    the    furtherance    of    the 
common  objects  of  the  Society.     To  carry  out  this  programme,  it 
is  desirable  that  the  *'  London  Lodge  "  should  be  administered  by, 
at  least,  fourteen  Councillors — one  half  openly  inclining  towards 
the   Christian    Esotericism   as   represented   by   Mrs.    K.,    and   the 
other  half  following  Buddhist  Esotericism  as  represented  by  Mr. 
S.  ;  all  important  business  to  be  transacted  by  majority  of  votes. 
We  are  well  aware  of  and  quite  alive  to  the  difficulties  of  such 
an  arrangement.     Yet,  it  seems  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to 
re-establish  the  lost  harmony.     The  constitution  of  the  "  London 
Lodge  **  has  to  be  amended  and  can  be  so  amended  if  the  mem- 
bers would  but  try ;  and  so  bring  about  more  strength  in  such 
friendly  division  than  enforced  unity. 

Unless,  therefore,  both  Mrs.  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Sinnett  agree 
to  disagree  in  details  and  work  in  strict  unison  for  the  chief 
objects  as  laid  down  in  the  Rules  of  the  Parent  Society,  we  can 
have  no  hand  in  the  future  development  and  progress  of  the 
London  Lodge. 

K.  H. 
December  7th,   1883, 
Mysore. 


THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  T.S.  403 

LETTER  No.  LXXXVI 

Received  January,   1884. 

GcxxJ  friend,  I  take  you  at  your  word.  In  one  of  your  recent 
letters  to  the  "  O.L. "  you  express  your  readiness  to  follow  my 
advice  in  almost  anything  I  may  ask  you.  Well — the  time  has 
come  to  prove  your  willingness.  And  since,  in  this  particular 
case,  I  myself  am  simply  carrying  out  the  wishes  of  my  Chohan, 
I  hope  you  will  not  experience  too  much  difficulty  in  sharing  my 
fate  by  doing — as  I  do. — **  Fascinating"  Mrs.  K.  has  to  remain 
President — j'usqu'a  nouvel  ordre.  Nor — can  I  conscientiously, — 
after  reading  her  apologetic  letter  to  H.P.B. — say  that  I  do  not 
side  with  her  in  much  she  has  to  say  in  her  excuse.  Of  course 
much  of  it  is — after-thought ;  still  her  very  eagerness  to  retain  her 
post  contains  good  hope  for  the  future  of  the  London  Lodge, 
especially  if  you  help  me  by  carrying  out  the  spirit  of  my  instruc- 
tions. Thus  the  London  Theos.  Soc.  will  be  no  more  **  a  tail  for 
her  to  wag"  at  her  own  sweet  pleasure  and  fancy,  but  she  will 
become  herself  part  and  parcel  of  that  **  tail  " — and,  the  more 
she  helps  to  wag  it — the  better  such  activity  for  your  Society. 
Minute  explanations  would  be  rather  too  long  and  tedious  a  job. 
Suffice  that  you  should  know  that  her  anti-vivisection  struggle 
and  her  strict  vegetarian  diet  have  won  entirely  over  to  her  side 
our  stern  Master.  He  cares  less  than  we  do  for  any  outward — or 
even  inward — expression  or  feeling  of  disrespect  to  the  **  Mahat- 
mas. ' '  Let  her  do  her  duty  by  the  Society,  be  true  to  her  prin- 
ciples and  all  the  rest  will  come  in  good  time.  She  is  very  young, 
and  her  personal  vanity  and  other  womanly  short-comings  are  to 
be  laid  at  the  door  of  Mr.  Maitland  and  the  Greek  chorus  of  her 
admirers. 

The  enclosed  paper  is  to  be  delivered  by  you  sealed  to  one  of  the 
Councillors  or  Fice-Presidents  of  your  Society — ^Mr.  C.  C.  Massey, 
I  believe,  would  be  the  best  fitted  person  for  the  task,  as  he  is  the 
sincere  friend  of  both  parties  concerned.  The  choice  is  left  to  your 
own  discretion  and  judgment,  however.  All  that  you  are  asked 
to  insist  upon  is  that  it  should  be  read  before  a  general  meeting 
composed  of  as  many  theosophists  as  you  can  gather,  and  at  the 
earliest  opportunity.  It  contains  and  carries  within  its  folds,  and 
characters  a  certain  occult  influence  that  ought  to  reach  as  many 
theosophists  as  possible.  What  it  is  you  may,  perhaps,  gather  here- 
after from  its  direct  and  indirect  effects.  Meanwhile — read  and  seal 
it ;  and  allow  no  one  to  put  the  indiscreet  question  whether  you  have 
taken  note  of  its  contents,  for  you  will  have  to  keep  the  knowledge 
secret.  In  case  the  condition  should  appear  to  you  dangerous, 
as  it  might  necessitate  a  denial  of  fact — ^better  leave  it  alone  and 


404  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

unread.  Fear  not,  I  am  there  to  watch  over  your  interests.  At 
all  events  the  programme  is  as  follows  :  the  memo  written  by 
your  humble  correspondent  must  be  read  to  the  Theosophists 
assembled  in  solemn  meeting-  and  preserved  in  the  Society's 
records.  It  contains  a  statement  of  our  views  in  regfard  to  the 
questions  raised  concerning  its  management  and  basis  of  work. 
Our  sympathy  with  it  will  depend  upon  the  carrying  out  of  the 
programme  therein  contained  and  laid  down  after  mature  thought. 

To  turn  to  a  few  of  your  philosophical  questions — (being  on  my 
way,  I  cannot  answer  them  all).  It  is  difficult  to  perceive  what 
relations  you  wish  to  establish  between  the  different  stages  of  sub- 
jectivity in  Deva  Chan  and  the  various  states  of  matter.  If  it  be 
supposed  that  in  Deva  Chan  the  Ego  passes  through  all  these 
states  of  matter,  then  the  answer  would  be  that  existence  in  the 
seventh  state  of  matter  is  Nirvana  and  not  Deva  Chanic  con- 
ditions. Humanity,  although  in  different  stages  of  development, 
yet  belongs  to  the  three  dimensional  condition  of  matter.  And 
there  is  no  reason  why  in  Deva  Chan  the  Ego  should  be  varying  its 
**  dimensions." 

Molecules  occupying  a  place  in  infinity  is  an  inconceivable  pro- 
position. Tlie  confusion  arises  out  of  the  Western  tendency  of 
putting  an  objective  construction  upon  what  is  purely  subjective. 
The  book  of  Khin-te  teaches  us  that  space  is  infinity  itself.  It  is 
formless,  immutable  and  absolute.  Like  the  human  mind,  which 
is  the  exhaustless  generator  of  ideas,  the  universal  mind  or  Space 
has  its  ideation  which  is  projected  into  objectivity  at  the  appointed 
time ;  but  space  itself  is  not  affected  thereby.  Even  your  Hamilton 
has  shown  that  infinity  can  never  be  conceived  by  any  series  of 
additions.  Whenever  you  talk  of  place  in  infinity,  you  dethrone 
infinity  and  degrade  its  absolute,  unconditional  character. 

What  has  the  number  of  incarnations  to  do  with  the  shrewd- 
ness, cleverness,  or  the  stupidity  of  an  individual?  A  strong 
craving  for  physical  life  may  lead  an  entity  through  a  number  of 
incarnations  and  yet  these  may  not  develop  its  higher  capacities. 
The  Law  of  Affinity  acts  through  the  inherent  Karmic  impulse  of 
the  Ego,  and  govern  its  future  existence.  Comprehending 
Darwin's  Law  of  Heredity  for  the  body,  it  is  not  difficult  to  per- 
ceive how  the  birth-seeking  Ego  may  be  attracted  at  the  time  of 
rebirth  to  a  body  bom  in  a  family  which  has  the  same  prop>ensities 
as  those  of  the  reincarnating  Entity. 

You  need  not  regret  that  my  restriction  should  include  Mr.  C.  C. 
Massey.  One  point  righted  and  explained  would  but  lead  to  other 
still  darker  points  ever  arising  in  his  suspicious,  restless  mind. 
He  is  a  bit  of  a  misanthrope  your  friend.  His  mind  is  clouded 
with  black  doubts,  and  his  psychological  state  is  pitiable.  All  the 
brighter  intentions  are  being  stifled,  his  Buddhic  (not  Buddhistic) 


THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  T.S.  405 

evolution  checked.  Take  care  for  him,  if  he  will  not — of  him- 
self !  The  prey  of  illusions  of  his  own  creation,  he  is  slipping* 
down  towards  a  deeper  depth  of  spiritual  misery,  and  it  is  possible 
that  he  may  seek  asylum  from  the  world  and  himself  within  the 
pale  of  a  theolog:y  which  he  would  once  have  passionately  scorned. 
Every  lawful  effort  has  been  tried  to  save  him,  especially  by  Olcott, 
whose  warm  brotherly  love  has  prompted  him  to  make  to  his  heart 
the  warmest  appeals — as  you  know.  Poor,  poor,  deluded  man  ! 
My  letters  are  written  by  H.P.B.,  and  he  has  no  doubt  I  gfot 
**  defrauded  Mr.  Kiddle's  "  ideas  out  of  her  head  I  But  let  him 
rest  as  he  is. 

Our  friend,  Samuel  Ward,  regrets  his  friend  Ellis's  discomfiture  ; 
it  should  concern  me  and  I  must  see,  I  suppose,  when  I  return 
if  a  pair  of  horns — the  **  coveted  horns  "  may  not  be  picked  up 
by  some  caravan,  were  dropped  naturally  by  the  animal.  Unless 
in  this  way,  **  Uncle  Sam  "  could  not  fairly  expect  me  to  help 
him  out  :  for  you  would  not  have  me  shoulder  a  rifle  and  leave 
•*  Esoteric  Buddhism  "  behind  me  at  the  foot  of  the  chamois- 
crags  ! 

I  am  sorry  you  took  the  trouble  of  posting  me  about  Bradlaugh. 
I  know  him  and  his  partner  well.  There  is  more  than  one  trait 
in  his  character  I  esteem  and  respect.  He  is  not  immoral ;  nor 
could  anything  that  might  be  said  against  or  for  him  by  Mrs.  K. 
or  even  yourself,  change  or  even  influence  my  opinion  of  both 
himself  and  Mrs.  Besant.  Yet  the  book  published  by  them — '*  The 
Fruits  of  Philosophy  ' '  is  infamous  and  highly  pernicious  in  its 
effects  whatever  and  however  beneficent  and  philanthropic  the 
objects  that  led  to  the  publication  of  the  work.  I  regret — very 
deeply, — my  dear  friend,  to  be  obliged  to  differ  widely  in  my 
views  upon  the  said  subject  from  you.  I  would  rather  avoid  the 
unpleasant  discussion.  As  usual,  H.P.B.  blundered  greatly  in 
rendering  what  she  was  told  to  say  to  Mrs.  K.,  but  on  the  whole 
she  gave  it  out  correctly.  I  have  not  read  the  work — nor  ever 
will ;  but  I  have  its  unclean  spirit  its  brutal  aura  before  me,  and 
I  say  again  in  my  sight  the  advices  offered  in  the  work  are 
abominable;  they  are  the  fruits  of  Sodom  and  Gommorah  rather 
than  of  Philosophy  the  very  name  of  which  it  degrades.  The 
sooner  we  leave  the  subject — the  better. 

And  now  I  have  to  go.  The  journey  before  me  is  long  and 
tedious  and  the  mission  nearly  hopeless.  Yet  some  good  will  be 
done. 

Yours  ever  sincerely, 

K.  H, 


4o6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 


LETTER  No.  LXXXVIP 

To  the  London  Lodge,  Theosophical  Society — Greeting. 

Since  the  telegrams  to  Mrs.  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Sinnett  and  my 
letter  from  Mysore  have  not  been  fully  understood,  I  was  ordered 
by  the  Maha-Chohan  to  advise  the  postponement  of  the  annual 
election,  so  as  to  avoid  anything  like  precipitancy  and  gain  time 
for  the  consideration  of  this  letter.  After  the  cold  reception  given 
by  the  members  of  the  L.L.T.S.  on  December  the  i6th  to  the 
proposal  contained  on  page  29  of  the  printed  and  confidential 
circular  of  Mrs.  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Maitland  (in  the  latter' s 
Remarks  and  Propositions),  namely  the  necessity  of  forming  a  dis- 
tinct body  or  group  within  the  general  group  of  the  L.L.T.S. — 
which  proposition,  if  not  identical  in  its  suggested  practical 
method,  is  so  in  substance  with  that  thrown  out  by  me  in  my 
letter  December  7th — on  the  one  hand,  and  certain  misconceptions, 
false  hopes  and  displeasure  on  the  other — the  postponement  was 
found  absolutely  necessary. 

As  implied  in  my  last,  at  the  date  of  the  above  communication 
the  burning  question  was  not  as  to  the  literal  or  allegorical 
character  of  Mr.  Sinnett 's  latest  work  but  the  loyalty  or  disloyalty 
of  your  President  and  her  co-worker  towards  ourselves,  whom 
many  of  you  have  seen  fit  to  choose  as  your  esoteric  Teachers. 
From  such  a  standpoint,  and  no  other  complaint  having  been 
lodged  at  that  time  (October  21st),  an  imperative  necessity  arose 
to  maintain,  in  the  wise  words  of  Mrs.  Kingsford — themselves  but 
the  echo  of  the  Tathagatha's  own  voice — the  policy  of  dissociating 
'*  the  authority  of  names,  whether  in  the  past  or  in  the  present, 
from  abstract  principles."  (Inaugural  Address  of  the  President, 
October  21st,  1883).  The  question  involved  being  that  of  Justice, 
Mrs.  Kingsford' s  ignorance  of  our  real  character,  our  doctrines 
and  status  (underlying  as  they  do  all  her  uncomplimentary  remarks 
in  connection  with  the  present  writer  and  his  colleagues)  made 
them  of  not  even  the  weight  of  a  flake  of  cotton  in  the  matter 
of  her  re-election.  This,  coupled  with  her  own  intrinsic  and 
individual  worth  and  her  charity  to  the  poor  brutes  as  also  the 
fact  of  her  asking  Madam  H.  P.  Blavatsky  to  **  submit  my  (her) 
letter  to  Koot-Hoomi  " — made  her  former  course  the  prop>er  one. 

And  now,  the  development  of  events  since  the  despatch  of  the 
telegrams  in  question,  will  have  perhaps  suggested  to  some  of 
you  the  true  reason  for  so  unusual,  not  to  say  arbitrary,  an  action 
as  an  interference  with  the  reserved  elective  rights  of  a  Branch. 

1  The  envelope  of  this  letter  has  a  London  postmark  with  the  date  Feb. 
7th,  1884.  The  postscript  is  in  K.H.'s  handwriting,  but  the  remainder  is  not. 
—Ed. 


THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  T.S.  407 

Time  often   neutralizes  the  gravest  evils  by  hastening  a   crisis. 
Moreover,  and  once  more  in  the  language  of  her  address, — (your 
President  referring  to  a  private  letter  of  mine  to  Mr.  Ward,  which 
she  had  read,  wherein  I  wrote,  as  she  thinks)  "  in  evident  ignor- 
ance of  the  facts,  and  this  is  not  wonderful  " — ^we  may  be  sup- 
posed to  have  been  likewise  ignorant  of  the  forthcoming  printed 
**  Letter,  private  and  confidential  "  circulated  among  the  members 
of  the  L.L.T.S.  on  December  the  i6th.      Thus  she  need  hardly  be 
surprised  to  find  that  this  **  Letter  "  has  greatly  altered  the  case. 
Always  on  the  strength  of  the  principle  of  impartial  justice  involved, 
we  find  ourselves  obliged  not  to  ratify  literally  our  decision  as  to  her 
re-election  but  to  add  to  it  certain  clauses  and  make  it  henceforth 
impossible  for   the    President  and    members  to  misconceive   our 
mutual  position.       Far  from  our  thoughts  may  it  ever  be  to  erect 
a  new  hierachy  for  the  future  oppression  of  a  priest-ridden  world. 
As  it  was  our  wish  then  to  signify  to  you  that  one  could  be  both 
an  active  and  useful  member  of  the  Society  without  inscribing  him- 
self our  follower  or  co-religionist,   so  is  it  now.        But  it  is  just 
because  the  principle  has  to  work  both  ways,  that  (our  personal 
desire  for  her  re-election  notwithstanding)  we  feel  and  would  have 
it  known  that  we  have  no  right  to  influence  the  free  will  of  the 
members  in  this  or  any  other  matter.     Such  interference  would  be 
in   flagrant  contradiction  with  the  basic  laws  of  esotericism  that 
personal  psychic  growth  accompanies  pari  passu  the  development 
of  individual  effort,  and  is  the  evidence  of  acquired  personal  merit. 
Moreover,   a   great  discrepancy  is   observable   in   the  reports   to 
us    of    the   effects    produced   by   the    '*  Kingsford — Sinnett    inci- 
dent "  upon  the  members.      In  the  face  of  this  I  find  it  impossible 
to  accede  to  Mrs.  Kingsford's  several  desires  as  expressed  in  her 
letter  to  Madam  Blavatsky.       If  Mr.  Massey  and  Mr.  Ward  give 
the  lady  their  **  entire  approbation  and  sympathy  "  a  very  large 
majority  of  members  seem  to  give  their's  to  Mr.  Sinnett.      There- 
fore, were  I  to  act  up  to  Mr.  Massey 's  suggestion  as  reported  by 
Mrs.  Kingsford  in  her  letter  of  December  20th  in  which  she  gives 
as  his  opinion  that  '*  a  word  only  from  Mahatma  K.H.  would  be 
quite  sufficient  to  reconcile  Mr.  Sinnett  to  my  (the  lady's)  view  of 
the  matter  and  to  establish  between  him  and  the  Lodge  the  most 
perfect    cordiality    and    understanding." — I    would    be    actually 
making  myself  the  quasi  Pope  she  deprecates  and  an  unjust  and 
an  arbitrary  one  besides.       I  would  then  truly  lay  myself  and  Mr. 
Sinnett  open  to  just  criticism,  even  more  severe  than  that  found 
in  her  inaugural  address,   in   the  several    remarkable   utterances 
wherein  she  affirms  her  "  mistrust  of  all  appeals  to  authority." 
One  who  has  just  said  :  "  I  look  with  sorrow  and  concern  on  the 
growing  tendency  of  the  Theosophical  Society  to  introduce  into  its 
methods — ^the  exaggerated  veneration  for  persons   and  personal 


4o8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

authority — ^the  veritable  outcome  of  which  is  a  mere  servile  hero- 
worship. — There  is  far  too  much  talk  among  us  about  the  Adepts 
our  *  Masters  '  and  the  like. — Too  much  capital  is  made  of  their 
sayings  and  doings,  etc." — should  not  have  asked  me  for  such 
interference  even  though  sure  that  my  faithful  friend,  Mr.  Sinnett, 
would  not  have  resented  it.  Were  I  to  have  acceded  to  the  lady's 
desire  to  apfK>int  her  as  the  '*  apK>stle  of  Eastern  and  Western 
Esotericism  "  and  try  to  force  her  election  on  even  one  unwilling 
member,  and  taking  advantage  of  Mr.  Sinnett' s  never  wavering 
warm  regard  for  myself,  influence  his  future  attitude  toward  her- 
self and  the  movement,  I  would  then  indeed  deserve  to  be  taunted 
as  "  the  oracle  of  the  Theosophists  "  and  classed  with  *'  Jo  Smith 
of  the  Latter-day-Saints,  and  Thomas  Lake  Harris,"  the 
transcendental  misegenist  of  two  worlds.  I  cannot  believe  that  one 
who  maintained  only  a  few  days  previously  that  *'  our  wise  and 
truly  theosophical  course  is  not  to  set  up  new  Popes  and  proclaim 
new  Lords  and  Masters  " — should  now  in  her  own  case  seek  the 
protection  and  evoke  the  aid  and  **  authority,"  which  could  only 
assert  itself  upon  the  hypothesis  of  a  blind  surrender  of  private 
judgment.  And,  as  I  prefer  to  attribute  Mrs.  Kingsford's  desire 
to  her  ignorance  of  the  real  feeling  of  some  of  her  colleagues,  the 
nature  of  which  is  perhaps  disguised  now  under  the  polished  in- 
sincerities of  civilized  Western  life, — I  would  recommend  her  and 
others  interested  in  the  present  dispute  to  appeal  to  the  decision 
of  the  ballot,  by  which  all  may  express  their  wishes  without  invidi- 
ously exposing  themselves  to  the  charge  of  discourtesy.  This 
'would  be  but  to  take  advantage  of  the  privilege  given  to  them 
at  the  close  of  Art.  3  of  their  Rides. 

And  now  for  another  consideration.  However  little  we  might 
care  for  personal  subserviency  to  us,  the  accepted  leaders  of  the 
Founders  of  the  Parent  Theososphical  Society,  we  can  never 
approve  or  tolerate  disloyalty  in  any  member  of  whatsoever 
Branch  to  the  fundamental  principles  represented  by  the  Parent 
Organization.  The  rules  of  the  mother-body  must  be  lived  up  to 
by  those  composing  its  Branches ;  provided  of  course,  that  they  do 
not  transcend  the  three  declared  objects  of  the  organization.  The 
experience  of  the  Parent  Society  proves  that  the  usefulness  of  a 
Branch  very  largely,  if  not  entirely,  depends  up>on  the  loyalt}s 
discretion  and  zeal  of  its  President  and  Secretary ;  however  much 
their  colleagues  may  do  to  assist  them,  the  efficient  activity  of 
their  group  develops  proportionately  with  that  of  those  officers. 

In  conclusion  I  must  repeat  that  it  is  to  prevent  action  in  the 
matter  of  Mrs.  Kingsford's  re-election  until  the  effacement  of  any 
misapprehension  produced  by  my  previous  communications,  that 
I  have  advised  the  annual  election  of  office-bearers  of  your  Lodge 
to  stand  over  until  the  arrival  of  the  present  letter.      Moreover,  as 


THE  LONDON  LODGE  OF  THE  T.S.  409 

the  President-Founder — who  knows  our  mind  and  has  our  con- 
fidence— is  expected  to  be  in  England  in  a  very  short  time,  we  do 
not  see  the  necessity  of  taking  any  hasty  steps  in  the  matter.  He 
has  been  given  such  a  general  view  of  the  situation  as  will  enable 
him  to  deal  impartially  with  this  case  and  others  upon  his  arrival, 
as  the  representative  at  once  of  his  Master  and  of  the  best  interests 
of  the  Society. 

(By  order  of  my  Most  Venerated 

Guru  Deva  Mahatma  K Y 

It  would  be  wise  to  read  this  letter  to  the  members — including 
Mrs.  Kingsford — before  the  new  day  of  election.  I  would  have 
you  prevent,  if  possible,  another  **coup  de  theatre."  However 
natural  such  sensational  surprises  may  be  in  politics  when  parties 
are  composed  of  devotees  whose  souls  rejoice  in  party  intrigue, 
they  are  very  painful  to  witness  in  an  Association  of  persons  who 
profess  to  give  themselves  up  to  the  most  solemn  questions  affect- 
ing human  interest.  Let  meaner  natures  wrangle  if  they  will ;  the 
wise  compound  their  differences  in  a  mutually  forbearing  spirit. 

K.  H. 

Mr.  Maitland's  Remarks  and  Observations  on  Esoteric 
Buddhism  are  fully  answered  by  Subba  Row  and  another  still 
greater  scholar.  They  will  be  sent  next  week  in  pamphlet  form, 
and  Mr.  Sinnett  asked  to  distribute  them  among  those  members 
esf>ecially  who  have  been  affected  by  the  criticism. 


1   In  the  original  a  triangle  with  a  point  in  the  centre  appears  here.     The 
remainder  of  the  letter  is  in  K.H.'s  handwriting, — Ed. 


SECTION  VI 
SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA 

LETTER  No.  LXXXVIII 

My  g^ood  friend — it  is  very  easy  for  us  to  give  phenomental 
proofs  when  we  have  necessary  conditions.  For  instance — • 
Olcott's  magnetism  after  six  years  of  purification  is  intensely 
sympathetic  with  ours — physically  and  morally  is  constantly 
becoming  more  and  more  so.  Damodar  and  Bhavani  Rao  being 
congenitally  sympathetic  their  auras  help — instead  of  repelling  and 
impeding  phenomenal  experiments.  After  a  time  you  may  become 
so — it  depends  on  yourself.  To  force  phenomena  in  the  presence 
of  difficulties  magnetic  and  other  is  forbidden.  As  strictly  as  for 
a  bank  cashier  to  disburse  money  which  is  only  entrusted  to  him. 
Mr.  Hume  cannot  comprehend  this.  And  therefore  is  "  indig- 
nant ' '  that  the  various  tests  he  has  secretly  prepared  for  us  have 
all  failed.  They  demanded  a  tenfold  expenditure  of  power  since 
he  surrounded  them  with  an  aura  not  of  the  purest — that  of  mis- 
trust, anger,  and  anticipated  mockery.  Even  to  do  this  much 
for  you  so  far  from  the  Headquarters  would  be  impossible  but  for 
the  magnetisms  O.  and  B.  R.  have  brought  with  them — and  I  could 
do  no  more. 

K.  H. 
P.S. — Perhaps,  tho'  I   could  put   down   for  you   to-day's  date 
March  the  nth,  1882. 


LETTER  No.  LXXXIX 

Received  Allahabad  March  24th,   1882. 

Private. 
Good  friend,  I  will  not,  in  sending  forth  the  letter,  reiterate 
again  the  many  remarks  that  might  be  made  respecting  the  various 
objections  which  we  have  the  right  to  raise  against  Spiritual 
phenomena  and  its  mediums.  We  have  done  our  duty ;  and, 
because  the  voice  of  truth  came  thro*  a  channel  which  few  liked, 
it  was  pronounced  as  false,  and  along  with  it — Occultism.  The 
time  has  gone  by  to  argue,  and  the  hour  when  it  will  be  proved 

410 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  411 

to  the  world  that  Occult  Science  instead  of  being,  in  the  words 
of  Dr.  R.  Chambers — '*  a  superstition  itself,"  as  they  may  be 
disposed  to  think  it,  will  be  foundl  the  explanation  and  the 
extinguisher  of  all  superstitions — is  nearby.  For  reasons  that 
you  will  appreciate,  though  at  first  you  will  be  inclined  to  consider 
(in  regard  to  yourself)  unjust.  I  am  determined  to  do  that,  for 
once,  which  hitherto  I  have  never  done;  namely,  to  personate 
myself  under  another  form,  and,  perhaps — character.  Therefore, 
you  need  not  grudge  Eglington  the  pleasure  of  seeing  me  per- 
sonally, to  talk  with  me,  and! — be  "  dumfounded  "  by  me  and 
with  the  result  of  my  visit  to  him,  on  board,  "  The  Vega."  This 
will  be  done  between  the  21st  and  the  22nd  of  this  month  and, 
when  you  read  this  letter,  will  be  a  **  vision  of  the  past," — if  Olcott 
sends  to  you  the  letter  to-day. 

*  *  All  things  being  are  in  mystery ;  we  expound  mysteries  by 
mysteries  " — you  may  perhaps  say.  Well,  well ;  to  you  as  to  one 
forewarned  it  will  not  be  one  ;  since,  for  several  reasons — one  more 
plausible  than  the  other — I  take  you  into  my  confidence.  One  of 
them  is, — to  save  you  a  feeling  of  involuntary  envy  (the  word  is 
queer  isn't  it?)  when  you  hear  of  it.  As  he  will  see  somebody 
quite  different  from  the  real  K.H.,  though  it  will  still  be  K.H. — 
you  need  not  feel  like  one  wronged  by  your  trans-himalayan  friend. 
Another  reason  is,  to  save  the  poor  fellow  from  the  suspicion  of 
boasting;  the  third  and  chief  est,  though  neither  least  nor  last,  is, 
that  theosophy  and  its  adherents  have  to  be  vindicated  at  last. 
Eglington  is  going  home;  and,  were  he  upon  his  return  to  know 
nothing  of  the  Brothers,  there  would  be  a  sore  day  of  trial  for 
poor  old  H.P.B.  and  H.S.O.  Mr.  Hume,  twitted  us  for  not 
appearing  to  Eglington.  He  chuckled  and  defied  us  to  do  it 
before  Fern  and  others.  For  reasons  which  he  may  or  may  not 
be  able  to  appreciate — but  that  you  will — ^we  could  not  or  rather 
would  not  do  so  as  long  as  E.  was  in  India.  No  less  had  we  very 
good  reasons  to  forbid  H.P.B.  to  either  correspond  with  him,  or 
take  too  much  notice  of  him  in  the  Theosophist.  But  now  that 
he  is  gone,  and  will  be  on  the  22nd,  hundreds  of  miles  away  at 
sea ;  and  that  no  suspicion  of  fraud  can  be  brought  against  either 
of  them,  the  time  for  the  experiment  has  come.  He  thinks  of 
putting  her  to  test — he  will  be  tested  himself. 

Thus,  my  faithful  friend  and  supporter,  keep  yourself  prepared. 
As  I  will  recommend  Eglington  to  recommend  in  his  turn,  to  Mrs. 
Gordon  discretion  and  that  the  good^  lady  may  feel  inclined  to 
carry  it  on  too  far  and  take  it  a  la  lettre,  I  furnish  you  before- 
hand with  a  hull  for  her,  calculated  to  unseal  her  lips. 

Now  for  Mr.  Hume.  He  has  worked  for  us,  and  is  certainly 
entitled  to  our  consideration — so  far.  I  would  fain  have  written 
to  him  myself,  but  that  the  sight  of  my  familiar  characters  may 


412  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

produce  a  diversion  in  his  feelings — for  the  worse — before  he  goes 
to  the  trouble  of  reading  what  I  have  to  say.  Will  you  kindly 
undertake  the  dielicate  task  of  notifying  him  of  what  I  now  write 
to  you?  Tell  him  that  there  are  persons — enemies — ^who  are 
anxious  to  catch  the  **  old  lady  "  at  cheating,  to  entrap  her,  so  to 
say,  and  that  for  that  very  reason  I  am  determined  to  settle  the 
question  and  have  it  once  for  ever  at  rest.  Say  to  him  that 
profiting  by  his  suggestion  and  advice  I, — K.H.,  will  appear  to 
Eglington  in  propria  persona  as  in  actu  at  sea,  between  the  21 
and  22  of  this  month ;  and  that,  if  successful  in  bringing  the  rebel 
who  denies  the  **  Brothers  "  to  his  senses,  Mrs.  Gordon  and  con- 
sort— will  be  notified  of  the  fact  immediately.  That's  all.  We 
have,  waited  on  purpose  to  produce  our  experiment  until  his 
departure,  and  now — we  mean  to  act. 

Yours  ever, 

K.  H. 
Till  the  25th  of  March,  Mr.  Sinnett  is  expected  to  keep  his  lips 
closed  as  they  will  be  in  death — three  score  and  ten  hence.  Not  a 
Soidy  but  Mrs.  S.,  your  good  lady,  must  know  one  word  of  this 
letter.  This  I  expect  of  your  friendship,  and  now  put  it  to  test. 
To  Mr.  Hume — you  may  write  just  now,  so  that  the  letter  might 
be  received  by  him  on  the  24th,  in  the  afternoon.  Your  future 
depends  on  this, — your  silence. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.   XC^ 

University  College,   London,  W.C., 

November  26th,   '81. 
My  dear  Sinnett, 

I  ought  to  have  answered  your  letter  before  this,  but  deferred 
doing  so  till  I  had  had  the  pleasure  of  a  conversation  with  Mrs. 
Sinnett.  This  I  have  had,  and  greatly  to  my  enjoyment.  She  is, 
as  you  led  me  to  expect,  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  reality  of 
what  she  has  seen  and  heard.  Like  me,  she  does  not  know  what 
to  make  of  the  last  departure,  I  mean  in  respect  of  my  spirit- 
experiences.  I  really  do  not  know  what  to  say  about  it.  There 
is  no  way  of  harmonizing  facts  with  the  claim  made  :  and  to  your 
belief  that  *  The  Brothers  cannot  be  ignorant  .  .  .  cannot  be 
mistaken  '  ?  I  can  only  reply  that  they  most  undoubtedly  are 
both   in   respect  of   me.^     This,    however,    would    merely   be    my 

1  K.H.'s  Comments  on  this  letter  are  written  in  ink  on  the  original,  and 
are  here  printed  in  bold  type.  Unless  there  is  a  footnote  to  the  contrary  italics 
indicate  that  the  passage  has  been  underlined  by  K.H. — Ed. 

2  This  passage  was  underlined  by  S.  Moses. — Ed. 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  413 

opinion,  were  it  not  that  I  have  an  unbroken  chain  of  documentary 
and  other  evidence  extending  in  absolute  sequence  from  the  first 
time  Imperator  appeared  down  to  yesterday.  These  are  all  dated 
communications,  notes,  and  records  which  speak  for  themselves, 
and  which  in  substance  can  be  attested  by  the  knowledge  of  my 
friends  who  have  been  concerned  with  me  all  thro'  this  matter. 

When  the  old  lady  first  hinted  at  some  connexion  between  the 
**  Lodge  "  and  me,  I  entered  at  once  into  the  thing  with 
Imperator  and  put  the  case  over  and  over  again.  Here  is  one 
record  which  I  transcribe.  Dec.  24,  1876.  **  I  asked  some 
questions  respecting  a  letter  from  H.P.B.  in  which  she  says  in 
reply  to  one  of  mine — *  If  you  are  profoundly  certain  that  I  have 
not  understood  you,  both  your  intuition  and  mediumship  have 
failed  you.  ...  I  never  said  that  you  had  mistaken  Imperator 
for  another  spirit.  He  is  not  to  be  mistaken,  once  that  he  is 
known.  He  knows  and  his  name  be  blessed  for  ever.  You  want 
objective  proof  of  the  Lodge.  Have  you  not  Imperator  and  can 
you  not  ask  him  whether  I  speak  the  truth?  ' 

To  this  the  answer  written  was  long  and  precise.  Among 
other  things  is  this  : — (The  first  person  plural  is  always  used 
by  I.)     Why? 

"  We  have  already  told  you  that  your  American  friends  under- 
stand neither  your  character,  nor  your  training,  nor  your  spiritual 
experiences.  So  far,  from  your  Intuition  having  failed  you,  it 
has  protected  you.  We  are  not  able  to  say  how  (  ! )  far  any  with 
whom  your  correspondent  is  in  communication  can  give  her  a  cor- 
rect account  of  you.  It  is  doubtful,  so  far  as  we  know  :  though 
some  have  the  power  as  Magus.  But  even  he  does  not  under- 
stand. (  !  !)  His  work  is  other  than  ours  and  he  is  not  concerned 
with  your  inner  life.  //  any  have  the  power,  they  have  not  been 
willing  to  exercise  it.  We  do  not  understand  whether  it  is  pre- 
tended  that  we  ourselves  have  given  any  information.  It  seems 
that  the  hint  is  conveyed  without  direct  statement.  We  may  say 
at  once  clearly  that  we  have  at  no  time  held  any  intercourse  with 
your  friend  on  the  subject.  She  does  not  know  us  in  any  way, 
and  we  know  nothing  of  this  Lodge  or  Brotherhood.*'     . 

I  will  try  one  more  honest  medium — Eglington,  when  he  is 
gone;  and  see  what  comes  of  it.  I  will  do  so  much  for  the 
Society. 

(As  to  my  mistaking  a  personating  spirit  for  Imperator,  it  was 
said) 

"  Assuredly  you  would  not  mistake  any  other  spirit  for  us.  It 
would  be  impossible.  We  are  what  we  have  revealed  ourselves 
to  you  :  no  other ;  and  our  name  and  presence  could  not  be  taken 

28 


414  .       THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

by  any  other.  We  have  been  permanently  your  Guardian,  and 
no  other  takes  our  place.'*  No;  the  6th  principle  cannot  be 
shifted. 

And  so  on  quite  unmistakeably.  I  may  say  here  that  Imperator 
stated  when  he  first  came  to  me,  and  many  times  subsequently 
that  he  had  been  with  me;  all  my  life,  tho'  I  was  not  conscious  of 
his  presence,  till  he  revealed  it— NOT  at  Mt.  Athos  most 
surely!? — but  in  quite  another  place  and  way.  The  coherent 
development  of  my  mediumship  has  been  uninterrupted.  There 
is  no  lacuna.  Now  objective  mediumship  is  gone,  and  my  inner 
spirit-sense  is  opened.  Only  yesterday  I  sought  and  got  from 
Imper.  who  was  clearly  visible  and  audible  to  me*  exact  and  pre- 
cise renewal  of  what  he  has  so  often  repeated  that  I  am  ashamed 
to  seek  a  repetition  of  his  assurance.  Whatever  may  be  the 
explanation,  rest  assured  without  room  for  doubt  that  not  only  is 
he  not  a  Brother,  hut  that  he  knows  nothing  whatever  of  any  such 
beings,     (i)* 

Your  warning  as  to  my  being  on  the  wrong  scent  if  I  supposed 
this  were  a  made  up  story  of  the  Old  Lady's  is  heeded,  one  must 
entertain  every  sort  of  theory  to  account  for  such  a  thing  :  but  I 
should  not  have  been  found  for  years  defending  her  against  every 
kind  of  calumny  if  I  thought  her  capable  of  a  mere  vulgar  fraud. 

It  will  not,  however,  escape  your  critical  mind  that  an  allega- 
tion such  as  this  confronted  by  such  plain  and  perfect  testimony 
as  I  bring,  must  be  capable  of  some  sort  of  proof,  if  it  is  to  be 
seriously  entertained.  It  is  unfortunately  the  fact  that  not  only 
is  the  claim  incompatible  with  all  the  facts ;  but  the  alleged  facts 
put  forward  are  just  those,  and  only  those,  made  known  by  me  : 
and  the  guesses  made  are  so  ludicrously  wide  of  truth — as  can  be 
shown  by  evidence  not  resting  on  me  alone — that  it  is  plain  they 
are  mere  shots. 

That  is  a  destructive  criticism  from  the  negative  side.  Now 
what  positive  proof  is  produced?  None.  Can  any  be  given? 
This  Brother  who  cast  his  eye  on  me  at  Mt.  Athos  and  assumed 
the  style  and  title  of  Imperator.  What  did  he  ever  say  to  me  or 
tell  me?  When  and  where  did  he  appear,  and  what  proof  can 
he  give  of  the  fact?  During  a  long  intercourse  such  as  he  claims 
he  can  surely  produce  some  positive  evidence  to  rebut  the  pre- 
sumption drawn  above. 

If  not  any  sane  person  would  know  what  conclusion  to  draw. 

Pardon  me  for  pursuing  this  subject  at  length.  I  see  in  fact 
that  I  am  come  to  a  place  where  two  ways  meet  :  and  I  sadly  fear 
that  Fragments  of  Occult  Truth  show  that  Spiritualism  and 
Occultism   are   incompatible.     I   should  be  heartily   sorry  if  you 

*  See  K.H.'s  comment  in  bold  type  post. — Ed. 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  415 

were  to  waste  your  time  and  force  over  anything  that  cannot  found 
itself  demonstrably  on  Truth.  Hence  my  desire  to  have  this 
raked  out. 

Otherwise   I    should   dismiss  it  with  much  contempt.     As  you 
say  of  the  Old  Lady  "  just  consider  the  opportunities  I  have  had 
of  formingf  an  opinion.'* 
Hearty  good  wishes, 

Yours  ever, 

W.  Stainton  Moses. 

(I)  A  Brother?  Does  he  or  even  yourself  know  what  is 
understood  by  the  name  of  Brother?  Does  he  know  what  we 
mean  by  Dhyan  Chohans  or  Planetary  Spirits,  by  the  disem- 
bodied and  embodied  Iha?  By — but  it  is  and  must  remain  yet 
for  some  time  a  mere  vexation  of  spirit  for  you  all.  My  letter 
is  private.  You  may  use  the  arguments  but  not  my  authority 
or  name.  It  will  be  all  explained  to  you  rest  assured.  A  living 
Brother  may  show  himself  and  be  de  facto  ignorant  of  many 
things.  But  a  spirit,  an  omniscient  Planetary  show  himself  so 
completely  ignorant  of  what  is  going  round  him  :  most  extra- 
ordinary. 

*  So  was  Madme.  LebendorflF  to  the  Russian  child  medium. 
.  .  .  So  is  Jesus  and  John  the  Baptist  to  Edward  Maitland; 
as  true  and  as  honest  and  sincere  as  S.M.;  though  neither  knew 
the  other  John  the  Baptist  never  having  heard  of  Jesus  who  is 
a  spiritual  abstraction  and  no  living  man  of  that  epoch.  And 
does  not  E.  Maitland  set  Hermes  the  first  and  second  and 
Elijah,  etc.  Finally  does  not  Mrs.  Kingsford  feel  as  sure  as 
S.M.  with  regard  to  4-  that  she  saw  and  conversed  with  God! ! 
And  that  but  a  few  evenings  after  she  had  talked  with,  and 
received  a  written  communication  from  the  Spirit  of  a  dog? 
Read,  read  Maitland*s  Soul,  etc.,  once  more,  my  friend,  see 
pp.  180,  194,  239,  240,  and  267-8-9,  etc.  And  who  purer  or 
more  truthful  than  that  woman  or  Maitland  \  Mystery,  mystery 
will  you  exclaim.  Ignorance  we  answer;  the  creation  of  that 
we  believe  in  and  want  to  see. 


LETTER  No.   XCIa 

Received  Allahabad,  cold  weather,   1882-83. 

Read  the  enclosed  from  C.C.M.  ;  summon  to  your  recollection, 
and  then  tell  Sinnett  the  whole  truth  about  the  message  which  I 
gave    you    in    London    about    the    ;^ioo    in    Mrs.    Billing's    and 


4i6  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Upasika's  presence.  Do  not  forget  to  state  the  conditions  under 
which  I  spoke.  Do  not  let  H.P.B.  see  C.C.M.'s  letter  but  return 
it  to  Allahabad  with  your  remarks. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XCIb 

I  got  out  the  letters  of  C.C.M.  and  yourself  and  gave  the 
former  to  Mr.  Olcott  to  answer.  Thus  one  half  of  the  "  damag- 
ing '*  accusation  is  disposed  of  and  explained  away  naturally 
enough.  Poor  woman  !  Incessantly  and  intensely  engrossed 
with  one  ever  working  thought — the  cause  and  Society — even  her 
carelessness  and  lack  of  memory,  her  forgetfulness  and  distrac- 
tion are  viewed  in  the  light  of  criminal  acts.  I  have  now  again 
**  osmosed  "  his  answer  to  return  it  with  a  few  more  words  of 
explanation  that  should  come  from  me. 

The  deduction  of  Mr.  Massey  that  **  the  adept  foresight  was 
not  available  "  in  sundry  noted  cases  of  theosophical  failure  is  but 
the  restatement  of  the  old  error  that  the  selection  of  members  an<l 
the  actions  of  Founders  and  Chelas  are  controlled  by  us  !  This 
has  been  often  denied,  and — as  I  believe — sufficiently  explained 
to  you  in  my  Darjeeling  letter,  but  objectors  cling  to  their  theory 
despite  all.  We  have  no  concern  with,  nor  do  we  guide  the  events 
generally :  yet  take  the  series  of  names  he  quotes  and  see  that  each 
man  was  a  useful  factor  toward  producing  the  net  result.  Hurry- 
Chund  drew  the  party  to  Bombay — although  they  had  prepared  to 
go  to  Madras,  which  would  have  been  fatal  at  that  stage  of  the 
Theosophical  movement ;  Wimbridge  and  Miss  Bates  gave  an 
English  complexion  to  the  party  and  caused  from  the  first  much 
good  by  causing  a  bitter  journalistic  assault  upon  the  Founders 
which  brought  on  reaction ;  Dayanand  stamped  the  movement 
with  the  impress  of  Aryan  nationality ;  and  lastly  Mr.  Hume — who 
is  already  the  secret  and  may  well  become  the  open  foe  of  the 
cause — has  aided  it  greatly  by  his  influence  and  will  promote  it 
more  despite  himself,  by  the  ulterior  results  of  his  defection.  In 
each  instance  the  individual  traitor  and  enemy  was  given  his 
chance,  and  but  for  his  moral  obliquity  might  have  derived  incal- 
culable good  from  it  to  his  personal  Karma. 

Mrs.  Billing  is — a  medium,  and  when  that  is  said  all  is  said. 
Except  this,  that  among  mediums  she  is  the  most  honest  if  not 
the  best.  Has  Mr.  Massey  seen  her  answer  to  Mrs.  Simpson, 
the  Boston  medium  that  the  questions — very  compromising  no 
doubt   for    the    New    England   prophetess    and    Seer — should    be 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  417 

brought  forward  as  evidence  of  her  guilt?  Why — if  honest  has 
she  not  exposed  pro  bono  publico  all  such  false  mediums? — may 
be  the  question  asked.  She  tried  to  warn  her  friends  repeatedly; 
result  ;  "  friends  "  fell  off  and  she  herself  was  regarded  in  the 
light  of  a  slanderer,  a  **  Judas."  She  tried  to  do  so,  indirectly, 
in  the  case  of  Miss  Cook  (junior).  Ask  Mr.  Massey  to  recollect 
what  were  his  feelings  in  1879,  ^^  the  time  he  was  investigating 
the  materialization  phenomena  of  that  young  lady, — when  told  by 
Mrs.  Billing — guardedly,  and  by  H.P.B.,  bluntly,  that  he  was 
mistaking  a  piece  of  white  muslin  for  a  "  spirit."  In  your  world 
of  maya  and  kaleidoscopic  change  of  feeling — truth  is  an  article 
rarely  wanted  in  the  market ;  it  has  its  seasons  and  very  short 
ones.  The  woman  has  more  sterling  virtues  and  honesty  in  her 
little  finger  than  many  of  the  never  distrusted  mediums  put  to- 
gether. She  has  been  a  loyal  member  of  the  Society  from  the 
time  she  joined  it,  and  her  rooms  in  New  York  are  the  rallying 
centre  where  our  theosophists  meet.  Her  loyalty,  moreover,  is 
one  that  cost  her  the  regard  of  many  patrons.  She  also,  unless 
closely  watched  by  *'  Ski  "  can  turn  a  traitor — precisely  because 
she  is  a  medium,  though  it  is  not  likely  she  would  do  it — withal 
she  is  incapable  of  either  a  falsehood  or  deceit  in  her  normal  state. 
I  cannot  control  a  feeling  of  repugnance  to  going  into  particu- 
lars about  this,  that,  and  the  other  phenomenon  that  may  have 
occurred.  They  are  the  playthings  of  the  tyro  and  if  we  some- 
times have  gratified  the  craving  for  them  (as  in  Mr.  Olcott  and  in 
a  lesser  degree  your  own  case  at  the  beginning,  since  we  knew 
what  good  spiritual  growth  would  come  of  it)  we  do  not  feel 
called  upon  to  be  continually  explaining  away  deceptive  appear- 
ances, due  to  mixed  carelessness  and  credulity,  or  blind  scepticism, 
as  the  case  may  be.  For  the  present  we  offer  our  knowledge — 
some  portions  of  it  at  least — to  be  either  accepted  or  rejected  on 
its  own  merits  independently — entirely  so — from  the  source  from 
which  it  emanates.  In  return,  we  ask  neither  allegiance,  loyalty, 
nor  even  simple  courtesy — nay,  we  rather  have  nothing  of  the 
sort  offered  since  we  would  have  to  decline  the  kind  offer.  We 
have  in  view  the  good  of  the  whole  association  of  earnest  British 
theosophists  and  care  little  for  individual  opinion  or  the  regard  of 
this  or  that  member.  Our  four  year  old  experience  has  sufficiently 
delineated  the  future  of  the  best  possible  relations  between  our- 
selves and  Europeans  to  make  us  still  more  prudent  and  less  lavish 
of  personal  favours.  Suffice  then  for  me  to  say  that  "  Ski  "  has 
more  than  once  served  as  carrier  and  even  mouthpiece  for  several 
of  us ;  and  that  in  the  case  Mr.  Massey  alludes  to,  the  letter  from 
"  a  Scotch  Brother  "  was  a  genuine  one  to  deliver  which  to  him 
mysteriously  we — the  "  Scotch  "  Brother  included — refused  point 
blank,  as,  notwithstanding  Upasika's  passionate  prayers  to  make 


4i8  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

a  few  exceptions  in  favour  of  C.  T.  Massey, — (her  **  best  and 
dearest  friend,"  one  whom  she  loved  and  trusted  so  implicitly, 
that  she  actually  offered  to  accept  one  year  more  of  her  long, 
dreary  exile  and  work  far  away  from  her  final  goal  would  we  but 
consent  to  gratify  him  with  our  presence  and  teachings — as  not- 
withstanding all  this,  I  say,  we  were  not  allowed  to  waste  our 
powers  so  ruthlessly.  Madame  B.  was  therefore,  left  to  send  it 
by  post,  or  if  she  preferred  it,  to  go  by  **  Ski  " — M.  having  for- 
bidden her  to  exercise  her  own  occult  means.  Surely  no  crime 
can  be  imputed  to  her — unless  absolute  and  frenzied  devotion  to 
a  great  Idea  and  those  who  she  regards  as  her  best  and  truest 
friends,  may  now  be  imputed  as  an  offence.  And  now,  I  hope,  I 
may  be  relieved  of  the  necessity  of  going  into  detailed  explanation 
about  the  famous  Massey-Billing  letter  affair.  Let  me  only  point 
out  to  you  what  is  the  impression  made  on  anyone  with  a  fair 
unbiassed  mind  who  would  happen  to  read  Mr.  Massey 's  letter 
and  the  lame  evidence  contained  therein,  (i)  No  clear  medium 
bent  on  carrying  out  a  plan  of  deception  previously  concocted, 
would  have  the  idiotic  idea  of  producing,  and  placing  before  him 
with  her  own  hands,  any  article  (minute  book  in  her  case)  in 
which  the  tricky  *'  phenomenon  "  was  to  take  place.  Had  she 
known  that  *'  Ski  "  placed  the  letter  inside  that  book  there  are  99 
chances  out  of  100  that  she  would  not  have  brought  it  to  him  her- 
self. It  is  over  twenty  years  that  she  made  of  mediumship  her 
profession.  A  fraud  and  an  unscrupulous  deceiver  in  one  thing, 
she  must  have  been  in  many.  Among  hundreds  of  enemies  and 
still  more  sceptics  she  passed  triumphantly  and  unscathed  the 
most  crucial  tests  producing  the  most  wonderful  mediumistic 
phenomena.  Her  husband  is  the  only  one — he  who  ruined  to  now 
dishonour  her — who  accuses  her  with  documentary  proof  in  hand 
of  being  a  trickster.  H.P.B.  wrote  to  him  the  most  violent  letters 
of  reproach  and  insisted  on  his  expulsion  from  the  Society.  He 
hates  her.  What's  the  use  of  seeking  for  further  motives?  (2) 
Mr.  Massey  is  but  half  a  prophet  when  telling — he  supposes  *  *  you 
will  be  told  that  these  things  were  occult  forgeries)  !  "  No;  the 
message  on  the  back  of  Dr.  Wyld's  letter  is  in  her  own  hand- 
writing, as  also  the  first  portion  of  the  letter  copied  and  now 
quoted  by  him  for  your  benefit — the  most  damaging  portion  in  his 
opinion — and  no  harm  in  it  as  far  as  I  see,  and  as  explained 
already.  She  does  not  want  him  to  know  that  she  used  *'  Ski  " 
whose  entity  he  was  known  to  distrust,  the  shortcomings  and 
crimes  of  several  other  '*  Skis  "  having  been  fathered  on  the  real 
"  Ski."  And  Mr.  Massey  unable  to  recognise  one  from  the  other. 
In  her  loose  careless  way  she  says  :  "  Let  him  think  what  he  likes 
hut  he  must  not  suspect  you  have  been  near  him  with  Ski  at  your 
orders."     Thereupon,   Mrs.  B.   the  "clever  impostor"  hardened 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  419 

and  "  experienced  in  deceit  "  does  precisely  that,  which  she  is 
plainly  asked  not  to  do  i.e.  goes  near  him  and  hands  to  him  the 
very  book  in  which  Ski  had  placed  the  letter  !  Very  clever ;  quite 
so.  (3)  He  argues  that,  "  even  if  otherwise  conceivable  (the 
occult  forgery)  the  later  contents  of  the  letter  were  inconsistent 
with  the  supposed  object,  for  it  went  on  to  speak  of  the  T.S.  and 
of  the  adepts  with  as  much  apparently  genuine  devotion  etc.  etc." 
Mr.  Massey,  I  see,  makes  no  difference  between  an  **  occult  "  and 
a  common  forger  such  as  his  legal  experience  may  have  made  him 
acquainted  with.  An  **  occult  "  forger  a  dugpa  would  have 
forged  the  letter  precisely  in  this  tone.  He  would  never  have 
become  guilty  of  being  carried  away  by  his  personal  grudge,  so 
as  to  deprive  his  letter  of  its  cleverest  feature.  The  T.S.  would 
not  be  shown  by  him  "  a  superstructure  upon  fraud  "  and  it  is 
*'  the  very  opposite  impression  "  that  is  its  crown.  I  say  is  for 
half  of  the  letter  is  a  forgery  and  a  very  occult  one.  Mr.  Massey 
may  perhaps  believe  me  since  it  is  not  that  portion  which  con- 
cerns him  that  is  denied  (all  with  the  exception  of  the  words 
*'  mysterious  "  and  (or  some  other  still  more  mysterious  place  " — 
but  **  the  later  portion  "  just  that  one  which  **  Billing  himself 
reluctantly  admitted  "  as  giving  **  the  very  opposite  impression." 
**  L.L. "  is  nobody  living  or  dead.  Certainly  not  "  Lord  Lindsay  " 
'*  since  he  was  not  known  to  H.P.B.,  nor  had  she  then  nor  had 
she  ever  since  the  least  concern  about  his  Lordship.  This  portion 
bears  so  much  the  impression  of  clumsy  fraud  upon  its  face  that 
it  could  have  deceived  but  one  whose  mind  was  already  well  pre- 
pared to  see  fraud  in  Mrs.  Billing  and  her  **  Ski."  I  have  done, 
and  you  may  show  this  to  your  friend  Mr.  Massey.  Whatever 
his  personal  opinion  about  myself  and  Brothers  can  in  no  way 
influence  the  promised  "  teachings  "  through  your  friendly 
agency. 

Yours, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XCU 

23-11-83. 
P.S. — It  may  so  happen  that  for  purposes  of  our  own. 
mediums  and  their  spooks  will  be  left  undisturbed  and  free  not 
only  to  personate  the  '*  Brothers  *'  but  even  to  forge  our 
handwriting.  Bear  this  in  mind  and  be  prepared  for  it  in 
London.  Unless  the  message  or  communication — or  whatever 
it  may  be  is  preceded  by  the  triple  words  :  **  Kin-t-an,  na-lan-ba, 
dha-ra-in."     **  Know  it  is  not  me,  nor  from  me.** 

K.H. 


420  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.   XCIII 
Received  in   London   about  December,   1883. 

My  good  and  faithful  friend — the  explanation  herein  contained 
would  have  never  been  made  but  that  I  have  of  late  perceived  how 
troubled  you  were  during  your  conversations  upon  the  subject  of 
•'  plagiarism  "  with  some  friends — C.C.M.  particularly.  Now 
especially  that  I  have  received  your  last  in  which  you  mention  so 
delicately  this  "wretched  little  Kiddle  incident,"  to  withhold 
truth  from  you — would  be  cruelty ;  nevertheless,  to  give  it  out  to 
the  world  of  prejudiced  and  malignantly  disposed  Spiritualists 
would  be  sheer  folly.  Therefore,  we  must  compromise  :  I  must 
lay  both  yourself  and  Mr.  Ward,  who  shares  my  confidence, 
under  a  pledge  never  to  explain  without  special  permission  from 
me  the  facts  hereinafter  stated  by  me  to  anyone — not  even  to 
M.  A.  Oxon  and  C.  C.  Massey  included  for  reasons  I  will  mention 
presently  and  that  you  will  readily  understand.  If  pressed  by 
any  of  them  you  may  simply  answer  that  the  **  psychological 
mystery  "  was  cleared  up  to  yourself  and  some  others; — if  satis- 
fied— you  may  add,  that  the  **  parallel  passages  "  cannot  be 
called  plagiarism  or  words  to  this  effect.  I  give  to  you  carte 
blanche  to  say  anything  you  like — even  the  reason  why  I  rather 
have  the  real  facts  withheld  from  the  general  public  and  most  of 
the  London  Fellows — all  except  the  details  you  alone  with  a  few 
others  will  know.  As  you  will  perceive,  I  do  not  even  bind  you 
to  defend  my  reputation — unless  you  feel  yourself  satisfied  beyond 
any  doubt,  and  have  well  understood  the  explanations  yourself. 
And  now  I  may  tell  you  why  I  prefer  being  regarded  by  your 
friends  an  **  ugly  plagiarist." 

Having  been  called  repeatedly  a  "sophist,"  a  "myth,"  a 
**  Mrs.  Harris  "  and  a  "  lower  intelligence  "  by  the  enemies,  I 
rather  not  be  regarded  as  a  deliberate  artificer  and  a  liar 
by  bogus  friends — I  mean  those  who  would  accept  me  reluctantly 
even  were  I  to  rise  to  their  own  ideal  in  their  estimation  instead 
of  the  reverse — as  at  present.  Personally,  I  am  indifferent,  of 
course,  to  the  issue.  But  for  your  sake  and  that  of  the  Society 
I  may  make  one  more  effort  to  clear  the  horizon  of  one  of  its 
**  blackest  "  clouds.  Let  us  then  recapitulate  the  situation  and 
see  what  your  Western  sages  say  of  it.  "  K.H." — it  is  settled — 
is  a  plagiarist — if  it  be,  after  all  a  question  of  K.H.  and  not  of 
the  two  "Occidental  Humourists."  In  the  former  case,  an 
alleged  "  adept  "  unable  to  efvolve  out  of  his  "  small  oriental 
brain  "  any  idea  or  words  worthy  of  Plato,  turned  to  that  deep 
tank  of  profound  philosophy,  the  Banner  of  Light,  and  drew 
therefrom  the  sentences  best  fitted  to  express  his  rather  entangled 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  421 

ideas,  which  had  fallen  from  the  inspired  lips  of  Mr.  Henry 
Kiddle  !  In  the  other  alternative,  the  case  still  becomes  still  more 
difficult  to  comprehend — save  on  the  theory  of  the  irresponsible 
mediumship  of  the  pair  of  Western  jokers.  However,  startling 
and  impracticable  the  theory,  that  two  persons  who  have  been 
clever  enough  to  carry  on  undetected  the  fraud  of  personating  for 
five  years  several  adepts — not  one  of  whom  resembles  the  other ; — 
two  persons  of  whom  one,  at  any  rate,  is  a  fair  master  of  English 
and  can  hardly  be  suspected  of  paucity  of  original  ideas,  should 
turn  for  a  bit  of  plagiarism  to  a  journal  as  the  Banner,  widely 
known  and  read  by  most  English  knowing  Spiritualists ;  and 
above  all,  pilfer  their  borrowed  sentences  from  the  discourse  of  a 
conspicuous  new  convert,  whose  public  utterances  were  at  that 
very  time  being  read  and  welcomed  by  every  medium  and 
Spiritualist ;  however  improbable  all  this  and  much  more,  yet  any 
alternative  seems  more  welcome  than  simple  truth.  The  decree  is 
pronounced;  **  K.H.,"  wherever  he  is,  has  stolen  passages  from 
Mr.  Kiddle.  Not  only  this,  but  as  shewn  by  a  **  Perplexed 
Reader  " — he  has  omitted  inconvenient  words  and  has  so  distorted 
the  ideas  he  has  borrowed  as  to  divert  them  from  their  original 
intention  to  suit  his  own  very  different  purpose. 

Well,  to  this,  if  I  had  any  desire  to  argue  out  the  question  I 
might  answer  that  of  what  constitutes  plagiarism,  being  a  borrow- 
ing of  ideas  rather  than  of  words  and  sentences,  there  was  none  in 
point  of  fact,  and  I  stand  acquitted  by  my  own  accusers.  As 
Milton  says — *'  such  kind  of  borrowing  as  this,  if  it  be  not  bettered 
by  the  borrower  is  accounted  plagiary."  Having  distorted  the 
ideas  **  appropriated,"  and,  as  now  published — diverted  them  from 
their  original  intention  to  suit  my  own  **  very  different  purpose," 
on  such  grounds  my  literary  larceny  does  not  appear  very  formid- 
able after  all?  And  even,  were  there  no  other  explanation  offered, 
the  most  that  could  be  said  is,  that  owing  to  the  poverty  of  words 
at  the  command  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  correspondent,  and  his  ignorance 
of  the  art  of  English  composition,  he  has  adapted  a  few  of  inno- 
cent Mr.  Kiddle's  effusions,  some  of  his  excellently  constructed 
sentences — to  express  his  own  contrary  ideas.  The  above  is  the 
only  line  of  argument  I  have  given  to,  and  permitted  to  be  used 
in,  an  editorial  by  the  **  gifted  editor"  of  the  Theosophist,  who 
has  been  off  her  head  since  the  accusation.  Verily  woman — is  a 
dreadful  calamity  in  this  fifth  race  !  However,  to  you  and  some 
few,  whom  you  have  permission  to  select  amongst  your  most 
trusted  theosophists,  taking  first  care  to  pledge  them  by  word  of 
honour  to  keep  this  little  revelation  to  themselves,  I  will  now 
explain  the  real  facts  of  this  *'  verj-  puzzling "  psychological 
mystery.  The  solution  is  so  simple,  and  the  circumstances  so 
amusing,  that  I  confess  I  laughed  when  my  attention  was  drawn 


422  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

to  it,  some  time  since.  Nay,  it  is  calculated  to  make  me  smile 
even  now,  were  it  not  for  the  knowledge  of  the  pain  it  gives  to 
some  true  friends. 

The  letter  in  question  was  framed  by  me  while  on  a  journey  and  ^ 
on  horse-back.  It  was  dictated  mentally,  in  the  direction  of,  || 
and  *'  precipitated  "  by,  a  young  chela  not  yet  expert  at  this 
branch  of  Psychic  chemistry,  and  who  had  to  transcribe  it  from 
the  hardly  visible  imprint.  Half  of  it,  therefore,  was  omitted  and 
the  other  half  more  or  less  distorted  by  the  **  artist."  When 
asked  by  him  at  the  time,  whether  I  would  look  it  over  and 
correct  I  answered,  imprudently,  I  confess — *'  anyhow  will  do, 
my  boy — it  is  of  no  great  importance  if  you  skip  a  few  words." 
I  was  physically  very  tired  by  a  ride  of  48  hours  consecutively,  and 
(physically  again) — half  asleep.  Besides  this  I  had  very  impor- 
tant business  to  attend  to  psychically  and  therefore  little  remained 
of  me  to  devote  to  that  letter.  It  was  doomed,  I  suppose.  When 
I  woke  I  found  it  had  already  been  sent  on,  and,  as  I  was  not  then 
anticipating  its  publication,  I  never  gave  it  from  that  time  a 
thought. — Now,  I  had  never  evoked  spiritual  Mr.  Kiddle's 
physiognomy,  never  had  heard  of  his  existence,  was  not  aware 
of  his  name.  Having — owing  to  our  correspondence  and  your 
Simla  surroundings  and  friends — felt  interested  in  the  intellectual 
progress  of  the  phenomenalists  which  progress  by  the  by,  I  found 
rather  moving  backwards  in  the  case  of  American  Spiritualists. — 
I  had  directed  my  attention  some  two  months  previous  to  the  great 
annual  camping  movement  of  the  latter,  in  various  directions, 
among  others  to  Lake  or  Mount  Pleasant.  Some  of  the  curious 
ideas  and  sentences  representing  the  general  hopes  and  aspira- 
tions of  the  American  Spiritualists  remained  impressed  on  my 
memory,  and  I  remembered  only  these  ideas  and  detached  sen- 
tences quite  apart  from  the  personalities  of  those  who  harboured 
or  pronounced  them.  Hence,  my  entire  ignorance  of  the  lecturer 
whom  I  have  innocently  defrauded  as  it  would  appear,  and  who 
now  raises  the  hue  and  cry.  Yet,  had  I  dictated  my  letter  in  the 
form  it  now  appears  in  print,  it  would  certainly  look  suspicious, 
and,  however  far  from  what  is  generally  called  plagiarism,  yet  in 
the  absence  of  any  inverted  commas,  it  would  lay  a  foundation 
for  censure.  But  I  did  nothing  of  the  kind  as  the  original  impres- 
sion nowJ>efore  me  clearly  shows.  And  before  I  proceed  any 
further,  I  must  give  you  some  explanation  of  this  mode  of  pre- 
cipitation. The  recent  experiments  of  the  Psychic  Research 
Society  will  help  you  greatly  to  comprehend  the  rationale  of  this 
"mental  telegraphy."  You  have  observed  in  the  Journal  of 
that  body  how  thought  transference  is  cumulatively  affected.  The 
image  of  this  geometrical  or  other  figure  which  the  active  brain 
has    had    impressed    uf>on    it    is    gradually    imprinted    upon    the 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  423 

recipient  brain  of  the  passive  subject — as  the  series  of  reproduc- 
tions illustrated  in  the  cuts  show.  Two  factors  are  needed  to 
produce  a  perfect  and  instantaneous  mental  telegraphy — close  con- 
centration in  the  operator,  and  complete  receptive  passivity  in  the 
*'  reader  " — subject.  Given  a  disturbance  of  either  condition,  and 
the  result  is  proportionately  imperfect.  The  "  reader"  does  not 
see  the  image  as  in  the  "  telegrapher's  "  brain,  but  as  arising  in 
his  own.  When  the  latter' s  thoughts  wander,  the  psychic  current 
becomes  broken,  the  communication  disjointed  and  incoherent.  In 
a  case  such  as  mine,  the  chela  had,  as  it  were,  to  pick  up  what 
he  could  from  the  current  I  was  sending  him  and,  as  above  re- 
marked, patch  the  broken  bits  together  as  best  he  might.  Do 
not  you  see  the  same  thing  in  ordinary  mesmerism — the  niaya 
impressed  upon  the  subject's  imagination  by  the  operator  becom- 
ing, now  stronger,  now  feebler,  as  the  latter  keeps  the  intended 
illusive  image  more  or  less  steadily  before  his  own  fancy?  And 
how  often  the  clairvoyants  reproach  the  magnetiser  for  taking 
their  thoughts  off  the  subject  under  consideration?  And  the 
mesmeric  healer  will  always  bear  you  witness  that  if  he  permits 
himself  to  think  of  anything  but  the  vital  current  he  is  pouring 
into  his  patient,  he  is  at  once  compelled  to  either  establish  the 
current  afresh  or  stop  the  treatment.  So  I,  in  this  instance,  having 
at  the  moment  more  vividly  in  my  mind  the  psychic  diagnosis  of 
current  Spiritualistic  thought,  of  which  the  Lake  Pleasant  speech 
was  one  marked  symptom,  unwittingly  transferred  that  reminis- 
cence more  vividly  than  my  own  remarks  upon  it  and  deductions 
therefrom.  So  to  say,  (the  "despoiled  victims"  Mrs.  Kiddle's 
utterances)  came  out  as  a  *'  high  light  "  and  were  more  sharply 
photographed  (first  in  the  chelas'  brain  and  thence  on  the  paper 
before  him,  a  double  process  and  one  far  more  difficult  than 
*•  thought  reading  "  simply)  while  the  rest, — my  remarks  there- 
upon and  arguments — as  I  now  find,  are  hardly  visible  and  quite 
blurred  on  the  original  scrap  before  me.  Put  into  a  mesmeric 
subject's  hand  a  sheet  of  blank  paper,  tell  him  it  contained  a 
certain  chapter  of  some  book  that  you  have  read,  concentrate 
your  thoughts  upon  the  words,  and  see  how — provided  that  he 
himself  has  not  read  the  chapter,  but  only  takes  it  from  your 
memory — his  reading  will  reflect  your  own  more  or  less  vivid 
successive  recollection  of  your  author's  language.  The  same  as 
to  the  precipitation  by  the  chela  of  the  transferred  thought  upon 
(or  rather,  into)  paper  :  if  the  mental  picture  received  be  feeble 
his  visible  reproduction  of  it  must  correspond.  And  the  more  so 
in  proportion  to  the  closeness  of  attention  he  gives.  He  might — 
were  he  but  merely  a  person  of  the  true  mediumistic  temp>era- 
ment — be  employed  by  his  "Master  "  as  a  sort  of  psychic  printing 
machine  producing  lithographed  or  psychographed  impressions  of 


424  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

what  the  operator  had  in  mind ;  his  nervous  system,  the  machine, 
his  nerve-aura  the  printing  fluid,  the  colours  drawn  from  that 
exhaustless  store-house  of  pigments  (as  of  everything  else)  the 
Akasa.  But  the  medium  and  the  chela  are  diametrically  dis- 
similar and  the  latter  acts  consciously  except  undier  exceptional 
circumstances  during  development  not  necessary  to  dwell  upon 
here. 

Well,  as  soon  as  I  heard  of  the  charge — the  commotion  among 
my  defenders  having  reached  me  across  the  eternal  snows — I 
ordered  an  investigation  into  the  original  scraps  of  the  impression. 
At  the  first  glance  I  saw  that  it  was  I,  the  only  and  most  guilty 
party, — ^the  poor  little  boy  having  done  but  that  which  he  was 
told.  Having  now  restored  the  characters  and  the  lines — 
omitted  and  blurred  beyond  hope  of  recognition  by  anyone  but 
their  original  evolver — to  their  primitive  colour  and  places,  I  now 
find  my  letter  reading  quite  differently  as  you  will  observe.  Turn-  J 
ing  to  the  Occult  World — the  copy  sent  by  you — to  the  page  cited,  " 
(namely  p.  149  in  the  first  edition)  I  was  struck,  upon  carefully 
reading  it,  by  the  great  discrepancy  between  the  sentences.  A 
gap,  so  to  say,  of  ideas  between  i>art  i  (from  line  i  to  line  25) 
and  part  2 — the  plagiarized  portion  so-called.  There  seemed  no 
connection  at  all  between  the  two;  for  what  has,  indeed,  the 
determination  of  our  chiefs  (to  prove  to  a  sceptical  world  that 
physical  phenomena  are  as  reducible  to  law  as  anything  else)  to 
do  with  Plato's  ideas  which  "  rule  the  world  "  or  "  Practical 
Brotherhood"  of  humanity?  I  fear  that  it  is  your  i>ersonal 
friendship  alone  for  the  writer  that  has  blinded  you  to  the  dis^ 
crepancy  and  disconnection  of  ideas  in  this  abortive  **  precipita- 
tion "  even  until  now.  Otherwise  you  could  not  have  failed  to 
perceive  that  something  was  wrong  on  that  page ;  that  there  was 
a  glaring  defect  in  the  connection.  Moreover,  I  have  to  plead 
guilty  to  another  sin  :  I  have  never  so  much  as  looked  at  my 
letters  in  print — until  the  day  of  the  forced  investigation.  I  had 
read  only  your  own  original  matter,  feeling  it  a  loss  of  time  to 
go  over  my  hurried  bits  and  scraps  of  thought.  But  now,  I  have 
to  ask  you  to  read  the  passages  as  they  were  originally  dictated 
by  me,  and  make  the  comparison  with  the  Occult  World  before 
you. 

I  transcribe  them  with  my  own  hand  this  once,  whereas  the 
letter  in  your  possession  was  written  by  the  chela.  I  ask  you 
also  to  compare  this  hand^writing  with  that  of  some  of  the  earlier 
letters  you  received  from  me.  Bear  in  mind,  also  the  "  O.L.*s  " 
emphatic  denial  at  Simla  that  my  first  letter  had  ever  been  written 
by  myself.  I  felt  annoyed  at  her  gossip  and  remarks  then;  it 
may  serve  a  good  purpK>se  now.  Alas !  by  no  means  are  we  all 
"Gods";   especially  when  you   remember  that  since  the  palmy 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  425 

days  of  the  **  impressions  "  and  **  precipitations" — **  K.H."  has 
been  born  into  a  new  and  higher  light,  and  even  that  one,  in  no 
wise  the  most  dazzlingf  to  be  acquired  on  this  earth.  Verily  the 
Light  of  Omniscience  and  infallible  Prevision  on  this  earth — that 
shines  only  for  the  highest  Chohan  alone  is  yet  far  away  from 
me  ! 

I  enclose  the  copy  verbatim  from  the  restored  fragments 
underlining  in  red^  the  omitted  sentences  for  easier  comparison. 
(Page  149. — First  Edition.) 

Phenomenal  elements   previously    unthought  of, 

will  disclose  at  last  the  secrets  of  their  mysterious  workings. 
Plato  was  right  to  readmit  every  element  of  speculation  which 
Socrates  had  discarded.  The  problems  of  universal  being  are 
not  unattainable  or  worthless  if  attained.  But  the  latter  can  be 
solved  only  by  mastering  those  elements  that  are  now  looming 
on  the  horizon  of  the  profane.  Even  the  Spiritts.  with  their  mis- 
taken, grotesquely  perverted  views  and  notions  are  hazily 
realizing  the  new  situation.  They  prophesy  and  their  prophecies 
are  not  always  without  a  point  of  truth  in  them,  of  intuitional 
pre-vision,  so  to  say.  Hear  some  of  them  reasserting  the  old, 
old  axiom  that  '*  Ideas  rule  the  world";  and  as  men's  minds 
receive  new  ideas,  laying  aside  the  old  and  effete  the  world  (wiU) 
advance ;  mighty  revolutions  (wiU)  spring  from  them  ;  institutions 
(aye,  and  even  creeds  and  powers,  they  may  add) — wiU  crumble 
before  their  onward  march  crushed  by  their  own  inherent  force 
not  the  irresistible  force  of  the  "  new  ideas "  offered  by  the 
Spiritualists !  Yes;  they  are  both  right  and  wrong.  It  will  be 
just  as  impossible  to  resist  their  influence  when  the  time  comes 
as  to  stay  the  progress  of  the  tide  : — to  be  sure.  But  what  the 
Spiritualists  fail  to  perceive,  I  see,  and  their  "  Spirits  "  to  explain 
(the  latter  knowing  no  more  than  what  they  can  find  in  the  brains 
of  the  former)  is,  that  all  this  will  come  gradually  on  ;  and  that 
before  it  comes  they  as  well  as  ourselves,  have  all  a  duty  to  per- 
form,  a  task  set  before  us  :  that  of  sweeping  away  as  much  as 
ix>ssible  the  dross  left  to  us  by  our  pious  forefathers.  New  ideas 
have  to  be  planted  on  clean  places,  for  these  ideas  touch  upon  the 
most  momentous  subjects.  It  is  not  physical  phenomena  or  the 
agency  called  Spiritualism  but  these  universal  ideas  that  we  have 
precisely  to  study  :  the  noumenon  not  the  phenomenon,  for,  to 
comprehend  the  latter  we  have  first  to  understand  the  former. 
They  do  touch  man's  true  position  in  the  Universe,  to  be  sure, — 
but  only  in  relation  to  his  future  not  previous  births.  It  is  not 
physical  phenomena  however  wonderful  that  can  ever  explain  to 
man  his  origin  let  alone  his  ultimate  destiny,  or  as  one  of  them 
expresses  it — the  relation  of  the  mortal  to  the  immortal,  of  the 
1  These   passages   are   printed  in   italics. — Ed. 


426  THE  MAHATMA  LETTEKS 

temporary  to  the  eternal,  of  the  finite  to  the  infinite,  etc.,  etc. 
They  talk  very  glibly  of  what  they  regard  as  new  ideas  **  larger, 
more  general,  grander,  more  comprehensive,  and  at  the  same 
time,  they  recognise  instead  of  the  eternal  reign  of  immutable 
law,  the  universal  reign  of  law  as  the  expression  of  a  divine 
will  (  ! ).  Forgetful  of  their  earlier  beliefs,  and  that  '*  it  repented 
the  Lord  that  he  had  made  Man  "  these  would-be  philosophers 
and  reformers  would  impress  upon  their  hearers  that  the  expres- 
sion of  the  said  divine  Will  "  is  unchanging  and  unchangeable — 
in  regard  to  which  there  is  only  an  Eternal  now,  while  to  mortals 
(uninitiated?)  time  is  Past  or  Future  as  related  to  their  finite 
existence  on  this  material  plane  ^' — of  which  they  know  as  little 
as  of  their  spiritual  spheres — a  speck  of  dirt  they  have  made  the 
latter  like  our  own  earth,  a  future  life  that  the  true  philosopher 
would  rather  avoid  than  court.  But  I  dream  with  my  eyes  open. 
At  all  events  this  is  not  any  privileged  teachings  of  their  own. 
Most  of  these  ideas  are  taken  piece-meal  from  Plato  and  the 
Alexandrian  Philosophers.      It  is  what  we  all  study  and  what  many 

have  solved etc.,  etc. 

This  is  the  true  copy  of  the  original  document  as  now  restored 
— the  **  Rosetta  stone"  of  the  Kiddle  incident.  And,  now,  if 
you  have  understood  my  explanations  about  the  process,  as  given 
in  a  few  words  further  back, — you  need  not  ask  me  how  it  came 
to  pass  that  though  somewhat  disconnected,  the  sentences 
transcribed  by  the  Chela  are  mostly  those  that  are  now  considered 
as  plagiarized  while  the  "missing  links"  are  precisely  those 
phrases  that  would  have  shown  the  passages  were  simply  reminis- 
cences if  not  quotations — the  key-note  around  which  came  group- 
ing my  own  reflections  on  that  morning.  In  those  days  you 
were  yet  hesitating  to  see  in  Occultism,  or  the  O.L.'s  phenomena 
anything  beyond  a  variety  of  Spiritualism  and  mediumship.  For 
the  first  time  in  my  life  I  had  paid  a  serious  attention  to  the 
utterances  of  the  poetical  "  media,"  of  the  so-called  "  inspira- 
tional "  oratory  of  the  English  and  American  lecturers,  its  quality 
and  limitations.  I  was  struck  with  all  this  brilliant  but  empty 
verbiage,  and  recognised  for  the  first  time  fully  its  pernicious 
intellectual  tendency.  M.  knew  all  about  them — ^but  since  I  had 
never  had  anything  to  do  with  any  of  them  they  interested  me 
very  little.  It  was  their  gross  and  unsavoury  materialism  hiding 
clumsily  under  its  shadowy  spiritual  veil  that  attracted  my  thoughts 
at  the  time.  While  dictating  the  sentences  quoted — a  small 
portion  of  the  many  I  had  been  ix>ndering  over  for  some  diays — 
it  was  those  ideas  that  were  thrown  out  en  relief  the  most,  leaving 
out  my  own  parenthetical  remarks  to  disappear  in  the  precipita- 
tion. Had  I  looked  over  the  impressed  negative  (?)  there  would 
have  been  one  more  weapon  broken  in  the  enemy's  hand.     Having 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  427 

neglected  this  duty  my  Karma  evolved,  what  the  mediums  of  the 
future  and  the  Banner  may  call  the  **  Kiddle  triumph."  The 
coming  ages  will  divide  Society  after  the  manner  of  your  modern 
Baconians  and  Shakesperians  into  two  quarrelling  camps  of 
partisans,  called  respectively  **  The  Kiddlites  "  and  **  The  Koot- 
humites  "  who  will  fight  over  the  impK>rtant  literary  problem — 
"  which  one  of  the  two  plagiarized  from  the  other  "?  I  may  be 
told  that  meanwhile  the  American  and  English  spiritualists  are 
gloating  over  the  **  Sinnett — K.H."  Sedan?  May  their  great 
orator  and  champion  and  they  enjoy  their  triumph  in  peace  and 
happiness,  for  no  "adept"  will  ever  cast  his  Himalayan  shadow 
to  obscure  their  innocent  felicity.  To  you  and  a  few  other  true 
friends  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  give  an  explanation.  To  all  others 
I  leave  the  right  to  regard  Mr.  Kiddle — whoever  he  may  be — as 
the  inspirer  of  your  humble  servant.  I  have  done,  and  you  may 
now,  in  your  turn,  do  what  you  please  with  these  facts,  except 
the  making  use  of  them  in  print  or  even  speaking  of  them  to 
the  opponents,  save  in  general  terms.  You  must  understand  my 
reasons  for  this.  One  does  not  cease  entirely,  my  dear  friend 
to  be  a  man  nor  lose  one's  dignity  for  being  an  adept.  In  the 
latter  capacity,  one,  no  doubt,  remains  in  every  case  quite  in- 
different to  the  opinion  of  the  outside  world.  The  former  always 
draws  the  line  between  ignorant  surmise  and — deliberate,  personal 
insult.  I  cannot  really  be  expected  to-  take  advantage  of  the  first 
to  be  ever  hiding  the  problematic  **  adept  "  behind  the  skirts  of 
the  two  supposed  "humourists";  and  as  man,  I  had  too  much 
experience  lately  in  such  above-said  insults  with  Messrs.  S.  Moses 
and  C.  C.  Massey  to  give  them  any  more  opportunities  to  doubt 
the  word  of  *'  K.  H.",  or  see  in  him  a  vulgar  defendent,  a  kind  of 
guilty,  tricky  Babu  before  a  panel  of  stern  European  juryme'n  and 
judge. 

I  have  no  time  to  answer  fully  now  your  last,  long  business 
letter,  but  will  shortly.  Nor  do  I  answer  Mr.  Ward — since  it 
is  useless.  I  highly  approve  of  his  coming  to  India,  but  dis- 
approve as  highly  his  fancy  of  bringing  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  here. 
The  result  of  the  latter  would  be  to  injure  the  cause  among 
Englishmen.  Distrust  and  prejudice  are  contagious.  His 
presence  In  Calcutta  would  be  as  disastrous  as  Mr.  Ward's  pre- 
sence and  services  to  the  cause  I  live  for  would  be  beneficient  and 
fruitful  of  good  effects.  But  I  would  insist  upon  his  passing  some 
time  at  the  Headquarters  before  his  taking  up  his  proposed  labour 
of  love  among  the  officials. 

It  is  certainly  most  flattering  to  hear  from  him  that  Mrs.  K. 
"  had  essayed  her  best  to  meet  me  in  one  or  more  of  her  trances  "  ; 
and  most  sad  to  learn  that  '  *  though  she  had  invoked  you  (me) 
with  all  her  Spiritual  intensity — she  could  get  no  response."       It 


428  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

is  too  bad,  really,  that  this  **  ladiefair  "  should  have  been  put  to 
the  trouble  of  a  fruitless  ramble  through  space  to  find  insig-nificant 
me.  Evidently  we  move  in  different  astral  **  circles,"  and  hers 
is  not  the  first  instance  of  persons  becoming-  sceptical  as  to  the 
existence  of  things  outside  their  own  milieu.  There  are,  you 
know,  "  Alps  upon  Alps  "  and  from  no  two  peaks  does  one  get 
the  same  view  !  Nevertheless,  it  is,  as  I  say  flattering-  to  find  her 
evoking  me  by  name,  while  preparing  for  myself  and  colleagues  a 
disastrous  Waterloo.  To  tell  the  truth,  I  was  not  aware  of  the 
former,  though  painfully  conscious  of  the  latter.  Yet,  had  not 
even  the  dismal  plot  ever  entered  her  spiritual  mind,  to  be  honest, 
I  do  not  think  I  could  have  ever  responded  to  her  call.  As  an 
American  Spiritualist  would  put  it — there  seems  to  be  very  little 
affinity  between  our  two  natures.  She  is  too  haughty  and 
imperious,  too  self-complacent  for  me ;  besides  which  she  is  too 
young  and  "fascinating"  for  a  poor  mortal  like  myself.  To 
speak  seriously,  Mme.  Gebhard  is  quite  another  sort  of  person. 
Her's  is  a  genuine,  sterling,  nature;  she  is  a  born  Occultist  in  her 
intuitions  and  I  have  made  a  few  experiments  with  her — ^though 
it  is  rather  M.'s  duty  than  my  own,  and  that,  as  you  would  say, 
it  was  not  "  originally  contemplated"  that  I  should  be  made  to 
visit  all  the  sibyls  and  sirens  of  the  Theosophical  Establishment. 
My  own  preference  makes  me  keep  to  the  safer  side  of  the  two 
sexes  in  my  occult  dealings  with  them,  though  for  certain  reasons, 
even  such  visits — in  my  own  natural  skin — have  to  be  extremely 
restricted  and  limited.  I  enclose  a  telegram  from  Mr.  Brown 
to  the  **  O.L."  This  day  week  I  will  be  at  Madras  en  route  to 
Singapore  and  Ceylon,  and  Burmah.  I  will  answer  you  through 
one  of  the  chelas  at  the  Headquarters. 

The  poor  "O.L."  in  disgrace?  Oh  dear,  no!  We  have 
nothing  against  the  old  woman  with  the  exception  that  she  is  one. 
To  save  us  from  being  insulted  as  she  calls  it,  she  is  ready  to 
give  our  real  addresses  and  thus  lead  to  a  catastrophe.  The  real 
reason  is  that  the  hapless  creature  was  too  much  compromised,  too 
bitterly  insulted  owing  to  our  existence.  It  all  falls  upon  her  and, 
therefore,  it  is  but  right  that  she  should  be  screened  in  some 
things. 

Yes  !  I  would  see  you,  President,  if  possible.  Unless  permitted 
by  the  Chohan  (who  forwards  you  His  Blessing)  to  act  on  other 
lines  of  business — i.e.  psychologically  I  renounce  to  trust  for  the 
rebirth  of  the  Phoenix  to  the  good-will  of  my  countrymen.  The 
feeling  between  the  two  races  is  now  intensely  bitter  and  any- 
thing undertaken  by  the  natives  now,  is  sure  to  be  opposed  to  the 
bitter  end  by  the  Europeans  in  India.  Let  us  drop  it  for  a  while. 
I'll  answer  your  questions  in  my  next.  If  you  find  time  to  write 
for  the  Theosophist  and  can  induce  someone  else,  as  Mr.  Myers, 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  429 

for  instance — ^you  will  oblige  me  personally.  You  are  wrong  in 
distrusting  Subba  Row's  writings.  He  does  not  write  willingly, 
to  be  sure,  but  he  will  never  make  a  false  statement.  See  his 
last  in  the  November  number.  His  statement  concerning  the 
errors  of  General  Cunningham  ought  to  be  regarded  as  a  whole 
revelation  leading  to  a  revolution  in  Indian  archaeology.  Ten 
to  one — it  will  never  receive  the  attention  it  deserves.  Why? 
Simply  because  his  statements  contain  sober  facts,  and  that  what 
you  Europeans  prefer  generally  is  fiction  so  long  the  latter  dove- 
tails with,  and  answers  preconceived  theories. 

K.  H. 
The  more  I  think  of  it,  the  more  reasonable  appears  to  me  your 
plan  of  a  Society  within  the  London  Society.      Try,  for  something 
may  come  out  of  it. 


LETTER  No.   XCIV 

My  dear  friend — Amid  the  various  and  arduous  labours  it  has 
pleased  the  venerable  Chohan  to  entrust  me  with — I  had  entirely 
forgotten  the  **  Kiddle  incident."  You  have  my  explanation.  In 
asking  you  to  keep  me  the  secret  I  only  meant  the  withholding  of 
certain  details  that,  in  their  ignorance  of  the  scientific  process  you 
and  my  opponents  would  take  exception  to,  make  of  it  a  pretext 
for  poking  fun  at  occult  sciences  and  finally  charge  me  with 
clumsy  lies  and  yourself  with  credulity,  or  **  hero-worship  *'  as 
the  golden-haired  nymph  of  the  Vicarage  puts  it.  But  if  you  are 
prepared  to  stand  the  fire  of  furious  denial  and  adverse  criticism, 
make  of  my  letter  and  explanations  the  best  use  you  can.  The 
several  letters  and  articles  in  the  last  numbers  of  the  Theosophist 
given  out  with  my  permission — ^by  Gen.  Morgan,  Subba  Row  and 
Dharani  Dhu  may  pave  the  way  for  you.  I  would  not  have  **  the 
propagation  of  theosophy  "  impeded  on  my  account  and  to  save 
my  name  from  a  few  extra  blows. 

Yours  in  haste, 

.     K.  H. 


LETTER  No.   XCV^ 

Such  a  life  of  infamy.  I  will  try  to  make  of  him  a  vegetarian 
and  a  teetotaller.  Total  abstinence  from  flesh  and  liquor  are  very 
wisely  prescribed  by  Mr.   Hume  if  he  would  have  good  results. 

I  The  beginning  of   this  letter  is   missing. — Ed. 

29 


430  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

In  good  hands  E.  will  do  an  immense  good  to  the  T.S.  in  India, 
but  for  this,  he  has  through  a  training  of  purification. 
M.  had  to  prepare  him  for  six  weeks  before  his  departure  other- 
wise it  would  have  been  impossible  for  me  to  project  into  his 
atmosphere  even  the  reflection  of  **  my  double."  I  told  you 
already,  my  kind  friend,  that  what  he  saw  was  not  me.  Nor  will 
I  be  able  to  project  that  reflection  for  you — unless  he  is  thoroughly 
purified.  Therefore,  as  the  matter  now  stands  I  have  not  a  word 
to  say  against  Mr.  Hume's  conditions  as  expressed  in  his  last 
**  official  "  letter,  except  in  congratulating  him  with  all  my  heart. 
For  the  same  reason  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  answer  him  and 
his  questions  just  now.  Let  him  have  patience,  pray,  in  the  E. 
matter.  There  are  dirty  conspiracies  set  on  foot,  and  germinating 
in  London,  among  the  spiritualists ;  and  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that 
E.  will  resist  the  tide  that  threatens  to  submerge  him  unless  they 
obtain  from  him,  at  least  a  partial  recantation.  We  departed  from 
our  policy  and  the  experiment  was  made  with  him  on  the  "  Vega  " 
solely  for  the  benefit  of  some  Anglo  Indian  theosophists.  Mr. 
Hume  had  expressed  his  surprise  that  even  E.'s  **  spirits  "  should 
know  nothing  of  us,  and  that  despite  the  interests  of  the  cause 
we  did  not  show  ourselves  even  to  him.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Calcutta  spiritualists  and  Mrs.  Gordon  with  them  were 
triumphant,  and  Colonel  G.  followed  suit.  The  "  dear  departed  " 
ones  were  for  the  short  period  of  his  stay  at  Calcutta  in  the  odour 
of  sanctity,  and  the  "  Brothers  "  rather  low  in  public  estimation. 
Many  of  you  thought  that  our  appearing  to  E.,  would  **  save  the 
situation  "  and  force  spiritualists  to  recognise  the  claims  of 
Theosophy.  Well,  we  complied  with  your  wishes.  M.  and  I 
were  determined  to  show  to  you  that  there  was  no  ground  for  such 
hope.  The  Bigotry  and  Blindness  of  the  Spiritualists  fed  by  the 
selfish  motives  of  professional  mediums  are  rampant  and  the 
opponents  are  now  desperate.  W^e  must  allow  the  natural  course 
of  events  to  develop,  and  can  only  help  on  the  coming  crisis  by 
having  a  hand  in  the  increasing  frequency  of  exposures.  It  would 
never  do  for  us  to  force  events,  as  it  would  be  only  making 
"  martyrs  *'  and  allowing  these  the  pretext  for  a  new  craze. 

Thus,  pray  have  patience,  Mr.  Hume — if  he  only  holds  on  to 
his  resolutions — has  a  grand  and  noble  work  before  him — the 
work  of  a  true  Founder  of  a  new  social  era,  of  a  philosophical  and 
religious  Reform.  It  is  so  vast  and  so  nobly  conceived,  that  if, 
as  I  hope,  we  will  now  finally  agree,  he  will  have  quite  enough  to 
do  during  the  interval  that  is  necessary  for  me  to  probe  and  pre- 
pare Eglinton.  I  will  write  to  Mr.  Hume  and  answer  his  every 
point  in  a  few  days  explaining  the  situation  as  I  conceive  it. 
Meanwhile  you  will  do  well  to  show  him  this  letter.  Your  Review 
of  the  Perfect  Way  is  more  perfect  than  its  author's  conception. 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  431 

I  thank  you,  my  friend,  for  your  good  services.  You  are  begin- 
ning to  attract  the  Chohan's  attention.  And  if  you  only  knew 
what  significance  that  has,  you  would  not  be  calculating  to  a 
nicety  what  reward  you  are  entitled  to  for  certain  recent  services 
mentioned. 

Yours  affectionately, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  XCVI 

My  humble  Pranams  Sahib.  Your  memory  is  not  good.  Have 
you  forgotten  the  agreement  made  at  Prayag  and  the  pass-words 
that  have  to  proceed  every  genuine  communication  coming  from 

us   through   a ^     Choot-dak   or  medium?     How 

likely  the  seance  of  December  the  15th — coroneted  card,  my  letter 
and  all  !  Very  similar — as  a  Peling  pundit  would  say.  Yes  first 
a  loving  greeting  from  old  woman  to  Lonie  misspelled  on  card 
Lonis,  then  to  C.  C.  Massey  whose  name  she  now  never  pro- 
nounces, and  that  greeting  coming  after  supper — when  C.C.M. 
had  already  left.  Then  my  message  in  a  fained  hand  when  I  am 
at  dead  loggerheads  with  my  own  ;  again  I  am  made  to  date  my 
supposed  message  from  Ladhak  December  i6th,  whereas  I  swear 
I  was  at  Ch-in-ki  (Lhassa).  Smoking  your  pipe.  Best  of  all  my 
asking  you  to  **  prepare  for  our  coming  as  soon  as  we  have  won 
over  Mr.  Eglinton  Sahib  !  !  !  "  One  Saturday  and  Lord  Dun- 
raven  having  failed  why  not  try  again.  A  solemn  evening,  that 
Saturday,  at  Piccadilly  over  old  Sutheran  the  mouldy  bookseller. 
Knew  premises  well,  and  felt  amused  and  watched  with  your 
leave.  Why  feel  so  disgusted?  Spooks  worked  remarkably  well 
nothing  abashed  by  my  presence  of  which  neither  W.E.  nor  his 
bodyguard  knew  nothing.  My  attention  was  attracted  by  their 
forging  H.P.B.'s  handwriting.  Then  I  put  aside  my  pipe  and 
watched.  Too  much  light  for  the  creatures  coming  from  a  Picca- 
dilly Street  though  Sutheran  emanations  helped  a  good  deal.  I 
would  call  your  friend  Mr.  Myers'  attention  to  psychic  fact  of 
rotten  emanations.  Raise  a  good  Choot  crop.  Yes ;  the  room 
with  windows  overlooking  Piccadilly  is  a  good  place  for  pyschic 
development. 

Poor  entranced  wretch.  "  We  wish  to  state  to  prevent  any 
future  misunderstanding  that  whatever  phenomena  may  present 
themselves  to  you  this  evening  we  are  in  no  way  responsible  for 
them  and  have  no  hand  in  their  production."     This  is  pure  self- 

1  A  word  in  Oriental  characters  appears  here  in  the  original. — Ed, 


432  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

abnegation — modesty  is  no  name  for  it.  He  paced  the  room  and 
I  followed  from  a  distance.  He  went  to  Mr.  Ward's  writing  desk 
and  took  a  sheet  of  his  monogram  paper — and  I  helped  myself  to 
one — just  to  show  you  I  watched.  As  for  all  of  you  you  did  not 
watch  very  keenly  when  he  was  guided  to  place  paper  and 
envelope  between  the  leaves  of  a  book  and  when  he  laid  it  upon 
the  table,  or  you  would  have  seen  something  very  interesting  for 
science.  The  clock's  silvery  tongue  strikes  ten — fifteen  and 
K.H.'s  form  descending  a  hill  on  horseback — (he  is  in  the  far  off 
woods  of  Cambodia  now)  is  supposed  to  cross  the  horizon  of 
**  Uncle  Sam's  "  vision — and  disturbs  the  activity  of  the  Pisachas. 
The  astral  disturbance  impedes  their  dull  progress.  Their  bells 
are  fine — ^very. 

Now  Sahib,  you  must  not  be  too  hard  upon  the  wretched 
young  fellow.  He  was  utterly  irresponsible  on  that  night.  Of 
course  his  belonging  to  your  L.L.T.S.  is  pure  nonsense  for  a  paid 
and  suspected  medium  is  no  peer  for  English  gentlemen.  Yet  he 
is  honest  in  his  way  and  however  much  K.H.  made  fun  of  him 
in  his  card  addressed  to  the  Gordons — that  all  of  you  took 
seriously  at  the  time — he  is  really  honest  in  his  way  and  to  be 
pitied.  He  is  a  poor  epileptic  subject  to  fits  especially  on  the 
days  when  he  is  expected  to  have  dinner  with  you.  I  mean  to  ask 
K.H.  to  beg  a  favour  from  Mr.  Ward  :  to  save  the  poor  wretch 
from  the  two  elementaries — which  have  fastened  upon  him  like 
two  barnacles.  It  is  easy  for  good  **  Uncle  Sam  "  to  get  for  him 
an  appointment  somewhere  and  thus  save  him  from  a  life  of 
infamy  which  kills  him,  he  will  thereby  do  a  meritorious  and  a 
Theosophical  act  of  charity.  Mr.  Ward  is  wrong  he  is  not 
guilty  of  any  conscious,  deliberate  jugglery  that  night.  He  got  a 
passionate  desire  to  join  the  L.L.  and  as  the  wish  is  father  to 
the  deed — his  astral  ticks  fabricated  that  letter  of  mine  through 
means  of  their  own.  Had  he  done  it  himself  he  would  have  re- 
membered it  was  not  my  handwriting  as  he  is  familiar  with  it 
through  Gordons.  Woe  to  the  spiritualist !  Their  Karma  is 
heavy  with  the  ruin  of  men  and  women  they  entice  into  medium- 
ship.  And  then  throw  off  to  starve  like  a  toothless  dog.  At  any 
rate  ask  him  for  the  card  of  Upasika  with  her  alleged  writing  on 
it.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  keep  and  show  occasionally  to  the 
Masseys  of  the  L.L.  who  believe  pure  lies  and  will  suspect  fraud 
where  none  is  meant.  You  are  at  liberty  to  regard  me  as  a 
"  nigger  "  and  savage  Sahib.  But  though  I  am  the  first  to  advise 
Mrs.  K.'s  re-election — nevertheless,  I  would  sooner  trust  W.E.'s 
clairvoyance  than  Mrs.  K.  's  or  rather  her  rendering  of  her  visions. 
But  this  will  soon  stop.  Subba  Row  is  vindicating  you. — 
Writing  answer  to  the  Australian  convert. 

M. 


SPIRITUALISM  AND  PHENOMENA  433 


LETTER  No.  XCVIl 

Common  people,  are  the  masses  as  diiferent  from  those  who  are 
distinguished.  Your  methods  were  not  abandoned,  it  was  only 
sought  to  show  the  drift  of  cycHc  change  no  doubt  that  is  helped 
by  you  too.  Are  you  not  man  of  the  world  enough  to  bear  the  small 
defects  of  young  disciples.  In  their  way  they  also  help — and  do 
greatly.  In  you  is  also  concealed  a  power  to  help  from  your  side 
for  the  poor  Society  will  even  yet  need  all  the  care  it  can  get. 
It  is  good  that  you  have  seen  the  work  of  a  noble  woman,  who 
has  left  all  for  the  cause.  Other  ways  and  times  will  appear  for 
your  help.  For  you  are  a  single  witness  and  well  knowing  the 
facts  that  will  be  challenged  by  traitors. 

We  cannot  alter  Karma  my  "  good  friend  "  or  we  might  lift 
the  present  cloud  from  your  path.  But  we  do  all  that  is  possible 
in  such  material  matters.  No  darkness  can  stay  for  ever.  Have 
hope  and  faith  and  we  may  disperse  it.  There  are  not  many  left 
true  to  the  original  programme  !  And  you  have  been  taught  much 
and  have  much  that  is  and  will  be  useful. 

M. 


SECTION  VII 

MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  XCVIII 

*  I  realized  it  perfectly.  But  however  sincere,  these  feelings 
are  too  deeply  covered  by  a  thick  crust  of  self  sufficiency  and 
egoistical  stubbornness  to  awaken  in  me  anything  like  sympathy. 

(i)  For  centuries  we  have  had  in  Thibet  a  moral,  pure  hearted, 
simple  people,  unblest  with  civilization,  hence — untainted  by  its 
vices.  For  ages  has  been  Thibet  the  last  corner  of  the  globe  not 
so  entirely  corrupted  as  to  preclude  the  mingling  together  of  the 
two  atmospheres — the  physical  and  the  spiritual.  And  he  would 
have  us  exchange  this  for  his  ideal  of  civilization  and  Govt.  ! 
This  is  pure  self  peroration,  an  intense  passion  for  hearing  him- 
self discuss,  and  for  imposing  his  ideas  upon  every  one. 

(2)  Now  really,  Mr.  H.  ought  to  be  sent  by  an  international 
Committee  of  Philanthropists,  as  a  Friend  of  Perishing  Humanity 
to  teach  our  Dalai  Lamas — wisdom.  Why  he  does  not  straight- 
way sit  down  and  frame  a  plan  for  something  like  Plato's  Ideal 
Republic  with  a  new  scheme  for  everything  under  the  Sun  and 
moon — passes  my  poor  comprehension  ! 

(3)  This  is  indeed  benevolent  in  him  to  go  so  far  out  of  his  way 
to  teach  us.  Of  course,  this  is  pure  kindness  and  not  a  desire  to 
over-top  the  rest  of  humanity.  It  is  his  latest  acquisition  of 
mental  evolution,  which,  let  us  hope,  will  not  turn  in — dissolution. 

(4)  Amen!  My  dear  friend,  you  ought  to  be  held  responsible 
for  not  starting  in  his  head  the  glorious  idea  to  offer  his  services 
as  a  General  School  Master  for  Thibet,  Reformer  of  ancient  super- 
stitions and  Saviour  of  future  generations.  Of  course,  were  he 
to  read  this,  he  would  show  immediately  that  I  argue  like  an 
**  educated  monkey." 

(5)  Now  just  listen  to  the  man  jabbering  about  what  he  knows 
nothing.  No  men  living  are  freer  than  we  when  we  have  once 
passed  outside  of  the  stage  of  pupilage.  Docile  and  obedient  but 
never  slaves  during  that  time  we  must  be ;  otherwise,  and  if  we 
pass  our  time  in  arguing  we  never  would  learn  anything  at  all. 

1  The  asterisk  and  numbers  refer  to  Letter  XCIX  from  A.  O.   Hume  on 
which  K.H.  Comments  in  this  letter. — Ed. 

434 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  435 

(6)  And  whoever  thought  of  proposing  him  as  such?  My  dear 
fellow  can  you  really  blame  me  for  shrinking  from  closer  relations 
with  a  man  whose  whole  life  seems  to  hang  upon  incessant  argu- 
mentation and  philipics?  He  says  that  he  is  no  doctrainaire  when 
he  is  the  very  essence  of  one  !  He  is  worthy  of  all  the  respect  and 
even  affection  of  those  who  know  him  well.  But  my  stars  !  in  less 
than  24  hours  he  would  paralyse  any  one  of  us,  who  might  be 
unfortunate  enough  to  come  within  a  mile  of  him,  merely  by  his 
monotonous  piping  about  his  own  views.  No ;  a  thousand  times 
no:  such  men  as  he  make  able  statesmen,  orators  anything  you 
like  but — never  Adepts.  We  have  not  one  of  that  sort  among  us. 
And  that  is  perhaps  why  we  never  felt  the  necessity  for  a  house 
of  lunatics.  In  less  than  three  months  he  would  have  driven 
half  of  our  Thibetan  population  mad  ! 

I  mailed  a  letter  for  you  the  other  day  at  Umballa.  I  see  you 
did  not  receive  it  yet. 

Yours  ever  affectionately, 

KOOT   HOOMI. 


LETTER  No.  XCIX^ 

My  Dear  Koot  Humi, 

I  have  sent  Sinnett  your  letter  to  me  and  he  has  kindly  sent  me 
yours  to  him — I  want  to  make  some  remarks  on  this,  not  by  way 
of  cavil,  but  because  I  am  so  anxious  that  you  should  understand 
me.  Very  likely  it  is  my  conceit,  but  whether  or  no  I  have  a 
deep  rooted  conviction  that  I  could  work  effectually  if  I  only  saw 
my  way,  and  I  cannot  bear  the  idea  of  your  throwing  me  over 
under  any  misconception  of  my  views.  And  yet  every  letter  I 
receive  of  yours,  shows  me  that  you  do  not  yet  realize  what  I 
think  and  feel.^  To  explain  this  I  venture  to  jot  down  a  few  com- 
ments on  your  letter  to  Sinnett. 

You  say  that  if  Russia  does  not  succeed  in  taking  Tibet  it  will 
be  due  to  you  and  herein  at  least  you  will  deserve  our  gratitude — 
I  do  not  agree  to  this  in  the  sense  in  which  you  mean  it.  (i)  If  I 
thought  that  Russia  would  on  the  whole  govern  Tibet  or  Indian 
in  such  wise  as  to  make  the  inhabitants  on  the  whole  happier  than 
they  are  under  the  existing  Government,  I  would  myself  welcome 
and  work  for  her  advent.  But  so  far  as  I  can  judge  the  Russian 
Government  is  a  corrupt  despotism,  hostile  to  individual  liberty 
of  action  and  therefore  to  real  progress     .     .     .     etc. 

Then  about  the  English-speaking  vaquil — .     Was  the  man  so 

1  Extracts  only  are  given  from  this  letter.     The  numbers  in  brackets  refer 
to  the  previous  letter  from  K.H.  No.  XCVIII.— Ed. 


436  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

much  to  blame?  You  and  yours  have  never  taught  him  that 
there  was  anything  in  **  Yog  Vidya. "  The  only  people  who 
have  taken  the  trouble  to  educate  him  at  all  have  in  so  doing 
taught  him  materialism — you  are  disgusted  with  him,  but  who  is 
to  blame?  ...  I  judge  perhaps  as  an  outsider,  but  it  does 
seem  to  me,  that  the  impenetrable  veil  of  secrecy  by  which  you 
surround  yourselves,  the  enormous  difficulty  which  you  oppose  to 
the  communication  of  your  spiritual  knowledge,  are  the  main 
causes  of  the  rampant  materialism  which  you  so  much  deplore. 
.  .  ,  You  alone  do  possess  the  means  of  bringing  home  to  the 
ordinary  run  of  men,  convictions  of  this  nature,  but  you,  appar- 
ently bound  by  ancient  rules,  so  far  from  zealously  disseminating 
this  knowledge,  envelope  it  in  such  a  dense  cloud  of  mystery,  that 
naturally  the  mass  of  mankind,  disbelieve  in  its  existence  .  .  . 
there  can  be  no  justification  for  not  clearly  giving  to  the  world 
the  more  important  features  of  your  philosophy,  accompanying 
the  teaching  of  such  a  series  of  demonstrations  as  should  ensure 
the  attention  of  all  sincere  minds.  That  you  should  hesitate  to 
confer  hastily  great  powers  too  likely  to  be  abused,  I  quite  under- 
stand— but  this  in  no  way  bars  the  dogmatic  denunciation  of  the 
results  of  your  psychical  investigation,  accompanied  by  phe- 
nomena, sufficiently  clear  and  often  repeated  to  prove  that  you 
really  did  know  more  of  the  subject  with  which  you  dealt  than 
Western  Science  does  (2)     .     .     . 

Perhaps  you  will  retort  "  how  about  Slade's  case,"  but  do  not 
forget  that  he  was  taking  money  for  what  he  did ;  making  a 
living  out  of  it.  Very  different  would  be  the  position  of  a  man, 
who  came  forward  to  teach  gratuitously,  manifestly  at  the  sacrifice 
of  his  own  time,  comfort  and  convenience,  what  he  believed  it  to 
be  for  the  good  of  mankind  to  know.  At  first  no  doubt  everyone 
would  say  the  man  was  mad  or  an  impostor — but  then  when 
phenomenon  on  phenomenon  was  repeated  and  repeated,  they 
would  have  to  admit  there  was  something  in  it,  and  within  three 
years, .  you  would  have  all  the  foremost  minds  in  any  civilized 
country  intent  upon  the  question  and  tens  of  thousands  of  anxious 
enquirers  out  of  whom  ten  per  cent,  might  prove  useful  workers 
and  one  in  a  thousand  perhaps  develop  the  necessary  qualifications 
for  becoming  ultimately  an  adept.  If  you  desire  to  react  on  the 
native  through  the  European  mind  that  is  the  way  to  work  it. 
Of  course,  I  speak  under  correction  and  in  ignorance  of  con- 
ditions, possibilities,  etc.,  but  for  this  ignorance  at  any  rate  /  am 
not  to  blame     .     .     .     (3). 

Then  I  come  to  the  passage.  "  Has  it  occurred  to  you  that  the 
two  Bombay  publications  if  not  influenced,  may  at  least  not  have 
been  prevented  by  those  who  might  have  done  so  because  they 
saw  the  necessity  for  that  much  agitation  to  effect  the  double 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  437 

results  of  making  a  needed  diversion  after  the  brooch  grenade, 
and  perhaps  of  trying  the  strength  of  your  personal  interest  in 
occultism  and  theosophy?  I  do  not  say  it  was,  I  but  enquire 
whether  the  contingency  ever  presented  itself  to  your  mind." 
Now  of  course  this  was  addressed  to  Sinnett,  but  still  I  wish  to 
answer  it  in  my  fashion.  First  I  should  say  cui  bono  throwing 
out  such  a  hint?  You  must  know  whether  it  was  so  or  not.  If 
it  was  not,  why  set  us  speculating  as  to  whether  it  may  have 
been,  when  you  know  it  was  not.  But  if  it  was  so,  then  I  sub- 
mit, that  in  the  first  place  an  idiotic  business  like  this  would  be 
no  test  of  any  man's  (there  are  of  course  lots  of  human  beings 
who  are  only  a  sort  of  educated  monkey)  personal  interest  in  any- 
thing- ...  In  the  second  place  if  the  Brothers  did  deliberately 
allow  the  publication  of  those  letters,  I  can  only  say,  that  from 
my  worldly  non-initiated  standpoint,  I  think  they  made  a  sad  mis- 
take .  .  .  and  the  object  of  the  Brothers  being  avowedly  to 
make  the  T.S.  respected,  they  could  have  hardly  selected  any 
worse  means,  than  the  publication  of  these  foolish  letters.  .  .  . 
but  still  when  the  question  is  broadly  put  did  you  ever  consider 
whether  the  Brothers  allowed  this  publication,  I  cannot  avoid 
replying,  if  they  did  not,  it  is  futile  wasting  consideration  on  the 
matter.  If  they  did,  it  seems  to  me  that  they  were  unwise  in  so 
doing.     (4)  i 

Then  come  your  remarks  about  Colonel  Olcott.  Dear  old 
Olcott,  whom  everyone  who  knows  must  love.  I  fully  sympathize 
with  all  you  say  in  his  favour — but  I  cannot  but  take  exception 
to  the  terms  in  which  you  praise  him,  the  whole  burthen  of  which 
is  that  he  never  questions  but  always  obeys.  This  is  the  Jesuit 
organization  over  again — and  this  renunciation  of  private  judg- 
ment, this  abnegation  of  one's  own  personal  responsibility,  this 
accepting  the  dictates  of  outside  voices  as  a  substitute  for  one's 
own  conscience,  is  to  my  mind  a  sin  of  no  ordinary  magnitude. 
.  .  .  Nay  further  I  feel  bound  to  say  that  if  .  .  .  this 
doctrine  of  blind  obedience  is  an  essential  one  in  your  system,  I 
greatly  doubt  whether  any  spiritual  light  it  may  confer  can  com- 
pensate mankind  for  the  loss  of  that  private  freedom  of  action,  that 
sense  of  personal,  individual  responsibility  of  which  it  would 
deprive  them.     •     •     •     (5) 

.  .  .  but  if  it  be  intended  that  I  shall  ever,  get  instructions 
to  do  this  or  that  and  without  understanding  the  why  or  the  where- 
fore without  scrutinizing  consequences,  blind  and  heedless, 
straightway  go  and  do  it, — then  frankly  the  matter  for  me  is  at  an 
end — I  am  no  military  machine — I  am  an  avowed  enemy  of  the 
military  organization — and  a  friend  and  advocate  of  the  industrial 
and  co-operative  system,  and  I  will  join  no  Society  or  no  Body 
which  purport  to  limit  or  control  my  right  of  private  judgment. 


438  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Of  course  I  am  not  a  doctrainaire !,  ( ?)  and  do  not  desire  to  ride 
any  principle  as  a  hobby  horse.     .     .     . 

To  return  to  Olcott — I  do  not  think  his  connection  with  the 
proposed  Society  would  be  any  evil.     .     .     . 

In  the  first  place  I  could  not  object  in  any  way  to  dear  old 
Olcott's  supervision,  because  I  know  it  would  be  nominal,  as 
even  if  he  tried  to  make  it  otherwise  Sinnett  and  I  are  both  quite 
capable  of  shutting  him  up  if  he  interfered  needlessly.  But 
neither  of  us  could  accept  him  as  our  real  guide  (6),  because  we 
both  know  that  we  are  his  intellectual  superiors.  This  is  a  brutal 
way,  as  the  French  would  say,  of  putting  it,  but  que  voulez  vous?. 
Without  perfect  frankness  there  is  no  coming  to  an  understand- 
ing.    ... 

Yours  sincerely, 

A.  O.  Hume. 


LETTER  No.  C^ 

The  new  ''  guide  "  has  meanwhile  a  few  words  to  say  to  you. 
If  you  care  anything  about  our  future  relations,  then,  you  better 
try  to  make  your  friend  and  colleague  Mr.  Hume  give  up  his 
insane  idea  of  going  to  Tibet.  Does  he  really  think  that  unless 
we  allow  it,  he,  or  an  army  of  Pelings  will  be  enabled  to  hunt  us 
out,  or  bring  back  news,  that  we  are,  after  all,  but  a  **  moon- 
shine "  as  she  calls  it.  Madman  is  that  man  who  imagines  that 
even  the  British  Govt  :  is  strong  and  rich  enough  and  powerful 
enough  to  help  him  in  carrying  out  his  insane  plan  !  Those  whom 
we  desire  to  know  us  will  find  us  at  the  very  frontiers.  Those 
who  have  set  against  themselves  the  Chohans  as  he  has — would 
not  find  us  were  they  to  go  L'hassa  with  an  army.  His  carrying 
out  the  plan  will  be  the  signal  for  an  absolute  separation  between 
your  world  and  ours.  His  idea  of  applying  to  the  Govt  :  for  per- 
mission to  go  to  Tibet  is  ridiculous.  He  will  encounter  dangers 
at  every  step  and — ^will  not  even  hear  the  remotest  tidings  about 
ourselves  or  our  whereabouts.  Last  night  a  letter  was  to  be 
carried  to  him  as  well  as  to  Mrs.  Gordon.  The  Chohan  forbid  it. 
You  are  warned,  good  friend — act  accordingly. 

K.  H. 


1  This  communication  is  written  across  the  lines  of  a  letter  of  H.P.B.'s 
to  A.P.S.  ;  the  subject  matter  of  the  2  letters  however  bear  no  relation  to  each 
other. — -Ed. 


I 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  439 

LETTER  No.  CI 

Received  Simla,   1881. 

Your  letter  received.  I  believe  you  had  better  try  and  see 
whether  you  could  not  make  your  ideas  less  polemical  and  dry 
than  his.  I  begin  to  think  there  may  be  some  stuff  in  you  since 
you  are  able  so  to  appreciate  my  beloved  friend  and  brother.  I 
have  attended  to  the  Brahmin  boy's  letter  and  erased  the  offensive 
sentence  replacing  it  with  another.  You  can  now  show  it  to  the 
Maha  Sahib ;  him  so  proud  in  his  bakbak  humility  and  so 
humble  in  his  pride.  As  for  phenomena  you  will  have  none — I 
have  written  through  Olcott.  Blessed  is  he  who  knows  our 
Koothoomi  and  blessed  is  he  who  appreciates  him.  What  I  now 
mean  you  will  understand  some  day.  As  for  your  A.O.H. 
/  know  him  better  than  you  ever  will. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  CII 

Received  Simla,    1881. 

My  dear  young  friend,  I  am  sorry  to  differ  from  you  in  your 
last  two  points.  If  he  can  stand  one  sentence  of  rebuke  he  will 
stand  far  more  than  what  you  would  have  me  alter.  Ou  touts  ou 
rien — as  my  frenchified  K.  H.  taught  me  to  say.  I  have  thought 
your  suggestion  No.  i — good  and  have  fully  adopted  it.  Hoping 
that  you  will  not  refuse  some  day  to  give  me  lessons  of  English. 
I  had  '*  Benjamin  "  stick  a  patch  in  the  page,  and  made  him 
forge  my  caligraphy  while  smoking  a  pipe  on  my  back.  Not 
having  the  right  to  follow  K.H.  I  feel  very  lonely  without  my  boy. 
Hoping  to  be  excused  for  writing,  and  refusal,  I  trust  you  will 
not  shrink  from  telling  the  truth,  if  need  be,  even  in  the  face  of 
the  son  of  **  a  member  of  Parliament."  You  have  too  many 
eyes  watching  you  to  afford  making  mistakes  now. 

M. 


440  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  CIII 

Received  Allahabad,   1880-81. 

To  accomplish  a  plan  like  the  one  in  hand  many  agencies  must 
be  employed  and  failure  in  any  one  direction  jeopardises  the  re- 
sults tho'  it  may  not  defeat  it.  We  have  had  various  checks  and 
may  have  more.  But  observe  :  first — that  two  points  are 
auspicious — thanks  to  kind  Providence ;  Allen  has  become  friendly, 
and  a  friend  of  yours  (I  believe)  is  Resident  at  Kashmir.  And 
second  that  until  the  Maharajah  of  Kashmir,  the  prince  first  on 
the  programme — has  been  sounded  the  vital  point  will  not  have 
been  touched.  He — the  first  as  I  say  on  the  programme  has  been 
left  to  the  last  !  Not  much  was  expected  from  others  and  thus 
far  each  of  the  others  who  has  been  approached  has  failed  to 
respond.  Why  do  not  the  chelas  (?)  do  as  they  are  told?  If 
chelas  neglect  orders,  and  strained  sense  of  delicacy  interferes, 
how  without  miracle  can  results  be  expected  !  I  have  telegraphed 
you  to  await  Olcott's  coming  because  it  is  best  that  you  should 
work  together  at  Calcutta  to  try  and  set  things  in  motion.  One 
word  from  you  to  the  Resident  would  have  been  sufficient — but 
you  are  proud  as  all  your  race.  Olcott  will  be  at  Calcutta  about 
the  20th.  Do  not  listen  to  the  old  woman — she  becomes  weak- 
minded  when  left  to  herself.     But  M.  will  take  her  in  hand. 

Yours, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CIV 

Received  October,  1881.  (?) 
My  dear  friend  :  Your  note  received.  What  you  say  in  it  shows 
in  that  you  entertain  some  fears  lest  I  should  have  been  offended 
by  Mr.  Hume's  remark.  Be  at  ease,  pray,  for  I  never  could  be. 
It  is  not  anything  contained  in  his  observations  that  annoyed  me 
but  the  persistence  with  which  he  was  following  out  a  line  of 
argument  that  I  knew  was  pregnant  with  future  mischief.  This 
argumentum  ad  hominum — renewed  and  taken  up  from  where  we 
had  left  it  off  last  year  was  as  little  calculated  as  possible  to  draw 
the  Chohan  from  his  principles,  or  force  him  into  some  very  desir- 
able concessions.  I  dreaded  the  consequences  and  my  appre- 
hensions had  a  very  good  foundation,  I  can  assure  you.  Please 
assure  Mr.  Hume  of  my  personal  sympathy  and  respect  for  him 
and  give  him  my  most  friendly  regards.  But  I  will  not  have  the 
pleasure  of  "  catching  up  "  any  more  of  his  letters  or  answering 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  441 

them  for  the  next  three  months.  As  nothing  whatever  of  the 
Society's  original  programme  is  yet  settled  upon,  nor  do  I  hope  of 
seeing  it  settled  for  some  time  to  come  I  have  to  give  up  my  pro- 
jected voyage  to  Bhootan,  and  my  Brother  M.  is  to  take  my 
place.  We  are  at  the  end  of  September  and  nothing  could  be 
done  by  October  ist  that  might  warrant  upon  my  insisting  to  go 
thither.  My  chiefs  desire  me  particularly  to  be  present  at  our 
New  Year's  Festivals,  February  next,  and  in  order  to  be  pre- 
pared for  it  I  have  to  avail  myself  of  the  three  intervening  months. 
I  will,  therefore,  bid  you  now  good-bye  my  good  friend,  thanking 
you  warmly  for  all  you  have  done  and  tried  to  do  for  me. 
January  next  I  hope  to  be  able  to  let  you  have  news  from  me ; 
and, — save  new  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  Society  arise  again 
from  "  your  shore  " — you  will  find  me  in  precisely  the  same  dis- 
position and  frame  of  mind  in  which  I  now  part  with  both  of  you. 
Whether  I  will  succeed  in  bringing  my  beloved  but  very  obstinate 
Brother  M.  to  my  way  of  thinking  is  what  I  am  now  unable  to 
say.  I  have  tried  and  will  try  once  more,  but  I  am  really  afraid, 
Mr.  Hume  and  he  would  never  agree  together.  He  told  me  he 
would  answer  your  letter  and  request  through  a  third  party — not 
Mad.  B.  Meanwhile  she  knows  quite  enough  to  furnish  Mr. 
Hume  with  ten  lectures  had  he  but  a  desire  to  deliver  them,  and 
were  he  but  to  recognise  the  fact,  instead  of  entertaining  such  a 
poor  of  her  in  one  direction  and  such  a  very  erroneous  con- 
ception in  some  others.  M.  promised  me  though  to  refresh  her 
failing  memory  and  to  revive  all  she  has  learned  with  him  in  as 
bright  a  way  as  could  be  desired.  Should  the  arrangement  fail 
to  get  Mr.  Hume's  approbation  :  I  will  have  but  to  sincerely 
regret  it,  for  it  is  the  best  I  can  think  of. 

I  leave  orders  with  my  "  Disinherited  "  to  watch  over  all  as 
much  as  it  lies  in  his  weak  powers. 

And  now  I  must  close.  I  have  but  a  few  hours  before  me, 
to  prepare  for  my  long,  very  long  journey.  Hoping  we  part  as 
good  friends  as  ever,  and  that  we  might  meet  as  better  ones  still. 
Let  me  now  "  astrally  "  shake  hands  with  you  and  assure  you  of 
my  good  feelings  once  more. 

Yours  as  ever, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CV 
My  dear  friend — 

Before  I  give  you  any  definite  answer  to  your  business  letter 
I  desire  to  consult  our  venerable  Chohan.      We  have,  as  you  say 


442  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

12  months  time  before  us.  For  the  present  I  have  a  little  busi- 
ness on  hand,  that  is  very  important,  as  it  hinges  on  to  a  series 
of  other  deliberate  untruths,  whose  real  character  it  is  nigh  time 
to  prove.  We  are  called  in  so  many  words,  or  rather  in  five 
letters  "liars"  (sic)  and  accused  of  "base  ingratitude."  The 
language  is  strong,  and  willing  as  we  should  feel  to  borrow  many 
a  good  thing  from  the  English,  it  is  not  politeness,  I  am  afraid, 
that  we  would  feel  inclined  to  learn  from  the  class  of  gentlemen 
represented  by  Mr.  Hume.  Left  standing  by  itself,  the  business 
I  am  now  concerned  with,  you  may  truly  regard,  as  of  very  little 
im|x>rtance  collated  with  other  facts  unless  shewn  on  good  and 
unimpeachable  testimony  as,  to  say  the  least,  a  perversion  of  facts 
— it  tends  to  become  a  cause  which  will  yield  unpleasant  effects 
and  ruin  the  whole  fabric.  Do  not,  therefore,  I  pray  you,  stop 
to  argue  the  utter  unworthiness  of  the  small  remembrance,  but 
relying  upon  our  seeing  something  of  the  future  which  remains 
hidden  to  you,  pray  answer  my  question,  as  a  friend  and  brother. 
When  you  have  done  that  you  will  learn  why  this  letter  is  written. 

H.P.B.  has  just  quarrelled  with  Djual  Khool,  who  maintained 
that  the  unpleasant  proceeding  was  not  entered  in  the  minutes  by 
Davison,  which  she  affirmed  that  it  was.  Of  course  he  was 
right  and  she  wrong.  Yet  if  her  memory  failed  her  in  this 
particular,  it  served  her  well  as  to  the  fact  itself.  You  remember, 
of  course  the  event.  Meeting  of  the  Eclectics  in  the  Billiard 
room.  Witnesses — yourself,  the  Hume  pair,  the  Gordon  couple, 
Davison  and  H.P.B.  Subject :  S.  K.  Chatterji  his  letter  to  Hume 
expressing  contempt  for  theosophy  and  suspicious  about  the  good 
faith  of  H.P.B.  Handing  over  the  letter  I  had  returned  her  to 
Mr.  Hume  she  said  that  I  had  given  orders  through  her  to  the 
General  Council  to  invite  the  Babu  to  resign.  Thereupon  Mr. 
Hume  proclaimed  most  emphatically  :  "In  such  case  your  Koot 
Hoomi  is  no  gentleman.  The  letter  is  a  private  letter  and  under 
these  circumstances  no  gentleman  could  ever  think  of  acting  as 
desired  by  him."  Now  the  letter  was  not  a  private  one,  since 
it  was  circulated  by  Mr.  Hume  among  the  members.  At  the  time 
I  paid  no  attention  whatever  to  the  fling.  Nor  had  I  come  to 
know  of  it  through  H.P.B.,  but  through  G.  Khool  who  had  heard 
it  himself  and  has  an  excellent  memory. 

Now,  will  you  oblige  me  by  writing  for  me  two'  lines  telling  me 
as  you  remember  the  event.  Were  the  words  "  no  gentleman  " 
applied  to  your  humble  servant  or  in  general.  I  ask  you  as  a 
gentleman,  not  as  a  friend.  This  has  a  very  important  bearing 
on  the  future.  When  done,  I  will  let  you  see  the  latest  develop- 
ment of  the  infinite  fertility  of  resource  at  the  command  of  our 
mutual  friend.  It  may  be,  that  under  any  other  circumstances 
Mr.  H. 's  braggadocios  about  Lord  Ripon's  high  opinion  of  Hume's 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  443 

theosophy  and  his  "  big-  talk  "  about  his  literary,  monetary,  and 
other  services  rendered  to  us  might  pass  unnoticed,  for  we  all 
know  his  weaknesses;  but  in  the  present  case  they  must  be  dealt 
with  so  as  not  to  leave  him  a  single  straw  to  catch  at,  because 
his  last  letter  to  me  (which  you  will  see) — is  not  only  entirely  at 
variance  with  all  the  acknowledged  rules  of  good  breeding,  but 
also  because  unless  his  own  mis-statements  are  actually  proved, 
he  will  boast  hereafter  of  having  given  the  direct  lie  to  our 
Brotherhood,  and  that  no  member  of  the  latter  could  ever  permit 
it.  You  cannot  fail  to  remark  the  absurd  contrast  between  his 
apparent  confidence  in  his  wonderful  powers  and  superiority  and 
the  soreness  he  exhibits  at  the  slightest  remark  cast  upon  him  by 
myself.  He  must  be  made  to  realize  that  were  he  really  as  great 
as  he  asserts,  or  even  if  he  were  himself  quite  satisfied  of  his 
greatness  and  the  infallability  of  his  power  of  memory,  whatever 
even  the  adepts  might  think,  he  would  remain  indifferent  to,  at 
any  rate,  would  not  be  as  vulgarly  abusive  as  he  is  now.  His 
sensitiveness  is  in  itself  evidence  of  the  doubts  lurking  in  his 
mind  as  to  the  validity  of  the  claims  he  so  boastfully  puts  forth ; 
hence  his  irritability,  excited  by  anything  and  everything  that  is 
likely  to  disturb  his  self-delusions. 

I  hope  you  will  not  refuse  a  direct  and  clear  answer  to  my  direct 
and  clear  question. 

Yours  ever  affectionately, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CVI 

I  desire  to  answer  your  letter  carefully  and  explicitly.  I  must, 
therefore  ask  you  to  accord  me  a  few  days  longer  when  I  will 
be  quite  at  leisure.  We  have  to  take  measures  for  effectually 
protecting  our  country  and  vindicating  the  spiritual  authority  of 
our  Priestly  King.  Perhaps,  never,  since  the  invasion  of  Alex- 
ander and  his  Greek  legions  have  so  many  Europeans  stood 
together  under  arms  so  near  to  our  frontiers  as  they  da  now.  My 
friend,  your  correspond^ents  seem  to  acquaint  you  with  the  greatest 
news  but  superficially — at  best :  p>erhaps,  because  they  do  not  know 
it  themselves.  Never  mind  it  will  all  be  known  some  day.  How- 
ever, as  soon  as  I  get  a  few  hours  leisure,  you  will  find  at  your 
service  your  friend. 

K.  H. 

Try  to  believe  more  than  you  do  in  the  "  old  lady."  She  does 
rave  betimes ;  but  she  is  truthful  and  does  the  best  she  can  for  you. 


444  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  CVII 
My  dear  Ambassador — 

To  quiet  the  anxiety  I  see  lurking  within  your  mind,  and  which 
has  even  a  more  definite  form  than  you  have  expressed,  let  me 
say  that  I  will  use  my  best  endeavours  to  calm  our  highly  sensitive 
— not  always  sensible  old  friend,  and  make  her  stop  at  her  pK>st. 
Ill  health  resulting  from  natural  causes,  and  mental  anxiety  have 
madie  her  nervous  to  an  extreme  degree  and  sadly  impaired  her 
usefulness  to  us.  For  a  fortnight  past  she  has  been  all  but  use- 
less and  her  emotions  have  sped  along  her  nerves  like  electricity 
thro'  a  telegraphic  wire.  All  has  been  chaos.  I  am  sending 
these  few  lines  by  a  friend  to  Olcott  so  that  they  may  be  for- 
warded without  her  knowledge. 

Consult  freely  with  our  friends  in  Europe  and  return  with  a  good 
book  in  your  hand  and  a  good  plan  in  your  head.  Encourage  the 
sincere  brethren  at  Galles  in  their  work  of  education.  Some  cheer- 
ing words  from  you  will  give  them  heart.  Telegraph  to  Nicolas 
Dias  Inspector  of  Police  Galles  that  you,  a  member  of  the  Council 
of  the  T.S.  are  coming  (the  date  and  name  of  steamer  given)  and 
I  will  cause  H.P.B.  to  do  the  same  to  another  person.  Think  on 
the  way  of  your  true  friend. 

K.  H.  and  .     .     .     . 


LETTER  No.  CVIIP 

The  man  sent  by  me  last  night  was  a  Ladaku  ch^la  and  had 
nothing  to  do  with  you.  What  you  just  said  about  **  initiation  " 
is  true.  Any  Fellow  who  truly  and  sincerely  rei>ents  ought  to  be 
taken  back.     As  you  see  I  am  with  you  constantly. 


LETTER  No.  CIX 

I  cannot  make  a  miracle,  or  I  would  have  shown  myself  to  Mrs. 
Sinnett  at  least  in  spite  of  the  matches  of  the  French  woman 
and  to  yourself  in  spite  of  the  physical  and  psychical  conditions. 
Kindly  realize  that  my  sense  of  justice  is  so  strong  that  I  would 
not  deny  you  a  satisfaction  I  gave  Kamaswami.  If  you  have  not 
seen  me  it  is  simply  because  it  was  an  impossibility.  If  you  had 
gratified  K.H.  by  attending  the  meeting  no  harm  would  as  a 
matter  of  fact  have  been  done  to  you  for  K.H.  had  foreseen  and 
prepared  all.  And  the  very  effort  you  made  to  be  firm  even  at 
supposed  personal  risk,  would  have  totally  changed  your  condition. 
Now  let  me  see  what  the  future  has  in  store. 

M. 
1  This  fragment   is  in   M.'s  handwriting. — Ed. 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  445 

LETTER  No.  CX 
My  dear  friend — 

May  I  trouble  you  to  hand  the  enclosed  Rs  :  50  to  Darbhag-iri 
Nath  when  you  see  him?  The  little  man  is  in  trouble  but  has  to 
be  remonstrated;  and  the  best  punishment  for  an  accepted  Chela 
is  to  receive  the  reproof  through  a  **  lay  "  one.  On  his  way  from 
Ghoom  to  Beng-al  through  imprudence  and  indiscretion  he  lost 
money,  and,  instead  of  addressing  himself  directly  to  me  he  tried 
to  dodge  "  the  Master's  eye  "  and  called  upon  a  probationary  chela 
upon  whom  he  has  not  the  sligfhtest  claim  to  help  him  out  of  his 
difficulty.  So  please  tell  him  that  Ram  S.  Gargya  has  not  received 
his  telegram  from  Burdwan  but  that  it  w^ent  direct  into  the  hands 
of  the  Lama  who  notified  me  of  it.  Let  him  be  more  prudent  in 
future.  You  now  see  the  danger  in  allowing-  young  chelas  out  of 
sight  even  for  a  few  days.  Money  losses  are  nothing-,  but  it  is 
the  results  involved  and  the  temptation  that  are  terrible.  My 
friend,  I  am  afraid  you  too,  have  been  again  imprudent.  I  have 
a  letter  from  Colonel  Chesney — very  polite  and  quite  diplomatic. 
Several  such  messages  may  do  for  an  excellent  refrigerator. 

Yours, 

K.H. 

P.S. — I  am  glad  to  find  you  reprinting  in  the  Pioneer  *'  A  Day 
with  my  Indian  Cousins"  by  Atettjee  Sahibjee,  etc.  From 
Vanity  Fair.  Last  year  I  had  asked  you  to  give  some  work,  to 
the  author  of  those  sketches  after  the  manner  of  the  once  famous 
Ali  Baha — but  was  refused.  You  thought  he  did  not  write  well 
enough  for  the  Pioneer.  You  distrusted  a  native  and  now  his 
articles  are  accepted  in  Vanity  Fair. 

I  am  glad  for  poor  Padshah.  He  is  a  madcap,  yet  of  excellent 
heart  and  sincerely  devoted  to  Theosophy  and — our  Cause. 

I  must  consult  you.  Hume  writes  to  H.P.B.  (a  most  loving 
letter  !),  He  sends  her  two  corrected  copies  of  a  letter  of  his  in 
the  Pioneer  of  the  20th  and  remarking  that  the  time  has 
come  when,  if  the  native  press  all  over  the  country  will  only 
follow  this,  his — lead,  push  the  question  strongly — material 
concessions  will  be  obtained — he  adds  "  you  will  of  course  reprint 
this  in  the  Theosophist.'*  How  can  she  do  it,  without  connecting 
her  journal  directly  with  politics?  I  would  have  extremely  liked 
to  have  his  letter  on  education  reproduced  from  your  Pioneer  in 
the  Theosophist,  but  hesitated  to  tell  her  to  do  it,  fearing  it  would 
give  a  new  colouring  to  the  magazine.  Some  of  his  articles  are 
extremely  able. 

Well  and  what  are  you  to  do  about  anniversary  of  "  Eclectic  *' 
and  cyclic  conclusion? 

She  is  better  and  we  have  left  her  near  Darjeeling.       She  is  not 

30 


446  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

safe  in  Sikkim.  The  Dugpa  opposition  is  tremendous  and  unless 
we  devote  the  whole  of  our  time  to  watching  her,  the  **  Old  Lady  " 
will  come  to  grief  since  she  is  now  unable  to  take  care  of  herself. 
See  what  happened  to  the  little  man — he  will  tell  you.  You  ought 
to  take  her  in  for  October  and  November. 

Yours  again, 

K.H. 

This  little  wretch  forced  me  to  blush  before  you  on  account  of 
his  indiscretion — **  from  a  European  standpoint."  I  cannot  be 
always  looking  after  my  Chelas  in  their  travels — and  their  know- 
ledge of  your  ways  and  usages  amounts  to  cypher!  It  is  but 
to-day  that  I  learned  of  his  borrowing  from  you  Rs  :  30  through 
Djual  Khool.  He  had  no  business  and  no  right  to  do  so ;  but  you 
must  pardon  him  for  he  has  not  the  least  conception  of  the  differ- 
ence between  a  Tibetan  and  a  European  chela  and  acted  as  uncere- 
moniously with  you  as  he  would  with  Djual  Khool.  I  send  you 
back  with  thanks  the  money  lent,  hoping  you  will  not  take  us  all 
for  savages ! 

I  am  writing  you  a  long  letter  by  fits  and  starts  as  usual.  When 
that  business  letter  will  be  on  it's  way,  I  will  send  another  with 
answers  to  your  questions. 

A  ludicrous  thing  happened  in  connexion  with  C.  C.  M.'s  letter 
that  I  will  relate  in  my  next. 

Hail  and  success  to  the  **  new  President "  at  last  !  ! 

Yours  ever, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXI 
My  dear  friend, 

The  present  will  be  delivered  at  your  house  by  Darbhagiri  Nath, 
a  young  Chela  of  mine,  and  his  brother  Chela,  Chandra  Cusho. 
They  are  forbidden  to  enter  anyone's  house  without  being  invited 
to  do  so.  Therefore,  I  pray  you  to  pardon  our  savage  customs 
and,  at  the  same  time  to  humour  them  by  sending  them  an  invita- 
tion in  your  name,  either  now — if  you  can  receive  them  privately 
and  without  risking  their  meeting  at  your  place  with  any  stranger ; 
or — at  any  other  time  during  the  evening,  or  late  at  night. 

I  have  not  the  slightest  objection  to  Mrs.  S.  your  lady  seeing 
either  of  them  ;  but  I  pray  her  not  to  address  them,  since  they  are 
forbidden  by  our  religious  laws  to  speak  with  any  lady — their 
mothers  and  sisters  excepted! — and  that  she  would  otherwise 
greatly  embarass  them.  I  pray  her  to  do  so  in  my  name,  and 
for  my  sake.       I  trust  also  to  your  friendship  that  none  btU  you 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  447 

will  si>eak  with  them.  They  have  their  mission  and  beyond  that 
they  must  not  gfo  (i)  to  deliver  into  your  hands  my  "  answer  to  the 
famous  contradiction  "  and  (2)  to  interview  Mr.  Fern.  If  you  have 
an  answer  for  me,  Darbhagiri  Nath  will  come  for  it  whenever  you 
are  ready.  I  also  entreat  you  most  earnestly  not  to  inflict  upon 
them  Mr.  Hume.  Do  not  think  of  what  has  happened  until  every- 
thing is  explained. 

Ever  yours, 

K.  H. 
P.S. — They  are  also  forbidden  to  shake  hands  with  any  man  or 
woman  i.e.  to  tmwh  anyone;  but  you  can  invite  my  little  man  to 
come  and  talk  with  you  as  much  as  you  like  provided  you  are 
discreet. 


LETTER  No.  CXII 

My  reply  to  Colonel  Chesney  in  answer  to  his  letter  was  already 
written  and  ready  to  be  forwarded  by  my  little  man,  when  I 
received  yours  advising  me  not  to  correspond  with  him.  There- 
fore I  forward  it  to  you  to  be  read,  and  should  you  think  it 
expedient — to  deliver  it  to  it's  address.  It  seems  rude  to  leave 
his  letter  without  any  acknowledgment — whether  he  is  or  is  not  in 
sympathy  with  the  movement. 

But  good  friend  I  leave  this  entirely  in  your  hands  and  pray 
you  to  use  in  the  matter  your  own  discretion.  You  ought  to  know 
that  decidedly  young  Fern  is  a  little  humbug  and  worse — a  con- 
genital though  often  an  irresponsible  liar.  He  tries  in  his  last 
to  bamboozle  M.  and  make  him  believe  he,  Fern,  is  a  new  Zanoni 
en  herhe.  He  is  testing  us  in  every  way  and  manner  and  constant 
skirmishes  notwithstanding  has  a  certain  and  very  strong  influence 
on  Hume,  whom  he  bamboozles  with  imaginary  **  powers  "  whose 
mission  is  to  supplant  the  Brothers.  He  made  him  believe 
indirectly  he  belonged  to  a  Society  whose  **  name  is  unmention- 
able "  a  Society  that  seeks  no  one,  whose  one  member  knows  not 
who  the  other  is,  nor  will  he  know  till  the  real  nature  of  the 
"  Brothers  "  is  made  public,  though  the  system  on  which  it  works 
precludes  all  deception,  etc.  etc.  To  M.  he  writes  that  he  con- 
fesses he  •*  ought  not  to  have  put  temptation  "  in  his  (Hume's) 
way.  For  having  over  estimated  his  strength,  he  has  "  un- 
wittingly caused  him  to  fall."  This  individual  is  at  the  bottom 
of  much  that  has  happened.  Watch  and  beware  of  him.  One 
thing  is  certain  though.  These  are  not  times  for  visiting  with 
severity  the  offences  of  the  two  indiscreet  and  but  half  faithful 
**  lay  chelas."      Now  that  Mr.  Hume  alienated  the  Chohan  and  M. 


448  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

I  remain  alone  to  carry  on  the  difficult  work.  You  read  H.*s 
letter.  How  do  you  like  that  huge  shadow  of  a  Yogi  with 
solemnly  stretched  out  hand,  and  defiant  haughty  eyes  disavowing 
with  contemptuous  gesture  the  intent  of  hurting  the  Society. 

Let  me  echo  your  sigh  for  the  poor  Society,  and  before  fading 
away  again  into  the  foggy  distance  between  Simla  and  Pari  Yong 
assure  you  of  my  ever  friendly  feelings  for  yourself, 

K.  H. 

Mr.  W.  Oxley  wants  to  join  the  Eclectic.  I'll  tell  her  to  send 
to  you  on  his  letter.  Kindly  write  to  him  to  say  that  he  must 
not  feel  vexed  at  my  denial.  I  know  he  is  thoroughly  sincere  and 
as  incapable  of  a  deception  or  even  exaggeration  as  you  are.  But 
he  trusts  too  much  to  his  subjects.  Let  him  be  cautious  and 
very  guarded ;  and,  if  he  joins  the  Society  I  may  help  and  even 
correspond  with  him  through  you.  He  is  a  valuable  man,  and 
indeed,  more  worthy  of  sincere  respect  than  any  other  Spiritualistic 
mystic  I  know  of.  And  though  I  have  never  approached  him 
astrally  or  conversed  with  I  have  often  examined  him  in  thought. 
Do  not  fail  to  write  to  him  with  the  first  steamer. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXIII 

Private. 
My  dearest  Friend, 

Please  pardon  me  for  troubling  you  with  my  own  business — but 
though  I  am  forced  by  the  Chohan  to  answer  I  really  do  not  know 
whether  I  am  within  the  limits  of  your  code  of  politeness  or  out- 
side of  it. — I  have  a  long  letter  to  write  to  you  upon  something 
that  troubles  me  and  I  want  you  to  advise  me.  I  am  in  a  most 
disagreeable  p>osition  placed  as  I  am  between  the  risk  of  betraying 
a  friend  and — your  code  of  honour  (the  friend  is  not  yourself.)  I 
hope  I  may  place  an  entire  confidence  in  your  personal  friendship 
and  of  course  honour. 

Honour  !  What  funny  very  funny  notions  you  seem  to  have 
about  that  sacred  thing  !  Do  not  be  frightened  for  indeed  the 
whole  thing  is  more  ludicrous  than  dangerous.  Yet  there  is  a 
danger  in  losing  Mr.  Hume. 

To-morrow  I  will  write  more  fully.  Fern  is  a  little  ass  but  he 
is  a  clairvoyant  and  likewise  a  little  hallucinated.  But  Mr.  H.  is 
too  severe  upon  him.  The  boy  hopyes  that  if  we  are  myths  or 
frauds  he  will  find  us  out.  Well  where  is  the  harm  in  such  a 
hallucination?  Yet  H.  betrays  his  confidence  and  sends  me  a 
letter  three  yards  long  with  advice  how  to  get  out  of  our  difficul- 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  449 

ties  1  He  wants  to  be  our  benefactor  and  place  us  under  an 
eternal  obligation  for  saving  M.  from  falling  once  more  into  Fern's 
trap.  I  would  have  sent  you  on  his  letter  but  it  is  superscribed 
**  private  and  confidential  "  and  I  would  be  in  his  eyes  no  gentle- 
man  were  he  find  out  such  a  breach  of  confidence.  Well  I  want 
you  to  read  this  letter  at  any  rate  and  leave  it  at  your  option  to 
be  either  sent  or  destroyed.  If  you  do  not  want  him  to  know  you 
have  read  it — well  put  a  stamp  on  it  and  throw  it  into  the  letter- 
box. I  do  not  think  he  will  take  you  into  his  confidtence  this  once. 
However,  I  may  be  mistaken.  Soon  you  will  learn  more. 
Yours  affectionately, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXIV 
Received  about  February,  1882,  Allahabad. 

The  letter  forwarded  is  from  a  Baboo — ^your  nausea — inspiring 
Bengalee,  from  whom,  I  ask  you,  for  K.H.'s  sake — ^to  conceal  the 
feeling  of  queasiness  that  may  overcome  you  at  his  sight — if  he 
comes.  Read  it  with  attention.  The  lines  underlined  contain 
the  germ  in  them  of  the  greatest  reform,  the  most  beneficent 
results  obtained  by  the  Theosophical  movement.  Were  our  friend 
of  Simla  less  cantankerous,  I  might  have  tried  to  influence  him 
to  draft  out  special  rules  and  a  distinct  pledge  with  apps  and 
obligs  for  the  Zenana  women  of  India.  Profit  by  the  suggestion 
and  see  whether  you  can  prevail  upon  him  to  do  so.  Write  to  him 
without  delay  to  Bombay  to  come  and  meet  the  old  woman  at  your 
house  and  then  pass  him  on  to  his  countryman  and  Brother-Fellow 
the  "  Prayag  "  Babu — the  young  leach  of  your  Society.  Then 
telegraph  to  her  to  Meerut  to  come  using  my  name — otherwise  she 
will  not.  I  already  answered  him  in  her  name.  Do  not  feel 
surprised,  for  everything  I  have  a  reason  of  mine,  as  you  may 
learn  some  years  hence. 

And  why  should  you  be  so  anxious  to  see  my  chits  to  other 
people?  Have  you  not  sufficient  trouble  to  make  out  my  letters 
addressed  to  yourself? 

M. 


LETTER  No.  CXV 

Received  during  brief  visit  to  Bombay  in  January,   1882. 

It  was  certainly  K.H.'s  and  my  great  desire  that  since  Scott 
could  not  attend  the  anniversary  you  should — not  to  take  any  part 


450  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

in  its  proceedings  but  simply — be  present  at  it.  This  hapless 
organization  will  once  more  exhibit  its  representation  without  one 
single  European  of  position  and  influence.  But  neither  of  us 
would  force  a  course  of  action — against  your  wish — upon  you. 
Therefore  what  I  say  must  not  be  construed  into  an  order  or  urgent 
request.  We  think  it  good — but  you  must  obey  your  own  cool 
judgment — the  more  so  as  perhaps  to-day  marks  a  crisis.  One 
reason  for  my  calling  you  was  K.H.'s  wish  that  you  should  be 
brought  under  certain  magnetic  and  other  occult  influences  that 
would  favourably  act  upon  yourself  in  future. 

I  will  write  more  to-morrow  for  I  yet  hope  you  will  give  us 
a  day  or  two  and  so  let  us  have  time  to  see  what  can  be  done 
for  you  by  Khoothoomi. 

M. 


LETTER  No.  CXVI 

A,  P.  Sinnett. 
My  dear  Friend, 

I  am  tired  and  disgusted  with  all  this  wrangling  to  death. 
Please  read  this  before  giving  it  to  Mr.  Hume.  If,  as  a  debt 
of  gratitude,  he  would  exact  but  a  pound  of  flesh,  I  would  have 
naught  to  say — but  a  pound  of  useless  verbiage  is  indeed  more 
than  even  I — can  stand  ! 

Yours  ever, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXVII 

This  will  introduce  to  my  Chela  (lay)  No.  i,  "  lay  Chela  No.  2  " 
— Mohini  Babu.  The  experiences  of  the  latter  and  v.'hat  he  has 
to  say  will  interest  Mr.  Sinnett.  Mohini  Babu  is  sent  by  me 
on  a  certain  mission  in  reference  to  the  forthcoming  and  very 
threatening  end  of  the  cycle  (theosophical) — and  has  no  time  to 
lose.      Please,  receive  him  at  once  and  take  his  evidence. 

Yours, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXVIII 

This  is  a  fraudulent  intrusion  into  private  correspondence.       No 
time  to  even  answer  your  queries — will  do  so  to-morrow  or  next 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  451 

day.  For  several  days  I  have  noticed  something-  like  anxiety  in 
your  lady's  thoughts  about  "  Den."  Children's  diseases  are 
seldom  dangerous  even  when  somewhat  neglected,  if  the  child 
has  naturally  a  strong  constitution  ;  the  pampered  ones  falling 
naturally  victims  to  contagion. 

I  remarked  her  fear  of  carrying  the  germs  of  the  disease  home 
with  her  at  Mr.  Hume's  the  other  day,  as  my  attention  was  drawn 
to  her  by  the  **  Disinherited  "  who  was  on  the  watch.  Fear  not 
in  any  case.  I  hope  you  will  pardon  me  if  I  advise  you  to  sow 
up  the  enclosed  in  a  small  bag — a  part  of  it  will  do — and  hang  it 
on  the  child's  neck. 

Unable  as  I  am  to  carry  into  your  homestead  the  full  magnetism 
of  my  physical  person  I  do  the  next  best  thing  by  sending  you  a 
lock  of  hair  as  a  vehicle  for  the  transmission  of  my  aura  in  a  con- 
centrated condition.  Do  not  allow  anyone  to  handle  it  except 
Mrs.  Sinnett.  You'll  do  well  not  to  approach  Mr.  Fern  (?)  too 
near  for  a  time. 

Yours, 


K.  H. 


Say  nothing  of  this  note  to  anybody. 


LETTER  No.  CXIX 

Give  Mr.  Sinnett  my  salams — and  ask  him  to  comment  upon 
the  slip  enclosed.  He  may  know  what  I  mean  him  to  write  upon 
the  subject  editorially.  Tell  him  also  that  time  is  short  and 
precious  and  ought  not  to  be  wasted. 

K.  H. 
The  following  may  lead  later  on  to  a  curious  confirmation  ot 
our   "  obscuration  "    doctrine   which    so   puzzles   my    friend — the 
Editor  of  the  "  Phoenix." 

Will  you  kindly  and  likewise,  comment  upon  it  and  oblige 
thereby, 

Yours, 

K.  H. 
Newspaper  Cutting 

Sir  John  Lubbock's  opinion  confirms  or  endorses  the  con- 
clusion long  since  put  forth  by  some  of  the  most  eminent 
astronomers,  namely,  that  there  are  now  in  the  solar  system,  or 
firmament,  many  dark  bodies- — that  is,  bodies  which  now  emit  no 
light,  or  comparatively  little.  He  points  out,  for  example,  that 
in  the  case  of  Procyon  the  existence  of  an  invisible  body  is 
demonstrated  by  the  movement  of  the  visible  stars.  Another 
illustration  which  he  cites  relates  to  the  notable  phenomena  pre- 
sented by  Algow,  the  bright  star  in  the  Head  of  Medusa.     This 


452  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

star  shines  without  change  for  two  days  and  thirteen  hours ;  then, 
in  three  hours  and  a  half,  dwindles  from  a  star  of  the  second  to 
one  of  the  fourth  magnnitude ;  and  then,  in  another  three  and  a 
half  hours,  resumes  its  original  brilliancy.  According  to  the  view 
entertained  by  Professor  Lubbock,  these  changes  must  be  re- 
garded as  indicating  the  presence  of  an  opaque  body,  which  inter- 
cepts at  regular  intervals  a  part  of  the  light  emitted  by  Algow. 


LETTER  No.  CXX 

To  Mr.  Sinnett's  lady. 

Wear  the  hair  enclosed  in  a  cotton  tape  (and  if  preferred  in  a 
metal  armlet)  a  little  lower  than  your  left  armpit  below  the  left 
shoulder.  Follow  advice  that  will  be  given  to  you  by  Henry 
Olcott.  It  is  good  and  we  shall  not  object.  Harbour  not  ill-feel- 
ing even  against  an  enemy  and  one  who  has  wronged  you  :  for 
hatred  acts  like  an  antidote  and  may  damage  the  effect  of  even 
this  hair. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXXI 

Received  at  Bombay  on  return  to  India,   July,   1881. 

Thanks.  The  little  things  came  very  useful,  and  I  gratefully 
acknowledge  them.  You  ought  to  go  to  Simla.  Try.  I  confess 
to  a  weakness  on  my  part  to  see  you  do  so.  We  must  patiently 
await  the  results,  as  I  told  you  of  the  Book.  The  blanks  are  pro- 
voking and  "  tantalizing  "  but  we  cannot  go  against  the  inevit- 
able. And  as  it  is  always  good  to  mend  an  error  I  already  did  so 
by  presenting  the  Occult  World  to  the  C— *s  notice.  Patience, 
patience. 

Yours,  ever 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXXH 

My  good  friend ;  tho*  Mr.  Eglington  has  promised  to  return  by 
the  end  of  June  he  cannot  do  so — after  the  danger  that  has 
threatened  him  at  Calcutta  on  the  very  day  of  his  departure — 
unless  he  is  thoroughly  protected  against  any  such  disgraceful 
recurrence.  If  Mr.  Hume  is  anxious  to  have  him,  let  him  for 
want  of  something  better — offer  him  the  place  of  his  private  secre- 
tary, for  a  year  or  so,  now  that  Mr.  Davison  is  away.     If  you  or 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  453 

Mr.  Hume  are  really  anxious  to  see  me — (or  rather  my  astral 
Self)  there's  a  chance  for  you.  H.P.B.  is  too  old  and  not  passive 
enough.  Besides  she  has  done  too  many  services  to  be  forced 
into  it.  With  Mr.  Eglington,  and  he  willing,  the  thing  would 
become  easy.  Profit  then  by  the  chance  offered  :  in  a  year  more  it 
will  be  too  late. 

Yours, 
London,  April  27.  K.  H. 

To  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett, 

Editor  Pioneer,  Allahabad. 


LETTER  No.  CXXIII 

Do  not  be  impatient — good  friend,  I  will  answer  to-morrow. 
When  you  learn  one  day  the  difficulties  that  are  in  my  way  you 
will  see  how  mistaken  you  are  at  times  in  your  notions  about  my 
movements. 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXXIV 

Cannot  you  manage  to  pick  up  for  me  three  pebbles?  They 
must  come  from  the  shores  of  the  Adriatic — Venice  preferably ; 
as  near  to  the  Dogal  Palace  as  they  can  possibly  be  found  ;  (under 
the  Bridge  of  Sighs  would  be  the  most  desirable  but  for  the  mud 
of  the  ages).  The  pebbles  must  be  of  three  different  colours  one 
— red,  the  other  black;  the  third  white  (or  greyish).  If  you 
manage  to  get  them,  please  keep  them  apart  from  every  influence 
and  contact  but  yours,  and  oblige  ever  yours, 

K.  H. 


LETTER  No.  CXXV 

I  am  commanded  by  my  beloved  Master,  known  in  India  and 
the  Western  lands  as  Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Singh,  to  make  in  his  name 
the  following  declaration,  in  answer  to  a  certain  statement  made 
by  Mr.  W.  Oxley,  and  sent  by  him  for  publication  in  the 
Theosophist.  It  is  claimed  by  the  said  gentleman  that  my  Master 
Koot  Hoomi  (a)  has  thrice  visited  him  "  by  the  astral  form,"  and 
{b)  that  he  had  a  conversation  with  Mr.  Oxley  when,  as  alleged 
he  gave  the  latter  certain  explanations  in  reference  to  astral  bodies 
in  general,  and  the  incompetency  of  his  own  Mayavy-rupa  to  pre- 
serve its  consciousness   simultaneously  with  the  body   "  at  both 


454  THE  MAHxiTMA  LETTERS 

ends  of  the  line  '* — therefore  my  Master  declares  that : — 
I.  Whomsoever  Mr.  Oxley  may  have  seen  and  conversed  with  at 
the  time  described,  it  was  not  with  Koot  Hoomi,  the  writer  of 
the  letters  published  in  the  Occult  World. 

2.  Notwithstanding  that  my  Master  knows  the  gfentleman  in 
question  who  once  honoured  him  with  an  autograph  letter,  there- 
by giving  him  the  means  of  making  his  (Mr.  Oxley 's)  acquaint- 
ance and  of  sincerely  admiring  his  intuitional  powers  and  western 
learning — ^yet  he  has  never  approached  him  whether  astrally  or 
otherwise  :  Nor  has  he  ever  had  any  conversation  with  Mr.  Oxley, 
least  of  all  one  of  that  nature  in  which  both  the  subject  and  pre- 
dicate, the  premises  and  conclusions  are  all  wrong. 

3.  In  consequence  of  the  said  claims,  the  repetition  of  which  is 
calculated  to  lead  many  of  our  theosophists  into  error,  my  Master 
has  determined  to  issue  the  following  resolution. 

Henceforth  any  medium  or  seer  who  will  feel  disposed  to  claim 
either  to  have  been  visited  by,  or  to  have  held  conversation  with, 
or  to  have  seen  my  Master, — will  have  to  substantiate  the  claim 
by  prefixing  his  or  her  statement  with  three  secret  words,  which 
he,  my  Teacher,  will  divulge  to  and  leave  in  the  safe  keeping  of 
Mr.  A.  O.  Hume,  and  Mr.  A.  P.  Sinnett  the  respective  President 
and  Vice-President,  of  **  The  Eclectic  Theosophical  Society  "  of 
Simla.  As  long  as  they  do  not  find  these  three  words  correctly 
repeated  by  a  medium  or  heading  a  statement  to  that  effect, 
whether  verbal  or  printed,  emanating  from  him  or  her,  or  on  his 
or  her  behalf,  the  claim  shall  be  regarded  as  a  gratuitous  assump- 
tion and  no  notice  will  be  taken  of  it.  To  his  regret  my  Master  is 
forced  to  adopt  this  step,  as  unfortunately  of  late  such  self-decep- 
tion have  become  quite  frequent,  and  would  demand  a  speedy 
check. 

The  above  declaration  and  statement  to  be  appended  as  a  foot- 
note to  Mr.  Oxley*s  published  statement. 

By  order, 

Gjual-Khool.  M.xxx. 


LETTER  No.  CXXVI 

P.S.  It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  make  arrangements  for  a 
Punjab  address  through  which  to  correspond.  Both  B.  and  I  had 
counted  much  upon  the  young  man  whose  sentimentalism  we  find 
unfits  him  for  the  useful  office  of  intermediary.  Still,  I  will  not 
cease  trying  and  shall  hope  to  send  you  the  name  of  a  post  office 
either  in  the  Punjab  or  North-West  Provinces  where  one  of  our 
friends  will  be  passing  and  re-passing  once  or  twice  a  month. 

K.  H. 


MISCELLANEOUS  LETTERS  455 


LETTER  No.  CXXVIP 

Extracts   from    Letters   of   K.H.    to  A.O.H.    and   A.P.S.     Received   by   A.P.S. 

August   13th,   1882. 

One  of  your  letters  begfins  with  a  quotation  from  one  of  my 
own  .  .  .  **  Remember  that  there  is  within  man  no  abiding 
principle  " — which  sentence  I  find  followed  by  a  remark  of  yours 
"How  about  the  sixth  and  seventh  principles?"  To  this  I 
answer,  neither  Atma  nor  Buddhi  ever  were  within  man, — a  little 
metaphysical  axiom  that  you  can  study  with  advantage  in  Plutarch 
and  Anaxagoras.  The  latter  made  his — vou?  aL>ToxpaTY)<; — the 
spirit  self-potent,  the  nous  that  alone  recognised  noumena  while 
the  former  taught  on  the  authority  of  Plato  and  Pythagoras  that 
the  semomnius  or  this  nous  always  remained  without  the  body  ; 
that  it  floated  and  overshadowed  so  to  say  the  extreme  part  of 
the  man's  head,  it  is  only  the  vulgar  who  think  it  is  within  them. 
.  .  .  Says  Buddha  "  you  have  to  get  rid  entirely  of  the  sub- 
jects of  impermanence  composing  the  body  that  your  body  should 
become  permanent.  The  permanent  never  merges  with  the 
impermanent  although  the  two  are  one.  But  it  is  only  when  all 
outward  appearances  are  gone  that  there  is  left  that  one  principle 
of  life  which  exists  independently  of  all  external  phenomena.  It 
is  the  fire  that  burns  in  the  eternal  light,  when  the  fuel  is  ex- 
pended and  the  flame  is  extinguished  ;  for  that  fire  is  neither  in 
the  flame  nor  in  the  fuel,  nor  yet  inside  either  of  the  two  but  above 
beneath  and  everywhere — (Darinirvana  Sutra  kwnen  XXXIX). 

.  .  .  You  want  to  acquire  gifts.  Set  to  work  and  try  to 
develop  lucidity.  The  latter  is  no  gift  but  a  universal  possibility 
common  to  all.  As  Luke  Burke  puts  it  "  idiots  and  dogs  have  it, 
and  to  a  more  remarkable  degree  often  than  the  most  intellectual 
man.  It  is  because  neither  idiots  nor  dogs  use  their  reasoning 
faculties  but  allow  their  natural  instinctive  perceptions  to  have 
full  play. 

.  .  .  You  use  too  much  sugar  in  your  food.  Take  fruit 
bread  tea  coffee  and  milk  and  use  them  as  freely  as  you  would 
like  to,  but  no  chocolate,  fat,  pastry  and  but  very  little  sugar. 
The  fermentations  produced  by  it  especially  in  that  climate  of 
yours  is  very  injurious.  The  method  used  for  developing  lucidity 
in  our  chelas  may  be  easily  used  by  you.  Every  temple  has  a  dark 
room,  the  north  wall  of  which  is  entirely  covered  with  a  sheet  of 
mixed  metal,  chiefly  copper,  very  highly  polished,  with  a  surface 
capable  of  reflecting  in  it  things,  as  well  as  a  mirror.  The  chela 
sits  on  an  insulated  stool,  a  three-legged  bench  placed  in  a  flat- 
bottomed  vessel  of  thick  glass, — the  lama  operator  likewise,  the 

»  The  extracts  are  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  handwriting.— Ed. 


456  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

two  forming  with  the  mirror  wall  a  triangle.  A  magnet  with  the 
North  Pole  up  is  suspended  over  the  crown  of  the  chela's  head 
without  touching  it.  The  operator  having  started  the  thing 
going  leaves  the  chela  alone  gazing  on  the  wall,  and  after  the 
third  time  is  no  longer  required. 


LETTER  No.  CXXVIII 

Telegram  to  Madame  Blavatsky  from  Colonel  Olcott. 

25.11.83. 
Editor  of  the  Theosophist. 

Damodar  left  before  dawn  at  about  eight  o'clock  letters  from 
him  and  Koothumi  found  on  my  table — Don't  say  whether  return 
or  not — Damodar  bids  us  all  farewell  conditionally  and  says 
brother  theosophists  should  all  feel  encouraged  knowing  that  he 
has  found  the  blessed  masters  and  been  called  by  them.  The 
dear  boys  recent  developments  astonishing  Hooney  bids  me  await 
orders. 


LETTER  No.  CXXIX 

Class  P. 

Indian  Telegraph. 

Local 

No. 

To 

From 

Station 

Adyar  Madras 

Station     Jummar 

To 

From 

Person 

Madame  Blavatsky 

Person  Col. 

Olcott 

The 

Masters 

have 

taken 

Damodar 

return 

not 

promised 

We  will  send  him  back. 

K.\ 

Adyar  25-11-83 

428 


APPENDIX 
LETTER  No.  CXXX 

Triplicane, 

Madras,  7th  May,    1882. 
To  A.  P.  Sinnett  Esq., 

Editor  of  the  Pioneer,  etc.  etc.  etc. 
Dear  Sir, 

I  have  been  requested  by  Madame  Blavatsky  several  times 
within  the  last  three  months  to  give  you  such  practical  instruction 
in  our  occult  Science  as  I  may  be  permitted  to  give  to  one  in  your 
position ;  and  I  am  now  ordered  by  ....  to  help  you  to  a 
certain  extent  in  lifting  up  a  portion  of  the  first  veil  of  mystery. 
I  need  hardly  tell  you  here  that  the  Mahatmas  can  hardly  be 
expected  to  undertake  the  work  of  personal  instruction  and  super- 
vision in  the  case  of  beginners  like  you,  however  sincere  and 
earnest  you  may  be  in  your  belief  in  their  existence  and  the 
reality  of  their  science  and  in  your  endeavours  to  investigate  the 
mysteries  of  that  science.  When  you  know  more  about  them 
and  the  peculiar  life  they  lead,  I  am  sure  you  will  not  be  inclined 
to  blame  them  for  not  affording  to  you  personally  the  instruction 
you  are  so  anxious  to  receive  from  them. 

I  beg  to  inform  you  that  the  help  hereby  promised  will  be  given 
to  you  provided  you  give  your  consent  to  the  following  con- 
ditions : — 

(i)  You  must  give  me  your  word  of  Honour  that  you  will  never 
reveal  to  anybody  whether  belonging  to  the  Theosophical  Society 
or  not,  the  Secrets  communicated  to  you  unless  you  previously 
obtain  my  permission  to  do  so. 

(2)  You  must  lead  such  a  life  as  is  quite  consistent  with  the 
Spirit  of  the  rules  already  given  you  for  your  guidance. 

(3)  You  must  reiterate  your  promise  to  promote  as  far  as  it  lies 
in  your  power  the  objects  of  the  Theosophical  Association. 

(4)  You  must  strictly  act  up  to  the  directions  that  will  be  given 
to  you  with  the  instruction  herein  promised 

I  must  also  add  here  that  anything  like  a  wavering  state  of 
mind  as  to  the  reality  of  Occult  Science  and  the  efficacy  of  the 

457 


458  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

prescribed  process  is  likely  to  prevent  the  production  of  the  desired 
result. 

In  sending  me  a  reply  to  this  letter  I  hope  you  will  be  good 
enough  to  let  me  know  whether  you  are  acquainted  with  the 
Sanskrit  alphabet  and  whether  you  can  pronounce  Sanskrit  words 
correctly  and  distinctly. 

I  beg  to  remain, 

Yours  sincerely, 

T.  SuBBA  Row. 


LETTER  No.  CXXXI 

Coconada. 

26th  June,  1882. 
To  A.  P.  Sinnett,  Esq.,  etc.  etc.  etc. 
Dear  Sir, 

Please  kindly  excuse  me  for  not  having  sent  you  a  reply  to 
your  letter  to  this  time.  The  qualified  assent  which  you  were 
pleased  to  give  to  the  conditions  laid  down  by  me  necessitated  a 
reference  to  the  Brothers  for  their  opinion  and  orders.  And  now 
I  am  sorry  to  inform  you  that  anything  like  practical  instruction 
in  the  ritual  of  Occult  Science  is  impossible  under  the  conditions 
you  propose.  So  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  no  student  of  Occult 
Philosophy  has  ever  succeeded  in  developing  his  psychic  powers 
without  leading  the  life  prescribed  for  such  students;  and  it  is 
not  within  the  power  of  the  teacher  to  make  an  exception  in  the 
case  of  any  student.  The  rules  laid  down  by  the  ancient  teachers 
of  Occult  Science  are  inflexible ;  and  it  is  not  left  to  the  discretion 
of  any  teacher  either  to  enforce  them  or  not  to  enforce  them 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  existing  circumstances.  If  you 
find  it  impracticable  to  change  the  present  mode  of  your  life,  you 
cannot  but  wait  for  practical  instruction  until  you  are  in  a  posi- 
tion to  make  such  sacrifices  as  Occult  Science  demands ;  and  for 
the  present  you  must  be  satisfied  with  such  theoretical  instruction 
as  it  may  be  possible  to  give  you. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  now  to  inform  you  whether  the  instruc- 
tion promised  you  in  my  first  letter  under  the  conditions  therein 
laid  down  would  develop  in  you  such  f>owers  as  would  enable  you 
either  to  see  the  Brothers  or  converse  with  them  clairvoyantly. 
Occult  training,  however  commenced  will  in  course  of  time,  neces- 
sarily develop  such  powers.  You  will  be  taking  a  very  low  view 
of  Occult  Science  if  you  were  to  suppK>se  that  the  mere  acquire- 
ment of  psychic  powers  is  the  highest  and  the  only  desirable  result 
of  Occult  training.  The  mere  acquisition  of  wonder-working 
powers  can  never   secure  immortality  for  the  student  of   Occult 


APPENDIX  459 

Science  unless  he  has  learnt  the  means  of  shifting-  gradually  his 
sense  of  individuality  from  his  corruptible  material  body  to  the 
incorruptible  and  eternal  Non-Being  represented  by  his  seventh 
principle.  Please  consider  this  as  the  real  aim  of  Occult  Science 
and  see  whether  the  rules  you  are  called  upon  to  obey  are  neces- 
sary or  not  to  bring  about  this  mighty  change. 

Under  the  present  circumstances,  the  Brothers  have  asked  me 
to  assure  you  and  Mr.  Hume  that  I  would  be  fully  prepared  to 
give  you  both  such  theoretical  instruction  as  I  may  be  able  to  give 
in  the  Philosophy  of  the  Ancient  Brahminical  Religion  and 
Esoteric  Buddhism. 

I  am  going  to  leave  this  place  for  Madras  on  the  30th  of  this 
month. 

I  beg  to  remain  your  sincerely, 

T.  SuBBA  Row. 


LETTER  No.  CXXXIP 

Extracts  I  got  for  your  benefit — pitying  your  impatience  from 
**  Rishi  M.'*     See  my  note. 

It  would  no  doubt  cause  him  considerable  inconvenience  if  he 
were  obliged  to  change  his  mode  of  life  completely.  You  will 
find  from  the  letters  that  we  are  very  anxious  to  know  beforehand 
the  nature  of  the  Siddhis  or  wonder-working  powers  that  he  is 
expected  to  obtain  by  the  process  or  ritual  I  intend  proscribing  for 
him. 

The  power  to  which  he  will  be  introduced  by  the  process  in  ques- 
tion will  no  doubt  develop  wonderful  clairvoyant  powers  both  as 
regards  sight  and  sound  in  some  of  its  higher  correlations;  and 
that  the  highest  of  its  correlations  is  intended  by  our  Rishi — M — 
to  lead  the  candidate  through  the  first  three  stages  of  initiation  if 
he  is  properly  qualified  for  it. 

But  I  am  not  prepared  to  assure  Mr.  Sinnett  now  that  I  will 
teach  him  any  of  its  higher  correlations.  What  I  mean  to  teach 
him  now  is  a  necessary  'preliminary  preparation  for  studying  such 
correlations 


My  proposal  into  consideration. 

As  I  have  been  wandering  here  and  there  since  my  arrival  here 
I  have  not  been  able  to  complete  my  second  article  with  reference 
to  Mr.  Oxley's  book. 

1  Parts  of  this  letter  are  missing.     The  comments  in  K.H.'s  handwriting 
are  printed  in  bold  type. — Ed. 


46o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

But  I  will  try  my  best  to  finish  it  as  soon  as  possible. 
For  the  present  I  beg  to  remain 

Your  most  obedient  servant 

T.  SuBBA  Row. 
Coconada  3rd  June,  1882. 

To  Madam  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  etc. 
My  dear  friend,  I  strongly  advise  you  not  to  undertake  at 
present  a  task  beyond  your  strength  and  means;  for  once 
pledged  were  you  to  break  your  vows  it  would  cut  you  off  for 
years  if  not  for  ever  from  any  further  progress.  I  said  from 
the  first  to  **  Rishi  M."  that  his  intention  was  kind  but  his 
project  wild.  How  can  you  in  your  position  undertake  any 
such  labour?  Occultism  is  not  to  be  trifled  with.  It  demands 
all  or  nothing.  I  read  your  letter  to  S.R.  sent  by  him  to  Morya 
and  I  see  you  do  not  understand  the  first  principles  of  X. 


LETTER  No.  CXXXIII 

My  dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

It  is  very  strange  that  you  should  be  ready  to  deceive  yourself  so 
willingly.  I  have  seen  last  night  whom  I  had  to  see,  and  getting 
the  explanation  I  wanted  I  am  now  settled  on  points  I  was  not 
only  doubtful  about  but  positively  adverse  to  accepting.  And 
the  words  in  the  first  line  are  words  I  am  bound  to  repeat  to  you 
as  a  warning,  and  because  I  regard  you,  after  all,  as  one  of  my 
best  personal  friends.  Now  you  have  and  are  deceiving,  in  vulgar 
parlance  bamboozling  yourself  about  the  letter  received  by  me 
yesterday  from  the  Mahatma.  The  letter  is  from  Him,  whether 
written  through  a  chela  or  not ;  and — perplexing  as  it  may  seem 
to  you,  contradictory  and  "  absurd  "  it  is  the  full  expression  of 
his  feelings  and  He  maintains  what  he  said  in  it.  For  me  it  is 
surpassingly  strange  that  you  should  accept  as  His  only  that  which 
dovetails  with  your  own  feelings,  and  reject  all  that  contradicts 
your  own  notions  of  the  fitness  of  things.  Olcott  has  behaved 
like  an  ass,  utterly  devoid  of  tact ;  he  confesses  it  and  is  ready  to 
confess  it  and — say  mea  culpa  before  all  the  Theosophists — and  it 
is  more  than  any  Englishman  would  be  willing  to  do.  This  is 
perhaps,  why,  with  all  his  lack  of  tact,  and  his  frequent  freaks 
that  justly  shock  your  susceptibilities  and  mine  too,  heaven  knows  ! 
going  as  he  does  against  every  conventionality — he  is  still  so  liked 
by  the  Masters,  who  care  not  for  the  flowers  of  European  civiliza- 
tion.     Had  I  known  last  night  what  I  have  learnt  since — i.e.  that 


APPENDIX  461 

you  imagine,  or  rather  force  yourself  to  imagine  that  the 
Mahatma's  letter  is  not  wholly  orthodox  and  was  written  by  a 
chela  to  please  me,  or  something  of  the  sort,  I  would  not  have 
rushed  to  you  as  the  only  plank  of  salvation.  Things  are  getting 
dark  and  hazy.  I  have  managed  last  night  to  get  the  Psychic 
Research  Society  rid  of  its  nightmare,  Olcott,  I  may  manage  to 
get  England  rid  of  its  bugbear — Theosophy.  If  you — the  most 
devoted,  the  best  of  all  Theosophists — are  all  ready  to  fall  a  victim 
to  your  own  preconceptions  and  believe  in  new  gods  of  your  own 
fancy  dethroning  the  old  ones — ^then,  notwithstanding  all  and 
everything  Theosophy  has  come  too  early  in  this  country.  Let 
your  L.L.T.S.  go  on  as  it  does — I  cannot  help  it,  and  what  I 
mean  I  will  tell  you  when  I  see  you.  BiU  I  will  have  nothing  to 
do  with  the  new  arrangement  and — retire  from  it  altogether  unless 
we  agree  to  disagree  no  more. 

Yours, 

H.P.B. 


LETTER  No.  CXXXIV 

Dehru   Dun.     Friday.     4th. 

Arrived  only  yesterday,  last  night  late  from  Saharampur.  The 
house  very  good  but  cold,  damp  and  dreary.  Received  a  whole 
heap  of  letters  and  answer  yours  first. 

Saw  at  last  M.  and  showed  him  your  last  or  rather  Benemad- 
hab's  on  which  you  have  scratched  a  query.  It  is  the  latter  Morya 
answers.      I  wrote  this  under  his  dictation  and  now  copy  it. 

I  wrote  to  Sinnett  my  opinion  on  the  Allahabad  theosophists. 
(Not  through  me  though?)  Adetyarom  B.  wrote  a  foolish  letter 
to  Damodar  and  Benemadhab  writes  a  foolish  request  to  Mr. 
Sinnett.  Because  K.H.  chose  to  correspond  with  two  men,  who 
proved  of  the  utmost  use  and  importance  to  the  Society  they  all — 
whether  wise  or  stupid,  clever  or  dull,  possibly  useful  or  utterly 
useless — lay  their  claims  to  correspond  with  us  directly — too.  Tell 
him  (you)  that  this  must  be  stopped.  For  ages  we  never  cor- 
responded with  anyone,  nor  do  we  mean  to.  What  has  Benemad- 
hab or  any  other  of  the  claimants  done  to  have  a  right  to  such  a 
claim?  Nothing  whatever.  They  join  the  Society,  and  though 
remaining  as  stubborn  as  ever  in  their  old  beliefs  and  superstitions, 
and  having  never  given  up  caste  or  one  single  of  their  customs, 
they,  in  their  selfish  exclusiveness,  expect  to  see  and  converse 
with  us  and  have  our  help  in  all  and  everything.  I  will  be  pleased 
if  Mr.  Sinnett  says,  to  everyone  of  those  who  may  address  him 
with  similar  pretensions  the  following  :  '*  The  '  Brothers  '  desire 

31 


462  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

me  to  inform  one  and  all  of  you,  natives,  that  unless  a  man  is  pre- 
pared to  become  a  thoroug^h  theosophist  i.e.  to  do  as  D. 
Mavalankar  did, — give  up  entirely  caste,  his  old  superstitions  and 
show  himself  a  true  reformer  (especially  in  the  case  of  child  mar- 
riage) he  will  remain  simply  a  member  of  the  Society  with  no 
hope  whatever  of  ever  hearing  from  us.  The  Society,  acting  in 
this  directly  in  accordance  with  our  orders,  forces  no  one  to  become 
a  theosophist  of  the  lid.  Section.  It  is  left  with  himself  and  at 
his  choice.  It  is  useless  for  a  member  to  argue  '  I  am  one  of  a 
pure  life,  I  am  a  teetotaller  and  an  abstainer  from  meat  and  vice. 
All  my  aspirations  are  for  good  etc'  and  he,  at  the  same  time, 
building  by  his  acts  and  deeds  an  impassable  barrier  on  the  road 
between  himself  and  us.  What  have  we,  the  disciples  of  the  true 
Arhats,  of  esoteric  Buddhism  and  of  Sang-gyas  to  do  with  the 
Shasters  and  Orthodox  Brahmanism?  There  are  lOO  of  thou- 
sands of  Fakirs,  Sannyasis  and  Saddhus  leading  the  most  pure 
lives,  and  yet  being  as  they  arej  on  the  path  of  error,  never 
having  had  an  opportunity  to  meet,  see  or  even  hear  of  us.  Their 
forefathers  have  driven  away  the  followers  of  the  only  true 
philosophy  upon  earth  away  from  India  and  now,  it  is  not  for  the 
latter  to  come  to  them  but  to  them  to  come  to  us  if  they  want  us. 
Which  of  them  is  ready  to  become  a  Buddhist,  a  Nastika  as  they 
call  us?  None.  Those  who  have  believed  and  followed  us  have 
had  their  reward.  Mr.  Sinnett  and  Hume  are  exceptions.  Their 
beliefs  are  no  barrier  to  us  for  they  have  none.  They  may  have 
had  influences  around  them,  had  magnetic  emanations  the  result 
of  drink.  Society  and  promiscuous  physical  associations  (resulting 
even  from  shaking  hands  with  impure  men)  but  all  this  is  physical 
and  material  impediments  which  with  a  little  effort  we  could 
counteract  and  even  clear  away  without  much  detriment  to  our- 
selves. Not  so  with  the  magnetism  and  invisible  results  prc^- 
ceeding  from  erroneous  and  sincere  beliefs.  Faith  in  the  Gods 
and  God,  and  other  superstitions  attracts  millions  of  foreign  influ- 
ences, living  entities  and  powerful  agents  around  them,  with 
which  we  would  have  to  use  more  than  ordinary  exercise  of  power 
to  drive  them  away.  We  do  not  choose  to  do  so.  We  do  not 
find  it  either  necessary  or  profitable  to  lose  our  time  waging  war 
to  the  unprogressed  Planetaries  who  delight  in  personating  gods 
and  sometimes  well  known  characters  who  have  lived  on  earth. 
There  are  Dhyan-Chohans  and  "  Chohans  of  Darkness,"  not  what 
they  term  devils  but  imperfect  *'  Intelligences  "  who  have  never 
been  born  on  this  or  any  other  earth  or  sphere  no  more  than  the 
**  Dhyan  Chohans"  have  and  who  will  never  belong  to  the 
**  builders  of  the  Universe,"  the  pure  Planetary  Intelligences,  who 
preside  at  every  Manvantara  while  the  Dark  Chohans  preside  at 
the  Pralayas.       Explain  this  to  Mr.  Sinnett  (I  can't) — tell  him  to 


APPENDIX  463 

read  over  what  I  said  in  the  few  things  I  have  explained  to  Mr. 
Hume ;  and  let  him  remember  that  as  all  in  this  universe  is  contrast 
(I  cannot  translate  it  better)  so  the  light  of  the  Dhyan-Chohans 
and  their  pure  intelligence  is  contrasted  by  the  "  Mo-Mo 
Chohans  " — and  their  destructive  intelligence.  These  are  the  gods 
the  Hindus  and  Christians  and  Mahomed  and  all  others  of  bigoted 
religions  and  sects  worship ;  and  so  long  as  their  influence  is  upon 
their  devotees  we  would  no  more  think  of  associating  with  or 
counteracting  them  in  their  work  than  we  do  the  Red-Caps  on 
earth  whose  evil  results  we  try  to  palliate  but  whose  work  we 
have  no  right  to  meddle  with  so  long  as  they  do  not  cross  our 
path.  (You  will  not  understand  this,  I  suppose.  But  think  well 
over  it  and  you  will.  M.  means  here  that  they  have  no  right 
or  even  power  to  go  against  the  natural  or  that  work  which  is 
prescribed  to  each  class  of  beings  or  existing  things  by  the  law 
of  nature.  The  Brothers,  for  instance  could  prolong  life  but  they 
could  not  destroy  death  even  for  themselves.  They  can  to  a  degree 
palliate  evil  and  relieve  suffering;  they  could  not  destroy  evil. 
No  more  can  the  Dhyan  Chohans  impede  the  work  of  the  Mamo 
Chohans,  for  their  Law  is  darkness,  ignorance,  destruction  etc., 
as  that  of  the  former  is  Light,  knowledge  and  creation.  The 
Dhyan  Chohans  answer  to  BM^d/i-Divine  Wisdom  and  Life,  in 
blissful  knowledge,  and  the  Ma-mos  are  the  personification  in 
nature  of  Shiva,  Jehovah  and  other  invented  monsters  with  Ignor- 
ance at  their  tail). 

The  last  phrase  of  M.'s  I  translate  is  thus.  **  Tell  him  (you) 
then  that  for  the  sake  of  those  who  desire  to  learn  and  have  in- 
formation, I  am  ready  to  answer  the  2  or  3  enquiries  of  Beninadhab 
from  the  Shasters,  but  I  will  enter  in  no  correspondence  with  him 
or  any  other.  Let  him  put  their  questions  clearly  and  distinctly 
to  (you)  Mr.  Sinnett,  and  then  I  will  answer  through  him  (you)." 


I  send  you  my  uncle's  letter  just  received  by  me.  He  says 
(as  my  translation  of  his  Russian  letter  shows)  that  he  wrote  to 
you  the  same.  Whether  you  received  it  or  not,  I  know  not,  but 
I  send  you  this.  If  it  is  identical  with  yours  then  send  me  back 
mine.  I  suppose  that  by  this  time  it  is  pretty  well  proved  that  I 
am  / — and  not  someone  else ;  that  my  uncle  being  now  adjunct 
(or  asst.)  Minister  of  the  Interior,  is  a  personage  who  by  saying 
his  name  in  full  can  certainly  be  trusted,  unless,  indeed,  the  C. 
and  M.  and  your  friend  Primrose  invent  a  new  version  and  say 
that  we  have  forged  the  documents.  But  my  uncle  says  in  his 
official  letter  to  me  that  the  Prince  Dondovhof  is  going  to  send 
me  an  official  document  to  prove  my  identity,  and  so  we  will  wait. 
His  other  private  letter  I  cannot  translate  as  its  phraseology  is 
far  from  complimentary  for  Mr.   Primrose  in  particular,  and  the 


464  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

Anglo-Indians  who  insult  and  vilify  me  in  general.      I  will  ask  the 
Prince  to  write  to  Lord  Ripon,  or  Gladstone  direct. 
Your's  in  the  love  of  Jesus 

H.  P.  Blavatsky. 
Why  the  deuce  does  the  * '  Boss  '  *  want  me  now  to  go  to  Allaha- 
bad? I  can't  be  spending  money  there  and  back  for  I  have  to  go 
by  Jeypur  and  Baroda  and  he  knows  it.  What  all  this  means  is 
more  than  I  can  tell.  He  made  me  go  to  Lahore  and  now  it's 
Allahabad!! 


LETTER  No.  CXXXV 

My  dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

For  fear  that  you  should  *  *  trace  back  "  to  me  a  new  treachery 
permit  me  to  say  that  I  have  never  said  to  Hiibbe  Schleiden  and 
Franz  Gebhard  that  the  existence  of  our  seven  objective  planets 
was  an  allegory.  What  I  said  was,  that  the  objectivity  and 
actuality  of  the  septenary  chain  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  correct 
understanding  of  the  seven  rounds.  That  outside  of  the  initiates 
no  one  knew  the  mot  final  of  this  mystery.  That  you  could  not 
understand  it  thoroughly,  nor  explain  it,  because  Mahat  K.H.  told 
you  hundred  times  that  you  could  not  be  told  the  whole  doctrine; 
that  you  knew  Hume  had  made  him  questions  and  cross-examined 
Him  until  his  hair  became  grey.  That  there  were  hundred 
apparent  inconsistencies  just  because  you  had  not  the  key  to  the 
Xyy'/X  and  could  not  be  given  it.  In  short  that  you  gave  the 
truth  out  but  by  far  not  the  whole  truth  especially  about  rounds 
and  rings  which  was  only  at  best  allegorical. 

Yours, 

H.P.B. 


LETTER  No.  CXXXVI 

March  17th. 
My  dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

Your  invitation  read  with  surprise. 

Not  **  surprise  "  at  myself  being  invited,  but  surprise  at  you 
inviting  me  again,  just  as,  if  you  had  not  had  enough  of  me  !  ! 
Now  what  good  can  I  be  to  any  one  in  this  world,  except  to  make 
some  stare,  others  to  speculate  upon  my  cleverness  as  an  impostor, 
and   the   small  minority   to  eye  me  with   the   feeling  of  wonder 


APPENDIX  465 

generally  in  store  for  "monsters"  exhibited  in  museums  or 
aquariums.  This  is  fact;  and  I  had  enoug-h  proof  of  it,  not  to 
run  again  my  neck  into  the  halter  if  I  can  help  it.  My  coming 
to  stop  with  you  even  for  a  few  days,  would  be  only  a  source  of 
disappointment  to  yourself,  and  one  of  torture  to  me. 

Now,  you  must  not  take  these  words  en  mauvaise  part.  I 
am  simply  sincere  with  you.  You  are  and  have  been, — especially 
Mrs.  Sinnett,  for  ever  so  long — my  best  friends  here ;  but  it  is 
just  because  I  consider  you  as  such,  that  /  am  forced  to  rather 
give  a  momentary  than  a  prolonged  annoyance  to  you ;  rather  a 
refusal,  than  an  acceptance  of  the  kind  invitation.  Besides — as 
a  medium  of  communication  between  yourself  and  K.H.  (for  I 
suppose  you  do  not  invite  me  pour  mes  heaux  yeuxy  alone?)  I  am 
utterly  useless  now.  There  is  a  limit  to  endurance,  there  is  one 
to  the  greatest  self-sacrifice.  I  have  worked  for  them  faithfully 
and  unselfishly  for  years,  and  the  result  was,  that  I  ruined  my 
health,  dishonoured  my  ancestral  name,  got  reviled  by  every  green- 
grocer from  Oxford  Street,  and  every  fishmonger  from  Hungerford 
market — who  had  become  a  C.S.  and — finally  did  no  good  to  them, 
very  little  to  the  Society  and  none  at  all  to  either  poor  Olcott  or 
myself.  Believe  me,  we  are  better  friends  with  several  hundred 
miles  between  us  than — a  few  steps.  Besides  this.  Boss  says 
there's  a  new  development  hanging  over  our  heads.  He  and 
K.H.  put  their  wise  heads  together  and  are  preparing  to  work 
as  they  tell  me.  We  have  but  a  few  months  left  until  November 
and  if  things  are  not  entirely  whitewashed  until  then  and  fresh 
blood  poured  into  the  Brotherhood  and  Occultism — we  may  just 
as  well  go  to  bed  all  of  us.  Personally  for  myself  it  is  a  matter 
of  very  little  moment,  whether  it  is  so  or  not.  My  time  is  also 
fast  approaching  when,  my  hour  of  triumph  will  strike.  Then  is 
it,  that  I  also,  may  prove  to  those  who  speculated  about  me,  those 
who  believed  as  those  who  disbelieved  that  none  of  them 
approached  within  100  miles  the  area  of  truth.  I  have  suffered 
hell  on  earth,  but  before  I  leave  it,  I  promise  myself  such  a  triumph, 
as  will  make  the  Regions  and  his  Roman  Catholics,  and  the  Baly's 
and  Bishop  Sargeant  with  their  Protestant  donkeys — ^bray  as  loud 
as  their  lungs  will  bear.  Now,  do  you  really  think  that  you  know 
ME  my  dear  Mr.  Sinnett?  Do  you  believe  that,  because  you  have 
fathomed — as  you  think — my  physical  crust  and  brain  ;  that  shre^\^d 
analyst  of  human  nature  though  you  be — you  have  ever  penetrated 
even  beneath  the  first  cuticles  of  my  Real  Self?  You  would 
gravely  err,  if  you  did.  I  am  held  by  all  of  you  as  untruthful 
because  hitherto  I  have  shown  the  world  only  the  true  exterior 
Mme.  Blavatsky.  It  is  just  as  if  you  complained  of  the  falseness 
of  a  moss  and  weed  covered,  and  wMi-covered,  strong  and  rugged 
rock  for  writing  outside  "  /   am  not   moss   covered   and  mud- 


466  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

plastered ;  your  eyes  deceive  you  for  you  are  unable  to  see  beneath 
the  crust,"  etc.  You  must  understand  the  allegfory.  It  is  not 
boasting  for  I  do  not  say  whether  inside  that  unprepossessing  rock 
there  is  a  palatial  residence  or  an  humble  hut.  What  I  say  is 
this  :  you  do  not  know  me ;  for  whatever  there  is  inside  it,  is  not 
what  you  think  it  is;  and — to  judge  of  me  therefore,  as  of  one 
untruthful  is  the  greatest  mistake  in  the  world  besides  being  a 
flagrant  injustice  /,  (the  inner  real  "  I  ")  am  in  prison  and  cannot 
show  myself  as  I  am  with  all  the  desire  I  may  have  to.  Why 
then,  should  I,  because  speaking  for  myself  as  I  am  and  feel  myself 
to  be,  why  should  I  be  held  responsible  for  the  outward  jail-door 
and  its  appearance,  when  I  have  neither  built  nor  decorated  it? 

But  all  this  will  be  for  you  no  better  than  vexation  of  spirit. 
*'  The  poor  old  lady  is  crazy  again — "  will  you  remark.  And 
let  me  prophecy  that  the  day  will  come  when  you  will  accuse 
K.H.  too  of  having  deceived  you ;  for  only  failing  to  tell  you  what 
he  has  no  right  to  tell  anyone.  Yes ;  you  will  blaspheme  even 
against  him;  because  you  always  secretly  hope  that  he  may  make 
an  exception  in  your  favour. 

Why,  such  an  extravagant,  seemingly  useless  tirade  as  con- 
tained in  this  letter?  Because,  the  hour  is  near;  and  that  after 
having  proved  what  I  have  to,  I  will  bow  myself  out  from  the 
refined  Western  Society  and — be  no  more.  You  may  all  whistle 
then  for  the  Brothers. — Gospel. 

Of  course  it  was  a  joke.  No ;  you  do  not  hate  me ;  you  only  feel 
a  friendly,  indulgent,  a  kind  of  benevolent  contempt  for  H.P.B. 
You  are  right  there,  so  far  as  you  know  her  the  one  who  is  ready 
to  fall  into  pieces.  Perchance  you  may  find  out  yet  your  mistake 
concerning  the  other — the  well  hidden  party.  I  have  now  with 
me  Deb ;  Deb  **  Shortridg  "  as  we  call  him,  who  looks  a  boy  of 
12,  though  is  past  30  and  more.  An  ideal  little  face  with  small 
cut  delicate  features,  pearly  teeth,  long  hair,  almond  cut  eyes  and 
a  Chinese-tartar  purple  cap  on  the  top  of  his  head.  He  is  my 
"  heir  of  Salvation  "  and  I  have  work  to  do  with  him.  I  can- 
not leave  him  and  have  no  right  to,  now.  I  have  to  make  over 
my  work  to  him.  He  is  my  right  hand  (and  K.H.'s  left  one) — at 
imposture  and  false  pretence. 

And  now — God  bless  you.  Better  not  be  angry  at  anything 
I  may  do  or  say;  only  as  a  friend,  a  real  friend,  I  say  to  you,  so 
long  as  you  have  not  changed  your  mode  of  living,  expect  no 
exception. 

Yours  truly 

H.P.B. 

My  sincere  love  to  Mrs.  Sinnett  and  a  kiss  to  dear  little  Dennie. 


APPENDIX  467 

LETTER  No,  CXXXVII 

Clan  Drummond  :  Algiers. 

Sunday  8th  (?) 
My  dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

You  see  I  am  as  good  as  my  word.  Last  night  as  we  were 
hopelessly  tossed  about  and  pitched  in  our  Clan  wash-tub  Djual 
K.  put  in  an  appearance  and  asked  in  his  Master's  name  if  I  would 
send  you  a  chit.  I  said  I  would.  He  then  asked  me  to  prepare 
some  paper — which  I  had  not.  He  then  said  any  would  do.  I 
then  proceeded  to  ask  some  from  a  passenger  not  having  Mrs. 
Holloway  to  furnish  me  with.  Lo  !  I  wish  those  passengers,  who 
quarrel  with  us  every  day  about  the  possibility  of  phenomena 
could  see  what  was  taking  place  in  my  cabin  on  the  foot  of  my 
berth  !  How  D.K.'s  hand,  as  real  as  life,  was  impressing  the 
letter  at  his  Master's  dictation  which  came  out  in  relief  between 
the  wall  and  my  legs.  He  told  me  to  read  the  letter  but  I  am 
no  wiser  for  it.  I  understand  very  well  that  it  was  all  probation 
and  all  for  the  best ;  but  it  is  devilish  hard  for  me  to  understand 
why  it  should  all  be  performed  over  my  long  suffering  back.  She 
is  in  correspondence  with  Myers  and  the  Gebhard's  and  many 
others.  You  will  see  what  splatters  /  will  receive  as  an  effect 
of  the  causes  produced  by  that  probation  business.  I  wish  I  had 
never  seen  the  woman.  Such  treachery,  such  a  deceit  I  would 
never  have  dreamt  of.  I  was  also  a  chela  and  was  guilty  of 
more  than  once  fiapdoodling  but  I  would  have  thought  as  soon  of 
murdering  physically  a  man  as  to  murder  morally  my  friends  as 
she  has.  Had  not  Master  brought  about  the  explanation  I  would 
have  gone  away  leaving  a  nice  memory  of  myself  in  Mrs.  Sinnett 's 
and  your  hearts.  We  have  on  board  Mrs.  (Major)  Burton  of 
Simla.  She  left  it  the  day  before  I  came  and  has  been  always 
anxious  since,  to  meet  me.  She  wants  to  join  us  and  is  a  charming 
little  woman.  We  have  several  Anglo  Indians  and  all  kindly 
disposed.  The  steamer  is  a  rolling  wash-tub  and  the  steward  an 
infamy.  We  are  all  starving  and  live  upon  our  own  tea  and 
biscuits.  Do  write  a  word  to  Port  Said,  poste  restante.  We 
shall  remain  in  Egypt  perhaps  a  fortnight.  It  all  depends  on 
Olcott's  letters  and  news  from  Adyar.  Can't  write  for  the  rolling. 
Love  to  all. 

Yours  ever  truly 

H.  P.  Blavatsky. 


468  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 


LETTER  No.  CXXXVIII 

Adyar,  March  17th. 
My  dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

I  am  ver)'  sorry  that  the  Mahatma  should  have  selected  me  to 
fight  this  new  battle.  But  since  there  must  be  concealed  wisdom 
even  in  the  act  of  choosing  a  half  dead  individual  who  just  rises 
from  eight  weeks  of  sick  bed  and  can  hardly  gather  her  scattered 
ideas  to  say  that  which  had  better  be  left  unsaid — I  obey. 

You  cannot  have  forgotten  what  I  told  you  repeatedly  at  Simla 
and  what  the  Master  K.  H.  wrote  to  you  himself  namely,  that  the 
T.S.  is  first  of  all  a  universal  Brotherhood,  not  a  society  for 
phenomena  and  occultism.  The  latter  must  be  held  secret  etc. 
I  know  that  owing  to  my  great  zeal  for  the  cause  and  your  assur- 
ances that  the  society  would  never  prosper  unless  the  occult 
element  was  introduced  into  it  and  the  Masters  proclaimed  I  am 
more  guilty  than  any  for  having  listened  to  this.  Still  all  of  you 
have  now  to  suffer  Karma.  Well,  the  phenomena  are  now  all 
found,  on  the  evidence  of  padris,  and  other  enemies,  frauds  (by 
Mr.  Hodgson),  from  the  ''brooch  "  phenomenon  downward;  and 
the  Masters  are  dragged  before  the  public  and  their  names 
desecrated  by  every  rascal  in  Europe. 

The  padris  have  spent  thousands  for  false  and  other  witnesses, 
and  I  was  not  permitted  to  go  to  law  where  at  least  I  could  pro- 
duce my  evidence  :  and  now  Hodgson,  who,  unto  this  day  seemed 
most  friendly  and  came  nearly  daily  to  us  changed  front.  He 
went  to  Bombay  and  saw  Wimbridge  and  all  my  enemies.  Re- 
turning he  assured  Hume,  (who  is  here,  and  also  coming  daily) 
that  in  his  opinion  the  evidence  of  our  boys  in  office  and  other 
witnesses  is  so  contradictory  that  after  Bombay  he  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  all  our  phenomena  were  frauds.     Amen. 

And  now  what  is  the  use  in  writing  to  disabuse  Mr.  Arthur 
Gebhard's  mind?  So  soon  as  the  P.R.S.  oracle  will  have  pro- 
claimed me  a  wholesale  **  fraud  "  and  all  of  you  my  dupes  (as 
Hume  does  here  laughingly,  and  with  the  greatest  unconcern) — 
Your  L.L.  Society  is  sure  to  collapse.  Can  even  you,  the  true 
and  the  faithful,  stand  the  storm?  Happy  Damodar  !  He  went 
to  the  land  of  Bliss,  to  Tibet  and  must  now  be  far  away  in  the 
regions  of  our  Masters.  No  one  will  ever  see  him  now,  I  expect. 
Well,  this  is  where  the  accursed  phenomena  led  us  to.  Olcott 
is  returning  from  Burma  in  three  days  and  will  find  nice  things. 
At  first  Hume  was  all  friendly.  Then  came  the  revelations. 
Hodgson  had  traced  the  brooch  !  !  !  I  had  given  an  identical 
brooch  or  pin  to  mend  to  Servai  before  going  to  Simla,  he  was 
told,  and  it  was  that  brooch.     Does  Mrs.  Sinnett  remember  that 


APPENDIX  469 

I  spoke  at  that  time  of  having  had  a  pin  very  like  it  with  pearls 
that  I  sent  with  another  I  bought  at  Simla  to  my  sister's  children? 
I  spoke  of  the  likeness  even  to  Mr.  Hume.  I  asked  Mr.  H.  to 
have  his  pin  sent  to  the  jeweller  (unknown  but  to  Servai,  Wim- 
bridge's  partner  and  my  mortal  enemy)  who,  will  or  will  not 
identify  it.  Most  probably  he  will.  Why  shouldn't  he — for  a 
hundred  rupees  or  so? 

Mr.  Hume  wants  to  save  the  Society  and  has  found  a  means. 
He  called  yesterday  a  Council  meeting  composed  of  Ragunath 
Row,  Subba  Row,  Sreenavasa  Row,  Honourable  Subramanya 
Iyer  and  Rama  Iyer.  All  leaders  of  Hindoos.  Then  having 
selected  Rag  :  Row  Chairman  and  the  audience  being  composed 
of  the  two  Oakeleys,  Hartmann  and  the  chelas — he  gave  him  a 
paper.  In  it  he  proposed,  to  save  the  Society  (he  imagines  and 
insists  that  it  is  falling  to  pieces  after  the  "  revelations  "  though 
not  one  fellow  has  yet  resigned).  To  force  Colonel  Alcock  its 
life-President  Madame  Blavatsky,  (ditto)  Damodar  (absent) 
Bowaji,  Bhavani  Row,  Ananda,  Rama  Swami,  etc.  in  all  16 
persons  to  resign  as  they  were  all  frauds  and  accomplices  since 
many  of  them  asserted  they  knew  the  Masters  independently  of 
me  and  that  the  Masters  did  not  exist.  The  headquarters  must 
be  sold  and  on  its  place  a  new  scientifico-philosophico-humanitarian 
Theosophical  society  raised.  I  was  not  present  at  the  meeting, 
I  am  confined  to  my  room.  But  the  Councillors  came  to  me  in  a 
body  after  the  proceedings.  Instead  of  accepting  the  proposal 
though  and  proclaiming  the  phenomena  a  fraud  as  Mr.  Hume  said 
they  had  all  done  to  his  knowledge — Raganath  Row  rejected  the 
paper  throwing  it  aside  with  disgust.  They  all  believed  in  the 
Mahatmas — he  said,  and  the  phenomena  they  had  witnessed  per- 
sonally but  would  have  no  more  their  names  desecrated.  Phe- 
nomena must  be,  hereafter,  prohibited,  and  if  they  did  happen 
independently,  must  not  be  talked  about  under  penalty  of 
expulsion.  They  declined  to  ask  the  Founders  to  resign.  They 
saw  no  reason  for  it.     Mr.  Hume  is  a  queer  "  saviour  !  " 

Ergo,  no  more  phenomena,  at  least  here  in  India.  While 
Mascul.  and  Cook  produce  things  far  better  and  are  paid  for  it, 
we  come  out  second  best  and  are  kicked  for  them. 

Mr.  Hume  is  more  liberal  than  the  Padris.  These  call  Olcott 
"a  credulous  fool  but  undeniably  an  honest  man";  and  he  de- 
clares, that  since  Olcott  swears  to  have  seen  the  Masters  he  must 
be  a  dishonest  man,  and  since  he  got  his  pearl-pin  at  the  pawn- 
broker's at  Bombay  he  must  be  (by  implication)  a  thief  too, 
though  Hume  denies  this. 

Such  is  in  brief  the  present  situation.  It  began  at  Simla  open- 
ing with  the  first  act  and  now  comes  the  prologue  that  will  soon 
finish    with    my    death.     For,    though,    doctors    notwithstanding 


470  THE  M  AH  ATM  A  LETTERS 

(who  proclaimed  my  four  days'  agony,  and  the  impossibility  of 
recovery)  I  suddenly  got  better  thanks  to  Master's  protecting 
hand,  I  carry  two  mortal  diseases  in  me  which  are  not  cured  in 
heart,  and  kidneys.  At  any  moment  the  former  may  have  a  rup- 
ture, and  the  latter  carry  me  away  in  a  few  days.  I  will  not  see 
another  year.  All  this  is  due  to  five  years  of  constant  anguish, 
worry  and  repressed  emotion.  A  Gladstone  may  be  called  a 
"  fraud  "  and  laugh  at  it.  I — can't,  say  what  you  may,  Mr. 
Sinnett. 

And  now  to  your  business.  I  have  never,  before  beginning  the 
service  for  you  and  Mr.  Hume,  transmitted  and  received  letters  to, 
and  from  Master  except  for  myself.  If  you  had  any  idea  of  the 
difficulties,  or  the  modus  operandi  you  would  not  have  consented 
to  be  in  my  place.  And  yet  I  never  refused.  The  shrine  was 
thought  of  to  facilitate  the  transmission,  as  now  dozens  and 
hundreds  come  to  pray  and  beg  to  put  their  letters  inside.  As 
you  know,  and  is  proved  to  all  except  Mr.  Hodgson,  who  finds 
contradictions,  all  received  answers  without  my  leaving  the  room 
and  often  in  different  languages.  It  is  this,  that  unable  to 
account  for,  Mr.  Hume  calls  a  wholesale  collective  fraud  for, 
since  the  Masters,  in  his  ideas,  do  not  exist,  and  that  they  have 
never  written  one  single  of  the  letters  ever  received — then  the 
logical  conclusion  is  that  it  is  the  whole  staff — everyone  in  head- 
quarters— Damodar,  Bowaji,  Subba  Row,  all,  all  who  help  me  to 
write  the  letters  and  pass  them  through  the  hole.  Even  Hodgson 
finds  the  idea  preposterous. 

And  now  to  the  deception  practised  on  Mr.  Arthur  Gebhard,  of 
which,  I  learned  from  the  Mahatma  and  A.G. 's  own  letter  sent  to 
me.  This  **  fraud  "  coupled  with  the  revelations  and  hints  about 
others  insinuated  by  kitten-like  Mrs.  Holloway  must  have 
impressed  a  figure  of  H.P.B.  of  exquisite  honourability  and 
honesty  on  poor  dear  Mrs.  Gebhard  ! 

Well,  persons  who  are  on  the  eve  of  their  death  do  not  gener- 
ally fib  and  say  lies.  I  hope  you  will  give  me  credit  for  speaking 
the  truth.  Ar.  G.  is  not  the  only  one  to  suspect  and  accuse  me  of 
fraud.  Say  then  to  the  '*  friends  "  who  may  have  received 
letters  from  the  Masters  through  me  that  I  never  was  a  deceiver ; 
that  I  never  played  tricks  upon  them.  I  have  often  facilitated 
phenomena  of  letter  transmission  by  easier  but  still  occult  means. 
Only  as  none  of  the  Theosophists,  except  occultsits,  know  any- 
thing of  either  difficult  or  easy  means  of  occult  transmission  nor 
are  they  acquainted  with  occult  laws,  everything  is  suspicious  to 
them.  Take  for  instance  this  illustration  as  an  instance  :  trans- 
mission by  mechanical  thought  transference  (in  contradistinction 
with  the  conscious).  The  former  is  produced  by  calling  first  the 
attention  of  a  chela  or  the  Mahatma.     The  letter  must  be  open 


i 


APPENDIX  471 

and  every  line  of  it  passed  over  the  forehead,  holding  the  breath 
and  never  taking-  off  the  part  of  the  letter  from  the  latter  until 
bell  notifies  it  is  read  and  noted.     The  other  mode  is  to  impress 
every  sentence  of  the  letter  (consciously  of  course)  still  mechanic- 
ally  on  the   brain,    and   then   send    it   phrase   by   phrase   to   the 
other  person  on  the  other  end  of  the  line.     This  of  course  if  the 
sender  permits  you  to  read  it,  and  believes  in  your  honesty  that 
you  read  it  mechanically  only  reproducing  the  form  of  the  words 
and    lines   on    your   brain — and   not   the   meaning.     But    in   both 
instances  the  letters  must  be  open  and  then  burnt  with  what  we 
call    virgin   fire    (lit    neither    with    matches,    brimstone    nor    any 
preparation  but  rubbed  with  a  resinous,  transparent,  little  stone, 
a  ball   that  no   naked   hand   must   touch.     This  is  done  for   the 
ashes ;  which,  while  the  paper  burns  become  immediately  invisible, 
which  they  would  not,   if  the  paper  were  lit  otherwise;  because 
they  would  remain  by  their  weight  and  grossness  in  the  surround- 
ing atmosphere,   instead  of  being  transferred  instantaneously  to 
the  receiver.     This  double  process  is  done  for  double  security  : 
for  the  words  transmitted  from  one  brain  to  another,  or  to  the 
akasa  near  the  Mahatma  or  chela  may,  some  of  them,  be  omitted, 
whole  words  slip  out  etc.,  and  the  ashes  be  not  perfectly  trans- 
mitted ;  and  in  this  way  one  corrects  the  other.     I  cannot  do  that 
and  therefore  speak  of  it  only  as  an  example  how  deception  can 
be  easily  fathered.     Fancy  A.  giving  a  letter  for  the  Mahatma  to 
B.     B.  goes  into  the  adjoining  room  and  opening  the  letter — not 
one  word  of  which  can  he  remember  if  he  is  a  true  chela  and  an 
honest  man — transmits  it  to  his  brain  by  one  of  the  two  methods 
sending  one  sentence  after  the  other  on  the  current  and  then  pro- 
ceeds to  burn  the  letter;  perhaps — he  has  forgotten  the  "  virgin 
stone  "  in  his  room.     Leaving  inadvertently  the  opened  letter  on 
the  table,   he  absents   himself  for  a  few  minutes.     During  that 
time  A.  impatient  and  probably  suspicious  enters  the  room.     He 
sees  his  letter  opened  on  the  table.     He  will  either  take  it  and 
make  an  exposd  (!)  or  leave  it  and  then  ask  B.  after  he  has  burnt 
it  whether  he  sent  his  letter.       Of  course  B.  will  answer  he  has. 
Then  will  come  the  exposd  with  consequences  you  may  imagine,  or 
A.  will  hold  his  tongue  and  do  as  many  do  :  hold  for  ever  B.  for 
a  fraud.      This  is  one  instance  out  of  many,  and  a  real  one,  given 
to  me  as  a  caution  by  Master. 

There's  a  funny  thing  in  Mr.  A.G.'s  letter,  very  funny  and  sug- 
gestive, for  instance  recounting  in  it  how  he  gave  me  the  letter 
and  six  hours  later  I  had  told  him  "  it  was  gone  "  he  adds  **  four 
days  later  Colonel  wrote  to  H.P.B.  saying  that  his  Master 
appeared  "  and  said  that  K.H.  had  said  :  (see  original  sent  back 
to  you)  But  then  the  good  **  Colonel  must  also  be  a  fraud,"  a 
confederate  of  mine  an   accomplice?     Or  is   it   my   Master  who 


472  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

mystifies  him  Mr.  A.  G.  Arthur  Gebhard,  or  >vhat?  And  then 
again  :  '*  H.P.B.  is  a  fraud  although  I  will  never  deny  her  excel- 
lent qualities."  "The  '  excellent  qualities'  of  a  fraud  is  some- 
thing startling  and  original  at  all  events.  *  * 

Thus  you  will  please  tell  Mr.  A.  R.  Gebhard  that  we  are  two 
**  frauds — "  if  any;  and  also  this  :  Mahatma  K.  H.  has  received 
but  never  read  his  letter,  for  the  simple  reason  that  he  was  pre- 
vented by  his  promise  to  the  Chohan  never  to  read  a  letter  from 
any  theosophist  until  his  return  from  his  mission  to  China  where 
he  then  was.  This  He  condescended  now  to  tell  me  to  help  to 
my  justification,  as  he  said.  He  had  forbidden  me  most  strictly 
to  send  him  any  more  letters  until  further  orders.  Since  Master 
at  Arthur  G. 's  urgent  prayer  took  it  upon  Himself  for  reasons 
but  known  to  Himself,  I  had  nothing  to  say  but  to  obey.  I  took 
the  letter  and  put  it  in  a  drawer  full  of  papers.  When  I  looked 
for  it,  I  found  it  was  gone,  at  least  I  did  not  see  it,  and  said  so 
to  him.  But  before  going  to  bed  taking  out  an  enevlope  I  found 
his  letter  still  there,  though  in  the  morning  it  was  really  gone. 
Now  if  my  remembrance  is  right  I  showed  to  Madame  Gebhard, 
Olcott's  letter  in  which  he  speaks  of  what  Master  said.  /  had 
not  read  Gehhard's  letter  and  may  have  taken  the  words  as  an 
answer  to  this  letter.  As  it  is  I  have  not  now  the  faintest  recol- 
lection of  the  whole  of  the  message.  One  thing  I  know  and 
Madame  Geb.  will  corroborate  it  :  she  spoke  of  the  terrible 
quarrels  between  Arth.  G.  and  his  father  to  me  in  London,  before 
going  to  Paris  and  to  Olcott  repeatedly.  She  had  expressed  the 
hope  that  the  Mahatma  would  interfere  on  her  behalf,  and  these 
words  may  have  related  to  this  and  not  at  all  to  the  letter. 
How  can  I  remember?  Olcott  may  have  heard  imperfectly,  or 
I  muddled  up  the  thing.  Hundred  combinations  may  have  hap- 
pened. The  only  fraud  is  then,  in  my  telling  him  an  unconscious 
untruth  about  the  letter  going  six  hours  later  when  it  was  taken 
only  in  the  morning.     To  this  I  plead  **  guilty." 

But  as  in  the  Hume  *'  pearl-pin  "  affair  there  is  something  more 
employed  than  mere  fraud  in  the  production  of  phenomena.  If  I 
have  bamboozled  in  this.  Mad.  G.  and  himself  then  I  become  right 
away  a  black  leg,  a  swindler.  I  have  received  hospitality  at 
their  house  for  months  :  they  have  nursed  me  out  through  my 
sickness,  and  even  not  permitted  to  pay  the  doctor,  covered  me 
with  rich  presents,  honours  and  kindnesses,  for  all  of  which  I 
repay  with  deception.  Oh  powers  of  heaven.  Truth  and  Justice  ! 
May  Mr.  Arthur  Gebhard 's  Karma  prove  light  to  him.  I  forgive 
him  for  the  sake  of  his  mother  and  father  whom  I  will  love  and 
respect  to  my  last  hour.  Please  give  these  my  parting  words  to 
Mad.  Gebhard  ;  I  have  nothing  more  to  say. 

It  is  useless,  Mr.  Sinnett.     The  Theosophical  Society  shall  live 


APPENDIX  473 

here,  in  India,  for  ever  it  seems  doomed  in  Europe,  because  I  am 
doomed.  It  hangs  on  your  Esoteric  Buddhism  and  the  Occult 
world.  And  if  Mahatmas  are  myths,  I — the  author  of  all  those 
letters,  a  proclaimed  fraud  and  worse — by  the  P.R.S.  how  can  the 
London  Lodge  live?  I  told  you — for  I  felt  it,  as  I  always  feel 
that  this  investigation  of  Mr.  Hodgson  will  be  fatal.  He  is  the 
most  excellent,  truthful,  expert  young  man.  But  how  can  he 
recognise  truth  from  lies  when  there  is  a  thick  net  of  conspiracy 
around  him?  At  first,  when  he  visited  the  headquarters,  and  the 
padris  could  not  well  get  hold  of  him,  he  seemed  all  right.  His 
accounts  were  favourable.  And  then  he  was  caught.  We  have 
our  informants  who  followed  the  missionaries  sharply.  You  in 
England  may  laugh — we  do  not. 

We  knew  that  the  conspiracy  is  not  one  to  laugh  at.  The 
30,000  padris  of  India  are  all  leagued  against  us.  It  is  their  last 
card  they  play — either  they  or  we.  There  was  72,000  rupees  col- 
lected in  one  week  in  Bombay — **  to  conduct  investigations  against 
the  so  called  Founders  of  the  T.S."  All  the  judges  of  the  land 
(think  of  Sir  C.  Turner  !)  are  against  us.  Sceptics  and  nominal 
Christians,  free  thinkers  and  C.S.  snobs — my  very  name  stinks  in 
their  nostrils.  And  now  comes  the  old  sleeping  beauty  again  on 
the  scene,  I  am,  after  all,  a  Russian  spy !  Last  night  the  Oakleys 
dined  with  Hume  at  the  Garstins  and  were  told  very  seriously 
that  the  Government  was  to  over  shadow  me  once  more ;  that  they 
had  information  (the  Coulombs?)  and  that  I  had  "  to  be  watched." 
Vainly  did  Hume  laugh  and  the  Oakleys  protest.  It  was  "  very 
serious  "  in  view  of  the  Russians  crossing  Cabul,  Afghanistan,  or 
something  of  that  sort. 

An  old  and  a  dying  woman,  confined  to  her  room ;  forbidden 
to  mount  a  few  steps  lest  her  heart  bursts ;  never  reading  a  paper 
for  fear  of  finding  there  the  most  vile  personal  abuse;  receiving 
letters  from  Russia  but  from  relatives — a  spy,  a  dangerous 
character  !     Oh  Britishers  of  India  where  is  your  valour. 

Notwithstanding  Hume,  their  friend  Hodgson  and  all  the 
evidence,  the  Oakleys  do  not  believe  me  a  fraud.  They  have  full 
confidence  in  the  Masters,  nothing  they  say,  will  make  them 
doubt  their  existence — apart  some  little  unpleasantness  due  to 
gossip  upon  private  affairs,  they  are  staunch  theosophists  and  as 
they  say  my  best  friends.  Well,  and  good.  I  believe  Oh  Lord, 
help  thou  my  unbelief.  How  can  I  believe  anyone  my  friends  at 
such  a  moment?  It  is  only  he  who  knows,  as  he  knows  that  he 
lives  and  breathes,  that  our  Mahatmas  exist  and  phenomena  are 
real,  who  do  sympathise  with  me,  and  look  upon  me  as  a  martyr. 
Pamphlets  by  reverends,  books  and  articles  exposing  me  from  top 
to  foot  appear  every  day.  **  Theosophy  Unveiled — "  "  Madame 
Blavatsky  Exposed — "   "  The  Theosophical  Humbug  Before  the 


474  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

World — "  "  Christ  against  Mahatmas  "  etc.  etc.  :  you  who  knew 
India  well,  Mr.  Sinnett,  you  think  it  difficult  to  get  false  witnesses 
here?  They  have  all  the  advantages  over  us.  They  (the  enemies) 
work  night  and  day,  flooding  the  country  with  literature  against 
us  and  we  sit  motionless  and  only  quarrel  within  the  Theos  :  head- 
quarters. Olcott  is  held  finally  a  fool,  detested  by  the  Oakleys 
(for  some  mistakes  that  really  he  could  not  help,)  and  adored  by 
the  Hindoos.  And  now  after  the  arrival  of  Hume  I  come  for  my 
share.  Though  my  friends,  the  Oakleys,  advise  me  to  resign 
while  the  Hindoos  say  they  will  all  leave  if  I  do.  /  must  resign 
because  being  thought  a  **  Russian  spy  "  I  endanger  the  Society. 
Such  is  my  life  during  my  convalescence  when  every  emotion, 
says  the  doctor,  may  prove  fatal.  So  much  the  better.  I  will 
then  resign  de  facta.  But  then  they  forget  that  so  far  I  am  the 
only  link  between  the  Europeans  and  the  Mahatmas.  The 
Hindoos  do  not  care.  Dozens  of  them  are  chelas  hundreds  know 
Them,  but  as  in  the  case  of  Subba  Row  they  will  sooner  die  than 
speak  of  their  Masters.  Hume  could  get  nothing  from  Subba 
Row,  though  everyone  knows  what  he  is.  The  other  night  he 
received  a  long  letter  from  my  Master  in  the  meeting  room  when 
Hume  voted  my  resignation.  They  had  just  voted  there  should 
be  no  phenomena  any  more  and  Mahatmas  never  spoken  about ; 
the  letter  was  in  Telugu,  they  say.  Though  they  stand  by  me 
and  will  stand  to  the  last,  they  accuse  me  of  having  desecrated 
the  Truth  and  the  Masters  by  having  been  the  means  of  the  Occult 
world  and  Esoteric  Buddhism.  Do  not  count  upon  the  Hindoos, 
you  of  the  L.L.  I — dead,  say  Society  good  bye  to  the  Masters. 
Say  even  now — all  perhaps  with  one  exception — for  I  have  pledged 
my  word  to  my  Hindoo  Brothers  the  occultists,  never  to  mention 
except  among  ourselves  Their  names,  and  that  I  will  keep  it. 

This,  will  probably  be  my  last  letter  to  you,  dear  Mr.  Sinnett. 
It  took  me  a  week  nearly  to  write  this  one — I  am  so  feeble;  and 
then  I  do  not  think  I  will  have  an  oppK>rtunity.  I  cannot  tell 
you  why  :  most  probably,  you  will  not  regret  it.  You  cannot 
remain  faithful  much  longer,  living  as  you  do  in  the  world.  Myers 
and  P.R.S.  will  laugh  you  to  scorn.  Hume  who  goes  to  London 
in  April  will  set  all  against  the  Mahatmas  and  me.  It  takes  a 
different  kind  of  man  and  woman  than  you  have  in  L.L.  with  the 
exception  of  Miss  Arundale  and  two  or  three  others — to  withstand 
such  a  persecution  and  storm.  And  all  this  because  we  have 
profaned  Truth  by  giving  it  out  indiscriminately — and  forgot  the 
motto  of  the  true  Occultist  :  To  know,  to  dare,  and  to  keep  silent. 

Good-bye  then,  dear  Mr.  Sinnett  and  Mrs.  Sinnett.  Whether 
I  die  in  a  few  months  or  remain  two  or  three  years  in  solitude 
I  am  as  good  as  dead — already.  Forget  me,  and  try  to  deserve 
personal  communication  with  the   Master.        Then   you  shall  be 


APPENDIX  475 

able  to  preach  him,  and  if  you  succeed  as  I  succeeded  you  shall 
be  hooted  and  insulted  as  I  was,  and  see  whether  you  can  stand 
it.  The  Oakleys  urge  me  to  write  to  my  aunt  and  sister  and  ask 
her  to  send  me  the  design  of  the  i>earl  brooch  I  sent  them  in  1880. 
I  refuse.  Why,  should  I  ?  The  brooch  phenomenon  proven  then 
will  come  out,  some  other  proved  fraudulent  by  false  witnesses. 
I  am  tired,  tired,  tired  and  so  disgusted  that  Death  herself  with 
her  first  hours  of  horror  is  preferable  to  this.  Let  the  whole 
world,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  friends  and  my  Hindoo 
Occultists,  believe  me  a  fraud.  I  will  not  deny  it — even  to  their 
faces.      Say  so  to  Mr.  Myers  and  others. 

Good-bye,  again.      May  your  life  be  happy  and  prosperous  and 
Mrs.  S.'s  old  age  more  healthy  than  her  youth.      Forgive  me  the 
annoyances  I  may  have  caused  you  and — forget 
Yours  to  the  end 

H.  P.  Blavatsky. 


LETTER  No.  CXXXIX 


Wednesday. 


My  dear  Mr.   Sinnett, 

I  asked  you  (/  myself)  in  my  letter  to  you  **  Do,  please  do  try 
and  have  intuition."  You  have  succeeded  but  only  for  one 
portion.  You  felt  that  a  page,  or  so,  of  it  had  been  dictated  to 
me,  and  that  it  was  by  no  sham  K.H.  But  you  have  failed  again  to 
feel  in  what  an  unalloyed  spirit  of  kindness  sympathy  for  and 
appreciation  of  yourself  He  dictated  those  few  sentences.  You 
mistook  it  for  criticism.  Now,  hear  me.  Except  a  vague  recol- 
lection that  I  have  been  writing  under  his  dictating,  I  could  not, 
of  course,  remember  one  line  of  it  correctly,  though  I  have  read 
it  carefully  before  I  closed  the  letter.  But  what  I  can  swear  to 
is  that  there  was  not  a  shadow  of  criticism  against  yourself  person- 
ally meant  or  in  the  Mahatmas  thought  when  passing  this  to  me. 
1  was  writing  my  letter  to  you  and  had  written  about  three  or  four 
pages  when  the  Countess  came  in  and  read  to  me  out  of  your 
letter  those  desponding  lines  in  which  you  said  that  you  are  inclined 
to  suspect  that  the  "  Higher  Powers  "  do  not  wish  the  Society  to 
live  any  longer  and  that  it  is  useless  for  you  to  try  or  something  of 
that.  I  had  not  had  time  to  open  my  mouth  for  an  answer  and 
protest  when  I  saw  his  reflection  over  the  writing  desk  and  heard 
the  words  "  Now  write  pray."  I  did  not  Hsten  to  the  words 
dictated  except  in  a  mechanical  sort  of  way,  but  I  know  with  what 
attention  and  intense  interest  I  watched  the  "  thought  and  feeling- 
lights  "  and  aura,  if  you  understand  my  meaning.  The  Mahatma 
wanted  me  to,  I  suppose ;  otherwise  his  thoughts  and  inner  work- 


476  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

ing-  would  have  remained  impenetrable.  And  I  say,  that  never, 
since  you  know  Him,  never  was  there  so  much  kindness,  genuine 
feeling  for  you,  and  an  utter  absence  of  "  criticism  "  or  reproach 
directed  to  yourself  at  this  time.  Don't  be  ungrateful ;  don't 
misunderstand  Open  your  inner  heart  and  feeling  entirely  and 
do  not  judge  through  your  world  and  cold  reason  spectacles.  Ask 
the  Countess  to  whom  the  letter  was  read  and  to  whom  I  told 
what  I  say  to  you  now,  and  to  hear  which  she  was  so  glad  for 
you,  for  she  does  sympathise  with  you  and  your  position  and 
appreciates  as  much  as  I  do,  all  you  have  done.  All  you  say  is 
perfectly  true,  and  just  what  I  thought  I  had  discerned  in  the 
Mahatma's  aura.  The  yellow-grayish  streaks  were  directed  all 
to  Olcott,  (London  period',  not  now),  Mohini,  Finch  (more 
(reddish) ;  and  to  others  I  will  not  name.  Your  full  size  portrait, 
or  scin-leiia,  received  a  whole  torrent  of  blue,  clear  silvery  light — 
the  Prince's  Hall,  Kingsford  incident,  and  even  Holloway  were 
all  far  away  from  you  in  a  mist — hence  a  proof  undeniable  that 
you  were  implicated  in  it  by  no  fault  of  yours  personally,  but  drawn 
into  it  irresistibly  by  the  general  Karma.  Where  then  is  the 
"criticism"  or  reproach?  No  man  living  can  do  more  in  this 
world  than  is  in  him.  We  could  not  avoid — Prince's  Hall  meeting, 
for  the  Society  had  chosen  a  path,  in  which  it  had  to  come.  But 
all  of  you,  you  the  first,  had  you  prepared  for  it  as  it  ought  to 
have  been  done  long  before  would  have  saved  the  situation  by 
each  of  you  delivering — even  reading  it  would  have  been  better — 
a  speech  that  would  have  gone  home  to  the  public  instead  of  what 
it  has  done.  Your  speech  was  the  only  one  against  which  nothing 
could  be  urged — but,  on  account  of  your  ill-will,  you  have  been 
dragged  into  it — so  cold,  so  devoid  of  enthusiasm  or  even  earnest- 
ness that  it  became  like  a  key-note  to  the  others.  Olcott' s  was  a 
regular  Yankee  flapdoodle  one  of  the  worst.  The  **  Angel- 
Mohini's  was  a  remarkably  stupid  one,  Babu-flowers  of  rhetoric 
etc.  But  that's  things  of  the  past.  Of  course  it  was  a  failure; 
but  it  might  have  been  a  success  notwithstanding  everything 
adverse,  had  it  been  prepared  beforehand.  The  public  reception 
was  on  the  patJi  chosen  and  had  to  take  place,  for  it  would  have 
been  worse  still  had  it  not  come  off  Holloway  was  sent,  and  was 
in  the  programme  of  tricks  and  destruction.  She  has  done  you 
ten  times  more  harm  than  to  the  Society  but  this  is  your  fault 
entirely  and  now  she  is  dancing  the  war-dance  around  Olcott,  who 
is  as  fast  friends  with  her  and  more  than  you  were.  It  is  a  weekly 
correspondence  incessant  and  endearing,  charming  to  behold  she 
is  his  dear  agent  in  Brooklyn,  for  things  occult  etc.  Let  that  go. 
— About  **  chelas  " — it  is  a  more  serious  question.  They  are  no 
fools  either  of  them.  They  feel,  if  they  do  not  know  yet,  that  the 
abyss  between  them  and  Master  is  being  made  wider  daily.    They 


APPENDIX  477 

feel  they  are  on  the  wrong  left  side,  and  feeling*  that  they  will  turn 
towards  that,  to  which  all  such  "failures"  turn.  If  Masters 
ordered  them  to  go  back  to  India  I  do  not  think  they  would  now 
under  Bowajee's  inspiration.  Mohini  is  missed  by  him,  there's 
no  mistake  about  it.  And  Miss is  going  to  pots  in  their  com- 
pany. You  have  to  act  independently  of  them  ;  not  to  break 
visibly,  but  to  do  your  work  as  though  they  did  not  exist.  Look 
here  I  want  you  to  write  to  Arthur  Gebhard  a  serious  letter  and 
tell  him  all  you  know  about  Bowajee.  He  is  in  full  correspondence 
with  the  Americans,  and  getting  round  them  as  he  got  round  the 
Gebhards.  I  wrote  to  him  and  the  Countess  did.  But  he  will  not 
believe  us  unless  corroborated  by  you.  He  was  surely  told  by 
this  time  that  the  Countess  is  entirely  under  my  psychology. 
Franz  is  certain  of  it,  poor  man.  Unless  you  warn  him  the  two, 
or  one  of  **  chelas  "  are  sure  to  go  to  America.  If  you  could 
bring  the  second  to  clamour  for  his  departure  to  India,  as  a  settle- 
nient  then  he  would  have  no  excuse  to  stop.  But  how  to  do  it. 
If  I  could  only  see,  approach  the  hussy  I  would  be  ready  to  sacrifice 
myself. — Anything  to  weed  the  Society  from  all  this  poisonous 
vegetation.  But  you  can  work  independently  of  all  of  them — 
that's  sure. 

Before  the  15th  of  April,  we  will  be  near  you,  across  the  stream. 
The  Countess  come  with  me  and  takes  her  chances  until  about 
the  middle  of  May.  I  have  to  be  near  you  in  case  something 
should  happen,  for  save  herself,  I  do  not  think  I  have  a  friend 
a  real  friend  in  this  wide  world  besides  yourself  and  Mrs.  Sinnett. 
The  "semblance"  the  theosophical  Mr.  Hyde  (Dr.  Jekyll)  has 
done  his  best.  I  could  stop  it  in  one  hour  if  I  could  only  ix>unce 
on  them  unexpectedly.  This  I  swear.  "  But  how  to  do  it.  If  I 
could  only  arrive  and  stop  in  London  for  two  days  unknown  it 
would  be  done.  I  would  go  to  them  at  8  in  the  morning.  But 
I  must  see  you  and  think  over  it  first.  If  I  had  health  only — 
which  I  have  not.  The  **  two  years  life  and  no  more  "  of  the 
London  Doctor  brought  by  Mr.  Gebhard  and  of  my  doctor  at 
Adyar — are  drawing  near  the  end.  Unless  Master  interferes  once 
more — Good-bye. 

You  have  said  nothing  of  Gladstone's  little  tricks.  Don't  you 
believe  in  it  ?  Funny.  I  am  told  you  received  a  letter  upon  that 
subject  so  far  back  as  during  the  Ilbert  Bill  row.  Well  I  can  tell 
you  nice  things  about  the  Jesuits  and  their  doings.  But  of  course 
its  no  good.  Yet  indeed,  indeed  it  is  serious. 
Well,  good-bye,  do  write. 

Yours  ever  faithfully, 


Love  to  Mrs.  Sinnett^ 


H.P.B. 


32 


478  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  CXL 

Jan.  6.     1886.     Wurzburg. 
My  dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

I  am  impressed  to  give  you  the  following  :  First  let  me  tell  you 
that  the  dear  Countess  went  off  to  Munich  like  a  shot  to  try  and 
save  Hubbe  from  his  weakness  and  the  Society  from  crumbling 
down.  She  was  the  whole  evening  in  a  trance,  getting  out  and 
in  from  her  body.  She  saw  Master  and  felt  him  all  the  night. 
She  is  a  great  clairvoyant.  Well,  after  reading  a  few  pages  of 
the  Report  I  was  so  disgusted  with  Hume's  gratuitous  lies  and 
Hodgson's  absurd  inferences  that  I  nearly  gave  up  all  in  despair. 
What  could  I  do  or  say  against  evidence  on  the  natural  worldly 
plane  !  Everything  went  against  me  and  I  had  but  to  die.  I 
went  to  bed  and  had  the  most  extraordinary  vision.  I  had  vainly 
called  upon  the  Masters — who  came  not  during  my  waking  state, 
but  now  in  my  sleep  I  saw  them  both,  I  was  again  (a  scene  of 
years  back)  in  Mah.  K.H.'s  house.  I  was  sitting  in  a  corner  on 
a  mat  and  he  walking  about  the  room  in  his  riding  dress,  and 
Master  was  talking  to  someone  behind  the  door.  "  I  remind 
can't  " — I  pronounced  in  answer  to  a  question  of  His  about  a  dead 
aunt. — He  smiled  and  said  "  Funny  English  you  use."  Then  I 
felt  ashamed,  hurt  in  my  vanity,  and  began  thinking  (mind  you, 
in  my  dream  or  vision  which  was  the  exact  reproduction  of  what 
had  taken  place  word  for  word  16  years  ago)  **  now  I  am  here 
and  speaking  nothing  but  English  in  verbal  phonetic  language 
I  can  perhaps  learn  to  speak  better  with  Him."  (To  make  it 
clear  with  Master  I  also  used  English,  which  whether  bad  or  good 
was  the  same  for  Him  as  he  does  not  speak  it  but  understands 
every  word  I  say  out  of  my  head ;  and  I  am  made  to  understand 
Him — how  I  could  never  tell  or  explain  if  I  were  killed  but  I  do. 
With  D.K.  I  also  spoke  English,  he  speaking  it  better  even  than 
Mah.  K.H.)  Then,  in  my  dream  still,  three  months  after  as  I 
was  made  to  feel  in  that  vision — I  was  standing  before  Mah.  K.H. 
near  the  old  building  taken  down  he  w^as  looking  at,  and  as 
Master  was  not  at  home,  I  took  to  him  a  few  sentences  I  was 
studying  in  Senzar  in  his  sister's  room  and  asked  him  to  tell  me 
if  I  translated  them  correctly — and  gave  him  a  slip  of  f)aper  with 
these  sentences  written  in  English.  He  took  and  read  them  and 
correcting  the  interpretation  read  them  over  and  said  "  Now  your 
English  is  becoming  better — try  to  pick  out  of  my  head  even  the 
little  I  know  of  it."  And  he  put  his  hand  on  my  forehead  in  the 
region  of  memory  and  squeezed  his  fingers  on  it  (and  I  felt  even 
the  same  trifling  pain  in  it,  as  then,  and  the  cold  shiver  I  had 
experienced)  and  since  that  day  He  did  so  with  my  head  daily,  for 
about  two  months.       Again,  the  scene  changes  and  I  am  going 


APPENDIX  479 

away  with  Master  who  is  sending  me  off,  back  to  Europe.  I  am 
bidding-  good-bye  to  his  sister  and  her  child  and  all  the  chelas.  I 
listen  to  what  the  Masters  tell  me.  And  then  come  the  parting 
works  of  Mah.  K.H.  laughing  at  me  as  He  always  did  and  saying 
"  Well,  if  you  have  not  learned  much  of  the  Sacred  Sciences  and 
practical  Occultism — and  who  could  expect  a  woman  to — you  have 
learned,  at  any  rate,  a  little  English.  You  speak  it  now  only  a 
little  worse  than  I  do  !  "  and  he  laughed. 

Again  the  scene  changes  I  am  47th  St.  New  York  writing  Isiis 
and  His  voice  dictating  to  me.  In  that  dream  or  retrospective 
vision  I  once  more  rewrote  all  Isis  and  could  now  point  out  all 
the  pages  and  sentences  Mah.  K.H.  dictated — as  those  that  Master 
did — in  my  bad  English,  when  Olcott  tore  his  hair  out  by  handfuls 
in  despair  to  ever  make  out  the  meaning  of  what  was  intended.  I 
again  saw  myself  night  after  night  in  bed — ^writing  Isis  in  my 
dreams,  at  New  York,  positively  writing  it  in  my  sleep  and  felt 
sentences  by  Mah.  K.H.  impressing  themselves  on  my  memory. 
Ihen,  as  I  was  awakening  from  that  vision  (in  Wurzburg  now)  I 
heard  Mah.  K.H.'s  voice — '*  and  now  put  two  and  two  together, 
pKX>r  blind  woman.  The  bad  English  and  the  construction  of 
sentences  you  do  know,  even  that  you  have  learned  from  me 
.  .  .  take  off  the  slur  thrown  uf)on  you  by  that  misguided,  con- 
ceited man  (Hodgson)  :  explain  the  truth  to  the  few  friends  who 
will  believe  you — for  the  public  never  will  to  that  day  that  the 
Secret  Doctrine  comes  out." — I  awoke,  and  it  was  like  a  flash 
of  lightning;  but  I  still  did  not  understand  what  it  referred  to. 
But  an  hour  after,  there  comes  Hubbe  Schleiden's  letter  to  the 
Countess,  in  which  he  says,  that  unless  I  explain  how  it  is  that 
such  a  similarity  is  found  and  proven  By  Hodgson  between  my 
faulty  English  and  Mah.  K.H.'s  certain  expressions,  the  construc- 
tion of  sentences  and  peculiar  Gallicisms — I  stand  for  ever  accused 
of  deceit  forgery  (  !  !)  and  what  not.  Of  course  I  have  learned 
my  English  from  Him  !  This  Olcott  even  shall  understand.  You 
know  and  I  told  it  to  many  friends  and  enemies — ^I  was  taught 
dreadful  Yorkshire  by  my  nurse  called  Governess.  From  the 
time  my  father  brought  me  to  England,  when  fourteen,  thinking 
I  spoke  beautiful  English — and  people  asked  him  if  he  had  me 
educated  in  Yorkshire  or  Ireland — and  laughed  at  my  accent  and 
way  of  speaking — I  gave  up  English  altogether  trying  to  avoid 
speaking  it  as  much  as  I  could.  From  fourteen  till  I  was  over 
forty  I  never  spoke  it,  let  alone  writing  and  forgot  it  entirely  I 
could  read — which  I  did  very  little  in  English — I  could  not  speak  it. 
I  remember  how  difficult  it  was  for  me  to  understand  a  well- 
written  book  in  English  so  far  back  only  as  1867  in  Venice.  All 
I  knew  when  I  came  to  America  in  1873  was  to  speak  a  little  and 
this  Olcott  and  Judge  and  all  who  knew  me  then  can  testify  to.      I 


48o  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

wish  people  saw  an  article  I  once  attempted  to  write  for  the 
Banner  of  Light  when  instead  of  sanguine  I  put  sanguinary,  etc. 
I  learned  to  write  it  through  Isis,  that's  sure  and  Prof.  A.  Wilder 
who  came  weekly  to  help  Olcott  arranging  chapters  and  writing 
Index  can  testify  to  it.  When  I  had  finished  it  (and  this  Isis  is 
the  third  part  only  of  what  I  wrote  and  destroyed)  I  could  write  as 
well  as  I  do  now  not  worse  not  better.  My  memory  and  its 
capacities  seem  gone  since  then. 

What  wonder  then  that  my  English  and  the  Mahatma's  show 
similarity  !  Olcott's  and  mine  do  also  in  our  Americanisms  that 
I  picked  up  from  him  these  ten  years.  I  translating  mentally  all 
from  the  French  would  not  have  written  sceptic  with  a  k,  though 
Mahat.  K.H,  did  and  when  I  put  it  with  a  c  Olcott  and  Wilder 
and  the  proof  reader  corrected  it.  Now  Mah.  K.H.  has  preserved 
the  habit  and  stuck  to  it  and  I  never  did  since  I  went  to  India. 
I  would  have  never  put  carbolic  instead  of  **  carbonic  " — and 
I  was  the  first  to  remark  the  mistake  when  Hume  Mahatma's 
letter,  at  Simla,  in  which  it  occurs.  It  is  mean  and  stupid  of 
him  to  publish  it,  for  if  he  says,  this  referred  to  a  sentence  found 
in  some  magazine  then  the  word  correctly  written  was  there  before 
my  eyes  or  those  of  any  chela  who  precipitated  the  letter  and 
therefore  it  is  evidently  a  lapsus  calami  if  there  were  any  calami 
in  precipitation.  "  Difference  in  handwriting  " — oh  the  great 
wonder  !  Has  Master  K.H.  written  himself  all  His  letters?  How 
many  chelas  have  been  precipitating  and  writing  them — heaven 
only  knows.  Now  if  there  is  such  a  marked  difference  between 
letters  v^ritten  by  the  same  identical  person  mechanically  (as  the 
case  with  me  for  instance  who  never  had  a  steady  handwriting) 
how  much  more  in  precipitation,  which  is  the  photographic  repro- 
duction from  one's  head,  and  I  bet  anything  that  no  chela  (if 
Masters  can)  is  capable  of  precipitating  his  own  handwriting  twice 
over  in  precisely  the  same  way — a  difference  and  a  marked  one 
there  shall  always  be,  as  no  painter  can  paint  twice  over  the  same 
likeness  (see  Schmichen  with  his  (Master's)  portraits).  Now  all 
this  shall  be  easily  understood  by  theosophists  (not  all)  and  those 
who  have  thought  over  deeply  and  know  something  of  the 
philosophy.  Who  shall  believe  all  I  say  in  this  letter  outside  of 
the  few?  No  one.  And  yet,  I  am  demanded  an  explanation  and 
when  it  comes  out  (if  you  write  it  out  from  facts  I  can  give  you) 
no  one  shall  believe  it.  Yet  you  have  to  show  at  least  one  thing  : 
occult  transactions,  letters  handwriting  etc.  cannot  be  judged  by 
the  daily  standard,  experts,  this  that  and  the  other.  There  are 
no  three  solutions  but  two:  Either  I  have  invented  the  Masters, 
their  philosophy,  written  their  letters  etc.  or,  /  have  not.  If  I 
have  and  the  Masters  do  not  exist,  then  their  handwritings  could 
not  have  existed,  either  :  I  have  invented  them  also ;  and  if  I  have 


APPENDIX  481 

— how  can  I  be  called  a  *'  forger  "?  They  are  my  handwritings 
and  I  have  the  right  to  use  them  if  I  am  so  clever.  As  for 
philosophy  and  doctrine  invented  the  S.D.  shall  show.  Now  I 
am  here  alone  with  the  Countess  for  witness.  I  have  no  books 
no  one  to  help  me.  And  I  tell  you  that  the  Secret  Doctrine  will 
be  20  times  as  learned,  philosophical  and  better  than  Isis  which 
will  be  killed  by  it.  Now  there  are  hundreds  of  things  I  am  per- 
mitted to  say  and  explain.  It  will  show  what  a  Russian  spy  can 
do,  an  alleged  forger  plagiarist  etc.  The  whole  Doctrine  is  shown 
the  mother  stone  the  foundation  of  all  the  religions  including  Xty 
and  on  the  strength  of  exoteric  published  Hindu  books  with  their 
symbols  explained  esoterically.  The  extreme  lucidity  of  "  Esoteric 
Buddhism  "  will  also  be  shown  and  its  doctrine  proven  correct 
mathematically,  geometrically  logically  and  scientifically.  Hodg- 
son is  very  clever,  but  he  is  not  clever  enough  for  truth  and  it 
shall  triumph  after  which  I  can  die  peacefully. 

Babula  writing  my  Master's  letters  indeed  !  Hume  finding  out 
five  years  later  that  the  envelope  from  the  municipality  had  been 
*'  tampered  "  by  me  brought  by  Babula.  What  good  memory  his 
Mahomedan  bearer  must  have,  to  remember  that  it  was  precisely 
that  envelope!  And  Garstin's  letter  taken  to  him  by  Mohini  2^ 
hours  after  his  letter  had  been  placed  inside  and  disappeared  from 
the  shrine.  His  letter  sealed  glued  with  every  precaution  bearing 
no  such  marks  as  now  described  on  the  night  of  the  delivery,  and 
now  two  years  later,  after  having  passed  through  1000  hands, 
been  tampered  by  Garstin  and  experts  themselves,  trying  to  see 
how  it  could  have  been  opened — now  it  all  goes  against  me  !  And 
Hume's  lies.  Such  Tibetan  or  Nepaul  paper  he  learned  could  be 
procured  near  Darjeeling.  Masters  never  wrote  he  said  on  such 
paper  before  I  had  gone  to  Darjeeling.  Indeed.  Now  I  enclose 
a  slip  of  such  paper  for  your  perusal,  that  with  your  memory  you 
are  sure  to  recognise.  It  is  the  original  bit  from  which  the  first 
lessons  of  Master  were  given  to  you  and  Hume  in  his  Museum 
at  Simla.  You  looked  at  it  many  times.  Please  when  recognised 
send  it  back  to  me.  It  is  private  and  confidential  and  I  ask  you 
on  your  honour  not  to  let  it  go  out  of  your  hands  not  to  give  it 
to  any  one.  No  exi>ert  or  Orientalist  would  find  or  understand 
anything  in  it  but  letters  which  have  a  meaning  for  me  for 
no  one  else.  But  what  I  want  you  to  see  and  remember  that  I 
went  to  Darjeeling  a  year  later  after  Hume  had  quarrelled  with 
K.H.  and  this  paper  I  had  at  Simla  when  the  first  lessons  were 
begun.  And  all  throughout  the  whole  Report  the  same  lies,  false 
testimony  etc. 

Yours — No  more  broken  down. 

H.  P.  Blavatsky. 


482  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

LETTER  No.  CXLI 

March  17th,  1886. 
My  Dear  Mr.  Sinnett, 

Do  anything  you  like.  I  am  in  your  hands.  Only  I  cannot 
see  what  harm  there  could  be  were  the  lawyers  to  be  told  that  it 
is  a  lie  my  being-  Mme  Metrovitch  or  Mme  any  one  except  myself. 
It  would  prevent  them  and  put  a  stop  to  their  addressing  letters  to 
me  in  that  name;  for  surely  they  are  not  such  fools  as  not  to 
know  that  this  open  libel  is  against  law.  It  is  because  the  Bibichi 
bamboozle  them  into  the  belief  that  I  was  really  a  bigamist  and  a 
trigamist  that  they  did  it.  Well  very  soon  I  may  receive  a  letter 
addressed  to  me  in  the  name  of  Mrs.  Leadbeater  or  Mrs.  Damodar 
or  perhaps  be  accused  of  having  had  a  child  by  Mohini  or  Bowajee. 
Who  can  tell  unless  something  is  refuted. 

But  this  is  all  trifles.  There  is  something  insufferably  disgust- 
ing and  sickening  to  me  in  the  idea  of  any  concealment  of  names. 
1  hate  incognitos  and  changing  names.  Why  should  I  give  you 
more  bother  than  you  already  have  with  me?  Why  should  you 
lose  time  and  money  to  come  and  meet  me?  Don't  do  this.  I 
will  send  the  things  before  hand  and  come  out  with  Louise  quietly 
second  class,  passing  the  night  at  Bohn  or  at  Achen  (Aix  la 
Chapelle)  or  somewhere  on  the  road.  Lodgings  will  be  dear  at 
Ostende  in  June,  not  before.  Besides  I  can  go  somewhere  near-by. 
I  do  not  know  when  I  will  leave  here.  May  be  on  the  ist,  may  be 
on  the  15th.      I  have  paid  till  that  date. 

Why  shouldn't  Mrs.  Sinnett  come  with  Dennie?  Where's  the 
harm  and  why  should  she  not  stop  with  me  if  I  find  good  lodgings? 
I  would  never  be  happy  unless  she  was  with  me  for  what's  the 
use  of  her  being  in  other  lodgings  ?  Only  discomfort  for  her  and 
vexation  of  spirit  for  me. 

I  have  written  to  my  aunt  and  sister  giving  them  Red\vay's 
address.  The  letters  will  all  be  addressed  to  you  to  his  care, 
only  for  Madame  B  :  under  your  name.  However,  I  really  care 
little  for  letters  or  no  letters.  There's  a  long  article  in  my  praise 
and  glorification  in  the  Russian  papers  in  which  I  am  called  **  the 
martyr  of  England."  That's  comforting  and  makes  me  feel  as 
though  I  were  indeed  a  "grand  Russian  Spy!''  Say,  do  you 
know — but  then  you  will  never  believe  it.  Well  don't,  but  some 
day  you  will  be  forced  to,  Gladstone  is  a  secret  Roman  Catholic 
convert.  That's  sure.  Make  of  it  what  you  will,  you  cannot 
change  facts.  Ah,  poor  England,  and  foolish,  blind  are  thou 
who  seek  the  destruction  of  the  T.S.  ! 

Well  I  must  say  a  few  words  in  this  respect.  You  say  "  we 
are  almost  past  praying  for  .  .  .  paralyzed  and  helpless. 
The  French  and  German  branches  of  the  T.S.  are  practically  dead. 


APPENDIX  483 

The  London  movement  can  only  be  revivified  at  some  future  period, 
etc."  You  are  asked:  How  is  this?  You  are  not  dead.  The 
Countess  lives.  Two  or  three  fellows  around  you  breathe,  so 
far.  The  Society  in  India  is  flourishing  and  can  never  die.  In 
America  it  is  becoming  a  grand  movement.  Dr.  Buck,  Prof. 
Cowes,  Arthur  Gebhard  with  a  few  others  are  helped  because  they 
move  and  show  their  utmost  contempt  for  whatever  is  said, 
printed,  howled  in  the  streets.  Oh  do  try  and  be  intuitional — 
for  pity's  sake  do  not  shut  your  eyes  and  because  you  cannot  see 
objectively  do  not  paralyze  subjective  help  which  is  there  living, 
breathing,  evident.  Does  not  all  around  you  show  the  indestructi- 
bility of  the  Society,  if  we  see  how  the  fierce  waves  raised  by  the 
Dugpa-world  have  been  for  the  last  two  years  heaving  and  spread- 
ing and  beating  ferociously  around  the  Society  to  break  what? 
only  the  rotten  chips  of  the  **  Ark  of  the  Deluge."  Have  they 
carried  away  anyone  really  worthy  of  the  movement?  Not  one. 
You  suspect  that  the  "  Masters  "  want  to  put  an  end  to  the  move- 
ment? They  see  you  do  not  understand  what  they  are  doing  and 
feel  sorry  for  it.  Are  they  to  be  blamed  for  what  hapj>ened,  or 
we,  ourselves?  If  the  Founder  of  the  Society  and  the  Founders 
or  Presidents  of  the  Branches  had  ever  kept  in  view  the  fact  that 
it  is  not  so  much  the  quantity  we  are  in  need  of,  but  the  quality, 
to  make  the  Society  a  success  half  of  the  disasters  would  have 
been  avoided.  There  were  two  paths  before  the  L.L.  as  before 
any  other  branch  when  you  took  up  its  mangled  fragments  and 
rebuilt  them  into  the  growing  successful  body  it  was  :  that  which 
led  to  the  formation  of  a  secret,  arcane  Society  of  studying  practi- 
cal occultists ;  the  other  an  open  and  fashionable  body.  You  have 
always  preferred  the  latter.  A  chance  was  given  to  all  of  you  in 
the  formation  of  an  inner  group  :  you  would  not  assert  your 
authority  and  left  it  to  the  nominal  President — who  shook  on  his 
legs  at  every  gentle  breeze  from  within  and  without,  ruined  and 
then  deserted  it.  Every  such  attempt  was  either  repelled  or,  if 
realized,  had  such  a  strong  element  of  sham  in  it  that  it  proved 
a  failure.  It  was  found  impossible  to  help  it  and  it  was  left  to 
its  fate.  There  is  an  Asiatic  proverb  '*  You  may  cut  the  serpent 
of  wisdom  in  hundred  pieces  so  long  that  its  heart,  which  is  in 
its  head,  remains  untouched,  the  serpent  will  join  its  bits  and  live 
again."  But  when  the  heart  and  head  seem  everywhere  and  are 
nowhere,  what  can  be  done?  The  L.L.  having  taken  its  rank 
and  place  among  public  bodies  it  had  to  be  judged  by  its  appear- 
ances. It  is  not  enough  to  laud  the  Body  and  Branches,  as  schools 
of  morality  and  wisdom  and  benevolence,  for  they  will  always  be 
judged  by  the  outward  world  by  their  fruits  not  by  their  preten- 
sions— not  by  what  they  say  but  by  what  they  do.  The  branch 
was  always  in  need  of  efficient  workers;  and,  as  in  all  organiza- 


484  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

tions  the  work  devolved  upon  the  very  few.  Out  of  those  few 
one  only  had  a  definite  object  in  view,  pursued  it  firm  and  unwaver- 
ing— yourself.  Yet  your  natural  reserve  and  the  strong-  element 
of  worldly  Society  within  the  Occult  body,  the  sense  of  English 
individuality  and  propriety  in  each  member  prevented  you  on  the 
one  hand  from  asserting  your  rights  as  you  ought  to  have  done 
and  caused  the  rest  to  separate  from  you  wide  and  apart,  each 
determining  to  act  as  he  or  she  thought  best  to  secure  his  own 
salvation  and  satisfy  his  aspirations,  "  working  Karma  out  on  a 
higher  plane  "  as  the  foolish  phrase  goes  now  among  them.  You 
are  right  in  saying  that  *'  the  blows  that  have  been  struck  at  the 
movement  "  have  been  *'  all  emanating  from  the  consequences  of 
the  deputations  from  India";  you  are  wrong  in  thinking  that 
(i)  these  consequences  would  have  been  as  disastrous  had  not  the 
Hindu  element  been  mixed  up  with  the  European  and  strongly 
helf>ed  and  urged  on  toward  mischief  by  the  female  element  in  the 
L.L.,  and  (2)  that  "  the  higher  powers  wish  to  arrest  the  growth 
of  the  Society."  Mohini  was  sent  and  at  first  won  the  hearts 
and  i>oured  new  life  into  the  L.L.  He  was  spoiled  by  male  and 
female  adulation,  by  incessant  flattery  and  his  own  weakness — 
your  reserve  and  pride  left  you  passive  when  you  ought  to  have 
been  active.  The  first  bomb-shell  from  the  Dug-pa  world  came 
from  America ;  you  welcomed  and  warmed  it  in  your  own  breast, 
you  drove  the  writer  of  this  more  than  once  to  the  verge  of  despair, 
your  thorough-going,  sincere  earnestness,  your  devotion  to  truth 
and  the  "Masters"  having  been  made  powerless  for  the  time 
being,  for  discerning  the  real  truth,  for  sensing  that  which  was 
left  unsaid  for  it  could  not  be  said  and  thus  leaving  the  widest 
margin  for  suspicion.  The  latter  was  not  unfounded.  The 
Dugpa  element  triumphed  fully  at  one  time — ^why?  because  you 
believed  in  one  who  was  sent  by  the  opposing  powers  for  the 
destruction  of  the  Society  and  permitted  to  act  as  she  and  others 
did  by  the  "  higher  powers,"  as  you  call  them,  whose  duty  it  was 
not  to  interfere  in  the  great  probation  save  at  the  last  moment. 
To  this  day  you  are  unable  to  say  what  was  true,  what  false — 
because  there  is  no  spot  made  apart,  separated  from  the  Society 
and  consecrated  to  the  one  pure  element  in  it,  love  and  devotion 
to  the  truth  whether  abstract  or  concreted  in  the  **  Masters  " — a 
spot  in  which  no  element  of  individuality  or  selfishness  would  enter 
— a  real  inner  group  is  here  meant.    The  Oriental  group  has  proved 

a  farce.    Miss cares  more  for  the  chelas  (?  )  than  the  Masters  ; 

she  is  blind  to  the  fact  that  those  who  were  (and  yet  think  they 
still  are)  most  devoted  to  the  Cause,  Masters,  Theosophy,  call  it 
by  whatever  name — are  those  that  are  the  most  tried;  that  she  is 
now  being  tried,  that  it  is  her  last  trial  and  that  she  does  not  come 
out  of  it  as  a  conqueror,  it  seems.      "  In  the  absence  of  any  means 


APPENDIX  485 

of  communicating  directly  with  them  I  can  only  judge  by  signs  ** — 
you  say.  The  signs  are  evident.  It  is  the  great  supreme  trial 
all  round.  He  who  remains  passive  will  lose  nothing,  but  will 
not  gain  one  tittle,  when  it  is  over.  He  may  even  cause  his 
Karma  to  slide  him  gently  back  on  the  path  he  has  already  been 
climbing.  What  you  sorely  lack  is  Olcott's  blessed  self-confidence 
and — pardon — his  vulgar  but  all  powerful  cheek.  One  need  not 
give  up  tact  and  culture  to  have  it.  It  is  a  many-faced  Proteus 
that  can  have  either  of  his  faces  or  cheek  turned  to  the  enemy  and 
force  him  to  cover.  If  the  L.L.  is  composed  only  of  six  members 
— ^the  President  the  seventh;  and  this  daring  **  vieille  gard^  " 
faces  the  enemy  coolly,  not  allowing  him  to  know  how  many  you 
are  and  impressing  him  with  outward  signs  of  a  multitude  by  the 
number  of  pamphlets,  convocations  and  other  distinct,  material 
proofs  that  the  Society  has  not  been  shaken,  that  it  has  not  felt 
the  blows,  that  it  snaps  its  fingers  in  the  enemy's  face,  you  will 
soon  win  the  day ;  you  will  have  exhausted  the  enemy  before  it 
tires  out  the  Society  to  its  last  member.  All  this  can  be  easily 
achieved  and  no  "smashing  disasters"  would  really  affect  it  if 
its  members  had  intuition  enough  to  see  what  *'  the  higher 
powers  *'  really  wish,  what  they  can  or  cannot  prevent.  Spiritual 
discernment  is  what  is  most  wanted.  *'  It  is  not  so  much  a 
question  of  saving  what  remains  of  the  Society — as  of  recom- 
mencing the  movement  at  some  future  time.^'  Fatal  policy. 
Follow  it,  and  you  will  have  broken  by  that  (future)  time,  every 
invisible  yet  powerfully  vital  thread  that  links  the  L.L.  with  the 
ashrums  beyond  the  great  mountains.  Nothing  can  kUl  the  L.L. 
except  that  one  thing — passivity.  Know  this,  you  who  confess 
that  you  **  have  no  heart  for  the  present  to  be  giving  lectures  and 
addresses."  "  Work  underground  '* — it  is  the  best  you  can  do — 
but  not  in  silence — if  you  would  not  kill  the  Society  and  your  own 
personal  aspirations  with  your  own  hand.  All  are  not  speakers 
in  the  L.L.  and  very  lucky,  or  it  would  be  a  Babel.  All  are  not 
wise,  but  those  who  are  ought  to  share  with  the  rest.  Combine 
to  make  things  complete.  Make  your  activity  commensurate  with 
your  opportunities  and  do  not  turn  your  face  away  from  the  latter, 
even  from  those  that  are  created  for  you.  **  Fling  the  burning 
brands  apart,  and  they  will  quickly  go  out;  rake  them  together 
and  they  will  glow,  burst  into  flame  and  shoot  sky-ward  with  ruddy 
brightness."  So  shall  the  L.L.  shine  out  if  demoralization  is  kept 
at  distance,  if  its  lights  are  not  allowed  to  burn  and  die  out  as 
isolated  and  intermediate  points  of  lights,  but  are  clustered  and 
focalized  into  full  ruddiness  by  the  hand  of  its  President,  and  if 
this  hand  is  not  allowed  to  drop  the  banner  entrusted  to  it. 
Human  dirt  never  sticks,  nor  does  it  soil  the  flame  it  is  flung 
against.      It  only  sticks  hard  to  the  marble,  to  the  cold  heart  that 


486  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

has  lost  the  last  spark  of  the  Divine  flame.  Yes  indeed,  the 
"Masters"  and  the  "Powers  that  be"  would  call  and  guide 
many  and  many  a  sad,  lonesome  and  weary  one  in  this  fair  land 
of  occult,  psychic  theosophy  to  gather  with  them  around  their 
altars.  Two  are  bodily  there  already,  who  have  won  their  day 
and  found  the  alleged  "  Invisibles  " — each  by  his  own  path.  For 
the  teachings  of  the  "  Order  "  are  like  precious  stones — whatever 
way  turned,  light  and  truth  and  beauty  flash  forth,  and  will  guide 
the  weary  traveller  in  search  of  them,  if  he  but  stops  not  on  his 
way  to  follow  the  will-o '-wisps  of  the  illusive  world,  and  remains 
deaf  to  public  rumour. 

Now  do,  for  pity  sake,  do  try  to  arouse  for  once  your  intuitions 
if  you  can.  I  do  suffer  for  you  and  would  do  anything  to  help 
you.  But  you  prevent  me.  Pardon  this  and  try  to  recognise 
the  foreign  from  my  own  words. 

H.  P.  B. 


LETTER  No.  CXLIIa 

THE  THEOSOPHICAL   SOCIETY 

With  reference  to  the  Rules  and  Organization  of  the  Society, 
I  beg  to  make  the  following  suggestions.  The  |x>ints  I  urge 
appear  to  me  very  necessary  as  I  have  had  conversation  with 
many  Natives  and  have  a  claim  to  know  the  Hindu  character 
better  than  a  foreigner  can. 

A  general  impression  appears  to  prevail  that  the  Society  is  a 
religious  sect.  This  impression  owes  its  origin,  I  think,  to  a 
common  belief  that  the  whole  Society  is  devoted  to  Occultism. 
As  far  as  I  can  judge,  this  is  not  the  case.  If  it  is,  the  best 
course  to  adO'pt  would  be  to  make  the  entire  Society  a  secret 
one,  and  shut  its  doors  against  all  except  those  very  few  who 
may  have  shown  a  determination  to  devote  their  whole  lives  to 
the  study  of  Occultism.  If  it  is  not  so,  and  is  based  ufK>n  the 
broad  Humanitarian  principle  of  Universal  Brotherhood,  let 
Occultism,  one  of  its  several  Branches,  be  an  entirely  secret  study. 
From  time  immemorial  this  sacred  knowledge  has  been  guarded 
from  the  vulgar  with  great  care,  and  because  a  few  of  us  have 
had  the  great  fortune  to  come  into  contact  with  some  of  the 
custodians  of  this  invaluable  treasure,  is  it  right  on  our  part  to 
take  advantage  of  their  kindness  and  vulgarize  the  secrets  they 
esteem  more  sacred  than  even  their  lives?  The  world  is  not  yet 
prepared'  to  hear  truth  about  this  subject.  By  placing  the  facts 
before  the  unprepared  general  public,  we  only  make  a  laughing 
stock  of  those  w^ho  have  been  kind  to  us  and  have  accepted  us 


APPENDIX  487 

as  their  coworkers  for  doing  good  to  humanity.  By  harping  too 
much  upon  this  subject,  we  have  made  ourselves  in  a  measure 
odious  in  the  eyes  of  the  public.  We  went  even  to  such  an  extent 
that,  unconsciously  to  ourselves,  we  led  the  public  to  believe  that 
our  Society  is  under  the  sole  management  of  the  Adepts,  while 
the  fact  is  that  the  entire  executive  management  is  in  the  hands 
of  the  Founders,  and  our  Teachers  give  us  advice  only  in  rare 
exceptional  cases  of  the  greatest  emergency.  The  public  saw 
that  they  must  have  misapprehended  the  facts,  since  errors  in 
the  Management  of  the  Society — some  of  which  could  have  been 
very  well  avoided  by  the  exercise  of  ordinary  common  sense — 
were  from  time  to  time  exposed.  Hence  they  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that 

(i)  Either  Adepts  do  not  exist  at  all ;  or 

(2)  If  they  do,  they  have  no  connection  with  our  Society,  and 

therefore  we  are  dishonest  impostors ;  or 

(3)  If  they  have  any  connection  with  the  Society,   it  must  be 

only  those  of  a  very  low  degree,  since,  under  their  manage- 
ment, such  errors  occurred. 
With  the  few  noble  exceptions  who  had  entire  confidence  in  us, 
our  Native  Members  came  to  one  of  these  three  conclusions.  It 
is  therefore  necessary  in  my  opinion  that  prompt  measures  should 
be  adopted  to  remove  these  suspicions.  For  this,  I  see  only  one 
alternative  : — (i)  Either  the  entire  Society  should  be  devoted  to 
occultism,  in  which  case  it  should  be  quite  as  secret  as  the  Masonic 
or  the  Rosicrucian  Lodge  or,  (2)  Nobody  should  know  anything 
about  occultism  except  those  very  few  who  may  have  by  their 
conduct  shown  their  determination  to  devote  themselves  to  its 
study.  ITie  first  alternative  being  found  inadvisable  by  our 
"  Brothers  "  and  positively  forbidden,  the  second  remains. 

Another  impK>rtant  question  is  that  of  the  admission  of  Members. 
Until  now,  any  one  who  expressed  a  desire  to  join  and  could  get 
two  sponsors  was  allowed  to  come  into  the  Society,  without  our 
enquiring  closely  what  the  motives  in  joining  were.  This  led 
to  two  evil  results.  People  thought  or  pretended  to  think  that 
we  took  in  Members  simply  for  their  Initiation  Fees  on  which 
we  lived ;  and  many  joined  out  of  mere  curiosity,  as  they  thought 
that  by  paying  an  Initiation  Fee  of  Rupees  Ten,  they  could  see 
phenomena.  And  when  they  were  disappointed  in  this,  they  turned 
round  on  us,  and  began  to  revile  our  Cause  for  which  we  have 
been  working  and  to  which  we  have  pledged  our  lives.  The  best 
way  to  remedy  this  evil  would  be  to  exclude  this  class  of  persons. 
The  question  naturally  arises  how  can  this  be  done,  since  our 
Rules  are  so  liberal  as  to  admit  every  one?  But,  at  the  same 
time  our  Rules  prescribe  an  Initiation  Fee  of  Rupees  Ten.  This 
is  too  low  to  keep  out  the  curiosity  seekers,  who,  for  the  chance 


488  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

of  being  satisfied,  feel  they  can  very  well  afford  to  lose  such  a 
paltry  sum.  The  fee  should  therefore  be  so  much  increased  that 
those  only  would  join  who  are  really  in  earnest.  We  need  men 
of  principle  and  serious  purpK>se.  One  such  man  can  do  more 
for  us  than  hundreds  of  phenomena-hunters.  The  fee  should  in 
my  judgment  be  increased  to  Rs  :  200  or  Rs  :  300.  It  might  be 
urged  that  thus  we  might  exclude  really  good  men  who  may  be 
sincere  and  earnest  but  unable  to  pay.  But  I  think  it  is  prefer- 
able to  risk  the  |x>ssible  loss  of  one  good  man  than  take  in  a 
crowd  of  idlers,  one  of  whom  can  undo  the  work  of  all  the  former. 
And  yet,  even  this  contingency  can  be  avoided.  For,  as  now  we 
admit  some  to  membership,  who  appear  especially  deserving, 
without  their  paying  their  own  fees,  so  could  the  same  thing  be 
done  under  the  proposed  change. 

Damodar  K.  Mavalankar,  F.T.S. 
Respectfully  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  Mr.  Sinnett. 


LETTER  No.  CXLII  b 

Respectfully  submitted  for  the  consideration    of    Mr.    Sinnett, 
under  the  direct  orders  of  Brother  Koot  Hoomi. 

Damodar  K.  Mavalankar. 
With  the  exception  of  fee — too  exaggerated — his  views  are  quite 
correct.  Such  is  the  impression  produced  upon  the  native  mind. 
I  trust,  my  dear  friend,  that  you  add  a  paragraph  showing  the 
Society  in  its  true  light.  Listen  to  your  inner  voice,  and  oblige 
once  more, 

Yours  very  faithfully, 

K.  H. 


APPENDIX 


489 


MARS  AND  MERCURY 

Mr.  Sinnett  in  his  posthumous  work  *'  The  Early  Days  of 
Theosophy  in  Europe  "  reopens  this  old  controversy,  and  in  the 
course  of  his  remarks  he  makes  many  insinuations  of  a  personal 
nature  against  Madame  Blavatsky  which  are  as  untrue  of  her,  as 
they  are  unworthy  of  her  old  colleague.  In  Chapter  IX  p.  92 
of  that  work  after  saying  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had  stated  in 
The  Secret  Doctrine  that  he  had  made  a  great  mistake  in  repre- 
senting Mars,  Mercury,  and  the  Earth  as  belonging  to  the  same 
planetary  chain,  he  continues  on  the  same  page —  :  .  .  .  . 
**  The  letter  from  the  Master  from  which  she  (H.P.B.)  professed 
to  give  extract  was  not  what  she  represents  it,  an  answer  to 
enquiries  of  her  own,  but  a  garbled  version  of  a  letter  originally 
addressed  to  me." 

In  other  words  he  clearly  implies  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had 
not  only  perverted  the  facts,  but  misquoted  the  letter  referred  to, 
in  order  to  gain  support  for  her  own  explanation. 

On  page  94  of  the  same  work  appears  the  following : — 
*'  Eventually  when  Mrs.  Besant  by  the  expansion  of  her  own 
knowledge  had  ascertained  definitely  that  Mars  and  Mercury  did 
belong  to  our  chain  with  functions  in  evolution  as  I  had  originally 
described  them,  she  did  publish  a  statement  to  that  effect  in 
♦Lucifer'  vol.  XVII.  p.  271." 

For  the  convenience  of  those  not  having  access  to  the  volumes 
of  Lucifer  the  passage  referred  to  is  here  quoted  in  full  together 
with  a  former  statement  by  Mrs.  Besant  on  the  same  subject  : — 
Extract  from  Lucifer  for  November,    1893,    Vol.   XIII.,   p.   203. 

Mars  and  the  Earth. 

♦*  The  apparent  contradiction  between  the  teaching  of  The 
Masters  as  put  forward  by  their  direct  messenger  H.  P.  Blavatsky, 
and  as  understood  by  Mr.  Sinnett  is  capable  of  very  easy  explana- 
tion. The  solution  turns  on  the  words  *  Solar  System.'  If  that 
term  be  held  to  denote  the  Solar  System  known  to  Western 
Science,  the  sentence  given  by  Mr.  Sinnett  is  meaningless ;  but 
reference  to  the  series  of  letters  from  which  the  isolated  passage 
respecting  Mars  is  quoted,  at  once  shows  the  meaning  attached 
to  the  '  Solar  System  '  in  the  correspondence.  I  naturally  turned 
to  the  letters  themselves — copies  of  which  I  have — to  solve  the 
puzzle,  and  I  found  that  Master  K.H.  used  the  term  in  a  special 
and  quite  definite  sense. 

"  He  explains  three  kinds  of  Manvantaras,  Pralayas  etc.,  uni- 
versal, solar,  and  minor.  A  minor  Manvantara  is  composed  of 
seven  Rounds  i.e.  the  circuit  seven  times  of  a  Planetary  Chain  of 
seven  Globes.  To  such  a  chain,  our  Earth  belongs.  A  Solar 
Period  consists  of  seven  of  such  sevenfold  Rounds  i.e.  forty-nine; 
seven    such    Planetary    Chains    compose    a    *  Solar    System  ' ;    in 


490  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

three  of  such  chains,  our  Earth,  Mars,  and  Mercury,  form  the 
D.  Globe.  Globe  D.  of  the  Mars  Chain,  Globe  D.  of  the  Mercury 
Chain  are  visible  to  us,  because  those  chains  are  sufficiently  near 
our  own  in  evolution,  one  behind  us  and  one  ahead  of  us,  for  their 
matter  to  affect  our  senses,  while  the  remaining  four  chains  are 
too  far  away  in  evolution  to  have  enough  in  common  with  us  for 
visibility. 

*'  Mars  and  Mercury  bear  a  special  relation  to  our  Earth  in  the 
whole  evolution  of  the  Solar  System,  though  not  part  of  the 
Earth  Chain.  The  other  four  Planetary  Chains  belonging  to  our 
Solar  System  are  too  far  behind  us  or  in  front  of  us  for  even 
their  Globes  D.  to  be  seen. 

"  Other  planets  in  the  Solar  System  of  Science  as  arranged  in 
the  West  do  not  belong  to  the  Solar  System  of  the  Esoteric 
Philosophy ;  and  it  is  the  ignoring  of  this  which  led  to  the  con- 
fusion. A  western  reader  naturally  gives  the  term  his  own  sense 
not  knowing  that  in  the  teachings  it  was  used  in  quite  a  different 
one.  And  so,  once  more  we  find  the  Masters'  doctrines  self- 
consistent." 

Annie  Besant. 

Extract  from  Lucifer  for  December,  1895,   Vol.  XVIL,  p.  271. 

**  The  old  Mars  and  Mercury  discussion  has  been  lately  revived 
to  some  extent  in  Theosophical  circles,  and  an  appeal  has  been 
made  to  me  to  say  if  any  further  light  has  been  thrown  upon  the 
subject.  In  Lucifer  vol.  XIII.  p.  206,  I  wrote  an  explanation 
which  seemed  satisfactory  so  far  as  the  documents  then  in  my 
hands  were  concerned.  I  was  leaving  for  India  when  I  wrote  the 
paragraph  and  Mr.  Sinnett  kept  silence,  in  his  generous  way, 
during  my  absence ;  but  on  my  return  he  showed  me  the  original 
letter  on  which  the  statement  in  Esoteric  Buddhism  was  founded, 
the  letter  partially  quoted  in  the  Secret  Doctrine  vol.  I  p.  187 ;  this 
letter  was  one  of  those  received  in  the  early  days  and  was  not 
among  those  of  which  I  had  copies.  This  original  letter  left  no 
doubt  as  to  the  Master's  statement  on  this  point,  for  it  said 
categorically,  that  Mars  and  Mercury  made  part  of  the  chain  of 
which  our  Earth  is  the  fourth  Globe.  As  the  Society  was  then 
disturbed  over  Mr.  Judge's  affair,  Mr.  Sinnett  did  not  wish  the 
question  to  be  revived  merely  to  justify  himself,  but  there  is  no 
reason  now  why  the  matter  should  not  be  put  straight. 

"The  facts  are  these;  the  planetary  chain  consists  of  Globes 
A.,  B.,  Mars,  Earth,  Mercury,  P.,  and  G.,  and  round  these  the 
great  life-wave  has  swept  three  and  a  half  times,  reaching  Earth 
for  the  fourth  time ;  the  mass  of  humanity  passed  from  Mars  to 
the  Earth,  and  will  pass  from  the  Earth  to  Mercury.  But  the 
leading  class  of  humanity — and  here  is  a  fact  that  throws  some 
light  on  the  opposing  statements — did  not  share  in  this  general 
evolution.  It  came  directly  to  the  Earth  from  another  region  at 
a  much  later  period  in  evolution,  and  had  never  been  on  Mars  at 
all.  Another  fact,  which  H.P.B.  evidently  had  in  mind,  when 
writing  on  this  question,   is  that  Mars  is  also  concerned  in  an 


APPENDIX  491 

entirely  different  evolution,  as  to  which  nothing  can  be  publicly 
said.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  clear  the  matter  up  to  the 
satisfaction  of  exoteric  students,  but  it  is  just  that  it  should  be 
publicly  stated  that  Mr.  Sinnett's  statement  is  entirely  borne  out 
by  the  original  letter." 

It  will  be  at  once  seen  that  in  the  first  of  the  above  statements 
Lucifer  Vol.  XIII,  Mrs.  Besant  in  the  main  supports  the  explana- 
tion g-iven  in  the  Secret  Doctrine,  while  in  the  second.  Vol.  XVII 
she  says,  "  that  the  letter  partially  quoted  on  page  187  of  Secret 
Doctrine  Vol.  I.,  categorically  states  that  Mars  and  Mercury 
made  part  of  the  chain  of  which  our  Earth  is  the  fourth  Globe." 

The  letter  referred  to  was  among  those  left  by  Mr.  Sinnett 
and  it  is  therefore  possible  to  examine  the  facts  in  the  light  of  the 
original  document.  The  passage  quoted  will  be  found  on  page 
176  of  this  volume  in  the  paragraph  numbered  (23).  If  the 
reader  will  now  turn  to  page  187  Vol.  I  of  the  Secret  Doctrine 
and  compare  the  passage  there  quoted  with  the  original  as  given 
in  this  volume,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  letter  was  correctly  quoted 
in  every  detail  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  that  moreover  she 
quoted  the  whole  of  the  relevant  passage.  As  there  is  only  one 
such  letter  quoted  on  that  page  of  the  Secret  Doctrine  there  is  no 
possible  room  for  mistake,  and  with  due  deference  to  Mrs.  Besant, 
it  must  be  pointed  out  that  there  is  nothing  in  that  paragraph  or 
the  remainder  of  the  letter,  which  can  be  construed  into  a  "  cate- 
gorical statement  that  Mars  and  Mercury  made  part  of  the  chain 
of  which  our  Earth  is  4th  Globe." 

As  stated  over  and  over  again  and  from  every  point  of 
yiew  in  these  pages  of  the  Secret  Doctrine^  .  .  .  **  neither 
Mars  nor  Mercury  belong  to  our  chain.  They  are  along  with 
other  planets,  Septenary  Units  in  the  Great  host  of  Chains  of 
our  System  and  all  are  as  visible  as  their  upper  Globes  are  in- 
visible. "^  And  again  *'  The  one  Eternal  Law  unfolds  everything 
in  the  to  be  manifested  Nature,  on  a  sevenfold  principle;  among 
the  rest,  the  countless  chains  of  worlds  composed  of  7  globes, 
graduated  on  the  4  lower  planes  of  the  World  of  Formation,  the  3 
others  belonging  to  the  Archetypal  Universe.  Out  of  these  7 
only  one,  the  lowest  and  the  most  material  of  these  Globes,  is  with- 
in our  plane  or  means  of  perception,  the  6  others  lying  outside  it 
and  being  therefore  invisible  to  the  terrestrial  eye.  ...  To 
make  it  clearer  ;  we  are  told  that  each  of  the  planets,  of  which  seven 
only  were  called  sacred,  as  being  ruled  by  the  highest  Regents  or 
Gods,  ...  is  a  septenary,  as  also  is  the  chain  to  which  the 
Earth  belongs ;  .  .  .  while  the  superior  fellow  globes  of  these 
planets  are  on  other  planes  quite  outside  that  of  our  terrestrial 
senses.     .     .     .     These  invisible  companions  correspond  curiously 

1  Vol.  I.,  pp.   186-193. 

2  p.  188. 


492  THE  MAHATMA  LETTERS 

to  that  which  we  call  the  "  principles  "  in  man.  The  seven  are 
on  three  material  planes  and  one  spiritual  plane  "^  .  .  .  and 
again  ..."  but  it  may  be  stated  that  our  satellite  is 
only  the  gross  body  of  its  invisible  principles.  Seeing  then  that 
there  are  seven  Earths,  so  there  are  seven  Moons,  the  last  alone 
being  visible.  The  same  for  the  Sun,  whose  visible  body  is  called 
a  Maya  a  reflection,  just  as  man's  body  is.  The  real  Sun  and 
the  real  Moon  are  as  invisible  as  the  real  man."^  Says  an  occult 
axiom. 

Could  words  be  plainer?  Hardly — and  yet  for  over  thirty  years 
the  Theosophical  Society  has  permitted  itself  to  spread  this  mis- 
leading superstition,  preferring  to  assume  that  it  was  Madame 
Blavatsky  who  did  not  understand  what  she  was  writing  about. 
The  mystery  is  after  all  as  clear  as  it  well  nigh  can  be.  The 
septenary  chains  of  Globes  about  which  Theosophical  Text  Books 
talk  so  much,  are  seven  principled  Units,  each  having  a  physical 
body  and  six  higher  or  subtler  principles  invisible  to  the  ordinary 
senses,  but  co-existing  and  inter-penetrating  each  other. 

Students  of  Astrology  at  least  are  able  to  prove  for  themselves 
that  the  correspondence  between  man  and  a  planet  is  exact ;  for 
just  as  the  six  invisible  principles  of  a  planet  correspond  to  the 
six  invisible  principles  in  man,  so  do  the  seven  sacred  Planets  cor- 
respond to  the  whole  of  the  seven  principles  of  our  Earth  and 
therefore  of  man.  How  then  is  it  possible  that  the  theory,  which 
credits  the  Earth  Chain  with  three  physical  planets,  can  be  cor- 
rect from  any  point  of  view.  It  is  manifestly  ridiculous,  because 
if  it  were  true,  it  would  mean  by  the  occult  law  of  correspondence, 
that  man  also  must  have  three  physical  bodies  which  is  an 
absurdity,  and  proves  the  whole  theory  false  from  beginning  to 
end. 

The  publication  of  these  letters  gives  to  the  student  an  oppor- 
tunity to  examine  the  whole  range  of  Theosophic  teaching  in  their 
light — while  adding  thereto  the  faculty  of  criticism — the  highest 
and  most  discriminative  of  which  he  is  capable.  That  faculty  is 
an  impersonal  one ;  it  is  neither  critic  nor  respecter  of  persons — 
for  to  it  persons  are  without  significance.  But  with  ideas — with 
doctrines,  it  has  everything  to  do,  and  if  it  is  inevitable  that  the 
use  of  that  faculty  by  students  the  world  over  will  reveal  many 
discrepancies  in  the  accepted  Theosophical  doctrines  of  the  day, 
it  is  equally  certain  that  a  large  part  of  that  teaching  will  receive 
a  confirmation  which  cannot  be  gainsaid. 

A.  T.  B. 


1  Vol.  I.,  p.  176. 

2  Vol.  I.,  p.  202. 

Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  Ebenezer  Baylis  Sc  Son,  Trinity  Works,  Worcester.
