"e n oA d tuns.


p
AM

Pre]

- h :


reb
NET
Vp us


TZ"


Lanm co


A
(zi ed


E
Maier


rfr
"ene


"Tt
eeItf
J^


p
re
v


Tte zi


ftr EOM pdac onn


u
Xl


Y


"T


eV
U


aa


Ve E
NOM


US


Ur SEA
bro DeC TS


VAN
Show NA
XT


"CTS


"1


box
X


e LR QU.
Any USE


v Cn . sa
e SENEC eR NO.


" K ».
tm pcr s »


: : ; : d : MS ^
Z Tes : a j 4 *. i SANINSON -
uro ttm * 1 "" TS
SON MN
Pre Roe
Jets e E iQ
WERT aq EENNEQUN CROP S URS Te TAN EON MD


M - B MTS x u— M der
SUCUS NPNRRNUNDACUN DOCUON UNIS SO TNT SSTS
WU TUNOIR UE gr et IR EDU CUORE Temper


Glasgow
VJüníversíto aLíbraro


Jfevrguson Gollectíon
1921


B m e IE.


P )
*
Kj
/ "r7 /
/ / l
/ / oj »"
/ & [


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2016.


https:;//archive.org/details/b24927363 0001


deed UNE
c pag Dix 2


THE HERMETIC MUSEUM


RESTORED AND ENLARGED.


Edition limited to 2 50 numbered, coftes.


2
A
N
R
Ri
RE
o
Cx
ue
S
Re


ENLARGED.


THE


HERMETIC MUSEUM,


RESTORED AND ENLARGED:


MOST FAITHFULLY INSTRUCTING ALL DISCIPLES OF THE SOPHO-SPAGYRIC
ART HOW THAT GREATEST AND TRUEST MEDICINE OF


JDEPE BXLDEOSOBRLIBRS STONES


MAYV BE FOUND AND HELD.


Now FIRST DONE INTO ENGLISH FROM THE LATIN ORIGINAL PUBLISHED AT
FRANKFORT IN THE YEAR 1678.


Containing Tuwenty-two most celebrated Chemical Tracts.


IN TWO VOLUMES.
MOTIUMUE I.


3X onbon :
JAMES ELLIOTT AND CO,
TEMPLE CHAMBERS, FALCON CoumT, FLEET STREET, E.C.


1893.


»


—À


L AS GOWw
VATVE our
LUBRART;


TIACBILAE.- (UB C OUN J ENT S.


VOLUMJB. T.


PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH ÉDITION


PREFACE TO THE OmnRiGINAL EDITION


I—Tnur GorpEN TmRacT concerning the Stone of the


Philosophers, by an Anonymous German Adept


II.— Tur GorpEN Acre ResrogEp : Having now appeared


a second time, flourished beautifully, and brought
forth fragrant and Golden Seed.  'This rare and
precious Seed is shewn and imparted to all the
Sons of True Wisdom and the Doctrine, by Henry
Madathanas


III.—Tnurx Soprnic HypnorrrH ; or, Water Stone of the Wise,


that is, a Chemical Work, in which the Way is
shewn, the Matter named, and the Process described ;
namely, the Method of obtaining the Universal
Tincture ... sot ES


IV. —A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE, made to the erring


Alchemists, and complaining of the Sophists and
other False Teachers. Set forth by John A. Mehung


V.—A SnHonT TRacr, or PmuHiLosoPHiCAL SuMMARY, by


Nicholas Flamell


PAGE.


5I


69


I2I


141


VI.—THr ONLY TnRuE Wav; or, an useful, good, and
helpful Tract, pointing out the Path of Truth


VII.—THEs GronRvy or THE WoRrp ; or, Table of Paradise ;
that is-to say, a True Account of the Ancient Science
which Adam learned from God Himself; which
Noah, Abraham, and Solomon held as one of the
Greatest Gifts of God ; which also all Sages, at all
times, preferred to the wealth of the whole world,
regarded as the Chief Treasure of the whole world,
and bequeathed only to Good Men; namely, the
Science of the Philosopher's Stone is asc


VIII.—A TRAcT or GREAT PRicE, published by a German
Sage in the year 1423, under the following title :
'The True Teaching of Philosophy concerning the
Generation of Metals and their True Origin


IX.—4A Vzrnvy BRrgzF TRACT CONCERNING THE PHILOSOPHICAL
SroNr. Written by an unknown German Sage,
about 200 years ago, and called The Book of Alze...


X.—THE Book or LAMBSPRING, a noble ancient Philosopher,
concerning the Philosophical Stone, by Nicholas
Barnaud Delphinas


XL—THEÉ GorpEN TmiPop; or, Three Choice Chemical
Tracts, namely: That of Basilius Valentinus, a
Monk of the Benedictine Order, called Practica,
with Twelve Keys and an Appendix ...


PAGE.


149


245


PROBE BACE
DO TqUEH BINGIPSH EDITION.


HE HERMETIC MUSEUM RESTORED AND ÉNLARGED
was published in Latin at Frankfort, in the year
1678, and, as its title implies, it was an enlarged
form of an anterior work which, appearing in 1625, is more
scarce, but, intrinsically, of less value. Its design was apparently
to supply in a compact form a representative collection of the
more brief and less ancient alchemical writers; in this respect,
it may be regarded as a supplement to those large storehouses
of Hermetic learning such as the Z7eatrum  Chemicum, and
that scarcely less colossal of Mangetus, the 2z0Zotheca  Chemzca
Cu*iosa, which are largely concerned with the cream of the
archaic literature, with the works of Geber and the adepts of the
school of Arabia, with the writings attributed to Hermes, with
those of Raymond Lully Arnold de Villa Nova, Bernard
Trevisan, and others.
TuE HERMETIC MUSEUM would also seem to represent
a distinctive school in Alchemy, not altogether committed to
certain modes and terminology which derived most of their
prestige from the past, and sufficiently enigmatical as it was,
still inclined to be less obscure and misleading than was the


RS THE HEBERIVMBTIC MUSEUM:


habit,of the older masters. For it belonged to a period
which had inherited a bitter experience of the failures, impos-
tures, and misery surrounding the ZZagzum Opus and its
mystical quest, which was weary of unequipped experiment,
weary of wandering * multipliers, and pretentious * bellows-
blowers," while it was just being awakened to the conviction
that if Alchemy were true at all, it was not to be learned
from books, or, at least, from any books which had hitherto
been written on the subject. Running through all the tracts
which are comprised in the following volumes, the reader will
recognize traces of a central claim in alchemical initiation—
that the secrets, whatever they were, must be understood as
the property of a college of adepts, pretending to have
subsisted from time almost immemorial, and. revealing them-
selves to the select and the few, while the literature, large as
it is, appears chiefly as an instrument of intercommunica-
tion between those who knew. At the same time, it may
also be regarded as a.sign and omen to the likely seeker,
an advertisement that there was a mystery, and that he must
go further who would unravel it.

While the treatises now translated are for the most part
anonymous, as befits veiled masters, the literary reader will
remember that the name of John de Meung connects the
allegorical * Romance of the Rose" with the parables of
Alchemy ; Flamel will be familiar to all Hermetic students
as the most celebrated of the French adepts ; the saintly
name of Basil Valentine, investigator of the properties of
antimony, will not even now be unhonoured by the chemist;
Eirenaeus Philalethes, equally revered and unknown by all
devout Spagyrites, is supposed to have been the most lucid


VE UE POINTE) INQUE NGHE AST. BETON. x


of hierophants, and the *Open Entrance" to be the clearest
of all his works.  Helvetius was an illustrious chemist, and
Michael Maier is a person of some repute in the Rosicrucian
controversy. Michael Sendivogius was an uninstructed disciple
of Alexander Seton, and the * New Chemical Light," which
he published and claimed as his own, was really the work of
his master, who has been called the chief martyr of Alchemy.
It may be added in this connection that some critics have
cast doubt upon the genuine nature of the " Testament of
John Cremer," and it is true that the annals of Westminster
do not include an abbot of that name.

It should be understood that the writer of this brief note
must not be accredited with the translation which it seeks
to introduce. That is the work of a gentleman who is said
to have had a life-long acquaintance with alchemical litera-
ture; it has been subjected to a searching revision at the
hands of the present editor, who may himself be permitted
to claim some experience in Hermetic antiquities; the version
as it stands does not uncreditably represent both the spirit
and the sense of the original without the original's prolixity.
While affording to the modern student of secret doctrines an
unique opportunity for acquiring in English a collection of
alchemical writers, this edition of THE HERMETIC MUSEUM
also claims consideration at the hands of the historian as a
contribution of real value to the early history of chemistry.


ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE.


a SON ;
IA MU bos
Piel EA:


x
C


CI" ima
T UMS n


Vs.


T HB*T PRERBSACEB


OD THE ORIGINE bIDIZJTZdI|GIT:


ADDRESSED TO THE CANDID READER.


all the arts invented for the use of life by the reason of

man, that of Acemy is the most noble and glorious.

For all philosophers exclaim, as it were, with one voice,
albeit in many languages, that this art is not only true, but
(after the Divine Law by which our souls are saved) the best
and most magnificent gift bestowed upon man by God; and
that it should therefore be investigated with all zeal and with
the greatest pains. But as good wine needs no praise, so
neither does this art require a herald ; for its truth is undoubted,
and its utility in human life universally acknowledged, and
shewn forth, not only in the Art of Medicine, in Pharmacy, and
many other sciences, but more especially in the Art of Trans-
muting Metals, is so clearly and perspicuously demonstrated,
that it in no way requires to be adorned by the splendour of
oratory, or tricked out with the device of language. I will not
enlarge upon the blessing which the elaboration of minerals and
metals has bestowed upon our race. I merely point it out, but
refrain from discussing it at length. Different men devote
themselves to the study of this science from different motives.
The philosopher is impelled by the love of truth, and the thirst
after wisdom. He delights in knowledge for its own sake. He

A


| T would be unjust to doubt, most gentle reader, that of


2 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


welcomes every elegant and copious treatise on the marvels of
Nature, to the glory of Almighty God. This is a sufficiently
generous reward for a philosopher. He has at his command:
the most effectual means of becoming rich, if he would only
use them.  Buthe is fired by the love of philosophy, and does
not care for the mocking grandeur of fortune. So thought the
Sages of the Saracens, Egyptians, Arabs, and Persians; for
when they were oppressed by tyrants, and violently driven into
exile, they protected and supported themselves by means of
their Art, and, through their knowledge of the transmutation
of metals, they had at their command, not only sufficient to
live upon, but all the comforts and pomp of life, and thus
practically demonstrated that they could obtain all that gold
and silver could give. Concerning this true transmutation of
metals, which is accomplished only by the Elixir or Stone of
the Philosophers, we here propose to speak. This art is set
forth in a series of treatises by different authors, which appeared
several years ago, and, like the present volume, was entitled
* A Museum of Hermes" But many writers having discussed
this subject, and treated it from various points of view (so that
one writes more clearly than another, and each throws light on
the other's meaning), some of my friends, who are adepts in
this Art, urged me to add to the former collection certain
treatises supplementary of those already given. For though that
former collection contained the mostselect writings on the subject,
yet it was not as complete as it might have been, nor was it
calculated to furnish to the reader in full measure the eagerly
expected fruit.of his study. "To this wish of my friends I have
all the more readily submitted, because its fulflment must
redound to the advantage of the student. I have, therefore,
enlarged the collection with several most select treatises, and
caused it to be adorned with many engravings. lI was most
strongly impelled to undertake the task by this consideration,
viz, that through the fraudulent machinations of greedy
impostors many false, so-called chemical treatises have been put
forward, in which there is not a single spark of truth, and that
very many have been, and are still being deceived by them.
These dupes, by reading this book, in which the Magistery of the
Stone is most clearly and plainly set forth, and into which no


PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION. 3


error or forgery has been admitted, will be secured against the
imposture of that wicked and mercenary band who delight in
fraud. For in this book all errors are shewn up and dispelled.
For this reason I confidently offer this volume to the sons of
knowledge, in order that while they think upon and investigate
the secret working of Nature, they may obtain from it nothing
but the truth, and gain a clear insight into the very nature of
things. In this alone consists the perfection of the entire
most Holy Art of Philosophy. Only let them go forward along
the Royal Road which Nature prescribes in all her operations.
As to the rest, I heartily beg the friends of this Art to give a
kindly reception to the present volume, and when, through the
Will of God, by constant labour, they have put ashore in the
desired haven of philosophy, after the manner of philosophers
to exclude all that are unworthy from the knowledge thereof,
and, being mindful of charity towards their needy neighbour
in the fear of God (without any vain ostentation), to sing eternal
praises to the Good and Thrice Great God for this Wonderful
and Divine Gift (without any abuse thereof) in a silent and
devoutly joyful heart.


A2


NEA ((i/f 1
ENUN


Qua. funt i fn ips E deno d mfünt- z
Uu caelum, id terra. frequenter lalet
lys, ua M Mitans duo y funt conFraru: felix ,


"f ?t Hbi fCirz fat
NE UN MIRGRBUP eG:


—Ds omina c E EE. M n


dad dins


THE GOLDEN TRACT


CONCERNING


TIEDB STONE "OB  TEUS- PENIDOSOPLDDERS


Bv AN ANONYMOUS GERMAN PHILOSOPHER.


' : ,
x :
à
N b
à
" - , 12
* s ,
|l -
|
'
x:


THE GOLDEN TRACT
CONCERNING THE PHILOSOPHER'S STONE.


The Author's Preface to the Art-loving Reader.


ORTHY reader, and true enquirer into the secrets

4 of nature, marvel not that in the old age of this

world, when it seems to have one foot already in

the grave, I have determined to write this tract,

although all libraries are already full of books on this subject—
of which, however, the greater part are false, and wear merely
the rouge and powder of philosophy. I have written it not for
my own pleasure, but for your advantage, that, by pointing to
the foundation of truth, I might lead you back from the pathless
wilderness into the right way—which is certainly for your own
interest. As far as I am concerned, I have long known all that
I seek to know in regard to this matter, and have no need of
many books, seeing that during the last twenty-two years I have
read and re-read all the works that fell into my hands—in-
cluding numerous manuscripts, as well as many printed volumes.
In this my tract you will find the subject set forth, and the

true solution given, not only theoretically, but also from a
practical and allegorical point of view, with a clearness and
lucidity such as I believe to be almost unparalleled in any prev-
ious philosophical treatise. In quoting, 1 have always been care-
ful to give the exact reference, so that you may look out the
passage for yourself, and by diligently considering it, sharpen
your understanding. I could more easily have composed this
treatise, and made myself known to the Brethren of the Golden


8 . THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


Cross, if I had left out those references ; but for your sake I
decided otherwise. Do not wonder that I conceal my name, and
refuse to appear to you face to face. I have come forward, not
for the sake of any paltry glory, or of worldly praise, but to do
you good. Moreover, my teachers, even the true philosophers,
advised me not thus to risk my life for the sake of obtaining a high
place in the world's esteem, to expose myself to greedy robbers or
to give occasion for many crimes by the prostitution of this pro-
foundsecret. No doubt the gentle reader has learned by the works
of Sendivogius that whenever he shewed himself openly to the
powerful, he went in constant fear of hislife. Experience teaches
that many philosophers who gave no thought to their personal
safety, have been killed and deprived oftheirtinctureby greedy and
powerful robbers ; and it stands to reason that any one going about
with a great treasure in his hand, must fall a prey to brigands.
Sendivogius concealed his name by an anagram. Thus also a
short time ago another philosopher and Brother of the Golden
Cross, whose real name has long been familiar to me, concealed
it beneath an anagram, and made himself known to his friends by
an enigmatical designation. Why then should I place myself at
the mercy of this impure world ? Permit me rather, dear friend,
to follow the example ofthe sages, and leave the rest to the thrice
good and great God, who will make my true self known to you
in good time, if it be for the glory of His name, and for your and
my good. Do not be eager to enquire after my name. For
even if you should get to know it, or become personally acquainted
with me, you would have to rest satisfied with the contents of
this tract. For I have solemnly promised two philosophers—
Bernard, Count of Trevisan, and Neigens—that I will not betray
to any one more than has been revealed in this book. — Neither
beanxious to ask whether I actually possess this precious treasure.
Ask rather whether I have seen how the world was created ;
whether I am acquainted with the nature of the Egyptian dark-
ness; what is the cause of the rainbow ; what will be the appear-
ance of the glorified bodies at the general resurrection ; what is
the most indelible colour. Of you that rightly understand this
little book, I will enquire whether you have seen that great salt
sea, without any corrosion, raise a sufficiency of the moisture of
all nature to the summits ofthe highest mountains. Tell me


2994 Faber i


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 9


where there is sulphur out of sulphur, and mercury out of
mercury—or where sulphur springs from mercury, and again
mercury from sulphur. When was there placed before your
eyes the idea of most fervent love, the male and the female em-
bracing each other so closely that they could no more be torn
asunder, but through unsearchable love became oze? If you
understand what I am alluding to, and have performed the
experiment with your own hands, and seen it with your own
eyes, I welcome you as fellow partakers of the mystery, and have
no dearer wish than to enjoy your familiar intercourse—for which
reason I have also sent forth into the world this little tract.

If any one complain of the difficulty of our Art, let him
know that in itself it is perfectly simple, and can present no
obstacle to those who love God, and are held worthy by Him of
this knowledge. If any one blame me for setting forth the
truths of this Art too plainly and clearly, so as to render it
possible for any one to gain a knowledge thereof, I answer that I
have indeed explained them with sufficient lucidity for those who
are worthy and foreordained of God, but that the unworthy can
derive no profit from them. — To some foolish and shallow persons
I have several times expounded this Art in the simplest manner,
and even word for word, but they despised it only, and would not
believe me that there is exhibited in our work a twofold resur-
rection of the dead. Our Art, its theory as well as its practice,
is altogether a gift of God, Who gives it when and to whom He
elects : it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but simply
through the mercy of God. "Though I had diligently studied this
Art for 17 or 18 years, yet I. had, after all, to wait for God's own
time, and accept it as a free gift. No one need doubt the truth
orcertainty ofthis Art. It is as true and certain, and as surely
ordained by God in nature, as it is that the sun shines at noon-
tide, and the moon shews her soft splendour at night. But I
must conclude this preface, and gird myself for writing the tract
itself. But ye, beloved Brethren of the Golden Cross, who are
about to learn how to enjoy and use this most precious gift of
God in secret, do not remain unknown to me, and if ye know me
not, be sure that the faithful will be approved and their faith be-
come known through the Cross, while security and pleasure over-
shadow it. God be with us, Amen!


2»,


bes "asd


IO THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.
? N o AE HS LEA DH P HEAT 777777
N W
N NS t
NNNNN SN , / Z
N SS oL Z
4 z
i t: :
E , 5 ]
/ -
Z :
4 :
SS SNNSNN |
53
,
i
|


-


THE GOLDEN TRACT


CONCERNING THE STONE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS.


reader, and devoted seeker after true wisdom, when

through the grace of God they had reached the goal of

their desires, have endeavoured to make their discovery
known to their fellow inquirers in all parts of the world—not
only because they wished to inform them that the thrice great
and good God had enlightened their minds, blessed the labours
of their hands, and shewn to them the greatest and most pro-
found secret of earthly wisdom (for which benefit all praise,
honour, and glory are justly due to Him)— but also that they
might afford assistance to beginners in the Art, by which, with
God's permission, they too might attain to the knowledge of this
most holy mystery. Such men there have been in all countries.
Amongst the Egyptians Hermes Trismegistus holds the highest
place; then come Chaldaans, Greeks, Arabs, Italians, Gauls,
Englishmen, Dutchmen, Spaniards, Germans, Poles, Hungarians,
Hebrews, and many others. Though the aforementioned Sages
wrote at different times, and in different languages, yet their
works exhibit so marvellous an agreement, that any true
philosopher may easily see that all their hearts had been
gladdened by God in the discovery of this stone, and that they
all had performed this work with their own hands. Now, as the
truth of their views is perceived by their agreement, so the
disagreement of certain others marks them as false philosophers.
For, not knowing the foundation of this glorious Art, and making
up fanciful theories out of their own heads, they exhibit their
ignorance to all.


À NCIENT as well as modern philosophers, most beloved


I2 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The aforesaid agreement exists in regard to the Matter, its
solution, its weight, and the regulation and increase of the fire.

As concerns the Matter, it is oze, and contains within itself
all that is needed. Out of it the artist prepares whatever he
wants. Its '' Birth is in the sand," as the philosopher Anastratus
says in * The Crowd " : * Nothing is more precious than the red
sand of the sea ; it is the distilled moisture of the Moon joined
tothe light of the Sun, and congealed." That only this one
substance is required is attested by Agadmon in the same
book. He says: * Know that unless you take my body
[sulphur] without the spirit [mercury] ye will not obtain what ye
desire. Cease to think of many things. Natureis satisfied with
one thing, and he who does not know it is lost."

In the same way Arnold, of Villa Nova, writes in his
* Flower of Flowers"; ** Our stone is made out of one thing,
and with one thing." To the same effect he says to the King
of Naples: * Allthat is in our stone is essential to it, nor does
it need any foreign ingredient. Its nature is one, and it is oze
thing. And Rosinus says: * Know that the object of your
desire is one thing, out of which all things are made." Lilium:
* You have need only of one thing, which at any stage of our
experiment can be changed into another nature." So Geber
says in his * Summary" : '* Our stone is one, one medicine, to
which we add nothing, from which we take nothing away, only
removing that which is superfluous" Again, Scites in * The
Crowd" says: * The essence of this Art is in like manner a
certain one thing which is stronger and more exalted than all
other things, and is called the most powerful acid, because
it changes gold into a clear spirit, without which there is neither
whiteness, nor blackness, nor redness. When the spirit is joined
to the body it becomes one with it; and yet again becomes
a spirit, and is saturated with the spiritual and unchangeable
tincture, and thus again by combination receives a bodily tincture
which cannot be annihilated. If you place the body without
the acid over the fire, it will be burnt and destroyed." From
these words of Scites the reader might conclude, that not one
but two things, namely a body and an acid (as he calls it) are
required, and that a liquid must be combined with a dry thing
lest the dry thing should be consumed by the fire, in order that


———


VENIR GS QIADENC ACT. I3


by the moist thing it may be preserved from such combustion. To
such a conclusion, if rightly accepted, I gladly subscribe. But
from the above mentioned philosophical dicta (however obscurely
worded they may be) it is clearer than day that the substance of
our Blessed Stone is oze (although different sages call it by
different names), and that Nature has made it ready to the hand
of the adept, having willed this one thing, and no other thing in
all the world, to be the material of the Stone. "This Matter lies
before the eyes of all; everybody sees it, touches it, loves it, but
knows it not. It is glorious and vile, precious and of small
account, and is found everywhere. "Theophrastus Paracelsus,
in his book concerning * The Tincture of Physical Things,"
calls it the Red Lion, which is named by many, but known
by few. Hermes, in the first chapter of his Treatise, calls it
"Quick Silver coagulated in its innermost chambers." In the
* Rosary of the Philosophers" itgoes by the name of Salt. But,
to be brief, our Matter has as many names as there are things in
the world; that is why the foolish know it not. Foolish I call
those who, without any previous knowledge of Nature and her
properties, undertake to learn this Art, and come to it (as Arnold
says)like the ass to the crib, not knowing for what they open
their mouths. Hence it is well said by Geber, in the ** Sum of
Perfection: * He who has no elementary knowledge of Nature
is far from a proper appreciation of this Art" And Rosarius
says: "Iadvise no one to approach this Art unless he knows
the principle and the regimen of Nature: if he be acquainted
with these, little is wanting to him except one thing, nor need
he put himself to a great expense, since the stone is one,
the medicine is one, the vessel one, the rule one, the disposition
one" Yet this one substance is so divided by the operation of
Nature, and the skill of the Artist, that it is transmuted into our
White Eagle, nor does the splendour of the sun illuminate more
abundantly the spagyric matter with its beams; or, as Basilius
Valentinus hath it, that, * thence is born a spirit white as srow,
and another spirit red as blood, which two spirits are contained
in a third hidden thing." Hence King Aros wellsays: * Our
medicine is composedout of twothings havingone essence,namely,
through the mercurial union of a solid and a liquid, a spiritual
and a corporeal a cold and a moist,a warm anda dry, and in


I4 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


no other way can it be made" — And Richard the Englishman
says: * The stone is one, the medicine one, which, however,
according to the philosophers, is called Rebis (Two-thing),
being composed of two things, namely, a body and spirit [red or
white But over this many foolish persons have gone astray,
explaining it in divers ways." Rebis is two things, and these
two things are one thing, namely, water joined to a body, by
which the body is dissolved into a spirit, that is, mineral water,
out of which it was first made; and this body and spirit make
up one mineral water, which is called Elixir, that is to say,
ferment; for then water and spirit are one thing, of which is
composed a tincture and medicine for purging all bodies. And
thus, according to the philosophers, we have the nature of sulphur
and mercury above ground, while underground they become
gold and silver. Bernard, Count of Trevisan and the March,
says: '"* Our work is performed by means of one root, and two
crude  mercurial substances, drawn and extracted ífrom a
mineral, pure and clear, being conjoined by the heat of friendship,
as this matter requires, and carefully cooked until the two things
become one thing," &c. Basilius Valentinus (Z6. JVa£. e£
Supernat., c. 4) says: * I will make this known to thee in all truth
[for the love of God], that the root of philosophic sulphur, which
is a heavenly spirit, is united in the same material with the root
ofthe spiritual and supernatural mercury, and the principle of
spiritual salt—out of which is made the Stone, and not out of
several things. "That universal thing, the greatest treasure of
earthly wisdom, is one thing, and the principles of three things
are found in one, which has powerto change all metals into
one. The three things are the true spirit of mercury, and the
soul of sulphur, united to spiritual salt, and dwelling in one
body; they are dragon and eagle, king and lion, spirit and
body, etc."

In this way our prepared material is also called male and
female, active and passive. So Zimon says, in * The Crowd " :
«* Know that the secret of the work consists in male and female,

- &&.,,an active and a passive principle. In lead is found the male,
in órpiment the female. The male rejoices when the female is
brought to it, and the female receives from the male a tinging
seed, and is coloured thereby." And Diomedes says: * Join the


í————— É!


ZEE? 6 QIDDYR NL TR C T 15


male child of the * red servant? to the fragrant spouse, and they
will produce the object of our Art. But you must not introduce
any foreign matter, neither dust, nor any other thing. The con-
ception will then be perfect, and a true son will be born. Oh,
how precious is the nature of the *red servant, without whom
nothing can be effected!" — Others call it quicksilver, or mercury,
and sulphur, or fire, as Roger Bacon says, in the third chapter of
his * Mirror ": * Out of sulphur and mercury are all metals,
and nothing adheres to them, neither is joined to them, or trans-
mutes them, but what is of them. And thus we must accept
mercury and sulphur as the matter of the stone." So also
Menabadus says: * He who joins quicksilver to the body of
magnesia, and the woman to the man, extracts the secret essence
by which bodies are coloured."  Lullius in his ** Codicil " says:
"'The property of our mercury is to be coagulated by its
sulphur." And, in the Practice of his Testament : ** The silver is
a flowing moisture, floating above and preserving the whole from
combustion."

Others use the names, body, spirit, and soul. Thus Arnold,
in his * Flower of Flowers," says: * The Sages have affirmed
that our Stone is composed of body, soul, and spirit, and they
have spoken truly. For the imperfect part they have compared
to a body, because it is weak. The water they have called
spirit, and truly, because it is spirit. The ferment they have
termed soul, because it gives life to the imperfect body (which
before was dead), and makes its form more beautiful."

Again, he says : '* A spirit is never joined to a body but by
the interposition of a soul. For the soul is the medium between
body and spirit, joining them together" ^ Morienus Says: he
soul quickly enters its own body— but if you tried to join itto a
foreign body, you would labour in vain. And Lilium Says :
" Body, soul, and spirit make up one thing, which has all in it-
self, and to which nothing is added."

But why should we mention and explain all the names by
which our Matter is designated? We will be content with the
foregoing, seeing that they are the most common and the most
germane to our purpose. Inthe following pages, after endeavour-
ing to find where our substance lies hid, and where it may be
obtained, we will say some words about the mode of its dis-


16 TEE T MMC AULAE


solution, that being afterall the principal objectofour inquiry.
And first, as concerns the search after our Matter, we should
remember that in the beginning, when there was nothing but
Himself, God, who is infinite in wisdom, created two classes of
things, namely, those that are in heaven, and those that are
under heaven. . The heavenly things (about which we need not
here speak at length) are the heavens themselves, and the dwellers
in heaven. The things that are under the heavens were created
out of four elements, and are commonly divided into three
classes. Those that live and feel hold the first place, and are
called animals. "The second class are the plants, that grow out of
the earth, but do not feel. The third class, that of the minerals,
has its origin underground. These three classes include all that
(beneath the moon) has been created out ofthe elements. They
can never become more or less, and God has bound each thing
to its own genus and species, so that it cannot change from one
genus to another. If any one tried to make a man or a tree out
of a stone, or a monkey or lead out of a plant, or an animal or a
plant out of lead, he would be prevented from doing so by the
eternal order of the Great King. Ifsucha thing were possible,
all classes of natural objects could be changed into one. But,
because such a change would put an end to the world, the Ruler
of the Universe does not permit it Nay, what is more, He not
only restricted everything to its own kind, but gave each created
thing its own seed, by which it might be propagated after its own
manner—always remaining in its own class, and not overstepping
the bounds of some other species. If any one wished to change
a man into a horse, an apple into a lettuce, a diamond or any
other jewel into gold, he would make an enormous mistake. For
such an attempt would be against the nature of sublunar things.
And as it was in the beginning so it shall be in the end, when
the Almighty, who in the beginning said * Let it be," shall say
* Let it perish." But among those things which have a common
substance, seed, and elementary composition, it is not difficult to
accomplish an amelioration and improvement, by the puri-
fication of their matter. So we may see a man of a clear and
subtle mind attain to a higher degree of human excellence than
others who are less gifted. This difference arises from the superior
purity and subtlety of his spiritual substance, which again has its


OPI. c QUSVEVELIN LS RAT CT 17


origin in a rectified and well constituted body. Thus also we see
one horse excel the strength and speed of another ; and it is the
same with all kinds of living beings. Alike rule holds good to
an even greater degree in regard to plants and trees— with trees,
by transplanting, grafting, and kindred methods well familiar to
gardeners ; while as to other vegetable natures, we are taught by
daily experience how plants and flowers of the same kind differ
from each other in glory, in beauty, in fragrance, and savour. Of
this cloves and tulips afford a striking instance. Into how many
different species have these flowers been developed ; and even
these new developments are being made more beautiful from
' day to day, and it is universally admitted that never were there
such fine and fragrant flowers before. What am I to say about
metals which have a common substance, namely, quicksilver,
digested and consolidated by the power of sulphur?  Concern-
ing this common substance, Richard the Englishman has the
following words: * Nature has elaborated all kinds of fusible
things by a natural process out of mercury, and the substance of
its sulphur, because it is the property of quicksilver to be con-
solidated by steam, as by the heat of white and red sulphur
which does not burn."

The same view is expressed by Arnold (pt. r., Gp db)
* Quicksilver is the elementary form of all things fusible ; for all
things fusible, when melted, are changed into it, and it mingles
with them because it is of the same substance with them. Such
bodies differ from quicksilver in their composition only so far as
itself is or is not free from the foreign matter of impure sulphur."
Similarly Rosinus (42 Saratantaz) says : * The substance of all
metals in the heart of the earth is solidified and imperfect quick-
silver; for by the quickening heat of sulphur different metals
(according to the different varieties of sulphur) are generated
in the earth ; their original substance is one and the same, and is
modified only by a greater or smaller external influence." Hence
we see daily how busily Nature is occupied in bringing them
to mortification and perfection. Now the perfection of metals
and the final intention of Nature in regard to them, is gold. For
all metals shew that Nature has done something for them towards
ultimate perfection ; no metal is so base as not to contain a single
grainofgoldorsilver Naturewould always changequicksilver that


B


18 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


has within itself its own sulphur into gold, if she were not often
hindered by some outward impediment, viz, impure, fcetid, and
combustible sulphur. In most cases gold is dug out pure, clear,
free from. dross, and unmixed with any other metals But
most frequently a large quantity of foreign sulphur mingles with
the quicksilver, and thus prevents its perfect development ; and,
according to the variety of that sulphur, different kinds of
metals are generated, as Aristotle says (4. Meteor.): *If the
quicksilver be of a good substance but the sulphur impure
and combustible, it changes the quicksilver into brass. If the
quicksilver be stony, impure, and earthy, and the sulphur not
pure, it becomes iron. Tin seems to have good and pure quick-
silver; but the sulphur is bad and not well mixed. Lead has
gross, bad, and ill-smelling quicksilver, and is thus not properly
coagulated."

That retarding, combustible, and fcetid sulphur is not the
true fire that fashions metals; but quicksilver has its own
sulphur in itself, which is sufficient for the purpose of fashioning
it, as Bernard, Count of Trevisan, says: ** Some believe that in
the generation of metals, a sulphuric substance is introduced
from without ; but, on the contrary, it is clear that in the work-
ing of Nature sulphur is already enclosed in the mercury. Yet
it has no power in it except through the moving heat, by which the
said sulphur is changed, and with it two other qualities of the
mercury. In this way, then, Nature generates by means of this
sulphur the different kinds of metals in the veins of the earth,
according to the diversity of degrees and alterations" For in
metals, according to Arnold (pt. L, cp. iii.), *there is a two-fold
superfluity : one that is enclosed in the innermost nature of the
quicksilver, and got there at the first mingling of the metal; the
other does not belong to the essence of it, is external to it, and
corruptible. To remove the former is a difficult task ; the latter
may be removed without any difficulty. The combustible
sulphur is taken away by being subjected to the action of fire, or
is destroyed by foreign bodies ; but the other, which is in the
quicksilver, is preserved by it from combustion." But again,
that inward sulphur which fashions the quicksilver belonging
to it, and matures it towards perfection, is either pure or impure,
combustible or incombustible. Impure sulphur hinders the


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 19


digestion of the quicksilver, which cannot .be transformed into
gold until that which does not belong to it has been entirely
separated from it; but the pure, incombustible, fixed sulphur
remains with it, and then at length it passes either into gold or
silver, according as the sulphur is either white or red. This
internal sulphur is nothing but mature mercury, and the most
advanced part of the quicksilver. and for this reason the quick-
silver receives it so kindly, as being of its own essence, while
it rejects the other which is foreign to it. — So Richard the
Englishman says, in his ninth chapter: ** The more simple the
sulphur is, the more readily does it combine with simple and
pure mercury, and the more intimately they combine the
more precious is the metal which is produced. But such
sulphur, says Avicenna, * is not found on earth, except in so far
as it exists in metallic bodies through the action of the sun and
moon. In the sun it exists in a perfect state, because there it is
better digestedand decocted." According to Richard,in his twelfth
chapter, the red sulphur of the philosophers exists in the sun
on account of its greater digestion, and the white sulphur in
the moon on account of its inferior digestion."

Since, then, the substance of the metals is oze, and common
to all, and since this substance is (either at once, or after laying
aside in course of time the foreign and evil sulphur of the baser
metals by a process of gradual digestion) changed by the virtue
of its own indwelling sulphur into GOLD, which is the goal of
all the metals, and the true intention of Nature— we are obliged
to admit, and freely confess that in the mineral kingdom, as well
as in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, Nature seeks
and demands a gradual attainment of perfection, and a
gradual approximation to the highest standard of purity and
excellence.

I thought it would be best, O friendly searcher of Nature,
to discuss the matter more in detail,in order that you might the
more readily know and make use of the substance of our Stone !
For if you attempted to produce our Stone out of an animal
substance you would fail, because the two things belong to
different natural orders. For the Stone is a mineral, but you
would be trying to fashion it out of an animal substance. «But
nothing," saysour Richard, in his first chapter, * can be got out


B2


20 JAMES) HERMETIC AMMUSEUM.


ofa thing which is not in it. Therefore every species, every
genus, every natural order, is naturally developed within its own
limits, bearing fruit after its own kind, and not within some other
essentially different order: everything in which seed is sown
must correspond to its own seed." And Basil. Valentinus says :
* Consider arid know, my friend, that you must not select an
animal soul for this your purpose. For flesh and blood were
given by the Creator to animals, and are proper to animals, and
from them animals are formed and brought forth." For this
reason I wonder at those who wish to be regarded as great
adepts, and yet look for the substance of the stone in female
menstruums, the seminal fluid, eggs, hairs, urine, and similar
things, and are not ashamed to fill so many volumes with their
vain and worthless recipes, and to deceive the ignorant with such
foolish, futile, and useless speculations. ^ Roger, in his
* Mirror" (cp. iii.), expresses his amazement at the folly of these
men when he exclaims: * How strange that any sane person
should look for what he wants in the animal and vegetable
worlds, which have nothing whatever to do with the object of his
search, while the mineral world is quite as ready to his hand.
It is incredible that any philosopher should establish his art on
such a remote foundation, except indeed by way of allegory."
* For our Stone (says Basil.) is not made of combustible things.
Verily that Stone and the matter thereof are safe from all such
violence, therefore cease to seek it in the animal kingdom ; for
Nature herself could not find it there." Again, whoever hopes
to find it in the vegetable world, as, for instance, in trees,
herbs, flowers, is quite as much mistaken as he who would
change an animal into a stonc. Plants and trees, with all that
they produce, may be consumed by fire, and leave nothing
behind but the dust out of which they are made, and the salt
which at the first creation of their species they received from
Nature. Let no one be misled by the confident assertions of
those who pretend that they can produce the Philosopher's Stone
out of wheat, or out of wine. "These persons fancy they under-
stand the meaning of a certain passage in thewritings of Raymond
Lullius, but they exhibit the depth of their folly by the assumption
of profound wisdom, and thus only deceive themselves and others.
I do not deny that some excellent solvents, indispensable both.


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 2T


to the physician and to the chemist, are obtained from these
sources; but I do most positively deny that the Philosopher's
Stone can be prepared, or its seed elicited, from them, since the
Creator has ordained that nothing should overstep the bounds
of the natural order to which it was originally assigned. Hence
every true disciple of wisdom may gather that the substance of
the Stone is to be obtained neither in the animal nor in the
vegetable world, seeing that both are combustible. We must
therefore look for it among incombustible things, that is to
say, in the mineral world, and thence only can we prepare it.
Since, then, the Stone of the Wise is mineral, and there are differ-
ent kinds of minerals, as stones (including clay and the different
varieties of earth), salts, general minerals, and metals, we must
further ask, in which of allthese it is contained. We may at
once eliminate stones, because they contain no fusible mercury,
and cannot be melted, dissolved, or divided into their component
parts on account of the large quantity of foreign sulphur and
earthly substance which cleave to them.

Nor will the wise investigator of Nature's secrets expect to
find the substance of the Blessed Stone in salts, alums, or
similar minerals. In them he meets with a sharp, corroding,
destructive spirit, but mercury and sulphur, as understood by
philosophers, he would vainly look for. General minerals, like
magnesia, bismuth, antimony, ctc, can never under any circum-
stances become metals; how, then, can the substance of this
Stone, which is the essential perfection of all metals and minerals,
be obtained from them? ^ Moreover, they have nothing in
common with metals, but do burn, corrode, and destroy them :—
how then can they be the means of their improvement ?

Hear what Richard the Englishman has to say on this head
(cp. x): " The lesser minerals cannot become metals—First,
because they were not generated out of the elementary substance
of metals, which is quicksilver. But seeing that their generation
differs from the generation of metals in form, and substance, and
composition, they can never become metals, because things
belonging to the same species have the same elementary sub-
stance,and spring from the same seed. But the lesser minerals are
not generated from mercury, as we learn from Aristotle and
. Avicenna, If they were to become metals, they would have to


22 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


change into the elementary substance of metals. And, since
such a transformation is beyond the power of chemistry, they can
never become metals ; that is to say, they can never be the sub-
stance of the Stone. Second, since the lesser minerals cannot be-
come the elementary substance of metals, which is mercury, they
can never reach the middle and the end of the same develop-
ment, namely, metals and the tincture. — But because the pro-
perties of the lesser minerals are foreign to those of the metals,
although they may have some of the virtues of minerals, yet on
the whole they are less excellent and are liable to be injured by
fire. Therefore the nature of metals delights not in them, but
repels them, while it receives that which is suited to it. For this
reason they are foolish who bring in so many foreign specula-
tions for the purpose of imposing upon their hearers ; for the
things they put forward are altogether unlike metals and can
never receive nor impart their nature."

The student must not suffer himself to be misled by the
language occasionally employed with regard to salts by the
philosophers whom we have quoted, as, for instance, when it is
said, in the mystic language of our Sages, * He who works with-
out salt will never raise dead bodies"; or, again, when he reads in
the book of Soliloquies,* He who works without salt draws a bow
without a string." ^ For you must know that these sayings refer
to a very different kind of salt from the common mineral. This
you may see from the following passage of the * Rosary of the
Philosophers": * The salt of metals is the Philosopher's
Stone; for our Stone is water congealed in gold and silver;
it is hostile to fire and may be dissolved into the water of which
it is composed after its kind." And that the *congealed water "
of the Sages does not mean ordinary water may be gathered from
the following words of Geber (lib. forn, cp. xix.): *Seek to
resolve the sun and the moon into their dry water, which the
vulgar call mercury." The Sages have also described their earth
under the name of salt—e,g., in the * Sounding of the Trumpet,
where it is said: * That which is left at the bottom of the dis-
tilling vessel is our salt—that is to say, our earth." — And in the
* Allegories of the Wise " one bursts forth into these words :
* Mark well that those bodies which flow forth from our bodies
are salts and alums" At times they call the medicine itself


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 23


* Salt," as in the following passage ofthe * Scale": ' The virtue
of the second water is to exalt earth into its own mineral salt, as
though assimilating it by its own strength." And Arnold, in his
work concerning the * Preservation of Youth," (lib. iii) says:
* "This prepared salt has great virtue in preserving youth. — The
Sages have compared it to the natural heat of healthy youth.
The Stone itself has sometimes been called by the wise the
Animal Stone, sometimes the Mineral Secret, on account of this
similitude ; sometimes the Everlasting Remedy, or the Water of
Life. The whole preparation may be reduced to the purest
drinking water, like other things that have the same properties.

From the aforesaid it clearly appears that we are forbidden both
by the teaching of the Sages and by the nature of the thing to
suppose that the Stone can be made out of the lesser minerals.

We should next enquire more carefully whether the matter
of our Stone may be obtained from the intermediate minerals—
like bismuth, antimony, magnesia, and so on. They are certainly
often mentioned in this connection by the Sages. — Thus Senior
says,in a certain passage: *If yellow orpiment has not the
power of coagulating mercury our Magistery can never attain its
goal." Thomas de Aquinas recommends us to take *our antimony,
or black earth," while Parmenides, in * The Crowd," says : * Take
quicksilver and coagulate it in the body of magnesia, or cor-
ruptible sulphur." But in all such passages these terms are used
metaphorically ; it is not meant that the Great Stone can ever be
made out of such substances. "The orpiment and magnesia of
the Sages are not the common minerals, but the substance which
in other passages is called the Agent, the Lion, the King,
Sulphur, and by many other names. They call it orpiment
because it gives a deeper and more brilliant colouring to gold ;
magnesia because of the excellence and greatness of that
which is gained from it ; antimony, with Thomas Aquinas, on
account of the brilliant blackness which it assumes after solution.
As a matter of fact, when the Stone has assumed its ebony colour
they are in the habit of comparing it to all black things.

But it may be said that some of these intermediate minerals
are, as a matter of fact, composed of mercury and sulphur, and
may become metals, £2., magnesia unites with lead and tin, and :
antimony not only mingles with metals, but also produces a


24. THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


lead not very different from natural lead. Moreover, it is
asserted that many persons of high and low degree have
actually seen gold made of these minerals. It is further said
that as these minerals are composed of mercury and sulphur
(and can by chemical means be reduced to them), and are therc-
fore of a common origin with the metals, the substance of the
Stone may also be elicited from them. But, in the first place,
we must draw a distinction between the various minerals of this
class, namely those which contain mercury, and those which
hardly ever contain it. "Those that are full of mercury are of
greater account, since, by means of our Medicine, their mercury
may be transformed into gold and silver; and, their nature
being partly metallic, they may well be called half metals.
But the rest, which have no mercury, are of no use for our
purpose. But forasmuch as, on account of the gross and com-
bustible sulphur which is in them, even the first are very far
indeed from the metallic goal, so they cannot be taken for the
substance of our Stone, which should be pure and perfect
mercury combined with pure, subtle, and  incombustible
sulphur. That they are most impure and deeply infected with
the grossness of their sulphur, may be easily seen by the test of
a chemical experiment. One of them (zinetum) might, by
reason of its weight and brilliance, be taken at first sight for
pure mercury by the careless ; but when brought to the test of
fire it is consumed with a smoke, like that of sulphur.
Bismuth, on the other hand, is not even fusible by fire—such is
its earthy grossness and impurity. Antimony, again, can be
purged by a chemical process, and reduced to a very white and
beautiful regulus. As we gaze upon it in this purified state, 1t
seems difficult to believe that it may not be transformed into
something glorious. ^ Hence it is natural that some self-con-
ceited people should have supposed that the Stone may be
prepared from it. But however much antimony is purged of its
blackness, it still retains its grossness, hardness, and sulphuric
properties ; it can never become malleable (like the metals), and
therefore, in spite of its numerous affinities, cannot be regarded
as a metal. Moreover, it has gross and impure mercury ; and its
sulphur is combustible. Ye, then, who would be great philo-
sophers and do deceive many with your voluminous writings,


IAE DLE TAVAICUT. 25


in which you put this mineral forward as the essence of the
universal remedy—l ask you again and again to reconsider
your opinion, and to mark the saying of Arnold, that "it is
foolish to seek in a thing that which it does not contain. He
also says, in his Commentary on * The Crowd": * The
philosopher's stone is a pure substance. Again, Lullius in his
* Last Testament," observes : '* Our tincture is nothing but pure
fire.^ There is an expression to the same effect in his
* Vade Mecum": *It is a subtle spirit which tinges bodies,
and cleanses them of their leprous infirmities." But this
mineral (like all the rest, without a single exception) is so gross
and impure that it can only be cleansed by the mediation of our
tincture. — Therefore, the substance of our Great Stone cannot
be elicited from it, since (Richard, cp. tr.) nothing can be
obtained from a body which does not exist therein. What shall
we say of vitriol which misleads many by its wonderful
qualities, especially as some part of it changes into copper, and
itself has the power of transforming iron into copper? Asa
matter of fact, it is the elementary substance of copper, and
when this mineral vapour (or aeriform mercury) finds in the
mineral veins of the earth a place where its bitter, acid, salt, and
venereal sulphur lies hid, it immediately amalgamates with it
into a metal. But since the quantity of the aforesaid sulphur
greatly exceeds that of the mercury, when the pure is separated
from the impure, and the combustible from the incombustible by
the segregating office of Nature, the mercury itself is changed
into a greenish inferior substance. When common sulphur is
added to copper, and the whole brought in contact with fire (for
art can do by intense heat in a few moments what it takes the
gentle heat of Nature a long time to accomplish) it corrodes the
copper, and changes it into vitriol, and, in proportion to the
quantity of the sulphur, the vitriol assumes a richer or fainter
colour ; whence it comes that some vitriol contains more copper
and some less. In iron, too, there is gross sulphur ; hence it is
corroded by vitriol which seeks its mercury (the mercury of iron
being very like that of vitriol), and (the mercury being joined to
the sulphur) the iron becomes pure copper.

. It should be carefully noticed that the acid spirit of vitriol
15 generated from sulphur ; for the smell of sulphur is perceived


26 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


in the spirit of vitriol, and the spirit of sulphur, like the spirit of
vitriol, has power to change into vitriol. Since, then, this
corrosive sulphur is hid in vitriol,and since it contains so small
a quantity of impure mercury, we may be sure that it cannot be
the object of our search. In this we agree with Alphidius, who
says: * Take heed, my son, and eschew dead bodies, and stones ;
in these things there is no true way of procedure, for their life
preserves not, but destroys. Such are salts, orpiments, arsenic,
magnesia, bismuth, tutty, and the like ^ And Arnold (Flos
Flor.) says: * The reason of these mistakes is that thc four spirits,
viz, orpiment, salt of ammonia, mercury, and sulphur, are not
the seed of perfect or imperfect metals (except, of course,
mercury and sulphur by themselves)."

But from these last words of Arnold it might be inferred
that common mercury and quicksilver are the substance of
the stone, seeing that these are referred to the four spirits, and
that sulphur is supposed to consolidate the mercury. But I
answer, with Richard the Englishman, in his eleventh chapter,
that it does not really do so. For every kind of common
sulphur is repugnant to metals, as the Sage says: ** Indeed
you must know that sulphur comes forth out of the fatness of
the earth, and is thickened in the minera by gentle heat ; when
it becomes hard it is ca//ed sulphur."

Now there are two kinds of sulphur, the living and the
combustible. Quick sulphur is the active principle of metals,
and, when purged from all foreign matter, is the Matter of our
Stone. But the common combustible variety is not the Matter
of metals or of our Stone ; rather, it is injurous to them.
Common, combustible sulphur—so we are told by Avicenna and
Richard the Englishman—has nothing to do with our art.
However carefully prepared, it still disintegrates and destroys
metals, because it has no affinity with them. When enclosed in
metals, it retards their fusion. This is clearly seen in the case
of iron, which contains hard, gross, and impure sulphur. When
this sulphur is burned it is nothing but a dead, earthy, powdery
substance. How then can it impart life to other things? For
it has two principles of decay—its inflammability and its earthy
impurity. The sulphur of the Sages, on the other hand, is
living fire; it is quick, and quickens and matures lifeless


42/7 2C B D Y LY AM E 27


substances. Common sulphur, then, cannot be the substance
of the Stone.

But what shall we infer concerning common mercury ?
The Sages tell us tbat the Matter of our Stone is a mercurial
substance, and many of its qualities closely resemble those
of vulgar mercury. For it is the elementary substance of all
fusible minerals, as Arnold says (Ros., pt. L, cp. ii) : * Since all
fusible substances, when melted, are changed into it, and it
mingles with them because of its common nature: they can
differ from it only in so far as it contains impure foreign
sulphur. And, again (cp. iv.): * Living mercury is clearly
most perfect, and proved in all its operations, since it saves from
combustion and promotes fusion. It is the red tincture, the sum
of perfection, and quick as lightning ; nor is it severed from that
with which it has mingled so long as it exists. The same is
full of affinity, cleaving faithfully, and is the medium by which
tinctures are united, for it mingles most intimately with them,
penetrating naturally into their inmost part, for it is of the same
nature. We imitate Nature exactly, who in her minera hath no
other matter whereon she works except a pure mercurial form.
It is the only thing that overcomes fire, and is not overcome by
it, but delights in its amicable warmth." Again, Bernard says:
*In this mercury is enclosed essential sulphur, which the fire
cannot touch ; and it accomplishes our object without any other
substance than that of pure mercury." Seeing, then, that
mercury has such excellent properties, it must surely be the
substance of our Stone? True; but as there are two kinds of
sulphur, so there are two kinds of mercury, the common mercury
and the mercury of the Sages. Common mercury is gross and
crude ; nor does it stand the test of fire like our mercury, but is
dissipated in the form of smoke, even by gentle heat. Hence
the Sages have laid down this rule: * Our mercury is not the
mercury of the vulgar herd." So Lullius says (Slav op
" Common  quicksilver, however carefully prepared, can
never become the quicksilver of the Sages, for common quick-
silver can only stand the test of fire by the aid of some other dry
and more highly digested quicksilver. ^ But most students of
this art have spoken largely about the sublimation of common
mercury, and have persisted in seeking the treasure of earthly


28 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


wisdom where it cannot be found, because Nature has not placed
it there. And, truly, the working even of common mercury is so
wonderful that it has misled some who supposed themselves to
be adepts in this art. The following is a case in point. I knew
a man who.succeeded in giving to his amalgam an orange
colour, but he could not get it any nearer to the colour of gold.
At last this clever chemist determined to increase the heat of the
furnace, thinking that this would have the desired effect of more
intimately combining the various ingredients. But alas! the
alembic burst, the gold was hurled into the fire, and almost
changed from its nature by the still volatile mercury.
Hence it appears that the mercury (which is its body) so
strongly affected the gold in its minutest particles as to reduce
it to a tincture, although several colours were obtained by the
action of the heat on the melted mass. If that good man had
taken to heart Arnold's words in the * Flower of Flowers," he
would never have made that experiment. For the said Arnold
makes reference to those who adopt this method in the following
terms : * They knew that mercury is the elementary principle of
the metals, and that they are produced through its digestion by -
the heat of sulphur ; they therefore sublimed mercury by itself,
then fixed and consolidated it, again melted it and did again
coagulate it: but when they came to examine the alembic, they
found no gold, etc." Therefore we cannot believe that common
quicksilver is the substance ofthe Stone. At the same time I
do not deny that it is indispensable both to the philosophical
chymist and to the physician.

We have carefully sought the substance of our stone in the
animal and vegetable world, among stones, lesser, intermediate,
and greater minerals, but in vain. We must now see whether
we can find it in the metals, and if so, whether in all or only in
some. It is a well-known fact (to which Roger bears witness,
Spec., cp. iii.), that all metals are generated outof sulphur and
quicksilver, and that nothing will become one with them, or
change.them, but what originates in themselves ; since a thing
can be developed and improved only by that which belongs to
its own nature (Richard, cp. i.).

I need not say that the Great Artist has ordained that
throughout the whole of Nature things should generate and


JOLEED S C5 QULTDVEVC TOR 29


produce only that which is like them, so that, for instance, a
horse can never be the offspring of a man. * As brute animals,"
says Basil Valentine, **cannot multiply after their kind by way
of generation except by virtue of their common nature ; so you
cannot expect to obtain the Blessed Stone, but out of its own
seed, out of which it was made from the beginning. Now to
find the. seed you should diligently consider for what purpose
you require the Store. You will at once see that it can be
obtained only from the metallic root from which God has ordained
that the metals themselves should be generated. Moreover,
there is a great conformity between the generation of the metals
and the Stone. For in both sulphur and quicksilver (containing
that salt which is their quickening soul) are indispensably
required ; nor can any useful metal be generated until these
three (making up the metallic substance) have been combined ;
for in the composition of metals there must be nothing which has
not been obtained from a metallic source" * No external thing,
says Draco, ** which is not derived from these two [sulphur and
mercury]has power to produce or transmute metals. On this
account we must select a metallic substance for the production
of the Stone" We must next briefly enquire whether it is to be
found in imperfect metals. Many imagine that the substance of
the white (tincture) may be elicited from tin or lead, and that of
the red out of copperoriron,orboth. This idea is doubtless owing
to a misconception of the words of the Sages. For Geber (lib.
forn. cp. ix.) says : * The mass for fermentation we generally gain
from the imperfect [base] bodies" Therefore we lay it down as
a general rule that the white paste may be extracted from Jupiter
and Saturn, the red from Venus, Saturn,and Mars. And Basil.
Valentinus says (Lib. de phys. et hyperphys.), that the tincture
Is prepared out of a conjunction of Mars and Venus. Acain
(Triumph. Antimon.), he uses these words : * After this tincture
of the Sun and Moon comes the tincture of Venus and Mars

which two make up the tincture of the Sun, when they have been
thoroughly perfected and condensed. After these come the
tinctures of Jupiter and of Saturn (for the coagulation of mercury)

and at last the tincture of mercury itself." But the searcher of
Nature must know that there can be no contradiction of opinion
between Geber or Basil, for it is impossible that the true


30 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


philosophers should ever lie, and so these words should be para-
bolically understood. For no perfection can be obtained from
imperfect metals, either by themselves or mixed, nor can that
which is itself imperfect bring other things to perfection. For
the purest substance of mercury is required for our purpose, as
is testified in the * Sounding of the Trumpet," and by Avicenna,
Lullius, and almost all the Sages, who unanimously affirm that
"the purest substance of mercury is selected by us for our
work." Now this highly refined substance of mercury is not
found in the base metals, since they are rendered so gross by
their impure and unessential sulphur, that, like leprous bodies,
they can never be thoroughly purged and cleansed, in which
process is the essence of our artifice. Nor do they well stand the
test of fire, which is one of the properties required in our Matter.
Let us hear what Geber has to tell us (Summa, cp. Ixiii.) concern-
ing the impurity of imperfect metals, and the properties of
perfect mercury : * Thus," hesays, * we happen upon two most
wonderful secrets. The one is that there exists a twofold cause
for the destruction of every [imperfect] metal by fire : namely,
(1), the combustible sulphur enclosed in their interior substance
is kindled by fierce heat, and (unimpeded by any excellence in
their mercury) annihilates, and converts into smoke their entire
substance; (2), the outward flame is fed by them, penetrates
into their interior, and dissolves them into smoke, even though
they be very solid ; (3), their interior is laid bare by calcination.
Now when all these conditions of destruction are found together,
bodies must needs be destroyed ; if they are not found together,
they are destroyed somewhat more slowly. "The second secret
is the excellence which quicksilver imparts to bodies. Forquick-
silver (no other condition of decay being present) does not
permit itself to be separated into its elements, but proves its
perfection by preserving its substance intact inthefire. Blessed
be God who created it, and gave it such a substance and such
properties as are not found in all Nature besides. This is that
which overcomes fire, and delights in its amicable heat" Here
Geber clearly shews that the substance of our Stone cannot exist
in imperfect metals; because things that are impure in them-
selves do not abide the fire which might purify them, while our
mercury (on account of its purity) is not in the slightest degree


DL


- iin, ds


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 31


injured by the fire. Thus we perceive that no one imperfect
metal can contain the substance of our Stone. But neither is it
to be found in a mixture of impure metals—for by mixing they
become less pure than they were before. Moreover we said
above that the. substance we required was oze. his fact is
clearly set forth by Halys (lib. secret., cp. vi), when he says:
« The Stone is One ; nothing else must be added to it: out of
one substancc the Sages obtain our remedy. Nothing else must
mingle with the Stone itself, or with its substance. And
Morienus says: * This Magistery grows from one original root,
which branches out into several parts, and from which springs
one thing."

But if base metals cannot be the substance of the Stone, why
do the Sages bid us employ them? I will tell you. When they
speak of impure bodies, they do not mean copper, iron, lead, tin,
&c., but its own Zody, or its earth—as Arnold (Flos Flor.) says:
* Mercury is united to earth, Ze, to an imperfect substance
[or body]" For though this * earth " is so perfect and pure that
in these respects it would seem to attain the utmost possibility
of Nature, yet in regard to the Stone it is still imperfect and
impure. In this point art leaves Nature behind, since it accom-
plishes what Nature could not perform. That this. earth before
its plenary purgation and regeneration is imperfect, may be
seen from the fact that it cannot yet accomplish more in the
matter of tinging than Nature has given to it, while after its
regeneration it is most powerful [Its grossness is clearly
perceived in an actual experiment : for first it is black and looks
like lead or antimony ; then it is of a whitish colour, and is
called Jupiter (or tin, or magnesia), and this also before it has
attained true whiteness, but when it has passed the white stage,
itis called Mars and Venus; after that it becomes perfect and
red. That Basil Valentinus agrees with me, and did not
really hold the opinion which he expressed in some of his
writings, is clear from his tract concerning the Great Stone,
where (speaking of the Matter of the Stone) he says that in the
Sun all three perfections are found together, whence it derives
its power of resisting the fire, and that the Moon, on account of
its fixed mercury, does not easily yield to the fire, but endures
the trial. *' That noble paramour Venus," he continues, '*is


32 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


furnished with an abundance of colour, and the greater and richer
part of her body is full of tincture. The colour is the same which
dwells in the most precious of metals, and on account of its
abundance has a reddish appearance. But its body is leprous,
for which reason the tincture cannot remain fixed in it, but
evaporates when the former is destroyed. For when the body
decays the soul cannot remain, but is dissipated and driven off.
Its habitation is destroyed and burnt with fire, and its place knows
it no more. In a fixed body it would without difficulty remain.
The fixed 'salt' gives to brave Mars a hard, strong, and heavy
body ; whence the strength of his soul is perceived: for this
warrior is not easily overcome. For his body is hard and difficult
to wound."

But let no one conclude from these words of Basilius that
that fixed sulphur of Venus, when united to the spirit of perfect
mercury, will become the tincture. We must again repeat that
our substance is not collected from many sources; but, as
Basilius says, it is oze universal thing, and is found in, and
obtained from one thing, being the spirit of mercury, the soul
ofsulphur, and a spiritual salt, united under one heaven and
dwelling in one body. Therefore let us turn our backs upon
the base metals, and turn our minds to the precious metals,
taking to heart those words of Plato (qu. ii): * Why do you
melt and dissolve other bodies with great labour, when in these
[the precious metals] you have what you seck? If you wish
to use the base metals, you must first change them into the
substance of perfect bodies." Therefore, beloved inquirer into
the secrets of Nature, leave on one side all things animal and
vegetable, all salts, alums, vitriols, bismuths, magnesias, antimo-
nies, and all base and impure metals, and seek thy Stone with
Arnold de Vill. nov. (Pt. L, cp.vii.): *in Mercury and the Sun for
the Sun, and in Mercury and the Moon for the Moon; since
the whole virtue of this art consists in them alone"  * For as
the source of ignition is fire, so gold is the principle of gold
making," says Ripley, in his * First Gate." If, therefore, thou
wouldest make gold and silver by the philosopher's art, take
for this purpose neither eggs, nor blood, but gold and silver,
which, being subjected to the action of fire naturally, prudently,
and not manually, generate new substances after their own kind,


ID ———


at v


-— n ———————I HPV" Can ion a ne


^ iine


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 33


like all things in Nature. Richard (cp. x.)tells us" to sow gold
and silver, that aided by our labour they may bring forth fruit,
through the mediation of Nature: for these two have [and are]
what you seek and nothing else in all the world." And why
should I not fix on them since they contain pure and perfect
mercury, with red and white sulphur. (Richard,cp. xvii) So
Avicenna teaches that, * in all silver is white, as in all gold there
is red, sulphur. No other sulphur like that which exists in these
bodies is found on allthe earth. Therefore we cunningly pre-
pare these two bodies, that we may have sulphur and quick-
silver of the same substance as that which generates gold and
silver under the earth. For they are shining bodies, whose
rays tinge other bodies with true whiteness and redness, ac-
cording to the manner of their own preparation." * For our
Magistery," says, Arnold (Rosar, pt. Ll, cp. v.) "aids perfect
bodies, and works upon the imperfect without the admixture
ofanything else. Gold, then, being the most precious of all the
metals, is the red tincture, tinging and transforming every body.
Silver is the white tincture, tinging other bodies with its perfect
whiteness." Let me tell the gentle reader that the metals, that
is to say, gold and silver in their metallic form, are not the Matter
of our Stone—being in the middle between them and the base
metals, as our Matter is in the middle between the former and
our Great Stone. So Bernard says (pt.ii): * Let them be
silent who affirm that there is any tincture but our own, or any
other sulphur than that which lies hid in magnesia ; also those
who would extract the quicksilver from any but the red slave,
and who speak of some other water but our own which is
incorruptible and combines with nothing except that which
belongs to its own nature, and moistens [tinges] nothing except
that which is one with its own nature. There is no acid but our
own, no other regimen, no other colours. In the same way,
there is no other true solution, sublimation, consolidation,
putrefaction. | therefore advise you to have done with alums,
vitriols, salts, black bodies, borax, aqua fortis, herbs, animals,
beasts, and all that proceeds from them, hairs, blood, urine,
human seed, flesh, eggs, and all minerals, and to keep to the
metals. But though the quicksilver required for our Stone is found
in metals only, and in these is the beginning of the work, they


34 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


are not therefore our Stone, so long. as they retain their metallic
form. For one and the same substance cannot have two forms.
How can they be the Stone which holds an intermediate form
between metals and mercury, unless their present form is first
destroyed and removed ?" Therefore, also, Raymond Lully says
in his * Testament" (cp. vi): * On this account a good artist
takes metals for his media in the work of the magistery, and
especially the Sun and Moon, because in them the sub-
stance of the Mercury and Sulphur is ripened, pure, and
well-digested by Nature's own artifice, ^ The artist would
vainly endeavour to produce this exact proportion out
of the natural elements, if he did not find it ready to
his hand in these bodies" ^ And in the * Codicil" he says:
* Without these two, viz, gold and silver, our art would have
no existence, since the sulphur they contain has been purified by
nature with a thoroughness such as art would vainly strive to
imitate. From these two bodies, with their prepared sulphur [or
prepared arsenic] our Medicine may be elicited, but without them
we can never obtain it." In the preface to his * Key" he says:
* [ advise you, my friends, to operate on nothing but the Sun and
Moon ; but these you should resolve into their elementary sub-
tances, viz, our quicksilver and our sulphur." In like manner
Arnoldus assures us that *from these bodies there is extracted
an exceedingly white and red sulphur; for in these there
is a most pure substance of sulphur, cleansed to the highest
degree by Nature's own artifice." ^ Nicarus, in * The
Crowd," says: *I bid. you take gold, which you desire to
multiply and renew, and to divide its water into two parts ; for
that metal falling into that water will be called the fermenting
matter of gold." How can this Sage call his * water" gold? To
- assist the student in solving this enigma I must tell him that the
gold of the Sages is not common gold, as also Senior tells us. In
*The Crowd" it is said : * As mercury is the element of all metals,
so gold is their ultimate goal; hence in all metals, pure and im-
pure, there are gold,silver, and mercury. But there is one true gold
which is the essence of all? ^ Thus you see that there is a gold
of the Sages, which, though derived from common gold, is yet
very different from it. The following words occur in the * Rising
Dawn" (cp. xvi) * The philosopher's gold resembles common


A E ———PERRRRRRRRREPPRRRRRN


i oc m PEE


DEECGODDEN TRACT. 95


gold neither in colour nor in substance. That which is extracted
from it is the red and white tincture." * The philosopher's gold
may be bought at a low price " (Aphidius). * All that is bought
at a high price is false. With little gold we buy much
(Morienus). Moreover, our gold is living gold, and our silver is
living silver, so that they can cause nothing but life and growth.
Common gold and silver are dead, They can effect nothing
until they are raised from the dead and quickened by the Sage.
Then they live, and possess in a high degree the power of pro-
pagating and multiplying their race. Concerning the life of our
metals that great philosopher, Sendivogius (who is still living),
has the following words : * Let me advise you not to receive the
gold and silver of the vulgar herd, for they are dead. Take our
living metals. Place them in our fire, and there will result a
dry liquid. First, earth will be resolved into water [for thus the
Mercury of the Sages is called. That water will solve gold and
silver, and consume them until only the tenth part with one part
is left. This will be tbe humid radical of the metals."

It is to be noted that Sages sometimes call their water,
as wellas their earth, gold. Hereunto we have already heard
the words of Nicarus, and after a like manner we are told in the
" Rosary of the Philosophers : * Our gold and silver are not the
gold and silver of the vulgar. We call gold the water which rises
into the air when exposed to fire. Verily, this gold is not the
gold of the vulgar. The vulgar would not believe of zZezz gold
that it could be volatilised on account of its solid nature."

The philosopher's *earth," then, is sometimes designated
their gold, as the same author testifies: * Know that our ore,
which is the gold of the philosophers, is their earth." This
"earth" is also called ore, ferment, or tincture ; just as the
" water" is called white and flaky *earth" ^ So we read in the
" Sounding of the Trumpet ": * Wherefore Hermes says, * Sow
your gold in white, flaky earth which by calcination has been
made glowing, subtle, and volatile That is to say : Sow gold,
2.e., the soul and quickening virtue, into the white earth, which
by preparation has been made white and pure and freed from all
Its grossness. "Thus natural gold is not the fermenting matter,
but the philosopher's goldis thequickening ferment itself." Again,
in the Seventh Step of the * Ladder of the Philosophers " : * Their


C2


36 . THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


earth is white in which their gold [which is the soul]is sown,
and this body is the centre of knowledge, the concentration
thereof, and the habitationspf tinctures" Once more: * There-
fore Hercules says; 'Solve the body of magnesia which has
become white and like the leaves of the bramble. This is the
body ; the soul is the esssence which is called the philosopher's
gold." (For with water the spirit ascends into the upper air.)
* Mix," says Senior, *gold with gold, that is water [mercury]
and ashes)" Again, Hermes says: *Sow gold into the white
flaky earth." From these expressions, however obscurely worded,
it is clear that our gold is not common gold.

But why do the philosophers call their gold now * water,"
and now *earth"? Do they not contradict themselves, or each
other? No; our Sages, in expounding tbe truth, veil it under
obscure and allegorical expressions, but nevertheless agree with
each other so marvellously that they allseem to speak, as it
were, with one mouth. "They do not confound one thing with
another, nor do they wish to lead the earnest enquirer astray.
They express themselves in mystic phrases to hide the truth
from the unworthy and impious, lest they should seem to be
casting pearls before s:ine, and giving: the holy thing to be
trodden underfoot by these who think only of indulging their
lustful desires. But the noble student of our art has been told
more than once, not only from what quarter our Stone may be
obtained, but also that its substance must be cze, which by the
artist's skill may be resolved into two, viz., earth and fire, or
mercury and sulphur.

The Sages, then, do well to call their gold earth or water ;
for they have a perfect right to term it whatever they like. So
they have frequently called their Stone their gold, their super-
perfect gold, their regenerate gold, and by many other names
besides. If any one does not perceive their meaning at the first
glance, he must blame his own ignorance, not their jealousy.

The reader now knows that the substance of our Stone is
neither animal nor vegetable, and that it does not belong to the
minerals or the base metals, but that it must be extracted from
gold and silver, and that our gold and silver are not the vulgar,
dead gold and silver, but the living gold and silver of the Sages.
We must now say something about the mode of solution, as the


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 37


greatest arcanum of all, and the root of the matter. A solution
takes place when we transform a dry thing into a liquid, a hard
thing into a soft, a hidden thing into one that is manifest, z.e.,
when a solid is changed into water ; not, however, the vulgar
water (as Parmenides and Agadmon in * The Crowd " teach us:
* When some persons hear of the liquefaction, they think a change
takes place into the water of the clouds. But if they had read
and understood our books, they would know that our water is
permanent), but into the water of the Sages, Ze., the elementary
substance, as Arnold (Ros. I., cp. ix.) says: * The object of the
Sages is to dissolve the Stone into its mercury, or elementary
matter" And Avicenna says: * Thou who wouldest attain our
object must first endeavour to dissolve and sublime the two
luminaries, which is the first stage of the experiment, that they
may become quicksilver, ^ Therefore Arnold (Ros. II, cp. ii.)
describes the solution as a resolving of bodies, and a preparation
ofthe first Matter or Nature. And Richard the Englishman
(cp. xviii.) writes thus : * First the Stone must be resolved into its
elementary substance [seeing that it is an union of body and
spirit], that the two may become one mercurial water." But even
as this first solution is the most vital part of our process, so is it
also the most difficult, as Eobold Vogelius testifies when he
says : * How hard this achievement is can be affirmed by those
who have performed it" Bernard of Trevisan, in his book
addressed to Thomas of Bononia, says: * He who knows the
secret of the sclution is acquainted with the arcanum of the Art,
which is, to mingle kinds, and effectually to extract elements
from elements which lie hid in them." — The solution must not
be made with aqua fortis ; for aqua fortis corrodes and destroys
the body which should be only liquefied and improved. The
solution does not take place into any water that wets the hands,
but into a dry water, which is called both sulphur and mercury,
as Zneumo says (Turba): *Unless by resolving it into its
elements you extract from the body its marrow, and make it an
impalpable spirit, you labour in vain." And Richard the English-
man, following Avicenna, affirms (cp. xi): * The Sages have
striven to discover how those sulphurs may be extracted from
those more perfect bodies, and how their qualities may be so
refined by Art, that that which was not manifest before (although


8 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


it always lay hid in them) may appear by the mediation of the said
Art with Nature. And thisthey confess cannot be done unless
the body be resolved into its First Matter, which is quicksilver,
out of which it was made in the beginning, without admixture
of any outward things ; since foreign matter cannot improve the
nature of our Stone. **For no water," says Bernard, ** dissolves
our bodies, but that which is of their kind, and may be
inspissated by them." (Ep. to Thom. of Bonon) And in the
same Epistle he writes : * The solution should be permanent, so
that from both elements, viz, the male and female seed, a new
species may result. Amen, I say unto you that no natural
water can dissolve metals, except that which is always in them
substantially and formally, and which the metals themselves,
being dissolved, may again consolidate." ^ Thus Morfoleus, in
* 'The Crowd " says: * Every body is dissolved with the spirit that
is joined to it, and doubtless also becomes spiritual. ^ And
every spirit is modified and coloured by bodies, to which spirit
is thus added a tinging colour which stands the test of fire."
Hence the student of our art must diligently enquire what
that water is. * For the knowledge of the menstruum;," says
Raymond (Comp. An., p.i.) *isathing without which nothing can
be done in the magisteryof this Art. Nothing preserves the metals
while it dissolves them, but our menstruum," which, as he further
states in his 'Codicilj is *the water by which the metals are
' solved, while all their essential properties are conserved." Though
this is the Great Arcanum which our Sages have always kept
secret, and have forbidden us to reveal, yet, as far as we may,
we will put you on the right track by two quotations. The
first is found in the abridged Rosary, and runs as follows: * The
first preparation and foundation of this Art, is the solution [ze.,
reduction] of the body into water, Ze., into quicksilver, and this
they call the solution, when they say : Let the gold be dissolved,
which is hid in the body of magnesia, that it may be reduced to
its First Matter, that thence it may become sulphur and quick-
silver, and not be again liquefied into water. The object of our
solution is to make it liquid, and resolve it into the substance of .
quicksilver that the saltness of its sulphur may be diminished,
which divine sulphur is prepared by extraction from two
sulphurs, when the spirit meets the body." The second quota-


TEDPA GOLDEN. URACT. 39


tion is from the ** Prooemium of the Twelve Gates, by Ripley :
* [ will straightway teach thee that thou mayest know that there
are three mercuries, which are the keys of knowledge [which
Raymond calls his menstrua], without which nothing is properly
done. But two of them are superficial The third is of the
essence of the Sun and Moon, the properties of which I will
describe to thee. For mercury, the essence of other metals, is
the principal substance of our Stone. In Gold and Silver our
menstrua are not visible to the eye, and are only perceived by
their effect. This is the Stone of which we speak, if anyone
understand our books aright. It is the soul and shining sub-
stance of the Sun and Moon, that subtile influence from which
the earth derives its splendour. For what are gold and silver
(says Avicenna) but pure red and white earth? Take away
from it the aforesaid splendour, and it will be nothing but
worthless earth. The whole compound we call our lead. The
quality of splendour comes from the Sun and Moon. And, in
brief, these are our solvents. Perfect bodies we naturally calcine
with the first, without adding any impure body but oxe, com-
monly called by philosophers the green lion, and this is the
medium for perfectly combining the tinctures of theSunand Moon.
With the second, which is a vegetable liquid, reviving what
before was dead, the two principles [both material and formal]
must be solved ; else they would be of little value. "With the
third, which is a permanent, incombustible liquid, of unctuous
quality, the tree of Hermes is burnt to ashes. This is our
natural, most sure fire, our mercury, our sulphur, our pure tincture,
our soul,our Stone raised with the wind, born in the earth.
These things take to heart. This Stone, I dare to tell thee, is the
powerful essence of the metal, and thou must be careful how thou
dost obtain it. For this solvent is invisible, although with the
secondary philosophic water it may, by the separation of ele-
ments, become visible in the form of pure water. Out of this
solvent, and with it, thou mayst obtain the sulphur of Nature, if
it be naturally turned into a pure spirit. Then thou mayst with
it dissolve thy fundamental mass [Ze. gold and silver]."

In these two quotations the whole mystery of the solution is
revealed. If you will consider the properties and powers of
.Nature, and compare them with these words, and annihilate all


40 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


the workings of Nature (Ze. reduce them, and unroll them
like the thread of a skein), you will find in them all truth plainly
and fundamentally. But if you cannot gather from them
where are the bolted gates, and do not know the substance
and the powers of Nature, you shall be conducted to them, not
by contemptuous self-conceit, but by ardent prayer and inde-
fatigable study.

For (by the revelation of the great and good God) I have
attained this Art only by persevering application, vigils, and
repeated reading of authentic books. I do not speak of the
matter—that was made known to me by the revelation of God
alone; but I have by study discovered the secret of its solution,
which is the same with ancient and modern Sages, and the true
arcanum of the Art, in the absence of which neither past nor
present Philosophers could have performed anything, whence it is
a secret of Art and an arcanum of wisdom which no one but God
must reveal, for which benefit I give undying thanks with heart
and lips to the Creator of all things, world without end, Amen.

That you may have no cause to complain of me, gentle
reater, I will, however, for the love of God, expound to you
another mystery. You are to know that, although the solution
is one, yet in it there may be distinguished a first, and a second,
as they say in the schools. The irs solution is that of which
Arnold speaks in the above quotation, vzz., the reduction of it to
its First Matter; the secozd is that perfect solution of body and
spirit at the same time, in which the solvent and the thing solved
always abide together, and with this solution of the body there
takes place simultaneously a consolidation of the spirit.

Here you may clearly and plainly see with your eyes what
you have long desired to see. If you understand it, it is mere
child's play ; therefore, I will forbear to speak any further about it.
If you know the beginning, the end will duly follow by the help of
God, from whom alone we may obtain all glory, the corruptible
glory of this world, and that eternal glory in which with glorified
bodies we shall see God face to face—despising all mundane
pleasure that we may behold with our own eyes that eternal,
infinite, and unspeakable joy of heaven.

With these words I will conclude my little tract. Every-
thing else that remains to be said I will set forth in the following


TEIBAGOUDEN. TRACT. 41


parable, where you will find the entire system and practice
clearly expounded. If you duly follow it, you will doubtless .
attain to the true.wisdom. May it be shewn to you, and to all
good men, by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Spirit, Blessed for evermore !


M.S.


The thing is one in number, and one essence, which Nature
strives to transform, but with the help of Art, into two, and twice
two: mercury and sulphur impart nourishment to themselves.
Spirit, and soul, and body, and four elements: the fifth which
they furnish is the Philosophers Stone. Select your substance
without guile, let it be double, and let its splendour be of pure
mercury. Take sulphur free from every foreign substance, and
consume it in a fiery furnace. But when you put it together
again, let it still be of the same weight. "Then I will believe that
you are upon the road of the mystery. When you have dis-
solved, quickly sublime it. Pound what you obtain, and
ceaselessly distil it. Then endeavour to condense it, and
continue to expose it to heat ^ After this begin to "*tinge"
largely. You have the panacea of men, and the sum of the
metals, and you shall be able to cure whomsoever and what-
soever you please.


Here follows a. Parable in which the Mystery of the whole
Matter 2s Declared.


Once upon a time, when I was walking abroad in a wood,
and considering the wretchedness of this life, and deploring that
through the lamentable fall of our first parents we had been
reduced to this pitiable state, I suddenly found myself upon a rough,
untrodden, and .impracticable path, which was beset with briars.
Then I was afraid, and strove to retrace my steps. But it was not
in my power to do so ; for so violent a tempest blew upon me from
behind that it was easier to take ten steps forward than to
take one backward. So I had to hurry forwàrd, and follow the
rugged path up and down hill After a while, I reached a beau-


42 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


tiful meadow, surrounded with heavy-laden fruit trees, which the
: inhabitants of the place called the Meadow of Happiness.
There I met a crowd of decrepit men with grey beards, one of
whom, an elderly personage, had a long darkish beard, whom also
I knew by name, but whose face I had never seen. These men
were discusssing various subjects, c.g., the goodness and wisdom
of God, all natural objects, and especially the great mystery
which lies hid in Nature, which —they said—-God conceals from
the whole world, and makes known only to a few who truly
love Him. I listened to them for a long time (for I was
pleased with their discourse) till I thought that some were
talking rather wildly, not in regard to the substance and the
method, but as concerns parables, similitudes, etc, which were
the figments of Aristotle, Pliny, and others When I heard
these things, I could no longer contain myself, and, like Saul
among the prophets, I began to give my opinion, and to refute
those futile assertions by arguments drawn from experience and
reason. Some of them agreed with me, and began to test my
knowledge with many questions. But I was so well grounded
that I stood the test to the admiration of all They all mar-
velled at the soundness of my knowledge, and affirmed with
one voice that I should be received into their fellowship.
These words filled me with great joy. But they said I could
not be their Brother until I knew their Lion, and his internal
and external properties. ^ They told me. I must summon up
my whole strength to subdue him. I confidently replied that
I would leave no stone unturned to attain this object. For
their kindness affected me so, that I would not have left them
for all the wealth of this world. Therefore they conducted me
to the Lion, and were at great pains to declare to me his nature.
But no one would tell me how I must treat him at first. Some
of them did indeed mutter a few words on this point, but so con-
fusedly and obscurely, that scarce one in a thousand would. have
understood their meaning. However, they said that when I had
bound him without being harmed by his sharp claws and
terrible teeth, I should know all the rest. This Lion was old,
fierce, great, and terrible to behold with his flowing yellow mane.
Then Í repented of my temerity, and would gladly have re-
treated if I had not been held to my purpose by my vow, and


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 43


the old men that surrounded me. So I carefully descended into
the Lion's den, and strove to pacify him; but he glared upon
me with red eyes, and affrighted me so that I could hardly stand
upon my feet, and thought that my last hour had come. But
calling to mind what one of the old men had said to me when I
entered the den, namely, that many had undertaken to tame the
Lion, but that only few had accomplished it, I summoned up
courage, and tried several artifices, which I had learned by dili-
gent training. Moreover, I had some knowledge of natural
magic. I therefore relinquished my blandishments, and seized
him so gently, skilfully, and subtly, that almost before he knew
what I was about I had drawn all the blood from his body, and
from his very heart and bowels. "This blood was red indeed, but
choleric. Then I proceeded to dissect him, and made a most
marvellous discovery :—his bones were as white as snow, and their
quantity more considerable than that of the blood. When the
old men who stood round the den, and had watched our struggle,
saw this, they began to converse with great eagerness, as I could
see from their gestures— for, being in the den, I could not hear
their words. But anon their dispute began to run high, and I
could distinguish these words: * He must bring him to life again
if he wishes to be our brother." Therefore, without further delay,
I stepped out of the den into a large open space, and then
suddenly (I know not how) found myself upon a very high wall,
which rose more than 100 yards into the air, but at the top was
not more than a foot in width, and along the middle of it
ran an iron battlement of great strength. Now as I passed
along I thought I saw one walking before me on the right
side of the battlement. When I had followed him a short
distance I became aware of another person following me on
the other side ; but, whether it was a man or a woman I
cannot undertake to say. This person hailed me, and said
that there was more convenient footing on his side than on
mine. "This I was quite ready to believe; for the battlement,
which was on the middle of the wail, made the path so narrow
as to render progress extremely difficult at such a great height ;
indeed, I noticed that some of those who followed me actually
fell Therefore I got over the battlement on to the other side,
and proceeded to the end of the wall, which presented a most


44 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


difficult and dangerous descent. Then I was sorry that I had
deserted my own side, as I could neither advance nor retreat.
But, remembering that fortune befriends the bold, I attempted
the descent, and by using my hands and feet, I got down safely.
Now when I had advanced a little further, I put away all thought
of danger, and: forgot all about the wall and the battlement.
"Then lighting upon a certain place, I found white and red roses,
but the latter were more abundant ; so I gathered some of them
and stuck them in my cap. In that place were some most beau-
tiful women, and in the neighbouring garden a number of young
men were to be seen. But a wall which surrounded the garden
prevented the latter from joining the women. They were eager
to do so, but were not allowed to go round the garden and find
the gate. The sight moved me to pity, and therefore I hastily
went back by the smooth path along which I had come, and
soon reached some houses, among which I expected to find the
gardener' cottage. But I found there many men, of whom each
had his own cell (in. very few there were two living together).
They were all busily at work, each labouring by himself Their
work was of a kind long and familiarly known to me indeed,
far too well known. So I said to myself: * Behold, here are
many persons at work upon vain and foolish experiments, which
have a certain specious plausibility (according to each man's
idiosyncrasy), but no real foundation in Nature. Surely you,
too, will obtain forgiveness." At least, I would not suffer myself
to be detained with these barren futilities, but went on my way.
When I reached the gate of the garden some looked askance at
me, and I was afraid they would prevent me from carrying out
my purpose. Others murmured, and said: "Look, this fellow
presumes to approach the gate of the garden, and we who have
spent so many years in these horticultural labours, have never
gained admittance! How we will jeer at him if he meets with a
repulse" But I paid no attention to their talk (for I knew the
interior of that garden better than they, although I had never
been in it), and approached the gate, which was double-locked,
and in which there appeared to be no keyhole, but soon I per-
ceived a keyhole which would have escaped any common observer.
So I inserted my master key (called by some " the adulteress "),
which I had diligently fashioned for the purpose, pushed back


"TEES GODIDEN RMCUM .  - 45


the bolt, and entered. After passing this gate, I came upon
other bolted gates, which, however, I opened without any diffi-
culty. So I entered the garden, and found in the middle of it a
small square garden, which was surrounded with a rose hedge
covered with beautiful roses, and as a little rain was falling, and
the rays of the sun shone upon it, I beheld a rainbow. But I
was hastening past the small garden, to that place where I
thought I could aid the young women, when, behold, there
came forward the most beautiful of all the maidens, arrayed in
silk and satin, with the most beautiful of the youths, dressed in a
scarlet robe. They walked arm in arm to the rose garden, and
carried many fragrant roses in their hands. I greeted them, and
and asked how she had got over. * This my beloved bride-
groom," she said, "helped me, and now we are leaving this
pleasant garden, and hastening to our chamber to satisfy our
love" "Iam glad," I returned, * that without any trouble on my
part your desires have been fulfilled. ^ But you see how much
trouble I have taken on your behalf, having traversed so
great a distance in so short a time" Then I came to a
water-mill, built within of stones, where there were no flour
bins or other millers requisites; yet I saw wheels driven
round by the water. I asked the decrepit miller the reason,
and he told me the grinding took place somewhere out of
view. At the same moment I saw a miller enter that place
by a small bridge, and immediately followed him. ^ When I
had passed the bridge, which was on the right side of the
wheels, [ paused and beheld a wonderful sight. In a moment
the wheels were above the bridge; I saw very black water,
with white drops; the bridge was only about three inches
wide; but by clinging to the rails I got safely back, without
being wetted at all, and asked the old man how many wheels
he had. He answered, *Ten" I was troubled by the mar-
vellous incident, and would gladly have known its meaning,
but felt that it was labour lost to ask the old man any questions,
and so departed. Before the mill was a raised platform on
which some of the aforesaid old men were walking to and fro in
the warm sunshine, discussing a letter which they had received
from the Faculty of the University. I guessed the tenor of the
letter, and, feeling sure that it concerned me, I addressed to them


46 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


a question to that effect. "It Zoes concern you," they said, * the
wife whom you married a long time ago, you must keep for ever,
or else we must tell our chief" * You need not trouble your-
selves about this matter," I said, *for we were born together, and
brought up together as children, and now that I have married
her, I will never forsake her, but cherish her till her last breath ;
nay, even death itself shall not sever us" It is well" they
said, *your wife is satisfied, too; you must be joined together."
* | am content," I said. "It is well," they repeated. * For thus
the Lion will be restored to life, and be more powerful and more
active than he was before" Then I remembered my labours,
and knew by certain signs that this matter concerned not myself,
but a very good friend of mine. As these thoughts crossed my
mind, I saw our bridegroom and his beloved bride—both clothed
in the aforesaid garments—come forward, eager to be joined
together. "This sight gladdened me ; for I had been afraid that
the whole matter concerned me. Now when the bridegroom, in
his bright scarlet robe, with his bride, whose silk dress gave out
shining rays, reached. the old men, they were straightway joined
together. And I marvelled that the maiden, who was said to be
the mother of her bridegroom, was of so youthful an appearance,
that she might have seemed his daughter But I know not
what sin they had committed, except that brother and sister
had been drawn to each other by such passionate love that
they could no more be separated; and, being charged with
incest, they were shut up for ever in a close prison, which,
however, was as pellucid and transparent as glass, and
arched like the heavenly vault,so that all that they did could
be seen from without. Here they were to do penance for
their sins with ever-flowing tears, and true sorrow. All their
clothes and outward ornaments were taken away. None of
their servants and friends were allowed to be with them, but
after they had received sufficient meat and drink (the latter
taken from the aforesaid water), the door was shut and locked,
and the seal of the Faculty was affixed to it. I was entrusted
with the charge of heating their chamber in the winter, so that
they might be neither too hot nor too cold, and I was further
to see that they did not escape. If any accident of any kind
happened, I was to be severely punished. I did not like this


THE GOLDEN TRACT 4?


charge; and, as I remembered that the matter was most im-
portant, and that the College of Sages were not wont to say
what they did not mean, I was filled with fear. But since I
had to bear that which I could not alter, and since the
chamber was situated in a strong tower, and surrounded with
battlements and lofty walls, and, moreover, could be easily
heated with a gentle and continuous fire, I called upon God for
help, and began to heat the chamber. But what happened?
As soon as they felt the grateful warmth, they fell to embracing
each other so passionately that the husband's heart was melted
with the excessive ardour of love, and he fell down broken in
many pieces. When she who loved him no less than he loved her,
saw this, she wept for him, and, as it were, covered him with
overflowing tears, until he was quite flooded and concealed from
view. But those complaints and tears did not last long, for
being weary with exceeding sorrow, she at length destroyed
herself. Alas! what fear and anguish fell upon me, when I
saw those who had been so straitly committed to my charge,
lying, as it were, melted and dead before me. I felt sure that
I should be put to death for it; but the jeers, the derision, and
the contempt which I would have to undergo seemed more
grievous even than death. In this anxious state of mind I spent
several days, until the thought occurred to me that, if Medea had
restored a dead body to life, I might perhaps be able to do the
same. But I could think of no better plan than to keep up the
warmth of the chamber until the water should have evaporated,
and the dead bodies of the lovers could again be seen.
doubted not that then I should most honourably escape from all
danger. So I kept up the fire forty days, the water diminishing
from day to day, and the dead bodies beginning to reappear.
Now, however, they looked as black as coals. "This effect would
have been produced sooner if the chamber had not been so
closely shut and sealed so that I could in no wise open it. For
I noticed that the water rose to the roof of the chamber, and
then came down again like rain ; but it could find no exit from
the chamber, until the dead bodies had putrefied and began to
give out a grievous smell In the meantime the rays of the sun,
shining upon the moisture of the chamber, produced a most
beautiful rainbow ; and, after all my sorrow, the sight of its gay


48 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


colours filled me with great delight; and I was particularly
pleased to see my lovers lying before me. But as there is no
joy without a drop of bitterness, so I was still disturbed by the
thought that those who had been committed to my care were
still lying lifeless. Nevertheless, I comforted myself with the
reflection that the chamber (being so tightly closed) must still
contain their souls and spirits. "Therefore I continued diligently
to perform my office of warming them, being assured that they
would not return to their bodies while they could enjoy that
moist atmosphere. "This conjecture was justifed by the event.
For towards evening I noticed that many vapours rose from the
earth through the heat of the sun, and were lifted up as water is
attracted by the sun ; afterwards when night fell, they watered
the earth as fertilising dew, and washed our bodies, which became
more beautiful and white the oftener this sprinkling took place.
And the whiter they became, the more the quantity of moisture
in the air diminished, until at last the atmosphere was too thin
for the spirit and soul to remain therein any longer; so they
were at length compelled to return to the clarified body of the
Queen, which (to my great joy) was straightway restored to life.
My joy was all the greater, because now she was arrayed in a
beautiful and magnificent garment such as is rarely seen by
mortal eye, and had a glorious crown, all made of diamonds,
upon her head. Thus attired, she stood upon her feet and
cried: * Know this, ye mortals, and let it enter your hearts,
that the most High God is one God, who has power to set up
and pull down kings. He makes rich and poor as He wills.
He has killed, and raised again. I was great, and was brought
low; but now, having been humbled, I have been made Queen
of many more kingdoms. After death life has been restored to
me. When I was poor, the treasures of the wise and mighty were
committed to me. Therefore I, too, can make the poor rich,
give grace to the humble, and restore the health of the sick.
But I am not yet able to raise my beloved brother, the most
mighty King, from the dead. Nevertheless, when he comes, he
will show that my words are true," When she had thus spoken
the sun lighted up the world with his glorious rays, and the heat
waxed great (for the dog days were approaching) Long before
this, garments of rich black silk, of grey or ash-coloured damask,


THE GOLDEN TRACT. 49


of rare white silk, embroidered with silver, precious pearls, and
brilliant diamonds, had been got ready towards the marriage of
our Queen ; and now garments of many colours, of flesh colour,
orange, and saffron, and of red and scarlet silk, richly em-
broidered with rubies and carbuncles, were being prepared for
the adornment of our new King. But there was no one to be
seen working at those garments ; yet one after another was got
ready, insomuch that I greatly marvelled, because I knew that
none but the bride and the bridegroom had entered the chamber.
My wonder increased when I observed that as each dress was
finished, those that had been there before straightway vanished,
though I could see no one put them away. Now when that
most precious scarlet garment had been finished, the great and
mighty King appeared in great splendour and indescribable
magnificence, and when he saw that he was shut in, he besought
me, in the most persuasive accents, to open the door, as it would
be to my advantage to let him out of the chamber. Now,
though I had been most strictly enjoined not to open the
chamber, I was filled with awe by the majesty and persuasive
speech of the King, and acceded to his request. When he left
the chamber, he bore himself so kindly, so gently, and so humbly,
that I could not help reflecting that these virtues are the most
glorious ornaments of the great. As he had passed the dog
days in great heat he was extremely thirsty, spent, and weary ;
wherefore he humbly requested me to bring him some water
from the river where it raged and foamed under the wheels.
I gladly acceded to his request, and, after slaking his thirst with
a deep draught, he returned to the chamber, requesting me to
shut the door carefully so that no one might disturb him or
rouse him from his sleep. So he slept a few days, and then
called me back to open the door again. He looked much more
beautiful, ruddier, and more royal, and said that this water was
very precious and full of virtue. — When at his request I had
fetched him some more, he took a deeper draught than before,
insomuch that the size of the chamber seemed to become en-
larged. After drinking of this water (which is lightly esteemed
by the ignorant) as much as he desired, he became so beautiful
and glorious that in all my life I do not remember to have seen
a more glorious man, or more glorious deeds. For he took me
D


50 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


into his kingdom and showed me all the treasures and riches of
the whole world, till I was obliged to confess, that so far from
exaggerating his power, the Queen had not told me the half of it.
Of gold and precious carbuncles there was no end. "There was
also to be found renewal and restoration of youth, and of the
natural faculties, and recovery of lost health, with a never failing
panacea for all diseases. What pleased me most of all, was that
the people of that kingdom knew, feared, and honoured their
Creator, and asked and obtained of him wisdom, understanding,
and, after this life, eternal glory and beatitude. May this latter
be given to us also by God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Spirit, the Blessed Trinity, to Whom belong praise,
glory, and honour, world without end, Amen.


———


^ul tisl ^. dilepmm ied niae bsedlumn cni


THE GOLDEN AGE
RESTORED:


HAVING NOW APPEARED A SECOND TIME, FLOURISHED
BEAUTIFULLY, AND BROUGHT FORTH FRAGRANT AND
GOLDEN SEED. THIS RARE AND PRECIOUS
SEED IS SHEWN AND IMPARTED TO ALL
THE SONS OF TRUE WISDOM AND
THE DOCTRINE,


BY


HOENEY MAIDATEH ANAS.


E
z


** Jf any of you lack swisdom, let him ask of God, who
Qzves sinply, and without upbraiding, and it shall be


: a P :
Q7ven to him."—]AMES i, 5.


MOTTO OF THE AUTHOR:


'" The Centre of the World—a Grazn of Sand."


DIRUSSDUASCU.


To the Worthy and Christian Reader.


ELOVED and pious reader, above all, ye who are Sons

of Wisdom and the Doctrine, some years ago Almighty

God, in answer to my daily prayers, opened my eyes by

the light of His Holy Spirit (Who was sent us through

Christ by the Father, and from Whom we receive all wisdom), and
enabled me to discover the True Centre in the Centre ofthe
Triangle and the one true Matter of the precious Philosopher's
Stone, so that I now hold it in my hands; but it took me five
years longer to discover how the blood of the Red Lion and the
glue of the White Eagle were to be extracted, and how these
were to be mixed in their natural proportions, enclosed, sealed,
and committed to the secret fire. — Nor did I even then find the
arcanum without constant and untiring application. — I have,
indeed, studied the writings, parables, and various figures of the
philosophers with singular industry, and laboured hard to solve
their manifold wonderful enigmas, most of which are simply the
vain products of their imaginations. It was long before
experience taught me that all their obscure verbiage and high
pretensions are mere folly and empty phantasms (as is amply
testified by our leading Sages) "Then I understood that their
preparations (of which we read in Geber, Albertus Magnus, and
others), their purgations, sublimations, cementations, distillations,
rectifications, circulations, putrefactions, conjunctions, solutions,
coagulations, calcinations, incinerations, mortifications, revivifica-
tions, &c., as also their tripods, athanors (furnaces), reverberatory
alembics, excrements of horses, ashes, sand, stills, pelican-violas,
retorts, fixatories, &c., are mere plausible impostures and frauds.
This must be apparent to any one who considers the truth ofthe
matter. Nature, who, in her noble simplicity, delights in her own


34 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


proper substance, knows nothing of these futilities. — Hence
"Theophrastus (Sec. Mag. de Phil. Lap.) rightly says of those who
seek the substance of the Stone in wine, imperfect bodies, blood,
bismuth, mercury, sulphur, wine, dung, orpiment, and in plants,
as chelidonia, hyssop, ivy, &c., that they are full of lies and
thievery—deceiving the credulous, milking their purses dry, and,
as to the rest, following their own foolish fancies, that are quite
unable to realise the requirements of Nature. (Tell menow who
will help me with the minerals of the earth, distillations of water,
&c.?) Some of them take new wine and urine for the purpose of
changing them into metals. To hear them talk, you might sup-
pose all that is sold at the apothecaries to be good for metals.
Thou foolish man, dost thou not perceive that none of these
things have anything to do with them ?

You might as well try to sever Nature, as endeavour to make
metals out of blood. Make a man out of a horse, or a milch cow
out of a mouse : this would be according to the same method of
multiplication. Art cannot change or overstep the natural order
of the universe. Ifa woman bring forth a male child, you can-
not change him into alittle girl. From this rule, which evidently
obtains throughout Nature, any sane person may gather where,
and how, we must look for, and find, our Blessed Matter.
But let no one imagine, or suffer any quack to delude him into
the belief, that he has all that he requires when the substance
has been made known to him either by God, or by one of the
initiated. Let him not suppose that the solution and purification
are a very simple matter. He could fall into no more serious
mistake. He has scarcely got beyond the most elementary stage
of his task. Let me once more tell him that I spent five entire
years, after discovering the true Matter of the Stone, in the
search after the right method of manipulating it, until at length,
in the sixth year, the key of power was entrusted to me by the
secret revelation of the most High God. "That same key the
ancient Patriarchs, Prophets, and Sages have always kept secret.
* For i£" says Monarcha, in a certain passage, "they had
described it in an universally intelligible manner, and placed it
within the reach of every labourer and porter, it would have been
a great theft, and no true mystery ; moreover, many evils would
arise from such a profanation of the arcanum, which would also


Y om rmm REM


dieetibu iu qui a,


|
i

|
1


THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED. ss


be manifestly contrary to God's will." For these and other reasons
(which I have stated in the Epilogue), lest I should seem to be
hiding the talent committed to me by God, I have in this my
* Golden Age Come Back " (as far as Nature and God allow)
revealed the Great Mystery of the Sages, which, through the grace
of God, I have seen with these eyes, and handled with these
hands. "The just and pious reader will regard my undertaking
with a kindly eye, and not suffer seeming contradictions to mis-
lead him: the theory of and practice of this Art, and the laws
which obtain in the Republic of the Chemists, forbade me to
write more openly or plainly. Ihope and trust that, neverthe-
less, all who look upon this book with the eyes of the mind, pore
over it by day and by night, and pray to God from the bottom
of their hearts, will, together with me, enjoy the wonderful
hidden fruits of philosophy. In this way the Brethren of the
true Golden Cross, and the elect members of the philosophic
communion, are and remain joined together in a great confeder-
ation.

In conclusion, that the learned and worthy Christian reader
may know my Christian name and my surname, I will remove
every cause of complaint by making it known in the following
manner. Let all and sundry be certified that the number of my
name is I6I3: by this number my whole name is written in the
book of Nature with two dead ones, and seven living ones. After
that, the letter 5 is the fifth part of B, and 15 the fifth part of 12.
With this information you must be satisfied. Written at
Taunenberg, March 23rd, 1622.


Epigram to the Sons of Wisdom and the Doctrine.


I have sought ; I have found ; I have often purified ; and
I have joined together; I have matured it: Then the golden
tincture has followed, which is called the Centre of Nature
(heuce so many opinions, so many books, so many parables).
It is the Remedy, I openly declare it, for all metals, and for all
sick persons. "The solution is of God.

HERMAN DATICHIUS,
The Author's Famulus.


£p c
ME. 4 PRSE D "un o d


"a 4- uw 3
— ; E TIN LEA
r i id


- I y 3 A. : 1 T -— depo ht. E ? Per Lun it Lm XI Y " :
" ERE IUEBNMRULMTL PETS r Pme mmu


THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED.


S I pondered in my mind the marvels of the Most
3 High, and the duty of fervent love to our neigh-
bours, which He laid upon us; I remembered the
. wheat harvest, when Reuben, the son of Leah, found
Dudaim in the field, which Leah gave to Rachel for the
love of the Patriarch Jacob. "Then I was carried forward,
being plunged in profound thought, to the time of Moses,
who rendered potable the golden calf (which Aaron had
formed) by reducing it to powder in the fire, throwing it into
the water, and giving it the children of Israel to drink ; and I
marvelled greatly at the wonderful and masterly destruction of
the metal by the man of God. But when I reflected upon
the matter, the truth was borne in upon my mind, and my eyes
were opened like those of the disciples at Emmaus, who knew
their Master in the breaking of bread ; and my heart burned
within me. Then I retired to rest, that I might consider the
matter further (on the morrow), and fell into a deep slumber ;
when, behold, Solomon appeared to me in all his power,
wealth, and glory, and with him came his whole harem: sixty
were queens, eight hundred concubines, and of virgins
there was a countless number. One of them was his most
beautiful dove, and was dearest to his heart. They formed a
procession according to the Catholic rite, in the centre of which
was one greatly praised and beloved, whose name was like oint-
ment poured out, and whose fragrance was sweeter than that of
spices ; the fiery spirit of this person was the Key for the
opening of the Temple, for entering the Holy of Holies, and
taking hold on the horns of the Altar.
When the procession had been performed in the manner
aforesaid, Solomon shewed me the One Centre in the Triangle


58 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


of the Centre, and opened my understanding. "Then I observed
that a woman stood behind me, who had bared her breast, from
a deep wound in which blood and water gushed forth. Her
thighs were like two half-moons, made by the Master; her navel
was like a round goblet; her belly like a heap of wheat, set
about with roses; her breasts like two young roes that are
twins ; her neck like a tower of ivory ; her eyes like the fish-
pools in Heshbon, by the Gate of Bathrabbim ; her nose like
the Tower of Lebanon, which looketh towards Damascus ;
her head like Carmel, and the hair of her head like royal
purple. Her garments, which were rancid, ill-savoured, and full
of venom, lay at her feet, whither she had cast them ; and at
length she broke forth into these words: *I have put off my
coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet; how
shall I dele them ? — The watchmen that went about the
city found me, they smote me, they wounded me; they
took away my veil from me." "Thereupon I fell to the ground
with great and ignorant terror. But Solomon bade me rise,
and said : * Fear not ; for you see Nature bared, and the most
secret of all secrets that is found beneath the sky and earth :
She is beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
army with banners—and nevertheless the pure and chaste virgin
of whom Adam was formed and created. The entrance of
her tabernacle is sealed. She lives in gardens, sleeps in the
double cave of Abraham, in the field of Hebron, and her
palace is in the depths of the Red Sea, and in transparent
caverns. "The air bare her, the fire nourished her: therefore
she is the Queen of the earth, and has honey and
milk in her breasts; her lips are as a dropping honey-
comb ; honey and milk are under her tongue ; and the smell of
her garments is to the wise like the smell of Lebanon—but to
the ignorant an abomination. ^ And Solomon said further :
* Awake, and see my whole harem, and say what it is like."
And straightway his whole harem was stripped naked. Yet
could I not find or judge, and my eyes were sealed lest I should
know the secret When Solomon saw my infirmity, he set
that naked woman apart from the rest of the harem, and said :
*'Thy thoughts are vain, and thy mind is sunburnt ; thy memory
is shrouded in a thick mist, so that thou canst judge nothing


THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED. 59


rightly. But if thou art on the watch, and makest good use
of thy present opportunity, the bloody sweat and snowy tears
of this virgin will have power to restore thee, and to strengthen
and clarify thy intellect and memory that thy eyes may see
the secret wonders of the Most High, the height of the things
above, the depth of the things beneath, and that thou mayst
clearly understand the powers and operation of all Nature, and
of the elements. "Thy intellect shall be silver, and thy memory
golden. The colour of all precious stones shall appear before
thy eyes; thou shalt know their birth, and separate the good
from the bad, the sheep from the goats. "Thy life shall be peace,
butthe bells of Aaron shall rouse thee from sleep, and the lyre
of David, my father, from drowsiness" These words of
Solomon awed and terrified me still more; in partl was
adread at such emphatic speech, and in part also at the
splendour and glory ofthe King's harem. But King Solomon
seized my right hand, and led me through a wine cellar into a
most splendid secret palace, where he refreshed me with flowers
and apples. The windows were of transparent crystal, and I
gazed through them.  Andhesaid: * What do you see?" I said :
*[ see the former chamber whence we came, and on the left
stands thy royal harem, and on the right naked virgins. Their
eyes are redder than wine, and their teeth whiter than milk.
But the garments that lie at their feet are fouler, blacker, and
more unsightly than the river Kidron." .* Choose out one of
these," said Solomon, *to be your love. I esteem the virgins
even as my own harem. And the more their loveliness delights
me, the less am I deterred by their foul garments" With this,
the King turned himself and spoke most kindly to one of his
queens. There was in the chamber a mistress of about a
hundred years of age. She was arrayed in a grey robe, and
had a black fillet on her head, that was embroidered with many
brilliant jewels, and lined within with red, yellow, and blue silk ;
her mantle was heavily ornamented with all kinds of Turkish
and Indian colours and figures. This ancient woman nodded to me,
and swore piously that she was the mother of that naked virgin,
and that she was a pure, chaste, and sealed virgin, who had
never before suffered the eye of man to dwell upon her, nor had
any one ever touched her. She was the virgin of whom the


60 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Prophet had spoken: *Behold, we have a secret son, who
with others has been changed.  Behold,a virgin has conceived,
the virgin that is called Apdorossa, that is, the sealed one, who
suffers not others." Because her daughter was still unmarried,
she had concealed her dowry beneath her feet, lest in the present
war she should be deprived of her wealth by soldiers. But
I was not to be deterred by her foul garments, but to
choose her daughter from among all the rest for my beloved
one, and the pleasure of my life. IfIdid so she would give mea
lye with which I could cleanse her garments. Moreover, with her
hand I should receive the flowing salt, the incombustible oil, and
an inestimable treasure. ^ She was about to declare this to
me more in detail, when Solomon turned round, looked askance at
me, and said : * I am the wisest of men, and my pleasant harem
and the glory and the beauty of my queens excel the gold of
Ophir. The ornaments of my concubines shame the rays of the
sun, and the beauty of my virgins the light of the moon. My
virgins are heavenly, my wisdom inscrutable, my mind past
finding out."

Then I answered, while I bowed down to the ground with
awe: * Behold, if I have found grace in your eyes—for I am
lowly—give me that naked virgein whom I have chosen from
among all, to preserve my life. Her garments are old, defiled,
and foul, but I will purge them, and love her with all my heart.
Let her be my sister, my spouse, since one glance of her eyes
has stolen away my heart, and I am sick with love for her."
On hearing this Solomon straightway gave her to me. With
that there arose a tumult in the harem, which roused me from my
sleep, Now I knew not what had happened to me; but I
took it for some dream, and thereupon until the light dawned I
was full of subtle thoughts. But when I had risen, and poured
forth my prayers, behold, I saw the garments of the naked virgin
lying by my bedside, and when I saw not her, my hair stood on
end, and I was covered with a cold perspiration. But I took
heart and recalled my dream, and endeavoured to remember
whether it had been real or not. But seeing that my pondering
could explain nothing, I would by no means look again upon the
garments, much less did I dare to touch them. So I changed
my chamber, and, out of sheer ignorance, left those garments


ZOEDB GS QUSE AN OE RESTORE. 61


lying there a long time. For I feared that if I touched them or
turned them over, something remarkable would happen to me.
Now the poisonous odour of the garments which I had inhaled
in my sleep was so sickening that my eyes could not see the
time of grace, or my heart understand the great wisdom of
Solomon.

After the garments had lain five years in the chamber, I at
length determined to throw them into the fire, and change my
dwelling. In the night after I had formed this resolution, that
ancient woman appeared to me in a dream,and rebuked with
the following angry words: '" Most ungrateful of mortals, the
garments of my daughter, beneath which lie concealed those
priceless jewels, have now been committed to thee for more than
five years. Yet in all that time thou hast not cleansed or puri-
fied them, and now thou thinkest to burn them ; is it not enough
that thou art the cause of my daughters death?" Then I
answered, wrathfullyi: * How am I to understand thy words?
Wouldst thou make me out to be a robber, though during those
five years I have never seen thy daughter, or heard a syllable
about her? How can I possibly be the cause of her death?"
Here she took me up: * All this is true. Nevertheless thou
hast sinned grievously against God, and on that account hast
not received from me my daughter, or the lye of the Sages
wherewith to cleanse her garments. For since thou wert from
the very first horrified at the sight of my daughter's garments,
the planet Saturn, her grandfather, was wroth, and changed
her into what she was before her birth ^ Moreover, thou
hast offended him by despising her, and being the cause of
her death, corruption, and final destruction. She it is of whom
Senior thus speaks: *Woe, woe unto me! Bring me a naked
woman, while my body was yet invisible, and I had not
yet become a mother, till I should be born a second time;
then I brought forth all the strength of the vegetable
roots, and carried off the victory in my essence'" These
words sounded strange and mysterious to me, yet I
manfully repressed my wrath, and solemnly protested that I
knew nothing of her daughter's decease, and certainly had not
been the cause of her death, corruption, and destruction ; thatI
had kept her garments five years in my chamber, but had been


62 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


prevented by my great blindness from understanding their use ;
and that I felt innocent before God and men. | My excuse satis-
fied the ancient woman ; she looked kindly at me, and said : *I
see that thy conscience is pure from guilt, and for thy innocence
thou shalt receive a great reward. Therefore, I will reveal to thce
this matter faithfully, but secretly. My daughter, for the great
love she bare thee, has left thee under her garments a grey box
wrapped in a thick, black, mouldy cloth." With this she gave me a
glass bottle full of lye, and continued : * Purge that box well of
the dirt and bad smell with which the garments have infected it,
and then thou shalt want no key, but the box will open of its
own accord, and in it thou shalt find two things, viz, a white
silver casket full of polished diamonds, and a rich robe inter-
tissued with precious solar jasper stones. ^ All these treasures
belonged to my dear daughter, and she left them all to thee before
she was transtormed and perished. If thou wilt skilfully trans-
pose this treasure, carefully purify it, and silently and patiently
place it in some warm, moist, vaporous, and transparent chamber,
and guard it there from cold, wind, hail, swift lightning, and all
outward injury, till the. season of the wheat harvest, thou shalt
perceive and behold the great glory and beauty of thine heritage."

When she had thus spoken, I awoke, and devoutly prayed
that God might grant me wisdom to find the box which had been
described to me in my dream. Then I instituted a careful search
among the garments, and was soon rewarded with success ; but
the cloth in which the box was wrapped was so hard and so firmly
glued to it that I could not tear it off ; moreover, I could not
cleanse it with lye, or cut it with iron, steel, or any other
metal So I did not know what in all the world I should do, and
began to think that it was a poisoned cloth, and to call to mind
the saying of the Prophet: * Though thou wash thee with nitre
and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me,
saith the Lord God."

So another year passed away, and stillall my patient toil and
thought had met with no success. Atlast, to drive away melan-
choly, I took a walk in a certain garden ; and, after some time, I
sat down upon a stone and fell into a deep sleep. I slept, but my
heart waked. Then the ancient woman appeared to me once
more, and said: * Have you entered upon the heritage of my


—-————


Tel -—-— —


Dire M e orum UEM AM


THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED. 63


daughter?" I sorrowfully replied, *I did indeed find the box,
but I cannot remove the cloth, nor will the lye that thou gavest
me avail to soften it" ^ Then she laughed at my simplicity, and
said: '* Dost thou try to eat oysters or crabs in their shells?
Must they not first be prepared by the ancient cook of the planets?
I told thee to purify the grey box with the lye I gave thee, but
not the cloth which is wrapped round it. The latter thou
shouldest first have burned with thefire of the Sages." For this
purpose she gave me some glowing coals, wrapped in a silk cloth,
from which I was to obtain the subtle fire of the Sages, and told
me that if with this fire ! burned away the cloth I should get at
the box. When she had ended, straightway there arose a north
and south wind, and blew through the garden. "Then I awoke
again, shook off sleep, and beheld the glowing coals lying at my
feet. I took them up with a grateful heart, and began to work
day and night, remembering the saying of the Sages : * Fire and
Azoth are sufficient for thee " ; and the passage in Esdras (Bk. iv.) :
* And he gave me a goblet filled with fire, and when I had drunk
it wisdom grew in me ; and God granted me understanding, and
my spirit was preserved, and my mouth opened, but nothing else
was added." After forty nights I had finished 204 books, of
which seventy were worthy to be read by the most wise, and
were written upon box tablets. I thus continued in silence and
hope, as that ancient woman had bidden me do, until at last,
after a long time, my understanding, in fulfilment of Solomon's
prophecy, became silver, and my memory gold.

When, in obedience to the directions of the ancient lady,
I had skilfully placed the treasure of her daughter in a chamber
by itself, and closed it up, I gazed upon those brilliant lunar
diamonds, and solar rubies, and understood the meaning of
Solomon when he says: * My Beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the most fine gold,
his locks are bushy, and black as a raven ; his eyes are as the
eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly
set; his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers ; his lips
like roses dropping fragrant myrrh ; his hands are as gold rings
set with the beryl; his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with
sapphires; his legs are as pillars of marble set upon sockets of
fine gold ; his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the


64 JHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


cedars ; his mouth is most sweet; yea, he is altogether lovely.
This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem. Hold him, and suffer him not to go, till I have
brought him into my mothers house, into my mother's
chamber."

'To these words of Solomon I could find no answer, and had
already determined to take the treasure out of the chamber that
I might at length enjoy quietness and peace, when I happened
upon this other passage: *I charge you, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, by the roes and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir
not up nor awake my love till he please. She is a garden
enclosed ; a spring shut up; a fountain sealed ; a vineyard at
Baal-hamon ; a vineyard at Engedi ; an orchard ; a spice garden ;
a hill of myrrh; a mountain of incense; a bed; a crown; a
palm tree ; a rose of Sharon ; a sapphire ; a beryl stone ; a wall ;
a tower, and battlement ; a garden of herbs; a fountain in a
garden; a spring of living waters; a daughter of princes, and
the pleasant love of Solomon ; she dearly loves her mother, and
is her mother's chosen one; her head is full of dew, and her
locks wet with the drops of night."

'These words enlightened me, and shewed unto me the aim of
the wise: wherefore I patiently left the treasure in the chamber,
and waited till through God's mercy all should have been happily
perfected by the operation of Nature, and the labour of my
hands.

Shortly afterwards, on the day of the new moon, an eclipse
of the sun was seen, which was terrible to behold, for it began
with a misty greenness, somewhat shot over with other colours,
but it was followed by entire blackness; all heaven and earth
were shrouded in thick darkness, and men were full of fear, but
I rejoiced. For I remembered God's great mercy, and the
Mystery of Regeneration, as Christ Himself told us that
unless a grain of wheat was cast into the earth, and de-
composed, it could bring forth no fruit | Now it happened
that the eclipse was covered by clouds, and the sun began to
shine, but as yet three-fourths of it were darkened. And,
behold, an arm held out from the clouds a letter sealed at the
four corners, on which was written : * I am black, but comely, O
daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the


———rn


——— PER


Jc -———————


" " :
pes. MVP v aep e b,


THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED. 65


curtains of Solomon. Look not upon me, because I am black,
and burnt by the sun." Then there was seen a rainbow, and I
remembered the Covenant of the Most High, and the faithful-
ness of my Teacher, and, behold, by the help of the planets and
the fixed stars, the sun at last overcame the eclipse, and shone
out once more in perfect brightness upon the mountains and
valleys. Then allfear and terror were at an end, and all that
had seen that day rejoiced in the Lord, and said: * Lo, the
winter is past, the rain is overand gone; the flowers appear
on the earth ; the time of the singing of birds is come, and the
voice of the turtle is heard in our land; the fig tree putteth
forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grapes give
a good smell Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the
vines, that we may gather the ripe grapes and drink wine, and
be satisfied in due season with milk and the honeycomb." At
the approach of evening the sky changed its aspect, and the
Seven Stars rose with a lurid light, till, having completed their
natural course, they paled and vanished before the Redness of
the Sun. And, behold, the wise that dwelt upon earth awoke
from their sleep, and gazed up to heaven, and said : ** Who is it
that bursts forth like the Dawn, beautiful like the Moon, mighty
like the Sun, in whom there appears no spot? his fervour is
kindled, and the flame ofthe Lord: Many waters cannot quench
love, neither can the floods drown it. "Therefore, we will not
forsake her ; she is our sister, though she be small, and have no
breasts. We will take her back to the house of her mother, into
the transparent palace where she was before, that by sucking the
breasts of her mother, she may become great like the tower of
David, strengthened with battlements, on which hang a thousand
shields and all the weapons of the strong. When she went
forth the daughters called her blessed, the Queen and the
concubines praised her." But I knelt down, and returned thanks
to God, and glorified His Holy Name.


EPILOGUE.


And now, my beloved Sons of Wisdom and the Doctrine,
herein is the great Mystery of the Sages, in all the power and
glory thereof, and the Revelation of the Spirit, concerning

E


66 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Whom the prince and monarch Theophrastus has these words, in
his Apocalypse of Hermes : * He is the only God, and holds the
whole world together; through Him alone can we be true, and
truly vanquish the Elements, and obtain the Quintessence. No
eye has seen, no ear has heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of any man to conceive that which is in the mind of this
Spirit of Truth. In Him alone is truth, and through Him alone
Adam and the other patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were
enabled to secure constant health, and a long life, and to provide
for themselves great wealth. Through this Spirit the Seven Sages
invented the Arts, and gained riches. ^ With His aid Noah
built the Ark, Solomon the Temple, and Moses the Tabernacle ;
through Him vessels of pure gold were borne into the Temple;
through Him Solomon gained his excellent knowledge, and per-
formed mighty deeds. He enabled Ezra to restore the Law ;
Miriam, sister of Moses, to exercise liberality ; and the Prophets
of the Old Covenant to predict the future. He is the Sanctifica-
tion and Healing of all things, the highest knowledge, the
ultimate Mystery of Nature, that is to say, the Spirit of the
Lord, Who fills the whole universe, and Who brooded over the
waters in the beginning—without Whose secret teaching
the world cannot be understood, and Whom the whole
world desires on account of His power, while the Saints
have sought and longed ardently to see Him from the
beginning of the world. For He dwells in the seven
Planets, raises the clouds, dispels the mist, gives light to all
things, changes everything into gold and silver, imparts all
health, abundance, and treasure, heals the leper, cures dropsy
and gout, prolongs life, comforts the sorrowful, restores health to
the sick, removes all defects, and, in short, is the Mystery of all
mysteries, the Arcanum of all arcana, the true healing and
Medicine of all things. He gives the desired knowledge, and is
the best of all sublunar things, by which Nature is strengthened,
and the heart with all the members renewed, the flower of youth
kept fresh, old age driven away, diseases destroyed, and the
whole earth renewed. His Nature is unsearchable, His power
infinite, His excellence and glory unapproachable.

* Moreover, this Spirit presides over all heavenly things,
gives health, fortune, joy, peace, love, destroys every evil after


-5


THE GOLDEN AGE RESTORED. 67


its kind, puts an. end to poverty and misery, renders men
incapable of doing, saying, or thinking any evil, and gives to the
godly temporal felicity, but to the wicked who abuse it, eternal
punishment."

And thus, in the Name of the Holy Trinity, we will, in
these few words, conclude our exposition of the Great Mystery of
the Most Precious Philosophical Stone, and of the Arcanum of
the Sages. To the Most High and Almighty God, the Creator
of this Art, Whom it hath pleased to reveal to me, wretched, sin-
ful man (in answer to my prayer), this most precious knowledge,
be eternal praise, glory, honour, and thanksgiving ; and to Him
be addressed a most humble and fervent prayer that He may so
direct my heart and mind, that I may not speak of this Mystery,
or make it known to the wicked, lest I be found unmindful of my
Vow, a Breaker of the Heavenly Seal, a perjured Brother of the
Golden Cross, and guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.
From this may God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, the Blessed and Indivisible Trinity, in mercy
PRESERVE ME. Amen, Amen, Amen.


E2


TS


a


THE -SOPEHTC M VDROLLTED:


OR,


WATER STONE OP THEB WISE;


THAT IS, A CHYMICAL WORE, IN WHICH THE WAY IS SHEWN,
THE MATTER NAMED, AND THE PROCESS DESCRIBED ;
NAMELY, THE METHOD OF OBTAINING THE
UNIVERSAL TINCTURE.


NOW PUBLISHED FOR THE FIRST TIME.


PRINTED AT THE PUBLIC COST FOR THE ADVANTAGE OF THE PUBLIC.


A BRIEF EXPOSITION
OF THE
WONDERFUL WATER STONE OF THE WISE,


COMMONLY CALLED


TDERE) PLHTIPEOSOPHEBERS STONB:


ROM the beginning of the world, there have always
been God-enlighted men and experienced philosophers
and wise Gentiles who diligently studied the nature
and properties of the lower Creation. They laboriously

endeavoured and fervently longed to discover whether Nature
contained anything that would preserve our earthly body from
decay and death, and maintain it in perpetual health and vigour.
For by the light of Nature, and Divine revelation, they intuitively
perceived that the Almighty, in His love to men, must have con-
cealed in the world some wonderful arcanum by which every
imperfect, diseased, and defective thing in the whole world might
be renewed, and restored to its former vigour.

By the most diligent and careful search they gradually
found out that there was nothing in this world that could procure
for our earthly and corruptible body immunity from 4eazZ, since
death was laid upon the Protoplasts, Adam and Eve, and their
posterity, as a perpetual penalty. But they did discover oze
thing which, being itself incorruptible, has been ordained of God
for the good of man, to remove disease, to cure all imperfection,
to purge old age, and to prolong our brief life—a boon actually
enjoyed by the Patriarchs.

This wonderful remedy was industriously sought by the
wise and understanding, until they discovered it, and its precious
virtue. Thus, the Patriarchs used it to restore their bodily


72 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


vigour, and prolong their lives; and it was no doubt revealed by
God to Adam, our thrice great parent, who bequeathed the secret
to all the Patriarchs who were his descendants, who thereby pro-
cured for themselves length of days and boundless wealth.
When the aforesaid Gentiles had received this knowledge, they
justly regarded it as a most precious gift of God, and a most
holy Art, and forasmuch as they perceived that, by God's
providence, it had been revealed only to a few, and concealed
from the majority of mankind, they always made it a point of
conscience and honour to keep it secret.

But that the secret might not be lost, but rather continued
and preserved to posterity, they expounded it most faithfully,
both in their writings and in oral teaching to their faithful
disciples, for the benefit of posterity ; nevertheless, they so
clothed and concealed the truth in allegorical language that
even now only very few are able to understand their instruction
and turn it to practical account. For this practice they had a
very good reason; they wished to force those who seek this
wisdom to feel their dependence on God (in Whose hand are all
things) to obtain it through instant prayer, and, when it has
been revealed to them, to give all the glory to Him. Moreover,
they did not wish the pearls to be cast before swine. For they
knew that if it were made known to the wicked world, men
would greedily desire nothing but this one thing, neglect all
labour, and give themselves up to a dissolute and degraded life.

But although the said philosophers have treated this subject
with so great a variety of method, and used many peculiar and
singular expressions, curious parables, and strange and fanciful
words, yet they all agree in pointing out the same goal, and one
and the same Matter as essential to the right conduct of the Art.
Nevertheless, many students of the Art have entirely missed
their meaning, and the secret Matter of which they speak. For
at the present day there are (as there have always been) a large
number not only of low charlatans, but of grave and learned men,
who have sought this knowledge with unwearied industry, and
yet have not been able to attain to it. Nay, some, angling with
a golden hook, have utterly ruined themselves, and have been
compelled to abandon their search in despair. "Therefore, lest
anyone should doubt the existence of this secret Art, or, after the


(ipe


VAZURINSQUOEDI C TEIPVAQUE ITE 71


manner of this wicked world, look upon it as a mere figment, I
will enumerate some of the true Sages (besides those named in
Holy Scripture) who really knew this Art, in the natural order
of their succession. They are Hermes Trismegistus, Pytha-
goras, Alexander the Great, Plato, Theophrastus, Avicenna,
Galen, Hippocrates, Lucian, Longanus, Rasis, Archelaus,
Rupescissa, the Author of the (Great Rosary, Mary the
Prophetess, Dionysius, Zachaire, Haly, Morienus, Calid, Con-
stantius, Serapion, Albertus Magnus, Estrod, Arnold de Villa
Nova, Geber, Raymond Lully, Roger Bacon, Alan, Thomas
Aquinas, Marcellus Palingenius; and, among moderns, Bernard
of Trevisa, Frater Basil Valentinus, Phillip Theophrastus (z.e.,
Paracelsus), and many others. Nor is there any doubt that,
among our own contemporaries, there might be found some, who,
through the grace of God, daily enjoy this arcanum, though they
keep it a close secret from the world. But, side by side with
these great Sages who have written truly and uprightly con-
cerning this Magistery, there are found many charlatans and
imposters who falsely pretend to have a knowledge of this Art,
and, by tricking out their lies in the phraseology of the Sages,
throw dust into men's eyes, make their mouths water, and at
length fail to make good their promises. Their dupes should
well ponder the following warning: * Trust not him who
distills gold out of your money-box. If you are wise you will
be on your guard against such. If you would not suffer
both loss and mockery, beware of these dishonest charlatans.
Follow those who are simple, straightforward, and modest. He
who has the good, enjoys it in silence" But where are you to
find such? *Seek the good; you may know them by their
excelling the rest in weight, matter, and performance" | Now,
since there are many students of this Art who would fain learn its
secret by a true and straight path, and are yet so bewildered
by these impostors and charlatans, by their empty talk and their
high pretensions, that they do not know which way to turn:
therefore I have determined briefly to expound the true prin-
ciples of this Art. For though I account myself unworthy to
speak of so great a Mystery, yet I may say, without any self-
glorification, that, through the grace of God, I have made greater
progress in this Magistery than most; and I consider it as my


74 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


duty not to hide the talent which my Lord and Master, the
great and good God, has committed to my unworthy keeping.
For this reason I am willing to show the right way, by which
they may attain a true knowledge of this subject, to all lovers
of chemistry, and have put forth this Brief Epitome and Declar-
ation of the Whole Art (so far as it may be committed to
writing), in the hope that through my means, God may perchance
open the eyes of some, and lead them back from their precon-
ceived notions to the right path, and so manifest to them His
mighty works. For the greater convenience of the reader I
will divide the work into four parts.

In the First part I will set forth the rudiments of the Art,
and the best mode of preparing oneself for its study.

In the Second I will shew and describe the quality and
properties of the substance required, as also the method of its
preparation and manipulation.

In the Third something will be said concerning the great
utility of the Art, and its unspeakable efficacy and virtue.

In the Fourth will follow a Spiritual Allegory, in which this
whole Magistery is set forth, being the true form of the
Heavenly, Everlasting, and Blessed Corner Stone of the Most
High. It will also contain a true, brief, and simple, practical
manual of the method of proceeding, for I am no friend of many
specious words.


ID/ASESSTIE


IDASMASITSMEONDE


* Who is he that feavs the Lord ?. He will zustiruct him in
the right path."


In the first place, let every devout and God-fearing
chemist and student of this Art consider that this arcanum
should be regarded, not only as a truly great, but as a most
holy Art (seeing that it typifies and shadows out the highest
heavenly good) Therefore, if any man desire to reach this
great and unspeakable Mystery, he must remember that it is
obtained not by the might of man, but by the grace of God, and


—O—"


THE SOPHIC HYDROLITH. 75


that not our will or desire, but only the mercy of the Most High,
can bestow it upon us. For this reason you must first of all
cleanse your heart,lift it to Him alone, and ask of Him this gift
in true, earnest, and undoubting prayer. He alone can give and
bestow it.

If the omnipotent God, who is the unerring searcher of all
hearts, should find in you uprightness, faithfulness, sincerity, and
a desire to know this Art, not for any selfish end, but for His true
honour and glory, He will doubtless hear your prayer (according
to his promise), and so lead you by His Holy Spirit that you
will begin to understand this art, and feel that this knowledge
would never have entered your heart if the most gracious Lord
had not answered your petition, and revealed to you the under-
standing even of the most elementary principles.

Then fall upon thy knees, and with a humble and con-
trite heart render to Him the praise, honour, and glory due
for the hearing of thy prayer, and ask Him again and again
to continue to thee His grace, and to grant that, after attaining
to ful and perfect knowledge of this profound Mystery,
thou mayest be enabled to use it to the glory and honour
of His most Holy Name, and for the good of thy suffering
fellow men.

. Moreover, as you love your soul, beware of revealing the
Mystery to any unworthy or wicked man, even in the smallest
particular, or by making him in any sense a partaker thereof.
If you in any way abuse the gift of God, or use it for your own
glorification, you will most certainly be called to account by the
Almighty Giver, and you will think that it would have been
better for you if you had never known it.

When you have thus, as it were, devoted yourself to God
(who is not mocked), and learned to appreciate justly the aim
and scope of this Art, you should, in the first place, strive to realise
how Nature, having been set in order by God the Triune, now
works invisibly day by day, and moves and dwells in the will of
God alone. For no one should set about the study ofthis Art with-
out a just appreciation of natural processes. Now Nature may
truly be described as being oze, true, simple, and perfect in her own
essence, and as being animated by an invisible spirit. If there-
lore you would know her, you, too, should be true, single-hearted,


76 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


patient, constant, pious, forbearing, and, in short, a new and
regenerate man.

If you know yourself to be so constituted and your nature
adapted to Nature, you will have an intuitive insight into her
working, such as it would otherwise be impossible to obtain.

For the study of this Art is such a perfect guide to excel-
lence that a good knowledge of its principles will (as it were,
against your will) hurry you on to an understanding of all the
wonderful things of God, and teach you to rate all temporal and
worldly things at their true value. But let not him who desires
this knowledge for the purpose of procuring wealth and pleasure
think that he will ever attain to it. "Therefore, let your
mind and thoughts be turned away from all things earthly, and,
as it were, created anew, and consecrated to God alone. For
you should observe that these three, body, soul, and spirit, must
work together in harmony if you are to bring your study of this
Art to a prosperous issue, for unless the mind and heart of a
man be governed by the same law which develops the whole
work, such an one must indubitably err in the Art.

When you are in inward harmony with God's world, out-
ward conformity will not be wanting. Yet our artist can do
nothing but sow, plant, and water: God must give the increase.
Therefore, if any one be the enemy of God, all Nature declares
war against him ; but to one who loves God, heaven and earth
and all the elements must lend their assistance. If you bear
these things in mind, and know the true First Matter (of which
we shall speak later on) you may at once set about the practical
part of this study, calling on God for grace, direction, and guid-
ance, so that your work may be carried successfully through all
its stages.


EG GIEESUASINXSE


* He that abides im the fear of. the Lord, and cleaves to His
Word, and «waits faithfully on. His office, will transform tin and
copper anto silver and gold, and will do great things with the. Áelp
of God: yea, with the grace of Jehovah, he will have power to
2uake gold out of. common vefuse."


nm-—-—


THE SOPHIC HYDROLITH. 77


IP/ASRSDOSIUS
ISAIAH XXVIII.


* Therefore, thus. saith the Lord : Behold I lay in Zion for a
foundation a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious corner Stone, a
sure foundation. .He that has st shall not be confounded."


The numerous writers on our most noble Art have never
wearied of singing its praises, and inventing for it new and
glorious names. ts most precious object they have called the
PHILOSOPHER'S STONE, or the most ancient, secret,
natural, incomprehensible, heavenly, blessed, beatified, and
triune universal Stone of the Sages. Their reason for naming
it a stone, or likening it to a stone, was this: First because its
original Matter is really a kind of stone, which, being hard and
solid like a stone, may be pounded, reduced to powder, and
resolved into its three elements (which Nature herself has joined
together), and then again may be re-combined into a solid stone
of the fusibility of wax by the skilled hand of the artist adjusting
the law of Nature.

The importance of starting with an exact knowledge of
the first or otherwise the second Matter of the Philosophical Stone
has been largely dwelt upon by all writers on this subject.
This Matter is found in one thing, out of which alone
our Stone is prepared (although it is called by a thousand
names), without any foreign admixture ; and its quality,
appearance, and properties have been set forth in the
following manner. It is composed of three things, yet it is only
one. Likewise, having been created and made of one, two, three,
four, and five, it is everywhere found in one and two. "They also
call it the universal Magnesia, or the seed of the world, from
which all natural objects take their origin. Its properties are of
a singular kind ; for, in addition to its marvellous nature and
form, it is neither hot and dry like fire, nor cold and wet like
water, nor cold and dry like earth, but a perfect preparation of
all the elements. Its body is incorruptible, and is not destroyed by
any of the four elements, but its properties far exceed
those of the four elements, and the four qualities, like heaven and
the Quintessence. With respect to its outward appearance,


78 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


figure, form, and shape, they call it a stone, and not a stone ;
they liken it to gum and white water, and to the water of the
Ocean. It is named the water of life, the purest and most
blessed water, yet not the water of the clouds, or of any common
spring, but a thick, permanent, salt, and (in a certain sense) dry
water, which wets not the hand, a slimy water which springs
out of the fatness of the earth. Likewise, it is a double mercury
and Azoth, which, being supported by the vapouror exudation of
the greater and lesser heavenly and the earthly globe, cannot be
consumed by fire. For itself is the universal and sparkling flame
of the light of Nature, which has the heavenly Spirit in itself,
with which it was animated at first by God, Who pervades all
things, and is called by Avicenna, the Soul of the world. For as
the soul lives and moves in all the members of the body,
so that spirit lives and moves in all elementary creatures, and is
the indissoluble bond of body and soul, the purest and most
noble essence in which lie hid all mysteries in their inexhaustible
fulness of marvellous virtue and efficacy. Moreover, they
ascribe to it infinite Divine power and virtue when they say
thatit is the Spirit of the Lord who fills the Universe, and in
the beginning moved upon the face of the waters. "They also
call it the spirit of truth that is hid in the world, and cannot be
understood without the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, or the
teaching of those who know it. It is found fezezza//y every-
where, and in everything, but in all its perfection and fulness
only in oze thing. In short, it is a Spiritual Essence which is
neither celestial nor infernal, but an aérial, pure, and precious
body, in the middle between the highest and lowest, the choicest
and noblest thing under heaven. But by the ignorant and the
beginner it is thought to be the vilest and meanest of things. It
is sought by many Sages, and found by few; suspected by
those that are far away, and received by those that are near ;
seen by ali, but known by few, as you may see from the following
lines :

* Into three the great good is divided, yet it is oze, and
highly esteemed by the world. Men have it before their eyes,
handle it with.their hands, yet know it not, though they con-
stantly tread it under their feet. It is the greatest wealth, and he
who knows the Art may rival the richest."


|
|


VENE S QUOTIQUEISVID A (QUPPIEI: 79


AN ENIGMA OF THE SAGES,


In which the underlying substance of the Art, called the
Phoenix of the Sages, is found to be thrice threefold.

** [f [ tell you three parts of a thing you have no cause to
complain. Seek one of three, and of the three one will be there :
for where there is body and soul, there is also Spirit, and there
shine salt, sulphur, and mercury. Trust my word, seek the grass
that is trefoil. "Thou knowest the name, and art wise and cun-
ing if thou findest it."


ANOTHER ENIGMA.
(Much easier.)


* There is one thing in this world which is found occasionally.
It is bluish-grey and green, and, wonderful to say, there is in this
thing a red and white colour. It flowslike water, yet it makes
not wet ; itis of great weight, and of small. I might give it a
thousand names, yet the thousand know it not. It is mean to
look upon, yet to the Sage it is precious. He who solves it with
the second and condenses it with the third, he has our glorious
subject."


YET ANOTHER ENIGMA,.


Everthing contributes to the formation of this Stone. It is
conceived below the earth, born in the earth, quickened in heaven,
dies in time, obtains eternal glory.


Now when you have the substance indicated (which is in
part heavenly, in part earthly, and in its natural state a mere
confused chaos without certain name or colour), and know it well
(for this knowledge the Sages have always accounted the
principal part of this work), then you must give your whole mind
to manipulating it in the proper manner. But before doing any-
thing to it with his hands, the student should remember not to
begin the preparation of this great and inscrutable arcanum
before he knows well the spirit that lurks in it according to its
essential qualities and properties. ^ With this spirit," says a
certain philosopher, * you should not meddle until you first have a
full and exact knowledge of it. For God is marvellous in His
works, and He is not mocked. . I could give some instances of


80 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


men who set about this matter with great levity and were heavily
punished by meeting (some of them) with fatal accidents in their
laboratories, For this work is no light thing, as many suppose,
perhaps, because the Sages have called it child's play. Those to
whom God has revealed His secrets may indeed find the experi-
ment simple and easy. But do thou carefully beware of expos-
ing thyself to great danger by unseasonable carelessness. Rather
begin thy work with reverent fear and awe and with earnest
prayer, and then thou wilt be in little danger."

Now when you have exercised yourself with exceeding
diligence in the oratory, the matter being ready to your hand, go
into the laboratory, take the substance indicated, and set to work
in the following manner.

Above all things you mustlet it be your first object to solve
this substance (or first Entity, which the Sages have also called
the highest natural good). Then it must be purged of its watery
and earthy nature (for at first it appears an earthy, heavy, thick,
slimy, and misty body), and all that is thick, nebulous, opaque,
and dark in it must be removed, that thus, by a final sublima-
tion, the heart and inner soul contained in it may be separated
and reduced to a precious essence.

All this can be accomplished with our Pontic and Catholic
water, which in its refluent course irrigates and fertilizes the
whole earth, and is sweet, beautiful, clear, limpid, and brighter
than gold, silver, carbuncles, or diamonds. "This blessed water
is enclosed and contained in our Matter.

Then the extracted Heart, Soul, and Spirit must once more
be distilled and condensed into oze by their own proper salt
(which in the interior of the substance is first of a. blood-red
colour, but then becomes of a bright, clear, and transparent
white, and is called by the Sages the Salt of Wisdom). You have
thus first, by what is called. the anterior process, separated the
pure from the impure, and first rendered the visible invisible,
then, again, the invisible visible or palpable (but yet no longer so
gross and shapeless as it wasat first), and it is now a bright body
with a pleasant, penetrating smell, and withal so subtle and
ethereal that if it were not fixed it would evaporate and vanish
away. Forthis reason the Sages call it mercurial water, or water
of the sun, or mercury of the sun, or mercury of the wise. But


IDERE SOPEIC. ETYDROJIATTET. 81


so long asit remains in the aforesaid form it would, if used as a
medicine, produce no good effect, but rather act as a poison. If,
therefore, you wish to enjoy its glorious virtue, and manifold
power, you must subject it to some further chemical processes.

For this purpose you must diligently observe the working
of Nature (extending over a considerable period of time), and
strictly follow her guidance. When you have this knowledge,
you should take two parts of the aforesaid prepared aqueous
matter, and again three different parts. "The first two parts you
should keep ; but to the three parts add another matter, viz., the
most precious and divinely endowed Body of Gold, which is
most intimately akin to the First Matter. Of this add one
twelfth for the first fermentation; for both, the spiritual and
heavenly prepared substance, and this earthly Body of Gold,
must be joined together, and coagulated into oze body.

But it should be noted that common gold is useless for this
purpose, being unsuitable and dead. For though it has been
declared by God the Omnipotent to be the most precious and
beautiful of metals, yet so long as it lay hid in the mine its
perfect growth and development was hindered. Daily use,
moreover, blunts its indwelling powers, namely, sulphur, or its
soul, and it is continually becoming mingled and defiled with
other things that are foreign to its nature. Hence it becomes
daily more and more unfit to be the subject of art. You must,
therefore, seek to obtain gold which has a pure, living spirit, and
of which the sulphur is not yet weakened and sophisticated, but
is pure and clear (by passing through antimony, or by the
heaven and sphere of Saturn, and being purged of all its defile-
ment) : otherwise the first substance, being spiritual and ethereal,
will not combine with it. For this Magistery deals only with
pure bodies, and suffers no unclean thing near, on, or around it.

Now when these unequal parts of the water and gold
(differing not only in quality, but also in quantity, for the first is,
after its preparation, ethereal, thin, subtle, and soft, while the
other is very heavy, firm and hard) have been combined in a
solutory alembic, and reduced to a dry liquid or amalgam, they
should be left six or seven days exposed to gentle heat of at
least a tepid character. Then take one part of the three parts of
water, and pour it into a round, oval glass phial, similar to an

F


82 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


egg in shape; put the tempered liquid in the midst thereof, and
leave it once more for six or seven days ; the Body of the Sun
will then be gradually dissolved by the water. Thereupon both
will begin to combine, and one will mingle with the other as
gently and insensibly as ice with warm water. "This union the
Sages have shadowed out in various ways, and likened it, for
instance, to the wedlock of a bride and bridegroom (as in the
Song of Solomon). When this is done, add the third part (which
you have kept) to the rest, but not all at once, or in one day, but
in seven different instalments : otherwise the Body would become
too liquid, and entirely corrupted by too much moisture.

For as seed, when cast into the ground, is destroyed and
rendered useless by an excess of moisture and rain, so our work
cannot prosper unless the water is judiciously administered. All
this being done, let the phial be carefully closed and sealed, to
prevent the compound from evaporating or losing its odour ; and
place it in the furnace, there exposing it to a gentle, continuous,
airy, vaporous, and well-tempered heat, resembling the degree
of warmth with which the hen hatches her eggs.

[NoTE.—The Sages have said much about vaporous fire,
which they have called the fire of wisdom, which is not elemen-
tary or material, but (according to them) essential and preter-
natural. They also call it the Divine fire, Ze, the water of
mercury, roused into action by common fire.]] Digest and heat
it well, yet take care that none of it is sublimed, or, in the
parabolic language of the Sages, that the wife does not rule the
husband, and that the husband does not abuse his authority over
the wife, &c.,—if you do this, the whole will proceed normally,
without any interference on your part (except that, of course,
you must keep up the fire). . At first the earthly Body of the Sun
is totally solved, and decomposed, and robbed of all strength
(the Body, which was first of a muddy impurity, changing to a
coal-black colour, called by the Sages the Raven's Head, within
the space of forty days), and is thus despoiled of its Soul. The
Soul is borne upward, and the Body, being severed from the
Soul,lies for some time, as if dead, at the bottom of the still,
like ashes. But if the fire is increased, and well tempered, the
Soul gradually descends again in drops, and saturates and
moistens its Body, and so prevents it from being completely


THE SOPHIC HYDROLITH. 83


burned and consumed. Then, again, it ascends and descends, the
process being repeated seven times. "The temperature you must
keep at the same point from beginning to end. Haste slowly—
for it is of the greatest importance that the influence of the fire
should be brought to bear gently and gradually. In the mean-
time you will observe various chemical changes (e, of colour)
in the distilling vessel, to which you must pay careful attention.
For if they appear in due order, it is a sign that your undertaking
will be brought to a prosperous issue.

First there appear granular bodies like fishes' eyes, then a
circle around the substance, which is first reddish, then turns
white, then green and yellow like a peacock's tail, then a dazzling
white, and finally a deep red—until at last, under the rarefying
influence of the fire, the Soul and Spirit are combined with their
Body, that lies at the bottom, into a fixed and indissoluble
Essence, which union and conjunction cannot be witnessed
without unspeakable admiration and awe. "Then you will behold
the revivified, quickened, perfected, and glorified Body, which is
of a most beautiful purple colour (like cochineal), and its tincture
has virtue to change, tinge, and cure every imperfect body, as
we shall hereafter show more in detail. When thus, by the grace
and help of God, you have happily attained the goal of your
labours, and found the Phoenix of the Sages, you should once more
return thanks to Him with your whole heart,and use His un-
speakable gift solely for His glory, and for the advantage of your
suffering brethren. Thus I have most faithfully explained to
you the whole process by which this most noble Art; and highest
achievement, to wit, the Egg of the Sages, or Philosopher's
Stone, may be begun and successfully completed.

If, however, during the operation, any accidental mishap
should occur, it must be seen to in time, or else the chemical
process will never be brought to perfection. If you (1) observe
that before the compound is solved and turns black, anything is
sublimed, or evaporated, or something resembling a red oil floats
on the surface of the substance (which is a bad sign); or (2) if
before or after it has turned white, it turns red too suddenly ; or
(3) if, towards the end, it does not properly coagulate ; or (4) if
the substance is so strongly affected by the heat that, being
taken out, it does not instantly zze/7 on red Aot zron like cvax, but

F2


84 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


tinges and colours the iron, and afterwards will not remain fixed
in the fire—you may regard all these indications as symptons
of a false composition and temperature, or of some kind or other
of carelessness.

If these defects are not immediately seen to, they will
speedily become incorrigible ^A cunning adept should be ac-
quainted with the various devices by which they may be
remedied; and I will recount them here for the sake of the
beginner.

If one or more of the above defects are observed, the whole
compound must again be taken out of the phial, and once more
solved in the aforesaid water of mercury (also called virgin's milk,
or the milk,blood, and sweat ofthe First Matter,or the never-failing
fountain, or the water of life, which nevertheless contains the
most malignant poison); with this water it must once more be
moistened and saturated, and then subjected to the action of the
fire, until there is no longer any sublimation or formation of
gaseous vapours; or till the final coagulation has duly taken
place, as described above. Of its subsequent fermentation and
multiplication, and of its uses, more will be said in the third part.

Of the Zzze required for the whole process, it is impossible
to say anything very definite ; and, indeed, the Sages have put
forward the most conflicting opinions on this point—no doubt
because some have been occupied with it longer than others.
But ifany man will carefully observe the working of Nature,
and be guided by her teaching, and in all things hold a middle
course, he will gain his object sooner than one that trusts too
blindly to his own wisdom.

But I tell thee not to go beyond the middle point of the
letter X either in the former or latter stage of the operation,
but to take one half (V) for the time of the solution and the
other half for the composition. "Then, again, for the final union,
the number XX should be thy guide (unless anything unforeseen
should occur) Be satisfied with that space of time. On the
other hand, do not try to hurry on the consummation, for one
hours mistake may throw thee back a whole month. If thou
strivest unduly to shorten the time thou wilt produce an abortion.
Many persons have, through their ignorance, or self-opinionated
haste, obtained a Nihilixir instead of the hoped for Elixir.


DEBE SQUE EV QU IET. 85


In view of the importance of this magical science, I have
thought it right to lay this before the sons of knowledge, for
their careful consideration.


RIDDLE.


There are seven cities, seven metals, seven days, and the
number seven; seven letters, seven words in order meet, seven
times, and as many places; seven herbs, seven arts, and seven
stones. Divide seven by three, and thou shalt be wise. No one
will then strive to precipitate the half. In brief, all will proceed
favourably in this number."

In the following lines the whole Process is briefly described :—


(L)—THE FIRST STAGE.
* Dissolve your substance, and then let it be decomposed ;
then let it be distilled, and once more condensed."


(IL)— THE SECOND STAGE.

*Combine two things, decompose them, let them become
black. Digest them and change them to white by your skill ; at
last let the compound change to a deep red, let it be
coagulated, and fix it; and you will be a favoured man. f,
afterwards, you cause it to ferment, you will have conducted
the whole work prosperously. Then tinge therewith whatso-
ever you will, and it will multiply to you infinite treasure."


Or, more briefly, thus :—
| * Seek three in one, again seek one in three.  Dissolve, and
condense, and thou shalt be master of the Art."


A Riddle in which also the Process is indicated :—

* A spirit is given for a time to the body, and that spirit is
thelife of a soul. Ifthe spirit draw the soul to itself, they are
both severed from the body. "Then are there three abiding in
the same place, until the precious body is dissolved, and is
decomposed and dies. But after a time the spirit and the soul
are brought back by gentle warmth, and hold once more their
former seat. Then you have the essence; no perfection is
wanting, and the work is glorified by a joyful end."

PROov. XXIII.


"* My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my
ways."


86 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,
D/AXSSTSTTEE


Szrach xliii: '" Who has seen Him that he should tell of
Him? Who can exalt Him according to His greatness? .We
see but the smallest of His. svorks: those that are much greater
are hidden from us. For God has made all, and gives under-
standznge thereof to those that fear. Him."


Concerning the end of this great Art, and the excellence,
virtue, efficacy, and unspeakable utility of the marvellous
Philosophers Stone, much has been written: yet has no
one been able to tell out its thought-surpassing glory or
to adequately set forth its fame. All Sages have regarded
it as the chief felicity that this earth can afford, without
which no one can attain perfection in this world. For
Morienus says: * He who has this Stone has all, and needs no
other help." For it includes all temporal felicity, bodily health,
and solid good fortune.

They have also commended the Stone for that the spirit
and efficacy which lie concealed in it are the spirit of the Quint-
essence of all things beneath the disc of the moon; on this
account they say that it upholds the sky, and moves the sea.
"They also describe it as the most elect, the most subtle, the
purest, and noblest of all the heavenly spirits, to which all the
rest yield obedience as to their King, that bestows on men all
health and prosperity, heals all:diseases, gives to the God-fearing
temporal honour and a long life, but to the wicked, who abuse
it, eternal punishment. It is also extolled by the Sages because
it has never been known to fail of effecting its purpose, but is
found to be in all proved, perfect, and unerring. Therefore
Hermes and Aristotle call it the true, undeceiving, and unfailing
arcanum of all arcana, the Divine Virtue which is hidden from
the foolish. In brief, they have designated it the chief of all
things under heaven, the marvellous conclusion or epilogue
of all philosophic works. Hence some devout Sages have
affirmed that it was Divinely revealed to Adam, and by him
handed down to all the holy Patriarchs.

For by its aid Noah is said to have built the Ark, Moses
the Tabernacle with all its golden vessels, and Solomon the


H


EAEOSQDPINOUTIVID SQUE, 87


Temple, besides accomplishing many other great deeds, fashion-
ing many precious ornaments, and procuring for himself long
life and boundless riches.

Moreover, the Sages own that through its means they
invented the seven liberal arts, and sought and obtained suste-
nance for themselves. God gave them this gift that they might
not be hindered in their researches by poverty, or driven to flatter
the rich for the sake of gain, and thus become contemptible,
and as a jestor by-word in His sight.

The Stone enabled them to discern the great mysteries
of the Divine wonders, and the inexhaustible riches of the
Divine Glory, By it their hearts were roused and stirred up
toa more intimate knowledge of God. For they sought not to
obtain great wealth, or the honour and pleasures of this world,
butall their delight was to search out and contemplate the
marvellous secrets of Nature. They regarded the works of God
with very different eyes, and in a very different manner than
most men in our own times, who, alas, look on them like cows
or calves, and pursue the study of our noble Art for the sake of
wealth, and temporal advantage and pleasure. But they will
never find what they seek. For God gives not this gift to the
wicked, who despise His word, but to the godly who strive to
live honestly and quietly in this wicked and impure world,
and to lend a helping hand to the needy brethern; or, in the
words of the poet :—

* God gives this Art to the sincere and good, nor can the
world purchase it with all its gold. The vulgar know nothing
of this Mystery, for if any man be impious, he seeks the Stone
in vain. He who holds it in silence dwells where he would, and
fears neither accidents, nor thieves, nor any evil. For this reason
this sacred gift is granted to few: it is in the hands of God, and
He gives it to whomsoever He will."

Much has been said concerning the operation, virtue, and
utility of this Art in a variety of writings which have heretofore
seen the light, as, for example, unto what extent the said Stone,
prepared and made more than perfect, becomes a medicine
which is above every medicine. It has been denominated the
universal panacea, to which not only all diseases yield (as, for
instance, leprosy and gout) but by the use of which old men


88 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


may become young again, recover their lost faculties, and their
former strength, and by which those who are already half dead
may be revivified and quickened. But, as I am no physician, I
will forbear to give an opinion on this point. That the Stone
has this virtue, every one that possesses it can discover for him-
self I prefer to set down a few observations concerning those
qualities and uses of the Stone which are known to me by daily
experience.

In the first place, the practice of this Art enables us to
understand, not merely the marvels of Nature, but the nature of
God Himself, in all its unspeakable glory. It shadows forth, in
a wonderful manner, how man is the image of the most Holy
Trinity, the essence of the Holy Trinity, and the Oneness of
Substances in that Trinity, as well as the difference of Persons ;
the Incarnation of the Second Person of the Holy Trinity, His
Nativity, Passion, Death, and Resurrection ; His Exaltation and
the Eternal Happiness won by Him for us men; also our
purification from original sin, in the absence of which purification
all good actions of men would be vain and void—and, in brief,
all the articles of the Christian faith, and the reason why man
must pass through much tribulation and anguish, and fall a prey
to death, before he can rise again to a new life. All this we see
in our Art as it were in a mirror, as we shall take occasion to set
forth in our Fourth Part.

Secondly, its earthly and natural use consists in changing
all imperfect metals, by means of its tincture, into pure and solid
gold, as I will try to show as briefly as I can.

The Stone or Elixir cannot be used for this purpose in the
form in which we left it at the completion of the previous stage
of our process; but it should be still further fermented and
augmented in the following manner, as otherwise it could not be
conveniently applied to imperfect metals and bodies.

Take one part of the Essence, and add to it three parts of
purest gold, which has been purged and melted by means of
antimony, and reduced to very thin plates. Let them be placed
together in the crucible.

Thereupon the whole compound will be transformed into a
pure and efficacious, Tincture, which, when applied to base
metals, in the ratio of 1 : : 1000, will change them into pure gold.


TADE  SQPHIG  IOYXDIRQDLTTLHH. 89


NoTE.—The purer the metals are, and the greater their
affinity to our substance, the more easily are they received by
the Tincture, and the more perfect and rapid is the process of
regeneration. For the transformation consists in all that is
impure and unsuitable being purged off, and rejected like dross.
In the same manner flawed stones can be transmuted into
precious diamonds, and common crystal can be so tinged as to
become equal to the most precious stones. Moreover, many
other things may be done with the Tincture which must not be
revealed to the wicked world. These virtues of the Stone, and
others of a like kind, are looked upon as the least important by
the Sages, and by all Christians on whom God has bestowed
this most precious gift. Such men think them vile indeed when
compared with the knowledge of God and of His works which is
afforded by the Stone.

For let me tell you that he on whom the Most High has
conferred the knowledge of this Mystery esteems mere money
and earthly riches as lightly as the dirt of the streets. His heart
and all his desires are bent upon seeing and enjoying the
heavenly reality of which all these things are but a figure;
as Solomon, the wisest of wise Kings, testifies in chapter
vii. of the Book of Wisdom, where he says: *I preferred wisdom
before sceptres and thrones, and esteemed riches nothing in
comparison of her. Neither compared I unto her any precious
stone, because all gold in respect of her is as a little sand, and
silver shall be counted as clay before her." Those, therefore,
that desire this Art as a means of procuring temporal
honour, pleasure, and wealth, are the most foolish of men ; and
they can never obtain that which they seek at so great an
expense of money, time, and trouble, and which fills their hearts,
their minds, and all their thoughts. For this reason the Sages
have expressed a profound contempt for worldly wealth (not as
though it were in itself a bad thing, seeing that it is highly com-
mended in Holy Scripture as an excellent gift of God, but
because of its vile abuse). They despised it because it seemed to
hinder men from following the good and the true, and to intro-
duce a mischievous confusion into their conceptions of right and
wrong. These abuses of money the illustrious Marcellus Palin-
genius Stellatus has graphically described in the poem entitled


90 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


the * Zodiac of Life," under the sign of Sagittarius, where he
draws a vivid picture of the evils of avarice. To this poem I
would therefore refer the gentle reader.

From this poem we may gather how lightly this dis-
tinguished man, though evidently a possessor of the Stone, as
appears out of his *Zodiac of Nature,' held gold and silver,
and all things temporal, in respect of virtue.

Nor is his case by any means exceptional. All Sages have
regarded wisdom, and the knowledge of heavenly things, as far
better than the transient things of earth, and have so ordered
their lives and actions that at the last they might obtain im-
mortality and eternal glory. This feeling is well expressed by
Solomon, in his Book of Proverbs (cp. xvi), where he says:
* How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get
understanding rather to be chosen than silver !"—and again in
the xxii chapter: * A good name is rather to be chosen than
great riches, and knowledge rather than silver and gold" The
same aspiration prompted the following words of the son of
Sirach : *See that thou keep a good name, for it is better than
a thousand treasures of gold."

By reason of these and other virtues which result from the
philosophy of the Stone, the Sages have never wearied of
extolling its marvellous excellence ; and they have taken great
pains to make it known to the worthy, in order that its wisdom
might be accepted and practically exhibited by them. But to
the foolish everything is obscure and difficult to be understood.
(This is the gist of the first six chapters of Solomon's Book of
Proverbs, where he says that men should strain every nerve to
attain to our wisdom. In the Book of Ecclesiastes, too, he uses
the following words: * My son, be satisfied with a lowly station :
for it is better than all that this world desires. The greater thou
art, the more humble thyself, and God will give thee grace.
For the Lord is a most High God, and does great things through
the lowly."


TETUR CE SQUE UY QE TER 91
BARI EV.


PSALM LXXVIIL AND MATTH. XIII.


* [ qvill open amy mouth in parables, and declare things hidden
from the foundation of the world."


When it pleases Almighty God by His Divine Word to make
known unto the human race His marvellous, deep, and celestial
mysteries, He is wont to do so in parables, andto shadow forth
His meaning in things familiar to our eyes which are depicted
visibly before us. For instance, when pronouncing upon Adam
in Paradise, after the Fall, the sentence of death, He told him
that as he was made and formed of dust, he should also return
to dust—dust being a thing which in itself has no life. Again,
when promising to Abraham an innumerable posterity, He
illustrated His meaning by pointing to the stars of the heavens,
the sand of the sea shore, and the dust of the earth. In the
same manner, God made use of divers precious types in declaring
His will to the children of Israel through the Prophets. "This
practice was also adopted in the New "Testament by Christ
Himself—the Foundation and Express Image of the Truth—
who set forth His teaching in parables in order that it might be
better understood. So He compares His Divine and Blessed
Gospel—the highest happiness of man—to seed that is sown in
a field, amongst which the enemy scatters evil seed; to a
hidden treasure ; to a pearl of great price; to a grain of wheat ;
to a mustard seed ; to leaven, etc.

[Cp. Luke vii. Matthew xiii and xxii ^ Luke xix.
Matthew xx.]

The Kingdom of Heaven He describes under the image of
a great Wedding Feast. The Christian Church, again, He com-
pares to a Vineyard, and to a King calling upon his servants to
render up an account. —Healso uses the similitude of a noble
lord who entrusted his goods to his servants, of a lost sheep, a
prodigal son, and others of a similar nature.

[Cp. Matthew xviii Luke xvi Matthew xxv. Luke xviii.
Markxii. Luke xviii Luke x.]

These types and similitudes were given to us on account of

our human infirmity, which prevents us from understanding and


92 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


picturing to ourselves the things of heaven. And since it is God's
wont to reveal His mind in parables and /feures, we can but
regard it as of a piece with all the other dealings of God, that
the Chief Good, His Son, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
who by His obedience saved all mankind from eternal death and
restored to us the Kingdom of Heaven, should have expressed
His nature in a concrete bodily form. This is the greatest
mystery of Almighty God, and the highest and worthiest object
of knowledge.
[Ephes. iii. Coli Isaiah xlv.: '* Lez Zhe Leaveus drop down
Jrom above, and let the skies pour down righteousness. Let
ihe earth open and bring forth the Saviour."|

And although this great Good had been prefigured to us in
the Old Testament by types such as the sacrifice of Isaac, the
ladder of Jacob, the betrayal and wonderful exaltation of Joseph
the brazen serpent, Samson, David, and Jonah ; yet, besides all
these, Almighty God deigned to give us a fuller revelation and a
corporal, visible, and apprehensible Idea of His heavenly trea-
.sures and gifts in the Person of His Son. This earthly and
bodily manifestation He plainly toretold in the Prophet Isaiah
(cp. xxviii): *Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a corner
stone, a tried stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall
not make haste. To the same effect the Royal Seer David
speaks, through the Holy Spirit, in Psalm cxviii.: * The Stone
which the builders rejected is become the head stone of the corner.
This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes." This
type, the aforesaid Corner Stone, Christ applies to Himself
(Matth. cp. xxi) when He says: * Have ye never read in the
Scriptures? The Stone that the builders rejected is become the
chief stone of the corner. ^ This is the Lord's doing, and it is
marvellous in our eyes. And whosoever shall fall on this Stone
shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall it shall grind
him to powder. And Peter (Acts, cp. iv.) and Paul in his
Epistle to the Romans (cp. ix.) repeat almost the same words.

This tried, blessed, and heavenly Stone Jesus Christ was
longingly expected from the beginning of the world by the
Fathers and Holy Patriarchs ; God-enlightened men prayed that
they might be accounted worthy to see the promised Christ in
His bodily and visible form. And if they rightly knew Him by


TED SQUE ER TRQUE TTE 93


the Holy Spirit, they were comforted by His presence in their
lives, and had an invisible Friend on whom they could stay them-
selves, as upon a spiritual fulcrum, in trouble and danger even
unto the end of their life.

But although that heavenly Stone was bestowed by God as
a free gift on the whole human race, the rich as well as the poor
(Matth. xi., 6.) ; yettothis very day comparatively few have been
able to know and apprehend Him. To the majority of mankind
He has always been a hidden secret, and a grievous stumbling
block, as Isaiah foretold in his eighth chapter: * He shall be for
a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence, a gin and a snare, so
that many shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared,
and be taken." Thesamevwas revealed to the aged Simeon, when he
spake thus to Mary, the Mother of the Corner Stone : * Behold,
He shall be for a fall and rising again of many in Israel, and
for a sign that shall be spoken against" To this S. Paul also
bears witness (ad. Rom. ix.): * They fell from the Stone of offence,
and the rock of stumbling. He that believes in Him shall not be
confounded." "This Stone is precious to them that believe, but
to the unbelieving *a stone of offence and stumbling, seeing
that they are broken against the word, and believe not in
Him on whom they are founded (Eccl xliii)" In all these
respects the Precious, Blessed, and Heavenly Stone agrees most
wonderfully with our earthly, corporal, and philosophical Stone ;
and it is, therefore, well worth our while to compare our Stone
with its Heavenly prototype. We shall thus understand that
the earthly philosophical Stone is the true image of the real,
spiritual, and heavenly Stone Jesus Christ.

Thus, then, those who would truly know and prepare the first
Matter of the Philosopher's Stone (the chief and principal mystery
of this earth) must have a deep insight into the nature of things,
just as those who would know the Heavenly Stone (Ze, the
indissoluble, triune essence of the true and living God) must have
a profound spiritual insight into the things of heaven : hence we
said in our first part, that the student of our Art must first have
a thorough knowledge of Nature and her properties If a man
would come to know the highest good, he must rightly
know, first God, and then himself (Acts xvii.: * For in Him we
live" etc) If anyone learn to know himself and God (Ze.


94 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


our duty as men, our origin, the end of our being, and our affinity
to God), he has the highest scholarship, without which it is
impossible to obtain happiness, either in this world, or in the
world to come.

If we would find that high and heavenly Stone, we must
remember that, as our earthly Philosophical Stone is to be
sought in one thing and two things, which are met with every-
where, so we must look for Him nowhere but in the eternal
Word of God, and the Holy Scripture (consisting of the Old
and New Testaments)—as God the Father testified at His Trans-
figuration on Mount Tabor (Mark ix., Luke ix.), when He said :
*'Thisis My Beloved Son: hear ye Him." In the same way
Christ, the essential and eternal Word of God, speaks of Him-
self : * No one comes to the Father, but by Me "—Aaccording to
the Scripture, the infallible testimony of the Divine Word (Isaiah
xxxiv.) In Isaiah viii. we find the words: * to the Law and the
Testimony." And Christ, the aforesaid Corner Stone, bears
witness to the necessity of Scripture, when He says: * Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye believe that ye have eternal life,
and it is they that testify of Me" Therefore, David says in
Psalm cxix., long before the coming of Christ: * My delight, O
Lord, is in Thy commandments, for they are my counsellors ;
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet ; I rejoice in the way of Thy
testimonies more than in great riches. Also, I consider Thy
ways, and walk in Thy testimonies."

[Cp. Gen. xiii Psal xlv. Isaiah ix, 49. Jerem. xxxii.
I obnessgra MEO rS OT]

Moreover, when and where the First Matter of this heavenly
Stone was founded (*from the beginning of the world"), is
expressly set forth in several passages of Holy Scripture,
especially in the fifth chapter of Micah : * Whose goings forth
have been from of old, from everlasting" ^ When the Jews asked
the Corner Stone Himself who He was, He answered: * I that
speak to you was from the beginning," and again: * Before
Abraham was,l am." From these passages it follows that He
had His being, without a beginning, from all eternity, and that
He will abide throughout all eternity.

And although this knowledge is to be found and obtained
nowhere but in the Old and New Testaments, nevertheless he


-——"


TEE SOPHIC. ILYDROLITH. 95


who would gain it must proceed with the greatest care (II.
Timothy, iii.) for one false step may render all our subsequent
labour useless. He who would gain a golden understanding of
the word of truth, should have the eyes of his soul opened, and
his mind illumined by the inward light (1r. John, v.) which
God has kindled in our hearts from the beginning ; for he who
strives to obtain this knowledge without the Divine light, may
easily mistake Saul for Paul, and choose a false road instead of
the right path. This happens continually in regard to our
earthly Stone. Ten persons may read the same description of it,
and yet only one may read the words aright. So the majority
of mankind daily miss the knowledge of the Heavenly Stone ;
not because it is not before their eyes, but because they have not
eyes to see it. Therefore Christ says: (Luke xi) "' The eye is
the light of the body, and if the eye be dark the whole body will
be full of darkness" In the seventeenth chapter of the same
Gospel He says: '" Behold the kingdom of God is within you."
From these words it most clearly appears that the knowledge of
the light in man must come from within, and not from without.
The external object, as they say, or the letter, is written for
the sake of our infirmity, as a further aid to the implanted light
of grace (Matth. xxiv.) as also the outward spoken word is
used as an auxiliary means for the conveyance and advancement
of knowledge. For example, if a white and a black tablet were
put before you, and you were asked to say which was white and
which black, you would not be able to answer the question if
you had no previous knowledge of those colours ; your ability to
do so, comes, not from looking at the tablets, but from the know-
ledge that before was in your mind. The object only stirs up
your perceptive faculty, and calls out the knowledge that before
was in you, but does not of itself afford that knowledge. In the
same way, if any one put into your hand a flint, and asked you
to bring outward and visible fire out of it for him, you would be
unable to do so without the steel that belongs to it, with which
you would have to elicit the spark slumbering in the stone.
Moreover, you would have to catch and fan it into flame on a
piece of tinder—or else the spark would immediately vanish
again. If you do this, you will have a bright fire, and so long as
you keep it up, you will be able to do with it whatever you


96 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


like. In the same manner, the heavenly light slumbers in the
human soul, and must be struck out by outward contact,
namely, by the true faith, through reading and hearing, and
through the Holy Spirit whom Christ restored to us, and
promised to give us (John xiv: * No man comes to the Father
but by me"), and to put into our dark, but. still glowing
hearts, as into a kind of tinder, where He may be fanned and
kindled into a bright flame, working the wil of God in our
souls. For He delights to dwell in light unapproachable, and
in the hearts of believers. Although no man ever has, or ever
can, see God with his outward bodily eyes, yet with the in-
ward eyes of the soul He may well be seen and known. But
notwithstanding that inward light casts its bright beams over
the whole world, and into the heart of every man without
any difference, the world, by reason of its innate corruptness,
cannot see it rightly, and refuses to acknowledge it; and on
this account so many false and pernicious notions are current
concerning it. But we shall do well to consider that God has,
not without a good purpose, furnished our heads with two
eyes and two ears; for He would thereby teach us that man
has a double vision and a double hearing ; namely, the outward
and the inward. With the inward he is to judge spiritual things,
and the outward is also to perform its own proper office. The
same distinction we find in the spirit and the letter of Scrip-
ture. For this reason I thought fit to explain this matter for
the sake of students of the simple sort, who might otherwise
be at a loss to apprehend the full significance of the triune
Stone.

Again, as the substance of the earthly Stone is nothing
accounted of in the world, and rejected by the majority of man-
kind, so Christ, the eternal Word of the Father, and the Heavenly
Triune Stone, is lightly esteemed in this world, and scarcely
even looked at ; nay, we may say that nothing is so profoundly
and utterly despised by mankind, as the Saving Word of God.
Hence (Cor. i, 2) it is called foolishness by the wise of this
world. Nor is it only contemned and regarded as worthless ;
it is even proscribed and laid under a ban, like some false
heretical doctrine, and it is greivous for a God-fearing man to
listen to the blasphemous words that are spoken against it, But


IADE SOPIAUCGCHAUDROII DH. 97


the believer must be tried by it, and the world sifted by its
appearance. So S. John says(cp. i): * He came unto His own,
and they received Him not; " and again: *He was in the
world, and the world knew Him not." !
Again, as the physical and earthly water-Stone of the Sages
has, on account of its unsearchable excellence, been called by a
great variety of names by the multitude of philosophers, so the
Heavenly Light, the one Noumeri and Illuminant, whose riches
and glory are past finding out, is designated in Holy Scripture
by a large number of titles. We will go through the most
important names of both. The Philosopher's Stone is called the
most ancient, secret or unknown, natural, incomprehensible,
heavenly, blessed, sacred Stone of the Sages. t is described as
being true, more certain than certainty itself, the arcanum of all
arcana—the Divine virtue and efficacy, which is hidden from the
foolish, the aim and end of all things under beaven, the wonder-
ful epilogue or conclusion of all the labours of the Sages—the
perfect essence of all the elements, the indestructible body
which no element can injure, the quintessence ; the double and
living mercury which has in itself the heavenly spirit—the cure
for all unsound and imperfect metals—the everlasting light—
the panacea for all diseases—the glorious Phoeenix—the most
precious of treasures—the chief good of Nature—the universal
triune Stone, which is naturally composed of three things, and,
nevertheless, is but oze—nay, is generated and brought forth of
one, two, three, four, and five. In the writings of the Sages we
may also find it spoken of as the Catholic Magnesia, or the seed
of the world, and under many other names and titles of a
like nature, which we may best sum up and comprehend in
the perfect number of one thousand. And as the earthly
Philosopher's Stone and its substance have a thousand names,
so an infinite variety of titles is even more justly predicated of
the Chief Good of the Universe. For He is God, the Word of
God, the Eternal Son, the real, eternal, tried, and precious
corner and foundation Stone which the builders refused and
rejected. He is true, and more ancient than all things. seeing
that He was before the foundation of the world, and from ever-
lasting. He is the true, hidden, and unknown God, super-
natural  incomprehensible, heavenly, blessed, and highly
G


98 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


praised. He is the only Saviour, and the God of Gods
(Deut. x. Sure He is, and true, and cannot lie (Nu. xxiii,
Rom.iii) He is the only Potentate who does what He will,
according to His good pleasure. He is secret and eternal, and in
Him lie hid all the treasures and mysteries of knowledge
(Rom. xvi, Col ii) ^ He is the only Divine virtue and
omnipotence, which is unknown to the foolish, or the wise of
this world. Heis the only true essence of all elements, seeing
that of Him all things are and were created (Rom. ii., Ja. i). He
is the quintessence, the essence of all essences, and yet Himself
notan essence of anything. He has in Himself the Heavenly
Spirit which quickens all things with life itself (Wisd. vii., Isaiah
xlii, John xiv.. He is the one perfect Saviour of all imperfect
bodies and men, the true heavenly physician of the soul, the
eternal light that lights all men (Isaiah Ix., John i.), the universal
Remedy of all diseases, the true spiritual panacea. He is the
glorious Pheenix that quickens and restores with His own blood
His little ones whom the old Serpent, the Devil, had wounded
and killed. He is the greatest treasure, and the best thing in
heaven or upon earth, the triune universal essence, called
Jehovah—of one, the Divine essence—of two, God and Man—of
three, namely three Persons—of four, namely three Persons, and
one Divine Substance—of five, namely of three Persons, one
Divine and one Human Substance. He is also the true
Catholic Magnesia, or universal seed of the world, of Whom,
through Whom, and to Whom are all things in heaven and upon
earth—the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, says
the Lord that is, and was, and is to come, the Almighty
(A poc. i.).

But again, as in the case of the philosophical work, it is not
enough for anyone to know its substance and its triune essence,
with the quality and property thereof, if he does not also know
where to obtain it, and how to become a partaker of its benefits
— which can only be done, as we said above, by dissolving the
substance into its three parts, decomposing it, and so
depriving it of its caliginous shadow and hirsute essence, subliming
its inner hidden heart and soul by means of the sweet, universal,
fiery, marine water (extracted from itself) into a volatile essence—
so we cannot know that glorious triune Essence, called Jehovah,


IDEE SOPEHIGURHYVDROPELUTH. 99


unless the image of Him is first dissolved and purified in our own
souls, the veil of Moses (Ze, our own desperate sinfulness which
prevents us from seeing God as He is) being taken away, and
our inner heart and soul being purified, cleansed, and sublimed
by the Divine illumination of Him that dwells within, namely,
Christ, who washes our hearts like pure water (Isaiah xliv.), and
fills them with His sweet and gentle comfort. So you first
behold the wrath, but afterwards the love of God.

Once more: As our Matter, in the philosophical work,
after being dissolved into its three parts or principles, must
again be coagulated and reduced into its own proper salt, and
into oze essence, which is then called the salt of the Sages: so
God, and His Son, must be known as Oe, by means of their
essential substance, and must not be regarded as two or three
Divinities, possessing more than one essence. When you have
thus known God through His Son, and united them by the bond
of the Holy Spirit, God is no longer invisible, or full of wrath,
but you may feel His love, and, as it were, see Him with your
eyes, and handle Him with your hands, in the person of Jesus
Christ, His Son and express image. But even this knowledge
of the Triune God will avail you little, unless you continue to
advance and grow in His grace, for God otherwise will be still
terrible, and as it is said of Him (Deut. vii, 18), *a consuming
fire" For as the substance of the Sages, after all the changes
that it has undergone, will do more harm than good as a medi-
cine applied to the body, without the final preparation, so unless
you fully and perfectly apprehend Christ, the mere knowledge of
Him will tend to your condemnation rather than to the salvation
of your soul (I. John, iv.). Therefore if you wish to become a
partaker of Christ, and if you desire to possess and enjoy His
heavenly gifts and treasures, you must advance in the 2ezsozad
knowledge of Christ, and look upon Him, not merely as a pure
and immaterial Spirit, but as the Saviour who in the fulness of
time took upon Himself a human body, and became the Son of
Man, as well as the Son of God.

Forasin our philosophical work another most noble and
cognate metallic body must be united to our first substance (if
it is to be rendered effectual for the perfecting of other metals),
and joined together with it into oze body, so the Divine Nature

G2


100 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


of the Son of God had to take upon itself, as it were, another
kindred * metallic" body, namely our human nature, our human
flesh and blood (which, having been created in the image of
God, has the greatest affinity with Him), and to be joined with
it into one indissoluble whole, in order that He might have the
power of bringing imperfect men to perfection.

But again, we said that common gold, on account of its
imperfection and impurity, would not combine with our substance,
because its manifold defects had rendered it * dead " and useless
for our purpose, and that, for this reason, it must first receive a
bright and pure body (not adulterated or weakened by the
presence of bad internal sulphur) In the same way, the Divine
essence of the Son of God could not be joined to common
human nature, which is conceived in sin, defiled with hereditary
uncleanness, and many actual sins and  besetting infirmities
(though all these are no integral part of human nature as such),
but required a pure, sinless, and perfect humanity.

For if the earthly Adam, before the Fall (though after all
only a created being), was holy, perfect, and sinless, how much
more must the heavenly Adam, to whom the only begotten Son
of God was joined, have a perfect humanity? ^ Therefore the
heavenly, eternal, fundamental Corner Stone, Jesus Christ (like
the earthly Philosophical Stone), is now Oxze, uniting in Him-
self, after an inscrutable manner, a dual nature of admirable
generation and origin, and the properties both of God and of
man. For according to His Divine Nature, He is true God, of
the Substance of His heavenly and eternal Father, and the Son
of God, whose goings out (as the Scripture says) were from
everlasting (Mic. v. According to His human nature, on the
other hand, He was born in the fullness of time as a true
and perfect man, without.sin, but with a real body and soul
(Matth. xxvi) Therefore He now eternally represents the indis-
soluble and personal union of the Divine and the human sub-
stance, the oneness of the natures of God and man.

It is much to be wished that the eyes of our self-opinionated
doctors were opened, or the nebulous film, or sophistical mask,
which obscures their vision, taken away, that so they might see
more clearly. I am particularly alluding to the Aristotelians,
and other blind theological quibblers, who spend their lives in


ERES SQUPEDIG ER QUTET IOI


wrangling and disputing about Divine things in a most un-
christian manner, and put forth no end of manifold distinctions,
divisions, and confusions, thus obscuring the Scriptural doctrine
concerning the union of natures and communication of sub-
stances in Christ. If they will not believe God and His Holy
Word, they might at least be enlightened by a study of our
chemical Art, and ofthe union oftwo waters (viz., that of mercury
and that of the Sun) which our Art so strikingly and palpably
exhibits. But the scholastic wisdom of their Ethnic philosophy
is entirely based upon pagan philosophy, and has no foundation
in Holy Scripture or Christian Theology. "Their Aristotelian
precepts, their * substances " and * accidents," entirely blind them
to the true proportions of things, and they forget Tertullian's
saying "that philosophers are the patriarchs of heresy." But we
do not think it worth while to pursue this subject any further.
Again, as our chemical compound (in which the two essences
have been combined) is subjected to the action of fire, and is
decomposed, dissolved, and well digested, and as this process,
before its consummation, exhibits various chromatic changes, so
this Divine Man, and Human God, Jesus Christ, had, by the will
of His heavenly Father, to pass through the furnace of affliction,
that is, through many troubles, insults, and sufferings, in the
course of which His outward aspect was grievously changed ;
thus He suffered hunger when, after His Baptism and EHis
entrance upon the ministry of the Word, the Holy Spirit led Him
into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, and there waged
with Him a threefold contest, as an example to all baptized
Christian men, who, having declared themselves followers of
Christ, are, like Him, tempted, and have to sustain the shock of
various grievous assaults. Again, He was subject to weariness,
He shed tears, He trembled, He wrestled with death, He shed
drops of sweat mingled with blood, He was taken captive and
bound, was struck in the face by the high priest's servant,
was mocked, derided, spitted upon, scourged, crowned with
thorns, condemned to die upon the Cross, which He had to bear
Himself; was nailed to it between two malefactors, received
vinegar and gall to drink, cried out with a loud voice, com-
mended His spirit into the hands of His Father—and so gave up
the ghost and died upon the Cross. These and other tribulations,


102 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


which are faithfully related by the Evangelists, He had to bear
in the course of His earthly life.

And as the Sages say that the above mentioned process of
chemical digestion is generally completed within forty days, so
the same number seems to have a most peculiar significance in
Scripture, more particularly in connection with the life of our
Lord. The Israelites remained forty years in the wilderness ;
Moses was forty days and forty nights on Mount Sinai; Elijah's
flight from Ahab occupied the same length of time. Christ
fasted forty days and forty nights in the wilderness; He spent
forty months in preaching upon earth; He lay forty hours in
the grave—appeared to His disciples forty days after His Re-
surrection. Within forty years from Christ's Ascension Jerusalem
was destroyed by the Romans, and made level with the ground.

Then again, the Sages have called our compound, while
undergoing the process of decomposition, the Raven's Head, on
account of its blackness. In the same way, Christ (Isaiah liii.)
had no form nor comeliness—was despised and rejected of men—
a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief—so despised, that
men hid, as it were, their faces from Him ; and in the 22nd
Psalm He complains that He * is a worm, and no man," *a
scorn and laughing-stock of the people." "We may also see an
analogy to Christ in the fact that the decomposed body of the
sun lies for some time dead and lifeless, like burnt-out ashes, at
the bottom of the phial, and that its * soul" gradually descends
to it under the influence of greater heat, and once more saturates,
as it were, the dead and decaying body, and saves it from total
destruction. For when, on the Mount of Olives, and on the
Cross, Christ had experienced a feeling of utter dereliction, He
was afterwards comforted and strengthened, and nourished (as
it were) with Divine nectar from above. And when at length He
had given up the ghost, and all the strength forsook His body,
so that He went down to the parts below the earth, even there
He was preserved, refreshed, and filled with the quickening
power of the eternal Deity, and thus, by the reunion of His
spirit with His dead body, quickened, raised from the dead,
lifted up into heaven, and appointed Lord and King ofall—
where, sitting at the right hand of His Father, He now rules,
governs, preserves, and quickens all things with the power of


PITE SOPEHIC (£IVDISQDUIDE. 103


His Word. This marvellous Union and Divine Exaltation
angels and men in heaven, upon earth, and under the earth can
scarce think upon without holy fear, and trembling awe—
Whose power, strength, and purple Tincture (Z«., Blood) changes
us imperfect men and sinners in body and soul, and is a mar-
vellous medicine for all our diseases, as we shall see further on.

We have briefly and simply considered the most obvious
analogies that serve to establish the typical connection between
Jesus Christ, the heavenly Corner Stone, and our earthly
Philosopher's Stone, and to illustrate its figurative resemblance to
the Incarnation of the Saviour of men. We will now proceed to
shew that the earthly Stone also shadows forth His transmuting,
strengthening, healing, and quickening power towards us sinful,
wretched, and imperfect human beings.

.For though God created man at the beginning in His own
image, and made him more glorious and perfect than other
creatures, and breathed into him a living and immortal soul,
yet by the fall the image of God was defaced, and man was
changed into the very reverse of what God had intended that
he should be.

But in order that we might be restored to our former
glorious state, God in His great mercy devised the following
remedy : As the perfect earthly Stone, or Tincture, after its
completion extends its quickening efficacy, and the perfecting
virtue of its tincture to other imperfect metals, so Christ, that
blessed heavenly Stone, extends the quickening influence of His
purple Tincture to us, purifying us, and conforming us to
the likeness of His perfect and heavenly Body. For, as S.
Paul says: (Rom. viii), He is the first-born among many
brethren, as He is also the first-born before all creatures, through
whom all things in heaven and earth were created, and reconciled
to God. If we who are by Nature impure, imperfect, and
mortal, desire to become pure, immortal and perfect, this
transmutation can be effected only through the mediation of the
Heavenly Corner Stone Jesus Christ, who is the only holy, risen,
glorified, heavenly King, both God and man in the unity of oze
Person.

For as the Philosopher's Stone, which is the Chemical King,
has virtue by means of its tincture and its developed perfection


104. THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


to change other imperfect and base metals into pure gold, so our
heavenly King and fundamental Corner Stone, Jesus Christ, can
alone purify us sinners and imperfect men with His Blessed ruby-
coloured Tincture, that is to say, His Blood, from all our natural
flth and uncleanness, and perfectly heal the malignant disease
of our nature ; seeing that there is no salvation but in Him, and
that no other name is given under heaven whereby men can
obtain happiness and perfection.

The blind and insensate world has, indeed, through the craft
and deceit of the Devil, tried many other ways and methods of
obtaining everlasting salvation, and has toiled hard to reach the
goal; but Christ nevertheless is and remains the only true
Saviour and Mediator, who alone can make us appear just in the
sight of God, and purify us from our spiritual leprosy—just as,
upon earth, there is only one royal, saving, chemical Stone by
which all imperfect metals must be brought to perfection and all
bodily diseases healed (especially that fearful, and otherwise in-
curable leprosy) ^ All other spiritual remedies—such as those
invented and used by Jews, Turks, heathens, and heretics—may
be compared to the devices of false and sophistical alchemists ;
for by them men are not purified, but defiled--not quickened, but
enfeebled, and given over to a state of more helpless spiritual
deadness. So the pseudo alchemists, or malchemists, as they
may be more appropriately termed, discover many tinctures and
colours by which men are not only deceived, but, as daily
experience teaches, often ruined in fortune, body, and soul.

Again, if we men would be purified and cleansed of our
original sin and the filth of Adam (in whom, through the subtilty
of the Cacodaemon, our whole race was corrupted in the very:
Protoplast), we can obtain perfection and eternal happiness only
through the regeneration of water and the Spirit, as the royal
chemical substance is regenerated by water and its spirit. In
this new and spiritual regeneration, which is performed in
baptism through water and the Spirit, we are washed and
purified with the Blood of Christ, united to His Body, and clothed
with Him as with a garment (Col. iii, Eph. v.). For, as the
Philosophical Stone becomes joined to other metals by means of
its tincture and enters into an indissoluble union with them, so
Christ, our Head, is in constant vital communion with all His


"EB. SOPHIA UEDVIDAQUATIBEEF. 105


members through the ruby tincture of His Blood, and compacts
His whole Body into a perfect spiritual building which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. Now, that regenera-
tion which is wrought in baptism through the operation of the
Holy Spirit is really nothing but an inward spiritual renewal of
fallen man, by which we become God's friends instead of His
enemies, and thus heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ (1.
Cor. ii, Rom. xii, Ephes. ii, Hebr. iii). For to this end Christ
died and rose again, that through this means, namely, through
His passion, death, resurrection, and ascension, He might enter
the Holy Place made without hands, and prepare for us the way to
our everlasting Fatherland. Therefore, we, too, as His brothers
and sisters, should follow His passion, and grow like Him in love,
humility, and all other virtues, till we are conformed to His
glorified body, and until, having lived and died with Him, we
also reign with Him, and share His everlasting glory.

But this inward quickening and imitation of Christ, our
heavenly King, in our daily lives, is not the outgrowth of our
own merit or natural will (for by nature all men are blind, deaf,
and dead, as to spiritual things), but is produced solely through
the effectual working of the Holy Spirit, who dwells in us
through the blessed laver of regeneration. In like manner, the
minerals and metals are in themselves gross and dead, and
cannot purify or ameliorate themselves, but are purified, renewed,
dissolved, and perfected through the agency of the spagyric
spirit. Now when we have been incorporated in the Body of our
heavenly King, and washed and cleansed of original sin through
His purple Tincture, and so rendered capable of bringing forth
the first fruits of the Holy Spirit, we are fed up, like little children,
and nourished with the pure and health-giving milk of grace,
until at length we become living stones, fit for the heavenly
building and the highest priesthood, which consists in offering up
spiritual sacrifices such as are acceptable to God the Father,
through Jesus Christ. For even a Christian, though regenerated
through water and the Word, cannot grasp or apprehend all
things at once, but must grow gradually, and daily, in the
knowledge of God and of Christ.

For as, in our philosophical experiment, the union of the
two essences, namely of the earthly gold and the heavenly


106 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


prepared Matter, which have first been reduced to a kind of dry
liquid, or amalgam, in a solutory alembic, does not take place
all at once (seeing that the different parts are added gradually
and at stated intervals) so we must expect the growth of the
quickened spirit to be slow and gradual. For when the spiritual
union of a man with Christ in baptism has once taken place, and
he is united once for all with His Body, he must gradually
advance in the Christian faith, and assimilate in his soul one
article after another, until he has obtained perfect knowledge,
and is firmly established in all the fulness of conviction.

Now the Christian faith, like the prepared aqueous sub-
stance, consists of twelve articles, according to the number of
the Apostles, and these again fall into three principal sections,
viz. (1r) that which treats of our creation, (2) that which deals
with our redemption, and (3) that which describes our sanctifica-
tion. All these articles the Christian must, one by one, and
little by little, make his own. He cannot master them all at
once; for if too much spiritual nourishment were administered
to him at a time, his soul might begin to loathe its food, and he
might be entirely estranged from the faith. "Therefore, the third
article, for instance, should be divided into seven parts, and taught
in seven different lessons (just as the matter was not put into the
phial all at once. When a man has made the whole faith
thoroughly his own, he must carefully preserve it pure from all
corruption and falsification.

Moreover, in the chemical process, the Stone cannot bring
its influence to bear on imperfect metals, unless it is first com-
bined with three several parts of highly refined and purified gold,
not because the tincture of the Stone itself is imperfect, but on
account of the grossness of the metals which otherwise could not
receive its subtle influence. The Stone itself is perfect; but the
base metals are so feeble and dead that they cannot apprehend
the angelical and spiritual perfection of the Tincture, except
through the more congenial medium of gold, refined and fused
through Antimony. In the same way, our heavenly King, Jesus
Christ, has, through His obedience to His Father's will, once
for all delivered us from sin and impurity, and made us sons
and heirs of God ; nevertheless, His saving Blood, the true purple
Tincture, cannot be received by us, on account of our inborn


ZE SOPHIGC EIDYDROLTIH, 107


infirmity and gross sinfulness, except through three media
appointed by God for this purpose, namely: (1) His Holy
Word, which is better and purer than earthly gold seven times
refined ; (2), saving faith, which is a marvellous gift of God,
comes through the Word of God, unites the hearts of men, and
is tried in the fire of affliction ; (3), unfeigned love towards God
and our neighbour, which is also a gift of God, the fulfilment of
the law, and a perfect imitation of God's nature. If we have and
possess in a proper manner these three things, the Word, faith,
and love, Christ can operate rightly upon us with his heavenly
Tincture, and celestial Unction, make their blessed influence felt
throughout our imperfect natures, and thus, by pervading our
entire being, cause us to be partakers of His own heavenly
nature. But Satan, that grim pseudo-alchymist, ever lies in
wait to draw those whom Christ has regenerated, and made sons
of God by faith through baptism, and who are warring the
good warfare, and keeping faith and a good conscience, away
from the right path— and in this attempt he and his faithful
servants, our sinful flesh, and the wicked, seductive world, are, alas,
very frequently successful (for even the just man falls seven times
a day. Prov. xxiv.) For as he lay in wait for Christ, our Lord,
Master, and Guide, and soon after His Baptism made a violent
assault upon Him ; so to the present day he spreads his crafty
nets and pernicious snares in the Christian Church. Our Lord
he first endeavoured to delude into doubting the Word of God,
and questioning His Fathers love, by pointing to the want,
hunger, and bodily affliction, that God suffered Him to endure in
the wilderness. But if Christians do not yield to this tempta-
tion, Satan attacks them on another point, and tries to induce
them to place a foolhardy confidence (such as is not warranted
by God's word) in their heavenly Father; just as he strove to
persuade Christ to cast Himself down from the pinnacle of the
Temple, seeing that God would surely protect Him. If this
device does not succeed, the Evil One is not ashamed to try
a third expedient: he promises us all the riches of this world,
and the glory thereof, if we will forsake God, become idolators,
and worship Satan himself—a proposal which he actually had
the hardihood to make to Christ. These Satanic machinations
God, in His inscrutable wisdom, permits, in order that men may


108 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


thereby be exercised in faith, hope, patience, and true prayer,
and prepared for the agony of death which the old man will one
day have to undergo—that thus they may gain a final victory
over their hereditary foe. "This victory they will gain if they
are taught by the grace of God how to encounter the Devil's
deceitful and crafty wiles.

For since, as S. Paul says, we wrestle not with flesh
and blood, but with principalities and powers, with the rulers of
the darkness of this world, with the spiritual forces of wicked-
ness in the heavenly places ; we cannot successfully oppose our
own strength to their spiritual assaults, but we must, after the
example of our Standard-bearer, Jesus Christ, arm ourselves
against our spiritual foes with spiritual weapons, such as
the Word of God, and the sword of the Spirit We musttake .
from the armoury of the Holy Spirit the breast-plate of
righteousness, and have our loins girt with truth, our feet shod
with the preparedness of the Gospel of peace ; and we must cover
ourselves with the great shield of faith, with which we shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one: for faith in
Jesus Christ is a most strong shield which no weapon of the Evil
Demon has power to pierce.

Again, we saw that in our chemical operation the regulation
of the fire, and a most patient and careful tempering of its heat,
was of the greatest importance for the proper digestion of the
substance. We also spoke of the * fire of the Sages " as being
one of the chief agents in our chemical process, and said that it
was an essential, preternatural, and Divine fire, that it lay hid in
our substance, and that it was stirred into action by the influence
and aid of the outward material fire. In like manner, the true
Word of God, or the Spirit of God, whom Jeremiah compares to
a fire, lies hid in our hearts, having been planted in our souls by
Nature, and only defaced and obscured by the fall. "This spirit
must be aided, roused into action, and fanned into a bright
flame, by another outward fire, viz, the daily fire of godliness,
the exercise of all the Christian virtues in good days and in evil,
and the study of the pure Divine Word, if, indeed, the internal
light of grace, or the Spirit of God, is to work in us, instead of
being extinguished. For as an earthly craftsman polishes iron,
which in itself is cold, till it is heated by continual friction, and


TELE SOQPIIG HOVDRODLYTTH. 109


as a lamp must go out if it is not constantly fed with oil ; so the
inward fire of man, unless it is assiduously kept up, gradually
begins to burn low, and is at length completely extinguished.
Therefore it is indispensable for a Christian diligently to hear,
carefully to study, and faithfully to practice the Word of God.

Again, what we said of spiritual sight, viz, that it must take
place not with the outward eyes of the body, but with the
inward eye of the soul, is equally applicable to spiritual hearing.
I speak of listening, not to the outward speech of men, or to the
Pharisaic leaven of the new Scribes, which nowadays, alas, is
substituted for the sincere and unadulterated Word of God, but
to the Voice of God Himself. I speak of the thrice rehned Word
of God (Psalm cxix.), which proceeds out of the mouth of God,
and is declared by His Holy Spirit—which is not, as these false
teachers presumptuously assert, a vain and empty sound, but the
Spirit, the life, and the saving power of God to all that believe.
Of it the Royal Seer David speaks as follows: *I will hear
what the Lord shall say unto me" — Of this inward and Divine
hearing of the Word of God, as from a kind of fountain-
head, good and living faith, which works by love, takes its source.
For it is, as S. Paul says (Rom. x.) : * Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the Word of God."

Now if the Word is pure and undefiled, the hearing, too,
may be pure and undefiled, and the faith which comes of such
hearing will also be true, and show itself by love and humble
obedience to the will of God 1n prayer, praise, and thanksgiving.
It will also find expression in all good works towards our neigh-
bour. To the exercise of this love Christ exhorts us in His long
valedictory discourse (John xiii.) and leaves it with us as His
farewell saying : * This is my commandment that ye love each
other, even as I also loved you."  * If any one say, I know God,
and love not his brother, he is aliar, and the truth is not in him.
But he who keeps the Word of God, in him the love of God is
perfected " (I. John, ii). And again (I. John, iv.): * God is love,
and he that abides in love abides in God, and God in him."
From these passages we learn that love is the bond of perfection
by which we are united to Christ, and by which we are in Him,
He in His Father, and His Father in Him.  *If any one," says
Christ, *will keep my word, this is he that loves me, and I will love


IIO THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


him, and we will come to him and take up our abode with him."
Again: *If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my
love | But this our love to God must also find expression to-
wards our neighbour. For *ifany one love not his brother whom
he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? And
this commandment we have of Him, that he that loves God love
his brother also.^ — The nature ofthis love is described by S.
Paul (1. Cor. xiii.) in the following words : * Love suffereth long,
and is kind ; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is not
puffed up, and never fails" — Hence it appears that there is no
true love which does not show itself in works of kindness towards
our fellow men ; and hence also it appears that the good works
which are acceptable to God cannot precede faith, but are its
outgrowth and precious fruit ; works do not make faith good and
acceptable, but it is faith that gives their real value to works—
for we are justified and obtain eternal life by faith alone. And
if a regenerate man bear himself thus lovingly and humbly in all
his life, he will never lack fruit in due season. For such a man is
placed by God in the furnace of affliction, and (like the hermetic
compound) is purged with the fire of suffering until the old Adam
is dead, and there arises a new man created after God in
righteousness and true holiness, as S. Paul says(Rom.vi.): * We
are buried with Christ by baptism into death, that like
as Christ was raised up from the dead, even so we also
should walk in newness of life ^ When this has been accom-
plished, and a man is no longer under the dominion of sin, then
there begins in him something analogous to the solution of the
gold added to the substance of our chemical process. — The old
nature is destroyed, dissolved, decomposed, and, in a longer or
shorter period of time, transmuted into something else. Sucha
man is so well digested and melted in the fire of affliction that
he despairs of his own strength and looks for help and comfort
to the mercy of God alone. In this furnace of the Cross, a man,
like earthly gold, attains to the true black «Raven's Head, ze,
loses all beauty and reputation in the eyes of the world;
and that not only during forty days and nights, or forty years,
but often during his whole life, which is thus often more full of
sorrow and suffering than of comfort and joy. And, through this
spiritual dying, his soul is taken from him, and lifted up on high ;


TIEDE) SQUID OEDYT QD DII


. while his body is still upon earth, his spirit and heart are already
in his eternal Fatherland ; and all his actions have a heavenly
source, and seem no longer to belong to this earth. For he lives
no longer according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit, not
in the unfruitful works of darkness, but in the light and in the
day—in works that stand the test of fire. "This separation of
body and soul is brought about by a spiritual dying. For as the
dissolution of body and soul is performed in the regenerated
gold, where body and soul are separated from one another, and
yet remain close together in the same phial, the soul daily
refreshing the body from above, and preserving it from final
destruction, until a set time: so the decaying and half-dead
bodily part of man is not entirely deserted by its soul in the
furnace of the Cross, but is refreshed by the spirit from above
with heavenly dew, and fed and preserved with Divine nectar.
(For our temporal death, which is the wages of sin, is not a. real
death, but only a natural and gentle severing of body and soul).
The indissoluble union and conjunction of the Spirit of God, and
the soul of the Christian, are a real and abiding fact. And here
again we have an analogy to the (sevenfold) ascending and
descending of the soul in the chemical process. For the tribu-
lations and temporal sufferings of God's people have now lasted
six thousand years ; but during this whole time, men have again
and again been refreshed, comforted, and strengthened by the
Spirit of God—and so it is now, and ever will be, until the great
universal Sabbath and rest-day of the seventh millenium. ^ Then
this occasional spiritual refreshing will cease, and everlasting joy
will reign, since God will be all in all.

While the digestion of the dead spiritual body in man goes
forward, there may be seen (as in the chemical process) many
variegated colours and signs, z.., all manner of sufferings, afflic-
tions, and tribulations, including the ceaseless assaults of the
Devil, the world, and the flesh. Butall these signs are of good
omen, since they show that such a man will at length reach the
desired goal. For Scripture tells us that all that are to obtain
the eternal beatitude of Christ must be persecuted in this world,
and we must enter into the kingdom of heaven through much
tribulation and anguish. This truth is well expressed in the
following words of S. Augustine: * Marvel not, brother, if after


Luo THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


becoming a Christian you are assailed by many troubles. For
Christ is our Head, and, as His members, we must follow and
imitate, not only Him, but His life and sufferings. The life of
Christ was closely beset with all manner of tribulations, poverty,
insult, mockery, scorn, sorrow, and acute bodily suffering ; and it
is clear that if you would obtain the life of Christ, you must, like
Him, become perfect through suffering. For without these
afflictions and tribulations we cannot come to God. |. A man who
would enter Paradise must go through fire and water, whether
he be Peter, to whom the keys of heaven were entrusted, or Paul,
a chosen vessel of God, or John, to whom all the secrets of God
were revealed. ^ Every brother must enter the kingdom of
heaven through much tribulation."

It should further be observed that the Antimony of the
Sages with which the gold must be refined before being added
to the Elixir, or royal chemical substance (or before undergoing
a sudatory bath with ancient grey-headed Saturn) is expressed
by the sign à. In the same way, a ball with a cross upon
it is put into the hands of the Lord of the Holy Roman Empire,
whereby it is indicated that he, too, must experience, and be
tried by the tribulations of this world, before he can be peace-
fully seated upon his throne. To all this we may find an
analogy in the aforesaid School of the Cross, and the tribulations
and persecutions through which all Christians must pass, and the
struggle which they must wage with grey-headed Saturn, that is
to say, the old Adam and Satan, before they can enter into
everlasting joy and rest.

Besides the aforesaid sorrows and afflictions, there are also
in this world certain signs and marvels, and great mundane
revolutions, which we must diligently consider and perpend. We
must first hear of wars, and rumours of wars, various sects,
plagues, and famines; for all these things are the true fore-
runners aud heralds of our redemption. Then must come the
general resurrection of the dead, by which those who obtain the
victory through the Blood of the Lamb (for this second regene-
ration is begun and rendered possible by their first regenera-
tion in this life) pass into a new and unending life through the
final indissoluble union of their bodies, souls, and spirits. For
by the power and effectual working of Christ, our almighty


THE SOPHIC HYDROLITH. I'D3


heavenly King (to whom we are joined in a supernatural
manner by faith), we shall be endued with pure spiritual health,
strength, glory, and excellence. This marvellous union of body,
soul,and spirit, this Divine glorification and exaltation of the
elect, is a consideration fraught with reverential and unspeakable
awe (like the sight of the final chemical transformation); it is
a sight at which the very angels will stand rapt in inexpressible
wonder; and then they will see us pass into the heavens to
reign with Christ, and with them, and the ministering spirits,
in everlasting glory, and joy unspeakable, world without end.
To conclude—as, in our chemico-philosophical process, it
was possible and necessary to correct at once any defect or
irregularity, since otherwise the whole compound would be
corrupted and rendered useless; so, in the Christian life, every
fault must at once be carefully corrected, and put away, lest
it afford a loophole for Satan, the world, and the flesh, to creep
in again, and to cause in us, so to speak, a pernicious sublima-
tion, or a premature redness (corresponding to the first and
second chemical defects) or to make us despair of God's mercy
when we consider our many grevious sins, or to stir up in us
a spirit of murmuring against the great furnace heat of God's
discipline (which two latter failings correspond to the third and
fourth chemical defects) If any of these unfortunate accidents
happen to our souls, they must be dissolved again (after the
analogy of the chemical compound), by repentance, by the
solutory key of holy Absolution, and thus, as often as is
required, be purged of sin and post-baptismal defilement by
Absolution, as well as by the pure heavenly milk of the Lord's
Supper, which is the sweat of the heavenly Lamb, and water
and blood, the fountain of life—which (like the mercurial water
of the chemical process) is, to the unworthy and wicked, the
most deadly poison, but food, drink, and a source of strength to
the repentant believer. Thus he may still attain to what cor-
responds to the final coagulation and perfect chemical conden-
sation, namely, to the heavenly perfection of eternal beatitude.
These two most wholesome remedies for post-baptismal sin
(viz, Absolution and the Lord's Supper), God in his mercy has
ordained, and entrusted to the keeping of His most Beloved
Church, for the healing of repentant Christian men. Through


H


LT4 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


her, we are either, by absolution, pronounced free from guilt,
or, if we remain impenitent, and persist in our wicked course,
we are, by excommunication, delivered over to Satan, that by
the destruction of the flesh, our souls may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.


19] eITE(OXCOIIS).


Thus, gentle and well-wishing reader, I have briefly and
simply set forth to you the perfect analogy which exists between
our earthly and chemical and the true and heavenly Stone, Jesus
Christ, whereby we may attain unto certain beatitude and per-
fection, not only in earthly but also in eternal life. I might have
done so more grandly and copiously ; but you must know that I
am neither a theologian, nor, according to the modern fashion,
an Aristotelico-theologian, but a simple and unsophisticated lay-
man. For the knowledge which God has committed to me, I
have obtained, not at any learned academy, but in the universal
school of Nature, and by perusing the open book of God. For
this reason I have expressed my thoughts simply, and not tricked
them out in sesquipedalian words, as is the manner of pro-
fessional theologians ; nor do I pretend to have exhausted the
subject ; all that I have done is to throw out some hints for the
guidance of those who wish to investigate it more carefully. In
doing my best, I have also endeavoured to do my duty ; for
every lover of the truth is bound to praise God by revealing the
knowledge entrusted to him. Besides all this, I desired to pro-
fess publicly my belief in the true Christian faith ; since at the
present time many devout and godly Christians are falsely
represented and decried by lying slanderers as heretics. Let
not the blasphemies and reckless judgment of the wicked world
trouble the true Christian, against whom they are directed ; for
the Devil and his servants have at all times done to the followers
of Christ what they did to Christ Himself. Therefore I will say
no more on this subject, but I will leave it to be decided by the
Judge of all the world.

As to the earthly Stone itself I must ask the reader to study
diligently what has gone before in our treatise as to this subject.


THE SOPHIC HYDROLITH. IIS


For as in an excellent poem a verse is sometimes repeated at
least once, so on this point we are accustomed to do the same,
because the reader ought not to direct his aims and thoughts to
the earthly Philosophical Stone until he has attained a right
knowledge of the Celestial Stone, and has prepared it, or, at least,
has commenced with the utmost zeal the preparations of both
together. For the earthly Stone is a gift from God, descending
by the clemency of the Celestial Stone. I agree with all the
Sages that it would be folly to attempt the study of so profound
a mystery without a good previous knowledge of Nature and
her properties. But I also say that it is not merely difficult, but
quite impossible, to prepare the Philosopher's Stone without a
true knowledge of Christ, the heavenly Corner Stone, in whom
all Nature lives and moves, and has its being. This warning.
should be duly considered ; and he who would not expose him-
self to the certainty of ignominious failure, should reflect that the
mastery of any art requires persevering exercise, and that, before
setting about this search after the Philosopher's Stone, he must
prepare himself by careful and patient study. If any neglect
this warning, his failure will be the result of his own ignorance
and mental immaturity.

But I wonder still more that there are to be found some
men, who not only study this Art, but even try to practice it, and
yet do not quite know whether it proceeds by natural and
legitimate magic, or whether it is not after all a necromantic, or
black art, which is exercised by the illegitimate aid of the powers
of hell No, my good friend. The Devil, wicked angels, and
wicked men, have no power but that which God suffers them to
possess—and with our present glorious Art they positively have
nothing whatever to do. It is entirely in the hand of God, who
imparts it to whom He will, and takes it away from whom He
will; and He does not suffer any votaries of pleasure, or evil
.Spirits, to partake of it. He gives it only to the pure, true, and
humble of heart. "This excellence is neither known, nor under-
stood, by the majority of the present generation ; and when the
sound of it strikes upon their ears, and they do not comprehend
it, they straightway call it foolishness. On account of this their
blindness, that spirit will always be hidden from their minds,
and will at length be entirely taken away from them.

H2


116 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Let me, however, be permitted to impress one thing on
the minds of my pious and devout readers. [n so far as a man
orders his life, soul, heart, and actions aright in the sight of God,
in sofar will he perceive that he is making good progress in the
discovery, preparation, and use of the Stone. This assertion is
the result of my own personal experience during many years,
and it embodies my deliberate conviction. Therefore, the best
preparation for this study is, in my judgment, a diligent amend-
ment of heart and life.

I am aware that I here lay myself open to the objection
that it is possible to enumerate several men who actually
possessed this Stone, or Tincture, and with it transmuted base
metals into gold and silver; and who yet were not good men,
but vain, profligate, and without knowledge of God. To this
objection, I answer that from whencesoever these men may have
obtained the Tincture, I certainly never will believe that they
prepared it—ze.,the true and right Tincture—themselves. The
tragic end of many of these men, and the headlong destruction
brought upon them by their Tincture, prove but too clearly the
truth of what I say. Moreover, all that call themselves
alchemists are not therefore necessarily true possessors of the
Stone. For, as in other branches of knowledge, there are
found many different schools and sects, so all that are in search
of this precious Tincture are called alchemists, without
necessarily deserving the name.

In this tract I have spoken of true, natural, and scientific
alchemy, which teaches us to distinguish the evil and impure
from the good and pure, and thus, to aid the weakness, and
correct the corruption, of Nature. We help the metals to arrive
at maturity, just as a gardener may assist fruit, which by some
accident is prevented from ripening, or as a seed or grain of corn
may easily be multiplied by being sown in the ground. Of
pseudo-alchemy I neither pretend, nor care, to know anything,
because I perceive that the ways of its teachers are crooked, and
that they promise mountains of gold, without being able to
redeem the least part of their pledge ; I also see that those who
follow them incur great expense, ceasless toil, and are often
ruined in body and soul. Therefore, if you encounter alchemists
of this description, who speak boastfully of their Art, and offer


EDENESQIOEATO CET QUE PET. imb


to teach it you for money, I warn you to be on your guard
against them. For with such men there is mostly a serpent
lurking in the grass (Mic. ii.). 4

I think I may confidently assert that the cost of preparing
the Tincture (apart from your own daily maintenance, and the
fuel required) doces not exceed three florins. For the Matter, as
has already been said, is for most part, very common, and may
be everywhere obtained in abundance ; and the /adour is easy
and simple. In brief, the whole design can present no difficulty
whatever to those whom God has chosen for this purpose, ze, to
those who love Him ; but to the wicked it is beset with insuper-
able impediments. In conclusion, let me tell you that if God
in His gracious mercy should vouchsafe to reveal to you this
open secret, it will then become your sacred duty to use it well,
and to conceal your knowledge from the unworthy, to put a seal
upon your lips, and to preserve unbroken silence about it. If
you neglect this well-meant warning, you may bring upon your-
self the anger of God, and persecutions of wicked men, and be
justly punished with temporal and eternal ruin.


* [f any one seek riches by means of this sacred "
* Art, let him be devout, and simple-hearted, silent,"
"and wise. He who strives not after these virtues,"
* will receive the opposite of that which he desires : "
* he will be poor, needy, naked and wretched."


AII this, beloved Reader, I desired to enjoin upon you as a
farewell admonition. I devoutly hope that God has opened your
eyes, and that you have completely apprehended my meaning.
To explain the matter more clearly and openly than I have done,
I am forbidden by my vow. I can only ask you once more to
peruse this treatise carefully, and to ask God to enlighten your
understanding.


ZAXDODBONLD/ BOX.


If, after obtaining this knowledge, you give way to pride or
avarice (under the pretext of economy and prudence), and thus
gradually turn away from God, the secret will most certainly fade
out of your mind in a manner which you do not understand.
This has actually happened to many who would not be warned.


118 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


RECAPITULATORY LINES.


* If you will follow my teaching, and if you are "
*a devout Christian man, you may take the"

" *substance which I have before indicated, and,"
* by following the directions I have given, you"
* may possess all the riches of the whole world."


To this end—if you are worthy—may God in His mercy
vouchsafe you His blessing. This prayer I offer up for you from
the bottom of my heart.


IRVASYABNRO


Almighty, everlasting God, Father of heavenly light, from
Whom proceed all good and perfect gifts: we pray Thee, of
'Thine infinite mercy, to reveal to us Thine eternal wisdom,
which is evermore about Thy throne, and by which all things
were created and made, and are still governed and preserved :
send it down to us from heaven, and from the throne of Thy
glory, that it may be with us, and work with us, seeing that it is
the teacher of all heavenly and secret arts, and knows and under-
stands all things. Let it accompany us in all our works, that
by Thy Spirit we may attain a true understanding and certain
knowledge of this Blessed Art, and of the marvellous Stone of
the Sages, which Thou art wont to reveal only to Thine elect,
and hast concealed from the world. And so further us with Thy
wisdom, that we may begin, continue, and complete this work
without any error, and enjoy its fruits for ever with great joy—
through the Heavenly and Eternal Foundation and Corner
Stone, Jesus Christ, Who with Thee and the Holy Spirit liveth
and reigneth, ever One God, world without end. Amen.


Joshua xxi. 43-44.

* And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which He
sware to give unto their fathers ; and there failed not aught of
any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of
Israel ; all came to pass."

Deuteronomy xxxil, 3.
* Ascribe the Glory unto God Alone ! "
AMEN.


UB OSQUOTEIAC C EIWIDRQU PDT. II9
EPIGRAM.


*Itis an easy matter to prepare gold in the furnace out of
metals: at times there is found a man to whom the secret is
revealed. "Why is not every alchemist rich? — The reason is that
one thing is wanting which many seek with anxious care.
Common gold is not fixed, and, when brought to the test of fire,
quickly disappears and perishes. But he who knows the fixed
gold, which at all times remains the same, and from which nothing
is lost, he is the possessor of the true Art, and may be called a
good and practical Sage and Chemist."


ANOTHER EPIGRAM.


*'lheology without alchemy is like a noble body without its
right hand. This is graphically shewn and exhibited in the pic-
ture before us. First look at the helmet and the two wings,
which signify the love of the Art. They bear us onward to
Sophia (Wisdom), who is brightlike Phoebus. Her body is naked
because she is ardently loved. She is loved because she has at
her disposal the riches of the whole world. He that gazes upon
her beauteous form cannot refrain himself from loving her, goddess
as she is. Although this love is, as it were, hidden, yet it is con-
stant; and that is indicated by the mask. ^ Her heart is sincere,
her words are modest, righteousness upholds her steps, she is free
from malice and guile. Her valiant appearance shews that she
is of an open mind. Yet she seems to be falling, too: that is
because the base world hates her, and with fierce truculence tries
to cast her down to the ground. But evermore she bravely rises
on high, though ambition moves her not. She is beloved by God
and man. "Though mockery is to her for a garment, as is shewn
by the noisy cymbals, yet she cares nothing for it, but cleaves all
the more faithfully to wisdom ; to it she lifts her eyes, to it she
directs her steps. For she knows that it is the only true salva-
tion, and therefore she occupies herself with it by day and by
night. She is not anxious for worldly praise, nor does she heed
the hatred and injustice of men, or care for their opinion too little or
too much. Much suffering and tribulation are inflicted upon her
by this wicked world, yet she bears it with a valiant heart and holds
itin disdain. For she possesses the treasure which gives her all


120 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


that she desires, and avarice dwells not in her thoughts. That
in which the world delights, she accounts as the dirt beneath her
feet, since fortune is a wheel, and its revolutions are swift. There-
fore she delights to tread the path of thorns, until, leaving the
world, she finds rest in the tomb. — Then her righteous soul will
soar aloft to heaven, and for a just reward there shall be given
unto her a diadem of stars. After her death, her praise and glory
shall wax bright in the world, like unto the glorious splendour of
the sun; nor will it ever pale, but. become more intense as the
years advance, and her name shall shine like a bright star for
evermore."*


UNTO GOD ALONE BE THE GLORY.
AMEN.


* NoTE.— The Latin original contains no engraving illustrative of this Epigram.


A


DIEN OWNSTRATTOJN


OF


NOR T U RE


MADE TO THE ERRING ALCHEMISTS, AND COMPLAINING


OF THE SOPHISTS AND OTHER FALSE TEACHERS.


SET FORTH BY


JOHN A. MEHUNG.


NATURE (speaks).


seeing the human race, which God created perfect, in
His own image, and appointed to be the lords of the
earth, depart so far away from me! I allude more
particularly to you, O stolid philosophaster, who presume to
style yourself a practical chemist, a good philosopher, and yet are
entirely destitute of all knowledge of me, of the true Matter, and
of the whole Art which you profess! For, behold, you
break vials, and consume coals, only to soften your brain still
more with the vapours. You also digest alum, salt, orpiment,
and atrament; you melt metals, build small and large
furnaces, and use many vessels: nevertheless, I am sick of
. your folly, and you suffocate me with your sulphurous smoke.
With most intense heat you seek to fix your quicksilver, which is
the vulgar volatile substance, and not that out of which I make
metals ; therefore you effect nothing. For you do not follow my
guidance, or strive to imitate my methods, rather mistaking my
whole artifice. You would do better to mind your own business,
than to dissolve and distil so many absurd substances, and
then to.pass them through alembics, cucurbitas, stills, and
pelicans. By this method you will never succeed in congealing
quicksilver. For the revivification you use a reverberatory fire,
and make it so hot as to render everything liquid—thus do you
finish your work, and in the end ruin yourself and others. You
will never discover anything unless you first enter my workshop,
where, in the inmost bowels of the earth I ceaselessly forge
metals: there you may find the substance which I use, and
discover the method of my work.
Do not suppose that I will reveal my secret to you unless
you first find the growing seed of all metals (resembling that of


( OOD heavens, how deeply I am often saddened at
J


124 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


the animals and vegetables) I preserve in the bosom of the
earth both that which is used for their generation, and that with
which they are nourished up.

Metals Eazsz, vegetables Lzve aud Grow, and animals Fez,
which is more than merely to grow. I make metals, stones, and
the atramental substances out of certain elements, which I mix
and compound in a certain way. "These elements you must seek
in the heart of the earth, and nowhere else. Vegetables contain
their own seed, and image ; in like manner, animals are propa-
gated, and by the same means do generate their own likeness.
Everything proceeds by the laws laid down for it. Only you,
wicked man, who try to usurp my office, have departed further
from me than any other creature. Metals have no life, or
principle of generation and growth, if they lack their own proper
seed. The first is accomplished by the four elements in nine
days; the Moon goes through the twelve heavenly signs in
twenty-nine and a half days.

By the aforesaid laws, winter and summer relieve each other,
the elements are changed, generations take place in the earth—
through my working, through the working of God and the
heavens, do all things subsist, the perceptible, the visible, and the
invisible. Thus all things in heaven which are comprehended
under the Moon, do work, and impart their influence to the
substance, which, like a woman, longs to conceive seed. Each
star influences its own substance, and according to their peculiar
nature, they produce different things. "They work first in heaven
above, then in the earth beneath in the elements, each according
to its own peculiar virtue ; and hence arise species and individual
things.

You are to know that these manifold influences do not pour
themselves fruitlessly upon the earthly elements. For though
their working is invisible, yet it is a most certain and real
thing. The earth is surrounded by heaven, and from it obtains
her best influences and substances. Every sphere is ready to
communicate its truth, and therewith to pervade her centre.
Through this motion and heat, there arise upon earth vapours,
which are the first substances. Ifthe vapour is cold and moist,
it sinks down again to the earth, and is there preserved ; that
which is moist and warm ascends to the clouds. "That which is


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 125


shut up in the earth I change, after a long time, into the
substance of sulphur, which is the active, and into quicksilver,
which is the passive principle. The metals are another mixture
of this first composition. The whole is obtained from the four
elements, which I form into one mass. This process I repeat so
often that you have no excuse for a mistake.

After the putrefaction comes the generation, which is
brought about by the internal incombustible warmth heating the
coldness of the quicksilver, which gladly submits to this heat
because it wishes to be united to its sulphur. All these things,
fire, air, and water, I have in one alembic in the earth. "There I
digest, dissolve, and sublime them, without any hammer, tongs,
file, coals, vapour, fire, * bath of S. Mary," or other sophisticated
contrivances. For I have my own heavenly fire which excites
the elemental according as the matter desires to put on a suitable
and comely form. "Thus I extract my quicksilver from the four
elements, or their substance. "This is always accompanied by its
sulphur, which is its second self, and warms it gradually, gently,
and pleasantly. "Thus the cold becomes warm, and the dry moist
and oily. But the moist is not without its dry substance, nor is
the dry without its moist: one is conserved by the other in its
first essence (which is the elementary spirit of the essence, or the
quintessence) from which proceeds the generation of our child.
The fire brings it forth, and nourishes it in the air, but before
that, it is decomposed in virgin earth ; then water flows forth (or
it flows forth from the water), which we must seek, since itis my
first Matter, and the source of my mineral. For contrary resists
strenuously to contrary, and doth in such wise fortify itself, lest
perchance it be carried away in operating ; then does it suffer
transmutation, and is stripped of its form by the concupiscence
of matter, which incessantly attracts a new form.

By my wisdom I govern the first principle of motion. My
hands are the eighth sphere, as my Father ordained ; my.
hammers are the seven planets, with which I forge beautiful
things. The substance out of which I fashion all my works,
and all things under heaven, I obtain from the four elements
alone. Chaos, or Hyle, is the first substance. This is the
Mistress that maintains the King, the Queen, and the whole
court. A horseman is always ready to do her bidding, and a


126 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


virgin performs her office in the chambers. The more beautiful
she is, the more beautiful do I appear in her. Know also that
I have power to give their essence to all essences, that it is I who
preserve them, and mould them into shape. Moreover, observe
the three parts into which God has divided the first substance.
Of the first and purest part He created the Cherubin, Seraphin,
Archangels, and all the other angels. Out of the second, which
was not so pure, He created the heavens and all that belongs to
them; of the third, impure part, the elements and their pro-
perties. First and best of these is 7zre Fire admits of no
corruption, and contains the purest part of the quintessence.
After Fzre, He made the subtle Air, and put into it a part (but
not so large a part) of the quintessence. Then came the
visible element of Water, which has as much of the quintessence
as it needs. Last of all comes the Zaz77. All these (like all
the rest of Nature) He created in a moment of time. The earth
is gross and dark, and though it is fruitful, yet it contains the
smallest part of the quintessence. At first the elements re-
mained as they were in their separate spheres. So Air is really
moist, but is properly tempered by Fire. Water is really warm,
butobtains its moisture from the air. The Earth is really dry,
but it is also cold ; its great dryness renders it akin to fire. Fire,
however, is the first of elements which causes life and growth by
its heat.

Now all these elements influence and qualify each other, so
that each in its turn is now active, now passive. For instance,
Fire works upon air and earth. Earth is the mother and nurse
of all things, and sustains all that is liable to decay under
heaven. Now God has given me power to resolve the four
elements into their quintessence; this is that first substance
which in every element is generically qualified. I resolve them
for my own purpose, and thereby bring aBBut all generation.
But no one will be able to resolve me into my first substance, as
he strives to resolve the elements. For I alone can transmute
the elements and their forms, and he who thinks otherwise
deceives himself For you will never be able to assign to each
substance its proper influence, or to find the correct proportions
of the elements which are required by that substance. I alone,
I say, can form created things, and give to them their peculiar


4 DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 127


properties and substance. By my heavenly mysteries I produce
perfect works, which are justly called miracles, as may be seen
in the Elixir which has such marvellous virtue, and is of my own
forming. No art upon earth can add anything to, or improve
upon, my workmanship. Every sane person must see that
nothing can be accomplished without a perfect knowledge of the
heavenly bodies, or apart from the efficacy which abides in them ;
without these everything is error and misuse ; and yet, whence
is a mere man to obtain this influence, and how is he to apply it
to the substance? How can he mingle the elements in their
right proportions? Even if a man were to spend a long life in
the investigation of this secret (says Avicenna, De Vir. Cord.,
cp. ii) he would not get any nearer to its solution. It is
entrusted to my keeping alone,and can never be known to any
man. By my virtue and efficacy I make the imperfect perfect,
whether it be a metal or a human body. [I mix its ingredients,
and temper the four elements. I reconcile opposites, and calm
their discord.

This is the golden chain which I have linked together of my
heavenly virtues and earthly substances. Iaccomplish my works
with such unerring accuracy that in them all my power is shewn
forth, and with so much skill that the wisest of men cannot attain
to my perfection. Go forth then, and behold my works, you who
think yourself so skilled a workman, and (without any know-
ledge of me), with your coal fires and your S. Mary's bath, strive
to make gold potable in my alembics—and know that I cannot
bear the sight of your folly. Are you not ashamed, after con-
sidering my works, to attempt to rival them with your mal-
odorous decoctions in your coloured and painted vials, and thus
lose both your time and your money? |] am at a loss to con-
ceive what you can be thinking. Have pity upon yourself,
and consider my teaching. Try to understand rightly what I tell
you, for I cannotlie. Consider how that most glorious metal,
gold, has received its beautiful form from heaven and its precious
substance from the earth. The generation of the precious stones,
such as carbuncles, amethysts, and diamonds, takes place in the
same manner. The substance itself is composed of the four
elements ; its form and qualities it receives through heavenly in-
fluences, although the capacity of being thus wrought upon


128 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


slumbers in the element and is only brought out and purified in
the course of time. All this is accomplished by my hands alone.
I am the architect, and no one else knows the secret of life, For,
however wise he may think himself, he does not know how much
to take of each element, or where to obtain it, or how to mingle
hostile elements so as to allay their discord, or how to bring the
heavenly influences to bear on these essences. — He cannot even
make iron, or lead, or the very basest of metal; how then should
he be able to make gold except by stealing my treasure? The
object which he desires can be accomplished by my art alone—
an art which it is impossible for man to know.

And even though we allow gold to be the most precious of
metals, yet gold by itself cannot cure diseases, or heal the
imperfections of other metals, or change them into gold. In the
same way glass (which might otherwise be the Philosopher's
Stone)can never become so soft as to be rendered malleable.
Gold alone is the most precious and the most perfect of all
the metals. Butif you cannot even make lead, or the minutest
grain of any metals, or produce the fruit of any herb, how hope-
less must your search after the art of making gold appear!
Again if you say that you wish to produce some chemical result,
even if it do not turn out to be gold, I answer that you thereby
only give a fresh proof of your folly. Can you not understand
that the secret of my innermost working must always remain a
sealed book to you? What Nature does can never be success-
fully imitated by any created being. Nay, if I made gold
out of seven metals, and you do not understand my method, how
can you ever hope to prepare the substance which itself changes
all metals into the purest gold, and is the most precious treasure
that God has given me? You are foolish and ignorant, if you
do not know that this precious thing which you seek is, to the
created mind, the greatest mystery of Nature, and that it is com-
pounded by heavenly influences—and thus has power to heal
and deliver men from all diseases, and to remove the imperfec-
tion of the base metals. If, therefore, it is in itself so perfect
that it has not its like upon earth, it must surely be the work-
manship of the highest Intelligence, since no one else can even
make gold, and certainly not produce a thing which has itself
the power of making gold. Surely, to maintain that you are


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 129


able to prepare such a thing, is like saying that you cannot carry
ten pounds, but that you are strong enough to carry a hundred
pounds. Put to heart, therefore, the true scope and responsibility
of your intent.

I, myself, again, receive all my wisdom, virtue, and power
from heaven, and my Matter, in its simplest form, is the four
elements. This is the first. principle and the quintessence of the
elements, which I bring forth by reductions, time, and circula-
tions, by which I transmute the inferior into the more perfect,
the cold and dry into the moist and warm ; and thus I preserve
stones and metals in their natural state of moisture. This is
brought about by the movements of the celestial bodies, for by
them the elements are ruled; by their controlling influence like
is brought to like. ^ The purer my substance is, the more excel-
lent are the results produced by the heavenly influence. And
do you think that there in your alembic, where you have your
earth and water, I will be induced by your fire and heat, and
by your white and red colour, to bend my neck to your yoke,
and to do your will and pleasure? Do you think that you can
move the heavens, and force them to shed their influence upon
your work. Do you think that that is an organic instrument
which gives forth sweet music only when it is touched by the
musician's fingers? You take too much upon yourself, you
foolish man. — Do you not know that the revolutions of the
heavens are governed by a mighty Mind, which, by its influence,
imparts power to all things ?

I beseech you to remember that all great things proceed
from me, and, in the last instance, from God; and not to
suppose that the skill of your hands can be as perfect as the
operation of Nature. For it is void and vain, and, ape-like,
must imitate me in all things. Nor must you suppose that
your distilling, dissolving, and condensing of your substance
in your vessel or your eliciting of water out of oil, is the
right way of following me. Far from it, my son. All your
mixing and dissolving of elements never has produced, and
never can produce, any good result. Do you wish to know
the reason? Your substance cannot stand the heat of the
furnace for a single half-hour, but must evaporate in smoke, or
be consumed by the fire. But the substance with which I

I


130 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


work, can stand any degree of heat, without being injured.
My water is dry, and does not moisten what it touches; it
does not evaporate, or become less, neither is its oil consumed.
So perfect are my elements; but yours are worse than
useless.

In conclusion, let me tell you that your artificial fire will
never impart my heavenly warmth, nor will your water, oil,
and earth supply you with any substitute for my substance.
It is the gift of God, shed upon the elements from heaven,
and upon one more than upon another; but how, is known
only to me, and to the Great Artist who entrusted me with
this knowledge. One thing more let me tell you, my son.
If you would imitate me, you must prepare all out of one
simple, self-contained Matter, in oze well-closed vessel, and in
one alembic. "The substance contains all that is needed for
its perfect development, and must be prepared with a warmth
that is always kept at the same gentle temperature. Let me
ask you to consider the birth and development of man, my
noblest work. You cannot make a human body out of any
substance whatsoever. Of my method in forming so subtle a
body neither Aristotle nor Plato had the remotest knowledge.
I harden the bones and the teeth, I make the flesh soft, the
muscles cold, the brain moist, the heart, into which God has
poured the life, warm, and fill all the veins with red blood.
And in the same way, I make of one quicksilver, and of one
active male sulphur, one maternal vessel, the womb of which is
the alembic. It is true that man aids me with his art, by
shedding external heat into the matrix; more than this,
however, he cannot do. He, then, that knows the true Matter,
and prepares it properly in a well-closed vessel, and puts the
whole in an alembic, and keeps up the fire at the proper
degree of warmth, may safely leave the rest to me. Upon
the fire all depends, and much, therefore, does it behove you
to see thereto. Consider, therefore, the fire, which they call
epesin, pepsin, pepausin, and optesin, or natural, preternatural,
and infranatural fire, which burns not. Without the true
Matter and the proper fire, no one can attain the end of his
labour. I give you the substance; you must provide the
mere outward conditions. Take, then, a vessel, and an alembic


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 131


of the right kind and of the right size. Be wise, and perform
the experiment in accordance with my laws. Help me, and
I wil help you. I will deal with you as you deal with me.
To my other sons, who have treated me well, have obeyed
their father and mother, and submitted themselves to my
precepts, I have given a great reward, as John de Mehung,
for instance, will tell you. His testimony is also borne out
by Villanova, Raymond, Morienus the Roman, Hermes (whom
they call Father, and who has not his like among the Sages),
Geber, and others who have written about this Art, and know
by experience that it is true.

If you, my son, wish to prepare this precious Stone, you
need not put yourself to any great expense. All that you want
is leisure, and some place where you can be without any fear of
interruption. Reduce the Matter (which is oze) to powder, put
it, together with its water, in a well-closed vessel, and expose it
to continuous, gentle heat, which will then begin to operate,
while the moisture favours the decomposition. "The presence of
the moisture prevents the dryness of the quicksilver fromretarding
its assimilation. Meanwhile, you must diligently observe what
I do, and remember the words of Aristotle (Meteor iii. and iv.),
who says: * Study Nature, and carefully peruse the book con-
cerning Generation and Corruption. You must also read the
book concerning heaven and the world, in which you will find
indicated the beautiful and pure substance. If you neglect this
study, you will fail. On this subject consult Albertus Magnus,
De Mineralibus. But if your eyes are opened by such studies,
you will discover the secret of the growth of minerals, viz., that
they are all produced from the elements.

First learn to know :ze, before you call yourself Master.
Follow me, that am the mother of all things created, which have
one essence, and which can neither grow, nor receive a living
soul, without the heavenly and elementary influences. When
you have learned by persevering study to understand the virtues
of the heavenly bodies, their potent operations, and the passive
condition of the elements, and its reason—if you further know
the media of transmutation, the cause of generation, nutrition,
and decay, and the essence and substance of the elements—you
are already acquainted with the Art, notwithstanding that a

I2


132 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


most subtle mind is still needed for the studying of my operations,
But if you do not possess part at least of this knowledge, you
will be fortunate indeed if you succeed in discovering my
secret. Itisa secret that is read not by those that are wise in their
own conceits, but by those that humbly and patiently listen to
my teaching. Therefore, if you desire to own this treasure,
which has been the reward of the truly wise in all ages, you must
doas I bid you. For my treasure has such virtue and potency
that the like of it is to be found neither in heaven nor upon
earth. It holds an intermediate position between Mercury and
the Metal which I take for the purpose of extracting from it by
your art and my knowledge that most precious essence. It is
pure and potable gold, and its radical principle is active
humidity. Moreover, it is the universal Medicine described by
Solomon (Eccles. xxxviii); the same also is taken from the
earth, and honoured by the wise. God has assigned it a place
among my mysteries, and reveals it to the Sages, although
many who call themselves learned doctors of Theology and
Philosophy, hold it in ignorant contempt—as Alchemy is also
despised by the doctors of Medicine, because they do not know
me, and are ignorant of that which they profess to teach. They
must be insufficiently furnished with brains, or they would not
direct their foolish scorn against the panacea which renders all
other medicines unnecessary. Happy is the man, even though
he be sinking under the weight of years, whose days God pro-
longs until he has come to the knowledge of this secret! For (as
Geber says) many to whom this gift was imparted late in life,
have, nevertheless, been refreshed and delighted by it in
extreme old age.

He that has this secret possesses all good. things and great
riches One ounce of it will ensure to him both wealth and
health. It is the only source of strength and recreation, and far
excels the golden tincture. It is the elixir and water of life,
which includes all other things. In my treasure are concealed
quicksilver, sulphur, incombustible oil, white, indestructible, and
fusible salt. I tell you, frankly, that you will never be able to
accomplish its preparation without me, just as I can do nothing
without your help. But if you understand my teaching, and co-
operate with me, you can accomplish the whole thing in a short
time.


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 133


Have done with the charlatans, and their foolish writings ;
have done with all their various alembics, and phials ; have done
with their excrements of horses, and all the variety of their coal-
fires, since all these things are of no use whatever. Do not
perplex yourself with metals, or other things of a like nature :
rather change the elements into a mutable form. For this is the
most excellent substance of the Sages, and is rejected only by
the foolish. Its substance is like, but its essence unlike, that of
gold. Transmute the elements and you will have what you
seek. Sublime that which is the lowest, and make that which is
the highest, the lowest. Take quicksilver which is mixed with
its active sulphur ; put it into a well-closed vial, and one alembic,
plunge one-third of it into the earth, kindle the fire of the Sages,
and watch it well so that there may be no smoke. — The rest you
may leave to me. I ask you to do no more, but only bid you
follow my unerring guidance.


THE ANSWER OF THE CHEMIST,


In wich Ae confesses his errors, asks pardon for them, and
returns than&s to Nature.


Dearest Mother Nature, who, next to the angels, art the
most perfect of all God's creatures, I thank thee for thy kindly
instruction. I acknowledge and confess that thou art the
Mother and Empress of the great world, made for the little world
of man's mind. Thou movest the bodies above, and transmutest
the elements below. At the bidding of thy Lord thou dost
accomplish both small things and great, and renewest, by cease-
less decay and generation, the face of the earth and of the
heavens. I confess that nothing can live without a soul, and that
al! that exists and is endued with being flows forth from thee by
virtue of the power that God has given to thee. All matter is
ruled by thee, and the elements are under thy governance.
From them thou takest the first substance, and from the heavens
thou dost obtain the form. "That substance is formless and void
until it is modified and individualized by thee. — First thou givest
it a substantial, and then an individual form. In thy great
wisdom thou dost cunningly mould all thy works through the
heavenly influences, so that no mortal hand can utterly destroy
them. Under thy hands God has put all things that are necessary


134 JHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


to man, and through thee, He has divided them into four king-
doms, namely, those that have being and essence, like the metals
and stones; those that have essence and growth, like the
vegetables; those that have feeling and sensation, like the beasts,
birds, and fishes. These are the first three classes; in the fourth
it pleased God to place only the noblest and most perfect of His
works, namely, man, to whom He also gave a rational and im-
mortal soul. "This soul is obscured by the defilement which
found its way into the body through the senses, and, but for the
grace and mercy of God, would have become involved in its
condemnation. Hence the chief perfection of man is not
derived from thee, nor dost thou impart to us our humanity.
Nevertheless, the material part of man is the work of thy hands
alone.

And, surely, our bodies are cunningly and wonderfully made,
and, in every part of them, bear witness to the masterly skill of
the workman. How marvellous are the uses of our various
members! How wonderful that the soul can move them and
set them to work at will! But, alas! oftener still the body is
master of the soul, and forces it to do many things which pure
reason condemns. If we consider the matter from this point of
view, it seems as though thou hadst begun well, and yet thy
work had,,after all, turned out an abortion. | Wert thou wanting
in wisdom, or knowledge, or couldst thou not do otherwise?
Pardon me if I speak too presumptuously about thy wisdom, I
only desire to be rightly and truly informed. For, indeed, even
now thy stern rebuke has made many things clear to me. I have
spent my whole life in attending to thy lessons; and the more
closely I have listened, the more clearly have I understood my
mistakes and the depth of thy wisdom. | Now, whether I lie, or
stand, or walk, I can think of nothing but thy great mystery.
And yet I am unable to conceive what subtance and form I must
take for it. Thou didst sternly rebuke me for not following thy
way ; but thou knowest that, if I do not obey thee, it is only be-
cause I do not know what thou wouldst have me do. I shall
never be able to attain any satisfactory result in this Art, unless
thou wilt enlighten my blindness. Thou hast rightly said that it
is not for man to know the mystery of thy working: how then
can I be guided to this knowledge, unless thou wilt take me by


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 135


the hand? Thou sayest that I must follow thee; and I am
willing to do so. But tell me what I must do, and what books I
must study for that purpose. Of the books which I have read,
one says, * Do this," and the other, * No, do that"; and they are
full of unintelligible expressions and of dark parables. At last I
see that I cannot learn anything from them. "Therefore I take
refuge with thee, and instantly beseech thee to advise and to tell
me how to set about this difficult task, — On my kness I implore
thee to show me the way by which I can penetrate into the lower
parts of the earth, and by what subtle process I am to obtain the
perfect mercury ofthe metals. And yet I doubt whether any
man, even after obtaining this mercury, can really make gold.
That is thy work, and not the work of man ; as thy words and
my own experience most clearly shew.

We see that the cold and moist mercury needs the
assistance of its sulphur, which is its seed after its kind, or its
homogeneous sperm, out of which the metal or Stone must be
produced. But thou sayest only : Take the proper substance, the
proper vessel the proper mineral, the proper place, and the
proper fire; then form, colour, and life will grow and spring forth
from thence. "Thou art the Architect ; thou knowest the glorious
properties of the Matter. "The active principle can do nothing
unless there be a passive principle prepared to receive its
influence. Thou knowest how to mix the warm and the cold,
the dry and the moist ; by reconciling hostile elements, thou
canst produce new substances and forms. For I did indeed
understand all that thou didst tell me, but am unable to express
itso well as thou. "This thou hast firmly impressed on my
mind, that the Elixir is composed by the reconciling and mutual
transmutation of the four elements. But what man is sufficient
for such a task? For who knows how earth can have its
essence in common with air, or how it can be changed into
moisture which is contrary to its nature? For humidity will not
leave a cold and humid element, not even under the influence of
fire. "This, too, is the work of Nature, that it becomes black, and
white, and red. These three visible colours correspond to the
three elements, earth, water, and fire, and are pervaded by the air.

Then, again, thou sayest that the Stone is prepared of oze
thing, of oze substance, in oxe vessel| the four (elements)


136 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


composing one essence in which is oze agent which begins and
completes the work ; man, thou sayest, need do nothing but add
a little heat, and leave the rest to thy wisdom. For all that
is needed is already contained in the substance, in perfection,
beginning, middle, and end, as the whole man, the whole
animal, the whole flower is contained each in its proper seed.
Now, in the human seed the human specific-substance is also
included, as flesh, blood, hair, &c.; and thus every seed contains
all the peculiar properties of its species. In the whole world
men spring from human seed, plants from plants, animals from
animals. Now I know that when once the seed is enclosed
in the female vessel, no further trouble or work of any kind is
required—everything is brought to perfection by thy gradual
and silent working. And the generation of the Stone, thou
sayest, is performed in a similar manner. Only one substance
is required, which contains within itself air, water, and fire—in
short, everything that is needed for the completion of this work.
No further handling of any kind is necessary, and a gentle
fire is sufficient to rouse the internal warmth, just as an infant in
the womb is cherished by natural heat. The only thing in
which man must aid thee, is, by preparing the substance,
removing all that is superfluous, enclosing this simple earth,
which is combined with its water, in a vessel, and subjecting
it to the action of gentle heat in a suitable alembic. This,
thou sayest, is all that needs to be done by man ; when all has
been prepared for thee, thou dost begin thy part of the work.
Thou dissolvest the substance, and makest the dry watery ; then
thou sublimest it, and bearest it upward into the air, and thus,
without any further aid, bringest that to perfection which can
itself impart perfection to all imperfect things. Therefore, thou,
Nature, art the first mother, since thou dost cunningly combine
the four elements into an essence by a process of which none
but thou has any knowledge. "Thus far have I understood thee,
and do not quite despair, if it be pleasing unto God and to thee,
of seeing thy great reward with my own eyes.

But at present I earnestly desire to know but one thing :
and that is, how can that substance be obtained, what are its
qualities, and what its powers to impart perfection to imperfect
things ?


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 137


I am well aware that gold is the most precious of the metals ;
but I cannot see that it has any capacity of becoming more
potent than it already is. For whatever man may do with it,
it will never be able to perfect anything but itself. If any one
told me to dissolve it and extract from it its quicksilver, I should
regard that as a very foolish direction ; for nothing can be got
out of gold but what is in it. These philosophasters betray
their ignorance by saying that they can reduce gold to its first
substance; but thy instruction has made it clear to me that
the first substance cannot be obtained, except by destroying the
specific properties of a thing, nor can any new species be brought
forth by such a destruction, unless the species be first universa-
lized into the genus. Moreover, I make bold to affirm that no
man can first resolve gold into its generic substance, and then
restore it again ; for when it has once lost its specific properties,
no mere human skill can change it back into what it was before.
Nor can any one really reduce gold to the first form imparted to
it by the elements. For gold is not transmuted either by heat
or by cold, and is so perfect in its kind that fire only renders it
purer. Itdoes not admit of any further development, and there-
fore no other metal or quicksilver can be obtained from it.

It is true that plants and animals are constantly producing
their like by means of their seed, and their capacity of organic
nutrition. But I do not see how the same can be said of metals,
seeing that at the expiration of any given period they still retain
the same size and weight which they had at the beginning.
"Through thee they receive their being out of the elements with-
out any sowing, planting, or development of any kind. Moreover,
I know that no credit is to be attached to the fanciful notions of
the old Sages who would prepare our Stone out of a crude
inetallic substance, and do not understand that the form and
substance of a thing are conditioned by its essential nature.
Now, I remember a certain juggling charlatan, who was looked
upon as a great philosopher, telling me that the only true
material was common quicksilver, which must be well mingled
with gold, since in such an union the one brought the other to
perfection. If I did this, continued that impostor, I should be
able to prepare the Elixir. First, however, the four elements
must be separated from each other, then, after each had been


138 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


purified, they must be reunited, the great being combined with the
small, and the subtile with the gross. This, he said, was the right
way of making the Stone. But I know that all this is sheer non-
sense, and that such men are only deceiving themselves and others.

I am also aware that only God can produce anything out of
the elements. He alone knows how to mingle and combine them
in their due proportions. For He alone is the Creator and
Author of all good things, and there is nothing in the world that
He has not made. Therefore, let the charlatans cease their vain-
glorious talk, and remember that they can never hope to gather
where they cannot sow; let them make an end of their false cal-
cinations, sublimations, distillations, by which they extract the
spirit in a vaporous form, and of their juggling coagulations and
congelations, by which they pretend, even among the initiated, to
be able rightly to separate the elements of gold and quicksilver.
It is certainly true that all things under heaven are composed of
the four elements, and mixed of them according to the due pro-
portion of their genus and species ; but itis notsimply the union
of the four elements, but their being combined in a certain way,
which constitutes the substance of the Philosophical Stone.

I also understand that in the red quicksilver and perfect
body, which is called the Sun, the four elements are combined in
a peculiar way, and so inseparably conjoined, that no mere human
art can divide them. For all ancient and true Sages say that
fire and air are enclosed in earth and water, and contend so
violently with each other that none but God and Nature can loosen
their grappling embrace. This I can truly affirm and also prove.
For we can neither see the fire nor grasp the air ; and ifany one
says that the several elements can be seen he is an imposter,
seeing that they are inseparably and inextricably conjoined.
For, although the Sophists pretend, and confidently affirm, that
they can divide gold and quicksilver into the four elements, yet
for all that they speak not the truth. — If two elements, fire and
air, were thus taken away, all the rest must vanish into nothing.
They may say that those two are retained, but they are, never-
theless, densely ignorant as to what becomes of them; for air
and fire cannot be seen or perceived. Again, that extract which
they callfire and air renders humid, which is not the property
either of fire or of air.


A DEMONSTRATION OF NATURE. 139


Moreover, as thou hast said, even the most learned Doctor
cannot know the proportion of each element in any given
substance. For God has entrusted this knowledge to thee alone.
Nor is any Sage wise enough to be able to mingle and put
together the elements so as to produce any natural object. If
then he dissolves anything into its elements, how, I pray thee,
is he to put them together again into any abiding form, since
heis ignorant of their proportionate quantity and quality, and
of the method of their composition? Yet it is of no use to
separate them, if they cannot be put together again. To thee,
O Nature, we must entrust this task, since thou knowest the
art of preparing the Philosopher's Stone, and of combining the
elements without first separating them. Nevertheless, for the
preparation of the true Elixir, thou needest the aid of a wise and
truly learned man. Aristotle says: * Where the physicist ends,
there the physician begins" Nor can we attain to true alchemy,
until we begin to follow Nature, and to be guided by a know-
ledge of her principles. Where the study of Alchemy is rightly
carried on, it is mightily advanced by Nature. But, for all that,
we must not suppose that every natural substance must be useful
to the alchemist. We must remember that Alchemy has a
threefold aim: First, to quicken and perfect the metal,
and so to digest its spirit that none of it is lost; secondly,
so to digest and heat the substance in a small phial that
(without the addition of anything else) the body and
spirit are changed into one. The mingling of the elements is
performed, not by the artist, but by thee. Thirdly, it (alchemy)
proves that the process of preparing the Stone does not in-
clude any separation of the four elements (of the quicksilver
and the Sun, which is called red and glorious gold) ^ To
believe that such a separation must take place is a great
mistake, and contradicts the fundamental principles of phi-
losophy.

Again, it is an undoubted fact, that every elementary sub-
stance is fed by the elements themselves. If, then, that which
now forms one object is dissolved, the object as such is
destroyed, the bond which held the elements together being
violently broken, and each returning to that from which it was
first taken. A father that begets a son must not be destroyed


140 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


for that purpose; it suffices that the generating spirit shall go
forth with the seed, and be conceived by the female seed, and
cherished with its warmth. Such a generating spirit has power
to beget an infant of the same species, as Avicenna says. Now,
it is the same with pure gold, which is the true matter of the
Philosophical Stone. For the father is the aczzve principle, and
must not be destroyed, or resolved into its elements, but it is
sufficient for the paternal Sun (gold) to breathe its virtue and
strength through the mother into the son. When the mother
(who is of the earth) brings forth, the son is seen to have the
father's substance.

Thus, I have learnt from thee, O Nature, that Alchemy isa
true science, and that the deep red gold, which is called Sun, is
the true father of the Stone or Elixir, from which this great and
precious treasure proceeds ; which heats, digests, and cunningly
tinges (without the least diminution or corruption) the other
principle of that gold, and thus brings forth so glorious a son.
Itis worse than useless, therefore, to meddle with the composi-
tion, or to separate the elements, which Nature has so skilfully
combined in the quicksilver, and in the perfect body of the gold.
All we have to do is to imitate Nature, and use the instruments
with which she combines the elements, and which she uses in
moulding minerals, and in giving its form to the quicksilver.
If we act otherwise, we destroy thy works, and sever the golden
chain which thou hast forged. Nevertheless, we must, as
Aristotle says, transmute the elements that we may obtain the
object of our search.

Thus thou hast wisely led me into thy way, and hast
shewn me the utter folly of my own doings  Unto thee I
render the most heartfelt thanks for that thou hast delivered
me from my own ignorance, and from the disgrace and ruin
to which all my endless alembics, quicksilvers, aquae fortes,
dissolutions, excrements of horses, and coal fires, must at length
have brought me.

In future, I will read thy book more diligently, and obey
thee more implicitly. For this is the surest and safest way
that a man can go, because the Art is entirely in thy hands,
although, by reason of its gigantic aim, its progress must
necessarily be slow. — Therefore, I will lose no more time, and


A PHILOSOPHICAL SUMMARY. 141


first begin to think about the substance, the active principle
of which shall yield me most potent quicksilver. That I will
enclose in a clean, air-tight phial, and under it I will place an
alembic; thereupon thou wilt wait upon thine office. From
the bottom of my heart I once more render unto thee the
debt of unspeakable gratitude, for that thou hast deigned to
visit me, and to bestow upon me so precious an inheritance.
In token of my gratitude I will now do thy bidding, and let
it be my ceaseless aim to attain to this most glorious Tincture
of the Elements, feeling assured that with the help of the
thrice great and good God, I shall succeed.


A .SHORT TRJACIT,


OR


PARISIUS OPI ACIE S CSV TINASISNE


By NICHOLAS FLAMELL.


and how they are transmuted one into another,

ought first to find an answer to the question, from

what substance they spring, and how they are
formed in their ores. For this purpose he must observe the
changes that are continually going forward in the mineral veins
of the earth. Hence they may be made subject to transmutation
outside of their ores if they are first made spiritual, so that they
may be reduced to their sulphur and mercury, which is performed
by Nature. Now all metals have been formed out of sulphur
and quicksilver, which are the seeds of all metals, the one
representing the male, and the other the female principle.
These two varieties of seed are, of course, composed of elementary
substances ; the sulphur, or male seed, being nothing but fire and


| E that would understand the whole subject of metals,


142 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


air (Ze, geo sulphur, resembling fire, free from the mutable
properties of metals, and not that common sulphur which is
not a metallic substance at all) ; while the quicksilver, or female
seed, is nothing but earth and water. These two seeds were
figuratively represented by the ancient Sages under the forms of
two dragons, or serpents, one of which had wings, while the
other had none. The wingless dragon is sulphur, because it
never flies away from the fire. The winged serpent is quicksilver,
which is borne away through the air (the female seed, which is
composed of water and earth)—because in a certain degree it
flies away or evaporates. Now, if these two seeds, separated
one from another, are united spermatically by triumphant Nature,
in the book of Mercury, the first mother of metals, the Sages
call the substance that results, the flying dragon, because this
dragon, being kindled with its fire, in its flight pours abroad
into the air fire and a poisonous vapour. The same happens
to mercury, which, if placed in a vessel over an ordinary fre,
has its internal, hidden fire kindled ; and then you may see how
the outward vegetable fire kindles the inward natural fire of
mercury. You will notice that it exhales into the air a
certain poisonous fume or vapour, the stench of which is
such as to prove that it is nothing but the head of the dragon
which is leaving Babylon in great haste, even the philosophical
Babylon which is encompassed by a double or treble vessel.
Other Sages have likened this Mercury to a flying Lion,
because the Lion devours other animals, and refreshes and
strengthens himself at will with the blood of all animals except
those which have power to resist his rage—and because mercury,
too,is known to deprive other metals of their specific form,
and to absorb and incorporate them. — Gold and silver, however,
are strong enough to resist its violence ; although it is well-known
that mercury, when exposed to an exceptional degree of heat,
devours and swallows even these two metals. Yet neither of
them is changed into the nature of the mercury, howbeit, they
are enclosed in its womb; for gold and silver are more per-
manent and more perfect than crude mercury, this being an
imperfect metal, notwithstanding that there is in it the substance
of perfection. — Common gold, which is a perfect metal, and
silver, and all the imperfect metals, are developed out of


A PHILOSOPHICAL SUMMARY. 143


mercury. For this reason, the ancient Sages have called it the
Mother of the Metals, and hence, being itself a metal, it must
contain a two-fold metallic substance, namely, the inner sub-
stance of the Moon, and that of the Sun (which is unlike the
other. Of these two substances mercury is formed, and they
are cherished in its body in the form of spiritual essences. Now,
as soon as Nature has formed that mercury of these two spirits,
she strives to transmute them into a perfect bodily form ; and
therefore, when those two spirits have grown up, and their two
varieties of seed awake, they desire to assume their own proper
bodies ; and then the Mother, mercury, must die, and having
died a natural death, can never be quickened any more into that
which it was previously.

Vainglorious and arrogant .Alchemists have  obscurely
hinted that perfect and imperfect bodies must be transmuted
into fluid mercury, but.this assertion is only a trap for the un-
wary. lt is true that mercury consumes imperfect metals, like
lead and tin, and thus increases in quantity ; but, by doing so,
it loses its perfection, and is no longer the mercury that it was
before. If, indeed, it could be so mortified by a chemical
process as to shut out all hope of its ever quickening itself again,
it would be changed into something else, as happens with cinna-
bar, or in sublimate. But, when it is coagulated by a chemical
process, whether by a swift or a slow method, its two bodies do
not assume a permanent form. By the natural process this
coagulation is indeed successfully carried out ; and thus we never
find a vein of lead, for instance, which does not contain a few per-
manent grains, at least, of gold and silver. "The first coagulation
of mercury is lead, which is most suitable for fixing it, and
bringing it to pérfection. For lead is never without some fixed
grain of gold and silver, which are impa;ted to it by Nature for
the purpose of multiplication and development, as I myself
have experienced, and am able to testify. So long as it is in
its mercury, and not separated from its mineral, it can continue
to increase its substance from the substance of its mercury.
But if this fixed grain is taken away, and severed from its
mercury (or the mineral in which it is found), it can no longer
gain in size. It is with this grain as with the green fruit that
is formed on a tree when the blossom has been shed. Ifit is


144 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


plucked off before it is ripe, it can come to nothing. [fit is
left on the tree, it is nourished and increased by the sap and the
juice of the parent stem, and thus gradually attains to its proper
size, and to maturity. But, until ripeness has been attained, the
fruit continues to attract to itself the sap and juice of the tree,
that is to say, so long as the connection with the parent tree is
not severed.

Almost the same thing happens with gold. Such a grain
attracts to itself the mercury ofthe lead, and incessantly * fixes "
it into its own mercury, whereby it grows and gradually increases
in size. The mercury of perfect or imperfect metals is the parent
tree, and the grain (of gold) can be nourished with nothing but
this mercury. But as soon as you sever the connection with the
parent mercury, that growth of the grain must immediately come
to an end; it is as though the unripe fruit had been plucked
from the tree : you would vainly endeavour to restore the vital
connexion. When you have once removed an unripe pear or
apple from its native branch, it would be foolish indeed to join
it to the tree once more, and expect it to ripen. Instead of
growing, it will gradually shrivel up, and become smaller. The
same thing may be observed in the case of the metals. For if
any one were to take common metallic gold and silver, and tried
to resolve those metals into mercury, he would be doing a very
foolish thing. It is a result which cannot be brought about by
any chemical process, however subtle and ingenious, just as fruit
which has once been plucked in an unripe state can never again
be vitally joined to the parent tree. [t has, indeed, been well
said by the Sages that if gold and silver be joined together
through their proper mercury, they have power to render all
other (imperfect) metals perfect. But these Sages did not speak
of common gold and silver, which must always remain what they
are, can never become anything else, and certainly cannot aid the
development of other metals. It is fruit that has been plucked
before the time, and therefore is dead and withered. No, the
/iving fruit (the realliving gold and silver) we must seek o 7e
tree; for only there can it grow, and increase in size, according
to the possibilities of its nature. This tree we must transplant,
without gathering its fruit, into a better and richer soil, and to
a sunnier spot. Then its fruit will receive more nourishment in


A PHILOSOPHICAL SUMMARY. 145


a single day than it was wont to receive in a hundred years,
while it was still in its former sterile soil.

I wish you to understand that Mercury, which is a most
excellent tree, and contains silver and gold in an indissoluble
form, must be taken and transplanted into a soil that is nearer
to the Sun (Ze, in this case, gold), where it may flourish ex-
ceedingly, and be abundantly watered. Where it was planted
before, it was so shaken and weakened by the wind and the
frost, that but little fruit could be expected from it. So there it
remained a long time, and bore no fruit.

But in the garden of the Sages, the .$zz sheds its genial
influence both morning and evening, day and night, un-
ceasingly. "There our Zzee is watered with the rarest dew, and
the fruit which hangs upon the trees swells and ripens and
expands, from day to day. It never withers, but makes more
progress in one year than it did in a thousand years in its
former sterile situation. Or, to drop metaphor, let the mercury
be taken, and warmed day and night in an alembic over a
gentle fire. Yet it should not be a coal or a wood fire, but
a clear and pellucid heat, like that of the Sz itself—a gentle
and even warmth. (Growing fruit must not be exposed to too
much heat, or else it is withered, and shrivelled up, and is
never brought to perfection. It must have a genial warmth,
and be supported by a moderate moisture in the tree, if it is
to flourish and expand. | For heat and moisture are the food
of all earthly things, both animal, vegetable, and mineral.
Ordinary coal or wood fires are too violent for our purpose,
and give no nourishment like the heat of the Sun which pre-
serves all bodies through its natural influences. For this
reason the Sages use none but this natural fire, not because
it is made by the Sages, but because it is made by Nature—
Nature, that creates all things, whether they be animal, vege-
table, or mineral, and warms them, each at its own proper
degree.

Therefore, I will not say that man by his art can make
natural things ; but I do say that human art can impart
greater perfection to that which Nature makes. For this
purpose the ancient Sages have had but one object in
view, namely, to produce from the moon and the true mother

K


146 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


mercury, the mercury of the philosophers, which in its opera-
tion is much more potent than natural mercury, and is
useful for working upon simple, perfect, imperfect, cold,
and warm metals Now, the Philosophical Stone is good
for perfect and imperfect metals, and soon  restores
and brings them to perfection without any diminution,
addition, or real change of any kind. For, apart from perfect-
ing them, it leaves them in the state in which they were before.
I do not say that the Sages combine common gold, silver, and
mercury for this purpose: this is the method only of ignorant
charlatans, who thereby hope to prepare the mercury of the
Sages; butthey never succeed in producing this, the real first
substance ofthe Stone. If they would obtain it they must go
to the seventh mountain, where there is no plain, and from
its height they must look down upon the sixth, which they will
behold at a great distance. On the summit of that mountain
they will find the glorious Regal Herb, which some Sages call
a mineral, some a vegetable. The bones they must leave, and
only extract its pure juice, which will enable them to do the
better part of the work. "This is the true and subtle mercury
of the philosophers which you must take. Now, first it prepares
the white tincture, and then the red. For the Swz and /7eoz
are prepared by the same method, and yield the red and white
tincture respectively, and the preparation is so simple that it
might be seen to by a woman while she works at her spindle
—just as she might set a hen on some eggs, without washing
them first, and without any other trouble but that of turning
the eggs every day that the chickens may break the shells
all the sooner. In like manner, you must not wash your
mercury, but only put it with its like (which is fire) into ashes
(corresponding to the straw), into one glass vessel (which is
the nest) in a suitable alembic (which is the house) — If you
do this there will come out a chicken, that will deliver you
with its blood from all diseases, and feed you with its flesh,
and clothe you with its feathers, and shelter you from the cold.
Therefore, I pray and beseech the Creator of all things to
grant His grace to all faithful Alchemists, that they may find
the chicken, which, through God's unspeakable goodness and
mercy, has now been vouchsafed to me. I have written this


A PHILOSOPHICAL SUMMARY. 147


tract for your sakes, to encourage you, and point out to you
the right way: I hope and trust that my words will enable
you to understand more fully the works of other Sages.
Farewell !


K2


THE ONLY TRUE
WAY;


AUN CDS EE UTE (CO OD RGASINTIDEUESDES ADEST OISEAU


POINTING OUT THE PATIT OB TRUTEH.


CS VR


di^ , : aS L " M NA us ^ jw Ü
3 ME ODONIS
, * E 4 , , P " 2 em m Q4. m 3a


»
- | P ! :
E: E . | E
: j - "
: 1
; EL
'


DERE ONISVOIURUUER C WASYE


ELOVED friend and brother, under the name of this
glorious Art there is to be found much false teach-
ing, which is put forward by pseudo-alchemists,
whose writings are nothing but imposture and deceit,

and are yet highly esteemed by people of the simpler
sort. These charlatans induce their dupes to waste much
money and time on that which can profit them nothing ;
for unless a thing be well begun, it can never be brought
to a good end. Yet most men, who, nowadays, have
devoted themselves to this exalted art of chemistry, are pursuing
a wrong course, and are deceivers or deceived. ^ The deceivers
are conscious of their own ignorance, and try to veil it under an
obscure and allegorical style. "The less they really know, the
more pompous and the more unintelligible do their speculations
become. But the reader, who is puzzled by their perplexing
stylé, may at least comfort himself with the assurance that he
knows as much about the matteras the authors. That assurance
must serve for a kind of clue to the endless labyrinth of their
false sublimations, calcinations, distillations, solutions, coagula-
tions, putrefactions, and corruptions. Nevertheless, we may
almost every day see foolish persons spend their whole sub-
stance on those absurd experiments, being induced to do so
by the aforesaid pseudo-alchemists, who impose on them with a
false process, and fanciful perversions of Nature.

With these useless and unnecessary experiments the true
Alchemists will have nothing to do. "They follow the method
pursued by Nature in the veins of the earth, which is very
simple, and includes no solutions, putrefactions, coagulations, or
anything of the kind Can Nature, in the heart of the earth,
where the metals do grow and receive increase, have anything


152 THE HBERMETIG MUSEUM.


corresponding to all those pseudo-alchemistical instruments,
alembics, retorts, circulatory and  sublimatory phials, fires,
and other materials, such as cobbler's wax, salt, arsenic,
mercury, sulphur, and so forth? Can all these things really be
necessary for the growth and increase ofthe metals? [t is
surprising that any one not entirely bereft of his senses can
spend many years in the study of alchemy, and yet never get
beyond those foolish and frivolous solutions, coagulations, putre-
factions,  distillations, while Nature is so simple and
unsophisticated in her methods. Surely every true Artist must
look upon this elaborate tissue of baseless operations as the
merest folly, and can only wonder that the eyes of those silly
dupes are not at last opened, that they may see something
besides such absurd sophisms, and read something besides those
stupid and deceitful books. It seems that they are so entangled
in their sophisms that they can never attain to the freedom of
true philosophy.

Butlet me tell you that so long as you love lies, and turn
away from rational philosophy, you will never find the right way.
I can speak from bitter experience. For I, too, toiled for many
years in accordance with those sophistic methods, and en-
deavoured to reach the coveted goal by sublimation, distillation,
calcination, circulation, and so forth, and to fashion the Stone out
of substances such as urine, salt, atrament, alum, etc. Ihave tried
hard to evolve it out of hairs, wine, eggs, bones, and all manner
of herbs; out of arsenic, mercury, and sulphur, and all the
minerals and metals. I have striven to elicit it by means of aqua
fortis and alkali. I have spent nights and days in dissolving,
coagulating, amalgamating, and precipitating. Yet from all these
things I derived neither profit nor joy. I had hoped much from
the quintessence, but it disappointed me like the rest.

Therefore, beloved brother, let me warn you to have nothing
to do with sublimations of sulphur and mercury, or the solution of
bodies, or the coagulation of spirits, or with all the innumerable
alembics, which bear little profit unto veritable art. —So long as
you do not seek the true essence of Nature, your labours will be
doomed to failure; therefore, if you desire success, you must
once for all renounce your allegiance to all those old methods,
and enlist under the standards of that method which proceeds in


THE ONLY TRUE WAY. 153


strict obedience to the teaching of Nature—in short, the method
which Nature herself pursues in the bowels of the earth. — For
you see that Nature uses only one substance in her work of
developing and perfecting the metals, and that this substance in-
cludes everything that is required. Now, this substance appears
to call for no special treatment, except that of digestion by gentle
heat, which must be continued until it has reached its highest
possible degree of development. For this simple heating pro-
cess the cunning sophists have substituted solutions, coagula-
tions, calcinations, putrefactions, sublimations, and other fantas-
tical operations—which are only different names for the same
thing; and thereby they have multiplied a thousand-fold the
difficulties of this undertaking, and given rise to the popular
notion that it is a most arduous, hazardous, and ruinously expen-
sive enterprise. This they have simply done out of jealousy and
malice, to put others off the right track, and to involve them in
poverty and ruin. But they will find it difficult to justify their
conduct before God, who has commanded us to love our neigh-
bours as ourselves. For out of sheer malice they have rendered
the road of truth impassable, and perplexed a simple natural
process with such an elaborate tissue of circumstantial nomen-
clature, as to make the amelioration of the metals appear a hope-
lessly difficult task.

For while you heat, you also putrefy, or decompose, as you
may see by the changes which a grain of wheat undergoes in the
ground under the influence of the rain and of the sun; you know
that it must first decay before new life can spring forth. It is
this process which they have denominated putrefaction and solu-
tion. Again when you heat, you also sublime, and to this coction
they have applied the terms sublimation and multiplication, that
the simple man mighterr more easily. In like manner coagula-
tion takes place in heating ; for they say that coagulation takes
place when humidity is changed into the nature of fire, so as to
be able to resist the action of fire, without evaporating, or being
consumed. And heating also includes that which they call
* circulation," or conjunction, or the union of fire with water to
prevent complete combustion.

Thus you see that that which they-have called by so many
names is really but one simple process. The substance, which


154 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


is one, they have described under a similar variety of appellations,
to prevent men from finding that which, by the grace of God,
can provide for them so many precious blessings. In the first
place they call it *our mercury,' by which they mean nothing
but moisture, which begins to unite itself with the fire, and there-
fore may be compared to mercury. Again, they use the expres-
sion, *our sulphur, whereby they mean nothing but the fire
itself, which lies hid beneath the water, or humidity, and is
heated by the water to its highest degree. Then, again, they call
it Hyle, or the First Substance, because all things are first
generated out of water and fire. Other names, such as Arsenic,
Orpiment, Bismuth, are not used by the Sages at all, but only
by certain ignorant charlatans, of whom we need not take any
further notice. Let zs follow the guidance of Nature: sZe will
not lead us astray.

If you let this be your motto, you will surely be able to
call to mind the first substance, out of which all metallic sub-
stances are generated. But before we consider this question, it
will much behove you to understand why the Sun, Moon, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, are metals, and what is their origin.
Besides finding an answer to this question, you must also bear
in mind that all created things are divided into three kingdoms,
viz, the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral To the first
belong all living things that have flesh and blood ; to the second
all herbs, plants, and trees; to the third all metals, stones, and
everything that cannot be burned.

But, though divided into three classes, yet all things,
O my brother, may be traced back to one common Principle,
from which they derive their generation, or birth. By different
varieties of heat this first substance is transmuted in various
ways, and assumes different specific forms. — Since, then, Nature
is so simple, I advise you once more to have done with all those
foolish sublimations, coagulations, and putrefactions, and the
ridiculous old wives' fables which are even now believed by many,
and simply to follow Nature, and her unsophisticated methods :
then she will take you by the hand, and guide you to the true
substance. For the only method of correcting or ameliorating
Nature, consists in the natural heating of essences. Now, this
Essence, my friend, is the principal thing, on which depends the


THE ONLY TRUE WAY. 155


whole matter. This simple truth, the vulgar herd of alchemists
seem quite unable to understand, and thus go on toiling day by
day with substances which have nothing to do with the matter.
They might as well sow horn, or wood, cr stones, and expect a
golden harvest of corn. The suz and zzeoz cannot be made out
of a// substances, but only out of the natural Essence out of
which all things are formed, being afterwards differentiated into
divers substances by different varieties of heat. Thus the
special quality of every individual thing is to be referred to the
degree of its coction. If, therefore, we wish to exercise the
true Art of Alchemy, we must imitate the method by which
Nature does her work in the bowels of the earth.

The ancients have named many colours in connexion
with this process, such as black, white, citrine, red, green, and
so forth. All this is simply intended to lead you astray from
the right road, and to keep you in ignorance. "Those ancient
writers were constantly at the greatest pains to obscure their
style with such a perplexing variety of allegorical expressions
as to render it impossible for the ordinary reader to under-
stand their meaning.

Therefore, I would again and again exhort you not to
believe them when they tell you that you must have or take a
black substance, or that the substance turns black, white, and
red in the course of the chemical process. The black colour was
suggested to them by the fact that the substance or essence at
first mingles with a brilliant material fire, by which a liquid is
separated from the essence in the form of a certain black fume.
This black fume the ancients called the Black Raven, and the
essence they denominated the Raven's Head. — This separation
you should carefully observe. From it the ancients learned that
the separation of natural subtances is nothing buta natural
defect of the heating process. This, again, suggested to them the
consideration that those essences that had been imperfectly
heated by Nature, might be aided in a natural manner by
ordinary fire, and that thus the essences which are still combus-
tible, and their liquids (which the ancients invidiously called
mercury), being black when they are separated from the essence,
might be perfected by art, and the essences guarded against com-
bustion by their liquid, and the liquid rendered incapable of being


156 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


separated from the essence. This the ancients called *our
sulphur. ^ Forafter this preparation the essence is no longer
vegetable or animal, but by the perfection of its heating it has
become a mineral essence, and is therefore called sulphur ; the
essence is nothing but an e/ezzenzary fire, and its liquid, which is
guarded against combustion, is true e/emezary air, and, because
air is naturally warm and moist, it is called mercury by those
jealous ancients. ^ Air contains in itself the nature of fire, and
elementary fire, again, contains within itself the nature of air:
thus, by the union of their common elements, a true amalgama-
tion of the two can take place. Such are the material fire and
water which we see. ^ These material elements are nothing but
an aid to the essences ofthe elements by which they can be
naturally reduced to the highest degree (of perfection ?). This
gradation is the only true Alchemy, and there is none beside.
The pseudo-alchemy of our modern charlatans is mere waste of
money and time.

It would be a great mistake for you to suppose that you
can derive any real knowledge from the writings of the Sages.
They show you only the outside, and conceal the internal
Essence. To you they offer the husks, but the finest of the
wheat they keep for themselves. They showyou a way which they
do not dream of treading. I advise you, therefore, in future, to
give them a wide berth ; or you will only enrich the apothecaries
while you plunge yourself and your family into the deepest
poverty ; nay, instead of gaining the universal panacea, you will
contract the most dangerous diseases from constantly moving in
an atmosphere black with sulphurous and mercurial smoke, and
fetid with the stench of bismuth and all manner of salts.

It is truly amazing that none of the seekers after this great
treasure, though willing to submit to any amount of labour and
hardship for its sake, seem capable of perceiving the lesson
which constant failure is striving to impress upon them. — What,
I pray you, have those thousands of persons, who have tried the
solutions, coagulations, putrefactions, amalgamations, and
circulations, gained by their agonising toil? "What good result
have they produced with their waters, solutions of metals, blood,
hair, eggs, milk, sugar, and all manner of herbs? Let me
beseech you to profit by their heart-breaking experience, and to


THE ONLY TRUE WAY. 157


have done with everything but true Alchemy, which teaches
that the substance is brought to perfection, and attains the
exaltation of elementary fire, by its own light and liquid—
by which also imperfect metals are ameliorated, because their
elementary fire was not properly digested by its liquid.
And for the same reason the elementary fire cannot remain,
for the liquid is separated from that elementary fire by
the heat of the ordinary fire, and evaporates in the form of
white smoke. The elementary fire, on the other hand, does not
evaporate, but abides with its earth, and must be burned with
it, because its protecting liquid has vanished in white smoke.
This is that whiteness of which the Ancients have said that it
comes after the black colour. For this reason, they are in the
habit of saying that you must make it black before you make it
white. We begin our process with blackness, and transmute
the black smoke, but do not take it for our substance, and make
it white. The latter would be a foolish supposition and. im-
posture. If you would avoid such misapprehensions, you must
not attempt the study of this subject until you have a sound
knowledge of the operations of Nature, and more especially of
the essential properties of the metals.

I am afraid, my Brother, that my book will cause you
heaviness of heart, instead of joy, because I sweep away at one
fell stroke all those false sophistical notions which had become
so dear to you. Nevertheless, you must once for all relinquish
that idea of yours that you are profoundly versed in the
mysteries of this Art, and leave these childish absurdities to
those who derive wealth and profit from them. Among these
persons, Adam de Bodenstein held a very distinguished place ;
for he wrote all manner of so-called theosophical books, and
boasted of his attainments in the alchemistic Art, of which he
was really quite ignorant. Yet to the present day many people
believe that he (whose expressions are those of a mere charlatan)
had a real knowledge of true alchemy. t is true that his
nonsense cannot for a moment impose on the initiated ; but
among the blind (as the proverb says) it is easy to win golden
opinions as a good fencer. On this account, and as Bodenstein
is no more among the living, I will dismiss the subject, for
nothing but what is favourable should be spoken of the dead


158 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


and of the absent. This I will say, however, that he was a
good Sophist and a good physician ; but of Alchemy he knew
little or nothing. I should not have said this much if I were
not really anxious to warn the unwary against being dazzled by
the splendour of his name, and to prevent them from being
lured on by it to their own ruin.

If, then, you are a lover of the truth, you will bid farewell
to these specious absurdities, and henceforth entrust yourself to
the guidance of Nature alone; be sure that she will lead you
onward without faltering to the desired goal, even thát method
by which she works towards the essence. Moreover, she will
demand of you neither much labour nor any considerable outlay.
The whole thing is done by a simple process of heating, which
includes the solution and coagulation of the bodies, and also the
sublimation and putrefaction. But some writers have substi-
tuted for the simple and true essence a certain other essence,
with which they have deceived the whole world, and involved
many persons in considerable losses. Whether their conduct
was upright and loving will one day be decided by the Great
Judge. lt would be better not to publish such writings, since
the false statements and groundless assertions with which they
swarm, plunge so many credulous persons into grievous losses.
For if there were not so many books put forward by ignorant
writers, many thousands of persons who at the present moment
are hopelessly floundering about in a sea 'of specious book-
learning, would have been led by the light of their own unaided
intellects to the knowledge of this precious secret; they are
prevented, these many years, from seeing the plain truth by a
vast mass of printed nonsense which commands their reverence,
because they do not understand it. The Ancients did indeed
know something about the Art; butat the present day we can
very well dispense with the cumbrous phraseology under which
they (most successfully) attempted to veil their meaning. It
can only tend to the bewilderment of honest enquirers, who are
thereby thrown off the true scent, unless indeed they should
come to be instructed by living Masters.

I myself may not speak out as plainly as I would, for I am
silenced by the vow which binds all the masters of the Art, the
curse that lights on those who violate the sacred seal of Nature's


JTEPE (QNVLY TROBE WAY. 159


secrets, and the malediction of all the philosophers. Therefore,
I must exhort you again and again to trust your own obser-
vations rather than the writings of others, and to let the Book
of Nature be the most favoured volume of your library.
Observe her methods, not only in the production of metals, but
in the procreation of the fruits of the earth, and their constant
growth and development, in the winter and summer, in the
spring and autumn, by rain and sunshine. If you had a sound
knowledge of Nature's methods in producing the bud and the
flower, and in ripening the green fruit, you would be able to set
your hand to the germs which Nature provides in the bowels of
the earth, and to educe from them (or their substance) that
which you so much desire.

Forgive me then, my Brother, for so unceremoniously
overthrowing all your old settled and dearly cherished con-
victions. My excuse must be that I have done it for your own
good, as you would otherwise never learn the true secret of
transmuting metals. You may believe and trust me, for I can
have no conceivable motive for filling the world with fresh lies,
of which, God knows, it is already full enough, through the
agency of the aforesaid deceivers and their willing dupes, who
after being lured on by those false books to the loss of all their
worldly goods, have not suffered their eyes to be opened by
their losses, and seem unable to find their way out of that
gigantic labyrinth of falsehood. Nay, they have even taken
upon themselves to write books, and to speak as if they were
perfect masters of the Art, and had derived great advantage
from it, though in reality they have been brought so low as to -
be able to afford nothing but miserable decoctions. They
dissolved until their whole fortune had undergone a process of
dissolution ; they sublimed until all their gold and silver had
evaporated ; they putrefied until their clothes decayed upon
their bodies; and they calcined until all their wood and coal
were consumed to ashes, and they themselves were reduced to
wallet and staff.

This is the prize which they have won with all their trouble.
Let their ruin be a warning to you, my Brother. For /Zezr
alchemy, instead of imparting health, is followed by penury and
disease; instead of transmuting copper into gold, it changes


160 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


gold into copper and brass. Consider also how many ignorant
persons, such as cobblers, tailors, bankrupt merchants, and
tavern keepers, pretend to a knowledge of this Art, and, after a
few years' unsuccessful experimenting in the laboratory, call
themselves great doctors, announce in boastful and sesquipe-
dalian language their power to cure many diseases, and promise
mountains of gold. "Those promises are empty wind, and their
medicines rank poison, with which they fill the churchyards,
and for the impudent abuse of which God will one day visit
them with heavy punishment. But I will leave the magistrates
and the jailers to deal with these swindling charlatans.
speak of them only to put you on your guard. If so many
persons write on the subject of Alchemy, who know nothing
whatever about the nature and generation of metals, it becomes
all the more necessary for you to be careful what books you
read, and how much you believe.

For I tell you truly that so long as you have no real and
fundamental knowledge of the nature of the metals, you cannot
make much progress in the true Art of Alchemy, or understand
the natural transmutation of metals. You must grasp the
meaning of every direction before you con put it into effect.
Always mistrust that which you do not understand (Ze, in
studying this art). "There are zazy false ways, but there can be
only oze that is true, and indicates a process which does not
require many hands, or much labour. For this reason, beloved
friend and Brother, you must work hard by day and by night to
obtain a thorough knowledge of the metals, and of their
essential nature. Then you will be able to understand the
requirements of the art. You will know without being told
what is the true substance and the true method. You will see
the utter uselessness of your former labour, and you will be
amazed at your former blindness. Study the nature of metals
and the causes of their generation, for they derive their birth
from the same source as all other created things.

For as by a heating process the infant is developed in the
mother's womb out of the father's seed, and as the chicken is
brought forth out of the egg by the natural incubation of the
hen, so the metals, too, are developed in a certain way out
of a certain substance. Yet I do not say, my Brother, that


EDE C QVE Y^. EU. WAY. 161


mercury and sulphur are the first substance of metals. Those
juggling deceivers have told you so; but in the veins of the
earth, where the metals grow, are found neither mercury nor
sulphur. "Therefore, when they speak of sulphur, you must un-
derstand them to allude to elementary fire, and by mercury you
must understand the liquid. In a similar lying spirit they have
called fire (elementary) * our Sun," and the liquid * our Moon,

or the elementary fire soul, and the elementary liquid spirit, be-
cause elementary substances are invisible. The soul is invisible
fire, and the spirit invisible moisture: the outward essential fire
and water they have called ' 2odzes, because they are visible and
palpable. Nay, they try to make you believe that these are
metallic bodies, and that you must dissolve them. — But do not
let them deceive you. Be on your guard against their dishonest
tricks, and cunning devices, by which they set you to experiment
with metallic bodies, when they really mean the metallic essence.

They point out to you varieus materials and substances,
notwithstanding that there is only oe true substance, and oze
true method. Be sure that their solutions, coagulations, sub-
limations, calcinations, and putrefactions, do not represent the
method of Nature in the heart of the carth, where the metals
grow. For pious Nature only heats the elementary fire which is
thereby ameliorated and fixed through its liquid ; which latter
she also changes, by various degrees of heat, into all the various
objects which compose the three natural kingdoms—and although
now it is differentiated into bodies so different as vegetables, ani-
mals, and minerals, yet they have all originally sprung from one
common substance, all have one root, which the Ancients
denominated the first Matter or Hyle. But it is really nothing
but hidden elementary fire, with its liquid, which the Ancients
called the root liquid, radical moisture, or humid radical, because
it is the root of all created things.

This liquid, with its fire, is differentiated into the various
kinds of natural bodies, by the various degrees of heat, or
' cocto", which take place in them. One thing is more perfectly
heated in its clementary fire through its liquid, than another.
The vegetab/e nature is that in which the coction is least perfect.
Therefore its essence is easily burned, and its liquid easily sepa-
rated from its elementary fire, by common fire,


L


162 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The coction of the azz»za/ is almost as imperfect as that of
the vegetable substance: for its essence is easily burned. The
coction of the ;zera/ substances is the most perfect of all,
because in them the metallic liquid is more closely united (by
coction) to its elementary fire. Hence metals are better able to
resist common fire than the vegetable and animal substances.
When a metal is placed in the fire, it does not burn with a bright
flame like wood ; for the liquid of wood is not so completely
joined (by coction) to its essence, as the liquid of metals
is to z/s essence. The union of the liquid with the essence
is not metallic, but vegetable, for which reason the latter is
consumed with a black smoke, when, by a higher degree
of coction, the vegetable has been transmuted into a metallic
essence, it no longer gives out a black smoke in common fire, but
a white smoke, as you may see when imperfect metals are melted
in the fire. Thatis why the Ancients said that you must árst
make the substance black before you make it white, Ze., it must
first give out a black smoke before it gives out a white. Again
they say : You must first make it white before you make it red.
To make red is to make perfect, because gold and silver have
been rendered perfect by coction, their essence being fully united
to their liquid, and changed into pure fire.

Do not then suffer yourself to be thrown off your guard by
the obscure phraseology of the Ancients. If you thoroughly
study the simple fundamental nature of the metals, you will
know what their enigmatic expressions mean, and will not, like
some moderns, conclude from their writings that you must take
a certain substance and dissolve it until it turns black, then
again purify and calcine it till the blackness disappears and it
begins to turn white ; and after that, once more increase the fire
and calcine and toil until the substance turns red. Such an
interpretation of the language of the Ancients can only suggest
itself to persons entirely ignorant of the nature of metallic
substances ; indeed, the Ancients wrote as they did solely in
order to hide their real meaning from all but the close students
of Nature. To this end they were in the constant habit of
employing the terms * mercury " and * sulphur  Andalthough
the metallic essence is the true substance which, by natural
coction, must be raised from the lowest to the highest stage of


EAE DIEA DRRULA, AL, 163


development, and although the meaning of the Ancients is
intelligible enough to the initiated, yet the ignorant can gather
from their language no more than the fact that the substance
must be taken from the metals. But where are they to obtain
it, and how are they to bring it to perfection? The metallic
essence can not be separated from the imperfect metals without
being injured ; for if it be separated with fire the liquid must
evaporate, and the essence (witli its earth) be consumed. Nor
will you be able to separate the essence of the imperfect metals
by means of aqua fortis, arsenic, aqua vita, or alkali, without
injuring the essence and its liquid by the foreign moisture : for
the metallic nature can bear no foreign substance, and if any
foreign moisture combines with the metallic liquid, it loses its
proper quality and is entirely corrupted.

The metallic essence of the perfect metals you cannot
obtain in a separate form ; for their liquid and elementary fire
are welded together by so perfect a process of coction, and so
closely united with their earth, that neither fire nor water can
avail to separate them, seeing that the fire has no power over
them, and no foreign moisture can combine with, or corrupt, the
liquid of perfect metals. All your labour will be in vain : the
coction has done its work so well that you will never be able to
undo it.

Hence, the Ancients said that there was no sulphur in
anything but in the metals, and hence also they called the
metallic liquid quicksilver. But names do not alter facts : the
fact is that the elementary fire must be so united to its element-
ary liquid by natural coction that they become indivisible. For
the liquid protects the fire against combustion, so that both
remain fixed and unchanged in common fire. This perfected
substance the Ancients have well called Elixir, or fire which
has undergone a process of perfect coction: for that which
before was crude and raw is * cooked," or digested by the
process of coction. "That element which, by its imperfection,
causes base metals to be broken up and disintegrated by fire,
has been digested and perfected by natural heat.

For this reason you must not grudge the labour which the
proper performance of this heating process demands, seeing that
it includes purification, sublimation, dissolution, and all the other

L2


*


164 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


chemical processes enumerated by the ancient alchemists. All
these you may safely dismiss from your mind, as they can cause
you nothing but trouble, loss, and waste of time. My purpose
in writing this faithful admonition is to caution you again and
again to beware of those pitfalls with which the contemptuous
obscurity of the Ancients has so plentifully beset the path of
the ingenuous enquirer. Il also desired to suggest to you the
true suósiance, and the one true zzezAod, and have throughout
endeavoured to express myself in a style as free from allegorical
obscurity as possible. I have recalled you from your wander-
ings in the pathless wilderness, and put you in the right way.


Now you must beseech Almighty God to give you the real:


philosophical temper, and to open your eyes to the facts of
nature. Thus alone you will be able to reach the coveted goal.


THE


(GLORY OB THESW ORDD.


OR,
TASTE SOJEUCUPASIRSZASDIESIEUS


THAT IS TO SAY,


. A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE ANCIENT SCIENCE WHICH ADAM LEARNED
FROM GoD HIMSELF; WHICH NOAH, ABRAHAM, AND SOLOMON
HELD AS ONE OF THE GREATEST GiFTS OF GOD; WHICH
ALSO ALL SAGES, AT ALL TIMES, PREFERRED TO THE
WEALTH OF THE WHOLE WORLD, REGARDED AS
THE CHIEF TREASURE OF THE WHOLE
WORLD, AND BEQUEATHED ONLY TO
Goop MEN;


NAMELY,


IHR SOGIENGE OR-THE PHILOSOPHER'S SW OINIB:


DPI, XH 9:


"or this they willingly, through their sickedness, are
zgnorant o/, that through the Word ot God the heavens were
0/ old, and the earth standing out oí the vafer, and m the
water."


155 dii


THE GEORY (OE LHB WORLD,


OR,


TABLE OF PARADISE:


A most precious book, containing art, the like of which is not to
be found upon earth; shewing the truth concerning the true
Philosophy, and the most noble medicine, and priceless
Tincture, together with divers other valuable Arts,
and the Instruments required for them.


Preserver of this World, I venture to shew forth the

hidden mysteries of Nature, which God has planted

there, and deigns to reveal to men, that they may see
how marvellously things are created, and how wonderfully all
classes of natural objects are brought forth : for a testimony to all
believing Christian men, and for a comfort to all afflicted and
troubled hearts—seeing that allthings created perish and are de-
composed only to be renewed again, to be multiplied, animated,
and perfected after their kind. For nothing that is created, or
born, is at rest, but daily undergoes increase or multiplication on
the part of Nature, until it becomes that which is created and
ordained to be the treasure of all mankind.

Therefore, beseech God to give you such wisdom and un-
derstanding as will enable you to understand this Art, and to
bring it, by His blessing, to a good issue for His own glory, and
the good of your neighbour.

If then you would obtain this knowledge at the hand of
God, you must confess yourself a miserable sinner, and implore
His blessing, which alone can enable you to receive His Gift


N OW, in the name of God, the Almighty Creator and


168 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


worthily, and to bear in mind that He has bestowed it upon you
out of pure mercy, and that any pride or presumptuous insolence
on your part will most certainly entail its loss, in addition to His
wrath, and eternal condemnation. You must resolve to begin
this blessed and divine work in the name of God, for the service
of all good Christians, and the building up of our faith ; to be a
good athlete in the war against unbelievers; to shun the company
of wicked men ; never to open your mouth against the righteous ;
but to bestow your bounty upon the needy in order that after
this life you may receive the crown of eternal joy and beatitude.
For this treasure, which is above all other earthly treasures, is
granted to him alone who approves himself humble, honest,
gentle, and faithful, as far as the weakness of human nature
allows, and keeps the laws of God through God's bounty and
blessing, and who is not likely to mistake the true nature of the
gift, or to abuse it against his own eternal welfare. It is the gift
of the Holy Spirit, the loving bounty of the great God, which
comes down from the Father of light. | He who masters this
Art, must have asked and obtained wisdom of God, since he has
not only gold, silver, and all the riches of this world, but also
perfect health, length of days, and, what is better still, the com-
fort to be derived from a reassuring type of the bitter passion
and death of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, His descent
into hell, His glorious and most holy Resurrection on the third
day, and His victory and triumph over sin, death, Devil, and
hell—a victory that must carry joy and comfort to all that have
the breath of life.

Let me now shew you how wonderfully the human and
divine natures of Jesus Christ were united and joined together
in one Person. The soul and body of Christ and His divine
nature were so inseparably joined together that they cannot be
severed throughout all eternity. Nevertheless Christ had to die,
and His soul had to be separated from His body, and once
more joined to it on the third day, that His body might be
glorified, and rendered as subtle as His soul and spirit. For
He had received His body of the substance of the most Blessed
Virgin Mary, and therefore it had to be perfected by temporary
separation from His soul and spirit Nevertheless, His divinity
remained united in one essence with the body and soul of


VERDE (7. QRCVRNDUD TEIE C YPADRUP D: 169


Christ—it was with the body in the tomb, and with His soul in
Paradise. j

The body of Christ had to be separated from its soul in
order that it might receive the same power and glory. But
now, Christ having been dead, and His soul having afterwards
been reunited to His body, they are henceforth inseparably
conjoined into one subtle essence. His divine omnipotence
which He received from His Father, which governs all things in
heaven and earth, and is equally perfect from all eternity, is now
one Person with the Christ Jesus, who suffered, died, rose again,
and ascended into heaven, in endless power, glory, majesty,
might, and honour.

Therefore, O  sinful man, render thanks to Almighty God
for the grace and fatherly loving kindness shewn to you ; and
rest assured that you may obtain the glorification which was
given to Christ. For Christ rose first that he might open up for
you a way unto His heavenly Father. Like Him, you too
must be crucified to this world by many hardships, tribulations,
and anxieties. But that you may understand the glorification
of the body, and its renewal to eternal life, you should diligently
consider God's fatherly love and mercy towards fallen man.
Bear in mind that all things that come down from Him are
good and perfect gifts. "Take care, therefore, lest you foully
abuse the gifts bestowed upon you freely, without any merit
of your own, to the destruction of your soul; rather let all
your actions shew that you love and fear God, and then every
labour to which you set your hand will prosper, and from
beginning to end you will pursue the work successfully and
joyously. | Commit your care to God, trust His word, and
keep His holy commandments: then God will be with you
in all things, will bless your toil, and in His fatherly love
forefend all loss and harm. Your art will then afford you true
comfort, yield you all you need, refresh you amid all your hard-
ships, supply you with the means of relieving the necessities
of others, and constantly keep before your eyes a living type
of your own glorious resurrection, and of that of all Christian
believers—whereby we must exchange this earthly and mortal
life for endless joy and the glory of eternal and incorruptible
beatitude.


170 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Let me then tell you, who would be a true lover of this Art,
that it was first delivered by God to Adam in Paradise, For it
is a true revelation of many secrets and mysteries. It shews
you the vanity of your body and of your life in this world ; but
it also solaces you with the hope of eternal salvation. It sug-
gests to you the reflection that if God has infused such wonderful
virtues into mere inanimate natural objects, surely we, who are
so much better than they, must be reserved for some high and
glorious destiny. I beseech you, therefore, to acquit yourself
wisely in all that you do—not to be in haste, —but to reveal this
mystery to no mortal man, unless he be a lover of this Art and
of a godly, sincere, and merciful temper. Such was the practice
of the ancient Sages to whom this wisdom was revealed by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. You must also confess that this
Art is real, for the sake of those who will not believe that Jesus
Christ proceeded from His Almighty Heavenly Father, and was
also born of a pure virgin. Moreover, you must ask God to
enlighten you by the gift of His Holy Spirit, to sharpen your
understanding, to open your eyes, and to grant you a profound
insight into that unfathomable wisdom which lies hid in our
Art, and which no Sage has ever been able to express in his
writings. For there are many secrets in Nature which it is
impossible for our unaided human reason to apprehend. If you
follow my directions and suffer yourself to be guided by the
grace of God, then the work which you undertake for the glory
of God, and for the good of your neighbour, will have a joyful
issue. Feed the hungry ; give drink to the thirsty ; clothe the
naked; comfort the afflicted ; visit the sick and the prisoners :
and you shall have what you desire.

ROBERT VALENS RUGL.


* A spirit is within, which by deliberate skill"
* you must separate from the body. Simply"
* disjoin the material part from the vapour. You"
* should then add the cold water of the spring."
* With this you should unweariedly sprinkle both."
* You will then have the true Elixir of all this "


«€T Amt?


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 171


Exhortation and Information


to all the lovers of this Art, in which they can see, as in a mirror,
all the fundamental and essential requirements thereof ; whether
it is possible or not to arrive at the true Art, and concerning the
same.


I would warn all and sundry, but especially you, my beloved
disciples, in clear and impressive language, to be on your guard
against all fantastical teaching, and to listen to the truthful infor-
mation which I shall now proceed to give you.

In the first place, you must give a wide berth to the false
Alchemy of the vulgar herd. I have experienced this so much
that [I am loath to recommend any to undertake the work,
since this Art is so well hidden that no mortal on earth can dis-
cover it unless Sol and Luna meet. If you give diligent heed to
my warning you may attain to a knowledge thereof, but if you
do not, you will never approach any nearer to it. Know also
that there is only oze thing in the whole world that enters into
the composition of the Stone, and that, therefore, all coagulation,
and admixture, of different ingredients, would shew you to be on
a wrong scentaltogether. If you could perform all the different
operations of our art, yet all your dissolving, coagulating, decom-
posing, distilling, augmenting, albefying, &c., would be useless,
without a true knowledge of our Matter. For our Art is good
and precious, nor can any one become a partaker of it, unless it be
revealed to him by God, or unless he be taught by a skilled
Master. Itis a treasure such as the whole world cannot buy.
Do not, therefore, my sons, spend your toil until you know what
that is on which you are to operate. For even if you knew the
right Matter, your information would be useless to you without
a knowledge of the method of preparing it. "The Stone in its
final and effective form is not to be found anywhere in the whole
world, either in the heavens above, or in the earth beneath ; nor
in any metal, nor in anything that grows, nor yet even in gold or
silver. lt must be prepared, Ze, developed, into its final form ;
yet for all that, it cannot, strictly speaking, be made better than
God created it, nor can the Tincture be prepared out of it: the
* Tincture' must be added to it, and therefore has nothing to do


172 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


with our main object, since it is a different thing altogether. If
it were in any metal, we should surely have to look for it in the
Sun or Moon ; yet the Moon cannot contain it, or it would long
since have become the Sun. Neither is it in mercury, or in any
sulphur, or salt, or in herbs, or anything of that nature, as you
shall see hereafter. Now we will conclude our exhortation, and
proceed to describe the Art itself.


There follow some Methods of Recogniszng our Stone.


It

Know that our Stone is oze, and that it is justly called a
Stone. For it zs a Stone, and could bear no name so character-
istic, as that of the Stone of the Sages. Yet itis notany one of our
existing stones, but only derives its appellation from its similarity
to them. For our Stone is so prepared as to be composed ofthe
four elements. On this account it has been called by different
names, and assumes different forms, although it is oze thing, and
its like is not found upon earth. It isa Stone, and not a stone
in the sense of having the nature of any one stone; it is fire, yet
it has not the appearance, or properties, of fire; it is air, yet
neither has it the appearance, or properties, of air; it is water, but
has no resemblance, or affinity, to the nature of water. It is
earth, though it has not the nature, or appearance, of earth, seeing
that it is a thing by itself.


Another way of Knowzng our Precious Stone.


1c

An ancient philosopher says: Our Stone is called the
sacred rock, and is divided, or signified, in four ways. Firstly,
into earth ; secondly, into its accretion; thirdly, into fire; and
fourthly, into the flame of fire. If any one knows the method of
dissolving it, of extracting its salt, and of perfectly coagulating
it, he is initiated in the mysteries of the Sages. Therefore if the
salt turn white, and assume an oily appearance, then it tinges.
There are three stages in our Art. Firstly, the transmutation of
the whole thing into.one salt ; secondly, the rendering of three
subtle bodies intangible; thirdly, the repetition of the whole
solution of the whole thing. If you understand this, set your
hand to the work. For the Matter is only one thing, and would


ZEB) C OVI REP DUE ETE QS D 173


remain one thing, though a hundred thousand books had been
written about it, because this Art is so great a treasure that the
whole world would not be a sufficient compensation for it. It is
described in obscure terms, yet openly named by all, and known
toall. But ifall knew its secret, no one would work, and it would
lose its value. On this account it would be impious to describe
it in universally intelligible language. He to whom God will
reveal it, may understand these dark expressions. But because
most men do not understand them, they are inclined to regard
our Art as impossible, and the Sages are branded as wicked men
and swindlers. Learned doctors, who thus speak of us, have it
before their eyes every day, but they do not understand it,
because they never attend to it. And then, forsooth, they deny
the possibility of finding the Stone; nor will any one ever be
able to convince them of the reality of our Art, so long as they
blindly follow their own bent and inclination — In short, they are
too wise to discern it, since it transcends the range of the human
intellect, and must be humbly received at the hand of God.


Yet Another Way of Knowzng our Blessed Stone.


The philosopher, Morienus, calls our Stone, water: and he
had good reasons for the name. .O water of bitter taste, that
preservest the elements! (O glorious nature, that overcomest
Nature herself! ^O thou that resemblest Nature, which
dissolvest her tractable nature, that exaltest Nature—that art
crowned with light, and preservest in thyself the four elements,
out of which the quintessence is made! Thou art for the simple,
seeing that thou art most simple in thy operation. Having
conceived by a natural process, thou bringest forth vapour,
and art a good mother. "Thou needest no outward help ; nature
preserves nature, and is not separated from nature by the
operation of nature. The thing is easy to find, the knowledge
is easy, altogether familiar, yet it is as a miracle to many. Thy
solution is great glory, and all thy lovers are named above. Thou
art a great arcanum and to the many thou appearest impossible !


Explanation.


Know, my son, that our Stone is such that it cannot
adequately be described in writing. For it is a stone, and


174 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


becomes water through evaporation ; yet it is no stone, and it
by a chemical process it receives a watery form it is at first
like any other liquid water, being a thin fluid ; yet its nature is
not like that of any other water upon earth. "There is only one
spring in all the world from which this water may be obtained.
That spring is in Judaea, and is called, the Spring of the
Saviour, or of beatitude. By the grace of God its situation
was revealed to the Sages. [t issues in a secret place, and its
waters flow over all the world. It is familiar to all, yet none
knows the principle, reason, or way to find the spring, or
discover the way to Judaa. But whoever does not know
the right spring will never attain to a knowledge of our Art.
For this reason, that Sage might well exclaim, * O water
of a harsh and bitter taste!" For, in truth, the spring is
difficult to find ; but he who knows it may reach it easily, with-
out any expense, labour, or trouble. The water is, of its own
nature, harsh and bitter, so that no one can partake of it ; and,
because it is of little use to the majority of mankind, the Sage
doth also exclaim, * O water, that art lightly esteemed by the
vulgar, who .do not perceive thy great virtues, in thee lie, as it
were, hid the four elements. "Thou hast power to dissolve, and
conserve, and join nature, such as is possessed by no other thing
upon earth." If you would know the properties and appearance
of this Stone, know that its appearance is aqueous, and that the
water is first changed into a stone, then the stone into water,
and the water at length into the Medicine. If you know the
Stone without the method of its preparation, your knowledge
can be of no more use to you than if you knew the right method
without being acquainted with the true Matter. Therefore our
hearts are filled with gratitude to God for both kinds of
' knowledge.


Concerning the Treasure im the Tuncture.


For let me tell you that when you have the red [tincture]
you have something that all the treasures of the world will not
buy. For it transmutes all metals into true gold, and is there-
fore much better than the preparation of the Sun. As a
medicine it excels all other gold ; all diseases may be cured by
drinking one drop of the tincture in a glass of wine ; and it has


— nii


THE' GLORY OF THE WORLD. X75


power to work many other marvels which we cannot here
mention at length. If you wish to prepare the tincture for the
Moon, take five half-ounces of the red tincture, and mix it well
with five hundred half-ounces of the Moon, which have been
subjected to the action of fire, then melt it, and the whole will
be changed into the Tincture and the Medicine. Of this take half
an ounce, and inject it into five hundred half-ounces of Venus
or any other metal, and it will be transmuted into pure silver.
Of the red tincture, which you have diligently prepared, take
one part to a thousand parts of gold, and the whole will be
changed into the red tincture. Of this, again, you may take
one part to a thousand parts of Venus, or any other metal, and
it will be changed into pure gold. For this purpose you need
not buy any gold or silver. The first injection you can make
with about a drachm of both ; and then you can transmute with
the tincture more and more.

You should also know that in our Art we distinguish two
things—the body and the spirit: the former being constant, or
fixed, while the other is volatile. These two must be changed,
the one into the other: the body must become water, and the
water body. "Then again the body becomes water by its own
internal operation, and the two, Z.e., the dry and the liquid, must
once more be joined together in an inseparable union. This
conjunction could not take place if the two had not been
obtained from oze thing ; for an abiding union is possible only
between things of the same nature. Of this kind is the union
which takes place in our Art; for the constituent parts of the
Matter are joined together by the operation of nature, and not
by any human hand. The substance is divided into two parts,
as we shall explain further on. For instance, the Eagle is a
"water," which being extracted is then a body dead and lifeless :
if it is to be restored to life, the spirit must once more be joined
to it, and that in a unique fashion, as we see that it devours
gradually again the one eagle after the other. "Then the body
loses all its grossness, and becomes new and pure ; nor can this
body and soul ever die, seeing that they have entered into an
eternal union, such as the union of our bodies and souls shall
be at the last day. i


176 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Another. Description of our. Stone.


The Enigma of the wise (the Stone) is the Salt and Root
of the whole Art, and, as it were, its Key, without which no one
is able either to lock or unlock its secret entrance. No man can
understand this Art who does not know the Salt and its prepara-
tion, which takes place in a convenient spot that is both moist
and warm; there the dissolution of its liquid must be accomp-
lished, while its substance remains unimpaired. These are the
words of Geber.

Explanatzon.


Know that the Salt of which Geber speaks has none of the
specific properties of salt, and yet is called a Salt, and zs a Salt.
It is black and fetid, and when chemically prepared, assumes the
appearance of blood, and is at length rendered white, pure, and
clear. It is a good and precious Salt which, by its own operation,
is first impure and then pure. It dissolves and coagulates
itself, or, as the Sage says, it locks and unlocks itself ^ No Salt
has this property but the Salt of the Sages. Its chemical
development it may undergo in a moist and convenient place,
where its moisture (as the Sage says) may be dissolved in the
Bath of Mary. He means that it must be warm enough for its
water to be distilled, yet not warmer than the excrement of
horses, which is not fresh.


Another Descrzption of our Stone.


Alexander the Great, King of Macedonia,in his * Philosophy"
has the following words: Know that the Salt is fire and dryness.
Fire coagulates, and its nature is hot, dry, and penetrating, even
unto the inmost part. Its property is to become white even as
the Sun and the Moon with the variations in the extremes of fire,
to wit,of the natural fire, while the Sun restores redness and the
Moon whiteness, and brings bodies to their spiritual condition
at the same time that it removes their blackness and bad sulphur.
With it bodies are calcined: it is the secret of the red and
white tincture, the foundation and root of all things, and the
best of all created things after the rational soul of man. For no
Stone in the whole world has a greater efficacy, nor can any
child of this earth find the Art without this Stone. Blessed be


VEA. DAE, (QE TREPE AAT, 177


God in heaven, who hath created this Art in Salt for the trans-
mutation of all things, seeing that it is the quintessence which is
above all things, and in all things. God Most High has not
only from Heaven blessed creatures in this fashion, but praise,
excellence, power, and wisdom are to be recognised as existing
in this Salt. He who can dissolve and coagulate it, is well
acquainted with the arcana of this Art. Our Salt is found in a
certain precious Salt, and in all things. On this account the
ancient Sages called it the *common moon," because all men need
it. If you would become rich, prepare this Salt till it is rendered
sweet. No other salt is so permanent, or has such power to fix the
* soul," and to resist fire. The Salt of the earth is the soul ; it
coagulates all things, is in the midst of the earth when the earth
is destroyed ; nor is there anything on the earth like its tincture.
It is called Rebis (Two-thing), is a Stone, Salt, oze body, and, to
the majority of mankind, a vile and a despised thing. Yet it
purifies and restores bodies, represents the Key of our whole Art,
and all things are summed up in it. Only its entering in is so
subtle that few perceive it: yet if it enter a body, it tinges it and
brings it to perfection. What then should you desire of God but
this Salt and the ingression thereof?

If a man lived a hundred thousand years, he could never
sufficiently marvel at the wonderful manner in which this noble
treasure is obtained from ashes, and again reduced to ashes. In
the ashes is Salt, and the more the ashes are burnt, the more
ashes it affords ; notice also, that that proceeds from fire, and
returns to fire, which proceeds from [the] earth. — All must con-
fess that in the Salt there are two salts that kill mercury. This
is a most profound saying. For sulphur, and the radical liquid,
are generated in earth of a most subtle nature, and thus is pre-
pared the Philosopher's Stone, which causes alil things, even as
the philosophers set forth, to arise out of oze thing, and one
nature, without the addition of any foreign substance. Our
Matter is one of the commonest things upon earth, and contains
within itself the four elements. It is, indeed, nothing short of
marvellous that so many seek so ordinary a thing, and yet are
unable to find it. We might put down many other characteristics
of this Salt, but I prefer to leave the further elaboration of this
subject to the reader, and to confine myself to a more detailed

M


178 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


account of its fruits, entrance, and life, of the mode of opening
the garden, and catching a glimpse of the glorious roses, of the
way in which they multiply, and bear fruit a thousand-fold ; also
how you may cause the dead body to re-appear, and to be raised
again to immortal life, by the power of which it may be able to
enter imperfect bodies, purify them, and bring them to perfec-
tion, and to a state of immutable permanence.

I now propose to speak of the Stone under three aspects,
viz, as the vegetable, the animal, and the mineral Stone ; and
among these again, of the one which contains those four
elements that impart life to all. Place this one substance in an
air-tight alembic, and treat it according to the precepts of our
Art, which we shall set forth further on. Then the sowing in the
field can take place, and you obtain the Mineral Stone, and the
Green Lion that imbibes so much of its own spirit. Then
life returns to its spirit through the alembic, and the dead
body lies at the bottom of the vessel. In the latter there are
still two elements which the fire cannot sever—for sooner
[than that] the ashes are burned in the fire itself, and the
Salt thereby becomes stronger. The earth must be calcined
until it turns white; then the earth is severed of its own accord,
and is united to its own earth. For every thing strives to
be joined to its like. Give it the cold and humid element
to drink, and leave it standing eight days, that the two
may be well mixed. You must see yourself what is best to be
done after this: for I cannot give you any further information at
present. Sun and Moon must have intercourse, like that of a
man and woman: otherwise the object of our Art cannot be
attained. — All other teaching is false and erroneous. Think
upon this Salt as the true foundation of our Art ; for its worth
outweighs all the treasures of this world. Itself is not developed
into the tincture, but the tincture must be added to it. Nor is
the substance of our Art found in any metal.


Another. Description of the Matter and the. Method.
By Senzor.
Natural things, according to this Sage, are those which have
been generated and produced out of a natural substance by a
natural method. Now in its first, or lunar, stage, our Stone is


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 179


produced from a coagulated white earth, as the Sage says:
Behold our Sun in our white earth, and that by which the
union in our Art is effected ; which is twice transmuted into
water, and whose volatile exhalation, representing that which is
most precious in our Substance, is the highest consolation of the
human body. With this water the inward mercury of the
metals must be extracted. Hence it follows that our Stone is
obtained from the elements of two luminaries (gold and silver),
being called our quicksilver and incombustible oil, the soul and
light of bodies—which alone can afford to dead and imperfect
bodies eternal light and life. Therefore I pray and beseech you,
my son, to crush quicksilver from our Substance with intelligence
and great activity.


The Purging the * Earth" of Its Superfluous Earth.


The aforesaid earth, or Matter, you must purify, or calcine;
so as to extract its water and spirit. The latter you must en-
close in a phial,and pour common aqua vitae upon it till the
substance is covered to the height of three or four fingers; then
subject it to the action of fire for an hour, and diligently distil it
by the bath. What remains you must again calcine, and extract
with its water till you find nothing more in the *earth." The earth
keep for the second stage ofthe process. The water you have
extracted distil over a gentle fire. Then you will find at the
bottom of the distilling vessel a certain beautiful substance,
resembling a crystal stone, which is purged of all earthly gross-
ness, and is called *our earth." "This substance you must place
in a glass (pumpkin-shaped) distilling vessel, and calcine until
it becomes dry and white, and yet liquid withal Then you
have obtained the treasure of this world, which has virtue to
purify and perfect all earthly things: it enters into all, it
nourishes the fixed salt in all things by means of Mercury or
the body.


Another. Description of our. Stone.

Know, my sons, that the Stone out of which our Art is
elaborated, never touches the earth after its generation. If it
touch the earth, it is of no use for our purpose, although at its
first birth it is generated by the Sun and Moon, and embodies

M2


180 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


certain earthy elements. It is generated in the earth, then
broken, destroyed, and mortified. Out of it arises a vapour
which is carried with the wind into the sea, and thence brought
back again to the land, where it almost immediately disappears.
It must be caught in the air, before it touches the ground ; other-
wise it evaporates. As soon asit is borne from the sea to the
land, you must promptly seize it, and enclose it in your phial,
then manipulate it in the manner described. You may know its
coming by the wind, rain, and thunder, which accompany it ;
therefore it should not escape you. "Though it is born anew
every day, yet it existed from the beginning of the world. But
as soon as it falls to the ground, it becomes useless for the pur-
poses of our Art.

* From our earth wells forth a fertilizing fountain,"

* whence flow two precious stones. The fist"

*straightway hastens to the rising of the Sun ;"

*the other makes its way to the setting thereof."

* From them fly forth two Eagles, plunge into the "

* flames, and fall once more to the earth. Both"

* are furnished with feathers, and Sun and Moon,"

* being placed under their wings, are perfected."
Know also that two waters flow forth from this fountain ; the
one (which is the s22777) towards the rising Sun, and the other,
zke body, towards the setting Sun. The two are really only oze
very limpid water, which is so bitter as to be quite undrinkable.
'The quantity of this water is so great that it flows over the whole
earth, yet leads to nothing but the knowledge of this Art. The
same also is misused too often by those who desire it. "Take also
the * fire," and in it you will find the Stone, and nowhere else in
the whole world. It is familiar to all men, both young and old,
is found in the country, in the village, in the town, in all things
created by God ; yet itis despised by all. Rich and poor handle
it every day. It is cast into the street by servant maids. Chil-
dren play with it. Yet no one prizes it, though, next to the
human soul, it is the most beautiful and the most precious thing
upon earth, and has power to pull down kings and princes.
Nevertheless, it is esteemed the vilest and meanest of earthly
things. Itis cast away and rejected by all. Indeed it is the
Stone which the builders of Solomon disallowed. But if it be


MM dM EE EE


TDEDB. GLORY QU TEE WORLD. 181


prepared in the right way, it is a pearl without price, and, indeed,
the earthly antitype of Christ, the heavenly Corner Stone. As
Christ was despised and rejected in this world by the people of
the Jews, and nevertheless was more precious than heaven and '
earth; so it is with our Stone among earthly things: for the
spring where it is found is called the fount of nature. For even
as through Nature all growing things are generated by the heat
of the Sun, so also through Nature is our Stone born after that
it has been generated.

When you have found the water which contains our Stone,
you must take nothing away from it, nor add anything to it: for
it must be entirely prepared by means of that which it contains
within itself. "Then extract the water in an alembic, and separate
the liquid from the dry. The body will then remain alone on
the glass, while the water runs down into the lower part. There-
upon unite the water once more to the body in the manner
described above, and your task will be accomplished. Know
also that the water in which is our Stone, is composed in well-
balanced proportions of the four elements. In the chemical
process you will learn to distinguish earth, oil, and water, or body,
spirit, and soul: the earth is at the bottom of the glass vessel, the
oil, or soul, is with the earth, and the water is the spirit which is
distilled from it. In the same way you will come upon two
colours, namely, white and red, representing the Moon and the
Sun. Theoilis the fire, or the Sun, the water is air, or the Moon ;
and Sun and Moon are silver and gold which must enter into
union. But enough, what I have said in this Epistle ought to
enable you to find the Stone, and if herein you fail to discover it,
rest assured that it will never become known to you. Be thou,
therefore, a lover of the Art,and commended unto God the
Almighty even unto all eternity. Written in the year 1526 after
the birth of our Lord.

Thus do the Sages write concerning the two waters which
yet are only eze water—and in this alone the Stone is to be
found. Know also that by so much as the earthly part is
wanting, by also so much does the heavenly part abound more
fully. Now this Stone renders all dry and arid bodies humid,
all cold bodies warm, all impure bodies clear and pure. It con-
tains within itself all healing and transmuting virtue, breathed


182 JHE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


into it by the art of the Master and the quickening spirit of fire,
Thanks be unto God therefore in all time.


The Sun zs zts Father, the Moon zts Mother.


If you have those two spirits, they bring forth the Stone,
which is prepared out of one part of Sulphur, or Sun, and four
parts of Mercury, or Moon. "The Sulphur is warm and dry, the
Mercury cold and moist. That must again be dissolved into
water, which before was water, and the body, which before was
mercury, must again become mercury.


Concerning the First Matter, ov Seed of the Metals, including
zkhat of the Husband, and that of the Spouse.


Metals have their own seed, like all other created things.
Generation and parturition take place in them as in everything
else that grows. If this were not the case, we should never have
had any metals. Now, the seed is a metallic Matter which is
liquefied from earth. "The seed must be cast into z/s earth, and
there grow, like that of every other created thing. Therefore,
we must prepare the earth, or our first Matter, and cast into it
the seed, whereupon it will bring forth fruit after its kind. This
motion is required for the generation out of oze thing, viz., that
first Matter; the body must become [a] spirit, and the spirit
body : thence arises the medicine which is transmuted from one
colour to another. Now, that which is sought in the white pro-.
duces white, and the red, in like manner, gives red. The first
Matter is oze thing, and fashioned into its present shape by the
hand of God, and not of man—joined together, and transmuted
into its [being] essence by Nature alone. ^ This we take, dissolve,
and again conjoin, and wash with its own water, until it becomes
white, and then again red. Thus our earth, in which we now
may easily see our Sun and Moon, is purified. For the Sun is the
Father of metals, and the Moon is their Mother : and if genera-
tion is to take place, they must be brought together as husband
and wife. By itself neither can produce anything, and therefore
the red and the white must be brought together. And thougha
thousand books have been written about it, yet for all that, the
first substance is not more than one. It is the earth into which
we cast our grain, that is to say, our Sun and Moon, which then


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 183


bear fruit after their kind. If itself be cast into metals, it is
changed into that which is best, viz, Sun and Moon. This is
most true. Thanks be unto God.


A Simple Account of the. True Art.


According to the Sages, no body is dissolved without the
coagulation of the spirit. For as soon as the spirit is transmuted
into the body, [the Stone] receives its power. So long as the
spirit is volatile, and liable to evaporate,it cannot produce any
effect: when it is fixed, it immediately begins to operate. You
must therefore prepare it as the baker preparesthe bread. Take
a little of the spirit, and add it to the body, as the baker adds
leaven to the meal, till the whole substance is leavened. [It is
the same with our spirit, or leaven. The Substance must be con-
tinuously penetrated with the leaven, until it is wholly leavened.
Thus the spirit purges and spiritualizes the body, till they are
both transmuted into one. Then they transmute all things, into
which they are injected, into their own nature. The two must
be united by a gentle and continuous fire, affording the same
degree of warmth as that with which a hen hatches her eggs. It
must then be placed in a St. Mary's Bath, which is neither too
warm nor too cold. The humid must be separated from the dry,
and again joined to it. When united, they change mercury into
pure gold and silver Thenceforward you will be safe from the
pangs of poverty. But take heed that you render thanks unto
God for His gracious gift which is hidden from many. | He has
revealed the secret to you that you may praise His holy name,
and succour your needy neighbour. Therefore, take diligent
heed, lest you hide the talent committed to your care. Rather
put it out at interest for the glory of God, and the good of your
neighbour. For every man is bound to help his fellowman, and
to be an instrument in the hand of God for relieving his necessi-
ties. Of this rule Holy Scripture affords an illustration in the
example of Joseph, Habakkuk, Susanna, and others.


Here follows my "TESTAMENT weh J have drawnm up zn
your favour, my beloved Sons, with all dy. Heart.


For your sakes, beloved students of this Art, and dear Sons,
I have committed to writing this my testament, for the purpose


184 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


of instructing, admonishing, warning, and informing you as to
the substance, the method, the pitfalls to be avoided, and the
only way of understanding the writings of the Sages. For as
Almighty God has created all things out of the dry and the
humid elements, our Art, by divine grace, may be said to pursue
a precisely similar course. If therefore any man know the prin-
ciple and method of creative nature, he should have a good
understanding of our Art. If anyone be unacquainted with
Nature's methods, he will find our Art difficult, although in reality
it is as easy as to crush malt, and brew beer. In the beginning
when, according to the testimony of Scripture, God made
heaven and earth, there was only oze Matter, neither wet nor
dry, neither earth, nor air, nor fire, nor light, nor darkness,
but one single substance, resembling vapour or mist, invisible and
impalpable. It wascalled Hyle, or the first Matter. Ifathing is
once more to be made out of nothing, that *nothing" must be
united, and become oze.thing ; out of this oze thing must arise a
palpable substance, out of the palpable substance oze body, to
which a living soul must be given—Uwhence through the grace of
God, it obtains its specific form. When God made the substance,
it was dry, but held together by moisture. If anything was to
grow from that moisture, it had to be separated from that which
was dry, so as to get the fire by itself, and the earth by
itself. Then the earth had to be sprinkled with water, if any-
thing moist was to grow out of it, for without moisture nothing
can grow. In the same way, nothing grows in water, except it
have earth wherein to strike root. It then the water is to bedew
the earth, there must be something to bring the water into con-
tact with the earth ; for example, the wind prevents all ordinary
water from flowing to the sea, and remaining there. Thus one
element without the aid of another can bear no fruit ; if there
was nothing to set the wind in motion it would never blow—
therefore the fire has received the office of impelling and obliging
it to do its work. This you may see when you boil water over
the fire; for then there arises a steam which is really azr, wafer
being nothing but coagulated air, and air being generated from
water by the heat of the Sun. For the Sun shines upon the
water, and heats it until steam is seen to issue forth. "This vapour
becomes wind, and, on account of the large quantity of [the] air,


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 185


we get moisture and rain : so air is once more changed or coagu-
lated into water, or rain, and causes all things upon earth to grow,
and fills the rivers and the seas.

It is the same with our Stone, which is daily generated from
[the] air by the Sun and Moon, in the form of a certain vapour,
yea, even through the Red Sea ; it flows in Judea in the channel
of Nature whither it behoves us to bring it. If we catch it, we
lop off its hands and feet, tear off its head, and try to bring itto the
red [colour]. If we find anything black in it, we throw it away
with the entrails and the filth. When it has been purified, we
take its limbs, join them together again, whereupon our King
revives, never to die again, and is so pure and subtle as to pervade
all hard bodies, and render them even more subtle than itself.
Know also that when God, the Almighty, had set Adam in Para-
dise, He shewed him these two things in the following words:
* Behold, Adam, here are two things, one fixed and permanent,
the other volatile : their secret virtue thou must not make known
to 2// thy sons."

Earth, my brother, is constant, and water volatile, as you
may see when anything is burnt. For then that which is
constant remains, while that which is volatile evaporates. That
which remains resembles ashes, and if you pour water on it, it
becomes an alkali, the efficacy of the ashes passing into the
water. If you clarify the lye, put it into an iron vessel, and let
the moisture evaporate over a fire, you will find at the bottom
the substance which before was in the lye, that is to say, the
salt of the matter from which the ashes were obtained. This
salt might very well be called the Philosopher's Stone, from
being obtained by a process exactly similar to that which is
employed in preparing the ze2/ Stone, though at the same time
it profits nothing in our work. For the substance which con-
tains our Stone is a lye, not indeed prepared by the hand of
man from ashes and water, but joined together by Nature,
according to the creation and ordination of God, commingled of
the four elements, possessed of all that is required for its perfect
chemical development. If you take the substance, which
contains our Stone, subject it to a S. Mary's Bath in an alembic,
and distil it, the water will run down into the antisternium, and
the salt, or earth, remain at the bottom, and is so dry as to be


186 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


without any water, seeing that you have separated the moist
from the dry. Pound the body small, put it into the S. Mary's
Bath, and expose it to heat till it is quite decomposed. "Then
give it its water to drink, slowly, and at long intervals, till it is
clarifed. For it coagulates, dissolves, and purifies itself. The
distilled water is the spirit which imparts life to its body, and is
the alone soul thereof. Water is wind (air) and wind is life,
and the life is [in the] soul. In the chemical process, you find
water and oil—but the oil always remains with the body, and is,
as it were, burnt blood. Then it is purified with the body by
long-continued gentle heat. But you should be careful not to
set about this Art before you understand my instructions, which
at the end of this first part are bequeathed to you in the form
of a Testament. For the Stone is prepared out of nothing in
the whole world, except this substance, which is essentially one.
He who is unacquainted therewith can never attain the Art. It
is that one thing which is not dug up from mines, or from the
caverns of the earth, like gold, silver, sulphur, sait, &c., but is
found in the form which God originally imparted to it. It is
formed and manifested by an excessive thickening of air; as
soon as it leaves its body, it is clearly seen, but it vanishes
without a trace as soon as it touches the earth, and, as it is
never seen again, it must therefore be caught while it is still in
the air—as I told you once before. I have called it by various
names, but the simplest is perhaps that of *Hyle," or first
principle of all things. It is also denominated the One Stone
of the Philosophers, composed of hostile elements, the Stone of
the Sun, the Stone of the Metals, the runaway slave, the
aériform Stone, the Thirnian Stone, Magnesia, the corporeal
Stone, the Stone of the jewel, the Stone of the free, the
golden Stone, the fountain of earthly things, Xelis, or Silex
(flint), Xidar, or Radix (root), Atrop, or Porta (gate). By these
and many other names it is called, yet it is only oze. If you
would be a true Alchemist, give a wide .berth to all other
substances, turn a deaf ear to all other advisers, and strive to
obtain a good knowledge of our Stone, its preparation, and its
virtue.

My Son, esteem this my Testament very highly: for in it I
have, out of love and compassion towards you, given the reins


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 187


to the warm-hearted impulse which constrains me to reveal more
than I ought to reveal. But I beseech you, by the Passion of
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,not to communicate my
Testament to ignorant, unworthy, or wicked men, lest God's
righteous vengeance light upon you, and hurl you into the
yawning gulf of everlasting punishment, from which also may
the same merciful God most mercifully preserve us.

It is by no means a light thing to shew the nature of the
aforesaid Hyle. Hyle is the first Matter, the Salt of the Sages,
Azoth, the seed of all metals, which is extracted from the body
of * Magnesia " and the Moon. .

Hyle is the first principle of all things—the Matter that
was from the beginning. 1t was neither moist, nor dry, nor
earth, nor water, nor light, nor darkness, but a mixture of all
these things, and this mixture is HYLE.


HERE FOLLOWS THE SECOND PART OF THIS BOOK.


In the beginning, when God Almighty had created our first
parent Adam, together with all other earthly and heavenly
bodies, He set him in Paradise, and forbade him, under penalty
of eternal death, to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil. So long as Adam obeyed the Divine precept
he had immortality, and possessed all that he needed for perfect
happiness But when he had partaken of the forbidden fruit,
he was, by the command of God, driven forth into this world,
where he and his descendants have since that time suffered
nothing but poverty, disease, anxiety, bitter sorrow, and death.
If he had been obedient to the Divine injunction, he would have
lived a thousand years in Paradise in perfect happiness, and
would then have been translated to heaven; and a like happy
destiny would have awaited all his descendants. For his
disobedience God visited him with all manner of sufferings and
diseases ; but in His mercy also shewed him a medicine whereby
the different defects brought in by sin might be remedied,
and the pangs of hunger and disease resisted, as we are, for
instance, preserved and strengthened by bodily meat and drink.


188 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


It was on account of this original sin that Adam, in
spite of his great wisdom and the many arts that God had
taught him, could not accomplish his full thousand years.
But if he had not known the virtues of herbs, and the Medicine,
he would certainly not have lived as long as he did. When,
however, at length his Medicine would no longer avail to
sustain life, he sent his son Seth to Paradise to fetch the tree
of life. This he obtained after a spiritual manner. But
Seth did seek also and was given some olives of the Tree
of the Oil of Mercy, which he planted on the grave of his
father. From them sprang up the blessed Tree of the Holy
Cross, which through the atoning death of our Redeemer
became to us wretched, sinful men, a most potent tree of life,
in gracious fulfment of the request of our first parent Adam.
On the other hand, the suffering, disease, and imperfection
brought not only upon men, but also upon plants and animals,
by the fall of Adam, found a remedy in that precious gift
of Almighty God, which is called the Elixir, and Tincture,
and has power to purge away the imperfections not only
of human, but even of metallic bodies; which excels all other
medicines, as the brightness of the sun shames the moon
and the stars — By means of this most noble Medicine
many men, from the death of Adam to the fourth monarchy,
procured for themselves perfect health and great length of
days. Hence those who had a good knowledge of the
Medicine, attained to three hundred years, others to four
hundred, some to five hundred, like Adam ; others again to nine
hundred, like Methusalem and Noah; and some of their
children to a longer period still, like Bacham, Ilrehur, Kalix,
Hermes, Geber, Albanus, Ortulanus, Morienus, Alexander
of Macedonia, Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, and many others who
possessed the Medicine of the Blessed Stone in silence, and
neither used it for evil purposes, nor made it known to the
wicked ; just as God Himself has in all times hidden this know-
ledge from the proud, the impure, and the froward. But cease
to wonder that God has put such excellent virtue into the
Stone, and has imparted to it the power of restoring animal
bodies, and of perfecting metals: for I hope to explain to you
the whole matter in the three parts of my Book, which I have


ELE (os OY (QE THE WORLD. 189


entitled GLORY of the WORLD. If you will accept my
teaching, and follow my directions, you will be able to prove
the truth of my assertions by your own happy experience.
Now when you have attained this great result, take care that
you do not hide your talent. Use it for the solace of the
suffering, the building of Christian schools and churches, and
the glory of the Holy Trinity. Otherwise God will call you
to an eternal account for your criminal neglect of His gift.
May God deign to keep us from such a sin, and to establish
us in His Holy Word!


To the Reader.


If it should seem unto you a tedious matter, my friendly
reader, to read through and digest my book, I advise you
to cheer yourself on by bearing in mind the great object you
have in view. If you do so you will find the book very
pleasant reading, and a joy indeed. Since God— praised in
all times be his Holy and  Venerable Name!—in His
unspeakable mercy has made known to. me the magistery of
this most true and noble Art, I am moved and constrained
by brotherly love to shew you the manner of producing this
treasure, in order that you may be able to avoid the ruinous
trouble and expense to which I was put in the course of a
long and fruitless search. I will endeavour to be as clear
and outspoken as possible, in order to vindicate myself from
the possible charge of imposture, malice, and avarice. I am
most anxious that the gift which God has committed to my
trust shall not rust, or rot, or be useless in my hands. For
this most precious Medicine is so full of glorious potency as
to be most justly styled the Oil of Mercy, for reasons which
your own understanding will suggest to you. It is therefore
unnecessary for me to go into this preliminary question at
any great length. I may at once proceed to give you an
account of the Art itselfP and to put you on your guard
against all seducing deceivers,—in short, to open up to you a
true, unerring, and joyful road to the knowledge and possession
of the Stone, and to the operations of this Art.

Therefore, I—who possess the Stone, and communicate
to you this Book—would faithfully admonish and  beseech


190 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


you tc keep this my TABLE of PARADISE and GLORY
of the WORLD, from all proud and unjust oppressors of the
poor ; from all presumptuous, shallow, scornful, calumnious, and
wicked persons, so as not to put it into their hands, on pain of
God's everlasting punishment. I beseech you to take this warning
to heart; but, on the other hand, to communicate and impart
this my Table to all true, poor, pious, honest, and benevolent
persons, who will gratefully reverence and rightly use the
merciful gift of God, and conceal it from the unworthy.
Nevertheless, even if my book should find its way into the hands
of wicked men, God will so smite them with blindness as to
prevent them from apprehending too much of my meaning, and
frustrate all their attempts to carry out my directions. For God
knows how to confound the wicked, and bring their presumption
to nought ; as we are also told by David in his psalms: * Thine
enemies shalt thou hold in thine hand, and shalt restrain them
in the snares of their mind." I beseech you, therefore, my
sons, to give diligent heed to my teaching ; then you will spend
this life in health and happiness, and at length inherit everlasting
joy. I pray that God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
may grant this my petition.


An Account of the True Art.


I make known to all ingenuous students of this Art that the
Sages are in the habit of using words which may convey either
a true or a false impression ; the former to their own disciples
and children, the latter to the ignorant, the foolish, and the
unworthy. Bear in mind that the philosophers themselves
never make a false assertion. The mistake (if any) lies not
with them, but with those whose dulness makes them slow to
apprehend the meaning. Hence it comes that, instead of the
waters of the Sages, these inexperienced persons take pyrites,
salts, metals, and divers other substances which, though very
expensive, are of no use whatever for our purpose. For no one
would dream of buying the true Matter at the apothecary's ;
ay, that tradesman daily casts it into the street as worthless
refuse. Yet the matter of our Stone is found in all those things
which are used by ignorant charlatans : for it is our Stone, our
Salt, our Mercury, our verdigris, halonitre, salmiac, Mars,


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 191


sulphur, &c. lt is not dug out with pick-axes from ordinary
mountains, seeing that our Stone is found in our mountains and
springs; our Salt is found in our salt-spring, our metal in our
earth, and from the same place we dig up our mercury and
sulphur. But what we mean by our mines and springs these
charlatans cannot understand. For God has blinded their
minds and made gross their senses, and left them to carry on
their experiments with all manner of false substances. Nor do
they seem able to perceive their error, or to be roused from their
idle imaginations by persistent failure. Where they sbould
have distilled with gentle heat they sublime over a fierce fire,
and reduce their substance to ashes, instead of devcloping its
inherent principles by vitalizing warmth. Again, when they
should have dissolved, they coagulated instead, and so on. By
these false methods they could, of course, obtain no good result ;
but instead of blaming their own ignorance they lay the fault on
their teacher, and even deny the genuineness of our Art. Asa
matter of fact, all their mistakes arise from their misinterpreting
the meaning of words which should have put them on the right
scent. For instance, when the Sages speak of calcining, these
persons understand that word to mean *" burning," and conse-
quently render their substance useless by burning it to ashes.
When the Sages "dissolve," or transmute into * water," these shal-
low persons corrode with aqua fortis. They do not understand that
the dissolution must be effected with something that is contained
within our substance, and not by means of any foreign appli-
ance. These foolish devices bear the same relation to our Art
that a dark hole bears to a transparent crystal. [t is their own
ignorance that prevents them from attaining to a true knowledge;
but ZZey put the blame on our writings, and call us charlatans
and impostors. "They argue that if the Stone could be found at
all, they must have discovered it long ago, their eyes being as
keen and their minds as acute as they are. **DBehold," say
they, ^how we have toiled day and night, how many books we
have read, how. many years we have spent in our laboratories :
surely if there were anything in this Art, it could not have
escaped us" By speaking thus, they only exhibit their own
presumption and folly. "They themselves have no eyes, and
they make that an argument for blaspheming our high and holy


192 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Art. Therefore, you should first strive to make yourselt
acquainted with the secrets of Nature's working, and with the
elementary principles of the world, before you set your hand to
this task. After acquiring this knowledge, carefully peruse this
book from beginning to end ; you will then be in a position to
judge whether our Art is true or false. You will also know what
substance you must take, how you must prepare it, and how
your eager search may be brought to a successful issue. Let
me enjoin you, therefore, to preserve strict silence, to let no-
body know what you are doing, and to keep a good heart:
then God will grant you the fulfilment of all your wishes.


Here follows my own Opinion and Philosophical
Dactum.


I now propose to put down a brief statement of the view
which I take of this matter. He who understands my mean-
ing, may at once pass on to the opinions of the various Sages,
which I have placed at the end of my book. He who does not
apprehend my meaning, will find it explained in the following
treatise.

Since I know the blessed and true Art, with the nature
and the matter of the Stone, I have thought it my duty freely
to communicate it to you —not in a lawyer's style, nor in pompous
language, but in few and simple words. Whoever peruses this
book carefully, and with an elementary knowledge of natural
relations, cannot miss the secret which I intend to convey. I
am afraid that I shall be overwhelmed with reproaches for
speaking out with so much plainness, seeing that this Art has
never, from the beginning ofthe world, been so clearly explained
as [ mean to explain it in this Book. Nevertheless, I am well
aware that I am now declaring a secret which must for ever
remain hidden from the wise of this world, and from those who
are established in their own conceits. But [ must now proceed
to give you the result of my experience.

My beloved sons and disciples, and all ye that are
students of this Art ; I herewith, in the fulness of Christian faith
and charity. do make known to you that the Philosopher's Stone
grows not oz/y on " ou" tree, but is found, as far as its effect
and operation are concerned, in the fruit of all other trees, in all


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 193


created things, in animals, and vegetables, in things that grow,
and in things that do not grow. For when it rises, being stirred
and distilled by the Sun and the Moon, it imparts their own
peculiar form and properties to all living creatures by a divine
grace ; it gives to flowers their special form and colour, whether
it be black, red, yellow, green, or white; in the same way all
metals and minerals derive their peculiar qualities from the op-
eration of this Stone. All things, I say, are endowed with their
characteristic qualities by the operation of this Stone, Ze., the
conjunction of the Sun and Moon. For the Sun is the Father,
and the Moon the Mother of this Stone, and the Stone unites in
itself the virtues of both its parents. Such are the peculiar proper-
ties of our Stone, by which it may be known. If you understand
the operation, the form, and the qualities, of this Stone, you will
be able to prepare it ; but if you do not, I faithfully counsel you
to give up all thought of ever accomplishing this task.

Observe, furthermore, how the seeds of all things that grow,
as, for instance, grains of wheat or barley, spring forth from the
ground, by the operation of the Stone, and the developing
influences of Sun and Moon; how they grow up into the air, are
gradually matured, and bring forth fruit, which again must be
sown in its own proper soil. The field is prepared for the grain,
being well ploughed up, and manured with well rotted dung;
for the earth consumes and assimilates the manure, as the body
assimilates its food, and separates the subtle from the gross
'Therewith it calls forth the life of the seed, and nourishes it with
its own proper milk, as a mother nourishes her infant, and
causes it to increase in size, and to grow upward. The earth
separates, [ say, the good from the bad, and imparts it as nutri-
ment to all growing things ; for the destruction of oze thing is
the generation of another. It is the same in our Art, where the
liquid receives its proper nutriment from the earth. Hence the
earth is the Mother of all things that grow ; and it must be
manured, ploughed, harrowed, and well prepared, in order that
the corn may grow, and triumph over the tares, and not be
choked by them. A grain of wheat is raised from the ground
through the distillation of the moisture of the Sun and Moon,
if it has been sown in its own proper earth. The Sun and Moon
must also impel it to bring forth fruit, if it is to bring forth fruit

N


194 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


atall. For the Sun is the Father, and the Moon the Mother, of
all things that grow.

In the same way, in ozz soil, and out of our seed, our Stone
grows through the distilling of the Sun and Moon ; and as it
grows it rises upwards, as it were, into the air, while its root
remains in the ground. — That which is above is even as that
which is below; the same law prevails ; there is no error or
mistake. Again, as herbs grow upward, put forth glorious
flowers and blossoms, and bear fruit, so oux grain blossoms, mat-
ures its fruit, is threshed, sifted, purged of its chaff, and again put
in the earth, which, however, must previously have been well
manured, harrowed, and otherwise prepared. "When it has been
placed in its natural soil and watered with rain and dew, the
moisture of heaven, and roused into life by the warmth of the
Sun and Moon, it produces fruit after its own kind. "These two
sowings are peculiar characteristics of our Art. For the Sun and
Moon are our grain, which we put into our soil, as soul and spirit
—Aand such as are the father and the mother will be the children
that they generate. "Thus, my sons, you know our Stone, our
earth, our grain, our meal, our ferment, our manure, our verdigris,
our Sun and Moon. You understand our whole magistery, and
may joyfully congratulate yourselves that you have at length
risen above the level of those blind charlatans of whom I spoke.
For this, His unspeakable mercy, let us render thanks and praise
to the Creator of all things, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


Concerning the Origin of Metals.


My son, I will now proceed to explain to you more in detail
the generation of the metals, and the way in which they receive
their growth and development, with their special form and quality.
You will thereby be enabled to understand, even from the very
foundation, with marvellous accuracy and clearness, the principle
that underlies our whole Art. Permit me, therefore, to inform
you that all animals, trees, herbs, stones, metals, and minerals,
grow and attain to perfection, without being necessarily touched
by any human hand: for the seed is raised up from the ground,
puts forth flowers, and bears fruit, simply through the agency of
natural influences. As it is with plants, so it is with metals.


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 195


While they lie in the heart of the earth, in their natural ore, they
grow, and are developed, day by day, through the influence ot
the four elements: their fire is the splendour of the Sun and
Moon ; the earth conceives in her womb the splendour of the
Sun, and by it the seeds of the metals are well and equally
warmed, just like the grain in the fields. Through this warmth
there is produced in the earth a vapour or spirit, which rises
upward and carries with it the most subtle elements. It might
well be called a fifth element : for it Zs a quintessence, and con-
tains the most volatile parts of all the elements. This vapour
strives to float upward through the summit of the mountains, but,
being covered 'vith great rocks, they prevent it from doing sso:
for when it strikes against them, it is compelled to descend again.
It is drawn up by the Sun, it is forced down again by the rocks,
and as it falls the vapour is transmuted into a liquid, z.&, sulphur
and mercury. Of each of these a part is left behind—but that
which is volatile rises and descends again, more and more of it
remaining behind, and becoming fixed after each descent. This
* fixed " substance is the metals, which cleave so firmly to the
earth and the stones that they must be smelted out in a red-hot
furnace. The grosser the stones and the earth of the moun-
tains are, the less pure will the metal be; the more subtle the
soil and the stones are, the more subtle will be the vapour, and
the sulphur and mercury formed by its condensation—and the
purer these latter are, the purer, of course, will the metals them-
selves be. When the earth and the stones of the mountain are
gross, the sulphur and mercury must partake of this grossness, and
cannot attain to their proper development. Hence arise the
different metals, each after its own kind.  Foras each tree of the
field has its own peculiar shape, appearance, and fruit, so each
mountain bears its own particular ore ; those stones and that
earth being the soil in which the metals grow. The quality of
this soil is to a great extent dependent upon planetary influences.
The nearer the mountains lie to the planets, the more do metals
grow in them ;: for the qualities of metals are determined by
planetary influences. Mountains that are turned towards the
sun have subtle stones and earth, and produce nothing but gold.
If they are more conveniently situated for being influenced by
the moon, their metallic substance is turned into silver. For all
N2


196 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


metals, when perfectly developed, must ultimately become Moon
and Sun, though some need to be operated on by the Sun and
Moon longer than others: for the Sun is the Father, and the
Moon the Mother, of all things that grow. Thus you see that gold
glitters like the Sun, and silver like the Moon. Now, children
always resemble their parents ; and all metallic bodies contain
within themselves the properties of the Sun: to change the baser
metals into gold and silver, there is positively nothing wanting
but gentle solar warmth. n this respect there exists a close
analogy between animal and vegetable growth. "When the Sun
retires in the winter, the flowers droop and die, the trees shed
their leaves, and all vegetable development is temporarily sus-
pended. In the summer again, when the heat of the Sun is too
great, not being sufficiently tempered by the cooling influences
of the Moon, all vegetation is withered and burnt up. If there
is to be perfect growth, the Sun and Moon must work together,
the one heating and the other cooling. If the influence of the
Moon prevails unduly, it must be corrected by the warmth of the
Sun; the excessive heat of the Sun must be tempered by the
coldness of the Moon. All development is sustained by solar
fire. Imperfect metals are what they are, simply because they
have not yet been duly developed by solar influences.

Now, by the special grace of God, it is possible to bring this
natural fire to bear on imperfect metals by means of our Art, and
to supply the conditions of metallic growth without any of the
hindrances which in a natural state prevent perfection. Thus by
applying our natural fire, we can do more towards *' fixing " im-
perfect bodies and metals in a moment, than the Sun in a
thousand years. For this reason our Stone has also power to
cure all things that grow, acting on each one according to its
kind. For our Matter represents a perfect and inseparable union
of the four elements, which indeed is the sum of our Art, and is
consequently able to reconcile and heal all.discord in all manner
of metals and in all things that grow, and to put to flight all
diseases. For disease is discord of the elements, (one unduly
lording it over the rest) in animal as well as in metallic bodies.
Now as soon as our blessed Medicine is applied, the elements are
straightway purified, and joined together in amity ; thus metallic
bodies are fixed, animal bodies are made whole of all their dis-


THE GLORY OF THE.WORLD. 197


eases, gems and precious stones attain to their own proper per-
fection.

You should also know that all stones are generated by the
Sun and Moon out of the sulphur and volatile mercury ; if they
do not become metals, that is entirely due to their own grossness.
In the same way, all plants are generated from sulphur and
mercury, and that by the heat of the Sun and Moon. For the
Sun and Moon are the mercury in our Matter. The Sun is warm
and dry, the Moon warm and moist ; for in [the] earth is hid a
warm and dry fire, and in that fire dwells warm and moist air—
and from these is generated mercury which is both warm and
moist. Hence there may be distinguished two chief constituent
principles, to wit, moist and dry, that is, earth, wind, and water,
unto which mercury is conjoined,and the same is warm and moist.
Mercury and sulphur, in our substance, and in all things, spring
from the moist and dry, the moist and dry being stirred by the
warmth of the Sun, and distilled and sublimed,—in each thing
according to its specific nature. Thus our Stone is that mercury
which is mixed of the dry and the moist. But the common mer-
cury is useless for our purpose—for it is volatile, while our mer-
cury is fixed and constant. "Therefore have nothing to do with
the common mercury, but take our mercury which is the principle
of growth in all bodies, whether human, vegetable, or metallic ;
which imparts to all flowers their fragrance and colour.  Uhis
mercury represents an harmonious mixture of the four elements,
hot and dry, Sun and Moon. [It is generated in the form of a
vapour in the fields and on the mountains, by the warmth of the
Sun: that vapour is condensed into a moisture, from which arise |
sulphur and mercury, and from them again metals. The same
process takes place in our Art, which represents the union of the
warm and moist, by means of warmth. For our substance is
generated in the form of a vapour out of warmth and moisture,
and changed into sulphur. In this fire and water, and nowhere
else, is our Stone to be found. For the vapour carries upward
with it most subtle earth, most subtle fire, most subtle water, and
most subtle air, and thus presents a close union of the most subtle
elements. This is the first Matter, and may be divided into
water and earth, which two are again joined together by gentle
heat, even as in the woods and mountains mercury is joined with


198 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


a quick earth and rare water by means of a temperate warmth,
and in the long process of time is converted into metal So is
it ordained in our Art, and not otherwise does the process take
place. When you, therefore, see that our substance, having been
first generated in the form of a vapour, permits itself to be sepa-
rated into water and earth, you may know that the Stone is
composed of the four elements. Know also that the vapour in
the mountains is true mercury (which cannot be said of the
ordinary mercury); for wherever there is vapour in the mountains,
there is true mercury, which by ascending and descending, in the
manner described above, becomes fixed, and inseparable from its
earth, so that where the one is, there the other must abide.

'Thus I have told you plainly enough how the metals are
generated, what mercury is, and how it is transmuted into metals.
I will therefore conclude this part of my treatise, and tell you in
the following section how you may actually perform the chemical
process You see that it is not so incredible, after all, that
all metals should be transmuted into gold and silver, and all
animal bodies delivered from every kind of disease ; and I hope
and trust that God will permit you practically to experience the
truth of this assertion.


Now 4 «i tell you how you must produce the Fzre and
Water, in wich is prepared the Mercury required
for the red and white Tzncture.


Take fire, or the quicklime of the Sages, which is the vital
fire of all trees, and therein doth God Himself burn by divine love.
In it purify Mercury, and mortify it for the purposes of our Art ;
understand, with vulgar Mercury, which you wish to fix in water
or fire. But the Mercury which lies hidden in this water, or fire,
is therein fixed of itself. The Mercury which is in the fire must be
decomposed, clarified, coagulated, and fixed with indelible,
living, or Divine fire, of that kind which God has placed in
the Sun ; and wherein God Himself burns as with Divine love
for the consolation of all mankind. Without this fire our Art can
not be brought to a successful issue. This is the fire of the
Sages which they describe in such obscure terms, as to have
been the indirect cause of beguiling many innocent persons to


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 199


their ruin; so even that they have perished in poverty
because they knew not this fire of the Philosophers. It is the
most precious fire that God has created in the earth, and has a
thousand virtues—nay, it is so precious that men have averred
that the Divine Power itself works effectually in it. It has
the purifying virtue of Purgatory, and everything is rendered
better by it. It is not wonderful, therefore, that a fire should
be able to fix and clarify Mercury, and to cleanse it from all
grossness and impurity. "The Sages call it the living fire,
because God has endowed it with His own Divine, and vital-
ising power.

In the writings of the Sages, this fire goes by different
names. Some call it *burnt" wine, others assign to it three names
from the analogy of the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity, God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; Body,
Soul, and Fire, or Spirit.

The Sages further say: The fire is fire, and also water,
containing within itself both cold and heat, moisture, and
dryness, nor can anything extinguish it but itself Hence
others say that it is an inextinguishable fire, which is continually
burning, purifying, and tinging all metals, consuming all their
impurities, and combining Mercury with the Sun in so close
an union that they become one and inseparable.

"Therefore our great Teachers say that as God the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are three Persons, and yet but
one God; so this fire unites these three things, namely, the
Body, Spirit, and Soul, or Sun, Mercury, and Soul The
fire nourishes the Soul which binds together the Body and
the Spirit, and thus all three become one, and remain united
for ever. Again,as an ordinary fire, on being supplied with
fuel, may spread and fill the whole world, so this Tincture
may be multiplied, and so this fire may enter into all metals;
and one part of it has power to change two, three, or five
hundred parts of other metals into gold.

Again, the Sages call this fire the fire of the Holy Spirit,
because as the Divinity cf Christ took upon itself true flesh and
blood without forfeiting anything of its Divine Nature, so the
Sun, the Moon, and Mercury, are transmuted into the true
Tincture, which remains unaffected by all outward influences,


200 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


and endures, and will endure, for ever. Once more, as God
feeds many wicked sinners with his blood, so this Tincture
tinges all gross and impure metals, without being iniured by
contact with them. So also, therefore, may it be compared with
the sacro-saintly Sacrament of the Most Holy Eucharist, from
which no sinner is excluded, how impure soever he may have
been. You have thus been made acquainted with the all but
miraculous virtue of this fire: remember that no student of this
Art can possibly do without it. For another Sage says: *In
this invisible fire you have the whole mystery of this Art, as the
three Persons of the Holy Trinity are truly concluded in one
substance." [n this fire the true Art is summed up in three
palpable things, which yet are invisible and incomprehensible,
like the Holy Spirit. Without those three things our Art can
never be brought to perfection. One of them is f; the
second, water ; the third, earth ; and all those three are invisibly
present in oze essence, and are the instrumental cause of all
perfection in Nature.


Now «wil [ also describe the operation of those Tree
Tlungs in our Art, aud will at once begin
vhal Three.


Our wise Teacher Plato says: '* Every husbandman who
sows good seed, first chooses a fertile field, ploughs and manures
it well, and weeds it of all tares ; he also takes care that his own
grain is free from every foreign admixture. When he has
committed the seed to the ground, he needs moisture, or rain, to
decompose the grain, and to raise it to new life. He also
requires fire, that is, the warmth of the Sun, to bring it to
maturity." 'The needs of our Art are of an analogous nature.
First, you must prepare your seed, ze, cleanse your Matter from
all impurity, by a method which you will find set forth at length
in the Dicta of the Sages which I subjoin to this Treatise.
Then you must have good soil in which to sow your Mercury
and Sun; this earth must first be weeded of all foreign
elements if it is to yield a good crop. Hence the Sage enjoins
us to *sow the seed in a fruitful field, which. has been prepared
with living fire, and it will produce much fruit."


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 201


What is the Urine of Children ?


I wil now truly inform you concerning the Urine of
Children, and of the Sages. The spirit which is extracted from
the metals is the urine of children: for it is the seed and the
first principle of metals. Without this seed there is no con-
summation of our Art, and no Tincture, either red or white.
For the sulphur and mercury of gold are the red, the sulphur
and mercury of silver are the white Tincture: the Mercury of
the Sun and Moon fixes all Mercury in imperfect metals, and
imparts excellence and durability even to common Mercury.
Dioscorides has written an elegant treatise concerning this
Urine of Children, which he calls the first Matter of metals.


What is the Mercury of the Sages ?


Mercury is nothing but water and salt, which have been
subjected for a long space of time to natural heat so as to be
united into one. This is Mercury, or dry water, which is not
moist, and does not moisten anything ; of course, I do not speak
of crude common mercury, but of the Mercury of the Sages.
The Sages callit the fifth element. Itis the vital principle which
brings all plants to maturity and perfection. The other quint-
essence, which is in the earth, and partly material, contains within
itself its own seed which grows out of its soil. The heavenly
quintessence comes to the aid of the earthly, removes the
grossness of its earth, and brings the aforesaid seed to maturity.
For Mercury, and the Celestial Quintessence, drain off all
harmful moisture from the quintessence of the earth. This
Mercury is also called sulphur of the air, sulphur being a
hardening of mercury; or we may describe them as husband
and wife, from whom issue many children in the earth. You
must not think that I desire to hide from you my true meaning :
nay, I will further endeavour to illustrate it in the following way.
Common sulphur, as you know, coagulates common mercury ;
for sulphur is poisonous, and mercury deadly. How then can
you obtain from either of them anything suitable for perfecting
the other, seeing that both require to be assisted by some ex-
ternal agent? On the other hand, I tell you that if, after the
conjunction of our fixed sulphur with our sublimed mercury, you
sprinkle a mere particle of it upon crude mercury, the latter is at


202 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


once brought to perfection. Again, you may clearly perceive
that the quintessence of the earth has its operation in the winter
when the earth is closed up with frost; while the Quintessence
of the Stars operates in the summer time, when it removes all
that is injurious in the inferior quintessence, and thus quickens
everything into vigorous growth. "The two quintessences may
also be driven off into water, and there conserved. An earthly
manifestation you may behold in the colours of the rainbow,
when the rays of the Sun shine through the rain. But, indeed,
there is not a stone, an animal, or a plant, that does not contain
both quintessences. In short, they embody the secret of our
whole Magistery, and out of them our Stone is prepared.
Hermes, in his Emerald Table, expresses himself as follows:
* Our Blessed Stone, which is of good substance, and has a soul,
ascends from earth to heaven, and again descends from heaven
to earth. Its effectual working is in the air; it is joined to
Mercury; hence the Sun is its Father, the Moon its Mother;
the wind has borne it in her womb, the earth is its nursing
mother, and at length that which is above is also that which is
below. "The whole represents a natural mixture: for it is a
Stone and nota Stone, fixed and volatile, body and soul, hus-
band and wife, King and Queen, Let what I have said
suffice, instead of many other words and parables.


Composition.


Albertus expresses himself thus concerning the conjunction
of the Stone: * The elements are so subtle that no ordinary
method of mingling will avail. They must first be dissolved
into water, then mixed, and placed in a warm spot, where they
are united after a time by natural warmth. For the Elixir and
the two solutions must be conjoined in the proportion of three
parts of the Elixir and one part of the crushed body. This
must again be coagulated and dissolved, and so also again until
the whole has become oze, without any transmutation. All this
is accomplished by the virtue of our mercurial water; for with
it the body is dissolved. It is that which purifies, conjoins,
dissolves, and makes red and white." Aristotle says of it as
follows: This water is the earth in which Hermes bids us sow
the seed ; the Sun or Moon, as Senior hath it, for extraction of


THE GLORF OF THE WORLD. 203


the Divine water of sulphur and mercury, which is fire, warming
and fructifping by the igneous virtue thereof. This is the
Mercury and that is the water which wets not the hand. It is
the Mercury which all Sages have loved and used, and of which
they have acknowledged the virtue so long as they lived.


THE THIRD PART OF THIS TREATISE, CONTAINING
THE DiCTA OF THE SAGES.


i I will now proceed to quote the very words of the
various Sages in regard to this point, in order that you may the
more easily understand our meaning. Know then that AI-
mighty God first delivered this Art to our Father, Adam, in
Paradise. For as soon as He had created him, and set him in
the Garden of Eden, He imparted it to him in the following
words: * Adam, here are two things: that which is above is
volatile, that which is below is fixed. "These two things contain
the whole mystery. Observe it well, and make not the virtue
that slumbers therein known to thy children ; for these two
things shall serve thee, together with all other created things
under heaven, and I will lay at thy feet all the excellence and
power of this world, seeing that thou thyself art a small
world."

ii ABEL, the son of Adam, wrote thus in his Principles :
After God had created our Father, Adam, and set him in
Paradise, He subjected to his rule all animals, plants, minerals,
and metals. For man is the mountain of mountains, the Stone
of all stones, the tree of trees, the root of roots, the earth of
earths. Allthese things he includes within himself, and God
has given to him to be the preserver of all things.

ii; SETH, the son of Adam, describes it thus: Know,
my children, that in proportion as the acid is subjected to coc-
tion, by means of our Art, and is reduced into ashes, the more of
the substance is extracted, and becomes a white body. 1f you
cook this well, and free it from all blackness, it is changed into a
stone, which is called a white stone until it is crushed.  Dissolve
it in water of the mouth, which has been well tempered, and its


204 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


whiteness will soon change to redness. The whole process is
performed by means of this sharp acid and the power of God.

iv. ISINDRUS: Our great and precious Matter is air, for
air ameliorates the Matter, whether the air be gross or tenuous,
warm or moist. For the grossness of the air arises from the
setting, the approach, and the rising of the Sun. Thus the air
may be hot or cold, or dry and rarefied, and the degrees of this
distinguish summer and winter.

V. ANAXAGORAS says: God and His goodness are the
first principle of all things. Therefore, the mildness of God
reigns even beneath the earth, being the substance of all things,
and thus also the substance beneath the earth. For the mild-
ness of God mirrors itself in creating, and His integrity in the
solidity that is beneath the earth. Now we cannot see His
goodness, except in bodily form.

vi. SENIOR, or PANDOLPHUS, says: I] make known to
posterity that the thinness, or softness, of airis in water, and is
not severed from the other elements. If the earth had not its
vital juice, no moisture would remain in it.

vii  ARISTEUS delivers himself thus briefly: Know that
the earth is round, and not flat. For if it were perfectly flat, the
Sun would shine everywhere at the same moment.

vii. PYTHAGORAS: That which is touched and not seen,
also that which is known but not looked upon, these are only
heaven and earth; again, that which is not known is in the
world and is perceived by sight, hearing, smell, taste, or touch.
Sight shews the difference between black and white; hearing,
between good and evil; taste, between sweet and bitter; touch,
between subtle and gross ; smell, between fragrant and fetid.

ix. ARISTEUS, in his Second Table, says: Beat the body
which I have made known to you into thin plates; pour
thereon our salt water, Ze, water of life, and heat it with a
gentle fire until its blackness disappears, and it becomes first
white, and then red.

Xx. PARMENIDES : The Sages have written about many
waters, stones, and metals, for the purpose of deceiving you.
You that desire a knowledge of our Art, relinquish Sun, Moon,
Saturn, and Venus, for our ore, and our earth, and why so?
Every thing is of the nature of no thing.


DUE GLORY TREE WORLD. 205


xi LUCas: Take the living water of the Moon, and coag-
ulate it, according to our custom. By those last words I mean
thatit is already coagulated. Take the living water of the Moon,
and put it on our carth, till it becomes white: here, then, is our
magnesia, and the natures of natures rejoice.

xii ETHEL: Subjectour Stone to coction till it becomes
as bright as white marble. "Then it is madea great and effectual
Stone, sulphur having been added to sulphur, and preserving its
property.

xiii, PYTHAGORAS: We exhibit unto you the regimen con-
cerning these things. The substance must drink its water, like
the fire of the Moon, which you have prepared. It must con-
tinue drinking its own water and moisture, till it turns white.

xiv. PHILETUS: Know, ye sons of philosophy, that the
substance, the search after which reduces so many to beggary, is
not more than one thing of most effectual properties. It is
looked down upon by the ignorant, but held in great esteem by
the Sages. Oh, how great is the folly, and how great also is the
presumptuous ignorance of the vulgar herd! If you knew the
virtue of this substance, kings, princes, and nobles would envy
you. We Sages call it the most sharp acid, and without this acid
nothing can be obtained, neither blackness, whiteness, nor the
Tincture.

xv. METHUSALEM : With air, vapour, and spirit we shall
have vulgar mercury changed into as good a silver as the nature
of minerals will allow in the absence of heat.

xvi  SIXION: Ye sons of philosophy, if you would make
our substance red, you must first make it white. Its three na-
tures are summed up in whiteness and redness. Take, therefore,
our Saturn, subject it to coction in aqua vite until it turns white,
becomes thick, and is coagulated, and then again till it becomes
red. "Then it is 7ed /ead, and without this lead of the Sages no-
thing can be effected.

xvi. MUNDINUS: Learn, O imitators of this Art, that
the philosophers have written variously of many gums in their
books, but the substance they refer to is nothing but fixed
and living water, out of which alone our noble Stone can
be prepared. Many seek what they call the essential
"* gum," and cannot find it. I reveal unto you the knowledge of


206 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


this gum and the mystery which abides therein. Know that our
gum is better than Sun and Moon. Therefore it is highly
esteemed by the Sages, though it is very cheap ; and they say :
Take care that you do not waste any of our *gum." But in their
books they do not call it by its common name, and that is the
reason why it is hidden from the many, according to the command
which God gave to Adam.

xvii. DARDANIUS: Know, my sons, that the Sages take
a living and indestructible water. Do not, then, set your hands
to this task until you know the power and efficacy of this water.
For nothing can be done in our Art without this indestructible
water. For the Sages have described its power and efficacy as
being that of spiritual blood. "Transmute this water into body
and spirit, and then, by the grace of God, you will have the spirit
firmly fixed in the body. I

xix. PYTHAGORAS, in his Second Book, delivers himself as
follows : The Sages have used different names for the substance,
and have told us to make the indestructible water white and red.
'They have also apparently indicated various methods, but they
really agree with each other in regard to all essentials, and
it is only their mystic language that causes a semblance of
disagreement. Our Stone is a stone, and not a stone. It has
neither the appearance nor the properties of stone, and yet it
is a stone. Many have called it after the place where it is
found ; others after its colour.

xx. NEOPHIDES: I bid you take that mystic substance,
white magnesia. And have a care that the Stone be pure
and bright. "Then place it in its aqueous vessel, and subject it
to gentle heat, until it first becomes black, then again white, and
then red. The whole process should be accomplished in forty
days. When you have done this, God shows you the first
substance of the Stone, which is an eagle-stone, and known to
all men.

xxi  THEOPHILUS: Take white Magnesia, Ze., quicksilver,
mingled with the Moon. Pound it till it becomes thin water;
subject it to coction for forty days; then the flower of the
Sun will open with great splendour. Close well the mouth
of the phial, and subject it to coction during forty days, when
you will obtain a beautiful water, which you must treat in the


ZEE GLORY OD TEE WORLD. 207


same way for another forty days, until it is thoroughly
purged of its blackness, and becomes white and fragrant.

xxii B/;ELUS says: I bid you take Mercury, which is
the Magnesia of the Moon, and subject it and its body to coction
till it becomes soft, thin, and like flowing water. Heat it again
till all its moisture is coagulated, and it becomes a Stone.

xxii. BASAN says: Put the yellow Matter into the bath,
together with its spouse, and let not the bath be too hot, lest both
be deprived of consciousness. Let a gentle temperature be kept
up till the husband and the wife become oze; sprinkle it with
its sweat, and set it in a quiet place. Take care you do not
drive off its virtue by too great heat. Honour then the King
and his Queen, and do not burn them. If you subject them to
gentle heat, they will become, first black, then white, and then
red. If you understand this, blessed are ye. But if you do
not, blame not Philosophy, but your own gross ignorance.

xxiv. ARISTOTLE: Know, my disciples, the Sages call our
Stone sometimes earth, and sometimes water. Be directed in
the regulation of your fire by the guidance of Nature. In
the liquid there is first water, then a stone, then the earth of
philosophers in which they sow their grain, which springs
up, and bears fruit after its kind.

XXv. AGODIAS: Subject our earth to  coction, till it
becomes the first substance. Pound it to an impalpable dust,
and again enclose it in its vessel. Sprinkle it with its own moisture
till an union is effected. "Then look at it carefully, and if the
water presents the appearance of )(, continue to pound and
heat. For,if you cannot reduce it to water, the water cannot be
found. In order to reduce it to water, you must stir up the body
with fire. The water I speak of is not rain water, but
indestructible water which cannot exist without its body,
which, in its turn, cannot exist, or operate, without its own
indestructible water.

XXvi  SIRETUS: What is required in our Art is our water
and our earth, which must become black, white, and red, with
many intermediate colours which shew themselves successively.
Everything is generated through our living and indestructible
water. True Sages use nothing but this living water which
supersedes all other substances and processes. Coction, califac-


208 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


tion, distillation, sublimation, desiccation, humectation, albefac-
tion, and rubrefaction, are all included in the natural development
of this one substance.

xxvii MOSINUS: The Sages have described our subs-
tance, and the method of its preparation, under many names, and
thus have led many astray who did not understand our writing.
It zs composed of red and white sulphur, and cf fixed or indes-
tructible water, called permanent water.

Xxviii PLATO: Let it suffice you to dissolve bodies with
this water, lest they be burned. Let the substance be washed
with living water till all its blackness disappears, and it becomes
a white Tincture.

xxix. ORFULUS: First, subject the Matter to gentle
coction, of a temperature such as that with which a hen hatches
her eggs, lest the moisture be burnt up, and the spirit of
our earth destroyed. Let the phial be tightly closed that the
earth may crush our substance, and enable its spirit to be
extracted. The Sages say that quicksilver is extracted from the
flower of our earth, and the water of our fire extiacted from two
things, and transmuted into our acid. But though they speak
of many things, they mean only oze thing, namely, that
indestructible water which zs our substance, and our acid.

xxx. BATHON : If you know the Matter of our Stone, and
the mode of regulating its coction, and the chromatic changes
which it undergoes—as though it wished to warn you that its
names are as numerous as the colours which it displays—then
you may perform the putrefaction, or first coction, which turns
our Stone quite black. By this sign you may know that you
have the key to our Art, and you will be able to transmute it
into the mystic white and red. The Sages say that the Stone
dissolves itself, coagulates itself, mortifies itself, and is quickened
by its own inherent power, and that it changes itself to black,
white, and red, in Christian charity and fundamental trnth.

xxxi. BLoDIUS. Take the Stone which is found every-
where, and is called Rebis (Two-thing), and grows in two
mountains. Take it while it is still fresh, with its own proper
blood. Its growth is in its skin, also in its flesh, and its food is
in its blood, its habitation in the air. Take of it as much as you
like, and plunge it into the Bath.


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 209


xxxii. LEAH,the prophetess, writes briefly thus: Know,
Nathan, that the flower of gold is the Stone; therefore subject
it to heat during a certain number of days, till it assumes the
dazzling appearance of white marble. |

xxxii ALKIUS: You daily behold the mountains which
contain the husband and wife. Hie you therefore to their
caves, ard dig up their earth, before it perishes.

xxxiv. BONELLUS: All ye lovers of this Art, I say unto
you, in faith and love: Relinquish the multiplicity of your
methods and substances, for our substance is oe thing, and is
called living and indestructible water. He that is led astray by
many words, will know the persons against whom he should be
on his guard.

xxxv. HIERONYMUS: Malignant men have darkened
our Art, perverting it with many words; they have called our
earth, and our Sun, or gold, by many misleading names. Their
salting, dissolving, subliming, growing, pounding, reducing to an
acid, and white sulphur, their coction of the fiery vapour, its
coagulation, and transmutation into red sulphur, are nothing but
different aspects of one and the same thing, which, in its first
stage, we may describe as incombustible and indestructible
sulphur.

xxxvi. HERMES: Except ye convert the earth of our
Matter into fire, our acid will not ascend.

xxxvii  PYTHAGORAS, in his Fourth Table, says: How
wonderful is the agreement of Sages in the midst of difference !
They all say that they have prepared the Stone out ofa sub-
stance which by the vulgar is looked upon as the vilest thing on
earth. Indeed, if we were to tell the vulgar herd the ordinary
name of our substance, they would look upon our assertion as a
daring falsehood. But if they were acquainted with its virtue
and efficacy, they would not despise that which is, in reality,
the most precious thing in the world. God has concealed
this mystery from the foolish, the ignorant, the wicked, and
the scornful, in order that they may not use it for evil
purposes.

xxxvii. HAGIENUS: Our Stone is found in all mountains,
all trees, all herbs, and animals, and with all men. It wears
many different colours, contains the four elements, and has been

Oo


210 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


designated a microcosm. Can you not see, you ignorant seekers
after the Stone, who try, and vainly try, such a multiplicity of
substances and methods, that our Stone is one earth, and one
sulphur, and that it grows in abundance before your very eyes?
I will tell you where you may find it. The first spot is on the
summit of two mountains ; the second, in all mountains ; the
third, among the refuse in the street ; the fourth, in the trees and
metals the liquid of which is the Sun and Moon, Mercury,
Saturn, and Jupiter. "There is but one vessel, one method, and
one consummation.

xxxix. MORIENUS: Know that our Matter is not in
greater agreement with human nature than with anything else,
for it is developed by putrefaction and transmutation. fit were
not decomposed, nothing could be generated out of it. The goal
of our Art is not reached until Sun and Moon are conjoined, and
become, as it were, one body.

xl THE EMERALD TABLE: [t is true, without any
error, and it is the sum of truth; that which is above is also that
which is below, for the performance of the wonders of a certain
one thing, and as all things arise from one Stone, so also they
were generated from one common Substance, which includes
the four elements created by God. And among other miracles
the said Stone is born of the First Matter. The Sun is its
Father, the Moon its Mother, the wind bears it in its womb,
and it is nursed by the earth. Itself is the Father of the whole
earth, and the whole potency thereof. If it be transmuted into
earth, then the earth separates from the fire that which is most
subtle from that which is hard, operating gently and with great
artifice. Then the Stone ascends from earth to heaven, and
again descends from heaven to earth, and receives the choicest
influences of both heaven and earth. If you can perform this
you have the glory of the world, and are able to put to flight all
diseases, and to transmute all metals. It overcomes Mercury,
which is subtle, and penetrates all hard and solid bodies. Hence
it is compared with the world. Hence I am called Hermes,
having the three parts of the whole world of philosophy.

xli. LEPRINUS says: The Stone must be extracted from
a two-fold substance, before you can obtain the Elixir which is
fixed in one essence, and derived from the one indispensable


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 2T


Matter, which God has created, and without which no one can
attain the Art. Both these parts must be purified before they
are joined together afresh. The body must become different,
and so must the volatile spirit. Then you have the Medicine,
which restores health, and imparts perfection to all things. The
fixed and the volatile principle must be joined in an inseparable
union, which defies even the destructive force of fire.

xlii. LAMECH: In the Stone of the Philosophers are the
first elements, and the final colours of minerals, or Soul, Spirit,
and Body, joined unto one. The Stone which contains all these
things is called Zibeth, and the working of Nature has left it
imperfect.

xliii. SOCRATES: Our Mystery is the life of all things, or
the water. For water dissolves the body into spirit, and sum-
mons the living spirit from among the dead. My son, despise
not my Practical Injunction. For it gives you, in a brief form,
everything that you really need.

xliv. ALEXANDER: The good need not remain concealed
on account of the bad men that might abuse it. For God rules
over all, according to His Divine Will. Observe, therefore, that
the salt of the Stone is derived from mercury, and is that Matter,
most excellent of all things, of which we are in search. The
same also contains in itself all secrets. Mercury is our Stone,
which is composed of the dry and the moist elements, which have
been joined together by gentle heat in an inseparable union.

xlv. SENIOR teaches us to make the Salt out of ashes, and
then, by various processes, to change it into the Mercury of the
Sages, because our Magistery is dependent on our water alone,
and needs nothing else.

xlvi. ROSARIUS: Itisa stone, and not a stone, viz., the
eagle-stone. "The substance has in its womb a stone, and when
it is dissolved, the water that was coagulated in it bursts forth.
Thus the Stone is the extracted spirit of our indestructible body.
It contains mercury, or liquid water, in its body, or fixed earth,
which retains its nature. This explanation is sufficiently plain.

xlvii PAMPHILUS: The Salt of the Gem is that which is
in its own bowels ; it ascends with the water to the top of the
alembic, and, after separation, is once more united and made one
body with it by means of natural warmth. Or we may, with

02


2T THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


King Alexander, liken the union to that of a soul with its
body.

xlviii. DEMOCRITUS: Our Substance is the conjunction
of the dry and the moist elements, which are separated by a vapour
or heat, and then transmuted into a liquid like water, in which
our Stone is found. Forthe vapour unites to the most subtle earth
the most subtle air, and contains all the most subtle elements.
This first substance may be separated into water and earth, the
latter being perceptible to the eye. The earth of the vapour is
volatile when it ascends, but it is found fixed when the separation
takes place, and when the elements are joined together again it
becomes fixed mercury. For the enjoyment of this, His precious
gift, we Sages ceaselessly praise and bless God's Holy Name.

xlix. SrRos: The body of the Sages, being calcined, is
called everlasting water, which permanently coagulates our
Mercury. And if the Body has been purified and dissolved, the
union is so close as to resist all efforts at separation.

l. NOoaH, the man of God, writes thus in his Table: My
children and brethren, know that no other stone is found in
the world that has more virtue than this Stone. No mortal man
can find the true Art without this Stone. Blessed be the God
of Heaven who has created this property in the Salt, even in the
Salt of the Gem !

li | MENALDES: The fire of the Sages may be extracted
from all natural things, and is called the quintessence. It is of
earth, water, air, and fire. It has no cause of corruption or other
contrary quality.

li. HERMES, in his second Table, writes thus:  Dissolve
the ashes in the second element, and coagulate this substance
into a Stone. Let this be done seven times. For as Naaman
the Syrian was purged of his leprosy by washing himself seven
times in Jordan, so our substance must undergo a seven-fold
cleansing, by calcining and dissolving, and exhibiting a variety
ofever deepening colours. In our water are hidden the four
elements, and this earth, which swallows its water, is the dragon
that swallows its tail, Ze, its strength.

lii  NUNDINUS: The fire which includes all our chemical
processes, is three-fold: the fiery element of the air, of water,
and of the earth. This is all that our Magistery requires.


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD 202


liv. ANANIAS: Know, ye Scrutators of Nature, that fire
is the soul of everything, and that God Himself is fire and
soul. And the body cannot live without fire. For without fire
the other elements have no efficacy. It is, therefore, a most
holy, awful, and divine fire which abides with God Himself in
the Most Holy Trinity, for which also we give eternal thanks
to God.

lv. BOoNIDUS: In the fountain of Nature our Substance is
found, and nowhere else upon earth ; and our Stone is fire, and
has been generated in fire, without, however, being consumed by
fire.

lvi. RosINUS: Two things are hidden in two things, and
indicate our Stone: in earth is fire, and air in water, yet there
are only two outward things, viz, earth and water. For Mercury
is our Stone, consisting as it does both of moist and dry
elements. Mercury is dry and moist in its very nature, and all
things have their growth from the dry and moist elements.

lvii. GEBER: We cannot find anything permanent, or
fixed, in fire, but only a viscous natural moisture which is the
root of all metals. For our venerable Stone nothing is required
but mercurial substances, if they have been well purified by our
Art, and are able to resist the fierce heatoffire. This Substance
penetrates to the very roots of metals, overcomes their imperfect
nature, and transmutes them, according to the virtue of the
Elixir, or Medicine.

lvii. AnROS: Our Medicine consists of two things, and
one essence. There is one Mercury, of a fixed and a volatile
substance, composed of body and spirit, cold and moist, warm
and dry.

lix. ARNOLDUS: Let your only care be to regulate the
coction of the Mercurial substance. In proportion as it is itself
dignified shall it dignify bodies.

lx. ALPHIDIUs: Transmute the nature, and you will find
what you want. For in our Magistery we obtain first from the
gross the subtle, or the spirit; then from the moist the dry,
Ze., earth from water. Thus we transmute the corporeal into the
spiritual, and the spiritual into the corporeal, the lowest into the
highest, and the highest into the lowest.


214 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


lxi... BERNARDUS: The middle substance is nothing but
coagulated mercury ; and the first Matter is nothing but two-
fold mercury. For our Medicine is composed of two things, the
fixed and the volatile, the corporeal and the spiritual, the cold
and the warm, the moist and the dry. Mercury must be sub-
jected to coction in a vessel with three divisions, that the
dryness of the active fire may be changed into vaporous moisture
of the oil that surrounds the substance. Ordinary fire does not
digest our substance, but its heat converted into dryness is the
true fire. :

Ixii STEPHANUS: Metals are earthly bodies, and are
generated in water. The water extracts a vapour from the
Stone, and out of the moisture of [the] earth, by the operation of
the Sun, God lets gold grow and àccumulate. Thus earth and
water are united into a metallic body.

Ixiii;. GuIDO BONATUS writes briefly concerning the
quintessence, as being purer than all elements. "The quint-
essence contains the four elements, that is, the first Matter, out
of which God has created, and still creates, all things. It is
Hyle, containing in a confused mixture the properties of every
creature.

lxiv. ALRIDOS: The virtue and efficacy of everything
is to be found in its quintessence, whether its nature be warm,
cold, moist, or dry. This quintessence gives out the sweetest
fragrance that can beimagined. Therefore the highest perfection
is needed.

Ixv. LONGINUS describes the process in the following
terms: Let your vessel be tightly closed and exposed to an
even warmth. This water is prepared in dry ashes, and is sub-
jected to coction till the two become one. When one is joined
to the other; the body is brought back to its spirit. Then the
fire must be strengthened till the fixed body retains that which
is not fixed by its own. heat. With this you can tinge ten
thousand times ten thousand of other substances.

Ixvi. HERMES, in his Mysteries, says: Know that our
Stone is lightly esteemed by the thankless multitude ; but it is
very precious to the Sages. If princes knew how much gold
can be made out of a particle of Sun, and of our Stone, they

, would never suffer it to be taken out of their dominions.


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. za


*'lThe Sages rejoice when the bodies are dis- lc
*solved; for our Stone is prepared with two"
* waters. It drives away all sickness from the "
*diseased body, whether it be human or"
** metallic."


By means of our Art, we do in one month what Nature
cannot accomplish in a thousand years: for we purify the parts,
and then join them together in an inseparable and indissoluble
union.

Ixvii, NERO: Know that our Mercury is dry and moist,
and conjoined with the Sun and Moon. Sun and Moon in
nature are cold and moist mercury and hot and dry sulphur,
and both have their natural propagation by being joined in one
thing.


Herve follows a T: vue Explanation of some of the Foregoing
Philosophical Dicta, the. smeaning, word for word
and point for point, being clearly set forth.


I now propose to say something about the meaning of the
obscure and allegorical expressions used by some of the Sages
whom I have quoted. Be sure that they all were true Sages,
and really possessed our Stone. It may have been possessed
by more persons since the time of Adam, but the above list
includes all of whom I have heard. I need not here review all
their sayings ; for the words of the least of them are sufficient for
imparting to you a knowledge of this Art; and my ambition
goes no higher than that. If I have enumerated so large a
number of authorities, I have only done so in order that you
might the better understand both the theory and practice of
this Art, and that you might be saved all unnecessary ex-
pense. Forthis reason I have declared this true philosophy
with all the skill that God has given me. I hope the initiated
will overlook any verbal inaccuracy into which I have fallen,
and that they will be induced by my example to abstain from
wilfully misleading anxious enquirers. I tnay have fallen. into
some errors of detail, but as to the gist of my work, I know
what I have written, and that it is God's own truth.


216 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Explanation of the Saying of Adan.

When God had created our first parent Adam, and set him
in Paradise, He shewed him two things, namely, earth and water.
Earth is fixed and indestructible, water is volatile and vaporous.
These two contain the elements of all created things : water con-
tains air, and earth fire—and of these four things the whole of
creation is composed. In earth are enclosed fire, stones, minerals,
salt, mercury, and all manner of metals; in water, and in air, all
manner ofliving and organic substances, such as beasts, birds,
fishes, flesh, blood, bones, wood, trees, flowers, and leaves. To all
these things God imparted their efficacy and virtue, and subjected
them to the mastery and use of Adam. Hence you may see how
all these things are adapted to the human body, and are such as
to meet the requirements of his nature. He may incorporate the
virtue of outward substances by assimilating them in the form of
food. In the same way, his mind is suitably constructed for the
purpose of gaining a rational knowledge of the physical world.
That this is the case, you may see from the first chapter of
Genesis.

On the sixth day of the first year of the world, that is to
say, on the r5th day of March, God created the first man, Adam,
of red earth, in a field near Damascus, with a beautiful body, and
after His own image. When Adam was created, he stood naked
before the Lord, and with outstretched hands rendered thanks to
Him, saying : O Lord, Thy hands have shaped me: now remem-
ber, I pray Thee, the work of Thy hands, which Thou hast clothed
with flesh, and strengthened with bones, and grant me life and
loving-kindness.

So the Lord endowed Adam with great wisdom, and such
marvellous insight that he immediately, without the help of any
teacher—simply by virtue of his original righteousness—had a
perfect knowledge of the seven liberal arts, and of all animals,
plants, stones, metals, and minerals. Nay, what is more, he had
perfect understanding of the Holy Trinity, and of the coming ot
Christ in the flesh. Moreover, Adam was the Lord, King, and
Ruler of all other creatures which, at the Divine bidding, were
brought to him by the angel to receive their names. Thus all
creatures acknowledged Adam as their Lord, seeing that it was
he to whom the properties and virtues of all things were to be


TIN GE OY RROEE EO. PEEES- ADI UD. 2/7


made known. Now the wisdom, and knowledge of all things,
which Adam had received, enabled him to observe the properties,
the origin, and the end of all things. He noted the division and
destruction, the birth and decay of physicalsubstances. EHe saw
that they derive their origin from the dry and the moist elements,
and that they are again transmuted into the dry and the moist.
Of all these things Adam took notice, and especially of that
which is called the first Matter. For he who knows how all
things are transmuted into their first Matter, has no need to ask
any questions. It was that which existed in the beginning
before God created heaven and earth; and out of it may be
made one new thing which did not exist before, a new earth, fire,
water, air, Sun, Moon, Stars, in short, a new world.

As in the beginning all things were created new, so there is
a kind of new creation out of the first substance in our Art.
Now although God warned Adam generally not to reveal this
first substance—viz, the moist and the dry elements—yet He
permitted him to impart the knowledge to his son Seth. Abel
discovered the Art for himself, by the wisdom which God had
given him, and inscribed an account of it on beechen tablets.
He was also the first to discover the art of writing ; further, he
f»retold the destruction of the world by the Flood, and wrote all
these things on wooden tablets, and hid them in a pillar of stone,
which was found, long afterwards, by the children of Israel
Thus you see that our Art was a secret from the beginning, and
a secret it will remain to the end of the world. For this reason
it is necessary carefully to consider all that is said about it, and
especially the words of the Lord to Adam : for they exhibit in a
succinct form the secret of the whole Art.


Explanation of the Saying of Abe.

This saying partly explains itself, and is partly explained
by what we said about God's words to Adam. — Yet I will add a
few remarks concerning it Man hath within him the virtue and
efficiency of all things, whence he is called a small world, and is
compared to the large world, because the bones which are beneath
his skin, and support his body, may be likened to the mountains
and stones, his flesh to the earth, his veins to the rivers, and his
small veins to the brooks which are discharged into them. — The


218 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


heart is the sea into which the great and small rivers flow ; his
hair resembles the growing herbs—and so with all other parts
of his body. Again, his inward parts, such as the heart, lungs,
and liver, are comparable to the metals. ^ The hairs have their
head in the earth (ZZ, the flesh) and their roots in the air, as the
Sages say, that the root of their minerals is in the air, and their
head in the earth. "That which ascends by distillation is volatile,
and is in the air; that which remains at the bottom, and is
fixed, is the head, which is in the earth. Therefore, the one
must always exist in conjunction with the other if it is to be
effectual. Hence man may be compared to an inverted tree : for
he has his roots, or his hair, in the air, while other trees have their
hairs. or their roots, in the earth.

And of our Stone, too, the Sages have justly said that it has
its head in the earth, and its root in the air. "This similitude has
a two-fold interpretation. First, with regard to the place in
which our Matter is found ; secondly, with regard to the dissolu-
tion and second conjunction of the Stone. For when our Stone
rises upward in the alembic, it has its root in the air; but if it
would regain its virtue and strength, it must once more return to
its earth, and then it has its head and perfect potency in the
earth. Hence our Stone, too, is not inaptly denominated a small
world ; it is called the mountain of mountains, from which our
ore is derived, since it is evolved from the first substance in a way
analogous to that in which the great world was created. Know
that if you bury anything in [the] earth, and it rots, as food is
digested in the human body, and the gross is separated from the
subtle, and that which is fetid from that which is pure, then that
which is pure is the first Matter which has been set free by decay.
If you understand this, you know the true Art. But keep it to
yourself, and cast not pearls before swine ; for the vulgar regard
our Art with ignorant contempt.


Explanation of the Saying of Seth, Som of Adam.


By * acid which is to be subjected to coction, and
transmuted into ashes," the Sage Seth means distilled water,
which we call seed. If this, by diligent coction, is condensed
into a body— which he calls ashes—the body loses its blackness
by being washed till it becomes white; for, by constant


TELE. GAIXQRV^ QUO TEDE: WEOIGIIUD. 219


coction, all blackness and gross impurity are removed. If it
were not for this earth, the spirit would never be coagulated ;
for it would have no body into which it could enter—seeing
that it cannot be coagulated and fixed anywhere but in its
own body. On the other hand, the spirit purifies its body,
as Seth says, and makes it white. He says further: *If you
diligently heat it, and free it from its blackness, it is changed
into a Stone, which is called the white coin of the Stone."
That is to say, if it is slowly heated with a gentle fire, it is
by degrees changed into a body which resists fire, and is
named a Stone. It is fixed, and it has a brilliantly white
appearance. A coin it is called, because, as he who has a coin
may purchase with it bread or whatever else he needs, so he
who has this Stone may purchase for himself health, wisdom,
longevity, gold, silver, gems, etc. Hence it is justly called the
Coin, since it can buy what all the riches in the world cannot
procure. [tis struck by the Sages, who, instead of the image
of a prince, impress upon it their own image. Therefore it is
denominated the COIN of the SAGES, because it is their own
money, struck in their own mint.

Again, when the Sage says, * Heat the Stone till it breaks
[itself] and dissolve it in the well-tempered water of the
Moon," he means that the Stone must be heated by that which
is in itself, until it is changed into water, or dissolved. All this
is done by its own agency ; for the body is called Moon, when
it has been changed into water; and the extracted spirit, or
distilled water, is called Sun. For the element of [the] air is
concealed in it ; but the body must be broken in its own water,
or dissolved by itself. The * well-tempered water of the Moon "
is the gentle inward heat which changes it into water, and yields
two waters, viz., the distilled spirit, and the dissolved body.
These two waters are again united by slow and gentle coction,
the distilled spirit becoming coagulated into a body, the
dissolved body becoming a spirit. The fixed becomes volatile,
and the volatile fixed, by dissolution and coagulation, and both
assume, first a white, and then a red colour. The change to
white and red is produced by the same water, and the white is
always followed by the red, just as the black is followed by the
white. When the Sage says, in conclusion, *that the whole


220 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


can be accomplished only with the best acid, through the power
of God alone," he means that the one thing from which alone our
Stone can be procured may be compared to the sharpest acid,
and that, by means of our Art, this acid is changed into the
best of earthly things, which all the treasures of all kings and
princes are not sufficient to buy


Explanation of the Saymg of [sindrus.


Good Heavens! How skilfully the Sages have contrived
to conceal this matter. It would surely have been far better if
they had abstained from writing altogether. For the extreme
obscurity of their style has overwhelmed thousands in ruin,
and plunged them into the deepest poverty, especially those
who set about this task without even the slightest knowledge
of Nature, or of the requirements of our Art What
the Sages write is strictly true; but you cannot understand
it unless you are already initiated in the secrets of this Art.
Yea, even if you were a Doctor of the Doctors, and a Light
of the World, you would be able to see no meaning in
their words without this knowledge. They have written, but
you are none the wiser. They half wished to communicate the
secret to their posterity ; but a jealous feeling prevented them
from doing so in plain language. To the uninitiated reader
these words of Isindrus must appear nothing short of nonsense:
* Great is the air, because the air corrects the thing, if it is thin or
thick, hot or cold." But the Sage means that when it ascends
with the water, it is hot air, for fire and air bear our Stone
like secret fire concealed therein, and the water which ascends
from the earth, by that ascension becomes air, and thin;
and when it descends, it descends into water which contains fire ;
thus the earth is purified, seeing that the water takes [the] fire
with it into the earth. For the fire is the Soul, and the Moon
the Spirit. "Therefore, theair is great, because it bears with it
water and fire, and imparts them to all things, though thereby
(by this loss of water) itself becomes cold. Then theair becomes
thick, when with its fire it is transmuted into the body, and thus
the air corrects the thing by its thickness. For it bears out
our Stone as it carries it in, and purifies it both in its ascent and
in its descent. In the same way air purifies all things that grow


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. sn


(Z.«., plants), gives them their food (Ze. water), and imparts to them
its fire, by which they are sustained. Of this you may convince
yourself by ocular demonstration. For the air bears the clouds,
and sheds them upon earth in the form of rain; which rain
contains secret fire derived from the earth, and the rays of the
Sun by which it was drawn upward—and this fire it gives to all
things as food. And although the rays of the Sun and Moon
are immeasurably subtle, swift, and intangible; yet the rays of
our Sun and Moon are much swifter and more subtle than those
which are received by the plants in their growth. For the earth
digests the rays of the Sun and Moon, and they sustain in
the most wonderful manner things of vegetable growth ; and all
the living rays of the Sun and Moon nourish all created things.
For by this digestion they obtain their life. For this reason
the air may be called great, because through the grace of God it
accomplishes great things.

Again, when the Sage says, * If theair becomes thick, " ze,
when the Sun turns aside, or is changed, "there is a thickness,
till it rises," he means that if the distilled water which is taken
for the Sun, or fire, approaches its body, and is changed into it,
then the Sun stoops down to the earth.  Thereby the air
becomes thick, being joined to the earth, and if the Sun is once
more elevated the air becomes thin ; that is to say, when the
water is extracted from the earth by means of the alembic, the
fire rises upward, Ze, the Sun is exalted, and the air becomes
thin. Again,when he says, * This also is hot and cold, and
thickness, and thinness, or softness," the Sage means that the
Sun is hot, and the Moon cold ; for the earth, when dissolved, is
the Moon, and water, in which is fire, is the Sun : these two must
be conjoined in an inseparable union. This union enables them
to reduce the elements of all metallic and animal bodies, into
which they are injected, to perfect purity and health. "When
the Sage adds that thickness and thinness denote summer and
winter, he means that our Art is mingled of thickness and
thinness, or two elements which must be united by gentle warmth,
like that of winter and summer combined. "This temperate
warmth, which resembles that of a bath, brings the Sun and
Moon together. Thus I have, by the grace of God, interpreted
to you the parabolic saying of Isindrus.


222 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Explanation of the Saying of Anaxagoras.


From the beginning of all things God is. He is likened to
light and fire, and He may be likened to the latter in His
essence, because fire is the first principle of all things that are
seen and grow. In the same way, the first principle of our Art
is fire. Heat impels Nature to work, and in its working are:
manifested Body, Spirit, and Soul; that is, earth and water.
Earth is the Body, oil the Soul, and water the Spirit; and all this
is accomplished through the Divine goodness and lenity, without
which Nature can do nothing; or, as the Sage says: * God's
lenity rules all things ; and beneath the thickness of the earth,
after creation, are revealed lenity and integrity." ^ Thatisto say:
If the earth is separated from the water, and itself dissolved into
oil and water, the oil is integrity, and the water lenity ; for the
water imparts the soul to the oil and to the body, and [the body]
receives nothing but what is imparted to it by heaven, that is,
by the water—and the water is revealed under the oil, the oil
under the earth. For the fire is subtle, and floats upward from
the earth with subtle waters, and is concealed in the earth. Now
oil and air and earth are purified by their own spirit. "Therefore
the oil is integrity in the body, and the spirit lenity. And the
spirit in the first operation descends to the body and restores life
to the body; although the oil is pure and remains with the body,
yet it cannot succour the body without the help of the spirit; for
the body suffers violence and anguish while it is dissolved and
purified. "Then, again, the "thickness of the earth" is transmuted
into a thin substance such as water or oil, and thus the * lenity "
is seen in the body. For the body is so mild or soft as to be
changed into water, or oil, although before it was quite dry.
"Therefore oil is seen in the earth, which is the fatness or life of
the water, Ze, an union of fire, air, and water. Now give the
water to the body to drink, and it will be restored to life. — And
though those three elements have ascended from the earth, yet
the virtue remains with the body, as you may see by dissolving
it into oil and water. But the oil cannot operate without the
spirit, nor can the spirit bear fruit without the oil and the body.
"Therefore they must be united ; and all *lenity " and "integrity "
are seen in the body when it is transmuted to white and red.


VOLES GILORT^ OP. DEBE WORLD. 223


Explication of the Opinion of Pythagoras.

This Sage asks what that is which is touched, and yet not
seen. He means that the substance which is prepared by our
Art is oze thing, which is tangible and invisible. "That is to say,
it is felt, but not seen, nor is the mode of its operation known.
He who knows it, but knows not its operation, as yet knows
nothing as he ought. "This one thing, which alone is profitable
for the purposes of our Art, proceeds from a certain dark place,
where it is not seen, nor are its operation or its virtue known to
any but the initiated. A great mystery is also concealed in the
Matter itself, namely, air and fire, or the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars. "This is concealed in it, and yet is invisible, as the Sage
says: What is not seen, or known, is only heaven. — That which
is felt, and not seen, is earth. Earth, says the Sage, is thickness,
or body, which is found at the bottom of the Matter, has accu-
mulated in the Matter, and can be felt and known. By the
words, *that is between heaven and earth, which is not known,"
(Ze, in the world), the Sage means that the Matter of our Stone
is found in the small world ; not in rocks and mountains, or in
the earth, but between heaven and earth, Ze, in the air. Again,
when he says that '* in it are senses, and entirety, as smell, taste,
hearing, touch," he would teach us that in human nature there is
entirety of mind and perception; for man can know, feel, and
understand. He would also teach us how our Stone is to be
found, namely, by sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. By
sight, because the Matter of the Stone is thick, or thin and clear,
and turns black, white, and red. By smell, because, when its
impurity is purged away, it emits a most sweet fragrance. By
taste, because it is first bitter and disagreeable, but afterwards
becomes most pleasant. By touch, because that sense enables us
to distinguish between the hard and the soft, the gross and the
subtle, between water and earth, and between the different stages
of distillation, putrefaction, dissolution, coagulation, fermentation,
and injection, which the substance goes through. ^ The different
processes of the task are perceived with the senses, and it should
be accomplished within forty-six days.

Loosenzng of the Kmot of Aristeus.

"Take the body which I have shewn you, and beat it into thin

leaves," Ze, take the earth which cleaves to our substance, and,


224 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


by having become dry, becomes visible and knowable ; for now
it is water and earth. "The earth is thus sZezvz, and divided into
two parts, earth and water. Let that earth be taken, placed in a
phial, and put in a warm bath, by the warmth of which it is dis-
solved, through its own internal coction, into water; this the Sage
calls beating into thin leaves. — The body which is thus obtained
is variously described as the Philosopher's Stone, or the Stone of
leaves. * Add some of our salt water, and this is the water of
life" That means: After its dissolution into water, it must
receive our salt water to drink—for this water has been previously
distilled from it, and is the water of life; for the soul and spirit
of the body are hidden in it, and it is called our sea water; the
same also is its natural name, because it is obtained from the
invisible hidden sea of the Sages, the sea of the smaller world.
For our Art is called the smaller world, and thus it is the water
ofoursea. Ifthis water is added to the body, and heated and
purified with it, the body is purged by long coction, and its colour
changes from black to a brilliant white, while the water is coagu-
lated, and forms, by indissoluble union with the body, the
imperishable Philosopher's Stone, which you must use to the
glory of God, and the good of your neighbour.


Exposition of the Saying of Parmenides.


Jealous Sages have named many waters and metals and
stones, simply for the purpose of deceiving you; herein the
philosophers would warn us that they have used secrecy, lest the
whole mystery should be manifested before all the world.
'Those who follow the letter of their directions are sure to be led
astray, and to miss entirely the true foundation of our Art.
'The fault, however, lies not with the Sages so much as with the
ignorance of their readers. The Sages name it a sZoze ; and so
it Zs a stone, which is dug up from our mine. They speak of
metals ; and there are such things as metals liquefied from our
ore. They speak of water; but our water we obtain from our
own spring. The redand white sulphur they refer to are obtained
from our air. Their salt is obtained from our salt mines. /7 is
our Sun, our verdigris, halonitre, alkali, orpiment, arsenic, our
poison, our medicine, etc. By whatever name they call it they
cannot make it more than oze thing. It is rightly described by


E


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 225


all the Sages, but not plainly enough for the uninitiated en-
quirer. For such an one knows neither the substance nor its
operation. The Sage says: * Relinquish Sun, Moon, and Venus
for our ore," Ze, it is not to be found in any earthly metals, but
only in our ore. Whoever rightly understands the concluding
words of the Sage has received a great blessing at the hand of
God.


Explanation of the Saying of Lucas.


By the living water of the Moon this Sage means our
water, which is twofold. "The distilled water is the Moon ; the
Sun, or fire, is hidden in it, and is the Father of all things.
Hence it is compared to a man, because the Sun is in the water.
It is also called living water; for the life of the dead body is
hidden in the water. It is the water of the Moon, because the
Sun is the Father and the Moon the Mother. Hence, also, they
are regarded as husband and wife. The Body is the Moon,
or Mother, and the distilled water, or male principle, rises up-
ward from the earth; and for that reason is sometimes called
Moon. For it is the water of the Moon, or Body. It has left
the Body, and must enter it again before our Art can be
perfected. Hence the Body, or Moon, has well been designated
the female principle, and the water, or Sun, the male principle,
for reasons which have been set forth at length in this book.

Again, when the Sage says, * Coagulate it after our
fashion," those last three words mean that the body must receive
its spirit to drink gradually, and little by little, until it recovers
its life, and health, and strength, which takes place by means of
the same gentle heat which digests food in the stomach, and
matures fruit in its place. For it is our custom to eat, drink,
aud live in gentle warmth. By this regimen our body is pre-
served, and all that is foul and unprofitable is driven out from
our body. According to the same fashion of gentle coction, all
that is fetid and black is gradually purged out of our Stone.
For when the Sage says * after our fashion," he wishes to teach
you that the preparation of the Stone bears a strict analogy
to the processes of the human body. That the chemical de-
velopment of our substance is internal, and caused by the
operation of Nature and of its four elements, the Sage indicates

P


226 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


by the words, *Everything is already coagulated." The sub-
stance contains all that is needed ; there is nothing to be added
or taken away, seeing that it is dissolved and again conjoined
by its own inherent properties. When the Sage continues, *I
bid you take water of life, which descends from the Moon,
and pour it upon our earth till it turns white," he means that if
water and earth are separated from each other, then the dry
body is our earth, and the extracted water is the water of the
Moon, or water of life. "This process of adfusion, desiccation,
attrition, coagulation, etc., is repeated till the body turns white ;
and then takes place onr conglutination, which is indissoluble.
*'Then," as the Sage says, "we have our Magnesia, and the
Nature of natures rejoices." Its spirit and body become one
thing: they were one thing, and after separation have once more
become one thing ; therefore, one nature rejoices in the restora-
tion of the other.


Exposztzon of the Saying of Ethelzus.


He says: * Heat our Stone until it shines like dazzling
marble; then it becomes great, and a mystic Stone; for sulphur
added to sulphur preserves it on account of its fitness" That is
tosay: When the moist and the dry have been separated, the
dry which lies at the bottom, and is called our Stone, is as black
asaraven. It must be subjected to the coction of our water
(separated from it) until it loses its blackness, and becomes as
white as dazzling marble. "Then it is the mystic Stone which by
coction has been transmuted into fixed mercury with the bless-
ing of God. The Stone is mystic, or secret, because it is found
in a secret place, in an universally despised substance where no
one looks for the greatest treasure of the world. Hence it may
well be called The HIDDEN STONE. By the joining of
two sulphurs and their mutual preservation, he means that
though, after the separation of spirit and body, there seem to be
two substances, yet, in reality, there is only one substance; so
the body which is below is *sulphur," and the spirit which is
above is also *sulphur" Now, when the spirit returns to the
body, one sulphur is added to another; and they are bound to-
gether by a mutual fitness, since the body cannot be without the
spirit, nor the spirit without the body. Hence there are these


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 22/7


two sulphurs in the body, the red and the white, and the white
sulphur is in the black body, while the red is hid beneath it. If
the spirit is gradually added to the body, it is entirely coagulated
into the body, sulphur is added to sulphur, and perfection is
attained through the fitness which exists between them. 'The
body receives nothing but its own spirit; for it has retained its
soul, and what has been extracted from a body can be joined to
nothing but that same body. The spirit delights in nothing so
much as in its own soul, and its own body. Hence the Sage
says: * When the spirit has been restored to the body, the
sulphur to the sulphur, and the water to the earth, and all has
become white, then the body retains the spirit, and there can be
no further separation." "Thus you have the well purged earth of
the Sages, in which we sow our grain, unto infinity, that it may
bring forth much fruit.


Explanation of the Saying of Pythagoras.


You have good cause to wonder atthe great variety of ways
in which the Sages have expressed the samething. Nevertheless,
their descriptions apply only to one Matter, and their sayings
refer only to a single substance. For when our Sage says, * We
give you directions concerning these things: "We tell you that
it is dry water, like the water of the Moon, which you have pre-
pared," he means that we Sages must give directions, according to
the best of our ability. Ifthose directions, rightly understood, do
not answer the purpose, you may justly charge us with fraud and
imposture. But if you fail through not taking our meaning, you
must blame your own unspeakable stupidity, which follows the
letter, but not the spirit of our directions. When the Sage
further says that it must drink its own water, he would teach you
that after the separation of the dry from the moist, the water ex-
tracted from the body is the right water, and the water of the
Moon, prepared by putrefaction and distillation. "This extracted
water is regarded as the male principle, and the earth, or body,
as the female principle. The water of the husband must now be
joined in conjugal union to that of the wife; the body must, at
intervals, drink of its own prepared water, and become ever
purer, the more it drinks, till it turns most wonderfully white.
Then it is called * our calx," and you must pour the water of our

P2


228 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


calx upon the body, until it is coagulated, becoming tinged, and
a most bright quality returns to it, and the body itself is saturated
with its own moisture. If you wish to obtain the red tincture,
you should dissolve and coagulate, and go through the whole pro-
cess over again. Verily, this is God's own truth, an accurate,
simple, and plain statement of the requirements of our Art.


Explanation of the Emerald Table of Hermes.


: Hermes is right in saying that our Art is true, and has been
rightly handed down by the Sages ; all doubts concerning it have
arisen through false interpretation of the mystic language of the
philosophers. But, since they are loth to confess their own ig-
norance, their readers prefer to say that the words of the Sages are
imposture and falsehood. ^ The fault really lies with the ignorant
reader, who does not understand the style of the Philosophers.
If, in the interpretation of our books, they would suffer themselves
to be guided by the teaching of Nature, rather than by their own
foolish notions, they would not miss the mark so hopelessly. By
the words which follow : * That which is above is also that which
is below;" he describes the Matter of our Art, which, though oze,
is divided into two things, the volatile water which rises upward,
and the earth which lies at the bottom, and becomes fixed. But
when the reunion takes place, the body becomes spirit, and the
spirit becomes body, the earth is changed into water and becomes
volatile, the water is transmuted into body, and becomes fixed.
When bodies become spirits, and spirits bodies, your work is
finished ; for then that which rises upward and that which des-
cends downward become oze body. "Therefore the Sage says that
that which is above is that which is below, meaning that, after
having been separated into two substances (from being one sub-
stance), they are again joined together into one substance, ze, an
union which can never be dissolved, and possesses such virtue
and efficacy that it can do in one moment what the Sun cannot
accomplish in a thousand years. And this miracle is wrought by
a thing which is despised and rejected by the multitude. Again,
the Sage tells us that all things were created, and are still gene-
rated, from one first substance, and consist of the same elementary
material ; and in this first substance God has appointed the four
elements, which represent a common material into which it might


VIEUD CIO QV ETE QV EV 229


perhaps be possible to resolve all things. Its development is
brought about by the distillation of the Sun and Moon. For it
is operated upon by the natural heat of the Sun and Moon, which
stirs up its internal action, and multiplies each thing after its
kind, imparting to the substance a specific form. "The soul, or
nutritive principle, is the earth which receives the rays of the Sun
and Moon, and therewith feeds her children as with mother's
milk. Thus the Sun is the father, the Moon is the mother, the
earth the nurse—and in this substance is that which we require.
He who can take it and prepare it is truly to be envied. It is
separated by the Sun and Moon in the form of a vapour, and
collected in the place where it is found. "When Hermes adds
that * the air bears it in its womb, the earth is its nurse, the whole
world its Father, he means that when the substance of our
Stone is dissolved, then the wind bears it in its womb, Ze, the air
bears up the substance in the form of water, in which is hid fire,
the soul of the Stone ; and fire is the Father of the whole world.
Thus, the volatile substance rises upward, while that which
remains at the bottom, is the * whole world " (seeing that our Art
is compared to a *small world") Hence Hermes calls fire the
father of the whole world, because it is the Sun of our Art, and
air, Moon, and water ascend from it; the earth is the nurse of
the Stone, Ze., when the earth receives the rays of the Sun and
Moon, a new body is born, like a new fcetus in the mother's
womb. The earth receives and digests the light of Sun
and Moon, and imparts food to its foetus day by day, till it
becomes great and strong, and puts off its blackness and
defilement, and is changed to a different colour. This, * child,"
which is called *our daughter, represents our Stone, which
is born anew of the Sun and Moon, as you may easily see,
when the spirit, or the water that ascended, is gradually
transmuted into the body, and the body is born anew, and
grows and increases in size like the fcetus in the mother's womb.
Thus the Stone is generated from the first substance, which con-
tains the four elements; itis brought forth by two things, the
body and the spirit; the wind bears it in its womb, for it
carries the Stone upward from earth to heaven, and down again
from heaven to earth. Thus the Stone receives increase from
above and from below, and is born a. second time, just as every


230 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


other fcetus is generated in the maternal womb; as all created
things bring forth their young, even so does the air, or wind,
bring forth our Stone. When Hermes adds, *Its power, or
virtue, is entire, when it is transmuted into earth," he means
that when the spirit is transmuted into the body, it receives
its full strength and virtue. For as yet the spirit is volatile, and
not fixed, or permanent. [fit is to be fixed, we must proceed as
the baker does in baking bread. | We must impart only a little
of the spirit to the body at a time, just as the baker only puts a
little leaven to his meal, and with it leavens the whole lump.
The spirit, which is ezz leaven, in like fashion transmutes the
whole body into its own substance. Therefore the body must
be leavened again and again, until the whole lump is thoroughly
pervaded with the power of the leaven. In our Art the body
leavens the spirit, and transmutes it into one body, and the
spirit leavens the body, and transmutes it into one spirit. And
the two, when they have become one, receive power to
leaven all things, into which they are injected, with their own
virtue.

The Sage continues: *If you gently separate the earth from
the water, the subtle from the hard, the Stone ascends from earth
to heaven, and again descends from heaven to earth, and receives
its virtue from above and from below. By this process you
obtain the glory and brightness of the whole world. "With ityou
can put to flight poverty, disease, and weariness; for it overcomes
the subtle mercury, and penetrates all hard and firm bodies."
He means that all who would accomplish this task must separate
the moist from the dry, the water from the earth. The water, or
fire, being subtle, ascends, while the body is hard, and remains
where itis. The separation must be accomplished by gentle heat,
&,in the temperate bath of the Sages, which acts slowly, and is
neither too hot nor too cold. "Then the Stone ascends to heaven,
and again descends from heaven to earth. — The spirit and body
are first separated, then again joined together by gentle coction,
of a temperature resembling that with which a hen hatches her
eggs. Such is the preparation of the substance, which is worth
the whole world, whence it is also called a "little world." "The
possession of the Stone will yield you the greatest delight, and
unspeakably precious comfort. It will also set forth to you in a


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 231


typical form the creation of the world. It will enable you to cast
out all disease from the human body, to drive away poverty, and
to have a good understanding of the secrets of Nature. 'The Stone
has virtue to transmute mercury into gold and silver, and to
penetrate all hard and firm bodies, such as precious stones and
metals. You cannot ask a better gift of God than this gift, which
is greater than all other gifts. Hence Hermes may justly call
himself by the proud title of * Hermes Trismegistus, who holds
the three parts of the whole world of wisdom."


ZASNOOUBDEIUSAES C DORCAS CU,


CORRESPONDING TO THE FIRST, WHICH MAY BE
READ WITH GREAT PROFIT.


IBZISSBEBUANCUES:


We may justly wonder that the Sages who have written
about this most precious and secret Art, have thought it necessary
to invent so many occult and and allegorical expressions, by
means of which our Art is concealed not only from the unworthy,
but from earnest and diligent students of the truth.  Foolish
persons, indeed, who read their books, and hear of the riches and
all the other good things which this Art affords, experience a
pleasant tickling sensation in their ears, and straightway behold
visions of themselves sitting on golden thrones, and commanding
all the treasures of the universe ; they fancy that the Art can be
learned in the twinkling of an eye, soon come to regard them-
selves as great Doctors, and are unable to conceive the possibility
of their making a mistake, or being led astray by the Sages.
Much less are they aware that it has always been the custom of
the philosophers to conceal the fundamental facts of this Art,
and to reveal them to their own sons and disciples only in senten-
tious allegorical sayings. It is impossible to read through all that
the Sages have ever written on this subject; but it is a still more


232 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


hopeless undertaking to gather from their books a full and suffi-
cient knowledge of our Art, unless, indeed, God opens your
understanding, and gives you a real insight into the natural
properties of things, and thereby into the sayings of those who
speak of them. For it is Nature alone that accomplishes the
various processes of our Art, and a right understanding of Nature
will furnish you with eyes wherewith to perceive the secrets
thereof .Thus Basonsays: * Take care not to add anything else ;
for it is the property of our substance to overcome all other
things" And Bondinus tells us that the whole process is accom-
plished by means of the water which issues from the Stone.
Alphidius declares that the Philosopher's Stone contains four
different natures, and thereby possesses a virtue and efficacy
such as are found in no other stone. Therefore, the question of
the Royal Sage Haly, whether there is another stone upon
earth which may be compared with our Stone, and possesses the
same wonderful properties, is answered by Morienus in the fol-
lowing words: * Iam aware of no other stone of equal excellence,
potency, and virtue; for it contains the four elements in a
visible form, and is singular of its kind among all the created
things of the world. If, therefore, any person should take any
[other] Stone but the one demanded by this Magistery, his
labours must result in failure." Moreover, the ancient Sage Arros
says : * Our Stone is useless for our purpose, until it be purged
of its gross earth." In like manner we are informed by Morienus
that unless the body be purged of its grossness, it cannot be
united to its spirit; but when it has put off its gross nature,
the spirit joins itself to it, and delights in it, because both have
been freed from allimpurity." The truth of his words is attested
by Ascanius in * The Crowd," who says: * Spirits cannot join
themselves to impure bodies; but when the body has been well
purged, and digested by coction, the spirit becomes united to it,
amidst a phenomenal exhibition of all the colours in the world,
and the imperfect body is tinged with the indestructible colour of
the ferment ; this ferment is the soul, in and through which the
spirit is joined to the body, and transmuted with the body into
the colour of the ferment, whereupon all three become one thing."
Hence it is well, though somewhat enigmatically said by the
Sages, that there takes place a conjugal union of husband and


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 233


wife, and that of the two a child is born after their likeness, just
as men generate men, metals metals, and all other things that
which is like them.

Hence all that would exercise this Art must know the pro-
perties of the most noble substance thereof, and follow the
guidance of Nature. But many enquirers conduct their operations
at haphazard, they grope in the dark, and do not know whether
their art be an imitation of Nature, or not. Yet they undertake
to correct, and intensify, the operation of Nature. Ofsuch persons
Arnold says that they approach our Art as the ass goes up to
the crib, not knowing for what it opens its mouth. For they do
not know what they would do, nor are they aware that they must
listen to the teaching of Nature. They seek to do the works
of Nature, but they will not watch the hand of her whom
they pretend to imitate. Yet our Art has a true foundation
in natural fact. For Nature prepares the metals in the earth,
some perfect, like gold and silver; others imperfect, like
Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter, according to the labour and
influence of the planets. He, then, who would accomplish our
Magistery, and desires to participate in this most noble Art, must
know the seed from which the metals are naturally generated in
the earth, which seed we remove by Nature, and purify and pre-
pare it by Art, making it so glorious, and full of wonderful
potency, that with it we can impart instant purity and perfection
to the imperfect bodies of men and metals. "This seed we must
extract from perfect, pure, and mature bodies, if we would attain
the desired end. Now, in order that you may the more readily
attain this knowledge, I have composed the following Tract
concerning the first principle of Nature, and the creation and
generation of man—which the student of our Magistery should
diligently peruse, consider, and digest Then he will not so
easily miss the right path.


The Fear of the Lord is the Beginnzng of. Wisdom.


All true Sages and philosophers have earnestly sought to
obtain a knowledge of Almighty God as He is revealed in His
marvellous works ; this knowledge they attained, in so far as it
can be attained by the human mind, by diligently considering
the origin and first principles of all things. — For they were enabled


340100 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


to realize the omnipotence of the Creator by the contemplation
of the secret powers, and miraculous virtues, which He has infused
into natural things. "They were led to consider how they might
employ their knowledge for the good of the human race, and how
they might reveal it to others, and they received wisdom to ex-
pound the first principles of natural things, but more especially
the birth and death of man, in something like the following way :
In the beginning God created all things out of a subtle liquid, or
impalpable vapour which was neither moist, nor dry, nor cold,
nor hot, nor light, nor dark, but a confused chaos. This subtle
vapour God first changed into water, which He then separated
into a hard and a liquid part, or into earth and water. Out or -
elementary water He further evolved air, and out of elementary
earth He brought forth fire, that is, elementary fire. And it may
still be seen that the two first elements contain the two last; for
daily experience teaches us that in water there is air, and that in
earth there is fire. Out of these God created the firmament, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, and all other natural objects. At
last He created a being in His own image, which He formed out
of moist earth—z»e, for the most part out of earth (which encloses
fire) moistened with water (containing air) Hence it is said
that man was created out of the four elements, and he is called a
"small world." But man lay like one dead upon the ground, until
God breathed into his nostrils the spirit oflife,and Adam became
aliving soul. In like manner God created all other animals, and
all plants and minerals, out of the four elements. "Then God set
Adam in the Garden of Eden, in Paradise, which He had planted
with His own hands, and in which flourished all manner of flowers,
fruit, roots, herbs, leaves, and grass. Then Adam's heart was
filled with joy, and he understood the great power of his Creator,
and praised and magnified Him with his lips; at that time he
suffered no lack of any thing, having all that his heart desired,
and he was appointed lord of all other creatures. Therefore, the
eternal Creator bade the holy angels bring every other living
being to Adam, that all might acknowledge him as their lord,
and that Adam might give to each one its own name, and
distinguish one from the other. í
Now when God beheld the animals walking about in
Paradise, each with its own mate (except Adam, for whom no


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 235


" mate was found); when God saw them approaching him, and
yet eager to flee from him, because of the reverence and awe
with which he inspired them —God said: *It is not good for
man to be alone"; therefore He caused a deep sleep to fall upon
Adam, and taking one of his ribs, not far from his heart, He
formed it into a beautiful woman. "This woman God brought
unto the man, calling her Eve, and gave her to him for a wife,
that he might protect her, that she might obey him, and that
they might be fruitful and multiply.


The Glory and Excellence of Adam.


God had appointed that Adam and Eve should spend a
thousand years in Paradise, and then be translated, body and
soul, to the Eternal Life of Heaven ; the same glorious destiny
was in reserve for their posterity. —Foras yet man was pure, good,
and sinless, and not subject or liable to any kind of distemper,
or sickness. He was acceptable and perfect in the sight of His
Creator, who had made him in His own image, and given him all
the produce of Paradise to eat, except the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, from which he was to abstain on pain of eternal
punishment, both bodily and spiritual. But when he gave ear
to the seducing words of the Evil One, and ate the forbidden
fruit, he straightway became poor and wretched, perceived his
own nakedness, and concealed himself amongst the trees of the
garden. He had deserved eternal death, and it would have
fallen upon him, if the Son of God, our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, had not promised to give satisfaction for him. Yet in
this world God punished Adam with a heavy yoke of wretched-
ness, tribulation, poverty, and disease, followed by the bitter
agony of death. He also drove him forth from Paradise, aad
laid a heavy curse upon the ground, that thenceforward it should
not bring forth fruit of its own accord, but that it should bear
thorns and thistles Now, when Adam found himself in the
midst of a wild and uncultivated earth, compelled to gain his
bread by tilling the field in the sweat of his brow, and to endure
much suffering, care, and anxiety, he began to think seriously of
what he had done to provoke the wrath of God, to experience deep
sorrow for his grievous sin, and to implore God's gracious mercy
and forgiveness. His prayers appeased the paternal heart of


236 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


God, and induced Him to ease the grievous yoke laid upon
Adam. The centralfact of his punishment, however, remained,
and death, though deferred, at length overtook him.

But, as I say, God mitigated the punishment of Adam, and
took away from his neck the grievous yoke .of suffering, by
shewing him the means of warding off the strokes of impending
calamity. For this purpose the natural properties of things were
revealed to Adam by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit ; and
he was taught to prepare medicines out of herbs, stones, and
metals, wherewith he might alleviate his hard lot, ward off
disease, and keep his body in good health until the end of his days,
which, however, was known to God alone. For,although from
the very beginning Adam had a clear insight into the working
of the natural world, the greatest of all secrets was still hidden
from him, till God one day called him into Paradise, and set forth
to him this marvellous mystery—the mystery of our Stone—in
the following words:

* Behold, Adam, here are two things, the one fixed and
immutable, the other volatile and inconstant. 'The great virtue
and potency that slumber in them you must not reveal to 27
your sons. For created them for a special purpose, which I
will now no longer conceal from you. Now, when Adam had
learned the mystery out of God's own mouth, he kept it a strict
secret from all his sons, until at length, towards the close of
his life, he obtained leave from God to make the preparation of
the Stone known to his son Seth. Unless Adam had posses-
sed the knowledge of this great mystery he would not have
been able to prolong his life to the age of 3oo (let alone 900)
years. For he was never for a momeut free from an agonizing
sense of his guilt, and of the terrible evils which he had, by his
disobedience, brought upon himself and his posterity, who,
through his fault, were one and all involved in the condemnation
of eternal death. If we consider this, it must appear amazing
that Adam could keep alive even so long as a single year after
his fall; and we thereby clearly perceive (from the fact that he
attained to so great a length of days) that the goodness of God
must have furnished him with some life-preserving remedy. If
Adam had not possessed our Medicine, or Tincture, he could
not have borne up under so much tribulation, anxiety, wretched-


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD, 237


ness, grief, sorrow, and disease. But against all these ills he
used our Medicine, which preserved his limbs and his strength
from decay, braced his faculties, comforted his heart, refreshed
his spirit, relieved his anxiety, fortified his mortal body against
all manner of disease, and, in short, guarded him from all evil
until the last hour of his life.

At length, however, Adam found that the Remedy had no
longer any power to strengthen him, or to prolong his life. So
he began to consider his end, refrained from applying the Medi-
cine any more, threw himself upon the mercy of God, and sent
his son Seth (to whom he had confided the secret), to the gate
of Paradise, to demand some of the fruit of the Tree of Life.
His request was denied him, whereupon he returned, and carried
back to his father the answer of the Angel. It was heavy news
for Adam, who now felt that his end was approaching, and there-
fore sent Seth a second time to fetch the oil of mercy. Before he
could return, Adam died ; but,at the bidding of God, Seth
obtained from the Angel some olive-stones from the Tree of the
Oil of Mercy, and planted them on his father's grave, where
they grew into the tree from which the Cross of our Blessed
Redeemer was made. Thus, though in a carnal sense the Oil
was denied to Adam, and brought him no surcease from tem-
poral death ; yet, in a spiritual sense, it was freely given to him
and obtained for him and all his offspring eternal life, and free,
gracious, and merciful forgiveness of all their sins, concerning
which God promised that He would remember them no more.

Thus, through the Heavenly Tree of Life, God fulfilled the
prayer of our first parent Adam, and granted his request in a
way which he had not looked for; and he now tastes the joy
which is at the right hand of God, and is for ever removed from
the hostile power of hunger, thirst, heat, cold, death, and all the
other evils which flesh is heir to. Let us then diligently strive to
realize that the Mystery of the Redemption is the most precious,
the most excellent, and the most awful of the mysteries revealed
by God to man, a mystery which no human thought can sound,
and which no human lips can ever fully utter. But of this
Awful Mystery, or Medicine of the Soul, God has also bestowed
upon us an earthly antitype, or Medicine of the Body, by means
of which wretched man may, even in this world, secure himself


238 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


against all bodily distempers, put to flight anxiety and care, and
refresh and comfort his heart in the hour of trouble—namely,
the Mystery of the Sages, or the Medicine of the Philosophers.
If, therefore, à man would be perfectly happy in this world, and
in the world to come, he should earnestly and devoutly strive to
become possessed of these two Remedies ; and for this purpose,
he should turn to God with his whole heart,and ask for His
gracious help, without which neither can be obtained; and, above
all, he should be most eager to receive that Remedy by which
the soul is healed of the mortal disease of sin.

This is the true fountain of the Sages ; and there is nothing
like it upon earth, but one eternal thing, by which the mortal
body may, in this vale of tears, be fortified against all accidental
disease, shielded from the pangs of poverty, and rendered sound,
healthy, and strong, being protected against all mischances to
the very end ; and by which also metallic bodies may be chan-
ged into gold through a quickening of the process which Nature
uses in the heart of the earth. The preparation and effects ot
this Stone are not unjustly considered to bear a close analogy to
the creation of the world ; therefore, I thought well to give an
account of it from the very beginning.

I will now proceed briefly to expound my view of this Art,
which, as all Sages testify, corresponds most closely to the
creation and generation of man. Il will attempt to make my
meaning as plain as I dare, for the glory of the Holy Trinity, and
the good of all Christian believers When God had created the
world, and adorned it with all manner of green things, herbs,
roots, leaves, flowers, grass, and also with animals and minerals,
he blessed them, and appointed that everything should bring
forth fruit and seed after its kind. Only Adam (who is our
Matter) was not yet in a position to produce any fruit out ot
himself Before he could propagate his species, it was necessary
that a part of him should be taken away, and again joined to him,
i^,his wife Eve. Hereunto we must understand that so long
as our substance is still gross and undivided, it can produce no
fruit. It must first be divided, the subtle from the gross, or the
water from the earth. "The water is Eve, or the spirit ; the
earth Adam, or the body. And as the male is useless for pur-
poses: of generation until it be united to the female, so our


EET DRY QE TE, -WORDJD. 239


earth is dead till it is quickened by the union with water.
This is what that ancient Sage, Hermes, means when he says
that the dead must be raised to life, and the feeble made strong.

It is necessary, then, to unite body and soul, and to
change that which is below into that which is above, Ze, body
into spirit, and spirit into body. By this expression you are to
understand not that the spirit by itself is changed into a body,
or that the body by itself is changed into a spirit, but that both
are united, and that the spirit, or water, dissolves, or resuscitates
the body, or earth, while the body attracts the spirit, or water ;
and that they are thus joined into oze substance, the earth being
softened by the water, and the water hardened by the earth—as
the boys in the street pour water on dry dust, and knead the
whole into one mass. For this reason the Sages call our process
child's play, in which the death of one is the life of the other,
Ze., in which the hardness of the one is softened by the other,
and vzce versa, seeing that the two are nothing but body and
spirit originally belonging together. When contemplating this
union, the Sage, Hermes, bursts forth into the following ex-
clamation: * Oh, how strong, victorious, and precious is this
nature that so unspeakably comforts its supplementary nature ! "
This nature is water, which stirs up and quickens the nature of
the body. Hence it is said that Adam, or the body, would be
dead without Eve, the spirit; for when the water has been
distilled from our substance, the body lies dead and barren at
the bottom of the alembic, and is described by the Sages
as being, after the loss of its spirit, black, poisonous, and
deadly. Ifthe body is to be resuscitated, it must be rendered
fit for generation by being purged of its blackness and fetid
smell, and then its sweat or spirit must be restored to it; the
spirit cannot conceive unless the body be allowed to:embrace its
Eve, or spirit. Senior says that the higher vapour must be
brought back to the lower vapour; the Divine water is the King
that descends from heaven, and leads the soul back to its body
which is thereby quickened from the dead. "Observe that in the
body there is hidden fixed sa2//, which slumbers there just as the
male seed slumbered in Adam. — This the spirit, or Eve, attracts,
and thus becomes pregnant; that is to say: The seed of the
body, which we call fixed salt, is extracted from the body by its


240 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


own water (which has before been separated from it) and is
rendered so subtle and volatile that it ascends with the spirit to
heaven. Then we say that the fixed has become volatile, that
the dead has been revived, and that the body has received life
from its spirit. On this account the water is called by some
Sages the living water of the man, since it is extracted from the
body, or man ; and Lucas enjoins us to take it, and heat it after
the fashion of Nature. Other Sages call the body the * black
soil," because in it the fixed salt is concealed from view, like the
seed in the ground. Others, again, call it the * black raven;"
which has in its maw the * white dove" ; and the water which is
distilled from the body they call the *virgin's milk," by which
the white dove must be brought forth from the black raven. In
short, these things are described by the Sages under a great
variety of names ; but the meaning of those names is the same.
In this fashion the water is embraced by the body, and the seed
of the body, or the fixed salt, makes the water pregnant. For
the water dissolves the body, and bears upward with it some
particles ofthe fixed salt; and the oftener this process is repeated,
the thicker does the water become. Hence the repetition of
the process is a most important point. Hermes says that when
he saw the water gradually grow thicker and harder, he rejoiced,
for thereby he knew that he should find what he sought. The
water, then, must be poured upon the body, and heated with it,
till the body is dissolved, and then again extracted till the body
is coagulated. Thus the body must be well broken up, and purified
by washing. This process of affusion and extraction must be
repeated until all the salt, or potency and efficacy, has been ex-
tracted from the body. This is the case when the water becomes
white and thick, and, in the cold, hard and solid like ice, while in
the heat it melts like butter. Now, when nothing more can be
extracted from the body, the residuum must be removed ; for it
is the superfluous part of the substance. This is what the Sages
mean when they say: In the preparation we remove that which
is superfluous; but otherwise our whole Magistery is accomplished
with one single substance, nothing being added, and nothing
taken away, except that which is really superfluous; for it
possesses in abundance all that is needed, namely, the water, or
* white, flaky earth, which must be injected into "living


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. 241


mercury," that so the transmutation into good and fixed silver
may take place. But something much more noble and precious
is concealed in this water (fixed salt) which grows and grows
like the infarit in the mother's womb. For as the embryo in the
matrix, which is first a mere seed, grows, and is gradually trans-
muted into flesh and blood, Ze, into a thicker substance, till at
length the limbs are formed ; so this water grows from the white
colour which distinguishes it at first, till it is changed to another
colour. (For the embryo,too, is transmuted from the natural
colour of the embryo into flesh and blood.) "The substance at
length assuming a red colour, may be compared to the forming
of the infant's limbs ; it is then that we first see what is to
become ofit. When you perceive this final transmutation—the
germ of which lay in the substance all along—you may
well rejoice; for you have attained the object of your
desire.

Thus I have described the union of the man and woman,
that is to say, of the body and spirit, by means of which the
child is conceived in the water, and the whiteness extracted from
the black body. Nor do we need anything else, except, as
Morienus says, time and patience. This coagulated water is the
* white, flaky earth," in which the Sage bids us sow our gold and
silver that they may bear fruit a hundred-thousand-fold. This is
the *clear spring" of the Count of Trevisa, in which the King
bathes, though not assisted by any of his ministers, who only
watch his clothes until he has dried up the whole spring, when
he makes all his ministers lords and kings such as he was at
the time of his entering the bath. But now the King's dignity
is three times as great as it was before; he wears a three-fold
diadem on his head, and is arrayed in garments that shine like
carbuncles and amethysts, and beneath them he wears the tunic
of purity, and is bound with the girdle of righteousness. He is
the most glorious King of life, whose power transcends all human
thought. Athis sideis seated his pure and chaste queen, sprung
of his own seed ; and of these two are born many royal children.
The redness is concealed and preserved in the whiteness,
which must not be extracted, but subjected to gentle coction
until its full crimson glory flames forth. "This whiteness is thus
referred to in *The Crowd" : * If yousee that after the blackness


Q


242 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


there follows a whiteness, be sure that after the whiteness will
come a redness: for the redness slumbers in the whiteness, and
should not be extracted, but gently heated, until the whole turns
red." Let what I have now said suffice you.


THE GLORY OF THE WORLD.  2a43


HERMES [says]:


You must have a good knowledge of the True Principle
of both Natural and Artificial Substances. For he who knows


not the true First Principle will never attain to the end.


THE LovkE oF GOD AND
OF YOUR NEIGHBOUR


LS amem. TPORORORURSG TON. COm^ PASETA SAI SUODKOUME


To LovE GOD rs THE HIGHEST WISDOM,
AND


TJIMEE Xs /'oUR JPOSSESSION.


UNTO HIM BE ALL HONOUR, PRAISE, AND


GI OR Y.


AC CM NACT


OF GREAT PRICE


GONGERNUING FEDES  PEDLEGOSQO/BU AJ


5TONE,.


PUBLISHED BY A GERMAN SAGE IN THE YEAR
1423,


UNDER THE FOLLOWING TITLE:


IDEHBLODRUUIE DBANGEBUN CC OR CPESBIUEOS()PEN
CONCERNING
THE GENERATION OF METALS


AND


UEHEZDRE IPIE ORIGIN:


u "ü 4 E *
(A ile J E] k i "T
"s
T
1
E
" " EI 3 I a
| '"T2A Lr yo
ENCU 6s b. n ; r j UN
EX. 0 we R E ] I e E
D i , «i | ,
^ Uu , | : und i
Ed o acu d EE
! ; i ] "
ED Ari | | y:
i EM d i 2 E" EB á E " LE
» «X M : a ! , Ds T. »
ESPERE | | |
i m s 1 I
| e À : INUE
L2 La E B
p : ar : *
n m - 1
E E E J uM rictu 4 E v
" LI M do ^ ^ " E J * ] f
: : "i i " ]
3» dud D I LE
K 3 E i -
- Mt
Lr. T B . E É cv us
"x ; : S eh Lu T
d y ^ad "3 M $ | x
E » " 5 M P p E - 2 EA weird
HI E
orae rr" y LER , "- "d
ES | hk" " ". Y i
EM POME 1 J - s
* Lu K E E er B
"1: 1 J - E . H )
* E
E lend (^3 "3 ü p La i
SOS 2 - d ES 2^ n
2t Me Lord T " * * ! P
MO WELLE A X : MISI XN UI is
t Lr HU "E P s. uL" ON ^ "n


VI


En LRL I ""


Fr


AC VTSRUAVG qm X093B. C CURCEZASI CURSOS,


CONCERNING THE PHILOSOPHICAL STONE.


CELATPTER. T.


LL temporal things derive their origin, their existence,
and their essence from the earth, according to the suc-
cession of time. "Their specific properties are deter-
mined by the outward and inward influences of the stars

and planets, (such as the Sun, the Moon, Etc.), and of the four
qualities of the elements. From these combined circumstances
arisethe peculiar forms,and propersubstances,of all growing, fixed,
and generating things,accordingto the natural order appointed by
the Most High at the beginning of the world. "The metals, then,
derivetheir origin fromthe earth,and are specifically compounded
of the four qualities, or the properties of the four elements ; their
peculiar metallic character is stamped upon them by the
influences of the stars and planets. So we are informed by
Aristotle, in the fourth book of his Meteor., where he says that
quicksilver is the common substance of all metals. "The first
thing in Nature, as we said before, is the substance which
represents a particular conglomeration of the four elements,
which the Sages call Mercury, or quicksilver. But this
quicksilver is as yet imperfect, on account of its gross and
earthy sulphureous nature, which renders it too easily combus-
tible, and on account of its superfluous watery elements, which
have all been collected together out of the four elements by the
action of the heavenly planets. This substance is composed of a
hot sulphureous earth, and a watery essence, in such a way that
the Sages have called it imperfect sulphur.


248 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Now, since Nature is always striving to attain perfection, and
to reach the goal set before her by the Creator of all things, she is
continually at work upon the qualities of the four elements of
each substance ; and so stirs up and rouses the inward action of
the elements by the accidental heat of the Sun, and by natural
warmth, that there arises a kind of vapour or steam in the veins
of the earth. This vapour cannot make its way out, but is
closed in; in penetrating through fat, earthy, oily, and impure
sulphureous substances it attracts to itself more or less of these
foreign and external impurities. "This is the reason that there
areseen in it so great a variety of colours before it attains to
purity and its own proper colour.

Those mineral and metallic substances which contain the
largest proportion of efficacious sulphureous and mercurial
vapour are the best ; and each quality of the four elements has
its own peculiar operation and transmuting influence in such a
conglomeration of various substances—their action being roused
by the sulphur of the earth and the outward heat of the Sun.
(Through these agencies the Matter is often dissolved and
coagulated, till that which is pure, or impure, is borne upward ;
and this is the work not of a few years, but of a great length of
time. Nature has to purge away the peculiar characteristics of
all other metals before she can make gold; as you may see by
the fact that different kinds of metal are found in the same
metallic vein. 'This fact may be explained in the following
manner. When the sulphureous and mercurial vapours ascend,
they are mixed, and united by coction, with the aforesaid
substance. If those sulphureous vapours are earthy, thick, and
impure, and the heat of the Sun, or their own natural heat, have
too sudden and violent an effect, the substance hardens, with all its
sulphureous impurities, before it can be purged of its grossness,
and it becomes more like metallic sulphur. If the quicksilver is
hardened, the whole mass takes the form of some metal,
according to the influence of the particular planet with which it
is penetrated. For Nature first combines the four elements into
some substance or body, which then receives its specific
properties through the influence of some planet Such is the
origin of copper, tin, lead, iron, and quicksilver. But it is not
essential that I should here describe at length the specific


IR (0T GIRUELAUD. CPC E, 249


composition and distinctive properties of each of the imperfect
metals; they are all mingled in various proportions of impure
sulphur and inefficacious quicksilver. Nature, as I said, is
ceaselessly at work upon these imperfect metals, purging and
separating the pure quicksilver from the impure, and the pure
sulphur from the impure, until all their grossness is removed, and
they become what God designed that they should be, viz., gold.
But if these vapours float upward in their original pure condition,
with their inward, pure, and subtle earth, without becoming mixed
with gross, earthy, and sulphureous alloy, and if they succeed in
breaking forth into the open air, before they become hardened
into a sulphureous mass, they remain quicksilver and are not
changed into any metal.

If, however, this pure quicksilver floats upward in a pure
mineral earth, without any gross alloy, it is hardened into the
pure and white sulphur of Nature by being subjected to a very
moderate degree of gentle heat, and at length assumes the
specific form of silver. Like all the other metals it may still be
developed into gold, if it remain under the influence of its
natural heat. But if the same pure, unalloyed quicksilver be
subjected to .a higher degree of natural heat, it is transmuted
into the pure reZ sulphur of Nature, and becomes gold without
first passing through the stage of silver. In this form it
remains, because gold is the highest possible stage of metallic
development.

Quicksilver is the mother of all metals, on account of its
coldness and moistness ; and if it be once purified and cleansed
of all foreign matter it cannot be mixed any more with gross-
ness of any kind, neither can it be changed back into an
- imperfect metal. For Nature does not undo her work, and that
which has once become perfectly pure can never become impure
again. Sulphur, on the other hand, is the father of all metals,
on acount of its heat and dryness. In the following chapter we
shall refer to this difference, and speak more in detail about
quicksilver. :


LDADUPEIS I


. There is, then, in 4// metals true mercury, and good sulphur,
in the imperfect as well as in the perfect metals. But in the


250 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


imperfect metals it is defiled with impure matter, and stands in
need of maturing. Hence you see that all metals may be
changed into gold and silver, if the golden and silver properties
that are in them be freed from all alloy, and reduced by gentle
heat to the form of silver or gold. "Those metals, indeed,
which have been torn up by the roots, that is to say, that have
been dug up from their own proper soil in the veins of the
earth, can no longer proceed in that course of development
which they pursued in their native abode ; yet, as much as in
them lies, they strive to be perfected.

Now the Spirit of Truth, who imparts all true knowledge,
has taught the Sages a Medicine, or Form, by which all the
impurities of the imperfect metals may be removed, and the
perfect nature, or true mercury, which is in them, transmuted
into gold and silver.


IEIPASDATSIITS NQSTITITE


But we must now proceed to say a few words about the
method of preparing this Medicine, by which the imperfection is
removed from imperfect metals through the mediation of perfect
mercury, and the mode of gold and silver is developed in them.

I find that the writings of the Sages are all about gold,
silver, and quicksilver, which, it is said, must be reduced to the
form which they wore before they became metals; that is to
say, the form which they wore, perhaps, some thousands of
years ago. But the operation of Nature is progressive, not retro-
gressive. Hence it is a great mistake to suppose that the work
of Nature can be reversed by dissolution in aqua fortis, or by
the amalgamation of gold or silver and quicksilver. For if
the metal be plunged in a solvent, if water be distilled from it, or
if quicksilver be sublimed from it, it still remains the same
metal that it was before. "The specific properties of a metal can-
not be destroyed so as to obtain the first substance. Yet
Aristotle says that metals cannot be changed unless they are
reduced to their original substance.


(O EIE SEATEENIS IIR A


What we said in the last chapter shows that Alchemical Art
cannot be concerned with the subjecting of gold, silver, or quick-


"^


Ze ETAT TRU GE AUEY UTERE QST


silver to chemical processes. Nevertheless, that which you read
in the books of the Sages is most true; and we shall see in the
following pages in what sense it is to be understood, that our Art
is in gold, silver, and quicksilver. But it is clear that our Art can
make no use of quicksilver such as may be obtained from the
metals by means of any kind of artificial process, such as disso-
lution in aqua fortis, or amalgamation, or any other method of
chemical purification.

If then, this is not the right substance, or original mercury,
it is clear that it is not to be found in the metals. For even if
you melt two, three, or four metals together, yet not one of them
can give the others any aid towards attaining perfection, seeing
that itself stands in need of external aid. And even though you
mix some imperfect metal with gold, the gold will not give up its
own perfection for the purpose of succouring the other: for it
has nothing to spare which it might impart to the imperfect
metal And even if the imperfect metal could assume the virtue
and efficacy of the gold, it could only do so at the expense of the
gold itself. In vain, then, shall we seek in metals the Medicine
which has power to liberate the perfect mercury contained in im-
perfect metals.


CLDASPTER V.


Again, we read in the books of the Sages that quicksilver
and mercury are the original substance of all metals. "These
words are true in a certain sense. But by many beginners they
are supposed to mean ordinary quicksilver. Such an interpreta-
tion, however, makes nonsense of the dictum of the Sages. For
ordinary quicksilver is an imperfect metal, and itself derived from
the original substance of all metals. The Sages, indeed, say
little about the o7zgzz of their mercury ; but that is exactly be-
cause they use the name of mercury, or sulphur, for the first
substance of their perfect metals. If common mercury were not
a metal, there would be no metal corresponding to the celestial
influence of the planet Mercury, as gold and silver receive their
specific properties from the influence of the Sun and Moon. Now,
as it is one of the metals, the other metals cannot be derived from
it, much less can their properties be derived from it or from
themselves, although the real perfect mercury is quite as abundant


252 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


in mercury as in any other metal Nor can common sulphur
be the first substance of the metals, for no metal contains so
much impurity as common sulphur ; and if it be mixed with any
metal, that metal becomes even more impure than it was before,
and is even partially, or wholly, corroded.


(GXSIPAIPATUIITS SNR VAIR


Again, the Sages affirm that quicksilver, or mercury, is the
spirit of the specific nature of metals, collected out of the four
elements by the influence of the Planets, and the operation of
Nature in the earth—and that from it is developed either gold,
silver, or some other of seven metals, according to the peculiar
effects of the predominant planetary influence.

Hence ignorant alchemists have supposed that all this is
true of the common quicksilver, because it amalgamates with
all metals, and is soft and volatile. But why should its volatile
properties prove it to be no metal? X According to this definition,
we might deny the metallic character of tin, lead, and other
metals, because they do not remain fixed ina fierce fire—though
one can stand a greater degree of heat than another. If, again,
any substance is to be called the first substance of metals because
of the facility with which it amalgamates with them, copper
would have a better claim to be so regarded, since it enters into a
closer union with gold and silver than mercury, and shares both
their fusible and malleable nature. But that is no final union,
for it admits of separation; and quicksilver may, with the
greatest ease, be separated from the metals with which it has
amalgamated. A true union of metals can only take place in
the original substance which is common to all. We do find
amalgams of three, or even more metals; but then this union
was consummated in the first substance, which is oze, and the
whole amalgam would have been developed into gold, if its
natural growth had not been retarded by gross, sulphureous,
arsenical| and earthy impurity, which is found among metals
when purified. "The metals which we dig up out of the earth
are,as it were, torn up by the roots, and, their growth having
come to a standstill, they can undergo no further development
into gold, but must always retain their present form, unless some-


2 mRMCT OPm GREAT PRICE. 2/53


thing is done for them by our Art. Hence we must begin at the
point where Nature had to leave off: we must purge away all
impurity, and the sulphureous alloy, as Nature herself would have
done if her operation had not been accidentally, or violently, dis-
turbed. She would have matured the original substance, and
brought it to perfection by gentle heat, and, in a longer or shorter
period of time, she would have transmuted it into gold. In this
work Nature is ceaselessly occupied while the metals are still in
the earth; but she takes away from them nothing save their
superfluous water, and the impurity which prevents them from
attaining to the nature of gold, as we briefly showed in the
second chapter.


GLDASPIDBRC OVID


It is clear, then, that the final union of metals, or their per-
fection, cannot be attained by the mingling of any specific
metals; that the metallic substance becomes useless for our
purpose, as soon as it assumes a specific form ; but that, at the
same time, all metals have a common origin, or Matter, which is
one thing, flowing out by the operation of Nature, who ever
desires the most perfect form which her own essence and her con-
dition will admit. And this is the form of gold, highest and best
of all that belong to the metallic mode. If, then, the purest form
of this substance which it is possible for Art to prepare with the
help of Nature, be added to the imperfect metals, then it over-
comes what is impure in these, for it is not the impure, but the
pure matter which is like unto it But you must not suppose
that this power belongs to common gold ; common gold has its
own specific form, which it is unable to impart to other metals.
The power of gold is sufficient only for preserving its own excel-
lence; but our prepared substance is much better and more
honourable than gold, and has power to do that which gold
cannot do, viz, to change the common matter of all metals
into gold.


CIEDAJPAT ERE VATI:
From what I have hitherto said, one ignorant of alchemy


might suppose that the teaching of the Sages is altogether false
and untrustworthy. Therefore I must now proceed to tell you


254 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


how it may truly be affirmed that our Art is concerned with quick-
silver, silver, and gold, or with quicksilver and sulphur, and in
what sense mercury is the spirit of the metals. I will first speak
about quicksilver, and at once premise that this word is not here
taken to mean that common quicksilver which is one of the
metals, but the first substance of all the metals, and itself no
specific metal at all. For a metal must have derived its distinctive
properties through planetary influences ; nor can any one
metal be the first substance of all metals. "This quicksilver is
neither too hot, nor too cold, nor too moist, nor too dry ; but it is
a well-tempered mingling of all four. When perfectly matured
quicksilver is subjected to external heat, operating thereon, it is
not burned, but escapes in a volatile essence. Hence it may well
be called by the philosophers a spirit, or a swift, and winged, and
indestructible soul.

So long as it is palpable and visible it is also called body ;
when subjected to external cold it is congealed into a fixed body,
and then these three, body, soul, and spirit, are one thing, and
contain the properties of all the four elements. That outward
part which is moist and cold is called zvazez, or quicksilver; on
account of its inward heat it is called azz ; if without it appear hot
and dry it is fre or sulphur; and on account of its internal
coldness it is also styled ea7ZZ. In this way quicksilver and sul-
phur are the original substance of all metals ; but, of course, I do
not mean that the substance is prepared by mixing common
sulphur and quicksilver. The sulphur and quicksilver of the
Sages are one and the same thing, which is first of the nature of
quicksilver, or moist and watery, and is then, by constant coction,
transmuted into the nature of sulphur, which may rnost justly be
described as dry and igneous.


(OIBIPASPAIUDRISSGIENG


But I wish to confine my discourse to the quicksilver and
sulphur of the philosophers, from which all metals derive their
origin ; and it is, according to the Sages, a heavy, earthy water,
mixed with very subtle white earth, and subjected to natural coc-
tion until the moist and the dry elements have become united
and coagulated into one body—through the perfect mutual


EB DD AE T ACE, 255


adjustment of all the elementary properties, and by the accidental
operation of cold. This is the substance which is used for the
purposes of our Art, after it has been perfected and purified by
gentle coction, and freed from its earthy and sulphureous gross-
ness, and the combustible wateriness ofthe quicksilver. Itis then
one clear, pure, and indestructible substance, proceeding from a
duplex substance, exhibiting, in their greatest purity and efficacy,
the united properties of quicksilver and of sulphur. In Art the
operation is similar to Nature. Hence the Sages have justly
affirmed that our Art is concerned with quicksilver, gold, and
silver. For in its first stage the substance resembles quicksilver,
which is sublimed by gentle natural heat, and purified in the
veins of the rocks in the form of a pure vapour, as we explained
above. To it we now add silver and gold, and that for the fol-
lowing reason, because we cannot find anywhere else in any one
thing the metallic power needed for rousing the sulphur of the
quicksilver, and coagulating it, except in gold and silver. For
the Sage cannot prepare our quicksilver unless it be first removed
from the earth, and separated from the potency of its natural
surroundings ; and all these natural influences can be artificially
supplied only by the addition of gold and silver. Our Art, then,
has to find a substitute for those natural forces in the precious
metals. By them alone it is able to fix the volatile properties of
our quicksilver, for in them alone do we find the powers and in-
fluences which are indispensable to our chemical process.

You should also bear in mind that the silver should be
applied to our quicksilver before the gold, because the quicksilver
is volatile, and cannot with safety be subjected all at once to
great heat. Silver has the power of stirring up the inherent
sulphur of the quicksilver, whereby it is coagulated into the
form of the Remedy for transmuting metals into silver; and
this coagulation is brought about by the gentle heat of the
silver. Gold requires a much higher degree of heat, and if
gold were added to the quicksilver before the silver, the greater
degree of heat would at once change the quicksilver into
a red sulphur, which, however, would be of no use for the
purpose of making gold, because it would have lost its essen-
tial moisture; and our Art requires that the quicksilver should
be first coagulated by means of silver into white sulphur,


256 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


before the greater degree of heat is applied which, through gold,
changes it into red sulphur. "There must be whiteness before
there is redness. — Redness before whiteness spoils our whole
substance.


(ORIPASSIBEU SNC


The quicksilver of the Sages has no power to transmute
imperfect metals, until it has absorbed the essential qualities of
gold and silver; for in itself it is no metal at all, and if it is to
impart the spirit, the colour, and the hardness of gold and silver,
it must first receive them itself. It is with the first substance of
metals as it is with water. If saffron is dissolved in water, the
water is coloured with it, and if mixed with other water, imparts
to that water, too, the colour of saffron. Unless the first sub-
stance, or quicksilver, is tinged with silver and gold, and coagu-
lated by their efficacy, it cannot impart any colour, or
coagulate the (water or) first substance which is latent in the
imperfect metals. For it is essentially a spirit, and volatile, and
if it be added to imperfect metals, it cannot act upon their water,
or undeveloped first-substance, because that is partly fixed by
their coagulated sulphur. But if the first-substance has been
fixed by means of gold and silver, it has become a fixed and
indestructible water; and, if added to imperfect metals, takes up
into its own nature their first substance, or water, and mingles
with it. By this means all that is combustible and impure in
them is driven off by the fire. And herein is the saying true,
which was uttered by the Sage Haly: * The spirit (z.e., quick-
silver) is not coagulated, unless the body (Ze., gold and silver) be
first dissolved." For then gold and silver become spiritual, flow-
ing, capable of being assimilated by the common substance of
all metals, and of imparting to it their own metallic strength
and potency. And even though this new substance be fusible
in the fire, yet, when it cools again, it still remains what it
was, nor is it ever again converted into a permanent spiritual
substance. It is the quicksilver, then, that constitutes the chief
strength and efficacy of our Art; and he that has no
quicksilver is without the very seed of gold and silver from
which they grow in the earth.


21092722189 (T GIBT PRIGE. 257


EPILOGUE.


We have sufficiently explained that quicksilver is the first
substance of the metals, without which no metal can become
perfect, eitherin Nature or in our Art. But we do not yet
know where to look for it, and where to find it. This is the
great secret of the Sages, which they are always so careful to
veil under dark words that scarcely one in many thousands
is thought worthy to find the philosophical Mercury. Many
things have been written about it; but I will quote the words
of one philosopher which I consider as the most helpful: In the
beginning, he says, God created the earth plain, simple, rich,
and very fertile, without stones, sand, rocks, hills, or valleys ; it
is the influences of the planets which have now covered it with
stones, rocks, and mountains, and filled it with rare things of
various colours, Ze, the ores of the seven metals ; and by these
means the earth has entirely lost its original form, and that
through the following causes :—

First, the earth which was created rich, great, deep, wide,
and broad, was, through the daily operation of the Sun's rays,
penetrated to her very centre with a fervent, bubbling, vaporous
heat. For the earth in herself is cold and saturated with the
moisture of water. Atlength the vapours which were formed
in this way in the heart of the earth became so strong and
powerful as to seek to force a way out into the open air, and
thus, instead of effecting their object, threw up hills and hillocks,
or,as it were, bubbles on the face of the earth. And since in
those places where mountains were formed the heat of the Sun
must have been most powerful, and the earthy moisture rich
and most plentiful,it is there that we find the most precious
metals. Where the earth remained plain, this steam did not
succeed in raising up mountains ; itescaped, and the earth, being
deprived of its moisture, was hardened into rocks. Where the
earth was poor, soft, and thin, it is now covered with sand
and little stones, because it never had much moisture, and, having
been deprived of the little it possessed, has now become sandy
and dry, and incapable of retaining moisture. No earth was
changed into rocks that was not rich, viscous, and well saturated
with moisture. For when the heat of the Sun has sucked up


R


258 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


its moisture, the richness of the earth still. makes it cohere,
although now it has become hard and dry ; and earth that is not
yet perfectly hard is even at the present time undergoing a
change into hard stones, through the diligent working of Nature.
But the steam and the vapours that do not succeed in escap-
ing, remain enclosed in the mountains, and are day by day
subjected to the maturing and transmuting influences of the Sun
and the planets. Now, if this vaporous moisture become mixed
with a pure, subtle, and earthy substance, it is the quicksilver
of the Sages; if it be reduced to a fiery and earthy hardness,
it becomes the sulphur of the Sages. "This enquiry opens up
the way of finding our quicksilver, or first substance of the
metals ; but though it be found in great quantities in all mines, it
is known only to very few. It is not silver, or gold, or com-
mon quicksilver, or any metal, or sulphur. The Sage says: * It
is a vaporous substance out of four elements, watery, and pure,
and though it is found with all metals, it is not matured in those
which are imperfect. Hence it must be sought in the ore, in
which we find gold and silver" And when again he says, * If
this quicksilver be hardened, it is the sulphur of the Sages," he
means that this can only be done by means of gold and silver,
which it takes into itself, and by which it is sublimed and
coagulated through its own natural gentle coction, under the
influence of the Sun's heat, and in its own proper ore.


O heavenly Father, shew this quicksilver
to all whom
'Thou biddest walk in Thy paths!


AUUVERY UBROLEB TRACT


CONCERNING THE


PIIDLOSOPBEPDMCAJI, SJ QNS.


WRITTEN BY AN UNKNOWN GERMAN SAGE,
ABOUT 200 YEARS AGO, AND CALLED THE BOOK OF ALZE,
BUT NOW PUBLISHED FOR THE FIRST TIME.


Da 7 a9
"m E.


Aa, cuta T


Ex.


5b


TIBLRC UBIQUE OB TUAE ZEB


O not, gentle Reader, find fault with me for speaking
first about the Moon, then about the Sun, and the other
planets, and only in the third place about our most
excellent Medicine, ALZE. In this case that which is

last is better and more honourable than thatwhichisfirst. Thesub-
stance must first become white, and then red ; it cannot become red
unless it have first become white. Hence Simon the Sage says:
* Know that unless you first make the Stone white, you cannot
make it red" For by the red are the rest of the planets united,
and the Medicine appears unawares unless this order is
observed in the matter of the white and red. So is the Moon
first taken and makes, with the white, Elixir, that is, the white of
the Moon to the white of Mercury out of bodies comes to the
red. Whence our Sages say that the red is hidden in the white,
which they do not dare to extract, until the whole substance has
become red. When the substance has been subjected to the
influence of the Moon, it may then, in the second place, be
brought under the influence of the Sun, which will bring the
Medicine to perfection without any aid from the other planets.
By which you may understand why the Medicine comes last,
even as from the Father proceeds the Son, and the Holy Spirit
from both of these. He thathath ears to hear let him hear, and
comprehend the brief statement of our Art, which is given in * The
Crowd ": * Know that the true Tincture can be prepared only
out of our ore" Concerning this ore I therefore propose to give
you the only explanation that is required, and I shall be careful
to supplement and confirm my own opinion by quotations from
other Sages. I shall speak not only about our ore, but also
about our union or conjunction of water and mercury. For
Eximenus says: * Nothing profitable can arise out of the


262 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


elements without conjunction and gentle coction, Our ore
Lucas calls the white ore, and it goes by many other names on
account of the many colours which it exhibits in the various
stages of the chemical process. But though the jealousy of the
Sages has described it under various names, it is, and remains
only one substance. Pythagoras says: * Many names are
given to it; nevertheless, it is nothing else but the one and true
Matter, and this is by reason of the development of its nature.
'The envious have described it by the names of all bodies, as, for
instance, a coin, lead, copper, etc., according to the variety of its
colours. So Lucas tells us that we have no need of many things,
but only of one thing.  Diamedes and Basan say : * Do not add
toit any foreign substance ; for the common substance of metals
is one thing, and more excellent than all other things" Hence
our whole Art is concerned with water,and a twin substance
that ameliorates the water. Synon tells us that sulphur and our
ore are derived from one thing, and changed into four. Lucas
says: "The white ore is subjected to coction till it generates itself.
'Thus it becomes united in all its four elements, and receives a
living soul. It is never more than one thing, but as a man
consists of body, soul, and spirit, and yet is no more than one
person, so our substance consists of body, soul, and spirit The
ore receives its strength, spirit, and growth from the water." The
Sages say: *If the ore be often deadened in its coction, it
becomes all the more excellent, and if the body have a soul after
the manner of man." The body does not penetrate the soul, but
the soul penetrates the body, because it is volatile. The soul,
which is hidden in the four parts of the body, is called sulphur.
'These bodies are male and female, and by their mutual operation
our substance becomes water.  Aristeus says: * Observe the
indestructible water which issues from it" Take the humidity
which it gives off. Hence other Sages say: * Take water with
its twin substances, and let it be dried up by means of the vapour
which is like it, and coagulated in its own water." "That water is
also called poison ; it is the principle of life, because itis a soul,
and extracted from many things. All bodies that this
Tincture enters are quickened; all bodies from which it is
extracted are destroyed. ts potency is spiritual blood, which, if
well mixed with bodies, transmutes them into spirits, and


DIEA BOO QE ALLZE. 263


combines with them into one substance. The body attracts the
spirit, and the spirit tinges the body with a spiritual substance
like blood. For the Sages say that whatever has a spirit has
blood. If the venom penetrate the body, it imparts to it an
indestructible colour, and then the soul cannot be separated from
the body any more. If in flying it faces round and meets its
pursuer, then is theflight at an end. The two belong together,
aud Nature always tends to assimilate kindred substances.
The final colour is indestructible, because the soul pervades
every part of the body, and is inseparably bound up with it.
Though the wateris naturally cold, yet we must beware of too
fierce a degree of heat; for if the moisture of the substance be
dried up, our work must come to nought.

That which is called the spirit, is the active, or male prin-
ciple, and can only be obtained by the dissolution of the body.
Accordingly, we must understand this of the humidity which
results, namely, that which is produced, as long as two spouses
are conjoined after a lawful manner, even unto the white.
Would you know when the body has been rendered liquid by
coction? Hear what Bonellus answers: * When you see a black
substance floating in the water, you may know that the body has
been dissolved."

These two, body and spirit, have a third thing which
represents their common substance, and is, in its turn, called their
body. It is also called a round cloud, death, blackness, darkness,
shadow, ashy lead, or a metallic and subtle ore ; or it is described,
after that which is obtained from it, as gold that was hidden in
the body of Magnesia. Hence it is said: * Extract the shadow
thereof from the splendour" This also is the substance of which
so many have spoken. Three things constitute the true ore, viz.,
body, soul, and spirit. Hence it is compared to an egg, because
in an egg, too, the chicken is developed out of three things.
Thus also Alchemy is produced out of the above-mentioned
three things, as many philosophers do testify in * The Crowd."
The male principle, or the water, is also called the * nature" 3 fot
water is a natural agent which dissolves the elements of bodies,
and then again unites them. — Concerning this water, it is said by
Fictes, that its nature has the wonderful power of transmuting
the body into spirit. Where it is found alone it overcomes all


264 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


other things, and is an excellent, harsh, and bitter acid, which
transmutes gold into pure spirit. — Without this acid we cannot
attain either the red, or the black, or the white. When itis com-
bined with bodies, then the body changes into spirit, by a heavenly
fire, and immutable, indestructible tincture. Know also that the
union must be brought about by a gentle fire, since the elements
cannot stand a fierce fire, until the union has taken place.
When the gentle heat is applied, the elements devour and con-
sume each other, and yet again, on the other hand, comfort and
strengthen each other, and teach each other to stand the test of
fire. Hence the Sages say : * Invert the elements, and you will
find what you seek." To invert the elements is to make that
which is moist, dry, and that which is volatile, fixed. ^ The hus-
band also enforces conjunction that he may reproduce his own
likeness. Many strive to accomplish this separation and conjunc-
tion; but few succeed in bringing about an union which can
stand the test of fire. "The composition which is prepared out of
our precious substance is not even in the slightest degree dimin-
ished in volume by fire. Rather, it is nourished by fire, as a
mother nourishes her child. "These are the only things that have
the power of making red and white, both inwardly and outwardly.
Remember that at first they can only bear a gentle fire. When
you see that a whiteness begins to appear it must be your next
care to extract it from the black substance; then you should
develop the redness which is hidden in it. But the latter object
you must attain, not by extraction, but by gentle coction. Do
not marvel that the Sages describe our ore under many names,
and as consisting of body, soul, and spirit. They are also
referred to as brothers, or as husband and wife. But Geber says
that sometimes the whole substance is only called body, or spirit ;
and unless there be a dissolution into water, our work cannot be
brought to a successful issue. Of course, we do not mean the
the water of the clouds, as the foolish say, but a permanent
water, which, however, cannot be permanent without its body.
Thus Hermogenes says that we are to take the hidden spirit, and
not to despise it, because it shares its great power with its brother.
For only the union of the two can give us the right Tincture.
The water is also called a most sharp acid, with which the body
must be washed ; this is what Socrates calls * woman's work, and


YE UBOOR. Qf 4LZB. 265


child's play." The secret of our Art is the union of man and
woman : the husband receives the tinging spirit from his wife.
The union of husband and wife coagulates the female principle ;
and if the whole be transmuted into red, we have the treasure of
the world, of which Synon says: *If the water be changed into the
body, the body is changed, first into earth, then into dust and
ashes, and you have what you want."

'Then the work is over, and the Stone contains within itself
the Tincture in the body of Magnesia. "Therefore, the Sages say,
in conclusion: * My son, extract from the splendour its shadow."
Accordingly, we need exertion, and exercise is beneficial to us,
seeing that milk is for infants, but that strong men require
stronger food. So also is it in this operation of the Stone.

Now, it is laid down by Geber that our Art must do more
for the substance than Nature has done for it; otherwise we
should never obtain the Medicine which has the power of
correcting and perfecting the essences of the seven planets, or
metals. For this purpose the Art of Alchemy has been delivered
to us by the Sages; but the beginner must be on his guard
against being misled by their manner of speaking, and the multi-
plicity of names which they give to our substance, which has
been suggested to them by its great variety of (successive) colour-
ing, and by the fact that it is composed of the four elements.
The Stone must be saturated with its water, that it may imbibe
it all, and then subjected to the action of fire, until it turns to a
kind of dust, like burnt blood, and becomes indestructible by fire.
This Stone is sought by Kings, but is found only by those to
whom it is given of God. It is publicly sold for money. But if
men knew its precious nature, they would cease to think lightly
ofit. God, however, has hidden it from the world, and he who
would accomplish our work should first lay the right foundation,
or his building must come to nought. Let me tell you, then, that
our Stone requires a gentle fire; and if, after not many days, it
die, and lie in the tomb, yet God restores to it its spirit, and re-
moves its disease and its impurity. When it is burnt to ashes,
it must be well sprinkled and saturated with its blood, until it
becomes like burnt blood. Hermes remarks that both substances
rejoice in being united to each other. To the spiritual substance
God gives that which Nature could not give it. For Nature has


266 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


nothing so precious as the true Tincture; and if with its bodies
it become liquid, it produces a marvellous effect. For the Tinc-
ture changes everything itis mixed with into its own nature, and
makes it white both within and without. By one operation and
way, by one substance, and by one mixing, the whole work is
accomplished, while its purity is also one, and it is perfected in
two stages, each consisting of a dissolution and a coction, with
the repetition of these. ;

It must be your first object to elicit the whiteness of the sub-
stance by means of gentle and continued coction orheat. I know
that the Sages describe this simple process under a great number
of misleading names. But this puzzling variety of nomenclature
is only intended to veil the fact that nothing is required but sim-
ple coction. This process of coction, however, you must patiently
keep up, and that with the Divine permission, until the King is
crowned, and you receive your great reward. If youask whether
the substance of our Stone be dear, I tell you that the poor pos-
sess it as well as the rich.

Many have been reduced to beggary because they foolishly :
despised that which is highly esteemed by the Sages. If kings
and princes knew it, none of us would ever be able to obtain it.
Only one vessel is required for the whole process, which
should be of stone, and should be capable of resisting fire.

A. pound of the body of our ore should be taken, and ren-
dered as pure, refined, and highly rectified, like the virtue of
heaven, as the philosophers have it. Then the vessel should be
placed in a reverberatory alembic. "This should be set over a
gentle fire, the vessel being kept tightly closed, in order that it
may be able to retain its companion, and permit the same to
enkindle the whiteness thereof, as Lucas says. "The vessel con-
taining the ore must be placed over the fire, since there can be no
perfection without heat and intermixture of elements, seeing
that it is produced from blood. When the male and the
female principle have been together for a space of forty nights,
there is an emission of moist warm seed; and to the same God
has liberally given much blood to heat it. This seed develops
into an embryo which is supported with a little milk over a
moderate fire, and grows stronger day by day. Its growth must
be aided by warmth ; but the heat of the fire should be temper-


DEB BOOK OFT ALZB. 267


ate, like that of the Sun. This may be effected by placing our
vessel over an:empty vessel, and that again upon some glowing
coals. "The process of coction should be continued until the
alembic is well dried and the substance begins to assume a
liquid aspect; for water alone is sufficient for the coagulation
and fixing of the whole, as we are told by Democritus. "This
water is described under various names, such as sulphur, quick-
silver, spirit, and also vapour, for it can scarcely retain its
companion. There are in our Art only two substances, and if
I speak of two, then I think of four, all which things require one
thing, by which. Nature, conquering all Nature, is extracted.
For Nature, on account of its nature, rejoices in itself, Nature
conquers nature, and in itself contains nature. At the same time
one is not opposed to the other, but one comprehends the other,
whereby it excels the other, and the philosophers call this
water the purifying water.

This dissolution first imparts a black appearance to the
body. The substance should then turn white, and finally red.
The blackness exhibits an intermediate stage between fixedness
and volatility. So long as there is blackness, the female principle
prevails, till the substance enters into the white stage. This
whiteness is called the first power of our Stone, and the water is
referred to as that most excellent acid. You must be very care-
ful not to destroy the potency of this water. Avicenna says
that natural heat operating in humid bodies, first causes black-
ness ; then removes the blackness ; and finally causes whiteness,
as may be seen in calx. Hence our substance must become first
black, and then white, and be reduced to a kind of powder.
'Then the soul must be restored to the powder by a powerful fire;
and both [be] subjected to coction until they become first black,
then white, afterwards red, and finally good venom, the whole
being accomplished by the separation of waters. And now, the
waters being divided, cook the matter and the vapour till
coagulation takes place, and there is made a white stone. Then
are the waters divided. Another mortification, or exsiccation,
follows, and is called clouds, or smoke. The smoke well coagu-
lated with its feces becomes quick white; roast then the white
ore that it may bring forth itself. When the blackness vanishes,
the spirit is restored ; for the spirit does not die, but rather


268 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


quickens body and soul. The more perfectly our ore is purged,
and subjected to coction, the better it becomes, till it is at
length condensed into a Stone. But it must be dissolved again,
and subjected to a powerful fire, until it looks like burnt blood.
If this Stone be added to any substance, it tinges it into gold.
The Sages speak of it as a kind of root. Take, they say, the
whole virtue of the Tincture, and concentrate it in the Root. If
a body which has no earthy elements receive this Tincture, it
receives more benefit than less excellent bodies. The Stone
overcomes everything to which it is applied, and tinges foreign
bodies with its own colour. The dry fire tinges bodies, the air
strengthens them, the white water washes away their blackness,
and their earth receives the Tincture. Concerning the coction
needed for the development of our substance, the Sages have
expressed themselves in a great variety of ways. Observe
Hermes, who says that it must be repeated again and again,
until the red colour at length is obtained.  Herein is the stability
of the whole work. Afterwards it assumes many, many colours,
not including the red, which appears at the end. For the white
must precede it. Set to work by the regimen of fire, and
triturate. The above mentioned water volatilizes all bodies ;
even such as are gross it penetrates until it has assimilated them
toits own nature. Know that unless you operate upon bodies
until they are destroyed and their soul is extracted, with such
you will never tinge any body, for nothing tinges which has not
first itself been tinged. If the body be made fluid and burnt,
then it bends itself towards its begetter, becoming a subtle
Magnesia, and it turns towards the earth, which makes it
spiritual and vivifies it. Before the final whiteness of the first
stage is attained, the substance turns first of a black, then of an
orange, and then of a reddish colour (which, however, is quite
different from the final redness of the last stage). "These colours,
however, need not trouble you, since they are evanescent and
merely transitional.

From what I have said you may gather that our substance
is found in the gold which is hidden in Magnesia, and that it is
oz thing composed of sulphur from sulphur and mercury from
mercury. And as the substance of our Stone is one, so is the
method of its preparation. Therefore, do not listen to those


r8


TERES ENDOYR. QE ALZ. 269


ignorant and fraudulent alchemists who speak of many different
kinds of sublimation and distillation. Turn a deaf ear to those
who say that the substance of our Stone is the powder of the
Basilisk. As to the (length of) time required for the prepara-
tion, you must begin it in the winter, which is moist, and extract
the moisture until the spring, when all things become green, and
when our substance, too, should exhibit a variety of colours. In
the summer the substance should be reduced to powder by
means of a powerful fire. The autumn, the season of ripeness,
should witness its maturity,or final redness. About the motions
of the stars or planets you need not trouble yourself.: Our
substance is a body containing the spirit which makes glass
malleable, and turns crystals into carbuncles. One drop of our
Elixir, as large as a drop of rain, will suffice to tinge and trans-
mute a body a thousand times as large as itself.

This most noble Remedy was appointed, like all other
things, for the use of man, because he is the most glorious of
God's creatures, and the lord of the whole earth. It was given
to him for the purpose of preserving his youth, expelling
disease, preventing suffering, and providing him with all he
requires. Our Elixir is better than all the medicinal prepara-
tions of Hippocrates, Avicenna, and others. From it may be
prepared a potable antidote which has power to cure leprosy.
As fire purges and refines metals, so this Remedy restores to
the human body its natural heat, expels from it all health-
destroying matter, and fortifes it against every conceivable
form of disease. Its virtue is infinitely greater than that of the
potable gold dust, which is taken as a preventative among the
Gentiles.

Great and wonderful is the potency of the gold that slum-
bers in Magnesia, both for the purifying of the human system,
and for the transmuting of metals. What more shall I say?
A]I the things that I have here faithfully described I have seen
with my own eyes, and performed with my own hands.

When I was preparing the substance, after discovering the
true method, I was so seriously interfered with by the persons
with whom I lived that I was almost on the point of giving up
the whole thing in despair At length I communicated my
discovery to a friend, who faithfully executed my instructions,


270 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


and brought the work to a successful issue. For which Blessed
Gift may God be praised, world without end. Amen.


THE BOOK OF
LAMBSPRING,
A Noble Ancient PAilosopher,


pEMPEOSOPHIPCSOLE STONES


RENDERED INTO LATIN VERSE BY


NICHOLAS BARNAUD DELPHINAS,


Doctor of Medicine, & gealous Student of this Art.


TRAMA AUTE LUI


PUROSIBUACC E.


|I AM CALLED LAMBSPRING, BORN OF A NOBLE FAMILY,


THIS CREST | BEAR WITH GLORY AND JUSTICE.


AND


274 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


understood,
The utmost depth of my teachers! knowledge

have I sounded.
This God graciously granted to me,
Giving me a heart to understand wisdom.
'Thus I became the Author of this Book,
And I have clearly set forth the whole matter,
That Rich and Poor might understand.
There is nothing like it upon earth ;
Nor (God be praised) have I therein forgotten my humble

self.
I am acquainted with the only true foundation :
Therefore preserve this Book with care,
And take heed that you study it again and again.
Thus shall you receive and learn the truth,
And use this great gift of God for good ends.
O God the Father, which art of all the beginning and end,
We beseech thee for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ
To enlighten our minds and thoughts,
That we may praise Thee without ceasing,
And accomplish this Book according to Thy will !
Direct Thou everything to a good end,
And preserve us through Thy great mercy.—
With the help of God I will shew you this Art,
And will not hide or veil the truth from you.
After that you understand me aright,
You will soon be free from the bonds of error.
For there is only oze substance,
In which all the rest is hidden ;
"Therefore, keep a good heart.
Coction, time, and patience are what you need ;
If you would enjoy the precious reward,
You must cheerfully give both time and labour.
For you must subject to gentle coction the seeds and the
metals,


Dp oem I have read, and thoroughly


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRZNG. 25


Day by day, during several weeks ;

Thus in this one vile thing

You will discover and bring to perfection the whole work
of Philosophy,

Which to most men appears impossible,

Though it is a convenient and easy task.

If we were to shew it to the outer world

We should be derided by men, women, and children.

"Therefore be modest and secret,

And you will be left in peace and security.

Remember your duty towards your neighbour and your God,

Who gives this Art, and would have it concealed.

Now we will conclude the Preface,

That we may begin to describe the very Art,

And truly and plainly set it forth in figures,

Rendering thanks to the Creator of every creature.

Hereunto follows the First Figure,


ms í


THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The Sages will tell you

That two fishes are in our sea

Without any flesh or bones.

Let them be cooked in their own water ;
Then they also will become a vast sea,

'The vastness of which no man can describe.
Moreover, the Sages say

'That the two fishes are only one, not two ;
"They are two, and nevertheless they are one,
Body, Spirit, and Soul.

Now, I tell you most truly,

Cook these three together,

'That there may be a very large sea.

Cook the sulphur well with the sulphur,

And hold your tongue about it :

Conceal your knowledge to your own advantage,
And you shall be free from poverty.

Only let your discovery remain a close secret.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 277


FIGURE I.


BE WARNED AND UNDERSTAND TRULY
. THAT TWO FISHES ARE SWIMMING IN OUR SEA.


The Sea is the Body, the two Fishes are Soul and Spirit.


278 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The Sage says

'That a wild beast is in the forest,

Whose skin is of blackest dye.

If any man cut off his head, .

His blackness will disappear,

And give place to a snowy white.
Understand well the meaning of this head :
'The blackness is called the head of the Raven ;
As soon as it disappears,

A white colour is straightway manifested ;
It is given this name, despoiled of its head.
When the Beast's black hue has vanished in a black smoke,
jhedSacessrc]olco

From the bottom of their hearts ;

But they keep it a close secret,

'Fhat no foolish man may know it.

Yet unto their Sons, in kindness of heart,
They partly reveal it in their writings ;
And therefore let those who receive the gift
Enjoy it also in silence,

Since God would have it concealed.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 279


FIGURE Il.


HERE YOU STRAIGHTWAY BEHOLD
A BLACK BEAST IN THE FOREST.


Putrefactton.


280


HE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The Sages say truly

That two animals are in this forest :

One glorious, beautiful, and swift,

A great and strong deer ;

'The other an unicorn.

"They are concealed in the forest,

But happy shall that man be called

Who shall snare and capture them.

The Masters shew you here clearly

That in all places

These two animals wander about in forests

(But know that the forest is but one).

If we apply the parable to our Art,

We shall call the forest the Body.

That will be rightly and truly said.

The unicorn will be the Spirit at all times.

The deer desires no other name

But that of the Soul; which name no man shall take away
from it.

He that knows how to tame and master them by Art,

To couple them together,

Amd to lead them in and out of the forest,

May justly be called a Master.

For we rightly judge

'That he has attained the golden flesh,

And may triumph everywhere ;

Nay, he may bear rule over great Augustus.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 281


FIGURE III.


HEAR WITHOUT TERROR
THAT IN THE FOREST ARE HIDDEN A DEER AND AN
UNICORN.


P7


,; he Body there is Soul and Spirit.


282 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


'The Sages do faithfully teach us

'That two strong lions, to wit, male and female,

Lurk in a dark and rugged valley.

"These the Master must catch,

Though they are swift and fierce,

And of terrible and savage aspect.

He who, by wisdom and cunning,

Can snare and bind them,

And lead them into the same forest,

Of him it may be said with justice and truth

'That he has merited the meed of praise before all others,
And that his wisdom transcends that of the worldly wise.


TDEDBR UB OQ QUE QUIT LAMBSPRING. 283


FIGURE IV.


HERE YOU BEHOLD A GREAT MARVEL—
TWO LIONS ARE JOINED INTO ONE.


The Spirit and Soul must be united im their Body.


284 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Alexander writes from Persia

That a wolf and a dog are in this field,
Which, as the Sages say,

Are descended from the same stock,
But the wolf comes from the east,

And the dog from the west.

"They are full of jealousy,

Fury, rage, and madness :

One kills the other,

And from them comes a great poison.
But when they are restored to life,
"They are clearly shewn to be

'The Great and Precious Medicine,

'The most glorious Remedy upon earth,
Which refreshes and restores the Sages,
Who render thanks to God, and do praise Him.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRZNG. 285


FIGURE V.


A WOLF AND A.DOG ARE IN ONE HOUSE, AND ARE
AFTERWARDS CHANGED INTO ONE.


The Body is mortified and vendered | white, then Jomed to
Soul and Spirit by being saturated with them.


286 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


A savage Dragon lives in the forest,

Most venomous he is, yet lacking nothing :
When he sees the rays of the Sun and its bright fire,
He scatters abroad his poison,

And flies upward so fiercely

That no living creature can stand before him,
Nor is even the Basilisk equal to him.

He who hath skill to slay him, wisely

Hath escaped from all dangers.

Yet all venom, and colours, are multiplied

In the hour of his death.

His venom becomes the great Medicine.

He quickly consumes his venom,

For he devours his poisonous tail.

A]I this is performed on his own body,

From which flows forth glorious Balm,

With all its miraculous virtues.

Hereat all the Sages do loudly rejoice.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 287


FIGURE VI.


AT MIRACLE AND WITHOUT ANY


THIS SURELY IS A GRE


DECEPTION- —
THAT IN A VENOMOUS DRAGON TH


GREAT MEDICINE.


ERE SHOULD BE THE


The Mercury is precipitated or sublimed, dissolved in its own
proper water, aud then once more coagulated.


288 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


A nest is found in the forest,

In which Hermes has his brood ;

One fledgling always strives to fly upward,
'The other rejoices to sit quietly in the nest ;
Yet neither can get away from the other.

'The one that is below holds the one that is above,
And will not let it get away from the nest,

Xs a husband in a house with his wife,

Bound together in closest bonds of wedlock.
So also do we rejoice at all times,

That we hold the female eagle fast in this way,
And we render thanks to God the Father.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 289


BIGURE. VLL


WE HEAR OF TWO BIRDS IN THE FOREST,
YET WE MUST UNDERSTAND THEM TO BE ONLY ONE.


The Mercury having been often sublimed, is at length fixed, and
becomes capable of vesisting fire: the sublimation quust
be repeated until at length fixation is attained.


ar


290 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


In India there is a most pleasant wood,

In which two birds are bound together.

One is of a snowy white ; the other is red.
They bite each other, and one is slain

And devoured by the other.

"Then both are changed into white doves,

And of the Dove is born a Phoenix,

Which has left behind blackness and foul death,
And has regained a more glorious life.

'This power was given it by God Himself,

That it might live eternally, and never die.

It gives us wealth, it preserves our life,

And with it we may work great miracles,

As also the true Philosophers do plainly inform us.


REUEVEOQA QUT OE ZMASIRDNG. 291


FEIGURE VILE


HERE ARE TWO BIRDS, GREAT AND STRONG—THE BODY AND
SPIRIT; ONE DEVOURS THE OTHER.


Let the Body be pe n P. or a warm bath, the Spirit
having been extracted from it/— The Body has become «white
by the process, the Spirit red by our Avt.. AW that
exists tends towards perfection, and thus is
Ue Plulosophers Stone prepared.
T2


l3


9


l3


IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


. Now hear of a wonderful deed,


For I will teach you great things,

How the King rises high above all his race ;
And hear also what the noble lord of the forest says :
I have overcome and vanquished my foes,

I have trodden the venomous Dragon under foot,
I am a great and glorious King in the earth.
There is none greater than I,

Child either of the Artist or of Nature,

Among all living creatures.

I do all that man can desire,

I give power and lasting health,

Also gold, silver, gems, and precious stones,

And the panacea for great and small diseases.
Yet at first I was of ignoble birth,

Till I was set in a high place.

'To reach this lofty summit

Was given me by God and Nature.

'Thence from the meanest I became the highest,
And mounted to the most glorious throne,

And to the state of royal sovereignty :

Therefore Hermes has called me the Lord of the Forests.


TEE BOOK OP LZMBSPALAVG. 293


TOR CE DRESS JOX-


THE LORD OF THE FORESTS HAS RECOVERED HIS KINGDOM,
AND MOUNTED FROM THE LOWEST TO THE HIGHEST DEGREE.
IF FORTUNE SMILE, YOU MAY FROM A RHETOR BECOME A
CONSUL ;

IF FORTUNE FROWN, THE CONSUL MAY BECOME A RHETOR.


Thus you may £now that the Tincture has truly attained
the first degree.


94


THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


In all fables we are told

That the Salamander is born in the fire ;

In the fire it has that food and life

Which Nature herself has assigned to it.

It dwells in a great mountain

Which is encompassed by many flames,

And one of these is ever smaller than another—
Herein the Salamander bathes.

The third is greater, the fourth brighter than the rest—
In all these the Salamander washes, and is purified.
'Then he hies him to his cave,

But on the way is caught and pierced

So that it dies, and yields up its life with its blood:
But this, too, happens for its good:

For from its blood it wins immortal life,

And then death has no more power over it.

Its blood is the most precious Medicine upon earth,
'The same hàs not its like in the world.

For this blood drives away all disease

In the bodies of metals,

Of men, and of beasts.

From it the Sages derive their science,

And through it they attain the Heavenly Gift,
Which is called the Philosopher's Stone,

Possessing the power of the whole world.

This gift the Sages impart to us with loving hearts,
(That we may remember them for ever.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 295


FIGURE X.


A SALAMANDER LIVES IN THE FIRE,
WHICH IMPARTS TO IT A MOST GLORIOUS HUE.


A


ENSRI
—


Tas 2s the reiteration, gradatwn, and amelioration of the
Tzncture, or Philosophers Stone ; and the whole is
calted its Augmentation.


296 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


Here is an old father of Israel,

Who has an only Son,

A Son whom he loves with all his heart.

With sorrow he prescribes sorrow to him.

He commits him to a guide,

Who is to conduct him whithersoever he will.

The Guide addresses the Son in these words :

Come hither! I will conduct thee everywhere,

'To the summit of the loftiest mountain,

That thou mayest understand all wisdom,

'That thou mayest behold the greatness of the earth, and of
the sea,

And thence derive true pleasure.

I will bear thee through the air

To the gates of highest heaven.

'The Son hearkened to the words of the Guide,

And ascended upward with him ;

"There saw he the heavenly throne,

"That was beyond measure glorious.

When he had beheld these things,

He remembered his Father with sighing,

Pitied the great sorrow of his Father,

And said: I will return to his breast.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 297


FIGURE XI.


THE FATHER AND THE SON HAVE LINKED THEIR HANDS
WITH THOSE OF THE GUIDE :
KNOW THAT THE THREE ARE BODY, SOUL, AND SPIRIT.


298 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Says the Son to the Guide :

I will go down to my Father,

For he cannot live without me.

He sighs and calls aloud for me.

And the Guide makes answer to the Son :
I will not let thee go alone ;

From thy Father's bosom I brought thee forth,
I will also take thee back again,

'That he may rejoice again and live.

This strength will we give unto him.

So both arose without delay,

And returned to the Father's house.
When the Father saw his Son coming,
He cried aloud, and said :—


THE BDOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 299
FIGURE XII.


ANOTHER MOUNTAIN OF INDIA LIES IN THE VESSEL,


WIIGEE LEBBE- SBIRIT ANJILTEBE SOUL—-
THAT IS, THE SON AND THE GUIDE—HAVE CLIMBED.


2


m gs


I


* * A


300 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


My Son, I was dead without thee,

And lived in great danger of my life.

I revive at thy return,

And it fills my breast with joy.

But when the Son entered the Father's house,
'The Father took him to his heart,

And swallowed him out of excessive joy,
And that with his own mouth.

'The great exertion makes the Father sweat.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING. 3OI


FIGURE XIII.


HERE THE FATHER DEVOURS THE SON ;
THE SOUL AND SPIRIT FLOW FORTH FROM THE BODY.


- CPU
ANE ios


SE i


NS
j


siempre rorum ana


302 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Here the Father sweats on account of the Son,
And earnestly beseeches God,

Who has everything in His hands,

Who creates, and has created all things,

To bring forth his Son from his body,

And to restore him to his former life.

God hearkens to his prayers,

And bids the Father lie down and sleep.

'Then God sends down rain from heaven

To the earth from the shining stars.

It was a fertilizing, silver rain,

Which bedewed and softened the Father's Body.
Succour us, Lord, at the end,

That we may obtain Thy gracious Gift !


SEONSSRRESERSESSRSDS


ASNSNSNNSSSSNISNSENSSRNINU


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING.


PIGUREBE XIV.


HERE THE FATHER SWEATS PROFUSELY,
WHILE OIL AND THE TRUE TINCTURE
OF THE SAGES FLOW FORTH FROM HIM.


z—— — A
T EE


pl


2


99


304 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The sleeping Father is here changed
Entirely into limpid water,

And by virtue of this water alone

'The good work is accomplished.

"There is now a glorified and beautiful Father,
And he brings forth a new Son.

'The Son ever remains in the Father,

And the Father in the Son.

Thus in divers things

'They produce untold, precious fruit.

They perish never. more,

And laugh at death.

By the grace of God they abide for ever,

'The Father and the Son, triumphing gloriously
In the splendour of their new Kingdom.
Upon one throne they sit,

And the face of the Ancient Master

Is straightway seen between them :

He is arrayed in a crimson robe.


THE BOOK OF LAMBSPRING.


FIGURE XV.


HERE FATHER AND SON ARE JOINED IN ONE,
SO TO REMAIN FOR EVER.


305


o6 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


d COST EIBESESISNBVERSITEDSIIE SKIING:
OF
TESETSIS VA SRSIPEIDE
TO


IBOEISE OS OUNSIAYAEUTURSUEEESASNEI)NOUISVIBIVIKOSSSMIRAMID


(Er (EID)


BE


IDSSVAGISSSERASNBIDR GP OBSS VE
NOW


AND


IJSVEESRSVIOBNRSER
AMEN.


TEUER COGQUEIDPUNETPSTPOTS


OR,


THREE CHOICE CHEMICAL TRACTS,


NAMELY :


(i) That of BASILIUS VALENTINUS, a Monk of the
Benedictine Order; called PRACTICA, with twelve


Keys and an Appendix.

aD mbe CREIDIE MIHI of Ordina of "PEKONAS
NORTON, an English Sage.

(iii) The TESTAMENT of a certain CREMER, Abbot of
WESTMINSTER.


EDITED BY


MICHAEL MAIER,


DOCTOR OF MEDICINE.


- 1 ML k


M»


j
ccm


INS CIRUB ED
TO


THE MOST LEARNED AND HUMANE OF PHYSICIANS, THE
TRUEST, SINCEREST, NOBLEST, AND MOST


ACCOMPLISHED OF HIS KIND,


JO N UPARTNMUANON OEYJIERA
M.D.,
A RENOWNED PHYSICIAN AND COUNCILLOR OF THE IMPERIAL


FREE CITY, FRANCFORT-ON-THE-MAIN,


bY
IMEINGOEISAUBUD MCAGY BURG


M.D., PH.D; COUNT PALATINE, KNIGHT, AND FORMERLY


COURT PHYSICIAN TO HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY.


Being placed in the thick of the struggle between the fol-
lowers of Dogmatic and Hermetic Medicine, I thought it would
throw great and unexpected light on the subject of this contro-
versy, if I published in the Latin tongue the three great classical
Tracts bearing upon the matter, viz., that of the Benedictine Monk
BASILIUS VALENTINUS, and those of the two great
English Sages NORTON and CREMER. This Triad of Tracts


Quo IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.
I have ventured to call the GOLDEN TRIPOD, and the name


suggests to me, as appropriate to our controversy, the answer
returned to the enquiring Ionians by the priestess of Delphi :


*'l'he feud between the Meropes and the Ionians "
"will not cease until the Golden Tripod, which"
* Vulcan cast into the sea, be brought into the"
*house of the man who knows the things that "
* are, that were, and that are to come."


Thus I believe our controversy, too, may be determined, if I
dedicate zzy golden Tripod to the most learned of modern
physicians. For, as Homer says, * A physician is worth many or-
dinary men," and if I searched through the whole of Germany, nay,
Europe, I could not find a fitter person than him who is set upon
the lofty tower of world-wide celebrity, and whose skill is admired
and courted far and wide by princes and nobles. Accept, then,
this GOLDEN TRIPOD, forged by the hands of the Hermetic
Vulcan. Value it as a token of affection and esteem, as well as
because of its inward worth. I firmly trust that it will assuage
the feud between the adherents of Dogmatic and of Hermetic
Medicine, as its namesake of old did that between the Meropes
and Ionians ; and that it will establish amity and concord among
physicians of both schools. In order that its beneficial influence
might be as widely spread as possible, I have set it forth in the
common language of European scholars. In conclusion, let me
pray you to love me, even as I love you—as I also know that
you do.


Written at Francfort-on-the-Main in the month of
January, 1618.


IIT)


Fue RC


WITH TWELVE KEYS, AND AN APPENDIX THERETO,


CONCERNING


"A^EILE GREAT STONE Ob IPmE
ANCIENT SAGES.


BY
BASSINS "VOAJTLISN DIN S;


A MONK OF THE BENEDICTINE ORDER.


PIRST TRACI.


AN EPIGRAM


UPON


STO TRES IAS A OTIO AEN) SEIS P ANS TENTI E


BY


TVIBIK OU ETIPASISSIPESVIOASIBEISISSS


* Pactolus contains not such great treasures ; "
*nor does gold-bearing Hebrus roll down such "
* precious things in its golden sand, as Valentine "
*scatters abroad in this one book. Here is"
*greater wealth than all the riches of the Inds."
* For he bore away the golden fruit from the"
* Hesperian garden, and blessed with them fair"
"Germany's fields. | He bore away the golden "
* fleece from Colchis, and gave it to us by mighty "
*toi. | And when at length he sank into the"
*tomb, he left us his royal Treasure to enjoy."
* Here is something for you to admire and"
"imitate. Only seek it at the bottom of the"
* vessel,or you will wander astray. All things "
* are one, though they be described under various "
*names. Let this suffice thee; seek not many "
*utensils for thy labour. If thou knowest the"
*substance and the method, it is enough, and "
*thou knowest all."


e
cf IN


THES PREFASCE


OF
BASILIUS VALENTINUS, THE BENEDICTINE,


CONCERNING


TUUS  (GURIDAT. STONE OP TEE
ZUNCUE NA -- SIANGUBIS:


7 HEN I had emptied to the dregs the cup of human

/ suffering, I was led to consider the wretchedness

n of this world, and the fearful consequences of our

first parents' disobedience. Then I saw that there

was no hope of repentance for mankind, that they were getting

worse day by day, and that for their impenitence God's ever-

lasting punishment was hanging over them ; and I made haste

to withdraw myself from the evil world, to bid farewell to it,
and to devote myself to the service of God.

When I had spent some years at the monastery, I found
that after I had performed my work and my daily devotions
I still had some time on my hands. — This I did not wish to pass
in idleness,lest my evil thoughts should lead me into new sins;
and so I determined to use it for the study and investigation of
those natural secrets by which God has shadowed out eternal
things. So I read a great many books in our monastery written
in olden times by philosophers who had pursued the same study,
and was thereby stimulated to a more ardent desire of knowing
that which they also knew. Though I did not make much
progress at first, yet at last God granted my earnest prayer, and
opened my eyes that I might see what others had seen
before me.


314 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


In the convent there was a brother, who was afflicted with
a severe disease of the kidneys, and to whom none of the many
physicians he had consulted had been able to give even mo-
mentary relief. So he had committed himself to the hand of
God, and despaired of all human aid.

As I loved him, I gathered all manner of herbs, extracted
their salts, and distilled various medicines. But none of them
seemed to do him the slightest good, and after six years I found
that I had tried every possible vegetable substance, without any
beneficial effect.

It last I determined to devote myself to the study of the
' powers and virtues which God has laid into metals and minerals ;
and the more I searched the more I found. One discovery led
to another, and, after God had permitted unto me many experi-
ments, I understood clearly the nature and properties, and the
secret potency, imparted by God to minerals and metals.

Among the mineral substances I found one which exhibited
many colours, and proved to be of the greatest efficacy in art.
"The spiritual essence of this substance I extracted, and therewith
restored our sick brother, in a few days, to perfect health. For
the strength of this spirit was so great as to quicken the prostrate
spirit of my diseased brother, who, from that day to the day of
his death, remembered me in his hourly prayers. And his prayers,
together with my own diligence, so prevailed with God, that
there was revealed to me that great secret which God ever con-
ceals from those who are wise in their own conceits.

Thus have I been wishing to reveal to you in this treatise, as
far as may be lawful to me, the Stone of the Ancients, that you,
too, might possess the knowledge of this highest of earthly treas-
ures for your health and comfort in this valley of sorrow. I write
about it, not for my own good, but for that of posterity ; and
though my words be few and simple, that which they import is
of immeasurable magnitude. Ponder them well, that you also
may find the Rock which is the foundation Stone of truth, the
temporal blessing, and the eternal reward.


PODES OP OANCUM,
OF


BASILIUS VALENTINUS, THE BENEDICTINE,
CONCERNING


SERES CGIRIBSCACT SITONUES- QUE "DERE
ANCIENT SAGES.


N the preface, gentle Reader, and zealous Student of this
Art, I promised to communicate to you a knowledge of
our Corner Stone, or Rock, of the process by which it is
prepared, and of the substance from which it was already
derived by those ancient Sages, to whom the secret of our Art
was first revealed by God for the health and happiness of earthly
life. Let me assure you that I fully intend to fulfil my promise,
and to be as plain with you as the rules of our Art permit, not mis-
leading you by sophistical deceptions, but opening up to you the
spring of all blessings even unto the fountain head. I propose
to set forth what I have to say in a few simple, straightforward
words, for I am no adept in the art of multiplying words; nor
do I think that exuberance of language tends to clearness ; on
the contrary, I am convinced that it is many words that darken
council.

Let me tell you, then, that although many are engaged in
the search after this Stone, it is nevertheless found but by very
few. For God never intended that it should become generally
known. [It is rather to be regarded as a gift which He reserves
for those favoured few, who love the truth, and hate falsehood, who
study our Art earnestly by day and by night, and whose hearts
are set upon God with an unfeigned affection.


316 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Hence, if you would prepare our great and ancient Stone,
I testify unto you in all truth that you must give diligent heed to
my teaching, and before all things implore the gracious blessing
of the Creator of all things. You must also truly repent you of
all your sins, confessing. the same, and firmly resolve to lead
a good and holy life. It is also necessary that you should
determine to shew your gratitude to God for His unspeakable
Gift, by succouring the poorandthe distressed,and by opening your
hand and your heart to the needy. Then God will bless your
labour, and reward your search with success, and yourself with
a seat in Heaven as the fruit of your faith.

Do not despise the truthful writings of those who
possessed the Stone beforeus. For, after the enlightening grace
of God, it is from them that I received my knowledge. Let
your study of them be increased and repeated often, lest you
lose the thread of insight, and the lamp of understanding be
extinguished.

Give yourself wholly to study, and be not flighty or double-
minded. Let your mind be like a firm Rock,in which all the
various sayings of the Sages are reduced to the unity of their
common meaning. For a man who is easily influenced in
different directions is not likely to find the right path.

As our most ancient Stone is not derived from combustible
things, you should cease to seek it in substances which cannot
stand the test of fire. For this reason it is absurd to suppose
that we can make any use of vegetable substances, though the
Stone, too, is endowed with a principle of growth.

If our Stone were a vegetable substance, it would, like
other vegetables, be consumed by fire, leaving only a certain
salt. Ancient writers have, indeed, described our Stone as the
vegetable Stone. But that name was suggested to them by the
fact that it grows and increases in size, like a plant.

Know also that animals only multiply after their kind, and
within their own species. Hence our Stone can only be pre-
pared out of its own seed, from which it was taken in the
beginning ; and hence also you will perceive that the soul of an
animal must not be the subject of this investigation. Animals
are a class by themselves; nor can anything ever be obtained
from them that is not animal in its nature. But our Stone, as it


ALI


JICHE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 317


has been bequeathed to me by the Ancients, is derived from
two things, and one thing, in which is concealed a third thing.
This is the purest truth, and a most faithful saying. ^ For
male and female have from of old been. regarded as one body,
not from any external or visible consideration, but on account
of the ardour of that mutual love which naturally draws them
together into one; and as the male and female seed jointly
represent the principle of propagation, so also the sperm of the
matter out of which our Stone is made can be sown and
increased. There are in our substance two supplementary kinds
of seed, from which our Stone may be prepared and multiplied.

If you are a true lover of our Art, you will carefully
weigh and ponder these words, lest, with other sophisticators,
you fall into the dangerous pit prepared by the common enemy
of man.

But whence are you to obtain this seed? This question
you may most easily answer by asking yourself another question.
What do you want to develop from this seed, and what use do
you wish to make of it? "There can be no doubt, then, that
it must be the root, or first substance, of metals, from which all
metals derive their origin. It is, therefore, necessary that we
should now proceed to speak of the generation of the metals.

In the beginning, when the Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters, and as yet all was involved in darkness,
Almighty and Eternal God, Whose beginning and wisdom are
from everlasting, by His inscrutable counsel created heaven and
earth, and all that in them is, both visible and invisible, out
of nothing. How theact of creation was accomplished I will not
attempt to explain. "This is a matter which is set forth to us
in Holy Scripture, and must be apprehended by faith.

To each creature God gave its own seed, wherewith to
propagate its kind, that in this way there might always be an
increase of men and animals, plants and metals. Man was not
to be able to produce zew seed : he was only permitted to educe
new forms of life out of that which already existed. — The creat-
ing of seed God reserved to Himself. For if man could create
seed he would be equal to the Creator.

Know that our seed is produced in the following way. A
celestial influence descends from above, by the decree and


318 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.

ordinance of God, and mingles with the astral properties.
When this union has taken place, the two bring forth a third,
namely, an earth-like substance, which is the principle of our
seed, of its first source, so that it can shew an ancestry, and from
which three the elements, such as water, air, and earth, take their
origin. These elements work underground in the form of fire,
and there produce what Hermes, and all who have preceded me,
call the three first principles, viz., the internal soul, the impalpable
spirit, and visible bodies, beyond which we can find no earlier
beginning of our Magistery.

In the course of time these three unite, and are changed
through the action of fire into a palpable substance, viz., quick-
silver, sulphur, and salt. If these three substances be mixed,
they are hardened and coagulated into a perfect body, which
represents the seed chosen and appointed by the Creator. "This
is a most important and certain truth. If the metallic soul, the
metallic spirit, and the metallic /o777 of body be present, there
will also be metallic quicksilver, metallic sulphur, and metallic
salt, which together make up the perfect metallic body.

If you cannot perceive what you ought to understand
herein, you should not devote yourself to the study of philosophy.

Moreover, I tell you in few words, that you cannot obtain a
metallic body except by perfectly joining these three principles
into one. Know, also, that all animals are, like man, composed
of flesh and blood, and also possess a vitalizing spirit, but are
destitute of the rational soul which the Creator gave to man alone.
Therefore, when animals die, they perish for ever. But when
man yields up his mortal life into the hands of his Creator, his
soul does not die. It returns, and is united to the glorified body,
ia which, after the Resurrection, soul and spirit dwell together
once more in eternal glory, never to be separated again through-
out all eternity.

Hence the rational soul of man makes him an abiding
creature, and, though his body may seem to die, yet we know
that he will live for ever. For to him death is only a process of
purification, by means of which he is freed from his sins, and
translated to another and better place. Butthere is no resurrection
for the brute beasts, because they have no rational soul, for which
alone our Lord and Saviour shed His blood.


QUEE) NEQUEAT RATUP QU. 319


For though a body may be vitalized by a spirit, yet it need
not, therefore, be fixed, unless, indeed, it possess a rational soul,
that strong bond between body and spirit, which represents their
union, and resists all efforts to separate them. — Where there is
no soul, there is no hope:of redemption. Nothing can be perfect
or lasting withoutasoul. Thisisa profound and most important
truth, which I feel in conscience bound to make known to my
readers. Now, the spirits of metals have this property of fixed-
ness in a greater or less degree ; they are more or less volatile in
proportion to the mutual fitness of their bodies and souls. A
metal that has the three conditions of fixedness is not affected
by fire or overcome by any other outward agent. But there is
only oze metal that fulfils these conditions, namely, gold. Silver
also contains fixed mercury, and is not so quickly volatilised as
the imperfect metals, but stands the trial of fire, and yields no
food to voracious Saturn.

Amatory Venus is clothed with abundant colour, and her
whole body is one pure tincture, not unlike the red colour which
is found in the most precious of metals. But though her spirit
is of good quality, her body is leprous, and affords no permanent
substratum to the fixed tincture. Hence the soul has to share
the fate of the imperfect body, and when the body dies the soul
has to leave it. For its dwelling has been destroyed by fire, and
it is without a house wherein to abide.

Fixed salt has imparted to warlike Mars a hard, firm, and
durable body, which is evidence of the generosity of his soul ; nor
can fire be said to have much power over it. And if its strength
be united to the beauty of Venus, I do not say but that a precious
and harmonious result may be obtained. For the phlegmatic or
humid quality of the Moon may be heated with the ardent blood
of Venus, and the blackness of Venus removed with the strong
salt of Mars.

You need not look for our metallic seed among the elements.
It need not be sought so far back. If you can only rectify the
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt (understand, those of the Sages) until
the metallic spirit and body are inseparably joined together by
means ofthe metallic soul, you thereby firmly rivet the chain of
love, and prepare the palace for the coronation.

These things represent a liquid key, comparable to the


320 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


celestial influence, and a dry water joined to the terrestrial sub-
stance : all which are oze thing, derived from three, and two, and
one. [f you understand this, you have already attained our
Magistery. Then you must join the husband and wife together,
that each may feed upon the other's flesh and blood, and that so
they may propagate their species a thousandfold.

Though I would fain reveal this matter to you more
plainly and openly, I am prohibited from doing so by the law of
God, and by the fear of His wrath, and of eternal punishment,
lest the gift of the Most High should be abused.

I: however, you do not understand the theoretical part of
my work, perhaps the practical part will serve to enlighten you
more fully. I will therefore proceed to shew how, by the help of
God, I was enabled to prepare the Stone of the Ancients, and,
for your further instruction, I will add twelve keys, in which I
give a figurative account of our Art.

Take a quantity of the best and. finest gold, and separate it
into its component parts by those media which Nature vouchsafes
to those who are lovers of Art,as an anatomist dissects the
human body. Thus change your gold back into what it
was before it became gold ; and thou shalt find the seed, the
beginning, the middle, and the end—that from which our go/Z
and its female principle are derived, viz, the pure and subtle
spirit, the spotless soul, and the astral salt and balsam. When
these three are united, we may call them the mercurial liquid : a
water which was examined by Mercury, found by him to be
pure and spotless, and therefore espoused by him as his wife.
Of the two was born an incombustible oil; for Mercury be-
came so proud that he hardly knew himself. He put forth eagle
feathers, and devoured the slippery tail of the Dragon, and
challenged Mars to battle.

Then Mars summoned his horsemen, and bade them enclose
Mercury in prison under the ward of Vulcan, until he should be
liberated by one of the female sex.

When this became known, the other Planets assembled
and held a deliberation on the question, what would be the
best and wisest course to adopt When they were met
together, Saturn first came. forward, and delivered himself as
follows :


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 321


* [, Saturn, the greatest of the planets in the firmament,
declare here before you all,that I am the meanest and most
unprofitable of all that are here present, that my body is weak,
corruptible, and of a swarthy hue, but that, nevertheless, it is I
that try you all For having nothing that is fixed about me,
I carry away with me all that is of a kindred nature. My
wretchedness is entirely caused by that fickle and inconstant
Mercury, by his careless and neglectful conduct. Therefore, I
pray you, let us be avenged on him, shut him up in prison, and
keep him there till he dies and is decomposed, nay, until not a
drop of his blood is to be seen."

Then yellow Jupiter stepped forward, bent his knees, in-
clined his sceptre, and with great authority bade them carry out
the demand of Saturn. He added that he would punish every-
one who did not aid the execution of this sentence.

Then Mars presented himself, with sword drawn—a sword
that shone with many colours, and gave out a beautiful and
unwonted splendour. This sword he gave to the warder Vulcan,
and bade him slay Mercury, and burn him, together with his
bones, to ashes. "This Vulcan consented to do.

While he was executing his office, there appeared a beautiful
lady in a long, silver robe, intertissued with many waters, who
was immediately recognised as the. Moon, the wife of the Sun.
She fell on her knees, and with outspread hands, and flowing
tears, besought them to liberate her husband—the Sun—from
the prison in which, through the crafty wiles of Mercury, he was
being detained by the Planets. But Vulcan refused to listen to
her request ; nor was he softened by the moving prayers of Lady
Venus, who appeared in a crimson robe, intertissued with threads
of green, and charmed all by the beauty of her countenance and
the fragrance of the flowers which she bore in her hand. She
interceded with Vulcan, the Judge, in the Chaldee tongue, and
reminded him that a woman was to effect the deliverance of the
prisoner. But even to her pleading he turned a deaf ear.

While they were still speaking the heaven was opened, and
there came forth a mighty animal, with many thousands of young
ones, which drove the warder before it, and opening its mouth
wide, swallowed Venus, its fair helper, at the same time exclaim-
ing with a loud voice: *I am born of woman, woman has

M


322 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


propagated my seed, and therewith filled the earth. Her soul is
devoted to mine, and therefore I must be nourished with her
blood" When the animal had said these words with a loud
voice, it hastened into a certain chamber, and shut the door
behind it; whither its voracious brood followed, drinking of the
aforesaid incombustible oil, which they digested with the greatest
ease, and thereby became even more numerous than they had
been before. This they continued to do until they filled the
whole world.

Then the learned. men of that country were gathered
together, and strove to discover the true interpretation of all they
had seen. But they were unable to agree until there came for-
ward a man of venerable age, with snowy locks and silvery
beard, and arrayed in a flowing purple robe. On his head he
wore a crown set with brilliant carbuncles. His loins were
girded with the girdle of life. His feet were bare, and his words
penetrated to the depth of the human soul He mounted the
tribune, and bade the assembly listen to him in silence, since he
was sent from above to explain to them the significance of what
they had seen.

When perfectsilence prevailed,he delivered hrmself as follows :

. * Awake, O man, and behold the light,lest the darkness
deceive thee! "The Gods revealed to me this matter in a profound
sleep. Happy is the man who knows the great works of the
Divine power. Blessed is he whose eyes are opened to behold
light where before they saw darkness.

* ''wo Stars are given by the Gods to man to lead him to
great wisdom. —Gaze steadily upon them, follow their lights, and
you will find in them the secret of knowledge.

** The bird Phaeenix, from the south, plucks out the heart of
the mighty beast from the east. Give the animal from the east
wings, that it may be on an equality with the bird from the
south. Forthe animal from the east must be deprived of its
lion's skin, and lose its wings. Then it must plunge in the salt
water of the vast ocean, and emerge thence in renovated
beauty. Plunge thy volatile spirits in a deep spring whose
waters never fail, that they may become like their mother, who
is hidden therein, and born of three.

* Hungary is my native land, the sky and the stars are my


—2 8


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD 323


habitation, the earth is my spouse. Though I must die and be
buried, yet Vulcan causes me to be born anew. Therefore, Hun-
gary is my native land, and my mother encloses the whole world."

When all that were present had received these his sayings,
he thus continued :

* Cause that which is above to be below; that which is
visible, to be invisible ; and that which is palpable, to become
impalpable. Again, let that which is below become that which is
above; let the invisible become visible, and the impalpable,
palpable. Here you see the perfection of our Art, without any
defect, or diminution. . But that in which death and life,
destruction and resurrection dwell, is a round sphere, with
which the goddess of fortune drives her chariot, and imparts
the gift of wisdom to men of God. Its proper name here upon
earth, and for the human understanding, is * All-in- All."

* Let him who would know what this *All-in-AII' is, give the
earth great wings, and make it fly upward through the air to the
heavenly regions. Then singe its wings with fierce heat, and
make it fall into the Red Sea, and there be drowned. "Then dry
up the water with fire and air till the earth reappears, and you
will have * All-in-A1l.'

* [f you cannot find it in this way, look around upon the
things that are in the world. "Then you will find the * All-in- All,
which is the attracting force of all metals and minerals derived
from salt and sulphur, and twice born of Mercury. More I may
not say about * All-in-All,' since all is comprehended in all.

* My friends, blessed are ye if, by listening tothe wcrds of
the wise, ye can find this great Stone, which has power to cure
leprous and imperfect metallic bodies and to regenerate them ;
to preserve men in health, and procure for them a long life—
as it has hitherto kept the vital fire burning within me so long
that [ am weary of life, and yearn to die.

" For His wisdom and mercy, and for the gracious Gift which
He has bestowed upon me so long ago, [ am bound to render
God thanks, now and evermore. Amen."

When the old man had thus spoken, he vanished from
their sight.

But all who had heard him went each man to his house,
and meditated on his words by day and by night.


Y2


324 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


HERE FOLLOW


TEES SISVVAEPTO VAT SSTSGTDN AS


OF
BASSBIEDUS OVANISENUIBINUUSASBEUBEASBEN!ESIO TS UUNIBS


WITH WHICH WE MAY OPEN


THE DOORS OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
MOST ANCIENT STONE,


AND UNSEAL


THE MOST SECRET FOUNTAIN OF HEALTH:


INIRSU KEV


,


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 325


Let my friend know that no impure or spotted things are
useful for our purpose. For there is nothing in their leprous
nature capable of advancing the interests of our Art. "There is
much more likelihood of that which is in itself good being spoiled
by that which is impure. Everything that is obtained from the
mines has its value, unless, indeed, it is adulterated.  Adultera-
tion, however, spoils its goodness and its efficacy.

As the physician purges and cleanses the inward parts of
the body, and removes all unhealthy matter by means of his
medicines, so our metallic substances must be purified and refined
of all foreign matter, in order to ensure the success of our task.
Therefore, our Masters require a pure, immaculate body, that is
untainted with any foreign admixture, which admixture is the
leprosy of our metals.

Let the diadem of the King be of pure gold, and let the
Queen that is united to him in wedlock be chaste and immaculate.

If you would operate by means of our bodies,take a fierce grey
wolf, which, though on account of its name it be subject to the sway
of warlike Mars, is by birth the offspring of ancient Saturn, and
is found in the valleys and mountains of the world,where he roams
about savage with hunger. Cast to him the body of the King,
and when he has devoured it, burn him entirely to ashes in a
great fire. By this process the King will be liberated ; and when
it has been performed thrice the Lion has overcome the wolf, and
will nd nothing more to devour in him. "Thus our Body has
been rendered fit for the first stage of our work.

Know that this is the only right and legitimate way of puri-
fying our substance : for the Lion purifies himself with the blood
of the wolf, and the tincture of its blood agrees most wonderfully
with the tincture of the Lion, seeing that the two liquids are
closely akin to each other. When the Lion's hunger is appeased,
his spirit becomes more powerful than before, and his eyes glitter
like the Sun. His internal essence is now of inestimable value
for the removing of all defects, and the healing of all diseases.
He is pursued by the ten lepers, who desire to drink his blood ;
and all that are tormented with any kind of sickness are refreshed
with this blood.

For whoever drinks of this golden fountain, experiences a
renovation of his whole nature, a vanishing of all unhealthy


326 IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


matter, a fresh supply of blood, a strengthening of the heart and
of all the vitals, and a permanent bracing of every limb. For it
opens all the pores, and through them bears away all that pre-
vents the perfect health of the body, but allows all that is bene-
ficial to remain therein unmolested.

But let my friend be scrupulously careful to preserve the
fountain of life limpid and clear. If any strange water be mixed
with it, it is spoiled, and becomes positively injurious. If it still
retain any of the solvent which has been used for its dissolution,
you must carefully purge it off. For no corrosive can be of the
least use for the prevention of internal diseases.

When a tree is found to bear sour and unwholesome fruit,
its branches must be cut off, and scions of better trees grafted
uponit. Thenew branches thereupon become organically united
to the trunk ; but though nourished with its sap, they thence-
forward produce good and pleasant fruit.

The King travels through six regions in the heavenly firma-
ment, and in the seventh he fixes his abode. There the royal
palace is adorned with golden tapestry. lf you understand my
meaning, this Key will open the first lock, and push back the
first bolt; but if you do not, no spectacles or natural eyesight
will enable you to understand whatfollows. But Lucius Papirius
has instructed me not to say any more abóut this Key.


THE GOLDEN TKRIPOD. 327
SECOND XKEY.


In the houses of the great are found various kinds of drink,
of which scarcely two are exactly like each other in odour,
colour, or taste. For they are prepared in a great variety of
different ways. Nevertheless they are all drunk, and each is
designed for its own special use.

When the Sun gives out his rays, and sheds them abroad
upon the clouds, it is commonly said that he is attracting water,
and if he do it frequently, and thereby cause rain, it is called a
fruitful year.

If it be intended to build a palace, the services of many
different craftsmen must be employed, and a great variety of
materials is required. Otherwise the palace would not be worthy
the name. It is useless to use wood where stone is necessary.

'The daily ebb and flow of the sea, which are caused by the
sympathetic influence of heavenly bodies, impart great wealth
and blessing to the earth. For whenever the water comes
rolling back, it brings a blessing with it.


328 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


A bride, when she is to be brought forth to be married, is
gloriously adorned in a great variety of precious garments,
which, by enhancing her beauty, render her pleasant in the eyes
of the bridegroom. But the rites of the bridal night she
performs without anv clothing but that which she was arrayed
withal at the moment of her birth.

In the same way our bridal pair, Apollo and Diana, are
arrayed in splendid attire, and their heads and bodies are
washed with various kinds of water, some strong, some weak,
but not one of them exactly like another, and each designed for
its own special purpose. Know that when the moisture of the
earth ascends in the form of a vapour, it is condensed in the
upper regions, and precipitated to the earth by its own weight.
Thus the earth regains the moisture of which it had been
deprived, and receives strength to put forth buds and herbs.
In the same way you must repeatedly distil the water which you
have extracted from the earth, and then again restore it to your
earth, as the water in the Strait of Euripus frequently leaves the
shore, and then covers it again until it arrives at a certain
limit.

When thus the palace has been constructed by the hands of
many craftsmen, and the sea of glass has absolved its course, and
filled the palace with good things, it is ready for the King to
enter, and take his seat upon the throne.

But you should notice that the King and his spouse must be
quite naked when they are joined together They must be
stripped of all their glorious apparel, and must lie down together
in the same state of nakedness in which they were born, that
their seed may not be spoiled by being mixed with any foreign
matter.

Let me tell you, in conclusion, that the bath in which the
bridegroom is placed, must consist of two hostile kinds of
matter, that purge and rectify each other by means of a con-
tinued struggle. For itis not good for the Eagle to build her
nest on the summit of the Alps, because her young ones are
thus in great danger of being frozen to death by the intense cold
that prevails there.

But if you add to the Eagle the icy Dragon that has long
had its habitation upon the rocks, and has crawled forth from


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 329


the caverns of the earth, and place both over the fire, it will elicit
from the icy Dragon a fiery spirit, which, by means of its great
heat, will consume the wings of the Eagle, and prepare a per-
spiring bath of so extraordinary a degree of heat that the snow
will melt upon the summit of the mountains, and become a water,
with which the invigorating mineral bath may be prepared, and
fortune, health, life, and strength restored to the King.


SIRERSRSID S T ESEE VA


Atelfl!


(UN
VA »
i


By means of water fire may be extinguished, and utterly
quenched. If much water be poured upon a little fire, the fire
is overcome, and compelled to yield up the victory to the water.
In the same way our fiery sulphur must be overcome by means
of our prepared water. But,after the water has vanished, the
fiery life of our sulphurous vapour must triumph, and again
obtain the victory. But no such triumph can take place unless
the King imparts great strength and potency to his water, and
tinges it with his own colour, that thereby he may be consumed


OI IHE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


and become invisible, and then again recover his visible form,
with a diminution of his símple essence, and a development of
his perfection.

A painter can set yellow upon white, and red or crimson
upon yellow ; for, though all these colours are present, yet the
latter prevails on account of its greater intensity. When you
have accomplished the same thing in our Art, you have before
your eyes the light of wisdom, which shines in the darkness,
although it does not burn. For our sulphur does not burn, but
nevertheless its brilliancy is seen far and near. Nor does it
colour anything until it has been prepared, and dyed with its
own colour, which it then imparts to all weak and imperfect
metals. This sulphur, however, cannot impart this colour until
it have first by persevering labour been prevailed upon to abjure
its original colour. For the weaker does not overcome the
stronger, but has to yield the victory to it. The gist of the
whole matter lies in the fact that the small and weak cannot aid
that which is itself small and weak, and a combustible substance
cannot shield another substance from combustion. "That which
isto protect another substance against combustion must itself
be safe from danger. The latter must be stronger than the
former, that is to say, it must itself be essentially incombustible.
He,then, who would prepare the incombustible sulphur of the
Sages, must look for our sulphur in a substance in which it is
incombustible—which can only be after its body has been
absorbed by the salt sea, and again rejected by it. Then it
must be so exalted as to shine more brightly than all the stars
of heaven, and in its essence it must have an abundance of blood,
like the Pelican, which wounds its own breast, and, without any
diminution of its strength, nourishes and rears up many young
ones with its blood. "This Tincture is the Rose of our Masters,
of purple hue, called also the red blood of the Dragon, or the
purple cloak many times folded with which the Qucen of Salva-
tion is covered, and by which all metals are regenerated in colour.

Carefully preserve this splendid mantle, together with the
astral salt which is joined to this sulphur, and screens it from
harm. Add to it a sufficient quantity of the volatility of the
bird; then the Cock will swallow the Fox, and, having been
drowned in the water, and quickened by the fire, will in its turn
be swallowed by the Fox.


—M"— MOL


0


en e ma
| NER


2 x


—— - m


AII flesh that is derived from the earth, must be decomposed
and again reduced to earth ; then the earthy salt produces a new
generation by celestial resuscitation. For where there was not
first earth, there can be no resurrection in our Magistery. For
in earth is the balm of Nature, and the salt of the Sages.

At the end of the world, the world shall be judged by fire,
and all those things that God has made of nothing shall by
fire be reduced to ashes, from which ashes the Phoenix is to
produce her young. For in the ashes slumbers a true and
genuine tartaric substance, which, being dissolved, will enable us
to open the strongest bolt of the royal chamber.

After the conflagration, there shall be formed a new heaven
and a new earth, and the new man will be more noble in his
glorified state than he was before.

When the sand and ashes have been well matured and
ripened with fire, the glass-blower makes out of it glass, which.
remains hard and firm in the fire, and in colour resembles a
crystal stone. To the uninitiated this is a great mystery, but
not to the master whom long experience has familiarized with
the process.


332 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Out of stones the master also prepares lime by burning,
which is very useful for our work. — But before they are prepared
with fire, they are mere stones. The stone must be matured
and rendered fervent with fire, and then it becomes so potent
that few things are to be compared to the fiery spirit of lime.

By burning anythiny; to ashes you may gain itssalt. Ifin this
dissolution the sulphur and mercury be kept apart, and restored
to its salt, you may once more obtain that form which was
destroyed by the process of combustion. This assertion the
wise of this world denounce as the greatest folly, and count as a
rebellion, saying that such a transformation would amount to a
new creation, and that God has denied such creative power to
sinful man. But the folly is all on their side. For they do not
understand that our Artist does not claim to create anything,
but only to evolve new things from the seed made ready to his
hand by the Creator.

If you do not possess the ashes, you will be unable to obtain
our salt ; and without our salt you will not be able to impart to
our substance a bodily form ; for the coagulation of all things is
produced by salt alone.

As salt is the great preserving principle that protects all
things from decay, so the Salt of our Magistery preserves metal
from decomposition and utter annihilation. If their Balm were
to perish, and the Spirit to leave the body, the body would be
quite dead, and no longer available for any good purpose. The
metallic spirit would have departed, and would have left its habi-
tation empty, bare, and lifeless.

Observe also, thou who art a lover of this Art, that the salt
that is gained from ashes has great potency, and possesses many
concealed virtues. Nevertheless, the salt is unprofitable, until its
inward substance has been extracted. For the spirit alone gives
strength and life. The body by itself profits nothing. If you
know how to find this spirit, you have the Salt of the Sages, and
the incombustible oil, concerning which many things have been
written before my time.

Although many philosophers

Have sought for me with eagerness,
Yet very few succeed at length

In finding out my secret virtue.


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 333
INESSETRSE Y.


Z 2


ZN


1


The quickening power of the earth produces all things that
grow forth from it, and he who says tbat the earth has no life
makes a statement which is flatly contradicted by the most
ordinary facts. For what is dead cannot produce life and growth,
seeing that it is devoid of the quickening spirit. "This spirit is
the life and soul that dwell in the earth, and are nourished by
heavenly and sidereal influences. For all herbs, trees, and roots,
and all metals and minerals, receive their growth and nutriment
from the spirit of the earth, which is the spirit oflife. Thisspirit
is itself fed by the stars, and is thereby rendered capable of im-
parting nutriment to all things that grow, and of nursing them as
a mother does her child whileit is yet in the womb. The minerals
are hidden in the womb of the earth, and nourished by her with
the spirit which she receives from above.

Thus the power of growth that I speak of is imparted not
by the earth, but by the life-giving spirit that is in it. If the
earth were deserted by this spirit, it would be dead, and no


334 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM,


longer able to afford nourishment to anything. For its sulphur
Or richness would lack the quickening spirit without which there
can be neither life nor growth.

Two contrary spirits can scarcely dwell together, nor do
they easily combine. For when a thunderbolt blazes amidst a
tempest cf rain, the two spirits, out of which it is formed, fly from
one another with a great shock and noise, and circle in the air,
so that no one can know or say whither they go, unless the same
has been ascertained by experience as to the mode in which
these spirits manifest

Know then, gentle Reader, that life is the only true spirit,
and that that which the ignorant herd look upon as dead may
be brought back to permanent, visible, and spiritual life, if but
the spirit be restored to the body—the spirit which is supported
by heavenly nutriment, and derived from heavenly, elementary,
and earthly substances, which are also called formless matter.

Moreover, as iron has its magnet which draws it with the
invisible bonds of love, so our gold has its magnet, viz., the first
Matter of the great Stone. If you understand these my words,
you are richer and more blessed than the whole world.

Let me conclude this chapter with one more remark. When
a man looks into a mirror, he sees therein reflected an image of
himself. If, however, he trv to touch it, he will find that it is not
palpable, and that he has laid his hand upon the mirror only.
In the same way, the spirit which must be evolved from this
Matter is visible, but not palpable. This spirit is the root of the
life of our bodies, and the Mercury of the Philosophers, from
which is prepared the liquid water of our Art—the water which
must once more receive a material form, and be rectified by means
of certain purifying agents into the most perfect Medicine. For
we begin with a firm and palpable body, which subsequently
becomes a volatile spirit, ard a golden water, without any con-
version, from which our Sages derive their principle of life.
Ultimately we obtain the indestructible medicine of human and
metallic bodies, which is fitter to be known to angels than to
men, except such as seek it at God's hands in heartfelt prayer,
and give genuine proofs of their gratitude by service rendered to
Him, and to their needy neighbour.

Hereunto I may add, in conclusion, that one work is devel-


DE GOLDEN IRIPOD. 335


oped from another. First, our Matter should be carefully puri-
fied, then dissolved, destroyed, decomposed, and reduced to
dust and ashes. Thereupon prepare from it a volatile spirit, which
is white as snow, and another volatile spirit, which is red as blood.
These two spirits contain a third, and are yet but one spirit.
Now these are the three spirits which preserve and multiply life.
"Therefore unite them, give them the meat and drink that Nature
requires, and keep them in a warm chamber until the perfect birth
takes place. Then you will see and experience the virtue of the
gift bestowed upon you by God and Nature. now, also, that
hitherto my lips have not revealed this secret to any one, and
that God has endowed natural substances with greater powers
than most men are ready to believe. Upon my mouth God has
sect a seal, that there might be scope for others after me to write
about the wonderful things of Nature, which by the foolish are
looked upon as unnatural. For they do not understand that all
things are ultimately traceable to supernatural causes, but never-
theless are, in this present state of the world, subject to natural
conditions.


SIENTES SES OY


VIE Mai is MT
| M i 8


NS


336 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


The male without the female is looked upon as only half a
body, nor can the female without the male be regarded as
more complete For neither can bring forth fruit so long as it
remains alone. But if the two be conjugally united, there is a
perfect body, and their seed is placed in a condition in which it
can yield increase.

If too much seed be cast into the field, the plants impede
each other's growth, and there can be no ripe fruit. But if, on
the other hand, too little be sown, weeds spring up and choke it.

If a merchant would keep a clear conscience, let him give
just measure to his neighbour. If his measure and weight be
not short, he will receive praise from the poor.

In too much water you may easily be drowned ; too little
water, on the other hand, soon evaporates in the heat of the
sun.

If, then, you would attain the longed-for goal, observe just
measure in mixing the liquid substance of the Sages,lest that
which is too much overpower that which is too little, and the
generation be hindered. For too much rain spoils the fruit, and
too much drought stunts its growth. Therefore, when Neptune
has prepared his bath, measure out carefully the exact quantity
of permanent water needed, and let there be neither too little
nor too much.

'The twofold fiery male must be fed with a snowy swan,
and then they must mutually slay each other and restore each
other to life; and the air of the imprisoned fiery male will occupy
three of the four quarters of the world, and make up three parts
of the imprisoned fiery male, that the death-song of the swans
may be distinctly heard ; then the swan roasted will become
food for the King, and the fiery King will be seized with great
love towards the Queen, and will take his fill of delight in
embracing her, until they both vanish and coalesce into one
body.

It is commonly said that two can overpower one, especially
if they have sufficient room for putting forth their strength.
Know also that there must come a twofold wind, and a single
wiud, and that they must furiously blow from the east and from
thesouth. If, when they cease to rage, the air has become water,
you may be confident that the spiritual will also be transmuted


ZUR. n QT. PARUPERCHID 89/7


into a bodily form, and that our number shall prevail through
the four seasons in the fourth part of the sky (after the seven
planets have exercised power), and that its course will be per-
fected by the test of fire in the lowest chamber of our palace,
when the two shall overpower and consume the third.

For this part of our Magistery skill is needed, in order to
divide and compound the substances aright, so that the art
may result in riches, and the balance may not be falsified by
unequal weights. The sky we speak of is the sky of our Art,
and there must be justly proportioned parts of our air and earth,
our true water and our palpable fire.


SEVENTE, KEY.


Natural heat preserves the life of man. If his body lose its
natural heat his life has come to an end.

A moderate degree of natural heat protects against the
cold ; an excess of it destroys life. [It is not necessary that the
substance of the Sun should touch the earth. The Sun can
heat the earth by shedding thereon its rays, which are intensified

Ww


338 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


by reflection. This intermediate agency is quite sufficient to do
the work of the Sun, and to mature everything by coction. The
rays of the Sun are tempered with the air by passing through it
so as to operate by the medium of the air, as the air operates
through the medium of the fire.

Earth without water can produce nothing, nor can water
quicken anything into growth without earth ; and as earth and
water are mutually indispensable in the production of fruit, so
fire cannot operate without air, or air without fire. For fire has
no life without air ; and without fire air possesses neither heat
nor dryness.

When its fruit is about to be matured, the vine stands in
greater need of the Sun's warmth than in the spring ; and if the
Sun shine brightly in the autumn, the grapes will be better than
if they had not felt his autumnal warmth.

In the winter the multitude suppose everything to be dead,
because the earth is bound in the chains of frost, so that nothing
is allowed tosprout forth. Butas soon as the spring comes, and
the cold is vanquished by the power of the Sun, everything is
restored to life, the trees and herbs put forth buds, leaves, and
blossoms, the hibernating animals creep forth from their hiding
places, the plants give out a sweet fragrance, and are adorned
with a great variety of many coloured flowers ; and the summer
carries on the work of the spring, by changing its flowers into fruit.

Thus, year by year, the operations of the universe are per-
formed, until at length it shall be destroyed by its Creator, and
all the dwellers upon earth shall be restored by resurrection to a
" glorified life. "Then the operations of earthly nature shall cease,
and the heavenly and eternal dispensation shall take its place.

When the Sun in the winter pursues his course far away
from us, he cannot melt the deep snow. But in the summer he
approaches nearer to us, the quality of the air becomes more
fiery, and the snow melts and is transmuted by warmth into
water. Forthat which is weak is always compelled to yield to
that which is strong.

The same moderate course must be adopted in the fiery
regimen of our Magistery. For it is all important that the liquid
should not be dried up too quickly, and that the earth of the Sages
should not be melted and dissolved too soon, otherwise your


UOCE ONG QUITAR. PRSE. 339


fishes would be changed into scorpions. If you would perform
our task rightly, take the spiritual water, in which the spirit was
from the beginning, and preserve it in a closely shut chamber.
For the heavenly city is about to be besieged by earthly foes.
You must, therefore, strongly fortify it with three impassable
and well-guarded walls, and let the one entrance be well protected.
Then light the lamp of wisdom and seek with it the gross thing
that was lost, shewing only such light as is needed. For you
must know that the worms and reptiles dwell in the cold and
humid earth, while man has his proper habitation upon the face
of the earth ; the bodies of angels, on the other hand, not being
alloyed with sin or impurity, are injured by no extreme either of
heat or cold. When man shall have been glorified, his body will
become like the angelic body in this respect. lf we carefully
cultivate the life of our souls, we shall be sons and heirs of God,
and shall be able to do that which now seems impossible. But
this can be effected only by the drying up of all water, and the
purging of heaven and earth and all men with fire.


BACODIUIPET OKSBLYS


340 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Neither human nor animal bodies can be multiplied or pro-
pagated without decomposition ; the grain and all vegetable
seed, when cast into the ground, must decay before it can spring
up again; moreover, putrefaction imparts life to many worms
and other animalcule. The process of augmentation and quick-
ening is mostly performed in [the] earth, while it is caused by
spiritual seed through the other elements.

The farmer's wife knows that she cannot hope to obtain
chickens except through the decomposition of the egg.

If bread is placed in honey, and suffered to decay, ants are
generated ; worms are bred in the putrefying bodies of men,
horses, and other animals ; maggots are also developed by the
decay of nuts, apples, and pears.

The same thing may be observed in regard to vegetable life.
Nettles and other weeds spring up where no such sced has ever
been sown. "This occurs only by putrefaction. The reason is that
the soil in such places is so disposed, and, as it were, impregnated,
that it produces these fruits, which is a result of the properties of
sidereal influence ; consequently the seed is spiritually produced
in the earth, and putrefies in the earth, and by the operation of the
elements generates corporeal matter according to the species of
Nature. Thus the stars and the elements may generate new
spiritual, and, ultimately, new vegetable seed, by means of putre-
faction. But man cannot create new seed ; for it is not in his
power to order the operation of the elements and the essential
influences of the stars. By natural conditions, however, new
plants are generated simply through putrefaction. This fact is
not noticed by the farmer, simply because it is a thing that he
has always been used to, and for which he is unable to find an
explanation. But you who should know more than the vulgar
herd, must search into the causes of things, and endeavour to
understand how the process of generation and resuscitation is
accomplished by means of decomposition, and how all life is
produced out of decay.

Each element is in its turn decomposed and regenerated
by that which is contained in it. For you should know that
every element contains the three others. In air,for instance,
there is fire, water, and earth. This assertion may appear
incredible, but it is nevertheless true, In like manner, fire


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 341


includes air, water, and earth, since otherwise it could generate
nothing. Water contains fire, air, and earth; for if it did not,
there could be no growth. At the same time, each element is
distinct, though each contains the others. All this is found by
distillation in the separation of the elements.

In order to rationally prove this to you, who are investigat-
ing the separation of Nature, and purpose to understand the
division of the elements, lest you should think my words inven-
tions, and not true, I tell you that if you distil earth, you will find
that, first of all, there is an escape of air, which, in its turn, always
contains fire, as they are both of a spiritual essence, and exercise
an irresistible mutual attraction. In the next place, there issues
water from the earth, and the earth, in which is the precious salt,
remains by itself at the bottom of the vessel.

When water is distilled, air and fire issue from it, and the
water and material earth remain at the bottom. — Again, when
the invisible part of elementary fire is extracted, you get water
and earth by themselves. | Nor can any of the three other
elements exist without air. It is air that gives to earth its power
of production, to fire its power of burning, to water its power of
generating fruit. Again, air can consume nothing, nor dry up
any moisture, without that natural heat which must be imparted
toit by fire. For everything that is hot and dry contains fire.
From these considerations we conclude that no element can
exist without the others, and that in the generation of all things
there is a mingling of the four elements. He who states the
contrary in no wise understands the secrets of Nature, nor has
he investigated the properties of the elements. For if anything
is to be generated by putrefaction, the process must be as
follows: The earth is first decomposed by the moisture which
it contains ; for without moisture, or water, there can be no true
decay ; thereupon the decomposed substance is kindled and
quickened by the natural heat of fire: for without natural heat
no generation can take place. Again, if that which has received
the spark of life, is to be stirred up to motion and growth, it
must be acted upon by air. For without air, the quickened
substance would be choked and stifled in the germ. Hence it
manifestly appears that no one element can work effectually
without the aid of the others, and that all must contribute


342 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


towards the generation of anything. Thus their quickening co-
operation takes the form of putrefaction, without which there
can be neither generation, life, nor growth. "That there can be
no perfect generation or resuscitation without the co-operation of
the four elements, you may see from the fact that when Adam
had been formed by the Creator out of earth, there was no life
in him, until God breathed into him a living spirit. "Then the
earth was quickened into motion. In the earth was the salt,
that is, the Body ; theair that was breathed into it was mercury,
or the Spirit, and this air imparted to him a genuine and
temperate heat, which was sulphur, or fire. Then Adam moved,
and by his power of motion, shewed that there had been infused
into him a life-giving spirit. For as there is no fire without air,
so neither is there any air without fire. "Water was incorporated
with the earth. "Thus living man is an harmonious mixture of
the four elements ; and Adam was generated out of earth, water,
air, and fire, out of soul, spirit, and body, out of mercury, sulphur,
and salt.

In the same way, Eve, our common mother, was created ;
for her body was built up and formed out of Adam's body—a
fact which I wish you particularly to notice.

To return again to putrefaction, O seeker of the Magistery
and devotee of philosophy, know that, in like manner, no metallic
seed can develop, or multiply, unless the said seed, by itself alone,
and without the introduction of any foreign substance, be
reduced to a perfect putrefaction.

The putrefaction of metallic seed must, like that of animal
and vegetable seed, take place through the co-operation of the
fourelements. I have already explained that the elements them-
selves are not the seed. But it ought by this time to be
clear to you that the metallic seed which was produced by
the combined operation of heavenly, sidereal, and elementary
essences, and reduced into bodily-form, must, in due course, be
corrupted and putrefied by means of the elements.

Observe that this seed containsa living volatile spirit. For
when it is distilled, there issues from it first a spirit, and then
that which is less volatile. But when by continued gentle heat,
it is reduced to an acid, the spirit is not so volatile as it was
before. For in the distillation of the acid the water issues first,


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 343


and then the spirit. And though the substance remains the
same, its properties have become very different. It is no longer
wine, but has been transmuted by the putrefaction of gentle heat
into an acid. "That which is extracted with wine or its spirit,
has widely different properties and powers from that which is
extracted with an acid. For if the crystal of antimony be
extracted with wine or the spirit of wine, it causes vomiting and
diarrhcea, because it is a poison, and its poisonous quality is not
destroyed by the wine. But if it be extracted with a good dis-
tilled acid, it furnishes a beautiful extract of a rich colour. If
the acid be removed by means of the St. Mary's Bath, and the
residuum of yellow powder washed away, you obtain a sweet
powder which causes no diarrhcea, but is justly regarded as a
marvellously beneficial medicine.

'This excellent powder is dissolved in a moist place into a
liquid which is profitably employed as a painless agent in surgery.

Let me sum up in few words what I have to say. "The sub-
stance is of heavenly birth, its life is preserved by the stars, and
nourished by the four elements; then it must perish, and be
putrefied ; again, by the influence of the stars, which works
through the elements, it is restored to life, and becomes once
more a heavenly thing that has its habitation in the highest
region of the firmament. Then you will find that the heavenly
has assumed an earthly body, and that the earthly body has been
reduced to a heavenly substance.


344 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.
NINTH KEY.


Saturn, who is called the greatest of the planets, is the least
useful in our Magistery. Nevertheless, it is the chief Key of the
whole Art, howbeit set in the lowest and meanest place.
Although by its swift flight it has risen to the loftiest height, far
above all other luminaries, its feathers must be clipped, and
itself brought down to the lowest place, from whence it may once
more be raised by putrefaction, and the quickening caused by
putrefaction, by which the black is changed to white,and the
white to red, until the glorious colour of the triumphant King
has been attained. "Therefore, I say that though Saturn may
seem the vilest thing in the world, yet it has such power and
efficacy that if its precious essence, which is exceesively cold, be
reduced to a metallic body by being deprived of its volatility, it
becomes as corporeal as, but far more fixed than, Saturn itself.
This transmutation is begun, continued, and completed with
Mercury,sulphur, and salt. This will seem unintelligible to many,
and it certainly does make an extraordinary demand upon the
mental faculties ; but that must be so because the substance is
within the reach of everyone, and there is no other way of


TUDEDE, GOUIWEN.- TEGZIPOD, 345


keeping up the divinely ordained difference between rich
and poor.

In the preparation of Saturn there appears a great variety of
different colours ; and you must expect to observe successively
black, grey, white, yellow, red, and all the different intermediate
shades. In the same way, the Matter of all the Sages passes
through the several varieties of colour, and may be said to
change its appearance as often as a new gate of entrance is
opened to the fire.

The King shares his royal dignity with noble Venus, and
appears in splendid state, surrounded by all the dignitaries of his
court. Before him is borne a beautiful crimson banner, in which
there is an. embroidered representation of Charity in green
garments. Saturn is the prefect of the royal household, and in
front of him Astronomy bears a black standard, with a repre-

sentation of Faith in yellow and red garments.
Jupiter is the Grand Marshal, and is preceded by a banner
of grey colour, borne by Rhetoric, and adorned with a variegated
representation of Hope.

Mars is at the head of military affairs, and executes his
office with a certain fiery ardour. Geometry carries beforc
him a crimson banner, on which you moy behold Courage in a
crimson cloak. Mercury holds the office of Chancellor ; Arith-
metic is his standard bearer, and his standard is of many colours;
on it may be observed the figure of Temperance in a many
coloured robe.

The Sun is Vice-Regent, and is preceded by Grammar,
bearing a yellow banner, on which Justice is represented in a
golden robe. "Though Venus seems to cast him into the shade
by the gorgeous magnificence of her appearance, he really pos-
sesses more power in the kingdom than she.

Before the Moon, Dialectic bears a shining silver banner,
with the figure of Prudence wrought into it in sky-blue, and
because the husband of the Moon is dead, he has transferred to
her his task of resisting the domination of Queen Venus. For
among all these there is enmity, and they are all striving to
supplant each other. Indeed, the tendency of events is to give
the highest place to the most excellent and the most deserving.
For the present state of things is passing away, and a new


346 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


world is about to be created, and one Planet is devouring another
spiritually, until only the strongest survive.

Let me tell you allegorically that you must put into the
heavenly Balance the Ram, Bull, Cancer, Scorpion, and Goat.
In the other scale of the Balance you must place the Twins, the
Archer, the Water-bearer, and the Virgin. "Then let the Lion
jump into the Virgin's lap, which will cause the other scale to
kick the beam. "Thereupon, let the signs of the Zodiac enter into
opposition to the Pleiads, and when all the colours of the world
have shewn themselves, let there be a conjunction and union
between the greatest and the smallest, and the smallest and the
greatest.

If the whole world's nature

Were seen in one figure,

And nothing could be evolved by Art,

Nothing wonderful would be found in the Universe,
And Nature would have nothing to tell us.

For which let us laud and praise God.


VIBEPXNSISEDSESEDVA


NT UD S
AA DDOD22 2,557 mum, 117373 4
S vo


NATVS SVM EX HERMOGENE.


SS $
/ 3 Js
X S € E)
e —i $
*. ti $
e$ B5 2e S8
$, 8 et* SS
€ SB e BE S
^* BB EE $^
$, 8 ERES
$c, E BEBSO
Q,ZzZete€ fS EIS
$*$24 ES
eS 8 eS


d»
LT


//)
gym E,


PD
SS
"SS
NC
E.

va


ex
NN


m.
U
-J
-J
Uu

ic
ra


NS
os"


N


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 347


In our Stone, as composed by me and by those who have
long preceded me, are contained all elements, all mineral and
metallic forms, and all the qualities and properties of the whole
world. In it we find most powerful natural heat, by which the
icy body of Saturn is gently transmuted into the best gold. 1t
contains also a high degree of cold, which tempers the fervent
heat of Venus, and coagulates the mercury, which is thereby also
changed into the finest gold. All these properties slumber in the
substance of our Stone, and are developed, perfected, and matured
by the gentle coction of natural fire, until they have attained
their highest perfection.

If the fruit of a tree be plucked before it is ripe, it is unfit
for use; and if the potter fail to harden his vessels in the fire, they
cannot be employed for any good purpose.

In the same way you must exercise considerable patience in
preparing our Elixir, if it is to become all that you wish it to
become. No fruit can grow from a flower that has been plucked
before thetime. He who is in too great a hurry, can bring nothing
to perfection, but is almost sure to spoil that which he has in hand.
Remember, then, that if our Stone be not sufficiently matured, it
will not be able to bring anything to maturity.

The substance is dissolved in a bath, and its parts reunited
by putrefaction. In ashes it blossoms. In the form of sand all
its excessive moisture is dried up. Maturity and fixity are ob-
tained by living fire. The work does not actually take place in
the Bath of St. Mary, in horse-dung, in ashes, or in sand, but the
grades and regimen ofthe fire proceed after the degrees which are
represented by these. The Stone is prepared in an empty furnace,
with a threefold line of circumvallation, in a tightly closed cham-
ber. It is subjected to continued coction, till all moisture and
clouds are driven off, and the King attains to indestructible
fixedness, and is no longer liable to any danger or injury, because
he has become unconquerable. Let me express my meaning in
a somewhat different manner. When you have dissolved your
earth with your water, dry up the water with its own inward fire.
Then the air will breathe new life into the body, and you will
have that which can only be regarded as that Great Stone which
in a spiritual manner pervades human and metallic bodies, and
is the universal and immaculate Medicine, since it drives out that


348 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


which is bad, and preserves that which is good, and is the un-
failing corrective of all imperfect or diseased substances. This
Tincture is of a colour intermediate between red and purple, with
something of a granite hue, and its specific weight is very
considerable.

Whoever gains possession of this Stone, should let his whole
life be an expression of his gratitude towards God in practical
kindness towards his suffering brethren, that after obtaining God's
greatest earthly gift, he may hereafter inherit eternal life.

Praise be unto God everlastingly for this His inestimable
gift.


I/IYENAE/NSDEISSKSE/V2


The eleventh Key to the Knowledge of the augmentation
of our Stone, I will put before you in the form of a parable.

There lived in the East a gilded knight, named Orpheus,
who was possessed of immense wealth, and had everything that
heart can wish. He had taken to wife his own sister, Euridice,


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 349


who did not, however, bear him any children. This he re-
garded as the punishment of his sin in having wedded his own
sister, and was instant in prayer to God both by day and by
night, that the curse might be taken from him.

One night, when he was buried in a deep sleep, there came
to him a certain winged messenger, named Phoebus, who touched
his feet, which were very hot, and said: * Thou noble knight,
since thou hast wandered through many cities and kingdoms,
and suffered many things at sca, in battle, and in the lists, the
heavenly Father has bidden me make known to thee the following
means of obtaining thy prayer: Take blood from thy right side,
and from the left side of thy spouse. For this blood is the
heart's blood of your parents, and though it may seem to be of
two kinds, yet, in reality, it is only one. Mix the two kinds
of blood, and keep the mixture tightly enclosed in the globe of
the seven wise Masters — There that which is generated will
be nourished with its own flesh and blood, and will complete its
course of development when the Moon has changed for the
eighth time — If thou repeat this process again and again, thou
shalt see children's children, and the offspring of thy body shall
fill the world."

When Pheebus had thus spoken, he winged his flight
heavenward. In the morning the knight arose and did the
bidding of the celestial messenger, and God gave to him and to
his wife many children, who inherited their father's glory, wealth,
and knightly honours from generation to generation.

If you are wise, my son, you will find the interpretation of
my parable. If you do not understand it, ascribe the blame
not to me, but to your own ignorance. 1I ay not express my-
self more explicitly ; indeed, I have revealed the matter in a
more plain and straightforward manner than any of my pre-
decessors.  [ have concealed nothing; and if you will but
remove the veil of ignorance from your eyes, you will behold
that which many have sought and few found.


350 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


! Eu 2


?3


If an athlete know not the use of his sword, he might as
well be without it ; and if another warrior that is skilled in the
use of that weapon come against him, the first is like to fare
badly. For he that has knowledge and experience on his side,
must carry off the victory.

In the same way, he that possesses this tincture, by the
grace of Almighty God, and is unacquainted with its uses, might
as well not have it at all. Therefore this twelfth and last Key
must serve to open up to you the uses of this Stone. In dealing
with this part of the subject I will drop my parabolic and
figurative style, and plainly set forth all that is to be known.

When the Medicine and Stone of all the Sages has been
perfectly prepared out of the true virgin's milk, take one part of
it to three parts of the best gold purged and refined with
antimony, the gold being previously beaten into plates of the
greatest possible thinness. Put the whole into a smelting pot,
and subject it to the action of a gentle fire for twelve hours ;
then let it be melted for three days and three nights more.


THE GOLDEN TRIPOD. 351


For without the ferment of gold no one can compose the
Stone or develop the tinging virtue. Forthe sameis very subtle
and penetrating if it be fermented and joined with a ferment
like unto itself; then the prepared tincture has the power of
entering into other bodies, and operating therein. Take then
one part of the prepared ferment for the tinging of a thousand
parts of molten metal, and then you will learn in all faith and
truth that it shall be changed into the only good and fixed gold.
For one body takes possession of the other ; even if it be unlike
to it, nevertheless, through the strength and potency added to
it, it is compelled to be assimilated to the same, since like
derives origin from like.

Whoever uses this as a medium shall find whither the
vestibules of the palace lead, and there is nothing comparable
to the subtlety thereof. He shall possess all in all, performing
all things whatsoever which are possible under the sun.

O principle of the prime principle, consider the end! O
end of the final end, consider the beginning! And be this
medium commended unto your faithful care, wherein also God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, shall give unto you whatsoever
you need both in soul and body.


Concerning the First Matter of the Philosophical Stone.


Seek for that Stone which has no fleshly nature, but out of
which a volatile fire is extracted, whence also this stone is
made, being composed of white and red. It is a stone, and no
stone ; therein Nature alone operates. 4A fountain flows from it.
'The fixed part submerges its father, absorbing it, body and life,
until the soul is returned to it. And the volatile mother like to
him, is produced in her own kingdom ; and he by his virtue and
power receives greater strength. The volatile mother when
prepared surpasses the sun in summer. Thus the father by
means of Vulcan was produced from the spirit. Body, soul, and
spirit exist in both, whence the whole matter proceeds. It
proceeds from one, and is one matter. Bind together the fixed
and the volatile; they are two, and three, and yet one only.
If you do not understand you will attain nothing. Adam was
in a bath—Uwherein Venus found her like, which bath the aged
Dragon had prepared when his strength was deserting him.


352 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


There is nothing, says the Philosopher, save a double mercury ;
I say that no other matter has been named ; blessed is he who
understands it. Seek therein, and be not weary; the result
justifies the labour.


A short Appendix and clear. Resumption of the foregoing
Tract concernzng the Great Stone of the
Ancient Sages.

I, Basil Valentine, brother of the Benedictine Order, do
testify that I have written this little book, wherein, after the
manner of the Ancients, I have philosophically indicated how this
most rare treasure may be acquired, whereby the true Sages did
prolong life unto its furthest limit.

But, notwithstanding that my conscience doth bear me wit-
ness in the sight of the Most High, before whom all concealed
matters are laid bare, that [ have written no falsehood, but have
so exposed the truth that understanding men can require no
further light (that which is laid down in the theoretical part
being borne out and confirmed by the practice of the Twelve
Keys), yet have I been impelled by various considerations to


3/75/52 MU (EID RARO 959


demonstrate by a shorter way what I have written in the said
treatise, and thus cast further light thereon, whereby also the
lover of the desired wisdom may obtain an increased illumination
for the fulfilment of his desire There are many who will con-
sider that I am speaking too openly, and will hold me answerable
for the wickedness that they think will follow, but let them rest
assured that it will be sufficiently difficult, notwithstanding, for
any thick-headed persons to find what they scek herein. Atthe
same time the matter shall be made clear to the elect. Hearken
then, thou follower of truth, to these my words, and so shalt thou
find the true way !

Behold, I write nothing more than I am willing to hold by
after my death and resurrection! Do thou faithfully and simply
lay to heart this shorter way, as hereinafter exhibited, for my
words are grounded in simplicity, and my teaching is not con-
fused by a labyrinth of language.

I have already indicated that all things are constituted of
three essences—namely, mercury, sulphur, and salt—and herein
I have taught what is true. But know that the Stone is com-
posed out of one, two, three, four, and five. Out of five—that is,
the quintessence of its own substance. Out of four, by which we
must understand the four elements. Out of thrce, and these are
the three principles of all things. Out of two, for the mercurial
substance is twofold. | Out of one, and this is the first essence of
everything which emanated from the primal fiat of creation.

But many may by all these discourses be rendered doubtful
in mind as to what they must start with, and as to the conse-
quent theory. So I will,in the first place, speak very briefly
concerning Mercury, secondly concerning Sulphur, thirdly con-
cerning Salt; for these are the essence of the Matter of our
Stone.

In the first place, you must know that no ordinary quick-
silver is useful, but our quicksilver is produced from the best
metal by the spagyric art, pure, subtle, clear, and glistening, like
a spring, pellucid even as crystal, free from all dross. Hence
make water or combustible oil. For Mercury was in the
beginning water, and herein all the Sages agree with my dictum
and teaching In this oil of Mercury dissolve its own Mercury,
from which the water in question was made, and precipitate the

X


354 THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


Mercury with its own oil. Then we havea twofold mercurial
substance; but you must know that gold must first be dissolved
in a certain water, as explained in my second Key, after the
purification described in the first Key, and must be reduced into
a subtle calx, as is mentioned in the fourth Key. Next, this calx
must be sublimated by the spirit of salt, again precipitated, and
by reverberation reduced into a subtle powder. Then its own
sulphur can more easily enter into its substance, and have great
friendship with the same, for they have a wondrous love towards
each other. "Thus you have two substances in one, and it is
called Mercury of the Sages, but is yet a single substance, which
is the first ferment.


JVow follows concerning Sulphur.


Seek your Mercury in a similar metal Then when you
know how to extract the metal from its body by purification, the
destruction of the first Mars, and reverberation, without the use of
any corrosive (the method of doing which I have indicated in my
third Key)—you must dissolve that Mercury in its own blood,
out of which it was made before it became fixed (as indicated in
the sixth Key) ; and you have then nourished and dissolved the
true lion with the blood of the green lion. For the fixed blood
of the Red Lion has been made out of the volatile blood of the
Green Lion; hence, they are of one nature, and the unfixed
blood again renders that which is volatile fixed, and the fixed
bleod in its turn fixes that which is volatile, as it was before its
solution. . Then foster it in gentle heat, until the whole of the
mercury is dissolved, and you obtain the secozd ferment (by
nourishing the fixed sulphur with that which is not fixed), as all
Sages,unite with me in testifying. X Afterwards this becomes, by
sublimátion with spirit of wine, of a blood-red colour, and is
called 7oza&/e go/d.


JVow I «will also give my Opinion vespecting the
Sa/t of the Sages.


The effect of *salt" is to fix or volatilize, according as it
is prepared and used. For the spirit of the salt of tartar, if
extracted by itself without any addition, has power to render all
metals volatile by dissolution and putrefaction, and to dissolve


UEDIS CR QUAL DANG RUP COE. 355


quick or liquid silver into the true mercury, as my practical
directions shew.

Salt of tartar by itself is a powerful fixative, particularly if
the heat of quicklime be incorporated with it. For these two
substances are singularly efficacious in producing fixation.

In the same way, the vegetable salt of wine fixes and
volatilizes according to the manner ofits preparation. ts useis
one of the arcana of Nature, and a miracle of the philos-
opher's art.

When a man, drinks wine, there may be gained from his
urine a clear salt, which is volatile, and renders other fixed
substances volatile, causing them to rise with it in the alembic.
But the same does not fix. Ifa man drank nothing but wine,
yet for all that the salt obtained from his urine would have a
different property from that gained out of the lees of wine. For
it has undergone a chemical change in the human body, having
become transmuted from a vegetable into an animal salt—just
as horses that feed on oats, straw, etc, change those vegetable
substances into flesh and fat, while the bee prepares honey out
of the precious juices of flowers and herbs.

he great change which takes place in these and other
substances is due to Puzrefactzon, which separates and transmutes
the constituent elements.

'The common spirit of salt, which is extracted according to
the direction given in my last declaration, if there be added to
it a small quantity of the "spirit of the dragon," dissolves,
volatilizes, and raises together with itself in the alembic, gold and
silver; justas the * eagle," together with the spirit of the dragon
(which is found in stony places), before the spirit is separated
from its body, is much more powerful in producing fixation
than volatility. |

This I also say, that if the spirit of common salt be joined
to the spirit of wine, and distilled together with it, it becomes
sweet, and loses its acidity. "This prepared spirit does not dis-
solve gold bodily, but if it be poured on prepared calx of gold,
it extracts the essence of its colour and redness. If this be
rightly done, it reduces the white and pure moon to the colour
of that body from which it was itself extracted. "The old body
may also receive back its former colour through the love of


BS THE HERMETIC MUSEUM.


alluring Venus, from whose blood it, in the first instance, derived
its origin.

But observe, likewise, that the spirit of salt also destroys
the moon, arid reduces it to a spiritual essence, according to my
teaching, out of which the * potable moon " may be prepared.
This spirit of the moon belongs to the spirit of the sup, as the
female answers to the male, by the copulation or conjunction of

. the spirit of mercury or its oil.

'The spirit lies hid in mercury, the colour you must seek in
sulphur, and their coagulation in salt; then you have three
things which together are capable of once more generating a
perfect thing. The spirit is fermented in the gold with its own
proper oil ; the sulphur is found in abundance in the property of
precious Venus. This kindles the fixed blood which is sprung
from it, the spirit of the salt of the Sages imparts strength and
firmness, though the spirit of tartar and the spirit of urine,
together with true vinegar, have great virtue. For the spirit of
vinegar is cold, and the spirit of lime is intensely hot, and thus
the two spirits are found to be of opposite natures. I do not
here speak according to the customary manner of the Sages.
But I must not say too openly how the inner gates are to be
unlocked.

In bidding farewell,let me impart to you a faithful word.
Seek your material in a metallic substance. . Thence prepare
mercury. his ferment with the mercury. of. its own proper
sulphur, and coagulate them with salt. Distil them together ;
mix allaccording to weight. Then you will obtain oe ZZzzg,
consisting of elements sprung from one Z£zug. Coagulate and fix
it by means of continuous warmth. 'Thereupon augment and
ferment it a third time, according to the teaching of my two last -
Keys, and you will find the object and goal of your desire. The
uses of the Tincture are set forth plainly in my twelfth Key.


JISEIVASNIESS UISIRNSII EK (9)IOS


As a parting kindness to you, I am constrained to add that
the spirit may also be extracted from black Saturn and ben-
evolent Jupiter. When it has been reduced to a sweet oil, we
have a means of robbing the common liquid quicksilver of its
vivacity, or rendering it firm and solid, as is also set forth in my
book.


IDEAE OQ DEA TIeLPOD. 357


Postscript.


When you have thus obtained the material, the regimen of
the fire is the only thing on which you need bestow. much atten-
tion. This is the sum and the goal of our search. ' For our fire
is a common fire, and our furnace a common furnace. And
though some of my predecessors have left it in writingsthat our
fire is not common fire, I may tell you that it was only one of
their devices for hiding the mysteries of our Art. For the.
materialis common, and its treatment consists chiefly in the
proper adjustment of the heat to which it is exposed.

'TFhe fire of a spirit lamp is useless for our purpose. Nor is
there any profit in * horse-dung," nor in the other kinds of heat
in the providing of which so much expense is incurred.

Neither do we want many kinds of furnaces. Only our
threefold furnace affords facilities for properly regulating the heat
of the fire. Therefore do not let any babbling sophist induce
you to set up a great variety of expensive furnaces. Our furnace
is cheap, our fire is cheap, and our material is cheap—and
he who has the material will also find a furnace in which to
prepare it, just as he who has flour will not be at a loss
for an oven in which it may be baked. Itis unnecessary to write
a special book concerning this part of the subject. You cannot
go wrong, so long as you observe the proper degree of heat,
which holds a middle place between hot and cold. If you
discover this, you are in possession of the secret, and can practise
the Art, for whichthe CREATOR of all nature be praised world
without end. AMEN.


ENIDOOR VOILDUMNME T,


LONDON:
JaMwEs ELLi10TT AND Co., T&MPLE CHAMBERS, FALCON CoumT, FLEET STREET, E.C,


E
1
-
* ^
&
TEES ^
*
"
'
h
£
Ly
- s *
A * B
n
J *
x
La
r
, tg .
E &
Í 4
m. v5 t d »
- ' "ac w 4
* ; M
* Py J
^ J| n P m
i -
à ' à
*
? 1
2 ay A
: 3 si ^
a. ^ à
EJ " t A ur M. 3
beg . "
] ad 1 "S
^d £45 - 9 ap
Lo x x. "
T" B
4 * u T Ap aT, G6
auis Rn
,*- a » »» |
aoo m baa dez
* " T XI " E


M ue


€
!
Lt ae


eA


N


Ne n


Rv2.


VN NET
rd


DIU
m
95s
z


""
ft


. É EA ; Uu Lim o t
s : UA I E


E NIIT , ; * men


ute


Ww


e


12)


T


234
Mor


v
un


Ü
"


P ama


Lo
D


Ü


ron
