Author: Abraham of Worms
Source: https://archive.org/details/TheSacredMagicOfAbramelinTheMageBook1

The Sacred Magic
of
Abramelin the Mage
Introduction and Book I
Translated by
S.L. Mac Gregor Mathers
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
The Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage
Introduction and Book I
This Adobe Acrobat edition contains the complete and unaltered text of the
corresponding sections in the second (1900) edition published by John M. Watkins,
London.
Prepared and typeset by Benjamin Rowe, December 6, 1998.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
i
INTRODUCTION,
BY
S.L. MAC GREGOR MATHERS.
WING perhaps to the circumstance that the indispensable “Baedecker”
accords only a three or four line notice to the “Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal” –
but few English or American visitors to Paris are acquainted with its name,
situation, or contents, though nearly all know at least by sight the “Bibliothèque
Nationale” and the “Bibliothèque Mazarin”.
This “Library of the Arsenal,” as it is now called, was founded as a private
collection by Antoine René Voyer D'Argenson, Marquis de Paulny; and was ﬁrst
opened to the public on the th Floréal, in the ﬁfth year of the French Republic
(that is to say, on th April, ), or just a century ago. This Marquis de Paulny
was born in the year , died in , and was successively Minister of War, and
Ambassador to Switzerland, to Poland, and to the Venetian Republic. His later
years were devoted to the formation of this Library, said to be one of the richest
private collections known. It was acquired in  by the Comte D'Artois, and
today belongs to the State. It is situated on the right bank of the Seine, in the Rue
de Sully, near the river, and not far from the Place de la Bastille, and is known as
the “Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal”. In round numbers it now possesses , printed
books, and about  manuscripts, many of them being of considerable value.
Among the latter is this Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin, as delivered
by Abraham the Jew unto his son Lamech; which I now give to the public in
printed form for the ﬁrst time.
Many years ago I heard of the existence of this manuscript from a celebrated
occultist, since dead; and more recently my attention was again called to it by my
personal friend, the well-known French author, lecturer and poet, Jules Bois, whose
attention has been for some time turned to occult subjects. My ﬁrst-mentioned
informant told me that it was known both to Bulwer Lytton and Eliphas Levi, that
the former had based part of his description of the Sage Rosicrucian Mejnour on
that of Abra-Melin, while the account of the so-called Observatory of Sir Philip
Derval in the “Strange Story” was to an extent copied from and suggested by that of
the Magical Oratory and Terrace, given in the Eleventh Chapter of the Second
Book of this present work. Certainly also the manner of instruction applied by
Mejnour in “Zanoni” to the Neophyte Glyndon, together with the test of leaving
him alone in his abode to go on a short journey and then returning unexpectedly, is
closely similar to that employed by Abra-Melin to Abraham, with this diﬀerence,
2
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
ii
that the latter successfully passed through that test, while Glyndon failed. It would
also be especially such experiments as those described at length in the Third Book,
which the author of the “Strange Story” had in view when he makes Sir Philip
Derval in the MS. history of his life speak of certain books describing occult
experiments, some of which he had tried and to his surprise found succeed.
This rare and unique manuscript of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin, from
which the present work is translated, is a French translation from the original
Hebrew of Abraham the Jew. It is in the style of script usual at about the end of the
seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth centuries, and is apparently by the
same hand as another MS. of the Magic Of Picatrix
1 also in the “Bibliothèque de
L'Arsenal”. I know of no other existing copy or replica of this Sacred Magic of
Abra-Melin, not even in the British Museum, whose enormous collection of Occult
Manuscripts I have very thoroughly studied. Neither have I ever heard by
traditional report of the existence of any other copy.
2 In giving it now to the Public,
I feel, therefore, that I am conferring a real beneﬁt upon English and especially
American students of Occultism, by placing within their reach for the ﬁrst time a
Magical work of such importance from the Occult standpoint.
The Manuscript is divided into three Books, each with its separate Title Page,
surrounded by an ornamental border of simple design, in red and black ink, and
which is evidently not intended to be symbolical in the slightest degree, but is
simply the work of a conscientious caligraphist wishing to give an appearance of
cleanness and completeness to the Title Page.
The wording of each is the same: “Livre Premier (Second or Troisième, as
the case may be) de la Sacrée Magie que Dieu donna à Moyse, Aaron, David,
Salomon et à d’autres Saints Patriarches et Prophetes qui enseigne la vraye
sapience Divine laissée par Abraham à Lamech son Fils traduite de l’hebreu
”. I give the translated title at the commencement of each of the Three Books.
On the ﬂy-leaf of the original MS. is the following note in the handwriting of
the end of the eighteenth century: —
“This Volume contains  Books, of which here is the ﬁrst. – The Abraham and
the Lamech, of whom there is here made question, were Jews of the ﬁfteenth
century, and it is well known that the Jews of that period possessing the Cabala of
Solomon passed for being the best Sorcerers and Astrologers.” Then follows in
another and recent hand:–

1 Probably the same as Gio Peccatrix the Magician, the author of many Manuscripts on Magic.
2 Since writing the above, I have heard casually that a copy of at least part, or perhaps of the whole, is
said to exist in Holland.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
iii
“Volume composed of three parts–
st part
 pages.
nd

rd

——

June, .”
The style of the French employed in the text of the MS. is somewhat vague and
obscure, two qualities unhappily heightened by the almost entire absence of any
attempt at punctuation, and the comparative rarity of paragraphic arrangement.
Even the full stop at the close of a sentence is usually omitted, neither is the
commencement of a fresh one marked by a capital letter. The following example is
taken from near the end of the Third Book; “Cest pourquoy la premiere chose
que tu dois faire principalement ates esprits familiers sera de leur commander
de ne tedire jamais aucune chose deuxmemes que lorsque tu les interrogeras
amoins queles fut pour tavertir des choses qui concerne ton utilite outon
prejudice parceque situ ne leur limite pas leparler ils tediront tant etdesi
grandes choses quils tofusquiront lentendement et tu ne scaurois aquoy
tentenir desorte que dans la confusion des choses ils pourroient te faire
prevariquer ettefaire tomber dans des erreurs irreparables ne te fais jamais prier
en aucune chose ou tu pourras aider et seccourir tonprochain et nattends pas
quil tele demande mais tache descavoir afond,” etc. This extract may be said to
give a fair idea of the average quality of the French. The style, however, of the First
Book is much more colloquial than that of the Second and Third, it being
especially addressed by Abraham to Lamech, his son, and the second person singular
being employed throughout it. As some English readers may be ignorant of the fact,
it is perhaps as well here to remark that in French “tu,” thou, is only used between
very intimate friends and relations, between husband and wife lovers, etc.; while
“vous,” you, is the more usual mode of address to the world in general. Again, in
sacred books, in prayers, etc.,  “vous” is used, where we employ "thou" as having a
more solemn sound than “tu”. Hence the French verb “tutoyer,” = “to be very
familiar with, to be on extremely friendly terms with any one, and even to be
insolently familiar”. This First Book contains advice concerning Magic, and a
description of Abraham’s Travels and experiences, as well as a mention of the many
marvellous works he had been able to accomplish by means of this system of Sacred
Magic. The Second and Third Books (which really contain the Magic of
Abra-Melin, and are practically based on the two MSS. entrusted by him to
Abraham, the Jew, but with additional comments by the latter) diﬀer in style from
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
iv
the former, the phraseology is quaint and at times vague, and the second person
plural, “vous,” is employed for the most part instead of  “tu”.
The work may then be thus roughly classiﬁed:
First Book: = Advice and Autobiography; both addressed by the Author
to his son Lamech.
Second Book: = General and complete description of the means of
obtaining the Magical Powers desired.
Third Book: = The application of these Powers to produce an immense
number of Magical results.
Though the chapters of the Second and Third Books have special headings in
the actual text, those of the First Book have none; wherefore in the “Table of
Contents” I have supplemented this defect by a careful analysis of their subject
matter.
This system of Sacred Magic Abraham acknowledges to have received from the
Mage Abra-Melin; and claims to have himself personally and actually wrought
most of the wonderful eﬀects described in the Third Book, and many others besides.
Who then was this Abraham the Jew? It is possible, though there is no mention
of this in the MS., that he was a descendant of that Abraham the Jew who wrote
the celebrated Alchemical work on twenty-one pages of bark or papyrus, which
came into the hands of Nicholas Flamel, and by whose study the latter is said
eventually to have attained the possession of the “Stone of the Wise”. The only
remains of the Church of Saint Jacques de la Boucherie which exists at the present
day, is the tower, which stands near the Place du Châtelet, about ten minutes’ walk
from the Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal; and there is yet a street near this tower which
bears the title of “Rue Nicolas Flamel,” so that his memory still survives in Paris,
together with that of the Church close to which he lived, and to which, after the
attainment of the Philosopher’s Stone, he and his wife Pernelle caused a handsome
peristyle to be erected.
From his own account, the author of the present work appears to have been
born in A.D. , and to have written this manuscript for his son, Lamech, in
, being then in his ninety-sixth year. That is to say, that he was the
contemporary both of Nicholas Flamel and Pernelle, and also of the mystical
Christian Rosenkreutz, the founder of the celebrated Rosicrucian Order or
Fraternity in Europe. Like the latter, he appears to have been very early seized with
the desire of obtaining Magical Knowledge; like him and Flamel, he left his home
and travelled in search of the Initiated Wisdom; like them both, he returned to
become a worker of wonders. At this period, it was almost universally believed that
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
v
the Secret Knowledge was only really obtainable by those who were willing to quit
their home and their country to undergo dangers and hardships in its quest; and
this idea even obtains to an extent in the present day. The life of the late Madame
Blavatsky is an example in point.
This period in which Abraham the Jew lived was one in which Magic was
almost universally believed in, and in which its Professors were held in honour;
Faust (who was probably also a contemporary of our author), Cornelius Agrippa,
Sir Michael Scott, and many others I could name, are examples of this, not to
mention the celebrated Dr. Dee in a later age. The history of this latter Sage, his
association with Sir Edward Kelly, and the part he took in the European politics of
his time are too well known to need description here.
That Abraham the Jew was not one whit behind any of these Magicians in
political inﬂuence, is evident to any one who peruses this work. He stands a dim
and shadowy ﬁgure behind the tremendous complication of central European
upheaval at that terrible and instructive epoch; as Adepts of his type always appear
and always have appeared upon the theatre of history in great crises of nations. The
age which could boast simultaneously three rival claimants to the direction of two
of the greatest levers of the society of that era – the Papacy and the Germanic
Empire – when the jealousies of rival Bishoprics, the overthrow of Dynasties, the
Roman Church shaken to her foundations, sounded in Europe the tocsin of that
fearful struggle which invariably precedes social reorganisation, that wild
whirlwind of national convulsion which engulfs in its vortex the civilisation of a
yesterday, but to prepare the reconstitution of a morrow. The enormous historical
importance of such men as our Author is always underrated, generally doubted;
notwithstanding that like the writing on the wall at Belshazzar’s feast, their
manifestation in the political and historical arena is like the warning of a Mene,
Mene Tekel, Upharsin, to a foolish and undiscerning world.
The full and true history of any Adept could only be written by himself, and
even then, if brought before the eyes of the world at large, how many persons would
lend credence to it? and even the short and incomplete statement of the notable
events of our Author’s life contained in the First Book, will be to most readers
utterly incredible of belief. But what must strike all alike is the tremendous faith of
the man himself, as witnessed by his many and dangerous journeyings for so many
years through wild and savage regions and places diﬃcult of access even in our own
day with all the increased facilities of transit which we enjoy. This faith at length
brought him its reward; though only at the moment when even he was becoming
discouraged and sick at heart with disappointed hope. Like his great namesake, the
forefather of the Hebrew race, he had not in vain left his home, his “Ur of the
Chaldees,” that he might at length discover that Light of Initiated Wisdom, for
which his soul had cried aloud within him for so many years. This culmination of
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
vi
his wanderings was his meeting with Abra-Melin, the Egyptian Mage. From him
he received that system of Magical instruction and practice which forms the body of
the Second and Third Books of this work.
In the Manuscript original this name is spelt in several diﬀerent ways, I have
noted this in the text wherever it occurs. The variations are: Abra-Melin,
Abramelin, Abramelim, and Abraha-Melin. From these I have selected the
orthography Abra-Melin to place on the title page, and I have adhered to the same
in this Introduction.
As far as can be gathered from the text, the chief place of residence of Abraham
the Jew after his travels was Würzburg, or, as it was called in the Middle Ages,
“Herbipolis”. He appears to have married his cousin, and by her to have had two
sons, the elder, named Joseph, whom he instructed in the Mysteries of the Holy
Qabalah, and Lamech, the younger, to whom he bequeaths this system of Sacred
Magic as a legacy, and to whom the whole of the First Book is addressed. He speaks
further of three daughters, to each of whom he gave , golden ﬂorins as a
dowry. He expressly states that he obtained both his wife, and a treasure of
,, golden ﬂorins, by means of some of the Magical Operations described in
the Third Book. He further admits that his ﬁrst inclination to Qabalistical and
Magical studies was owing to certain instructions in the Secrets of the Qabalah,
which he received when young from his father, Simon; so that after the death of the
latter his most earnest desire was to travel in search of an Initiated Master.
To the sincere and earnest student of Occultism this work cannot fail to be of
value, whether as an encouragement to that most rare and necessary quality,
unshaken faith; as an aid to his discrimination between true and false systems of
Magic; or as presenting an assemblage of directions for the Production of Magical
eﬀects, which the Author of the book aﬃrms to have tried with success.
Especially valuable are the remarks of Abraham the Jew on the various
Professors of the “Art which none may name” in the course of his wanderings and
travels; the account of the many wonders he worked; and, above all, the careful
classiﬁcation of the Magical Experiments in the Third Book, together with his
observations and advice thereon.
Not least in interest are the many notable Persons of that age for or against
whom he performed marvels: The Emperor Sigismund of Germany: Count Frederic
the Quarreller: the Bishop of his city (probably either John I., who began the
foundation of the Würzburg University in  with the authorisation of Pope
Boniface IX., or else Echter von Mespelbrunn, who completed the same noble
work): the Count of Warwick: Henry VI. of England: the rival Popes – John
XXIII., Martin V., Gregory XII., and Benedict XIII.: the Council of Constance: the
Duke of Bavaria: Duke Leopold of Saxony: the Greek Emperor, Constantine
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
vii
Palaeologos: and probably the Archbishop Albert of Magdeburg: and also some of
the Hussite Leaders – a roll of names celebrated in the history of that stirring time.
Considering the era in which our Author lived, and the nation to which he
belonged, he appears to have been somewhat broad in his religious views; for not
only does he insist that this Sacred system of Magic may be attained by any one,
whether Jew, Christian, Mahometan, or Pagan, but he also continually warns
Lamech against the error of changing the religion in which one has been brought
up; and he alleges this circumstance as the reason of the occasional failures of the
Magician Joseph of Paris (the only other person he mentions besides himself and
Abra-Melin who was acquainted with this particular system of Magic), namely
that having been brought up a Christian, he had renounced that faith and become
a Jew. At ﬁrst sight it does not seem clear from the Occult point of view what
particular Occult disadvantage should be attached to such a line of action. But we
must remember, that in his age, the conversion to another religion invariably
meant an absolute, solemn and thorough renunciation and denial of any truth in
the religion previously professed by the convert. Herein would be the danger,
because whatever the errors, corruption, or mistakes in any particular form of
religion, all are based on and descended from the acknowledgment of Supreme
Divine Powers. Therefore to deny any religion (instead of only abjuring the
mistaken or erroneous parts thereof ) would be equivalent to denying formally and
ceremonially the truths on which it was originally founded; so that whenever a
person having once done this should begin to practise the Operations of the Sacred
Magic, he would ﬁnd himself compelled to aﬃrm with his whole will-force those
very formulas which he had at one time magically and ceremonially (though
ignorantly) denied; and whenever he attempted to do this, the occult Law of
Reaction would raise as a Ceremonial Obstacle against the eﬀect which he should
wish to produce, the memory of that Ceremonial Denial which his previous
renunciation had ﬁrmly sealed in his atmosphere. And the force of this would be in
exact proportion to the manner and degree in which he had renounced his former
creed. For of all hindrances to Magical action, the very greatest and most fatal is
unbelief, for it checks and stops the action of the Will. Even in the commonest
natural operations we see this. No child could learn to walk, no student could
assimilate the formulas of any science, were the impracticability and impossibility
of so doing the ﬁrst thing in his mind. Wherefore it is that all Adepts and Great
Teachers of Religion and of Magic have invariably insisted on the necessity of faith.
But though apparently more broad in view in admitting the excellence of
every religion, unfortunately he shows the usual injustice to and jealousy of women
which has distinguished men for so many ages, and which as far as I can see arises
purely and simply from an innate consciousness that were women once admitted to
compete with them on any plane without being handicapped as they have been for
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
viii
so many centuries, the former would speedily prove their superiority, as the
Amazons of old did; which latter (as the writings even of their especial enemies, the
Greeks, unwillingly admit) when overcome, were conquered by superior numbers,
not by superior valour. However, Abraham the Jew grudgingly admits that the
Sacred Magic may be attained by a virgin, while at the same time dissuading any
one from teaching it to her! The numerous advanced female occult students of the
present day are the best answer to this.
But notwithstanding the forementioned shortcomings, his advice on the
manner of using Magical Power, when acquired, to the honour of God, the welfare
and relief of our neighbour, and for the beneﬁt of the whole Animate Creation, is
worthy of the highest respect; and no one can peruse it without feeling that his
highest wish was to act up to his belief.
His counsel, however, of a retired life after attaining Magical Power by his
system (I do not speak of the retirement during the six months’ preparation for the
same) is not borne out by his own account of his life, wherein we ﬁnd him so
constantly involved in the contests and convulsions of the time. Also, however much
the life of a hermit or anchorite may appear to be advocated, we rarely, if ever, ﬁnd
it followed by those Adepts whom I may perhaps call the initiated and
wonderworking medium between the Great Concealed Adepts and the Outer
World. An example of the former class we may ﬂnd in our Author, an example of
the latter in Abra-Melin.
The particular scheme or system of Magic advocated in the present work is to
an extent “sui generis,” but to an extent only. It is rather the manner of its
application which makes it unique. In Magic, that is to say, the Science of the
Control of the Secret Forces of Nature, there have always been two great schools, the
one great in Good, the other in Evil; the former the Magic of Light, the latter that
of Darkness; the former usually depending on the knowledge and invocation of the
Angelic natures, the latter on the method of evocation of the Demonic races.
Usually the former is termed White Magic, as opposed to the latter, or Black
Magic.
The invocation of Angelic Forces, then, is an idea common in works of Magic,
as also are the Ceremonies of Pact with and submission to the Evil Spirits. The
system, however, taught in the present work is based on the following conception:
(α) That the Good Spirits and Angelic Powers of Light are superior in power to the
Fallen Spirits of Darkness. (β) That these latter as a punishment have been
condemned to the service of the Initiates of the Magic of Light. (This Idea is to be
found also in the Koran or, as it is frequently and perhaps more correctly written,
“Qur-an”.) (γ) As a consequence of this doctrine, all ordinary material effects and
phenomena are produced by the labour of the Evil Spirits under the command
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
ix
usually of the Good. (δ) That consequently whenever the Evil Demons can escape
from the control of the Good, there is no evil that they will not work by way of
vengeance. (ε) That therefore sooner than obey man, they will try to make him
their servant, by inducing him to conclude Pacts and Agreements with them. (ζ)
That to further this project, they will use every means that oﬀers to obsess him. (η)
That in order to become an Adept, therefore, and dominate them; the greatest
possible ﬁrmness of will, parity of soul and intent, and power of self-control is
necessary. (θ) That this is only to be attained by self-abnegation on every plane. (ι)
That man, therefore, is the middle nature, and natural controller of the middle
nature between the Angels and the Demons, and that therefore to each man is
attached naturally both a Guardian Angel and a Malevolent Demon, and also
certain Spirits that may become Familiars, so that with him it rests to give the
victory unto the which he will. (κ) That, therefore, in order to control and make
service of the Lower and Evil, the knowledge of the Higher and Good is requisite
(ie., in the language of the Theosophy of the present day, the knowledge of the
Higher Self).
From this it results that the magnum opus propounded in this work is: by
purity and self-denial to obtain the knowledge Of and conversation with one’s
Guardian Angel, so that thereby and thereafter we may obtain the right of using
the Evil Spirits for our servants in all material matters.
This, then, is the system of the Secret Magic of Abra-Melin, the Mage, as
taught by his disciple Abraham the Jew; and elaborated down to the smallest
points.
Except in the professed Black Magic Grimoires, the necessity of the invocation
of the Divine and Angelic Forces to control the Demons is invariably insisted upon
in the operations of evocation described and taught in mediaeval Magical
Manuscripts and published works. So that it is not so much, as I have before said,
this circumstance, as the mode of its development by the Six Moons’ preparation,
which is unusual; while again, the thorough and complete classiﬁcation of the
Demons with their oﬃces, and of the eﬀects to be produced by their services, is not
to be found elsewhere.
Apart from the interest attaching to the description of his travels, the careful
manner in which Abraham has made note of the various persons he had met
professing to be in the possession of Magical powers, what they really could do and
could not do, and the reasons of the success or failure of their experiments, has a
particular value of its own.
The idea of the employment of a Child as Clairvoyant in the invocation of the
Guardian Angel is not unusual; for example, in the “Mendal,” a style of Oriental
Divination familiar to all readers of Wilkie Collins’ novel, “The Moonstone,” ink
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
x
is poured into the palm of a Childs hand, who, after certain mystical words being
recited by the Operator, beholds visions clairvoyantly therein. The celebrated
evocation at which the great Mediaeval Sculptor, Benvenuto Cellini, is said to have
assisted, also was in part worked by the aid of a Child as Seer. Cagliostro
3 also is
said to have availed himself of the services of Children in this particular. But for
my part I cannot understand the imperative necessity of the employment of a Child
in the Angelic evocation, if the Operator be pure in mind, and has developed the
clairvoyant faculty which is latent in every human being, and which is based on
the utilisation of the thoughtvision. This thought-vision is exercised almost
unconsciously by everyone in thinking of either a place, person, or thing, which they
know well; immediately, coincident with the thought, the image springs before the
mental sight; and it is hut the conscious and voluntary development of this which is
the basis of what is commonly called clairvoyance. Among the Highlanders of
Scotland, the faculty, as is well known, is of common manifestation; and  the
English it is usually spoken of as “by Second-Sight”.
Unfortunately, like far too many modern Occultists, Abraham the Jew shows a
marked intolerance of Magical systems diﬀering from his own; even the renowned
name of Petrus di Abano
4 is not suﬃcient to save the “Heptameron or Magical
Elements” from condemnation in the concluding part of the Third Book. Works on
Magic, Written Conjurations, Pentacles, Seals, and Symbols, the employment of
Magical Circles, the use of any language but one's mother tongue, appear at ﬁrst
sight to be damned wholesale, though on a more careful examination of the text I
think we shall ﬁnd that it is rather their abuse through ignorance of their meaning
which he intends to decry, than their intelligent and properly regulated use.
It will be well here to carefully examine these points from the occult standpoint
of an Initiate, and for the beneﬁt of real students.
Abraham in several places insists that the basis of this system of Sacred Magic
is to be found in the Qabalah. Now, he expressly states that he has instructed his
eldest son, Joseph, herein as being his right by primogeniture, even as he himself had
received somewhat of Qabalistic instruction from his father, Simon. But this system
of Magic he bequeaths to his younger son, Lamech, expressly as a species of
recompense to him for not being taught the Qabalah, his status as a younger son
being apparently a serious traditional disqualiﬁcation. This being so, the reason is
evident why he warns Lamech against the use of certain Seals, Pentacles,
incomprehensible words, etc.; because most of these being based on the secrets of the
Qabalah, their use by a person ignorant hereof might be excessively dangerous
through the not only possible but Probable Perversion of the Secret Formulas

3 See Appendix B.
4 Born about 1250.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xi
therein contained. Any advanced student of Occultism who is conversant with
Mediaeval works on Magic, whether MS. or printed, knows the enormous and
incredible number of errors in the Sigils, Pentacles, and Hebrew or Chaldee
Names, which have arisen from ignorant transcription and reproduction; this being
carried to such an extent that in some cases the use of the distorted formulas given
would actually have the eﬀect of producing the very opposite result to that expected
from them. (I have commented at length on this subject in my notes to the “Key of
Solomon,” published by me a few years ago.) Wherefore Abraham the Jew it
appears to me, in his anxiety to save his son from dangerous errors in Magical
working, has preferred to endeavour to ﬁll him with contempt for any other systems
and methods of operation than the one here laid down. For also besides the
unintentional perversions of Magical Symbols I have above mentioned, there was
further the circumstance not only possible but probable of the many Black Magic
Grimoires falling into his hands, as they evidently had into Abraham's, the Symbols
in which are in many cases intentional perversions of Divine Names and Seals, so
as to attract the Evil Spirits and repel the Good.
For the Third Book of this work is crowded with Qabalistic Squares of Letters,
which are simply so many Pentacles, and in which the Names employed are the
very factors which make them of value. Among them we ﬁnd a form of the
celebrated Sator, Arepo, Tenet, Opera, Rotas, which is one of the Pentacles in the
“Key of Solomon”. Abraham's formula is slightly diﬀerent: —
and is to be used for obtaining the love of a maiden.
The Pentacle in my “Key of Solomon the King” is classed under Saturn, while
the above is applied to the nature of Venus. I give the Hebrew form (see Appendix
A, Table of Hebrew and Chaldee Letters) of Equivalents:
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xii
Or in Latin Letters:
In the “Key of Solomon” it is (as being a Pentacle) inscribed within a double
circle, wherein is written the following versicle from Psalm lxxii., v. 8 “His
dominion shall be also from the one sea unto the other, and from the ﬂood unto the
world’s end". In the Hebrew, this versicle consists of exactly twenty ﬁve letters, the
number of the letters of the square. It will be at once noticed that both this form
and that given by Abraham the Jew are perfect examples of double Acrostics,
that is, that they read in every direction, whether horizontal or perpendicular,
whether backwards or forwards. But the form given as a Pentacle in the “Key of
Solomon the King” is there said to be of value in adversity, and for repressing the
Pride of the Spirits.
This example therefore shows clearly that it is not so much the use of Symbolic
Pentacles that Abraham is opposed to, as their ignorant perversions and
inappropriate use.
It is also to be observed, that while many of the Symbolic Squares of Letters of
the Third Book present the nature of the double Acrostic, there are also many which
do not, and in the case of a great number the letters do not ﬁll up the square
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xiii
entirely, but are arranged somewhat in the form of a gnomon, etc. Others again
leave the centre part of the square blank.
In Appendix C
5 to the Introduction I will, for the sake of comparison, give
some examples of Angelic invocation taken from other sources.
Abraham the Jew repeatedly admits, as I have before urged, that this
particular System of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin has its Basis in the Qabalah.
It is well to examine what is here meant. The Qabalah itself is divided into many
parts; the great bulk of it is of a mystic doctrinal nature, giving the inner Occult
meaning of the Jewish Sacred Writings. Also it employs the numerical values of the
Hebrew Letters, to draw analogies between words, the total numerical value of
whose letters is the same; this branch alone is a most complicated study, and it will
be foreign to our purpose to go into it here; the more so as my work, the “Kabbalah
Unveiled,” treats at length of all these points. The so-called Practical Qabalah is
the application of the mystic teachings to the production of Magical eﬀects. For the
classiﬁcation of Divine and Angelic Names; of Hosts and Orders of Angels, Spirits
and Demons; of Particular Names of Archangels, Angels, Intelligences, and
Demons, is to be found carried out even to minute detail in the Qabalah, so that
the knowledge hereof can give a critical appreciation of the correspondences,
sympathies, and antipathies obtaining in the Invisible World. Therefore what
Abraham means is, that this system of Sacred Magic is thoroughly reliable, because
correct in all its attributions, and that this being so, there is no chance of the
Operator using Names and Formulas on wrong occasions and in error.
But also it is notable that Abraham the Jew (probably again with the intent of
confusing Lamech as little as possible) speaks only of two great classes of Spirits: the
Angels and the Devils; the former to control, the latter to be controlled; and leaves
entirely out of consideration, or rather does not describe that vast race of beings, the
Elemental Spirits, who in themselves comprise an inﬁnitude of various divisions of
classiﬁcation, some of these being good, some evil, and a great proportion neither
the one nor the other. Evidently, also, many of the results proposed to be attained in
the Third Book, would imply the use of the Elemental Spirits rather than that of
the Demons. No advanced Adept, such as Abraham evidently was, could possibly be
ignorant of their existence, power, and value; and we are therefore forced to
conclude either that he was unwilling to reveal this knowledge to Lamech; or,
which is inﬁnitely more probable, that he feared to confuse him by the large
amount of additional instruction which would be necessary to make him
thoroughly understand their classiﬁcation, nature, and oﬃces. This latter line of
action would be the less imperative, as the correctness of the symbols of the Third
Book would minimise chances of error; and what Abraham is undertaking to teach

5 See Appendix C, “Examples of Angelic Invocation”
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xiv
Lamech, is how to arrive at practical Magical results; rather than the Secret
Wisdom of the Qabalah.
It is entirely beyond the scope of this Introduction for me to give here any
lengthy dissertation on the natures, good or evil, of Spiritual beings. I will,
therefore, only state brieﬂy and concisely the principal diﬀerences between Angels,
Elementals, and Devils.
We may then conclude that Angels, though themselves divided into numerous
orders and classes, possess generally the following characteristics: That they are
entirely good in nature and operation, the conscient administrators of the Divine
Will upon the plane of the material universe; that they are responsible, not
irresponsible agents, and therefore capable of fall; and that they are independent of
the currents of the inﬁnite Secret Forces of Nature, and can therefore act beyond
them, though their classiﬁcation and qualities will cause them to be more
sympathetic with certain among these forces than with the rest, and this in varying
degree. Also that they are superior in power to Men, Spirits, Elementals, and
Devils.
The Elementals on the other hand, though consisting of an inﬁnitude of
classes, are the Forces of the Elements of Nature, the administrators of the currents
thereof; and can therefore never act beyond and independently of their own
particular currents. In a sense, therefore, they are irresponsible for the action of a
current as a whole, though responsible for the part thereof in which they
immediately act. Therefore also they are at the same time subject to the general
current of the Force, wherein they live, move, and have their being; though superior
to the immediate and particular part of it which they direct. Such races, superior to
man in intuition, and magical powers; inferior to him in other ways; superior to
him in their power in a particular current of an Element; inferior to him in only
partaking of the nature of that one Element; are of necessity to be found constantly
recurring in all the Mythologies of Antiquity. The Dwarfs and Elves of the
Scandinavians; the Nymphs, Hamadryads, and Nature Spirits of the Greeks; the
Fairies good and bad of the legends dear to our childish days the host of Mermaids,
Satyrs, Fauns, Sylphs, and Fays; the Forces intended to be attracted and propitiated
by the Fetishes of the Negro-Race; are for the most part no other thing than the
ill-understood manifestations of this great class, the Elementals. Among these, some,
as I have before observed, are good; such are the Salamanders, Undines, Sylphs, and
Gnomes, of the Rosicrucian Philosophy; many are frightfully malignant, delighting
in every kind of evil, and might easily be mistaken for Devils by the uninitiated,
save that their power is less; a great proportion are neither good nor evil,
irrationally working either; just as a monkey or a parrot might act; in fact such
closely resemble animals in their nature, and especially combinations of animals, in
which forms distorted and mingled, would lie their symbolic manifestation.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xv
Another very large class, would not act irrationally in this manner; but with
intent, only always following the predominant force either good or evil in their
then entourage; a spirit of this kind, for example, attracted into an assembly of
good persons would endeavour to excite their ideas towards good; attracted among
evil-minded persons would incite them mentally to crime. Among how many
criminals is not their only excuse that  they “thought they kept hearing
something telling them to commit the crime”! Yet these suggestions would not
always arise from Elementals alone, but frequently from the depraved astral
remnants of deceased evil persons.
Devils, on the other hand, are far more powerful than Elementals, but their
action for Evil is parallel to that of the Good Angels for Good; and their
malignancy is far more terrible than that of the Evil Elementals, for not being, like
them, subjected to the limits of a certain current, their sphere of operation extends
over a far greater area; while the Evil they commit is never irrational or
mechanical, but worked with full consciousness and intent.
I do not agree entirely with the manner of behaviour, advised by Abraham
towards the Spirits; on the contrary, the true Initiates have always maintained that
the very greatest courtesy should be manifested by the Exorciser, and that it is only
when they are obstinate and recalcitrant that severer measures should be resorted to;
and that even with the Devils we should not reproach them for their condition;
seeing that a contrary line of action is certain to lead the Magician into error. But,
perhaps, Abraham has rather intended to warn Lamech against the danger of
yielding to them in an Exorcism even in the slightest degree.
The word “Demon” is evidently employed in this work almost as a synonym of
Devil; but, as most educated people are aware, it is derived from the Greek
“Daimon,” which anciently simply meant any Spirit, good or bad.
A work ﬁlled with suggestive Magical references is the well-known “Arabian
Nights,” and it is interesting to notice the number of directions in the Third Book
of this work for producing similar eﬀects to those there celebrated.
For example, the ninth chapter of the Third Book gives the symbols to be
employed for changing human beings into animals, one of the commonest incidents
in the “Arabian Nights,” as in the story of the “ﬁrst old man and the hind,” that of
the “three Calendars and the ﬁve ladies of Bagdad,” that of “Beder and Giauhare,”
etc., etc.; as distinct from the voluntary transformation of the Magician into
another form, as exempliﬁed in the “story of the Second Calendar,” the symbols for
which are given in the twenty-ﬁrst chapter of our Third Book.
Again these chapters will recall to many of my readers the extraordinary
magical eﬀects which Faust is said to have produced; who, by the way, as I have
before remarked, was in all probability contemporary with Abraham the Jew.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xvi
But the mode of their production as given in this work is not the Black Magic
of Pact and Devil-worship, against which our Author so constantly inveighs, but
instead a system of Qabalistic Magic, similar to that of the “Key of Solomon the
King” and the “Clavicles of Rabbi Solomon,” though diﬀering in the circumstance
of the prior invocation of the Guardian Angel once for all, while in the works I
have just mentioned the Angels are invoked in each Evocation by means of the
Magical Circle. Such works as these, then, and their like, it could not be the
intention of Abraham to decry, seeing that like his system they are founded on the
Secret Knowledge of the Qabalah; as this in its turn was derived from that mighty
scheme of Ancient Wisdom, the Initiated Magic of Egypt. For to any deep student
at the same time of the Qabalah and of modern Egyptology, the root and origin of
the former is evidently to be sought in that country of Mysteries, the home of the
Gods whose symbols and classiﬁcation formed so conspicuous a part of the Sacred
Rites; and from which even to the present day, so many recipes of Magic have
descended. For we must make a very careful distinction between the really Ancient
Egyptian Magic, and the Arabian ideas and traditions prevailing in Egypt in
recent times. I think it is the learned Lenormant who points out in his work on
Chaldean Magic, that the great diﬀerence between this and the Egyptian was that
the Magician of the former School indeed invoked the Spirits, but that the latter
allied himself with and took upon himself the characters and names of the Gods to
command the Spirits by, in his Exorcism; which latter mode of working would not
only imply on his part a critical knowledge of the nature and power of the Gods;
but also the aﬃrmation of his reliance upon them, and his appeal to them for aid
to control the forces evoked; in other words, the most profound system of White
Magic which it is possible to conceive.
The next point worthy of notice is what Abraham urges regarding the
preferability of employing one's mother tongue both in prayer and evocation; his
chief reason being the absolute necessity of comprehending utterly and thoroughly
with the whole soul and heart, that which the lips are formulating. While fully
admitting the necessity of this, I yet wish to state some reasons in favour of the
employment of a language other than one's own. Chief, and ﬁrst, that it aids the
mind to conceive the higher aspect of the Operation; when a diﬀerent language and
one looked upon as sacred is employed, and the phrases in which do not therefore
suggest matters of ordinary life. Next, that Hebrew, Chaldee, Egyptian, Greek,
Latin, etc., if properly pronounced are more sonorous in vibration than most
modern languages, and from that circumstance can suggest greater solemnity. Also
that the farther a Magical Operation is removed from the commonplace, the better.
But I perfectly agree with Abraham, that it is before all things imperative that the
Operator should thoroughly comprehend the import of his Prayer or Conjuration.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xvii
Furthermore the words in these ancient languages imply “formulas of
correspondences” with more ease than those of the modern ones.
Pentacles and Symbols are valuable as an equilibrated and ﬁtting basis for the
reception of Magical force; but unless the Operator can really attract that force to
them, they are nothing but so many dead, and to him worthless, diagrams. But
used by the Initiate who fully comprehends their meaning, they become to him a
powerful protection and aid, seconding and focussing the workings of his Will.
At the risk of repeating what I have elsewhere said, I must caution the Occult
student against forming a mistaken judgment from what Abraham the Jew says
regarding the use of Magic Circles and of Licensing the Spirits to Depart. It is true
that in the Convocation of the Spirits as laid down by him, it is not necessary to
form a Magic Circle for defence and protection; but why? — Because the whole
group of the Bedchamber, Oratory, and Terrace, are consecrated by the
preparatory Ceremonies of the previous Six Moons; so that the whole place is
protected, and the Magician is, as it were, residing constantly within a Magic
Circle. Therefore also the Licensing to Depart may be to a great extent dispensed
with because the Spirits cannot break into the consecrated limit of the periphery of
the walls of the house. But let the worker of ordinary Evocations be assured that
were this not so, and the Convocation was performed in an unconsecrated place,
without any Magical Circle having been traced for defence, the invocation to
visible appearance of such fearful Potencies as Amaymon, Egyn, and Beelzebub,
would probably result in the death of the Exorcist on the spot; such death presenting
the symptoms of one arising from Epilepsy, Apoplexy, or Strangulation, varying
with the conditions obtaining at the time. Also the Circle having been once formed,
let the Evocator guard carefully against either passing, or stooping, or leaning
beyond, its limits during the progress of the Exorcism, before the license to depart
has been given. Because that, even apart from other causes, the whole object and
eﬀect of the Circle working, is to create abnormal atmospheric conditions, by
exciting a diﬀerent status of force within the Circle to that which exists without it;
so that even without any malignant occult action of the Spirits, the sudden and
unprepared change of atmosphere will seriously aﬀect the Exorciser in the intensely
strained state of nervous tension he will then be in. Also the License to Depart
should not be omitted, because the Evil Forces will be only too glad to revenge
themselves on the Operator for having disturbed them, should he incautiously quit
the Circle without having previously sent them away, and if necessary even forced
them to go by contrary conjurations.
I do not share Abraham’s opinion as to the necessity of withholding the
Operation of this Sacred Magic from a Prince or Potentate. Every great system of
Occultism has its own Occult Guards, who will know how to avenge mistaken
tampering therewith.
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com
https://www.holybooks.com/sacred-magic-abramelin-mage/
Introduction
xviii
At the risk of repeating myself I will once more earnestly caution the Student
against the dangerous automatic nature of certain of the Magical Squares of the
Third Book; for, if left carelessly about, they are very liable to obsess sensitive
persons, children, or even animals.
Abraham’s remarks concerning the errors of Astrology in the common sense,
and of the attribution of the Planetary Hours are worthy of careful note. Yet I have
found the ordinary attribution of the Planetary Hours eﬀective to an extent.
In all cases where there is anything diﬃcult or obscure in the text, I have
added copious exp

[... Truncated at 50,000 characters. Full text available in original PDF. Total extracted: 156268 chars]
