THE

GODS  OF  THE  EGYPTIANS


LOB  DOH

PKiM r r>  by

GIVBBSf

\ .Vi*

It  I v t S ft  !*•  * N . r.'l

ID

HI,  johb'h

iroCsiK,

CL  K U

kKVWLL).:  K.<-.

THE


GODS  OF  THE  EGYPTIANS

on

STUDIES  IN

EGYPTIAN  MYTHOLOGY


BY

E.  A.  WALLIS  BUDGE,  ala.,  Litt.d..  d.Litt.,  d.Lit.

KEEPER  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN  ANTIQUITIES
IN  THE  BRITISH  .MUSEUM


WITH  98  COLOURED  PLATES
AND  131  ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  THE  TEXT


VOLUME  I.


METHUEN  & CO.

36  ESSEX  STREET  W.C.
LONDON
1904


<?  •?  -


/


*7^  5.

r*w>-  / ^


O


\ y

v


DEDICATE  THIS  BOOK


ON

THE  GODS  AND  MYTHOLOGY  OF  EGYPT

BY  PEKMISSIOX
TO  THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE

THE  EARL  OF  CROMER .

PRIVY  COUNCILLOR,  G.C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  K.C.S.I.,  C.I.

TIIE  REGENERATOR  OF  EGYPT

with

SINCERE  GRATITUDE  AND  RESPECT


• PREFACE


AMONG  the  various  branches  of  Egyptology  which  have  been
^closely  studied  during  the  last  twenty-five  years,  there  are
none  which  are  more  interesting  to  inquire  into,  or  more  difficult
to  understand  fully,  than  the  religion  and  mythology  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.  When  we  consider  the  number
of  works  on  these  subjects  which  have  been  written  and  published,
both  by  expert  Egyptologists  and  by  competent  exponents  of  the
science  of  religion  during  that  period,  such  a statement  may  appear
at  first  sight  to  be  paradoxical,  and  many  may  think  when  reading
it  that  some  excuse  must  certainly  be  made  for  the  philosopher
who  asked  an  eminent  professor  of  Egyptology  thq  somewhat
caustic  question,  “ Is  it  true  that  the  more  the  subjects  of  Egyptian
religion  and  mythology  are  studied  the  less  is  known  about  them  ? ”
The  question  is,  however,  thoroughly  justified,  and  every  honest
worker  will  admit  that  there  are  at  the  present  time  scores  of
passages,  even  in  such  a comparatively  well-known  religious  com-
pilation as  the  Book  of  tho  which  are  inexplicable,  and

scores  of  allusions  of  a fundamentally  important  mythological
character  of  which  the  meanings  are  still  unknown.  The  reasons
for  this  state  of  things  are  many,  and  the  chief  of  them  may  be
briefly  recalled  here.  *

The  custom  of  reiving  absolutely  upon  the  information  about
the  ancient  Egyptian  religion  and  mythology,  which  is  reported  by’
Greek  historians,  was  abandoned  by  Egyptologists  long  ago,  for
as  soon  as  the  native  Egyptian  religious  texts  could  be  read,  it


viii


PREFACE

became  evident  that  no  Greek  or  Latin  writer  had  any  exact
first-hand  knowledge  of  these  subjects,  and  that  none  of  them
succeeded  wholly  in  reproducing  accurately  in  their  works  the  facts
concerning  them  which  they  derived  from  Egyptian  books  or  from
Egyptian  priests.  This  is  hardly  to  be  wondered  at,  for  the
cultured  Greek  writers  must  have,  and  did,  as  we  know,  look
with  mingled  pity,  and  contempt,  and  ridicule,  upon  the
animal  cults  of  the  Egyptians,  and  they  had  no  sympathy  with
the  materialistic  ..beliefs  and  with  the  still  more  materialistic
funeral  customs  and  ceremonies,  which  have  been,  from  time
immemorial,  so  dear  to  certain  Hamitic  peoples,  and  so  greatly
prized  by  them.  The  only  beliefs  of  the  Egyptian  religion  which
the  educated  Greek  or  Roman  truly  understood  were  those  which
characterized  the  various  forms  of  Aryan  religion,  namely,  the
polytheistic  and  the  solar : for  the  forms  of  the  cults  of  the  dead,
and  for  all  the  religious  ceremonies  and  observances,  which  pre-
supposed a belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  in  everlasting
life,  and  which  had  been  in  existence  among  the  indigenous  inhabi-
tants of  north-east  Africa  from  predynastic  times,  he  had  no  regard
whatsoever.  The  evidence  on  the  subject  now  available  indicates
that  he  was  racially  incapable  of  appreciating  the  importance  of
such  beliefs  to  those  who  held  them,  and  that  although,  as  in  the
case  of  the  Ptolemies,  he  was  ready  to  tolerate,  and  even,  for  state
purposes,  to  adopt  them,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  absorb  them
into  his  life.  It  is  important  to  remember  this  fact  when  dealing
with  the  evidence  of  Greek  and  Roman  writers  on  the  Egyptian
religion  and  mythology,  for  it  skoAvs  the  futility  of  trying  to  prove
an  absolute  identity  in  the  indigenous  religions  of  the  Aryans  and
Egyptians.

N oav,  although  a true  decipherment  of  the  ancient  Egyptian
hieratic  and  hieroglyphic  texts  has  enabled  us  to  draw  our  in-


IX


PR^Aci

formation  on  the  religion  and  mythology  of  Egypt  from  native
sources,  we  have  still  to  contend  against  the  ignorance  of  Egyptian,
scribes  and  the  mistakes  of  careless  copyists,  :;and  it  must*  never  be
forgotten  that  the  theologians  at  the  court  of  the  Pharaohs,  under  the
XVIIIth  and  XIXth  Dynasties  were  just  as  ignorant  of  many  facts
connected  with  their  religion  and  mythology  as  we  ourselves  jptre.
In  proof  of  this  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to  the  different  explanations
of  certain  passages  which  are  given  along  with  the  text  in  the
xviith  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead , apd  to  the  childish
punning  etymologies  of  the  names  of  gods  rind  of  many  myth-
ological explanations  which  are  set  down  in  the  texts  inscribed  on
the  walls  of  some  chambers  in  the  tomb  of  Seti  I.  at  Thebes,  and
on  the  walls  of  the  temple  of  Horus  of  Behutet  at  Edfil.  It  is
safisfactory  to  be  able  to  say  that  many  of  the  absurd  etymologies
and  trivial  explanations  which  are  products  of  the  scribes  of  old
can  now  be  corrected.  Recent  researches  have  shown  that  the
royal  scribes  under  the  New  Empire  (n.e.  1700-700)  were  unable
to  read  correctly  the  hieratic  characters  which  formed  the  names  of
some  of  the  kings  of  the  early  Archaic  Period,  and  this  being  so.
little  surprise  need  be  felt  at  the  difficulties  in  religious  texts
which  are  due  to  their  ignorance  or  blunders.  Apart  from  such
considerations,  however,  the  subjects  of  Egyptian  religion  and
mythology  themselves  are  full  of 'inherent  difficulties,  which  have,
unfortunately,  not  been  lessened  by  the  manner  in  which  some
Egyptologists  have  treated  them.

“ ‘ ,■  i

The  number  of  the  gods,  even  under  the  iVtlx  Dynasty,  abteut
B.c.  3000,  was  very  great,  and  as  thne  went  on  it"  multiplied
greatly.  The  Pyramid  Texts,  which  were  written  under  the  IVth,
Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties,  supply  the  names  of  about  two  hundred
gods  and  mythological  beings,  but  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead
according  to  the  Theban  Recension  (n.c.  17Q0-1200)  over  five^


X


PREFACE


hundred  gods  are  mentioned.  If  to  these  be  added-  the  names  of
all  the  mythological  beings  which  occur  in  the  various  Books  of  the
Underworld,  we  shall  find  that  the  number  of  the  gods  who  were
recognized  by  the  theologians  of  the  XIXth  Dynasty  at  Thebes
was  about  twelve  hundred.  If  all  the  religious  texts  of  this  period
from  all  the  religious  centres  of  Egypt  were  available  for  £tudy,
we  should  certainly  find  that  the  names  of  hundreds  of  additional
local  gods,  goddesses,  and  mythological  beings  could  be  collected

from  them.  With  such  a number  of  gods  to  consider,  it  was

✓

impossible  for  confusion  not  to  arise  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptian
when  dealing  with  them,  and  the  texts  prove  that  he  found  the
gods  as  difficult  to  group  and  classify  as  the  modern  investigator.
The  attributes  of  hundreds  of  them  were  vague  and  shadowy,  and
the  greater  number  of  them  were  merely  provincial  gods,  to  whom
circumstances  had  given  some  transient  importance,  which  resulted
in  their  names  being  recorded  in  writing.  In  fact,  the  theologian
of  ancient  Egypt  found  it  impossible  to  form  a system  of  gods
which  should  be  consistent  in  all  its  parts,  and  should  assign  to
earth  gods,  water  gods,  air  gods,  village  gods,  city  gods,  nome
gods,  national  gods,  and  foreign  gods,  the  exact  position  and
attributes  which  Avere  their  due  in  it.  From  one  point  of  view
the  modem  investigator  is  more  fortunate  than  the  Egyptian
theologian,  for  he  has  more  materials  upon  which  to  Avork,  and,  qg
a rule,  he  is  better  equipped  for  his  inquiry.  Hie  Egyptian  kneAV
nothing  about  the  study  of  comparative  religion,  and  he  av$s  sadly
haifipered  by  his  OAvn  methods.

Modern  scientific  study  of  the  Egyptian  religion  and  myth-
ology may  be  said  to  have  begun  Avith  the  publication  in  full  of  the
texts,  both  hieratic  and  hieroglyphic,  of  the  Ileliopolitan,  Thebart,
and  Suite  Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (Per-em-hrv),  and  of
Jhe  cognate  funeral  texts,  such  as  “The  Book  of  what  is  in  the


PREFACE


xi


Underworld,”  “The  Book  of  Breathings,”  “The  Book  of  Trans-
formations,” the  “Lamentations,”  and  the  “Festival  Songs  of  Isis
and  Nephthys,”  &c.  The  first  to  attempt  to  build  up  on  a large
scale  a system  of  Egyptian  theology  and  mythology  from  ancient
native  works  was  the  late  Dr.  Heinrich  Brugsch,  who  collected
and  published  in  his  Religion  und  Mythologie  der  alien  A Hgy-pter,
Leipzig,  1885-1888,  a mass  of  facts  of  the  greatest  importance,  and
a summary  of  the  conclusions  which  he  deduced  from  them.  In
the  same  year  in  which  the  first  section  of  Dr.  Brugsch’s  work
appeared,  M.  Maspero  published  in  the  ltevue  den  Religions  (tom.
xii.,  p.  123  f.)  a masterly  article,  entitled  La  Religion  Egypt ie nue
d’apres  If. s pyr  amides  de  la  V*  et  de  la  VI*  dynastic,  in  which  he
gave  to  the  world  some  of  the  results  of  his  study  of  the  “ Pyramid
Texts,”  which  contain  the  oldest  known  Recension,  i.e.,  the
Heliopolitan,  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead.  In  1887,  Signor
L an zone  published  the  last  part  of  his  Uiziouario  di  Mitologia
Egisia , which  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  contributions  to  the  study
of  Egyptian  mythology  ever  made,  and  which  contains  the  names
of  a large  number  of  gods,  demons,  spirits,  etc.,  arranged  alpha-
betically, and  a series  of  drawings  of  many  of  them  printed  in
outline  in  red  ink.  In  1888  and  1889,  M.  Maspero,  in  two
admirable  articles  in  the  Revue  des  Religions  (La  Mythologie
Egyptienne,  tom.  xviii.,  p.  253  f.,  and  tom.  xix.,  p.  1 f.),  discussed
and  criticized  both  the  works  of  Brugsch  and  Laxzone,  and  shed  a
great  deul  of  new  light  upon  the  facts  collected  in  both.

To  M.  Maspero  belongs  the  credit  of  being  the  first  to
consider  the  Egyptian  religion  and  mythology  from  the  anthropo-
logical point  of  view,  and  all  the  evidence  on  these  subjects  which  ^
has  since  become  available  goes  to  prove  the  general  correctness  of
the  opinion  which  he  stated  some  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  ago.
Brugsch,  it  must  be  admitted,  regarded  the  origin  of  Egyptian


XU


PREFACE


religion  from  too  lofty  a metaphysical  and  philosophical  standpoint,
and  appealed  for  proofs  of  his  contentions  to  Egyptian  texts
belonging1  to  too  late  a period  to  be  entirely  free  from  the  influence
of  .Greek  culture  and  thought ; in  fact,  he  read  into  certain
Egyptian  texts,  ideas,  doctrines,  and  beliefs  which  the  primitive
and  indigenous  Egyptians  could  never  have  possessed.  On  the
other  hand,  it  seems  to  me  that  M.  Maspkro  has  somewhat
underrated  the  character  of  the  spiritual  conceptions  of  the
dynastic  Egyptians,  and  that  he  has  done  so  because,  when  he
wfbte  his  great  article,  La  Mi/tliologie  fiyypthmnr,  Egyptologists
had  not  thoroughly  realized  the  distinction  which  exists  between
the  primitive  or  predynastic  element  in  the  Egyptian  religion  and
the  Asiatic  element.  This  element  was  of  a solar  character
undoubtedly,  and  was  introduced  into  Egypt  by  the  “ Followers  of
Horus,”  or  the  “ Blacksmiths,”  who  invaded  the  country,  and
conquered  the  natives,  and  settling  down  there,  built  up  the  great
dynastic  civilization  which  we  call  Egyptian.  This  seems  to  be
the  correct  explanation  of  the  diversity  of  view  of  two  such
eminent  experts,  and  the  opposite  character  of  their  conclusions
appears  to  be  due  chiefly  to  the  difference  of  the  standpoints  from
which  they  viewed  the  subject.

A prolonged  study  of  the  religious  and  mythological  texts  of
ancient  Egypt  has  convinced  me  of  the  futility  of  attempting  V>
reconcile  the  conflicting  beliefs  and  to  harmonize  the  contradictory
^ statements  which  are  found  in  them,  so  long  as  we  regard  the
Egyptian  religion  as  “one  in  its  extension  and  principle.”  It
must  first  of  all  he  resolved  into  its  constituent  elements,  and  when
this  has  been  done,  it  will  probably  be  possible  to  classify,  and
arrange,  and  assign  to  their  proper  sources  the  various  material
and  spiritual  conceptions  and  beliefs  which  the  Egyptians  heaped
t,up  in  their  minds  and  flung  together  in  their  religious  writings.


PREFACE


xiii

It  must,  moreover,  be  studied  by  tlie  light  which  the  science  of
comparative  religion  has  given  us,  and  due  regard  must  be  paid
to  the  important  evidence  on  the  subject  that  may  be  deduced
from  the  remains  and  monuments  of  the  Predynastic  and  Archaic
Periods  which  have  been  unearthed  during  the  last  few  years.

The  primitive  dwellers  in  Egypt  undoubtedly  belonged  to  a
large  and  important  section  of  the  inhabitants  of  North-East
Africa,  and  possessed  physical  and  meutal  characteristics  which
were  peculiar  to  themselves.  In  the  earliest  times  they  were
savages,  and  lived  and  died  like  savages  in  other  parts  of  the
world;  religious  belief  of  any  kind,  in  the  modern  sense  of  the«
term,  they  had  none,  and  they  probably  regarded  the  animate  and
inanimate  objects  which  they  saw  about  them  as  akin  to  them-
selves. At  a much  later  period  they  peopled  the  earth,  air,  sky,
and  water  with  beings  of  various  kinds,  and  they  paid  a sort  of
homage  or  Worship  to  certain  stones,  trees,  and  living  creatures,  in
which  they  assumed  that  they  lived.  Some  beings  were  held  to
be  friendly  and  others  unfriendly ; and  it  was  thought  that  gifts  or
offerings  would  secure  the  continuance  of  the  friendship  of  the
former  and  avert  the  hostility  of  the  latter.  Friendly  beings
gradually  became  gods,  and  unfriendly  ones  were  classed  as  devils,
and  in  the  ceremonies  which  the  Egyptian  savage  performed  in
•their  honour,  and  in  the  incantations  which  he  recited,  the  magic
of  Egypt,  the  forerunner  of  her  religion,  had  its  origin.  The  chief
object*  of  tho  savage  Egyptian  was  self-preservation,  and  self;
interest  was  the  mainspring  of  his  actions,  all  of  which  were
undertaken  with  a view  to  material  benefits.  When  he  first
becomes  known  to  us  in  the  late  Neolithic  Period  wc  fiud  that  he
possessed  a belief  in  au  existence  beyond  the  grave,  and  that  it  was
of  a material  character  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  he  placed  offerings
of  food  in  the  graves  of  the  dead.  To  prevent  their  return  to  tlys


XIV


PREFACE


world,  and  their  consequent  claim  for  food  and  other  material
things,  the  heads  of  the  dead  were  often  severed  from  their  bodies,
and  their  feet  cut  off ; thus  the  living  made  themselves  secui’e  in
the  possession  of  their  homes,  and  wives,  and  goods.  Nothing  is
known  of  the  Egyptian  religion  and  its  ceremonies  at  this  period,
but  whatever  they  were,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  the  object  of
them  all  was  to  secure  for  themselves  after  death  a renewal  of  life
which  should  be  full  of  carnal  delights  and  pleasures,  and  there  is
no  doubt  that  the  ideas  of  a resurrection  from  the  dead  and
immortality  ou  these  lines  were  finnly  implanted  in  the  native
mind  long  before  the  Dynasty  Period  began.

The  cult  of  Osiris,  the  dead  mau  deified,  and  the  earliest
forms  of  his  worship,  were,  no  doubt,  wholly  of  African  origin  ;

I

these  are  certainly  the  oldest  elements  in  the  religiou  of  the
Dynastic  Period,  and  the  most  persistent,  for  Osiris  maintained  his
position  as  the  god  and  judge  of  the  dead  from  the  Prcdynastic
to  the  Ptolemaic  Period.  The  Followers  of  Iiorus,  who  brought  a
solar  religion  with  them  into  Egypt  from  the  East,  never  succeeded
in  dislodging  Osiris  from  his  exalted  position,  and  his  cult  survived
undiminished  notwithstanding  the  powerful  influence  which  the
priests  of  Ra,  and  the  worshippers  of  Amen,  and  the  votaries  of
Aten  respectively  exercised  throughout  the  country.  The  heaven
of  Osiris  was  believed  to  exist  In  a place  where  tlie  fields  were
fertile  and  well  stocked  with  cattle,  and  where  meat  and  drink
, were  abundant ; the  abodes  of  the  blessed  were  thought  to  lie
constructed  after  the  model  of  the  comfortable  Egyptian  home-
steads in  which  they  had  lived  during  life,  and  the  ordinary
Egyptian  hoped  to  live  in  one  of  these  with  his  wives  and  parents.
On  the  other  hand,  the  followers  of  Ra,  the  sun-god,  believed  in  a
heaven  of  a more  spiritual  character,  and  their  great  hope  was  to
pccupy  a seat  in  the  boat  of  the  god,  and,  arrayed  in  light,  to  travel


PREFACE


xv


whithersoever  he  went.  They  wished  to  become  bright  and
shining  spirits,  and  to  live  upon  the  celestial  meat  and  drink  upon
which  he  lived ; as  he  was  so  they  hoped  to  be  in  eveiy  respect.
The  materialistic  heaven  of  Osiris  appealed  to  the  masses  in  Egypt,
and  the  heaven  where  Ra  lived  to  the  priests  of  Ra.  and  other  solar
gods,  find  to  royal  and  aristocratic  families,  and  to  the  members  of
the  foreign  section  of  the  community  who  were  of  Eastern
origin.

The  various  waves  of  religious  thought  and  feeling,  which
swept  over  Egypt  during  the  five  thousand  years  of  her  history
which  are  known  to  us,  did  not  seriously  disturb  the  cult  of
Osiris,  for  it  held  out  to  the  people  hopes  of  resurrection  and
immortality  of  a character  which  no  other  form  of  religion  could
give.  Secure  in  these  hopes  the  people  regarded  the  various
changes  and  developments  of  religious  ideas  in  their  country  with
equanimity,  find  modifications  in  the  public  worship  of  the  gods,
provided  that  the  religious  feasts  and  processions  were  not  inter-
rupted, moved  them  but  little.  Kings  and  priests  from  time  to
time  made  attempts  to  absorb  the  cult  of  Osiris  into  religious
systems  of  a solar  character,  but  they  failed,  and  Osiris,  the  man-
god,  always  triumphed,  and  at  the  last,  when  his  cult  disappeared
before  the  religion  of  the  Man  Ciikist,  the  Egyptians  who  em-
braced Christianity  found  that  the  moral  system  of  the  old  cult
and  that  of  the  new  religion  were  so  similar,  and  the  promises  of
resurrection  and  immortality  in  each  so  much  alike,  that  they
transferred  their  allegiance  from  *Osiris  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth
without  difficulty.  Moreover,  Isis  and  the  child  Homs  were
straightway  identified  with  Mary  the  Virgin  and  her  Son,  and  ip
the  apocryphal  literature  of  the  first  few  centuries  which  followed
the  evangelization  of  Egypt,  several  of  the  legends  about  Isis  and
her  sorrowful  wanderings  were  made  to  centre  round  the  Motlicyr


XVI


PREFACE


of  Christ.  Certain  of  the  attributes  of  the  sister  goddesses  of
Isis  were  also  ascribed  to  her,  and,  like  the  goddess  Neith  of  Sa'is,
she  was  declared  to  possess  perpetual  virginity.  Certain  of  the
Egyptian  Christian  Fathers  gave  to  the  Virgin  the  title  “Theo-
tokos,” or  “ Mother  of  God,”  forgetting,  apparently,  that  it  was  an
exact  translation  of  neter  raid , ^ a very  old  and  common  title

of  Isis.  Interesting,  however,  as  such  an  investigation  would  be,
no  attempt  has  been  made  in  this  work  to  trace  out  the  influ-
ence of  ancient  Egyptian  religious  beliefs  and  mythology  on
Christianity,  for  such  an  undertaking  would  till  a comparatively
large  volume.

From  what  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  pages  the  plan
followed  in  the  preparation  of  the  present  volumes  will  be  evident.
In  the  opening  chapter  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  describe  the
religious  beliefs  of  the  primitive  Egyptians,  and  to  explain  how
their  later  ideas  about  the  “gods”  and  God  grew  up, "and  how  they
influenced  the  religious  writings  and  paintings  of  the  Dynastic
Period,  The  region  which  is  commonly  called  Heaven,  or  the
“ Underworld,”  and  its  denizens  are  next  considered  at  some  length,
and  this  section  is  followed  by  chapters  on  the  ancient  myths  of
I».a,  the  legend  of  Ra  and  Isis,  and  the  legend  of  the  destruction  of
mankind.  The  hieroglyphic  texts  of  the  myths  and  legends  are
given  with  interlinear  transliteration  and  translation,  so  that  the
student  may  verify  my  statements  for  himself.  Of  the  minor  gods
_ and  demons,  of  which  nothing  but  the  names  are  known,  li'sts  only
are  printed.  The  great  gods  of  Egypt  have  been  grouped  as  far  as
possible,  and  they  are  discussed  in  connection  with  the  various
religious  centres  to  which  they  belong,  e.g.,  Utah,  Sekhet,  and
I-em-hetep  with  Memphis,  Amen,  Mut,  and  Jvhensu  with  Thebes,
and  the  “ Great  Company  ” of  the  gods  with  Heliopolis.  Speaking
generally,  the  first  volume  of  this  work  treats  of  the  oldest  and


PREFACE


xvn


greatest  gods  and  triads  of  gods  of  Egypt,  and  the  second,  of  the
gods  of  Heliopolis,  among  whom  are  included  Osiris  and  the  deities
of  his  funeral  cycle.  The  hymns  to  the  gods  have  been  freely
quoted,  because  they  illustrate  so  clearly  the  views  which  the
Egyptians  held  concerning  them,  aud  the  manner  in  which  they
sought*  to  praise  them.  In  a chapter  entitled  “Miscellaneous
Gods”  will  be  found  several  lists  of  gods  of  the  hours,  days,
months,  winds,  Dekans,  etc,,  which  I have  collected  from  Dr.
Brugsch’s  Thcxuurui s*  of  astronomical  and  other  texts;  for  the  main
facts  given  in  these  volumes  the  authorities,  both  ancient  and
modern,  will  be  found  at  the  foot  of  the  pages  wherein  they  are
first  mentioned.

Most  of  the  portraits  of  the  gods  which  appear  in  the  coloured
plates  have  been  reproduced  from  papyri,  coffins,  etc.,  but  for  the
outlines  of  a few  I am  indebted  to  Signor  Lanzone’s  Dhionario
mtohx/ia  !:'• /hiit,  the  value  of  which  has  been  already  mentioned.
It  has  been  thought  advisable  to  print  the  portraits  of  the  gods
which  are  not  taken  from  papyri  upon  a papyrus-coloured  ground,
and  to  enclose  each  within  a coloured  border,  for  the  effect  is
better,  and  the  plan  is  consistent  with  that  followed  by  the
ancient  Egyptian  artists  at  all  periods.

My  thanks  are  due  to  Reginald  Lake.  Esq.,  of  Messrs.
Gilbert  & Rivington,  and  to  Mr!  G.  E.  Hay  and  Mr.  F.  Rainer,  of
his  staff,  for  the  care  and  attention  which  they  have  taken  in
printing  this  work.


E.  A.  WALLIS  BUDGE.


London,  September  5th,  1903.


CONTENTS


CHAP.  PAGE

I.  "The  Gods  of  Egypt 1

Appendix  : Unas,  the  Slayeh  and  Eater  of  the  Gods —
Hieroglyphic  text  with  interlinear  transliteration
and  translation  .........  45

II.  Conception  of  God  and  the  “Gods"  .....  57

III.  Primitive  Gods  and  Nome-Gods  .....  95

IV.  The  Companions  of  the  Gods  in  Heaven  ....  156

V.  The  Underworld  .........  170

VI.  Hell  and  the  Damned  ........  263

VII.  The  oldest  Company  of  the  Gods  and  the  Creation  2S2

VI II.  History  of  the  Creation  of  the  Gods  and  of  the  World —
Hieroglyphic  text  with  interlinear  transliteration
and  translation  .........  308

IX.  BA,  the  Sun-God,  and  his  forms  322

X.  The  Myths  of  Ra 359

XI.  The  Legend  of  Ra  and  Isis — Hieroglyphic  text  with  inter-

linear transliteration  and  translation  . .372

XII.  The  Destruction  of  Mankind — Hieroglyphic  text  with

interlinear  transliteration  and  translation  . . 388

XIII.  Thoth,  and  MaXt  and  the  other  Goddesses  who  were

ASSOCIATED  WITH  HIM 400

XIV.  ’Hathor  and  the  Hathor.Goddesses 42$

XV.  The  IIorcs  Gods 466

XVI.  The  Great  Triad  op  Memphis,  Ptah,  Sekhbt,  and  I-em-hetep  500


LIST  OF  COLOURED  PLATES


TO  FACE  PACE

1.  The  Creation  ...........  298

2.  The  goddess  But  .........  328

3.  Amen-Rii-Heru-kkuti  .........  330

4.  The  god  Khepora  seated  in  his  boat  .......  334

5.  The  god  Teniu  . . . ¥■  348

6.  The  god  Tom  seated  in  his  boat  ....  . . 350

7.  The  goddess  lusaaset ..........  354

8.  The  god  Kh opera  ..........  356

9.  Thoth,  the  scribe  of  the  gods  ........  400

10.  Auh-Tchuti  and  his  associate  the  Ape  ......  402

11.  Thoth,  the  scribe  of  the  gods 108

12.  The  Moon-god  Aah  ......  412

13.  The  goddess  Mafit  ..........  418

14.  The  goddess  Nekhemauait.  ........  420

15.  The  goddess  Meh-urt 422

16.  Nut,  the  goddess  of  heaven,  as  a Cow  ......  424

17.  The  goddess  Sosheta  .........  420

18.  The  Cow-goddess  Hatbor  looking  forth  from  the  funeral  mountain  at

Thebes  ..........  428

19.  The  goddess  Ilathor  in  the  form  of  a woman  . 431

20.  The  goddess  .Ilathor  with  horns  and  disk  ......  436

21.  The  goddess  Nekhebet,  or  Nekhebit  ....  436

22.  The  goddess  Uatebet,  or  Uatchit  ...  440

23.  The  goddess  Bast  ...  ....  444

24.  The  goddess  Nit  (Neith),  as  a huntress  . . 450

25.  The  goddess  Sebek-Nit  suckling  Horus  . . ,-^iC  156

26.  The  goddess  Nit  (Neith),  the  weaver  ......  462*

27.  The  god  Heru-ur  (Aroeris)  ....  466

28.  Hevu-pa-khrat  (Ilarpoerates)  . . 468

29.  Heru-khuti  (flarnaachis)  . . . 470

30.  Heru-sma-taui  ...  472

31.  Ra-IJeru-Khuti  of  Boluitet  . . . 474

32.  Heni-netch-tef-f  ....  . 476

33.  ELeru-netch-lirA-tef-f  ..........  478

34.  Horus  the  son  of  Isis,  and  the  son  of  Osiris  . 48^


COLOURED  PLATES

TO  PACK  FAGK


35.  peifU-netch-tef-Ra 488

36.  The  four  children  of  Homs  ........  490

37.  The  god  comprehending  all  gods 492

38.  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  and  the  son  of  Osiris,  or  Harpoerates  494

39.  The  god  Sept 498

40.  Ptah  fashioning  the  Egg  of  the  World  500

41.  The  god  Ptali- Seker 502

42 Jk  The  Ark  of  the  god  Seker  on  its  sledge 504

43.  The  god  Seker 506

44.  The  god  Tatenen  ......  508

45.  The  goddess  Sekhefc  .....  . 514

16.  The  goddess  Sekhet  ......  516

47.  The  goddess  Sekhet ...  518

48.  The  god  Nefer-Temu  520

49.  The  god  I-em-hetep  (Imouthis)  ........  522


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS


PAGE


1.

Usertsen  II.  receiving  41  life  ” from  the  god  Sept

. 25

2.

The  serekh  of  Kamcses  II.

26

3.

The"  serpent-headed  leopard  Setcha

39

4.

The  eagle-headed  lion  Sefer

60

5.

The  fabulous  beast  Sak  ......

60

6.

A fabulous  leopard  ......

61

7.

The  animal  Sha  ......

61

8.

The  First  Hour  of  the  Night

. 179

9.

The  Second  Hour  of  the  Night  .....

. J81

JO.

The  Third  Hour  of  the  Night

. 183

11.

The  Fourth  Hour  of  the  Night  .

. 185

12.

The  Fifth  Hour  of  the  Night  ....

. 187

13.

The  god  on  the  top  of  the  Steps

. 189

14.

The  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night

. 193

15.

The  Ninth  Hour  of  the  Night  .....

. 195

16.

The  Tenth  Hour  of  the  Night  .....

. 197

17.

The  Eleventh  Hour  of  the  Night

. 199

18.

The  gate  of  the  Twelfth  Hour  of  the  Night

. 203

19.

Sunrise  .........

. 204

20.

Book  of  the  Underworld — First  Hour

. 206

21.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Second  Hour

. 209

22.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Third  Hour

. 213

23.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Fourth  Hour

. 217,  219

24.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Fifth  Hour

. 221,  223

25.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Sixth  Hour

. 225,  227,  229

26.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Seventh  Hour  .

2C1,  233,  235,  236

27.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Eighth  Hour

. 237,  239,  240

28.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Ninth  Hour

. 243,  245

29.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Tenth  Hour

. ,;l  247,  249

30.

Book  of  the  Underworld — Eleventh  Hour  .

. 251,  253

31.

The  Oldest  Company  of  the  Gods  ....

. 282

32.

The  Cow-goddess  Nut

. 368

33.

Thothmes  IV*  making  offerings  to  the  Sphinx  .

. 171

34.

II  or  us  of  Behutet  armed  with  a how  and  arrows  and  a

chib  . 474

35.

The  double  god  Ilorus-Set  .....

. 475

36.

Sckcr-Asar  ........

. 501

37.

Ptolemy  Euergetes  and  the  Hennu-Boat  .

. 004

38.

Asar-^api  (Serapis)  ....

. 513

THE

GODS  OF  THE  EGYPTIANS


CHAPTER  I

THE  GODS  OF  EGYPT

T'M-IE  Greek  historian  Herodotus  afKrms  1 that  the  Egyptians
were  “beyond  measure  scrupulous  in  all  matters  apper-
“ taining  to  religion,”  and  he  made  this  statement  after  personal
observation  of  the  care  which  they  displayed  in  the  perform-
ance of  religious  ceremonies,  the  aim  and  object  of  which
was  to  do  honour  to  the  gods,  and  of  the  obedience  which  they
showed  to  the  behests  of  the  priests  who  transmitted  to  them
commands  which  they  declared  to  be,  and  which  were  accepted
as,  authentic  revelations  of  the  will  of  the  gods.  From  the
manner  in  which  this  writer  speaks  it  is  clear  that  he  had  no
doubt  about  what  lie  was  saying,  and  that  he  was  recording  a
conviction  which  had  become  settled  in  his  mind.  He  was  fully
conscious  that  the  Egyptians  worshipped  a large  number  of
aifimals,  and  birds,  and  reptiles,  with  a seriousness  and  earnestness
which  must  have  filled  the  cultured  Greek  with  astonishment,  yet
he  was  not  moved  to  give  expression  to  words  of  scorn  as  was
Juvenal,2  for  Herodotus  perceived  that  beneath  the  acts  of  apparently
1 ii.  6-4.

2 “ Quia  nesoifc,  Volusi  Hi  thy  nice,  qualia  demens
“ Aegyptus  portenta  colafc  ? croeodilon  adorat
u Pars  liaec,  ilia  pavot  salaram  serpentibus  ibin.

“ Effigies  sneri  nitet  nurea  ceruopitlieci,

“ Dimidio  magicae  resonant  ubi  Menmone  chordae
“ Atque  vetus  Thebe  centum  jacet  obrufca  port  is.

“ Illic  aeluros,  hie  piscem  lluminis,  illic  J

B


2 ANTIQUITY  OF  RELIGIOUS  OBSERVANCES

foolish  and  infatuated  Avorship  there  existed  a sincerity  which
betokened  a firm  and  implicit  belief  Avhich  merited  the  respect  of
thinking  men.  It  would  be  wrong  to  imagine  that  the  Egyptians
Avere  the  only  people  of  antiquity  Avho  Avere  scrupulous  beyond
measure  in  religious  matters,  for  Ave  knoAv  that  the  Babylonians,
both  Sumerian  and  Semitic,  Avere  devoted  worshippers  of  their
gods,  and  that  they  possessed  a very  old  and  complicated  system  of
religion ; but  there  is  good  reason  for  thinking  that  the  Egyptians
Avere  more  scrupulous  than  their  neighbours  in  religious  matters,
and  that  they  always  bore  the  character  of  being  an  extremely
religious  nation.  The  evidence  of  the  monuments  of  the  Egyptians
proves  that  from  the  earliest  to  the  latest  period  of  their  history
the  observance  of  religious  festivals  and  the  performance  of
religious  duties  in  connexion  with  the  Avorship  of  the  gods  absorbed
a very  .large  part  of  the  time  and  energies  of  the  nation,  and
if  we  take  into  consideration  the  funeral  ceremonies  and  services
commemorative  of  the  dead  which  Avere  performed  by  them  at  the
tombs,  a casual  visitor  to  Egypt  who  did  not  knoAv  Iioav  to  look
beloAV  the  surface  might  be  pardoned  for  declaring  that  the

“ Oppida  tota  caucm  venerautur,  nemo  Dianam.

“Porrurn  et  caepe  iicfiin  violare  et  frangere  niorsu  :

“ O sanctas  gentes,  quihus  haec  nasenntur  in  liortis

li  Nomina  ! Lauatis  animal i bun  nbstinet  omnis

“ Mensii,  nefas  illic  fetain  ingulare  capellae  :

“ Carnibus  hum  an  is  vesci  licet.  ” — Satire,  xv.  1 — 13.

That  the  crocodile,  ibi.s,  dog-headed  ape,  and  fish  of  various  kinds  were  venerated
in  Egypt  is  time  enough ; they  were  not,  however,  venerated  in  dynastic  times  as
animals , but  as  the  abodes  of  yods.  In  certain  localities  peculiar  sanctity  was
attributed  to  the  leek  and  onion,  as  Juvenal  suggests,  but  neither  vegetable  was  an
object  of  worship  in  the  country  generally ; an<l  there  is  no  monumental  evidence
to  show  that  tlie  eating  of  human  flesh  was  practised,  for  it  is  now  known  that
even  the  predynastie  Egyptians  did  not  eat  the  flesh  of  the  dead  and  gnaw  their
bo  new,  as  was  once  rashly  asserted.  Juvenal’s  statements  are  only  partly  true,  ami
some  of  them  are  on  a par  with  that  of  a learned  Indian  who  visited  England,  and
wrote  a book  on  this  country  after  his  return  to  Bombay.  Speaking  of  the  religion
of  the  English  he  declared  that  they  were  all  idolatorw,  and  to  prove  this  assertion
lie  gave  a list,  of  churches  in  which  he  had  seen  a figure  of  a I.AMU  in  the  sculpture
work  over  and  alwut  the  altar,  and  in  prominent  places  elsewhere  in  the  churches.
- The  Indian,  like  Juvenal,  and  Cicero  also,  seems  not  to  have  understood  that
m&xf  nations  have  regarded  animals  as  symbols  of  gods  and  divine  powers,  and
still  do  so.


DIVINE  ORIGIN  OF  KINGS


Egyptians  were  a nation  of  men  who  were  wholly  given  up  to  the
worship  of  beasts  and  the  cult  of  the  dead.

The  Egyptians,  however,  acted  in  a perfectly  logical  manner,
for  they  belipved  that  they  were  a divine  nation,  and  that  they
were  ruled  by  kings  who  were  themselves  gods  incarnate;
their  earliest  kings,  they  asserted,  were  actually  gods,  who  did
not  disdain  to  live  upon  earth,  and  to  go  about  and  up  and  down
through  it,  and  to  mingle  with  men.  Other  ancient  nations  were
content  to  believe  that  they  had  been  brought  into  being  by  the
power  of  their  gods  operating  upon  matter,  but  the  Egyptians
believed  that  they  were  the  issue  of  the  great  God  who  created  the
universe,  and  that  they  were  of  directly  divine  origin.  When  the
gods  ceased  to  reign  in  their  proper  persons  upon  earth,  they  were
succeeded  by  a series  of  demi-gods,  who  were  in  turn  succeeded
by  the  Manes,  and  these  were  duly  followed  by  kings  in  ■whom  was
enshrined  a divine  nature  with  characteristic  attributes.  When?"
the  physical  or  natural  body  of  a king  died,  the  divine  portion  of
his  being,  i.e.,  the  spiritual  body,  returned  to  its  original  abode
with  the  go(Js,  and  it  was  duly  worshipped  by  men  upon  earth  as
a god  and  with  the  gods.  This  happy  result  was  partly  brought
about  by  the  performance  of  certain  ceremonies,  which  were  at
first  wholly  magical,  but  later  partly  magical  and  partly  religious,
and  by  the  recital  of  appropriate  words  uttered  in  the  duly
prescribed  tone  and  manner,  and  by  the  keeping  of  festivals  at
the  tombs  at  stated  seasons  when  the  appointed  offerings  were
made,  and  the  prayers  for  the  welfare  of  the  dead  were  said.

F rom  the  earliest  times  the  worship  of  the  gods  went  hand  in  hand
■frith  the  deification  of  dead  kings  and  other  royal  personages,  and
the  worship  of  departed  moriarchs  from  some  aspects  may  be
regarded  as  meritorious  as  the  worship  of  the  gods.  From  one
point  of  view  Egypt  was  as  much  a land  of  gods  as  of  men,  and
the  inhabitants  of  the  country  wherein  the  gods  lived  and  moved
naturally  devoted  a considerable  portion  of  their  time  upon  earth
to  tho  worship  of  divine  beings  and  of  their  ancestors  who  had
departed  to  the  land  of  the  gods.  In  the  matter  of  religion,  and
all  that  appertains  thereto,  the  Egyptians  were  a “ pecjjdiar
people,”  and  in  all  ages  they  have  exhibited  a tenacity  of  belief


4


NUMBER  AND  VARIETY  OF  GODS

and  a conservatism  which  distinguish  them  from  all  the  other
great  nations  of  antiquity.

But  the  Egyptians  were  not  only  renowned  for  their  devotion
to  religious  observances,  they  were  famous  as  much  for  the
variety  as  for  the  number  of  their  gods.  Animals,  birds,  fishes,
and  reptiles  were  worshipped  by  them  in  all  ages,  but  in  addi-
tion to  these  they  adored  the  great  powers  of  nature  hs  well
as  a large  number  of  beings  with  which  they  peopled  the  heavens,
the  air,  the  earth,  the  sky,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  and
the  water.  In  the  earliest  times  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  in
common  with  every  half-savage  people,  believed  that  all  the
various  operations  of  nature  were  the  result  of  the  actions  of  beings
which  were  for  the  most  part  unfriendly  to  man.  The  inunda-
tion which  rose  too  high  and  flooded  the  primitive  village,  and
drowned  their  Cattle,  and  destroyed  their  stock  of  grain,  was
regarded  as  the  result  of  the  working  of  an  unfriendly  and
unseen  power ; and  when  the  river  rose  just  high  enough
to  irrigate  the  land  which  had  been  prepared,  they  either  thought
that  a friendly  power,  which  was  stronger  tliaif  that  which
caused  the  destroying  flood,  had  kept  the  hostile  power  in  check,
or  that  the  spirit  of  the  river  was  on  that  occasion  pleased  with
them.  They  believed  in  the  existence  of  spirits  of  the  air,  and
in  spirits  of  mountain,  and  stream,  and  tree,  and  all  those  had
to  be  propitiated  with  gifts,  or  cajoled  and  wheedled  into  bestow-
ing their  favour  and  protection  upon  their  suppliants.

It  is  very  unfortunate  that  the  animals,  and  the  spirits  of
natural  objects,  as  well  as  th,e  powers  of  nature,  were  all
grouped  together  by  the  Egyptians  and  were  described  by  the
word  nkteku,  which,  with  considerable  inexactness,  we  are
.obliged  to  translate  by  “ gods.”  There  is  no  doubt  that  at  a
very  early  period  in  their  predynnstie  history  the  Egyptians
distinguished  between  great  gods  and  little  gods,  just  as  they  did
between  friendly  gods  and  hostile  gods,  but  either  their  poverty
of  expression,  or  the  inflexibility  of  their  language*  prevented
them  from  making  a distinction  apparent  in  writing,  and  thus
it  happens  that  in  dynastic  times,  when  a lofty  conception  of
ynonotheism  prevailed  among  the  priesthood,  the  scribe  found


GOD  AND  “GODS”  AND  ANGELS  r>

himself  obliged  to  call  both  God  and  the  lowest  of  the  beings  that
were  supposed  to  possess  some  attribute  of  divinity  by  one  and  the
same  name,  i.c.,  netku.  Other  nations  of  antiquity  found  a way
out  of  the  difficulty  of  grouping  all  classes  of  divine  beings  by  one
name  by  inventing  series  of  orders  of  angels,  to  each  of  which
they  gave  names  and  assigned  various  duties  in  connexion  with
the  sei;vice  of  the  Deity.  Thus  in  the  KurSui  (Sum  xxxv.)  it  is
said  that  God  maketh  the  angels  His  messengers  and  that  they
arc  furnished  with  two,  or  three,  or  four  pairs  of  wings,  Jiecord-
ing  to  their  rank  and  importance ; the  archangel  Gabriel  is  said
to  have  been  seen  by  Muhammad  the  Prophet  with  six  hundred
pairs  of  wings ! The  duties  of  the  angels,  according  to  the
Muhammadans,  were  of  various  kinds.  Thus  nineteen  angels  are
appointed  to  take  charge  of  hell  tire  (Sunt  lxxiv.) ; eight  are  set
apart  to  support  God’s  throne  on  the  Day  of  Judgment  (Sura.
lxix.) ; several  tear  the  souls  of  the  wicked  from  their  bodies
with  violence,  and  several  take  the  souls  of  the  righteous  from
their  bodies  with  gentleness  and  kindness  (Sura  Ixxix.) ; two
angels  are  ordered  to  accompany  every  man  on  earth,  the  one  to
write  down  his  good  actions  and  the  other  his  evil  deeds,  and  these
will  appear  with  him  at  the  Day  of  Judgment,  the  one  to  lead  him
before  the  Judge,  and  the  other  to  bear  witness  either  for  or
against  him  (Sura  1.).  Muhammadan  theologians  declare  that  the
angels  are  created  of  a simple  substance  of  light,  and  that  they
are  endowed  with  life,  and  speech,  and  reason ; they  are  in-
capable of  sin,  they  have  no  carnal  desire,  they  do  not  propagate
their  species,  and  they  arc  not  moved  by  the  passions  of  wrath
tfnd  anger;  their  obedience  is  absolute.  Their  meat  is  the
celebrating  of  the  glory  of  God,  their  drink  is  the  proclaiming  of
His  holiness,  their  conversation  is  the  commemorating  of  God,  and
their  pleasure  is  His  worship.  Curiously  enough,  some  are  said
to  have  the  form  of  animals.  Four  of  the  angels  are  Archangels,
viz.  Michael,  Gabriel,  Azrael,  and  Israfel,  and  they  possess  special
powers,  and  special  duties  are  assigned  to  them.  These  four  are
superior  to  all  the  human  race,  with  the  exception  of  the  Prophets
and  Apostles,  but  the  angelic  nature  is  held  to  be  inferior  to
human  nature  because  all  the  angels  were  commanded  to  worship


6


MUHAMMADAN  AND  SYRIAN  ANGELS

Adam  ( Sura  ii.).  The  above  and  many  pther  characteristics
might  be  cited  in  proof  that  the  angels  of  the  Muhammadans
possess  much  in  common  with  the  inferior  gods  of  the  Egyptians,
and  though  many  of  the  conceptions  of  the  Arabs  on  this  point
were  undoubtedly  borrowed  from  the  Hebrews  and  their  writings,
a great  many  must  have  descended  to  them  from  their  own  early
ancestors.

Closely  connected  with  these  Muhammadan  theories,  though
much  older,  is  the  system  of  angels  which  was  invented  by  the
Syrians.  In  this  we  find  the  angels  divided  into  nine  classes  and
three  orders,  upper,  middle,  and  lower.  The  upper  order  is
composed  of  Cherubim,  Seraphim,  and  Thrones  ; the  middle  order
of  Lords,  PpWers,  and  Rulers ; and  the  lower  order  of  Princi-
palities, Archangels,  and  Angels.  The  middle  order  receives
revel ations  From  those  above  them,  and  the  lower  order  are  the
ministers  who  wait  upon  created  things.  The  highest  and  fore-
most among  the  angels  is  Gabriel,  who  is  the  mediator  between
God  and  His  creation.  The  Archangels  in  this  system  are
described  as  a “ swift  operative  motion,”  which  has  dominion  over
every  living  thing  except  man;  and  the  Angels  are  a motion
which  has  spiritual  knowledge  of  everything  that  is  on  earth  and
in  heaven.1  The  Syrians,  like  the  Muhammadans,  borrowed  largely
from  the  writings  of  the  Hebrews,  in  whose  theological  system
angels  played  a very  prominent  part.  In  the  Syrian  system  also
the  angels  possess  much  in  common  with  the  inferior  gods  of  the
Egyptians.

The  inferior  gods  of  the  Egyptians  were  supposed  to  suffer
from  many  of  the  defects  of  mortal  beings,  and  they  were  even
thought  to  grow  old  and  to  die,  and  the  same  ideas  about  the
.angels  were  held  by  Muhammadans  and  Hebrews.  According  to
the  former,  the  angels  will  perish  when  heaven,  their  abode,  is
made  to  pass  away  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.  According  to  the
latter,  one  of  the  two  great  classes  of  angels,  i.e.,  those  which  were
created  on  the  fifth  day  of  creation,  is  mortal ; on  the  other  hand,
the  angels  which  were  created  on  the  second  day  of  creation

1 See  my  edition  of  the  Book  of  Ike  Bcti,  by  Solomon  of  AI-Baara.  Oxford,
£886,  pp.  9-11.


7


HEBREW  ANGEI-.S  OR  “GODS”

endure  for  ever,  and  these  may  be  fitly  compared  with  the
unfailing  and  unvarying  powers  of  nature  which  were  personified
and  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians  ; of  the  angels  which  perish,
some  spring  from  fire,  some  from  water,  and  some  from  wind.
The  angels  are  grouped  into  ten  classes,  i.c.,  the  Erelitn,  the  tshim,
the  Bene  Elohhn,  the  Malachim,  the  Hashmahm,  the  Tarshishim,
the  Shjshanim,  the  Cherubim,  the  Opliannim,  and  the  Seraphim  ;
among  these  were  divided  all  the  duties  connected  with  the
ordering  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  they,  according  to
their  position  and  importance,  became  the  interpreters  of  the  Will
of  the  Deity.  A comparison  of  the  passages  in  Rabbinic  literature
which  describe  these  and  similar  matters  connected  with  the
angels,  spirits,  etc.,  of  ancient  Hebrew  mythology  with  Egyptian
texts  shows  that  both  the  Egyptians  and  Jews : possessed  many
ideas  in  common,  and  all  the  evidence  goes  to  prpyfe  that  the
latter  borrowed  from  the  former  in  the  earliest  period.  '

In  comparatively  late  historical  times  the  Egyptians  intro-
duced into  their  company  of  gods  a few  deities  from  Western
Asia,  but  these  had  no  effect  in  modifying  the  general  character
either  of  their  religion  or  of  their  worship.  The  subject  of  com-
parative Egyptian  and  Semitic  mythology  is  one  which  has  yet
to  be  worked  thoroughly,  not  because  it  would  supply  us  with
the  original  forms  of  Egyptian  myths  and  legends,  but  because  it
would  show  what  modifications  such  tilings  underwent  when
adopted  by  Semitic  peoples,  or  at  least  by  peoples  who  had
Semitic  blood  in  their  veins.  Some  would  compare  Egyptian  and
Semitic  mythologies  on  the  ground  that  the  Egyptians  and
Semites  were  kinsfolk,  but  it  Inust  be  quite  clearly  understood
that  this  is  pure  assumption,  and  is  only  based  on  the  state-
ments of  those  who  declare  that  the  Egyptian  and  Semitic
languages  are  akin.  Others  again  have  sought  to  explain
the  mythology  of  the  Egyptians  by  appeals  to  Aryan  mythology,
and  to  illustrate  the  meanings  of  important  Egyptian  words  in
religious  texts  by  menus  of  Aryan  etymologies,  but  the  results
are  wholly  unsatisfactory,  and  they  only  serve  to  show  the  futility

1 See  the  chapter  “ Was  die  Judeti  von  den  gufcen  Engeln  leliren  ” in  Eisen-
raeuger,  Enldcckten  Judeuthuma , vol.  ii.  p.  370  ff.


8 THE  OLDEST  GODS  OF  EGYPT

of  comparing  the  mythologies  of  two  peoples  of  different  race
occupying  quite  different  grades  in  the  ladder  of  civilization.  It
cannot  be  too  strongly  insisted  on  that  all  the  oldest  gods  of  Egypt
are  of  Egyptian  origin,  and  that  the  fundamental  religious  beliefs
of  the  Egyptians  also  are  of  Egyptian  origin,  and  that  both  the
gods  and  the  beliefs  date  from  predynastic  times,  and  have  nothing
Avhatever  to  do  with  the  Semites  or  Aryans  of  history.

Of  the  origin  of  the  Egyptian  of  the  Palaeolithic  and  early
Neolithic  Periods,  we,  of  course,  know  nothing,  but  it  is  tolerably
certain  that  the  Egyptian  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Neolithic  Period
was  indigenous  to  North-East  Africa,  and  that  a very  large
number  of  the  great  gods  worshipped  by  the  dynastic  Egyptian
were  Avorshipped  also  by  his  predecessor  in  predynastic  times.
The  conquerors  of  the  Egyptians  of  the  Neolithic  Period  Avho,
Avith  good  reason,  have  been  assumed  to  come  from  the  East  and
to  have  been  more  or  loss  akin  to  the  Proto-Semites,  no  doubt
brought  about  certain  modifications  in  the  Avorship  of  those  Avhom
they  had  vanquished,  but  they  could  not  have  succeeded  in
abolishing  the  A'arious  gods  in  animal  and  other  forms  which  Avere
Avorshipped  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  country,
for  these  continued  to  be  venerated  until  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies.

We  have  at  present  no  means  of  knowing  hoAvfar  the  religious
beliefs  of  the  conquerors  influenced  the  conquered  peoples  of
Egypt,  but  vieAved  in  the  light  of  Avcll-ascertaincd  facts  it  seems
tolerably  certain  that  no  great  change  took  place  in  the  vieAvs
which  the  indigenous  peoples  held  concerning  their  gods  ns  the
result  of  the  invasion  of  foreigners,  and  that  if  any  foreign  gods
Avere  introduced  iuto  the  coiupany-of  indigenous,  predynastic  gods.,
they  Avere  either  quic  kly  assimilated  to  or  Avholly  absorbed  by  them.
Speaking  generally,  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians  remained  unchanged
throughout  all  the  various  periods  of  the  history  of  Egypt,  and  the
minds  of  the  people  seem  always  to  have  had  a tendency  towards
the  maintenance  of  old  forms  of  worship,  and  to  the  preservation
of  the  ancient  texts  in  Avhich  such  forms  Avere  prescribed  and  old
beliefs  were  enshrined.  The  Egyptians  never  forgot  the  ancient
gods  of  the  country,  and  it  is  typical  of  the  spirit  of  conservatism
Avhich  they  displayed  in  most  things  that  even  in  the  Roman


INDIGENOUS  BELIEFS


0

Period  pious  folk  among  them  were  buried  with  the  same  prayers
and  with  the  same  ceremonies  that  had  been  employed  at  the
burial  of  Egyptians  nearly  five  thousand  years  before.  The
Egyptian  of  the  Homan  Period,  like  the  Egyptian  of  the  Early
Empire,  was  content  to  think  that  his  body  would  be  received  in
the  tomb  by  the  jackal-headed  Anubis ; that  the  organs  of  his
corruptible  body  would  be  presided  over  and  guarded  by  animal-
headed gods : that  the  reading  of  the  pointer  of  the  Great  Scales,
wherein  his  heart  was  weighed,  would  be  made  known  by  an  ape
to  the  ibis-headed  scribe  of  the  gods,  whom  avc  knoAv  by  the  name
of  Thoth ; and  that  the  beatified  dead  would  be  introduced  to  the
god  Osiris  by  a lurwk-headed  god  called  Horns,  son  of  Isis,  Avho  in
many  respects  was  the  counterpart  of  the  god  lleru-ur,  the  oldest,
of  all  the  gods  of  Egypt,  whose  type  and  symbol  Avas  the  haAvk.
From  first  to  last  the  indigenous  Egyptian  paid  little  heed  to  the
events  Avhich  happened  outside  his  own  country,  and  neither
conquest  nor  invasion  by  foreign  nations  had  any  effect  upon  his
personal  belief.  He  continued  to  cultivate  his  land  diligently,
he  Avorshipped  the  gods  of  his  ancestors  blindly,  like  them  he
spared  no  pains  in  making  preparations  for  the  preservation  of  his
mummified  hotly,  and  the  heaven  Avhich  he  hoped  to  attain  Avas
fashioned  according  to  old  ideas  of  a fertile  homestead,  Avell
stocked  Avith  cattle,  Avhere  he  would  enjoy  the  company  ot  his
parents,  and  be  able  to  worship  the  local  gods  Avliom  he  had
adored  upon  earth.  The  priestly  and  upper  classes  certainly  held
vieAvs  on  these  subjects  which  differed  from  those  of  the  husband-
man, but  it  is  a significant  fact  that  it  was  not  the  religion  and
mythology  of  the  dynastic  Egyptian,  but  that  of  the  indigenous,
predynastie  Egyptian,  with  his  animal  gods  and  fantastic  and
half-savage  beliefs,  which  strongly  coloured  the  religion  of  the
country  in  all  periods  of  her  history,  and  gave  to  her  the  cliarac- '
teristics  which  were  regarded  Avith  astonishment  and  Avouder  by
all  the  peoples  Avho  came  in  contact  Avitli  the  Egyptians.

The  predynastie  Egyptians  in  the  earliest  stages  of  their
existence,  like  most  savage  and  semi-savage  peoples,  believed  that
the  sea,  the  earth,  the  air,  and  the  sky  Averc  filled  to  overflowing
with  spirits,  some  of  Avhom  were  engaged  in  carrying  on  the  works


10  BELIEF  IN  SPIRITS

of  nature,  and  others  in  aiding  or  obstructing  man  in  the  course
of  his  existence  upon  earth.  Whatsoever  happened  in  nature  was
attributed  by  them  to  the  operations  of  a largo  number  of  spiritual
beings,  the  life  of  whom  was  identical  with  the  life  of  the  great
natural  elements,  and  the  existence  of  whom  terminated  with  the
destruction  of  the  objects  which  they  were  supposed  to  animate.
Such  spirits,  although  invisible  to  mental  eyes,  were  very  real
creatures  in  their  minds,  and  to  them  they  attributed  all  the
passions  which  belong  to  man,  and  all  his  faculties  and  powers
also.  Everything  in  nature  was  inhabited  by  a spirit,  and  it  was
thought  possible  to  endow  a representation,  or  model,  or  figure  of
any  object  with  a spirit  or  soul,  provided  a name  was  given  to  it ;
this  spirit  or  sold  lived  in  the  drawing  or  figure  until  the  object
which  it  animated  was  broken  or  destroyed.  The  objects,  both
natural  ami  artificial,  which  we  consider  to  be  inanimate  were
regarded  by  the  predynastic  Egyptians  as  animate,  and  in  many
respects  they  were  thought  to  resemble  man  himself.  The  spirits
who  infested  every  part  of  the  visible  world  were  countless  in
forms,  and  they  differed  from  each  other  in  respect,  of  power;
the  spirit  that  caused  the  Inundation  of  the  Nile  was  greater  than
the  one  that  lived  in  a canal,  the  spirit  that  made  the  sun  to
shine  was  more  powerful  than  the  one  that  governed  the  moon,
and  the  spirit  of  a great  tree  was  mightier  than  the  one  that
animated  an  ear  of  corn  or  a blade  of  grass.  The  difference
between  the  supposed  powers  of  such  spirits  must  have  been
distinguished  at  a very  early  period,  and  the  half-savage  inhabi-
tants of  Egypt  must  at  the  same  time  have  made  a sharp  distinc-
tion between  those  whose  operations  were  beneficial  to  them,  and
those  whose  actions  brought  upon  them  injury,  loss,  or  death.  It
is  easy  to  see  how  they  might  imagine  that  certain  great  natural
'objects  were  under  the  dominion  of  spirits  who  were  capable  of
feeling  wrath,  or  displeasure,  and  of  making  it  manifest  to  man.
Thus  the  spirit  of  the  Nile  would  be  regarded  as  beneficent  and
friendly  when  the  waters  of  the  river  rose  sufficiently  daring  the
period  of  the  Inundation  to  ensure  an  abundant  crop  throughout
the  land ; but  when  their  rise  was  excessive,  and  they  drowned  the
cattle  and  washed  away  the  houses  of  the  people,  whether  made  of


ANIMALS  ANI)  REPTILES


11


wattles  or  mud,  or  when  they  rose  insufficiently  and  caused'  want
and  famine,  the  spirit  of  the  Nile  would  be  considered  unfriendly
and  evil  to  man.  An  ample  and  sufficient  Inundation  was
regarded  as  a sign  that  the  spirit  of  the  Nile  was  not  displeased
with  man,  but  a destructive  flood  Avas  a sure  token  of  displeasure.
The  same  feeling  exists  to  this  day  in  Egypt  among  the  peasant-
farmers,  for  several  natives  told  me  in  1899,  the  year  of  the  lowest
rise  of  the  Nile  of  the  XIXth  century,1  that  “Allah  was  angry
with  them,  and  would  not  let  the  Avater  come”;  and  one  man
added  that  in  all  his  life  he  had  never  before  known  Allah  to  be  so
angrv  Avith  them.

The  spirits  which  were  always  hostile  or  unfriendly  towards  man,
and  were  regarded  by  the  Egyptians  as  evil  spirits,  Avere  identified
with  certain  animals  and  reptiles,  and  traditions  of  some  of  these
sown  to  have  been  preserved  until  the  latest  period  of  dynastic  his-
tory. A pep,  the  serpent-devil  of  mist,  darkness,  storm,  and  night,
of  whom  more  Avill  be  said  later  on,  and  his  fiends,  the  “children  of
rebellion,”  Avere  not  the  result  of  the  imagination  of  the  Egyptians
in  historic  tunes,  but  their  existence  dates  from  the  period  when
Egypt  Avas  overrun  by  mighty  beasts,  huge  serpents,  and  noxious
reptiles  of  all  kinds.  The  great  serpent  of  Egyptian  mythology,
which  was  indeed  a formidable  opponent  of  the  Sun-god,  had  its
prototype  in  some  monster  serpent  on  earth,  of  which  tradition  had
preserved  a record : and  that  this  is  no  mere  theory  is  proved  by
the  fact  that,  the  remains  of  a serpent,  which  must  have  been  of
enormous  size,  have  recently  been  found  in  the  Fay  yum.  The
vertebra.4  are  said  to  indicate  that  the  creature  to  which  they
belonged  was  longer  than  the  largest  python  known.3  The  allies
of  the  great  serpent-devil  A pep  were  as  hostile  to  man  as
was  their  master  to  the  Sun-god,  and  they  were  regarded  with
terror  by  the  minds  of  those  who  had  evolved  them.  On  the  other
hand,  there  were  numbers  of  spirits  whose  actions  were  friendly

* In  October,  1899,  the  level  of  the  water  of  Lake  Victoria  was  2 ft.  below  the
normal,  and  in  December  the  level  at  Aswan  was  5 ft.  8 ins.  below  the  average  of
previous  years.

5 “ If  the  proportions  of  this  snake  were  tlio  same  as  in  the  existing  Python
“ *ehoe  it,  probably  reach ed  a length  of  thirty  feet.”  C.  W.  Andrews,  D.Sc.,  in
Geological  May.,  vol.  viii.,  1901,  p.  438.  ^


12


HEAVEN  AND  IIELL


and  beneficial  to  man,  and  some  of  these  were  supposed  to  do  battle
on  his  behalf  against  the  evil  spirits.

Thus  at  a very  early  period  the  predynastic  Egyptian  must
have  conceived  the  existence  of  a great  company  of  spirits  whose
goodwill,  or  at  all  events  whose  inaction,  could  only  be  obtained  by
bribes,  i.e.,  offerings,  and  cajolery  and  flattery ; and  of  a second
large  company  whose  beneficent  deeds  to  man  he  was  wont  to
acknowledge  and  whose  powerful  help  he  was  anxious  to  draw
towards  himself ; and  of  a third  company  who  were  supposed  to  bo
occupied  solely  with  making  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  to  shine,  and
the  rivers  and  streams  to  flow,  and  the  clouds  to  form  and  the  rain
to  fall,  and  who,  in  fact,  wore  always  engaged  in  carrying  out
diligently  the  workings  and  evolutions  of  all  natural  things,  both
small  and  great.  The  spirits  to  whom  in  predynastic  times  the
Egyptians  ascribed  a nature  malicious  or  unfriendly  towards  man,
and  who  were  regarded  much  as  modern  nations  have  regarded
goblins,  hobgoblins,  gnomes,  trolls,  elves,  etc.,  developed  in  dynastic
times  into  a corporate  society,  with  aims,  and  intentions,  and  acts
wholly  evil,  and  with  a government  which  was  devised  by  the
greatest  and  most  evil  of  their  number.  To  these,  in  process  of
time,  were  joined  the  spirits  of  evil  men  and  women,  and  the
prototype  of  hell  was  formed  by  assuming  the  existence  of  a place
where  evil  spirits  and  their  still  more  evil  chiefs  lived  together.
By  the  same  process  of  imagination  beneficent  and  friendly  spirits
were  grouped  together  in  one  abode  under  the  direction  of  rulers
who  were  well  disposed  towards  man,  and  this  idea  became  the
nucleus  of  the  later  conception  of  the  heaven  to  which  the  souls  of
good  men  and  women  were  supposed  by  the  Egyptian  to  depart,
after  he  had  developed  sufficiently  to  conceive  the  doctrine  of
immortality.  The  chiefs  of  the  company  of  evil  spirits  subsequently
became  the  powerful  devils  of  historic  times,  and  the  rulers  of  the
company  of  beneficent  and  good  spirits  became  the  gods ; the  spirits
of  the  third  company,  i.e.,  the  spirits  of  the  powers  of  Nature,
became  the  great  cosmic  gods  of  the  dynastic  Egyptians.  The  cult
of  this  last-class  of  spirits,  or  gods,  differed  in  many  ways  from  that
of  the  spirits  or  gods  who  were  supposed  to  be  concerned  entirely
with  the  welfare  of  man,  and  in  dynastic  times  there  are  abundant


ANTIQUITY”  OF  EGYPTIAN  MAGIC


13


proofs  of  this  in  religious  texts  and  compositions.  In  the  hymns  to
the  Sun-god,  under  whatsoever  name  he  is  worshipped,  we  find  that
the  greatest  wonder  is  expressed  at  his  majesty  and  glory,  and  that
he  is  apostrophised  in  terms  which  show  forth  the  awe  and  fear  of
his  devout  adorer.  His  triumphant  passage  across  the  sky  is
described,  the  unfailing  regularity  of  his  rising  and  setting  is
mentioned,  reference  is  made  to  the  vast  distance  over  which  he
passes  in  a moment  of  time,  gloi’y  is  duly  ascribed  to  him  for  the
great  works  which  he  performs  in  nature,  and  full  recognition  is
given  to  him  as  the  creator  of  men  and  animals,  of  birds  and  fish,
of  trees  and  plants,  of  reptiles,  and  of  all  created  things  ; the
praise  of  the  god  is  full  and  sufficient,  yet  it  is  always  that  of  a
finite  being  who  appears  to  be  overwhelmed  at  the  thought  of  the
power  and  might  of  an  apparently  infinite  being.  The  petitions
lack  the  personal  appeal  which  we  find  in  the  Egyptian’s  prayers
to  the  man-god  Osiris,  and  show  that  he  regarded  the  two  gods
from  entirely  different  points  of  view.  It  is  impossible  to  say  how
earlv  this  distinction  between  the  functions  of  the  two  gods  was
made,  but  it  "is  certain  that  it  is  coeval  with  the  beginnings  of
dynastic  history,  and  that  it  was  observed  until  very  late  times.

The  element  of  magic,  which  is  the  oldest  and  most  persistent
characteristic  of  the  worship  of  the  gods  and  of  the  Egyptian
religion,  generally  belongs  to  the  period  before  this  distinction  was
arrived  at,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  dates  from  the  time  when  man
thought  that  the  good  and  evil  spirits  were  beings  who  were  not
greatly  different  from  himself,  .and  who  could  be  propitiated  with
gifts,  and  controlled  by  means  of  words  of  power  and  by  the  per-
formance of  ceremonies,  and  moved  to  action  hv  hymns  and
addresses.  This  belief  was  present  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians
in  all  ages  of  their  history,  and  it  exists  in  a modified  form  among,
the  Muhammadan  Egyptians  and  Sudani  men  to  this  day.  It  is
true  that  they  proclaim  vehemently  that  there  is  no  god  but  God,
and  that  Muhammad  is  His  Prophet,  and  that  God’s  power  is
infinite  and  absolute,  but  they  take  care  to  guard  the  persons  of
themselves  and  their  children  from  the  Evil  Eye  and  from  the
assaults  of  malicious  and  evil  spirits,  by  means  of  amulets  of  all
kinds  as  zealously  now  as  their  ancestors  did  in  the  days  befor^


14


EVIL  SPIRITS


the  existence  of  God  Who  is  One  was  conceived.  The  caravan
men  protect  their  camels  from  the  Evil  Eye  of  the  spirits  of  the
desert  by  fastening  bright-coloured  beads  between  the  eyes  of  their
beasts,  and  by  means  of  long  fringes  which  hang  from  their
mahhlfas,  or  saddles,  and  in  spite  of  their  firm  belief  in  the  infinite
power  of  God,  they  select  an  auspicious  day  on  which  to  set  out
on  a journey,  and  they  never  attempt  to  pass  certain  'isolated
caves,  or  ravines,  or  mountains,  in  the  night  time.  All  the
members  of  the  great  family  of  the  Jinn  are  to  them  as  real  to-day
as  their  equivalents  were  to  the  ancient  Egyptians,  and,  from  the
descriptions  of  desert  spirits  which  arc  given  by  those  who  have
been  fortunate  enough  to  see  them,  it  is  clear  that  traditions  of
the  form  and  appearance  of  ancient  Egyptian  fiends  and  evil
spirits  have  been  unconsciously  preserved  until  the  present  day.
The  modem  Egyptians  call  them  by  Arabic  names,  but  the
descriptions  of  them  agree  well  with  those  which  might  be  made
of  certain  genii  that  appear  in  ancient  Egyptian  mythological
works  treating  of  the  Underworld  and  its  inhabitants.

The  peoples  of  the  Eastern  Sudan,  who  are  also  Muhammadans,
have  inherited  many  ideas  and  beliefs  from  the  ancient  Egyptians,
and  this  is  riot  to  be  wondered  at  when  we  remember  that  the
civilization  of  Nubia  from  the  beginning  of  the  XVlIIth  Dynasty
to  the  end  of  the  XXVlth,  i.e.,  from  about  b.c.  1550  to  about
b.c.  550,  was  nothing  but  a slavish  copy  of  that  of  Egypt.  A
stay  of  some  months  in  the  village  at  the  foot  of  Jobel  Barkal,
which  marks  the  site  of  a part  of  the  old  Nubian  city  of  Napata,
convinced  me  of  this  fact,  and  visits  to  other  places  in  the  Eastern
Sfidan  proved  that  these  ideas  and  beliefs  were  widespread.  The
hills  and  deserts  are,  according  to  native  belief,  peopled  with
spirits,  which  are  chiefly  of  a disposition  unfriendly  to  man,  and
they  are  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  entering  both  human
. beings  and  animals  almost  at  pleasure.  Palm-trees  die  or  become
unfruitful,  and  cattle  fall  sick  through  the  operations  of  evil  spirits,
and  any  misfortune  which  comes  upon  the  community  or  upon  the
individual  is  referred  to  the  same  cause.  The  pyramids,  which
they  call  furabU , on  the  hill,  are  viewed  with  almost  childish  fear
by  the  natives  who,  curiously  enough,  speak  of  the  royal  personages


MODERN  SUDANI  SUPERSTITIONS  to

buried  therein  as  illdhdt,  or  “gods,”  and  none  of  them,  if  it  can
possibly  be  avoided,  will  go  up  after  sundown  into  “ the  mountain,”
as  they  call  the  sandstone  ridge  on  which  they  are  built.  Tombs
and  cemeteries  are  carefully  avoided  at  night  as  a matter  of  course,
but  to  approach  the  pyramids  at  night  is  regarded  as  a wilful  act
which  is  sure  to  bring  down  upon  the  visitor  the  wrath  of  the
spirits  ©f  the  kings,  who  have  by  some  means  acquired  a divine
character  in  the  eyes  of  the  natives.  When  I was  opening  one  of
the  pyramids  at  Jebel  liarkal  in  1897,  Muhammad  wad  Ibrahim,
the  shekh  of  the  village,  tried  to  keep  the  workmen  at  work  as
long  as  daylight  lasted,  but  after  this  had  been  done  for  two  or
three  evenings,  several  of  the  wives  of  the  men  appeared  and
carried  off  their  husbands,  fearing  they  should  cither  be  bewitched,
or  suffer  some  penalty  for  intrusion  in  that  place  at  the  time  when,
in  popular  opinion,  the  spirits  of  the  dead  came  forth  to  enjoy  the
cool  of  the  evening.  The  same  idea  prevailed  further  south  among
the  people  who  lived  on  the  river  near  the  pyramids  of  Jiakrawiyeh,
which  mark  the  site  of  the  royal  necropolis  of  the  ancient  city  of
lierua,  or  Mama,  i.e.,  Meroe.  The  local  shekh  was  appointed  to
go  with  me  and  to  help  in  taking  measurements  of  some  of  the
pyramids  at  this  place,  but  when  we  were  about  half  a mile  from
them  he  dismounted,  and  said  he  could  go  no  further  because  he
was  afraid  of  the  spirits  of  the  gods,  Utah  At,  who  were  buried  there.
After  much  persuasion  he  consented  to  accompany  me,  but  nothing
would  induce  him  to  let  the  donkeys  go  to  the  pyramids ; having
hobbled  them  and  tied  them  to  a large  stone  he  came  on,  but
seated  himself  on  the  ground  at  the  northern  end  of  the  main
£roup  of  pyramids,  and  nothing  would  persuade  him  to  move
about  among  the  ruins.  The  natives  of  Jebel  liarkal  viewed  the
work  of  excavation  with  great  disfavour  from  the  very  first,  aud
their  hostile  opinion  was  confirmed  by  the  appearance  at  the
pyramids  of  great  numbers  of  wasps,  which,  they  declared,  were
larger  than  any  which  they  had  seen  before ; they  were  convinced
that  they  were  evil  spirits  who  had  taken  the  form  of  wasps,  and
that  evil  was  coming  upon  their  village.  It  was  useless  to  explain
to  them  that  the  wasps  only  came  there  to  drink  from  the  water-
skins, which  were  kept  full  and  hung  there  on  pegs  driven  into  the


10  MODERN  SUDANI  SUPERSTITIONS

masonry  for  the  use  of  the  workmen ; aud  when  a harmless  snake,
about  eight  feet  long,  which  had  al§£  crawled  there  to  drink,  was
killed  one  morning  by  the  men,  their  fears  of  impending  evil  were
confirmed,  for  they  were  certain  that  the  spirit  of  a king  had  been
killed,  aud  they  expected  that  vengeance  would  be  taken  upon
them  by  the  divine  spirits  of  his  companions.

About  halfway  up  Jebel  Barkal  there  lived  four  largfe  hawks
which  always  seemed  to  be  following  any  person  who  ascended  the
mountain,  but  yet  never  came  very  near ; these  were  always
l’egarded  by  the  natives  as  the  embodied  spirits  of  the  gods  whose
figures  still  remain  sculptured  and  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  rock-
hewn  sanctuary  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  I never  heal’d  of  any
attempt  beiug  made  to  shoot  or  snare  them  by  the  people  of  the
villages  of  Barkal,  Shibba,  or  Maraud.  The  inhabitants  could  not
know'  that  the  hawk  was  probably  the  first  living  creature  which
was  worshipped  in  the  Nile  Valley,  and  therefore  the  respect  which
they  paid  to  the  hawks  must  have  been  due  to  a tradition  wdiich
had  been  handed  down  to  them  through  countless  generations  from
a past  age.  Their  connecting  the  hawks  with  the  figures  of  the
gods  sculptured  in  the  sanctuary  of  Arnen- lift  is  worthy  of  note,
for  it  seems  to  show  that  on  such  matters  they  thought  along  the
same  lines  as  their  ancestors.

Concerning  amulets,  the  SudAut  man  is  as  superstitious  us
were  his  ancestors  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  he  still  believes  that
stones  of  certain  colours  possess  magical  properties,  especially  when
inscribed  with  certain  symbols,  of  the  meaning  of  which,  however,
he  has  no  knowledge,  but  which  are  due,  he  says,  to  the  presence  of
spirits  in  them.  Women  and  children,  especially  female  children,
protect  many  parts  of  their  bodies  with  strings  of  beads  made  of
magical  stones,  and  sometimes  with  plaques  of  metal  or  stone,  which
are  cut  into  various  shapes  and  ornamented  with  signs  of  magical
.power  ; the  positions  of  such  plaques  on  the  body  are  frequently
identical  with  those  whereon  the  dynastic  Egyptians  laid  amulets
on  the  dead,  and,  if  we  could  learn  from  the  SCld&ni  folk  the  reasons
which  prompt  them  to  make  use  of  such  things,  we  should  probably
find  that  the  beliefs  which  underlie  the  customs  are  also  identical.
The  above  facts  concerning  the  Siidfmi  belief  in  spirits  might  bo


IDEAS  ABOUT  THE  BEETLE


17


greatly  multiplied,  and  they  are  not  so  remotely  connected  with  the
beliefs  of  the  dynastic,'  and^even  predynastic,  Egyptians  as  may
appear  to  be  the  case  at  first  sight,  and  the  writer  behoves  that  a
large  amount  of  information  of  a similar  kind  awaits  the  investigator,
who  will  devote  the  necessary  time  to  living  in  some  of  the  out-of-
the-way  villages  of  the  black  (not  negro)  peoples  who  dwell  on  the
eastern  bank  of  the  Mile  and  of  the  Blue  Nile.

In  many  Isolated  places  in  Southern  Nubia  and  the  Eastern
Sedan  arc  trees  which  men  regard  with  reverence,  but  this  may
be  the  result-  of  contact  with  the  natives  of  Central  Africa,  where
people  pray  to  trees  on  certain  occasions,1  believing  that  the  spirits
which  are  supposed  to  dwell  in  them  can  bestowgifts  upon  those  whom
they  regard  with  favour,  and  ensure  safety  both  to  themselves  and
their  animals  when  travelling.  Still  further  to  the  south  certain
animals,  e.g.,  the  cynocephalus  ape,  which  plays  such  a prominent
part  in  dynastic  Egyptian  mythology,  are  supposed  to  he  inhabited
by  divine  spirits  and  to  possess  extraordinary  powers  of  intelligence
in  consequence,  and  the  various  kinds  of  scarabaei,  or  beetles,  are
thought  to  be  animated  by  spirits,  which  the  natives  connect  with
the  sun.  The  dead  bodies  of  these  insects  were,  in  former  days,
often  eaten  by  women  who  wished  to  become  mothers  of  large
families,  and  to  this  day  parts  of  them  are  cooked,  and  treated
with  oil,  and  made  into  medicines2  for  the  cure  of  sore  eves,  etc.
The  dynastic  Egyptians  believed  that  the  scarab  was  connected

1 “ Under  the  w id  o - s p 1 vad  i ng  branches  of  an  enormous  lieglik-t-rae.  and  on  a
“ spot  beautifully  clean  aiul  sprinkled  with  fine  Baud,  the  Medeya  t-  beseech  an
“ unknown  god  to  direct  them  in  their  undertakings  and  to  pioteut  them  from
“’danger.”  Slat-in  Pasha,  Fire  anil  Si  card  in  the  Sudan,  London.  1896,  p.  114.

3 Ibrahim  Hiishdl,  Clerk  of  Telegraphs  at  Menliti,  in  Lower  Egypt,  told  mo  in
January,  1895,  that  in  many  districts  the  beetles  were  boiled,  and  the  grease
extracted  from  them  ; as  they  are  being  boiled  the  shells  come  off.  The  bodies  are
next  roasted  in  olive  oil,  and  then  steeped  in  myrrh,  and  after  this  tiny  aro
macerated  iu  that  liquid,  and  strained  through  muslin ; the  liquid  which  runs
through  is  believed  to  cure  the  itching  which  is  caused  by  a certain  internal  ailment. : '
Some  men  drink  a few  drops  of  it  iu  each  cup  of  coffee,  and  women  drink  it  to
make  them  fat.  The  old  women  have  a prescription  for  sore  eyes,  which  is  as
follows: — Stick  a splinter  of  wood  through  a series  of  beetles  for  twelve  hours
when  a child  is  about  to  be  born  ; when  the  child  is  born,  pull  the  splinter  out  of
the  last  beetle,  and  dip  it  in  kohl,  and  rub  the  eyes  of  the  child
be  done  in  the  proper  way  the  child  will  qever  suffer  frojajioifpjeyaj.  ”0 BIETY  ^


18


FORMS  OF  EVIL  SPIRITS


with  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and  in  religious  texts  of  all  periods  it  is
said  that  the  beetle  occupied  a place  in  the  boat  of  this  god.

YVe  have  already  seen  that  the  dynastic  Egyptians,  and  their
predecessors,  conceived  the  existence  of  spirits  hostile  towards
man,  of  spirits  beneficent  towards  man,  and  of  spirits  which  were
wholly  occupied  with  carrying  out  the  various  operations  of
Nature,  and  we  must  now  consider  the  manner  and  forms  in  which
they  became  visible  to  man.  The  commonest  form  in  which  a
spirit  was  believed  to  make  itself  visible  to  man  was  that  of  some
beast,  or  bird,  or  fish,  or  reptile,  ami  at  a very  early  period
adoration,  in  one  form  or  another,  of  the  so-called  inferior  animals
was  well-nigh  universal  in  Egypt.  At  the  time  when  this  worship
began  animals,  as  well  as  inanimate  objects,  were  not  considered
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  Valley  to  be  greatly  removed  from
themselves  in  intelligence.  Primitive  man  saw  nothing  ridiculous
in  attributing  speech  to  inanimate  objects  and  animals,  which
were  supposed  to  think,  and  reason,  and  act  like  human  beings  ;
and  the  religious  literature  of  many  of  the  most  ancient  nations
contains  numerous  proofs  of  this  fact.  Among  thy  baked  clay
tablets  found  in  the  ruins  of  the  Royal  Library  of  Nineveh,  which
contained  copies  of  hundreds  of  documents  preserved  in  the  temples
of  the  most  ancient  cities  of  Babylonia,  were  fragments  of  a
dialogue  between  a horse  and  an  ox,  which  is  now  known  as  the
“Fable  of  the  Horse  and  the  Ox,”1  and  it  is  tolerably  certain  that
this  dialogue  did  not  originate  in  the  reign  of  Asbur-baui-pal
(is.e.  GC>8--C>2<>),  although  the  tablet  on  which  it  was  written  is
not  older  than  his  time.  Again,  in  the  Creation  Legend  the
dragon-monster  Tiamat,  the  representative  of  the  powers  of  evil
and  darkness,  is  made  to  conspire  against  the  gods,  and  to  create
a serpent  brood2  in  order  to  do  effective  battle  with  them; ’and
other  instances  might  be  quoted  to  show  that  the  Babylonians  and
^Assyrians  attributed  to  the  animals  reason,  passions,  and  language.


1 See  Guide  io  the  JJnhylortiun  and  Assyrian  Ant  if  pi  i ties , London,  1900,  p.  48 ;
ti»o  CrogincntiH  are  exhibited  in  the  British  Museum,  Nineveh  Gallery,  Table-case  C.

:l  I hid.  p.  ;>0.  For  the  cuneiform  tablets  in  the  British  Museum  see  Nineveh
Galler  , Table-case  A.  See  also  L.  W.  King,  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation . vol.  i.,


TALKING  ANIMALS,  TREES,  ETC.  19

From  the  Bible  we  learn  that  the  Hebrews  held  the  same
views  as  their  kinsmen  on  this  matter,  and  we  are  told  that  the
serpent  beguiled  and  seduced  Eve  by  his  speech,  and  made  her
break  the  command  of  the  Lord  (Genesis  iii.  1 ff.),  and  that  the
slie-ass  of  Balaam  remonstrated  with  her  master  and  asked  him
why  he  had  smitten  her  three  times  (Numbers  xxii.  28).  We  may
note  in  passing  that  this  animal  is  said  to  have  been  able  to  see  the
Angel  of  the  Lord  standing  in  the  way,  whilst  her  master  could
not,  and  we  are  forcibly  reminded  of  the  belief  which  was  current
among  Jews  and  Muhammadans  to  the  effect  that  dogs  howled
before  a death  because  they  were  able  to  see  the  Angel  of  Death
going  about  on  his  mission,  to  say  nothing  of  our  own  superstition
to  the  same  effect,  which,  however,  we  seem  to  have  derived  not
from  the  East,  but  from  cognate  northern  European  nations.  We
see  also  from  the  Book  of  Judges  (ix.  8 ff.)  that  speech  and  reason
were  sometimes  attributed  to  objects  which  we  regard  as  inanimate,
for  we  read  that  the  trees  “ went  forth  on  a time  to  anoint  a king
“over  them  ; and  they  said  unto  the  olive  tree,  Reign  thou  over  us.”
When  the  olive  tree  refused,  they  went  to  the  fig  tree  with  the
same  request,  and  when  the  fig  tree  refused,  they  went  to  the  vine,
which  refused  to  leave  its  wine  “which  cheereth  God  and  man”  ;
on  this  they  applied  to  the  bramble,  which  placed  before  them  the
choice  of  coming  and  putting  their  trust  in  its  shadow,  or  of  being
burnt  by  the  fire  which  should  come  forth  from  out  of  itself.  In
connexion  with  this  idea  may,  perhaps,  be  mentioned  the  incident
recorded  in  Numbers  xxi.  17,  wherein  we  are  told  that  the  princes
and  nobles  digged  a well  “ with  their  staves  ’ by  the  direction  of
tfie  lawgiver,  and  that  the  Children  of  Israel  sang  this  song,

“ Spring  up,  0 well ; sing  ye  unto  it.”  Many  other  examples
might  be  quoted  from  Hebrew  literature  to  show*  that  animals  and  .
inanimate  objects  were  on  certain  occasions  regarded  as  beings  which
possessed  thinking  and  reasoning  powers  similar  to  those  of  men.

Among  the  Egyptians  animals  thought,  and  reasoned,  and
spoke  as  a matter  of  course,  and  their  literature  is  full  of  indica-
tions that  they  believed  them  to  be  moved  by  motives  aud  passions
similar  to  those  of  human  beings.  As  a typical  example  may  be
quoted  fjhe  instance  of  the  cow,  in  the  Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers, «


20


THE  DOG-HEADED  APE


who  tells  her  herd  that  his  elder  brother  is  standing  behind  the
door  of  the  byre  with  his  dagger  in  his  hand  waiting  to  slay  him  ;
the  young  man  having  seen  the  feet  of  his  brother  under  the  door
took  to  flight,  and  so  saved  his  life.  Here  we  have  another  proof
that  animals  wex*e  sometimes  credited  with  superhuman  intelligence
and  discernment,  since  but  for  the  warning  of  the  cow,  who  had
perceived  what  her  master  had  failed  to  notice,  the  herd  would
have  been  slain  as  soon  as  he  entered  the  byre.  Here,  too,  must
be  noted  the  very  important  part  which  is  played  in  the  Judgment
Scene  in  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  by  animals.  In  the  Story  of  the
Shipwreck  also  we  are  told  concerning  a huge  serpent  thirty  cubits
long,  with  a beard  two  cubits  long,  which  made  a long  speech  to
the  unfortunate  man  who  was  wrecked  on  the  island  wherein  it
lived.

In  the  papyri  of  the  XVII Ith  Dynasty  we  have  representa-
tions of  the  weighing  of  the  heart  of  the  deceased  in  the  Great
Balance,  which  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  Company
of  the  gods,  who  act  as  judges,  and  who  pass  the  sentence  of  doom,
that  must  be  ratified  by  Osiris,  according  to  the  report  of  the  god
Thoth,  who  acts  as  scribe  and  secretary  to  the  gods.  The  Egyptian
hoped  that  his  heart  would  exactly  counterbalance  the  feather,
symbolic  of  Mafit  or  the  Law,  and  neither  wished  nor  expected  it
to  outweigh  it,  for  he  detested  performing  works  of  supererogation.
The  act  of  weighing  was  carefully  watched  by  Anubis  the  god  of
the  dead,  whose  duty  was  to  cast  to  the  Eater  of  the  Dead  the
hearts  which  failed  to  balance  the  feather  exactly;  and  by  the
guardian  angel  of  the  deceased,  on  behalf  of  the  deceased ; and  by
a dog-headed  ape,  who  was  seated  on  the  top  of  the  pillar,  and  who
supported  himself  upon  the  bracket  on  which  was  balanced  the
• beam  of  the  Great  Scales.  This  ape  was  the  associate  and  com-
panion of  the  god  Thoth,  and  he  was  supposed  to  be  skilled  in  the
art  of  computation,  and  in  the  science  of  numbers,  and  in  the
measurement  of  time ; his  duty  at  the  weighing  of  the  heart  was
to  scrutinize  the  pointer  of  the  scales,  and,  having  made  sure  that
the  beam  of  the  scales  was  exactly  level,  i.e.,  that  the  heart  and
the  feather  exactly  counterbalanced  each  other,  to  report  the  fact
4 to  Thoth,  so  that  he  in  turn  might  make  his  report  to  the  gods  on


THE  DOG-HEADED  APE


21


the  case  under  consideration.  The  ape  seated  on  the  pillar  of  the
Scales  belongs  to  a species  which  is  now  only  found  in  the  Sudan,
but  which  in  late  predynastic  or  in  early  dynastic  times  might
have  been  found  all  over  Egypt.  The  dog-headed  ape  is  very
clever,  and  even  in  modern  times  is  regarded  with  much  respect
by  the  natives,  who  believe  that  its  intelligence  is  of  the  highest
order,  liud  that  its  cunning  is  far  superior  to  that  of  man;  the
high  esteem  in  which  it  was  held  by  the  ancient  Egyptians  is
proved  by  the  fact  that  the  god  Thoth  was  held  to  be  incarnate  in
him,  and  by  the  important  functions  which  he  performed  in  their
mythology.

It  will  also  be  remembered  that  in  the  vignette  which
represents  the  sunrise  in  the  I took  of  the  Dead  a company  of  six
or  seven  dog-headed  apes  is  depicted  in  the  act  of  adoring  the  god
of  day,  as  he  rises  on  the  eastern  horizon  of  heaven ; they  stand
on  their  hind  legs  and  their  forepaws  are  raised  in  adoration,  and
they  are  supposed  to  be  singing  hymns  to  the  Sun-god.  In  a
text  which  describes  this  scene  these  apes  are  said  to  be  the  spirits
of  the  dawn*who  sing  hymns  of  praise  to  the  Sun-god  whilst  he  is
rising,  and  who  transform  themselves  into  apes  as  soon  as  he  has
risen.  It  is  a well  known  fact  in  natural  history  that  the  apes  and
the  monkeys  in  the  forests  of  Africa  and  other  countries  chatter
noisily  at  dawn,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  was  the  matutinal  cries  of
these  animals  which  suggested  their  connection  Avith  the  spirits  of
the  daAvn.  It  is  not  stated  in  the  text  Avhether  the  spirits  of  the
daAvn  Averc  created  afresh  each  day  or  not,  or  whether  the  monkeys
transformed  themselves  into  spirits  daily,  and  so  Avere  able  to
greet  the  rising  sun  each  morning.  We  may,  hoAvever,  connect
the  idea  concerning  them  with  that  Avhich  is  met  with  in  an
ancient  Hebrew  description 1 of  the  angels  of  HebrcAv  mythology,
for  one  group  of  “ angels  of  service  ” from  the  river  of  fire  were
supposed  to  be  created  daily  in  order  to  sing  one  hymn  to  God
Almighty  and  then  to  come  to  an  end.

Passing  noAV  to  the  consideration  of  the  Avorship  of  animals  by
the  Egyptians  of  the  predynastic  and  dynastic  periods,  Ave  have

1 Compare  Eiseumenger,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  371.  V1033  NOVI  NOV  biD

rrvp  now  -run  nroo  rrwn  ONto


22  FEAR  THE  MOTIVE  OF  WORSHIP

to  endeavour  to  find  the  reasons  which  induced  the  early  inhabi-
tants of  the  Nile  Valley  to  pay  adoration  to  birds,  beasts,  fishes,
and  other  creatures  of  the  animal  kingdom.  A careful  examina-
tion of  the  facts  now  available  shows  that  in  Egypt  primitive  man
must  have  worshipped  animals  in  the  first  instance  because  they
possessed  strength,  and  power,  and  cunning  greater  than  his  own,
or  because  they  were  endowed  with  some  quality  which  enabled
them  to  do  him  bodily  harm  or  to  cause  his  death.  The  funda-
mental motive  in  man  for  worshipping  animals  was  probably  vkak.
When  man  first  took  up  his  abode  in  Egypt  the  physical  conditions
of  the  country  must  have  resembled  those  of  some  parts  of  Central
Africa  at  the  present  time,  and  the  whole  country  was  probably
covered  with  forests  and  the  ground  obscured  by  dense  under-
growth. In  the  forests  great  numbers  of  elephants  and  other
large  beasts  must  have  lived,  and  the  undergrowth  formed  a home
for  huge  serpents  of  various  species  and  for  hosts  of  deadly  reptiles  of
different  kinds,  and  the  river  was  filled  with  great  crocodiles  similar
in  length  and  bulk  to  those  which  have  been  seen  in  recent  years
in  the  Blue  Nile  and  in  the  rivers  further  to  the  south.  We  have
no  means  of  knowing  at  what  period  the  elephant  was  exterminated
in  Egypt,  but  it  was  probably  long  before  dynastic  times,  because
he  finds  no  place  in  Egyptian  mythology.  The  ivory  objects
which  have  been  found  in  predynastie  graves  prove  that  this
substance  Avas  prized  by  the  primitive  Egyptians,  and  that  it  Avas,
comparatively,  hugely  used  by  them  for  making  personal  orna-
ments and  other  small  objects,  but  Avhether  they  imported
elephants’  tusks  from  the  Sudan,  or  obtained  them  from  animals
Avhich  they  hunted  and  killed  in  some  part  of  Egypt  cannot  be
said.  On  the  top  of  one  of  the  standards 1 which  are  painted  on
predynastie  vases  we  find  the  figure  of  an  elephant,  a fact  which
seems  to  show  that  this  animal  Avas  the  symbol  of  the  family  of  the
man  for  whom  was  made  the  vase  on  Avhich  it  is  found,  or  of  his
country,  or  of  the  tutelary  deity,  i.e.,  the  god  of  his  toAvn  or  tribe.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite  clear  from  several  passages  in  the
texts  with  which  the  Avails  of  the  chambers  and  corridors  of  the
pyramid  tombs  of  On  sis  and  Teta,  and  other  kings  of  the  'Early
1 1 J.  do  Morgan,  Ethnographic  Prchivtorujiie,  p.  93.


ANTIQUITY  OF  SERPENT  WORSHIP


23


Empire  at  Sakkfira  are  inscribed  that  Egypt  was  infested  with
venomous  snakes  and  noxious  reptiles  of  various  kinds  when  the
original  forms  of  those  passages  were  written,  and  that  they  were
sufficiently  formidable  and  numerous  to  cause  the  living  grave
anxiety  about  the  safety  of  the  bodies  of  their  dead.  Thus  in  the
text  of  -Unas,’  a king  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  we  find  a series  of
short  magical  formulae,  many  of  which  arc  directed  against
serpents  and  fierce  animals,  and  all  are  couched  in  terms  which
prove  that  they  must  have  been  composed  long  before  they  were
inscribed  on  the  walls  inside  this  king’s  pyramid,  and  M.  Mospero
is  undoubtedly  correct  in  thinking  that  they  must  have  presented
serious  difficulties  to  the  king’s  lifrrali.  In  these  formulae

are  mentioned  the  serpents  Ufa,  (j  '$8*,  Nai,

Heka,  (j  faH , Hekret,  Jj^  ^ ^ 1JBI , Sotche1-1’  P ^ j(  tffll  >

Akeneh’  A ™ Amen’  H “ l-Ulu’  ru  f)  ^ m>  Antsf,

O ™ A iSi’  Tcheser-tep,  ^ [1  ^ © TflJL,  Thetliu,  “ ,

Hemth,  (XI  Scnenahomthet,  | “ I)  fO  ^ “ Wi,  and

allusion  is  made  to  a most  “ terrible  serpent,”  ^ <ww«
0 s=3  (| . At  the  time  when  these  formulae  were  composed

each  of  these  serpents  was  probably  the  type  of  a class  of  venomous
snakes,  and  their  names  no  doubt  described  their  physical  charac-
teristics and  their  methods  of  attack.  The  abject  fear  of  the
Egyptians  for  the  serpent  seems  to  have  been  constant  in  all
generations,  and  the  texts  of  the  latest  as  well  as  those  of  the  earliest
period  contain  numerous  prayers  intended  to  deliver  the  deceased
from  the  “ serpents  which  are  in  the  Underworld,  which  live  upon
“ the  bodies  of  men  and  women,  and  consume  their  blood.” 2 Long,
after  Egypt  was  cleared  of  snakes  and  when  the  country  was  in
the  condition  in  which  we  now  know  it,  the  tradition  remained  that  a

1 Ed.  Mnspero,  1.  533  ff.

M \\

Book  of  the


WWV\


k<NM


Dead,  Chapter ju.,  1.  4.


^ (0 Q VNAAA-N

-Qr  (wiT  ©

j -vvwv>


I I •


24  WORSHIP  OF  URAEUS  AND  VULTURE


mighty  serpent,  some  thirty  cubits,  i.e.,  about  fifty  feet  long,  lived
on  the  top  of  Eakhau,  Jj  «—=>  ^ , the  Mountain  of

the  Sunrise,  and  his  name  was  Ami-lletnf,  i.e.,  “Dweller  in  his


flame,”


w ra


The  worship  of  the  serpent  in  Egypt  is  of  great  antiquity,
and  shrines  to  certain  members  of  the  species  must  have  existed
at  a very  earlv  date.  In  predvuastic  times  the  uraeus  was  held  in
great  veneration,  and  the  great  centre  of  its  worship  was  in  the
Delta,  at  a place  which  the  Egyptians  in  dynastic  times  called
“ Per-Uatchct,”  and  the  Greeks  “ Buto.”  At  the  period  when  the
uraeus  was  being  worshipped  in  Bower  Egypt,  the  vulture  was  the
chief  object  of  adoration  in  Upper  Egypt,  its  principal  sanctuary
being  situated  in  the  city  which  the  Egyptians  called  “ Nekhebet,”
and  the  Greeks  “ Eileithyiaspolis.”  The  uraeus  goddess  was  called
“Uatehet,”  or  “ Uatchit,”  and  the  vulture  goddess  “Nekhebet,”
or  “ Xekhebit,”  and  the  cities  which  were  the  centres  of  their
worship  became  so  important,  probably  in  consequence  of  this
worship,  that  in  the  early  dynastic  period  we  find  it  Customary  for
kings  when  they  wished  to  proclaim  their  sovereignty  over  all


Egypt  to  give  themselves  the  title


which  may  be  freely


rendered  by  “ Lord  of  the  shrines  of  the  Vulture  and  Uraeus.’*
The  equivalents  of  these  signs  are  found  on  the  now  famous  plaque
inscribed  with  the  name  and  titles  of  Aha,  a king  who  is  often,  but
without  sufficient  reason,  assumed  to  be  identical  with  Mena  or
Menes,  and  thus  it  is  clear  that  the  cities  of  Nekhebet  and  Per-
Uatcliet  were  important  religious  and  administrative  centres  in
predynastic  times.

Other  wild  animals  which  were  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians
'about  the  same  period  were  the  lion,  and  the  lynx,  which  they
called  ioa f/c t arid  the  hippopotamus,  and  the  quadruped


which  became  the  symbol  of  the  god  Set ; among  amphibious
creatures  the  crocodile  and  the  turtle  were  the  most  important.
Among  domestic  animals  the  bull  and  the  cow  were  the  principal
objects  of  worship,  and  proof  is  forthcoming  that  they  were


1 Book  of  the  Bead,  Chapter  cviii.,  1.  5.


WORSHIP  OF  THE  BOLT,


25


regarded  as  deities  in  predynastic  times.  The  great  strength  of
the  bull,  and  his  almost  irresistible  attack  in  fighting  and  headlong
rush,  exeited  the  fear  and  admiration  of  primitive  man,  and  his
fecundating  powers  made  him  at  a very  early  period  the  type  of
the  generative  principle  in  nature.  For  thousands  of  years  the
kings  of  Egypt  delighted  to  call  themselves  “ mighty  bull,”  and
the  importance  which  they  attached  to  this  title  is  evinced  by  the
fact  that  many  of  them  inscribed  it  upon  their  .s erekh,  or  cog-
nizance, which  displayed  their  name  as  the  descendant  of  Horus  ;


Usortson  II.  receiving  *4  lifo  ” from  tho  god  Sept.  Behind  him  is  his  ncrckh
inscribed  with  his  Horns  name.

in  fact,  it  formed  their  Horus  name.  The  figure  of  a bull  is
found  sculptured  upon  some  of  the  green  slate  objects  which  date  .
from  tlie  predynastic  period,  and  which  have  been  erroneously
called  palettes,  and  a flint  model  of  the  head  and  horns  of  the  cow,

. which  in  later  times  became  the  animal  symbolic  of  the  goddess
Tlathor,  was  found  in  a predynastic  grave  ; all  these  objects  are
in  the  British  Museum  (Nos.  20,700,  20,702,  and  32,124).  The
warrior  kings  of  the  XYIIIth  and  XIXth  Dynasties  were  pleased
when  the  court  scribes  related  in  commemorative  inscriptions  how.


26


WORSHIP  OF  THE  BULL


their  lords  raged  and  roared  like  lions  as  they  mounted  their
chariots  aud  set  out  to  crush  the  foolish  enemy  who  had  the


Serekh  of  Bamcspa  TL,  on
which  ifnnpf*ril»ed  fcho  IIoruH
niune  of  this  king,  i.u.,  Ra-
nk k jit  - mf.ri  - Maat.  Thu
canopy  of  the  «erekh  i«  in
the  form  of  the  nky
am]  from  the  standard  on
which  it  rests  spring  two
hurntTi  arms  and  bamia.
The  right  granny*  a sf  aitdarr!
&Mjrmt>ufitf*d  by  th»*  head  of
the  Icing,  which  hero  repre-

Rants  the  “ royal  kaM  * aud

the  left  the  symbol  or  Mailt,


temerity  to  defy  them,  but  they  preferred
to  be  likened  to  the  “mighty  bull,”  who
trampled  opposition  beneath  his  hoofs,  aud
gored  and  destroyed  with  his  horns  that
which  his  hoofs  had  failed  to  annihilate.
Out  of  the  reverence  which  was  paid  to  the
bull  in  predynastic  times  grew  the  worship
of  two  special  bulls.  Hap  and  Mer-ur,  which
names  the  (1  reeks  modified  into  Apis  and
Mnevis,  the  sacred  animals  of  tlic  ancient
cities  of  Memphis  and  Heliopolis  respectively.
The  worship  of  Apis  is  at  least  as  old  as  the
beginning  of  the  dynastic  period,  and  we
know  that  the  cult  of  this  bull  continued  in
Memphis  until  the  close  of  the  rule  of  the
Ptolemies.  In  some  way  the  beliefs  con-
cerning Apis  were  connected  with  those
which  the  Egyptians  held  concerning  Osiris,
the  god  and  judge  of  the  dead,  who  is  called
in  the  Book  of  the  Dead 1 the  “Bull  of
Amentet,”  i.e.,  the  “ Bull  of  the  Under-
world,” ( ^ | ; and  in  the  Ptolemaic

period  the  two  gods  were  merged  into
one  and  formed  the  god  Sarapis,  to
whom  were  ascribed  the  attributes  of  -|i^ev
Egyptian  and  Greek  gods  of  the  Under-
world.

It  now  seems  to  he  generally  admitted  g
by  ethnologists  that  there  are  three  mait£
causes  which  have  induced  men  to  worship
animals,  i.e.,  they  have  worshipped  themjt
as  animals,  or  as  the  dwelling-places  of  gods,
or  as  representatives  of  tribal  ancestors.


1 Chapter  i.f  1.  4.


APIS  BULL  AND  RAM  OF  MENDES


27


There  is  no  reason  whatsoever  for  doubting  that  in  neolithic  times
the  primitive  Egyptians  worshipped  animals  as  animals  and  as
nothing  more ; the  belief  that  animals  were  the  abodes  of  spirits  or
deities  grew  up  in  their  minds  later,  and  it  was  this  which  induced
them  to  mummify  the  dead  bodies  of  birds,  and  beasts,  and  fishes,
etc.,  in  which  they  thought  deities  to  have  been  incarnate.  We
have  no  tomans  of  knowing  exactly  when  this  belief  arose,  but  it
is  certainly  as  old  as  the  time  when  the  Apis  Bull  began  to  be
worshipped,  and  when  the  Egyptians  began  to  keep  the  ram  and
other  animals,  and  birds,  and  reptiles,  and  fishes  in  sanctuaries,  and
to  worship  them  as  deities  incarnate.  In  connection  with  it  we
must  notice  that,  in  the  case  of  the  Apis  Bull  and  the  Ram  of
Mendes,  the  god  Apis  did  not  take  up  his  abode  in  every  bull,  and
that  the  soul  of  Osiris,  which  was  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  Ram  of
Mendes,  did  not  make  his  habitation  in  every  ram.  The  Apis  Bull,
like  the  Ram  of  Mendes,  had  to  be  sought  for  diligently,  and  no
hull  or  ram  was  made  the  object  of  veneration  in  the  sanctuaries  of
Memphis  or  Mendes  unless  he  possessed  the  characteristic  marks  by
which  the  priests  recognized  him.  The  ordinary  bulls  and  rams  of
the  species  to  which  the  Apis  Bull  and  the  Ram  of  Mendes  belonged
were  not  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  the  animals  which  by  the
marks  upon  them  proclaimed  themselves  to  be  the  creatures  to
which  worship  should  be  offered,  and  they  were,  of  coui’se,  sacrificed
in  the  performance  of  funeral  ceremonies  and  killed  and  eaten  as
food  by  the  people,  even  though  somewhat  of  the  deity  may  have
been  incarnate  in  them.  When  the  Apis  Bidl  or  the  Rain  of  Mendes
' died  the  deity  who  had  been  incarnate  in  it  transferred  himself  to
^.ttojp&hcr  animal,  and  therefore  did  not  leave  the  earth.

V-  The  question  as  to  whether  the  Egyptians  worshipped  animals
as  representations  of  tribal  ancestors,  or  “ totems,”  is  one  which  has
’’given  rise  to  much  discussion,  a.nd  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,
*fbr  the  subject  is  one  of  difficulty.  We  know  that  many  of  the
gjtdndards  which  represent  the  nomes  of  Egypt  are  distinguished  by
ngures  of  birds  and  animals,  c.g.,  the  hawk,  the  bull,  the  liai*e,  etc.,
but  it  is  not  clear  whether  these  are  intended  to  represent  “totems”
or  not.  It  is  pretty  certain  that  the  nome-stnndard  of  dynastic
times  was  derived  from  the  standards  which  the  predynastic


NOME  GODS


28.

■aVj.

Egyptians  set  up  in  their  boats,  or  caused  to  be  carried  in  cere-
monial processions,  or  during  the  performance  of  public  functions,
and  there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that,  substantially,  the  same
ideas  and  beliefs  underlie  the  use  of  both  classes  of  standards.  The
animal  or  bird  standing  on  the  top  of  a nome-pcreh  or  standard  is
not  intended  for  a fetish  or  a representation  of  a tribal  ancestor,
but  for  a creature  which  was  regarded  as  the  deity  under  whose
protection  the  people  of  a certain  tract  of  territory  were  placed,  and
we  may  assume  that  within  the  limits  of  that  territory  it  was  un-
lawful to  injure  or  kill  such  animal  or  bird.  Thus  in  the  Nome  of
the  Black  Bull  a black  bull  of  a certain  kind  would  be  regarded  as
a sacred  animal,  and  it  is  certain  that  in  prcdyuastic  times  worship
would  be  offered  to  it  as  a god  ; similarly  in  the  Nome  of  the  Hare
the  hare  would  be  worshipped ; and  in  the  Nome  of  the  Hawk  the
hawk  would  be  worshipped.  Outside  these  nomes,  however,  the
bull  and  the  hare  and  the  hawk  might  be,  and  probably  were,
killed  and  eaten  for  food,  and  from  this  point  of  view  the  sacred
creatures  of  the  Egyptians  may  be  thought  to  have  something  in
common  with  the  totems,  or  deified  representatives  of  tribal
ancestors,  and  with  the  fetishes  of  the  tribes  of  nations  which  are
on  the  lowest  levels  of  civilization.  In  connexion  with  this  matter
it  is  customary  to  quote  the  statements  of  Greek  and  Roman
writers,  many  of  whom  scoff  at  the  religion  of  the  Egyptians
because  it  included  the  worship  of  animals,  and  charge  the  nation
with  fatuity  because  the  animals,  etc.,  which  were  worshipped  and
preserved  with  all  care  in  some  places  were  killed  and  eaten  in
others.  The  evidence  of  such  writers  cannot  be  regarded  jis  wholly
trustworthy,  first,  because  they  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  under-
stand the  views  which  the  Egyptians  held  about  sacred  animals,
and  secondly,  because  they  were  not  in  a position  to  obtain  trust-
worthy information.  In  the  passage  from  one  of  Juvenal's  Satires
already  quoted,  he  declares  that  the  Egyptians  ate  human  flesh,
and  it  is  possible  that  he  believed  what  he  wrote ; still  the  faef;
remains  that  there  is  not  a particle  of  evidence  in  the  Egyptian
inscriptions  to  show  that  they  over  did  so,  and  we  have  every
reason  for  believing  that  they  were  not  cannibals.

His  other  statements  about  the  religion  of  the  Egyptians  are,


ANIMAL  WORSHIP  NOT  TOTEMISM


29


probably,  as  untrustworthy.  There  is  not  enough  ancient  Egyptian
religious  literature  extant  to  enable  us  to  trace  the  history  of
religion  in  all  periods  of  dynastic  history,  still  less  are  we  able  to-
follow  it  back  in  the  predynastic  period,  because  of  that  time  we
have  no  literature  at  all;  such  monuments  and  texts  as  we  have,
however,  serve  to  show  that  the  Egyptians  first  worshipped  animals
as  animals,  and  nothing  more,  and  later  as  the  habitations  of  divine
spirits  or  gods,  but  there  is  no  reason  for  thinking  that  the  animal
worship  of  the  Egyptians  was  descended  from  a system  of  totems
or  fetishes,  as  Mr.  .1.  F.  M’Lennan  believed.1  It  lias  been  assumed
by  some  ethnologists  that  many  primitive  peoples  have  been  accus-
tomed to  name  individuals  after  animals,  and  that  such  animal
names  have  in  certain  cases  become  tribe  names.  These  may  have
become  family  surnames,  and  at  length  the  myths  may  have  grown  up
about  them  in  which  it  is  declared  that  the  families  concerned  were
actually  descended  “ from  the  animals  in  question  as  ancestors,
“ whence  might  arise  many  other  legends  of  strange  adventures
“and  heroic  deeds  of  ancestors,  to  be  attributed  to  the  quasi-human
“ animals  wlipso  names  they  bore ; at  the  same  time,  popular
“ mystification  between  the  great  ancestor  and  the  creature  whose
“ name  he  held  and  handed  down  to  his  race,  might  lead  to  veneration
“for  the  creature  itself,  and  thence  to  full  animal-worship.”3  This
theory  may  explain  certain  facts  connected  with  the  animal-worship
of  numbers  of  savage  or  half-savage  tribes  in  some  parts  of  the
world,  but  it  cannot,  in  the  writer’s  opinion,  be  regarded  as
affording  an  explanation  of  the  animal- worship  of  the  Egyptians.
In  dynastic  times  kings  were,  it  is  true,  worshipped  as  gods,  and
dftrine  honours  were  paid  to  their  statues,  but  the  reason  for  this
was  that  the  king  was  believed  to  be  of  the  seed  of  the  god  Horus,
the  oldest  of  all  the  gods  of  Egypt.  There  is  reason  for  believing
that  to  certain  men  who  were  famous  for  their  knowledge  or  for
some  great  works  which  they  had  accomplished  divine  honours
were  paid,  but  neither  these  nor  the  kings  were  held  to  be
gods  who  were  worshipped  throughout  the  land  as  were  the  well-
known  or  natural  gods  of  the  country.  In  short,  the  worship  which

1 Sec  the  Fortnightly  Review,  1 869-1870.

8 See  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  vol,  ii.,  p.  236.


30


NOME  STANDARDS


was  paid  to  kings  after  their  death,  or  to  ordinary  men,  who  were
sometimes  deified,  was  quite  difierent  from  that  paid  to  the  gods  of
the  country,  whether  they  were  in  animal  or  human  form  or  whether
they  represented  the  spirits  which  concerned  themselves  with  the
welfare  of  men  or  those  which  occupied  themselves  with  the  direc-
tion of  the  operations  of  Nature.

We  see,  moreover,  from  the  nome-standards  that  several  objects
besides  animals  were  worshipped  and  regarded  as  gods,  or  that  they,
at  all  events,  became  the  symbols  of  the  deities  which  were  wor-
shipped in  them.  In  predynastie  times  we  know  that  some  standards
were  surmounted  by  representations  of  two,  three,  four,  or  five

hills,1  c=r),  !Wi,  another  by  two  arrows  (?)

another  by  a fish,  another  by  two  arrows  and  a shield,
etc.  With  the  predynastie  is  probably  to  be  compared  the
dynastic  sign  and  with  the  predynastie  the  dynastic

sign  It  is  not  easy  at  present  to  find  a dynastic  equivalent

for  the  two  arrows  (?)  or  to  find  the  reason  why  the  three

hills  fwi  were  connected  with  a god,  but  we  shall,  probably  be
correct  if  we  connect  the  two  arrows  (?)  with  some  aboriginal  god
of  war,  and  the  three  hills  with  the  abode  of  some,  at  present,
unknown  god.  The  shield  and  the  crossed  arrows  can,  we  think,
be  explained  with  move  certainty.  We  know  from  the  Nome-

Lists  that  the  fifth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,  which  was  called

Sapi  by  the  Egyptians  and  Sai'tes  by  the  Greeks,  had  for  its
capital  the  city  Saut  or  Sais,  and  that  the  great  deity  of  this  city
was  the  goddess  Nit  or  Neith.  The  dynastic  pictures  of  this
goddess  represent  her  in  the  form  of  a goddess  who  holds  in  her
hands  two  arrows  and  a bow ; she  sometimes  wears  upon  her  head
the  crown  of  the  north  ^/,  or  x=><,  which  is  the  sign  for  her  nnmc^
or  two  crossed  arrows  in  fact,  such  pictures  prove  beyond  a

doubt  that  Nit,  the  goddess  of  Sa'is,  was  the  goddess  of  the  chase
jior  excellence.  That  this  goddess  was  worshipped  in  the  earliest
dynastic  period  is  certain,  for  we  find  that  her  name  forms  part  of

1 See  my  “ History  of  Egypt  ” {Egypt  in  the  Predynastie  and  Archaic  Periods),
vol.  i.,  p.  78.


THE  GODDESS  NIT


31


the  name  of  Nit-hetep,  Avho  seems  to  have  been  the  daughter  of
king  Sraa,  and  who  was  probably  the  wife  of  Aha,  and  also  part
of  that  of  the  early  dynastic  king  Mer-Nit.  That  the  dynastic  sign

H is  the  equivalent  of  the  predynastic  sign  there  is  no  reason
v-^r

to  doubt,  and,  as  the  former  is  known  to  represent  the  crossed
arrows  and  shield  of  the  hunting  goddess  of  Sa'is,  we  arc  justified
in  believing  that  its  predynastic  equivalent  was  intended  to  be  a
picture  of  the  same  objects,  and  to  be  symbolic  of  the  same
goddess.

We  have  already  mentioned  the  predynastic  standard  sur-
mounted by  the  figure  of  an  elephant,  which  was,  undoubtedly,
intended  to  represent  a god,  and  thus  it  is  clear  that  both  in  pre-
dynastic and  dynastic  times  the  Egyptians  symbolized  gods  both
hv  means  of  animals  and  by  objects  connected  with  their  worship
or  with  their  supposed  occupations.  In  dynastic  Nome- Lists  we

have  for  the  name  of  Mhtenu  a knife  for  the  nomc  of  Ten  a

pair  of  horns  surmounted  by  a plumed  disk  , for  the  some

of  lias,  or  Us,  a sceptre  for  the  nome  of  Sesheshet  a sistrum  |! ,

etc.  The  first,  third,  and  fourth  of  this  group  of  examples  are
dearly  objects  which  were  connected  with  the  worship  of  the  gods
whom  they  symbolize,  and  the  second  is  probably  intended  to  be
the  headdress  of  the  god  of  the  nomc  which  it  symbolizes.  At  this
period  of  the  world’s  history  it  is  impossible  to  fathom  the  reasons
which  led  men  to  select  such  objects  as  the  symbols  of  their  gods,
and  we  can  only  accept  the  view  that  they  were  the  product  of
some  indigenous,  dominant  people  who  succeeded  in  establishing
their  religious  customs  so  strongly  in  Egypt  that  they  survived
all  political  commotions,  and  changes,  and  foreign  invasions,
and  flourished  in  the  country  until  the  third  century  of  our
era  at  least.

-The  cult  of  Nit,  or  Neith,  must  have  been  very  general  in
Egypt,  although  in  dynastic  times  the  chief  seat  thereof  was  at  Sa'is
in  the  Delta,  and  we  know  that  devotees  of  the  goddess  lived  as  far
south  as  Nakada,  a few  miles  to  the  north  of  Thebes,  for  several
objects  inscribed  with  the  name  of  queen  Nit-hetep  have  been  found


32


THE  GODDESS  NIT


in  a grave  at  that  place.  Of  the  early  worship  of  tho  goddess
nothing  is  known,  but  it  is  most  probable  that  she  was  adored  as
a great  hunting  spirit  as  were  adored  spirits  of  like  character  by
primitive  peoples  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  crossed  arrows
and  shield  indicate  that  she  was  a hunting  spirit  in  the  earliest
times,  but  a picture  of  the  dynastic  period  represents  her  with  two
crocodiles 1 sucking  one  at  each  breast,  and  thus  she  appears  in
later  times  to  have  had  ascribed  to  her  power  over  the  river.

It  has  ali-eady  been  said  that  the  primitive  Egyptians,  though
believing  that  their  gods  possessed  powers  superior  to  their  own,
regarded  them  as  beings  who  were  liable  to  grow  old  and  die,  and
who  were  moved  to  love  and  to  hate,  and  to  take  pleasure  in  meat
and  drink  like  man ; they  were  even  supposed  to  intermarry  with
human  beings  and  to  have  the  power  of  begetting  offspring  like  the
“sons  of  God,” as  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  (vi.  2,  -1).  These
ideas  were  common  in  all  periods  of  Egyptian  history,  and  it  is
clear  that  the  Egyptians  never  wholly  freed  themselves  from  them;
there  is,  in  fact,  abundant  proof  that  even  in  the  times  when
monotheism  had  developed  in  a remarkable  degree  they  clung  to
them  with  a tenacity  which  is  surprising.  The  religious  texts
contain  numerous  references  to  them,  and  beliefs  which  were
conceived  by  the  Egyptians  in  their  lowest  states  of  civilization  are
mingled  with  those  which  reveal  the  existence  of  high  spiritual
conceptions.  The  great  storehouse  of  religious  thought  is  the  Book
of  the  Driiil,  and  in  one  of  the  earliest  Recensions  of  that  remark-
able work  we  may  examine  its  various  layers  with  good  result.  In
these  are  preserved  many  passages  which  throw  light  upon  the
views  which  were  held  concerning  the  gods,  and  the  powers  which
they  possessed,  and  the  place  where  they  dwelt  in  company  witli
the  beatified  dead.

One  of  the  most  instructive  of  these  passages  for  our  purpose
forms  one  of  the  texts  which  are  inscribed  on  the  walls  and
corridors  of  the  chambers  in  the  pyramid  tombs  of  Unas,  a king
of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  and  of  Teta,  a king  of  the  Vltli  Dynasty.

' In  the  text  of  IJnas  (1. 627)  tho  crocodile-god  Sebek  is  culled  the  son  of  Noith

PJ-V7X-


33


KING  UNAS  AS  A GOD

The  paragraphs  in  general  of  the  great  Heliopolitan  Recension
deal,  as  we  should  expect,  with  the  offerings  which  were  to  be
made  at  stated  intervals  in  the  little  chapels  attached  to  the
pyramids,  and  many  were  devoted  to  the  object  of  removing
enemies  of  every  kind  from  the  paths  of  the  king  in  the  Under-
world ; others  contain  hymns,  and  short  prayers  for  his  welfare,
and  magical  formulae,  and  incantations.  A few  describe  the  great
power  which  the  beatified  king  enjoys  in  the  world  beyond  the
grave,  and,  of  course,  declare  that  the  king  is  as  great  a lord  in
heaven  as  he  was  upon  earth.  The  passage  in  question  from  the
pyramid  of  Unas  is  of  such  interest  and  importance  that  it1  is
given  in  the  Appendix  to  this  Chapter,  with  interlinear  translation
and  transliteration,  and  with  the  variant  readings  from  the  pyramid
of  Teta,  but  the  following  general  rendering  of  its  contents  may  be
useful.  “ The  sky  poureth  down  rain,  the  stars  tremble,  the  bow-
“ bearers  run  about  with  hasty  steps,  the  bones  of  Aker  tremble,
“ and  those  who  are  ministrants  unto  them  betake  themselves  to
“ flight  when  they  see  Unas  rising  [in  the  heavens]  like  a god  who
“ liveth  upon  his  fathers  and  feedeth  upon  his  mothers.  Uuas  is
“ the  lord  of  wisdom  whose  name  his  mother  knoweth  not.  The
“ noble  estate  of  Unas  is  in  heaven,  and  his  strength  in  the  horizon
“ is  like  unto  that  of  the  god  Tern  his  father,  indeed,  he  is  stronger
“ than  his  father  who  gave  him  birth.  The  doubles  (/can)  of  Unas
“ are  behind  him,  and  those  whom  he  hath  conquered  are  beneath
“ his  feet.  His  gods  are  upon  him,  his  uraei  are  upon  his  brow,
'*  his  serpent-guide  is  before  him,  and  his  soul  looketh  upon  the
“ spirit  of  flame ; the  powers  of  Unas  protect  him.,:  From  this
paragraph  we  see  that  Unas  is  declared  to  be  the  son  of  Tern,  and
has  made  himself  stronger  than  his  father,  and  that  when  the  king,
who  lives  upon  his  fathers  and  mothers,  enters  the  sky  as  a god,
all  creation  is  smitten  with  terror.  The  sky  dissolves  in  rain,  the
stars  shake  in  their  places,  and  even  the  bones  of  the  great  double
lion-headed  earth-god  Aker,  £=£,  quake,  and  all  the  lesser  powers
of  heaven  flee  in  fear.  He  is  considered  to  have  been  a mighty
conqueror  upon  earth,  for  those  whom  he  has  vanquished  are

* The  hieroglyphic  texts  are  given  by  Masporo,  Lis  Inscriptions  dcs  Pyramided
* Saqqarnh,  Paris,  1894,  p.  07, 1.  496,  and  p.  134,  1.  319.

D


34


KING  UNAS  AS  A GOD


beneath  his  feet ; there  is  no  reason  why  this  statement  should  not
be  taken  literally,  and  not  as  referring  to  the  mere  pictures  of
enemies  which  were  sometimes  painted  on  the  cartonnage  coverings
of  mummies  under  the  feet,  and  upon  the  sandals  of  mummies,  and
upon  the  outside  of  the  feet  of  coffins.  An  ordinary  man  possessed
one  lea  or  “ double,”  but  a king  or  a god  was  believed  to  possess
many  lean  or  “ doubles.”  Thus  in  one  text 1 the  god  Ra  is  said  to
possess  seven  souls  (ban)  and  fourteen  doubles  (kau),  and  prayers
were  addressed  to  each  soul  and  double  of  Ra  as  well  as  to  the  god
himself;  elsewhere2  we  are  told  that  the  fourteen  lean  of  Ra,

i n i ~’v“v'  l I 'wwv'  ^ £?f  j were  given  to  him  by  Thoth.  Unas

appeal’s  in  heaven  with  his  “ gods  ” upon  him,  the  serpents  are  on
his  brow,  he  is  led  by  a serpent-guide,  and  is  endowed  with  his
powers.  It  is  difficult  to  say  what  the  “ gods  ” here  referred  to
really  are,  for  it  is  unlikely  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  small  figures
of  gods  which,  in  later  times,  were  laid  upon  the  bodies  of  the
dead,  and  it  seems  that  we  are  to  understand  that  he,  Unas,  was
accompanied  by  a number  of  divine  beings  who  had  laid  their
protecting  strength  upon  him.  The  uraei  on  his  brow  and  his
serpent-guide  were  the  emblems  of  similar  beings  whose  help  lie
had  bespoken — in  other  words,  they  represented  spirits  of  serpents
which  were  made  friendly  towards  man.

The  passage  in  the  text  of  Unas  continues,  “ Unas  is  the  Bull
“of heaven  which  overcometh  by  his  will,  and  which  feedeth  upon
“that  which  cometh  into  being  from  every  god,  and  he  eateth
“ of  the  provender  of  those  who  fill  themselves  with  words  of
“ power  and  come  from  the  Lake  of  Flame.  Unas  is  provided
“ with  power  sufficient  to  resist  his  spirits  (A7w),  and  he  riseth  [in
“heaven]  like  a mighty  god  who  is  the  lord  of  the  seat  of  the
“hand  (i.e.,  power)  [of  the  godsj.  He  taketh  his  seat  and  his
“ back  is  towards  Seb.  Unas  weigheth  his  speech  with  the  god
“ whose  name  is  hidden  on  the  day  of  slaughtering  the  oldest
“ [gods].  IJnas  is  the  master  of  the  offering  and  he  tietli  the
“ knot,  and  provideth  meals  for  himself ; he  eateth  men  and  he


1 Durnichen,  Tempdinnchrt fieri,  vol.  i.,  pi.  29.

2 Lepgiua,  Ltnkmaler,  Hi.,  J31.  194.


KING  UNAS  AS  A GOD


35


« liveth  upon  gods,  he  is  the  lord  of  offerings,  and  he  keepeth
« count  of  the  lists  of  the  same.”  The  dead  king  is  next  likened
to  a young  and  vigorous  bull  which  feeds  upon  what  is  produced
by  every  god  and  upon  those  that  come  from  the  Fiery  Lake  to
eat  words  of  power.  Here  we  have  a survival  of  the  old  worship
of  the  bull,  which  began  in  the  earliest  times  in  Egypt,  and  lasted
until  the'  Roman  period.  His  food  is  that  which  is  produced  by
every  god,  and  when  we  remember  that  the  Egyptians  believed
that  every  object,  animate  and  inanimate,  was  the  habitation  of  a
spirit  or  god,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  allusion  in  these  words  is  to
the  green  herbage  which  the  bull  ordinarily  eats,  for  from  this
point  of  view,  every  blade  of  grass  was  the  abode  of  a god.
In  connexion  with  this  may  be  quoted  the  words  of  Sankhon-
yathan,  the  Sanclioniatho  of  the  Greeks,  as  given  by  Eusebius,  who
says,  “ But  these  first  men  consecrated  the  productions  of  the
“ earth,  and  judged  them  gods,  and  worshipped  those  things,  upon
“ which  they  themselves  lived,  and  all  their  posterity,  and  all
“ before  them ; to  these  they  made  libations  and  sacrifices.” 1

Now  the  -food  of  this  bull  Uniis  is  also  said  to  be  those  who


came  from  the  Lake  of  Fire,  or  the  city  of  She-Sasa,  and  who  are
these?  From  Chapter  cviii.  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  we  learn  that


She-Sasa  was  situated  in  Sckhct-Sasa,3  i.e.,  a district  in  heaven.


and  it  is  clear  from  the  text  of  the  Chapter  that  it  was  one  of  the
abodes  wherein  the  beatified  dead  obtained  food.  The  deceased  is


made  to  say,  “ I have  not  lain  down  in  death ; I have  stood  over
“ thee,3  and  I have  risen  like  a god.  I have  cackled  like  a goose,
“ and  I have  alighted  like  the  hawk  by  the  divine  clouds  and  by
“ the  great  dew  ....  I have  come  from  She-Sasa,  which  is  in
“ Sokhet-Sasa,  i.e.,  the  Lake  of  Fire,  which  is  in  the  Field  of
“Fire”  Towards  the  end  of  the  Chapter  (line  10)  mention  is

made  of  herbage  or  crops  ((j  J , and  it  seems  as  if  these


1 Eusebius,  Praep.  Evan.,  lib.  i.,  c.  10  (in  Cory,  Ancient  Fragments,  London,

1*W2,  p.  5;.

jULl  s ( P (j  p (j  © . See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  Text,
p.  203.

3 He  speaks  to  tbe  Thigh,  ^ in  heaven.


36


KING  UNAS  AS  A GOD


grew  in  the  Field  of  Fire,  or  in  the  neighbourhood  of  it,
and  it  is  clear  that  it  must  be  these  which  are  referred  to
as  the  provender  of  those  who  come  from  the  Lake  of  Fire.
"We  are  next  told  that  Unas  hath  power  sufficient  to  oppose
or  resist  his  spirits  (Jehu),  but  it  is  not  certain  whether  these  are
beings  in  the  Underworld  which  are  hostile  to  him,  or  spirits
which  belong  to  himself ; in  any  case  the  meaning  of  the  passage
is  not  clear.  Having  risen  in  heaven  Unas  takes  his  seat  with  his
back  towards  Sob,  the  great  earth-god  who  was  represented  by  the
mythological  goose  which  was  supposed  to  have  laid  the  great
cosmic  egg.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  section  of  the  text  of  Unas
quoted  above  we  have  some  remarkable  ideas  enunciated.  It  is
asserted  first  of  all  that  he  “ weigheth  his  speech  with  the  god
whose  name  is  hidden,”  which  indicates  that  Unas  was  supposed
to  be  of  equal  rank  and  power  with  the  god  of  judgment.  From
the  Theban  Recensions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead 1 we  know  that  the

expression  “weighing  of  words,”  ^ jj  means  also

the  “ weighing  of  actions,”  and  that  it  is  applied  to  the  examina-
tion of  the  deceased  which  is  held  on  the  day  wherein  his  heart  is
weighed  in  the  Great  Scales.  The  examination  was  conducted  by
Thoth  on  behalf  of  Osiris,  but  the  words  in  the  text  of  Unas  show
that  the  dead  king  considers  himself  able  to  judge  his  own  actions,
and  to  award  himself  happiness.  The  god  of  the  hidden  name  is
probably  Osiris.  Finally  it  is  said  that  Unas  eats  men  and  feeds
upon  the  gods.  We  have  already  referred  to  the  passage  in
Juvenal’s  Fifteenth  Satire  in  which  he  declares  that  the  Egyptians
ate  human  flesh,  and  it  has  been  idready  said  that  the  dynastic
inscriptions  afford  no  proof  whatsoever  that  the  Egyptians  were
cannibals.

The  statement  here  that  Unas  ate  men  is  definite  enough,  and
it  is  not  easy  to  give  any  other  than  a literal  meaning  to  the  words ;
wc  can  only  assume  then  that  this  portion  of  the  text  has  reference
to  some  acts  of  cannibalism  of  which  a tradition  had  come  down
from  predynastic  to  dynastic  times.  We  gather  from  other
passages  in  the  texts  of  Unas  and  Teta  what  manner  of  treatment

1 my  Chapter*  of  Coming  Forth  hy  Day,  Text,  p.  18, 1.  12  ; p.  19, 1.  5 ; etc.


KING  UNAS  AS  A GOD


37


was  meted  out  to  the  vanquished  in  battle  by  the  victors,  and  it
seems  to  find  a parallel  in  the  atrocious  acts  which  were,  and  in
some  places  still  are,  perpetrated  by  conquering  tribes  of  Central
Africa  after  a battle.  In  prcdynastic  times  all  the  property  of
those  who  wore  defeated  in  war  was  seized  upon  by  the  successful
warriors,  and  all  the  women  fell  into  their  hands,  and  at  times
nameless  abominations  were  committed  upon  the  unfortunate  male
captives.  The  dead  king  in  the  texts  of  Unas  and  Teta  is,
naturally,  described  as  the  lord  of  heaven  and  of  all  the  beings  and
things  which  are  therein ; as  such  he  is  master  of  all  the  women,
and  it  is  said  plainly  of  him  that  he  is  the  “ fecundator,  and  that
*•  he  carries  off  the  women  from  their  husbands  to  whatsoever  place
“ he  pleaseth  whensoever  he  pleaseth.” 1 Thus  one  of  his  attributes
was  that  of  the  bull,  which,  because  of  his  fecundity  and  strength,
became  the  object  of  worship  by  the  early  Egyptians,  and  he
exercised  the  rights  of  a victorious  tribal  chief.  Upon  the  con-
quered men  who  were  allowed  to  live  terrible  indignities  were
perpetrated,  and  in  the  text  of  Teta  the  dead  king  is  exhorted  to
rise  up,  “ for  -Horus  hath  caused  Thoth  to  bring  unto  thee  thine
“ enemy,  and  he  (i.e.,  Horus)  hath  put  thee  behind  him  in  order
“ that  he  may  not  do  thee  an  injury,  and  that  thou  mayest  make
“thy  place  upon  him,  so  that  when  [thou]  goest  forth  thou  mayest
“take  thy  place  upon  him,  and  he  may  not  have  union  with
“thee.” 2 It  is  possible  then  that  in  predynastic  rimes  in  addition
to  the  wanton  destruction  which  the  Egyptians  brought  about  after
a victorious  fight  with  their  enemies,  and  the  slaughter,  and  rapine,
and  nameless  abominations  which  followed,  they  sometimes  imitated
the  example  of  wild  and  savage  beasts  and  ate  the  foes  they  had


o

lino  629.


j]  wwim  <


ra


to3

i


— ky


,WV\W  ANWVA


i!7S(±yI

% 4-i)


Q -Wr  ^ ' Units,

uL


ro  □


Teta,  line  2 80.


38  UNAS  EATS  THE  GODS,

conquered.  The  accounts  of  the  battles  of  dynastic  times  show
that  the  Egyptians  looted  and  destroyed  the  cities  and  towns  of  the
vanquished,  and  that  they  cut  down  orchards  and  gardens,  and
carried  off  all  the  flocks  and  herds  which  they  could  find ; and
there  is  abundant  proof  that  they  mutilated  the  bodies  of  their
dead  foes  after  a fight,  but  that  they  either  ate  them  or  behaved
towards  them  in  a manner  contrary  to  nature  there  is  absolutely  no
evidence  to  show.

AVe  have  now  to  consider  the  remaining  paragraphs  of  the
extract  from  the  text  of  Unas.  The  gods  upon  whose  bodies  Unas
fed  were  snared  by  Am-kehuu,  and  they  were  examined  as  to  their
fitness  and  condition  by  Tcheser-tep-f,  a divine  being  who  was  in
later  times  one  of  the  Forty-Two  Judges  in  the  Hall  of  Maiiti,  and
is  mentioned  in  the  “ Negative  Confession  ” of  the  Hook  of  the
Dead . The  gods  were  next  bound  by  H er-thertu,  and  the  god
Khensu  cut  their  throats  and  took  out  their  intestines ; a being
called  Shesernu  acted  as  butcher  and  cut  them  up  and  eooked  the
pieces  thereof  in  his  fiery  cauldrons.  Thereupon  Unas  ate  them,
and  in  eating  them  he  also  ate  their  words  of  power  and  their
spirits.  The  largest  and  finest  of  the  gods  he  ate  at  daybreak,  and
the  smaller  sized  ones  for  meals  at  sunset,  and  the  smallest  for  his
meals  in  the  night ; the  old  and  worn-out  gods  he  rejected  entirely
and  used  them  up  as  fuel  in  his  furnace.  The  cauldrons  in  which
the  bodies  of  the  gods  were  cooked  were  heated  by  the  “ Great  One
in  heaven,”  who  shot  flame  under  those  which  contained  the  thighs
of  the  oldest  of  the  gods ; and  the  “ Perer,  Avho  is  in  heaven,”  of
Unas  cast  also  into  cauldrons  the  thighs  of  their  women.  (Jnas  is
then  said  to  make  a journey  about  every  part  of  the  double  sky,  ’or

double  heaven,  , i.e.,  the  night  sky  and  the  day  sky,  and  also
to  travel  about,  presumably  from  one  end  to  the  other,  through  the
two  a! elm,  (|<rsa  Jj  ^ c ~ ^ , of  Egypt,  i.e.,  the  land  which  lies

between  the  mountains  and  the  Nile  on  each  side  of  the  river.  As
a result  of  eating  of  the  bodies  of  the  gods  Unas  becomes  the  Great
Sekhcrn,  the  Sekhem  of  the  Sekhemu ; he  also  becomes  the  Ashem
of  Ashem,  the  Great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu.  The  power  which
protects  Unas  and  which  he  possesses  is  greater  than  that  of  all  the


ABSORBS  THEIR  POWERS


39


sa/ni  in  the  heavens,  and  he  becomes  the  eldest  of  all  the  firstborn
gods  and  ho  goes  before  thousands  and  makes  offerings  to  hundreds
[of  them] ; indeed,  the  power  which  has  been  given  to  him  as  the
Great  Sekhem  makes  him  to  become  as  the  star  Sahu,  i.e.,  Orion,
with  the  gods.  “ Unas  can  repeat  his  rising  in  the  sky,  for  he  is
“ the  Seben  crown  as  lord  of  the  heavens.  He  takcth  count  of  the
“ knots  *(or,  sinews)  and  of  livers,  and  he  hath  taken  possession  of
“ the  hearts  of  the  gods.  He  hath  eaten  the  Red  Crown,  he  hath
“ eaten  the  White  Crown,  and  he  feedeth  upon  fat  entrails ; the
“ offerings  made  to  him  are  those  in  whose  hearts  live  words  of
“power.  What  the  Red  Crown  emittcth  that  he  hath  eaten,  and
“ he  flourislieth ; the  words  of  power  are  iu  his  belly,  and  his  stlhv
“ is  not  turned  away  from  him.  He  hath  eaten  the  knowledge  of
“ every  god,  and  his  existence  and  the  duration  of  his  life  are
“eternal  and  everlasting  in  any  Hahn  which  he  is  pleased  to
“ make.  Whatsoever  he  hateth  he  shall  never  do  within  the  limits,
“or,  inside  the  borders  of  heaven.  Heboid  their  soul,  i.e.,  the
“soul  of  the  gods,  is  in  Unas,  and  their  spirits  are  with  him;
“his  food  is. more  abundant  than  that  of  the  gods,  iu  whose  bones
“ is  the  fl^iiie  of  Unas.  Behold  their  soul  is  with  Unas,  and  their
“ Shadows  are  with  their  Forms,  or  Attributes.  Unas  is  in,  or
“ with,  the  doubly  hidden  Kha  gods  (?)  | as]  a Sekhem,  and  having
“ performed  [all]  the  ordinances  of  the  (ceremony  of)  ploughing
“ the  scat  of  the  heart  of  Unas  shall  be  among  the  living  upon  this
“ earth  for  ever  and  ever.”

The  last  portion  of  the  extract  is  of  peculiar  interest  because
it  affords  some  insight  into  the  beliefs  which  the  Egyptians  held
about  the  constituent  parts  of  the  economy  of  the  gods.  W e have
already  seen  that  a ha,  or  soul,  has  been  assigned  to  Unas,  and  lcav,
or  “ doubles,’*  and  /7m,  or  spirits,  and  a mhu,  and  a nekhem;  the.
last  two  words  are  difficult  to  translate,  but  they  are  rendered
with  approximate  correctness  by  “ spiritual  body,”  and  “ power.”
The  soul  was  intimately  connected  with  the  heart,  and  was
supposed  to  be  gratified  by  offerings,  which  it  was  able  to  consume ;
the  “ double  ” was  an  integral  part  of  a man,  and  was  connected
with  his  shadow,  and  came  into  being  wheu  he  was  bom,  and  lived
in  the  tomb  with  the  body  after  death ; the  spirit  was  the  seat  of.


40  unAs,  the  ashem  of  the  ashemu

the  spiritual  part  of  man,  and  gods  and  divine  personages  were
credited  with  the  possession  of  several  spirits ; the  eahu,  or
spiritual  body,  was  the  ethereal,  intangible,  transparent  and  trans-
lucent body,  which  was  supposed,  in  dynastic  times  at  all  events,
to  grow  from  the  dead  body,  the  form  of  which  it  preserved ; the
isekhem  was  the  “ power  ” which  seems  to  have  animated  the  sahu
and  to  have  made  it  irresistible.  From  the  extract  given  above
from  the  text  of  Unas  we  learn  that  the  gods  were  composed  of  all
these  various  parts,  and  that  in  fact  their  economy  resembled  that
of  man ; in  other  words,  the  Egyptians  made  their  gods  in  their
own  image,  only  they  attributed  to  them  superhuman  powers.
The  gods,  however,  preserved  their  existence  by  means  of  a

magical  protection  which  they  enjoyed,  melee t,  ^ , and  also

by  h (■kail,  iu\\,  which  is  commonly  translated  “words  of

power  ” ; the  aim  of  every  Egyptian  was  to  obtain  possession  of
both  the  magical  protection  and  the  words  of  power,  for  they
thought  that  if  they  once  were  masters  of  these  they  would  be  able
to  live  like  the  gods.  Tn  the  earliest  times  in  Egypt  men  thought
that  the  only  way  to  obtain  the  strength  and  immortality  of  the
gods  was  to  eat  the  gods  themselves,  and  so  we  read  that  Unas,
having  eaten  parts  of  the  boiled  bodies  of  the  gods,  “hath  eaten
“ their  words  of  power  ( Mia ),  and  swallowed  their  spirits  ( khu ).”
As  a result  of  this  he  becomes  the  “Great  Power,”  the  “ Power  of
Powers,”  i.e.,  the  greatest  Power  in  heaven.  He  becomes  also  the
Ashem  of  Ashem,  the  great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu,  that  is  to  say,
the  very  essence  of  Ashem,  and  the  greatest  powers  of  the  Ashemu
beings  are  enshrined  within  him  because  he  has  within  him  the
spirits  and  the  words  of  power  of  the  gods.

But  what  is  the  meaning  of  Ashem  ? In  the  text  of  Teta  the
word  has  for  its  determinative  a hawk  perched  upon  a standard,
3^,  which  shows  that  it  has  some  meaning  connected  with  deity  or
divinity,  but  it  cannot  be  the  name  of  one  divine  being  only,  for

we  find  it  in  the  plural  form  Ashemu,  ' " Jx^  ^ The

determinative,  however,  does  not  help  us  very  much,  for  it  proves
little  more  than  that  some  attribute  of  the  Hawk-god  Hcru  was
1 ascribed  to  the  Ashemu ; the  hawk  was  undoubtedly  the  first


UNAS,  THE  ASHEM  OF  THE  ASHEMU  41

creature  worshipped  by  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  and  3^  became
in  consequence  the  common  determinative  of  all  words  implying  the
idea  of  deity  or  divinity,  and  of  the  proper  names  of  the  gods  in  a
very  large  number  of  passages  in  the  hieroglyphic  texts  inscribed
on  the  walls  of  the  chambers  and  corridors  in  the  pyramids  at
Sakkara.  The  common  name  for  “’god,”  as  we  have  already  seen,
is  “ netcr,”  "j,  or  ^ ^j,  with  the  plural  “ netcru,”  ej'=jcj,  or  ^ !,  or

111  i !■  or  3^- 3^  3^-,  but  we  find  that  the  male  gods  are  some-
times called  “hawks,”  Jj  Av , even  when  the  female

gods  are  called  “netert,  ” In  the  Book  °f th*

Dead'2,  the  word  Ashemu  is  written  ^x,  j ^ j,  which  may

be  ti’anslated  by  “ divine  Ashemu,”  and  as  the  fii’st  determinative  is
a squatting  hawk,  we  may  assume  that  the  word  ashemu  means
“hawks.”3  If  this  assumption  be  correct,  “Ashem  of  Ashem,
Great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu,”  means  “ Hawk  of  Hawk,  the  Great
Hawk  of  the  Hawks,”  and  since  the  hawk  was  not  only  a god  to
the  predynastic  Egyptians,  but  their  oldest  and  greatest  god,  being
in  fact  the  spirit  of  that  which  is  above,  i.e.,  heaven,  the  passage
“ Ashem  of  Ashem,  Great  Ashem  of  the  Ashemu, *’  may  very  well
be  rendered  “ god  of  god,  great  god  of  the  gods.”  Thus  with  the
words  of  power  and  the  spirits  of  the  gods  in  him  Unas  becomes
the  habitation  of  the  power  of  God,  and  the  firstborn  of  the  gods.
He  is  now  able  to  go  round  about  heaven  at  pleasure,  and  as  the
Great  Sekliem,  or  Power,  his  visible  emblem  is  Sail  or  Orion,  and
he  is  able  to  repeat  his  rising  [daily]  in  heaven  like  this  constella-
tion. Jt  is  not  improbable  that  the  identification  of  Orion  with
kings  who  had  eaten  the  gods  filtered  down  in  tradition  to  the
Semitic  people  who  lived  in  the  Delta  in  dynustic  times,  and  so
became  the  base  of  the  legends  about  Orion  which  are  found  among
the  Arabs  and  Hebrews.

1 See  tluj  text  of  Unas,  line  209 ; in  the  text  of  Tetii,  line  197,  the  gods  are
described  as  “ male  and  female,”  CjCjCj

3 See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  Text,  p.  128,  1.  14.

3 A variant  form  of  the  word  is  dkhem  , and  Brngscli  (Wbrfcerbucli,

btipph,  p.  279)  renders  it  by  “ tlie  symbol,  or  visible  form  of  a god.”


^ c <=»  *


42


POWER  OVER  THE  HEART

i

Modem  travellers  have  put  on  record  the  fact  that  certain
savage  and  semi-savage  peoples  were,  even  in  recent  times,  in  the
habit  of  eating  pieces  of  flesh  of  mighty  wild  animals  or  of  strong
men,  and  of  drinking  their  blood  with  the  view  of  absorbing  their
nature,  and  life,  and  strength  into  their  own  bodies.1  This  idea
also  existed  among  the  Egyptians,  both  predynastic  and  dynastic,
and  we  find  an  allusion  to  it  in  the  extract  from  Unas  under
consideration,  for  he  is  said  to  take  possession  of  the  hearts  of  the
gods,  and  to  reckon  up  the  them  and  beqcsit,  and  to  feed  upon
fat  sman.  The  importance  which  the  Egyptians  attached  to  the
possession  of  the  physical  heart,  or  of  having  power  over  it,  is
proved  by  many  texts,  and  especially  by  several  Chapters  of  the
Hook  of  the  Dead , wherein  we  find  many  prayers  which  were
specially  written  for  the  protection  of  the  heart.  Thus  in
Chapter  xxvi.  the  deceased  prays,  “may  my  heart  be  to  me  in
“the  house  of  hearts,  may  my  hdti 2 be  to  me  in  the  house  of
“ hat  a Chapters  xxvii.,  xxviii.,  and  xxix.  were  written  to
prevent  the  heart  being  carried  away  by  those  who  steal  hearts

and  destroy  them,  s=rr^  ^ (j(j  j ^ j n (j(j  ^ ; Chapter  xxix.A

was  composed  to  prevent  its  death  in  the  Underworld ; and
Chapters  xxx.a  and  xxx.b  were  intended  to  prevent  a man’s
heart  from  being  driven  away  from  him  there,  especially  at  the
time  of  the  Judgment,  when  it  was  weighed  in  the  Great  Scales.
For  the  Avords  thesu,  betjesu,  and  siiiau  it  is  not  easy  to  find
equivalents.  From  the  connexion  in  which  it  occurs  thesu  must
mean  either  the  vertebra  or  some  internal  organ  of  the  body
which  resembles  a tied  or  knotted  cord,  Avhilst  of  beqesu  the
determinative  proves  that  it  also  is  an  internal  organ.  In
Chapter  xxx.a  the  deceased  says,  “ Homage  to  thee,  0 my
“ heart  (dl>) ! Homage  to  thee,  0 my  hdti  (pericardium  ?) !
“ Homage  to  thee,  0 my  besek,”  Avhich  is  probably  a variant
form  of  beqes,  but  curiously  enough  the  determinative  of  besek ,
JPT*  is  a heart.  Tn  spite  of  this,  however,  it  seems  as  if  the


1 Sou  Jlolxirtson  Smith,  The  Religion  of  f he  Semites,  p.  295.
i 9 the  pericardium  (?).  In  the  ancient  texts  the  hat,  or  haii  of  ft  god

G*  \\

was  the  seat  of  the  words  of  power  by  means  of  which  he  maintained  his  life.


THE  HEART  AND  WORDS  OF  POWER  43


word  actually  means  “liver.”  Mr.  Frazer  has  quoted  in  his
work1  instances  which  prove  that  savage  tribes  look  upon  the
liver  as  the  seat  of  the  soul  or  life  of  man,  and  that  portions  of
it  are  eaten  by  them  with  the  view  of  acquiring  the  qualities  of
the  former  possessor  of  the  liver.  The  words  of  the  text  of  Unas
do  not  say  definitely  that  the  king  ate  the  thrsu  and  livers  of  the
gods  who  had  been  killed  for  him,  but  it  is  evident  from  the
context  that  they  were  supposed  to  form  part  of  his  food.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  said  definitely  that  he  did  eat  their  mnan  xoau,  or

“ fat  entrails>'’  TTT  P g lk  ^ an<1  their  hearts>  -f  -

or  those  portions  of  them  which  were  the  seats  of  the  hehiut
{U\,  or  words  of  magical  power,  which  were  the  source  of  their
life.

Now  besides  the  spirits,  and  the  words  of  power,  and  the
internal  organs  of  the  gods,  Unas,  it  is  said,  hath  eaten  the

“knowledge,”  [1  (j  *eua  a tan,  of  every  god,  and  the  period  of  his

life  and  his  existence  arc  merged  into  eternity  and  everlastingness,
which  he  may  pass  in  any  way  that  pleaseth  his  spiritual  body
(wh),  and  during  this  existence  he  has  no  need  whatsoever  to  do
anything  which  is  distasteful  to  him.  Moreover,  the  soul[s]  and
spirits  of  the  gods  are  in  and  with  Unas,  and  their  souls,  and  their
shadows,  and  their  divine  forms  are  with  him.  Tims  we  see  that
Unas  has  absorbed  within  his  spiritual  body  all  the  life  and  power
of  the  gods,  and  his  portion  is  everlasting  life,  and  he  can  do
anything  and  everything  he  pleases.  Here  we  should  naturally
expect  the  section  to  come  to  an  end,  but  the  last  sentence  goes  on
to  say  that  Unas  is  with  the  double  Kha  god,  who  is  invisible,  or
unknown,  and  that  being  a Power  (selflu  iu)  who  hath  performed
[the  ceremony]  of  ploughing,  “ the  seat  of  the  heart2  of  Unas  shall <
“ be  among  those  who  live  upon  this  earth  for  ever  and  for  ever.”
In  this  sentence  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  difficulty  of  under-
standing aud  explaining  the  Egyptian  religion  and  the  doctrine
of  the  gods.  In  the  early  portion  of  the  passage  from  the  text  of

1 The  Golden  Hough , vol.  ii.,  p.  357  (2nd  edition).

2 The  word  here  used  is  db  ,


44  THE  DOUBLE  LIFE  OF  UNAS

Unas  already  translated  and  analyzed  we  are  told  how  the  dead
king  became  the  god  of  god,  immortal  and  invisible,  with  supreme
power  in  heaven,  etc.,  but  at  the  end  of  it  we  read  that  the  seat  of
the  heart  of  Unas  shall  be  among  those  who  live  upon  this  earth
for  ever  and  ever,  i.e.,  Unas  shall  enjoy  after  death  a continuation
of  the  life  which  he  began  in  this  world ; in  fact,  shall  have  a
double  existence,  the  one  heavenly  and  the  other  earthly.


( « )


APPENDIX  TO  CHAPTER  I

UNAS,  THE  SI, AYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


iSB-  of

□ o

m

***  491  ■

kep

pet

dhi

sebu

nem

I’oureth  down  water

heaven,

tremble

the  stars,

go  about

pe.tr het  seta  qes  Aker  ker-er  - sen

the  bow-bearers,  quake  the  bones  of  Aker,  those  beneath


them

&

/WVW\

IV

(WWW  (1  1

-C K>-  1

wwv,  499.

(Sip)

V

kenemn

via  en  s<

nt

Unds

khd

ba

take  to  flight

[when]  they

see

Unas

rising

[as]  a soul

k

i

f

k

DOCS

cm

neter

dukh

e in

at  - f

nsheb

like  a god  [who]  liveth  upon  his  fathers  [and]  feedeth

•™°-k  G5D  d11  ^

vmt  - / Unds  2)<l  ne^  sabut

upon  his  mothers.  Unas  this  [is]  the  lord  of  wisdom,


1 The  text  here  given  is  from  the  Pyramid  of  Unas  (Maspero,  Becueil,  tom.  iv.,
p.  .r>9) ; the  variants  are  from  tlio  Pyramid  of  Teta  (Recuvil,  tom.  v.,  p.  48,  l.  319),


5 PJ&  — ilk


‘.iJkVA^k


46  SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


A r AAAAAA

khem i m

knoweth  not


mut  - / rcn  - /

his  mother  his  name


dv  shepsu
Is  the  noble  rank


^H'T|

O


(SDk  ~ 'IMZ  k %*=  50\

Unas  era  pet  an  user-f  em  Mut  rnd  Tern

of  Unas  in  heaven,  is  his  strength  in  the  horizon  like  Tem,


<=>  3


di-f


i z

du  men  - nef


IMP-*

sit  mem  eref


his  father ; he  (i.e.,  Tem)  begot  him  [and]  he  became  stronger

than  he.

503-(SO  f-*

au  kail  Undfi  ha  - f tin  hemu  set-f  (?)

Are  the  doubles  of  Unas  behind  him,  the  conquered  [are]


kZ>


m Si'-"  <1*  111 ®“-

kher  retui-f  du  iiefern  -/  (ep-f  du  dart  - f
beneath  his  two  feet.  His  gods  are  on  him.  His  uraei  are


504-k  a-*-

em  dpt,  - / du  samtn  Unds  em  hat  -f

on  his  brow.  The  serpent  guide  of  Unas  is  before  him.


a


*fk


©

□


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS  47


°;t  vu  t jp  "Monism

petret  ba  Jchut  ent  bes  an  useru  Unas

Seeth  soul  [his]  the  spirit  of  flame.  The  powers  of  Unas


her  meket  - f
protect  him.


Unas  pd  lea  put  en  het

Unas  this  [is]  the  bull  of  heaven  that  tlirusteth


k O'-

em  db  - f

with  his  will,


Ik  Jt  506.  ^

nnkh  em  kheper  en  neter

living  upon  what  cometh  into  being  of  god


- +r

k •

-*“jk!&  P —

neb  dm

em

seven  - sen

in

every,  and  eating

of

their  food

who  come

4

°°S


meh
to  fill


«►—  n

1 1 /WWW
<=>  1

k

JuV

k

C ) A.VWVA

kho  t - sen

em

hrkau

em

8 he  en

their  belly

with

*

words  of  power

from

the  lake  of

8dsd

Flame.


sid  < ur

Unas  pd  ajxr-d  er  dab  Jchn  - f

Unas  this  [is]  provided  with  power  against  his  spirits.

^SID.f.  k ^ jLl,'

an  Unas  leha  em  nr  pu  neb  amu  dst-d

Unas  riseth  like  a mighty  one,  the  lord  in  the  seat  of  the

hand  [of  the  gods].

'\ITM  f7  ,+j>-k*'*


48  SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS

X h-l  508-(£p  °<l

hems  -f  m -f  dr  Seb  TJnda  pa

He  is  seated  [with]  his  back  to  Seb.  Unas  this


O3

I

hru


T~ 1 i <=!£=>  R — ' a , a<=>

pn  X a

utcha  met-f  head  Amen  ren  - f tint  pu

weigheth  his  word  with  Hidden  of  Name  on  day  this


TP^-‘  PSU^  (£5)  D

ni  rel’hen  semsu  Unas  />[«]  neb

of  slaughtering  the  eldest  [gods]  Unas  this  [is]  the  lord


<=»  □


tes


of  the  offering,  tying


X!

at qa

the  knot.


<s


3o:,-(sii]  d‘T

tchesef  Una * pd

for  himself.


am,

Unas  this  eatetli


- O
dri  dut  - f

making  his  meals


” f

remth  dnkh
men  [and]  liveth


k 111  -

ern  neteru  neb


m


annu


Idia


V


dpt


on  the  gods,  the  lord  of  the  offerings,  who  examineth  the  lists  of


offerings.


' 4


3 A


8 HI


TP  'ofc


AMAAA

A ^
<=>  □ <=x=,


I


o o o


f


V

□ a


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS  49


( I)


AMAAA

an


'o^t  P-™

dkhem  dpt  Am-lcehuu  sepeh  - sen

Behold,  he  who  maketh  to  bow  Am-kehuu  hath  snared
foreheads,  them


£ A/WW\


P'


— pETjn  510.  <1  >1  w ® 3 -HH

V^rr-J  1 A aww^  1 V W.

e»  Unas  an  Teheser-tep-f  saa-uef-sen

for  Unas.  Behold,  Tcheser-tep-f  hath  known  them


•P4-ZP—

khesef  - nef  sen


I)  ^ ^ Z

A/WW\

d»  iJo’  - thertu


V


P'


</as  - ns/  sen

[and]  he  hath  driven  Behold,  Her- thertu  hath  bound  them,
them  [to  him].

JL  JL— Y l^P-^  ’P—

an  Khensn  metes  nebu  tchat  - / sen

Behold,  Khensu  the  slaughterer  of  lords  hath  cut  the  throats  of

them


en

for


(SB  5U-2Z  Pjh  TP  —

Unas  shet-nef  amt  khat  - sen

Unas,  [and]  he  hath  tom  out  what  is  in  their  belly,


ov>*  <=>  ®P4-

dpt  pu  habu  - f er  khesef

[for]  he  is  the  messenger  [whom]  he  sent  to  drive  [them].


‘<1


V V V

ol  “I al


This  creature  is  mentioned  in  the  Negative  Confession ; see
my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day , Text,  p.  259,  1.  41.

4 ft  ft  n ^


A(VWVA

o V

D a.


/WWVN  /v wwv

7


p


wanting.


3]


10


ra


50


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


JL  13’  TP^-P SSI-PPilw

an  Shesemu  rekh.es  -/  sen  en  Unds  feses  - nef
Behold,  Shesemu  hath  cut  them  up  for  Unas,  he  hath  boiled


nkp-  k ?p0o-!

dkhet  dm  - sen  em  ketdt  - / meshert  Unas

pieces  of  them  in  his  cauldrons  blazing.  Unas


□1)

i y p —

_Lk

pd

dm

heka  - sen

dam

khn  - sen

this

hath  eaten

their  words  of

[he]  hath  eaten

their  spirits.

power.

^J^P — — —

an  urn  - sen  en  dshet-f  tuat  an  her-dlnt-sen

Their  great  ones  are  for  his  meal  of  the  morning,  their  middle  ones

are


en  meshert  - f du  shereru  - sen  en  dshf-f

for  his  sunset  meal,  their  little  ones  arc  for  his  meal

du  da.  - sen  datn  - sen  ,

of  the  night,  their  old  ones  (male)  their  old  ones  (female)  are


i ns~t


kfc*TPP


AWW\  AWM


8


»


o

o

o


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


51


/WWW


o £


leapt

his  furnace.


- JL  k ^

/ (i/i  ««a  em  jpei

Behold,  the  great  one  in  heaven


\^\Z  r=\&  - MWo°  4>V

utu-nef  setchet  er  -uhatu  khert-


■uhatu


khert-sen


hath  shot  flame  against  the  cauldrons  beneath  them


k & ? Pkl^b~‘

cm  khepeshi  nu  semsu  - sen  du  Perer  - dmu  - pet
vith  the  thighs  of  the  eldest  ones.  Perer-amu-pet


svs  i


with  the  thighs  of  the  eldest  ones


— (Ejnpi  w

en  Unas  shesert  - nef


Uo°’  1


Ice,  tat


em  retu  nu


of  Units  hath  thrown  [into]  the  cauldrons  the  legs  of


fcs

hemt  - sen  du  teben  - nef  pet  tem-thd

their  women.  He  hath  gone  round  about  the  double  heaven,  all  of  it,


>=  0 H
tem-thd


GEODI  d|1

du  perer  - nef  dtebu  Unas  pd

he  hath  gone  round  about  the  two  halves  of  Egypt.  Unas  this  [isj


□ o

. ' Jj  I

Unas  pd


P?®k815-k  w


‘khem  nr


sekhem


the  sekhem  great,  the  sekhem


em  sekhemu  Unas
of  the  sekhemu.  Unas


PkP^i  JL

O

^ Ja  ooo


•p?«


52  SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


°f  ^k  ^k  ™k^  'tfW"-

p>d  dshem  dshem  ashemu  ur  gemi  - f

this  [is]  the  ashem,  the  ashem  of  the  ashemu  great.  [What]  he  findeth

k 5^-*  -K'-ZW  k^k$>

em  uat-f  dm  -f  nef  su  em  ' umu

on  his  way  he  eateth  it  greedily.

feyl  k-®  516- 11— ' '!V

du  meket  Una * cm  hat  sdh  n vebu

The  protection  of  Unas  [is]  before  [that  of]  the  sahu  Jill

(SB  of  PkP  - PklV

dmv  khut  Una*  pd  semes  er  senmi

in  the  horizon.  Unas  this  is  the  eldest  of  the  old  ones.


du  perer  - nef
He  hath  gone  round


Hi


AAAA>V.  (0  (c>


khan  an  nten  - nef  shard
thousands,  he  hath  offered  hundreds.


*=*az

du  erta  - nef
Hath  been  given  to  him


selchem


AWWV


ur  an


the  hand  as  the  sekhem  great,  behold


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


53


* »»-j>  m1  4*ik~

i Sahu  dr  netern  du  nem  en  Unds  Jehatu

Orion,  with  the  gods.  Hath  repeated  Unas  [his]  rising

k -

em  neb  kliut

as  lord  of  the  horizon.


em  pet  ....  seben

in  heaven.  He  is  the  seben  crown


du  heseb  - nef  tesu  bet/esu  du  tliet  - nef

He  hath  counted  up  knots  [and]  livers.  He  hath  taken  possession  of


A ,ww*  cs»  o 1

A

i - nef  teshert

i eaten  the  Red  Crown,

GSD  k

usfieb  J'nds  em

Feedeth  Unas  upon

t-tt  p*kk*  t--  k r k -f  °o°

jfmait  saau  hetep-f  em  a nick  em  hatu

entrails  fat,  his  offering  whereon  live  in  [their]  hearts  .

[is  that]

,s\\

‘P  J — 4

'fl'lT-  °3T^p6kKt:  "fT


O O


the  hearts


111  +
netern  du  an

of  the  gods.  He  hath


4^-kZ  hY

uu  dm  - nef  uatchetu

he  hath  eaten  the  White  Crown.


64  SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS


«9.tuy  p~  i)p-  0“^

helcau  - sen  dsth-f  du  Unas  nasb  - / sebeshu

their  words  of  power.  Behold,  Unas  eateth  what  is  cast

out


dmu

[from]


^ ^ fi©i^

tasked  df  -uakhha  - f

the  Red  Crown,  he  tiourisheth,


du  helm  - sen
their  words  of  power


k _li\  spy

em  khat-f  an  hem  cm  sdhu  Unas

» • •

are  in  his  belly,  not  is  turned  back  the  saliu  of  Unas


ma-f

from  him.


q>-k:

du  dm  - naj
He  hath  eaten


mn

the  intelligence


an  -Ha  tar  neb
of  god  every,


n°‘

dhdu

pa  neheh

[his]  period  of  life

[is]  eternity,

k

□

a/vwa

ywvwi

em  sdh  - /

pen  en

in  his  sah,

this  what

521.  □ 1)^

tcher-f  pd  t chetta

his  existence  is  everlastingness

-C2>-

'merer  - f dr  - f

he  is  pleased  [to  do]  he  doeth,


ll±l

■~pj-kpj~ji*”m

— °f  n ^ — derail  — m


6


SLAYER  AND  EATER  OF  THE  GODS  55


-ft-  ***>-  ^ !)-{[*  BW

mestchetch-f  an  dr-nef  dm  tehcr  khut

[what]  he  hateth  not  doeth  he  in  the  limits  of  the  horizon

]•!*=*  P^  VP—  522-l^“  (SH)

tchetta  er  neheh  sek  ba  - sen  drat  Tinas

for  ever  and  ever.  Behold,  their  soul  [is]  in  Unas,


id  troso-

Unas  cm  ba  khet  - f


P

khu  - non  hhe.r
spirits  their  [are]  with  Unas,  more  abundant  [is]  his  food

A


•=•  111  — fgTD  533-k

er  nete.ru  qerert  en  Tinas  em

than  [that  of]  the  gods.  The  flame  of  Uniis  [is]  in


TOP—  P^  VP—'  (51]  TTT'VP-

qesu  - sen  sek  bn -sen  khev  Unas  khaibitu-sen

their  bones,  behold,  their  soul  is  with  Unas,  their  shadows


k-jHYP~~#w-|l^Splk  44

md  dm  - sen  da  Unds  em  men  hhd  khd

are  with  their  forms.  Uniis  is  with  these,  rising, iising,


h ^**“*“"1  a

I Aft/WVA  1 IVWM

dmm  amen


sekhem


1


dm  dritu  ....

hidden,  hidden,  a sekhem  having  performed  the  ordinances


n*


•*  A <UMLM|  A

1 /wvw  1


V*


VVWA


*


56  SLAYER  EATER  OF  THE  GODS

525-k  ® JP'  J-o  G£D

em  Tthebes  dst-db  Unas  em

of  ploughing,  the  seat  of  the  heart  of  Unas  [is]  among


fV  k

dnkhu


em


I SS

ta


JL  “1  •=* — kO

pen  tchetta  er  neheh


the  living  on  earth  this  for  ever  and  for  ever.


'®n\


( 57  )


CHAPTER  II

CONCEPTION  OF  GOD  AND  THE  “GODS”

THE  texts  in  the  pyramids  of  Unas  and  Teta  and  their
immediate  successors  prove  that  the  religious  literature  of
the  Egyptians  contains  a multitude  of  beliefs  and  opinions  which
belong  to  all  periods  of  their  history,  and  represent  different  stages
in  the  development  of  their  civilization.  Their  ideas  about  the
various  parts  which  constitute  their  material,  and  mental,  and
spiritual  existences  cannot  have  been  conceived  all  at  once,  but  it
is  very  hard  to  say  in  respect  of  some  of  them  which  came  first.
We  need  not  trouble  about  the  order  of  the  development  of  their
ideas  about  the  constituent  parts  of  the  gods,  for  in  the  earliest
times,  at  least,  the  Egyptians  only  ascribed  to  them  the  attributes
which  they  had  already  ascribed  to  themselves : once  having
believed  that  they  possessed  doubles,  shadows,  souls,  spirits,  hearts,
(i.e.,  the  seats  of  the  mental  life),  names,  powers,  and  spiritual  bodies,
they  assigned  the  like  to  the  gods.  But  if  the  gods  possessed
doubles,  and  shadows,  and  hearts,  none  of  which,  in  the  case  of
man,  can  exist  without  bodies,  they  too  must  possess  bodies,  and
thus  the  Egyptians  conceived  the  existence  of  gods  who  could
eat,  and  drink,  and  love,  and  hate,  and  fight,  and  make  war,  and
grow  old,  and  die,  and  perish  as  far  as  their  bodies  were  concerned.
And  although  the  texts  show  that  in  very  early  times  they  began
to  conceive  monotheistic  ideas,  and  to  develop  beliefs  of  a highly
spiritual  character,  the  Egyptians  never  succeeded  in  abandoning
the  crude  opinion  about  the  gods  which  their  indigenous  ancestors
had  formed  long  before  the  dynastic  period  of  their  history.  It  is,
of  course,  impossible  to  assume  that  educated  classes  of  Egypt  held
such  opinions,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  religious  texts  which


58


BELIEFS  IN  IMMORTALITY


were  written  for  tlieir  benefit  contain  as  great  a mixture  of  views
and  beliefs  of  all  periods  as  those  which  were  written  for  humbler
folk.

The  Book  of  the  Dead  in  all  dynasties  proves  that  the  rich
and  the  poor,  and  the  educated  and  the  uneducated  alike  prayed
for  funeral  offerings  in  the  very  Chapters  in  Avhich  they  proclaimed
their  sure  belief  in  an  existence  in  which  material  things  were
superfluities.  In  the  texts  of  the  Early  Empire  the  deceased  is
declared  to  be  a god,  or  God,  and  the  son  of  god,  or  God,  and  the
oldest  god  of  all,  Horus,  gives  him  his  eye,  and  he  sits  on  a great
throne  by  the  side  of  God  ; yet  in  the  same  texts  we  read  that  he
partakes  of  the  figs  and  wine  of  the  gods,  that  he  drinks  beer
which  lasts  for  ever,  that  he  thirsts  not  like  the  gods  Shu  and
Tefnut,  and  that  the  throne  of  God  is  made  of  iron,  that  its  legs
terminate  in  hoofs  like  those  of  bulls,  and  that  its  sides  are
ornamented  with  the  faces  of  lions.1  The  great  god  Horus  gives
him  his  own  4<  double  ” (ka),  and  yet  there  are  in  heaven  enemies
who  dare  to  oppose  the  deceased ; and  although  he  is  declared  to
be  immortal,  “ all  the  gods  give  him  of  their  food  that  he  may  not
u die,”  and  he  sits  down,  clothed  in  white  linen  and  wearing  white
sandals,  with  the  gods  by  the  lake  in  the  Field  of  Peace,  and
partakes  with  them  of  the  wood  (or,  tree)  of  life  on  which  they
themselves  live  that  he  also  may  live.  Though  he  is  the  son  of
God  he  is  also  the  child  of  So  this,  and  the  brother  of  the  Moon,
and  the  goddess  Isis  becomes  his  wife ; though  he  is  the  son  of
God  we  are  also  told  that  his  flesh  and  his  bones  have  been
gathered  together,  that  his  material  body  has  been  reconstructed  ;
that  his  limbs  perform  all  the  functions  of  a healthy  body ; and  as
he  lives  as  the  gods  live  we  see  that  from  one  point  of  view  he  and
the  gods  are  constituted  alike.  Instances  of  the  mixture  of
spiritual  with  material  ideas  might  be  multiplied  almost  inde-
finitely, and  numbers  of  passages  containing  the  most  contradictory
statements  might  be  adduced  almost  indefinitely  to  prove  that  the
ideas  of  the  Egyptians  about  the  world  beyond  the  grave,  and
about  God  and  the  gods  were  of  a savage,  childish,  and  inconsistent

1 The  passages  from  the  Pyramid  Texts  are  collected  in  my  Papyrus  nf~  Ani,
London,  pp.  lxxi.  ff.


COMPOSITE  ANIMAL-GODS


59


character.  What,  however,  we  have  to  remember  in  dealing  with
Egyptian  religious  texts  is  that  the  innate  conservatism  of  the
Egyptian  in  all  ages  never  permitted  him  to  relinquish  any  belief
which  had  once  found  expression  in  writing,  and  that  the  written
word  was  regarded  by  him  as  a sacred  thing  which,  whether  he
believed  it  not,  must  be  copied  and  preserved  with  great  care,  and
if  possible  without  any  omission  or  addition  whatsoever.  Thus
religious  ideas  and  beliefs  which  had  been  entirely  forgotten  by
the  people  of  Egypt  generally  were  preserved  and  handed  down
for  thousands  of  years  by  the  scribes  in  the  temples.  The  matter
would  have  been  simple  enough  if  they  had  done  this  and  nothing
more,  but  unfortunately  they  incorporated  new  texts  into  the
collections  of  old  ones,  and  the  various  attempts  which  the  priests
and  scribes  made  to  harmonize
them  resulted  in  the  confusion
of  beliefs  which  we  uoav  have
in  Egyptian  religious  works.

Before  we  pass  to  the
consideration  of  the  meaning
of  the  old  Egyptian  name  for
god  and  God,  i.e.,  “ neter,”
mention  must  be  made  of  a
class  of  beings  which  were
supposed  to  possess  bodies
partly  animal  and  partly  human,  or  were  of  a composite  character.
Among  the  latter  class  may  be  mentioned  the  creature  which  has
the  body  of  a leopard  and  the  head  and  neck  of  a serpent,  and  was


The  serpent-headed  leopard  S etch  a.


called  “ Setcha,”  1 2 jl  | ; and  that  which  has  the  body  of  a lion,  from
which  grow  a pair  of  wings,  and  the  head  of  an  eagle,  and  is
called  “ Sefer,”  j)  3 ; and  that  which  has  a body,  the  fore  part

being  that  of  a lion,  and  the  hind  part  that  of  a horse,  and  the
head  of  a hawk,  and  an  extended  tail  which  terminates  in  a
flower  somewhat  resembling  the  lotus.  The  name  of  this  creature
is  Sak,  Q,  and  she  is  represented  with  a collar  round  her


1 See  Cliampollion,  Monuments , tom.  ivM  Paris,  1845,  pi.  382.

2 Ibid.  See  also  Newberry,  Beni-Haaimt  ii.,  pi.  iv.


60


COMPOSITE  ANIMAL-GODS


neck,  and  with  bars  and  stripes  on  her  body,  which  has  eight
teats.1  Among  creatures,  part  animal  part  human,  may  be  men-
tioned the  leopard,  with  a human  head  and  a pair  of  wings

growing  out  of  his  back,2  and
the  human  - headed  lion  or
sphinx.  The  winged  human
head  which  springs  from  the
back  of  the  leopard3  strongly
reminds  one  of  the  modern
convention^  representations  of
angels  in  religious  pictures,
but  as  the  name  of  this  fabu-
lous creature  is  unknown,  it  is
impossible  oven  to  guess  at  the

Tho  eagle-headed  lion  Sk,™.  reASOnS  for  W,lich  he  WlS  fur"

nished  with  a winged  man’s
head.  In  connexion  with  the  composite  animals  enumerated  above
must  be  mentioned  the  “ Devourer  of  Amenti,”  called  “ Am-init,  the
Eater  of  the  Dead,”  whose  forequarters  were  those  of  a crocodile,
and  hindquarters  those  of  a hippopotamus,  and  whose  body  was


that  of  a lion,  -=^  /WWW  V
o I jyi


The  tombs  at  Beni-hasan,  in  which  the
figures  of  the  Sdcka,  the  Sefer,
and  the  Sak  are  depicted,
date  from  the  Xllth  Dynasty,
about  b.c.  2500,  and  there  is
no  reason  for  supposing  that
their  existence  was  not  con-
ceived of  long  before  that
time.  Bide  by  side  with  these
is  also  depicted  an  animal
called  Ska,  TtTiT.  which  has
long  square  ears,  and  an  extended  tail  resembling  an  arrow,  and  in
its  general  appearance  it  much  resembles  the  animal  of  the  god  Set.


The  fabulous  beast  Sak,


1 Seo  .’Rosclliui,  Mmmicnii  Cmlit  pi.  xxiii.,  No.  4.

2 Ibid. . pi.  xxiii.,  No.  6.  3 See  Lepsius,  Denhn&ler,  iii.,  pi.  131.


COMPOSITE  ANIMAL-GODS


61


A fabulous  leopard.


Two  explanations  of  the  existence  of  such  composite  creatures
may  be  given.  They  may  be  due  either  to  the  imagination  of  the
Egyptians,  which  conceived  of  the  existence  of  quadrupeds  wherein
were  united  the
strength  of  one
animal  and  the
wisdom  or  cunning
of  another,
the  Setcha  which
united  within  itself
the  strength  of  the
leopard  with  the
cunning  of  the  ser-
pent, and  the  name-
less leopard  with  a man’s  winged  head,  or  to  the  ignorance  of
the  ancients  of  natural  history.  The  human  head  on  an  animal
represented  the  intelligence  of  a man,  and  the  wings  the  swift
flight  of  the  bird,  and  the  body  of  the  leopard  the  strength  and
the  lithe  motions  of  that  animal.  In  conceiving  the  existence  of
such  creatures  the  imagination  may  have  been  assisted  in  its
fabrication  of  fabulous  monsters  by  legends  or  stories  of  pre-
dvnastic  animals  which  were  current  in  certain  parts  of  Egypt
during  the  dynastic  period.

Tlius,  as  we  have  said  before,
the  monster  serpentsof  Egyp-
tian my  tliology  have  their  pro-
totypes  in  the  huge  serpents
which  lived  in  the  country  in
primeval  times,  and  there  is
no  doubt  that  Apep  was,
originally,  nothing  more  than
a huge  serpent  which  lived  in
some  mountain  on  the  western

bank  of  the  Nile.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the
Egyptians  really  believed  in  the  existence  of  composite  animals,
and  that  they  never  understood  the  impossibility  of  the  head  and
neck  of  a serpent  growing  out  of  the  body  of  a lion,  or  the  head


62


COMPOSITE  ANIMAL-GODS


of  a hawk  out  of  the  body  of  a lion,  or  a human  head  with  the
wings  of  a bird  out  of  the  body  of  a leopard.  They  were  keen
enough  observers  of  the  animals  with  which  they  came  in  contact
daily,  and  their  representations  of  them  are  wonderful  for  the
accurate  delineation  of  their  forms  and  characteristics ; but  of
animals  which  they  had  never  seen,  and  could  only  know  from
the  reports  of  travellers  and  others,  naturally  they  could  not  give
accurate  representations.  Man  in  all  ages  seems  prone  to  believe
in  the  existence  of  composite  animals  and  monsters,  and  the  most
cultured  of  the  most  ancient  nations,  e.g.,  the  Egyptians  and  the
Babylonians,  form  no  exception  to  the  rule.  The  early  seal-
cylinders  of  the  Babylonians  reveal  their  belief  in  the  existence
of  many  a fabulous  and  mythical  animal,  and  the  boundary  stones,
or  landmarks,  of  a later  period  prove  that  composite  animals  were
supposed  to  watch  over  the  boundaries  of  kingdoms  and  estates,
which  they  preserved  from  invasion,  and  the  winged  man-headed
bulls,  which  the  Assyrians  set  up  in  the  gates  and  doorways  of
their  palaces  to  “protect  the  footsteps  of  the  kings  who  made
them,”  indicate  clearly  that  they  duly  followed  the  examples  set
them  by  their  kinsmen,  the  Babylonians.  From  the  Assyrians
Ezekiel  probably  borrowed  the  ideas  which  he  developed  in  his
description  in  the  first  chapter  of  his  book  of  the  four-faced  and
four-winged  animals.  Later,  even  the  classical  writers  appeared
to  see  no  absurdity  in  solemnly  describing  animals,  the  existence
of  which  was  impossible,  and  in  declaring  that  they  possessed
powers  which  were  contrary  to  all  experience  and  knowledge.
Ilorapollo,  i.  10,  gravely  states  that  the  scarabaeus  represents  an
only  begotten,  because  the  scarabaeus  is  a creature  self-produced,
being  unconceived  by  a female,  fiovoy^ves  /icv  on  avroyeves  earn  to
ljutov,  xmo  dyjjKtl as  fir)  Kvo<f>opovfievo v ; and  in  one  form  or  another
this  statement  is  given  by  ./Elian  (De.  Nat  Animal .,  iv.  49),
Aristotle  (Hist.  An.,  iv.  7),  Porphyry  (De  Abstinentia , iv.  9),  Pliny
(Nat.  Hint.,  xi.  20  fT.),  etc.  Of  the  man-headed  lion  at  Gizeh,  i.e.,
the  Sphinx,  Pliny,  Diodorus,  Strabo,  and  other  ancient  writers
have  given  long  descriptions,  and  all  of  them  seem  to  take  for
granted  the  existence  of  such  a creature.

The  second  explanation,  which  declaresjthat  composite  animals


THE  WORD  NETER


63


are  the  result  of  the  imagination  of  peoples  who  have  no  knowledge,
or  at  all  events  a defective  one,  of  the  common  facts  of  natural
history  is  not  satisfactory,  for  the  simple  reason  that  composite
animals  which  are  partly  animal  and  partly  human  in  their  powers
and  characteristics  form  the  logical  link  between  animals  and  man,
and  as  such  they  belong  to  a certain  pei*iod  and  stage  of  develop-
ment in  the  history  of  every  primitive  people.  If  wc  think  for  a
moment  we  shall  see  that  many  of  the  gods  of  Egypt  are  closely
connected  with  this  stage  of  development,  and  that  comparatively
few  of  them  were  ever  represented  wholly  in  man’s  form.
The  Egyptians  clung  to  their  representations  of  gods  in  animal
forms  with  great  tenacity,  and  even  in  times  when  it  is  certain
they  cannot  have  believed  in  their  existence  they  continued  to
have  them  sculptured  aud  painted  upon  the  walls  of  their  temples ;
curiously  enough,  they  do  not  seem  to  have  been  sensible  of  the
ridicule  which  their  conservatism  brought  down  upon  them  from
strangers.

W e have  .already  said  above  that  the  common  word  given  by
the  Egyptians  to  God,  and  god,  and  spirits  of  every  kind,  and
beings  of  all  sorts,  and  kinds,  and  forms,  which  were  supposed  to

A/WWV

possess  any  superhuman  or  supernatural  power,  Avns  neter,  01  ,
and  the  hieroglyph  which  is  used  both  as  the  determinative  of  this


word  and  also  as  an  ideograph  is  | . Thus  we  have  ^ or  II.
“god,”  and  or  “j  j,  or  cJejcj , or  cjcjcj  !,  “gods;”  the  plural  is


The  common  word


, WVVWA

sometimes  written  out  in  full,  e.g.,

for  “goddess”  is  netert,  which  can  be  written  “I  ^ , or  “1
q I O I “

or  j <=>;  sometimes  the  determinative  of  the  word  is  a woman,
, and  at  other  times  a serpent,  e.g.  1 * The  plural  is


neterit,c|  ||{j  j.  We  have  now  to  consider  what  object  is

supposed  to  be  represented  by  ^ , and  what  the  word  neter  means.
In  Bunsen’s  Egypt’s  Place  (i.,  Nos.  556,  557,  62.3)  the  late  Dr.  Birch
described*^  as  a hatchet;  in  1872  Dr.  Brugsch  placed 1 ^ among
“objets  tronchants,  arines,”  in  his  classified  list  of  hieroglyphic


1 Index  dea  hitrogly plies  phoneiiques,  No.  394.


64


THE  AXE  A SYMBOL  OF  GOD

characters ; thus  it  is  clear  that  the  two  greatest  masters  of  Egypt-
ology considered  "j  to  be  either  a weapon  or  a cutting  tool,  and,  in
fact,  assumed  that  the  hieroglyphic  represented  an  axe-head  let  into
and  fastened  in  a long  wooden  handle.  From  the  texts  wherein
the  hieroglyphics  are  coloured  it  is  tolerably  clear  that  the  axe-head
was  fastened  to  its  handle  by  means  of  thongs  of  leather.  The
earliest  axe-heads  were  made  of  stone,' or  flint  or  chert,  and  later  of
metal,  and  it  is  certain  that  when  copper,  bronze,  and  iron  took  the
place  of  stone  or  flint,  the  method  by  which  the  head  was  fastened
to  the  handle  was  considerably  modified.  Recently  an  attempt  has
been  made  to  show  that  the  axe,  , resembled  in  outline  “ a roll  of
“ yellow  cloth,  the  lower  part  bound  or  laced  over,  the  upper  part
“ appearing  as  a flap  at  the  top  probably  for  unwinding.  It  is
“possible,  indeed,  that  the  present  object  represents  a fetish,  e.g.,
“a  bone  carefully  wound  round  with  cloth  and  not  the  cloth
“ alone.”  1 But  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  no  evidence  for  the
correctness  of  these  views  is  forthcoming.  Whether  the  hiero-
glyphic ^ was  copied  from  something  which  was  a roll  of  cloth  or
a fetish  matters  little,  for  the  only  rational  determination  of  the
character  is  that  which  has  already  been  made  by  Drs.  Birch  and
Brugsch,  and  the  object  which  is  represented  by  “j  is,  in  the
writer’s  opinion,  an  axe  and  nothing  else.

Mr.  Legge  has  collected2  a number  of  examples  of  the
presence  of  the  axe  as  an  emblem  of  divinity  on  the  megaliths  of
Brittany  and  in  the  prehistoric  remains  of  the  funeral  caves  of  the
Marne,  of  Scandinavia,  and  of  America,  and,  what  is  very  much  to
the  point,  he  refers  to  an  agate  cylinder  which  was  published  by
the  late  Adrien  de  Longp6rier,  wherein  is  a representation  of  a
priest  in  Chaldaean  garb  offering  sacrifice  to  an  axe  standing
upright  upon  an  altar.  Mr.  Legge  points  out  “ that  the  axe
“appears  on  these  monuments  not  as  the  representation  of  an
“ object  in  daily  use,  but  for  religious  or  magical  purposes,”  and
goes  on  to  say  that  this  is  proved  by  “the  fact  that  it  is  often
“ found  as  a pendant  and  of  such  materials  as  gold,  lead,  and  even
“amber;  while  that  it  is  often  represented  with  the  peculiar
“ fastenings  of  the  earlier  flint  weapon  shows  that  its  symbolic  use

1 Griffith,  Hieroglyphs,  p.  46.  3 Proc.  Soe.  Bibl.  Arch.,  1899,  p.  310.


THE  AXE  A SYMBOL  OF  GOD


65


“goes  back  to  the  neolithic  and  perhaps  the  palaeolithic  age.”
He  is  undoubtedly  correct  in  thinking  that  the  use  of  the  stone  axe
precedes  that  of  the  flint  arrow-head  or  flint  knife,  and  many  facts
could  be  adduced  in  support  of  this  view.  The  stone  tied  to  the
end  of  a stick  formed  an  effective  club,  which  was  probably  the
earliest  weapon  known  to  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  and  subse-
quently man  found  that  this  weapon  could  be  made  more  effective
still  by  making  the  stone  flat  and  by  rubbing  down  one  end  of  it
to  form  a cutting  edge.  The  earliest  axe-head  had  a cutting  edge
at  each  end,  and  was  tied  by  leather  thongs  to  the  end  of  a stick
by  the  middle,  thus  becoming  a double  axe ; examples  of  such  a
weapon  appear  to  be  given  on  the  green  slate  object  of  the  archaic
period  which  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum1  (Nos.  20,790,
20,792),  where,  however,  the  axe-heads  appear  to  be  fixed  in
forked  wooden  handles.  In  its  next  form  the  axe-head  has  only
one  cutting  edge,  and  the  back  of  it  is  shaped  for  fastening  to
a handle  by  means  of  leather  thongs.  When  we  consider  the
importance  that  the  axe.  whether  as  a weapon  or  tool,  was  to
primitive  man,  we  need  not  wonder  that  it  became  to  him  first
the  symbol  of  physical  force,  or  strength,  and  then  of  divinity  or
dominion.  By  means  of  the  axe  the  predynastic  Egyptians  cut
down  trees  and  slaughtered  animals,  in  other  words,  the  weapon
was  mightier  than  the  spirits  or  gods  who  dwelt  in  the  trees  and
the  animals,  and  as  such  became  to  them  at  a very  early  period
an  object  of  reverence  and  devotion.  But  besides  this  the  axe
must  have  been  used  in  sacrificial  ceremonies,  wherein  it  would
necessarily  acquire  great  importance,  and  would  easily  pass  into
the  symbol  of  the  ceremonies  themselves.  The  shape  of  the  axe-
head  as  given  by  the  common  hieroglyphic  suggests  that  the
head  was  made  of  metal  when  the  Egyptians  first  began  to  use  the
character  as  the  symbol  of  divinity,  and  it  is  clear  that  this  change
in  the  material  of  which  the  axe -head  was  made  would  make  the
weapon  more  effective  than  ever.

Taking  for  granted,  then,  that  the  hieroglyphic  ^ represents
au  axe,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  was  used  as  a symbol  of  power  and


1 See  my  History  of  Egypt,  vol.  ii.,  p.  10,  where  it  is  figured  and  described.


66


THE  WORD  NETER


divinity  by  the  predynastic  Egyptians  long  before  the  period  when
they  were  able  to  write,  but  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  what
they  called  the  character  or  the  axe  before  that  period.  In
dynastic  times  they  certainly  called  it  nkter  as  Ave  have  seen,  but
another  difficulty  presents  itself  to  us  Avhen  we  try  to  find  a word
that  Avill  express  the  meaning  which  they  attached  to  the  Avord ; it
is  most  important  to  obtain  some  idea  of  this  meaning,  for  at  the
base  of  it  lies,  no  doubt,  the  Egyptian  conception  of  divinity  or
God.  The  Avord  nkter  has  been  discussed  by  many  Egyptologists,
but  their  conclusions  as  to  its  signification  are  not  identical.
M.  Pierret  thought  in  1879  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  Avoid  is
“ renewal,  because  in  the  mythological  conception,  the  god  assures
“ himself  everlasting  youth  by  the  reueAval  of  himself  in  engender*
“ ing  himself  perpetually."’ 1 In  the  same  year,  in  one  of  the
Hibbert  Lectures,  Renouf  declared  that  he  was  "able  to  affirm
“ Avith  certainty  that  in  this  particular  case  avg  can  accurately
“determine  the  primitive  notion  attached  to  the  Avord,”  i.e.,  to
XUTAR  (nkter).  According  to  him,  " none  of  the  explanations
“hitherto  given  of  it  can  be  considered  satisfactory,”  but  he
thought  that  the  explanation  Avliicli  he  Avas  about  to  propose  Avould
“ be  generally  accepted  by  scholars,”  because  it  avhs  “ arrived  at  as
“ the  result  of  a special  study  of  all  the  published  passages  in  Avhieh
“ the  AA'ord  occurs.” 2 Closely  allied  to  nutak  (nkter)  is  another
word  nutra  (netra),  and  the  meaning  of  both  Avas  said  by  Renouf
to  be  found  iu  the  Coptic  rtojurre  or  noaa+,  Avhieh,  as  we  may
see  from  the  passages  quoted  by  Tatham  in  his  Lericou  (p.  310),  is
rendered  by  the  Greek  Avoids  ieryt/?,  7rapd/cXi7<m,  and  napaKaXexu.
The  primary  meaning  of  the  Avord  110x1+  appears  to  be  “ strong,”
and  having  assumed  that  neter  Avas  equivalent  in  meaning  to
this  word,  Renouf  stated  boldly  that  neter  signified  “mighty,”
“ might,”  “ strong,”  and  argued  that  it  meant  PoAver,  “ Avhieh  is
“also  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew'  El.”  We  may  note  in  passing

1 “ I A»  mot  par  lequel  on  rendait  1’idce  de  Dieu  ^ ^ | ijj  nuter,  signifie  aa

“ propre,  ! rcnouvel lenient,’  parco  que  dans  la  conception  rnytliologiqne,  le  dieu
“ s’aBsure  ane  cternelle  jennes.se  par  le  renonvellement  de  lui-mcme,  en  s’eugendrant
" lui-mcme  perpetuellemeni.”  Essai  znr  la  M ythologic  Egyptienne,  Paris,  1879,  p.  8.

- lMigion  of  Ancient  Egypt,  p.  93.


THE  WORD  NETER


67


that  the  exact  meaning  of  “El,”  the  Hebrew  name  for  God,  is
unknown,  and  that  the  word  itself  is  probably  the  name  of  an
ancient  Semitic  deity.

The  passages  which  were  quoted  to  prove  that  neter  meant
“ strong,  strength,  power,”  and  the  like  could,  as  M.  Maspero  has
said,1  be  explained  differently.  M.  Maspero  combats  rightly  the
attempt  to  make  “strong”  the  meaning  of  nkter  (masc.),  or
neterit  (fern.),  in  these  Avords : “ In  the  expressions  ‘ a toAArn
“ neterit,'  ‘ an  arm  netrri ,’  ....  is  it  certain  that  ‘ a strong  city,’
“ 1 a strong  arm,’  gives  us  the  primitive  sense  of  neter  ? When
” among  ourselves  one  says  • divine  music,’  * a piece  of  divine
“ poetry,’  ‘ the  divine  taste  of  a peach,’  ‘ the  divine  beauty  of  a
“ woman  ’ [the  Avord]  divine  is  a hyperbole,  but  it  Avould  be  a
*•  mistake  to  declare  that  it  originally  meant  ‘ exquisite  ’ because
“ in  the  phrases  Avhich  I have  imagined  one  could  apply  it  as
“‘exquisite  music,’  ‘a  piece  of  exquisite  poetry,’  'the  exquisite
“ taste  of  a peach,’  ‘ the  exquisite  beauty  of  a Avoman.’  Similarly
“in  Egyptian  ‘a  toAvn  neterit'  is  a ‘divine  toAvn’;  ‘an  arm
“ rieter *’  is  ‘ a divine  arm,’  and  ncteri  is  employed  metaphorically
“in  Egyptian  as  is  [the  Avord]  ‘ divine ’ in  French,  Avithout  its
“ being  any  more  necessary  to  attribute  to  [the  word]  neter  i the
“primitive  meaning  of  ‘strong,’  than  it  is  to  attribute  to  [the
“ word]  ‘ divine  ’ the  primitive  meaning  of  * exquisite.’  The
“meaning  ‘strong’  of  ncteri,  if  it  exists,  is  a derived  and  not  an
“ original  meaning.” 3


The  vicAv  taken  about  the  meaning  of  neter  by  the  late
Dr.  Brugsch  Avas  entirely  different,  for  he  thought  that  the
fundamental  meaning  of  the  Avord  was  “ the  operative  power  Avhich
“ created  and  produced  tilings  by  periodical  recurrence,  and  gave
“ them  new  life  and  j’estored  to  them  the  freshness  of  youth  (die
“ thiitige  Kraft,  Avelche  in  periodiseher  Wiederkehr  die  Dinge
“ erzeugt  und  erscliafft,  ihnen  neues  Lebeu  verleiht  und  die
“ Jugendfrische  zuriiekgiebt.” ;l  The  first  part  of  the  Avork  from
which  these  Avords  are  quoted  appeared  in  1885,  but  that  Dr.
Brugsch  held  much  the  same  vieAVS  six  years  later  is  evident

1 Etudes  de  Mythologiv. • el  d'  Archt’ologie  Egyptiennes,  tom.  ii.,  p.  215.

2 Maspero,  op.  cit.,  p.  215.  * Religion  und  Mythologie , p.  93.


68


THE  WORD  NETER


from  the  following  extract  from  his  volume  entitled  Die  Aegyplo -
logie  (p.  166),  which  appeared  in  1891.  Referring  to  Renouf’s
contention  that  xeter  lias  a meaning  equivalent  to  the  Greek
Swazis,  he  says,  “ Es  liegt  auf  der  Hand,  dass  der  Gottesname  in
“ Sinne  von  Starker,  Mach  tiger,  vieles  fur  sich  hat,  um  so  inehr
“ als  selbst  leblose  Gegenstiinde,  wie  z.  B.  ein  Baustein,  adjek-
“ tivisch  als  initri  d.  li.  stark,  miichtig,  nicht  selten  bezeielinet
“ werden.  Aber  so  vieles  diese  Erkllirung  fiir  sich  zu  haben
“ schient,  so  wenig  stimmt  sie  zu  der  Thatsache,  dass  in  den
“ Texten  aus  der  besten  Zeit  (XVIII  Dynastic)  das  Wort  mitr  als
“ ein  Synonym  fiir  die  Yorstelluug  der  Verjunguug  oder  Erneue-
“ rung  auftritt.  Es  diente  zum  Ausdruck  der  periodiseli  wieder-
“ kehrenden  Jugendfrische  nach  Alter  und  Tod,  so  dass  selbst  deni
u Menschen  in  den  iiltesten  Sarginschriften  zugerufen  wird,  er  set
“ fortan  in  einen  Gott  d.  h.  in  ein  Wesen  mit  jugendlieher  Frisehe
“ umgewaudelt.  Ioh  lasse  es  dahin  gestellt  sein,  nach  welcher
“ Richtung  bin  die  aufgeworfene  Streitfrage  zu  Gunsteu  der  einen
“ oder  der  anderen  Auftassung  entschieden  werden  wird ; liier
“ sei  nur  betont,  dass  das  Wort  nutr,  wtte,  den  eigentliclien
“ Gottesbegriff  der  alien  Aegyptcr  in  sich  schliesst  und  dalier  einen
“ganz  besonderen  Aufmerksamkeit  worth  ist.”

In  this  passage  Dr.  Brugsch  substantially  agrees  with  Pierrot's
views  quoted  above,  but  he  appears  to  have  withdrawn  from  the
position  which  he  took  up  in  his  Religion  und  Myfhologie , wherein
he  asserted  that  the  essential  meaning  of  nkter  was  identical  with
that  of  the  Greek  Averts  and  the  Latin  “ natura.’' 1 It  need  hardly
be  said  that  there  are  no  good  grounds  for  such  an  assertion,  and
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  eminent  Egyptologist  could  attempt
to  compare  the  conceptions  of  God  formed  by  a lialf-civilized
African  people  with  those  of  such  cultured  nations  as  the  Greeks
and  the  Romans.

The  solution  of  the  difficulty  of  finding  a meaning  for  netkr
is  not  brought  any  neai*er  when  we  consider  the  views  of  such
distinguished  Egyptologists  as  E.  de  Rouge,  Liebleiri,  and  Maspero.

1 I)or  Inbegriff  dieses  Worteg  deckfc  sicli  dalier  vo  11  ski  it  dig  mit  dor  ur-
“ spriingliohen  Bedeutung  des  griechischeu  physis  und  des  lnteinischen  natura


THE  WORD  NETER


69


The  first  of  these  in  commenting  on  the  passage  ^ jf)  ^ ^
^variant  | j cs=1xD  ^ ^ , which  he  translates  “ Dieu


“ devenant  dieu  (en)  s’engendrant  lui-mcine,”  says  in  his  excellent
GhresUmathic  figypticnne  (iii.  p.  24),  “ One  knows  not  ex.actly  the
“ meaning  of  the  verb  miter , which  forms  the  radical  of  the  word
“ miter,  ‘ god.’  It  is  an  idea  analagous  to  ‘ to  become,’  or  ‘ renew
“ oneself,’  for  miter l is  applied  to  the  resuscitated  soul  which
“ clothes  itself  in  its  immortal  form.”  Thus  we  find  that  one  of
the  greatest  Egyptologists  thinks  that  the  exact  meaning  of  xeter
is  unknown,  but  lie  suggests  that  it  may  have  a signification  not
unlike  that  proposed  by  Pierret.  Prof.  Lieblein  goes  a step
further  than  E.  de  Rouge,  for  he  is  of  opinion  that  it  is  impossible
to  show  the  first  origin  of  the  idea  of  God  among  any  people  hitherto
known  historically.  When  we,  for  instance,  take  the  Indo-
“ Europeans,  what  do  avc  find  there  ? The  Sanskrit  word  deea  is
“ identical  with  the  Latin  /leu*,  and  the  northern  tin,  tirar ; as
44  now  the  word  in  Latin  and  northern  language  signifies  God  it
“ must  also  in  Sanskrit  from  the  beginning  have  had  the  same
41  signification.  That  is  to  say,  the  Arians,  or  Indo-Europeans,
" must  have  combined  the  idea  of  God  with  this  word,  as  early  as
" when  they  still  lived  together  in  their  original  home.  Because,
‘‘if  the  word  in  their  pre-historic  home  had  had  another  more
primitive  signification,  the  wonder  would  have  happened,  that
“ the  word  had  accidentally  gone  through  the  same  development
“ of  signification  with  all  these  people  after  their  separation.  As
“ this  is  quite  improbable,  the  word  must  have  had  the  significa-
“ tion  of  God  in  the  original  Indo-European  language.  One  could
“ go  even  farther  and  presume  that,  in  this  language  also,  it  was
a Avord  derived  from  others,  and  consequently  originated  from  a
“ still  earlier  pre-historic  language.  All  things  considered  it  is
“ possible,  even  probable,  that  the  idea  of  God  has  developed  itself
“ in  an  earlier  period  of  languages,  than  the  Indo-European.  The
“ future  will  perhaps  be  able  to  supply  evidence  for  this.  The
“ science  of  languages  has  been  able  partly  to  reconstruct  an  Indo-
’*  European  pre-historic  language.  It  might  be  able  also  to
4t  reconstruct  a pre-historic  Semitic,  and  a pre-historic  Hamitic,


70


THE  WORD  NETER


“ and  of  these  three  p re-historic  languages,  whose  original  con-
nexion it  not  only  guesses,  but  even  commences  to  prove
“gradually,  it  will,  we  trust  in  time,  be  able  to  extract  a still
“ earlier  pre-historic  language,  which  according  to  analogy  might
“ be  called  Uoaliitic.  When  we  have  come  so  far,  we  shall  most
“ likely  in  this  pre-historic  language,  also  find  words  expressing
“ the  idea  of  God.  But  it  is  even  possible  that  the  idea  of  God
“ has  not  come  into  existence  in  this  pre-historic  language  either.
“ It  may  be  that  the  first  dawning  of  the  idea,  and  the  word  God
“ should  be  ascribed  to  still  earlier  languages,  to  layers  of  languages
“ so  deeply  buried  that  it  will  be  impossible  even  to  excavate
“them.  Between  the  time  of  inhabiting  caves  in  the  qunternian
“ period,  and  the  historical  kingdoms,  there  is  such  a long  space  of
“ time,  that  it  is  difficult  to  entertain  the  idea,  that  it  was  quite
“ devoid  of  any  conception  of  divinity,  so  that  this  should  first
“ have  sprung  up  in  the  historical  time.  In  any  case  we  shall  not
“ be  able  to  prove  historically  where  and  when  the  question  first
“ arose,  who  are  the  superhuman  powers  whose  activity  we  see
“ daily  in  nature  and  in  human  life.  Although  the  Egyptians  arc
“the  earliest  civilized  people  known  in  history,  and  just  therefore
“ especially  important  for  the  science  of  religion,  vet  it  is  even
“ there  impossible  to  point  out  the  origin  of  the  conception  of  the
“ deity.  The  oldest  monuments  of  Egypt  bring  before  us  the
“ gods  of  nature  chiefly,  and  among  these  especially  the  sun.
“They  mention,  however,  already  early  (in  the  IVtli  and  Vth
“Dynasties)  now  and  then  the  great  power,  or  the  great  God,  it.
“ being  uncertain  whether  this  refers  to  the  sun,  or  another  god  of
“ nature,  or  if  it  was  a general  appellation  of  the  vague  idea  of  a
“ supernatural  power,  possibly  inherited  by  the  Egyptians.  It  is
“ probably  this  great  God  indicated  ori  the  monuments,  from  the
“the  I Vth  Dynasty,  and  later  on.  who  has  given  occasion  to  the
“ false  belief  that  the  oldest  religion  of  the  Egyptians  was  pure
“ monotheism.  But  firstly,  it  must  be  observed,  that  lie  is  not
“ mentioned  alone  but  alongside  of  the  other  gods,  secondly,  that
“ he  is  merely  called  ‘ The  great  God,'  being  otherwise  without
“ distinguishing  appellations,  and  a God  of  whom  nothing  else  is
“ mentioned,  has,  so  to  speak,  to  use  Hegel’s  language,  merely  an


THE  WORD  NETER  71

“abstract  existence,  that  by  closer  examination  dissolves  into
“ nothing.”

It  is  necessary  to  quote  Professor  Lieblem  s opinion  at  length
because  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  discuss  the  earliest  idea  of  God  in
connection  with  its  alleged  similarity  to  that  evolved  by  Aryan
nations ; if,  however,  he  were  to  rewrite  the  passage  given  above  in
the  light  of  modern  research  he  would,  we  think,  modify  many  of
his  conclusions.  For  our  present  purpose  it  is  sufficient  to  note
that  he  believes  it  is  impossible  to  point  out  the  origin  of  the
conception  of  the  deity  among  the  Egyptians.  The  last  opinion
which  we  need  quote  is  that  of  M.  Maspero,  who  not  only  says
boldly  that  if  the  word  never  or  xetki  really  has  the  meaning  of
“strong”  it  is  a derived  and  not  an  original  meaning,  and  he
prefers  to  declare  that  the  word  is  so  old  that  its  earliest  significa-
tion is  unknown.  In  other  words,  it  has  the  meaning  of  god,  but
it  teaches  us  nothiug  as  to  the  primitive  value  of  this  word.  We
must  be  careful,  he  says,  not  to  let  it  suggest  the  modern  religious
or  philosophical  definitions  of  god  which  are  current  to-day,  for  an
Egyptian  god  is  a being  who  is  born  and  dies,  like  man,  and  is
finite,  imperfect,  and  corporeal,  and  is  endowed  with  passions,  and
virtues,  and  vices.3  This  statement  is,  of  course,  true  as  regards
the  gods  of  the  Egyptians  at  several  periods  of  their  history,  but  it
must  be  distinctly  understood,  and  it  cannot  be  too  plainly  stated,
that  side  by  side  with  such  conceptions  there  existed,  at  least
among  the  educated  Egyptians,  ideas  of  monotheism  which  are  not
far  removed  from  those  of  modern  nations.

From  what  has  been  said  above  we  see  that  some  scholars  take
the  view  that  the  word  never  may  mean  “renewal,”  or  “strength,”
or  “ strong,”  or  “ to  become,”  or  some  idea  which  suggests  “renewal,”
and  that  others  think,  its  original  meaning  is  not  only  unknown, .
but  that  it  is  impossible  to  find  it  out.  But  although  we  may  not
be  able  to  discover  the  exact  meaning  which  the  word  had  in  pre-
dynastic  times,  we  may  gain  some  idea  of  the  meaning  which  was
attached  to  it  in  the  dynastic  period  by  an  examination  of  a few
passages  from  the  hymns  and  Chapters  which  are  found  in  the

x Egyptian  Religion , by  J.  Lieblein,  Leipzig,  1884.

* La  Afythotogie  JSgyptienne  {fStuiles  Mythologies  tom.  ii.,  p.  21«>).


72


THE  WORD  NETER


various  versions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  In  the  text  of  Pepi  1.
(line  191)  we  have  the  words : — “ Behold  thy  son  Horns,  to  whom
“thou  hast  given  birth.  He  hath  not  placed  this  Pepi  at  the
*'  head  of  the  dead,  but  he  hath  set  him  among  the  gods  nete.ru’'


± Is  ^ - -A- (SD  ^ ® .kT -

,i~- 1 \ SJk  111  1 — Now  hcr°  1 <=»  ^ .

must  be  au  adjective,  and  we  are  clearly  intended  to  understand
that  the  gods  referred  to  are  those  which  have  the  attribute  of


neteru ; since  the  “gods  netern 1111-1  , are  mentioned  in
opposition  to  “the  dead”  it  seems  as  if  we  are  to  regard  the
gods  as  “living,”  i.e.,  to  possess  the  quality  of  life.  In  the  text  of

the  same  king  (line  419)  a bdk  net  nr,  -P— ^1— ’ ie> a
hawk  having  the  quality  of  voter  is  mentioned ; and  in  the  text  of


Unas  (line  569)  we  read  of  haul  nefrni,  or  the  two


souls  which  possess  the  quality  of  neter.  These  examples  belong
to  the  Vtli  and  VTth  Dynasties.  Passing  to  later  dynasties,  i.e.,
the  XVIIIth  and  XIXth,  etc.,  we  find  the  following  examples  of
the  use  of  the  words  neter  and  netri : —


• 1 4*  $

C3  a

hvn

netri

Boy

netri.

on  l,,h  ute.t  ee-ines  su  tr.heecf

Boy  netri , heir  of  eternity,  begetting  and  giving  birth


to  himself.


tu-d  tii  cm  dh-d  d ft  hakui  netri

I am  devoted  in  my  heart  without  feigning,  0 thou  netri

- 111s

er  neteru

more  than  the  gods.


1 ray  chafers  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  Text,  t>.  11,  1.  10.

2 Ibid.,  p.  ].  4.


THE  WORD  NETER


73


3-  T JL  T — l<LfJL'

tehet  - tu  re  pen  her  malm  en  netrdt

Shall  be  said  this  chapter  over  a crown  of  netrdt.


1<L!  ¥$’

neter  - bid
I have  become  neter.


da  - d khd  - hud
I have  risen  up


era  hdk  netri

in  the  form  of  a hawk  netri.


(>.


n


/VWVA  ^ V,^


ah


I have  become  pure,


IsTi

neter  - hud,

I have  become  neter.


him  - had

I ha  ve  become  a
spirit  (him ),


IPS  Ti

user  - hud
f have  become  strong,


»VIT4*

ba  - had

T have  become  a soul  (ba).


'■  IS!  &-•  111  S 1S^S

nnen-f  neter  rad  neter  a era  Netne-Jchertet

His  being  neter  with  the  gods  in  the  Neter-khertet.

(or,  he  shall  be)


8-

d„ ./

He  shall


l^f!  ^

vetrd  ichat-f  temtu

netrd  his  body  all.


1 See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,  p.  80,  1.  10.

3 Ibid.,  p.  154,  1.  6.  a ihid.,  p.  168, 1. * Ibid.,  p.  174, 1.  15.

1 Ibid.,  p.  417,  1.  12.  « Ibid.,  p.  410, 1.  7.


74


THE  WORD  NETER


netri

V

ba  - k

They  make

veter

thy  soul

1«LL

I

netn  -

/

ba  - k

He  makes  neter

thy  soul

cm  per  Selmt

in  the  house  of  Sebut.

44  1111  Is

md  net  era

like  the  gods.


-*•11  i-h  a-sa

neter  netri  kheper  t che.se f paul

God  netri,  self-produced,  primeval  matter.


Now,  in  the  above  examples  it  is  easy  to  see  that  although  the
words  “ strong  ” or  “ strength,”  when  applied  to  translate  ncter  or
netri,  give  a tolerably  suitable  sense  in  some  of  them,  it  is  quite
out  of  place  in  others,  e.g.,  in  No.  6,  where  the  deceased  is  made  to
say  that  he  has  acquired  the  quality  of  neter , and  a spirit,  and  a
soul,  and  is,  moreover,  strong ; the  word  rendered  “ strong  ” in
this  passage  is  user,  and  it  expresses  an  entirely  different  idea  from
iieter.  From  the  fact  that  ncter  is  mentioned  in  No.  1 in  connection
with  eternal  existence,  and  self-begetting,  and  self-production,  and
in  No.  11  with  self-production  and  primeval  matter,  it  is  almost
impossible  not  to  think  that  the  word  has  a meaning  which  is
closely  allied  to  the  ideas  of  “self-existence,”  and  the  power  to
“ renew  life  indefinitely,”  and  “ self-production.”  In  other  words,
ncter  appears  to  mean  a being  who  has  the  power  to  generate  life,
and  to  maintain  it  when  generated.  It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  ex-
plain the  word  by  Coptic  etymologies,  for  it  has  passed  over  directly
into  the  Coptic  language  under  the  forms  nouti  rroY'f",  and  mute,
ffOYTC,  the  last  consonant,  r,  having  disappeared  through  phonetic
decay,  and  the  translators  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  from  that  language
used  it  to  express  the  words  “ God  ” and  “ Lord.”  Meanwhile,  until
new  light  is  thrown  upon  the  subject  by  the  discovery  of  inscrip-


1 See  ‘my  Chapters  of  Comug  Forth  by  Day.  Text,  p.  509,  1.  18.

2 I hid,  p.  511,  1.  18.  s Ibid,  p.  49,  1.  1.


THE  PRIMITIVE  GOD


< ;>

tions  older  than  any  which  we  now  have,  we  must  be  content  to
accept  the  approximate  meaning  of  neter  suggested  above.

The  worship  of  the  gods  ( neteru ),  which  began  far  away
back  in  predynastic  times,  continued  through  the  archaic  and
dynastic  periods,  and  lasted  until  the  IV th  or  Vth  century  of
our  era ; it  is  tolerably  certain  that  in  respect  of  some  of  them  the
ideas  of  the  Egyptians  never  changed,  but,  as  regards  others,  their
views  did  not  remain  as  constant  as  some  writers  would  have  us
imagine.  In  the  earliest  days  every  village  community  in  Egypt
lmd  its  local  god,  who  shared  the  good  or  evil  fortune  of  the
community  to  which,  he  belonged.  His  emblem  or  symbol  was
carried  out  to  war,  and  was,  of  course,  present  at  all  great  public
gatherings  when  matters  connected  with  the  welfare  of  his  devotees
were  discussed.  A special  habitation  was  set  apart  for  him,  and
its  upkeep  was  provided  for  out  of  common  funds.  As  the  riches
of  the  people  of  the  village  increased,  the  rank  and  dignity  of  their
god  kept  pace  with  them,  but  his  revenues  suffered  in  times  of
scarcity,  and  defeat,  and  war ; his  emblem  might  even  be  carried
off  into  captivity  and  burnt,  or  smashed,  when,  of  course,  the  spirit
which  dwelt  in  his  symbol  was  also  destroyed.  The  number  of
such  early  gods  was  legion,  for  many  large  communities  possessed
several  gods,  each  of  which  was  famed  locally  for  some  particular
attribute.  When  a man  left  one  village  and  settled  in  another
he  took  his  god  or  gods  with  him,  but  he  would  be  obliged  to
acknowledge  the  god  of  the  village  or  city  in  which  he  had  made  his
new  abode,  and  to  contribute  towards  the  maintenance  of  his  house
and  its  small  compound.  The  reduction  in  the  number  of  the  gods
of  Egypt  began  when  man  first  realized  that  certain  gods  were
mightier  than  others,  for  he  ceased  gradually  to  worship  those
who  had,  in  his  opinion,  failed  to  justify  his  belief  in  them,  and
transferred  his  allegiance  to  the  gods  who  were  able  to  give  him
the  most  help.  In  process  of  time  the  god  or  goddess  of  a certain
village  or  town  would  obtain  a fame  and  reputation  for  power
which  would  outrival  those  of  the  deities  of  the  neighbouring
cities,  and  the  growth  of  the  worship  of  such  god  or  goddess  would
be  accompanied  by  a corresponding  decline  in  that  of  the  gods  in
the  towns  round  about.  The  gods,  in  the  first  instance,  grew  bv


%Q  SELECTION  OF  GODS

a process  of  selection  out  of  the  spirits  who  were  well  disposed
towards  man  and  were  helpful  to  him,  and  the  “ great  gods  ” of  the
Egyptians  were  evolved,  practically,  in  a somewhat  similar  manner.
It  is  at  present  hopeless  to  attempt  to  enumerate  all  the  gods
who  were,  from  first  to  last,  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians,  for  it
will  not  be  possible  to  do  this  until  every  text  extant  has  been
published.  Meanwhile  an  examination  of  the  earliest  Egyptian
religious  literature  known  to  us  proves  that  a number  of  gods  who
were  of  some  importance  in  the  polytheistic  system  of  the  Early
Empire  dropped  out  from  it  long  before  the  period  of  the  New
Empire,  and  thus  it  is  very  doubtful  if  we  shall  ever  be  able  to
collect  the  names  of  all  the  gods  who  have  been  worshipped  in  the
Valley  of  the  Nile  between  the  Archaic  and  Roman  periods,  whilst
to  make  a list  of  all  the  predynastic  gods  is  manifestly  impossible.

Future  discoveries  in  Egypt  may  produce  texts  that  will  tell
us  which  were  the  favourite  gods  in  the  archaic  period  and  give  us
some  idea  as  to  the  pronunciation  of  their  names,  for  we  have
reason  to  think  that  during  the  greater  part  of  that  period  the
Egyptians  were  able  to  write.  If  ever  such  texts  are  brought  to
light  we  shall  probably  find  that  the  gods  who  were  worshipped
during  the  archaic  period  were  those  who  were  popular  in  the
predynastic  period,  just  as  we  find  that  the  gods  of  the  Egyptians
of  the  Middle  and  New  Empires  were  to  all  intents  and  purposes
the  same  as  those  of  the  Egyptians  of  the  Early  Empire.  Speaking
generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Egyptians  of  the  greater  part  of
the  dynastic  period  of  their  history  invented  few  new  gods,  and
that  they  were  avcII  content  to  worship  such  deities  as  were  known
to  their  ancestors : we  know  that  they  admitted,  at  times,  foreign
gods  into  the  assembly  of  the  old  Egyptian  gods,  but  the  religious
texts  prove  that  they  were  never  allowed  to  usurp  the  functions  of
the  indigenous  gods.  Political  and  other  reasons  might  secure  for
them  a certain  amount  of  recognition  in  the  country  generally,  and
the  people  of  the  cities  where  their  emblems  and  statues  found
resting-places  treated  them  with  the  easy  toleration  which  is  so
marked  a characteristic  of  many  countries  in  the  East ; but  as  soon
as  such  reasons  disappeared  the  foreign  gods  were  quietly  ignored,
and  in  a short  time  their  worship  was  forgotten.  This  statement  is


GODS  OF  THE  EARLIEST  DYNASTIES  77

not  intended  to  apply  to  the  gods  who  were  introduced  from  one
city  or  district  of  Egypt  into  another,  for  we  know  that  the
Egyptian  priesthood  and  people  of  a given  city  were  ready  to  show
hospitality  to  almost  any  god  of  any  town,  or  city,  or  district,  pro-
vided that  he  belonged  to  the  same  coni/xi  uy  as  that  of  which  the
chief  local  god  was  a member.

We  have,  unfortunately,  no  long  connected  religious  texts  in
the  forms  in  which  they  must  have  existed  under  the  first  four
dynasties,  and  we  cannot  therefore  say  what  gods  were  worshipped
during  that  period.  There  is,  as  has  been  shoAvn  elsewhere,1  good
reason  for  believing  that  some  parts  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  were
revised  or  edited  during  the  early  part  of  the  period  of  the  1st
Dynasty,  and  if  this  be  so  we  may  assume  that  the  religious  system
of  the  Egyptians  as  revealed  in  the  texts  of  a much  later  time  closely
resembled  that  whicli  was  in  existence  in  the  later  part  of  the
archaic  period,  i.e.,  during  the  first  three  dynasties.  Under  the  Vth
and  Vlth  Dynasties  we  touch  firmer  ground,  and  we  find  abundant,
though  not  complete,  materials  for  the  study  of  the  gods  of  Egypt
and  their  attributes  in  the  lengthy  hieroglyphic  texts  which  were
inscribed  inside  the  pyramid  tombs  of  Unas,  Teta,  Pepi  I.,  Mer-en-
lia-Mehti-em-sa-f,  and  Pepi  II.  An  examination  of  these  texts
reveals  the  existence  of  an  established  theological  system  in  Egypt,
and  we  find  that  even  at  that  time  the  literature  in  which  it  was,
more  or  less,  expounded,  contained  innumerable  layers  of  religious
thought  and  expressions  of  belief  which  belonged  to  periods  many
of  which  must  have  been  separated  by  long  intervals  of  time.  The
gods  are  mentioned  in  such  a way  as  to  prove  that  the  writers  of
the  texts,  or  at  least  the  copyists,  assumed  that  the  reader  would
he  well  acquainted  with  the  subject  matter  of  the  compositions,  and
from  first  to  last  neither  explanation  nor  gloss  is  to  be  found  in
them.  The  texts  are,  of  course,  sepulchral,  and  the  greater  number
of  the  gods  mentioned  in  them  are  referred  to  in  their  characters
.as  gods  who  deal  with  the  souls  of  the  dead  in  the  woi’ld  beyond
the  grave.

The  Sun-god  Hit  and  the  gods  of  his  cycle,  and  Osiris,  the  god
and  judge  of  the  dead,  aud  the  gods  of  his  cycle,  have  definite
1 See  my  J Book  of  the  Dead , London,  1901,  vol.  i.,  p.  xxxiii.


7fi


GODS  OF  THE  ARCHAIC  PERIOD


positions  and  duties  assigned  to  them,  and  it  is  very  clear  that  both
the  texts  which  describe  these  and  the  ceremonies  which  were
performed  in  connection  with  the  words  recited  by  the  priests  were,
even  under  the  Vth  Dynasty,  extremely  ancient.  Moreover,  it  is
certain  that  the  religious  texts  in  use  for  funeral  purposes  under
that  dynasty  are  substantially  those  which  were  compiled  several
centuries  before.  We  may  note  in  passing  that  the  funeral  books
were  edited  by  the  priests  of  Aunu  or  Anu,  i.e.,  Heliopolis,  and  as
a result  they  exhibit  traces  of  the  influence  of  the  theological
opinions  of  the  great  priestly  college  of  that  city ; but  at  bottom
the  views  and  beliefs  which  may  be  deduced  from  them,  and  the
fundamental  conceptions  to  which  they  give  expression  are  the
products  of  the  minds  of  the  predymistic,  indigenous  Egyptians.
To  the  consideration  of  the  Heliopolitan  religious  system  we  shall
return  later,  and  we  may  therefore  pass  on  to  the  enumeration  of
the  principal  gods  who  are  made  known  to  us  by  the  Pyramid
Texts  at  SakkAra.  Among  the  great  gods  who  were  certainly
worshipped  in  the  early  archaic  period  may  be  mentioned  : —


Ptah  (Teta  88)

Xu  (Unas  199)

Xet,  or  Noith  (Unas  (57)
Pa  (poHsim)

H et- H er u ( Hathor)


/VWVAA  |

005

,wvws  2

e


Hern,3  or  Horus  (Mer-en-Pii  454)


l

Khoper  j (Unas  444)
Kheprer)  ( Pepi  II.  <S5ti)
Khucrnu  (Unas  556)
Sebek  (Unas  565)


Of  these  gods  lleru,  or  Horus,  was  the  hawk-god,  i.e.,  the
spirit  and  personification  of  the  “height”  of  heaven  ; Kheper  was
the  beetle-god ; Khnemu  the  ram-god ; and  Sebek  the  crocodile-
god  ; Xet  or  Noith  was  originally  a wood-spirit,  Pa  and  Ptah  were
two  forms  of  the  Sun-god,  and  Xu  was  the  watery  mass  of  heaven


i Or,  00  (Unaa,  309),  or  ^ ^ (Tetu,  78).

AWAA  £ /

* jL  (Unas,  272).

Or,  iieru-ur,  “ Homs  the  elder  ” (Unas,  358).


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS


79


in  which  he  lived.  With  Ra  and  Kheper  the  priests  of  Heliopolis
associated  the  form  of  the  Sun-god  which  was  specially  worshipped
irt  their  city,  and  thus  we  have  mentioned  the  compound  gods

Ra-Tcm  (Unas  216,  224,  Mer-en-Ra.  458),  and  Tem-

Klieprer  ^ ® ^ ^ (Pepi  II.  662).  In  the  text  of  Unas

JQ  /V'AAAA  41  A

(line  626)  Sebek  is  styled  “ son  of  Net,”  ^ ^ ^><Q,  and  he  is  also

trailed  “ lord  of  Baru,”  JJ  <2=-  ^ Q^V)  (line  565) ; but  if  the

XVIIIth  Dynasty  texts  be  correct  the  name  of  this  place  is  mis-
spelt, and  in  any  case  it  must  be  identical  with  the  Bakhau,

Jj  ^ , or  Mountain  of  the  Sunrise  of  Chapter  cviii.

of  the  Hook  of  the  Dead.  The  following  is  a list  of  the  other
principal  gods  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts : —


Aim  (Pepi  II.  850)


t\  1


Aker  (Unas  498,  614,  Teta  809)
A pi  (Unas  487)  (j  □


jUtllUAU,

,VWA\

^luumu^

/WVN-'A

C2k


Ap-uat  (Unas  187)  • Y?

Amen  (Unas  557)  (|

Ament  (Unas  557)  (j

Am-henth-f  (Pepi  J.  666)

«/wwv\

1

Am-sepa-f  (Pepi  I.  666)

4 □

Amsu  or  Min  (Unas  377)
Amset  (Tetii  60,  197)


Ana  (Unas  272,  275)

Anpu  (Unas  71,  207,  219)
An-mut-f  (Pepi  IT.  772)

An-tcher-f  (Pepi  I.  651)

Akhet-nen-tlia  (Teta.  807)

Asar,  Osiris  (pafixiin)

Ast,  Isis  (Unas  181)  jj

Asken  (Pepi  II.  1324)  jk.

I VYWA  1

Ater-asfet  (Pepi  II.  980)

• _ n avww

Ankh  (Pepi  I.  672)  ^


1 Aim  appeal's  to  be  identical  with
1>pI>i  11.,  1.  1320.


(W)


, who  is  Anisu  or  Min  -a®- ; see


80


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS


I-en-her-pes  (Unas  392)

Uahu  (Teta  383)  f|  ^ ^
Ur-sheps-f  (Pepi  I.  671)

Urt  (Unas  272)  Jg  ^

Urt-hekau  (Unas  269)

^8UU

Usert  (Unas  229)  ^ P <Z>

Uthes  (Pepi  II.  976)

Ba  (Mer-en-Ra  784)  ^

Baba  (Unas  532)  J i)

Babi  (Unas  644, 647)  J ^ |
Baabu  (Pepi  1.^58)

Babua  (Pepi I.  604)

Bastet  (Pepi  I.  569)

Ba-ashem-f  (Mer-en-Ra  784)

Pent  (Unas  280)

Pesetcbet  (Unas  417)

°n  _
Maat-Khnemu  (Pepi  1.445)  ^

Maat  (Unas  220)


Mut (Units  181)J^^2p. . The
variants  are  |j(|  <=>

Ment  (Pepi  II.  849)  (j

Mentef  (Pepi  II.  1228)

“^11

AWVAA  "W*  1

Menth  (Mer-en-Ra  784)  gg
Meht-urt  (Unas  427,  623)

Ck  <K:>  JT7)

Mei.it-urt  (Unas  427,  623)

OC3>t  ww.v.  ^

' MW.


/wwv\  r\


£2x1

1

£2x


□

yVW-AA


111  <=.
III


Em-khent-maati  (Pepi  I.  645)

kiisfe

Em-khent-maati  (Pepi  I.  645)

. k(i «,

Meskha  (Unas  567)  [fj  ® ^

Meskhaat  (Pepi  I.  671)

fillkk0^

Metchetat  (Pepi  II.  956)

Nau  (Unas  557)  AWAA  4*
Nubt  (Unas  479)  P5^  J © 3-J
Nebt-het  (Unas  220)  ^ [|

Nefer-Tem  (Unas  395)  \ipcx


This  god  is  said  to  have  a 41  red  ear”  • 2 Var.  p ^


£2x

o ’


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS  81
Enen  (Unas  557))  ^ JL  | Hem  (pepi  I.  641)


Enenet  (Unas  240)  j 'vwvv^  ©

Nekhben  (Unas  459)  ^ JJ  q

Nehebkau  (Unas  559)

Nekhebet  (Mcr-en-Rii  762)

7U4


WWW

AA/VVv\


o

/WNAAA


Neht  (Unas  601)

Nesei’t  (Unas  209)

N'cti  (Unas  279)

Netetthab  (Unas  598)  ] (jo

Renenut  (Unas  441)

Rurutha  (Pepi  II.  976,  979)

Hepatb  (Pepi  1.  636)

ra^"kT

Henena  (Pepi  I.  636)  (TJ  ].].  (]  i
Hetchhetch  (Pepi  I.  173)

Hettenuut  (Teta,  332)

11  u (Unas  439)  ^

Hep  (Unas  187)  | □

Hep-ur  ( Unas  431)  | °

Hep  (Teta  60,  197)  1 0


Hemen  (Pepi  II.  850)  jj  c~~l

A /www  ^

Hen-pesetchti  (Teta  309)

Hent  (Unas  417)

Hunt  (Teta  357)  { + ^ \

Heru  (passim)

Hem-aah  (Teta  365)  ^ <1  g
Heru-am-henu  (Unas  211)

Heru-khent-peru  (Unas  202)

^fdti  nn

II  eru-khesbetch-maati  ( U nas3 6 9 )
Heru-khuttha  (Unas  471)

U


Heru-Sept  (Unas  465)
Hcru-tesher-maati  (Unas  369)

Heru-Tat  (Unas  218)

Ileru-khart  (Teta  301)
Hra-f-ha-f  (Pepi  I.)


ller-hepes  (Unas  226)  a


o


82


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS


Hesat  (Pepi  II.  976)


Hesmennu  (Mer-en-Ra  670)

A /wwv\  _ZJL  i

Het-Hert  (Unas  575)

Heka  (Pepi  I.  583)  8 U

ITeqet  (Pepi  I.  570)


Khaata  (Unas  536)  g?n  (j  ^
Khebetch  (Unas  434)  © Jj

Khent-  Amenti  (Unas  201)fjjj^^
Khent-maati  (Unas  218)

Khnemu  (Unas  556,  Pepi  I.  455)

sA

Khensu  (Unas  510)  ® — %

A/VWSA  -JI

Khensu-Sept  (Unas  588)

*9  A L

Saa  (Unas  439)  p (j  4rsa  ^
Sathet  (Pepi  I.  297)  p (j

Seb  (Unas  234)  Jj

Sephu-urt  (Pepi  II.  976)

PD

Sept  (Unas  219)  ^


Sma-ur  (Unas  280)

P ^ ^

Smentet  (Teta  355)  p ^

A/WWN  1

S until  (Pepi  II.  854)  — -
Seref-ur  (Teta  309)

Serqet  (Pepi  I.  647)  ^

Serqet-hetu  (Teta  207)

Seliepu  (Pepi  I.  685)  — - 1 ^
Sekheinf  (Pepi  II.  978)

P?  ® jk>

Seklien-ta-en-ur  (Unas  281)

A/VWV\

© W

Sekliet  (Unas  390)  pf

Sashsa  (Pepi  II.  975)

p i)  on  p & **=*.


/VWWN  y


Seker  (Pepi  I.  641)

' 'iAAfc:

Seksen  (Pepi  I.  650)  p-^r^p

Set  (Unas  6)  3-=J

Setliasetha  (Pepi  I.  265)

Seththa  (Pepi  I.  259)  f ^ |j
Shu  (Unas  185)  on


1 Var.


Var.  P 1 j^.


Pepi  I.,  352.
□

Cb2


* Ho  is  identified  with  ^ ^ ^ ^ | in  Pepi  n.,  1320.


GODS  OF  THE  PYRAMID  TEXTS


83


Shesmu  (Unas  511)

Sheskhentet  (Unas  300)  nn||°
Kenur  (Pepi  II.  070)


a

iww\


Kasut  (Pepi  II.  975)


Qebhsennuf  (Teta  GO)


Tnit  (Tebi  876)


Tem-kheprer  (Pepi  II.  662)

5J30T  □ {IS  <=>

Tatct  (Unas  67)  Q ^

Tuamutef  (Teta  60)

Tenanu  (Pepi  I.  269)  q ^


Tent  on  (Unas  280)
Tehuti  (Unas  228)


iWvW>  A<W\/V\

4


Teba  (Unas  128)


Tcfcn  (Unas  453)
Tefnut  (Unas  453)
Tcm  (Unas  207)


WMAA
^ /WWV\

'Ja=n:


Tclient  (Mer-en-Ra  773)  %

rJTDa  \

Tchenteru  (Teta  198)

Tohenttch  enter  (Pepi  I.  301)


Besides  the  above  gods  are  mentioned  the  “angel  (or
messenger)  of  the  two  gods,”  ^ ^ (Unas  408)  ; and  the  “ Ashein

that  dwelleth  within  Aru,”  Av  ^ 1]  <b>-  tvsn  (Teta  351).
Allusions  are  made  to  the  following  important  stars : —

Nekkekli  (Tct*  218),

Septet  (Teta  349),  p ^ ^ ^ i.e,,  the  Dog  Star.

Sah  (Teta  349),  p f i-e.,  Orion.

Sehut  (Pepi  II.  857),  H 8 “

I A VsSKBI

The  Pyramid  Texts 'show  that  in  addition  to  the  gods  already
enumerated  there  existed*certain  classes  of  beings  to  whom  were
attributed  the  nature  of  the  gods,  e.g. : —

The  Afu  (Pepi  II.  951),  ^ ^ j^.

The  Utennu  (Pepi  II.  951),  ^ ggg  3^  3^--


84


OTHER  DIVINE  BEINGS


The  Urshu  of  Pe  (Pepi  II.  849),  na

The  Urshu  of  Nekhen  (Pepi  IT.  849),  csa  ®

The  Henmemet  (Unas  211),  ^ ^ j*


The  Set  beings,  superior  mid  inferior,  (Pepi  II.  951),


The  Skemsu  Ileru


(Pepi  I.  100),  ^


Of  the  functions  of  the  Afu  and  IJtennu  nothing  whatever  is
known.  The  Urshu,  i.c.,  the  Watchers,  of  Pe  and  Nekhen  may
have  been  groups  of  well-known  gods,  who  were  supposed  to
“ watch  over  ” and  specially  protect  these  cities ; but,  on  the  other-
hand,  thev  mav  onlv  have  been  the  messengers,  or  angels,  of  the
souls  of  Pe  and  Nekhen.  The  Henmemet  beings  are  likewise  a
class  of  divine  beings  about  whom  we  have  no  exact  information.
In  certain  texts  they  are  mentioned  in  connection  with  gods  and
men  in  such  a maimer  that  they  are  supposed  to  represent
“unborn  generations,”  but  this  rendering  will  not  suit  many  of  the
passages  in  which  the  word  occurs,  and  in  those  in  which  it  seems
to  do  so  many  other  hypothetical  meanings  would  fit  the  context
just  as  well.  The  passage  in  which  the  Set  beings  are  referred  to
must  belong  to  the  period  when  the  god  Set  was  regarded  as  a
beneficent  being  and  a god  who  was,  with  Uorus,  a friend  and  helper
of  the  dead.  The  text  quoted  above  shows  that,  like  Horus,  Set
was  supposed  to  be  the  head  of  a company  of  divine  beings  with
attributes  and  characteristics  similar  to  those  of  himself,  and  that
this  company  was  divided  into  two  classes,  the  upper  and  the
lower,  or  perhaps  even  the  celestial  and  the  terrestrial.  Last  must
be  mentioned  the  Shemsu  Ileru,  or  the  “Followers  of  Horus,”  to
whom  many  references  are  made  in  funeral  literature;  their
primary  duties  were  to  minister  to  the  god  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  but
they  were  also  supposed  to  help  him  in  the  performance  of  the
duties  which,  he  undertook  fori  the  benefit  of  the  dead.  In  the
religious  literature  of  the  Early  Empire  they  occupy  the'* place  of

the  “Mesniu,”  fjjl  ^ ^ ^ j,  of  Horus  of  Behutet,  the  modern


THE  GOD  OF  FOUR  FACES


85


Edfft,  i.e.,  the  workers  in  metal,  or  blacksmiths,  who  are  supposed
to  have  accompanied  this  god  into  Egypt,  and  to  have  assisted  him
by  their  weapons  in  establishing  his  supremacy  at  Behutet,  or  Edfu.
The  exploits  of  this  god  will  be  described  later  on  in  the  section
treating  of  Homs  generally.

In  the  text  of  Pepi  J.  (line  419)  we  have  a reference  to  a god
with  four  faces  in  the  following  words : — “ Homage  to  thee,  0 thou
“ who  hast  four  faces  which  rest  and  look  in  turn  upon  what  is  in

“ Kenset,1  and  who  bringest  storm ! Grant  thou  unto  this

“Pepi  thy  two  fingers  which  thou  hast  given  to  the  goddess  Nefert,
“ the  daughter  of  the  great  god,  as  messengcrfsj  from  heaven  to
“ earth  when  the  gods  make  tlieir  appearance  in  heaven.  Thou
“ art  endowed  with  a soul,  and  thou  dost  rise  [like  the  sun]  in  thy
“ boat  of  seven  hundred  and  seventy  cubits.2  Thou  hast  carried  in
“ thy  boat  the  gods  of  Pe,  and  thou  hast  made  content  the  gods  of
“ the  East.  Carry  thou  this  Pepi  with  thee  in  the  cabin  of  thy
“boat,  for  this  Pepi  is  the  son  of  the  Scarab  which  is  born  in
“ Hetepet  beneath  the  hair  of  the  city  of  Iusaas  the  northern,  and
“ he  is  the  offspring  of  Seb.  It  is  he  who  was  between  the  legs  of
“Khent-maati  on  the  night  wherein  he  guarded  (?)  bread,  and  on
“ the  night  wherein  he  fashioned  the  heads  of  arrows.  Thou  hast
“ taken  thy  spear  which  is  dear  to  thee,  thy  pointed  weapon  which
“ thrusteth  down  river  banks,  with  a double  point  like  the  darts  of
“ Ra,  and  a double  haft  like  tlie  claws  of  the  goddess  Maf'tet.”

Throughout  the  Pyramid  Texts  frequent  mention  is  made  of
one  group,  or  of  two  or  three  groups,  of  nine  gods.  Thus  in  Unas
(line  179)  we  read  of  “bowing  low  to  the  grouud  before  the  nine

g°ds,”  | ^<c=>  =-*¥=»  111111111’  an^  *n  ^ne  234  we  are  t°ld

that  the  king’s  bread  consists  of  “ the  word 8 of  Seb  which  cometh


[Wl

* ^ tche{  means  literally  “ word,"  but  it  often  is  used  to  express  “ thing,”
“matter,"  like  the  Hebrew  121.


nnnn
case  nnn  *


86  PAUT  OR  SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  GODS


forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  nine  male  gods,’  /WW\A

"7*  — ^ 111111111 J-W  The  ®od  S(3sha4>  Pc


crzi


&


is  said  in  line  382  to  have  been  “ begotten  bv  Seb  and  brought  forth

„y  the  uiuc  gods"  1>1  1 = 1111111111;

and  in  line  5!)2  11a  is  said  to  be  the  “chief  of  the  nine  gods,”

O ^ 111111111*  k’rom  several  passages  (e.g.,  Unas  251)

we  learn  that  one  company  of  nine  gods  was  called  the  “ Great,”
7 HII  *7  » an<^  that  another  company  Avas  called  the  “Little,”

I*1 1111  * and  the  4 n^ne  «ods  of  Horus  ” are  spoken

of  side  by  side  with  “ the  gods  j”  ^ p AVAV\  111


IT

IT


111111111  IXk  (line  443),  but  whether  this  group  is  to
be  connected  with  the  Great  or  Little  company  of  gods  cannot  be
said.  A double  group  of  nine  gods  is  frequently  referred  to,  e.g.,
in  Teta,  line  67,  where  it  is  said,  “ The  eighteen  gods  cense  Teta,

a„d  his  „,™th  is  pure,"  111111111111111111  (ffl

; and  in  Pepi  L,  line  273,  where  we  read  that  the
“ two  lips  of  Meri-Rii  are  the  eighteen  gods,”  |1  ^ £|i)')|

mniinnimm aad  a-ain  *n  Hne  «.  s

said  to  be  “with  the  eighteen  gods  in  Qebhu,”  and  to  be  the

“ fashioner  of  the  eighteen  gods,”  iz,  iiinnmnmiii

k-jmss  ^ i-^ijiiiiiiminnm.


We  may  perhaps  assume  that  the  eighteen  gods  include  the  Great
and  the  Little  companies  of  the  gods,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  as
“ male  and  female  gods  ” are  mentioned 2 in  the  text  of  Teta,  nine
of  the  eighteen  gods  may  be  feminine  counterparts  of  the  other
nine,  who  must  therefore  be  held  to  be  masculine.  But  the  texts
of  Teta,  (line  307)  and  Pepi  I.  (line  218)  show  that  there  was  a
third  company  of  nine  gods  recognized  by  the  priests  of  Helio-


1 Variant  0^^  © ; Teta,  1.  iibii.


(1.  197).


o a a


COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS


87


©

<=,  in


poiis  and  we  find  all  three  companies  represented  thus:

111111111111111111111111111 •

The  Egyptian  word  here  rendered  “company”  is  pauti  or

jmitf  which  may  be  written  either  □ or  ©,  and  the

meaning  usually  attached  to  it  has  been  “ nine.”  It  is  found  in
texts  subsequent  to  the  period  of  the  pyramids  at  Sakkara  thus
written IT  j pant  neleru,  “jmvt  of  the  gods”;  the
double  company  of  the  gods  is  expressed  by

jmitti,  or  we  may  have  © c]c]c]  <


f*1  AAA/V'A

l j paid  nnte.ru  oat

punt  netern  netchesct,  i.e.,  “the  Great  company  of  gods  and  the
Little  company  of  the  gods.”  The  fact  that  a company  of  gods  is
represented  by  nine  axes,  has  led  to  the  common

belief  that  a company  of  the  gods  contained  nine  gods,  and  for
this  reason  the  word  po  ut  has  been  explained  to  mean  “ nine.”  It
is  quite  true  that  the  Egyptians  frequently  ann ir/ned  nine  gods  to
the  pant,  as  we  may  see  from  such  passages  as  Unas  235, 1 and
especially  from  line  283,  where  it  is  said,  “ Grant  thou  that
this  Unas  may  rule  the  nine,  and  that  he  may  complete  the

“m|’“y of  the  «ods”  A'HVd  (SB  21 !!!  2 1 2L

But  the  last  quoted  passage  proves  that  a pant,  of


111111111-


the  gods  might  contain  more  than  nine  divine  beings,  for  it  is  clear
that  if  the  intent  of  the  prayer  was  carried  out  the  pa  id  referred
to  in  it  would  contain  ten,  king  IJnas  being  added  to  the  nine
gods.  Again,  in  a litany  to  the  gods  of  the  Great  company  given
in  the  Unas  text  (line  240  if.)  we  see  that  the  paid  contains  Tern,
Shu,  Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  Isis,  Set,  Nephthys,  Thoth,  and  llorus,
i.e.,  ten  gods,  without  counting  the  deceased,  who  wished  to  be
added  to  the  number  of  the  gods.  In  the  text  of  Mer-en-Ra
(line  205)  the  paid  contains  nine  gods,3  and  it  is  described  as  the


0

o


3 rakniimn  t j

X i P c=d  Cfl  fli  seo  also  1>epi  IIm  l 6<i5,


88


COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS


“ Great  pavt  which  is  in  Annu  ” (Heliopolis),  whilst  in  the  text  of
Pepi  II.  (line  669)  the  same  punt  is  said  to  contain  Tem,  Shu,
Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Osiris-Klient-Amenti,  Set,  Horus,  Ha,
Khent-maati,  and  Hatchet,  i.e.,  twelve  gods.  Similarly  the  gods  of
the  Little  pant-  are  more  than  nine  in  number,  and  in  Unas  (line
253  f.)  they  are  thus  enumerated  : — Rat,  the  dweller  in  Annu,


Q-fF  &©’ tlie  dweller  in  Antchet,  a *^1,  the  dweller  in  I;lct-
Serqet,  the  dweller  in  the  divine  palace,  jj|,  the

dweller  in  Hetch-paiir,  j


, the  dweller  in  Orion,  ^T>,  the


dweller  in  Top,  Q the  dweller  in  Het-ur-ka,  [ the

dweller  in  Unnu  of  the  South,  the  dweller  in  Unnu  of  the

North

morrn,


Thus  the  Little  paid  contained  eleven  gods,  not  counting  the
deceased  who  desired  to  be  added  to  their  number.  The  fact  that
the  paid  contained  at  times  more  than  nine  gods  is  thus  explained
by  M.  Maspero  1 : “ The  number  nine  was  the  original  number,
**  but  each  of  the  nine  gods,  especially  tlie  first  and  the  last,  could
“ be  developed.”  Thus  if  it  was  desired  to  add  the  god  Amen  of
the  Theban  triad  to  the  pant  of  Heliopolis,  lie  could  be  set  at  the
head  of  it  either  in  the  place  of  Temu,  the  legitimate  chief  of  the
pant,  or  side  by  side  with  him.  Mut,  the  consort  of  Amen,  might
be  included  in  the  punt,  but  Amen  and  Mut  would  together  only
count  as  one  god.  Similarly,  any  one  or  all  of  the  gods  who
belonged  to  the  shrine  of  Amen  could  be  iueluded  with  that  god
himself  in  the  pant  of  Heliopolis,  and  yet  the  number  of  that  pant
was  supposed  to  be  increased  only  by  one.  In  other  words,  the
admission  of  one  god  into  a pant,  brought  with  it  the  admission  of
all  the  gods  who  were  in  any  way  connected  with  him,  but  their
names  were  never  included  among  those  of  the  original  members
of  it.  This  explanation  is  very  good  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  it  must
not  be  taken  as  a proof  that  the  Egyptians  argued  in  this  manner,
or  that  they  argued  at  all  about  it.


The  nine  axes  Cj,=|,=|C]CjC|6]C|C]  are>  heyond  doubt,  intended  to  re-


La  Mythologie  figyptienne , p.  245.


SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  GODS


89


present  nine  gods,  i.e.,  a triad  of  triads,  but  the  signs  i iniiini,
paut  neteru,  must  be  translated  not  “ Neunheit,”  as  Brugsch
rendered  them,1 *  but  the  “ stuff  of  the  nine  gods,”  i.e.,  the  substance
or  matter  out  of  which  the  nine  gods  were  made.  The  word  paut,

, means  “ dough  cake,”  or  cake  of  bread  which

formed  part  of  the  offerings  made  to  the  dead ; similarly  paut  is
the  name  given  to  the  plastic  substance  out  of  which  the  earth  and
the  gods  were  formed,  and  later,  when  applied  to  divine  beings  or
things,  it  means  the  aggregation  or  entirety  of  such  beings  or
things.  Thus  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  (sheet  i.,  line  6)  the  god
Tatunen  is  declared  to  be  “ one,  the  maker  of  mankind,  and  of  the
“ material  of  the  gods  of  the  South  and  the  North,  the  West  and
“ the  East.” 3 4 But  there  was  a primeval  matter  out  of  which
heaven  was  made,  and  also  a [primeval]  matter  out  of  which  the
earth  was  made,  and  hence  Khepera,  the  great  creator  of  all
tilings,  is  said  in  Chapter  xvii.  (line  110)  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  to
possess  a body"  which  is  formed  of  both  classes  of  matter  {pant).
And  again  in  Chapter  lxxxv.  (line  8)  the  deceased,  wishing  to
identify  himself  with  this  divine  substance,  says,  “ I am  the  eldest
“ son  of  the  divine  pautti , that  is  to  say,  the  soul  of  the  souls  of  the
“ gods  of  everlasting,  and  my  body  is  everlasting,  and  my  creations  are
“ eternal,  and  L am  the  lord  of  years,  and  the  prince  of  everlasting-
“ ness.”  In  the  words  which  are  put  into  the  mouth  of  Khepera,
who  is  made  to  describe  his  creation  of  the  world,  the  god  says,
“ I produced  myself  from  the  [primeval]  matter  [which]  I made,”


1 “ Dor  kosmogoniscUe  Lelire  von  der  Ogdoas.  deren  ael  teste  Spuren  sich  bis

* zu  den  Pyrazuidentexten  verfolgen  lasscn,  sell  loss  sich  die  Doctrin  * der  Neunheit'

‘ (Knnuas)  oder  der  ® an.  Sie  umfasste  die  genet  ische  Kntsieliung  der  noun

4 -Fheile  mid  Kriifte,  seiche  die  znkunftige  Wohnung  der  den  Leib  Gottes  bildeten,
4dessen  *Seele  davon  Besitz  nalun,  um  aJles  mit  ihr  zu  erfiillen.”  Aetfyi*foUnjiey
[>.170.


iMiinni!


£2*  \


©

© *=>  i


90


THREE  COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS


I = i'  th>3  is  tho  only  mean-

iug  which  can  be  extracted  from  the  Egyptian  words,  and  the
context,  which  the  reader  will  find  given  in  the  section  on  the
Creation,  proves  that  it  is  the  correct  one.  The  word  “ primeval,"
which  is  added  in  brackets,  is  suggested  by  the  texts  wherein

pavtti  is  accompanied  by  ® tep,  i.e.,  “first,"  in  point  of  time,


compare  ^ ^ 0 j “first  matter,”  that  is  to  sav,

the  earliest  matter  which  was  created,  and  the  matter  which
existed  before  anything  else.  From  the  above  facts  it  is  clear
that  the  meaning  “ Neuuheit  ” must  not  be  given  to  the  Egyptian


word  paid.

We  have  now  seen  that,  so  far  back  as  the  Vth  Dynasty,  the
priests  of  Heliopolis  conceived  the  existence  of  three  companies  of
gods  ; the  first  two  they  distinguished  by  the  appellations  “ Great  ”
and  “ Little,”  but  to  the  third  they  gave  no  name.  The  gods  of  the
first  or  “Great”  company  are  well  known,  and  their  names  are:  - •

1 . Tern,  the  form  of  the  Sun-god  which  was  worshipped  at  Heliopolis.

2.  Shu.  3.  Tefnut.  4.  Seb.  5.  iS’ut.  6.  Osiris.  7.  Isis.  8.  Set.
9.  Nephthys.  Sometimes  this  company  is  formed  bv  the  addition
of  Homs  and  the  omission  of  Tern.  The  names  of  gods  of  the  second
or  “ Little  ” company  appear  to  be  given  in  the  text  of  Unas,
line  253  fF.,  where  we  have  enumerated  : — 1.  Rut.  2.  Am-Annu.

3.  Am-Antchet.  1.  A rn-H et-Serqet-ka-hetepet.  5.  Ain-Nctcr-het.
6.  Am-Ilctch-paar.  7.  Am-Sah.  8.  Am-Tep.  9-  Ain-Hot-ur-
Ra.  10.  Am-Unriu-resu.  11.  Ani-ITnnu-mel.it.  It  must,  how-
ever, be  noted  that  whereas  in  the  text  the  address  to  the  Great
company  of  the  gods  as  a whole  follows  the  separate  addresses  to
each,  the  address  to  the  Little  company  precedes  the  separate
addresses  to  each ; still  there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  the
second  group  of  names  given  above  are  really  those  of  the  Little
company  of  the  gods.  The  names  of  the  gods  of  the  third  company
are  unknown,  and  the  texts  are  silent  as  to  the  functions  which  the
company  was  supposed  to  perform ; the  Great  and  Little  companies
of  the  gods  are  frequently  referred  to  in  texts  of  all  periods,  but


* Sec  Archacologia,  voh  lii„  p,  557,

2 Sec*  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day , Text,  p.  348, 1.  15.


THREE  COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS


91


the  third  company  is  rarely  mentioned.  Thus  in  the  text  of
Pepi  I.  (line  43),  the  king  is  said  to  sit  on  an  iron  throne  and  to
weigh  words  at  the  head  of  the  Great  company  of  gods  in  Annu ; the
two  companies  of  the  gods  lift  up  the  head  of  Pepi  (line  97),  and  he
takes  the  crown  in  the  presence  of  the  Great  company  (line  117) ;
lie  sits  at  the  head  of  the  two  companies  (line  167),  and  in  their  boat
(line  169);  and  he  stands  between  the  two  companies  (line  186).
It  has  already  been  suggested 1 that  the  Great  company  of  gods  was
a macrocosm  of  a primitive  kind,  and  the  Little  company  a micro-
cosm: this  view  is  very  probably  correct,  and  is  supported  by
passages  like  the  following  : — “ The  son  of  his  father  is  come  with
“ the  company  of  the  gods  of  heaven,  . . . the  son  of  his  father  is
‘‘come  with  the  company  of  the  gods  of  earth.”

^ q,L  M ^ Z ^ 111111111  ?T  ^
M Z 111111111 QT  -

Prom  numerous  passages  in  texts  of  all  periods  it  is  clear
that  the  Egyptians  believed  that  heaven  was  in  many  respects  a
duplicate  of  earth,  and,  as  it  was  supposed  to  contain  a celestial
Nile,  and  sacred  cities  which  were  counterparts  of  those  on  the
earth  and  which  were  called  by  similar  names,  it  is  only  reasonable
to  assign  to  it  a company  of  gods  who  were  the  counterparts  of
those  on  earth.  And  as  there  were  gods  of  heaven  and  gods  of
earth,  so  also  were  there  gods  of  the  Tuat,  or  Underworld,  who

Avero  either  called  tuat,  j,  or  * Q j,  or  -net  era

m tuat , 111^  | AAAAAA  ^ ^ . This  being  so,  Ave  may  assume  that
Avhen  the  Avriters  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  mentioned  three  companies

Of  the  god,  inilininillllllllimill.  they  referred
to  the  company  of  the  gods  of  heaven,  the  company  of
the  gods  of  earth,  and  the  company  of  the  gods  of  the  Under-
world, meaning  thereby  what  the  writer  of  the  XXIIIrd
Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  meant  Avhen  he  spoke  of  “the


1 Maspero,  La  Mytholoijie  Eyyptieiine,  j>.  244.
s Pepi  I.,  11.  298  *300.


02


THREE  COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS

“company  of  all  the  gods,”  ® HI  $ j </W«=>(J||  ^ ^ In
the  Pyramid  Texts,  however,  and  in  the  later  Recensions  of  the
Book  of  the  Dead  which  are  based  upon  them,  the  pautti  neterv ,

miiniiiiiiiim  -,e„inm  — * -

present  the  G recat  and  Little  companies  of  the  gods,  and  these  only ;
the  members  of  each  company  varied  in  different  cities  and  in
different  periods,  but  the  principle  of  such  variation  is  com-
paratively simple.  Long  before  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  grouped
the  gods  of  Egypt  into  companies  certain  very  ancient  cities  had
their  own  special  gods  whom  they  probably  inherited  from  their
predecessors,  i.e.,  the  predynastic  Egyptians.  Thus  the  goddess
of  Sals  was  Nit,  or  Net,  or  Noith ; the  goddess  of  Per-Uatehet  was
Hatchet;  the  goddess  of  Dendera  was  Tfathor;  the  goddess  of
Nekheb  was  Nckhebet : the  god  of  Ed  fit  was  Ilorus ; the  god  of
Heliopolis  was  Tern ; and  so  on.  When  the  priests  of  these  and
other  cities  found  that,  for  some  reason,  they  were  obliged  to
accept  the  theological  system  formulated  by  the  priests  of  Helio-
polis and  its  Great  company  of  gods,  they  did  so  readily  enough,
but  they  always  made  the  great  local  god  or  goddess  the  head  or

chief,  ® \\ , of  the  company.

At  Heliopolis,  where  the  chief  local  god  was  called  Tern,  the
priests  joined  their  god  to  Iiii,  and  addressed  many  of  their  prayers
and  hymns  to  Tem-Ra  or  Ra-Tem.  At  Edfu  the  great  local  god
Ilorus  of  Behutet  was  either  made  to  take  the  place  of  Tem,  or  was
added  to  the  Heliopolitan  company  in  one  form  or  another.  The
same  thing  happened  in  the  case  of  goddesses  like  Neith,  Uatchet,
Nekhebet,  Hathor,  etc.  It  was  found  to  be  hopeless  to  attempt  to
substitute  the  Heliopolitan  company  of  gods  for  Neith  in  the  city
of  Sai's,  because  there  the  worship  of  that  goddess  was  extremely
ancient  and  was  very  important.  The  fact  that  her  name  forms  a
component  part  of  royal  names  very  early  in  the  1st  Dynasty  proves
that  her  worship  dates  from  the  first  half  of  the  archaic  period,  and
that  it  is  much  older  than  the  theological  system  of  Heliopolis.
But  when  the  priests  of  Sais  adopted  that  system  they  associated
her  with  the  head  of  the  company  of  the  gods,  and  gave  her


THE  COMPANIES  OF  THE  GODS


93


suitable  titles  and  ascribed  to  her  proper  attributes,  in  accordance
with  her  sex,  which  would  make  her  a feminine  counterpart  to  the
god  Tern.  The  god  Tern  was  the  Father-god,  and  the  lord  of
heaven,  and  the  begetter  of  the  gods,  therefore  Keith  became  “ the
“ great  lady,  the  mother-goddess,  the  lady  of  heaven,  and  queen  of

“ the  gods,”  ^ ^ t=3  ^ ^ 111’  Elsewhere1 *  she  is  called

“ mother  of  the  gods,”  and  just  as  Tern  was  declared  to  have  been
self-produced,  so  we  find  the  same  attribute  ascribed  to  Keith,  and
she  is  said  to  be  “the  great  lady,  who  gave  birth  to  Ra,  who
“brought  forth  in  primeval  time  herself,  never  having  been

“ creuto’>” S ^ (!)  t1  I Mil  — <■  1 11  ()  f1  ■ The

same  thing  happened  at  the  cities  of  Per- Hatchet  in  the  Delta  and
Nekhcbet  in  Upper  Egypt,  for  at  one  place  Uatchet,  the  ancient
and  local  goddess,  became  the  head  of  the  company  of  gods,
and  the  goddess  Nekhcbet  at  the  other.  Tt  is  interesting  to  note
that  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  themselves  included  Uatchet  in  their
Great  company  of  the  gods,  as  wo  may  see  from  the  text  of
Pepi  II., 11  where  we  find  that  the  deceased  king  prays  concerning
the  welfare  of  his  pyramid  “ to  the  great  pant  of  gods  in  Annu,”
i.e.,  Tem,  Shu,  Tefrmt,  Seb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Set,  Neplithys,  Klient-
Maati,  and  Uatchet.

The  goddess  llathor  at  Dendera  was  treated  by  the  }>riests
there  as  was  Keith  at  S.ais,  for  every  conceivable  attribute  was
ascribed  to  her,  and  her  devotees  declared  that  she  was  the  mother
of  the  gods,  and  the  creator  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  of
everything  which  is  in  them.  In  fact,  both  Neith  and  Hatlior
were  made  to  assume  all  the  powers  of  the  god  Tem,  and  indeed  of
every  solar  god.

The  general  evidence  derived  from  a study  of  texts  of  all
periods  shows  that  the  chief  local  gods  of  many  cities  never  lost
their  exalted  positions  in  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants,  who  clung
to  their  belief  in  them  with  a consistency  and  conservatism  which
are  truly  Egyptian.  In  fact,  the  god  of  a nome,  or  the  god  of  the

1 L>.  Mallet.  Le  Culte  dr,  Neit  d Sal n,  Paris,  1888,  p.  47.

’ Ilml,  p.  146.  3 See  11.  669  ff.


94


LOCAL  GODS


capital  city  of  a nonie,  when  once  firmly  established,  seems  to  have
maintained  his  influence  in  all  periods  of  Egyptian  history,  and
though  his  shrine  may  have  fallen  into  oblivion  as  the  result  of
wars  or  invasions,  and  his  worship  have  been  suspended  from  time
to  time,  the  people  of  his  city  always  took  the  earliest  opportunity
of  rebuilding  his  sanctuary  and  establishing  his  priests  as  soon  as
prosperity  l’eturned  to  the  country.


( 95  )


CHAPTER  III

PRIMITIVE  GODS  AND  NOME-GODS

DURING  tlie  predynastic  period  in  Egypt  every  village  and
town  or  settlement  possessed  its  god,  whose  worship  and
the  glory  of  whose  shrine  increased  or  declined  according  to  the
increase  or  decrease  of  the  prosperity  of  the  community  in  which
he  lived.  When  the  country  was  divided  into  sections  which  the

Egyptians  called  hasp",  f P □ ^ ^ > or  “ nomes,”  a certain  god,  or
group  of  allied  gods,  became  the  representative,  or  representatives,
of  each  nomc,  and  so  obtained  the  pre-eminence  over  all  the  other
gods  of  the  nomc ; and  sometimes  one  god  would  represent  two
nomes.  In  this  way  the  whole  country  of  Egypt,  from  the  Medi-
terranean Sea  to  Elephantine,  was  divided  among  the  gods,  and  it
became  customary  in  each  nomc  to  regard  the  god  of  that  nome  as
the  “ Great  God,”  or  “ God,”  and  to  endow  him  with  all  the  powers
and  attributes  possible.  We  have,  unfortunately,  no  means  of
knowing  when  the  country  was  first  split  up  into  nomes,  but  the
division  must  have  taken  place  at  a very  early  period,  and  the  gods
who  were  chosen  to  represent  the  nomes  were  undoubtedly  those
who  had  been  worshipped  in  the  large  towns  or  settlements  during
the  predynastic  period.  Thus  in  the  earliest  dynastic  times  of
which  we  have  inscriptions  of  any  length  we  iind  that  Neith  was  the
chief  deity  of  Sais,  Osiris  of  Busiris,  Thoth  of  Hermopolis,  Uatchet
of  Per-Uatcliet,  Ptah  of  Memphis,  Sebek  of  Crocodilopolis,  Amen  of
Thebes,  Nekhebet  of  Nekheb,  and  Khnemu  of  Elephantine.  The
number  of  the  nomes  seems  to  have  been  different  in  different
periods,  so  it  is  not  possible  to  say  "with  certainty  how  many  the
early  nome-gods  were  in  number.  The  Egyptian  lists  give  the
number  of  nomes  as  forty-two  or  forty-four,  but  the  classical  writers,


96


NOME-GODS


Strabo,  Diodorus,  and  Pliny,  do  not  agree  in  their  statements  on
the  subject.  Strabo  says 1 that  the  Labyrinth  contained  twenty-
seven  chambers,  and  if  each  one  represented  a noine  the  nomes
must  have  been  twenty-seven  in  number,  i.e.,  ten  in  Upper  Egypt,
ten  in  Lower  Egypt,  and  seven  in  the  Heptauomis.  On  the  other
hand,  Herodotus  says3  that  the  Labyrinth  contained  twelve  halls,
Pliny  (Bk.  v.,  chap.  9)  enumerates  the  nomes  as  follows: —
Ombites,  Apollopolites,  Hermonthites,  Thinites,  Phaturites,  Copt-
ites,Tentyrites,  Diopolites,  Antaeopolites,  Aphroditopolites,  Lycopo-
lites,  Pharbaethites,  Bubastites,  Sethroites,  Tanites,  the  Arabian
nome,  the  Hammonian  nome,  Oxyrynchites,  Leontopolites,  Athri-
bites,  Cynopolites,  Hermopolites,  Xoites,  Mendesium,  Sebenriytes,
Oabasites,  Latopolites,  Heliopolites,  Prosopites,  Panopolites,  Busi-
rites,  Onuphites,  Sai'tes,  Ptenethu,  Phthemphu,  Naucratites,  Mete-
lites,  Gynaeopolites,  Menelaites,  Maraeotis,  Herat- leopolites,  Arsino-
i'tes,  Memphites,  and  the  two  nomes  of  Oasites.  Diodorus  Siculus
(i.  54)  gives  the  number  of  the  nomes  as  thirty-six : Herodotus
(ii.  164)  tells  us  that  the  country  of  Egypt  was  divided  into
districts 1 or  nomes,  but  he  does  not  say  how  many  of  them  there
were.  These  facts  serve  to  show  that  the  number  of  nomes  when
the  country  was  first  divided  was  smaller  than  in  later  times,  arid
we  may  assume  that  it  was  the  nomes  of  the  Delta  which  increased
in  number  rather  than  those  of  Upper  Egypt.  The  following  is  a
list  of  the  nomes  of  Egypt  according  to  inscriptions  at  Edfil  and
elsewhere,  together  with  their  capitals  and  the  gods  who  were
worshipped  in  them : —

UPPER  EGYPT.

Capital.  God.

Abu  ^ £3  Jj  Khnemu  ^

(Elephantine)

Teb  J^Jj©  J.‘eru-Behutet

( Apoll  inopolis  Magna)


Nome.

1.

Ta-khent

c So

c Zi  a

0

JU,

Thes-  j

Rertu


1 xvii.  1.  § 37.  * ii.  § 148.

A 8«  \o>pav  airacrav  us  kcu  rpiaKorra  ptpif)  8uXg&v9  a kolXowtiv  Alyvirnoi  vopois.
* Kara  yap  8 rj  vopou?  Aiyvirros  arraou  %iapaiprjTai.


V I


Nome.


3.  Ten


. JJL


4.  Uast


Capital.


Nekheb^.0j;  Nekhabot^oj^

(Eileithyia)

Senit  © (Esneh)

Uast  f J (Thobes)  Amen-Ra  !|  = <f  ^


5.  Hejiui


6.  Aa-ta  v


Amsu’MiKim  t j


j^©

(Coptos)


Ta-en-  =™=»  <=???=*  <r=>  Het-Heru  n o ^ u
tarert  avwv\  i (i.e.,IIathor)  Uni^oS’l

(Denderah)


7.  Seshesh


Act


uotg


U©  Het-Hera

(Diospolis  Parva)


-A'H»  f J ‘ An-Her  ^ ^

(Abydos)

Thenit  'j  ^ (This)


9.  A MS


T’KuZ  4 -V  4 ° ^ • Am3"’  “Then,  T


(Pauopolis)


10a.  IJatchet  Ft)  Tebut  ^jj  ^ |j


‘let

(Aphroditopolis)


iOjj.  Neterui  jH  Tu-qat  ^ ^ ^ Hern  (Horus)


(Antaeopolis)


11.  Set  &!


sSirtep


Klmeinu


(Hypsele)


1 ^ar>  '0*  Ah. (ut,  i.e,,  “ the  city  of  the  mountain  of  tho  heart’s  desire”  ; see
Ih’imiclien,  Gesehichte,  p.  143.


98


NOME-GODS


Nome.


12.  Tu-f


13.  Atef-

KHEKT


Oil


14.  Atkf-  A ^

FF.HU

TTirr
i f 1 1 (

15,  Lx

nr


16.  Meh-

MAITETCII


a


17.  Anpu

"I  I ITT

AILIX-


18.  Sef


3EI>  .


**m*TT"
-LI  ALL


19.  Uah


hi

•[II


22.  Maten


Capital.  God.

(Antaeopolis)


(Lvcopolis)


Khemcnim  1 ' 1 ' 5
1 1 1 1 ©

(Hormopolis)

Hebennu  J jg

(Hipponon)

Kasa

(Cynopolis)


cz.  czs

WAr.'i^


20.  Atee-  Oil

KUEXT  '“XT

nrir.

jEcrr

21a.  Atef-  0-^


Ilet-sutenQ^-j^.

(Alabastron  polls)
I’er-Matchet

i m ***  ©

(Oxyryneluis)

Q /\AAA'.-\

IJcncnsu.  1

(Herakleopolis  Magna)


Tebuti  (Thotb)


llmi  $

Anpu

Anpu

«et  •y

Her-shefi  ^


PEHU


21b.  Ta-she  ° “
□ncA]


Ermeu-  <=>

liert  o ©

shot

(Crocodilopolis)

Tcp-ahet

(Aphroditopolis)


Khnerau


Sebek  p J


TO*


■sfl


Het-Mert


Q nM


NOME-GODS


99


LOWER  EGYPT.


Nome.


Capital.


1.  Ankh-


01  Men-


hetch  'r~Vm  nefert  aWwv6<=>©
“ (Memphis)


2 °
© • ^


2.  Kuknsu1  '"S  Sckhemt  n f\  Hcru-ur  *^\  J)

(Letopolis)

3.  Ament  Pj|j^  Nut-ent-  © 0 A>s  Het-Heru  (1  ^ <=>  ft

rX  H>'p  - l - □ aA  ■' Ct  M UU

“ (Apis)

, a.  Vfl  , 0

■J.  &AI-I-HE8  Tclicqa  n Sebck,  Isis,  Amo;,


/'  ( Cl  ©


5.  Sap- mi-: 1 1


Sm,t  W®  Nrt(Koifl,)^|

(Sals)


«•  Khasutjp^;  A.nen-lta  (jS^I

“ (Xols)  ° '■

1 ...Ament  A'  ’j  Scnti-  Q f _ ]],,  R

THff  nefert  ^ wjSOq  ® * a Jr  ill


N Vbt


w!


».  Ati  ft


Theket  Temu  °

© ^OL

(Succotli)

1 *er-  erz]  n ^ <=»

A tem  i i 'teztt  ©


<=>  -fv  '(


(Pithoru)


(Busiris)

1 IVrliaps  a variant  is  ^ ^ = J <**Bk  seo  Pleytv,  J«./.  Zrit.,

17  J mad  Dumichcxi,  Kttlnn&iriuackriJieH,  L 10iM.


CTZ1


<SJ>T  S <r— **


100


NOME-GODS


10.

11.

12.

13.

14.


15.


16.

17.


18.


19.


20.


Nome.


Ka-qem


Ka-HESEB


Theb-

KA


«,  fl


Heq

Khent-abt


Teuut


fflff


Kha (?)


ft


Am-khent


Am-:


PEIIU


Sept


AL


Capital.

Het-ta-  n o «=???=»  <&
her-ab  Id  cnn  ’§”0’  ©
(Athribis)

Hobes-ka  JJ

(Cabasus)


Tbeb-noter  =jSj=“
(Sebennytus)


Anrm  ill  0


it


(Heliopolis,  On)


Tohalu Mi


©

(Tunis)


Per-Tehuti


Sam-  l s©

BEllUTET  v^T  '


'4

(Hermopolis)

Per-ba-neb-Tettu

(blendes)

1 ’u-khen-en-  Amen

Ullflll

LZ — ZJ


WWvV.
AAAAAA  1 ^ ^

(Diospolis)


Per-Bast


(Bubastis)


Per-Uatchet^l^l

(Buto)

Qesem  _6_  ©

(Goshen  ?)


God.

Horus  ^ sfl

bi9  jjol


An-her  ^

“^1


Heru


Teliuti  (Thotli)


Ba-neb-
Tattu,  or  •,  ^ f\  ‘1.

Tettetet  b **  11  ®


Amen-Ra

Uatcliet  | “|
Sep!  ft.


1 The  authorities  to  be  consulted  on  the  nomes  of  Egypt  arefBrugscb,  Diet*  O''1". i •
(see  the  list  at  the  end  of  vol.  iii.) ; Diimichen,  Geographic  des  alien  Aegyptens  ('n
Meyer,  Geschiclde  des  alien  Aegyptens),  Berlin,  1887  ; and  J.  de  Rouge,  Geographic
Anciemie  de  la  Basse- Hgypte,  Paris,  1801.


NOME-GODS


101


Thus  every  nome  of  Egypt  possessed  a representative  god
whose  temple  was  situated  in  the  capital  city  of  the  nome,  and
attached  to  the  service  of  each  nome-god  was  a body  of  priests  who
divided  among  themselves  the  various  duties  connected  with  the
service  of  the  gods,  the  maintenance  of  the  buildings  of  the  temple,
the  multiplying  of  copies  of  religious  works,  and  the  religious
education  of  the  community.  In  Upper  Egypt,  where  the  care  of
the  dead  seems  to  have  been  the  principal  duty  of  the  living,  the
lower  orders  of  the  priesthood  probably  carried  on  a lucrative
business  in  mummifying  the  dead,  and  in  funeral  papyri  and
amulets,  and  in  conducting  funerals.  The  high-priest  of  each
great  city,  and  sometimes  even  the  high-priestess,  bore  a special
title.  In  Thebes  the  liigh-priest  was  called  “ first  servant  of  the
“god  Ra  in  Thebes”; 1 in  Heliopolis  the  title  of  the  high-priest  was
“Great  one  of  visions  of  Ra-Atem”;3  in  Memphis,  “Great  chief
“of  the  hammer  in  the  temple  of  him  of  the  Southern  Wall,  and
“ Setem  of  the  god  of  the  Beautiful  Face  (i.e.,  Ptah)  ” ; 3 in  Safe,
“governor  of  the  double  temple  ” ; 1 and  similarly  the  high-priestess
of  Memphis  bore  the  title  of  “ Xofer-tutu  ” ; 3 in  Sekhem  the  title
of  the  high-priestess  was  “ Divine  mother”;6  in  Safe,  “ Urt,”  i.e.,
“great  one”;7  in  Mendes,  “ Utcha-ba-f ” ; 8 and  so  on.  The
priests  of  every  great  god  were  divided  into  classes,  among
which  may  be  mentioned  “ those  who  ministered  at  certain  hours,”

'll"  ^ I ^ “ ^ie  servants  of  the  gods,”  ^ | ^ j ; the  “ holy

fathers,”  ^ (j  ^ j ; the  “ libationers,”  «««  ^ j . The

accounts  of  the  temple  were  kept  by  the  “scribe  of  the  temple,”


‘flgf  — olkfo


>3


*B?Q.


HIM.


in

•i^a.


102


NOJVIE-GODS


in  large  temples,  one  or  more  scribes  kept  a

register  of  gifts  to  the  temple  and  of  the  property  of  the  god.1
It  is  impossible  to  say  how  many  priests  of  all  classes  ministered  to
any  given  nome-god  ; it  seems  that  the  highest  permanent  priestly
officials  were  at  all  times  and  in  all  cities  very  few  in  number,  and
that  the  “ servants  of  the  god  ” were  very  many.  The  priests  of
each  nome-god  were  subject  to  no  external  authority,  and  the  high-
priest  of  a great  nome  possessed  a.  power  which  was  hardly  inferior
to  that  of  the  nomarch  himself.


The  worship  of  each  nome-god  contained  elements  peculiar  to
itself,  and  the  beliefs  which  centred  in  him  represented  all  the
ancient  and  indigenous  views  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  nome,  and
these  were  carefully  observed  and  cultivated  from  the  earliest  to
tlic  latest  times.  AYe  may  see  from  the  list  of  nome-gods  given
above  that  many  nomes  worshipped  the  same  god,  e.g.,  Horns  was
worshipped  in  three  nomes  of  Upper  Egypt  and  two  nomes  of
Lower  Egypt,  whilst  one  nome  worshipped  him  under  the  special
form  of  Ilorusof  Behutct;  three  nomes  of  Upper  Egypt  worshipped
Khneniu,  two  worshipped  Amsu  (or  Min  or  I\ hem  ?),  two  worshipped
Anpu,  and  Hathor  was  worshipped  in  five  nomes  in  Upper  Egypt
and  one  in  Lower  Egypt.  The  cults  of  the  ram-headed  god  Khneniu
at  Elephantine,  of  the  vulture  goddess  Nekhebet  at  Kilcithyia,  of  the
crocodile  god  Sebek  in  the  district  of  Ta-she  (Eayyfim),  of  the  dog-
headed  god  Anpu  at  Uynopolis  and  Alabastronpolis,  of  the  ibis-god
Thoth  at  Hermopolis,  of  Horus  the  elder  (Ueru-ur)  at  Letopolis,
and  of  Uatchet  at  Buto  (Per- Hatchet),  were  extremely  ancient,  and
with  them  are  probably  to  be  grouped  in  point  of  antiquity  the
cults  of  the  wolf(?)-headed  god  Ap-uat,  the  lioness  goddess  Sekhet,
the  cat-headed  goddess  Bast,  and  the  god  Set.  The  animal  which
was  the  type  and  symbol  of  this  last  god  has  not  as  yet  been
identified ; it  cannot  have  been  the  ass  as  was  once  thought,  and  it
is  hardly  likely  to  have  been  the  camel ; at  present,  therefore,  we
can  only  tentatively  assume  that  it  belonged  to  some  class  of  animal
which  became  extinct  at  a very  early  period.  Tlic  cults  of  the
various  forms  of  the  sky-god  Horus,  and  of  the  Sun-god,  and  of  the


1 For  other  temple  officials  see  Brugscli,  Aegyptoloyie,  p.  218.


OSIRIS


103


o-odfless  Hathor,  are  the  oldest  of  all.  The  goddess  Neith,  whose

JO

symbols  were  two  arrows  and  a shield,  appears  to  have  been  of
Libyan  origin,  but,  as  lias  already  been  shown,  the  attributes  of
some  of  the  oldest  indigenous  gods  of  Egypt  were  ascribed  to  her
in  early  dynastic  times.  The  origin  of  the  god  Osiris  is  obscure,
but  it  is  difficult,  when  all  the  statements  made  concerning  him  in
the  religious  texts  are  taken  into  consideration,  not  to  think  that
the  original  seat  of  his  worship  was  in  the  Delta.  Early  in  the
dynastic  period  his  most  important  shrine  was  at  Abydos,  which
became  the  centre  of  his  cult  and  the  sacred  city  to  which  his
worshippers  flocked  for  countless  generations.  In  spite  of  this,
however,  the  nomc-lists  show  that  the  nomc-god  was  An- Her,  or
Anhui',  and  notwithstanding  the  special  honour  in  which  Osiris
was  held  throughout  Egypt,  An- Her  was  always  regarded  as  the
official  god  of  the  nome  Abt  and  of  its  capital  of  the  same  name.

The  Hlysian  Fields,  i.e.,  the  Sckhet-hetepet,  were  situated
in  the  Delta  where  the  country  was  fertile,  and  where  the
land  was  traversed  by  canals  and  streams  of  water  running  in
all  directions;  moreover,  the  “House  of  Osiris  ” pur  e.rrrllmr.e

I'er-Asar 1 = Busiris)  was  in  the  Delta,  and  the  shrine

of  the  god  who  was  worshipped  in  the  form  of  a rain  which
was  said  to  contain  the  soul  of  Osiris,  was  also  in  the  Delta.
Everywhere  in  the  texts  Osiris  is  called  the  “ lord  of  Abydos,”
and  generally  this  title  is  followed  by  another,  i.e..  “ lord  of
Tattu.”  Now  Tattii  is  the  city,  and  “ The  Ram,  lord  of  Tartu,”

& ^yyl1  fj @ Ba-ncb-Tdffn,  was  its  god.  The  name  Tattu  was


corrupted  into  “Meudes”  by  the  Greeks,  and  in  this  city  the  great
local  god  was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a ram,  which  is  now
commonly  known  as  the  “ Mendesian  Ram.”  The  frequent  use  of
the  title  “lord  of  Tattu”  suggests  that  the  worship  of  Osiris  was
grafted  on  to  or  was  made  to  absorb  that  of  the  local  ram-god,  and
that  in  consequence  Osiris  became  the  lord  of  the  city  in  his  stead.
It  may  he  urged  that  Tattu  was  merely  the  seat  of  the  shrine  of
the  god  Osiris  in  the  northern  kingdom,  just  as  Abydos  was  his


1 The  words  Ba-ncb-  Ta((n  usually  follow  here,  therefore  the  full  name  of  the
rilr  44  House  of  Osiris,  the  llam,  lord  of  Tattu.”


104


AMEN  AND  ATEN


sanctuary  in  the  southern  kingdom,  but  this  explanation  of  the  use
of  the  title  is  insufficient.  It  may  further  be  urged  that,  inasmuch
as  the  titles  “ lord  of  Abydos,”  “ lord  of  Tattu,”  occur  in  connection
with  others  which  have  reference  to  Osiris  in  his  capacity  as
governor  of  the  Underworld,  the  Abydos  and  Tattu  here  mentioned
arc  mythological  cities  and  not  cities  upon  earth.  But  even  if
this  be  so  it  matters  little,  for  we  know  that  the  Egyptians  fashioned
their  mythological  or  heavenly  cities  after  the  manner  of  their
earthly  cities,  and  that  their  conceptions  of  things  spiritual  were
based  upon  things  material.

Returning  for  a moment  to  the  adoption  of  gods,  we  may  note:
that  from  first  to  last  the  people  of  one  nome  were  generally  ready
to  offer  hospitality  to  the  gods  of  another,  and  also  to  the  gods  of
strangers  who  had  come  to  settle  among  them.  At  times,  however,
a new  god,  or  a new  group  of  gods,  was  forced  upon  the  inhabitants
of  one  or  more  nomes.  and  even  upon  a whole  province,  as  the  result
of  conquest,  or  by  the  wish  of  the  king,  or  by  the  supremacy  of  the
priesthood  of  a given  city.  Thus  the  priesthood  of  Jlii  or  Ha-Teni
at  Heliopolis  succeeded  in  making  their  theological  system  para-
mount in  the  country,  and  the  whole  of  the  religious  philosophy  of
the  Theban  Books  of  the  Dead  is  based  upon  their  teaching.  Until
the  conquest  of  the  llyksos  by  the  Theban  princes  the  god  A men
was  a nome-god  of  no  great  importance,  but  when  they  became
kings  of  the  south  and  north,  he  immediately  became  the  king  of
all  the  gods  of  the  south  and  the  north,  and  the  titles  and  powers
and  attributes  of  the  great  gods  of  the  country  were  ascribed  to
him  by  his  priests.  As  the  prince  of  Thebes  was  greater  than  any
and  every  prince  in  the  other  nomes  of  Egypt,  so  the  Theban  nome-
god  was  greater  than  any  and  every  other  god  of  Egypt.  The
extraordinary  dislike  which  Amen-hetep  J.V.  exhibited  towards
this  god,  and  the  foolish  attempt  which  he  made  to  substitute  for
bis  worship  that  of  Aten,  or  the  Disk,  furnishes  us  with  an  example
of  the  imposition  of  a god  upon  a priesthood  and  province  ; the
attempt  was  successful  for  a time  over  a limited  area,  but  it  had  no
chance  of  permanent  success  because  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the
worship  of  the  god  as  Amen-hetep  interpreted  them  were  foreign
to  the  religious  conceptions  of  the  Egyptians  generally.


ItA  AND  AMEN


105


From  what  has  been  said  above  it  will  be  easy  to  imagine
the  remarkable  spectacle  which  Egypt  must  have  presented  to  a
foreigner  who  went  there  and  found  the  country  split  up  into  a
scries  of  nomes,  each  possessing  its  great  god,  Avho  was  ministered
to  by  a body  of  priests  and  servants  who  were  amenable  to  no  general
authority  outside  the  nome,  and  who  performed  his  worship  when
and  as  they  pleased,  and  who  claimed  for  him  powers,  and  rights,
and  privileges  without  fear  of  opposition.  The  stranger  would  find
that  each  college  of  priests  in  each  nome  asserted  that  its  god
Avas  the  father  of  all  the  other  gods,  and  the  creator  of  the  heavens
and  the  earth,  and  that,  generally  speaking,  the  priests  of  one
nome-god  and  his  divine  companions  were  content  to  alloAV  their
neighbours  in  other  nomes  to  declare  anything  they  pleased  about
their  nome-gods  and  their  divine  companions.  As  far  as  c an  be
gathered  from  the  religious  texts,  it  seems  that  the  priests  of  one
company  of  gods  never  attempted  to  suppress  the  gods  of  another
company  if  the  fortune  of  Avar  gave  them  paramount  poAver  in  the
nome  Avherein  they  Avere  Avorshipped.  Thus  Avlien  the  priests  of
Rfi  attained  to  the  great  power  Avhich  they  enjoyed  at  Heliopolis
under  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties  they  did  not  suppress  the  local
god  Tern,  but  they  associated  their  god  Avith  him,  and  produced  the
compound  god  Ra-Tem.  Similarly,  at  a later  period,  Avlien  Amen,  as
the  nome-god  of  the  victorious  princes  and  kings  of  Thebes,  Avas
declared  to  be  tlie  greatest  of  the  gods  of  Egypt,  his  priests  did  not
declare  that  the  other  gods  of  Egypt  were  not  gods  and  try  to
suppress  them,  but  they  asserted  that  all  the  poAvers  of  the  other
gods  were  assimilated  in  him,  and  that  he  Avas  in  consequence  the
greatest  of  the  gods.  In  the  texts  of  Unas  and  the  kings  who  Avere
his  immediate  successors  avo  read  of  the  Great  and  Little  companies
of  the  gods,  but  avc  also  find  mention  of  the  company  of  gods  of
Homs  and  of  the  double  company  of  gods  of  Tern  ; 1 the  priests  of
Heliopolis  claimed  supremacy  among  the  gods  for  Rfi,  but  they
took  care  to  include  as  far  as  possible  the  name  of  every  god  and
goddess  to  whom  worship  had  been  paid  in  past  generations.  The


Unas,  11.  443,  444.


10(i


GODS  OF  HELIOPOLIS


same  characteristic  is  observable  in  the  texts  of  the  Theban  priest-
hood, and  we  find  that  their  god  Amen  was  even  introduced  into  the
Booh  of  the  Dea< l whore,  manifestly,  he  laid  little  claim  to  be.  The
hymns  in  the  chapters  of  that  work  are  addressed  either  to  Itu,  in
one  form  or  another,  or  to  Osiris,  but  in  Chapter  clxxi.  we  find
the  following  address : — “ 0 Tern,  0 Shu,  0 Tcfnet,  0 Seb,  0 Nut,
“0  Osiris,  0 Isis,  0 Set,  0 Nephthys,  0 Neru-khuti  (Harmaehis),
“ 0 Hathor  of  the  Great  House,  0 Khopcra,  0 Mcutliu,  the  lord  of
“Thebes,  0 Amen,  the  lord  of  the  thrones  of  the  two  lands,  0
“ Great  company  of  the  gods,  0 Little  company  of  the  gods,  0 gods
“and  goddesses  who  dwell  in  Nu,  0 Sebek  of  the  two  Meht,  0
“ Sebek  in  all  thy  manifold  names  in  thine  every  place  wherein  thy
“ Ka  (i.e.,  double)  hath  delight,  O gods  of  the  south,  0 gods  of  the
“ north,  0 ye  who  are  in  heaven,  0 ye  who  are  upon  the  earth,
“grant  ye  the  garment  of  parity  unto  the  perfect  spirit  of  Amen-
“ hetep.” 1 The  greater  number  of  the  gods  whose  names  are  given
in  the  Pyramid  Texts  are  also  mentioned  in  the  religions  literature,
especially  in  the  Book  of  Hr  Dead  of  later  periods,  and  if  we  pos-
sessed copies  of  all  the  religious  works  of  the  New  Empire  wo  should
probably  discover  that  the  names  of  all  the  gods,  with  perhaps  tin*
exception  of  Set,  worshipped  under  the  Early  Empire  were  pre-
served in  them.  The  Egyptians,  certainly  in  dynastic  times,  rarely
abandoned  a god,  and,  speaking  generally,  it  is  remarkable  how
little  the  character  and  attributes  of  the  gods  vary  in  the  period
between  the  IVth  and  the  X X Ylth  Dynasties.  The  obstinate
conservatism  of  the  Egyptians,  which  seems  to  have  been  inherited
in  an  almost  unaltered  state  bv  their  descendants  the  Copts,  induced
the  writers  of  religious  texts  to  introduce  into  their  works  as  many
of  the  gods  as  possible,  and  they  were  moved  to  do  this  as  much  by
motives  of  priestly  policy  and  by  self-interest  as  by  feelings  of
reverence  for  the  gods  of  Egypt.

In  the  Pyramid  Texts  the  predominant  gods  arc  those  of  the
company  of  Heliopolis,  but  we  nevertheless  find  that  the  gods
of  remote  towns  and  cities  had  duties  assigned  to  them,  and  that
one  and  all  of  them  were  supposed  to  minister  to  the  deceased
kings  in  the  Underworld.  The  reason  of  this  is  not  far  to  seek.

1 Seo  my  Chapter h of  Coining  Forth  hy  Drey  (Translation),  p.  315.


SUBDIVISIONS  OF  HEAVEN


107


'L’lie  heaven  which  the  Egyptian  conceived  in  his  mind  closely
resembled  Egypt  in  respect  of  its  sub-divisions,  and  its  various
cities  and  districts  were  ruled  by  gods  whom  it  was  necessary  to
propitiate,  and  whose  friendship  must  be  gained  at  any  cost.  A.
man  hoped  that  in  the  next  life  he  would  be  able  to  wander  about
at  will  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  heaven,  aval  the  only
way  to  obtain  this  privilege  was  to  secure  the  goodwill  of  the
•rods  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  sky  by  the  recital  of  prayers  of
various  kinds,  and  by  the  performance  of  certain  ceremonies,
which  were  always  of  a more  or  less  magical  character.  To  be
able  to  pass  at  pleasure  along  the  eastern  Delta  of  heaven  and
without  opposition  presupposed  the  favour  of  Sept  and  Temu ;
and  to  have  power  to  drink  of  the  waters  of  the  celestial  Nile
presupposed  the  favour  of  the  god  Klmemu,  the  lord  of  the  Island
of  Elephantine,  close  to  which  were  situated,  according  to  Egyp-
tian belief,  the  sources  of  the  Nile.  The  texts  of  all  periods
exhibit  an  almost  childish  anxiety  to  prove  that  every  god  of
Egypt  is  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  beings  in  the  Underworld
who  were  once  mortal  men,  and  it  was  a common  belief  also  in  all
periods  that  the  mere  asserting  in  writing  that  the  gods  would
minister  to  the  deceased  would  produce  the  assistance  desired.  To
enjoy  the  power  to  enter  into  certain  cities  in  heaven  the  deceased
was  obi  met  to  know  the  various  gods  or  “ Souls  ” who  were
worshipped  in  them.  Thus  the  Souls  of  the  West  were  Tern,  and
Sebek,  the  lord  of  the  Mountain  of  Sunrise,  and  Ifathor,  the
lady  of  the  Evening;1  the  Souls  of  the  East  were  l.leru-klmti
(Harmachis),  the  Calf  of  the  goddess  KhcrA,  and  the  .Morning
Star;-  the  Souls  of  the  city  of  I'e  were  Horns,  Mestha,  and
Utipi;1  the  Souls  of  the  city  of  Nekheti  were  Horns,  Tuumutcf,
and  Qobhsennuf ; 4 the  Souls  of  Heliopolis  were  ll.i,  Shu,  and
Telnet ; n and  the  Souls  of  the  city  of  Hermopolis  were  Thotli,
ttu,  and  Tern®  Similarly  every  great  heavenly  city  was  held  to
contain  a company  of  gods,  and  the  beatified  soul  was  thought
to  enjoy  the  duty  of  paying  visits  to  their  shrines  just  as,  when
111  the  body,  it  made  offerings  to  their  earthly  counterparts.

1 Umik  of  the  Dotd,  Chap.  cviii.  2 Ibid.,  ("Imp.  cix.  s I hid.,  Chap.  cxii.

1 I hid..  Chap,  cxiii.  5 Ibid.,  Chap.  cxv.  r‘  Ibid.,  Chap.  cxvi.


108


DEIFICATION  OF  THE  DEAD


In  the  observations  already  made  concerning  the  difficulty  of
assigning  an  exact  meaning  to  the  word  for  God  and  “ god,”  neter,
we  have  seen  that  in  dynastic  times  the  chief  attribute
which  was  assigned  to  a god  was  the  power  to  renew  his  lift;
indefinitely,  and  to  live  for  ever,  and  the  text  of  Unas  has  shown
us  that  in  very  early  times  the  Egyptian  thought  he  could  obtain
this  power  by  eating  his  god  or  gods.  Closely  connected  with  this
belief  is  another  which  finds  expression  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,  and
also  in  the  later  Recensions  of  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  which  are
based  upon  them.  In  many  passages  scattered  throughout  the
religious  texts  of  all  periods  we  find  it  stated  that  the  deceased
lias  acquired  the  powers  of  such  and  such  a god,  and  that  as  a
result  he  has  become  the  counterpart  or  fellow  of  several  gods,  and
that  he  takes  his  place  among  the  company  of  gods  in  the  proper
persons  of  several  of  their  number.  A still  further  development
of  the  idea  makes  every  member  of  the  body  of  the  deceased  to  be,
first,  under  the  protection  of  a god,  and  secondly,  to  become  that
same  member  of  the  god  its  protector;  hence  his  whole  body
becomes  the  “double  company  of  the  gods,”  and  the  “two  great
“ gods  watch,  each  in  his  place,  and  they  find  him  in  the  form  of
“ the  double  company  of  the  gods  weighing  the  words  of  every
“ chief  like  a chief,  and  they  bow  down  before  him,  and  they  make
“ offerings  to  him  as  to  the  double  company  of  the  gods.”  1 More-
over, the  deceased  is  made  in  the  texts  to  stand  up  at  the  head  of
the  company  of  the  gods  as  Seb,  the  “erpa,”  or  hereditary  chief,
of  the  gods,  and  as  Osiris,  the  governor  of  the  divine  powers,  and
as  Horus,  the  lord  of  men  and  of  gods.'  His  bones  are  the  gods


i Sec  Pepi  L,  11.  317.  318.  <=>  |]  'j  c]cj  ^ ^ |)  ***»

k P ~~  1 * k 111111111111111111  T H
P—  P^«S>  P—  ^ P~» CSj]  k
111111111111111111.

* fr  mimn  ip  s m j — flPdih-  iff


fp


□ <=*

0 5)<H>


111-  Pepi  I.,  1.  106.


DEIFICATION  OF  THE  DEAD


109


and  goddesses  of  heaven ; 1 his  right  side  belongs  to  Horus,  and
his  left  side  to  Set ; he  becomes  the  actual  son  of  Tern,  or  Tem-Rii,
and  Shu,  Tefnet,  Seb,  and  Nut,  and  he  is  the  brother  of  Isis,
Nephthys,  Set,  and  Thoth,  and  the  father  of  Horus.2  The  god
Horus  taketh  his  own  Eye  and  giveth  it  to  him,3  and  he  bestoweth
upon  him  his  own  ha  or  double,41  and  never  leaveth  him,  and
the  Bull  of  the  Nine 5 maketh  wide  his  dominions  among
the  gods.

The  oldest  copy  of  the  prayer  for  the  deification  of  the
members  of  the  body  is  found  in  the  text  of  Pepi  T.  (line  565  if.),
and  as  it  is  very  important  from  several  points  of  view  a version
of  it  is  here  given: --“The  head  of  this  Rii-meri  is  in  the  form
“ of  [that  of]  the  hawk  ; he  comcth  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in

“ heaven.  The  skull,  ^ &,  of  this  Pepi  is  that  of  the  divine

“ Goose  ; he  comcth  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The

“ Thai u]  of  this  Pepi  is  the  ....  of  Nu ; he  cometli  forth

“ and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  face  of  this  Pepi  is  the

“ face  of  A p-uat,  \J  £=?£  2=?2  ; he  cometli  forth  and  raiseth

“ himself  up  in  heaven.  The  two  eyes  of  Rii-meri  are  the  great
“ goddess  (Hathor  ?)  at  the  head  of  the  Souls  of  Aunu  ; he  corneth
“ forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  mouth  of  this  Pepi

“ is  Khens-ur,  fJ  0 ; he  corneth  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up

“ in  heaven.  The  toxuue  of  this  Pepi  is  the  steering-pole  (?)  of  the
“ boat  of  Mailt ; he  cometli  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.
“ The  teeth  of  this  Pepi  are  the  Souls  [of  Annu]  ; he  corneth  forth
“ and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  lips  of  this  Pepi  are
" the  . . . . ; he  cometli  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.


1 See  TctA,  1.  200.


s rzr

AWVSA


<H>.


3 See  Unas  ( llerucil ),  tom.  iii , pp.  200-211.

□

/WWW


A w P — (aid  ~L'  Popi  r-  '•  “7-


1.  205.


v


u


§>  i


■=>  □


Telit,


u s Dn  ^li!

1 qq!  ill*


110  DEIFICATION  OF  THE  DEAD


“ The  chin  of  this  Pepi  is  Khert-Khcnt-Sekhem,  ^ ^ @ ; ho

“ cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  backbone  of
“ this  Pepi  is  [the  Bull]  Stna,  |1  Jp  comefch  forth  and

“ raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  shoulders  and  arms  of  this
“ Pepi  ai*e  Set ; he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.
“The  [breast]  of  this  Pepi  is  Baabu,  jj  he  com°bi

“ forth  and  raiseth  liimself  up  in  heaven.  The  heart  of  this
“ Ra-meri  is  Bastet ; ho  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  tip
“ in  heaven.  The  belly  of  this  Ra-meri  is  N'ut ; ho  cometh
“ forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  [loins  of
“this  Pepi  are]  the  Great  and  Little  companies  of  the  gods:
“ he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  Tin*
“back  of  this  Pepi  is  llcqet;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth
“ himself  up  in  heaven.  The  buttocks,  ® of  this  Ra-meri  am
“the  Semket  and  Mat  boats  ; 1 he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself
“up  in  heaven.  The  phallus  of  this  Pepi  is  flap ; " he  cometh
“forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in  heaven.  The  two  thioiis  :|  of
“ Ra-meri  are  Nit  and  Serqet ; lie  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  liimself


“ up  in  heaven.  The  two  legs4  of  this  Ra-meri  are  the  twin  soul-
“ gods  at  the  head  of  Sekhet-teher ; 0 he  cometh  fort  It  and  raiseth
“ himself  up  in  heaven.  The  soles  of  the  two  pelt  of  this  Ra-
“ meri  ai’e  the  double  Maati  boat;  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth
“ himself  up  in  heaven.  The  heels  (?),  <=»,  of  this  Pepi  are  the

Souls  of  Annu ; he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  in


“ heaven


99


In  the  XV filth  Dynasty  versions  of  this  interesting  text  were
written  in  papyri  containing  the  Book  of  (hr  I hat  I,  and  of  these
the  following  exhibit  variant  readings  which  appear  to  indicate
changes  of  belief.


n*ch  *=*

I ^

Q ^VWyAA

r^r^.

U*ss-
JV


i


CSS]


r'-L-

dih  Tl1®


JJUiiUil.

•t  ^ A

B


c,


DEIFICATION  OF  THE  DEAD


111


From  tiie  Papyrus  ok  Nu.

(Brit.  Mbs.,  No.  10,477,  sheet  6.)

“ My  hair  is  the  hair  of  Nu.

«.  My  face  is  the  face  of  the  Disk.

“ Mv  eyes  are  the  eyes  of  Hathor.

“ My  ears  are  the  ears  of  Ap-uat.

« My  nose  is  the  nose  of  Khenti-
“ khas.

‘‘My  lips  are  the  lips  of  Anpu.
“My  teeth  arc  the  teeth  of
“ Ser'qet.

“Mv  neck  is  the  neck  of  the
•/

“ divine  goddess  Isis.  !

n i

“ My  hands  are  the  hands  of  i

“Ba-neb-Tattu.  i

• • • |

“ My  fore-arms  are  the  fore-arms  i

“ of  Neitli,  the  Lady  of  Sa'is.  ;

“My  backbone  is  the  backbone  j

“ofSuti.  i

“ My  phallus  is  the  phallus  of  j

“ Osiris.  j

“ Mv  reins  are  the  reins  of  the  I

I

“Lords  of  Kher-fiha.

“My  chest  is  the  chest  of  An-
“ shelit.

“My  belly  and  back  are  the
“ belly  and  back,  of  Sekhet.
“My  buttocks  arc  the  buttocks
“ of  the  Eye  of  Horus.

“ My  hips  and  legs  are  the  hips
“ and  legs  of  Nut.

“ My  feet  are  the  feet  of  Ptah.

U [My  fingers]  and  my  leg-bones
“are  the  fingers  and  log-

o o

“ hones  of  the  Living  Gods.
‘Iherc  is  no  member  of  my


From  the  Papyrus  of  Ani.

(Brit.  Mus.,  No.  10.470,  sheet  32.)

“The  hair  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the
“ hair  of  Nu.

“ The  face  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the
“ face  of  Ka.

“ The  eyes  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the
“ eyes  of  Hathor.

“ The  ears  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the
“ ears  of  Ap-uat.

“ The  lips  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the
“ lips  of  Anpu.

“ The  teeth  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the
“ teeth  of  Serqet.

“ The  neck  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the
“ neck  of  Isis.

“The  hands  of  Osiris  Ani  are

“ the  hands  of  Ba-neb-Tattu.

• • •

“The  shoulder  of  Osiris  Ani  is
“the  shoulder  of  Uatchct.

“The  throat  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the
“ throat  of  Mcrt.

“ The  fore-arms  of  Osiris  Ani
“are  the  fore-arms  of  the
“ Lady  of  Sui’s.

“The  backbone  of  Osiris  Ani  is
“ the  backbone  of  Set.

“The  chest  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the
“ chest  of  the  Lords  of
“ Ivher-Alui.

“The  flesh  of  Osiris  Ani  is  the
“ flesh  of  Aa-shefit.

“The  reins  and  hack  of  Osiris
“ Ani  are  the  reins  and
“ back  of  Sekhet.

“ The  buttocks  of  Osiris  Ani  are


112


DEIFICATION  OF  THE  DEAD


“ body  which  is  not  the
“member  of;ya  god.  The
“god  Thoth  shieldeth  my
“body  wholly,  and  I am
“ Ra  day  by  day.” 1


“the  buttocks  of  the  Eye
“ of  Horus.

“The  phallus  of  Osiris  Ani  is
“ the  phallus  of  Osiris.

“ The  legs  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the
“ legs  of  Nut.

“ The  feet  of  Osiris  Ani  are  the
“ feet  of  Ptah.

“The  fingers  of  Osiris  Ani  are
“ the  fingers  of  Orion.

“ The  leg-bones  of  Osiris  Ani
“ are  the  leg-bones  of  the
“ laving  Uraoi.”


The  text  which  follows  that  describing  the  deification  of  the
members  in  the  inscription  of  Pepi  I.2  is  perhaps  of  even  greater
interest,  for  it  declares  that : —

“ This  Pepi  is  god,  the  son  of  god  ; he  cometh  forth  and  raisefh
“himself  up  to  heaven.  This  Ra-meri  is  the  son  of  Ra,  who  loveth
“ him ; he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  Ra  hath
“ sent  forth  this  Ra-meri,  who  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up
“ to  heaven.  Ra  hath  conceived  this  Pepi,  who  cometh  forth  and
“ raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  Ra  hath  given  birth  to  this  Pepi,
“ who  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  This  [is]  the
“ word  of  power  which  is  in  the  body  of  Ra-meri,  and  he  cometh
“forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to  heaven.  This  Ra-meri  is  the
“ Great  Power  among  the  great  company  of  sovereign  chiefs  who
“are  in  Annu,  and  he  cometh  forth  and  raiseth  himself  up  to
“ heaven.”

In  the  previous  pages  it  has  been  shown  that  the  Great
company  of  the  Gods  of  Heliopolis  contained  nine  or  more  gods,
and  that  whenever  these  were  adopted  by  other  cities  and  towns
the  attributes  of  the  chief  of  the  Heliopolitan  gods  were  transferred
to  the  local  nom  e-god,  and  the  identities  of  both  gods  were  merged
in  each  other.  It  will,  however,  be  evident  at  a glance  that . there


1 See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Translation),  p.  94.

- Line  574.


THE  GODS  OF  HERMOPOLIS


113


Avere  very  few  localities  which  could  afford  to  maintain  in  a proper
state  the  worship  of  nine  or  more  great  gods  in  addition  to  that  of
the  nome-god,  and  as  a matter  of  fact  we  find  that  very  few  even
of  the  great  towns  and  cities  adopted  all  the  gods  of  the  companies
of  Heliopolis,  and  that  very  few  possessed  companies  of  gods  which
contained  as  many  members  as  nine.  The  city  of  Khemcnnu
(Herinopolis)  was  famous  as  the  sanctuary  of  the  company  of  Eight


Gods,  indeed  the  name  “ Khemennu,”  J 1 J j ^ , means  “the  city  of  the
Ei‘*ht  Gods.”  The  names  of  these  gods  were : — 1.  Nu,  000  Jf\ .

^ I r -J  A/SAAAA  l.J

2'NUT’S  = o|-  3.  4.  flKFrUT,  .

5.  1\eki;i, b-  Kbkuit,  v_^\\

Keren,  ^ s>  ^ . 8.  Kerehet,  ^ ^ , and  Avith  their


loader  Tkiiuti,  or  Thoth,  they  formed  one  of  the  oldest  of  the
companies  of  gods  in  all  Egypt.  The  names  of  the  members  of  the
pant,  or  company,  of  Herinopolis  as  here  given  are  taken  from  the
texts  inscribed  on  the  Avails  of  the  temple  Avliich  Darius  II.  built  at
llebet  in  the  Oasis  of  Kharga,1  and  which  is  a comparatively  late
building,  but  there  is  reason  for  believing  that,  they  are  copied  from
A'ery  ancient  documents,  and  that  taken  together  this  group  of  gods
represents  the  oldest  form  of  the  llermopolitan  pant.  I n some  lists  of
the  gods  Amen  and  Ament  arc  made  to  take  the  places  of  Nu  and
Nut,  and  those  of  Kerch  and  Kerehet  arc  filled  by  Nenu  and  Nenut;
in  others  Amen  and  Ament  are  substituted  for  Kereh  and  Kerehet.2

Throughout  Egypt  generally  the  company  of  gods  of  a toAvn
or  city  Avere  three  in  number,  and  they  Avere  formed  by  the  local
deity  and  tAvo  gods  who  Avere  associated  Avith  him,  and  avIio  shared
with  him,  but  in  a very  much  less  degree,  the  honour  and
reverence  which  Avere  paid  to  him.  Speaking  generally,  two
members  of  such  a triad  Avere  gods,  one  old  and  one  young,  and
the  third  was  a goddess,  Avho  Avas,  naturally,  the  Avife,  or  female
counterpart,  of  the  older  god.  The  younger  god  Avas  the  son  of
the  older  god  and  goddess,  and  he  Avas  supposed  to  possess  all  the


1 8ee  Brugsch,  Iteisc  nnclt  dor  groesen  Oasc  el-Khurgeh , Leipzig,  1878,  pi.  14.

2 For  the  lists  of  the  pant  of  Thoth  at  lOdfil,  Dendera,  Ktunak,  Philae,  etc.,
seo  Brugsch,  Religion  tmd  Mythologie,  p.  127.


114


THE  CONCEPTION  OF  THE  TRIAD


attributes  and  powers  which  belonged  to  his  father.  The  head  of
the  triad  was  sometigt^^  Ra,  and  sometimes  a god  of  compara-
tively limited  reputation,  to  whom  were  ascribed  the  power  ami
might  of  the  great  Sun-god,  which  his  devotees  assumed  that  he
had  absorbed.  The  feminine  counterpart  or  wife  of  the  chief  god
was  usually  a local  goddess  of  little  or  no  importance ; on  the  other
hand,  her  son  by  the  chief  god  was  nearly  as  important  as  his  father,
because  it  Avas  assumed  that  he  Avould  succeed  to  his  rank  and
throne  when  the  older  god  had  passed  away.  The  conception  of
the  triad  or  trinity  is,  in  Egypt,  probably  as  old  as  the  belief  in
the  gods,  and  it  seems  to  be  based  upon  the  anthropomorphic
vieAvs  Avliich  Avere  current  in  the  earliest  times  about  them.  The
Egyptian  provided  the  god  with  a Avife,  just  as  he  took  care  to
provide  himself  with  one,  in  order  that  he  might  have  a son  fo
succeed  him,  and  he  assumed  that  the  god  Avould  have  as  issue  a
son,  even  as  he  himself  Avishcd  and  expected  to  have  a son.  fa
later  times,  the  group  of  nine  gods  took  the  place  of  the  triad,
hut  Ave  are  not  justified  in  assuming  that  the  enncad  Avas  a simple
development  of  the  triad.  The  triad  contains  tAvo  gods  and  one
goddess,  but  the  enncad  contains  five  gods  and  four  goddesses,
being  made  up  of  four  pairs  of  deities,  and  one  supreme  god.  Tin*
ennead  is,  howe\'er,  often  regarded  as  a triad  of  triads,  and  the


three  enneads  of  Heliopolis,  c'j~  ,


as  a triad  of  a triad  of  triads.  The  conception  of  the  ennead  is
probably  very  much  later  than  that  of  the  triad.1  Examples
of  triads  are: — At  Mendes,  Ba-neb-Tattu  IlFit-mchit

and  I:,eru‘Pa’khai’t'  ^Dllr  iM;  at  Tche<|ii,
Sebek  p JJ  Isis  jj  ^ ^fj,  and  Amen  (j  t~~1  ^J;  at  Memphis,  Ptali

“IS.  Sekhct  P ? imd  I-em-Iietcp  A ’ ut  Tliel,w’

Amen-Ra  ()  “ ' ° $>  Mut  o ,md  Khon8u  and

triads  like  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus  jj  ^ jfj,  and  Set,

Nephthys,  and  Anubis  p^^,  Avere  wot-


’ 1 An  exactly  opposite  view  is  taken  by  M.  Maspcro  ( La  Mythologie  figyptUnne,
p.  270;.


POLYTHEISM  AND  MONOTHEISM


115


shipped  in  several  places  in  Egypt.  The  members  of  many  triads
in  Egypt  varied  at  different  times  and  ^different  places,  but
variations  were  caused  chiefly  by  assimilating  local  gods  and
o-oddesses  with  the  well-known  members  of  the  companies  of  the

rT>

(rods  of  Heliopolis.

n

The  facts  recorded  in  the  preceding  pages  show  that  the  great
(rods  of  the  dynastic  period  in  Egvpt  were  selected  from  a huge
number  of  local  gods,  who  were  in  turn  chosen  from  among  the
representatives  of  the  gods  of  the  desert,  and  mountain,  and  earth,
aud  water,  and  air,  and  sky,  who  had  been  worshipped  in
predynastic  times.  Thus  in  the  great  company  of  the  gods  of
Heliopolis  we  have  Shu,  a form  of  An-her  , the  local

•rod  of  Sebennvtus  ; Osiris,  the  local  god  both  of  Busiris  and
Mende.s : Isis,  a form  of  the  still  more  ancient  goddess  “ Hatch  it,
lady  of  I’e,”  J (J(j  “ ( ° i.e.,  Buto  ; Tefnet,  the  goddess

of  a district  in  the  fifteenth  no  me  of  Lower  Egypt ; etc.  The  gods
of  the  later  predynastic  period  were,  of  course,  developed  out  of
the  multitude  of  spirits,  good  and  bad,  in  whom  the  most  primitive
Egyptians  believed,  and  it  is  clear  that  in  general  characteristics
the  gods  of  the  dynastic  period  were  identical  with  those  of  the
predynastic  period,  and  that  the  Egyptians  rarely  abandoned  any
god  whose  priests  in  the  earliest  times  had  succeeded  in  establishing
for  him  a recognized  position.  The  form  of  the  worship  of  the
gods  must  have  changed  greatly,  but  this  was  due  rather  to  the
increase  in  the  general  prosperity  of  the  country  than  to  any
fundamental  change  in  the  views  and  beliefs  of  the  Egyptians  as  to
their  gods ; the  houses  of  the  gods,  or  temples,  became  larger  and
larger  and  more  magnificent  as  increased  wealth  flowed  into  the
country  as  the  result  of  foreign  conquest,  but  the  gods  remained
the  same,  and  the  processions  and  ceremonies,  though  more  mag-
nificent under  the  New  Empire,  preserved  the  essentials  of  the
early  period.  But  if  we  examine  the  religious  texts  carefully  it
will  be  seen  that  the  Egyptians  were  always  trying  to  reduce  the
number  of  their  gods,  or,  in  other  words,  were  always  advancing
from  polytheism  to  monotheism.  The  priesthood  and  the  educated
classes  must  have  held  religious  views  which  were  not  absolutely
identical  with  those  of  the  peasant  who  cultivated  the  fields,  but


116


ABSORPTION  OF  ANCIENT  GODS


such,  I believe,  were  concerned  chiefly  with  the  popular  forms  of
worship  of  the  gods  ,fj|j.d  with  conceptions  as  to  their  nature.  Tim
uneducated  people  of  the  country  clung  with  great  tenacity  to  the
ordinary  methods  of  celebrating  their  worship,  principally  because
the  frequent  festivals  and  the  imposing  ceremonies,  which  formed  a
large  and  important  part  of  it,  were  regarded  as  essential  for  their
general  well-being ; the  priests  and  the  educated,  on  the  other
hand,  clung  to  them  because  their  influence  was  not  sufficiently
powerful  to  establish  a popular  form  of  religion  and  worship  which
would  be  consistent  with  their  own  private  views.

Every  change  which  can  be  traced  in  the  religion  of  tin-
country  proves  that  the  priesthoods  of  the  various  great  religion-,
centres  absorbed  into  the  new  systems  whenever  possible  tin-
ancient  gods  and  the  ancient  beliefs  in  them ; hence  during  the
period  of  the  highest  culture  in  Egypt  we  find  ideas  of  the  grossest
kind  jostling  ideas  which  were  the  product  of  great  intellectuality
and  much  thinking.  Expressions  which  are  the  result  of  a series
of  beliefs  in  tree  gods,  desert  gods,  water  gods,  earth  gods,  and  go»U
with  human  passions,  abound,  and  it  is  these  which  have  drawn  down
upon  the  Egyptians  the  contempt  of  the  Hebrews,  the  Greeks,  ami
the  Romans,  and  even  of  modern  skilled  investigators  of  Egyptian
religion  and  mythology.  It  has  not  been  sufficiently  realized  that
the  polytheism  of  the  Egyptians  had  aspects  which  were  peculiar
to  itself,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  one  phase  of  the  beliefs
of  this  people  which  appears  to  be,  and  which,  the  writer  thinks,
undoubtedly  is,  monotheistic.  When  the  priests  of  Heliopolis
formulated  their  system  of  theogony  they  asserted  that  the  goil
Tem  produced  the  two  gods  that  issued  from  himself,  i.c.,  Shu  ami
Tefnut,  by  masturbation,1  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  in  making
this  declaration  they  were  repeating  what  the  half  savage  ami
primitive  Egyptians  may  really  have  believed;  but  it  would  he


Q WVM
Q AAAfAA


11.  400.


tr  \ \


117


NOTION  OF  DIVINE  UNITY

utterly  wrong  to  declare  that  the  priests  themselves  believed  these
tilings,  or  that  such  a statement  represent  the  views  of  any
educated  person  in  Egypt  on  the  subject  of  the  origin  of  the  gods.
In  Chapter  xvii.  of  the  Book  of  the  Bead 1 is  an  allusion  to  the
fhdit  which  took  place  between  Horus  and  Set,  but  no  Egyptian
who  accepted  the  refined  beliefs  which  are  found  even  in  the  same
chapter  could  have  regarded  this  allusion  as  anything  more  than
the  record  of  an  act  of  savagery  which  had  crept  into  religious
texts  at  a time  when  acts  of  the  kind  were  common.

The  same  might  be  said  of  dozens  of  expressions  and  allusions
which  are  scattered  throughout  the  texts  of  all  periods,  and  no
just  investigator  will  judge  the  Egyptians,  and  their  religion,
and  their  beliefs  by  the  phases  of  thought  and  expressions  which
reflect  the  manners  and  customs  and  ideas  of  the  primitive  dwellers
in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile.  But  yet  it  is  precisely  by  such  things  that
the  Egyptian  religion  is  judged  by  many  modern  writers.  The
eminent  Egyptologist,  M.  Maspero,  says  that  before  he  began  to
decipher  Egyptian  texts  for  himself,  and  so  long  as  he  was  content
to  reproduce  the  teaching  of  the  great  masters  of  the  science  of
Egyptology,  he  believed  that  the  Egyptians  had  in  the  earliest
times  arrived  at  the  notion  of  divine  unitv,  and  that  tliev  had
fashioned  an  entire  system  of  religion  and  of  symbolic  mythology
with  an  incomparable  surety  of  hand.  When,  however,  he  began
to  study  the  religious  texts  ho  found  that  they  did  uot  breathe  out
the  profound  wisdom  which  others  had  found.  “ Certainly,”  he
says,  “ no  one  will  accuse  me  of  wishing  to  belittle  the  Egyptians ;
“ the  more  I familiarize  myself  with  them,  the  more  I am  persuaded
“ that  they  were  one  of  the  great  nations  of  the  human  race,  and
“one  of  the  most  original  and  most  creative,  but  at  the  same
“time  that  they  always  remained  half  savage.”2  In  other  words,


P


<=*mi


A

SPxv


<£ 'J  .wvw\


s3  k


t crn5  au  debout  do  ma  carriore,  il  y a bientot  vingt-cinq  ans  de  cola,  et

J fu  soutenu  pendant  loiigtomps,  eomme  M.  Bmgsch,  quo  los  Isgyptiens  ctaient
^parvenus,  des  leur  enfariee,  it  la  notion  de  V unite  divine  et  qu’ils  en  avaient  tiro
Un  syHtcme  entier  de  religion  et  de  mytliologie  symboliquc,  agence  d’un  bout


118


NOTION  OF  DIVINE  UNITY


the  Egyptians,  according  to  M.  Maspero,  never  attained  to  the  idea
of  the  unity  of  God^and  were  at  the  best  of  times  nothing  but  a
half  savage  nation.  It  is  easy  to  bring  a charge  of  being  half
savage  against  a great  nation,  but  in  this  case  the  charge  is  ill-
founded,  aud  is,  in  the  writer’s  opinion,  contradicted  by  every
discovery  which  is  made  in  Egypt ; for  the  more  Ave  learn  of  the
ancient  Egyptians  the  more  complete  and  far-reaching  Ave  find
their  civilization  to  have  been.  The  evidence  of  the  monuments  of
the  Egyptians  will,  however,  be  sufficient  to  exhibit  the  character
of  this  civilization  in  its  true  light,  and,  as  the  expression  “ half
savage”  is  at  best  very  vague,  and  must  vary  in  meaning  according
to  the  standpoint  of  him  who  uses  it,  we  pass  on  to  consider  the
question  whether  the  Egyptians  attained  to  a conception  of  the
unity  of  God  or  whether  they  did  not.

AYe  have  seen  that  M.  Maspero  believes  that  they  did  not,  but
on  the  other  hand  some  of  the  greatest  Egvtologists  that  have
ever  lived  thought  that  they  did.  He  thinks  that  the  Egyptians
possessed  the  greater  number  of  their  myths  in  common  with  the
most  savage  of  the  tribes  of  the  Old  and  New  "Worlds,  that  their
practices  preserved  the  stamp  of  primitive  barbarism,  that  their
religion  exhibits  the  same  mixture  of  grossness  and  refinement
which  is  found  in  their  arts  and  crafts,  that  it  was  cast  in  a mould
by  barbarians,  arid  that  from  them  it  received  an  impression  so
deep  that  a hundred  generations  have  not  been  able  to  efface  it,
nor  even  to  smooth  its  roughnesses  or  to  soften  its  outlines.1  No

44 I’autre  avec  u no  so  re  to  de  main  incomparable.  Cotait  le  temps  ou  jo  n’avuis  p:ts
48  essay  u par  in  oi -memo  le  deebiifrement  dos  tuxtes  religion  x ot  oil  jo  me  borrmis
14  u reprodnire  l’enseignement  de  nos  grands  mat  ires.  Q mint  l j’ai  etc  con t. mint

*'  do  les  aborder. j’ai  du  m’avouer  a moi-mumo  qu’ils  ne  respu-aienfc  point

*•  cette  sagesse  pro  ton  de  quo  d'autres  y avaient  sen  tie.  Cortes  on  ne  m’aecusera  pas
“■  do  vouloir  deprecier  les  Kgyp liens  : plus  je  me  familiarise  avec  eux,  et  plus  je  me
^ persuade  qu’ils  ont  etc  un  des  grands  pen  pies  de  I’humanite,  Tun  des  plus  origiiuiux
44  et  des  plus  createnrs,  mais  aussi  qu’ils  sont  tuujouro  demeures  des  demi-barbares.”
L'f  Myiholoyitt , p.  277.

1 44  En  art,  on  science,  on  Industrie,  ils  ont  Ixiaueoup  invent**,  lieaucoup
“ produit,  beaucoup  pro  mis  surtout;  leur  religion  presente  le  mfcme  me  lunge  de
44  gmshiereto  et.  de  raffinemont  qu’on  refcrouve  dans  tout  le  reste.  La  plupart  do
“ ses  wythes  lui  sont.  cotnmuns  avec  les  tribus  les  plus  saavages  dc  1’Ancien  et  du
44  Nonveau-Monde ; ses  pratiques  g ardent  le  cachet  de  la  barbaric  primitive,  et  je
44  crois  quo  les  sacrifices  hunmins  nVn  avaient  pas  disparu  dans  certain es  circon-


EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM


119


one  will  attempt  to  deny  that  traces  of  half  savage  ideas  and
customs  are  to  he  found  in  Egyptian  religious  literature,  but  the
real  question  is  whether  such  traces  render  it  impossible  for  the
Egyptians  ever  to  have  attained  to  the  conception  of  monotheism,
whether  the  existence  of  such  half  savage  ideas  and  customs  is
incompatible  with  it  or  not.  Every  one  who  is  familiar  with  the
literatures  of  oriental  religions  knows  that  the  sublime  and  the
ridiculous,  spiritual  ideas  and  material  views,  intellectuality  and
grossness,  and  belief  and  superstition,  occur  frequently  in  close
juxtaposition,  arid  illustrations  of  these  statements  may  be  found
in  the  writings  of  the  Arabs,  and  even  in  certain  parts  of  the
Hebrew  Scriptures.  Yet  no  one  will  deny  that  the  Arabs  as  a
people  have  been  monotheists  since  the  time  of  Muhammad  the
Prophet,  and  no  one.  will  refuse  to  admit  that  the  Hebrews,  after
a certain  date  in  their  history,  became  monotheists  and  have
remained  so.  The  literatures  of  both  the  Hebrews  and  the  Arabs
are  full  of  extravagances  of  every  kind,  but  no  competent  person
has  denied  to  these  nations  the  right  to  bo  called  monotheistic,  and
no  one  in  the  light  of  modern  research  will  attempt  to  judge  them
by  the  coarsest  expressions  and  materialistic  thoughts  which  ai'e
found  in  their  Scriptures.  On  the  other  hand,  no  one  expects  to
find  either  in  Hebrew  or  in  Arabic  literature  the  lotty  spiritual
and  philosophical  conceptions  which  modern  highly  educated
thinkers  associate  with  the  idea  of  monotheism,  and  the  same  is,
of  course,  to  be  said  for  tile  literature  of  the  Egyptians ; but  it  is
not  difficult  to  show  that  the  idea  of  monotheism  xvliieh  existed  in
Egypt  at  a very  early  period  is  at  least  of  the  same  character
as  that  which  grew  up  among  both  Hebrews  and  Arabs  many
centuries  later.

To  prove  this  statement  recourse  must  be  had  to  a number  of
extracts 1 from  religious  texts,  and  among  such  may  be  quoted  the
following: — To  the  dead  king  Enas  it  is  said,  “Thou  existest  at

“ stances,  memo  sons  los  grands  Pharaona  fin; bains.  Kilo  a etc  jetee  au  raoule
“ par  des  Barba  res,  efc  ©lie  a reeu  deux  une  empreinto  si  forto  quo  cent  generations
“ n’ont  pu,  je  ne  dirai  pas  l’eft'acer,  main  ou  amollir  les  asperites  et  eu  adoncir  lea
“contours.”  La  Mytholoyie,  p.  277.

1 Seo  the  group  given  in  my  Papyrus  of  Ant,  London,  1805,  p.  lxxxiii.  ft.


120


EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM


“ tlie  side  of  God,”  'o*  [j  <=>  ZS  0 cm  *1 ; of  Teta  it  is  said,

1 I I

“ He  weigheth  words,  and  behold,  God  hearkeneth  unto  the  words,'1

in  'll1  z ik-M

king  it  is  said,  “God  hath  called  Teta  (in  his  name,  etc.),”
JVWW,  P ArWW.  ^ ^ [|  Jj  1*  to  Pepi  I.  it  is  said,  “ Thou  hast  received  the
“attribute  (or,  form)  of  God,  thou  hast  become  great  therewith
“before  the  gods,”  S&D  ™ 1 ^ <^>

cjcj,::j;  and  “Thy  mother  Nut  hath  set  thee  to  be  as  God  to  thine
“ enemy  in  thy  name  of  God,”  ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 1

VSAAAA  2$  ^ ^ ^6  *'\  " AA/Vv\\  J;  and  of  the  same  king  it  is

aawv\  i 1


AA AAiW


and  of  the  same  king  it  is


said,  “This  Pepi  is,  therefore,  God,  the  son  of  God,”  ^ ij ,| J n^>

/j  <=»  i.  It  maybe  argued  that  we  should  render  nrh-r,  'J  .

in  these  passages  by  “a  god”  or  “the  god,”  but  this  would  make
nonsense  of  the  passages  in  most  cases.  There  is  no  point  in
telling  a dead  king  that  he  will  live  “by  the  side  of  a god,”  or
that  “a  god  " will  listen  to  his  words  when  he  is  weighing  words,
i.e.,  giving  judgment  upon  matters  in  the  next  world ; what  the
writer  said  and  what  he  meant  his  readers  to  understand  was  that


Unas  will  live  with  the  God,  or  God,  and  that  he  will  have  such  an
exalted  position  there  that  he  will  be  appointed  by  God  to  act  as
judge,  an  office  which  belonged  to  God  himself,  and  that  God  will
listen  to,  i.e.,  obey  his  rulings.  The  above  passages  are  taken  from
texts  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties,  but  they  are  only  copies  of
older  documents,  for  there  are  good  reasons  for  thinking  that  oven
so  far  back  as  the  time  when  they  were  made,  about  n.c.  3300,  the
texts  had  already  been  revised  two  or  three  times,  and  changes
and  additions  made  in  them  as  the  result  of  modified  beliefs  and


The  value  of  such  passages,  however,  consists  iu  the  fact  that
they  prove  conclusively  that  so  far  back  as  b.c.  3300  some  one
god  had  become  so  great  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptians  that
he  stood  out  from  among  the  “gods,”  111  j,  and  was  different
from  the  First,  Second,  and  Third  companies  of  the  gods,


OSIRIS  AS  GOD


121


niiiiiiinnnininiiim  A,,°ther  view  wh“h

may  be  urged  is  that  the  neter,  ^ here  referred  to  is  either  the

god  Osiris  or  the  god  Ra,  hut  even  so  it  must  be  admitted  that
Osiris  or  lla  occupied  a position  in  the  mind  of  the  Egyptian
theologian  which  was  far  superior  to  that  of  any  of  the  “ gods.”
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the  Pyramid
Texts  are  full  of  passages  in  which  we  are  told  what  great  things
Ra  will  do  for  the  deceased  in  the  next  world,  and  the  honour
which  lie  will  pay  to  him,  and  we  must  therefore  conclude  that
the  God  referred  to  in  the  passages  which  we  have  quoted  is  not
Rfi,  although  he  may  be  Osiris.  But  if  wo  arrive  at  this  conclu-
sion we  must  admit  that  in  the  relatively  remote  period  about
u.c.  3300  Osiris  was  considered  to  be  such  a great  god,  and  to
occupy  such  an  exalted  position  at  the  head  of  the  “gods,”  that
lie  could  be  spoken  of  and  referred  to  simply  as  “ God.”  We  have
already  seen  it  implied  that  Osiris  was  the  judge  of  those  avIio
were  in  the  Underworld,  and  we  know  from  the  text  of  Unas
(line  494)  that  he  sat  on  a throne  in  heaven ; 1 as  the  king  is  said
to  have  become  “god,  and  the  messenger  (or,  angel)  of  God”  2
(line  l7o),  and  to  “enter  into  the  place  which  was  more  holy  than
any  other  place”  3 (line  178),  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  God  of
the  Pyramid  Texts  was  an  entirely  different  being  from  the  “gods”
and  the  “companies  of  the  gods.”  The  deceased  is  actually  called
“ Osiris  Pepi,”  * and  as  he  is  said  to  have  become  an  angel  of  God,
if  Osiris  be  that  God  and  judge,  he  must  have  held  a similar
position  to  that  of  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  who  is  said  to  “judge
among  the  gods,”  5 and  must  have  been  ministered  to  by  “ gods  ’

1 ^PCEDDI  jL  T Ss  JL,  o[i<=  1.

:t  jj  o /vw*a  p <n>  jj  o >

4 ra  Ik  j)  (MI  Pepi  Im  L 60-

5 Psalm  Ixxxii.  1,  IDDitf1  Otffat  3"m.

: vi  v vs


122


CONCEPTION  OF  GOD


of  a rank  inferior  to  his  own.  We  may  assume,  then,  that  the
God  of  the  Pyramid  Texts  was  Osiris,  the  god  and  judge  of  the
dead,  but  it  is  clear  that  the  only  aspects  of  the  God  which  are
referred  to  are  those  which  he  bears  as  the  god  and  judge  of
the  dead.  We  have,  unfortunately,  no  means  of  knowing  how
he  was  described  by  his  earliest  worshippers,  for  the  priests
of  Heliopolis,  when  they  absorbed  him  into  their  theological
system,  took  care  to  give  him  only  such  characteristics  as  suited
their  own  views ; they  have,  however,  shown  us  that  he  was
the  judge  of  the  dead,  and  that  lie  occupied  a unique  position
among  the  gods,  and  enjoyed  some  of  the  powers  possessed  by
the  God  of  the  nations  which  are  on  all  hands  admitted  to  be
monotheistic.

But  we  may  obtain  further  information  about  the  conception
of  God  among  the  Egyptians  by  an  examination  of  certain  passages
in  the  famous  Precepts  of  Kaqeinna  and  the  Precepts  of  Ptah-
hetep.  The  first  of  these  works  was  composed  in  the  reign  of
Seneferu,  a king  of  the  IVtli  Dynasty,  and  the  second  in  the  reign
of  Assa,  a king  of  the  Yth  Dynasty,  but  we  only  know  them  from
the  copies  contained  in  the  papyrus  which  was  given  to  the
Bibliotheque  Royale  in  Paris  by  Ii.  Prisse  d’Avennes  in  1817.'
This  document  was  probably  written  about  the  period  of  the
XVIItli  Dynasty,  and  may,  of  course,  contain  readings  and  addi-
tions reflecting  the  opinions  of  the  Egyptians  on  religion  and
morals  which  were  then  current ; but  the  foundations  of  both
works  belong  to  an  earlier  time,  though  whether  that  time  fell
under  the  Xllth  Dynasty,  as  some  think,  or  under  the  I.Vth  and
Vth  Dynasties  as  the  works  themselves  declare,  matters  little  for
our  present  purpose.  1 ri  both  sets  of  Precepts  we  have  a series  of
moral  aphorisms  similar  to  those  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the
Book  of  Wisdom,  and  Ecclesiasticus,  and  the  Book  of  Proverbs,
and  they  are  given  as  the  outcome  of  the  experience  of  men  of  the
world ; neither  the  work  of  Kaqeinna  nor  that  of  Ptah-hetep  can
be  said  to  have  been  drawn  up  from  a religious  point  of  view,
and  neither  author  supports  his  advice  by  appeals  to  religious

1 See  Facsimile  d'vn  papyrus  Ftjyptien  c»  caracUrcs  hierati^nes,  Park,
1847,  folio.


CONCEPTION  OF  GOD


123


authority.  In  these  works  we  find  the  following  admonitions  and

reflections : —


1 .

<■ >>  n /wwv\

©

c III

-<s>-

V

an

rekhentu

khepert

dr  if.

neter

i6  Not  [are]

known

the  things

which  maketh

God,'

i.e.,  the  things  which  will  come  to  pass  by  God’s  agency  cannot  be
known,  that  is  to  say,  God’s  ways  are  inscrutable.


2-  ^ ii  “k


an  am
The  eating


53)

l I I

tan

of  bread


kher

is  according  to


© ^ T

seiche  r neter

the  plan  of  God,


i.e.,  a man’s  food  comes  to  him  through  the  providence  of  God.


dm  - k
Thou  shalt  not


dri  her
put  terror


cm  reth

into  men  and  women  ;


is  opposed  [thereto]


1'

neter

God.


dr  seka  - nek  ter

If  thou  hast  land  labour

for  ploughing

1'

neter

God.

l.The  author  of  this  observation
Ptah-hetep.


&_J]  p ■=>

cm

aekhet

td  set

in

the  field

(which)  hath  given

was  Kaqemna ; the  other  ones  are  by


124  CONCEPTION  OF  GOD

/

*•  k rg()4j

dr  un  - nek  em  sa  dqer  dri  - k m

If  thou  wouhlst  be  a man  perfect  make  thou  [thy]  son

— 1

en ■ sniom  neter

to  be  pleasing  unto  God.


k

sehetep

1 dipt  - k

cm

Satisfy

thy  dependants

by

/WV\AA  ^ ^

1

c\

a J/esrxH

neter

by  him  that  is  favoured  by  God.


^ j AAAAAA.

cri-^  1

kh  ejn  ‘ rt-n  >lc  1'Ji  epryf

thy  actions ; it  should  be  done


l1

•inert  u

neter  \>n

art  cm

What  is  loved

ot  God  is

obedience ;

a n ec.Um
disobedience


iiiPTM  1-

en  mesMn  ■ neter

hateth  God.


mdk  m nefer
Verily  a son  good  [is]


en  tdtd
of  the  gifts


1'

neter

of  God.


And  finally  from  the  Prisse  Papyrus  may  be  quoted  the  exhorta-
tion, “ If  having  been  of  no  account,  thou  hast  become  great,  and
“ if,  having  been  poor,  thou  hast  become  rich,  when  thou  art


IDEA  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE


125


k crovemor  of  the  city  be  not  hard-hearted  on  account  of  thy
u advancement,  because  thou  hast  [only]  become

»■  Atli  I1

mer  xepfu  neter

il  the  guardian  of  the  provisions  of  God.”

From  this  group  of  extracts  we  learn  that  the  ways  of  the  god
referred  to  in  the  “ Precepts  ” were  inscrutable,  that  it  was  he  who
was  supposed  to  give  a man  children,  and  property,  and  food,  that
lie  was  opposed  to  any  man  tyrannizing  over  his  fellow  creatures ;
that  lie  loved  to  be  obeyed  and  hated  disobedience,  i.e.,  those  who
would  not  hearken  unto  him ; that  the  perfect  man  was  he  who
brought  up  his  son  in  ways  pleasing  to  God ; that  God  expected  the
man  who  had  been  favoured  by  him  to  do  good  to  those  who  were
dependent  upon  him ; and  the  writer  of  the  “ Precepts  ” urged  the
governor  of  a city  to  remember  that  he  was  only  the  guardian  of
goods  and  provisions  which  belonged  to  God.  1 n all  these  extracts
it  is  clear  that  the  allusion  is  to  some  great  and  powerful  being  who
rules  and  governs  the  world  and  provides  according  to  his  will  for
those  who  are  in  it.  In  the  second  extract  we  have  the  words

neter,  i.e.,  the  scHer  of  God.  The  word  m.i-her  |)  |,  has

many  meanings,  among  them  being  “thought,  plan,  intention,
scheme,  design,”  and  the  like,  and  when  Ptah-hetep  said  that  “ the
eating  of  bread  is  according  to  the  sekher  of  God,”  there  is  no
doubt  that  he  intended  his  readers  to  understand  that  a man
obtained  bread,  or  food,  to  eat  according  to  the  plan  or  design
which  God  had  made,  or  decreed  beforehand.  A rendering  which
would  very  well  represent  the  words  seiche  r neter  is  “ Divine  provi-
dence ; ” but  they  do  not  justify  the  translation  “ fate  ” which  has
been  proposed  for  them.

Now  we  know  that  both  the  writers  Kaqenma  and  Ptah-hetep
lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Memphis,  because  their  tombs  are  at
bakkara,  and  if  they  lived  at  Memphis  their  great  local  god  would
be  Ptah  of  the  Beautiful  Face,  or  Ptah  of  the  White  Wall,  whose


126


PRECEPTS  OF  KHENSU-HETEP


feminine  counterpart  was  Sckliet  and  whose  son  was  I-em-hetep.
But  in  the  group  of  extracts  just  given  there  is  no  mention  of  any
of  these  gods,  and  the  God  referred  to  cannot  he  Osiris,  first,
because  the  texts  are  not  funereal,  and  secondly,  because  the
attributes  ascribed  to  this  God  are  not  of  those  which  we  know
from  later  texts  belonged  to  the  god  of  the  dead.  Who  then  is  the
God  whose  power,  and  providence,  and  government  of  the  world
are  here  proclaimed  ? The  answer  to  this  question  is  that  the  God
referred  to  is  God,  Whose  power  men  of  the  stamp  of  Ptah-hetep
discerned  even  at  the  remote  period  in  which  he  lived,  and  Whose
attributes  they  clearly  distinguished  ; He  was  in  their  opinion  too
great  to  be  called  anything  else  but  God,  and  though,  no  doubt,
they  offered  sacrifices  to  the  gods  in  the  temple  at  Memphis,  after
the  manner  of  their  countrymen,  they  knew  that  God  Avas  an
entirely  different  Being  from  those  “ gods.”

Passing  hoav  to  the  period  of  the  New  Empire  we  have  to
consider  a few  extracts  from  the  famous  work  commonly  known  as
the  “Maxims  of  Ani,”  or  the  “Precepts  of  Khcnsu-hetcp,”  which
Avas  first  described1  by  E.  de  Rouge  in  1861,  and  was  published  in
full  fifteen  years  later  by  Clmbas.2  The  text 3 is  written  upon  a
papyrus  which  was  found  in  a box  lying  upon  the  floor  of  the  tomb
of  a Christian  monk  at  Her  al-Medinet,  and  from  considerations  of
palaeography  it  must  probably  be  assigned  to  the  period  of  the
XXIInd  Dynasty,  but  the  original  composition  must  be  a great
deal  older,  and  it  may  well  date  from  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty.  The
following  extracts  will  illustrate  the  conception  of  God  in  the  mind
of  the  author  of  the  “ Maxims  —

>■  ia  -

pa  nder  an  maud  ren  * /

The  God  is  for  making  great  his  name.


1 See  Moniicnr,  15  Aoufc,  1861 ; and  Comptes  Jlendus , Paris,  1871,  ri»
310-350,

9 Stic  L'  figypfolotjic,  Clialons-sur-Saone  and  Paris,  4to,  1876-1878.

8 A facsimile  was  published  by  Mariette  in  Papyrus  Egyptians  da  Musi'e  de
JBoulaq.


PRECEPTS  OF  KHENSU-HETEP


127


3.  u ±nv

pa  neter  dput  pa  man

The  God  [is]  the  judge  of  the  right.

or,  the  God  is  the  judge,  the  righteous  one,  i.e.,  the  judge  who
passes  sentence  according  to  what  is  straight,  mad,  i.e.,  the  law,
the  canon.


an


* n

<5

tan


li

neler-hn


unu


Giveth  thy  God  the  means  of  subsistence.


4.  “ I have  given  thee  thy  mother,”  the  writer  says  to  his  son,
“and  she  carried  thee  even  as  she  carried  thee,  and  took  upon
“ herself  a heavy  burden  for  thy  sake,  and  did  not  lean  upon  me.
“ When  at  length  thou  wast  born  after  having  been  carried  by  her
“ for  months,  she  laid  herself  under  thy  yoke,  and  she  nourished
“ thee  for  three  years,1  and  was  never  weary  of  thee.  . . . When
“thou  wsist  sent  to  school  to  be  taught,  she  came  every  day
“ without  fail  to  thy  master  [bringing]  bread  and  beer  [for  thee]
“ from  her  house.  Now  thou  hast  become  a man  and  hast  married
“ a wife  and  hast  a house,  set  thine  eye  upon  thy  child,  and  bring
“him  up  as  thy  mother  brought  thee  up.  Wrong  not  thy  mother
“ lest  she  lift  up

ddni-set  en  pa  neter  erntuf  seteniu  aebhu-set
“her  hands  to  the  God  [and]  he  hearken  unto  her  prayers”

[and  punish  thee].


5.


A/VWVN


dmma  su  en  pa*

“Let  [a  man]  give  himself  to  the

4

1 Literally,  “ lior  breasts  were  in  tl»y  mouth  for  three  years.”


id

neter

God,


128


PRECEPTS  OF  KHENSU-HETEP


/WWW  A/WVW
0


muu  - h an  em-ment  en
11  keep  thou  thyself  daily  for


pa

the


k

netur

God,


to  *k*v?  n


w


ra


==>  ji  °
^ 1 1
ham


du  tuami  md-qeti  pa

“ to-morrow  (?)  being  like  the  day  (to-day  ?)


6.


II  °*PJUk


o eLJ

Ichcnnn  en  neter  betn-tvf
“ The  sanctuary  of  God  its  abomination


p u *eh  eh  il-

ls much  speaking.


MV


I
I

/WWW  A -CTV-S  /X  UUL  dZ-i!  I

senemehu-nek


k

ah  meet


i **=_


cm


“ Make  thou  thy  prayers  with  a heart  of  love


i

da  metet  - f
all  the  petitions


neht


-CS>-


QQ  I I I

dmcnnn  dri-f

“ of  which  ai’e  in  secret.  He  will  perform


©


I Ok

I


aetevvn-f  d tchetclu-k  seshepu-[f]

11  he  will  hear  what  thou  sayest,  he  will  accept


i

khcru-fuk
thy  affairs,

"i]

uteunu-t.uk
thine  offerings.


ntennu  neter-hu  sau-tu-  * «/

“ In  making  offerings  to  thy  God  guard  thou  thyself  against

na  hetiui-tuf  d ennu  maat-k  cr

“ the  things  which  he  0 observe  [with]  thine,  eye
abominateth.


PRECEPTS  OF  KHENSU-HETEP


129


paif

“his


sekheru  qentet

plans.  Devote


— w K 21  e

emtulc  scnenti-tu
thyself  to  the  adoration


em,  ren  - / su  t&t  torn*

« 0f  his  name.  It  is  he  who  giveth  souls


hell

to  millions


AVWV\


en
“ of


darn

forms,


a fraud


and  [he]  magnifieth


O \\

jia  enti
whosoever


, x daud  - f

“ magnifieth  him.


dr  net.  nr  ta  pen  en

Now  the  god  of  this  earth  is

O


c9j
<=>  in


i Z

pa  Shim  her  kind  dir

“ the  god  Shu,  he  who  is  over  the  horizons.


n i »

naif  mat'd
His  similitudes


r?  r:  ti i u k

her  tep  ta  tdtd-tha  sen  ter d em

“ [are]  upon  earth,  are  given  [to  them]  offerings  of  incense  with


vcr.p-

kai-set

“ their  food  offerings


em-ment.


daily.”


The  group  of  passages  given  above  supplies  a new  set  of
attributes  ascribed  by  the  Egyptians  to  God,  and  they  show  that
they  believed  this  Being  to  be  one  who  judged  according  to  right,
who  was  jealous  for  the  honour  of  his  name,  who  received  pray  era

K


130  CONCEPTION  OF  GOD  AND  THE  GODS


and  offerings,  and  who  granted  to  the  suppliant  all  his  petitions,
and  performed  all  his  desires,  when  such  petitions  were  made  to
him  in  secret  and  with  a “ loving  heart.”  The  seventh  extract  is
peculiarly  instructive,  for  in  it  we  have  a sharp  distinction  drawn
between  this  God  and  the  solar  god  Shu,  who  is  here,  clearly,
identified  with  the  Sun-god.  The  worshipper  of  God  is  exhorted

to  consider  His  plans,  or  designs,  |1  ^ | !,  which  arc  manifest

upon  earth,  to  pay  good  heed  to  the  manner  in  which  he  makes
offerings  to  Him,  and  to  dedicate  himself  to  the  adoration  of  His
name,  for  it  is  He  who  giveth  souls,  i.e.,  life,  to  millions  of  beings,
and  those  who  exalt  Him  He  Avill  exalt.  On  the  other  hand,  the
similitudes  of  the  god  Shu,  the  lord  of  the  horizons,  i.e.,  the  skies
of  the  South  and  the  North,  the  East  and  the  West,  and  the  god
of  this  earth,  are  upon  the  earth,  and  to  them  offerings  of  incense
and  meat  are  made  daily.  There  is  no  need  here  to  dwell  upon
the  lofty  conception  of  what  is  meet  for  the  worship  of  God  ; nor
upon  the  fact  that  many  of  the  phrases  in  the  extract  are  identical
in  meaning,  and  almost  in  words,  with  passages  in  the  Hebrew
Scriptures,  for  they  will  be  familiar  to  all,  and  extracts  like  the
following  will  occur  to  every  reader : — “ Consider  the  wondrous
works  of  God”  (Job  xxxvii.  14);  “them  that  honour  me  I will
honour”  (1  Samuel  ii.  30),  etc.  The  word  rendered  “similitudes,'’

is  difficult  to  explain  in  detail  though  its  general

meaning  is  clear  enough,  and  we  must  understand  by  it  “ things
which  are  in  the  likeness  [of  Shu]  ” ; these  can,  apparently,  only
refer  to  the  gods  to  whom  incense  and  offerings  were  brought
daily.  The  great  importance  of  the  second  group  of  extracts
consists  in  the  fact  that  they  emphasize  and  develop  the  difference
between  the  Egyptian  conception  of  God  and  the  gods.  The
author  of  the  “Maxims,”  like  Kaqemna  and  Ptah-hetep,  set  out
to  write  a book  of  moral  precepts  by  which  he  intended  his  son  to
mould  his  course  of  life  and  to  be  guided.  This  work  is  not  of  a
funereal  character,  therefore  the  God  who  is  referred  to  throughout
cannot,  be  Osiris,  and  the  context  proves  beyond  all  doubt  that  the
writer  is  alluding  to  the  same  Being  as  were  the  earlier  writers
of  moral  aphorisms  already  mentioned.  In  the  case  of  the


ONENESS  OF  THE  GODS


131


“Maxims,”  however,  the  word  for  God,  netar  n is  usually
qualified  by  the  emphatic  article  pa  ^

But  in  all  the  passages  quoted  above  there  is  no  distinct
statement  that  the  God  alluded  to  therein  is  God  alone,  and  that
there  is  no  other  God  besides  Him,  although  this  is  clearly  implied ;
we  must  therefore  turn  to  another  class  of  texts  in  which  the
attribute  of  oneness  or  unity  is  ascribed  to  one  or  more  “great
gods,”  and  see  how  it  is  applied.  The  god  Ta-tunen  is  called,
“ One,  maker  of  mortals,  and  of  the  company  of  the  gods  ” ; 1 the
•rod  lta-Tom  is  called,  “ lord  of  heaven,  lord  of  earth,  maker  of
“ beings  celestial  and  of  beings  terrestrial,  God  One,  who  came
“ into  being  in  primeval  time,  maker  of  the  world,  creator  of
“rational  beings,  maker  of  Nu  (the  sky),  creator  of  the  Nile,
“ maker  of  whatsoever  is  in  the  waters,  and  giver  of  life  to  the


“ same,  knitter  together  of  the  mountains,  making  to  come  into
“ being  men  and  women,  and  boasts  and  cattle,  and  creator  of  the
“ heavens  and  the  earth”;*  the  great  Ivlin  (Spirit)  whom  Tern
created  is  described  as  the  “ only  One  in  Nu  ” ; 3 Osiris  is  said  to
he  “ lord  of  the  gods,  god  One  ” ; v and  in  a remarkable  passage,
in  which  the  whole  of  the  attributes  of  the  Sun-god  1'a  have  been
transferred  to  Amcn-llii,  we  have  the  following  statement  wherein
this  god  is  said  to  be  “ the  holy  (or,  venerable)  Soul  which  came


1 <=•  4”]’

i w Jr  sssw  ?1  -

"/  ■!>//,  sheet  1,  lino


I -csr>-


***  <


® C]C]C]-


I -<s>-


Afww

aa/wva


G\  V /WWV»
\\  WWV\


■vww\  jc33^>»

Waaaa  --


.VVW\A

WVWA

.WvW>

^ III


I'awrn*  of  llunefer,  sheet  1,  line  5 IT.

Hook  of  the.  Dead , Chap.  lxxviii.  IG.
1 Chap.  clxxiii.


i raaa  * — i ^ o ^

I VWNAA  .VWVSA  ^ \


132


ONENESS  OF  THE  GODS

“ into  being  aforetime,  the  great  god  who  livetli  in  (or  by)  Maat
“ (i.e.,  unfailing  and  unvarying  order  and  regularity),


pautti.  tv  pi  mes

“ the  puut  primeval  [which]  gave

birth  to


pautti

the  two  companies  of
gods,


o —

kheper

neter

neb  dm  - f

“ came  into  being

god

every  through  him,

nd  ndui
one  alone,


-<2>-


dri  - /
“he  made


&

A\WW

AVAV>


3


I

I

1


unen


what  exists


shad  ta


when  the  earth  began


□ © D\\


em  sep  tepi
in  primeval  time,


silt:  tau

“ hidden


men

of  births,


kheperiu
manifold  of  forms,


-A-  <=>  R s

m i\ .

/VW./\A  W LJ

dn  Tvhhtn
not  is  known


bes  - f
“ his  growth.”  1

The  text  goes  on  to  say  that  Amen-Ra  is  the  “ holy  Sekliem  (i.e.,
“ Power),  the  god  who  is  beloved,  and  is  terrible  and  mighty  in
“his  risings,  lord  of  space,  the  Power,  Khepera,  the  creator  of
“ every  evolution  (or,  thing)  which  belongeth  to  his  existence,'
“ except  whom  at  the  beginning  none  other  existed.”  Here  then
we  have  Ta-tunen,  Ka-Tem,  and  the  god  Osiris  all  called  “ God

One,”  neter  ud,  ^ ^ and  in  the  last  extract  we  have  the

remarkable  expression  “God  One  alone,”  < T n ^ applie<l
to  Amen-Ra.  If  we  consider  for  a moment  we  shall  see  that  the


' ^ See  Maupero,  Mem.  Miss.  Arch.,  tom  i.f  p.  594.

■ * ‘ ^<=>y  i ^


133


ONENESS  OF  THE  GODS

gods  Tem  and  Khepera  are  only  forms  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and  as
Tatunen  was  concerned  in  the  production  of  the  Sun-god  he  also  is
a solar  god ; at  the  time  when  the  above  extracts  were  written,
j.c.,  under  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty,  we  have  abundant  proof  that  the
Egyptians  were  continually  adding  to  the  attributes  which  they
ascribed  to  Osiris,  and  that  such  attributes  were  those  which
belonged  to  some  form  of  Ra  or  to  Ra  himself.  The  word  “ One  ”
then  is  applied  in  these  cases  to  Ra,  and  to  the  forms  of  Ra,  and
to  a god  who  had  come  to  be  regarded  in  one  aspect  at  least  as  a
solar  god,  and  it  will  be  found  on  examination  of  the  texts  that
whenever  a god  or  goddess  is  described  as  “ One  ” it  is  because
that  deity  has  been  endowed  by  the  writer,  whether  rightly  or
wrongly  is  another  matter,  with  some  of  the  attributes  of  11a.

It  is  easy  to  see  from  the  hieroglyphic  extract  given  above
that  to  the  god  there  described  are  attributed  many  of  the  creative
qualities  which  we  assign  to  God  Almighty.  Thus  he  is  said  to
be  the  primeval  Pant  or  divine  substance  who  gave  birth  to  the
two  companies  of  the  gods  (in  this  case  we  must  understand  the
company  of  the  gods  of  heaven  and  the  company  of  the  gods  of
earth,  and  not  the  Great  and  Little  Companies  of  the  gods  of
Heliopolis),  and  every  god  came  into  being  by  him  or  through  him.
Here  it  is  quite  clear  that  “every  god”  means  only  every  inferior
being  who  possessed  something  of  the  quality  of  a netrr  or  “ god,”
and  every  being  who  ministered  to  the  great  Paut,  and  avIio  in  the
Hebrew  Scriptures  would  be  grouped  under  tlie  name  “ Elohim,”
D’ri'jN,  or  among  the  “ angels,”  and  in  Arabic  literature  among  the
good  Jinn.  The  text  goes  on  to  say  not  only  in  primeval  times,
i.e.,  “in  the  beginning,”  be  created  whatever  exists  upon  the
earth,  but  also  that  in  primeval  time  no  other  being  existed  with
him.  This  is  a definite  statement  of  the  unity  or  oneness  of  God  <
which  cannot  be  gainsaid,  and  it  was  this  attribute  of  unity  or
oneness  Avhieh  tlie  priests  of  various  cities  ascribed  to  tlieir  local
god  whenever  they  could.  We  have  no  means  of  saying  whether
this  idea  of  oneness  or  unity  was  first  applied  to  Ra  or  to  some
more  ancient  god  such  as  Horus,  but  it  is,  in  the  writer’s  opinion,  *
quite  certain  that  it  existed  in  the  minds  of  the  educated  classes  <3$.
^gypt  in  the  earliest  times,  and  that  in  all  periods  it  was  the  .


134


THE  GREAT  SELF-CREATED  GOD


centx-al  point  of  their  conceptions  of  God.  But  the  text  goes  on  to
say  that  the  great  Paut  who  created  the  companies  of  the  gods  is
“ hidden  of  births  and  manifold  of  forms,”  and  that  “ his  growth
(or  development)  is  unknown.”  This  is  only  another  way  of  saying
that  the  manner  in  which  the  beings  and  things  produced  by  the
Paut  came  into  being  is  unknown,  and  that  he  appears  under  many
forms.  We  may  here  refer  to  the  passage  in  the  XVIIth  Chapter
of  the  Boole  of  the  Dead  (line  9),  wherein  it  is  said  : —


nuh  litter  da  kheper  trhesef
u I am  the  great  god  self-created,


ooo  — '

/VWSA\  . ,
F=*  /V“A/W\  jA


3


Nu

Nu,


/m

that  is  to  say,


I


tjema-m  renu

“ who  made  his  names


/


©


'pant,

the  company


111

netern

of  the  gods


& 14

era  neter
“ as  god.”


Concerning  this  being  the  question  is  asked,  “ Who  then  is  this  ? ”
and  the  following  answer  is  given  : —


lid  pa  qematn  renu

“ It  is  Rii  who  created  names


a i

A/WVW.  ^ jTy  I ^ ^

en  at  - f

for  liis  member


8«=»  U


□

(5

er  enen  pu
“ and  these  came  into  being


/■m

in  the  form  of


111

netern
the  gods


ami  - lchet  1 Id


“ who  are  in  the  following  of  Ua.”


Oh  the  creative  power  of  the  great  Paut  special  emphasis  is  laid  in
the  extract  on  p.  132,  for,  after  declaring  that  he  created  in  the  begin'


HENOTHETSM


135


rung  whatsoever  exists,  the  text  adds  that  lie  created  everything
that  had  to  do  with  his  own  coming  into  being ; and  in  the  passages
from  the  Book  of  the  Dead  it  is  taught,  according  to  one  dogma,
that  the  names  of  the  great,  self-produced  god  Nu  became  the
company  of  gods  under  the  form  of  God,  and  according  to  another
that  the  gods  who  were  in  the  train  of  Ha  were  the  members  or
limbs  of  Ha,  and  that  these  limbs  were,  in  turn,  the  names  of  Ra.
The  last  text  quoted  is  of  considerable  importance,  for  it  gives  us  a
direct  proof  that  the  attributes  of  the  god  N u were  transferred  to
11a,  and  that  Ra  was  identified  absolutely  with  Xu,  and  the  last-
text  but  one  quoted  sIioavs  how  the  attributes  of  Ra  were  transferred
to  Amen,  who  was  originally  only  the  local  god  of  Thebes,  by
means  of  the  fusion  of  the  two  gods  into  Amen-Ra.  We  know
that  to  many  gods  were  ascribed  the  attributes  of  Ra,  and  that  all
solar  gods  were,  in  the  dynastic  period  at  least,  held  to  be  forms  of
him:  if  wo  could  identify  them  all  we  should  be  able  to  reduce  the
number  of  Egyptian  gods  considerably.

The  attribute  or  quality  of  oneness  or  unity,  which  is  ascribed
first  to  the  great  God  who  was  the  creator  of  the  heavens  and  the
earth  and  all  therein,  and  secondly  to  the  Sun-god  who  was
regarded  as  the  visible  type  and  symbol  of  God  and  his  various
forms,  and  thirdly,  at  a later  period  to  the  god  Osiris,  has  been
termed  “ henotheism  ” by  many  writers  who  asserted  that  it
was  a “phase  of  religious  thought”1  which  was  different  lronx
monotheism.  According  to  the  late  Right  Honourable  Prof.  Max
Muller  we  have  become  acquainted  with  this  phase  of  religious
thought  “ for  the  first  time  through  the  Veda,”  and  he  goes  on  to
say  that  “when  these  individual  gods  are  invoked  they  are  not
“ conceived  as  limited  by  the  power  of  others,  as  superior  or
“ inferior  in  rank.  Each  god  is  to  the  mind  of  the  suppliant  as
“good  as  all  the  gods.  He  is  felt  at  the  time  as  a real  divinity,
“ as  supreme  and  absolute,  in  spite  of  the  necessary  limitations
“ which,  to  our  mind,  a plurality  of  gods  must  entail  on  every
“single  god.  All  the  rest  disappear  from  the  vision  of  the  poet,
“ and  he  only  who  is  to  fulfil  their  desires  stands  in  full  light
“ before  the  eyes  of  the  worshippers.”  It  is  quite  true  that  the
1 Max  Muller,  llibbcrt  Lecture »,  p.  285.


136


HENOTHEISM


Egyptian  religion  passed  through  a phase  which  has  been  identified
as  henotheism,  but,  assuming  for  a moment  that  we  should  be
correct  in  calling  that  phase  henotheism,  the  Egyptian  religious
texts  prove  that  it  was  “ not  the  henotheism  of  Max  Muller  or  of
“ Hartmann,  or  of  Asmus,  but  a practical  henotheism,  i.e.,  the
“ adoration  of  one  God  above  all  others  as  the  specific  tribal  god  or
“ as  the  lord  over  a particular  people,  a national  or  relative
•‘monotheism,  like  that  of  the  ancient  Israelites,  the  worship  of  an
“ absolute  sovereign  who  exacts  passive  obedience.  This  practical
“monotheism  is  totally  different  from  the  theoretical  monotheism,
“ to  which  the  Aryans,  with  their  monistic  speculative  idea  of  the
“ godhead,  are  much  nearer.”  1

These  words  by  the  late  Professor  Tide  here  quoted  were  not
applied  by  him  to  the  Egyptian  religion,  but  they  so  well  express
the  present  writer’s  views  about  the  monotheism  of  the  Egyptians
that  they  are  adopted  for  that  purpose.  Professor  Tiele  was,
undoubtedly,  the  greatest  authority  on  comparative  religion  of  Ins
day,  and  although  lie  was  not  an  Egyptologist  at  first  hand,  he
had  discussed  Egyptian  religious  texts  with  great  experts  like
Ohabas,  Birch,  de  Rouge,  and  others,  to  such  good  purpose  that
his  opinion  on  the  subject  is  of  peculiar  value.  According  to  him
the  Egyptian  religion  presents  two  apparently  contradictory  and
irreconcilable  phenomena:  — 1.  A lively  sentiment  of  the  spirituality
of  God  united  to  the  coarsest  materialistic  representations  of
different  divinities ; and  2.  A sentiment,  not  less  lively,  of  the
unity  of  God,  united  to  an  extremely  great  multiplicity  of  divine
persons.2  The  best  educated  priests,  he  thinks,  who  were  the
most  vigorous  promoters  «d‘  religious  progress,  were  as  much
attached  to  forms  and  traditional  symbols  as  the  people  themselves,
and  they  were  most  unwilling  to  give  up  any  part  of  them.  The
symbolism,  being  misunderstood  by  the  ignorant  folk,  produced
serious  errors,  and  the  forms  under  which  the  Egyptians  repre-
sented their  gods,  and  which  are  repellent  to  our  refined  taste,
answered  in  their  minds  to  the  idea  of  divinity  which  was  purer
and  more  spiritual  than  the  noble  and  beautiful  forms  of  the  gods  of

1 C.  P.  Tiule,  in  Encyclopaedia  IJrifannica , vol.  xx.,  p.  367.

s Ilistoire  Compare*  des  Ancienne h Religion* , Paris,  1882.


POLYTHEISM  AND  MONOTHEISM


137


Hellas.  The  ignorant  felt  no  repugnance  to  monstrous  representa-
tions because  they  appeared  as  representations  having  a profound
and  mysterious  meaning ; the  learned  understood  the  meanings  of
the  symbols,  and  paid  their  adoration  through  them  to  the  truth
of  which  they  were  the  coverings.  In  other  words,  the  uneducated
loved  a plurality  of  gods,  while  the  priests  and  educated  classes
who  could  read  and  understand  books  adopted  the  idea  of  One
God,  the  creator  of  all  the  beings  in  heaven  and  on  earth  who,  for
want  of  a better  word,  were  called  “ gods.”

The  priests  and  theologians  saw  nothing  incompatible  in
believing  that  God  was  One,  and  that  he  existed  under  innumer-
able forms.  We  may  note  the  existence  of  the  same  view  in  the
Hebrew  Scriptures  where,  in  spite  of  the  commandments,  “ Thou
“ shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto
“thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  likeness  [of  anything]  that  [is]
“in  heaven  above,  ....  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to
“ them,  nor  serve  them  . . . .”  (Exodus  xx.  3-5),  the  Israelites
felt  no  scruple  in  representing  God  in  the  midst  of  His  sons,  and
for  a very  long  time  they  continued  to  adore  a number  of  divine
beings  side  by  side  with  Yahweh.1  Thus  in  Joshua  xxii.  22,  we
read,  “ The  Lord  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he  knoweth  and
“ Israel  shall  know; ” in  Exodus  xxii.  28  is  given  the  commandment.


“Thou  shalt  not  revile  the  gods  nor  curse  the  ruler  of  thy  people  ; ’’
in  Psalui  cxxxvi.  2,  Israel  is  exhorted  to  “ give  thanks  unto  the
“ God  of  gods ; ” the  “ sons  of  God  ” we  know  from  Genesis  vi.  2 ;
Job  ii.  1 ; xxxviii.  7 ; ' and  that  “gods”  in  some  passages  mean
nothing  but  beings  possessing  some  characteristic  of  God  is  clear
from  1 Samuel  xxviii.  13,  wherein  we  read  that  the  witch  of
Eridor  told  Saul  that  she  “ saw  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth.”
The  allusion  in  this  last  passage  is  clearly  to  some  kind  of
supernatural  being  or  beings.  Returning  for  a moment  to  the
views  of  Professor  Tiele,  we  admit  that,  judging  from  certain
texts  of  the  Dynastic  Period,  he  is  justitied  in  asserting  that
in  Egypt  monotheism  is  anterior  to  polytheism;  but  judging
from  the  evidence  of  the  recently  discovered  monuments  of  the


1 Tiulu,  Hint,  Coviparre,  p.  13S.

3 Of.  also  Dent.  x.  17  ; Psalms  xiv*  3 ; lxxxii.  1,  6;  Job  i.  (5.


138


EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM


predynastic  and  archaic  periods,  we  must  admit  that  polytheism
appears  to  be  older  than  monotheism.  On  the  other  hand,  the
monotheistic  ideas  which  appear  in  the  works  of  Kaqemna  and
Ptah-hetcp  were  certainly  not  invented  during  the  period  in
which  they  lived,  and  there  is  every  reason  for  believing  that  they
originated  at  a much  earlier  date.  If  literary  compositions
belonging  to  the  first  three  dynasties  are  ever  brought  to  light
from  the  tombs  of  Egypt,  we  shall  probably  find  that  the  idea  of
the  oneness  of  God  is  expressed  with  just  as  much  force  and
certainty  as  it  is  under  the  following  dynasties,  and  in  the  same
•works  we  shall  also  find  mention  of  the  various  gods  who  were
created  bv  the  great  God  who  was  proclaimed  to  be  One,  and
expected  to  be  worshipped  with  obedience.

The  final  opinion  of  Professor  Tiele  on  the  Egyptian  religion
was  that  from  the  beginning  it  was  polytheistic,  but  that  it
developed  in  two  opposite  directions ; in  the  one  direction  gods
were  multiplied  by  the  addition  of  local  gods,  and  in  the  other  the
Egyptian  drew  nearer  and  nearer  to  monotheism.1

Wo  may  now  consider  the  opinions  of  some  of  the  greatest
Egyptologists  on  the  monotheism  of  the  Egyptians.  Writing  in
the  Rrcnt  . Yrcln'ulixjiijuc  (18(10,  p.  73)  E.  do  Rouge  says,  “The
“unity  of  a supreme  and  self-existent  being,  his  eternity,  his
“ almightiness,  and  eternal  reproduction  thereby  as  God ; the
“attributing  of  the  creation  of  the  world  and  of  all  living  beings
“ to  the  supreme  God : the  immortality  of  the  soul,  completed  by
“ the  dogma  of  punishments  and  rewards ; such  is  the  sublime

1 “ Eon  voorhistori.sch  monotheisme  omh?rstelt  eon  grand  van  ontwikkeling
“tin  oc.'ii  vordering  in  hot  w i jsgeerig  nation  ken,  die  bij  ron  nog  barbaarsch  volk
*■  met  donkbaar  ziju.  Ook  do  egyptische  godsdionst  is  van  aniniisine  en  magi.se  h
4*  polydaemoniame  uitgegaan  on  zoo  eerst  tofc  polytheisms  opgekloininen.  Dit
fcl  polytlieisme  ontwikkelt  zicli  dan  in  twee  geheel  Logon  o verges  tel  de  richtingen.
“ Ann  don  eenen  kant  word!  de  godenwereld,  door  bijeenvoeging  van  plaatselijke
iv  godsdiensten,  een  gevolg  van  de  ondcrvverpiiig  der  versohi  Hondo  gewesten  met
il  liun  godsdienstige  middelpnnten  aaii  het  gezag  van  eon  koning,  on  door  over-
,l  neming  van  vreemde  godheden,  steeds  rijker.  Aan  den  anderun  kant  nndert
men  'hot  nionothejame  moor  en  meer,  zonder  het  ooitholder  en  ondiihbolzinnig  nit
li  to  spreken.  Do  gelemlen  trachtteu  beide  mit  elkander  ovoreen  to  brengeu,  onder
,k  Anduren  door  de  velc  goden  voor  to  stellen  als  de  openbaringeu  van  don  een  pig
“ongeschapeu,  verborgen  God.  zijn  leben,  door  hem  zelnengoschapen/’  See
GcsrhiMenis  ran  den  Godsdienst  in  de  Oudheid , Amsterdam,  1893,  p.  25.


EGYPTIAN  MO N OTHE IS  M


13W


“and  persistent  base  which,  notwithstanding  all  deviations  and  all
“mythological  embellishments,  must  secure  for  the  beliefs  of  the
“ancient  Egyptians  a most  honourable  place  among  the  religions
“of  antiquity.”'  In  an  article  on  the  “Religion  of  the  Ancient
Egyptians,”  written  nine  years  later  as  a result  of  a close  study  of
many  of  the  great  religious  texts,  he  asserted  that  more  than  live
thousand  years  before  there  existed  in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  the
hymn  to  the  unity  of  God,  and  the  belief  in  the  unity  of  a supreme
God  with  the  attributes  of  Creator  of  men,  and  Legislator  of  man,
whom  he  has  endowed  with  an  immortal  soul.  In  his  description
of  the  principal  monuments  at  the  Egyptian  Museum  at  Bidak  in
Cairo,  Maricttc  Bey  said,  “ At  the  head  of  the  Egyptian  pantheon
“soars  a God  who  is  one,  immortal,  uncreated,  invisible  and  hidden
“ in  the  inaccessible  depths  of  his  essence ; be  is  the  creator  of  the
“ heavens  and  of  the  earth ; lie  has  made  everything  which  exists
“and  nothing  has  been  made  without  him;  such  is  the  God  who
“is  reserved  for  the  initiated  of  the  sanctuary.” 2 A similar  view
was  held  by  Chaims,'1  who  said,  “The  One  God,  who  existed  before
“all  things,  who  represents  the  pure  and  abstract  idea  of  divinity,
“ is  not  clearly  specialized  by  [any]  one  single  personage  of  the  vast
“ Egyptian  pantheon.  Neither  Ptali,  nor  Seb,  nor  Thoth,  nor  Ra,


1 4i  1./ unite  d’un  c tits  supreme  exist  ant  par  lui-inciue,  son  eternity,  sa  toute-
puissance  et.  la  generation  etenudle  on  Dieu  ; la  creation  du  monde  et  tie  tons
41  les  etros  vivants  attribute  a ce  Dieu  supreme  : riinmortalitc  de  IViine.  completes
44  par  le  dogme  (les  pci  nets  et  des  recompenses  ; tel  est  Ie  fond  sublime *et:  persistant
“qui,  malgre  tontes  les  deviations  et  Unites  les  broderies  mvthologiques.  doit
4 ; assurer  aux  croy&nccs  des  anciens  Kgyptiens  mi  rang  tics  honorable  parmi  les

41  religions  de  Fantiquitc.” 44  II  y a plus  de  oOOO  axis  qu’a  commence,  dans

44  la  vallce  tin  Nil,  Phymne  a PVniit  de  Dieu  et  a P 1 minor  to  lit*'-  dv  Pai  nv ; et  nous
44  voyons  dans  les  derniers  temps  I’jGgypte  arrivee  an  Polythrisme  Ie  plus  effivne.
"La  croyancc  a V Unit  a da  Diva  supreme*  d svs  attrihuts  de  C"'atvnr  vt  de  Letjtshiicvr
Ck  dv  I'hammv , qn’il  a dead  d'anc  dmv  immortelle;  voila  les  notions  primitives
“ enchassees  comme  des  diamants  indestructibles  au  milieu  des  superfetations  mytho-
“ ^°"i<lnes  aecuniulces  par  les  siceles  qui  out  passe  sur  cet-to  vieillo  civilisation.*’
A nntdes  de  Philosophic*  Chn'ticmne,  Paris,  1800,  p.  3dt>.

a 44  Au  sonnnet  du  pantheon  Egyptian  plane  un  Dieu  unique,  imniartel,  incivc,
'‘invisible  et  cache  dans  les  profondenrs  inaccessiblos  de  son  essence;  il  est  le
k cveatcur  dn  ciel  ot-  de  la  ter  re ; il  a fait  tout  ce  qui  existe,  et  rien  u’a  etc  fait  sans
tfc  lui ; e’est  lo  Dieu  reserve  ii  Pinitie  du  sanctuaire.”  Mariette,  Node? , Cairo,
p.  17.

s Calendrier  des  jours  fasten  et  nvfastes , p.  107.


140  EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM

“ nor  Osiris,  nor  any  other  god  is  a personification  of  him  at  all
“ times ; but  of  these  sometimes  one  and  at  other  times  another  is
“invoked  in  terms  which  assimilate  these  intimately  with  the
“ supreme  type ; the  innumerable  gods  of  Egypt  are  only  attributes
“ and  different  aspects  of  this  unique  type.”

M.  Pierret,  in  discussing  the  matter,  holds  the  view  that  the
texts  prove  that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  a God  who  was  One,
and  was  without  a second,  and  was  infinite  and  eternal.  At  the
very  time,  however,  when  the  scribes  were  writing  upon  papyrus
or  cutting  upon  stone  the  inscriptions  which  affirmed  this  belief,
the  artists  were  making  sculptures  of  the  gods  with  heads  of  hawks,
or  rams,  or  crocodiles,  or  goddesses  with  the  heads  of  lionesses,
cats,  or  cows.  Nevertheless  the  One  God,  who  is  without  a second,
is  One  even  among  the  company  of  the  gods,  for  lie  has  numerous
names  and  forms,  and  he  appears  under  sacred  and  mysterious
forms  in  the  temples,  that  is  to  say  under  the  figures  1 which  were
painted  on  the  walls,  and  in  the  statues  of  the  gods  which  were
set  up  in  the  temples.  The  greatest  supporter  of  the  doctrine  of
ancient  Egyptian  monotheism  was  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch,  who
assigned  to  the  word  for  God,  m:trr  ^ the  highly  philosophical
meaning  which  has  been  quoted  above.  Accepting  the  view,
which  the  Egyptians  themselves  held,  that  the  gods  were  only
names  of  the  various  attributes  of  the  One  God,  he  searched
through  the  religious  literature  and  collected  from  the  hymns,
prayers,  etc.,  which  were  addressed  to  the  various  gods  and
goddesses  in  various  periods,  a,  number  of  epithets  and  attributes 2
which  were  bestowed  upon  them  by  their  worshippers.  Those
extracts  he  classified,  and  when  they  were  grouped  and  arranged
they  formed  a description  of  God  such  as  it  would  be  difficult  to
find  a parallel  for  outside  the  Holy  Scriptures.  It  has  been
contended  that  as  these  scattered  epithets  are  never  found  together
the  ancient  Egyptians  had  no  conception  of  a God  who  was  One,
and  was  self-produced,  and  had  existed,  and  would  exist,  always,
and  was  hidden  and  unknown  of  form  and  name,  and  was  the
Creator  of  heaven  and  the  gods,  and  earth,  and  man,  and  all

' I’icrrefc,  Xe  Paulin' on  JUgyptien,  Paris,  1881.

- They  will  be  found. in  Brugsch,  Religion  ton  I Mytholoyie,  p.  96  ff.


EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM


141


things,  and  was  at  the  same  time  merciful,  and  compassionate,  and
loving,  and  the  protector  of  the  weak  against  the  strong,  and  the
re  warder  and  protector  of  those  who  served  him.

But  this  contention  is  not  well  founded,  because,  although
these  attributes  were  ascribed  to  a miscellaneous  number  of  deities,
we  must  remember  that  they  would  not  have  been  thus  associated
unless  the  writers  recognized  such  gods  as  phases  or  aspects  of  the
Great  God.  The  fact  remains  that  such  attributes  were  ascribed  to
gods  who  were  created  by  God,  and  that  the  Egyptians  arrived  at
such  ideas  as  those  described  above  is  a lasting  proof  of  the  exalted
character  of  their  religion  and  of  their  conception  of  monotheism.
The  main  point  to  keep  in  view  is  that  the  gods  of  Egypt  were
regarded  by  the  Egyptians  generally  as  inferior  beings  to  the  great
God  who  made  them,  and  that  they  were  not  held  to  be  equal  to
him  in  all  respects.  Further,  we  must  repeat  that  the  God  referred
to  in  the  moral  precepts  of  the  Early  Empire  holds  a position
similar  to  that  held  by  Yahweh  among  the  Hebrews  and  Allah
among  the  Arabs,  and  that  the  gods  and  goddesses  who  were
ministers  of  his  will  and  pleasure  find  their  counterparts  in  the
angels,  and  archangels,  and  spirits  of  all  kinds,  both  good  and  bad,
of  whom  the  Hebrew  and  Arabic  literatures  are  full.  No  surer
proof  of  this  can  be  given  than  the  well-known  passage  in
Deuteronomy  vi.  4,  where  it  is  said,  “ Hear,  0 Israel,  Yahweh  our
“ God  (literally,  gods),  is  Yahweh  One,” 1 and  the  Egyptian  nrfer  vd

1 ?!  U One  God,”  as  far  as  the  application  and  meaning  of  ua
is  concerned,  is  identical  with  that  of  the  Hebrew  word  in  the
text  quoted.  We  may  note,  too,  the  words,  “Yahweh  our  gods,”
which  show  that  Yahweh  was  identified  with  the  gods,  a'ri1?** , of  the
polytheistic  period  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  religion  ; it  is,  however,
possible  that  when  the  verse  in  Deuteronomy  was  written  the  word
Klohim  had  come  to  mean  the  great  God  of  the  HebrcAvs,  although
originally  it  had  meant  a collection  of  sacred  or  divine  beings.  In
the  Kur‘an,  Sura  cxii.,  the  God  of  the  Arabs  is  declared  to  be
One,  and  from  the  commentaries  on  the  Sura  we  know  that  this
declaration  was  revealed  to  Muhammad  in  answer  to  the  people  of


1 Compare  St.  Mark  xii.  29.


142  EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM

the  Kuresli,  who  asked  him  concerning  the  distinguishing  attributes
of  the  God  he  invited  them  to  worship.  If  we  had  all  the  litera-
ture of  the  early  Hebrews,  and  of  the  Arabs  at  the  period  of  the
propaganda  of  Muhammad  we  should  probably  find  that  many
local  gods  in  Palestine  and  Arabia  were  called  One,  but  that  only
the  God  who  had  the  moral  aspects  which  were  attributed  to  the
great  God  of  the  Egyptians  by  the  philosophers  of  the  Early
Empire  succeeded  in  retaining  it  permanently.

The  religion  of  the  Egyptians  has,  however,  always  been
regarded  from  two  distinct  and  opposite  points  of  view  ; a number
of  scholars,  among  whom  may  be  mentioned  Champollion-Figeae,
de  Kongo,  Chabns,  Mariette,  Devdria,  Birch,  and  Brugsch,  have
considered  it  to  have  been  monotheistic,  but  others  have  declared
unhesitatingly  that  it  was  polytheistic ; this  result  is  due  probably
to  the  way  in  which  it  is  regarded.  Speaking  of  the  difference  of
opinion  which  existed  on  the  subject  between  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch
and  himself,  M.  Maspero  says  that  ho  and  Brugsch  considered  the
Egyptian  religion  in  two  different  ways.  Time,  he  says,  which  lias
done  so  much  harm  to  other  nations,  has  shown  itself  favourable
to  the  Egyptians.  It  has  spared  their  tombs,  their  temples,  their
statues,  and  the  thousand  small  objects  which  were  the  pride  of
their  domestic  life,  and  it  has  led  us  in  such  a way  that  we  judge
them  by  the  most  beautiful  and  the  prettiest  of  the  things  which
they  made,  and  has  at  length  caused  us  to  place  their  civilization
on  the  same  footing  as  that  of  the  Romans  or  the  Greeks.  But  if
it  be  looked  at  more  nearly  the  point  of  view  changes ; to  speak
quite  shortly,  Thothmes  Ilf.  and  Raineses  II.  resemble  Mfesa  of
Central  Africa  more  closely  than  they  do  Alexander  or  Caesar.
It  is  not  their  fault,  but  they  arrived  too  soon  in  a period  which
was  too  early,  and  they  must  bear  the  penalty  of  their  precocious-
ness. In  art,  in  science,  in  trade,  they  have  invented  much  and
produced  much,  aud  have,  above  all,  promised  much ; their  religion
presents  the  same  mixture  of  coarseness  and  refinement  which  is
found  in  all  else.  Most  of  its  myths  it  holds  in  common  with  the
most  savage  tribes  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Worlds.  The  Egyptian
possessed  the  spirit  of  the  metaphysician,  a fact  which  he  proved
when  Christianity  furnished  him  with  a subject  worthy  of  his


EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM  143

subtle  powers.  But,  M.  Maspero  asks,  what  kind  of  metaphysics
could  proceed  from  so  naive  a conception  of  the  universe  and  of
things  which  he  has  revealed?  He  thinks  it  must  be  true,  at
least  in  the  main,  because  Brugscli  depicted  the  Egyptian  world  in
a manner  very  similar  to  his  own,  and  deeming  it  true  he  cannot
any  longer  admit  the  notion  of  the  Egyptian  Deity  and  his  unity
which  several  scholars  have  adopted.  He  takes  the  Egyptian
religion  for  what  it  shows  that  it  is,  viz.,  a polytheism  with  its
contradictions,  and  its  repetitions,  with  its  dogmas  indecent  some-
times, cruel  sometimes,  and  ridiculous  sometimes,  according  to
modem  ideas,  and  with  its  families  of  half-human  gods  which  the
worshipper  cherished  the  more  or  understood  the  better  the  more
closely  they  resembled  himself.1  The  opinion  thus  expressed,
though  unfavourable  to  the  character  of  the  Egyptian,  and  directly
opposed  to  the  views  of  some  of  the  greatest  Egyptologists  of  the
last  century,  is  evidently  honest,  and  coming  from  such  a quarter
is  entitled  to  the  greatest  respect ; but  it  seems  that  M.  Maspero
has  judged  the  Egyptians  of  all  periods  according  to  the  standard
of  religion  which  was  in  vogue  in  Egypt  in  predvnastic  times,
when  the  primitive  Egyptians  were,  no  doubt,  half  savage.

The  Egyptians,  being  fundamentally  an  African  people,
possessed  all  the  virtues  and  vices  which  characterized  the  North
African  races  generally,  and  it  is  not  to  be  held  for  a moment  that
any  African  people  could  ever  become  metaphysicians  in  the
modern  sense  of  the  word.  In  the  tirst  place,  no  African  language
is  suitable  for  giving  expression  to  theological  and  philosophical
speculations,  and  even  an  Egyptian  priest  of  the  highest  intellectual
attainments  would  have  been  unable  to  render  a treatise  of
Aristotle  into  language  which  his  brother  priests  without  teaching
could  understand.  The  mere  construction  of  the  language  would
make  such  a thing  an  impossibility,  to  say  nothing  of  the  ideas  of
the  great  Greek  philosopher,  which  belong  to  a domain  of  thought
and  culture  wholly  foreign  to  the  Egyptian.  The  allusion  to
the  Christian  metaphysics  of  the  Egyptian  is  understandable,  as
everyone  knows  who  has  taken  the  trouble  to  read  the  literature  of
the  Copts,  who  transferred  much  of  the  base  and  degraded  Egyptian
1 Im  Mythologic  Egypt  feme  ^ p.  278.


144  EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM

mythology  which  was  current  during  the  first  few  centuries  of  the
Christian  era  into  their  newly  acquired  belief  in  Jesus  Christ.
The  lives  of  the  Coptic  martyrs  show  the  use  which  the  Egyptian
made  of  his  metaphysical  spirit,  and  the  history  of  the  early
Church  in  Egypt  illustrates  what  happened  when  he  tried  to  apply
it  to  the  consideration  of  the  common  theological  terms  in  Greek
and  in  Latin.  Incidentally  we  may  note  that  in  order  to  express
the  various  ideas  connected  with  the  Christian  Deity  and  the
Persons  of  the  Trinity  he  was  obliged  to  take  over  the  actual
Greek  words  into  his  language,  which  was  poor  in  abstract  ideas.
In  the  picture  which  M.  Maspero  has  given  of  the  Egyptian’s
conception  of  the  universe  and  of  the  origin  of  gods  and  things  he
has  only  dwelt  upon  the  mythological  side  of  the  question,  and  Inis
not  set  forth  all  the  passages  upon  which  other  Egyptologists  have
based  their  views  about  Egyptian  monotheism ; moreover,  no
allowance  appears  to  have  been  made  for  the  peculiar  religious  and
mental  characteristics  of  the  race.  But  when  all  is  said  against
the  Egyptian  religion  which  can  be  said,  the  fact  remains  that
it  is  not  the  religion  itself  which  has  cruel,  ridiculous,  and
indecent  dogmas,  but  the  myths  wherewith  generations  of  foolish
priests  obscured  the  pure  beliefs  in  monotheism  and  immortality
which  seem  to  have  existed  in  Egypt  from  the  earliest  times.  If
modem  oriental  religions  were  judged  in  the  adverse  manner  in
which  the  religion  of  ancient  Egypt  has  been  judged,  none  would
escape  similar  condemnation ; the  same  thing  may  be  said  of  some
of  the  religions  of  the  Western  nations.

The  superstitions  which  exist  among  many  Eastern  nations
professing  monotheism  and  even  Christianity  are  as  gross  as  those
found  among  so-called  Pagan  nations  ; as  examples  may  be  quoted
the  Christians  of  St.  John  in  Southern  Mesopotamia,  and  many  of
the  Arabic-speaking  peoples  of  the  Eastern  Sudan,  yet  among  the
former  no  one  attempts  to  deny  the  existence  of  a sort  of
Christianity,  though  he  would  indeed  be  bold  who  would  dare  to
compare  it  with  the  Christianity  of  such  men  as  Canon  Liddon  or
Cardinal  Newman ; similarly,  the  monotheism  of  the  peoples  of  the
Eastern  Sudan  is  universally  admitted,  but  it  does  not  prevent  their
indulging  in  the  coarsest  and  most  fantastic  beliefs  and  practices,


EGYPTIAN  MONOTHEISM


145


many  of  which,  however,  it  must  be  admitted  have  descended  to
them  from  their  pagan  ancestors.  Fortunately,  however,  the
monotheistic  character  of  the  Egyptian  religion  rests  on  too  firm  a
foundation  to  be  easily  overthrown,  and  notwithstanding  the
elaborate  system  of  symbolic  ceremonials  which  was  so  prominent  a
feature  of  Egyptian  worship,  Egyptian  monotheism  always  main-
tained its  place  in  the  minds  of  those  who  were  sufficiently  educated
to  understand  the  ideas  which  the  symbols  thereof  represented.
The  Egyptian  never  confounded  God  with  the  gods,  and  it  would
seem  that  he  even  discriminated  between  God  and  “the  god  of  the
“city,”  for  in  the  Negative  Confession  (No.  3K)  the  deceased  says,

“ 0 Utu-rekhit,  who  comest  forth  from  thy  house,  i have  not  cursed
“God”;  and  in  No.  42  he  says,  “ Hail,  An-si-f,  who  comest  forth
“ from  Aukert  (the  Underworld),  I have  not  thought  scorn  of  (or,

“ belittled)  the  god  who  is  in  my  city.”  Whence  came  the  Egyptian
conception  of.  monotheism,  or  when  it  first  sprang  up,  cannot  be
said,  but  in  its  oldest  form  it  is  coeval  with  the  dynastic  civilization
of  Egypt  at  least,  and  it  may  well  date  from  far  earlier  times.  The
monotheistic  idea  is  not  the  peculiar  attribute  of  any  one  people
or  period.  It  may  seem  unnecessary  to  discuss  Egyptian  mono-
theism at  such  length,  but  the  matter  is  one  of  great  interest  and
importance  because  the  literature  of  Egypt  proves  it  to  have  been
in  existence  in  that  country  for  more  than  three  thousand  five
hundred  years  before  Christ ; in  fact,  Egyptian  monotheism  is  the
oldest  form  of  monotheism  known  to  us.  It  is  easy  enough  to
understand  how  anxious  the  priesthoods  of  the  various  cities  would
he  to  persuade  the  people  who  worshipped  the  local  gods  that  this
or  that  god  was  the  being  who  united  in  himself  the  attributes  of
the  original  god  of  the  city  with  those  of  the  great  cosmic  god  with
physical  aspects  who  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  with
those  of  the  ethical  god  who  was  proclaimed  by  Kaqemna,  Ptali-
lietep,  Ani,  and  other  writers  of  moral  precepts.

In  the  earliest  times  it  was  the  god  Horus  who  was  chosen  in
this  manner,  for  under  the  form  of  a hawk  lie  appears  to  have  been
the  first  god  who  was  worshipped  throughout  the  country  generally,
and  the  numerous  forms  of  this  god,  and  the  fact  that  his  attributes
were  at  a later  period  ascribed  to  Horus  the  son  of  Isis,  attest  the


146


HORUS  AND  RA


antiquity  and  importance  of  liis  cult.  The  next  god  chosen  to
represent  the  great  ethical  God  of  the  Egyptians  was  not  a personi-
fication of  the  sky  as  was  Horus,  but  the  Sun-god  Ra,  on  whom
was  bestowed  every  epithet  of  power  and  might  which  was  known
to  the  Egyptians,  as  well  as  the  epithets  and  forms  of  the  god
Horus.  But  although  his  worship  was  common  throughout  Egypt,
and  his  sanctuaries  were  for  many  centuries  the  most  important
in  the  land,  there  is  abundant  proof  that  the  Egyptians  never
merged  their  conceptions  of  their  great  ethical  God  in  their  concep-
tions of  Ra.

There  seem  to  be  traces  of  a belief  that  Ra  as  the  spirit  or
god  of  the  sun  may  have  been  a form  or  representative  of  him,  but
they  arc  not  very  definite,  and  the  worship  of  Ra’s  visible  symbol,
the  sun,  as  the  source  of  heat  and  light,  and  therefore  of  life — as
the  Egyptians  recognized  at  an  early  period — was  commoner  than
any  abstract  conception  of  his  nature  or  existence.  In  a hymn  to
Hapi,  the  Nile-god,  we  find  a remarkable  passage  in  which  some
of  the  chief  attributes  of  God  are  ascribed  to  the  power  which
causes  the  Inundation  and  who  is  addressed  under  the  names  of  the
gods  Ptali  and  Ivhnemu.  To  this  Being  it  is  said  by  the  author  of
the  hymn,  “ If  thou  wert  overcome  in  heaven  the  gods,  t=jeJcj  j ,
“ would  fall  upon  their  faces  find  mankind  would  perish.”  The
context  shows  that  the  author  first  pays  a tribute  of  reverence  to
the  local  god  of  Memphis,  Ptali,  whom  he  styles  the  “lord  of  fish,  '
and  the  “ creator  of  wheat  and  barley,”  and  of  whom  he  says  with
reference  to  the  well-known  attribute  of  Ptali  as  the  great  artificer,
“inactivity  is  the  abomination  of  his  fingers,”  i.e.,  the  fingers  of  the
god  hate  idleness.  He  then  goes  on  to  mention  Khnemu,  the  local
god  of  the  First  Cataract,  wherein  the  sources  of  the  Nile  were  at
one  time  believed  to  be  situated,  and  styles  him  “ the  bringer  of
“ food  and  provisions,  the  creator  of  all  good  things,  the  lord  of  all
“ choice  and  pleasant  meats,  who  maketh  the  herb  to  grow  for  the
“ use  of  the  cattle,  who  filleth  the  storehouses  and  heapeth  up  high
“ [corn]  in  the  granaries,  who  payeth  heed  to  the  poor  and  needy,
“ who  maketh  to  grow  crops  which  are  sufficient  for  the  desires  of
“ all  men  and  yet  is  not  diminished  thereby,  and  whose  strength  is
“ a shield.”  Now  the  author  of  the  hymn  goes  on  to  declare  that


THE  ATTRIBUTES  OF  HAPI  147

the  true  Hapi,  or  god  of  the  Nile,  “ cannot  be  figured  in  stone,  he
« is  not  to  be  seen  in  the  images  on  which  are  set  the  crowns  of  the
“ south  and  the  north  with  their  uraei,  offerings  cannot  be  made  to
“ him,  he  cannot  be  brought  forth  from  his  secret  places,  his  dwell-
“ ing-place  is  not  to  be  found  out,  he  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
“shrines  which  are  inscribed  with  texts,  there  is  no  habitation
“ which  is  sufficiently  large  for  him  to  dwell  in,  and  the  heart  [of
“man]  is  unable  to  depict  him.”  1

The  being  here  referred  to  is  u physical  and  not  an  ethical
god,  and  the  simplest  and,  from  this  point  of  view,  most  natural
explanation  of  these  remarkable  statements  is  that  they  are  intended
to  describe  the  inaccessibility  both  of  the  Nile-god  and  of  his  shrine.
The  fact,  however,  remains  that  the  declaration  of  the  almighty
strength  and  inscrutability,  and  invisibility,  and  the  impossibility
of  a description  of  the  power  which  moves  the  Nile-god  being
made  by  man  in  writing,  or  in  drawing,  or  in  sculpture,  proves  the
existence  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptian  writers  of  a lofty  conception
of  the  attributes  of  God.

But  side  by  side  with  the  fundamental  ideas  of  Horus  and  Rii
and  the  conceptions  which  were  at  the  root  of  the  worship  of  these
gods,  there  existed  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians  a firm  and
continuous  belief  in  the  god  Osiris,  who  held  a position  in  the
Egyptian  religion  which  was  quite  distinct  from  that  held  by
any  other  god.  About  his  origin  nothing  can  be  said,  but  there
is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  he  was  a god  of  the  indigenous
inhabitants  of  Egypt,  and  that  his  worship  was  firmly  established
in  the  country  before  the  dynastic  period.  He  was  from  the
earliest  times  associated  with  the  doctrine  of  immortality,  and  was,
the  writer  believes,  the  symbol  of  monotheism  in  Egypt.  It  is
impossible  to  say,  or  even  to  suggest,  what  was  the  original  form
of  his  -worship,  but  we  know  that  in  the  archaic  period  one  great
centre  of  his  cult  was  at  Abydos,  and  from  the  fact  that  he  was
included  in  the  pant,  or  company  of  gods  of  Heliopolis,  we  may
conclude  that  he  was  a very  important  god  of  Tattu,  or  of  Busiris,
111  the  Delta,  and  that  his  sanctuary  was  much  visited  by  the
peoples  thereof.  Under  the  Yth  Dynasty,  as  we  have  already
A transcript  of  this  text  will  be  found  in  my  First  Slt'j/s  in  Egyptian,  p.  208.


148  OSIRIS,  LCfttD  6f  TATTU

seen,  lie  was  regarded  as  the  judge  of  the  dead,  and  it  is  clear  that
he  was  also  the  god  of  the  dead  par  excellence ; but  it  must  be
noted  that  the  priests  of  Ra  formed  at  that  time  the  predominant
priesthood  of  Egypt,  and  therefore  care  was  taken  to  assign  to
Osiris  a position  inferior  to  that  of  Ha  in  heaven.  When  the  Vlth
Dynasty  of  kings  came  to  an  end  the  power  of  the  priesthood  of
Ra  was  greatly  diminished,  and  the  worship  of  Osiris  grew  and
prospered.  It  is  unnecessary  to  trace  here  step  by  step  the
growth  of  the  cult  of  the  god  until  the  period  of  the  XVIIIth
Dynasty,  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  between  the  Vlth  and
the  end  of  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  nearly  all  the  attributes  of  the
Sun-god  Ra  were  transferred  to  Osiris,  and  the  name  of  Ra  is
joined  to  that  of  Osiris,  just  as  in  much  earlier  times  it  was  joined
to  Tern  and  Heru-khuti  to  indicate  the  compound  gods  Ra-Tem
and  Rii-Heru-khuti.  Thus  in  Chapter  exxx.  of  tbe  Book  of  the
Dead 1 the  deceased  says,  “ I shall  not  be  turned  back  in  the
“horizon,  for  I am  Ra-Osiris,”  and  this  passage  is  a proof  that
quite  early  in  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty  Osiris  was  considered  to  be
a solar  god.  In  Chapter  xvii.  (1.  110  tl'.)  the  deceased  is  made
to  say,  “ I am  the  God-Soul  which  dwelleth  in  the  Twin-gods,
On  this  the  question  follows,  “What  does  this
“ mean  ? ” to  which  we  have  the  answer,  “ It  hath  reference  to
“Osiris  when  he  goetli  into  Tattu2  and  findeth  there  the  soul  of
“ Ra ; there  one  god  embraceth  the  other,  and  the  divine  Souls
“ spring  into  being  within  the  Twin-gods.”  These  lines  of  text  are
illustrated  by  a very  interesting  vignette  in  the  Papyrus  of  Ani
(see  sheets  7-10),  wherein  we  see  a pylon-shaped  building  between
the  double  jj  jj,  which  represents  Tattu,  and  upon  it  stand  the  god
Ra,  in  the  form  of  a hawk  with  a solar  disk  upon  his  head,  and.
Osiris  in  the  form  of  a human-lieaded  hawk,  wearing  the  White
Crown.  The  two  gods  face  each  other  in  Tattu,  and,  according  to
the  text,  were  absorbed  or  merged  each  in  the  other;  thus  Osiris
obtained  the  attributes  and  characteristics  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  but
was  supposed  at  the  same  time  to  retain  all  his  own  peculiar
attributes.


1 Papyrus  of  Nu,  Chap.  exxx.,  1.  18.

9 Either  Mendes  in  the  Delta,  or  the  heavenly  Mendes.


149


IDENTITY  OF  OSIRIS  AND  RA

The  view  here  given  is  that  which  was  favoured  by  the  priests
of  Thebes  who,  however,  only  reprochieed  that  which  they  had
borrowed  from  the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  and  having  gained
currency  in  the  theological  colleges  of  the  South,  it  spread
among  the  people  to  such  an  extent  that  almost  every  great  city
possessed  a sanctuary  dedicated  to  Osiris.  A very  important
hymn  to  Osiris,  which  is  certainly  as  old  as  the  period  of  the
XVI Ilth  Dynasty,  shows  us  how  this  god  assimilated  to  himself
the  old  solar  gods,  and  how  he  became  Rii.  His  holy  double  (L-f  ha)
was  said  to  live  in  Mendes,  he  was  the  god  who  dwelt  in  Sekhem
(i.e.,  Horns),  the  lord  of  Qerert  (i.e.,  the  Underworld),  the  holy
one  in  Memphis,  the  lord  of  the  temple  of  Hermopolis,  the  local
gods  of  which  Avere  Thoth  and  his  pant,  or  company,  and  he  was
declared  to  be  the  “ soul  of  Ra  ” and  the  very  body  of  this  god,

• His  essence  was  that  of  the  primeval

god  Nu,  and  he  was  the  great  spirit  and  divine  body  in  heaven.
He  was  supposed  to  tight  and  to  vanquish  the  traditional  fiend
Seba,  who  dared  to  wage  war  against  Ra,  and  he  was  the  stablisher

of  right  and  truth,  ^ ' inaat , throughout  the  world.  He  made

the  earth  with  his  own  hands,  and  its  winds,  and  its  vegetation,
and  feathered  fowl,  and  fish,  and  cattle  and  other  quadrupeds,  and
to  him  belonged  by  right  the  mountains  and  the  desert  land
throughout  the  world.  The  lands  of  Egypt  rejoiced1  to  crown
him  upon  his  throne  like  his  father  Ra.  The  Great  and  the  Tuttle
Companies  of  the  gods  loved  him,  he  was  the  leader  of  every  god,
and  the  brother  of  the  stai’s.  Finally,  as  a proof  of  the  absolute
identity  of  Ra  and  Osiris  may  be  quoted  the  opening  lines  of
Chapter  clxxxi.  of  the  Boole  of  the  Dear /,  which  read : — “ Homage
“to  thee,  0 governor  of  Amentet, Uu-nefer,  the  lord  of  Ta-teliesert,
“ 0 thou  who  risest  like  Ra ! Verily  I come  to  see  thee  and  to
“ rejoice  at  thy  beauties.  His  disk  is  tliy  disk ; his  rays  are  thy
“ rays ; his  crown  is  thy  crown ; his  majesty  is  thy  majesty ; his
“risings  are  thy  risings : his  beauty  is  thy  beauty ; the  awe  which
“ is  his  is  the  awe  which  is  thine ; his  odour  is  thy  odour ; his  hall

’ See  the  text,  with  a trims*] iteration  and  translation,  in  my  First  St-cps  in
Egyptian,  p.  179  ff.


150  OSIRIS  AND  IMMORTALITY

“ is  thy  hall ; his  seat  is  thy  seat ; his  throne  is  thy  throne ; his
“ heir  is  thy  heir ; his  ornaments  are  thy  ornaments ; his  command
“ is  thy  command ; his  mystery  is  thy  mystery ; his  things  are
“thy  things;  his  knowledge  is  thy  knowledge;  his  attributes  of
“ majesty  are  thy  attributes  of  majesty ; his  magical  powers  are
“ thy  magical  powers ; he  died  not  and  thou  shalt  not  die ; he  was
“ not  vanquished  by  his  enemies  and  thou  shalt  not  be  vanquished
“by  thine  enemies;  no  evil  thing  befell  him,  and  no  evil  thing
“ shall  befall  thee  for  ever  and  for  ever.”

In  such  terms  did  the  Egyptians  extol  the  greatness  and
power  of  Osiris,  but  they  make  no  mention  of  the  aspect  of  the
god  which  endeared  him  to  countless  generations  of  Egyptians.
From  hundreds  of  funeral  and  other  texts  we  learn  that  Osiris  was
held  to  be  partly  divine  and  partly  human,  that  is  to  say,  unlike
any  other  Egyptian  god  he  possessed  two  natures,  and  two  bodies,
the  one  divine  and  the  other  human,  and  two  doubles,  the  one
divine  and  the  other  human,  and  two  souls,  the  one  divine  and  the
other  human,  and  two  spirits,  the  one  divine  and  the  other  human.
The  human  body,  according  to  the  Egyptian  tradition  recorded  by
Plutarch,1  once  lived  upon  earth  and  was  put  to  death  in  a cruel
manner,  and  was  mutilated  by  his  brother;  but  his  feminine
counterpart,  Isis,  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  Thoth  the  knowledge
of  certain  words  and  ceremonies,  and  having  learnt  from  him  the
proper  manner  of  reciting  these  words,  and  how  to  perform  these
ceremonies,  by  means  of  them  she  raised  up  to  life  the  dead  body
of  Osiris.  The  god  Thoth  was  the  personification  of  the  intelligence
of  the  whole  company  of  the  gods,  and  thus  the  words  which  he
taught  Isis  were  divine,  and  they  were,  presumably,  names  by  the
utterance  of  which  the  gods  themselves  maintained  their  existence.
Now  when  Osiris  had  been  raised  from  the  dead  he  did  not  con-
tinue his  life  upon  earth,  but  passed  into  the  region  of  the  Under-
world, where  he  became  the  judge  and  god  of  the  dead  and,  as  we
have  seen,  was  made  the  possessor  of  all  the  attributes  of  the  Sun-
god  Rii  and  of  the  great  One  God.  But,  the  Egyptians  in  the
early  ages  thought,  Since  Osiris  was  raised  to  life  by  the  words  and
ceremonies  which  Thoth  taught  Isis,  and  since  Osiris  has  gained
1 Dc  laide  et  Otiride,  ed.  Didot  (Scripta  Moralia,  t.  in.,  pp.  429-469),  § xii.  ff.


151


OSIRIS  AND  IMMORTALITY

immortality  by  means  of  them,  these  same  words  and  ceremonies
will  raise  us  to  life  and  give  us  immortality  also.  Their  priests
therefore  invented  a number  of  magical  ceremonies,  which  they
led  the  people  to  believe  were  identical  with  those  which  Isis  had
performed  at  the  bidding  of  Thoth,  and  they  strung  together
magical  words  which  they  declared  to  be  those  which  had  raised
Osiris  to  life,  and  the  words  were  recited  and  the  ceremonies
performed  by  priests  who  appear  to  have  dressed  themselves  in
such  a way  as  to  resemble  the  divine  beings  who  were  concerned
with  the  resurrection  of  Osiris.

At  a later  period,  however,  the  Egyptians  put  their  trust  in
Osiris  himself,  and  addressed  their  prayers  directly  to  him  as  the
Being,  partly  divine  and  partly  human,  who  had  raised  himself
from  the  dead  without  having  seen  corruption,  and  who  had
bestowed  upon  his  own  earthly  body,  by  means  of  his  divine
nature,  the  gift  of  an  everlasting  life  which  it  enjoyed  in  an  incor-
ruptible and  glorified  form  in  heaven.  The  Egyptians  “ loved  life
“ and  hated  death,”  and  they  worshipped  Osiris  as  the  Great  God
who  not  only  possessed  the  power  of  maintaining  his  own  life
indefinitely — which  was  supposed  to  be  the  chief  distinguishing
characteristic  of  a god — but  also  of  giving  mortals  the  power  to
live  after  death  in  this  world.  What  Osiris  had  effected  for
himself  he  could  effect  for  man ; hence  Thothmes  III.  is  made  to
address  the  god  in  these  words,  “ Homage  to  thee,  0 my  divine
“ father  Osiris,  thou  hast  thy  being  with  thy  members.  Thou
“ didst  not  decay,  thou  didst  not  turn  into  worms,  thou  didst  not
“ rot  away,  thou  didst  not  become  corruption,  thou  didst  not
“ putrefy.  ...  I shall  not  decay,  I shall  not  rot,  I shall  not
putrefy.  ...  I shall  have  my  being,  I shall  live,  I shall  germinate,
“ I shall  wake  up  in  peace.  . . . My  body  shall  be  stablished,  and
“ it  shall  neither  fall  into  ruin  nor  be  destroyed  off  this  earth.”  1
Because  the  human  body  of  Osiris  rose  from  the  dead,  the  body  of
every  man  could  rise  from  the  dead  also,  but  man  lacked  what
Osiris  possessed,  i.e.,  the  divine  body,  soul,  spirit,  and  nature,
which  had  brought  about  the  resurrection  of  his  human  body,  soul,
spirit,  and  nature.  In  the  earliest  times  of  the  worship  of  the

Book  of  the  Dead,  Chap.  cliv.


t


152


OSIRIS  AND  IMMORTALITY


god  the  Egyptians,  as  we  have  seen,  invented  magical  words  and
ceremonies  with  the  object  of  supplying  the  human  body  with  the
power  necessary  to  raise  itself  f rom  the  dead,  but  as  time  went  on
they  realized  that  both  words  and  ceremonies  were  incapable  of
giving  eternal  life  to  the  dead,  and  that  only  Osiris  himself  could
•rive  them  that  which  thev  so  earnestlv  desired,  i.e.,  everlasting
life,  by  supplying  to  their  dead  earthly  bodies  the  power  to  rise
again,  a power  which  he  himself  possessed.  Beyond  all  doubt  the
Egyptians  realized  that  Osiris  was  the  only  God  who  could  make
them  to  inherit  life  everlasting,  and  that  he  {done  had  the  power
of  making  “ men  and  women  to  be  born  again.” 1

We  have  already  seen  how  the  attributes  of  the  great  God
who  created  all  tilings  w ere  ascribed  to  him,  and  we  now  see  that
he  was  regarded  as  the  god  who  had  the  power  to  vanquish  death
by  raising  up  the  bodies  of  the  dead  in  glorified  forms,  and  to
reunite  to  them  their  souls  and  their  spirits,  and  to  give  them
eternal  life  in  his  dominions.  These  things  were  declared  of  no
other  god,  and  no  other  god  united  in  his  person  the  attributes  of
an  ethical  god,  and  an  almighty,  creative  god,  and  a god  who  was
the  vivifier  of  the  dead.  The  conception  of  Osiris  included  the
conceptions  of  every  other  god,  but  the  conception  of  no  other  god
included  that  of  Osiris  during  the  period  of  the  highest  thought
and  civilization  of  Egypt.  The  Sun-god  J‘a  was  called  “ One,”
a few  other  gods  who  were  made  to  usurp  his  attributes  were  also
each  called  “ One ; ” this  in  the  earliest  times  was  natural  enough,
because  the  Egyptians  were  only  acquainted  with  one  Sun,  and
whether  the  physical  body  of  the  sun  as  a symbol  of  the  power
which  moved  it  or  that  power  itself  is  referred  to  in  the  hymns
matters  little,  for  “ One  ” was  a suitable  epithet  both  for  the  sun
and  its  god.  In  connexion  with  tin’s  matter  it  is  important  to
remember  the  unique  position  which  Osiris  occupies  in  the  Book
of  f he  Dead  and  in  funeral  texts  generally.  In  the  texts  of  the
Vth  Dynasty  we  find  that  Osiris  was  believed  “to  weigh  words,”
i.e.,  to  inquire  into  the  various  words  and  deeds  of  the  lives  of


kMlik  I Se°  Bo°kof  llteDtadiCXm p.clxjsxii..


OSIRIS  AND  IMMORTALITY


153


men  when  their  souls  left  their  bodies,  in  order  that  he  might
reward  them  according  to  their  merits.

In  later  times  this  idea  was  illustrated  by  the  vignette  in
which  the  heart  of  the  deceased  was  seen  being  weighed  in  the
Great  Scales  against  the  symbol  of  Mailt,  or  the  Law  and  right
and  truth  ; at  a still  later  period,  when  the  heart  was  the  symbol
of  the  conscience,  this  scene  became  associated  with  the  examina-
tion of  the  words  and  deeds  of  the  dead  which  took  place  in  the
Hall  of  Maiiti.  In  the  large  scenes  of  the  weighing  of  the  heart
which  were  prefixed  to  the  finest  papyri  of  the  Hook  of  Hie  Dead  of
the  XVlIItli  and  XIXth  Dynasties,  and  which  were  accompanied
by  suitable  hymns  and  texts,  the  ceremony  takes  place  in  the
presence  of  the  gods  of  the  Great  and  Little  companies,  but  in  the
Hall  of  Maiiti  the  Forty-Two  Assessors  are  substituted  for  the
gods.  In  both  cases,  however,  the  great  judge  of  all  is  Osiris,  and
it  was  to  him  that  all  Egyptians  returned  after  death.  Why  the
Assessors  were  1'ortv-two  in  number  cannot  be  said,  but  it  is  very
probable,  as  has  been  before  suggested,  that  each  of  them  repre-
sented a district  in  Egypt  in  the  earliest  dynastic  times,  and  that
the  Hall  of  Maiiti  thus  became  a meeting  place  for  the  Assessors  of
the  whole  country  when  Osiris  sat  to  judge  the  dead.  Tt  is,
moreover,  impossible  to  say  why  certain  assessors  were  supposed
to  hear  confessions  about  the  non-committal  of  certain  sins,  and  we
have  no  knowledge  of  the  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  their
selection  and  to  their  admission  into  the  Hall  of  Judgment.  Some
of  them  appear  to  have  been  originally  the  gods  of  cities,  and
others  gods  of  nomes,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  a.  few  of  them  are
deities  who,  in  the  earliest  times,  were  apparently  hostile  to  the
dead.  Failing  full  information  on  the  subject,  the  chief  interest
which  attaches  to  the  Assessors  and  the  Hall  of  Maiiti,  in  which
they  sit,  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  vignette  proves  how  com-
pletely Osiris  had  gained  the  ascendancy  over  all  the  gods  of
Egypt.

In  the  preceding  pages  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  trace  the
development  of  the  conception  of  a supreme  being  in  Egypt,  from
the  earliest  times  to  the  period  when  Osiris  became  endowed  with
many  of  the  attributes  now  ascribed  to  God  Almighty.  There  is


154  DEVELOPMENT  OF  MONOTHEISM

no  doubt  that  iu  predynastic  times  the  Egyptians  worshipped
stocks,  and  stones,  and  animals,  and  plants,  and  trees,  and  that
they  only  arrived  at  the  idea  of  gods  which  were  partly  animal  and
partly  man  at  the  end  of  a long  period  of  what  is  called  in  modern
times ‘‘gross  idolatry.”  From  the  idea  of  animal-man  gods  they
advanced  to  the  idea  of  a man-god,  and  finally  their  minds
developed  the  conception  of  monotheism.  When  we  first  gain  any
definite  knowledge  of  them  we  find  that  as  a people  they  had  put
away  the  worship  of  stocks  and  stones,  and  most  of  the  things
which  that  worship  implies,  but  that  certain  animals  were  held  to  be
sacred  in  certain  cities,  and  that  the  literature  contained  allusions
to  savage  habits  and  practices,  as  we  have  already  seen.  As  time
went  on,  many  changes  took  place  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians
concerning  their  gods,  but  little  variation  was  made  in  their
worship  and  ceremonial  in  the  temples  ; in  other  words,  the  spirit
of  the  religion  changed  whilst  the  observance  of  the  letter  remained
unchanged.  Thus  the  forms  of  worship  and  the  literature  pre-
served a great  deal  which  no  one  believed  in  except  the  commonest
folk,  and  in  this  way  traces  of  the  lowest  forms  of  religion  were
preserved  and  handed  down  to  posterity.  The  Egyptians,  after
the  period  of  the  IVth  Dynasty,  were  the  victims  of  conservatism
and  conventionality,  and,  we  might  almost  add,  of  the  priesthoods
of  Heliopolis  and  Thebes ; but  for  these  powerful  and  wealthy
confraternities  the  history  of  the  religion  of  Egypt  would  have
been  very  different.  The  conception  of  monotheism,  which  is  so
clearly  expressed  in  the  moral  precepts  of  the  Early  Empire,  would
have  developed  rapidly,  and  in  its  growth  it  would  have  obliterated
the  remains  of  the  old  and  obsolete  faiths  which  had  crystallized,
and  which  existed  in  layers  side  by  side  with  the  higher  doctrine.
But  the  decay  which  set  in  after  the  IVth  Dynasty,  and  which
stifled  the  development  of  painting  and  sculpture,  also  attacked
the  religion  of  the  country,  and  the  noble  conception  of  mono-
theism, with  its  cult  of  the  unseen,  was  unable  to  compete  with  the
worship  of  symbols,  which  could  be  seen  and  handled,  until  the
time  when  Osiris  was  recognized  as  the  One  God,  who  was  also  the
givei  of  eternal  life.  The  Egyptians  were  unlike  other  nations,
aud  similarly  their  religion  and  their  gods  were  unlike  the  religion


EGYPTIAN  RELIGION


155


and  the  gods  of  other  nations  ; and  as  they  must  not  he  judged  by
the  standard  of  any  one  foreign  nation  belonging  to  any  one  period,
so  their  religion  and  their  gods  must  not  be  judged  by  the  standard
of  the  religion  and  gods  of  any  later  civilized  nation.  We  can
only  know  what  the  Egyptians  thought  and  believed  by  reading
and  studying  the  texts  which  they  wrote,  and  a final  opinion  on
their  beliefs  cannot  be  obtained  until  all  their  religious  literature
has  been  published  ; the  general  outline,  however,  of  their  religion
is  clear  enough,  and  it  shows  us  that  they  possessed  a good,
practical  form  of  monotheism  and  a belief  in  immortality  which
were  already  extremely  ancient  even  in  the  days  when  the
Pyramids  were  built.-


( 156  )


CHAPTER  IV

THE  COMPANIONS  OF  THE  GODS  IN  HEAVEN

IN  the  preceding  chapters,  which  are  devoted  to  the  considera-
tion of  general  questions  concerning  God  and  the  gods,  no
mention  is  made  of  the  habitation  of  these  divine  beings  or  of  their
companions.  The  texts  of  all  periods  arc  silent  as  to  the  exact
position  of  heaven,  but  it  is  certain  that  the  Egyptians  assigned  to

it  a place  above  the  sky,  and  that  they  called  it  pet  ^ ^ ; we  must

distinguish  between  the  meanings  of  pet  p and  nut  ° for  the
former  means  “ heaven,”  and  the  latter  “ sky.”  We  may  also
note  that  two  skies  are  mentioned  in  the  texts,  i.e.,  0 the  day
sky,  and  the  night  sky.  The  hieroglyphic  for  heaven  and

sky  represents  a slab,  each  end  of  which  rests  on  a support,  and
we  may  assume  that  the  primitive  Egyptians  believed  that  each
end  of  heaven  rested  upon  a support  (i.e.,  two  mountains) ; out
of  one  mountain  came  the  sun  every  morning,  and  into  the  other
he  entered  every  night.  The  mountain  of  Sunrise  was  called

Bakhau,  Jj  and  the  mountain  of  Sunset  Manu,

In  the  earliest  times  the  sky  was  divided  into  two

parts  only,  the  East  and  the  West,  but  later  another  division  was
made,  and  heaven  was  split  up  into  four  parts,  and  each  was
placed  under  the  care  of  a god.  The  latter  division  was  made
long  before  the  Pyramid  Texts  were  written,  for  in  them  it  is
always  assumed  that  the  flat  slab  of  iron  which  formed  the  sky,
and  therefore  the  floor  of  the  abode  of  the  gods,  was  rectangular,
and  that  each  corner  of  it  rested  upon  a pillar,  |.  That  this  is  a
very  ancient  view  concerning  the  sky  is  proved  by  the  hieroglyphic


THE  FOUR  PILLARS  OF  HEAVEN


157


which  is  used  in  texts  to  determine  words  for  rain,  storm,  and
the  like;  here  we  have  a picture  of  the  sky  falling  and  being
pierced  by  the  four  pillars  of  heaven.

At  a later  period,  the  four  quarters  of  heaven  were  believed
to  be  under  the  direction  of  four  gods,  and  the  four  pillars  of  the
sky  were  poetically  described  as  the  four  sceptres  which  they  held
in  their  hands.  Thus  in  the  text  of  Teta.  (1.  233)  it  is  said,  “ As
“ Teta  goeth  towards  them  they  bring  unto  him  the  four  gods
“ who  stand  with  the  sceptres  of  heaven,  and  they  repeat  the  name
“ of  Teta  to  RS,  and  they  take  up  his  name  to  Horus  of  the  two
“ horizons.”  1 In  several  texts2  allusion  is  made  to  the  lifting  up  of

heaven  upon  its  four  pillars,  e.g.,^

and  in  one  place  the  four  pillars  are  said  to  support  that  on  which
the  four  heavens  rest,  J|TJ  -£[j  ; at  a comparatively  late

period  the  idea  arose  that  the  sky  needed  support  in  the  middle  as
well  as  at  the  corners,  and  the  god  who  acted  as  the  prop  was
called  II  eh,  According  to  one  myth  which  represented  the

heavens  in  the  form  of  the  head  of  a man,  and  which  made  the  sun
aud  the  moon  to  be  his  eyes,  the  supports  of  heaven  were  supposed
to  be  formed  of  his  long  flowing  hair,  and  thus  we  have  in  the  text
of  Unas  (1.  173)  an  allusion  to  the  “four  elder  spirits  who  dwell
“ in  the  locks  of  hair  of  Horns,  who  stand  in  the  eastern  part  of
“ heaven  grasping  their  sceptres.” The  gods  who  grasped  as
sceptres  the  four  pillars  of  heaven,  which  eventually  became  the


'AiiLX(s£IW


"MW
VWV\%

^ AAWW.


2 Sue  Brngsch,  Worterhuch9  p.  1351.


/■wwwv.  r-.


p


t


<£>  □ O

/VWVW


'IP—


158


THE  FOLLOWERS  OF  HORUS


four  cardinal  points,  were  Amset,  (j  p <=>,  god  of  the  southern
point.  Hap,  q ^ W the  god  of  the  northern  point,  Tua-
nrntef,  , the  god  of  the  eastern  point,  and  Qebhsennuf,

jjj  |||  the  god  of  the  western  point.  These  four  gods  played

a prominent  part  in  connexion  with  the  deceased  in  the  Pyramid
Texts,  where  they  are  called  the  “ children  of  Horus,” 1 for  at  one
time  they  are  called  upon  to  bring  him  the  boat  of  the  Eye  of

Tem,  j32>'  isJfeg,  which  is  on  the  Lake  of  Kha,  and  at  another


they  are  exhorted  to  protect  his  life  by  their  magical  power  and
amulets,  [1^.0 — N®WM«,2and  finally  the  deceased  is  said  to  become
one  of  these  four  gods  (Pepi  1. 1.  <>72),  ^ J J (j  □ ^ *sje^t=|  .

The  duties  which  are  assigned  to  them  as  funereal  gods  in  the  Tiooh
of  the  Dead  will  be  described  later  on.

Chief  among  the  dwellers  in  heaven  was  the  god  11a,  who  is
said  to  sit  upon  an  iron  throne  [the  sides  of  which  were  orna-
mented] with  the  faces  of  lions  and  feet  which  resembled  the  hoofs
of  bulls.3  Hound  about  Ua,  whether  walking  or  sitting,  were  the
gods  who  were  “ in  his  train,”  and  these  formed  the  nucleus  of  the
inhabitants  of  heaven.  Next  to  these  came  certain  companies  of
the  gods,  and  as  the  whole  universe  was  divided  into  three  portions,
namely,  heaven,  earth,  and  the  Tuat,  or  Underworld,  and  each
portion  had  its  own  gods,  we  may  assume  that  a place  was  reserved
for  them  in  the  heaven  of  the  Egyptians.  But  this  heaven  also
contained  several  classes  of  beings,  first  and  foremost  among  whom
may  be  mentioned  the  Sn esc- Heim:,  or  Sjiemsu-Hkru,  a name

which  appears  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  under  the  form  ij

(Pepi  I.,  1.  Uifi),  and  may  be  translated  “Followers  of  Horus.”
They  are,  in  fact,  beings  who  followed  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  in
heaven,  where  they  waited  upon  him,  and  performed  his  behests,


THE  ASHEMU  AND  HENMEMET


159


and  when  necessary  defended  and  protected  him.  They  occupied
a position  of  great  importance  among  the  celestial  hosts,  and  are
mentioned  in  such  a way  as  to  suggest  that  they  tvcre  almost  equal
to  the  gods  ; thus  Pepi  I.  (1.  166)  is  said  to  “ pacify  them,”  but  on
the  other  hand  it  was  they  who  “ washed  him,  and  who  recited  on
“ his  behalf  the  Chapter  of  those  who  come  forth,  and  [the  Chapter
“of  those  who]  rise  up.”1 *  Next  may  be  mentioned  the  Ashemu,

a class  of  beings  whose  characteristics  are

not  known,  and  who  in  the  text  of  Teta  (l.  327)  are  referred  to  in
connexion  with  the  sekhemu.  The  word  dshem  is  usually  supposed
to  mean  the  “ form  in  which  a god  is  visible,”  but  it  must  have


another  and  an  older  meaning.


The  Henmkmkt,


I


or  hamkmbt,  appear  to  have  been  a class  of  beings  who  either  were
to  become,  or  had  already  been,  human  beings,  but  the  Egyptians
themselves  seem  to  have  had  no  very  clear  idea  about  their
attributes,  and  the  passages  in  the  Theban  Book  of  the  Dead  in
which  they  are  mentioned  have  been  understood  in  different  ways
by  different  scholars.

In  a hymn  it  is  said  of  Ra,  “ when  he  riseth  the  rekhil  (i.e.,
“rational  beings)  live,  and  the  hamemet , ffl  rrrf  Jj  ! , exult  in

° 111  « fcii  ill  I


“ him  ” ; Osiris  is  called  “ [lord  of]  the  hamemet , ( ^ ,,  in

“Kher-ilha”;  and  the  deceased  says  in  Chapter  xlii.  of  the  Book  of
the,  Dead,  “ And  shall  do  me  hurt  neither  men,  nor  gods,  1 1 ,

“nor  spirits,  ® ^ | , nor  the  dead  (or  damned),  o ^ ! ,

“ nor  the  j)dl,  Jj !,  nor  the  relchit,  (i.e.,  rational  beings),  nor


“the  ha me  m et.”  Elsewhere  the  deceased  prays  “that  the  com-
“ pany  of  the  gods  may  hold  their  peace  whilst  the  hamemet  talk
“ with  ine  ” ; 3 and  it  seems  from  a passage  in  an  inscription  of


1 Compare  the  variant  m

4 Teta,  1.  Do.

3 See  the  list  of  passages  given  in  my  Vocabulary  to  the  Hook  of  the  Dead,
p.  205.


160  THE  AFAU,  UTENNU,  AND  SETIJ

Hatsliepset1  as  if  in  the  latter  part  of  the  dynastic  period  the  word
had  come  to  mean  a class  of  men  and  women,  especially  as  it  is

determined  by  the  signs  ^ which  usually  indicate  a number  of

human  beings.  Thus  ltameses  III.  speaks  of  “ all  the  gods  and
“ goddesses  of  the  South  and  the  North,  and  all  men,  and  all  the
11  pat,  and  all  the  r debit,  and  all  the  hainemet” ; finally,  that  the
bamemd  were  believed  to  live  upon  grain  is  proved  by  the  passage
in  a hvmn  to  Amen-Ra  wherein  this  god  is  said  to  be  the  “ maker
“ of  the  green  herb  which  giveth  life  to  the  beasts  and  cattle,  and

“ of  the  plant  of  life,  ww«  ■¥•  _ Al  , of  the  hanuvniet.” 3 Of  the
characteristics  of  the  classes  of  beings  called  Afa,^"*1  ,

and  TJtenxu,  _3> , wlio  are  mentioned  in  the  text

of  Pepi  II.  (1.  !)51),  we  know  nothing,  and  the  same  must  be  said
of  the  Set  beings,  jl  .A,  who  were,  however,  divided  into

two  classes,  the  Upper  and  the  Lower,  ^ The

following  extract  will  show  how  these  beings  are  mentioned : —
“ 0 great  heaven,  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  Pepi  Nefcr-ka-Rii !
“ 0 mighty  heaven,  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  Pepi  Nefer-ka-Ra,  for

“Pepi  is  thy  divine  hawk,  {j  1 TC*  ^*eP*  bath  come

“ having  come  forth  into  heaven,  and  he  hath  penetrated  Qebhu ;
“ Pepi  hath  paid  homage  to  his  father,  and  he  riseth  like  Horus.
“ Pepi  hath  come  to  the  place  where  he  is,  and  he  (his  father)
“ granteth  to  him  to  rise  like  the  sun,  and  he  stablisheth  for  him  his

“two  divine  uidiats , ^ <^=> and  when  Pepi  cometh  forth

“with  him,  great  like  Horus,  son  of  Nut,  and  like  the  child  with
“the  lock  of  hair  (i.c.,  Harpocrates),  and  smiting  the  crowns,  and
“giving  orders  to  the  gods  Utknnu,  the  A fa  gods  follow  Pepi,  and
“ those  avIio  are  in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth  come  to  him  pay-

“ ing  homage,  together  with  the  two  uraei  guides,  P ^ ^ ° ^ »

“ and  the  jackals,  and  the  spirits,  and  the  Set  beings,  both  the


//////


.‘//AV  ^ J y..  |UUl||J/U|  ■ ..

» • ' O A OOO  -ww*


3 Ed.  G rebuilt,  section  vi.


THE  WATCHERS  OF  PE  AND  NEKHEN  161


“ Upper  and  the  Lower.”  It  is  possible  that  the  Set  beings  may
have  been  of  like  nature  to  the  god  Set,  who  was  the  brother  and
associate  of  Horns  in  the  earliest  times,  but  who  in  later  times  lost
his  position  as  a god  and  became  the  type  and  symbol  of  all  evil.

In  addition  to  these  the  text  of  l’epi  II.  (line  K49)  mentions
the  “ Watchers  of  the  city  of  t’e,”  and  the  W atchers  of  the  city  of

Nekhen,”  cm  o ® nn  ^ t © ©,  from  which  we

may  assume  that  certain  cities  were  supposed  to  enjoy  the  protec-
tion of  a number  of  gods  whose  duty  it  was  to  look  after  their
interests  in  heaven.  We  know  from  several  passages  in  the  Iiook
of  the  Dead  that  groups  of  gods  were  called  the  “ souls  ’’  of  such
and  such  cities,  and  it  is  clear  from  the  inscriptions  that  each  city
and  town  possessed  a soul  which  had,  like  the  soul  of  a man  after
death,  the  power  to  wander  about  at  will.  Thus  on  a wall  in  the
temple  which  Cleopatra  VII.  built  at  Er  merit  (now  destroyed),
was  a scene  in  which  the  great  queen  was  depicted  in  the  act  of
giving  birth  to  her  son  Caesarion.  The  goddess  Neith  holds  up

the  queens  arms,  and  the  midwife  Netehemtchemt,  ||  ^ > receives

the  boy  in  the  presence  of  several  gods  and  goddesses.  Now  in  the
upper  part  of  the  relief  were  two  groups  of  souls  of  cities,  seven  on
the  right  hand  and  seven  on  the  left,  who  were  supposed  to  have
been  present  at  the  birth  of  the  child,  and  to  have  taken  him  uuder
their  protection.  Among  the  cities  represented  are  Thebes,  Ant,

t.YVWv\  ^ . y"— ^ y'-y.  /i

g , Hot,  ni@,  Qeset,  Unt,  Abet,  Iletep,  lauaa,  @ >

etc.'  Each  soul  is  in  the  form  of  a human-headed  hawk,  and  each
lias  on  its  head  horns  and  a disk,  , in  the  front  of  which  is  a
uraeus.

Want  of  space  does  not  allow  of  the  mention  of  many  obscure
beings  who  are  called  gods,  and  who  are  practically  innumerable,
and  we  therefore  pass  on  to  refer  to  the  spirits  and  souls,  etc.,  of
the  righteous  men  and  women  who  once  lived  upon  this  earth.  To
these,  as  well  as  to  the  divine  beings,  was  given  the  name  “ living

ones,”  as  may  be  seen  from  the  passage  in  Unas  (line  206),

which  rends,  “ Hail,  Unas,  behold  thou  hast  not  departed  dead

1 See  Lopsrus,  Denkmaler,  iv.  pi.  l>0.

M


162


THE  LIVING  ONES


as  one  (ff)  thou  hast  gone  to

“ take  thy  seat  upon  the  throne  of  Osiris.  Thy  sceptre  db
is  in  thy  hand,  and  thou  givest  commands  unto  the
living  ones;  thy  sceptre  makes  |1  ^) , and  thy  sceptre

“ Nehebet  ( A/WVV\  SUb)  are  in  thy  hands,  and  thou  givest  thine

“ orders  to  those  whose  habitations  are  hidden.”  When  king  Tcta
is  in  heaven  the  seat  of  his  heart  is  declared  to  “ be  among  the

“ living  ones  on  this  earth  for  ever,”  ^ .'

We  have  in  this  latter  passage  a proof  that  the  Egyptians  con-
ceived it  possible  for  a man  to  attain  to  all  the  attributes  of  a
divine  being,  or,  let  us  say,  of  an  angel,  and  at  the  same  time  to
enjoy  an  existence  upon  earth  as  well  as  in  heaven.  This  idea
probably  arose  because  they  wished  to  provide  a future  for  the
dead  body  just  as  they  provided  a habitation  in  heaven  for  the
spirits  and  souls  of  the  righteous.  Heaven  and  earth  were  comple-
ments each  of  the  other,  the  gods  of  heaven  were  the  complements
of  the  gods  of  earth,  and  vice  verxd,  and  the  existence  of  the
spiritual  and  mental  attributes  of  man  with  the  gods  in  heaven
was  a complement  of  his  continued  life  after  dcatli  in  some  region
on  this  earth.  The  Pyramid  Texts  show  that  the  opinion  of  the
Egyptians  about  the  number  and  functions  of  the  constituent  parts
of  his  economy,  both  physical  and  spiritual,  changed  as  time  went
on  and  as  they  ascended  the  various  grades  which  led  up  to  the
high  platform  of  their  civilization,  and  the  result  of  the  change,  or
rather  changes,  made  itself  manifest  in  their  religious  compositions.
In  the  early  predynastic  period  they  thought  that  the  life  after
death  was  a mere  continuation  of  the  life  in  this  world,  and  when
they  had  placed  some  food  in  or  on  the  graves  of  their  dead  they
were  satisfied.

But  they  knew  that  the  body  of  a man  iu  the  new  life  could


' I ^ v*  P — *=*^  f 1 f,®  ^ fff


l’CJn  T*» ,l*  r>4r’»


o


THE  SPIRITS  AND  SOULS  OF  THE  DEAD  163


not  be  like  that  which  he  possessed  on  earth,  although  its  form
might  be  similar,  and  they  therefore  assumed  the  existence  of
another  body.  In  his  dreams  the  Egyptian  saw  a figure  of  himself
or  a duplicate,  engaged  in  various  occupations,  and  to  this  figure
he  gave  the  name  lea,  it  was  born  with  a man,  it  remained
within  him,  usually  inoperative,  and  survived  him  at  death.  It
never  left  the  body  in  the  grave  or  tomb,  and  the  offerings  which
were  made  in  the  halls  of  the  tombs  in  all  periods  were  intended

to  maintain  its  existence.  Nevertheless  the  ka  of  Horus,  ,

is  in  heaven  (Teta,  line  88),  and  also  the  lea  of  Teta  (line  94),  which
is  adjured  to  bring  that  which  the  king  might  eat  with  it ; and  as
the  kau  of  men  and  gods  lived  in  heaven  so  there  lived  there  also  the

lean  of  cities,  e.g.,  of  the  city  of  I'e,  (Teta,  line  88),

and  the  “ lords  of  kau  praised  Ra  both  in  the  dominions  of  Homs
“ and  in  the  dominions  of  Set.”  1 King  Unas  is  declared  to  be  the

“ chief  of  the  doubles,”  , and  he  is  said  to  “ gather  together

“hearts  for  the  great  wise  chief”  (Unas,  line  395).  Men  and  gods
alike  possessed  shadows,  and  they  also  had  au  existence  in  heaven
after  the  death  of  the  bodies  to  which  they  belonged.  When  Unas
had  eaten  the  bodies  of  the  gods,  and  had  absorbed  all  their  souls
and  spirits,  it  is  said  that  the  “ flame  of  Unas  is  in  their  bones,  for
“their  soul  is  with  Unas,  and  their  shadows  are  with  their  forms”
(Unas,  line  523,  Teta,  line  330).  The  souls  and  the  spirits  of  men
had  their  abode  in  heaven  with  the  gods,  and  the  religious  texts  of
all  periods  are  so  full  of  allusions  to  this  fact  that  it  is  unnecessary  to

quote  examples ; the  soul,  ha,  V is  usually  depicted  in  the
form  of  a hawk  with  a humau  head,  and  the  spirit,  lint,  as  a

heron.  Related  intimately  to  the  body,  but  with  undefined
functions,  so  l'ar  as  we  can  discover,  was  the  ac/.7iem,  P © a

word  which  has  been  translated  “ power,”  and  “ form,”  and  even
“ vital  force  ; ” and  filially  the  glorified  body,  to  which  had  been


fi*  ES


164


THE  SA#U  OK  SPIRITUAL  BODY


united  the  soul,  and  spirit,  and  power,  and  name  of  the  deceased,
had  its  abode  in  heaven.  This  new  body  of  the  deceased  in  heaven


was  called  xd/m,  |) a I.  ^ S > an<^  may  f°r  practical  purposes


be  termed  the  spiritual  body ; it  grew  out  of  the  dead  body  and
was  called  into  existence  by  the  ceremonies  which  were  performed,
and  the  words  which  were  recited  by  the  priests  on  the  day  when
the  mummified  body  was  laid  in  the  tomb.

Thus  we  see  that  the  denizens  of  heaven  consisted  of  the
Great,  and  the  Little,  and  the  other  companies  of  the  gods ; and  of
a large  number  of  beings,  who  may  for  convenience  be  called  the
“ inferior  gods,”  and  of  several  orders  of  beings  who  possessed
some  characteristic  which  caused  the  Egyptians  to  assume  that
they  were  divine ; and  of  the  shadows,  doubles,  souls,  spirits,
powers,  hearts,  and  spiritual  bodies  of  those  who  had  lived  upon
this  earth.  In  Chapter  lxiv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Demi  (line  21)  is  a
curious  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  “ spirits  are  four  million,

“ six  hundred  and  one  thousand,  two  hundred,”  j| '

in  number,  but  whether  this  is  intended  to


be  an  enumeration  of  the  spirits  of  heaven,  or  of  the  spirits  which
once  inhabited  human  bodies,  cannot  be  said.  Of  the  occupations
of  the  denizens  of  heaven  little  is  known,  but  to  some  of  them  was
assigned  the  task  of  directing  the  affairs  of  this  world,  others
directed  the  operations  of  the  celestial  bodies,  and  others  were
attached  to  the  trains  of  the  great  gods,  and  accompanied  them  in
their  triumphant  courses  through  the  heavens.  All  these  sang
praises  to  Kfi  as  the  king  and  chief  of  the  gods,  and  they  sang
hymns  to  him  describing  his  greatness  and  glory  just  as  men  sang
songs  of  joy  to  the  sun  when  he  rose  and  set.  The  gods  nourished
themselves  with  celestial  food  which  was  supplied  to  them  by  the
Eye  of  Homs,  that  is  to  say,  they  supported  their  existence  on  the
rays  of  light,  which  fell  from  the  sun  which  lit  up  heaven,  and  they
became  beings  whose  bodies  were  wholly  of  light.  According  to
one  myth  the  gods  themselves  lived  upon  a “wood,  or  plant  of

hie,  ^ @ (Pepi  I.,  line  4 .‘10),  which  seems  to  have  grown

near  the  great  lake  in  Sekhet-hetep,  round  which  they  were  wont


THE  ABODE  OF  THE  BLESSED


lf>5


to  sit,1  but  this  idea  belongs  to  the  group  of  views  which  held  that
the  beatified  dead  lived  in  a beautiful,  fertile  region,  where  white
wheat  and  red  barley  grew  luxuriantly  to  a great  height,  and  where
canals  were  numerous  and  full  of  water,  and  where  material  enjoy-
ments of  every  kind  could  be  found.  In  other  places  we  read  of
“ bread  of  eternity,”  and  “ beer  of  eternity,”  i.e.,  bread  and  beer
which  was  supposed  never  to  grow  stale  or  to  become  spoiled,2  and


we  also  have  mention  of  a heavenly  fig-tree
heavenly  vine  the  fruit  of  which  is  eaten  by  the


beatified.  The  bread  upon  which  the  blessed  fed  themselves  was
that  bread  which  the  hive  of  Horus  shed  upon  the  branches  of  the


olive-tree,


^ ^ Q ^ (Unas,  line  200).


Finally,  the  blessed  were  arrayed  in  apparel  similar  to  that  which
was  worn  by  the  gods,  but  they  also  had  white  linen  garments  on
their  bodies,  and  white  sandals  on  their  feet.

All  these  details  show  the  simple  character  of  the  heaven
which  the  primitive  Egyptian  imagined,  and  prove  that  it  was  at
first  intended  to  be  nothing  but  the  celestial  complement  of  a
terrestrial  farm  or  estate.  He  wished  for  a vine,  and  a fig-tree,
and  an  olive  tree,  for  wheat  wherewith  to  make  bread,  and  for
barley  wherewith  to  brew  beer ; he  also  desired  clean  white
garments  and  white  sandals.  His  celestial  homestead  he  expected
to  be  intersected  with  numerous  canals,  which  would  do  away  with
the  necessity  of  laboriously  drawing  water  from  the  celestial  Nile
by  means  of  some  mechanical  contrivance  similar  to  the  modern
xhaduf;  the  tillage  would,  of  course,  be  provided  for  in  the  next
world  by  the  gods,  who  would  take  care  that  the  crops  did  not
fail.  This  simple  material  heaven  is  very  different  from  the  ,


V*VW\  A/VWW


n AAAAAA  O AAAAAA  A A «

' f © ^ 1 m'

2 Tcta,  1.  288.  Pepi  I.,  1.  442  ami  1.  390.


ESI


o ®


166


THE  ABODE  OF  THE  BLESSED


heaven  of  the  Hebrew  and  Muhammadan  writers,  with  its  sensual
and  sensuous  joys  of  every  kind,  and  its  luxurious  meats,  and
drinks,  and  delights.  W e know  from  one  or  two  passages  in  the
Pyramid  Texts  that  there  were  women  in  heaven  just  as  there
were  goddesses,  but  they  are  not  spoken  of  as  are  the  Hur  al-^uyun
(houris),  i.e.,  the  women  with  large,  black  pupils  of  the  eye  set  in.
large  whites,  who  are  mentioned  in  Arabic  descriptions  of  Paradise,
and  they  are  not  made  to  be  one  of  the  chief  attractions  of  heaven.
As  far  as  can  be  seen,  the  heaven  of  the  Egyptians  had  no  musical
instrument  in  it,  and  the  only  sounds  heard  in  it  must  have
been  the  songs  of  the  ministering  gods  and  of  the  beatified  when
they  hymned  the  Great  God.  What  the  Egyptian  gentleman  who
lives  on  his  own  laud  in  places  remote  from  towns  is  now,  the
Egyptian  gentleman  everywhere  was  then ; he  loved  to  wash  and
anoint  himself,  and  having  put  on  clean  linen  to  sit  in  the  sun  in
the  morning,  and  to  bear  himself  with  dignity,  and  to  be  treated
with  respect  by  his  neighbours  and  inferiors.  He  loved  to  have
com,  and  wine,  and  oil  in  abundance,  and  a sufficient  number  of
slaves  to  minister  to  his  wants  arid  to  maintain  his  dignity  when  he
moved  about  from  village  to  village.  He  honoured  his  mother,
and  usually  married  a very  limited  number  of  wives,  among  whom
might  be  a sister,  or  half-sister,  or  cousin,  and  lie  took  great
interest  in  his  male  offspring  ; we  note  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  that
the  families  of  the  deceased  kings  are  never  mentioned,  and  that
nothing  is  said  about  their  wives,  although  Pirns  (lines  028,  (>29)  is


said  to  cany  off  women  from  their  husbands,  o pg

||  wheresoever  he  pleasetli,  whensoever  he  pleaseth.  On  the


other  hand,  Isis  is  said  to  come  to  king  Teta,  who  unites  with
her,  and  the  goddess  having  conceived  like  the  star  Sept,  gives
birth  to  Homs  Sept,1  and  in  another  passage  Unas  is  said  to  have


S-va/voi  ' a as-ssv\  J r»

H


fi  l“=TD  CTZ3  a <•*= T&  °


, Teta.  1.  270.


THE  ABODE  OF  THE  BLESSED


167


become  the  husband  of  the  goddess  Mauit,  and  also  of  the  young
woman  who  brought  bread  to  him.1

But  these  beings  were,  after  all,  only  the  celestial  waters
described  under  the  forms  of  a goddess  and  a woman,  and  the
sensual  idea  conveyed  by  a literal  interpretation  of  the  text  there-
fore disappears.  The  life  of  the  primitive  Egyptians  in  heaven
was  as  simple  as  their  life  upon  earth,  and  their  chief  wish  was
to  enjoy  a state  of  comfortable  and  dignified  peace,  without  war
and  without  tumult  or  strife.  We  hear  nothing  of  a heaven  with
a floor  of  white  flour  or  musk,  with  pearls  for  stones,  and  trees
with  trunks  of  gold,  and  houses  covered  with  gold  and  silver,  and
rivers  of  milk,  and  honey,  and  wine,  and  innumerable  maidens
with  bodies  made  of  pure  musk,  who  live  in  pavilions  made  of
hollow  pearls  and  are  free  from  all  defects  of  their  sex.  The  idea
of  the  means  to  be  employed  for  reaching  the  heaven  of  the
Egyptians  was  as  primitive  as  that  of  the  heaven  itself,  for  the
Egyptians  thought  that  they  could  climb  on  to  the  iron  floor  of
heaven  by  going  to  the  mountains,  the  tops  of  which  it  touched
iu  some  places.  At  a later  period  it  was  thought  that  a ladder
was  necessary,  certainly  for  those  who  did  not  live  near  the
mountains  whose  tops  touched  heaven’s  floor,  and  in  many  tombs
models  of  ladders  were  placed  so  that  the  deceased  might  make
use  of  them  sit  the  proper  time.  The  god  Osiris  even  was  believed
to  have  needed  si  ladder,  and  to  have  been  helped  to  ascend  it  by
Itsi  and  Horns,  or  bv  Horus  and  Set.  The  idea  of  the  need  of  a
ladder  was  deeply  seated  iu  the  Egyptian  mind,  for  when  the
custom  of  placing  models  of  ladders  in  the  tombs  ceased,  they  drew


w\vv\

1 vww


(SD  k W 3 $ 11  ■ “P  4 1 *


/WWW

/WWW


i


^ ’ ^7  /WWW  ,/ce


GEEI


<=.  ^ — GEj]]  A P q (SM)  P J ^

ro  tk  0 t l7uii,S(  i isi.


168  THE  SEKHET-HETEP


pictures  of  them  in  the  papyri  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  which  were
placed  in  tombs.*  The  model  of  the  ladder,  fp  ^ ^ , maget,

could  be  made  as  long  as  the  deceased  wished  by  reciting  certain
words  of  power  over  it,  and  by  similar  means  the  picture  of  the
ladders  given  in  the  papyri  could  be  turned  into  real  ladders.

The  above  mentioned  facts  will  show  that  in  his  conception
of  heaven  the  Egyptian  never  succeeded  in  freeing  himself  wholly
from  material  ideas  and  the  wish  to  make  sure  of  eternal  life  and


happiness  by  means  of  his  own  acts.  In.  the  latter  part  of  the
dynastic  period  the  conception  of  heaven  became  more  material,
and  at  length,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  texts,  the  belief  in  the
resurrection  of  the  actual,  physical  body  prevailed,  and  the  life
after  death  was  regarded  as  nothing  but  a continuation  of  the  life
upon  earth.  Thus  the  title  of  Chapter  cx.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead
declares  that  the  text  which  follows  will  give  a man  the  power  of
“doing  everything  even  as  a man  doeth  upon  earth.”  As  a result
of  this  view  the  deceased  prays  thus : — “ May  f become  a khv
“ (spirit)  therein,  i.o.,  in  the  Sekhet-hetep  or  Elysian  Fields,  may  I
“eat  theicin,  may  I drink  therein,  may  L plough  therein,  may  I
“ reap  therein,  may  I fight  therein,  may  I make  love  therein,  may
“ my  words  be  mighty  therein,  may  I never  be  in  a state  of
“ servitude  therein,  but  may  I be  in  authority  therein.”  He  also
wishes  that  he  may  have  with  him  in  Sekhet-lietcp  his  father  and
mother,  and  presumably  his  wife  and  children,  and  also  the  god
or  gods  of  his  city,  but  in  these  materialistic  passages  we  find  no
mention  of  his  desire  to  worship  and  praise  the  gods  of  hcaveu,
or  even  the  Great  God  who  is  said  to  “ grow  ” therein.  Thus  in
another  place  in  the  same  chapter  he  says,  “ 0 (lakh,  I have
“ entered  into  thee,  I have  eaten  my  bread,  I have  gotten  the
“ mastery  over  choice  pieces  of  the  flesh  of  oxen  and  of  feathered
“ fowl,  and  the  birds  of  Shu  have  been  given  to  mo.  I have
“ plunged  into  the  lakes  of  Tchesert ; behold  me,  for  all  filth  hath
“ departed  from  me.  The  Great  God  groweth  therein,  and  behold,
“ I have  found  [food  therein] ; I have  snared  feathered  fowl  and
“ I feed  upon  the  best  of  them.  ...  I have  seen  the  Osiris  [my


1 See  the  Papyrus  of  2nd  edition,  pi.  22.


THE  SEKHET-HETEP


169


“ father],  «m<l  I have  gazed  upon  my  mother,  and  X-  have  made
“love.”  In  every  division  of  the  Elysian  Fields  the  deceased,  in
the  later  period  of  dynastic  history,  found  some  fresh  material
pleasure,  but,  in  spite  of  all  its  inconsistencies  and  his  materialism,
the  heaven  of  the  Egyptians  was  better  and  purer  than  that  of
many  more  modern  nations  which  are  credited  with  higher  intelli-
gence and  better  civilization.


( 170  )


CHAPTER  V

THE  UNDER YVOItl  A )

IN  the  chapters  on  (rod  and  the  gods  it  has  already  been  said
that  the  Egyptians  in  the  earliest  times  believed  that  the
gods  were  moved  by  the  same  passions  as  men  and  grew  old  and
died  like  men ; later,  however,  they  believed  that  it  was  only  the
bodies  of  the  gods  which  died,  and  they  therefore  provided  in
their  religious  system  a place  for  the  souls  of  dead  gods,  just  as
they  provided  a place  for  the  souls  of  dead  men  and  women.  The
writers  of  the  religious  texts  were  not  all  agreed  as  to  the  exact
position  of  this  place,  but  from  first  to  last,  whatever  might  be  the

conceptions  entertained  about  it,  it  was  called  Tuat,  * .

This  word  is  commonly  rendered  “ underworld,”  but  it  must  be
distinctly  understood  that  the  Egyptian  word  does  not  imply  that
it  was  situated  under  our  world,  and  that  tins  rendering  is  only
adopted  because  the  exact  signification  of  the  name  Tuat  is
unknown.  The  word  is  a very  old  one,  and  expresses  a conception
which  was  originated  by  the  primitive  Egyptians,  and  was  probably
unknown  to  their  later  descendants,  who  used  the  word  without
troubling  to  define  its  exact  meaning.  To  render  Tuat  by  hell  ”
is  also  incorrect,  because  “ hell  ” conveys  to  modern  peoples  ideas
which  were  foreign  to  the  Egyptians  of  most  schools  of  religious
thought.  Whatever  may  be  the  moral  ideas  of  the  Tuat  as  a place
of  punishment  for  the  wicked  in  later  times,  it  is  clear  that  at  the
outset  it  was  regarded  as  the  place  through  which  the  dead  Sun-
god  JRa  passed  after  Ids  setting  or  death  each  evening  on  his
journey  to  that  portion  of  the  sky  in  which  he  rose  anew  each
morning.  In  the  X I Xth  Dynasty  we  know  that  the -Tuat  was
believed  to  be  situated  not  below  our  earth,  but  away  beyond  the


171


THE  TUAT

earth,  probably  in  the  sky,  and  certainly  near  the  heaven  wherein
the  gods  dwelt ; it  was  the  realm  of  Osiris  who,  according  to  many
texts,  judged  the  dead  there,  and  reigned  over  the  gods  of  the
dead  as  well  as  over  the  dead  themselves.

The  Tuat  was  separated  from  this  world  by  a chain  or  range
of  mountains,  and  consisted  of  a great  valley,  which  was  shut
in  closely  on  each  side  by  mountains ; the  mountains  on  one
side  divided  the  valley  from  this  earth,  and  those  on  the  other
divided  it  from  heaven.  We  may  note  in  passing  that  the
Hebrews  separated  the  blessed  from  the  damned  by  a wall,1 * *  and
that  Lazarus  was  separated  from  Dives  in  hell  by  a ” great  gulf,”8
and  that  the  Muhammadans  divide  heaven  from  hell  by  the
mountain  Al-A‘raf,  «_j  which,  however,  cannot  be  of  any

great  breadth  because  those  who  stand  upon  it  are  supposed  to  be
able  to  hold  converse  both  with  the  blessed  and  the  damned.  It
is  pretty  certain  that  both  Hebrews  and  Muhammadans  borrowed
their  ideas  of  the  partition  between  heaven  and  hell  from  the
Egyptian  Tuat,  but  there  is  no  authority  in  the  texts  for  the
Muhammadan  view  that  it  is  a sort  of  limbo  or  purgatory  for
those  who  are  too  good  for  earth  but  not  good  enough  for  heaven.
Those  who  stand  on  Al-A‘r«\f  are  said  to  be  angels  in  the  form  of
men,  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  saints,  and  those  whose  good  deeds
oil  earth  were  exactly  counterbalanced  by  their  evil  deeds,  and
avIio  therefore  merit  neither  heaven  nor  hell.  Through  the  valley
of  the  Tuat  runs  a river,  which  is  the  counterpart  of  the  Nile  in
Egypt  and  of  the  celestial  Nile  in  heaven,  and  on  each  bank  of
this  river  lived  a vast  number  of  monstrous  beasts,  and  devils,  and
fiends  of  every  imaginable  kind  and  size,  and  among  them  were
large  numbers  of  evil  spirits  which  were  hostile  to  any  being  that
invaded  the  valley.

On  the  sarcophagus  of  Seti  I.  is  a representation  of  the
Creation,  which  is  reproduced  on  p.  204,  and  from  it  we  see  that  the
Tuat  is  likened  to  the  body  of  Osiris,  which  is  bent  round  like
a hoop  iu  such  a tray  that  his  toes  touch  the  back  of  his  bead.

1 See  .Kisenmenger,  “ Was  »lio  Juilen  von  dor  Ildllon  lelm'n  ' (EntUcefc(et

J tide  it  I hum,  tom.  ii.,  p.  322  if.

" St  Luke  xvi.  2(5.


See  KurViu,  Sum  vii.


172


THE  THAT  AND  AMENTET

On  the  top  pf  liis  head  stands  the  goddess  Nut,  who  supports  with
both  hands  the  disk  of  the  sun.  From  this  we  may  conclude  both
that  Osiris  is  the  personification  of  the  Tuat,  and  that  the  Tuat
is  a narrow  circular  valley  which  begins  where  the  sun  sets  iu  the
west,  and  ends  where  he  rises  in  the  east.  The  Tuat  was  a terrible
place  by  reason  of  the  monsters  and  devils  with  which  it  was  filled,
and  its  horrors  were  increased  by  the  entire  absence  of  light  from
it,  and  the  beings  therein  groped  about  in  the  darkness  of  deep
night.  That  the  Tuat  should  be  a place  of  blackness  and  gloom
is  quite  natural  when  once  wo  have  realized  that  it  was  the  path
of  the  dead  sun  between  the  sunset  of  one  dav  and  the  sunrise  of
the  following  day.  The  ideas  about  this  region,  which  we  find
reproduced  in  papyri  of  the  Mew  Empire,  belong  to  different
periods,  and  we  can  see  that  the  Theban  writers  who  described  it
and  drew  pictures  of  the  beings  which  lived  in  it,  collected  a mass
of  legends  and  myths  from  every  great  religious  centre  of  Egypt,
wishing  to  make  them  all  form  part  of  their  doctrine  concerning
the  great  god  of  Thebes,  Amen-Rfi.  As  the  priests  of  Heliopolis
succeeded  in  promulgating  their  theological  system  throughout,  the
length  and  breadth  of  Egypt  by  identifying  the  older  gods  with
their  gods,  and  by  proving  that  their  views  included  those  of  all
the  priesthoods  of  the  great  cities  of  Egypt,  so  the  priests  of
Thebes  endeavoured  to  convince  the  priests  of  other  great  cities
of  the  superiority  and  greatness  of  their  God  Amen-Ra,  and
probably  succeeded  in  so  doing.  The  Theban  writers  and  scribes
knew  perfectly  well  that  originally  every  nome  or  great  city
possessed  its  own  underworld  just  as  it  possessed  its  own  company
of  gods,  and  that  each  underworld  was  designated  by  a special
name ; they,  therefore,  made  the  Tuat  to  include  all  these  under-
worlds and  all  the  various  gods  with  whom  they  were  peopled,
and  they  gave  it  the  most  important  of  the  names  of  the  local
underworlds.  The  best  known  of  these  was  Amentet,  | i.e.,

the  hidden  place,”  which  appears  to  have  been  originally  the
place  where  An-lier,  the  local  god  of  Abydos,  ruled  as  god  of  the
dead,  under  the  title  of  “ Khenti  Amentet.”  that  is  to  say,  “ he
who  is  the  chief  of  the  unseen  land.”  When  the  importance  of
An -her  was  eclipsed  by  the  new-comer  Osiris,  the  title  of  the  former


THE  TUAT  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS  173

was  assigned  to  Osiris,  who,  henceforth,  was  always  called  “ Khenti
Amentet.”  But  this  usurpation  of  An-her’s  title  ds  god  of  the
dead  by  Osiris  must  have  taken  place  in  very  early  times,  for
Amentet  was  a common  name  for  the  underworld  throughout
Egypt,  and  is  found  in  texts  of  all  periods,  even  in  those  of  the
Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties.

Yet  long  before  even  this  remote  period  the  priesthoods  of
certain  nomes  or  cities  must  have  developed  the  idea  that  the  life
of  a man  resembled  the  course  of  the  sun  during  the  day,  and  that
setting  was  to  the  sun  what  death  was  to  a man ; the  sun,  how-
ever, reappeared  each  morning  in  apparently  a new  body,  and  as
man  wished  to  live  again  in  a renewed,  or  new,  body,  the  Egyptian
theologians  set  to  work  to  form  a system  of  theology  in  which  the
souls  of  the  blessed  dead,  i.e.,  those  who  had  been  buried  with  all
the  ceremonies  prescribed  by  the  religion  of  the  period,  were  made
to  accompany  the  sun  in  his  boat  as  he  passed  through  the  portion
of  the  Tuat  which  had  been  assigned  to  them.  As  the  sun  passed
through  the  Tuat  large  numbers  of  souls  made  their  wav  into  his
boat,  and  although  it  was  only  the  dead  sun  that  was  their  guide
and  protector,  and  his  passage  was  through  the  realms  of  the  dead
which  were  under  the  sovereignty  of  Osiris,  the  god  of  the  dead,
they  were  brought  forth  at  length  to  renewed  life  and  light  as
soon  as  the  boat  passed  out  from  the  eastern  end  of  the  Tuat  into
the  day.  This  view  was  a very  popular  and  widespread  one,
especially  as  it  made  Ila  and  Osiris  work  together,  each  after  his
own  method,  to  secure  eternal  life  and  happiness  for  the  souls  of
the  dead.  As  soon  .as  the  priests  had  made  up  their  minds  that
the  Tuat,  existed,  they  began  to  people  it  with  imaginary  beings
which  were  supposed  to  be  hostile  to  the  souls  of  the  dead,  and  to
invent  descriptions  of  the  various  regions  iuto  which  they  declared
it,  was  divided ; such  descriptions  were  at  length  committed  to
writing,  at  first  in  a very  simple  form,  and  after  the  manner  of
every  group  of  texts  which  were  composed  for  the  benefit  of  the
dead,  but  finally  they  became  more  elaborate,  and  attempts  were
made  to  represent  pictorially  tin;  creatures  which  were  found  in
the  Tuat.  In  fact,  it  was  intended  to  compile  a book  which  should
contain  such  accurate  descriptions  of  the  Tuat,  and  such  true


174


THE  SHAT  AM  TUAT


pictures  of  the  foes  which  the  dead  soul  would  have  to  meet  there,
together  with  lists  of  their  names,  that  when  a soul  was  once
provided  with  a copy  of  it  he  would  find  it  impossible  to  lose  his
way,  or  to  be  overcome  by  any  monster  which  attempted  to  bar
his  way  or  to  prevent  his  access  to  the  boat  of  Bii.

The  great  work  which  the  Egyptians  called  “ Coming  Forth

by  Day,”  ^ supplied  the  soul  with  a great  many

words  of  power,  and  prayers,  and  incantations,  as  well  as  hymns,
but  even  in  the  Early  Empire,  about  b.c.  3500,  many  of  its
doctrines  were  antiquated,  and  the  priests  found  it  necessary  to
add  new  chapters  and  to  modify  old  ones  in  order  to  make  it  a
funeral  work  suitable  for  the  requirements  of  newer  generations  of
men.  Owing  to  the  extreme  antiquity  of  the  “ Book  of  Coming
Forth  by  Day,”  the  views  expressed  in  many  of  its  chapters  were
contrary  to  those  held  by  Theban  priests  of  the  New  Empire,  about,
b.c.  1(550,  and  as  a result,  whilst  preserving,  and  holding  in  great
reverence  this  work  which  they  had  borrowed  from  the  ancient
priesthood  of  Heliopolis,  they  compiled  two  works,  which  may  be
called  “The  Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Tuat,”  and  the
“ Book  of  the  Pylons.”  In  the  first  of  these,  the  Shat  am  Tuat,”


erzr


were  gathered  together  all  the  views  held


by  the  Heliopolitan  priesthood  on  the  life  of  man’s  soul  after  death,
and  though  it  contained  all  the  doctriues  as  to  the  supremacy  of
Ha,  their  great  Sun-god,  these  were  so  skilfully  manipulated  by
the  Theban  priests,  that  the  compilation  actually  became  a work
which  magnified  the  grade  and  influence  of  Ainen-Rii,  the  great
god  of  Thebes,  and  raised  him  to  the  position  which  the  Thebans
claimed  for  him,  namely,  “king  of  the  gods,  and  lord  of  the
thrones  of  the  two  lands.”  The  thrones  here  referred  to  are  not
those  of  kings,  but  the  shrines  of  all  the  gods  on  all  the  land  on
each  side  of  the  river  Nile.  In  the  Heliopolitan  system  of  theology
the  god  Osiris  held  a comparatively  subordinate  position  in  the
paid,  or  company  of  the  gods,  and  was  in  fact  only  the  greatest  of
the  gods  of  the  dead  who  wore  worshipped  in  the  Delta;  in  the
“ Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Underworld  ” he  also  holds  a position
subordinate  to  Rsl,  and  his  underworld  is  made  to  be  a portion  of


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PYLONS


175


the  Tuat  through  which  the  dead  sun  passed  nightly.  In  the  Shat

bn  Sbau,  /WWW  ^ or  “Book  of  the

Pylons,"  the  greatest  god  of  all  is  the  god  Osiris,  and  the  whole
work  is  devoted  to  a description  of  the  various  sections  of  the
region  over  which  he  presides,  and  is  intended  to  form  a guide  to
it  whereby  the  souls  of  the  dead  may  be  enabled  to  make  their
way  through  it  successfully  and  in  comfort.  The  Shat  am  Tuat
and  the  Siiat  en  sbau  were,  in  fact,  the  outcome  of  two  distinct
schools  of  theology ; the  latter,  iu  its  most  primitive  form,  was  the
older  of  the  two,  and  described  the  life  of  man  after  death  more
as  a continuation  of  his  existence  on  this  earth  than  as  an  entirely
new  life,  while  the  former  made  the  future  life  to  be  passed  entirely
with  the  Sun-god.  The  latter  maintained  the  views  about  the
Elysian  Fields  and  their  material  delights,  which  found  utterance
in  the  “Book  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day,”  and  was  to  all  intents
and  purposes  an  amplification  of,  and  a companion  volume  to  it,  but
it  also  contained  doctrines  which  were  inserted  in  it  with  the  view
of  making  it  harmonize  with  the  theories  in  the  former  which
related  to  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Ra.  The  Theban  priests  had
no  wish,  when  once  they  had  established  the  mastery  of  Amen-Ra,
but  to  bring  all  the  doctrines  of  the  various  schools  of  religious
thought  into  harmony  with  their  own,  for  such  a course  could  do
nothing  but  contribute  to  the  material  prosperity  of  the  great
brotherhood  of  Amen-Ra.  They  were  tolerably  sure  of  the
offerings  of  the  faithful  of  Thebes,  but  they  were  anxious  to
obtain  a share  of  those  of  the  devotees  of  Osiris  who  flocked  to
Abydos,  which  was,  rightly  or  wrongly,  celebrated  as  the  burial-
place  of  the  god.  The  history  of  Egypt  shows  that  the  fight
between  the  kings  of  the  South  and  the  kings  of  the  North  for  the
supremacy  of  the  whole  country  was  always  going  on,  but  as  the
fortunes  of  war  had  given  victory  to  the  kings  of  the  South,  who
were  the  lords  of  all  Egypt  under  the  New  Empire,  the  priests  of
the  god  of  these  kings  determined  that  Amen-Ra  should  be  the
king  of  the  gods.  Religious  ambition  w'as  helped  by  the  success
of  the  great  warrior  kings  of  the  XVIIIth  Dynasty,  and  thus
Amen-Ra  became  the  overlord  of  Osiris.


176


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


Both  the  “ Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Underworld  ” and  the
“ Book  of  the  Pylons  ” divide  the  Tuat  into  twelve  parts,  each  of
which  corresponds  to  one  of  the  hours  of  the  night,  and  the


divisions  are  called  u Field,”


1 , sekhet,  or  “ City,”  w , nut,  or


“ Hall,3


arret,  or  “ Circle,’


A


CTZ3


qerert.  In  Chapter


cxliv.  of  the  Hook  of  the  Dead,  according  to  the  Papyrus  of  Nu
(Brit.  Mus.,No.  10,477),  the  Arrets  are  seven  in  number,  and  each
is  guarded  by  a doorkeeper,  a watcher,  and  a herald  with  the


following  names


Arret  I.  1.  Sekhet-hra-iisht-aru,  p ® ^ ^

2.  Semetu,  [)  'c==5i  ^ ^ • 3.  Hu-kheru,  HD  ^

1M-


Arret  II.  1.  Tun-pehti,  ^ -•  Seqet-hra.p  ^

3.  Sabos,  p ^ J P .


O I


Arret  III.  1.  Am-huat-ent-peh-fi,


f!  o 1


^ | A-WWk

I

I \\


2.  Res-hra,  <=>  p J . 3.  liaau,  ^ n ^ .

Arret  IV.  1.  Khesef-hra-ash-klicru,  ^ C ji^1  | ^ •

2.  Res  - ab,  <=>  P ^ ^ • 3.  Neterja  - lira  - khesef  - atu,

^ IT


,-ViAAAA  m*


Arret  V.  1.  Ankh  - em  - fentu,  -p  @ AAAftM  2.

Ashcbu,  cm  J|  ^ . 3.  Teb  - her  - kehaat,  JJ  ^


ra


d

JK*  O l ‘


Arret  VI.  1.  Aken-tau-k-ha-kheru,  ^ •

^ . 3.  Metes-hm-nri-she,  ^ ^


!)Tii


C20

I xs;'


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


177


Arret  VII.  1.  Metes-sen,  • 2.  Aa-kheru,

3]  I ^ • 3-  Khesef-hra -khemiu,  © p wfl

T^kMiV

In  Chapter  cxlv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  according  to  the
Theban  and  Sa’ite  Recensions  the  domain  of  Osiris,  i.e.,  Sekhet-

Aarrn,  Mfi  “ Q ^ ^ ® • or  Sekhct-  Aanre,  M ~


..iiua,  v 1

AA/WSA  Y«.

^ 1 j I ZkJL  ^ , contains  Twenty-one  pylons,  each  of  which

has  a name,  generally  a very  long  one,  and  each  of  which  is
guarded  by  a god.  The  names  of  the  gods  who  guard  the  first  ten

of  these  pylons  are: — 1.  Nkri,  <__>  q(|  2.  Mes-Peh,

(H  (1  □ | _S!  ^ . 3.  Ektat-Seba^a,  3 P j \ ; “7  k 0 M ■ •

4.  NEKAU,  Ts'k^^si-  5-

6.  Semamti,  P y k k « I 7-  Akenti’  l)  H $■ ■ *•  Kuc-

TC1IKT-K,  ^ ^ | ^ . !).  ToHESKF,  yjj . SbKHEX-UR,

P ® 3-rr^  sfl  * These  names  are  taken  from  the  Papyrus  of

Nu  already  quoted  (sheet  25),  but  the  following  come  from
the  Turin  Papyrus,  which  was  edited  by  Lepsius  so  far  back  as
1842,  and  they  illustrate  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  in

the  names.  1.  NkrAu,  ^ [j  <fj . 2.  Mes-Ptau,  jt)P°|.

3.  BkQ,  J4|.  4.  Ilu-TEPA,  | tjt  ~ ^ ^ | . 5.  EUTA-

HEN-EU-REQAU,  ^ <=>  ^ ^ -^j)  j . (>.  SaMTI,  | “ ^ .

7.  Am-Nit,  8.  Netc uses,  ~T~  9.  Khau-

TCIIET-F,  10.  SEKHES-m,,

The  names  of  all  the  pylons  are  given  in  both  the  Theban  and
Sa’ite  Recensions,1  but  the  names  of  the  gods  who  guard  pylons
-XI. — XXI.  are  given  in  neither.  The  domain  of  Osiris,  or  Sekhet-
Aarru,  was,  according  to  Chapters  cxlix.  arid  cl.,  divided  into  fifteen

Aats,  which  are  thus  enumerated : — Aat  ( ”^)  I*  Sckhet  Aarru  ;


1 See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Tost.),  p.  334  IT.


178


DIVISIONS  OF  SEKHET-AARRU


its  god  was  Ra-Heru-khuti.  A at  II.  Apt-ent-khet,  \/  ® ;

its  god  was  Fa-akh,  ^ ^ j . A at  III.  Tu-qa-aat,

* k X I Hi  k JL-  Aat  IV-  “ The  Aat  of  the  sPirits>"


nnm


MMEHET,


® ^ | • ^AT  v-  ^
is  called  Sekher-remu,  p

Asset,


.(1


fclie  g°d  in
J.  Aat  VI.


i i i


©•


Aat  VII.  Ha-sert,  ("q  _A  P <^>  © ; the  -


god  in  it  is  Fa-pet,  'jf . Aat  VIII.  Apt-knt-qajju,


/WSMA

I ^


f.  ^ £?l*  ^Ai  lj  ©;  the  god  in  it  is  Sept,

A*^\*  i^A1  2’  ^ie  god  in  it  is  Ileteinet-baiu,

jUVIkVi-  Aat  XL  Apt-het,  MTE;the s0'1  ™

it  is  Aa-sekhemu,  | p ^ jj . Aat  XII.

k V;  tho  god  in  « “ llrii>>  1 1?  H i .

Aat  XIII


Kher-aha,


ffi


i.e.,  the  Nile.

JVW/A


^ tk  'vwvv'  msm

A/AAAA  AAAAAA

A XX  |


>


■ n

>1’-K

M-SIIKT,

av.

Akksi,

HJ-

(W]

0 <=z*>  *

(j  p^;  the  god  in  it  is  Maa-tliet-f,

Aat  XV.  Amentet-nefkrt,  “Beautiful  Anientet,
wherein  the  gods  live  upon  cakes  and  ale.

In  connexion  with  these  various  divisions  of  the  realm  of
Osiris  here  will  follow  naturally  a brief  description  of  the  Book
op  Pylons.  An  excellent  copy  of  its  text,  with  illustrations,  is  to
be  found  on  the  famous  alabaster  sarcophagus1  of  Seti  I.,  now
preserved  in  Sir  John  Soane’s  Museum  in  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields,
and  variants  of  several  of  tho  passages  are  given  on  the  walls  of
the  tombs  of  several  kings  of  the  XXth  Dynasty,  who  were  buried
in  the  Valley  of  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings  at  Thebes.  Curiously
enough,  the  work,  as  M.  Jequier  has  remarked,2  seems  never  to
have  become  popular,  and  copies  of  it  are  only  found  in  royal
tombs ; it  is  generally  admitted  that  it  represents  an  attempt  on

* See  Bonomi  and  Sharpe,  The  alabaster  Sarcophagus  of  Oimenephtah  /.,  King
of  Egypt,  London,  1864.

2 Le  Livre  de  ce  rpu’il  y a dam  V Hades,  Paris,  1894,  p.  13.


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  TUAT


179


the  part  of  the  Theban  priests  to  adjust  the  cult  of  Ra  to  that  of
Osiris,  and  if  this  be  so  there  is  little  to  wonder  at  if  it  failed.
According  to  the  Book  of  Pylons  the  Tuat  is  a long,  narrow
valley,  with  sandy  slopes,  and  is  divided  into  two  equal  strips  by
the  river  on  which  the  boat  of  the  sun  sails ; it  is  made  to  contain


Thu  First  Hour  of  ihu  Night.


twelve  nomes  or  divisions,  which  correspond  to  the  twelve  hours
of  the  night.

In  the  First  Division,  i.e.,  the  First  Hour,  we  have  the
Mountain  of  the  West,  divided  into  two  portious,  and  along
its  lowest  part  is  a path  which  forms  the  entrance  from  this  world
to  the  Tuat.  On  the  right-hand  side  is  a jackal-headed  standard,


180


FIRST  DIVISION  OF  THE  THAT


^ , and  on  the  left  a ram-hcaded  standard,  ^5  each  of  these  is
adored  by  the  god  of  the  mountain,  Set,  , and  the  god  of  the
Tuat,  css  ^ . On  the  right  are  the  twelve  gods  of  the


mountain,  and  on  the  left  the  twelve  gods  of  Set-Amentet,
1111  j ^ |j  . In  the  centre  is  the  boat  of  the  sun,  and  we
see  in  it  a disk  containing  a beetle ; the  disk  is  encircled  by  a
huge  serpent  in  folds,  which  holds  its  tail  in  its  mouth.  In  the
bows  of  the  boat  stands  the  god  Sa,  and  in  the  stern,  Heka,
1 1 1,  the  god  of  magical  words.  The  boat,  having  moved  on,
approaches  a pylon  with  closed  doors,  guarded  by  a huge  serpent

which  stands  on  his  tail  and  bears  the  name  Saa-Set,  sa

This  pylon  forms  the  entrance  to  the  Second  Division,  or  Second
Hour,  and  when  the  god  has  passed  through  it  “ those  who  dwell  in

“their  Set,  j , cry  out.”1  On  the  right  are  twenty-four  human
forms,  which  represent  those  who  praised  Rsi  upon  earth,  * "'p'j

0 ^ '=■--■=•  an(j  wjlo  directed  their  words  of  power  against  the  arch-

1 I I s’  1 °


fiend  Apep,  Q Q mth • In  the  centre  is  the  boat  of  the  sun,  in

which  the  god  stands  in  a shrine ; lie  is  ram-headed,  and  holds  in
his  hand  a sceptre.  The  shrine  is  protected  by  the  serpent

Mehen,  , and  a serpent  stands  upright  on  its  tail  before  him ;

/vwa/\

the  boat  is  being  towed  along  by  four  beings  of  the  Tuat,

a c ..  | /W .AAA

* erz)  j/j  j,  and  is  met  by  the  seven  gods  called  Nepmeli,  ^g  ,
Nenha,  Ba  (?),  Horus,  Ua-ab,  O,  Klmemu,  and  Setchet,

!,  and  by  six  gods  of  the  fiqet,  and  a god  with  a

staff.  On  the  left  hand  of  the  divine  boat  arc  : — (1)  The  god  Tom,
leaning  on  a staff,  (2)  four  dead  men  lying  on  their  backs,

and  twenty  men  standing  with  their  arms  tied  together  behind
their  backs.  These  last  are,  according  to  M.  Lefebure’s  rendering2
of  the  text,  “ the  criminals  in  Rfi’s  great  hall  (the  world),  those
“ who  have  insulted  Ra  on  the  earth,  those  who  have  cursed  that


1 Bonomi  and  Sharpe,  op.  cifc.,  pll.  5 and  4.

2 See  Record m of  ike  Fast,  vol.  xM  p.  85  ff.


The  Second  Hour  of  the  Night.


182


THIRD  division  of  the  tuat


“ which  is  in  the  Egg,  those  who  have  frustrated  justice,  those  who
“ have  uttered  blasphemies  against  Khuti.”  The  pylon  which  the
god  now  approaches  is  quite  different  from  the  first,  but  it
resembles  all  the  others  which  have  to  be  passed  through.  The
opening  is  protected  like  a fortress  by  some  advanced  work,  and
through  the  wall  is  an  entrance  to  a corridor  which  runs  between
two  walls  crowned  with  a series  of  spear  heads.  This  corridor
bends  at  right  angles,  and  in  each  angle  is  a uraeus,  from  the
mouth  of  which  drop  balls  of  fire  that  fill  the  whole  length  of  it ;
at  each  end  of  the  corridor  is  a god  in  the  form  of  a mummy,  one


is  called  Am-iiua-qfdi-f,  3$^

Sekhabsenfunen,  ^ Jj  jl  ^ ^


! -<1


A/WNAA
A/WNAA  *


^ ^ , and  the  other,

The  pylon  itself  is  called


Septet-uauau,  |1  Z_,  '£]  <T|  Qi  | » an^  the  name  of  the  snake

which  guards  it  and  stands  upon  its  tail  is  Aqebi,  d Jj  (j(|  .

The  entrance  to  the  pylon  is  also  protected  by  nine  gods,  in
mummied  form,  who  represent  the  “ Second  Company  ” of  the


gods,  1 1 1


B 11

w ii

<=>  in


i:


The  door  of  the  pylon  is  opened  towards  the  Third  Division


of  the  That,  or  the  Third  Hour.  The


gate


is  called  Septet


UAUAU  SKTET-SKN-Ra,  P ^ Jl,  f )f)  Q,  i P “ Q,  £ • 0n  the
right  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are  twelve  holy  gods  of  the  Tuat,
each  in  his  shrine,  with  the  doors  open,  and  twelve  gods  of  the
lakes  of  fire ; a huge  snake  lies  along  the  tops  of  all  the  shrines,
and  before  each  god  of  the  basins  of  fire  is  an  ear  of  corn.  On  the
left  hand  are : — 1 . The  god  Tern  ; 2.  the  serpent  Apep ; H.  the
nine  gods  who  are  called  the  “ chiefs  who  drive  back  Apepi,”

lllrr&Z*  a~a  an(l  '*•  Tern  and  the  nine  gods  of

things,  ! . The  boat  of  the  sun  is  towed

through  this  division  by  eight  gods  of  the  Tuat,  and  the  middle  of
the  rope  is  fastened  to  a long  pole  or  beam,  each  end  of  which
terminates  in  the  head  of  a bull.  This  pole  is  supported  by  eight
gods  in  mummied  form,  and  upon  it  are  seated  seven  gods;  in
front  and  behind  these  stands  a bull,  and  at  the  end  of,  the
division  stand  four  shrouded  mummy  forms.  The* gods  who  are


184


FOURTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


on  the  left  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  sun,  and  are  under  the  direction
of  Tern,  form  two  companies,  whose  special  duty  it  was  to  carry
out  the  commands  of  this  god  in  respect  of  the  slaughter  of  the
arch-fiend  Apepi.  This  monster  was  first  of  all  to  be  enchanted
by  the  incantations  which  were  recited  over  him,  and  then  his
head  was  to  be  cut  off,  and  his  body  to  be  hacked  in  pieces  at  the
joints.  As  the  god  passes  out  of  the  Third  Division  and  the  door
closes,  all  the  beings  who  are  fated  to  remain  in  it  lift  up  their
voices  and  weep.

The  pylori  of  the  Fouimi  Division  or  Fourth  Hour  is  called
Nebt-s-tchefau,  ! , and  the  name  of  the  serpent  which

guards  it  and  stands  upon  its  tail  is  Tclietbi,  n““5|  the  gods

in  mummied  forms  who  stand  one  at  the  beginning  and  one  at  the

A/VWSA  ^ ^

end  of  the  corridor  are  called  Nenuerbesta,  , and

,,  ,t  ^ (rV \ ^

Seta-ta,  respectively.  The  nine  gods  who  guard

the  wall  are  the  “ the  third  company  of  the  great  god,’’  & IIS <<===a !


^ in


IsS-AU-  0n  the  right  side  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are
twelve  gods,  who  are  described  as  the  “bringers  of  their  doubles,”
in  ^ ( ( awm  Id  p w.w  t and  twelve  jackal-headed  figures,  who  .are

■walking  on  the  Lake  of  Life,1  and  ten  uraei,  who  rise  out  of  the
Lake  of  uraei ; - to  all  these  the  Sun-god  addresses  words  of
comfort,  and  they  respond  suitably.  The  uraei,  who  are  called

“ those  who  live,’  l|  ~ **  {(f\  | © ,,,  > are  ordered  to  preserve

their  flames  and  fire  for  use  against  the  enemies  of  Rii.,  and  they
answer  the  god,  saying,  “ Come  to  us,  unite  thyself  to  T alien,”
j\  ---T-  ^ ]j_  . On  the  left  side  of  the  boat  of

the  god  is  Horus  the  Aged,  who  follows  eleven  human  forms  as
they  march  behind  the  uracus  called  Flame,  <=>,  to  a shrine  in
which  the  god  Osiris,  wearing  the  crown  of  the  South,  stands  upon
a serpent.  Behind  Osiris  are  the  twelve  gods,  “ who  are  behind
the  shrine,”  and  four  gods,  who  preside  over  pits  in  the  earth,
and  the  “prince  of  destruction,”  who  holds  a sceptre  in  his  left


csa

I


XL'

*//•  —r-


©


DO
I 33


Bi


186


FIFTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  XU  AT


hand  and  ^ in  his  right.  In  the  middle  is  the  boat  of  the  sun

being  towed  along  the  river  of  the  Tuat  by  four  gods  as  usual,  and
it  is  made  to  approach  a long  low  sepulchral  building  in  which  are
nine  chapels,  each  containing  a mummied  god  lying  flat  on  his
back  ; these  are  called  “ the  gods  who  are  in  the  train  of  Osiris  in

their  caves,”  HI  — ^ j X -f  \ ^ § , ? , TV  At  the
end  of  this  building  are  two  groups,  each  containing  six  women,
who  are  the  personifications  of  the  twelve  hours  in  the  Tuat;

between  them  is  the  serpent  H erert,  , with  multitudinous

coils  ami  windings,  and  he  is  said  to  give  birth  to  twelve  young
ones  to  devour  the  hours.  In  this  division,  as  in  the  others,  Ra.
addresses  the  beings  who  are  in  it,  and  makes  arrangements  for
their  supply  of  food,  and  reminds  them  of  their  duties  to  him  their
creator.

The  pylon  of  the  Fifth  Division  or  Fifth  Hour  is  called
Arit,  (j  -<s>-  (j(j  <=>  and  the  serpent  who  guards  it  bears  the  name

of  Teka-hra,  ^ ^ ; the  jackal-headed  mummy  at  one  end  of  the

corridor  is  Aau,  a and  he  at  the  other  is  Tekemi,

jj{|  . Along  the  front  of  the  wall  are  nine  gods  in  mummied

forms  who  represent  the  fourth  company  of  the  gods.  On  the
right  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  arc : — 1 . The  twelve  worshippers

in  the  Tuat ; 2.  Twelve  bearers  of  cord,  ^ ^ j ^ ^ O

and  3.  Four  gods  with  sceptres.  These  beings  are  said  to  be
those  who  knew  Ra  upon  earth,  and  who  made  offerings  to  him,
and  in  return  for  this  Ra  awarded  them  meat  and  drink  in  the
most  holy  place  in  Amentet,  and  said  to  them,  “ I am  satisfied
“ with  what  you  did  for  me,  whether  I was  shining  in  the  Eastern

of  my  eye."


“ heaven,  or  whether  I was  in  the  temple,

Therefore  they  feed  upon  the  food  which  Ra  eats,  and  offerings  are
made  to  them  upon  earth  on  account  of  the  praise  which  they
ascribe  to  Ra  in  Araenti.  The  beings  who  carry  the  cords  are

supposed  to  measure  the  “ fields  of  the  spirits,”  m:  V

and  their  cords  are  supposed  to  represent  the  cord  of  law,  i.e.,


The  Fifth  Hour  of  the  Night.


188


FIFTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


the  measuring  cord  by  which  law  and  justice  are  represented,
and  “Ra  says  to  them,  Their  law  is  the  cord  in  Amentet,”
A /www  /www  8 @ c=.  |]  PP . On  the  left  side

H i i i I --a  ~wwv  0 a

of  the  boat  of  the  sun  are: — 1.  Horus  the  Elder  loaning  upon  a
stick;  2.  Sixteen  men,  four  of  whom  arc  J|  j,  i.e.,  Egyp-
tians, four  are  Aamu,  ] ^ | , four  are  Negroes,  ^ | P ^ ’


and  four  are  Libyans,


i;  3.  Twelve  men,  called  ‘‘those


who  bear  ladders  (?)  in  Ament,  <^>  ^ ^ j f — Q^°

aJJIlllUljL

, and  who  are  holding  a long  serpent ; and  4.  Eight

A/WAA  # 1

divine  sovereign  chiefs  in  Ament.  To  these  four  classes  of  men,
whom  Horas  describes  as  being  in  the  Tuat  of  Egypt  and  the  Red


Land,  * t — i C=~Z  r^i  ^ , it  is  said  by  the  god,  “ Ye  are  the
“tears  from  my  PI  VOj  /vwaa  <r , 'z>  cr  ■*&>-

“ in  your  name  of  ‘ men,’  ” <==>  ^ ^ j.  He  then  tolls  the  Aamu,
<®  r—r.  ^ ! , and  the  Negroes  and  the  Libyans  that  he  has
created  them,  and  that  it  is  the  goddess  Sekhet,  y ® ^fj,  Avho

redeems  their  souls,  | ^ ! ,‘T  i ‘ finally,  the  god

addresses  those  who  hold  the  ladder  (?),  and  bids  them  take
measurements  of  the  souls  that  are  appointed  for  destruction,
and  destroy  the  souls  that  have  to  be  destroyed  ; in  the  hands
of  these  beings  was  the  power  of  determining  the  length  of  the
period  which  had  to  be  passed  by  souls  in  Amentet,  and  it  is
undoubtedly  passages  like  these  which  have  given  rise  to  the  idea
that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  purgatory.  In  the  centre  of  this
Division  the  boat  of  the  sun  is  being  drawn  along  by  four  gods
belonging  to  it  U3  before.  Before  these  are  nine  gods  with  pro-
jecting elbows  and  covered  shoulders  called  “ holders  of  Plnnutchi,”

<£»  M i ^ 0 ^ ’"l  M they  are  joined  together  by  a
rope:  these  gods  follow  twelve  men  who  are  described  as  the
“souls  of  the  men  who  are  in  the  Tuat,”  and  both  groups  of
beings  proceed  towards  a god  who  holds  a sceptre,  and  is  called
P.Ier-qenbet-f,  a ij  ° ,w.  The  duty  of  this  god  was  to

aww.  lZTZj  *


SIXTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


189


call  the  souls  of  the  righteous  and  put  them  in  their  dwellings,
by  the  corner  of  those  who  lived  near  him.  Rii  addresses  the
gods  who  tow  his  boat  along,  and  bids  them  to  pull  with  vigour,
and  to  be  strong  of  arm  and  firm  of  limb,  and  swift  of  foot,  and
bold  of  soul  to  make  a prosperous  way  for  him  to  the  hidden


circles,


A <o  l
1


^ I


J


Next  he  addresses  the  figures  with  draped


shoulders  who  bear  the  serpent  Ennutchi,
and  bids  them  to  draw  him  along ; and
then  praises  those  who  have  spoken  truth,


AA/WSA

III  O

magnified  the


| j , upon  earth,  and  have
forms  of  God,  •^l *>  !

M r | a-vwva  Jl  I

j|  Aw**  (j  <~>  i!  j | I,  and  decrees  for

them  cakes  for  their  souls,  wind  for  their
nostrils,  green  herbs  from  Sekhct-Aaru,
and  a place  among  the  gods  of  right  and
truth,  ^ Jft , in  the  corner  of  the  abode

. — /J  \\  JL... I

of  Rii  where  the  companions  of  the  god

pass  sentences  of  doom.  The  doctrine  here

preached  is  essentially  that  of  Osiris,  and

there  is  no  wonder  that  the  Book  of  1 ‘vious

was  not  popular  with  the  priests  of  Amen.

The  name  of  the  pylon  of  the  Sixth

Division  1 or  the  Sixth  Hour  is  Xcbt-aha,

"J7  v . the  guardian  at  the  entrance  to

Q 1 i ° / _

the  corridor  is  Maii-ah, o ™ , “ Right  of

heart,”  and  he  who  is  at  the  end  is  Sheta-ah,

“Secret  Ileai’t.”  The  wall  is

“■W3  I

guarded  by  twelve  gods  in  mummied
forms,  who  are  called  “ the  gods  and
“goddesses  who  are  in  this  Pylon,”  cjcjcj  ^ ^ i
■ 1 ® erzj  ° . Behind  the  wall  is  a chamber,  the  Avail  of  Avhich

I -cj  A/VWVA

has  upon  it  a voav  of  spear  heads,  and  inside  avg  see  the  god  Osiris

1 The  scene  of  the  Sixth  Division  is  so  mutilated  on  the  sarcophagus  of  Seti  I.

that  it  is  not  reproduced  hero.


190


SIXTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


seated  upon  the  top  of  a flight  of  nine  steps,  on  each  of  which
stands  a god ; thus  the  whole  company  of  the  gods  of  Osiris  are
here  represented.  Osiris  wears  a double  crown,  , and  holds  in

his  hands  the  sceptre,  J,  and  the  emblem  of  “life.”  Before  him

stands  a mummied  figure  who  forms  the  pillar  of  a pair  of  scales,
and  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  personification  of  the  Great
Balance  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  the  Judgment  Scene  as
depicted  in  papyri.  In  the  pan  of  the  scales  is  the  bird  of  evil,  .
Near  the  scales  is  a boat  in  which  are  an  ape  and  a pig ; the  ape
is  urging  the  pig  along  with  a stick.  In  the  upper  part  of  the
scene  are  the  heads  of  four  oryxes  and  a figure  of  the  god  Anubis.
The  difficult  texts  which  accompany  this  scene  tell  us  that  the
“ enemies  of  Osiris  are  beneath  his  feet,  the  gods  and  the  spirits
“are  before  him;  he  is  the  foe  of  the  damned,  he  repulses  the
“ enemies,  and  he  destroys  them,  and  effects  their  slaughter.
“The  bearer  of  the  hatchet,  and  the  supporter  of  the  scales
“protect  him  who  is  in  Amenti,  who  restetli  in  the  Tuat,  and  who
“passeth  through  darkness  and  shadow.  Above  is  Joy,  and  below

“are  Right  and  Truth  . The  god  restetli  and  giveth  forth

“the  light  of  Maiit  which  he  hath  made.”  The  ape  in  the  boat  is
said  to  hand  over  the  pig  to  punishment  “ when  the  god  riseth,”
and  Anubis  says,  “ 0 ye  who  bring  words  true  or  false  to  me
“ [remember]  that  it  is  Thoth  who  woigheth  them.”  Concerning
Osiris  we  read,  “ When  the  weighing  of  words  taketh  place  he
“smiteth  evil ; lie  hath  a right  heart,  and  he  holdeth  the  words  in
“ the  Scales  in  the  holy  place  wherein  the  trial  of  the  secret  things
u of  the  secrets  of  the  spirits  taketh  place.  It  is  the  god  who  riseth
“ who  hath  made  all  the  beings  who  arc  in  the  Tuat.”  The  text
■which  relates  to  the  four  inverted  heads  of  oryxes  is  not  clear  in
its  meaning,  but  it  says  that  their  dwelling-place  is  the  Amehet,
a district  in  the  Ely  si  an  Fields,  and  that  they  hide  or  protect
the  spirits.  We  must  note  in  passing  the  position  of  the  Sixth
Division  of  the  Tuat.  Assuming  that  the  Tuat  was  regarded  as
a nearly  circular  valley  which  curved  round  from  the  W est,  where
the  sun  set,  to  the  North,  and  curved  round  from  the  North  to  the
East,  where  the  sun  rose,  it  follows  if  all  the  twelve  divisions  of


SEVENTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT  191

the  Tuat  be  equal  in  length,  that  the  Sixth  Division  would  be  very
near  the  most  northerly  part  of  the  Tuat.  And  this  is  exactly
where  it  was  intended  to  be,  for  the  most  northerly  part  of  the
Tuat  would  include  the  greater  part  of  the  Delta,  where  the
principal  shrines  of  Osiris,  i.e.,  Mendcs  and  Busiris,  were  situated,
and  it  was  only  right  to  make  the  position  of  the  kingdom  of
Osiris  on  earth  to  correspond  with  that  of  his  domain  in  the  Tuat.
Unlike  the  other  divisions  of  the  Tuat,  the  Sixth  Division  contains
no  representation  of  the  god  Ra,  and  the  texts  belonging  to  it  do
not  even  mention  his  name ; the  Book  off  1’ylons  made  Osiris
absolutely  supreme  in  his  own  dominions,  and  the  exclusion  of  Ra,
or  Amen-Ra,  from  them  was  clearly  the  cause  which  made  the
Avorlc  unpopular  with  all  the  worshippers  of  the  great  god  of
Thebes.  The  position  of  Osiris  on  the  top  of  a flight  of  steps
explains  the  allusions  to  the  “ god  who  is  on  his  staircase  ” in
the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  it  proves  that  it  is  this  god
who  is  represented  on  the  wooden  plaque  of  Semti,1  and  before
whom  the  king  is  dancing.  The  Sun-god  Ra,  having  arrived
at  the  north  of  the  Tuat,  must  now  make  his  way  towards  the
East.

The  serpent  who  guards  the  pylon  of  the  Seventh  Division
or  the  Seventh  Hour*  is  called  Akhan-maati,  o~=»  , and  the

guardian  at  the  end  of  the  corridor  is  called  Slicpi,  L’^TJ  lj(j  ;
but  the  mutilated  state  of  the  scene  renders  it  impossible  to  give
the  name  of  the  pylon  or  of  the  guardian  of  the  entrance  to  the
corridor.  On  the  right  side  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are  a number
of  beings  bearing  a rope,  which  is  usually  made  to  resemble  a
serpent,  and  on  the  left  side  are  : — 1.  A god  bending  over  a staff ;
his  name  is  Men-slieta,  t~~! {]  c~n:-1  “Stablisher  of  what  is  secret.”

WWW  U

2.  A number  of  mummied  forms  extended  on  couches,  who  are
described  as  the  “ mighty  spirits.”  These  beings  are  commanded
by  Rii  to  uncover  themselves  and  to  drive  awav  darkness.  In  the
centre  is  the  boat  of  the  Suft-god  being  towed  along,  presumably

1 See  British  Mmcum t No.  32,050.

8 The  Beene  of  the  Seventh  Division  is  so  mutilated  on  the  sarcophagus  of
Seli  I.  that  it  is  not  reproduced  here.


192


EIGHTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  THAT


by  four  gods  of  the  Tuat  as  before.  Marching  in  front  of  those

•who  tow  the  boat  are  twelve  gods  with  sceptres,  and  four

mummied  foi’ins  who  cry  out  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  Division

of  the  Tuat  to  praise  Ra,  for  he  will  weigh  words  and  will  destroy

their  enemy.

*

The  pylon  of  the  Eighth;  Division  or  the  Eighth  Hour  is
called  Bekhkhi,  Jj  @ ^ Q,  > an^  the  name  of  the  snake-god,


its  guardian,  is  Set- lira,


'***’  “£51^ ; the  guardian  of  the
entrance  to  the  corridor  is  called  Benen,  Jj  and  the  guardian
at  its  end  is  llept-ta,  ^ ^ ^ • The  wall  is  protected  by  nine

gods  in  mummied  forms,  ©Inc..  On  the  right  side  of  the  boat  of

the  god  are  : — 1.  Twelve  beings  in  human  form,  who  are  described
as  the  u sovereign  chiefs  who  give  bread,  Mailt,  and  green  herbs  to

0 1 — I — 1 A — t 1 Jp


“ the  souls  of  Ta-nescrser,”  I A

' KM  h»


| /WVW\

t&  c*  I I I ’i-Er-S  I


—7  » .\WA',


7K


f^.  2.  Nine  souls,  in  the  form  of

bearded  human-headed  hawks,  with  their  hands  raised  in  adora-
tion ; these  are  the  “ souls  of  Ta-riescrseiV'  which  are  fed  with
bread  and  green  kerbs  by  the  command  of  the  god  Ra.  On  the
left  hand  side  of  the  boat  of  Ra  are  : — 1.  Horus  leaning  on  a stall'.
2.  Twelve  men,  who  represent  the  enemies  of  Osiris  that  have
been  burnt  in  the  fire,  with  their  arms  tied  together  behind  their
backs,  each  group  of  four  in  a different  way.  Opposite  the  first


of  these  is  a huge  serpent  called  Ivheti,  f^,  which  belches  forth

a stream  of  fire  into  his  face ; on  the  back  of  the  serpent  stand
seven  gods.  The  twelve  beings  are  those  on  whom  punishment
has  been  inflicted  by  Horus  at  the  command  of  Ra,  who  has
decreed  the  death  both  of  their  bodies  and  of  their  souls  because
of  what  they  did  against  Osiris,  whose  mysteries  they  despised,
and  whose  image  they  tore  from*  the  sanctuary.  The  serpent
Kheti,  which  is  commanded  by  Horus  to  consume  the  foes  of  his
father  Osiris,  is  adjured  to  burn  up  both  the  souls  and  the  bodies
of  these  wicked  ones.  In  the  centre  of  this  division  are: — :1.  The


boat  of  the  sun  being  towed  by  four  gods  as  before.  2.  “ The
dweller  in  Nu  ” leaning  on  a staff.  3.  A rectangular  lake  in  which


The  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night.


NINTH  Dr


TUAT


are  sixteen  men,  four  of  wtiom  bathe,  |"0  <^>  (J(J  ^ j,  four  float,

(j  □ 1)1)  j , four  swim,  f^l  J 1)1)  ^ j , -vnd  four  dive,  ^ ^

The  gods  who  tow  the  boat  say,  “ Let  there  be  praise  to  the  soul  of
“ Ra  in  heaven,  and  adoration  to  his  body  upon  earth ; for  heaven
“ is  made  new  by  his  soul,  and  earth  is  made  new  by  his  body.
“ Hail ! We  open  for  thee  heaven,  we  make  straight  for  thee  the
“ways  of  Akert.  Rest  thyself,  0 Ra,  upon  thy  hidden  things;
“ the  hidden  ones  are  adored  in  thy  forms.”  He  who  dwelleth  in
Nu  also  addresses  those  who  are  in  the  lake.

The  pylon  of  the  Ninth  Division  or  Ninth  Houk,  is  called

Aat-sliefsheft,  TZn  | 22 : the  serpent  which  guards  it  is

Ab-ta,  ; and  the  guardians  of  the  corridor  are  Anhefta,

and  Ermen-ta,  /”  ° . The  Avail  is  guarded  by
nine  gods  in  mummied  forms,  ® !!!  *=>.  On  the  right  hand  side  of
the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  are : — 1.  Four  gods  of  the  South,  ^ j ^
each  wearing  the  white  crown,  and  grasping  a rope  Avhieh  is  also
held  by  a man  Avho  is  called  “ the  master  of  the  front,”  ^

betAveen  the  man  and  these  four  gods  is  a pillar  surmounted  by  a
bearded  head,  with  a Avhite  croAvn  on  it,  Avhieh  is  being  raised  by
means  of  the  rope.  2.  A hawk-headed  sphinx  Avith  the  Avhite
crown  on  his  head,  and  a bearded  head,  Avith  a Avhite  croAAm  on  it,
resting  on  his  hind  quarters.  Standing  on  his  back  is  a human
figure  which  is  surmounted  by  the  heads  of  Ilorus  and  Set.

3.  Four  gods  of  the  North,  ^ j each  Avearing  the  red  crown,

and  grasping  a rope  Avhieh  is  also  held  by  a man  Avho  is  called  “the
master  of  the  back,”  v=n  ; between  the  man  and  these  four  gods


is  a pillar,  surmounted  by  a bearded  head  Avith  a red  crown  on  it,
which  is  being  raised  by  means  of  the  rope.  4.  A personage  called

A pu,  ^j/^,  holding  the  serpent  Shemti,  which  has  four

heads  at  each  end  of  his  body.  5.  A personage  holding  the  serpent
Bath,  J {j  *=» , Avith  a head  at  each  end  of  his  body ; on  his  back
stands  a serpent  which  is  called  Tepi,  ® (jij,  and  which  is  provided


The  Ninth  Hour  of  ihik  Nijrht.


196


TENTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT

■ ' - £ "


at  each  end  of  his  body  with  four  human  heads,  breasts,  and  arms,
and  four  pairs  of  human  legs.  6.  Two  men  holding  a rope  (?).
On  the  left  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are : — Sixteen  human
forms  which  represent  the  (a)  souls  of  Amentet,  (t>)  the  followers  of
Thoth,  (c)  the  followers  of  Horus,  (d)  the  followers  of  Osiris ; the
first  four  have  the  heads  of  men,  the  second  four  the  heads  of
ibises,  the  third  four  the  heads  of  hawks,  and  the  fourth  four  the
heads  of  rams.  These  sixteen  beings  draw  a rope  to  which  is
attached  a double  serpent  with  four  heads,  two  at  each  end  of
his  body,  and  one  pair  of  legs  at  each  end  which  support  the
larger  serpent.  The  serpent  is  called  Khepri,  ^ (j(j , and  on  one

of  his  folds  is  perched  the  hawk  Heru-tuati,  3=g3t  . At  the

other  end  of  the  rope  are  eight  human  forms  called  Akhmiu,
(j  ® ^ ^ ^ie  centre  °*  this  Division  the  boat  of

the  god  is  being  towed  along  as  before.  Before  him  march : —
1.  Six  human  forms,  four  apes,  and  four  women,  each  holding  a
rope  (?) ; and  2.  Three  men  holding  a rope  which  is  thrown  over
the  head  and  held  in  the  hands  by  a prostrate  man  who  has  the
ears  of  an  ass,  and  who  is  called  Aai,  (J  (j(J , i.e.,  “ Ass.’’  Each


man  holds  a pike  which  he  is  about  to  drive  into  the  prostrate
body.  In  front  of  the  man  are : — 1.  The  serpent  A pep,  and  2.  The
crocodile,  with  a tail  which  terminates  in  a serpent’s  head,  called
Shesshes,  rm  |)  na  jl.  The  beings  here  described  are  those  who
work  magic  for  Ra  on  the  arch-fiend  Apep,  and  they  bid  him  come
to  the  place  of  slaughter  that  he  may  be  slain ; they  say,  “ the
“ slaughtering  places  are  against  thee,  and  the  Aai  gods  are

“ aeainst  thee>” — & n ! i n 1 P 4-  W ! Si  •

The  three  beings  with  pikes  drive  their  weapons  into  Apep,  and


destroy  utterly  the  serpent  Sesi,


; and  they  keep  fast


hold  of  the  rope  of  Ai,  (j(j  , and  do  not  let  that  serpent  rise


up  towards  the  boat  of  the  god.

The  pylon  of  the  Tenth  Division  or  the  Tenth  Hour  is  called
Tcheserit,  W’’  lj(j  the  serpent-god  who  guards  it  is  Sethu,
t t ^ ; and  the  guardians  of  the  corridor  are  Nemi,  ^ (|(j ,


The  Tenth  Hour  of  the  Night.


198


TENTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


and  Kefi,  |j(| . The  wall  is  guarded  by  sixteen  uraei.  On  the

right  hand  of  the  boat  of  the  god  are: — 1.  Four  beings,  each
holding  a knife  and  a rope  (?).  2.  Four  beings,  similarly  armed,

but  each  having  four  serpents’  heads ; these  are  called  Antiu,


(j  ^ and  Hentiu,  ^ ^ ^ respectively.  3.  The

serpent  Apep,  “whose  voice  goeth  round  about  in  the  Tuat,”
held  by  a chain  which  is  grasped  by  four  beings,  Stefiu,  jjlj  j,
and  twelve  gods,  and  a mighty  hand  called  the  “hidden  body.”
(j | . On  the  chain,  near  Apcp's  head,  is  stretched  out

the  scorpion-goddess  Serqet.  Behind  the  hand,  and  growing  out
of  the  chain  are: — (a)  Seb,  Jj,  who  grasps  a small  chain  to
which  is  attached  the  serpent  Uamemti,  -^j  ^czi.  (b)  Mest,
I , Tuamutef,  *


Hapi,  £


- CT3.

^ \\

, and  Qebhsennuf,


At  the  end  stands  Ivhenti-Anienti,  or  Osiris.  The  beings  on  this
side  of  the  Tuat  are  engaged  in  destroying  Apep  and  the  foes  of
the  sun-god  so  that  they  may  not  attack  the  boat  of  the  sun  when
it  comes  to  a narrow  passage.  On  the  left  hand  side  of  the  boat

of  Ra  are: — 1.  The  twelve  Akhmu-seku  gods,  (j  © ^ ^

[1 ' ■*,  holding  paddles.  2.  TAvelve  women,  who  represent  the
horn’s.  3.  Four  gods  with  sceptres,  Bant,  Jj  i , Seshsha,

P (j , Ka- Ament,  { ] ^ , and  Rencn-scbu,  wmv4  ^ . 4c*  A

monkey  on  a standard,  s-^~,  with  a star  over  his  head,  described  as

the  “god  of  Retlienu  ” (Syria),  | c-'  . 5.  An  eve

(utchat)  on  a standard,  6.  A god  with  a sceptre.  Along

y

the  middle  of  this  division  the  boat  of  the  god  is  towed  as  usual
by  four  gods.  Before  it  are: — 1.  The  star  god  Unti,

AAA/VNA  A

2.  Four  deities,  Sekhet,  Abesh,  a J]  nn,  Serq,  f , and

Horus.  3.  Three  star  gods,  who  tow  a small  boat  in  which  are
the  “ face  of  the  disk,”  ^ |j  , and  a uraeus.  4.  A winged

uraeus  called  Semi,  (J(| , standing  upon  its  tail.  5.  A god
called  Besi,  JJ  |1  (j(j , pouring  flame  upon  a standard  surmounted


The  Eleventh  Hour  of  the  Night.


200  ELEVENTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


by  the  head  of  a horned  animal.  6.  A serpent  caled  Ankhi,
with  a bearded  god  in  mummied  form  growing  out  from
each  side  of  its  body.  7.  Four  women,  with  hands  raised  in
adoration,  who  are  called  “the  adorers,”  00  .-S-,-  8.*  The

i i »


adoration,  who  are  called  “ the  adorers,”  (J||  =^=>.  8.*  The

double  god  Horus- Set,  with  two  heads  and  two  pairs  of  arms  and
hands  on  one  body,  standing  upon  a platform  which  rests  on  two
bows;  from  each  end  of  the  platform  spring  three  uraei.  All
these  beings  are  supposed  to  be  employed  in  helping  Ra  to  con-
tinue his  course  through  the  Tenth  Division,  and  to  make  his  way
to  the  region  of  the  sunrise ; it  is  evident  that  most  of  them  are
personifications  of  the  stars  which  herald  the  approach  of  the
dawn.

The  pylon  of  the  Eleventh  Division  or  the  Eleventh  Hour
is  called  Shetat-besu,  r~^~l  ^ Sj  0 ! , and  the  serpent  which


is  called  Shetat-besu,  ^ Jj  ^ <t^1  j , and  the  serpent  which

• f\  AAAAOA

guards  it  is  called  Am-net-f,  (J  A ^ ^ the  guardians

of  the  corridor  are  Metes,  " . and  Shetau,  1:30  Before

the  wall  are  two  large  sceptres  surmounted  by  the  white  crown ;
one  of  these  is  called  Sar,  i.e.,  Osiris,  and  the  other  Horus.

On  the  right  hand  of  the  boat  of  Ra  are: — 1.  Four  gods,  called
“ bearers  of  light,”  ^ ^ ^ j , holding  disks  on  their

right  hands.  2.  Four  gods,  called  “bearers  of  stars,”  ^ j,

holding  stars  in  their  right  hands.  ?>.  F our  gods  “ who  go  out,”
^ -A  4.  The  gods  Ba,  Khnemu,  Tenter,  n

and  Tent,  ram-headed.  5.  Four  gods,  Horus,  Horus-Sept,

Sept,  and  “ he  who  is  in  his  double  boat,”  (j  -jj-  w , hawk-

headed. 6.  Eight  women,  the  Hours,  seated  on  coiled  up  serpents
and  each  holding  a star  in  her  hand ; these  are  the  “ protecting

hours,”  * ^ O ^ 7.  The  god  Sebek-Ra,  crocodile-headed.

All  these  are  personifications  of  Stax’s  which  bear  along  the  boat  of
Ra  towards  the  day-break,  for  they  wish  to  see  it  floating  once


more  on  the  bosom  of  N ut,


O I F=>


; and  when  “ the  arms  of  the


ELEVENTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT  201


“ sky-god  Nu  receive  Ra  they  shout  praises  with  the  stars  which
“ they  carry,  and  go  to  him  in  the  heights  of  heaven  in  the  bosom
of  Nut.”1  In  connexion  with  the  idea  of  the  stars  praising  Ra
at  sunrise  we  may  note  its  similarity  to  that  expressed  in  Job
xxxviii.  7,  “When  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the
“sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.”  On  the  left  of  the  boat  of  Ra

are: — 1.  Four  beings,  Setheniu-tep,  s=s  ij ! ®,  wearing  white
crowns.  2.  Four  bearded  gods  called  Akebiu,  i.e.,  “ wailers,”
||  JJ  /jlj  ! . 3.  Four  beings,  Khnemiu,  ^ crrr.  ^ j , wearing  red

crowns.  4.  Four  bearded  gods  called  Renniu  y AAA/NAA  mi-
5.  Twelve  goddesses,  the  female  counterparts  of  the  first  three
groups  of  gods.  6.  Four  gods,  with  bowed  bodies,  and  7.  The

cat-headed  goddess  Mati,  ^ (j  These  beings  were  supposed  to

place  white  crowns  on  the  heads  of  the  gods  in  the  train  of  Ra,
and  though  their  souls  rose  up,  they  were  never  able  to  leave  this
Division  of  the  Tuat  or  pass  out  of  the  pylon.  Their  duty  was  to
weep  for  Osiris  after  Ra  had  passed  out  of  Ament-,2  and  to  be  with
him,  as  far  as  their  souls  were  concerned,  but  their  bodies  had  to
stay  in  their  places ; they  also  had  to  raise  up  Mailt  and  to  stablish
it  in  the  shrine  of  Rii.3  It  was  they  who  “ fixed  the  period  of  the
“years  which  those  who  were  decreed  for  the  Tuat  should  pass
“ there,  and  the  period  of  those  who  were  to  live  in  heaven ; ” 1
but  they  “ tore  their  hair  in  grief  before  the  great  god  in  Amentet,
“ for  although  they  drove  away  Set  from  the  pylon  they  themselves


A/WWA


™ , 7 t □


I


ooo  ©

|


□ □


A AA/NAAA

I I I


V O


,\vwv\

Ck  □ * • I


,VWW\  ^

III

O— =>  O ^

' ^ l


^ /WWW

I I I I I I


, Bono  mi  and


Sharpe,  op.  oit.,  pi.  10

* l|  'szz*  Jj  ( 'ox


w


A/WW\

I I I I -cs>-

■ ■ iVwwv


.Cl

A


O

A I


U


A in**uui

^ ||  CLTITj

I AWWA


* O

cm


A/VWW


W

C2>

ID
□ ci


P=3


/WWW  fV/\/^  .


([O


(m  — 4T!


202  ELEVENTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  TUAT


“ were  not  allowed  to  enter  into  the  heights  of  heaven.” 1 In  the
centre  of  this  division  we  have  the  boat  of  lla  being  drawn  along
by  four  of  its  gods  as  usual.  Preceding  these  are : — 1.  A group  of
nine  gods,  each  of  whom  holds  a knife,  in  the  right  hand,  and
a scepti'e,  J,  in  the  left;  the  first  four  are  jackal-headed.  They
are  described  as  the  “ nine  gods  who  annihilate  Apep,”  ® j ! j ^ j
Ij  2.  The  serpent  Apep  chained  to  the  earth  by  five

chains  which  are  called  the  “gods  who  produce  winds,”  j.

3.  Four  apes,  (j  ^ ^ j , each  holding  before  him  a large  hand.

4.  The  god  of  Amenti,  , wearing  the  crown  of  the  South.

5.  The  goddess  of  the  North,  Herit  (?),  (|(J  jJLj,  wearing  the

crown  of  the  North,  (>.  The  god  Sebekhti,  p J|  ® L^_J-  These

gods  of  the  Tuat  say,  “[This  is]  the  exit  from  Ament,  and  the
“ place  for  rest  in  the  two  divisions  of  Nu,  and  [the  god]  maketh
“ his  transformations  in  the  hands  of  Nu.  This  god  doth  not  enter

“ heaven  , but  he  openetlx  the  Tuat  upwards  in  his  trans-


“ formations  [lvhich  take  place]  in  Nu.  What  openeth  the  Tuat
“ into  heaven  are  the  two  hands  of  the  god  whose  name  is  hidden,


a

u

a

u

u

u

u

u


lie  existeth  in  the  darkness  which  is  a solid  thing,
iJp  and  Rii  cometh  forth  [in]  it  from  the  night,
Those  who  are  in  this  portion  take  their  knives  in


their  hands,  and  grasp  their  weapons,  and  smite  Apep,  and  effect
his  slaughter,  and  smash  his  joints  which  are  in  heaven.  The
chains  of  this  fiend  are  in  the  hands  of  the  children  of  Horus,
they  advance  to  the  god  with  their  fetters  in  their  fingers.  The
god  counteth  his  members  after  the  hidden  one  hath  opened  his


“ [arms]  to  the  Eye  of  Horus.  The  Worm  (iXtfk)  who  is
“ in  this  scene  is  fettered  by  the  children  of  Horus.”  The  other
gods  “ acclaim  Ha  in  the  Eastern  horizon  of  heaven,  and  the  four


)


I I I


/VWWi

I I I


O aaaaaa  aaaa/VS

A


III  o


P J©cpp  -


^ LI  c riD


o

A A


/WWiA

1 I I


9

5==**


TWELFTH  DIVISION  OF  THE  THAT


203


“ apes  guide  him  who  created  them,  two  ou  the  right  hand,  and

icm)  of  this  god.”


(H


o

I


u two  on  the  left,  to  the  double  dtert

The  pylon  of  the  Twelfth  Division*  or  Twelfth  Hour  is

called  Tesert-baiu,  <=^>  i.e.,  “ Red-Souls,”  and  its  serpent

god  is  Sebi,  (j(j  the  two  guardians  of  the  corridor  are  Pai,

2^  (j(J  | , and  Akhekhi,  (j  ® (j(j  r-^ . In  front  of  the  wall  are  two

poles,  each  of  which  is  surmounted
by  a bearded  head ; on  one  head  is
the  disk  of  the  god  Tern,  and  on  the
other  the  beetle  of  the  god  Tvhepera,
i.e.,  two  forms  of  the  Sun-god.  Close
to  the  pylon  “ Red-Souls  ” was  the
pylon  of  the  serpent  god  Reri,

each  side  of  which  was

guarded  by  the  two  uraei  of  Isis  and
Nephthys,  one  on  each  side.  When
Ra  had  passed  through  these  doors  lie
emerged  triumphantly  from  the  Tuat,
and  his  boat  floated  on  the  waters  of
Nu,  i.e.,  in  the  sky.  In  the  scene  in
which  this  is  depicted  we  sec  the  boat
containing  the  beetle  of  Khepera  and
the  disk  of  Ra,  with  the  five  gods  Seb,

Shu,  llek  (for  Heka),  Hu,  and  Sa,  and
the  two  goddesses  Isis  and  Ncphthys,
and  three  gods  of  pylons.  The  god  Nu,

t is  seen  holding  up  the  boat  with

his  hands,  which  “come  forth  from
the  water,  and  bear  up  this  god.”

A little  distance  away  from  the  boat  is  a sort  of  island  which  is
formed  by  Osiris,  the  body  of  the  god  being  bent  round  in  such  a
way  as  to  cause  the  tips  of  his  toes  to  touch  the  back  of  his  head ;
the  text  says  that  it  is  Osiris  himself  who  forms  the  encircling

On  the  head  of  the  god  stands  the  goddess


border  of  the  Tuat.


204


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


Nut,  0 Q.  with  arms  outstretched  ready  to  receive  Ra.  Thus  the

god  reaches  the  end  of  the  Tuat  and  passes  by  an  opening  through
its  border,  which  is  painted  black,  dotted  everywhere  with  red
spots.  We  have  seen  that  Ra  was  omnipotent  in  all  divisions  of
the  underworld,  except  one,  which  was  sacred  to  Osiris ; in  this
neither  Ra  nor  his  name  appears.


We  may  now  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  the  contents  of
the  “ Book  of  that  which  is  in  the  Underworld. *’  The
authorities  for  the  text  and  vignettes  of  this  work  are  numerous,1
and  from  the  copies  of  both  which  have  come  down  to  us  it  is

1 See  Sharpe,  Egyptian  Inscriptions , 1st  series,  pll.  28-32  ; 2nd  series,  pll.  1-21 ;
Prerret,  Recueil , tom.  v.,  pp.  103  ff;  Lanzone,  Domicile  des  Esprit #,  Paris,  1879;
Birch,  Papyrus  of  Nasthem , London,  1863 ; Mariette,  Papyrus  Egyptians , tom.  ii.f
Cairo,  1878.


FIRST  HOUR  OF  THE  NIGHT


205


clear  that  the  book  was  one  of  considerable  length.  But  long
before  the  end  of  the  XXIst  Dynasty  (about  b.c.  1100)  the
Egyptians  found  it  impossible  to  obtain  or  to  pay  for  complete
copies  with  all  the  vignettes,  and  a shortened  form  of  it  conse-
quently came  into  general  use.  This  shortened  form,  which  is
called  an  “Abrege”  by  M.  Maspero,  and  a “Resume”  by  M.
Lefebure,  was  supposed  to  contain  all  that  was  absolutely  necessary
for  the  dead,  and  it  became  very  popular  throughout  Egypt.  In
the  tomb  of  Seti  I.1  we  find  a copy  of  the  full  text,  with  vignettes,
of  the  first  eleven  hours,  and  also  a copy  of  the  “ Abridgment.”
The  space  at  our  disposal  will  not  admit  of  a detailed  description
of  the  longer  work,  and  therefore  a notice  of  the  “Abridgment”
only  is  given  here.  The  complete  work  is  entitled,  “The  beginning
“of  the  horn  of  the  West,  the  remote  boundary  of  thick  darkness,’’

The  “horn  of

the  West”  means  the  most  westerly  point  where  the  sun  sets,  and
keku  mmu,  i.e.,  “ thick  darkness,”  or  “ solid  darkness,”  refers  to
the  extreme  end  of  the  Tuat,  which  is  painted  to  resemble  a black
Avail,  dotted  everywhere  Avith  red  spots,  and  which  contains  an
opening  through  Avhich  the  boat  of  Ra.  emerges  every  morning.
The  shorter  Avork  is  entitled  “Abridgment  of  this  book,”

The  First  Hour  of  the  night  is  called  Ushemkt  iiatlt  khefti
Ra,:i  i.e.,  “ Crusher  of  the  forehead  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,”  and  the
place  through  Avhicli  the  god  passes  in  it  is  described  as  an  arrit,
<S>  |j(j  i.e.,  a hall,  or  a sort  of  ante-chamber  of  the  Tuat.  It
is  quite  unlike  any  part  of  the  Tuat,  for  when  Ra  is  in  this  hall  he

1 See  “ Le  Tombeau  de  Seti  Iv\”  in  M 'moh  t*  de  fa  Mia*.  Arch . Franraisc,
Paris,  1880 ; First  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  21-20 ; Second  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  29-32 ;
Third  Hour,  part  iv.,  pli.  32-35  ; Fourth  Hour,  part  i.,  pll.  23-25;  Fifth  Hour,
parti.,  pll.  20-29 ; Sixth  Hour,  part  iv.,  pll.  39-42  ; Seventh  Hour,  port  iv. , pll.  43-40  ;
Eighth  Hour,  part  iv.,  pH.  47-49 ; Ninth  Hour,  part  ii.,  pll.  15-18;  Tenth  Hour,
part  ii.,  pll.  .19-22;  Eleventh  Hour,  part  ii.,  pll.  23-20;  and  see  Maspero,  Lea
Ihjjjog^ca  lloyaiix  tic  Thebes,  p.  29.

* See  the  edition  of  the  hieroglyphic  text,  with  a French  translation,  by
Jcquier,  op.  eit.,  pp.  37  ft*.


on


V— j O


1

.1


I O l


I-


206  BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD

has  not  yet  arrived  in  that  dismal  valley.  But  even  when  here
he  is  an  entirely  different  being  from  what  he  was  in  the  day-time,
for  instead  of  being  the  sun  of  day,  he  is  the  sun  of  night,  i.e.,  a
dead  god,  in  fact  a mere  dead  body  which  is  called  Af,  (j  i.e.,
“Flesh,”  and  is  represented  with  the  head  of  a ram  surmounted
by  a solar  disk.  In  the  day  time  he  travelled  in  the  Atet  boat,


The  First  Hour  of  the  Night.


o ^ hut  at  night  he  made  his  journey  along  the  river  of  the
Tuat  in  the  Sektet  boat,  ^r,s , in  fact,  in  the  same  boat  in

which  he  sailed  over  the  sky  from  noon  to  sunset.  In  the  boat
with  the  dead  Sun-god  Af  are  Ap-uat,  \jf  “The  Opener  of

the  ways,”  Sa,  Heru-Hekenu,  ^ ^ Nehes,  ^ [1,

yu>  f ^ » the  double  of  Shu,  |_j  p , the  captain  of  the  boat,


FIRST  HOUR  OF  THE  NIGHT


<=>t— and  the  “lady  of  the  boat,”  ^ >jns.  The  last-named

celestial  personage  changed  every  hour,  for  she  represented  the
local  goddess  of  one  hour  who  was  supposed  to  be  the  appointed
guide  of  the  god  through  one  portion  of  the  Tuat  only ; knowing
the  way  through  her  own  district,  she  was  able  to  instruct  the
captain  of  the  boat  how  and  where  to  sail  over  difficult  reaches  of
the  river.

The  dwellers  in  the  First  Hour  of  the  night  appear  to
have  been  the  apes  who  opened  the  doors  of  the  arrit  to  the  god,
and  the  beings  who  were  necessary  for  the  singing  of  songs  of
praise  to  Ra,  and  for  piloting  his  boat  through  this  hall  to  the
Tuat,  and  a large  number  of  celestial  beings  who  are  mentioned  in
the  text,  but  who  are  otherwise  unknown,  and  the  souls  of  the
dead  who  had  passed  from  the  earth  to  this  intermediate  place  and
who  were  waiting  for  the  opportunity  of  entering  into  the  boat
of  lla,  wherein  they  would  fain  continue  their  journey.  Why  the
last-named  were  here  cannot  be  said,  but  it  is  probable  that  such
souls  belonged  to  men  and  women  who,  when  living  upon  earth,
were  unable  to  avail  themselves  of  all  the  costly  and  complicated
ceremonies  prescribed  by  the  priests,  and  the  numerous  amulets
which  were  thought  to  be  necessary  for  the  welfare,  of  the  soul  in
the  Tuat.  The  descriptive  text  of  the  First  Hour  reads: — “This
“ (;od  entereth  from  the  earth  into  the  arrit  of  the  horizon  of
“the  West,  and  he  must  travel  one  hundred  and  twenty  dtrn

“ fd  0 c — > ® \ in  this  arrit  befoi’e  he  arriveth  at  the  gods
VM <=> on/  — — <->

“ of  the  Tuat.  Nct-Rii  ( — o Jft ) is>  the  name  ot  this  first

“ country  of  the  Tuat.  Ra  giveth  fields  to  the  gods  who  are  in  his
“ following,  and  he  beginneth  to  pass  decrees  and  to  give  -commands
“ concerning  the  things  which  are  done  in  the  Tuat  by  the  gods  of
“ this  country.  Whosoever  shall  do  these  tilings  according  to  this
“ similitude  of  the  hidden  things  of  the  Tuat,  and  shall  recognize
“ that  they  are  similitudes  of  the  great  god  himself,  shall  find  them
“ of  benefit  to  him  on  the  earth,  and  they  shall  do  him  good  in  the
“ great  Tuat.”  The  fact  that  this  region  is  called  “ country  ”
shows  that  it  was  regarded  almost  as  a part  of  this  world,  and  it
is  definitely  stated  that  it  is  1 20  dtrn  in  length ; now,  the  dtrn  is


208


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


said  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the  Greek  a^oli/os,  i.e.,  about  an
English  furlong,  and  thus  the  region  of  the  sunset  traversed  by
* Rii  in  his  first  hour  would  be  fifteen  miles  in  length.  It  is  probable,
however,  that  120  atm  were  intended  to  be  a greater  distance
than  fifteen  miles,  for  the  second  hour  brought  Ra  into  the  domain
of  Osiris,  which  is  more  than  fifteen  miles  from  Thebes.

The  name  of  the  Second  Hour  is  Shesat  makkt  neb-s,  i.e.,
“ She  who  knoweth  how  to  protect  her  lord.” 1 The  country

.Wv'AA

passed  through  is  called  Ur-nes,  which  the  late  Dr.

Birch  compared  with,  and  believed  to  be  equivalent  to,  the  Greek
ovpavo> ;;  this  name,  however,  seems  to  be  that  of  the  Nile  in  the
second  region  of  the  Tuat,  and  in  any  case  it  is  not  applied  to  any
other  division  or  hour  except  by  accident.2  The  descriptive  text
says,  “This  great  god  next  arriveth  in  Ur-nes,  which  is  three
“ hundred  and  nine  dim  in  length,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty
“ dt.ru  in  width  (i.e.,  this  division  measures  about  50  miles  by  15
“ miles).  The  name  of  the  gods  who  are  in  this  country  is  * Souls

Jjj  ! , and  he  who  knoweth  their

“ name 'shall  be  with  them.  This  great  god  will  give  to  him  fields,
“ the  situation  of  which  shall  be  in  the  country  of  Ur-nes ; he  shall
“ stand  up  with  the  gods  who  stand  up,  and  he  shall  follow  after
“ this  great  god.  He  shall  make  his  way  through  the  Tuat,  he
“ shall  see  the  tresses  of  the  gods  who  wear  long  flowing  hair,  he


“ of  the  Tuat,’


cm i


“ shall  trample  upon  the  Eater  of  the  Ass  (


i*=a


sS)’


“ and  after  the  division  of  the  unoccupied  land  hath  been  made,
“ he  shall  eat  bread  in  the  Boat  of  the  Earth  (j  p ^),


“ and  there  shall  be  given  to  him  of  the  first  things  of  Tatuba
“ ^ Jj  [J  jfj').”  The  text  adds  that  those  who  draw  pictures

of  these  Souls  of  the  Tuat  and  make  offerings  to  them  upon
earth  will  gain  benefit  therefrom  a million  fold  after  death;
moreover,  it  will  be  extremely  useful  to  them  in  the  Tuat  if  they
know  what  words  are  addressed  by  the  gods  to  the  great  god.


2 See  J£quier,  op,  cit.,  p.  49,  note  2.


The  Second  Hour  of  the  Night.


210  BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD

The  gods  with  long  flowing  hair  are  the.  four  children  of  Horus,
Mestha,  Hiipi,  Tuamutef  and  Qebhsennuf,  each  of  whom  wore  a
lock  or  tress  of  hair,  which  became  a pillar-sceptre,  and  supported
one  of  the  four  corners  of  heaven ; these  four  gods  became  at  a
later  period  the  gods  of  the  cardinal  points  and  the  lords  of  the
four  quarters  of  heaven.  The  Eater  of  the  Ass  is,  of  course,  the
great  serpent  of  darkness,  probably  Apepi,  and  the  Ass  is  a form
of  the  Sun-god,  between  whom  and  the  serpent  was  continual  war ;
the  Ass  was  connected  with  the  Sun-god  by  reason  of  his  great
virile  powers.  According  to  M.  Maspero,1  the  Boat  of  the  Earth
is  a name  given  to  the  Boat  of  Ra  when  it  reaches  the  earth  ;
Tatuba  was  probably  an  earth  god.

The  illustrated  version  of  the  Second  llo on  shows  that  the
boat  of  Ka  was  preceded  by  four  boats.  The  fii’st  of  these  had  a
human  head  on  each  end,  and  on  its  side  were  the  picture  of
heaven,  t==^,  and  the  Utchat,  In  the  boat  rests  the  moon  on

a pedestal,  and  behind  it  is  the  god  who  sets  up  the  feather  of
Maat.  This  is  the  boat  of  Osiris  as  the  Moon,  who  is  one  of
the  Souls  of  the  Tuat.  The  second  boat  has  a human  head  sur-
mounted by  the  plumes  of  Amen,  [j],  on  each  end,  and  in  it  is  a
huge  sistrum,  the  emblem  of  Hathor ; on  each  side  of  it  is  a
goddess.  In  the  bows  is  a beetle,  This  is  the  boat  of  Isis  as

Hathor,  who  is  one  of  the  Souls  of  the  Tuat.  The  third  boat  has
the  white  crown  at  the  bows,  and  the  red  crown  at  the  stern ; in
it,  between  the  two  standards,  which  are  the  symbols  of  the  gods
Anpu  (Anubis)  and  Apuat,  is  a huge  lizard,  out  of  the  back  of
which  spring  a human  head  and  the  white  crown.  This  is  the
boat  of  the  god  who  opens  the  ways,  and  who  is  one  of  the  Souls
of  the  Tuat.  The  fourth  boat  has  a uraeus  at  the  bows  and
stern.  In  the  centre  is  a kneeling  woman  without  arms,  and
on  each  side  of  her  stands  a woman  also  armless ; at  each  end  of

the  boat  is  a plant,  or  shrub.  This  is  the  boat  of  hiepr,  ^ | ^/j ,

the  god  of  grain  and  of  vegetation,  and  a form  of  Osiris,  and  he  is
also  one  of  the  Souls  of  the  Tuat.  The  gods  who  minister  to


1 Leu  liypn'f  'cs,  ]>,  4G.


SECOND  HOUR  OF  THE  NIGHT


211


Osiris  in  the  Second  Hour  are : — Isis  who  avengeth,  J o,  .

Seb  of  the  two  corners,  J Khnemu  of  the  "two

corners,  Q A 1)  ^ , Thoth  on  his  stairs,  <~>  J3L  yi

JOl  fwrww  -*<J  \\  ^ 1 d 1 *


Afu  on  his  stairs,  (j


=3


■d


lvetuifc- ten-ha,


Oj

tZ7Z3  AVWVA


& , Kherp  - hu  - khefti.  Ud  ^ ° ,

Heru-Tuat,  Seben-hesq-khaibit.  |1  | ^

^ tlie  two  ape-gods  Benth,  Jj  A/VVSAA  ^ and  A.an  fly  (|  VW/,  ^ the  god
with  two  faces,  ^L2,  Horus- Set,  Mest-en-  Asar.  f\  I ij

" A -£S>-  ’

Met-en-Asar,  J the  term  of  Osiris,  and  a lion-headed

goddess  Sesenet-khu,  77Z77  ! . Behind  all  these  conic  seven


goddesses,  Mest-tcheses,  jfj  ^ , Amani-mitu,

P,0,.  Her-tuaiu,  @ ^ j . Sekhet  of  Thebes,  o 'J  o,

Ainet-tclieru,  Ament-nefert,  (j  rv^i  J . and

Nit-tep- Ament,  ^ o (|  On  the  other  side  of  the  boat  of


the  god  are  Nebui,  ^-'a  J (J  (J , Besabes-uaa,  J — J


Nepr,  Jj^g,  Tepu,  ®®&,  Heteh-a,  | o.  Ab,

- — a J Nepen,  jjT\  Ar-ast-neter,  (j  <=>  jj  ^ I,  Amu-aa,

lleru-hhabit,  ^ *—  J Anubis,  Osiris-

Unnefer,  Kliui,  (j(j,  Horus  of  the  two  faces,  i.c.,  Horus  and

Set,  Hen-Heru,  Hun,  ^ *4^  ^ Hatchetchu,


Nehr,

Afau,


U


|.  Makhi,  %,  (j!j,  Renpti


/WWW  ^ \\


^ , and  Fa-tr:  IUt


Mi-  AU


these  gods  worship  the  great  god,  and  guide  him  on  his  way,  and
weep  when  he  has  left  them;  some  of  them  bear  to  him  the
prayers  of  those  who  are  upon  earth,  and  also  lead  disembodied
souls  to  the  forms  which  belong  to  them;  others  .apparently
mark  the  seasons  of  the  year.  When  Ra  addressed  the  beings
there,  they  came  to  life  at  the  sound  of  his  voice,  and  they  bx*eathed


212


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


y

again ; gave  them  food  in  abundance,  and  the  gods  gave  water
to  the  spirits  to  drink  at  his  command,  and  the  hearts  of  the  rebels
of  Ra  were  burnt  in  the  tire.  It  is,  however,  clear  from  the
texts  that  although  Osiris  was  the  Lord  of  the  Second  Hour  Ra
was  the  overlord  of  Osiris,  and  that  it  was  he  who,  like  Osiris,  made
gifts  to  the  dead.  On  the  other  hand,  the  followers  of  Osiris  had
to  perform  service  for  Ra,  and  one  of  their  chief  duties  consisted  in
keeping  in  check  his  enemies,  who  were  always  attempting  to
prevent  the  progress  of  his  boat ; in  a way  the  service  of  these
followers  was  unrewarded,  for  they  were  condemned  to  remain
always  in  the  same  place,  and  to  perform  the  same  duty.

From  the  above  paragraph  the  reader  will  gain  some  idea  of
the  difference  between  the  illustrated  version  of  the  Second  Hour
and  the  abstract  of  it  which  is  found  in  the  “ Abridgment.”  As
the  short  version  makes  no  attempt  to  supply  the  souls  which  wore
supposed  to  make  use  of  it  with  the  names  of  the  various  gods  and
beings  in  it,  wre  can  only  assume  that  they  leamt  them  when  on
earth  in  the  body.  The  larger  version  of  the  Second  Hour  is
extremely  interesting  in  showing  what  a subordinate  place  the
priests  of  Amen-Ra  made  Osiris  occupy  in  respect  of  Ra  when
passing  through  the  Tuat.

The  descriptive  text  of  the  Third  Hour,  which  is  called
Tent-baiu,1  says : — “ This  great  god  next  arrives  in  the  Country


“ of  those  who  slav


(Ml


□


V


A I


I $


i i


)>


and  he  roweth  over


“ the  Stream  of  Osiris


(,%WM  AAAAAA
AAAAAA
^ AAA/ AA


jj  a space  three  hundred  and


“nine  atm  long,2  and  one  hundred  and  tweuty  dim,  wide  (i.c.,
“this  portion  of  the  Tuat  measured  about  38^  miles  long  by  15
“ miles  wide).  This  great  god  giveth  commands  to  the  gods  who
“are  in  the  following  of  Osiris  concerning  this  city,  and  he  assigns
“ to  them  estates  from  this  country.  The  name  of  the  gods  who

“are  in  this  liehl  is  ‘Hidden  Souls’  C~S~^  jj !),  and  whosoever
“knoweth  their  name  shall  ascend  to  the  place  where  Osiris  is.


3

miles.


. >*•.

A variant  given  by  Jcquior  gives  480  dim  as


C'^3

AAAAAA


the  length,  i.c.,  about  sixty


The  Third  Hour  of  t he  Night.


214


OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


“ and  water  shall  be  given  unto  him  for  |his  Field.  The  name

(AAAAAA  AAAAAA  £j\

MWWVN  ^Jj

'•  ^ <^>  iT^o  ^ | j)  • Whosoever  shall  make  drawings  of  these

“ Hidden  Souls  together  with  a representation  of  the  hidden
“things  of  the  Tuat- — beginning  the  same  from  the  West — it  shall
“ he  of  great  benefit  not  only  to  him  upon  earth,  but  in  the  Uuder-
“ world,  and  indeed  always.  Whosoever  knowetli  them  shall  pass
•‘[unhurt]  by  them  as  they  roar,  and  shall  not  fall  into  their
“cauldrons.  Whosoever  knoweth  these  things,  being  attached  to
“ his  place,  shall  have  his  bread  with  Ha.  Whosoever,  being  a
“ soul  and  a spirit,  knoweth  these  tilings  shall  have  the  mastery
“ over  his  legs,  and  he  shall  never  enter  into  the  place  of  destruc-
tion,  and  he  shall  come  forth  in  his  forms  and  smell  the  air  at.  his
“appointed  hour.”  The  illustrated  version  of  the  Third  Hour
represents  the  boat  of  Ra  sailing  over  the  “ Stream  of  Osiris  ”
preceded  by  three  boats,  each  of  which  is  moved  onwards  by  two
men  with  paddies;  the  beings  in  these  boats  are  all  forms  of  the
god  Osiris,  and  the  gods  who  stand  on  each  side  of  the  stream
belong  to  his  cycle,  or  company.  These  latter  had  their  bodies  of
flesh,  to  which  their  shadows  had  been  re-united,  and  their  soxds
talked  in  them,  as  soon  as  Ra  had  spoken  to  them ; they  made
answer  to  the  god,  and  sang  his  praise  whilst  he  was  with  them,
but  their  cries  of  joy  changed  to  lamentations  when  he  left  them.
They  could  not  go  with  him,  because  it  was  their  duty  to  guard
their  district,  and  to  destroy  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  to  support  the
life  of  Ra,  and  to  make  the  Nile  to  flow.

Among  the  gods  in  this  Hour  were  the  nine  forms  of  the  god

Osiris: — Osiris,  lord  of  Ament,  Osiris  Khenti- Ament,

XdHih  0s  iris  the  Throne,  jj  Osiris,  conqueror  of

millions,  zn3  ^ * Osiris  the  double  of  Ament,

Osiris  on  his  staircase,  ® ^l]  ; Osiris  prince  of  the  gods,

if  1i!i;  0siris  king  of  Uwci*  K«yp*»  X an<1

Osiris-SSaliu,  1 The  duties  of  the  beings  who  are.  grouped
with  these  are  clear  from  their  names,  for  these  refer  to  destruction


215


THIRD  HOUR  OF  THE  NlGHpfer

in  one  form  or  another,  and  the  explanatory  text  tells  us  that  they
are  employed  in  “ hacking  and  cutting  souls,  in  shutting  up  the
“ shallows  of  the  dead,  ami  in  dragging  the  occupants  of  tombs  to
“ their  place  of  slaughter ; ” moreover,  they  shoot  out  flames,  they
cause  fires  to  come  into  being,  and  the  heads  of  the  enemies  of  Ka
are  cut  off  by  their  swords.  The  master  of  the  region  traversed

in  the  Third  Hour  is  called  Khatra,  {] , and  Ave  learn  from  the

speech  of  Ka  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  mythological  district  over
Avhicli  he  presides  were  created  by  Ra  specially  to  follow  and  to
protect  Osiris.  To  these  he  says,  “ O ye  whom  I have  hidden,
“ whose  souls  I have  put  in  a secret  place,  whom  I have  set  in  the
“following  of  Osiris  to  defend  him;  to  accompany  his  images,  to
“ make  an  end  of  those  avIio  attack  him  (even  as  the  god  Hu  is
“ behind  thee,  O Osiris,  to  defend  thee,  to  accompany  thy  images,
“ to  destroy  those  who  attack  thee,  even  as  IIu  is  to  thee,  0 Osiris,
“ and  oven  as  fta  is  to  thee,  O Khenti  Amentct),  ye  souls  Avliose
“ forms  arc  stablished,  ye  souls  Avliose  magical  poAvers  make
“certain  your  coming  into  being,  who  breathe  the  air  [through
“ your  nostrils,  avIio  look]  Avith  your  faces,  avIio  listen  Avith  your
“ears,  who  are  apparelled  in  your  raiment,  avIio  are  clothed  Avith
“ your  SAvathings,  avIio  have  offerings  made  to  you  at  stated  seasons
‘‘by  the  priests  of  God,  who  have  estates  set  apart  for  your  OAvn
“ behoof  and  benefit,  whose  souls  are  not  cast  down,  whose  bodies
“are  not  overthrown:  [0  Hidden  Souls,  I say]  open  ye  your
“ circles,  and  set  ye  yourselves  in  your  own  places,  for  1 have
“ come  to  see  my  bodies,  and  to  look  upon  the  similitudes  of  myself
“ Avhicli  are  in  the  Tuat,  and  it  is  you  Avho  have  brought  me  along
“ and  have  given  me  the  opportunity  of  coming  to  them.  And
“ now  I lead  thy  soul  to  heaven,  0 Osiris,  and  thy  soul  to  earth,  O
“ Khenti  Aukert,  with  thy  gods  behind  thee,  and  thy  spirits  before
“ thee,  and  thy  being  and  thy  forms  [about  thee].  And  thy  spirit
“ hath  its  word  of  power,  0 Osiris,  and  you,  ye  spirits  who  are  iu
“ the  folloAving  of  Osiris,  have  your  Avords  of  power.  1 go  up  on
“ the  earth  and  the  day  is  behind  me ; I pass  through  the  night,
“ and  my  soul  rejoins  itself  to  vour  forms  during  the  day,  and  I
“ fulfil  the  ceremonies  of  the  night  Avhieh  are  needful  for  you.  I


216


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD

“ have  created  your  souls  for  mine  own  use,  so  that  they  may  be
“ behind  me,  and  what  I have  done  for  them  will  preserve  you
“ from  falling  down  to  the  place  of  destruction.”  1

The  Fourth  Hour  of  the  night,  which  is  called  Sekuemus,8
conducts  the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  through  a region  of  a very
different  character  from  the  earlier  divisions.  The  descriptive  text
says,  “ The  majesty  of  tin’s  great  god  next  arriveth  in  the  hidden
“Circle  of  Amentet,  and  he  performeth  the  designs  of  the  gods
“who  are  therein  by  means  of  his  voice  without  seeing  them.

“The  name  of  this  Circle  is  Ankhet-kheperu  ^ fjf  III)’
“and  the  name  of  the  pylon  of  this  Circle  is  Ament-sthau
“ [(j  ~ ^ crzij . Whosoever  knoweth  this  plan

“of  the  hidden  paths  of  Re-stau  ( <~]=>  > ( , and  of  the


cz


A)-‘


uni  of  the


“ winding  roads  of  the  Ammehet  ^ ^

“ hidden  pylons  which  are  in  the  Land  of  Seker,  he  who  is  on  his
“sand  shall  eat  the  bread  which  hath  been  prepared  for  the  mouth
“ of  the  living  gods  who  are  in  the  temple  of  Tom.  lie  who
“knoweth  these  things  shall  [know]  the  paths  rightly,  and  shall
“have  power  to  journey  along  the  roads  of  Re-stau,  and  to  see
“ the  forms  (or  guides)  in  the  Ammehet.”  The  Circle  Auunchot
is,  as  we  learn  from  Chapter  cxlix  of  the  Hook  of  the  Dead,  the
Sixth  Aat,  or  district  of  the  domain  of  Osiris  which  is  presided

over  by  the  god  Seker:  the  deceased  addresses  it  thus: “Hail,

“thou  Ammehet  which  art  holy  unto  the  gods,  and  art  hidden
“ for  the  spirits,  and  art  baleful  unto  the  dead ; the  name  of  the
“god  who  dwelleth  in  thee  is  Sekher-At  (?)  [or  Sekher-remu |.
“Homage  to  thee,  0 Ammehet,  I have  come  to  see  the  gods  who
“ dwell  in  thee.  Uncover  your  faces  and  put  off  your  head-dresses
“ when  ye  meet  me,  for,  behold,  I am  a mighty  god  among  you,
“ and  1 have  come  to  prepare  provisions  for  you.  Let  not  Sekher-
“ At  (?)  have  dominion  over  me,  lot  not  the  divine  slaughterers


Sw  Mifepcro,  Lcs  Unpaged s,  p.  04.


*.


or  Ukt-sekukmU'H,


I 1 I


FOURTH  HO l Jit  OF  THE  NIGHT


217


“ come  after  me,  let  not  tlie  murderous  fiends  come  after  me,  but
“ let  me  live  upon  sepulchral  offerings  among  you.” 1

The  illustrated  edition  of  the  Fourth  Hour  shows  us  the  boat
of  Rii  passing  through  an  entirely  new  country,  in  fact  a region


which  is  filled  with  huge  and  fearsome  snakes,  and  represents  the
region  over  which  the  god  Seker  presides.  Here  there  is  no  river
with  banks  lined  with  the  gods  and  the  souls  of  the  dead,  and  here

See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Translation),  ]>.  1207.


218


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


there  are  no  fields  to  be  distributed  by  Ra  among  the  faithful
followers  of  himself  and  of  Osiris ; indeed  there  are  so  few  beings
to  render  him  service  that  he  is  obliged  to  betake  himself  to
another  kind  of  boat,  and  the  god  of  day  is  compelled  to  glide
through  the  passages  of  the  dark  and  gloomy  land  almost  without
a following  of  gods.  Ra  stands  within  a shrine  in  his  boat  as
before,  but  the  boat  itself  is  formed  of  a serpent  with  a head  at
each  end  of  his  body ; this  boat  is  hauled  over  the  sandy  ground  of
the  god  “ who  is  upon  his  sand  ” by  gods  of  the  company  of  Osiris,
with  whom,  however,  are  mingled  the  gods  of  the  company  of  Ptali
of  Memphis,  and  Osiris  himself  is  merged  in  Seker  and  becomes
Osiris  Seker.  The  narrow  way,  or  road,  of  Re-stau  has  three  dooi*s,

which  are  called  Mates-sma-ta,  ^ T I i~

Metes-mau-at,  V>.  1 f,  and  Metcs-neheh,  V\

h I i I Nc-  * * ~~ h —

Ul  G,  and  by  these  it  is  divided  into  three  parts.  Into  one

part  the  god  Ra  neither  enters  nor  travels,  but  the  door  thereof
obeys  his  voice ; in  another  part  is  the  body  of  Seker,  who  is  on
his  sand,  the  hidden  form  which  can  be  neither  looked  at  nor  seen ;
another  part  is  that  through  which  Seker  passeth,  but  neither  the
gods,  nor  the  spirits,  nor  the  dead  go  through  it,  and  it  is  lillcd
with  the  souls  which  have  been  consumed  by  the  lire  that  comes
forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  goddess  Am-mit.  The  region  through
which  the  boat  of  Ra  travels  is  full  of  thick  darkness,  and  the  light
which  the  god  usually  omits  is  unable  to  penetrate  it ; in  this
difficulty  he  is  helped  upon  his  way  by  the  light  of  the  flames  of
fire  whicli  issue  from  the  mouth  of  the  serpent  which  forms  the
bodv  of  his  boat.  Among  the  gods  who  march  in  front  of  the  boat
areThoth  and  Horus,  who  stand  facing  each  other  with  outstretched
hands  in  which  they  hold  an  Utcliat,  which  is  here  to  be

identified  with  the  god  Seker.  The  serpents  which  are  passed  by
the  god  arc  of  various  kinds  and  of  different  sizes.  The  first,


called  H etch-nan,  ^ ^ q ^ , lies  at  full  length  in  a boat,


each  end  of  which  terminates  in  a human  head,  and  is  the
guardian  of  Seker ; the  second  is  three-headed,  and  he  moves  over
the  ground  on  four  human  legs  and  feet ; the  third  is  called  Amen,


Thu  Fourth  Hour  of  the  Xisht-.


220


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


!j  C“1;  the  fourth  is  Hekent,  ^ and  has  a human  head

growing  out  of  its  body  just  above  the  tail;  and  the  fifth  is
Menmenu,  O \>  BKL?  which  has  three  heads,  and  bears  on

A.VWSA  A - Ji

its  baek  fourteen  stars  and  fourteen  human  heads  surmounted  by
disks.  Next  we  have  three  huge  serpents  near  the  great  scorpion

Ankhet,  <=>,  and  a huge  uraeus,  to  which  libations  are  being

poured  out  by  a man ; and  a.  three-headed  serpent,  witli  wings,
which  moves  along  on  four  human  feet  and  legs ; and  the  serpent

Neheb-kau,  H JU  V I ’ wkich  two  heads  at  one  end  of  its
bodv,  and  one  head  at  the  other.  All  these  monsters  are  said  to

W *

make  their  journey  daily  round  about  the  l’egion  of  the  Fourth
Hour,  and  they  live  upon  what  they  find  on  their  way.

The  last  hour,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a part  of  the  dominions  of
Seker,  but  the  Fifth  Hour,  which  is  called  Semit-hkr-abt-uaa-s,'
contains  his  capital  city.  The  descriptive  text  says,  “This  great
“ god  is  drawn  along  over  the  actual  roads  of  the  Tuat,  and  over
“the  hidden  Circle  of  Seker,  the  god  who  is  on  his  sand,  ami  ho
“neither  seetli  nor  looketh  upon  the  hidden  figure  of  the  land
“which  containeth  the  flesh  of  this  god.  The  gods  who  are  with
“ this  god  hear  the  voice  of  Ra-Heru  (?),  and  they  adore  him  at
“ the  seasons  of  this  god.  The  name  of  the  pylon  of  this  city  is

“Aha-ncteru,  — ny — a *1  and  the  name  of  this  Circle  is

a I L . J

“ Ament,  (1  . [Here  are]  the  secret  ways  of  Ament,  and

1 A/WWV  I-  *"

“the  doors  of  the  house  of  Ament,  and  the  habitable  house


U ( JI  Jt*  <=>  I ) the  earth  of  Seker,  and  his  flesh,  and  his

“members,  and  his  body,  in  their  primeval  forms.  The  name  of
“those  who  are  in  this  Circle  is  ‘Baiu  amu  Tuat’  (i.e.,  Souls  in  the


The  forms  who  are  in  their  hours  and  their  hidden  beings


“Tuat).

“ neither  see  nor  look  upon  this  form  of  Seker  himself.  Whosoever
“ maketh  a picture  of  these  things  which  are  in  Ament  in  the  Tuat,
“ to  the  south  of  the  hidden  house,  and  whosoever  knoweth  these
“things,  his  soul  shall  be  at  peace,  and  he  shall  be  satisfied


o


222


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


“ with  the  offerings  of  Seker.  And  Khemit  Ij(J  shall

“not  hack  his  body  in  pieces,  and  he  shall  go  to  her  in  peace.
“ Whosoever  shall  make  offerings  to  these  gods  upon  earth  shall
“ [find]  them  of  benefit  to  him  in  the  Tuat."

The  illustrated  version  of  the  Fifth  Houit  shows  us  Ra
travelling  in  his  serpent  boat  and  being  towed  along  by  seven  gods
and  seven  goddesses,  who  represent  the  gods  of  fourteen  days  of
the  month ; before  these  are  the  divine  sovereign  chiefs,  i.e.,


Her-kliu,  jj  j , An-hetep,  | s&i,  Her-hequi,  £*5  |>j>,

and  H etch-met  ? _|.  Half  way  through  the  hour  Ra  comes  to  a

mound  of  sand,  the  top  of  which  is  surmounted  by  the  head  of  a
woman,  whereon  rests  the  forepart  of  a beetle,  only  one  half  of
which  is  visible,  symbol  of  the  god  Khepera;  this  head  indicates
the  position  of  the  hidden  abode  wherein  is  Seker,  and  when  the
beetle  alights  upon  it  the  god  Khepera  holds  converse  with  that
god.  Immediately  beneath  the  head  is  the  “ Land  of  Seker,"
which  has  the  shape’cuo,  and  is  described  as  the  “ hidden  land  of
“ Seker  which  guardetli  the  hidden  flesh : ” it  is  surrounded  by  a
wall  of  sand,  and  at  each  end,  outside  the  wall,  is  a sphinx  with
the  head  of  a man  and  the  body  of  a lion.  Inside  this  land  is
a two-headed,  winged  serpent,  with  a tail  which  terminates  in  a
human  head ; between  the  wings  stands  a figure  of  the  hawk-
lieaded  god  Seker ; this  serpent  monster  represents  the  god
watching  over  his  own  image.  The  two  sphinxes  are  watched  hy

two  serpents,  Tepan,  “ (|  and  Ankh-aapau,  j (j  ^ ^ :


the  first  serpent  enters  into  the  presence  of  this  god,  and  carries
to  him  daily  the  offerings  which  arc  made  by  the  living,  but  the
second  never  leaves  his  place,  and  lives  upon  the  flames  which
proceed  from  his  own  mouth.  Before  the  second  serpent  are  four
seated  gods,  who  bear  on  their  knees  the  emblems  of  “hidden
symbols”  of  Seker,  i.e.,  (J,  ^ , 3L , and  [j],  and  rest  by  the  side
of  a lake  of  water  called  Nut,  ; ^or  ^lose  who  arc  in


this  lake  its  waters  are  like  fire,  and  each  of  the  heads  of  the  four
gods  which  rise  above  them  bears  upon  it  the  symbol  of  fire.  The
lake  is  watched  over  by  the  company  of  gods  of  Ra,  represented


F


te  axes,
ifth  Hou!


and  call
aws,  is  j


224


BOOK  OF  THE  UNDERWORLD


beetle,  only  one  half  of  which  is  visible.  This  beetle,  or  KheperA,
typified  the  germ  of  life,  and  when  the  boat  of  Rii  was  drawn  on
to  the  top  of  the  mound  of  sand  already  described,  it  was  supposed
to  stop  on  it  as  it  passed,  and  having  done  so,  it  went  to  the  dead
god  and  raised  him  up  to  life.  This  chamber  was  guarded  by  a

two-headed  serpent  called  'Per,  jj  ? and  it  had  to  be

jealously  watched  in  order  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  any  one  who
would  disturb  or  destroy  the  germ  of  life.  A little  beyond  the
chamber  of  sand  is  a group  of  seven  gods,  whose  duty  it  was  to
inspect  the  slaughter  of  the  dead  in  the  Taut,  and  to  consume
their  bodies  bv  the  flames  of  their  mouths  in  the  course  of  each
day ; and  a little  further  on  is  the  goddess  who  “ lives  upon  the
blood  of  the  dead,”  and  who  is  occupied  in  slaying  a man  doomed
to  die  by  the  gods.  When  the  boat  of  Rii  arrived  at  the  end  of
the  Fifth  Hour  he  saw  the  star  of  the  “ living  god,  who  joumeyeth,

“and  journeyeth  and  passeth,”  ^ i j rjp rjp  . l)r.  Urugseh,

and  following  him  M.  Maspero,  and  others,  have  identified  this
star  with  the  planet  Venus,  the  star  of  the  morning,  and  the
identification  is  undoubtedly  correct.  This  is  an  important  fact,
for,  as  M.  Jcquier  has  pointed  out,1  coupled  with  the  representa-
tion of  the  beetle  going  forth  from  the  night  to  place  itself  in  the
boat  of  Ra,  it  shows  us  that  the  domain  of  Scker,  although  reduced
to  two  hours  which  have  been  inserted  in  their  proper  geographical
position  in  the  Tuat,  certainly  at  one  time  formed  a complete  hell,
and  that  the  rising  of  the  sun  was  the  final  event  which  took  place
in  it.

The  Sixth  Hour,  which  is  called  M e si* b hit- a u a t-  m a .vr  u ,a


brings  us  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  shrines  of  Osiris  in  the
Delta.  The  descriptive  text  says,  “ W hen  this  great  god  arri veth
“ at  the  abyss  of  water,  which  is  the  lady  of  the  gods  of  the  Tuat,
“ he  holdeth  discourse  with  the  gods  who  are  there,  and  he  giveth
“ the  command  for  them  to  obtain  the  mastery  over  their  offerings


*)  in  this  city.  He  saileth  in  this  [Field]  being


1

2


THE  PITS  OF  THE  TUAT  225

provided  with  his  boat,  and  he  comraandeth  them  [to  have]  their
fields  for  their  offerings,  and  he  giveth  them  water  for  their
streams  as  they  go  about  the  Tuat  each  dav.  The  name  of  the


tosa;


to!


pylon  of  this  city  is  Sept-mctu  /\  fl  ^ ^ ^).  The

hidden  path  of  Amentet,  on  the  stream  of  which  this  great  god


226


THE  SIXTH  HOUR


‘ journeycth  in  his  boat  to  perform  the  affairs  of  the  gods  of  the
“ Tuat,  and  the  collecting  of  their  names,  and  the  manner  in  which
“ their  forms  rest,  and  all  that  appei’taineth  to  their  hidden  hours,
“ and  the  hidden  similitude  of  the  Tuat,  are  unknown  ....  The
“ majesty  of  this  god  utteretli  words,  and  he  giveth  divine  offerings
“ to  the  gods  who  are  in  the  Tuat,  and  he  standeth  near  them ;
“ they  see  him,  and  they  have  the  mastery  over  their  fields  and
“over  the  gifts  which  are  made  to  them,  and  they  have  their
“beings  through  the  command  which  this  great  god,  who  is
“ mighty  of  words,  giveth  unto  them.  The  name  of  this  district


“ is  Metchet-nebt-Tuatiu


Ofh


A/VWNA

AMAM

AWAA


£!)•■


The


I ' CTD

third  paragraph  of  the  text  promises  to  those  who  make  pictures
of  the  Sixth  Hour  a participation  in  the  offerings  which  have
been  made  to  the  gods  in  the  train  of  Osiris,  and  also  that
offerings  shall  be  made  to  them  by  their  kinsfolk  on  earth.

The  illustrated  edition  of  the  Sixth  Hour  shows  us  that  Ra
has  no  longer  any  need  of  the  boat  which  was  made  of  the  body  of
a serpent  wherein  he  passed  through  the  realm  of  Seker,  and  that
he  is  once  again  in  his  old  boat  and  sailing  over  the  waters  of  the
stream  in  the  Tuat.  In  front  of  his  boat  are  : — 1 . Thoth,  who  is
called  Khenti-Tuat,  and  who  is  represented  by  a dog-headed  god
holding  an  ibis  on  his  out-stretched  right  hand  ; and  2.  the  goddess

Ament-semu-set,  (J  j|  j ^ . Beyond  these  is  a large

house  with  sixteen  divisions,  in  each  of  which  is  a god  in  mummied
form ; these  represent  the  mansions  of  Osiris,  and  four  contain
kings  of  the  South,  four  contain  kings  of  the  North,  four  contain

Heteptiu,  ^ j , and  four  contain  Spirits.  All  these  form  the
guardians  of  a huge  five-headed  serpent  called  Ash-hrau,  ^ ! ,

v— , * I I


the  body  of  which  is  bent  round  into  an  irregular  oval  in  such  a
way  that  his  tail  almost  touches  one  of  his  heads.  Lying  on  his

back  within  this  oval  is  a god  who  is  called  Afu,  |,  i.e.,  “Flesh,”

and  as  he  is  touching  with  his  right  hand  the  leg  of  a beetle  which
he  holds  on  his  head,  we  may  assume  that  he  represents  the  dead
body  of  Khepera,  and  is  the  opposite  of  the  Sun-god  in  his  boat,

who  is  called  “ Flesh  of  Ra,”  | o . The  sixteen  gods  mentioned


The  Sixth  Hour  of  the  Night.


228


THE  SIXTH  HOUR


above  are  addressed  by  Ra,  who  commands  them  to  be  happy  with
their  offerings,  and  to  protect  him,  and  to  slay  the  serpent  Apepi ;
they  hearken  to  his  voice,  and  the  text  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is
the  voice  of  Ra  which  will  make  the  god  within  the  folds  of  the
serpent  Ash-hrau  and  the  beetle  upon  his  head  to  move.  With
these  must  be  mentioned  the  double  company  of  the  gods  of  Osiris,
one  company  being  depicted  in  human  form  sitting  on  invisible


thrones;  these  are: — Hetep-IIenti-Tuat,  *,  Ast-amhit,  jj

Asiir-am-ub-neteru,  X ^ f
, Benti-ar-aht-f,  Jj


to


I

III’


Heru-khenti-


<=*  w


, and  three  gods  whose


Maa-ab-khenti-aht-f,  flit)  ^ ^ Q

names  are  not  given.  The  second  company  of  nine  gods  is  repre-
sented by  nine  sceptres,  each  of  which  has  a knife  fixed  at  its  base,
J ; the  first  three  are  surmounted  by  the  white  crowns,  ,
the  second  three  by  the  red  crowns,  ^/,  and  the  third  three  by
uraei,  Next  we  have  the  lion  god  Ka-hemhem,  lj  ro

with  Isis,  and  Horus,  and  the  mummied  figure,  s=j  s=s  ^


i

ill’


armed  with  and,  , who  keep  guard  over  the  three  houses
of  Ra,  each  of  which  is  protected  by  a serpent  god  standing  upon
its  tail  and  emitting  fire  from  its  mouth.  The  first  house  is  called

Het-tua-Ra  oflX  and  has  for  its  symbol  ~2pt,  and  the  sign  - ^ ;
the  second  is  called  Het-stau-Kher-nha-Ra,  n Q fl\  , and
has  for  its  symbol,  ® ; and  the  third  is  called  Het-temtet-Rii,
Q <=^‘  ***,  and  has  for  its  symbol,  the  head  of  a man.  On
the  left  hand  side  of  the  boat  of  the  Sun-god  are  two  gods
whose  names  ai*e  wanting,  Ahi,  (J  (j(J,  Netch-atef,  n— {j  ^ ,
Ankh-hra,  Met-hra,  | ^ (Sept-hra  ^ ?),  Netch-pautti,

; the  goddesses  Antheth,  (j  A MW


n '

\Tr\Tr  hi


Henhenith,


1|(J  s==»#  Hemt,  ^ an<^  Sehith,  and  the

monster  serpent  Am-khu,  — a ^ | j , which  bears  on  its

back  the  heads  of  the  four  Children  of  Horus,  Mesthu,  Hupi,


230


THE  SEVENTH  HOUR


Tuamutef,  and  Qebhsennuf.  The  duty  of  this  serpent  is  to  devour
the  shadows  and  the  spirits  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,  who  are  over-
thrown in  the  Tuat.  The  monster  is  followed  by  the  four  earthly

forms  of  Osiris,  Kai,  S (j(|,  Meni-ret,  /j/|  Enen-retui,
^ and  Urt,  <cr>,  and  nine  fire-spitting  serpents  armed
with  knives,  which  are  Ta-thenen,  ~ Tern,  Ehepera,  Shu,
Seb,  Osiris,  Horus,  Apu,  Xjf  and  Iletepui,  . The  duty

of  these  gods  consisted  in  destroying  the  enemies  of  Kliepera,
and  in  cutting  up  their  shadows;  they  lived  in  Nu  and  in  the
water  of  Ta-thenen,  and  Kliepera  by  means  of  his  magical  power
daily  made  them  to  breathe  through  the  word  of  Iia.

The  Seventh  Hour,  which  is  called  Ivhesef-haa-iieseq-Neha-
hka,1  takes  us  into  the  region  of  the  Tuat  which  contains  the
hidden  abode  of  the  god  Osiris.  The  descriptive  text  says,
“ When  the  majesty  of  this  great  god  arriveth  in  the  hidden  abode

“ ( Tephd  ^ ^ Osiris,  lie  addressetli  to  the  gods  who  are

“ there  [suitable]  words.  This  god  maketh  to  himself  other  forms
“for  this  hidden  abode,  so  that  he  may  turn  back  the  way  for
“Apep  by  means  of  the  magical  words  of  Isis,  and  the  magical

“ words  of  Ser,  , The  name  of  the  pylon  of  this  city  through
“ which  the  god  journeyeth  is  ‘ Gate  of  Osiris  ’ (<=>  ^ J^);

“ and  the  name  of  the  city  is  Tepliet-shetat  ^ ^

“ This  great  god  passe th  over  the  hidden  way  of  Araentet  in  his
“ boat  which  is  endowed  with  magical  powers,  and  he  journeyeth
“ over  it  when  there  is  no  stream  in  it,  and  when  there  are  none  to
“ tow  him.  He  performeth  this  by  means  of  the  words  of  power
“ of  Isis  and  of  Ser,  and  by  means  of  the  mighty  words  of  power
“which  proceed  from  his  own  mouth,  and  in  this  region  of  the
“Tuat  he  inflicteth  with  the  knife  wounds  upon  Apep,  whose
“ place  is  in  heaven.”  The  man  who  shall  make  a picture  of  the
things  which  are  to  the  north  of  the  hidden  house  of  the  Tuat  shall
find  it  of  great  benefit  to  him  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth ; and


1 ro^C  IMu.  -If  fco  T**  *i-


THE  SEVENTH  HOUR


231


he  who  knows  it  shall  be  among  the  spirits  near  Ra,  and  he  who
recites  the  words  of  Isis  and  Ser  shall  repulse  Apep  in  Amentet,
and  he  shall  have  a place  on  the  boat  of  Rsi  both  in  heaven  and


upon  earth.  The  man  who  knows  not  this  picture  shall  never  be
able  to  repulse  the  serpent  Nelm-hra.

The  text  continues,  “ The  shallows  of  the  land  of  Neha-hra  are


232


THE  SEVENTH  HOUR


“450  cubits  long,  and  it  is  filled  with  his  folds,  but  over  one
“ portion  thereof  this  great  god  joumeyeth  not  when  he  travefleth
“ to  the  hidden  abode  of  Osiris,  for  he  journeyeth  through  this  city

“ under  the  form  of  the  god  Mehen,  lAJl)  . Neha-hra  shall

“never  drink  the  water  of  him  that  knoweth  this,  and  the
“ soul  which  knoweth  it  shall  never  bo  given  over  to  the  violence
“of  the  gods  who  are  in  this  Circle;  and  the  crocodile  Ab-she


“ ( a JJ  csa)  shall


never  eat  the  soul  of  him  that  knoweth  it.”


From  what  is  said  above  we  see  that  the  boat  of  Ra  has  arrived  at
a shallow  place  in  the  celestial  stream  where  there  is  not  enough
water  to  float  the  boat,  or  even  to  allow  it  to  be  towed  ; moreover,
the  serpent  Neha-hra  opposes  the  advance  of  the  god.  In  this
difficulty  Isis,  the  great  enchantress,  enters  the  boat,  and  standing
in  the  bows  utters  the  words  which  make  it  proceed  on  its  way.
Neha-hra,  as  we  see  from  the  illustrated  edition  of  the  hour,  is


and  held  in


seized  by  Serqet  and  Her-tesu-f,  ^

bonds,  and  is  transfixed  to  the  ground  by  six  knives;  thus  Ra,
with  the  serpent  Mehen  over  him  in  the  form  of  a canopy,  moves
on  without  let  or  hindrance.  Behind  the  monster  serpent  stand
four  goddesses,  each  armed  with  a huge  knife,  whose  duty  it  is  to
guard  the  tombs  of  the  four  forms  of  Osiris;  the  names  of  the


four  goddesses  are : — Temtith,


Tenith,


Nakith,  /j  /j£j  s=*,  and  Hetcmitet,  ^ jj  (j(j  Their  duty

was  to  drive  away  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  to  hack  in  pieces  with
their  awful  knives  the  fiend  Apep  every  day.  The  four  tombs  of
Osiris  are  rectangular  buildings,  and  inside  each  is  a bed  or  small
mound  of  sand  whereundcr  lie  the  dead  souls  of  the  god,  which  are
known  by  the  names  Tern,  Khepera,  Ra,  and  Osiris.  At  each  end
of  each  tomb  is  a human  head,  which  is  said  to  come  forth  from
the  tombs  whenever  it  hears  the  voice  of  Ra,  and  after  he  has
passed  “ they  eat  their  own  forms,”  i.e.,  the  heads  disappear  from
sight.  It  was,  no  doubt,  a custom  in  predynastic  times  to  slay
slaves  at  the  graves  of  kings  and  nobles,  just  as  in  many  parts  of
the  world  it  has  been  the  custom  to  kill  human  beings  and  to  lay
their  bodies  beneath  the  foundations  of  buildings  which  were  to


THE  SEVENTH  HOUR


The  Seventh  Hour  of  the  Night.


234


THE  SEVENTH  HOUR


be  erected  in  order  that  the  souls  of  the  slaughtered  might  protect
them  and  keep  away  evil  spirits.  The  human  heads  on  the  tombs
of  Osiris  probably  represent  a tradition  that,  when  Osiris  was
buried,  human  sacrifices  were  offered  at  his  tomb  for  this  or
for  some  similar  purpose.1  This  view  has  been  well  discussed  by
M.  Lefobure,  who  has  done  so  much  to  illustrate  the  religious
and  funeral  customs  of  the  ancient  Egyptians,3  and  some  allusion
to  it  is  probably  made  by  Horapollo,3  who  says  that  when  they
wanted  to  represent  tf>v\a.KTrjpi.ov  they  were  wont  to  draw  two
human  heads,  one  male  and  the  other  female,  that  of  the  male
looking  inwards,  and  that  of  the  female  outwards.  These  heads
would  keep  away  the  attack  of  any  evil  spirit,  even  if  no  inscription
was  placed  with  them.

The  other  illustrations  of  this  hour  show  us  the  god  Af-Asar,
QSSSSSSL  ^ , i.e.,  “ Flesh  of  Osiris,”  seated  under  a

canopy  made  by  the  body  of  a form  of  the  serpent  Mehen  called
Ankh-aru-tchefau,  with  the  human-headed  serpent

Ankhtith,  and  the  lion-headed  goddess  Hekentli,  ^ s=>,


behind  him ; a little  further  behind  is  the  god  Shepes,


a form  of  Thoth.  Before  the  god  kneel  three  figures,  whose  heads
have  been  cut  off  by  a cat-headed  god,  and  lying  on  the  ground
are  three  beings  who  have  been  fettered  by  the  god  Anku,


IN  /WWW  A

(1  , these  represent  the  enemies  of  Osiris  whose  souls  have


been  plucked  out,  and  whose  shadows  have  been  hacked  in  pieces
because  they  rebelled  against  the  lord  of  the  Tuat.  Before  these
are  three  human-headed  hawks  wearing  double  crowns,  and  they
represent  the  souls  of  the  “living;”  and  on  a serpent  near  is  seated

on  a throne  the  god  Af-Tem,  (j j i.e.,  “Flesh  of

Tem.”  Among  the  other  gods  in  this  hour  is  “Horus  on  his
throne,”  and  before  him  are  a company  of  gods  who  have  been


1 See  Maspero,  Lea  Hypoyt'ea , p.  104 ; Jequier,  op.  cit.,  p.  94.

2 Hites  jEgyptiena^  pp.  4 ff.,  18  ff.

* &v\aKTrjpiov  81  ypatjxiv  /3ov\6pavoit  Svo  Kc<f>a\ds  avOpunrmv  (prypa^owrij  Trjv  piv
rou  apcrcvos  Jcroi  fJKiirowrav,  rryv  Si  OrjkvKtjv  i(ta.  ovru)  yap  <j>a tnv  oiSiy  r&y  Satfiovwv
itfraifrtrai,  inttSri  teal  \u>pls  ypa/x/xarcuv,  k.t.K.  ffieroglyplrica,  i.  24.


The  Seventh  Hour  of  tho  Night.


236


THE  EIGHTH  HOUR


joined  to  their  stars,  and  the  goddesses  of  the  twelve  hours.
Facing  these  companies  is  the  crocodile  “ Ab-sha-am-Tuat,*'

— D-l  \0™  *§*  who  acts  as  guardian  of  the  tomb  of  Osiris
and  of  what  is  in  it.  When  Ha  passes  by  the  crocodile,  which  is
described- as  “Osiris,  the  Eye  of  Ra,”  this  beast  is  fascinated  and
made  helpless  by  the  words  so  long  as  the  god  is  speaking  to  him,
and  the  dead  Osiris,  who  is  in  the  ground  under  the  crocodile,
puts  up  his  head  that  he  also  may  look  at  the  Sun-god ; the


Tho  Seventh  Hour  of  the  Night,


followers  of  Osiris  also  seize  the  opportunity  of  gazing  upon  Ra,
and  do  so  without  risk  of  being  devoured  by  the  monster  whicli
is  temporarily  enchanted.

The  Eighth  Hour,  which  is  called  Nebt  Ushau,1  brings  us
into  a very  interesting  division  of  the  Tuat ; the  name  of  its  pylon


1


% Isltl  % ‘=F51  * j) .


Tho  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night.


238  THE  CIRCLES  OF  THE  TUAT

is  Alia-en-urt-nef,  — 0 f > an<^  the  name  of  the

city  is  Tebat-neteru-s,  <=a  JJ  ^ "j  J (__j.  Ra  passes  through

this  division  in  his  boat  under  the  protection  of  Melien,  and  its
gods  tow  him  at  the  command  of  this  mighty  snake  ; he  sees  all
the  gods  in  their  various  Circles,  and  those  “ who  are  on  their
sand,”  and  he  addresses  words  to  them.  They  come  out  of  their
secret  abodes  when  the  god  passes  by,  and  the  doors  thereof  open
of  their  own  accord.  In  this  Hour  only  gods  and  spirits  who
have  been  mummified  and  buried  with  appropriate  rites  are  to
be  found,  and,  though  dead,  they  quickly  come  to  li&  again  at
the  words  of  Ra,  who  exhorts  them  to  put  an  end  to  all  the
enemies  of  his  who  are  to  be  found  in  that  region.  The  illustrated
edition  of  the  Hour  shows  us  the  boat  of  the  god  being  towed
along,  and  in  front  of  it  are  nine  large  signs,  the  forms  of  which

are  based  upon  the  hieroglyphic  character  fj  shesu  or  shemsu,  i,e.,

follower  ” or  “ servant.”  From  the  top  of  seven  of  these  is
suspended  a human  head,  which  shows  that  we  are  actually
dealing  with  beings  who  are  in  the  following  of  Osiris,  and  before

each  is  the  hieroglyphic  for  “ linen,”  .IX • These  nine  remarkable

objects  represent  beings  who  have  been  mummified  in  the  manner
prescribed  by  Horus,  and  who  are  suitably  provided  with  funeral
bandages ; they  are  described  as  beings  whose  whole  life  is  in
their  heads,  and  when  Ra  calls  to  them  by  their  names  they  imme-
diately seize  his  enemies  everywhere  and  cut  off  their  heads
with  their  knives.  Before  these  are  the  four  forms  of  the

god  Ta-thenen,  which  are  depicted  as  rams  and  are

described  as  “ form  one,”  “form  two,”  “form  three,”

’ anc*  “ ^orm  ^our»”  • On  each  side  of  the  way

by  which  Ra  journeys  are  five  Circles.

The  door  of  the  first  Circle,  Seslieta,  is  called  Tes-neb-terer.

• • . ^37  <|>  ffff,  and  shuts  in  the  images  of  Tern,  Khepera,

and  Shu ; when  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  which
resembles  the  humming  of  bees.  The  door  of  the  second  Circle,


The  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night.


240  * THE  CIRCLES  OF  THE  THAT

Tuat,  *,  is  called  Tes-aha-Ta-thenen, — n f —

and  shuts  in  the  images  of  Tefnut,  Seb,  and  Nut ; when  Ra  speaks

to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  which  resembles  that  of  weeping

women.  The  door  of  the  third  Circle,  As-neteru,  |j  ^ p cm  ^ j ,
is  called  Tes-khem-baiu,  ~ and  shuts  in  the  images

of  Osiris,  Isis,  and  Horus ; when  Rii  speaks  to  them  they  answer
in  a voice  Avhich  resembles  that  of  men  who  moan.  The  door  of


The  Eighth  Hour  of  the  Night.


the  fourth  Circle,  Aakebi,  (j  ^ ffi  J !j|]  is  called  Tes-sheta-
ein-tliehen-neteru,  — ™ c=z  ^nfj»  , and  shuts  in  the  images
of  Ka-Amentet,  j_j  ^ , Ba-neteru,  ^7  "'j6]6] » and  llem-neteru,

cJcjcj ; when  Ru  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  which
is  like  that  of  bulls  and  men  when  they  make  lamentation.  The

n | M A 0 111

door  of  the  fifth  Circle,  Nebt«semu-nefu,  a ||  j q >


THE  CIRCLES  OF  THE  THAT


241


is  called  Tes-sma-kekui,  ^ jj  ^ w*Tr\  and  shuts


in  the  images  of  Khatri,


, Affi,  I)


and  Aranbfi,


A J1  ’^1  \\;  when  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a voice

which  is  like  unto  that  of  him  that  maketh  supplication  in  terror.
These  five  Circles  are  shut  in  by  a door  called  Tes-khaibit-tuatiu,

TTT  I * C"~:1  ! ‘ ^ie  ^oor  °f  the  sixth  Circle  is  called

m„u  -rmon-tn  ? <=>  and  shuts  in  some  divine  beings

les-eimenta,  fe

whose  attributes  are  not  yet  all  clearly  defined ; when  Ra  speaks
to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  which  is  like  that  of  male  cats  when
they  mew.  The  door  of  the  seventh  Circle,  Hetemet-khemiu,


01  ^


O


is  called  Tos  - Ra  - khefti  - f,
and  shuts  in  Nut,  Ta,  and  Sebeq-hra,

P J|  A 1 T’  w^en  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  -which
is  like  the  roar  of  the  living.  The  door  of  the  eighth  Circle,
Hap  - semu  - s,  j is  called  Tes  - sekhem  - aru,

■<s>-  ^ |,  and  shuts  in  four  gods;1  when  Ra

speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  which  is  like  the  shouts  of

war  heard  in  the  battle  of  Nu.  The  door  of  the  ninth  Circle,
Sehert-baiu-s,  — jj  <^>  ^ ^ 'JJ  cm,  is  called  Tes-sept-nestu,
^2  ] JJ  ^ | ^ j , and  shuts  in  four  gods ; 2 when  Ra

speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a voice  which  is  like  that  of  the

cry  of  the  divine  hawk  of  Horus.  The  door  of  the  tenth

Circle,  Aat-setekau,  j)  JJ  ^ Qj  JJ>  *3  caded  Tes"khu>

^ H i’ and  shuts  iu  four  °otls  iu  tlie  forra  of  uraei


1 i J P o T’ ?ebset  s Senkot;  J ^ *=>  Tebat;  and

Temtet,  ^ ° .

c=i±=>

u Keku;  JJ  | Ijlj,  Menlju;  ^ ^ j , Tcher-klm ; and

® J p jJJ  Khobs-ta.


242


THE  NINTH  HOUR


who  rest  upon  11;  when  Ra  speaks  to  them  they  answer  in  a
voice  which  is  like  the  twittering  and  chattering  of  water-fowl  on
a lake.  The  last  five  Circles  are  shut  in  by  a door  called  Tes-am-

mit-em-sheta-f,  = •

The  Ninth  Hour,  which  is  called  Tuatet-maket-neb-s,1
brings  us  into  a country  which  is  called  the  “hidden  Circle  of

“ Amentet  ” ; the  name  of  the  city  is  Bes-aru,  J — '5P

and  th®  name  of  its  pylon  is  Sa-Akeb,

“ When  the  great  god  arrivetli  in  this

“ Circle  he  addresseth  from  his  boat  the  gods  who  are  therein,  and
“ the  sailors  who  are  in  his  boat  are  content  with  this  city.”  The
man  who  shall  make  a copy  of  the  scenes  of  this  Hour,  and  shall
know  the  names  of  the  gods  and  their  places  in  Amentet  shall
attain  to  a position  in  Amentet,  and  he  shall  stand  up  in  the
presence  of  the  lord  of  affairs  and  shall  enjoy  the  power  of  making

what  he  says  to  come  to  pass  with  the  divine  assessors,  ! ,

on  the  day  of  reckoning  up  accounts  by  Per-aa  (Pharaoh).  The
illustrated  edition  of  this  Hour  shows  us  the  boat  of  the  god
travelling  on  as  before,  and  in  front  of  it  are  twelve  divine  rowers,

v rl  wav  •

each  with  his  paddle  ; among  these  are  Rlienu,  ^ , Akhem-


sek-f,  (j  © Akliem-urt-f,  (|  © xZ*  ’ Akhem-hemi-f,

{j  © ^ (j|j  Akhem-khemes-  a Khen-

unnut-f,  ^ ? Hapti-ta-f>  ye^eP"u^a>

— ^n5,  Neter-neteru,  ^ ^ ! . Tcha-Tuat,  | and  Tcpi,  (|(J .

The  duty  of  these  sailors  is  not  only  to  row,  but  also  to  throw  water
with  their  paddles  upon  the  spirits  who  stand  on  each  bank  of  the
river  whereon  the  god  sails,  and  they  have  to  lead  the  soul  of  lia
to  the  place  where  he  will  reanimate  the  disk.  Before  these
sailors,  resting  on  baskets,  are  the  three  gods  who  give  abundant


3 801,10  w>J,iC8  add  f T'J-M  A ! •


The  Ninth  ITour  of  the  Night.


244


THE  NINTH  HOUR


offerings,  Muti-klienti-Tuat,  ^ ^ (Hh  ^ vv  Nesti-khenti-
Tuat,  ® rflh  ^ *JL,  and  Nebt-au-khent-Tuat,  v
({111  o^n*  *be  right  the  boat  of  Ra  passes  twelve  gods,  each
seated  on  11,  and  twelve  goddesses ; these  last  are  said  to  breathe

after  he  has  saluted  them,  and  after  they  have  heard  his  voice,
and  their  duty  is  to  utter  words  of  power  wherewith  they  are
to  surround  the  hidden  soul,  and  thereby  to  cause  life  and
strength  to  rise  up  in  Osiris.  The  names  of  these  are : — Nehata,


Teba,  <==»  J |,  Ariti,  ^s=- 1-^  Menkhet,

1 1 . I.lebs,  J Nebti,  Asti-neter,  jj  ~ cm  ^ ,

Asti-paut,  jj^cm®,  Hetemet-khu,  ° J Neb-pat,


ra

© a


■ D n !
O I


i , Temtu,


'sx  ! — , Meu-a,

- c^£=


) — a,  Perit,


Shemat-khu,  <=>  j , Nebt-shsit,
shefet,  x=7 130  00  o , Aat-aatet,

" ^ _ jc  _ ■*—  *

Nebt-setau,


^ ! , Hent-nut-s,  ^


KZ7  C30

o i l l
o


, Nebt-shef-


; ■


WvW  1

AVAAA


.VLYKLY,  I

W !


•,  Nebt-


mat,  v Q (1  ° ! , Tesert-ant,  ^ (1  fX , Aat-khu,  HZi  ^

’ Q 4Hl’  ‘ ’ <=>  rr“=i  1 Ka  ’ ’ c-“=>

Sekhet-metu,  ^ ® | ^ jj,  Netert-en-khentet-Rsi,

^ <=> JL  ^ ® . On  the  left  are  twelve  uraei,  each  of  whom

rests  on  j!  1 . and  sends  out  fire  through  his  mouth;  they  are  said


to  kindle  the  fire  for  the  god  who  is  in  the  Tuat  with  the  fire
which  is  in  their  mouths,  and  when  the  god  has  passed  on  his  way
they  eat  up  the  fire  which  they  poured  forth  before  Ra  went
by.  The  object  of  the  fire  was,  of  course,  to  show  light  on  his
path.  Before  these  uraei  come  the  nine  gods  of  cultivation  and  of
husbandry,  who  are  under  the  direction  of  a god  in  mummified

form ; these  nine  are  the  sekhtiu , (}jjj|  ^ ^ j , or  “ field-labourers,”

of  the  god  Her-she-tuati,  ^ cm  k | , their  leader,

and  they  perform  all  the  works  connected  with  the  ploughing  and
watering  of  the  fields.


Tho  Ninth  Hour  of  the  Night.


246


THE  TENTH  HOUR.


The  Tenth  Houb,  which  is  called  Tentit-uhksqet-khat-ab,1
brings  Ra  in  his  boat  to  the  city  called  Metchet-qat-utebu,

T®’ with  ite i>y|on  called Aa-

kheperu-mes-ara.  | ||

The  boat  of  the  sun  travels  on  as  before,  but  Ra  again  holds  a
serpent  in  his  hand  after  the  manner  of  a staff.  Immediately  in

front  is  the  serpent  Thes-hriiu,  fc"9<r  *** ! , with  a head  at  each  end

of  his  body ; on  one  head  is  the  white  crown,  and  on  the  other
the  red  crown ; he  has  two  pairs  of  human  legs,  one  pair  turned
towards  the  right,  and  the  other  pair  towards  the  left.  His
body  is  bent  in  the  form  of  a pair  of  horns,  and  in  the  curve  stands
Khent-Heru,  |jj|^  c=3,  in  the  form  of  a black  hawk ; on  the  left  is

the  goddess  of  the  north,  Neith,  with  her  two  bows,  and  on
the  right  is  the  goddess  Hert-ermen,  'r~^*  Next  comes  a boat

containing  the  serpent  Ankh-ta,  and  before  it  are  three  groups,
each  containing  four  gods.  The  gods  of  the  first  group  have  solar
disks  for  heads,  and  are  armed  with  arrows,  and  are  called

Tepthera,  ® (j,  Shesera,  ^55  {j,  Temau,  . and  Utu,

^ The  gods  of  the  second  group  carry  each  a javelin,

and  are  called  Setu,  % . Rau,  , Tvhesfu,  , and

Nekenu,  o ; and  the  gods  of  the  third  group  carry  each  a


bow,  and  are  called  Pesthi,  a , Shemcrthi,  ’ ''  ' w,  Thesu,

7S9eS  ^ I’  an<^  Kk*-a,  | — d.  All  these  gods  accompany  Ra

as  he  goes  towards  the  east,  and  they  slay  all  his  enemies  who
live  in  the  darkness,  and  wreak  special  vengeance  on  the  serpent
Neha-hra  ; they  escort  the  god  to  the  very  limits  of  the  Hour,  and
form  part  of  his  train  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  sky.  The  name

of  the  region  traversed  by  Ra  in  this  Hour  is  Akert,  |j  ^ ® °


nan


[W)


As  the  boat  of  Ra  passes  the  god  sees  the  “living  beetle,”  * °
born  in  the  presence  of  the  god  P-anklii,  □ M , and  sees  how  he


248


THE  TENTH  HOUR


pushes  before  him  his  zone,  0 ^ C=D.  Next  Ave  have  the  two

serpents,  Menenui,  ^ *)•*)-  \ standing  on  their  tails,  and

holding  on  their  bent  necks  a solar  disk ; and  two  seated  personifi-
cations of  the  South  and  North ; and  the  two  goddesses,  Netheth,

/wwvx  ^ r\

*==>,  and  Ivenat,  (1^,  one  of  whom  supports  the  hatchet,
and  the  other  the  solar  disk,  which  rests  upon  it,  ^j.  From  the
serpents  go  forth  two  goddesses,  those  of  the  East  and  West ; and
from  the  axe,  called  Seftit,  (j(j  ^ “j , go  forth  the  goddesses  of

the  East  and  West  also ; i.e.,  these  goddesses  are  the  souls  of  the
serpents  and  of  the  axe,  which  come  forth  to  look  upon  the  Sun-
god,  and  as  soon  as  he  has  passed  they  return  into  their  material
bodies.

Next  Ra  sees  eight1  goddesses  advancing  to  a seated  dog-
headed god,  who  presents  to  them  the  Eye  of  Horus,  and
their  duty  is  to  see  that  it  is  in  good  condition,  and  to  take  care  of
it  and  protect  it,  so  that  it  may  shine  daily.  Besides  these  there

come  the  eight  gods  called  Ermenui,  '”"7,  Neb-siqet,  '^37  M,

Tua-khu,  ^ © j , Her-she-taiu,  Sem-Ileru,

Tua-Heru,  ^ ^ , Khenti-ast-f,  jj  , and  Khenti-ment,

“5^  0 j j the  duty  of  these  gods,  who  lived  by  the  breath  of  the
great  god,  was  to  wreck  the  bodies  and  scatter  the  swatlrings  of
the  enemies  of  Ra.  On  his  left  hand  Ra  passed  in  his  journey
through  this  Hour  Horus,  and  twelve  beings  who  dive  and  swim
and  perform  evolutions  in  tanks  of  water.  These  are  said  to
beat  the  water  in  their  attempts  to  recover  their  breath,  and  Ra
calls  upon  them  to  fill  themselves  with  the  water  of  the  celestial
Nile,  and  promises  that  their  members  shall  not  suffer  corruption,
and  that  their  bodies  shall  not  perish ; he  decrees  that  they  shall


1 I.e.,  Sekliet,  ^ <=»}  Menkert,
^ (jtj  -a,  Abet-weteru-s,  ^ ^ j — *— ,
and  Theinatli,  *


<=> , Huntlietli,  j?  -JU  , Usit,

A/VWVA  & A V S-  - >

crr.v5=a  _ M fl

Aritathetli,  ^ s-ra  y Aliat,  fl  T 0 >


THE  TENTH  HOUR  249

be  masters  of  their  own  arms  in  their  water  because  they  are  the
denizens  of  Nu,  and  that  their  souls  shall  live.  Beyond  these  are


4b —


four  goddesses,  each  with  a serpent  hanging  down  her  back  with
its  head  above  her  own,  and  with  them  is  a standard  surmounted


250


THE  ELEVENTH  HOUR


by  the  head  of  Set,  This  god  was  the  guardian  of  the  Tenth

Hour,  and  when  Ra  was  about  to  pass  from  it  into  the  eastern  part
of  the  sky,  Set  was  believed  to  rouse  himself  and  to  make  the
journey  with  him.  The  four  goddesses  “ who  lived  by  their
heads,”  shed  light  on  the  path  of  Ra.

The  Eleventh  Houb,  which  is  called  Sbbuit-nebt-uaa-
KHESFET-SKBAU-EM-PEHT-r,*  brings  us  to  a city  called  Re-qerert-apt-

khat,  T*  ^ o 1 9,  ®>  with  a py,on  bc“rins the

name,  of  Sekhen-tuatiu,  ^ ^ crm  j -man-;  the  object  of

the  texts  and  the  illustrations  which  accompany  it  was  to  enable
the  spirits  of  the  dead  to  become  participators  with  the  gods,  and
to  provide  them  with  such  things  as  were  necessary  for  their
equipment  both  in  heaven  and  upon  earth.  Ra  stands  as  usual  in
his  boat,  but  he  has  changed  the  serpent  which  he  held  in  his  hand


as  a sceptre  for  the  ordinary  sceptre,  |,  and  on  the  bows  of  the
boat  we  see  a solar  disk,  surrounded  by  a serpent ; the  name  of  this

disk  is  ^ <=^‘  j or  Pestu  or  Pestet,  and  it  is  probably

connected  with  some  well-known  star  which  l’ose  heliaeally  at
certain  seasons  of  the  year.  The  duty  of  the  disk  was  to  guide
the  boat  of  the  great  god  along  the  paths  which  led  to  that  part
of  the  Tuat,  at  the  end  of  the  Eleventh  Hour,  where  the  darkness
faded  away  ; the  texts  call  the  darkness  at  this  point  keku  /ecskexu,


^ WTT*


i i r

h


i.e.,  the  opposite  of  the  kelcu i sanmi ,


<2  w i


i , or  the  thick,  solid  darkness  which


filled  the  greater  part  of  the  Tuat.  Before  the  boat  of  Ra  are
twelve  gods,  who  carry  upon  their  heads  the  serpent  Me  hen  to  the

eastern  part  of  the  sky;  their  names  are: — Fa,  , Erinenu,


O,  Athpi,


Retu,


a Net.ru,  » ^ , Shepu,  X □ \ >
> Amu'  Ama>  She*u-


S‘  ' ■*  *


The  Eleventh  Hour  of  the  Night.


252


THE  ELEVENTH  HOUR


^ , Sekhenu,  ^ ^ , Semsem,  , and  Mehni,  (J(J .

Before  these  are : — 1.  A uraeus  wearing  the  crown  of  the  North
and  a human  head ; and,  2.  A uraeus  from  the  back  of  which
emerges  the  white  crown,  with  a human  head  on  each  side  of  it.

The  first  of  these  is  called  Sem-shet,  'Tft 1 30 , and  the  second

^ -u  D

Sem-Nebt-het,  Tt?-*  'jj ; the  human  heads  on  the  white  crown  only
come  forth  when  Ra  is  passing  by,  and  when  he  has  departed  they
disappear.  Next  we  have  figures  of  the  four  forms  of  the  goddess
Neith,  two  of  them  wearing  the  white  crown,  and  two  the  red ;


Q , in  allusion  to  the  belief
f=G)


A/WWV


they  are  called  Neith  the  fecundator,
that  this  goddess  begat  herself,  Neith  of  the  red  crown,

Neith  of  the  white  crown,  ^ Q,  and  Neith  the  child,  ^


V’


these  goddesses  came  into  being  as  soon  as  they  heard  the  voice  of
Ra,  and  their  duty  was  to  guard  the  gate  of  Sais,  (|(j  the

unknown,  the  unseen,  the  invisible,  <T>  *-=_  ~fL'  OO  -a—  <=>

This  Circle  of  the  Tuat  through  which  the  god  travels  to  appear  in
the  mountain  of  the  sunrise  contains  many  wonderful  beings,  and
it  is  said  to  “ swallow  always  the  forms  therein  in  the  presence  of


“ the  god  who  knoweth,  Jj , who  is  in  this  city,  and  afterwards

“ it  giveth  them  for  the  births  of  those  who  are  to  come  into  being
“ on  this  earth.”  Among  these  are : — A god  with  the  solar  disk

for  a head ; from  it  project  two  human  heads,  one  wearing  and

the  other  /^f.  He  is  called  Aper-hra-neb-tchctta,  atl^

stands  facing  a god  having  two  heads,  but  without  crowns,  whose
name  is  Tepui,  In  the  space  between  we  see  a serpent

provided  with  a pair  of  wings  and  four  human  legs  and  feet,  facing

the  serpent  Shetu,  ™ * , upon  the  back  of  which  is  seated  a

eJtSa  (II  *

god ; the  heads  of  both  serpents  are  among  a number  of  stare.
Standing  by  the  side  of  the  winged  serpent,  which  is  called

Tchet-s,  ^7)  , is  a god  called  Petra,  (j  with  his  arras

stretched  out  in  such  a way  as  to  keep  the  wings  wide  apart  ; he
has  on  his  head  a disk,  and  his  neck  is  between  the  double  utchat,


The  Eleventh  Hour  of  the  Night.


254


THE  ELEVENTH  HOUR


The  descriptive  text  says  that  the  god  with  a disk  and

~j^y  by  Ha,” 1 iind  that  he

never  leaves  his  place  in  the  Tuat.  The  god  who  stands  by  the
winged  serpent  is  Teniu,  who  springs  out  of  the  reptile’s  back
when  Ha  addresses  it;  but  as  soon  as  the  words  cease  Temu
disappears  into  the  serpent.  The  second  serpent  is  the  con-
stellation Shetu,  i.e.,  the  Tortoise,  and  its  soul  appears  in  human
form  on  its  back  as  soon  as  Ra  addresses  it,  but  when  the  words
have  ceased  like  Temu  it  disappears  into  its  body.  The  duty  of
Slietu  was  to  “ emit  life  for  Ra  every  day.”

Before  these  march  Khnemu  and  ten  gods,  five  of  whom  have
no  arms ; from  the  neck  of  one  of  these  project  the  heads  of  two
serpents.3  From  the  descriptive  text  we  learn  that  the  souls  of
these  gods  lived  on  the  hidden  light  of  11a  ; that  the  breath  of  his
mouth  gave  them  life,  and  that  their  souls  fed  upon  the  provisions
which  were  stored  in  his  boat ; their  chief  duty  was  to  be  with  and
in  attendance  upon  the  god.  Besides  these  gods  we  also  have  in
this  Hour  four  goddesses,  each  of  whom  sits  upon  the  bodies  of
two  uraei,  which  are  bent  upwards  in  such  a way  sis  to  form  a
seat ; the  heads  of  each  pair  of  uraei  are  reared  up  in  front  of  the
knees  of  the  goddess,  who  is  sitting  on  their  backs,  and  whose  feet
rest  upon  their  necks.  Each  goddess  has  her  right  hand  raised  as
if  to  hide  her  face,  and  with  her  left  she  grasps  the  body  of  one
of  the  uraei.  It  is  possible  that  the  uraei  are  only  four  in  number,
and  that  they  are  two-headed  ; the  goddesses  are  called  Nebt-

ankhiu,  -"p  j . Nebt-khu,  ! , Nert,  and

Hent  (?)-neteru,  ^ (*||.  The  descriptive  text  says  that  the
arms  of  these  beings  are  on  earth,  and  their  feet  in  the  thick


two  heads  is  “he  who  stands,


1 M.  Miispern  s]X*aks  of  him  ;is  the  a^ratliodenum  ” of  Ra.


‘ The  names  are : — Klinem-remt,
kha-nof,  ZIZj]


‘ , Nuria,


, Apt-taui,  , Mer-cm-aaai-f,

1 c 7


, Aaiu-f-oin-
, Aun&auif.


i|  \ w,  Rest-f,  p Tua-^leru,  * Mai,  Moskhti,

jj]  & , and  Ifepa,


THE  PITS  OF  THE  THAT


255


darkness,  and  as  long  as  the  god  is  speaking  to  them  they  utter
cries  and  acclaim  him  ; they  never  move  from  their  places,  and
their  souls  live  upon  the  voices  of  the  uraei  which  go  forth  from
their  feet  daily.  When  the  shadows  depart  the  winds  which  arise
in  the  Tuat  are  diverted  from  the  faces  of  the  four  goddesses  by
their  hands,  which  they  hold  up.  In  this  statement  we  seem  to
have  an  allusion  to  the  keen,  fresh  wind  of  daAvn  with  which  all
travellers  in  the  desert  are  well  acquainted,  and  which  usually
blows  about  one  hour  before  sunrise.

In  the  region  on  the  left  hand  side  of  Ra  we  see  how
punishment  is  inflicted  upon  the  enemies  of  Ra,  and  in  it  we  have
a country  of  blazing  fire.  At  one  end  stands  Horus  with  a disk,
surrounded  by  a uraeus,  upon  his  head,  holding  in  his  left  hand  a


boomerang,  one  end  of  which  terminates  in  the  head  of  a serpent ;
the  idea  here  suggested  is  that  the  weapon  held  by  the  god  is  a
real  serpent,  which  when  thrown  at  an  enemy  will  suddenly  attach
itself  to  his  body  after  the  manner  of  the  vicious  uraeus.  The
right  arm  of  Horus  rests  on  a staff  wherewith  the  god  usually
supports  himself,  and  before  him  rears  itself  a huge  serpent  called

“Set  of  millions  of  years,’’  ^ the  duty  of  which  was  to

devour  any  of  the  enemies  of  Ra,  i.<\,  the  dead,  who  succeeded
in  making  their  escape  from  the  fires  of  the  country  of  the
Eleventh  Hour.  In  front  of  these  were  the  five  awful  chambers,
or  pits  in  the  sky,  which  wore  filled  with  the  red-hot  materials  of
blazing  fires,  and  employed  to  consume  the  enemies  of  Ra.


The  first  chamber  01


• pit,  llatet,  ^


was  filled  with  the


bodies  of  fiends  who  were  dashing  out  their  own  brains  with  axes,
’ an^  Avas  un^er  the  charge  of  a lion-headed  goddess,
called  llert-Ketit-s,


p,  who  stood  by  its  side  and


belched  fire  into  it  through  her  mouth  ; when  the  fire  had  done  its
work  on  the  wretched  creatures  they  were  hacked  to  pieecs  by  the
huge  knife  which  she  held  in  both  her  hands.  The  second
chamber  or  pit  was  also  filled  with  the  bodies  of  fiends,  and  was


underthechargeofawomancalledHert-Hant.ua,  ^ ijjjp  j (|,
who  spat  fire  upon  them  and  Avho  Avas  armed  Avitli  a monster  knife.


256


THE  ELEVENTH  HOUR


The  third  chamber  or  pit  was  filled  with  the  souls,  ^jj*^*^*^**
of  the  fiends,  and  was  under  the  charge  of  a woman  called  Hert-
Nekenit,  (1(1  <=>,  who  spat  fire  upon  them  and  who  was

^ /WWW  II

similarly  armed.  The  fourth  and  fifth  chambers,  which  were  under
the  charge  of  similar  women,  called  H ert-N emmat-set, v ^ ni  P ° ’

and  Hert-sefu-s,  'r~^i  < ( (P,  contained  the  shadows,  TTT>

and  heads,  @@@,  of  the  damned.  Passing  by  these  chambers  we
come  to  the  “ Valley  of  those  who  are  cast  down  headlong,”

(j  ^ <=a  j , which  is  represented  by  a large  hollow  wherein
four  men  are  standing  on  their  heads,  next  to  this  are

four  goddesses  of  the  desert,  each  of  whom  has  upon  her  head
the  emblem  of  desert;  their  names  are  Pesi,


(j  !j  ^ , Her-sha-s,


nr~i

i i i


. and  Sait,  (j(j


Rekhit,
. Each


name  has  a meaning  something  like  fiery,”  and  refers  to  the
goddesses  in  their  character  of  mistresses  of  the  blazing  desert.


Finally,  behind  these  comes  the  god  Her-ut-f,  t=*  , who

was  in  some  way  connected  with  the  embalming  of  the  dead.  The
descriptive  text  which  accompanies  these  scenes  makes  the  great
god  Ra  command  “ his  father  Osiris  to  hack  in  pieces  the  bodies  of
“ the  enemies  and  of  the  dead  who  are  cast  down  headlong.”


Then,  addressing  the  enemies  themselves,  he  tells  them  that
when  his  father  Osiris  hath  smitten  them  for  destruction,  and  hath
cut  in  pieces  their  spirits  and  souls,  and  hath  rent  asunder  their
shadows,  and  hath  cut  off  their  heads  in  such  a way  that  existence
in  the  future  will  be  impossible  for  them,  they  will  be  cast  down
headlong  into  burning  furnaces  from  which  there  is  neither  escape
nor  deliverance,  and  Set  the  everlasting  snake  will  drive  his  flames
against  them,  and  the  Lady  of  furnaces,  and  the  Lady  of  fiery  pits,
and  the  Lady  of  slaughtering  blocks,  and  the  Lady  of  swords,  will
drive  against  them  the  flames  which  come  forth  from  their  mouths,
that  they  will  hack  them  in  pieces  in  such  wise  that  the  wretched
beings  will  never  again  see  those  who  live  upon  the  earth.  The
slaughter  of  the  enemies  is  ordered  to  be  performed  by  Horus,  the
god  of  those  who  are  in  the  Tuat,  and  it  is  curious  to  note  that  the


THE  TWELFTH  HOUR


257


gods  his  companions  are  said  to  live  upon  the  voices  of  the  enemies
who  are  slain,  and  on  the  shrieks  and  cries  of  the  souls  and
shadows  which  are  cast  down  into  the  blazing,  fiery  pits.

The  Twelfth  Hour,  Maa-nefekt-Ra,1  brings  the  god  Rii  into
the  Circle  which  is  on  the  confines  of  thick  dai’kness,  and  to  a city

called  Khepert-kekui-khaat-mest,  ^ ^ ! Qn  ~~qJ1  ! jj|

with  its  pylon  called  Then-neteru,  ! 1 jj  ^ In  this  region  the
god  is  born  under  the  form  of  Khepera,  ^ <=>  | | WW\A

$ <=>  W’  and  Nu>  H and  Nut,  0 Helm,

and  IJehut,  ||  \ **  $ , come  into  the  Circle  when  he  is  born,
and  when  he  goeth  forth  from  the  Tuat  and  resteth  in  the  Man  tit,
^ |j(j  o zjnj , boat,  and  when  he  risetli  on  the  body 2 of  Nut.

Ra  journeys  in  his  boat,  as  before,  but  the  solar  disk  which  was  at
the  bows  in  the  Eleventh  Hour  is  no  longer  there,  and  its  place  is
occupied  by  the  beetle  of  Khepera,  the  forerunner  of  the  rising
sun;'  Twelve  gods  tow  the  boat,  not  over  a river  or  over  the
back  of  a serpent  or  serpents,  but  completely  thromjh  a serpent ; in
front  the  tow-rope  is  held  by  the  hands  of  twelve  women.  This

serpent  is  called  Ka-en-Ankh-neteru,  ULJ  f 1 in’  i,e,»  “the  life
of  the  gods,”  and  the  gods  who  draw  Af,  that  is  to  say,  Ra,
through  it  are  his  “ loyal  servants,”  ! , Amlcltin.  The  boat

enters  the  serpent  at  his  tail  in  deep  darkness,  and  passing
through  his  body  emerges  through  the  mouth  into  the  light  of
day ; the  god  in  his  boat  enters  the  snake  in  the  form  of  a dead,
old  Sun-god,  and  he  comes  forth  not  only  alive,  but  made  young
again,  and  appeal’s  in  the  sky  under  the  form  of  Khepera.  The
“loyal  servants”  of  Ra  are  the  souls  of  the  blessed  which  have
been  so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  admission  into  his  boat ; they  were
his  devout  adorers  when  upon  earth,  and  the  reward  which  they


J>


l


° O *

III  10


3 [ , a word  sometimes  rendered  by  rnha,  / mbia , and , flunk.

8 See  ljttnzone,  Domicile  (let  Esjirita,  pi.  v.


258


THE  TWELFTH  HOUR


obtain  for  their  fidelity  is  renewed  youth  and  a new  birth  upon
the  earth.  What  they  are  to  do  upon  earth  is  not  made  clear,  but
it  is  evident  that  they  cannot  remain  there  for  an  indefinite
period,  for  since  their  master  needs  to  be  re-born  daily  they  also
must  need  re-birth  each  day.  It  is  doubtful,  if  we  judge  by  some
passages,  if  they  came  to  the  earth  at  all,  and  it  is  far  more  likely
that  their  enjoyment  consisted  in  journeying  about  at  will  through
the  sky  and  looking  down  from  some  portion  of  it  upon  the  scenes
of  their  old  life  than  in  making  hurried  visits  to  the  earth  daily.

When  the  boat  of  Ra  has  passed  through  the  serpent  the
twelve  women  or  goddesses,  mentioned  above,  take  the  rope  from
the  gods  and  haul  it  on  to  the  paths  of  the  sky.  The  god  is
accompanied  through  the  Twelfth  Hour  by: — I.  Twelve  goddesses,
each  bearing  a serpent  on  her  head  and  shoulders,  and  2.  Twelve
gods,  or  men,  with  their  hands  raised  in  adoration ; all  these  are
on  the  right  hand  side.  Each  deity  has  a name,  which  is  written
in  front  of  his  or  her  figure.  The  uraei  of  the  goddesses  are  said
to  proceed  from  them,  and  the  flames  which  drive  away  A pep
come  forth  from  their  mouths.  The  goddesses  travel  with  the
god  until  he  rises  on  this  earth,  but  after  this  they  return  to  their
places.  The  duty  of  the  twelve  gods  is  to  praise  Ha.  On  the  left

of  the  boat  we  have  the  gods  Nu,  GOO,  Nuth,  Hehu,


Wmt,  these  gods  are  “in  their  own  bodies,*’

k^rf.'icr;  and  they  go  to  Ra  in  heaven,  to  receive
this  great  god  as  he  cometh  forth  to  them  in  the  eastern  part  of
heaven  daily.  They  live  in  their  drrit,  i.e,,  hall  of  the  horizon,

but  their  forms,  | |wp'A) , of  the  Tuat  belong  to  this  Circle.

Next  we  have  two  human -headed  gods,  a bird-headed  god  called

/WWSA  f\  ft  /VWAA

Nehui,  f[]  (jlj  y a god  with  two  birds  heads  called  Ni,  [)  jj  ,


the  serpent  Nesmekhef,  """  'Wit  and  four  human-headed

gods;  all  these  carry  paddles  on  their  right  shoulders.  The
duty  of  the  gods  is  to  raise  up,  s=»  the  disk  of  the  sun  daily,
but  the  serpent  Nesmekhef  slaughters  the  enemies  of  Ra;  they
travel  with  Ra  and  receive  their  spirits,  V®  t=»  in  this


251)


OSIRIS,  GOVERNOR  OF  AMENTI


Circle.  Before  these  are  ten  gods,  with  hands  raised  in  adoration,1
who  are  described  as  the  hentiu,  ^ ® ! , of  the  forms  of


Osiris,  the  Governor  of  the  thick  darkness,  \\  ^

Y w^*T!%  and  they  say  to  him,  “Live,  thou  Governor  of  thy


“ darkness ! Live,  0 thou  who  art  great  in  all  things  ! Live,  0
“ thou  Prince  of  Amentet,  Osiris,  thou  Governor  of  those  who  are
“ in  Amenti ! Mayest  thou  live,  mayest  thou  live,  0 thou  who
“ art  Governor  of  the  Tuat,  the  wind  of  Ra  is  to  thy  nostrils,
“ the  breath  of  Khepera  is  with  thee,  thou  livest  and  they  live,
“ Hail,  Osiris,  lord  of  the  living  ones ; the  gods  who  are  with
“ Osiris  are  those  who  were  with  him  at  the  first  time,”  etc.

The  allusion  here  is  to  the  death  and  burial  of  Osiris,  when
Horus  carried  out  the  arrangements  which  had  to  be  made  for  the
performance  of  the  general  ceremonies,  and  when  every  detail
connected  with  mummification,  etc.,  was  thought  out  by  the  loving
care  of  the  son  of  Osiris.  In  the  illustrated  version  of  the  Twelfth


Hour,  published  by  Signor  Lanzone  (tav.  vii.),  we  have  represented
the  semi-circular  wall  of  thick  darkness  which  forms  the  end  of  the
Tuat  and  the  division  between  it  and  this  world.  Against  this
wall,  in  the  lower  part  of  it,  lies  a mummied  form,  representing
Osiris,  and  called  Sem-Af,  R.>  i-e->  the  “Image  (or  Form)  of
“ Af  ” ; this  is  the  object  of  the  praises  which  the  last  two  groups
of  gods  lavish  upon  him.  The  descriptive  text  says  concerning  the
mummy,  “ He  who  is  in  this  picture  in  the  hidden  form  of  Horus  of
“ thick  darkness  is  the  secret  image  which  Shu  makes  to  be  under
“ Nut,  and  which  cometh  forth  from  Keb-ur  on  earth  in  this  form.”3


, ^ I l , Tes-kliu,  , Theuiaru,  ^ ^ <=^> , Aaklibu,

L W’  /Wv-WN  J-~\  Tr

Sekhenn,  ^ ^ , Ermenu,  ^ , Kheunn,  ^ Bunfui,

, Anru,  Atliep,  (j  * ^ *,  and  Am -Jj-.

->ki  0 •


A.WW


260


THE  SUN’S  NEW  BIRTH


In  the  middle  of  the  wall  of  thick  darkness  is  a red  disk,  from
which  proceeds  a human  head ; this  is  the  “ image  of  Shu,”

who  extends  his  arms  along  the  vaulted  wall,  and  of

whose  body  one  part  is  in  the  Tuat  and  the  other  in  this  world.
Immediately  above  the  head  of  the  god  is  the  beetle  of  Khepera,

here  spelt  ® |r|,  which  makes  its  way  into  this  world  through  the

opening  which  the  head  and  shoulders  of  Shu  have  made  in  the
wall  of  thick  darkness.  Through  this  opening  the  boat  of  Ra  also
was  enabled  to  pass  into  this  world,  and  the  god  continued  his
journey  with  the  help  of  the  deities  who  towed  him  along ; there
is  no  doubt  about  this  because  the  tow-line  is  prolonged  to  the
wall  of  thick  darkness.  As  Af,  the  dead  body  of  Ra,  passes  into
our  world,  his  new  life  begins,  and  for  men  and  women  the  night
passes  away,  and  a new  day  is  born.

We  have  now  traced  the  passage  of  the  Sun-god  through  the
Tuat  as  it  was  imagined  by  those  who  believed  in  the  absolute
supremacy  of  Osiris,  and  as  it  was  described  by  the  author  of  the
Book  of  Pylons,  and  we  have  briefly  passed  through  its  divisions
as  described  in  the  Book  of  that  which  is  jn  the  Tuat,
throughout  which  the  absolute  supremacy  of  Ra  is  maintained.  It
is  now  easy  to  see  that  these  two  works  represent  two  opposite
and  conflicting  theories  as  to  the  future  life.  The  heaven  of  the
devotees  of  Osiris  was  originally  most  materialistic,  and  the  life
which  was  led  in  it  by  the  beatified  was,  to  all  intents  and
purposes,  merely  a continuation  of  the  life  led  by  men  and  women
upon  earth  ; the  heaven  of  the  priests  of  Ra  was  of  a more  refined
character,  and  it  lacked  the  grosser  characteristics  of  the  dwellers
in  the  Elysian  Fields  of  Osiris.  Some  have  argued  from  the  facts
about  the  Tuat  given  above  that  the  Egyptians  believed  in  the
existence  of  purgatory,  and  in  the  everlasting  punishment  of  the
wicked  in  a hell  of  fire,  and  in  the  reincarnation  of  souls,  and  in
many  other  things  which  would  presuppose  the  holding  by  them
of  doctrines  which  are  commonly  thought  to  be  the  products  of
the  minds  of  modern  nations ; but  the  facts  do  not  support  these
beliefs.  Whichever  doctrine  of  the  future  life  we  take,  whether
that  of  Osiris  or  that  of  Ra,  we  find  no  room  in  it  for  a purgatory.


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  WICKED


261


In  the  Judgment  which  took  place  before  Osiris  only  the  righteous
were  permitted  to  enter  into  the  Elysian  Fields,  and  the  wicked
were  destroyed  immediately ; in  other  words,  annihilation  was  the
punishment  for  sin.  The  Egyptians  believed  largely  in  the
efficacy  of  works,  and  in  addition  to  the  deeds  of  love  and  charity
which  they  performed  in  all  periods,  strict  care  concerning  the
ceremonies  of  religion,  worship,  and  of  the  funeral,  and  a proper
respect  and  reverence  for  words  of  power,  and  amulets,  and  sacred
writings,  and  figures  were  demanded  from  them  by  priests  and
religious  teachers  at  all  times.  There  was,  of  course,  a large  class
of  people  who  could  not  afford  costly  burials,  and  who  were  too
poor  to  buy  even  cheap  amulets,  but  they  were  not  condemned  in
the  Judgment  because  of  their  poverty ; on  the  contrary,  they
escaped  annihilation  and  were  admitted  by  Osiris  into  the  first
division  of  the  Tuat,  where,  however,  they  were  compelled  to  stay
because  they  did  not  know  the  words  of  power  which  would  enable
them  to  continue  their  journey  through  the  remaining  divisions  of
the  Underworld.  But  there  was  no  punishment  inflicted  upon
them  because  they  had  been  both  poor  and  ignorant  in  this  world ;
they  merely  remained  in  the  place  to  which  their  religious  qualifi-
cations enabled  them  to  attain,  and  each  evening,  or  each  night,
they  were  made  glad  by  the  sight  of  the  great  god  Kii  as  he  sailed
through  the  Tuat  in  his  boat,  and  they  rejoiced  in  his  daily  visit.

The  beings  in  the  Tuat  of  Osiris  upon  whom  punishment  was
inflicted  were  the  “ enemies  of  Osiris,”  and  these  were  usually  the
“ enemies  of  Ra.  ” ; but  in  no  text  is  it  said  that  the  punishment
which  they  had  to  endure  there  ever  obliterated  their  guilt,
whatever  it  might  be,  or  that  when  the  proper  time  had  arrived
they  would  be  allowed  to  proceed  into  another  division  of  the  Tuat
where  their  punishment  would  be  lighter,  or  where  they  would
undergo  none  at  all.  Though  a man  could  earn  happiness  in  the
realm  of  Osiris  or  in  that  of  II  a by  his  good  works  on  earth,  and
by  ceremonies  performed  at  his  funeral  by  duly  qualified  priests,
and  by  the  presence  of  copies  of  religious  texts  which  were  buried
with  him,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  when  once  his  soul
reached  the  Underworld  it  could  ever  better  its  position  there
either  by  suffering  punishment  or  by  the  performance  of  good


262


OFFERINGS  TO  THE  DEAD


works.  The  offerings  made  at  the  tombs  of  the  dead  were  for  the
benefit  of  the  ha  or  double,  and  perhaps  for  the  animal  soul  which
was  at  one  time  believed  to  exist  in  the  human  body,  but  neither
the  offerings  nor  the  pi’ayers  which  accompanied  them  seem  to
have  been  able  to  remove  the  spirits  and  souls  of  the  dead  from  one
division  of  the  Tuat  into  another,  or  to  modify  the  state  or
condition  which  had  been  decreed  for  them.  Similarly,  there  is  no
evidence  that  prayers  for  the  dead  or  offerings  would  ameliorate
the  condition  of  those  who  had  successfully  passed  the  ordeal  of
the  Judgment,  and  had  been  sent  by  Osiris  into  one  or  other  of  the
habitations  of  his  kingdom.


( 263  )


CHAPTER  VI

HELL  AND  THE  DAMNED

IF  we  examine  the  doctrine  concerning  the  future  life  according
to  the  priesthoods  of  Rfi  we  find  still  less  room  for  a purga-
tory in  their  theological  system.  According  to  this  the  souls  of
the  dead  assembled  in  Amentet,  i.e.,  the  “hidden”  region,  the
Egyptian  Hades,  where  they  waited  for  the  boat  of  lia  to  pass  by.
When  the  god  appeared  those  who  had  been  his  worshippers  and
adorers  on  earth,  and  who  were  fortunate  enough  to  have  secured
the  words  of  power  which  would  enable  them  to  enter  the  boat  did
so,  and  they  made  their  journey  with  him  through  the  Tuat.
Under  his  protection  they  passed  through  all  the  dangers  which
threatened  to  destroy  them,  and  continued  their  journey  through
the  realms  of  Osiris  and  Seker,  and  at  length  appeared  with  lla  in
the  eastern  horizon  of  heaven  at  daybreak.  Once  there  they  were
able  to  wander  about  heaven  at  will,  and  they  did  so,  presumably,
until  the  time  of  sunset,  when  they  rejoined  the  god  in  his  boat,
and  again  made  the  journey  through  the  Tuat  with  him.  Each
division  of  the  Tuat,  apparently,  contained  a host  of  beings  who
wished  to  enter  the  boat  of  Ra,  but  could  not  do  so,  either  for
want  of  the  necessary  words  of  power,  or  because  they  had  reached
the  place  to  which  their  qualifications  entitled  them ; these  all,
however,  received  great  benefit  from  the  nightly  visit  of  lla,  and
as  he  left  each  division  to  enter  the  next  they  were  filled  with
great  sorrow,  and  many  of  them  ceased  to  exist  until  the  following
night,  when  they  renewed  their  life  for  a brief  period.  Many
divisions  of  the  Tuat  contained  enemies  of  lla,  who  were,  of  course,
destroyed  without  mercy  by  the  followers  of  the  god ; but  there  is
no  reason  whatsoever  for  the  view  that  these  enemies  were  the


264


HELL.  AND  THE  DAMNED


damned,  or  that  they  were  doomed  to  eternal  punishment.  At  the
end  of  the  Tuat  was  a region  where  certain  goddesses  presided  over
pits  of  fire  and  superintended  the  destruction  of  the  bodies,  and
spirits,  and  shadows,  and  heads  of  numbers  of  such  enemies,  and
it  would  seem,  judging  by  the  knives  in  their  hands,  that  they
hacked  the  bodies  to  pieces  before  they  were  burnt.  But  even
these  were  not  punished  eternally,  for  as  soon  as  the  god  had
passed  through  their  region  the  fires  went  out.  and  the  mere  fact
that  lie  was  able  to  appear  in  the  eastern  sky  proved  that  all  his
enemies  were  destroyed.  Each  night  and  morning  Itfi  destroyed
the  hosts  of  enemies  who  attempted  to  bar  his  progress,  for  such
enemies  perished  instantly  by  the  flames  which  went  forth  from
the  dime  beings  whom  he  had  created.

Originally,  too,  such  enemies  were  only  the  personifications  of
the  powers  of  nature,  such  as  twilight,  darkness,  night,  gloom,  the
blackness  of  eclipses,  fog,  mist,  vapour,  rain,  cloud,  storm,  wind,
tempest,  hurricane,  and  the  like,  which  were  destroyed  daily  by
Ra  and  his  fiery  beams.  Many,  in  fact  the  greater  number  of  such
personifications,  were  endowed  by  Egyptian  artists  with  human
forms,  and  the  pictures  of  the  scenes  of  their  destruction  by  fire
were  supposed  by  many  to  represent  the  burning  of  the  souls  of
the  damned.  The  ignorant  and  the  superstitious  did  not  under-
stand that  the  Sun-god  slew  and  burned  with  fire  the  enemies  of
each  night  and  morning  during  that  same  night  and  morning;
each  rising  of  the  sun  was  the  result  of  the  annihilation  of  his
foes  of  that  day.  It  may  be  urged  that  these  foes  were  always
the  same  because  they  were  always  of  the  same  kind,  but  the
Egyptians  did  not  think  so,  and  they  believed  that  a new  host  of
foes  appeared  to  attack  Ra  each  night  and  morning.  But  even
had  they  thought  so,  the  punishment  was  only  intermittent,
and  it  was  only  renewed  during  that  part  of  each  night  which
immediately  preceded  the  dawn,  and  during  the  interval  between
dawn  and  sunrise.  The  souls  of  the  damned  could  have  done
nothing  to  hinder  the  progress  of  Ra,  and  the  Egyptians  never
imagined  that  they  did,  but  it  is  possible  that  in  late  dynastic
times  certain  schools  of  theological  thought  in  Egypt,  being
dissatisfied  with  and  unconvinced  of  the  accuracy  of  the  theory  of


HELL  AND  THE  DAMNED


265


the  annihilation  of  the  wicked,  assigned  to  evil  souls  dwelling-
places  with  the  personifications  of  the  powers  of  nature  already
mentioned  in  the  Tuat.  The  spears  which  pierced  the  enemies  of
Ra  were  the  fiery  rays  of  the  sun,  and  the  knives  which  hacked
their  bodies  in  pieces  were  his  flames  of  fire ; and  the  lakes  and
pits  of  fire  were  suggested  to  the  minds  of  the  primitive  Egyptians
by  the  fiery  splendour  which  filled  the  eastern  heavens  at  sunrise.
They  certainly  did  not  believe  in  everlasting  punishment,  and
there  is  nothing  in  the  texts  which  will  support  the  view  that  they
did ; in  fact,  the  doctrines  of  purgatory  and  hell  which  were
promulgated  during  the  Middle  Ages  in  Europe  with  such  success
find  no  equivalents  in  the  ancient  Egyptian  religion.  Apart  from
the  general  characteristics  of  their  religion  the  Egyptians  were
too  practical  to  entertain  the  idea  of  repeated  destructions  or
consumings  by  fire  of  the  same  body,  but  had  they  done  so  we
should  certainly  have  found  some  texts  which  had  been  composed
to  avert  such  an  awful  doom.  They  mummified  the  bodies  of
their  dead  in  the  earliest  times  because  they  expected  them  to  rise
again,  and  they  did  so  in  later  times  because  they  believed  that
a spiritual  body  would  grow  out  of  them ; they  never  expected
to  obtain  a second  physical  body  in  the  Underworld,  and  therefore
they  took  the  greatest  care  to  preserve,  by  means  of  magical
ceremonies  and  words,  the  bodies  in  which  they  lived  in  as
complete  a form  as  possible.  The  destruction  of  the  body  involved
the  ruin  of  the  hi,  or  double,  and  of  the  shadow,  and  of  many  of
the  mental  and  spiritual  constituents  of  man  ; and  the  Egyptians
regarded  the  death  of  the  body  with  such  dismay  that,  fearing  lest
the  spiritual  body  which  sprang  from  it  after  death  might  be  in
danger  of  dying,  they  caused  prayers  to  be  composed  for  the
purpose  of  averting  from  it  the  “ second  death  ” and  the  possibility
of  its  dying  a second  time.

We  may  see,  however,  that  although  the  Egyptians  had  no
hell  for  souls  in  the  mediaeval  acceptance  of  the  term,  their  fiery
pits,  and  fiends,  and  devils,  and  enemies  of  Ra  formed  the
foundations  of  the  hells  of  later  peoples  like  the  Hebrews,  and
even  of  the  descendants  of  the  Egyptians  who  became  Christians
i.e.,  the  Copts.  Many  proofs  of  this  fact  may  be  found  in  Coptic


200


OUTER  DARKNESS


literature  as  the  following  instances  will  show.  In  “ Pistis
Sophia,” 1 we  have  the  Virgin  Mary  asking  Jesus,  her  Lord,  to  give
her  a description  of  “ outer  darkness,”  * and  to  tell  her  how  many
places  of  punishment  there  are  in  it.  Our  Lord  replies,  “The
“ outer  darkness  is  a great  serpent,  the  tail  of  which  is  in  its
“ mouth,  and  it  is  outside  the  whole  world,  and  surroundeth  the
“ whole  world ; in  it  there  are  many  places  of  punishment,  and  it
“ containeth  twelve  halls  wherein  severe  punishment  is  inflicted.
“ In  each  hall  is  a governor,  but  the  face  of  each  governor  differeth
“ from  that  of  his  neighbour.  The  governor  of  the  first  hall  hath
“ the  face  of  a crocodile,  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth.  From  the
“ mouth  of  the  serpent  proceed  all  ice,  and  all  dust,  and  all  cold,
“ and  every  kind  of  disease  and  sickness ; and  the  true  name  by
“ which  they  call  him  in  his  place  is  Enkhthonin.  And  the
“ governor  of  the  second  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a cat,
“ and  they  call  him  in  his  place  Ivharakuab.  And  the  governor
“ of  the  third  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a dojr,  and
“ they  call  him  in  his  place  Auku arokii.  And  the  governor  of  the
“ fourth  hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a serpent,  and  they
“ call  him  in  his  place  Akhrokhar.  And  the  governor  of  the  fifth
“ hall  hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a black  ox,3  and  they  call
“ him  in  his  place  Markhoub.  And  the  governor  of  the  sixth  hall
“ hath  as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a goat,  and  they  call  him  in  his
“ place  LamkhamoR.  And  the  governor  of  the  seventh  hall  hath
“ as  his  true  face  the  face  of  a bear,  and  they  call  him  as  his  true
“ name  Lonkuar.  And  the  governor  of  the  eighth  hall  hath  as
“ his  true  face  the  face  of  a vulture,  and  they  call  him  in  his  place
“ Laraokh.  And  the  governor  of  the  ninth  hall  hath  as  his  true
“ face  the  face  of  a basilisk,  and  they  call  him  in  his  place
“ Arkiieokii.  And  in  the  tenth  hall  there  are  many  governors,
“ and  there  is  there  a serpent  with  seven  heads,  each  head  having
“ its  [own]  true  face,  and  he  who  is  over  them  all  in  his  place  they
“ call  X arm  arokii.  And  in  the  eleventh  hall  there  are  many

1 See  IJin tit  Sophia . Ojnn  Guosticvw  Valentino  udjudicolvni,  ed.  Sclrwartze,
Berlin.  1851.

* I1KAKE  ET  Ql  Ko7\.

3 OVgO  JUtJUA.CE  ft  KAJUE.


THE  HELL  OF  THE  GNOSTICS


267


“ governors,  and  there  are  there  seven  heads,  each  of  them  having
(i  as  its  true  face  the  face  of  a cat,  and  the  greatest  of  them,  who  is
“ over  them,  they  call  in  his  place  IJhokhar.  And  in  the  twelfth
“ hall  there  are  many  great  governors,  and  there  are  there  seven
“ heads,  each  of  them  having  as  its  true  face  the  face  of  a dog,  and
“ the  greatest,  who  is  over  them,  they  call  in  his  place  Khremaor.
“ These  twelve  governors  are  in  the  serpent  of  outer  darkness,  and
“ each  of  them  hath  a name  according  to  the  hour,  and  each  of
“ them  changeth  his  face  according  to  the  hour.”  1 *

It  is  quite  clear  that  in  the  above  extract  from  the  famous
Gnostic  work  we  have  a series  of  chambers  in  the  outer  darkness
which  has  been  borrowed  from  the  twelve  divisions  of  the  Egyptian
Tuat  already  described,  and  the  reader  has  only  to  compare  the
vignettes  to  Chapters  cxliv.  and  cxlv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  with
the  extract  from  “ Pistis  Sophia  ” to  see  how  close  the  borrowing
has  been.  An  examination  of  another  great  Gnostic  work,
generally  known  as  the  “ Book  of  leu,”  - proves  that  the  Under-
world of  the  Gnostics  was  nothing  but  a modified  form  of  the
Amentet  or  Amenti  of  the  Egyptians,  to  which  were  added
characteristics  derived  from  the  religious  systems  of  the  Hebrews
and  Greeks.  The  Gnostic  rivers  and  seas  of  fire  are  nothing  but
equivalents  of  those  mentioned  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  and  the
beings  in  Amenti,  and  Chaos,  and  Outer  Darkness  are  derived,  in
respect  of  form,  from  ancient  Egyptian  models.  The  great  dragon
of  Outer  Darkness  and  his  twelve  halls,  and  their  twelve  guardians
or  governors  who  change  their  names  and  forms  every  hour  are,
after  all,  only  modifications  of  the  old  Egyptian  system  of  the
Twelve  Pylons  or  Twelve  Hours  which  formed  the  Underworld*
The  seven-headed  serpent  of  the  Gnostic  system  has  his  prototype

in  the  great  serpent  Nau, fl  ^ which  is  called  the  ‘4  bull  of

“ the  gods,”  and  has  “ seven  serpents  on  his  seven  necks,”

P ,'m  *—  (1 « \ “ & Mi  o $ «=  P jk  P Tz  ,"u


| JJ  ^ ;3  the  seven-headed  serpent,  Nau-shesma,


1 Pistis  Sophia,  Coptic  tost,  p.  319  ff.

3 See  Schmidt,  Gnostische  tichriflen  in  Koptischer  Sprachr,  Leipzig;  189^.

3 Teta,  1.  307.


268


AMENTET  AND  THE  TUAT


nnjl^  ^,n,  also  had  seven  uraei  for  heads,  and  he
had  authority  over  seven  archers,  or  seven  bows,  | % 1 1

| ® o ||||_  <*(  >=<

Of  Amentet  and  the  Tuat  in  general  we  find  many  traces  in
the  martyrdoms  of  Coptic  saints,  but,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the
writers  have  made  the  demons  and  the  pits  of  fire  of  the  Egyptian
Underworld  instruments  of  punishment  for  the  souls  of  those  who
did  not  embrace  Christianity  when  upon  this  earth.  Thus  the
writer  of  the  Martyrdom  of  George 2 of  Cappadocia  makes  the  saint
to  raise  up  from  the  dead  a pagan  called  Boes,  who  had  been  dead
two  hundred  years,  and  who  told  Dadianus,  the  governor,  that  he
had  been  on  earth  a worshipper  of  the  “ stupid,  dumb,  deaf,  and
“ blind  Apollo,”  and  that  when  he  departed  this  life  he  went  to
live  in  “ a place  in  the  river  of  lire  until  such  time  as  I went  to
“ the  place  where  the  worm  dieth  not.”  According  to  another
writer,  Macarius  of  Antioch  restored  to  life  a man  who  had  been
dead  for  six  hours,  and  who  stated  that  his  miseries  during  that
short  time  had  been  greater  than  those  which  he  had  endured
throughout  all  his  life  upon  earth.  He  confessed  that  lie  had  been
a worshipper  of  idols,  and  then  went  on  to  say  that  when  he  was
dying  the  fiends  crowded  upon  him,  and  that  these  had  the  faces
of  serpents,  lions,  crocodiles,  and,  curiously  enough,  of  bears.
They  tore  his  soul  from  his  body  with  great  violence,  and  fled
with  it  to  a great  river  of  fire  wherein  they  plunged  it  to  a depth
of  four  hundred  cubits ; then  they  drew  it  out  and  set  it  before
the  Judge  of  Truth,3  who  passed  sentence  upon  it.  After  this  was
done  they  took  it  to  a “ place  of  darkness,  wherein  there  was  no
“ light  whatsoever,  and  they  cast  it  down  into  the  cold  where
“ there  was  gnashing  of  teeth.  Here,”  said  the  wretched  man,  “ I
“ sawr  the  worm  which  never  slumbereth,  and  his  head  was  like
“ unto  that  of  a crocodile.  He  was  surrounded  by  serpents  of
“ eveiy  kind  which  cast  souls  before  him,  and  when  his  own  mouth


1 Teta,  1.  306.

■ See  my  St.  George  of  Cappadocia,  p.  20.

* YlIKpiTHC  JUUUtHI.  The  word  JUtHI  is  the  old  Egyptian  £5^,  wm««.
which  ie  commonly  rendered  by  “ law,  light,  troth,  true,  just,”  and  the  like.


RA  AND  A PEP


269


“ was  full  lie  allowed  the  other  creatures  to  eat ; iu  that  place
“ they  tore  us  to  pieces,  but  we  could  not  die.  After  that  they
“ took  me  out  of  the  place  and  carried  me  into  Amenti,  where  I
“ was  to  stay  for  ever.” 1 In  another  work 2 a nameless  mummy  is
made  to  tell  how  before  he  died  the  avenging  angels  came  about
him  with  iron  knives  and  pointed  goads,  which  they  thrust  into
his  sides,  and  how  other  angels  came  and  tore  his  soul  from  his
body,  and  having  tied  it  to  the  similitude  of  a black  horse  they
carried  it  off  to  Amentet.  Here  he  was  tortured  in  a place  filled
with  noxious  reptiles,  and  having  been  cast  into  the  outer  darkness
he  saw  a pit  more  than  two  hundred  feet  deep,  which  was  filled
with  reptiles,  each  of  which  had  seven  heads,  and  had  its  body
covered  with  objects  like  scorpions.  In  this  place  were  several
other  terrible  serpents,  and  to  one  of  these,  which  had  teeth  like
iron  stakes,  the  poor  soul  was  given  to  be  devoured  ; this  monster
crushed  the  soul  for  five  days  of  each  week,  but  on  Saturday  and
Sunday  it  had  respite.  This  last  sentence  seems  to  suggest  that
the  serpent  respected  the  Sabbath  of  the  Jews  and  the  Sunday  of
the  Christians.

In  all  these  examples,  and  even  in  the  words  of  Isaiah,
who  says  (Ixvi.  24),  “ their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall
“ their  fire  be  quenched,”  we  have  a direct  allusion  to  the  great
serpent  of  the  Egyptian  Underworld,  which  was,  in  all  periods
of  history,  the  terror  of  the  worshippers  of  the  Sun-god,  and
which  was  known  by  many  names.  The  allies  and  companions
of  this  serpent  were  serpents  like  itself,  and  to  nearly  every
power  which  was  hostile  to  the  dead  or  the  living  the  form  of
a snake  or  serpent  was  attributed.  The  type  and  symbol  of  all
enmity  to  Ea,  whether  of  a physical  or  moral  character,  was  the
arch-serpent  Apep  or  Apepi,  which  attacked  him  dailjr,  and  was
overcome  daily.  To  this  monster  we  have  several  allusions  in  the
Book  of  the  Dead , but  these  do  not  adequately  convey  an  idea  of
the  terror  with  which  he  was  regarded,  at  all  events  in  the  latter
pai’t  of  the  dynastic  period.


1 Hyvomat,  Les  A ctes  dee  Martyr a dr  PHhjyptr,  p.  •">*>  f.

‘ Amulinean,  Monuments  pour  serrir  a VHietoire  dr-  /'  f.'jijptv  Chriticnne , p.  167.


270


KA  AND  APEP


From  a papyrus  preserved  in  the  British  Museum 1 we  learn
that  a special  service  was  in  use  in  Upper  Egypt  for  the  purpose
of  destroying  the  power  of  Apepi  and  of  making  his  attacks  on  the
sun  to  have  no  eftect.  This  service  consisted  of  a series  of  chapters
which  were  to  be  recited  at  certain  times  of  the  day  during  the
performance  of  a number  of  curious  ceremonies  of  a magical
character.  Thus  one  rubric  orders  that  the  name  of  Apepi  shall
be  written  in  green  colour  upon  a piece  of  new  papyrus,  and
that  a wax  figure  of  the  fiend  shall  be  made  and  his  name  inlaid
upon  it  with  green  colour.  Both  papyrus  and  wax  figure  were  to
be  burnt  in  the  fire,  the  belief  being  that  as  the  wax  figure  melted
and  as  the  sheet  of  papyrus  burnt,  the  fiend  Apepi  would  also
decay  and  fall  to  pieces.  Whilst  the  wax  figure  was  melting  in
the  fire  it  was  to  be  spit  upon  several  times  each  hour,  and  when  it
was  melted  the  refuse  of  it  was  to  be  mixed  with  dunjr  and  a<rain
burnt.  It  was  imperative  to  do  this  at  midnight,  when  h’a  began
his  return  journey  in  the  Tuat,  towards  the  east,  and  at  dawn,  and
at  noon,  and  at  eventide,  and  in  fact  at  any  and  every  hour  of  the
day.  This  might  also  be  done  with  advantage  whenever  storm
clouds  appeared  in  the  sky,  or  whenever  the  clouds  gathered
together  for  rain.  The  following  extract  will  give  an  idea  of  the
general  import  of  the  service  for  the  destruction  of  Apepi.  The
deceased  says : “ Apepi  hath  fallen  into  the  flame,  a knife  is  stuck
u ^to  his  head,  his  name  no  longer  existeth  upon  this  earth.  It  is
decreed  for  me  to  inflict  blows  upon  him,  I drive  darts  into  his
u bones,  I destroy  his  soul  in  the  course  of  every  day,  I sever  his
l"  vertebrae  from  his  neck,  cutting  into  his  flesh  with  a knife  and
stabbing  through  his  skin.  He  is  given  over  to  the  fire  which
£‘  obtains  the  mastery  over  him  in  its  name  of  * Sekhet,’  and  it
11  hath  power  over  him  in  its  name  of  * Eye  burning  the  enemy.’
" Darts  are  driven  into  his  soul,  his  bones  are  burnt  with  fire,  and
*(his  limbs  are  placed  therein.  Horus,  mighty  of  strength,  hath
u decreed  that  he  shall  come  in  front  of  the  boat  of  Ra ; his  fetter
of  steel  tieth  him  up  and  maketh  his  limbs  so  that  they  cannot
*"  movc ; Horus  repulseth  his  moment  of  luck  during  his  eclipse,

“ and  he  maketh  him  to  vomit  that  which  is  inside  him.  Horus

1 See  Archaeoloijia , vol,  lii.


RA  AND  APEP


271


“ fettereth,  bindeth,  and  tieth  up,  and  Aker  taketh  away  his
“ strength  so  that  I may  separate  his  flesh  from  his  bones ; that  I
“ may  fetter  his  feet  and  cut  off  his  two  hands  and  arms ; that  I
“ may  shut  up  his  mouth  and  lips,  and  break  in  his  teeth ; that  I
“ may  cut  out  his  tongue  from  his  throat,  and  carry  away  his
“ words ; that  I may  block  up  his  two  eyes,  and  carry  off  his  ears ;
“ that  I may  tear  out  his  heart  from  its  seat  and  throne  ; and  that
“ I may  make  him  so  that  he  existctli  not.  May  his  name  never
“ exist,  and  may  what  is  born  to  him  never  live ; may  lie  never
“ exist,  and  may  his  kinsfolk  never  exist ; may  he  never  exist,  and
“ may  his  relatives  never  exist ; may  he  never  exist,  and  may  his
“ heir  never  exist ; may  his  offspring  never  grow  to  maturity ;
“ may  his  seed  never  be  established ; moreover,  may  his  soul,  and
“ body,  and  spirit,  and  shade,  and  words  of  power,  and  his  bones,
“ and  his  skin,  never  more  exist.”

The  Rubric  runs : “ This  Chapter  is  to  be  said  over  a figure
“of  Apepi,  inscribed  upon  new  papyrus  with  green  ink,  and
“ placed  inside  a covering  on  which  his  name  hath  been  written,
“ and  thou  shalt  tie  these  round  tightly  with  cord,  and  put  such  a
“ figure  and  covering  into  the  fire  every  day.  Thou  shalt  stamp
“ upon  it  and  defile  it  with  thy  left  foot,  and  thou  shalt  spit  upon
“ it  four  times  during  the  course  of  every  day,  and  when  thou
“ hast  placed  it  upon  the  fire  thou  shalt  say,  11  lui  triumpheth  over
“ ‘ thee,  Apepi,  and  Horus  triumpheth  over  his  enemies,  and  P-aa
“ ‘ (i.e.,  the  deceased)  triumpheth  over  his  enemies.’  Next  thou
“ shalt  write  down  the  names  of  all  the  male  and  female  devils  of
“ which  thy  heart  is  afraid,  the  names  of  all  the  enemies  of  P-aa,
“ in  death,  and  in  life,  and  the  names  of  their  father,  mother,  and
“ children,  [and  place  the  papyrus]  insido  the  covering,  together
“ with  a wax  figure  of  Apepi.  These  shall  then  be  placed  in  the
“ fire  in  the  name  of  Apepi,  and  shall  be  burnt  when  Ha  riseth  in
“the  morning;  this  thou  shalt  repeat  at  noon  and  at  evening
“ when  Ra  setteth  in  the  land  of  life,  whilst  there  is  light  at  the
“ foot  of  the  mountain.  Over  each  figure  of  Apepi  thou  shalt  recite
“ the  • above  chapter,  in  very  truth,  for  the  doing  of  this  shall  be
u of  great  benefit  [for  thee]  upon  earth  and  in  the  Underworld.”  1

1 On  the  Hieratic  Papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu,  p.  52  ( Arckaeolvgia , voi.  Hi.)*


272


SERPENTS  AND  SNAKES


To  destroy  the  fiends  which  were  associated  with  Apcpi  it
was  necessary  to  make  figures  of  them  in  wax,  and  having
inscribed  their  names  upon  them  to  tie  them  round  with  black
hair,  and  then  to  cast  them  on  the  ground,  and  kick  them  with  the
left  foot,  and  pierce  them  with  a stone  spear.  To  obtain  the  full
benefit  of  all  the  names  of  Apepi  a man  had  to  make  the  figure  of
a serpent  with  his  tail  in  his  mouth,  and  having  stuck  a knife  in
its  back,  and  cast  it  down  upon  the  ground,  to  say,  “ Apep,  Jfiend,
“ Betet.”  The  faithful  follower  of  Rii  is  also  bidden  to  “make
“ another  serpent  with  the  face  of  a cat,  and  with  a knife  stuck  in
“ his  back,  and  call  it  Hemiiem.  Make  another  with  the  face  of
“ a crocodile,  and  with  a knife  stuck  in  his  back,  and  call  it
“ Hauna-aru-her-hra  ; make  another  with  the  face  of  a duck,
“ and  with  a knife  stuck  in  his  back,  and  call  it  Aluti.  Make
“ another  with  the  face  of  a white  cat,  and  with  a knife  stuck  in
“ his  back,  and  tie  it  up  and  bind  it  tightly,  and  call  it  ‘ Apep
“ the  Enemy.’  ” The  papyrus  which  contains  these  interesting
passages  was  written  about  b.c.  312-311,  though  the  compositions
in  it  are  very  much  older,  but  it  shows  that,  even  at  that  period,
when  the  Macedonians  had  begun  to  reign  over  Egypt,  and  Greek
influence  was  making  itself  supreme  in  the  country,  the  old  beliefs
still  held  sway  over  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians.  In  fact,  in  this
matter  as  in  nearly  all  others,  they  clung  most  tenaciously  to  the
views  and  opinions  of  their  forefathers.

The  primitive  Egyptians  feared  snakes  and  propitiated  them,
and  the  earliest  dynastic  people  of  the  country  employed  charms,
and  incantations,  and  magical  formulae  to  keep  snakes,  and  serpents,
and  reptiles  of  every  kind  from  their  dead ; the  priests  of
Heliopolis  respected  the  prevailing  views  of  their  countrymen,  and
ancient  formulae  against  snakes  w<jre  copied  into  their  funeral
texts.  Every  Recension  of  the  of  the  Dewl,  contained

Chapters  which  were  written  to  preserve  the  dead  from  the  attacks
of  snakes ; it  is  tolerably  certain  that  some  of  them  contain
formulae  which  are  not  older  than  dynastic  times,  and  these  show
that  the  fear  of  serpents  was  as  great  as  ever,  although  these
reptiles  cannot  have  been  so  numerous  as  formerly.  The.  priests
of  Amen  made  snakes  to  play  very  prominent  parts  in  the  Under-


TUAT  AND  GEHENNA


273


world,  and,  curiously  enough,  they  thought  that  the  dead  Sun-
god,  or  the  “ Flesh  of  Ra,”  was  re-born  into  the  life  of  a new  day,
only  after  he  had  been  drawn  in  his  boat  through  the  body  of  a
serpent.  The  Egyptians  usually  had  some  reason  for  the  things
they  said,  and  wrote,  and  depicted,  find  although  it  is  not  easy  to
find  the  reason  in  every  case,  there  is,  fortunately,  little  doubt
about  it  here.  They  observed  that  snakes  sloughed  their  skins
from  time  to  time,  and  that  their  bodies  were  much  improved  in
appearance  as  the  result,  and  it  is  pretty  certain  that  they  had  this
habit  of  snakes  in  their  minds,  when  they  made  their  god  Ra  as  a
new  being  to  emerge  in  his  boat  out  of  the  great  serpent  which  lay
in  deep  undulations  between  the  end  of  the  Tuat  and  this  world.

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  influence  upon  the
hell  of  the  Copts  of  the  old  Egyptian  mythology  about  the  Tuat,
and  it  is  right  here  to  point  out  that  the  Hebrews  appear  to  have
borrowed  from  it  many  of  their  ideas  concerning  the  abodes  of  the
dead  in  the  Underworld.  It  is  quite  certain  that  the  hell  of  which
they  conceived  the  existence  was  not  derived  from  the  Babylonians,
for  we  know  from  the  story  of  Ishtar’s  descent  into  the  “ land  of
no  return  ” that,  although  it  had  Seven  Gates,  it  contained  no  pits
of  fire  or  monster  serpents.  Ishtar,  we  are  told,  found  it  to  be  a
place  of  darkness,  and  she  saw  that  the  beings  in  it  were  dressed
in  garments  of  feathers,  and  that  dust  and  mud  were  their  food.1
The  commonest  of  the  names  which  the  Hebrews  gave  to  the
abode  of  the  damned  is  G ft  Hinnom,2  or  Gehenna,  which  was
originally  the  Valley  of  Hinnom,  that  lay  quite  near  to  Jerusalem,3
where  children  were  sacrificed  to  the  god  Moloch ; 4 this  name
passed  into  the  New  Testament  under  the  form  Teewa,  and  into
Arabic  litei*ature  as  “ Jahanuain.” 5 The  portion  of  the  Valley  of
Hinnom  where  the  sacrifices  were  burnt  was  called  “ Topheth.”
According  to  the  Rabbis  “Gehenna”  was  created  on  the  second
day  of  creation,  with  the  firmament  and  the  angels,  and  just  as
there  were  an  Upper  and  a Lower  Paradise  so  there  were  also  two


* See  L.  W.  King,  liahyloiiian  lMiyiov,  p.  170  f.


Now  generally  identified  with  the  Wadi  or-Rabnbi.


4 See  2 Kings  xxiii.  10.


5 * -


3


274


HALLS  OF  GEHENNA


Gehennas,  one  in  the  heavens  and  one  on  the  earth.  As  to  the
size  of  Gehenna  wc  read  that  Egypt  was  400  parassangs 1 long  and
400  parassangs  wide,  i.e.,  about  1,200  miles  long  by  1,200  miles
wide;  that  Nubia  (jtns)  was  sixty  times  as  large  as  Egypt;  that
the  world  was  sixty  times  as  large  as  Nubia,  and  that  it  would
require  500  years  to  travel  across  either  its  length  or  its  breadth ;
that  Gehenna  was  sixty  times  as  large  as  the  world ; and  that  it
would  take  a man  2,100  years  to  reach  it.3

In  Gehenna,  as  in  Paradise,  there  were  seven  “ palaces  ”
(/rforr),  and  the  punishments  which  were  meted  out  to  their
inhabitants  varied  both  in  kind  and  in  intensity.  In  each  palace
there  are  6,000  houses,  or  chambers,  and  in  each  house  are  6,000
boxes,  and  in  each  box  are  6,000  vessels  fitted  with  gall.  Gehenna
is  so  deep  that  it  would  take  300  years  to  reach  the  bottom  of  it ;
according  to  another  opinion  it  is  300  miles  long,  300  miles  wide,
1,000  miles  thick,  and  100  miles  deep.  The  fire  in  each  palace  is
fiercer  and  more  destructive  than  that  in  the  palace  preceding,
and  the  flames  of  the  deepest  portion  o£  it  are  able  to  consume
human  souls  utterly,  which  fire  upon  earth  can  never  do.  Each
palace  is,  according  to  one  view,  under  the  command  of  an  angel,
who  is  subservient  to  Dumah,  the  prince  of  Gehenna,  and  who  has
with  him  tens  of  thousands  of  angels  who  are  occupied  in  judging
sinners  and  sealing  their  doom;  but  according  to  another  the
seven  mansions  are  ruled,  under  Dflmuh,  non,  by  three  angels
called  Mashkhith,  Af,  and  Khema.  The  voices  of  the  beings  in
Gehenna  rise  up  to  heaven  mingled  with  the  cries  of  the  wicked.
Dfimah,  the  prince  of  Gehenna,  seems  to  have  been  of  Egyptian
origin,  for  we  read,  “ At  the  time  when  Moses  said,  ‘I  will  perform
“‘judgments  on  all  the  gods  of  Egypt,’  Dftmali,  the  prince  of
“ Egypt,  went  400  miles  and  God  said  unto  him,  ‘ This  decree  is
“ ‘ decreed  by  me,  even  as  it  is  written,  I will  visit  the  host  of  the
“ ‘ height  in  the  height ; ’ 3 and  in  that  same  hour  sovereignty  was
“ taken  away  from  him,  and  he  was  appointed  prince  over
“ Gehenna,  and  some  say  that  he  was  set  over  the  dead.”

1 The  parassaug  = 30  stadia,  and  the  stadion  = 202  yards,

2 Eisemneiiger,  EnUfockte#  Jmlenthnrn , part  ii.,  p.  328.

a Isaiah  xxiv.  21.


HALLS  OF  GEHENNA


275


Another  prince  of  Gehenna  was  called  ‘Arsitsl,  and  his  duty
was  to  stand  before  the  souls  of  the  righteous  to  prevent  them
from  praying  to  God  on  behalf  of  the  wicked.  Opinions  vary  as
to  the  number  of  gates  or  doors  which  are  in  Gehenna,  some  saying
there  are  50,  others  8,000,  and  others  40,000 ; but  the  writers
who  followed  the  best  traditions  fixed  the  number  at  seven,  and
this  agrees  with  the  best  Muhammadan  tradition  also.  Finally,  as
a river  runs  through  the  Tuat  so  a river  or  canal  flows  through
Gehenna.  The  first  division  of  Gehenna  is  1 00  miles  long  and  50
miles  wide,  and  it  contains  several  pits  wherein  fiery  lions  dwell ;
when  men  fall  into  the  pits  the  lions  consume  parts  of  them  and  the
fire  devours  the  remainder,  but  soon  afterwards  they  come  into  being
again  and  have  to  pass  through  the  fire  which  is  in  the  second
division,  when  they  are  again  consumed  and  again  come  to  life.
In  this  way  tlxey  have  to  pass  through  the  fire  of  till  the  seven
divisions.  According  to  another  opinion  one  half  of  Gehenna
is  fire  and  the  other  half  hail,  and  the  angel  who  is  in  charge
drives  the  souls  of  the  damned  from  the  fire  into  the  hail  and  from
the  hail  into  the  fire  without  ceasing.  Another  writer  says  that
each  of  the  seven  divisions  of  hell  contains  seven  streams  of  fire
and  seven  streams  of  hail,  and  that  each  division  is  sixty  times  as
large  as  that  which  is  immediately  above  it.  In  each  division  arc
7,000  small  chambers,  and  in  each  chamber  7,000  clefts,  and  in
each  cleft  7,000  scorpions,  and  in  each'  scorpion  seven  joints,  and
in  each  joint  1,000  vessels  of  gall;  through  it  flow  seven  rivers
filled  with  deadly  poison,  and  the  danuied  have  to  pass  one  half
of  the  year  in  the  fire,  and  the  other  half  in  the  hail  and  snow,
which  are  far  more  terrible  than  the  fire.  Moreover,  from
under  the  throne  of  God  Almighty  there  goes  forth  a river
of  fire  which  empties  itself  upon  the  heads  of  the  wicked,  but
most  of  these  have  a rest  from  their  punishment  for  one  hour
and  a half  three  times  a day,  i.e.,  at  the  times  of  morning,
mid-day,  and  evening  prayer,  and  they  lxave  rest  the  whole  of
each  Sabbath  and  of  each  festival  of  the  new  moon.  Some  of
the  Rabbis  believed  that  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  would
last  for  ever,  but  others  thought  that  a period  of  punishment  six
or  twelve  months  in  length  would  suffice  for  their  purification.


276


TUAT  AND  GEHENNA


Those  who  are  damned  shall  not  remember  the  names  which
they  bore  upon  earth,  and  although  the  angels  beat  them  and  call
upon  them  to  declare  their  names,  they  shall  not  be  able  to  do  so ;
this  view  was  clearly  held  by  the  Egyptians,  for  we  are  specially
told  in  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line  169),  “ Pepi  is  happy  with  his

“name,”  f ***~  fl  (H  ^ § <==>Ka—.  From  the  facts

recorded  above  it  is  easy  to  see  how  much  the  Hebrews  were
indebted  to  the  Egyptians  in  the  construction  of  their  Gehenna,
and  how  closely  they  fitted  native  beliefs  into  a framework  of
foreign  conceptions.  Some  of  their  writers  seem  to  have  possessed
a better  insight  into  such  matters  than  others,  whilst  a few  of  them
unconsciously  reproduced  the  original  conception  of  the  Tuat  as
the  place  of  destruction  for  the  enemies  of  the  god,  and  believed
that  Gehenna,  or  hell,  would  be  abolished.  These  thought  that  at
some  future  time  God  would  remove  the  sun  from  its  place  and
would  place  it  in  the  second  firmament,  in  a hollow  place  or
chamber  specially  prepared  for  it,  and  that  having  judged  and
condemned  the  wicked  He  would  send  them  into  this  chamber,
where  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun  would  consume  them.1  The
Rabbis  generally  took  no  pains  to  say  either  how  the  fires  of
Gehenna  were  started,  or  how  they  were  maintained,  but  Rabbi
Yannai  and  Rabbi  Shim'on  ben-Lakish  evidently  thought  it  out,
and  so  reduced  Gehenna,  unintentionally,  to  the  place  where  a
physical  sun  supplied  the  consuming  fire,  and  did  for  the  damned
among  the  Hebrews  exactly  what  it  did  for  the  enemies  of  Rii
among  the  Egyptians.

It  must  be  noted  that  the  Gehenna  of  the  Hebrew  lacked
the  serpents  of  the  Egyptian  Tuat,  but  when  we  consider  the
difference  between  the  physical  characteristics  of  Egypt  and  those
of  Syria  and  Palestine  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  In
prcdynastic  times  Egypt  was  filled  with  serpents  of  every  kind,
and  the  terror  which  they  inspired  lived  in  the  minds  of  the
people  of  dynastic  times  long  after  the  country  had  been
practically  cleared  from  these  reptiles.  In  Palestine  and  Syria
snakes  were  never  very  plentiful,  but  in  the  region  of  Southern


1 Eisenmenger,  op.  cit.,  p.  366.


A PEP  AND  TIAMAT


277


Babylonia,  whence  came  Abraham  and  his  companions,  they  must
have  existed  in  large  numbers.  It  is  a curious  fact  that  the
Hebrews,  who  borrowed  so  largely  in  their  cosmogony  from
Babylonian  sources,  did  not  also  borrow  in  some  form  or  other
the  monster  Tiamat,  which  played  in  their  mythology  the  same
part  that  Apep  or  Apepi  played  among  the  Egyptian  gods.  The
Babylonian  Tiamat  waged  war  against  Marduk,  the  champion
chosen  by  the  gods,  and  was  held  to  be  the  incarnation  of  all  evil,
both  physical  and  moral ; and  although  the  HebreAvs  assigned  to
the  serpent  cunning  and  guile,  and  declared  that  he  was  “ more
“ subtle  than  any  beast  ” (Gen.  iii.  1 ),  they  hardly  considered  him  to
be  a great  physical  power  which  waged  war  against  the  sun  daily.
Tiamat,  as  we  learn  from  a cuneiform  text,1  was  50  kaslni  long,
and  the  height  of  its  undulations  was  1 kasha;  its  mouth  was  one-
half  a (far,  or  six  cubits  wide,  and  it  moved  in  water  9 cubits
deep.  Three  other  measurements  are  given,  viz.,  1 (jar,  1 jar,  and
5 jar,  but  as  the  text  following  them  is  broken  it  cannot  be  said  to
what  they  refer.  Now,  the  kasbu  was  the  distance  usually  passed
over  in  a journey  of  two  hours,  and  the  cubit  may  be  considered
to  be  about  20  inches.  Reckoning  the  kasbu  at  six  miles  we  thus
have  a monster  300  miles  long,  which  had  a mouth  10  feet  wide,
and  which  moved  in  undulations  six  miles  high ! The  measure-
ments of  5 gar  probably  refers  to  its  girth,  and  if  this  be  so  the
creature  was  100  feet  round  its  body.

When  Tiamat  had  been  slain  we  are  told  that  its  blood  flowed
from  its  body  for  three  years,  three  months,  and  one  day,  and  we
are  able  to  obtain  an  idea  of  its  huge  size  from  the  statement  that
when  Marduk  had  smashed  in  its  skull  with  his  club,  and  had  slit
the  channels  of  its  blood,  he  split  it,  like  a flat  fish,  into  two
halves,  one  of  Avhich  he  made  use  of  to  form  the  “ covering  of  the
“ heavens.”  * There  is  no  doubt  that  originally  the  Babylonian
Tiamat  Avas  nothing  but  the  rain  clouds,  and  the  mist  and  fog
Avhich  lie  over  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  in  the  early  morning  at
certain  seasons  of  the  year,  and  which  when  looked  at  from  the

1 See  King,  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  from  Babylonian  Tablets,  etc.,  part  xiii.,
pi.  33  f.,  London,  1901 ; and  King,  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation , vol.  i.,  p.  119.

* King,  Babylonian  Jleligion,  p.  77.


278


APEP,  TIAMAT,  LEVIATHAN


desert  appear  like  a huge  serpent  stretched  along  the  length  of  the
stream,  both  up  and  down  the  river.  The  Hebrew  Scriptures
contain  several  allusions  to  a great  nature  serpent,1  though  he
finds  no  place  among  the  Seven  Mansions  of  their  hell.  Thus  the
prophet  Amos  (ix.  3)  refers  to  the  serpent  at  the  bottom  of  the
sea,  which  Yahweh  would  command  to  bite  the  wicked  if  they
attempted  to  hide  there  ; in  Psalm  lxxiv.  13  f.  God  is  referred  to
as  the  breaker  of  the  heads  of  Leviathan  and  of  the  dragons  in  the
waters ; in  Isaiah  (li.  9)  we  have,  “ Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,
“ O arm  of  Yahweh ! Awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the
“ generations  of  old  ! Art  thou  not  it  that  did  slay  the  monster
“ Rsihabh,  and  wound  the  serpent  (tannin)  ? ” Ritkabh  may  here,
as  some  have  argued,  refer  to  Egypt,  but  if  so,  it  is  to  Egypt  as  the
home  of  the  great  serpent  monster  which  we  now  know  as  Apcpi,
and  which  was  to  the  prophet  Isaiah  the  type  and  symbol  of  the
country,  and  not  to  the  judgments  which  Yahweh  meted  out  to
that  land.

The  Hebrew  writers  refer  to  the  nature  serpent  under  several
names,  e.g.,  tannin , nakhdsh,  rdhabh,  but  the  monster  referred
to  under  them  is,  in  reality,  one  and  the  same,  i.e..  Leviathan
(tnrfr  livydthdn),  “ the  serpent  of  many  twistings  or  folds,”  anti
both  Nebuchadnezzar  II.  and  the  **  King  of  Assyria”  are  identified
with  him  (see  Jeremiah  li.  34  ; Isaiah  xiv.  29).  According  to  the
Rabbis  he  was  created  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  week  of  creation,3
and  was  hunted  for  slaughter  by  Gabriel,  and  with  the  assistance
of  Yahweh  was  slain  by  him  ; here  we  have  a series  of  close
resemblances  to  the  history  of  Tiamat,  for  Gabriel  is  in  every  way
the  counterpart  of  Marduk,  and  Yahweh  takes  the  place  of  Anshar
as  the  head  of  the  gods.  Finally,  Leviathan  was  slain  by  Gabriel,
just  as  Tiamat  was  killed  by  Marduk,  and  out  of  the  skin  of
Leviathan  Gabriel  made  a tent  wherein  the  righteous  might  dwell,3
and  a covering  for  the  walls  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  This

1 See  Goldxiher,  Mythology  of  the  Hebrew  h,  pp.  27,  28;  King,  Babylonian
Religion,  p.  115.

2 Emenmenger,  op.  eit.,  p.  877.

4 yn1?  crpHx1?  .-did  jrwy1?  nvt  7 m wrrpn  T/iy : Eisen-

monger,  op.  cifc.,  p.  888.


SEVEN-HEADED  SERPENT


279


covering  was  bright  and  shining,  and  it  emitted  light  which  was  so
strong  that  it  could  he  seen  from  one  end  of  the  world  to  the  other.
The  last  statement  recalls  the  words  of  the  Fourth  Tablet  of  the
Creation  Series,  which  tell  how  Marduk  made  a canopy  in  the
heavens  of  one-half  of  the  body  or  skin  of  Tiamat.  In  the  Hebrew
version  of  the.  story  it  is  said  that  the  righteous  feed  upon  the  body
of  Leviathan,  but  there  is  no  equivalent  passage  in  the  cuneiform
texts  at  present  known.  From  the  passage  in  the  Psalm  already
quoted  (lxxiv.  13)  it  would  appear  that  Leviathan  had  many
heads,  but  this  view  is  not  supported  by  any  known  description  of
Tiamat,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  on  the  subject  we  must
assume  that  the  idea  of  a plurality  of  heads  came  from  Egypt.
In  the  Book  of  Revelation  (xii.  3 ; xiii.  1)  mention  is  made  of  a
“ great  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  seven
“ crowns  upon  his  heads,”  which  appeared  in  heaven,  and  of  a
beast  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  with  ten  crowns  upon  his
horns,  which  came  up  out  of  the  sea,  but  the  idea  of  these  also  was
not  derived  from  Babylonia.  All  the  available  evidence  goes
to  show  that  whilst  the  Hebrew  conception  of  Leviathan  was
of  Babylonian  origin  that  of  a hell  of  fire  was  borrowed  from
Egypt.

Similarly,  the  seven-headed  dragon  and  beast  of  the  Book  of
Revelation,  like  the  seven-headed  basilisk  serpent  mentioned  in
“ Pistis  Sophia,” 1 have  their  origin  in  the  seven-headed  serpent
which  is  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts.  In  Revelations  ix.  19,
horses  are  referred  to  which  had  tails  “ like  unto  serpents,  and  had
heads,”  and  here  again  we  have  an  idea  suggested  by  a monster
which  inhabited  one  of  the  Pylons  of  the  Tuat,  and  which  had  the
body  of  a crocodile  and  a tail  formed  of  a writhing  serpent’s  body
with  a serpent’s  head  for  the  tip  of  it.

But  although  the  Hebrews  borrowed  the  framework  of  their
hell  from  Egypt  they  appear  to  have  made  no  use  of  the  means  by
which  the  Egyptians  hoped  to  escape  from  Amentet  and  the  Tuat,
that  is  to  say,  there  is  no  evidence  to  sIioav  that  they  had  in  early

err  it  goq  epe  CAjgqe  H A.ne  t poq ; «i.  Schwartzo,  pp.  136,
140,  147.


280


GNOSTIC  MAGICAL  NAMES


times  any  equivalent  for  the  system  of  words  of  power  which
played  such  an  important  part  in  the  magical  side  of  the  Egyptian
religion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Copts,  at  least  those  of  them  who
belonged  to  Gnostic  sects,  retained  the  beliefs  concerning  the
efficacy  of  magical  words  and  names,  and  they  introduced  them
into  their  writings  in  a remarkable  manner.  Thus  in  “ Pistis
Sophia  ” we  are  told  1 that  after  His  resurrection  Jesus  stood  up
with  His  disciples  by  the  sea,  and  prayed  to  His  Father,  whom  He
addressed  by  a series  of  magical  names,  thus : — Afiftioud,  Iao,  A6i,
Oiapsinothf.r,  Tiikrnops,  Nopsiteh,  ZagoiirP:,  PagourP,  Neth-
momaoth,  Nepsiomaoth,  Marakiiakhtha,  Thobarrabau,  Tiiar-
nakhakuax,  Zorokothora,  Ikou,  Sabaotii.8  Whilst  He  was  say-
ing these  names  Thomas,  Andrew,  James,  and  Simon  the  Canaanite
stood  in  the  west  with  their  faces  towards  the  east;  and  Philip
and  Bartholomew  stood  in  the  south  with  their  faces  towards  the
north.  In  another  passage3  Jesus  addresses  His  Father  in  these
words  and  by  these  names: — Iao  Iouo,  Iao,  Adi,  OrA,  Psinother,
Theropsin,  Opsither,  Nephthomaotji,  Nrpiiiomaotii  Marakiiakh-
tha,  Marmara  khth  a,  IP  ana  menaman,  Am  an  Pi  tou  ouranou,
Israi  Hamen  HamPn,  Soubaibai  appaap  HamPn  Hamkn,  deraarai
IIapahou  HamPn  H amP.n, Sarsarsartou H amP:n H amP;n,  Koukiamin
miai  If  am  Ax  Hamen,  Iai,  Iai,  Tou  a HamBn  Ham  An  HamAn,  Main-
mari,  MariA,  Marei  HamP:n  Ham  fix  H am  An.4  In  another  place 5

Ed.  Sell  wart  zc,  p.  357.

1 aehioyuj*  iaut  Aour  tui  A\jsmu)&Ep'  eepfta>\J/-  itui'iJ/rTep'

^ATovpH*  nAvoYpH  nGejuojuAtoe-  rfeip'ioJUAtue'  AAApA-
X^X^*-’  0UjftAppAftAY'  ^OpOKOdOp*.'

ieov  CA.ftA.uje:

3 Ed.  Scliwartze,  p.  375.

* i'Au>  ioYur  i'AU)*  AUJi  ujia  \J/muueep'  0epuj\pirr
eep  rtecl>eoJUAuJ0-  necJnojuAure*  JutApA^CAX^A*  JUApjuA-
pA3C0A  JHAftA  JUerfAUArr  AJUtAItHI  TOY  OYpAltOY*  ICpAI
gAJUHrt  g,AJUHff  COYftAlftAi*  AnnAAIT*  gAJUtHff’  gAJULHrr
2v€pAApAI  gAnAgOY  gAJULHIY  g,AJAHft  CApCApCApTOY
^AJULHff  gAJUHfT  KOYKIAAitft  JUIAI  gAAAHfY'  gAJUtHtt*  IAI*
IAI*  TOY  An  gAJUHff  gAJUHIT  gAJUHfT  JUAfff  JUApt*  JULAplH’
JUtAper  gAJUHN  gAJUtHfY  gAJUHff  (p.  375).

4 Ibid.,  j>.  375.


GNOSTIC  MAGICAL.  NAMES


281


He  addresses  those  who  forgive  sins  by  their  names  thus: —
SlTHIREPSNIKHIEU,  ZENEI,  BeRIMOU,  SoKHABRIKHAu,  EUTHABl,
Nanai  DieisbalmArikit,  Meunifos,  Kiiirie,  Entair,  Mouthiour,
Smoub,  PeukiiAr,  Oouskiious,  Minionor,  Isokhobortua  ; 1 and
immediately  afterwards  He  calls  upon  the  Powers  of  His  Father  by
these  names: — AuAr,  Bebro,  Atiironi,  Eolrepii,  Bone,  Souphen,
K nitousoki ireopii , Mau6nbi,  Mneuor,  Souoxi,  KhOkheteoph,
Kiiokhe,  EteAfii,  Memokh,  and  AnAsipji.2  An  examination  of
the  books  of  “ Pistis  Sophia”  will  show  that  many  of  the  details  of
the  “ mysteries  ” which  are  there  described  are  based  upon  ancient
Egyptian  beliefs,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  doctrine  of  spiritual
light  which  is  expounded  therein  only  represents  a spiritualized
conception  of  the  far-reaching  character  of  the  power’s  of  the  light
of  the  sun  upon  both  the  living  and  the  dead,  which  the  dynastic
Egyptians  recognized  and  described  centuries  before  the  Christian
era.  This  was  expressed  in  the  terms  of  a highly  artificial  system
wherein  words  of  power,  magical  names,  emanations,  ranks  of
angels,  gates,  watchers,  and  purely  Christian  conceptions  were
mixed  up  together,  with  the  Lord  Christ  as  the  central  Figure.
Much  has  yet  to  be  done  before  all  the  comparisons  and  connections
between  the  Egyptian  and  Christian  systems  can  be  fully  worked
out,  but  the  facts  quoted  above  will,  perhaps,  suggest  the  import-
ance of  the  study.

1 ci<J>ipe\Jm!3(;i€V  ^erter  Aepuuov  cox*&piXHP*  eY_
«Apr  itAftA.!*  :Alelcf^LA.?^JUlHpl^(;•  JtieYrrinoc-  ^P16’  e«TA.ip'
AJtoveioYp-  cjuiovp*  nev^wp*  ooycxoyc*  jumiortop*  icoxo-
ftopeA.  (p.  370).

3 A.YHp’  Beftpur  Aeporrr  Hovitecjr  Hourre’  coy<J>en*  Kiti-
tt o yco^c pe ujcJ> ‘ JutAYoorrAr  JurteYoup*  coYumr  xuJXerreou4>*
X^OC6’  erreoKp*  xjiextujx'  (p.  370).


( 282  )


CHAPTER  VII

THE  OLDEST  COMPANY  OF  THE  GODS  AND

THE  CREATION

IN  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  work  mention  has  been  made
of  three  companies  of  gods,  the  existence  of  which  was
formulated  by  the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  and  it  has  been  shown  that
a company  of  gods  usually  consisted  of  four  pairs  of  deities,  four
gods  and  four  goddesses,  and  a president  or  chief  of  the  same.
We  have  also  shown  that  a pant  or  company  of  gods  did  not
necessarily  contain  nine  deities  only,  and  that  it  as  often  as  not
was  supposed  to  include  more  than  nine  gods.  Originally,  how-
ever, the  Helio-
politan  priests,  or
the  authors  of  the
theological  system
exhibited  in  the
Pyramid  Texts,  in-
tended the  pant  to
consist  of  nine  gods,
and  it  seems  that  they  arrived  at  this  decision  as  the  result
of  the  addition  of  their  own  local  god  Tern  to  a group  of  four
pairs  of  deities,  four  gods  and  four  goddesses,  whom  they  had
grouped  together  according  to  the  plan  followed  by  an  older  school
of  theologians  in  forming  an  older  company  of  the  gods.  The
company  of  the  gods  last  mentioned  is  probably  the  oldest  of  all
the  companies  in  Egypt,  although  for  various  reasons  it  never
seems  to  have  attained  to  the  popularity  of  the  “ great  pant  of  the
gods  of  Annu,”  or  to  have  enjoyed  such  a prominent  position  in
the  minds  of  the  religious  philosophers  of  Egypt.  This  is  not  to
be  wondered  at,  for  whilst  the  Hcliopoiitan  company  of  .the  gods
included  the  Sun-god  Rii-Tem,  or  llu-Tem-Kheperu,  and  Osiris,


r


THE  FIRST  EIGHT  GODS


283


the  god  of  the  dead,  the  older  company  consisted  of  pail’s  of  deities
who  represented  religious  conceptions,  and  faiths,  and  beliefs,
which  even  at  that  remote  period  had  been  long  dead,  and  the
meaning  of  which  had  been  forgotten.  The  very  gods  of  the  older
company  had  been  superseded,  and  their  worship  abolished,  and
the  knowledge  of  their  history  and  attributes  was  preserved  only
in  the  minds  of  priests  and  religious  experts,  who  probably
regarded  the  ancient  views  about  these  gods  which  had  come  down
to  them  as  the  product  of  men  belonging  to  a lower  stage  of
civilization  than  their  own.  The  older  company  of  the  gods  here
referred  to  have  been  described  as  personifications  of  aspects,  or
phases,  or  properties  of  primeval  matter,  and  may  be  thus
enumerated : —


,T  OOO S\

Nu,  —

V— H WWA\  k 1

000  ^ eft

Nut,  J.

* J /WWW  VJ  k_i

JJkhu,  HM-

Bejiut,

Xekui,

Kkkuit,

Kekh,  ^ ^ ^ .

Kebhet,

The  character  of  the  first  pair  of  gods  can  be  readily  deter-
mined by  the  hieroglyphics  which  form  their  names ; thus  the
name  Nu,  PPO  Jj  ,x  is  expressed  by  three  vases  of  water  which
indicate  the  sound,  and  the  outstretched  heaven,  s=5,  and  the
determinative  for  water,  . and  the  sign  for  “ god,”  all  of  which
show  that  this  deity  was  the  god  of  the  watery  mass  of  the  sky.
The  goddess  Nut,  PPP  Q J) . was  merelv  his  female  counter-

part,  as  the  signs,  ^ indicate.  From  various  passages  found

in  the  religious,  mythological,  and  funereal  texts  of  all  periods  it
is  abundantly  clear  that  in  primeval  times  at  least  the  Egyptians
believed  in  the  existence  of  a deep  and  boundless  watery  mass  out
of  which  had  come  into  being  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and
everything  that  is  in  them.  The  germs  of  all  and  every  kind  of
life  were  in  this  watery  mass,  and  they  were  supposed  to  have

WwW\  /WW-A

1 The  old  form  is  OCO,  or  (Unas  199,  STOP),  or  ^ (Tela  78).


284


N U AND  NUT


w


been  there  from  the  beginning.  They  do  not  seem  to  have
formulated  any  exact  ideas  about  the  position  of  this  watery  mass
in  the  sky  or  heaven,  and  they  certainly  did  not  attempt  to  assign
to  it  dimensions  which  could  be  expressed  by  the  ordinary  methods
of  measurements;  in  later  times,  however,  Nu  was  frequently

identified  with  the  sky,  pet  0 ^ and  witli  the  heaven  above  it,
unt,  0 though,  strictly  speaking,  he  represented  the  watery

mass  which  was  supposed  to  exist  between  the  two.  It  must  also
be  noted  that  the  ocean  and  also  the  Nile  1 were  identified  with
Nu,  whose  characteristics  appear  to  have  changed  during  the  latter
part  of  the  dynastic  period.  The  name  of  this  god  has  been
compared  with  the  Coptic  word  itovit  abyss,”  “ deep,”  and  the
like,  and  it  is  possible  that  it  may  have  some  connection  with  it,
but  it  is  difficult  to  sec  how  in  that  case  it  can  mean  “ young,”
as  the  late  Dr.  Brugseh  suggested.2  The  true  meaning  is  much
more  likely  to  be  suggested  by  the  play  on  the  words  Nu  and  ueu
which  we  have  on  p.  o09  in  the  passage,  “ l raised  them  up  from
out  of  the  watery  mass  (nu)  out  of  inactivity  ” (nun),  i.e.,  Nu  was
the  inert  mass  of  watery  matter  from  which  the  world  was
created.  Of  Nut,  the  female  counterpart  of  Nu,  little  need  be  said
here,  except  that  she  was  regarded  as  the  primeval  mother,  with
whom  in  later  dynastic  times  were  identified  several  goddesses,
e.g.,  Hathor,  Mut,  Nit,  or  Neith,  and  whoso  attributes  were
assigned  to  them.  The  forms  in  which  Nu  is  depicted  vary.
Thus  he  is  represented  in  human  form  holding  a sceptre  when  he
forms  one  of  the  company  of  the  gods  of  Amen,  but  he  is  also
represented  with  the  head  of  a frog,  which  is  surmounted  by  a
beetle,3  and  even  with  the  head  of  a snake.  The  goddess  Nut  is
also  represented  in  human  form,  but  sometimes  she  has  the  head
of  a uraeus,  surmounted  by  a disk,4  and  at  other  times  she  has
the  head  of  a cat.5

1 Compare  Horajiollo  I.  21  (ed.  Loemans ; p.  28) : — NtiAou  Si  Ava/3a<rtv
fr/)/u.aiVovT«s,  Sr  «a\ ovaiv  Atyvimori  Now ; attention  was  first  drawn  to  this  passage
by  Tatt&ni.

' - Religion  untl  Mylhologie,  p.  120.

1 Canzone,  ftiziomtrio , P>-  167,  No.  2.

4 V>id.,  No  5 lhul,  pi.  170,  No.  2.


KEKUI  AND  KEKUIT


The  characteristics  of  the  second  pair  of  gods,  Hchu,  ^ ?

and  Idehut,  ^ ^ are  not  easy  to  determine.  According

to  Signor  Lanzonc  they  are  personifications  of  male  and  female
elements  of  fire,1  and  from  the  ancient  pictures  of  them  we  see  that
the  Egyptian  artists  regarded  them  from  different  points  of  view.
Thus  in  one  group  of  the  eight  primeval  gods  Hehu  is  represented
in  one  of  the  forms  of  Nu,  i.e.,  frog-headed,  already  described,  and
Heliut  in  the  form  of  Nut ; 2 and  in  another  group  Hehu  has  the
head  of  a serpent,  and  IJehut  that  of  a cat.  According  to  the
late  Dr.  Brugsch 3 the  name  Heh  is  connected  with  the  word

which  indicates  an  undefined  and  unlimited  number,  i.e.,  heh,  ;

when  applied  to  time  the  idea  suggested  is  “millions  of  years,”
and  Hell  is  equivalent  to  the  Greek  alatv.  In  several  passages
quoted  by  I)r.  Brugsch  mention  is  made  of  a god  Heh,
who  seems  to  be  a personification  of  the  atmosphere  which
exists  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  to  lie  identical  with
Shu,  and  that  distinguished  Egyptologist  went  so  far  as  to
compare  his  functions  with  those  which  were  exercised  by
Aion,  Eros,  and  Pneuma  in  Greek  systems  of  philosophy.
In  a small  scene  reproduced  by  Signor  Lanzone1  we  see  the

,Q

god  Harpocrates  in  his  usual  attitude,  jjiO,  just  above  what  appeal’s

to  be  a small  tree.  On  the  right  kneels  the  goddess  Heliut,  who
is  making  her  outstretched  hand  and  arm  a support  for  the  left
hand  of  the  young  god  which  rests  upon  it ; on  the  other  side
kneels  Hehu,  who  is  represented  in  the  act  of  raising  or  supporting
the  feet  of  the  god.  above  whose  head  arc  the  beetle  and  disk.

The  characteristics  of  the  third  pair  of  gods,  Kekuj,

and  Kekuit,  xx  ’ ar°  casier  to

determine,  and  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  these  deities  represent
the  male  and  female  powers  of  the  darkness  which  was  supposed  to
cover  over  the  primeval  abyss  of  water ; they  have  been  compared
by  Dr.  Brugsch  with  the  Erebos  of  the  Greeks.  In  some  aspects
they  appear  to  represent  both  the  night  and  the  day,  that  is  to

■ //>/(/.,  pi.  168  ff.

4 Op.  oil.,  p.  685.


1 Lanzone,  Dizionario , page  (585.
3 Religion , p.  132.


286


KERH  AND  KERHET

• • *


say,  Ivekui  is  called  “ the  raiser  up  of  the  light,”  and  Kekuit  “ the
“raiser  up  of  the  night.”  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  these
deities  obtained  these  names,  for  Kekui  represents  that  period  of
the  night  which  immediately  precedes  the  day,  and  Kekuit  is
that  period  of  the  night  which  immediately  follows  the  day.  At
one  period  Kekui  and  Kekuit  were  considered  to  be  gods  of
Elephantine,  and  their  attributes  were  identified  with  those  of  the
Nubian  god  Khnernu  and  his  female  counterpart  Sati ; but  this,  no
doubt,  was  a result  of  regarding  Ivekui  and  Kekuit  as  personi-
fications of  the  Nile-god  Hapi,  whose  hidden  fountains  lay  beneath
the  rocks  at  some  part  of  the  Island  of  Elephantine.  According  to
another  view  the  crocodile-god  Scbek,  one  of  whose  chief  seats  of
worship  was  at  Kom  Ombo,  was  a personification  of  the  old
primeval  god  Kekui,  and  in  any  case  Sebek  was  certainly  con-
sidered to  be  one  of  the  principal  forms  in  which  the  sold  of  the
primeval  darkness  loved  to  array  itself.1  In  the  scenes  in  which
the  forms  of  the  oldest  pant  or  company  of  the  gods  are  repre-
sented Kekui  is  usually  given  the  head  of  a serpent,  but  Kekuit
has  the  head  either  of  a frog  or  a cat.2  In  one  scene  Kekui  and

Kekuit  are  identified  with  Ka  and  Kait,  ( f^j,  ( I (j(j  the


former  being  called  the  “ grandfather  of  all  the  gods,”  and  the  latter
the  “ grandmother  of  the  divine  company,”  <=*  o ® ^ ; in

this  scene  Ka  or  Kekui  has  the  head  of  a frog  surmounted  by  a beetle,
and  Kait  or  Kekuit  the  head  of  a serpent  surmounted  by  a disk.
The  characteristics  of  the  fourth  pair  of  gods,  Kerh,

^ ^J,  and  Kerhet,  ^j,  are  not  easy  to  define,

and  the  texts  in  some  places  give  quite  different  names  where  we

VAW  rv

should  expect  to  find  theirs ; thus  we  have  Ni,  |j[j  , or

A/VW/W  O

Nenu,  ^£<3^,  or  Nut,
of  Kerb,  and  Ennit,  f"r
or  Nit,


or  Amen,  (J t=i instead


/VWWl  _

or  Nenuit,  <wvvv'  e , or  Nut,

' — cv  ^ k»  • *

The  common  meaning  of  the  word  kerh  is  “ night,”  and  according


O


O’


o’

or


Cb  \\  ‘

instead  of  Kerhet.


2 Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  168


Bmgsch,  llelijion , p.  142.


THE  FIRST  EIGHT  GODS


287


to  this  the  deities  Kerb  and  Kcrhet  would  represent  the  male  and
female  powers  of  night;  on  the  other  hand,  the  determinative
which  occurs  in  each  name,  shows  that  these  gods  were  regarded
as  personifications  of  some  apparently  inactive  powers  of  the
primeval  watery  abyss,  and  we  may,  therefore,  regard  them  as
types  of  powers  of  nature  in  a state  of  repose  either  before  or  after
a state  of  activity.  In  the  scenes  in  which  the  forms  of  the  oldest
company  of  the  gods  are  represented,  Xi,  that  is  to  say,  Kerh,  has
the  head  of  a frog,  with  or  without  a beetle  upon  it,  or  the  head  of
a snake,  and  Ennit,  that  is  to  say,  Kerhet,  has  either  the  head  of  a
frog  or  that  of  a cat.

It  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  the  various  views  which
Egyptologists  have  held  about  the  above  four  pairs  of  deities,  and
it  certainly  appears  as  if  the  ancient  Egyptians  themselves  had  no
very  clear  ideas  as  to  their  functions.  As  to  their  antiquity  there
is  no  room  for  doubt,  for  although  the  oldest  pictures  of  their
forms  do  not  date  from  a period  anterior  to  the  reign  of  Seti  I.,  it
is  quite  clear,  from  the  way  in  which  they  are  mentioned,  that
they  represent  traditional  ideas  of  an  extremely  ancient  character.
One  proof  of  this  is  the  careful  mention  of  the  female  counterparts
of  the  four  great  primeval  gods,  for  it  was  usual  in  the  case  of  gods
who  were  the  product  of  the  purely  dynastic  period  to  pay  small
attention  to  the  goddesses  who  were  regarded  as  their  wives.

Tlius  Eli  and  Amen  possessed  female  counterparts  called  Rat,

and  Ament,  (j  but  they  play  no  prominent  parts  in

Egyptian  mythology,  and  are  rarely  mentioned  in  the  texts.  Man
always  has  fashioned,  and  probably  always  will,  fashion  his  god,
or  gods,  in  his  own  image,  and  he  has  always,  having  reached
a certain  stage  in  development,  given  to  his  gods  wives  and
offspring ; but  the  nature  of  the  position  taken  by  the  ■wives  of
the  gods  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the  position  of  women  in  the
households  of  those  who  write  the  legends  and  traditions  of  the  gods.

The  gods  of  the  oldest  company  in  Egypt  were,  the  writer
believes,  invented  by  people  in  whose  households  women  held  a
high  position,  and  among  whom  they  possessed  more  power  than  is
usually  the  case  with  Oriental  peoples.  Xut,  Hehut,  Ivekuit,  and


288  APZU-lilSHTU,  M&MfU-TIAMAT

Kerliet  are  the  equals  of  the  gods  Nu,  Hell,  lvekui,  and  Kerb,  and
not  merely  the  bearers  of  offspring  as  were  the  later  goddesses.
The  general  drift  of  the  texts  wherein  the  four  pairs  of  gods
are  mentioned  indicates  that  three  pairs  were  qualities,  or
characteristics,  or  attributes  of  the  fourth  pair  personified,  although
some  would  make  the  four  pairs  represent  the  male  and  female
elements  of  the  Four  Elements,  Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and  Water,  and
others  would  make  them  stand  for  the  primeval  Matter  out  of
which  all  things  have  been  made,  and  primeval  Space,  and
primeval  Time,  and  primeval  Power.  To  say  definitely  and
exactly  what  they  represent  is  in  the  present  state  of  Egyptological
knowledge  impossible,  for  the  evidence  which  would  enable  us  to
arrive  at  a final  decision  in  the  matter  is  not  forthcoming.

Before  we  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  the  events  which
resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  sun  and  later  of  the  world,  it  will  be
interesting  to  compare  with  the  above  four  pairs  of  gods  the  group
of  gods  that  we  meet  with  in  the  “ Seven  Tablets  of  Creation,”  1
which  are  written  in  cuneiform,  and  contain  the  views  and  beliefs
of  the  Assyrians  as  to  the  origin  of  the  gods,  and  of  the  world,
and  of  mankind.  The  old  company  of  primeval  gods  mentioned
in  these  Tablets  are  also  eight  in  number,  and  they  fall  readily
into  four  pairs.  The  first  pair  consisted  of  Apzu  - risht6,
fcfiy  tyyty-  t^TyTt , i.e.,  the  “primeval  abyss,”  and

Mummu-Tiamat,  s-yyy  ^ wT<  ■£-V>.  The  meaning  of  the
word  nmrnmu  is  unknown,2  but  Tiamat  is  the  name  of  the  female
counterpart  of  Apzu-rishtu,  and  she  became  the  mother  of  offspring
by  him.  These  two  deities,  then,  represent  the  male  and  female
powers  of  the  watery  mass  which  contained  the  germs  of  all  life,
and  of  every  kind  of  life,  and  they  existed  at  a time  “ when  of  the
“ gods  none  had  been  called  into  being,  and  none  bore  a name,  and
“ no  destinies  [were  ordained].”  When  “ their  waters  were

1 The  best  copies  of  the  cuneiform  texts  hitherto  issued  will  be  found  in  the
publication  of  the  Trustees  of  the  British  Museum,  untitled  Cuneiform  Texts  from
Jlubylouiun  Tablets,  part  xiii.,  London,  1901.  These,  with  many  additional  texts,
are  ffiven  in  Mr.  L.  W.  King’s  Seem  Tablets  of  Creation  with,  transliterations,
translations,  notes,  etc.,  London,  1902.  (Vol.  I.)

• Mummu  = the  Merii/ut  of  Damascus,  and  probably  means  “ chaos.”


LAKHMP^i.ftD  LAKHAMIJ  289

“ mingled  together  ” then  the  work  of  creation  began.  We  thus
see  that  Apzh-rishtu  and  Mflmmu-Tiamat  are  the  exact  equivalents
in  the  Babylonian  cosmogony  of  Nu  and  Nut  in  the  Egyptian,  and
that  they  are  the  originals  of  the  Greek  forms  'Avaortov  and  TavOe,
which  are  given  in  the  scheme  of  Damascius. 1

The  next  pair  of  gods  in  the  Assyrian  texts  are  Lakh  mu,
m-T  tTTT<  and  Lakhamu,  hut  of  their

functions  we  know  nothing,  any  more  than  we  do  of  the  Egyptian
primeval  gods  Heh  and  Hehut.  The  names  of  the  third  and
fourth  deities  in  the  list  of  Damascius  (ed.  Kopp,  p.  125)  are-da^os
and  Jaxv,  hut  these  are  clearly  mistakes  for  and  Aa-xv,  i.e.,

Lakhmu  and  Lakhamu.

According  to  the  First  Tablet  of  the  Creation  Series  “ ages
increased,”2  and  then  two  more  gods  came  into  being,  viz.,
Anshar,  Hf  and  Ivishar,  ►*>*y  <m  a,  i.e.,  the  'A crcrcopos
and  Kicrcraprj  of  Damascius.  Now  up  to  this  point  the  three  pairs
of  gods  of  the  Assyrians  agree  exactly  with  the  first  three  pairs  of
gods  of  the  oldest  Egyptian  company  of  the  gods,  and  the  points
of  resemblance  are  striking.  We  see  from  the  table  printed  by
Brugsch :t  that  the  Egyptian  authorities  differed  as  to  the  names  of
the  god  and  goddess  of  the  fourth  pair  of  gods,  some  giving  Kerh
and  Kcrhet,  others  giving  Amen  and  Ament,  and  others  giving
Enen  and  Enenet-hemset,  and  others  Ni  and  Ennit ; all,  however,
agreed  that  a fourth  pair  of  deities  were  necessary  to  complete  the
company,  and  tliat  one  must  be  a god  and  the  other  a goddess.

The  First  Tablet  of  the  Creation  Series  mentions  a seventh
deity  called  Asru,  «-T  R </-.  who  is  clearly  to  be  identified  with
the  'Avos  of  Damascius,  and  an  eighth  deity  called  Nudimmud,
—T  y-  <STf  -HA.  which  is  a title  of  the  god  Ea  ; the  context
which  would  probably  have  supplied  us  with  the  name  of  a ninth
god  is  broken  away,  and  at  present  there  is  no  means  of  restoring

1 He  was  born  in  Syria,  probably  at  Damascus,  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  Vth
century  of  our  era.  Ho  studied  at  Alexandria  and  at  Athens,  and  was  a pupil  of
Marinus  and  Zenodotus,  and  when  Justinian  closed  the  schools  at  Athens  lie  went
to  the  court  of  the  Persian  king  Khusrau  (Chosrocs).  The  best  editiou  of  his  work

on  u First  Principles  '*  is  that  of  Kopp,  published  in  1828.

3 Babylonian  lielujion , p.  61.  3 lle/i<jivnf  p.  127.

U


290


ANU,  EA,  BEL*

the  passage.  Both  these  deities  are  masculine,  whereas  one  should
be  masculine  and  one  feminine.  In  the  list  of  the  primeval  gods
given  by  Damascius  following  Kurcrap-q  we  have  kvo?,  ’IMiros,
and  'A6$ ; the  first  of  these  is,  as  we  have  said,  Anu  ; the  second
is  the  god  Enlil,  fcjyj ; and  the  third  is  Ea,  ~T  CTTTT  !?•
But  all  these  are  gods,  and  there  is  no  goddess  among  them,  and  it
is  difficult  not  to  think  that  in  making  the  recension  of  the  story
which  is  preserved  in  cuneiform  the  Assyrian  editors  substituted
the  three  gods  Auu,  Bel,  and  Ea,  who  represented  heaven,  and
earth,  and  the  abyss  respectively,  for  those  who  were  in  the  older
recension.  The  Assyrian  copy  which  we  now  have  was  made
during  the  reign  of  Asliur-bani-pal,  king  of  Assyria  from  n.o.  668
to  b.c.  626,  presumably  from  a Babylonian  archetype,  but  it  is
impossible  to  say  to  what  period  the  actual  version  which  it
represents  is  to  be  assigned.  The  Seven  Tablets  of  Creation
contain  several  Assyrianized  forms  of  ancient  Sumerian  words,  a
fact  which  proves  that  the  original  traditions  incorporated  in  the
work  must  be  of  Sumerian  origin,  and  must  have  been  formulated
in  remote  antiquity.  It  is  surprising  therefore  to  find  so  much
similarity  existing  between  the  primeval  gods  of  Sumer  and  those
of  Egypt,  especially  as  the  resemblance  cannot  be  the  result  of
borrowing.  It  is  out  of  the  question  to  assume  that  Ashur-bani-
pal’s  editors  borrowed  the  system  from  Egypt,  or  that  the  literary
men  of  the  time  of  Seti  I.  borrowed  their  ideas  from  the  literati  of
Babylonia  or  Assyria,  and  we  are  therefore  driven  to  the  conclusion
that  both  the  Sumerians  and  the  early  Egyptians  derived  their
primeval  gods  from  some  common  but  exceedingly  ancient  source.
The  similarity  between  the  two  companies  of  gods  seems  to  be  too
close  to  be  accidental,  especially  as  there  is  every  possibility  that
the  Sumerian  system  was  taken  into  Egypt  by  the  same  people
who  carried  into  the  country  the  art  of  making  bricks,  the  use
of  tiie  cylinder  seal,  and  the  like.1  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is
certain  that  the  company  of  primeval  gods,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  was  common  to  the  Sumerians  and  Egyptians,  was  quite
different  from  the  companies  of  gods  of  which  Osiris  and  Ra-Tem
were  the  heads  in  Egypt,  and  also  from  those  which  were  formed
1 Soo  my  ’Etjijiit  in  the  Predynaetic  and  Archaic  Periods,  p.  41.


291


THE  PRIMEVAL  SPIRIT

in  Babylonia  and  Assyria  when  these  countries  were  inhabited  by
Semitic  populations.

Now  the  First  Tablet  of  Creation  gives  us  to  understand
clearly  that  the  work  of  creation  began  when  the  waters,  or
essences,  of  the  first  pair  of  primeval  gods,  Apzu  and  Tiamat,
were  mingled  together,  and  that  the  offspring  of  this  union  were
Lakhmu  and  Lakhamu,  Anshar  and  Kishar,  etc.  What  the  views
of  the  ancient  Egyptians  on  this  subject  were  we  do  not  know,  but
it  is  quite  clear  from  the  allusions  in  many  texts  that  the  second,
third,  and  fourth  pairs  of  the  gods  already  mentioned  were  the
offspring  of  the  union  of  the  first  pair  Nu  and  Nut,  i.e.,  that  they
were  their  attributes.  We  may  also  conclude  that  Nu  and  Nut
were  the  male  and  female  powers  of  the  vast  and  inert  watery
mass,  with  its  male  and  female  counterparts  Ni  and  Ennit,  and
that  the  second  pair  of  gods.  Hell  and  Hehut,  represented  their
eternal  nature.  The  third  pair  of  deities  are  nothing  but  the  male
and  female  counterparts  of  Darkness  personified,  and  thus  we  have
as  the  primeval  material  from  which  everything  was  made  an  eternal,
boundless,  watery  mass  wherein  are  the  germs  of  life,  male  and
female ; this  watery  mass  is,  however,  enveloped  in  thick  darkness.
The  late  Dr.  Brugsch,  basing  his  opinion  upon  certain  statements
made  in  the  Egyptian  texts,  declared  that  the  primeval  spirit  (Urgeist)
felt  the  desire  for  creative  activity,  and  that  his  word  awoke  the
world  to  life  in  a form  in  which  it  had  already  been  mirrored  in  his
mind,  and  that  the  first  act  of  creation  began  with  the  formation  out
of  the  primeval  watery  mass  of  an  egg,  wherefrom  issued  the  light  of
day,  i.e.,  Ra,  which  was  the  immediate  cause  of  all  life  in  the  earthly
world.  In  this  light,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  Risiug  Sun,  the  almighty
power  of  the  divine  spirit  incorporated  itself  in  a brilliant  form.1

1 “Der  go  til  iclie  Urgeist,  un/.ertreimlidi  von  dem  Uvstoff  des  Urwassers,
“fiihlte  das  Verlangen  nach  sdio pf cri seller  Tluitigkeit  und  sein  Wort  erweekte  die
u Welt  zuin  Lehen,  deren  Gestalt  und  formeiireidie  Gebilde  sidi  in  seineiu  Auge
“ vorher  abgespiegeit  batten.  Hire  korperliclien  Umrisso  und  Farben.  entspradien
“ nacb  ihrer  Entstehung  der  Wabrheifc  d.li.  dor  Urvorstellungen  des  gottlichen
li  Geistes  uber  sein  kiinftiges  Werk.  Der  era  to  Scliopfungsact  begann  mit  der
“ Bildung  eines  Eies  ans  dem  Urgowiisser,  aus  deni  das  Tagesliclit  (Ril),  die  un-
“ mittelbare  Ursache  (ra)  des  Lebens  in  dom  Bereiche  der  irdischen  Welt  heraus-
“ brack.  In  der  aufgehenden  Sonne  verkorperte  sicb  die  Allmacht  des  gottlidien
“ Pistes  in  ihrer  glanzvollsten  Gestalt”  (Religion,  p.  101).


'2  92


THOTH  AND  HIS

The  opinion  of  the  great  Egyptologist  is  of  great  weight  on
all  matters  of  this  kind,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  have
no  authority  in  the  texts  for  all  the  details  of  his  narrative  of  the
events  which  are  supposed  to  have  taken  place  before  the  appear-
ance of  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  and  that  for  many  of  the  ancient
Egyptian  views  on  the  subject  of  the  Creation  our  only  authorities
are  compositions  which,  in  the  forms  in  which  we  know  them,  are
not  older  than  the  period  of  the  end  of  the  Middle  Empire  and
that  of  the  beginning  of  the  New  Empire,  and  many  of  the  views
and  opinions  expressed  in  them  date  from  the  same  periods.  That
the  sun  was  the  product  of  the  primeval  watery  mass  of  Nu  the
Egyptians  believed  beyond  doubt,  because  they  declared  repeatedly
that  lla  came  forth  from  Nu,  but  they  did  not,  as  far  as  we  know,
make  it  to  be  the  dwelling-place  of  a primeval  spirit  (Urgeist)
which  designed  and  planned  the  future  world  in  its  mind  before
it  began  to  create  it,  and  which  carried  out  the  various  works  of
creation  on  the  lines  which  it  had  evolved  in  its  consciousness  long
before  the  darkness  which  lay  on  the  watery  mass  was  pierced  by
the  light  of  the  sun.  We  know  that  the  priesthood  of  Hermopolis,
the  Khemennu  of  the  Egyptian  texts,  i.e.,  the  “ city  of  the  Eight
Gods,”  where  Nu,  Nut,  Hehu,  Hehut,  Kekui,  Kekuit,  Kerb,  and
Kerhet  were  worshipped,  placed  at  the  head  of  their  divine
company  the  god  Thoth,  to  whom  certainly  in  later  times  were
ascribed  many  of  the  attributes  which  Dr.  Brugsch’s  “ Urgeist  ”
possessed.  But  there  is  no  proof  whatsoever  that  Thoth  was  the
original  leader  of  this  company  of  gods ; on  the  contrary,  there  is
reason  for  thinking  that  if  the  Eight  ever  had  a leader  in  the
beginning  of  their  existence  he  must  have  been  a form  of  the
Sun-god.  The  fact  is  that  as  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  formed
their  companies  of  gods  from  systems  already  in  existence,  and
placed  their  own  local  gods  at  the  head  of  them,  so  the  priests
of  Hermopolis  for  some  reason  unknown  to  us  adopted  the
primeval  company  of  Eight,  and  appointed  their  own  local  god
Thoth  to  be  their  head.  The  attempt  to  find  any  equivalent  of
the  “ spirit  of  Elohim,”  which,  according  to  the  Book  of  Genesis,
moved,  or  brooded,  on  the  face  of  the  waters  before  the  creation  of
light,  has  nothing  to  support  it  in  the  Egyptian  texts.


PAPYRUS  OF  NES-AMSU  2»3

But  although  we  do  not  know  what  the  primitive  Egyptians
imagined  to  be  the  means  by  which  the  Sun  came  into  being,  we
have  a very  good  idea  of  what  they  thought  about  the  creation  of
the  gods,  and  of  the  world,  and  of  the  animals,  birds,  trees,  fish,
reptiles,  etc.,  which  are  in  it,  and  by  whose  agency  it  was  brought
about.  We  owe  our  knowledge  of  these  things  to  a papyrus
preserved  in  the  British  Museum  (No.  10,188),  which  was  written
for  a priest  of  Panopolis  (the  modern  Akhniim),  of  high  rank  and
lineage,  called  Nes-Amsu,  or  Nes-Min,  during  the  thirteenth  year
of  the  reign  of  “ Alexander,  the  son  of  Alexander,”  i.e.,  about
b.c.  312.  This  remarkable  document  contains,  among:  other
valuable  compositions,  a series  of  Chapters  of  a long  magical  work
which  was  written  with  the  object  of  effecting  the  destruction  of
the  arch-fiend  Apepi  and  his  fiends  and  devils  of  darkness,  and  of
keeping  storms  and  hurricanes  out  of  the  sky;  many  of  the
Chapters  are  followed  by  rubrics  which,  as  we  have  already  shown
in  the  description  of  the  Tuat  given  above,  contain  directions  for
the  performance  of  the  ceremonies  which  were  to  accompany  the
reeital  of  the  words.  Where  the  Chapters  were  to  be  recited  is
not  clear,  but  as  two  out  of  three  works  in  the  papyrus  were
chanted  in  the  temple  of  Amen-Ra,  the  king  of  the  gods,  at  Thebes,
we  shall  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  assume  that  the  third  was  a service
which  was  performed  in  the  temple  from  time  to  time.  The  first
work,  the  “Festival  Songs  of  Isis  and  Nephthys,”  was  a very
important  service,  and  the  second,  the  “ Lamentations  of  Isis,”  was
probably  a supplement  to  it ; two  priestesses,  who  dressed  in  the
characters  of  Isis  and  Nephthys,  and  personified  these  goddesses,
sang  the  sections,  or  “houses,”  of  the  Festival  Songs  in  turn  on
the  great  commemorative  festivals  of  Osiris,  and  as  the  “Lamenta-
tions” were  rhythmical  they  were  probably  sung  at  the  same
service.

The  rubric  of  the  “ Festival  Songs  ” orders  that  they  be  sung
in  the  temple  of  Amen-Ra,  and  as  the  third  work,  the  “Book
of  Overthrowing  Apepi,”  was  devoted  to  the  protection  of  the  Sun-
god  Ra,  the  great  lord  of  the  temple,  provision  must  have  been
made  for  reciting  it  there.  Be  this  as  it  may,  our  present  interest
in  the  papyrus  centres  in  the  fact  that  it  contains  two  copies  of


294


THE  CREATION


the  story1  of  the  Creation  which  are  of  the  greatest  interest.
Curiously  enough,  each  copy  is  inserted  among  the  Chapters  in  the
main  body  of  the  work,  and  it  seems  as  if  they  represent  two
distinct  versions,  although  in  many  places  the  text  in  each  is
identical.  Each  copy  is  entitled,  “ The  Book  of  knowing  the
Evolutions  of  Ra,  and  of  Overthrowing  Apepi.”  The  word  here


rendered  by  “ Evolutions  ” is  khf peril,


<2


being  derived


from  the  root  kheper,  ® ^ jj,  which  means  “to  make,  to  fashion,
“ to  produce,  to  form,  to  become,”  and  in  a derived  sense  “ to  roll,”
so  that  the  title  might  be  translated  the  “ Book  of  knowing  the
“ Becomings  of  Ra,”  i.e.,  the  things  which  were  made,  or  created,
or  came  into  being  through  Rfi.  In  the  text  the  words  are  placed
in  the  mouth  of  the  god  Neb-er-tcher,  ^ , the  lord  of  the

universe  and  a form  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  who  says,  “ I am  he  who
“ came  into  being  in  the  form  of  the  god  Khepera,  ^ ||  ,


“ and  I was  the  creator  of  that  which  came  into  being,  that  is  to
“ say,  I was  the  creator  of  everything  which  came  into  being ; now
“ when  I had  come  into  being  myself,  the  things  which  I created
“ and  which  came  forth  from  out  of  my  mouth  were  very  many.”
In  these  words  Neb-er-tcher,  or  Ra,  says  that  he  took  upon  himself
the  form  of  Khepera,  i.e.,  that  he  was  the  god  who  was  most
intimately  connected  with  the  creation  of  things  of  every  kind.
Khepera  was  symbolized  by  a beetle  which  belonged  to  the  class
of  “ Coprophagi,”  or  “ dung-eaters,”  which  having  laid  its  eggs  in
masses  of  dung  rolled  them  about  until  they  became  circular  in
form.  These  balls,  though  made  of  dead,  inert  matter,  contained
the  germs  of  life,  which,  under  the  influence  of  warmth  and  heat,
grew,  and  in  due  course  developed  into  living  creatures  which
could  move  about  and  seek  their  food.  At  a very  early  period  in
their  history  the  Egyptians  associated  the  sun’s  disk  with  the  dung
ball  of  the  beetle,  partly  on  account  of  its  shape,  and  partly  because
it  was  the  source  of  heat,  and  light,  and  life  to  man,  even  as  the
dung  ball  was  to  the  young  beetles.  Having  once  got  the  idea
thtj,t  the  disk  of  the  sun  was  like  the  ball  of  the  beetle,  they  went  a
step  farther,  and  imagined  that  it  must  be  pushed  across  the  sky


1 The  first  copy  is  in  column  xxvi.  and  the  second  in  column  xxviii.


THE  CREATION


295


by  a gigantic  beetle  just  as  the  dung  ball  was  rolled  over  the
ground  by  a beetle  on  earth,  and  in  pictures  of  the  sunrise  we
actually  see  the  disk  being  pushed  up  or  forward  into  the  sky  by  a
beetle.  Gradually  the  ideas  of  new  life,  resurrection,  life  in  a
new  form,  and  the  like,  became  attached  to  the  beetle,  and  the
god  with  the  attributes  of  the  beetle,  among  which  in  later  days
was  included  the  idea  of  self-production,  became  one  of  the  most
important  of  the  forms  of  Ra,  and  the  creator  of  heaven,  and  earth,
and  the  Tuat  and  all  that  is  in  them.

Having  declared  under  what  form  he  had  come  into  being
Khepera  goes  on  to  say  that  his  power  was  not  exhausted  by  one
creative  act,  but  that  he  continued  to  create  new  things  out  of
those  which  he  had  already  made,  and  he  says  that  they  went  forth
from  his  mouth.  The  word  “mouth”  may  be  here  a figurative
expression,  but  judging  from  other  parts  of  the  text  we  are
probably  intended  to  understand  it  literally.  The  god  continues
his  narrative  thus  : — “ Heaven  did  not  exist,  and  earth  had  not
“ come  into  being,  and  the  things  of  the  earth  (plants  ?)  and
“ creeping  things  had  not  come  into  existence  in  that  place  (or,  at
“ that  time),  and  I raised  (or,  built  up)  them  from  out  of  Xu  from
“ a state  of  inactivity.”  Thus  it  is  clear  that  Khepera  himself  was
the  one  thing  besides  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu  which  was  then  in
existence,  and  it  is  evident  that  we  are  to  understand  that  he
performed  the  various  acts  of  creation  without  the  help  of  any
female  principle,  and  that  Nu  had  nothing  to  do  with  them
except  to  supply  the  primeval  matter,  the  “ Urstoff  ” of  Brugsch,
from  which  all  things  were  made.  The  word  rendered  above  by

inactivity  is  enen,  an<*  ^ ougkt  to  refer  to  the

things  which  Khepera  says  he  raised  up  out  of  Nu,  in  which  case
we  must  understand  that  everything  in  heaven  and  in  earth  was  at
that  time  existing  in  a quiescent  state  iu  the  watery  mass  of  Nu.

The  narrative  continues : “I  found  no  place  there  whereon  I
“ could  stand.  I worked  a charm  upon  my  own  heart  (or,  will),
“ [and]  I laid  a foundation  in  Maa,  [and]  I made  every  form  (or,
“ attribute).  I was  one  by  myself,  [for]  I had  not  emitted  from
“ myself  the  god  Shu,  and  I had  not  spit  out  from  myself  the  goddess


296  MAAT  AND  IJOKHMAh

“ Tefnut ; there  was  no  other  being  who  worked  with  me.”  The
things  made  clear  by  this  passage  are  that  Khepera  alone  was  the
creator,  and  that  he  had  no  place  to  stand  upon  in  performing  the
various  acts  of  creation.  The  words,  Khut-nd  em  db-d,  here
rendered  “ I worked  a charm  upon  my  heart,”  present  difficulty,
but  this  or  something  very  like  must  be  their  meaning.

The  word  | in  texts  of  the  kind  generally  means  “ to

“ perform  a magical  rite  or  ceremony,”  and  the  author  of  the
story  of  the  creation  before  us  found  himself  obliged  to  make  the
god  l'esort  to  magical  powers  to  get  himself  out  of  a difficulty ;
that  Khepera  worked  in  some  way  and  by  some  means  upon  his
heart  or  will  is  clear,  and  as  a result  he  laid  a foundation  for
himself  and  the  work  which  he  was  about  to  do  in  Maa.  The
name  p ^ may  be  read  either  as  Maa  or  Shu,  but  Shu  cannot  be
the  reading  here  because  in  the  next  sentence  Khepera  tells  us
that  he  had  not  at  that  time  emitted  Shu  from  himself.  From  the
texts  of  all  periods  we  learn  much  about  the  conceptions  which  the
Egyptians  had  arrived  at  concerning  Maa,  and  it  is  clear  that  the
word  primarily  meant  “what  is  straight,”  and  that  it  also  came  to
mean  “ straightness,  rectitude,  uprightness,  right,  law,  order,
“ regularity,  justice,”  and  other  significations  of  like  character ; the

goddess  Maat,  ^ , was  the  personification  of  “Truth.”

The  idea  which  the  text  is  intended  to  convey  here  is  that  Khepera
laid  the  foundation  of  the  future  world  according  to  a clear,  well-
defined,  and  unalterable  plan,  wherein  there  was  no  error;  Mad
was  with  Khepera  exactly  what  Hokumah,  noprr  (a  word  somewhat
inadequately  rendered  “wisdom”  in  Proverbs  viii.  2 ff.),  was  to
Yahweh.  Wisdom  says  that  she  was  set  up  from  everlasting,
from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was,  when  there  were  no
depths,  before  the  mountains  were  settled,  and  before  the  hills
was  she  brought  forth  when  as  yet  Yahweh  had  made  neither  the
dearth,  nor  the  fields,  nor  the  highest  part  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,
and  that  she  was  there  when  he  prepared  the  heavens  and  placed  a
cirple  upon  the  face  of  the  depth  (Proverbs  viii.  23  ff.).

% The  narrative  continues : “ I made  a foundation  in  (or,  by)
own  heart,  and  there  came  into  being  multitudes  of  things,


TEM,  SHE,  TEFNUT


*297


“ of  things  from  the  things  of  what  was  produced  from  the  things
“which  they  produced.”  This  sentence  is  both  involved  and
redundant,  but  about  its  meaning  there  is  fortunately  no  difficulty,
for  the  writer  only  makes  the  god  assert  in  an  emphatic  manner
that  everything  that  is  came  into  being  as  a result  of  the  act  of
the  god  in  laying  a foundation  in  his  own  heart,  and  that  when
once  the  creative  processes  had  been  set  in  motion  they  continued
their  operation  of  their  own  accord,  apparently  without  any  direct
interference  from  the  original  creative  power.  In  the  next
sentence  we  have  a reference  to  a curious  belief  which  was  already
current  in  the  Vlth  Dynasty,  but  at  that  period  it  had  reference  to
the  god  Tem  and  not  to  Khepera,  and  occurs  with  the  following  con-
text:— “This  Pepi  washeth  himself  in  the  Lake  of  Aaru  wherein
“ Ra  washeth  himself ; Ilorus  hath  brought  the  back  of  this  Pepi,
“ and  Thoth  hath  brought  his  legs,  and  Shu  hath  lifted  him  up
“ to  heaven ; 0 Nut,  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  Pepi.  Tem  hath
“ departed  to  Annu  to  satisfy  his  love  of  pleasure ; he  hath  thrust
“ his  member  into  his  hand,  and  hath  performed  his  desire,  and
“ hath  produced  the  two  children  Shu  and  Tefnut,1  and  these  two
“ children  put  Pepi  between  them,  and  they  set  him  among  the
“ gods  which  are  in  Sekhet-lietepet.”  In  the  story  of  the  creation
Khepera  is  made  to  say,  “ I had  union  with  my  hand,  and  I
“ embraced  my  shadow  in  a love  embrace ; I poured  seed  into  my
“ own  mouth,  and  I sent  forth  from  myself  issue  in  the  form  of
the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut.”  Now  a myth  of  this  character  can
only  be  the  product  of  a people  at  a low  level  of  civilization,  and
it  is  difficult  to  understand  the  character  of  the  mind  of  an  author
who  in  one  sentence  helps  Khepera  out  of  a difficulty  by  ascribing
to  him  the  possession  and  use  of  magical  /ewers,  and  in  another
reduces  him  to  the  necessity  of  committing  an  act  of  masturbation
in  order  to  begin  the  generations  of  the  gods,  and  yet  assigns  to


Jjts  Jj


O


*


AWVNA

aa/wna


m


,'yVA\\

o


1.  Pepi  I.,  1.  40f>  ff.


298


APPEARANCE  OF  RA


him  at  the  same  time  many  of  the  powers  which  are  assigned  by
Christian  nations  to  God.  The  only  possible-  way  of  accounting
for  this  gross  passage  is  to  assume  either  that  it  was  copied  into
the  papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu,  or  Nesi-Min,  by  the  scribe  simply
because  he  found  it  in  the  archetype  from  which  he  was  working,
or  that  the  author,  knowing  that  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  held  to  be
the  children  of  Khepera,  and  that  this  god  was  unaccompanied  by
any  female  counterpai*t,  explained  the  origin  of  his  children  in  the
manner  described  above.  But  in  any  case  this  brutal  example  of
naturalism  was  not  intended  to  be  obscene,  and  it  must  be  regarded
as  a survival  in  literature  of  the  dynastic  period  of  one  of  the
coarse  habits  of  the  predynastic  Egyptians,  that  is  to  say,  of  one  of
the  indigenous  African  tribes  from  whieh  dynastic  Egyptians  were
partly  descended.

The  next  section  of  the  narrative  is  difficult  to  translate  and
explain,  for  it  contains  words  which  Khepera  puts  into  the  mouth
of  his  “father”  Nu,  who  says  that  liis  eye,  i.e.,  the  Sun,  was
covered  up  behind  Shu  and  Tefnut,  but  that  after  henti  periods,

5 ^ hftd  passed1  that  he  had  become  three

A w/m  /www  I I LJ  1 A

gods  instead  of  one,  and  after  he  had  come  into  being  in  this
earth,  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  raised  up  from  out  of  the  watery
mass  wherein  they  were,  and  they  brought  his  eye  in  their
train.  The  general  meaning  of  these  words  seems  to  be  that  when
Khepera  was  existing  in  Nu  by  himself  the  sun,  in  which  he
afterwards  incorporated  himself,  was  hidden  in  the  watery  deep ;
but  as  soon  as  Khepera  had  produced  Shu  and  Tefnut  the  sun
emerged  from  the  deep  and  followed  in  their  train.  In  other

words,  we  learn  that  the  Eye,  of  Nu  was  unable  to  make

itself  seen  until  after  Shu  and  Tefnut  had  come  into  being.  "VVe
need  not  tarry  to  consider  all  the  various  attributes  of  these  twin
gods,  and  it  will  be  sufficient  to  say  here  that  Shu  represents  the
daylight  and,  in  some  cases,  the  atmosphere  which  supports  the
heavens  and  keeps  them  above  the  earth,  whilst  Tefnut,  the  female

- 1 The  hen  period  = CO  years,  but  when  two  such  periods  are  referred  to  the
writer  does  not  mean  necessarily  120  years,  bat  some  long,  indefinite  period  of
time.


The  Creation


CREATION  OF  MAN


299


counterpart  of  Shu,  represents  rain,  dew,  and  moisture.  We  have
already  seen  that  these  twin  gods  proceeded  from  Khepera,  and
the  words  which  are  used  to  express  the  idea  of  emission,  i.e.,

dffhesh  /]  , and  tef  ^ * f’*®,  indicate  the  processes  by

which  they  came  into  being  as  separate  entities.  The  creation  of
Shu  made  a space  between  the  heavens  and  the  earth  into  which
the  Eye  of  Nu  could  rise  from  out  of  the  waters  and  shine,  and
because  the  sunlight  immediately  followed  the  creation  of  Shu  that
god  is  sometimes  identified  with  light,  and  is  regarded  as  its
personification.  The  general  sense  of  the  passage  under  discussion
makes  it  necessary  to  assume  that  Nu  is  identified  with  Khepera,
and  vice.  verm.

The  next  passage  refers  to  the  creation  of  man,  and  the  god,
presumably  Khepera,  says,  “ Now  after  these  things,  I united  my
“ members,  and  I wept  over  them,  and  men  and  women  came  into
“ being  from  the  teal’s  which  came  forth  from  my  eye.”  Of  this
passage  there  are  two  interpretations  possible.  We  may  either
assume  that  the  tears  which  fell  from  the  Eye  of  Nu,  or  Khepera,
are  the  rays  of  light  which  fell  from  the  sun,  and  that  men  and
women  are  the  offspring  of  the  light,  or  what  is  far  more  probable,
that  men  and  women  are  the  product  of  the  tears  of  water  which
fell  from  the  eye  of  the  god  upon  his  members,1  and  that  they
turned  into  human  beings  straightway.  Meanwhile  the  god  Nu  or
Khepera  had  made  another  Eye,  by  which  we  are,  no  doubt,  to
understand  the  Moon,  and  it  is  said  that  when  the  first  Eye  found
that  a second  had  been  made  it  raged  at  the  god ; now  when  the
god  saw  this  he  endowed  the  second  Eye  with  some  of  the  power
(or,  splendour)  which  he  had  made,  and  having  made  it  take  up
its  position  in  his  face  it  henceforth  ruled  the  whole  earth.  After
this  the  god  brought  about  the  creation  of  plants,  and  herbs,  and
reptiles,  and  creeping  things.  Finally,  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut
produced  the  gods  and  goddesses  Seb  and  Nut,  Osiris  and  Isis,  Set
and  Nephthys,  and  Heru-khent-an-maati,  i.e.,  the  u Blind  Horus,”
one  after  the  other  at  one  birth,  and  these  deities  multiplied


300


kheperA  and  OSIRIS


offspring  in  this  earth.  Thus  we  have  a complete  account  of  how
a male  god  who  existed  alone  in  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu  produced
from  himself  by  unnatural  means  a pair  of  deities,  one  male  and
one  female,  and  how  this  pair  produced  three  other  pail's,  i.e.,
three  gods  and  three  goddesses,  and  one  male  deity  in  addition,  in
fact  the  paid,  or  company  of  the  great  gods  of  Heliopolis,  which  in
this  instance  was  made  to  include  ten  gods.  It  is  interesting  to
note  the  order  in  which  the  acts  of  creation  took  place.  The  self-
existent  god  who  had  lived  for  ever  created  : 1.  The  light.  2.  The
firmament,  or  home  of  moisture,  i.e.,  clouds  and  rain.  3.  Man-
kind. 4.  The  second  (?)  Eye,  i.e.,  the  Moon  (?).  5.  Plants,  and
herbs,  and  reptiles,  and  creeping  things.  6.  Seven  deities,  four
being  male  and  three  female.

In  the  second  version  of  the  story  of  creation  which  we  shall
now  describe  some  interesting  variants  will  be  found,  and  we  shall
see  that  the  god  Osiris  is  made  to  usurp  the  position  which  in  the
first  version  is  occupied  by  the  god  Khepera.  The  opening  words
are  : — Neb-er- teller  saith,  “ I am  the  creator  of  what  hath  come
“ into  being,  and  I myself  came  into  being  under  the  form  of  the
“ god  Khepera,  and  I came  into  being  in  primeval  time.  I came
“ into  being  in  the  form  of  Khepera,  and  I was  the  creator  of  what
“ came  into  being,  that  is  to  say,  I formed  myself  out  of  the
“ primeval  matter,  and  I formed  myself  in  the  primeval  matter.

“ My  name  is  Ausakes,  (j  <©  ^ (i.e.,  Osiris),  [who]  is  the

“ primeval  matter  of  primeval  matter.  I have  done  all  my  will  in
“ this  earth,  I have  spread  abroad  therein,  and  I have  made  strong
“ (or,  lifted  up)  my  hand.”  In  this  passage  we  have  Neb-er-tcher,
who  came  into  being  in  the  form  of  Khepera,  identifying  himself

with  Osiris,  who  is  described  as  the  panted  pautti , ® ®

^ i ’ **e,»  very  essence  of  primeval  matter,  and
the  source  of  all  created  things.  This  is  a remarkable  attribute  to
ascribe  to  the  god  of  the  dead,  and  it  is  only  understandable  when
we  remember  that  it  was  a common  belief  of  the  Egyptians  that
life  rose  out  of  death.  The  narrative  continues,  “ I was  alone,  for
“they  (i.e.,  the  gods)  were  not  born,  and  I had  emitted  from
“ myself  neither  Shu  nor  Tefnut.  I brought  my  name  into  my


POWER  OF  THE  NAME


301


“ own  mouth,  that  is  to  say  [I  uttered  it  as]  a word  of  power,

' i V *5-  J^)  i be&au*  an(i  I forthwith  came  into  being  under

“ the  form  of  things  which  were  created  and  under  the  form  of
“ Khepera.”

Here  we  have  an  interesting  statement,  for  the  god  tells  us
how  he  came  into  being,  and  he  is  not  content  with  merely  saying
that  he  existed.  We  know  from  the  literature  of  Egypt  how
great  a part  words  of  power  played  in  its  magical  and  religious
systems,  and  how  the  believer  hoped  to  obtain  all  his  desires  by  the
utterance  of  special  names,  or  words,  or  formula?.  Here,  however,
Ave  have  the  god  Osiris  transforming  himself  from  the  essence  of
primeval  matter  into  the  active  principle  of  creation  by  merely
uttering  his  OAvn  name.  The  belief  in  the  potency  of  certain
names  is  very  old  in  Egypt,  and  rests  upon  a still  older  idea  that
no  creature,  animate  or  inanimate,  could  be  said  to  have  an
existence  until  it  possessed  a name,  an  idea  Avith  Avhich  every  one
is  familiar  from  Genesis  ii.  19  f.,  where  avc  read  that  Adam  gave
names  to  every  beast  of  the  field  and  to  every  foAvl  of  the  air,  and
to  all  cattle.  EA*ery  god  and  goddess  and  supernatural  being  Avere
believed  to  possess  a hidden  name  by,  and  through,  and  in  Avhich
he  and  she  lived.  The  man  who  could  find  out  these  names  Avas
able  to  command  the  help  of  the  gods  who  bore  them,  and  the
man  Avho  could  obtain  by  any  means  a hidden  name  for  himself
thought  he  Avould  be  the  equal  of  the  gods.  On  the  other  hand,  to
destroy  or  “ blot  out  ” a name  Avas  to  Avipe  out  of  existence  the
being  Avho  bore  it,  and  it  Avas  for  this  reason  that  in  the  earliest
days  of  civilization  in  Egypt  services  in  Avhich  the  name,  or
names,  of  the  dead  Avere  commemorated,  and  were  mentioned  Avith
laudatory  epithets,  Avere  established.  We  may  note  in  passing
that  one  of  the  greatest  gifts  Avhich  Avas  to  be  given  to  the  true
believers  of  the  Church  of  Pcrgamos  was  “ a Avhite  stone,  and  in
“ the  stone  a new  name  Avritten,  Avhich  no  man  knowetli  saving  he
“ that  receiveth  it”  (Revelation  ii.  17).  Here  is  a direct  allusion
to  the  old  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  an  amulet  Avhich  Avas  made  of  a
certain  stone,  and  inscribed  Avith  a name,  by  and  through  and  in
which  its  OAvner  would  enjoy  life  and  happiness.


302


THE  CREATION


Returning  to  our  narrative  Ave  find  that  the  god  continues,
“ I came  into  being  from  primeval  matter,  and  I appeared  under
**  the  form  of  multitudes  of  things  from  the  beginning.  Nothing
“ existed  at  that  time,  and  it  aatis  I Avho  made  Avhatsoever  was
“ made.  I Avas  alone,  and  there  Avas  no  other  being  Avho  worked
“ with  mo  in  that  place.  I made  all  the  forms  under  Avhich  1
11  appeared  by  means  (or,  out  of)  the  god-soul  Avhich  I raised  up
“ out  of  Nu,  £££  out  of  a state  of  inertness  (or,  out  of  the
“ inert  mass).”  In  this  passage  avc  haA*e  a neAv  element  introduced,
that  is,  a “ god-Soul,”  or,  in  other  Avords,  the  Soul  Avhich

possessed  the  quality  of  nefer,  and  Avas  existent  in  a quiescent
state  in  the  inactive  watery  mass  of  Nu.  When  avc  consider  the
genei’al  ideas  of  the  Egyptians  about  the  soul  this  statement  need
not  surprise  us,  for  Ave  knoAv  that  they  endoAved  e\*ery  object  in
nature  Avith  a soul,  and  if  they  assumed  the  existence  of  a mass  of
primeval  matter  they  Avere  bound,  logically,  to  give  it  a soul.
Thus  Ave  have  in  the  second  version  of  the  story  of  the  creation  an
idea  which  is  wholly  wanting  in  the  first.  We  next  read,  “ I
“ found  there  (i.e.,  in  Nu)  no  place  Avherein  I could  stand.  I
“ Avorked  a spell  on  my  heart,  and  I laid  a foundation  before  me,
“ and  I made  Avhatsoever  Avas  made.  I Avas  alone.  I laid  a
“ foundation  in  (or,  by)  my  heart,  and  I made  the  other  things
“ which  came  into  being,  and  the  things  of  Khcpera  Avhich  Avere
“ made  Avere  manifold,  and  their  offspring  came  into  existence
“ from  the  things  to  Avhich  they  gave  birth.  It  was  I Avho  emitted
‘‘  Shu,  and  it  was  I Avho  emitted  Tefnut,  and  from  being  one  god
“ (or,  the  one  god)  I became  three,  that  is  to  say,  the  tAvo  other
“ gods  Avho  came  into  being  on  this  earth  came  from  myself,  and
“ Shu  and  Tefnut  were  raised  up  from  out  of  Nu  wherein  they  had
“ been.  Now,  behold,  my  Eye,  ^ (i.e.,  the  Sun),  did  they

“ bring  to  me  (or,  I brought  to  them)  after  a double  /ten  period
“ [had  passed  since]  they  went  forth  from  me.  I gathered
“ together  my  members  Avhich  came  forth  from  my  own  person
“ after  I had  union  Avith  my  hand,  and  my  heart  (or  will)  came
“ unto  me  from  out  of  my  hand.  The  seed  fell  into  my  mouth,
“ and  I sent  forth  from  myself  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut,  and  from


THE  CREATION


303


“ being  one  god  (or,  the  one  god)  I became  three,  that  is  to  say,

“the  two  other  gods  who  came  into  being,  ^ <==>  f|(|  ^ j »

“ on  this  earth  came  from  myself,  and  Shu  and  Tefnut  were  raised
“ up  from  out  of  Nu  wherein  they  had  been.  ”

The  repetitions  in  the  above  passage  are  due  to  the  fact  that
the  scribes  possessed  many  variant  readings  of  portions  of  it,  these
representing,  no  doubt,  the  opinions  of  different  schools,  and  the
scribe  of  the  papyrus  of  Nes-Amsu,  with  characteristic  reverence
for  what  was  written,  incorporated  them  all  into  his  text.

The  next  passage  contains  a very  interesting  addition  and
variant  reading,  which  makes  “father”  Nu  declare  that  his  Eye,
i.e.,  the  sun,  was  covered  over  with  large  numbers  of  “ bushes  ”
for  an  indefinite  number  of  periods,  each  containing  sixty  years ;
now  “ bushes,”  otherwise  called  “ hair,”  is  the  name  given  to  the
clouds  which  hang  round  the  sun  at  sunrise,  and  obscure  his  rays,
and  it  seems  as  if  the  god  intends  to  complain  that  his  sight  was
impeded  by  them  for  centuries.  The  words  following  seem  to
indicate  that  vegetation  and  reptiles,  including  worms  or  serpents,
proceeded  from  the  god  Rem,  and  that  they  Avere  the  product  of
the  tears  Avhich  fell  from  Khepera,  but  this  rendering  is  not  wholly
certain.  The  vegetation  and  worms  here  mentioned  are  forms  of
mist  and  cloud  which  Avholly  or  partially  hide  the  sun,  and  the  line
is  probably  added  to  the  text  to  account  for  the  “ bushes  ” of  which

“father”  Nu  spoke  above.  Of  the  god  Rem,  <=>

Ave  knoAV  nothing,  but  as  the  Avord  rem  means  “ to  Aveep,”  and  an
allusion  to  “crying  or  weeping,”  <=>  > is  contained  in

the  line  in  Avhich  the  name  of  the  god  occurs,  Ave  may  assume
that  he  was  the  personification  of  Ra’s  tears.  Mention  is  made
in  the  / took  of  the  Dead  (lxxxiii.  4)  of  a god  called  Remi,


{ ( oi  , Avho  seems  to  have  been  the  Fish-god,  and  to


have  been  identified  in  some  way  Avith  Sebek,  the  personification  of
Nu,  but  it  is  not  clear  that  Rem  and  Remi  are  one  and  the  same  god.

We  next  arrive  at  the  description  of  the  making  of  man,  and
each  version  of  the  story  of  the  creation  gives  a different  account.
According  to  the  first,  Ivhcpera  joined,  or  united,  his  members  and


304


FOUR  RACES  OF  MEN


wept  upon  them,  and  men  and  women  came  into  being  from  these
tears ; according  to  the  second,  Khepera  wept  with  his  Eye,  and
men  and  women  came  into  being  forthwith.  It  is  impossible  to
say  decidedly  which  is  the  older  view,  but  it  is  probably  the
former.  The  difference  between  the  methods  employed  in  creating
gods  and  men  must  be  noted ; the  gods  are  the  seed  of  Ivhepera,
and  they  came  forth  from  his  mouth,  Avhilst  men  are  only  the  tears
of  the  god,  and  they  came  forth  from  his  Eye.  The  older  version
makes  the  tears  of  Ivhepera  to  fall  upon  his  genital  organs,  and  it
is  only  after  they  have  been  in  contact  with  the  god’s  virility
that  they  turn  into  human  beings.  In  late  dynastic  times  the
Egyptians  divided  mankind  into  four  classes,  namely,  the
Egyptians,  the  Aamu,  the  Nehesu,  and  the  Themeliu.  Thus  in
the  Book  of  Pylons 1 Horus  says  to  the  “ chiefs  of  Rii,”  J ° ^ J ® >
who  are  in  the  Tuat  of  the  Black  Land  and  the  Red  Land  (i.e.,
Egypt  and  the  deserts  to  the  South),  “Ye  are  the  tears  made  by
my  Eye  in  your  name  of  ‘ Men.’”3  The  Aamu,  ^ n ^ j ,

(i.e.,  the  Semitic  nomad  tribes  of  the  Eastern  Desert),  were  created
by  Horus  and  Sekhet,  ^ ® ^ , and  this  goddess  protected  their
souls ; the  Themehu,  or  Libyans,  ’ $ ^ ^ | > were  also  created

by  Horus  and  Sekhet,  and  the  goddess  protected  their  souls.  Of
the  Nehesu,  $ P <§.  ^ j (i-e.,  the  Negroes),  Horus  says,  “ I
“ masturbated  for  you,  and  I have  been  content  at  the  millions
“ who  have  come  forth  from  me  in  your  name  of  Nehesu  ; Horus
“ hath  created  you,  and  it  is  he  who  hath  protected  their  souls.”  '*
This  last  statement  is  of  interest,  for  it  connects  the  idea  of
masturbation  with  the  Negroes,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  dark  or
black-skinned  races  of  Nubia  who  lived  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile


1 See  Jkmomi  and  Sliarpe,  Sarcophagus  of  Qimenepthah , pll.  7 and  6r>.


AWWVS

'S

*=>  I I I


U n ^ ¥ - rr,  1*5  \
"HZ rr,  — ^ I f* « s$  j ('“<»  ic-2°)-


.A


THE  CREATION


305


so  far  south  as  the  Sixth  Cataract,  and,  as  we  have  already  said,
the  legend  as  to  the  origin  of  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut  is  far  more
likely  to  have  been  the  product  of  some  indigenous  dark-skinned
race  than  of  the  group  of  mixed  peoples  whom  we  call  Egyptians.
It  will  be  noticed  that  only  the  Egyptians,  or  offspring  of  Ra,  are
said  to  have  been  produced  by  the  tears  of  Ra,  which  are  the  same
as  the  tears  of  the  Eye  of  Horus,  i.e.,  the  sun.

According  to  one  version  of  the  story  of  the  creation,  men  and
women  were  created  after  the  gods  Shu  and  Tefnut,  and  before  the
plants  and  reptiles,  but  according  to  the  other,  they  were  created
after  the  plants  and  reptiles  ; neither  version  mentions  the  creation
of  beasts  and  cattle.  A point  of  interest  is  that  men  and  women
were  not  fashioned  by  Ivhepera,  or  Neb-er-tcher,  himself,  and  that
they  seem  to  have  come  into  being  almost,  as  it  were,  by  accident ;
in  making  the  gods  Khepera  showed  both  will  and  design,  but  men
and  women  were  only  the  tears  which  fell,  apparently  without
volition,  from  his  Eye.  But  it  must  also  be  noted  that  in  both
versions  of  the  Egyptian  creation  legends  it  is  Ra  the  Sun-god,  the
Eye  of  Temu,  who  is  in  reality  the  creator  of  man,  and  this  is
exactly  what  we  find  in  the  Mesopotamian  creation  legends.
After  Marduk  had  defeated  Tiamat  and  her  eleven  fiends,  and  had
split  up  her  body,  like  a fish,  and  made  heaven  out  of  one  half  of
her  skin,  he  conversed  with  Ea,  the  lord  of  the  great  deep,  and
declared  his  intention  of  making  man,  in  the  following  words : —
“ My  blood  will  I take,  and  bone  will  I build  up,  and  I will  make
“ man,  that  man  may  . . . . ; and  I will  build  up  man  who

“ shall  inhabit  [the  earth].”  Tills  very  important  passage  proves
that  the  statement  of  Berosus  to  the  effect  that  man  was  made  out
of  the  blood  of  Bel,  i.e.,  Marduk,  was  based  upon  a genuine
Assyrian  tradition  ; unfortunately  the  cuneiform  text,1  which  was

1 The  tablet  is  No.  92,629  (obv.  11.  5-7).  The  text  reads  :-grr<ce  m

« ET  tT  SETT  A4T  M [sfc  Sf=]  M «

et  ess  -sM  m tt  m tt  meh  m et  ^ et  ks

Hi Ef  R R V MB  ^a~wl

ln-titih.ziz.maa  aincla[a]  In  a-me-lu  [.  . . .]  Iv-ub-ni-ma  am'la[(t']  a-»hib  irsitim.  See
W.  King,  The  Seren  Tablets  of  Creation,  vol.  i.,  pp.  86  IT.,  and  vol.  ii.,  pi.  xxxv.

X


306


THE  CREATION  OF  MAN


first  identified  by  Mr.  L.  W.  King,  is  incomplete,  but  when
the  inevitable  duplicate  is  found  we  shall  probably  find  the
equivalent  of  the  rest  of  the  story  according  to  Berosus,  who  says
that  the  blood  of  which  man  was  made  was  obtained  from  Bel
himself  after  his  head  had  been  cut  off.

The  passage  which  follows  the  mention  of  the  creation  of  man
in  the  Egyptian  story  refers  to  the  Eye  of  Nu,  which,  Khepera
says,  he  endowed  with  power  or  splendour,  or  with  the  serpent

kkiit,  ® which  possessed  both  these  attributes.  The  Eye

raged  at  him  when  it  found  “ another  growth  ” in  its  place,  by
which,  apparently,  the  moon  is  referred  to,  and  it  made  an
onslaught  upon  the  “ bushes,”  i.e.,  the  light  clouds,  which  Ivhepera
had  placed  over  it  to  adorn  it,  or  to  keep  order  in  it ; but  finally
it  took  up  its  position  in  the  god’s  face,  and  henceforth  ruled  the
whole  earth.  The  text  concludes  with  the  statement  that  Shu  and
Tefnut  gave  birth  to  Seb,  Nut,  Osiris,  Heru-khenti-un-maati,  Set,
Isis,  and  Nephthys,  and  that  their  offspring  increase  and  multiply
in  the  earth,  and  that  they  invoke  the  name  of  Khepera  and  so
overthrow  their  enemies,  and  that  they  create  words  of  power,


l V <§>  ^ j ? whereby  they  overthrow  Apepi.  We  may  now


summarize  briefly  the  results  of  the  two  versions,  and  we  shall
find  that  the  Egyptians  thought  that  a self-begotten  and  self*
existent  god  lived  alone  in  a primeval  watery  mass,  which  was
itself  part  male  and  part  female,  and  which  was  the  abode  of  two
living  powers,  the  one  male  and  the  other  female,  and  also  of  a
soul,  and  that  this  mass  was  of  unlimited  extent,  and  was  eternal,
and  was  enveloped  in  thick  darkness.  The  self-existent  god,  at
some  unknown  time  and  for  some  unknown  reason,  uttered  his
own  name  as  a word  of  power,  and  he  straightway  came  into  being
under  the  form  of  the  god  Khepera.  He  next  roused  the  soul  of
the  watery  abyss  out  of  inactivity,  and  then  having  brought  some
influence,  probably  by  the  utterance  of  certain  words,  to  bear  upon
his  heart,  he  produced  some  material  place,  probably  the  earth,
whereon  he  could  stand.  From  this  place  he  produced  the  gods
Shu  and  Tefnut,  which  act  resulted  in  the  immediate  creation  of
light  and  in  the  dispersion  of  darkness,  and  in  the  formation  of  the


THE  CREATION  OF  MAN


307


sky  or  firmament.  These  acts  were  followed  either  by  the  creation
of  men  and  women,  or  by  the  creation  of  vegetation  and  creeping
things  and  reptiles  of  every  kind ; of  the  creation  of  stars  and  of
birds  and  beasts  nothing  is  said.  I he  above  statement  represents
one  of  the  earliest  of  the  opinions  of  the  Egyptians  about  the
creation  in  its  simplest  form,  the  one  in  fact  which  was  first
adopted  by  the  priests  of  Heliopolis,  and  was  then  modified  to  suit
the  theological  system  which  they  formulated.  The  texts  on
which  it  was  based  are  transcribed  into  hieroglyphics  with
interlinear  transliterations  and  translations  in  the  following
chapter.


CHAPTER  VIII


THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CREATION  OF  THE
GODS  AND  OF  THE  WORLD.  VERSION  A.


A.WVNA

xx vi.  21.

<=>  1 o \\

® i

$ <»  M

? oi

Shat  enti

rekh

kheperu

nu  Rd

The  Book  of

knowing

the  evolutions

of  Ra,

2I1!

Kzy  ta.  ®

<=>  <=>  ill

* whiter  Apep

tchejtu

Neb-er-tcher

tchel  -f

[and]  of  over-  Apep.  The  words  of
throwing

Neb-er-tcher

[which]  he
spake

■ £1

1 <a

em-khet  Icheper  - f

nuk

pH

kheper

after  he  had  come  into  being.  I am  he  who  came  into  being


Ik  18  SIM

era,  Kheperd


in  the  form  of  I was  (or,  became)
Khepera,


& <=>

W c^£=>

Iclieper

the  creator


22.


i

i

i


khepcru


of  what  came  into
being,


82

kheper

the  creator


82i  82^1

kheperu  neb  em-khet  kheper-d

of  what  came  into  all ; after  my  coming  into
being  being


J

O 1 I

dsht

many


THE  CREATION


309


i e II

hheperu


ctzj

em  per


cm


roa


WW\A

an


[were]  the  things  which  coming  forth  from  my  mouth.  Not
came  into  being


^

*JU

/WWW

Sf  ^ 1 E

Jcheper  pet

dn>

kheper  to.

an

fjemam

existed  heaven,

not

existed  earth,

not  had  been  created

■ .1  £a  | 1 1

kJ'^

wi.

satat

tchetfet

em  bet

pui

the  things  of  the  earth,

and  creeping

in  place

that ;

(i.e.,  plants)

things

r-Tikirr,  k

coo

JO,  AAAWA

P'1  ■"!  ///A/ SA

thes  - nd

dm  - sen  em

Nu

I raised  up  them

from  out  of

Nu  (i.e.,  the  primeval  abyss

of  water)

kUZl

i>r.

™ ^kiT  J-=

H 0 ™

1 A h

em  cnen

dn  qem-nd

bet

dhd-nd

from  a state  of

Not  found  I

a place

I could  stand

inactivity.

qkjL

r\  yvwwv

1 i

k

ami

khut-nd

cm

dbt-d

wherein.  I worked  a charm  upon  (or,  with)  my  heart.


k PI

senti-nd  em  Mad


/WVA\


T ASH


ari-na


aru


o

nebt


1 laid  a foundation  in  Maa  [and]  I made  attribute  every.

q


kP*l

ud-k\ua'\  an  dshesh-ud  em  Shu

I was  alone,  [for]  not  had  I spit  in  the  form  of  Shu,


an

not


310

THE  CREATION

A ftVWW

'Lr*  &

k

-JU.

/VWWv

8^

tef-na

em  Tefnut

an

kheper

H

had  I emitted

Tefnut,1

not

existed

another

senti-nd  em  dbt-d  tches-d


,VW\/V\

o ss


24.  <2=-

V-w  t

dri-nef  hend-d

who  worked  with  me.  I made  a foundation  in  my  heart  my  own,

(or,  by  means  of  my  own  will)


<5={v

o HI

as  fit


0

i


8T1I


8T!I

hheper  as  fit  Jchepem  nu

[and]  there  came  the  multitudes  which  came  of  the  things  which
into  being  of  things  into  being  came  into  being


iern


k

8TIII

0

1

API  k

em

kht •pern

nu

mesu  em

from  out  of  the  things  which  came  of

into  being

births,  from  out  of

8TIII

? apip.t,

°

Jchepem

nu  mesusen

dnuk

pv  hat-d

the  things  which
came  into  being

of  their  births.

I,  even

I,  had  union

k l Col  xxvii-1-  k

em  Ichefd-d  taUidt-nd  em

with  my  clenched  hand,  I joined  myself  in  an  with

embrace


Ml

kkaibit-d
my  shadow,


c — S'


i^AWA


kher-nd


I poured  seed


em.  re-d
into  my  mouth


Ml

tches-d
my  own,


1 I.e.,  I had  not  sent  forth  from  my  body  the  emanation  which  took'the  form
of  Shu,  nor  the  moisture  which  took  the  form  of  Tefnafc.


THE  CREATION


311


<=>  n


1aa^T  kPel

dshesh-nd  era  Shu  tefnet-nd

I sent  forth  issue  in  the  form  of  Shu,  I sent  forth  moisture


^ AWVAA


em  T of  nut  dn  dtef-d  Nn

in  the  form  of  Saith  my  father  Nu,
Tefnut.


i IklMT.

satd-sen

u They  make  to
be  weak


a kfirr,  7 islsl mm  flkmT


rnaa  t-d  em-sa-sen  trher


hcnhenti


uan-sen


my  eye  behind  them,  because  for  double  henti  they  proceeded

periods


er-d  ein-lchet  Icheper-d  em  neter

from  me  after  I became  from  god


II  in


ud  neter  Jchernt
one  gods  three,


□

(2


erTkrr  a

pn  er-d  hheper-nd  em  la  pen  had.

that  is  from  out  of  [and  after]  I came  in  earth  this.  Were  raised  up
myself,  into  being


fir

p^f

§

a-j  o a

a Oil

k

XI1

/WWW  CV

5.  Jf

(wwv\  !_/

dref

Shu

Tdfnut

em

one  nn

therefore

Shu

[and]  Tefnut

in

the  inert

; watery  mass

& n —

wvw\  1 1 1 1

Ik

\\

n a

J] — P. . .

/■.vwsr  cv

A J

71

un-sen

dmi

-

f

dn-sen

nd

uiaat-d

wherein  they

were

brought  they

to  mo

my  eye

kHP

^ AAWA

1 1 1

k

f\  <7>

@ O 1

r-— 1 /VW\W

1 A

It/ lot m

'Mil

cnt-i

khet  dref

sam-

•nd

fit- a

in  their  train.  After  therefore  I had  united  my  members


312


THE  CREATION


rem-na

I wept


<£>  n

i I i i i

her-sen


! □


her-sen  Iheper  reth  pu  em

over  them,  [and]  came  into  men  and  from


being


i


k T,i

em  maat-d


women

jJ

khnru-s


the  teal’s  [which]  came  forth  from  my  eye,  [and]  it  raged

kn  O ^kJLP  ^ T T


cr-a  em  k.


nevus


an-na


against  me  after  it  came  [and]  found  [that]  I had  made  another


d^P


P k V


em  dst-s


febi-s


C*\  v/vV*

• 3

drn-nd


in  its  place.  [I]  endowed  it  with  the  power  I had  made.

(or,  splendour)  which


Pffl>r>  qr  d^PkTMkn

sekhenti  dref  dst-s  em  hrd-d  em-khet

Having  made  to  approach  therefore  its  place  in  my  face,  afterwards


dref  heips  ta  pen  er  teller  - / Icher

therefore  it  ruleth  earth  this  to  its  whole  extent.  Fall

““ko'P.T.  i«flkj«,*.prr,  ajit«

en  at-sen  da  uabusen  febui-nd

their  moments  (or,  seasons)  upon  their  plants,  I endowed  it


k— mmD  ]

i

thet-s


I endowed  it


fl  k flk-kl1,


ineis  amis  per-na  em  uatm

with  what  it  hath  in  it.  I came  forth  from  (or,  in  the  plants,
taken  possession  of  the  form  of)


THE  CREATION


313


1 O I 1 1

^ ® <=>

- W e-a

VZ7

o

ilk  err,

tchetfet

nebt  hheper

iie.bt

dm-sen

creeping  things

all,  [and]  things  which
came  into  being

all

[are]  in  them.

iliP!±  P«!

«•  1™

mix

mesu  an  Shu  Tdfnut  hand

Nut  mesu  an

Give  birth  Shu  [and]  Tefnut  [Seb]  and

Nut.  Give  birth

a o

O

13

3

Seb  Nut

As  dr  Her  Khent-dn-maa

Set  Ast

Seb  and  Nut  to  Osiris,  Horus-Khent-an-maati,

Set,  Isis,

k

r :sk$

1

D

HkP,™

Nebt-het  era

khat  ud  eni-sa

ud

dm-sen

Nephthys  from

the  womb,  one  after  the  other

of  them,

Wi  p;t.

O | 1 | 1 1 1 JPQs,  1

□

/WWW

mes-sen  dsht-sen  era  ta  pen


they  give  birth  [and]  they  multiply  in  earth  this.


THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CREATION  OF  THE
GODS  AND  OF  THE  WORLD.  VERSION  B.


xxviii.  20.  ck;

<=>  i

/vww  <^>  n

o © ll

f?  G JiS  i

?

Shat

cut  rekh

Jcheperu

nn  Iia

The  Book

of  knowing

the  evolutions

of  Ra

P

D a$k  2^  i1  i

setcher

Apep

tehettu

Neb-er-tcher

tchet-f

[and]  of  over-

■  Apep.

The  words  of  Neb-er-tcher.

He  says : —

throwing

314


THE  CREATION


BTiai


Meper-d  Icheper  kheperu

u I was  (or,  the  creator  of  what  came
became)  into  being.


0T— k

khepern-lc\j<~\d  em
I came  into  being  in


02Mi  — 0W  k ®®"

kheperu  en  Eheperd  kheper  em  sep  tepi

the  forms  of  lvhepera  coming  into  being  in  primeval  time.


02®$

k 021$

kheper-kud

em  kheperu

I came  into

in  the  forms

being

02

0TJ$i

kheper

kheperu

the  creator  of  what  came  into  being,


“*■“  02M  02#$

en  Kheperd  kheper-d

of  Kliepera.  I was  (or,

became)


pu  en  pa-ad


that  is  to  say,  I produced  myself


du  pautet
from  the  primeval  matter


dru-nd  pa-ad

[which]  I made.  I produced  myself


em  pautet

from  primeval  matter.


pa  ren-d  Amdres

Mv  name  is  Osiris,


pautet  pautit  dri-d  mertu-d

the  primeval  matter  of  primeval  matter.  I have  done  my  will


O

wbt

all


□

I 51  WMW

am  ta


a


I


W— ,


a

pen  usekht-nd  dm  - /

in  earth  this,  [and]  I have  spread  abroad  in  it ;


tJws-nd
I raised  up


THE  CREATION


315


S4.Tt

8 ™ API  I1

1 1 1 AAAAAA

tet-d

udu-kud

an  mes-sen  an

my  hand.

I was  alone ;

not  born  [were]  they.  Not

n ran  ^

•Idd^  1

k hi

•jl.  a. n

WWW  ^ 1 51

k^-°J

dshesh-na

em  Sh  u

a«  taf-nd

m Tdfnut

had  I spit  in  the  form  of  Shu,  not  had  I emitted

Tefnut

A ftV.VA

h — 1

\ 3

□

<5

an-nd

re-d

tches-d  ren-d

pu

I brought  [into]

my  mouth

my  own  my  name,

that  is  to  say,

IVVfil

114^

23-  T

k

hekau

dunk

pu  kl icper  - nd

em

a word  of  power

, and  I,  even  I,  came  into  being

in  the  form

8TMI

8««l

k8~Mi  -

kheperu

kheper-kud

m kheperu  eu  Khepera

of  things  which

and  I came

in  the  forms  of  Khepera.

came  into  being,

into  being

{1$  , w ,

k k

Jk-fkSI

khcper-nd

em

pautti

kheper

I came  into  being  from  the  primeval  matter,  coming  into  being


rM  mi  k

dshi  kheperu-  em

[in]  multitudes  of  forms  from


© — 0
i I

tep-d

the  beginning.


.JU.

an

Not


&

P3


existed


8TMi  iL

kheperu  nebt  em  ta  pen
created  things  any  in  land  this;


I

dri-nd
L made


an

whatsoever  was  made


316


THE  CREATION


=>  24.  = ™

nebt  w««-£[wd]  an  kheper  Id  en  dru^nef

everything.  I was  alone,  not  existed  [any  other]  who  worked


a k j


crzj

hend-d  em  bet

with  me  in  place


□

<2


w


pm

that ;

%> i

ami  em  ha

therein  by  means  of  divine  soul


firm

art- a,  hheperu-d

I made  what  I made


w


□


w


VAW

I


pui  thes-nd

that  [which]  I raised  up


4kJL  k


:i  k 44


/WWV\


amt


em


Nu


em


enen


an


therein  out  of  Nu  (i.e.,  the  primeval  from  a state  of  not

abyss  of  water)  inertness,


-*kJLT  J'cA,


w


qemi-na
found  I


bet


dha-nd


arm


khut-nd


a place  whereon  I could  stand.  I worked  with  the

spirit  [which]  was


k

db-d


/www

^ w


® 25-  T kT $


w


m


em


w $

senti  - nd  em  hrd-d  dri-nd  art

in  my  heart,  I laid  a foundation  before  me,  I made  whatsoever

was  made

37  +02.  <3


' rs®  T k ?i A

nebt  udu-k[ud~\  aenti-nd  em  db-d  qemam-nd
all.  I was  alone,  I laid  a foundation  in  my  heart,  I made


WiTMi  T'i  ®Tl!i  ?

hi  kheperu  dsht  kheperu  nu  Kheperd.

other  things  which  and  manifold  were  the  things  of  Khepera
came  into  being,  which  came  into  being


THE  CREATION


317


er  jLftPi  p.t.  k


i 1 1 1 1


Icheper  an  mem-sen  em  Icheperu  vu  mesu-sen
Came  into  what  they  gave  out  of  the  creations  of  their  offspring.


being


birth  to


dnulc  pu  dshesh-nd  em  Shu  taf-nd

I,  even  I,  spat  in  the  form  of  Shu,  [and]  I emitted


& '


klisil  "■

em  Tafnnt  kheper-nd  em  neter  nd  neter  khemt
Tefuut,  [and]  I became  from  god  one  gods  three,


® Wc^TUXiMi  J^i  s

pu  er-d  kheperiut  em  ta  pen

that  is  to  say,  from  myself  two  gods  came  into  being  on  earth  this.


A — 0 o


had  dref  Shu  Tdfnvt-  em  Xu

Were  raised  up  therefore  Shu  and  Tefnut  in  Nu  (i.e.,  the

primeval  watery  abyss)


jiirrjk,


unen-sen  amt


i jh*t  »-i);


an  maat-a


au-na


wherein  they  were.  Behold,  my  eye  brought  to  me  they


kn  iMm  flVTPrr.

em-lchet  henti  uav-sen  er-d

in  the  train  of  a lienti  period,  they  proceeded  from  me.


TTkrJia  ^.T.

sam-nd  em  at-d  per-sen  ami  tches-d

I collected  my  members,  they  came  forth  from  myself


ami  tches-d


em-Jchet

after


318


THE  CREATION


(fl

k

WIT

hat-nd

em

khefcl-d

i-nd

I had  union

with

my

clenched  hand,

came  to  me  (?)

?i9

k

<=»  jS
<=>  <t  £L

i

k

db-d

cm

fet-d

aaaa

Icher  em

my  heart  (or,  will)

out  of  my  hand.  The  seed

[which]  fell  into

r<?-«  dshesh-nd  em  Shu  taf-nd

my  mouth,  I spat  in  the  form  of  Shu,  I emitted  water


k

0<=>T

k

*o2-
1 fl

u

cm

Tdfuut

kheper-nd

em  neter

ad

netcru

in  the  form  of  Tefnut,

I became

from  [being]  god  one

gods

i i i

□

©

- i

IAA\

k

Jchemt

jm

er-d

hheperiut

cm

three.

that  is  to  say,

from  myself

two  gods  came  into  being  on

€==r?r=3

1 3S

□

AWwSA

i

ta

pen

lidd

•

dref

Shu  Tdfnut

earth

this.  Were  raised  up

therefore

Shu  and  Tefnut

k

/ww/  c\

essii

n a w i

£££  1 1 1 1 S |-“~1

/MW

em

Nu

Unen~Sen

ami

from  out  of  Nu  (i.e.,  the  inert  wherein  they  were,

primeval  watery  abyss)

Saith

i


The  paragraph  beginning  Q <B>’  and  ending  with

<vw*vi  o I lU

is  repeated,  apparently  by  inadvertence,  in  tho  papyrus.


THE  CREATION


310


dtef-d  Nu  ati-sen

my  father  Nu,  “They  cover


i i i t=>  i


& kfp;


ati-sen  maat-d  em-sa  sen


Nu,  “They  covered  up  my  eye  after  them
[or,  made  weak]


uabu  sep  sen  hentiu

[with]  bushes,  twice,  for  hen  periods.


hentiu


ua bn

Vegetation


Will


hefi  em  Rem  em  rem-tk

and  reptiles  [came]  from  the  god  Hern,  from  the  tears


[falling]  from  me.


T$li

lea  en  maat-d  klieper  ret

Cried  my  eye,  came  into  being  mankind.


«T  1®  k


en  /WWVN


pu  tebu-nd  sa  em  Ichut
I endowed  it  with  power.


maru-nes  er-a
It  raged  at  me


kn  mi-

em-khet  i-s


ret  em  khennu  en  dst-s


after  it  came  [finding]  another  growth  within  its  place.


K ^ I1  Q«  flk’J«.W  T


Tcher  en  ten-tens  du  uabu-s  her

Fell  its  vigorous  power  upon  its  bushes,  upon

flkM,  AJ^T  ilk  Pr3fl  Mkl>

uabu  tebui-nd  dm  se-ndd  dm-s

the  bushes  [which]  I placed  there  to  make  adornment  in  it.


uabu-s


320


THE  CREATION


3 !


khenti  dref  dst-s  hrd-d  heq-nes  ta  tcher  - f

Ruling  therefore  [on]  its  seat  in  my  face  it  ruleth  the  whole  earth.

jip-MwAa  ft

me  sen  Shu  Tdfnut  Nv.t  visa/  Ilevu-lchenti-dn-maati
Gave  birth  Shu  [and]  Tefnut  to  Nut,  Osiris,  Heru-khenti-an-maati,


P


cm

Set

Set,


(|


/\\A*>AA

(in


API  P.T.


o

Ast  Nebt-het  an  inesn-sen

Isis,  Nephthys,  [and]  behold,  their  children


kkIKIPT  e


1 r I

i G.  1

i ^ n


qemam-sen
they  create


kheperu

beings


I 31

dsht  em  tn.

manifold  in  earth


□

/WWVv


! 0
I I


e

•pen  em  kheperu  nv  mesu  em

this  from  the  beings  of  children,  from


k 8TJ«9I  0

kheperu  nv,
of


APIP.T,  l^P.'T


mesu-sen

their  children.

4-fcl  P.T,

kheft-sen

their  enemies,


shent-sen
They  invoke


i

•d

my  name,


A.VWSA

ren~d


the  beings


PJ>^PT,

sekhry-sen

they  overthrow


PT.  IV  ^


| AA/WVA


qemam-sen
they  create


hekau  en

words  of  power  for


□ □


VI


ddui


sekher  Apep  du-f  her  sau  her
the  overthrow  of  Apep,  who  is  to  be  bound  by  the  two  hands


THE  CREATION


321


en  Aker  dn  un  ddui  - f cut,  un  retui  -f

of  Aker,  not  may  be  his  two  hands,  not  may  be  his  two  feet,


AAAAAA

U

.sated  - f

eu

dst  ud  md

hu  Rd

setchcbu-f

may  he  be  chained

to

one  place  even  as

inflicteth  Ra

his  blows

A (D  ^ amma

1<=“=i  J^=w.

(j©

p ® ~ e V

t

utu-nef

du

sekher-tnf  her

sali-f

pui  tu

decreed  for  him.

He

is  overthrown  on

his  back

wicked,

g ^ 1 ®

□ © * a I

senpu  hrd-f  her
slit  is  his  face  for

Q®  fw'-  a MU

du  sati  - / pui
upon  his  back


•< H=»-

dri-nef  meni  sn

what  he  hath  done,  and  he  remaineth

I

i

hi

evil.


Y


( 322  )


CHAPTER  IX

HA,  THE  SUN-GOT),  AND  HIS  FORMS

RV  is  the  name  which  was  given  by  the  Egyptians  of  the
dynastic  period  to  the  god  of  the  sun,  who  was  regarded
as  the  maker  and  creator  of  everything  which  we  see  in  the
visible  world  around  us,  and  of  the  gods  in  heaven,  as  well  .‘is  of
heaven  itself,  and  of  the  Tuat  or  underworld  and  the  beings
therein ; the  original  meaning  of  his  name  is  unknown,  but  at  one
period  of  Egyptian  history  it  seems  to  have  been  thought  that  the
word  ra  indicated  “ operative  and  creative  power,”  and  that  as  a
proper  name  it  represented  in  meaning  something  like  “ Creator,”
this  epithet  being  used  much  in  the  same  way  and  with  the  same
idea  as  we  use  the  term  when  applied  to  God  Almighty,  the
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  and  of  all  things  therein.  The
worship  of  the  sun  in  Egypt  is  extremely  ancient  and  appears  to
have  been  universal ; at  a very  early  period  adoration  of  him  was
associated  with  that  of  the  hawk-god  Hem,  who  was  the  personi-
fication of  the  “ height  ” of  heaven,  and  who  appears  to  have  been
a type  and  symbol  of  the  sun.  The  worship  ol  the  hawk-god

Heru,  | ^ ^ j^,  is  the  oldest  in  Egypt,  and,  strictly  speaking,

he  'should  have  been  discussed  before  Ra,  but  as  Ra  and  the
personifications  of  his  various  forms  are  the  greatest  of  the  gods  of
the  Egyptians,  ho  must  be  regarded  as  the  true  “ father  of  the
gods,”  and  his  attributes,  and  the  myths  which  grew  up  round
him  must  be  considered  before  those  of  Horus.  The  god  Ra  is
usually  depicted  with  the  body  of  a man  and  the  head  of  a hawk,
but  sometimes  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a hawk  j on  his
head  he  wears  his  symbol,  to,  i.e.,  the  disk  of  the  sun  encircled  by


BOATS  OF  THE  SUN


the  serpent  Jchut,  ® j^,  of  which  mention  has  already  been
made.  When  he  has  a human  body  he  holds  the  emblem  of  life,
in  his  right  hand,  and  a sceptre,  j,  in  his  left,  and  from  the  belt  of

his  tunic  hangs  down  the  tail,  which  is  a survival  of  the  dress  of
men  in  predynastic  times,  and  probably  later.  Viewed  from  a
practical  point  of  view  Ra  was  the  oldest  of  all  the  gods  of  Egypt,
and  the  first  act  of  creation  was  the  appearance  of  his  disk  above
the  waters  of  the  world-ocean ; with  his  first  rising  time  began,
but  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to  say  when,  i.e.,  how  long  ago,  his
first  rising  took  place.  When  the  Egyptians  said  that  a certain
thing  had  been  in  existence  “ since  the  time  of  Ra  ” 1 it  was
equivalent  to  saying  that  it  had  existed  for  ever.

The  Egyptians,  knowing  that  the  sun  was  a fire,  found  a
difficulty  in  assuming  that  it  rose  directly  into  the  sky  from  out  of
the  watery  mass  wherein  it  was  brought  forth,  and  they,  therefore,
assumed  that  it  must  make  its  journey  over  the  waters  in  a boat,
or  boats,  and  as  a matter  of  fact  they  believed  that  it  passed
over  the  first  half  of  its  course  in  one  boat,  and  over  the  second
half  in  another.  The  morning  boat  of  the  sun  was  called  Matet,

n — c j i.e.,  “ becoming  strong,”  and  the  name  of

the  evening  boat  was  Seinktet,  , i.e.,  “ becoming

weak  ” ; these  are  appropriate  names  for  the  rising  and  the
setting  sun.2  The  course  which  Ra  followed  in  his  journey  across
the  sky  was  thought  to  have  been  defined  at  creation  by  the
goddess  called  Maat,  who  was  the  personification  of  the  conceptions
of  rectitude,  straightness,  law,  order,  unfailing  regularity,  and  the
like,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  the  regular  and  unfailing
appearance  of  the  sun  each  morning,  as  much  as  its  light  and  heat,
which  struck  wonder  into  primitive  man,  and  made  him  worship
the  sun.  In  passing  through  the  Tuat,  or  underworld,  at  night
Ra  was  supposed  to  be  obliged  to  leave  his  boat  at  certain  places,
and  to  make  use  of  others,  including  even  one  which  was  formed
by  the  body  of  a serpent ; according  to  one  opinion  lie  changed  his


See  Unas.  1.  202.


324


MYTHOLOGICAL  FISH


boat  every  hour  during  the  day  and  night,  but  the  oldest  belief  of
all  assigned  to  him  two  boats  only.  Ra  was  accompanied  on  his
journey  by  a number  of  gods,  whose  duties  consisted  in  navigating
the  boat,  and  in  helping  it  to  make  a successful  passage  from  the
eastern  part  of  the  sky  to  the  place  where  the  god  entered  the
Tuat ; the  course  was  set  by  Thoth  and  his  female  counterpart
Maat,  and  these  stood  one  on  each  side  of  Horus,  who  acted  as  the
steersman  and  apparently  as  captain  also.  Before  the  boat  of  Ra,  one

on  each  side,  swam  the  two  pilot  fishes  called  Abtu,  ^ Jj  and
Ant,  respectively.1  But,  judging  from  the  religious

and  mythological  texts  which  have  come  down  to  us,  not  all  the
power  of  Ra  himself,  nor  that  of  the  gods  who  were  with  him,
could  ward  off  the  attacks  of  certain  fiends  and  monsters  which
endeavoured  to  obstruct  the  passage  of  his  boat.

Chief  among  such  were  the  serpent  Apep,  and

Sebau,  jl  Jj  (j  ^ ■ii&hh,  and  Nak,  ^ (J  ami  of  these  the

greatest  and  most  wicked  was  Apep.  In  dynastic  times  Apep  was
a personification  of  the  darkness  of  the  darkest  hour  of  the  night,
against  which  Ra.  must  not  only  fight,  but  fight  successfully  before
he  could  rise  in  the  east  in  the  morning ; but  originally  he  was
the  thick  darkness  which  enveloped  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu,  and
which  formed  such  a serious  obstacle  to  the  sun  when  he  was
making  his  way  out  of  the  inert  mass  from  which  he  proceeded  to
rise  the  first  time.  In  the  Boole  of  the  Dead  he  is  frequently
mentioned,'  but  rather  from  a moral  than  a physical  point  of  view.
Thus  in  the  xxxixth  Chapter  the  deceased  says  : “ Get  thee  back,
“ Fiend,  before  the  darts  of  his  beams.  Ra  hath  overthrown
“ thy  words,  the  gods  have  turned  thy  face  backwards,-  the  Lynx

“ (Maftet,  ^ j , hath  torn  open  thy  breast,  the

“ Scorpion  goddess,  e|p!  » hath  cast  fetters  upon  thee,  and

“ Maat  hath  sent  forth  thy  destruction.  Those  who  are  in  the
“ ways  have  overthrown  thee ; fall  down  and  depart,  0 Apep,


1 Book  of  the  Dead.  (Papyrus  of  Aru\  pi.  1,  line  15.)

See  the  Vocabulary  to  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day , under  Apep  (p.  61).


RA  AND  APEP


325


“ thou  Enemy  of  Ra.”  A little  further  on  the  deceased  says : “ T
“ have  brought  fetters  to  thee,  0 Ra,  and  Apep  hath  fallen  because
“ thou  hast  drawn  them  tight.  The  gods  of  the  South,  and  of  the
“ North,  of  the  West  and  of  the  East  have  fastened  chains  upon
“ him,  and  they  have  fastened  him  with  fetters ; the  god

“ Rekes  hath  overthrown  him,  and  the  god  Hertit

“ (1  | ^ !sfl)  Put  him  in  chains.  0 Apep,  thou

li  Enemy  of  Ra,  thou  slialt  never  partake  of  the  delights  of  love,
“ thou  shalt  never  fulfil  thy  desire  ! He  niakcth  thee  to  go  back,
“ 0 thou  who  art  hateful  to  Ra ; he  looketh  upon  thee,  get  thee
“ back.  He  pierceth  thy  head,  he  slitteth  up  thy  face,  he  divideth
“ thy  head  where  its  bones  join  and  it  is  crushed  in  thy  land,  thy
“ bones  are  smashed  in  pieces,  thy  members  are  hacked  off  thee,

“and  the  god  Aker  ( jf))  ^ia^1  Passed  sentence  of  doom

“ upon  thee.”

From  the  “ Books  of  Overthrowing  Apep,” 1 we  obtain
further  information  as  to  the  destruction  of  the  monster,  and  we
find  that  this  work  was  recited  daily  in  the  temple  of  Amen-Ra
at  Thebes.  The  first  Book  was  divided  into  Chapters,  which  were
entitled: — 1.  Chapter  of  spitting  upon  Apep.  2.  Chapter  of
defiling  Apep  with  the  left  foot.  3.  Chapter  of  taking  a lance  to
smite  Apep.  4.  Chapter  of  fettering  Apep.  5.  Chapter  of  taking
a knife  to  smite  Apep.  (>.  Chapter  of  putting  fire  upon  Apep.
The  following  Books  describe  with  great  minuteness  the  details  of
the  destruction  which  was  to  fall  upon  Apep,  and  they  are  insisted
on  to  a wearisome  degree ; according  to  these  the  monster,  which
is  referred  to  at  one  time  as  a crocodile  and  at  another  as  a
serpent,  is  first  to  be  speared,  then  gashed  with  knives,  and  every
bone  of  his  body  having  been  separated  by  red-hot  knives,  and  his
head,  and  legs,  and  tail,  etc.,  having  been  cut  off,  his  remains  were
to  be  scorched,  and  singed,  and  roasted,  and  finally  shrivelled  up
and  consumed  by  fire.  The  same  fate  was  to  come  upon  A pep’s
confederates,  and  everything  which  formed  parts  of  him  and  of
them,  i.e.,  their  shadows,  souls,  doubles,  and  spirits,  were  to  be


1 »Soo  Archacolofjia , vol.  lii.  (The  Pajiyrus  of  Neat  - Am*  u ) .


326


NAMES  OF  APEP


wiped  out  of  existence,  including  any  offspring  which  they  might
possess.  Not  content  with  reciting  the  words  of  power  which
would  have  the  effect  of  destroying  Apep  and  his  fiends,  great  care
was  taken  to  perform  various  ceremonies  of  a magical  character,
which  were  supposed  to  benefit  not  only  Ra,  but  those  who
worshipped  him  on  earth.  Apep  was  both  crafty  and  evil-doing,
and  like  Bit,  lie  possessed  many  names ; to  destroy  him  it  was
necessary  to  curse  him  by  each  and  every  name  by  which  he  was
known.  To  make  quite  sure  that  this  should  be  done  effectively
the  Papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu  adds  a list  of  such  names,  and  as  they
are  the  foundation  of  many  of  the  magical  names  met  with  in  later
papyri  they  are  here  enumerated: — 1.  Nesiit.  2.  Tutu.  3.
Hau-hra.  4.  Hemhemti.  5.  Qettu.  6.  Qerneru.  7.  Iubani.

8.  A mam.  3.  Hem-taiu.  10.  Saatet-ta.  11.  Khermuti.  12.

Kenememti.  13.  Sheta.  14.  Serem-taui.  15.  Sekjiem-hra.  16.
Uim.  17.  Ivarau-anememti.  18.  Kheskf-rra.  19.  Seba-ent-

seba.  20.  Khak-ab.  21.  Khan-ru  ....  uaa.  22.  Nai.  23.

Am.  24.  Turrupa(?)  25.  Iubau.  26.  Uai.  27.  Kiiarubu,  the
FOUR  TIMES  WICKED.  28.  SaU.  29.  BeTESHU.1

In  the  Egyptian  texts  we  have  at  present  no  account  of  the


‘ l


w


f^-  ">-n\T^7Z-  "
kk:^-  «•“


o

\\


kA^-  12!

"•^.^'akk


<=>  <?.  jba


25.


26.


23-  k 24-

am**-

»■  &s  © . See  my  papor  in  Archaeologia f vol.  Hi.,  pp.  202-204,


RA  AND  APEP


327


first  fight  which  took  place  between  Ra  and  Apep,  but  it  is  clear  from
several  passages  in  the  “ Books  of  Overthrowing  Apep  ” that  such
a thing  must  have  occurred,  and  that  the  means  employed  by  the
Sun-god  for  destroying  his  foe  resembled  those  made  use  of  by
Marduk  in  slaying  Tiamat.  The  original  of  the  Assyrian  story  is
undoubtedly  of  Sumerian  origin,  and  must  be  very  old,  and  it  is
probable  that  both  the  Egyptians  and  the  Sumerians  derived  their
versions  from  a common  source.  In  the  Assyrian  version1  Marduk
is  armed  with  the  invincible  club  which  the  gods  gave  him,  and
with  a bow,  spear,  net,  and  dagger  ; the  lightning  was  before  him,
and  fierce  fire  filled  his  body,  and  the  four-fold  wind  and  the
seven-fold  wind  went  with  him.  Mat’d  uk  grasped  the  thunderbolt
and  then  mounted  his  chariot,  drawn  by  four  swift  and  fiery  horses
which  had  been  trained  to  beat  down  under  their  feet  everything
which  came  in  their  way.  When  he  came  to  the  place  where
Tiamat  was,  Kingu,  whom  she  had  set  over  her  forces,  trembled
and  was  afraid,  but  Tiamat  “stood  firm  with  unbent  neck.”
After  an  exchange  of  words  of  abuse  the  fight  began,  and  Tiamat
pronounced  her  spell,  which,  however,  had  no  effect,  for  Marduk
caught  her  in  his  net,  and  drove  the  winds  which  he  had  with  him

a

into  her  body,  and  whilst  her  belly  was  thus  distended  he  thrust
his  spear  into  her,  and  stabbed  her  to  the  heart,  and  cut  through
her  bowels,  and  crushed  her  skull  with  his  club.  On  her  body  he
took  his  stand,  and  with  his  knife  he  split  it  “ like  a flat  fish  into
two  halves,”  and  of  one  of  these  he  made  a covering  for  the
heavens.  With  the  exception  of  the  last,  every  detail  of  the
Assyrian  account  of  the  fight  has  its  equivalent  in  the  Egyptian
texts  which  concern  Ra.  and  Apepi.  An  allusion  to  the  fight  is
found  in  the  apocryphal  work  of  “ Bel  and  the  Dragon,”  wherein
we  are  told  that  both  the  god  and  the  monster  were  worshipped  in
Babylon  ; but  the  narrative  says  that  the  dragon  was  destroyed  by
means  of  lumps  of  pitch,  and  fat,  and  hair  seethed  together,  and
that  these  having  been  pushed  into  the  creature’s  mouth  he  burst
asunder.  In  Egyptian  papyri  Apep  is  always  represented  in  the
form  of  a qerpent,  in  each  undulation  of  which  a knife  is  stuck.


1 See  King,%J Babylonian  linlujiun,  p.  71  ff.


328  THE  CITY  OF  THE  SUN

■tofcfch;  in  the  “Book  of  the  Gates”  (see  above  p.  197)  we  see  him
fastened  by  the  neck  with  a chain  (along  which  is  stretched  the
scorpion  goddess  Serqet),  the  end  of  which  is  in  the  hands  of  a
god,  and  also  chained  to  the  ground  by  five  chains.

It  has  already  been  said  that  Ra  was  the  “ father  of  the  gods,”
and  we  find  that  as  early  as  the  Vth  Dynasty  a female  counterpart,
who  was  the  mother  of  the  gods,  was  assigned  to  him.  This

goddess  is  called  in  the  text  of  Unas  (1.  253)  Rat,  and  in  later
times  her  title  appears  to  have  been  “ Rat  of  the  two  lands,  the
“ lady  of  heaven,  mistress  of  the  gods,”  ^ t=5  ^ cjcjcj ;

she  is  also  called  “ Mistress  of  Heliopolis.”  Her  full  name  was,
perhaps,  Rat-taiut,  ^ ^ ^f|,  i.e.,  “Rat  of  the  world.”  She  is

depicted  in  the  form  of  a woman  who  wears  on  her  head  a disk
with  horns  and  a uraeus,  and  sometimes  there  are  two  feathers
above  the  disk ; 1 the  attributes  of  the  goddess  are  unknown,  but  it
is  not  likely  that  she  was  considered  to  be  more  important  than
any  other  great  goddess.

The  home  and  centre  of  the  worship  of  Ra  in  Egypt  during
dynastic  times  was  the  city  called  Annu,  or  An  by  the

Egyptians,  On  by  the  Hebrews,  and  Heliopolis  by  the  Greeks ; its
site  is  marked  by  the  village  of  Matariyeh,  which  lies  about  five
miles  to  the  north-east  of  Cairo.  It  was  generally  known  as  Annu
meht,  i.e.,  Annu  of  the  North,  to  distinguish  it  from  Aunu  Qemau,
i.e.,  Annu  of  the  South,”  or  Hermonthis.  Among  the  early
Christians  great  store  was  set  upon  the  oil  made  from  the  trees
which  grew  there,  and  in  the  famous  “ Fountain  of  the  Sun  ” the
Virgin  Mary  is  said  to  have  washed  the  garments  of  her  Son  ; the
ancient  Egyptians  also  believed  that  Ra  bathed  each  day  at  sunrise
in  a certain  lake  or  pool  which  was  in  the  neighbourhood.  Of  the
origin  and  beginnings  of  the  worship  of  Ra  at  Heliopolis  we  know
nothing,  but  it  is  quite  certain  that  under  the  Vth  Dynasty,  about
b.c.  3350,  the  priests  of  R,i  had  settled  themselves  there,  and  that
they  had  obtained  great  power  at  that  remote  period.  The


1 See  LanzoiK-,  op.  cit. , pi.  186,  Nob.  1-4.


The  Q000E8S  RAT.


HA  WORSHIP


329


evidence  derived  from  the  Westcar  Papyrus 1 indicates  that  User-
ka-f,  the  first  king  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  was  the  high-priest  of  Ra,
and  that  he  was  the  first  to  add  “ son  of  the  Sun  ” to  the  titles  of
Egyptian  monarchs.  Up  to  that  time  a king  seems  to  have
possessed  : — l.  A name  as  the  descendant  or  servant  of  Horus.  2.
A name  as  the  descendant  or  servant  of  Set.  3.  A name  as  lord


of  the  shrines  of  Nekhebet  and  Uatchit,


of  the  North  and  South,


4.  A name  as  king


User-ka-f,  however,  introduced  the


title  of  “ son  of  the  Sun,”  , which  was  always  followed  by  a
second  cartouche,  and  it  was  adopted  by  every  succeeding  king  of
Egypt.  According  to  the  Westcar  Papyrus  User-ka-f  and  his  two
immediate  successors  Sahu-Ra  and  Ivakaa  were  the  sons  of  the  god
Ra  by  Rut-tetet,  the  wife  of  a priest  of  the  god  Ra  of  Sakhabu,

[q]  i •*-=■  Jj  ^ these  were  brought  into  the  world  by  the

goddesses  Isis,  Nephthys,  Meskhenet,  and  Heqct,  and  by  the  god
Khnemu,  and  it  was  decreed  by  them  that  the  three  boys  should
be  sovereigns  of  Egypt.

This  legend  is  of  importance,  not  only  as  showing  the  order
of  the  succession  of  the  first  three  kings  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  but
also  because  it  proves  that  in  the  early  Empire  the  kings  of  Egypt
believed  themselves  to  be  the  sons  of  Ra,  the  Sun-god.  All
chronological  tradition  afiirms  that  lia  had  once  ruled  over  Egypt,
and  it  is  a remarkable  fact  that  every  possessor  of  the  throne  of
Egypt  was  proved  by  some  means  or  other  to  have  the  blood  of
Ha  flowing  in  his  veins,  or  to  hold  it  because  he  was  connected
with  Ra  by  marriage.  The  bas-reliefs  of  Queen  II atshepset  at
Dor  al-Bahari,  and  those  of  Amcn-hetep  III.  at  Luxor,  and  those
of  Cleopatra  VII.  in  the  temple  at  Erment  (now  destroyed,  alas!)
describe  the  process  by  which  Ra  or  Amen- lift  became  the  father
of  the  kings  and  queens  of  Egypt.  From  these  we  see  that
whenever  the  divine  blood  needed  replenishing  the  god  took  upon
himself  the  form  of  the  reigning  king  of  Egypt,  and  that  he  visited
the  queen  in  her  chamber  and  became  the  actual  father  of  the  child
who  was  subsequently  bom  to  her.  When  the  child  was  born  it


1 See  Ernmn,  West  cur  Papyrus,  pi.  ix.  IT.


330


HA  AND  RA-TEM


was  regarded  as  a god  incarnate,  and  in  due  course  was  presented,
with  appropriate  ceremonies,  to  Ra  or  Amen-Ra,  in  his  temple,
and  this  god  accepted  it  and  acknowledged  it  to  be  his  child.  This
clever  priestly  device  gave  the  priests  of  Ra  great  power  in  the
land,  but  their  theocratic  rule  was  not  always  the  best  for  Egypt,
and  on  one  occasion  they  brought  about  the  downfall  of  a dynasty.
The  first  rise  to  power  of  the  priests  of  Ra  took  place  at  the
beginning  of  the  Vth  Dynasty,  when  the  cult  of  Ra  became
dominant  in  the  land.  About  the  time  of  Userkaf  we  find  that  a
number  of  shrines,  which  united  the  chief  characteristics  of  the
low  rectangular  tomb  commonly  known  by  its  Arabic  name  of

mastaba,  i.e.,  “bench,”  and  of  the  pyramid,  /\  , were  built  in
honour  of  the  god ; 1 but,  according  to  Prof.  Sethc,  the  custom  of
building  such  only  lasted  for  about  one  hundred  year’s,  i.e.,  from
the  reign  of  Userkaf  to  that  of  Men-kau-Heru.  Be  this  as  it  may,
the  priesthood  of  Heliopolis  succeeded  in  making  their  worship  of
Ra  to  supei’sede  generally  that  of  almost  every  other  god  of  Egypt,
and  in  absorbing  all  the  local  gods  of  importance  throughout  the
country  into  their  theological  system,  wherein  they  gave  them
positions  subordinate  to  those  of  Ra  and  his  company  of  gods.

Originally  the  local  god  of  the  city  was  Tern,  who  was
worshipped  there  in  a special  temple,  but  they  united  his  attributes

to  those  of  Ra.  and  formed  the  double  god  lla-Tem,  O (Unas,
1.  222).  With  the  close  of  the  Vlth  Dynasty  the  power  of  the  priests
of  Ra  declined,  and  it  was  not  until  the  reign  of  Usertsen  I.,  about
b.c.  2433,  that  the  sanctuary  at  Heliopolis  was  rebuilt,  or  perhaps
entirely  refounded.  This  king  dedicated  the  temple  which  he
built  there  to  Ra  and  to  two  forms  of  this  god,  Horus  and  Temu,
who  were  supposed  to  be  incarnate  in  the  famous  Bull  of  Mnevis,
which  was  worshipped  at  Heliopolis  as  Apis  was  worshipped  at
Memphis.  In  front  of  the  temple  he  set  up  two  massive  granite
obelisks,  each  66  feet  high,  the  pyramidions  of  which  were  covered
with  copper ; these  were  still  in  situ  about  a.d.  1200.  Between
the  Xllth  and  the  XXth  Dynasties  we  hear  little  of  Heliopolis,  but

1 See  an  interesting  paper  on  this  subject  by  Sethe  in  Aegyptinclic  Zeitschrift ,
1889,  p«  Ill  If.  (Die  HeUujthumer  ties  i?o4  im  alien  Reich).


AMEN-RA  - HERU  - KHUTI.


AMEN-RA  - (Harmachis).


HELIOPOLIS


331


a further  restoration  of  the  temple  buildings  took  place  under
Eameses  III.,  who  set  apart  large  revenues  for  the  maintenance  of
the  worship  of  Ra  and  the  dignity  of  his  priests  and  servants.
When  Piankhi  invaded  Egypt,  about  b.c.  750,  he  visited
Heliopolis  after  the  capture  of  Memphis,  going  by  way  of  the

mountain  of  Kher-aha,  ^ a ^ fV\  © , and  he  performed

certain  ceremonial  ablutions  in  the  “ Lake  of  cold  water,”  ‘ ^ ,

and  washed  his  face  in  the  “ milk  of  Nu  wherein  Ra  was  wont  to
“wash  his  face 1 this  “ Lake”  is  clearly  the  fountain  of  the  sun
which  we  have  already  mentioned.

At  a place  called  Shai-qa-em-Annu 2 he  “ made  great  offerings
“ at  Sha-qa-em-Amen  to  Ra  at  sunrise,  viz.,  white  oxen,  milk,  anti
“ unguent,  incense,  and  sweet-smelling  woods,  and  then  he  passed
“ into  the  temple  of  Ra,  which  he  entered  bowing  low  in
“ adoration  to  the  god.  The  chief  kher  heh  priest,  ^ ® ,
“ offered  up  prayer  on  behalf  of  the  king,  tliat  he  might  be  able  to
“ repulse  his  enemies,  and  then  having  performed  the  ceremony
“ connected  with  the  ‘ Star-room,’  ^ , he  took  the  seteb  girdle,
“ and  purified  himself  with  incense,  and  poured  out  a libation,
“ when  one  brought  to  him  the  flowers  which  are  offered  up  in  the

“ Het-Benbenet,3  QJ  JJ  ^ t_]Cj.  He  took  the  flowers  and  went
“ up  the  steps  [leading  to]  the  ‘ great  tabernacle,’  p czzd  ,

“to  see  Ra  in  Het-Benbenet.  He  stood  [on  the  top]  there  by
“ himself,  he  pushed  back  the  bolt,  he  opened  the  doors  [of  the
“ tabernacle],  and  he  saw  his  father  Ra  in  Het-Benbenet.  He
“ made  adoration  to  the  Matet  Boat  of  Ra  (i.e.,  the  boat  of  the
“ rising  sun),  and  to  the  Sektet  boat  of  Tem  (i.e.,  the  boat  of  the
“ setting  sun).  He  then  drew  close  the  doors  again,  and  having
“ affixed  thereto  the  clay  for  a seal  he  stamped  it  with  the  seal  of


/WWW  WWW  QQQ

yVWVAA  AWW^

'vvvvv'  WWW

AAAAAA  Q /WWW


^ (Stele  of  Pianklii,  1.  102).

3 I.c.t  the  shrine  or  holy  of  holies  of  the  temple  of  K:>


— 0 I


HELIOPOLIS


332


“ the  king  himself.  He  then  admonished  the  priests  [saying],  ‘ I
“ have  set  [my]  seal  here,  let  no  other  king  enter  herein  [or]  stand
“ here.’  And  they  cast  themselves  on  their  bellies  before  his
“ majesty,  saying,  ‘ May  Horus  who  loveth  Annu  (Heliopolis)  be
“ firm  and  stable,  and  may  he  never  come  to  an  end.’  And  the
“ king  went  into  the  Temple  of  Tem,  and  he  performed  all  the
“ceremonies  and  service  connected  with  the  worship  of  father
“ Tem-Khcpera,  ^ I]  ^ prince  of  Annu.”

From  the  above  it  is  certain  that  the  sacred  boats  of  11a.  were


P


kept  in  a sort  of  wooden  tabernacle  with  two  doors,  jf^§ , that
could  be  fastened  by  a bolt,  and  from  what  we  know  from  pictures
of  these  boats  it  is  equally  certain  that  the  Matet  boat  contained  a
hawk-headed  figure  of  Ra,  and  that  the  Sektet  boat  contained  a
man-headed  figure  of  11a.  The  text  says  that  the  tabernacle,

^ cmj,  was  situated  on  the  top  of  a flight  of  steps,  and  this  is

what  we  should  expect,  for  we  know  that  the  support  was  intended
to  represent  the  high  ground  in  or  near  the  city  of  Khemennu,

— — /vwwv  A

” — q (Hermopolis),  whereon  Ra  established  himself  on

the  day  when  he  proceeded  from  the  watery  abyss  of  Nu,  before
the  pillars  of  Shu  were  set  up.  In  the  Hook  of  the  Dead  this

high  ground  is  called  “ Qaqa  in  Khemennu,”  a A °
f \\  n q ^ ©.  During  the  period  of  the  Persian

invasion  the  prosperity  of  the  priesthood  of  Heliopolis  declined,
and  it  is  said  that  later,  during  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  II.  (b.c.  285-
247)  many  of  its  members  found  an  asylum  at  Alexandria,  where
their  reputation  for  learning  caused  them  to  be  welcomed.  A
tradition  says  Solon,  Thales,  and  Plato  all  visited  the  great  college
at  Heliopolis,  and  that  the  last-named  actually  studied  there,  and
that  Manetho,  the  priest  of  Sebennytus,  who  wrote  a history  of
Egypt  in  Greek  for  Ptolemy  II.,  collected  his  materials  in  the
library  of  the  priesthood  of  Ra.  Some  time,  however,  before  the
Christian  era,  the  temple  buildings  were  in  ruins,  and  the  glory  of
Heliopolis  had  departed,  and  it  was  frequented  only  by  those  who
went  there  to  carry  away  stone  or  anything  else  which  would  be
useful  in  building  or  farming  operations.


CULT  OF  HELIOPOLIS


333

We  have  now  to  consider  briefly  what  was  the  nature  of  the
doctrine  which  was  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the
teaching  of  the  priests  of  Heliopolis.  In  the  first  place  it  pro-
claimed the  absolute  sovereignty  of  Ra  among  the  gods,  and  it
made  him  the  head  of  every  company  of  the  gods,  but  it  did  not
deny  divinity  to  the  older  deities  of  the  country.  The  chief
authorities  for  the  Heliopolitan  doctrine  are  the  Pyramid  Texts,  to
which  allusion  has  so  often  been  made,  and  from  these  we  see  that
the  priests  of  Rsi  displayed  great  ingenuity  and  tact  in  absorbing
into  their  form  of  religion  all  the  older  cults  of  Egypt,  together
with  their  magical  rites  and  ceremonies.  Apparently  they  did  not
attempt  to  abolish  the  old,  indigenous  gods ; on  the  contrary,  they
allowed  their  cults  to  be  continued,  provided  that  the  local  priest-
hoods would  make  their  gods  subordinate  to  Ra.  Thus  Osiris
and  Isis,  and  their  companion  gods,  were  absorbed  into  the  great
company  of  the  gods  of  Heliopolis,  and  the  theological  system  of
the  priests  of  Osiris  was  mixed  with  that  of  the  priests  of  Ra.
Nothing  is  known  of  the  origin  of  Osiris  worship,  but  the  god
himself  and  the  ceremonies  which  accompanied  the  celebration  of
his  festivals  suggest  that  he  was  known  to  the  predynastic  dwellers
in  Egypt.  The  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  worship  of  the  Man-god,
who  rose  from  the  dead,  and  established  himself  in  the  underworld
as  judge  and  king,  was  indelibly  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the
Egyptians  at  a very  early  period,  and  although  the  idea  of  a
heaven  of  material  delights  which  was  promised  to  the  followers  of
Osiris  did  not,  probably,  commend  itself  in  all  particulars  to  the
imaginations  of  the  refined  and  cultured  folk  of  Egypt,  it  was
tacitly  accepted  as  true  and  was  regarded  as  a portion  of  their
religious  inheritance  by  the  majority  of  the  people.  On  the  other
hand,  the  priests  of  Ra  declared  that  the  souls  of  the  blessed  made
their  way  after  death  to  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  that  if  they  succeeded
in  alighting  upon  it  their  eternal  happiness  was  assured.  No
fiends  could  vex  and  no  foes  assail  them  successfully,  so  long  as
they  had  their  seat  in  the  “ Boat  of  Millions  of  Years;  they  lived
upon  the  food  on  which  the  gods  lived,  and  that  food  was  light.
They  were  apparelled  in  light,  and  they  were  embraced  by  the  god
of  light.  They  passed  with  Ra  in  his  boat  through  all  the  dangers


334


CULT  OF  HELIOPOLIS


of  the  Tuat,  and  when  the  god  rose  each  morning  they  wore  free
to  wander  about  in  heaven  or  to  visit  their  old  familiar  habitations
on  earth,  always  however  taking  care  to  resume  their  places  in  the
boat  before  nightfall,  at  which  time  evil  spirits  had  great  power
to  injure,  and  perhaps  even  to  slay,  the  souls  of  those  who  had
failed  to  arrive  safely  in  the  boat.

But  although  the  priests  of  Ra  under  the  Early  Empire,  and
the  priests  of  Amen-Ra  under  the  Middle  and  Mew  Empires,  were
supported  by  all  the  power  and  authority  of  the  greatest  kings  and
queens  who  ever  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Egypt,  in  their  proclama-
tion of  a heaven,  whicli  was  of  a far  more  spiritual  character  than
that  of  Osiris,  they  never  succeeded  in  obliterating  the  belief  in
Osiris  from  the  minds  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  population  in  Egypt.
The  material  side  of  the  Egyptian  character  refused  to  be  weaned
from  the  idea  of  a Field  of  Peace,  which  was  situated  near  the
Field  of  Reeds  and  the  Field  of  the  Grasshoppers,1  where  wheat
and  barley  grew  in  abundance,  and  where  a man  would  possess  a
vine,  and  fig  trees,  and  date  palms,  and  be  waited  upon  by  his
father  and  his  mother,  and  where  he  would  enjoy  an  existence
more  comfortable  than  that  which  he  led  upon  this  earth.  The
doctrine  of  a realm  of  light,  where  the  meat,  and  drink,  and
raiment  were  light,  and  the  idea  of  becoming  a being  of  light,  and
of  passing  eternity  among  creatures  of  light  did  not  satisfy  him.
The  result  of  all  this  was  to  create  a perpetual  contest  between  the
two  great  priesthoods  of  Egypt,  namely,  those  of  Ra  and  Osiris ;
in  the  end  the  doctrine  of  Osiris  prevailed,  and  the  attributes  of
the  Sun-god  wei’e  ascribed  to  him.  In  considering  the  struggle
which  went  on  between  the  followers  of  Ra  and  Osiris  it  is  difficult
not  to  think  that  there  was  some  strong  reason  for  the  resistance
which  the  priests  of  Ra  met  with  from  the  Egyptians  generally,
and  it  seems  as  if  the  doctrine  of  Ra  contained  something  which
was  entirely  foreign  to  the  ideas  of  the  people.  The  city  of
Heliopolis  appears  always  to  have  contained  a mixed  population,
and  its  situation  made  it  a very  convenient  halting-place  for
travellers  passing  from  Arabia  and  Syria  into  Egypt  and  vice

1 Mi  * i & ( Book  of  the  Dead , exxv.  19).


The  God  KHEPERA  seated  in  his  Boat.


HYMNS  TO  RA


335


versa. ; it  is,  then,  most  probable  that  the  doctrine  of  Ra  as  taught
by  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  was  a mixture  of  Egyptian  and
Western  Asiatic  doctrines,  and  that  it  was  the  Asiatic  element  in
it  which  the  Egyptians  resisted.  It  could  not  have  been  sun-
worship  which  they  disliked,  for  they  had  been  sun- worshippers
from  time  immemorial.

The  above  paragraphs  contain  a statement  of  the  facts
concerning  the  worships  of  Ra  and  Osiris  which  appear  to  be
fairly  deducible  from  the  extant  religious  literature  of  the
Egyptians,  but  it  is  time  to  let  the  hymns  to  these  gods  declare
the  attributes  which  were  assigned  to  them  during  the  most
flourishing  period  of  Egyptian  history.  More  hymns  were  ad-
dressed to  these  two  than  to  any  other  gods,  a fact  which  proves
that  they  were  considered  to  be  the  chief  means  of  salvation  for
the  Egyptians.  The  following  hymns  are  taken  from  the  Papyri  of
Tlunefer,  and  Aui,  and  Neklit1 : —

“ Homage  to  thee,  0 thou  who  art  Ra  when  thou  risest,  and
“ Temu  when  thou  settest.  Thou  risest,  thou  risest,  thou  shinest,
“ thou  shinest,  thou  who  art  crowned  king  of  the  gods.  Thou  art
“ the  lord  of  heaven,  thou  art  the  lord  of  earth ; thou  art  the
“creator  of  those  who  dwell  in  the  heights  and  of  those  who
“ dwell  in  the  depths.  Thou  art  the  God  One  who  didst  come
“ into  being  in  the  beginning  of  time.  Thou  didst  create  the  earth,
“ thou  didst  fashion  man,  thou  didst  make  the  watery  abyss  of  the
“sky,  thou  didst  form  Hapi  (the  Nile),  thou  didst  create  the
“ watery  abyss,  and  thou  dost  give  life  unto  all  that  therein  is.
“ Thou  hast  knit  together  the  mountains,  thou  hast  made  mankind
“ and  the  beasts  of  the  field  to  come  into  being,  thou  hast  made
“the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Worshipped  be  thou  whom  Mailt
“ embraceth  at  mom  and  at  eve.  Thou  dost  travel  across  the  sky
“ with  heart  swelling  with  joy ; the  Lake  of  Testes  becometh
“ contented  thereat.  The  serpent-fiend  Nak  hath  fallen,  and  his
“ two  arms  are  cut  off.  The  Sektet  boat  receiveth  fair  winds,  and
“ the  heart  of  him  that  is  in  the  shrine  thereof  rejoiceth.  Thou  art
“ crowned  prince  of  heaven,  and  thou  art  the  One  dowered  [with


1 See  my  Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Bay  (Translation),  pp.  8,  3<>.


336


HYMNS  TO  RA


“ all  attributes]  who  eomest  forth  from  the  sky.  Ra  is  he  whose
“word  when  uttered  must  come  to  pass.  0 thou  divine  Youth,
“thou  heir  of  everlastingness,  thou  self-begotten  one,  thou  who
“didst  give  thyself  birth!  0 thou  One,  thou  mighty  [one]  of
“ myriad  forms  and  aspects,  King  of  the  world,  Prince  of  Annu
“ (Heliopolis),  lord  of  eternity  and  ruler  of  everlastingness,  the
“ company  of  the  gods  rejoice  when  thou  risest  and  when  thou
“sailest  across  the  sky,  0 thou  who  art  exalted  in  the  Sektet
“ boat.”  (From  the  Papyrus  of  Hunefer,  sheet  1.)

“ Hail,  thou  Disk,  thou  lord  of  rays,  who  risest  on  the  horizon
“ day  by  day ! Homage  to  thee,  O Heru-kliuti,  who  art  the  god
“ Ivhepera,  the  self-created ; when  thou  risest  on  the  horizon  and
“sheddest  thy  beams  of  light  upon  the  lands  of  the  North  and
“ of  the  South,  thou  art  beautiful,  yea  beautiful,  and  all  the  gods
“ rejoice  when  they  behold  thee,  the  lung  of  heaven.  The  goddess
“ Nebt-unnut  is  stablished  upon  thy  head ; and  her  uraei  of  the
“ South  and  of  the  North  are  upon  thy  brow ; she  taketh  up  her
“ place  before  thee.  The  god  Thoth  is  stablished  in  the  bows  of
“ thy  boat  to  destroy  utterly  all  thy  foes.  Those  who  are  in  the
“ Tuat  come  forth  to  meet  thee,  and  they  bow  in  homage  as  they
“come  towards  thee  to  behold  thy  beautiful  form.  And  I have
“come  before  thee  that  I may  be  with  thee  to  behold  thy  Disk
“ every  day.  May  I not  be  shut  up  in  [the  tomb],  may  I not  be
“ turned  back,  may  the  members  of  my  body  be  made  new  when  1
“ view  thy  beauties,  even  as  [are  those  of]  all  thy  favoured  ones,
“ because  I am  one  of  those  who  worshipped  thee  upon  earth.  May
“ I come  in  unto  the  land  of  eternity,  may  I come  even  unto  the
“ everlasting  land,  for  behold,  0 my  lord,  this  hast  thou  ordained
“ for  me.

“ Homage  to  thee,  0 thou  who  risest  in  the  horizon  as  Rii,
“thou  rcstest  upon  law  unchangeable  and  unalterable.  Thou
“passest  over  the  sky,  and  every  face  watcheth  thee  and  thy
“ course,  for  thou  hast  been  hidden  from  their  gaze.  Thou  dost
“ show  thyself  at  dawn  and  at  eventide  day  by  day.  The  Sektet
“ boat,  wherein  is  thy  Majesty,  goeth  forth  with  light ; thy  beams
“ are  upon  all  faces ; the  [number]  of  thy  red  and  yellow  rays
“ cannot  be  known,  nor  can  thy  bright  beams  be  told.  The  lands


HYMN  TO  RA


337


“ of  the  gods,  and  the  lands  of  Punt  must  be  seen,  ere  that  which
“ is  hidden  [in  thee]  may  be  measured.  Alone  and  by  thyself  thou
“dost  manifest  thyself  when  thou  comest  into  being  above  Nu.
“ May  I advance,  even  as  thou  dost  advance ; may  I never  cease  to
“ go  forward  as  thou  never  ceasest  to  go  forward,  even  though  it  be
“ for  a moment ; for  with  strides  thou  dost  in  one  little  moment
“ pass  over  the  spaces  which  would  need  millions  and  millions  of
“ years  [for  men  to  pass  over ; this]  thou  doest  and  then  thou  dost
“ sink  to  rest.  Thou  puttest  an  end  to  the  hours  of  the  night,  and
“ thou  dost  count  them,  even  thou ; thou  endest  them  in  thine
“own  appointed  season,  and  the  earth  becometh  light.  Thou
“ settest  thyself  therefore  before  thy  handiwork  in  the  likeness  of
“ llii  [when]  thou  risest  on  the  horizon.

“ Thou  art  crowned  with  the  majesty  of  thy  beauties ; thou
“ mouldest  thy  limbs  as  thou  dost  advance,  and  thou  bringest  them
“ forth  without  birth-pangs  in  the  form  of  Ra,  as  thou  dost  rise
“ up  into  the  upper  air.  Grant  thou  that  I may  come  unto  the
“ heaven  which  is  everlasting,  and  into  the  mountain  where  dwell
“ thy  favoured  ones.  May  I be  joined  unto  those  shining  beings,
“ holy  and  perfect,  who  are  in  the  Underworld  ; and  may  I come
“forth  with  them  to  behold  thy  beauties  when  thou  shinest  at
“ eventide  and  goest  to  thy  mother  Nu.  Thou  dost  place  thyself
“ in  the  west,  and  my  two  hands  are  [raised]  in  adoration  of  thee
“when  thou  settest  as  a living  being.  Behold,  thou  art  the
“ maker  of  eternity,  and  thou  art  adored  when  thou  settest  in  the
“heavens.  I have  given  my  heart  unto  thee  without  wavering,
“ 0 thou  who  art  mightier  than  the  gods.  A hymn  of  praise  to
“ thee,  0 thou  who  risest  like  unto  gold,  and  who  dost  flood  the
“world  with  light  on  the  day  of  thy  birth.  Thy  mother  giveth
“ thee  birth,  and  thou  dost  give  light  unto  the  course  of  the  Disk.
“0  thou  great  Light,  who  shinest  in  the  heavens,  thou  dost
“ strengthen  the  generations  of  men  with  the  Nile-flood,  and  thou
“dost  cause  gladness  in  all  lands,  and  in  all  cities,  and  in  all
“temples.  Thou  art  glorious  by  reason  of  thy  splendours,  and
“thou  niakest  strong  thy  Double  with  divine  foods.  0 thou
“ mighty  one  of  victories,  thou  who  art  the  Power  of  Powers,  who
* dost  make  strong  thy  throne  against  evil  fiends ; who  art  glorious
z


HYMN  TO  RA


‘Wb

“ in  majesty  in  the  Sektet  boat,  and  who  art  exceedingly  mighty
“ in  the  Atet  boat,  make  thou  me  glorious  through  words  which
“when  spoken  must  take  effect  in  the  Underworld;  and  grant  thou
“ that  in  the  nether  world  I may  be  without  evil.  I pray  thee  to
“ put  my  faults  behind  thee  ; grant  thou  that  I may  be  one  of  thy
“ loyal  servants  who  are  with  the  shining  ones ; may  I be  joined
“unto  the  souls  which  are  in  Ta-tchesertet,  and  may  I journey
“into  the  Sekhet-Aaru  by  a prosperous  and  happy  decree.”  (From
the  Papyrus  of  Aui,  sheet  20  f.)

“ Homage  to  thee,  0 thou  glorious  being,  thou  who  art
“ dowered  with  all  attributes,  0 Tem-Heru-khuti,  when  thou  risest
“ in  the  horizon  of  heaven,  a cry  of  jov  cometh  forth  to  thee  from
“the  mouth  of  all  peoples.  0 thou  beautiful  being,  thou  dost
“ renew  thyself  in  thy  season  in  the  form  of  the  Disk  within  thy
“ mother  Hathor ; therefore  in  every  place  every  heart  swelleth
“ with  joy  at  thy  rising  for  ever.  The  regions  of  the  North  and
“ South  come  to  thee  with  homage,  and  send  forth  acclamations  at
“thy  rising  in  the  horizon  of  heaven  ; thou  illuminest  the  two
“ lands  with  rays  of  turquoise  light.  O Rii,  thou  who  art  Heru-
“khuti,  the  divine  man-child,  the  heir  of  eternity,  self-begotten
“and  self-bom,  king  of  earth,  prince  of  the  Tuat,  governor  of
“the  regions  of  Aukert ; thou  comest  forth  from  the  water,  thou
“hast  sprung  from  the  god  Nu,  who  cherisheth  thee  and  ordereth
“ thy  members.  O thou  god  of  life,  thou  lord  of  love,  all  men  live
“when  thou  shinest;  thou  art  crowned  king  of  the  gods.  The
“ goddess  Nut  doeth  homage  unto  thee,  and  Maat  embraceth  thee
“at  all  times.  Those  who  are  in  thy  following  sing  unto  thee
“ with  joy  and  bow  down  their  foreheads  to  the  earth  when  they
“ meet  thee,  thou  lord  of  heaven,  thou  lord  of  earth,  thou  king  of
“Right  and  Truth,  thou  lord  of  eternity,  thou  prince  of  ever-
“ lastingness,  thou  sovereign  of  all  the  gods,  thou  god  of  life,  thou
“ creator  of  eternity,  thou  maker  of  heaven  wherein  thou  art  firmly
“ established.

“ The  company  of  the  gods  rejoice  at  thy  rising,  the  earth  is
“glad  when  it  beholdeth  thy  rays  ; the  peoples  that  have  been
“ long  dead  come  forth  with  cries  of  joy  to  see  thy  beauties  every
“ day.  Thou  goest  forth  each  day  over  heaven  and  earth  and  art


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


33ff


“made  strong  each  day  by  thy  mother  Nut.  Thou  passest
“ through  the  heights  of  heaven,  thy  heart  swell eth  with  joy ; and
“ the  Lake  of  Testes  is  content  thereat.  The  Serpent-fiend  hath
“ fallen,  his  arms  are  hewn  off,  the  knife  hath  cut  asunder  his
“joints.  11a  liveth  by  Mafit  the  beautiful.  The  Sektet  boat
“ draweth  on  and  cometh  into  port ; the  South  and  the  North,  the
“West  and  the  East  turn  to  praise  thee,  0 thou  primeval
“ substance  of  the  earth  who  didst  come  into  being  of  thine  own
“accord.  Isis  and  Nephthys  salute  thee,  they  sing  unto  thee
“ songs  of  joy  at  thy  rising  in  the  boat,  they  protect  thee  with  their
“ hands.  The  souls  of  the  East  follow  thee,  the  souls  of  the  West
“ praise  thee.  Thou  art  the  ruler  of  all  the  gods,  and  thou  hast
“joy  of  heart  within  thy  shrine,  for  the  serpent  fiend  Nak  hath
“been  condemned  to  the  fire,  and  thy  heart  shall  be  joyful  for
“ever.”  (From  the  Papyrus  of  Nekht,  sheet  21.)

Even  more  instructive,  however,  than  these  are  the  Seventy-
five  Praises  of  Ra.  which  are  found  inscribed  on  the  walls  of  royal
tombs  of  the  XIXth  and  XXtli  Dynasties  at  Thebes.  In  these  wc
find  enumerated  a large  number  of  most  remarkable  epithets  and
attributes,  some  idea  of  the  meaning  of  which  will  be  gathered
from  the  following  rendering  : —

1 . “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,1  lord  of  the  hidden
“ circles  [of  the  Tuat],  bringer  of  forms,  thou  restest  in  secret
“ places  and  makest  thy  creations  in  the  form  of  the  god  Taint

“ C==f^  jfj,  i.e.,  the  universal  god).

2.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  thou  creative  force


3.

4.


“ <=>  |j(j  , who  spreadest.  out  thy  wings,  who  restest  in


“ the  Tuat,  who  makest  the  created  things  which  come  forth
“ from  his  divine  limbs.

“ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Ta-thenen,  begetter
“ of  his  gods.  Thou  art  he  wlio  protecteth  what  is  in  him,  and
“ thou  makest  thy  creations  as  Governer  of  thy  Circle.

“ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  looker  on  the
“ earth,  and  brightener  of  Amenti.  Thou  art  he  whose  forms


1 Literally,  “ Power."


340


PRAISES  OF  RA

are  liis  own  creations,  and  thou  makest  thy
“ creations  in  thy  Great  Disk.

5.  “ Praise  he  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekliem,  the  Word-soul,

“ that  resteth  on  his  high  place.  Thou  art  he  who  pro-
“ tecteth  thy  hidden  spirits  j),  and  they  have  form

“ in  thee.

6.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  mighty  one,  bold  oi
“ face,  the  knitter  together  of  his  body.  Thou  art  he  who
“ gatheretli  together  thy  gods  when  thou  goest  into  thy  hidden
“ Circle.

7.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem.  Thou  dost  call  to
“ thine  Eye,  and  dost  speak  to  thy  head,  and  dost  give  breath
“ to  the  souls  in  their  places,  and  they  receive  it  and  have
“ their  forms  in  him.

8.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  destroyer  of  thy
“ enemies ; thou  art  he  who  doth  decree  destruction  for  the

“dead

9.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  sender  forth
“ of  light  into  his  Circle ; thou  art  he  who  maketh  the
“ darkness  to  be  in  his  Circle  and  thou  coverest  those  who  are
“ therein.”

10.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  illuminer
“ of  bodies  in  the  horizons ; thou  art  he  who  cntereth  into
“ his  Circle.

11.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  support

“ of  the  Circles  of  Ament ; thou  art  indeed  the  body  of  Temu

“(w  t^d).


12.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  hidden  support

“ of  Anpu  ((j  D ^ ) ; thou  art  indeed  the  body  of

“ Khepera  (^  <=>  (j  jfj) .

13.  “Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  whose  duration  of
“ life  is  greater  than  that  of  her  whose  forms  are  hidden ;

“ thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Shu  (cso

14.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  guide


341


THE  PRAISES  OF?  M


“ (0  0 qfl  * selri)  of  Ra  to  his  members  ; thou  art  indeed  the
“ bodies  of  Tefnut  (x_  ^ JJj .


15.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  dost  make
“ to  be  abundant  the  things  which  are  of  Ra  in  their  seasons,

and  thou  art  indeed  Seb  Jj  .

16.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  mighty  one
“ who  doth  keep  count  of  the  things  which  are  in  him ; thou
" art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nut.

17.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  lord  who
“ advancest ; thou  art  indeed  Isis  (]j  ^ $$})  •

18.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  whose  head
“ shineth  more  than  the  things  which  are  in  front  of  him ;

“ thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nephthys  .

19.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  united  is  he  in


“ members,  One,  who  gatlicreth  together  all  seed  ; thou  art
“ indeed  the  bodies  of  Horns  •

20.  (i  Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  thou  shining  one
“ who  dost  send  forth  light  upon  the  waters  of  heaven  ; thou

art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nu  ( ) .

21.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  avenger  of  Nu

“ who  cometh  forth  from  wliat  is  in  him ; thou  art  indeed  the
“ bodies  of  the  god  Remi  {<==>  !](]  .

22.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the  two
“ Uraei  who  bear  their  two  feathers  [on  their  heads];  thou  art

u indeed  the  bodies  of  the  god  II  uaaiti  \\  £§)*

23.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  goest  in
“ and  comest  out  and  thou  coinest  out  and  goest  in  to  thy
“ hidden  Circle,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Aatu

24.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  Soul  who
“ departeth  at  his  appointed  time  ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies

“ of  Nethert  «=>  ~).

25.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 lla,  exalted  Sekhem,  who  standeth  up,


342


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


“ the  Soul  One,  who  avengeth  his  children ; thou  art  indeed
“ the  bodies  of  Netuti  ^ ^).

26.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  raisest  thy
“ head  and  thou  makest  bold  thy  brow,  thou  ram,  mightiest
“ of  created  things.

27.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  light  of  Shu  at

“the  head  of  Akert  ((j  fv^);  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies


“ of  .Ament  ((j


AAAAAA


)•


28.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  the  soul  that
“ seeth,  the  governor  of  Ament ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies

“of  the  double  Circle  J).

29.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art
“ the  Soul  that  mourneth,  and  the  god  that  crieth

“ (<=>  ^ lj(]  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

“ Aakebi  j M In  si)-

30.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  makest  thy
“ hand  to  pass  and  praisest  thine  Eye,  and  thou  art  indeed


ii m e5)*


“ the  bodies  of  the  god  of  hidden  limbs  ([j

31.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ; thou  art  the  Soul
“exalted  in  the  double  hidden  place  thou  art

\\  (Wl/


\\  £W)>


“ indeed  Khenti-Amenti  ^ ^ (J

32.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  of  manifold
“ creations  in  the  holy  house ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

“ the  god  Kheprer  ^

33.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  placest
“ thine  enemies  in  their  strong  fetters,  and  thou  art  indeed  the

“ bodies  of  Mati  £|  ^ ^ )•

34.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  givest  forth
“ light  in  the  hidden  place,  and  thou  art  the  bodies  of  the  god

. “ of  generation  (“  ^ ^ ).

35.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the
“ vivifier  of  bodies ; thou  makest  throats  to  inhale  breath,  and


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


343


“thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  god  Tebati  ^

36.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ka,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  assemblest
“ bodies  in  the  Tuat,  and  they  gain  the  form  of  life,  thou
“ destroyest  foul  humours,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

“ god  Serqi  (<>  ()()  | $ ).

37.  “Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rfi,  exalted  Sekhem,  Hidden-face

Seshem-Nethert  CkilSo)!  thou

“ art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Sliai  (|(|  23


38.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Rii,  exalted  Sekhem,  lord  of  might ;
“ thou  embracest  the  Tuat  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

“ Sekhen-Ba  || fe  ^ |).

39.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rii,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  hidest  thy
“ body  in  that  which  is  within  thee,  and  thou  art  indeed  the

“ bodies  of  Amen-kUat  (1]  = | ^ ^ £ i s3)-

40.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rii,  exalted  Sekhem,  more  strong  of
“ heart  than  those  who  are  in  his  following  ; thou  scndest  fire
“ in  the  house  of  destruction,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies


“ of  the  Fire-god  Rekhi  | (j[j

41 . “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rii,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  sendest  forth
“ destruction,  and  thou  makest  beings  to  come  into  existence
“ in  thy  creations  in  the  Tuat,  and  thou  art  the  bodies  of

“ Tuati

42.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Bua-tep  {]

“ ® ^),  governor  of  his  Eye;  then  sendest  forth  light  into
“ the  hidden  place,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  body  of  Shepi
“(*□!)!)  ^)-

43.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rii,  exalted  Sekhem,  Temt-hiitu,


“ stablisher  of  Amta  ((J  -|J-  j l,=  ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies

“ of Temt-hatu

44.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  creator  of  hidden


344


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


“ things,  generator  of  bodies ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of


the  god  Seshetai  (gag  [|(j  ^).


45.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  providest
“ those  who  are  in  the  Tuat  with  what  they  need  in  the


“ hidden  Circles,  and  thou  art  indeed  Aper-ta  ^

46.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thy  limbs  rejoice

“ when  they  see  thy  body,  0 Uash-Ba  L~^~l

“ when  thou  enterest  thy  body,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies

“ofaaid^l).

47.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  aged  one  of  the

“pupil  ^chat,  Bai  ^ ’ thou


“ makest  full  thy  splendour,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

c:m-

48.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  makest
“ straight  ways  in  the  Tuat,  and  openest  up  roads  in  the
“ hidden  place,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Maa-uat


ii


***  !


49.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem  ; thou  art  the  Soul
“ who  inovest  onwards,  and  thou  hastenest  thy  steps,  and

“ thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Akhpa  ((j  ® (j  ^fj).


50.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  sendest
“ forth  thy  stars  and  thou  illuminest  the  darkness  in  the
“ Circles  of  those  whose  forms  are  hidden,  and  thou  art  indeed

“ the  god  IJetchiu  w ^ ^).

51.  “Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  the
“ maker  of  the  Circles,  thou  makest  bodies  to  come  into  being
“ by  thine  own  creative  vigour.  Thou,  O Ra,  hast  created
“ the  things  which  exist,  and  the  things  which  do  not  exist,

“the  dead  (^j)?  and  the  gods,  and  the  spirits;  thou  art

“ indeed  the  body  that  maketh  Khati  ® ^)-t°  come

“ into  being.


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


345


52.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the
“doubly  hidden  and  secret  god  ('J^|  ® [}  (j(j  ^),  and

“ the  souls  go  where  thou  leadest  them,  and  those  who  follow
“ thee  thou  makest  to  enter  in ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

“ Ameni  (f)  = ()^).

53.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  TTben-


“ An  J \ $5?  | £?))  of  ^ment,  and  the  light  of  the


“ lock  of  hair  on  thee  . . . . ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of
“ the  god  Uben.

54.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 lia,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the
“ Aged  One  of  forms  who  dost  go  about  through  the  Tuat,  to
“ whom  the  souls  in  their  Circles  ascribe  praises ; and  thou


55.


56.


i t

cc

it

cc

it


art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Then-aru


Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; when  thou  dost
unite  thyself  to  the  Beautiful  Ament,  the  gods  of  the  Tuat
rejoice  at  the  sight  of  thee ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of


MJ)-


“ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the
“ Great  Cat,  the  avenger  of  the  gods,  and  the  judge  of  words,
“ and  the  president  of  the  sovereign  chiefs  (or,  assessors),  and
“ the  governor  of  the  holy  Circle  ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies


“ of  the  Great  Cat  tj  ^ jj).

57.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  when  thou  fillest
“ thine  eye,  and  speakest  to  the  pupil  thereof,  the  divine  dead
“ bodies  shed  tears ; thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Metu-


“khut.f  (|^|

58.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 lla,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the  Soul
“ on  high  and  thy  bodies  are  hidden ; thou  sendest  forth  the
“ light,  and  thou  lookest  upon  thy  hidden  things  (or,  places)  ;

“ thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Her-ba  ^ ^

59.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  exalted  of
“ Soul ; thou  destroyest  thine  enemies,  thou  sendest  fire  on

“ the  wicked,  and  thou  art  the  bodies  of  Qa-Ba


346


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


60.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Auaiu

“ (^)  ^ ^ S^)’  w^°  h^est  hi  purity  ; thou  hast  gained

“ the  mastery  over  the  souls  of  the  gods,  and  thou  art  indeed
“ the  bodies  of  Auai.

61.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Oldest  one
“ (*==  \ $),  Great  one,  Governor  of  the  Tuat,  Creating

“one  thou  didst  create  the  two  Setchet

“ ^ ^),  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  two

“ Setchet  «orls  (—  2^  §>$  $)■

62.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem,  Mighty  One  of
“ joumeyings  ; thou  orderest  thy  steps  by  Mailt,  thou  art  the
“ Soul  that  doetli  good  to  the  body,  thou  art  Senk-hra

«‘(=q*  i.e..  Face  of  Light),  and  thou  art  indeed  the
“ bodies  of  Senk-hra.

63.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  dost  protect
“ (or,  avenge)  thy  body,  and  thou  dost  hold  the  balance

“ [among]  the  gods  as  the  hidden  Ama  c=l  (j  ^),  [and]

“as  Am-ta  ([)  -[[-  aud  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of

“ the  double  god  Ama- Anita  £=.  ^ l|  -]]-  *=**=»

64.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the  lord
“ of  the  fetters  of  thine  enemies,  the  One,  the  Prince  of  the

“Apes  0 ^ ^1  !)’  an<^  thou  art  *n^eed  the  bodies  of


“ Antetu  (()  ^ jf|).

65.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  sendest
“ forth  flames  into  thy  furnaces  ^ (j|j  j),  and  thou
“cuttest  off  the  heads  of  those  who  are  to  be  destroyed


“ ^ jJ  -frrg  (j(J  ^ ^ j),  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies

“ of  the  two  gods  Ketuit  (v^b  ^ (|(j

66.  “Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  {the
“god  of  generation  ^ (j(j  'TO=a $fj)’  thou  destroyest  [thy]
“ offspring,  thou  art  One,  thou  stablishest  the  two  lands  by


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


347


“ [thy]  spirit  <=»  ^ ! |)»  an<^  *hou  ar*  indeed  the  bodies


“ of  the  god  Ta-Thenen  s=»  -|**|*  ^)*

67.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rfi,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  stablishest
“ the  gods  who  watch  the  hours  cn  IMS)  on  their
“standards,  and  who  are  invisible  and  secret,  and  thou  art
“ indeed  the  bodies  of  the  Watcher  gods  crszi  |J|J  ®

68.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rfi,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the

“double  Tchent  god  of  heaven,  and  the  gate  of

“the  Tuat,  and  the  god  Besi  [with]  his

“ spiritual  bodies  ( q ^ ^ J j!  j),  and  thou  art  the  bodies

“ of  Besi.

69.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the

“ Apes  ((j  0 ^ j) , and  thou  art  the  true  creative

“Power  of  [thy]  divine  attributes  (-css-  (j(j  ^ j),  and

“ thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  Ape-god  in  the  Tuat.

70.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Rfi,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  makest  new
“ the  earth,  and  thou  openest  a way  for  that  which  is  therein,
“ thou  that  art  the  Soul  which  giveth  names  unto  his  limbs,

“ and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Sma-ta  | , s

71.  “Praise  be  to  thee,  O Rfi,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  Nehi
“ (www  ^ (j|j  | who  bumest  up  thine  enemies,  the  Fire-


“god  Setcheti  ^ ^),  who  bunieth  up  fetters,  and

“ thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Nehi  ^ ][  (|[|  ^ ^).

72.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Rfi , exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the  god

“of  motion  (cjip  the  god  of  light

“who  travelleth,  thou  makest  the  darkness  to  come  into
“ being  after  thy  light,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of
“ Shemti.

73.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  0 Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the  lord
“ of  souls  who  art  in  the  house  of  thy  obelisk  (JJ  Jj  C_J),
“thou  art  the  chief  of  the  gods  who  are  supreme  in  their


348


THE  PRAISES  OF  RA


“districts  dsDj  crzi^l  !),  and  thou  art  indeed

“ the  god  Neb-baiu  | j i.e.,  Lord  of  souls).

74.  “Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem;  thou  art  the

“ double  Sphinx-god,  the  Double  obelisk-god  (j(j

“ Jj  JJ  (j(j  the  Great  God  who  lifteth  up  his

“ two  Eyes,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  the  double
“ Sphinx  god  Huiti  £§)*

75.  “ Praise  be  to  thee,  O Ra,  exalted  Sekhem ; thou  art  the  lord
“ of  light  and  declarest  the  things  which  are  hidden,  and  thou
“ art  the  Soul  that  speaketh  with  the  gods  who  are  in  their

Circles,  and  thou  art  indeed  the  bodies  of  Neb-Senku

“ ('w7  ^>0^,  i.e.,  the  Lord  of  light).” 1

An  impartial  examination  of  the  above  translation  will  show
the  reader  the  lofty  conceptions  which  were  associated  by  the
Egyptians  with  Ra  the  Sun-god,  and  there  is  not  room  for  any
reasonable  doubt  that  they  ascribed  to  the  god,  whose  symbol  was
the  sun,  all  the  attributes  which  modern  nations  are  wont  to
regard  as  the  properties  peculiar  to  God  Almighty.  He  was  One,
and  the  maker  of  “ gods  ” and  men  ; he  was  the  creator  of  heaven,
earth,  and  the  underworld  ; he  was  self-begotten,  self-created,  and
self-produced ; he  had  existed  for  ever  and  would  exist  to  all
eternity ; he  was  the  source  of  all  life  and  light ; and  he  was  the
personification  of  right  and  truth,  and  goodness,  and  the  destroyer
of  darkness,  night,  wickedness,  and  evil.  There  is  scarcely  an
attribute  of  importance  ascribed  to  our  God  for  which  there  is  no
equivalent  in  the  hymns  and  texts  which  relate  to  Ra  and  describe
his  greatness  and  power,  for  he  was  not  only  the  god  of  the  living
but  also  the  god  of  the  dead,  and  the  god  of  everything  unborn.
His  relations  with  Osiris,  who  was  part  god  and  part  man,  and  was
the  cause  and  type  of  immortality  for  man,  were  at  once  those  of  a
god,  a father,  and  an  equal,  and  when  we  consider  that  Osiris  was
a king  who  reigned  over  Egypt,  and  that  every  king  was  an

1 For  the  hieroglyphic  textH  from  the  tombs  of  Seti  I.,  Seti  II.,  and  Ramoses  IV.,
and  a French  translation,  see  Naville,  La  Utanie  du  Soldi , Leipzig,  1875.


The  Goo  TEMU.


TEM  OF  HELIOPOLIS


349


incarnation  of  Ra,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  he  came  to  have
the  power  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and  to  act  as  the  judge  of  the
dead  on  behalf  of  his  father  Ra.


Tem,  or  Tf.mu,  or  Atem,  1]^


Tem,  or  Temu,  or  Atem,  was  originally  the  local  god  of  the
city  of  Annu,  or  Heliopolis,  and  in  the  dynastic  period  at  all  events
he  was  held  to  be  one  of  the  forms  of  the  great  Sun-god  Ra,  and  to
be  the  personification  of  the  setting  sun.  In  the  predynastic
period,  however,  he  was,  as  M.  Lefebure  has  pointed  out,1  the  first
man  among  the  Egyptians  who  was  believed  to  have  become
divine,  and  who  was  at  his  death  identified  with  the  setting  sun ;
in  other  words,  Tem  was  the  first  living  man-god  known  to  the
Egyptians,  just  as  Osiris  was  the  first  dead  man-god,  and  as  such
was  always  represented  in  human  form  and  with  a human  head.
It  is  important  to  note  this  fact,  for  it  indicates  that  those  who
formulated  the  existence  of  this  god  were  on  a higher  level  of
civilization  than  those  who  depicted  tho  oldest  of  all  Egyptian
gods,  Horus,  in  the  form  of  a hawk,  or  in  that  of  a hawk-headed
human  body.  In  the  papyri  and  on  the  monuments  he  usually

wears  the  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,  upon  his  head,  and  he

holds  , the  emblem  of  life,  in  his  right  hand,  and  the  sceptre,  j ,

in  his  left.  In  the  boat  of  Ra  he  is  depicted  in  human  form  even
when  lla  is  symbolized  by  a disk  which  is  being  rolled  along  by  a
beetle,  and  the  god  Khepera  is  represented  by  a beetle,  and  the
rising  sun  Heru-Khuti  is  shown  under  the  form  of  a hawk’s  head,
from  Avhich  fall  rays  of  light.3  Tem  was,  in  fact,  to  the  Egyptians
a manifestation  of  God  in  human  form,  and  his  conception  in  their
minds  marks  the  end  of  the  period  wherein  they  assigned  animal
forms  to  their  gods,  and  the  beginning  of  that  in  which  they
evolved  the  idea  of  God,  almighty,  inscrutable,  unknowable,  the
maker  and  creator  of  the  universe.  It  is  useless  to  attempt  to
assign  a date  to  the  period  when  the  Egyptians  began  to  worship


1 Tram,  Soe.  Lihl.  Arch,,  ix.,  p.  175.


2 Lanzone,  op.  cii,  pi,  39fc>.


350


TEM  OF  HELIOPOLIS


God  in  human  form,  for  we  have  no  material  for  doing  so ; the
worship  of  Tern  must,  however,  be  of  very  great  antiquity,  and  the
fact  that  the  priests  of  Ra  in  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties  united
him  to  their  god  under  the  name  of  Eii-Tem,  © proves  that
his  worship  was  wide-spread,  and  that  the  god  was  thought  to
possess  attributes  similar  to  those  of  I 'a.

The  Pyramid  Texts  show  that  the  attributes  of  Temu  were

a#

confounded  with  those  of  Ra,  and  that  the  protection  and  favour
of  this  god  were  all  essential  for  the  well-being  of  the  deceased  in
the  Underworld ; indeed,  it  is  Tem  the  father  who  stretches  out
his  hand  to  Pepi  I.  and  sets  him  at  the  head  of  the  gods,  where  he
judges  the  great  and  the  wise.1  This  passage  shows  that  Tem  was
regarded  as  the  father  of  the  human  race,  and  as  he  was  also
divine  his  power’s  to  help  the  dead  were  very  great.  In  many
respects  he  was  held  to  be  the  equal  of  Ra,  and  the  prayers  and
hymns  which  were  addressed  to  him  frequently  show  that  the
Egyptians  were  very  anxious  to  propitiate  him.  This  is  not
difficult  to  understand  if  we  remember  the  dogmas  of  the
Heliopolitan  priesthood  about  the  means  by  which  the  souls  of  the
blessed  departed  from  this  world.  They  taught  that  souls  when
they  left  this  world  went  to  the  region  which  lay  between  the
earth  and  the  beginning  of  the  Valley  of  the  Tuat,  and  which  was
called  Amentet,  and  that  they  waited  there  until  the  Boat  of  the
Setting  Sun,  i.e.,  the  boat  of  Ra  in  his  form  of  Temu,  made  his
appearance  there  ; as  soon  as  it  arrived  the  souls  flocked  to  it,  and
those  who  had  served  Ra  upon  earth  and  whose  bodies  had  been
buried  with  the  orthodox  rites,  and  ceremonies,  and  prayers  of  the
priesthood  of  Ra,  and  were,  therefore,  provided  with  the  necessary
words  of  power,  were  admitted  to  the  boat  of  Tem,  where  they
enjoyed  the  protection  and  favour  of  the  god  in  his  various  forms
to  all  eternity.

There  was,  moreover,  another  aspect  of  Tem  which  gave  the
god  a position  of  peculiar  importance  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians,

ii’=  111  4° w


The  God  TEM  Seated  in  his  Boat.


RA-TEM  OF  HELIOPOLIS


351


i.e.,  he  was  identified  not  only  with  the  god  of  the  dead,  Osiris,  but
also  with  the  young  Horus,  the  new  and  rising  sun  of  the  morrow.
All  these  ideas  are  well  expressed  in  a hymn  to  Tem  which  is  found
in  the  Papyrus  of  Mut-hetep  (Brit.  Mus.,  Xo.  10,010,  sheet  5),  and
which  was  composed  to  enable  every  spirit  who  recited  it  to  “ come
forth  by  day  ” and  in  any  form  he  pleased  and  to  have  great  power
in  the  Tuat.  The  lady  Mut-hetep  says,  “ O Ka-Tem,  in  thy
“ splendid  progress  thou  risest,  and  thou  settest  as  a living  being
“ in  the  glories  of  the  western  horizon ; thou  settest  in  thy
“territory  which  is  in  the  Mount  of  Sunset  (Manu,  r^n).

“ Thy  uraeus  is  behind  thee,  thy  uraeus  is  behind  thee.  Homage
“ to  thee,  O thou  who  art  in  peace  ; homage  to  thee,  0 thou  who
“ art  in  peace.  Thou  art  joined  unto  the  Eye  of  Tem,  and  it
“ chooseth  its  powers  of  protection  [to  place]  behind  thy  members.
“ Thou  goest  fortli  through  heaven,  thou  travellest  over  the  earth,

“ and  thou  joumeyest  onward.  0 Luminary,  the  northern  and
“ southern  halves  of  heaven  come  to  thee,  and  they  bow  low  in
“ adoration,  and  they  do  homage  unto  thee,  day  by  day.  The
“ gods  of  Amentet  rejoice  in  thy  beauties,  and  the  unseen  places
“ sing  hymns  of  praise  unto  thee.  Those  who  dwell  in  the  Sektet
“ boat  go  round  about  thee,  and  the  Souls  of  the  East  do  homage
“ to  thee,  and  when  they  meet  thy  Majesty  they  cry : * Come,
“ come  in  peace  ! ’ There  is  a shout  of  welcome  to  thee,  0 lord
“ of  heaven  and  governor  of  Amentet ! Thou  art  acknowledged
“ by  Isis  who  sceth  her  son  in  thee,  the  lord  of  fear,  the  mighty
“ one  of  terror.  Thou  settest  as  a living  being  in  the  hidden
“ place.  Thy  father  [Ta-]tunen  raiseth  thee  up  and  he  placeth
“ both  his  hands  behind  thee ; thou  becomest  endowed  with  divine
“ attributes  in  [thy]  members  of  earth ; thou  wakest  in  peace  and
“ thou  settest  in  Manu.  Grant  thou  that  I may  become  a being
“ honoured  before  Osiris,  and  that  I may  come  to  thee,  0 Rfi-Tem !
“ I have  adored  thee,  therefore  do  thou  for  me  that  which  I wish.
u Grant  thou  that  I may  be  victorious  in  the  presence  of  the
“ company  of  the  gods.  Thou  art  beautiful,  0 Ru,  in  thy  western
“horizon  of  Amentet,  thou  lord  of  Maat,  thou  being  who  art
“ greatly  feared,  and  whose  attributes  are  majestic,  0 thou  who  art
“ greatly  beloved  by  those  who  dwell  in  the  Tuat ! Thou  shinest


352


kheperA-ra-temu


“ with  thy  beams  upon  the  beings  that  are  therein  perpetually,
“ and  tliou  sendest  forth  thy  light  upon  the  path  of  Re-stau.
“ Thou  openest  up  the  path  of  the  double  Lion-god,  thou  settest
“ the  gods  upon  [their]  thrones,  and  the  spirits  in  their  abiding-
“ places.  The  heart  of  Naarerf  (i.e.,  An-rut-f,  a region  of  the
“ Underworld)  is  glad  [when]  Ra  setteth ; the  heart  of  Naarerf  is
“ glad  when  Ra  setteth.  Hail,  0 ye  gods  of  the  land  of  Amentet
“ who  make  offerings  and  oblations  unto  Rii-Tem,  ascribe  ye  glory
“[unto  him  when]  ye  meet  him.  Grasp  ye  your  weapons  and
“ overthrow  ye  the  fiend  Seba  on  behalf  of  Ra,  and  repulse  the
“ fiend  Nebt  on  behalf  of  Osiris.  The  gods  of  the  land  of  Amentet
“ rejoice  and  lay  hold  upon  the  cords  of  the  Sektet  boat,  and  they
“ come  in  peace ; the  gods  of  the  hidden  place  who  dwell  in
“ Amentet  triumph.”  In  the  opening  words  of  another  hymn  Tern
is  addressed  as  “ Ra,  who  in  thy  setting  art  Tem-Heru-khuti
“ (Tem-Harmachis),  thou  divine  god,  thou  self-created  being,  thou
“ primeval  matter,” 1 from  which  we  see  that  the  attributes  of  self-
creation, etc.,  which,  strictly  speaking,  belonged  to  Khepera,
were  ascribed  to  Tern.

In  the  Myth  of  Ra  and  Isis  Ra  is  made  to  say,  “ I am  Khepera
“ in  the  morning,  and  Ra  at  noonday,  and  Temu  in  the  evening.” 8
From  which  we  may  understand  that  the  day  and  the  night  were
divided  into  three  parts,  each  of  which  was  presided  over  by  one
of  the  three  forms  of  Ra  hero  mentioned.  In  the  time  of  the
Middle  Empire  Tern  is  often  mentioned  with  Heru-khuti,  Ra,  and
Khepera,  and  the  priests  of  Heliopolis  always  attempted  to  prove
that  he  was  the  ancestor  of  all  the  other  forms  of  the  Sun-god.

In  the  Book  of  the  Bead  (xvii.  5 ff.)  the  deceased  is  made  to
identify  himself  with  Tern  as  the  oldest  of  the  gods,  and  he  says,

“ I am  Tern  in  rising ; I am  the  only  One  ; I came  into  being  in
“Niu.  I am  Ra  who  rose  in  the  beginning.”  The  statement  is
followed  by  the  question,  “ Who  then  is  this?”  and  the  answer  is,


1 Naville,  Tortlenbuch,  Bd.  i.,  pi.  19.


■iFk'xk


cm  i


<2  i


> nr


SHRINES  OF  TEM


353


« It  is  Ra  when  at  the  beginning  he  rose  in  the  city  of  Suten-
“ lienen,  crowned  like  a king  in  rising.  The  pillars  of  Shu  were
“ not  as  yet  created  when  he  was  upon  the  high  ground  of  him
“ that  dwelleth  in  Kheniennu  ” (i.e.,  Thoth).  Thus  it  is  clear  that
the  Heliopolitans  made  out  that  it  was  Tem  who  was  the  first
god  to  exist  in  primeval  matter,  and  they  consistently  coupled
him  with  Harmachia,  s§  004  with

Khepera,  ^ <=>  I)  jf),  as  forms  of  the  rising  sun;  on  the  other

hand,  they  often,  with  fine  inconsistency,  identified  him  with  the
setting  sun,  and  made  the  wind  of  evening,  which  gave  refreshment
to  mortals  and  breath  to  the  dead,  to  go  forth  from  him.

It  is  difficult  to  say  definitely  where  the  original  shrine  of

Tem  "was  situated,  but  it  appeal's  to  have  been  in  the  Eighth

ffY'  A

Nome  of  Lower  Egypt/  v^,  Nefer  Abt,  the  Heroopolites  of

' TH  IT-

-U  H I «»■  ■

the  Greeks),  at  the  place  which  is  called  both  Thuket,  r ^ q , and

Pa-Atemt,  L~(~J  (|  ^ ^ , and  it  is  described  as  the  “ gate  of  the
East.”  Under  the  form  “ Pithom  ” the  sacred  name  of  the  city
Pa-  Atemt  is  familiar  to  all  from  the  Bible.  The  site  of  Pa-Atemt  or
Pithom  was  long  thought  to  be  buried  beneath  the  ruins  called  by  the  ^
Arabs  Tell  al-Maskhutah,1  which  are  situated  close  to  the  modern
village  of  Tell  el-Kebir,  and  the  excavations  made  on  the  spot  by
M.  Naville  prove  that  this  view  is  correct.  The  inscriptions  prove
beyond  all  doubt  that  the  great  god  of  Pithom  was  Tem,  and  from
the  allusions  which  are  made  in  them  to  the  “ Holy  serpent  ”
therein,  and  from  the  fact  that  one  part  of  tlxe  temple  buildings  was

called  Pa-Qerhet,2  L"i_J  i ^ ’ or  ^st-qerhet,  jj  ^ ,

that  is,  “the  house  of  the  snake-god  Qorhet,”  it  is  tolerably
certain  that  one  of  the  forms  under  which  Tem  was  worshipped
was  a huge  serpent.  A town  situated  as  Pithom  was  on  the  large
canal  joining  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Nile,  and  on  the  highway  from
Arabia  to  Heliopolis  must  have  contained  a very  mixed  population,
which  would  include  a number  of  merchants  and  others  from  Western
Asia.  ’ These  probably  brought  in  with  them  a number  of  strange

1 j».

a a


3 This  is  the  Pi-lialriroth  of  the  Bible.


354


I US  A ASET  AND  NEBT-IjlETET


practices  connected  with  the  worship  of  their  own  gods,  which
having  been  adopted  by  the  indigenous  peoples  in  the  district
modified  their  worship.  From  a passage  in  the  Pyramid  Texts
already  quoted  it  seems  that  the  original  form  of  the  worship  of
Tem  was  phallic  in  character,  but  if  it  was  nothing  is  known
about  it ; some  scholars  have  regarded  obelisks  as  phallic  emblems,
and  have  pointed  to  their  earliest  forms,  in  which  their  tops  were
surmounted  by  disks,  in  proof  of  the  correctness  of  their  view.

Attached  to  the  god  Tem  were  two  female  counterparts

called  respectively  Iusaaset,  P u anc*  ^EBT'9ETEP>


and  they  formed  members  of  the  company  of  the
gods  of  Heliopolis,  being  mentioned  with  Tem,  lord  of  the  two
lands  of  Annu,  Ra,  and  Heru-khuti.1 *  Iusaaset,  the  Sawo-is  of
Plutarch,  is  called  the  “mistress  of  Annu,”  and  the  “ Eye  of  Ha,”

^3Z>\  and  she  is  regarded  as  the  mother,  and  wife,  and  daughter

of  Tem  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  texts ; 3 as  the  wife  of
Tem  she  is  said  to  be  the  mother  of  Shu  and  Tefnut.  She  is


depicted 3 in  the  form  of  a woman  who  holds  the  sceptre,  J,  in  her
right  hand,  and  “ life,”  in  her  left ; on  her  head  she  weal’s  the

vulture  head-dress  surmounted  by  a uraeus,  and  a disk  between  a
pair  of  horns.  In  this  form  she  is  called  the  “ mistress  of  Annu,”

A^-A  <>-==■  ~|g,  and  was  the  wife  of  Tem-Heru-khuti.  The
goddess  Nebt-hetep  appears  to  have  been  nothing  but  a form  of
Iusaaset,  for  in  the  scene  in  which  she  is  represented  in  the
form  of  a cow  she  is  called  “ mistress  of  the  gods,  Iusaaset-Nebt-
hetep.”

According  to  Brugsch  * Tem  was  joined  to  the  god  Osiris
under  the  phase  Tem-Asar,  and  formed  with  Hathor  of  Annu,  or

Ant,  and  i.ieru-sma-taui,  ^ the  head

of  the  triad  of  Heroopolis.  As  local  forms  of  the  god  Tem- 1 la
he  enumerates  Khnernu  in  Elephantine,  Khnemu-H eru-sliefit  in
Heracleopolis  Magna,  and  Khnemu-Ba-neb-Tettet  in  Mcndes.


1 fj 'mat  Harris  Papyrus,  sheet  i.,  line  4.

Lanzoue,  op.  cifc.,  pi.  51.


3 Brngseh,  Religion,  p.  284.
* Op.  cit.,  p.  290.


The  Qoooess  IUSASET.


KHEPERA


355


K HEP ERA

The  third  form  of  Ra,  the  Sun-god,  ivas  Khepera  kheper-
tchesef,  ^ <=>  (J  ^ ^ <=*  , i.e.,  Khepera  the  self-produced,

whose  type  and  symbol  was  a beetle ; he  is  usually  represented  in
human  form  with  a beetle  upon  the  head,  but  sometimes  a beetle
takes  the  place  of  the  human  head.  In  one  scene  figured  by
Lanzone  he  is-  represented  seated  on  the  ground,  and  from  his
knees  projects  the  head  of  the  hawk  of  Horus,  which  is  surmounted
by  ■¥•,  “ life.” 1 In  the  section  which  treats  of  the  Creation  we
have  already  translated  and  discussed  the  text  which  tells  how
the  Sun-god  Ra  came  into  being  under  the  form  of  Khepera
from  out  of  the  primeval  watery  mass  of  Nu,  and  how  by
means  of  his  soul,  which  lived  therein  with  him,  he  made  a
place  whereon  to  stand,  and  straightway  created  the  gods  Shu
and  Tefnut,  from  whom  proceeded  the  other  gods.  The  worship
of  the  beetle  was,  however,  far  older  than  that  of  Ra  in  Egypt,
and  it  is  pretty  certain  that  the  identification  of  Ra  with  the
beetle-god  is  only  another  example  of  the  means  adopted  by  the
priests,  who  grafted  new  religious  opinions  and  beliefs  upon  old
ones.  The  worship  of  the  beetle,  or  at  all  events,  the  reverence
which  was  paid  to  it,  was  spread  over  the  whole  country,  and  the
ideas  which  were  associated  with  it  maintained  their  hold  upon
the  dynastic  Egyptians,  and  some  of  them  appear  to  survive  among
the  modern  inhabitants  of  the  Nile  valley.  The  particular  beetle
which  the  Egyptians  introduced  into  their  mythology  belongs
to  the  family  called  Scarah&idae  (Coprophagi),  of  which  the
Scarahueus  surer  is  the  type.  These  insects  compose  a very
numerous  group  of  dung-feeding  Lamellicoms,  of  which,  however,
the  majority  live  in  tropical  countries;  they  are  usually  black,
but  many  are  adorned  with  bright,  metallic  colours.  They  fly
during  the  hottest  hours  of  the  day,  and  it  was  undoubtedly  this
peculiarity  which  caused  the  primitive  Egyptians  to  associate
them  with  the  sun.  Thus  as  far  back  as  the  Vlth  Dynasty  the
# dead  king  Pepi  is  said  “ to  fly  like  a bird,  and  to  alight  like  a

1 Ltvnzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  3-0.


356


kheperA


“ beetle  upon  the  empty  throne  in  the  boat  of  11a.” 1 According
to  Latreille 2 it  was  the  species  of  a fine  green  colour  ( Ateuckus
Aegyptiorum)  which  was  first  identified  with  the  sun.  The  insect
lays  a vast  numbers  of  eggs  in  a mass  of  dung,  which  it  proceeds  to
push  about  with  its  legs  until  it  gradually  assumes  the  form  of  a
ball,  and  then  rolls  it  along  to  a hole  which  it  has  previously  dug.

A ball  of  dung  containing  eggs  varies  in  size  from  one  to  two

inches  in  diameter,  and  in  rolling  it  along  the  beetle  stands  almost

upon  its  head,  with  its  head  turned  away  from  the  ball ; in  due

course  the  larvae  are  hatched  by  the  heat  of  the  sun’s  rays  beating

down  into  the  hole  wherein  it  has  been  placed  by  the  beetle,  and

they  feed  upon  the  covering  of  dung  which  protected  them.  The

mind  of  the  primitive  Egyptian  associated  the  ball  of  the  beetle

containing  potential  germs  of  life  with  the  ball  of  the  sun,  which

seemed  to  be  rolled  across  the  sky  daily,  and  which  was  the  source

of  all  life.  The  beetle  shows  great  perseverance  in  conveying  the

egg-laden  balls  of  dung  to  the  holes  in  which  the  larvae  are  to  be

hatched,  and  they  frequently  carry  them  over  rough  ground  on

the  broad,  flat  surface  of  their  heads,  and  seek,  when  unable  singly

to  complete  the  work,  the  assistance  of  their  fellows.  It  is  this

habit  of  the  beetle  which  is  represented  in  mythological  scenes

where  we  see  the  disk  or  ball  of  the  sun  on  the  head  of  the  beetle,
o

A curious  view  was  held  by  the  ancient  writers  Aelian,3

Porphyry,4  and  Horapollo 5 to  the  effect  that  beetles  were  all  males
(KdvBapos  yds  ire U apfav),  and  that  as  there  were  no  females  among
them,  the  males  were,  like  the  Sun-god  lla,  self-produced.  This
erroneous  idea  probably  sprang  up  because  the  male  and  female
scarabaeus  are  very  much  alike,  and  because  both  sexes  appear  to
divide  the  care  of  the  preservation  of  their  offspring  equally
between  them,  but  in  any  case,  it  is  a very  ancient  one,  for  in  the
Egyptian  story  of  the  Creation  the  god,  whose  type  and  symbol


^ ShiV  eee

"jf-  O (Unaa,  1.  477)


2 Cailliaud,  Voyage,  tom.  ii.,  p.  311.  3 De  Nat . Animal x.  15.

4 ])e  Abstincntia,  iv.  9.  6 Ed.  Lcemans,  p.  II.


Ck


*


THE  FATHER  OF  THE  GODS


;iov


was  a beetle,  not  only  produced  himself,  but  also  begot,  conceived,
and  brought  forth  two  deities,  one  male  (Shu),  and  the  other
female  (Tefnut).

In  the  Egyptian  texts  Khepera  is  called  the  “ father  of  the
gods,”  ^ ejCjCj,  and  in  the  Boole  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  116)  the

deceased  addresses  him,  saying,  “ Hail,  Khepera  in  thy  boat,  the
“ double  company  of  the  gods  is  thy  body,”  but  the  form  of  the
Sun-god  with  which  he  is  most  closely  allied  is  that  of  Ileru-khuti,
or  Harmachis.  In  the  Booh  of  the  Dead  Khepera  plays  a
prominent  part  in  connection  with  Osiris:  he  is  called  the
“creator  of  the  gods”  (Ani,  1,  2);  “ Ileru-khuti-Temu-H eru-
Kliepera  ” (Qenna,  2,  15),  and  whatever  forms  he  takes,  or  has
taken,  the  deceased  claims  the  right  to  take  also.  Moreover,  the
god  Khepera  becomes  in  a manner  a type  of  the  dead  body,  that  is
to  say,  he  represents  matter  containing  a living  germ  which  is
about  to  pass  from  a state  of  inertness  into  one  of  active  life.  As
he  was  a living  germ  in  the  abyss  of  Nil,  and  made  himself  to
emerge  therefrom  in  the  form  of  the  rising  sun,  so  the  germ  of  the
living  soul,  which  existed  in  the  dead  body  of  man,  and  was  to
burst  into  a new  life  in  a new  world  by  means  of  the  prayers
recited  during  the  performance  of  appropriate  ceremonies,  emerged
from  its  old  body  in  a new  form  either  in  the  realm  of  Osiris  or  in
the  boat  of  Jin.  This  doctrine  was  symbolized  by  the  germs  of
life  rolled  up  in  the  egg-ball  of  the  beetle,  and  the  power  which
made  those  to  become  living  creatures  was  that  which  made  man’s
spiritual  body  to  come  into  being,  and  was  personified  in  the  god
Khepera.  Thus  Khepera  symbolized  the  resurrection  of  the  body,
and  it  was  this  idea  which  was  at  the  root  of  the  Egyptian  custom
of  wearing  figures  of  the  beetle,  and  of  placing  them  in  the  tombs
and  on  the  bodies  of  the  dead  ; the  myriads  of  scarabs  which  have
been  found  in  all  parts  of  Egypt  testify  to  the  universality  of  this
custom.  As  to  its  great  antiquity  there  is  no  doubt  whatsoever,
for  the  scarab  was  associated  with  burial  as  far  back  as  the  period
of  the  IVth  Dynasty.  Thus  in  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  (Brit.  Mus.,
No.  10,477,  sheet  21)  we  are  told  in  the  Rubric  that  Chapter
lxiv.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  was  found  inscribed  in  letters  of


358


KHEPERA  AND  THE  HEART


real  lapis-lazuli  inlaid  in  a block  “ of  iron  of  the  south  ” under  the
feet  of  the  god  (i.e.,  Thoth),  during  the  reign  of  Men-kau-Ra
(Mycerinus),  by  the  prince  Heru-ta-ta-f  in  the  city  of  Kliemennn.

At  the  end  of  the  second  paragraph  this  Chapter  is  ordered  to
be  recited  by  a man  “ who  is  ceremonially  clean  and  pure,  who
“ hath  not  eaten  the  flesh  of  animals  or  fish,  and  who  hath  not  had
“ intercourse  with  women.”  The  text  continues,  “ And  behold,
“ thou  shalt  make  a scarab  of  green  stone,  with  a rim  of  gold,  and
“ this  shall  be  placed  in  the  heart  of  a man,  and  it  shall  perform
“ for  him  the  ‘ Opening  of  the  Mouth.’  And  thou  shalt  anoint  it
“ with  anti  unguent,  and  thou  shalt  recite  over  it  the  following
“words  of  power.”  The  “words  of  power”  which  follow  this
direction  form  Chapter  xxx  a.  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead , wherein
the  deceased  addresses  the  scarab  as  “ my  heart,  my  mother ; my
“ heart,  my  mother  ! My  heart  whereby  I came  into  being.”  He
then  prays  that  it  will  not  depart  from  him  when  he  stands  in  the
presence  of  the  “ guardian  ” of  the  Balance  wherein  his  heart  is  to
be  weighed,  and  that  none  may  come  forward  in  the  judgment  to
oppose  him,  or  to  give  false  or  unfavourable  evidence  against  him,
or  to  “ make  his  name  to  stink.”  Curiously  enough  he  calls  the
scarab  “ his  double  ” (ka).  Another  Rubric  makes  the  lxivth
Chapter  as  old  as  the  time  of  Hesepti  (Semti),  the  fifth  king  of  the
1st  Dynasty,  and  the  custom  of  burying  green  basalt  scarabs  inside
or  on  the  breasts  of  the  dead  may  well  be  as  old  as  his  reign.  Be
this  as  it  may,  scarabs  were  worn  by  the  living  as  protective
amulets,  and  as  symbols  of  triumphant  acquittal  in  the  Judgment
Hall  of  Osiris,  and  as  emblems  of  the  resurrection  which  was  to  be
effected  by  the  power  of  the  god  Khepera  whom  they  represented,
and  the  words  of  power  of  Chapter  xxx  b made  them  to  act  the
part  of  the  ka  or  double  for  the  dead  on  the  day  of  the  “ weighing
of  words  ” before  Osiris,  and  his  officers,  and  his  sovereign  chiefs,
and  Thoth  the  scribe  of  the  gods,  and  the  two  companies  of  the
gods.  If  scarabs  were  placed  under  the  coffin  no  fiend  could  harm
it,  and  their  presence  in  a tomb  gave  to  it  the  protection  of  the
“ father  of  the  gods.”


( 359  )


CHAPTER  X

THE  MYTHS  OF  HA

IN  the  preceding  pages  it  has  been  shown  how  among  theologians
and  thoughtful  Egyptians  Ra  was  regarded  as  God,  but
among  certain  classes,  that  is  to  say  magicians,  and  astrologers,
and  soothsayers,  quite  other  views  were  hold  about  his  nature  and
attributes.  It  will  be  remembered  that  among  such  men  in  ancient
times  it  was  customary  to  prescribe  as  antidotes  to  poison  and
sicknesses  the  recital  or  wearing  of  certain  magical  texts ; the
power  of  such  texts  was  thought  to  bo  very  great,  especially  if  it
contained  a narrative  of  how  some  god  or  divine  being  had  been
delivered  by  the  power  of  a great  being  from  death  by  poison  or
by  a sickness  caused  by  poison.  We  may  note  in  passing  that
such  beliefs  were  not  confined  to  the  Egyptians,  and  that  we  find
exactly  the  same  ideas  existent  in  Babylonia  and  Assyria ; this  is
illustrated  by  the  following  interesting  extract  from  a Babylonian
tablet  recently  published  by  Mr.  R.  Campbell  Thompson.1  The
text  reads: — “From  Anu  [came  the  heavens],  the  heavens  created
“ [the  earth],  the  earth  created  the  rivers,  the  rivers  created  the
“ canals,  the  canals  created  the  marshes,  and  the  marshes  created
“ the  Worm.  Then  came  the  Worm  before  Shamash,  the  Sun-god,

“ weeping,  and  before  Ea  came  up  her  tearful  plaint,  [saying],

“ ‘ What  wilt  thou  give  me  to  eat ? What  wilt  thou  give  me  to
“gnaw?’  [The  gods  said],  ‘I  will  give  thee  dry  bones  [to  eat],
“‘and  the  pungent  hlwskkhar  wood.’  [The  Worm  said],  * What
“ ‘ are  thy  dry  bones  to  me  ? Or,  what  is  thy  khashkhav  wood  to
“ ‘ me  ? Let  me  drink  among  the  teeth  [of  men],  and  give  me
“ ‘ my  place  in  [their]  gums,  that  I may  suck  the  blood  of  the  teeth,

1 Cuneiform  Texts  from  Babylonian  Tablets,  part  xvii.,  pi.  50 ; and  see  R.  0.  v-V.
rhompson,  The  Devils  and  Evil  Spirits  of  Babylonia,  vol.  i.,  Introduction,  at  the  end.  ; ' j


360


RA  AND  ISIS


“ ‘ and  that  I may  tear  asunder  the  flesh  of  the  gums.  In  this  wise
“ ‘ I shall  have  power  over  the  bolt  of  the  door  ’ (i.e.,  the  mouth  of  a
“ man).  Therefore,  O sick  man,  shalt  thou  say  the  following  words,
“ ‘ O Worm,  may  Ea  smite  thee  with  all  his  might.’  ” Following
these  words  come  the  rubrical  directions  which  order  the  patient  to
mix  together  a prescription  compounded  of  beer,  oil,  and  the  juice
of  a certain  plant,  and  when  the  incantation  has  been  recited  over
the  man  with  the  toothache  three  times,  the  mixture  is  to  be  rubbed
on  the  tooth.  In  the  one  case  the  object  of  the  narrative  was  to  cure
the  man  who  had  been  bitten  by  a venomous  serpent,  and  in  the
other  to  ease  the  pain  in  the  teeth  and  the  inflammation  of  the
gums  which  were  supposed  to  be  caused  by  a worm,  a descendant
of  the  original  Worm  which  claimed  before  Ea  the  right  to  make
teeth  decay  and  to  suck  the  blood  of  the  gums.

The  Egyptian  texts  which  were  written  for  magical  purposes
have  preserved  for  us  some  very  curious  and  interesting  myths  of  Ea,
and  among  these  may  be  quoted  the  following  stoiy  about  him  and
the  goddess  Isis.1  The  title  reads : — “ The  Chapter  of  the  divine
“ god,  the  self-created  being,  who  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
“ and  the  winds  which  give  life,  and  the  fire,  and  the  gods,  and  men,
“ and  beasts,  and  cattle,  and  reptiles,  and  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the
“ fish  of  the  sea ; he  is  the  king  of  men  and  of  gods,  he  hath  but
“ one  period  to  his  life,  and  with  him  a double  hen  period  (i.e.,  one
“ hundred  and  twenty  years)  is  as  a single  year ; his  names  are
“ manifold  and  unknown,  the  gods  even  know  them  not.”  The
story  runs : — “Now  Isis  was  a woman  who  possessed  words  of
“ power ; her  heart  was  wearied  with  the  millions  of  men,  there-
“ fore  she  chose  the  millions  of  the  gods,  but  she  esteemed  more
“highly  the  millions  of  the  spirits.  And  she  meditated  in  her
“ heart,  saying,  * Cannot  I by  means  of  the  sacred  name  of  God
“ * make  myself  mistress  of  the  earth  and  become  a goddess  of  like
“ * rank  and  power  to  Ea  in  heaven  and  upon  earth  ? ’ And

1 The  hieratic  text  will  be  found  in  Pleyte  and  Bossi,  Le  Papyrus  de  Turin,
1809- 1876;  pll.  31*37,  and  131-138;  and  a transcript  into  hieroglyphics  with  a
transliteration  and  translation  in  my  First  Steps  in  Egyptian , 1893,  pp.  241-256.
A French  translation  by  Lefcbure  was  published  in  Ary.  Zeit 1883,  pp.  27  B. ; and
for  English  renderings  see  iny  Papyrus  of  Ani , 1895,  p.  Ixxxix.,  -and  Egyptian
Magic,  p.  137.


RA  IS  POISONED


361


“ behold,  each  day  Ra  entered  at  the  head  of  his  holy  mariners
“ and  established  himself  upon  the  throne  of  the  two  horizons ;

“ but  the  divine  one  (i.e.,  Ra)  had  grown  old,  he  dribbled  at  the
“ mouth,  his  spittle  fell  upon  the  earth,  and  his  slobbering  dropped
“ upon  the  ground.  And  Isis  kneaded  [some]  thereof  with  earth
“ in  her  hand,  and  formed  therewith  a sacred  serpent  in  the  form
“ of  a dart ; she  did  not  set  it  upright  before  her  face,  but  let  it
“ lie  upon  the  ground  in  the  path  whereby  the  great  god  went
“ forth,  according  to  his  heart’s  desire,  into  his  double  kingdom.

“ Now  the  holy  god  arose,  and  the  gods  who  followed  him  as
“ though  he  were  Pharaoh  went  with  him ; and  he  came  forth
“ according  to  his  daily  wont ; and  the  sacred  serpent  bit  him.

“ The  flame  of  his  life  departed  from  him ; and  he  who  dwelt
“ among  the  cedars  was  overcome.  The  holy  god  opened  his
“ mouth,  and  the  cry  of  his  majesty  reached  unto  heaven ; his
“company  of  the  gods  said,  ‘What  hath  happened?'  and  his
“ gods  exclaimed,  “ What  is  it  ? ’ But  Ra  could  not  answer,  for
“ his  jaws  trembled  and  all  his  members  quaked,  the  poison  spread
“ swiftly  through  his  flesh  just  as  Nile  rusheth  through  all  his
“ land.  When  the  great  god  had  stablished  his  heart,  he  cried

“unto  those  who  were  in  his  train,  saying,  ‘ Come  unto  me,  0 ye

“ ‘ who  have  come  into  being  from  my  body,  ye  gods  who  have
“ ‘ come  forth  from  me,  make  ye  known  unto  Khepera  that  a dire
“ ‘ calamity  hath  fallen  upon  me.  My  heart  perceiveth  it,  but  my
“ * eyes  see  it  not ; my  hand  hath  not  caused  it,  nor  do  I know

“ ‘ who  hath  done  this  unto  me.  Never  have  I felt  such  pain,

“ * neither  can  sickness  cause  more  woe  than  tnis.  I am  a prince,
“ * the  son  of  a prince,  the  sacred  essence  which  hath  proceeded
“ * from  God.  I am  the  great  one,  the  son  of  the  great  one,  and
“ * my  father  planned  my  name ; I have  multitudes  of  names,  and
“ ‘ multitudes  of  forms,  and  my  being  is  in  every  god.  I have
“ ‘ been  proclaimed  by  the  heralds  Temu  and  Homs:  and  my  father
“ ‘ and  my  mother  uttered  my  name ; but  it  hath  been  hidden
“ ‘ within  me  by  him  that  begat  me,  who  ■would  not  that  the  words
“ ‘ of  power  of  any  seer  should  have  dominion  over  me.  I came
“ * forth  to  look  upon  that  which  I had  made,  I was  passing  through
i(  ‘ the  world  which  I had  created,  when  lo ! something  stung  me,


362


THE  HOLY  NAME  OF  RA


“ ‘ but  what  I know  not.  Is  it  fire  ? Is  it  water  ? My  heart  is
“ ‘ on  fire,  my  flesh  quaketh,  and  trembling  hath  seized  all  my
“ * limbs.  Let  there  be  brought  unto  me  my  children,  the  gods
u * who  possess  the  words  of  power  and  magical  speech,  and  mouths
“ ‘ which  know  how  to  utter  them,  and  also  powers  which  reach
“ ‘ even  unto  the  heaven.’

“ Then  the  children  of  every  god  came  unto  him  uttering
**  cries  of  grief.  And  Isis  also  came,  bringing  with  her  her  words  of
“ magical  power,  and  her  mouth  was  full  of  the  breath  of  life  ; for
“ her  talismans  vanquish  the  pains  of  sickness,  and  her  words  make
**  to  live  again  the  throats  of  those  who  are  dead.  And  she  spake,
“ saying,  * What  hath  come  to  pass,  0 holy  Father  ? What  hath
“ * happened  ? Is  it  that  a serpent  hath  bitten  thee,  and  that  a
**  * thing  which  thou  hast  created  hath  lifted  up  his  head  against
“ ‘ thee  ? Verily  it  shall  be  cast  down  by  my  effective  words  of
**  ‘ power,  and  I will  drive  it  away  from  before  the  sight  of  thy
“ * sunbeams.’  The  holy  god  opened  his  mouth  and  said,  * I was
“ * passing  along  my  path,  and  I was  going  through  the  two
“ ‘ regions  of  my  lands  according  to  my  heart’s  desire,  to  see  that
**  ‘ which  I had  created,  when  lo ! I was  bitten  by  a serpent  which
“ * I saw  not.  Is  it  fire  ? Is  it  water  ? I am  colder  than  water,
“ * I am  hotter  than  fire.  All  my  flesh  sweateth,  I quake,  mine
“ * eye  hath  no  strength,  I cannot  sec  the  sky,  and  the  sweat
“ ‘ rusheth  to  my  face  even  as  in  the  time  of  summer.’  Then  said
“ Isis  unto  Ra,  * O tell  me  thy  name,  holy  Father,  for  whosoever
“ * shall  be  delivered  by  thy  name  shall  live.’  And  Ra  said,  ‘ I
“ * have  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  I have  knit  together
“ * the  mountains,  I have  created  all  that  is  above  them,  I have
“ ‘ made  the  water,  I have  made  to  come  into  being  the  goddess
“ * Meht-urt,  and  I have  made  the  Bull  of  his  mother,  from  whom
“ ‘ spring  the  delights  of  love,  I have  made  the  heavens,  I have
“ ‘ stretched  out  the  two  horizons  like  a curtain,  and  I have  placed
” * the  souls  of  the  gods  within  them.  I am  he  who,  if  he  openeth
“ ‘ his  eyes,  doth  make  the  light,  and,  if  he  closeth  them,  darkness
“ * cometh  into  being.  At  his  command  the  Nile  riseth,  and  the
“ * gods  know  not  his  name.  I have  made  the  hours,  I have
“ * created  the  days,  I bring  forward  the  festivals  of  the  year,  I


ISIS  THE  ENCHANTRESS


363


*«  * create  the  Nile-flood.  I make  the  fire  of  life,  and  I provide
“ ‘ food  in  the  houses.  I am  Khepera  in  the  morning,  I am  Ra  at
“ ‘ noon,  and  I am  Temu  at  even.’  Meanwhile  the  poison  was  not
“taken  away  from  his  body,  but  it  penetrated  deeper,  and  the
“ great  god  could  no  longer  walk.

“ Then  said  Isis  unto  Ra,  * What  thou  hast  said  is  not  thv
“ * name.  0 tell  it  unto  me,  and  the  poison  shall  depart ; for
“ * he  shall  live  whose  name  shall  be  revealed.’  Now  the  poison
“ burned  like  fire,  and  it  was  fiercer  than  the  flame  and  the
“ furnace,  and  the  majesty  of  the  great  god  said,  * I consent  that
“ * Isis  shall  search  into  me,  and  that  my  name  shall  pass  from  me
“ ‘ into  her.’  Then  the  god  hid  himself  from  the  gods,  and  his
“ place  in  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years  was  empty.  And  when
“ the  time  had  arrived  for  the  heart  of  Ra  to  come  forth,  Isis  spake
“ unto  her  son  Ilorus,  saying,  ‘ The  god  hath  bound  himself  by
“ * oath  to  deliver  up  his  two  Eyes  (i.e.,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon).’
“ Thus  was  the  name  of  the  great  god  taken  from  him,  and  Isis,
“ the  lady  of  words  of  magical  power,  said,  ‘ Depart,  thou  poison,
“ * go  forth  from  Ra.  O Eye  of  Horus,  go  forth  from  the  god,  and
“ * shine  outside  his  mouth.  It  is  I who  work,  it  is  I who  make  to
“ ‘ fall  down  upon  the  earth  the  vanquished  poison,  for  the  name
“ ‘ of  the  great  god  hath  been  taken  away  from  him.  Let  Ra  live,
“ * and  let  the  poison  die  ! Let  the  poison  die,  and  let  Ra  live ! ’
“ These  are  the  words  of  Isis,  the  mighty  lady,  the  mistress  of  the
“ gods,  who  knew  Ra  by  his  own  name.”  The  above  text  was  to
be  recited  over  figures  of  Temu,  “ the  Bull  of  his  mother,”  and
Horus,  and  Isis  and  Horus,  and  there  is  little  doubt  that  these
figures  were  made  to  represent  the  various  scenes  which  took
place  when  Ra  was  poisoned,  and  when  the  goddess  Isis  succeeded
in  taking  from  him  his  name.

Another  myth  of  Ra  of  considerable  interest  is  that  which
describes  the  destruction  of  mankind,  and  tells  how  men  scorned
the  great  Sun-god  because  he  had  become  old ; 1 the  text  of  this,

1 For  tho  hieroglyphic  text  see  Lefebure,  Tomhoan  de  Seti  I.,  part  iv.,  pH.  15-
,18;  Brngsch,  Die  nene  Weltordnung,  Berlin,  1881;  Naville  in  Tram.  Soe.  Bibl.
Arch.,  iv.,  pp.  1 ff. ; viii.,  pp.  412  ff. ; Bergmann,  Hist.  Inschri/t.,  pll.  75-82:  and
my  First  Steps  in  Egyptian,  pp.  218-230.


364


REVOLT  OF  MEN  AGAINST


in  a mutilated  condition,  is  found  inscribed  upon  the  walls  of  the
tombs  of  Seti  I.  and  Rameses  IV.  at  Thebes,  and  from  it  the
following  is  clear.  “ [Ra  is]  the  god  who  created  himself  after  he
“ had  risen  in  sovereignty  over  men,  and  gods,  as  well  as  over
“ things,  the  One.  And  mankind  was  uttering  words  of  complaint,
“ saying,  ‘ Behold  now,  his  Majesty,  life,  strength,  and  health  [to
“ * him] ! hath  become  old,  his  bones  are  like  silver,  his  limbs  are
“ ‘ like  gold,  and  his  hair  is  like  unto  real  lapis-lazuli.’  Now  his
“ majesty  heard  the  words  which  mankind  spake  [concerning
“ him],  and  he  said  unto  those  who  were  following  him,  ‘ Cry  out,
“ * and  bring  ye  unto  me  mine  Eye,  and  Shu,  and  Tefnut,  and
“ ‘ Seb,  and  Nut,  and  the  fathers  and  the  mothers  who  were  with
“ ‘ me  when  I was  in  Nu,  together  with  my  god  Nu.  Let  him
“ * bring  his  ministers  with  him,  and  let  them  be  brought  silently,
“ * so  that  mankind  may  not  perceive  it  and  take  to  flight  with
“ 1 their  hearts.  Come  thou  with  them  to  the  Great  House,  and
“ * let  them  declare  their 'plans,  for  I*  will  go  forth  from  Nu  unto
“ f the  place  wherein  I performed  creations,  and  let  those  [gods]  be
“ ‘ brought  unto  me  there.’  Now  the  gods  were  on  both  sides  of
“ Ra,  and  they  bowed  down  even  to  the  ground  in  presence  of  his
“ Majesty,  and  he  spake  his  words  in  the  presence  of  the  father  of
“ the  firstborn  gods,  the  maker  of  men,  and  the  king  of  those  who
" have  knowledge.  And  they  spake  before  his  Majesty,  [saying],
“ * Speak  unto  us,  for  we  are  listening  ’ ; and  Ra  spake  unto  Nu,
“ saying,  * O thou  firstborn,  god,  from  whom  I came  into  being,  0
“ ‘ 7°  gods  [my]  ancestors,  behold  ye  what  mankind  is  doing,  they
“ * who  were  created  by  mine  Eye  are  uttering  murmurs  against
“ * me.  Give  me  your  attention,  and  seek  ye  out  a plan  for  me,
“ * and  I will  not  slay  them  until  ye  shall  say  [what  I am  to  do]
“ ‘ concerning  it.’

“Then  the  Majesty  of  the  god  Nu,  the  son  of  Ra,  spake
“ [saying],  ‘ Thou  art  the  god  who  art  greater  than  he  that  made
“ * thee,  and  who  art  the  sovereign  of  those  who  were  created  by
“ ‘ him,  thy  throne  is  set,  and  the  fear  of  thee  is  great ; let
“ ‘ then  thine  Eye  be  upon  those  who  have  uttered  blasphemies
“‘against  thee.’  And  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake  [saying],'
“ ‘ Behold  ye  how  they  have  taken  flight  into  the  mountain !


365


THE  SUN-GOD  RA

“ ‘ Their  hearts  are  afraid  because  of  what*  they  have  said.’
“ ‘ Then  the  gods  spake  before  his  Majesty,  saying,  * Make
“ 1 thine  Eye  to  go  forth,  and  let  it  destroy  for  thee  those  who
“ ‘ utter  evil  words  of  blasphemy  against  thee.  There  is  not  an
“ ‘ eye  upon  all  this  earth  which  can  resist  thine  when  it
“ ‘ descendeth  in  the  form  of  Hathor.’  And  the  goddess  [Hathor]
“ went  forth  and  slew  the  people  on  the  mountain,  and  the  Majesty
“ of  this  god  spake,  [saying],  * Come,  come  in  peace,  Hathor,  the
“ ‘ work  is  accomplished.’  And  the  goddess  said,  ‘ Thou  livest  for
“ ‘ me.  When  I had  gained  the  mastery  over  men  it  was  well
“ ‘ pleasing  to  my  heart.’  And  the  Majesty  of  Rii,  spake,  [saying],
“ ‘ I will  gain  the  mastery  over  them  as  king,  and  [I]  will  destroy
“ ‘ them  ’ ; and  it  came  to  pass  that  Sekhet  waded  about  in  the
“ night  season  in  their  blood,  beginning  at  Suten-henen  (Herakleo-
“ polis  Magna).  Then  the  Majesty  of  Ra  spake,  [saying],  ‘Cry  out
“ ‘ and  fetch  me  swift  and  speedy  messengers  who  can  run  like  the
“ ‘ wind  ’ ; and  straightway  one  brought  these  messengers.  And
“ the  Majesty  of  this  god  spake,  [saying],  ‘ Let  them  go  to  Abu
“ ‘ (Elephantine),  and  bring  me  mandrakes  in  great  number  ’ ; and
" one  brought  to  him  these  mandrakes,  and  the  Majesty  of  this  god
“ gave  them  to  Sekliet  who  [dwelletli]  in  Annu  (Heliopolis)  to
“ crush.  And  behold,  when  the  women  were  crushing  the  barley
“ to  [make]  beer,  he  placed  these  mandrakes  in  the  vessels  which
“ were  to  hold  the  beer,  and  some  of  the  blood  of  the  men  [who
“ had  been  slain].  Now  they  made  seven  thousand  vessels  of
“ beer.

“ Now  when  the  king  of  the  Soutli  and  North,  Ra,  had  come
“ with  the  gods  to  look  at  the  beer,  and  the  daylight  appeared
“ after  the  goddess  had  slaughtered  mankind  in  their  season  as  she
“ sailed  up  the  river,  the  Majesty  of  Ra  said,  * It  is  doubly  good,
“ 1 but  I must  protect  mankind  against  her.’  And  Ila  spake,
“ [saying],  * Let  them  take  up  the  vases  and  carry  them  to  the
“ ‘ place  where  men  and  women  are  being  slaughtered.’  Then  the
“ Majesty  of  the  king  of  the  South  and  North,  Rii,  commanded
“ them  to  pour  out  from  the  vessels  during  the  [time  of  the]
• “ beauty  of  the  night  the  beer  which  made  [men]  wish  to  lie  down,
“ and  the  regions  of  the  four  heavens  were  filled  therewith  even


366


REVOLT  OF  MEN  AGAINST


“ according  to  the  Will  of  the  Majesty  of  this  god.  Now  when  the
“ goddess  Sekhet  came  in  the  morning  and  found  the  regions  flooded,
“ her  face  beamed  with  joy,  and  she  drank  of  the  beer  and  blood,
“ and  her  heart  was  glad,  and  she  became  drunk,  and  she  took  no
“ further  heed  of  mankind.  And  the  Majesty  of  Ra,  spake  unto
44  this  goddess,  [saying]  ‘ Come,  come  in  peace,  0 fair  and  gracious
“‘goddess;’  [and  henceforth]  there  were  young  and  beautiful
“ women  in  the  city  of  Amen.1  Then  the  Majesty  of  Rii  said  unto
“ this  goddess,  * There  shall  be  prepared  for  thee  vases  of  drink
“ * which  shall  make  thee  wish  to  sleep  at  every  festival  of  the  New
“ * Year,  and  the  number  thereof  shall  be  in  proportion  to  the
“ * number  of  my  handmaidens ; ’ and  from  that  day  until  this
“ present  men  have  been  wont  to  make  on  the  occasions  of  the
“ festival  of  Hathor  vases  of  beer  which  will  make  them  sleep,  in
number  according  to  the  number  of  the  handmaidens  of  Rii.
“ And  the  Majesty  of  Rii  spake  unto  this  goddess,  [saying],
“ 4 Behold,  the  pain  of  the  burning  heat  of  sickness  hath  come
“ 4 upon  me ; whence  cometh  [this]  pain  ? ’ Then  the  Majesty  of
44  Ra  said,  4 1 am  alone,  but  my  heart  hath  become  exceedingly
44  4 weary  of  being  with  them  (i.e.,  with  men)  ; I have  slain  [some
44  4 of]  them,  but  there  is  a remnant  of  worthless  ones,  and  the
44  4 destruction  which  I wrought  among  them  was  not  commensurate
44  4 with  my  power.’  And  the  gods  who  were  in  his  train  said
44  [unto  him],  4 Tarry  not  in  thy  weariness,  for  thy  might  is  in
44  4 proportion  to  thine  own  will.’  Then  the  Majesty  of  this  god
44  said  unto  the  Majesty  of  Nu,  4 For  the  first  time  my  limbs  have
44  4 lost  their  power,  and  I will  never  permit  this  thing  to  happen
44  4 a second  time.’  ”

At  this  point  the  inscription  becomes  much  broken,  and  it  is
difficult  to  make  out  the  general  meaning  which  is  to  be  attached


Here  there  is  a pun  on  the  appellation  of  the  goddess  Arnit  1 1


and  on  the  name  of  the  city  Amen,  © , i.e.,  the  capita)  of  the  nome.

Ament,  ■where  the  goddess  Hathor  was  worshipped.  The  city  is  also  called

n i iAA  a . . . „

gj,  and  the  “city  of  Apis.


THE  SUN-GOD  HA


367


to  the  scattered  words ; according  to  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch,1  the
myth  ends  somewhat  as  follows: — When  Ra  had  described  his
weariness  to  Nu,  this  god  commanded  Shu  to  perform  the  work  of
Ra  and  to  take  the  place  of  his  Eye,  and  directed  the  sky  goddess
Nut  to  help  Ra.  Nut  asked  Nu  how  this  was  to  be  done,  and  he
told  her  to  take  Ra  upon  her  back ; thereupon  Nut  took  the  form
of  a cow,  and  Rii  seated  himself  upon  her  back.  In  due  course
mankind  saw  Ra  on  the  back  of  Nut,  and  they  were  filled  with
remorse  at  their  former  behaviour  towards  him,  and  they  Avished  to
see  slain  his  enemies  who  had  blasphemed  him,  but  his  Majesty  did
not  tarry,  and  he  went  on  into  the  temple.  On  the  following  day
as  soon  as  the  morning  had  come,  men  Avent  forth  armed  Avitli
boAvs  and  spears  in  order  to  do  battle  Avith  the  enemies  of  Rii,  and
as  soon  as  the  god  suav  this  he  said  to  them,  “Your  sins  are
“ forgiven  you,  for  the  sacrificial  slaughters  Avhich  ye  have  made
“ have  done  aAvay  Avith  the  murders  [which  mine  enemies  have
“ committed].”  Then  Ra  raised  himself  from  the  back  of  the
goddess  Nut  into  the  sky,  Avhere  he  made  for  himself  a kingdom
in  Avhich  all  people  Avere  to  be  assembled.  Finally  he  ordered  a

Field  to  come  into  being,  D DUD  , hetejt  sekhet,  and  straight-

Avay  the  Field  of  Hetep  (“  Peace  ”),  \\  j)  j|  ( Sek/t et-hete p,2 came
into  being,  and  the  Majesty  of  the  god  said,  “I  Avill  plant


dardt-dy  literally,  I Avill  make  to  groAv)


“ green  herbs  therein,”  and  straightAvay  there  came  into  being
Sekhet-aaru,3 4  (j  ^ <=>  ^ YJ ®, , “and  I will  plenish

“ it  with  objects  Avhich  sparkle,1  that  is  to  say  AArith  stars.”
Thereupon  the  goddess  Nut  quaked  in  all  her  members,  and  Ra
declared  that  he  would  make  supports  to  come  into  existence
to  strengthen  her,  and  straightway  supports  appeared.  Ra  next


1 Die  Neue  Weltordnuiuj  nach  Vernichtumj  des  suadiyen  Menscliengeschlcchle
von  H.  Brngscli,  Berlin,  1881,  p.  23.

2 Note  the  jingle  in  the  words  sekhet  anil  hetejK

8 Note  the  play  ou  the  verbal  dara(-u  and  the  noun  dam.

4 Note  the  jingle  in  ® i| ! hhet , 11  objects,”  and  (I  © (j  © ^ I 4*  things  which
sparkle.”  ^ U ' ‘


The  Cow-froililusA  Nut.


THE  COW-GODDESS  NUT  369

ordered  his  son  Shu  to  place  himself  beneath  the  goddess  Nut,
who  was  trembling,  in  such  a way  as  to  support  her  body,  and  he
ordered  him  to  take  heed  to  the  supports,  or  pillars,  whereon
the  goddess  rested,  and  to  protect  them,  and  to  keep  Nut  stayed
upon  his  head.

Near  this  place  in  the  text  we  have  a representation  of  the
great  cow-goddess  Nut,  i.e.,  the  heavens  and  the  sky  (see  opposite).
Along  the  belly  of  the  cow,  which  is  emblematic  of  the  sky,  and  is
supported  by  the  god  Shu,  are  thirteen  stars,  and  immediately  below
are  the  two  boats  of  the  Sun-god.  In  the  Matet  boat  stands  a figure
of  Ra  as  god  of  the  day,  with  a disk  upon  his  head,  and  in  the  Sektet
boat  we  see  the  god  seated  in  a shrine ; the  former  boat  is  between
the  fore-legs  of  the  cow  of  Nut,  and  the  latter  by  her  udders.
Each  leg  of  the  cow  is  supported  by  two  gods,  one  in  front  and
one  behind,  and  each  god  who  is  with  the  cow  has  a special  name,
which  is  duly  set  forth  in  the  text  which  runs  in  vertical  columns
on  each  side  of  the  scene.1

When  the  narrative  recommences  (line  56)  wc  are  told  that
the  Majesty  of  the  god  lla  commanded  Thoth  to  give  the  order

that  the  god  Seb,  or  Sab,  Jj  ^ (whom  Brugsch  calls  “ Iveb  ”),

should  come  into  his  presence  forthwith,  and  when  he  had  done  so,
and  Seb  had  appeared  before  him,  Ra  told  him  that  strife  had
arisen  by  reason  of  the  worms  (or  snakes),  m,  which

were  in  his  (i.e.,  Seb’s)  territory,  and,  he  added,  “ May  they  fear
me  as  long  as  I am  alive.”  Ra  also  told  him  to  find  out  what  their
plans  were,  and  then  to  go  to  the  place  wherein  was  his  father  Nu,
and  to  warn  him  to  be  careful  about  what  was  on  the  earth  and  in
the  water.  The  text  which  immediately  follows  is  full  of  difficulty,
but  its  general  meaning  seems  to  be  that  Ra  expects  Seb  to  keep
watch  on  the  serpents  in  the  earth,  and  that  although  he  is  about
to  betake  himself  to  the  uppermost  regions  of  heaven  his  light  will
find  them  in  their  holes,  and  will  watch  them.  Moreover,  Ra
promises  that  he  will  give  the  men  who  have  knowledge  of  words

of  power,  , dominion  over  them,  and  that  he

1 See  Lefcbure,  Tombcau  r/c  Set!  I.,  part  iv„  pi.  16,  11.  47  ff.

b b


370


THO¥ip|^AR  OF  RA

will  furnish  them  with  spells  and  charms  which  shall  draw  them
from  their  holes.  After  these  things  the  Majesty  of  the  god
Itii  ordered  that  Thoth  should  come  into  his  presence  speedily,
and  when  he  had  arrived  he  said  to  him,  “ Come,  let  us  depart
“ from  heaven,  and  from  my  place,  because  I am  about  to  create

“ a thing  of  light  °)  of  the  god  of  light  ^ ^

“ in  the  Tuat  (^_^)  and  in  the  Land  of  Babat  ^ @)  •

“ And  there  thou  shalt  write  down  for  punishment  among  the
“ dwellei*s  therein  those  who  have  committed  deeds  of  rebellion,

“ and  those  whom  my  heart  hateth.  And  thou  shalt  be  in  my

“place  dst),  and  thou  shalt  be  called  Asti  ( j ^),

“ that  is  to  say,  the  deputy  of  Ha.  And  it  shall  be  permitted  to
“ thee  to  send  for  thy  messenger  (ro  JJ  J\  hub),  and  at

“ these  words  the  ibis  ((”□  Jj  \\  hnbi),  which  is  the  envoy

“ of  Thoth,  came  into  being.”  Ha  next  tells  Thoth  that  he  will
give  him  the  power  to  lift  up  his  hand  before  the  great  companies

of  the  gods,  ^ ^ ^ j ! , and  makes  a play  on  the

words  kheu  ® Jj,  and  Tehh-ni  Q ° \\  3 , a bird  sacred  to  Thoth;
he  also  promises  to  make  Thoth  to  embrace  [j  <01  ^ < — a dnh,

the  two  heavens  with  his  beauties,  and  straightway  the  Moon,

(j o came  into  being.  Thoth  is  to  drive  back,  ZyJ  an,

the  Ha-nebu,  'j  e/vo,  and  straightway  the  Ape,  ^

dndn,  of  the  god  came  into  being;  and  finally  Thoth  is  to  be
wholly  the  representative  of  lla  upon  earth.

From  the  observations  which  follow  the  words  of  Ra  we
can  see  how  holy  these  words  were  considered  to  be.  Any  one
who  wished  to  repeat  them  must  anoint  his  face  with  oil,  and  rub
his  hands  and  the  places  behind  his  ears  with  incense,  and  cleanse
his  mouth  with  natron,  and  wash  his  new  apparel  in  Nile  water,
and  put  on  Avhite  sandals,  and  lay  a figure  of  Maat  upon  his
tongue ; and  he  must  cleanse  himself  with  a sevenfold  cleansing ,
each  day  for  three  whole  days.  Finally,  the  king  (Seti  I.)  for


THE  KIN#fSOlTE  371

whom  these  texts  were  written  declares  that  his  soul  is  the  soul  of
Shu,  and  [Khnemu],  and  Nelieh,  and  Kek,

-■'*  . and  Kerh,  ^ ^ T"  and  Nu,  and  Ida,  and  Astu*-Ba-

Tettet,  and  the  souls  of  the  Sebak  gods,  p J (j  ^ , and  of

the  Crocodiles,  and  the  soul  of  every  god  in  the  form  of  a serpent,
^ ^jUL  and  the  soul  of  Apep,  and  of  Hu  in  all  the  earth.


( 372  )


CHAPTER  XI

THE  LEGEND  OF  ltA  AND  ISIS

HIEROGLYPHIC  TEXT  WITH  TRANSLITERATION  AND

TRANSLATION


T - II  1^1

Re  en  neter  neterti  kheperu  tchesaf  an

Chapter  of  the  gocl  divine  (?)  self-produced,  the  maker


t==q

pet


I 3S

ta


iTi  a


man


1111:

neteru

of  gods,


rcth  out

of  men,  of  beasts,


AA/VW  A/VWA

men  m en

of  cattle,


en.

dnlch

lihet

of

life,

of  fire.

<=*  i i i

\effet


of  reptiles  and
creeping  things,


1 “ li

*==»  ^ i

111:  k

apt

remit

siiten

rcth

neteru  em

of  the  fowl

[and]  of  fishes,

the  king

of  men

[and]  of  gods,  in

of  the  air,

liken'


4.r iT-


v.a


ir*m

henti


er


<==>

1 l i

O 111

renput

dsht

rewtt

form  one,  [to  whom]  periods  [are]  as  years,  of  many  names,
of  120  years


RA  AND  ISIS


™ Ti

an  relch

not  known


pefi

is  that  [god],


_ru.

an

not


©I  111^!

rehli.  pejl  neleru

known  is  that  [god  to]  the  gods.


'll1®  j:Bi

dstti  Ast
Behold,  Isis

"V,

i

tchetu

words  (i.e.,  matters).


em  set


was  in  the  a woman
form  of

lchak-dh-s
Her  heart  rebelled


bkkf  “““

SCbth  Gib

[who  was]  skilled  in


er  helm  em
at  the  millions  of


ir-i  kinii  nzzh

reth  setep  ores  helm  em  neteru  apt-set

men,  she  chose  rather  the  millions  of  the  gods,  and  she  esteemed


f'i  k

hehu  em
• •

the  millions  of


Ichu

the  spirits
[of  more  value].


an  Ichem  set
“Could  she  not  be


em  pet

in  heaven


"=m=»

I SS

ta

[and]  earth


HQ  e>|  JLJL

md  Ra  dri  Jeert

like  Ra  [and]  make  herself  mistress


=FK=“

I SS

ta

of  the  earth


netert

and  a goddess,”


b

ka-set

she  meditated


k

?b

em

db-set

in

her  heart,

er  relch
“ by  knoAving


II  $M)I

ren  neter  shepsi

the  name  of  the  god  holy  ? ”


0 a


374


RA  AND  ISIS


A — °i  i


O


e ^ A '-'EU  i JS^oi'liiLliL  J

dstu  dq  en  ltd  hnt  neb  ern  hot  qet  - [/]

Behold,  came  in  Ra  every  day  in  front  of  [his]  sailors,


Of

a men-thd

and  was  stablished

dnut

Had  become  old


9

i

her

upon


S


cm


* w

nest

the  throne


cO)  cm
o \\  cm


of  the  two  horizons.


1


\\


AMAAA

0 <5


netri

the  divine  one,


ennn  - nef  re  - f

he  dribbled  at  his  mouth,


T


/wwv\
J A/WWA
>VWWs


sat  - f
he  poured  out


p.


vebdut  - /
his  exudations

© 9


er

upon


I xt
to


the  ground.


t"  I — s l

pekas  en  su  selcher  her  sat  sck-nes  Asl

and  his  spittle  fell  upon  the  earth.  Isis  she  kneaded  [it]


-23s*


• _ /wvw\  . .

I (Www  I I »


h M


P


k~P-  11

em  tet-set  hend  ta  unenet  her-sel  qet-nes-set

in  her  hand  with  earth  which  was  on  it,  she  fashioned  it


k ii'rf1  j&'P«2J


*CSO-  wvw,  1 1 Gk


P'


em  tchetfeti

in  the  form  of  a serpent


9 si  ari  en  set  em

sacred,  [and]  she  made  [it]  in


Sj


Vllfl  HUI

qua  heti

the  form  of  a dart.


_A_


an

Not


k®“™ke(l7i

nemunemud-s
did  it  move  along


RA

ANI)  ISIS

375

1 ^ A P °

fkk®

ankh-thd

er  kheft-set

khadse.t.

ham -u

her

alive

before  her,

[and]  she  left  [it]

lying

on

o o

^ 1

^1,8  ~?P

0

—

L=

y?

I

uat

dpep  neter  da

hers

er  dha

- /

the  path  whereon  journeyed  the  groat  god  according  to  his  desire


em  kliet
through


taui  - f
his  two  lands.


1

1 sSsf}'-

0

-s>

Q

B

Q

■neter  shepsi

khu  - f

er  /m

neteru

The  god  holy

rose  up,

behind

the  gods

nn^

f i

P k

©ja

cm

Aa-perti

dakh  n tch  a.

se?dy  em

kliet-  f

in  the  great  double  house,  life,  strength,  health!  [were]  followinghim,


P^PTi^'-  k

aeffseft  - f met  hru  neb  uakhuset  em

[and]  he  marched  on  as  [he  did]  every  day  [when]  bit  [him]


«=•(  W

tchetfe  ti
the  serpent


£'iuj  :ii  ^

shepsi  kliet  unkind  per-thd

sacred ; the  fire  of  life  was  coming  out


Ik"-  s=l  §=

dm  - f tchesef  fer-nes

from  him  himself,  it  destroyed


ik"

/wwvs

cgS  \5c
<®  1 1

dmi

na

dshu

the  dweller

in  the

cedars.

376


RA  AND  ISIS


y 1

r j r n

L/VWWV  J

at — at

1


tuter

netri

M ■

f re  - /

Merit  en

The  god

divine

he  opened  his  mouth,

the  voice  of

¥ 1 I1

AVAAA

©

cx

hen  -/

a.  u . s.

peh-nef

er  pet

Pant

his  Majesty

L.  S.  H. ! reached

unto  heaven.

The  company

a

n

Q

IS&

(2

9

i

Try:-

neteru

tuf

her

md  pu-n

neteru  - f

of  the  gods  was  for  [saying],  “ What  is  it  ? ” His  gods  [were]


9

i


□ <=>


%

her  petrd-n

for  [saying]  “ What  is  the  matter  ? ”


an

Not


qem  - /
found  he


unfit]

mettu

words


er

to


® r-

rm  J1  x ;
nshcbt


answer


9^

i

her  -/
about  it.


drti-fi

His  two  jaws


| © © e»  J\

■? !

^ \ i

■ [

«T  /WWW

^ (5  1

her  khetkhet

dt  - f neb

%r

dstiti

metii

rattled,

his  limbs  all

trembled,

the  poison

CX  Gk  AArfVWV

o

tmrJ . „

.<=>o  0^ qtt

t o Urr  v

thetet-nef

evn  dufi

md  thetet

Hup

took  possession

of  his  body

as

taketh  possession

the  Nile

T

Z Q!Z

em  khel  - f

neter

da  emen-nef

db-f

of  his  river  bed.  The  god  great  stablished  his  heart,


RA  AND  ISIS


377


rani-  -

ike  S3-

Cj  /WWW

MAMA  \A

III  Hi

\xids]  - f er

diniu  lchet  - f

max-ten  nd

he  [cried]  out  to

those  in  his  train

“ Come  to  me,

s r?*.

^ h

rt!  $

D

Q

D

12*

khepert

em

hf/t-d

neteru

0 ye  who  have  come

into  being  from  my

members,

[ye]  gods

CTZ3  e

<7k>  m

k$

iL_D  <=>l
o © 1

1 ^

1 /WWW

Jill

pern

em-d

tat  rekh-ten

who  have  proceeded

from  me,  and  I will  make  you  to  know

BMP-

R , /www

a —

kheperd-set

temu-eutn

lchet

meru

what  hath  happened : I am  wounded  by  something  deadly,


© U
rekh-set

knowcth  it


U

db-d

my  heart.


->  1
O O T


0


•pJU.

WWW

an  maa  su

Not  have  seen  it


rnaa-d
my  eyes,


an

not


-cs>-


dri  set  tet-d  du


rekh-set  em  dri-nd  nebt

made  it  my  hand,  not  know  [I]  it  who  hath  done  [this]  to  me

anyone,


/VWSAiA

Cl

/WWW

O-

iU.

/WWW

f-k.T,

dn

teptu-d

ment

mdtet-set

an

meru

not

have  I tasted

pain

like  it,  never  was  deadly  [any  thing]

T l

IM

v .

, M

•

dnuk

ser

m

ser

more  than  it.

I am

a prince,

the  son

of  a prince,

378


RA  AND  ISIS


¥1  8T  k II

mu  khepern  em  neter

the  divine  issue  produced  by  a god.


<)SI  SI

(in  uk  ur

I am  a great  one,


%‘S  SI  J — flJLl  Hill

sa  nr  mav.t  en  dtcf-d  ren-d

the  son  of  a great  one,  thought  out  my  father  my  name.


<1SI

dunk

I am


i i i

dshu
of  many


rennu

names,


^ III

ash U

of  many


SHI  I ^

khepern  du

forms  (or,  existences)  is


eyn  % kii  - mi;

kheperd-d  unu  em  neter  neb  nds-d-tn

my  form  (or  existence)  living  in  god  every.  I have  proclaimed


Tent  u Hern  helennu

• •

Temu  and  Heru  Hekennu.

^)of9

mut-d  ren-d

and  my  mother  my  name,

— SMi

ine.s-d  en  meri

my  begetter  who  wished

hekau-d

him  who  would  enchant  me


<1.111
dtcf-d
my  father


Olb  k TH

draenset  em  khat-d  er
hidden  was  it  in  my  body  by


tern  ertat  kheperu  pehti

not  to  let  have  power


en  hekai  er-d

by  enchantments  over  me.


du  tchet
Have  uttered


RA  AND  ISIS


379


CTZ)

I

pern-lr  er  ha

T.  had  come  forth  from  the  abode


Jr


-cs>-


o o

er  mo  a dri-nd

to  see  what  I had  made


f)  <2.  ~e~

I oa  A
sit  let


on


=FF=  S

taut


/.


e


qemamu-na

[and]  was  being  led  through  the  lands  [which]  I had  created.


Q


Ml®


f\  ^ f \ ^ ©

on  tehetem  l'ker-d  an  relch-d  sn

when  [something]  aimed  a blow  at  me  [and]  I know  not  what  it  is.


_n_


.flflPS


□


.V/AV.

/WWW

/WW\A  /WWW  I I CSi


dw  /i7/r/  d.s  pit  an  mu  as  pu

Behold  it  is  not  fire,  behold  it  is  not  water.


db-d  khen
My  lieart  contains


CM

\khc(\u

fire,


Irtii  qpntfi  rlM

hat-d  dstiti  dt-\d~\

my  limbs  [are]  trembling,  [my]  members


l:hen

contain


WAW  AVWS'


ftl  P \ i 5 J P xx  flQ  2t3  III  1 JJ  <a  (2

wic*«  /testis  dmmd  dntu-nd

the  children  of  quakings.  I pray  you  let  be  brought  to  me

™i

mesu-d  neteru  Ichui

my  children,  the  gods  mighty


i


- i i

metet

of  words,


© WH

rekhi

skilful

, prr,  p^s^p™  -f  prr.

resen  sart-sen  pehsen  her

with  their  mouths,  their  powers,  they  reach  to  heaven.


380


RA  AND  ISIS


e

iP\i  11

- qk

ffi  \\

iu-eref

mesa  neter

neb  dm

kheri

Came  to  him  [his]  children,  god

every  there

with

q-KZ

-A  A — jj“j^

ffl  "

<=»  tr=5f=J

%>:p-

dkebu-ncf

in  en  Ast

kheri

khut-set

his  cries  of  weeping.

Came  Isis

with

her  power

k ^in  ™"

Q tXM  >2  n

T © r

d*’/.  re-get

em  nifn  en

dnkh

thes-set

and  her  skilled  mouth.

with  the  breath  of

life,  her  incantations

<v>  C=a  r“uui

■*  ■»  AAAAAA

I V-

her  ter  merit  meftu-set


— 1 I ° <&  n ,

l < a o ill  4J-  <®  SiM


n T l-M

smile  h Jca


heti


destroy  diseases,  her  word  maketh  to  live  stinking  throats

(i.e.,  throats  of  the  dead).


Zuh  4*SS  HZd  II

tchet-set  md  pu-u  dtef  neter  petrd  tclietji

She  said,  What  is  this,  0 father  god  ? What  is  it  ? A snake


ten


/WW\A

o e


i

i


^|l  ^=76

mennu  dm-k  ud  mes-k  fa

hath  shot  sickness  into  thee.  A thing  made  by  thee  hath  lifted  up


©;

I


tep  -/  trek  ka

its  head  against  thee.  Verily


P<£>2|U

sekher-set  em

it  shall  be  overthrovm  by


£=1  C

WAVi  |

menkhiu


hekaiu

words  of  power  beneficent,  I will  make  it  to  depart  from


$ O©  O

kheikhet  - /


er


RA  AND  ISIS


381


>0  uss-  yzz  r-

maa  sati-lc  neter  tcheseri  dpu-nef  re  - /
the  sight  of  thy  rays.  The  god  holy  opened  his  mouth:


1

<=>  1

1 QO  J

k

dv.uk

pa  shemi

her

nat

H U tut

em

I

was  passing

over

the  way

going

through

tJkd — ?$"=•  sK

taui  set-d  aha  en  dh-d  e,r  maa

the  two  lands  of  my  country,  wished  my  heart  to  see


ti


©l&Sx  Vs

(WVW\  ✓


qemamu-n  d khuncn-iid

what  I had  created  [when]  I was  bitten


tchetfi
a snake


,>  (U

/W'./WV  O O I

d/t  v/n/ti  .sv<
invisible.


d»  khet  as  pu
Behold  it  is  not  tire,


mwvw


/\VW\\

/WV\AA

A/\AAA\


IP


□


d/1  »i«  ds  /)?/

behold  it  is  not  water.


‘ <=>

,WAA

AVvWV

www\

Tl

? <=*

qehehh-kud

or

mu

shemem-kud

er

I am  colder

than

water,

I am  hotter

than

lit  Id

^3?

ffl  w

<0  c=*i=s

^ ^ ill

«d

«es/ie<  /tdf-d

•

neb

er  A7/m

fetet

iud

fire,  my  limbs

all

are  full  of

sweat,

I

.JU.

AVWW

Of

^'«kii

Id

dstiti  ' maat-d

an

smen

d/i  qemhu-

'ti

tremble,  my  eye  is  without  stability,  I cannot  see


382


RA  AND  ISIS


Ji  n

/WWW.
/WVW\  Sy

/vww>  v

i

V So

pet

fill

ww

7ter

hr  d-d

e?«  shemn

s heavens,

bursteth  out

water

on

my  face

[as]  in  summer.

1

\ /WWW

jj“S\  —

i)i

Q A/WW\

tcA/d  da

Ad  en

AV

d

t chef -rui

ren-lc

Said

Isis  to

lift,

0

tell  me

thy  name,

iwia

11

p WWW

T ©

1 $

is  ?

dtef

neter

diilih

na

t.enui-tu  her

father

god ;

livetli

the  person

who  hath  declared

re n - / (in u.k

his  name.  [Said  R;i]  I am


-<S>-

dW  /><d

the  maker  of  heaven


I w
la

[and  | earth,


c__ -o


then


E3
(2(2  III
tun


the  knitter  together  of  the  mountains,


ye  nt  am  n
the  creator


i!


i ^

i - w

11  p v ,

ll  I .‘./v/w  I I '

Hit  lift

of  what  exists


9

A#

-<2>-

W/M

WWW

<£}  °

<::=>

WWW

/or  - /

■unit

ari

mu,

left  e part  n

upon  it.

1 am

the  maker

of  the  water

making  to  exist

0«0<  Q Wvw.

A 0 www
A /www

«<so-

u

r=o

wwva  \\  — _

Jkfchj

■ ^ fj|  e

Meftt-ur

dri

hi

CH  lUUt  - f

hlie.  peril

Meht-ur,  acting  [as]  bull  of  his  mother,  the  creator

An#*'iV*  /■/V/l/V‘.  p.  I>

IA  Aift

c=*  £}  =*L>

GO  ^ 1 1 1

netehem  netekaniu

nnlc

dri

pet,

senheta

of  the  joys  of  love.  I am  the  maker  of  heaven  and  have  covered  over


RA  AND  ISIS


383


<=>  w crzi
khuti


"&  h-i  ?™i  k^P*

tti-d  ha  nn  neteru  cm-khennuset

the  two  horizons,  I have  set  the  soul  of  the  gods  within  them


I ara

(D

/WvWV  V-


mamr  -<s>-

/WWVA  ^ ■ ■■■ ^ -<2>*

un  maati-f

he  who  openetli  his  eyes,


e

khepern

becometh


1^*1
hetchetchtu
the  light ;


-<32>-


XX  Bf  ©

(ilthmnn  maati-f  kheperu  lcekni
shutteth  [he]  his  eyes,  becometh  the  dark.


A/AW
AAA/SAA  ^

/www  v


/m  mn
Risetli  the  flood


□


a/vw/xa

/WWXA  ^
/VWvNX  V

r-=r


A


Hop

lilt  eft

utu-uef

du

of  I.lfvp  (Nile)

when

he  giveth  the  command,

not

© i — mil  —

1'-

i -C2>-

* !
?T8o  li

relch  eu  netcru

ran

- f link

dri

nnnti

know  the  gods

his  name.  I am

the  maker

of  hours,

i V

0 @

'iC£7  J
e o i

IT

kheperu  hru

nnlc

dpu

hcbti

rev  pit

the  creator  of  days,

I am

the  opener  of  the  festivals  of  the  year,

i

i i

i

ftQ  (D  IW WV

II  /WWW

Lj  avm  v

1 <3>

-cs>.

tjemamu

atm

nuk

dri

the  creator

of  streams  of  water.

I am

the  maker

t


/ww vs
o ©


e


HI

o i y


I /WWW


I I
I

CTZ3  I


ti  ankhet  er  sekhepem  kat  en  umu

of  flame  of  life  making  to  be  performed  xvorks  in  the  houses.


384


RA  AND  ISIS


ewi  k °i  k

»«&  Kheperd  cm  fuaun  lid  em  dhdu-f

I am  Ivhepera  in  the  morning,  Ra  in  his  noontide,


<2*


» e i i


ik^'kS

Temu  ami  mdshem

Temu  in  the  evening.


r=a  mvm

f /WWA

^ 1 AA/WVN


4-

kite  iief

[But]  not  was  driven


/wvw\

du


k^klh  ^ tk!

me/  ewt  shemi-set  an  netchem  neter  da

the  poison  out  of  its  course,  not  was  relieved  the  great  god.


^ ,JL  jjoSi  ™~

tchet  an  Ast  m
Said  Isis  to


/WV-W  (VWWV


*


ltd  an  ren-k  d/m

Ra : — Thv  name  is  not  enumerated


em


na


/WW\

r*"3*  $

tchdu-k-nd


it

tchvt-fc


a


K

set


na


among  the  things  which  thou  hast  0 tell  thou  it  to  me,
said  to  me ;


<=*  Jf  1

Q AWWW

f ® ni

peri

ta

metu

dnkh  so.

and  shall  come  out

the

poison.

Shall  live  a person

itk^h

iemu-tu

ren  - f

metu

tchetemu-set

having  uttered

his  name.

The  poison

it  burned

k itk®a  ?k*

* — U"1  A/WWS

0

**«  Jjj  (j  <5  Q /wWv'

em  tchetemu

sekhemu-nes  er

nebau  en

■with  burnings,

it  was  stronger  than

the  flame  of

RA  AND  ISIS


385


Q.

**  ||  WAMA

art

tchet  dn

fire.

Said

l'i  —

hev.  en

the  majesty  of


ltd  tdl-rui
US,  I give  myself


hehni  ntd  Ast  per  em  ren-d  em

to  be  searched  out  by  Isis,  shall  come  forth  my  name  from


lchat-d  er
my  body  into


khat-s

her  body.


I*  l^M


amen,  en  m netri  em
Hid  himself  the  divine  one  from


llls^i  ®P§!  jXkik^-  T\

netern  nsekh  ast  em  nan  en  heh  renput

the  gods,  empty  was  the  place  in  the  Boat  of  millionsof  years.

x n

dr  kheperu  md
When  it  became  about

? il kl

dh  tehet-s  en  sa  Hera  He  aha  cut  su

• • I

the  heart  she  said  to  [her]  son  Horus: — Let  him  bind  himself  by

an  oath

kfTS

em  ankh
sworn  by  the  life

u z ja  x ux

neter  ant  uthes  - nef  her  ren  - f Ast  urt-hekauti

•The  god  great  was  removed  from  his  name,  Isis,  great  in  words

of  power  [said]: —


i « <=>  i ^

1 5LI  ^ i £Lf  -cs=-  \\

neter  erf  at  neter  maati-f

of  the  god  that  the  god  will  give  his  two  eyes.


□ ©
sep

the  time  of


Q J)  Q

pert  eut

the  coming  forth  of


386


RA  AND  ISIS


f-TT'J  jt*$>  I

□ a/  !


shept

Run  out,


(*=0)  fk  /WWA  i cm

v\  ir  AAAAM  | <^>

^ jr  i A/wwN  i ^


k °l


-<s>-
o I


niftftt  per  m AVi  waa£  IJeru

poison,  come  forth  from  Ra,  Eye  ofHorus,


& k II  ~ TT

peri  an  neter  nubdu  en  re  - f

come  forth  from  the  god,  and  shine  without  his  mouth.


link  dri-d  nuk
I,  I have  worked,  I


rakl-Ml  ? ~

hau  er  mddi  her  ta
make  to  fall  down  upon  the  ground


^ @ i A/WVSA  I V .■■—*)

er  metn  sekliemu
the  poison  which  is  defeated,


s3.  —

nuiki  nthes  en  neter
verily  was  removed  from  the  god


da  ren  - /

great  his  name.


?l

ltd

Ra


f=a  —

r*  A/VWA

^ 1 jVWVA


dnkh  - f met

may  he  live,  the  poison


mil

may  it  die


Cr-xmca

S)

the.s  rcr

and  conversely.


“a  kh

men  mes

A certain  one,  the  son


i


en  ment

of  a certain  woman,


- f metu  mit  tchet  en  Ast  ur

may  he  live,  the  poison  may  it  die.  [Thus]  said  Isis,  great  lady,


I2i  niii  ti  3i  k ri-  =>

hent  neteru  rekh  Ra  em  ren  - / tchesef,

mistress  of  the  gods,  who  knew  Ra  by  his  name  his  own.


RA  AND  ISIS


387


T

sli  ~~

a t\  <?  8

; Mfiii

tell  el  her

tut  an

Taum  hand

ll.erti-hi'fomvn

• m

Tobesaid  over

an  image  of

Temu  and

ilcru-hekcnnu.

□ Wo  I

1 ill

erpil

Ast

tut

lieu

anil  [over]  a figure  of  Isis,  and  an  image  of  liorus.


( 388  )


CHAPTER  XII

THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND

EGYPTIAN  TEXT  WITH  TRANSLITERATION  AND  TRANSLATION

1,9  =

neter  /che.per  te/ictu./  nn-khet.  nn-nef  cm

god,  who  created  himself.  After  he  was  in


1


111


cru  -T

I I I


fmtcnU

the  sovereignty


reih
of  men,


ndc.ru
and  of  gods,


em  khd
and  of  creation,


S \\


Uuti

the  One,


—


I <©>
I *

I I


mi  an  rdh  her  hat
men  and  women  were  blaspheming


i a HKI

metal

and  saying,


ri'i  t i

I1

dstu

are/  hen  ankh  utrha

senb

(iuuu

Behold,

his  majesty,  life,  strength,  health,

has  grown  old,

11

T

fS3^

O r,  o

avm a III  1

hem-  J'

em  he/ch  hdu  - f

em

nub

sheni  - /

his  bones

are  like  silver,  his  limbs

like

gold,

his  hair

1*^

© n<=5'

■■■-«■ — 0 O 0

±W  hi'-

TvU

em

khesbet

madt

un  an  hen-f

her  setein
•

is  like

lapis-lazuli

real ;

was  his  majesty

listening  to

DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


389


ii-  f i p

metet  an  rdh  tchut  an  hen-f  tlnkh  vkha  sent)
what  said  mankind.  Said  his  majesty,  life,  strength,  health,


AA/Wt*

-A

v JJ.

ipI

/ /wvw

— i.  fi

ur

enti

e.mkheJti-f

lids

md-iui,

to

those

who  were  in  his  train.

Call,

bring  me

nr  niaul-d


my  Eye,


-m  £,1  zi  iz

ec  Slut.  Trfnvt  Sch  Nut  heed.
and  Shu,  Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  and


ate  fiu  mut

the  father  and  mother
gods


my  « -

linen  in  hend-d,  dstu-d  cm

who  lived  with  me  when  behold  I was  in


OOO  j- — fl\

Nu  licud,  khvr
Xu,  together  with


W

ueter-d
my  god


000


ww\a

^AVAA


A


Nil,  dii-n  cf

Nu.  Let  him  bring


die n tlii-  - f
his  ministers


he nd  - J
with  him.


dn-nck  set  em  ketket  dm  iihm

Bring  thou  them  in  silence,  that  not  may  see


ruth

mankind,


dm

not


nav


v ww.\

I I I I

db-sen


may  flee  their  hearts.


i-k

Come  thou


l


WMA

fl


A*VW\A

I I I


• hend-sen
with  them


*=>  §=>  23 rr.  P^iirr

er  het-dat  fehet-seu  . sek hern-sen

into  the  great  temple,  let  them  declare  their  counsel


300  DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND

aM  «=  z=i

lu-d  cm  Nn  er  bu

I will  enter  into  Nu  to  the  place


<&<=>

$5

ilk

A a 4a

wzmn

Ichc per-

mi  dm

dn-nd  dn-tu

mm  netern

vn  dn

wherein  I was  born,  let  be  brought  to

me  those  gods.

Were

^ A/WSM

T *[  AAWv\

111  1Z

9

1 1 w

t fB1®  rz

-t!

men

net  cm  dpen

/«?r  kesni-f

her  tehcn  to

• «

cm-hah

those

gods  on  both

sides  of  him,

bowing  to  the  earth

before

hf-u  - f lrhet-f

metet  - /

em-tmh  dtef

his  majesty.  He  spake

his  words

before  the  father

PkPMId!

•<2

-dll  1ZJ

c*jy  //niy.

a ’(Diitsitf

of  the  firstborn  gods,

(.(>  1 l

the  maker

1 (.  f-lP  *»  »€•■«*  /<■

of  men,  the  king

4-  M-

rckhlt

tchel  dn  xen

Ml/t  /«?7t  - /

of  rational  beings.

They  said

before  his  majesty,

i ^ iD ! — . . .

^ JL  ©“i  ^

tne/u-en-n

er  xetem-cn-i

let  tc.hvt  dn  lid

Speak  to  us,  for  we  are  listening

to  them.  Said  Ra

oco,a,w*  ® ea  fij

— Itfl

cuMi  e-nk-

rii  Nu  netcr

xemm

kheper-nd  dm  - /

to  Nu,  0 god

firstborn,

from  whom  I came  into
being,

DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


391


neteru  tep-du  vui-ten  reth  khepern

and  ye  ancestor  gods,  take  ye  heed  to  mankind  who  came  into  being


o 1 1

mu  maat-d
from  my  eye,


n AAA/W.

ka-en-seu
they  speak


$


llf'


ineiet  m-d  tchet-nd
words  against  me.  Tell  me


-0Z>-  Ci
O /wvwv

I I II  1 I

aril-ten

[what]  ye  would  do


er-s

about  it,


Ok

/wvaaa

I I I


/ na-ten-nd


take  ye  heed  to  it  for  me,


111$

hehi-d

seek  out  a plan  for  me.


an  sma-ud  set  er  sdemn-d
Not  will  I slay  them  until  I hear


M rh  •=>  —

fell ef-t lid  fen  er-s

what  ye  say  concerning  it.


'I  i !


feliet  an  hen.  on
• »

Said  the  majesty  of


000  ,-w"-
/WNAAA


^ >1  /V///A


$


iVn


Nu,


sa

the  son


o -

Q

Bd

neter

(lit

er

dri  sit

of  lla : —

God

greater

than

he  who  made  him,

nr

mightier


er  qema\_m~\-iu-su  hems

than  those  who  were  created  with  him,  sit  on


ast-lc

thy  throne,


ur  senl-k

great  is  the  fear  of  thee,


*=*

an  uiant-k  er
let  thine  Eye  be  upon


392


DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


noiu  lim-k

those  who  blaspheme  thee.

Pm

vul-ten  set  udr

Behold  ye  them  fleeing


^ qy !'

0 ^

tehet  an  hen

• m

en  lid

Said  the  majesty

of  Ra: —

(W)

o j n —

t i 1 * 1 1

vr  sid

(ibseh

into  the  mountain,  their  hearts


P^M  T ZaS-P.T;  ^YP.T

seiitu  her  tehet  en  Ken  tehet  dnsm

are  afraid  because  of  what  they  have  said.  They  said

4-  M-

kheft  hen  - / (a  ahem  vnwt-k  havs-nek

before  his  majesty: — Let  go  forth  thine  Eye,  let  it  destroy  for  thee


n°

i in

■flkii

set

min

those

who  blaspheme

k

^JU.

/vww

1

em

tu

an

maat

with

wickedness,

not

an  eye

(flh  <=>  w ^ S\  ~*~

khenti  arn-8
can  precede  it


er

in


i\i^m

ft  it  i § • § » mfi*

resistance  . . . ,


Ph^P

set  has
[when]  it  goeth  down


em  Het-Hert

in  the  form  of  Ilathor.


a\  fl

-JLL  AAVvVS

iu  an
Went  forth


<=>

1 <^>  HI

Ok

/WVWk

eref

ne.tert

ten

then

goddess

this,

smam-nes

she  slew


reth  her  set  tehet  an

m •


mankind  on  the  mountain.  Said


DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


■m


i


i


□

/VWWA

hen  eu  neter  pen
the  majesty  of  this  god :


A,


idi-ni  mi,  hetep  Het-Uert
Come,  come  in  peace,  Hathor,


AWW  -<2>-  %%%

1T3

r\  AA/WVA  AMVA

nr  _ V

AwyM  1 © J-1;!

'dr  it  eu  dr  it

ft'het  an

net  n't  ten  dnkh-k  ltd.

for  the  deed  is  done.

Said

this  goddess  : — Thou  gavest  me  life.

IMS!

lft=i  T

nu  sekhem-nd

(Mil

re  th

«/«  nctchem  her

when  I had  power

over  mankind

it  was  pleasing  to

f1

O ^

j (IM^S

dh-d  Ic.h  et  tin

hen

eu  lid

dii-d  tr  srhhein

my  lieart.  Said  the

majesty

of  liii:

— I will  be  master

rr,  = 1™I

rm  -s<

hi  em  snfeu

eni,

sdntu-set

khvfw

over  them  as  king

destroying  them.  It  came  to  pass  that

O

AWM

-=*

t

tiekhet.

pu  shehebet

nit.

kerh  (

• m

y r tltrl  hrr

Sekhet

of  the  offerings

of

the  night  waded  about  in

T <=*  A /vvvvv'

1 2JJ  -wvw\

T AWAA  jl  ©

^iy  ?

senf-sen  shad

evi

tiutiM-ljeuen

trhet  dn  lid

their  blood  beginning  in

Suten-lienen.

Said  Ka:- —

/vw*a  n 1

1P$!

YKMi  MS

• nas

md-nd

dpnti

A7w«  .

sdmiu

Call,

bring  to  me  messengers

swift

. [and]  speedy,

394  DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND

PePWi  P,™  —

eekhsekh-sen  shut  en

they  shall  run  [like]  the  wind  of  the  body ;


^ i

hJtat


an  an- In

eiten  djmf  i

dpen  her  dui

one  brought

messengers

these  straightway.

;h  i

f==Z3\  /WWW

I /WWW

1 D

1 A/WAAA

Htf'krri  •=•

tchet  an

hen  en

neter  pen

sha-sen  er

Said  the

majesty  of

this  god : —

Let  them  go  to

— a

A, . .

¥ ^48

<=>  ^

Aha

an

nd  tatadt

er  ur

Elephantine

[and]  bring

me  mandrakes  in  great  number.

-j  www  ^ o r\  ^ o

T T A Jl\\  111

my  i'

tin  dn-lv

nof  enrn

tatadt,

• •

erldt,  an  hen

• *

One  brought  to  him  these

mandrakes,

gave  the  majesty

WWWI  | u

1 AVlM^

/www  pa

-=»  \\

IS  T

en  neter  pen

Sektet

enti  e m

•

Anna  her  notch

of  this  god

to  Sektet

who  is  in  Heliopolis  to  crush

“°  B o n (!«,%>  m 0“,*!  ♦ “ x

W III  I /WWW  1 1 Jr  <=>  1 l ui  i cm < — a

tatadt  dpen  dstu  kher  hent  her  teeh

mandrakes  these.  Behold,  when  the  women  were  bruising


bOb  I


a.  Ill


■perlu  er  hegt  erta  dn-tu  tatadt  dpen

the  barley  for  beer,  and  they  were  placing  mandrakes  those


DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


“ 111  — /~\

her  shebehei  tan  sanf  en  rath

in  the  beer  vessels,  [they  became]  blood  of  men.

tw-*  i-s  ^ ffiffli

drif-dn-in  hai/t  drnel  7000  in  d\

Having  been  made  of  beer  vessels  seven  thousand,  came


rath

men.


7000  in  an


mi  ten  Init


(SB  I

Ha  In


therefore  the  majesty  of  the  king  of  the  South  Kit

and  North


111  <=

net  can  d/ian  of

gods  these  to


ketch  ta

when  it  was  dawn,


WI  Ut  W-*

niiia  alien  heqet  data

see  this  beer.  Behold,


Si  — P^kV


an  sitianui

after  had  slaughtered


IV  ira  k pppkp.t,  ?


dn  netart  em  sem-sen


khentithit


the  goddess  during  their  period  of  sailing  up  the  river,


■'ll  1

U ' AA/WVS

J,  — o$  J

K

metch  du

hen  en  Ed

ne/erui

set

said

the  majesty  of  Ra : — It  is

good,  it  is

good.

- ~M\  XP

.^V

-O

du-d

er  nidket  reth  her- a

tc.hel  dn

Ed

I am

for  protecting  mankind  against  her.

. Said

Ra: —

396


DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


i i i


P;


1 1

fai  md  set  er  hua

Let  them  carry  and  bring  them  to  the  place


:p:


nes  sma
she  slew


4k


reth


am


I1

hen


i'll


sulen  bat


hep  an

mankind  therein.  Commanded  the  majesty  of  the  king  of  the

South  and  North


c=>  i — e

fl  1 v'  MAM^  as

l..s  as  as  ] aaaa


(SB  k III  <2.1-*-  -

Tin  cm  ue  fern  kerb  er  or  hit  satet-hi

« • • •

Ka  during  the  beauties  of  the  night  to  cause  to  be  poured  out


W


/wwv\


&

III


^Y  kl


men  setohert  vn  an

these  vases  of  sleep-causing  beer,  were


j ftW.V,

N>  | \\

a hot  on  ft

the  Helds  of


mi


9


oo^


I


/WVWl

wwv\


k SM


I

I AAA/WN


f/u  her  Utah  em  mu  ein  bain  en
heaven  the  four  filled  with  water  by  the  Will  of


0 1 awaa  'l  n

A 1 VAAM

■3PMY

1*H

1 <WW\A

hen  a

u neter  pen

shorn

t an

ve  ter  l

fen  em

the  majesty  of  this  god.

Came

goddess  this  in

(i.e.,  Sekhet)

11

E>^

4-:

\ /WWVA

J AAAAAA

^ ~=v

I ^ ,

0 f

5 wwv\  r

^ MA/IM  0 ^

fun  in

i/em-nes

Va

uen

her  inch t nefer

morning,

found  she

this  [heaven

i]  flooded,  joyful

4Y  ?P-

4k

jS§i»  A

/WVW\  1

lY

P-  T

P£4=fl

an  hrd-set

dm

un

(in

set

/ter  swrd

was  her  face

because  of  it,

was

she

drinking,

DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


T?r  jur

»e/cr  W d/>-se<  i-nes  telch-thd

merry  was  her  heart,  she  came  to  a condition  of  drunkenness,


akl!i~  iUL  !'  ~~

fsa-uea  reth  Icltcf,  an  hen  en  ltd

knew  she  mankind.  Said  the  majesty  of  Ra


ini


air  nrtc  ft,  ten

to  goddess  this


- To  mu*

it-ill  cm  he  l ap  Amit

Come,  come  in  peace,  0 Beautiful  one ;


Irhcprr  nefert  cm  Am  tchel  an


and  there  became  beautiful

young  women  in

Am.

Said

|l  I AWVSA  AA/WV\

14>l

)

J l /wvw

-<S>-  A/VWVA

«£>

lien  cn  ltd  en

netert

ini

dri  en

S(Jf

the  majesty  of  lla  to

goddes

s this: —

Let  be  made  for  her

k <

(0,v£7

1 1 o

S\  ° {

net  chart  et

am

trdi  u

renpet

dpen

vases  of  sleep-causing  beer

at

seasons

of  the  year

these ;

h - VJM  8«T

act,  er  hent-d  kheper  dr  it

they  [shall  be]  in  proportion  to  my  handmaidens.  There  were  made


k

k:

‘53zA

<1

setchert

pu  em

dpt

h lent

vases  of  sleep-

according  to

the  number

of  the  handmaidens

causing  beer

398


DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


y


Vp  /WWW


I

I


ra,^°


heb  c

n II el- her  1 an

reth

neb

teller

hrn

of  the  festival  of  Hathor  by

mankind

all

since

the  day

□ «

"1  f)

CTTTa  \ /WWW

J 1 /ww*

fS

/www

O

tepi

icZnY  d»

/«>«■  CM

ltd

en

netert

ten

first.

Said

the  majesty  of

Ra

to

goddess

this : —

/WWW

ran

| 11  WAM

ra  '*»

an  du

mer

en

/ja/t  /?//,

mer

Behold

a pain

of

fire  of

sickness

© °

1

/wwv

, TfF

kher

tra-ui

an

mer

teh  el  d

whence

, 0 whence

is

the  pain  ?

Said

? f

/WWW  Q A/WWA

'.ll

4*?i8

Rd

dnkh-na

mm  ub-d

7.1

Ra : —

I live,

[but]  my  heart

is  vei

kheper


hen


en


r*  &L\*)

A/WWA

WAV\


unen


cp.t:  PMst  p:  ^

hend-aen  smmn-d  net  sep  en

with  them.  I slew  them,  [but]  there  remain  of


q \\


dti  an  un  ant  dntu

the  worthless,  for  not  was  the  destruction  as  wide-spreading

7*!#  in

drd  tclietet  en  neteru
[as]  my  power.  Said  the  gods


O \\


© o :

A


enti  am - hhetr  f

who  were  in  his  train :


DESTRUCTION  OF  MANKIND


kJ1?

k

(j

?k-U

em  beh

evi  nrt-k

dn-k

sekhem-thd

Tarry  not

in  thy  weariness  [for]  thou  art

mighty

k

i i 0

/WWV\  I |

1 A/S/WVX

em

merrat-k  tchet  an

liev

ea  neter  pen

according  to

, thy  will.  Said

the  majesty

ot  this  god

WAAA  0 l

000  "W™  fi\

/WWV\  ATAW\

V ■ ‘N  A/WWN

Imsl  1*^

en  hen  en  Nu

hau-d

nhet  era

to  the  majesty  of  Nu:—  My  members

arc  weak  for

" ® \\

'l~t  5

/WVW  C?T^1\  l

sep  tepi

«//

the  first  time,  not

( 400  )


CHAPTER  XIII

THOTH  ^ (TEHUTI),  AND  HI  A AT,  j|,  AND

THE*  "OTHER  GODDESSES  WHO  WERE
ASSOCIATED  WITH  HUM

T*^I1E  hymus  to  lla  which  are  found  in  the  Hook  of  the  Dead,
and  in  other  funeral  works  of  the  ancient  Egyptians
state  that  the  deities  Thoth  and  Maat  stand  one  on  each  side  of
the  great  god  in  his  boat,  and  it  is  clear  that  they  were  believed
to  take  some  important  part  in  directing  its  course ; and  as  they
were  with  Ra  when  he  sprang  up  from  the  abyss  of  Nu  their
existence  must  have  been  coeval  with  his  own.  The  conceptions
which  the  Egyptians  formed  about  Thoth  and  Maiit  were  both
material  and  spiritual,  and  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  any
conclusion  concerning  the  functions  of  these  deities  without
enumerating  the  facts  about  them  which  may  be  derived  from  the
texts;  speaking  generally,  Maat  may  be  considered  the  female
counterpart  of  Thoth.  In  the  Pyramid  Texts,  our  earliest
authorities,  the  functions  of  Thoth  are  of  a purely  funereal  character,
that  is  to  say,  he  appears  only  as  a god  who  is  willing  to  be  a
helper  of  the  deceased  kings,  and,  although  it  is  certain  from  many
passages  that  his  assistance  was  eagerly  awaited  by  souls  in  the
Underworld,  there  is  no  description  given  in  these  early  works  of
the  functions  of  the  god.  We  must,  then,  rely  upon  the  inscrip-
tions of  the  later  dynastic  period  for  our  knowledge  of  the  powers
of  Thoth,  and  from  these  we  learn  that  he  was  called,  “ Lord  of
“ Khemennu,  self-created,  to  whom  none  hath  given  birth,  god
“ One ; ” “ he  who  reckons  in  heaven,  the  counter  of  the  stars,  the
“ enumerator  of  the  earth  and  of  what  is, therein,  and  the  measurer  -•
“ of  the  earth ; ” and  the  “ heart  of  Ra  which  cometh  forth  in  the


THOTH.  the  Scribe  of  the  Gods.


THOTH


401


“form  of  the  god  Thoth.”  1 The  chief  shrine  of  the  god  was
in  Khemennu,  called  Hermopolis  by  the  Greeks,  and

Esbmunfin  by  the  Arabs,  but  he  also  had  shrines  in  Abydos,
Hesert,  Urit,  Per-ab,  Rehui,

<=>|  1 ® 1’  Ta'ur’  SeP>  Hat,  Pselket,


□ ^
,crr^>  ©


, Talmis,


©


, Aa-tcha-Mutet,  i-^si  1^


rso-o*


Bah, ’J*-©,  Amen-heri-ab,  (j  <==>  O©,  and  Ta-kens,  |s|.


As  lord  of  these  places  he  was  “lord  of  divine  words,”  *1  ^

“lord  of  Maat,”  . and  “judge  of  the  two  combatant  gods,


\f  <=>  ^ \\  j , *-e-7  Horns  and  Set ; and  among  other  titles
we  find  him  called  “Twice  great,”  and  “Thrice  great,”

From  this  last  were  derived  the  epithets  “Trismegistos”

and  “ ter  maximus  ” of  the  classical  writers.

The  above  facts  prove  that  Thoth  was  regarded  as  a god  who
was  self-begotten  and  self- produced,  that  he  was  One,  that  he  made
the  calculations  concerning  the  stablishing  of  the  heavens,  and  the
stars,  and  the  earth,  that  he  was  the  heart  of  Ra,  that  he  was  the
master  of  law  both  in  its  physical  and  moral  conceptions,  and  that
he  had  the  knoAvledge  of  “ divine  speech.”  From  many  passages
we  see  also  that  he  was  the  inventor  and  god  of  all  arts  and
sciences,  that  he  was  the  “ lord  of  books,”  and  the  “ scribe  of  the
gods,”  and  “ mighty  in  speech,”  i.e.,  his  words  took  effect,  and  he
was  declared  to  be  the  author  of  many  of  the  funeral  works  by
which  the  deceased  ga»*ed  everlasting  life.  In  the  Book  of  the
Bead  he  plays  a part  which  gives  him  a unique  position  among
the  gods,  and  he  is  represented  as  the  possessor  of  powers  which
are  greater  than  those  of  Osiris,  and  even  those  of  Ra  himself.
Before,  however,  we  go  on  to  consider  these  the  forms  in  which  he
appears  on  the  monuments  must  be  mentioned.  Usually  he
appears  in  human  form  with  the  head  of  an  ibis,  but  he  also
appears  as  an  ibis.  When  in  human  form  he  holds  in  his  hands


d d


1 See  Lanzone,  op.  cifc. , p.  1265.


402


THOTH


the  sceptre  and  emblem  of  “ life  ” common  to  all  gods,  but  his
headdress  varies  according  to  the  particular  form  of  the  god  in
which  the  artist  wishes  to  depict  him.  As  the  reckoner  of  times
and  seasons  he  has  upon  his  head  the  crescent  moon  and  disk,
Q;  as  a form  of  Shu  and  An-Her  he  wears  the  headdresses  of  these

gods ; he  is  also  seen  wearing  the  atef  crown,  & , and  the  united

crowns  of  the  South  and  the  North.1  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  he
appears  as  the  “ scribe  of  Maiit  of  the  company  of  the  gods,”

f^!|  ^T"*  ^ ^ 1 ’ and  then  he  holds  in  his  hands  the  writing  reed
and  palette  of  the  scribe ; but  his  connection  with  Ra  and  his  first
rising  in  primeval  times  is  indicated  sometimes  by  the  ntehat
i.e.,  the  power  or  strength,  of  the  Eye  of  Ra,  which  he  is  seen
carrying  along  in  his  hands.

The  name  of  the  god  Thoth,  , Teliuti,  appears  to  be
derived  from  the  supposed  oldest  name  of  the  ibis  in  Egypt,  i.e,,
tehn,  to  which  the  termination  ti  has  been  added,  with  the  idea  of
indicating  that  the  king  called  Teliuti  possessed  the  qualities  and
attributes  of  the  ibis.2  A derivation  of  the  name  which  appears  to
have  been  favoured  by  the  Egyptians  connected  it  with  the  word
teJeh,  ^ O,  “a  weight,”  and  in  passages  quoted  by  Lanzone3  we
find  the  god  actually  called  tekh,  “ Now  the  determinative

for  the  word  tekh,  a weight,  is  the  sign  for  “heart,”  O,  and  we
know  that  the  bird  called  tekh  or  tekhnu,  which  closely  resembled
the  ibis,  the  bird  sacred  to  Thoth,  was  in  the  opinion  of  some
ancient  writers  connected  with  the  heart.  Thus  Horapollo  says
(i.  30)  that  when  the  Egyptians  wish  to  write  “ heart  ” they  draw
an  ibis,  for  this  bird  was  dedicated  to  Hermes  (i.e.,  Thoth)  as  the
lord  of  all  knowledge  and  understanding;  and  ASlian  (Do  Nat.
Animal,  x.  29)  supports  his  testimony  by  adding  several  curious
and  interesting  facts  about  the  habits  of  the  ibis.  Other  names

given  to  Thoth  were,*  A,  (j  ^ , and  Sheps,  lord  of  Khemennu,

SlN^EE®’  Afl?en>  *)  Khenti>  d M«w-

1 .Sets  Lanzone,  op.  cit-,,  pi.  402  f.  2 Compare  Brngsch,  Religion,  p.  439.

3 Op.  oit.,  p,  1265.  * See  Brngsch,  Religion , p.  441.


THOTH


403


etc.  The  commonest  name  given  to  Thoth  is  halt,  fO  Jj
“ ibis,”  a word  which  finds  its  equivalent  in  the  Coptic  gifiujl,
iind  one  of  his  commonest  forms  is  the  dog-headed  ape,  ' n

which  occupies  such  a prominent  position  in  the  Judgment  Scene
in  the  Book  of  the  Demi.  Here  we  see  him  seated  on  the  top  of  the
support  of  the  beam  of  the  Balance  in  which  the  heart  of  the
deceased  is  weighed,  where  his  duty  is  to  watch  the  pointer,  and
tell  the  ibis-headed  Thoth  when  the  beam  is  exactly  level ;
according  to  Brugscli,  this  ape  is  a form  of  Thoth  as  the  god  of
“ equilibrium,”  1 and  he  appears  to  be  a symbol  of  the  equinoxes.
The  ape  nan  is  also  connected  with  the  moon,  for  he  is  often  seen
with  the  lunar  crescent  and  disk,  ©,  upon  his  head  ; but  there  is
no  doubt  that  he  represented  Thoth  in  his  character  of  “lord  of
divine  words  and  the  scribe  [of  the  gods],”  for  in  a scene  re-
produced by  Lanzone 3 we  see  him  holding  in  one  paw  the  god’s
palette  and  writing  reeds,  and  these  titles  are  given  to » him.
Besides  these  forms  of  Thoth  may  be  also  mentioned  those  in
which  lie  possesses  the  attributes  of  other  gods.  Tlius  as  a god  of
Mendcs  he  has  a human  body  with  the  head  of  a bull  surmounted
by  a disk  and  uraeus ; as  Shu  he  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a man
wearing  the  crown  of  Shu ; as  An-lier  he  is  depicted  in  the  form
of  a man  wearing  the  crown  of  this  god ; as  Sheps  he  has  the  head
of  a hawk  ; 3 the  ibis  and  the  ape  dan  are  his  commonest  forms.

The  principal  seat  of  the  worship  of  Thoth  was  Khemennu,  or
Hermopolis,  a city  famous  in  Egyptian  mythology  as  the  place

containing  the  “ high  ground,”  j a on  which  Ra  rested

when  he  rose  for  the  first  time.  Here  he  was  regarded  as  the  head
of  the  company  of  the  gods  of  the  city,  who  were  eight  in  number  :
Nu  and  Nut,  Hehu  and  Iiehut,  Kek  and  Iveket,  and  Kerh  and
Kerhet  (or  Nau  and  Nait),  i.e.,  four  pairs  of  deities,  each  pair
consisting  of  a male  and  a female  deity.  As  to  the  importance  ot
this  company  of  the  gods  two  eminent  Egyptologists  have  held
directly  opposite  opinions,  for  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch  thought  that

2 Op.  cit.,  pi.  404,  No.  1.

» Ibid.,  pll.  402  ff.


1 Itdujion,  p.  443.


404


THOT11


the  four  pail’s  of  deities  formed  the  oldest  example  of  the  ogdoad,
while  M.  Maspero  is  of  opinion  that  we  must  join  the  four  pairs  to
Thoth,  when  the  nine  gods  will  form  an  independent  paut,  con-
structed partly  on  the  model  of  the  paut  of  Heliopolis.  Dr.  Brugsch
thought  that  the  eight  gods  of  Hermopolis  were  primordial  deities,
but  M.  Maspero  thinks  that  their  character  is  entirely  artificial,  and
that  they  are  only  “gods  formed  according  to  the  laws  of  grammar,
“ four  being  masculine,  and  four  feminine.” 1 The  latter  argues
that  because  the  high  priest  of  Hermopolis  was  called  by  a title
which  indicates  that  he  served  “ him  that  is  chief  of  five,”  the  gods
of  the  city  were  only  five  in  number,  i.e.,  Thoth  and  the  four  gods
of  the  cardinal  points ; to  the  lour  gods  of  the  cardinal  points  were
then  assigned  female  counterparts,  hence  the  “Eight  gods”

PP  $ i ‘ according  to  M.  Maspero,  is  to  these  what

Tern  or  Ra-Tern  was  to  the  pant  of  Heliopolis,  and  the  Hermo-
politan  pant  was  constructed  after  the  model  of  the  Heliopolitan
pant ; thus  Nu  and  Nut  = Shu  and  Tefriut,  Ijehu  and  II  chut  =
Seb  and  Nut,  Kek  and  Keket  = Osiris  and  Isis,  and  Kerb  and
Kerhet  (or,  Nau  and  Nait)  = Set  and  Nephthys.  This  view  is,
however,  not  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the  texts,  which,  in
the  'writer’s  opinion,  indicates,  as  has  already  been  said,  that  the
four  pairs  of  gods  of  Hermopolis  belong  to  a far  older  conception
of  the  theogony  than  that  of  the  company  of  gods  of  Helio-
polis. Another  point  to  be  remembered  is  that  Thoth  was
intimately  associated  with  the  ape,  as  were  also  the  gods  of  his
company  ; this  takes  us  back  to  a very  remote  period  when  super-
natural powers  were  assigned  to  the  particular  class  of  ape  which
was  the  companion  of  Thoth,  and  when  the  primitive  Egyptian
regarded  the  knowledge  and  cunning  of  the  dog-headed  ape  as
proofs  of  his  divine  nature.  Between  the  period  when  this  took
place  and  the  development  of  the  Heliopolitan  theogony,  a very
long  interval  of  time  must  have  passed ; the  two  conceptions
belong  not  only  to  different  stages  of  civilization,  but  probably  to
two  distinct  races  of  men.

One  of  the  most  interesting  titles  of  Thoth  is  “ Judge  of  the
1 La  Mylhologie,  J3gyjUienne,  p.  257.


THOTH


405


“ Rehehui,  the  pacifier  of  the  gods,  who  dwelleth  in  Unnu
“ (Hermopolis),  the  great  god  in  the  Temple  of  Abtiti.” 1 A very
early  Egyptian  tradition  made  a great  fight  to  take  place  between
the  god  of  light  and  the  god  of  darkness,  and  in  later  days  Ra
himself,  or  some  form  of  him,  generally  one  of  the  llorus  gods,
was  identified  with  the  god  of  light,  and  Set,  in  one  form  or  other,
was  identified  with  the  god  of  darkness.  Thus  the  fights  of  Ra
and  A pep,  and  Hcru-Behutet  and  Set,  and  ll  orus,  son  of  Isis,  and
Set,  are  in  reality  only  different  versions  of  one  and  the  same
story,  though  belonging  to  different  periods.  In  all  these  fights
Thoth  played  a prominent  part,  for  when  the  Eye  of  Ra,  i.e.,  the
Sun,  was  doing  battle  with  Set,  this  evil  power  managed  to  cast
clouds  over  it,  and  it  was  Thoth  who  swept  them  away,  and
“ brought  the  Eye  alive,  and  whole,  and  sound,  and  without  defect
“to  its  lord”  ( Hook  of  the  Dead,  xvii.  71,  ff.) ; he  seems  also  to
have  performed  the  same  office  for  Ra  after  his  combat  with  Apep.
At  the  contest  between  Horns,  son  of  Isis,  who  fought  with  Set  in
order  to  avenge  the  murder  of  his  father  Osiris,  Thoth  was  present,
and  when  Horus  had  cut  off  his  mother’s  head  because  of  her
interference  in  the  fight  at  the  moment  when  victory  w;is  inclining
to  him,  it  was  Thoth  who  gave  her  a cow’s  head  in  place  of  her
own.  In  all  these  fights  Thoth  was  the  arbiter,  and  his  duty
was  to  prevent  either  god  from  gaining  a decisive  victory,  and
from  destroying  the  other ; in  fact,  he  had  to  keep  these  hostile
forces  in  exact  equilibrium,  the  forces  being  light  and  darkness,  or
day  and  night,  or  good  and  evil,  according  to  the  date  of  the
composition  of  the  legends,  and  the  objects  which  the  scribes
intended  to  secure  by  writing  them  down.  In  the  group  of  titles
of  Thoth  quoted  in  this  paragraph  we  sec  that  he  is  caUed  “ great
god  in  Het-Abtit,”  or  the  Temple  of  Abtit,  which  was  one  of  the
chief  sanctuaries  of  the  god,  and  was  situated  in  Hermopolis.

The  hieroglyphics  with  which  the  name  “Hot  Abtit”  are
written  prove  that  they  mean  the  “ House  of  the  Xet,”  i.e.,  the


406


THOTH


temple  where  a net  was  preserved  and  venerated,  but  the  questions
naturally  arise,  what  was  this  net,  and  what  was  its  signification  ?
We  know  from  the  two  versions  of  Chapter  cliii.  of  the  Book  of  the
Dead  that  a net  was  supposed  to  exist  in  the  Underworld,  and  that
the  deceased  regarded  it  with  horror  and  detestation.  Every  part
of  it,  its  poles,  and  ropes,  and  weights,  and  small  cords,  and  hooks,
had  names  which  he  was  obliged  to  learn  if  he  wished  to  escape
from  it,  arid  would  make  use  of  it  to  catch  food  for  himself,  instead
of  being  caught  by  “ those  who  laid  snares.”  Thus  in  a prayer  we
read,  “Hail,  thou  ‘god  who  lookest  behind  thee/  thou  ‘god  who
“ hast  gained  the  mastery  over  thine  heart/  I go  a-fisliing  with
“ the  cordage  of  the  * uuiter  of  the  earth  ’ (Horus  ?),  and  of  him
“ that  maketh  a way  through  the  earth.  Hail,  ye  fishers  who  have
“ given  birth  to  your  own  fathers,  who  lay  snares  with  your  nets,
“ and  who  go  round  about  in  the  chambers  of  the  waters,  take  ye
“ not  me  in  the  net  wherewith  ye  ensnared  the  helpless  fiends,  and
“ rope  me  not  in  with  the  rope  wherewith  ye  roped  in  the
“ abominable  fiends  of  earth,  which  had  a frame  which  reached
“ unto  heaven,  and  weighted  parts  that  rested  upon  the  earth.”
From  this  passage  it  is  clear  that  the  Egyptians  possessed  a legend
in  which  one  power  or  the  other  in  the  mythological  combats  was
armed  with  a net  wherein  he  tried  to  ensnare  his  adversary.  In
Chapter  cxxxiii.  the  deceased  says,  “ Lift  thyself  up,  0 thou  Rii,
“ who  dwellest  in  thy  divine  shrine,  draw  thou  into  thyself  the
“ winds,  inhale  the  north  wind,  and  swallow  thou  the  bet/em

“ ( J|  A \ ^ R.)  thy  net  ((J  JJ  <=>  on  the  day  wherein  thou

“ breathest  Maat.”  The  meaning  of  beqesn  is  not  quite  clear  in
this  passage,  because  from  its  determinative,  we  should  naturally
connect  it  with  some  organ  of  the  human  body,  but  it  is  evident
from  its  context  that  R;i  possessed  a net,  and  we  are  certain  from
the  former  extract  that  it  was  one  of  the  weapons  which  he
employed  in  his  war  against  the  god  and  fiends  of  darkness.

An  interesting  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  Assyrian  and
Babylonian  versions1  of  the  fight  between  the  Sun-god  Marduk
and  the  monster  Tiarnat  and  her  fiends,  for  it  is  said  in  them,

1 So e L.  W.  Kintf,  Babylonian  Ileliyion,  p.  71,


THOTH


407


“ He  (i.e.,  Marduk)  set  the  lightning  in  front  of  him,  with  burning
“fire  he  filled  his  body.  He  made  a net  to  enclose  the  inward
“parts  of  Tiamat,  the  Four  Winds  he  set  so  that  nothing  of  her
“ might  escape ; the  South  wind,  and  the  North  wind,  and  the
“ Bast  wind,  and  the  West  wind,  lie  brought  near  to  the  net  which
“ his  father  Anu  had  given  him.”  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in
the  passage  from  the  cxxxiiird  Chapter  the  winds  are  also  men-
tioned in  connexion  with  the  net  of  Rfi,  and  it  is  difficult  not  to
arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  use  to  Avliich  the  Sun-god  put  his
net  was  the  same  in  each  legend  ; whether  this  be  so,  however,  or
not  matters  little  for  our  purpose  here.  It  is  quite  clear  that  in
the  Egyptian  legend  the  god  Tlioth  was  supposed  to  have  some
connexion  with  the  net  of  Rsi,  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  in  his
temple,  which  was  called  the  Temple  of  the  Net,  the  emblem  of  a
net,  or  perhaps  even  a net  itself,  was  venerated.

We  are  now  able  to  sum  up  the  attributes  ascribed  to  Thoth,
and  to  consider  how  he  employed  them  in  connection  with  the
dead.  In  the  first  place,  he  was  held  to  be  both  the  heart  and  the
tongue  of  Ra,  that  is  to  say,  he  was  the  reason  and  the  mental
powers  of  the  god,  and  also  the  means  by  which  their  will  was
translated  into  speech ; from  one  aspect  he  was  speech  itself,  and
in  later  times  he  may  well  have  represented,  as  Dr.  Birch  said,  the
Xoyo?  of  Plato.  In  every  legend  in  which  Thoth  takes  a prominent
part  wo  see  that  it  is  he  who  speaks  the  word  that  results  in  the
wishes  of  Ra  being  carried  into  effect,  and  it  is  evident  that  when
he  had  once  given  the  word  of  command  that  command  could  not
fail  to  be  earned  out  by  one  means  or  the  other.  He  spoke  the
words  which  resulted  in  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,
and  he  taught  Isis  the  words  which  enabled  her  to  revivify  the
dead  body  of  Osiris  in  such  wise  that  Osiris  could  beget  a child  by
her,  and  he  gave  her  the  formulae  which  brought  back  her  son
Horus  to  life  after  he  had  been  stung  to  death  by  a scorpion.  His
knowledge  and  powers  of  calculation  measured  out  the  heavens,
and  planned  the  earth,  and  everything  which  is  in  them ; his  will
and  power  kept  the  forces  in  heaven  and  in  earth  in  equilibrium ;
it  was  his  great  skill  in  celestial  mathematics  which  made  proper
use  of  the  laws  ( madt  upon  which  the. foundation  and


408


THOTH


maintenance  of  the  universe  rested ; it  was  he  who  directed  the
motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  times  and  seasons ; and
without  his  words  the  gods,  whose  existence  depended  upon  them,
could  not  have  kept  their  place  among  the  followers  of  Ra.  Ife
was  the  “ scribe  of  the  gods,”  and  possessed  almost  unlimited  poAver
in  the  Underworld;  the  god  Osiris  was  in  many  ways  Avholly
dependent  upon  his  good  offices,  and  the  ordinary  mortal  sought
his  words  and  help  with  great  earnestness.  In  the  Judgment
Scene  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  it  is  Thoth  Avho  acts  the  part  of  the
recording  angel,  and  it  is  his  decision  Avhich  is  accepted  by  the
gods,  who  ratify  the  same  and  report  it  to  Osiris ; lor  when  once
Thoth  said  that  the  soul  of  the  deceased  had  been  Aveighed,  and
that  it  had  been  found  true  by  trial  in  the  Great  Balance,  and
that  there  was  no  Avickedness  Avhatsoever  in  it,  the  gods  could  not.
fail  to  ansAver,  “ That  Avhich  cometh  forth  from  thy  mouth  is  true,
“ and  the  deceased  is  holy  and  righteous  ” ; and  in  consequence
they  straightAvay  award  him  a place  Avith  Osiris  in  the  Sekhet-
Iietepu,  or  Elysian  Fields.  Thoth  as  the  great  god  of  words  was
rightly  regarded  as  the  judge  of  words,  and  the  testing  of  the  soul
in  the  Balance  in  the  Iiall  of  Osiris  is  not  described  sis  the  judging
or  “ Aveighing  of  actions,”  but  as  the  “ weighing  of  Avords,”

^ 2^  1 ^ | Hi uteM  •***■'

To  words  uttered  under  certain  conditions  the  greatest
importance  Avas  attached  by  the  Egyptians,  and  in  fact  the  Avholc
efficacy  of  prayer  appears  to  have  depended  upon  the  manner  and
tone  of  voice  in  which  the  Avords  Avere  spoken.  Thoth  could  teach
a man  not  only  words  of  poAver,  but  also  the  manner  in  Avhich
to  utter  them,  and  the  faculty  most  coveted  by  the  Egyptian
was  that  Avhich  enabled  him  to  pronounce  the  formulae  and
Chapters  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead  in  such  a way  that  they  could
not  fail  to  have  the  effect  which  the  deceased  wished  them  to  have.
After  the  names  of  deceased  persons  we  always  find  in  funeral

papyri  the  words  mad  kheru  | ^ °r

which  mean  “he  whose  word  is  mad,”  that  is  to  say,  he  whose

1 See  the  passages  enumerated  in'  my  Vocabulary  to  the  Jiook  of  the  Dead,
p.  96.


THOTH,  the  Scribe  of  the  Qods.


THOTH


409


words  possess  such  power  that  whenever  they  are  uttered  by  him
the  effects  which  he  wished  them  to  produce  unfailingly  come  to
pass.  The  words,  however,  here  referred  to  are  those  which  must
he  learned  from  Tlioth,  and  without  the  knowledge  of  them,  and  of
the  proper  manner  in  which  they  should  be  said  the  deceased  could
never  make  his  way  through  the  Underworld.  The  formulae  of
Thoth  opened  the  secret  pylons  for  him,  and  provided  him  with
the  necessary  meat,  and  drink,  and  apparel,  and  repelled  baleful
liends  and  evil  spirits,  and  they  gave  him  the  power  to  know  the
secret  or  hidden  names  of  the  monsters  of  the  Underworld,  and  to
utter  them  in  such  a way  that  they  became  his  friends  and  helped
him  oil  his  journey,  until  at  length  he  entered  the  Fields  of  Peace
of  Osiris  or  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years.  These  are  the  words
referred  to  in  the  title  of  Thoth,  “ lord  of  divine  words,”  or  “ lord
of  the  words  of  god.”  The  whole  of  the  Haul:  of  the  Dead  was
assumed  to  be  the  composition  of  Thoth,  and  certain  chapters  of  it
lie  “ wrote  with  his  own  fingers.”  In  the  late  work  called  the
“ Book  of  Breathings”  it  is  said,  “ Thoth,  the  most  mighty  god,
the  lord  of  Kheinennu,  coineth  to  thee,  and  he  writeth  for  thee
“ the  ‘ Book  of  Breathings  * with  his  own  fingers.  Thus  thy
“ soul  shall  breathe  for  ever  and  ever,  and  thv  form  shall  be
“ endowed  with  life  upon  earth,  and  thou  shalt  be  made  a god
‘‘  along  with  the  souls  of  the  gods,  and  they  shall  be  the  heart
*•  of  Ra,  and  thy  members  shall  be  the  members  of  the  great  god.”  1
In  later  times  the  epithet  mad  khc.ru,  appears  to  have  had  a some-
what different  meaning  from  that  given  to  it  above,  and  at  times  it
may  well  be  rendered  “ he  whose  word  is  right,”  and  have
reference  to  the  words  of  Thoth  in  the  Judgment,  when  he  informs
the  gods  that  the  heart  of  Osiris  has  been  weighed  with  the
strictest  care  on  the  part  of  himself  and  his  ape,  which  sits  on  the
support  of  the  Balance,  and  that  at  the  weighing  the  heart  in  one
pan  of  the  Scales  was  able  to  counterbalance  exactly  the  feather  of
Right  or  the  Law  in  the  other,  and  that  the  case  of  the  individual
under  examination  was  a “ right  ” one.

From  many  passages  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  we  learn  of  the


i Chapters  of  Coming  Forth  by  Day  (Translation),  p.  exwrii.


410


THOTH


services  which  Thoth  performed  for  Osiris,  and  which  he  was  to
repeat  for  the  benefit  of  every  man  who  was  acquitted  in  the
Judgment.  In  the  xviiith  Chapter  is  a list  of  calamities  which
were  averted  from  Osiris  by  Thoth,  who  gave  words  to  the  dead
god  and  taught  him  to  utter  them  with  such  effect  that  all  the
enemies  of  Osiris  were  vanquished.  Thus  he  made  him  to  triumph

(semaa-kheru  jl  jj  | “in  the  presence  of  the  great  assessors

“ of  every  god  and  of  every  goddess;  in  the  presence  of  the  assessors
who  are  in  Arrau  on  the  night  of  the  battle  and  of  the  overthrow
“ of  the  Sebau-fiend  in  Tattu  ; on  the  night  of  making  to  stand  up
“ the  double  Tet  in  Sekhein ; on  the  night  of  the  things  of  the
“ night  in  Sekhem,  in  Pe,  and  in  Tepu  ; on  the  night  of  stablishirig
“ Horus  in  the  heritage  of  the  things  of  his  father  in  Rekhti ; on
“ the  night  when  Isis  makcth  lamentation  at  the  side  of  her
u brother  Osiris  in  Abtu ; on  the  night  of  the  Maker  festival  when
“ a division  is  made  between  the  dead  and  the  spirits  who  are  on
“ the  path  of  the  dead ; on  the  night  of  the  judgment  of  those  who
“ are  to  be  annihilated  at  the  great  [festival  of]  the  ploughing  and
“ the  turning  up  of  the  earth  in  An-rut-f  in  Re-stau ; and  on  the
“ night  of  making  Horus  to  triumph  over  his  enemies.”  In  the
clxxxiiird  Cliapter  the  deceased  Hunefer  says  to  Osiris,  “ I have
“ come  unto  thee,  O son  of  Nut,  Osiris,  Prince  of  everlastingness ;
“ I am  in  the  following  of  the  god  Thoth,  and  I have  rejoiced  at
“ every  thing  which  he  hath  done  for  thee.  He  hath  brought  unto
“ thee  sweet  (i.e.,  fresh)  air  for  thy  nose,  and  life  and  strength  to
“ thy  beautiful  face,  and  the  north  wind  which  cometh  forth  from
“Tem  for  thy  nostrils,  0 lord  of  Ta-tchesert.  He  hath  made  the
“ god  Shu  to  shine  upon  thy  body ; he  hath  illumined  thy  path
“ with  rays  of  splendour ; he  hath  destroyed  for  thee  [ all]  the  evil
“ defects  which  belong  to  thy  members  by  the  magical  power  of
“ the  words  of  his  utterance.  He  hath  made  the  two  Horus
“ brethren  to  be  at  peace  for  thee ; he  hath  destroyed  the  storra-
“ wind  and  the  hurricane ; he  hath  made  the  Two  Combatants  to  be
“ gracious  unto  thee,  and  the  two  lands  to  be  at  peace  before  thee ;
“ he  hath  put  away  the  wrath  which  was  in  their  hearts,  and  each*
“ hath  become  reconciled  unto  his  brother.”


THOTH


411


In  the  xcivth  Chapter  the  deceased  addresses  the  “ guardian
of  the  book  of  Thoth,”  and  says,  “ I am  endowed  with  glory,  I am
“ endowed  with  strength,  I am  filled  with  might,  and  I am
“ supplied  with  the  books  of  Thoth,  and  I have  brought  them  to
“ enable  me  to  pass  through  the  god  Aker,  who  dwelleth  in  Set.

*•  J have  brought  the  palette  and  the  ink-pot  as  being  the  objects
“ which  are  in  the  hands  of  Thoth ; hidden  is  that  which  is  in
“ them  ! Behold  me  in  the  character  of  a scribe  ! 0 Heru-khuti,

4-  thou  didst  give  me  the  command,  and  I have  copied  what  is
“ right  and  true,  and  I do  bring  it  unto  thee  each  day.”  In  the
vignette  of  the  chapter  we  see  the  deceased  seated  with  a palette
and  an  ink-pot  before  him.

In  the  Pyramid  Texts  there  is  evidence1  that  Thoth  was
connected  with  the  western  sky  just  as  Horus  was  identified  with
the  eastern  sky,  and  this  idea  is  amplified  in  an  interesting  fashion
in  the  clxxvth  Chapter  of  the  Hook  of  thv.  Demi,  where  we  find
that  the  deceased  addresses  Thoth  both  as  Thoth  and  as  Temu,  the
setting  sun,  or  god  of  the  west.  He  is  disturbed  about  that  which
“ hath  happened  to  the  divine  children  of  Nut,”  for  “ they  have  done
“ battle,  they  have  upheld  strife,  they  have  done  evil,  they  have
“ created  the  fiends,  they  have  made  slaughter,  they  have  caused
“ trouble ; in  truth,  in  all  their  doings  the  mighty  have  worked
“ against  the  weak  ....  And  thou  regardest  not  evil,  nor  art
“ thou  provoked  to  anger  when  they  bring  their  years  to  confusion
“ and  throng  in  and  push  to  disturb  their  months ; for  in  all  that
“ they  have  done  unto  thee  they  have  worked  iniquity  in  secret.
The  deceased  adds,  “ I am  thy  writing  palette,  0 Thoth,  and  I
“have  brought  unto  thee  thine  ink-jar,”  and  as  he  declares  that
he  is  not  one  of  those  who  work  iniquity  hi  secret  places,  at  the
same  time  he  clearly  dissociates  himself  from  those  who  do.  These
words  are  followed  by  a very  remarkable  passage  in  which  the
deceased,  addressing  Thoth  under  the  name  of  Temu,  asks  the  god
what  the  place  is  into  which  he  has  come,  and  he  says  that  it  is
without  water,  that  “ it  hath  not  air,  it  is  depth  unfathomable,  it

“ is  black  as  the  blackest  night,  and  men  wander  helplessly  therein.

•


1 Brugsch,  Retiyioui  p.  451.


412


THOTH


“ In  it  a man  may  not  live  in  quietness  of  heart ; nor  may  the
“ longings  of  love  be  satisfied  therein.”  A little  further  on  in  the
Chapter  he  asks  the  lord  Tern,  i.e.,  Thoth,  “ How  long  have  I to
live?”  i.e.,  how  long  will  my  existence  in  this  new  world  be?
and  the  god  replies,  “ Thou  art  for  millions  of  millions  of  years,
“ a period  of  life  of  millions  of  years,”  (j  ^ <=»  ^ ! *</>*>*  ^ j

^ ^ jvvvvva  S' I-  “ is  a remarkable  fact  that  it  is  not  Osiris,  the

lord  of  life  everlasting,  but  Temu-Thoth  who  promises  the  deceased


this  coveted  gift.

In  the  first  part  of  the  Chapter  from  which  the  above  extracts
have  been  made  Thoth  is,  clearly,  appealed  to  in  his  capacity  of
measurer  and  regulator  of  times  and  seasons,  that  is  to  say,  as  the
Moon-god,  who  is  commonly  called  Aah-Tehuti,  (J  — o
or  (j a ^ “ the  great  god,  the  lord  of  heaven,  the  king  of

the  gods,”  and  “ the  maker  of  eternity  and  creator  of  cverlasting-
ness.”  Under  this  form  the  god  Thoth  is  depicted: — 1.  As  a
mummy,  standing  upon  the  symbol  of  via  (if  and  holding  in

his  hands  the  emblems  of  “ life,”  u stability,”  j|,  “ sovereignty
and  dominion,”  J\  J,  and  the  sceptre  j ; on  his  head  is  the
crescent  moon,  O,  and  by  the  side  of  his  head  he  has  the  lock  of
hair,  symbolic  of  youth,  %.  2.  As  a bearded,  mummied  human

figure  with  the  crescent  moon  on  his  head,  and  the  lock  of  hair
symbolic  of  youth.  The  head,  however,  has  two  faces,  which  are
intended,  presumably,  to  represent  the  periods  of  the  waxing  and
the  waning  of  the  moon.1  In  some  scenes  we  have  Aah-Tehuti
represented  in  the  form  of  a disk  resting  between  the  horns  of  the
crescent  moon,  and  placed  upon  a pedestal  in  a boat  similar  to
that  in  which  Ra  is  usually  seen;  sometimes  an  utehat,  is

placed  over  each  end  of  the  boat.  In  one  interesting  scene  the
god  Aah-hetep  is  represented  with  the  head  of  an  ibis  surmounted
by  the  lunar  disk  and  crescent  seated  in  a boat,  and  a dog-headed
ape  stands  before  him  and  presents  an  utehat ; it  is  noteworthy
that  the  curved  end  of  the  boat  .is  notched  like  the  notched  palm
branch  which  symbolizes  “years,”  :P.  In  the  narrowest  sense


1 For  tiie  figures  see  Law  zone,  op.  cit.,  pll.  36  ff.


The  Moon  Qod  AAH.


THOTH


413


Aah-Tehuti  symbolizes  the  new  moon,  and  this  is  only  natural,
for,  as  is  well  known,  all  calculations  made  by  the  moon  in  the
East  from  time  immemorial  have  been  based  upon  the  first
appearance  of  the  new  moon  in  the  sky ; but,  generally  speaking,
Thoth  as  the  Moon-god  represents  the  moon  during  the  whole

month.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Utchat  of  Thoth,  , indicates
the  full  moon,  just  as  the  Utchat  of  Ra  stands  for  the  mid-day
sun ; this  fact  is  proved  by  an  interesting  scene  reproduced  by
Signor  Lanzone  1 from  Brugsch,  Monuments  (Berlin,  1857).  Here
we  see  the  god  Thoth,  ibis-headed,  standing  by  the  side  of  a lotus

pillar  which  supports  heaven,  j , resting  on  heaven  is  a crescent,

and  in  it  is  the  Utchat  of  Thoth,  Leading  up  to  the  top  of

the  pillar  is  a flight  of  fourteen  steps,  of  unequal  length,  which  are
intended  to  represent  the  first  fourteen  days  of  the  month,  and  at
the  foot  of  it  stand  fourteen  gods,2  the  first  of  these  being  Tern,  who
has  his  right  foot  resting  on  the  first  step,  which  is  the  shortest  of
the  whole  flight.  The  gods  who  stand  behind  him  are : — Shu,
Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,  Horus,  Isis,  Nephthys,  Heru-em-het-Aa,  Amseth,
liap,  Tua-mut-f,  Qebh-sennuf,  and  a god  without  a name.

In  a more  extended  sense  the  Utcha  t.  of  Thoth  represented  the
left  eye  of  liu,  or  the  winter  half  of  the  year,  when  the  heat  of  the
sun  was  not  so  strong,  nor  its  light  so  great,  and  when  darkness
remained  in  the  skies  for  a longer  period.  This  Utchat  of  Thoth,
or  of  Thoth-Horus,  as  it  should  more  correctly  be  called,  is
mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,3  where  it  is  called  the  “ Black
Eye  of  Horus”  ; thus  of  King  Unas  it  is  said,  -‘Thou  hast  seized
“ the  two  Eyes  of  Horus,  the  White  Eye  aud  the  Black  Eye,
“ and  thou  hast  carried  them  off  and  set  them  in  front  of  thee  and
“ they  give  light  to  thy  face.”  * The  White  E ye  here  referred  to


1 Op.  eit.,  pi.  39.

2 The  head  and  name  of  the  fourth  god  are  wan  t ing.

3 Unas,  1.  37 ; the  reference  given  by  Brugsch  is,  like  many  others  in  his
Religion , incorrect.


4


^ J-cd  *55=


A/WvV\


p


MWVW


P AW\AA


1


414


THOTH


is,  of  course,  the  sun.  Thus  we  see  that  Thoth  not  only  brought
the  Eye  of  Ra  to  the  god,  as  we  have  already  said,  but  that  he  also
established  the  Eye  of  the  Moon-god,  who  was  indeed  only  a form
of  himself,  and  that  Thoth  was  also  in  certain  aspects  identified

with  Osiris,  and  with  Horus,  and  with  Tern,

and  therefore  with  Kliepera.  One  other  attribute  of  Thoth
remains  to  be  noticed,  i.e.,  that  which  is  made  known  to  us  by
the  xcvtli  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  wherein  the  deceased
says,  “ I am  he  who  sendeth  forth  terror  into  the  powers  of  rain
“ and  thunder,  ....  I have  made  to  flourish  my  knife  along  with
“ the  knife  tvhich  is  in  the  hand  of  Thoth  in  the  powers  of  rain  and
“ thunder.”  The  short  composition  in  which  this  passage  occurs  is
called  the  “ Chapter  of  being  nigh  unto  Thoth,”  and  in  the  vignette
the  deceased  is  seen  standing  before  Thoth  with  both  hands  raised
in  adoration.

From  the  above  facts  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  Greeks  were
generally  correct  in  the  statements  which  they  made  about  the
wisdom  and  learning  of  Thoth,  whom  they  identified  with  their
own  Hermes.  They  described  him  as  the  inventor  of  astronomy
and  astrology,  the  science  of  numbers  and  mathematics,  geometry
and  land  surveying,  medicine  and  botany ; he  was  the  first  to
found  a system  of  theology,  and  to  organize  a settled  government
in  the  country ; he  established  the  worship  of  the  gods,  and  made
rales  concerning  the  times  and  nature  of  their  sacrifices;  he
composed  the  hymns  and  prayers  which  men  addressed  to  them,
and  drew  up  liturgical  works  ; he  invented  figures,  and  the  letters
of  the  alphabet,  and  the  arts  of  reading,  writing,  and  oratory  in  all
its  branches ; and  he  was  the  author  of  every  work  on  every
branch  of  knowledge,  both  human  and  divine.  According  to
Clemens  Alexandrinus  (Stromata,  vi.)  the  “Books of  Thoth”1  were
forty-two  in  number,  and  they  were  divided  into  six  classes;
books  i.-x.  dealt  with  the  laws,  and  the  gods,  and  the  education  of

1 On  the  Books  of  Thoth,  see  some  interesting  remarks  by  Brngsch  in
Religion  und  Mythologie,  pp.  448  ff. ; this  distinguished  Egyptologist  thought  he,
hod  discovered  the  original  hieroglyphic  titles  of  many  of  these  inscribed  on  the
walls  of  the  temple  of  Edffl.


THOTH


415


the  priests ; books  xi.-xx.  treated  of  the  services  of  the  gods,  i.e.,
sacrifices,  offerings,  forms  of  worship,  etc. ; books  xxi.-xxx.  related
to  the  history  of  the  world,  geography,  and  hieroglyphics  ; books
xxxi.-xxxiv.  formed  treatises  on  astronomy  and  astrology ; books
xxxv.  and  xxxvi.  contained  a collection  of  religious  compositions  ;
and  books  xxxvii.-xlii.  were  devoted  to  medicine.  An  attempt  was
made  some  years  ago  to  include  the  Book  of  the  Dead  among  the
“ Books  of  Thoth,”  but  it  is  now  quite  certain  that,  although  Thoth
was  declared  to  have  written  some  of  its  Chapters,  it  must  be  re-
garded as  an  entirely  separate  work  and  as  one  which  enjoyed  a much
greater  reputation  than  they.  How  Thoth  was  able  to  perform  all
the  various  duties  which  were  assigned  to  him  by  the  ancients  it  is
difficult  to  understand,  until  we  remember  that  according  to  the
Egyptian  texts  he  was  the  heart,  i.e.,  the  mind,  and  reason,  and
understanding  of  the  god  Ra.  The  title  given  to  him  in  some

inscriptions,  | , “ three  times  great,  great,”  from  which

the  Greeks  derived  their  appellation  of  the  god  6 rpto-fteyio-ro?,
or  “ ter  maxirnus,”  has  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  explained,  and
at  pi'esent  the  exact  meaning  which  the  Egyptians  assigned  to  it  is
unknown.1  It  is,  however,  quite  clear  that  Thoth  held  in  their
minds  a position  which  was  quite  different  from  that  of  any  other
god,  and  that  the  attributes  which  they  ascribed  to  him  were
unlike  the  greater  number  of  those  of  any  member  of  their
companies  of  the  gods.  The  character  of  Thoth  is  a lofty  and  a
beautiful  conception,  and  is,  perhaps,  the  highest  idea  of  deity  ever
fashioned  in  the  Egyptian  mind,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,
was  somewhat  prone  to  dwell  on  the  material  side  of  divine
matters.  Thoth,  however,  as  the  personification  of  the  mind
of  God,  and  as  the  all-pervading,  and  governing,  and  directing
power  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  forms  a feature  of  the  Egyptian
religion  which  is  as  sublime  as  the  belief  in  the  resurrection  of
the  dead  in  a spiritual  body,  and  as  the  doctrine  of  everlasting
life.

, 1 A number  of  valuable  facts  have  been  collected  on  the  subject  generally  by

Pietechmann,  in  his  Hermes  Trismegistm , naeh  aegyptisehen , griechUcften  nnd
orientalischm  Ueberliefungen , 1875.


MAAT


416


The  goddess  Maa,  or  Maat,


Closely  connected  with  Thoth,  so  closely  in  fact  that  she  may
be  regarded  as  the  feminine  counterpart  of  the  god,  is  the  goddess
Maat,  who  stood  with  Thoth  in  the  boat  of  lia  when  the  Sun-god
rose  above  the  waters  of  the  primeval  abyss  of  Nu  for  the  first
time.  The  type  and  symbol  of  this  goddess  is  the  ostrich  feather,

p,  which  is  always  seen  fastened  to  her  head-dress,  and  is  some-
times seen  in  her  hand.  She  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a woman


seated,  or  standing,  Jj,  and  she  holds  the  sceptre,  J,  in  one  hand,
and  the  emblem  of  “life,"  in  the  other;  in  many  pictures  of


her  she  is  provided  witli  a pair  of  wings  which  are  attached  one  to
each  arm,  and  in  a few  cases  she  has  the  body  of  a woman  with  an
ostrich  feather  for  a head.

The  reason  for  the  association  of  the  ostrich  feather  with  Maat
is  unknown,  as  is  also  the  primitive  conception  which  underlies  the
name,  but  it  is  certainly  very  ancient,  and  probably  dates  from
predynastic  times.  The  hieroglyphic  £=>,  which  also  has  the
phonetic  value  of  Maat,  is  described  by  some  as  a “ cubit,”  i.e.,  the
measure  of  a cubit,  and  by  others  as  a “ flute,”  which  would,
presumably,  be  made  of  a reed.  We  see,  however,  that  the  god
Ptah  usually  stands  upon  a pedestal  made  in  the  shape  of  /=>,  and
that  figures  of  the  god  Osiris  stand  upon  pedestals  of  similar  form,
and  as  we  have  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  figures  of  these
two  gods  were  placed  upon  flutes  it  is  tolerably  certain  that
must  mean  something  else  besides  flute.  We  know  that  Ptah  of
Memphis  was  the  god  of  artificers  in  general  and  of  workers  in
metal  and  of  sculptors,  in  particular  ; it  is  far  more  likely  that  the
form  of  his  pedestal,  *=>,  was  intended  to  represent  some  tool
which  was  used  by  sculptors  and  carvers,  e.g.,  a chisel,  or  the
identification  of  the  object  as  a u cubit  ” may  be  correct  if  it
means  that  it  was  some  instrument  used  for  measuring  purposes.

About  the  meaning  of  the  word  maat  | j ? there  is,  fortunately, .

no  difficulty,  for  from  many  passages  in  texts  of  all  periods  we


CONCEPTIONS  OF  MAAT


417


learn  that  it  indicated  primarily  “ that  Avhich  is  straight,”  and  it
was  probably  the  name  which  was  given  to  the  instrument  by
which  the  work  of  the  handicraftsman  of  every  kind  was  kept’
straight ; as  far  as  we  can  see  the  same  ideas  which  were  attached
to  the  Greek  word  koihov  (which  first  of  all  seems  to  have  meant
any  strnvjhl  vod  used  to  keep  things  straight,  then  a rule  used  by
masons,  and  finally,  metaphorically,  a rule,  or  law,  or  canon,  by
which  the  lives  of  men  and  their  actions  were  kept  straight  and
governed)  belong  to  the  Egyptian  word  madt.  The  Egyptians
used  the  word  in  a physical  and  a moral  sense,  and  thus  it  came  to
mean  “ right,  true,  truth,  real,  genuine,  upright,  righteous,  just,
steadfast,  unalterable,”  etc. ; khexbet  madt  is  “ real  lapis-lazuli  ” as
opposed  to  blue  paste ; shes  madt  means  “ ceaselessly  and  regularly,”
cm  tm  madt  indicates  that  a thing  is  really  so,  the  man  who  is
good,  and  honest  is  madt , the  truth  (madt)  is  great  and  mighty,
and  “ it  hath  never  been  broken  since  the  time  of  Osiris  ” ; finally,
the  exact  equivalent  of  the  English  words  “ God  will  judge  the

right  ” is  found  in  the  Egyptian  pa  neter  dpu  pa  madt ,


The  goddess  Mailt  was,  then,  the  personification  of  physical
and  moral  law,  and  order  .and  truth.  In  connexion  with  the  Sun-
god  Ra  she  indicated  the  regularity  with  which  he  rose  and  set  in
the  sky,  and  the  course  which  he  followed  daily  from  east  to  west.
Thus  in  a hymn  to  Ra  we  read,  “ The  land  of  Manu  (i.e.,  the  West)
" receiveth  thee  with  satisfaction,  and  the  goddess  Maat  embraeeth
“ thee  both  at  morn  and  at  eve;”  “ the  god  Thoth  and  the  goddess
“ Maat  have  written  down  thy  daily  course  for  thee  every  day ; ”
may  I see  Horus  acting  as  steersman  [i  i the  boat  of  Ra]  with
“ Thoth  and  Maat,  one  on  each  side  of  him.”  1 In  another  hymn
Qenna  says,  “ I have  come  to  thee,  0 Lord  of  the  gods,  Temu-
“ Ileru-khuti,  whom  Maiit  directeth ; ” Amen-Ru  is  said  to  “ rest
upon  Maat,”  i.e.,  to  subsist  by  Maat ; Rii  is  declared  to  “ live  by
Maat; ” Osiris  “carries  along  the  earth  in  his  train  by  Maat  in  his

name  of  Seker.”  In  her  capacity  of  regulator  of  the  path  of  the

#


s e


1 Papyrus  of  Aui , sheet  1.


418


HALL  OF  MAAT


Sun-god  Moat  is  said  to  be  the  “ daughter  of  Ru,”  and  the  “ eye  of
Ra,”  and  “ lady  of  heaven,  queen  of  the  earth,  and  mistress  of  the
Underworld,”  and  she  was,  of  course,  “ the  lady  of  the  gods  and
goddesses.”  As  a moral  power  Ma.it  was  the  greatest  of  the

goddesses,  and  in  her  dual  form  of  Maati,  PP  ^ J)  Jj?  i.e.,  the  Maat

goddess  of  the  South  .and  the  North,  she  was  the  lady  of  the
Judgment  Hall,  and  she  became  the  personification  of  justice,
who  awarded  to  every  man  his  due ; judging  by  some  vignettes
which  represent  the  weighing  of  the  heart  she  took  at  times  the
form  of  the  Balance  itself.  The  hall  in  which  Maat  sat  in  double
form  to  hear  the  “ confession  ” of  the  dead  is  often  depicted  in
connection  with  the  exxvth  Chapter  of  the  Hook  of  the  Data!,
and  we  see  that  it  was  spacious,  and  that  the  cornice  thereof
was  formed  of  uraei  and  of  feathers  symbolic  of  Maat.  In  the
centre  of  it  is  a god  with  both  hands  stretched  out  over  a
lake,  and  at  each  end  of  the  hall  is  seated  au  ape  before  a pair
of  scales.

Anubis  was  the  guardian  of  the  door  at  the  end  by
which  the  deceased  entered,  and  which  was  called  Khersck-Sliu,


one  leaf  of  the  door  was  called  Neb-Maat-
lieri-tep-rct  ui-f,  v — 7 3 ' ^ ®


c I ■»

— I I


SIT

Neb-pehti-thesu-inenmenet,


and  the  other  leaf


t--»o  (&  I rT^  -*r  I

^ AAAAAA  I


AAAAAA

^ 0 AAA/VSA


These  names  had  to  be  learnt  and  uttered  by  the  deceased  before
he  was  allowed  to  enter  the  Hall  of  the  Maati  goddesses,  ^ ^ ®


When  he  «n-ived  inside  the


Hall  he  found  assembled  there  the  Forty-two  Assessors  or  Judges
drawn  up  in  two  rows,  each  of  which  contained  twenty-one  Judges,
one  on  each  side  of  the  length  of  the  Hall.  Before  each  of  these
he  was  obliged  to  make  a solemn  declaration  that  he  had  not
committed  a certain  sin;  these  forty-two  denials  are  commonly
known  as  the  “Negative  Confession.” 1 The  names  of  the  Assessors


1 An  Koglish  translation  will  be  found  in  my  Clusters  of  Coming  Forth  by

Itoy , p.  193  tf.


ASSESSORS  OF  MAAT


419


according  to  the  Papyrus  of  Nebseni  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  9,900,  sheet
30)  are  as  follows : —


1.  Usckht-nemmat,  ^ ® | ^

2.  Ilept-shet,  j[  ^ Q


x

£2i


3.  Fenti,  <{F

4.  Ain  - khaibetu,  ^

T-*L

T,.  Neba-l.au,

6.  Rerti,

7.  Maati-f-eni-tes,

C2l

- w - nna

AV/A'  /-V

8.  Nebii-per-em-khetkhot,  J ^


21.  Heri-seru,


w


\\


\>  X


9.  Set-kesu,  |1

10.  Uatch-ncs,  | ^

11.  Qerti,  <=> °

12.  Hetch-abehu,

18.  W,}^|  ™f"tr
U-  Am-taeku,  J|1

15.  Nob-Maat,  ^ p j j ^j.

16.  Thenemi,

1T-  A“ft

IB.  Tutu-f,


19.  Uamemti,


xx»


20.  Maa-an-f,^^^


m-

24.  Nekheu,  q %.

A/W  .AA  ii

25.  Ser-kheru,

26.  Basti,


22.  Khemi,  ©UHg.

23.  Shct-kheru,  c*=^

CSJ

A\


©


f-A-


27.  Hra-f-ha-f,

28.  Tji-ret,  “ ^ [

29.  Kenemti,  ^

30.  An-betep-f,  ““

31.  Neb-brau,  ^3?


32.  Serekhi,


©


33.  Neb-abui,  37

34.  Nefcr-Tem,  J


35.  Tem-sep,  D®|-

36.  Ari-em-ab-f,  ^ ^ 1


37.  Alii-rau  (?),  I)1I|(|'X

38.  Utu  - rekhit,  |^>|  <^>  (j(j


i .


39.  Neheb  - nefert,  jj  jj  c *

1*2*.

0 C^=>

40.  N cheb-kau,  i J x V I

41.  Tcheser-^ep,  |

42.  An-a-f,  ^ ^ 71^  1ASL-


420


ASSESSORS  OF  MAAT


Eveu  when  the  deceased  had  satisfied  the  Forty-two  Assessors
he  could  not  pass  out  of  the  Hall  of  Maati  unless  he  knew  the
magical  names  of  the  various  parts  of  the  door  which  opened  into
the  regions  of  the  blessed.  In  the  address  which  he  makes  to  the
gods  collectively,  and  which  is  usually  considered  to  have  been
made  after  the  Negative  Confession,  he  summarizes  his  good  deeds,
and  declares  to  the  god  Osiris,  whom  he  calls  the  “lord  of  the
Atrf  crown,”  that  he  has  done  Madt,  and  purified  himself  with
Madt,  and  that  none  of  his  members  lack  Madt.  He  tells  how  he
has  been  to  the  “ Field  of  the  Grasshoppers,”  and  how  he  lias
bathed  in  the  pool  wherein  the  sailors  of  lla  bathe,  and  describes
all  the  things  which  he  has  done,  including  the  finding  of  a sceptre
of  flint  in  the  “furrow  of  Maat.”  Finally,  having  satisfied  all  the
various  parts  of  the  door  by  declaring  to  them  their  magical  names,

he  comes  to  the  god  Mau-taui,  o ^ who  acts

as  guardian  of  the  Hall  of  Maati,  and  who  refuses  to  allow  him  to
pass  unless  he  tells  his  name.  The  deceased  says,  “ Thy  name  is

Sa-abu-tchiir-khat,”  ^ j 2^  j and  demands

to  be  admitted,  but  the  god  is  not  satisfied,  and  asks  him,  “ Who  is
the  god  that  dwelleth  in  his  hour  ? ” In  reply  the  deceased  utters
the  name  Mau-taui,  whereupon  he  is  at  once  asked  by  the  god,
“ And  who  is  this  ? ” and  in  answer  the  deceased  says,  “ Mau-taui  is
Thoth.”  On  this  Thoth  asks  the  reason  of  his  coming  to  the  Hall,
and  when  the  deceased  has  told  him  that  he  has  come  because  he
wished  his  name  to  be  written  down  by  him,  Thoth  questions  him
further  as  to  the  fitness  of  his  condition  and  as  to  the  identity  of
the  being  “ whose  heaven  is  of  fire,  whose  walls  are  living  uraei,
“ and  the  floor  of  whose  house  is  a stream  of  water.”  In  answer  to
these  questions  he  says  that  he  is  “ purified  from  evil  things,”  and
that  the  being  whose  house  is  described  is  Osiris,  whereupon  Thoth
calls  upon  him  to  enter,  saying  that  his  name  shall  be  “ mentioned  ”
or  recorded.

Thus  we  see. how  closely  the  attributes  of  Moat  merge  into
those  of  Thoth,  and  how  the  fate  of  the  deceased  depends  ultimately
upon  these  deities.  It  was  not,  however,  sufficient  for  him  to  pass’
the  Assessors,  for  beyond  them  stood  Thoth  with  his  final,  search-


The  Goddess  NEKHEMAUAIT.


421


NEHEMAUAIT

ing  questions ; Thoth  spake  the  word  which  caused  the  universe  to
come  into  being,  and  it  was  he  who  had  the  power  to  utter  the
name  of  the  deceased  in  such  a way  that  his  new  spiritual  body
would  straightway  come  into  being  in  the  realm  of  Osiris. . Thoth
in  one  respect  was  greater  than  It  a,  and  in  another  he  was  greater
than  Osiris,  but  both  from  a physical  and  a moral  point  of  view  he
was  connected  inseparably  with  the  Maat,  which  was  the  highest
conception  of  physical  and  moral  law  and  order  known  to  the
Egyptians.


The  goddess  Neuemauait


Now  besides  Maat  or  the  Maati  goddesses  we  find  that  there
were  other  goddesses  who  were  associated  with  Thoth  in  different
parts  of  Egypt,  and  among  these  is  Neiiemauait,  who  is  described

as  the  dweller  in  Aat-tchamutet,  J (vr^,  and  as  the  “ holy
and  mighty  lady  in  Ivhemennu  ” (Hcnnopolis),1  and  the  “ mistress  of
l'er-Khemennu,”  and  the  “ lady  of  Baliut,”  JJ  — a ^ “ ,

and  “ the  dweller  in  Deudera,”  L-fhd  ^ ® . Thus  we  see  that  she

was  the  goddess  of  the  great  temple  in  the  city  of  Thoth,  i.e.,
Hermopolis,  and  that  she  had  a shrine  iri  Denderu,  and  in  the
metropolis  of  the  fifteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,  which  is  here
mentioned  under  its  civil  name  “ Baliut  ” ; the  sacred  name  of

the  city  was  Pcr-Tehuti-ap-rehuh,  i ® - i-0'?

“ Temple  of  Thoth,  the  judge  between  the  lieliiri  (Horns  and  Set).’
The  texts  described  her  ns  the  “ daughter  ol  llii,'’  and  the  manner
in  which  she  is  depicted  proves  that  she  was  regarded  as  a form  of
the  goddess  Hathor.  In  the  examples  given  by  Signor  Lanzone 2
she  has  the  form  of  a woman,  and  she  wears  upon  her  head  either

the  sistrum,  |,  or  a disk  resting  between  a pair  of  horns ; in  one
picture  a papyrus  sceptre,  J,  rests  on  the  palm  of  her  right  hand,
and  a figure  of  Maat,  *j|  , on  that  of  her  left.  A very  interesting


1

3


Dizionario , pi.  174  j and  see  Brugscli,  Religion,  p.  471.


422


NEHEMAUAIT — MEHURT


sketch  also  given  by  Signor  Lanzone  shows  that  her  emblem  was  a
Hathor-headed  standard,  on  the  top  of  which  was  a sistrum ; on

each  side  of  the  sistrum  is  a uraeus  with  a disk  on  its  head,  |[ ,


and  from  each  side^of  the  face  of  the  goddess  hang  two  similar
uraei.  The  standard  is  held  up  in  a vertical  position  by  two  men
who  stand  one  on  each  side.  Plutarch,  as  Brugseh  has  noted,  says
.that  Typhon  Avas  driven  aAvay  by  a sistrum,  Avhieh  seems  to
indicate  that  the  rattling  of  the  wires  produced  a sound  that  had  a
terrifying  effect  upon  that  evil  beast;  ladies  of  high  rank  and
priestesses  are  often  depicted  Avith  sistra  in  their  hands,  and
though  this  fact  is  usually  explained  by  assuming  that  those  Avho
hold  sistra  assisted  in  the  musical  parts  of  the  services  in  the
temples,  it  is  very  probable  that  they  carried  them  both  as  amulets
and  as  musical  instruments.  Dr.  Brugseh  quotes  tAvo  passages
from  texts  in  Avhicli  a royal  personage  declares  that  demoniacal
poAvers  are  kept  aAvay  from  him  by  means  of  the  sistrum  which  he
holds  in  his  hand.  Nehemiiuait  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Book  of
the  Dead,  and  it  seems  that  she  is  not  an  ancient  deity ; she  is
probably  a comparatively  modern  form  of  some  well  known  older
goddess.

From  the  texts  of  the  late  dynastic  period  Ave  find  that  she
Avas  identified  with  Mkh-ukt  1 and  with  the  goddess  whose  name


is  variously  read  Sefekh-aabu  and  Sesheta.  Meh-urt,  8

“Sfe*  ‘A  /VWWA

o (/.,  is  mentioned  but  rarely  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead


(xvii.  7b,  79;  lxxi.  13;  exxiv.  17),  but  the  passage  in  the
xviith  Chapter  tells  us  exactly  Avho  she  is.  The  deceased  says
there,  “ I behold  Ra  Avho  Avas  born  yesterday  from  the  buttocks  of
“ the  goddess  Meh-urt,”  and  as  ansAver  to  the  question,  “ What
“ then  is  this  ? ” Ave  have  the  Avords,  “ It  is  the  Avatery  abyss  of
“ heaven,  or  (as  others  say),  It  is  the  image  of  the  Eye  of  Ra  in
“ the  morning  at  his  daily  birth.  Meh-urt  is  the  Eye  (Utchat)  of
“ Ra.”  Meh-urt  Avas  originally  a female  personification  of  the
watery  matter  which  formed  the  substoince  of  the  world,  and  her
name,  which  means  “mighty  fulness,”  indicates  that  she  was  the


1 The  Mefchyer  (M tOvtp)  of  Plutarch.


The  Goddess  MEH-URIT.


KEHEMAUAIT— MEgURT  423

abundant  and  unfailing  source  of  the  matter  of  every  kind  which
was  fecundated  by  the  male  germs  of  life  of  every  kind ; she  was,
in  fact,  a form  of  the  primeval  female  creative  principle,  and  in
some  aspects  was  identified  with  Isis  and  Hathor.  She,  of  course,
is  a later  conception  than  Nut,  or  Nit  (Neith),  of  both  of  whom  she
was  also  a form.  In  one  of  the  representations  of  the  goddess
figured  by  Signor  Lanzone 1 she  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a
pregnant  woman  with  full,  protruding  breasts,  emblem  of  fertility,
but  she  usually  appears  as  the  great  cow  of  the  sky,  either  in  the
form  which  is  illustrated  on  p.  308,  or  in  that  given  in  the  accom-
panying plate.  Sometimes  she  has  the  body  of  a woman  and  the
head  of  a cow,  and  then  she  holds  in  her  right  hand  a sceptre
round  which  is  twined  the  stalk  of  a lotus  flower  which  she  appears
to  be  smelling  ; the  flower  itself  is  between  ® , the  symbols  of  the

South  and  the  North,  and  is  supposed  to  represent  the  great  world
lotus  flower,  out  of  which  rose  the  sun  for  the  first  time  at  the
Creation.  The  usual  titles  of  the  goddess  are  “ lady  of  heaven,
“ mistress  of  all  the  gods,  mistress  of  the  two  lands,”  but  she  is  also
said  to  have  “ existed  from  the  beginning,”  and  to  have  helped
Thoth  to  create  the  first  things  which  appeared  in  lvhemennu  or
Hermopolis.  In  primitive  times  the  “ weighing  of  words,"  i.c.,  the
examination  and  judgment  of  the  dead,  was  believed  to  take  place  in
the  Hall  of  Meh-urt,  which  seems  to  prove  that  in  very  early  times
the  attributes  of  Mailt  were  ascribed  to  the  great  goddess,  whose
form  was  the  cow,  and  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  were  thought  to
be  judged  in  the  sky.  The  first  conception  of  the  Judgment  was
probably  physical,  and  it  was  not  until  the  period  when  the  cult  of
Osiris  became  predominant  that  it  assumed  the  character  with
which  we  are  familiar  from  the  Book  of  ’he  Dead.  It  would  seem
that  in  the  very  ancient  times  it  was  the  body  and  not  the  soul
that  was  the  subject  of  examination  by  the  celestial  powers,  and
this  is  what  is  to  be  expected  in  predynastic  times  when  the
theory  of  the  resurrection  then  current  demanded  a renewed  or
revivified  physical  body.

Closely  associated  with  Thoth  in  the  performance  of  certain  of


1 Op.  cit.,  pi.  131  ff,


424


THOTH  AND  SEFKHET-AABUT


his  duties  as  the  god  of  letters  and  learning,  was  the  goddess
whose  name  is  generally  read  Skkkhet-aabut,  |1
; the  reading*  “ Sesheta  ” lias  also  been  proposed  for
the  hieroglyphic  sign,  which  forms  the  symbol  of  this  goddess,


but  both  readings  are  merely  guesses,  for  the  phonetic  value  of  the
sign  has  not  yet  been  ascertained,  and  even  the  sign  itself  has  not
been  identified.  All  that  is  certain  about  it  is  that  in  some
pictures  of  the  goddess  the  sign  seems  to  be  compounded  of  a pair
of  horns  inverted  over  a seven-rayed  star,  or  flower  with  seven
petals,  supported  on  a standard.  Dr.  Brugsch  believed  that
Sefkhet-aabut  was  the  correct  reading  of  the  name,  and  that  it
either  meant,  “ she  who  has  inverted  her  horns,”  or,  “ she  who  is
provided  with  seven  horns,”  the  latter  meaning  being  suggested  by
the  similarity  of  the  first  part  of  the  name  Sefkhet  with  the  ordinary
word  for  “ seven.”  From  the  pictures  of  the  goddess  and  the  titles
which  accompany  them  it  is  quite  certain  what  her  functions
were.  We  see  her  wearing  her  characteristic  symbols  on  her
head,  with  a close-fitting  panther  skin  garment  upon  her  body,
and  in  her  hands  she  holds  a scribe’s  palette  and  writing  reed ;
in  this  form  she  is  called  “ the  great  one,  the  lady  of  the  house  of


- . l«  y T 1 it<__  f ' W ‘ "*

books,”  ^ . Thus  she  was  a goddess  of  literature

and  the  library.

Elsewhere  we  see  her  without  her  panther  skin  garment,


holding  a writing  reed  in  the  right  hand,  and  the  cartouche  cnx,

symbolic ^of  “name”  in  her  left;  in  this  form  she  suggests  the
idea  of  being  a kind  of  recording  angel,  not  so  much  of  the  deeds
committed  by  man,  but  of  their  names,  of  which  she,  presumably,
took  note,  that  her  associate  Thoth  might  declare  them  before
Osiris.  In  the  title  which  accompanies  this  picture  she  is  called
“great  one,  lady  of  letters,  mistress  of  the  house  of  books,”

vrr?  ^7  i . Jn  another  scene1  she  holds  a notched

10  ^ o l <=*?:crz)

palm  branch  in  her  hand,  and  she  appears  to  be  counting  the
notches ; the  lower  end  of  the  branch  rests  on  the  back  of  a frog,


1 For  all  these  pictures  see  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  340.


NUT,  the  Goddess  of  Heaven,  as  a Cow.


SEFKHET-A  ABUT


425


seated  upon  Q,  the  emblem  of  “eternity,”  and  from  the  upper
end  hangs  the  symbol  of  the  double  Set  festival,  2E  . Thus  she


appears  in  the  character  of  the  chronoghipher  and  chronologist ;
the  use  of  the  notched  palm-branch  as  a symbol  of  the  counting  of
years  takes  us  back  to  a custom  which  was  pi’obably  prevalent  in
predynastie  times.  In  yet  another  scene  we  find  the  goddess
standing  before  a column  of  hieroglyphics  meaning  “life,”  and
“ power,”  and  “ thirty-year  festivals,”  which  rest  upon  a seated
figure  who  holds  in  each  hand  ■^*,  “life,”  and  who  typifies
“ millions  of  years.”  In  connection  with  this  must  be  noted  a
passage  in  a text  in  which  she  declares  to  a king  that  she  has
inscribed  on  her  register  on  his  behalf  a period  of  life  which  shall  be
“ hundreds  of  thousands  of  thirty-year  periods,”  and  has  ordained
that  his  years  shall  be  upon  the  earth  like  the  years  of  Ra,  i.c.,  that
he  shall  live  forever.  In  the  Hook  of  the  Dead  (lvii.  6)  the  deceased
says,  “ My  mouth  and  my  nostrils  are  opened  in  Tattu,  and  I have
“ my  place  of  peace  in  Annu,  wherein  is  my  house ; it  was  built
“ for  me  by  the  goddess  Sefekli-aabut  (or  Sesheta),  and  the  god
“ Kim  emu  set  it  up  for  me  upon  its  walls.”  And  again  he  says
(clii.  3),  “ The  goddess  Sefekh-afibut  hath  brought  the  god  Nebt,
“ and  Anpu  (Anubis)  hath  called  unto  the  Osiris  Xu  (i.e.,  to  me)
“ to  build  a house  on  the  earth.  Its  foundation  is  in  Kher-aha,
“ its  shrine  is  the  god  Sekhem,  who  dwelletli  in  Sekhem,  according
“ to  that  which  I have  written  the  renewal  thereof,  and  men  surd
“ women  bring  offerings,  and  libations,  and  ministrants.  And
“ Osiris  saith  unto  all  the  gods  who  are  in  his  train,  and  who
“ journey  [with  liim],  ‘ Behold  ye  the  house  which  hath  been  built
“ ‘ for  a spirit  who  is  well-equipped,  and  who  cometh  daily  to
“ ‘ renew  himself  among  you.’  ” In  the  clxixth  Chapter  (line  18)
the  goddess  is  said  to  be  seated  before  the  deceased,  and  the
goddess  Sa  protects  his  members.

These  passages  show  that  Sefekh-iiabut  was  supposed  to  be

the  “ goddess  of  construction,”  and  she  would  thus  be  a

suitable  counterpart  of  Thoth,  and  one  fitted  to  carry  out  his
commands  concerning  the  Creation.  It  is,  however,  certain  from
many  passages  that  her  chief  duties  were  connected  with  the  writing


426


THOTH  AND  UNNUT


of  history,  and  happy  was  the  king  who  was  fortunate  enough  to
have  his  deeds  recorded  by  the  lingers  of  the  goddess  herself,  and
his  abode  in  the  next  world  built  on  the  plan  which  she  drew  up
in  accordance  with  her  attributes  as  the  inventor  of  letters,  the
lady  of  the  builder’s  measure,  and  the  founder  of  architecture.1
In  a text  quoted  by  Brugseh  she  declares  to  Seti  that  her  words
concerning  him  shall  never  be  gainsaid,  that  her  hand  shall  set
down  in  writing  his  fame  after  the  manner  of  her  brother  Thoth,
and  all  according  to  the  decree  of  Tern.  She  was  identified  with
the  goddess  Renenet,  “ f/n , and  with  Isis,  and  at  Dendera  she
is  called  the  “daughter  of  Nut;”  at  Lycopolis  she  was  regarded
as  the  sister  of  Osiris,  and  the  mother  of  l.Ieru-nub,  , or  the
“ Horus  of  gold.”


Yet  another  goddess  must  be  mentioned  in  connection  with
Maat  and  Thoth,  that  is  to  say,  Unnut,  ® f , the  lady  of  Unnu,

/V)  /wwv\  ^ O *

who  must  not  be  confused  with  Unnut,  the  goddess  of

/WWW  Q

the  hours,  who  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a woman  with  a star  upon
her  head.  The  former  goddess  has,  on  the  other  hand,  the  body
of  a woman  with  the  head  of  a hare,  and  she  usually  holds  in  each
hand  a knife,  ; 2 sometimes  she  holds  a sceptre  in  one  hand,
and  “life,”  in  the  other.  One  aspect  of  her,  i.e.,  that  of  the
goddess  who  destroys  with  her  knives,  was  identified  with  Sekhet,
^ ^ *o  ’ an<^  *n  form  she  was  the  deity  of  the  city  Menliet,

c~“s  § ^ . From  a passage  in  the  cxxxviith  Chapter  of  the  Book

/WWW  A w

of  the  Dead  we  may  gain  some  idea  of  the  antiquity  of  the  goddess
Unnut,  for  towards  the  end  of  the  rubric  (line  38)  it  is  said  that
the  Chapter  was  found  in  the  handwriting  of  the  god  Thoth

in  the  temple  of  “ Unnut,  lady  of  Unnu,”  L~“J  ° Pn
■^*0  v©»  by  Heru-tata-f,  the  son  of  Khufu,  i.e.,  Cheops,  a

king  of  the  IVth  Dynasty.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  even  in  that
remote  period  a temple  in  honour  of  the  goddess  existed  at
Unnu,  i.e.,  Hermopolis,  or  the  city  of  Thoth.  Unnu,  as  we  know,
was  the  chief  city  of  the  nome  Un,  the  chief  local  god  of  which.


2 See  Larzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  52.


1 See  Brugseh,  Religion,  p.  474.


The  Goooess  SESHETA.


AP-REHUI


427


was  depicted  in  the  form  of  a hare,  and  Unnut  is  the  female

counterpart  of  the  god  Unnu,  and  was  the  old  local  goddess  of  the
metropolis  of  the  nome.

In  the  vignette  of  the  cxtli  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead
(Papyrus  of  Ani,  pi.  35)  we  see  the  deceased  standing  with  hands
raised  in  adoration  before  three  seated  deities,  the  first  having  the
head  of  a hare,  the  second  that  of  a snake,  and  the  third  that  of  a
bull ; behind  him  stands  the  god  Thoth  with  palette  and  reed,  but
whether  he  is  in  any  way  connected  with  the  three  gods  cannot  be
said.  A hare-lieaded  god  is  also  seen  as  one  of  the  group  of
three  gods  who  preside  over  one  of  the  Ants  in  the  Underworld ;
according  to  the  Papyrus  of  Ani  it  is  the  first  Arit,  and  according
to  the  Papyrus  of  Nu  it  is  the  second.  At  Dcndera  a hare-
headed god  is  seen  wrapped  in  mummy  swathings,  with  his  hands
in  such  a position  that  they  suggest  his  identification  with  Osiris,
and  an  attempt  has  been  made 1 to  show  in  connexion  with  this
representation  that  the  hare -headed  god  was  called  Un,  that  this
name  appears  in  the  compound  name  “ TJn-nefer,”  the  well-known
title  of  Osiris,  that  the  hare-god  Un  was  only  another  form  of
Osiris,  and  that  the  name  Un  was  applied  to  Osiris  because  he
“ sprang  up,”  like  the  hare,  which,  as  the  rising  sun,  is  said  to  be
the  “ springer.”  According  to  this  view  the  goddess  Unnut  would
be  a female  form  of  the  hare-god  Un  or  IJnnu,  but  Brugsek’s
opinion  which  makes  her  to  be  the  goddess  of  the  city  of  Unnu,  or
Hermopolis,  is  more  correct,  especially  when  we  remember  that
the  cities  An,  and  Apt,  and  Behutet,  etc.,  possessed  goddesses  of
the  city  which  were  ealled  Anit,  and  Apit,  and  Behutit.  AVe  have
already  seen  that  the  goddess  Maat  had  two  forms,  i.e.,  Maat  of
the  South  and  Maat  of  the  North,  and  -imilarly  we  find  that
Unnut  had  two  forms,  one  of  which  belonged  to  Hermopolis  of  the
South,  and  the  other  to  Hermopolis  of  the  North,  the  Si  If
Unnu  meht  of  the  text,  i.e.,  Hermopolis  Parva,  wherein  Thoth
was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  Ap-rehui,  \/  <=>  ^
together  with  his  female  counterpart  Nehemauait.2

1 See  Renonf  in  Trans.  Soc.  ffibl.  Arch.,  vol.  ix.,  pp.  281-294.

9 Brugach,  Religion,  p.  477 ; de  Ronge,  Geographic,  pp.  30,  102.


( 428  )


CHAPTER  XIV'

HATHOR,  HET-HEliT,  AND  THE

HATHOR  GODDESSES


THE  goddess  Hatiior  is  one  of  the  oldest  known  deities  of
Egypt,  and  it  is  certain  that,  under  the  form  of  a cow,
she  was  worshipped  in  the  early  part  of  the  archaic  period,
because  a flint  model  of  the  head  and  horns  of  the  cow,  which  was
her  type  and  symbol,  has  been  found  among  the  early  archaic,  or
late  predynastic  flints  in  Egypt.1  The  forms  in  which  the  goddess
is  depicted  are  numerous,  but  this  is  not  to  bo  wondered  at,
because  during  the  course  of  the  dynastic  period  she  was
identified  with  every  important  local  goddess,  and  all  their
attributes,  of  whatever  class  and  kind,  were  ascribed  to  her.
The  oldest  form  of  all  is  probably  that  of  the  cow,  and  this  was
preserved,  though  chiefly  in  funeral  scenes  and  in  the  Book  of
the  Dead,  until  the  beginning  of  the  Roman  period.  Hkt-IIert,


, the  name  of  the  goddess,  means  the  “ House  above,”
i.e.,  the  region  of  the  sky  or  heaven,  and  another  form  of  it,  ^ ,


which  is  to  be  read  Het-Heru,  and  which  means  “House  of
Horus,”  shows  that  she  was  a personification  of  the  house  in  which
Horus  the  Sun-god  dwelt,  and  that  she  represented  the  portion  of
the  sky  through  which  the  course  of  the  god  lay.  In  the  earliest
times  Hathor,  the  * Ad  tap  of  the  Greek  writers,  typified  only  that
portion  of  the  sky  in  which  Horus,  the  oldest  form  of  the  Sun-
god,  had  been  conceived  and  brought  forth,  and  her  domain  was  in
the  east  of  the  sky ; but  at  length  she  came  to  represent  the  whole


1 This  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum,  No.  32,124.


^ET-yERT)  Hathor  the  Cow-Goddess  looking  forth  from  the
Funeral  Mountain  at  Thebes.


HATHOIt


429


sky,  and  in  so  doing,  she,  no  doubt,  absorbed  many  of  the  attributes
of  prcdynastic  goddesses.  In  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line  593)  it  is
said,  “ Every  god  will  take  the  hand  of  l»a-meri  in  heaven,  and


“they  will  conduct  him  to  Het-IIeru  ^),  which  is  in  the
“ heaven  of  Qebliu  J]  ^ t=q) , and  his  double  shall  be  able


“ to  make  his  voice  (or  word)  take  effect  upon  Sob.”  From  this
passage  it  seems  as  if  the  House  of  Ilorus  was  only  one  special  part
of  the  great  watery  mass  of  heaven  which  is  generally  known  by
the  name  of  “ Qebli.”

At  the  time  when  the  Egyptians  first  formulated  their
thcogony  .Hathor  was  certainly  a cosmic  goddess,  and  was
associated  with  the  Sun-god  Ra,  of  whom  she  was  the  principal
female  counterpart.  In  the  theological  system  of  the  priests  of
Heliopolis  she  became,  as  Brugsch  says,1  the  “ mother  of  the  light,”
the  birth  of  which  was  the  first  act  of  creation ; her  next  creative


act  was  to  produce  Shu  and  Tefnut,  that  is  to  say,  certain  aspects
of  these  gods,  for  according  to  a very  old  tradition  Temu  was
their  begetter  and  producer.  Of  the  various  forms  in  which  Hathor
is  depicted  may  be  mentioned  the  following 2 : — As  the  “ chief-
tain css,”  ^ ^ , of  Thebes  and  the  mistress  of  Amentet  she  is  usually


represented  in  the  form  of  a woman  who  wears  upon  her  head  a
pair  of  horns  within  which  rests  the  solar  disk;  as  the  lady  of

Hetepet,  '~L  ^ ©,  she  wears  the  vulture  tiara,  with  a uraeus  in
front  and  five  uraei  on  the  top  of  it ; as  the  lady  of  Senemet,
^wvvv  q , she  appears  in  the  form  of  a woman  with  the  headdress

, or  with  plumes  and  horns ; as  the  lady  of  Abshck,  Ij  Jj  r-v-»  ,

she  wears  a disk  between  horns ; as  the  great  goddess  of  Dendera,

♦ 'WWW

|0g,  she  appears  in  the  form  of  a lioness,  with  a uraeus  on  her
head,  and  as  a woman  wearing  XjX  and  p,  or  jp,  or  CX  and  \J,  or
Xj/  and  [p , or  the  sistrum,  ^ , or  ^ and  p , or  and  , or  \J
and  and  and  (p , and  she  usually  carries  a sceptre,  j or  |,


1 Religion , p.  312.


8 Lanzone,  op.  cvt..,  pi.  314  ft.


430


IJATHOR


< - mm\  - - . ' ''

in  one  hond,and  “life,”  in  the  other;  tplpke  lady  of  the

£'  /ww^  i a it

“ southern  sycamore,”  m 0 l|  sg  3.  > she  has  the  head  of  a cow ; as
the  lady  of  Anna  she  has  on  her  head  ; as  the  goddess  of
turquoise  [land],  i.e.,  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula,  called  “ Miifek,”
a — c o,  she  wears  the  crown  of  the  north,  ^ , or  and\/;

and  in  another  form  she  weal’s  the  vulture  head-dress  surmounted
by  a tiara  formed  of  uraei,  and  above  these  is  a pylon  set  among  a
mass  of  lotus  flowers  and  buds.  As  the  “ lady  of  the  Holy  Land,”


i.e.,  the  Underworld,  and  Amentet,  she  appears  in  the  form

of  a cow  walking  out  from  the  funeral  mountain,  and  she  is  some-
times represented  in  the  form  of  a cow  standing  in  a boat  sur-
rounded by  papyrus  plants  which  are  growing  up  to  a considerable
height  above  her  body.  As  the  cow-goddess  of  the  Underworld,
however,  she  wears  a long,  pendent  collar,  and  on  the  back  of  her
neck  is  the  Mxndt,  iVy  , an  emblem  of  joy  and  pleasure.  On  her
back  also  is  a kind  of  saddle-cloth  with  a linear  design,  and  the
whole  of  her  bodv  is  sometimes  marked  with  crosses,  which  are
probably  intended  to  represent  stars.  Two  other  interesting  forms
of  the  goddess  which  are  illustrated  by  Signor  Lanzone 1 represent
her  holding  in  her  hand  the  notched  palm  branch,  which  is  usually
the  characteristic  of  the  goddess  Sefekh-aabut,  who  acted  as
assistant  chronographer  and  chronologist  to  the  god  Thoth,  and
from  this  point  of  view  Hathor  must  be  regarded  as  a female
counterpart  of  Thoth.  Finally,  she  is  represented  as  a sphinx,
wearing  on  her  head  the  vulture  head-di’ess,  with  uraeus  and  disk ;
the  side  of  her  body  is  made  to  resemble  a part  of  a mend). (,  and  she
rests  upon  a pylon.  The  titles  which  accompany  this  last  form  call
her  “ lady  of  Hetep,  the  eye  of  Rii,  dweller  in  his  disk,  lady  of


“ heaven,

()  K

1 O


mistress  of  all  the  gods,”
o <=>  q qqq
o p=q  X <=»  I I I i i i*


V37  -<K>-  5CX

e>  o G o I I


We  have  already  seen  that  the  worship  of  Horns  was  universal


in  Egypt,  probably  from  the  earliest  period,  and  that  in  dynastic


times  shrines  which  were  specially  consecrated  to  his  worship  were  (i


» Op.  cit.,  pi.  325  ff.


HATHOR


431


common  throughout  the  country  ; the  texts  prove  that  the  worship
of  Hatlior  was  also  universal,  and  that  her  shrines  were  even  more
numerous  than  those  of  Horus.  She  was,  in  fact,  the  great  mother
of  the  world,  and  the  old,  cosmic  Hathor  was  the  personification  of
the  great  power  of  nature  which  was  perpetually  conceiving,  and
creating,  and  bringing  forth,  and  rearing,  and  maintaining  all
things,  both  great  and  small.  She  was  the  “ mother  of  her  father,
“and  the  daughter  of  her  son,”  and  heaven,  earth,  and  the  Under-
world were  under  her  rule,  and  she  was  the  mother  of  every  god
and  every  goddess.  In  all  the  important  shrines  of  the  local
goddesses  she  was  honoured  with  them,  and  she  always  became  the
chief  female  counterpart  of  the  head  of  the  company  or  triad  in
which  she  had  been  allowed  to  enter  as  a guest.  A clear  proof  of
this  fact  is  given  in  the  list  compiled  by  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch,  Avhich
showed  the  various  names  and  forms  she  took  in  all  the  large
cities  in  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  and  from  this  we  see  that  she

was  identified  with  Satkt,  , and  Axqf.t,  ^ in

Elephantine ; with  Ta-sent-nkfekt,  <=>  ^ ^ J <55  , in  Ombos;

with  Bf.hutet,  ^ , in  Apollinopolis  Magna;  with


4


AVSAAA  ^ '


Nit-  Xebuut>  and  MExt,n>  in
Latopolis;  with  Mut,  and  Xekhei;kt,  -j-  2 J|  ^ ’ *n

Eileithyiaspolis ; with  Rat-tauit,  ant^  Thenexkt,

in  llermonthis;  with  Mut,  and  Amextiiet,

, in  Thebes;  with  Heqet,  in  Apollinopolis

Larva;  with  Isis,  and  Anit,  jj}  ^ *n  Coptos;  with

Skfkiiet  - a abut,  in  Diospolis  Larva;  with  Mkhit  - Tefnut  -

-s  m z a \ • a “ w “

This ; with  Isis  and  Khent  Abtet,  ^ ^ | J ^ ^ , in
Lanopolis;  with  IIeqet  and  A nth  at,  ° ^ o lik’  in  Aphrodi-
topolis ; with  Kit,  Uatchet,  |^j^,  Sekhet,  ^ j^\  > etc.,  in

Hypselis;  with  Mailt  and  Isis  in  Hierakonpolis ; with  Mut  and


482  HATH  OR

Sefkliet-aabut  in  Bycopolis;  with  Sekhet  and  Maat  in  Cusae ;
with  Neiiemauait,  ^ o -^j  £j  ^ 5 and  Sefkhet-aabut,

and  Meli-urt,  CK=\  -^3-  ^ , in  Hermopolis ; with  ldeqet  and
Ashet,  in  Ibiu ; with  Pakhth,  a ® -gas,  at  the  Speos

Artemidos;  with  Anpet,  (|  in  Cynopolis;  with  Hatchet

in  Alabastronpolis ; with  Hatiiok  of  Oxyrinchus  ; with  Anthat  and
Meksekhent  iz=x  p ® _o_  in  Heraklcopolis  Magna;  with  Renpit,
fa.  in  Crocodilopolis  ; with  Khersekhet  in  Ptolemais  ; with  Isis
and  Tep-ahet  in  Aphroditopolis ; with  Bast,  ^ ^ ^ , Sekhet,  and

Renpit  in  Memphis;  with  Nebuarekiit-aat,  xzt-  £ j ^ ^

in  Letopolis  ; with  Uskrt-hkqet,  J xj  in  Prosopis;

with  Nit  (Neith)  in  Sais ; with  Urt-Apset,  * \/  ^ ^ in

A’ots  ; with  Isis  in  Canopus ; with  Hatchet  in  Buto ; with  Tefnut
in  Pa-Tem  (Pithom)  ; with  Tatet  or  Tait,  ^ ^ !

Busiris ; with  Kiiuit,  ^ > in  Athrihis;  with  Tetet,

daughter  of  lta,  an^  Tefnut,  in  the  form  of  a lion,


G ^ e=-  u-^>  aTul  WERT>  i*c->  tll°  female

AA/WV\  -■  Ck

counterpart  of  Horus,  and  Desert,  ^ '4i0\5  with  Iusaset,

and  NliBT-HKTEP,  “d  MESAT-  “O’

and  Repit,  <=^>  (}(j  “ with  Khext-Abtet,  ^ ^ in  Sele  (?) ;
with  Nehemiiuait,  Tefnut,  and  Isis  in  Hermopolis;  with  IIAt-
mehit,  in  Mendes;  with  Mut,  Tefnut,  and  Khent-

Abtet,  in  Diospolis ; with  Bast,  U ^ > in  Bubastis ; with  Isis
and  Hatchet  in  Ammet,  /j  c=z  and  with  Septit,  |1  ^ (j/)  ^ $?)>

and  Khekhsit,  ® ® (j(j  ^ '{j^,  in  the  nomo  of  Sept..  It  is,  then,

quite  certain  that  in  late  dynastic  times,  at  least,  Ilathor  became
the  representative  of  all  the  great  goddesses  in  Egypt,  and  that
shrines  in  her  honour  were  built  in  most  great  cities  there.  In
his  valuable  Dizionario  di  Mitologia  Egizia  (p.  875),  Signor


THE  SEVEN  HATHORS


43*3


Lanzone  has  collected  the  names  of  a number  of  cities  which
contained  shrines  of  Hathor,  but  the  enumeration  of  them  all 1
here  would  serve  no  useful  purpose,  because  the  identifications
of  the  goddess  described  above  ai’e  sufficient  to  indicate  the
universality  of  her  worship.

A little  consideration  of  the  texts  shows  us  that  it  was  quite
impossible  for  any  worshipper  of  Hathor,  however  devout,  to
enumerate  all  the  forms  of  the  goddess  which  existed,  and  also
that  some  of  them  were  considered  of  greater  importance  than  the
others ; as  a result  we  find  that  at  a comparatively  early  period  a
selection  of  the  Hathors  was  made,  and  that  it  usually  contained
seven.  The  Skvkn  Hatiioks  who  were  worshipped  at  Dendera

were: — 1.  Hathor  of  Thebes,  ^ ^ . 2.  Hathor  of  Heliopolis,  |

3.  Hathor  of  Aphroditopolis,  & ^ . -1.  Hathor  of  the  Sinaitic

Peninsula,  0 Hathor  of  Alomeinphis  (Amina),

lH  ^ . 6.  Hathor  of  Herakleopolis,  j ^ "•  Hathor  of

lveset,  ^ . These  were  represented 2 in  the  form  of  young  and
handsome  women  arrayed  in  close-fitting  tunics,  and  wearing


i <r


The  following  selection  may,  however,  be  of  interest  :

n ck  r\  o r\  /7>  ^

11  ^ ^ kekhet-Ra,  J ? Kesct,


-Arif,


© ’


Miitchet,
khat.  (?),


, Seuiuet,  IWVVA  ®,  Khauit.

©

UO>,  Slietenu,  Akenu,  © ,

^ , Slie-'JVsher,  Kepeimt  (in  Syria),

M rrva  /-*  i rv\'  W / ^ 1

^ r ■ i <=-_  n A.A  r\  < — — -n  TT  /”>

’ Per-tennu  in  Ankh-taui

3^.^©’  An*

^ o©>  Tclierutet,

AVWv>  Vi.


? l eMier,  ^ ^ JX  ’ ivsjjcuuu  ujna;,

in  Ankli-tauit,  jj  ^ ^ g*  ? itehesu.

Veka,  Xj”  ©»  Tep-ahct,  Alkat’  An‘

’ |4©>  Maiiti’  PPS’  Sebti*  P Ju®’  *°ann’  jLe®’  Tclierutet,

*©,  Sek,  pZS®,  Per-Utchat,  Hes>  ^ @ ; Ken3et'

f »c=w.  fv'  n _ a : . . I)  O*

Noferus,  J ^ |l  ©,

dub  °


I v

Kheklmit,  f ^ ® ' An  to,  A

® \\  <=»  O ■ -1


•■ex

AMNW  f
<£k  £Zz


MVvVv  fW/1  ^


G>

k&k®'

ugaclt,  Mythologischc  Jn&chriftcn

a 4?


434


THE  SEVEN  HATHORS


vulture  head-dresses  surmounted  by  » and  holding  tambourines
in  their  hands.  In  the  “ Tale  of  the  Two  Brothers  ” 1 we  lind  the
Seven  Ilathors  actingt  the  part  of  prophetic  fairies,  for  in  that
entertaining  narrative  they  are  made  to  come  and  look  upon  the
wife  whom  Khnemu  had  fashioned  for  the  younger  brother  Bata,
and  who  “ was  more  beautiful  in  her  person  than  any  other  woman
“ in  all  the  earth,  for  every  god  was  contained  in  her ; ” but  when
they  had  looked  upon  her,  they  said  with  one  voice,  “ Her  death
will  be  caused  by  the  knife.”  Unfortunately  avc  do  not  know  the

disti’icts  which  these  Seven  Ilathors,  ^ Q |_^_J  ^ j ,

represented.  The  Seven  Hatliors  mentioned  by  Mariette 2 com-

| /wwv\  ^

prise  tlie  Hathors  of  Dendera,  |q^,  lveset  (Cusae),  Neliet


l^j  ^ ^ the  Two  Mountains,  ^ (i.e.,  the  modern  Gebelen),
Eileithviaspolis,  Ij-  O J|  and  Mafek  (Sinai),  Kepenut  isQ  O (X|  $
(Byblos),  and  Het-sesliesh,  ^ (Diospolis  Parva)  ; thus  it  is  clear

that  the  company  of  the  Seven  Hatliors  did  not  always  include  the
same  forms  of  the  goddess.  In  the  Litanies  of  Seker :t  we  have  also
a “ Litany  of  the  Hathors,”  wherein  are  mentioned  the  Hathors
of : — 1 . Tep-ahct.  2.  Mafek  and  Thebes.  3.  Thebes.  4.  Nebt-
hetep.  5.  Suten-henen.  (>.  Memphis.  7.  She-Tesher  ; here,  then,
is  a different  group  of  Seven  Hathors.  In  the  six  lines  of  text
which  follow,  Hathor  is  identified  with  the  goddesses  : — 1.  Bast.
2.  Sati.  3.  Uatchet.  4.  Sekhet.  5.  Lady  of  Ammu.  (>.  N it
(Neith) ; and  after  this  we  have  addresses  to  the  Hathors  of
Thebes,  Suten-henen,  Tep-ahet,  Nehau,  Rehsau,  Shet-Teshert,
Mafek,  Aneb,  Uaua,  Ammu,  Amem,  and  Hathor,  lady  of  the  “ City


of  Sixteen,”  ^ H i.e.,  I ^ycopolis,  in  all  Twelve  Hathors.


If  we  had  full  information  on  the  subject  we  should  probably  find
that  each  great  city  possessed  its  own  selection  of  Hathors,  and
that  the  forms  of  the  goddess  whose  names  were  inscribed  on
funeral  papyri  were  only  those  which  were  popular  with  those  who
caused  such  documents  to  be  made.


1 Page  ix.,  L 8.  (Birch,  Select  Papyri.)

2 See  Dendemh,  tom.  1,  pi.  27 ; Brngseh,  Diet . Grog.,  p.  972.

!i  See  my  paper  in  Archaeologic i,  vol.  lii.  (Papyrus  of  Nesi-Amsu).


The  Goddess  HATHOR


H ATHOR-APHROD ITE


435


The  Greeks  identified  Hathor  with  their  goddess  Aphrodite,
and  there  are  many  passages  in  the  Egyptian  texts  which  show
that  they  were  justified  in  doing  so.  She  represented  not  only
what  was  true,  but  what  was  good,  and  all  that  is  best  in  woman
as  wife,  mother,  and  daughter  j she  was  also  the  patron  goddess  of
all  singers,  dancers,  and  merry-makers  of  every  kind,  of  beautiful
women,  and  of  love,  of  artists  and  artistic  works,  and  also  of  the
vine  and  wine,  and  ale  and  beer,  and,  in  fact,  of  joy  and  happiness,
and  of  everything  which  contributed  thereto.  She  was  identified
astronomically  with  the  star  Sept,  ^ ^ , or  Sothis,  which  was

called  the  “ second  sun  ” in  heaven,  she  was  thereby  connected
with  the  rise  of  the  Nile  preparatory  to  the  Inundation,  and  she
appeared  in  the  form  of  this  star  in  the  heavens  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  sun  in  the  second  half  of  July.  Sothis  rose  hcliacally
on  the  first  day  of  the  Egyptian  New  Year,  and  when  the  Sun-god
Ra  had  entered  his  boat,  Hathor,  the  goddess  of  the  star  Sothis,  Avent
Avitli  him  and  took  up  her  place  like  a crown  upon  his  forehead.1
She  Avas,  as  Ave  have  seen,  both  the  Avife  of  Rfi,  and  the  daughter  of
Ra ; she  herself  Avas  brought  forth  by  the  goddess  N ut  in  the  form
of  a black-skinned,  a i ^ , or  blackish-red  skinned  child  and
received  as  her  name  that  of  the  last  hour  of  the  day.  Khnemet-

f *

ilnkli,  or  \$ Hathor,  as  lady  of  the

Underworld,  played  a very  prominent  part  in  connection  Avith  the
Avelfare  of  the  dead,  for  Avithout  her  friendly  help  and  protection
the  deceased  could  never  attain  to  everlasting  life.

The  position  Avhich  Hathor  held  among  the  gods  of  the
Underworld  is  well  illustrated  by  the  folloAving  passages  from  the
Hook  of  the  Dead.  In  his  hymn  to  Ra  the  deceased  officer  Nekht
says,  “0  thou  beautiful  being,  thou  dost  renew  thyself  in  thy
“ season  in  the  form  of  the  Disk  within  thy  mother  Hathor,”  Avith
Avhich  words  he  refers  to  the  goddess  as  a nature  power.  In  the
Judgment  Scene  we  find  that  she  is  one  of  the  company  of  the
gods  who  watch  the  “ weighing  of  Avords,”  and  who  afterwards
decree  joy  and  felicity  for  the  heart  Avhich  has  been  weighed  and

1 Bragacli,  Religion , p.  318 ; Lanzone,  op,  cit>,  p.  865,

2 Brugscli,  Mythologifiche  Inschriften,  p.  844  (Twelfth  Hour  of  the  Day).


436


HATHOR  OF  THE  DEAD


found  just.  When  the  deceased  is  face  to  face  with  the  monster
Apcp,  Hathor  is  one  of  the  group  of  gods  consisting  of  Netcheb-
ab-f,  | ^ ^ Tern,  Nentchii,  Seb,  Nut,  and

Khepera,  who  encourage  the  deceased  to  do  battle  with  him,  and
she  cries  out  to  the  deceased,  “ Take  your  armour ; ” but  she,  like
the  deceased,  is  in  terror  of  Apep  and  “ she  quaketh  ” thereat
(xxxix.  22).  In  the  Chapter  (xlii.)  which  describes  the  deification
of  the  members  of  the  deceased,  she  becomes  his  two  eyes,  and  he
declares,  “ My  eyes  are  the  eyes  of  Hathor.”  Now  Hathor  was,
according  to  one  myth,  the  star  Sothis,  ^ , >SVp/,  and  she  took

up  her  place  in  the  face  of  Horus  or  Rii  as  his  right  eye  ; another
myth  which  made  her  the  night  sky  also  made  her  the  moon
therein  ; hence  the  eyes  of  Hathor  are  the  sun  and  moon,  and  the
deceased  regards  these  as  his  own  eyes  in  the  text.  In  other
Chapters  (lii.,  lxiii.A,  lxviii.),  she  appears  as  the  goddess  who
provides  the  deceased  with  meat  and  drink,  and  thus  we  find  the
following : — “ Let  me  eat  my  food  under  the  sycamore  tree  of  my
“ lady  Hathor,  and  let  my  times  be  among  the  divine  beings  who
“ have  alighted  thereon ; ” and  again,  “ In  a clean  place  I shall  sit
“ on  the  ground  beneath  the  foliage  of  the  date  palm  of  the  goddess
“ Hathor,  who  dwelleth  in  the  spacious  Disk  as  it  advanceth  to
“ Annu,  having  the  books  of  the  divine  words  of  the  writings  of
“ the  god  Thoth ; ” and  again,  “ Let  me  have  power  over  cakes,
“ and  let  me  eat  of  them  under  the  leaves  of  the  palm  tree  of  the
“ goddess  Hathor,  who  is  my  divine  lady  ” (lxxxii.  7).

In  the  Hall  of  Maati  the  name  of  the  left  foot  of  the  deceased
was  “ Staff  of  Hathor  ” (exxv.  35),  and  a special  Chapter  (ciii.)
was  composed  with  the  view  of  enabling  the  deceased  to  “be
among  those  who  are  in  the  following  of  Hathor.”  Thus  we  see
that  she  was  held  to  be  sufficiently  important  to  have  a train  of
attendant  gods,  or  ministering  angels,  about  her.  In  the  vignette
of  Chapter  cxxxiv.  Hathor  forms  one  of  the  company  of  the  gods
of  Heliopolis,  which  here  consists  of  Tem,  Shu,  Tefnut,  Seb,  Nut,
Osiris,  Isis,  Nephthys,  Hathor,  and  Horus,  the  last  named  taking
|he  place  of  Set  or  Suti ; and  in  Chapter  cxl.  Hathor,  with  Ten),
tJtchatet,  \ Shu>  Seb,  Osiris,  Suti,  Horus,


Twe  Goddess  HET-HERT(HATHOR).


HATHOR  OF  THE  DEAD


43/


Menth'  “II’  BiUl>  J — J i 'S’  *E  J)>  RR-^-neljel.,  © ^ •=►

**«  ® j^,  Thoth,  Naau-tchetta  (?)  q (j  Nut,  Isis,

Nephthys,  Nekht,  Mert,  (?)  <==>  ^ , Maat,  Anep,  and

Ta-mes-tchetta,  ~ |jj  1 , are  said  to  be  “ the  soul  and  body  of

Ra.’  In  Chapter  cli.A  Nephthys  addresses  the  deceased  and  says,
“ Rii  hearkencth  unto  thy  cry  ; thou,  0 daughter  of  Hathor,  art
“ made  to  triumph,  thy  head  shall  never  be  taken  away  from  thee,
“ and  thou  slialt  be-  made  to  rise  up  in  peace,”  It  was  Hathor  in
the  form  of  a cow  who  received  the  dead  when  they  entered  the
Underworld,  she  gave  them  new  life,  and  celestial  food  wherewith
to  maintain  it,  and  in  the  Roman  period  the  personality  of  the
deceased  is  merged  in  that  of  the  goddess  in  the  funeral  texts,  just  as
during  the  dynastic  period  it  was  merged  in  that  of  Osiris.  Finally,
it  is  said  in  a passage  quoted  from  a papyrus  by  M.  Maspero  ’
which  prescribes  the  placing  of  the  “ swathing  of  Hathor  ” on  the
face  of  Jhe  deceased,  “ She  (i.e.,  Hathor)  shall  make  thy  face
“ perfect  among  the  gods,  she  shall  make  thy  thighs  large  among
“ the  goddesses,  she  shall  open  thine  eye  so  that  thou  shalt  see
“ each  day,  she  shall  enlarge  thy  place  in  Amentet,  she  shall  make
“ thy  voice  to  prevail  over  thy  adversaries ; and  she  shall  make
“ thy  legs  to  walk  with  ease  in  the  Underworld  in  her  name  of
“ Hathor,  lady  of  Amentet.”

In  an  interesting  text  in  the  Ptolemaic  temple  at  Der  al-
Medina,’  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Nile  opposite  Thebes,  we  find  that
Hathor  is  called  Nubt,  i.e.,  the  “Golden  One,”  and  that  she

is  addressed  as  the  “ queen  of  the  gods,”  and  her  adorer  says,
“ thou  standest  high  in  the  south  as  the  lady  of  Teka  (Eileithyias-
“ polis),  and  thou  illuminest  the  west  as  lady  of  Sals.  Thou
“ appearest  and  thou  art  commemorated  in  festivals  as  Hathor,
“ the  great  lady,  the  beloved  of  Rii  in  [thy]  seven  forms.”  Thoth,
we  are  told,  comes  to  look  upon  her  face,  and  he  praises  her
according  to  her  desire,  and  she  is  built  up  by  his  words.  As

1 Mi'moire  aur  quelqms  Papyrus  dtt  Louvre , Paris,  1875,  p.  104.

• 2 The  Egyptian  name  of  the  place  was  ^ VvWVA  |1  © , Kheft-hm-

en-neb-s>  and  the  Greek  Pasemis ; Brugsch,  Diet.  G<:o<j.,  p.  574*.


438


NEKHEBET


Nebt-hetepet  she  is  glorious  in  heaven,  and  mighty  upon  earth,
and  queen  of  the  Underworld.  As  the  goddess  Temt  she  is  the  lady
of  the  “ two  lands,”  and  of  the  red  covering,  and  she  shines  in  the
cities  of  Buto  and  Buba&tis.  It  is  evident  from  the  above  that  as
the  goddess  of  the  Underworld  Hathor  was  identified  with  the  four
great  and  ancient  goddesses,  Nekhebet  of  Nekhebet  (Eileithyias-
polis),  Uatchet  of  Per-Uatehet,  Bast  of  Bubastis,  and  Nit  (Neith)
of  Su'is,  i.e.,  with  the  four  typical  goddesses  of  the  four  quarters  of
the  world  and  of  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  it  is  also  quite
evident  that  this  identification  is  the  product  of  a late  period,
when  the  earliest  attributes  of  Uatchet  and  Nekhebet,  etc.,  were
forgotten.  It  is,  however,  convenient  to  consider  these  goddesses
under  the  head  of  Hathor,  and  they  will,  therefore,  be  described
here,  not  because  the  writer  regards  the  Ptolemaic  identification
as  the  correct  one,  but  because  there  is  something  to  be  said  for  it.


Nekhebet,  TUE  goddess  of  the  South.

From  the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  which  belong  to  the
archaic  period  we  find  that  the  kings  of  Egypt  were  in  the  habit

of  placing  before  their  names  the  sign  , by  which  they  intended

to  indicate  their  sovereignty  over  the  South  and  the  North ; it  is
uncertain  how  these  signs  are  to  be  read,  but  there  is  no  doubt
whatsoever  about  their  meaning.  The  vulture  is  the  symbol  of
the  goddess  of  the  South,  and  the  uraeus  is  the  symbol  of  the
goddess  of  the  North,  and  down  to  very  late  dynastic  times  the
kings  of  Egypt  gloried  in  declaring  that  they  were  sovereigns  of
the  country  by  virtue  of  the  favour  of  the  goddesses  whose  emblems
were  the  vulture  and  uraeus.  It  is  tolerably  certain  that  in
prcdynastic  times  the  vulture  was  worshipped  generally  throughout
Upper  Egypt,  and  that  a particular  form  of  the  serpent  was
venerated  in  the  Delta ; the  centre  of  the  worship  of  the  vulture

was  in  the  city  called  Nekhebet,  O Jj  @ > or»  ^ ^ T *}*  ® Jj  ’
which  was  named  Eileithyiaspolis  by  the  Greeks,  and  “ Civitas
Lucinae  ” by  the  Latins,  and  formed  the  capital  of  the  third  nome»
of  Upper  Egypt,  and  the  centre  of  the  worship  of  the  serpent  was


NEKHEBET


439


Per-Uatchet,  ^ @ > the  BoGros  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Buto
of  the  Latins,  and  the  capital  of  the  seventh  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.
Nekhebet  was  declared  to  be  the  daughter  of  Ra,  ^ ',  and  also

the  “ divine  wife  of  Khent  Amenti,”  ^ ^ ^ . The  shrine

of  the  goddess  was  Nekhent,  , or,  or,  © , and  its

site  is  represented  by  the  modern  Arab  village  of  El-Kab  ; in  late
times  Nekhebet  lost  all  its  political  importance,  and  the  neigh-

• | /WW\A  4»  ■-

bouring  towns  of  Ani,  ||  [}[j  ©,  and  Senit,  came  into

prominence  in  its  place.1  Nekhen,  also  written,  | i.e.,  the

“ White  Neldien,”  was  the  town  which  contained  the  sanctuary  of
the  “venerable  (or,  holy)  vulture,”  ^ ^ and  the

vulture  goddess  Nekhcbet  in  the  land  of  the  South  is  distinctly,  in
later  texts,  identified  with  Hathor.2

Nekhebet  is  usually  represented  in  the  form  of  a woman  who
wears  on  her  head  the  vulture  head-dress  surmounted  by  the  white

croAvn,  the  sign  of  sovereignty  over  Upper  Egypt,  to  which  are
attached  two  plumes ; sometimes  she  holds  in  one  hand  the  sceptre,
J,  and  sometimes  j,  and  in  the  other  we  see  the  symbol  of  “life,”

Occasionally  the  sceptre  is  formed  of  a long-stemmed  flower,

which  seems  to  be  a water-lily,  with  a serpent  twined  round  it ;
this  serpent  is  none  other  than  the  winged  serpent,  with  the  crown
of  the  South  upon  its  head,  which  is  as  symbolic  of  the  goddess  as
the  vulture.  Nekhebet  is  also  represented  in  the  form  of  a woman
with  the  head  of  a vulture,  and  in  a picture  of  her  reproduced  by
Signor  Lanzone3  she  stands  upon  maat  and  holds  a bow  and
an  arrow  in  her  left  hand.  In  the  form  of  a uraeus  Nekhebet  took
her  place,  with  her  twin  sister  Hatchet,  upon  the  brow  of  Ra,  and
both  goddesses  devoted  themselves  to  destroying  the  enemies  of
the  god ; this  idea  is  alluded  to  in  the  winged  disks  which  are  seen

1 BrugBch,  Did.  Grog.,  p.  352  ff.

J Op.  dt.,  pi.  348.


440


NEKHEBET


sculptured  over  the  doors  of  temples  in  Egypt,  for  on  each  side  is
a serpent,  that  on  the  right,  or  south  side,  being  Nekhebet,  and
that  on  the  left,  or  north  side,  being  Uatchet.  Nekhebet  was,
astronomically,  the  western  or  right  eye  of  the  sun  during  his
journey  in  the  Underworld,  and  Uatchct  was  his  eastern  or  left
eye.  As  a nature  power  Nekhebet  was  a form  of  the  primeval
abyss  which  brought  forth  the  light,1  and  she  is  therefore  called  the
“ father  of  fathers,  the  mother  of  mothers,  who  hath  existed  from
“ the  beginning,  and  is  the  creatrix  of  the  world.”  In  the  bas-
l’eliefs  in  Egyptian  temples  she  is  usually  represented  with  her
twin  sister  Uatchet,  and  also  in  coronation  scenes,  for  it  was  most

important  for  a king  to  be  crowned  with  the  double  crown,
by  these  deities.

According  to  Brugsch,  special  rooms  or  chambers  were  set
apart  in  the  temples  of  Egypt,  near  the  sanctuaries  of  the  gods
wherein  Uatchet  and  Nekhebet  were  supposed  to  abide ; the
chamber  of  the  former  Avas  on  the  Avest,  or  right  side  of  the

sanctuary,  and  Avas  called  per  nexeri  ( ^ or  “house  of

fire,”  and  that  of  the  latter  Avas  on  the  cast,  or  left  side  of  the
sanctuary,  and  Avas  called  per  vr,  or  “great  house,”  t~|~J

And  it  is  very  probable  that  at  the  time  of  the  coronation  of  a
king  priestesses  dressed  themselves  in  the  character  of  the  tAVo
goddesses,  and  that  the  one  declared  the  South  had  been  given  to
him  Avhilst  the  other  asserted  the  same  concerning  the  North.  In

coloured  pictures  of  Nekhebet  Fakit,  ~*~~n  S l|(|  we  find  that  she

is  painted  of  a light  yellow,  or  almost  Avhite  colour,  Avhich  is
probably  intended  to  represent  the  colour  of  the  desert  regions  of
the  South,  and  of  the  white  light  of  the  newly  risen  sun  or  moon.
From  one  aspect  she  Avas  identified  with  Isis,  the  fertile  nature
goddess,  just  as  Uatchet  was  identified  Avith  Nephthys,  Avho  was
supposed  to  act  the  part  of  nurse  to  the  offspring  whom  Isis
brought  forth ; in  other  Avords,  Nekhebet  was  the  mother  of  the
Sun-god,  and  therefore  also  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  his  son,  and
Uatchet  Avas  his  nurse.  A passage  in  the  text  of  Mer-en-Ra


1 Brngadi,  Religion,  p.  324.


The  Goddess  UATCHIT.


UATCHET


441


(line  762)  seems  to  connect  Nekhebet  with  Annu,  for  we  read,
“ Thou  protectest  Mcr-en-Ra,  0 Nekhebet,  tliou  hast  protected
“ Mer-en-Rii,  0 Nekhebet,  in  the  House  of  the  Prince  in  Annu  ;
“thou  hast  committed  him  to  Am-hijnt-f,  and  Am-hent-f  hath
“ committed  him  to  A.m-sei*a-f  1 if  this  be  so  it  is  probable  that
Nekhebet  was  identified  with  one  or  other  of  the  local  goddesses
Iusaaset  or  Nebt-lietep.  In  an  interesting  text  published  by
M.  Maspero2  an  allusion  is  made  to  the  natron  of  the  city  of
Nekheb,  which  was  apparently  much  used  in  embalming  the  dead,
and  it  was  believed  that  in  consequence  the  goddess  N ekhebet  would
watch  over  them  in  the  Underworld,  and  would  change  their  faces
into  things  of  beauty  with  two  brilliant  eyes  of  light.  To  make
certain  of  this  result  the  “ bandage  of  Nekheb was  laid  upon  the
forehead  of  every  carefully  prepared  mummy.


Uatcuet,  the  goddess  of  tiie  North.

Uatchet,  or  Uatchit,  as  we  have  already  said  above,  is  a
goddess  who  was  worshipped  under  the  form  of  a serpent,  and  the

oldest  seat  of  her  cult  was  at  Per-uatehet,  L~l-J  | ^ @ • the  Bovtos
of  the  Greeks,  a city  which  was  situated  in  the  “land  of  Uatchet,”
f *’e,?  111  ^1C  soventh  liome  of  Lower  Egypt,

or  Nefer- Ament,  v^y } . The  temple  in  which  Uatchet  was

n nrr
3 1.1 1 C

venerated  and  its  precincts  are  known  in  texts  of  all  periods  by
the  name  Pe-Tep,  and  from  the  frequent  mention  of  this

double  name  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  it  is  clear  that  the  shrine  was
both  very  famous  and  very  old.  Uatchet  was  identified  with  Isis


*2  (HMk- IS


w I"™1]

i*  - ifc  Qktf  iz.  Ik-#-  Tkr-

2 The  <&0ff'ori9$  of  Ptolemy,  and  the  Ptenetu  of  Pliny;  see  de  Rouge,
Geographic,  p.  41.

* 'Monwire  stir  qudques  Papyrus,  pp,  50,  83.


442


UATCHET


at  a very  early  period,  and  there  is  abundant  proof  that  Horns,  the
son  of  Isis,  was  worshipped  with  Isis  at  Per-Uatchet ; we  are,  then,
driven  to  the  conclusion  that  Pe-Tep  was  a city  with  two  distinct
divisions,  in  one  of  which  IJatchet-Isis  was  worshipped,  and  in  the
other  Horus,  and  that  Horus  dwelt  in  Pe,  and  IJatchet-Isis  in  Tep.
Among  the  variants  of  the  name  worthy  of  mention  are  Pi-Tchepet,

□ |j(j  ^ , and  Pi-Tep,  □ (|{|  J In  late  dynastic  times  Uatchet
was  called  Ap-taui,  i.e.,  “ opener  of  lands,”  \/  but  the  exact

meaning  of  this  title  is  not  quite  certain.  Near  the  city  of  the
goddess  was  situated  the  Island  of  Kliebit,  © Jj  q , or
# Jj  ^ ^ , or  © J (j(J  has  ^cen  rightly  identified

Avith  the  island  called  Xep/, and  Xeppe s1  2 by  classical  writers,  and

Na-ateh,  the  Natho  of  the  Greeks,  which  play  such  a prominent
part  in  the  legends  of  Isis  and  Horus.  According  to  these,  Isis
retreated  to  the  papyrus  swamps  after  she  had  conceived  her  child,
and  she  remained  hidden  in  them  until  her  months  were  fulfilled,
Avhen  she  brought  forth  Horus,  avIio  afterwards  became  the
“ avenger  of  his  father ; ” Set  never  succeeded  in  finding  her
hiding  place,  because  the  great  goddess  had  found  some  means
whereby  she  caused  the  papyrus  and  other  plants  to  screen  her
from  his  view,  and  the  goddess  Uatchet  visited  her  and  helped  her
in  her  retreat.

In  pictures  and  reliefs  the  goddess  is  represented  in  the  form
of  a woman  who  ivears  upon  her  head  the  crown  of  the  North,  ^ ,

and  she  holds  in  one  hand  the  papyrus  sceptre,  round  which
is  sometimes  twined  a long  snake ; in  some  examples  she  is  seen

bearing  in  her  right  hand  the  croAvn  of  the  North,  , which  she

is  about  to  place  upon  the  head  of  a king.  Occasionally  we  find
her  in  the  form  of  a large  winged  serpent 3 with  the  crown  of  the
North  upon  her  head ; her  titles  are  “ Uatchet,  lady  of  heaven ; ”
“ Uatchet,  lady  of  Pe,  mistress  of  Tep,  the  august  one,  the  mighty

1 Bragsch,  Diet.  Gt'og.,  p.  215.  2 Ibid.,  p.  568.

3 See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  58  f.


round  about  Avhich  Avere  the  papyrus  sivamps


UATCHET


443


one ; " “ Uatchet,  lady  of  heaven,  mistress  of  all  tlie  gods ; ”
“ Uatchet,  lady  of  Ncbiui,  v***  JJ  [|(j  \\  lj?j  ©>  lady  of  Neter-


lady  of  Pcr-Mcnat,


crzi  <=>


I 21  ©’  an<l  lady  °f  Amemt,
© Besides  her  shrines  in  these  last  named  cities

41


“ta,  ^

one  built  in  her  honour  seems  to  have  existed  in  Sept,  ^jp5-.  The

views  held  about  the  goddess  in  connexion  with  the  dead  are  well
illustrated  by  certain  allusions  made  to  her  in  the  Book  o f the  Dead.
In  the  xviith  Chapter  she  is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  a god

called  Uehu,  ^ > and  she  is  definitely  identified  with  Isis

who  is  said  to  have  protected  her  son  Horus  by  shaking  her  hair  out
over  him,  although  Uatchet  appears  in  the  form  of  a serpent  twined
round  the  stalk  of  a papyrus  plant  and  is  called  the  “ eye  of  Ra.”
In  the  xliind  Chapter  the  shoulder  of  the  deceased  is  said  to
be  the  shoulder  of  Uatchet;  in  the  lxvith  Chapter  the  deceased
says,  “I  have  knowledge.  I was  conceived  by  Sekhet,  and  the
“ goddess  Nit  (Neith)  gave  me  birth.  I am  Horus,  and  I have
“ come  forth  from  the  Eye  of  Horus  (i.e.,  Ra).  I am  Uatchet  who
“ came  forth  from  Horus.  I am  Horus,  and  I fly  up  and  perch
“ myself  upon  the  forehead  of  Ra  in  the  bows  of  his  boat  which  is
“ in  heaven.”  In  Chapter  cxxxvi.A  the  deceased  is  said  to  be

the  ‘‘lord  of  Moat  | j),  which  the  goddess  Uatchet  worketh  ; ”

in  Chapter  cxxxvi.B  he  says,  “ I am  the  spiritual  body  (mh
“ a ^ 8 I)  °f  the  lord  of  Mailt  which  is  made  by  the  goddess

“ Uatchet ; ” and  in  Chapter  clxxix.  he  says,  “ The  Enemy  hath
“ come  to  an  end  beneath  me  in  the  pi’csence  of  the  Assessors,
and  I eat  him  in  the  great  field  on  the  altar  of  Uatchet  :”
finally,  in  Chapter  clxxii.  (1.  19)  certain  bones  in  the  head  of
the  deceased  are  identified  with  those  of  the  Uatchti  goddesses,
i.e.,  Nekhebet  and  Uatchet.  During  the  ceremonies  connected
with  embalming,  the  operator  or  priest  addressed  the  mummy,
saving,  “ The  goddess  Uatchet  cometh  unto  thee  in  the  form  of  the

“living  Uraeus  (<E> ^ j^,  Amt),  to  anoint  thy  head  with  their

1 Their  ss=  Uatchet  and  Nekhebet,


444


BAST


“ flames.  She  riseth  up  on  the  left  side  of  thy  head,  and  she
“ shineth  from  the  right  side  of  thy  temples  without  speech  ; they
rise  up  on  thy  head  during  each  and  every  hour  of  the  day,  even
“ as  they  do  for  their  father  lta,  ancl  through  them  the  terror
“ which  thou  inspirest  in  the  holy  spirits  is  increased,  and  because
“ Hatch ct  and  Xekliebet  rise  up  on  thy  head,  and  because  thy  brow
u becometh  the  portion  of  thy  head  whereon  they  establish  them*
“ selves,  even  as  they  do  upon  the  brow  of  Ka,  and  because  they
“ never  leave  thee,  awe  of  thee  striketh  into  the  souls  which  are
“ made  perfect.” 1

In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  Hatchet  generally  plays  the  part  of
destroyer  of  the  foes  of  the  deceased,  but  her  connexion  with
Maat  shows  that  she  was  identified  with  some  one  of  the  female
counterparts  of  Thoth.  In  a calendar  published  by  Brugsch2  we

see  that  under  the  name  of  Apt,  ( ^ , or,  (j  ^ vx? , Hatchet  was

regarded  as  the  goddess  of  the  eleventh  mouth  of  the  Egyptian
year  (Epiphi).


Bast,  ^


c>


thk  Lady  of  the  East.


Bast  was  the  goddess  par  excellence  of  the  eastern  part  of  the
Delhi,  and  the  centre  of  her  worship  was  at  Per-Bast,  or  I 'a- Bast,

L-(~J  ^ , or,  or  Bubastis,  the  capital  of  the

JS3

, , the  seventh  norne  (Bubastites)  of  Lower  Egypt ;


this  city  is  often  referred  to  by  classical  writers  (Herodotus  ii.
137,  156;  Diodorus  16,  51;  Strabo  xvii. ; Pliny  v.  9),  and  is
mentioned  in  the  Bible  under  the  name  Pibeseth,  nD:p3  (Ezekiel
xxx.  17).  The  site  is  marked  by  the  ruins  at  Tell-Basta  which
were  carefully  excavated  by  M.  Naville,  who  made  some  interesting
discoveries  concerning  the  great  antiquity  of  the  city  of  Bubastis,
and  who  published  the  inscriptions  which  are  still  to  be  found
upon  the  ruins  of  the  great  buildings  which  once  stood  there,®


l Maspero,  Mt'moire  sur  qnel quest  Papyrus*,  p.  82,

- AstronomUche  und  Axtrologi&chc  Inschriflen , p.  473,  No.  IT.
s *See  Eighth  and  Tenth  Memoirs  of  the  Egypt  Exploration  Fund,

1891  and  1892.


The  Godoess  BAST.


BAST


445


In  the  version  of  Manetho  according  to  Julius  Africanus  (Cory’s
Ancient  Fragments,  p.  98),  it  is  said  that  in  the  reign  of  Boethus,
the  first  king  of  the  Ilnd  Dynasty,  a chasm  opened  at  Buhastis,
and  that  many  persons  perished,  but  M.  Navillo  found  no  historical
remains  so  old  as  this  period  on  the  site ; he  has,  however,
discovered  on  blocks  of  stone  there  the  names  of  Khufu  and  Khaf-
Ka,  kings  of  the  IVtli  Dynasty,  written  in  such  a way  as  to  prove
that  the  inscriptions  were  cut  during  the  period  of  the  Early
Empire.  Of  the  kings  of  the  Vlth  Dynasty  only  the  name  of
Pepi  I.  is  found  at  Buhastis,  and  in  connection  with  this  king  it  is
interesting  to  note  that  in  his  funeral  inscription  (line  509)  his
heart  is  said  to  be  the  heart  of  Bestet,  i.e.,  Bast,  JJ  p ^ .


This  fact  shows  that  the  worship  of  Bast  was  already  very  old  in
Egypt,  at  all  events  in  the  Delta,  and  that  a definite  position
was  assigned  to  her  in  the  theological  system  of  the  priests  of

Heliopolis.  In  the  text  of  Pepi  II.  Q]  (o  J Lijj , it  is  said,
“ 0 god  of  the  double  town  ^ the  double  of  Pepi  is  for  thy

“ two  fingers ; Pepi  hath  swept  off  towards  the  heavens  like  a crane,
“ Pepi  hath  scented  out  the  heavens  like  a hawk,  Pepi  hath  flown
up  to  heaven  like  the  grasshopper  of  Ra : Pepi  must  not  be
“ repulsed,  O king,  there  is  no  green  herb  for  Pepi,  0 Bast

“(%-PS^)’ 01,(1  none  hath  made  dances  for  Pepi  [who


“ standeth]  like  a great  man  at  the  door”  (line  809).  To  find  the
name  of  Bast  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  is  natural  enough,  for  their
Heliopolitan  editors  introduced  many  local,  and  even  foi’eign
deities  into  the  companies  of  their  gods  ; in  the  Theban  Recension
of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  however,  Bast  and  her  city  are  very
rarely  mentioned,  and  her  name  is  entirely  omitted  from  the  list
of  the  gods  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  deification  oi  members


(Chapter  xlii.).

In  the  “ Negative  Confession  ” (line  16)  of  the  cxxvth  Chapter
we  have  the  mention  of  the  assessor  called  Thenemi,  Ao


i.e.,  he  who  goes  backwards,  who  is  said  to  come  forth  from  Bast,
^ and  an  assessor  called  Basti,  U ^ (line  20),  is  said  to  come
forth  from  the  city  of  Shetait.


BAST


446

The  goddess  Bast  is  usually  represented  in  the  form  of  a
woman  with  the  head  of  a cat,  but  she  also  has,  at  times,  the  head
of  a lioness  surmounted  by  a snake ; in  her  right  hand  she  holds
a sistrum,  and  in  her  left  an  aegis  with  the  head  of  a cat  or

lioness  on  the  top  of  it.  The  form  in  which  the  goddess  was

worshipped  in  the  earliest  times  was  that  of  a cat,  and  her  identifi-
cation with  a lioness  probably  belongs  to  a comparatively  late
period.  From  the  inscription  we  find  that  she  was  also  identified

with  Rat,  the  female  counterpart  of  Ra,  and  with  Temt,

X o’  ^e  ^ema^e  counterpart  of  Tern;  she  is  often  called  the
“eye  of  Ra,”  and  the  “eye  of  Tern,”  and  the  Shetat,  ^ ,
i.e.,  the  “ Hidden  one.”  According  to  one  legend  Bast  was  the
personification  of  the  soul  of  Isis,  jj  ^ ^ , and  was

worshipped  as  such  in  Bubastis,  and  it  was  only  at  “ Bubastis  of

the  South,”  Jj  ^ , i.e.,  Dendera,  that  she  was  regarded  as

the  female  counterpart  of  Tern.  From  the  fact  that  she  is  asso-
ciated with  the  god  Sept,  “ the  lord  of  the  East,”  it  is  tolerably
certain  that  in  one  aspect  .as  least  she  was  regarded  as  a foreign
goddess,  whose  attributes  and  characteristics  had  been  transferred

to  her.  As  Temt,  at  Dendera,  she  was  said  to  be  the

mother  of  the  lion-headed  god  Ari-hes,  f , the  lord  of
Aphroditopolis,  ~rf , the  holy  Sekhem,  ^ i cj  who  dwelt  in
the  temple  of  Bast  of  Dendei'a ; 1 her  husband  in  this  case  was  the
god  An,  i|  ^j,  who  was  a form  of  Osiris.

At  Thebes  Bast  was  identified  with  Mut,  the  lady  of  Asheru ;
at  Memphis  with  Mut  and  Hatchet,  at  Heliopolis  with  Iusaaset,
and  in  Nubia  with  Sekhet  and  Menhet,  at  a town  in  the  Delta

called  Sekhet,  DM  T©>  her  name  appears  to  have  been  Bare-
Ast,  Jj  <j:>  jj  ^ If  we  are  to  seek  for  the  derivation  of
the  name  Bast  in  Egyptian  we  must  connect  it  with  the  word  for

1 See  Brugsch,  Diet,  G{og.f  p.  208;  Religion , p.  332.

2 Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  226.


BAST


447


“fire,”  bes  JJ  |1  f^,  and  regard  the  goddess  as  a personification  of

a power  of  the  sun  which  made  itself  manifest  in  the  form  of  heat.
That  this  view  is  correct  is  certain  from  several  passages  in
Egyptian  texts,  wherein  both  Bast  and  Sekhet  are  described  as
closely  connected  forms  of  a female  personification  of  the  heat  and
light  of  the  Sun-god,  and  wherein  they  are  made  to  act  as  the
destroyers  both  of  the  enemies  of  the  Sun-god,  and  of  the  deceased.
Thus  of  Sekhet  it  is  said  in  the  “ Book  of  Overthrowing  Apep  ”
(xxvii.  15),  “The  Eye  of  Horus  falls  upon  him  cutting  and
“ hacking  his  head  from  his  neck ; the  goddess  Sekhet  tears  out
“ his  intestines  and  kicks  them  on  the  fire  with  her  left  leg;  she
“ places  them  on  the  fire  and  burns  into  him  in  her  name  of  4 Set-

“ usert-aa  ’ fl  "|  P '^s  ^ ^ |) > she  burns  into  him  and

“ drives  out  his  soul  from  his  body  ; she  obtains  the  mastery  over
“ him  in  her  name  of  1 Sekhet  ’ ^|J)  ; and  she  overpowers

“ him  in  her  name  of  ‘ Ivhut-nebat  ’ AWAA  JJ  l]  “ Q,  ?

“ i.e..  Eye  of  Flame)  ; she  consumes  his  interior  and  blazes  in  it
“ with  the  flame  of  her  mouth/'  Speaking  generally,  Sekhet
personified  the  burning,  fiery,  and  destructive  heat  of  the  sun,  and
Bast  represented  the  milder  heat  which  at  certain  periods  of  the  day
and  year  encouraged  the  growth  of  vegetation,  and  the  germination
of  seeds.

That  Sekhet  and  Bast  are  goddesses  of  fire  is  quite  clear,  for
they  accompany  Hathor  in  her  character  of  the  “Eye  ot  Ha,”  and
as  forms  of  the  Sun-god  they  symbolize  the  heat  of  the  late  and
early  summer  respectively.  It  has  already  been  said  that  Bast  is
identified  with  Mut  at  Thebes,  but  we  also  find  that  at  Thebes
Mut-Bast 1 is  depicted  as  Isis,  and  we  see  her  wearing  upon  her

head  the  feathers  of  the  god  Shu,  Jjji,  and  horns  with  the  sun’s
disk  between  them.  The  god  of  whom  she  is  the  female  counter-
part is  in  this  case  Amen-Ra-Temu-Khepera-Heru-khuti,  who  is
represented  with  the  head  of  a hawk  wearing  the  crown  of  Shu ;
the  offspring  of  the  two  deities  is  Khensu,  ^ ^ ^ • These

l See  Brugscli,  Religion  und  'Mythologies  p.  334.


448


FESTIVALS  OF  BAST


considerations  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  Bast  was,  at  all
events  in  dynastic  times,  a personification  of  the  moon,  especially
when  we  remember  that  Ivhensu  was  a lunar  god.  With  the  head
of  a lioness,  which  is  usually  painted  green,  she  symbolized  the
sunlight,  but  when  she  is  given  the  head  of  a cat  her  connexion
with  the  moon  is  undoubted ; Dr.  Brugsch  refers  to  Plutarch’s
remark  that  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  of  cats  become  full  and  very
large  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon,  and  it  is  probable  that  the
primitive  Egyptians  held  the  same  view,  and  that  as  a result
they  identified  the  cat-headed  goddess  Bast  with  the  moon.
From  another  aspect  Bast  was  regarded  as  exercising  a special
influence  over  women  who  were  with  child,  and  she  appears  on
several  occasions  as  one  of  the  goddesses  of  the  birth-chamber ;
her  son  Khensu  was  declared  “ to  make  women  fruitful,  and  make
“ the  human  germ  to  grow  in  his  mother’s  womb,”  and  he  was
supposed  to  do  this  especially  in  his  character  of  the  “ moon,  the
light-bearer.”

According  to  the  Stele  ol  Canopus,  the  chief  festivals  of  the
goddess  Bubastis  were  celebrated  in  the  months  of  April  and  May,
and  of  one  of  these  Herodotus  (ii.  (»<>)  furnishes  some  interesting
information.  He  says  : — “ Such  of  this  people  as  with  entyre  and
“ affectionate  zeale  most  religiously  obserue  the  feast  at  Bubastis,
“ behaue  and  beare  themselucs  on  this  manor.  Certayne  shippes
being  addressed,  wherein  infinite  numbers  of  men  and  women
“ sayle  towards  the  city,  in  the  meane  season  whiles  they  be  in
“ voiage  on  ye  water,  certain c of  the  women  play  upon  drums  and
*£  tabers,  making  a great  sound  and  noyse,  ye  men  on  pipes.  Such
as  want  these  implements,  clap  their  hands  and  straine  their
uoice  in  singing  to  ye  highest  degree.  At  what  city  soeuer  they
ariue,  happely  some  of  the  women  continue  their  mirth  and  dis-
port  on  ye  timbrels,  some  others  raile,  reuile,  and  scold  at  the
“ dames  of  ye  city  beyond  measure : many  trauise  and  daunce
“ minionly : other  cast  up  their  clothes,  and  openly  discouer  and
*•  bewray  their  shame,  doing  this  in  all  those  cittes  yt  are  neere
*•  adioyning  to  the  riuers  side.  Being  assembled  and  gathered
“ together  at  Bubastis,  they  honour  the  feast  day  with  principall
“ solemnity,  making  large  offerings  to  Diana,  wherein  is  greater


FESTIVALS  OF  BAST


449


“ expence  and  effusion  of  grape  wine  than  all  the  yearc  besides.
“ To  this  place  by  the  voice  of  ye  countrey  are  wont  to  repayre
“ 7000  men  and  women,  besides  children,  and  thus  they  passe  the
“ time  at  Bubastis.” 1 Of  the  city  of  l^ubastis  itself  the  same
writer  says 3 (ii.  137,  138) : — “ The  noble  city  of  Bubastis  seemeth
“ to  be  very  haughty  and  highly  planted,  in  which. city  is  a temple
“ of  excellent  memory  dedicate  to  the  goddesse  Bubastis,  called  in
“ our  speech  Diana,  then  the  which,  albeit  there  be  other  churches
“ both  bigger  and  more  richly  furnished,  yet  for  the  sightly  grace
“ and  seemelyncsse  of  building,  there  is  none  comparable  unto
“ it.  Besides,  the  very  entrance  and  way  that  leadeth  unto  the
“ city,  the  reste  is  in  forme  of  an  Ilande,  inclosed  round  about  with
“ two  sundry  streaines  of  the  river  Nil  us,  which  runne  to  either
“ side  of  the  path  way,  and  leauing  as  it  were  a lane  or  causey
“ betweene  them,  without  meeting,  take  their  course  another  way.
“ These  urines  of  .the  floud  are  each  of  them  an  hundred  foote
“ broade,  beset  on  both  sides  the  banckes  with  fayre  braunched
“ trees,  ouershadowing  ye  waters  with  a coole  and  pleasant  shade.
“The  gate  or  entry  of  the  city  is  in  heighth  10.  paces,  hauing  in
“ the  front  a beautifull  image,  6.  cubites  in  measure.  The  temple
“ it  selfe  situate  m the  middest  of  ye  city,  is  euermore  in  sight  to
“ those  yt  passe  to  and  fro.  For  although  ye  city  by  addition  of
“ earth  was  arrered  and  made  higher,  yet  ye  temple  standing  as  it
“ did  in  ye  beginning,  and  neuer  mooned,  is  in  maner  of  a lofty
and  stately  tower,  in  open  and  cleare  vie  we  to  euery  parte  of  ye
“city.  Bound  about  the  which  goeth  a wall,  ingrauen  with
“ figures  and  portraitures  of  sundry  beasts.  The  inner  temple  is
“ enuironed  with  an  high  grove  of  trees,  set  and  planted  by  the
“ hande  and  industrie  of  men : in  the  whiche  temple  is  standing  an
“ image.  The  length  of  the  temple  is  in  euery  way  a furlong.
“ From  the  entrance  of  the  temple  Eastward,  there  is  a fayre  large
“ causey  leading  to  the  house  of  Mercury,  in  length,  three  furlongs
“ and  four  acres  broade,  all  of  faire  stone,  and  hemmed  in  on  each
“ side  with  a course  of  goodly  tall  trees  planted  by  the  hands  of
“ men,  and  thus  as  touching  the  description  of  ye  temple.”

%■

1 B.  R.’b  Translation,  fob  86a.  3 B.  It’s  Translation,  iol.  108a.

Q g


450


NET  OH  NEITH


According  to  Brugsch,1  the  great  triad  of  the  city  of  Bubastis
consisted  of  Osiris,  Bast,  and  their  offspring,  who  was  called  Heru-
hekennu,  or  Nefer-Tem,  or  Bast ; their  equivalents

in  Heliopolis  were  Tern,  Iusaaset,  and  Nefer-Tem ; in  Memphis,
Ptali-Sekhet,  and  Nefer-Tem ; in  Thebes,  Amen- Ra- I;I eru-khuti ,
and  Mut-Bast,  and  Kliensu,  or  Horus,  or  Neb-aut-ab ; in  Aphro-
ditopolis,  Osiris- An,  and  Bast-Temt,  and  «Ari-hes.  In  the  Bu-
bastite  nome  were  many  temples  and  localities  in  which  the
worship  of  Bast  was  paramount,  and  among  such  may  be

mentioned  Bairsist,  JJ  <=>  jj  “ © , the  modem  Belbfls,  and

Netert,  Q nr  where  was  preserved  a thigh  of  Osiris,

shut  up  in  a “hidden  chest.” 2


Net,


■vNA  AiWWA  n t

0|> ,m  - v>


on


A/VWSA  /wv,vw

o *•=*»  0K  o


the  Lady  op  the  West.


Net,  or  Neitii,  was  one  of  the  oldest  of  all  the  Egyptian
goddesses,  and  it  is  tolerably  certain  that  her  worship  was  wide-
spread even  in  predynastie  times ; many  attempts  have  been  made
to  arrive  at  a decision  *about  her  earliest  attributes  by  means  of
etymological  processes,  but  they  are  unsatisfactory  because  they  only
illustrate  the  views  which  the  Egyptians  held  concerning  her  in  com-
paratively late  dynastic  times,  and  several  of  them  only  explain
the  objects  which  the  goddess  is  seen  holding  in  her  hands  in
pictures.  The  examples  reproduced  by  Lanzone  represent  the
goddess  in  the  form  of  a woman,  who  wears  upon  her  head  the
crown  of  the  North,  ; she  often  holds  a sceptre,  |,  or  J,  in  one
hand,  and  the  symbol  of  life  in  the  other,  but  sometimes  the  hand
which  holds  the  sceptre  also  grasps  a bow  and  two  arrows,  which
are  her  characteristic  symbols.  She  once 3 appears  inthefomiof
a cow  with  eighteen  stars  on  one  side,  and  a collar  round  her  neck
from  which  hangs  on  her  back  is  a ram-headed  lion  with  horns

and  plumes,  , upon  his  head.  The  cow  stands  in  a boat,  the

1 Religion , p.  336.  2 See  de  J.louge,  Geographic  p.  122.

3 Op.  cit.,  pi.  175  if.


The  Goddess  NIT  (Neith).


NET  OR  NEITH


451


prow  of  which  terminates  in  a lion’s  head  with  a disk  upon  it,  and
is  provided  with  wings ; the  stern  of  the  boat  terminates  in  a
rain’s  head,  and  by  the  fore  feet  of  the  cow,  which  is  described  as
“Net,  the  Cow,  which  gave  birth  to  Rfi,”  (]  ^ j fj}^’
is  an  utchat , In  one  scene  she  is  represented  with  a crocodile

sucking  at  each  breast.'  In  late  dynastic  times  there  is  no  doubt
that  Net  or  Neith  was  regarded  as  nothing  but  a form  of  Hathor,
but  at  an  earlier  period  she  was  certainly  a personification  of  a
form  of  the  great,  inert,  primeval  watery  mass  out  of  which  sprang
the  Sun-god  Rii,  and  it  is  possible,  as  Brugsch  has  suggested,  that
the  name  Net  may  be  akin  in  meaning  to  Nut.  On  the  other
hand,  if  we  connect  her  name  with  the  root  nrh-L  ^ ,

“ to  knit,  to  weave,”  and  the  like,  we  may  accept  the  view  of
those  who  describe  Net  as  the  goddess  of  weaving,  and  who


identify  the  signs,  >oc,  and  xtk,  which  are  often  seen  upon
her  head,  with  a shuttle.  It  is,  however,  quite  clear  that  the
oldest  and  most  characteristic  symbols  of  the  goddess  were  two
arrows  and  a shield,  which  at  a very  early  period  became  the
recognized  emblems,  not  only  of  Net  herself,  but  also  of  the  city  in
which  her  chief  temple  was  situated,  and  they  also  served  as  the
symbols  which  formed  the  name  of  the  nome  of  which  die.

4#

city  Sa'is  was  the  capital.  Now  since  Net  was  represented  by  a
bow  and  two  arrows,  there  is  no  good  reason  for  doubting  that  she
was  originally  either  a goddess  of  war  or  of  the  chase,  and  it  is
probable  that  she  was  identified  with  a local  wood-spirit,  or
hunting-spirit,  which  was  worshipped  in  the  cast  of  the  Delta  in
the  predynnstic  period.  In  any  case  it  is  quite  certain,  when  we
consider  the  attributes  which  are  ascribed  to  her  in  the  texts,  that
she  represents  several  goddesses  who  were  die  conceptions  ot  quite
different  periods  of  history  and  of  stages  of  civilization.  Thus,  at
times,  her  attributes  cannot  be  distinguished  from  those  gf  Tsis,
Hatchet,  Sekhet,  Bast,  Mut,  Xekhebet,  and  other  goddesses,  and
she  was  identified  with  one  and  all  of  them  by  turns.

The  most  ancient  and  famous  sanctuary  of  Net  was  at  Suis,
, Sant,  the  capital  of  the  fifth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,

1 Laiizoue,  op.  eiL,  pi.  175,  No.  3.


452


NET  Oil  NEITH


which  bore  the  name  of  M “ Sapi-meht,”  i.e.,  “ Sapi  of  the

n nTt  i rriTr

iiiiji.  lxtm

North,”  and  which  was  also  called  Het  Net,  U ^ i.e.,  “ House

of  Net,”  and  “Ast-Net,”  j jj~,  i.e.,  “The  seat  of  Net;”
a rare  name  of  the  city  quoted  by  Brugsch 1 and  de  Rouge 3 is


““rt"

“ temples  of  Net,”


or


*>  A ,'A

- | jj  ^ . The  texts  often  mention  the
|.  that  is  to  say,  the  temples  of  the  gods


who  were  worshipped  with  Net  at  Sa’is ; the  names  of  thcs<
temples  are: — Het-khebit,  Q Resenet  and  Mehenet,


CT3’


Per-Rii,  Jj , and  Per-Tcm,  t~1~1  ^ . The  great  temple  of

Net  at  Saifs  must,  of  course,  not  be  confounded  with  that  of  Sais  of
Upper  Egypt,  i.e.,  Esneh,  which  was  called  Pcr-Nct-mut-kheper-


lietch,  L“1_J  ^ Q ©;  the  names  of  Esneh  are  Ani,  | (j/j

and  Seni,  At  Sais  Avas  held  the  great  annual  festival  in

honour  of  Isis-Net,  as  recorded  by  Herodotus  (ii.  59),  and  it  is  this
which  is  described  by  the  same  writer  (ii.  92)  in  the  following
words 3 : — “In  like  manner  meeting  (as  before)  at  the  city  Sais,
“ there  to  accomplishe  the  rites  and  ceremonies  due  to  the  day,  at
“ the  approche  and  neere  poynt  of  the  cuening,  they  furnish  and
“ beset  their  houses  with  torches  and  lampes,  which  being  re-
“ plenished  with  pure  oyle  mingled  with  salte,  they  giue  fire  to  the
“ Aveike,  and  suffer  them  to  continue  burning  till  the  next
**  morning,  naming  the  day  by  the  feast  of  lampes.  Such  as
“ resort  not  to  this  feast,  do  neuerthelesse  at  their  owne  homes  giue
“ due  honour  to  the  night,  placing  in  euery  corner  of  theyr  house
“ an  infinite  number  of  tapers  and  candles,  the  customc  being  not
“ only  kept  at  Sais,  but  spread  and  scattered  throughout  the
“ whole  region.  But  for  what  onde  this  night  is  held  soleinne  by
“ lighting  of  lampes,  a certayne  mystieall  and  religious  reason  is
“ yeelded  Avhich  we  must  keepe  secret.”

After  describing  the  place  in  the  temple  of  Sais  where  Apries


a Diet.  Ot'og p.  1323.  8 Geographic  de  la  Jianse'figyptei  p>  2^-"

8 B;  K.’s  translation,  fol.  80b,


NET  Oil  NE1TH


453

was  buried,  and  mentioning  the  “ fayre  Chamber  builte  of  stone,
“ beauty fied  with  sundry  Pyllers  ingrauen  like  unto  Palme- trees,
“ being  otherwyse  very  sumptuously  and  royally  garnished,”  and
the  two  “ inayne  posts  in  the  middest  ol'  the  chamber,  bctweene
“ the  which  standeth  a Cophine,”  and  the  “ toumbe  in  the  same,
“ the  name  whereof,”  he  says,  “ 1 may  not  descry  without  breaehe
“ of  Religion,”  Herodotus  goes  on  to  speak  of  other  matters
connected  with  Sa'is,  and  says  (ii.  170) : — “ A t Sa'is  in  the  Temple
“ of  Minei’va,  beneath  the  Churche  and  neerc  unto  the  walle  of
" Minerva,  in  a base  Chappell,  are  standings  certayne  grcate
“ brooches  of  stone,  whereto  is  adioyninge  a lowe  place  in  manner
“ of  a Dungeon,  couered  over  wvth  a stone  curiously  wroughte,  tho
“ vaute  it  selfe  being  on  cilery  side  earned  with  most  exquisite
“ arte,  in  biggnesse  match inge  with  that  in  Delos,  which  is  called
“Trochoides.  Hei’cin  euei*y  one  counterfav tetli  the  shadowes  of
hys  owne  affections  and  phantasies  in  the  nvghte  season,  which
“ the  Aegyptians  call  Mysteryes ; touchinge  wliiche,  God  forbid,  I
“ should  aduenture  to  discouer  so  much  as  they  vouchsafed  to  tell
“ inee.”  1 * The  “ Mysteries  ” here  referred  to  were  probably  the
ceremonies  performed  in  connexion  with  the  annual  commemoration
of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Osiris,  who,  according  to  an  old
legend,  Avas  buried  at  Sais.

Passing  now  to  consider  the  autiquity  of  the  cult  of  Net  at
Sa'is  Ave  find  much  to  prove  that  the  Avorship  of  this  goddess  dates
from  the  latter  part  of  the  predynastic  period.  The  earliest  form
of  Net’s  name  is  found  on  an  ivory  cover  of  a box  and  on  an  ivory
vase,3  Avhere  it  occurs  in  connexion  Avitli  /u.7ep,  and  so  serves  as  a

constituent  part  of  the  proper  name  Xet-hetep,  ^><^c=s=».  Xoav,

Net-hetep,  Ave  knoAv,  Avas  connected  Avith  the  early  king  Sma,  and
she  appears  to  have  been  the  Avife  of  king  CkA,  Aha,  avIio  has  heen
commonly,  but  on  insufficient  evidence,  identified  Avith  Mena,  the
first  historical  king  of  Egypt.  But  Avhether  Aha  is  Mena  or  not
matters  little  for  our  purpose  here,  for  it  is  quite  certain  that  both
he  and  Sma  flourished  about  the  beginning  of  the  period  of  the

1 B.  R.’s  translation.,  fol.  1106.

* See  Petrie,  lloyal  Tombs,  ii.,  pp.  4-20,  anil  pi.  ii.


NET  OR  NEITH


1st  Dynasty,  and  this  being  so  the  name  of  the  goddess  which
forms  part  of  the  name  of  the  queen  Net-hetep  must  also  be  as
old.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  even  in  the  1st  Dynasty  the  cult  of  Net
must  have  been  of  considerable  antiquity.  During  the  first  four
dynasties  the  goddess  possessed  sanctuaries  in  many  parts  of
Egypt,  and  several  of  her  priests  and  priestesses  were  buried  in
mastaba  tombs  in  and  near  Sakkara.  M.  Al allot  quotes 1 an
interesting  passage  from  the  sarcophagus  of  Apa-fmkli  in  which
she  is  addressed  together  with  Anunu,  (1  ^ O and  Ncscrt,


— ^ o jL' . who  are  two  very  ancient  goddesses,  and  in  which  it  is

declared  that  she  came  forth  from  the  god,  and  that  the  god  came

forth  from  her.'  We  thus  see  that  in  the  IVth  Dynasty  she  was

thought  to  he  at  once  the  mother  and  the  daughter  of  the  Sun-god

lift,  and  that  she  had  more  than  one  form,  and  possessed  also  the

power  to  conceive  and  bring  forth  the  new  Sun-god  daily  by

means  of  the  divine  and  magical  formulae  with  which  she  was

provided.  Among  her  early  titles  is  that  of  Apt-uat,  i.e.,  “ Opener

of  the  wavs,”  . which  seems  to  suggest  that  she

was  in  some  way  a female  counterpart  of  Anubis.

In  the  text  of  Unas  (line  67)  we  find  the  “ temples  of  Net,”

J ,’  mentioned,  side  by  side  with  the  citv  of  Top,  „ _ , and
ijlrb  ^ ’ J • ’ 1 ’ □ ©

the  name  of  the  goddess  is  coupled  with  that  of  Tatet,


who  was  supposed  to  dress  the  dead : thus  the  passage  clearly
proves  that  Net  was  believed  to  perform  some  important  ceremonies
in  connexion  with  the  preservation  of  the  dead,  and  it  would
seem  that  these  were  of  a magical  character.  We  may  note  in
passing  that  in  the  late  “ Ritual  of  Embalmment,”  published  by
M.  Maspero,1  it  is  directed  that  a piece  of  linen,  upon  which  were
drawn  or  painted  figures  of  Fliipi  and  Isis,  be  placed  in  the  hand
of  the  deceased,  and  that  Isis  is  identified  with  Neith.  This  piece


i

o


lji  Cult  tie  Neit  a Sat*-,  Paris,  1888,  p,  104.


1 MWZ  *=*

* Me  moire  snr  quel  quo*  Papyru * dn  Louvre , p.  90.


NET  OR  NEITH


455


of  linen  was  intended  to  serve  as  an  amulet,  and  to  bring  to  the
mummy  the  protection  of  Net,  who  is  referred  to  under  the  name
of  Isis.  In  the  text  of  Tinas  (line  597)  we  liave  the  following
addi'ess: — “Homage  to  thee,  0 Ilorus,  In  the  regions  of  Horns;
“ homage  to  thee,  0 Set,  in  the  regions  of  Set ; homage  to  thee,

“ 0 Aarer  ^ in  Sekhet-Aarer ; 1 homage  to  thee,  0

“ Netetthaab  (^  ^ "|  [|  <>) , thou  son  of  these  four  gods  who  are  in

“ the  Great  Temple,  wherefrom  the  voice  of  Unas  goeth  not  out.
“ Take  oflf  your  apparel  in  order  that  Unas  may  see  you  as
“ Ilorus  seeth  Isis,  and  that  Unas  may  see  you  as  Nehebu-kau


seeth  Selqet ; and  that  Unas  may


“see  you  as  Sebek  seeth  Net,  and  that  Unas  may  see  you  as  Set
“seeth  Netetthaab.”  A little  further  on  (lines  620-627)  we  have
another  reference  to  Net  and  her  sou  Sebek  in  these  words,  “ Unas


“hath  come  in  the  form  of  Khent-em-meht-akcba


/WNAAA
AVUUM
^ iVMV,


/wvA.'V'k  '

/vww\


) , and  this  Unas  is  Sebek  with  the  green

“ feather  ( f'j  J p) , who  watcheth  and  who  raiseth  up  his
“forehead,  and  who  is  the  white  one  who  cometh  forth  from  the
“ thigh[s]  of  Khebset-urt  (©  J •&)  , who  is  in  the  light.
u Unas  hath  come  to  his  pools  which  are  ou  the  banks  of  the  canal
“ £ J ™)  of  Meht-urt  ™ <§*)  , at  the  place  where

offerings  flourish,  and  in  the  fields  which  are  in  the  horizon,  and
6i  he  hath  made  to  flourish  his  garden  on  the  banks  of  the  horizon.

“ Unas  hath  brought  the  crystal  (s=>  jj  o Tflf ) to  ^ie  ^reat
“ Plye  which  is  in  the  field.  Unas  hath  taken  his  place  in  the
“ horizon,  he  riseth  like  Sebek,  the  son  of  Net  ( ^

“ eateth  with  his  mouth,  he  voideth  water,”  etc.  In  the  text
of  Teta  (line  204)  Net  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  Isis,

Nephthys,  and  Serqet-IIetu,  Jp^fo]  0 3^P  ^

as  one  of  the  four  goddesses  who  shot  forth  flame,  p jj  ^ .


456


NET  OR  NEITH


and  worked  “protection,”  on  behalf  of  the  god  Nu,

when  he  was  seated  on  his  throne.

These  same  four  goddesses  also  appear  in  connection  with  the
Four  Children  of  Horus,  whom  they  assisted  in  protecting  by
magical  means  the  various  parts  of  human  bodies  which  were
placed  in  “ Canopic  jars.”  Thus  Isis  says,  “ I conquer  the  foe,  I
“make  protection  for  Amseth  who  is  in  me”;  Nephthys  says,
“ I hide  the  hidden  thing,  and  I make  protection  for  Hiipi  who  is
“ in  me  ” ; Net  says,  “ I pass  the  morning  and  I pass  the  night  of
“ each  day  in  making  protection  for  Tuamutef  who  is  in  me  ” ;
Serqet  says,  “ I employ  each  day  in  making  protection  for  Qebh-
“ sennuf  who  is  in  me.”  1 The  Egyptian  word  used  here  to
express  the  meaning  of  “ protection  ” is  »*«**»,  and  the  character
represents  a knot  of  a peculiar  kind  ; the  part  which  knots  and
cords  tied  in  various  ways  have  always  played  in  magical
ceremonies  is  too  well  known  to  need  description,  and  it  need
only  be  pointed  out  here  that  the  sign  indicates  that  the
protection  which  Net  exercised  on  behalf  of  the  dead  must  have
been  of  a magical  character.  This  view  is  supported  by  a passage
in  the  text  of  Unas  (1.  271  ff.)  in  which  we  find  Net  mentioned  in


connection  with  the  goddesses  Ana,


A


AVWSA

1


Urt,


LIU  V .
U 44’


&

now  Urt-


Nesert,  q and  Urt-hekau,

hekau  is  distinctly  said  to  be  the  “ protective  power  of  the  Eye  of
Horus,”  and  thus  the  attributes  of  Net  and  of  the  other  goddesses
must  be  of  a kindred  nature.  In  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (1.  572),  in
the  passage  relating  to  the  deification  of  the  members  of  the
deceased  it  is  said  that  the  thighs  of  Pepi  are  “Net  and  Serqet,”


n:


5^;  but  in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Hook  of  the.

Dead  (Chapter  xlii.  11),  it  is  the  fore-arms  of  the  deceased  which
are  identified  with  the  fore-arms  of  the  lady  of  Sais,  i.e.,  Net.  In
the  Theban  Recension  the  deceased  declares  (lxvi.  2)  that  he  was
conceived  by  the  goddess  Sekhet,  and  that  the  goddess  Net  gave
birth  to  him.  In  Chapter  lxxi.  15,  we  read,  “ Behold,  the  god  of
“ One  Face  is  with  me.  The  god  Sebek  hath  stood  up  within  his


1 For  the  texts  see  my  Mummy,  p.  199  ff.


The  Goddess  SEBEK-NIT  suckling  HORUS.


NET  OR  NEITH


457


“ ground,  and  the  goddess  Net  hath  stood  up  within  her  planta-
“ tion  ” ; and  elsewhere  (cxiv.  5 ; cxvi.  2)  we  read  that  she
shineth  in  the  city  of  Matchat,  or  Mentchat.  In  Chapter  cxvi.  4,
the  deceased  says,  “ 0 ye  gods  who  dwell  in  Khemennu,  ye  know
me  even  as  I know  the  goddess  Net  ” ; and  in  Chapter  cxlv.  81,
he  says,  “ 1 have  entered  into  the  house  of  Astcs,  and  I have  made
“ supplication  to  the  Khati  gods  and  to  Sekhet  in  the  Temple  of
“ Net.”  In  the  Rubric  to  Chapter  clxiii.,  which  has  for  its  vignette
a serpent  on  legs,  and  two  utchats  on  legs,  it  is  ordered  that  in  the
pupil  of  one  ntrhat  there  shall  be  drawn  a figure  of  the  “ god  of  the
lifted  hand  ” with  the  face  of  Net,  and  having  plumes  and  a back
like  unto  a hawk.  From  one  aspect  at  least  it  is  clear  that  Net  must
have  been  a form  of  the  power  of  the  Eye  of  Horus,  as  well  as  of
Isis,  his  mother  ; her  son  Sebek  is  a local  form  of  Horus,  and  it  is
probable  that  the  two  crocodiles,  which  are  seen  accompanying  her,
and  Avhich  have  been  already  mentioned,  are  in  some  way  connected

with  the  god  Ilenti,  ^j,  whose  symbols  are  two  crocodiles.


llenti,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe,  was  a form  of  Osiris.  It  is,
however,  possible  that  one  of  the  crocodiles  may  represent  Horus,

or  Osiris,  and  the  other  J leteh-nefer-Sebcq,  Q £ [1  JJ  ^ , the  son  of


Net.


We  have,  unfortunately,  no  description  of  the  cei’emonies
connected  with  the  worship  of  Net,  but  there  is  good  reason  for
believing  that  they  were  of  a mystic  character,  and  that  they  were
modified  from  time  to  time  in  accordance  with  the  change  of  beliefs
of  the  priests  in  respect  of  the  attributes  of  the  goddess.  Origin-
ally its  chief  characteristics  must  have  been  those  of  a local  Delta
or  Libyan  goddess  of  nature,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  included
ceremonies  which  were  intended  to  represent  the  various  processes
of  generation  and  reproduction.  This  view  is  supported  by  several
of  the  titles  which  are  given  in  Egyptian  texts  to  her  and  to  her
kindred  goddesses.  Thus  as  Isis  she  was  the  first  to  give  birth  to  a

god,  JtTjT  “I  fj]  ® ; 1 as  Hathor  she  was  the  great  cow  which
gave  birth  to  Ra  ; ” and  she  is  called  “ the  great  goddess,  the  mother


1 See  Mallet,  he  CuUe  ,le  Neit,  p.  140.


458


NET  OR  NE1TH


“ of  all  the  gods,”  and  “ Rat  (i.e.,  the  female  Sun),  the  lady  of
“ heaven,  the  mistress  of  all  tlie  gods,  who  came  into  being  in  the
“ beginning.”  In  a text  quoted  by  M.  Mallet  she  is  actually  called

“ One,”  ^ » a fact  which  proves  that  at  a certain  period  of  her

history  she  was  to  goddesses  what  Ra  was  to  gods.  A certain
amount  of  light  is  thrown  upon  the  history  of  Net  by  the  inscrip-
tion 1 on  the  famous  shrine-bearing  statue  of  Utcliat-Heru  now
preserved  in  the  Vatican,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  this
monument  is  not  older  than  the  early  part  of  the  Persian  period.
Utcliat-Heru  was  an  official  of  very  high  rank  in  Sai's,  and  he  was
high-priest  of  Net,  and  as  such  bore  the  official  title  of  Ur-. -mu,

<^<f  , i.e.,  “gi'eat  one  of  knowledge.”  He  was  commander  of

the  vessels  of  Aahmes  II.  (Amasis),  and  when  Cambyses  came  to
Egypt  and  visited  Sai's  after  his  conquest  of  the  country,  it  was
Utcliat-Heru  who  received  him,  and  explained  to  him  the  antiquity
and  greatness  of  the  goddess  Net,  and  conducted  him  through  the
various  sanctuaries  which  were  grouped  together  in  her  temple.
In  the  course  of  his  conversation  with  the  king  he  told  him  that  it
was  Net,  the  mighty  mother,  who  had  given  birth  to  Ha,  and  that
she  was  the  first  to  give  birth  to  anything,  and  that  she  had  done
so  when  nothing  else  had*  been  born,  and  that  she  had  never  her-
self been  born.  For  some  reason  or  other  Utchat-IIeru  found
favour  in  the  sight  of  Cambyses,  and  the  text  tells  us  that  the
king  made  offerings  “ even  as  every  other  good  king  had  done.”
The  funds  provided  by  Cambyses  were  spent  by  Utehat-Heru  in
reviving  the  schools  which  had  fallen  into  decay,  and  in  refoundiug
colleges  for  the  priests  of  Sai's.  The  fame  and  traditions  of  the
antiquity  of  Net  and  her  worship  were  current  among  the  late
Greek  writers,  and  it  will  be  remembered  that  Plutarch  (I)e  hide
nt  Ouir.,  ix.)  refers  to  an  inscription  on  a statue  of  Pallas  which  he
renders,  “ I am  everything  which  hath  been,  and  which  is,  and
“ which  shall  be,  and  there  hath  never  been  any  who  hath  un-
“ covered  (or  revealed)  my  veil.” 2 Elsewhere  (Chapter  lxii.)  he


1 See  itevilloufc  in  Revue  fiijyptolotjiqne,  tom.  i.,  p.  72  ft.

* 'fiyw  tifjLt  iruv  to  ytyovbs,  «eai  or,  xal  tirofiuov,  kcu  rbv  i/iw  iriir\ov  ovSut  irv>
aV€Kd\v\f/€P.


NET  OR  NEITH


459


says  that  the  Egyptians  often  called  Isis  by  the  name  Athene,
which  signifies,  “ I have  come  from  myself.”  1

Up  to  the  present  no  hieroglyphic  inscription  has  been  found
which  can  be  regarded  exactly  as  the  original  of  the  Greek  words,
but  there  is  no  doubt  that  Plutarch  only  turned  into  words  the
opinions  about  the  goddess  Net  which  were  current  when  he  wrote
his  famous  treatise  on  Isis  and  Osiris.  In  a passage  of  Proclus,
who  gives  a Greek  rendering  of  an  Egyptian  text  in  terms  closely
resembling  those  of  Plutarch,  after  the  words  Tov  ipbv  xLT“>va  ovBeU
a.7T€Kci\vifj£i',  the  goddess  Net  is  made  to  say,  ov  iyot  Kapirbv  ctckov,
fj\i o«  iyevero,  which  beyond  all  doubt  reflects  with  considerable
exactitude  the  meaning  of  the  Egyptian  title  of  “ Net,  the  mighty
mother,  who  gave  birth  to  Ha.”  2 The  words  put  into  the  mouth  of
the  goddess,  “ 1 am  what  has  been,  what  is,  and  what  shall  be,”
are,  as  M.  Mallet  has  remarked,3  only  a development  of  a play

upon  her  name  JSet  and  the  word  rat  , or  mtet  , i.e.,  a

q ■ a q


person  or  tiling  which  is,  or  which  exists,  or  which  has  being.
In  other  words,  the  Egyptians  regarded  Net  as  the  “ Being  ” par
excellence,  i.e.,  the  Being  who  was  eternal  and  infinite,  and  was
the  creative  and  ruling  power  of  heaven,  earth,  and  the  under-
world, and  of  every  creature  and  tiling*  in  them.  Plutarch,  how-
ever, was  not  without  authority  when  lie  made  Net  say,  nal  tov
ipov  iriir'kov  oiiSeis  ttcj  aireKd\v\jjev,  for  i n an  Egyptian  text  published
by  Pierrot 1 under  the  title  of  “lady  of  the  sycamore  house,”


^•—^7  /WAVK

a


words : —


crzP


the  goddess  Net  is  addressed  in  the  following


II


d


Hail,


X

WVM  1 V -/j

IK!  P

mat

ur

an  sefekh

mesv-s

mother

great,

not  hath  been  uncovered

thy  birth !

1 rjXOov  air*  ifiavrijs.

8 Op.  cit.,  p.  191.

4 JStudc * HgyptologiqueH,  etc Paris,  1873,  p.  45  ff.


^ Net  urt  mut  mes  Ra.


460


NET  OR  NEITH


4S  i:  ik^-

d vrtert  flat  am  hb.cn  en  Tuaut  shetat  sep  sen

Hail,  goddess  great,  within  the  underworld  which  is  doubly

hidden,


at  at.  rekh-s
thou  unknown  one !


l«f.


iidrdi

thou  divine  one


great,


P*©  ^ ct

sefekh-tn-


Q J\
sefekh


m p


sal  etc  ft -l  a,  qeras-s  a sajelrn  senhu-s

hath  been  unloosed  thy  garment ! 0 unloose  thy  garment.


□ ~ f
Soil


a Ha  pi  an  ertfi-tn  nat-ii  en  dq

Hail,  Hapt  (Hidden  one),  not  is  given  my  way  of  entrance


miidt


sh&pt


jj ® 1 ®^,A$  I'


him  is


to  her,  come,  receive  thou  the  soul  of  Osiris,  protect  it


era  hhrii  an


tifiui


within  [thy]  two  hands.


These  lines  form  a prayer  which  is  put  into  the  mouth  of
Ankh-f-en-Khensu,  and,  in  the  form  in  which  wo  have  it  here,  is
not  older  than  the  Saite  period,  i.e.,  about  n.c.  550 ; but  the
petition  refers  very  distinctly  to  the  mysterious  character  of  the
births  of  Net,  and  to  her  attribute  of  inscrutability  in  the  doubly
hidden  underworld,  and  whilst  the  deceased  declares  that  none  has
ever  penetrated  the  cloak  wherewith  she  is  shrouded,  he  beseeches
her  to  unloose  it  for  him.  Two  words  are  used  to  express  “ cloak,”


NET  OR  NEITH


4H1


i.e.,  qerda  and  sen/m  (jpg  and  ~ ^ a fact  which  calls

to  mind  the  two  words  ireVXos  and  yiTwc  which  are  used  by
Plutarch  and  Prod  us  respectively  to  express  the  same  word.  It
is,  however,  quite  certain  that  the  ideas  and  beliefs  expressed  in
the  above  prayer  arc  far  older  than  the  time  of  the  Psammetici,
and  in  one  form  or  other  they  may  be  actually  traced  back  to  the
period  of  the  Early  Empire.

Another  proof  of  the  mysterious  and  remarkable  powers
which  were  attributed  to  Net  by  Greek  writers  is  given  bv
Horapollo,  who  in  his  “ Hieroglyph iea  ” (i.  12)  says  that  when  the
Egyptians  wish  to  depict  a figure  of  Hephaistos  they  draw  a scarab
and  a vulture,  and  when  they  want  to  represent  Athene  (i.e.,  Net)
they  draw  a vulture  and  a scarab,  for  they  believe  that  the  world
is  composed  of  two  elements,  the  one  male  and  the  other  female,
these  two  being  the  only  gods  whom  they  believe  to  be  both  male
and  female.1  We  have  already  seen  that  the  god  Khepera  was
supposed  to  possess  the  powers  of  begetting  and  conceiving,  and
giving  birth,  and,  in  fact,  to  be  at  once  both  male  and  female,
“ and  other  forms  of  the  Sun-god  were  said  to  be  self-begotten,
self-produced,  and  self-born ; ” these  characteristics  are,  however,
not  applied  to  any  goddess  except  Net.  Since  the  Egyptians
declared  that  she  was  eternal,  and  was  self-produced,  it  followed  as  a
matter  of  course  that  both  a masculine  and  a feminine  nature  must  be
attributed  to  her.  We  have  already  described  how  Khepera  pro-
duced his  son  Shu  and  his  daughter  Tefnut,  the  information  on  these
points  being  derived  from  ancient  Egyptian  writings,  but  details  of
the  birth  of  Ka  by  Net  have  not  come  down  to  us,  and  as  far  as
can  be  seen  the  Egyptian  conception  of  the  manner  in  which  this
goddess  exerted  her  reproductive  powers  is  of  a far  loftier  character
than  that  which  appertained  to  the  creation  of  Shu  and  Tefnut  by
Khepera.  It  is  customary  to  say  that  the  Egyptians  possessed
no  philosophical  conceptions  until  the  arrival  of  the  Greeks  in
their  country,  but  this  view  is  a mistaken  one,  for  there  is  much
evidence  extant  which  proves  that  already  under  the  Early  Empire
Egyptian  philosophers  were  constantly  engaged  in  thinking  out  the


1 ovroi  yap  /torai  Qtusv  vap’  avroU,  aptrtvoO^ktu  iirdpxowri  (ed.  Leemans,  p.  19).


462


NET  OR  NEITH


problems  which  are  connected  with  cosmogony  and  theogony.
The  reason  why  they  did  not  advance  as  a nation  further  in
such  matters  is  that  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  hampered  by
traditional  opinions  and  beliefs,  and  by  the  rituals  and  ceremonies
which  the  people  in  general  demanded  should  be  integral  portions
of  the  public  worship  of  the  gods.  The  statements  of  Greek
writers,  taken  together  with  the  evidence  derived  from  the  hiero-
glyphic texts,  prove  that  in  very  early  times  Net  was  the  personi-
fication of  the  eternal  female  principle  of  life  which  was  self-
sustaining  and  self-existent,  and  was  secret,  and  unknown,  and
all-pervading;  the  more  material  thinkers,  whilst  admitting  that
she  brought  forth  her  son  Ra  without  the  aid  of  a husband,  were
unable  to  divorce  from  their  minds  the  idea  that  a male  germ  was
necessary  for  his  production,  and  finding  it  impossible  to  derive  it
from  a power  or  being  external  to  the  goddess,  assumed  that  she
herself  provided  not  only  the  substance  which  Avas  to  form  the
body  of  Ra  but  also  the  male  germ  Avhicli  fecundated  it.  Thus  IS'  et
was  the  prototype  of  partheno-genesis.

When,  hoAvever,  as  Horapollo  says,  the  Egyptians  represented
Net  by  a vulture  they  referred  to  her  in  her  character  of  the
unh’ersal  mother,  and  as  such  many  allusions  are  made  to  her  in
the  texts.  Certain  passages,  it  is  true,  speak  of  her  having  set  her
arroAV  to  her  boAV,1  and  of  her  enemies  falling  daily  under  her
darts,  but  usually  she  is  said  to  provide  clothing  for  the  dead,  just
as  the  house-mother  arrays  her  dead  in  linen.  Thus  in  the  form  of
Mehenit,  (){)“=*  she  brought  linen  apparel  and  coverings  of
Avhite,  green,  red,  and  purple  linen  to  deck  the  face  of  the
deceased,  and  an  ancient  legend  declared  that  she  arrayed  Osiris
in  the  apparel  Avhich  had  been  specially  Avoven  for  him  by  the  tAvo
Rekliti  goddesses,  i.e.,  Isis  and  Nephthys.  And  because  of

the  part  which  she  had  taken  in  arraying  Osiris  in  his  grave-
clothes  Net  Avas  made  to  preside  over  the  “good  house,”
L"i~1  J)  ’ **e.,  chamber  in  Avhich  the  dead  were  embalmed
and  swathed  in  linen,  and  over  the  chambers  of  the  temples  in
Avhich  the  unguents  Avhich  Avcre  employed  in  public  worship  Averc


1 See  Bnigsch,  Ifeli/jiov,  p.  340.


The  QODOE88  NIT  <Neith>.


NET  OR  NE1TH


463


compounded.  The  unguents  which  she  mixed  for  Osiris  proved  to
be  the  means  by  which  the  body  of  the  god  was  preserved  from
destruction  and  made  young  again,  and  happy  were  the  dead  who
were  able  to  secure  the  ministrations  of  Net.  We  must  note  in
connexion  with  these  facts  that  many  of  the  attributes  of  Net  as  a
goddess  of  the  dead  were  assigned  to  her  because  of  her  association
with  Osiris,  and  it  is  clear  from  the  texts  of  the  late  dynastic
period  that  Net  was  regarded  in  the  light  of  a mother  of  Osiris,
and  SaVs  was  actually  called  the  city  of  Osiris.  At  certain  seasons
of  the  year,  festivals  were  celebrated  there  in  commemoration  of
the  embalming,  and  bandaging,  and  burial  of  this  god,  and  the
great  feast  of  lamps,  which  is  also  referred  to  by  Herodotus,  was
one  of  the  most  important.  Another  very  important  festival  was
that  kept  in  the  spring,  on  the  birthday  of  Osiris,  the  son  of  Isis-
Net,  which  the  late  Dr.  Brugsch  identified  with  the  birthday  of  the
spring  sun.1

In  Upper  Egypt  Net  was  chiefly  worshipped  at  Seni  (Esneh),
the  Latopolis  of  the  Greeks,  which  is  called  in  the  texts,  “the
house  of  Net  in  the  land  of  the  south.”  Here  she  was  identified
with  Nebuut,  ^ ^fj,  Menhit,  Sekhet,  and  Tefnut,  and  was

represented  with  the  head  of  a lioness  painted  green ; and  her
titles  were,  “ Father  of  fathers,  and  Mother  of  mothers,”  and
“ Net-Menhit,  the  great  lady,  lady  of  the  south,  the  great  cow
“ who  gave  birth  to  the  sun,  who  made  the  germ  of  gods  and
“ men,  the  mother  of  lla,  who  raised  up  Tern  in  primeval  time,
“ who  existed  when  nothing  else  had  being,  and  who  created  that
“ which  exists  after  she  had  come  into  being.”  The  people  of
Seni  (Latopolis)  assigned  to  her  as  husband  the  ram-headed  god
Khnemu,  Q @ ^ > the  lord  of  the  First  Cataract,  and  she  be-
came therefore  “ lady  of  Abu  ” (Elephantine),  and  the  mother  of
Tutu,  a form  of  the  god  Shu,  whose  symbol  was  a lion  Avalking.
Tutu,  is  also  known  by  the  names  Her-ka,  ^ LJ  jjv),3  and

1 Ueliyion  und  Mythologies  p.  347.

3 Variants,  <=>  ^ > or  5r?k  •

3 Or,  ^ | j □ Her-ka-p-lihttrt.


464


NET  Oil  NEITH


Hetch-xefkr-sebeq,  Q J p Jj  ^ , and  he  is  depicted  h^pbe  form

of  a young  man 1 wearing  on  his  head  the  crown  of  the  North,  and
the  Atef  crown  with  uraei  and  disks ; the  forefinger  of  his  right
hand  is  raised  to  his  mouth,  which  suggests  that  he  had  something
in  common  with  the  Harpocrates  gods.  According  to  Dr.  Brugsch
he  is  the  personification  of  the  sun  when  he  enters  the  zodiacal
sign  of  Leo,  and  the  same  scholar  would  connect  the  lion-lieaded
rain-spouts  of  the  temples  of  Dendcra,  Khensu  at  Thebes,  Edfii,
and  Philae,  witlx  the  summer  sun.3  In  the  texts  which  describe
these  spouts  they  are  called  “ Lion,”  the  “ Strong  one  of  strength,”
“ mighty  of  strength,”  “ possessor  of  two-fold  strength,”  “ the
mighty  one  of  roarings,”  “ ficry-face,"  and  “ lion  of  the  face  which
enchanteth  (or  terrifieth).”  A form  of  Tutu,  the  son  of  Net  and

Ivhnemu,  called  Au-hf.s-xf.fer,  jj  ^ ^ , often  appears  in

inscriptions  wherein  he  is  described  as  a “ god  of  the  south,”  and
he  must  be  identified  witlx  the  crocodile-headed  god  who  appears
in  the  temple  sit  Esneh  under  the  names  Sebek-Ra  and  Hes-
neff.r-Sebek,  the  son  of  Net.

From  certain  passages  in  the  texts  quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch  ’ it
is  clear  that  Amen-Ra,  the  “ king  of  the  gods,”  was  the  son  of  Net,
and  in  the  hymn  which  Darius  II.  caused  to  be  inscribed  on  the
walls  of  the  temple  of  Hcbt,  in  the  Great  Oasis,  it  is  said  that  the

Cow,  i.e.,  Net,  rejoiceth  in  the  “Bull  ofj his  mother.”

Here  the  Sun-god  is  described  as  the  husband  who  maketh  fertile
with  his  seed,1  and  he  is  said  to  come  to  the  town  of  Sapi,

i.e.,  Sai's.  The  hymn  continues,5  “ Thine  image  reposeth
“ in  Ilet-khebit,  in  the  nest  of  the  lady  of  Sai's.  Thy  mother  Net
“ uniteth  herself  unto  thee  in  the  form  of  Nu,  and  with

“ thy  body  arrayed  in  the  veil  [which  she  hath  woven]  thy  body
“ dwelleth  in  the  temples  Resenet  and  Mehenet.  Thy  raiment  is


1 Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  407,  No.  3.

2 Rdiijion , p.  349.


* Ihid,,  p.  353.


1)1)


mr?.


5 See  BragBch,  Raise  nach  tier  yroasen  Oa»e,  pi.  xxvi.,  1.  28  f.


NET  OR  NEITH


465


“ upon  theflands  of  the  two  crocodile  gods,”  JJ  ^ j-

The  crocodile  gods  here  mentioned  are,  of  course,  the  two  crocodiles
which  are  seen  one  on  each  side  of  the  goddess  in  certain  pictures
of  her.  Finally,  we  find  that  in  Thebes  Net,  as  the  mother  and
wife  of  Amen-Ra,  was  known  under  the  form  and  name  of  the
ancient  goddess  Ament.  She  is  represented  as  a young  woman
who  wears  upon  her  head  the  crown  of  the  North,  and  holds  in
each  hand  the  emblem  of  water,  as  such  she  is  called  “Ament,

the  dweller  in  Apt,  Nini,”  (1  C~1  -=>  ^ O A <3  Under  the

1 /wwv\  1^1^  \V  VS.

name  of  Ament-Ra,  (j  A/VWVN  ^ she  is  seen  suckling  Horus,  and  she

also  appears  as  a ram-headed  goddess  wearing  the  Ate/  crown.1
All  the  attributes  of  Net  were  ascribed  to  Ament,  who  was  origin-
ally the  female  counterpart  of  the  local  god  Amen,  and  of  necessity
a deity  of  little  importance.  Thus  Ament  is  styled,  “ the  Cow,  the
“ great  lady,  who  fashioned  the  company  of  the  gods,  the  mother
“ of  Ra,  who  gave  birth  to  Horus.”  It  is  very  difficult  to
harmonize  all  the  various  statements  which  are  made  in  the  texts
concerning  the  attributes  of  Net,  and  the  above  paragraphs  on  this
goddess  Avill  illustrate  the  difficulty.  They  prove,  however,  that
the  opinions  which  the  Egyptians  held  concerning  her  varied  from
time  to  time,  and  that  contradictions  in  their  statements  are  due,
not  so  much  to  inconsistency  or  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  priests
and  copyists,  as  to  the  attempt  made  to  harmonize  every  new
religious  system  of  belief  with  every  one  which  had  existed
before  it.


1 See  Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  25.


( 466  )


CHAPTER  XV


THE  HORUS  GODS


IT  has  already  been  stated  that  the  hawk  was  probably  the  first
living  creature  which  was  worshipped  generally  throughout
Egypt,  and  that  as  the  spirit  of  the  heights  of  heaven,  and  as  the
personification  of  the  god  who  made  the  sky  he  was  called  Heru,


i.e.,  “ he  who  is  above,”  or,  “ that  which  is  above.”


It  appears,  however,  that  at  a very  early  period  this  conception  of
Heru  was  partly  lost  sight  of,  and  whether  as  a result  of  the
different  views  held  by  certain  early  schools  of  thought,  or  whether
due  to  the  similarity  in  sound  between  the  name  “ Heru  ” and  the
word  for  “ face,”  Her  or  Hra,  the  idea  which  became  associated
with  the  god  Heru  was  that  he  represented  the  Face  of  heaven,
i.e.,  the  Face  of  the  head  of  an  otherwise  unknown  and  invisible
god.  We  can  see  that  this  view  was  an  ancient  one  even  in  the  time
when  the  Pyramids  were  built,  for  several  allusions  are  made  in
the  funeral  texts  of  the  Vth  and  Vlth  Dynasties  to  the  “hair”  or


“tresses,”  ? (JO  'th.  , of  the  Face  of  Heru  as  the  Face  of

7 X o ill  i r


heaven,  and  four  gods  who  are  called  the  “ children  of  Horus,”


are  declared  to  have  their  abodes  in  these  tresses.*


The  Face  of  heaven  was  supported  by  the  four  gods  by  means  of
the  four  sceptres  which  they  held  in  their  hands,  and  these  four


sceptres  took  the  place  of  the  four  pillars,  j of  the  god  Shu

which,  according  to  an  older  myth,  supported  the  four  comers,  i.e.,
the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  great  iron  plate  that  formed  the  floor


1 Pepi  I.,  11.  593,  600 ; and  see  Maspero,  La  Mylhologie  Hgypticnne , p.  227.
8 The  “ Children  of  Horus  ” will  be  described  later.


The  God  HERU-UR,


HORUS  THE  ELDER


467


of  heaven,  and  the  sky  above  the  earth.  That  the  heavens,  or  the
skies,  were  considered  to  be  a Face  is  evident  from  many  allusions.
Thus  the  Sun  is  frequently  called  “ Eye  of  Horus,”  and  the  Moon
is  also  an  “ Eye  of  Horus,”  the  Sun  being  the  right  eye,  and  the
Moon  the  left ; a well  known  title  of  the  Face  is  “ Horus  of  the


Two  Eyes,”  ^j,  and  when  neither  Eye  is  visible  it  is  called

“ Horus  dwelling  without  Eyes,”  ^ ^ ^ .


The  forms  of  Horus  mentioned  in  Egyptian  texts  are  numerous,
but  the  following  are  the  most  important : —


1.  Heru-ur,  *‘e,}  H°rus  the  elder”  (or  the

“ aged  ”),  the  hipuffpis  of  the  Greeks,  so  called  to  distinguish  him
from  Heru-pa-khart,  or,  “ Horus  the  younger.”  He  is  depicted  in
the  form  of  a man  with  the  head  of  a hawk,  and  also  as  a lion  with
the  head  of  a hawk ; he  usually  wears  the  crowns  of  the  South  and
North  united,  but  he  is  once  seen  with  the  horns  of  Ivhnemu
upon  his  head,  and  above  them  are  a crown  with  plumes,  uraei,
disks,  etc.1  According  to  the  Egyptian  texts  Heru-ur  was  the
son  of  Ilii  and  Hathor ; the  Hathor  here  referred  to  is  the  form  of

the  goddess  which  was  specially  worshipped  at  Qesqeset,  ^ ^ @ >

i.e.,  Apollinopolis  Parva;  but  Plutarch  declared  him  to  be  the
son  of  Ivronos  and  Rhea,  i.e.,  Seb  and  Nut,  and  therefore  the
brother  of  Osiris.  This  statement  was  probably  correct  enough  in
late  dynastic  times,  when  men  had  wholly  identified  Horus,  the
son  of  Isis,  with  Horus  the  Elder.  Originally  Ileru-ur  represented
a phase  or  aspect  of  Horus,  the  Face  of  heaven,  and  it  was  he  who
was  the  twin  god  of  Set ; Heru-ur  was  the  Face  by  day  and  Set
the  Face  by  night.  There  was  also  a Heru-ur  of  the  South,  as  we
learn  from  the  picture  of  the  god  given  by  Lanzone,4  the  seat  of

whose  worship  was  at  Makhenut,  q ^ , near  El-Kab  in  Upper

Egypt,  and  a Heru-ur  of  the  North,  theseat  of  whose  worship  was  at

Sekhemet,  m or  or  Seshemet,  the

Latopolis  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  OYujeJU.  of  the  Copts,  which  lay  a


1 See  Lftnzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  1226.


s Ibid.,  No.  3.


468


HORUS  THE  ELDER


few  miles  to  the  north  of  Memphis ; other  shrines  of  Heru-ur  were
at  Ombos,  q , at  Smennut,  p 4=3  O ^ , and  at  Apollinopolis.
The  most  important  shrine  of  the  god  was  at  Sekliem,  where  stood
the  sanctuary  Pa- Ait,  1|  ^ (jlj  [JLj;  in  its  shrine  was  preserved

the  shoulder,  mdlchaq , J|^  ^ ^ 9 > of  the  god  Osiris,  and  close  by

grew  the  famous  Nebes,  *****  an(^  Shent,  $ ^ trees.

Heru-ur  of  Sekhem  is  called  “ lord  of  the  Utchati , 5n5,”  i.e.,  lord
of  the  Sun  and  Moon.  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (xviii.c)  it  is  said
that  the  sovereign  princes  in  Sekhem  are  H eru-khent-an-maati
and  Tlioth,  but  it  is  clear  that  locally  the  great  gods  of  the  city
were  Isis,  Osiris,  and  Horus.  The  form  in  which  Heru-ur  Avas
worshipped  at  Sekhem  and  other  places  was  a lion.  The  inscrip-
tions on  the  walls  of  the  temple  at  Ombos 1 prove  that  he  was  called
the  “lord  of  the  south,”  the  “lord  of  Nubti  (Ombos),”  and  that
he  was  identified  with  Shu,  son  of  Rii ; with  “ Heru- tenia,  the.
“great  god  and  lord  of  heaven,  of  two-fold  strength,  mighty- one
“ among  all  the  gods,  whose  power  hath  vanquished  the  foes  of  his
“ father  Ra  ” ; with  Amen-ur,  or  Amen  the  Elder;  and  in  fact  with
several  gods  who  were  regarded  as  gods  of  light  and  of  aspects  of
the  rising  Sun,  and  also  with  the  various  gods  who  wcx-e  connected
with  them.  At  Ombos  Heru-ur  was  the  head  of  a triad  which
consisted  of  himself,  and  his  female  counterpart,  Ta-sent-nefert,

o and  their  son  P-neb-taui,  □ Avho  is

sometimes  called  “ the  child,”  □ ^ . The  third  member  of  this

triad  wears  a disk  upon  his  head,  and  has  a lock  of  hair  at  the  side
of  his  face  like  Harpocrates,  and  ho  is  called  the  “ young  sun,”
and  the  general  titles  Avhich  are  given  to  Heru-ur  and  Ta-sent-
nefert  indicate  that  in  later  days  they  were  considered  to  be
identical  with  Shu  and  Tefnut.

2.  Heru-p-khart,  i.e.,  “Horus  the  Younger”

(or,  the  “ Child  ”),  the  'Apnoupdr r)t  of  the  Greeks,  so  called  to

1 Brugsch,  Religion,  p.  539.  2 See  de  Morgan,  Korn  Ombos , pp/  156,  181


HERU-PA-KHRAT  (HARPOCRATES).


HORUS  THE  YOUNGER


469


distinguish  him  from  Heru-ur,  or  Horus  the  Elder.  In  Egyptian
pictures  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a youth  wearing  a lock
of  hair,  the  symbol  of  youth,  on  the  right  side  of  his  head ; some-
times he  wears  the  triple  crown  with  feathers  and  disks,  and  the

like,  and  sometimes  a disk  with  plumes,  ^p,  but  usually  his
crown  is  formed  by  the  united  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,
^ . In  one  scene  he  is  seated  inside  a box  which  rests  on  the
back  of  a lion.1  Heru-p-khart  was  the  son  of  a Horus  god  by  the
goddess  Riit-tauit,  ^ , who  is  said  to  have  brought  him

forth  in  the  temple  of  Het-ennut,  []  c~3  111  Hermonthis,

in  a birth  chamber,  L~(~J  ^ 1 . in  the  precincts  of  the  building

Qemqern,  ( ©:  the  goddess  seems  to  have  been  wor-

shipped here  under  the  form  of  a hippopotamus,  <=>


Heru-p-khart,  or  Harpocrates,  was  a form  of  the  rising  sun  and
represented  his  earliest  rays;  the  Egyptians  distinguished  seven
forms  or  aspects  of  the  god,  which  may  be  thus  enumerated : —

1.  Heru-Ra-p-khart,  so.  ^ the  dweller  in  Hermonthis.  2.

l.ieru-Shu-p-khart  the  great,  P <5  ^ ^ ; his  father  was

Saaba,  |1  , and  his  mother  Anit,

khart.  [son]  of  Hathor,  ^ ^ p)  0 ^


3.  Sma-taui-p-
4.  Heru-p-khart,
the  dweller  in  Busiris,  jj  'r>-  A^b  ^ > 9011  of  Hathor.

6.  11  aq-p-khart,  *=^  □ £;} , the  sou  of  Sekhet.  7.  Heru-IIennu,

3.  IIebu-merti,  o o ‘ *orm  ^e  "°&  19

represented  as  a man  with  a hawk’s  head,  above  which  are  the
horns  of  the  god  Khncmu  and  the  solar  disk  encircled  by  a uraeus ;

in>  his  hand  he  bears  the  Utchati,  A passage  in  a


1 Lunzone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  328.


2 See  Urugsch,  Diet.  Grog.,  p.  348.


470


HARMACHIS


papyrus  quoted  by  Lanzone 1 calls  him  “ Horus  of  the  Two  Eyes,”
for  this  is  what  the  name  means,  “ lord  of  Slietennu  ©) ,

Amseti-Asi,  ) , in  the  city  of  Apu,”  i.e.,  Panopolis,

and  this  seems  to  show  that  Heru-merti  was  a local  form  of  the
god  Amsu,  or  Ivhem,  or  Min,  as  the  Moon.

4.  Heru-an-mut-f,  | was  a local  form  of  Horus

which  was  worshipped  at  Ateb,  [j  ^ i.e.,  Edfu,  but  the  exact

characteristics  of  the  god  here  are  unknown.

5.  Heru-xub,  This  was  the  form  of  the  god  which

was  worshipped  at  Hierakonpolis,  Per-Heru-nubt,  ^y"3  ^ ^ , and


he  was  depicted  as  a hawk  seated  on  the  head  of  an  antelope,
which,  according  to  Brugsch,2  commemorates  his  triumphant
victory  over  Set,  the  murderer  of  Osiris.

6.  Heru-khenti-Khat,  ^ . In  this  form  the  god  is

represented  with  a human  body  and  the  head  of  a crocodile,  on
which  he  wears  the  horns  of  Khncmu,  and  the  triple  crown  and
plumes ; 3 this  form  of  Horus  does  not  appear  to  be  ancient.


i.e.


7.  Heru-khentj-an-maati,  jjJli  jfj,  i.e.,  “ Horus  at
the  head  of  sightlessness,”  or  the  “ Blind  Horus ; ” he  appeal's  to
represent  the  god  when  neither  of  his  eyes  was  visible.

8.  Rf.bo-k.iuti,

“ Horus  of  the  two  horizons,”  or  the  Harmachis  of  the  Greeks.
He  was  one  of  the  chief  forms  of  the  Sun-god  Ra,  and,  speaking
generally,  represented  the  sun  in  liis  daily  course  across  the  skies
from  the  time  he  left  the  Mount  of  Sunrise  (Bakhau)  to  the  tiiAe
when  he  entered  the  Mount  of  Sunset  (Manu).  Thus  he  combined
in  his  own  person  the  god  Ra  and  several  of  his  forms,  and  in  the
Booh  of  the  Dead  and  other  funeral  works  he  is  joined  to  Temu,


\ s v- 1 *ni *>  KhePera>  ^


1 Op.  cit.  p.  617.  2 Religion,  p.  664.

3 Seo  Lanzone,  p.  622,  pi.  17 ; Brugsch,  Religion,  p.  606.

4 For  the  passages  see  my  Vocabulary  to  the  Chapters  of  Coining  Forth  by  Day ,
p.  225.


HERU  KHUTI  (Harmachis)-


IIAKMACHTS


471


Temu  here  indicates  the  god  of  the  setting  sun,  and  Khepcra  the
god  of  the  sun  when  he  is  about  to  rise.  When  Heru-khuti  was
identified  with  the  various  forms  of  the  Sun-<rod  he  was  also
supposed  to  possess  their  particular  attributes,  and  thus  it  happens
that  he  is  said  to  have  produced  himself,  and  it  is  this  fact  which
supplies  the  reason  why  hymns  addressed  to  him  are  found.  In
the  texts  he  is  called  the  “ lord  of  heaven,”  “ the  great  god,  lord  of

Sept-Hat,”  SHE  a city  or  district  near  the  First  Cataract,
;the  governor  of  the  Aat  of  Ra,”  <=>D  (Heliopolis),


Thotlimca  IV.  making  offerings  to  the  Sphinx,


“ Heru-khuti-Tem,  the  lord  of  the  two  lands  of  Annu,”  and  the
“ dweller  in  Behutet.”  The  chief  shrines  of  the  god  were,  how-
ever, situated  at  Annu  and  at  Apolliuopolis,  and  the  greater  of
these  was  Annu,  or  Heliopolis,  where  he  was  identified  with  the
forms  of  Ra  which  were  worshipped  there.  The  largest  known
monument  or  figure  of  Heru-khuti  is  the  famous  Sphinx,  near  the
Pyramids  of  Gizeh,  which  was  his  type  and  symbol.  This
marvellous  object  was  in  existence  in  the  days  of  Kha-f-Ra,
or  Khephren,  the  builder  of  the  Second  Pyramid  at  Gizeh,  and  it
is  probable  that  it  is  a very  great  deal  older  than  his  reign,  and


472  JHERU-SMA-TAUI

that  it  dates  from  the  end  of  the  archaic  period.  No  mention,
however,  is  made  of  the  Sphinx  in  the  inscriptions  until  the  time
of  Thothmes  IV.,  when  we  are  told  in  the  text  inscribed  on  the
stele  between  the  paws  of  the  Sphinx,  that  the  image  had  become
entirely  covered  over  with  sand.  To  this  king  the  god  of  the
Sphinx,  Heru-khuti-Ra-Temu-Khepera,  appeared  one  day  when
lie  was  sleeping  his  midday  sleep,  and  promised  to  give  him  the
crown  of  Egypt  if  he  would  clear  away  the  sand  from  his  image,
and  restore  his  temple.  Thothmes  IV.  carried  out  the  wishes  of
the  god,  and  having  excavated  the  Sphinx,  and  rebuilt  the  temple
between  his  paws,  Thothmes  set  up  an  inscribed  stele  to  com-
memorate his  work.  Judging  by  the  silence  of  the  ancient
monuments  about  the  Sphinx  this  figure  of  Heru-khuti  cannot
have  been  popular  in  dynastic  times,  and  if  this  was  so  it  is
possible  that  it  was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Sphinx  was  thought  to
be  connected  in  some  way  with  foreigners  or  with  a foreign  religion
which  dated  from  prcdyuastic  times.  A recent  but  fanciful  theory
makes  the  Sphinx  to  be  the  work  of  Amenemhiit,  a king  of  the
Xllth  Dynasty;  its  name  in  Egyptian  was  Hu,  The

forms  in  which  Heru-khuti  is  represented  are  many,  but  whether
in  human  form  or  not,  he  usually  has  the  head  of  a hawk ; in  the
examples  collected  by  Signor  Lanzone 1 we  see  him  wearing  on  his
head  the  solar  disk  encircled  with  a unions  or  the  triple  crown,
or  the  a/t’f  crown.  In  one  scene  he  is  depicted  as  a double
man  with  a head  having  the  faces  of  two  hawks,  one  looking  to  the
right,  and  the  other  to  the  left,  and  above  this  two-faced  head  is  an
ul chat , in  another  scene  lie  has  the  head  of  a ram,  which

identifies  him  with  Khnemu,  the  god  of  the  First  Cataract,  and  in
another  ho  is  seated  on  a throne  which  is  carried  on  poles  by  two
snake-  and  two  beetle-headed  gods.

0.  IiERU-sMA-TAur,  i.e.,  “ Horus,  the  uniter  of  the

South  and  North.”  He  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  Ilathor ; his  chief
places  of  worship  were  Aat-liehu,  a district  near

Herakleopolis  Magna,  and  Ant,  | ___  i.e.,  Denderab,  and  the  city


1 Op.  cit.,  pll,  229  ft.


HERU  - SMA  - TAUI.


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET  473

• *


of  Kliatat,  ^ ^ @ > and  the  creatures  in  which  he  was  thought  to

be  incarnate  were  the  hawk  and  a species  of  serpent.  He  is
usually  depicted  with  the  body  of  a man  with  the  head  of  a hawk,

3

or  serpent,  or  man,  and  ho  wears  as  head-dresses,  and  iljjk;

in  one  scene  he  is  represented  as  a hawk,1  and  he  wears  upon  his
head  a disk  and  plumes,  JJjy  • In  this  form  Horus  was  believed  to

spring  into  existence  out  of  a lotus  flower  which  blossomed  in  the
heavenly  abyss  of  Nu  at  dawn  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.

10.  Heru-hekennu,  ^ | He  is  said  to  have  been

the  son  of  the  goddess  Bast,  and  the  seats  of  his  worship  were  the


towns  of  Netert,  and  Hct-Nefer-Tem ; he  is  usually


depicted  in  the  form  of  a hawk-headed  man,  with  the  solar  disk
encircled  by  a serpent  on  his  head.  The  exact  attributes  of  the
god  are  unknown.


11.


Heuu-Behutet,  J i ^


This  is  one  of  the


greatest  and  most  important  of  all  the  forms  of  Horus,  for  he
represents  that  form  of  Heru-khuti  which  prevailed  in  the
southern  heavens  at  midday,  and  as  such  typified  the  greatest
power  of  the  heat  of  the  sun.  It  was  under  this  form  that  Horus
waged  war  against  Set  or  Typhon,  and  the  inscriptions  are  full  of
allusions  to  the  glorious  victory  which  the  god  of  light  gained  over
the  prince  of  darkness  and  his  fiends.

The  principal  shrines  of  the  god  were  at  Mesen,  |jj  ^ anf^

Qem-baius,  ^ , Aat-fib,  kf^J  ^ J q (Pliilae),  and


Tebt,  ^ J © (Tanis) ; in  the  last  named  place  he  was  worshipped

under  the  form  of  a lion,  which  wears  the  triple  crown  upon  its
head,  and  is  depicted  in  the  act  of  trampling  upon  its  enemies,
The  god  is,  however,  usually  depicted  with  the  head  of  a hawk,
and  carrying  in  his  hands  some  weapon  which  indicates  his
character  as  a destroyer.  Thus,  in  one  illustration  given  by
Signor  Lanzone,2  we  see  him  holding  a weapou  like  a club  or  mace


See  Liuizone,  op.  cit.,  pi.  -39.


3 Op.  cit.,  pll.  242  ff.


474


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


iu  his  right  hand,  and  a bow  and  three  arrows  in  his  left 1 ; in
another  he  is  about  to  club  an  ass-headed  man  in  fetters  with  the
club,  -8 — 2 ; in  another  we  see  him  standing  on  an  oiyx  or
antelope,  and  holding  a long  liawk-headed  spear  in  his  right  hand,

and  three  cords,  to  each  of  which  is  attached  a prisoner,
Elsewhere  we  see  him  depicted  with  the  head  of  a lion,  which
seems  to  have  been  the  form  in  which  he  was  worshipped  at

Tchar,  <r=»  jXj  , or  Tanis,  in  the  Delta,  and  in  one  place  he  is
seated  on  a throne  which  rests  .on  the  back  of  a lion.  As  the  cod


Horus  of  Bcliutet  armed  with  a bow  and  arrows  and  a club.


of  generation  and  reproduction  he  appears  as  a hawk  with  a
phallus  terminating  in  the  head  of  a lion,  and  in  a scene  of  the  late
period  he  is  represented  with  the  body  of  a man,  and  the  head  and
wings  of  a hawk,  kneeling  upon  two  crocodiles ; on  his  head  he

wears  and  in  his  left  hand  he  holds  a scorpion,  M .


1 He  is  here  called  ^


r^O  A*AAAA

W


edtttsj

<=>©*


5 He  is  here  called  “ smitcr  of  the  rebel/'


RA-HERU-KHUTI,


THe  Dweller  IN  Behutet.


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


475


In  an  extract  from  a text  inscribed  on  a Avail  of  the  temple  of
Edfii  given  by  Dr.  Brugsch,1  Heru-behutet  is  described  as  the
power  which  dispels  darkness  and  night,  and  drives  aAvay  clouds,
rain,  and  storms,  and  fills  all  heaven  and  the  Avorld  Avith  his
brilliance  and  light ; he  rises  Avith  golden  disk  as  the  holy  beetle  of
gold,  and  he  is  declared  to  be  the  lord  and  creator  of  the  gods.
He  created  himself,  there  is  none  like  unto  him,  he  reneAvs  his
birth  daily,  and  year  by  year  he  performs  his  appointed  course  in
the  heavens,  bringing  in  his  train  the  seasons,  and  their  proper

produce.  In* one  of  his  aspects  he  is  identified
Avith  Osiris,  and  then  the  goddesses  Isis  and
Ncphthys  arc  said  to  help  him  to  emerge
from  the  abyss  of  Nu  ; he  made  the  hea\rcns
to  be  the  dAvclling-place  for  his  soul,  and  he
created  the  deep  that  it  might  serve  as  a
place  Avherein  to  hide  his  body,  which  is  here
called  Un-nefer,  I ^ . But  the  forms
in  Avhich  Heru-behutet  appealed  most  strongly
to  the  mind  of  the  Egyptians  Avere  those  in
Avhich  as  the  god  of  light  he  fought  against
Set,  the  god  of  darkness,  and  as  the  god  of
good  against  the  god  of  evil.  We  knoAv
from  a passage  in  the  xviith  Chapter  of
the  Hook  of  the  Dtcul  (line  66)  that  in
very  early  times  a combat  took  place
betAveen  Horus  and  Set,  Avherein  the
foimer  destroyed  the  virility  of  Set,
and  the  latter  cast  filth  in  the  face  of  Horus,  and  it  is  this  form  of
the  traditional  fight  betAveen  the  two  “ Combatants,”  or  Rehui,
<T>  i ^ Avhich  is  the  base  of  the  narrative  inscribed  ou  the

Avails  of  the  great  Temple  of  Edfii.  There  Avas,  hoAvever,  one  very
great  difference  betAveen  the  fight  of  Horus  and  Set  of  predynastic
times  and  that  described  betAveen  the  Horus  and  Set  knoAvn  at
Edfii ; in  the  former  fight  the  tAvo  combatants  were  unarmed,  but


The  double  god  Horus- Sol.


in  the  latter  Horus  Avas  armed  Avith  Aveapous  ot  iron,  and  he  was


1 Religion,  p.  548.


476


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


accompanied  by  a number  of  beings  who  are  called  memriu,
(|j  [1  ^ ^ j , or  memitu,  ^ p o vx  $j  j .l  It  is  pretty  certain  from

AACfteT,  the  Coptic  equivalent  of  the  word  memeti,  that  the
mesnin  were  workers  in  metal,  and  that  this  name  was  first  applied
to  them  as  blacksmiths,  and  that  at  a later  period  the  tncsniu
were  men  armed  with  weapons  made  of  metal.  The  place  where
metal  work  was  done,  i.e.,  where  the  ore  was  smelted  and  the

weapons  were  forged,  was  called  me* net,  the  “foundry,”  and

the  worshippers  of  Horus  of  Jlehutet  never  tired  of  describing
their  god  as  the  “lord  of  the  forge-city,”  i.e.,  Edfu,  the  place
where  tradition  declared  he  first  established  himself  as  the  great
master  blacksmith.  And  Edfu  itself  was  regarded  as  the  foundry
wherein  the  great  disk  of  the  sun  was  forged,  as  we  see  from  a
passage  quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch,  in  which  it  is  said  “when  the

“ doors  of  the  foundry  are  opened  the  Disk  riseth  up,”  \/  ^

In  support  of  this  tradition  we  find  that  a certain  chamber  in
the  temple  of  Edfu,  which  lay  just  behind  the  sanctuary,  was  called

mesnet,  |j|  j'  ; |.  and  it  was  here  that  the  “ blacksmiths  waited


©


in  attendance  to  usher  forth  the  image  of  the  god  in  his  temple.
From  the  representations  of  the  “ blacksmiths  ” given  on  tlve  walls
of  the  temple  of  Edfu 3 we  see  that  they  were  originally  men  with
shaven  heads  who  wore  a short  tunic  arid  a deep  collar,  and  that  in
their  right  hands  they  carried  a spear  inverted,  j , and  in  their  left
a metal  instrument,  (j.  In  the  same  scene  in  which  these  occur
Horus  of  Behutet  is  represented  standing  in  a boat,  dressed  like
his  followers,  and  driving  a long  spear  into  the  head  of  a hippo-
potamus beneath  the  boat  with  his  right  hand,  and  holding  the
monster  in  restraint  by  a double  chain  which  he  grasps  in  his  left
hand.  In  the  bows  of  the  boat  kneels  Isis,  who  also  holds  the
hippopotamus  by  a chain  in  each  hand,  and  we  may  note  that


. T»ri,»U»re|P0e|)  ^0^$.

3 WOrtcrbnrh,  p.  703.

3 See  Naville,  Mtjlhe  d’lforus,  Geneva,  1870,  pi.  7.


HERU-NETCH-TEF-F.


477


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


the  tackle  of  the  boat  consists  of  chains,  presumably  of  iron,  and
not  of  ropes.  In  another  place 1 * Horus  stands  on  the  back  of  the
hippopotamus,  the  legs  of  which  are  tied  together  by  chains,  and
the  lower  jaw  of  which  is  held  fast  by  a 'chain.  The  story  of  the
defeat  of  Set  by  Heru-Behutet  is  told  in  the  texts  on  the  walls  of
the  temple  of  Edfii  substantially  as  follows : — In  the  year  363,

III,  of  Ra-Heru-klxuti  , 3CX  the  kin°  °f  the

South  and  North  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  his  Majesty  found
himself  in  the  country  of  Ta-kens*  or  Nubia),  for  he  had

gone  to  the  district  of  Uauat,3  because  certain  folk  had  conspired
against  tlieir  lord.  Having  suppressed  the  rebellion  he  returned
to  Edfu,  and  deputed  his  son  Heru-behutet  to  continue  the  war
on  his  behalf;  this  god  had  observed  how  men  had  conspired
against  his  father,  and  he  was  ready  to  carry  out  his  behests.
Thereupon  Heru-behutet  flew  up  to  heaven  in  the  form  of  a
winged  disk, sses?,  and  ever  aftex*  he  was  called  “great  god,  lord  of


heaven.”

From  the  height  of  heaven  he  was  able  to  see  his  father’s
enemies,  and  he  chased  them  in  the  form  of  a great  winged  disk ;
he  attacked  them  with  such  wrath  aud  vigour,  that  they  lost  their
senses  and  could  see  neither  with  their  eyes  nor  hear  with  their
ears,  ^ ^ P ju  ^ J f $$  f p ® , and  every  man  fell

upon  his  neighbour  and  slew  him,  and  in  a moment  all  were  dead.
And  straightway  Horus,  with  many-coloured  shapes  aud  feathers,
returned  to  his  form  as  a winged  disk  and

took  up  his  position  in  the  boat  of  Ra.  At  this  junctui’e  Thoth
declared  that  Horus,  son  of  Ru,  should  be  called  H cru-Behutet,
and  Behutet  (Edfu)  should  be  called  the  city  of  Homs ; and  Ra
referred  with  pleasure  to  the  blood  which  his  son  had  shed  and
which  he  likened  to  grapes.  Then  Horus  suggested  that  Ra
should  come  and  look  upon  his  dead  enemies,  and  Ra,  escorted  by


1 Naville,  op,  cit.,  pi.  9.

3 Note  the  pun  on  the  name  Uauat,  lin^  ^ie  ver^  **  111U1  mui  *

conspire,”


478


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET

■ •


Hathor,  and  followed  by  the  goddess  Asthertet,
who  is  described  as  the  “ mistress  of  horses,”  ^ £


and  who  in  the  form  of  a Woman  with  the  head  of  a lioness  is  seen
standing  in  a chariot,  agrees  to  his  son’s  proposal.  The  chariot  of
the  goddess  is  drawn  by  four  horses,  which  trample  upon  the  foes
of  Ra,  who  lie  upon  the  ground  bound  with  fetters.  When  Ra

saw  this  he  said  to  Horus,  “ This  is  a very  pleasant  life,”  | ^ | ,

and  therefore  the  temple  of  Horus  was  called  “ Pleasant  Life,”
from  that  day.  Then  Thoth  observed,  “ This  was  the  spearing  of

my  foes,”  and  therefore  Edfu  was  called  Teb,  © JJ,  from  that
day ; and  he  further  said  to  Horus,  “ Thou  art  a great  protector,”
u n |,  and  straightway  the  boat  of  Horus  was  called  “Great

Protector.”  After  this  Ra  proposed  that  they  should  journey
upon  the  water,  and  his  enemies  also  went  to  the  water,  and  as
soon  as  they  had  entered  it  they  turned  into  crocodiles,  mnsuhu

and  hippopotamuses,  ^ <2^  j , f«pu,  and  when  they  were

near  enough  to  him  they  opened  their  mouths  intending  to  swallow
up  the  god.  Then  Homs  came  along  with  his  “blacksmiths,”

UP- — ^ j , each  having  a spear  made  of  divine  iron,  ^ D ,

AIWVNA

and  a chain,  <§. , in  his  hand,  and  they  slew  the  crocodiles,  and

the  hippopotamuses,  and  they  brought  in  651 1 enemies,  jl  [j  JJ

immediately.  Ra-Heru-khuti  next  ordered  that  statues  of  himself
should  be  set  up  in  the  land  of  the  south  in  the  place  called

Het-a-nekht,  o D n , and  Thoth  applauded  Homs  because

he  had  made  use  of  the  formulae  which  were  to  be  found  in  the
Book  of  the  slaughter  of  the  Hippopotamus,  < — a ^ <2^ ;

from  that  day  the  blacksmiths  of  Heru-Behutet  have  existed  at
Edfh.


non

1 Naville  gives  (pi.  xiii.,  1.  8)  ^ ^ I,  bnt  Brugsch  ( Ahhanrtlvuycn

Koniglichen  Gesellmha/t  tier  Wistenscha/ten  zu  Gottingen,  Bd.  xiv,,  p.  216)  and
Wiedemann  both  give  381,  i.e.,  they  read  I .

• ' nnn  nn


x • T-  ,nr  J ^ •'/•-*>  . -V  . V tW?'- . ..  ' V


HERU-NETCH-HRA-TEF.-F.


470


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET

• •


And  Horus  once  again  took  the  form  of  a winged  disk,  and
placed  himself  in  the  bows  of  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  he  took  with  him

the  two  goddesses  Nekhebet,  2 J|  » anc*  ^Tatchit,  | “ ^ , in

the  form  of  two  serpents,  that  they  might  destroy  the  crocodiles
and  the  hippopotamuses  in  their  dens.  As  soon  as  the  enemies  of
Ra  perceived  that  they  were  being  followed  they  turned  round  and
fled  to  the  south,  but  they  were  overtaken  by  Horus  and  his
blacksmiths,  each  with  his  spear  and  his  chain  in  his  hands,  and  a
mighty  slaughter  took  place  on  a plain  which  was  situated  to  the

south-east  of  Thebes,  ^ ^ ^ I © ’*  ant^  on  account  of  the

terrible  scenes  of  carnage  that  were  enacted  there  was  called
Tclietemet,  *•©•»  “ slaughter.”  This  was  the  second

slaughter  of  the  foes  of  Ra,  and  after  this  they  retreated  north-
wards, to  the  region  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  they  were
utterly  disheartened  and  in  fear  of  Horus ; but  this  god  followed
after  them  in  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  with  him  were  his  companions
Avho  were  provided  with  speai’s  and  chains,  Horus  himself  was

provided  with  a battle  spear,  and  a chain,  ^ ^ and


blacksmiths,  t=afc=i  ^ j , and  when  he  had  waited  a whole  day  he
saw  his  foes  to  the  north-cast  of  Dendera,  and

having  attacked  them  he  made  a third  great  slaughter,  ^ (j(j  '*==>-.
lhai,  among  them : the  name  of  the  place  where  the  enemy  was
defeated  was  called  “ Divine  Slaughter,”  1“  ''*-•> and

it  was  situated  quite  close  to  Dendera.  Iieru-Behutet  was  made
the  god  of  the  region,  and  the  acacia,  9 and  the  sycamore,

fl  A A /WWW  \ JL

”***  jl  [1 4,  Avere  sacred  to  him.

Once  more  the  enemy  fled  to  the  north  and  Avas  pursued
closely  by  Horus,  Avho  Avas  armed  as  before ; for  four  whole  days


and  nights,  ^ J,  lie  saAv  nothing  whatsoever  of  the  enemy,  for

they  had  changed  themselves  into  crocodiles  and  hippopotamuses,
but  when  he  did  see  them  he  attacked  them  Avitli  great  vigour  and
slew  them  in  large  numbers.  One  hundred  and  forty-tAvo  of  them
he  bound  in  chains  and  dragged  on  to  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  he


480


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET

■ •


captured  also  a “male  hippopotamus,”  r=a;  all  the  fiends  he

slew,  and  he  gave  their  entrails  to  his  companions,  and  their  bodies
to  the  gods  and  goddesses  who  were  in  the  boat  of  Ra  near  the

town  of  IJeben,  Jj.  ’ As  a proof  of  his  victory  he  got  up  and

stood  upon  the  back  of  the  hippopotamus,  and  as  a result  he  was
called  “Her-pest,”  i.e.,  “He  who  is  on  the  back.”  All  these
things  took  place  on  the  piece  of  ground  which  formed  the  temple
estate  of  the  town  of  Heben,  and  which  measured  342  Jehet,

ee©  ^ 1 1 , on  the  South,  North,  West,  and  East.  The  enemy,
however,  was  not  wholly  defeated,  and  some  fled  to  the  north
hoping  to  reach  the  “ Great  Green  Sea,”  ; but  the  god

Horus  followed  after  them  and  slew  many  of  the  rebels,  the
remainder  of  whom  went  to  the  Sea  of  Mertet,  ° ,

/VWW>  Q OIW)’

and  there  joined  themselves  to  the  fiends  of  Set,  4.  After
some  difficulty  Horus  found  out  where  the  enemies  were,  and
having  come  up  with  them  ho  captured  381  rebels,  whom  he
slew  in  the  bows  of  the  boat  of  Ra,  and  he  sent  one  body  to  each
of  his  ‘companions.  When  Set  saw  what  had  been  done  to  his
friends  be  cried  out  and  uttered  awful  imprecations  and  complaints
of  the  terrible  destruction  which  Horus  had  wrought,  and  because

of  his  foul  words,  | ^ ^ inetu-neha,  the  fiend  was

ever  after  called  Neliaha,  A-wvV'  ^ ^ • Horus  straightway

attacked  Set,  and  hurled  his  lance  at  him,  and  threw  him  down
upon  the  ground  in  a place  near  the  city  which  was  always  after-
wards called  Per-Rerehu,  L"J  ^ ® : when  he  came  back  he

brought  Set  with  him,  and  his  spear  was  in  his  neck,  ^ <=>
® ^ , and  the  legs  of  the  monster  were  chained,  and  his  mouth
had  been  closed  by  a blow  from  the  club  of  the  god.  After  these
exploits  Ra  ordered  that  Horus  should  be  called  Urui-Tenfen,

he  further  decreed  that  the  enemies  of

^ W /W>W  /WVWi  LI l

himself  ami  Horus,  Set  and  his  confederates,  should  be  handed
over  to  the  goddess  Isis  and  her  son  Horus  for  them  to  do
with  them  as  they  pleased.  Thereupon  Isis  and  Horus  took  up


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


481


their  position  near  Ra,  and  the  young  god  drove  his  weapon,
mdb,  into  Set,  at  a place  called  “ She-nu-aha,”  fy>.  i.e.,
“Lake  of  Battle,”  or,  “She-neter,”  oa  ^ i.e.,  “Lake  of

God ; ” he  next  cut  off  his  head,  and  the  heads  of  his  followers,
in  the  presence  of  Ra  and  the  great  company  of  the  gods,  and  then
dragged  his  body  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  his  land  with
his  spear  thrust  through  his  head  and  his  back.

Then  Ra  ordered  that  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  should  drag  the
body  of  the  monster  about,  and  because  of  this  “ dragging  ” the

place  was  called  “Atha,”  fj  <=>  <^>  ^ ,*  ever  after.  At  this  juncture

the  divine  Isis  asked  her  father  Ra  that  the  winged  sun-disk,
might  be  given  to  her  son  Horus  as  a talisman,  because  he  had  cut
off  the  heads  of  the  fiend  and  his  companions,  and  as  a result  Hcru-
behutet  and  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  together  pursued  the  foe  Set,  and
both  gods  were  of  the  same  form  and  appearance.  They  had  the
bodies  of  men,  and  the  heads  of  hawks,  and  they  wore  the  White
and  Red  Crowns,  with  plumes,  and  uraei.  All  these  events

took  place  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month  Tvbi,  | <55>  * ,
and  the  place  wherein  they  happened  was  called  Aat-shatet,


After  these  things  Set  changed  himself  into  a serpent  which
hissed  loudly,  and  he  sought  out  a hole  for  himself  in  the  ground
wherein  he  hid  himself  and  lived,  whereupon  Ra  said,  “the  monster

“ Bu  (JJ  > hath  turned  himself  into  a hissing  serpent,  lot,
“ Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  set  himself  above  his  hole  in  the  form  of  a


“ pole  on  the  top  of  which  is  the  head  of  Horus,  , so  that  he

“ may  never  again  come  forth  therefrom.”  As  the  result  of  this
the  serpent  of  that  town  was  called  “ Hisser  ” or  “ Roarer,”

^ m Y Hemhemet,  and  Horus  the  son  of  Isis  stood  upon

him  in  the  form  of  a pole,  or  staff,  on  the  top  of  which  was  the
head  of  a hawk.  When  all  these  things  were  done  the  boat  of  Ra
arrived  at  Per-aha,  ctzd  Q£y,  or  “ House  of  Battle  ” ; the  fore  part
of  the  boat  was  made  of  acacia  wood,  and  the  after  part  of
sycamore  wood,  and  both  kinds  of  wood  were,  henceforth,  holy.


I i


482


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


Meanwhile,  however,  there  still  remained  some  of  the  enemies  of
Iia  in  the  land,  and  this  god  exhorted  his  son  to  set  out  and
to  make  an  end  of  them,  whereupon  Horus  told  his  father  that  if
he  would  allow  the  boat  to  go  whither  he  pleased,  he  would  treat
the  enemy  in  such  a way  that  it  would  be  pleasing  to  Ra.  When

the  boat  had  sailed  but  a little  way  on  the  water  of  Meh,  ' — ,

he  found  one  of  the  friends  of  Set,  and  having  hurled  his  spear  at
him,  he  caught  him,  and  slaughtered  him  in  the  presence  of  Ra,  at

a place  called  Astabet,  A truce  for  six  days  and  six

nights  then  followed,  and  Horus  had  rest,  while  Isis  made  use  of
her  words  of  power  to  keep  away  Ba,  i.e.,  Set,  from  the  district
called  “ An-rut-f.”  Soon  afterwards  Horus  slew  100  of  the  enemy,
and  then  made  a final  attack  upon  them  in  the  neighbourhood  of


An-hat,  'Z2,  and  Tchar,


, or  Tanis  : some
n-'vi  1 ©’


made  their  escape  and  succeeded  in  getting  away  to  the  moun-
tains, and  others  threw  themselves  into  the  sea.  Horus  changed
himself  into  the  form  of  a lion,  with  the  head  of  a man  sur-


mounted by  the  triple  crown,  and  grasping  in  his  hand  his  keen-
edged  knife  he  pursued  them,  and  brought  hack  142  of  the  enemy,
whom  he  slew,  and  he  tore  out  their  tongues,  and  their  blood

gushed  out  upon  the  ridges  of  the  ground,  ^ n ^ j'O  ^


■ri


jo  ^ ^ □
in  i v.  in  o*

When  this  was  done


Ila  told  Horus


that  he  wished  to  travel


further  upon  the  sea,  and  to  smite  the  remainder  of  his  toes  who
still  lived  in  the  form  of  crocodiles  and  hippopotami  near  Egypt,
but  Horus  told  him  that  it  was  impossible  to  sail  further  on  the  sea
because  the  one-third  of  the  enemy  which  still  remained  were
therein.1  When  Thoth  heard  this  he  recited  certain  chapters
containing  magical  formulae,  with  the  view  of  protecting  the  Boat
and  the  vessels  of  the  blacksmiths  which  were  with  it,  and  of  quiet-
ing the  sea  during  the  period  of  storm.  It  is  clear  that  when
these  chapters  had  been  recited,  Ra  and  his  company  set  out  and
went  over  the  whole  sea,  but  as  no  more  enemies  were  seen  they


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET


483


returned  to  Egypt,  travelling  by  night.  Finally,  Horns  and  his
companions  went  back  to  Nubia,  to  the  town  of  Shashertet,

tdlt  (J  P ^ where  he  destroyed  the  rebels  of  Uauat,  and
their  ablest  soldiers.  When  this  was  dorfe  Horus  changed  himself
once  more  into  the  form  of  the  winged  sun-disk  with  uraei,  and
took  with  him  the  goddesses  Nekhebct  and  Uatchit  in  the  form  of
two  serpents,  that  they  might  consume  with  fire  any  rebels  who
still  remained.  When  the  gods  who  were  in  his  boat  saw  this
they  said,  “ Great  indeed  is  that  which  Horus  hath  done  by  means
“ of  his  double  snake  diadem ; he  hath  smitten  the  enemy  who
“ were  afraid  of  him  ! ” And  Horus  said,  “ Henceforward  let  the
“ double  snake  diadem  of  Heru-Behutet  be  called  Ur-uatchti

“QiSff  anc*  ^ was  so‘  After  these  things  Horus

journeyed  on  in  his  ship,  or  boat,  and  arrived  at  Apollinopolis
Magna  (Edfii)  ©,  and  Thotli  decreed  that  he  should  be

called  the  “ Light-giver,  who  comcth  forth  from  the  horizon


“ p ^ rO-i^;  **  hereupon  Horus  commanded  Thoth  that  the

winged  sun-disk  with  uraei,  «Qs,  should  be  brought  into,  every
sanctuary  wherein  he  dwelt  and  in  every  sanctuary  of  all  the  gods
of  the  lands  of  the  South  and  of  the  North,  and  in  Amentet,  in
order  that  they  miglit  drive  away  evil  from  therein.  Then  Thoth
made  figures  of  the  winged  sun-disk  with  uraei,  and  distributed
them  among  the  temples,  and  sanctuaries,  aud  places  wherein
there  were  any  gods,  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  the  winged
disks  with  uraei  which  are  seen  over  the  entrances  of  the  courts  of
the  temples  of  all  the  gods  and  goddesses  of  Egypt.  The  snake
goddess  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the  disk  is  Nekhebet,  and  that
on  the  left  is  Uatchit.1

The  above  legend  is  very  important  for  the  study  of  Egyptian
mythology,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  in  its  form  here  described
it  belongs  to  a very  modern  period.  The  fundamental  facts  of  the
story  are  very  old,  for  they  belong  to  the  earliest  period  of

1 For  the  text  of  the  legend  summarized  above  see  Nhville,  Mytlie  tl’ Horns,
pll.  xii.  ff. ; and  for  a translation,  with  transliteration  of  text  and  commentary,  seo
Bragsoh,  Die.  Sage  von  der  gcfliigclt.cn  Sunnenscheibe  in  the  Abhandlnngcn  of  the
Boyal  Society  of  Sciences  in  Gottingen  (Phys.  Classe,  I3d.  xiv.,  p.  173  ff.).


484


HORUS  OF  BEHUTET

* •

Egyptian  history,  and  are  derived  from  the  old  nature  myth
of  the  combat  between  Light  and  Darkness.  With  these,  how-
ever, we  have  mingled  another  element,  which  is  apparently
historical,  and  is  also  of  very  great  antiquity.  In  the  original
fight  between  Rii  and  Apep,  or  Horus  and  Set,  the  Sun-god  was
accompanied  by  his  followers,  whose  duties,  apparently,  consisted
in  watching  the  combat,  and  who  were,  like  Rii  himself,  un-
connected with  the  earth.  But  in  the  fight  of  lleru-Behutet  with
Set,  the  companions  of  the  gods  were  beings  in  the  forms  of  men
who  were  armed  with  spears  and  chains  for  fettering  purposes,  and
they  were  rewarded  by  him  after  the  manner  of  men.  The  god
himself  was  armed  with  a very  long  spear  made  of  “ iron  of  the
god  ” or  “ divine  iron,”  and  with  a chain  of  unusual  length,  and
his  method  of  fighting  was  to  hurl  his  spear  at  his  foes,  and  when
it  had  struck  home,  he  fettered  them  with  his  chain,  and  having
dragged  them  to  his  boat,  slaughtered  them  at  leisure.  The
first  great  defeat  of  the  enemy  took  place  at  Aat-Tchetemi,

£=.  (|(j  ©,  near  Thebes;  the  second  took  place  at  Ncter-

near  Dendera,  and  was  followed  by  the

overthrow  of  small  bodies  of  them  in  the  neighbouring  nomes
going  towards  the  north  : and  the  last  great  conquest  was  effected
by  the  god,  who  took  the  form  of  a lion,  at  Tehar,  'j  twj,

or  Tanis,  in  the  east  of  the  Delta,  not  far  from  the  modern
Suez  Canal.

All  these  facts  indicate  that  we  are  not  dealing  entirely  with
mythological  events,  and  it  is  nearly  certain  that  the  triumphant
progress  ascribed  to  Heru-Behutet  is  based  upon  the  exploits  of
some  victorious  invader  who  established  himself  at  Edfu  in  very
early  times,  and  then  made  his  way  with  his  followers  northwards,
beating  down  all  opposition  as  he  went.  It  is  pretty  clear  that
he  owed  his  success  chiefly  to  the  superiority  of  the  weapons
with  which  he  and  his  men  were  armed,  and  to  the  material  of
which  they  were  made  ; given  equality  of  bravery  iu  two  bodies
of  men  opposed  each  to  the  other,  troops  armed  with  weapons  of
flint  would  not  long  oppose  successfully  those  armed  with  weapons
of  iron.  In  other  words,  the  followers  of  Horus,  who  are  called


HORUS,  the  Son  of  ISIS,  the  Son  of  OSIRIS.


485


IIORUS  OF  BEIIUTET

memiti  in  the  text,  as  we  have  already  shown,  were  actually
workers  in  metal,  or,  “ blacksmiths,”  and  men  who  knew  how  to
smelt  iron  ore  and  to  forge  the  metal  into  weapons  of  offence
and  defence.  These  men  called  their  workshop  or  foundry  memet
or  mesnit,  and  later,  when  their  leader  and  themselves  had  become
deified,  and  priests  had  been  appointed  to  perform  the  worship  of
the  god,  the  portion  of  the  temple  which  was  set  apart  for  them
was  also  called  mesvet  or  nutntit , and  when  the  metal  statue  of
the  god  of  the  rising  sun,  I.leru-Behutet,  was  brought  out  by
them  from  their  chamber  the  g6d  was  said  to  issue  from  the
foundry  wherein  he  had  been  cast,  and  the  inwnef  was  identified
with  that  portion  of  the  sky  from  which  the  Sun-god  appeared.

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  sav  who  were  the  blacksmiths
that  swept  over  Egypt  from  south  to  north,  or  where  they  came
from,  but  the  writer  believes  that  they  represent  the  invaders  in
predynastic  times,  who  made  their  way  into  Egypt,  from  a country-
in  the  East,  by  way  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  by  some  road  across  the
eastern  desert,  e.g.,  that  through  the  Wadi  Hammamat,  or  that
which  touches  the  Nile  a little  to  the  south  of  Thebes..  They
brought  with  them  the  knowledge  of  working  in  metals  and  of
brick-making,  and  having  conquered  the  indigenous  peoples  in  the
south,  i.e.,  those  round  about  Edfu,  they  made  that  city  the  centre
of  their  civilization,  and  then  proceeded  to  conquer  and  occupy
other  sites,  and  to  establish  sanctuaries  for  their  god  or  gods.1  In
later  times  the  indigenous  priesthoods  merged  the  legendary
history  of  the  deified  king  of  the  blacksmiths  in  that  of  Horus,  the
god  of  heaven  in  the  earliest  times,  and  in  that  of  Ka,  which
belonged  to  a later  period.  The  priests  of  Edfu  found  many
parts  of  this  mixed  history  very  dilficult  to  explain,  and  they
endeavoured  to  get  out  of  their  difficulties  by  the  fabrication  of
foolish  etymologies  and  puns,  whereby  they  sought  to  elucidate
events  and  names.  These,  however,  have  a certain  importance,
for  they  at  least  prove  that  parts  of  the  legends  were  not  under-
stood when  the  puns  or  plays  on  words  were  made,  and  that  the

1 The  historical  element  iu  the  legend  was  long  ago  recognized  by  Maspero ;
see  Jjts  Vorgorons  d' Horus  el  la  Legctxde  do  l' Hunts  iChdfou  (in  Z lib.  hgypt.,  tom.  ii.,
pp.  313  ff.).

/


486


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


legends  themselves  are  of  great  antiquity;  another  point  is  also
made  clear  by  them,  i.e.,  that  the  Egyptians  themselves  were  not
better  informed  on  such  subjects  than  we  are.

12.  Heru-thema,  _ — o,  i.e.,  “Horns  the  piercer.”

This  form  of  Horus  is  that  in  which  the  god  attacked  Set,  the
murderer  of  his  father  Osiris,  with  his  long  spear  with  a sharp-
pointed  iron  head;  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a hawk-
headed man  in  the  act  of  driving  his  long  spear  into  some  unseen


foe  on  or  below  the  ground.


u


Heru-Hebenu,  i.e.,  Horus  of  Hebenu,  or

UAAAA,V\

a p q,  the  metropolis  of  the  sixteenth  nonie  of

Upper  Egypt.1  He  is  mentioned  in  the  myth  of  Heru-Behutet,
with  whom  he  is  often  identified,  and  he  is  usually  depicted  in  the
form  of  a hawk-headed  man  standing  upou  the  back  of  fin  antelope;
this  animal  was  supposed  to  be  connected  with  Set,  and  Horus  of
Ilebennu  mounted  upon  his  back  as  a symbol  of  his  sovereignty
over  the  god  of  darkness  and  all  his  host.

If.  Hbhu-sa-Ast-sa- Asin, jlj  ^.j$|  JS*


i.e.,  “ Horus,  son  of  Isis,  son  of  Osiris,”  like  many  other  forms  of
Horus,  represented  in  general  the  rising  sun,  and  appears  to  have
been  to  the  Egyptians  exactly  what  Apollo  was  to  the  Greeks  in
this  respect ; the  aspects  of  this  god  were  many,  and  in  consequence
his  shrines  were  very  numerous  both  in  the  South  and  in  the
North.  In  him  were  at  one  time  or  another  included  all  the


various  Horus  gods,  beginning  with  Ileru,  ^ ^ , the  god

of  the  heights  of  heaven,  and  Horus  the  Elder,  and  ending  with  the
least  important  Horus,  i.e.,  the  god  of  some  provincial  town.  His
principal  aspects  were,  however,  two,  i.e.,  he  represented  the
new  Sun  which  was  born  daily,  and  which  was  the  successor  of
Heru-khuti  or  of  lla,  and  he  was  also  the  offspring  of  the  dead
man-god  Osiris  and  his  lawful  successor.  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis
and  of  Osiris,  was  a god  whose  attributes  appealed  strongly  to  the
Egyptians  from  one  end  of  Egypt  to  the  other,  because  in  him


1 Brugsch,  Diet.  G(og.,  p.  490 ; and  Bragsoh,  Religion,  pp.  558  ff.


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


487


every  man  and  woman  saw  the  type  of  what  he  or  she  wished  to
possess,  that  is  to  say,  renewed  life,  and  life  as  opposed  to  death,
and  movement  as  opposed  to  inactivity,  and  intercourse  with  the
living  instead  of  with  the  dead.  In  a way  Osiris  and  Horus  were
complements,  each  of  the  other,  but  the  chief  difference  was  that
Osiris  represented  the  past,  and  Horus  the  present,  or,  as  we  have
it  expressed  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  15),  “ Osiris  is  Yester-
“ day,  and  Ra  (i.e.,  Horus  grown  up)  is  to-day,”  (j  <r=>  jl
□ ^ (J  <=>  ic  ^ O <==>n  ^ . The  texts  are  not  always

consistent  in  the  matter  of  the  paternity  of  Horus,  for  though  Isis
is  invariably  regarded  as  his  mother,  his  father  is  sometimes  said
to  be  Osiris,  and  sometimes  Ra ; but  this  inconsistency  is  easily
accounted  for  by  remembering  that  Osiris  is,  under  one  aspect,  a
form  of  the  dead  Sun-god.  Of  the  circumstances  under  which
Horus  was  begotten  we  gain  a good  idea  from  a hymn  to  Osiris
in  which  the  sorrow  of  his  mother  Isis  at  the  death  of  her
husband  is  described.  The  goddess  was  greatly  distressed,  but
she  was  equipped  with  mighty  words  of  power,  and  she  knew  how
to  utter  them  so  that  they  might  have  the  greatest  effect,  and  she
set  out  in  search  of  the  dead  body  of  Osiris  and  never  rested  until
she  had  found  him.  With  her  hair  she  made  light,  and  with  her
win(rs  she  stirred  the  air  as  she  made  lamentation  for  her  brother

O

Osiris,  and  at  length  she  brought  his  body  into  a state  of  activity,
and  was  then  united  to  him  : thus  she  became  with  child  by  him,
and  her  son  Horus  was  born  in  a secret  place  where  she  suckled
him  and  l'eared  him.1

This  spot  appears  to  have  been  situated  among  the  papyrus
swamps  in  the  Delta,  and  the  event  is  alluded  to  in  many  scenes  in
which  the  goddess  is  seen,  suckling  her  child  amidst  a dense  mass
of  papyrus  plants.  Soon  after  the  birth  of  her  child  she  was
persecuted  by  Set,  who  kept  herself  and  Horus  prisoners  in  a
house,  but  by  the  help  of  Thoth  she  escaped  with  her  child  one
evening,  and  set  out  on  her  way  under  the  protection  of  seven

scorpions  called  Tefen,  Befen,  Jj  ^es*e*>

1 See  C hallos,  Rerue  Archeologique,  1857,  p.  <15;  Ledrain,  Monuments
Bgyptiens,  pll.  22  ff.


488


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


j|)  “ Mestetef,  [|j  “ d8®,  Petet,  o°o  cM,  Thetet,

O Of

and  Matet,  These  scorpions  probably  represent  the

seven  stars  of  the  constellation  Canis  Major,  in  which  the  stars  of
Isis  and  Sothis  were  situated.  The  last  three  scorpions  showed

Isis  the  way  and  led  her  to  the  town  of  Per-Sui,  LyJ!j.  (j{j
or  Crocodiiopolis,  and  then  on  to  the  city  of  Tliebti,  the  city  of  the
Two  Sandals-Goddesses,  ® ^ ^ ^fj , where  the  swamp  country

begins.  Whilst  Isis  was  absent  one  day  Homs  was  stung  by  a
scorpion,  and  when  she  came  Home  she  found  him  lying  on  the
ground,  and  the  foam  was  on  his  lips,  and  his  heart  was  still,  and
there  was  not  a muscle  or  limb  of  him  which  was  not  rigid  ; she  had
protected  him  against  Set,  and  against  the  possibility  of  attack  by
any  being  in  the  papyrus  swamps,  but  a scorpion  had  stung  the
child,  and  he  was  dead.  Whilst  Isis  was  lamenting  his  death  her
sister  Nephthys  came  with  Serqet,  the  scorpion  goddess,  and
advised  her  to  cry  out  to  heaven  for  help,  and  she  did  so,  and  her
cry  penetrated  to  Ra  in  his  “ Boat  of  Millions  of  Years.”  The
great  god  stopped  his  boat,  and  Thoth  came  down  with  words  of
power,  and  by  means  of  these  her  son  was  once  more  raised  to  life
and  health.  Soon  after  these  things  had  taken  place  Horus  set  to
work  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  father  Osiris,  and  it  was  under  his

form  of  “ Horus,  the  avenger  of  his  father,”  ^ “J**  ^ ^

()  ,2  that  ho  appealed  so  strongly  to  the  imagination  of

the  Egyptians.

According  to  a notice  in  the  Calendar  given  in  the  Fourth
Sallier  Papyrus  (Brit.  Mus.,  No.  10,184),  Horus  began  his  fight
with  Set,  which  lasted  three  days,  on  the  26th  day  of  the  month
of  Thoth,  and  the  two  gods  fought  in  the  form  of  two  men.  Isis
was  present  at  the  fight  and,  because  she  in  some  way  supported
Set  against  Horus,  her  son  turned  upon  her  with  the  fury  of  a
“ panther  of  the  south,”  and  cut  off  her  head.  Thoth,  however,
seeing  what  had  been  done,  took  the  head  of  the  goddess,  and  by

1 The  story  is  told  on  the  MeUerniclmtclc , ed,  Golenischeff,  Leipzig,  1877,
pi.  iii.,  11.  46  Jf.

2 For  references  to  him  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  sec  my  Vocabulary , p.  225.


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


489


means  of  his  words  of  power  transformed  it  into  the  head  of  a cow,
and  then  fixed  it  upon  the  body  of  Isis.1  According  to  Plutarch
{De  Iside  et  Oxiride),  Isis  found  that  her  son  Horus  had  succeeded
in  fettering  Set  and  in  binding  him  in  chains,  but  not  wishing  that
he  should  perish  she  loosed  his  fetters  and  set  him  at  liberty ; then
it  was  that  Horus  tore  off  her  head  the  symbols  of  sovereignty
which  were  upon  it.  We  have  no  means  of  assigning  a date  to  the
composition  of  the  above  legend,  but  it  must  be  very  old,  and  it  is
easy  to  see  that  it  is  only  a version  of  the  older  legend  of  the
combat  between  11a  and  Apep,  and  Heru-ur  and  Set,  and  I.Ieru-
Behutet  and  Set,  and  it  is,  of  course,  one  of  the  sources  of  all  the
post- Christian  legends  of  the  overthrow  of  dragons  by  kings  and
heroes,  e.g.,  Alexander  the  Gi'eat  and  Saint  George.  When  Horus
had  overcome  Set  he  succeeded  to  the  inheritance  of  his  father,  and
took  his  seat  upon  the  throne  of  Osiris,  and  reigned  in  his  stead ;
and,  in  the  words  addressed  to  Osiris  by  the  official  Hunefer,  “ Horus
is  triumphant  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  company  of  the  gods,
“ the  sovereignty  over  the  world  hath  been  given  unto  him,  and  his
“ dominion  is  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth.  The  throne  of
“ the  god  Seb  hath  been  adjudged  unto  him,  along  with  the  rank
“ which  hath  been  founded  by  the  god  Temu,  and  which  hath  been
Established  by  decrees  in  the  Chamber* of  Books,  and  hath  been
“ inscribed  upon  an  iron  tablet  according  to  the  command  of  thy
“ father  Ptah-Tancn,  on  the  great  throne.  . . . Gods  celestial  and
“ gods  terrestrial  transfer  themselves  to  the  service  of  thy  son
“ Horus,  and  they  follow  him  into  his  hall,  [where]  a decree  is
“ passed  that  he  shall  be  lord  over  them,  and  they  perform  the
“ decree  straightway.” 2

Now,  besides  the  fight  in  which  he  engaged  with  Set,  Horus
performed  many  other  filial  duties  which  endeared  him  to  the
Egyptians.  Thus  he  took  the  greatest  care  that  every  ceremony
which  could  possibly  benefit  the  deceased  was  performed  on  his
father’s  behalf,  and  every  detail  of  the  mummification  of  the  god,
and  of  the  method  of  swathing,  and  of  the  placing  of  amulets,  etc.,
upon  the  body  was  watched  by  him  with  loving  attention,  and  his

1 C halms,  Calendricr,  Paris,  1 Still,  pp.  20

2 Book  of  the  Dead,  Chap,  elxxxiii.,  11.  12  ff.


490


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


filial  affection  became  the  pattern  which  was  followed  by  every
pious  Egyptian  from  time  immemorial.  We  find,  however,  that
Horus  was  believed  to  help  the  dead  generally,  even  as  he  helped
Osiris,  and  all  men  hoped  that  he  would  come  to  their  assistance
after  death,  and  act  as  a mediator  between  the  judge  of  the  Under-
world and  themselves.  In  the  Judgment  Scene  in  the  Hook  of  the
Dead  (Papyrus  of  Ani,  plates  3 and  4),  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,
leads  the  deceased,  after  his  heart  has  been  weighed,  into  the
presence  of  Osiris,  and  he  says  to  his  father,  “ I have  come  to  thee,
“ 0 Un-nefer,  and  I have  brought  unto  thee  Osiris  Ani,”  and  then
goes  on  to  say  that  Thoth  has  weighed  Ani’s  heart  in  the  Balance
according  to  the  decree  of  the  gods,  and  has  found  it  right  and
true.  He  also  asks  Osiris  that  Ani  may  be  allowed  to  appear  in  his
presence,  and  that  cakes  and  ale  may  be  given  to  him,  and  that  he
may  be  among  the  followers  of  Horus  for  ever.  In  none  of  the
variants  of  the  Judgment  Scene  do  we  find  that  the  place  of  Horus
as  introducer  of  the  dead  is  taken  by  any  other  god,  and  there  is
no  doubt  that  this  duty  was  assigned  to  him  because  it  was
believed  that  Osiris  "would  favourably  receive  those  who  were  led
into  his  presence  by  the  son  who  had  done  so  much  for  him.  From
the  Pyramid  Texts  we  learn  that,  at  the  time  when  man  believed
that  it  was  necessary  to  ‘have  a ladder  in  order  to  aseeud  into
heaven  from  the  earth,  Horus  was  regarded  as  the  god  of  the
ladder,  and  that  he  was  entreated  to  set  up  the  ladder  and  to  hold
it  in  place  whilst  the  deceased  climbed  up  it.  Sometimes  Ra  held
one  side  of  it  whilst  Horus  held  the  other,  aud  sometimes  its
supporters  were  Horus  and  Set,  but  even  so  the  deceased  seems
sometimes  to  have  experienced  difficulty  in  ascending  it,  for  we
read  that  Horus  had  to  give  him  a push  upwards  with  his  two
fingers.1

More  than  this,  however,  was  done  for  the  deceased  by  Horus,
for  he  took  the  bodies  of  the  dead  under  his  care  just  as  he  took  the
body  of  his  father  Osiris  into  his  own  hands,  and  superintended  the
performance  of  his  funeral  rites  and  ceremonies.  In  this  great
work  he  was  assisted  by  a number  of  beings  called  Hebu-shemsu,

1 English  renderings  of  the  passages  trill  be  found  in  my  Egyptian  Magic ,
pp.  52  ff.


FOUR  CHILDREN  OF  HORUS.  or  the  Gods  of  the  Cardinal  Points.


The  Deceased  Risinci  from  the  Funeral  Chest,  which  is  the  type  of  the  Aat  of  Abydos
* with  the  Symbol  of  Life  in  each  Hand.


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


491


$ P ^ $fl  I ’ ^e’’  “ Followers  of  Horus.”  Now  we  know

from  several  passages  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  that  Osiris,  Ra,
Nefer-Tem,  Neb-er-tcher,  Mclii,  Hathor,  and,  in  fact,  all  great
gods  were  ministered  to  b)r  a number  of  lesser  gods,  but  noue  of
these  are  of  the  importance  of  the  followers  of  Horus,  and  none  of
them  are  as  old.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  original  Horus-

god,  ^ ^ ^ , who  represented  the  face  of  heaven,  was

supposed  to  have  long  hair  which  huyg  down  from  his  face,  and  which
probably  supported  it,  and  that  in*  the  myth  of  Shu  the  supports

of  this  god,  i.e.,  the  four  pillars,  jjj|,  which  held  up  the  vast,

rectangular,  iron  plate  that  formed  the  floor  of  heaven  were  placed
in  the  tresses  of  Horus.  At  a later  period,  when  the  four  followers
of  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  were  identified  with  the  followers  of  the
older  Horus,  these  gods  were  made  to  dwell  near  the  pillars  of  Shu
and  to  have  dominion  over  them,  and  also  over  the  four  quarters
of  heaven,  and  they  took  the  place  of  the  earlier  gods  of  the
cardinal  points.  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  these  four  children
of  Horus  play  very  prominent  parts,  and  the  deceased  endeavoured
to  gain  their  help  and  protection  at  all  costs,  both  by  offerings  and
prayers.  In  the  pictures  of  the  funeral  'procession  four  men  draw
along  the  coffin  containing  the  mummied  intestines  of  the  deceased,
four  animals  are  taken  for  sacrifice,  and  all  the  instruments  used  in
the  ceremony  of  “ opening  the  mouth,”  as  well  as  the  vases,  and
boxes  of  unguents,  etc.,  are  in  quadruplicate.  Even  prayers  and
formulae  are  said  four  times  over,  e.g.,  in  Chapter  xl.,  the  deceased
in  addressing  the  Eater  of  the  Ass  says,  “ I know  thee,”  four  times;
and  in  Chapter  exxiv.,  ho  says,  “ I am  pure,”  four  times.  Most
important  of  all,  however,  it  was  to  remember  that  the  four
children  of  Horus  shared  the  protection  of  the  body  of  the  deceased
among  them,  and  as  far  back  as  the  Vth  Dynasty  we  find  that  they
presided  over  his  life  in  the  underworld.  The  names  ot  the  four

gods  are : — Hap,  ^ □ A , Tuamutef,  * ^ > Amset,

(j  c=  |)  o,  and  Qeblisennuf,  A Jj  ^ ^ |||  0 ^ this  is  the

order  in  which  they  are  mentioned  in  the  Pyramid  Texts,  but  in


492


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


later  times  the  order  of  the  names  and  the  spelling  vary  thus : —
MesthO,  I)  9api,  § ()()  Tuamutef,  fl

and  Qebh-sennuf,  | O ’ ^ ^ J • ^ie  two  arms  °f  the  de-
ceased wore  identified  Avith  Hiipi  and  Tuamutef,  and  his  two  legs
with  Amset  and  Qebhsennuf ; and  when  he  Avent  into  the  Sckhet-
Aaru  they  Avere  his  guides  and  Avent  in  Avith  him,  two  on  each  side.
Hapi  represented  the  north  and  protected  the  small  viseerae  of  the
body ; Tuamutef  represented  the  east,  and  protected  the  heart  and
lungs ; Amset  represented  the  ’south,  and  protected  the  stomach
and  large  intestines,  and  Qebhsennuf  represented  the  Avest,  and
protected  the  liver  and  the  gall  bladder.  Associated  Avith  the  four
gods,  perhaps  as  female  counterparts,  Avei’e  the  goddesses  Nephthys,
Neith,  Isis,  and  Selqet,  or  Sen  jet.

As  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  Avas  so  thoroughly  identified  Avith
Horus  the  Elder,  and  with  other  forms  of  the  rising  sun,  it  is
not  surprising  to  find  that  the  sanctuaries  of  the  god  Avere  very
numerous,  and  that  they  existed  in  all  parts  of  the  country ; the
names. of  a great  many  of  these  have  been  collected  by  Signor
Lanzone,1  and  from  them  Ave  learn  that  Horus,  dweller  in  the  tAvo

Egvpts,  ^ 3 fyz  ^ , 'vas  lord  of  Nubti,  rs|n  ^ (Ombos),  and  lord  of

Bast,  ^ ^ (Thebes),  .and  of  Maam,  ^ ' 0 r\/vo?  Kensct,

Het-Ant,  Q <=>,  Re-ur,  , Pe,  Belien,  II  ^ c=~d,

Neklien,  Pcr-netchem,  Re-iiu,  ^ /Jt.©,

Hurent,  Ka-qem,  Reqetit,  <=>  r[]]

Therer,  Bak,  ^ Aat-fmt,  k=bJ^,  llu,  ^

Tchart,  ^ Aat-ab,  Hut,  Het-suten,  ^ Q

Petchatclia,  □ | | ©,  It,  jjj  (j(j  ^ , Rethma  Heben,  ^ JJ^,

Sekhem,  Abtu,  f Shes-en-meh,  ^

Het-neh,  [)g|,  Hebt,  QQ^,  Shep,  ° , Ivhat,  | G,  Qah,


1 Op.  cit.,  p.  569.


THE  GOD  COMPREHENDING  ALL  GODS.


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


493


I 1 ®>  Tenrotut,
etc-


<=>  _S53£.  <=>  s ,

. Ant,

AAAAAA  ^


| and  Buka,  ^


The  forms  in  which  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  is  depicted  are  both
numerous  and  interesting,  and  they  sdiow  how  completely  he
absorbed  the  attributes  of  all  the  other  Horus  gods.  Thus  he  is
represented  as  a child  seated  on  a lotus  flower,  with  one  of  his
forefingers  touching  his  lips,  and  with  the  lock  of  hair  on  the  side
of  his  head ; he  wears  the  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,  and
holds  both  /\  and  J.1  In  another  section  he  stands  on  the  back
of  a hippopotamus,  into  the  head  *of  which  lie  is  driving  a spear  ;
in  this  instance  he  is  clearly  identified  with  Heru-Bchutet.  In
late  dynastic  times  the  god  was  depicted  in  a great  many  fantastic
forms,  and  the  various  attributes  which  were  ascribed  to  him  are
indicated  in  many  curious  ways.  Thus  as  guardian  of  the  funeral
coffer  of  Osiris  he  has  the  head  of  a hawk,  on  which  is  the  triple
crown,  with  the  body  of  a lion,  and  a tail  in  the  form  of  a head
and  neck  of  some  unknown  animal.  Elsewhere  he  is  represented
with  seven  , heads,  among  which  are  those  of  a bull,  a ram,  a cat,
and  a crocodile,  and  with  the  body  of  a man,  ithyphallic,  and  the
legs  and  hoofs  of  a bull,  and  the  wings  of  a bird  ; in  one  hand  he
holds  a knife,  and  in  the  other  a serpent.

But  besides  the  attributes  of  the  other  Horus  gods,  Horus,
son  of  Isis,  was  endowed  with  many  of  the  characteristics  of  other
gods.  Thus  with  the  god  Anpu  or  Anubis,  he  becomes  Heru-em-
Anpu,  i.c.,  Horus  as  Anubis,  and  is  said  to  dwell  in  the  “ divine

hall,”  ^ ^ jPipl  l_^_|  • he  recalls  under  this  name  the  god  “ Her-
manubis,”  who  is  mentioned  by  Plutarch  {lh>.  hide  ef  Oxiride,  § 01)
and  by  Diodorus  (lines  18,  87).  This  dual  god  is  represented  in
the  form  of  a man  with  the  head  of  a jackal,  and  it  is  impossible  to
distinguish  him  by  his  picture  from  the  two  jackal  gods  Anpu,  or
Anubis,  and  Ap-uat,  who  are  only  two  forms  of  one  and  the  same
god.  Strictly  speaking,  Anpu  is  the  “ opener  of  the  roads  of  the

^outli,  the  power  of  the  two  lands,”  \J  =j=  ^ ° and

Apuat  is  the  “opener  of  the  roads  of  the  North,  the  power  of


1 See  Liuizone,  op.  c*it.,  pH.  214  ff.


494


HORUS,  SON  OF  ISIS


heaven,”  \J ^ ^ ^ The  two  Jackal  Sods  are  often

seen  depicted  on  stelae,  where  they  symbolize  the  two  halves  of
the  year,  and  the  night  and  the  day  sky,  and  the  periods  of  waxing
and  waning  of  the  powers  of  nature  in  summer  and  winter.

The  particular  form  of  Homs  which  was  identified  with

yA/WWV

the

Hipponon  of  the  Greeks,  where  also  Anubis  was  specially  venerated.
The  identification  of  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  with  Anubis  is  easy  to
explain,  for  botli  gods  assisted  in  mummifying  the  dead  body  of
Osiris,  and  it  is  expressly  stated  in  the  Bool:  of  the  Dead  (xvii.
125  ff.),  that  it  is  Anubis  who  passes  through  the  purification

chamber  in  the  Mesqet  $ ft and  that  he  stood  “behind  the

chest  which  contained  the  inner  parts  of  Osiris.”  According
to  the  same  chapter  (lines  100-108),  it  was  Anubis  who
appointed  the  Seven  Spibits,  “ the  followers  of  their  lord  Sepa,”

— — '*»#*  , to  be  the  protectors  of  the  dead  body  of

Osiris.  One  authority  quoted  in  the  same  chapter  stated  that  the
Seven  Spirits,  Q ^ , were  the  Four  Children  of  Horus,

already  mentioned  above,  and  Maa-atef-f,
and  Kheri-beq-f,  \\  | J|

aw//,  -C£t>-

^ \\  ^e>-  » ^ut  an°ther  authority  gives  the  names  of  the

Seven  Spirits  as  follows: — 1.  Netclieh-netcheh ; 2.  Aaqetet ;

8.  An-erta-nef-bes-f-khenti-lieh-f ; 4.  Aq-her-ammi-unnut-f ; 5.

Tesher-maati-ammi-het-Anes ; 6.  Ubes-hra-per-em-khetkhet ; 7.

Maa-em-kerli-an-nef-em-hru.2  In  connexion  with  these  must  be
• »


^ (|  , and  Ileru-khenti-maati,


1 j Boole  of  the  Dead , Chap,  cxlii.,  § iv.  24,  2a.


dlh


<; > /www  n /~v

Jii

li-l-  *VA?Wk''±2*L!i9-

H-k"  EUJS'r’i-  «


ra
o wra


tzrza

i


7


HARPOCRATES


495


mentioned  the  goddess  Hetep-sekiius,


□ © ^ A ^ PSv

who  is  identified  either  with  the  Eye  of  Ra  or  with  the  flame
which  follows  Osiris  to  burn  up  his  enemies,  arid  the  assessors  of
that  section  of  the  Underworld  which  is  called  An-aareretef,


or  Aa-*ret-f-  Sft  V’  ie-

“place  where  nothing  grows,”  the  chief  of  whom  was  Heru-netch-
iira-atef-f,  , or  “Horus,  the

avenger  of  his  father.”

15.  llKltu-l'A-KHART,  ^ ^ ^ i.c.,  “ Horus

the  Child.”  We  have  already  described  Horus  the  Child,  who  was
the  son  and  successor  of  Horus  the  Elder,  and  brief  mention  must  be
made  of  Horus  the  Child  who  was  the  son  and  successor  of  Osiris.
The  greater  number  of  the  attributes  which  belonged  to  the  old
Horus  gods  were  transferred  to  the  son  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  especially
in  late  dynastic  times  when  the  worship  of  Osiris  was  dominant  in
Egypt,  and  llorus  the  Child  became,  the  type  of  the  new  birth,  and
new  life,  the  first  hours  of  the  day,  and  the  first  days  of  the  month,
and  the  first  months  of  the  year,  and  iu  fact  of  everything  which
was  young  and  vigorous.  Soon,  however,  the  characteristics  of
the  great  forms  of  the  Sun-god  were  added  to  his  own,  and  his
original  conception  as  Horus  the  Chilcf  was  somewhat  forgotten ;
at  times  it  is  very  difficult  to  distinguish  in  the  texts  exactly
which  Horus  is  referred  to.  In  all  the  great  sanctuaries  of  Egypt,
from  the  period  of  the  New  Empire  onwards,  we  find  that  Horus
the  Child,  or  Harpocrates,  was  identified  by  the  priests  of  the  local
gods  as  a form  of  their  principal  deities  in  which  the  chiefs  of  the
companies  or  triads  of  gods  had  renewed  and  rejuvenated  them-
selves. The  late  Dr.  Brugscli  collected  a large  number  of  examples
of  this  fact,1  and  he  proved  that  as  Heru-sma-taui-pa-khart  he  was
identified  with  Tem,  and  was  said  to  be  son  of  Heru-khuti  and

Hathor;  that  joined  with  -Ahi,  (|  ^ ()(j  Harpocrates  became  a
form  of  Ra,  and  was  called  “ son  of  Hatliof,  to  ’whom  Isis  gave
birth,”  and  was  regarded  as  the  offspring  of  Un-nefcr,


1 Religion  nnd  Mythologies  p.  S73.


496


HARPOCRATES


i.e.,  of  Osiris ; and  that  he  was  also  made  to  be  the  renewed  form
of  the  gods  Shu,  Seb,  Khensu,  and  Amsu,  or  Min.

In  connexion  with  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  in  one  or  other  of  his
forms  must  be  mentioned  the  interesting  legend  which  is  preserved
in  the  cxiith  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead , and  which  has

reference  to  the  district  or  place  called  Khat,  ^ j , of  the

dweller  in  Khat,  in  the  city  of  Aupct,  © , in  the  nome  of  Hii-

mehit,  i.e.,  the  sixteenth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.  Strictly

speaking,  Anpet  was  the  name  'of  the  temple  and  quarter  of  the
city  of  Mendes,  the  local  triad  of  which  consisted  of  Ba-neb-Tetet,

1.1  a-mehit,  1 |j(j  “ ^fj,  and  Heru-pa-kluirt.

Mendes  was  full  of  associations  with  the  worship  of  the  god  Osiris,
for  in  the  temple  there  were  preserved  the  phallus  and  the  back-
bone of  Osiris ; the  temple  was  called  Het-baiut,  y 3*5?  ill  i-e.,
“ House  of  the  Rams,”  and  the  place  where  the  relics  were  found
Per-khent,  C-)“:3  ^ .*  The  rams  here  referred  to  recall  the  legend

in  which  the  Ram  of  Mendes  was  said  to  unite  within  himself  the


souls  of  Ra,  Osiris,  Shu,  and  Khepera,  and  he  was  known  as  the
“Ram  with  four  heads  *i%)on  one  neck,”  ^ ^ Jj  .“
It  is  possible  that  he  is  also  referred  to  in  the  text  of  Pepi  I.  (line


419)  where  a god  with  four  faces  is  mentioned,  J J (j  □

In  the  Chapter  above  mentioned  the  deceased  is  made  to  ask  a
number  of  gods,  “ Do  ye  know  for  what  reason  the  city  of  Pe  hath
“ been  given  unto  Horus  ? ” and  he  goes  on  to  say,  “ I,  even  I,
“ know  it  though  ye  know  it  not.  Behold,  Ra  gave  the  city  to  him
“ in  return  for  the  injury  to  his  Eye ; for  which  cause  Ra  said  to
“ Ilorus,  ‘ Let  me  see  what  is  coming  to  pass  in  thine  eye,’  and
“ forthwith  he  looked  thereat.  Then  Ra  said  unto  Horus,  ‘ Look
“ at  that  black  pig,’  and  he  looked,  and  straightway  an  injury  was
“'done  unto  his  eye,  that  is  to  say,  a mighty  storm  [took  place


^ czz z 1 1 o <2
- Sett  do  Rougu,  Grotjy aphifi  Ancienne.  p.  114.


*32


HARPOCRATES


497


“ therein].  Then  said  Horus  unto  Ra,  ‘Verily,  my  eye  seems  as  if
“ it  were  an  eye  upon  which  Suti  had  inflicted  a blow’  ; and  [thus
“ saying]  he  ate  his  heart.1 *  Then  said  Ra  to  those  gods,  * Phice  ye
“ him  in  his  chamber,  and  he  shall  do  well.’  Now  the  black  pig
“ was  Suti  (Set)  who  had  transformed  himself  into  a black  pig,  and
“ he  it  was  who  had  aimed  the  blow  of  fire  which  struck  the  eye  of
“ Horus.  Then  said  Ra  unto  those  gods,  ‘ The  pig  is  an  abominable
u ‘ thing  unto  Horus  ; but  he  shall  do  well,  although  the  pig  is  an
“ ‘ abomination  unto  him.’  Then  the  company  of  the  gods,  who
“ were  among  the  divine  Followers  of  Horus  when  he  existed  in
“ the  form  of  his  own  child,  said,  * Let  sacrifices  be  made  of  his
“ bulls,  and  of  his  goats,  and  of  his  pigs.’  Now  the  father  of
“ Mesthi,  Hapi,  Tuamutef,  and  Qebh-sennuf  is  Horus,  and  their
“ mother  is  Isis.  Then  said  Horus  to  Ra,  ‘ Give  me  two  divine
“ ‘ brethren  in  the  city  of  L’e  and  two  divine  brethren  in  the  city  of
“ ‘ Nekhen,  who  [have  sprung]  from  my  body  and  who  shall  be  with
“ ‘ me  in  the  guise  of  everlasting  judges,  and  then  shall  the  earth'
“ ‘ blossom  and  thunder-clouds  and  rain  be  done  away.’  And  the

“ name  of  Horus  became  Her-uatch-f,  ^ I 1 s^-.”

In  addition  to  the  forms  of  Horus  mentioned  in  the  above
paragraphs  the  Pyramid  Texts  make  known  the  following : —

1.  Heru-Aaji,  Q n | i.e.,  Horus,  the  Moon-god;3  2.  Heru-

KH  ENT- PERU,  3.  HeRU-AM-HeNNU,

and  Heuu  of  Tat,
authorities  Horus  possessed  one  white  eye  and  one  black,
<=»  £ — i,a  which  king  Unas  is  said  to  have  taken  to
illumine  his  face ; and  two  other  titles  of  the  god  arft  “ Horus  of


©'


According  to  the  same


the  two  blue  eyes,”  ^ J ^\7  and  “ Horus  of  the  two
red  i,eyes,”  In  the  Theban  Recension  of  the


1 I.e.,  he  lost  his  temper  and  raged.

» ■=='  H *=-  2: 'e=*  2 ^ Tet»,l.  365.

3 Unas,  1.  202.  4 Unas,  1.  211.  * Unas,  1.  218.

« Unas,  1.  37.  7 Unas,  1.  369.  8 Unas,  1.  869.


498


MISCELLANEOUS  HORUS  GODS


Booh  of  the  Dead  these  titles  are  also  mentioned  (Chap,  clxxvii.  7)
as  well  as  the  following: — Heru-aa-abu,  ^ 1 ^ J,  Heru-

ahai,  — o Ueru-ami-abu-her-ab-ami-khat,  ^

m % 4 -f xx  Heru-ami-athen,  M Heru-

em-khebit,  ^ ^ Heru-neb-ureret,  ^ ^ ~ ^ ^ j,

Heru-her-neferu,  Heru-khent-heh,  ^

™ j,  Heru-khenti-heh,  ^ (f^  ™ n ^ I ’ ^eru-sekhab

Weru-shet-hra,  etc*  Finally»  hl

the  text  of  Unas  (line  462  ff.)  we  meet  with  the  form  of  Heku-

is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  Rii,  Tern,


Thotk,  and  Horus  of  Tat,  and  the  star  Nekhekh,


/WWW


Hem-Sept


is  a form  of  Horus,  presumably  the  god  of  the  rising  sun,  united  to
the  particular  form  of  the  same  god  Sept  which  was  worshipped
in  the  twentieth  nome  of  Lower  Egypt,  i.e.,  the  norae  Sept,

Mp  ‘ In  the  examples  given  by  Signor  Lanzone  of  the  various
85  c


forms  under  which  Sept  is  depicted  he  is  sometimes  seen  in  the
form  of  a man  having  upon  his  head  either  the  symbol  ^ , or  double
plumes,  jj] , or  a disk,  © , and  sometimes  in  the  form  of  a mummied
hawk,  , with  plumes  on  his  head,  and  the  symbol  ^ in  front  of
him,  and  the  mendt , , on  his  back.  The  titles  which  accompany

these  representations  describe  him  as  the  “ lord  of  the  east,”  i.e.,
the  eastern  part  of  the  Delta  and  Arabia.  On  a shrine  discovered
at  Saft  al- Henna  by  M.  Naville  he  appears  in  the  form  of  the  god

Bes,  Jj  J1  who  is  represented  with  outspread  arms,  hands,  and
wings,  and  with  feathers  on  the  top  of  his  head.  In  this  form
he  is  called,  “Sept,  the  smiter  of  the  Menti,”  |>

i.e.,  the  tribes  of  the  Eastern  Desert  and  Arabia.  Sept  was
clearly  a god  of  battles,  (j(j  and  he  was  called

the  “ Bull  that  trampleth  on  the  Menti ; ” he  was  the


*


The  God  SEPT.


MISCELLANEOUS  HOllUS  GODS  499


“ strengthener  of  Egypt,  and  the  protector  of  the  temples  of  the
gods.” 1


The  principal  seat  of  the  worship  of  the  god  was  ’in  the
metropolis  of  the  nome,  i.e.,  at  Per-Sept,  L~(_J  ^ ^ ; if  Kesem,

@ , was  a distinct  city  from  Per-Sept  a temple  to  the  god


may  have  stood  there  also.  The  female  counterpart  of  Heru-Sept
was  a form  of  the  goddess  Hathor  to  whom,  in  the  twentieth  nome

of  Lower  Egypt,  the  name  Sectit,  was  Siven>  his

sanctuary  contained  some  fine  vebes 2 trees,  hence  its  name  axt


nebes,  jj


crz]


JJ  P Q j , “ house  of  nebes  trees.”  As  the  “ lord  of


battle,”  ^37  (y\ , Sept  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a hawk-headed
lion  with  the  tails  of  a lion  and  a hawk,  and  in  his  hands,  which
are  those  of  a man,  he  holds  a bow  and  a club  ; on  his  head  are  a
disk3  and  plumes.  Sept  is  mentioned  even  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead
with  the  attributes  of  a god  of  war,  and  in  Chapter  xvii.  (line  30)
he  is  said  to  “ thwart  the  acts  of  the  foes  of  Neb-er-tcher.”  In  the
xxxiind  Chapter  the  deceased  drives  away  the  Crocodile  of  the
South,  and  says,  “ I am  Sept  ” ; and  in  the  cxxxth  Chapter
(line  11)  Ave  read  of  the  “ slaughtering  block  of  the  god  Septu,”

. Up  to  the  present  no  satisfactoiy  explanation
has  been  given  of  the  object  A which  is  the  symbol  of  the  god


Sept,  but  it  appears  to  have  been  some  kind  of  a triangle ; a figure
or  model  of  it  was  preserved  at  Amen-kheperutet,  tj^|  ^ f © >
which  is  described  in  the  Ed  ft!  list  as  ^ 'j  A/WW\  WVWl  J
i.e.,  “ the  hidden  ^ of  Khas  (?)  en-Sept.”


1 Do  Rouge,  Geographic  Aucienne , p.  141.

3 The  Cordia  Sehestena , or  Zizyphm  Lotos  Tlr.,  according  to  Brngsch,  Religion,
p.  567.

3 Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  1048.


( 500  )


CHAPTER  XVI

THE  GREAT  TRIAD  OF  MEMPHIS,  PTAH,
SEKHET,  AND  I-EM-HETEP,

THE  greatest  of  all  the  old  gods  of  Memphis  was  undoubtedly
Ptah,  ° | or  Ptah-neb-ankh,  ^ | ^ and

his  worship,  in  one  form  or  another,  goes  back  to  the  earliest  part
of  the  dynastic  period.  He  has  usually  been  regarded  as  a form
of  the  Sun-god,  and  as  the  personification  of  the  rising  sun,  either
at  the  time  when  it  begins  to  rise  above  the  horizon  or  immediately
after  it  has  risen.  The  name  has  often  been  explained  to  mean
“ Opener,”  and  to  be  derived  from  a root  which  was  cognate  in
meaning  with  the  well-known  Semitic  root  pdthalch,  nrs,  in  fact
Ptah  was  thought  to  be  the  “ Opener  ” of  the  day  just  as  Tem  was
considered  to  be  the  “ Closer  ” of  the  day.  The  chief  drawback,
however,  to  the  acceptance  of  this  derivation  is  the  fact  that  Ptah
never  forms  one  of  the  groups  of  the  chief  forms  of  the  Sun-god  in
the  texts,  and  his  attributes  are  entirely  different  from  those  of
Khepera,  Tem,  Heru,  and  Ha.  Moreover,  although  the  word

ptah,  ^ j[  > is  found  in  Egyptian  it  never  has  the  meaning  “ to

open,”  in  the  sense  of  opening  a door,  and  the  determinative  which
follows  it,1  proves  conclusively  that  although  it  does  mean
“ to  open  ” it  is  always  in  the  sense  of  “ to  engrave,  to  carve,  to
chisel,”  and  the  like ; compare  Heb.  HIT©  “ engraving,  sculpture.”
The  meaning  proposed  for  the  name  “ Ptah  ” by  Dr.  Brugsch  is
“ sculptor,  engraver,”  and  many  passages  in  the  texts  of  all  periods
make  it  plain  that  Ptah  was  the  chief  god  of  all  handicraftsmen,


1 Brugsch,  Worterlmch,  p.  528,


FTAH  FASHIONING  THE  EGG  OF  THE  WORLD  UPON  A POTTER'S

* Wheel,  which  he  works  with  his  Foot.


PTAH  THE  ARTIFICER


501


% and  of  all  workers  in  metal  and  stone.  What  the  form  of  the  god
was  originally  it  is,  unfortunately,  impossible  to  say,  but  from  the
titles  which  the  dynastic  Egyptians  gave  to  him  it  is  clear  that
his  main  characteristics  did  not  change  from  the  period  of  the
Ilnd  Dynasty  to  that  of  the  Ptolemies  and  Romans.  At  a very
early  period  he  was  identified  with  one  of  the  great  primeval  gods
of  Egypt,  and  he  was  called  “ the  very  great  god  who  came  into

“ being  in  the  earliest  time,”  "j  ->-==>  lYhT  1 n ^ “father

“ of  fathers,  Power  of  powers,”  ^ ^ ^ ^ “j'j'j;  “father  of

“beginnings,  and  creator  of  the  egg[s]  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,”
| P ^ ? “ lord  of  Mafit,  king  of  the  two

“lands,  the  god  of  the  Beautiful  Face  in  Thebes,  who  created  his
“ own  image,  who  fashioned  his  own  body,  who  hath  established  Maat
throughout  the  two  lands  ; ” 1 “ Ptah,  the  Disk  of  heaven,  illuminer
“ of  the  two  lands  with  the  fire  of  his  two  eyes.” 2 In  the  text  of

Teta  (lines  87,  97)  the  “workshop  of  Ptah,”  | is  men-

tioned, and  the  general  sense  of  the  passages  indicates  that  it  was
Ptah  who  was  believed  to  fashion  the  new  bodies  in  which  the
souls  of  the  dead  were  to  live  in  the  Underworld.  Ptah,  as  we
shall  see  later  from  the  passages  quoted  .from  the  Book  of  the  Dead,
was  the  great  artificer  in  metals,  and  lie  was  at  once  smelter,  and
caster,  and  sculptor,  as  well  as  the  master  architect  and  designer
of  everything  which  exists  in  the  world.  The  Greeks  and  the
Latins  rightly  identified  one  form  of  him  with  Hephaistos  and
Vulcan.

Ptah  was  the  fellow-worker  with  Khnemu  in  carrying  into
effect  the  commands  concerning  the  creation  of  the  universe  which
were  issued  by  Thoth,  and  whilst  the  latter  was  engaged  in
fashioning  man  and  animals,  the  former  was  employed  in  the
construction  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  The  large  rectangular


avav\  tJ


1


Ck

/WWW


, Lanzone,  op.  cit.,  p.  240.


502


FORMS  OF  PTAH

iron  slab  which  formed  the  floor  of  heaven  and  the  roof  of  the  sky
was  beaten  out  by  Ptah,  and  he  and  his  assistants  made  the  stays
and  supports  which  held  it  in  position.  In  the  character*  of
architect  of  the  universe  he  partakes  of  the  nature  of  Thoth,
especially  in  respect  of  his  title  “ lord  of  Maat ; ” and,  as  the  god
who  beat  out  the  iron  firmament  with  a hammer  and  supported  it,
his  attributes  resemble  those  of  Shu.  In  other  capacities  he  was
supposed  to  be  endowed  with  powers  which  we  are  wont  to
associate  with  other  gods,  and  thus  we  find  enumerated  in  religious
and  funeral  texts  Ptafj-Asar  (Ptah-Osiris),  Ptaii-Hapi,  Ptah-Nu,
Ptah-Seker,  Ptah-Seker-Asar,  Ptah-Sekkr-Tkm,  Ptah-Tanen,
and  the  like.  The  part  which  Ptah  in  his  various  forms  plays  in
the  Book  of  the  Dead  is  well  illustrated  by  the  following: — In
Chapter  iv.  he  is  said  to  come  forth  from  the  Great  Temple  of  the
Aged  One  in  Annu ; in  Chapter  xi.  the  deceased  says,  “ I shall
stand  up  like  Horus,  I shall  sit  down  like  Ptah,  I shall  be  mighty
“ like  Thoth,  and  I shall  be  strong  like  Tern.”  From  Chapter  xxiii.
we  learn  that  Shu  or  Ptah  performed  the  ceremony  of  “ opening
the  mouth  ” of  the  gods  with  an  iron  knife ; in  Chapter  xlii.  the
feet  of  the  deceased  are  identified  with  the  feet  of  Ptah ; in
Chapter  lxiv.,  line  8,  he  is  said  to  have  covered  his  sky  with
crystal;  Chapter  lxxxii.  is  a text  by  the  use  of  which  a man
transforms  himself  into  Ptah,  when  his  tongue  becomes  like  that  of
the  god ; in  Chapter  cxlv.,  line  07,  the  “ writings  of  Ptah  ” are
referred  to;  in  Chapter  cli.A  Mestha  tells  the  deceased  that  he
has  “ stablished  his  house  firmly  according  to  what  Ptah  hath
commanded ; ” and  in  Chapter  cliii.,  line  6,  the  11  hook  of  Ptah  ”
is  mentioned ; in  Chapter  clxvi.  Ptah  is  said  to  overthrow
the  enemies  of  the  deceased  (see  .also  Chapter  clxxii.  1 0).  In
Chapter  cli.  the  hair  of  the  deceased  is  compared  to  that  of  Ptah-
Seker,  and  in  Chapter  clxx.  this  god  is  said  to  give  him  help  with  his

khakern,  ynr*  ^ jj  j , weapons  from  his  divine  house.  In  a hymn  to
Osiris  (Chapter  xv.)  Osiris  is  addressed  as  Un-nefer  IJeru-kliuti,
and  as  “ Ptah-Seker-Tem,  in  Annu,  the

“lord  of  the  hidden  place,  and  the  creator  of  Het-ka-Ptah  (i.e.,
“ 1 the  House  of  the  Double  of  Ptah,’  or  Memphis) ; ” finally,  Ptah-


FORMS  OF  PTAH


503


Tanen  is  mentioned  in  Chapter  clxxxiii.,  line  15,  as  having  caused
to  be  inscribed  certain  decrees  concerning  Horus  upon  an  “ iron
tablet.”

The  commonest  form  in  which  Ptah  is  represented  is  that  of  a
bearded  man  with  a bald  head  who  is  * shrouded  in  a close-fitting
garment,  from  an  opening  in  the  front  of  which  project  his  two
hands;  from  the  back  of  his  neck  hangs  the  mendt , symbol  of

pleasure  and  happiness,  and  in  his  hands  he  holds  a sceptre,
and  the  emblems  of  “ life,”  and  “ stability,”  j^.  When  standing

upright  his  feet  rest  upon  a pedestal  made  in  the  shape  of  the
sign  moot  /— n,  and  when  seated  his  throne  rests  upon  a pedestal
of  similar  shape.  At  the  back  of  standing  figures  of  the  god  we

sometimes  see  an  obelisk,  or  the  tet,  |j,  which  symbolizes  both
“stability”  and  the  tree  trunk  in  which  the  body  of  Osiris  was  hidden
by  Isis.  Ptah  under  his  forms  of  Ptah-Nu,

Ptah-Hapi,  | "Hsi’  merely  rePresents  the  union  of

the  great  celestial  workman  and  architect  with  the  primeval
elements  of  earth  and  water,  and  there  are  no  representations
specially  set  apart  for  these  forms.

On  the  other  hand,  his  forms  of  Ptah-Seker,  or  Ptah-Seker-

asar,  an<i i>ta?-tanbn> sy

JJ|  ^ tjfr , must  be  specially  considered.  Ptah-Seker  represents

a personification  of  the  union  of  the  primeval  creative  power
with  a form  of  the  inert  powers  of  darkness,  or  in  other  words,
Ptah-Seker  is  a form  of  Osiris,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  night  sun,  or
dead  Sun-god.  Seker  is  depicted  in  the  form  of  a hawk-headed
man  in  mummied  form  resembling  that  of  Ptah,  and  his  hands
project  from  the  front  of  his  close-fitting  garment  and  hold  the

emblems  of  sovereignty  and  dominion,  J , jf\,  sometimes  he  has

the  head  of  a man  and  holds  in  each  hand  a knife.1  Seker  >yas
originally  a power  of  darkness,  or  of  the  night,  which  in  later
times  was  identified  with  forms  of  the  night  sun  like  lem.  He  is


Lanzoiie,  op.  cit..,  pi.  3(58,  No.  4.


504


THE  SEKER  BOAT


iSokor-Asar.


called  “ the  great  god,  who  came  into  being
“ in  the  beginning,  he  who  resteth  upon  the

“ 'tarlmesa,”

T the  xviith  Chapter  of  the

Book  of  the  Dead  (line  113)  occurs  a petition
in  which  the  deceased  begs  to  be  delivered
from  the  “great  god  who  carrieth  away
“ the  soul,  who  eateth  hearts,  and  who
“ feedeth  upon  offal,  the  guardian  of  the
“ darkness,  the  god  who  is  in  the  Seker

“ boat,  and  in  the  explanation

of  the  passage  which  is  given  in  answer  to
the  question,  “ Who  is  this  ? ” the  god  who  is
in  the  Seker  boat  is  said  to  be  either  Suti,

°r  smam-™>

^=t,  the  soul  of  Seb.  Thus  it  is  clear  that


Seker  was  an  ancient  spirit  or  god  whose  attributes  were  such  that
he  might  well  be  represented  by  Set,  or  Suti,  the  enemy  of  Ra,  or
by  the  soul  of  the  earth-god  Seb.  In  comparatively  early  dynastic
times  Seker  was
exalted  to  the
position  of  god  of
that  portion  of  the
Underworld  which
was  allotted  to  the
souls  of  the  in-
habitants of  Mem-
phis and  the  neigh-
bourhood, and  it
is  tolerably  certain
that  he  was  re-
garded as  the  tute-
lary deity  of  the
necropolis  of  Sak;-
k&ra.


Ptolemy  Eaergetea  and  the  Henna  Boat.


505


SEKER  OR  HENNIJ  BOAT

The  Seker  Boat  which  has  been  mentioned  above  is  often
represented  on  sepulchral  monuments  and  papyri,  and  it  was
certainly  made  to  play  a very  prominent  part  in  certain  solemn,
sacred  ceremonies.  It  was  not  made  in  the  form  of  an  ordinary
boat,  but  one  end  of  it  was  very  much  higher  than  the  other,  and
was  made  in  the  shape  of  the  head  of  some  kind  of  gazelle  or  oryx ;
the  centre  of  the  boat  was  occupied  by  a carefully  closed  coffer
which  was  surmounted  by  a hawk  with  protecting  wings  stretched
out  over  the  top  of  it.  This  coffer  contained  the  body  of  the  dead
Sun-god  Ar,  or  of  Osiris,  and  it  rested  upon  a framework  or  sledge
which  was  provided  with  runners.  On  the  great  day  of  the
festival  of  Seker  which  was  celebrated  in  many  places  throughout
Egypt,  the  ceremony  of  placing  the  Seker  boat  upon  its  sledge  was
performed  at  sunrise,  at  the  moment  when  the  rays  of  the  sun
were  beginning  to  spread  themselves  over  the  earth.  The  whole
ceremony  was  under  the  direction  of  the  high  priest  of  Memphis,

whose  official  title  was  “ Ur  klierp  hem,”  f f ’ U i-e->  great  chief

of  the  hammer  ” ; this  official  was  expected  to  lift  the  Seker  Boat
upon  its  sledge,  and  to  march  at  the  head  of  the  procession  of
priests  which  drew  the  loaded  sledge  round  the  sanctuary.  By
this  action  the  revolution  of  the  sun  and  other  celestial  bodies  was
symbolized,  but  no  texts  explaining  the  symbolism  have  come
down  to  us.  From  the  inscriptions  which  are  found  at  Memphis
and  in  the  neighbourhood  we  know  that  the  office  of  high  priest  of
Ptah  was  considered  to  be  a most  honourable  position,  and  that
many  men  of  noble  family  and  of  high  rank  held  it  as  far  back  as
the  period  of  the  Ilnd  Dynasty.  Now  since  the  priestly  office
existed  in  those  remote  times  it  is  only  reasonable  to  assume  that
the  Seker  Boat  also  existed,  and  that  the  ceremonies  with  which  it
was  used  in  the  later  period  were  also  performed  in  the  earlier ;
the  god  Seker  was,  even  when  the  Pyramids  were  built,  an  ancient
god,  and  the  chief  characteristics  of  his  worship  must  be  as  old  as
the  god  himself.

The  name  given  to  the  Seker  Boat  is  “ Hennu,"  ^ ^

and  it  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Booh  of  the.  Dead and
sometimes  in  Connexion  with  traditions  of  great  importance.


506


SEKER  OR  HENNU  BOAT

Thus  after  the  lxivth  Chapter  we  have  a rubric  which  states
that  the  composition  was  found  in  the  masonry  below  the  shrine  of
Hennu  during  the  reign  of  Semti  (Hesepti)  a king  of  the  1st
Dynasty ; now  Hennu  can  only  be  the  god  of  the  Hennu  boat,
and  the  shrine  of  Hennu  must  be  the  place  where  it  was  kept.  A
most  valuable  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  this  boat  is  found  on  an
ebony  tablet  in  the  British  Museum 1 which  was  made  for  the  royal
chancellor  Heinaka,  who  flourished  during  the  reign  of  Semti,
whose  Horus  name  was  Ten.  On  this  we  see  a representation  of
the  king  dancing  before  Osiris,,  who  is  seated  within  a shrine  on
the  top  of  a flight  of  steps,  and  in  the  register  immediately  below
it  is  a figure  of  the  Hennu  Boat.  The  Seker  or  Hennu  Boat  was
probably  a form  of  the  Sektet  Boat,  i.e.,  the  boat  in  which  the
sun  sailed  over  the  sky  during  the  second  half  of  his  daily  journey,
and  in  which  he  entered  the  Underworld  in  the  evening,  for  Rft

the  Aged,  is  said  to  be  like  Horus,  and  Ra  the  Babe,

T 1 <—>’  to  be  like  Seker.  The  sanctuaries  of  Seker  must  have

been  extremely  numerous 2 in  Lower  Egypt  in  very  early  dynastic
times;  but  it  appears  that  before  the  great  development  of  Ra
worship  took  place,  the  god  Seker  was  already  identified  with  and
merged  in  Utah,  and  that  these  gods  were  adored  together  in  one
temple.  The  forms  in  which  Ptah-Seker  is  represented  are
interesting,  for  they  illustrate  the  attributes  of  the  double  god,  and
prove  that  it  was  Ptah  who  usurped  the  characteristics  of  Seker,
and  that  Seker  was  the  older  god.  Ptah-Seker  is  often  depicted
in  the  form  of  a man  who  wears  upon  his  head  a crown  composed

of  disk,  plumes,  horns,  and  uraei  with  disks  on  their  heads,

a cognate  form  is  perhaps  that  reproduced  by  Lanzone 9 in  which
the  god,  who  in  this  case  is  called  “ Ptah  whose  double  plumes  are
lofty,”  has  upon  his  head  horns,  plumes,  and  a uraeus,  and  a uraeus
upon  his  forehead.  Another  interesting  form  is  that  of  a mummy

with  a disk  and  the  two  feathers  of  Maat,  upon  his  head.4
Elsewhere  he  is  found  in  the  usual  form  of  Ptah  seated  upon

* See  a list  given  by  Lanzone,  op.  cifc.,  p.  1117.

* Ibid.,  pi.  95.


* No.  32,650.

3 Op.  cifc.f  pi.  94,  No.  4.


SEKER


ptah-seker-asAr


507


a throne,  behind  Osiris  and  followed  by  Anubis,  Horus,  son  of  Isis,
and  Hathor.

Under  the  name  of  Ptah-Seker-Asar  we  find  PtaE  and
Seker  united  with  Osiris  to  form  a remarkable  triad,  which  is
depicted  in  various  ways.  A common  representation  of  the  god  is
the  hawk,  with  the  White  Crown  and  plumes  upon  his  head,
standing  upon  a low  pedestal,  from  the  front  of  which  projects  a
serpent ; in  this  form  ho  is  often  met  with  on  painted  coffins  and
sepulchral  chests.  In  the  Papyrus  of  Anhai  (Brit.  Mus.,  plate  5)
the  god  is  seated  within  a shrine  in  human  form  with  the  crown,

^ , upon  his  head;  behind  him  stand  Isis  and  Nephthys.  The

titles  here  given  to  him  are,  “ Dweller  in  the  secret  place,  great
“ god,  lord  of  Ta-tchesertet,  king  of  eternity,  governor  of  ever-

eQp  DO


T Sll  Before  the  god  is  the  skin  of  the  pied  bull,  of  which

the  head  has  been  cut  off,  with  blood  dripping  from  it  into  a bowl,
and  perched  on  the  side  of  the  tlirohe  is  his  son  Horus  in  the  form
of  a hawk.  The  cornice  of  the  shrine  in  which  the  god  is  seated
is  composed  of  uraci  with  disks  on  their  heads,  and  before  it  stand

the  Mer  goddess  of  the  South,  ^ ^ , wearing  a red  garment,  and

the  Mer  goddess  of  the  North,  <^>,  wearing  a blue  garment,

and  it  is  quite  clear  from  the  general  arrangement  of  the  vignette
that  in  the  XXIInd  Dynasty  Ptah-Seker-Asar  was  wholly
identified  with  Osiris.  A very  interesting  form  of  the  triune  god
is  that  in  which  he  appears  as  a squat  pigmy  with  a large,  bald
head,  and  thick  limbs ; on  the  top  of  his  head  he  usually  has  a
beetle,  but  occasionally  plumes  are  given  to  him.  An  examination
of  the  variants  of  this  form  proves  that  he  was  supposed  to  possess
all  the  virile  power  of  Amsu,  or  Min,  and  the  creative  power  of
Khepera,  which  is  symbolized  by  the  beetle,  and  the  youth  and
vigour  of  Harpocrates,  which  is  represented  by  the  lock  of  hair  on
the  right  side  of  his  head;  and  as  sometimes  he  stands  upon  a
crocodile,  and  holds  a serpent  in  each  hand,  he  must  have  possessed
besides  the  powers  of  several  of  the  great  solar  gods.  Ptali-Seker-
Asar  is,  then,  like  Osiris,  the  type  and  symbol  of  the  resurrection


508  PTAH-TANEN


from  the  dead,  and  he  has  been  fittingly  described  as  the  “ triune
god  of  the  resurrection  ” ; that  he  was  the  outcome  of  some  local
Memphite  belief,  or  the  result  of  some  compromise  between  the
priests  of  Osiris  and  the  priests  of  the  old  Memphite  god  is  toler-
ably certain,  but  there  is  no  evidence  to  show  exactly  what  belief,
or  doctrine,  or  dogma  was  associated  with  this  mysterious  god  who
united  within  himself  the  attributes  of  Seker,  and  those  of  Ptah
the  architect  and  builder  of  the  material  world,  and  of  Khepera
the  self-begotten  and  self-bom,  and  Osiris  the  giver  of  everlasting
life.


Finally  must  be  mentioned  Ptah  in  his  connexion  with  the


primeval  god  Tenen  y AAAAAA  or  Ta-tu-nen,
Ta-thunen,


or


M = ^ ii I-  or  TA-rao-nnwr.  ^44  “

This  god  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a man,  either  sitting  or
standing,  who  wears  on  his  head  the  crown,  , and  holds  in  his
hands  the  symbols  of  sovereignty  and  dominion,  J,  and  j;


in  a figure  reproduced  by  Lanzone 1 we  see  him  seated  upon  the
oval  object,  ezra.  Another  figure  represents  the  god  seated  with
a potter’s  wheel  before  him,  which  he  works  with  his  foot,  and  on
the  upper  part  of  it  is  the  egg  of  the  world  which  he  is  fashioning
with  his  hands ; elsewhere  ho  is  depicted  with  a scimitar  in  his
right  hand,  which  suggests  that  in  one  form  he  was  regarded  as  a
destructive  power  of  nature,  or  as  a warrior-god.  Tenen,  or
Ta-Tenen,  must  have  been  one  of  the  earliest  gods  of  Lower  Egypt,
and  have  been  a personification  of  a nature  power,  the  exact
attributes  of  which  appear  to  have  been  unknown  even  to  the
Egyptians.  In  the  early  part  of  the  dynastic  period  it  was  thought
that  Ptah,  the  local  god  of  Memphis,  might  be  fittingly  identified
with  Tenen,  or  Ta-Tenen,  and  his  name  was,  therefore,  joined  to
that  of  the  older  god,  just  as  in  later  days  the  name  of  Amen  was
joined  to  that  of  Ra ; later  Tenen  and  Ta- tenen  were  merely  forms
and  names  of  Ptah,  From  a hymn  to  Ptah-Tenen,*  which  is  pro-
bably a product  of  the  XXth  or  XXIst  Dynasty,  we  may  gain  some


Op.  cit.,  pi.  401,  No.  8.

* For  the  hieratic  text  see  Lepsius,  DenkmiUer,  vi.,  pi.  118.


tatenen


HYMN  TO  PTAII-TANEN


509


idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  name  Ta-tenen,  “Ta,”  ( , is  of  course

“ earth,”  and  “ Tenen,”  a^a  , is  probably  to  be  connected  with  the

^ _ AAAAAA  £ A/VWSA

word,  . cnen,  or  nen,  which  means  “inertnesS,  in-

activity, rest,  motionless,”  and  the  like,  .and  if  this  derivation  bo
correct  Ta-Tenen  must  be  the  god  of  the  inert  but  living  matter  of
the  earth.


The  passage  on  which  this  view  is  based  is  a very  difficult
one,  and  appears  to  read,  “ There  was  given  to  thee  a See hem
“ (i.e.,  Power)  upon  the  earth  in  its  things  which  were  in  a state
“ of  inactivity,  and  thou  didst  gather.,  them  together  after  thou
“ didst  exist  in  thy  form  of  Ta-Tenen,  in  thy  becoming  the  * Uniter
“ of  the  two  lands,’  which  thy  mouth  begot  and  which  thy  hands
“ fashioned.” 1 It  is,  as  Dr.  Brugsch  suggested,  quite  possible
that  in  this  passage  the  writer  was  not  discussing  the  derivation
of  the  name  Tenen,  or  Ta-Tcnen,  seriously,  and  was  only  making
a play  upon  the  words  of  similar  sound.  In  the  hymn  to  Ptali-
Tenen  already  mentioned  we  lintl  the  following  address  to  the  god
and  titles : — “ Homage  to  thee,  O Ptah-Tenen,  thou  great  god,
“ whose  form  is  hidden  ! Thou  openest  thy  soul  and  thou  wakest
“ up  in  peace,  O father  of  the  fathers  of  all  the  gods,  thou  Disk
“ of  heaven ! Thou  illuminest  it  with  thy  two  Eyes,  and
“ thou  lightest  up  the  earth  with  thy  brilliant  rays  in  peace.”


rsiuiaiijjMini


o,

glia  'nnnir

A/WWV


@ III


I)


O


3.

m


^ \\


n


I

I

«==--=»  3S  |


J?  l S Ul_*  1*5  I-  In  “ whkh  follo"r  he  “

called  the  “ begetter  of  men,”  ^ /e==a  ^ j > the  “ mftker


HYMN  TO  PTAH-TANEN


of  their  lives,”  the  “ creator  of  the  gods,”  “ he  who  passeth  though
eternity  and  everlastingness,”  PJ  J\  lol  *^1,  “of  multitudinous
forms,”  ^ ]jg  | (j  J | j , “ *be  hearer  of  prayers  which  men
make  to  him,”  ^ ^ | D <=>  'j|  ™ ^ ^ ^ j , “ builder  of
his  own  limbs,”  ^ ^ ^ and  maker  of  his  body,

“ when  as  yet  heaven  and  earth  were  not  created,  and  when  the
“ waters  had  not  come  forth,”  ~JU‘  0 <=>  0 Q <o  *wJ'


zz  a-.? “ti,ou  <udst  kni*  *°sether  &e

“ earth,  thou  didst  gather  together  thy  members,  thou  didst
“ embrace  thy  limbs,  and  thou  didst  hnd  thyself  in  the  condition
“ of  the  One  who  made  his  seat,  and  who  fashioned  (or,  moulded)
“ the  two  lands.1  Thou  hadst  no  father  to  beget  thee  in  ,thy
“ person,  and  thou  hadst  no  mother  to  give  birth  unto  thee ; thou
“ didst  fashion  thyself  without  the  help  of  any  other  being.  Fully
“ equipped  thou  didst  come  forth  fully  equipped.” 3 Next  we  have

an  allusion  to  thy  “aged  son,”  (J  ^ he.,  Ra,

and  to  the  dissipation  of  night  and  darkness  by  the  sun  and  moon,
which  are  called  the  “ Eyes  ” of  Ptah-Teneri.  The  hymn  continues,
“ Thy  feet  are  upon  the  earth  and  thy  head  is  in  the  heights  above
“ in  thy  form  of  the  dweller  in  the  Tuat.  Thou  bearest  up  the
“ work  which  thou  hast  made,  thou  supportest  thyself  by  thine
“ own  strength,  and  thou  holdest  up  thyself  by  the  vigour  of  thine
“ own  hands.  . . . The  upper  part  of  thee  is  heaven  and  the  lower

“part  of  thee  is  the  Tuat.”


^ | 3X


laid


n G | QQ 0,1

<— S3  U 1 <1  A O <=»  tl.


<?*-

\ -<3Z>-


a a Ok


fHK®6S^el'=,5l  P


P^A  !•


511


HYMN  TO  PTA£-TANEN


<C>  aaaw

S ID  Ua  e


°U-«iP“T~k


— =:^ ^ k^>”  *k^

“ The’ winds  come  forth  from  thy  nostrils,  and  the  celestial  water
“ from  thy  mouth,  and  the  staff  of  life  *(ix\,  wheat,  barley,  etc.),
“ proceeds  from  thy  back ; thou  makest  the  earth  to  bring  forth
“ fruit,  and  gods  and  men  have  abundance,  and  they  see  Meh-urit
“ cattle  in  thy  field.  When  thou  art  at  rest  the  darkness  cometh,
“ and  when  thou  openest  thy  two  eyes  beams  of  light  are  produced.
“ Thou  shinest  in  thy  crystal  form  according  to  [the  wont  of]

“ thy  majesty The  company  of  the  gods  of  thy  supreme

“ company  praise  thee,  and  they  acclaim  thee  at  thy  rising  and
“ hymn  thee  at  thy  setting  in  the  land  of  life.”  A few  lines  lower
down  Ptah-Tenen  is  called  the  “ great  god  who  stretched  out  the
“ heavens,  who  maketh  his  disk  to  revolve  in  the  body  of  Nut  and
“ to  enter  into  the  body  of  Nut  in  his  name  of  Ra,  Moulder  of
“ gods,  and  of  men,  and  of  everything  which  is  produced,  maker  of
“ all  lands,  and  countries,  and  the  Great  Green  Sea  in  his  name  of
“ Khkpeh-ta  B ringer  of  Hiipi  ( ^ sj  from  his

“ source,  making  to  flourish  the  staff  of  life,  maker  of  grain  which


T /OOO  A/WVVN  I CU

“ cometh  forth  from  him  in  his  name  Nu  the  Aged  ^ tn^})’

“ who  maketh  fertile  the  watery  mass  of  heaven,  and  maketh  to
“come  forth  the  water  on  the  mountains  to  give  life  to  men


I


“ and  women


| V a

jj  in  his  name  of  Aki-axkh

“ |^,  Maker  of  the  Tuat  with  all  its  arrangements,

“ who  driveth  away  the  flame  from  those  who  live  in  their  corners
“in  his  name  of  Suten-taui  King  of  eternity

“ and  everlastingness,  and  lord  of  life.”  Among  other  titles  of  the

god  in  this  hymn  we  have: — “Babe,  born  daily,”  ® (j(j  jjjpp

O I „ AVk/wx  • u

,__7;  “Aged  one  on  the  borders  of  eternity,

^ ® i’  “ Aged  one  traversing  eternity,”  [j  <2

“ Inert  one  passing  over  all  his  aspects,”


oaTi  i <2  in


; “ Exalted  one  without  his  strength,”  a ^ ^ :


512


SHRINES  OF  PTAH


q|-S>


^ — ; “Lord  of  the  hidden  throne,  hidden  is  he,”
*l“i  Zj  “ Hidden  one,  whose  eternal
“form  is  unknown,"  ^ T fl  &>!  “Lord

of  years,  giver  of  life  at  will,’’  ^ ^ ® «_•

The -above  extracts  are  sufficient  to  show  the  importance  of
the  god  Ptah-Tenen  in  the  eyes  of  the  Egyptians  about  b.c.  1100,
at  which  time,  if  we  may  judge  from  palaeographical  evidence,  the
hymn*  was  probably  written,  ancj  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing
that  he  was  thought  less  of*during  any  period  of  Egyptian  history.
The  papyrus  upon  which  the  text  is  inscribed  is  said  to  have  been
found  at  Thebes,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  style  of*writing
closely  resembles  the  fine  bold  hand  of  the  great  papyrus  of
Raineses  III.,  king  of  Egypt  about  u.c.  1200,  which  also  was
discovered  at  Thebes ; we  should  not,  however,  expect  to  find,  in
the  city  of  Amen-Ra,  the  king  of  the  gods,  papyri  containing
hymns  to  Ptah-Tenen,  the  god  of  Memphis,  in  which  this  god  is
made  to  possess  all  the  attributes  of  all  the  great  gods  of  Egypt,
yet  such  has  been,  undoubtedly,  the  case.  The  fact  that  the  triad
of  Ptah,  Sekhet,  and  Nefer-Tem  was  worshipped  at  Thebes  is
another  proof  of  the  influence  which  the  priests  of  Heliopolis
exerted  over  the  religious  views  of  the  Thebans  in  almost  every
period  of  Egyptian  history  after  the  Ylth  Dynasty.

Returning  now  to  the  consideration  of  Ptah  in  his  simplest
form,  it  must  be  noted  that  the  principal  centre  of  his  worship  was

in  the  city  of  Men-nefer,  T A,  i.e.,  Memphis,  the  capital  of


Aneb-hetch,  j Lfe,  the  first  nome  of  Lower  Egypt.  The  commonest

names  for  Memphis  in  the  religious  texts  are : — 1.  Ha-nefer,
A®*  Het-ka-Ptah,1  Q ^ ^ ^ from  which  the
Greek  name  for  Egypt,  'kiyvirros,  has  been  commonly  derived.
3.  Khut-taui,  cQi


i.e.,  “ horizon  of  the  two  lands.”


1 Le..  “ House  of  the  Double  of  Ptah.’1


ASAR-HAPI  OR  SERAPIS


513


4.  Het-ka-khnem-neteru,1  Q^VqTi*  5*  ^nebu»  0©’

i.e.,  the  “ city  of  walls.”  0.  Makha-taui,  ^ £^J_  ^ ,

i.e.,  the  balance  of  the  two  lands.”  In  the  city  of  Memphis  or  its
neighbourhood  were  the  temples  of  Pt&ih,  Sekhet,  Bast,  Hathor,
Osiris,  Seker,  and  I-em-hetep,  the  most  important  being  the

Het-aa,  “the  house  of  the  Aged  One,”  i.e.,  Ra.  In

the  temple  culled  Ankh-taui,  r © were  ^10  sacre(l  persea

and  acacia  trees;  in  Hckemiut,  ^

Osiris  was  worshipped  ; in  Het-utet,  Q

t3>©*  1*e*»  “ house  of  the  begetter,”  the
cult  of  Khnemu  was  observed ; another  sacred
place  was  called  the  “ Path  of  Anubis,”

f\  /V/A/vV  ^

| ; and  another
!J  >vwaa,  i.e.,


OTrnl®


o (?


0*  Ta-het-pa-Aten,


CTZ3


the  “ House  of  the  Disk”;  and  in  Tepeh-tchat,

□ I.  icin'  was  ^ ano*bcr  sacred  tree.2.

The  Serapeum,  which  was  discovered
by  M.  Mariette  in  1868,  was  known  by
the  name  of  “ Neter-hct  per  en  Asar-Ilap,”

O a district  called  Balitet,

was  the  centre  of  the  worship  of


Asar-Hajii  (Serapis).


CT3

I

©

Seker;  the  district  of  IVpcnat,  □


3*5?


□ ^
AWVV\  ^ ,


was  the  centre  of  the  worship  of  Bast ; Osiris
was  adored  in  the  district  of  II ekennut . ^ ^ ; Hathor  was

adored  in  the  district  of  Smen-Maat,  |"l 1=5  | P @ ? Khnemu  was
adored  at  Uafet,  ^ ©;  and  Ptal.i  and  Sekhet  and  their  son

I-em-hetep  appear  to  have  possessed  temples  wherein  they  were
worshipped  exclusively.  The  city  of  Memphis  is  often  called  in
the  hieroglyphic  texts  “Aneb,"  a name  which  is  written


1 I.e.,  “House  of  the  Double, which  uiiitetli  the  gods;

2 See  de  Rouge,  Gvographie*  pp.  4 H‘.


514


SEKHET  AND  NEFER-TEM


or  0 ®*  or  000  !©**  an<^  ^ere  *s  no  doubt  tliat  the  appellation
of  “Walls”  was  given  to  it  because  of  its  strong  fortifications.
Once  a year  the  priests  of  Ptah-Seker-Asar  formed  a solemn

procession,  and  led  by  the  Sem-priest,  p and  usually  ac-
companied by  the  king,  they  marched  all  round  the  walls  of
Memphis;  it  is  probable  that  the  image  of  this  triune  god  was
carried  in  the  procession.  The  god  Ptah  himself  was  worshipped
in  a temple  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  city  called  “Aneb-abt,”

Y*;  the  temple  of  Tenen  bore  the  name  of  “ Aneb  Athi,”  |J  Jj|  ©;
and  Ptah-Seker-Asar  was  adored  in  a temple  on  the  south  side  of
the  city  called  “ Aneb-rest-f,”  i.e.,  “ his  southern  wall,”

The  whole  city  was  known  by  the  name  of  “ White  Wall,"*
to  which  reference  is  made  by  Herodotus2  (iii.  91).

The  principal  female  counterpart  of  Ptah  was  the  goddess

Sekhet,  |1  ® !),  who  was  at  once  his  sister  and  wife,  and  the

mother  of  his  son  Nkyer-TJIX,  and  a sister-form  of  the  goddess
Bast.  She  is  generally  depicted  in  the  form  of  a woman  with  the
head  of  a lioness  which  is  surmounted  by  the  solar  disk  encircled
by  an  uraeus,  O,  but  sometimes  the  disk  is  omitted,  and  a uracus
only  is  seen  upon  her  head.  The  name  of  the  goddess  appears  in
the  Pyramid  Texts  (Unas,  line  390),  where  after  the  .statement
that  Unas  hath  proceeded  from  the  thighs  of  the  company  of

the  gods,  111111111  ’ said  to  have  been  conceived

by  Sekhet,  p®,  and  by  Sheskhentet,  00  ^ and  by  Sothis,

ic  p ^ E.  . Iri  comparatively  late  dynastic  times  Sekhet  and

Bast  were  identified  with  forms  of  Hathor,  and  were  regarded  as
the  goddesses  of  the  West  and  the  East  respectively,  just  as  Nekhe-
bet  and  Uatchet  were  the  goddesses  of  the  South  and  the  North
respectively.  Each  goddess  had  the  head  of  a lioness,  but  the  body
-of  Sekhet  is  said  to  have  been  draped  in  a red  garment  whilst  that
of  Bast  was  arrayed  in  a green  garment.  Several  special  fonns  of
Sekhet  are  "known  to  have  existed,  viz.,  Sekhet,  lady  of  Itekht,


1 Brugsch,  Diet.  G6og.t  p.  55.


2 lv  T<j!  A tvKut  T«x«‘£  T<?  Mtjxtfii.


The  Goddess  SEKHET.


SEKHET -MEIIENET


515


P ® ^ ^ Sekhet>  la(1y  of  Sa,  ^ ©,  Sekhet,

lady  of  Rehesaui,  <=>  | ^ [q1  ^ , Sekhet,  the  great  lady*  the
queen  of  Ant,  ® (j  ™,  Sekhet  in  Bashu,  J (j  □□  p ^ ©,  Sekhet
in  Sah,  Sekhet-Nut  in  Ilet-khat,  |1  p ® p ^ Qs,

and  Sekhet  in  Nefer  (?)-Shuu,  J crnn  ^ ^ ©.  The  principal  titles
of  Sekhet  were  “ Mighty  lady,  lady  of  Flame,  Tefnut  in  Senemet,”


r/ww-

^T(i


o

O 6“~


>/wvw  @ 1 j “ greatly  beloved  one  of
Ptah,  lady  of  heaven,  mistress  of  thfe  two  lands,”  ^ ^

^ “ lady  of  Tep-nef,”  ® ^ 2^3©;  “ lady  of  T char,

n*T^  <=^>  J -A  > and  of  Sehert,  pg  ; “chief  of  the  Libyan


lands,  mistress  of  Pa-mertet,”  ^ f==j  ^ ****  j £


0
<=>  o


0^0


©.


The  name  “ Sekhet  ” appears  to  be  derived  from  or  connected


with  the  root  sel’hem,  ^ p jj,  “ to  be  strong,  mighty,  violent,”

and  the  like,  and  as  she  was  the  personification  of  the  fierce,
scorching,  and  destroying  heat  of  the  sun’s  rays,  these  attributes
would  be  very  suitable  for  her  character.  In  the  form  of  the

serpent-goddess  Mehenet,  ^ /W VNAA

on  the  head  of  her  father  Ita,  and  poured  out  from  herself  the
blazing  fire  which  scorched  and  consumed  his  enemies  who  came
near,  whilst  at  those  who  were  some  distance  away  she  shot  forth
swift  fiery  darts  which  pierced  through  and  through  the  fiends
whom  they  struck.  In  a text  quoted  by  Dr.  Brugsch 3 she  is  made
to  say,  “ I set  the  fierce  heat  of  the  fire  fov  a distance  of  millions
“ of  cubits  between  Osiris  and  his  enemy,  and  I keep  away  from
“ him  the  evil  ones,  and  remove  his  foes  from  his  habitation.”  One
of  the  commonest  names  of  the  goddess  is  “ Nesert,”  i.e.,  Flame,  as
a destroying  element,  and  in  texts  of  all  periods  she  plays  the  part
off  a power  which  protects  the  good  and  annihilates  the  wicked.


, she  took  up  her  position


■mas

2 Keligimii  p.  520.


o


^ CTZ3  □ §
^ 1 o X’


516


SEVEN  GODS  OF  LEARNING


In  some  aspects  she  may  be  compared  with  Uatehet,  of  whom  a
well-known  name  is  “ Lady  of  flame.”  We  have  already  said  that
in  some  respects  Sekhet  may  be  regarded  as  a form  of  Hathop>nnd
Net,  and  indeed  several  of  the  titles  of  the  last  named  goddesses
are  bestowed  upon  her,  e.g.,  “ Lady  of  Amentet.  lady  of  Manu
“ (i.e.,  the  mountain  of  the  setting  sun),  the  queen  of  the  Libyan
“ lands,”  etc. ; these  appear  to  suggest  a western  or  Libyan  origin
for  the  goddess.


In  connexion  with  Sekhet  and  her  relationship  with  Hathor,
Net,  and  Maiit  must  be  mentioned  the  Seven  Wise  Ones  of  the

goddess  Meli-urt,  who  together  with  Thoth,  Tkku,


planned  the  world : they  were  born  of  Meli-urt,
at  the  feet  of  Nu,


coo


ra


c , in  their  home  in  • Nehct-rest,
" , and  they  came  forth  from  the  water,  from  •the


pupil  of  the  Eye  of  Ra,  and  they  took  the  form  of  seven  hawks
and  flew  upwards,  and  together  with  Astkn,  {j  p , a form  of

Thoth,  they  presided  over  learning  and  letters.  The  names  of
these  Seven  Wise  Ones,  A P ^ ! ,m’  are: — Nkekk-hati,

Apeii-peiiui,  Neb-Tesiieru,  Ka,  Bak,  Kiiekh,  and  San.1  Ptah,
as  the  master  architect  and  workman  who  carried  out  the  designs
of  Thoth  and  his  Seven  Wise  Ones,  partook,  in  some  respects,  of
the  characteristics  of  them  all,  and  as  Sekhet  was  his  female
counterpart  she  appears  to  have  acquired  some  of  their  attributes
also,  because  Thoth  was  in  reality  only  a personification  of  the
intelligence  of  Ptah.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Sekhet  becomes
identified  with  the  goddess  Maiit,  for  Maiit  was  the  inseparable
companion  of  Thoth,  and  inasmuch  as  Thoth  was  contained  in
Ptah,  Maat  became  the  female  counterpart  of  Ptah  and  a sister
form  of  Sekhet.  Tn  one  of  the  titles  of  Sekhet  given  above,  the
goddess  is  identified  with  Tefnut,  the  female  counterpart  of  Shu  ;


MS-


^37  cm  1


!•  Sa.  J!)


Religion,  p.  522.


II


p ; sec  Dumichen,  Tr.mpe limch r i/ten , pi.  25 ; Brugsch,

/WWV.  Ill1  ‘ "


The  Goddess  SEKHET.


517


SEKHET,  BAST,  PAKHT

this  need  cause  no  surprise,  because  Thoth  was  only  the  Herrao-
pojjtan  form  of  Shu,  and  Tefnut  was  therefore  his  female  counter-
pan^  and  as  Ptah  absorbed  Thoth,  that  is  to  say,  Shu,  the  female
counterpart  of  Ptah  (i.e.,  Sekhet)  absorbed  the  female  counterpart
of  Thoth,  or  Shu  (i.e.,  Tefnut).  In  many  texts  Sekhet  is  called

the  4‘  Eye  of  Ka,”  ^ I , and  in  a scene  reproduced  by  Lanzone ' Ave
see  the  goddess  in  the  form  of  a woman,  Avith  the  Utrfiat , , in

place  of  a head,  kneeling  upon  a rectangular  tin-one,  Avhilst  a haAA'k
Avith  outstretched  Avings  stands  behind  her.  Tier  titles  in  this
form  are,  u Great  lady,  beloved  ’of  Ptali,  holy  one,  poAA’erful  one,
“ dweller  in  At-Tefnut,”  1=1  (~J  ‘l .

We  have  already  mentioned  the  small  porcelain  figures  of
Ptah-Seker- A sar,  and  seen  how  they  Avere  intended  to  represent
the  union  of  the  poAvers  of  the  three  great  gods  Avhose  names  ai‘e
here  joined  together,  and  avc  must  uoav  note  that  on  the  backs  of
certain  examples  Ave  find  outlined  the  form  of  a goddess,  who
might  be  identified  Avith  any  of  the  female  counterparts  of  the
great  gods  to  whom  the  head  of  a lioness  Avas  given  by  Egyptian
sculptors  and  artists.  The  goddess  here  found,  however,  is  Bast,

who  avus  for  some  time  confounded  by  Egyptologists  Avith
the  goddess  Pekuetii,  j-?.  s =>  _£■».,  ov*Pekiiet,  ,5.  , or  Pern,

j?  the  Cat  or  Lioness  deity  of  1‘ekhit,  @ ^ ©’  *n  honour

of  Avhom  a temple  of  Pekhcth,  avus  heAvn  out  of  the

solid  rock  in  the  mountain  near  the  modem  A’illage  of  Beni
Hasan  in  Upper  Egypt:  this  temple  is  knoAvn  by  the  names  of
“Stahl  al-Antar,”  and  ‘’Spcos  Artemidos.’’  The  name  Pekht,  or
Paklit,  or  Paslit  means  the  “tearer,”  and  is  of  course,  suitable  for
a goddess  Avho  possessed  the  attributes  of  the  oat  or  lioness ; this

goddess  was  the  lady  of  Ant,  ant^  °f  Set,  OV

the  supplementary  nome  of  which  the  city  Pekht,  was  the

capital.8  Her  title  Avas  “ lady  of  Sept,”  ^ i.e.,  of  the  star

Sothis,  and  she  Avas  identified  Avith  Isis  and  Avith  a torm  of


1 Op,  oil.,  pi.  3<54,  No.  i>.


2 Diet.  Geog.j  pp.  225,  22G.


518


SEKHET-BAST-RA


Hathor,  and  also  with  a form  of  Sekhet.  In  the  great  inscription
of  Beni  Hasan  (line  18)  we  find  the  mention  of  Horns  Pakht,
ft  ® and  we  may  therefore  assume  that  Pakht  . Was

in  some  way  connected  wif.h  one  of  the  forms  of  Horus,  and  that
she  was  a local  deity  of  great  importance.

It  is  probable  that  Bast  was  a female  counterpart  of  the
triune  god  Ptah-Seker-  Astir,  and  that  she  possessed  attributes
which  cannot  at  present  be  clearly  defined.  As  a nature  power
she  represented  the  gentle,  fructifying  heat  of  the  sun,  and  its
regenerative  influence  in  the  iltost  comforting  form.  In  late
dynastic  times  Bast,  and  Sekhet,  and  Ru  formed  a deity  whose
existence'  is  made  known  to  us  by  a Chapter  in  the  Book  of  the
Dead  (clxiv.).  In  the  vignette  Sekhet-Bast-Ra  is  represented  as  a
woman  with  a man’s  head,  and  wings  attached  to  her  arms,  and  the
heads  of  two  vultures  springing  either  from  her  head  or  neck ; She
has  the  phallus  of  a man  and  the  claws  of  a lion.  One  vulture’s


head  is  like  that  of  Pekhat,


©I'koSv  and  haS  Plumes


it,  and  the  other  is  like  that  of  an  ordinary  vulture,  and  appeal’s
to  have  plumes  upon  it  also ; the  man’s  head  has  upon  it  the
united  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,  and  taken  together  with
the  phallus  they  indicate  that  the  body  of  the  woman,  who  is  here
called  Mut,  was  supposed  to  possess  the  generative  and  procreative
powers  of  Ra.

The  text  which  forms  the  chapter  is  a very  interesting  one,
and  reads : — “ Homage  to  thee,  0 Sekhet-Bast-Ra,  thou  mistress
“ of  the  gods,  thou  bearer  of  wings,  thou  lady  of  the  red  apparel
dries),  queen  of  the  crowns  of  the  South  and  North,


“ only  One,  sovereign  of  her  father,  superior  to  whom  the
“gods  cannot  be,  thou  mighty  one  of  enchantments  (or,  words
“ of  power)  in  the  Boat  of  Millions  of  Years,  thou  who  art  pre-
“ eminent,  who  risest  in  the  seat  of  silence,  mother  of  Pasiiakasa
* ( ^ I&I  ^ ^ ^ D ) , queen  of  Paheh aqa  - Kheper#

“Ck'k'm  mistress  and  lady  of

“ the  tomb,  Mother  in  the  horizon  of  heaven,  gracious  one,  beloved,
“ destroyer  of  rebellion,  offerings  are  in  thy  grasp,  and  thou  art


SEKHET-BAST-RxV


519


“ standing  in  the  bows  of  the  boat  of  thy  divine  father  to  over-
“ throw  Qetu.1  Thou  hast  placed  Mailt  in  the  bows  of  his  boat.
“Thou  art  the  fire  goddess  Ammi-seshet  (-{]-  (j(j  ^fj),
“ whose  opportunity  escapeth  her  not ; thy  name  is  Tekaharesa-
“ 1-OSAltEMKAKARr.MET

Thou  art  like  unto  the  mighty  flame  of  the
“ goddess  Saqknaqat  (f  ^ ^ “ $) . which  is  in  the

“bows  of  the  boat  of  thy  father  FIauepukakasiiabeshabaiu

“ for  bell  old,  thus  is  [his]  name  in  the  speech  of  the  Negroes,  and
“ of  the  Anti,  and  of  the  people  of  Ta-kensetet  (Nubia).  Praise
“ be  unto  thee,  0 Lady,  who  art  mightier  than  the  gods,  words  of
“ adoration  rise  unto  thee  from  the  Eight  Gods  of  Hermopolis.
“ The  living  souls  who  are  in  their  hidden  places  praise  the
“ mystery  of  thee,  0 thou  who  art  their  mother,  thou  source  from
“ which  they  sprang,  who  makest  for  them  a place  in  the  hidden
“ Underworld,  who  makest  sound  their  bones  and  preservest  them
“ from  terror,  who  makest  them  strong  in  the  abode  of  cverlasting-
“ ness,  who  preservest  them  from  the  evil  chamber  of  the  souls
“ of  Hes-hua  ■ p ^ ^ , who  is  among  the  company

“ of  the  gods.  Thy  name  is  Sefi-peu-em-IIes-hi.’a-iiapu-tciiet-f


□ 5

% <2  v — ft  «=*  \ v *


w <=  m r>$

each  side  of  Sekhet-Bast-Ita  in  the  vignette  is  a dwarf  with
two  faces,  one  of  a hawk  and  one  of  a man,  and  the  body  of  each

is  fat ; each  has  on  his  head  the  disk  and  plumes,  , and  each

has  one  hand  and  arm  raised  after  the  manner  of  Amsu,  or
Min.  The  name  of  one  dwarf  is  Atarb-am-tcher-qemtu-rennu-

pab-shrta,  1

^ _2xs  *,  and  that  of  the  other,  Pa-nemma-nemma.

'k-  ~~  £ H 11 1 • ■ «“»*• the  last  namo  «*£>  *°

Sekhet-Bast-Ru  is  Utchat-Sekhet-dbt-hent-neteiiu,  yUo.

i lj  the  name  of  si  fiend.  2 I.e.,  “ god  of  the  terrible  fare.”


520  FORMS  OF  NEFER-TEM


^ ^ and  she  is  said  to  be  the  emanation  of  Mut,  “ who


“ maketh  souls  to  be  as  gods,  who  maketh  bodies  to  be  sound,  and
who  delivereth  them  from  the  abode  of  the  fiends  which  is  hr 'the
*‘  chamber  of  the  evil  one.”.  According  to  the  Rubric,  the  deceased
for  whom  pictures  of  the  goddess  and  the  two  dwarfs  were  made
would  become  like  the  immortals,  and  worms  would  not  eat  his
body,  and  his  soul  would  never  be  fettered,  and  he  would  drink
water  at  the  source  of  the  river,  and  would  have  a homestead  of
his  own  in  Sekhet-Aanre,  and  he  would  become  a star  of  heaven.


.and  he  would  fight  and  overcome* the  fiends  Tab,  ^


and  Nek au,


The  third  member  of  the  Memphite  triad  is  Nefer-Tem,


£ ^ ^ , or  Nefer-Tem  it,  ^ ^fj , who  is  the  son  bf  Ptah  and

Sekhet,  or  of  Ptah  and  Pakht,  or  of  Ptah  and  Bast.  He  is  usually
represented  in  the  form  of  a man  who  holds  in  his  hands  either

the  felt  dm  sceptre,  j,  and  tlie  symbol  of  life,  or  the  lotus

sceptre  surmounted  by  plumes,  f;  in  these  forms  he  is  called
Nefer-Tem  khu  taui,”  and  “ Nefer-Tem  kihj  taui  ankii


REKHIT>”  a?d  l :


-9-  *m.


The  small


© “

blue  and  green  glazed  porcelain  statues  of  the  god  make  him  to  stand
upon  a lion,  and  sometimes  he  appears  in  religious  scenes  with  the
lotus  flower,  or  the  lotus  flower  and  plumes  upon  his  head.1  In
some  cases  Nefer-Tem  has  the  head  of  a lion,  and  his  body  has  the
form  of  a mummy,  and  consistently  with  this  his  hands  project
from  a close-fitting  garment,  and  he  holds  in  them  the  frhurn


sceptre  and  flail,  /\  | • In  the  earliest  times  the  lotus  flower  was

associated  with  Nefer-Tem,  and  in  the  Pyramid  Texts  we  find
allusions  to  this  fact.  Thus  in  the  text  of  Unas  (line  392)  the
dead  king  is  compared  to  a lotus  at  the  nostrils  of  the  Great

Sekham,  (j  <=>  ^ jl  ^ , and  a line  or  two  further

on*  it  is  said,  “ Unas  hath  risen  like  Nefer-Tem  from  the  lotus  to


1 See  Lanzonc,  op.  rit,  pH.  147  and  148.


The  Goo  NEFER-TEMU.


FORMS  ’ OF  NEFER-TEM  5*21


“ the  jpstrils  of  Ra,  and  he  goeth  forth  from  the  horizon  on  each
“ day,  and  the  gods  are  sanctified  by  the  sight  of  him.” 1

In  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  llooh  of  the  Dead  (xvii.  124)  is
a passage  which  appears  to  show  that  the  attributes  of  Nefer-Tem
were  not  well  defined,  and  we  find  him  mentioned  in  connexion
with  a number  of  gods  in  a manner  which  is  hard  to  explain.
The  text  makes  the  deceased  to  beseech  Ra  to  deliver  him  from
the  gbd  “ whose  form  is  hidden,  and  whose  eyebrows  are  like  unto
“ the  two  arms  of  the  Balance  on  the  night  of  reckoning  destruc-
“ tion,”  and  in  answer  to  the  question,  “ Who  then  is  this  ? ” we
have  the  words,  “It  is  An-a-f,”  i.e.,  the  “ god  who  bringeth  his

“arm,”  j^'www-  j^3  Jfj,2  who  is  usually  regarded  as  a form  of

A nisin  or  Min.  The  words  “night  of  reckoning  destruction”  are
explained  by  making  them  refer  to  the  burning  of  the  damned  and
the  slaughter  of  the  wicked  on  the  block  of  the  god  by  the

“ Slaughterer  of  Souls,”  ****  Vs  i , Tent-baiu.  The  opinions
of  the  Egyptian  theologians  differed  greatly  as  to  the  identity  of  this
god  Tent-baiu,  for  some  thought  he  was  Nemu,s  fjff

the  headsman  of  Osiris,  and  others  thought  he  might  be  Apep,
with  one  head,  or  Homs  with  two  heads,  or  Horus  the  Great
of  Sekhem,  or  Thoth,  or  Nefer-Tem,  or  Septu,  j\^  jff’  ^ *ien  we

remember  that  Nefer-Tem  is  the  “ young  Tern,”  i.e.,  a god  of  the
rising  sun,  and  that  the  Horus  gods  and  Septu  were  likewise  forms
of  the  rising  sun,  it  is  evident  that  Nemu  and  Apep  must  have  had
some  characteristic  in  common  with  the  son  of  Ptal.i  and  Sekhet.
From  Chapters  lxxxi.,  versions  a and  b,  we  learn  that  the  deceased
had  power  to  transform  himself  into  a lotus : in  the  first  version  of
the  text  he  says,  “ I am  the  pure  lotus  which  springeth  up  from
“ the  divine  splendour  that  belongeth  to  the  nostrils  of  Ra,”  and  in
the  second  we  read,  “ Hail,  thou  Lotus,  thou  type  of  the  god


a


111


DD


V;y, f

f


DTJ
^ &


o


8 He  in  one  of  the  Forty-two  Assessors  in  the  Hull  of  ilaati.
8 See  Hook  of  the  Demi,  eliii.A  iS,  31,  32  ; cliii.  5;  elxx.  6.


5^2  I-EM-HETEl*

v A

“ Nefer-Tem ! I am  he  who  knoweth  you,  arid  I kno^your
“ names  amon^  tWe  gods,  the  lords  of  the  Underworld,  andj  am
“ one 'of  you.”  The  vignette  of  the  first  version  is  a lotus,  /md
that  of  the  second  is  a lotus  plant  with  a flower  and  buds
growing  out  of  a pool  of  water,  and  out  of  the  flower  springs  a
human  head,  i.e.,  the  head  of  the  deceased.

The  idea  conveyed  by  the  hast  vignette  seems  to  have
originated  in  the  mind  of  some  early  writer  who  was  accustomed
to  see  the  sun  rise  over  the  flooded  lands  of  the  Delta  where  the
lotus  grew  in  abundance.  In  Chapter  clxxiv.  19,  the  decetised
says,  “ I rise  like  Nefer-Tem,  who  is  the  lotus  at  the  nostrils  of
“ Ha,  whqn  he  cometh  forth  from  the  horizon  each  day,”  and  in
Chapter  clxxviii.  30,  Nefer-Tem  has  the  same  title.  We.  must
also  note  that  he  is  the  thirty-fourth  Assessor  in  tke  Hall  ot
Maati  and  that  the  deceased  makes  the  following  address  .to,
him: — “Hail,  Nefer-Tem,  who  comest  forth  from  liet-ka-
“ Ptah  (Memphis),  I have  not  acted  with  deceit,  and  T have  not
“ worked  wickedness.”  In  the  late  Egyptian  texts  Nefer-Tem
is  identified  with  a number  of  gods,  all  of  whom  are  practically
forms  of  Horns  and  Thoth,  and  in  consequence  the  mother  of  each
of  these  gods  becomes  his  mother.

The  Egyptian  texts  prove  that  besides  Nefer-Tem  another  son

of  Ptah  called  I-km-jietkp,  ^ jfj,  was  regarded  as  the

third  member  of  the  great  triad  of  Memphis ; he  was  called
'Ifiovdr/s  by  the  Greeks,  and  possessed  many  attributes  in  common
with  their  god  Aesculapius.  The  name  of  I-em-hetep  means,  “ He
who  cometh  in  peace,”  and  is  appropriate  to  the  god  who  brought
the  art  of  healing  to  mankind.  The  god  is  represented  like  Ptah,
with  a bald  head,  and  he  is  depicted  in  a seated  position  with  a roll
of  papyrus  open  upon  his  knees ; he  was  a god  of  study  and  learn-
ing in  general,  but  he  owed  his  great  power  to  the  knowledge  of
medicine  which  he  possessed.  As  a god  of  learning  he  partook  of
some  of  the  attributes  of  Thoth,  and  he  was  supposed  to  take  the*
place  of  this  god  in  the  performance  of  funeral  ceremonies,  and  in
superintending  the  embalming  of  the  dead ; in  later  tinges  he
absorbed  the  duties  of  Thoth  as  “scribe  of  the  gods,”  and  the


The  God  t-EM-HETEP  (Imouthis),


I-EM-HETEP  5i3

♦ *

authorship  of  the  words  of  power  which  protected  the  dead  from
enemies  of  every  kind  ip  the  Underworld  was  ascribed  to  him.
Inyjertain  aspects  the  g<ra  had  a funeral  character  which  somowhat
resembled  that  of  Ptah-Seker-Asar,  although  he  is  not  mentioned
in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead.  In  the  “ Ritual
Sf  Embalmment  ” 1 it  is  said  to  the  deceased,  “ Thy  soul  uniteth
“ itself  to  I-em-hetep -whilst  thou  art  in  the  funeral  valley,  and  thy
‘‘heart  rejoiceth  because  thou  dost  not  go  into  the  dwelling  of
“ ^ebek,  and  because  thou  art  like  a son  in  the  house  of  his  father,

“ and  doest  what  pleaseth  thee  in^the  city  of  Uast  (Thebes).”  The
oldest  shrine  of  the  god  was  situated  close  to  the  city  of  Memphis,
and  was  called  “ the  Temple  of  I-em-hetep,  the  son  of  1 ‘tali', ”

L |~J  jjj*  <=■  ^ ^ ^ » *°  which  the  Greeks  gave  the  name,

to  'Aa-KXrjiAeiov ; 3 it  stood  well  outside  the  city,  and  lay  quite  near
the  Serapeum,  on  the  edge  of  that  portion  of  the  desert  which
formed  the  necropolis  of  the  city.  Under  the  Ptolemies  a small
temple  was  built  in  honour  of  I-em-hetep  on  the  Island  of  Philae ;
the  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  are  tliose  of  Ptolemy  IV.,  Philopator,
but  the  Greek  text  over  the  door  was  placed  there  by  the  comlnand
of  Ptolemy  V.,  Epiphanes.  From  one  of  the  former  we  leam  that
the  god  was  entitled,  “ Great  one,*  son  of  Ptal.i,  the  creative  god,

“ made  by  Thenen,  begotten  by  him  ahd  Beloved  by  him,  the  god
“of  divine  forms  in  the  temples,  who  givcth  life  to  ail  men,  the
“ mighty  one  of  wonders,  the  maker  of  times  (?),  who  eometh  unto
“ him  that  calleth  upon  him  wheresoever  he  may  be,  who  givetti

“sons  to  the  childless,  the  chief  kher-heh  {/J\  ^ he.,  the  wisest

“ and  most  learned  one),  the  image  and  likeness  of  Thoth  the
“ Arise.”

I-em-hetep  was  the  god  who  sent  sleep  to  those  who  were
suffering  and  in  pain,  and  those  who  were  afflicted  with  any  kind
of  disease  formed  his  special  charge;  he  was  the  good  physician
bqth  of  gods  and  men*  and  he  healed  the  bodies  of  mortals  during
life,  and  superintended  the  arrangements  for  the  preservation  of
the  same  after  death . If  we  could  trace  his  history  to  ^it^

1 See  Maspeco,  op.  (‘it.,  p.  80.  3 Brugscb,  Diet.  Geog.,  p.  1098.

•*.-  See  jjrugscli,  Thesaurus,  p*783;  p.  527  ; Setlic,  Imhotep , 1903.


£&4  I-EM-HETEP  AND  HERUTATAF

beginning  we  should  find  probably  that  he  was  originally  a very
highly  skilled  “ medicine  man  ” who  had  introduced  some  ele-
mentary knowledge  of  medicine  anjongst  the  Egyptians,  and  #vrho
was  connected  with  the  practice  of  the  art  of  preserving  the
bodies  of  the  dead  by  ffieans  of  drugs,  and  spices,  and  linen
bandages.  He  was  certainly  the  god  of  physicians  and  of  all  tho^s
who  were  occupied  with  the  mingled  science  of  medicine  and
magic;  and  when  we  remember  that  several  of  the  first  kings  of
the  Early  Empire  are  declared  by  Manetho,  whose  statements  hgve
been  supported  by  the  evidence  $f  the  papyri,  to  have  written,  i.e.,
caused  to  be  edited,  works  on  medicine,  it  is  clear  that  the  adora-
tion of  the  god  of  medicine  was  in  Memphis  as  old  as  the  archaic
period.  In  the  songs  which  were  suiig  in  the  temple  of.Antuf,
the  wfiter  says,  44  I have  heard  the  words  of  I-ein-hotcp  arid  of

“ Weru-tata-f,  (^5,  ^ ^ $) > "’hid.  are  repeated  over  and  oVer

“again,  but  where  are  their  places  this  day?  Their  walls  are
“ overthrown,  their  seats  (or  places)  have  no  longer  any  being,  and
“ they  are  as  if  they  had  never  existed.  No  man  cometh  to  declare
“ unto  us  what  manner  of  beings  they  were,  and  none  telleth  us
“of  their  possessions,^  etc.  lleru-tata-f,  as  we  know  from  later
texts,  was  a very  learned  man,  even  though  his  speech  could  only
with  difficulty  be  understood,  agd  we  also  know  the  prominent
part  which  he  took  as  a recognized  man  of  letters  iu  bringing  to
•th^ourt  of  his  father,  Khufu,  the  magician  Tel  tela,  and  how  his
^namO  is  associated  with  the  “ finding  ” of  certain  Chapters  of  the
• Book  of  the  Dead,  Of  the  sage  I-em-lietep,  who  is  mentioned  iu
connexion., with  him,  it  is  difficult  not  to  think  that  he  was  famous
as  a skilled  physician  whose  acts  and  deeds  were  worthy  of  being
eja^sed  Wi^ptlfe  V°r^9  of  Heru-tata-f.

t Frbni^  the  manner  in  which  these  great  and  wise  men  are
, referred  to  ltdaplear  that  they,  who  were  the  ^hosen  representatives
of  the  ablest  and  nrdst  learned  among  men,  bad  become,  even*  at
the  time  when  the  Songs  of  Antuf  were  composed,  mythical  beings
in*  whole  or  in  part;  and  there  is  no  good  reason  why  I-em-hetep,
the  third  member  of  ^the  triad4,  of  Memphis,  should  not  be  a
deified  form  of  a distinguished  physician  who  was  attached  to  the


I-EM-HETEP


yin


priesthood  of  Ra,  and  who  flourished  before  the  end  of  the  rule  of
the  kings  of  the  Illrd  Dynasty.  The  pictures  and  figures  of  the
go 3 suggest  that  he  was  of  human  and  of  strictly  local  origin.,  but
it  is  not  evident  how  he  came  to  usurp  the  place  of  Nefer-Tem  at
Memphis,  especially  as  he  was  not  the  *son  of  Ptah  by  Sekhet,  or
Bast,  or  any  form  of  these  goddesses.  The  worship  of  I-em-hetep
was  commoner  in  the  Sai'te  and  Ptolemaic  periods  than  in  the
Early  and  Middle  Empires,  and  all  the  bronze  figures  of  the  god
belong  to  a period  subsequent  to  the  XX^Ind  Dynasty.  The
titles  given  to  him  in  the  inscriptions  at  Philae  may,  it  is  true,
represent  ancient  beliefs,  but  it  is  improbable,  and  as  he  does  not
appear  in  the  Theban  Recension  of  the  Boole  of  the  Dead  it  *is
tolerably  certain  that  his  worship  was  as  popular  and  fashionable
at  Memphis,  immediately  before  and  during  the  Ptolemaic  .period
as,  that  of  Amen-hetep,  the  son  of  Hapu,  the  famous  sage  Who
had  seen  and  conversed  with  the  gods,  was  at  Thebes  about  the
same  time.


END  OF  VOL.  l.


T.OXDON*

PRlNTh  O BY  Crl  T.BBKT  A NO  K1VINGTOX,

st.  John’s  hocsk1,  cli.rkexwell,  k.c


r.  i:»
