The Book
of Black
Magic


PRIVATELY ee BY
D . de LAURENCE.


Sn


Af ti ZZ
MU \
m


MHI) UTM
I


|
(i) ees Naa
ie =|

Us ‘ i. +


sO
—


Ne


a ——


EDWD. KELLEY a MaaIcIaAn


In the act of invoking the spirit of deceased person


The
Book Of Black Maric
Gnd Of Pacts


INCLUDING THE RITES AND MYSTERIES OF GOETIC THEURGY,
SORCERY, AND INFERNAL NECROMANCY, ALSO
THE RITUALS OF BLACK MAGIC


BY


ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE


AUTHOR OF “DEVIL WORSHIP IN FRANCE,” ETC., ETC.


TWO HUNDRED ILLUSTRATIONS


This Edition Prepared for Publication Under the Editorship of
L. W. de LAURENCE


Author of “The Great Book of Magical Art, Hindu Magic and East Indian Occult-
ism,” “The Sacred Book of Death, Hindu Spiritism, Soul Transition and Soul
Reincarnation,” “The Mystic Text Book of the Hindu Occult Chambers,”
“The Magic and Occultism of India, The Wonders of the Magic Mirror,
Hindu and Egyptian Crystal Gazing, Astral Auras and Colors,”

“The Immanence of God, Know Thyself,” “God, the
Bible, Truth and Christian Theology.” Owning and
controlling the publishing rights of the only stan-
dard and exclusive line of Occult Works by
The Old Masters and Adepts
extant today


FAITHFULLY REPRODUCED FROM THE LONDON EDITION OF 1898
PRIVATELY PRINTED


“Als daemones malos virtute divinorum nominum adjuratos, advocare solent, atque haec
est illa Necromantiae species quae dicitur malefica: vel in Theurgiam, quae quaet bonis
Angelis, divinoque numine regitur (ut nonulli putant) cum saepissime tamen sub Det, et
Angelorum nominibuse malie Daemonoum tlusionibue peragitur.”—ROBERT FLUDD.


Tenth Edition


The de LAURENCE CO., Chicago, Ill, U. S. A.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
1910


IT.


Copyright, 1910
By
de LAURENCE CO.


SPECIAL NOTICE


The illustrations, cover design and contents of this Volume are
protected by copyright, and must not be reproduced or copied


without written permission from the Publishers Dieters of this


warning will subject the offender to the penalty provided by law.


PREFACE


trines edited in English a work on Ceremonial Magic,

entitled Clavicula Salomonis, or, the ‘‘ Key of Solomon
the King.’’ In an introduction prefixed to the work he
stated that he saw no reason to doubt, and therefore pre-
sumably accepted, the tradition of its authorship.’ Mr.
Mathers, it should be added, undertook his translation
more especially for the use of occult students, that is to say,
for those persons who believe in the efficacy of magical rites,
and may desire to put them in practice. With this excep-
tion, the large body of literature which treats of ‘‘Theurgic
Ceremonial]’’ in its various branches has remained inacces-
sible to the generality of readers, in rare printed books and
rarer manuscripts, in both cases mostly in foreign lan-
guages.” There is probably a considerable class outside oc-
cult students to whom a systematic account of magical prac-
tices would be not unwelcome, perhaps mainly as a curi-
osity of old-world credulity, but also as a contribution of
some value to certain side issues of historical research;
these, however, an edition for occult students would deter
rather than attract. In the present work both interests
have been as far as possible considered. The subject is


I N the year 1889 a learned expositor of Kabbalistic doc-


_ 1 The work as it now stands quotes Ezekiel, Daniel, the fourth Gospel, and men-
tions SS. Peter and Paul. Most of these anachronisms are to be found in the pen-
tacles accompanying the text.

_2 A judicious and excellent paper was contributed some time_ago to the Transac-
trons of the Bibliographical Society under the title of “Some Books on Magic,” by
J. H. Slater. It does not, of course, pretend to be exhaustive, and, though inform-
ing, 1s not entirely accurate.


Vv


Preface


approached from the bibliographical and critical stand-
points, and all the sources of information which many years
of inquiry have made known to the writer have been con-
sulted to render it complete. At the same time, the require-
ments of the professed occultist have been studied in two
important respects, which will not, it is believed, be a source
of offence to merely historical readers. They have been
studied, firstly, by the observance of strict technical exacti-
tude; the ceremonial produced in this book is absolutely
faithful to the originals, and removes all necessity of having
recourse to the originals before determining any doubtful
point of magical procedure in the past. For convenience of
reference it is indeed superior to the originals, because it
has been put systematically, whereas they often exceed un-
derstanding owing to the errors of transcribers, the mis-
readings of printers, the loose methods of early translators,
aud seemingly, it must be added, the confused minds of the
first compilers, ‘‘Solomon’’ himself not excepted. The in-
numerable offices of vain observance which constitute Cere-
monial Magic, as it is presented in books, will therefore be
found substantially intact by those who concern themselves
with such observance. :

The second respect in which the interests of the occult
student have been considered is, however, of much more im-
portance. Robert Turner, the English translator of the
‘‘Magical Elements,’’ written, or supposed to be written, by
the unfortunate Peter of Abano, describes that treatise as
an introduction to ‘“‘magical vanity,’’ a term which was
probably used in a transcendental manner, to intimate that
all things which concern the phenomenal world are indiffer-
ently futile. The occult purpose of the present investiga-
tion is to place within reach of those persons who are tran-
scendentally inclined the fullest evidence of the vanity of

v1


Preface


Ceremonial Magic as it is found in books, and the fantastic
nature of the distinction between White and Black Magic—
so far also as the literature of either is concerned. It would
be unbecoming in a professed transcendentalist to deny that
there is a Magic which is behind Magic, or that the occult
sanctuaries possess their secrets and mysteries; of these the
written ceremonial is either a debased and scandalous trav-
esty or a trival and misconstrued application. Let a tran-
scendentalist assure the ‘‘occult student’’ that he is dealing
therein simply with curious researches. The statement.just
inade will explain why it is permissable to bring forth from
the obscurity of centuries a variety of processes which
would be abominable if it could be supposed that they were
to be seriously understood. It will explain also why this
work is entitled ‘‘The Book of Black Magic,’ when it deals,
as a fact, in a fairly exhaustive manner, with most extant
Rituals. These are all tainted with Black Magic in the
same way that every idle word is tainted with the nature of
sin. The distinction between White and Black Magic is the
distinction between the idle and the evil word.

It would, however, be unsafe to affirm that all persons
making use of the ceremonies in the Rituals would fail to ob-
tain results.. Perhaps in the majority of cases most of such
experiments made in the past were attended with results of
a kind. To enter the path of hallucination is likely to in-
sure hallucination, and in the presence of hypnotic and clair-
voyant facts it would be absurd to suppose that the seering
processes of Ancient Magic—which are many— did not pro-
duce seership, or that the auto-hypnotic state which much
magical ritual would obviously tend to occasion in predis-
posed persons did not frequently induce it, and not always
only in the predisposed. To this extent some of the proc-
esses are practical, and to this extent they are dangerous.

Vil


Preface


For convenience of treatment the present work is di-
vided into two parts. The first contains an analytical and
critical account of the chief magical rituals known to the
writer; the second forms a complete Grimoire of Black
Magic. It must be remembered that these are the opera-
tions which gave arms to the Inquisitors of the past, and
justified Civil Tribunals in the opinion of their century for
the sanguinary edicts pronounced against witch, warlock,
and magician. It is, in truth, a very curious and not reas-
suring page in the history of human aberration, nor has it
been wholly a pleasing exercise which has thus sought to
make it plain, once and for all


CO? tO? cor
WN =


wm WH =


(Ot tO? (0? cor


CO? cOr 60? er
PONe


CONTENTS


PAGE
PREEPACE - 3 bps sesbow cach bediis ies ened oak eae enw eee v
PART I
Che Literature of Ceremonial Magic
CHAPTER I
THE ANTIQUITY OF MAGICAL RITUALS
. THE IMPORTANCE OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC...........ecee008 3
. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN WHITE AND Brack Macic.... 12
. THe UNpRINTED LITERATURE OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC...... 16
CHAPTER II
THE RITUALS OF TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC
THE ARBATEL OF MAGIC......ccccccccccccscccccvccsccces 22
THEOSOPHIA PNEUMATICA.......cccccccccccccccccccccecs 33
- THE ENCHIRIDION OF POPE LEO.......cccccccccccccccces 35
. THE SEVEN MYSTERIOUS ORISONS.........cccccccccccsece 41
. SUMMARY OF TRANSCENDENTAL MAGIC...........- ‘vara, 40
CHAPTER III
COMPOSITE RITUALS
. THe Key or SOLOMON THE KING........cccccceccceccces 50
Tue Lesser Key oF SOLOMON......ccccccccccccccccccses 55
THe Fourto Boox or CoRNELIUS AGRIPPA.......ccccccees 57
THE HEPTAMERBON.........ccccscccccccccccccesccececece 66


tor tO? (0? tO? tO?
fm GW NS =


wn


Or cr
WN) m=


Contents


CHAPTER IV
THE RITUALS OF BLACK MAGIC


PAGE
THE GRIMORIUM VERUM.......c ccc cece ccccccccecccceces 70
TRUE BLACK MAGIC........cccccccccccccccccccvcceceves 74
THE GRAND GRIMOIRE.......ccccccccccccccccccscccececs 74
THE GRIMOIRE OF HONORIUS...........ccccccccccceccecs 77
MINOR AND Spurious Rituats or BLacK MacIc.......... 83
HE BLACK PULUET 56.60. $605 64:8: k ch we we SRT RR 86
TALISMANS OF THE SAGE OF THE PYRAMIDS...........000- 91
THE GOLD-FINDING TIEN s 665056-5 30e Se Aww A wae 104

PART II
The Complete Srimoire
CHAPTER I
THE PREPARATION OF THE OPERATOR

. CONCERNING THE LOVE OF GOD........cccccccccccccccecs 111

. CONCERNING FORTITUDE......... ccc ccccccccccccecvcecees 114

. CONCERNING CONTINENCE AND ABSTINENCE...........22. 115

. CONCERNING THE EXTERNAL PREPARATION OF THE OPER-

ATOR, AND FIRSTLY CONCERNING ABLUTION............ 118

. CONCERNING THE EXTERNAL PREPARATION OF THE OPER-

ATOR, AND SECONDLY CONCERNING THE VESTMENTS.... 120
CHAPTER II
THE INITIAL RITES AND CEREMONIES
. CONCERNING THE VIRTUES OF THE PLANETS...........000- 122
. A GENERAL INSTRUCTION CONCERNING THE INSTRUMENTS
REQUIRED FOR THE ART........cccccccccccccsccescccs 126


Contents


PAGE
§ 3. CoNCERNING THE Rop AND STAFF OF THE ART...... pasaeinis 131
§ 4. ConcERNING THE PEN AND INK OF THE ART.........0000- 134
§ 5. CoNCERNING VIRGIN WAX OR VIRGIN EARTH.........0000- 138
§ 6. CONCERNING THE SILKEN CLOTH..........cccccccccccees 139
§ 7. CONCERNING THE VICTIM OF THE ART.......ccccceccceces 139
§ 8. CONCERNING ASPERSION AND FUMIGATION.......ccccceees 147
§ 9. CONCERNING THE TIME OF OPERATION.....cccccscesccseee 151
CHAPTER III
CONCERNING THE DESCENDING HIERARCHY
§ 1. Tae NAMEs AND OFFICES OF EviL SPIRITS..........000008 154
§ 2. Tae Forms or INFERNAL SPIRITS IN THEIR MANIFESTATIONS 163


CHAPTER IV


THE MYSTERIES OF GOETIC THEURGY ACCORDING
TO THE LESSER KEY OF SOLOMON THE KING


§ 1. CoNcCERNING THE SPIRITS OF THE BRAZEN VESSEL, OTHER-


WISE CALLED THE FALs—E MoNARCHY OF DEMONS....... 165
§ 2. CoNCERNING THE RITE OF CONJURATION FROM THE “LEME-
GETON  sorsi-ace 2 Gack Saeed Kies OG eee ed wa wees 190


CHAPTER V


CONCERNING THE MYSTERY OF THE SANCTUM REG-
NUM, OR THE GOVERNMENT OF EVIL SPIRITS;
BEING THE RITE OF CONJURATION ACCORDING
TO THE GRIMORIUM VERUM............ceeesceeee 203


CHAPTER VI


THE MYSTERIES OF INFERNAL EVOCATION AC-
CORDING TO THE GRAND GRIMOIRE


§ 1. THe Rite oF LUCIFUGE si 566 6siices ice tusaneseseaweeees ~ 208
§ 2. CoNCERNING THE GENUINE SANCTUM REGNUM, OR THE TRUE
METHOD OF MAKING PACTS......cceccccccscccccccces 221


xi


CO? tO? cor
GW ND) ww


con tO? LO? <0? tO? tO? tO? CO?
“NOV tn & Ww A


co


§ 1.
§ 2.


Contents
CHAPTER VII


PAGE
THE METHOD OF HONORIUS..........cccccccccces 230
. UNIVERSAL CONJURATION........ccccccccccccccccece Listens: “ele
. CONJURATION OF-THE DEMONS..........-cccccsccccccsecs 275
. WHAT MUST BE SAID IN COMPOSING THE CIRCLE........... 2/7
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS AND MINOR PROCESSES
. CONCERNING Works oF HATRED AND DESTRUCTION........ 262
. CONCERNING VENEREAL EXPERIMENTS.............ceccces 264
. CONCERNING THE EXPERIMENT OF INVISIBILITY..........2+ 271
. CONCERNING THE HAND OF GLORY...........cccecccccecs 275
. CONCERNING THE VISION OF SPIRITS IN THE AIR.......... 278
. CONCERNING DIVINATION BY THE Worp oF URIEL......... 279
. CONCERNING THE Mrrror oF SOLOMON, SUITABLE FOR ALL
KINDS OF DIVINATION........ ccc ccc ccccccccccccccese 283


. CONCERNING THE THREE Rincs oF SOLoMON, SON or Davin 285


CHAPTER IX


CONCERNING INFERNAL NECROMANCY.......... 28/7

A CONJURATION FOR THE SPIRIT GUARDIANS OF HIDDEN
EREASUBE 555. dos 6-04 a8 52k 0.0 sed oR DEO Rae RS 323

A CONJURATION COMPELLING OBEDIENCE......ccccccoeces 324


EXPLANATION OF FULL-PAGE PLATES


PLATE I


FrontisPiece.—Edward Kelley, the Alchemist and alleged Magician, in the act
of invoking the Spirit of a Deceased Person.

The plate is reproduced from the second edition of Ebenezer Sibley’s “Illus-
tration of the Occult Sciences.” The companion of Kelley within the circle is
presumably Paul Waring, who, according to Weaver (“Funeral Monuments,”
1631, pp. 45, 46), was assoctated with him in all his conjurations. The scene is
intended to represent the churchyard of Walton Ledale, “in the county of Lan-
caster.” The information of Sibley is derived from Weaver, whose authority is
said to have been Waring. On this point and the general question of Kelley’s
necromantic pursuits, see “The Alchemical Writings of Edward Kelley,” Biograph-
ical Preface, pp. xxvii-xxx.


PLATE II...


The Angels of the Seven Planets, their Sigils, the Signs and Houses of the
Planets, the names of the Seven Heavens, according to the “Magical Ele-
ments” of Peter de Abano, with the names of the Olympic Spirits of the
Planets according to “Arbatel of Magic,” and the Infernal Sigils o the
Evil Planetary Spirits according to the “Red Dragon.”

The name of Michael, the Angel of the Lord’s Day, appears over his Sigil,
together with the Astrological Symbol of Sol, the Zodiacal Sign of Leo, which
is the House of the Sun, and the name of the Fourth Heaven, Machen. The
name of Gabriel, the Angel of Monday, appears over his Sigil, together with
the Astrological Symbol of Luna, the Zodiacal Sign of Cancer, which is the
House of the Moon, and the name of the First Heaven, Shamain. The name of
Samael, the Angel of Tuesday, appears over his Stil, together with the Astro-
logical Symbol of Mars, the Zodiacal Signs of Aries, and Scorpio, which are
the Houses of the Planet, and the name of the Fifth Heaven, Machon. The
name of Raphael, the Angel of Wednesday, appears over his Sigil, together with
the Astrological Symbol of Mercury, the Zodiacal Signs of Gemini and Virgo,
which are the Houses of the Planet, and the name of the Second Heaven, Raquie.
The name of Sachiel, the Angel of Thursday, appears over his Sigil, together


eee


Explanation of Full-Page Plates


with the Astrological Symbol of Jupiter, the Zodiacal Signs of Sagittarius and
Pisces, which are the Houses of the Planet, and the name of the Sixth Heaven,
Zebul. The name of Anael, the Angel of Friday, appears over his Sigil, together
with the Astrological Symbol of Venus, the Zodiacal Signs of Taurus and Libra,
which are the Houses of the Planet, and the name of the Third Heaven, Sagun.
The name of Cassiel, the Angel of Saturday, appears over his Sigil, together
with the Astrological Symbol of Saturn, and the Zodiacal Signs of Capricornus
and Aquarius, which are the Houses of the Planet.


PLATE ITI


‘Mystic Figures of the Enchiridion.

Figure I., the mystic symbol of the Tau, converted into a monogram which
has been supposed to signify the word Taro or Tora. Figure II., the triple
Tau. Figure III, an arbitrary figure supposed to represent the fortieth part
of the stature of Jesus Christ. Figure IV., the Labarum of Constantine, with
the usual inscription, “In this sign thou shalt conquer,” and the emblems of the
Passion of Christ. Figure V., a double door, connected by a bar, and inscribed
with the first seven letters of the Latin alphabet. Figure VI., a composite sym-
bol of unknown meaning. The second circle contains twenty-two letters, which
recall the Keys of the Taro. Figure VII. represents the dimensions of the
wound produced by the lance of the Centurion in the side of Jesus Christ.
Figure VIII., a two-edged sword, for which various simple meanings may be
conjectured. Its inscription has been adopted by alchemists.


PLATE IV


Mystic Figures of the Enchiridion.

Figure I, the reversed form of a well-known occult symbol. The Hebrew
words signify Jehovah, Elohim, Agla, Elohim Tsabaoth. Figure II., the Laba-
rum of Constantine, another form. Figure III., the inscription on this talisman
is unintelligible. Figure IV., the occult symbol of the pentagram, reversed, and
therefore the sign of the Demon, according to Eliphas Lévi. Possibly misplaced
by the ignorance of the prinfer, but it occurs in this manner in many books
which do not apparently connect with Black Magic. Figure V., a talisman with
the monogram of Michael. Figure VI., undescribed, but belonging to a prayer
of St. Augustine addressed to the Holy Spirit to receive a revelation. Figure
VII, the characters of this talisman would seem to be Hebrew, but are so
corrupt that they are unintelligible. Figure VIII, a talisman with the mono-
gram of Gabriel. Figure IX., the talisman and monogram of Michael.


PLATE V


The characters of Evil Spirits, from the so-called “Fourth Book” of Cornelius
Agrippa, and described as follows in the original.
1. A right line; 2. a crooked line; 3. a reflexed line; 4. a simple figure;
5. penetrate; 6. broken; 7. a right letter; 8. a retrograde letter; 9. an in-


XIV


Explanation of Full-Page Plates


verted letter; 10. flame; 11. wind; 12. water; 13. a mass; 14. rain; 15.
clay; 16. a flying creature; 17. a creeping thing; 18. a serpent; 19. an eye;
20. a hand; 21. a foot; 22. a crown; 23. a crest; 24. horns; 25. a sceptre;
26. a sword; 27. a scourge.


PLATE VI


~The Sabbatic Goat, from the “Ritual of Transcendental Magic,” by Eliphas
Lévi, who identifies it with the Baphoment of Mendes, and does not regard
it as connected with Black Magic, but as “a pantheistic and magical figure
of the absolute.”


PLATE VII


The instruments of Black Magic, from the Grimoire entitled “True Black Magic.”

Figure I., the knife with the white handle. Figure II., the knife with the
black handle. Figure III., the arctrave, or hook. Figure IV., the boline or
sickle. Figure V., the stylet. Figure VI. the needle. Figure VII., the wand.
Figure VIII., the lancet. Figure IX., the staff. Figure X., the sword of the
master. Figures XI., XII., XIII, the swords of the assistants.


PLATE VIII


The Magical Circle used in Goétic Theurgy, according to the “Lesser Key of
Solomon the King,” showing the position of the operator, the divine names
and symbols to be inscribed within and about the double circle, and the
situation of the lights.

The figure and place of the triangle into which the spirit is commanded
will be found in the text, pp. 190-192. The Divine Names differ in some of the
manuscripts.


~


PLATE Ix


The Goétic Circle of Black Evocations and Pacts according to -Eliphas Lévi.

The circle is formed from the skin of the victim, fastened to the ground
by four nails taken from the coffin of an executed criminal. The skull is that of
a parricide; the horns those of a goat; the male bat opposite the skull must have
been drowned in blood; and the black cat, whose head forms the fourth object
on the circumference of the circle, must have been fed on human flesh. There
is no authority for any of these stipulations. The small circles within the triangle
show the place of the operator and his assistants.


PLATE X


The Apparatus of Ceremonial Crystallomancy according to White Magic, show-
ing the crystal in a frame, which should be of polished ebony, ivory, or
boxwood, the torch, and the engraven candlesticks of brass.

The process of Ceremonial Crystallomancy is analogous to that of the Mirror
of Solomon.


XV.


PART I
THE LITERATURE OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC


CHAPTER II


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals
§ 1. The Importance of Ceremontal Magic.


eo


HE ordinary fields of psychological inquiry, largely
in possession of the pathologist, are fringed by a


borderland of transcendental experiment into which
pathologists may occasionally venture, but it is left for the
most part to unchartered explorers. Beyond these fields
and this borderland there lies the legendary wonder-world
of Mysticism, Magic, and Sorcery, a world of fascination
or terror, as the mind which regards it is tempered, but in
either case the antithesis of admitted possibility. There all
paradoxes seem to obtain actually, contradictions logically
coexist, the effect is greater than the cause, and the shadow
more than the substance. Therein the visible melts into the
unseen, the invisible is manifested openly, motion from
place to place is accomplished without traversing the inter-
vening distance, matter passes through matter. There two
straight lines may enclose a space; space has a fourth di-
mension, and further possiblities beyond it; without meta-
phor and without evasion, the circle is mathematically
squared. There life is prolonged, youth renewed, physical
immortality secured. There earth becomes gold, and gold
earth. There words and wishes possess creative power,
thoughts are things, desire realizes its object. There, also,
the dead live, and the hierarchies of extra-mundane intelli-
gence are within easy communication, and become ministers


The Book of Black Magic


or tormentors, guides, or destroyers, of man. There the
Law of Continuity is suspended by the interference of the
higher Law of Fantasia.

But, unhappily, this domain of enchantment is in all re-
spects comparable to the gold of Faerie, which is presum-
ably its medium of exchange. It cannot withstand daylight,
the test of the human eye, or the scale of reason. When
these are applied, its paradox becomes an anticlimax, its
antithesis ludicrous; its contradictions are without genius;
its mathematical marvels end in a verbal quibble; its elixirs
fail even as purges; its transmutations do not need exposure
at the assayer’s hands; its marvel-working words prove bar-
barous mutilations of dead languages, and are impotent
from the moment that they are understood; departed
friends, and even planetary intelligences, must not be seized
by the skirts, for they are apt to desert their draperies, and
these are not like the mantle of Elijah.

The little contrast here instituted will serve to exhibit
that there are at least two points of view regarding Magic
and its mysteries—the simple and homogeneous view, pre-
vailing within that charmed circle among the few survivals
whom reason has not hindered from entering, and that of
the world without, which is more complex, more composite,
but sometimes more reasonable only by imputation. There
is also a third view, in which legend is checked by legend
and wonder substituted for wonder. Here it is not the-Law
of Continuity persisting in its formulm despite the Law of
Fantasia; it is Croquemetaine explained by Diabolus, the
runes of Elf-land read with the interpretation of Infernus;
it is the Law of Bell and Candle, the Law of Exorcism, and
its final expression is in the terms of the auto-da-fe. For
this view the wonder-world exists without any question,
except that of the Holy Tribunal; it is not what it seems,


4


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


but is adjustable to the eye of faith in the light from the
Lamp of the Sanctuaries; in a word, its angels are demous,
its Melusines stryges, its phantoms vampires, its spells and
mysteries the Black Science. Here Magic itself rises up
and responds that there is a Black and a White art, an art
of Hermes and an art of Canidia, a Science of the Height
and a Science of the Abyss, of Metatron and Belial. In this
manner a fourth point of view emerges; they are all, how-
ever, illusive; there is the positive illusion of the legend,
affirmed by the remaining adherents of its literal sense, and
the negative illusion which denies the legend crassly with-
out considering that there is a possibility behind it: there is
the illusion which accounts for the legend by an opposite
hypothesis, and the illusion of the legend which reaffirms
itself with a distinction. When these have been disposed
of, there remain two really important questions—the ques-
tion of the Mystics and the question of history and litera-
ture. To a very large extent the first is closed to discussion,
but, so far as may be possible, it will be dealt with a little
later on. As regards the second, it is the sole concern and
purpose of this inquiry, and the limits of its importance
may therefore be shortly stated.

There can be no extensive literatures without motives
proportionate to account for them. If we take the magical
literature of Western Europe from the Middle Ages and on-
ward, we shall find that it is exceedingly large. Now, the
acting principles in the creation of that literature will
prove to rule also in its history; what is abscure in the one
may be understood by help of the other; each reacted upon
each; as the literature grew, it helped to make the history,
and the new history was so much additional material for
further literature. There were, of course, many motive
principles at work, for the literature and history of Magie

5


The Book of Black Magic


are alike exceedingly intricate, and there are many inter-
pretations of principles which are apt to be confused with
the principles, as, for example, the influence of what is
loosely called superstition upon ignorance; these and any
interpretations must be ruled out of an inquiry like the
present. The main principles are summed in the conception
of a number of mysterious forces in the universe which
could be put in operation by man, or at least followed in
their secret processes. In the ultimate, however, they could
all be rendered secondary, if not passive, to the will of man;
for even in astrology, which was the discernment of forces
regarded as peculiarly fatal, there was an art of ruling, and
sapiens dominabitur astris became an axiom of the science.
This conception culminated or centered in the doctrine of
unseen, intelligent powers, with whom it was possible for
prepared persons to communicate ; the method by which this
communication was attempted are the most important pro-
cesses of Magic, and the books which embody these methods,
called Ceremonial Magic, are the most important part of the
Jiterature. Here, that is to say, is the only branch of the
subject which it is necessary to understand in order to un-
derstand the history. Had Magic been focussed in the read-
ing of the stars, it would have possessed no history to speak
of, for astrology involved intellectual equipments which
were possible only to the few. Had Magic centered in the
transmutation of metals, it would never have moved mul-
titudes, but would have remained what that still is, the
quixotic hope of chemistry. We may take the remaining
occult sciences collectively, but there is nothing in them of
themselves which would make history. In virtue of the syn-
thetic doctrine which has been already formulated, they
were all magically possible, but they were all subsidiary to
that which was head and crown of all—the art of dealing
| 6


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


with spirits. The presumed possession of the secret of this
art made Magic formidable, and made therefore its history.
There was a time indeed when Ceremonial Magic threatened
to absorb the whole circle of the occult sciences; it was the
superior method, the royal road; it effected immediately
what the others accomplished laboriously, after a long time.’
It had, moreover, the palmary recommendation that it was
a conventional art, working by definite formule, a process
in words. :

It was the fascination of this process which brought men
and women—all sorts and conditions of both—to the Black
Sabbath and to the White Sabbath,? and blinded them to the
danger of the stake. It was the full and clear acceptation of
this process as effectual by Church and State which kindled
the faggots for the magician in every Christian land. As-


_) Thus; the abstruse processes of astrology might, on the hypothesis, be dispensed
with altogether in favour of the evocation of one of those numerous spirits whose
office it was to give instruction in astrology and on instantaneous knowledge
thereof. It is otherwise obvious that the least occult of the esoteric sciences was
exploded by an art which provided familiar spirits who could discern the past,
present, and future. In like manner, Alchemy was superfluous for a magician who
could cause treasures to be transported from the depths of the sea or the bowels
of the eartli, and even from the royal exchequer, in the more convenient shape of
current coin.


? There is much the same ground for this distinction as for that made between
the Black and White Magic of the Rituals. They were abominable or fantastic
according to the disposition of those who frequented them. As a whole, they have
probably been much exaggerated. Jules Garinet, in his Histoire de la Magie en
France, depuis le commencement de la Monarchie jusqu’ d nos jours (1818), specu-
lates that the monks, who abused public credulity for the sake of diversion amidst
their idleness, may have assumed ridiculous disguises, and may themselves have
committed the extravagances which they attributed to devils. The same author
affirms, as certain and incontestable, that in all the criminal trials of sorcerers and
sorceresses the scene of the Sabbath was invariably in the neighbourhood of a
monastery. “Since the destruction of the monastic orders,” he concludes triumph-
antly, “no more is heard of such assemblies, even in places where the fear of the
devil still exists.” Add to this that seventy-five years later, Papus, the French
occultist, would persuade his readers that all the Grimoires of Black Magic were
the work of priests, and the case is almost as complete as French reasoning can
make it. It is cited here to show that, outside the demonologists, the Sabbath is
viewed rather as a moonlight mummery, where the presiding genius was not the
fallen star Wormwood, but Venus, and, even on the monkish hypothesis, the
mysteries were those of Priapus rather than Pluto. The records of trials for
sorcery rest under the gravest suspicion, firstly, because there is no guarantee
that they have not been garbled, and, secondly, because information extracted by
torture is, in the ultimate, always of the nature which it was intended to extract;
but they are also mainly records of sexual mania.


7


The Book of Black Magic


trology was scarcely discouraged, and if the alchemist were
occasionally tortured, it was only to extract his secret.
There was no danger in these things, and hence there was
no judgment against them, except by imputation from
their company ; but Magic, but dealing with spirits, was that
which made even the peasant tremble, and when the peasant
shakes at his hearth, the king is not secure in his palace, nor
the Pope at St. Peter’s, unless both can protect their own.
Moreover, in the very claim of Ceremonial Magic there was
an implied competition with the essential claim of the
Church.’

The importance of Ceremonial Magic, and of the litera-
ture which embodies it, to the history of the occult sciences
being admitted, there is no need to argue that this history is
a legitimate and reasonable study; in such a case, knowl-
edge is its own end, and there can be certainly no question as
to the distinguished influence which has been exercised by
the belief in Magic throughout the ages. In order, how-
ever, to understand the literature of Magic, it is necessary
to obtain first of all a clear principle of regarding it. It
will be superfluous to say that we must surrender the leg-
ends, as such, to those who work in legends and dispute
about their essential value. We need not debate whether
Magic, for example, can really square the circle, as magi-
cians testify, or whether such an operation is impossible
even to Magic, as commonly would be objected by those who
deny the art. We need not seriously discuss the proposition


1 That is to say, the Church communicates the supernatural world by a sacra-
mental system, and the direct communication which Magic pretends to establish
must, if established, supersede the Church. It is not surprising that a sacerdotalism
so acute, especially along the lines of its own interests, as that of the Roman Church
should not discern that the rival claim assailed its fundamental position, but it is
regrettable that an institution possessing the sacramental system should have dis-
turbed itself about a direct communication of the kind attempted by Ceremonial
Magic. If it be said that the Church discerned the possibility behind the veil of
vain observance, then it was not so acute as would seem, for behind that veil there
is no danger to the sacramental system.

8


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


that the devil assists the magicians to perform a mathemat-
ical impossibility, or its qualified form, that the circle can be
squared indifferently by those who invoke the angel Cassiel
of the hierarchy of Uriel and those who invoke Astaroth.
We shall see very shortly, as already indicated in the pref-
ace, that we are dealing with a bizarre literature, which
passes, by various fantastic phases, through all folly into
crime. We have to account for these characteristics.

The desire to communicate with spirits is older than his-
tory; it connects with ineradicable principles in human na-
ture, which have been discussed too often for it to be neces-
sary to recite them here; and the attempts to satisfy that de-
sire have usually taken a shape which does gross outrage to
reason. Between the most ancient processes, such as those
of Chaldean Magic, and the rites of the Middle Ages, there
are marked correspondences, and there is something of com-
mon doctrine, as distinct from intention, in which identity
would more or less obtain, underlying them both. The doc-
trine of compulsion, or the power which both forms pre-
tended to exercise even upon superior spirits by the use of
certain words, is a case in point. In approaching the Cere-
monial Magic of the Middle Ages, we must therefore bear
in mind that we are dealing with a literature which, though
modern in its origin, embodies some elements of antiquity.’
It is doubtful whether the presence of these elements can be
accounted for on the principle that mankind in all ages
works unconsciously for the accomplishment of similar in-
tentions in an analogous way; a bizarre intention, of course,
tends independently to be fulfilled in a bizarre manner, but
in this case the similarity is so close that it is more easily

1The Ceremonial Magic of certain Greco-Egyptian papyri offers the closest
analogies with the process of the Kabbalistic school, but they are the channel, and


not the source. We must look beyond history, certainly far ond the documents
of Leyden, and even the “Ritual of the Dead,” for the origin of Ceremonial Magic.


9


The Book of Black Magic


explained by the perpetuation of an antique tradition, for
which channels could be readily assigned. There is one
upon the face of the literature, and that is the vehicle of
Kabbalistic symbolism.

There are two ways of regarding the large and still un-
known literature which embodies the Kabbalah of the Jews,
and these in turn will give two methods of accounting for
the spurious and grotesque processes which enter so exten-
sively into Ceremonial Magic. It is either a barren mysti-
fication, a collection of supremely absurd treatises, in which
obscure nonsense is enunciated with preternatural solem-
nity, or it is a body of symbolism. The first view is that
which is formed almost irresistibly upon a superficial ac-
quaintance, and there is not any need to add that it is the
one which obtains generally in derived judgments, for here,
as in other cases, the second-hand opinion issues from the
most available source. The alternative judgment is that
which prevails among the real students of the literature.
From the one it would follow that the Ceremonial Magic
which at a long distance draws from the Kabbalah, repro-
duces its absurdities, possibly with further exaggerations.
Two erroneous views have issued from the other—an exag-
gerated importance attributed to the processes in question
on the ground of their exalted connections, and—this, how-
ever, is rarely met with—an inclination to regard them also
as symbolical writing.

There is no ground for the criticism of the first infer-
ence, which follows legitimately enough, and is that which
will be most acceptable to the majority of readers. Those
who value Kabbalistic literature as a symbolism, the inner
sense of which is or may be of importance, but see nothing
in the processes of Ceremonial Magic to make them mo-
mentous in their literal sense or susceptible to interpreta-

10 |


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


tion, will be tempted to dismiss them as medigval and later
impostures, which must be carefully distinguished from the
true symbolical tradition. In either case the ceremonial
literature is disdainfully rejected.
: There is, however, yet another point of view, and it is of
some moment, as it connects with that question of the Mys-
tics about which it has been already observed that very little
has transpired. All students of occultism are perfectly well
aware of the existence in modern times of more than one
Mystical Fraternity, deriving, or believed to derive, from
other associations of the past. There are, of course, many
unaffiliated occultists, but the secret Fraternities exist, and
the keys of mystic symbolism are said to be in their posses-
sion. From a variety of isolated statements scattered up
and down the works of professed occultists in recent years,
it is possible to summarize broadly the standpoint of these
bodies in respect of Ceremonial Magic. There is no extant
Ritual, as there is no doctrine, which contains, or can possi-
bly contain, the secret of mystical procedure or the essence
of mystic doctrine. The reason is not because there is, or
can reasonably be, any indicible secret, but because the
knowledge in question is in the custody of those who have
taken effectual measures for its protection; and though,
from time to time, some secrets of initiation have filtered
through printed books into the world at large, the real mys-
teries have never escaped. The literature of Magic falls,
therefore, under three heads: (a.) The work of adepts, stat-
ing as much as could be stated outside the circle of initia-
tion, and primarily designed to attract those who might be
ripe for entrance. (b.) The speculations of independent
seekers, who, by thought, study, and intuition, sometimes at-
tained valuable results without assistance. (c.) Travesties
of mystic doctrine, travesties of mystic intention, travesties
11


The Book of Black Magic


of mystic procedure, complicated by filtrations from the su-
perior source.’

Most Ceremonial Magic belongs to the third class; the
first, by its nature, is not represented; the second only
slightly. In a word, Ceremonial Magic reflects mainly the
egregious ambitions and incorporates the mad processes of
medieval sorcery—of the Sabbath above all. The addi-
tional elements are debased applications of certain Kabbal-
istic methods, seering processes current among country
people, and fantastic attempts to reduce magical legends
to a formal practice.

Whichever of the above views the reader may prefer to
adopt, it will be seen that the net result as regards the Rit-
uals is not generically different, that they are of literary
and historical interest, but nothing further. For the occult-
ist they will possess, from their associations, an impor-
tance which will be of no moment to another student. It is
desirable that they should not be undervalued because they
have exercised an influence, and they are memorable as curi-
osities of the past; but it is more desirable still that the
weak and credulous should be warned against acting like
fools. :


1In this connection, the author may be permitted to quote a general statement
on the subject which he has received from a correspondent who seems to claim some
connection of an unattached kind with the sources of secret knowledge. “Practical
Magic is the science of the economy of spiritual dynamics, and is concerned with
those Theurgic processes whereby he who has trained himself for the purpose can,
by virtue of powers inherent in man’s spiritual constitution (but undeveloped in the
majority of mankind), enter into relations with the unseen intelligences to whom
are assigned, in due order, the control of what_are called natural forces. ‘Cere-
monial Magic’” (presumably not that of the Ceremonial Literature) “is Official
Magic, in which the Magician, in connection with one or more assistants, acts as
the delegate of an occult Fraternity, who, for some very important end, wish to
communjcate with beings of a higher order than usual. For this purpose there is
a recognized ceremonial, or rather there are two—the ‘ceremonial of approach’
and the ‘ceremonial of the presence.’ It is chiefly in the former that lights, fumi-
gations, symbolic figures and numbers, and incantations occur, all of which have
their use, either as credentials of authority or as weapons of attack and defense
in the intermediate hostile region between the material and spiritual universe.”


12


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals
§ 2. The Distinction between White and Black Magte.


Having considered the possible stand-points from which
the Rituals may be regarded, we come now to the distinc-
tions that are made between them, and, first and foremost,
to that instituted between White and Black Magic. The his-
tory of this distinction is exceedingly obscure, but there can
_ be no question that in its main aspect it is modern, that is to
say, in so far as it depends upon a sharp contrast between
Good and Evil Spirits. In Egypt, in India, and in Greece,
there was no dealing with devils in the Christian sense of
the expression; Typhon, Juggernaut, and Hecate were not
less divine than the gods of the over-world, and the offices of
Canidia were probably in their way as sacred as the peace-
ful mysteries of Ceres.

Each of the occult sciences was, however, liable to that
species of abuse which is technically know as Black Magic.
Astrology, or the appreciation of the celestial influences in
their operation upon the nature and life of man, could be
perverted in the composition of malefic talismans by means
of those influences. Esoteric Medicine, which consisted in
the application of occult forces to the healing of disease in
man, and included a traditional knowledge of the medicinal
properties resident in some substances disregarded by ordi-
nary pharmacy, produced in its malpractice the secret
science of poisoning, and the destruction of health, reason,
or life by unseen forces. The transmutation of metals by
alchemy resulted in their sophistication. In like manner,
Divination, or the processes by which lucidity was supposed
to be induced, became debased into witchcraft, and Cere-
monial Magic into dealing with devils. White Ceremonial
Magic is, by the terms of its definition, an attempt to com-
municate with Good Spirits for a good, or at least an in-

13


The Book of Black Magic


nocent, purpose. Black Magic is the attempt to communi-
cate with Evil Spirits for an evil purpose.

The contrasts here established seem on the surface per-
fectly clear. When we come, however, to compare the cere-
monial literature of the two classes, we shall find that the
distinction is by no means so sharp as might be inferred
from the definitions. In the first place, Theurgic Ceremo-
nial, under the pretence of White Magic, usually includes
the Rites for the invocation of Evil Spirits. Supposing
that they are so invoked for the enforced performance of
works contrary to their nature, the issue becomes compli-
cated at once, and White Magic must then be defined as the
attempt to communicate with Good or Evil Spirits for a
good, or at least for an innocent purpose. This, of course,
still leaves a tolerably clear distinction. Yet the alternative
between a good and an innocent object contains all the ma-
terial for a further confusion. It will be made clear as we
proceed that the purposes and ambitions of Magic are com-
monly very childish, so that we must distinguish really be-
tween Black and White Magic, not as between the essen-
tially good and evil, but as between that which is certainly
evil and that which may only be foolish. Nor does this
exhaust the difficulty. As will also be made evident in pro-
ceeding, White Ceremonial Magic seems to admit of a num-
ber of intentions which are objectionable, as well as many
that. are frivolous. Hence it must be inferred that there is
no very sharp distinction between the two branches of the
Art. It.cannot be said, even, that Black Magic is invari-
ably, and White Magic occasionally evil. What is called
Black Magic is by no means black invariably; it is almost
as much concerned with harmless and stupid processes as
the White variety with those of an objectionable kind.
Thus,. the most which can be stated is that the literature

" 14


oe ——


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


falls chiefly into two classes, one of which usually terms
itself black, but that they overlap one another.

In what perhaps it may be permissible to term the mind
of Magic, as distinct from the effects which are proposed by
the Rituals, there has always been a clear contrast between
the two branches corresponding to Magus and Sorcerer, and
the fact that the ceremonial literature tends to the confu-
sion of the distinction stamps it immediately as garbled. But
this is not to tay that it has been tampered with in the sense
of having been perverted by editors. White Magic has not
usually been written down into Black; Goetic Rituals have
not been written up in celestial terms. They are, for the
most part, naturally composite, and it would be impossible
to separate their elements without modifying their struc-
ture.

Modern occultism has taken up the distinction and de-
veloped it. Appealing to the secret traditional knowledge
behind the written word of Magic, to that unmanifested
science which it believes to exist behind all science, and to
the religion behind all religion, it affirms that the spiritual
life has been entered by two classes of adepts, sometimes
somewhat fantastically distinguished as the Brothers of the
Right and the Brothers of the Left, transcendental good
and transcendental evil being their respective ends, and in
each case something altogether different from what is un-
derstood by either White or Black Magic. As might be ex-
pected, the literature of the subject does not bear out this
development, but, by the terms of the proposition, this is
scarcely to be regarded as an objection. For the rest, if
recent revelations lead us to concede, within certain limits,
that there may have been some recrudescence of diabolism
in more than one country of Europe, some attempt at the
present day to communicate formally with the Powers of

15


a


The Book of Black Magic


Darkness, it must be said that this attempt returns in its old
likeness, and not invested with the sublimities and terrors
of the modern view. Paris Diabolism, for example, in so
far as it may be admitted to exist, is the Black Magic of the
Grimoire, and not the sovereign horror of the Brothers of
the Left Hand Path, wearing their iniquity like an aureole,
and deathless in spiritual evil.


§ 3. The Unprinted Literature of Ceremonial Magtc


For the purposes of the present inquiry it will be con-
venient to consider the Rituals under the three heads of
Transcendental, Composite, and Black, subject, as regards
the first, to some important qualifications which will appear
in the second chapter. So far as may be possible, the an-
tiquity of individual Rituals will be determined in the
course of their examination, but as this inquiry is based,
with a single exception of undeniable importance, upon the
printed literature, because it is that only which has exer-
cised a real influence, it may be well, as a conclusion to this
introductory part, to give some information regarding mag-
ical processes which have remained in MS., and are to be
found only, or can at least be consulted only, in the public
libraries of Europe. Almost without exception, the source
of their inspiration is the work mentioned in the preface,
namely, ‘‘The Key of Solomon,”’’ and they are consequently
of later date. The Library of the Arsenal at Paris has a
reputation for being especially rich in Magical MSS., but
there is also a large collection in the British Museum which
may be regarded as typical. There is nothing of earlier
date or more importance among the French treasures, and,
to determine the question of antiquity in a few words, there
is nothing among our own that is much anterior to the be-


ginning of the fourteenth century.


16 me geet


_


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals
The numerical strength of the treatises, late and early


_ combined, is in itself considerable, but, setting aside the


codices made use of by the English editor of ‘‘The Key of
Solomon,’’ the interest of which has been exhausted by the
appearance of that work, there are only three small classes
or cycles to which special importance attaches in connection
with the present inquiry. The first may be termed the group
of Honorius, comprising three MSS.; the second is that of
the Sepher Raziel, of which there are two forms; the third
includes the English codices of the ‘‘Lemegeton.’’ The
chief MS. of the first group is also one of the most ancient
treatises dealing with Magic in the library. This is Sloane
313, a Latin MS. on vellum, in a bad state of preservation.
The close writing and abbreviations make it very difficult to
read. It is interesting, however, because it connects with
the Grimoire of Honorius, one of the most important Rit-
uals of Black Magic, being the work of some person bear-
ing that name. It belongs to the fourteenth century, has no
title or other determinate name, but it appears from the
text that 1t was understood to be the ‘‘Sworn Book of Hon-
orius.”’ The introduction or prologue to the work is some-
what obscurely worded in the initial pages, but it seems to
account for the condemnation of magic by the prelates of
the Church on the ground that they have been deceived by
demons. The result was the convocation of all the ‘‘masters
of Magic,”’ to the number of 811, all of whom seem to have
come out of Naples, Athens, and a place entitled Tholetus.
Among these a species of spokesman was chosen, whose
name was Honorius, the son of Euclidus, Master of the
Thebans. He was deputed to work for the rest, and he en-
tered into council with an angel called Hochmel or Hocroel,
(? Hochmael), and thereby wrote seven volumes of Magic
Art, ‘‘giving the kernel to us and the shells to others.’’
17 :


The Book of Black Magic


From these books he seems afterwards to have extracted
ninety-three chapters containing a summary of the art, and
made them into a volume which ‘‘we term the sacred
or sworn book.’’ In the meantime, the princes and prelates,
having burned ‘‘certain fables or trifles,’’ concluded that
they had completely destroyed the art, and were therefore
pacified. The magicians, however, took an oath among
themselves to preserve the masterpiece of Honorius in the


most secret and careful manner, making three copies at the


most, the possessor of any example being bound over to
bury it before his decease, or otherwise insure its interment
in his own grave, unless there was some trusty and worthy
person to whom it could be transmitted. The important


point about this MS. is that it fixes the source of the menda-


cious tradition which ascribes a Grimoire of Black Magic
to a Pope of the name of Honorius, as will be seen at length
later on. The ‘‘Sworn Book’’ is not, of course, the Grim-
oire, but the existence and reputed authorship of the one
enables us to understand the attribution of the other. Hon-
orius the sorcerer was identified with Honorius the Pope,
firstly by the confused mind of magical legend, and secondly
by conscious imposture, much after the same manner that
Raymond Lully, the ‘‘illuminated doctor’’ of Majorca, was
identified with Lully the alchemist, by tradition at the in-
ception, and not long afterwards by the help of forged trea-
tises. The ‘‘Sworn Book’’ is in other respects exceedingly
remarkable, and has been most unaccountably overlooked
by writers on Ceremonial Magic; it may be taken to indieate
that an association of magicians was most probably in cor-


/


porate existcnce during or before the fourteenth century. -


While it is clearly of Christian origin, it derives from the

supposed works of Solomon, and would appear to indicate

that the Solomonic cycle was at that time only in course of
18


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


formation, as also that the earliest elements approximate
not to the Grand Clavicle, but to the Little Key, otherwise,
the Lemegeton. As to its operations, they are those of
White and Black Magic, undiscriminated, without, however,
any trace of the conventional ‘‘dealing with the devil.’’ The
MS. under notice need not, of course, be regarded as the
original; as to this there is no means of knowing. The
British Museum possesses also a later transcript, belonging
to the sixteenth century, and a most valuable English trans-
lation, written on vellum in beautiful Gothic characters. It
is referred to the fifteenth century.

The second group comprises two MSS., both in the
Sloane collection, and both containing, among other trea-
tises, the important and curious work attributed to Solomon
under the title of Sepher Raziel. That numbered 3826 be-
longs to the sixteenth century. It is an English translation
of a Latin original which in this form is unknown to the
present writer ; the first line of this original is usually given
at the beginning of each section. It is divided into seven
books, and purports to have been sent to Solomon by a
prince of Babylon who was greater and more worshipful
than all men of his time, his name being Sameton, while the
two wise men who brought it were called Kamazan and
Zazant. The Latin title of the treatise is said to be Angelus
Magnus Secret: Creatoris ; it was the first book after Adam,
written in the language of Chaldea and afterwards trans-
lated into Hebrew. It is a noticeable fact that in this work
the first section is entitled Clavis, and if we may regard the
Sepher Raziel as antedating the Claviculz, it explains why
a Key was attributed to Solomon. The Clavis in question
is, however, concerned with the magical influences of the
stars, ‘‘without which we can effect nothing.’’ The second
book is called Ala; it treats of the virtues of stones, herbs,

| 19


The Book of Black Magic


and beasts. The third is Tractatus Thymiamatum, the use
of which term connects it with the ‘‘Sworn Book’’ of Hon-
orius; it treats of suffumigations. The fourth sets out the
times of the year, day, and night which are disposed to oper-
ation; the fifth embodies the laws regarding cleanness and
abstinence; while the sixth, called Samaim, expounds the
nature of the heavens, of the angels, and of the operations
of each. The seventh and last book is concerned with the
virtues of names. A Latin version of the Sepher Raziel
occurs in Sloane MS. 3853, ascribed to the same period. It
differs greatly from the former, being much shorter, and
full of rear magical symbols.

The MSS. of the third group are all in English, and all
of late date.

Sloane 2731 is a very neat MS., begun on January 10,
1676, and containing the entire ‘‘Lemegeton, or Lesser Key
of Solomon,’’ in English. Some account of this celebrated
work, which has so unaccountably escaped publication, will
be found in the third chapter of this part. Sloane 3648 is
another manuscript of the ‘‘Lemegeton,”’ also in English,
together with the Ars Notoria, a book of invocations and
prayers attributed to Solomon, of which there are many ex-
amples extant in England and on the Continent.’ It is a
work which connects with Magic without being itself magi-
cal, and, in fact, stands in much the same relation to the
Key or Clavicle as the ‘‘Enchiridion of Pope Leo’’ to the
‘‘Tsagoge’’ of the Arbatel. Lastly, the same MS. contains the
‘*Magical Archidoxies’’ of Paracelsus, but seems to be quite
distinct from the treatise so entitled in the Geneva folio,


containing the collected writings of the German adept.’


21The English translation of Robert Turner is well known to collectors.

2The genuine “Archidoxies” are concerned with the alchemical separation of
elements, with transcendental Medicine and the Quintessence, with Magisteries and
Elixirs. The first complete translation is in “The Hermetic and Alchemical
Writings of Paracelsus,” edited by Arthur Edward Waite, 2 vols. 4to 1910 (Pub-
lished by, Messrs. de Laurence, Scott & Co.)


20


The Antiquity of Magical Rituals


In either case, it is not a work of Ceremonial Magic.
Sloane 3805 is a quarto MS., chiefly alchemical and medi-
cal, comprising a translation of the forged epistles of Sendi-
vogius, and towards the end the ‘‘Lemegeton,’’ started
by the writer apparently with the intention of transcribing
all the works attributed to Solomon under the heading of
this angelic name. It breaks off, however, at the end of the
offices of the thirteenth spirit of the Infernal Hierarchy.
It should be added that the three groups contain mate-
rials which are common to all. The independent treatises
which follow the Sepher Raziel in Sloane 3826 extract mat-
ter from the ‘‘Sworn Book,’’ while that entitled Liber
Lune, concerning the intelligences of the mansions of the
moon, the squares of the planets, their seals, rings, and so
forth—which, by the way, is in this form unknown to mod-
ern critics—has given material to other and later collections.
The unprinted literature of Ceremonial Magic offers a
vast field of bibliographical research, and may be the sub-
ject of a future inquiry. Among the miscellaneous MSS. in
the British Museum, it is here only necessary to notice two,
as they contain materials connected with the present design.
Sloane 3884 includes a process in Necromancy—how to call
the ghost of a dead body—the invocation of spirits into a
erystal—the form for summoning spirits within a circle—
and a method of exorcism in the Tuscan language,—all im-
pudently attributed to the author of the ‘‘Nullity of Mag-
iv,”? Roger Bacon. In the second part of this work a spe-
cial chapter is devoted to Infernal Necromancy, and the
MS. here mentioned will be useful for purposes of refer-
ence. Sloane 3850 is a MS. of the seventeenth century,
which contains transcripts from the fourth book of Corne-
lius Agrippa and from the Heptameron of Peter de Abano
in Latin. There is also a ‘‘Good and Proved Experiment”’


21


The Book of Black Magic


for evocation, which uses the Pater, Ave, Credo, and Litany
of the Saints as magical formule. There are also processes,
mostly in Latin, but some in English, for the discovery of
things lost, the recovery of things stolen, for the spirits of
the dead who cannot rest in their graves, and for persons
possessed by evil spirits. The treatise De Novem Candartis
Salomonis, containing curious figures and sigils, deserves
particular mention, as it seems unknown to students. Its
attribution notwithstanding, it is the work of a Catholic
writer.


CHAPTER II
Che Rituals of Transcendental Magic
§ 1. The Arbatel of Magic.


: HE term transcendental must not be interpreted in
: any exalted or philosophical sense when it is used,
informally enough, in such a connection as the pres-
ent. It has not been adopted because it is more than toler-
ably appropriate, but rather in the absence of a better word
of definition, and because also it has been previously ad-
mitted in the same connection. It is perhaps loosely equiv-
alent to the Haute Magi of Eliphas Lévi, which has been —
rendered ‘‘Transcendental Magic,’? not as an identical
equivalent, but because there is no current or admitted ex-
pression which corresponds more closely. When due allow-
ance has been made for the conceptions which may be pre-
sumed to underlie it, it must be admitted that in Ceremonial
Magic there is little true Transcendentalism. Whatever
may be claimed for the intelligences with whom communica-
tion is sought to be established, they reveal themselves by
their offices, which are mostly either fantastic or frivolous.
In such an association it should be understood that material
interests are to be included in the second class; in the first
would be comprised those which are outside realisation by
reason of their extravagance, and at the same time are quite

unconnected with spiritual aspiration.
There is scarcely anything in Practical Magic which in-

23


The Book of Black Magic


terlinks, for example, with a true Mystic Purpose.* Hence,
by Rituals of Transcendental Magic there must not be un-
derstood a collection of processes by which the Divine in
Man is sought to be united with the Divine in the Universe.
The works of St. John of the Cross, of Ruysbroeck, of Eck-
art, of Molinos, of Saint-Martin, even the Imitation of St.
Thomas a Kempis, these contain the grand processes of true
Transcendental Magic, were it fitting to apply a term which
has become almost ridiculous to treasures which might be
disparaged by the association. There must be understood
simply those processes of so-called Theurgic Ceremonial, in
which there is at least no explicit connection with Black
Magic, which not only contain no dealings with evil spirits
for evil purposes, but appear to eschew all such communica-
tion, for whatever purpose. An exception—which, properly
understood, is, however, an exception only on the surface—
should be made in favour of the procedure adopted by the
Church for the expulsion of diabolical powers from persons
in the flesh, not because the phenomena of possession are
necessarily other than pathological, even in those cases
which would appear to be marked and obstinate, but be-
cause, on the terms of the ecclesiastical assumption, the Rite
of Exorcism is a far more exalted Rite than most which ob-
tain in Transcendental Magic. In this matter, as in many
other cases of much higher importance, sufficient justice has
not been done to the position of the Catholic Church. It
should be observed in addition, that while Ceremonial Magic
is concerned with a variety of processes which may obvi-
ously tend to produce in unwary operators the phenomena
which characterise possession, there is scarcely a single pro-

1 By Practical Magic is here intended not the transcendent science said to be
pore by initiation, and to be borally oe from childish attempts to discover


den treasure, to obtain the ring of invisibility, and so forth; the reference is
intended solely to the Magic of the Ceremonial Literature.


24


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


cess In any one of the Rituals—White or Black, Composite
or Transcendental—which makes any pretence of relieving
persons 80 afflicted.’ There is, therefore, no reason to doubt
on which side of hallucination the apparatus of the Rituals
has been developed, and the sympathies of reasonable stu-
dents will be with the honourable institution which con-
demned the practices and sought to liberate the victims,
leaving possesssion itself as an open question, and in this
sense asa side-issue.

Even with the qualification which we have registered, the
| Transcendental Rituals are ex-
ceedingly few. There is—1. The
Enchiridion of Pope Leo the
Third. 2. The Arbatel of Magic.
3. The Celestial Magic of an
anonymous German mystic, en- .
titled ‘‘Theosophia Pneumat-
ica,’? which must be held to
>) J represent and to save enumera-
tion of one or two similar hand-
books. Of these, the first is in-
cluded among the Rituals of
Ceremonial Magic by the in-

TALISMAN OF ARBATBL, vineible ignorance of almost
every person who has undertaken to class it. On the other
hand, the third borrows all its importance from the second,
in which, upon both counts, the interest evidently centres.
As regards its origin, its authorship, and even its scope,


1 There are, of course, innumerable processes for destroying spells and enchant-
ments; among them one occasionally meets with an exorcism to be used in a case
of possession. There is one in the edition of the “Grimoire of Honorius” published
at Rome in 1760. It is supposed to be efficacious both for men and animals afflicted
by Satan. In the edition of 1800 there is another process, which prescribes holy
water for aspersion in the case of a human being, and in that of an animal salt
exorcised with blood drawn from the bewitched creature.


20


The Book of Black Magic


there is, however, considerable mystery. Within the knowl-
edge of the present writer, there are no copies in manu-
script, or none at least which are prior to the end of the
sixteenth century. It appeared in a tiny volume at Basle
and bore the date 1575.1. Back-dating and imputed author-
ship are the two crying bibliographical sins of Grimoires
and magical handbooks, and the antiquity of the ‘‘Ar-
batel’’ rests under a certain suspicion on account of its lit-
erary connections; at the same time it would require the
knowledge of an expert in typography to pronounce cer-
tainly on the reliability of the date indicated. The text is in
Latin, but there is a slender possibility in favour of its being
the work of an Italian.? It makes a reference to Theo-
phrastic Magic, which indicates the influence of Paracelsus,
and, although it is difficult to speak with any certainty,
seems to hint at an early period of that influence, the period,
in fact, of Benedictus Figulus, slightly antedating Rosicru-
cian enthusiasm, and thus accounting for the omission of all
Rosicrucian references, which, in view both of matter and
manner, might have been irresistibly expected had the
work been posterior to the year 1610.

It should be observed that the Arbatel has no connection
with the cycle, hereinafter considered, of the Keys of Solo-
mon, and it is permeated with Christian ideas. The author-
ship is completely unknown. Arbatel, is probably not an
assumed name, but indicative of an instructing or revealing


1Arbatel, De Magia Veterum, Basilez, 1575. The mottoes on the title are
Summum Sapientie Studium and In omnibus consule Dominum, et nihil cogites,
dicas, facias, quod tibt Deus non consuluerit.

2 The possibility is warranted by references in the 30th and 31st Aphorisms to
some obscure points of Italian history. It is said that by a judgment of the
Magicians it was decreed that no Italian should reign over the kingdom of Naptes;
now the monarch at the time was an Italian, and he was dethroned in due course.
To restore the national dynasty the decree must be annulled by those who made it.
A magician of greater power might be able to enforce this, and also the restitution
of a certain Book, Jewel, and Magic Horn, of which the Treasury of Magic has
been despoiled. The mastery of the whole world would pass into the hands of
their possessor.

26


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


Angel. The use of this Hebrew term is, however, peculiar
in connection with the fact that the references to the Old
Testament are few and unimportant, while the sayings of
Christ, and the New Testament narrative generally, are
subjects of continual citation. Solomon, moreover, is not
mentioned in the frequent enumerations of adepts and wise
men,

So far concerning the origin, authorship, and date of the
book. It remains to say that it is incomplete. Of the nine
‘‘T’omes’’ into which it purports to be divided, we possess
only one. It is not unlikely that the rest were never written,
because the author has left us a plan of his entire proposal,
and it is evident that his first book more than once overlaps
what should have followed. As it stands, the ‘‘Arbatel of
Magic’’-is concerned with the most general precepts of
Magic Art—in other words, with the Institutions. It is en-
titled ‘‘Isagoge,’’ which means essential or fundamental in-
struction. The missing books are those of Microcosmical
Magic, or Spiritual Wisdom; Olympic Magic, that is, the
evocation of the Spirits of Olympus; Hesiodiacal and Ho-
meric Magic, being the operations of Caco-daimones;
Roman or Sibylline Magic, concerning Tutelary Spirits;
Pythagorical Magic, dealing with the Genii of the Arts; the
Magic of Apollonius, giving power over the enemies of man-
kind ; Hermetic or Egyptian Magic; and that, finally, which
depends solely on the Word of God, and is called Propheti-
eal Magic.

It is an open question whether all of these books could
have been completed without a proportion of that danger-
ous instruction which makes for Black Magic. The Isagoge,
however, must be exempted from any such charge; the
Seven Septenaries of aphorisms of which it consists contain
many moral and spiritual exhortations, which, if they are


27


The Book of Black Magic


not exactly unhackneyed, are at least quite unexceptionable,
and must indeed rank among the more exalted of their kind.
The initial groups of these aphorisms serve to introduce the
Ritual of the Olympic Spirits, dwelling in the firmament
and in the stars of the firmament, between whom the gov-
ernment of the world is distributed. There are 196°
Olympic Provinces in the entire universe, so that Aratron
has 49, Bethor 42, Phaleg 35, Och 28, Hagith 21, Ophiel 14,
and Phul 7. These provinces are termed visible, but even
as the Seven Septenaries of Arbatel cover the whole ground
of Transcendental Magic, so these seven successive multi-
ples of the same mystical number may most probably be
taken to indicate powers and offices. It is further said that


the Olympic Spirits rule alternately, each for 490 years, .


which would be mere confusion were separate assemblages
of spheres permanently assigned to them.

The powers possessed by these Intelligences are very
curiously set forth. They rule naturally over certain de-
partments and operations of the material world, but outside
these departments they perform the same operations mag-
ically. Thus Och, the prime of Solar things, presides over
the preparation or development of gold naturally in the
veins of the earth—that is to say, he is the Mineralogist in
Chief of Nature; he presides also over the quicker prepara-
tion of the same metal by means of chemical art—that is, he
is the Prince of Alchemists; and, finally, he makes gold in
a moment by Magic. It is in this way that Ceremonial
Magic connects with while it assumes to transcend Hemetic
Art.

There is another curious instruction, with regard to the


1 The original edition of the Arbatel reads 186, and ascribes 32 provinces to
Bethor, which breaks the progression of the septenary and is probably a printer’s
mistake. It is followed, however, by the English and German translators.


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


names and characters of the Spirits. In opposition to much
of the traditional doctrine of Magic, it is affirmed that there
is no power in the figure of any character or in the pronun-
ciation of any name, except in so far as there is a virtue or
office ordained by God to both. The names, moreover, are
not definite, final or real names, whence they differ with
different writers accordingly as these have received them.
The only effectual names are those which are delivered to
an operator by the Spirits themselves, and even then their
efficacy seldom endures beyond forty years. It is, therefore,
better for the student, says the ‘‘ Arbatel,’’ to work only by
the offices of the Spirits, without their names; should he be
pre-ordained to attain the Art of Magic, the other parts of
that Art will offer themselves of their own accord.

The sources of occult wisdom, it proceeds, are, firstly, in
God; secondly, in spiritual essences—that is to say, the
Angelical Hierarchy ; thirdly, in corporal creatures, the ref-
erence being probably to the stgnatura rerum of Paracel-
sus; forthly, in Nature—that is to say, in a knowledge of
the secret virtues of natural things, as, for example, herbs
and precious stones; fifthly, but after a long interval, in
the apostate spirits reserved to the last judgment; ? sixthly,
in the ministers of punishments in hell, which seems to con-
nect with the classical conception of avenging infernal
gods; seventhly, in the people of the elements, that is, the
Salamanders, Sylphs, Undines, and Pigmies.

The secrets deriving from these sources range from the
highest achievements of mystical science * to the bourgeois

1 This reference, taken in connection with the matters proposed to be treated
in the seventh book, points conclusively to the intention of including the govern-
ment of Evil Spirits in the scheme of the “Arbatel.”

2 It should be observed that the mystical achievements are barely mentioned, and
that their attainment is imparted by a spirit possessing the office, which is quite.
opposed to Mysticism. The author of the “Arbatel,” however, considers it good


enough Mysticism, as does Eliphas Lévi, to cause oneself “to be worshipped as a
god,” in virtue of the sigil of Och.


The Book of Black Magic


ambitions of daily life, from the Regeneration of Enoch and
the Knowledge of God, Christ, and His Holy Spirit, wherein
is the perfection of the Microcosm, to the attainment of hon-
ours and dignities, the ingathering of much money, the
foundation of a family, good fortune in mercantile pursuits,
and successful housewifery both in town and country. The
prolongation of life, the transmutation of metals, and the
talismanic cure of all diseases, with other ‘‘paradoxes of
the highest science,’’ also figure in the list.

Meditation, inward contemplation, and the love of God
are the chief aids to the acquisition of Magic Art, together
with great faith, strict taciturnity, and even justice in the
things of daily life. Finally, a true magician is brought
forth as such from his mother’s womb; others who assume
the function will be unhappy..-


The powers and offices of the Seven Olympic Spirits are
as follows; ARATRON governs those
things which are ascribed astronom-
ically to Saturn. He can convert
any living organism, plant, or ani-
mal into stone, and that in a moment

- of time; he can also change coals into

. treasure, and treasure into coals; he

THE CHARACTER OF ARATRON. gives familiars, and reconciles sub-
terranean spirits to men; he teaches Alchemy, Magic, and


1 When his highest authorities disagree, the occult student is liable to get at
the truth, and will find occasionally that it is not at either end, nor yet in the middle.
It is edifying to compare this express statement of a ruling ceremonial process with
another, not less express, which we owe to the reconstruction of all the processes
and the reputed recoverer of the true practice of Magic. “Furthermore, certain
physical organizations are better adapted than others for the revelations of the
occult world; there are sensitive and sympathetic natures, with whom intuition in
the astral light is, so to speak, inborn; certain afflictions and certain complaints


30


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


Medicine, imparts the secret of invisibility, makes the bar-
ren fruitful, and, lastly, confers long life. He should be
invoked on a Saturday, in the first hour of the day,’ making
use of his character, given and confirmed by himself.


The affairs of Jupiter are administered by BrernHor, who
responds quickly when called. The person dignified by his
character may be exalted to illus-
trious positions, and obtain large
treasures. He reconciles the Spirits
of the Air to man, so that they will
give true answers, transport pre-
cious stones, and compose medicines
having miraculous effects. Bethor
also grants familiars of the firmament, and can prolong life
to seven hundred years, subject to the will of God. —


THB CHARACTER OF BETHOR.


PHALEG governs the things

which are attributed to Mars. a
The person who possesses his
character is raised by him to
great honour in military affairs.


THD CHARACTER OF PHALEG. ,


can modify the nervous system, and, independently of the concurrence of the will,
may convert it into a divinatory apparatus of less or more perfection; but these
phenomena are exceptional, and generally magical power should, and can, be
acquired by perseverance and labour.’—“Doctrine and Ritual of Transcendent
Magic,” by Eliphas Lévi, English translation by A. E. Waite, p. 196. In this case
the genius of enlightened differentiation rests entirely upon the later adept. As a
matter of fact, occult writers have always recognized that there is the Natural

ician and the Magician according to Art. Vel sanctum invenit, vel sanctum
facit has been said of Magic, and so also magical knowledge means magical power ;
where it does not find it, it brings it. But such knowledge is not of Rituals or
Grimoires, of Arbatel or another.


NOTH. de Laurence Oo. publish the id authentic American edition of “The Doctrine
and Ritual of Transcendent Magic” by phases Levi.


1See Part II, c. 6.
31


The Book of Black Magic


Solar interests are administered by OcH, who prolongs
life to six hundred years with perfect
health, imparts great wisdom, gives ex-
cellent (familiar) spirits, composes per-
fect medicines, converts any substance
into the purest of metals, or into precious
stones, also bestows gold and a purse,

THE CHARACTER OF quaintly described by the English trans-

re lator of the ‘‘Arbatel’”’ as ‘‘springing

with gold.’’ He causes the possessor of his character to be
worshipped as a god by the kings of the whole world.


The government of Venereal
concerns is entrusted to Haaira,
and the person possessing his char-
acter is adorned with all beauty.
He converts copper into gold in a

THE CHARACTER or Hacira,.Moment and gold instantaneously
into copper; he also gives faithful serving spirits.


OpHIEL is the ruler of those things
which are attributed to Mercury; he
gives familiar spirits, teaches all arts,

- and enables the possessor of his char-
acter to change quicksilver immedi-
ately into the Philosopher’s Stone.


THH CHARACTER OF
OPHIBL.


Lunary concerns are under the government of PHUL,


90


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


who truly transmutes all metals into silver, heals dropsy,
and provides Spirits of the Water, who serve

men in a corporal and visible form; he also

prolongs life to three hundred years.


Legions of inferior spirits are commanded
by each of the Governors, who also have Kings,
Princes, Presidents, Dukes, and Ministers rul-
ing under them, Ceremonial Magic usually
administers the hierarchies upon a colossal
scale. The invocation of the Governors is sim-
ple. It is performed in the day and hour of __) opac.
the planet which is in correspondence with the T#=® OF PHUL.
Olympic Intelligence by means of the following :—


PRAYER.


O Eternal and Omnipotent God, who hast ordained the
whole creation for Thy praise and Thy glory, as also for the
salvation of man, I beseech Thee to send Thy Spirit N., of
the Solor Race,’ that he may instruct me concerning those
things about which I design to ask him [or that he may
bring me medicine against the dropsy, &c.]. Nevertheless,
not my will, but Thine be done, through Jesus Christ, Thine
only-begotten Son, who is our Lord. Amen.

Unless the Spirit, in the words of Robert Turner, be
‘‘familiarly addicted’’ to the operator, he should not be de-
tained above one hour, and should in either case be ‘“‘li-
censed to depart’’ as follows :—


1 There is merely a typical form subject to variations according to the spirit who
is evoked.
30


Nichael
ibe aces Rah
i
aia een
; BX BWR
29S AO


BYP Syum Soon 9


Cassel 2x f
= P79 SR


3342


Digitized by Google


The Book of Black Magic


Tur DISCHARGE.


Forasmuch as thou camest in peace and quietness, hav-
ing also answered unto my petitions, I give thanks unto
God, in whose Name thou camest. Now mayst thou depart
in peace unto thine own order, but return unto me again,
when I shall call thee by thy name, or by thine order, or by
thine office, which is granted from the Creator. Amen.
[Then add:] Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine
heart be hasty to utter anything before God: for God is in
heaven, and thou art upon earth; therefore let thy words
be few. For a dream cometh through the multitude of busi-
ness, and a fool’s voice is known by multitude of words.—
Eccles. v. 3, 4. |


§ 2. Theosophta Pneumatica.


In the year 1686, the ‘‘Arbatel’’ was translated into
German, and in the same year—possibly in the same volume
—appeared, also in German, a work entitled ‘‘The Little
Keys of Solomon”’ or Theosophia Pneumatica.’ There are
no examples of these editions in the British Museum, and
inquiry has failed to elicit any particulars concerning them.
Both are reprinted, together with other specimens of An-
cient Magical Literature, to illustrate the Faust legend, in
the third volume of Scheible’s Das Kloster.? The transla-
tion of the ‘‘Arbatel’’ makes no reference to the previous
edition in Latin, and Theosophta Pneumatica nowhere
states that it is an adaptation of the earlier work. The-
attribution to Solomon is, of course, wholly contrary to the
spirit of the Ritual, and betrays so far the hand of ignor-
ance. |

1 Sabie Salomonis vel Theosophia Pneum


J. e, Das Kloster. W eltlich und Caitich Meist aus der Altern
Deutschen Pelks-Lucratur, 12 vols., Stuttgart, 1845-49.
34.


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


The adapter had, however, been subject to other occult
influences besides the ‘‘Arbatel.’’ He applies the term Tal-
mid’ to the magical aspirant, and this is not used by the
original. The adaptation has been well executed and makes
for additional clearness. The transcendental portions are
slightly accentuated; it is said in one place that the exalta-
tion of prayer is the end of the whole Mystery, and that
such exaltation will never be denied to the true seeker, who
is recommended on no account to undervalue his own pray-
ers. This is better mysticism than the corresponding pas-
sage in the ‘‘ Arbatel’’ itself. There is also an addendum on
Transcendental Medicine, which, so far as can be known, is
original, and it is as curious as. anything in the literature
with which we are dealing.?


1 There is a curious history attaching to this word, but it can be elucidated only
by a Hebrew scholar. It seems to be of late introduction, though it derives from
Coo to learn. It represents a stage of initiation in certain mystical societies
of Islam.
_ #As it is unlikely that Theosophia Pneumatica will ever be printed in English,
it may be well to give a summary of its appendix, that is to say, of the only section
of this work which differs generically from the “Arbatel.” Affirming that all
things are threefold, from the Divine Triad of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to
man, who is composed of the fleshly body, the sensitive soul, and the rational
spirit, it defines the human principles as follows; The body is of earth; the
sensitive soul is of the four elements, but derives through the stars, and is the seat
of understanding and genius for arts and sciences; the rational spirit is from
God absolutely; the sphere of its activity is celestial and divine, and divine inspira-
tion and influence pass through it to the material body. The ee a house
wherein soul and spirit abide and perform their functions, having been married
therein by God. At the same time they strive daily with one another, till the
irit overcomes the soul, and thus attains regeneration. There are two kinds of
eath—that which results from the destruction of vital physical organs by disease
or injury, and that which results from the destruction of the sensitive soul |
envenomed astral influences. Physical disintegration and flight of the divine spirit
follow in either case. The spirit may also be recalled by the direct action of the
will of God, without disease or injury. Man is therefore poised upon three pillars:
if one of them fall or break, the man dies. He should preserve and embalm his
body against infectious diseases, for the living organism can be embalmed better
than_a corpse. He should also combat the venomous influences of baleful stars,
for Elohim has gifted men with the power to compose characters that will destroy
such influences. It is impossible, however, to cure those diseases with which God
in His unsearchable compassion may Himself scourge mankind; vain are the best
medicines and vain the highest arcana, vain is p. ex. umicorn., vain is the potent
aurum, vain the spirttus auri, vain the quinta essentia; Azoth itself is useless; the
lapis philosophorum is made void. The skilled physician will immediately discover
such a case in a patient. All other diseases deriving from the planets, from the
natural corruption of the earth, or from neglect, may be cured by natural remedies


39


The Book of Black Magic
§ 3. The Enchiridion of Pope Leo.


We come now to the ‘‘Enchiridion of Pope Leo III.,
which, as already indicated, is not a book of Ceremonial
Magic; it is necessary, however, to include it in this notice,
_and to analyze it at some length, so as to establish its true
character. Misconceptions and mistakes upon a subject so
obscure as Magical Rituals are, speaking generally, excus-
able enough, but in this case they are found where they are
not excusable, namely, among those persons who have un-
dertaken to give account of the work. Catholic bibliograph-
ers of the occult sciences, or at least the anonymous author
of the occult encyclopedia in Migne’s great series, are very
angry at the pontifical attribution, and stigmatise the
‘‘Enchiridion’’ as an infamous storehouse of Black Magic.
Eliphas Lévi, who may possibly have read it—because oc-
easionally he seems to have glanced at his authors—magni-
fies its occult importance by stating that it has never been
printed with its true figures. In the absence of all evidence
on this point, it is impossible to entertain it seriously. The
‘*Enchiridion’’ is assuredly not a book of Black Magic, nor
does it lend itself to the introduction of other figures than
those which appear in it, and these are few and simple.
Finally Alfred Maury, in La Magic et l’Astrologie dan’
VAntiquité et au Moyen Age, describes the ‘‘Enchiridion’’
as a work on Sorcery, bearing traces of Neo-Platonic, and
even older, influences. He also evidently had not read it,
and is a personage of sufficient consequence to deserve se-
vere censure for following such an evil principle of criti-
cism.


—by herbs, balms, spices, oils, metals, or preparations of alchemy. When natural
diseases become incurable, it is through the ignorance or indocility of man. This
Appendix of Theosophia Pneumatica not only indicates the influence but repro-
duces the terminology of Paracelsus.


36


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


The legend of the ‘‘Enchiridion’’ is as follows. When
Charlemagne was leaving Rome after his coronation by Lev
IIL., that pontiff presented him with a memorial of the visit
in the shape of a collection of prayers to which wonderful
virtues were attributed. Whosoever bore the little work
upon his person with the respect due to Holy Scripture,
and recited it daily to the honour of God, would never be
overcome by his enemies, would pass unscathed through all
perils, and the Divine protection would abide with him to
the end of his days. These things took place in the year
800. In the year 1523 the ‘‘Enchiridion”’ is supposed to
have been printed at Rome for the first time. Thus broadly
outlined, there is nothing in this legend to offend possibility
or to raise very serious objection to the authorship. The
reputed connection with occult science would indeed seem
the chief presumption against it, because there never was a
literature so founded in forgery as that of Magic, except
the sister science of Alchemy. When we come, however, to
examine the work at first hand, the case against it assumes
a different aspect, and it is condemned out of its own mouth.
While it is not a Ritual of Magic, it is also certainly not a
simple collection of devotions designed to fortify the person
making use of them against dangers of body and soul by
the operation of Divine grace; it is rather a collection of
charms cast in the form of prayers, and is quite opposed in
its spirit to the devotional spirit of the Church; further-
more, it is concerned with worldly advantages far more than
with those of a spiritual kind. The work opens by pointing
out that of all the sovereign princes of past ages there was
none more fortunate than Charlemagne, and the source of
his great prosperity is acknowledged by him in a letter of
thanks addressed to Pope Leo, the original of which, it is
affirmed, may still be seen in the Library of the Vatican,

37


The Book of Black Magic


written with the monarch’s own hand. He states therein
that since his reception of a little volume entitled ‘‘Enchi-
ridion,’’ filled with special prayers and mysterious figures,
sent by His Holiness as a precious gift, he has never ceased
to be fortunate, and that of all things in the universe which
are capable of harming man, not one has shown any malig-
nity against him, in gratitude for which he proposes to de-
vote himself and all that is his to the service of his bene-
factor. The letter is in Latin; the monarch styles himself
Carolus Magnus, which appears highly unlikely, and he
terms the pontiff Summus Antistitum Antistites, but this is
not in itself improbable, as the Papal claim to Episcopal
supremacy was fully developed at the beginning of the ninth
century.

It is needless to say that there is no such document pre-
served in the Vatican Library; furthermore, there are no
letters of Charlemagne extant, and, despite the encourage-
ment he gave to men of learning and the Academy men-
tioned by Alcuin, it is not at all certain that he could either
read or write. Lastly, while it is quite true that his em-
pire included Germany, as it did also Holland, Belgium,
Switzerland, and part of Italy, after his coronation it is
much more probable that he would have styled himself
Emperor of the Romans. There is, in fact no colourable
pretence of genuineness about the so-called autograph
letter. |

This fact being established, we may proceed to the con-
sideration of the alleged date of publication—Rome, 1523.
This edition is mentioned by Pierre Christian in his His-
toire de la Magie, and he defends the authenticity of the
‘‘Enchiridion”’ on the ground, among others, that it passed
unchallenged in the Eternal City during such a pontificate
asthatof Clement VII. A second edition is said to have been

38


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


printed at Rome in 1606; between 1584 and 1633 it ap-
peared four times at Lyons and once at Mayence. In 1660
it was published for the last time at Rome. Unfortunately
for the purposes of this criticism, the examples of 1633 and
1660 have been alone available. The first claims to be nu-
perrime mendis omnibus purgatum, but it has been evi-
dently in the hands of a Grimoire maker, and it appears to
have been edited and extended in the Grimoire interest.’
This is certain, but it is impossible to say how much beyond
the ‘‘Seven Mysterious Orisons’’ connected with the name
of Pope Leo are to be found in the original, or whether the
original was antedated. Outside these Orisons the modern
accent of the work is unmistakable, and it is difficult to
understand how any instructed person, much less a biblio-
phile like M. Christian, could have been deceived by it.
The work itself, as already said, is simply a collection of
religious charms, effectual against all the perils to which
every sort and condition of men are made subject on land,
on water, from open and secret enemies, from the bites of
wild and rabid beasts, from poisons, from fire, from tem-
pests. While it thus ensures against evil, it gives happiness
in domestic matters and in the enterprises which contribute
to prosperity and to the pleasures of a contented life, ‘‘only
the instructions must be followed as accurately as human
weakness will allow.’’ Fortunately they are more simple
than the Grimoires. When a copy of the book has been
secured, it must be placed in a small bag of new leather, so
that it may be kept clean. A vow must be made to carry it
as far as practicable on one’s person, and to read with at-


1This appears more evidently in the last Roman edition, which pretends to be
based on all those which preceded it, including im press oo pu ublished at Parma,
Ancona, and Frankfort, ule are now generally un e editor has, more-
over, altered and rearranged, omitted and added at choice. He has supplied also
a Key to the whole wor which is a short process for the government of
guint
39


The Book of Black Magic


tentive devotion at least one page daily. If a specific danger
be apprehended, a page suitable to its nature should be se-
lected. Reading must be done upon the knees, with the face
turned to the east; ‘‘so did Charlemagne invariably.’’
Furthermore, works of piety must be performed in honour
of the celestial genii whose benign influence it is desired to
attract; alms also must be given to the poor, ‘‘as this is
of all things most pleasing unto such spirits, for thereby
we become their coadjutors and friends, the economy of the
universe being committed to them by the Creator.”’

Here we have the magical doctrine concerning planetary
intelligences which connects the ‘‘Enchiridion’”’ with the
‘*Arbatel,’’ and the hint of ‘‘secondary deities’’ which con-
nects it with Trithemius.'* :

The In Principio, or first chapter of the Gospel accord-
ing to St. John, is declared to be the most potent of all the
devotions in the book, and it is to be recited the most fre-
quently. The mysterious figures are said to have been ex-
tracted from the rarest manuscripts which antiquity has
committed to us, and their virtue is not only highly effica-
cious, but so easily put in motion, that it is enough for this
purpose to carry the work reverently on one’s person. ‘‘ Eix-
perience will remove any doubt which may be felt in this |
respect, while the scruples which may be occasioned by the
idea that there is Magic or superstition herein will be ban-
ished by a slight exercise of reason.”’

As to this latter point, it is said that a little reflection
upon the infinite number of secret sympathies and antip-
athies found in different beings here below will explain how
it is that such figures may be in sympathy with the Celestial


Intelligences which govern this vast universe.


1 Joannis Tritemii, Abbatis Spanheymene De Septem Secundtis, id est. Intelli-
gents, sive Spiritibus, Orbes post Deum Moventibus, &c. Coloniz, 1567. The
treatise is well known, or at least much talked of, and this is the original edition,
belonging to the date claimed for It.


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


It will scarcely be necessary to observe that the doctrine
of sympathies and antipathies is the very essence of Nat-
ural Magic, and connects it with the higher branches. The
mysterious figures referred to were originally nine in num-
ber, and in most cases recur several times. The most con-
spicuous is the Labarum of Constantine and the Tau
symbol, which Levi connects with the Tarot.

The apparently unmeaning enumeration of various Di-
vine Names is a special characteristic of Ceremonial Magic,
and certainly makes the ‘‘Enchiridion’’ interlink with a
eycle of literature from which it is otherwise distinct. There
is, indeed, little specific difference between the prayers
which incorporate them and the Invocations which swarm
in the Rituals. It may be added that the use of such Di-
vine Names is supported by reference to the Angelical
Theology of Dionysius.

The prefatory matter ends at this point. The prose of
the Gospel of St. John follows, with versicles and a praver.
Next come the Seven Penitential Psalms, with the Litany
of the Saints, after which are the ‘‘Mysterious Prayers of
Pope Leo,’’ followed by a multitude of others not less mvs-
terious, and prevailing against human fragility, and so
forth. There are prayers for voyages, prayers addressed
to the Cross, and then under the Tau symbol, commencing
with the curious exclamation, Per stgnum >k Domine Tau,
libera me, there follows a long conjuration, as express as
anything in Magic, designed to prevent the petitioner from
injury by any steel weapons whatsoever. Forming part of
this ceremony is the the pseudo-epistle addressed by Jesus
Christ to King Abgar, explaining why our Saviour could
not come Himself to that monarch, and promising to send
His disciple Thaddeus when He had fulfilled the work given
Him by His Father. It goes on to say that Christ has writ-

41


411,


Digitized by Google


The Book of Black Magic


ten it with His own hand, and that wheresoever the recipient
shall be, in house or field, by sea or stream, sive in pre lio
Paganorum seu Chrisitanorum (!) bis enemy shall never
prevail over him.’ The king recived the epistle with many
tears and prayers, all which being duly described, the con-
juration of the bacult, gladu, lancea,.enses, cultelli, sagitta,
claves, funes, et omma alta genera armorum, is continued.

As it is difficult to say where the original ‘‘Enchiridion’’
actually begins, so it is uncertain where it ends. A variety
of miscellaneous prayers are, however, attributed to well-
known saints quite outside the Carlovingian period, and to
Innocent IV. and John X., without prejudice to a further
orison of the great Pope Leo himself. Then come the ‘‘curi-
ous secrets’’—to conciliate and discover one’s proper gen-
ius, to become invulnerable, to prevent a gun from going
off, to behold a future husband or wife, all effected by means
of formal prayers—a kind of royal road to the chief ends
of Magic, without apparently exceeding the devotional dis-
cipline of the Church.

To complete the analysis of this curious collection, its
most important practical part is here added, namely :—


§ 4. The Seven Mysterious Ortsons.
SUNDAY.


‘Pater noster, dc. Deliver me, O Lord, I beseech Thee,
me even, thy creature, N., from all evils past, present, and
to come, whether of body or soul; grant me peace and health
in Thy goodness; incline favourably unto me Thy creature,
by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of Thy
holy apostles, Peter, Paul, Andrew, and of all the saints.


1For this legend, see Fabricius, Cod. Apoc. N.T., I, p. 317.


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


Vouchsafe peace unto Thy creature, and health during all
iny life, so that, strengthened by the mainstay of Thy mercy,
I may never be the slave of sin, nor go in fear of any trouble,
through the same Jesus Christ Thy Son, our Saviour, who,
being truly God, liveth and reigneth in the unity of the Holy
Spirit for ever and ever, Amen. May the peace of the Lord
be always with me, Amen. May that peace, O Lord, which
Thou didst leave to Thy disciples abide ever with power in .
my heart, standing always between me and my enemies, both
visible and invisible, Amen. May the peace of the Lord,
His countenance, His body, His blood, assist, console, and
protect me, Thy creature, N., in my soul and my body,
Amen. Lamb of God, who didst deign to be born of the
Virgin Mary, who didst cleanse the world from its sins upon
the Cross, have pity on my soul and my body. O Christ,
Lamb of God, immolated for the salvation of the world, have
pity on my soul and my body. Lamb of God, by whom all
the faithful are saved, give unto me Thy peace, to remain
with me for ever, both in this life and that which is to come,
Amen.


MonpDayY.


O great God, by whom all things have been set free, de-
liver me also from all evil. O great God, who hast granted
Thy consolation unto all beings, grant it also unto me. O
great God, who hast succoured and assisted all things, aid
me also, and succour me in all my necessities and miseries,
my enterprises and dangers; deliver me from all the hin-
drances and snares of my enemies, both visible and invisible,
in the Name of the Father who created the whole world >}s,
in the Name of the Son who hath redeemed it >, in the name
of the Holy Ghost who hath accomplished the entire law in its


43


The Book of Black Magic


perfection. I cast myself utterly into Thine arms, and place
myself unreservedly under thy holy protection, Amen.
May the blessing of God the Father Almighty, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, be always with me >, Amen. May
the blessing of God the Father, who by His only Word hath
made all things, be with me for ever>, Amen. May the
blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the great living
God, be with me for ever >, Amen. May the blessing and
seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost be with me for ever >«, Amen.
May the blessing of the Virgin Mary, and of her Son, be
with me for ever, Amen.


TUESDAY.


May the blessing and consecration of the bread and of
the wine, which our Lord Jesus Christ made when He gave
them to His disciples and said unto them: Take and eat
ye all of this, for this is My Body which shall be delivered
for you, in remembrance of Me and for the remission of all
sins, be with me for ever >. May the blessing of the Holy
Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Thrones, Dominations,
Cherubim and Seraphim, be with me for ever>, Amen.
May the blessing of the patriarchs and prophets, apostles,
martyrs, confessors, virgins, and of all the saints of God,
be with me for ever >, Amen. May the blessing of all the
heavens of God be with me for ever>*, Amen. May the
majesty of God Omnipotent sustain and protect me; may
His eternal goodness lead me; may His boundless charity
inflame me; may His supreme divinity direct me; may the
power of the Father preserve me; may the wisdom of the
Son enliven me; may the virtue of the Holy Ghost stand
always between me and my enemies, both visible and invis-
ible. Power of the Father, strengthen me; wisdom of the

44


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


Son, enlighten me; consolation of the Holy Ghost, comfort
me. The Father is peace, the Son is Life, the Holy Ghost
is the consoling and saving remedy, Amen. May the Divin-
ity of God bless me, Amen. May His piety warm me; may
His love preserve me. O Jesus Christ, Son of the living
God, have pity upon me a poor sinner.


WEDNESDAY.


O Emmanuel, defend me against the malignant enemy,
and against all my enemies, visible and invisible, and de-
liver me from all evil. Jesus Christ the King hath come in
peace, God made man, who hath suffered patiently for us.
May Jesus Christ, the gentle King, stand always for my
defence between me and my enemies, Amen. Jesus Christ
triumphs, Jesus Christ reigns, Jesus Christ commands.
May Jesus Christ deliver me from all evils for ever, Amen.
May Jesus Christ vouchsafe me grace to triumph over all
my adversaries, Amen. Behold the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Fly, therefore, O my enemies, at the sight
thereof; the Lion of the Tribe of Juda and of the Race of
David hath conquered. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Sav-
iour of the world, save and succour me. Thou who hast pur-
chased me by Thy Cross and Thy Blood, succour me, I con-
jure Thee, my God. O Agios, O Theos, Agios, Ischyros,
Agios, Athanatos, Elieson, Himas, Holy God, Strong God,
Merciful and Immortal God, have pity upon me Thy crea-
ture, N. Sustain me, O Lord; forsake me not, reject not my
prayers, O Thou, the God of my salvation. Do Thou assist
me always, O God of my salvation.

45


The Book of Black Magic


THURSDAY.


Enlighten mine eyes with true light, that they may never
be closed in eternal sleep, lest mine enemy should say: I
have prevailed over him. So long as the Lord is with me I
will not fear the malice of my enemies. O most sweet Jesus,
preserve me, aid me, save me; at the name of Jesus let every
knee bow, in heaven, on earth, and in hell, and let every
tongue confess openly that Jesus Christ is in the glory of
His Father, Amen. I know beyond doubt that in what day
soever I shall call upon the Lord, in the same hour shall I
be saved. O most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the
great living God, thou hast performed most mighty miracles
by the sole power of Thy most precious name, and hast
enriched the poor most abundantly, so that by force thereof
the demons flee away, the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame
walk erect, the dumb speak, the lepers are cleansed, the
sick cured, the dead raised up; for wheresoever the most
sweet Name of Jesus is pronouneed, the ear is ravished and
the mouth is filled with pleasant savour; at that one utter-
ance, I repeat, the demons take flight, every knee is bent,
all temptations, even the worst, are scattered, all infirmities
are healed, all disputes and conflicts between the world, the
flesh, and the devil are ended, and the soul is filled with
every heavenly delight; for whosoever invoketh or shall
invoke this holy Name of God is and shall be saved, this
holy Name pronounced by the angel even before His con-
ception in the womb of the Holy Virgin.


FRIDAY.


O sacred Name, Name which strengthens the heart of
man, Name of life, of salvation, of joy, precious Name, re-
splendent, glorious, agreeable Name, which fortifies the sin-

46


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


ner, Name which saves, conserves, leads, and rules all. May
it please Thee, therefore, most precious Jesus, by the power
of this same (Name of) Jesus, to drive away the demon
from me; enlighten me, O Lord, for I am blind; remove my
deafness ; set me upright, who am lame; give me speech, who
am dumb; cleanse my leprosy; restore me to health, who am
sick; raise me up, for I am dead; give me life once more,
and enrich me in all my parts, within and without, so that,
furnished and fortified by Thy holy Name, I may abide al-
ways in Thee, praising and honouring Thee, because all is
due to Thee, and Thou only art worthy to be glorified, the
Lord and eternal Son of God, in whom all things rejoice,
and by whom all are governed. Praise, honour, and glory,
be given Thee for ever and ever, Amen. May Jesus be al.
ways in my heart and in my breast, Amen. May our Lord
Jesus Christ be ever within me, may He establish me for
ever, may He be around me and preserve me; may He be
before me and lead me; may He be behind me and guard me;
may He be above me and bless me; may He be within me
and give me life; may He be near me and rule me; may He
be beneath me and fortify me; may He be always with me
and deliver me from all the pains of eternal death, who liv-
eth and reigneth for ever and ever, Amen.


S aTURDAY.


Jesus, Son of Mary, salvation of the world, may the Lord
look favourably upon me, with mildness and propitiation;
may He give me a holy and willing spirit, to respect and
honour Him only, who is the Liberator of the world. On
Him could no one lay hand, for His hour was not yet come—
He who is, who was, who shall remain, God and man, the
beginning and the end. May this prayer which I offer unto

47


The Book of Black Magic


Him deliver me eternally from my enemies, Amen. Jesus
of Nazareth, King of the Jews, honourable title, Son of the
Virgin Mary, have pity upon me, a poor sinner, and lead
me, according to Thy loving-kindness, in the way of eternal
salvation, Amen. Now Jesus, knowing what things must
come to pass concerning Him, came forward and said unto
them: Whom seek ye? They answered Him: Jesus of Naz-
areth. But Jesus said unto them: Iam He. And Judas,
who was to deliver Him, was with them. As soon then as
He had said unto them: I am He, they fell backward upon
the earth. Then asked He them again: Whom seek ye?
And they said: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered: I
have told you that I am He; if therefore ye seek Me, let
these go their way (speaking of His disciples). The lance,
the nails, the cross >k, the thorns, the death which I have
endured, prove that I have effaced and expiated the crimes
of the unfortunate. Preserve me, O Lord Jesus Christ,
from all afflictions of poverty and from the snares of my
enemies. May the five wounds of our Lord be unto me an
everlasting remedy. Jesus is the Way>k, Jesus is the
Life >, Jesus is the Truth >k, Jesus has suffered >, Jesus
has been crucified >, Jesus, Son of the living God, have
pity on me >. Now, Jesus passing went through the midst
of them, and no one could place his murderous hand upon
Jesus, because His hour was not yet come.


While these prayers are in some respects curious enough,
they compare quite unfavourably with the simple good sense
which characterises those of the Roman Liturgy; they are
inexact in their references and confused in their method,
and no person who seriously considers them will sustain the
early date which is claimed for them. Their period is sub-
sequent to the Renaissance, and the ignorance of liturgical


48


The Rituals of Transcendental Magic


formule which they show, in common with all similar for-
geries, makes it doubtful whether they are the work of an
ecclesiastic at all. In any case they are clumsy imitations,
the product of an unskilful hand.


§ 5. Summary of Transcendental Magic.


This concludes our examination of the Rituals of Tran-
scendental Magic, comprising all those to which any currency
has been given. There are no doubt other treatises which
exist only in manuscript and possess no literary history, but
they scarcely come within the scope of the present inquiry.
Such possibly is the ‘‘Book of Sacred Magic’’ in the Library
of the Arsenal, Paris, while a few others which connect par-
tially with the higher branches of ceremonial practice have
been noted briefly in the first chapter.

The general conclusion which must follow from the ex-
amination is not of a favourable kind. As premised at the
outset, the Rituals with which we have been dealing are not
worthy of the name Transcendental. We have, on the one
hand, a collection of prayers, falsely attributed and modern
in their origin, to which no occult significance can be rea-
sonably attached. Devotionally they are innocent enough;
applied after the manner of a charm, they are offices of vain
observance. On the other hand, we have a bald rite for the
Invocation of Olympic Spirits, which, despite the grandilo-
quent claims of the unknown author, is rather childish than
exalted, for it may be assumed that no person is naive
enough at the present day to take the angelical offices lit-
erally, and to believe, for example, that by the evocation of
Aratron the contents of his coal-cellar will be transformed
into rea] treasures. Transcendental Magic is, therefore,
hyperbolical in its promises, while these from the mystical
standpoint would be frivolous if they could be construed

49


481,


Digitized by Google 7


The Book of Black Magic


literally. The occult student will derive no light from such
processes, but the subject is at the same time a very curious
and fantastic branch of bibliographical research, in which
we have been able, moreover, to clear up some doubtful
points, and in this sense it has been worth prosecuting.


CHAPTER III -


Composite Rituals
$1. The Key of Solomon the King.


Y far the most important class of Magical Rituals is
B that which incorporates elements both of Black and
' White procedure. For convenience of treatment
these are here termed Composite. At the head of all, and,
within certain limits, the inspiration and the source of all,
stands the ‘‘ Key of Solomon,’’ with its complement, in many
respects more important than itself, the ‘‘Lemegeton, or
Lesser Key,’’ sometimes attributed to Solomon Rabbi; the
Rabbi and the monarch are, however, one and the same.
The other Rituals which will be treated in this class are the
so-called ‘‘Fourth Book of Cornelius Agrippa’’ and the
‘Magical Elements’’ of Peter of Abano. The occult student
has been taught to regard these works as dealing exclusively
with White Magic, and it is part of the present design to
indicate for the first time the mixed character of their
proceedings. The innumerable Rituals of Magic which re-
main in MS. and are never likely to be printed, belong also,
with few exceptions, to the composite class, but, setting the
‘‘Lemegeton”’ aside, to which every prominence should be
given, they have had little influence, and being, therefore,
of no moment to the history of the occult sciences, will not
demand further consideration than has already been ac-
corded some of them in the slight sketch at the close of the
first chapter.


51


The Book of Black Magic


The existence of Mr. Mathers’ admirable edition of the
‘Key of Solomon,’’ * which is still in print, although costly,
and therefore not so readily accessible, must be held to re-
move the necessity for entering into a detailed account of
the contents of that curious work. So far as it has been
incorporated by the later makers of Grimoires, it will be
found, with its Goétic variations, in the Second Part. We
have here only to consider the question of its antiquity and
to establish its true character.

The “‘Key of Solomon”’ proper is familiar to scholars in
Latin, French, Italian, and one or two German MSS. The
oldest codex used by the English editor is in contracted
Latin, and belongs to the sixteenth century. It is preserved
in the British Museum. It 1s possible that older MSS. may
exist in Continental libraries, but those of the Bibliotheque
Nationale and of the Arsenal at Paris are of later date.?
The majority of known MSS. are in the French language.
It is, however, claimed that the work was written originally
in Hebrew. In this claim there is nothing essentially im-
probable, and, assuming that it is well founded, it is not
unlikely that the original may still exist. The large Hebrew
literature of the Middle Ages has been only imperfectly
explored, especially in that part which connects with practi-
eal Magic. The knavish methods which have ruled in the
manufacture of most magical books largely discount the
probability with which we are dealing, and the mere affir-


1“The Key of Solomon the King (Clavicula Salomonis), now first translated
and edited from ancient MSS. in the British Museum.” By S. Liddell Macgregor
Mathers. With plates, George Redway.

2 As regards the Arsenal, ro are ail of the eighteenth century. Les Clavicules
de Rabbi Salomon, 2346 (72 ae. claims to be literally translated from the
Hebrew text into French. 5348 (75 S.A.F.) is entitled Livre de la Clavicule de
Salomon, Roy dvs Hébreux; it is said to have been oS Ore. Ne Hebrew
into Italian by Abraham Colorno, and thence into French. oe) ro
Les Vrais Clavicules du Ro Salomon, traduitte (sic) de Hébseux pa rmadel.
2350 (78 S.A.F.) is entitled Le Secret des Secrets, autrement Le Clavicule de Salo-
mon, ow le véritable venue Finally, there is the Livre Second de la Clavicule
de.Salomon 2791 (76 S.A.F.).

52


Composite Rituals


mation in an MS. cannot, under such circumstances, be re-
garded as evidence. No Hebrew scholar is acquainted at
the present day with such an original, and three hundred
years back the matter, according to P. Christian, was in-
volved in precisely the same uncertainty, for at the end of
the sixteenth century the learned Jesuit, Gretser, states
that it was unknown, but that there was a Greek translation
in the library of the Duke of Bavaria. The present where-
abouts of this highly important MS. we have failed to trace.
In the eighteenth century the Abbe d’Artigny mentions va-
rious examples in Latin, and also an edition printed in 1655,
which is not only unknown to Mr. Mathers, but seemingly to
all modern bibliographers.*

Leaving the language of the original an open question, it
is clear that, in either case, there is no ground for attribut-
ing to the ‘‘Key of Solomon’”’ in its present form a higher
antiquity than the fourteenth or fifteenth century, at which


1 Christian’s reference is, however, a mere travesty of some information found
in the Nouveaux Mémoires d'Histoire, de Critique, et de Littérature, par M. l’Abbé
d’Artigny, 7 vols. Paris, 1749-1756. The fourth article in the first volume is
entitled, “Concerning some pretended Books of Magic, with an Extract from the
Clavicles of Solomon.” It enumerates three works which, under this title, were
current at the time in the French language, and a fourth in Latin, Clavicula Salo-
mons ad Filium Roboam. A Liber Pentaculorum is also mentioned, in a way
which leaves it to be inferred that it is the Key of Solomon under another title,
but it is probably the Latin version of the Sepher Raziel. Whether any of these
works were printed does not explicitly appear, and the Abbé, like Christian him-
self, knew very little of his subject. It is he, however, who supplies the informa-
tion concerning Gretser, but it reads very differently. ‘Perhaps this (Liber Penta-
culorum) is the same as the treatise De Necromantia ad Filium Roboam, which
Father Gretser, a learned German peat had seen written in Greek in the library
of the Duke of Bavaria.” The collected works of Gretser are in seventeen folio
volumes, and there are limits to research. It may be affirmed, however, that the
Catalogus Codicum Manuscriptorum Bibliothece Regie Bavaria, auctore Ignatio
Hardt, ejusdem bibliothece subprefecto, 5 vols., Manarchii, 1806, does not mention
such a work. The reference to the printed edition of the Clavicle occurs at
pp. 36, 37 of D’Artigny’s article, and describes it as one of 125 pp. in quarto
without name of place or printer. The frontispiece (? title) reads “Clavicle o
Solomon,” with a cross within a circle beneath, and below this symbol the date
1655. The whole work is divided into twelve paragraphs, of which D’Artigny
transcribes part of No. 9, an Exorcism of the Spirits of the Air, which most cer-
tainly does not occur in any known edition of the “Grand Clavicle,” and is appar-
ently adapted from the “Lemegeton.”


D3


The Book of Black Magic


time Hebrew literature was developing at a rapid rate.’
If it were first written in Latin, it is, at any rate, permeated
with late Jewish ideas, and the corrupt state of the Hebrew
in the conjurations and talismans—which is much the same,
and that as bad as it can be, in all existing copies—could
scarcely have been attained in less than two centuries of
careless and ignorant transcription. We may therefore fix
the date of its manufacture, or otherwise of its translation,
about the period which has been mentioned.

The attribution of the work to Solomon is obvious
enough; it could not fail to have suggested itself to a com-
piler with Kabbalistic leanings, and it is quite consistent
with a literature which has done nothing but ascribe falsely.
That it should be taken seriously by any well-equipped per-
son at the present day seems, of course, quite inscrutable,
but as it is the case, it must be accounted for in one of two
ways :—by a predisposition to accept statements on the faith
of occult tradition following upon a conviction as to the
reality of occult science; or, alternatively, by a knowledge
derived from the traditions of initiation. The first is re-
grettable because it is open to abuse, but is not the less
readily to be understood in particular instances; the second
is not likely to exist, because it is injurious to the intelli-
gence of the King of Israel to suppose that he wrote the
Clavicle. }

So far concerning the antiquity of the work and the
sovereign mystification of its authorship. It remains now
to say something of its character. The ‘‘Key of Solomon”
can scarcely be judged accurately in the light of its English
version, for the translator, sincerely regarding it as a highly
ban crameretes fortscaeven sepatate Kabbolistle treatises winch appested fa


Hebrew between the middle of the thirteenth and the close of the sixteenth cen-
pet These are only the most noted, and extra-Kabbalistic literature was far
ef.


54


Composite Rituals


honourable memorial of lawful magic, has excised as much
as possible the Goétic portions, on the ground that they are
later interpolations. He still retains, however, what is
generally stigmatised as one of the distinctive marks of
Black Magic; the Ritual is permeated with the bloody sac-
rifice, which Mr. Mathers rightly condemns, but has not
seen his way to reject. His version also includes various
references to the performance of works of hatred and de-
struction—that is, works betraying an evil purpose, or a
purpose directly connecting with Black Magic. The chap-
ter detailing the method of effecting such objects is
omitted, but it is found in five out of the seven codices
upon which the version is based. Furthermore, where the
intention is not evil, it is frivolous, hyperbolical, or para-
mountly foolish. Itis (a.) frivolous in such experiments as
the detection of stolen goods, by which it is placed on the
same level as the pedlar’s literature of fortune-telling; it is
(b.) hyperbolical and fantastic in the experiment of invisi-
bility, in the composition of the Magic Garters and the
Magic Staff; it is (c.) foolish in such chapters as that on
preventing a sportsman from killing any game. M. Papus,
the mouthpiece of the French occultists, distinguishes be-
tween the Keys of Solomon and the impostures of colport-
age; but in what respect, it may be asked, are these processes
superior to the chapbooks of colporteurs?

The highest ambition of the Clavicles is identical with
that of the Grimoires—to become master of a treasure pos-
sessed by spirits. It should also be observed that experi-
ments which have for their object an interference with the
freewill of another person, such as that of seeking favour
and love, are essentially evil experiments.

We have now enumerated all the processes which are set
forth in this ‘‘fountainhead and storehouse of Kabbalistical

50


The Book of Black Magic


Magic’’; it is for such trumpery purposes that the Magus is
directed to undertake his laborious preparation, and for
such also to put in motion the powers believed to be inherent
in Divine Names, in long pages of pretentious prayers, and
in ‘‘stronger and more powerful’’ conjurations. However
much the justice of the critic may be tempered by the mercy
of the transcendentalist towards a memorial of occult
science which has been unduly honoured—that is, honoured
otherwise than as a literary curitosity—it must be concluded
that the ‘‘Key of Solomon’ is a grotesque combination of
the pompous and ridiculous; it is, in fact, the old story of
the mountain and the mouse, but so great is the travail that,
in this case, the mouse is brought forth dead.’


§ 2. The Lesser Key of Solomon.


The ‘‘Lemegeton, or Lesser Key of Solomon,’’ Rabbi
and King, is a work of a far more exalted pretensions,
which deploys all the hierarchies and evokes spirits by mil-
hards. About its antiquity there is no need for serious
dispute; it claims to be translated from the Hebrew, but its
earliest perfect examples are in French of the seventeeth
century, and no one has heard of the original. It must have
existed, however, in a much earlier form; it is the subject
of continual reference by demonologists like Wierus, under
the style of the sorcerer’s Inber Spirituum, and it is from
this source that the scornful sceptic who was the pupil of
Agrippa, derived his Pseudo-Monarchia Damonum, with,
however, significant variations from the known copies.

The ‘‘Lemegeton”’ is divided. into four parts, which con-
trol the offices of all spirits at the will of the operator, from


1It should, however, be observed that Mr. Mathers, tacitly, it is true, but almost
certainly, accepts the work as in the main of literary or archzological importance.


Composite Rituals


whom the ordinary conditions are exacted.’ With the ex-
ception of the first part, which gave materials to Wierus,
this remarkable, and in many respects attractive, work has
never been printed, although it has been taxed surrepti-
tiously for contributions by most makers of Rituals and
Grimoires. It deals, as we have said, with the evocation
of all classes of spirits, evil, indifferent, and good; its open-
ing Rites are those of Lucifer, Bel, Astaroth, and the whole
cohort of Infernus; it is entitled Goetta, which sufficiently
explains itself,? and contains the forms of conjuration for
seventy-two chief devils and their ministers, with an ac-
count of their powers and offices. The second part, or
Theurgia Goetia, deals with the spirits of the cardinal
points and their inferiors. These are mixed natures, some
good and some evil. The third book is called the ‘‘ Pauline
Art,’’ for the significance of which name we are unable to
account. It concerns the Angels of the Hours of the Day
and Night and of the Zodiacal Signs. The fourth part,
or Almadel, enumerates four other choirs of spirits in a
somewhat obscure manner. There is one significant point
about the entire work—the powers resident in the offices of
Infernal Spirits are minutely set forth, but the Ritual is
almost silent as to the special benefits which may be ex-
pected from intercourse with the higher classes of intelli-
gence; it is, therefore, obvious to whom the magician would
have recourse if he had a definite end in view. It is, in-
deed, by no means improbable that the first or Goetic por-
tion constitutes the true ‘‘Lemegeton,’’ and that the others,
apparently unknown to Wierus, are additions of a later
date. This division, in either case, is not only expressly con-
nected with Black Magic, or rather exclusively devoted to


1 See Part ii. c. 1
2It is a Greek word meaning, Witchcraft.


Oo”


The Book of Black Magic


it, but it indubitably divides with the so-called Greater Key
the forbidding honour of having been the chief inspira-
tion of all the later handbooks of infernal ceremonial. De-
void of any doctrinal part, it has nothing which calls for
citation in this place, but as no Grimoire can pretend to com-
pleteness without it, all its hierarchic tabulations and all its
evoking processes will be given in the Second Part.


§ 3. The-Fourth Book of Cornelius Agrippa.


It is a matter now almost of general knowledge that a
Fourth Book of ‘‘Occult Philosophy’’ is attributed to Cor-
nelius Agrippa, and that it is rejected as spurious. The
authenticity of the famous three books has never been ques-
tioned, and is indeed beyond challenge; the fourth is per-
haps less interesting from the nature of its contents than
from this question of its authorship. It is, at the same
time, a much more skilful performance than the common
run of magical impostures; it connects with and arises out
of the genuine work in a very curious manner; and, having
regard to the special magical complexion of the latter, there


is no inherent reason why it should not have been the pro- |


duction of Agrippa. The difficulties concerning it may be
reduced to three heads. One is of time; it appeared after
the death of the restless speculating philosopher of Netter-
sheim. Now, a posthumous publication is not necessarily
open to suspicion unless it is a treatise on Magic, but a trea-
tise on Magic of the period. concerned, not appearing in the
lifetime of its writer, is open to the gravest suspicion, be-
cause of the scandalous company to which is belongs. The
second difficulty is internal, and it is just possible that it can
be overridden. It is to a considerable extent a rechauffé of
various portions of the three undisputed books, and, even in
58


Composite Rituals


the days of Agrippa, it is not likely that any author would
have so liberally reproduced himself. The third difficulty
is that it was rejected as a forgery by Wierus, the pupil of
Agrippa, who must have had a good opportunity of know-
ing ; its rejection by later writers simply follows the lead of
Wierus, and is therefore of no moment. The strength of the
case against it lies mainly in the third difficulty, and even
that is not quite conclusive. If not the work of Agrippa, it
was evidently produced in immediate proximity to his
period.

The book itself, which is quite informally written, falls
into several divisions. There is, firstly, an elaborate trea-
tise on the method of extracting the names of the good and
evil spirits referred to the seven planets. This is a further
development of a subject treated at some length in the third
book of ‘‘Occult Philosophy.’’ The method is of no import-
ance to our inquiry, but those who have sought to unravel it
confess that they have been baffled. Possibly Agrippa and
his successor were only fooling their readers, and did not
disclose the secret. The treatise on Names is followed by
one upon Characters, and depending as it does from the
first, is also not readily intelligible. Then comes a formal
tabulation of all the known shapes familiar to the spirits of
the planets, after which there is a disquisition upon Pen-
tacles and Sigils, another upon the consecration of instru-
ments used in magical ceremonies, as also of fire, water, and
so forth. The work concludes with methods for the invoca-
tion of good and evil spirits and a short process in Necro-
mancy. As we shall have occasion to cite it frequently in the
Second Part, the analysis may here be confined to establish-
ing its connection with diabolism, and the kind of manifes-
tations which are supposed to be obtained by its processes.

Like the ‘‘Lemegeton,’’ it gives specific directions foy

o9


The Book of Black Magic


communicating with evil spirits, and there is no question
whatever as to the lawful nature of the experiment. Refine-
ments of this kind were evidently outside the magic of the
fifteenth century. In the following citation we shall depart
from our usual custom of translating at first hand, and
make use, with some needful prunings, of the version of
Robert Turner, which is quite faithful, and has, morever,
the pleasant flavour of antiquity. .


CONCERNING THE INVOCATION OF Evu. SPIRIts.


If we would call any evil Spirit to the circle, it first be-
hoveth us to consider and to know his nature, to which of the
planets it agreeth, and what offices are distributed to him
from the planet. This being known, let there be sought out
a place fit and proper for his invocation, according to the
nature of the planet and the quality of the offices of the
same Spirit, as near as the same may be done. For ex-
ample, if his power be over the sea, rivers, or floods, then let
a place be chosen on the shore, and so of the rest. In like
manner, let there be chosen a convenient time, both for the
quality of the air—which should be serene, clear, quiet, and
fitting for the Spirits to assume bodies—and for the quality
and nature of the planet, and so too of the Spirit, to wit,
on his day, noting the time wherein he ruleth, whether it
be fortunate or unfortunate, day or night, as the stars and
spirits do require. These things being considered, let there
be a circle framed at the place elected, as well for the de-
fence of the invocant as for the confirmation of the Spirit.
In the circle itself there are to be written the Divine gen-
eral names, and those things which do yield defence unto
us; the Divine names which do rule the said planet, with
the offices of the Spirit himself; the names, finally, of the

60


Composite Rituals


good Spirits which bear rule, and are able to bind and con-
strain that Spirit which we intend to call. If we would
further fortify our circle, we may add characters and penta-
cles agreeing to the work. So also, and within or without
the circle, we may frame an angular figure,’ inscribed with
such numbers as are congruent among themselves to our
work. Moreover, the operator is to be provided with lights,
perfumes, unguents, and medicines compounded according
to the nature of the planet and Spirit, which do partly agree
with the Spirit by reason of their natural and celestial vir-
tue, and partly are exhibited to the Spirit for religious and
superstitious worship. The operator must also be furnished
with holy and consecrated things, necessary as well for the
defence of the invocant and his fellows as to serve for bonds
which shall bind and constrain the Spirits. Such are holy
papers, lamens, pictures, pentacles, swords, sceptres, gar-
ments of convenient matter and colour, and things of the
like sort. When all these are provided, the master and his
fellows being in the circle, and all those things which he
useth, let him begin to pray with a loud voice and a conven-
lent gesture and countenance. Let him make an oration
unto God, and afterwards entreat the good Spirits. If he
will read any prayers, psalms, or gospels for his defence,
they should take the first place. Thereafter, let him begin
to invocate the Spirit which he desireth, with a gentle and
loving enchantment to all the coasts of the world, commem-
orating his own authority and power. Let him then rest a
little, looking about him to see if any Spirit do appear,
which if he delay, let him repeat his invocation as before,
until he hath done it three times. If the Spirit be still per-
tinacious and will not appear, let him begin to conjure him
with Divine power, but in such a way that all the conjura-


1 Compare the figures of the “Lemegeton,” Part ii. c. 4.
61


The Book of Black Magic


tions and commemorations do agree with the nature and
offices of the Spirit himself. Reiterate the same three times
from stronger to stronger, using objurgations, contumelies,
cursings, punishments, suspensions from his office and
power, and the like.

After all the courses are finished, again cease a little, and
if any Spirit shall appear, let the invocant turn towards
him, receive him courteously, and earnestly entreating him,
let him require his name. Then proceeding further, let him
ask whatsoever he will. But if in anything the Spirit shall
show himself obstinate or lying, let him be bound by con-
venient conjurations, and if you still doubt of any lie, make
outside the circle, with the consecrated sword, the figure of
a triangle or pentacle, and compel the Spirit to enter it.
If you would have any promise confirmed upon oath, stretch
the sword out of the circle, and swear the Spirit by laying
his hand upon the sword. Then having obtained of the
Spirit that which you desire, or being otherwise contented,
license him to depart with courteous words, giving com-
mand unto him that he do no hurt. If he will not depart,
compel him by powerful conjurations, and, if need require,
expel him by exorcism and by making contrary fumiga-
tions. When he is departed, go not out of the circle, but
stay, making prayer for your defence and conservation, and
giving thanks unto God and the good angels. All these
things being orderly performed, you may depart.

But if your hopes are frustrated, and no Spirit will ap-
pear, yet for this do not despair, but, leaving the circle, re-
turn again at other times, doing as before. And if you shall
judge that you have erred in anything, then you shall amend
by adding or diminishing, for the constancy of reiteration
doth often increase your authority and power, and striketh
terror into the Spirits, humbling them to obedience.

62


Composite Rituals


Hence some do use to make a gate in the circle, whereby
they go in and out, which they open and shut as they please,
and fortify it with holy names and pentacles. This also we
are to take notice of, that when no Spirits will appear, but
the Master, being wearied, hath determined to cease and
give over, let him not therefore depart without licensing the
Spirits, for they that do neglect this are very greatly in
danger, except they are fortified with some sublime defence.
Oftentimes also the Spirits do come, although they be not.
visible (for to cause terror to him that calls them), either
in the thing which he useth or in the operation itself. But
this kind of licensing is not given simply, but by a kind of
dispensation with suspension, until they shall render them-
selves obedient.

When we intend to execute any effect by evil Spirits
where an apparition is not needful, this is to be done by
making the required instrument or subject of the experi-
ment itself, whether it be an image, a ring, or a writing,
any candle, character, or sacrifice, or anything of the like
sort. The name of the Spirit is to be written thereon, with
his character, according to the exigency of the experiment,
either writing with blood or using some perfume agreeable
to the Spirit, making also frequent prayers to God and the
good angels before we invocate the evil Spirit, and conjur-
ing him by the Divine power.

Over and above the formal diabolism of this process,
there are instructions for composing a book of evil spirits,
to be prepared ceremoniously, according to their name and
order. By means of a ‘‘holy oath,’’ the ready obedience of
the Spirit whose name is written therein is supposed to be
insured. The book itself must be formed of most pure and
clean paper which has never been used previously—a stip-
ulation which may have been of moment in the days of the

, 63 .


The Book of Black Magic


palimpsest, but is, of course, unnecessary in our own. The
image of the Spirit must be drawn on the left side, and his
character on the right, preceded by the oath containing the
name of the Spirit, with his dignity, place, office, and power.
The operation must be performed on the day and in the hour
of the planet to which the Spirit is attributed. When the


book has been composed, it must be well bound and emblaz- —


oned, being furnished also with markers and seals, for to
open it at random after its consecration might endanger
the operator. It should be kept reverently and free from
profanation, for otherwise it will lose its virtue. Its con-
secration is a matter of some difficulty, as every Spirit
whose name appears therein must be called before the circle,
the bonds read over in his presence, and each in succession
must be compelled to impose his hand where his respective
image and character are drawn, and to ‘‘confirm and con-
secrate the same with a special and common oath.’’ In a
word, the document must be regularly and legally delivered
as the act and deed of each. During this ceremony the book
must be laid within a triangle described outside the circle.
There can be no doubt that these directions are the work

_ of a writer well acquainted with the ‘‘Lemegeton,’’ or that
the Liber Spirituum in question is identical with that men-
tioned by Wierus. The forms assumed by the evoked Spirits
differ somewhat from those of the ‘‘Lesser Key,’’ which,
moreover, at least in its Goétic portion, has no planetary
attribution. According to pseudo-Agrippa, the Spirits of
Saturn usually appear with a tall and lean body and an
angry countenance, having four faces, of which one is in the
usual position, another at the back of the head, and two, with
beaks, on either side. They have also a face on each knee,
of a shining black. Their motion is like that of the wind,
and it is accompanied with a kind of earthquake. Their

64


cp i a 5


—=~ —_— = =


Composite Rituals


sign is white earth, ‘‘whiter than any snow.’’ Their partic-
ular forms are a bearded king riding on a dragon; an old
bearded man; an old woman leaning on a staff; a boy; a
dragon; an owl; a black garment; a hook or sickle; a juni-
per-tree. How the three last manifestations are provided
with the six visages is a perplexity which must be surren-
dered to occult commentators.

The Spirits of Jupiter appear with a sanguine and cho-
leric body ; they are of middle stature; their motion is ‘‘hor-
rible and fearful,’’ but they are mild of countenance, and
gentle in speech. They are of iron colour, which ought to
have connected them with Mars; their motion is that of
flashing lightnings, and withal thunderous; their sign is the
apparition of men about the circle who seem to be de-
voured by lions. Their particular forms are a king with
drawn sword riding on a lion; a mitred personage in a long
vestment; a maid crowned with laurel and adorned by flow-
ers; a bull; a stag; a peacock; an azure garment; a sword;
a box-tree. :

The Spirits of Mars have a tall body and a choleric,
filthy countenance, brown, swarthy, or red in colour; they
have horns like the hart, claws like a griffin, and they bellow
like wild bulls. They have the motion of burning fire, and
their sign is thunder and lightning about the circle. Their
particular forms are an armed king riding on a wolf; an
armed man; a woman holding a buckler on her thigh; a
she-goat; a horse; a stag; a red garment; wool; a cheestip.
Wool of a choleric disposition is perhaps a Goétic form of
gun-cotton.

The Spirits of Venus have a body of medium height and
limb, sanguine, gross, and of a gold colour tinctured with
blood—which recalls Mrs. Browning’s pomegranate. Their
motion is that of lightning; their sign is to produce sweat

65


Digitized by Google


The Book of Black Magic


in the operator, which might, however, be the normal prop-
erty of all these stellar nondescrips of the world infernal.
Their particular forms are a sceptred king riding on a lion;
a crowned king; a queen with a sceptre; a bird—not other-
wise described, but anything probably except that of para-
dise ; a lion; a cock; a golden garment; a sceptre; and lastly,
something which Robert Turner wisely left untranslated—
caudatus, t.e., tailed.

The Spirits of Venus have a body of medium height and
a pleasant visage, of which the upper part is golden and
the lower white or green. Their motion is like that of a
brilliant star. Their sign is the semblance of maids sport-
ing about the circle, and luring the Magician to join them.
Their particular forms are a sceptred king riding on a
camel; a naked maid; a she-goat; a camel—probably the
atrocious demon of Cazotte; a dove; a white or green gar-
ment; the herb savine.

The Spirits of Mercury appear commonly with a body
of middle stature, cold, liquid, moist, which sounds redun-
dant, but the reference is to the properties of quicksilver—
that is to say, the Mercury of the philosophers was supposed
not to wet the hand, but the Mercurial spirits of the sorcerer
apparently did. They are withal fair, affable in speech, of
human shape, and like unto armed knights. They are like
silver-coloured clouds in their motion. Their sign is that
they cause horror and fear to the operator. Their special
shapes are a king riding on a bear; a comely youth; a
woman holding a distaff—it is difficult to understand how
such an apparition can be like an armed knight, an observa-
tion which, if it were worth while, might apply to the re-
maining modes of manifestation; a dog; a she-bear; a mag-
pie; a garment of many changing colours; a rod; and a
little staff.

66


~


Composite Rituals


Finally, the Spirits of the Moon have a large, soft,
phlegmatic body, like a dark cloud in colour. Their counte-
nance is swollen, their head bald, their eyes are red and
rheumy, their teeth like those of a wild boar. Their motion
is like that of a great tempest sweeping the sea. Their sign
is a heavy shower of rain about the circle. Their particular
shapes are a king like an archer riding on a doe; a litfle
boy; a huntress with bow and arrows; a cow; a small doe;
a goose; a green or silver-coloured garment; an arrow; a
many-footed creature—perhaps a centipede.

The imbecility of this muddled tabulation places the
forged Fourth Book in a more absurd light than it other-
wise deserves. It really reproduces the manner of Agrip-
pa’s treatise with a fidelity which is not unskilful, and has
quite as much claim to be taken seriously as any of the
composite Rituals.


§ 4. The Heptameron.


The Fourth Book of Cornelius Agrippa was much too
informal, and left too much to the discretion of the operator
to be satisfactory for a science so exact as that of Ceremo-
nial Magic. A form of procedure which bequeathed noth-
ing to the imagination and asked no other skill than the pa-
tient exactitude of the rule of thumb was necessary to the
weakness of the ordinary sorcerer. The ‘‘Heptameron, or
Magical Elements”? of Peter de Abano is an attempt to
supply the want, and to offer to the neophyte a complete
wizard’s cabinet. Cornelius Agrippa, says the introduc-
tion, seems to have written for the learned, for the well-
experienced in this art; he does not treat specially of the
ceremonies, but mentions them in a general way. Those
who have not ‘‘tasted magical superstitions’’ may here find


67


_ Of magical ceremonies.» — Con uration of the Lord’s


The Book of Black Magic


them ready to their hand. ‘‘In brief, in this book are kept
the principles of magical conveyances.’’ It may be con-
ceded at once that the undertaking is scrupulously fulfilled ;
what the operator must do and how he should perform it,
so as to ‘‘draw spirits into discourse,’’ are matters set forth
so plainly that the wayfaring man need not err therein.
Assuming the sacerdotal office of the operator, or a priest
for an accomplice, it is all so simple that failure could not
well be ascribed to a blunder on his part.

It would be invidious to suppose that the ‘‘ Heptameron’”’
is more authentic as regards its attribution than the work
to which it is professedly a sequel; its real authorship is in-
volved in much the same kind of obscurity as that of pseudo-
Agrippa. As there is no grave reason why the pupil of
Trithemius should not have written the spurious Fourth
Book, so Peter of Abano is not at all an unlikely personage
to connect with the ‘‘Magical Elements.’’ The one pro-
fessedly wrote upon Magic, the other upon Astrology and
Geomancy, unless his works in these departments of occult
science are also forgeries. But the ‘‘Heptameron’’ was
never heard of for nearly two hundred years after the death
of its reputed author, which occurred in 1316, and it is too
obviously late in its tone, too obviously a sequel? to a much
more recent work, for it to have been possibly a memoria]
of the fourteenth century.

Peter of Abano, a town in the vicinity of Padua, was


born in 1250, and was a learned physician of his period, who


attempted to conciliate the different medical systems, and
is supposed to have been the first European who quoted
Averroes. He established himself at Paris, but at the in-


1A sequal, moreover, = contains direct references, as, for example: “But
after what manner they ar has been described alread ne in the former book
ay. This recurs with

slight variations throughout the “Heptameron.”


68


Composite Rituals


stigation of jealous professional brethren he was accused
of heresy, and fled to his native place. At Padua a chair
of medicine was created for him, but the accusation followed
him; by some he was charged with denying the existence of
demons, by others with obtaining his knowledge from seven
imps whom he kept in a bottle. However this may be, the
Inquisition commenced its process, but the intended victim
was delivered by death—as some say, on the eve of his
execution. The intervention infuriated the Tribunal,
though the testament left behind him by Peter of Abano
affirmed his belief in the orthodox faith. The magistrates
of the city were ordered, on pain of excommunication, to
exhume his body, but it was removed by a faithful servant
and buried secretly in another church. The Inquisition
clamoured for the punishment of the offender, but was con-
tent in the end to burn the dead physician in effigy. Asa
counterpoise, a century later his bust was placed in the
town-hall of Padua. His undoubted works, which are
frankly unreadable, betray no acquaintance with the occult
sciences beyond a belief in astrology, which in those days
was catholic as Rome and powerful as the Holy Tribunal.
He remains, however, one of the moral martyrs of Magic,
faussement accusé, as Gabriel Naudé has it. His accusa-
tion and the mode of its prosecution remain also.among the
lesser glories of the Holy Office.

Accepting the ‘‘Heptameron”’ as a work belonging to the
period of its first publication, it is here placed among the
Rituals of a composite character, not because it professedly
deals with devils, but because the nature of its angels and
spirits is Indicated by the manner of their conjuration; in
a word, they are described as angels and threatened as de-
mons.

The procedure is divided into two parts—a general

69


The Book of Black Magic


method for the evocation of the Spirits of the Air, who are
undoubtedly demons, and a set of angelical conjurations
proper to each day of the week. The second presumably
belongs to the department of White Magic, as the intelli-
- gences concerned are said to be good and great, but their
offices are mixed and confusing, including the discovery of
treasures, the detection of secrets, fomenting war, opening
locks and bolts, procuring the love of women, inclining men
to luxury and sowing hatred and evil thought. Obviously,
White Magic of this kind is much blacker than it is painted.
Though the entire ‘‘Heptameron’’ appears under one at-
tribution, the first part only is ascribed in the text to Peter
de Abano. Therein the personal preparation of the opera-
tor corresponds to that given in the Second Part of the
present work, and the ceremonial itself, which, if cited at
all, would have to be printed tn extenso, as it contains no


detachable portions, is much toa elaborate ta be inserted in >


this place, more especially as that of the ‘‘Lemegeton’”’ will
provide later on a fairly complete notion of the seope and
purpose of the Composite Rituals,


CHAPTER IV


She Rituals of Black Magic


§ 1. The Grimorium Verum.


HE four specific and undisguised handbooks of
Black Magic, all in the French language, but in
three cases, like so much of the Ceremonial litera-

ture, possessing Italian connections, real or imputed, are :—

GRIMORIUM VERUM, or the Most Approved Keys of Solo-
mon the Hebrew Rabbin, wherein the Most Hidden Secrets,
both Natural and Supernatural, are immediately exhibited,
but it is necessary that the Demons should be contented on
their part.. Translated from the Hebrew by Plaingiére, a
Dominican Jesuit,? with a Collection of Curious Secrets.
Published by Alibeck the Egyptian. 1517.°

TruE Buack Maaic, or the Secret of Secrets, an MS.
found at Jerusalem in the Sepulchre of Solomon, contain-
ing: 1. Forty-five Talismans with their representation, as


1 This is only a conjectural translation. It is impossible to render such a pas-
sage as modo operator per necessarta et contenta facit scta tamen oportst Damonum
potentia dum taxat per agantur. ees

2 It will be oc necessary to advise the reader that a Dominican Jesuit is an
absurdity, which might be paralleled by “secular monk,” “unordained priest,” and
so forth. The Order of St. Benedict and the Society of Jesus are totally dis-
tinct. A Catholic critic might almost be justified in observing that so gross a
blunder would be possible only to a Jew or a heretic; certainly he would have
more reason than would be discoverable in the hypothesis of Papus, that priests are
the authors of the Grimoires.

_ 2 On the reverse of the title :—“The True Clavicles of Solomon. Memphis. Pub-
lished by Alibeck the Egyptian.”
G1


The Book of Black Magic


also the manner of using them, together with their Marvel-
ous Properties. 2. All Magical Characters known unto this
day. Translated from the Hebrew of the Magus Iroe-
Grego.?, Rome. In the year of grace, 1750.

THE GRAND GRIMOIRE, with the Powerful Clavicle of
Solomon and of Black Magic; or the Infernal Devices of
the Great Agrippa for the Discovery of all Hidden Trea-
sures and the Subjugation of every Denomination of Spir-
its, together with an Abridgment of all the Magical Arts.
(In its earliest edition, without place or date.)

THE CONSTITUTION OF Pope Honorius THE GREAT,
wherein may be found the Arcane Conjurations which must
be used against the Spirits of Darkness. With a Collection
of the Most Rare Secrets. Rome, 1670.

They are all tiny volumes, nominally in duodecimo, but
much smaller according to modern measurements.

The date specified in the title of the Grimortum Verum
is undeniably fraudulent; the work belongs to the middle of
the eighteenth century, and Memphis is Rome. The ‘‘Grand
Grimoire’’ is not of higher antiquity. That of Honorius
is said to have appeared originally in 1629, but it has been
sometimes referred erroneously to the same period of the
previous century.

As indicated by the authorship which is attributed to it,
the Grimorium Verum is based to some extent upon the
"Key of Solomon,”’ the main points of resemblance being
in the description of the magical instruments, and in some
of the forms of prayer. It distinguishes plainly the powers

1 That is, mystic characters for engraving on magical instruments, vessels, and
vestments. The statement is utterly untrue, for the characters given by the
Grimoire are few in number, and exceedingly imperfect as well. :


2Mr. Mathers reads Iohé Grevis. Iroe Gecis is another variation. It is a
corruption in any case.
12


The Rituals of Black Magic


which it is proposed to invoke by the name of Devils.* At
the same time it refers them nominally to the four elements,
which would connect them with the Sylphs, Salamanders,
and so forth, but the classification in question, somewhat
incidentally made, does not really obtain. There is an ac-
count of the Hierarchy of Spirits, with Lucifer, Beelzebuth,
and Astaroth, as potentates in chief.? A portion of this ac-
count is drawn from the ‘‘Lemegeton,”’ perhaps through
thé Pseudo-Monarchia of Wierus. The work purports to be
divided into three sections, containing :—(a.) The Charac-
ters and Seals of the Demons, with the forms for their Evo-
cation and Dismissal. (b.) A description of the Natural and
Supernatural Secrets which can be operated by the power
of the Demons, and that without any deception. (c.) The
Key of the work, and the proper application thereof. Pass-
ing over typographical errors, the MS. from which it has
been printed must have been in a most confused state; there
are not in reality any distinct divisions, and the little vol-
ume abounds in Latin passages which often defy transla-
tion, as, for example, sic pro ratione voluntas; ut tllud stt
hoc in opere tnclusum minimo clerum in doctis; quia amicus
fiet camitals, fiet tntmicus. So also we have Sanctum Re-
gum throughout for Sanctum Regnum. There are two fold-
ing plates of Characters and Seals, of which many have no
reference to the text, while others essential to the processes
are missing, the deficiencies being supplied in the modern
Italian versions, which probably follow another edition,
also Italian, and the source of the French translation, but

1“Here beginneth the Sanctum Regnum, called the Royalty of Spirits, or the
little Keys of Solomon, a most learned Hebrew nigromancer and Rabbin, contain-

ing various combinations of characters whereby the Powers, Spirits, or, more cor-
ie Devils are invoked, so that they are forced to appear whensoever you may
determine, each one according to his faculty, and are compelled to bring what-
soever you may require of them, causing you no kind of annoyance, provided only
that they are contented on their part, for these sorts of creatures give nothing for


nothing.”
2See Part it c. 3.


13


The Book of Black Magic


unknown to the present writer, as indeed to most bibliog-
raphers. The work, as it stands, is really in two parts only,
the Grimorium Verum proper, and certain ‘‘Rare and As-
tounding Magical Secrets.’’ The first may be analysed as
follows :—(a.) Directions for the preparation of the Oper-
ator, all of a personal kind, and analogous to those of the
Clavicle. (b.) Instructions for the manufacture of the
magical instruments required in the work, also analogous
to the Clavicle. (c.) The composition of the virgin parch-
ment on which the characters and seals are to be in-
scribed, showing distinct variations from the Clavicle.
(d.) The processes of evocation and the discharge. Be-
yond the fact that the evoked Spirits are Lucifer, Beel-
zebuth, Astaroth, and the inferiors and ministers of these,
this first and chief part is not more repulsive, as it is
indeed scarcely more unintelligent, than most of the pro-
cesses in its prototype.

The second part contains the usual curiosities common to
all the later Grimoires, including the ‘‘ Admirable Secrets’’
of the pretended Albertus Magnus, the ‘‘ Little Albert,’’ &c.
In so far as it presents any considerable variations, such
variations are usually in the direction of Black Magic.
Some are venereal in the objectionable sense of the term,
others merely revolting, while yet others, as that of the
Magic Garters, are derived from the Clavicle. Finally,
there are certain processes which are obviously those of
White Magic,’ and are concerned with the ceremonial in-
duction of simple clairvoyance.

We may therefore conclude that the Grimoritum Verwm
proper is not more diabolical than the first part of the
‘‘Lemegeton,’’ which indeed contains the ceremonial for
the evocation of precisely the same spirits.


1See Part ii. c. 8 8§ 6, 7, and 8.
| V4


The Rituals of Black Magic
§ 2. True Black Magic.


The Grimoire entitled ‘‘True Black Magic’’ is simply an
adapted version of the ‘‘Key of Solomon,’’ with the same
preambles, the same ritual, the same talismans, and charac-
ters which are analogous when they are not identical. With
the intelligible and careful presentation of Mr. Mathers it
of course compares very badly; like the Grimortum Verum,
it is exceedingly confused, and is rendered almost unmean-
ing by the omission of all the practical part. Its malicious
or diabolical element consists, however, solely in its-intro-
duction of the chapter upon works of hatred and destruc-
tion, which, as already seen, and as more fully established
later on, should undoubtedly be regarded as an intcgral
portion of the original work.


§ 3. The Grand Grimoire.


The ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ is the most fantastic of the cycle,
and is introduced with great pomp by its pretended editor,
Antonio Venitiana del Rabina, a personage whose name
indicates the Italian origin of the work. By reason of its
rarity and the great request in which it is, we are informed
that it must be regarded as the veritable Magnum Opus—
a view which may appear inconsequential, but for which the
authority of Rabbinical writers is cited. It is to these
authors that we owe the priceless treasure which innumer-
able charlatans have endeavored to counterfeit, but have
never succeeded in discovering. The copy made use of by
Antonio in preparing his edition was transcribed from the
genuine writings of the mighty King Solomon, which were
obtained by pure chance. ‘‘Of a truth, what other man,
save this invincible genius, would have had the hardihood

9)


The Book of Black Magic


to reveal the withering words which God makes use of to
strike terror into the rebellious angels and compel them into
obedience? Having soared into the celestial altitudes
that he might master the secrets and learn the omnipotent
words which constitute all the power of a terrible and ven-
erable Deity, the essence of those innermost arcana, made
use of by an infinite Divinity, was extracted by this grand
king, who passed all the days of his life in the most labori-
ous researches, and in pursuit of the most obscure and
hopeless secrets. He succeeded ultimately in all his under-
takings, penetrating into the most remote haunts of spirits,
whom he bound, one and all, and.forced them to obey him
by the power of his Talisman or Clavicle. Therein he has
discovered unto us the stellar influences, the constellation of
the planets, and the method for the evocation of all hier-
archies of spirits, by the recitation of the sublime Appella-
tions, as they are hereafter set down for you in this book,
as well as the true composition and effects of the dreadful
Blasting Rod, which causes the spirits to tremble; which
God also used to arm his Angel when Adam and Eve were
driven out of the Earthly Paradise; wherewith, finally, he
smote the rebellious Angels, precipitating their ambitions
into the most appalling gulfs by the power of this very
Rod—of this Rod which collects the clouds, disperses tem-
pests, averts the lightning, or precipitates each and all upon
any portion of the earth at the pleasure of its director.”’’
Such is the preamble of the ‘‘Grand Grimoire.’’ The
work is divided into two parts, the first containing the evo-
cation of Lucifuge Rofocale * by means of the Blasting Rod,
the second what Antonia inscrutably regards as the Sanc-
1 This alteration of the fallen Light-Bearer into Fly-the-Light does not seem to
occur in magical literature preceding the Grand Grimoire. It was afterwards


adopted by Lévi, by whom it has been made popular among occultists, who are
for the most part, quite unaware of its source.


16


The Rituals of Black Magic


tum Regnum, namely, the Rite of making Pacts; but one
of the most notable characteristics of all the Grimoires is
not their diabolical malice, but their unconscious ingenu-
ousness, and the devout, almost laudable, character of all
the operations seems to have been quite sincerely held.

The ‘“‘Grand Grimoire’”’ is, however, regarded as one of
the most atrocious of its class; it has a process in Necro-
mancy which is possible, say occult writers, only to a danger-
ous maniac or an irreclaimable criminal. It must be ad-
mitted that the Rite is highly unreasonable, but in dealing
with such literature it seems unsafe to advance -the objec-
tion, for it applies much too widely. As to its criminality,
this centres in the creation of a disturbance at midnight
Mass om Christmas Eve. There is further an account of a
poison entitled ‘‘The Composition of Death, or Philosoph-
ical Stone,’’ which is supposed to indicate an advanced
degree of diabolism. Eliphas Lévi says that it pretends to
be the Powder of Projection, the great Mystery of the
Sages, but it is really the Powder of Consecution—as to
the significance of which a vague image can alone be in-
voked. It may, in any case, be added that it cannot well
be either, seeing that the composition is a liquid. For the
rest, it is simply a stupid recipe, and as no unlawful appli-
cation is suggested, it is not diabolical at all, unless toxi-
cology, as such, is Satanic simply because it does not deal
in anodynes.

There is, of couse, no question that the ‘‘Grand Grim-
oire’’ is a book of Black Magic, and it is contrary to the
nature of things that a book of Black Magic should be other-
wise than diabolical. The most objectionable works are
not those which openly announce that they are evil, but
those which teach evil under the pretence of excellence.
The noticeable point, as regards the ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ and

TT


The Book of Black Magic


works of its class, is that the diabolism of the confessedly
diabolical is often so exceedingly thin, and that the angel-
ical element in Rituals assumed to be angelical should often
border so perilously on the Satanic. The first part of the
‘“‘Grand Grimoire,’’ just like the Grimoritum Verum, 18
simply a process for the evocation of evil spirits to obtain
the enforced surrender of hidden treasure. In the second .
part the magician is certainly expected to give himself, body
and soul, to the demon who serves him meanwhile, and there
can be no hesitation in admitting that this creates a sharp
distinction, not only between the ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ and all
the Composite Rituals, but also between the ‘‘Grand Grim-
oire’’ and the other Liturgies of Black Magic. It is only
a palliation to say that the compact is worded as a subter-
fuge, and in reality gives nothing to the demon, who here,
as so frequently in folk-lore, is bamboozled, receiving the
shadow in place of the substance.’


§ 4. The Grimotre of Honorvus.


Despite the iniquities of the Pacta Conventa Demonum,
the ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ has failed, however, to invoke upon
itself such severe condemnation as the ‘‘Grimoire of Honor-
ius the Great,’’ otherwise Honorius the Third. It is scarcely
too much to say, that almost every accusation preferred
against this remarkable work is false generally and specifi-
eally, the chief distinction between them being that some are
the misrepresentations of ignorance, and others the false
interpretations of prejudgment. The French occultist,
Papus, alone seems to take the middle view, though he
speaks with some vagueness when he says that the sorcery

re the droll history of the Devil and his Dam, and that concerning the


1 Com
course of Black Magic delivered by the Prince of Darkness at the University of
Salamanca.


. 18


The Rituals of Black Magic


of this Grimoire is more dangerous for weak experimental-
ists than for the enemies of the sorcerer. Eliphas Lévi
observes that the work is not without importance for the
students of occult science.’ At first sight it seems to be
nothing but a tissue of repulsive absurdities, but for those
who are initiated in the signs and secrets of the Kabbalah,
it becomes a veritable monument of human perversity.
There was seldom a statement for which there was less
foundation; there was never a magical work which less
connected with Kabbalism; the connection in so far as it
exists, and it is confined to a few words which occur in the
Conjurations, is common to all Ceremonial Magic, and this
is the one Grimoire which most is permeated with Christian
elements. Those, however, who are well acquainted with
the principles of interpretation which obtain in the writings
of Lévi, will not take a charge seriously which depends
upon the significance of Kabbalistic words or signs, for
it is notorious that with the French occultist they meant
many things according to his humour. But Eliphas Lévi
was not contented with the general impeachment; in a later
work * he elaborated a more particular charge. In common
with the ‘‘Key of Solomon”’ and all the Grimoires, the —
work of Honorius prescribes the sacrifice of a virgin kid,
with the object of ensuring the possession of a virgin parch-
ment by the operator. Now Lévi affirms that when the
‘‘abominable author’’ mentions a kid, he means really a
human child. In this interpretation he had not even the
excuse of the humorous analogy which has been instituted
in vulgar English, for his acquaintance, had he any, with
our language was exceedingly slight. There is not a par-
ticle of foundation for the charge; the sacrifice in the case


a oo de la Magic, p. 307.
La Clef des Grands ‘Mystires See also “Thaumaturgical Experiences of
Elipbes Lévi” in “The Mysteries of Magic,” by A. E. Waite, second edition.


19


The Book of Black Magic


of the ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius’’ means, and can mean, no
more than in the case of the ‘‘Key of Solomon.’’ There was
a defined purpose in connection with the slaughter of the
victim, which was the same in both instances.

So far concerning the misinterpretations of writers who
pretend to some first-hand acquaintance with the work un-
der notice. Others who have mentioned it within recent
years have been content to follow the French authority
without examination. Thus it is that we find Mr. J. H.
Slater, in a paper read before the Bibliographical Society,
and printed in its Transactions,’ describing the Grimoire
as an advocate of murder and all kinds of crimes. Further-
more, he confuses it throughout with the ‘‘Grand Grin-
oire.’’

Taking the work at first hand, the initial question con-
cerning it is the attribution of the authorship. From what
we know of magical literature, to say nothing of pontifical
dignity, it is antecedently unlikely that it is the work of a
Roman Bishop, more especially of such a bishop as Hon-
orius. Eliphas Lévi, who rightly sought to vindicate the
Church of his childhood, assailed, in the person of one of
its sovereign pontiffs, by an unintelligent accusation, but
vindicated it badly as usual, took a glance at the history of
the time, and discovered that during the pontificate of Hon-
orius there was an anti-pope set up by Henry IV. of Ger-
many, and that he was a man of evil life. He immediately
conjectured that this personage was the likely author of
the objectionable Grimoire. Again there is not a particle
of evidence for such a surmise, and it is un been vilatn
procédé, as M. Papus might say, to increase, without good
reason, the responsibility resting upon the memory of the
wicked prelate in question.
ss 1 oom Books on Magic.” Transactions of the Bibliographical Society, Vol.


80


The Rituals of Black Magic


If we come to the facts, they are these. The first edition
of the Grimoire is said to have appeared in 1629, and it is
not likely that it was forged much earlier than the end of
the sixteenth century, being, roughly, nine hundred years
after the death of its supposed author. The Pope, it must
be confessed, was a voluminous writer; his sermons and his
vast correspondence have appeared in two large volumes at
Paris,’ under auspices which were unlikely to admit even a
contemptuous reference to the forged constitution. There
is none, accordingly, which is to be regretted from the
standpoint of bibliography. But the editor has also ex-
cluded with the same silence another work much more rea-
sonably attributed, and to which no odium can attach. It
is one also which is important to our inquiry, and it is en-
titled Honoru Pape adversus tenebrarum Principem et
ejus Angelos Conjurationes ex originale Rome servato,
Rome, 1529. The authenticity of this work is evidently
questioned by its exclusion, and it is impossible to speak cer-
tainly concerning it, as, on account of its extreme rarity,
few public libraries, none apparently in England, possess
an example. But it is evidently the formularies of exor-
cism, a rite of the Church, and possessing a considerable
body of literature, to which even a Pope of past ages might
not inconceivably have contributed. However this may be,
the attribution in the one case will account for it in the
other. The book of Black Magic may be merely a perver-
sion of the orthodox conjurations, and if not that, is a re-
prisal; it is Sorcery revenging herself on a Pope who casts
out devils by representing him as the prince of those who
dealt with them.

Having said something to justify the Grimoire from
groundless condemnation, it is necessary now to add, on the


authority of its own evidence, that it is a malicious and
1 Horoy’s Bibliotheca Patristica, Honoris III. Opera Omnia. Paris, 1879, 8 vo.
81 ,


The Book of Black Magic


clever imposture, which was undeniably calculated to de-
ceive ignorant persons of its period who may have been
magically inclined, more especially ignorant priests, since
it pretends to convey the express sanction of the Apostoli-
cal Seat for the operations of Infernal Magic and Necro-
mancy. The entire claim is set forth most curiously at the
beginning of the pseudo-constitution, and must be cited at
considerable length to convey its full force.

The Holy Apostolic Chair, unto which the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven were given by those words which
Christ Jesus addressed to St. Peter: I give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and unto thee alone the
power of commanding the Prince of Darkness and his an-
gels, who, as slaves of their Master, do owe him honour,
glory, and obedience, by those other words of Jesus Christ:
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt
thou serve—hence by the power of these Keys the Head
of the Church has been made the Lord of Hell. But seeing
that until this present the Sovereign Pontiffs have alone
possessed the power of using invocations and commanding
Spirits, His Holiness Honorius the Third, being moved by
his pastoral care, has benignly desired to communicate the
methods and faculty of invoking and controlling Spirits to
his venerable Brethren in Jesus Christ, adding the Con-
jurations which must be used in such case, the whole being
contained in the Bull which here follows.


HOonorIvs.


Servant of the Servants of God, unto all and each of our
venerable Brethren of the Holy Roman Church, Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots; unto all and each of our sons
in Jesus Christ, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolytes,

82


The Rituals of Black Magic


Exorcists, Cantors, Pastors, Clerks both Secular and Regu-
lar, Health and Apostolic Benediction. In those days when
the Son of God, Saviour df the World, generated in the
fulness of time, and born, according to the flesh, of the
Race of David, did live on this earth, whose Most Holy
Name is Jesus, before which the heavens, earth, and hell
do bend the knee; we have seen with what power He com-
manded demons, which power was also transmitted to St.
Peter by that utterance: Upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
These words were addressed to St. Peter as the Head and
Foundation of the Church. We then, who, by the mercy
of God, and despite the poverty of our merit, have succeeded
to the Sovereign Apostolate, and, as lawful successor of St.
Peter, have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed
to our hands, desiring to communicate the power of invok-
ing and commanding Spirits, which hath been reserved unto
us alone, and our possessors did alone enjoy; wishing, I
repeat, by Divine inspiration, to share it with our venerable
Brethren and dear sons in Jesus Christ, and fearing lest
in the exorcism of the possessed, they might otherwise be
appalled at the frightful figures of those rebellious angels
. who in sin were cast into the abyss, lest also they should be
insufficiently learned in those things which must be per-
formed and observed, and that those who have been re-
deemed by the blood of Jesus Christ may not be tormented
by any witchcraft or possessed by the demon, we have in-
eluded in this Bull the manner of their invocation, while
same must be observed inviolably. And because it is meet
that the ministers of the Altar should have authority over
the rebellious Spirits, we hereby depute unto them all
powers which we possess, in virtue of the Holy Apostolic
Chair, and we require them by our Apostolic authority to
83


The Book of Black Magic


observe what follows inviolably, lest by some negligence
unworthy of their character they should draw down on them-
selves the wrath of the Most High.

The Grimorium Verum has once been reprinted in the
French language.’ Of the Italian version there have been
two modern editions, both poorly produced.? The book of
“True Black Magic’’ is known only by the edition of 1750.
The ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ reappeared at Nismes in 1823, and
is, Moreover, in all respects identical with the work entitled
the ‘‘Red Dragon,’’ of which there are several editions.®
The ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius’’ is exceedingly rare in the
original, but is better known by the reprints of 1660 and
1670, though these also are scarce. There is, finally, an
edition dated 1760, and this even commands a high price
among collectors. It remains to state that the Abbé d’Ar-
tigny was presented about the middle of the last century
with an MS. copy of this Grimoire, which was much more
complete than the printed editions. He gives no satisfac-
tory account of it, nor can it be traced at this day. Possibly
it represented the transition of the ‘‘Sworn Book of Hon-
orius’’ into the spurious Papal Constitution.


§ 5. Minor and Spurious Rituals of Black Magic.


To distinguish in a mass of forged literature certain
books as more spurious than others, seems at first sight a


1 Les Véritables Clavicules de Salomon. Trésor des Sciences Occultes, suivies
d'un Grand Nombre des Secrets, et notamment de la Magie du Papillon Vert. N.D.

21a Vera Clavicola del Re Salomone, Tesoro delle Science Occulie con molti
Altri Segreti e ee La Cabala della Farfalla Verde tradotte dalla Lingua
Strantera alla Lingua Italtana da Bestetts. Milano, 1868. Also, with slight vari-
ations, Firenze, Armato Muzzi editore, 1

8 For example, Le Dragon Rouge, ou PArt de Commander les Esprits célestes,
aériens et infernaux. A Milan, chez Gaspard Buffanelli. And, Le Vérttable Dragon
Rouge, plus la poule Noire, edition augmentée des secrets de la Reine Cleopatre
secrets pour se render invisible, sécrets d’Artephius, &c. This is a reprint of
the rare so-called edition of 1521, and is possibly still in print.


The Rituals of Black Magic


needless ingenuity of criticism. There are, however, some
Rituals of Black Magic which are merely the knavish spec-
ulations of catchpenny booksellers, and there are others,
anterior to the period, and foreign to the centres, of col-
portage, which have never exercised any influence, and are,
in fact, generally unknown. Both classes neither possess a
history nor have contributed anything to their subject. Yet
it does not follow that they offer no points of curiosity or
interest, and some account of them must be given in this
place.

The Verus Jesuitarum Libellus, or “True Magical Work
of the Jesuits, containing most powerful conjurations for
all evil spirits of whatever state, condition, and office they
are, and a most powerful and approved conjuration of the
Spirit Uriel;' to which is added Cyprian’s Invocation of
Angels, and his Conjuration of the Spirits guarding Hid-
den Treasures, together with a form for their dismissal,”’
—purports to have been published at Paris in the Latin
tongue, and in the year 1508. It was reprinted by Scheible
at Stuttgart in 1845, forming part of the curious collection
of Faust documents already mentioned. Finally, in the
year 1875, the late Major Herbert Irwin made an English
translation, which remains in MS. The date placed on the
title-page of the original edition at once betrays the impos-
ture. It will be almost needless to say that in the first de-
cade of the sixteenth century there were no Jesuits; the
Society originated with St. Ignatius, who died in 1556,
being two years after the confirmation of the Society by
Pope Paul ITI. The Conjurations are excessively curious.
The first is addressed to a spirit whose name is not indi-

1 The modern reprint of Scheible reads Usiel thr out, as does also the MS.


English translation. Supposing the latter to have followed the original edition,
it would seem conclusive that the blunder—for such it evidently is—occurs also in


that.
85


The Book of Black Magic


cated, but he is supposed to have been obedient to Abraham
and Isaac, and is directed to bring the magician out of the
depths of the sea so many millions—the number is not
specified, and depends upon the cupidity of the operator—
of the best Spanish gold; otherwise, says the Conjuration,
I will condemn thy body (sic) and thy soul. In the second
formula, the spirit is cited by the knowledge and exorcising
power of Agrippa,’ which again puts a definite limit to the
antiquity of the collection, were it otherwise necessary. The
third Invocation is addressed to the spirit Zayariel, who is
conjured by Agla Scheffert and the great Jehova Podasho-
cheia. The remainder, to the number of seven in all, are
nearly identical in character and quite in purpose, the
demon being invariably required to bring that which is
desired by the operator from the depths of the sea, or from
the abyss of the waters, or from the spiritual abyss. The
Discharge or Absolution which concludes the series is really
an additional conjuration.

The ‘‘ Citation of St. Cyprian’’ is presumably an experi-
ment in White Magic, seeing that it is addressed to an
Angel who was the guest of Lot and Abraham. As the ob-
ject is ‘‘help in need,”’ it is apparently appropriate for
every strait in life, and should be, therefore, noted for refer-
ence by those who may think it work while; it is too cum-
brous and tedious for these pages. A similar observation
would apply only too truly to the ‘‘ Process for the Magical
Acquisition of Hidden Treasures,’’ but it is much more com-
plete than the rest, and has so much connection with the
Summum Bonum, the desire of the eyes of all Ceremonial
Magic, that it is necessary to give it. It is, however, an
operation of Necromancy, and will be found in its proper
place in the Second Part.? The Verus Jesutarwm Inbellus


1 Cornelius Agrippa died in 1535.
2 Part II. c. 9.


86


The Rituals of Black Magic


closes with a fuliginous conjuration of the entire hierarchy
of Infernus, which continues for many pages, and contains
more unintelligible words than several combined Grimoires.
In the absence of all knowledge of its original edition, it is
impossible to throw any light upon this singular emposture.

The Praxis Magica Fausti, or ‘‘Magical Elements of
Dr. John Faust, Practitioner of Medicine,’’ claims to have
been printed from the original MS. in the Municipal Li-
brary of Weimar, and is dated 1571, at which period it
must be respectfully affirmed that there was no Municipal
Library in the birthplace of Goethe. Furthermore, the
existing collection does not include the MS. Whether the
original edition was antedated cannot be certainly affirmed,
as it is exceedingly scarce, and we are acquainted with it
only in the reprint of Scheible, and in an unprinted tran-
script by Major Irwin. The work consists of a few curious
plates, in the manner of the seventeenth century, and a few
unintelligible conjurations, all exceedingly brief. The third
of these exhorts the Evil Spirit on the quaint ground that
now it is the time of the Great Name Tetragrammaton.
The purpose of citation is not indicated; the formule are —
Christian, broken up by innumerable crosses, and by names
and terms which defy conjecture as to their significance.
The hierarchy of the spirit is determined by the closing
words: ‘‘I command thee, O Spirit Rumoar, even by Lu-
cifer, thy mighty sovereign.”’


§ 6. The Black Pullet.


‘“The Black Pullet,’’ the ‘‘Druid of Menapienne,’’ ‘‘Red
Magic, or the Cream of the Occult Sciences,’’ with deriva-
tives from the first of these works, such as the ‘‘Queen of
the Hairy Flies,’’ the ‘‘Green Butterfly,’’ &., form a class


87


The Book of Black Magic


by themselves, and, with one exception, are quite unserious
' publications, which can scarcely be called spurious, as they
are almost without pretence.’ They belong to the late end
of the eighteenth century. Dr. Encausse, the head of the
French Martinists, suggests that they were all fabricated at
Rome, and thence goes on to infer that we owe them to the
industry of priests, which seems to follow somewhat loosely
from the evidence, and is indeed of much the same value as
the statement in ‘‘Isis Unveiled,’’ that the habitual practice
of Black Magic at the Vatican could be ‘‘easily proved.’’

The ‘‘ Black Pullet’’ is far the most curious of its class,
and there is indeed sufficient merit in its narrative to lift
it much above the paltry impostures with which it connects.
Its chief occult interest centres in the series of talismanic
rings which it incorporates with the text, itself a species of
magical romance. It makes no claim to antiquity, except
that it embodies its wisdom, and it does not appeal to Solo-
mon. Ina book of Black Magic, as it certainly is, though
the Goétic intention is disguised, such modesty makes for
virtue. Many of the Talismans seem to be original devices,
at least they connect with nothing in occult symbolism
known to the present writer. At the same time they are
constructed in accordance with the rules laid down by the
Fourth Book attributed to Cornelius Agrippa as regards
infernal signatures.

The ‘‘Black Pullet’’ reappeared during its own period
at various dates, with slight alterations—once as the ‘‘ Treas-
ure of the Old Man of the Pyramids,’’ when it was fol-


1 Much depends, however, on the point of view of the critic. A work which,
even in its own country, seems almost unknown, Le Triple Vocabulaire Infernal, a
Manual a ee crae by Finellan, defines the Cabala as the art of commu-
nicating elementary spirits, and adds that among the Grand Cabalas are in-
cluded al) That called the Green Butterfly; (2) That of the Black Pullet; (3)
That of the Queen of Hairy Flies; and (4) That of the Black Screech Owl. The
works containing these mysteries are, it is said, exceedingly rare.


The Rituals of Black Magic


lowed by a sequel or companion under the title of the
‘*Black Screech Owl.’’ It has been reprinted within recent
years at Paris in an edition intended for bibliophiles, but
bearing no indications of bibliographical research. Though
modest in the claims which have been specified, the title of
the original edition is portentous enough, namely, ‘‘The
Black Pullet, or the Hen with the Golden Eggs, comprising
the Science of Magic Talismans and Rings, the Art of Ne-
cromancy and of the Kabbalah, for the Conjuration of
Aerial and Infernal Spirits, of Sylphs, Undines, and
Gnomes, for the acquisition of the Secret Sciences, for the
Discovery of Treasures, for obtaining power to command
all beings, and to unmask all Sciences and Bewitchments.
The whole following the Doctrines of Socrates, Pythagoras,
Zoroaster, Son of the Grand Aromasis, and other phil-
osophers whose works in MS. escaped the conflagration of
the Library of Ptolemy. Translated from the Language of
the Magi and that of the Hieroglyphs by the Doctors Mizza-
boula-Jabamia, Danhuzerus, Nehmahmiah, Judahim, and
Eliaeb. Rendered into French by A. J. S. D. R. L. G. F.”’
The place of publication is Egypt, which probably stands
for Rome, and the date is 740, meaning 1740, which, how-
ever, is untrue, as we shall see. It may be said at once that
there is no pretence in the text to fulfil the magnificent
assurances of the title.


The preface entreats that the ‘‘Black Pullet’’ may not be
confounded with the collections of reveries and errors which
so many have sought to accredit by announcing superna-
tural effects. This request, after due consideration, most
readers will find it impossible to grant. The work, it has
been said, is a romance, and the first thing which it makes
clear is that even the addition of a thousand years to the —


89


The Book of Black Magic.


date in the title is insufficient. It is the narrative of a
man who ‘‘formed part of the expedition to Egypt,’’ and
was ‘‘an officer in the army of the genius.’’ The reference
is, of course, to Napoleon, and the date of composition is
less than a century ago. While in Egypt, the narrator was
sent upon an expedition to the Pyramids, accompanied by
some mounted chasseurs. They lunched under the shadow
of the grand colossus, when they were attacked by a horde
of Arabs of the desert, the comrades of the writer were
slain, and he himself was left for dead upon the ground.
On returning to consciousness, he surrendered himself to
mournful reflections in the immediate anticipation of his
end, and delivered a valedictory address to the setting sun,
when a stone was rolled back in the Pyramid, and a vener-
able man issued forth, who was proclaimed to be a Turk
by his turban. This personage did not fail to discover
the corpses which strewed the desert, nor to identify their
nation. When the officer in his turn was examined, he
manifested life by kissing the hand of the ancient man, who,
superior to all prejudices which might have been dictated
to the ordinary Mussulman by patriotism or religion, took
pity on him, revived him by a wonderful liqueur which put
the wounded man upon his feet, and he followed his pre-
server into the Pyramid, which was the home of the ancient
man, and withal a house of Magic. There were vast halls
and endless galleries, subterranean chambers piled with
treasures, apparitions of blazing lamps, ministering spirits
innumerable, magic suppers; above all things there was the
Black Pullet. In a word, diurnal life was illustrated
throughout by the supernatural; it was a methodised ver-
sion of Aladdin with an inner meaning by Astaroth. The
sage himself proved to be sole heir of the Magi and the


11t is not impossible that the middle of the nineteenth century may be the
period to which it should be assigned.


The Rituals of Black Magic


makers of those Egyptian hieroglyphics which are the ‘‘de-
spair of the learned,’’ and, not least, he was himself in
quest of an heir, for he felt that he was about to pass away.
In fine, the French officer, having acquired the Turkish
language by means of a grammar which had its root in
sorcery, and being thus enabled to communicate with his
protector, which on the whole seems superfluous, seeing that
his protector possessed a talisman which communicated im-
mediate proficiency in all tongues, was instructed im the
powers and wonders of twenty-two talismanic figures and
the rings corresponding, as well as in the secret of the manu-
facture of the Black Pullet, which possessed more skill in
gold-finding than the divining rod in the discovery of water.
After these instructions, in spite of many prayers, and
the ministries of the genius Odous, the just man expired
upon a sofa, while the fortunate kinsman in philosophy
swooned at the feet of his benefactor. In due course, ac-
companied by the genius who had been transferred to his
service, the French officer managed to depart from Egypt,
Jaden with treasures, and with the ashes of the sage in a
costly urn. He took ship for Marseilles, stilled the tem-
pest on the voyage, and returned to his native country.
He made his abode in Provence, spending his days in ex-
periments with the Black Pullet, or in study, meditation,
and rambling. He undertook at length to write this mem-
orial of his good fortune, in which he threatens the pub-
lishers of any pirated edition to adorn them, by means of
a talisman, with ears six inches longer than those of Midas.
But this does not seem to have prevented the publishers.
The Black Pullet disclaims all connection with Black
Magic, and duly connects therewith, firstly by its characters,
and secondly by their pretended power over evil spirts;
though it should be observed that the infernal beings men-
91


The Book of Black Magic


tioned in the title are not devils, but Salamanders—that is
to say, elementary Spirits of Fire. But while it transcends
Black Magic it is not superior to plagiarism, and incorpo-
rates many pages of the Comte de Gabalts.

For the evocation of the genii who served the Old Man
of the Pyramid it suffices to say: THOMaTOS, BENESSER,
FLIANTER. You are then liable to be encompassed by thirty-
three several intelligences. To obtain their respect say:
Litan, Izer, Osnas, and they will bow down before you,
individually remarking: NantHer. The words Soutram,
UBARSINENS will cause them to transport you through the
air wheresoever you are inclined. Upon the utterance of
the one word Rasiam they will return you to your own
abode. It is necessary, however, to be fortified by the
talismans and rings of the master, but they can be obtained
by a cheap process. In the cabinet of the Old Man of the
Pyramid they were formed of
the precious metals and were
resplendent with gems, but
they will answer all practical
purposes if the rings are com-
posed of bronzed steel and the
talismans of satin, in strict
accordance with. the descrip-
tion which here follows.


§ 7. Talismans of the Sage
of the Pyramids.
I. Serves for the conjura-


tion of celestial and infernal
powers. It should be embroi-


ATYGAFAEO


Te in silver upon sky-blue
The characters should be graven on the dered po sky


inner side of the Ring. satin. The evoking words are
92 :


The Rituals of Black Magic


Smras, Ear, Besanar, at which multitudes of spirits will
appear.

II. Gives the love and complaisance of the entire female
sex. It should be embroidered in silver on black satin. The
evoking words are Napres, SuraDIs, MANINER, pronounced
with the ring, which should be on the middle finger of the
left hand, pressed against the lips. They ensure the mani-


TALISMAN IT.


seen bkte


~The characters should be graven on the
inner side of the Ring.


festation of a genius with rose-coloured wings, who, if ad-
dressed with the words SaprEr, Prostas, SOLASTER, will trav-
erse all space to transport you the lady of your heart,
though she were the queen of the Caliph’s seraglio. At
the words Mammes, LAHER, she will be removed by four
slaves.

93


The Book of Black Magic


ITT. Discovers all treasures and ensures their possession.
The figure of the talisman should be embroidered in gold
upon green satin. The words OnaIM, PERANTES, Rasonas-
TOS, Will cause the appearance of seven genii au teint bazane,
each of whom will pour out golden ducats from great bags


TALISMAN III.


The characters should be graven on the
inner side of the Ring.


of hide at the feet of the sorcerer, the operations of this

Grimoire being performed upon a huge scale. Item, a black

hooded bird will be perched upon the shoulder of each spirit.

IV. Discovers the most hidden secrets and enables its
94


The Rituals of Black Magic


possessor to penetrate everywhere unseen. The talisman
should be of violet satin, with the figures embroidered in
silver. It should be held in the left hand, on which also the
ring should be worn, and should be placed close to the ear,
pronouncing the words Nirraz, Rapov, SUNANDAM, when
a distinct voice will utter the desired secret.


TALISMAN IV. . sf suieMAN V.


LEIALUST A NSOows ee


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the
outer side of the ring. outer side of the ring.


V. Will make the most taciturn man bosom himself to
its possessor, whose enemies will also be forced to confess all
their machinations. The talisman should be of gold-col-
oured satin with the figures embroidered in gold. By plac-
ing the ring on the little finger of the left hand, the talisman
against the right ear, and pronouncing the words Nocrar,
RarBaN, the most discreet man will be compelled to unveil his
most secret thoughts. The addition of the word BrmaNnTHER


95


The Book of Black Magic


will force the enemies of the possessor to declare their
projects aloud.

VI. Sets to work enough genii for the immediate
achievement of any work which the possessor may desire
to undertake, and for the stoppage of any which may oppose
him. The talisman should be of lilac satin with the figures
embroidered in shaded silk. The magical words are ZORAMI,
ZaITvUx, ELASsTor.


TALISMAN VI. TALISMAN VII.


eee aed


SOON WU VN-U-Y Vu
esos


KT RCRL AAKARAAM


“VVUVIVVYG »


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the
outer side of the ring. inner side of the Ring.


VII. Has the power to destroy everything; to cause the
fall of hail, thunderbolts, and stars of heaven; to occasion
earthquakes, storms, and so forth. At the same time it pre-
serves the friends of the possessor from accidents. The fig-
ure of the talisman should be embroidered in silver upon
poppy-red satin. The magic words are: (1) Drrav,

: 96 |


The Rituals of Black Magic


Huranpos, for works of destruction; (2) Rmas, TaLIMot,
to command the elements; (3) Atrosis, Narpmwa, for the
fall of hail, &c.; (4) Uvusur, Irar, for earthquake; (5)
HisPEn, TromMapor, for hurricanes and storms; (6) Paran-
THES, Histanos, for the preservation of friends.


TALISMAN VIII.


The characters should be graven on the
outer side of the Ring.

VIII. Gives invisiblity, even to the eyes of genii, so
that God alone shall witness the actions of the possessor. It
is accompanied by the power of penetrating everywhere
and passing through brick walls. The magic words are
BENATIR, CARARKAU, Depos, ETinarMI. For each operation
the ring must be placed upon a different finger of the right
hand. The talisman is of yellow satin embroidered with
black silk.

IX. Transports the possessor to any part of the world,

97


The Book of Black Magic


and that without danger. The potent words are Rapitvus,


POLASTRIEN, TERPANDU, OstRATA, PERICATUR, ERMas. The
talisman is of puce-coloured satin embroidered with. gold.


TALISMAN IX. TALISMAN X.


%5 7 The,


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the
inner side of the Ring. outer side of the ring.


X. Opens all locks at a touch, whatever precautions have
been taken to secure them. The magic words are SARIvaP,
PERNISOX, OTTARIM. The talisman is of deep blue satin em-
broidered with silver.

XI. Sets the possessor in any desired house without the
preliminary of entering, and reads the thoughts of all per-
sons, so that they can be helped or harmed at pleasure.
The talisman is of light grey satin embroidered with gold.
To know thoughts, place it on your head, breathe upon the
ring, and say: O Tarot, NizarL, EsTarnas, TANTAREZ. To

98


The Rituals of Black Magic


serve those who deserve it: Nista, SaPer, VISNos, and they
will forthwith enjoy every kind of prosperity. To punish
your enemies or evil persons: XatTROSs, NiFER, Roxas, Tor-
Tos, and they will be immediately delivered to frightful
torments.


TALISMAN XI, TALISMAN XII.


eleceeiiie ‘mae Ss


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the
outer side of the ring. inner side of the Ring.

XIT. Destroys all projects formed against the possessor
and compels rebellious spirits. The talisman is of rose-col-
oured satin embroidered with silver. It should be placed
upon a table, the left hand imposed upon it; the ring should
be on the middle finger of the right hand, and the operator,
with bent head, should repeat in a low voice the words:
SenapPos, TERFITA, Estamos, PERFITER, NOTARIN.

XIII. Endows the possessor with every virtue and tal-

99


The Book of Black Magic


ent, as well as with the desire to do good. All substances
of evil quality can be rendered excellent by means of
it. For the first advantage, it is sufficient to raise up the
talisman, having the ring upon the first joint of the third
finger of the right hand, and to pronounce the words:
TURAN, Estonos, F'uza. For the second say: Vazotas, TEs-


TALISMAN XIII. TALISMAN XIV.


HTSFEGAIEISEO WwroWwSZGVO2%


The characters should be graven on theThe characters should be graven on the
outer side of the ring. outer side of the ring.


TaNaR. The talisman should be of saffron-coloured satin
-embroidered with silver.

XIV. Gives the knowledge of all minerals and vegeta-
bles, with their virtues and properties; gives also the uni-
versal medicine, and the faculty of healing all sick persons.
The talisman is of orange-coloured satin embroidered with
silver. It should be worn upon the breast, and the ring in
a locket (kerchief) round the neck by means of a ribbon


100


The Rituals of Black Magic


of flame-coloured silk. The operative words are: RETER-
REM, SALIBAT, CRATARES, HISASTER.

XV. Gives immunity from the most ferocious animals;
gives the means of overcoming them; gives the knowledge of
their language; and drives mad animals away. The talis-
man should be of deep green satin embroidered with gold.


TALISMAN XV. TALISMAN XVI.


fam {>
BRAG Ges LOWS WFYI AIA"


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the
outer side of the ring. outer side of the ring.

For the first three objects say: Hocatos, IMoraD, SURATER,

MarkinA. For the last: TRUMANTREM, Ricona, Estuprt,

Oxa.

XVI. Gives discernment for’ the good or bad intentions
of any person. The talisman is of black satin embroidered
with gold. It should be placed upon the heart, and the ring
on the little finger of the right hand. The words are:
Crostes, Furtmnot, Katrpa, GARINOS.

101


The Book of Black Magic


XVIT. Gives all talents and a profound knowledge of
all arts, so that the possessor will outshine their professors.
The talisman, which must be carried on the person, should
be of white satin embroidered with black silk. The opera-
tive words are: Riras, ONALUN, TERSORIT, OMBAS, SERPIPAS,
QUITATHAR, ZAMARATH, specifying the art which it is de-
sired to possess.


TALISMAN XVII. TALISMAN XVIII.


‘
A


WIP GQ PLAUC IS 2104 Goer MH


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the


inner side of the Ring smner side of the Ring.


XVIII. Gives good fortune in any lottery. The talis-
man is of cerise-coloured satin, embroidered with gold and
silver. It should be bound upon the left arm by means of a
white ribbon, and the ring must be on the little finger of the
right hand. The words are: Roxess for a winning number,
Piuatus for an ambes-ace, Zotoas for a denary, TULITAS
for a quaternary, XaTaniTos for a quinary, being careful to

102 :


The Rituals of Black Magic


pronounce all the words at the quine. At cards they should
be repeated when shuffling for self or partner. Before be-
ginning, touch your left arm with your right hand in the
neighbourhood of the talisman, and kiss the ring. These
little contrivances can be effected, says the honest Grimoire,
without exciting the notice of your opponent.

XIX. Gives the power of directing all the infernal hosts


TALISMAN XIX. TALISMAN XX.


ia
thy\-—-~
4 f s
G: ;
i
q
we ‘ }
my:
le


 WREAISrmmoRe UP 19- YH eX


The characters should be graven on the The characters should be graven on the
outer side of the Ring. outer side of the Ring.


against the enemies of its possessor. The talisman is of
greyish white satin shaded. It may be worn in any manner,
and the words are: OSTHARIMAN, VISANTIPAROS, NOCTATUR.

XX. Gives the knowledge of the counsels of Infernus
and the means of rendering its projects abortive. The talis-
man is of red satin, with the center embroidered in gold, the
border in silver, and the figures in black and white silk. It

103 7


The Book of Black Magic


should be worn upon the breast, and the ring on the first
joint of the little finger of the left hand. The words are:
Actatos, Catrpta, BEJOURAN, ITaPaAN, MARNUTUS.
The range of human ambition recognized by Ceremonial
Magic being always somewhat
Tee MACOLACK rule. -estricted, it is not surprising
 —_ that the offices of these talis-
mans frequently overlap one
another, or that some of them
correspond very closely to the
powers ascribed to the Magus
by the transcendental science
of the ‘“‘Arbatel.”’ The talis-
mans are preceded in the orig-
inal by the figure of a magical
Suis rod, stained, says the letter-


@ GT] press which accompanies it,
SIU A5ch- with the blood of a lamb, and


These characters should be inscribed ha the form of
spon the Rod with Chinese Ink. ving & serpent.


The Description is somewhat
obscure, but the wand can be
apparently bent, and the mouth
and tail joined by means of a
golden chain, so as to form a
circle. The wand should be six
feet long, and when bent can be
used as a circle of evocation.
There is also a figure of the
grand magical circle, but it is

THE GOETIC CIRCLE OF THE BLACK PULLET. NOt described in the text. There
are thus twenty-two figures in all, and the inclusion of the
word Taror in the list of evoking terms is not without


104


The Rituals of Black Magic


significance in this connection. A certain correspondence
between the talismans and the Tarot trumps is indeed un-
mistakable, at least in some instances, and seems to indicate
that the work has a more serious occult aspect than would
appear at first sight.


§ 8. The Gold-Finding Hen.


We must hasten, however, to the incubation of the gold-
finding hen, which is the head and crown of the proceedings.
The grand Oromasis, the father of Zoroaster, was the first
person who possessed one of these marvellous fowls, which
are hatched from an egg in the following manner. Take
aromatic woods, such as aloes, cedar, orange, citron, laurel,
iris-root, with rose-leaves dried in the sun. Place them in
_ @ golden chafing-dish; pour balsamic oil over them; add
the finest incense and clear gum. Next say: ATHas, SoLt-
NAM, ERMINATOS, PasaIm; set a glass over the chafing-
dish; direct the rays of the sun thereon, and the wood will
kindle, the glass will melt, a sweet odour will fill the place,
and the compost will burn speedily to ashes. Place these
ashes in a golden egg while still red-hot; lay the egg upon
a black cushion; cover it with a bell-glass of faceted rock-
crystal; then lift up your eyes and stretch your arms
towards heaven and cry: O Sanartaper, Ismai, NonvTApPI-
Lus, ERTIVALER, CANOPISTUS. Expose the glass to the most
fierce rays of the sun till it seems enveloped in flame, the
egg ceases to be visible, and a slight vapour rises. Presently
you will discern a black pullet just beginning to move, when
if you say: Bxrnusas, TeEsprpas, it will take wings and
nestle in your bosom.

While this is the true process of the Pyramids, and easy
no doubt to an heir direct of Oromasis, it is obvious that it

105


The Book of Black Magic


has its difficulties to those born merely under the common
moon of sorcery, and, merciful, like all its companions, to
human limitations, the Grimoire provides an alternative
method suitable to persons of small means. Take an un-
spotted egg; expose it to the meridian rays of the sun; then
select the blackest hen you can meet with; if it have any
coloured feathers, pluck them. Should the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals not intervene oppor-
tunely, contrive to hood this bird with a kind of black bonnet
drawn over the eyes so that it cannot see. Leave it the
use of its beak. Shut it up in a box also lined with some
black material, and large enough to hold it comfortably.
Place the box in a room where no light of day can pene-
trate; give food only in the night to the fowl; see that no
noise disturbs it, and set it to hatch the egg. As every
thing will be black to the bird, its imagination, which is
likely enough, will be overwhelmed by the sense of black-
ness, and if it should survive the incarceration, it will ulti-
mately incubate a perfectly black chicken, provided only
that the operator by his wisdom and virtue is worthy to
participate in such sacred and divine mysteries. It does not
appear how or why a fowl incubated after this uncom-
fortable fashion should have a particular instinct for de-
tecting the places wherein gold is hidden, but such is the
faculty attributed to it, and it can only be concluded that
the ‘‘Black Pullet’’ is a degree more foolish than its idle
company of Grimoires.

The simplified process did not, however, in the opinion
of sorcery, seem the last word which it was possible to say
upon the subject. Despite the threatened vengeance of the
heir of Oromasis, the mystery was adapted by the later
editors of the ‘‘Red Dragon,’’ and reappears as the Grand
Cabala, without which no other can succeed. In this, its


106


The Rituals of Black Magic


last transformation, it becomes a recipe for evoking the
devil which seems to breathe the true spirit of Goetic genius.
Its success, it may be premised, will depend upon a recol-
lected and devotional spirit in the operator, together with
a clean conscience; otherwise, in place of commanding the
evil spirit, the latter will command him. This understood, -
the process itself is simple. You have merely to secure a
black hen which has never been crossed by the male bird,


Ss


- *
a a
Se se


~
a


=


. - \ =
yk
2
x gee


ee:


el


a
, A ‘d


e
-
_


ieee.
3 r3


wa


ites
ie Ot


THD APPARITION OF THD GRAND CABALA,


and to do this in such a manner that it shall not cackle;
it is best therefore to seize it in its sleep, clutching it by the
neck, but not more than is necessary to prevent it from
erying. You must repair to the highroad, walk till you
come to a cross-way, and there, on the stroke of midnight,


107


The Book of Black Magic


describe a circle with a cypress rod, place yourself in the ~
midst thereof, and tear the bird in twain, pronouncing three
times the words, Eloim, Essaim, frugativi et appellavt.
Next turn to the east, kneel down, recite a prayer, and con-
clude it with the Grand Appellation, when the Unclean
Spirit will appear to you in a scarlet surcoat, a yellow vest,
and breeches of pale green. His head will resemble that of
a dog, but his ears will be those of an ass, with two horns
above them; he will have the legs and hoofs of a calf. He
will ask for your orders, which you will give as you please,
and as he cannot do otherwise than obey you, you may be-
come rich on the spot, and thus the happiest of men. Such
at least is the judgment of the Grimoire. Whether the vic-
tim of the process is to be torn in pieces alive does not ex-
plicitly appear, but may be inferred from the initial pre-
caution.


Digitized by Google


Digitized by Google


fl
ees


10834


PART II
THE COMPLETE GRIMOIRE


109


CHAPTER I


The Preparation cf the Operator


§ 1. Concerning the Love of God.


HE rites of Transcendental Magic are divine and
religious rites, and the counsels, spiritual and moral,

which are found in its instructions are, in their

way, the counsels of perfection, whatever element of pueril-
ity may radically obtain in its experiments.’ The Compos-
ite Rituals, despite the result of their analysis, also par-
take largely of the nature of religious observances, at times
Judaistic, at times Christian. In both cases this fact is
readily intelligible; to communicate with the fabled Spirits
of the Firmament, and to practise an art which offers to its
adepts the regeneration of Enoch, King of the Inferior


World,? ‘‘who was not, for God took him,’”’ may well de-


mand a high degree of sanctity from its candidates; while
to dominate the so-called Spirits of the Elements, the Kab-
balistic Klippoth and the Evil Demons, it is reasonable to
assume that the Magus must be free from common weak-


1The Analysis of the “Arbatel of Magic” in Part I. establishes this point, but
the following passages may be cited in support of the statement. “In all things
call upon the Name of the Lord, and without prayer unto God, ero His only-
begotten Son, do not thou undertake to do or to think anythin h. 2. “Let
the word of God never depart from thy mouth.” Jb. Aph. ee unto God in
all things.” Jb. Aph. 4. “Desire from God alone.” Ib. gree 11. “Before all

ings, be watchful in this, that your name is written in Heaven.”

3 The secret of this regeneration is promised to the adept in “Arbatel,” Aph. 24.


111


The Book of Black Magic


ness, from common vice,' and must be fortified by the grace
and favour of the superior world. Given the magical stand-
point in each case, the conditions essential to operation
seem, in this respect, above challenge. But it will assuredly
appear at first sight a most bizarre anomaly that Black
Magic should involve also religious observances and should
exact similar conditions, both inward and outward, from
those who would undertake its enterprises. It is not, as
generally supposed, either Christianity a rebours or a re-
versed religion of Israel; it is not the intentional profana-
tion of religious ritual and observance; it is something less
outrageous but logically more insensate; so far as it has re-
course to such ritual and such observance, it 1s not to do
outrage to God in the interests of diabolism, but to derive
power and virtue from above for the more successful con-
trol of Evil Spirits, and this obtains indifferently whether
the purpose of the operator be otherwise lawful or not.

The Divine Love, says the book of ‘‘True Black Mag-
ic,’?? must precede the acquisition of the Scenece of Solo-
mon, son of King David, who said: The beginning and
Key of my Wisdom are the fear of God, to do Him honour,
to adore Him with great contrition of heart, and to invoke
His aid in all our intentions and aspirations; which fulfill-
ing, God will lead us into the good way.®

To account for this anomaly it is insufficient to say that
the book of ‘‘True Black Magic’’ is simply the ‘‘Key of
Solomon’’ adapted to Goetic intentions. In the first place,
as already seen, it is impossible to read the Goetic intention
out of either of the Clavicles; and, in the second place, the
shcie cuareesertode defer Ink a word we mud overcome them ta dale
strength without ever being overcome by their ‘weaknesses.”—ELIPHAS Levi, Rituel
de la Haute Magie, c. 4.


2 Book I. c. 1.
8 An adapted rendering of “The Key of Solomon,” Book I. ¢. 1.


The Preparation of the Operator


same characteristics are found in the Grimoires which de-
rive least of all from the Clavicles, namely, that of Honor-
ius, and that called the ‘‘Grand Grimoire.’”’ To meditate
continually on the undertaking and to centre every hope in
the infinite goodness of the Great Adonay, is the rule estab-
lished by the latter as the first principle of success.*
Nor does the insensate nature of the processes of Black
- Magic offer explanation by itself. The attempt to propi-
tiate the Deity by means of prayers, sacrifices, and absti-
nence, and thus obtain the Divine assistance for the success-
ful consummation of hideous offences and preposterous or
impossible undertakings, is, of course, madness; for the
God acknowledged and invoked by Goetic Magic is not the
Principle of Evil, as the myth of Modern Satanism sup-
poses,” but the servance followed in reality from the inter-
pretation placed by ‘‘terrible and venerable Deity’’ who de-
stroyed the power of the rebellious angels, the Jehovah of
the Jewish rituals and the Trinity of the Christian magical
eycle. The insane observance followed in reality from the
interpretation placed by Goétic Theurgy on the funda-
mental doctrine of practical magic, namely, the power of
Divine words to compel the obedience of all spirits to those
who could pronounce them.® Collections of these words and
names were recited as invoking and binding forms, and,

2 Grand Grimoire, Book I. c. 1.

2To do evil because it is pleasing to the Prince of Evil did not enter into the
conception of Sorcery. Refinements of this kind are of late date, and mostly of
French invention. The sorcerer who sought to do evil and had recourse for as-
sistance to Satan was actuated by no recondite motive; he ministered merely to
his own propensities for lust, wealth, or revenge. He used Satan as an instru-
ment treated him and his inferiors as slaves, and always reckoned ultimately to
elude the dangers of such dealings.

3 The doctrine is summarized in a sentence by Eliphas Lévi, when he declares
that the virtue of things has created words. Cornelius Agrippa refers it to Platonic
teaching, affirming that a certain power or life belonging to the idea underlies the
“form of the signification,” that is, the voice or word, whence he also says that
Magicians regard words as the “rays of things.” De Occulta Philosophia, Book


I. c. 70. Compare also his rendering of the Platonic doctrine that the form comes
first from the idea. Ibid., c 13.
113


The Book of Black Magic


incorporated into a suitable setting of official prayers, were
used in all magical ceremonies. Black Magic was simply
their application to unlawful purposes. The utterance of
the Divine Name, which was supposed to make the devils
tremble and place them at the will of the Magus, was at least
equally powerful, it was argued, to enforce their obedience
for a purpose in consonance with their own nature. Then
seeing that prayer to God and the invocation of the Divine
Names presuppose a proper Spirit of reverence, devotion,
and love as the condition upon which prayer is heard, it
became a condition in Goetia. The first impossibility re-
quired of the adept in Black Magic is therefore that he
should love God before he bewitches his neighbour; that he
should put all his hopes in God before he makes pact with
Satan; that, in a word, he should be good in order to do
evil.
§ 2. Concerning Fortitude.


The spiritual intention of the operator being thus deter-
mined, his next step was the acquisition of the mental atti-
tude appropriate to his future work. We may picture him
in the traditional state of the sorcerer—poor, proscribed,
envious, ambitious, and having no capacity for legitimate
enterprises. Unable to earn money, he hankers after hidden
treasures, and haunts those spots up and down the country-
side which are reputed to conceal them. He has done this
presumably for a long time before determining to betake
himself to Magic, but the earth will not yield up her hoards,
for the gnomes and the Earth-Spirits, the Alastors and the
Demons of the Solitudes, stand guard over the secrets of
dead misers when the human ghost has ceased to walk in
the neighbourhood. He does not long hesitate when he
learns that the Grimoires of Black Magic are full of dark-

114


The Preparation of the Operator


some rites and fell, mysterious words which compel or expel
those guardians. The Church and State may threaten him
with a fire for his flesh and a fire for his soul, but by watch-
fulness and secresy he hopes to elude the one, and the other
is a distant danger. Obviously, however, in order to reach
his determination, he must arm himself with intrepidity
and prudence, and this is the first counsel of his guides to
the sanctum Regnum of Goétia.

‘“QO men! O impotent mortals!’ cries the author of the
“‘Grand Grimoire,’’? ‘‘tremble at your own temerity when
you blindly aspire to the possession of a science so pro-
found. Lift up your minds beyond your limited sphere,
and learn of me that before you undertake anvthing it is
necessary that you should become firm and immovable, be-
sides being scrupulously attentive in the exact observation,
step by step, of all things whatsoever that I shall tell you,
without which precautions every operation will turn to your
disadvantage, confusion, and total destruction; while, on
the contrary, by following my injunctions with precision,
you will rise from your meanness and poverty, achieving a
complete success in all your enterprises. Arm yourselves,
therefore, with intrepidity, prudence, wisdom, and virtue,
as qualifications for this grand and illimitable work, in
which I have passed sixty-and-seven years, toiling night and
day for the attainment of success in this sublime object.’’?


§ 3. Concerning Continence and Abstinence.


The Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, referred to Cor-
nelius Agrippa, but composite in character and spurious in
attribution, as already seen, gives an exceedingly curious
explanation of the rule of sanctity prescribed by all forms


1 Book I. c. 2.
3 The speaker is pseudo-Solomon.


The Book of Black Magic


of Ceremonial Magic. The instruments used in the Art are
ineffective without consecration. The act of consecration is
the act by which virtue is imparted to them, and this virtue
derives from two sources, the power of sanctification resid-
ing in Divine Names and in the prayers which incorporate
them, and the power of sanctification residing in the holi-
ness of the person consecrating.’ An indispensable part of
this holiness was the preservation of chastity for a defined
period preceding operation, and a fast of graduated sever-
ity. In their directions concerning these points the Rituals
of Black Magic differ little from their prototypes, the ear-
lier Kevs of Solomon, the work of pseudo-Agrippa,’ or
‘‘The Magical Elements’’ of Peter de Abano. Here is the
direction of the Neophyte which occurs in the ‘‘Grand
Grimoire’: ‘‘You must abstain during an entire quarter of
the moon from the society of females, so as to protect your-
self from the possibility of impurity. You must commence
your magical quarter at the same moment with that of the
luminary itself, by a pledge to the Grand Adonay, who is the
Master of all Spirits, to make no more than two collations
daily, that is to say, in every twenty-four hours of the said
quarter of the Moon, which collation should be taken at noon


2 Here the Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy merely reproduces the instruc-
tion of the genuine work. “Consecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which
a spiritual soul, being drawn by proportion and conformity, is infused into the
matter of our works according to the tradition of Magical Art rightly and law-
fully prepared, and our work is vivified by the spirit of understanding. The
efficacy of consecration is perfected by two things especially, viz. the virtue of the
person himself consecrating, and the virtue of the prayer itself. In the person is
required holiness of life and a power to consecrate. The former, nature and desert
perform; the latter is acquired by imitation and dignification.” Book III. c. 62. The
virtue of prayer derives from its institution by God, the ordinance of the Church,
or the commemoration which it may make of sacred things.

2So alse in the Third Book De Oculta Philosophia, which is especially de-
voted to Ceremonial Magic, the student is directed to abstain “from all those
things which infect either mind or spirit,” and above all from idleness and
luxury, “for the soul being suffocated by the body and the lust thereof, can discern
nothing that is celestial,” c. 55. The fourth book merely says: “Let the man
who would receive an oracle from the good spirits be chaste, pure, and confessed.”
Compare Peter de Abano: “The operator should be clean and purified for the
space of nine days before beginning the work; he should be confessed also, and


116


The Preparation of the Operator


and midnight, or, if it better please you, at seven o’clock in
the morning and at the corresponding hour in the evening,
using the following prayer previously to each repast during
the whole of the said quarter :—


PRAYER.


I implore Thee, O Thou Grand and Powerful Aponay,
Master of all Spirits! I beseech Thee, O Exom! I implore
Thee, O JEHovaM! O Grand Aponay, I give unto Thee my
soul, my heart, my inward parts, my hands, my feet, my de-
sires, my entire being! O Grand Aponay, deign to be fa-
vourable unto me! So be it. Amen.

Then take your repast, disrobe as seldom and sleep as
little as possible during the whole of the said period, but
meditate continually on your undertaking, and centre all
your hopes in the infinite goodness of the Great Adonay.’

The ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius,’’ which is exclusively in-
tended for persons in Holy Orders, restricts the period of
fasting to three days, as will be seen later on, and makes
no condition of continence in those who are devoted to cel-
ibacy. The Grimorium Verum prescribes a similar period,
and adds that the fast should be most austere, that human.
society and human communications must be avoided as
much as possible, but that of women especially. The ‘‘Book
of True Black Magic’’ varies the instruction as follows :*
If the Priest-Exorcist would succeed in operation, he must,
when all things else are prepared, abstain from every labour
of soul and body, from much eating and drinking, from all
luxury, from all vice, and he must meditate on those things
which he is about to put in practice for nine complete days


1Grand Grimoire, Book I. c. 2.
2An adaptation of the “Key of Solomon,” Book II. c. 4.


117


The Book of Black Magic


before beginning the work; his assistants—if any—must do
in like mariner, so that all may be truly fulfilled. Let them
begin by the following prayer, which should be recited twice
in the night and once in the day.


PRAYER.


O Lord God Almighty, be Thou favourable unto us,
though unworthy to lift our eyes to Heaven by reason of the
multitude of our offences! O God all-merciful, who willest
not the death of a sinner, but rather his true conversion,
bestow Thy grace on us! O Lord, O God, full of compas-
sion, aid us in this work which we are about to perform,
that Thy Name may be blessed for ever! Amen.*

The last days of the fast should be additionally strict,
the meals being limited to bread and water, with abstinence
from all sin and repetition of the above prayer.


§ 4. Concerning the External Preparation of the Operator,
and firstly Concerning Ablution.


The rite of lustration being the sacramental mark of in-
ward cleanliness, is prescribed in all magical ceremonies,
and is equally important in Goetic art. The ordinary daily
ablution itself becomes symbolical. When the operator
rises in the morning during the preparatory triduum pre-
scribed by the Grimorium Verum, his hands and face must


1 The following is added in the Clavicle, loc. cit.: “O Lord God, Father Eternal!

Thou who are seated upon Cherubim and Seraphim, who beholdest the earth
and the sea! Unto Thee do I lift up my hands, and beseech Thine aid alone—Thou
who art the fulfillment of good works, who givest rest unto those who toil, who
humblest the proud, who art Author of all life and Destroyer of death. Our
rest art Thou, Protector of those who call upon Thee; do Thou guard and defend
me in this undertaking, O Thou who livest and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.


118


The Preparation of the Operator


be sponged with a clean white cloth, using water which has
been previously exorcised according to the indications of the
Ritual * and reciting the


PREPARATORY PRAYER.


Lord God Aponay, who hast formed man out of nothing
to Thine own image and likeness, and me also, unworthy
sinner as I am, deign, I pray Thee, to bless > and sanctify
this water, that it may be healthful to my body and soul,
that all delusion may depart from me. O Lord God, Al-
mighty and Ineffable, who didst lead forth Thy people
from the land of Egypt, and didst cause them to pass dry-
shod over the Red Sea! Grant that I may be cleansed by
this water from all my sins, and may appear innocent be-
fore Thee. Amen.


Fhe ‘‘ Book of True Black Magic’’ observes that the bath
is most necessary for Magical Art,? and that it must be
taken on the final day of the fast, when the exorcisor has
been cleansed from all sins, when he has written with the
pen of the Art, upon virgin paper or parchment, all the
conjurations and exorcisms required in the practice, and
has performed all the other preparatory ceremonies. From
the crown of his head to the soles of his feet, he must purify
himself with warm exorcised water, saying as he does so:
‘‘O Lord Adonay, who hast formed me in Thine image and
.in Thy likeness, deign to bless and sanctify this water, so

1From these indications it follows literally that such water would hold quick-
lime in solution. The passage stands thus: “Warning: The said water must be
that which was previously exorcised, wherein thy lime was put”—namely, for the


dressing of the lambskin. But water consecrated at the same time as most
probably intended.

2 The statement is adapted from the “Key of Solomon,” Book II. c. 5, but the
analogy ends with the pececaonen of warm water; the prayers differ, and the whole
ceremony is simplified in the Goétic ritual.


119


The Book of Black Magic


so that it may become unto me the salvation of my soul and
body, and that no wickedness may ever find place upon me.”’
The Psalms Dominus tlluminatsto mea and Diatt insiprens
in corde suo should be added.'' Then he shall dry himself.

The prayer following must be repeated—five times dur-
ing the day and four times during the night—for the space
of three days: ASTROSCHIO, ASATH, @ sacra BEDRIMUBAL,
FELUT, ANABOTOS, SERABILEM, SERGEN, GEMEN, DOMOS. O
Lord God, who art seated above the heavens, who beholdest
the depths, grant me, I pray Thee, that those things which
I conceive in my mind may also be executed by me, through
Thee, O Great God, who livest and reignest for ever and
ever! Amen.


§ 5. Concerning the External Preparation of the Operator,


and secondly Concerning the Vestments.


The use of special garments in the ceremonies of Magic
follows reasonably enough from the religious character
ascribed to these operations. Peter de Abano recommends
a priest’s garment if possible, by which an alb may be
understood.’ ‘‘'Fhe Book of Black Magic,’’ following the
‘‘Key of Solomon,’’ and representing the Jewish rite, pre-
scribes an outer vestment like that of the Levites, with the


1These Psalms are numbered 13 and 26 in the Vulgate. They were possibly
selected on account of the symbolism attaching to these numbers. Thirteen refers
to death and resurrection into new life; it thus connects with the regeneration
typified by the bath. Twenty-six is the number of Jehovah. In the Authorized
Version these Psalms appear as 14 and 27.


2A long garment of white linen, close before and behind, covering the whole
body even to the feet, and cinctured by a girdle—such is the ordinance of pseudo-


oo 120


The Preparation of the Operator


following characters embroidered in red silk upon the
breast :—


bier’
SILL OL ANT”


All garments, even to the shirt, must be of linen cloth,’ and
when assuming them these words should be recited: ANTON,
AMATOR, EMITES, THEODONIEL, PoNCoR, Pacor, ANITOR’; by
the virtue of these most holy Angelic Names do I clothe my-
self, O Lord, in my Sabbath garments, that so I may fulfil,
even unto their term, all things which I desire to effect
through Thee, Most Holy Aponay, whose kingdom and rule
endure for ever and ever. Amen.

The shoes and hat should be of white leather, bearing the
same characters* written in cinnabar diluted with gum-
water, the pen of the Art being used. The following names
must be written about the hat: * JEHOVAH, behind; ADoNAY,
on the right hand; Exvoy on the left; and Grsor,® on the
front.


1 According to the ‘ ey of Solomon” the thread of which they are made should
be pun oy a young maiden.

2 The “Key of Solomon” renders these names differently, namely, Amor, Amator,
Amides, Ideodaniach, Pamor, Plaior, Anitor, and for Sabbath garments substitutes
Vestments of Power.

3 se characters are given for the garment and the shoes by the Clavicle.
They no anal to those of the Grimoire. :

‘For the hat or bonnet a crown is prescribed in the Clavicle, and it should be
made of virgin paper. : .

5In place of these words the “Key of Solomon” substitutes El and Elohim.


121


CHAPTER II


Che Initial Rites and Ceremonies
§ 1. Concerning the Virtues of the Planets.


HE ‘‘Key of Solomon the King”’ is the only Magical

Ritual which regulates the operations of Magical

Art in accordance with a formal attribution of cer-

tain hours in the day and night to the rule and influence of

certain planets, and the Book of ‘‘True Black Magic’’ is

the only Goetic Grimoire which follows the Clavicle closely

in this as in other respects.’ The directions given are, how-

ever, exceedingly confused. The common attribution of the

seven days to the seven planets obtains in both cases, and
is set out in the Grimoire as follows :?—


Solday’ . = Satun . . =e . « wm» Saturday.
Zedex lw om jupiter . «my « .w Thureday.
Madime . = Mars . +: +8  . . = Tuesday.
Zemen . == Sol « « OQ « < .m Sunday.
Hogos « =m Venus 5 * 9 - « -= Friday.
Cocao = Mercury. .-= Y : ..o= Wednesday.
Zeveac = Moon . ;..2°) ~ .* Monday.”


But as there is inequality in the length of the days, says
the Grimoire, that is to say, the comparative duration of day


1It should be observed, however, that favourable days and hours are oc-
casionally mentioned, but there is no attempt at a systematic salutation of the times
and seasons tre ed to beanies ee

2 The a $ given in the ae are corruptions of Hebrew
words, and the Engloh editor of ‘ of “The Key of Solomon” has restored their aoe
orthography, as follows :—Shabbathai, Tzedek, Medios Shemesh, Nogah,


122


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


and night varies in accordance with the times of sunrise and
sunset, so also the hours of the planets are unequal. When
the day is, say, fifteen hours, to ascertain how many minutes
compose an hour of the planet, multify the fifteen hours by
five; the result is seventy-five, and as many minutes will
form the hour of the planet of that day. The corresponding
hours of the night are nine; these multiplied by five pro-
duce forty-five, and as many minutes will form the hour of .
the planet of the night. The same method may be followed
through all seasons of the year.


But in any given day of twenty-four hours the number
of minutes is 1440, as against 1530 in the above computation,
and the method is therefore absurd.?’ The attribution ac-
cepted by all writers on Natural Magic, and corresponding
with the angelical succession in Peter de Abano, will be
found in the following :-—


TABLE OF PLANETARY HOURS COMPUTED FROM MIDNIGHT
TO MIDNIGHT


Hours or tHe Day


Sunday. Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. Thursday. Friday. Saturday.
1. Sun..... Moon....Mars....Merc.... Jup...... Venus. ..Sat.
2. Venus...Sat...... Sun..... Moon....Mars....Merc.... Jup.


10. Merc....Jup...... Venus. ..Sat...... Sun..... Moon... Mars
11. Moon...Mars....Merc.....Jup...... Venus...Sat....... Sun


1It offers no analogy’ with the system set forth in the Clavicle, nor can it be
definitely traced to any magical authority within the knowledge of the writer.


123


The Book of Black Magic


Hours or THE NIGHT


1. Jup...... Venus...Sat...... Sun..... Moon....Mars.... Mere.
2. Mars....Merc.....Jup...... Venus... Sat...... Sun..... Moon
3. Sun..... Moon... Mars....Merc.....Jup...... Venus... Sat.
4. Venus.. .Sat...... Sun..... Moon....Mars....Merc.....Jup.
5. Merc....Jup...... Venus...Sat...... Sun....- Moon....Mars


8. Jup...... Venus...Sat...... Sun..... Moon....Mars....Mere.

9. Mars....Merc.....Jup...... Venus... Sat...... Sun..... Moon
10. Sun..... Moon....Mars....Merc.....Jup...... Venus... Sat.
11. Venus..Sat...... Sun..... Moon....Mars....Merc.... Jup.
12. Merc....Jup...... Venus...Sat...... Sun...... Moon...Mars


It will be seen from this table that there is a recurring
rule of the planets in unbroken succession through the
whole week, after which the sequence recommences in the
same order, each planet during the first and the eighth of the
day hours and the third and the tenth of the night hours of
the day referred to that planet. These constitute the plane-
tary hours.

The ‘‘Book of Black Magic,”’ still following and con-
fusing the statements of the Clavicle,’ lays down that the
hours of Saturn, Mars, and Venus are good for communion
with spirits; the hour of Saturn serves for invoking souls in :
hell, and to have news of those who have died naturally.
The souls of those who have been slain should be invoked
in the hour and also on the day of Mars. It adds that ex-
periments made faithfully and with great diligence, observ-
ing all that is laid down, will be invariably verified, but to
fail over the smallest part will void perfection in any.

' The hours of Saturn and of Mars are also good for prep-
aration on those days when they are in conjunction with
the Moon, or indeed with one another.? In a contrary or


1In the version which follows, which condenses and summarises the original,
ae ae attempt to reduce them to order, and to make them consistent, if not
intelligible.

2The “Key of Solomon” says that the hours of Saturn and of Mars, and also
the days in which the Moon is in conjunction with these planets, are admirable
for experiments of hatred, enmity, and discord.


124


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


quadrate aspect they are good for experiences of hatred,
lawsuits, enmities, discords, and so forth. The hours of the
Sun, Jupiter, and Venus, especially their planetary hour,
are favourable both to ordinary and extraordinary experi-
ments not included in those already mentioned. Those of
the Moon are especially suited to the conjuration of spirits,
works of necromancy, and the finding of stolen goods; but
the luminary must be collocated and in a terrestrial sign—
that is to say, (in conjunction) with Mercury for love, fa-
yours, and invisibility; for works of hatred and discord in
a sign belonging to the fiery triplicity—Aries, Leo, Sagit-
tarius; for extraordinary experiences in an aquatic sign—
Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces. Should, however, the observa-
tion of these rules seem over-difficult, do this only—see that
the Moon waxing is in an equal number of degrees with the
Sun; it is then very good for the performance of the above
experiments. When the full Moon is in opposition to the
Sun, it is excellent for warlike, riotous, and discordant ex-
periments; in its last quarter it favours works which deal
directly with operations of destruction and ruin. The best
time for the experiences of death and invisibility is when
the Moon is almost deprived of light.

When the Moon is in conjunction with the Sun nothing
must be undertaken, because it is an unfortunate time and
all things fail therein; but when in its crescent period, actu-
ated with light, any experiences may be prepared and any
writings and operations accomplished, especially for con-
versing with spirits. It must, however, be the day of Mer-
eury and in the hour of that planet, the Moon being in an
earthly or aérial sign, as above said, and in a pair number
with the Sun.*


1 The attribution in the opel is pcan this portion not only erroneous,
but seems to involve impossible positions. It has been corrected partially, in ac-
cordance with the Clavicle.


125


The Book of Black Magic
§ 2. A General Instruction concerning the Instruments


required for the Art.


Most Goétic rituals specify with considerable minuteness
the instruments which are required for the operations, and
in these respects, but with variations peculiar to themselves,
and distinguishing them also from one another, they follow
the authority of the ‘‘Key of Solomon.’’ Peter de Abano
tells us nothing concerning them, nor yet pseudo-Agrippa,
with the one exception of the sword, which, following a
physical analogy, seems to be universal in practical magic.
In the Grimoires, however, though sometimes the first
weapon to be mentioned, its position is comparatively insig-
nificant, as the knife is a readier instrument, and, speaking
generally, there is little in the literature to justify the com-
plex modern elaborations of Eliphas Lévi and of Christian.

Among the necessary properties mentioned by the Book
of ‘‘True Black Magic’’ are the sword, the staff, the rod, the
lancet, the arctrave or hook, the bolline or sickle, the needle,
the poiniard, a white-handled knife, and another knife with
a black handle used to describe the circle. The most impor-
tant to make is that called the bolline; it must be forged on
the day and in the hour of Jupiter, taking a small piece of
unused steel. Set it thrice in the fire and extinguish it in the
blood of a mole mixed with the juice of the pimpernel.? Let
this be done when the Moon is in her full light and course.
On the same day and in the hour of Jupiter, fit a horn
handle? to the steel, shaping it with a new sword forged


1Or, according to the “Key of Solomon,” in the day and hour of Mercury, and
substituting the blood of the magpie and the j sue of the herb Mercury, the French
Foirole, from which a so-called Elixir of Long Life was formerly made.
2The “Key of Solomon” substitutes white boxwood; it omits the planetary in-
fluence, leaving it to be inferred that it should be done in the hour that the steel
is forged, which must also be sunrise.


126


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


thrice as above in the fire. When made and perfected,
recite over it this


PRAYER oR CONJURATION.


I conjure Thee, O form of this instrument, by the au-
thority of God the Father Almighty, by the virtue of
Heaven and the stars, by the virtue of the Angels, by that of
the elements, by that of stones and herbs, and in like manner
by the virtue of snowstorms, thunder, and winds, that thou
receive all power unto the performance of those things in
trickery, falsehood, or deception, by the command of God,
Creator of the ages and Emperor of the Angels. Amen.


The ensuing salutations must then be pronounced over
the instrument: Domine, Deus meus, in te speravi; Confite-
tor tibt, Domine, tn toto corde meo: Quemadmodum desid-
erat cervus ad fontes aquarum, &c., adding the following
words: DamMann, LuMEcH, GapAaL, Pancta, VELOAS, MEo-
ROD, LAMIDOCH, BALDACH, ANERETHON, MiratRoN, most holy
Angels, be ye warders of this instrument, because I shall
make use of it for several necessary works.

Place it in a new wrapper of red silk, making suffumiga-
tion with odoriferous perfumes, as will be hereinafter set
forth. Take care not to perfect the instrument otherwise
than on the day of Venus, and in the hour thereof, when also
the needle and other like instruments may be prepared.

Subsequently, on the day of Venus, the Moon being in
the sign of Capricorn, or otherwise of the Virgin,’ if the
same be possible, thou shalt make the first knife, and steep


1 Psalms vii., cx., and xli., according to the computation of the Vulgate.
2 According to the “Key of Solomon,” it should be on the day and in the hour
of Mercury, when Mars is in Aries or Scorpio.


127


The Book of Black Magic


it in the blood of the mole’ and the juice of the pimpernel.
Let the Moon be in an acute time of course and light, the
operation beginning in the first hour of Venus and ending
at the ninth hour of the same day. Fit the knife with a
handle of white wood cut at a single blow with a new sword
or knife, and on this handle engrave the following charac-


ters :—~
INYICIUNZ 223


Fumigate as before, and with this knife do all things
needful to the Art, the circle excepted. But if such a knife
be too difficult to manufacture, procure one of the same
form ready made; steep it in the blood and juice as above; fit
thereto the same handle bearing the same characters, and
upon the blade, proceeding from point to handle, write with
a male goose-quill the words: Agia, ON. Perfume as be-
fore, sprinkle with exorcised water, and place in the silken
wrapper already mentioned.

That with the black handle, destined to describe the
circle and intimidate the spirits, and for performing other
similar things, must be made in every respect like the first,
except as regards the day and hour, which should be those
of Saturn. The steel should be extinguished in the blood of
a cat? and the juice of hemlock, while the handle should be
of sheep’s horn. The poniard or stiletto and the lancet
should be made after the same manner on the day and in
the hour of Mercury, and the steel extinguished in the blood
of a mole and the juice of the herb se They should


1Of a gosling, says the Clavicle.
2 Of a black cat, says the Clavicle, and the weapon when finished should be
wrapped in a cloth of black silk, which, however, contradicts Book ii. c. 20, of the


same wor
128


MA: Avent
AVA


Digitized by Google


aa


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


be fitted with horn handles,’ shaped with a new sword in
the day and hour of Mercury, and should bear these char-


RISEN 0K


acters upon the said handles. Fumigate as before, and use
in their proper place as required.

The Grimorium Verum, which makes for simplicity, re-
duces the steel instruments to three, namely, knife, graver,
and lancet. The two first should be made on the day and in
the hour of Jupiter, with the waxing Moon in the ascendant,
which is at issue with the previous authority. When fin-
ished, the following Prayer or Conjuration must, in each
case, be recited over them. The knife should be large enough
to sever the neck of a kid at one blow; it should be fitted with
a haft of wood, made on the same day and in the same hour,
and graven with magic characters. The instrument should
then be sprinkled, fumigated, and preserved for use as re-
quired.


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, form of the instrument, N., by God the
Father Almighty; by the virtue of Heaven and by all the
stars which rule; by the virtue of the four elements; by that
of all stones, all planets, and all animals whatsoever; by the
virtue of hailstorms and winds; to herein receive such virtue
that we may obtain by thee the perfect issue of all our de-
sires, which also we seek to perform without evil, without
deception, by God, the Creator of the Sun and the Angels.
Amen. |


1 White boxwood is prescribed by the “Key of Solomon.”
129


The Book of Black Magic


Recite the Seven [Penitential] Psalms, and add these
words: DALMALEY, LAMECK, CaDAT, PanctA, VELOUS, MERr-
ROE, LAMIDECK, CALDULECH, ANERETON, MrrraTon, most
pure Angels, be ye guardians of these instruments, which
are needful for many things.

The lancet, which is mentioned but not described in the
Book of ‘‘True Black Magic,’’ should, according to the
Grimorium Verum, be made in the day and hour of Mercury,
the Moon waxing, and conjured after the same manner as
the knife and graver. Should assistants accompany the
operator, each must be provided with his knife, and the like
rule obtains concerning the Sword of the Art, which should
be polished on the day of Mercury, from the first to the third
hour of the night.2 That designed for the Master or chief
operator should bear the words ELoHIm Jiror,’ proceeding
from point to hilt. For that of the first disciple, write the
name CaRDIEL upon the handle, and upon the blade REaIon,
proceeding from point to hilt. It should appear on both
sides transversely, but add on the one PANoRAIM >, and on
the other HEoMEsIM >. On the sword of the second disciple
write URIEL, SARAION, GAMERIN >, DEBALIIN, in the manner
before described. On that of the third disciple write Dan-
TEL, IMETON, LAMEDIIN >, Erapin and fit the same with a
handle of white bone.®

The following Conjuration must be recited secretly over
the swords:—I conjure you, O sword, by the three Holy

1 The first or the fifteenth hour is the reading of the “Key,” but there is more
reason in the longer period, having regard to the nature of the operation.

24e., Elohim Gibor. The “Key of Solomon” prescribes other Divine Names for
the Sword of the Master.

8 These instructions are terribly confused. Compare the English version of the
“Key of Solomon,” wherein the passage is thus restored:—“The first sword should
have on the pommel the name Cardiel or Gabriel; on the Lamen of thé Guard,
Region; on the blade, Panoraim Heamesin. The second should have on the
Pomme. the name Auriel; on the Lamen of the Guard, Sarion; on the Blade,


amorin Debalin. The third sword should have on the eS the name Daniel


or Raphael; on the Lamen of the Guard, Yemeton; on the Blade, Lamedin Eradim.”


130


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


Names, ALBROT, ABRACADABRA, JEOVA! Be thou my fortress
and defence against all enemies, visible and invisible, in
every magical work. By the Holy Name Sapay, which is
great in power, and by these other names, Capos, Cabos,
Capos, ADoNAY, Evoy, Zena, OTH, OCHIMANUEL, the First
and the Last, Wisdom, Way, Life, Virtue, Chief, Mouth,
Speech, Splendour, Light, Sun, Fountain, Glory, Mountain,
Vine, Gate, Stone, Staff, Priest, Immortal, Messtan, Sword,
do thou rule in all my affairs and prevail in those things
which oppose me. Amen.


§ 3. Concerning the Rod and Staff of the Art.


The great mystery of practical magic is supposed to be
centred in the Magic Rod, and Eliphas Lévi, who claims to
have reconstructed the primitive ceremonial, but seems
rather to have over-edited his materials, supplies a highly |
sensational account of its powers and an elaborate method
of its preparation. For him it is the sign of the transmis-
sion of the magical priesthood, which has never ceased since
the darksome origin of transcendent science. The operator
is overwhelmed with precautions concerning the secrecy
which must be maintained in regard to it, and dejected by
the difficulties of its consecration. In view of such imputed
importance it is curious that De Abano and pseudo-Agrippa
omit all mention of this tremendous instrument, and the
‘‘Key of Solomon’’ dismisses it in a few lines of easy in-
struction. It would appear, however, that a staff and rod
are both necessary, especially in Goétic operations, though
their distinctive provinces are in no case described. Ac-
cording to the Book of ‘‘True Black Magic,’’ the staff
should be of cane and the wand or rod of hazel, both virgin

131


The Book of Black Magic


—that is, having no branches or offshoots.’ They must be
cut and trimmed on the day and in the hour of the Sun,
while the following characters must be inscribed upon the
staff, but on the day and in the hour of Mercury :?—


Jor EIZAISS


If engraved with the sacred instrument, it will be so much
the better.* In either case, let the following words be recited
when the writing is finished:—O Aponay, most Holy and
most Powerful, vouchsafe to consecrate and bless this Staff
and this Rod, so that they may possess the required virtue,
O most Holy Aponay, to whom the honour and glory for
ever and ever. Amen. |

Lastly, the two instruments should be asperged, fumi-
gated, and put away in the silken cloth.

The Grimorium Verum directs the operator to make two
wands of wood which has never borne fruit. The first should
be cut as a single stroke from an elder-tree on the day and in
the hour of Mercury. The second should be of hazel, free
from bud, and cut in the hour of the Sun.* The magic char-
acters which should be engraved upon each have been omit-
ted by the printer, but they are supplied in the modern Ital-
ian versions. They are, for the first, the seal or character
of Frimost and that of Klippoth for the second (see Chap.
ITI., See. 2). The prayer of consecration offers no varia-
tion of importance from that of ‘‘True Black Magic,’’ and


1The definition of virgin wood differs in the “Key of Solomon,” which says:
In all cases the wood should be virgin—that is, of one year’s growth only.

2 According to the “Key of Solomon,” both staff and rod should be cut on the
day and in the hour of Mercury at sunrise, which limits the operation to the few
days of the middle winter, when the sun rises about eight o’cl

‘8 Presumably, with the burin or graver.

«This variation appears to reconcile the “Book of True Black Magic” with the

“Key of Solomon,” and is probably the true reading.


182


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


does not need to be reproduced. Aspersion and fumigation
are prescribed, as in the previous case.

The ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ devotes an entire chapter to the
true composition of the Mysterious Wand, otherwise the
Destroying or Blasting Rod. It mentions no other instru-
ment, and ascribes to it all power in diabolical evocations.
It would seem to have supplied Eliphas Lévi with the first
hint of his still more potent Verendum, to which, however,
an allegorical significance may perhaps be attributed. On
the eve of the great enterprise, says this Ritual, you must go
in search of a wand or rod of wild hazel which has never
borne fruit; its length should be nineteen and a half inches.
When you have met with a wand of the required form, touch
it not otherwise than with your eyes; let it stay till the next
morning, which is the day of operation; then must you
cut it absolutely at the moment when the sun rises; strip it
of its leaves and lesser branches, if any there be, using the
knife of the sacrifice stained with the blood of the victim.?
Begin cutting it when the sun is first rising over this hemi-
sphere, and pronounce the following words:—I beseech
Thee, O Grand Aponay, ELorm, ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, to be
propitious unto me, and to endow this Wand which I am
cutting with the power and virtue of the rods of Jacob, of
Moses, and of the mighty Joshua! I also beseech Thee, O
Grand Aponay, Eom, ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, to infuse into
this Rod the whole strength of Samson, the righteous wrath
of EMANUEL, and the thunders of mighty Zariatnatmik,
who will avenge the crimes of mcn at the Day of Judgment!
Amen.

Having pronounced these sublime and terrific words, and
still keeping your eyes turned towards the region of the ris-
ing sun, you may finish cutting your rod, and may then carry


1See Chapter VI., Sec. 1.
133


The Book of Black Magic


it to your abode. You must next go in search of a piece of
ordinary wood, fashion the two ends like those of the gen-
uine rod, and take it to an ironsmith, who shall weld the steel
blade of the sacrificial knife into two pointed caps, and affix
them to the said ends. This done, you may again return
home, and there, with your own hands, affix the steel caps
to the joints of the genuine rod. Subsequently, vou must
obtain a piece of loadstone and magnetise the steel ends,
pronouncing the following words:—By the grand Aponay,
Exo, ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, I bid thee Join with and attract
all substances which I desire, by the power of the sublime
ADONAY, ELoIM, ARIEL, and JEHOvAM. I command thee, by
the opposition of fire and water, to separate all substances as
they were separated on the day of the world’s creation.
Amen.


Finally, you must rejoice in the honour and glory of the
sublime Adonay, being convinced that you are in possession
of a most priceless Treasure of the Light.’


§ 4. Concerning the Pen and Ink of the Art.


Preliminary magical ceremonial seems to have as its
chief object the personal consecration of every article, great
or small, indispensable or occasional, which is connected
with the several processes. The pen and ink with which
characters and names are written must both be specially
prepared. Take a new quill, says the Grimornwm Verum;
asperge and fumigate it after the manner of the other in-

1 Another method of preparing a Magic Rod ordains that it shall be a branch
of the hazeltree put forth during the year of operation. It must be cut during the
first Wednesday after the new moon, between 11 p.m. and midnight. The knife
must be new and the branch severed by a downward stroke. The rod must then
be blessed; at the stouter end must be written the word AGLA>, in the centre


On >, and towards the point TETRAGRAMMATON >. Lastly, say over it: Conjuro
te cito mihi obedire—I conjure thee to obey me forthwith.


134


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


struments; when you hold it in your hand to shap it, say the
following words:—ABABALOY, Samoy, Escavor, ADONAY:
I have expelled all illusion from this pen, that it may retain
efficaciously within it the virtue necessary for all things
which are used in this Art, as well for operations as for
characters and conjurations. Amen.

In like manner, a horn or ink-well must be bought on the
day and in the hour of Mercury, and in the same hour the
following names of God must be written about it:—Jop, Hx,
Vau, He, Meratron, Jon,’ Capos,? Evoym,® Sapaorn. It
must then be filled with fresh ink which has been exorcised
as follows:—


EXORCISM OF THE INK.


I exorcise thee, creature of Ink, by ANston, CERRETON,
SrimuLaTor,* Aponay, and by the name of Him whose one
Word created all and can achieve all, that so thou shalt as-
sist me in my work, that my work may be accomplished by
my will, and fulfilled with the permission of God, who ruleth
in all things and through all things, everywhere and for
ever. Amen.


BENEDICTION OF THE INK.


Lord God Almighty, who rulest all and reignest through
all eternity, who dost fulfil great wonders in Thy creatures,
grant unto us the grace of Thy Holy Spirit by means of this
ink. Bless it >, sanctify it >, and confer upon it a peculiar
virtue, so that whatsoever is said, whatsoever we desire to


1 The “Key of Solomon” substitutes the Divine Name, Jah, thrice repeated.
24.e., Kadosch.
84.¢., Elohim.
4The “Key of Solomon” reads Anaireton, Simulator.
135


The Book of Black Magic


do and to write herewith may succeed through Thee, Most
Holy Prince Aponay. Amen.’

Then asperge, fumigate, and exorcise.

‘‘The Book of True Black Magic,” on the other hand,
directs the operator to pluck the third feather from the night
wing of a male goose,? and to say when extracting it:
ABRACHAY, ABATOY, SamaToy, ScaveR, ADoNay! expel all
evil from this feather, so that it may possess full power to
write whatsoever I will.

Then shape it with the Knife of the Art, namely, that
having a white handle; incense also and asperge it. Lastly,
take a new earthen cornicle or inkhorn, made on the day and
in the hour of Venus, and write about it these names with the
exorcised lancet of the Art: Jop, Hr, Vavu, He, Mrratron,
JAE,* Jak, JAE, Capos, Evoyn, Zevao.* Then dip the pen
therein, pronouncing the following words:—I exorcise thee,
creature of the feather kind, by Erereron,’ by STIMULA-
TION,° and by the name Aponay. Do thou aid me in all my
works,

The instruction continues :—As it is sometimes necessary
to write with coloured inks, have several horns containing
white inks, in which infuse thy colours for the pentacles and
characters. The colours must be diluted with the blessed
water which we term exorcised, and with gum arabic.
Lastly, perfume them. Let this be done with all devotion,
humility, and faith, wanting which nothing can be accom-
plished, says the Grimoire.


1 This prayer, like many others in the Grimoires which derive from the Clavicle,
is the introduction of a Christian compiler. The “Key of Solomon” has no
Trinitarian references and no crosses.

sr his process is identical with that of the Clavicle, the names only being muti-

4.€.,
lated.
43.e., Elohim Tzabaoth.
GAs before, Anaireton and Simulator.


136


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


The same work gives particulars concerning the extrac-
tion of the sword-feather from the right wing of a swallow,
preceding the action with the words Sin re. It should then
be made into a pen by means of the Knife of the Art, and the
name Anereton must be written on it with the goose-quill,
after which the Psalms Ecce quam bonum et quam jucundum
and Laudate Dominum omnes gentes* are to be recited over
it, followed by aspersion and fumigation.


It is not to be supposed that any ordinary ink could be
suitable for so serious a business as that of engrossing pacts.
Even the consecrations previously given are inadequate in
such a case. It is understood that the signature is written
with the blood of the operator, but the form itself requires a
special preparation, as follows :—Place river-water in a new,
varnished earthenware pot, together with the powder here-
inafter described. Then take sprigs of fern gathered on the
Eve of St. John, and vine twigs cut in the full moon of
March. Kindle this wood by means of virgin paper, and
when the water boils the ink will be made. It must be
changed each time that there is occasion to write, that is to
say, whensover the appellation of a spirit is undertaken.


Powder for Pact-Ink.


Gall-nuts er Kg ; - 10 os.
Roman Vitriol or Green Copperas . 8 os.
Rock Alum or Gum Arabic - 8 os.


Make an impalpable powder, and when you would com-
pose the ink, use as above described.

The authorities for this process—which seems in itself
sufficiently harmless—are not the Grimoires proper, but the
collections of Magical Secrets which are sometimes ap-
pended to them, and sometimes form independent works.

1 Psalms cxxxii. and cxvi. of the Vulgate.


137


The Book of Black Magic


§ 5. Concerning Virgin Wax or Virgin Earth."


The candles used in evocation or in other magical expe-
riences, and the images required for bewitchment, must be
composed of virgin wax or virgin earth. That is to say, the
substances in question must not have been applied previously
to another purpose.? Before operating the following words
must be recited over the material :—ENTABoR, NaTaBor, St
tactbor, ADONAY, AN, LAYAMON, TINARMES, EOS PHILODEs.*®
Angels of God, be ye present! I invoke you in my work,
that I may obtain virtue by your mediation, and may be
perfected very surely. Then recite the Psalms Domine non
est exaltatum cor meum and Dominus quis habstabit,* add-
ing these words: I exorcise thee, creature of wax [or earth],
and, by the Creator and God Almighty, who created all
things from nothing by His Most Holy Name, and by His
angels, I ordain thee to receive virtue and benediction in
His Name, that so thou mayst be sanctified and blessed, thus
obtaining that virtue which we desire, by the Most Holy
Name Adonay, which is the life of all creatures, Amen.
Asperge the substance with the holy water of the Art, after
which preserve it to make use thereof when needed. So
doing, says ‘‘True Black Magic,’’ thou shalt obtain a true
result in all which thou undertakest.°®


1 This process is adapted from the “Key of Solomon,” Book ii. c. &

2 The virginity of the wax and the earth is more perfectly ensured by the di-
rections of the “Key of Solomon,” in accordance with which the operator must dig
up the earth with his own hands, and reduce it to a paste, using no instrument in
a of defilement. The wax must be taken from bees who have made it for the

t time.

® These names differ from those in the “Key of Solomon,” which, however, are,
for the most part, equally unintelligible.

4Ps. cxxx. and Ps. xiv. in the Vulgate.

5 The “Key of Solomon” directs that the earth should be freshly dug up on
each occasion that it is required.


138


The Initial. Rites and Ceremonies


§ 6. Concerning the Silken Cloth.’


When all the instruments belonging to the Art have been
properly consecrated and exorcised, they must be gathered
into a costly cloth of silk, as Solomon ordains, whereby they
may be preserved clean and pure, and may thus be more
efficacious. So it be not black or brown, the colour is indif-
ferent, but the following characters must be written upon it
in pigeon’s blood with the male goose-quill proper to the Art.


£4 Dy Edroh8irf


Add these names: ADoNAy, AMMASTIUS, ANARETON, Cos-
Bos, ELoym. Then fumigate and asperge, saying subse-
quently the Psalms Domine, Dominus noster, Deus Judicvum
tuum Regt da, and Ecce nunc dimitiis.? Place, lastly, all
the magical instruments in this silken cloth. ‘‘So shalt thou
use them at will, and shalt learn their effect,’’ says the
Magus, Iroé-Grego.


§ 7. Concerning the Victim of the Art.


It is usually supposed that the offering of a bloody sacri-
fice is an essential condition of success in Black Magic, and
that the embrutement of the operator is the chief purpose
of the ordination. It is true that such an offering is in most
eases enjoined, but its object is simple and commonplace
rather than diabolical or recondite, and the practice itself


1The process is adapted from the “Key of Solomon,” Book ii. c. 20. There,
however, the use of blood is omitt
2 Psalm viii. and Psalm Ixxi. in the Vulgate, together with the Canticle of


139


Simeon.


The Book of Black Magic


is based on the so-called White Magic of the ‘‘Key of Solo-
mon.’’ The Art has its victim, not because blood is required
in the one case more than the other, but because it was cus-
tomary for pacts and pentacles to be written on parchment
or vellum, and, in view of that doctrine of personal conse-
eration already explained, the Black Magician had, as far
as possible, to dispense with outside labour, to be his own
whitesmith, his own penmaker, and hence also his own
tanner. Alterius non sit qui suus esse potest was the maxim
of Paracelsus, and it was carried further in Goétia than
mere intellectual independence. Make yourself what you
want; do not trust it to others; it will not only possess more
of your personal virtue, but you will be sure of the article—
such might be the commentary of the Grimoires upon the
aphorism of the sage of Hohenheim, and there is the more
reason in the counsel because even the accessible substances
required by the operator had usually some awkward condi-
tions attached to them, which might remain unfulfilled un-
less he himself was actively present in their preparation.
A particular case in point is the parchment used in the Art.
The magician was required to slay a lamb or kid with his
own hands, not because there was any symbolical importance
attached to the act of destruction—the Grimoires make no
such ascription—not because the blood was used—for its
use is seldom prescribed—but to insure that the animal was
one from which virgin parchment or virgin vellum could be
prepared.

That is called virgin, says the ‘Book of True Black
Magic,’’ which is made from animals that have never engen-
dered, males above all,’—from which definition it is obvious
that recourse to the professional tanner might jeopardise the

1The “Key of Solomon,” Bk. ii. c. 17, distinguishes between virgin parchment


and unborn parchment; the latter is obtained from an animal which has been taken
before its time from the womb of its mother.


140


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


entire injunction. But seeing that every operation under-
taken in the Art assumed a religious aspect, the slaughter
of the animal became a sacrifice,’ and had its accompanying
ceremonies, prayers and invocations, each ritual possessing
its own variants.

The preparation of the virgin parchment is given as fol-
lows in the Grimortum Verum?—


CoNCERNING THE VICTIM OF THE ART.®


Take your kid; place it on a block with the throat turned
upward, so that it may be easier for you to cut it; be ready
with your knife, and cut the throat at a single stroke, pro-
nouncing the name of the Spirit whom you wish to invoke.
For example, say: I slay thee, N., in the name and to the
honour of N. Have a care that two blows be not needed,
but let it die at the first; then skin it with the knife, and
while skinning it make the following


INVOCATION.


Aponay, Datmay, Laupay, TETRAGRAMMATON, ANERE-
TON,‘ and all ye holy angels of God, be ye here and deign to
impart virtue unto this skin, that it may be properly con-
served, and that all things there written may attain their
perfection.


11It is fair to state that there is a form of evocation given in the Vocabulaire
Infernal in Which a sacrifice per se is prescribed. The source from which it is
derived is not cited. “Whosoever would evoke the devil must sacrifice to him a
dog, a cat, and a hen; these animals must be the property of the operator, who
must also pledge himself to eternal fidelity and obedience, and must receive a spe-
cial mark upon his body impressed by the devil himself. His recompense is an ab-
solute control over three infernal spirts, respectively of earth, water, and air.”
Some obscure demonologist is most likely the authority for this process, which is
unknown to the Grimoires. It should be added that the Vocabulaire Infernal was
compiled in the Catholic interest.

2 This preparation being one of the most important preliminaries of Goétic Art,
will be given with all its variations as they are found in the four chief Grimoires.
For the sacrificial portions of the “Grand Grimoire” and that of Honorius, see
Chapters VI. and VII.

7 " The process in the Grimorium Verum is an adaptation of that in the “Key of
olomon.

4 The English edition of the Clavicle reads, Zohar, Zio, Talmai, Adonai, Shaddai,
Tetragrammaton.

141


The Book of Black Magic


After the skinning take salt well pounded; stretch the
skin ; strew your salt upon it so as to cover the whole surface.
But first let the salt be blessed in the following manner :—


EXORCISM OF THE SALT,


I exorcise thee, creature of salt, by the living God, by
the God of gods and the Lord of lords, that all illusions may
depart from thee, and that so thou mayst serve to make the
virgin chart.


BENEDICTION OF THE SALT.


God of gods and Lord of lords, who hast created all
things out of nothing, and hast specially designed salt for
human health, bless >« and sanctify this salt, and may I so
use it that all things which are in this circle may receive the
required virtue for that effect which we desire. Amen.


This ended, place your salted skin in the rays of the sun
for the space of one day. Then prepare a vessel of glazed
_ clay, and write the characters of Guland and Surgat (Chap.
ITI. Sec. 2) about it with the pen and ink of the Art. Set
quicklime slaked with exorcised water in the pot, and while
it is liquid place your skin therein, and so leave it till it
peels of itself. When the hair is ready to fall at the touch
of a finger, take it from the pot and peel it with a knife of
hazel-wood, over which you have pronounced these words:
Most Holy Aponay, be pleased to impart such virtue unto
this wood that I may cleanse this skin therewith, through
Thy Holy Name Aqason. Amen.

This done, and the skin being also cleansed, stretch the
same upon a board of new wood, and round about it set


3a


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


stones of the same length as the sides of the skin. But first
say over them the prayer which here follows :—


PRAYER.


O Aponay, most strong and powerful God, grant that
these stones may stretch this skin, and do Thou remove from
them all illusion, so that by Thy power they may possess the
virtue which we desire. Amen.

This done, the skin may be left to dry, but before quit-
ting it recite the following


PRAYER.


JE, AGLA, JOD, HEU, HE, EMMANUEL, be ye guardians of
this parchment or skin, so that no phantoms may possess it.

This finished, leave it in the air until it be dried,’ taking
care that the place is clean, and has been asperged while .
-reciting the following holy words: In the name of the im-
mortal God, may God asperge thee and cleanse thee from all
delusion and from all wickedness; so shalt thou be whiter
than snow. Amen.

When the skin is dry, take it from the board, bless it with
aspersion and fumigation, and preserve it for use. It must
not be seen by women, especially in their times, for it will
lose its virtue, and whosoever makes this parchment must
be, in like manner, most pure and clean and chaste. Let him
say a Mass of the Nativity, whether it be the day of the
Feast or another day, and note that all the instruments
must be generally on the Altar.’

‘The Book of True Black Magic’’ reproduces with fur-
ther variations the process of the genuine Clavicle:—Se-


1 Which should be in the epee of three days, according to the Clavicle.

2 The Grimorium Verum exhibits the transition of the Rituals from the purely
Betis elements of the “Key of Solomon” to the purely Christian materials of the

imoire of Honorius. 143


The Book of Black Magic


cure the animal which is to furnish the parchment in a se-
cret place, where no one dwells or can behold it. Then take
a virgin rod ; shape it into the form of a knife with the white-
handled Knife of the Art, paring it neatly of all branches.
Over this say: I conjure thee, Rod, by the Creator of the
Universe and the King of Angels, whose name is HELsapay !*
Reeeive thou power and virtue to skin this animal for the
making of the parchment, that so all things which I shall
write thereon may prosper, by God Almighty, who liveth
and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen. When shaping this
knife recite the Psalm Deus judicium tuum Regi da.* Then
write these words upon the Rod: Agla, Adonay, Eloe,*® may
the work of this wooden Knife be accomplished by you!
Say also over it: Cara, cherna, sito, cirna.* Next, skin the
animal with the same wooden knife, saying: ADONAY,
Dannay, Sapay, TETRAGRAMMATON, ANERETON, ANERETON,
CurETON,® Holy Angels of God, be ye present and give vir-
tue to this parchment. May it be consecrated by you, and
thus may all things which shall be written therein acquire
the virtue needful for the attainment of the desired end.
When you have skinned it, take salt, and say over it: God
of gods, vouchsafe to bless and sanctify this salt, so that it
may cleanse the parchment which I am about to prepare
therewith, and that both may obtain virtue, power, and ef-
fect. Salt the skin, and set it in the sun for fifteen days;
next take a pot of glazed clay, and write these characters


eLOw I hgtohE-f


13¢., El Shaddai. 2 Psalm Ixxi. of the Vulgate. 8i.¢., Elohim.
«These words are peculiar to the Grimoire, and their significance is beyond con-
jecture.
5 See Note on p. 141.
144


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


about it; place a large piece of quicklime with some blessed
water in this vessel, and when the coal is extinguished steep
the skin for the space of nine whole days therein, after
which it must be extracted and scraped with a wooden knife
to remove the hair. Let it dry for eight days in the shade,
and when setting it to dry, asperge it and say: In the Name
of the Great Eternal God, I asperge thee. Be thou cleansed
from all vice and iniquity! [When dry] perfume it with
sweet-smelling herbs; wrap it in the silken cloth with the
other instruments of the Art; and take notice that if it be
seen by a woman in her times, it will lose all its virtue.
But if this kind of parchment be too difficult to prepare,’
take virgin parchment of any animal, exorcise it as before,
place lighted coal in a new glazed pot, mix good perfumes
therewith, and hold your parchment above the vessel to re-
ceive them. Before all, :
however, write these char-
acters about the pot? with Un? OCC whL3
the intruments of the Art.
So long as the fumigation goes on, say: Angels of God, be
my help, and by you be my work accomplished! When it
is finished say: Lazay, SatMAy, DaLMAy, ANEPATON, CEN-
DRION, ANITOR, ENCHEION,® Holy Angels of God, be ye pres-
ent and give virtue to this parchment, so that it may in turn
acquire that of all characters with which it shall be clothed,
by the help of the pious and merciful God. Recite the
Psalms Deus judictum tuum Regi da and Laudate Dominum
omnes gentes, adding the following


1The shorter process is not so good, says the Clavicle.

3 The “Key of Solonion” provides characters for the parchment but not for the
pot. They are, moreover, entirely different.

8 The “Key of Solomon” reads: Zazaii, Zalmaii, Dalmai, Adonai, Anaphaxeton,
Cedrion, Cripon, Prion, Anaireton, Elion, Octinomon, Zevanion, Alazaion, Zideon,
Agila, On, Yod He Vau He, Artor, Dinotor.


145


The Book of Black Magic


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, creature of parchment, by ali the names
of God, that nothing which shall be written within thee may
ever be blotted from truth.

Lastly, asperge it and place it in the silken cloth, as
above.


The Grimorium Verum indulges the weak pupil by a
further simplification, as follows:—If you are unable to
prepare the parchment yourself, buy a new one and conjure
it; asperge also and fumigate it three times. The sacrifice,
with its delays and unpleasantness, is thus abrogated, and
the operator can proceed at once to the practical mystery
of the Sanctum Regnum. It would also appear that parch-
ment or vellum proper may be dispensed with in favour
of :—(a.) the skin of some other animal, which would, how-
ever, involve a like process; or (b.) the caul of a new-born
child, which would, of course, possess the requisite virgin
character, and was simply consecrated according to the fol- -
lowing instructions, as found in ‘‘True Black Magic.’’?


When you have succeeded in obtaining the caul of a new-
born child, perfume the same with sweet odours and
sprinkle it, after which say the following Psalms: Domine,
exaudt orationem meam, and Domine, Deus meus, respice
wm me, with the conjuration here following :—BosMELETIC,
JEYSMY, ErH, Hopomos, BeLureos. O Lord, who didst
make all things in wisdom; who didst choose Abraham, Thy
first believer, and his seed hath multiplied like the stars of
heaven; who didst appear unto Moses, Thy servant, sur-
rounded with flaming fire, and didst make known to him Thy


1The “Key of Solomon” merely observes that the cauls of newly-born chil-
dren, duly consecrated, may be used instead of virgin parchment, and that paper,
satin, or silk may also be employed in operations of less importance.


146


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


names, which are Here, Acer, Hete,! that is to say, I am
that I am; who didst also lead forth Thy people dry-shod
over the Red Sea; who unto Moses, Thy servant, didst give
the Law of Salvation on Mount Sinai; who unto Solomon
didst impart wisdom above the measure of men; I humbly
adore Thy majesty and beseech Thy mercy, praying Thee
to consecrate this skin by Thy virtue, O Most Holy Aponay,
whose reign endureth for ever. Amen.

Asperge the caul with the blessed water of the Art, place
it in the silken cloth, and when working the exorcisms, the
requisitions made to the spirits must be written on this skin,
which should be fumigated with stinking odours.


§ 8—Concerning Asperston and Fumigation.


In the preparation of the instruments, as already abun-
dantly evident, and in the more important works which fol-
low it, the ceremonies of aspersion and fumigation, that 1s,
of purifying and consecrating, are frequently enjoined.
Sprinkling is performed with the Aspergillus, which, accord-
ing to the Grimorium Verum, should be composed of mint,
marjory, and rosemary, bound about with a thread woven
by a virgin girl. It should be made on the day and in the
hour of Mercury, the moon waxing. The ewer, according to
‘‘True Black Magic,’’ should be a pot of glazed earth,? filled
with fresh spring water, in which some salt has been cast.
The following Psalms should be recited over it:—Domine,
ne in furore tuo arguas me, and Domine, exaudi orationem
meam,® with the addition of this


1The mutilations of the Divine Names in the Grimoires are part of the dis-
tinguishing characteristics of these works, and hence they are preserved in the
text. It will be unnecessary to inform the student that the words mentioned should
read AuiH, AsHr, AHIH.

2 The “Key of Solomon” offers choice between a vessel of brass, of lead var-
nished within and without, and of ea

® Psalm vi. and Psalm xiii. in the Vulgate.


147


The Book of Black Magic


PRAYER.


O Thou most powerful Lord, my God, my rest, and my
life! Do Thou help me, Most Holy Father! In thee I place
my hope, who art the God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of
Jacob, God of the Angels and Archangels, God of the
Prophets, and God the Creator of all things. In all hu-
mility, and with the invocation of Thy Holy Name, I pray
that Thou wilt vouchsafe to bless this water, that in what-
soever place it shall be cast it may sanctify our bodies and
our souls, through Thee, Most Holy Aponay, whose reign
is without end. Amen.

The Aspergillus recommended by this Ritual differs
somewhat from the former, being of vervain, periwinkle,
sage, mint, valerian, ash, and basil, taking care not to use
hyssop,’ but rosemary in place thereof. It should be fitted
with a handle of virgin hazel, three palms in length, and
bound as before. The following characters should be en-
graved on one side of the said handle :—


otf HT, CY FEEL pe


This Aspergillus may be used on all occasions with per-
fect assurance that all phantoms will be expelled from every
place which shall be sprinkled thereby with water duly exor-
eised. The prayer to be used at sprinkling is thus given by
the Grimortum Verum:—In the Name of God Immortal,
may God asperge thee, N., and cleanse thee from all illusion
and from all wickedness, and thou shalt be whiter than snow.

When asperging add also: In the Name of the Father >
and of the Son >& and of the Holy Ghost >. Amen.


1The plant here condemned is prescribed by the “Key of Solomon.”
148


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


CONCERNING INCENSE AND F'UMIGATION.


The Grimorium Verwm prescribes a cruse or chafing-dish
for fumigation, adding somewhat redundantly that it should
be filled with freshly kindled coal and fresh fire, the whole
blazing. Place aromatics thereon, and perfume what you
would, saying: Angels of God, be our help, and by you be
our work fulfilled! Zazay, SabMay, DaLMay, ANGERECTON,
LEpDRION, AMisor, EucHry, Or! Great Angels! And do
thou also, O Aponay, be present and impart hereto such vir-
tue that this creature may receive a form whereby our work
may be accomplished! In the Name of the Father > and
of the Son >k and of the Holy Ghost >. Amen. Recite the
Seven Psalms which follow Judicwum tuwm Regi da and
Laudate Dominum omnes gentes.'


The perfumes are aloes wood and incense for most occa-
sions, and mace for the fumigation of the circle. ‘‘ The Book
of True Black Magic’’ omits mace and substitutes benzoin
and storax, and any others at choice, but without distinction
as to the circle. The following Prayers, Exorcisms, and
Benedictions to be said over the aromatic perfumes occur in
the two Rituals, the first and third being common to both,
and borrowed from the ‘‘Key of Solomon’’; the second, also
referable to the same source, is not found in the Grimortum
Verum.


First Exorcism.


O God of Abraham >, God of Isaac >, and God of Ja-
cob >, vouchsafe to bless and sanctify these creatures, of
whatsoever species they may be, so that they may obtain

1 As these Psalms, Ixxi. and cxvi. in the Vulgate, are widely separated from each


other, and so also 1 in ‘the Authorised Version, it is difficult to determine those which
are referred to in the text.
149


The Book of Black Magic


virtue and power to discern good spirits from bad, even
phantoms and enemies, through Thee O Aponay, who livest
and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.


SECOND EXORCISM.


I exorcise thee, O impure Spirit, who art the phantom of
the Enemy. In the name of God Almighty, come out from
this kind, with all thy falsehood and wickedness, so that it
may become sanctified and exorcised, in the Name of God
Almighty, that all virtues may inspire those who partake of /
this odour, that the Spirit of God may descend, and the
virtue of the Lord manifest, in the burning of this species,
and that no phantom may dare to accost it. Through the
Ineffable Name of God Almighty. Amen.


THirp Exorcism.


Deign, O Lord, to sanctify this creature, so that 1t may
become a signal remedy for the human race, and the salva-
tion of our souls and bodies, through the invocation of thy
Most Holy Name, that so all creatures who inhale the smoke
of this kind may have health of body and soul. Through
that Lord who hast created the ages of ages. So be it.

This done, sprinkle the perfumes with exorcised water,
and set them aside in the silken cloth for use as prescribed.
When you would fumigate anything, take new coal which
has not been kindled, set it alight, and while it 1s still black,
exorcise it, saying:

ExoRCISM OF THE LIGHTED COAL.

I exorcise thee, O creature of Fire, by Him who hath
made all things! Do thou expel from thee all phantoms, so
that they may in no wise harm or trouble us in our work, by
the invocation of the Most High Creator. Amen. O Sav-

| 150


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


iour, Almighty and merciful, bless Thy creature of this
kind, so that no harm may come to him who shall make use
of it. Amen.

In concluding this portion of its ceremonial, ‘‘The Book
of True Black Magic’’ states that there are occasions on
which perfumes of a stinking or malodorous kind must be
used ; the same should be prepared, saying: ADONAY, Lazay,
DeLMAY, AMAY, SaDAy, Exoy,' by the invocation, O Saviour,
of Thy Most Holy Name, vouchsafe us, through this kind,
the help of Thy grace, and may it assist us in all things
which we need to fulfil; may all malice pass out therefrom,
and may it be blessed and sanctified in Thy most powerful
Name. Amen.

Asperge the stinking perfume with exorcised water,
place it in the silken cloth, and use it as needed, but always
in the name of the Most Holy Aponay. So doing, thou shalt
obtain thy desire, says the ‘‘Manuscript discovered at Jeru-
salem in the Sepulchre of Solomon.’’?


§ 9. Concerning the Time of Operation.


When the sacrifice of the Art or its substitute has once
been completed, the operator is in possession of all the ma-
terials he will require for the performance of the Goétic
works described in ‘‘The Book of Black Magic’’ or the
Grimortum Verum. But as the first of these Rituals or-


1The names given in the “Key of Solomon” are Adonai, Lazai, Dalmai, Aima,
Elohi.

2A short way to Magic by means of perfumes is given by Nyrauld in his
work on Lycanthropy. To discern future events, fumigate yourself with linseed and
seed of psellium, or with roots of violets and wild parsley. To drive away evil
spirits and phantoms, make a perfume of calamon, peony, mint, and palma Christ,
To attract serpents, burn the windpipe of a stag; to expel them, burn a horn of the
same animal. Make a perfume with gall of cuttlefish, thyme, roses, and aloe woos
When kindled, sprinkle with water or blood, and presently the whole house will
seem full of water or of blood, as the case may be. Add ploughed earth, and the
ground will appear to tremble. The enumeration might be continued almost in-
definitely.

151


The Book of Black Magic


dains that the preparation of the artist shall be made in ac-
cordance with certain planetary influences, so in like man-
ner does it regulate the time of operation or accomplishment.
As before, its instructions follow, and still in a confused
manner, the authority of the Clavicle. It will be well to re-
produce them here in a succinct analysis, though the piece-
meal nature of the treatise attributed to Iroé-Grego leaves
the rules without much practical value, and no attention is
paid to them by other makers of Grimoires :—

An experiment of speaking with spirits or conjuring
them should be operated in the day and hour of Mercury,
which hour may be the first or the eighth, but the fifteenth
or twenty-second of the same night will be still better, for
spirits appear more easily in the silence of the dark hours.
A certain atmospheric condition is also required for the ex-
periment of calling spirits, and an obscure uninhabited place
congruous to such an art is even more necessary, for so only
will it be accomplished and educed. But if the experiment
be concerned with a theft,’ it should be performed in the
hour of the Moon and on her day—if it be possible, in the
crescent Moon—from the first to the eighth hour, or, failing
this, at ten o’clock in the night. It is better, however, in
the day, because the light has more correspondence to the
intention, that is, to manifest hidden things. The experi-
ence of invisibility ? should be operated when the Moon is
in Pisces. Experiments of love, favour, and grace * should
be accomplished on the day and in the hour of the Sun or
Venus, from the first to the eighth hour, with the Moon in


1An experiment of this kind is reproduced by the Grimoire from the “K
of Solomon,” but does not call for inclusion either by its connection with Black
Magic—for there is no connection, or by any inherent interest—for there is again
none.

2 See Chapter VIII.

8 See Venereal Experiments in Chapter VIII.


152


The Initial Rites and Ceremonies


Pisces. Works of destruction, hatred, and desolation’
should be performed on the day and in the hour of Saturn,
from the first or eighth to the fifteenth or twenty-second
hour of the night; they are then certain. Burlesque and
amusing experiments are performed on the day of Venus,
in the first and the eighth hour, or in the fifteenth and
twenty-second hour of the night. Extraordinary experi-
ences should be operated in corresponding hours on the day
of Jupiter.’


1See Chapter VIII.
2The chapter on Extraordinary Experiments in the “Key of Solomon” is


rendered useless by want of details. It reappears in the Grimoire, but is omitted
from this translation for the reason indicated.


153


CHAPTER ITI.


Concerning the Descending Bierarchy
§ 1.—The Names and Offices of Evil Spirits.


moires must be sought in the ‘‘Key of Solomon’’

proper, but for the names and offices of the demons it
must be sought in the ‘‘Lesser Key.’’ The hierarchy, ac-
cording to the ‘‘Lemegeton,’’ with its accompanying evok-
ing processes, will be given in the fourth chapter, as there
is no special reason for separating it from its practical
context. We shall deal in this place with the simpler though
later summaries, which will prevent these curious issues
from being confused.

The Book’of ‘‘True Black Magic,” like its prototype the
original Clavicle, gives no account of the nature of the
Spirits with which it professes to deal, and, as already seen,
it breaks off abruptly at the point where the conjuring for-
mule should follow to complete the work. This ‘‘Secret of
Secrets,’’ as the Grimoires term the methods for raising and
discharging spirits, being omitted, it may now be dismissed
from consideration till we come to the minor processes of
Ceremonial Magic, chiefly venereal and fantastic, which are
grouped in the eighth chapter. |

The ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius’’ mentions by name four
kings referred to the cardinal points and seven lesser spirits
to be invoked on the days of the week, but, as will appear
later on, there 1s no explicit notice of the Descending

154


I N all matters of ceremonial the inspiration of the Gri-


Concerning the Descending Hierarchy


Hierarchy. These deficiencies are supplied by the Gn-
morium Verum and the ‘‘Grand Grimoire.”’


THE SHBAL AND CHARACTERS OF THD SBAL AND CHARACTER
LUCIFER. BEELZEBUTH . od


As regards spirits, says the former, some are superior
and others inferior. The three su-
perior are Lucifer, Beelzebuth, and
Astaroth. According to the latter,
Lucifer is Emperor; Beelzebuth,
Prince; and Astaroth, Grand Duke.
They must be invoked by means of
the characters which they themselves
have made known, and these charac-
ters must be written with the blood
of the operator, or with that of a sea-
tortoise. Failing this, they may be Pad?
engraved on an emerald or ruby, for |
both these stones have great sympa- we OF ASTAROTH,
thy with spirits, especially with those of the solar race,

155


The Book of Black Magic


who are wiser, better, and more friendly than the rest. The
character must be worn upon the person; in the case of a
male, it should be placed in the right pocket, but a female
must carry it between the breasts, towards the left side, like
a reliquary. It should be graven or written on the day and
in the hour of Mars for both sexes, and apparently in the
case of each of the three spirits. ;

The lord commands the servants, so the Grimoire pro-
ceeds, and these three spirits can do all things. But the
operator is advised that he shall obey those who obey him,
because the exalted and powerful spirits serve only their
confidants and intimate friends. He is further grimly
warned to keep upon his guard lest any spirit should seize
him unawares. Each of the rules has two chief officers, who
announce to the subjects all things which their lord hath
commanded throughout the world, and ordain all that is to
be done. The inferiors of Lucifer are Put Satanachia and
Agaliarept; they inhabit Europe and Asia. Those of Beelze-
buth are Tarchimache and Fleurety; they dwell in Africa.
Those of Astaroth are Sargatanas and Nebiros, whose
asylum is America.

The ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ does not distribute the six sub-
ordinate spirits among the three rulers, but enumerates
them somewhat differently, together with their dignities,
as follows: ?


1 The attribution is somewhat confused; the ruby is a solar stone, but Albertus
Parvus attributes the emerald to the Moon, which would establish its connection
with evocation. . :

2 The Hierarchy according to Wierus is at variance with both the Rituals, and
may be worth quoting on account of its curious details :—

Princes AND Granp Dicniraries.—Beelsebuth, Supreme Chief of the Infernal
Empire, founder of the Order of the Fly. Satan, Leader of the Opposition.
Euronymous, Prince of Death, Grand Cross of the Order of the Fly. Moloch,
Prince of the Land of Tears, Grand Cross of the Order. Pluto, Prince of Fire.
Leonard, Grand Master of Sabbaths, Knight of the Fly. Baalberith, Minister of
treaties. Proserpine, Arch-she-devil, Sovereign Princes of Mischievous Spirits.
MInNisters.—Adramelek, Lord High Chancellor, Grand Cross of the Order of the
Fly. Astaroth, Grand Treasurer. Nergal, Chief of the Secret Police. Baal, Com-
mander-in-Chief of the Infernal Armies, Grand Cross of the Order of the Fly.
Ampsassapors.— Belphegor, in France, ise” in England, Belial in Turkey,


Concerning the Descending Hierarchy


LUCIFUGE RoFocaLE.—Prime Minister.
SATANACHIA.—Commander-in-Chief.
AGALIAREPT.— Another Commander.
FLEURETY.—Lieutenant-General.
SaRGATANAS.—Brigadier-Major.
NesBIRos.—Field-Marshal and Inspector-General.


It will be seen that the principalities of Infernus are
chiefly represented in the light of a standing army, yet their
interference in earthly matters is not of a military kind.
LuciFuGeE Rorocae has the control, with which Lucifer
has invested him, over all the wealth and treasures of the
world. His subordinates are Baal,’ Agares,? and Mar-
bas. The grand Satanacuia has the power of subject-
ing all wives and maidens to his wishes, and of doing with
them as he wills. His subordinates are Pruslas, Aamon,'
and Barbatos.5 AGALIAREPT has the faculty of discovering
the arcane secrets in all the courts and council-chambers of
the world; he also unveils the most sublime mysteries. He
commands the Second Legion of Spirits, and his subordi-
nates are Buer,® Gusoyn,’ and Botis. FLEvrety has the
power to perform any labour during the night, and to cause
hailstones in any required place. He controls a very con-


Rimmon in Russia, Thamug in Spain, Hutgin in Italy, Martinet in Switzerland.
upcEs.—Lucifer, Lord Chief Justice. Alastor, Commissioner of Public Works.
oYAL HouseHoLp.—Verdelet, Master of Ceremonies. Succor Benoth, Chief of the

Eunuchs. Chamos, Lord High Chamberlain, Knight of the Fly. Melchom, Pay-

master. Misroch, Grand Steward. Behemoth, Grand Cup-Bearer. Dagon, Grand

Pantler, Mullin, First Gentleman of the Bedchamber. Masters or THE REVELS.—

Kobal, Stage Manager. Asmodeus, SUBEEULH SEITE of Casinos. Nybbas, Chief

Mimic. Antichrist, Juggler and Mimic.

1 Baal, is the first Spirit of the “Lemegeton,” and a King ruling in the East.
2The second Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”

8 The fifth Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”

Possibly Paimon, ninth Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”

5 The eighth Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”

©The tenth Spirit of the “‘Lemegeton.”

Eleventh Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”

8 The seventeenth Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”


157


The Book of Black Magic


siderable army of spirits, and has Bathsin’ (or Bathim),
Pursan, and Eligor? as his subordinates. SarGaTaNas has
the power to make any person invisible, to transport them
anywhere, to open all locks, to reveal whatsoever is taking
place in private houses, and teach all the arts of the shep-
herds. He commands several Brigades of Spirits, and has
Zoray, Valefar, and Faraii for his immediate inferiors.
Nesrros has the power to inflict evil on whomsoever he will;
he discovers the Hand of Glory, and reveals every virtue of
metals, minerals, vegetables, as also of all animals, both
pure and impure. He possesses the art of predicting things
to come, being one of the greatest Necromancers in all the
Infernal Hierarchies; he goes to and fro everywhere and
inspects all the hordes of perdition. His immediate subor-
dinates are Ayperos, Naberrs, and Glassyalabolas.

It is added that there are millions of other spirits in sub-
jection to those which have been mentioned, but their enu-
meration serves no purpose, as they are required only when
it pleases the superiors to employ them in their own place,
for the latter make use of all the inferior Intelligences like
workmen or slaves.

The Grimorium Verum, however, mentions seventeen of
the most important subordinate spirits, who seem to corre-

pond with the ministers of

the six great leaders men-

tioned above, but there is

CA little unanimity among

NJ L makers of magical rituals,
whether white or black.

CHARACTER OF CLAUNECK. CLAUNECK has power
over goods and riches; he can discover hidden treasures to


1The eighteenth Spirit of the “Lemegeton.”
2The 4ifteenth Spirit of the Lemeseron™


158


Concerning the Descending Hierarchy


him who makes pact with him; he can bestow great wealth,
for he is well loved by Lucifer. He brings money from a
distance. Obey him, and he will obey thee!

Musisrin has power over great lords; he instructs them
in all that passes in the Republics and those of the Allies.


{ **s
CHARACTER OF MUSISIN. CHARACTER OF BECHARD.
BrecHarp has power over winds and tempests, over light-


ning, hail, and rain, by means of a charm with toads and
other things of this nature, &c.


FAR


CHARACTER OF FRIMOST.


Frimost has power over wives and maids, and will help
thee to enjoy them.


oe SF


CHARACTER OF KHIL. CHARACTER OF MERSILDE.
Kurt occasions great earthquakes.
MERSILDE can transport thee instantaneously whereso-
ever may be desired.


159


The Book of Black Magic
CLISTHERET makes day or night about thee at pleasure.


CHARACTER OF CLISTHERET.


SIRCHADE has power to show thee all kinds of animals,
of whatsoever nature they may be.


fe ty


CHARACTER OF SIRCHADE. CHARACTER OF SEGAI..


SraaL causes all manner of prodigies visibly, both nat-


ural and supernatural.
Hiepacrs will bring thee a distant person in an instant.


mu 2?
Ez Qe


CHARACTER OF HIBPACTH. CHARACTER OF HUMOTS.
Hvmorts can transport all manner of books for thy pleas-
ure.


160


Concerning the Descending Hierarchy


F'RUCISSIERE brings the dead to life.


A E+


CHARACTER OF FRUCISSIERD.


GULAND can cause all varieties of disease


AP tp


CHARACTER OF GULAND. CHARACTER OF SURGAT.


Suraat opens all locks.


CHARACTER OF MORAIL.
Moratt has the power to make everything in the world
invisible.
161


The Book of Black Magic


FRUTIMIERE dights thee all kinds of festivals.

Houictiieara occasions sleep and walking in some, and
afflicts others with insomnia. .

Satanachia and Satanicie govern forty-five, or , as some
say fifty-four demons, four of whom are Sergutthy, Hera-
mael Trimasel, and Sustugriel. Two of these rank as chief.
The rest are of no great importance.

These are serviceable spirits, who act easily and quickly,


CHARACTER OF HUICTIIGARA.


CHARACTER OF FRUTIMIERB.
provided that they are content with the operator. Serguthy
has power over wives and virgins, when the occasion is fa-
vourable. Heramael teaches the art of medicine, gives per-
fect knowledge of all diseases, with their perfect and radical
cure, makes known all plants in general, the places where
they grow, and the times of their gathering, their virtues
also and their composition for the attainment of a perfect
cure. Trimasel, and Sustugriel. Two of these rank as chief. °
The parts the true secret for confecting the powder of pro-
jection which changes imperfect metals—lead, iron, pewter,
162


Concerning the Descending Hierarchy


copper, and quicksilver—into true good silver and good
gold, namely, Sun and Moon, according to the ferment
thereof. Only he must be satisfied with the operator, if the
operator would be satisfied with him. Sustugriel teaches
magical art; he gives familiar spirts for all things that can
be desired, and furnishes mandragores.

Agalierept and Tarihimal govern Elelogap, whose power
is over water. The two Nebirots rule Hael and Sergulath.
Hael instructs in the art of writing all kinds of letters, gives
an immediate power of speaking all kinds of tongues, and
explains the most secret things. Sergulath furnishes all
kinds of speculations, teaches tactics, and the breaking of
hostile ranks, They have eight powerful inferiors, 1, Pro-
culo, who gives sleep for twenty-four hours, with knowledge
of the spheres of sleep. 2. Haristum, who gives the power
of passing unsinged through the fire. 3. Brulefer, who
makes one loved by women. 4. Pentagnony, who renders
invisible and also beloved by great lords. 5. Aglasis, who
transports through the whole world. 6. Sidragrosam, who
makes girls dance stark naked. 7. Minoson, who insures
winning in all games. 8. Bucon, who has the power to excite
hatred and jealousy between the two sexes.


§ 2.—Concerning the Forms of Infernal Spirits in their


Mantfestations.


Having regard to the nature and antecedents of the in-
telligences with which Black Magic professes to be con-
cerned, it must be highly important that the operator should
know the kind of apparitions which may be expected, when,
despite the incredulity of Horatio, the spirits from the vasty

163


The Book of Black Magic


deep do respond to conjuration. The majority of the Gri-
moires leave it to be inferred from their silence that they
come in human shape—possibly in ‘‘a neat surcoat and
snow-white linen,’’ like the Adonay of the sorcerer in the
Thaumaturgic Experiences of Eliphas Lévi. With the
Composite Rituals it is always a subject of apprehension,
and a peaceable manifestation is earnestly bargained for.

According to the Grimorium Verum, the spirits do not
invariably manifest under the same forms ; being disengaged
from all matter, they must of necessity borrow a body in
order to appear before us,’ and then they assume any form
and figure which seems good to them. Beware, however,
lest they affright thee! is another pregnant warning. Luci-
fer appears under the form ‘and figure of a comely boy;
when angered, he shows with a ruddy countenance, but there
is nothing monstrous in his shape. Beelzebuth appears oc-
casionally under monstrous forms, such as the figure of a
misshapen calf, or that of a goat having a long tail; at the
same time he manifests most frequently under the sem-
blance of an enormous fly.2, When angered, he vomits floods
of water and howls like a wolf. Astaroth appears of a black
and white colour, usually under a human figure, but occa-
sionally in the likeness of an ass.

The subject of Infernal Manifestations is, however, fully
treated in the next chapter. The indications in the present
section are merely the later variants.


__ 2A portion of this statement is derived from the “Key of Solomon”; but whereas
it is ipat clearly in the Grimoire, it is incomplete and inconsequent in the original.

7A giant, a serpent, a woman, are also other modes of his manifestation,
according to the discretion of certain demonologists.


164


CHAPTER IV.


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy According to the Besser
Rep of Solomon the King


§ 1.—Concerning the Spirits of the Brazen Vessel, otherwise
called the False Monarchy of Demons.


HE Goétie Art of Solomon’ gives instructions for

the evocation of the seventy-two spirits whom the

King of Israel, according to a well-known legend,

shut up in a brass vessel and cast into a deep lake. When

the vessel was discovered by the Babylonians, it was sup-

posed to contain a great treasure, and was accordingly

broken open. The spirits who were thus set at liberty, to-

gether with their legions, returned to their former places,

Belial excepted, who entered into a certain image, and gave

oracles to the people of the country in return for sacrifices

and divine honours. Their names and offices are as fol-
lows :—


1 Though a work of considerable length, this “Lesser Key,” so far as it con-
cerns our inquiry, admits of reduction into a manageable compass by the omission
of tiresome and egregious particulars as to the number of spirits who are subject
to a particular Lord, Prince, or Emperor, and are liable to appear in the company.
It should be understood in a general way that there are hundreds and thousands
and millions, according to the dignity of the hierarch, and they must have been a
source of considerable inconvenience, and even of dismay, to the operator!


165


The Book of Black Magic


I. Baat, a king ruling in the East
who imparts invisibility and wisdom.
He appears with a human head, or with
that of a toad or cat,’ but sometimes
with all at once. He speaks with a

THESHALOFBaaL. hoarse voice.
IT. Aqanss, a duke ruling in the East, who appears in the
form of a comely old man, ambling upon a crocodile and
earrying a goshawk on his wrist. He makes those who run


THE SEAL OF AGARES. THD SEAL OF VASSAGO. SBAL OF VASSAGO USED
IN WHITE MAGIC.


stand still, brings back runaways, teaches all languages, de-
stroys spiritual and temporal dignities, and causes earth-
quakes.2 He is of the Order of the Virtues.*


IIT. Vassaco, a mighty prince, of the nature of Agares,


1 The cat is the traditional domestic favourite not only of those who diabolise,
but of the diabolical world itself, which shows that after all there is a strong link
with naman in the cohorts of Lucifer. The reader will remember that the cat
falls on its feet, not by natural good luck, but by the special dispensation of
Mohammed, and that the favourite of the Prophet i is in Paradise, no doubt on the
best terms with the dog of the Seven Sleepers.

2 According to the Vocabulaire Infernal, the special province of Agares is to put
to fli ht the enemies of those whom he protects.

at is to say, during the first estate of the Fallen Angels.


166


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


who declares things past, present, and future, and discovers
what has been lost or hidden. He is good by nature.’

IV. GAMYGYN, a great marquis, appearing in the form
of a small horse or ass, but afterwards in human shape. He
speaks hoarsely, teaching the liberal sciences, and giving
news Of souls who have died in sin.?

V. Marsas,® a president, who appears as a mighty lion,
and then in human shape.* He answers truly concerning all


toh


THD SEAL OF GAMYGYN. THE SEAL OF MARBAS. THD SEAL OF VALEFOR.


things hidden or secret, causes and cures diseases, imparts
skill in mechanics, and changes men into various shapes.°

VI. VaLeror,® a powerful duke, appearing as a many-
headed lion.’ He leads those with whom he is familiar into
theft.


= 1 ii ee a oe is invocation, especially in Ceremonial Crystallomancy,
adepts o
2 According to MO Wier he summons into the presence of the exorcist the souls
of drowned men, and of those detained in Purgatory, rest magically Cartagra—
that is, the affliction of souls. They assume an aérial body, are visible to sight,
and reply to questions.

8 Or Bar

*At the request of the operator _(Wierus).

5 He is the third spirit in the Hierarchy of Wierus.

©Or Malaphar.

7 With the head of a hunter or a thief, says Wierus. He shows friendship to his
familiars till they are caught in the trap.


167


The Book of Black Magic


VIL. Amon, a strong and powerful marquis, who appears
like a wolf with a serpent’s head,’ and
vomiting flame. When so ordered, he
assumes a human shape, but with the
teeth of a dog. He discerns past and
future, procures love, and reconciles
friends and foes.


VIII. Barsatos, a great count and duke, who appears
when the sun is in Sagittarius with four
noble kings and three companies of
troops; he gives instruction in all the
sciences, reveals treasures concealed by
enchantment, knows the past and fu-

THE SHAL OF BARBATOS. ture, reconciles friends and those in
power, and is of the Ordcr of the Virtues.*


IX. Parmon, a great king, very obedient to Lucifer. He
appears like a crowned man seated
on a dromedary, preceded by all
manner of musicians. He speaks
with a roaring voice, teaches all
arts, sciences, and secrets, gives and

THEBEALOFPAIMON. confirms dignities, makes men sub-
ject to the will of the Magician, provides good familiars.
He is observed towards the north-west, and is of the Order
of Dominions.®


THB SBAL OF AMON,


X. Burr,‘ a great president, who appears when the sun
is in Sagittarius, and teaches philosophy, logic, the virtues


1Cauda serpentis, says Wierus
, a He see understands the songs of birds and the language of al] other animals

ierus

8 It appears from Wierus that the operator may fail to See oa this Psadie oth
which a must stretch forth the character belonging to him, an hin
to speak clearly

«The seventh spirit of the “Pseudo-Monarchia.”

168


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


of herbs, &c., he heals all diseases and gives good familiars,
XI. Gusion,’? a mighty duke, who appears like a cyno-
cephalus, and discerns the past, present, and future, answers


THE SHAL OF BUER. THD SHAL OF GUBION.


all questions, reconciles enemies, and gives honour and
dignities.

XII, Sytry, a great prince, who appears with a leopard’s
head, but assumes a human form at the Magician’s com-
mand. He procures love between the two sexes, and causes
women to show themselves naked.?

XIII. Beets,’ a terrible and mighty king, riding on a


THD SEAL OF SYTRY. THB SEAL OF BELETH.


pale horse, preceded by all manner of musicians. He is very
furious when first summoned, and must be commanded into
a triangle or circle with the hazel wand of the —


1 Otherwise, Gusayn, the eighth spirit of Wierus.
2“Jussus secreta libenter detegit feminarum, eas ridens ludificansque ut se
luxorise nudent.”—Weerus.
8 Otherwise, Byleth.


169


The Book of Black Magic


pointed to the south-east. He must be received courteously
and with homage, but a silver ring must be worn on the mid-
dle finger of the left hand, which must be held against the
face. He procures love between man and woman, and is
of the Order of the Powers.’

XIV, Lerasiz, a powerful marquis, coming in the like-


tH "EF


THE SEAL OF LBRAJIB. THB SEAL OF BLIGOR.


ness of an archer, clad in green, and bearing bow and quiver.
He occasions battles and causes arrow-wounds to putrefy.
XV. Egor, a great duke, appearing as a goodly knight
carrying a lance, pennon, and sceptre. He discovers hidden
things, causes war, marshals armies, kindles love and lust.
XVI. ZEPaR, a great duke, who appears in red apparel
and armed like a soldier. He inflames women with love for


THE SEAL OF ZEPAR THD SHAL OF BOTIS.


men, and can transform them into other shapes till they
have been enjoyed by their lovers.?
XVII. Boris, a great president and earl, who appears


1 He yet hopes to be restored to the Seventh Thrones.
_ The last statement is on the authority of Wierus. According to another read-


ing, Zepar makes women barren.
170


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


like a horrid viper, but, when commanded, assumes a human
shape, with large teeth and horns. He bears a sharp sword
in his hand, discerns past, present, and future, and recon-
ciles friends and foes.


XVITI. Barut,’ a mighty
duke, who appears like a
strong man with a serpent’s
tail, riding on a pale horse.
He knows the virtues of
herbs and precious stones, and
can transport men swiftly
from one country to another. THE SEAL OF BATHIN.


TTR


THD SEAL OF SALEOS.


XIX. Saeos,? a great duke, who
appeats like a brave soldier, riding
on a crocodile crowned. He promotes
love between the sexes.


XX. Purson,® a great king, who
appears like a lion-headed man, car-
rying a viper in his hand, and rid-
ing on a bear, preceded by many
trumpeters. He conceals and dis-
covers treasure, discerns past, pres-
ent, and future, gives true answers #§ THE SEAL OF PURSON.
concerning things human and divine, and provides good
familiars.


1 Otherwise, Bathym or Marthim.
Called also Zaleos.
8 Otherwise, Curson.


171


The Book of Black Magic


XXI. Morax,’ a great earl and
president, who appears like a human-
headed bull, and gives skill in astron-
omy and the liberal sciences, with good
familiars. He knows the virtues of all
THE SEALOF MoRax, Herbs and precious stones.


XXII. Ipos,? a mighty earl and
prince, appearing as an angel with a
lion’s head,® the webbed feet of a goose,


and a hare’s tail. He knows the past and
THE SEAL OFIPos, Luture, and imparts wit and courage.

XXIII. Arn,‘ a strong duke, who appears with the body

of a handsome man and three heads,

the first like a serpent, the second

like a man with two stars on the

forehead, and the third like a cat.

THE SHAL OF AINI. He rides on a viper, and carries a

blazing fire-brand, with which he spreads destruction. He

imparts much cunning, and gives true answers concerning

private matters.

XXIV. Napertus,® a

— valiant a who ap-

~~ pears in the form of a

crowing cock and flut-

ters about the circle. He

speaks hoarsely, gives


THB SEAL OF NABERIUS. skill in arts and sciences,
especially rhetoric, and restores lost dignities and honours.


1This spirit is named Faraii by Wierus.
2 Otherwise, Ipes and Aypeos.
® According to Wierus, sometimes in the form of an angel and sometimes in
that ‘ Called Aya and 0 lion. ere
ym or oryn by Wierus.
8é.¢., Cerberus.


= 172


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


XXV. GLASYALABOLAS,’ a mighty
president, who comes in the form of a


dog, but winged like a griffin. He
teaches all arts and sciences instanta-
neously, incites to bloodshed, is the
leader of all homicides, discerns past


and future, and makes men invisible. tsp SEAL OF GLASYALA-


XXVI. Bung, a strong duke, who appears as a three- —
headed dragon, the heads be-
ing respectively those of a
dog, griffin, and man. He has
a pleasant voice; he changes
the places of the dead, causes
demons to crowd round sepul-
chres, gives riches, makes men _ THE SEAL OF BUNE.
wise and eloquent, answers questions truly.


XXVIT. Ronoss,? a great mar-
quis and edrl, appears in a mon-
strous form; he teaches rhetoric and
the arts, gives a good understanding,
the knowledge of tongues, and fa-


vour of friends and foes.
THB SEAL OF RONOBB.


XXVIII. Berrrg,® a terrible duke, appearing in the


1 Alias, Caacrinolaas or Caassimola.
2 Otherwise, Roneve.
8 This spirit, says Wierus, is by some called Beal, but by the Jews Berith, and
necromancers Bofi.
173


The Book of Black Magic


form of a soldier in red apparel, with a golden crown, and
bestriding a red horse. The ring
used for Berith is required for his
evocation. He gives true answers of
things past, present, and to come,
turns all metals into gold, gives and
confirms dignities. He speaks in a
clear and persuasive voice, but 1s a
great liar, and his advice must not


THE SHAL OF BERITH. be trusted.


XXIX. AsTaRorH, a great and powerful duke, appears
like a beautiful angel riding on an in-
fernal dragon, and carrying a viper
in his right hand. He must not be
permitted to approach on account of
his stinking breath, and the magician
must defend his face with the magic
ring. Astaroth answers truly con-
cerning past, present, and future, dis-
covers all secrets, and gives great skill
THD SHALOF A8TAROTH. in the liberal sciences. He will also
discourse willingly concerning the fall of spirits,’


XXX. ForRNEUS, a great marquis, appears as a sea-mon-


THE SEAL OF FORNDUS.
ster. He teaches all arts and sciences, gives a good reputa-
2 But pretends that he himself was exempt from their lapse (Wierus).


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


tion and the knowledge of tongues, and causes men to be
loved by their enemies even as by their, friends.

XXXI. Foras,’ a great president, who appears in the
form of a strong man,
and teaches the virtues
of all herbs and pre- ¢ ,
cious stones, as well as
logic and ethics; he
makes men invisible,
imparts wit, wisdom,
and eloquence, discov- THE SEAL OF FORAS.
ers treasures, and restores things lost.

XXXIT. Asmopay,’ a strong and powerful king, appears
with three heads, the first like a bull,
the second like a man, and the third
like aram. He has a serpent’s tail,
the webbed feet of a goose, and he
vomits fire. He rides an infernal
dragon, carries lance and pennon,
and is the chief of the power of
Amaymon. He must be invoked
bareheaded,*® for otherwise he will
deceive. He gives the ring of vir- THE SBAL OF asMoDay.
tues, teaches arithmetic, geomancy, and all handicrafts, an-
swers all questions, makes men invisible, indicates the
places of concealed treasures and guards them if within the
dominion of Amaymon.

XXXIIT. Gaap,‘ a great president and prince, appears
when the sun is in the southern signs, coming in a human
shape, and preceded by four powerful kings. He teaches

1 Otherwise, Forcas.
3 Called also Sydonay.


8 And in a standing position (Wierus).
* Alias, Tap.
175


The Book of Black Magic


philosophy and the liberal sciences, excites love and hatred,
makes men insensible, gives in-
struction in the consecration of
those things which belong to the
divination of Amaymon, his
king, delivers familiars out of
the custody of other Magicians,
give true answers as to past,
present, and future, transports

| and returns men speedily from
| THB SBHAL OF GAAP. place to place at the will of the
exorcist.


XXXIV. FurFvrR, a great earl, appears in the form of a
hart with a fiery tail, and
will not speak till compelled
within the triangle. He
then assumes the form of an
angel, speaking with a hoarse
voice. He causes love be-

THB SHAL OF FURFUR. tween man and wife, raises
thunder, lightning, and great winds, gives true answers
about secret and divine things.


XXXV. Marcnosias, a mighty marquis, appears in the
form of a wolf with the wings of

a griffin, a serpent’s tail, and fire

issuing from his mouth. At

the command of the operator he

assumes a human form. He is

strong in battle, gives true an-

THE SHAL OF MARCHOSI48.  gwers to all questions, and is ex-


1 According to Wierus, he will speak outside the triangle, but what he says
will be false.
176


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


tremely faithful to the exorcist. He belongs to the Order
of Dominations.* ;

XXXVI. Souas or STOLas, a powerful prince, appears in
the likeness of a raven and then as a man. He teaches the
art of astronomy and the virtues of herbs and stones.


fn} foank


THE SBAL OF SOLAS. THB SEAL OF PHGENIA.


| XXXVI. PHOENIX, a great marquis, appears like the
bird of that name, singing dulcet notes in a child’s voice.
When he assumes human shape at the will of the Magician,
he speaks marvellously of all sciences, proves an excellent
poet, and fulfils orders admirably. He hopes to return to
the Seventh Thrones in 1200 years.
XX XVIII. Hatpas, a great earl; appears in the form of
a stockdove, speaking wth a hoarse voice. He burns towns,’


nay Gs


THD SHAL OF HALPAS, THE SEAL OF MALPAS.
visits the wicked with the sword, and can send men to fields
of war or to other places.

XXXIX. Matpas, a powerful president, appears at first
1And expects to return to the Seventh Thrones after 1200 years, but is deceived


therein (Wierus).
2Or, according to Wierus, builds them and fills them with armed men.


The Book of Black Magic


like a crow, but afterwards, when so commanded, assumes a
human form, speaking with a hoarse voice. He brings artif-
icers swiftly from all parts of the world, destroys the desires
and thoughts ? of enemies, gives good familiars, and receives
a sacrifice kindly, but will deceive him who offers it.

XL. Ravuwy,? a great earl, appears in the form of a crow,
but assumes human shape
when bidden. He steals
treasure and carries it
where commanded; he de-
stroys cities and dignities;
he discerns past, present,

THE SEAL OF RAUM. and future; he causes love
between friends and foes. Finally, he is of the Order of
the Thrones, 7


yor ee


THE SEAL OF FOCALOR. THD SEAL OF SABNACK.
XLI. Focator, a strong duke, appears in the form of a
man with the wings of a griffin. He drowns men, sinks war-
ships, and has power over the winds and the sea, but he will
hurt any one if commanded to forbear by the exorcist.
He hopes to return to the Seventh Thrones in 1050 years.®
XLIT. SaBnack,‘ a mighty marquis, appears in the form


1The reading of Wierus is preferable, i.e, Temples and Towers.
2Or Ra


m.
8 He is deceived, says Wierus.
4 Alias, Saburac.


178


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


of an armed soldier, having a lion’s head, and riding on a

pale-coloured horse. He builds towers, camps, and cities,

fortifies the same, torments men with wounds and putrid

sores swarming with worms;’ he gives good familiars.
XLITI. VeEpar,’ a great duke, appears as a mermaid.

He guides the waters and

battleships, and occasions

storms at sea when 80 com-

manded by the Magician.

He also causes the sea to

seem full of ships, and oc-

casions death in three days THE SEAL OF VEPAR.

by means of putrefying sores and worm-eaten wounds.
XLIV. SHax,® a great marquis, comes in the form of a

stockdove, speaking with a hoarse voice. He destroys the

sight, hearing, and understanding of any man or woman at

the will of the exorcist, steals money from the king’s ex-

chequer, and returns it in 1200 years. He will transport

anything, but must first be commanded into the triangle;


THE SEAL OF SHAX. THE SEAL OF VINE.
otherwise he will deceive the operator. He discovers all
hidden things which are not in the keeping of wicked spirits,
and gives good familiars.

XLV. VINE, a great king and earl, appears in a mon-


1 At the command of the magician (Wierus ;


i Chax or Scox.
179


2 Otherwise,


The Book of Black Magic


strous form,’ but assumes human shape when commanded.
He discerns things hidden, reveals witches, and makes
known the past, present, and future. At the command of
the exorcist he will build towers, demolish walls, and make
the waters stormy.

XLVI. Burrrons, a great earl, appears in a monstrous
form, but assumes the human
shape when commanded. He
gives proficiency in astrology,
geometry, and other mathemat-
ical arts; he teaches the virtues

THD SEAL OF BIFRONS. of herbs, precious stones, and
woods; he changes dead bodies, puts them in other places,
and lights phantom candles on their graves.

XLVII. VuwAL, a great duke, comes at first as an enor-
mous dromedary, but after-
wards assumes human form
and speaks in the Egyptian
tongue. He procures the
love of women, discerns

THE SHAL OF VUAL. past, present, and future,
and excites friendship even between foes. He was of the
Order of the Powers.

XLVIII. Haaentt, a great president, appears in the

shape of a gigantic bull with the wings of a griffin, but will


THE SEAL OF HAGENTI.
duly put on human form. He gives wisdom, transmutes all


metals into gold, and turns wine into water.
21Or as a lion seated on a black meta holding a viper in his hand.


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


XLIX. Proce.’ appears in the form of an angel, and is
a great and strong duke. He speaks
mystically of hidden things, teaches
geometry and the liberal sciences, and at
the command of the operator will make
a great commotion like that of running
waters; he also warms waters and tem-
pers baths.?, He was of the Order of
the Powers before his fall. THE SEAL OF PROCEL.
L. Furcas, a great duke, appears in the form of a cruel
old man, with long beard and hoary hair. He is seated on
a, pale horse, and has a sharp spear in his hand. He teaches
philosophy, rhetoric, astronomy, logic, chiromancy, and
pyromancy, perfectly in all their parts.
LI. Bawa, a terrible and powerful king, appears with
three heads, the first like that of a bull, the second like that


kee


THE SEAL OF FURCAS. THE SEAL OF BALAM.


of a man, and the third like a ram’s. With the tail of a
serpent and eyes flaming fire, he rides upon a furious bear,
carrying a goshawk on his wrist, and speaking with a hoarse


1 Otherwise, Pucel. .
2i.e., the thermal springs frequented by sick people.
181 :


The Book of Black Magic


voice. He gives true answers as to past, present, and fu-
ture, makes men go invisible, and imparts wit.’


LIT. A.ocen,’ a strong duke, ap-
pears in the form of a soldier, mounted
on a great horse, his face like that of a
lion, exceedingly red, his eyes flaming
fire, his speech hoarse and loud. He
teaches astronomy and the liberal
rum spaLGPattocen. Sciences, and gives a good familiar.

LITI. ‘Ca1m, a great president, appears in the form of a
thrush,* but afterwards in that
of a man bearing a sharp
sword, and seeming to answer
in burning ashes. He is a keen
disputant; he imparts to men
the understanding of bird’s
songs, the lowing of cattle, the
barking of dogs, and the voice
of waters. He gives true an-
swers concerning things to

THE SBAL OF CAIM. come, and was once of the Or-
der of Angels.

LIV. Murmur, a great duke and earl, appears in the
form of a soldier riding on a griffin, and
having a duke’s crown on his head. He
is preceded by two ministers sounding
trumpets. He teaches philosophy per-
fectly, and constrains the souls of the
dead to appear and to answer questions.
He was partly of the Order of Thrones

SPAL OF MURMUR. and partly of Angels.


1He is of the Order of the Dominations.
2 Otherwise, Alloien.
8Or of a blackbird.


182


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


LV. Onrosas, a great prince, appears first like a horse,
but when commanded, in human form. He discovers past,
present, and future; he gives good dignities and advance-


THE SEAL OF OROBAS.


ments, with the favour of friends and foes; he will reply
concerning the creation of the world and Divinity; he is
very faithful to the exorcist, and defends him from tempta-
tion by any spirit.

LVI. Gomory, a powerful duke, appears like a beautiful
woman, wearing a ducal crown.’ He discovers past, pres-


at


THD SBAL OF GOMORY. THE SEAL OF OSB.


ent, and future, as also the whereabouts of hidden treasures;

he procures the love of women, and especially of girls.
LVII. Oss, a great president, appears at first like a

leopard, and then in human shape. He gives skill in all


liberal sciences, and true answers concerning divine and
1And riding on a camel (Wierus).


The Book of Black Magic


secret things. He can change men into any shape that the
exorcist may desire, and he that is changed will not know it.’

LVITI. Amy, a great president, comes first as a great
flaming fire and then asa man. He gives perfect knowledge


THE SHAL OF AMY.


of astrology and the liberal sciences, with good familiars,
and can betray treasures that are kept by spirits.’
LIX. Ortas, a great marquis, appears in the form of a


THE SEAL OF ORIAS.
lion bestriding a strong horse; he has a serpent’s tail, and
holds two enormous hissing snakes in his right hand. He
teaches the virtues of the planets and the mansions thereof ;


1 He can also reduce them to sttch a state of insanity that they will believe
their identity changed, that they are kings and so forth. The delusion, however,
will only endure for one hour (Wierus).

2He is partly of the Order of the Angels and partly of that of the Powers.
He hopes to return to the Seventh Thrones in 1200 years, which is incredible, says


Wierus.
184


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy
he transforms men, gives dignities, prelates, and confirma-
tions, with the favour of friends and foes.

LX. Vapu.a, a strong duke, comes in the form of a lion


THD SBAL OF VAPULA.


with griffin’s wings. He gives skill not only in manual pro-
fessions but also in philosophy and the sciences.

LXI. ZaGan, a great king and president, appears at first
in the form of a bull
with the wings of a
griffin, and after in hu-
man shape. He makes
men witty, turns water
into wine, blood into THE SEAL OF ZAGAN,
oil, and oil into water; he can
change any metal into coin of
the realm and can make fools
wise.

LXII. Vaac, a great pres-
ident, comes as a little boy with
the wings of an angel and riding THD SEAL OF VALAC.
on a two-headed dragon. He gives true answers concerning
hidden treasures, tells where serpents may be seen, and will
deliver them helpless to the exorcist.

185


The Book of Black Magic


LXIII. Anpras, a great marquis, comes in the form of
an angel, with the head of a black night-raven, riding upon
' a strong black wolf, and having a sharp bright sword gleam-
ing in his hands. He sows discord, and will kill the unwary.

LXIV. FLavros, a great duke, appears at first like a ter-
rible leopard, but at the command of the exorcist he puts on


THE SEAL OF ANDRAS, THD SEAL OF FLAUROS.

the shape of a man, with fiery eyes and terrible countenance.

He gives true answers of things past, present, and future,

but unless commanded into the triangle he will deceive the

exorcist. He converses gladly of divinity and the creation

of the world, as also of the fall of spirits, his own included.
If desired, he will destroy and burn
the enemies of the operator, nor
will he suffer him to be tempted by
spirits or otherwise.

LXV. ANDREALPHUS, a mighty
marquis, appears at first in the
shape of a peacock, with a great
noise, but after puts on human

THE SEAL OF ANDREALPHUS. shape. He teaches geometry per-
fectly, and all that belongs to measurements, astronomy in-
cluded. He can transform men into the likeness of a bird.

186


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


LXVI. CrimeEntEs, a powerful marquis, appears like a
valiant soldier on a black horse.
He rules the spirits in the parts
of Africa; he teaches grammar,
logic, and rhetoric, discovers
hidden treasures and things lost
and hidden; he can make a man
appear like a soldier of his own
kind.

LXVII. Ampuscuas, a great duke, comes first like a uni-
corn, but will stand up at
request in human shape,
causing all manner of
musical instruments to be
heard but not seen. He
makes trees fall at the THE SHAL OF AMDUSCIAS.
will of the operator, and gives excellent familiars.


LXVITII. BEt1t, a mighty king, created next after Lu-
cifer, appears in the form of a beautiful angel seated in a
chariot of fire, and speaking with a pleasant voice. He fell


‘THE SEAL OF CIMBRBIBS.


THB SEAL OF BBLIAL.
first amongst the superior angels who went before Michael
and other heavenly angels. He distributes preferences of
senatorships, causes favours of friends and foes, and gives


187


The Book of Black Magic


excellent familiars. He must have offerings and sacrifices
made to him.’

LXIX. MDeEcaRABIA, a marquis,

q comes in the form of a star in a penta-

cle, but puts on the image of man at

1 a command. He discovers the virtues of

herbs and precious stones, makes birds
9 ) seem to fly before the exorcist, and re-

main with him as familiars, singing
THW SEAL OF DECARABIA. and eating like other birds.

LXX. Serre, a mighty prince under Amaymon, King of
the Hast, appearing in the form of a beau-
tiful man on a strong winged horse. He
brings all things to pass suddenly, trans-
ports to any place in the twinkling of an
eye, and discovers all thefts. He is in-

THHSEALOFSEERB. differently good or bad, and will do the
will of the operator.


LXXI. Danrtatian, a mighty duke, appears in the form


THE SBAL OF DANTALIAN.


of a man with many faces of men and women, and has a book
in his right hand. He teaches all arts and sciences, declares


1 He is partly of the Order of the Virtues and partly of that of the Angels.
188


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


all secret counsels, for he knows all human thoughts, and
can change them at his will. He

kindles love, and shows the similitude

of any person in a vision, wheresoever

they may be.

LXXIT. ANnpROMALIUS, a great
duke and earl, appears in the form of
a man holding a serpent in his hand.
He returns stolen goods and the thief,
discovers all wickedness and under-
hand dealing, as also hidden treas-


ures. THE SEAL OF ANDRO-
MALIUS.


Such are the prime mysteries of Goetia according to the
tradition of the ‘‘Lemegeton”’; such is the work which has
been described in the interest of White Magic as ‘‘distinct
from the ‘Key of Solomon,’ but highly important and valu-
able in its own department.’’ Viewed in the light of these
two-and-seventy methods of accomplishing all abomina-
tions, it would seem that the three ‘‘analogical realms of
occult philosophy’’ are the three kingdoms which we have
known under other names from our childhood, ‘‘the world,
the flesh, and the devil.’’ It will be unnecessary after their
enumeration to argue any longer upon the distinction be-
tween Black and White Magic as it appears in one of the
oldest and best of the Rituals. There is no longer any need
to inquire whether the operator is saved by his intention, for
we are acquainted with the nature of the intentions which
govern procedure in one of the most reputable memorials of
White Magic which is now extant. The evocation of Luci-
fer and Astaroth, whatever the pretext, must be the first
step towards Satanism; but here we have Satanism undi-
luted, plus all the mysteries of the impure Venus. To dis-

189


The Book of Black Magic


miss, therefore, the definition which no longer perplexes, let
us establish that the distinction between White and Black
Magic is the distinction between the ‘‘Lemegeton’’ and the
‘‘Grimoire of Honorius,’’—in other words, between cipher
and zero.


§ 2. Concerning the Rite of Conjuration from the
“* Lemegeton.”’


In communicating with the seventy-two spirits, the age
of the Moon should be observed, for it is affirmed on the au-
thority of Solomon that all days are profitable save the sec-
ond, fourth, sixth, ninth, tenth, twelfth, or fourteenth of


THE TRIANGLE OF SOLOMON.


that luminary. The seals must be made of metals; those of
the chief kings should be of gold; marquises, of silver;
dukes, of copper; prelates, of tin or silver; knights, of lead;
presidents, of fixed quicksilver;* and earls, of silver and
copper in equal parts. The entire cohort is governed by


1 Numerous experiments of the alchemists are concerned with congealing and
fixing quicksilver, but there are also “cabalistic” processes by which this sub-
stance was prepared expressly for the construction of talismans, and these must
not be confused with the more sober recipes of Hermetic Art. On this point
see “Les Secrets du Petit Albert,” Lyons edition, 1775, pp.


190


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


AMAYMON, King of the East; Corson, King of the West;
ZIMINAR, King of the North; and Gaap, King of the South.
These may be bound from 9 a.m. till noon, but, except on
occasions of great importance, should not be invoked them-
selves, as they act commonly by their inferiors. Marquises
may be bound from 3 to 9 p.m. and from sunset to sunrise;
dukes from sunrise till noon in clear weather; prelates in
any hour of the day; knights only from dawn till sunrise,


THE DOUBLE SBAL OF SOLOMON.


or from 4 P.M. till sunset; presidents in any daylight hour
up to the evening twilight; counts and earls in any hour of
the day, but it must be in the woods and forests, or in a
place that is free from noise, and far from the resort of
men. The ceremonial circle must be drawn towards that
side to which the spirit who is to be called is attributed.
The triangle into which Solomon summoned the rebellious
191


The Book of Black Magic


demons must be made two feet outside this circle and three
feet over it. The double seal and pentagram of Solomon
must be drawn on a parchment of calf-skin, or otherwise on
gold or silver, and worn upon the white vestment of the
operator, together with the seal of the spirit, which must be
exhibited on his appearance to compel obedience and as-
sumption of the human form. In addition to these char-


THD PENTAGRAM OF SOLOMON.


acters the secret seal of Solomon must be drawn with the
blood of a black cock that has never engendered, on virgin
parchment, the operator himself being clean within and
without, having abstained from sexual intercourse for the
space of one month, and having obtained pardon for his sins
by means of fasting and prayer. It is to be composed on a
Tuesday or Saturday at midnight, with the Moon increasing
in Virgo, and with burning of-perfumes of aloes, resin,
cedar, and alum.
192


19234


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


The other directions correspond broadly to those pre-
scribed in the second chapter. There is the rod or sceptre;
the sword; the mitre or cap; a long robe of white linen; a
girdle of lion’s skin, three inches wide and inscribed with
the names which appear in the outer circle of practice; ma-


Re
ex ——


rr


MAGICAL SWORDS AND WAND.


terial for the fumigations; oil to anoint the temples and eyes;
and clean water for the ablution. The Prayer at Lustration
is simply the versicle of David :—Thou shalt purge me with
hyssop, O Lord, and I shall be cleansed; Thou shalt wash
me and I shall be made whiter than snow.


PRAYER AT VESTING.


By the figurative mystery of this holy vestment, I will
clothe me with the armour of salvation in the strength of the
Most High, Ancor, AMIcAR, AMIDES, THEODONIAS, ANTTOR,
that so the end which I desire may be effected, O Aponal,
through Thy strength, to whom be praise and glory for ever
and ever.


193


The Book of Black Magic


Prayers should be offered also in harmony with the in-
tention of the operator before pronouncing the forms of
evocation, as follows :—

First CoNJURATION.

I invoke and conjure thee, O Spirit N., and, fortified
with the power of the Supreme Majesty, I strongly com-
mand thee by BaRaLAMENSIS, BALDACHIENSIS, PAUMACHIE,


THB SECRET SBHAL OF SOLOMON.


APOLORESEDES, and the most potent princes Gren10, LIACHIDE,
Ministers of the Tartarean Seat, chief princes of the seat of
APpo.oci4 in the ninth region; I exorcise and command thee,
O Spirit N., by Him who spake and it was done, by the
Most Holy and glorious Names Aponal, Ei, ELoHIM,
ELOHE, ZEBAOTH, ELION, ESCHERCE, JAH, TETRAGRAMMATON,
Sapal, do thou forthwith appear and show thyself unto me,
194


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


here before this circle, in a fair and human shape, without
any deformity or horror; do thou come forthwith, from .
whatever part of the world, and make rational answers to
my questions; come presently, come visibly, come affably,
and manifest that which I desire, being conjured by the
Name of the Eternal, Living,
and True God, HEtiorem; I
conjure thee also by the par-
ticular and true Name of thy
God to whom thou owest
thine obedience, by the name
of the King who rules over
thee, do thou come without
tarrying; come, fulfil my de-
sire; persist unto the end, ac-
cording to mine intentions I
conjure thee by Him to
whom all creatures are obe- |
dient, by this ineffable Name, TerraGRAMMATON JEHOVAH,
by which the elements are overthrown, the air is shaken, the
sea turns back, the fire is generated, the earth moves, and
all the host of things celestial, of things terrestrial, of things
infernal, do tremble and are confounded together; speak
unto me visibly and affably in a clear, intelligible voice, free
from ambiguity. Come therefore in the name ADONAI
ZEBAOTH, come, why dost thou tarry? AponaI Sapay, King
of kings, commands thee.

This being repeated frequently, if the spirit do not yet
appear, say as follows :—


THD RING OF THE EXORCIST.


SECOND CoNJURATION.


T invoke, conjure, and command thee, O Spirit N., to ap-
pear and show thyself visibly before this circle, in fair and
195


The Book of Black Magic


comely shape, without deformity or guile, by the Name of
On; by the Name Y and V, which Adam heard and spake;
by the Name of Jor, which Jacob learned from the Angel
on the night of his wrestling, and was delivered from the
hands of his brother Esau; by the Name of God Aqua, which
Lot heard and was saved with his family; by the Name
ANEHEXETON, which Aaron spake and was made wise; by
the Name ScHEmes AmaATHIA, which Joshua invoked and
the Sun stayed upon his course; by the Name EMMANUEL,
which the three children, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-
nego, chanted in the midst of the fiery furnace, and were
delivered; by the Name ALPHA and Omega, which Daniel
uttered, and destroyed Bel and the Dragon; by the Name
ZEBAOTH, which Moses named, and all the rivers and waters
in the land of Egypt brought forth frogs, which ascended
into the house of the Egyptians, destroying all things; by
the Name EscErcHIE ARISTON, which also Moses named,
and the rivers and waters in the land of Egypt were turned
into blood; by the Name E ion, on which Moses called,
and there fell a great hail, such as never was seen since the
creation of the world; by the Name Aponal, which Moses
named, and there came up locusts over all the land of Egypt,
and devoured what the hail had left; by the Name Haartos,
by the Seal of Aponat, by those others, which are JETROS,
ATHENOROS, PARACLETUS, by the three Holy and Secret
Names, AaGLA, ON, TETRAGRAMMATON ; by the dreadful Day
of Judgment; by the changing Sea of Glass which is before
the face of the Divine Majesty, mighty and powerful; by
the four beasts before the Throne, having eyes before and
behind, by the fire which is about the Throne, by the Holy
Angels of Heaven, by the Mighty Wisdom of God; by the
Seal of BaspatHeEa, by this Name PRIMEMATUM, which
Moses named, and the earth opened and swallowed Corah,
196 .


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


Dathan, and Abiram; do thou make faithful answers unto
all my demands, and evionn all my desires, so far as thine
office shall permit. Come therefore peaceably and affably ;
come visibly and without delay; manifest that which I de-
sire; speak with a clear and intelligible voice, that I may
understand thee.

If he come not at the reheasing of these Conjurations,
as without doubt he will, proceed as follows, it _— a
Constraint :—


THIRD CONJURATION.


I conjure thee, O Spirit N., by all the most glorious and
efficacious Names of the Great and Incomparable Lord the
God of Hosts, come quickly and without delay, from what-
soever part of the world thou art in; make rational answers
to my demands; come visibly, speak affably, speak intelligi-
bly to my understanding. I conjure and constrain thee, O
Spirit N., by all the aforesaid Names, as also by those seven
other Names wherewith Solomon bound thee and thy fellows
in the brazen vessel, to wit, ADONAI, PRERAI, TETRAGRAMMA-
TON, ANEXHEXETON, INESSENSATIONAL, PATHUMATON, and
Itemon; do thou manifest before this circle, fufil my will
in all things that may seem good to me. Be disobedient, re-
fuse to come, and by the power of the Supreme Being, the
everlasting Lord, that God who created thee and me, the
whole world, with all contained therein, in the space of six
days, by Ey, by Saray, by the virtue of the Name PRIMsE-
MATUM, which commands the whole host of Heaven, behold
I will curse and deprive thee of thine office, thy joy, and
thy place; I will bind thee in the depths of the bottomless
pit, there to remain until the Day of the Last Judgment. I
will chain thee in the Lake of Eternal Fire, in the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, unless thou come quickly, appearing

197


The Book of Black Magic


before this circle, to do my will. Come, therefore, in the
Holy Name Aponal, ZEBAOTH, AMIORAM, come, ADONAI
commands thee.


Should he still fail to appear, you may be sure that he
has been sent by his King to some other place. Invoke,
therefore, the King to despatch his servant as follows :—


INVOCATION OF THE KING.


O thou great and powerful King AmMaymon, who rulest
by the power of the Supreme God, EL, over all Spirits,
superior and inferior, but especially over the Infernal
Order in the Dominion of the East, I invoke and command
thee by the particular and true Name of God, and by the
God whom thou dost worship, by the Seal of thy creation,
by the most mighty and powerful Name of God, JEHOVAH,
TETRAGRAMMATON, who cast thee out of Heaven with the
rest of the Infernal Spirits, by all the other potent and great
names of God, Creator of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, of all
contained therein, by their powers and virtues, and by the
Name PRIMEMATUM, which commands the whole host of
Heaven. Do thou force and compel the Spirit N. here
before this circle, in a fair and comely shape, without injury
to myself or to any creature, that he may give me true and
faithful answer, so that I may accomplish my desired end,
whatsoever it be, provided that it is proper to his office, by
the power of God, Ex, who hath created and doth dispose of
all things, celestial, aérial, terrestrial, and infernal.


Having twice or thrice invoked the King in this manner,
again conjure the spirit, using the previous forms, and re-
hearsing them several times,.whereupon he will come as-

198


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


suredly. Yet should he fail, be convinced that he is bound
with chains in hell, and is not in the custody of his King.
To set him free it is necessary to recite


THe CHAIN CURSE.


O thou wicked and disobedient N., because thou hast
not obeyed or regarded the words which I have rehearsed,
the glorious and incomprehensible Names of the true God,
Maker of all things in the world, now I, by the power of these
Names, which no creature can resist, do curse thee into the
depths of the Bottomless Pit, to remain until the Day of
Doom in the Hell of unquenchable fire and brimstone, unless
thou shalt forthwith appear in this triangle, before this
circle, to do my will. Come, therefore, quickly and peace-
ably by the Names ApoNnal, ZEBAOTH, ADONAI AMIORAM.
Come, come, Aponal, King of Kings, commands thee.


Having read so far, if he come not, write his seal on
parchment; put it in a black box, with brimstone, assafo-
tida, and other stinking perfumes; bind the said box with
iron wire, hang it on the point of your sword, hold it over
the fire of charcoal, which shall have been placed towards
that quarter whence the spirit will come, and say first unto
the Fire:—I conjure thee, O Fire by Him who made thee,
and all other creatures in the world, to torment, burn, and
consume this Spirit N. everlastingly.


To THE Sprrrr.


Because thou art disobedient, and obeyest not my com-
mandments nor the precepts of the Lord thy God, now I,
who am the servant of the Most High and Imperial Lord

199


The Book of Black Magic


God of Hosts, JEHovaH, having His celestial power and
permission, for this thine averseness and contempt, thy
great disobedience and rebellion, will excommunicate thee,
will destroy thy name and seal, which I have in this box,
will burn them with unquenchable fire, and bury them in un-
ending oblivion, unless thou comest immediately, visibly and
affably, here before this circle, within this triangle, assuming
a fair and comely form, without doing harm unto myself or
any creature whatsoever, but giving reasonable answer to
my requests and performing my desire in all things.


If he appear not at this point, say as follows:—Thou art
still pernicious and disobedient, willing not to appear and
inform me upon that which I desire to know; now therefore,
in the Name and by the power and dignity of the Omnipo-
tent and Immortal Lord God of Hosts, JeEHovan Terra-
GRAMMATON, sole Creator of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, with
all contained therein, the marvellous Disposer of all things
visible and invisible, I do hereby curse and deprive thee of all
thine office, power, and place; I bind thee in the depth of
the Bottomless Pit, there to remain unto the Day of Judg-
ment, in the lake of fire and brimstone, prepared for the
rebellious Spirits. May all the Company of Heaven curse
thee; may the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Light of the
Hosts of Heaven, curse thee into fire unquenchable, into
torments unspeakable; and even as thy name and seal are
bound up in this box to be choked with sulphureous and
stinking substances, and to burn in this material fire, so, in
the Name of Jehovah, and by the power and dignity of the
three Names, TETRAGRAMMATON, ANEXHEXETON, PRIMEMA-
TUM, may all these drive thee, O thou disobedient Spirit N.,
into the Lake of Fire, prepared for the damned and ac-
cursed Spirits, there to remain until the Day of Doom, re-

200


The Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy


membered no more before the face of that God who shall
come to judge the quick and the dead, with the whole world,
by fire.


Set the box in the flame, whereupon he will appear;
when he comes, quench the fire, make sweet perfumes, give
him good entertainment, shewing him the pentacle on the
hem of your vestment covered with a linen cloth, and say-
ing :—Behold thy confusion, if thou be disobedient. Behold
the Pentacle of Solomon which I have brought into thy pres-
ence. Behold the person of the Exorcist, who is called
OCTINIMOES, in the midst of the Exorcism, armed by God
and fearless, potently invoking and calling. Make, there-
fore, reasonable answers to my demands, be obedient to me,
thy Master, in the Name of the Lord BaTHaL, rushing upon
ABRAC, ABEOR, coming upon BERoR.


He will become obedient and bid you ask what you will,
for he is made subject by God to your purpose. When he
shows himself humble and meek, say :—Welcome, Spirit (or,
most Noble King), welcome art thou unto me; I have called
thee through Him who created Heaven, Earth, and Hell,
with all contained therein, and thou hast obeyed also by
the like power. I bind thee to remain affably and visibly
before this circle, within this triangle, so long as I need thee,
and to depart not without my license, till thou hast truly
and faithfully fulfilled all that I shall require.


THe LICENSE To DEPART,


O Spirit N., because thou hast diligently answered my
demands, I do hereby license thee to depart, without injury
to man or beast. Depart, I say, and be thou very willing
and ready to come, whensoever duly exorcised and conjured

201


The Book of Black Magic


by the Sacred Rites of Magic. I conjure thee to withdraw
peaceably and quietly, and may the peace of God continue
for ever between me and thee. Amen.


Go not out of the circle till he be gone, but make prayers
to God for the great blessing He has bestowed upon you by
thus granting your desires, and delivering you from the
malice of the enemy.


For these verbose and tiresome conjurations the Latin
version of Wierus substitutes one general form of citation,
in the Name of the Christian Trinity, which is not really
an anachronism, for the compiler of the ‘‘Lemegeton’’ was
acquainted at least with the books of the New Testament.
This is proved by the references in the Third Conjuration
to the Living Creatures of the Apocalypse, and it leaves the
attribution to Solomon in precisely that state which our re-
spect for a prince in Israel would naturally desire.


CHAPTER V.


Concerning the Mysterp of the Sanctum Regnum, or the Governe
ment of the Chil Spirits; being the Rite of Conjura-
tion according to the Grimorium Berum


HE preparations of the operator prescribed by the
Grimorium Verum are fully represented in the ear-
lier chapters, but they may be summed here as fol-
lows:—1. An austere fast of three days; 2. Retreat or iso-
lation from human society; 3. Abstinence from sexual
intercourse; 4. The recitation of certain prayers and the
performance of certain ablutions; 5. The composition of
the required instruments. He must further devote himself
to the invocations, lest memory fail him at the moment of
operation, and to insure mastery of the practice. He should
also recite the following prayer daily ‘—at Prime once, at
Tierce twice, at Sext three times, at Nones four times, at
Vespers five times, and six times before going to rest. It is
explained that these hours are planetary and unequal.*
Prime is reckoned at the rising of the sun, Tierce at three
hours after, Sext at mid-day, Nones at three in the after-
noon, and vespers at sunset.


1 This portion of the process offers some analogy with the “Key of Solomon,”
Book ii. c. 2. ;


2i.¢, they are governed by the times of sunrise and sunset. Sext and Nones
would not, however, be variable.
203


The Book of Black Magic


PRAYER.?


ASTRACHIOS, ASACH, ASARCA, ABEDUMABAL, SILaT, ANA-
BOTAS, JESUBILIN, Sciain, GENEON, Domo, Lord God, who
dwellest above the heavens, whose glance searchest the
abyss; grant me, I pray Thee, the power to conceive in my
mind and to execute that which I desire to do, the end of
which I would attain by Thy Help, O God Almighty, who
livest and reignest for ever and ever. Amen.

These things being done, says the Grimoire, it remains
only to follow the invocations and to compose the charac-
ters, to which end the operator shall proceed as follows :—
On the day and in the hour of Mars, the Moon waxing, and
at the first hour of the day, which begins fifteen minutes
before the rising of the Sun, a piece of virgin parchment
must be prepared, containing all the characters and invoca-
tions of the spirits whom it is desired to invoke. On the day
and in the hour aforesaid, let the operator bind the little
finger of the (left) hand, which is the finger of Mercury,
with a thread woven by a virgin girl; let him pierce that
finger with the lancet of the Art, so as to draw blood, and
form therewith the character of Scirlin, from whom all
other spirits depend, since he is their messenger, and can
compel them to appear despite themselves, because he has
the power of the Emperor. His invocation, which must be
written, is as follows:—


THE INVOCATION OF SCIRLIN.
HELON >, TAUL >, VARF >, PAN >s, HEON ><, Homono-


1This Prayer is similar to that of the “Key of Solomon,” Book ii. c. 2, with
the exception of the names, which are much mutilated in the Grimoire; these
should read :—Herachio, s Asacro, Bedrimulael, Tilath, Arabonas, Ierahlem,
Ideodoc, Archarzel, Zophiel, Blautel, Baracata, Edoniel, Elohim, Emagro, Abra-
Sa Samoel, Geburahel, Cadato, Era, Elohi, Achsah, Ebmisha, Imachedel, Daniel,
a, Elamos, Izachel, Beal, Segon, Gemon, Demas. But the majority of these

are unintelligible.

204


The Mystery of the Sanctum Regnum


REUM >, CLEMIALH >, SERUGEATH >}, AGLA >t, TETRAGRAM-
MATON >, CASOLY >}.

With the confusion so common in the Grimoires, the
character of Scirlin is not given, whence the operator who
followed the instructions of this Ritual must have had re-
course to one of the superior spirits. The instructions, how-
ever, are not described ad clerum, and it is scarcely possible
to extract from them an intelligible method of procedure.
The name and surname of the operator must apparently be
written below the character of the spirit, following a pre-
scribed manner, which is also omitted; the conjuration of
the spirit must be added, and incense burnt in his honour.


CoNJURATON TO LUCIFER.


LUCIFER >k, OUYAR >, CHAMERON >, ALISEON >, Man-
DOUSIN >k, PremMy >, OrtetT>, Nayprus>, EsmMony >,
EPARINESONT >#, Estiot>k, Dumosson >, DANOCHAR >,
CaSMIEL >, Hayras>, F'ABELLERONTHON >, SoODIRNO >},
PEATHAM >, Come >, LUCIFER ><. AMEN.


CoNJURATION FOR BEELZEBUTH.


BEELZEBUTH >}, LUCIFER >, MADILON >, SOLYMO >fx, Sa-
ROY >, THEU >, AMECLO >, SEGRAEL >}*, PRAREDUN >, ADRI-
CANOROM >, MarTrRo>, T1Mo>, CAMERON sx, PHORSY >#,
METOSITE >, PRUMOSY >, Dumaso >, ELIVISA ><, ALPHROIS
>, FUBENTRONTY >, Come, BEELZEBUTH >. AMEN.


CoNJURATION FOR ASTAROTH.


ASTAROTH >, ADOR>, CAMESO>#, VALUERITUF >, Ma-
RESO ><, LopIR>#, CaADOMIR>, ALUIEL>#, CALNISO>#, TELY
-+, PLEORIM>, VIORDY>, CUREVIORBAS*, CAMERON >},

205


The Book of Black Magic


VESTURIEL x, VULNAVO >, BENEz «x, Meus CALMIRON >#,
Noarp>, NisA CHENIBRANBO CALEVODIUM >}, Brazo rk,
TABRASOL ><, Come >, ASTAROTH >}, AMEN.


Having repeated seven times the conjuration addressed
to one of these superior spirits, the same will forthwith
manifest to perform whatsoever shall be desired. Nore.—
Such conjuration must have been written on virgin paper or
parchment before invoking the spirits. These, having been
satisfied, may be dismissed by using the following


DISCHARGE.


Go in peace unto your places; may peace be with you,
and be ye ready to come whensoever I shall call upon you,
In the Name of the Father > and of the Son > and of the
Holy Ghost >. Amen.


CoNJURATION FOR INFERIOR SPIRITS.


O SurmMy >, DELMUSAN >k, ATALSLOYM >, CHARUSIHOA
>, MELANY >, LIAMINTHO >, CoLEHON >k, PARON >, Ma-
DION >, MERLOY >, BULERATOR >, DoNMEO +, HONE >,
PELOYN >, Ipasi >, Mron >, ALYMDRICTELS >, PERSON
>, Crisotsay >, LEMoN SEFLE Nipar Horm. PEvNtT sk,
HALMON >, ASOPHIEL >, ILNOSTREON >J«, BANIEL >, VERM-
14S x, ESLEVOR ><, NoELMA >, DorsAMOT *, LHAVALA >},
OmotT >, FRANGAM >, BELDoR =, Drain >, Come.


The name of the required spirit must here be added on
the parchment, when he will duly appear, and will grant
what is desired of him, after which he may be dismissed by
the previous Discharge.

206


The Mystery of the Sanctum Regnum


The characters should be burnt in each case, as they avail
once only.


ANOTHER CONJURATION.


I conjure thee, N., by the great living God, the Sovereign
Creator of all things, to appear under a comely human form,
without noise and without terror, to answer truly unto all
questions that I shall ask thee. Hereunto I conjure thee by
the virtue of these Holy and Sacred Names.


CHAPTER VI


Che Mysteries of Infernal Invocation according
to the Grand Grimoire


$1. The Rite of Lucifuge.


of Honorius’’ the darksome honour of an intelligi-

ble and unmutilated Ritual of Black Magic. Each
after its own kind is indeed an exceedingly curious work.
In the first is contained what is probably the only printed
method of making pacts; the second is remarkable, firstly,
on account of its pretended origin and the elaboration with
which it is set forth, secondly, for the ecclesiastical complex-
ion of its process, which can scarcely have failed to impose
upon innumerable credulous sorcerers. Both deserve to be
printed almost tn extenso, and, setting aside their prelimi-
nary portions, already adequately dealt with, they are given
practically verbatim in the chapters which here follow.

It will be remembered that the operator, or Karcist, as
he is termed in the ‘‘Grand Grimoire,’’ is recommended
continence, fasting, and similar privations for an entire
quarter of the moon, such quarter coinciding with that of
the luminary. On the morning which succeeds the first
night of the quarter, he must repair to a druggist’s, and
purchase a bloodstone, called Emattlle, which must be car-
ried continually about him for fear of accident, and in ex-

208


T HE ‘“‘Grand Grimoire’’ divides with the ‘‘Grimoire


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


pectation that the spirit whom it is proposed to compel and
bind will henceforth do all in his power to overwhelm the
operator with terror, so as to incite him to abandon the
enterprise, hoping in this manner to escape from the wiles
which are beginning to be woven about him.


The next operation is the purchase of a virgin kid, which
must be decapitated on the third day of the moon. Pre-
viously to the sacrifice, a garland of vervian must be wound
about the neck of the animal, immediately below the head,
and secured by means of a green ribbon. The sacrifice must
be offered on the scene of the coming evocation, a forlorn
and isolated spot free from all interruption. There, with
the right arm bared to the shoulder, having armed himself
with a blade of fine steel, and having kindled a fire of white
wood, the Karcist shall recite the following words in a hope-
ful and animated manner :—


INITIAL OFFERING.


I immolate this victim to thee, O grand Aponay, ELorm,
ARIEL, and JEHOvAM, to the honour, glory, and power of
thy Name, which is superior to all Spirits. O grand Aponayr!
vouchsafe to receive it as an acceptable offering. Amen.


Here he must cut the throat of the kid, skin it, set the
body on the fire, and reduce it to ashes, which must be col-
lected and cast towards the rising of the sun, at the same
time repeating the following words:—It is to the honour,
glory, and dominion of thy name, O grand Aponay, ELorm,
ARIEL, JEHOVAM, that I spill the blood of this victim!
Vouchsafe, O thou gread Aponay, to receive its ashes as an
acceptable sacrifice.


While the victim is being consumed by the flames, the
operator shall rejoice in the honour and glory of the grand
209


The Book of Black Magic


Aponay, Exiorm, ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, taking care to pre-
serve the skin of the virgin kid to form the round or grand
Kabbalistic circle in which hewnust himself stand on the
day of the grand enterprise.

The sacrifice of the victim is followed by the selection
and composition of the Blasting Rod, of which a descrip-
tion has been given. From the purpose for which it is in-
tended, and from the silence of the Grimoire, it may be in-
ferred that the preparation of the goatskin is exceedingly
simple and does not involve the removal of the hair.

- When the night of action has arrived, the operator shall
gather up his rod, goatskin, the stone called Ematille, and
shall further provide himself with two vervian crowns, two
candlesticks, and two candles of virgin wax, made by a
virgin girl and duly blessed. Let him take also a new steel
and two new flints, with sufficient tinder to kindle a fire, like-
wise half a bottle of brandy, some blessed incense and cam-
phor, and four nails from the coffin of a dead child. All
these must be carried to the place chosen for the great work,
where everything hereinafter laid down must be scrupu-
lously performed, and the dread Kabbalistic circle must be
described in an accurate manner. Lastly, it must be care-
fully borne in mind that there should be either one or three
taking part in the ceremony, the Karcist included, who is the
person appointed to address the spirit, holding the Destroy-
ing Rod in his hand. The evoking process may be given in
the actual words of the Grimoire.


CoNncERNING A TRUE REPRESENTATION OF THE GRAND
KABBALISTIC CIRCLE.

You must begin by forming a circle with strips of kid’s
skin fastened to the ground by means of your four nails.
Then with the stone called Ematille you must trace the tri-

210 :


,


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


angle within the circle, beginning at the eastern point. A
large A, a small £, a small a, and a small J, must be drawn
in like manner, as also the sacred name of Jesus between
two crosses. By this means the spirits will have no power
to harm you from behind. The Karcist and his assistants
may then fearlessly proceed to their places within the tri-
angle, and regardless of any noises, may set the two candle-
sticks and the two vervian crowns on the right and left
sides of the triangle within the circle. This being done,


THE GRAND KABBALISTIC CIRCLE.


the two candles may be lighted, taking care that there is a
new brazier in front of the Karcist, plied with newly con-
secrated charcoal. This must be kindled by the Karcist
casting a small quantity of the brandy therein and a part
_ of the camphor, the rest being reserved to feed the fire

periodically, in proportion to the length of the business.
Having punctually performed all that is mentioned above,
the chief operator may repeat the following prayer :—I pre-
sent thee, O great Aponay, this incense as the purest I can

21]


The Book of Black Magic


obtain ; in like manner, I present thee this charcoal prepared
from the most ethereal of woods. I offer them, O grand and
omnipotent ADonay, ELOoIM, ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, with my
whole soul and my heart. Vouchsafe, O grand Aponay,
to receive them as an acceptable holocaust. Amen.

You should also be careful, says the Grimoire, to have no
alloyed metal about your person, except a gold or silver coin
wrapped in paper, which you must fling to the spirit when he


THE CIRCLE OF WHITE MAGIC.


appears outside the circle, so as to prevent him from harm-
ing you. While he is picking up the coin, begin promptly
the following prayer, fortifying yourself with courage, en-
ergy, and prudence. Be, also, especially careful that the
Karcist is the sole speaker; the assistants must preserve a
determined silence, even if they are questioned or menaced
by the spirit.
First PRAYER.

O great and living God, subsisting in one and the same

person, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; I adore
212


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


Thee with the deepest veneration, and I submit with the
liveliest confidence to Thy holy and sufficient protection. I
believe with the most sincere faith that Thou art my Creator,
my Benefactor, my Preserver, and my Lord, and I testify to
Thy sovereign Majesty that my sole desire is to belong to
Thee through the whole of eternity. So be it. Amen.


SECOND PRAYER.


O great and living God, who hast created man to enjoy
felicity in this life, who hast adapted all things for his neces-
sities, and didst declare that everything should be made sub-
ject to his will, be favourable to this my design, and permit
not the rebellious spirits to be in possession of those treas-
ures which were formed by Thine own hands for our tempo-
ral requirements. Grant me, O great God, the power to dis-
pose of them by the potent and terrific names in Thy Clav-
icle: ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL, JEHOVAM, Tac La, MaTHon, be
ye propitious unto me. So be it. Amen.


OFFERTORY.


I offer Thee this incense as the purest which I have been
able to obtain, O sublime Aponay, ELorm, ARIEL, and JEHO-
vAM; vouchsafe to receive it as an acceptable holocaust. In-
cline to me in Thy power, and enable me to succeed in this
great enterprise. So be it. Amen.


First CoNJURATION.
Addressed to the Emperor Luctfer.


Emperor Lucifer, Master and Prince of Rebellious
Spirits, I adjure thee to leave thine abode, in whatsoever
quarter of the world it may be situated, and come hither to

213


The Book of Black Magic


communicate with me. I command and I conjure thee in
‘ the Name of the Mighty living God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, to appear without noise and without any evil smell,
to respond in a clear and intelligible voice, point by point,
to all that I shall ask thee, failing which, thou shalt be most
surely compelled to obedience by the power of the divine
Aponay, ELorm, ARIEL, JEHOVAM, Taacua, MAaTHON, and by
the whole hierarchy of superior intelligences, who shall con-
strain thee against thy will. Venité, Venité! Submiritillor
Lucifuge, or eternal torment shall overwhelm thee, by the
great power of this Blasting Rod. In subtto.


SECOND CoNJURATION.


I command and I adjure thee, Emperor Lucifer, as the
representative of the mighty living God, and by the power
of Emanuel, his only Son, who is thy master and mine, and
by the virtue of His precious blood, which He shed to re-
deem mankind from thy chains, I command thee to quit
thine abode, wheresoever it may be, swearing that I will give
thee one quarter of an hour alone, if thou dost not straight-
way come hither and communicate with me in an audible
and intelligible voice, or , if thy personal presence be impos-
sible, despatch me thy Messenger Astarot in a human form,
without either noise or evil smell, failing which I will smite
thee and thy whole race with the terrible Blasting Rod into
the depth of the bottomless abysses, and that by the power.
of those great words in the Clavicle—By Aponay, Exorm,
ARIEL, JEHOVAM, Taaua, MaTHON, ALMOUZIN, AROIS,
PirHona, Macors, SyLPpHarE, Tasots, SALAMANDRAR,
Gnomvus, TERRAE, CoELIS, GODENS, Aqua. In subtito..

Notice.—Before uttering the third Conjuration, should
the spirit refuse to comply, read what follows in the Clav-
icle, and smite all the spirits by plunging both the forked

214


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


extremities of your rod into the flames, and be not alarmed
in so doing at the frightful howls which you may hear, for
at this extreme moment all the spirits will manifest. Then,
before reading the Clavicle, and in the midst of the commo-
tion, recite the third Conjuration.


THIRD CoNJURATION.


I adjure thee, Emperor Lucifer, as the agent of the
strong living God, of His beloved Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, and by the power of the Great Aponay, ELorm, ARIEL,
and JEHOVAM, to appear instantly, or to send thy Messenger
Astarot, forcing thee to forsake thy hiding-place, whereso-
ever it may be, and warning thee that if thou dost not mani-
fest this moment, I will straightway smite thee and all thy
race with the Blasting Rod of the great Aponay, ELor,
ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, &c.


At this point, should the spirit still fail to appear, plunge
the two ends of your rod a second time into the flames, and
recite the following potent words from the grand Clavicle
of Solomon :—


Granp CoNJURATION.
Extracted from the Veritable Clavicle.


I adjure thee, O Spirit! by the power of the grand
AponayY, to appear instanter, and by E.oim, by ARIEL, by
JEHOVAM, by Aqua, Taaua, MatHon, Oarios, ALMOAZIN,
Artos, Mremsrot, Varios, Prroona, Masons, SuLPHAE,
GaBOTS, SALAMANDRAE, TABOTS, GINGUA, JANNA, ETITNAMUS,
ZARIATNATMIX, &. A. H. A.J. A. T. M. O. A. A.M, V. P.
M.8.C.8.J.0.G4. A. J. FP. Z. &e.

After a second repetition of these sublime and powerful
words, you may be sure that the spirit will respond after the
ensuing manner.

215


The Book of Black Magic


Of the Mantfestation of the Spirit.
Lo, Iam here! What dost thou seek of me? Why dost


LUCIFUGB ROFOCALE.


thou disturb my repose? Smite me no more with that dread
rod! LuUcIFUGE ROFOCALE.


Reply to the Sprit.


Hadst thou appeared when I invoked thee, I had by no
means smitten thee ; remember, if the request which I make
thee be refused, I am determined to torment thee eternally.


SOLOMON.
216


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


The Spirit’s Answer.


Torment me no further. Say, rather, what thou dost re-
quire at my hands. LuUcCIFUGE ROFOCALE.


The Requisition.


I require that thou shalt communicate two several times
on each night of the week, either with myself or with those
who are entrusted with my present Book, the which thou
shalt approve and sign; I permit thee the choice of those
hours which may suit thee, if thou approvest not those which
I now enumerate. To wit:

On Monday at nine o’clock and at midnight.

On Tuesday at ten o’clock and at one in the morning.

On Wednesday at eleven o’clock and at two in the morn-
ing.
On Thursday at eight and ten o’clock.

On Friday at seven in the evening and at midnight.

On Saturday at nine in the evening and at eleven at
night.

Further, I command thee to surrender me the nearest
treasure, and I promise thee as a reward the first piece of
gold or silver which I touch with my hands on the first day
of every month. Such is my demand. SoLoMoN.


The Spirit’s Reply.


I cannot comply with thy request on such terms, nor on
any others, unless thou shalt give thyself over to me in fifty
years, to do with thy body and soul as I please.

LucIFUGE ROFOCALE.


Rejoinder to the Spirit.


Lo, will I smite thee and thy whole race, by the might
217


The Book of Black Magic


of great Adonay, if, on the contrary, thou dost not comply
with my request.

Notice.—Here plunge the points of the Blasting Rod into
the fire and repeat the Grand Conjuration of the Clavicle
till the spirit surrenders himself to your will.


Answer and Compliance of the Spirit.


Smite me no further; I pledge myself to do what thou
desirest two several times on every night of the week. To
wit:

On Monday at ten o’clock and at midnight.

On Tuesday at eleven o’clock and at one in the morning.

On Wednesday at midnight and at two in the morning.

On Thursday at eight and at eleven o’clock.

On Friday at nine o’clock and at midnight.

On Saturday at ten o’clock and at one in the morning.

I also approve thy Book, and I give thee my true signa-
ture on parchment, which thou shalt affix at its end, to make
use of at thy need. Further, I place myself at thy dispo-
sition, to appear before thee at thy call when, being puri-
fied, and holding the dreadful Blasting Rod, thou shalt open
the Book, having described the Kabalistic circle and pro-
nounced the word Rofocale. I promise thee to have friendly
commerce with those who are fortified by the possession of
the said Book, where my true signature stands, provided
that they invoke me according to rule, on the first occa-
sion that they require me. I also engage to deliver thee
the treasure which thou seekest, on condition that thou keep-
est the secret for ever inviolable, art charitable to the poor,
and dost give me a gold or silver coin on the first day of
every month. If thou failest, thou art mine everlastingly.

LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE.

IMPRIMATUR.


218


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation
Reply to the Sprit.


I agree to thy conditions.
SoLoMOoN.
INVITATION OF THE SPIRIT. ©


Follow me, and come lay thy hands on the treasure.

Thereupon the Karcist, armed with the Blasting Rod
and the stone called Ematille, shall issue from the circle at
that point where the door of mighty Adonay is figured, and
shall follow the spirit, but the assistants shall not stir one
step from the circle, but shall remain firm and immovable
within it, whatever reports they hear, and whatever visions
they see. The spirit shall then conduct the Karcist to the
vicinity of the treasure, when it may befall that the Karcist
shall behold the apparition of a large and fierce dog with a
collar as resplendent as the sun. This will be a Gnome,
which he can drive off by the point of his rod, when the ap-
parition will make off towards the treasure. The Karcist
must follow, and on reaching the treasure, will be astonished
to discover the person who has hidden it, who will endeavor
to grapple with him, but will be unable so much as to ap-
proach him. The Karcist must be provided with a sheet of
virgin parchment inscribed with the grand conjuration of
the Clavicle. This he must cast upon the treasure, grasping
one of its coins at the same moment as a pledge and a surety,
and previously flinging down a piece of his own money bit-
ten by his own teeth, after which he may retire, walking
backwards, and carrying away what he can of the treasure.
The rest cannot escape him after the above precautions. He
must, however, take heed not to turn round, whatever noise
he may hear, for at this critical moment it will truly seem
as if all the mountains in the world were being precipitated
upon him, He must for this cause be fortified with special

219


The Book of Black Magic


intrepidity, must take fright at nothing, and keep perfectly
firm. So acting, he will be led back by the Spirit to the
entrance of the circle. Then shall the Karcist recite the
following discharge of the Spirit.


- CONJURATION AND DISCHARGE OF THE SPIRIT.


O Prince Lucifer, I am, for the time, contented with
thee. I now leave thee in peace, and permit thee to retire
_wheresoever it may seem good to thee, so it be without noise
and without leaving any evil smell behind thee. Be mindful,
however, of our engagement, for shouldst thou fail in it,
even for a moment, be assured that I shall eternally smite
thee with the Blasting Rod of the great Aponay, ELom,
ARIEL, and JEHOVAM. Amen.


Act oF THANKSGIVING.


O Omnipotent God, who hast created all things for the
service and convenience of men, we return Thee most
humble thanks for the benefits which, in Thy great bounty,
Thou hast poured out on us during this night of Thine in-
estimable favours, in which Thou hast granted us according
to our desires. Now, O Almighty God, have we realised all
the scope of Thy great promises when Thou didst say to us:
Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you. And as Thou hast commanded and warned us to suc-
cour the poor, we promise Thee, in the presence of the great
ADONAY, ELoim, ARIEL, and JEHOVAM, to be charitable and
to pour out on them the beneficent beams of the Sun with
which those four potent divinities have enriched us. So be
it. Amen. VALE.


220


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


§ 2. Concerning the Genuine Sanctum Regnum, or the True
Method of Making Pacts.


There are two kinds of pacts, says the Grimorium
Verum, the tacit and the manifest; but know at the same
time that among the several kinds of spirits there are some
which bind and some which do not bind, save only in a very
light manner. As to the first, they are those which require
something personally belonging to you whensoever a pact is
agreed. Against these you must be on your guard, because
the guileful friend becometh an open enemy.’ The Gri-
mortum Verum does not, however, entertain more largely
the question of a compact with Satan or his ministers,
though it may perhaps be inferred from its pages that all


1 Catholic theologians who have concerned themselves with the question of the
pact have so extended the sphere of its operation that it includes the mere proc-
ess of communicating with spirits. In his “Theological Dictionary” Bergier de-
fines the pact as an express or tacit agreement made with the demon in the hope
of accomplishing things which transcend the powers of Nature. It is ress
and formal when the operator himself invokes and demands the help of the
demon, whether that personage really appears in response, or the sorcerer be-
lieves that he beholds him, that is to say, is hallucinated. It is also express and
formal when the demon is invoked by the mediation of some one supposed to be
in relation with him; in other words, the consultation of a sorcerer is equivalent
to a compact with Satan. The performance of any act with the expectation of a
result from the demon is another compact of this kind. The pact is tacit or
equivalent when an act is performed with a view to some effect which cannot
naturally follow, while the intervention of God is not to be expected. There re-
mains only the fiend. For example, should any one cure a disease by uttering
certain words, this could only take place by the operation of the Infernal Spirit,
because the words do not themselves possess the required virtue, and God is
not likely to infuse it. Hence all theologians conclude that not only every species
of Magic, but every kind of superstition involves at least a tacit and equivalent
compact with the demon. St. Augustine and St. Thomas are said to have taken
this view. It is by precisely such judgments as these that the theology of the
Middle Ages brought itself to a by-word, and it is also for this reason that sorcery
most flourished when such doctrines ruled, because a power which condemns
everything to the same penalty condemns nothing effectually, and that which is
over-judged is always vindicated in the eyes of the people. We have come to
see that horse-stealing is not murder, and we no longer avenge it by the gallows;
so also, with due respect to the masters of Theology, the follies of a village maiden
who believes in a sooth-saying gipsy, and the trickeries of a quack-doctor who is
absurd enought to take Abracadabra seriously, are not the crime of Faust. But
the learned Bishop of Hippo and the Angel of the Schools produced Goethe as
their ultimate antithesis; when the girl who draws lots for her lover is given
over to Satan, the apotheosis of Faust is certain.


221


The Book of Black Magic


commerce with evil spirits is founded on a law of exchange.’
They can be bent to the intention of the operator, but it is
on the express understanding that they are satisfied for
their part, because these kinds of creatures give nothing
for nothing. |

With the author of the ‘‘Grand Grimoire’’ the pact is a
concession to the poverty of the operator’s resources. In
Black Magic, as in some other processes, the necessitous
must be ready to sacrifice, and the sorcerer who is insuffi-
ciently equipped must pay a higher price in the end. The
genuine Sanctum Regnum of the Grand Clavicle, otherwise
termed the Pacta Conventa Demonum, is explained by the
‘‘Grand Grimoire,’’ for the information of those who are
desirous to bind spirits, but are devoid of the requisite re-
sources for composing the Blasting Rod and the Kabbalistic
circle. Such persons, it is affirmed, will never succeed in
evoking spirits unless they perform, point by point, all that
is detailed hereinafter concerning the manner of making
pacts with any spirit whatsoever, whether the object in view
may be the possession of treasures concealed in the earth,
the enjoyment of women or girls, and for obtaining any de-
sired favour at their hands, whether for the discovery of
the most hidden secrets in all Courts and Cabinets of the
world, whether for the revelation of the most impenetrable
mysteries, whether for engaging a spirit to perform one’s
work in the night, whether to cause a fall of hail or a storm
in any appointed place, whether to open seals, to behold
what is passing in private houses, and learn all the skill of
the shepherds, whether to obtain the Hand of Glory, and
discern all the qualities and virtues of metals, minerals, and
vegetables, and of animals both pure and impure, and to
perform things so astounding that no person in existence

1 But Lucifer, in ordinary cases, is contented with a cat.


222


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


can fail to be in a condition of utter bewilderment to see that
by means of a pact with certain spirits one can discover the
grandest secrets of Nature, which are hidden from the eyes
of all other men.

- It is to the Clavicle of the great King Solomon, says the
Grimoire, that we owe the discovery of the genuine method —
of making pacts, which he also made use of himself for the
acquisition of his immense riches, for the pleasure of such
innumerable women, and for the revelation of the most im-
penetrable arcana of Nature, whereby every species of good
and evil may be accomplished.

With the highest potentates of Infernus, with Lucifer,
Beelzebuth, and Astaroth, it does not seem possible to enter
into a binding compact. The sorcerer must be content with
some one among the six governors,’ who will generally work
by their agents; an invariable covenant of the pact should
bargain for service by one of the three superiors among such
special subordinates.

Having determined to make a pact, continues the
‘‘Grand Grimoire,’’ you must begin on the previous evening
by cutting with a new and unused knife a rod of wild hazel,
which has never borne fruit, and shall be similar to the
Blasting Rod, as it has been previously described.

This must be done precisely at the moment when the sun
appears upon our horizon. The same being accomplished,
arm yourself with the stone called Ematille, and with two
blessed candles, and proceed to select a place for the coming
operation, where you will be wholly undisturbed; you may
even make the pact in some isolated room, or in some sub-
terranean part of an old ruinous castle, for the spirit has the
power to transport the treasure to any required place.


1 See c. ili. sec. 1.


223


The Book of Black Magic


This having been arranged, describe a triangle with the
stone called Ematille—this is exclusively needed on the first
occasion of making a pact.

Then set the two blessed candles in a parallel position on
either side of the Triangle of Pacts, inscribing the Holy
Name of Jesus below, so that no spirits can injure you after
any manner. You may now take up your position in the
middle of the triangle, holding the mysterious rod, together
with the grand Conjuration of the Spirit, the Clavicle, the
Requisition you mean to make, and the Discharge of the
Spirit.

Having exactly fulfilled what things soever have been
above described, begin by reciting the following Conjura-
tion with decision and hopefulness :—


GRAND CONJURATION OF SPIRITS WITH WHOM IT IS SOUGHT
| TO MAKE A PACT.


Taken from the Grand Clavecle.


~ Emperor Lucifer, Master of all the revolted Spirits, I
entreat thee to favour me in the adjuration which I address
to thy mighty minister, LuciFUGE RoFocaLg, being desirous
to make a pact with him. I beg thee also, O Prince Beelze-
buth, to protect me in my undertaking. O Count Astarot!
be propitious to me, and grant that to-night the great Luct-
FUGE may appear to me under a human form, and free from
evil smell, and that he may accord me, in virtue of the pact
which I propose to enter into, all the riches which I need.
O grand Lucirvueg, I pray thee to quit thy dwelling, where-
soever it may be, and come hither to speak with me, other-
wise will I compel thee by the power of the strong living
God, His beloved Son, and the Holy Spirit. Obey promptly,
or thou shalt be eternally tormented by the power of the

224


Digitized by Google


lle


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


potent words in the grand Clavicle of Solomon, wherewith
he was accustomed to compel the rebellious spirits to receive
his compact. Then straightway appear, or I will persist-
ently torture thee by the virtue of these great words in the
Clavicle.

AGLON, TETRAGRAM, VAYCHEON STIMULAMATON EZPHARES
RETRAGRAMMATON OLYARAM IRION ESYTION EXISTION ERYONA
ONERA ORASYM MOZM MESSIAS SOTER EMANUEL SABAOTH
Aponay, te adoro, et te invoco. AMEN.

You may rest assured that the recitation of these potent
words will be followed by the appearance of the spirit, who
will say :—


Manifestation of the Sprit.
Lo, Iam here! What dost thou seek of me? Why dost
thou disturb my repose? Answer me.
LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE.


Reply to the Spirit.
It is my wish to make a pact with thee, so as to obtain
wealth at thy hands immediately, failing which I will tor-
ment thee by the potent words of the Clavicle.


The Spirt’s Reply.

I cannot comply with thy request except thou dost give
thyself over to me in twenty years, to do with thy body and
soulasI please. | LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE.

Thereupon throw him your pact, which must be written
with your own hand on a sheet of virgin parchment; it
should be worded as follows, and signed with your own
blood:—I promise the grand Lucifuge to reward him in
twenty years’ time for all treasures he may give me. In
_ witness whereof I have signed myself. N.N.


220


The Book of Black Magic


Reply of the Spirit.


I cannot grant thy request.
LucIFUGE ROFOCALE.


In order to enforce his obedience, again recite the Su-
preme Appellation, with the terrible words of the Clavicle,
till the spirit reappears, and thus addresses you :—


Of the Spirit’s Second Mantfestatton.


Why dost thou torment me further? Leave me to rest,
and I will confer upon thee the nearest treasure, on condi-
tion that thou dost set apart for me one coin on the first
Monday of each month, and dost not call me oftener than
once a week, to wit, between ten at night and two in the
morning. Take up thy pact; I have signed it. Fail in thy
promise, and thou shalt be mine at the end of twenty years.

LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE.


Reply to the Spirit.


I agree to thy request, subject to the delivery of the near-
est treasure which I can at once carry away.

Follow the spirit without fear, cast your pact upon the
hoard, touch it with your rod, remove as much as you can,
return into the triangle, walking backwards, place the
treasure in front of you, and recite the Discharge of the
Spirit, as given in the preceding Rite.

It will be seen from the wording of the compact that it is
designedly evasive, and the final response of the supposed
spirit seems to recognize that it can obtain only by neglect on
the part of the sorcerer. There were apparently more bind-
‘ing contracts, for in the year 1678 the Abbé Eynatton pub-
lished a ‘‘Manual of Exorcisms’’ which contains the follow-

226


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


ing formal process for forcing the Demon to return any
writing which constitutes an agreement with him :—


EXORCISM.


O most merciful God, whose power hath no limit, whose
dominion is supreme over all beings, so that nothing can pos-
sibly be estreated from Thy rule by apostasy; behold, we
have sinned against Thee, we have provoked Thy most just
wrath, when we have failed to obey Thy commands, above
all when, forsaking Thy rule and Thy friendship, we have
abjured Thee and have consorted with the impious demons,
nor yet contented with Thy denial, have bound ourselves in
writing to those demons, surrendering the document of our
voluntary obligation against Thee into their custody. But
Thy mercies are without number, O Lord of loving-kind-
ness, and it is Thine to spare and to pardon; Look, there-
fore, with compassion upon this Thy creature, who, having
formerly denied Thee and given himself in writing to the
demons, but now, having returned to himself by the help of
Thine infinite goodness, doth abhor his impiety, doth desire
to be restored unto Thee his true Lord, and to be received
with contrite heart into Thy favour. We know, O Lord,
that a contrite and humble heart Thou wilt not desipse, nor
can any writing be an impediment in the way of Thy mercy;
we beseech Thee, therefore, that, by the abundance of Thy
clemency, not only may the heinousness of this sin be blotted
out with the Blood of Thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, but
that the demon, by the word of Thy power, may be com-
pelled to restore the deed, and obligation, and delivery, lest
he glory in his tyranny, and pretend to any right over the
man whom we pray may be delivered through Thy Son from
his bonds. Through the same Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our
Lord, &c.

227


The Book of Black Magic


The propitiation of offended Deity is followed by a cita-
tion of the demon who is required to disgorge his prey.


EXORCISM.


I exorcise thee, O impious Satan, who, when thy power
has passed away, dost still pretend to impose a tyrant yoke
onman. I exorcise thee by Jesus Christ, who came into this
world for the salvation of sinners; I conjure thee to remove
thy yoke immediately from this creature, who, deceived by
thy wiles, formerly delivered himself unto thee. Abandon-
ing thee henceforth, he commits himself to the Divine mercy,
seeking His service unto whom he alone is owing, who also
promises the reward of eternal life to those who follow Him.
I exorcise thee by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ by
which the deed of judgment against us hath been blotted out,
so that when Jesus receiveth the sinner into His favour, thou
shalt dare not to advance anything against him, and shalt
not fail to restore the deed by which this creature bound
himself unto thee, when cancelled by the Blood of Jesus
Christ.

Hear, therefore, accursed Satan, who art powerless over
a servant of God, when encouraged by his true Lord, he
turneth unto another service; in vain dost thou boast of this
deed ; I command thee to restore it in the name of the Lord,
as a proof before the whole world that when God receiveth
a sinner, thou hast no longer any rule over his soul. I abjure
thee, by him who expelled thee from thy stronghold, bereft
thee of the arms which thou didst trust in, and distributed
thy spoils. Return therefore this deed, whereby this crea-
ture of God foolishly bound himself to thy service; return
it, I say, in His name by whom thou art overcome; when thy
power has come to nothing, presume not longer to retain

228


The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation


this useless document. By penitence already hath this crea-
ture of God restored himself to his true Lord, spurning thy
yoke hoping in the Divine mercy for defence against thine
assaults, and assisted by the most holy and glorious virgin
Mary, Mother of God, by whose intercession he shall obtain
from Jesus Christ, His Son, that which he himself is not
worthy to expect. Through the same Christ our Lord. -
Whether this process was supposed to insure the visible
and material return of the incriminating document, or, fail-
ing this, was held to cancel it formally, does not certainly ap-
pear, and will matter little; for what with the subtleties of
the sorcerer and the assistance of the Church in the revoca-
tion of such acts and deeds, there was little chance for Infer-
nus,’ and the reluctance of Lucifuge Rofocale to enter into
the tricky contract is, on the whole, exceedingly intelligible.


1 But contracts with Infernus could apparently be repudiated with even greater
facility. “If you are disposed to renounce the devil after having entered into a
compact with him,” says the Vocabulaire Infernal, “spit three times on_ the
ground, and he will have no further power over you,”—in which case Black Magic
with all its grim theatricals is the Art of exploiting lost Angels with impunity.


CHAPTER VII


The Method of Bonorius


frankly diabolical of all the rituals connected with


T he ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius’’ is perhaps the most


Black Magic, and yet, as we have already seen, its
enormities have been much exaggerated. Its most obvious
objections are: 1. Profanation of the mysteries of religion.
2. A bloody sacrifice, characterised by details of a mon-


AD)
CFO
(ey


MYSTIC FIGURES FROM THB
TITLE-PAGE OF THE "“GRIM-
OIRE OF HONORIUS.”


strous kind. A less obvious ob-
jection is the superstitious na-
ture of some of its ordinances.
It must be confessed that such
a charge seems fantastic, having
regard to the innumerable offices
of vain observance with which
we have been dealing. But a
vain observance, it should be
remembered, is not necessarily
superstitious. To assume that a
virtue is resident in parchment
prepared from the skin of an ani-
mal which has not engendered,
and that such virtue is wanting in
the skin of one which has repro-
duced its species, may have no


foundation in fact, and may be eminently foolish, but
it is not a superstitious assumption. It has been well


230


The Method of Honorius


pointed out by Eliphas Lévi that the term superstition
signifies survival; that is to say, it is the sign surviving
the idea. Thus, the Catholic doctrine of Transubstantia-
tion may or may not be true doctrine, but in neither
case can the worship of the consecrated elements be super-
stitious, because such worship draws directly from the idea
which has created the outward sign. If a time could be sup-
posed when the Elements should continue to be worshipped
after the doctrine itself had passed away, that would be a
superstitious observance. But the etymological conception
of superstition connects also with the idea of redundance.
Thus, a double consecration of the Eucharistic elements
would be a superstitious observance, as well as blasphe-
mously absurd, because the first consecration is effectual by
the theological hypothesis. But the repetition of the Angel-
ical Salutation in the devotion of the Holy Rosary is not
superstitious, because the first recitation is not necessarily
effectual by the devotional hypothesis. So also the magical
practice which consists with the magical hypothesis will not
be superstitious though it may not consist with reason. The
slaughter of a kid with a view to securing a virgin parch-
ment is not a superstitious but a precautionary measure.
The conversion of this slaughter into a sacrifice is not super-
stitious, because it has a purpose which consists with the
magical hypothesis, namely, the increase of virtue by the
consecration of the religious motive. The importation into
such sacrifice of ceremonies which are not precautionary,
and do not, by the hypothesis, increase the virtue, are redun-
dant and so far superstitious. Such offices do not occur in
the Grimoires, with the exception of that of Honorius, in
which Ritual they are further characterised by brutal fea-
tures. The slaughter of a black cock, and the extraction of
231


The Book of Black Magic


the eyes, tongue, and heart, which must be reduced into pow-
der, and that powder subsequently sprinkled on the lamb-
skin, is a redundant and monstrous observance. We
should say therefore that the ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius’’
must be avoided, were it necessary at the present day to
warn any one against practices to which no one is likely
to resort, which belong to the foolish mysteries of old
exploded doctrines, and are interesting assuredly, but
only as curiosities of the past. It should be added that the
profanations of the mysteries of religion prescribed by
the ‘‘Grimoire of Honorius’’ are not intentional profana-
tions, and may be condoned to that extent. Their pur-
pose is not outrage, but increase of efficacy.


Having made these initial provisions, the substance of
this exceedingly curious Ritual may now be offered to the
student in the words of its writer. It will be remembered
that the person who desires to invoke the perverse ‘‘Spir-
' its of Darkness”’ according to the method of Honorius must
observe a three days’ fast; he must also confess and ap-
proach the Holy Altar. After these three days, upon the
morrow, and at the hour of sunrise, he shall recite the
Seven Gradual Psalms, with the accompanying Litanies
and Prayers,’ the whole on his knees; further, he must
drink no wine and eat no meat on that day. Next, he
shall rise at midnight on the first Monday of the month,’
and a priest shall say a Mass of the Holy Ghost.® After
the consecration, taking the Host in his left hand, he shall
recite the following prayer on his knees:—


1 The reference is probably to the Litany of the Saints and the various orations
which follow it.


2The three days’ fast must therefore have been regulated so that it expired on
the previous Saturday.

The Mass of Pentecost, except the Epistle, which should be that of the Tues-
day after Pentecost, and Gradual, for which there are special veriscles.


232


The Method of Honorius


PRAYER.

My Sovereign Saviour Jesus Christ, Son of the living
God! Thou who for the salvation of all mankind didst
suffer the death of the Cross; Thou who, before being ahan-
doned to Thine enemies, by an impulse of ineffable love
didst institute the Sacrament of thy Body; Thou who hast
vouchsafed to us miserable creatures the privilege of
making daily commemoration thereof; do Thou deign unto
thine unworthy servant, thus holding thy Living Body in
his hands, all strength and ability for the profitable ap-
plication of that power with which he has been entrusted
against the horde of rebellious spirits. Thou art their
true God, and if they tremble at the utterance of Thy
Name, upon that Holy Name will I call, crying Jesus
Christ! Jesus, be Thou my help, now and for ever! Amen.

After sunrise a black cock must be killed, the first
feather of its left wing being plucked and preserved for use
at the required time. The eyes must be torn out, and so
also the tongue and heart; these must be dried in the sun
and afterwards reduced to powder. The remains must be
interred at sunset in a secret place, a cross of a palm in
height being set upon the mound, while at each of the
four corners the signs which here follow must be drawn
with the thumb :—


QS D2 $7


A later edition substitutes the following signs:—
SUIUFOM SCL
re™

233


The Book of Black Magic


On this day also the operator should drink no wine
and abstain from eating meat.

On Tuesday, at break of day, let him say a Mass of the
Angels,’ placing the feather taken from the bird upon the
altar, together with a new penknife. The signs hereinafter
represented must be inscribed on a sheet of clean paper
with _ consecrated wine which is the Blood of Jesus


Arg w


In an edition circa 1800 the following signs are sub-
stituted :—


ICD Zw
In Bc


They should be written upon the altar, and at the end
of the Mass the paper should be folded in a new veil of
violet silk, to be concealed on the morrow, together with
the oblation of the Mass and a part of the consecrated Host.

On the evening of Thursday the operator must rise at
midnight, and, having sprinkled holy water about the cham-
ber, he must light a taper of yellow wax, which shall have
been prepared on the Wednesday and pierced in the form
of a cross. When it is lighted he shall recite Psalm Ixxvii.?
—Alttendite, popule menus, legem meam, &c.—without the

1The Mass for the | Epantion of St. Michael, May 8, with a special Epistle,


Gospel, Commemoration,
2 This Psalm is numbered Ixxviii. in the Authorised Version.


The Method of Honorius


Gloria Patri. He shall then begin the ‘‘ Office of the Dead”’
with Venite exultemus Domino, &. He shall recite Matins
and Lauds, but in place of the versicle of the ninth Lesson*
he shall say: Deliver us, O Lord, from the fear of hell.
Let not the demons destroy my soul when I shall raise them
from the deep pit, when I shall command them to do my
will. May the day be bright, may the sun and moon shine
forth, when I shall call upon them. Terrible of aspect are
they, deformed and horrible to sight; but do Thou restore
unto them their angelic shapes when I shall impose my will
upon them. O Lord, deliver me from those of the dread
visage, and grant that they shall be obedient when I shall
raise them up from hell, when I shall impose my will upon
them.


After the ‘‘Office of the Dead’’ the operator shall ex-
tinguish the taper, and at sunrise shall cut the throat of a
male lamb of nine days, taking care that the blood does
not gush forth upon the earth. He shall skin the lamb,
and shall cast its tongue and heart into the fire. The fire
must be freshly kindled, and the ashes shall be preserved
for use at the proper time. The skin of the lamb shall be
spread in the middle of a field, and for the space of nine
days shall be sprinkled four time every day with holy
water. On the tenth day, before the rising of the sun, the
lambskin shall be covered with the ashes of the heart and
tongue, and with the ashes also of the cock. On Thursday,?
after sunset, the flesh of the lamb shall be interred in a
secret place where no bird can come, and the priest with


1 This is extremely confused; the Office of the Dead does not begin with the
Venite Exultemus. The ninth Lesson belongs to the third Nocturne of the Matins.
The prayer given in the Grimoire is based on the verses which it replaces.

he days on which the various operations should be performed have been
confused, after the prevailing manner of the Grimoires.


The Book of Black Magic


his right thumb shall inscribe on the grave the characters —
here indicated :—


[42127345


In the edition already cited the signs are varied thus:—
y°S WZ


Moreover, for the space of three days he shall sprinkle
the four corners with holy water, saying: Sprinkle me, O
Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed! Wash me, and
I shall be made whiter than snow!

After the aspersion let him recite the following prayer,
kneeling with his face towards the east :—


PRAYER.


Christ Jesus, Redeemer of men, who, being the Lamb
without spot, wast immolated for the salvation of the hu-
man race, who alone wast found worthy to open the Book
of Life, impart such virtue to this lambskin that it may re-

236


The Method of Honorius


ceive the signs which we shall trace thereon, written with
Thy blood, so that the figures, signs, and words may become
efficacious ; and grant that this skin may preserve us against
the wiles of the demons; that they may be terrified at the
sight of these figures, and may only approach them trem-
bling. Through Thee, Jesus Christ, who livest and reign-
est through all ages. So be it.


The Litanies of the Holy Name of Jesus must then be
repeated, but instead of the Agnus Det, substitute: Immo-
lated Lamb, be Thou a pillar of strength against the demons!
Slain Lamb, give power over the Powers of Darkness! Im-
molated Lamb, grant favour and strength unto the binding
of the Rebellious Spirits. So be it.


The lambskin shall be stretched for eighteen days, and
on the nineteenth day the fleece shall be removed, reduced
into powder, and interred in the same place. The word
vellus shall be written above it with the finger, together
with the following character and the words: May this
which hath been reduced into ashes preserve against the
demons through the name of Jesus.


Vr EOULAIN MEE


Or, according to the later edition :—


Zr S


237


The Book of Black Magic
Add also these signs :—


TR BS t9


Or, according to the later edition :—


MEP WT &>


Lastly, on the eastern side, the said skin must be set to
diy in the sun for three days, the ensuing characters being
cut with a new knife :—


(Nyx4 BrFt


This being accomplished, recite Psalm lxxi., Deus, judt-
cum tuum regi da, &., and cut the following characters :—


The figure being thus far completed, recite the verses
Afferte Domino, patria gentium, occurring in Psalm xcv.:
Cantate Domino Canticum novum, of which the seventh


versicle is: Offerte Domino, Filu Det, &c., and cut sub-
sequently these characters :—


Ku &§& 5


238


The Method of Honorius


Next recite Psalm Ixxvii.: Attendite, popule meus,
legem meam, and compose the following figure :—


YY 233°lPwih3
Which being accomplished, recite Psalm ii.: Quare fre-


muerunt gentes et popult meditat: sunt tinanta? Then
make another figure as follows :—


| HHE CAE ollittol 1 w


Or, alternatively :—


And recite Psalm cxv.: Credidt propter quod locutus
sum. Finally, on the last day of the month a Mass for the
Dead shall be offered; the prose shall be omitted, and also
the Gospel of St. John, but at the end of the Mass the priest
shall recite the Psalm Conjfitemim Domino quoniam bonus,
&c.?

1 At this point the process of the Grimoire becomes almost unintelligible. The
recitation of the seventy-two names apparently succeeds the Psalm, and is followed
1, which is not omitted after all. There is then an extension
of the Deo Gratias; this concluded the Mass, which seems immediately followed


by the evocation. But the use of the Pentacles of Solomon and St. John does
woe Sorent ea tier One a Pee EN ne Crowe on ee omy urauoney and nok at allie
other.


239


The Book of Black Magic


In Honour of the Most Holy and August Trinity, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.


The Seventy-two Sacred Names of God.—TRInI1T,s,
SorHeErR, Messi1as, EMMANUEL, SABAHOT, ADONAY, ATHANA-
Tos, JESU, PentTaana, AaGragon, IscHuirnos, ELEYSON,
OTHEOS, TETRAGRAMMATON, Ey, Sapay, Aquita, Maanus
Homo, Visio, FLos, Orntao, SaLvaTorR, ALPHA AND OMEGA,
PRiMvs, NOVISSIMUS, PRINCIPIUM ET F'INIS, PRIMOGENITUS,
SAPIENTIA, VIRTUS, PARACLITUS, VERITAS, Via, MEDIATOR,
_ Mepicus, Satus, Aanus, Ovis, Viru.us, Spes, Artes, LEo,
Lux, Imago, Panis, JANuA, Petra, Sponsa, Pastor, Pro-
PHETA, SACERDOS, SANCTUS, IMMORTALITAS, JESUS, CHRISTUS,
Pater, Fintvus Hominis, Sancrus, Pater, OMNIPOTENS,
Devs, AGIos, RESSURRECTIO, MiscHtros, CHARITAS, AUTER-
Nas, CREATOR, REDEMPTOR, Unitas, SUMMUM BonvuM, IN-
FINITAS. AMEN.


Hereinafter follow the three small pentacles of Solomon,
and that of the Gospel of St. John.


The Method of Honorius


The Beginning of the Holy Gospel according to John.
Glory be to Thee, O Lord.


In the beginning was the Word, &c., in extenso, so far as
the end of the fourteenth versicle.

Thanks be to God. Hosanna to the Son of David!
Blessed is He who cometh in the Name of the Lord. Ho-
sanna in the Highest. We invoke Thee. We adore Thee.
We praise Thee. We glorify Thee, O blessed and glorious
Trinity! May the Name of the Lord be blessed, now and
henceforth for ever! Amen. In the Name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Jesus of Nazareth, King
of the Jews. May Christ conquer}, reign>k, command>k,
and defend me from all evil. Amen.


UNIVERSAL CONJURATION.


I, N., do conjure thee, O Spirit N., by the living God, by
the true God, by the holy and all-ruling God, who created
from nothingness the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all
things that are therein, in virtue of the Most Holy Sacra-
ment of the Eucharist, in the name of Jesus Christ, and by
the power of this same Almighty Son of God, who for us
and for our redemption was crucified, suffered death, and
was buried; who rose again on the third day, and is now
seated on the right hand of the Creator of the whole world,
from whence he will come to judge the living and the dead;
as also by the precious love of the Holy Spirit, perfect
Trinity. I conjure thee within the circle, accursed one, by
thy judgment, who didst dare to tempt God: I exorcise
thee, Serpent, and I command thee to appear forthwith
under a beautiful and well-favoured human form of soul
and body, and to fulfil my behests without any deceit what-
soever, as also without mental reservation of any kind, by


241


The Book of Black Magic


the great Names of the God of gods and Lord of lords,
ADONAY, TETRAGRAMMATON, JEHOVA, 'TETRAGRAMMATON,
ADONAY, JEHOVA, OTHEOS, ATHANATOS, IscHyROS, AGLA,
PENTAGRAMMATON, SADAY, SADAY, SADAY, JEHOVA, OTHEOS,
ATHANATOS, a Iiciat TETRAGRAMMATON, ADONAY, ISCHYROS,
ATHANATOS, SaDy, SaDy, Sapy, Capos, Capos, Capos, ELoy,
Aaa, AacLA, AauAa, Aponay, Aponay. I conjure thee,
Evil and Accursed Serpent, N., to appear at my will
and pleasure, in this place, before this circle, without
tarrying, without companions, without grievance, without
- noise, deformity, or murmuring. I exorcise thee by the in-
effable names of God, to wit, Gog and Magog, which I am
unworthy to pronounce; Come hither, Come hither, Come
hither. Accomplish my will and desire, without wile or
falsehood. Otherwise St. Michael, the invisible Archangel,
shall presently blast thee in the utmost depths of hell.
Come, then, N., to do my will.


- THE GRAND PENTACLE OF SOLOMON.


242


The Method of Honorius


Aa P:

Why tarriest thou, and why delayest? What doest thou?
Make ready, obey your master, in the name of the Lord,
BatTHatT or RacwHatT flowing over ABRACMENS, ALCHOR over
ABERER.


L.Q. L. F. A. P.


Behold the Pentacle of Solomon which I have brought
into thy presence! I command thee, by order of the great
God, ApoNAy, TETRAGRAMMATON, and Jesus! Hasten, ful-
fil my behests, without wile or falsehood, but in all truth, in
the name of the Saviour and Redeemer, Jesus Christ.


DISCHARGE.


Go in peace unto your places. May there be peace be-
tween us and you, and be ye ready to come when ye are
called. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Amen.’


Act oF THANKSGIVING.


Praise, honour, glory, and blessing be unto Him who
sitteth upon the throne, who liveth for ever and ever. Amen.


CoNJURATION OF THE BooK.


I conjure thee, O Book, to be useful and profitable unto
all who shall have recourse to thee for the success of their
affairs. I conjure thee anew, by the virtue of the Blood of
Jesus Christ, contained daily in the chalice, to be service-
able unto all those who shall read thee. I exorcise thee, in
the name of the Most Holy Trinity, in the name of the Most
Holy Trinity, in the name of the Most Holy Trinity!

1 This is the Liber Spirituum of Pseudo-Agrippa, sufficiently described in Part


I. The introduction of it in this Grimoire presupposes either an acquaintance in
the reader or information which is omitted.


The Book of Black Magic
What follows must be said before the sealing of the Book.


I conjure and command you, O Spirits, all and so many
as ye are, to accept this Book with good grace, so that
whensoever we may read it, the same being approved and
recognized as in proper form and valid, you shall be con-
strained to appear in comely human’ form when you are
called, accordingly as the reader shall judge. In no cir-
cumstances shall you make any attempt upon the body,
soul, or spirit of the reader, nor inflict any harm on those
' who may accompany him, either by mutterings, tempests,
noise, scandals, nor yet by lesion or by hindrance in the exe-
cution of the commands of this Book. I conjure you to
appear immediately when the conjuration is made, to exe-
cute without dallying all that is written and enumerated in
its proper place in the said book: You shall obey, serve,
instruct, impart, and perform all in your power for the
benefit of those who command you, and the whole without
illusion. If perchance some of the invoked spirits be un-
able to come or appear when required, they shall be bound
over to send others vested with their power, who also shall
swear solemnly to execute all that the reader may demand,
and ye are all hereby enjoined by the Most Holy Names of
the Omnipotent Living God, ELoym, JaH, Eu, ELoy, Terra-
GRAMMATON, to fulfil everything as it is set forth above.
If ye obey me not, I will force you to abide in torments for
a, thousand years, as also if any one of you receive not this
Book with entire resignation to the will of the reader.


CoNJURATION OF THE DEMONS.


In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Take heed! Come, all Spirits! By the vir-
244


The Method of Honorius


tue and power of your King, and by the seven crowns and
chains of your Kings, all Spirits of the Hells are forced to
appear in my presence before this pentacle or circle of
Solomon, whensoever I shall call them. Come, then, all at
my orders, to fulfil that which is in your power, as com-
manded. Come, therefore, from the East, South, West,
and North! I conjure and command you, by the virtue and
power of Him who is three, eternal, equal, who is God in-
visible, consubstantial, in a word, who has created the
heavens, the sea, and all which is under heaven.


After these Conjurations you shall command them
_ to affix the Seal. |
CONCERNING THE FIGURE OF THE CIRCLE.
Circles should be described with charcoal or holy water,


THD MAGIC CIRCLE OF HONORIUS.


sprinkled with the wood of the blessed Cross. When they
245


The Book of Black Magic


have been duly made, and the words have been written about
the circle, the holy water which has served to bless the same
may also be used to prevent the spirits from inflicting any
hurt. Standing in the middle of the circle, you shall com-
mand them in a lively manner, as one who is their master.


What must be satd in Composing the Circle.


O Lord, we fly to Thy virtue! O Lord, confirm this work!
What is operated in us becomes like dust driven before the
wind, and the Angel of the Lord pausing (sic), let the dark-
mess disappear, and the Angel of the Lord ever pursuing,
ALPHA, OmeEGA, Exy, ELoHr, ELoHIM, ZABAHOT, ELION,
Sady. Behold the Lion who is the conqueror of the Tribe of
Judah, the Root of David! I will open the Book, and the
seven seals thereof. I have beheld Satan as a bolt falling
from heaven. It is Thou who hast given us power to crush
dragons, scorpions, and all Thine enemies beneath Thy feet.
Nothing shall harm us, not even ELoy, ELoHIM, ELOHE,
ZABAHOT, ELION, ESARCHIE, ADONAY, JAH, TETRAGRAMMA-
TON, SaDy. ‘The earth is the Lord’s and all those who dwell
therein, because He established it upon the seas and pre-
pared it in the midst of the waves. Who shall ascend unto
the mountain of the Lord? Who shall be received in his
Holy Place? The innocent of hands and clean of heart.
Who hath not received his soul in vain, and hath not sworn
false witness against his neighbour. The same shall be

~ blessed of God, and shall obtain mercy of God to his salva-

tion. He is of the generation of those who seek Him.

Open your gates, ye princes, open the eternal gates, and the

King of Glory shall enter! Who is this King of Glory?

The Lord Almighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Open your

gates, ye princes! Lift up the eternal gates. Who is this
246


The Method of Honorius


King of Glory? The Lord Almighty. This Lord is the
King of Glory. Glory be to the Father, &c.


To dismiss them, the Pentacle of Solomon must be exhibited,


at the same time saying as follows :—


Behold your sentence! Behold that which forbids rebel-
lion to our wills, and doth ordain you to return unto your


A LESSER PENTACLE OF SOLOMON.


abodes. May peace be between us and you, and be ye ready
to come, each and all, as ye are called to do my will.


CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE East.


I conjure and invoke thee, O powerful King of the East,
Magoa, by my holy labour, by all the names of Divinity, by
247


The Book of Black Magic


the name of the All-Powerful: I command thee to obey, and
to come to me, or that failing, forthwith and immediately to
send unto me Massayel, Ariel, Satiel, Arduel, Acorib, to re-
spond concerning all that I would know and to fulfil all that
I shall command. Else thou shalt come verily in thine own
person to satisfy my will; which refusing, I shall compel
thee by all the virtue and power of God.


The Grand Pentacle or Circle of Solomon will answer for
the above and following Conjurations, which can be said on
all days and at all hours. If it be desired to speak only with
one spirit, one only need be named, at the choice of the
reader.


CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE SOUTH.


O Egym, great King of the South, I conjure and invoke
thee by the most high and holy Names of God, do thou here
manifest, clothed with all thy power; come before this circle,
or at least send me forthwith Fadal, Nastrache, to make an-
swer unto me, and to execute all my wishes. If thou failest,
I shall force thee by God Himself.


CoNJURATION OF THE KING OF THE WEST.


O Baymon, most potent King, who reignest in the West-
ern quarter, I call and I invoke thee in the name of the
Deity! I command thee by virtue of the Most High, to
send me immediately before this circle the Spirit Passiel
Rosus, with all other Spirits who are subject unto thee,
that the same may answer in everything, even as I shall
require them. If thou failest, I will torment thee with
the sword of fire divine; I will multiply thy sufferings, and
will burn thee.

248


The Method of Honorius


CONJURATION OF THE KING OF THE NoRTH.


O thou, Amaymon, King and Emperor of the Northern
parts, I call, invoke, exorcise, and conjure thee, by the vir-
tue and power of the Creator, and by the virtue of virtues,
to send me presently, and without delay, Madael, Laaval,
Bamlahe, Belem, and Ramath, with all other Spirits of
thine obedience, in comely and human form! In whatso-
ever place thou now art, come hither and render that honour
which thou owest to the true living God, who is thy Creator.
In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of. the Holy
Ghost, come therefore, and be obedient, in front of this
circle, without peril to my body or soul. Appear in comely
human form, with no terror encompassing thee. I conjure
thee, make haste, come straightway, and at once. By all the
Divine names—SECHIEL, BARACHIEL—if thou dost not obey
promptly, BALANDIER, suspensus, tracundus, Origratiumgu,
Partus, Olemdemis, and Bautratis. N. I exorcise thee, do
invoke, and do impose most high commandment upon thee,
by the omnipotence of the living God, and of the true God;
by virtue of the holy God, and by the power of Him who
spake and all things were made, even by His holy command-
ment the heaven and earth were made, with all that is in
them! I adjure thee by the Father, by the Son, and by the
Holy Ghost, even by the Holy Trinity, by that God whom
thou canst not resist, under whose empire I will compel
thee; I conjure thee by God the Father, by God the Son, by
God the Holy Ghost, by the Mother of Jesus Christ, Holy
Mother and perpetual Virgin, by her sacred heart, by her
blessed milk, which the Son of the Father sucked, by her
most holy body and soul, by all the parts and members of
this Virgin, by all the sufferings, afflictions, labours, agonies
which she endured during the whole course of her life, by

249


The Book of Black Magic


all the sighs she uttered, by the holy tears which she shed
whilst her dear Son wept before the time of His dolorous
passion on the tree of the Cross, by all the sacred holy things
which are offered and done, and also by all others, as in
heaven so on earth, in honour of our Saviour Jesus Christ,
and of the Blessed Mary, His Mother, by whatsoever is
celestial, by the Church Militant, in honour of the Virgin
and of all the Saints. In like manner, I conjure thee by the
Holy Trinity, by all the other mysteries, by the sign of the


_ Cross, by the most precious blood and water which flowed


from the side of Jesus Christ, by the sweat which issued .
from His whole body, when He said in the Garden of Olives:
My Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me—I
conjure thee by His death and passion, by His burial and
glorious resurrection, by His ascension. by the coming of
the Holy Ghost. I adjure thee, furthermore, by the crown
of thorns which was set upon His head, by the blood which
flowed from His feet and hands, by the nails with which He
was nailed to the tree of the Cross, by the holy tears which
He shed, by all which He suffered willingly through great
love of us: by the lungs, the heart, the hair, the inward
parts, and by all the members, of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
I conjure thee by the judgment of the living and the dead,
by the Gospel words of our Saviour Jesus Christ, by His
preachings, by His sayings, by all His miracles, by the child
in swaddling-clothes, by the crying child, borne by the
mother in her most pure and virginal womb; by the glori-
ous intercession of the Virgin Mother of our Saviour Jesus
Christ; by all which is of God and of His- Most Holy
Mother, as in heaven so on earth. I conjure thee by the holy
Angels and Archangels, and by all the blessed orders of
Spirits, by the holy patriarchs and prophets, by all the
holy martyrs and confessors, by all the holy virgins and in-
290


The Method of Honorius


nocent widows, and by all the saints of God, both men and
women. I conjure thee by the head of St. John the Baptist,
by the milk of St. Catherine, and by all the Saints.


CoNJURATIONS FOR EACH DAY OF THE WEEK.
For Monday, to Lucifer.


This experience is commonly performed between eleven
and twelve o’clock, or between three and four. Requisites:
coal, and consecrated chalk to compose the circle, about
which these words must be written: I forbid thee, Lucifer,
in the name of the Most Holy Trinity, to enter within this
circle. A mouse must be provided to give him; the master


must have a stole and holy water, and alb also and a sur-
plice. He must recite the Conjuration in a lively manner,
commanding sharply and shortly, as a lord should address
his servant, with all kinds of menaces: Satan, RaNTAM,
PALLANTRE, LurTais, CoricacoEM ScIRciGREuR, I require
thee to give me very humbly, &c.

251


The Book of Black Magic


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, Lucifer, by the living God, by the true
God, by the holy God, who spake and all was made, who
commanded and all things were created and made! I con-
jure thee by the ineffable name of God, ON, ALPHa, and
Omeca, Envoy, Eroym, Ya, Sapay, Lux, Muarens, Rex,
SaLus, ADONAY, EMMANUEL, Messras; and I adjure, con-
jure, and exorcise thee by the names which are declared
under the letters V, C, X, as also by the names JEHOVAH,

So., AGLA, RIFFASORIS, ORISTON, ORPHITNE, PHATON IPRE-
|v, Octa, Speraton, Imacon, AMUL, PENnaToN, SOrER,
TETRAGRAMMATON, ELOY, PREMOTON, STITMON, PERIGARON,
IRATATON, PLEGATON, ON, PERCHIRAM, TIROS, RUBIPHATON,
SIMULATON, PERPI, KLARIMUM, TREMENDUM, MERay, and by
the most high ineffable names of God, Gai, ENaa, EL, HaB-
DANUM, INGaopUM, OBU ENGLABIS, do thou make haste to
come, or send me N., having a comely and human form, in
no wise repulsive, that he may answer in real truth what-
soever I shall ask him, being also powerless to hurt me, or
any person whomsoever, either in body or soul.


For Tuesday, to Frimost.*


This experience is performed at night from nine to ten
o’clock, and the first stone found is given to him. He is to
be received with dignity and honour. Proceed as on Mon-
day ; compose the circle, and write about: Obey me, F'rimost!
Obey me, Frimost! Obey me, Frimost!


CoNJURATION.


I conjure and command thee, Frimost, by all the names


wherewith thou canst be constrained and bound! I exorcise
1 Otherwise, Nambroth.
252


The Method of Honorius


thee, Nambroth, by thy name, by the virtue of all spirits, by
all characters, by the Jewish, Greek, and Chaldean conjura-
tions, by thy confusion and malediction, and I will redouble
thy pains and torments from day to day for ever, if thou


come not now to accomplish my will and submit to all that I
shall command, being powerless to harm me, or those who
accompany me, either in body or soul.


For Wednesday, to Astaroth.


This experience is performed at night, from ten to eleven
o’clock; it is designed to obtain the good graces of the King
and others. Write in the circle as follows: Come, Astaroth!
Come, Astaroth! Come. Astaroth!

203


The Book of Black Magic


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, Astaroth, wicked spirit, by the words and
virtues of God, and by the powerful God, Jesus Christ of


Nazareth, unto whom all demons are submitted; who was
conceived of the Virgin Mary; by the mystery of the Angel
Gabriel, I conjure thee; and again in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; in the name
of the glorious Virgin Mary, and of the Most Holy Trinity,
in whose honour do all the Archangels, Thrones, Domina-
tions, Powers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Evangel-
ists sing without end; Hosannah, Hosannah, Hosannah,
Lord God of Hosts, who art, who wast, who art to come, as a
river of burning fire! Neglect not my commands, refuse
not to come. I command thee by Him who shall appear
with flames to judge the living and the dead, unto whom is
all honour, praise, and glory. Come, therefore, promptly,
204


The Method of Honorius


obey my will, appear and give praise to the true (Cod,
unto the living God, yea, unto all His works; fail not
to obey me, and give honour to the Holy Ghost, in whose
name I command thee.


For Thursday, to Stlcharde.


This experience is made at night, from three to four
o’clock, at which hour he is called, and appears in the form
of a King. A little bread must be given him when he is


required to depart; he renders man happy and also dis-
covers treasures. Write about the circle as follows: Holy
God! Holy God! Holy God!


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, Silcharde, by the image and likeness of
Jesus Christ our Saviour, whose death and passion re-
deemed the entire human race, who also wills that, by His

255


The Book of Black Magic


providence, thou’ appear forthwith in this place. I com-
mand thee by all the Kingdoms of God. Act—I adjure and
constrain thee by his Holy Name, by Him who walked upon
the asp, who crushed the lion and the dragon. Do thou
obey me, and fulfil my commands, being powerless to do -
harm unto me, or any person whomsoever, either in body
or soul.
For Friday, to Bechard.


This experience is performed at night from eleven to


twelve o’clock, and a nut must be given to him. Write
within the circle: Come, Bechard! Come, Bechard! Come,
Bechard!


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, Bechard, and constrain thee, in like man-
ner, by the Most Holy Names of God, ELoy, Aponay, ELoy,
Agata, SAMALABACTAY, which are written in Hebrew, Greek
and Latin; by all the sacraments, by all the names written

206


The Method of Honorius


in this book; and by him who drove thee from the height of
Heaven. I conjure and command thee by the virtue of the
Most Holy Eucharist, which hath redeemed men from their
sins; I conjure thee to come without any delay, to do and
perform all my biddings, without any prejudice to my body
or soul, without harming my book, or doing injury to those
that accompany me.


For Saturday, to Guland.*


This experience is performed at night from eleven to
twelve o’clock, and so soon as he appears burnt bread must


be given him. Ask him anything you will, and he will obey
you on the spot. Write in his circle: Enter not, Guland!
Enter not, Guland! Enter not, Guland!


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, O Guland, in the name of Satan, in the
1 Otherwise, Nabam. ont


The Book of Black Magic


name of Beelzebub, in the name of Astaroth, and in the name
of all other Spirits, to make haste and appear before me.
Come, then in the name of Satan and in the names of all
other demons. Come to me, I command thee, in the name of
the Most Holy Trinity. Come without inflicting any harm
upon me, without injury to my body or soul, without mal-
treating my book, or anything which I use. I command thee
to appear without delay, or, that failing, to send me forth-
with another Spirit having the same power as thou hast,
who shall accomplish my commands and be submitted: to my
will, wanting which, he whom thou shalt send me, if indeed
thou comest not thyself, shall in no wise depart, nor until
he hath in all things fulfilled my desire.


For Sunday, to Surgat.
This experience is performed at night from eleven to one


o’clock. He will demand a hair of your head, but give him


1 Otherwise, Aquiel.
208


The Method of Honorius


one of a fox, and see that he takes it. His office is to discover
and transport all treasures, and perform anything that you
may will. Write in his circle: TETRAGRAMMATON, TETRA-
GRAMMATON, TETRAGRAMMATON. ISMAEL, ADONAY, IHUA.
And in a second circle: Come, Surgat! Come, Surgat!
Come, Surgat! |


CoNJURATION.


I conjure thee, O Surgat, by all the names which are
written in this book, to present thyself here before me,
promptly and without delay, being ready to obey me in all
things, or, failing this, to despatch me a Spirit with a stone
which shall make me invisible to every one whensoever I
carry it! And I conjure thee to be submitted in thine own
person, or in the person of him or of those whom thou shalt
send me, te do and accomplish my will, and all that I shall
command, without harm to me or to any one, so soon as I
make known my intent.


Very Powerful Conjuration for all days and hours of the
Day or Night, being for Treasures hidden by men or
Spirits, that the same may be possessed and trans-
ported.


I command you, O all ye demons dwelling in these parts,
or in what part of the world soever ye may be, by whatsoever
power may have been given you by God and our holy Angels
over this place, and by the powerful Principality of the in-
fernal abysses, as also by all your brethren, both general and
special demons, whether dwelling in the East, West, South,
or North, or in any side of the earth, and, in like manner, by
the power of God the Father, by the wisdom of God the Son,
by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, and by the authority I de-
rive from our Saviour Jesus Christ, the only Son of the

259


The Book of Black Magic


Almighty and the Creator, who made us and all creatures
from nothing, who also ordains that you do hereby abdicate
all power to guard, habit, and abide in this place; by whom
further I constrain and command you, nolens volens, without
guile or deception, to declare me your names, and to leave me
in peaceable possession and rule over this place, of whatso-
ever legion you be and of whatsoever part of the world; by
order of the Most Holy Trinity, and by the merits of the
Most Holy and Blessed Virgin, as also of all the saints, I
unbind you all, spirits who abide in this place, and I drive
you to the deepest infernal abysses. Thus: Go, all Spirits
accursed, who are condemned to the flame eternal which is
prepared for you and your companions, if ye be rebellious
and disobedient. JI conjure you by the same authority, I
exhort and call you, I constrain and command you, by all the
powers of your superior demons, to come, obey, and reply
positively to what I direct you in the name of Jesus Christ.
Whence, if you or they do not obey promptly and without
tarrying, I will shortly increase your torments for a thou-
sand years in hell. I constrain you therefore to appear here
in comely human shape, by the Most High Names of God,
Harn, Lon, Himay, SasaorH, Heim, RapisHa, Leprena,
ADONAY, JEHOVA, YAH, TETRAGRAMMATON, SaDIA, MEssias,
Aaios, Iscoyros, EMMANUEL, AGLA, Jesus who is ALPHA and
OMEGA, the beginning and the end, that you be justly estab-
lished in the fire, having no power to reside, habit, or abide
in this place henceforth; and I require your doom by the
virtue of the said names, to wit, that St. Michael drive you
to the uttermost of the infernal abyss, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. So be it.

I conjure thee, Acham, or whomsoever thou mayst be, by
the Most Holy Names of God, by MatHame, Jaz, May,
MaBRON, JACOB, DasMEDIAS, ELOY, ATERESTIN, J ANASTARDY,

260


The Method of Honorius


Finis, Aaios, Isco yros, OTHEOS, ATHANATOS, AGLA, JEHOVA,
Homosion, Aaa, Messias, SorHer, CHRISTUS VINCIT,
CHRISTUS IMPERAT, INCREATUS Spiritus SANCTUS.

I conjure thee, Cassiel, or whomsoever thou mayest be,
by all the said names, with power and with exorcism! I
warn thee by the other sacred names of the most great Crea-
tor, which are or shall hereafter be communicated to thee;
hearken forthwith and immediately to my words, and ob-
serve them inviolably, as sentences of the last dreadful day
of judgment, which thou must obey inviolately, nor think
to repulse me because I am a sinner, for therein shalt thou
repulse the commands of the Most High God. Knowest
thou not that thou art bereft of thy powers before thy Crea-
tor and ours? Think therefore what thou refusest, and
pledge therefore thine obedience, swearing by the said last
dreadful day of judgment, and by Him who hath created
all things by His word, whom all creatures obey. P. per
sedem Baldarey et per gratiam et dtligentiam tuam habutste
ab eo hanc nalatumanamilam, as I command thee.


CHAPTER VIII.


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes
1. Concerning Works of Hatred and Destruction.


HE following process appears in several manuseript

copies of the ‘‘ Key of Solomon,’’ but has been omitted

by the English editor of that work, as others are also
omitted, presumably as a Goétic interpolation. But we have
seen that a Goétic process in a book like the ‘‘Key of Solo-
mon’’ is not necessarily an interpolation, while as regards
this particular instance it is very nearly evident that it is an
integral portion of that dubious collection. In the second
chapter of the first book we are told that the days and hours
of Mars are suitable for overthrowing enemies, while the
hours of Saturn and Mars, and also the days on which the
Moon is in conjunction with those planets, are excellent for
experiments of hatred, enmity, quarrel, and discord. In the
first chapter of the second book it is said :—As for operations
of destruction and desolation, we should put them into exe-
cution on the day of Saturn at the first hour, or rather at
the eighth or fifteenth of the day, and from the first until the
eighth hour of the night. From these statements it seems
fair to infer that there must have been a section containing
directions as to the performance of such works. In this
case, the ‘‘Key of Solomon’’ is neither better nor worse than
any other Grimoire of Black Magic. The apologists of the
Clavicle will probably cite in defence of it a passage which
occurs in Book i. ¢c. 8, in which the author proffers his secrets

262


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


on the express condition that they shall not be used to ruin
and destroy one’s neighbour. But when every allowance
has been for this stipulation, we shall do well to remember
that similar warnings are not wanting in purely Goétic
rituals. There is further another test by which the authen-
ticity of the following process may be largely determined,
and that is the manner of its wording, which corresponds
closely with the prevailing manner of the Clavicle. Itisa
loose and general wording, covering several classes of ex-
periment, and may be compared with Book I. ¢. xv., xvi,
Xvii., in which the same characteristics will be found.

The process itself is as follows:—Experiments upon
enemies may be performed in several ways, but whether with
waxen images or some other instrument, the particulars of
each must be diligently and faithfully observed. Should
the day and hour fail thee, proceed as already laid down, and
prepare the image or instrument proper to this effect in the
order and manner thereof. F'umigate with the proper per-
fumes, and if writing be required on the image, let it be
done with the needle or stylet of the art, as aforesaid. Next
recite the following words once over the said image :—Vsor,
DILAPIDATORE, TENTATORE, SOIGNATORE, DEVORATORE, CONCI-
TORE, ET SEDUCTORE. OQ all ye ministers and companions, I
direct, conjure, constrain, and command you to fulfil this
behest willingly, namely, straightway to consecrate this
image, which is to be done in the name of ;
that as the face of the one is contrary to the pices: SO the
same may never more look one upon another.

Deposit the image in some place perfumed with evil
odours, especially those of Mars, such as sulphur and assa-
fetida. Let it remain there for one night, having duly
asperged it, observing the proper hour and time. Do like-
wise when the experiment is performed with characters and

263


The Book of Black Magic


names, by touching the lovers with words, or by whatsoever
other manner. But when the experiment is made by giving
something to be eaten, the same must be performed on the
day and hour proper to this work. All things being pre-
pared, place them before you, and say: Where are ye,
SOIGNATORE, USORE, DILAPIDATORE, and DENTORE; CONCISORE,
DIVORATORE, SEDUCTORE, and SEMINATORE? Ye who sow dis-
cord, where are? Ye who infuse hatred and propagate en-
mities, I conjure you by Him who hath created you for this
ministry, to fulfil this work, in order that whensoever N.
[naming the person] shall eat of like things, or shall touch
them, in whatsoever manner, never shall he go in peace.
Give then whatsoever you please to the person desig-
nated, but let it be in the hour of Saturn or that of Mars,
observing all things needful for such experiments.


§ 2. Concerning Venereal Experiments.


We have seen that the sorcerer of the Middle Ages was
usually squalid and necessitous; hence he coveted treasures:
he was usually despised, and hence he longed for mastery,
for the prestige of mystery, and the power of strange arts:
he was usually lonely and libidinous, and hence he sought,
by means of spells and philtres, to compel the desire of
women. To be rich in worldly goods, to trample on one’s
enemies, and to gratify the desires of the flesh—such are the
ends, variously qualified and variously attained, of most
Ceremonial Magic, and hence the Rituals abound in Vene-
real Experiments.

In such as the Grimorium Verum there is no attempt to
hide their ilicit nature; in the ‘‘Key of Solomon’’ it is dis-
guised, but the process for obtaining favour and love which
occurs in that work is not really a more lawful experiment
than that Pour fatre.venr une Fille vous trouver, si sage

264


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


qu’elle soit. The ‘‘Key of Solomon”’ is reticent and the
Grimoires are frank; the one promises the fulfilment of the
operator’s desire without defining it; the others are explicit
and particular. It is true also that the one has recourse to
Adonai and implores his assistance, while the others invoke
the powers of Hell.

The Book of ‘‘True Black Magic’’ for once ignores the
experience of the Clavicle and substitutes the following :—


§ 3. Concerning the Experiment of Love.


Whatsoever person be the object of this experiment,
whether man or woman, it is needful in making it to observe
the proper day and hour, and note further that it is per-
formed by means of an image of wax or other suitable mat-
ter. Before composing it, say the following words over the
wax: NoGa, JES, ASTROPOLIM, ASMO, COCCAV, BERMONA, TEN-
TATOR, SOIGNATOR—I conjure you, ministers of love and un-
cleanness, by Him who hath condemned you to hell! Do ye
consecrate this wax in a regular manner, that it may acquire
the desired virtue, by the power of the Most Holy Adonay,
who liveth and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen.

The image must then be composed and suitable charac-
ters inscribed thereon with the male goose-quill of the Art,
after which it must be fumigated while reciting the follow-
ing words:—O thou most powerful King Paymon, whose
absolute rule and reign is in the western quarter! O thou,
Egim, most strong King, whose empire is in the cold region!
O thou, Asmodeus, who governest in the south! O thou,
Aymamon, most noble King, monarch of the Eastern world,
whose reign began from of old and will endure to the end of
time! I invoke and beseech you by Him who spake and it
was, whose sole word hath created all, whom all creatures


265


The Book of Black Magic


obey; by the seat of his Majesty ; by his Will and his Name;
by Him who was before the ages and hath created the ages;
whose Name is written with the four letters Jop, HE, Vau,
HE; by the enchantments and power thereof; and by all the
signal names of the Creator; I conjure you to consecrate
this image, and grant that it may acquire virtue according .
to our desire, by the Most Holy Name Adonay, the power
of which is without beginning or end.

This being done, conjure with the Conjuration of the
image, and if the woman or man should not appear, place
the said image beneath the pillow of your bed, and before
three days you shall behold admirable things, while chains or
earth shall not stay the desired person from coming to you,
for the fulfilment of your purpose, nothing being excepted.

But if the experience be to find the beloved person, place
the image under the door which he or she must pass. In
either case a powder must be made and cast upon the person,
or given them with their meat or drink. The solemnities of
' the hours, matters, and instruments must be faithfully ob-
served, and the Spirits conjured by name, saying also: I
conjure and constrain you, ye Devils, who have the power to
disturb the hearts of men and women! By Him who hath
ereated you from nothing and by this image, I conjure you
this night into my presence, that I may have the power to
compel whomsoever I will to love me, whether male or
female.

When the characters and images have been prepared,
say over them: I conjure you, O Anaél, Donquel, Theliel,
princes of love, with all your ministers, who have power to
fill with warmth the hearts of men and women, and to kindle
the fire of love! I conjure you by Him who is seated upon
the Cherubim and guardeth the abysses, by Him who
maketh the world to tremble, whom all creatures obey!

266


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


Grant that these characters and figures may possess this
virtue, that such man or woman may love me, may desire
me, and burn for my love, and that it shall be impossible
for him or her to love any person save me.

Place the image in a vessel for one night, operate on the
day and in the hour appropriate thereto, and you shall be-
hold a wonder.

The compiler of the Grimorium Veruwm, who seems to

‘have selected almost invariably the most bizarre processes,
instructs his pupils


How To CAusE THE APPEARANCE OF THREE LADIES OR
THREE GENTLEMEN IN ONE’S ROOM AFTER SUPPER.


§ 1. Preparation.


Abstain for three days from drawing Mercury, and then
will you rise up. On the fourth day, you shall cleanse and
prepare your chamber as soon as it is morning, immediately
after dressing, the whole fasting. But see you do it in such
a way that it will not be liable to disarrangement during the
remainder of the day. Note that there must be no hang-
ings, nor anything set crosswise, no tapestries, no hanging
clothes, hats, bird-cages, bed curtains, &c. Above all, put
clean sheets on your couch.


§ 2. Ceremony.


After supper pass in secret to your chamber, made ready
as above; kindle a good fire; place a white cloth on the table,
round which set three chairs, and before each chair, upon
the table, let there be a wheaten roll and a glass full of fresh
clear water. Lastly, draw up a chair and settee to the side
of the bed, and retire to rest, uttering the following

267


The Book of Black Magic


CoNJURATION.


Besticitum consolatio veni ad me vertat Creon, Creon,
Creon, cantor laudem omnipotentis et non commentur.
Stat superior carta bient laudem omviestra principiem da
montem et inimicos meos 6 prostantis vobis et mihi dantes
que passium fieri sincisibus.

The three persons having arrived, will rest themselves
near the fire, drinking, eating, and finally thanking him or
her who has entertained them; for if it be a young lady who
_ performs this ceremony, three gentlemen will come; but if it
be a man, three young ladies will appear. The said three
persons will draw lots among each other to know which of
them shall remain with you. If aman be the operator, she
who wins will place herself in the arm-chair which you have
set by the bed, and she will remain and commune with you
until midnight, at which hour she will depart with her com-
panions, without any need of dismissal. As regards the
two others, they will keep themselves by the fire, while the
other entertains you. So long as she remains you may
question her upon any art or science, or upon what subject
soever, and she will immediately give you a positive answer.
You may also inquire of her whether she is aware of any
hidden treasure, and she will instruct you as to its locality .
and the precise time suited to its removal. She will even
appear there with her companions to defend you against
the assaults of the Infernal Spirits who may have it in their
possession. At parting, she will present you with a ring,
which, worn on the finger, will render you lucky at play,
while if it be placed upon the finger of any woman or girl,
you shall there and then have your delight with them. Ob-
serve, however, that you must leave your window open in
order that they may enter.


268


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


This ceremony may be repeated frequently at the will of
the operator.

It must be acknowledged that the above experiment of-
fers a large return for very small pains in the preparation,
and hence it is very popular with the makers of Grimoires.
The same observation applies to the following process,
which is common to the supplementary portions of the
‘“‘Grand Grimoire,’’ the Grimortum Verum, the ‘‘Grimoire
of Honorius,’’ and most of the minor collections. It is
described as an experience of the wonderful power of the
Superior Intelligences. The nature of the superiority may,
however, be inferred from the title.


To Cause a Gir. TO SEEK YOU OUT, HOWEVER PRUDENT
SHE MAY BE.

Whether in the increase or wane of the Moon, a star
must be observed between eleven o’clock and midnight. But
before beginning do as follows. Take a vir-
gin parchment. Write thereon her name
whose presence you desire. The parchment
must be shaped as represented in the follow-
ing figure. On the other side inscribe these
words: Melchiael, Bareschas. Then place
your parchment on the earth, with the per-
son’s name against the ground. Place your
right foot above it, while your left knee is
bent to the earth. In this position observe
the brightest star in the firmament, holding in the right
hand a taper of white wax large enough to last for an hour,
and recite the following

CoNJURATION


I salute and conjure you, O beautiful Moon, O beautiful
Star, O bright light which I hold in my hand! By the air
269


The Book of Black Magic


which I breathe, by the breath which is within me, by the
earth which I touch, I conjure you, and by all the names of
the spirits who are princes residing in you; by the ineffable
Name Own, which hath created all; by thee, O Resplendent
Angel Gabriel, together with the Prince Mercury, Michael,
and Melchidael! JI conjure you again by all the divine
Names of God, that you send down to obsess, torment, and
harass the body, spirit, soul, and five senses of the nature of
N., whose name is written here below, in such a way that
she shall come unto me and accomplish my will, having no
friendship for any one in the world, but especially for N.,
so long as she shall be indifferent to me. So shall she en-
dure not, so shall she be obsessed, so suffer, so be tormented.
Go then promptly; go, Melchidael, Baresches, Zazel, Firiel,
Malcha, and all those who are without you (stc). I conjure
you by the great living God to accomplish my will, and I,
N., do promise to satisfy you duly.


Having thrice pronounced this conjuration, place the
taper on the parchment and let it burn. Take the parch-
ment on the morrow, put it in your left shoe, and there
leave it until the person for whom you have operated shall
have come to seek you out. You must specify in the Conju-
ration the day that you desire her to come, and she will not
fail.

This process has its disadvantages, and even its difficul-
ties. It seems absurd to suppose that there are Spirit
Princes inhabiting the flame of a taper, and the treatment
invoked upon the lady is of a turbulent kind, nor is there
any colourable pretence on which the position of the rival
lover can be justified; but it has the touch of the pictur-
esque, and, making all allowance for the potencies which
may inhere in Sator, Arepo, Tenet, Opera, Rotas, it does

270


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


not suffer seriously by comparison with the method of the
Clavicle.


§ 3. Concerning the Experiment of Invisibility.


We shall see later on that there are certain processes
found in the Grimoires which do not connect with Black
Magic otherwise than by their place in the Grimoires.
There are also other processes which are not in themselves
Goétic, but are objectionable on account of the abuse to
which they are liable. It is curious to observe how ex-
periments of this kind will in one Ritual appear under a
harmless guise, and will in another bear all the marks of
diabolism. The experience of Invisibility, with which we
are here concerned, illustrates all these points.
| Here Ceremonial Magic pretends to place its adepts in

possession of the ring of Gyges. Presuming that the ‘‘Key
of Solomon”’ is the most ancient of all the Rituals, it is
there that the formal process first occurs. It is accom-
plished, however, without the intervention of a ring, by
means of a simple preliminary invocation and an address
to Almiras, Master and Chief of Invisibility, whatsoever
may be necessary for the particular occasion, such as char-
acters and circles, being left to the discretion of the opera-
tor. There is also a complementary process by means of a
waxen image which occurs in one manuscript copy, and is
given by the English editor. The person who has duly
made and consecrated this image is supposed to become in-
visible when he carries it. If we now turn to the ‘‘ Book of
True Black Magic,’’ we shall find the first experiment
adapted as follows:—Before making the experiment of in-
visibility these words must be committed to memory:
Scaboles, Habrion, el, elimigit, gabolii, Semitrion, Men-
tinobol, Sabaniteut, Heremobol, cane, methé, baluti, catea,
271


The Book of Black Magic


timeguel, bora, by the empire which ye exert over us, fulfil
this work, so that I may become invisible.* The said words
must be written with the blood. before mentioned,” and the
following Conjuration recited: O ye Spirits of Invisibility,
I conjure and constrain you to incontinently and forthwith
consecrate this experiment, so that, surely and without
trickery, I may go invisible. Furthermore, I conjure you
by Lucifer, your prince, by the obedience which you owe to
him, and by the power of God, incontinently to aid me by
consecrating this experiment, without loss of my body or
my soul. So be it, so be it, so be it.

Prepare all things required for this experiment with
due solemnity and diligence, as it is laid down in the chap-
ter proper thereto: so shalt thou operate with certainty and
so find the truth; but failing any of the things needful, thou
shalt not attain thy desire, for not by the walls but the
gate may any man enter a town.
| This is merely a shorter recension of the process con-

tained in the Clavicle, with the reference to Lucifer inter-
polated.

In place of these bald and somewhat unmeaning direc-
tions, the Grimorium Verum supplies an excessively curious
process, at once monstrous and fantastic, recalling the sor-
ceries of Thessaly, and having direct connections with
folk-lore.

To become Invisible.


Begin this operation on a Wednesday before the sun
rises, being furnished with seven black beans. Take next
the head of a dead man, and place one of the beans in his
mouth, two in his eyes, and two in his ears. Then make


1 These names are given as follows by the English editor: Sceaboles, Arbaron,
Elohi, Elimigith, Herenobulcule, Methe, Baluth, Timayal, Villaquiel, Teveni, Yevie,
Ferete, Bachuhaba, Guvarin. ;

2 Possibly that of a mole, used in the consecration of the instruments.


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


upon this head the character of the figure which here fol-
lows. (Omitted in all the Grimoires.) This done, inter the
head with the face towards heaven, and every day before
sunrise, for the space of nine days, water it with excellent
brandy. On the eighth day you will find the cited spirit,
who will say unto you: What doest thou? You shall reply:
I am watering my plant. He will then say: Give me that
bottle; I will water it myself. You will answer by refus-
ing, and he will again ask you, but you will persist in
declining, until he shall stretch forth his hand and shew you
the same figure which you have traced upon the head sus-
pended from the tips of his fingers. In this case you may
be assured that it is really the spirit of the head, because
another might take you unawares, which would bring you
evil, and further, your operation would be unfruitful.
When you have given him your phial, he will water the
head and depart. On the morrow, which is the ninth day,
you shall return and will find your beans ripe. Take them,
place one in your mouth, and then look at yourself in a
glass. If you cannot see yourself, it is good. Do the same
with the rest, or they may be tested in the mouth of a child.
All those which do not answer must be interred with the
head.


The advantage of occasional invisibility in the pursuits
of illicit affection seems to have fascinated the compiler of
the ‘‘Little Albert,’’ and he refers to the adultery of Gyges
with evident relish in prefacing his process for


Invisibility by means of a Ring.


This important operation must be performed on a Wed-
nesday in spring-time, under the auspices of Mercury, when
it is known to be conjoined with other favourable planets,

273


The Book of Black Magic


such as the Moon, Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun. Taking good
Mercury, fixed and well purified, compose a large ring
thereof, so that the same will pass easily over the middle
finger of the hand. Let the collet be enriched by a small
stone which is found in the pewit’s nest, and about the ring
let the following words be enchased: Jesus passing>k
through the midst of them> disappeared.’


Next, having placed the ring on a palette-shaped plate
of fixed Mercury, compose the perfume of Mercury, and
_ thrice expose the ring to the odour thereof; wrap it in a
small piece of taffeta corresponding to the colour of the
planet, carry it to the pewit’s nest from which the stone
was obtained, let it remain there for nine days, and when
removed, fumigate it precisely as before. Then preserve it
most carefully in a small box made also of fixed Mercury,
and use it when required. The method of use is to place the
ring upon the finger with the stone outwards; it will so
fascinate the spectators by its virtue that one may be
present without being beheld. When the wearer no longer
desires to be invisible, he has merely to turn the ring, so
‘that the stone shall be inward, and close the hand over it.


But Eliphas Lévi affirms that the only authors who have
written seriously concerning the ring of Gyges or its equiva-
lents are Porphyry, Iamblichus, and Peter of Apono; that
their discourse is allegorical, and that they are referring to
the Great Magical Arcanum. However this may be, the
Little Albert supplies an alternative process which it pre-
tends to derive from these authorities, and also from
Cornelius Agrippa, the master of Peter of Apono. The
first requisite is a tuft of hair taken from the head of a
hyena, and from the upper part thereof. These hairs must


1Compare the Magic circle of Honorius.
274


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


be plaited into a ring, which must be carried, like the other,
to a pewit’s nest and deposited therein for the space of nine
days. The perfumes of Mercury must be used in hike man-
ner. The person who wears this ring will be invisible, and
he will reappear by removing it from his finger.


Eliphas Lévi observes that the directions recall the his-
tory of the bell of Rodilard, but the criticism is scarcely
commensurate, for the material is certainly obtainable, nor
would it be necessary to catch one’s own hyena. The point
which was missed by the occultist will be evident to the
ordinary reader, the head of the hyena is short-coated, and
the hairs could not be braided. It is not, however, un-
reasonable that impossible conditions should attach to an
impossible object.’


—


§ 4.—Concerning the Hand of Glory.


No person who is familiar with the humours of
Ingoldsby will have forgotten the wondrous legend of the
Hand of Glory, which includes a transcript from the Grim-
oires. It is less generally known that there are two
processes, serving distinct uses, and there can be little
doubt that they should both be in the possession of every
well-equipped operator. The possession of the first alone
might be a source of temptation, as it is designed primarily
for the protection of burglars. The second renders house-
breaking unnecessary, as it ensures a decent competence,


1A process was also fe ee against fascination and deception by means of
the ring of invisibility. It consists in the composition of a ring similarly shaped,
made of refined lead, and enchased with the eye of a female ferret which has
had only one litter. The words Apparuit Dominus Simoni should be engraved
about the circumference. It should be composed on a Saturday when Saturn is
in opposition with Mercury, perfumed three times with the perfume of Saturday,
wrapped in a piece of a winding-sheet, buried for nine days in a churchyard,
aerramied: when disinterred, as before, and it then ready for use.


275


The Book of Black Magic


but is at the same time without prejudice to its companion,
which will be serviceable in a number of emergencies not,
at least technically, illegal.

According to the Albertus Parvus Luci Inbellus, the
Hand of Glory is indifferently the right or left hand of a
criminal who has been gibbeted. The sorcerer obtains it as
he can, and in the days of Tyburn Tree such requisites might
have cost nothing beyond the
personal risk of the adven-
, oily ; ture; it is indispensable,
xh however, that it should be
wrapped in a piece of a
winding-sheet, and this sug-
gests that the criminal must
have been previously cut
down with a view to inter-
ment. Thus enclosed, the
hand must be well squeezed
so as to force out any blood
which may possibly remain
in the member, after which
it must be placed in an
eS earthen vessel, together with

Ss ita some zimort, saltpetre, com-
Cnn mn mon salt, and pepper-corns,
fin Rr AT all pounded. It should remain
— — in this vessel for fifteen days,
, and when extracted should be
exposed to the heat of the sun during the time of the dogstar
until it is extremely desiccated. If solar warmth be insuffi-
cient, it may be placed in a furnace heated with bracken and
vervain. The object is to extract all the grease from the
member, and therefrom, in combination with virgin wax


276


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


and sesame from Lapland, to compose a species of candle.
Wheresoever this frightful object is lighted, the spectators
will be deprived of all motion, and the sorcerer can do what
he will. It is possible to destroy its influence by anointing
the threshold of the door, or other places through which en-
trance may be gained to a house, with an unguent composed
_ of the gall of a black cat, grease from a white fowl, and the
blood of a screech-owl. This should also be confected in
the dog-days.

It is to be regretted that this signal process does not rest
upon the personal testimony of its historian, but he was
present at the trial of several who confessed, under torture,
that they had applied it with complete success. It is to be
regretted also that the alternative experiment must remain,
as regards its materials, in the language of its inventor. It
will be seen, however, that the Hand of Glory is not a hand,
but a serpent; the process has, in fact, no connection what-
ever with its name, which is wholly in accordance with the
genius of Black Magic.

Arrachez le potl avec sa racine d’une gument en chaleur, le
plus prés de la nature, saying: Dragne, Dragne, Dragne. Tie
the same in a knot, and go forthwith to purchase, without
haggling, a new earthen pot, fitted with a lid. Return home
at full speed; fill the said pot with spring water within two
inches of the brim. Place your material therein, cover the
vessel, and set it where neither you nor any one can perceive
it, for the same is danger, saith the Grimoire. At the end of
nine days, and at the hour of concealment, bring it forth,
open it, and you will discover a small animal in the form of
a serpent, which will at once spring up. Say then: I accept
the pact. Touch not the creature with your hand, but trans-
fer it into a new box, purchased expressly, without bar-
gaining; for food give it husks of wheat only, and those

277


The Book of Black Magic


daily. When you are in want of gold or silver, place as
much as you need in the box, retire to rest with the box at
your bedside; sleep, if you wish, for the space of three or
four hours; then rise, and you will find double the amount
of money which you have entrusted to the serpent. What
you originally placed in the box must, however, be left
therein; and it becomes therefore a sort of transcendental
savings-bank which doubles its capital daily. Should the
reptile be of ordinary appearance, you must not try for
more than one hundred francs at a time; but if your planet
give you the ascendant in things supernatural, the serpent
will have a human face, and you may deposit a thousand
francs. In either case, should the operator part with his
possession, two conditions must be observed: the recipient
must be a consenting party to the gift, and a figure, to be
drawn on virgin parchment, but omitted by the Grimoire,
must be placed in the box. If, however, you prefer to de-
stroy it, let the serpent be provided, not with his usual
bran, but with some of the flour used for consecration in the
first Mass of a priest, after eating which he will die. On
the whole, it will be simpler to retain the enchanted animal,
more especially as the vague responsibilities of the pact are
not apparently transferred in the one or annulled in the
other case. No jest is intended, says the dry author of the
Grimorium Verum, but the process of the Gold-Finding
Hen is on the whole simpler, as it is also more cleanly.


§ 5.—Concerning the Vision of Spirits in the Air.
For the Masters of Black Magic, as for the author of the
Comte de Gabalis, the air is the abode of far other beings
than the bird and fly, but the process by which they are
rendered visible is complicated by the exceptional nature of
the required materials. It is, of course, quite possible
278


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


to secure the brain of a cock, and dissection with
that object may perhaps be performed by deputy; the
kitchen-maid or the poulterer’s assistant would be easily
secured. The dust from the grave of a dead man 1s the
second ingredient of the process; but a visit to the nearest
cemetery will not be sufficient, because it is useless to collect
it on the surface; that which is next to the coffin will alone
serve the purpose. In addition to these substances there are
only oil of almonds and virgin wax. A compost must be
made of the four, and it must be wrapped in a sheet of vir-
gin parchment inscribed previously with the words GoMERT,
KAILOETH, and with the character of Khil.

The materials being thus prepared, it remains to set them
alight, whereupon the operator will behold that which the
Grimoire characterises as prodigious, but does not specify
except by the indication of the title. This experiment, it
adds, should be performed only by those who fear nothing.

It is easy to deride the process, but reflective persons will
see that it is the quintessence and summary of the whole art.
This is Black Magic in a nutshell, a combination in equal
proportions of the disgusting and the imbecile. There are
many more elaborate experiments, but few of a more repre-
sentative kind. It is not necessary to add that it has been
exceedingly popular, and is to be found in most of the
Grimoires.


§ 6.—Concerning Divination by the Word of Uriel.


As there are many practices passing under the name of
White Magic which are at least doubtful in character, so
there are experiences described in the Grimoires, or in the
treasuries of secrets which accompany them, having nothing
repulsive in their nature; they belong, however, to the
Grimoires; their connections in occult literature are those of

279


The Book of Black Magic


Black Magic, and they deserve a place here. Moreover, a
process which in one Ritual will be merely curious or di-
verting, hypnotic or clairvoyant, may in another bear all
the outward marks of diabolism. The mode of divination
termed the Word or Speech of Uriel—signifying answers
or oracles obtained from that spirit ceremonially invoked—
appears in the Grimoriwm Verum as an experiment in lu-
cidity induced by means of Hydromancy, but in the Verus
Jesutarum Inbellus the Conjuration of Uriel appears as
an infernal conjuration, and it is a process of Black Magic.

The experiment in the Grimorium Verum is worded as
follows :—


THE INVOCATION OF URIEL.


To succeed in this operation, it is needful that whosoever
makes the experiment shall do in all things as hereinafter
enjoined. Let him choose a small chamber or cabinet which
has not been frequented by impure women for at least nine
days. Let such place be well cleansed and consecrated by
aspersions and fumigations. In the middle of the said cham-
ber let there be a table covered with a white cloth, and set as
follows thereon, to wit, a new glass phial filled with spring
water, drawn shortly before the operation; three small
tapers of virgin wax mixed with human fat; a-sheet of vir-
gin parchment six inches square; a raven’s quill cut ready
for writing; a china ink-well filled with fresh ink; a small
pan furnished with the materials for a fire. . Let there be
also a young boy of nine or ten years, cleanly and modestly
dressed and of good behaviour, who must be placed near the
table. One of the three tapers should be fixed upon a great
new needle at a distance of six inches behind the phial, and
the two others, erected after the same manner, should stand

280


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


on the right and left at the same distance. While arranging
these matters, recite the following words:—Gabamiah,
Adonay, Agla, O Lord God of Powers, do Thou assist us!

The virgin parchment should be on the right, and the pen
with the ink on the left side of the phial. The windows and
door must be closed before beginning the operation. The fire
should then be stirred, the tapers lighted, and the boy placed
on his knees so that he can look into the phial; observe that
he should be bareheaded and his hands joined. The Master
of the operation shall thereupon command him to gaze
fixedly into the phial, when, approaching his right ear, and
in a moderate tone of voice, but as distinctly as possible, let
him make the following


CoNJURATION.


Uriel, Seraph, Josata, Ablati, Agla, Caila, I pray and
conjure thee by the Four Words which God uttered with
His mouth unto His servant Moses, Josata, Ablati, Agla,
Caila, and by the Nine Heavens wherein thou dwellest, as
also by the virginity of this child who is before thee, that
thou appearest, and without any delay, visibly in this phial,
to discover, without disguising, the truth which I desire to
know; which done, I will discharge thee in peace and good-
will, in the Name of the Most Holy Adonay.

After this conjuration the child must be asked whether he
beholds anything in the phial; and if he should reply that he
beholds an Angel or another apparition, the Master of the
operation shall say in an affable tone of voice: Blessed
Spirit, be thou welcome! I conjure thee once more, in the
Name of the Most Holy Adonay, to give me prompt enlight-
enment upon, etc. [Here name the subject upon which
information ts destred.] And if for reasons unknown to us,

281


The Book of Black Magic


thou art unwilling to proceed in an audible tone of voice,’ I
conjure thee in the Most Holy Name of Adonay to write
upon the virgin parchment here present, between now and
to-morrow morning, or at least reveal unto me that which
I desire this coming night in my sleep.

If the Spirit make answer to what is said, he shall be
heard respectfully ; should he fail to speak after thrice mak-
ing the same supplication, let the tapers be extinguished and
withdraw from the chamber, closing the door until the mor-
row, when the operator may return in the morning, and that
which was required will be found within, on the virgin
parchment, unless indeed it shall have been made known in
the night.

In the Verum Jesuitarum Inbellus this experiment in the
induction of clairvoyance by means of a seering cup and a
fantastic ceremonial, having only one monstrous condition, is
replaced by a fierce conjuration of many pages, commanding
the Spirit Uriel by all the words which have ever proceeded
out of the mouth of the Creator of Heaven and Earth against
the Evil Angels, and on pain of compulsion and torture, to
appear before the operator, an unworthy servant of God,
wherever he may be, even in the abyss of Hell. He is di-
rected to appear visibly and modestly in a human form, and
to bring whatsoever is desired in all tranquility and patience,
without tumult, without detriment, without blinding, with-
out dumbness, without whispering, without thunder, without
hail, without explosion, without puffing up, without trem-
bling. It is unnecessary to quote the entire citation, as the
process is not complete; but it is evident that the Conjura-
tion of Uriel in the forged treatise on the Magic of the
Jesuits is intended for the compulsion of a devil, and not for


, 2 That is, in a voice audible to the clairvoyant boy, the process being obviously
intended for those who are not themselves seers.


282


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


the solicitation of favours from the Blessed Spirit of the
Grimorium Verum.


§ 7.—Concerning the Mirror of Solomon, suttable for all
Kinds of Divination.


The following process is found in the Grimortum Verum
and in some other compilations. It is a mode of divination
akin to that given in the preceding chapter. It does not con-
nect with Black Magic except by the use of blood, and is
really an auto-hypnotic experiment fortified by conventional
ceremonies.


To Compose the Mtrror of Solomon.


In the Name of the Lord, Amen. Ye shall behold in this
mirror all things whatsoever that ye may desire. In the
Name of the Lord who is blessed, in the Name of the Lord,
Amen.

In the first place, ye shall do no fleshly actions, nor sin in
thought or deed, during the period hereinafter prescribed.
In the second place, ye shall perform many good works of
piety and mercy. In the third place, take a shining and
well-polished plate of fine steel, slightly concave, and with
the blood of a white pigeon inscribe thereon, to wit, at the
four corners, the names Jehova, Eloym, Metatron, Adonay.
Place the said steel in a clean and white cloth. Now, when ye
shall behold the new moon during the first hour after sunset,
draw nigh unto a window, look up to Heaven with devotion,
and say: O Eternal! O King Eternal! God ineffable! Thou
who hast created all things for love of me, and by a secret
judgment for the health of man, do Thou deign to look upon
me, N., Thy most unworthy servant, and upon this my inten-
tion. Vouchsafe to send unto me Thine Angel Anaél, even
upon this mirror, who doth order, command, and ordain his

283


The Book of Black Magic


companions and Thy subjects, whom Thou hast made, O
Thou Almighty Lord, who hast been, who art, who shalt
remain eternally, that in Thy Name they may judge and
act justly, instructing me in all that I shall require of them.

Lastly, cast upon burning coals a suitable perfume, and
while casting it say: In this, by this, and with this, which I
pour out before Thy face, O God, my God, who art blessed,
Three and One, and in the most sublime exaltation, who
sittest above the Cherubim and above the Seraphim, who
wilt judge the world by fire, hear Thou me!


Repeat this three times, and having done so, breathe also
thrice upon the mirror, and say: Come, Anaél, come, and
may it be thy good pleasure to be with me by thy will, in the
Name of the Father most mighty, in the Name of the
Son most wise, in the Name of the Holy Spirit most living!
Come, Anaél, in the Name of the terrible Jehovah! Come,
Anaél, by the virtue of the immortal Elohim! Come, Anaél,
by the right arm of the almighty Metatron! Do thou come
unto me, N.(here repeat your name over the mirror), and so
command thy subjects that in love, Joy, and peace they may
make manifest unto my eyes the things which are hidden
from me. So be it. Amen.


Having said and done as above, lift up your eyes to
heaven and say: O Lord Almighty, who dost cause all things
to: move according to Thy good pleasure, hear Thou my
prayer, and may my desire be agreeable unto Thee! Lord,
O Lord, if Thou wilt, condescend to look upon this mirror
and bless it, that so Anaél, one of Thy servants, may pause
thereon with his companions, to satisfy me, N., Thy poor and
humble servant, O God, blessed and exalted above all the
heavenly Spirits, who livest and reignest for ever and ever.
Amen.


284.


28434


Digitized by Google


Miscellaneous and Minor Processes


When you shall have accomplished these things, make the
sign of the Cross upon yourself and upon the mirror on the
first and following days for forty-five days in succession, at
the end of which time Anaél will appear to you under the
form of a beautiful child, will salute you, and will command
his companions to obey you. Observe that it does not inva-
riably require forty-five days to compose the mirror. The
Angel will frequently appear on the fourteenth day accord-
ing to the intention, devotion, and fervour of the operator.
When he shall appear, ask of him that which you desire, and
pray him to come at all times, whensoever you shall invoke
him to grant your demands. On subsequent occasions when
you desire to see in this mirror, it is not necessary to recite
all the prayers as above provided, but having perfumed it,
say only: Come — come, according to thy good
pleasure, &c.

To dismiss him, say: I thank thee, Anaél, because thou
hast appeared and hast satisfied my demands. Do thou
therefore depart in peace, and return when I shall call thee.

The perfume of Anaél is saffron.


§ 8.—Concerning the Three Rings of Solomon,
Son of David.

One more process, which is only incidentally connected
with Black Magic, may be cited here, as the complement of
those given in the preceding sections. It is scarcely a com-
plete process, and is not intelligible as it stands in the G'r-
morium Verum, where the characters on which it depends
are omitted. The experiment presupposes that the operator
is in possession of a talisman inscribed with the Pentacles of
Solomon,’ when it is open to him to proceed in accordance
with the following directions :—


1 oe grand pentacle, as given by the “Grimoire of Honorius,” will be found


on p. 242,
289


The Book of Black Magic


Compose your circle, but before entering therein, per-
fume it with musk, amber, aloes-wood, and incense. When
invoking, the perfume should be incense only, and take care
also that you have fire whensoever you make invocation, and
fumigate only in the name of the Spirit whom you would
call. When placing perfume on the fire, say: I burn this N.
in the name and to the honour of N. When invoking, see
that you hold the invocation in the left hand, having the rod
of elder’ in your right, while the ladle? and knife should be
at your feet. These things being arranged, place yourself
within the circle; if accompanied, your companions should
hold each other by one hand. When within, trace the circle
with the Knife of the Art, and take up the rods one after the
other, saying the Fiftieth psalm, namely, Miserere met. The
circle being composed, perfume and sprinkle the same with
holy water. Then write the characters at the four corners;
let the Spirit be forbidden in formal terms to enter, after
which begin the invocations, which must be repeated seven
successive times. When the Spirit shall have appeared,
cause him to sign the character which you hold in your
hands, promising to come always at your call. Ask for
whatsoever you deem suitable, and you shall be satisfied.
Dismiss him with these words: Go in peace unto your places,
and peace be with you until you return at my call. In the
name, &c. Amen.

1See the method for the composition Chie ar the Magic Rod according to the


Grimorium Verum in the second chapter of
2 Not previously mentioned under this name.


CHAPTER IX.


Concerning Infernal Pecromanceyp


T is only within recent times that the attempt to commu-
I nicate with the dead has been elevated to the dignity of
White Magic. Here it is necessary to affirm that the
phenomena of Modern Spiritualism are to be distinguished
clearly from those of old Necromancy. The identity of pur-
pose is apt to connect the methods, but the latter differ gen-
erically. To compare them would be almost equivalent to
saying that the art of Alchemy is similar to mercantile pur-
suits because the acquisition of wealth is the end in either
ease. To appreciate the claim of Modern Spiritualism
would be to exceed the limits of this inquiry; it is mentioned
only with the object of setting it quite apart. It need only
be added that occult writers have sometimes sought ambi-
tiously to represent the communication with departed souls
by means of Ceremonial Magic as something much more
exalted than mere Spiritualism, whereas the very opposite
is nearer the truth. Ancient Necromancy was barbarous
and horrible in its rites; it is only under the auspices of
Eliphas Lévi and Pierré Christian that it has been purged
and civilised, but in the hands of these elegant magicians it
has become simply a process of auto-hallucination, having
no scientific consequence whatever. The secret of true
evocation belongs to the occult sanctuaries; it is not the
process of Spiritualism, and still less, so far as may be
gleaned, it is that of the magical Rituals, nor would the
287


The Book of Black Magic


secret at best seem respected by those who possess it, be-
cause the higher soul of man transcends evocation, and that
which does respond is beneath the initiate.

In any case, the Necromancy of the Rituals is, properly
speaking, a department of Black Magic, and for this reason
no doubt it was excluded from the theurgic scheme of the
‘*Arbatel’’; nor do even such composite works at the two
Keys of Solomon and the ‘‘ Magical Elements’’ contain any
account of a process which was always held in execration.
It was lawful apparently for the Magus to conjure and com-
pel the devils, to rack the hierarchy of Infernus by the
agony of Divine Names, but he must leave the dead to their
rest. :

Where the. process is given, as in the Fourth Book of
Cornelius Agrippa, it is confined to the evocation of those
souls who might be reasonably supposed to be damned, and
it involves revolting rites. It assumes that the evil liver
carries with him into the next world the desires which have
depraved him here, and it allures kim by these persistent
affinities with the relinquished body. In this way the use of
blood came to be regarded as indispensable, because blood
was held to be the medium of physical life, and so also a por-
tion of the body itself, whether flesh or bone, was prescribed
in the rite. There is not any need to say that evocations in-
volving the use of such materials belong to Black Magic,
and offer no redeeming feature to the consideration of the
impartial student.

‘*It is also to be understood,’’ says pseudo-Agrippa, ‘‘that
those who are proposing to raise up the souls of any de-
ceased persons must do so in places with which it is known
that they were familiar, in which some special alliance be-
tween soul and body may be supposed, or some species of
attracting affection, still leading the soul to such places


288


Concerning Infernal Necromancy


. . . Therefore the places most suited for the purpose are
churchyards, and, better still, those which have been the
scene of the execution of criminal judgments,’’ in plain
words, the immediate neighbourhood of a gibbet. A battle-
field or other place of public slaughter is still more favour-
able, but best of all is the scene of a murder before the
removal of the carcase.

The ritual of Necromantic Evocation is indicated but not
given by the authority just cited; we must seek it in Ebene-
zer Sibley and in the supplementary portions of the ‘‘Grand
Grimoire’’ and the ‘‘Red Dragon.’’ The astrologer Sibley
does not give account of his sources, but they were evidently
not in printed books. The Sloane MS. numbered 3884 in the
Library of the British Museum would appear to have been
one. It is, in any case, not an invented process; it develops
the principles laid down in pseudo-Agrippa, and is quite in
harmony with the baleful genius of Black Magic. It is
here given verbatim.

But if, instead of infernal or familiar spirits, the ghost
or apparition of a departed person is to be exorcised, the
Magician, with his assistant, must repair to the churchyard
or tomb where the deceased was buried, exactly at midnight,
as the ceremony can only be performed in the night between
the hours of twelve and one. The grave is first to be opened,
or an aperture made by which access may be had to the
naked body. The magician having described the circle, and
holding a magic wand in his right hand, while his companion
or assistant beareth a consecrated torch, he turns himself to
all the four winds, and, touching the dead body three times
with the magical wand, repeats as follows:—By the virtue
of the Holy Resurrection, and the torments of the damned,
I conjure and exorcise thee, Spirit of N. deceased, to answer
my liege demands, being obedient unto these sacred cere-

289


The Book of Black Magic


monies, on pain of everlasting torment and distress .
Berald, Beroald, Balbin, Gab, Gabor, Agaba. Arise, arise,
I charge and command thee.

After these forms and ceremonies, the ghost or appart-
tion will become visible, and will answer any questions put
to it by the exorcist. But if it be desired to put interroga-
tories to the spirit of any corpse that has hanged, drowned,
or otherwise made away with itself, the conjuration must be
performed while the body lies on the spot where it is first
found after the suicide hath been.committed, and before it is
touched or removed. The ceremony is as follows. The ex-
orcist binds upon the top of his wand a bundle of St. John’s
Wort or Milltes perforatum, with the head of an owl; and
having repaired to the spot where the corpse lies, at twelve
o’clock at night, he draws the circle and. solemnly repeats
these words :—By the mysteries of the deep, by the flames of
Banal, by the power of the East and the silence of the night,
by the Holy Rites of Hecate, I conjure and exorcise thee,
thou distressed spirit, to present thyself here, and reveal
unto me the cause of thy calamity, why thou didst offer
violence to thy own liege life, where thou art now in being,
and where thou wilt hereafter be.

Then gently smiting the carcase nine times with the rod,
he adds :—I conjure thee, thou Spirit of this N. deceased, to
answer my demands that I propound unto thee, as thou ever
hopest for the rest of the holy ones and ease of all thy mis-
ery; by the Blood of Jesus which He shed for thy soul, I
conjure and bind thee to utter unto me what I shall ask thee.

Then, cutting down the carcase from the tree, they shall
lay its head towards the east; in the space that this following
conjuration is repeating, they shall set a chafing dish of fire
at its right hand, into which they shall pour a little wine,
some mastic, and some gum-aromatic, and lastly [the con-

290


Concerning Infernal Necromancy


tents of] a vial full of the sweetest oil. They shall have also
a pair of bellows and some unkindled charcoal to make the
fire burn bright when the carcase rises. The conjuration
is this :-—

I conjure thee, thou Spirit of N., that thou do immedi-
ately enter into thy ancient body again, and answer to my
demands, by the virtue of the Holy Resurrection, and by the
posture of the body of the Saviour of the world, I charge
thee, I conjure thee, I command thee, on pain of the torments
and wandering of thrice seven years, which I, by the force of
sacred magic rites, have power to inflict upon thee; by thy
sighs and groans I conjure thee to utter thy voice. So help
thee God and the prayers of the Holy Church. Amen.

This ceremony being thrice repeated, while the fire is
burning with mastic and gum-aromatic, the body will begin
to rise, and at last will stand upright before the exorcist,
answering with a faint and hollow voice the questions pro-
pounded unto it: why it destroyed itself, where its dwelling
is, what its food and life are, how long it will be ere it enter
into rest, and by what means the magician may assist it to
come to rest; also of the treasures of this world, where they
are hid. Moreover, it can answer very punctually concern-
ing the places where ghosts reside, and of the manner of
communicating with them, teaching the nature of Astral
Spirits and hellish beings so far as its capacity alloweth.
All this when the ghost hath fully answered, the magician
ought, out of commiseration and reverence to the deceased,
to use what means can possibly be used for procuring rest
unto the spirit, to which effect he must dig a grave, and,
filling the same half full of quick-lime, with a little salt and
common sulphur, must put the carcase naked into it. Next
to the burning of the body into ashes, this is of great force
to quiet and end the disturbance of the Astral Spirit. But

291


The Book of Black Magic


in this and in all cases where the ghosts or apparitions of
deceased persons are raised up and consulted, great caution
is to be observed by the Magician to keep close within the
circle; for if, by the constellation and position of the stars
at his nativity, he be in the predicament of those who follow
the Black Art for iniquitous purposes, it is very dangerous
to conjure any spirits without describing the form of the
circle, and wearing upon the heart, or holding in the hand,
the Pentacle of Solomon. For the ghosts of men deceased
can easily effect sudden death to the magician born under
such a constellation of the planets, even whilst in the act
of being exorcised.

It must be confessed that this process is grim and de-
pressing, and the occult student will not envy the sorcerer
at the first palpitation of the corpse. Yet the rite is method-
ical, and even sober, when compared with the monstrous
alternative of the ‘‘Grand Grimoire,’’ which must be given
on the authority of Lévi; for no available editions of the
work which is in question, nor yet of the ‘‘Red Dragon,”’
nor indeed any ritual of our acquaintance, contains it.

‘‘There are also necromantic processes, comprising the
tearing up of earth from graves with the nails, dragging out
some of the bones, setting them crosswise on the breast, then
assisting at midnight mass on Christmas Eve, and flying out
of the church at the moment of consecration, crying ‘Let the
dead rise from their tombs!’—then returning to the grave-
yard, taking a handful of earth nearest to the coffin, run-
ning back to the door of the church, which has been alarmed
by the clamour, depositing the two bones crosswise, again
shouting, ‘Let the dead rise from their tombs!’—then, if we
escape being seized and shut up in a madhouse, retiring at
a slow pace, and counting four thousand five hundred steps
in a straight line, which means following a broad road or


292


a eee ee ee


Concerning Infernal Necromancy


scaling walls; finally, having traversed this space, lying flat
upon the earth as if in a coffin, repeating in doleful tones,
‘Let the dead rise from their tombs!’—and calling thrice on
the person whose apparition is desired.”’

The object of Necromantic evocations was much the
same as the other operations of the Grimoires. If the sor-
cerer of old like the modern magician, had ever dispossessed
the shade of Appolonius of its eternal rest, it would have
been upon a question of finance. The remaining process in
Necromancy will be an appropriate conclusion to our whole
inquiry, as it is designed to raise up and expel a human
spirit who is supposed to stand guard over a hidden treas-
ure. It is from the Verus Jesuttarum Ltbellus, and is the
ne plus ultra of Ceremonial Magic. The end of all things is
money, says the sorcerer, and if asked to define Occult
Science, he would answer that it was the method of obtain-
ing concealed money. The testimony of the entire literature
coincides with this definition.


A CONJURATION FOR THE Sprrit GUARDIANS
oF HIppEN TREASURE.


I cite, require, and command thee, Human Spirit, who
frequentest this place, and in thy life has interred thy treas-
ure herein, who also of recent time, to wit, in the day or
night of. . . ., about the hour of. . . ., hast shewn thy-
self in the form of a fire at this spot: I conjure thee by God
the Father++, by God the Son>, by God the Holy Spirit,
by the most glorious and Holy Mother of God, by
the most holy wounds of our Saviour, by all miracles per-
formed through His Divine sorrows, passion, and tears, by
His material death, by His descent into Hell, by His tri-
umphant Resurrection, by His most glorious ascension into
Heaven, by His sitting on the right hand of God the Father,

293


The Book of Black Magic


giving rule to His angels from thence over the whole
earth>. I conjure thee by the terrible Day of Judgment,
by the power and virtue of St. John the Baptist>, by all
the martyrs, apostles, and prophets. Come to me. I ad-—
jure and beseech thee by the terrible, ineffable, and Divine
Names inscribed on this sheet, and in reverence and con-
fession of their power, to come before me, and to make thy
sign visible, without lightning, without thunder, without
noise of dread tempests, without causing fear or trembling,
harm to body or soul, or annoyance of any kind. But do
thou perform my will in all things, even as I shall command
thee, by the virtue of the one stupendous and holy Name,
which even the adverse and inferior powers of the Abyss do
venerate and adore, ever confessing the Almighty, whose
creatures we all are. Be this done by the virtue of God the
Father>, by His blessed Son, and by the union of the
Holy Spirit->k, even by the Trinity in unity, which liveth
and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen. Incessantly do
I call, adjure, conjure, ordain, and require thee, Human
Spirit, by the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity, by the
immortality which cometh after death, by the power and
victory of Hell, by the bearer of the Seven Swords, by the
Most Holy and Secret Seal, by the sacred love of Jesus, by
all the Ministers and Archangels of God, Ophanim >f,
Aralim >, Hasmalim >«, Cherubim >«, Seraphim >}, and
Malachim >, and by the terrible torments of the demons.
I conjure thee also by the good angels Maluzim >, Pen-
palabim >, and Calizantin >, by all the powers of Heaven
>, by the earth >k, and by the torments of Hell; I adjure
thee by all mysteries, by the Crucifixion, by the dolorous
scourging, by the crowning with thorns, by the bitterness of
the Divine death, by the Most Holy and Ineffable Name of
Jesus >}, which is sacred unto all Christians, but terror —
294


Concerning Infernal Necromancy


- and anguish to the evil, for they have refused the salvation
which has been offered them by the great living God. I
conjure thee to come before me immediately, in thy proper
human form, even as when thy treasure was buried. Come
before this circle, answer me faithfully, without falsehood,
and without enigmas. This I command thee, in the Name
and by the power of the Triune God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. Amen.


A CONJURATION CoMPELLING OBEDIENCE.


I adjure and command thee, Human Spirit, to appear
before me under the similitude of fire. By the ineffable
Name of Jehovah, by the ineffable and incomprehensible
Fiat, by the power which created all things and sustains all
things, I conjure and adjure thee to come visibly before
this circle. By the goodness of God when He created man
in His own likeness, by the power of His justice, which ex-
pelled the demons, enchaining them in the Infernal Abyss,
by His infinite mercy when He sent His Son to redeem us,
by all Divine Names and Attributes, by the omnipotence of
our Saviour Jesus Christ, destroying the works of hell,
blessing the seed of the woman and empowering it to crush
the serpent’s head—do thou answer me and obey faithfully.
By the ineffable Name Tetragrammaton, inscribed on this
rod, answer me without deception or equivocation. By the
power of our Saviour, who shall judge both thee and me,
the quick and the dead, I conjure thee. Come.


Ir THE SPIRIT BE OBSTINATE.


I conjure thee, Human Spirit, by the ineffable name of
God, written on this sheet, but not to be pronounced, by my
blood, most excellently redeemed by the Lord of the

295


The Book of Black Magic


Prophets, Jesus Christ, by His most Glorious Mother, by
the insignia of His humility, by the great book of the judg-
ments of God, by the angels, archangels, and all the host of
heaven. Be thou obedient unto me, a Christian baptized
in the holy waters of Jordan. Answer me exactly, without
enigma or pretence. Make known the power which aids


thee. I command thee by the most holy Name of God, who


hath condemned thee to frequent this place wherein thou
hast buried thy treasure. Amen. Amen. Amen.
Citation.
CoLPprRiziaNa, Orrina, ALTA, NESTERA, F'varo, MENUET.
Charge. .
ALIM. JEHOH, JEHOVAH, AGLA, ON, TETRAGRAMMATON.
When the Spirit makes visible appearance, say :—

ADON, SCHADAI, ELIGON, AMANAI, ELION, PNEUMATON,

Evi, ALNOAL, MeEssias, JA, HEYNAN, TETRAGRAMMATON.
Add the following Conjuration :—
ADONAI, ZEBOTH, ADON, SCHADAI, ELION, TETRAGRAM-
MATON, ELoOI, ELOHIM, Ja, Haaios, Ho, THros. Amen.
Say inwardly :—
ALLEY, FORTISSIAN, F'oRTISSIO, ALLINSON, ROA.
The Discharge.

Omaroma, Epyn, Seyox, Satany, Decony, Eparyaon,
GALLIGANON, ZOGOGEN, F'ERSTIGON.

The most barbarous and unintelligible words are said by
Picus de Mirandola to be the most powerful in Black Magic.
As those here cited from the Versus Jesuitarum Inbellus
seem in most cases fortuitous assemblages of letters, they
are doubtless all that can be desired, but additional eon-
straints and conjurations should the spirit of the deceased
miser refuse to appear will readily occur to the reader.


Were Ends the Complete Grimoire of Black Magic
296


7


. , ‘ -
° -* . a . 4
ee re eer Pet ae :
ee oe =
7. a ad. " ~ “ . Free
et os eee — ae
: . >, ‘ve wo r
be*ree c ar
I > .


ase ~ e .
> * *
x "ee A D ae ~ |
.*e"* ey er _-* x Pe hs
’ } Si of: m wet *s -
——————— ee aos
8 rT Fe7) | ae Hy ee ek a
er . ps
epee ve 7) aS ee Lae ees
7 aT . * , ae .
- ha bad ro bel ‘ a
‘ (Tie, d ’


“*,¢ iY
ih jas'e*
a i,’
‘ s* vk
; ae UP
e | —s_ ff
“ —
o | i a
toa Be
. ss e
4 bos
} ‘
mo US
- oe .
> ae ee ;
ae OF
on
- ‘ 4
S .* "
% ha
» bel


a os

. 5

ee Pe .
*.*


“650 ca, "Bound in Teaec ‘Size | 8 By 1 10 a, , Tn. Thick.


The Great Book Of Magical
Art, Hindu Magic And East Indian
Occultism Is Now Combined With The Book
Of Secret Hindu, Ceremonial And Talismanic Magic


NOTICE. This large Volume is now furnished bound in Seal Grain Leather and it is also furnished bound in
ee Woke ae ea The Side And Back Titles of both bindings, are stamped in gold with gold edges. For
Number and Price in either binding, see another page.


?


or


SBS Mie i. es
Pe a tern a
tse
.


ae ie


———


-


~~"
“oe. Ot ae
1


Great Book Of Magical
Art, Hindu Magic And East Indian
Occultism Is Now Combined With The Book
Of Secret Hindu, Ceremonial And Talismanic Magic


A Book Of Proved Utility That Lives.
Published And Sold For Over Twenty Five Years


NEW TWELFTH REVISED EDITION


Bound In Genuine Leather, Gold Stamped, Gold Edges
650 Pages, 30 Full-Page Illustrations, Size 8 By 10 Inches, 2 Inches Thick


AUTHORITATIVE INFORMATION

The Twelfth Revised Edition of ‘‘THE GREAT BOOK OF MAGICAL
ART, HINDU MAGIC AND EAST INDIAN OCCULTISM,” with TWO
HUNDRED PAGES ADDED, constitutes the largest aggregate of Au-
thoritative Information on the subjects of Spiritualism, Occultism and
East Indian Magic ever collected in One Volume. Its convenient arrange-
ment enables the student to select from the hundreds of pages of in-
struction the ONE FACT that he desires at any given time. If you own
this work you need not waste time over generalities. The page that
gives you what you want is THE ONLY PAGE YOU NEED TO LOOK
AT. You get at once what you want just as directly as if the author
were at hand to furnish in person that practical guidance demanded.


NOTICE. This large Volume fs now farnished bound in Seal Grain Leather, and it is also furnished bound
in Morocco Grain Leather. The Side and Back Titles of both bindings are stamped in gold, with gold edges. FOR
ORDER NUMBER AND PRICE IN EITHER BINDING, SEE ANOTHER PAGE.


a Ws
= . 228s
5 —
Published And Sold 2 Se
For A Quarter Of A Century ae
= Lo
ERO SS
Ae
E WS!
{cao uracennar gv rusamTUNTECANY CCN LVR FON ANG kT LO STON TA LCN DUO MRI


Is Accepted As A Standard And Official Work
By Spiritualists And Occult Students All Over The World


THOUSANDS SOLD. A DESERVED SUCCESS.

“THE GREAT BOOK OF MAGICAL ART, HINDU MAGIC AND EAST INDIAN OC-
CULTISM,” which is now Combined with “THE BOOK OF SECRET HINDU, CEREMO-
NIAL, AND TALISMANIC MAGIC.” Contains 650 Pages. 30 of these are Fine Full-Page
Illustrations. Size 8 By 10 Inches. 2 Inches Thick. This Massive Volume weighs almost
Six Pounds when packed ready for shipment. It is furnished Bound In French Seal Grain
Leather and also Bound In Morocco Grain Leather. Side and Back Titles are Stamped in
Gold, Gold Edges. For price of either of these bindings, see opposite page.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR SELF DEVELOPMENT


Specific Instruction by de Laurence. This is positively the best
and largest Volume of its kind ever published. It contains a Com-
plete System of Occult Philosophy; Ceremonial Magic; Natural
Magic; Magic, White and Black; Magic and Sorcery; Alchemical
Magic; Talismanic Magic; Magical Attractions; Magic Seals; Amu-
lets, Charms, Talismans, and many Secret and Exclusive Instruc-
tions which are not divulged here or in any printed matter. It also
gives the only Specific and Authentic Instructions for Self-develop-
ment ever written by L. W. de Laurence; the same being Lessons
in Adeptship; Clairvoyancy; Mediumship; Propelling the Astral
Body; Hindu Magic, and Oriental Occultism. Gives Specific and
Secret Instructions for the Exclusive Use and Information of de
Laurence’s Chelas (Disciples) in Hindu Magic; East Indian Occult-
ism ; Celestial and Natural Magic; Magic Pentacles, and the manner
of Constructing them; Alchemical Magic; The Key for the Com-
position of Amulets, Charms, and Seals requisite for the Perfection
of all Talismanic, Ceremonial, and Celestial Magic; Invocation and
Binding of Spirits; Exorcisms; Enchantments; Benedictions; Con-
jurations; Clairvoyancy, and Hindu Mediumship.


INVOCATION AND CONJURATION’OF SPIRITS


THE GREAT OCCULT MYSTERY OF BEING. Teaches the whole and entire Science and Art of
Necromancy; the Magical Virtue of Seals, Charms, Amulets, Numbers, Divine Names, Mystic Characters,
Symbols, Engravings, Magical Ceremonies, Idols, Seals of Spirits, Invocations, Prayers, and Human Im-
precations; all Talismanic Operations; the many Different forms of the Exorcisms, Benedictions, and
Conjurations; as well as the Consecrations and Benedictions of Water (Holy Water), Fire, Oil, Candles,
Wax, Burial Ground, Localities, Haunted Houses; and all the Drugs, Herbs, Seals, Instruments, Fumiga-
tions, and Materials used by the Hindu Adepts, Master Lamas, Philosophers, Necromancers, and Con-
jurera: the Character and Seals of Spirits; Magic Seals for the Conclusion of Talismanic Magic; the

ecessary Observations of the Celestials Requisite for the Perfection of all Talismanic Operations;
Remedies Against Witchcraft, Evil Spirits, Sorcery and Spells.


— ————
Sa


<* a SS ae = a at


7 i y rae == e\ep= : hy Dy |
i | | Et Ze PES as = :
" a tes e& a " ( a
ap


x ) Na


AN SS x


ae Te -— =a
he rm ee
ane = y
= ILA, uy We
i i ~ ; “4, AA
ae oN a \ Wy! ul Re
5 Ae KN
ee “Sy iF
Oe ee he fs - \—
vil Ny ; r
y


cb)
ms
Liffey Y
ee 7
i
rani
Ras BI
SS
SSE l


“aS |

a *t... Dee he a.

= — eS S ai .
ee


The — Book Of M Magical Art,
Hindu Magic And East Indian Occultism


IS NOW COMBINED WITH


The Book Of Secret Hindu,
Ceremonial And Talismanic Magic


A BOOK OF PROVED UTILITY THAT LIVES
Published And Sold For A Quarter Of A Century.


REDUCED PRICE. GREAT ADVANCE SALE.


New Twelfth Revised Edition Now Ready
Richly Bound In Two Genuine
Leather Gold Stamped Bindings. Gold Edges
Back And Side Titles Gold Stamped
Order Numbers And Price In Both Bindings Given par
This Massive Volume Is Always Sent Prepaid By Registered Mail Or Ex
ORDER No. 4301. THE GREAT BOOK OF MAGICAL ART, HINDU
MAGIC AND EAST INDIAN OCCULTISM. Bound In Seal Grain
Leather, Gold Edges, Side And Back Titles Stamped In Gold. Price
$10.50 Prepaid. Foreign Price £2 15s. Prepaid.


ORDER No. 4302. THE GREAT BOOK OF MAGICAL ART, HINDU
MAGIC AND EAST INDIAN OCCULTISM. Bound In Morocco
Grain Leather, Gold Edges, Side And Back Titles Stamped In Gold.


Price $12.50 Prepaid. Foreign Price £3 5s. Prepaid.


Above fs given the ee yor NUMBERS and PRICES of this book in TWO BINDINGS. you send an order
for this Massive Volume, YOU POSITIVELY MUST WRITE YOUR NAME AND FULL ADDRESS JUST AS
PLAINLY AS oe CAN. Should a want any of the TALISMANS or other FREE ARTICLES sent you with
your order, you are to read carefully those pages in this circular on which the free articles are described AND MAKE
YOUR SELECTIONS JUST EXACTLY IRECTED.


YOU WILL NEVER GET ANOTHER BOOK LIKE IT
SEND A DOWN PAYMENT. NOTICE. If you cannot send the fall amo SE TS AE ELEN One


as a down payment, T BOOK OF MAGICAL ART, HIND Cc EAST
M,” Combined with “THE BOOK CRET ’ TALISMANIC MAGIC,”
Ceeee ne aaioncd iecanly torus nidies aus, BE GUME, ora Ole AME AND PRG Aone


book will be shipped ee BE SURE AND YOUR NAME AND
DRESS JUST AS PLAINL YOU CAN.


C2 mn SELLERS OF OCCULT Be eo aS
deLAURENCE COMPANY, (hicago.liLusa


OW ee AND SPIRITUAL BOOKS.’ a WEF
beans 5 =e va - DES eEG =


THE PEERLESS PARACELSUS


THE HERMETIC AND ALCHEMICAL WRITINGS OF
PARACELSUS, “THE GREAT”


Now Published in Two Massive Volumes


Translated into English from the London Edition of 1894, which was
Edited with a Biographical Preface, Elucidatory Notes, and a
Copious Hermetic Vocabulary and Accurate Index


BY ARTHUR EDWARD WAITE


Volume I—Treats on Occultism and Hermetic Chemistry, Alchemy, Hermetic Science.
Volume II—Treats on Hermetic Medicine and Hermetic Philosophy.


PARACELSUS is the author of the most famous set of books that ever came into the
hand of man. This great Alchemist produced, during his life, the two massive Volumes,
known as “THE HERMETIC AND ALCHEMICAL WRITINGS” of PARACELSUS,
THE GREAT, the very same having been reproduced, from the Lonpon Epition of 1894,
under the editorship of Dr. L. W. pe Laurence. The reader will please understand that this
is positively the last chance there ever will be to obtain a set of these famous books in this
country. We have in stock exactly 93 sets of PARACELSUS’ works, and after they are
sold these books cannot be obtained in this country for less than $35.00 a set, as it will be
necessary to import them.


PARACELSUS is known, by all advanced Occult students, to be the father of AL-
CHEMISTS. No better investment can be made by students than to send $15.00 for these
two volumes. As time goes by these books become more rare and valuable, and no doubt
within a short time will sell for $40.00 and $50.00 a set. Those wishing this work had better
send their order at once, or else send $1.00 or $2.00 as a down payment, and we will put
aside a set until the balance can be sent in full, when the books will go forward.

Let the reader look over the circular, sent herewith, and note the wonderful page index
contained therein, showing just exactly what these two great books contain. As we positively
hold the copyright of these books in the United States, it will be impossible to obtain them
under $35.00 a set after the 93 sets in our stockroom are sold, and in view of this fact, we
earnestly advise you to send your order without delay, or at least forward us a deposit and
a set will be held for you. This is positively the most valuable set of books for the student
today in print, and no investigator, medium, spiritualist, or occult student should be without
them, as every student recognizes that PARACELSUS made discoveries during his lifetime
which are now being used by all of the great institutions of learning in this country. All
Medical Science and Modern Chemistry are the result of PARACELSUS’ discoveries during
his life. We have sold, during the last four years, several thousand sets of these books, and
consider it our duty to notify our friends that there are only 93 sets left, and after these
are sold it will be impossible to obtain them under $35.00. We also deem it advisable to
tell you that there are only a limited number of the following books in stock, and after they
are sold it will be difficult to obtain copies, as these books are all becoming very rare and
valuable. The books referred to are as follows:


Orver No. 3, THe Book Or Brack Macic Anp Or Pacts.—Orper No. 4, TRANSCEN-
DENTAL Macic, Its Doctrine RituaL.—Orper No. 5, THE Mysteries Or Macic.—Orper
No. 6, Macic, Wu11E ANp Bracx.—Orper No. 8, Inp1a’s Hoop Unveirep. These books
comprise the greatest line of official works on the subject of Occultism and Magic in exist-
ence, and the student who has them is surely to advance rapidly.


ORDER No. 1—The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of
Paracelsus, ““The Great.” Two Massive Volumes. PRICE, $15.00;
FOREIGN, &3 6s.


Digitized by Google


Digitized by Google


Oran


3 6105 O24 32? e0e


STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
- CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004
(415) 723-1493


All books may be recalled after 7 days
DATE DUE


GUN 3 pQay
Ne
~
Ns


Beas

C

JAN ae
‘JAN Te
Se


,
——e
%
“
yi =
D
a e .
rs ri
= *
«
*
= z ad
J 7
f
o
f
a
o
a
a 5 ,
Sd § y
F
’
a
S
* od o
7 a
f
' .’ # *
‘ Ps
Pt f
ry
r
oI ‘ Lj
\
q
*\*
’ ' q P
® »
- « C7 ®
A 7
.
5
2
D 2
‘
°
A
. -
:
f
¢
a
o
. ,
Lh
c
-
. 2
)
‘ ‘i
i,
8
| *
‘ ; |
@
t+
rn a |


i]


ee


a ; 4
= 1 eet rN, ete geha ten as


vs - — fe pee cy saa a - - 2
~- eee i. = a =
(ea. See ed papier oe
e fret Ses Clipe aoe S-=
* o r 4 4 : F P ; , ; ; = arse asa 2
an hs 7 — ; . * 2 ue 2 eee j : - - zal! weet ty see
—
ay se en eee
_ Ca siaea aes
rales ple We echt ites fre
; S41s¢ —— ity t eh ree bas
: he F ea eas :
~ $1 ae eee ay ph ps > aren fret
‘ T lee2:)-4 |  — 7 ood Bie a3 pat
7 Sire ee Bin eater) fais jcc:
ernie i ae SS Ry seer ten: fees ti ate ng ; : ne
‘ Setter i 5 aet. . ap en e oF i Lit fee é Sopa : sae $2555
Pap ann lh i :
=e (4 ee el ore peti) Rey. aa ie ae , we aa ‘ ve aegis
/ ps be od ane 4) eit S082 be shi Fhd Beds old
Hy. ; 4] a ; ~ ae at i oli eee aR qn SUT ih fettee—ste eee ti tote
: Sel Pa i ee ah be 5  esearttt os fisgeaes Hid fiat
fi Se eM aE SCTE Rt a irae | ae oe ids
lll Tey ee ed hl L Tb parr a). 0ife : ; she aN tay betbiogt bse : shane
Steaite mpe  tetrde (alesse ai i ao pais ete E | 3
4% TG eat te Lil aaa tl see bth. tip hie 3 i Brak ete eset ; aan : 2 AEE guide. 3. os
: a i ih einem wash enmeliebsso coe ae sae ; Bi sted fia : Pi diu4 dipltied eeotaecauues tee i Md jest aa
to bE mer etie Uh W) bu vsheetore a teauia: nie a po toos Met Tan a
‘hk J ' Tia ih fF a Peet HEL dae G ekieit , emule eked reah (aaa ; ; | =
‘ if F oo: : | i Ree Prarie 23. 4 fr oes nie y : “or — : .
I ue / a) _ . er Nemung ee ea iran yd th uy ne eae ne ai,
e eT eh a (t APE Mle Blt ali’) Cente a ae
mr F 7 i vo ee oe i kee ee a ei Vie 7 ne i rats cs aah
apl es a iil up " 4 eal he ee Poe eT on alli Vb he Gelb ahi da
; ; , ry eer J eihpepoieg ery ae ee , "i seas: hy ae a i sk ft na
Eagan helm Ou in tary nea ha
* ; or
: hee, Gt Tac Litem Lev! © bee] Fl teens + ee
; : os Be ie I att vee
i4es. ae aT | tirine ne! ice
> edhe pelle Fee tH
\ t er a . A
oar Lamar ibiee beet titiet
' ° oP SS ru Ro ie) oe
E ad rn Dbl P e*; re eb
ca p art ee iL Wiiearss ' !
Te ad |e a ayer reat fT ITA sg Hib!
a ‘ ‘ * 4H IPC 16") r
MPAA eon | ead . Beh Watts
rt Mien cd ba LEIA : som L, fb 5s |
nit i Tildblow r Tain ae ebesur| pele
RR TU RS SUNN 3 9g i pres a
“a | +e he . fia ie hdl 4 A ued asta , oe + he
‘ ri bape: . y ; .
> ty aie? inl Tee) eet ae rear ’
r ary c i a ; uch oe ce / q ia i per r i 1 I sal , 4 —— ah
Billea Be at BGT Up G4} are eie ney eet Uh nl tai
i au Ciel ME I ea tt ye eb Aho : a — TG bss
iM Bis iatcs Cul Ne of Dei Un te sae pa itetiactg etl eee
pea heed 1h SPL AL ee ha aie rer
i F la Roe Pale to ost eke eS
rio or i ta ie eet am
; iF Tie ; Btiae iia hae ge! ie
i “i aA, 4 , babe a + 44 ica ‘ y a
i 4 A
re eel ee sek Fan | ray me) le
een Ais ran / ie i ' v UI P Watrer ts | nee fa
Y ++ ee | een sh) | hi) SA re [ err asia a
ie aie Joe See Clea oe u Ana Goer) aoa
aieeeo 4 ite. Fi they " ] eae | RT ce WN eth byte eae
; mere) UA i a) 1 uy a lie BD boekogt ba aE sinh = Hl fe ae it
es arti dined 1) RR CTY ee eb Ot ite e ile Ai i POW 7
, : - Fe Ah if + et a uy ; Tak ee i :
ie a 4 PY Tt ; i tf iia ‘
J ¥ . an Tt hd 7 wat -) y bd ol aed 4 oe — ‘ Wot
; I , , ty ab TAL ay of yi pen ait Bt alia
2 oh he Rags: eat eu Mud i i — i
A ; ‘ ’ ‘ ergy yee aa ’
- ak. y He ! v F O ‘ meth ts 3> Z hi ie ran all ne Y M nities fi Ai So
" hi wu oh ; ie a). ih} . eat ne st
be del hl 7 oo : ie f ite nt }
O ui MW ; ust mea i y oe
eee f 7 /
j 4 r WE MY J nl #8 facet ie ay a a . , a
Pe \rorv it reeerieect co 0 | pavers ea a ra lad lHinibla a
7 Tao att i" in i
1 Bre as 3 hy ee oer PNT bee ee a net
- ne | j
’ an H ' i) | iy ' Pe) ' i 7 in ea itl i a
; Dental aie ' lie tt ih i
, " 4 , AT . ms rT i y a be i ui ee
od y { rt f ; 4 eee ny b hranet r
: , fT 1 & ute ;
. eal ae) mrt be
P ~~) P iu i) '* ha) “i in| a a mye oe my Tt H
: c 5 ai iba || A Ae iy Pe
/ , i ae mn ; 7 ‘ ] °
ry é i : - Ps
ud iT sheet
5 ie?
% Ter va eave fj
| Ucn hi
A vs ee : Hie T Hi
red : : ; be naar ae
i JUS Lt
it 7 4-4 § oe ‘
. +? it A ‘fl
‘ b pe ae ren j
f ’ 1 htt a |
7 -= i ;* wih Lah
} - i | ri
