OF rilK

CONQUEST OF ■'MEXICO.

HISTORY

THE CONQUEST OF MEXICO,

WITH A PRELIMINARY VIEW OF

THE ANCIENT MEXICAN CIVILISATION,

^ND THE LIFE OF THE CONQUEROR,

HERNANDO CORTES.

Bt william n. PRESCOTT,;

AUTHOR OP

“tHB history op P££1>12!AND AND IBAB^ILLA.”

'* Victricei aquilM aliam laturus in orbeni *’

Lucan, Pharsalia, lib. v., t. 233.

FIFTH EDITION.

IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. I.

LONDON:

RICHARD BENTLEY, 
SttMutl^er in <9ttr(nar]; to let 
1860,

PREFACE.

As the Conquest of Mexico has occupied the pens of 
Solis and of Robertson, two of the ablest historians 
of their respective nations, it might seem that little 
could remain at ^the present day to be gleaned by 
the historical inquirer. But Robertson^s narrative 
is necessarily brief, forming only part of a more 
extended work ; and iseither the British nor the 
Castilian author, was provided with the important 
materials for relating this event, which have been 
since assembled by the industry of Spanish scholars. 
The scholar who led the way in these researches was 
Don Juan Baptista Munoz, the celebrated historio- 
. grapher of the Indies, who, by a royal edict, was 
’ allowed free access to the national archives, and to 
all libraries, ^public, private, and monastic in the 
kipgdqm and its jcolonies. The result of his long 
labours was a vast body of materials, of which unhap- 
pily he did not live to reap the benefit himself. His 
manuscripts wefe deposited, after his death, in the

VI

PREPACE.

archives of the Royal Academy of History at Madridf 
and that collection was subsequently augmented by 
the manuscripts of Don Vargas Pon^e, President of 
the Academy, obtained, like those of Munoz, from 
different quarters, but especially from^ the Archives 
of the Indies at Seville.On my application to the Academy, in, 1838, for 
permission to copy that part of this inestimable col- 
lection relating to Mexico and Peru, it was freely 
acceded to, and an eminent German scholar, one of 
their own number, was appointed to superintend the 
collation and transcription of the manuscripts ; and 
.this, it may be added, before I had any claim on the 
courtesy of that respectable body, as one of its asso- 
ciates. This conduct shows the advance of a liberal 
spirit in the Peninsula since the timedof Dr. Robertson, 
who complains that he was denied admission to the 
most important public repositories. The favour with 
which my own application Vas regarded, however, 
must chiefly be attributed to the kind offices of the 
venerable President of the Academy, Don Martin 
Fernandez de Navarrete; a scholar whose personal 
character has secured to him the same high consi- 
deration at home, which his literary labours have 
obtained abroad. To this eminent person I am under 
still further obligations, for the free use which he has ‘ 
allowed me to make of his own manuscripts, — the 
fruits of a life of accumulation, ami the basis of those 
valuable publications with which he has at different 
times illustrated Spanish colonial history.

From these three magnificent colleqjions, the result

PREFACE,

vii

half a century^s careful researches, I have obtained 
a mass of unpublished documents, relating to the 
Conquest and Settlement of Mexico and of Peru, com- 
prising altogether about eight thousand folio pages. 
They cdhsist ^of instructions of the Court, military 
and private journals, correspondence of the great 
actors in t];ie scenes, legal instruments, contemporary 
Chronicles, and the like, drawn from all the principal 
places in the extensive colonial empire of Spain, as 
well as from the public archives in the Peninsula.I have still further fortified the collection, by 
gleaning such materials from Mexico itself as had 
been overlooked by my illustrious predecessors in 
these researches.. For these I am indebted to the 
courtly of Count Cortina, and, yet more, to that of 
Don Lucas Alamjan, Minister of Foreign Affairs in 
Mexico ; but, above all, to my excellent friend Don 
Angel Calderon de la Barca, late Minister Plenipo- 
tentiary to that country from the Court of Madrid, 
— a gentleman whose high and estimable qualities, 
even more than his station, secured him the public 
confidence, and gained him free access to every place 
of interest and importance in Mexico.

I have also to acknowledge the very kind offices 
rendered to me by the Count Camaldoli at Naples f by 
the Duke of Serradifalco in Sicily, a nobleman whose 
science gives , additional lustre to his rank ; and by 
the Duke of Monteleone, the present jrepresentative 
of Cortes, who ikts courteously opened the archives 
of his faniily to my inspection. To these names 
must also be added that of Sir Thomas Phillips, Bart.,

PREFACE.

viii

whose precious collection of manuscripts probably 
Burpmse^ in extent that of any private gentle- 
man in Great Britain, if not in Europe ; that of 
Mons. Ternaux-Compans, the proprietor of the valu- 
able literary collection of Don Antonio ‘^Uguina, 
including the papers of Munoz, the fruits of which 
he is giving to the world in his excellept transla- 
tions ; and, lastly, that of my friend and countryman, 
Arthur Middleton, Esq., late Charge d^ Affaires from 
the United States at the Court of Madrid, for the 
efficient aid he has afforded me in prosecuting my 
inquiries in that capital.In addition to this stock of original documents 
obtained through these various sources, I have dili- 
gently provided myself with such printed works as 
have reference to the subject, including the magni- 
ficent publications which have appeared both in 
France and England on the Antiquities of Mexico, 
which, from their cost and cdossal dimensions, would 
seem better suited to a public than to a private 
library.

Having thus stated the nature of my materials, 
and the somces whence they are derived, it remains 
for me to add a few observations on the general plan 
and composition of the work, — Among the remark- 
able achievements of the Spaniards in the sixteenth 
century, there is no one more striking to the imagin- 
ation than the. conquest of Mexico. The subversion 
of a great empire by a handful of adventurers, taken 
with all its strange and picturesque accompaniments, 
has the air of romance rather than of sober history ;

PREFACE.

IZ

ahd it is not easy to treat such a theme according to 
the severe rules prescribed by historical criticism. 
But, nptwithstanding the seductions of the subject, 
I have conscientiously endeavoured to distinguish 
fact from*ficti(^n, and to establish the narrative on 
as broad a basis as possible of contemporary evi- 
dence; an4 I have taken occasion to corroborate 
tfie text by ample citations from authorities, usually 
in the original, since few of them can be very 
accessible to the reader. In these extracts I have 
scrupulously conformed to the ancient orthography, 
however obsolete and even barbarous, rather than 
impair in any degree the integrity of the original 
document.Although the subject of the work is, properly, only 
the Conquest of HiBxico, I have prepared the way for 
it by such a view of the civilisation of the ancient 
Mexicans, as might acquaint the reader with the 
character of this extraordinary race, and enable him 
to understand the difficulties which the Spaniards 
had to encounter in their subjugation. This intro- 
ductory part of the work, with the essay in the 
Ap’pendix, which properly belongs to the Introduc- 
tion, although both together making only half a 
volume, has cost me as much labour, and nearly as 
much time, as the remainder of the history. If I 
shall have succeeded in giving the reader a just idea 
of the true nature and extent of the civilisation to 
which the Mexicans had attained, it will not be 
labour lost.

The story of the Conquest terminates with the fall

X

PREFACE.The story of the Conquest terminates with the fall

X

PREFACE.

of the, capital. Yet I have preferred to continue the 
narrative to the death of Cortes, relying on the 
interest which the development of his character in 
his military career may have excited in the reader. 
I am not insensible to the hazard I incur 43y such a 
course. The mind previously occupied with one 
great idea, that of the subversion of the capital, may 
feel the prolongation of the story beyond that point 
superfluous, if not tedious ; and may find it difficult, 
after the excitement caused by witnessing a great 
national catastrophe, to take an interest in the 
adventures of a private individual. Solis took the 
more politic course, of concluding his narrative with 
the fall of Mexico, and thus leaves his readers with 
the full impression of that melnorable event undis- 
turbed on their minds. To prolong the narrative is 
to expose the historian to the error so much censured 
by the French critics in some of their most celebrated 
dramas, where the author by a premature denouement 
has impaired the interest of'his piece. It is the 
defect th^t necessarily attaches, though in a greater 
degree, to the history of Columbus, in which petty 
adventures among a group of islands make up the 
sequel of a life that opened with the magnificent 
discovery of a World ; a defect, in short, which it 
has required all the genius of Irving, and the magical 
charm of his style, perfectly to overcome.

Notwithstanding these objections, I have been 
induced to continue the narrative partly from defe- 
rence to the opinion of several Spanish scholars, who 
considered that the biography of Cortes had not been

PREFACE,

XIPREFACE,

XI

fully exhibited, and partly from the circumstance of 
my having such a body of original materials for this 
biography at my command. And I cannot regret 
that I have adopted this course; since, whatever 
lustre the Conquest may reflect on Cortes as a military 
achievement, it gives but an imperfect idea of his 
enlightened .spirit, and of his comprehensive and 
versatile genius.

To the eye of the critic there may seem some 
incongruity in a plan which combines objects so dis- 
similar as those embraced by the present history ; 
where the Introduction, occupied with the antiquities 
and origin of a nation, has somewhat the character 
of a philosophic theme, while the conclusion is strictly 
biographicalj and the two may be supposed to match 
iudiflerently with the main body, or historical portion 
of the work. But I may hope that such objections 
will be found to have less weight in practice than in 
theory; and, if properly tnanaged, that the general 
views of the Introduction will prepare the reader for 
the particulars of the Conquest,' and that the great 
public events narrated in this will, without violence, 
open the way to the remaining personal history of 
the hero who is the soul of it. Whatever incon- 
gruity may exist in other respects, I may hope that 
the unity of interest^ the only unity held of much 
importance by jnodern critics, will be found still to 
be preserved.

The distance of the present age from the period 
of the narrative might be presumed to secure the 
historian from updue prejudice or partiality. Yet to

PREFACE.

xiiThe distance of the present age from the period 
of the narrative might be presumed to secure the 
historian from updue prejudice or partiality. Yet to

PREFACE.

xii

the American and the English reader, acknowledging 
so different a moral standard from that of the six- 
teenth century, I may possibly be thought too 
indulgent to the errors of the Conquerors ; while to 
a Spaniard, accustomed to the undi|,uted 'panegyric 
of Solis, I may be deemed to have dealt too hardly 
with them. To such I can only say, that, while, on 
the one hand, I have not hesitated to expose in their 
strongest colours the excesses of the Conquerors ; 
on the other, I have given them the benefit of such 
mitigating reflections as might be suggested by the 
circumstances and the period in which they lived. 
I have endeavoured not only to present a picture 
true in itself, but to place it in its proper light, and 
to put the spectator in a proper point of view for 
seeing it to the best advat^tage. I* have endeavoured, 
at the expense of some repetition, to surround him 
with the spirit of times, and, in a word, to make 
him, if I may so Express itiysjelf, a contemporary of 
the sixteenth century* ‘Whether, and how fctr, I 
have succeeded in this, he must determine.

For one thing, before I conclude, I may reasonably 
ask the reader^s indulgence. Owing to the state of 
my eyes, I have been obliged to use a writing-case 
made for the blind, which does not permit the writer 
to see his own manuscript. Nor have I ever cor- 
rected, or even read, my own original, draft. As the 
ehirography, under these disadvantages, has been too 
often careless and obscure, occasional errors, even 
with the utmost care of my secretary, must have 
necessarily occurred in the transcription, somewhat

PaEFACE.

xiiiPaEFACE.

xiii

ii^creased by the barbarous phraseology imported 
from my Mexican authorities. ^ I cannot expect that 
these errors have always been detected even by the 
vigilant eye of the? perspicacious critic to whom the 
proof-shecjfcs have been subjected.

In the prefa<?e to The History of Ferdinand and 
Isabella/" I lamented, that, while occupied with that 
subject, two'of its most attractive parts had engaged 
the attention of the most popular of American 
authors, Washington Irving. By a singular chance, 
something like the reverse of this has taken place in 
the composition of the present history, and I have 
found myself unconsciously taking up ground which 
he was preparing to occupy. . It was not till I had 
become master of ‘my rich collection of materials, 
that I was acquainted with this circumstance; and 
had he persevered* in hj^ft^ign, I should unhesi- 
tatingly have abandoned^b^ pij^n^^pot from courtesy, 
at least from policy ; faj, armed with the

weapons of Achilles, this cdlildijgive me no hope of 
success in a competition with Achilles himself. But 
no sooner was that distinguished writer informed of 
the. preparations I had made, than, with the gen- 
tlemanly spirit which wiU surprise no one who has 
the pleasure of his acquaintance, he instantly 
announced to me his intention of leaving the subject 
open to me. While I do but justice to Mr. Irving 
by this statement, I feel the prejudice it does to 
myself in the unavailing regret I am exciting in the 
bosom of the reader.

I must not conclude this Preface, too long pro-

xvr

PREFACE.I must not conclude this Preface, too long pro-

xvr

PREFACE.

tracted as it is already, without a word of acknow- 
ledgment to my friend George Ticknor, Esq,, — the 
friend of many years, — for his patient revision of my 
manuscript; a labour of love, the worth of which 
those only can estimate who are acquainted with his 
extraordinary erudition and his critical taste. 
If I have reserved his name for the last in the list of 
those to whose good offices I am indebted, it is most 
assuredly not because I value his services least.

WILLIAM IL PLESCOTT.

Boston®, October 1, 1843.

MAPS TO THE CONQUEST OE MEXICO.

* • ^

• *

The maps for this work are the result of a laborious investigation 
by a skilful and competent hand. Humboldt’s are the only maps of 
New Spain which can lay claim to the credit even of tolerable accu- 
racy. They have been adopted as the basis of those for the present 
history ; and an occasional deviation from them has been founded on 
a careful comparison with the verbal accounts of Gomara, Bernal 
Diaz, Clavigero, and, above all, of Cortt^s, illustrated by his meagre 
commentator, Lorenzana* Of these, Cortes is generally the most full 
and exact' in his statement of distances, though it is to be regretted, 
that he does not more frequently affor^ a hint as to the bearings of 
the places, > As it is desfpable to present tK© reader with a complete 
and unembarrassed view of the of C^r&i|he names of all other

places than those which occu^io#'thi^i iji^Jiliave been discarded, 
while a considerable number h^e introduced which are

not to be found on any previcMs position of these must

necessarily be, in some degree, hyp^etical ; but, as it has been 
determined by a study of the narratives of contemporary historians, 
and by the measurement of distances, the result, probably, cannot in 
any instance be much out of the way. The ancient names have been 
• retained, so as to present a map of the country as it was at the time 
of the Conquest.ARMS OF CORTES.

The stamp on the back of the work represents the arms granted 
letters patent to Cortes by the Emperor Charles V., March 7, 151 
In the instrument, it is stated, that the double-headed eagle is gi\ 
as the arms of the empire ; the golden lion, in memory of the coura 
and constancy shown by Cortes in the conquest of Mexico; t 
three gold crowns indicate the three monaxihs whom he successive 
opposed in the capital of Mexico ; the city represents tliat capita 
and the seven heads held together by a chain, on the border 
the shield, denote so many Indii^ princes whom he subdued i 
the Valley.

CONTENTS.

BOOK 1.

INTRODUCTION VIEW OF THE AZTEC CIVILISATION.

CHAPTER 1. ^

ANCIENT MEXICO. — CLIMATE AND PRODUCTS. — PRIMITIVE RACES. — 
AZTEC EMPIRE.

rAGR

Extent of the Aztec Territory 2

The Hot Region ^ 3

Tolcanic Scenery . . * , , . . . . 5

Cordillera of the Andes 5

Table-land in the Days of the Aztecs 6

Valley of Afexico 7

The Toltecs 8

Their mysterious Disappearance 10

Races from the North-west 10

Their Hostilities • 11

Foundation of Mexico . . . . “ . • , .12

Domestic Feuds 13

League of the kindred Tribes 14

Rapi^ Rise of Mexico 15

Prosperity of the Empire 16

Criticism on Veytia’s History 17

CHAPTER 11. ^ •

SUCCESSION TO THE CROWN.— AZTEC NOBILITY. — JUDICIAL SYSTEM. — 
LAliS and’ REVENUES. — MILITARY INSTITUTIONS.

Election of the Sovereign , . 19

His Coronation 20

Aztec Nobles . ’ . , .21

Their barbaric Pomp 21

Tenure of Uieir Estates^ . 22

VOL. I. 6

XVJll

CONTENTS.

PAOB

Legislative Power . . .

Judicial System

Independent Judges ....

Their Mode of Procedure 
Showy Tribunal .....

Hieroglyphical Paintings 
Marriage Rites . . . . .

Slavery in Mexico .....

Royal Revenues

Burdensome Imposts ....

Public Couriers

Military Enthusiasm ....

A;^c Ambassadors ....

Orders of Knighthood ^ .

Gorgeous Armour ....

National Standards

Military CodeRoyal Revenues

Burdensome Imposts ....

Public Couriers

Military Enthusiasm ....

A;^c Ambassadors ....

Orders of Knighthood ^ .

Gorgeous Armour ....

National Standards

Military Code

Hospitals for the Wounded 
Influence of Conquest on a Nation 
Criticism on Torquemada’s History 
Abbe Clavigero ,

CHAPTER III.

MEXICAN MYTHOLOGT. — TH^ SACERDOTAL ORDER. — THE TEMPLES.-

HUMAN SACRIJFICKS.

Systems of Mythology 45

Mythology of the Aztecs 46

Ideas of a God 47

Sanguinary War-god . 46

God of tile Air 49

Mystic Legends . 50

Division of Time 51

Future State 52 •

Funeral Ceremonies 53

Baptismal Rites •. !». ..53

Monastic Orders 55

•

Fasts and Flagellation . . . . . ... 56

Aztec Confessional *. . . 56

Education of the Youth . . ...... 57

Revenue of the Priests . . . • • • • • .59

^4

26

27

28

29

30 
81

31

33

34 
36

36 
, 37

37

38 
S9

41

42

43

CONTENTS,

xix

PAOB

^exicau Temples 60

Keligious Festivals 61

Human Sacrifices 62

The Captive’s Doom ........ 62

Ceremonies of Sacrifice 65

Torturing of the Victim 64

Sacrifice of Ihfants 65

Cannibal Banquets 65

Number of Victims 66

Houses of Skulks 67

Cannibalism of the Aztecs 70

Criticism on Sahagun’s History 72

CHAPTER IV. ♦

MEXICAN HIEROaLYPHICS. — MANUSCRIPTS. — ARITHMETIC. —

CHRONOLOGY. — ASTRONOMY.

Dawning of Science 75

.jFicture- writing 76

Aztec Hieroglyphics . . . 78

Manuscripts of the Mexicans .79

Emblematic Symbols 79

Phonetic Signs . * 80

Materials of the Aztec Manuscripts. ,83

Form of their Volumes 83

Destruction of most of them jt . . . . . . 84

Remaining Manuscripts . * 85

Difficulty of deciphering them . . « . . . . 88

Minstrelsy of the Aztecs 90

Theatrical Entertainments 91

System of Notation 91

Their Chronology 9,2

The Aztec Era 96

Calendar of the Priests 98

Science of Astrology 101

Astrology of the Aztecs 102

Aztec Astrondtoy * 103

Wonderful Attainments m this Science 104

Remarkable Festival 105

Camiv-al of the Aztecs 107Science of Astrology 101

Astrology of the Aztecs 102

Aztec Astrondtoy * 103

Wonderful Attainments m this Science 104

Remarkable Festival 105

Camiv-al of the Aztecs 107

Lord Kingsborough’s Work 108

Criticism on Gama . • 109

52

CONTENTS.

.■«r

CHAPTER V.

AQRlCin.ttrKB. — MECHAKtCAL ABTS. — iIeBCHAKTS. —

tlOMBSTlC MANNERS.

imli«tii(9il Gimius j ^

Agrikmltore . • . . 112

Mexican Husbandry • . .113

Vegetable Products 116

Mineral Treasures § - • - .117

Skill of the Aztec Jewellers jls

Sculpture . ]20

Huge CaJendar-stone ^20

Aztec Dyes , ^21

Beautiful Feather- work 122

Fairs of Mexico 123

National Currency • . 123

Trades 124

Aztec Merchants . . . r . . . . 124

Militant Traders 125

Hjmestic Life . . . . 127

Kindness to Children 128

Polygamy 128

Condition of the Sox 12^

Social Entertaininent . . . * . . . . . 1§9

Use of Tobacco 130

Culinary Art 131

Agreeable Drinks . . . • 132

Dancing 132

Intoxication * 133

Criticism on Boturini’s Work 134

CHAPTER VI.

TEZCirCANS.— THEIR GOLDEN AGE. — ACCOMPLISHED PRINCES. — 
DECLINE OF THEIR MONARCHY.

The Acolhuans or Tezcucans 137

Prince Nezahualcoyotl . . . . . . . 138

His Persecution '. . .139

His hair-breadth Escapes . . . . * . . ..140

CONTENTS.

xxi

Vis wandering Life

M08

141

Fidelity of his Subjects . . . , ,

141

Triumphs over his Enemies ....

142

Remark|ble League

143

General Amnesty

143

The Tezcucqji Code ......

143

Department is of Government ....

144

Council of Music

145

Its Censorial OfSce

145

Mterary Taste .......

ur

Tezcucan Bards

147

Resources of Neziihualcoyotl ....

149

His magnificent Palace

150

His Gardens and Villas

151

Address of the Priest

^153

His Baths

*155

Luxurious Residence

156

Existing Remains of it , .

157

Royal Amours*

158

Marriage of the King

159

Forest Laws. . . • .

160

Strolling Adventures

161

Munificence of^tlie Monarch ....

162

His Religion . . • ^ •

163

Temple to the Unknown God* ...

164158

Marriage of the King

159

Forest Laws. . . • .

160

Strolling Adventures

161

Munificence of^tlie Monarch ....

162

His Religion . . • ^ •

163

Temple to the Unknown God* ...

164

Philosophic Retirement .....

165

His plaintive Verses

166

Last hours of Nezahualcoyotl ....

168

His ‘Character ......

169

Succeeded by Nezahualpilli ....

170

The Lady of Tula

170

Executes his Son

171

Effeminacy of the King

« • «

172

His consequent Misfortunes ....

• • *

172

Death of Nezahualpilli

.

178

Tezcucan Civilisation , ^ .

173

Criticism on Ixtlilxochiti’s Writings

•

175

xxii

CONTENTS.

BOOK II.

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

CHAPTER I.

f

SPAIN UNDER CHARLES V, PROGRESS OF DISCOVERY. — COI.ONIAL

POLICY. — CONQUEST OF CUBA. — EXPEDITIONS TO YUCATAN.

PA|JK

CoDdition of Spain DU

Increase of Empire 182

Cardinal Ximenes 182

Arrival of Charles the Fifth 182

Swarm of Flemings 183

Oppbsition of the Cortes 184

Colonial Administration 184

Spirit of Chivalry 185

Progress of Discovery . . . . * . . • . .186

Advancement of Colonisation 186

System oi Itepartwiimtos . . . * . . . .187

Colonial I^olicy 187

Discovery of Cuba 188

Its C/onquest by Velasquez 189

Cordova’s Expedition to Yucatan . 190

His Reception by the Natives 191

Grijalva’s Expedition 192

Civilisation in Yucalim 192

Traffic with the Indians 193

His Reton to Cuba 194

His cool Reception 394

Ambitious Schemes of the Governor 195

Preparations for an Expedition 195

CHAPTER II.

HERNANDO CORXfes. — HIS EARLY LIFE. — vfsiTS THE NEW WORLD.

HIS RESIDENCE IN CURA. — DIFFICULTIES WITH . VELASQUEZ. — 
ARMADA INTRUSTED TO CORlfes.

Hernando Cortes '. . .197

His Education * . . . . 198

CONTENTS. xxiii

» PAOJS

choice of a Profession * . . L98

Departure for America 199

Arrival at Hispaniola 200

His moele of Life 20i

Enlists under Velasquez 202

Habits of Gallantry 202

Disaffected toward^ Velasquez 203

Cortes ill Confinement 204

Flies into a Sanctuary 205

^gain put in Irons 205His moele of Life 20i

Enlists under Velasquez 202

Habits of Gallantry 202

Disaffected toward^ Velasquez 203

Cortes ill Confinement 204

Flies into a Sanctuary 205

^gain put in Irons 205

His perilous Escape 205

His Mamage 206

Reconciled with the Governor 206

Retires to his Plantation 207

Armada intrusted to Cortes 209

Preparations for the Voyage 210

Instmctions to Cortes 212

CHAPTER III.

JEALOUSY OF VELASQUEZ. —COI^ES EMBARKS. — EQUIPMENT OF HIS 
FLIfi^T. — HIS PERSON ANJ> CH^ACTER. RENDEZVOUS AT HAVANA.

, — STRENGTH OF HIS ARMAMENT.

JonJousy of Velasquez . . 214

Intrigues against Cortes 215

Hi* clandestine Embarkation . 216

Arrives at Macaca 217

Accession of Volunteers 218

Stores and Ammunition 218

Orders from Velasquez to arrest Cortes 219

He raises the Standard at Havana , • . . . . . 219

Person of Cortes * * . , . 220

His Character . 221

Strength of the Armament 223

Stirring Address to his Troops 224

Fleet weighs Anchor 225

Remarks on Estrella^s Manuscript 225

XXIV

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER IV.

VOYAGE TO COZUMEL. — CONVERSION OF THE NATIVES. — JERONIMO DE 
AGUILAR. — ARMY ARRIVES AT TABASCO. — GREAT BATTLE WITH 
THE INDIANS. — CHRISTIANITY INTRODUCED. ,

PAGK

Disastrous Voyage to Cozumel 
Humane Policy of Cortes . 
Cross found in the Island

226

227

228

Religious Zeal of the Spaniards 
Attempts at Conversion . 
Overthrow of the Idols 
Jerdnimo de Aguilar 
His Adventures .

Employed as an Interpreter .

22 !)

230

232

233

234

Fleet arrives at Tabasco

234

Hostile Reception 235

Fierce Defiance of the Natives 23C

Desperate Conflict . . 237

Effect of the Fire-arms . . . . * . . . . 237

Cortds takes Tabasco 238

Ambush of the Indiana . . . • » . • • • 239

The Country in Arms 239

* Preparations for Battle 240

March on the Enemy 241

Joins Battle with the Indians . * . ^ 242,

Doubtful Struggle 24^

Terror at the War-horse 243

Victory of the Spaniards 243

Number of Slain . 244

Treaty with the Natives 245Joins Battle with the Indians . * . ^ 242,

Doubtful Struggle 24^

Terror at the War-horse 243

Victory of the Spaniards 243

Number of Slain . 244

Treaty with the Natives 245

Conversion of the Heathen 246

Catholic Communion 246

Spaniards embark for Mexico 247

• CHAPTER V.

VOYAGE ALONG THE COAST.— nONA MARINA. — SPANIARDS LAND IN 
MEXICO. — INTERVIEW WITH TAe AZTECS.

Voyage along the Coast • . . 248

Natives come on Board ' . . . 249

Dona Marina » . . . 250

CONTENTS.

XXV

^ker History .

PAGE

. . 250

Her Beauty and Character . . . . ,

. 251

First Tidings o^ Montezuma ....

. . 252

Spaniarc^ land in Mexico ....

. 253

First Interview with the Aztecs ....

. . 255

Their magiii^cent Presents ....

. 256

Cupidity of the Spatiards

. . 256

Cortes displays his Cavalry ....

. 257

Aztec Painting^

. . 257

%

CHAPTER VI.

ACCOUNT OF MONTEZUMA. — STATE OP HIS EMPIRE. — STRANGE PROG- 
NOSTICS. — EMBASSY AND PRESENTS. — SPANISH ENCAMPMENT.

Montezuma then upon the Throne 259

Inaugural Address 260

The Wars of Montezuma 261

His civil Policy 261

Oppression of his Subjects 262

Foes of his Empire 263

Superstition of Montezuma 264

Mysterious Prophecy * 264

Portentous Ohwns 265

Dismay of the ^Imperor 267

Embassy and Presents to the Spaiii^ds 268

Life in the Spanish Camp . * . ^ 269

Rich Present from Montezuma 270

Large gold and silver Wheels 271

Message from Montezuma 272

Effects of the Treasure on the Spaniards 273

Return of the Aztec Envoys 274

Prohibition of Montezuma 275

Preaching of Father Olmedo 275

Desertion of the Natives 276

CHAPTER VII.

TROUBLES IN THE CAMP. — PLAN OF A COLONY. — MANAGEMENT OF CORTES. 
— MARCH TO CEMPOALLA.— PROCEEDINGS WITH THE NATIVES. — 
FOUNDATION OF VERA CRUZ.

Discontent of the Soldiery

Envoys from the Totonacs 278

CONfEjrtS.

''aacvi

Bissensioiis in the Aztec Empire ....

Proceedings in the Camp

Cortes prepares to return to Cuba . . . ^

Army remonstrate

Cortes yields

Foundation of Villa Rica •CONfEjrtS.

''aacvi

Bissensioiis in the Aztec Empire ....

Proceedings in the Camp

Cortes prepares to return to Cuba . . . ^

Army remonstrate

Cortes yields

Foundation of Villa Rica •

Resignation and Re-appointment of Cortt% . • .

Divisions in the Camp

Genera’ Reconciliation ,

March to Cempoalla

Picturesque Scenery 2fi(>

Remains of Victims 2!{7

Terj’estrial Paradise 287

Love of Flowers by the Natives 288

, Their splendid Edifices 28.9

Hospitable Entertainment at Cempoalla 290

Conference with the Cacique 291

Proposals of Alliance 292

Advance of the Spaniards 293

Arrival of Aztec Nobles 294

Artful Policy of Cortes . . . , * . . , . 295

Allegiance of the Natives 206

City of Villa Rica built 297

Infatuation of the Indians . . • 298

CHAPTER VIII.

ANOTHKIl AZTEC EMBASSY. — DESTRUCTION OF Tllffi IDOtS.^DBSPATCIIES 
SENT TO SPAIN. — CONSPIRACY IN THE CAMP. — THE FLEET SUNfe.

Embassy from Montezuma 299

Its Results 300

Severe Discipline in the Army 301

Gratitude of the Cempoallan Cacique 301

Attempt at Conversion . . . 302

Sensation among the Natives 303

The Idols burned . . . , 304

Consecration of the Sanctuary . . . ... 3O5

News from Cuba . 300

]h:esents for Charles the Fifth 307

First Letter of Cortds . . . . ^ . 308

PAOp

m

279

280 
280 
281 
2S2 
283

283

284

OONTENTS<

XXYll

FAoa

J^spatches to Spam 309

Agents for the Mission 310

Departure of thi? Ship 311

It touchfiiB at Cuba 311

. Rage of Velasquez .311

Ship arrives 4n Spain 312

n Conspiracy in the Ctmp 313

Destruction of the Fleet 315

Oration of Cortes 316

Efhhusiasm of the Army 317

Notice of Las Casas . , . . . . . ,318

His Life and Character 319

Criticism on his Works 325

’ BOOK III.

llfAECH TO MEXICO.

CHAPTER I.

PROCEEDINGS AT CEMPOALLA. — f1^ SPANIARDS CLIMB THE TABLE- 
LAND. — PlCTURlDStiUE SCENERY. — TRANSACTIONS WITH THE NATIVES. 
— EMBASSY TO ffLASCALA.

Squadron otf the Coast 331

Stratagem of Cortes 332

Arrangement at Villa Rica 333Squadron otf the Coast 331

Stratagem of Cortes 332

Arrangement at Villa Rica 333

Spaniards begin their March 334

Climb the Cordilleras ........ 335

Immense Heaps of human Skulls 339

Transactions with the Natives 340

Accounts of Montezuma’s Power 341

Moderation of Father Olmedo 342

Indian Dwellings . , . . 344

Cortes determines his Route 345

Embassy to Tlascala 345

Remarkable Fortification 347

Arrival iu Tlascala • . . . 348

bcviii CONTEHTS.

CHAPTER II.

BEPUBUC OF TLASCALA. — ITS INSTITUTIONS. — EARLY HISTORY. — 
DISCUSSIONS IN THE SENATE. — DESPERATE BATTLES.

f PAGB

The Tlascalans ....

. 349

Their Migrations . . . .

.

.1

. 350

Their Government ....

c

. 350

Public Games

.

. 351

Order of Knighthood

.

. 352

Internal Resouiices . . . .

. SS2

Their Civilisation ....

. 353

Struggles with the Aztecs .

. 354

Means of Defence ....

.

. 355

Sufferings of the Tlascalans

. 35G

Their hai*dy Character

.

. 357

Debates in the Senate

,

.

. 357

Spaniards advance ....

.♦

. 358

Desperate Onslaught . . . .

. 359

Retreat of the Indians .

. 360

Bivouac of the Spaniards .

. 360

The Army resumes its March

. 361

Immense Host of Barbarians

. 363

Bloody Conflict in the Pass

. 364

Enemy give Ground . . . • .

. 365

Spaniards clear the Pass .

.

. 365

Cessation of Hostilities

.

. 366

Results of the Conflict

. 366

Troops encamp for the Night

.

.

. 366

CHAPTER HI.

DECISIVE VICTORY. — INDIAN COUNCIL. — NIGHT ATTACK. — NEGOTIATIONS

WITH THE ENEMY.— TLASCA LAN HERO.

Envoys to Tlascala 369

Foraging Party \ . . . 370

Bold Defiance by the Tlascalans 370

Preparations for Battle 372

Appearance of the Tlascalans , . . . ‘ . ,373

Showy Costume of the Wan-iors ....... 374

Their Weapons . . . 375

OOHTEKTS.

l^sperate Engagement 
The Combat thickens 
Pivisions among the Enemy 
Becisive Victory

Triumph *of Science over Numbers 
Bread of the Cavalry 
Indian CouiiCil . ^ .

Night Attack . . . .

Spaniards Victorious .Triumph *of Science over Numbers 
Bread of the Cavalry 
Indian CouiiCil . ^ .

Night Attack . . . .

Spaniards Victorious .

E^j^bassy to Tlascala 
Peace with the Enemy 
Patriotic Spirit of tlieir Chief .

XJ.1X

rAo«

376

377

378

379

380

380

381

382

383

383

384

385

CHAPTER IV.

DISCONTENTS IN THE ARMY. — TLASCALAN SPIES. — PEACE WITH THE 
REPUBLIC. — EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA.

Spaniards scour the Country 386

Success of the Foray *. 387

Biscontents in the Camp ........ 388

Representations of the Malcontents 388

Reply of Cortia 389

Biflficulties of the Enterprise .* 391

Mutilation of the Spies . ^ 392

Interview with the Tlascalan Chief**® 393

Peace with the Republic 395

Embassy from Montezuma 396

Declines to receive the Spaniards . . . . , . 397

They advance towards the City . . * . . . . 398

CHAPTER V.

SPANIARDS ENTER TLASCALA. — DESCRIPTION OF THE CAPITAL. — 
ATTEMPTED CONVERSION. — AZTEC EMBASSY. — INVITED TO CHOLULA.

Spaniards enter Tlascala 399

Rejoicings on their Arrival . . . . , . . 400

Description of Tlascala ! . * 401

Its Houses and* Streets 402

Its Fairs and Police 402

Divisions of the City ^ 402

CONTENTS.

:txi

Wild Scenery round Tlascala . 
Character of the Tlascalans 
Tigilance of J^orttJs 
Attempted Conversion 
Hesistance of the Natives 
Zeal of Cortes 
Prudence of the Friar 
Character of Olmedo .

Mass celebrated in Tlascala 
The Indian Maidens 
Aztec Embassy 
Power of Montezuma 
Embassy from Txtlilxochitl 
Deputies from Cholula 
Invitation to Cholula 
Prepare to leave Tlascala .

FAG^

4 ^

404

404

405

405

406

406

407

408 
408 
400

410

411

411

412

413

BOOK FIRST.

INTRODUCTION.

«

PRELIMINARY VIEW OF THE AZTEC CIVILISATION.

CONQUEST OF MEXICO.

BOOK I.

INTRODUCTION— VIEW OF THE AZTEC CIVILISATION.

CHAPTER I.

ANCIENT MEXICO. — CLIM/TE AND PRODUCTS. — PRIMITIVE RACES. — 
t AZTEC EMPIRE.CONQUEST OF MEXICO.

BOOK I.

INTRODUCTION— VIEW OF THE AZTEC CIVILISATION.

CHAPTER I.

ANCIENT MEXICO. — CLIM/TE AND PRODUCTS. — PRIMITIVE RACES. — 
t AZTEC EMPIRE.

Gf all that extensive empire which once acknowledged 
the authority of Spain in the* World, no portion, for 
interestf and importance, can be compared with Mexico 
and, this equally, whether we consider the variety of its soil 
and climate ; the inexhaustible stores of its mineral wealth ; 
its seenery, grand and picturesque beyond example ; the 
character of its ancient inhabitants, not only far surpassing 
in intelligence that of the other North American races, but 
reminding us, by their monuments, of the primitive civi- 
lisation of Egypt and Hindostan ; and lastly, the peculiar 
circumstances of its Conquest, adventurous and romantic as 
any legend devised by Norman or Italian bard of chivalry. 
It is the purpose of the present narrative to exhibit the 
history of this Conquest, and that of the remarkable man by 
whom it was achieve^.

VOL. I.

B

2

A2T^C CIVILISATION.

But, in order that the reader may have a better u!ider- 
standing of the subject, it will be well, before entering on 
it, to take a general survey of the political and social insti- 
tutions of the races who occupied the land at the tij^e of its 
discovery. ,

The country of the ancient Mexicans, Asftecs as they 
were called, formed but a very small part of the extensive 
territories comprehended in the modern republic of Mexico.* 
Its boundaries cannot be defined with certainty. They were 
much enlarged in the latter days of the empire, when they 
may ho considered as reaching from about, the eighteenth 
degree north, to the twenty-first on the Atlantic ; and from 
the fourteenth to the nineteenth, including a very narrow 
strip, on the Pacific. t In its greatest breadth, it could notExtensive indeed, if we may trust Arc^^bishop Lorenzana, who tells 
us, It is doubtful if the country of New Spain does not border on Tavtary 
and Greenland ; — by the way of California on the former, and by New 
Mexico on the latter!’* — EUstoria de Nuei^ Espaua, (Mexicoj 17.7$,) 
p. 38, nota. •

t I have conformed to the limits fixed by Clavigero. He has, probably, 
examined the subject with more thyoughness and fidelity than most of his 
countrymen, who differ from him, and who assign a more liberal extent to 
the monarchy, (See his Storia Antica del Messico, [Cesena, 1780,] 
7.) The Abbe, however, has not informed his readers on what frail 
foundations his conclusions rest. The extent of the Aztec empire is to be 
gathered from the writings of historians since the arrival of the Spaniards, 
and from the picture-rolls of tribute paid by the conquered cities; both 
sources extremely vague and defective. See the MSS. of the Mendoza 
collection, in Lord Kingsborough’s magnificent publication (Antiquities of 
Mexico, comprising Facsimiles of Ancient Paintings and Hieroglyphics, 
together with the Monuments of New Spain, London, 1830). The 
difficulty of the inquiry is much increased by the fact of the conquests 
having been made, as will he seen hereafter, by the united arms of three 
powers, so that it is not always easy to tell |o which party they eventually 
belonged. The affair is involved in so much uncertainty, that Clavigero, 
«otwitiistanding the positive assertions in his text, has not ventured, in his 
rnap, to define the precise limits of the empire, either towards the north, 
where it mingles with the Tezeucan empire, or, towards the south, where,

Aisinmt MEXICO.

dAisinmt MEXICO.

d

exceed fire degrees and a half, dwindling, as it approached 
its south-eastern limits, to less than two. It covered, pro- 
bably, loss than sixteen thousand square leagues.* Yet, such 
is the rl^markable formation of this country, that, though not 
more than twice as large as New England, it presfented every 
variety of c1imat% and was capable of yielding nearly every 
fruit found between the equator and the Arctic circle.

All along the Atlantic the country is bordered by a broad 
tract, called the tierra cdliente, or hot region, which has 
the usual high temperature of equinoctial lands/ Parched 
and sandy plains are intermingled with others of exuberant 
fertility, almost impervious from thickets of aromatic shrubs 
and wild flowers, in the midst of which tower up trees of 
that magnificent growth which is found only within the 
tropics. In this wilderness of sweets lurks the fatal malaria, 
engendered, probably; by the decomposition of rank vege- 
table substances in a hot and humid soil. The season of 
the bilious fever, — v&mito, it is called, — which scourges 
these coasts, continues from the spring to the autumnal 
equinox, when it is checked by the cold winds that descend 
from Hudson’s Bay. These* in the winter season

frequently freshen into tempests, and, sweeping down the 
Atlantic coast and the winding Gulf of Mexico, burst with 
the fury of a hurricane on its unprotected shores, and on

indeed, he has fallen into the egregious blunder of asserting, that, while the 
Mexican territory reached to the fourteenth degree, it did not include any 
portion of Guatemala. (See tom. i. p. 29, and tom. iv, dissert. 7.) The 
Tezcucan chronicler, Ixtlilxochitl, puts in a sturdy claim for the paramount 
empire of lus own nation. — Historia Chichemeca, MS., cap. 39, 53, et alibi.♦ Eighteen to twenty thousand, according to Humboldt, who considers 
the Mexican territory to have been the same with that occupied by tlie 
modern intendancies of Mexibo, Puebla, Vera Cruz, Oaxaca, and Valladolid. 
(Essai Politique eur le Royaume de Nouvelle Espagne, [Paris, 1825,] 
tom. i. p, 1|6 .) This last, however, was all, or nearly all, included in the 
rival kingdom of Mechoacan, as he himself more correctly state# in another 
part of his work. — Comjf. tom. ii. p. 164.

4

AZTKt? OimiSATION.

the ueighhouring West India islands. Such are the mighty 
spells with which Nature has surrounded this land of 
enchantment, as if to guard the golden treasures locked up 
within its bosom. The genius and enterprise of min have 
proved more potent than her epelis.After passing some twenty leagues acfoss tiis burning 
region, the traveller finds himself rising into a purer atmo- 
sphere. His limbs recover their elasticity. He breathes 
more freely, for his senses are not now oppressed by the 
sultry heats and intoxicating perfumes of the valley. The 
aspect of nature, too, has changed, and his eye no longer 
revels among the gay variety of colours with which the 
landscape was painted there. The vanilla, the indigo, and 
the fiowering cocoa-groves disappear as he advances. The 
sugar-cane and the glossy-leaved banana still accompany 
him ; and, when he has ascended abbut four thousand feet, 
he sees in the unchanging verdure, and the rich foliage of 
the liquid-amber tree, that he has reabhed the height where 
clouds and mists settle, in their passage from the Mexican Gulf. 
This is the region of perpetual humidity ; but he welcomes it 
with pleasure, as announcing ^\is escape from the influence of 
the deadly vomito,* He has entered the tierra templada, 
or temperate region, whose character resembles that of the 
temperate zone of the globe. The features of the scenery 
become grand, and even terrible. His road sweeps along 
the base of mighty mountains, once gleaming with volcanic

* The traveller, who enters the country across the dreary sand-hills of 
Vera Cruz, will hardly recoginse the truth of the above description. He 
must look for it in other parts of the timu caliente* Of recent tourists, 
no one has given a more gorgeous picture of the impressions made on his 
senses by these sunny regions than Latrobe, who came on shore at Tampico ; 
(Rambler in Mexico, [New York, 1836,] chap, i.) a traveller, it may be 
added, whose descriptions of man and nature in our own country, where we 
can judge, are distinguished by a sobriety and fairness that entitle him to 
confidence in his delineation of other countries. »

CI»IMATE PROD0CTS. 5CI»IMATE PROD0CTS. 5

/fires, and still resplendent in their mantles of snow, which 
serve as beacons to the mariner, for many a^ague at sea. 
All around he beholds traces of their ancient combustion, as 
his roa^ passes along vast tracts of lava, bristling in the 
innumerably fantastic forms into which the fiery torrent has 
been thrown by tile obstacles in its career. Perhaps, at the 
same moment, as he casts his eye down some steep slope,

► or almost unfathomable ravine, on the margin of the road, 
he sees their depths glowing with the rich blooms and ena- 
melled vegetation of the tropics. Such are the singular 
contrasts presented, at the same time, to the senses, in this 
picturesque region !

Still pressing upwards, the traveller mounts into other 
climates, favourable to other kinds of cultivation. The 
yellow maize, or Indian corn, as we usually call it, has con- 
tinued to follow him up from the lowest level ; but he now 
first sees fields of wheat, and the other European grains, 
brought into the country by the conquerors. Mingled with 
them he views the plantations of the aloe or maguey [agax>e 
Americana)^ applied to such parlous and important uses by 
the Aztecs. The oaks now ac(^lb a sturdier growth, and 
the dark forests of pine anuounc§ that he has entered the 
tierra fria, or cold region, the third and last of the greaj 
natural terraces into which the country is divided. When he 
has climbed to the height of between seven and eight thou- 
sand feet, the weary traveller sets his foot on the summit 
of the Cordillera of the Andes, — the colossal range that, 
after traversing South America and the Isthmus of Darien, 
spreads out, as it enters Mexico, into that vast sheet of 
table land which maintains an elevation of more than six 
thousand feet, for the distance of nearly two hundred leagues, 
until it gradually declines in the higher latitudes of the north.** This Jong extent ol country varies in elevation from 5570 to 6856 
feet, — equal to the height of the passes of Mount jJenis, oi' the Great

AZTEC CmLISATIOK*

. '’v'l''’

this mountain rampart a chain of volcanic hills 
stretches, in a westerly direction, of still more stupendous 
dimensions, forming, indeed, some of the highest land on 
the globe. Their peaks, entering the limits of perpetual 
snow, diffuse a grateful coolness over tlie elevated plateaus 
below; for these last, though termed •'‘cold,’' enjoy a 
climate, the mean temperature of which is not lower than 
that of the central parts of Italy. ^ The air is exceedingly 
dry ; the soil,- though naturally good, is rarely clotlied with 
the luxuriant vegetation of the lower regions. It frequently, 
indeed, has a parched and barren aspect, owing partly to 
the greater evaporation which takes place oh these lofty 
plains, through the diminished pressure of the atmosphere ; 
and partly, no doubt, to the want of trees to shelter the 
soil from the fierce influence of the summer sun. In the 
time of the Aztecs, the table land was thickly covered with 
larch, oak, cypress, and other forest trees, the extraordinary 
dimensions of some of which, remaining to the present day, 
show that the curse of barrenness in later times is chargeable 
more on man than on nature.^ Indeed the early Spaniards 
made as indiscriminate war on the forests as did our Puritan 
ancestors, though with xpich less reason. After once con- 
quering the country, they had no lurking ambush to fear 
from the submissive, semi-civilised Indian, and were not, 
like our forefathers, obliged to keep watch and ward for a

St. Bernard. The table land stretches still three hundred leagues further 
betbre it declines to a level of 2624^ feet — Humboldt, Essai Politique, 
tom. i, pp. 157, 255. ^St. Bernard. The table land stretches still three hundred leagues further 
betbre it declines to a level of 2624^ feet — Humboldt, Essai Politique, 
tom. i, pp. 157, 255. ^

* About 62® Fahrenheit, or 17® Reajrmur. (Humboldt, Essai Politique, 
i. p. 273.) The more elevated plateaus of the table land, as the 
Valley of Toluca, about 8500 feet above the Sea, have a stern climate, in 
which the thermometer, during a great part of the day, mrely rises beyond 
45® F. — ^Idem. (loc. cit.,) and Malte-Brun, (Uiiivei;;sal Geography, Eng. 
Tram., book 83,) who is, indeed, in this part of his work, hut an echo of 
the former writer. *

FEOBIFCTS.

7

century. This Bpolmtion of the ground, howerer, is said 
to have been pleasing to their imaginations, as it reminded 
them of the plains of their own Castile, — the table land of 
Europe^* where the nakedness of the landscape forms 
the burden^ of every traveller’s lament, who visits that 
country. ^

Midway across the continent, somewhat nearer the Pacific 
than the Atlantic ocean, at an elevation of nearly seven 
thousand five hundred feet, is the celebrated V'alley of 
Mexico. It is of an oval form, about sixty-seven leagues 
in circumference,! and is encompassed by a towering ram- 
part of porphyritic rock, which nature seems to have 
provided, though ineffectually, to protect it from invasion.

The soil, once carpeted with a beautiful verdure and 
thickly sprinkled with stately trees, is often bare, and, in 
many places, white with the incrustation of salts, caused by 
the draining of ^e waters. Five lakes are spread over the 
Valley, occupying one tenth of its surface. J On the 
opposite borders of the largest of these basinsV much

* The elevation of the Caatiles, to the authority repeatedly

cited, is about 350 toises, or 2100 feet“^Dove the ocean. (Humboldt’s 
Dissertation, apnd Laborde, Itineraire Desciaptif de I’Espagne, [Paris, 1827,] 
torn. i. p. 5.) It is rare to find plains in Europe of so great a height.d* Archbishop Lorenzana estimates the circuit of the Valley at ninely 
leagues, correcting at the same time the statement of Cortes, which puts it at 
seventy, very near the truth, as appears from the result of M. de Humboldt's 
measurement, cited in the text. Its length is about eighteen leagues, by 
twelve and a half in breadth. (Humboldt, Essai Politique, tom. ii, p. 29. 
— Lorenzana, Hist, de Nueva Espafla, p. 101.) Humboldt's map of Idie 
Valley of Mexico forms the third in his “ Atlas G<^ographique iot Physique,” 
and, like all the othefs in the collection, will be found of inestimable value 
to the traveller, the geologist, and the historian.

3: Humboldt, Essai Polilique, tom. ii. pp. 29, 44-49.— * Mai te-Brun, 
book 85. This latter geographer assigns only 6700 feet for the level of 
the Valley, contradicting himself, (comp, book 83,) or rather Humboldt, to 
whose pages he helps himself, plmis manibus, somewhat too liberally, 
indeed, for the scanty riferences at the bottom of his page.

jjntiti etnmmfos.

Iliilllil, jtt ^.dineoaiaiu* since the days ef the Aztecs, 
the citHM ef Mexico and Tezcocoi the capitals of the 
aJid floariahing states of Anahuac» whose 
ihat of the mysterious races that preceded 
Ailft m tim eomiliy, exhihlts some of the nearest approaches 
toeifdisalioatoheiiietirith anciently on thiNortli American 
continent.

Of these races the most conspicuous were the Toltecs. 
Advancing from a northerly direction, but from what region 
is nncertam, they entered the territory of Anahuac,t pro- 
bahljr before the close of the seventh century. Of course, 
Utde can be gleaned^ with certainty, respecting a people 
whose written records have perished, and who are icnown to* Torquemada accounts, in part, for this diminution, by supposing that, 
as God permitted the -waters, -which once co-vereA the -whole earth, to subside, 
after mankind had been nearly exterminated for their iniquities, so he 
allowed the waters of the Mexican lake to subside, in token of goodwill and 
reconciliation, after the idolatrous races of the land haa been destroyed by 
the Spaniards I (Monarchia Indiana, [Madrid, 172S,] tom, i. p. 309.) 
Quite as probable, if not as orthodox an explanation, may he found in the 
active evaporation of these upper regions, and in the fact of an Immense 
drain having been constructed, during the lifetime of the good father, to 
reduce the waters of the principal lake, and protect the capital from inun- 
dation.

f Anahuac, according to Humboldt, comprehended only the country 
between the 14th and 2l8tdegrec8ofN. latitude. (S&sai Politique, tom. i. 
p. 197.) According to Clavigero, it included nearly all since known as 
New Spain. (Stor. del Messico, tom. i. p. 27 .) Veytia uses it, also, as 
synonymous with New Spain, (Historia,^ Antigua de Mejico, [Mdjico, 
1836,] tom. i. cap. 12.) The first of writers probably allows too 
little, as the latter do too much, for its" boundaries. Ixtlilxochitl says it 
extended four hundred leagues south o| the Otomie country. (Hist, Chi- 
chemeca, MS., cap. 73.) The word' Anahuac signifies near the water. 
It -was, probably, first applied to the country aaound the lakes in the Mexi- 
can Valley, and gmdually extended to the remoter regions occupied by the 
A 2 te«a, and the other semi-civilised races. Or, possibly, the name may 
have been intended, as Veytia suggests, (Hist. Antig., lib. 1, cap. 1,) ta 
denote the land between the waters of the Atlantia and Pacific.

, c, c

US only through the traditionary legends of the nations tha|^ 
succeeded them,* By the general agreement of these., 
however, the Toltecs were well instructed in agriculture, 
and many of the most useful mechanic arts ; were nice 
workers of petals ; invented the complex arrangement of 
time adopted by^the Aztecs ; and, in short, were the true 
fountains of the civilisation which distinguished this part of 
the continent in later times.t They established their capital 
at Tula, north of the Mexican Valley, and the remains of 
extensive buildings were to be discerned there at the time of 
the Conquest.} The noble ruins of religious and other 
edifices, still to be seen in various parts of Now Spain, 
are referred to this people, whose name, Toltec, has 
passed into a synonyme for architect.^ Their shadowy 
history reminds us pf those primitive races, who preceded the 
ancient Egyptians in *the march of civilisation ; fragments 
of whose monuments, as they are seen at this day, incor- 
porated with the buildings of the Egyptians themselves.

♦ Clayigero talks of Boturini’s having written on the faith of the 
Tolter historians.” (Stor. del Messi^b, to^^i. p. 128.) But that scholar 
does not pretend to have ever met with a '‘roltec manuscript himself, and 
hiid heard of only one in the possession of Ixtlilxochitl. (See his Idea do 
una Nueva Historia Genei-al de la America Septentrional, [Madrid, 1746,] 
p. 110.) The latter writer tells us, that his account of the Toitec and 
Chichemec races was derived from interpretation,” (probably, of the Tez- 
cucan paintings,) “ and from the traditions of old men poor authority 
for events which had passed centuries before. Indeed, he acknowledges 
that their narratives were so full of absurdity and falsehood, that he was 
obliged to reject nine-tenths of them. (See his Relaciones, MS., No. 5.) 
The cause of truth would not have suffered much, probably, if he had 
rejected nine-tenths of the remainder.f Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 2. — Idem, Relaciones, MS., 
No. 2. — Sahagun, Historia Geheral de las Cosas de Nueva Espana, (Mexico, 
1829,) lib. 10, cap. 29. — Veytia, Hist. Antig., lib. 1, cap. 27.

t Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 10, cap. 29.

§ Idem, uhi supra. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. i. cap. 14.

10

AZTEO CIVILISATION.

give to these latter the appearance of almost modem 
constructions.*

After a period of four centuries, the Toltecs, who had 
extended their sway over the remotest borders of Anahiiac,f 
having been greatly reduced, it is said, by faming, pestilence, 
and unsuccessful wars, disappeared from tlfe land as silently 
and mysteriously as they had entered it. A few of theta 
still lingered behind, but much the greater number, pro- 
bably, spread over the region of Central America and the 
neighbouring isles ; and the traveller now speculates on the 
majestic ruins of Mitla and Palenque as possibly the work 
of this extraordinary people.^

After the lapse of another hundred years, a numerous and 
rude tribe, called the Chichemecs, entered the deserted 
country from the regions of the far North-west. They were 
speedily followed by other races, of higher civilisation, per^ 
haps of the same family with the Toltecs, whose language 
they appear to have spoken. The most noted of these were 
the Aztecs, or Mexicans, and the Acolhuans. The latter, 
better known in later times the name «f Tezcucaus, from 
tbeir capital, Tezcuco,§ on the eastern border of the Mexican

♦ Description de I’Egvpte, (Paris, 1809,) Antiquit^s, tom. i. cap. 1. 
Veytia has traced the migrations of the Tolteca with sufficient industry, 
scarcely rewarded by the necessarily doubtful credit of the results. — Hist. 
Antig.^ lib. 2, cap. 21-33.

f Ixtlilxoebitl, Hist. Chick, MS., cap. 73.f Ixtlilxoebitl, Hist. Chick, MS., cap. 73.

t Veytia, Hist. Antig., lib. 1, cap. 33. — Ixtlilxoebitl, Hisjt. Chich., 
MS., cap. 3. — Idem, Rclacioncs, MS., No. 4, 5. — Father Torquemada 
— perhaps misinterpreting the Ttzcucan hieroglyphics — has accounted 
for this mysterious disappearance of the ToltecsL by such fee-faw-fum 
stories of giants and demons, as show his appetite for the marvellous was 
fhlly equal to that of any of his calling.— «See his Monarch. Ind., lib. 1, 
cap. 14.

§ TeSfCUCO signifies ‘‘ place of detention as several of the tribes who 
successively occupied Anahuac were said to have halted some time at the 
spot. — Ixtliixochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 10. t

PRIMITIVE RACES.

11

lake, were peculiarly fitted, by their comparatively mild 
religion and manners, for receiving the tincture of civilisa- 
tion which could be derived from the few Toltecs that still 
remained in the country. This, in their turn, they commu- 
nicated to Jhe barbarous Chichemecs,* a large portion of 
whom became amalgamated with the new settlers as one 
nation.*Availing themselves of the strength derived, not only 
from the increase of numbers, but from their own superior* 
refinement, the Acolhuans gradually stretched their empire 
over the ruder tribes in tl\e north ; while their capital twas 
filled with a numerous population, busily employed iu many 
of the more useful and even elegant arts of a civilised com- 
munity. In this palmy state, they were suddenly assaulted 
by a warlike neighbour, the Tepanecs, their own kindred, 
and inhabitants of the same valley as themselves. Their 
provinces were overrun, their armies beaten, their king 
assassinated, and the flourishing city of Tezcuco became 
the prize of the victor. From this abject condition the 
uncommon abilities of the young prince Nezahaulcoyotl, the 
rightful heir to the crown, backe|t^ the efficient aid of his 
Mexican allies, at length redeemed the state, and opened to 
it a new career of prosperity, even more brilliant than the 
former.t

The Mexicans, with whom our history is principally con- 
cerned, came also, as we have seen, from the remote regions 
of the north, — the populous hive of nations in the New 
World, as it has been in the Old. They arrived on the

* The historian speaks, in one page, of the Chichemecs* burrowing in 
caves, or, at best, in cabins of straw ; — and, in the next, talks gravely of 
their seworos, and cabalkros I — Ibid., cap. 9, et seq. — Vey tia,

Hist. Antig.,lib. 2, cap. 1-10. — Camargo, Historia de Tlascala, MS.

+ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap, 9-20. — Vey tia, Hist, An tig., lib. 
2, cap. 29-54. •

12

AZTE€ CIVILISATION.Hist. Antig.,lib. 2, cap. 1-10. — Camargo, Historia de Tlascala, MS.

+ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap, 9-20. — Vey tia, Hist, An tig., lib. 
2, cap. 29-54. •

12

AZTE€ CIVILISATION.

borders of Anabuac towards the beginning of the thirteenth 
c^tury, some time after the occupation of the land by the 
Jtindred races. Por a long time they did not establish 
themselves in any permanent residence ; but continued shift- 
ing their quarters to different parts of the Meccan Yalley, 
enduring all the casualties and hardship^ of a migratory 
life. On one occasion, they were enslaved by a more power- 
ful tribe ; but their ferocity soon made them formidable to 
*their masters.* After a series of wanderings and adven- 
tures, which need not shrink from comparison with the most 
extmvagant legends of the heroic ages of antiquity, they at 
length halted on the south-western borders of the principal 
lake, in the year 1325. They there beheld, perched on 
the stem of a prickly pear, which shot out from the crevice 
of a rock that was washed by the waves, a royal eagle of 
extraordinary size and beauty, with a serpent in his talons, 
and his broad wings open to the rising sun. They hailed 
the auspicious omen, announced by an oracle as indicating 
the site of their future city, and laid its foundations by sink- 
ing piles into the shallows ; for the low marshes were half 
buried under water. On these they erected their light 
fabrics of reeds and rushes ; and sought a precarious sub-t 
sistence from fishing, and from the wild fowl wliich fre- 
quented the waters, as well as from the cultivation of such 
simple vegetables as they could raise on their floating 
gardens. The place was called Tenochtitlan, in token of 
its miraculous origin, though only known to Europeans by 
its other name of Mexico, derived from their war-god, 
Mexitli.t The legend of its foundatiqn is still further* These were the Colhuans, mot Acolkuant, with whom Humboldt, and 
most writers since, have confounded them.— See his Essaji Politique, tom. i. 
p. 414; li. p. 37.

Clavigero gives good reasons for prefening the etymology of Mexico 
above noticed, to various others. (See his Stoc. del Messico, tom. i.

PEIMITIVE RACESt

13

" I

commemoiated by the device of the eagle and the cactus, 
which form the arms of the modern Mexican republic. Such 
were the humble beginnings of the Venice of the Western 
World.*

The forlorn condition of the new settlers was made still 
worse by domestic feuds. A part of the citizens seceded 
from the main body, and formed a separate community on 
the neighbouring marshes. Thus divided, it was long before 
they could aspire to the acquisition of territory on the main 
land. They gradually increased, however, in numbers, and 
strengthened themselves yet more by various improvements 
in their polity and military discipline, while they established 
a reputation for courage as well as cruelty in war, which 
made their name terrible throughout the Valley. In the 
early part of the fifteenth century, nearly a hundred years

p, 168, nota.) The name Tenochtitlan signifies timal (a cactus) cm a stone, 
— Esplicacion de la Col. de Mendoza, apud Antiq. of Mexico, vol. iv.

♦ Datur hajc venia antiquitati,” says Livy, “ ut raiscendo humana 
divinis primordia urbium augustiora faciat.” — (Hist, Pnef.) See, for the 
above paragraph, Col. de Mendoza, plate 1, apud Antiq. of Mexico, vol. i. 
— Ixtlilxocldtl, Hist, Chich., MS., cap* Historia de las Indias,MS., Parte 3, cap. 8. — Veytia, Hist. Antlg., lib. 2, cap. 15. Clavigero, 
after a laborious examination, assigns the following dates to some of the 
prominent events noticed in the text. No two. authorities agree on them; 
aud this is not strange, considering that Clavigero — the most inquisitive of 
all — does not always agree with himself. (Compare his dates for the 
coming of the Acolliuans ; tom. i. p. 147, and tom. iv. dissert. 2.)

A.D.

The Toltecs arrived in Anahuac .... 648

They abandoned the country 1051

The Chichemecs arrijp’ed ..... 1170

The Acolhuans* arrived about . . . , , 1200

The Mexicans reached Tula . . . .1196

They founded Mexico . ’ 1825

See his Dissert. 2,* Sec. 12, In the last date, the one of most importance, 
ho is confirmed by the learned Veytia, who differs from him in all the 
others. — Hist. Antig., lib. 2. cap. 16,

14

AZTEC CIVILISAmK.

# •

fr6m tk© foundation of the city, an event took place which 
Created an entire revolution in the circumstances, and, to 
Some extent, in the character of the Aztecs. This was the 
subversion of the Tezcucan monarchy by the Tepanecs, 
already noticed. When the oppressive conduct of the 
victors had at length aroused a spirit resistance, its 
prince, Nezahualcoyotl, succeeded, after incredible perils 
and escapes, in mustering such a force, as, with the aid of 
the Mexicans, placed %im on a level with his enemies. In 
two successive battles these were defeated with great 
slaughter, their chief slain, and their territory, by one of 
those sudden reverses which characterise the wars of petty 
states, passed into the hands of the conquerors. It was 
awarded to Mexico, in return for its important services.Then was formed that remarkable league, which, indeed, 
has no parallel in history. It was agreed between the 
states of Mexico, Tezcuco, and the neighbouring little king- 
dom of Tlacopan, that they should mutually support each 
other in their wars, offensive and defensive, and that, in the 
distribution of the spoil, one-fifth should be assigned to 
Tlacopan, and the remainder Ibe divided, in what proportions 
is uncertain, between the other powers* The Tezcucan 
writers claim an equal share for their nation with the Aztecs. 
But this does not seem to be warranted by the immense 
increase of territory subsequently apI»ropriated by the latter. 
And we may account for any advantage conceded to them 
by the treaty, on the supposition, that, however inferior they 
may have been originally, they were, at the time of making 
it, in a more prosperous condition than their allies, broken 
and dispirited by long oppression. What is more extraordi- 
nary than the treaty itself, however, is the fidelity with 
which it was maintained. During a. century of uninter- 
rupted warfare that ensued, no instance occurred where the 
parties quarrelled over the division of .the spoil, which so

AZTEC EMPIRE. . 15

often makel shipwreck of similar confederacies among 
civilised states.*AZTEC EMPIRE. . 15

often makel shipwreck of similar confederacies among 
civilised states.*

The allies for some time found sufficient occupation for 
their arms in their own valley ; but they soon overleaped 
its rocky ramparts, and by the middle of the fifteenth cen- 
tury, under the ftrst Montezuma, had spread down the sides 
of the table land to the borders of the Gulf of Mexico. 
Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, gave evidence of the public 
prosperity. Its frail tenements wefe supplanted by solid 
’structures of stone and lime. Its population rapidly increased. 
Its old feuds were healed. The citizens who had seceded were 
again brought under a common government with the main 
body, and the quarter they occupied was permanently con- 
nected with the parent city ; the dimensions of which, cover- 
ing the same ground, were much larger than those of the 
modern capital of Mexico.f

The loyal Tezcucan chronicler claims the supreme dignity for his own 
sovereign, if not the greatest share of the spoil, by this imjMjrial compact. 
(Hist. Cliicli., cap. 32.) Torquemada, on the other hand, claims one half 
of all the conquered lands for Mexico. (Monarch, Ind., lib. 2, cap. 40.) 
All agree in assigning only one fifth Tlacopan ; and Veytia (Hist. Antig., 
lib. 3, aip. 3) and Zurita (Rapport sur les Diffdrentes Classes de Chefs de 
la Noilvelle Espagne, trad, de Ternaux [Paris, 1840], p. 11), both very 
competent critics, acquiesce in an equal division between the two principal 
citates in the confederacy. An^ode, still extant, 8f Nezahualcoyotl, in its 
Castilian version, bears testimony to the singular union of the three 
powers.

Solo se acordardn en las Nacioues

lo bien que gobernaron

las trm Oahezas que el Imperio honraron.”

CaNTARES DBZ. EhPKRAOOR.

Kezahualcoyotl, ms.Solo se acordardn en las Nacioues

lo bien que gobernaron

las trm Oahezas que el Imperio honraron.”

CaNTARES DBZ. EhPKRAOOR.

Kezahualcoyotl, ms.

See the plans of the ancient and modem capital, in BullocVs 
Mexico,” firet edition. The original of the ancient map was obtained by 
that traveller fropi the collection of the unfortunate Boturini : if, as seems 
probable, it is the one indicated on page 13 of his Catalogue, I find no 
Warrant for Mr. Bullock’s statement, that it was the one prepared for Cortes 
by the order of Monteznma.

^ 16 AETBC CmttSATlOIir.

Portoatelj, the throne W3l 8 £lled by a succJasion of able 
ptiinoest who knew how to profit by their enlarged resources 
hj the martial enthusiasm of the nation. Year after 
saw t\vem return, loaded witli tlie spoWs oi conquered 
cities, and with throngs of devoted captives, to their capital. 
Ko state was able long to resist the accumtflated strength of 
‘ the confederates. At the beginning of the sixteenth century, 
just before the arrival of the Spaniards, the Aztec dominion 
reached across the continent from the Atlantic to the Pacific; 
and, under the bold and bloody Ahuitzotl, its arms had been 
carried far over ^he limits already noticed as defining its 
permanent territor|?i Isi^ farthest corners of Guatemala 
and Nicaragua. ' This extent of empire, however limited in 
comparison with that of many other states, is truly wonder- 
ful, considering it as%bie acquisition of a people whose whole 
population and resources had so recently been comprised 
within the walls of tlieir own petty city ; and considering, 
moreover, that the conquered territory was thickly settled 
by various races, bred to arms like the Mexicans, and little 
inferior to them in social organisation. The history of the 
Aztecs suggests -some strong points of resemblance to that 
of the ancient Romans, not only in their military successes, 
but in the policy which led to them.^

ftft

• Clavigero, Stop, del Messieo, tom. i. lib. 2. — Torquemada, Monarch. 
Ind., tom. i. lib. 2. — Boturini, Idea, p. 146. — Col. of Mendoaa, part i. 
and Codex Telleriano-Remensia, apnd Artiq. of Mexico, vol. i., vL Ma- 
chiavelli baa noticed it aa one great cauae of the military auiffiSasea of Jhe 
Eomana, “ that they associated themselves, in their wars, with other sthtes, 
as the principal ; ” and expresses his astonishment that a similf^r policy 
should not have been adopted by ambitious republic^; in lR,ter times. (See 
his Discorsi sopra T. Livio, lib, 2. cap. 4, apud Opere.) [Geneva, 
1798.] This, as we have seen above, was the very course pursued by the 
Mexicans.

VBTTIA.

It

The most important contribution, of late years, to the early histoty 
of Mexico, is Hiatoria Antigua of the Lie. Don Mariano Veytia, 
published in tne city of Mexico, in 1636. This scholar was bom of 
an ancient and highly respectable family at Tuebla, 1718. Aftesr 
finishing his academic education, he went to Spain, where he was 
kindly received at court He afterwards visited several other coun- 
tries of Europe, ma^e himself acquainted with their languages, and 
returned home well stored with the fruits of a discriminating obser- 
vation and dil’gent study. The rest of his life he devoted to letters ; 
especially to the illustration of the national history and antiquities. 
As the executor of the unfortunate Boturini, with whom ht: had con- 
tracted an intimacy in Madrid, he obtained access to his valuable 
collection of manuscripts in Mexico, and from them, and every diher 
source which his position in socioty and luA e|GUin<||nt character opened 
to him, he composed various works, 6f however, except

the one before us, has been admitted tq^the of the press.

The time of his death is not given by his ed^|^;^nt it was probably 
not later than 1780. ^ • v /the one before us, has been admitted tq^the of the press.

The time of his death is not given by his ed^|^;^nt it was probably 
not later than 1780. ^ • v /

V^ytia's history covers the whole period the first occupation 
of Anahuac to the middle 5f the fifteenth century, at which point his 
labours were unfortunately terminated by his death. In the early 
portion he has endeavoured to trace the migratory movements and 
historical annals of the principal races who entered the country. 
Eve^ bears testimony to theextent and fidelity of his researches ; 
and if wa feel but piQde]r^ UOnfidence in the results, the fault is not 
imputable to himy So mucl^ a» tp the*dark and doubtful nature of the 
subject. As he descends ages, he is more occupied with the

fortunes of the Tezcucan thfflft with those of the Aztec dynasty, which 
have been amply discussed by Others of his countrymen. The pre-

rnature close of his labours pr|i]j^puted him, probably, from giving that 
attention to the domqsjiic institutions of the people he describes, to 
which they ajo entitled as the most important subject of inquiry to 
the historian. The deficiency has been supplied by his judicious 
editor, Orteaga, from other som'ces. In the early part of his work, 
Veytia has explained the chronological system of the A«tecs, but, 
like most writers preceding the accurate Gama, with indifferent suc- 
cess. As a critic, he certainly ranks much higher than the annalists 
who preceded him ; and, when his own religion is not involved, shows 
a discriminating judgment. •When it is, he betrays a full measure of 
the credulity wliicji still maintains its hold on too many even of the 
well informed of his countryman. The editor of the work has given 
a very interesting letter from the Abb^ Clavigero to Veytia, written 
VOL. 1 . • c

18

TBTTIA,18

TBTTIA,

when the former was a poor and humble exile, and in the tone of one 
tfiddressing a person of high standing and literary ejninence. Both 
^ere employed on the same subject. The writings of the poor Abbd, 
published again and again, and translated into various languages, have 
spread his fame throughout Europe; while the name of Yeytia, whose 
works have been locked up in their primitive manuscript, is scarcely 
known beyond the boundaries of ilexico. 0

CHAPTER IL

SUCCESSION TO THE 'CROWN. — AZTEC NOBILITY. — JUDICIAL SYSTEM.

LAWS AND REVENUES. MILITARY INSTITUTIONS.

The form of government differed in the different stateR of 
Anahuac. With the Aztecs and^^^zllM^i^l it wafo monar- 
chical and nearly absolute. Th0" resembled

each other (JO much, in their polt^^ liitw that one

of their historialie has remarked, in too uliq|»lified a manner 
indeed, that is told of on6 may Be always understood 
as apply ing|j|ii other.* I shall direct my inquiries to

the MexicailP^olity, borrowing an illustration occasionally 
from that of the rival kingdom.

The government was an elective monarchy. Four of the 
principal nobles, who had been^chosen by their own body in 
the preceding reign, filled the office of electors, to whom 
were added, with merely an honorary rank, however, the 
two royal allies of Tezcuco and Tlacopan. The sovereign 
was selected from the brothers of the deceased prince, or, 
in default of them, from his nephews. Thus the election 
was always restricted to the same family. The candidate 
preferred must have distinguished himself in war, though, 
as in the case of the last Montezuma, he were a member of 
the priesthood. f T^is singular mode of supplying the throne

. «

♦ Ixtlilxocbitl/ Hist. Chicb., MS., cap. 86.

+ This was an exception. — In Egypt, also, the king was frequently taken 
from the warrior caste, though obliged afterwards to be instructed in the 
mysteries'of the priesthood : S Si 4 k 4yiyero+ This was an exception. — In Egypt, also, the king was frequently taken 
from the warrior caste, though obliged afterwards to be instructed in the 
mysteries'of the priesthood : S Si 4 k 4yiyero

r<ov I4pwu. — Plutarch, de Isid. et Osir., sec. 9.

c2

Awmts msmAtm.

SO

Imil iKmie advantages. The candidates reeeiv^ an education 
wMcdt fitted them for the royal dignity, wh|e the age at 
Siiey were chosen not only secured the nation against 
Uie evils 6f minority, but ajS^rded ample means for esti- 
inaMng their qualifications for the office. The^result, at all 
events, was favomubk 5 since the throne, Is already noticed, 
wi» filled by a succession of able princes, well qualified to 
rule over a w^like and ambitious people. The scheme of 
election, however defective, aigues a more refined and cal- 
culating policy than was to have been expected from a 
barbamns nation.^

The new monarch was installed in his regal dignity with 
much parade of TCligiouB ceremony ; but not until, by a. 
idctorious campaign, he had obtained a sufficient number of 
captives to grace his triumphal entry into the capital, and 
to furnish victims for the dark and bloody rit^^hich stained 
the Aztec superstition. Amidst this pomp of kanan sacrifice 
he was crowned. The crown, resembling a mitre in its form, 
and curiously ornamented with gold, gems, and feathers, was 
placed on his head by. the lord of Tezcuco, the most powerful 
of his royal allies. The titfe of Kin^f by w^hich the earfwf 
Aztec princes are distinguished by Spanish writers, is sup- 
planted by that of Emperor in the later iieigns, in^mating, 
perhaps, his superiority over the confederated lUGuarchies of 
Tlacopon and Tezcuoo.f , > -* Torquemada, Monarch. lod., lib. % ,c^, 18; lib. 11, cap. 27.— Cla- 
vigero, Stor. del Meseico, tom. ii. p. fllS. — Acosta, Naturall and Morall 
Hialorie of the East and West Indie%?lEng. trans. (London, 1604.) Ac- 
cording to Zurita, an election hy the nohlee too^ place only in default of 
heirs of the deceased monarch. (Rapport, p. 15.) The minute historical 
investigation of Clavigcro may bo permitted to outweigh this general 
awertion.

•f* Saliagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, lib. 6,' cap. 9, 10, 14; lib. 8, 
cap. 31, 34. — See, also, Zurita, Rapport, pp. 20-23. Ixtlilxochitl stoutly 
claims this supremacy for his own nation. (Hisf. Chich., MS., cap. 34.)—

AtW KOBILITT*

21

The Azietfl princes, especially towards the close of the 
dynasty, liret in a barbaric pomp, tndy Oriental. Their 
spacious palaces were provided with halls for the different 
councils, who aided the moniaeh in the transaction of busi- 
ness. The jh‘ef of these was a sort of privy council, com- 
posed in part, pAbably, of the four electors chosen by the 
nobles after the accession, whose places, when made vaemnt 
by death, were immediately supplied as before. It was the 
business of this body, so far as can be gathered from the 
very loose accounts given of it, to advise the king, in respect 
to the government of the provinces, the administration of 
the revenues, and, indeed, on ail great matters of public 
interest.*In the royal buildings were accommodations, also, for a 
numerous body-guard of the sovereign, made up of the chief 
nobility. It is not easy to determine with precision, in 
these barbarian governments, the limits of the several orders. 
It is certain there was a distmet class of nobles, with large 
landed possessions, who held the most important offices near 
the person of the prince, and engrossed the administration 
of the provinces and cities.f Many of these could trace 
their descent from the founders of the Aztec monarchy. 
According to some writers of authority, there were thirty 
great caciques^ who had their residenoe, at least a part of 
the year, in the capital, and who could muster a hundred

His assertions are at variance M'ith facts stated by himself elsewhere, and 
are not countenanced by any other writer whom I have consulted.

* Sahagun, who places the elective power in a much larger body, speaks 
of four senators, who formed a state council, (l^ist. de Nueva Espana, 
lib. 8, cap. 80.) Acosta enlarges the council beyond the number of the 
electors. (Lib. 6, ch. 26.) •No two writers agree.

■f Zuiita enumprates four orders of chiefs, all of whom were exempted 
from imposts, and enjoyed very considerable privileges. He does not 
discriminate the several ranks with much precision. — Rapport, pp. 47 
et fie(^. •

AZtEO CmUSATION.

fMwilli emSBk on their ©states.* mthont relying 
jpH ©Itch wild fitatementS) it is clear, from thA testimony of 
Ihfe conquerors, that the country was occupied by numerous 
powerful chieftains, who lived like independent princes on 
their domains. If it be true that the kin^s eqcouraged, or 
indeed exacted, the residence of these nooies in the capital, 
and required hostages in their absence, it is evident that 
their power must have been very formidable.!Their estates appear to have been held by various tenures, 
and to bave been subject to different restrictions. Some of 
them, earned by their own good swords or received as the 
recompense of public services, were held without any limita- 
tion, except that the possessors could not dispose of them to 
a plebeian. { Others were entailed on the eldest male issue, 
and, in default of such, reverted to the crown. Most of 
them seem to have been burdened with the obligation of 
military service. The principal chiefs of Tezcuco, according 
to its chronicler, were expressly obliged to support their 
prince with their armed vassals, to attend his court, and aid 
him in the council. Some, instead of these services, werci

c

to provide for the repairs of his buildings, and to keep the 
royal demesnes in order, with an annual offering, by wayvof 
homage, of fruits and flowers. It was usii©l, 4f w© are Id

* See, in particular, Herrera, Hietoria Ge^'rial l^echos de los

Castellanos en las Islas y TierraFirme del Max Oedano, (Madrid, 1730,) 
dec. 2, lib. 7, cap. 12. , ,

+ Oafta de Cortes, ap. Loretizan%' de iNueva Espaua, p. 110. — 
Torquemada, IMonarch. Ind,,lib. 2, cap. 89; lib, 1 4, cap. 6. — Clavigero, Stor. 
del Messico, tom. ii. p. 121. — Znrita, Rapport, pp. 48, 65. Ixtlilxochitl 
(Hist. Chich., MS., cap., 34) speaks of thirty gr^t# feudal chiefs, some of 
them Tezcucan and Tlacopan, whom ho styles “ grandees of the empire !” 
Ho says notliing of the great ^a^^^of 100,000 vassals to each mentioned by 
Torquemada and Herrera.

$ Mace/iual^-^-^u word equivalent to the French word roturier. Nor 
could fiefs originally be held by plebeians in France.^See Hallam’s Middle 
Ages, (London, 1819,) vol. ii. p. 207. <l

JtJBIOIAL SYSmt.

believe 
confirmJtJBIOIAL SYSmt.

believe 
confirm

It cannot be denied that we recognise in all this several 
features of the feudal system, which, no doubt, lose nothing 
of their effect, under the hands of the Spanish writers, who 
are fond of tracii^ analogies to European institutions. But 
such analogies lead sometimes to very erroi^eous conclusions. 
The obligation of military service, for instance, the most 
essential principle of a fief, seems to be naturally demanded 
by every government from its subjects. As to minor points 
of resemblance, they fall far short of that harmonious system 
of reciprocal service and protection which embraced, in nice 
gradation, every order of a feudal monarchy. The kingdoms 
of Anahuac were, in their nature, despotic, attended, indeed, 
with many mitigating circumstances unknown to the des- 
potisms of the East ; ‘but it is chimerical to look for much 
in common — beyond a few accidental forms and ceremonies 
— with those Aristocratic institutions of the Middle Ages, 
which made the court of every petty baron the precise 
image in miniature of that of his sovereign.

The legislative power, both in Mexico and Tezcuco, 
resided wholly with the monarch. This feature of des- 
potism, however, was in some measure counteracted by the 
constitution of the judicial tribunals— of more importance, 
among a rude people, than the legislative, since it is easier to 
make good laws for such a community than to enforce them, 
and the best laws, badly administered, are but a mockery.* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., ubi supra. — Zurita, Rapport, ubi 
supra. — Clavigero, Stor, del Messico, tom. ii. pp. 122-124. — Torquemada, 
Monarch. Ind., lib. 14, cap. 7.— Gomara, Crdnica de Nueva Espafia, cap. 199, 
ap. Barcia, tom. ii. — Boturini*(Idea, p. 165) carries back the origin 
in Anahuac, to thp twelfth century. Carli says, “ Le systdme politique y 
etait fdodal.” In the next page he tells us, “ Personal merit alone made 
the distinction of the nobility ! ” (Lottres Amdricaiiies, trad. Fr., [Paris, 
1788,] tom. i. let. 11.) « Carli was a writer of a lively imagination.

histoMans, for a new king. On his accession, to 
the ii^estiture of estates derived from the crown.*

AimiO CtTIHSATIOlT,

O^r # 4 ^ of ihe principal cities* with its delendent tem- 
tOfi^y was placed a supreme judge, appointedf)y the crown, 
wiih original and final jurisdiction in both civil and criminal 
oases. There was no appeal from his sentence to any other 
tribunal, nor even to the king. He held his ^office during 
life ; and any one who usurped his ensifus was punished 
with death. ^

Below this magistrate was a court, established in each 
province, and consisting of three members. It held concur- 
rent jurisdiction with the supreme judge in civil suits, but 
in criminal an appeal lay to his tribunal. Besides these 
courts, there was a bpdy of inferior magistrates distributed 
through the oountij, chosen by the people themselves in 
their several districts. Their authority was limited to 
smaller causes, while the more important were carried up to 
the higher courts. There was still another class of subordi- 
nate officers, appointed also by the people, each of whom 
was to watch over the conduct of a certain number of fami^ 
lies, and report any disorder or breach of the laws 4o the 
higher authorities, f ^

In Tezcuco the judicial arrangements were of '"a more 
refined character ; J and a gradation of tribunals finallyIn Tezcuco the judicial arrangements were of '"a more 
refined character ; J and a gradation of tribunals finally

* This TOagiBtrate, vlio vaa called cUvuacoatl^ ms also to audit the 
accountB of tbe collectors of the taxes in hi* district. (Clavigero, Stor. del 
Meabico, tom. ii. p. 127.— Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 11, cap. 25.) 
The Mendoza Collection contains a painting of the courts of justice, under 
Montezuma, who introduced great changes in them. (Antiq, of Mexico, 
vol, L, Plate 70.) According to the interpreter, an appeal lay from thew^ 
in certain oases, to the king^e council.— Ibid, vol. vi p. 79.

f Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. pp. 127, 128. — Torquemada, 
Monarch. lnd.,ubi supra, — In this an'angement of the more humble magis- 
trates -we are reminded of the Anglo-Saxon hundreds and tithings, especially 
the l&tter^ the members of -which were to watch over the conduct of the 
families in their districts, and bring the offenders to justice. The bard 
penalty of mutual responsibility was not known to the Mexicans.

Ij: Zunta,.so temperate, usually, in his language, remarks, that, in the

nmoiu. ST8TIEU.

M

terminated inm general meeting or parliament, eonaisting of 
all the judg4» end petty, throughont the kingdom, 
held every eighty days in the capital, over which the king 
preaided in person. This body determine^MKiisnits, which, 
from their ynportance, or diiSculty, had lpi| reserved for 
its oonsideratioa^^y^e lower tribunalsi^l^ltorved, more- 
over, as a council !|l^4tate, tc« assist t]|pinonareh in the 
transaction of publid^Jrosiness.*Such are the vague and imperfect notiSes that can be 
gleaned, respecting the Aztec tribunals, from the hierogly- 
phical paintings still preserved, and from the mosikaccredited ^ 
Spanish writers. These, being usually ecclesiastics, have 
taken much less interest in this subject, than in matters 
connected with religion. They find some apology, certainly, 
in the early itotruction of most of the Indian paintings, 
from which theii^nformation was, in part, to be gathered.

On the^n^hdie, however, it must be inferred, that the 
Aztecs were sufficiently civUised tq evince a solicitude for 
the rights both of property and of persons. The law, 
authorising a# appeal to the highest judicature in crimiqal 
matters only, dhows an attention to personal security, ren- 
dered the mo#;ffi)ligatory by the extreme severity of their 
penal code, which would naturally have made them more

capital, “ Tribunals \yere instituted which might compare in tib^eir organisa- 
tion with the royal audiences of Castile.** (Rapport, p. 93,) IIis observa- 
tions are Aiefly drawn from the Tezcucan courts, which, in their forms of 
procedure, he says, were like the Aztec, — (Loc. cit.)

* Botnrini, Idea, p, 87, — Torquemada, Monarch, Ind., lib. II, cap, 26, 
— Zurita compares this body to the Castilian cdrtes. It would seem, how- 
ever, according to him,* to have consisted only of twelve principal judges, 
besides the king. His meaning is somewhat doubtful. (Rapport, pp. 94, 
101, 106.) M. de Humboldt* in his account of the Aztec courts, has con- 
founded them with the Tezcucan. — Comp. Vues des CordilBree et Monu- 
mens des Pcuples Indigenes de TAmerique, (Paris, 1810,) p. 55, and 
Clavigero, Sior. del Messico, tom. ii. pp. 128, 129.

26

AxtBc cmu&knm.26

AxtBc cmu&knm.

Cfiittiou® of a wrong conviction. The existen® of a number 
of co-ordinate tribunals, without a central oib of supreme 
authoritj to control the whole, must have given rise to very 
diBCordaiit mtei^retatioDS of the law in diiferent districts. 
But this is an which they shared in commpn with most 
of the nation^ ^urope. ^

The provision for making the fiKi|ifrior judges wholly 
independent of the crown was worthy of an enlightened 
people. It presented the strongest barrier, that a mere 
constitution could afford, against tyranny. It is not, indeed, 
to be supposed that, in a government otherwise so despotic, 
not be found for induencing the magistrate. 
B^I^Vas a great step to fence round his authority with the 
potion of the law ; and no one of the Aztec monarchs, as 
far as I know, is accused of an attempt to violate it.

To receive presents or a bribe, to be guilty of collusion in 
any way with a suitor, was punished, in a judge^with death. 
Who, or what tribunal* decided as to his guilt, does not 
appear. In Tezcuco this was done, by the rest of the court. 
But the king presided over that body.- The Tezeucan 
prince, Nezabualpilli, who rarely tempered justice 
mercy, put one judge to death for taking a bribe, and aisu^ther 
for determining suits in his own bouse, — a capital offmee, 
also, by law.*

The judges of the higher tribunals were maintained 
from the produce of a part of the crown lauds, reserved for 
this purpose. They, as well as the supreme judge, held 
their offices for life. The proceedings in the courts were 
conducted with decency and order. The judges wore an 
appropriate dress, and attended to business both parts of the

• ** Ah ! si esta se repitiera hoy, qiie bueno seria ! exclaims Sahagun’s 
Mexican editor.— -Hist, de Nueva Espafia, tom. ii. p. 304, nota.-r-Zurita, 
Rapport, p. 102. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., ubi supra.— Ixtlilxochitl,

Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 67 . ’’

JtTDiOlAXi 8TSTEM.

27Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 67 . ’’

JtTDiOlAXi 8TSTEM.

27

da;^ dining sways, for the sake of despatch, in an apart- 
ment of the Jlme budding where they held their session ; a 
method of proceeding much commended by the Spanish 
chroniclers^ to whi>m despatch was not very familiar in their 
own tribunufji. Officers attended to preserve order, and 
others summonea the parties, and produced them in court. 
No counsel was employed ; the parties stated their own case, 
and supported it by their witnesses. The oath of the 
accused was also admitted in evidence. The statement of 
the case, the testimony, and the proceedings of the trial, 
were all set forth by a clerk, in hieroglyphical paintings, 
and handed over to the court. The paintings were executed 
with so much accuracy, that, in all suits respecting real 
property, they were allowed to be produced as good autho- 
rity in the Spanish tribunals, very long after the Conquest ; 
and a chair for their* study and interpretation was estab- 
lished at Mexico in 1553, which has long since shared the 
fate of most other provisions for learning in that unfortunate 
country. ♦ *

A capital sentence was indicated by a line traced with an 
arrow across the portrait of the accused. In Tezcuco, where 
the king presided in the court, this, according to the 
national chronicler, was done with extraordinary parade. 
His description, which is of rather a poetical cast, I give in 
his own words: In the royal palace of Teaeuco was a 
court-yard, on the opposite sides of which were two halls of 
justice. In the principal one, called the ‘ tribunal of God/ 
was a throne of pure gold, inlaid with turquoises and other• Zurita, Rapport, pp. 95, 100, 103. — Saha^n, Hist. deNueva Espafia, 
loc. cit. — Humboldt, Vues 4^8 Cordilleres, pp. 55, 56.-“Torquemada, 
Monarch. Ind., lib. 11, cap. 25. Clavigero says, the accused might free 
himself by #ath ; “ il reo poteva purgarsi col giuramento.” (Stor. del 
Messico, tom. ii. p. 129.) What rogue, then, could ever have been 
convicted ?

2S

Azrm oimiBATioN,

precipus stanes. On a stool, in front, was pl«Jed a human 
skull, crowned with an immense emerald, o^a pyramidal 
form, and surmounted by an aigrette of brilliant plumes and 
precious stones. The skull was laid on j^heap of military 
weapons, shields, quivers, bows, and arrows.^ The walls 
were hung with tapestry, made of the hai/of different wild 
animals, of rich and various colours, festooned by gold rings, 
and embroidered with figures of birds and dowers. Above 
the throne was a •canopy of variegated plumage, from 4he 
centre of which shot forth resplendent rays of gold and 
jewels. The other tribunal, called *the King’s,’ was also 
surmounted by a gorgeous canopy of feathers, on which 
were emblazoned the royal arms. Here the sovereign gave 
public audience, and communicated his despatches. But, 
when he decided important causes, or confirmed a capital 
sentence, he passed to ‘ the tribunal *of God, ’ attended by 
the fourteen greatdords of the realm, marshalled according 
to their rank. Then, putting on his mitred crowp, incrusted 
with precious stones, and holding a golden arrow, by way of 
sceptre, in his left hand, he laid his right upon the skull, 
and pronounced judgment.’’ ** All this looks rather fine for 
a court of justice, it must be owned. But it is certain, that 
the Tezcucans, aa we shall see hereafter, possessed both thS 
materials and the skill requisite to work them up in this 
manner* Had they been a little further advance^ in refine* 
ment, one might well doubt their having the bad taste to 
do so.The laws of the Aztecs were registered, and exhibited to 
the people in their hieroglyphical paintings. Much the 
larger part of them, as in every nation imperfectly civilised, 
relates rather to the security of persons than of property.

♦ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 36. These various objects had a 
symbolical meaningj according to Boturini, Idea, p. 84.

hmn AHd EBYlSXrtTBS.

2d

The great ctemes against society were all made capital. 
Even the mtfder of a slave was punished with death. Adul- 
terers, as among the Jews, were stoned to deafth. Thieving, 
according to the degree of the offence, was punished by 
slavery or d^ath.^ Yet the Mexicans could hare been under 
no great apprehension of this crime, since the entrances to 
their dwellings were not secured by bolts, or fastenings of 
any kind. It was a capital offence to remove the boundaries 
of another’s lands ; to alter the established measures ; and 
for a guardian not to be able to give a good account of his 
ward’s property. These regulations evince a regard for 
equity in dealings, and for private rights, which argues a 
considerable progress in civilisation. Prodigals, who squan- 
dered their patrimony, were punished in like manner ; a 
severe sentence, since the crime brought its adequate punish- 
ment along with it. Intenp^rance, which was the burden, 
moreover, of their religious homilies, was visited with the 
severest penalties ; as if they had foreseen in it the copsum- 
ing canker of their own, as well as of the other Indian races 
in later times. It was punished in the young with death, 
and in older persons with loss of rank and confiscation of 
pre^rty. Yet a decent conviviality was not meant to be 
prospVibed at their festivals, and they possessed the means 
of indulging it, in a mild fermented liquor, called pulque^ 
which is still popular, not only with the Indian, but the 
European population of the country.** Paintings of the Mendoza Collection, Plate 72, and Interpretation ap. 
Antiq. of Mexico, vol. vi. p. 87. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 12, 
cap. 7. — Clavigerd, Stpr. del Messico, tom. ii. pp, 130-134. — Camargo, 
Hist, de Tlascala, MS. They could scarcely have been an intemperate 
people, with these heavy pepaltiee hanging over them. Indeed, Zurita 
bears testimony that :tho8e Spaniards, who thought they were, greatly erred, 
(Rapport, p. il2.)’ Mons. Temaux’s translation of a passage of the Anony- 
mous Conqueror, “aucun peuple n’est aussi sobre,*’ (Recueil de Pieces 
Relatives ^ la Conquete du libxique,ap. Voyages, &c., [Paris, 1838,] p.44,) 
may give a more favourable impression, however, than that intended by

30

AZTEC CtraiSATIOK,

The rites of marriage were celebrated •^th as much 
for^aality as in any Christian country ; and \he institution 
was held in such reverence, that a tribunal was instituted 
for the sole purpose of determining questions relating to it. 
Divorces could not be obtained, until authorised by a sentence 
of this court, after a patient hearing of the parties.But the most remarkable part of the Aztec code was that 
relating to slavery. There were several descriptions of 
slaves : prisoners taken in war, who were almost always 
reserved for the dreadful doom of sacrifice ; criminals, public 
debtors, persons who, frgm extreme poverty, voluntarily 
resigned their freedom, and children who were sold by their 
own parents. In the last instance, usually occasioned also 
by poverty, it was common for the parents, with the master’s 
consent, to substitute others of their children successively, 
as they grew up : thus distributing fhe burden, as equally 
as possible, among the difierent members of the family. 
The willingness of freemen to* incur the penalties of Ibis 
condition is explained by the mild form in whiclrit 
The contract of sale was executed in the preseqle of el least 
four witnesses. The services to be exfl.cte^.^W5ere limited 
with great precision. The slave was allowed to have his 
own family, to hold property, and ,«ven othej: daves* His 
children were free. No one.iEa>uld be bom to slavery in 
Mexico ; ^ an honourable distinction, not known, I believe, 
in any civilised community where slavery has been sanc- 
tioned.! Slaves were not sold by their masters, unless

his original, whose I'emark is confined to abstemiousness in eating. — 
See the Relatione, ap. Ramusio, Raccdita delle 'Navigationi et Viaggi, 
(Venetia, 1554-1565:)

♦ In Ancient Egypt the child of a slave was horn free, if the father were 
free. (Diodorus, Bibl. Hist., lib. 1, sec. 80.) This, though more liberal 
than the code of most countries, fell short of the Mexican.

•j- In Egypt the same penalty was attache|^to the murder of a slave as 
to that of a freeman. (Ibid. lib. 1, sec. 77^J Bobertscm speaks of a class

LAWS AND EEVENDES.

31•j- In Egypt the same penalty was attache|^to the murder of a slave as 
to that of a freeman. (Ibid. lib. 1, sec. 77^J Bobertscm speaks of a class

LAWS AND EEVENDES.

31

when these ’wfere driven to it by poverty. They were often 
liberated by fiem at their death, and sometimes, as there 
was no natural repugnance founded on difference of blood 
and race, were married to them. Yet a refractory or vicious 
slave might J)e 1^ into the market, with a collar round his 
neck, which intimated his bad character, and there be 
publicly sold, and, on a second sale, reserved for sacrifice.* 
Such are sonie of the most striking features of the Aztec 
code, to which the Tezcucan bore great resemblance.f 
With some exceptions, it is stamped with the severity, the 
ferocity, indeed, of a rude people, hardened by familiarity 
with scenes of blood, and relying on physical, instead of 
moral means, for the correction of evil.J Still, it evinces 
a profound respect for the great principles of morality, and 
as clear a perception of these principles as is to be found in 
the most cultivated nalions* ^

The royal revenues were derived from various sources. 
The crown lands, which ^appear to have been extensive, 
made their Returns in kind. The places in the neighbour- 
hood of the capital were bound to supply workmen and

of slaves held so cheap in the eye of the Mexican law, that one might kill 
them with impunity. (History of America, [ed. London, 1776,] vol.*iii. 
]}. 164.) This, however, was not in Mexico, but in Nicaragua, (see his 
own authority, Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 3, lib. 4, cap. 2,) a distant 
country, not incorporated in the Mexican empire, and with laws and insti- 
tutions very different from those of the latter.

* Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 12, cap. 15 ; lib. 14, cap. 16, 17. — 
Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafla, lib. 8, cap. 14.— -Clavigero, Stor. del 
Messico, tom. ii. pp. 134-136.* Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 12, cap. 15 ; lib. 14, cap. 16, 17. — 
Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafla, lib. 8, cap. 14.— -Clavigero, Stor. del 
Messico, tom. ii. pp. 134-136.

f Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chiqh., MS., cap* 38, and Relaciones, MS. The 
Tezcucan code, indeed, as digested under the great Nezahualcoyotl, formed 
the basis of the Mexican, in the latter days of the empire. — ^Zurita, Rap- 
port, p. 95.

X Irll^his, at least, they did not resemble the Romans ; of whom their 
countryman could boast, Gloriari liccrt, nulli gentium mitiores placuisse 
pcenas.” — Livy, Hist., lib. Ijjkcap. 28,

A^TBO OIVILISATIOir,

32

^ materials for building the king’s palaces, an^keeping them 
ii ppair. They were also to f|mish fuel, provisions, and 
whatever was necessary for his ordinary domestic expendi- 
ture, which was certainly on no stinted scale.* The 
principal cities, which had numerous villages^ and a large 
territory dependent on them, were distributei! into districts, 
with each a share of the lands allotted to it, for its support. 
The inbabitants paid a stipulated part of the produce to the 
crown. The vassals of the great chiefs, also, paid a portion 
of their earnings into the public treasury ; an arrangement 
not at all in the spirit of the feudal institutions, t

In addition to this tax on all the agricultural produce of 
the kingj^m, there was another on its manufactures. The 
nature abd the variety of the tributes will he best shown by 
an enumeration of some of the principal articles. These 
were cotton dresses, and mantles of featherwork, exquisitely 
made ; ornamented armour ; vases and plates of gold ; gold- 
dust, bands and bracelets ; crystal, gilt, and varnished jars* The Tezeucan revenuee were, in like manner, paid in the produce of 
the country. The various branche%of the royal expenditure were defrayed 
by specified towns and districts ; and the whole arrangements here, and in 
Mexico, bore a remarkable resemblance to the financial regulations of the 
Pe^ian empire, as reported by the Greek writers (see Herodotus, Clio, 
sec. 192) ; with this difference, however, that the towns of Persia proper 
were not burdened with tributes, like the conquered cities. — (Idem, 
Thalia, sec. 97.) •

+ Lorenzana, Hist, de NuevaEspafia, p. 172. — Torquemada, Monarch. 
Ind,, lib. 2, cap. 89 ; lib. 14, cap. 7. — Boturini, Idea, p. 166. — Camargo, 
Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 7, cap. 13. 
The people of the provinces were distributed into cal'p'aUi, or tribes, who 
held the lands of the neighbourhood in common. . Officers of their own 
appointment parcelled out these lands among the several families of the 
caJlpvlU ; amd, on the extinction or removal^of a family, its l^ds reverted 
to the common stock, to be again distributed. The individual proprietor 
had no power to alienate them. The laws regulating tiiese mat As were 
very precise, and had existed ever since the occupation of the country by 
the Aztecs.— 2urita, Eapport, pp, 51-62.

LAWS AND BEV£KUSS, 3|

and goblets ; jjells, arms, and ntensils of oopper ; reams of 
‘ paper ; grainy fruits, cop^, amber, cochineal, cocoa, wild 
animals and birds, timber, lime, mats, In this curious

medley of the most homely commodities, and the elegant 
superfluities of lujcury, it is singular that no mention should 
be made of silver, the great staple of the country in later 
times, and the use of which was certainly known to the 
Aztecs, t* The following items of the tribute funiished by different cities will 
give a more precise idea of its nature ; — 20 chests of ground chocolate ; 
40 pieces of armour, of a particular device ; 2400 loads of large mantles, of 
twisted ‘cloth; 800 loads of small mantles, of rich wearing apparel; 5 
pieces of armour, of rich feathers ; 60 pieces of armour, of common feathers ”, 
a chest of beans; a chest of chian ; a chest of maize; 8000 reams of 
paper ; likewise 2000 loaves of very white salt, refined in the shape of a 
mould, for the consumption only of the lords of Mexico ; 0000 lumps of 
unrefined copal; 400 small •baskets of white refined copal; 100 copper 
axes ; ^80 loads of red chocolate ; 800 sdearas, out of which they drank 
chocolate ; a little vessel of small turquoise stones ; 4 chests of timber full 
of maize ; 4000 loads of lime ; tiles of gold, of the size of an oyster, and 
as thick as the finger ; 40 bags of cochineal ; 20 bags of gold-dust, of the 
finest quality ; a diadem of gold, of a specified pattern ; 20 lip-jewels of 
clear amber, oraamented with gold ; 200 loads of chocolate; 100 pots or 
jars of liquid-amber ; 8000 handfuU of rich scarlet feathers ; 40 tiger- 
skins ; 1600 bundles of cotton, &c., ficc.—^lloL de Mendoza, part. 2, ap. 
Antiq. of Mexico, vols. i., vi.+ Mapa de Tributes, ap. Lorenzana, Hist, de Nueva Espaiia. — Tribute- 
roll, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, vol. i., and Interpretation, vol. vi. pp. 17-44. 
The Mendoza Collection, in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, contains a 
roll of the cities of the Mexican empire, with the specific tributes exacted 
froEft them. It is a copy made after the Conquest, with a pen, on European 
pap^,' (See Foreign Quarterly Review, No. xvii. Art. 4.) An original 
paintfiagof the same roll was in Boturini's museum. Lorenzana has given 
us ^gWivings of it, in which the outlines of the Oxford copy ace filled up, 
though somewhat rudely. Clavigero considers the explanations in Loren- 
zana’s edition very inaccurate, ^Stor. del essico, tom. i. p. 26,) judg- 
ment confirmed by Aglio, who has transcribed the entire collection of the 
MendoziPpaperB, in the first volume of the Antiquities of Mexico. It would 
have much facilitated reference to his plates, if they had been numbered ; 
— a strange omission!

VOL. I. * J)

34

AZTBC CIVILISATION.VOL. I. * J)

34

AZTBC CIVILISATION.

damsons were establisked in the larger ci^es, — probably 
those at a distance, and recently conquered, -*to keep down 
revolt, and to enforce the payment of the tribute.* Tax- 
gatherers were also distributed throughout the kingdom, 
who were recognised by their official b^-^es,^ and dreaded 
from the moJ ciJess rigour of their exacuons. By a stern 
law, every defaulter was liable to be taken and sold as a 
slave. Jn the capital were spacious granaries and ware- 
houses for the reception of the tributes. A receiver-general 
was quartered in the palace, who rendered in an exact 
account of the various contributions, and watched over the 
conduct of the inferior agents, in whom the least malversa- 
tion was summarily punished. This functionary was fur- 
nished with a map of the whole empire, with a minute 
specification of the imposts assessed on every part of it. 
These. ’imposts, moderate under the reigns of the early 
princes, became so burdensome under those at the close of 
the dynasty, being rendered still more oppressive by the 
manner of collection, that they bred disaffection throughout 
the land, and prepared the way for its conquest by the 
Spaniards.f *

Communication was maintained with the remotest parts 
of the country by means of couriers. Post-houses were 
established on the great roads, about two leagues distant 
from each other. The courier, bearing his despatches in 
the form of a hieroglyphical paintings ran with them to the

* The caciques, who submitted t© the allied arms, were usually con- 
firmed in their authority, and the conqmered places allowed to retalfi' their 
laws and usages. (Zurita, Rapport, p. 67.) The conquests were not 
always partitioned, hut sometimes, singularly enough, were held in common 
by the three powers. — Ibid., p. 11.•f* CoUec. of Mendoza, ap. Antiq, of Mexico, vol. vi. p. 17. — Carta de 
Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, Hist, de Nueva Espafia,’ p, llO. — Tofquemada, 
Monarch. Ind., lib. 14, cap. 6 , 8 . — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 7, 
cap. 13. — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib.^S, cap. 18, 19,

MILITARY INSTITUTIONS, 35

first station, takten by another messenger,

and carried forward to the next, and so on till they reached 
the capital. These couriers, trained from childhood, tra- 
velled with incredible swiftness ; not four or five leagues an 
hour, as an old ckronicler would make us believe, but with 
such speed that despatches were carried from one to two 
hundred miles a-day.* Fresh fish was frequently seived at 
Montezuma’s table in twenty-four hours from the time it 
had been taken in the Gulf of Mexico, two hundred miles 
from the capital- In this way intelligence of the move- 
ments of the royal armies was rapidly brought to court ; 
and the dress of the courier, denoting by its colour that of 
his tidings, spread joy or consternation in the towns through 
which he passed, t

* The Hon. C. A. Mumy, whose imperturbable good humour under 
real troubles form's a contrast, rather striking, to tlm sensitiveness of some 
of his predecessors to imaginary ones, tells us, among other marvels, that 
an Indian of his party travelled a hundred miles in four and twenty hours. 
(Travels in N. America, [New York. 1839,] vol. i. p. 193.) The Greek, 
who, according to Plutarch, brought the news of victory at Plataea, a hundred 
and twenty-five miles, in a day, was a better traveller still. Some inter- 
esting facts on the pedestrian capabilities of man in the savage state are 
collected by BufFon, who concludes, truly enough, L’homni© civilise ne 
coiinait pes ses forces.” — (Histoire Naturelle; De la Jeunesse.)

f Torquomada^ Monarch. Ind., lib. 14, cap. 1. The same wants led 
to the same expedients in ancient Home, and still more ancient Persia.f Torquomada^ Monarch. Ind., lib. 14, cap. 1. The same wants led 
to the same expedients in ancient Home, and still more ancient Persia.

Nothing in the world is borne so swiftly,” says Herodotus, “ as messages 
by the Persian couriers which his commentator, Valckenaer, prudently 
qualifies by the exception of the carrier pigeon. (Herodotus, Hist., Urania, 
sec. 98, nec non Adnot. ed. Schweigh'duscr.) Couriers are noticed, in the 
thirteenth century, in China, by Marco Polo. Their stations were only 
three miles apart, and they accomplished five days^ journey in one. (Yitggi 
di Marco Polo, lib. 2, cap. 20, ap. Ramusio, tom. ii.) A similar arrange- 
ment for posts subsists there at Abe present day, and excites the admiration 
of a modern traveller. (Anderson, British Embassy to China, [London^ 
1796,] p. 282.) In all these cases, the posts were for the use of 
government only. ,

.

91 Jidn^ «Gtv${^98r.

• "

« ^1^ ate # -Ibe AM0

pYlrate dismplte and puWb tenoara W^^lik© 
iraa the profession of arms. In Mexico, as in Egypt, the 
fioMier shared with the priest the highest consideration. 
The king, as we have seen, must be an e^OJerienced warrior. 
The tutelary deity of the Aztecs was the god of war. A 
groat object of their nuUtary expeditions was, to gather 
heeatombs of captives for his altars. The soldier, who fell 
in batiiOi was tranaported at once to the region of ineffable 
bliss in the briji^t mansions of the Sun.* Every war, 
therefore, became a crusade ; and the warrior, animated by 
a religiouf ^i^Usiasro, like that of the early Saracen, or 
the Christian crusader, was not only raised to a contempt 
of danger, but courted it, for the imperishable crown of 
inartyi*dom. Thus we find the same impulse acting in the 
most opposite quarters of the globe, and the Asiatic, the 
European, and the American, each earnestly invoking 
the holy name of religion in the perpetration of human 
butchery.The question of war was discussed in a council of the 
king and his chief nobles. Ambassadors were sent, pre- 
viously to its declaration, to require the hostile state to 
receive the Mexican gods, and to pay the customary tribute. 
The persons of ambassadors were held sacred throughout 
Anahuac. They were lodged and entertained in the great 
towns at the public charge, and were everywhere received 
with courtesy, so long as they did not deviate from the high- 
roads on their route. When they did, they forfeited their 
privileges. If the embassy proved unsuccessful, a defiance, 
or open declaration of war, was sent ; quotas were drawn 
from the conquered provinces, which were always subjected 
to military service, as well as the payment of taxes ; and

• Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 3. Apend.,cap. 3.

m rnaroh.* ^

The Aztec princes made use of the inceiitivea employed 
by European monarchs to excite the ambition of their fol* 
lowers. Th^y ^tablished various military orders, each 
haying its privileges and peculiar insignia. There seems, 
also, to have existed a sort of knighthood, of inferior degree. 
It was the cheapest reward of martial prowess, and whoever 
had not reached it was excluded from using ornaments on 
his arms or his person, and obliged to wear a coarse white 
stuff, made from the threads of the aloe, called nequen. 
Even the members of the royal family were not excepted 
from this law, which reminds one of the occasional practice 
of Christian knights, to wear plain armour, or shields with- 
out device, till they had achieved some doughty feat of 
chivalry, Although the military orders were thrown open 
to all, it is proballc that they were chiefly filled with per- 
sons of rank, who, by their previous training and con- 
nexions, were able to come into the field under peculiar 
advantages.! ^The dress of the higher warriors was picturesque, and 
often magnificent. Their bodies were covered with a close 
vest of quilted cotton, so thick as to be impenetrable to the 
light missiles of Indian warfare. This garment was so 
light and serviceable, that it was adopted by tbe Spaniards. 
The wealthier chiefs sometimes wore, instead of this cotton 
mail, a cuirhss made of thin plates of gold, or silver. Over

* Zurita, Rapport, pp. 68, 120. — Col, of Mendoza, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, 
vol. i. PI. 67 ; vol. vi. p. 74. — Torqucmada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 14, cap, 1. 
The reader will find a remarkable resemblance to these military usages in 
those of the early Romans. — Comp. Liv., Hist., lib. 1, cap. 32 ; lib. 4, 
cap. 30, et alibi.

Ibid, lib, 14, cap. 4, 5, — Acosta, lib. 6, ch. 26. — Collec. of Mendoza, 
ap. Antiq. of Mexico, voL i. Plate 65 ; vol. vi. p. 72. — Camargo, Hist, de 
Tlascala, MS. •

38

AZTiO CimiSATtOK.

it Hm thrown a sureoAt of the gorgeous featlier-w(frk in 
they excelled.^ Their helmets wer^ sometimes of 
wood, fftsMoned like the heads of wild animals, and somo- 
times of silver, on the top of which waved a panache of 
variegated feathers, sprinkled with pr^ious stones and 
ornaments of gold. They wore also collars, bracelets, and 
earrings, of the same rich materials. t

Their armies were divided into bodies of eight thousand 
men ; and these, again, into companies of three or four 
hundred, each with its own commander. The national 
standard, which has been compared to the ancient Roman, 
displayed, in its embroidery of gold and feather- work, the 
armorial ensigns of the state. These were significant of its 
name, which, as the names of both persons and places were 
borrowed from some material object, was easily expressed 
by hieroglyphical symbols. The companies and the great 
chiefs had also their appropriate banners and devices, and 
the gaudy hues of their many-coloured plumes gave a 
dazzling splendour to the spectacle.Their tactics were such as belong to a nation with whom

* ** Their mail, if mail it may be called, was woven 
Of vegetable down, like finest flax.

Bleached to the whiteness of i^ew-fallen snow.”

* « « «

“ Others, of higher office, were arrayed

In feathery breastplates, of more gorgeous hue 
Than the gay plumage of the mountain cock, ,

Than the pheasant’s glittering pride. But what were these,

Or what the thin gold hauberk, when opposed 
To arms like ours in battle ?

Madoc, P. I, canto 7.

Beautiful painting ! One may doubt, howeyer, the propriety of the Welsh- 
man’s vaunt, before the use of firearms.

*1* Sahaguii, Hist, de Nueva Espaila, lib. 2, caji. 27 ; lib. 8, cap. 12. — 
Relatione d’un gentir huomo, ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. p, 305. — Torquemado, 
Monarch, Ind., ubi supra.

MIIiITAKt IKSTITUtlOJJS,

39

war, thoug'h a trade, ia Bot elevated to tKe rank of a 
science. Thej advanced singing, and shouting their war- 
cries, briskly charging the enemy, as rapidly retreating, 
and making use of ambuscades, sudden surprises, and the 
light skirmish of |fuerilla warfare. Yet their discipline was 
such as to draw forth the encomiums of the Spanish con- 
querors. ‘‘A beautiful sight it was,** says one of them, 
“to see them set out on their march, all moving forward so 
gaily, and in so admirable order ! ’* * In battle, they did 
not seek to kill their enemies, so much as to take them pri- 
soners ; and they never scalped, like other North American 
tribes. The valour of a warrior was estimated by the 
number of his prisoners ; and no ransom was large enough 
to save the devoted captive.fTheir military code bore the same stern features as their 
other laws. Disobedience of orders was punished with 
death. It was death, also, for a soldier to leave his colours 
to attack the enemy before the signal was given, or to 
plunder another’s booty or prisoners. One of the last 
Tezcucan priices, in the spirit of an ancient Roman, put 
two sous to demh, — after having cured their wounds, — for 
violating the last-mentioned law.f

I must not omit to notice here an institution, the intro-

* Relatione d’un gentiP huomo, ubi supra. •

+ Col. of Mendoza, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, vol. i. Plates 65, 66 ; vol. vi. 
p. 73. — Sahagim, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 8, cap. 12. — Toribio, Hist, 
de los Indies, MS., Parte I, cap. 7. — Torquemada, Monarch. lad., lib. 14, 
cap. 3. — Relatione d’un gentil’ huomo, ap. Ramusio, loc. cit. Scalping 
may claim high authority, or, at least, antiquity. The Father of History 
gives an account of it among the Scythians, showing that they performed 
the operation, and wore the hideous trophy, in the same manner as our 
North American Indians. (Herodot., Hist, Melpomene, sec. 64.) Traces 
of the same savage, custom are also found in the laws of the Visigoths, 
among the Franks, and even the Anglo-Saxons. — See Guizot, Cours 
d’Histoire Moderne, (Paris, 1829,) tom. i. p. 283.

J Ixtlilxoghitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 67.

40

AZTEC CJTXLJSATIOX.

SliiotioE of 'whicla, in tlae Old World, is ranked among the 
“henefieent fruits of Christianity. Hospitals were established 
iiji the principal cities for the cure of the sick, and the per- 
manent refuge of the disabled soldier ; and surgeons were 
placed over them, “ who were so far bet^^er than -those in 
Eui-ope,” says an old chronicler, “ that they did not protract 
the cure, in order to increase the pay/’ *Such is the brief outline of the civil and military polity of 
the ancient Mexicans ; less perfect than could be desired, 
in regard to the former, from the imperfection of the sources 
whenc^lt^ drawn. Whoever has had occasion to explore 
the eaily^ history of modern Europe has found how vague 
andiittHSatisfactory is the political information which can be 
gleiwied from the gossip of monkish annalists. How much 
is the difficulty increased in the present instance, where 
this information, first recorded in the dubious language of 
hieroglyphics, was interpreted in another language, with 
which the Spanish chroniclers were imperfectly acquainted, 
while it related to institutions of which their past experience 
enabled them to form no adequate conception ! Amidst 
such uncertain lights, it is in vain to expect nice accumey 
of detail. All that can be done is, to attempt an outline of 
the more prominent features, th^ « correct impression, so 
far as it goes, may be produced-dli the mind of the reader.

Enough has been said, hoWever, to show that the Aztec 
and Tezcucan races were advanced in civilisation very far 
beyond the wandering tribes of North America. f The degree

* Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 12, cap. 6; lib. 14, cap. 3. — 
Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap 36,

f Zurita is indignant at the epithet of barbarians bestowed on the 
Aztecs ; an epithet, he says, “ which could come from no one who had 
personal knowledge of the capacity of the people, or their institutions, and 
which, in some respects, is quite a« well merited by the European nations.” 
— (Rapport, pp. 200. et seq.) This is strong language. Yet no one had 
better means of knowing than this eminent jurisC, who, for nineteen years,

AZTEO CIVILISATION,

41AZTEO CIVILISATION,

41

of civilisation which they had reached, as inferred by their 
political institutions, may he considered, perhaps, not much 
short of that enjoyed by our Saxon ancestors, under Alfred. 
In respect to the nature of it, they may be better compared 
with the Egyptians ; and the examination of their social 
relations and culture may suggest still stronger points of 
resemblance to that ancient people.

Those familiar with the modern Mexican will find it 
difficult to conceive that the nation should ever have been 
capable of devising the enlightened polity which we have 
been considering. But they should remember, thot in the 
Mexicans of our day they see only a conquered race ; as 
different from their ancestors as are the modern Egyptians 
from those who built, — I will not say the tasteless pyramids, 
‘—but the temples and palaces, whose magnificent wrecks 
strew the bordejs of the Nile, at Luxor and Kamac. The 
difference is not so great as between the ancient Greek and 
his degeneraite descendant, lounging among the master-held a post in the loyal audiences of Now Spain. During his long resi- 
dence m the countrf he had ample opjfbrtunity of acquainting himself with 
its usages, both through his own personal observation and intercourse with 
the natives, and through the first missionaries who came over after the 
Conquest. On his return to Spain, probably about 1560, he occupied 
himself with an answer to queries which had been propounded by the 
govtTnment, on the character of the Aztec laws and institutions, and on 
that of the modifications introduced by the Spaniards. Much of his 
treatise is taken up with the latter subject. In what relates to the former 
he is more brief than could he wished, from the difficulty, perhaps, of 
obtaining full and satisfactory information as to the details. As far as he 
goes, however, he manifests a sound and discriminating judgment. He is 
very rarely betrayed into the extravagance of expression so visible in the 
writers of the time ; and this temperance, combined with his uncommon 
sources of information, makee his work one of highest authority on the 
limited, topics within its range. The original manuscript was consulted by 
Clavigero, and, indeed, has been used by other writers. The work is now 
accessible to all, as one of the series of translations from the pen of the 
iudefatigsihle Ternaux. •

42

AZTEC CIVILISATION.

lUepes of art, which he has scarcely taste enough to admire, 
—speaking the language of those still more^ imperishable 
monuments of literature which he has hardly capacity to 
comprehend. Yet he breathes the same atmosphere, is 
warmed by the same sun, nourished by th|t same scenes, as 
those who fell at Marathon, and won the trophies of Olympic 
Pisa. The same blood flows* in his veins that flowed in 
theirs. But ages of tyranny have passed over him ; he 
belongs to a conquered race.The American Indian has something peculiarly sensitive 
in his i^tiire. He shrinks instinctively from the rude touch 
of a foreign hand. Even when this foreign influence comes 
in form of civilisation, he seems to sink and pine away 
beneath it. It has been so with the Mexicans. Under 
the Spanish domination, their numbers have silently melted 
away. Their energies are broken. ' They no longer tread 
their mountain plains with the conscious independence of 
their ancestors. In their faltering step, anid meek and 
melancholy aspect, we rofWi the sad characters of the con- 
quered race. The of humanity, indeed, has gained*

They live under a better system of laws, a. more 
tranquillity, a purefifaith. But all does nojJi^yaiL ^heir 
civilisation was of the hardy character whidMiAngs the 
wilderness. The fierce virtues pf the AzfeS ws^re all his 
own. They refused to submit to European culture,— to be 
engrafted on a foreign stock. His outward form, his com- 
plexion, his lineaments, are substantially the same ; but the 
moral characteristics of the nation, all that constituted its 
individuality as a race, are eflaced for ever.

Two of the principal authorities for this Chapter.,are Torqnemada 
and Clavigero. The former, a Provincial of the Franciscan order, 
came to the New World about the middle of the sixteentli century. 
As the generation of the conquerors had not then passed away, he had

TORQUEMADA,

43TORQUEMADA,

43

ample opportunities of gatheiing the particulars of theireuterprise from 
their own lips. Fifty years, during which he conunned in the coun- 
try, put him in^ossession of the traditions and usages of the natives, 
and enabled him to collect their history from the earliest missionaries, 
as well as from su^ monuments as the fanaticism of his own country- 
men had not then l^stroyed. From these ample sources he compiled 
his bulky tomes, beginning, after the approved fashion of the ancient 
Castilian chroniclers^ with the creation of the wox;kl|, iind embracing 
the whole circle df the Mexican institutions, political, religious, 
and social, fromt We earliest period to his own'^rilaP* In handling 
these fruitful them#/; the worthy father has showit tC full measure of 
the bigotry which belonged to his order at that petiod. Every page, 
too, is loaded with illustrations from ScripturejjHlf profane history, 
which form a whimsical contrast to the barbaricataple of his story ; 
and he has sometimes fallen into serious errori) from his miscon*' ^ 
ception of the chronological system of the Aztecs. But notwithstanding 
these glaring defects in the composition of the work, the student, 
aware of his author’s infirmities, w^ill find few better guides thtt 
Torquemada in tracing tlvs stream of historic truth up to the fountain 
head ; such is his manifest integrity, and so great were his facilities for 
information on the most curious points in Mexican antiquity. No 
work, accordingly, has been more largely consulted and copied, even 
by some who ^ke Herrera, have p>fiecte^ to set little value on the 
sources whence its information (Hist. General, dec. 6.

lib. 6, cap. 19). The Mmarqui^ first published at

Seville, 1615, (Nic. Antonio, Bibliotfaeoat-^ovaf [Matriti,«1783,] tom. 
ii. p. 787,) and since, in a better atyle^ volumes folio, at

M^fi^d^in 1723.Seville, 1615, (Nic. Antonio, Bibliotfaeoat-^ovaf [Matriti,«1783,] tom. 
ii. p. 787,) and since, in a better atyle^ volumes folio, at

M^fi^d^in 1723.

The other authority, frequently cited^fc the preceding pages, is the 
Abb^ ClAvigero's Storia Antica del Memco* It was originally printed 
towards the close of the last century, in the Italian language, and in 
Italy, whither the author, a native of Vera Cruz, and a member of 
the order of the Jesuits, had retired on the^ expulsion of that body 
from America, in 1767. During a residenoe of thirty-five years in 
his own country, Clavigero had made himself intimately acquainted 
with its antiquities, by the careful examination of paintings, manu- 
scripts, and such other remains as were to be found in his day. The 
plan of his work is nearly as comprehensive as that of his prede- 
cessor, Torquemada ; but Ihe latter and more cultivated period, in 
which he wrote, Is visible in the superior address with whidi he has 
managed his complicated subject. In the elaborate disquisitions in 
his concluding volume he has done much to rectify the chronology, 
and the various inaccuracies of preceding writers. Indeed, an

44

CLAYIGEKO.44

CLAYIGEKO.

avowed olbject of his work was, to vindicate his countrymen from 
|rhat he conceived to be the misrepresentations of Robertson, Raynal, 
and De Pau. In regard to the last two, he was perfectly successful. 
Such an ostensible design might naturally suggest unfavourable 
ideas of his impartiality. But, on the whole, he .^eems to have con- 
ducted the discussion with good faith ; and he has been led* 
by national zeal to overcharge the picture with brilliant colours 
he will be found much more temperate, on this score, than those who 
preceded him, p|iile he has applied sound principles of criticism, 
of which they iWl|re incapable. In a word, xliligence of his 
researches has galbered into one focus the scatti^l^ lights of tradition 
and antiquarian lore, purified in a great measure from the mists of 
superstition whicl^^bscure the best productions of an earlier period. 
From these causes, ^he work, notwithstanding its occasional prolixity, 
und the disagreeable aspect given to it by the profusion of uncouth 
names in the Mexican orthography, which bristle over every page,

, has found iperited favour with the public, and created something like 
lli^opul^'.lipterest in the subject. Soon after its publication at Cesena, 
in 1780j fPivas translated into English, and^more lately, into Spanish 
and German.

45

CHAPTEE in.

MEXICAN MYTHOLOGY. — THE SaCERdOTAL ORDER. — THE lEMPLES.— 
HUMAN SACRIFICES.

The civil polity of the Aztecs is so closely bh^nded witli 
their religion, that, without understanding the latter, it is 
impossible to form correct ideas of their government or their 
social institutions. I shall pass over, for the present, some 
remarkable traditions, bearing a singular resemblance to 
those found in the Scriptures, and endeavour to give a brief 
sketch of their mythology, and their careful provisions for 
maintaining a national worship.Mythology may be regarded as, the poetry of religion, — 
or rather as the poetic develop^e^lfihe religious principle 
in a primitive age. It is th^, of untutored man to 
explain the mysteries of existence, and the secret agencies 
by which the operations of nature are conducted. Although 
the growth of similar conditions of society, its character 
must vary with that of the rude tribes in which it originates : 
and the ferocious Goth, quaffing mead from the skulls of his 
slaughtered enemies, must have a very different mythology 
from that of the effeminate native of Hispaniola, loitering 
away his hours in idle pastimes, under the shadow of his 
bananas.

At a later and more refined period, we sometimes find 
these primitive legends combined into a regular system 
under the hands of the poet, and the rude outline moulded 
into forms of ideal beauty, which are the objects of adoration

46

AZTEC CimrSATION.

in a credulous age, and the delight of all succeeding ones. 
Such were the beautiful inventions of Hesiod and Homer, 
“ who,*’ says the Father of History, “ create*’^ the theogony 
of the Greeks ; ” an assertion not to be taken too literally, 
since it is hardly possible that any man/should create a 
religious system for his nation.* They only filled up the 
shadowy outlines of tradition with the bright touches of 
their own imaginations, until they had clothed them in 
beauty which kindled the imaginations of others. The 
power of the poet, indeed, may be felt in a similar way 
in a much riper period of society. To say nothing of the

Divina Gommedia,” who is there that rises from the 
perusal of IfeParadise Lost ” without feeling his own con- 
ceptions of the angelic hierarchy quickened by those of the 
inspired artist, and a new and sensible form, as it were, 
given to images which had before floated dim and undefined 
before him ?The last-mentioned period is succeeded by that of philo- 
sophy ; which, disclaiming alike the legends of the prinu- 
tive age, and the poetical embellishments of 
one, seeks to shelter itself from the charge ^ 
giving an aHegorical interpretation to tlm mytl^ology,

and thus to reconcile the latter with^]^ genuine deductions 
of science. ^

The Mexican r^igioa ha4^m®rged from the first of the 
periods we have been considering, and, although little 
affected by poetical influences, had received a peculiar com- 
plexion from the priests, who had digested as thorough and 
burdensome a ceremonial ever existed in any nation. 
They had, moreover, thrown the veil of allegory over early

* not^avrey Btoryopliiv ^EAA^inu Herodotus, Euterpe, sec. 63. — 
Heeren hazards a remark equally strong, respecting ihe epic poets of India, 
“ who,’* says ho, “ have supplied the numerous gods that fill her pantheon.** 
— Historical Researches, Eng, tram., (Oxford, 1833,) vol. iiL p. 139,

MEXICsiN MYTHOLOGY.

47

tradition, and invested their deities with attributes, savour- 
ing much more of the grotesque conceptions of the eastern 
nations in tA Old World than of the lighter fictions of 
Greek mythoIo|g^, in which the features of humanity, how- 
ever exaggerated^ were never wholly abandoned.*In contemplating the religious system of the Aztecs, one 
is struck with its apparent incongruity, as if some portion 
of it had emanated from a comparatively refined people, 
open to gentle influences, while the rest breathes a spirit of 
unmitigated ferocity. It naturally suggests the idea of two 
distinct sources, and authorises the belief that the Aztecs 
had inherited from their predecessors a milder faith, on 
which was afterwards engrafted their own mythology. The 
latter soon became dominant, and gave its dark colouring 
to the creeds of the conquered nations, —which the Mexicans, 
like the ancient Romans, seem willingly to have incorporated 
into their own, — until the same funereal superstition settled 
over the farthest borders of Anahuac.

The Aztecs recognised the existence of a supreme Creator 
and Lord of the universe. They addressed him, in their 
pjrayers, as “ the God by whom w© live,” “ omnipresent, 
that knoweth all thoughts, and giretli all gifts,” “ without 
whom man is as nothing,” “ invisible, incorporeal, one God, 
of perfect perfection and purity,” “ under whose wings we 
find repose and a sure defence.” These sublime attributes 
infer no inadequate conception of the true God. But the 
idea of unity — of a being, with whom volition is action, who 
has no need of inferior ministers to execute his purposes—

* The Hon. Mountstuart Elphinatone has fallen into a similar train of 
thought, in a comparison of the Hindoo and Greek Mythology, in his 
“ History of India,’* published jsince the remarks in the text were written. 
— (See book 1. ch. 4.) The same chapter of this truly philosophic work 
suggests some curious points of resemblance to the Aatec relJ|^ouB institu- 
tions, that may furnish pertinent illustrations to the mind bei^ on tracing 
the affinities of the Asiatit^and American races.

48 Atmo crntmAfioisf,48 Atmo crntmAfioisf,

too simple, or too vast, for their understandings ; and 
tbejr sought relief, as usual, in the plurality of deities, who 
presided over the elements, the changes of tm seasons, and 
the various occupations of man.* Of these, there were 
thirteen principal deities, and more than/two hundred in- 
ferior ; to each of whom some special day, or appropriate 
festival, was consecrated. t

At the head of .all stood the terrible Huitzilopotchli, the 
Mexican Mars ; although it is doing injustice to the heroic 
war-god antiquity to identify him with this sanguinary 
monster. This was the patron deity of the nation. His 
fantastic image was loaded with costly ornaments. His 
temples were the most stately and august of the public 
edifices ; and his altars reeked with the blood of human 
hecatombs in every city of the empire. Disastrous, indeed, 
must have been the influence of such a superstition on the 
character of the people. J

* Bitter has well shown, by the example of the Hindoo system, how the 
idea of unity suggests, of itself, that ,*of pluiulity. — History of Ancient 
Philosophy, Eng. trans., (Oxfbrd, 1838,) bobk 2, ch. 1.■f Sahagun, Hist, do Nueva l^pana, lib. 6, passim. — Acosta, lib. 5, 
ch. 9. — Boturini, Idea, p. 8, et ae'q. — Irtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS, 
cap. 1. — Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. The Mexicans, according to 
Clavigero, believed in an evil Spirit, the enemy of the human race, whose 
barbarous name signified ** Rational Owl.’^ti — (Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. 
p. 2.) The curate Bernaldez speaks of the Devil being embroidered on 
the dresses of Columbus’s IndianB, in the likeness of an owl. — (Historia de 
los Reyes Catdlicos, MS., cap* 131.) This must not be confounded, how- 
ever, with the evil Spirit in the mythology of the North American Indians, 
(see Heckewelder’s Account, ap. Transactions of the American Philosophical 
Society, Philadelphia, vol. i. p. 205,) still less, with the evil Principle of 
the Oriental nations of the Old World. It was only one among many 
deities, for evil was found too liberally mingled in the natures of most of 
the Aztec gods, — in the same manner as with the Oreek, — to admit of its 
personification by any one. • ,

J Sahagnn, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. S, cap. 1, et seq. — Acosta, 
lib. 5, ch. 9. — Torquemada, Monarch, Ind., lib. 6, cap. 21. — Boturini, 
Idea, pp. 27, 28. Huitzilopotchli is compound/^ of two words, signifying

IttXICAN MYTHOLOGY.IttXICAN MYTHOLOGY.

A far more interesting personage in their mytholJ^I^ 
was Quetzalcoatl, god of the air, a divinity who, during his 
residence on Wrth, instructed the natives in the use of 
metals, in agri«lture, and in the arts of government. He 
was one of thol| benefactors of their species, doubtless, 
who have been deified by the gratitude of posterity. Under 
him, the earth teemed with fruits and flowers, without the 
pains of culture. An ear of Indian corn was as much as a 
single man could carry. The ootton, as it grew, took, of 
its own accord, the rich dies of human art. The air was 
filled with intoxicating perfumes and the sweet raelody of 
birds. In short, these were the halcyon days, which find a“ humming-bird,” and left,” from his image having the feathers of this 
bird on its left foot; (Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. p. 17 ;) an 
amiable rtymcdogy for so ruffian a deity. The fantastic forms of the 
Mexican idols were in the highest degree symbolical. See Gama’s learned 
exposition of the devices on the statue of the goddess found in the great 
square of Mexico. — (Dcscripcion de las Dos Piedras, [Mexico, 1832,] 
parte 1, pp. 34-44.) The tradition respecting the origin of this god, or, 
at least, his appearance on earth, is curious. He was bom of a woman. 
His mother, a devout person, one day, in her attendance on the temple, 
saw a ball of bright-coloured feathers fioS,tiiig in the air. She took it, and 
deposited it in her bosom. She soon after found herself pregnant, and the 
dread deity was horn, coming into the world, like Minerva, all armed, — 
with a spear in the right hand, a shield in the left, and his head surmounted 
by a crest of green plumes. — (See Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. 
p. 1 9, et seq.) A similar notion in respect to the incarnation of their 
principal deity existed among the people of India beyond the Ganges, of 
China, and of Thibet. Budh,” says Milman, in his learned and luminous 
work on the History of Christianity, “ according to a tradition known in 
the West, was born of a virgin, So were the Fohi of China, and the 
Schaka of Thibet, no doubt the same, whether a mythic or a reel personage. 
The Jesuits in China, says Barrow, were appalled at finding in the 
mythology of that country the counterpart of the Virgo Deipara.” — (Vol. i. 
p. 99, note.) The existence ofi similar religious ideas in remote regions, 
inhabited by different races, is an interesting subject of study i furnishing, 
as it does, one of the most important links in the great chain of communi- 
cation which binds together the distant &milies of nations.

VOL. I.

E

AZTEC CaVILISiTION.

5dVOL. I.

E

AZTEC CaVILISiTION.

5d

pJlMse in the mythic systems of so many nations in the Old 
World. It was the golden age of Anahuac,

From BomQ cause, not explained, Quetz^^coatl incurred 
the wrath of one of the principal gods, was compelled 
to abandon the country. On his way, stopped at the 
city of Cholula, where a temple was dedicated to his wor- 
ship, the massy ruins of which still form one of the most 
interesting relics of antiquity in Mexico. When he reached 
the shores of the Mexican^ Gulf, he took leave of his fol- 
lowers, promising that he and his descendants would revisit 
them hereafter, and then entering his wizard skiff, mode of 
serpents’ skins, embarked on the great ocean for the fabled 
land nf Tlapallan. He was said to have been tall in stature, 
with a white skin, long, dark hair, and a flowing beard. 
The Mexicans looked confidently to the return of the bene- 
volent deity ; and this remarkable tradition, deeply cher- 
ished in their hearts, prepared the way, as we shall see 
hereafter, for the future success of the Spaniards.*♦ Codex Vaticanus, PI 15, and Codex Telleriano-RemensiB, Part 2, 
PL 2, ap. Antiq, of Mexico, voU, i, vi. — Sahagun, Hist, de Nucva Espafia, 
lib. 3, cap. 8, 4, 13, 14. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 6, cap. 24. — 
Ixtlilxocbitl, Hist. Chiclu, MS., cap. 1. — Gomara, Crdnica de la Nueva 
Espafia, cap. 222, ap. Barcia, Historiadores Primitivos de las Indias Occi- 
dentales, (Madrid, 1749,) tom. ii, Quetzalcoatl signifies “feathered 
serpent.” The last syllable means likewise, a “twin;” which furnished 
an argument for Dr. Siguenza to identify this god with the apostle Thomas, 
(Didymus signifying also a twin,) who, he supposes, came over to America 
to preach the gospel. In this rather startling conjecture he is supported 
by several of his devout countrymen, who appear to have as little doubt 
the fact as of the advent of St. James, for a similar purpose, in the mother 
country. See the various authorities and arguments set forth with becoming 
gravity in Dr. Mier’s dissertatioa in Bustamente’s edition of Sahagun, (lib, 
3, fiuplem., [and Veytia,] tom. i. pp. 160;200.) Our ingenious country- 
man, M‘Culloch, carries the Aztec god up to a still more respectable 
antiquity, by identifying him with the patriarch Noah.—Researches, 
Philosophical and Antiquarian, concerning the Aboriginal History of 
America, (Baltimore, 1329,) p. 233.

MEXICAN MtTHOtOQY.

m

We have not space for further details respecting the 
Mexican divmities, the attributes of many of whom were 
carefully defiifed, as they descended in regular gradation, to 
the pemtes orVousehold gods, whose little images were to 
he found in the numblest dwelling.The Aztecs felt the curiosity, common to man in almost 
every stage of civilisation, to lift the veil which covers the 
mysterious past, and the more awful future. They sought 
relief, like the nations of the Old Continent, irom the 
oppressive idea of eternity, by breaking it up into distinct 
cycles, or periods of time, each of several thousand years’ 
duration. There were four of these eyles, and at the end 
of each, by the agency of one of the elements, the human 
family was swept from the earth, and the sun blotted out 
from the heavens, to he again rekindled.*

They imagined three separate states of existence in the 
future life. Tie wicked, comprehending the greater part 
of mankind, were to expiate their sins in a place of 
everlasting darkness. Another class, with no other merit* Cod. Vat., PI. 7-10, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, vols. i., vi. — Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap, 1. M. de Huml}oldt has been at some pains to 
trace the analogy between the Aztec cosmogony and that of Eastern Asia. 
He has tried, though in fain, to find a multiple which might serve as the 
key to the calculations of the former. (Vues des Cordill^res, pp. 202-212.) 
In truth, there seems to be a material discordance in the Mexican state- 
ments, both in regard to the number of revolutions and their duration. A 
manuscript before me, of Ixtlilxocbitl, reduces them to three, before the, 
present state of the world, and allows only 4391 years for them ; (Sumaria 
Relacion, MS., No. 1 ;) Gama, on the faith of an ancient Indian MS., in 
Boturini’s Catalogue, (viii. 13.) reduces the duration still lower ; (Descrip- 
cion de las Dos Piedras, parte 1, p. 49, et seq. ;) while the cycles of the 
Vatican paintings. take up near 18,000 years. — It is interesting to observe 
how the wild coifijectwres of aif ignorant age have been condrmed by the 
more recent discoveries in geology, making it probable that ‘^e earth has 
experienced a number of convulsions, possibly thousands of fears distant 
from each other, which have swept away the races then cxistliil, and given 
a new aspect to the globe* •

82

52

AZTJEC OimiSAinOK.82

52

AZTJEC OimiSAinOK.

ihan tHat of having died of certain diseases, capriciously 
selected, were to enjoy a negative existence of indolent con- 
tentment. The highest place was reserv<|*i, as in most 
warhke nations, for the heroes who fell f i battle, or in 
sacrifice. They passed, at once, into the ^presence of the 
Sun, whom they accompanied with songs and choral dances, 
iA his bright progress through the heavens ; and, after 
some years, their spirits went to *animate the clouds and 
singing birds of beautiful plumage, and to revel amidst the 
rich blossoms and odours of the gardens of paradise.^ 
Such was the heaven of the Aztecs ; more refined in its 
character^ than that of the more polished pagan, whose 
elysiu^ l*eflected only the martial sports, or sensual gratifi- 
cations, of this life.t In the destiny they assigned to the 
wicked, we discern similar traces of refinement ; since the 
absence of all physical torture forms a striking contrast to 
the schemes of sufifering so ingeniously devised by the 
fancies of the most enlightened nations, — In all this, so

* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 3, Apcnd. — Cod. Vat., ap. 
Antiq. of Mexico, PI. 1-5. — Torqutmada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 13, cap. 48. 
The last writer assures ua, “ that, as to what the Aztecs said of their going 
to hell, they were right ; for, as they died in ignorance of the true faith, 
they have, without question, all gone there to suffer ©verlaating pimishr 
ment I ” Ubi supra,+ It conveys but a poor idea of these pleasures, tiiat thA ifliade of Achilles 
can say, “ he had rather he the slave of meanest man on earth, than 
aoveroign among the dead,” (Odyss. 4^ 488-490.) The Mahometans 
believe that the souls of martyrs pass^ After death, into the bodies of birds, 
that haunt the sweet waters and bowers of Paradise. (Sale's Koran, 
[London, 1825,] vol. i. p, 106.) — ^The Mexican heaven may remind on© 
of Pante’s in its material enjoyments; which, in both, are made up of light, 
music, and motion. The sun, it must also be remembered, was a spiritual 
conception with the Aztec ; <

Ho sees with other eyes than theirs ; where they 
Behold a sun, he spies a deity.”

4^ It is ringular that the Tuscan bard, while exhausting his invention in 
deviring modes of bodily torture, in his Inferno,” should have made so

MEXIOAK MYTHOLOGY.

53

contrary to the natural suggestions of the ferocious Aztec, 
we see the evidences of a higher civilisation, inherited from 
their predecesWs in the land.

Our limits allow only a brief allusion to one or two 
of their most interesting ceremonies. On the death of a 
person, his corpse was dressed in the peculiar habiliments of 
his tutelar deity. It was strewed with pieces of paper, 
which operated as charms against the dangers of the dark 
road he was to travel. A throng of slaves, if he were rich, 
was sacrificed at his obsequies. His body was burned, and 
the ashes, collected in a vase, were preserved in one of the 
apartments of his house. Here we have successively the 
usages of the Roman Catholic, the Mussulman, the Tartar, and 
the ancient Greek and Roman, curious coincidences, which 
may show how cautious we should be in adopting conclusions 
founded on analogy.A more extraordinary coincidence may be traced with 
Christian rites, in the ceremony of naming their children. 
The lips and bosom of the infant were sprinkled with water, 
and “ the Lord was implored, to permit the holy drops to 
wash away the sin that was given to it before the founda- 
tion of the world ; so that the child might be born anew.*’f

little use of the moral sources of misery. That he has not done so might 
be reckoned a strong proof of the rudeness of the time, did we not meet 
with examples of it in a later day ; in which a serious and sublime writer, 
like Drl Watts, does not disdain to employ the same coarse machinery for 
moving the conscience of the reader.

* Carta del Lie. Zuazo, (Nov., 1521,) MS.-“ Acosta, lib. 6, cap. 8,— • 
Torqiiemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 13, cap. 45. — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva 
Espafia, lib. 3, Apend. Sometimes the body was buried entire, with 
valuable treasures, if the deceased was rich. The “ Anonymous Con- 
queror,” as he is called, saw geld to the value of 8000 CasteHanos drawn 
from one of these Jombs. — Relaciono d’un gentil’ huomo, ap. Ramusio, 
tom. iii. p. 310.

t This interesting rite, usually solemnised with great foWnality, in the 
presence of the assembled Jiends and relatives, is detailed with minuteness

AZTEC mriLISATlOlr,t This interesting rite, usually solemnised with great foWnality, in the 
presence of the assembled Jiends and relatives, is detailed with minuteness

AZTEC mriLISATlOlr,

We are reminded of Christian morals, in more than one of 
their prayers, in which they use regular forms. ** Wilt 
thou hlot us out, 0 Lord, for ever ? Is t^ 'is punishment 
intended, not for our reformation, but for o\K‘ destruction ? ** 
Again, “ Impart to us, out of thy great ^ mercy, thy gifts 
which we are not worthy to receive through our own 
merits.’* **Keep peace with all,** says another petition ; 
** bear injuries ’with humility ; God, who sees, will avenge 
you.’* But the most striking parallel with Scripture is in 
the T^arkable declaration, that ‘‘he who looks too curiously 
on filpfomaa, commits adultery with his eyes.’* These pure 
and elevated maxims, it is true, are mixed up with others of 
a puerile, and even brutal character, arguing that confusion 
of the moral perceptions, which is natural in the twilight of 
civilisation. One would not expect, however, to meet, in 
such a state of society, with doctrines as sublime as any 
inculcated by the enlightened codes of ancient philosophy.* 
But, although the Aztec mythology gathered nothing 
from the beautiful inventions of the poet, nor from the 
refinements of philosophy, i^ was much indebted, as I have 
noticed, to the priests, who endeavoured to dazzle the ima*

by Sfthagun, (Hist, de Nueva Espana, |ib. 6, cap. 37,) and by Zuazo, 
(Carta MS.,) both of them eyewitnesses. For a version of part of Saha- 
gun^s account, see AppenidiXy PaH 1, No, 1. note 26.

* (j posible que este azote y ©ste castigo no se nos dfi pam nuestm 
coireccion y enmienda, sino para tptal destruccion y asolamiento ? ** (8a-* (j posible que este azote y ©ste castigo no se nos dfi pam nuestm 
coireccion y enmienda, sino para tptal destruccion y asolamiento ? ** (8a-

bagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, lib. 6. cap. 1.) “ Y esto por sola vuestra 
Hberalidad y magnidcencia lo habdis de hacer, que ninguno es digno ni 
inerecedor de recibir vuestras larguezas por su dignidad y merecimiento, 
.eino que i)or vuestra benignidad,*'— (Ibid., lib. 0, cap. 2.) “Sed sufridos y 
reportados, que Dios bien os vd y responderi por vosotros, y dl oi vengaiA 
(&) sed hutuildes con todos, y eon esto osc hard Dios mm^ed y tambien 
bonra,”— (Ibid., lib. 6, cap. 17.) “ Jampoco mires con curiosidad el gesto 
y disposicion de la gente principal, mayormente de las mugeres, y sobre 
tedo de las cosadas, porque dice el refran que el que curiosamente mira d 
la mugcr adultera con la vista. — (Ibid,, lib. 6, ^p. 22.)

MBHOAN MTTHOliO&Y.

gination of tlie people by the most formal iftnd pompous 
oeremonial. The influence of the priesthood must hh 
greatest in a» imperfect state of civilisation, where it 
engrosses all tllb scanty science of the time in its own body. 
This is particularly the case, when the science is of that 
spurious kind which is less occupied with the real pheno- 
mena of nature, than with the fanciful chimeras of human 
superstition. Such are the sciences of astrology and divina- 
tion, in which the Aztec priests were well initiated ; and 
while they seemed to hold the keys of the future in their 
own hands, they impressed the ignorant people w ith senti- 
ments of superstitious awe, beyond that which has probably 
* existed in any other country, — even in Ancient Egypt;The sacerdotal order was very numerous ; as may be 
inferred from the statement that five thousand priests were, 
in some way or other, attached to the principal temple in 
the capital. The various ranks and functions of this multi- 
tudinous body were discriminated with great exactness. 
Those best instructed in music took the management of the 
choirs. Others arranged the festivals conformably to the 
calendar. Some superintended the education of youth, and 
others had charge of the hieroglyphical paintings and oral 
traditions ; while the dismal rites of sacrifice were reserved 
for the chief dignitaries of the order. At the head of the 
whole establishment were two high-priests, elected from the 
order, as it would seem, by the king and principal nobles, 
without reference to birth, but solely for their qualifica- 
tions, as shown by their previous conduct in a subordinate 
station. They were equal in dignity, and inferior only to 
the sovereign, who rarely acted vrithout theiif advice in 
weighty matters of pubfic cojxoetn,*

* Sahagun, Hist, dc Nueva Espana, lib, % Apend. ; lib. 3, cap. 9. — 
Torquemada, Monarch. Tnd., lib. 8, cap. 20 ; lib. 9, cap. 3, t6.—G 
Crdn., cap. 215, ap. tom. iii. — Toribio, Hist, do W Indies, MS.,

56

AZTEO CimiSATIOSr.56

AZTEO CimiSATIOSr.

The priests were each deToted to the service of some 
particular deity, and had quarters provided within the 
spacious precincts of their temple ; at least/i^while engaged 
in immediate attendance there, — for they/ were allowed to 
marry and have families of their own. In this monastic 
residence they lived in all the stern severity of conventual 
discipline. Thrice during the day, and once at night, they 
were called to prayers. They were frequent in their ablu- 
tions and vigils, and mortified the flesh by fasting and cruel 
penance, — drawing blood from their bodies by flagellation, 
or by piercing them with the thorns of the aloe ; in short, 
by praidji^ing all those austerities to which fanaticism (to 
borrotyr^he strong language of the poet) has resorted, in * 
every^ge of the world.

In hopes to merit heaven by making earth a hell.’’ *

The great cities were divided into districts, placed under 
the charge of a sort of parochial clergy, who regulated 
every act of religion within their precincts. It is remark- 
able that they administered the rites of confession and 
absolution. The secrets <of the confessionhl were held 
inviolable, and penances were imposed of much the same 
kind as those enjoined in the Rotnaii Catholic Church. 
There were two remarkable peculiarities in the Aztec cere- 
mony. The first was, that, as the repetition of an oflence,

Parte 1, cap, 4 , Clavigero says that the high-priest was necessarily a 
person of rank. (Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. p. 37.) I find no authority 
for tbis, not even in his oracle, Torquemada, who expressly says, There ^ 
is no warrant for the assertion, however probable the fact may be.” 
(Monarch. Ind., lib. 9, cap, S;} Xt is contradicted by Sabagun, whom I 
have followed as the highest llutkdrity in these matters. Clavigero bad 
no other knowledge of Sahagu|iyf work than what was filtered through the 
writings of Torquemada, and later au^ops.^ ISa-hagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia^nbi supra.-rTorquemada, Monarch, 
Ind., lib. 9. cap. 25. — Gomara, Crdn., ap. Barcia, nbi supra. — .Acosta, lib. 
5, cap. 14, 17.

SACERDOTAL OBDBE.

once atoned for, ‘was deemed inexpiable, confession was made 
but once in a man’s life, and was usually deferred to a late 
period of it, wien the penitent unburdened his conscience, 
and settled, at %ice, the long arrears of iniquity. Another 
peculiarity was, that priestly absolution was received in 
place of the legal punishment of offences, and authorised 
an acquittal in case of arrest. Long after the Conquest, 
the simple natives, when they came under the arm of the 
law, sought to escape by producing the certificate cf their 
confession.*

One of the most important duties of the piiesthood was 
that of education, to which certain buildings were appro- 
priated within the enclosure of the principal temple. Here 
the youth of both sexes, of the higher and middling orders, 
were placed at a very tender age. The girls were intrusted 
to the care of priestesses ; for women were allowed to 
exercise sacerdotal functions, except those of sacrifice.f In* Sahagun, Ifist. de Nueva Espaha, lib. 1, cap. 12 ; lib. 6, cap. 7. 
The address of the confessor, on these occasions, contains some things too 
remarkable to be omitted. “ O mercfful Lord,*^ he says, in his prayer, 
“ thou who knowest the secrets of all hearts, let thy forgiveness and favour 
descend, like the pure waters of heaven, to wash away the stains from the 
soul. Thou knowest that this poor man has sinned, not from his own 
free hut from the influence of the sign under which he was bom.’* 
Aftcr^a (popious exhortation to the penitent, enjoining a variety of mortifi- 
cations liid minute ceremonies by way of penance, and particularly urging 
the necessity of instantly procuring a slave for sacrifice to the Deity, the 
priest concludes with inculcating charity to the poor, “Clothe the naked 
^and feed the hungry, whatever privations it may cost thee ; for remember 
their flesh is like thine, and they a/re men like thee’^ Such is the strange 
medley of truly Christian benevolence and heathenish abominations which 
pervades the Aztec litany, — intimating sources widely different.

The Egyptian gods were jilso served by priestesses. (See Herodotus, 
Euterpe, sec. 54.) Tales of scandal similar to those which the Greeks cir- 
culated respecting them, have been told of the Aztec virgins. (See Le 
Noir’s dissertation, ap. Antiquit^s Mexicaines, [Paris, 1834,} tom. ii. page 
7, note.) The early missionaries, credulous enough certainly, give no

CIVELiSAIION*

tie l^oys were drilled in the routine of 
licmastie discipline ; they decorated the shrines of the godB 
with flowers, fed the sacred flres, and tqfk part in the 
religious chants and festivals. Those in higher school,1 — ^the Gaknecae, as it was called,— were initiated in their 
traditionary lore, the mysteries of hieroglyphics, the prin- 
dples of government, and such branches of astronomical 
and. natural science as were within the compass of the 
priesthood. The girls learned various feminine employ- 
ments, especially to weave and embroider rich coverings for 
the sitars of the gods. Great attention was paid to the 
mo^ld^lllfipline of both sexes. The most perfect decorum 
pWM^ed ; and offences were punished with extreme rigour, 
in some instances with death itself. Terror, not love, was 
the spring of education with the Aztecs.*

At a suitable age for marrying, or for entering into the 
world, the pupils were dismissed, i^ith much ceremony, from 
the convent, and the recommendation of the principal often 
introduced those 'most competent to responsible situations 
in public life. Such was crafty policy of the Mexican 
priests, who, by reserving to themselves the business of 
instruction, were enabled to mould the young and plastic

couatenanee to such reports ; and father Acosta, on the contrary, exclaims, 
** In truth, it is veij strange to see that this &.l8e opinion of religion hath 
BO greaji force among those young men and maidens of Mexico, that they 
will serve the Divell with so great rigour and austerity, which many of us 
doe not in the service of the most high the which is a great shame 
Mid confhsion.” — Eng. Trans., lib, 5y cap. 18. w

♦ Torihio, Hist, de los Indios, MS., Parte 1, cap. 9. — Sahagun, Hist, 
dd Nueva Espana, lih. 2, Apend. ; lib. 8, cap. 4-8.— Zurita, Rapport, pp. 
123-1*26.— Acosta, lib. 5, cap. 15, 16.— Torquemadft, Monarch. Ind., lib.

cap. 11-14, 80, 31. “They were taught,'* says the good father last 
cited, “ to eschew vice, and cleave to virtue ,— to their notions 
to abstain from wrath, to offer violence and do wrong 
to no tinan^^ln short, to perform the duties j^inly pointed out by natural

SA0E1^TAZ»SA0E1^TAZ»

mind according to their own wills, and to train it early to 
implicit reverence for religion and its ministers ; a rever^llp 
which still mal^ntained its idd on the iron nature of tdp 
warrior, long af%r every other vestige of education had 
effaced by the rough trade to which he was devoted. ' ; * / 
To each of the principal temples lands were annexed fOr 
the maintenance of the priests. These estates were aug- 
mented by the policy or devotion of successive princes, until, 
under the last Montezuma, they had swollen to an enormous 
extent, and covered every district of the empire. The priests 
took the management of their property into their own hands; 
and they seem to have treated their tenants with the libe- 
rality and indulgjBace characteristic of monastic corporations. 
Besides the large supplies drawn from this source, the reli- 
gious order was enriched with the first-fruits, and such other 
offerings as pietj|j^or superstition dictated. The surplus 
beyond what was required for the support of the national 
worship was distributed in alms among the poor ; a duty 
strenuously prescribi&d by their moral code. Thus we find 
the same religion inculcating Iqssons of pure philanthropy, 
on the one hand, and of merciless extermination, as we shall 
soon see, on the other. The inconsistency will not appear 
incredible to those who are familiar with the history of 
the Homan Catholic Church, in the early ages of the 
Inquisition.^• Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 8, cap.' 20, 21. — Camargo, Hist, de 
iTlascala, MS. It is impossible not to be struck with the great resemb- 
lance, not merely in a few empty forms, but in the whole way of life, of the 
Mexican and Egyptian priesthood. Compare Herqdotns (Euterpe, passim) 
and Diodorus (lib. 1, sec. 73, 81.) The English reader may consult, for 
the same purpose, Heeren, (Hist. Res., vol. v, chap. 2,) Wilkinson, 
(Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, [London, 1^37,] voL i. 
pp. 267-279,) the lafet writer especially, — who , has contributed, more than 
all others, towards opening to us the interior of the social life of this 
interesting people.

Aztec civilisation.

#0Aztec civilisation.

#0

Tbo Mexican temples — teocallis, houses of God/’ as 
they were called — were very numerous. There were* several 
hundreds in each of the principal cities, /hiany of them, 
doubtless, very humble edifices. They wejfe solid masses of 
earth, cased with brick or stone, and in their form somewhat 
resembled the pyramidal structures of ancient Egypt. The 
bases of many of them were more than a hundred feet 
square, and they towered to a still greater height. They 
were distributed into four or five stories, each of smaller 
dimensions than that below. The ascent was by a flight of 
steps, at an angle of the pyramid, on the outside. This led 
to a sort of terrace or gallery, at the base of the second 
story, which passed quite round the building to another 
flight of stairs, commencing also at the same angle as the 
preceding and directly over it, and leading to a similar ter- 
race ; so that one had to make the circuit of the temple 
several times, before reaching the summit. In some in- 
stances the stairway led directly up the centre of the 
western face of the building. The top was a broad area, 
on which were erected one^or two towers, forty or fifty feet 
high, the sanctuaries* in which stood the sacred images of 
the presiding deities. Before these towers stood the dreadful 
stone of sacrifice, and two lofty altars, on which fires were 
kept, as inextinguishable as those in the temple of Vesta. 
There were said to be six hundred of these altars on smaller 
buildings within the inclosure of the great temple of Mexico, 
which, with those on the sacred edifices in other parts of the. 
city, shed a brilliant illumination over its streets, through 
the darkest night.** Bel. d’un gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 307. — -Camargo, Hist, do 
TloBC^la, MS. — Acosta, lib. 5, cap. 13. — Gomara, Ci'dnica, cap. 80, ap. 
Barcia^ tom, ii. — Toribio, Hist, de los Indios, MB.*, Parte 1, cap. 4. — 
Carta. del Lie. Zuaano, MS. This last writer, who visited Mexico imme- 
diately after the Conquest iu 1521, assures us that some of the smaller

SAOEJIBOTAI^ OBDER* 61

t ,

From the construction of their temples, all Religious ser- 
vices were public. The long processions of priests, winding 
round their massive sides, as they rose higher and higher 
towards the summit, and the dismal rites of sacrifice per- 
formed there, were all visible from the remotest corners of 
the capital, impressing on the spectator’s mind a supersti- 
tious veneration for the mysteries of his religion, and for the 
dread ministers by whom they were interpreted.

This impression was kept in full force by their numerous 
festivals. Every mouth was consecrated to some protecting 
deity ; and every week — nay, almost every day, was set 
down in their calendar for some appropriate celebration ; so 
that it is difiicult to understand how the ordinary business 
uf life could have he^n compatible with the exactions of 
religion. Many of their ceremonies were of a light and 
cheerful complexion, consisting of the national songs and 
dances, in which both sexes joined. Processions were made 
of women and children crowned with garlands and bearing 
offerings of fruits, the ripened maize, or the sweet incense 
of copal and other odoriferous gums, while the altars of the 
deity were stained with no blood save that of animals.**^ 
These were the peaceful rites derived from their Toltec pre- 
decessors, on which the fierce Aztecs engrafted a superstition 
too loathsome to be exhibited in all its nakedness, and one 
over which I would gladly draw a veil altogether, but that ittemples, or pyramids, were filled with earth impregnated with odoriferous 
gums and gold-dust ; the latter, sometimes in such quantities as probably 
to be worth a million of Castellanos / (Ubi supra.) These were the 
temples of Mammon, indeed ! But 1 find no confirmation of such golden 
reports.

♦ Cod. Tel.-Rem., PI. 1, and Cod. Vat., passim, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, 
vols. i. vi, — Torquemada, Monarch. lnd.,lib. 10, cap. 10, et seq.— Sahagun, 
Hist, de Nueva EspaHa, lib. 2, passim. Among the offerings, quails may 
be particularly noticed, for the incredible <iuantities of them sacrificed and 
consumed at many of the festivals.

■40 '"' Axma ci^xusATiON, ,

leave the reader in ignorance of their most striking 
institution, and one that had the greatest influence in 
forming the national character.

Human sacrifices, were adopted by the Aztecs early in 
the fourteenth century, about two hundred years before the 
Conijuest.* Bare at first, they became more frequent njith 
the wider extent of their empire ; till, at length, almost 
every festival Was closed with this cruel abomination. These 
religious ceremonials were generally arranged in sucl^ a 
manner as to afford a type of the most prominent circum- 
stances in #ie character or history of the deity who was the 
object of them. A single example will guffice.One of their most important festivals was that in honour 
of the god Tezoatlepoca, whose rank was inferior only to 
that of the Supreme Being, He was called the soul of 
the world, and supposed to have been its creator. He was 
depicted as a handsome man, endowed with perpetual youth. 
A year before the intended sacrifice, a captive, distinguisbed 
for his personal beauty, and without a blemish on his body, 
was selected to represent ^this deity. Certain tutors took 
charge of him, and instructed him how to perform -his new 
part with becoming grace and dignity. He was arrayed in 
a splendid dress, regaled with incense, and with a profusion 
of sweet-scented flowers, of which the ancient Mexicans 
were as fond as their descendants at the present day; 
When he went abroad, he was attended by a train of the 
royal pages, and, as he halted in the streets to play some 
favourite melody, the crowd prostrated themselves before 
him, and did him homage as the representative of their

♦ The traditiona of their origin have somewhat of a fhbulons^tinge. But, 
wlpther true or lalae, they are equally indicative of unparalleled ferocity 
in the people who could he the subject of them.-^Clavigero, Stor. del 
Mteco, tom, i. p. 167, et «eq. ; also Humboldt, (who does not appear to 
dcubt them,) Ynei dee Cordill^res, p.

mMATSf BACnmCEMrn * 0S

good deity. In this way he led an easy, luxurious life, till 
within a month of his sacrifice. Four beautiful girls, bearing 
the names of the principal goddesses, were then selected 
to share the honours of his bed ; and with them he con- 
tinued to live in idle dalliance, feaste4 At the banquets 
of, the principal nobles, who paid him all the honours of a 
divinity.At length the fatal day of sacrifice arrived. The term of 
hi| short-lived glories was at an end. He was stripped of 
his gaudy apparel, and bade adieu to the fair partners of hia 
revelries. One of the royal barges transported him across 
the lake to a tenjjil© which rose on its margin, about a 
league from the city. Hither the inhabitants of the capital 
flocked, to witness the consummation of the ceremony. As 
the sad procession wound up the sides of the pyramid, the 
unhappy victim threw away his gay chaplets of flowers, and 
broke in pieces the musical instruments with which he had 
solaced the hours of captivity. On the summit he was 
received by six priests, whose lq;ag and matted locks flowed 
disorderly over their sable robes, covered with hieroglyphic 
scrolls of mystic import. They led him to fhe sacrificial 
stone, a huge block of jasper, with its upper surface somewhat 
convex. On this the prisoner was stretched. Five priests 
secured his head and his limbs ; while the sixth, clad in 
a scarlet mantle, emblematic of his bloody office, dexterously 
opened the breast of the wretched victim with a sharp razor 
of — a volcanic substance hard as flint, — and, inserting

his hand in the wound, tore out the palpitating heart. The 
minister of death, first holding this up towards the sun, 
an object of worship throughout Anahuac, cast it at the 
feet of the deity to whom the temple was devoted, while 
the multitudes, below prostrated themselves m humble 
adoration. The tragic story of this prisoner was expounded 
by the priests as the type of human destiny, which.

AZTEC CIVIUSATION.

'Irmiant in ItB commencement, too often closes in sorrow 
and disaster.*AZTEC CIVIUSATION.

'Irmiant in ItB commencement, too often closes in sorrow 
and disaster.*

Such was the form of human sacrifice usually practised 
by the Aztecs. It was the same that often met the indig- 
nant eyes of the Europeans, in their progress through the 
country, and from the dreadful doom of which they them- 
selves were not exempted. There were, indeed, some 
occasions when preliminary tortures, of the most exquisite 
kind, — with which it is unnecessary to shock the reader,— 
were inflicted, but they always terminated with the bloody 
ceremony above described. It should be remarked, however, 
that such tortures were not the spontaneous suggestions of 
cruelty, a# "W^ith the North American InSians ; but were all 
rigorously prescribed in the Aztec ritual, and doubtless were 
often inflicted with the same compunctious visitings which a 
devout familiar of the Holy OflGLce might at times experience 
in executing its stern decrees. t Women, as well as the

* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 2, cap. 2, 5, 24, et alibi.— 
Herrera, Hist. Oeneral, dec. 3, Rb. 2, cap. 16. — Torquemada, Monarch. 
Ind., lib. 7, cap. 19; lib. 10, c^. 14. — Rel. d’ un gent., ap. RarauBio, 
tom. iii. fol. 30^7. — Acosta, lib. 5, cap. 9-21. — Carta del Lie. Zuazo, MS, 
Relacionpor el Regimiento dc Vera Cruz, (Julio, MS. Few readers,

probably, will sympathise with the sentence of Torqpemada, who concludes 
liis tale of woe by coolly dismissing “ the soul of the victim, to sleep with 
those of his false gods, in hell Lib. 10, cap. 23.+ Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, lib. 2, cap. 10, 29. — Oomara, 
Crdn., cap. 219, ap. Barcia, tom. ii. — Tonbio, Hist, de los Indies, MS., 
Parte 1, cap. 6-11. The reader will find a tolerably exact picture of the 
nature of these tortures in the twenty-fimt canto of the “ Inferno.” The 
fantastic creations of the Florentine poet were nearly realised, at the very 
time he was writing, by the barbarians of an unknown world. One sacrifice 
of a less revolting character, deserves to be mentioned. The Spaniards 
called it the “ gladiatorial sacrifice,” and it may remind one of the bloody 
games of antiquity. A captive of distinction was sometimes furnished with 
ai^S, and brought against a number of Mexicans in succession. If he 
defeated them all, as did occasionally happen, be was allowed to escape. If 
vanqahbed^ be was dragged to the block and sacrificed in the usual manner.

HUMAlf SACRIFICES.

65

other sex, were sometimes reserved for sacrifice. On some 
occasions, particularly in seasons of drought, at the festival 
of the insatiable Tlaloc, the god of rain, children, for the 
most part infants, were ofifered up. As they were borne 
along in open litters, dressed in their festal robes, and 
decked with the fresh blossoms of spring, they moved the 
hardest heart to pity, though their cries were drowned in 
the wild chant of the priests, who read in their tears a 
fayourable augury for their petition. These innocent vic- 
tims were generally bought by the priests of parents who 
were poor, but who stifled the voice of nature, probably 
less at the sugg^tions of poverty than of a wretched 
superstition,*The most loathsome part of the story, the manner in 
which the body of the sacrificed captive was disposed of, 
remains yet to be told. It was delivered to the warrior 
who had taken him in battle, and by him, after being 
dressed, was served up in an entertainment to his friends. 
This was not the coarse repast of famished cannibals, but a 
banquet teeming with delicious beverages and delicate 
viands, prepared with art, and attended by both sexes, who, 
as we shall see hereafter, conducted themselves with all the 
decorum of civilised life* Surely, never were refinement 
and the extreme of barbarism brought so closely in contact 
with each other ! f

The combat was fought on a huge circular stone, before the assemblea 
capital. — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espaua, lib. 2, cap. 21. — Rel. d’un 
gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 305.

* Sahagun, Hist. He Nueva Espafia, lib. 2, cap. 1, 4, 21, et alibi.— 
Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 10, cap. 10. — Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, 
tom, ii. pp. 76, 82.

t Carta del Lie. 2uazo, MS. — Torquemada, Monarch. lad., lib. 7, 
cap. 19. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 3, lib. 2, cap. 17*'' — Sahagun, Hist* 
de Nueva Espaua, lib. 2, cap. 21, et alibi. — Toribio, Hist, de los Indies, 
MS., Parte 1, cap. 2* «

VOL. I.

F

AZTEC CIYIIISATION.

66VOL. I.

F

AZTEC CIYIIISATION.

66

’ Human sacrifices hare been practised by many nations, 
not excepting the most polished nations of antiquity ; ^ but 
nerer by any, on a scale to be compared with those 
in Anahuac. The amount of victims immolated on its 
accursed altars would stagger the faith of the least scrupu- 
lous believer. Scarcely any author pretends to estimate the 
yearly sacrifices throughout the enapire at less than twenty 
tibousand, and some carry the number as high as fifty ! t 
On great occasions, as the coronation of a king, or the 
consecration of a temple, the number becomes still more 
appalling. At the dedication of the great temple of Huit- 
ziiopotchli, in 1486, the prisoners, who for some years had 
been reserved for the purpose, were drawn from all quarters

* To say nothing of Egypt, where, notwithstanding the indications on 
the monuments, strong reason for dou*bting it. — (Comp. Herodotus,

Euterpe, sec. 45.) , It was of frequent occurrence among the Greeks, as 
every school-hoy knows. In Rome, it was so common as to require to he 
interdicted by an express law, less than a hundred years before the Christian 
era,---a law recorded in a very honest strain of exultation by Pliny ; (Hist. 
Nat., lib. 30, sec. 3, 4 ;) notwithstanding whicii, tmees of the existence of 
the practice may be discerned to A much later period. See, among others, 
Horace, Epod., In Canidiam.See Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. p, 49, Bishop Zumarraga,. 
in a letter written a few years after the Conquest, st^fes that 20,000 victims 
were yearly slaughtered in the capital. Torquemada turns this into 
20,000 infants. — (Monarch. Ind., lib. 7, cap. 21.) Herrera, following 
Acosta, says 20,000 victims on a specified day of the year, throughout the 
kingdom. — (Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 2, cap. 16.) ClavigOTO, more 
cautious, infers that this number may have been sacrificed annually 
throughout Anahuac. — (Ubi supra.) Las Casas, however, in his reply to 
Sepulveda's assertion, that no one who had visited the New World put the 
numher of yearly sacrifices at less than 20,000, declares that “this is the 
estimate of brigands, who wish to find an apology' for their own atrocities, 
and that the real number was not above 60 ! ” — (QEuvres, ed. Llorente, 
fjE^s, 1822,] tom. i. pp. 365, 386.) Probably the good Bishop's arith- 
metic, here, as in most other instances, came more from his heart than his 
head. ^ With such loose and contradictory data^ ft is clear that any specific 
numhei^ is mere conjecture, undeserving the name of calculation.

HOMAN SACRIFICES.

67HOMAN SACRIFICES.

67

to the capital. Thej were ranged in files, forming a pro- 
cession nearly two miles long. The ceremony consumed 
sereral days, and seventy thousand captives are said to have 
perished at the shrine of this terrible deity ! But who can 
believe that so numerotis a bcydy would have suffered them- 
selves to be led, unresistingly, like sheep to the slaughter ? 
Or how could their remains, too great for consumption in 
the ordinary way, be disposed of, without breeding a pesti- 
lence in the capital ? Yet the event was of recent date, 
and is unequivocally attested by the best informed histOf 
rians.* One fact may be considered certain, it was 
customary to preserve the skulls of the sacrificed, in build- 
ings appropriated to the purpose. The companions of 
Cortds counted one hundred and thirty-six thousand in one 
of these edifices ! f Without attempting a precise calcula- 
tion, therefore, it is safe to conclude that thousands were 
yearly offered up, in the different cities of Anahuac, on the 
bloody altars of the Mexican divinities. J

* I am within bounds. Torquemada states the number, most precisely, 
at 71^, §44. — (Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, djj. 63.) Ixtlilxochitl, with equal 
precision, at 80|400. — (Hist. Chich., MS.,) Quim sabe f The latter adds, 
that the captives massacred in the capital, in the course of that memorable 
year, exceeded 100,000! — (Loc. cit.) One, however, has to read but a 
little way, to find out that the science of numbers* — at least, where the party , 
was not an eyewitness — is anything but an exact science with these ancient 
chroniclers. The Codex Tel.-Remensis, written some fifty years after the 
Conquest, reduces the amount to 20,000. — (Antiq. of Mexico, vol. i. 
Plate 19; vol. vi. p. 141, Eng. note.) Even this hardly warrants the 
Spanish interpreter in calling king Ahuitzotl a man “of a mild and 
moderate disposition,” templada y henigna concHcton / — Ibid. vol. v. p. 49.+ Gomara states the number on the authority of two soldiers, whose 
names he gives, who took the trouble to count the grinning horrors in one 
of these Golgothas, where thqy were so arranged as to produce the most 
hideous effect. Th^ existence of these conservatories is attested by every 
writer of the time.

4: The “ Anonymous Conqueror’’ assures us, as a fact beyC^ttd dispute, 
that the devil introduced himself into the bodies of the idols, and persuaded

F 2

AZTEC CIVILISATION.

m

. Infeed, the great object of war with the Aztecs was 
quite as much to gather victims for their sacrifices, as to 
extend their empire. Hence it was, that an enemy was 
never slain in battle, if there were a chance of taking him 
alive. To this circumstance the Spaniards repeatedly 
owed their preservation. When Montezuma was asked, 
“ why he had suffered the republic of Tlascala to maintain 
her independence on his borders,’’ he replied, “That she 
might furnish him with victims for his gods ! ” As the 
supply hogan to fail, the priests, the Dominicans of the 
New Wprid, bellowed aloud for more, and urged on their 
sovereign by the denunciations of celestial 
wrathi Like the militant churchmen of Christendom in 
the Middle Ages, they mingled themselves in the ranks, 
and were conspicuous in the thickest of the fight, by their 
hideous aspects and frantic gestures. Strange, that in 
every country the most fiendish passions of the human heart 
have been those kindled in the name of religion ! *

The influence of these practices on the Aztec character

0

the silly priests that his only diet was human hearts ! It furnishes a *very 
satisfactory solution, to his mind, of the frequency of Bacrifices ht Mexico. 
— Rel. d^un gent,, ap. Ramusio, tom. iii, fol. 307.* The Tezcucan priests would fain have persuaded the king 
Nezahualcoyotl, on occasion of k pestilence, to appe^ie gods the 
sacrifice of some of his own subjects, instead^of hfa enemies ; on the ground, 
that, not only they would be obtained more easily, but would be fresher 
victims, and more acceptable. — (Ixtlilxoclfitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 41.) 
This writer mentions a cool arrangel&j^i entered into by the allied 
monarchs with the republic of Tlascala ’ and her confederates. A battle- 
field was marked out, on which the troops of the hostile nations were to 
engage at stated seasons, and thus supply themselves with subjects for 
sacrifice. The victorious party was not to pursue his advantage by invading 
tjhe others’ territory, and they were to continue, in all other respects, on 
the most amicable footing.^ — (Ubi supra.) The historian, who follows in 
the track of the Tezcucan chronicler, may often find occasion to shelter 
himself, like Ariosto, with

“ Mettendolo Turpin, lo metto anch’io.”

HITMAN SAOBIPICES.

69“ Mettendolo Turpin, lo metto anch’io.”

HITMAN SAOBIPICES.

69

was as disastl’ous as might have been expected. Famili- 
arity with the bloody rites of sacrifice steeled the heart 
against human sympathy, and begat a thirst for carnage, 
like that excited in the Romans by the exhibitions of the 
circus. The perpetual recurrence of ceremonies, in which 
the people took part, associated religion with their most 
intimate concerns, and spread the gloom of superstition 
over the domestic hearth, until the character of the nation 
wore a grave and even melancholy aspect, which belongs to 
their descendants at the present day. The infiuence of 
the priesthood, of course, became unbounded. The sove- 
reign thought himself honoured by being permitted to assist 
in the services of the temple. Far from limiting the autho- 
rity of the priests to spiritual matters, he often surrendered 
his opinion to theirs, where they were least competent to 
give it. It was their opposition that prevented the final 
capitulation which would have saved the capital. The 
whole nation, from the peasant to the prince, bow^d 
their necks to the worst kind of tyranny — that of a blind 
fanaticism. ,

In reflecting dh the revolting usages recorded in the pre- 
ceding pages, one finds it difficult to reconcile their exist- 
ence with anything like a regular form of government, or an 
advance in civilisation. Yet the Mexicans had many claims 
to the character of a civilised community. One may, per- 
haps, better understand the anomaly, by reflecting on the 
condition of some of the most polished countries in Europe, 
in the sixteenth century, after the establishment of the 
modern Inquisition ; an institutibn which yearly destroyed 
its thousands by a death more painful than the Aztec sacri- 
fices ; which armed the -hand of brother against brother, 
and, setting its burning seal upon\he lip, did more to stay 
the march* of improvement than any other scheme ever 
devised by human cunning. •AZTEC CITILI8ATI0N.

Human sacrifice, however cruel, has nothing in it degrad- 
ing to its victim. It may be rather said to ennoble him, by 
devoting him to the gods. Although so terrible with the 
Aztecs, it was sometimes voluntarily embraced by them, as 
the most glorious death, and one that opened a sure passage 
into paradise.* The Inquisition, on the other hand, branded 
its victims with infamy in this world, and consigned them to 
everlasting perdition in the next.

One detestable feature of the Aztec superstition, however, 
S4tirk'it far below the Christian. This was its cannibalism; 
'thougb, in truth, the Mexicans were not cannibals, in the 
coarsest acceptation of the term. They did not feed on 
human flesh merely to gratify a brutish appetite, but in 
obedience to their n'eligion. Theii repasts were made of 
the victims whose blood had been pqured out on the altar of 
sacrifice. This is a distinction worthy of notice.! Still, 
cannibalism, under any form, or whatever sanction, cannot 
but have a fatal influence on the nation addicted to it. It 
suggests ideas so loathsome, so degrading to man, to his 
spiritual and immortal Hi^ture, that it is impossible the 
people who practise it should m|ike any ^reat progress in 
moral or intellectual culture. The Mexicans furnish no 
exception to this remark. The civilisation which they pos- 
sessed descended from the Toltecs, a race who never stained 
their altars, still less their banquets, with the blood of man. 
All that deserved the name of science in Mexico came from 
this source ; and the crumbling ruins of edifices, attributed

* Rel. d’un gent., ap. Ramnsio, tom. Hi. fol. 307. Among other 
instances, is that of Chimalpopoca, third king of Mexico, who doomed 
himself, with a number of his lords, to this death, to wijte off an indignity- 
offered him by a brother monarch. — (Tortjuemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, 
cap. 28.) This was the law of tonour with the Aztecs.f Voltaire, doubtless intends this when hp says, “ II s talent point 
anthropophages, oomme un tres petit nombre de peuplades Americaines.” 
— (Essai sur les Moeurs, chap. 148.) ^ t

HUMAN SAORIFIOBS.

71

to them, still extant in various parts of New Spain, show a 
decided superiority in their architecture over that of the 
later races of Anahuac. It is true, the Mexicans made 
great proficiency in many of the social and mechanic ^artf, 
in that material culture, — if I may so call it, — the »etural 
growth of increasing opulence, which ministers to the grati- 
fication of the senses. In purely intellectual progress, they 
were behind the Tezcucans, whose wise sovereigns came 
into the abominable rites of their neighbours with reluc- 
tance, and practised them on a much more moderate scale.* 
In this state of things, it was beneficently ordered by 
Providence that the land should be delivered over to another 
race, who would rescue it from the brutish superstitions that 
daily extended wider and wider, with extent of empire.! 
The debasing institutions of the Aztecs furnish the best 
apology for their conquest. It is true, the conquerors 
brought along with them the Inquisition ; but they also 
brought Christianity, whose benign radiance would still 
survive, when the fierce flames of fanaticism should be 
extinguished ; dispelling those dark forms of horror which 
had so long brooded over the fair regions of Anahuac.

The most important authority in the preceding chapter, and, indeed, 
wherever the Aztec religion is concerned, is Bernardino dC J^ahagun, 
a Franciscan friar, contemporary with the Conquest. His ^at work, 
Jffistorla Unwtrml de Nueva Espana^ has been recently printed for 
the first time. The circumstances attending its compilation and sub- 
sequent fate, form one of the most remarkable passages in literary 
history.

♦ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chichi, MS., cap. 46, et alibi.♦ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chichi, MS., cap. 46, et alibi.

+ No doubt the ferocity of character engendered by their sanguinary 
rites greatly facilitated their conquests. Machiavelli attributes to a similar 
cause, in part, the military successes of the Romans. (Discorsi sopra T. 
Livio, lib. 2, cap. 2.) The same chapter contains some ingenious reflec-* 
fions — much more iugeniitus than candid — on the opposite tendencies of 
Christianity,

AZtEO CmLISATIOH.

SahAgttn was bom in a place of the same name, in Old Spain* He 
was educated at Salamanca, and, having taken the vows of St. Francia, 
eame over as a missionary to Mexico in the year 1529. Here he 
^stinguished himself by his zeal, the purity of his life, and his 
dhwaaried exertions to spread the great truths of religion among the 
natives. He was the guardian of several conventual houses, succes- 
sively, until he j’eJinquished these cares, that he might devote himself 
more unreservedly to the business of preaching, and of compiling 
various works designed to illustrate the antiquities of the Aztecs. 
For these literary labours he found some facilities in the situation 
which he continued to occupy, of reader, or lecturer, in the College 
of Santa Cruz, in the capital.The ‘‘ Universal History” was concocted in a singular manner. In 
order to secure to it the greatest possible authority, he passed some 
years in a Tezcucan town, where he conferred daily with a number of 
respectable natives unacquainted with Castilian. He propounded to 
them queries, which they, after deliberation, answered in their usual 
method of writing, by hieroglyphical paintings. These he submitted 
to other natives, who had been educated. under his own eye in the 
college of Santa Cruz ; and the latter, after a consultation among 
themselves, gave a written version, in the Mexican tongue, of the 
hieroglyphics. This process he repeated in another place, in some 
part of Mexico, and subjected the whole to a still further revision by 
a third body in another quarter. He finally arranged the combined 
results into a regular history, ip the form it now bears ; composing it 
in the Mexican language, which he could both write and speak with 
great accuracy and elegance — greats, indeed, than any Spaniard of 
the time.

The work presented a mass of curious information, that attracted 
much attention among his brethren. But they feared its influence in 
keeping alive in the natives a too vivid reminisOenee of the very 
superstitions which it was the great object of the Cliristian clergy 
to eradicate. Sahagun had views more liberal than those of his 
order, whose blind zeal wodld willingly have annihilated every monu- 
ment of art and human ingenuity, which had not been produced under 
the influence of Christianity. They refused to allow him the neces- 
sary aid to transcribe his papers, which he had been so many years 
in preparing, under the pretext that the expense was too great for 
their order to incur. This occasionecJ a further delay of several 
years. What was worse, his provincial got possession of his manu- 
scripts, which were soon scattered among thp diflferent religious houses 
in the country.In this forlorn state of his affairs, Sahagun drew up a brief state-

SAHAarriTi

73

ment of the Batixre and eontents of Jiis work, and forwarded it to 
Madrid. It fell into the hands of Don Juan de Ovando, preindent of 
the council for the Indies, who was so much interested in it, that he 
ordered the manuscripts to be restored to their author, with the 
request that he would at once set about translating them into 
Castilian. This was accordingly done. His papers were recovered, 
though not without the naibnace of ecclesiaslXcal censures ; and the 
octogenarian author began the work of translation £rom tlie Mexican, 
in which they had been originally written by him thirty years before. 
He had the satisfaction to complete the task, arran^ng the Spanish 
version in a parallel column with the original, and adding a voca- 
bulary, explaining the difficult Aztec terms and phrases ; while the 
text was supported by the numerous paintings on which it was 
founded. In this form, making two bulky volumes in folio, it was 
sent to Madrid. There seemed now to be no further reason for post- 
poning its publication, the importance of which could not be doubted. 
But from this moment it disappears ; and we hear nothing further of 
it for more than two centuries, except only as a valuable work, which 
had once existed, and was probably buried in some one of the numerous 
cemeteries of learning in which Spain aboundaAt length, towards the close of the last century, the indefatigable 
Munoz succeeded in disinterring the long lost manuscript from the 
place tradition had assigned to it — ^the library of a convent at Tolosa, 
in Navarre, the northern extremity of Spain. With his usual ardour, 
he transcribed the whole work with his own hands, and added it to 
the inestimable collection, of which, alas ! he was destined not to reap 
the full benefit himself. From this transcript Lord Kingsborough 
was enabled to procure the copy which was published in 1830, in the 
sixth volume of his magnificent compilation. In it he expresses an 
honest satisfaction at being, the first to give Sahagun’s work to the 
world. But in this supposition he was mistaken. The very year 
preceding, an edition of it, with annotatinna, appeared in Mexico, in 
three volumes octavo. It v^as prepared % Bustamente, — a scholar 
to whose editorial activity his counlagr^ largely indebted, — from a 
copy of the Munoz manuscript which came into his possession. Thus 
this remarl^able work, which was denied the honours of the press 
during the author’s hfetime, after passing into obiivi<]^, reappeared 
at the distance of nearly three centuries, not in his own country, but 
in foreign lands widely remote from each other, and that almost 
simultaneously. The story is extraordinary, though unhappily not so 
extraordinary in Spain as it would be elsewhere.'

Sahagun divided his history into twelve books. The first eleven are 
occupied with the social Jmstitutions of Mexico, and the last with the

AZTEG OinnSATlON.

On the religion of the cmmi/ty he ie paartscnlarly full* His 
gpreat object evidently was, to give a clear view of its mythology, and 
^ tbfi Inn^ensoiim ritual which belonged to it. Beligion entered so 
Mhnateiy into the most private Concerns and usages of the Aztecs, 
mult Ssluigtm’a worit must be a text-book for every student of their 
lin#qtatties. Torqnemda availed himself of a manuscript copy, whichInto his lumda before it was sent to Spain, to enrich his oam pages, 
^ oboomstanee more fortunate for his readers than for Sahagnn’s 
reputation, whose work, now that it is published, loses much of the 
originality and interest which would otherwise attach to it. In one 
respect it is invaluable, as presenting a complete collection of the 
various forms of prayer, accommodated to every possible emergency, 
in use by the Mexicans. Tiiey are often clothed in dignified and 
beaiililul language, showing that sublime speculative tenets are quite 
compatible witii the most degrading practices of superstition. It is 
rdudi to be regretted that we have not the eighteen hymns, inserted 
by the author in his book, which would have particular interest, as 
the only specimen of devotional poetry preserved of the Aztecs. The 
hieroglyphical paintings which accompanied the text, are also missing. 
If they have escaped the hands of fanaticism, both may reappear at 
some future day.

Sahagun produced several other works, of a religious or philological 
character. Some of these were voluminous, but none have been 
printed. He lived to a very advanced age, closing a life of activity 
and usefulness, in 1590, in tlie capital of Mexico. His remaias were 
followed to the tomb by a numerous concourse of his own countrymen, 
and of the natives, who lamented in him the loss of unaffected piety, 
benevolence, and learning.

CHAH^R IT.

MEXICAN HIEROOLV PHICS. — MANUSCRIPTS. — ARITHMETIC. — 
CHRONOLOGT. — ASTRONOMY.CHAH^R IT.

MEXICAN HIEROOLV PHICS. — MANUSCRIPTS. — ARITHMETIC. — 
CHRONOLOGT. — ASTRONOMY.

It is a relief to turn from the gloomy pages of the preceding 
chapter to a brighter side of the picture, and to contemplate 
the same nation in its generous struggle to raise itself from 
a state of barbarism, and to take a positive rank in the scale 
of civilisation. It is not the less interesting, that these 
efforts were made on *an entirely new theatre of action, 
apart from those influences that operate in the Old World ; 
the inhabitants of which, forming one great brotherhood of 
nations, are knit together by sympathies, that make the 
faintest spark of knowledge struck out in one quarter, 
spread gradually wider and wider, until it has diffused a 
cheering light over the remotest. It is curious to observe 
the human mind, in this new position, conforming to the 
same laws as on the ancient continent, and taking a similar 
direction in its first inquiries after truth, — so similar, indeed, 
as, although not warranting, perhaps, the idea of imitation, 
to suggest^ at least, that of a common origin.

In the eastern hemisphere, we find some nations, as the 
Greeks, for instance, early smitten* with such a love of the 
beautiful as to be unwilling to dispense with it, even in the 
graver productions of science ; and other nations, again, 
proposing a severer end to themselves, to which even 
imagination and elegant art were made subservient. The 
productions of such a people must be criticised, not by the

AZTEC OIVIMSATIOir.

76

OTdmaity rules of taste, but by their adaptation to the pecu- 
liar end for which they were designed. Such were the 
Egyptians in the Old World,* and tlie Mexicans in the 
Difew. We have already had occasion to notice the resem- 
blance borne by the latter nation to the farmer in their 
religious economy. We shall be more -struck with it in 
their scientific culture, especially their hieroglyphical writing 
and their astronomy.To describe actions and events by delineating visible 
objects^ seems to be a natural suggestion, and is practised, 
after a certlln fashion, by the rudest savages. The North 
American Indian carves an arrow on the bark of trees to 
show his foDowers the direction of his march, and some 
other sign to show the success of his expeditions. But to 
paint intelligibly a consecutive series of these actions — form- 
ing what Warburton has happily called picture-writing — 
requires a combination of ideas, that amounts to a positively 
intellectual effort. Yet further, when the object of the 
painter, instead of being limited to the present, is to pene- 
trate the past, and to gather from its dark recesses lessons 
of instruction for coming generations, we see the dawnings 
of a literary culture, and recognise the proof of a decided 
civih'sation in the attempt itself, however imperfectly it may 
he executed. The literal imitation of olgeots will Jnot

♦ An Egyptian temple,” says Denon, strikingly, ^ is «n open volume, 
in which the teachings of science, morality, ;'an^ tbo arts are recorded. 
Everything seems to speak one and the same hsttgiiage, and breathes one 
and the same spirit.’* The passage is cited by Heeren, Hist. Res., vol. v, 
p. 178.

f Divine Legation, ap. Works, (lAnddn, 1811,) vol. iv. h. 4, sec. 4. 
The bishop of Gloucester, in his comparison of the various hieroglyphical 
systems of the world, shows his characteristic sagacity and boldness by an- 
nouncing opinions little credited then, though siace established. He 
affirmed the existence of an Egyptian alphabet, hut was not aware of 
the phonetic property of hieroglyphics, — the great literary discovery of 
our age.

MEXICAN aXEBOCLYFiatlCS.

77MEXICAN aXEBOCLYFiatlCS.

77

answer for this more complex and extended plan. It would 
occupy too much space, as well as. time, in the execution. 
It then becomes necessary to abridge the pictures, to confine 
the drawing to outlines, or to such prominent parts of the 
bodies delineated, as may readily suggest the whole. This 
is the representative or figurative writing, which forma the 
lowest stage of hieroglyphics.

But there are things which have no type in the material 
world ; abstract ideas, which can only be represented by 
visible objects supposed to have some quality ^alogous to 
the idea intended. This constitutes symholu^a^riimg, the 
most difficult of all to the interpreter, since the analogy 
between the material and immaterial object is often purely 
fanciful, or local in its application. Who, for instance, 
could suspect the association which made a beetle represent 
the universe, as with the Egyptians, or a serpent typify 
time, as with the Aztecs ?

The third and last division is the phonetic, in which signs 
are made to represent sounds, either entire words, or parts 
of them. This is the nearest app^roach of the hieroglyphical 
series to that beautiful invention, the alphabet, by which 
language is resolved into its elementary sounds, and an 
apparatus supplied for easily accurately expressing the 
most delicate shades of thought.

The Egyptians were well skilled in all three kinds of 
hieroglyphics. But, although their public monuments dis-** 
play the first class, in their ordinary intercourse and written 
records, it is now certain that they almost wholly relied on 
the phonetic character. Strange, that having thus broken 
down the thin partition which divided them from an alphabet, 
their latest monuments should exhibit no nearer approach to 
it than their earliest. ♦ The Aztecs, also, were acquainted^ It appears that the hieroglyphics on the most recent monuments of 
Egypt contain no larger infiisiou of phonetic characters than those which

AZT3B0 CiraiSATION.

tke several varieties of hieroglyphics. But they relied 
on the figurative infinitely more than on the others. The 
Egyptians were at the top of the sonle, the Aztecs at the 
bottom.

In casting the eye over a Mexican manuscript, or map, as 
it is called, one is struck with the grotesque caricatures it 
exhibits of the human figure ; monstrous, overgrown heads, 
on puny misshapen bodies, which are themselves hard and 
angular in their outlines, and without the least skill in 
compositioiw On closer inspection, however, it is obvious 
that it is noC so much a rude attempt to delineate nature, 
as a’ ^otiventional symbol, to express the idea in the most . 
cl^#nd forcible manner ; in the same way as the pieces of 
similar value on a chess-board, while they correspond with 
one another in form, bear little resemblance, usually, to the 
objects they repesent. Those parts of the figure are most 
distinctly traced, which are the most important. So, also, 
the colouring, instead of the delicate gradations of nature, 
exhibits only gaudy and violent contrasts, such as may pro- 
duce the most vivid irapr^Bssion. ‘*Fof even colours,'* as 
Gama observes, ** speak in the Aztec hieroglyphics.” *

But in the execution of all this the Mexicans were much 
inferior to the Egyptians. The drawings of the latter, 
indeed, are exceedingly defective when criticised by the

existed eighteen centuries before 'Christ; showing no advntnee, in tdiis 
* respect, for twenty-two hundred years I— (See Champollwn, Tracis du Sys; 
tdme Hi^roglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens, [Paris, 1824,] pp^ 242, 281.)It may seem more strange that the enchorial alphabet, so much more com- 
modious, should not have been substituted. But the jfcgyptians were 
fomiliar with their hieroglyphics from infiincy, which,’ moreover, took the 
fencies of the most illiterate, probably in the same manner as our children 
ore attracted and taught by the picture-alphabets in an ordinarv spelling- 
book. ' '

* Descripciott Histdrica y Chronoldgka de las Dos Piedras, (Mexico, 
1832,) Parte 2, p. 35.

HBXICAK

7 ?

rdes of art ; Ibr thej wem as ignomiit df perepectiYe as the 
Chinese, and only exhibited the head m prodle^ with the eye 
in the centre, and with total absence of expression. But 
they handled the pencil more gracefully than the Asteos, 
were more true to the natural forms of objects, and, abore 
all, showed great superiority in abridging the original figure 
by giving only the outline, or some characteristic or essential 
feature. This simplified the process, and facilitated the 
communication of thought. An Egyptian text has almost 
the appearance of alphabetical writing in its regular lines of 
minute figures. A Mexican text looks usually like a col- 
lection of pictures, each one forming the subject of a separatt; 
study. This is particularly the case with the delineations 
of mythology ; in which the story is told by a conglomera- 
tion of symbols, that may remind one more of the mysterious 
anaglyphs sculptured on the temples of the Egyptians, than 
of their written records.

The Aztecs had various emblems for expressing such 
things as, from their nature, could not he directly repre- 
sented by the painter ; as, for e^mple, the years, months, 
days, the seasons, the elements, the heavens, and the like. 
A “ tongue'’ denoted speaking ; a “ foot-print," travelling;‘‘ a man sitting on the ground," an earthquake. These 
symbols were often very arbitrary, rarying with the caprice 
of the writer ; and it requires a nice discrimination to inter- 
pret them, as a slight change in the form or position of the 
figure intimated a very different meaning.* An ingenious

* Descripcion Histdrica y Cronoldgica de las Dos Piedras, (Mexico, 
1832,) Parte 2, pp. 32, 44. — Acosta, lib. 6, cap. 7. The continuation of 
Gama’s work, recently edited by Bustamente, in Mexico, contaius, among 
other things, some interesting remarks on the Aztec hieroglyphics. The 
editor has rendered a good service by this further publication otf the writings 
of this estimable scholar, who has done more than any of his countrymen 
to explain the mysteries of Aztec science.

^ jtltEO CIVILISATION,

.jijiRlIr asserts, tbat the priests devised secret symbolic 
i^aracters for the record of their religious mysteries. 
It is possible. 3Jut the researches of ChampoUion lead 
to the conclusion, that the similar opinion, formerly enter- 
tained respecting the Egyptian hieroglyphics, is without 
foundation.*Lastly, they employed, as above stated, phonetic signs, 
though these were chiefly confined to the names of persons 
and places ; which, being derived from some circumstance, 
or cj^ariikCteristic quality, were accommodated to the hierogly- 
nbpi^ system# Thus the town Cimatlan was compounded 
orcimat?, a root,’’ which grew near it, and tlan^ signifying 
** near Tlaxcallm, meant “ the place of bread,” from its 
rich fields of corn ; Iluexotzinco, ** a place surrounded by 
willows.” The names of persons were often significant of 
their adventures and achievements. That of the great 
Tezcucan prince, Nezahualcoyoil, signified hungry fox,” 
mtimatiug his sagacity, and his distresses in early lifct. 
The emblems of such names were no sooner seen, than they 
suggested to every Mexic|n the person and place intended ; 
and, when' painted on their shields, or embroidered on their 
banners, became the armorial bearings by which city and

* Gama, DeBcripcion, Parte 2, p.,22. Warburton, with his usual pene- 
tration, rejects the idea of mystery in the figurative hieroglyphics. (Divine 
Legation, h. 4, sec, 4.) If there was any mystery reserved for the initiated, 
ChampoUion thinks it may have been the system of the anaglyphs, (Precis, 
p. S60.) Why may not this be true, likewise, of the monstrous symholi** 
combinations which represented the Mexican deities ?

f Boturini, Idea, pp. 77-83,— Gama, Descripcion, Parte 2, pp. 34-43, 
Heeren is not aware, or does not allow, that the Mexicans used phonetic 
characters of any kind. (Hist. Res., vol. v. p. 45.) They, indeed, re- 
YCrsed the usual order of proceeding, andy instead of adapting the hiero- 
glyphic to the name of the object, accommodated the name of the object 
to the hieroglyphic. This, of course, could not admit of great extension. 
We find phonetic characters, however, applied, in some instances, to 
cominon, as well as proper names.

MEXICAN HIEROCETPHIcS. g|^MEXICAN HIEROCETPHIcS. g|^

chieftain were distinguished, as ia Eur^e, in the age of 
chivalry.*

But, although the Aztecs were instructed in all the 
varieties of hieroglyphical painting, they chiefly resorted to 
the clumsy method of direct representation. Had their 
empire lasted, like the Egyptian, several thousand, instead 
of the brief space of two hundred, years, they would, doubt- 
less, like them, have advanced to the more frequent use of 
the phonetic writing. But, before they could be made 
acquainted with the capabilities of their own system, the 
Spanish Conquest, by introducing the European alphabet, 
supplied their scholars with a more perfect contrivance for 
expressing thought, which, soon supplanted the ancient 
pictorial character. t

Clumsy as it was, however, the Aztec picture-writing 
seems to have been adequate to the demands of the nation, 
in their imperfect state of civilisation. By means of it were 
recorded all their laws, and even their regulations for 
domestic economy ; their tribute-rolls, specifying the im- 
posts of the various towns ; their jnythology, calendars, and 
rituals ; their political annals, carried hack to a period long 
before the foundation of the city. ‘ They digested a complete 
system of chronology, and could specify with accuracy the 
dates of the most important events in their history ; the 
year being inscribed on the margin, against the particular 
circumstance recoas^ed. It is true, history, thus executed, 
must necessarily vague and fragmentary. Only a few 
leading incidents could be presented. But in this it did not

♦ Boturini, Idea, ubi fupra.

Clavigero has given a catalogue of the '| || | x ican bistorbiiiB of the six- 
teenth century, — some of whom are often in this history,— -which

hears honourable testimony to the literary ardour and intelligence of the 
native races. — Stor. del Messico, tom. i., Pref,— Also, Gam^, Descripcion, 
Parte 1, passim.

VOL. I. * • o

AZTEo mrmBAnoN.

82VOL. I. * • o

AZTEo mrmBAnoN.

82

differ xnttcli from the monkiah ehroaioles of the dark ages, 
which ‘ often dispose of years in a few brief sentenOes ; — 
quite long enough for the annals of barbarians.^

In order to estimate aright the picture-writing of the 
Aztecs, one must regard it in. connection with oral tradition, 
to which it was auxiliary. In tlm colleges of the priests the 
youth were instnioted in astronomy, history, mythology, &c. ; 
and those who were to follow the profession of hieroglyphical 
painting were taught the appUeation of the characters 
appropriated to each of these branches. In an historical 
work, one had charge of the chronology, another of the 
OTfjtllfi* ; Every part of the labour was thus mechanically 
di^rlhuted.t The pupils, inatnicted in all that was before 
known in their several departments, were prepared to 
extend still farther the boundaries of their imperfect science. 
The hieroglyphics served as a sort of stenography, a col- 
lection of notes, suggesting to the initiated much more than

* M. de Huxsboldt’s reznapk, that the Aztec annals, from the close of 
the eleventh centni^, exhibit the greatest method and astonishing minute-' 
ness,” (Vues des Oordilleres, 137,) must he received with som^ 
fioation. The reader would scarcely understand from it, iWe

rarely more than one or two fa^ts recorded in any year, ^nd sometimes not 
one in a dozen or more. The necessary looseness and Uui^rtainty of these 
historical records are made apparent by the reAa||i^ the Spanish inter- 
preter of the Mendoza Codex, who tells us Um^llie kaStves, to whom it was 
submitted, were very long in coming %||ji^i|rdemen^ about the proper 
signification of the paintings. — Antiil|. vol. vi. p. 87.

•f* Gama, Descripcion, Parte 2, p, lib. 6 , cap. 7. “ Tehian•f* Gama, Descripcion, Parte 2, p, lib. 6 , cap. 7. “ Tehian

para cada g^nero,” says Ixtlilxochm;^ ^lus Escritores, unos que tratahan 
de l 0 | Anales, poniendo por su dzdsn las <itie acaecian en cada un 
afro, con dia, 'meB, y hora; ofroe teniau £ su cargo las Genealogias, y 
descendencia de los Reyes, Sefrores, y Persomui de linaje, asentando por 
cuonta y razon los que nacian, y hormban los que morian con la misma 
cufbta* Unos teniau cuidqdo de las pinthuras, de los te'rmlnos, Umites, y 
de las Ciudade^, Provincias, Pueblos, y Uugares, y de las suertes, 
y r^rtimkmto de ks tierras cuyas eran, y i quien |wrtenecian ; otros de 
los lihroi de Leyes, ritos, y seremonias que usaban.^^ — Hist. Chich., MS., 
Prdlogu. t

M£XI€I^N H11B0<»1<YPIIZC)S.

e(mld be conveyed by a literal interpretation. This com- 
bination of the written and the oral comprehended *what 
may be called the literature of the Aztecs.*

Their manuscripts were made of different materials, — of 
cotton cloth, or skins nicely prepared ; of a composition of 
silk and gum ; but, for the most part, of a fine fabric ^om 
the kaves of the aloe, agwoe Amencona, called by the 
natives, maguey, which grows luxuriantly over the table 
lands of Mexico. A sort of paper was made from it, resem- 
bling somewhat the Egyptian papyrus, which, when 
properly dressed and polished, is said to have been more soft 
and beautiful than parchment* Some of the specimens, 
still existing, exhibit their original ^eshness, and the paint- 
ings on them retain their brilliancy of colours. They were 
sometimes done up into rolls, but more frequently into 
volumes of moderate size, in which the paper was shut up, 
like a folding-screen, with a leaf or tablet of wood at each

extremity, that gave the whole, when closed, the appearance

• ^extremity, that gave the whole, when closed, the appearance

• ^

* According to Boturini, the ancient Mexicans were acquainted with 
the Peruvian method of recording eveiflsi, by means of the quippus , — 
knotted strings of various colours, —which were afterwards superseded by 
hieroglyphical painting,— (Idea, p. 06). He could discover, however, hut 
a single specimen, wllich he met with in Tlascala, and that had nearly 
fallen to pieces with age, M‘Culloch suggests that it may have been only 
a wampum holt, such as is codlmon among our Utorth American Indians. 
(Researches, p. 201.) The conjecture is plausible enough. Strings of 
wampum, of various colours, were used by the latter people for the similar 
purpose of registering events. The insulated fact, recorded by Boturini, 
is hardly sufficient — unsupported, as far as I know, by any ether testimony 
— to establish the existence of qmppm amoU^ the AztecsJ who had but 
little in common with the Peruvians.

+ Pliny, who gives a minute account of the po/pyrUs iried of Egypt, 
notices the various manufactures obtained from it, as rope#, cloth, paper, 
&c. It also served as a thatch for the roofe of houses, as food and 
drink for the natives. — ^(Hist. Nat., lib. 11, cap, 20-22.) is singular 
that the American agam, a plant so totally different, shotritf liso have been 
applied to all these various uses.

AZTEC OmUSATIOK*

book. The length of the strips was determined only 
by convenience. As the pages might be read and referred 
to separately, this form had obvious advantages over th.e 
rolls of the ancients.*book. The length of the strips was determined only 
by convenience. As the pages might be read and referred 
to separately, this form had obvious advantages over th.e 
rolls of the ancients.*

At the time of the arrival of the Spaniards, great quan- 
tities of these manuscripts were treasured up in the country. 
Numerous persons were employed in painting, and the 
dexterity of their operations excited the astonishment of the 
conquerors. Unfortunately, this was mingled with other, 
and unworthy feelings. The strange, unknown characters 
inscribed on them excited suspicion. They were looked on 
as magic scrolls ; and were regarded in the same light with 
the idols and temples, as the symbols of a pestilent super- 
stition, that must be extirpated. The first archbishop of 
Mexico, Don Juan de Zumarraga, — a name that should be 
as immortal as that of Omar, — collected these paintings 
from every quarter, especially from Tezcuco, the most culti- 
vated capital in Anahuac, and the great depository of the 
national archives. ' He then caused them to be piled np in a 
‘‘mountain-heap,’’ — as it is called by the Spanish writers 
themselves,— ^in the market-place of Tlatelolco, and reduced 
them all to ashes ! f His greater Archbishop

♦ Lorenzana, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, Idea, p. 96. —

Humboldt, Vues des CordUl^fei, p. 62.— Martyr De

Orbe Novo, (Compluti, >1680,) dec. B, dec. 5, cap. 10. — Martyr

has given a minute descripticn Of th^ 1^1^ xuSps, sent home soon after 
the invasion of New Spain, -His MquisitivO^ mind was struck with the 
evidence they afforded of a. positive ' civilisation. Ribera, the friend of 
Cortds, brought back a story, that the ispitings were designed as patterns 
for embroiderers and jewellers. But 3|^tyr had been in Egypt, and he 
felt little hesitation in placing the Indian drawings in the same class with 
those he had seen on the obelisks and tlmples of that country.•f* Ixtlibcochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., Prdlogo. — Idem, Sum. Relac., MS. 
Wiiters are not agreed whether the conflagration took place in the square 
of Tlatelolco or Tezcuco. Comp. Olavigero, Stdr. del Messico, tom. ii. 
p. IBB, and Bustamente’s Pref. to Ixtlibcochitl, Cruautds des Oonqu^rans, 
trad, de Temaux, p. xvii.

MANUSCRIPTS.

8S

Ximenes, had celebrated a similar auto-da-fe of Arabic 
manuscripts, in Granada, some twenty years before. Never 
did fanaticism achieve two more signal triumphs, than by 
the annihilation of so many curious monuments of human 
ingenuity and learning ! *

The unlettered soldiers were not slow in imitating the 
example of their prelate. Every chart and volume which 
fell into their hands was wantonly destroyed ; so that, when 
the scholars of a later and more enlightened age anxiously 
sought to recover some of these memorials of civilisation, 
nearly all had perished, and the few surviving were jealously 
hidden by the natives.! Through the indefatigable labours 
of a private individual, however, a considerable collection 
wag eventually deposited in the archives of Mexico ; but 
was so little heeded there, that some were plundered, others 
decayed piecemeal from the damps and mildews, and others, 
again, were used up as waste-paper ! J We contemplate 
with indignation the cruelties inflicted by the early con- 
querors. But indignation is qualified with contempt, when 
we see them thus ruthlessly trampling out the spark of 
knowledge, the common boon and property of all mankind. 
We may Well doubt, which has the strongest claims to 
civilisation, the victor or the vanquished.

A few of the Mexican manuscripts have found their way, 
from time to time, to Europe, and are carefully preserved in 
the public libraries of its capitals. They are brought toge-

* It has been my lot to record both these displays of human infirmity, 
so humbling to the pride of intellect. — See the History of Ferdinand 
and Isabella, Part 2, Chap. 6.* It has been my lot to record both these displays of human infirmity, 
so humbling to the pride of intellect. — See the History of Ferdinand 
and Isabella, Part 2, Chap. 6.

! Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 10, cap. 274^Bustamente, 
Mafianas de Alameda, (Mexico^ 1836,) tom. ii., Prdlogo.

J Very many of the documents thus painfully amassed In the archives 
of the Audience of Mexico, were sold, according to Bustamente, as wrap- 
ping-paper, to apothecaries, shopkeepers, and rocket-makers ! Boturini’s 
noble collection has not fa^ed much better*

AZTIIC CnEmBATION.

tfeer in the magnificetit work of Lord Kingehorough ; but 
'not one is there from Spain. The most important of them, 
for the light it throws on the Aztec institutions, is the 
Mendoza Oodex ; which, after its mysterious disappearance 
for more than a century, has at length re-appeared in the 
Bodleian library at Oxford. It has been several times 
engraved.**^ The most brilliant in coiouring, probably, is the* The Itistorf of this famous collection is familiar to scholars. It was 
sent to the Em^peror Charles the Fifth, not long after the Conquest, by 
the Viceroy Mendoza, Marques de Mondejar. The vessel fell into the 
jbhhds of a French cruiser, and the manuscript was taken to Paris. It was 
afterwards bought by the chaplain of the English embassy, and, coming 
into the possession of the antiquary Purchas, was engraved, in exUnso, 
by him, in the third volume of his Pilgrimage,’* After its publication, 
in 1625, the Aztec original lost its importance, and fell into oblivion so 
completely, that, when at length the public curiosity was excited in regard 
to its fate, no trace of it could be discovered. Many were the speculations 
of scholars, at home and abroad, respecting it, and Dr. Robertson settled 
the question a« to its existence in England, by declaring that there was no 
Mexican relic in that country except a golden goblet of Montezuma. 
— ^(Bistory of America, [London, 1796,] vol. iii, p, 370.) Nevertheless, 
the identical Oodex, and sevetal ether Mexican paintings, have been since 
discovered in the Bodkian library. The circumstance has brought some 
obloquy on the historian nrho, while prying into the collections of Vienna 
and the Escurial, could be so blind to those under his own eyes. The 
oversight will not appear so* extraordinary to a thorough-bred collector, 
whether of manuscripts, or snedals, or any other rarity; The Mendoza 
Codex is, after all, but a copy, coarsely done wit^apenon European 
paper. Another copy, fi^ which Archbishop Lorenzana engraved his 
tribute-rolls in Mexico, existed in Boturini^s Collection. A third is in 
the Escurial, according to the Marquis off Spineto.— (Lectures on the 
Elements of Hieroglyphics, [Loudon,] Ipdl'. 7). This may possibly be the 
dHginal painting. The entire Codex, ct^iieid from the Bodleian maps, with 
its 3pinish and English interpretations, Is included in the noble compila- 
tion of Lord Kingsborough. — (Vols. i., v., vi.). It is distributed intU 
t^ree parts : embracing the civil history of the niition, the tributes paid by 
the dties, and the domestic economy and discipline of the Mexicans ; and, 
fironi Ihe fulness of the interpretation, is of much importance in regard 
to these several topics.lCAim80{lIPTS.

Borgian collection, in Rome.^ The most curious, howevoT, 
is the Dresden Codex, which has excited less attention than 
it deserves. Although usually classed among Mexican 
manuscripts, it bears little resemblance to them in its execu- 
tion ; the figures of objects are more -delicately drawn, and 
the characters, unlike the Mexican, appear to be purely 
arbitrary, and are possibly phonetic.! Their regular 
arrangement is quite equal to the Egyptian, The whole 
infers a much higher civilisation than the Aztec, and ofibrs 
abundant food for curious speculation. {

* It formerly belonged to the Giustiniani family ; but was to little 
cared for, that it was ‘suffered to fall into the mischievous bauds of the 
domestics' children, who made sundry attempts to burn it. Fortunately 
it WM painted on deerskin, and, though somewhat singed, ♦was not des- 
troyed. — (Humboldt, Vues des CordiU^res,p. 89, et seq.) It, is impossible 
to cast the eye over this brilliant assemblage of forms and colours without 
feeling how hopeless must be the attempt to recover a key to the . Aztec 
mythological symbols; which are here distributed with the symmetry, 
indeed, but in all the endless combinations of the kaleidoscope. It is in 
the third volume of Lord Kingsborough’s work.

t Humboldt, who has copied some pages of it in his Atlas Pitto- 
resque,” intimates no doubt of its Aztee origin. — (Vues des Cordilleres, 
pp. 266, 267). M. Le Noir even reads in it an exposition of Mexican 
Mythology, with occasional analogies to that of Eg>'pt and of Hindostan. 
— (Antiquit^s Mexicaines, tom. ii., introd.) The fantastic forms of 
hieroglyphic symbols may afford aiuilogies for almost anything.$ The history of this Codex, engraved entire in the third volume of 
the “ Antiquities of Mexico,” goes no furUier back than 1739, when it 
was purchased at Vienna for the Dresden library. It is made of the 
American agave. The figures ^painted on it bear little resemblance, eitlier 
in feature or form, to the Mexican. They are surmounted by a sort of 
headgear, which looks something like a modem peruke. On the chin of 
one we may notice a beard, a sign often used after the Conquest, to denote 
a European. Many of the persons are sitting cross-legged. The profiles 
of the faces, and the whole contour of the limbs, are sketched with a 
spirit and freedom very unlike the hard angular outlines of the Aztecs, 
the characters also,* are delicately traced, generally in an iiregular, but 
circular form, and are very minute. They are arranged, like the Egyptian^ 
both horizontally and perpendicularly, mostly in the foriqor manner, and,

AssTEc cmmATm.

few of these maps hate interpretationB inmexed t0 
them» which were obtained from the natives after the Con- 
qdest.^ The greater part are without any, and cannot now 
he unriddled. Had the Mexicans made free use of a pho- 
netic alphabet, it might have been originally easy, by 
mastering the comparatively few signs employed in this 
kind of communication, to have got a permanent key to the 
whole* t A brief inscription has furnished a clue to the 
vast labyrinth of Egyptian hieroglyphics. But the Aztec 
characters, representing individuals, or at most, species, 
require to be made out separately ; a hopeless task, for 
which little aid is to be expected from the vague and general 
tenor of the few interpretations now existing. There was, 
as already Inentioned, until late in the last century, a pro- 
fessor in the university of Mexico, especially devoted to thefrom tlie prevalent direction of the profiles, jvould seem to have been read 
from right to left Whether phonetic or ideographic, they are of that 
compact and purely conventional sort which belongs to a well digested 
system for the oommunicatioa of thought. One cannot but re|;ijet, that no 
trace should exist of the quarter whence this MS. was ohtain^a; perhaps 
some part of Central AmeriOa ; fA>m the region of the lU^nsteripus races* 
who built the monuments of Mitla and Palenque. Though in truth, there 
seems scarcely more resemblance in the symbols to the Palenque bas-reliefs 
than to the A7tec paintings.

* There are three of these ; the Mendoza Codex ; the Telleriano- 
Remensis, formerly the property of Archbishishop Tellier, in tfie Royal 
Library of Paris ; and the Vaticaa Ifo. S738. The interpretation of 
the last bears evident marks of its iTeeent origin ; probably as late as the 
close of the sixteenth, or the begit&ihg 'M the seventeenth century, when 
the ancient hieroglyphics were ria4 with the eye of faith, rather than of 
reason. Whoevei* was the cotnmentatbr, (comp. Vues des Cordill^res, pp. 
203, 204; and Antiq. of Mexico, vol. vi, pp. 155, 222,) he has given 
sudi an exposition as shows the old Aztecs to have been as orthodox 
ChiistiiiinB as any subjects of the Pope.

’f* The to^al number of E^yptiau biwoglyphics discovered by Ohampollion 
amounts to 864 ; and of these ISO only are phonetic, notwithstanding that 
this kind of character is used far more frequently than both the others. — 
Pi'dciB, p. 263 ; also Splneto, Lectures, leot. 3.

iCAKtreesiPTgk ii

4 ''**'•* *

eitudy of the pieture-ii^iting^ Bitt« as this was withiCAKtreesiPTgk ii

4 ''**'•* *

eitudy of the pieture-ii^iting^ Bitt« as this was with

a view to legal proceedings, his m^onuation, probably, was 
limited to deciphering titles. In less than a hundred years 
after the Conquest, the knowledge of the hieroglyphics had 
so far declinedi that a diligent Tezcucan writer complains 
he could find in the country only two persons, both very 
aged, at all competent to interpret them.^

It is not probable, therefore, that the art of reading these 
picture-writings will ever be recovered ; a circumstance 
certainly to be regretted. Not that the records of a semi- 
civilised people would be likely to contain any new truth or 
discovery important to human comfort or progress ; bui 
they could scarcely fail to throw some additional light on the 
previous history of the nation, and that of the more polished 
people who before occupied the country* This would he 
still more probable, if any literary relics of their Toltec 
predecessors were preserved ; and* if report he true, an 
important compilation from this source was extant at the 
time of the invasion, and may have perhaps contributed to 
swell the holocaust of Zumarraga^t It is no great stretch

* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., Dediq.— ^Boturini, who travelled 
through every part of the country, in the middle of the last century, could 
not meet with an individual who could afford hjm the least clue to the 
Aztec hieroglyphics. So completely had every vestige of their ancient lan- 
* guage been swept away from the memory of the natives. (Idea, p. 116.) 
If we are to believe Bustamente, however, a complete key to the whole system 
is, at this moment, somewhere in Spain. It was carried home at the time 
of the process against Father Myer, in 1795. The name of the Mexican 
Champollion who discovered it is Borunda*-— Gama, De6cri|^on, tom. ii. 
^ p. 33, nota.■f Teoamoxtli, *^the divine book,*^ as it was called. According to 
Ixtlilxochitl, it was composed by a Tezcucan doctor, named Huematzin, 
towards the close of the seventh centuryJ~-(Relaciones, MS.) It gave an 
account of the migrations of his nation from Asia, of the various stations 
on their journey, of their social and religious institutions, ^eir science, 
arts, &c., &c., a good deal too much for* one hook. JgnOtum pro magnifico.

19 ijswj

li fiuiajf'y to sitppooe &«ch monb aii|B^t reveal the 
eoecesaive linke m the migbtj chain of migration of the 
iriiliitke races, and, by carrying ns back to the seat of their 
possessions in the Old WiM*ld, have solved the mysteiy whidi 
has so long perplexed the learned, in regard to the settlement 
imd eiviitsation of the New.

Besides the hieroglyphioal maps, the traditions of the 
eountiy were embodied in the smigs and hymns, which, as 
already mentaoned, were carrfuMy taught in the public 
Bobmlk These were various, embracing the mythic legends 
of a heroic age, the warlike achievements of their own, or 
the softer tales of love and pleasure,^ Many of them were 
cmOposed by sdiolars and pi^ons of rank, and are cited 
as affording the most authentic record of events. t The 
Mexican disJect was rich and expressive, though inferior to 
the Tezcuoan, the most polished of the idioms of Anahuac. 
None of the Astec compositions have survived, but we can 
form some estimate of the general state of poetic culture 
from the odes which have come down to us from the royal 
house of Tezcuco.^ Sahagun has furnished us with trans^It has never been teen bj a Ewop^o. A copy is tiaid to have been in 
poieession of tbe Tescuoan ohitmidere, on the taking of their capital.*— 
(Buatamente, €r6nioa Bfexicana, [Mexico^ 1822,] carta 8.) Lord Kln^ 
borough, who can sceSt' out a Hebrew root, be it buried never no dee|<, 
haa discovered that %h 0 TetmMactli was *tbei Pentateuch. Thns , — tea * 
means ^ divine,” amoU ^ paper,” or “ book,” and moxtli ** appears to be 
Moaes,” — "Divine book of Moaeal”— Antiq. of Me:;ico, vol vi, p, 204, 
Bota. " »

V Boturini, Idea, pp. 90*97^— 'C^tigtro^ Stor. del Mesaico, tom. il. 
pp. 174-178.

■f " ho^ cantos con qtie las observahan Autores muy graves en su mode 
de dencia y floultad, pues fm&wi los mismos Reyes, y de la gente mas 
Rnstre y entendida, que simnpre olMervSron y adquiridron la verdad, y esta 
eon tanta, y razon, quanta pndidron tener los mas graves y fidedignos 
Allloret.”«~IxtHlxochitl, Hist Chich., MS., Prdlogo.

See Chap. 6, of this Introduction.

^ tiieir eonsiatiiig of prayers

and public di8COtH*ses, wbicli give a farourable idea of their 
eloquence, and ebow that they paid mnch attention to 
ihetorical e®5Ct* ’^They are said to hare had, afeo* some- 
thing like theatrical exhibitions, of a pantomimic sort, in 
which the faces of the performers were covered with masks^ 
and the figures of birds or animals were frequently relre- 
sented ; an imitation to which they may hare been led by 
the familiar^ delineation of such objects in their hiero- 
glyphios.* In all this we see the dawning of a literary 
culture, suipassed, however, by their attainments in the 
severer walks of mathematical science.They devised a system of notation in their arithmetic, 
sufficiently simple. The first twenty numbers were ex- 
pressed by a corresponding number of dots. The first five* 
had specific names ; after which they were represented by 
combining the fifth with one of the four preceding : as five 
and one for six, five and two for seven, and so on. Ten 
and fifteen had each a separate name, which was also com- 
bined with the first four, to express a higher quantity. 
These four, therefore, w ere the radical characters of their 
oral arithmetic, in the same manner as they were of the 
written with the ancient Romans ; a more simple arrange- 
ment, probably, than any existing among Europeans. f 
Twenty was expressed by a separate hieroglyphic,— »a fiag. 
Larger sums were reckoned by twenties, and, in writing, 
by repeating the number of fiags. The square of twenty,

See some account of these mummeries in Acosta, (lib. 5, cap. 30,) — 
also Olavigero (Stor. del Messico, ubi supra). Stone models, of masks are 
sometimes found among the Indian ruins, and engrayings of them are both 
in Lord Kingshorough’s work, and in the Antiquity Mexicaines.

f Gama, Descripoion, Parte 2, Apend. 2. Goma, in <^mpaxing the 
language of Mexican notation with the decimal system of tl|b Europeans, 
and the ingenious binary system of Leibnitz, confounds oral with written 
arithmetic. •

AZTEC crviLlSATION.AZTEC crviLlSATION.

four hundred, had a separate sign, that of a plume, and so 
had the cube of t^renty, or eight thousand, which was 
denoted by a purse, or sack. This was the whole arith- 
metical apparatus of the Mexicans, by the combination of 
which they were enabled to indicate any quantity. For 
greater expedition, they used to denote fractions of the 
larger sums by drawing only a part of the object. Thus, 
half or three-fourths of a plume, or of a purse, represented 
that proportion of their respective sums, and so on.^ With 
all this, the machinery will appear very awkward to us, 
who perform our operations with so much ease by means 
of the Arabic, or rather, Indian ciphers. It is not much 
more awkward, however, than the system pursued by the 
great mathematicians of antiquity, unacquainted with the

• brilli^t invention which has given a new 'aspect to mathe- 
matical science, of determining the value, in a great mea-

• sure, by the relative position of the figures.

In the measurement of time, the Aztecs adjusted their 
civil year by the solar* They divided it into eighteen 
months of twenty days each. Both months and days were 
expressed by peculiar hieroglyphics, — those of the fomiei* 
often intimating the season of the year,, liko J^he French 
months, at the period of the Revolution. Fire comple- 
mentary days, as in Egypt,t were added, to make up the 
full number of three hundred and sixty-five* They belonged 
to no month, and were regarded aapectdiarly unlucky. A 
month was divided into four of five days each, on

the last of which was the pubfii^ilair or market day.| This

* Oatna, ubi oupra. This learned-'^exicati has given a very satisfactory 
treatise on the arithmetic of the Azte<ai, in his second part,

+ Herodotus, Euterpe, sec. 4.

if Bahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, lib. 4, Apend. According to Cla- 
vigero, the fairs were held on the days bearing the sign of the year.— Stor. 
del Messico, tom. ii. p. 62.

CHRONOLOGY,

93if Bahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, lib. 4, Apend. According to Cla- 
vigero, the fairs were held on the days bearing the sign of the year.— Stor. 
del Messico, tom. ii. p. 62.

CHRONOLOGY,

93

arrangement, different from that of the nations of the Old 
Continent, whether of Europe or Asia,* has the advantage 
of giving an equal number of days to each month, and of 
comprehending entire weeks, without a fraction, both in 
the months and in the year.t

As the year is Composed of nearly six hours more than 
three hundred and sixty-five days, there still remained an 
excess, which, like other nations who have framed a calen- 
dar, they provided for by intercalation ; not, indeed, every 
fourth year, as the Europeans, | but at longer intervals, like 
some of the Asiatics. § They waited till the expiration of 
fifty-two vague years, when they interposed thirteen days,

* The people of Java, according to Sir Stamford Raffles, regulated their 
markets also by a week of five d^|» ^ Thiy had, besides, our week of 
seven. (History of Java, [bonddfi, 1880,] vol. i. pp. 581, 832.^ The 
latter division of time, of general use throughout the East, is the oldest 
monument existing of astronomical science. — See La Place, Exposition du 
Systeme du MondeJ (Paris, 1808,) liv. 5, chap.*l.

+ Veytia, Historia Antigua de fejico, (Mi^jico, 1806,) tom. i. cap. 6, 
7. — Gama, D6scripcion, Parte 1, pp. 33, 34, et alibi. Boturi||i, Idea, pp. 
4, 44, et seq. — Cod. Tel.-Rem., ap. Antiq* of Mexico, vol. vi. p. 104.— 
Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Toribio, Hist. 3e los Indios, MS., 
Parte 1. cap. 5.i Sahagun intimates doubts of this. " Otra fiesta hacian de cuatro en 
cuatro aiios 4 honra del fuego, y en esta fiesta es verostmil, y hay conye^ 
imas que hacian su visiesto contando seis dias de. nemontemi the five 
unlucky complementary days were so cajiled. — (Hist, de Nueva Espafia, 
lib. 4. Apend.) But this author, however good an authority for the super-, 
stitions, is an indifferent one for the science of the Mexicans.

§ The Persians had a cycle of one hundred and twenty years, of three 
hundred andw sixty-five days each, at the end , of which they intercalated 
thirty days. — (Humboldt, Vues des Cordilldres, p. 177.) This was the 
*same as thirteen after the cycle of fifty-two years of the Mexicans; but 
was less accurate than theiif probable intercalation of twelve days and a 
half. It is obviously indifferenlf, as far as accuracy is conoerned, which 
multiple of four is selected to form the cycle ; though the shorter the 
interval of intercalation, the less, of course, will be the temporary departure 
from the true time.

Aastac

M

twelve mA a balf, this being the nmhar wlu^ 
had &Uan ia arrear. Had they inserted tlurteen> it 
hata been too much, since the annual excess oyer three 
hundred and sixty-five is about eleven minutes less than six 
hours. But, as their calendar, at the time of the Conquest, 
was found to correspond with the European, (making allow- 
ance for the subsequent Gregorian reform,) they would 
seem to have adopted the shorter period of twelve days and 
a half,* which brought them, within an almost inappre- 
ciable fraction, to the exact length of the tropical year, as 
established by the most accurate observations.! Indeed, 
the intercalation of twenty-five days, in every hundred and 
four years, shows a nicer adjustment of civil to solar time 
than is presented by any European calendar ; since more 
than five centuries must elapse, before the loss of an entire♦ This is the conclusion to which Gama arrives, after a very careful in- 
vestigation of the subject. * He supposes that the ** huadles,” or cycles, of 
fifty-two yeara,-— by which, as we shall see, the Mexicans computed time, — ' 
ended alternately at midnight and midday. — (Descripcion, Parte 1, p. 52, 
et seej,) Hounds some warrant for this in Acosta’s account, (lib. 6, cap. 2,J 
though contradicted by Toinjuemada, (Monarch. Ind., lib. 5, cap. 33,) attl^ 
as it appears, by Sahe^un, — whose work, however, Gama never 8aw|*^ 
(Hist de Nueva Espana, lib, 7, cap. 9,) both of whom place Jim clpse of 
the year at midnight Gama’s hypothesis derives confirmati^P from a dr- 
cumstance I have not seen noticed. Besides the bundle” of fifiyntwo 
years, the Mexicans had a larger cycle of one hundred atid four years, 
called^* an old age.” As this was not used in tjtefr ^©ekonin^ which 
were carried on by their ** bundlfis,” it seemp highly probable that it 
was designed to express the period which bring round the com- 
mencement of the smaller cycles to hour, and i^ which the

intercalary days, amounting to twenty-fiv^ "^ghthe comprehended without 
a fraction.

f This length, as computed by Zaci^ at 365 d. 5 h. 48 m. 48 sec., ia 
caaly 2 m. 39 sec. longer than the Mdxipan ; which corresponds with the 
oelehrated calculation of the astronomers of the Caliph Almamon, that fell 
short about two minutes of* the true time. — See I^a Place, Exposition, 
p. 350.

€B&ONOLO<»T.

day.^ Snell waa the astonishing precision displayed by the 
Aztecs, or, perhaps, by their more polished Toltec predeeeSf 
Bors, in these computations, so difficult as to have baffled, 
till a comparatively recent period, the most enlightened 
nations of Christendom !f

The chronological system of the Mexicans, by which 
they dettermined the date of any particular evmit, was also

m 'The chronological system of the Mexicans, by which 
they dettermined the date of any particular evmit, was also

m '

* ** El corto exceso de 4 hor, 38 min. 40 seg,, que hay de mas de los 
25 dias en el periodo de 1 04 afios, no puede componer un di& entero, hasta 
que pasen mas de cinco de cstos periodo#m4ximo8 6 538 anos.’’ — (Gama, 
Descripcion, Parte 1, p. 23.) Gama estimates the solar year at 365 d. 5 h. 
48 m. 50 sec.t The ancient Etruscans arranged their calendar in cycles of 1 1 0 solar 
years, and reckoned the year at .365 d. 5 h. 40 m. ; at least, this seems 
probable, says Niebuhr. (History of Rome, 9hg. trans., [fcambridge, 1 828,] 
vol. i., pp. 113, 288.) The early Rdmans had not wit enough to avail 
themselves of this acourate measurement, which came within nine minutes 
of the true time. The Julian reform, which assumed 365 d. 5j^ h. as the 
length of the year, erred as much, or rather more, on the other side. And 
when the Europeans, who adopted this calendar, landed in Mexico, their 
reckoning was nearly eleven days in advance of the exact June, — or, in 
other words, of the reckoning of the luurharoue Aztecs ; a reiRrkable fact. 
Gama’s issearches led to the conclusion, that the year of the new cycle 
began with the Aztecs on the ninth of January ; a date considerably earlier 
llahi'thait^iilually assigned by the Mexican writers. — (Descripcion, Parte 1, 
JBy postponing the intercalation to the end of fifty-two years, 
the animal Iqss of six hours made ever}^ fourth year begin a day earlier. 
Thus, the cycle commencing on the ninth of January, the fifth year of it 
began on the eighth, the ninth year on the seventh^ and so on ; so that the 
last day of the series of fifty-two years fhll enthe twenty-sixth of December, 
when the intercalation of thirteen days rectified the chronology, and 
carried the oommenceroent o£ the new year to the ninth of January 
again. Torquemada, puzzled by the irregularity of the new year’s day, 
• asserts that the Mexicans were unacquainted with the annual excess of 
six hours, and therefore never intercalated !— (Monarch. Ind., lib. 10, 
cap. 36.) The interpreter of the Vatican Codex has fallen a scries of 
blunders on the same subject, still more ludicrous.— (Anti of Mexico, 
vol. vi. PI. 16.) So soon had Aztec science faRefi into oblli|t>n, after the 
Conquest I

AZTK<J cmiilSATlON.AZTK<J cmiilSATlON.

vef^ remarkable. The epock, from which they reckoned, 
tjorresponded with the year 1091, of the Christian era. It 
Vas the period of the reform of their calendar, soon after 
their migration from Aztlan. They threw the years, as 
already noticed, into great cycles, of fifty-two each, which 
they called “sheafs,’' or “bundles,” and represented hy a 
quantity of reeds bound together by a string. As*often as 
this hieroglyphic occurs in^their maps, it shows the number 
of half centuries. To enable them to specify any particular 
- year, they divided the gre^ cycle into four smaller cycles, 
or indictions, of thirteen years each. They then adopted 
two periodical series of signs, one consisting of their num- 
erical dots up to thirteen, the other, of four hieroglyphics of 
the years.* These latj^r they repeated in regular succes- 
sion, setting against each one a number of the correspond- 
ing series of dots, continued also in regular succession up 
to thirteen. The same system was pursued through the 
four indications, which thus, it will be observed, began 
always wj^ a different hieroglyphic of the year from the 
precedin* and in this . way, each of the hieroglyphics 
was made to combine successively with each of the Kbume- 
rical signs, but never twice with the same ; s ig|^ 
and thirteen, the factors of fifty-two, — the numhe^r jPi 
in the cycle, — must admit 'of just as many ee||iMitiiatioii|i 
as are equal to their product. Thus Had its

appropriate symbol, by wbicjh it was, recognised.

And this symbol, preceded by t^:,; proper number of ■ 
“bundles,” indicating the half , Jbnturies, showed the 
precise time which had elapsed 'since the national epochAnd this symbol, preceded by t^:,; proper number of ■ 
“bundles,” indicating the half , Jbnturies, showed the 
precise time which had elapsed 'since the national epoch

* These hieroglyphics were a “ rabbit,’’ a “ reed,” a “ flint,'’ a ‘‘ house.” 
They were taken as symbolical of the four elements, air, water, fire, earth, 
according to Veytia. — (Hist. Antig., tom. i. cap. 6.) It is not easy to see 
the connexion between the terms ‘^rabbit” and “air,” which lead the 
respective series.

CHRONOLOGY,

of 1091.^ The ingenious contrivance of a periodical series, 
in place of the cumbrous system of hieroglyphical notation, 
is not peculiar to the Aztecs, and is to be found among

! * The following table of two of the four indictions of thirteen years

AMfC crtitl»Arrojr.

"^il^ous people on the Asiatic continent,— the same in prin* 
ciple, though vaiying materiallj in arrangement.*

The solar calendar, above described, might have answered 
all the purposes of the nation ; hut the priests cho^e to con- 
struct another for themselves. This was called a “ lunar 
reckoning,’^ though nowise accommodated to the revolutions 
of the moon.t It was formed, also, of two periodical series;each will make the text more clear. The first column shows the actual 
year of the great cycle, or bundle the second, the numerical dots used 
in their arithmetic. The third is composed of their liieroglyphics for 
rabbit, reed, flint, house, in their regular order. By pursuing the combina- 
tions through the two remaining indictions, it will be found that the same 
number of dots will never coincide with the same hieroglyphic. These 
tables are generally thrown into the form of wheels, as are those also of 
their months and days, having a very pretty effect. Several have been 
published, at different times, from the collections of Siguenza and Boturini. 
The wheel of the great cycle of fifty-two years is encompassed by a serpent, 
which was also the symbol of “an age,” both with the Persians and 
Egyptians. Father Toribio seems to misapprehend the nature of these 
chronological wheels Tenian rodelas y escudos, y en elks pintadas las 
figuras y armas do sus Demonios con su blason.” — Hist, de los Indies, 
MS., Parte f, cap. 4.

* Among the Chinese, Japanese, Moghols, Mantchous, and other families 
of the Tartar race. Their series are composed of symbols of their five 
elements, and the twelve zodiacal signs, making a cycle of sixty years^ 
duration. Their several systems are exhibited in connexion with the 
Mexican, in the luminous pagw of Humboldt, (Vues des Cordilleres, 
p. 14.9,) who draws important consequences from the comparison, to wliich 
we shall have occasion to return hereafter.■f In this calendar, the months ^ the tropical year were distributed into 
cycles of thirteen days, which beings rep^ed twenty times, — the number 
of days in a solar month, — completed. lunar or astrological year of 260 
days ; when the reckoning began a^ain. “ By the contrivance of these 
trecenaa (terms of thirteen days) and the cycle of fifty-two years,” says 
Oama, they formed a luni-solar pe^od, most exact for astronomical 
prurposes.” — (Dcscripciqn, Parte 1, p. 27.) He adds, that these treemaa 
were suggested by the perio^fs in which the moon . is visible before and 
after conjunction. — (Loc. cit.) It seems hardly possible that a people, 
capable of constructing a calendar so accurately on the true principles of 
solar time, should so grossly err as to suppose, that in this reckoning they

CHEONOIOGT.

99

one of them consisting of thirteen numerical sign®, or dots, 
the other of the twenty hieroglyphics of the days. But, as 
the product of these combinations would only be 260, and, 
as some confusion might arise from the repetition of the 
same terms for the remaining 105 days of the year, they 
invented a third series, consisting of nine additional hiero- 
glyphics, which, alternating with the two preceding series, 
rendered it impossible that the three, should coincide twice 
in the same year, or indeed in less than 2340 days ; since 
20 X 13 X 9 = 2340.* Thirteen was a mystic number, 
of frequent use in their tables.! Why they resorted to that 
of nine, on this occasion, is not so clear. J

rfially represented the daily revolutions of the moon.’’ “ The whole 
Eastera world,” says the learned Niebuhr, ** has followed the moon in its 
calendar ; the free scientifit division of a yast portion of time is peculiar to 
the West. Connected with the West is that primeval extinct world which 
wo call the New.” — History of Rome, vol. i. p. 239.* They were named “ companions,” and “ lords of the night,” and were 
supposed to preside over the night, as the other signs did over the day. — 
Boturini, Idea, p. 57.

'f- Thus, their astrolo^cal year was divided into months of thirteen days ; 
there were thirteen years in their indictions, which contained each three 
hundred and sixty-five periods of thirteen days, &c. It is a curiotis fact, 
that the number of lunar months of thirteen days, contained in a cycle of 
fifty-two yea®B, with the intercalation, should correspond precisely with the 
number of years in the great Sothic period of the Egyptians, namely, 1491 ; 
a period in which the seasons and festivals came round to the same place 
in the year again. The coincidence may be accidental. But a people 
employing periodical series, and astrological calculations, have generally 
some meaning in the numbers they select and the combinations to which 
they lead.

t According to Gama, (Descripcion, Parte 1, pp. 75, 76,) because S60 
can he divided by nine without a fraction; the nine “companions” not 
being attached to the five complementary days. But 4, a mystic number 
much used in their arithmetical combinations, would have answered the 
same nurpose equally well. In regard to this, McCulloch observes, with 
mmch shrewdness, ‘‘ It seems impossible that the Mexicans, so careful in 
constructing their cycle, should abruptly terminate it with 360 revolutions, 
whose natural period of temination is 2340.” And he sufposes the nine

AZTEO CIVILISATION.

;| 60 ,AZTEO CIVILISATION.

;| 60 ,

This second calendar rouses a holy indignation in the 
early Spanish missionaries, and father Sahagun loudly con- 
demns it as “ most unhallowed, since it is founded neither 
on natural reason nor on the influence of the planets, nor 
on the true course of the year ; but is plainly the work of 
necromancy, and the fruit of a compact with the Devil ! * 
One may doubt, whether the superstition of those who 
invented the sfcheme was greater than that of those who 
thus impugned it. At all events, we may, without having 
recourse to supernatural agency, find in the human heart a 
sufficient explanation of its origin ; in that love of power, 
that has led the priesthood of many a faith to affect a 
mystery, the key to which was in their own keeping.

By means of this calendar the Aztec priests kept their 
own records, regulated the festivals afed seasons of sacrifice, 
and made all their astrological calculations.! The falseBy means of this calendar the Aztec priests kept their 
own records, regulated the festivals afed seasons of sacrifice, 
and made all their astrological calculations.! The false

companions” were used in connexion with the cycles of 260 days, in 
order to throw them into the larger ones of 2340 ; eight of which, with a 
ninth of 260 days, he ascertains to be equal to the great solar period of 
52 yearf. — (Researches, pp. 207, 208.) This is very plausible. But in 
fact the combinations of the two first series, forming the cycle of 260 days, 
were always interrupted at the end of the year, since each new yeaf began 
with the same hieroglyphic of the days. The third eeries of the “com- 
panions” was intermitted, as above stated, on -the five unlucky days which 
closed the year, in order, if we inay believe Boturini, that the first day of 
the solar year might have annexed to it the fii^st of the nine “ companions,” 
which signified “lord of the year;” (Idea^p. 57 ;) a result which might 
have been equally well secured, wither any intermission at all, by taking 5, 
another favourite number, instead of S, as the divisor. As it was, however, 
the cycle, as far as the third, series was concerned, did terminate with 360 
revolutions. The subject is a perplexing one ; and I can hardly hope to 
have presented it in such a manner as to make it perfectly clear to the 
reader. ♦ Hist, d* Nueva Espafia, lib. 4, Introd.

r}* “ Dans les pays les plus differents,” says Benjamin Constant, con- 
cluding some sensible reflections on the sources of the sacerdotal power, 
“ chez les peoples de mocurs les plus oppos^es, le sacerdoce a dfi au cvlte 
des dldments et des astres un pouvoir dont aujour-d’hui nous concevons A 
peine Tidde.’* — De la Religion, (Paris, 1825,) liv, 3, ch. 4.

CHRONOLOGY. lOlCHRONOLOGY. lOl

science of astrology is natural to a state of society partially 
civilised, where the mind; impatient of the slow and cautious 
examination by which alone it can arrive at truth, launches 
at once into the regions of speculation, and rashly attempts 
to lift the veil, — the impenetrable veil, which is drawn 
around the mysteries of nature. It is the characteristic 
of true science, to discern the impassable, but not very 
obvious, limits which divide the province of renson from 
that of speculation. Such knowledge comes tardily. How 
many ages have rolled away, in which powers that, rightly 
directed, might have revealed the great laws of nature, have 
been wasted in brilliant, but barren, reveries on alchemy 
and astrology !

The latter is more particularly the study of a primitive 
age ; when the mind, incapable of arriving at the stupendous 
fact, that the myriads of minute lights, glowing in the firma- 
ment, are the centres of systems as glorious as our own, is 
naturally led to speculate on their probable uses, and to con- 
nect them in some way or other with man, for whose conve- 
nience every other object in the universe seems to have been 
created. As the eye of the simple child of nature watches, 
through the long nights, the stately march of the heavenly 
bodies, and sees the bright hosts coming up, one after 
another, and changing with the changing seasons of the 
year, he naturally associates them with those seasons, as 
the periods over which they hold a mysterious influence. 
In the same manner, he connects their appearance with any 
^interesting event of the time, and explores, in their flaming 
characters, the destinies of the new-born infant.^ Such is

* ** It is a gentle and affectionate thouglit,

That, in immeasurable heights above us,

At our first birth the wreath of love was woven 
With sparkling stars for flowers.”* ** It is a gentle and affectionate thouglit,

That, in immeasurable heights above us,

At our first birth the wreath of love was woven 
With sparkling stars for flowers.”

Coleridge, “ Translation of Wallenstein/' Act 2, sc. 4 * 
Schiller is more true to poetiy than history, when he tells us, in the

A*T8C CrnmATlOl!.

the origin of astrology, tbe false lights of Trhich hare continued 
from the earliest ages Jo dazzle and bewilder mankind, till 
they have faded away in the superior illumination of a 
comparatively recent period. ^ •

The astrological scheme of the Aztecs was founded less 
on the planetary influences than on those of the arbitrary 
signs they had adopted for the months and days.* The 
character of the leading sign, in each lunar cycle of thirteen 
days, gave a complexion to the whole ; though this was 
qualified, in some degree, by the signs of the succeeding 
days, as well as by those of the hours. It was in adjusting 
these conflicting forces that the great art of the diviner was 
shown. In no country, not even in ancient Egypt, were the 
dreams of the astrologer more implicitly deferred to. On 
the birth of a child, he was instantly summoned. The time 
of the event was accurately ascertained ; and the family 
hung in trembling suspense, as the minister of Heaven cast 
the horoscope of the infant, and unrolled the dark volume of 
destiny. The influence of the priest was confessed by the 
Mexican, in the very first breath which he inhaled.*

We know little further of the astronomical attainments 
of the Aztecs. That they were acquainted with the cause 
of eclipses is evident fro^ the representation on their 
maps, of the disk of the moon projected on that of the

beautiful passage of which this is paTt,tt^at the worship of the stars took 
the place of classic mythology. It long before it,beautiful passage of which this is paTt,tt^at the worship of the stars took 
the place of classic mythology. It long before it,

^ Gama has given us a complete almaiiac of the astrological year, with 
the appropriate signs and divi8|pii8, showing with what scientific skill it was 
adapted to its various uscs.'^Descripcion, Parte 1, pp. 25-81 ; 62-76.) 
Sahagun has devoted a whole book to explaining the mystic import and 
value of these signs, witt^; a minuteness that may enable one to cast up a 
scheme of nativity for himself. — (Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 4.) It is 
evident he fully believed the magic wonders which he told. ** It was a 
deceitful art,” he says, “ pernicious and idolatrous ; and was never con- 
trived by human reason.” The good fether was certainly no philosopher.

ASTRONOMY,

im

sun.* Whether they had arranged a system of constella- 
tions, is uncertain ; though, that they recognised some of 
the most obvious, as the Pleiades for example, is evident 
from the fact that they regulated their festivals by thei^, 
We know of no astronomical instruqpients used by them, 
except the dial.t An immense circular block of carved 
stone, disinterred in 1790, in the great square of Mexico, 
has supplied an acute and learned scholar with the means 
of establishing some interesting facts in regard to Mexican 
science.^ This colossal fragment, on which the calendar is 
engraved, shows that they had the means of settling the 
hours of the day with precision, the periods of the solstices 
and of the equinoxes, and that of the transit of the sun 
across the zenith of Mexico. §

* See, among others, the Cod. Tel.-Eem., Part 4., PI. 22, ap. Antiq. 
of Mexico, vol. i.* See, among others, the Cod. Tel.-Eem., Part 4., PI. 22, ap. Antiq. 
of Mexico, vol. i.

+ “ It can hardly he doubted,” says Lord Kingsborougb, ‘‘ that the 
Mexicans were acquainted with many scientifical instruments of strange 
invention, as compared with our own ; whether the telescope may not have 
been of the number is uncertain ; but the thirteenth plate of M. Dupaix’s 
Monuments^ Part Second, which represents a man holding something of a 
similar nature to his eye, affords reason to suppose that they knew how to 
improve the powers of vision.” — (Antiq. of Mexico, vol. vi. p. 15, note.) 
The instrutuent alluded to is rudely carved on a conical rock. It is raised 
no higher than the nock of the pers^who holds it, and looks, to my 
lliinking, as much like a musket as a telescope ; though I shall not infer 
the use of fire-arms among the Aztecs from this circumstance. — (See vol. 
iv. PI. 15.) Captain Dupaix, however, in his commentary on the drawing 
sees quite as much in it as his lordship. — Ibid. vol. v.,'p. 241.

J Gama, Descripcion, Parte 1, sec. 4 ; Part© 2, Apend. Besides this 
colossal fragment, Gama met with some others, designed, probably, for 
similar scientific uses, at Chapoltepec, Before he had leisure to examine 
them, however, they were broken up for materials to build a furnace ! A 
fate not unlike that which has too often befaHen the monuments of ancient 
art in the Old World.

§ In his second treatise on the cylindrical stone, Gama dwells more at 
large on its scientific construction, as a vertical sun-dial, in order to dispel 
the dpubts of some sturdy sceptics on this point.-— (Descripcion, Parte 2,

AZTEC CmUSATIOir.AZTEC CmUSATIOir.

We cannot contemplate the astronomical science of the 
Mexicans, so disproportioned to their progress in other 
walks of civilisation, without astonishment. An acquaint- 
ance with some of the more obvious principles of astronomy 
is vnthin the reach of the rudest people. With a little care, 
they may learn to connect the regular changes of the seasons 
with those of the place of the sun at his rising and setting. 
They may foUoV the march of the great luminary through 
the heavens, by watching the stars that first brighten on 
his evening track, or fade in his morning beams. They 
may measure a revolution of the moon, by marking her 
phases, and may even form a general idea of the number of 
such revolutions in a solar year. But that they should be 
capable of accurately adjusting their festivals by the move- 
ments of the heavenly bodies, and should fix the true length 
of the tropical year, with a precision unknown to the great 
phUosophers of antiquity, could be the result only of a long 
series of nice, and patient observations, evincing no slight 
progress in civilisation.* But whence could the rude inha- 
bitants of these mountain regions have derived this curious 
erudition ? Not from the barbarous hordes who roamed 
over the higher latitudes of the north ; nor from the more 
polished races on th6 southern continent, with whom it is 
apparent they had no interwurse. If wo are driven, in our

Apend. 1.) The civil day was distributed by the l^exicans Into 
parts ; and began, like that of most of the Asitfric miliims. With sunrise, 
hi. de Humboldt, who probably never saw treafise, allows

only eight intervals. — Vues dos Cordill^];;ei, |v

* " Un calendrier,” exclaims the ** flui ct r^gle suronly eight intervals. — Vues dos Cordill^];;ei, |v

* " Un calendrier,” exclaims the ** flui ct r^gle sur

]a revolution annuelle du soleil, non seuleipeiitpar ^addition de cinq jours 
^us lea ans, mais encoi% par Ja correction 4^ bissextile, doit sans doute* 
Stap© regardd comme une Operation ddduite^Iuse ^tude rdflechie, et d’une 
grande combinaison. H faut done suppoeer chez ces peuples une suite 
d’observalions astronomiques, une distiucte de la sphere, de la 
j^dclinaison de I’^cliptique, ct rusage' jifeun calcul concemant les jours et 
les heures des apparitions solaires,’* — Lettres Ajadricaines, tom. i. let.* 23.

ASTROKOMT^

lol

eiftbarrassment, like the greatest astronomer of our age, to 
seek the solution among the ciTilised communities of Asia, 
we shall still be perplexed by finding, amidst general 
resemblance of outline, sufficient discrepancy in the details, 
to vindicate, in the judgments of many, the Aztec claim to 
originality.^I shall conclude the account of Mexican science with 
that of a remarkable festival, celebrated by the natives at 
the termination of the great cycle of fifty-two years. We 
have seen, in the preceding chapter, their tradition of the 
destruction of the world at four successive epochs. They 
looked forward confidently to another such catastrophe, to 
take place like the preceding, at the close of % cycle, when 
the sun was to be effaced from the heavens, the human race 
from the earth, and when the darkness of chaos was to 
settle on the habitable globe. The cycle would end in the 
latter part of December, and, as the dreary season of the 
winter solstice approached, and the diminished light of day 
gave melancholy presage of its speedy extinction, their 
apprehensions increased ; and, on the arrival of the five 
“ unlucky ” days which closed the year, they abandoned 
themselves to despair, t They broke in pieces the little 
images of their household gods^ in whom they no longer 
trusted. The holy fires were suffered to go out in the 
tpmples, and none were lighted in their own dwellings. 
Their furniture and domestic utensils were destroyed ; their 
garments torn in pieces ; and everything was thrown into

* La Pla<jp,'wlio suggests the analogy, frankly admits the difficulty. 
— ^Systeme du Monde, liT. 5. ch. 8.

M. Jomard errs in placing the 7i«ta^r«,with which ceremony the old 
cycle properly concluded, at the Vinter solstice. It was not till the 26th 
of December, if Gama is right. The cause of M. Jornard's error is his 
fixing it before, instead of after, the complementary days. — See his sensible 
letter on the Aztec calendar, in the Vues des Cordill^res, p. $09»

AZTBc '

tor ihe coming <rf ft© ©vil genii who were to 
d^icmidl on the desolate earth«AZTBc '

tor ihe coming <rf ft© ©vil genii who were to 
d^icmidl on the desolate earth«

On the ©yemng of the last day, a prooession of priests, 
wuutttig the dress and amaments of their gods, moved 
the capital towards a lofty moimtaiii about two leagues 
ftetant.. They carried with them a noble victim, the flower 
of their caiitives, and an apparatus for kindling the mtp f re, 
the success of which was an augury of the renewal of the 
cycle. On reaching the* summit of the mountain, the pro- 
cession paused till midnight ; when, as the constellation of 
the Pleiades approached the zenith,* the mw fire was 
Idndled hy the friction of the sticks placed on the wounded 
breast of the victim.^ The flame was soon communicated 
to a funeral pile, on which the body of the slaughtered 
captive was thrown. As the light streamed up towards 
heaven, shouts of joy and triumph hurst forth from the 
countless multitudes who covered the hills, the terraces of 
the temples, and the house-tops, with eyes anxiously bent 
on the mdunt of sacrifice. Couriers, with torches lighted at 
the blazing beacon, rapidly bore them over every part of 
the country ; and the cheering element was seen brighten- 
ing on altar and hearthstone, for the circuit of many a

* At the actual moment of tlleir culmination, according to both Saha- 
gun (Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 4, Apend.) and Torquemada (Monarch, 
lud., lib. 10, cap. 33, 36). But thiii^ could not be, a8 that took place at 
midnight, in November }• so late the last secular festival, ■which was 
early in Montezuma’s reign, in 1507^7--{Grama, Descripdon, Parte 1, 
p, 50, nota. — Humboldt, Vues des Cordillisres, pp. 181, 182.) The longer 
we postpone the beginning of the new cycle, the greater still must be the 
discrepancy. *

t On his hare brea^ the cedar houghs are laid ; »

On his bare breast, dry sedge.aud odorous gums 
Laid ready to l^eceive the sacred spark,

And blaze to herald the ascending Sun,

Upon his living altar.”On his bare breast, dry sedge.aud odorous gums 
Laid ready to l^eceive the sacred spark,

And blaze to herald the ascending Sun,

Upon his living altar.”

Southey’s Madoc, part 2, can. 26.

ASTEOIOUT.

league, long before the Sun, rising ott his aecustomed track, 
gave assurance that a new cycle had commenced its march, 
and that the laws of nature were not to be reversed for the 
Aztecs.

The following thirteen days were given up to festivity. 
The houses were cleansed and whitened. The broken 
vessels were replaced by new ones. The people, dressed 
in their gayest apparel, and crowned with garlands and 
chaplets of flowers, thronged in joyous procession, to ofier 
up their oblations and thanksgivings in the temples Dances 
and games were instituted, emblematical of tbe regeneration 
of the world. It was the carnival of the Aztecs ; or rather 
the national jubilee, the great secular festival, like that of 
the Romans, or ancient Etruscans, which few alive had 
witnessed before, — or could expect to see again.*

M. de Humboldt remarked, many years ago, were to be 
wished that some government would publish, at its own expense, the 
remains of the ancient American civilisation ; for it is only by the 
comparison of several monuments, that we can succeed in discovering 
the meaning of these allegories, which are partly astronomical, and 
partly mystic.” This enlightened wish has now been realised, not 
by ai^ government, but by a private indi^dual, Lord Kingsborough. 
The great work, published under his auspices, and so often cited in 
this Introduction, appeared in London in 1830. When completed, it 
will teach to nine volumes, seven of which are now before the public.^ I borrow the words of the summons by which the people were called 
to the Ivdi seculares, the secular games of ancient Rome, quos neo 
spectdsaet quisquam^ nec spectattirus eaaet."’* — (Suetonius, Vita Tib. 
Claudii, lib. 5.) The old Mexican chroniclers warm into something like 
# eloquence in their descriptions of the Aztec festival,-~-(Torquemada, 
Monarch. Ind., lib. 10, cap. 33. — Toribio, Jlis^. de los Indies, MS., Parte 
1, cap. 5. — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana,lib. 7, cap. 9-12* See, also, 
Gama, Descripcion, Parte 1, pp. 52-54. — Clavigero, Stor, del Measico, 
tom. ii. pp. 84-86.) The English reader will find a more briliiant colour- 
ing of the same scene in the canto of Madoc, above cited, — the Close 
of the Century,’*

tOEB KmQSmmUGB,

Some idea of its magnificence may be formed by those who have not 
seen it, from the fact that copies of it, with coloured plates, sold 
originally at 176^., and, with uncoloured, at 120^. The price has 
been since much reduced. It is designed to exhibit a complete 
view of the ancient Aztec MSS., with such few interpretations as 
exist ; the beautiful drawings of Castaiieda relating to Central 
America, with the commentary of Dupaix ; the unpublished history 
of father Sahagun ; and, last, not least, the copious annotations of his 
lordship.

Too much cannot be said of the mechanical execution of the book, 
—its splendid typography, the a*pparent accuracy, and the delicacy of 
the drawings, and the sumptuous quality of the materials. Yet the 
purchaser would have been saved some superfluous expense, and the 
reader much inconvenience, if the letter-press had been in volumes of 
an ordinary size. But it is not uncommon, in works on this magnifi- 
cent plan, to find utility in some measure sacnficed to show.The collection of Aztec MSS., if not perfectly complete, is very 
extensive, and reflects great credit on the diligence and research of 
the compiler. It strikes one as strange, however, that not a single 
document should have been drawn from Spain. Peter Martyr speaks 
of a number having been brought thither in his time. (De Insulis 
nuper inventis, p. 368.) The Marquis Spineto examined one in the 
Escurial, being the same with the Mendoza Codex, and perhaps the 
original, since that at Oxford is but a copy. (Lectures, lec. 7.) 
Mr. Waddilove, chaplain of the British embassy to Spain, gave a par- 
ticular account of one to Dr, Robertson, which he saw in the same 
library, and considered a« Aztec calendar. Indeed, it is scarcely 
possible that the frequent voyagers to the New World .should not 
have furnished the mother country with abundant specimens of thin 
most interesting feature of Aztec civilisation. Nor should we ISeiar 
that the present liberal government would seclude these treasures 
from the inspection of the scholar. ♦

Much cannot be said in favour of the arrangement of these codices. 
In some of them, as the Mendoza Codex, for example^ the plates 
not even numbered ; and one who would study them by the corre- 
sponding interpretation, must oft^ bewilder himself in the maze of 
hieroglyphics, without a clue to guide him. Neither is tliere any ' 
attempt to enlighten us as to the positive value and authenticity of the 
respective documents, or even Itimr pfevious^history, beyond a barren 
reference to the particular lib^lry from which they have been bor- 
rowed. Little light, indeed, can expected on these matters ; bnt 
we have not that little. — The defect of arrangement is chargeable on 
other parts of the work. Thus, for instance, the sixth book of

OAMA*

109OAMA*

109

Sahagun is transferred from the body of the history to which it belongs, 
to a preceding volume ; while the grand hypothesis of his lordship, 
for which tlie work was concocted, is huddled into notes hitched on 
random passages of the text, with a good deal less connection than the 
stories of Queen Sclieherezade, in the " Arabian Nights/’ and not 
quite so entertaining.

The drift of Lord Kingsborough’s speculations is, to establish the 
• colonisation of Mexico by the Israelites. To this the whole battery 
of his logic and learning is directed. For this, hieroglyphics are 
unriddled, manuscripts compared, monuments delineated. Flis theory, 
however, whatever be its merits, will scarcely become popular ; since, 
instead of being exhibited in a clear and comprehensive form, readily 
embraced by the mind, it is spread over an infinite number of notes, 
tliickly sprinkled with quotations from languages ancient and modeni| 
till the weary reader, floundering about in the ocean of fragments, 
with no light to guide him, feels like Milton’s devil, working his way 
through chaos, —

“ neither sea,

Nor good dry land ; nigh foundered, on he fares.”

It would be unjust, however, not to admit that the noble author, if 
his logic is not always convincing, shows much acuteness in detecting 
analogies ; that he displays familiarity with his subject, and a fund of 
erudition, though it often runs to waste ; that, whatever be the 
defects of arrangement, he has brought together a most rich collection 
of unpublished materials to illustrate the Aztec, and, in a wider sense, 
American antiquities ; and that, by tliis munificent unj^ertaking, 
which no government, probably, would .have, and few individuals 
could have executed, he has entitled himself to the lasting gratitude 
of every friend of science.Another writer, whose works must be diligently consulted by every 
student of Mexican antiquities, is Antonia Gama. His life contains 
as few incidents as thos^of most scholars. He was bom at Mexico, 
in 1735, of a respectable family, and was bred to the law. He early 
showed a preference for mathematical studies, conscious that in this 
career lay his strength. In 1771, he communicated ^his observations 
on the eclipse of that year to the French astronomer M. de Lalande, 
^ who published them in Paris, with high commendations of the author. 
Gama’s increasing reputation attracted thei»attention of government ; 
and he was employed by it in Various scientific labours of importance. 
His great passion, however, was the study of Indian antiqiiHies. He 
made himself acquainted with the history of the native races, their 
traditions, their languages, and, as far as possible, their hieroglyphics.An oppoHoMty of lowing the fruits of this prepamtory 
iVMhiiiig, and his skill as an antiquary, on the discovery of the great 
bandar stone, in 1790. He produced a masterly treatise on this 
and another Asstec monument, explaining the objects to which they 
were devoted, and pouring a flood of light on the astronomical science 
of the aborigines, their mythology, and tlieir astrological system. He 
afterwards continued his investigations in the same path, and wrote 
treatises bn the dial, hieroglyphics, and arithmetic of the Indians. 
These, however, 'were not given to the world till a few years since, 
when they were published, together with a reprint of the former work, 
under the auspices of the industrious Bustamente. Gama died in 
1802, leaving behind him a reputation for great worth in private life, 
—one in which the bigotry that seems to enter too frequently into the 
character of the Spanish-Mexican, was tempered by the liberal feel- 
ings of a man of science. His reputation as a writer stands high for 
patient acquisition, accuracy, and acuteness. His conclusions are 
neither warped by the love of theory so common in the philosopher, 
nor by the easy credulity so natural to the antiquary. He feels his 
way with the caution of a mathematician whose steps are demonstra- 
tions. M. de Humboldt was largely indebted to his first work, as he 
has emphatically acknowledged. But notwithstanding the eulogiums 
of this popular writer, and his own merits, Gama^s treatises are rarely 
met with out of New Spain, and his name can hardly be said to have 
a transaUantic reputation.

Ill

CHAPTER V.

AZTEC AGRICULTURE. — MECHANICAL ARTS. — MERCHANTS.— DOMESTIC 
MANNERS.Ill

CHAPTER V.

AZTEC AGRICULTURE. — MECHANICAL ARTS. — MERCHANTS.— DOMESTIC 
MANNERS.

It is hardly possible that a nation, so far advanced as the 
Aztecs in mathematical science, should not have made 
considerable progress in the mechanical arts, which are so 
nearly connected with it. Indeed, intellectual progress of 
any hind implies a degree of refinement that requires a 
certain cultivation of both useful and elegant art. The 
savage, wandering through the wide forest, without shelter 
for his head, or raiment for his back, knows no other wants 
than those of animal appetites ; and, when they are satis- 
fied, seems to himself to have answered the only ends of 
existence. But man, in society, feels numerous desires, 
and artificial tastes spring .up, accommodated to the various 
relations in which he is placed, and perpetually stimulating 
his invention to ‘devise new expedients to gratify them.

There Is a wide difference in the mechanical skill of differ- 
ent nations ; hut the difference is still greater in the inven- 
tive po#er which directs this skill, and makes it available. 
Some nations seem to have no power beyond that of imita- 
tion ; or, if they possess invention, have it in so low a 
degree, that they are constantly repeating the same idea, 
without a shadow of alteration or improvement ; as the bird 
builds precisely the same ^ind of nJst which those of its 
own species built at the beginning of the world. Such, 
for example, are the Chinese, who have, probably, been 
familiar for ages with the germs of some discoveries, of

AZTEC CIVILISATION,

practical benefit to themselves, but which, tinfiet the 
influence of European genius, have reached a degree of 
excellence, that has wrought an important change in the 
constitution of society.practical benefit to themselves, but which, tinfiet the 
influence of European genius, have reached a degree of 
excellence, that has wrought an important change in the 
constitution of society.

Far from looking back, and forming itself slavishly on 
the past, it is characteristic of the European intellect to be 
ever on the advance. Old discoveries become the basis of 
new ones. It passes onward from truth to truth, connect- 
ing the whole by a succession of links, as it were, into the 
great chain of science which is to encircle and hind together 
the universe. The light of learning is shed over the labours 
of art. New avenues are opened for the communication 
both of person and of thought. New facilities are devised 
for subsistence. Personal comforts of every kind are incon- 
ceivably multiplied, and brought within the reach of the 
poorest. Secure of these, the thoughts travel into a nobler 
region than that of the senses ; and the appliances of art 
are made to minister to the demands of an elegant taste, 
and a higher moral culture.

The same enlightened spirit, applied to agriculture, raises 
it from a mere mechanical drudgery, or the barren foi^ula 
of additional precepts, to the dignity of a science. As the 
composition of the earth is analysed, man learns thh capacity 
of the soil that he cultivates ; and, as his empir0 is gradu- 
ally extended over the elements of nature, be gains 
power to stimulate her to her most bounti^ and vanOM 
production. It is with satisfaction that we can lurn to the 
land of our fathers, as the one in which the experiment has 
been conducted on the broadest scale, and attended with 
results that the world has never before witnessed. With'' 
equal truth, we may point to the Anglo-Saxon race in both 
hemispheres, as that whose enterprising genius has contrit* 
buted most essentially to the great interests of humanity, 
by the application of science to the useful arts.

A©KI<jmiTURB. 113

•A©KI<jmiTURB. 113

•

Husbandry, to a very limited extent, indeed, was prac- 
tised by most of the rude tribes of North America. Wher- 
ever a natural opening in the forest, or a rich strip of 
interval met their eyes, or a green slope was found along 
the rivers, they planted it with beans and Indian corn.’*' 
The cultivation was slovenly in the extreme, and could not 
se(yire the improvident natives from the frequent recurrence 
of desolating famines. Still, that they tilled the soil at all 
was a peculiarity which honourably distinguished them from 
other tribes of hunters, and raised them one degree higher 
in the scale of civilisation.

Agriculture in Mexico was in the same advanced state as 
the other arts of social life. In few countries, indeed, has 
it been more respected. It was closely interwoven with the 
civil and religious institutions of the nation. There were 
peculiar deities to preside over it; thepaames of the months 
and of the religious festivals had moi|||i||^ll^ss reference to 
it. The public taxes, as we have seerijjl^pljijl often paid in 
agricultural produce. All, except the soSlBers and great 
nobles, even the inhabitants of the citie^i cultivated the 
soil. The work was chiefly done by the men ; the .women 
scattering the seed, husking the corn, and taking part only 
in the lighter labours of the field.-f In this they presented 
mu honourable contrast to the other tribes of the continent, 
who Imposed the burden of agriculture, severe as it is in

grain, according to Humboldt, was found by the Europeans 
in the ^orld, from the «outh of Chili to Pennsylvania; (Essai 
Politique, p. 408 he added, to the Bt. Lawrence.

^ Our puritan few& ^lbund 4*^ sS^ndanpe on the New England coast, 
wherever they l^ded. See England’s Memorial. (Boston,

1826,) p. 68. — Gookiu, Massadfii^s Historical Collectiom^ chap. 3.

•f* Torquemada, Monarch. Inol,'^. 13, cap. 31. ** Admirable example1826,) p. 68. — Gookiu, Massadfii^s Historical Collectiom^ chap. 3.

•f* Torquemada, Monarch. Inol,'^. 13, cap. 31. ** Admirable example

for onr times,” exclaims the good father, when women are not only, unfit 
. for the labours of the field, but have too much levity to attend to their 
own household !”

VOL. I.

1

m

AZTEC CmUSATION.

tKe Forth, on their women.^ Indeed, the sex was as ten- 
derly regarded by the Aztecs in this matter, as it is in most 
parts of Europe at the present day.

There was no want of judgment in the management of 
their ground. When somewhat exhausted, it was permitted 
to recover by lying fallow. Its extreme dryness was relieved 
by canals, with which the land was partially irrigated ; and 
the same end was promoted by severe penalties against the 
destruction of the woods, with which the country, as already 
noticed, was well covered before the Conquest. Lastly, 
they provided for their harvests ample granaries, which 
were admitted by the conquerors to be of admirable con- 
struction. In this provision we see the forecast of civilised 
man.t

Amongst the most important articles of husbandry, we 
may notice the banana, whose facility of cultivation and 
exuberant returiis^jfte so fatal to habits of systematic and 
hardy industry. celebrated plant was the cacao,

* A striking oontt^t also to ike Egjptians, with whom some antiquarj^ 
are disposed to identify the ancient Mexicans. Sophocles notices the 
effeminacy of the men in Egypt, who stayed at home tending the loonii^ 
while their wives were employed in severe labours out of doom. 
ird;/r* iic^lpeo rois iy Klyhmf ydfiois 
<^{nriv KttreiKacrB4yre:Kcd jBiov rpocpds^ 
ydp 01 ju^y Upcty^s Hard ^

Bcucowriy larovpyovyrts a! 5e cnl^yy^jm 
j3iou Tpo^€M vopff^yovar' iud ' *

Coljv- 337-841.Bcucowriy larovpyovyrts a! 5e cnl^yy^jm 
j3iou Tpo^€M vopff^yovar' iud ' *

Coljv- 337-841.

+ Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 13, eop, 'B2. — Clavigero, Stor. del 
Messico, tom. ii. pp. 153-155. Jam jit ^naddddron hambre,’’ says the 
former writer, “sino en pocas ocasiones.^ famines were rare, they

were very distressing, howeyer, and lesWl^ri^ry long. — Comp, Ixtlilxoehitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 41, 71, et

Ij: Oviedo considers the mma an imported plant ; and Hernandez, in 
his co|dou8 catalogue, makes no mention of it at all. But Humboldt, who 
has given much attention to it, concludes, that if some species were brought 
into the country, otlieie were indigenous.— ^(Essai Politique, tom, ii. pp.

AtSRIOlTLTURi;.

115

the fruit of which furnished the chocolate, — ^from the Mexi- 
can chocolatl , — now so common a beverage throughout 
Europe.* The vanilla, confined to a small district of the 
sea-coast, was used for the same purposes, of flavouring 
their food and drink, as with us.f The great staple of the 
country, as, indeed, of the American continent, was maize, 
or Indian corn, which grew freely along the valleys, and up 
the steep sides of the Cordilleras to the high level of the 
table-land. The Aztecs were as curious in its preparation, 
and as well instructed in its manifold uses, as the most 
expert New England housewife. Its gigantic stalks, in 
these equinoxial regions, afford a saccharine matter, not 
found to the same extent in northern latitudes, and supplied 
the natives with sugar little inferior to that of the cane 
itself, which was not introduced among them till after the 
Conquest, t But the miracle of nature was the great 
Mexican aloe, or maguey, whose clustering pyramids of 
flowers, towering above their dark coronals of leaves, were 
seen sprinkled over many a broad acre of the table-land. 
As we have already noticed, its bruisedNleaves afforded a 
paste from which paper was manufactured ; § its juice885-388.) If we niay credit Clavigero, the banana was the forbidden 
fruit that tempted our poor mother Eve! — Btor. del Messico, tom. i. 
p. 49; iiota.

• Rel. d’un gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 306. — Hernandez, De 
Historia Plantarum Novae Hispaniae, (Matriti, 1700,) lib. 6, cap. 87.

+ Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafia, lib. 8, cap. 13, et alibi.

J Carta del. Lie. Zuazo, MS. He extols the honey of the maize, as 
equal to that of bees. (Also Oviedo, Hist. Natural de las Indias, cap. 4, 
ap. Barcia, tom. i.) Hernandez, who celebrates the manifold ways in which 
the maize was prepared, derives it from the Haytian word mahiz^ — -Hist. 
]^ntarum, lib. 6, cap. 44, 45. •

^ And is still, in one spot at least, San A'ngel, — three leagues from the 
capital. Another mill was to have been established a few years since in 
Puebla. Whether this has actually been done I am ignqrant. — See the 
Report of the Committee on Agriculture to the Senate of the United 
States, March 12, 1838. •

jiim ciraiSAiraoN.

til

#as fermentei into an intoxicating beverage, of

which the natives, to this day, are excessively fond ;* its 
leaves further supplied an impenetrable thatch for the more 
humble dwellings ; thread, of which coarse stuffs were made, 
and strong cords, were drawn from its^ tough and twisted 
Mbr^s ; pins and needles were made of the thorns at the . 
extremity of its leaves ; and the root, when properly cooked, 
was converted into a palatable and nutritious food. The 
agave, in short, was meat, drink, clothing, and writing 
materials for the Aztec ! Surely, never did Nature enclose 
in so compact a form so many of the elements of human 
comfort and civilisation ! f* Before the Revolution, the duties on the pulgue formed so important 
a branch of revenue, that the cities of Mexico, Puebla, and Toluca alone 
paid $5 817,739 to government (Humboldt, Essai Politique, tom. ii. p. 
47.) It requires time to reponcile Europeans to the peculiar ilavour of 
this liquor, on the merits of which they are consequently much dividej^ 
There is but one opinion among the natives. The English readel 
will find a good account of its manufacture in Ward’s Mexico, vol. li. 
pp. 56-60.

t Hernandez enunperates the several species of the maguey, .wlfich are 
turned to these manifold uses, in his learned work, De Hist* Plantarum. 
(Lib. 7, cap. 71, et scq.) M. de Humboldt considers them all varieties 
of the a^ave Amenotma, familiar in the southern parts, both of the United 
States and Europe. (Essai Politique, tom. ii. p. 487 et scq.) This 
opinion has brought on him a rather sour rebuke from our countryman, the 
late Dr. Perrine, who pronounces them a distinct species from the American 
agave ; and regards one of the kinds, 'the pita, frotU which the fine thread < 
is obtained, as a totally distinct genus. (See the Report of the Committee 
on Agriculture.) Yet the Baron may find authority for all the properties 
ascribed by him to the maguey in the most accredited writers who have 
resided more or less time in Mexico. — See among others, Hernandez, ubi 
aupra.-— Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espaiia, lib. 9, cap. 2 ; lib, 11, cap. 7. — - 
Toribio, Hist, de los Indios, MS., Parte 3, cap. 19. — Carta del ^ 40 . 
Znazo, MS. The last, speaking of the»maguey which produces the 
mented drink, says expressly, ** De lo que queda de las dichas hojas se 
aprovechan, como de lino mui delgado, 6 de Olanda, de que hacen lienzos 
mui primos para vestir, 6 bien delgados.” It cannot be denied, however, 
that Dr. Perrine shows himself intimately acquainted with the structure

AMts,AMts,

It w(wld be dbviotisly ou^ of f iac© to enumeirat© in theses 
pages all the varieties of plants, many of them of medfeinal 
virtue, which have been introduced from Mexico into Europe. 
Still less can I attempt a catalogue of its lowers, wMch,. 
with their variegated and gaudy colours, form the greatest 
attraction of pur greenhouses. The opposite climates em- 
braced within the narrow latitudes of New Spain ^lave given 
to it, probably, the richest and most diversified Flora to be 
found in any country on the globe. These different pro- 
ducts were systematically arranged by the Aatecs, who 
understood their properties, and collected them into nur- 
series, more extensive than any then existing in the Old 
World. It is not improbable that they suggested the idea 
of those gardens of plants which were introduced into 
Europe not many years after the Conquest.*

The Mexicans were as well acquainted with the mineral,

with the vegetable treasures of their kingdom. Silver, 
Ibad, and tin they drew from the mines of Tasco ; copper 
from the mountains of Zacotollan. These were taken, not 
only from the crude masses oh the surfJbe, but from veins 
wrought in the solid rock, into which they opened extensive 
galleries. In fact, the traces of their labours furnished the 
best indications for the early Spanish miners. Gold, found 
on the surface, or gleaned from the beds of rivers, was cast 
into bars, or, in the form of dust, made part of the regular 
tribute of the southern provinces of the empire. The use. 
of iron, with which the soil was impregnated, was unknown 
to them. Notwithstanding its abundance, it demands so 
many processes to prepare it for use, that it has commonly 
,.b^n one of the last metals pressed into the service of man.

TSShabits of the tropical plants, which, with such patriotic spirit, he pro- 
posed to introduce into Florida.TSShabits of the tropical plants, which, with such patriotic spirit, he pro- 
posed to introduce into Florida.

* The first regular establishment of this kind, according to Carli, was at 
Padua, in 1545. — Lettres Amdric., tom. I chap. 21.

of iroui lias foUomd that of hms, m &ei as well as 
h fiotion.*

Ttiej found a substitute in an alloy of tin and copper ,* 
and, with tools made of this bronze, could cut not only 
metals, but, with the aid of a siliceous dust, the hardest 
substances, as basalt,. porph3nt*y, amethysts, and emeralds.! . 
They fashioned these last, which were found yery large, 
into, many curious and fantastic forms. They cast, also, 
vessels of gold and silver, carving them with their metallic 
chisels in a very delicate manner. Some of the silver vases 
were so large, that a man could not encircle them with his 
arms. They imitated very nicely the figures of animals, 
and, what was extraordinary, could mix the metals in such 
a manner, that the feathers of a bird, or the scales of a fish, 
should be alternately of gold and silver. The Spanish gold- 
smiths admitted their superiority over themselves in these 
ingenious works. J ^

* P, Martyr, De Orbe Novo, Decades, (Compluti, 1530,) dec. 5, p. 19}. 
— Acosta, lib. 4, cap. 3.yHiimboldt, Essai Politique, tom. iii. pp. 114-125,-x 
Torquemada, Monarcll Ind., lib. 13, cap. 34. Men -wrought in brass,’" 
says Hesiod, “ when iron did riot exist.*’

Xd\K(p y ipyd(ovro* /LtsAoj S’ ovk ^(Tkc (nSripos.

^ Hesiod. ‘'Epya Kal'^Hfx^pcu.Xd\K(p y ipyd(ovro* /LtsAoj S’ ovk ^(Tkc (nSripos.

^ Hesiod. ‘'Epya Kal'^Hfx^pcu.

The Abb^ Raynal contends that Ibe ignorance of iron must necessarily 
have kept the Mexicans in a low state of civilisation, since without it " they 
could have produced no work in metal, worth looking at, no masonry nor ^ 
mfcbitecture, engraving nor sculpture.” — (History of the Indies, JBjrig. tranSf, 
vol, iii. b. 6.) Iron, however, if known, was little rited by Ibe ancient 
Egyptians, whose mighty monuments were hevm. with bronze tools, while 
their weapons and domestic utensils were of ^ same material, as appear 
from the green colour given to them in theis paintirigs.

f Gama, Descripcion, Parte 2, pp. — Torquemada, MonajJjh..^

Irid., ubi supra. •

Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva £spafL% Ub. 9, cap. 15-17.r- Boturini, Idea, 
p. 77* — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind-,, loc. cit. * Herrera, who says they 
could also enamel, commends the slc^’of the Mexican goldsmiths in making 
birds and animals with movable wings and limbs, in a most curious fashion.

119

ABTs.

They pother tool, made of itztUf or obsidian,119

ABTs.

They pother tool, made of itztUf or obsidian,

a dark transpiM^ent mineral, exceedingly hard, found in 
abundance in theiij^ hills. They made it into knives, razors, 
and their serrated swords. It took a keen edge, though 
soon blunted. With this they wrought the various’ stones 
and alabasters employed in the construction of their public 
works and principal dwellings. I shall defer a inore parti- 
cular account of these to the body of the narrative, and will 
only add here, that the entrances and angles of the buildings 
were profusely ornamented with images, somelimcs of their 
fantastic deities, and frequently of animals.* The latter 
were executed with great accuracy. ** The former,** accord- 
ing to Torquemada, “ were the hideous reflection of their 
own souls. And it was not till after they had been con- 
verted to Christianity, that they could model the true figure 
of a man.**t The old chronicler’s facts are w^ll founded, 
whatever we may think of his reasons. Jhe allegorical 
phantasms of his religion, no doubt, gave a direction to the 
Aztec artist, in his delineation of the human figure ; sup- 
plying him with an imaginary befuty ins^he personification 
of divinity itself. As these superstitions lost their hold on 
his mind, it opened to the influences of a purer tas'teT*andT 
after th6 Conquest, the Mexicans furnished many examples 
of correct, and some of beautiful portraiture.

Sculptured images were so numerous, that the founda-

(B^t. General, dec. 2, lil). 7, cap. 15.) Sir John Maundeville, as usual, 
with his hair on end 
At his own wonders,*'

notices the " gret marvayle" of similar pieces of mechanisni, at the court of 
tlte gitind Ohane of Cathay. — See his Voiage and Travail^, chap. 20.

Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 7, ca]^ 11. — Torquemada, Monarch, 
^[p., lib. 13, cap. 34. — Gama, Gescripcion, Parte 2, pp. 27, 28.Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 7, ca]^ 11. — Torquemada, Monarch, 
^[p., lib. 13, cap. 34. — Gama, Gescripcion, Parte 2, pp. 27, 28.

•}• “ Parece, que permitia Dios, que la figura de sus cue^^os se asimilase 
d la que tenian sus almas, por el pecado, en que siempre ^ermanecian." — 
Monarch. Ind,, lib. 13, cap. 34.

120 AttM

4 /} 'If **

tidns of tbe oatib«ifi4 If Pt(X$0 Mapof,

<ff Mexico, are a& to if ^^rely composed 
spot may, indeed, be regarded* as the Aste© ^lorefitv^fte 
great deposit<fy of like "fifasures of aaeieiit sctdpfire, wlftojl 
now lie bid in its monuments are^ Bj^ead 41

ovOr the edpital. <5a» liar^lie

dug, oV up ih©

moulSerin^ relies of ''But they aTf 'Htfte

^heeded, and, if n# Woki^^JlL pieces

usually worked intntl^f#^

edifice \ t Two oolejjgdlfd of Ifsi Monleamna

and his father^ grfres

o/ Chapoltepec, w^i ^ 
last century ^1^© mlnumcnts 
of the barbarian from ©iirllised

man, as those harharip.§

The most remarka^l<i^»tecf ^ dfada^tftsred is

the great ©ulendiwp stoa©*', iibiilim preceding lel^pter.

It consists of dark porpliyiy, and in its- onglnat dSfl^fiSions,

as taken fra» 13/’ |ui6ri^ iS #mjput©d. to have weighed

._ “The. 
i»ero de&cefiS 
than 'miil^i0'^oodL

121

-4xm'

broken coimti^‘^intjeraee;t^ eanals. In

esrossing ti bndgQ,.wl4^^a!ii^eQd latter, in tb'e

capita^ the tKe li^ge'mass was

preei^^at^ ilito ^ with difhculty

recovered. ^ that so eiioniMMisf.a iEra^enf of por-

phyry could^ th^ earned^^DT lei^aa* in the face 
of such, obfila^eih bod mridbnnt the aid* ol cattle, — for the 
AziecSj aa alred^ s^nj^nied, had animab of draught, 
— sii^gcstfi to,, ho mean ideae 6f \the^ mfchanical skill, 
and of theb ; and p^lles<a4egre4| of cultivation)

little infjerior io 4hai geometrical and

astroncdd(^ji l^noe^ on this

very stcme^^ : .

Th|»'«ancient,]^eiQfaiM-:^i^^ for

the ordbax7.|mi^dliaSh,c^^ specimens

of which vases of a

lackered oT' wetf, and gaudily

coloured; ■ d^ea. 'bgth mineral andvery stcme^^ : .

Th|»'«ancient,]^eiQfaiM-:^i^^ for

the ordbax7.|mi^dliaSh,c^^ specimens

of which vases of a

lackered oT' wetf, and gaudily

coloured; ■ d^ea. 'bgth mineral and

vegetaU^: idWta^cep,^ Aniong wa^ the rich ciimson 
of the cochineaf, the modern .ofv^he 'fameiS Tyrian

122

AZTEC CIVILISATION.

plantations of cactus, since, fallen into neglect.^ The 
natives were thus enabled to give a brilliant colouring to the 
webs, which were manufactured of every degree of fineness 
from the cotton raised in abundance throughout the warmer 
regions of the country. They had the art, also, of inter- 
weaving with these the delicate hair of rabbits and other 
animals, which made a cloth of great warmth as well as 
beauty, of a kind altogether original.; and on this they 
often laid a rich embroidery of birds, flowers, or some other 
fanciful device. f

But the art in which they most delighted was their 
plumaje, or feather-work. With this they could produce all 
the efi'ect of a beautiful mosaic. The gorgeous plumage of 
the tropical birds, especially of the parrot tribe, afforded 
every variety of colour ; and the fine down pf the humming- 
bird, which revelled in swarms among the honeysuckle 
bowers of Mexico, supplied them with soft aerial tints that 
gave an exquisite finish to the picture. The feathers, 
pasted on a fine cotton web, were wrought into dresses for 
the wealthy, han^ngs for apartments, and ornaments for 
the temples. No one of the American fabrics excited such 
admiyktion in Europe, whither numerous specimens were 
sent by the Conquerors. It is to be regretted that so

* Hernandez, Hist. Plantarum, lib. 6, cap/ 116.* Hernandez, Hist. Plantarum, lib. 6, cap/ 116.

+ Carta del Lie. Zuazo, MS. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 7, 
cap. 15. — Boturini, Idea, p. 77. It is doubtful how far they were ac- 
quainted with the manufacture of silk. Carli supposes that what Cort<5s 
calls silk was only the fine texture of hair or down, mentioned in the text. 
(Lettres Amdric., tom. i. lett. 21.) But it is certain they had a species 
of caterpillar, unlike our silkworm, indeed, which spun a thread that was 
sold in the markets of ancient Mexico. See the Rssai Politique, (tom. hi* 
pp. 66-69,) where M. de Humboldt has collected some interesting facts in 
regard to the culture of silk by the Aztecs. • Still, that the fabric should ^j?:? 
a matter of uncertainty at all shows that it could not have reachefl any 
great excellence or extent.

IfEBCHANTS. 123

graceful an art should hare been suffered to fall into 
decay.* ^

There were no shops in Mexico, but the various manufac- 
tures and agricultural products were brought together for 
sale in the great market-places of the principal cities. 
Fairs were held there every fifth day, and were thronged 
by a numerous concourse of persons, who came to buy or 
sell from all the neighbouring country. A particular 
quarter was allotted to each kind of article. The numerous 
transactions were conducted without confusion, and with 
entire regard to justice, under the inspection of magistrates 
appointed for the purpose. The traffic was carried on partly 
by barter, and partly by means of a regulated currency, of 
different yalues. This consisted of transparent quills of gold 
dust ; of bits of tin, cut in the form of a X J &*id of bags of 
cacao, containing a specified number of grains. ‘‘Blessed 
money,** exclaims Peter Martyr, “ which exempts its 
possessors from avarice, since it cannot be long hoarded, 
nor hidden under ground ! ’* t

••

* Carta del Lie. Zuazo, MS. — Acosta, lib. 4 , cap. 37. — Sahagun, Hist, do 
Nueva Espaila, lib. 9, cap. 18-21. — ToribiojHist. do los lndios,MS./^"rte 1, 
cap. 15. — Rel. d’wi gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 30C. Count Carli is in 
raptures with a specimen of feather-painting which he saw in Strasbourg. 
“ Never did I behold anything so exquisite,** he says, “ for brilliancy and 
nice gradation of colour, and for beauty of design. No European artist 
could have made such a thing.” (Lettres Americ., lett. 21, note.) There 
is still one place, Patzquaro, where, according to Bustameute, they preserve 
some knowledge of this interesting art, though it is practised on a very 
limited scale, and at great cost. — Sahagun, ubi supra, nota.

•f “ O felicem monetam, quae suavem utilemque prsebet humano gener 
potum, et a tartarea peste avaritise suos immunes servat possessores, quod 
Buffodi aut diu servari nequeat !’* (De Orbe Novo, dec. 5, cap. 4. — See 
also, Carta de Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, p. 100 et seq. — Sahagun, Hist, de 
v-Ni*eva Rapnii n., lib. 8, cap. 36. — Toribio, Hist, de los IndioB, MS., Parte 3 
cap. — Carta del Lie. Zuazo, MS.) The substitute for money throughout 
the Chinese empire was equally simple in Marco Polo’s time, consisting of 
hits of stamped paper, made from the inner bark of the mulberry tree. —

124

AZTUC CIVILISATION.124

AZTUC CIVILISATION.

There did not exist in Mexico that distinction of castes 
found amongji^the Egyptian and Asiatic nations. It was 
usual, however, for the son to follow the occupation of his 
father. The different trades were arranged into something 
like guilds ; having each a particular district of the city 
appropriated to it, with its own chief, its own tutelar deity, 
its peculiar festivals, and the like. Trade was held in 
avowed estimation by the Aztecs. “ Apply thyself, my 
son,’* was the advice of an aged chief, to agriculture, or 
to feather-work, or some other honourable calling. Thus 
did your ancestors before you. Else, how would they have 
provided for themselves and their families ? Never was it 
heard, that nobility alone was able to maintain its pos- 
sessor.”* Shrewd maxims, that must have sounded 
somewhat strange in the ear of a Spanish hidalgo ” t 
But the occupation peculiarly respected was that of the 
merchant. It formed so important and singular a feature of 
their social economy, as to merit a much more particular 
notice than it has received from historians. The Aztec 
merchant was a sort of itinerant trader, who made his 
journeys to the remotest borders of Anahuac, and to the 
countries beyond, carrying with him merchandise of rich 
stuffs, jewelry, slaves, and other valuable commodities. The 
slaves were obtained at the great market of Aztcapotzalco, 
not many leagues from the capital, where fairs were regu- 
larly held for the sale of these unfortunate beings. They

See Viajrgi di Messer Marco Polo, gentil* huomo Veuetiano, lib. 2, cap. 18, 
ap. Ramusio, tom. ii.

f * Procurad de saber algun qficio honrosOy como es el hacer obras de

pluma y otros oficios m^cani <^08 Mirad que tengais cuidado

de lo tocante d la agricultura Bn ninguna parte he visto

que algimo ae mantenga por su nobleza.*’ — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafiti, 
lib. 6, cap. 17. ^de lo tocante d la agricultura Bn ninguna parte he visto

que algimo ae mantenga por su nobleza.*’ — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espafiti, 
lib. 6, cap. 17. ^

•h Col. de Mendoza, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, vol. i. PL 71 ; vol. vi. p. 36. 
— Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, cap. 41.

MERCHANTS.

125

were brought • thither by their masters, dressed in their 
gayest apparel, and instructed to sing, dance, and display 
their little stock of personal accomplishments, so as to 
recommend themselves to the purchaser. Slave-dealing was 
an honourable calling among the Aztecs.*

With this rich freight, the merchant visited the different 
provinces, always bearing some present of value from his 
own sovereign to their chiefs, and usually receivi^ig others in 
return, with a permission to trade. Should this be denied 
him, or should he meet with indignity or violence, he had 
the means of resistance in his power. He performed his 
journeys with a number of companions of his own rank, and 
a large body of inferior attendants who were employed to 
transport the goods. Fifty or sixty pounds were the usual 
load for a man. The whole caravan went armed, and so 
well provided against sudden hostilities, that they could 
make good their defence, if necessary, till re-inforced from 
home. In one instance, a body of these militant traders 
stood a siege of four years in the town of Ayotlan, which 
they finally took from the enemy, t Thdr own government, 
however, was always prompt to embark in a war on this 
ground, finding it a very convenient pretext for extending 
the Mcx'ican empire. It was not unusual to allow the 
merchants to raise levies themselves, which were placed 
under their command. It was, moreover, very common for 
the prince to employ the merchants as a sort of spies, to 
furnish him information of the state of the countries through 
which they passed, and the dispositions of the inhabitants 
towards himself. J

* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, Jb. 9 , cap. 4, 10-14.* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, Jb. 9 , cap. 4, 10-14.

't' Ibid., lib. 9, cap. 2.

Ibid., lib. 9, cap. 2, 4. In tbe Mendoza Codex is a painting, repre- 
Bcntitig the execution of a cacique and bis family, with the destruction of 
his city, for maltreating the persons of some Aztec merchants. — Antiq. of 
Mexico, vol. p. PI. 67.

126

AZTEC* CIVILISATION.

Thus their sphere of action was much enlarged beyond 
that of a humble trader, and they acquired a high considera- 
tion in the body politic. They were allowed to assume 
insignia and devices of their own. Some of their number 
composed what is called by the Spanish writers a council of 
finance ; at least, this was the case in Tezcuco.* They 
were much consulted by the monarch, who had some of 
them constantly near his person ; addressing them by the 
title of “ uncle,” which may remind one of that of primo, 
or “ cousin,” by which a grandee of Spain is saluted by 
his sovereign. They were allowed to have their own courts, 
in which civil and criminal cases, not excepting capital, were 
determined ; so that they formed an independent community, 
as it were, of themselves. And, as their various traffic 
supplied them with abundant stores of wealth, they enjoyed 
many of the most essential advantages of an hereditary 
aristocracy.!

That trader should prove the path to eminent political 
preferment in a nation but partially civilised, where the 
names of soldier Vind priest are usually the only titles to 
respect, is certainly an anomaly in history. It forms some 
contrast to the standard of the more polished monarchies of 
the Old World, in which rank is supposed to be less dis-* Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib, 2, cap. 41. Ixtlilxochitl gives a 
curious story of one of the royal family of Tezcuco, who offered, with two 
other merchants, otros mercaderes^ to visit the court of a hostile cacique, 
and bring him dead or alive to the capital. They availed themselves of a 
drunken revel, at which they were to have been sacrificed, to effect their 
object. — Hist. Chich,, MS., cap. 62.

f Sahagun,‘Hi8t. de Niieva Espana, lib. 9, cap. 2, 5. The ninth hook 
is taken up with an account of the merchants, their pilgrimages, the religions 
rites on their departure, andf the sumptuous way pf living on their return. 
The whole presents a very remarkable picture, showing they enjoyed a con- 
sideration, among the half-civilised nations of Anahuac, to which there is 
no parallel, unless it be that possessed by the merchant-princes of an Italian 
republic, or the princely merchants of- our own.

DOMESTIC MA25EEU8.

127

laonourcd Tjy a life of idle ease or frivolous pleasure, than by 
tliose active pursuits which promote equally the prosperity of 
the state and of the individual. If civilisation corrects many 
prejudices, it must be allowed that it creates others.We shall be able to form a better idea of the actual 
refinement of the natives, by penetrating into their domestic 
life, and observing the intercourse between the sexes. We 
have fortunately the means of doing this. We shall there 
find the ferocious Aztec frequently displaying all the sen- 
sibility of a cultivated nature ; consoling his friends under 
affliction, or congratulating them on their good fortune, as 
on occasion of a marriage, or of the birth or the baptism of a 
child, when he was punctilious in his visits, bringing presents 
of costly dresses and ornaments, or the more simple offering 
of flowers, equally indicative of his sympathy. The visits, 
at these times, though regulated with aU the precision of 
Oriental courtesy, were accompanied by expressions of the 
most cordial and affectionate regard.*

The discipline of children, especially at the public schools, 
as stated in a previous chapter, was exceedingly severe.! 
But after she had come to a mature age, the Aztec maiden 
was treated by her parents with a tenderness from which all 
reserve seemed banished. In the counsels to a daughter 
about to enter into life, they conjured her to preserve sim-

* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 6, cap. 23-37.— Camargo, Hist, 
de Tlascala, MS. These complimentary attentions were paid at stated 
seasons, even during pregnancy. The details are given with abundant 
gravity, and minuteness by Sahagun, who descends to particulars, which his 
Mexican editor, Bustamente, has excluded, as somewhat too unreserved 
for the public eye. If they were more so than some of the editor’s own 
notes, they must have been very communicatft^e indeed.

! Zurita, Rapport, pp. 112-134. The Third Part of the Col. de 
Mendoza (Antiq. of Mexico, vol. i.) exhibits the various ingenious punish- 
ments devised for the refractory child. The flowery path of knowledge 
was well strewed with thorns for the Mexican tyro.

AZTEC OimiSATION.

428AZTEC OimiSATION.

428

in her manners and conversation, uniform neatness in 
her attire, with strict attention to personal cleanliness. 
They inculcated modesty as the great ornament of a woman, 
and implicit reverence for her hushand ; softening their 
admonitions by such endearing epithets, as showed the 
fulness of a parent’s love.^

Polygamy was permitted among the Mexicans, though 
chiefly confined, probably, to the wealthiest classes. t And 
the obligations of the marriage vow, which was made with 
all the formality of a religious ceremony, were fully recog- 
nised, and impressed on both parties. The women are 
described by the Spaniards as pretty, unlike their nnfortii- 
nate descendants, of the present day, though with the 
same serious and rather melancholy cast of countenance. 
Their long black hair, covered, in some parts of the country, 
by a veil made of the fine w'eb of the pita, might generally 
he seen wreathed with flowers, or, among the richer people, 
with strings of precious stones, and pearls from the Gulf of* Zurita, Rapport, |jy>. ]51-1'60. Sahagim has given us the admonitions 
of both father and mother to the Aztec maiden, on licr coming to years of 
discretion. What can be more tender than the beginning of the mother’s 
exhortation ? Ilija mia muy amada, muy querida palmita : ya has oido 
y notado las palabras quo tu senor padre to ha dicho ; ellas son palabras 
preciosas, y que raramente sc dicen ni se oyen, las quales han procedido do 
las entranas y corazon en que estaban atesoradas j y tu muy amado padre 
bien sahe que ercs su hija, engendrada de dl, eres bu sangre y su came, f 
eabo Dios nucstro sefior que es asi; aunquO'fJtea miiger, d imdgeii de tu 
padre ^ que mas tc puedo decir, bija mia, do lo que ya esta dicho ? ” (Hist, 
de Nueva Espaiia, lib, 6, cap. 19.) The reader will find this interesting 
document, which enjoins so much of wbat is deemed most essential among 
civilised nations, translated entire in the Appendix, Part 2, No, 1.

+ Yet wo find the remarkable declaration, in the counsels of a father to 
bis son, that, for the multiplication of the species, God ordained one man 
only for one woman. " Nota, hijo mio, lo que tc digo, mira que el muudo 
ya ticne este estilo de engendrar y multiplicar, y para esta genemcion, y 
multiplicacion, ordend Dios que una muger usase de un varon, y un. 
varon de una mugcr.” — ^Ibid. lib. 6, cap, 21.

BOMBSTIC HANKERS.

129

California. They appear to have been treated with much 
consideration by their husbands ; and passed their time in 
indolent tranquillity, or in such feminine occupations as 
spinning, embroidery and the like ; while their maidens 
beguiled the^ours by the rehearsal of traditionary tales and 
ballads.*The women partook equally with the men of social festi- 
vities and entertainments. These were often conducted on 
a large scale, both as regards the number of guests and the 
costliness of the preparations. Numerous attendants, of 
both sexes, waited at the banquet. The halls were scented 
with perfumes, and the courts strewed with odoriferous herbs 
and dowers, which were distributed in profusion among the 
guest?, as they arrived. Cotton napkins and ewers of 
water were placed before them, as they took their seats at 
the board ; for the venerable ceremony of ablution,! before 
and after eating, was punctiliously observeiby the Aztecs. J

* Ibid., lib. 6, cap. 21-23; lib. 8, cap. 23. — Rcl. d'un gent., ap. 
Ramiisio, tom. iii. fol. 305. — Carta del Lie. Zuazo, MS.

f As old as the heroic age of Greece, at least. tVe may fancy ourselves 
at the table of Penelope, where water in golden ewers was poured into 
silver basins for the accommodation of bet guests before begimiing the 
repast : —

X4pvi^a 5’ ^LjLL^lTroXos vpox6<p hrtxfve <f>4pov(ra 
Ka\i} &pyyp€oio \f$7]T0Sf

Nixf/atrOar irepa irdyvere rpdirfQtv.

OAT22; A.

The feast affords many other points of analogy to the Aztec, inferring a 
similar stage of civilisation in the two nations. One may be surprised 
however, to find a greater profusion of the precious metals in the barren 
isle of Ithaca, than in Mexico. But the poet^s fancy was a richer mine 
than either.

J Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. cap. 22. Amidst some 
excellent advice of a parent to his son, on his generahdeportment, we find 
the latter punctiliously enjoined not to take his seat at the board till he 
has washed his face and hands, and not to leave it till he has repeated the 
same thing, and cleamed his teeth. The directions are given witli a pre- 
cision worthy of an Asiatic. “ A1 principio de la comida laharte has las 
VOL. I. K

• AZTBC CiraiSATIOIf.• AZTBC CiraiSATIOIf.

Tobacco was then offered to the company, in pipes, mixed 
np with aromatic substances, or in the form of cigars, 
insetted in tubes of tortoise-shell or silver. They com- 
pressed the nostrils with the fingers, while they inhaled the 
smoke, which they frequently swallowed. Whether the 
women, who sat apart from the men at table, ^ere allowed 
the indulgence of the fragrant weed as in the most polished 
circles of modern Mexico, is not told us. It is a curious 
fact, that the Aztecs also took the dried leaf in the pulverised 
form of snuff.*

The table was well provided with substantial meats, 
especially game ; among which the most conspicuous was 
the turkey, erroneously supposed, as its name imports, to 
have come originally from the East.f These more solid

maiios y la boca, y donde te juntares con otros ^ comer, no tc sientes luego ; 
mas antes tomar^s el agna y la jicara paraque se laben les otros, y ecbarles 
has agvia ^ ]os maiiq^, y despues de esto, cojci’As lo que se ha caido por el 
Buelo y barrerds el lugar de la comida, y tambien despuos de comer lavards 
te las manos y la boca, y limpiards los dientes.” — Ibid., loc. cit.• Rel. d’un gent., aj). Ramusio, tom. iii. fob 306. — Sabagiin, Hist, de 
Nueva Espana, lib. 4, cap. 37. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib, 13, cap. 
23.— -Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. p. 227. The Aztecs used to 
smoke after dinner, to prepare for the destd, in which they indulged them- 
selves as regularly as an old Castilian. Tobacco in Mexiran yeti, is de- 
rived from a Haytien word, taho/CO, The natives of Hispaniola, being the 
first with whom the Spaniards had much intercourse, have supplied Europe 
with the names of several important plants. Tobacco, in some form or 
other, was used by almost all the tribes of the American continent, from 
the North-west coast to Patagonia. (See M^'Culloch, Researches, pp. 9 1 -94.) 
Its manifold virtues, both social and medicinal, are profusely panegyrised 
by Hernandez, in his Hist. Plantarum, lib. 2, cap. 109.

f This noble bird was introduced into Europe from Mexico. The 
Spaniards called it gallopdvo, from its resemblance to the peacock, — See 
Rel. d'un gent., ap. RanniBio, (tom. iii. fol. 306) ; also Oviedo, (Rel. 
Sumaria, cap. 38,) the earliest naturalist who gives an account of the bird, 
which he saw, soon after the Conquest, in the West Indies, whither it had 
been brought, as he says, from New Spain. The Europeans, however, 
soon lost sight of its origin, iind the name " turkey ” intimated the popular

DOMESTIC MANNERS.

131DOMESTIC MANNERS.

131

dishes were flanked by others of vegetables and fruits, of 
every delicious variety found on the North American con- 
tinent. The different viands were prepared in various ways, 
with delicate sauces and seasoning, of which the Mexicans 
were very fond. Their palate was still further regaled by 
confections^nd pastry, for which their maize-flour and sugar 
supplied ample materials. One other dish, of a disgusting 
nature, was sometime^ added to the feast, especially when 
the celebration partook of a religious character. On such 
occasions a slave was sacrificed, and his flesh elaborately 
dressed, formed one of the chief ornaments of the banquet. 
Cannibalism, in the guise of an Epicurean science, becomes 
even the more revolting.^

The meats were kept warm by chafing-dishes. The 
table was ornamented with vases of silver, and sometimes 
gold, of delicate workmanship. The drinking-cups and 
spoons were of the same costly materials, and likewise of 
tortoise-shell. The favourite beverage was the chocolatl,belief of its Eastern origin. Several eminent waters have maintained its 
Asiatic or African descent ; but they cbuld not impose on the sagacious 
and better-instructed Buffon. (See Histoire Naturclle, Art. JJindon.) 
The Spaniards sav/ immense numbers of turkeys in the domesticated state, 
on their arrival fn Mexico, where they were more common than any other 
poultry. They were found wild, not only in New Spain, but all along the 
continent, in the less frequented places, from the North-western territory 
of the United States to Panama. The wild turkey is larger, more beau- 
tiful, and every way an incomparably finer bird, than the tame. Franklin, 
with some point, us well as pleasantry, insists on his preference to the bald 
eagle, as the national emblem. (See his Works, vol.x. p. 63, in Sparkes’s 
excellent edition.) Interesting notices of the history and habits of the 
wild turkey may be found in the Ornithology both of Buonaparte and of 
that enthusiastic lover of nature, Audubon, vox Meleagris, Gallopavo.

* Saliagun, Hist, de Nueva Espaua, lih.»4, cap. 37 ; lib. 8, cap. 13; 
lib. 9, cap. 10-14. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 18, cap. 23. — Rel. 
d’un gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 306. Father Sahagun has gone into 
many particulars of the Aztec cuidnCf and the mode of preparing sundry 
savoury messes, making, all together, no despicable contribution to the 
noble science of gastronomy.

AZTEC CIVILISATIOIT.

ll^

flavoured with vanilla and different spices. They had a way 
of preparing the /roth of it, so as to make it almost solid 
enough to be eaten, and took it cold.**^ The fermented 
juice of the maguey, with a mixture of sweets and acids, 
supplied also various agreeable drinks of differeijt degrees of 
strength, and formed the chief beverage of the elder part 
of the company.!As soon as they had finished their repast, the 3"oung 
people rose from the table, to close the festivities of the 
day with dancing. They danced gracefully, to the sound 
of various instruments, accompanying their movements with 
chants of a pleasing, though somewhat plaintive character. J

* The froth, delicately flavoured with spices and some other ingredients, 
was taken cold by itself. It had the consistency almost of a solid ; and 
the “ Anonymous Conqueror” is very careful to inculcate the imj)ortance 
of “ opening the mouth wide, in order to facilitate deglutition, that the 
foam may dissolve gradually, and descend imperceptibly, as it Avere, into the 
stomach.” It was so nutritions, that a single cup of it was enough to sus- 
tain a man through the longest day’s march, (Fol. 306.) The old soldier 
discusses the beverage amove,

■f Saliagun, Hist, de ^ueva Espaiia, lib, 4, cap. 37; lib. 8, 13.*—

Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib, 13, cap. 23. — Rel, d’un gent;, ap. Ra- 
musio, tom. iii. fol. 306.■f Saliagun, Hist, de ^ueva Espaiia, lib, 4, cap. 37; lib. 8, 13.*—

Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib, 13, cap. 23. — Rel, d’un gent;, ap. Ra- 
musio, tom. iii. fol. 306.

4: Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 7, cap. 8. — Torquemada, Monarch. 
Ind., lib. 14, cap. 11. The Mexican Boble^ enttertained minstrels in their 
houses, who composed ballads suited to the times, or the achievements of 
their loid, which they chanted to the accompaniment of instruments at the 
festivals and dances. Indeed, there was more or less dancing at most of the 
festivals, and it W'as performed in the courtyards of the houses, or in the 
open squares of the city. (Ibid., uhi supra.) The principal men had also 
buffoons and jugglers in their service, who amused them, and astonished 
the Spaniards by their feats of dexterity and strength; (Acosta, lib. 6, 
cap. 28;) also Clavigero, (Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. pp. 179-186,) who 
has designed several representations of their exploits, truly surprising. It is 
natural that a people of limited refinement should find their enjoyment in 
material, rather than intellectual pleasures, and, consequently, should 
excel in them. The Asiatic nations, as the Hindoos and Chinese, for 
example, surpass the more polished Europeans in displays of agility and 
legerdemain.

DOMESTIC MANNERS.

133

The older guests Continued at table, sipping pulque, and 
gossiping about other times, till the virtues of the exhilira+- 
ing beverage put them in good humour with their own. 
Intoxication was not rare in this part- of the company, and, 
what is singular, was excused in them, though severely 
punished in the younger. The entertainment was concluded 
by a liberal distribution of rich dresses and ornaments 
among the guests, when they withdrew, after midnight,some commending the feast, und others condemning the 
bad taste or extravagance of their host ; in the same man- 
ner,’’ says an old Spanish writer, “ as with us.”* Human 
nature is, indeed, much the same all the world over.

In this remarkable picture of manners, which I have 
copied faitlifully from the records of earliest date after the* 
Conquest, we find no resemblance to the other rates of 
North American Indians. Some resemblance we may trace 
to the general style of Asiatic pomp and luxury. But in^ 
Asia, woman, far from being admitted to unrestrved inter- 
course with the other sex, is too. often jealously immured 
within the walls of the harem. European civilisation, which 
accords to this loveliest portion of creation her proper rank 
in the social scale, is still more removed from some of the 
brutish usages of the Aztecs. That such usages should 
have existed with the degree of refinement they showed in 
other things, is almost inconceivable. It can only be 
explained as the result of religious superstition ; superstition 
which clouds the moral perception, and perverts even the natu- 
ral senses ; till man — civilised man — is reconciled to the very 
things which are most revolting to humanity. Habits and

* “ Y de esta manera pasaban gran rate de la noche, j se despedian, 6 
iban a sus casas, nnos alabando la fiesta, ^ otros murmurando de las 
demasfas, y excesos ; cosa mui ordinaria en los que A aemejantes, actos se 
juntan.” — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 13, cap. 23. — Sahagiin, Hist, 
de Nueva Kspana, lib. 9, cap. 10-14.

ASKTEO (JiraiSATION,

opihions founded <m religion must not be taken ns conclusive 
evidence of tbe actual refinement of a people.ASKTEO (JiraiSATION,

opihions founded <m religion must not be taken ns conclusive 
evidence of tbe actual refinement of a people.

The Aztec character was perfectly original and unique. 
It was made up of incongruities apparently irreconcilable. 
It blended into one the marked pe^^uliarities of different 
nations, not only of the same phase of civilisation, but as far 
removed from each other as the extremes of barbarism and 
refinement. It may find a fitting parallel in their own wonder- 
ful climate, capable of producing, on a few square leagues of 
surface, the boundless variety of vegetable forms which 
belong to the frozen regions of the North, the temperate 
zone of Europe, and the burning skies of Arabia and 
Hindostan !

One* of the works repeatedly consulted and referred to in this 
Introduction, is Boturini’s Idm de una nnevd Bhtorla General de la 
America Septentrional. The singular persecutions sustained hy its 
author, even, more than the merits of his book, have j^ssociated Jus 
name inseparably with the literary history of Mexico^f ^Phe Chevalier 
Lorenzo Boturini Begaduci was a MilanSW^iny.biSrth, of an ancient 
family, and possessed of 'much ICifcrMlig. From ^Madrid, where he 
was residing, ho passed ovei* to Nevr'iftpain, in 17*55, on some business 
of the Countess of Santihatiezj' .af H^eal descendant of Montezuma. 
While employed on this, iieVisit<iraiwe celebrated shrine of Our Lady 
of Guadaloupc, and being a petstHfl'of devout and enthusiastic temper, 
was filled with the desire of collecting testimony to establish the mar- 
vellous fact of her apparition. In the course of his excursions, made 
witli this view, he fell in with many relics of Aztec antiquity, and 
conceived, — what to a Protestant, at least, would seem much more 
rational, — the idea of gathering together all the memorials he could 
meet with of the primitive civilisation of the land.In pursuit of this double object, he penetrated into the remotest 
parts of the country, living much with the natives, passing his nights 
sometimes in their huts, tx^metimes in caves, and the depths of the 
lonely forests, frequently months would olapse without his being 
able to add anything to Ifls collection ; for the Indians had suffered 
too much, not to be very shy of Europeans. His long intercourse 
with them, however, gave him ample opportunity to learn their lan- 
guage and popular traditions, and, in the end, to amass a large stock

BOTUBIKI.

135

of materials, consisting of hieroglyphical charts on cotton, skins, and 
the fibre of the maguey ; besides a considerable body of Indian manu- 
scripts, written after the Conquest. To all these must be added the 
precious documents for placing beyond controversy the miraculous 
apparition of the Virgin. With this treasure he returned, after a 
pilgrimage of eight years, to the capital.

His zeal, in the meanwhile, had induced him to procure from Rome 
a bull, authorising the coronation of the sacred image at Guadaloupe. 
The bull, however, though sanctioned by the Audience of New Spain, 
had never been approved by the Council of the Indies. In conse- 
quence of this informality, Boturini was arrested in the midst of his 
proceedings, his papers were taken from him, and, as he declined to 
give an inventory of them, he was thrown into prison, and confined 
in the same apartment with two criminals ! Not long afterward he 
was sent to Spain. He there presented a memorial to the Council of 
the Indies, setting forth his manifold grievances, and soliciting I’edress. 
At the same time he drew up his “ Idea,” above noticed, in which he 
displayed the catalogue of his museum in New Spain, declaring, with 
affecting earnestness, that “he would not exchange these treasures 
for all the gold and silver, diamonds and pearls, in the New World.”After some delay, the Council gave an award in his favour ; acquit- 
ting liiin of any intentional violation of the law, and pronouncing a 
high encomium on his deserts. His papers, however, were not 
restored. Bi^ his Majesty was graicioti^y pleased to appoint him 
Histori(»grapher General of the Indies lTi% It salary of one thousand 
dollars per unnum. The stipend w’ite too ||ba.ll to allow him to return 
to Mexico, ‘He remained in Madirid, icompleted there the first 
volume of General History pf North America,” in 1749, Not 
long after this event, and before the^,pUbli<(sation of the work, he died. 
The same injustice was continued to his heirs ; and, notwithstanding 
repeated applications in their behalf, tliey were neither put in pos- 
session of their unfortunate kinsman’s collection, nor received a 
remuneration for it. What was ^ worse, — as fajc as the public was 
concerned, — the collection itself was deposited in apartments of the 
Vice-regal palace at Mexico, so damp that they gradually fell in 
pieces, and the few remaining were still further diminished by the 
pilfering of t/ie curious. When Baron Humboldt visited Mexico, not 
one-eighth of this inestimable treasure wa* in existence !

I have been thus particular in the account of the unfortunate Botu- 
rini, as affording, on the whole, the most remarkable example of tlie 
serious obstacles and persecutions which literary enterprise, directed 
in the path of the national antiquities, has, from some cause or other, 
been exposed to in New Spain,

BOTUBINI.

I«6BOTUBINI.

I«6

Boturini’s manuscript volume was never printed, and probably 
never will be, if indeed it is in existence. This will scarcely prove a 
great detriment to science, or to his own reputation. He was a man 
of a zealous temper, strongly inclined to the marvellous, with little of 
that acuteness requisite for penetrating the tangled mazes of anti- 
quity, or of the philosophic spirit fitted for calmly weighing its doubts 
and difficulties. His “Idea** affords a sample of his peculiar mind. 
With abundant learning, ill-assorted and ill digested, it is a jumble of 
fact and puerile fiction, interesting details, crazy dreams, and fantastic 
theories. But it is hardly fair to judge by the strict rules of cri- 
ticism a work, which, put together hastily, as a catalogue of literary 
treasures, was designed by the author rather to show what might 
be done, than that he could do it himself. It is rare that talents for 
action and contemplation are united in the same individual. Boturiiii 
was eminently qualified, by his enthusiasm and perseverance, for col- 
lecting the materials necessary to illustrate the antiquities of tb# 
country. It requires a more highly gifted mind to avail itsellt af 
til cm. „ ;

137

CHAPTER VI.

TEZCUCANS. — THEin GOLDEN AGE. — ACCOMPLISHED PTIINCES. — DECLINE 
OP THEIR MONARCHY.137

CHAPTER VI.

TEZCUCANS. — THEin GOLDEN AGE. — ACCOMPLISHED PTIINCES. — DECLINE 
OP THEIR MONARCHY.

The reader would gather but an imperfect notion of the 
civilisation of Anahuac, without some account of the 
Acolhiians, or Tezcucans, as they are usually called ; a 
nation of the same great family with the Aztecs, whom they 
rivalled in power, and surpassed in intellectual culture and 
the arts of social refinement. Fortunately, we have ample 
materials for this in the records left by Ixtlilxochitl, a lineal 
descendant of the royal line of Tezcuco, who flourished in 
the century of the Conquest. With every opportunity for 
information he combined muigh i^^t,ry end talent, and, if 
his narrative bears the hig^t;<^b}p||(^g of one who would 
revive the faded glories ©f but dilapidated

house, he has been uniformly eo3^^h^^^d for his fairness 
and integrity, and has been foDowM' without misgiving by 
such Spanish writers as could have access to his manu- 
scripts.^ I shall confine myself to the prominent features 
of the two reigns which may be said to embrace the golden 
age of Tezcuco ; without attempting to weigh the proba- 
bility of the details, which I will leave to be settled by the 
reader, according to the measure of his faith.

The Acolhuans came into the Vfftley, as we have seen, 
about the close of the twelfth century, and built their 
capital of Tezcuco on the eastern borders of the lake,

For a criticism on this writer, see the Postscript to this Chapter.

AZTEC CimiSATIOK.For a criticism on this writer, see the Postscript to this Chapter.

AZTEC CimiSATIOK.

opposite to Mexico. From this point they gradually spread 
themselves over the northern portion of Anahuac, when 
their career was checked hy an invasion of a kindred race, 
the Tepanecs, who, after a desperate struggle, succeeded 
in taking their city, slaying their monarch, and entirely 
subjugating his kingdom.**^ This event took place about 
1418 ; and the young prince, Nezahualcoyotl, the heir to 
the crown, ‘then fifteen years old, saw his father butchered 
before his eyes, while he himself lay concealed among the 
friendly branches of a tree, which overshadowed the spot.f 
His subseq^uent history is as full of romantic daring, and 
perilous escapes, as that of the renowned Scanderbeg, or of 
the “young Chevalier.

Not long after his flight from the field of his father’s 
blood, the Tezcucan prince fell into the hands of his enemy, 
was borne off in triumph to his city, and was thrown into a 
dungeon. He effected his escape, however, through the 
connivance of the governor of the fortress, an old servant of 
his family, who took the place of the royal fugitive, and 
paid for his loyal^ with his life. He was at length per- 
mitted, through the intercejSeion of the reigning family in 
Mexico, which was allied to him, to retire to that capital, 
and subsequently to his own, where he found a shelter in 
his ancestral palace. Here he remained unmolested for 
eight years, pursuing his studies under an old preceptor, 
who had had the care of his early youth, and who instructed 
him in the various duties befitting his princely station. §

* See Chapter First of this Introduction, p. 1 4.

+ Ixtlilxochitl, Kelaciones, MS., No. 9. — Idem, Hist. Cliicli., MS., 
cap. 19.* See Chapter First of this Introduction, p. 1 4.

+ Ixtlilxochitl, Kelaciones, MS., No. 9. — Idem, Hist. Cliicli., MS., 
cap. 19.

!j: The adventures of thef former hero are told with his usual spirit hy 
Sismondi (Repuhliques Itoliennes, chap. 79).' It is hardly necessary, for 
the latter, to refer the English reader to Chambers’s “ History of the 
Behellion of 1745 a work which proves how thin is the partition in 
human life which divides romance from reality.

§ Ixtlilxochitl, Relaciones, MS., No. 10.

GOLDEN AGE OP TEZCUCO.

139

At the end of this period the Tepanec usurper died, 
bequeathing his empire to his son, Maxtia, a man of fierce 
an‘d suspicious temper. Nezahualcoyotl hastened to pay 
his obeisance to him, on his accession. But the tyrant 
refused to receive the little present of flowers which he laid 
at his feet, and turned his back on him in presence of his 
chieftains. One of his attendants, friendly to the young 
prince, admonished him to provide for his own safety, by 
withdrawing, as speedily as possible, from the palace, where 
his life was in danger. He lost no time, consequently, in 
retreating from the inhospitable court, and returned to 
Tezcuco. Maxtia, however, was bent on his destruction. 
He saw with jealous eye the opening talents and popular 
manners of his rival, and the favour he was daily winning 
from his ancient subj ects.He accordingly laid a plan for making away with him at 
an evening entertainment. It was defeated by the vigilance 
of the prince’s tutor, who contrived to mislead Jhe assassins, 
and to substitute another victim in the pj^ce of his pupil.t 
The baffled tyrant now threw off all disguise, and sent a 
strong party of soldiers to Tezcuco, with orders to enter the 
palace, seize the person of Nezahualcoyotl, and slay him on 
the spot. The prince, who became acquainted with the 
plot through the watchfulness of his preceptor, instead of 
flying, as he was counselled, resolved to await his enemy. 
They found him playing at ball, when they arrived, in the 
court of liis palace. He received them courteously, and 
invited them in, to take some refreshments after their 
journey. While they were occupied in this way, he passed

•

* Idem, Relaciones, MS., No. 10. — Hist. Chich., cap, 20-24.

t Idem, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 25. The contrivance was effected by 
means of an extraordinary personal resemblance of the parties ; a fruitful 
source of comic, — as every reader of the drama knows, — though rarely of 
tragic interest.

140

AZTEC CIVILISATION.

lito an adjoining saloon, which excited no suspicion, as he 
was still visible through the open doors by which the apart- 
ments communicated with each other. A burning censer 
stood in the passage, and, as it was fed by the attendants, 
threw up such clouds of incense as obscured his movements 
from the soldiers. Under this friendly veil he succeeded in 
making his escape by a secret passage, which communicated 
with a large earthern pipe formerly used to bring water to 
the palace.* Here he remained till nightfall, when, taking 
advantage of the obscurity, ho found his way into the 
suburbs, and sought a shelter in the cottage of one of his 
father’s vassals.SThe Tepanec monarch, enraged at this repeated disap- 
pointment, ordered instant pursuit, A price was set on the 
head of the royal fugitive. Whoever should take him, dead 
or alive, was promised, however humble his degree, the 
hand of a noble lady, and an ample domain along with it. 
Troops of armed men were ordered to scour the country in 
every* direction. In the course of the search, the cottage 
in which the prince had taken refuge, was entered. But he 
fortunately escaped detection by being hid under a heap of 
maguey fibres used for manufacturing cloth. As this was 
no longer a proper placp of concealment, he sought a retreat 
in the mountainous and woody district lying between the 
borders of his own state and Tlascala.f

Here he led a wretched, wandering life, exposed to all the 
inclemencies of the weather, hiding himself in deep thickets

* It was customary, on entering the presence of a groat lord, to throw 
aromatics into the censer. Hecho en el brasero incienso, y copal, que 
era uso y costumbre dond^^estaban los Reyes y Sefiores, cada vez que los 
criados entraban con mucha reverenda y acatamiento echaban sahumcrio 
en el brasero; y asi con este perfume se obscurecia algo la sala.’^ — 
JxtlilxochitJf Relaciones, M8., No, 1 1.

f Idem, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 26, — Belaciones, MS., No. 11 , — 
Veytia, Hist. Antig., lib. 2, cap. 47.

GOLDEN AGE OF TEZOUCO. 141

*f Idem, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 26, — Belaciones, MS., No. 11 , — 
Veytia, Hist. Antig., lib. 2, cap. 47.

GOLDEN AGE OF TEZOUCO. 141

*

and caverns, and stealing out at night to satisfy the crav- 
ings of appetite ; while he was kept in constant Tilarm h/ 
the activity of his pursuers, always hovering on his track. 
On one occasion he sought refuge from them among a small 
party of soldiers, who proved friendly to him, and concealed 
him in a large drum around which they were dancing. At 
another time, he was just able to turn the crest of a hill, as 
his enemies were climbing it on the other side, when he fell 
in with a girl who was reaping cMan , — a Mexican plant, 
the seed of which was much used in the drinks of the 
country. lie persuaded her to cover him up with the stalks 
she had been cutting. When his pursuers came up, and 
inquired if she had sqen the fugitive, the girl coolly 
answered that she had, and pointed out a path as the one 
he had taken. Notwithstanding the high rewards offered, 
Nezahualcoyotl seems to have incurred no danger from 
treachery, such was the general attachment felt to himself 
and his house. Would you not deliver up the prince, if 
he came in your way? ” he inquired of a young peasant 
who was unacqudrfhtud with his pers6n. Not I,’* replied 
the other. ** What, not for a fair lady’s hand, and a rich 
dowry beside ? ’’ rejoined the prince. At which the other 
only shook his head and laughed.* On more than one 
occasion, his faithful people submitted to torture, and even to 
lose their lives, rather than disclose the place of his retreat. t

However gratifying such proofs of loyalty might be to 
his feelings, the situation of the prince in these mountain 
solitudes became every day more distressing. It gave aHowever gratifying such proofs of loyalty might be to 
his feelings, the situation of the prince in these mountain 
solitudes became every day more distressing. It gave a

* “ Nezahualcoyotl le dixo, que si viese & quien huscahan^ si lo iria 6, 
deuunciar ? respondid, que no ; tornandole i replicar diciendole, que haria 
mui mal en perder una muger hermosa, y lo demas, que el rey Maxtla 
prometia, el tnancebo se rid de todo, no haciendo caso ni de lo uno, ni dc lo 
otro.” — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 27.

f Ibid., MS., cap. 2d, 27.r- Kelaciones, MS., No. II.— Veytia, Hist. 
Antig., lib. 2, cap. 47, 48.

142 AZTB<3 CITIUSATION.

sdll keener edge to his own snflferings to witness those of 
tjie faithful followers who chose to accompany him in his 
wanderings. “ Leave me/’ he would say to them, “ to my 
fate ! Why should you throw away your own lives for one 
whom fortune is never weary of persecuting ? Most of 
the great Tezcucan chiefs had consulted their interests by 
a timely adhesion to the usurper. But some still clung to 
their prince, preferring proscription, and death itself, rather 
than desert him in his extremity.*

In the meantime, his friends at a distance were active in 
measures for his relief. The oppressions of Maxtla, and 
his growing empire, had caused general alarm in the sur- 
rounding states, who recalled the mild rule of the Tezcucan 
princes. A coalition was formed, a plan of operations con- 
certed, and, on the day appointed for a general rising, 
Nezahualcoyotl found himself at the head of a force suffi- 
ciently strong to face his Tepanec adversaries. An engage- 
ment came on, in which the latter were totally discomfited ; 
and the victorious prince, receiving everywhere on his route 
the homage of his joyful subjects, his capital, not

like a proscribed outcast, but as the rightful heir, and saw 
himself once more enthroned ih the halls of his fathers.like a proscribed outcast, but as the rightful heir, and saw 
himself once more enthroned ih the halls of his fathers.

Soon after, he united his forces with the Mexicans, long 
disgusted with the arbitrary' Qonduct of MaxtlA. The allied 
powers, after a series of bloody engagements with the 
usurper, routed him under the walls of his own capital. 
He fled to the baths, whence he was dragged out, and 
sacrificed with the usual cruel ceremonies of the Aztecs ; 
the royal city of Azcapuzalco was razed to the ground, and 
the wasted territory was henceforth reserved as the great 
slave-market for thetiations of Anahuac.t

* Ixtlilxochitl, MS., ubi supra. — Veytia, ubi supra.

•f* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist, Cbich,| MS., cap. 28-3L — Relaciones, MS., No, 11. 
— Veytia, Hist, Antig., lib. 2, cap, 61-54.

QOimm 'km ot mciuc<^ 143

These events, were snceeeded by the remarkable league 
among the three poarera of Tezcueo, Mexico, and Tlacopan, 
of which some account has been given in a previous chapter.* 
Historians are not agreed as to the precise terms of it ; the 
writers of the two former nations, each insisting on the 
paramount authority of his own in the coalition. AB agree 
in the subordinate position of Tlacopan, a state, like the 
others, bordering on the lake. It is certain, that in theii 
subsequent opei ations, whether of peace or wj,r, the three 
states shared in each other’s councils, embarked in each 
other’s enterprises, and moved in perfect concert together, 
till just before the coming of the Spaniards.The first measure of Nezahualcoyotl, on returning to his 
dominions, was a general amnesty. It was his maxim, 
“ that a monarch might punish, but revenge was unworthy 
of him,” f In the present instance, he was averse even to 
punish, and not only freely pardoned his rebel nobles, but 
conferred on some, who had most, deeply ofilended, posts of 
honour and confidence. Such conduct was doubtless politic, 
especially as their alienation ifas owing, probably, much 
more to fear of the usurper, th^ to any disaffection towards 
himself. But there are some acts of policy which a 
magnanimous spiiit only con execute.

The restored monarch next set about repairing the 
damages sustained under the late misrule, and reviving, or 
rather remodelling tha various departments of government. 
He framed a concise, but comprehensive, code of laws, so 
well suited, it was thought, to the exigencies of the times, 
that it was adopted as their own by the two other members 
of the triple alliance. It was written in blood, and entitled 
the author to be called the Draco, rsfther than the ‘‘ Solon

• See page 14 of this volume.

f ^ Que venganza no es justo la procuren los Reyes, sinh castigar al que 
lo merecierc.” — MS. de Ixtlilxocbitl.

144 Assiftd cimmA»rioir.

fciuac,” as he is fondly styled by his admirers.* 
Hnmanlty is one of the best fruits of refinement. It is 
only with increasing civilisation, that the legislator studies 
to economise human suffering, even for the guilty ; to devise 
penalti^^s, not so much by way of punishment for the past, 
as of reformation for the future. tHe divided the burden of government among a number of 
departments, as the council of war, the council of finance, 
the council pf justice. This last was a court of supreme 
authority^, both in civil and criminal matters, receiving 
appe8^|||||l?0m the lower tribunals of the provinces, which 
wero^lTged to make a full report, every four months, or 
days, of their own proceedings to this higher judica- 
ture. In all these bodies, a certain number of citizens were 
allowed to have seats with the nobles and professional digni- 
taries. There was, however, another body, a council of 
state, for aiding the king in the despatch of business, and 
advising him in matters of importance, which was .drawn 
altogether from the highest order of chiefs. It consisted of 
fourteen members* and they had seats provided for them 
at the royal table. J

Lastly, there was an extraordinary tribunal, called the

* See Clavigero, Stor. del Messtco, tom. i. p. 247. Nezahnalcoyotl|| 
code consisted of eighty laws, of which thirty-four only have come down to 
us, according to Veytia. (Hist. Antig., tom. iii. p. 224, nota.) Ixtlilxochitl 
enumerates several of them.—IIist. Ohich., MS.^ cap. 38, and Relaciones, 
MS., Ordenanzas.

+ Nowhere are these principles kept mord |(t<Statiily in view than in the 
various writings of our adopted countryman, I>t. iJieher, having more or less 
to do with the theory of legislation. Such works could not have been pro- 
duced before the nineteenth century.

$ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Ch^bh., MS., cap, 38. — Veytia, Hist. Antig., lib, 3, 
cap. / . According toZurita, the principal judges, at their genera] meetings 
every four months, constituted also a sort of parliament or edrtes, for ad- 
vising the king on matters of state. — ^See his Rapport, p. 106 ; also ante, 
p. 30.council of music, but which, differing from the import of its 
name, was devoted to the encouragement of science and art. 
Works on astronomy, chronology, history, or any other 
science, were required to be submitted to its judgment 
before they could be made public* This censorial power 
was of some moment, at least with regard to the historical 
department, where the wilful perversion of truth was made 
a capital offence by the bloody code of NezahuaicoyotL 
Yet a Tezcucan author must have been a bungler, who 
could not elude a conviction under the cloudy veil of hiero* 
glyphicB, This body, which was drawn from the best 
instructed persons in the kingdom, with little regard to 
rank, had supervision of all the productions of art, and of 
the nicer fabrics. It decided on the qualifications of the 
professors in the various branches of science, on the fidelity 
of their instructions to their pupils, the deficiency of which 
was severely punished, and it instituted examinations of 
these latter. In short it was a general board of education 
for the country. On stated days, historical compositions, 
and poems treating of moral or tradiflonal topics, were 
recited before it by their authors. Seats were provided for 
the three crowned heads of the empire, who deliberated 
with the other members on the respective merits of the 
pieces, and distributed prizes of value to the successful 
competitors.** Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 36. — Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, 
tom. ii, p. 137. — Veytia, Hist. An tig., lib. 3, cap. 7. ^Concurrian £ este 
consejo las tres cabezas del imperio, en ciertos dias, £ pir ctmtar las poesiM 
hfstdricas antiguas y modornas, para instruirse de toda su historia, y tambien 
cuaudo habia algun nuevo invento en cualquiera facultad, para exadioarlo, 
aprobarlo, (5 reprobarlo. Delante de las sillas los rey^a babuii tina gran 
mesa cargada de joy as de oro y plata, pedreria, pluman, y otras cosas 
estimables, y en los rinconesde la sala muchas de mantas de todas calidades, 
para premios de las habilidades y estfmulo de los profesov&s, las cuales, 
albajas repartian los reyes, en los dias que concurrian, £ los que se aventa- 
jaban en el ejercicio de sus facultades,^* — Ibid.

VOL. I.

w»cr mumAmv.

^ amrrdteus accounts transmitted to m of 
iMliuMim ; AH institution certainlj not to hate been 
oxpeeted among the aboiigines of America. It is calculated 
gi?6 U8 a higher idea of the refinement of the people, 
than even the noble arcfaiteotural remains which still cover 
some parts of the continent. Architecture is, to a certain 
extent, a sensual gratification. It addresses itself to the 
eye, and affords the best scope for the. parade of barbaric 
pomp and splendour. It is the form in which the revenues 
of %aemi-civilised people are most likely to be lavished. 
The most gaudy and ostentatious specimens of it, and some- 
times the most stupendous, have been reared by such hands. 
It is one of the first steps in the great march of civilisation. 
But the institution in question was evidence of still higher 
refinement. It was a literary luxury ; and argued the 
existence of a taste in the nation, which relied for its 
gratification on pleasures of a purely intellectual character.The influence of this academy must have been most pro- 
pitious to the capital, which became the nursery, not only of 
such sciences as c6uld he compassed by the scholarship of 
the period, hut of various useful and ornamental arts. Its 
historians, orators, and poets were celebrated throughout 
the country.* Its archives, for which accommodations w^ere 
provided in the royal palace, were stored with the records 
of primitive ages.t Its idiom, more polished than the 
Meadcan, was indeed the purest of all the Nahuatlac dialects;

* Veytia, Hist. Antig., lib. 8, cap. 7. — Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, 
tom. i., p. 247. The latter author enumeratea four historians, some of 
much repute, of the royal house of Tezcuco, descendants of the great 
NezahHalcoyotl. — See his Account of Writers, tom. 1., pp. 6-21.

+ “ Eu la ciudad de Tezt’uco estaban los Ai'chivos Reales de todas las 
cosas referidas, por haver sido la Metrdpoli de todas las ciencias, uses, y 
buenas costumhres, porque los Reyes que fudron de ella se precifiron de 
estoi'” (%tlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., Prdlogo). It was from the 
poor wreck of these documents, once so carefully preserved by his ances- 
tors, that the historian gleaned the mateiials, as he informs us, for his 
own works.

OOLMSir OF IlffiZCITJCo/ Hf

and continued, long after the Conquest, to he that in which 
the best productions of the native races were composed. 
Tezcuco claimed the glory of being the Athens of the 
Western World.*and continued, long after the Conquest, to he that in which 
the best productions of the native races were composed. 
Tezcuco claimed the glory of being the Athens of the 
Western World.*

Amon.^ the most illustrious of her bards was the emperor 
himself, — for the Tezcucan writers claim this title for their 
chiSf, as head of the imperial alliance. He, doubtless, 
appeared as a competitor before that very academy where 
he so often sat as a critic. Many of his odes descended to 
a late generation, and are still preserved, perhaps, in some 
of the dusty repositories of Mexico or Spain.! The his- 
torian, Ixtlilxochitl, has left a translation, in Castilian, of 
one of the poems of his roj^al ancestor. It is not easy to 
render liis version into corresponding English rhyme, with- 
out the perfume of the original escaping in this double 
filtration, if They remind one of the rich breathings of 
Spanish-Arab poetry, in which an ardent imagination is 
tempered by a not unpleasing and moral melancholy. §

* ** Auuque ea tenida la lengua Mejicana por Aalerna,^ la Tezcucana 
por mas cortesana y pulida/’ (Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS.) “ Tez- 
cuco,” says Boturini, “ donde los Senores *de la Tierra embiaban d bus 
hijos para aprehender lo mas puUdo de la Lengua Nhhuatly la Poesia, 
FiloBofla Moral, la Theologia Geatilica, la Astronomia, Medicina, y la 
Historia.”— Idea, p. 142.

•f ‘‘ CoinpuBO lx cantarcs,” says the author last quoted, quo quizas 
tambien havr&n’^perecido en las manos incendiarias de los ignorantes.” 
(Idea, p. 79.) Boturini had translations of two of these in his museum, 
(Catdlogo, p. 8,) and another has since come to light.J Difficult as the task may be, it has been executed by the hand of a 
fair friend, who, while she has adhered to the Castilian with singular 
fidelity, has shown a grace and flexibility in her poetical movements^, which 
the Castilian version, and probably the Mexican original, eannot Hoast. — 
See both translations in Appendix, Part 2, ifo, 2. .

§ Numerous specimens of this may be found in Cond^t ^ Dominacion 
de los Arabes en Espaiia.” None of them are superior to plaintive 
strains of the royal Ahderahmaii on the solitary palm tree, whimf reminded 
him, of the pleasant laud of his birth. — See Parte 2, cap. 9*

^ X. 2

AZTEC CmLISATlON.

'I#^ X. 2

AZTEC CmLISATlON.

'I#

Buti though sufficiently florid in diction, they are generally 
free from the meretricious ornaments and hyperbole with 
which the minstrelsy of the East is usually tainted. They 
turn on the vanities and mutability of human life : a topic 
very natural for a monarch who had himself experienced the 
strangest mutations of fortune. There is mingled in the 
lament of the Tezcucan bard, however, arf Epicurean philo- 
sophy, whict seeks relief from the fears of the future in the 
joys of the present. “Banish care,” he says; “if there 
are bounds to pleasure, the saddest life must also have an 
end. fthen weave the chaplet of flowers, amd sing thy songs 
in praise of the all-powerful God ; for the glory of this world 
soon fadeth away. Rejoice in the green freshness of thy 
spring ; for the day will come when thou shalt sigh for 
these joys in vain ; when the sceptre shall pass from thy 
hands, thy servants shall wander desolate in thy courts ; 
thy sons, and the sons of thy nobles shall drink the dregs of 
distress, and all the pomp of thy victories and triumphs shall 
live only in their recollection. Yet the remembrance of the 
just shall not pa^ away from the nations, and the good 
thoii^hast done shall ever be held in honour. The goods 
of this life, its ..glories, and its riches, are but lent to us ; 
its substance is but an illusory shadow, and the things of 
to-day shall change on the coming of the morrow. , Then 
gather the fairest flowers from thy gardens, to bind round 
thy brow, and seize the Joys of the present, ere they 
perish.”*

* ** lo tocar^ cantando

El mtisico instrumento sonordso,

Td de flores gozando

Danza, yCeeteja d Dios que es poderoso.

O gozemos de esta gloria,

Porque la humana yida es transitoria,*^

MS. DE IxTLaXOGHITL.

The sentimeDt, which is commoD enough, is expressed with uncommon 
heauty by the ‘English poet, Herrick ;

GOLDEN AGE OF TEZOtTCO.

149Porque la humana yida es transitoria,*^

MS. DE IxTLaXOGHITL.

The sentimeDt, which is commoD enough, is expressed with uncommon 
heauty by the ‘English poet, Herrick ;

GOLDEN AGE OF TEZOtTCO.

149

But the hours of the Tezeucan monarch were not all 
passed in idle dalliance with the Muse, nor in the sober con- 
templations of philosophy, as at a later period. In the 
freshness of youth and early manhood, he led the allied 
armies in their annual expeditions, which were certain to 
result in a wider extent of territory to the empire.* In the 
intervals of peace he fostered those productive arts which 
are the surest sources of public prosperity. He encouraged 
agriculture above all ; and there was scarcely a spot so rude, 
or a steep so inaccessible, as not to confess the power of 
cultivation. The land was covered with a busy population, 
and towns and cities sprung up in places since deserted, or 
dwindled into miserable villages.f

Gather the rosehud while you may,

Old Time is still arflying;

The fairest flower that blooms to-day,

To-morrow may be dying.”

And with sail greater beauty, perhaps, by Racine ;

“ Rions, chantons, dit cett© troupe impie ;

De fleurs en fleurs, de plaisirs en plaisirs, *

Promenons nos desirs.

Sur Tavenir insensd qui se fie.

De nos ans passagera le nombre est incertain.

Hatons-nous aujourd’hui de jouir de la vie,

Qui sait si nous scrons domain ?”

Athalir, Acte 2 -

It is interesting to see^under what different forms the same sentiment is 
developed by different races, and in different languages. It is an Epicurean 
sentiment, indeed, hut its universality proves its truth to nature.

* Some of the provinces and places thus conquered were held by the 
allied powers in common ; Tlacopan, however, only receiving one fifth of 
the tribute. It was more usual to annex the vanquished territory to that 
one of the two great states to which it lay nearest. — See Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 38. — 2^urita, Rapport, *|p, 11.Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 41. The same lifter, in another 
work calls the population of Tezcuco, at this period, double of what it was 
at the Conquest ; founding his estimate on the royal regleters^rLnd on the 
numerous remains of edifices still visible in his day, in places now depo- 
pulated. “ Paxece en las historias quo en este tiempo, dntes quo so

AZTEC civilisation.

From resources thus enlarged by conquest and domestic 
iudustry, the monarch drew the means for the large con- 
sumption of his own numerous household,* and for the 
costly works which he executed for the convenience and 
embellishment of the capital. He filled it with stately 
edifices for his nobles, whose constant attendance he was 
anxious to secure at his court. f He erected a magnificent 
pile ef buildings which might serve both f6r a royal resi- 
dence and for the public offices. It extended, from east to 
twelve hundred and thirty-four yards ; and from north 
to south, nine hundred and seventy-eight. It was encom- 
passed by a wall of unburnt bricks and cement, six feet wide 
and nine high, for one half of the circumference, and 
fifteen feet high for the other half. Within this enclosure 
were two courts. The outer one was used as the great mar- 
ket-place of the city; and continued to be so until long after 
the Conquest, if, indeed, it is not now. The interior court

destruyesea, havia doblado mas gente de la que halld al ticmpo que vino 
'Cortds, y los demas E%afioles ; porque yo hallo en los padrones reales, 
que el menor pueblo tenia 1 1 00 vecinos, y de alli para arriba, y aliora 
no tienen 200 vecinos, y aun en algunas partes de todo punto se ban

acabado Como se becha de ver en las. ruinas, hasta los

mas altos montes y sierras tenian sus sementeras, y casas principales para 
vivir y morar.” — Relaciones, MS., No, 9;acabado Como se becha de ver en las. ruinas, hasta los

mas altos montes y sierras tenian sus sementeras, y casas principales para 
vivir y morar.” — Relaciones, MS., No, 9;

* Torquemada has extracted the particulars of the yearly expenditure 
of the palace from the royal account-b[Ook, whichgcame into the historian’s 
possession. The following are ^ome of the items, namely : 4, 900,300 
fanegas of maize ; (the fmegh W equal to about one hundred pounds ;) 
2,744,000 fanegas of cacao; 8000 turkeys; 1300 baskets of salt ; besides 
an incredible quantity of gaoie of every kind, vegetables, condiments, &c. 
(Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, oifp.^ 53). — See also Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., 
MS., cap. 35.

There were more th& four hundred pf these lordly residences. 
** Asi mismo hizo edificar muchas casas y paiaeios para los senores y 
cavalleros, que asistian en su corte, cada uno conforme a la calidad y 
mdritos de su persona, las quales llegdron i quatrocientas casas

de sefiorcs y cavalleros de solar conooido.**---Jps|f cap. 38.

GOLDEN AGE OP TEZCUOO. 151

IS surrounded by the council chambers and halls of justice*, 
There were also accommoda,tiona there for the foreign 
ambassadors ; and a spacious saloon, with apartments open- 
ing inio it, for men of science and poets, who pursued their 
studies in this retreat, or met together to hold converse 
under its marble porticos. In this quarter, also, were 
kept the public archives ; which fared better under the 
Indian dynasty than they have since under their European 
successors.*Adjoining this cornet were the apartments of the king, 
including those for the royal harem, as liberally supplied 
with beauties as that of an eastern sultan. Their waUs 
were incrusted with alabasters, and richly tinted stucco, 
or hung with gorgeous tapestries of variegated feather-work. 
They led through long arcades, and through intricate 
labyrinths of shrubbery, into gardens, where baths and 
sparkling fountains were overshadowed by tall groves of 
cedar and cypress. The basins of water were well stocked 
with fish of various kinds, and the aviaries with birds glow- 
ing in all the gaudy plumage of the tfopics. Many birds 
and animals, which could not be obtained alive, , were 
represented in gold and silver so skilfully, as to have 
furnished the great naturalist Hernandez with models for 
his work.t

* Ibid., cap. 36. Esta plaza cercada de portales, y tenia asi mismo 
por la parte del poniciite otra sala grande, y muchos quartos a la redonda, 
que era la universidad, en donde asistian todos los poetas, histdricos, y 
phil6sopho8 del reyno, divididos en bus claves, y acaddnrias, conforme era 
la facultad de cada, uno, y asi mismo estaban aqui los arebivos reales.”

“t This celebrated naturalist was sent by Philip II. to New Spain, and 
be employed several years in compiling a voluminous work on its various 
natural productions, with drawings illustrating them. Although the govern- 
ment is said to have expended sixty thousand ducats in offectiiig this great 
object, the volumes were not published till long after ihe author’s death. 
In 1651 a mutilated «^^tion of the part of the work relating to medical 
botany appeared at KoiOiiBi The original MSS. were supposed to have been

ATOO CIVILISATIOK.ATOO CIVILISATIOK.

Accommodations on a princely scale were provided for 
tiiie sovereigns of Mexico and Tlacopan, when they visited 
the court. The whole of this lordly pile contained three 
hundred apartments, some of them fifty yards square.* 
The height of the building is not mentioned. was 
probably not great ; but supplied the requisite room by the 
immense extent of ground which it covered. The interior was 
doubtless constructed of light materials, especially of the 
rich woods, which, in that country, are remarkable, when 
polished, for the brilliancy and variety of their colours. 
That the’ ihore solid materials of stone and stucco were 
also liberally employed, is proved by the remains at the 
present day; remains which have furnished an inexhaustible 
quarry for the churches and other edifices since erected by 
the Spaniards on the site of the ancient city.f

destroyed by the great fire in the Escurial, not many years after. For- 
tunately, another copy, in the author’s own hand, was detected by the in- 
defatigable Munoz, in the library of the Jesuits’ College at Madrid, in the 
latter part of the last century ; and a beautiful edition, from the famous 
press of Ibarra, was publittlicd in that capital, under the patro’nage of govern- 
ment, in 1790. (Hist. Plantarum, Prafatio. — Nic. Antonio, Bibliotheca 
Hispana Nova, [Matriti, 1790,] tom. ii. p. 432.) The work of Hernandez 
is a monument of industry, and erudition, the more remarkable, as being 
the first on this difficult subject. And after all the additional light from 
the labours of later naturalists, it still holds its place as a book of the 
highest authority, for the perspicuity, fidelity, and thoroughness, with which 
the multifarious topics in it are discussed.

Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 36. 
f Some of the terraces on which it stood,” says Mr. Bullock, speaking 
of this palace, “ are still entire, and cpvered with cement, very hard, andIxtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 36. 
f Some of the terraces on which it stood,” says Mr. Bullock, speaking 
of this palace, “ are still entire, and cpvered with cement, very hard, and

equal in beauty to that found in ancient Roman buildings

The great church, which stands close by, is almost entirely built of tho 
materials taken from tho palace, many of the sculptured stones from which 
may be seen in the walls, though most of the ornaments are turned inwaids. 
Indeed, our guide informed us, that whoever built a house at Tezcuco made 
the ruins of the palace serve as his quarry.” (Six Months in Mexico, 
chap. 26.) Torquemada notices the appropriatioil of the materials to the 
same purpose, — Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, cap. 45.

GOLBEN AGE OP TEZCBC^ 153

We are not informecf of the time occupied in building 
this palace ; but two hundred thousand workmen, it is said, 
were employed on it ! * However this may be, it is certain 
that the Tezcucan monarchs, like those of A^a, and ancient 
Egyp1l||||had the control of immense masses of men, and 
would sometimes turn the whole population of a conquered 
city, including the women, into the public w^'rks.f — The 
most gigantic monuments of architecture which the worlu 
has witnessed wmuld never have been reared by the hands 
of freemen.Adjoining the palace were buildings for the king’s 
children, who, by his various wives, amounted to no less 
than sixty sons and fifty daughters.^ Here they were 
intstructed in all the exercises and accomplishments suited 
to their station ; comprehending, what would scarcely find 
a place in a royal education on the other side of the 
Atlantic, — the arts of working in metals, jewelry, and 
feather-mosaic. Once in every four months, the whole 
household, not exceptifig the- youngest, and including all 
the officers and attendants on the king’^ person, assembled 
in a grand saloon of the palace, to listen to a di^ourse 
from an orator, probably one of the priesthood. The 
princes, on this occasion, were all dressed in nequen, the 
coarsest manufacture of the country. The preacher began 
by enlarging on tlie obligations of morality, and of respect 
«

♦ Ixtlilxochitl, MS., ubi supra,

+ Thus, to panisli the Chalcas^br their rebellion, the whole population 
were compelled, women as well as men, says the chronicler so often quoted, 
to labour on the royal edifices, for four years together ; and large granaries 
were provided with stores for their maintenance in the mean time,— Idem, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 46. •

t If the people in general wore not much addicted polygamy, the 
sovereign, it must be confessed,— and it was the same, We shall see, in 
Mexico, — ^made ample amends for any self-denial on the part of his 
subjects. *

Amci oiYUjaAT^^if.,Amci oiYUjaAT^^if.,

gods, especially importaiJt persons whose rank 
gave such additional wei^t to example. He occasionally 
Seasoned his homily with a pertinent application to his 
audience, if any member of it had been guilty of a noto- 
rious delinquency. From this wholesome admoniJ|!i the 
monarch himself was not exem|tted, and the orator boldly 
reminded him of his paramount duty to show respect for his 
own laws. The king, so far from taking umbrage, received 
the lesson with humility : and the audience, we are assured, 
were often melted into tears by the eloquence of the 
preacher.* This curious scene may remind one of similar 
usages in the Asiatic and Egyptian despotisms, where the 
sovereign occasionally condescended to stoop from his pride 
of place, and allow his memory to he refreshed with the 
convfction of his own mortality.f It soothed the feelings 
of the subject, to find himself thus placed, though but for 
a moment, on a level with the king ; while it cost little to 
the latter, who was removed too far from his people to 
suffer a|iy thing by this short-Uved* familiarity. Jt is pro- 
bable that such act of public humiliation would have 
found lesfi favour with a prince less absolute.

Nessahualcoybtls fondness for magnificence was shown 
in his numerous villas, which .were embellished with all that 
could make a rural retreat delightful. His favourite resi- 
dence was at Tezcotzinco ; a conical hill about two leagues 
from the capital. J It was laid out in terraces, or hanging 
gardens, having a flight of steps five hundred and twenty

* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 87.* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 87.

, + The Egyptian priests managed th« affair in a more courtly style, and 
while they prayed that all |orts of kingly virtues might descend on the 
prince, they threw the blame of actual delinquencies' on his ministers ; thus, 
** not by the bitterness of reproof,” says Diodorysi ** hut by the allure- 
ments of praise, enticing him to an honest way of life.” — Lib. 1, cap. 70.

J Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich,, MS., cap. 42. — See Appendix, Part 2, 
No. 3, for the original description of this royal residence.

AGE OF mcuoo. 155

in number, many of i^tct hewn in the natural porphyry.* 
In the garden on the summit was a reservoir of lUlter, fed 
by an aqueduct that was carried over hill and Yalley, for 
several miles, on tuge buttresses of masonry. A large rock 
the midst of this basin, sculptured with the hiero- 
glyphics representing the years of Nezahualcoyotl’s reign 
and his principal achievements in eachit On a lower 
level were three other reservoirs, in each of which stood ^ 
marble statue of a woman, emblem Aic of the three states 
of the empire. Another tank contained a winged lion, 
cut out of the solid rock, bearing in his mouth the portrait 
of the emperor. J His likeness had been executed in gold, 
wood, feather-woik, and stone, but this was^the only one 
which pleased him.

From tfiese copious basins the water w|» distributld in 
nutnerous channels through the gardens, or was made to 
tuitoble over the rocks in cascades, shedding refreshing dews 
on the flowers and odoriferous shrubr below. In the depths 
of this fra^ant wilderness, marble porticos and pavilions 
were erected, and baths excavated in the solid porphyry, 
which are still shown by the ignorant natives, as the “Baths* “Quinientos y vein^te escalones.” Bavilla Padilla, Historic de la 
Provincia de Santiago, (Madrid, 1696^) lib. 2, cap. 81. ♦ This writer, who 
lived in the sixteenth century, counted the steps himself. Those which 
were not cut in the rock were crumbling Into ruins, as indeed every part of 
the establishment was even then far gone to decay.

f On the summit of the mount, according to Padilla, stood an image of 
a coyotlf — an animal resembling a fox, — which, according to tradition, re- 
presented an Indian famous for his fists. It was destio)^^ hy that stanch 
iconoclast, Bishop Zuma'rraga, as a relic of idolatry, (ll^t. de Santiago, 
lib. 2, cap. 81.) This figure was, no doubt, the embl^ lOf Nezahualcoyotl 
himself, whose name, as elsewhere noticed, signified “ hd^gry fox.”

4: ** Hecho de una pena un leon de mas de dos^razas do largo con sus 
alasyplumas: estaha hechado y min^do & la parte d^ ioiiente, en cuia 
boca asomaba un rostro, que era el mismo retrato del l^ay.* — Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap, 42.

156

AZTEO CiraiSATIOK.156

AZTEO CiraiSATIOK.

of Montezuma ! The visitor descended by steps cut in 
the living stone, and polished so bright as to reflect like 
mirrors.t Towards the base of the hill, in the midst of 
cedar groves, whose gigantic branches threw a refreshing 
coolness over the verdure in the sultriest seasons of the 
year,t rose the royal villa, with its light arcades and airy 
halls, drinking ,in the sweet perfumes of the gardens. 
Here the monarch often retired, to throw off the burden of 
state, and refresh his Vearied spirits in the society of his 
favourite wives, reposing during the noontide heats in the 
embowering shades of his paradise, or mingling, in the 
cool of the evening, in their festive sports and dances. 
Here he entertained his imperial brothers of Mexico and 
Tlacopan, and followed the hardier pleasures of the chase 
in the noble woods that stretched for miles around his villa, 
flourishing in all their primeval majesty. Here, too, he 
often repaired in the latter days of his life, when age had

* Bullock speaks of a beautiful basin, twelve foot long^by eight wide, 
having a well five feet four, deep in the centre,’^ &c., &c. Whether 
truth lies in the bottom of this well, is not so clear. Latrobe describes the 
baths as “ two singular basins, perhaps two feet and a half in diameter, not 
large enough for any monarch bigger tbau Oberon to take a duck in/* 
(Comp^Six Months in Mexico, chap. 26 ; and Rambler in Mexico, let. 7.) 
Ward speaks much to the same purpose, (Mexico in 1827, [London, 1828,] 
vol. ii. p. 296,) which agrees witli verbal accounts I have received of the 
same spot.

f “ Grades* hechos de la misma pena tan bien gravadas y lizas que 
parecian espejotf/’ (Ixtlilxochitl, MS., ubi supra.) The travellers just 
cited notice the beautiful polish still visible in the porj)hyry.J PadilU saw euitire pieces of cediu* among the ruins, ninety feet long, 
and four in diameter. Some of the massive' portals, he observed, were 
3liade of a single stone. (Hist, do &intiago, lib. 11, cap. 81.) Peter 
Mswiyr notices an enormous ^wooden beam, used in the construction of the 
palaces of Tezcuco, which was one hundred and twenty feet long by 
eight, feet in diameter f The accounts of this and similar huge pieces of 
timber Were so astonishing, he adds,^that be could not have received them 
except on the most unexceptionable testimony.-' — De Orbe Novo, dec. 5, 
cap. 10,

GOlffiEN AGE OF TEZCUCO*

157

tempered ambition and cooled the ardour of bis blood, to 
pursue in solitude the studies of pbilosopby and .gather 
wisdom from meditation.

The extraordinary accounts of the Tezcucan architecture 
are confirmed in the main, by the relics which still cover the 
hill of Tezcotzinco, or are half buried beneath its surface. 
They attract little attention, indeed, in the country, where 
their true history has long since passed into oblivion ; *’ 
while the traveller, whose curiosity leads him to the spot, 
speculates on their probable <jj*igin, and, as he stumbles over 
the huge, fragments of sculptured porphyry and granite, 
refers them to the primitive races who spread their colossal 
architecture over ^ the country, long before the coming of 
the Acolhuans and the Aztecs.f

The Tezcucan princes were used to entertain a grett 
number of concubines. They had but one lawful wife, to 
whose issue the crown descended. J Nezahualcoyotl remained 
unmarried to a late period. He was d^appointed in an* It is much to he regretted that the Mexica%govemment should not 
take a deeper interest in the Indian antiquities. What might not be 
eflfected by a few hands drawn from the idle garrisons of some of the neigh- 
bouring towns, and employed in excavating this ground, “the Mount 
Palatine ” of Mexico ! But, unhappily, the age of violence has been suc- 
ceeded by one of apathy.

+ “ They are doubtless,” says Mr. Latrobe, speaking of what he calls, 
“these inexplicable ruins,” “rather of Toltec than Aztec origin, and, 
perhaps, with still more probability, attributable to a people of an age yet 
more I'emote.” (Rambler in Mexico, let. 7.) “ I am of opinion,” says 
Mr, Bullock, “ that these were antiquities prior to tlie disco very of America, 
and erected by a people whose history was lost even before the building of 
the city of Mexico. — Who can solve this difficulty?” (Six Months in 
Mexico, ubi supra.) The reader who takes Ixtlilxochitl for his guide will 
have no great trouble in solving it. He will^find here, aA he might proba- 
bly in some other instances, that one need go little higb«r than the Con- 
quest for the origin of antiquities whicijb claim to be eoevid with Phoenicia 
and Ancient Egypt. *

t Zurita, Rapport, p. 12.

4ii»o cmuBATioy/

oiriy attaelmieBt, as the prbcess who had been educated 
in ^itacy to he the partner of his throne, gave her hand 
to another. The injured monarch submitted the affair to 
the proper tribunaL The parties, however, wore proved to 
have been ignorant of the destination of the lady, and the 
court, with an independence which reflects equal honour on 
the judges Who could give, and the monarch who could 
receive the sentence, acquitted the young couple. This 
story is sadly contrasted by the following.^The king devoured his cljp.gria in the solitude of his 
beautiful villa of Tezcotzinco, or sought to divert it by 
travelling. On one of bis journeys he was hospitably 
entertained by a potent vassal, the old lord of Tepechpan, 
who, to do his sovereign more honour, caused him to be 
attended at the banquet by a noble maiden, betrothed to 
himself, and who, after the fashion of the country, had 
been educated under his own roof. She was of the blood 
royal of Mexico^ and nearly related, moreover, to the 
Tezcucan monarch. The latter, who had all the amorous 
temperament of tba South, was captivated by the grace 
and personal charms of the youthful Hebe, and conceived a 
violent passion for her. He did not disclose it to any one, 
however ; but, on his return home, resolved to gratify it, 
though at the expense of his own honour, by sweeping 
away the only obstacle which stood in his path.

He accordingly sent an order to the chief of Tepechpan 
to take command of an expedition set on foot against the 
Tlascalans. the same time he instructed two Tezcucan 
chiefs to keep near the person of the old lord, and bring 
him into the thickest of the fight, where he might lose his 
life. He assured thetfi this had been forfeited by a great 
crime, but that, from regard for his v&ssars past services,

* Ixtlibcochitl, Hist. Chich., MS,, cap. 43.

^ ACCOatri^SHED PaiKOES, 1$0

he was willing to cover np his disgrace by an honourable 
death.

The veteran, who had long lived in retirement on his 
estates, saw himself, with astonishment, cajled so suddenly 
and needlessly into action, for which so many younger men 
were better fitted. He suspected the cause, and, in the 
farewell entertainment to his friends, uttered a presentiment 
of his sad destiny. His predictions were too soon verified , 
and a few weeks placed the hand of his virgin bride at her 
own disposal.Nezahualcoyotl did not think it prudent to break his 
passion publicly to the princess, so soon aftei; the death of 
his victim. • He^opened a correspondence with her through 
a female relative, and expressed his deep sympathy for her 
loss. At the same time, he tendered the best consolation 
in his power, by an offer of his heart and hand. Her 
former lover had been too well stricken in years for the 
maiden to remain long inconsolable. She was not aware of 
the perfidious plot against his life ; and, after a decent 
time, she was ready to comply with h%r duty, by placing 
herself at the disposal of her royal kinsman. ,

It was arranged by the king, in order to give a more 
patural aspect to the affair, and prevent all suspicion of the 
unworthy part he had acted, that the princess should pre~ 
sent herself in his grounds at Tezcotzinco, to witness some 
public ceremony there. Nezahualcoyotl was standing in a 
balcony of the palace, when she appeared, and inquired, as 
if struck with her beauty for the first time, “ who the 
lovely young creature was, in his gardens.'’ When his 
courtiers had .acquainted him with her name and rank, he 
ordered her to be conducted to theP palace, that she might 
receive the attentions due to her station. The interview 
was soon followed by a public declaration of his passion ; 
and the marriage was celebrated not long after, with great

AZtKO CmmSATION.

pomp> in the presence, of his court, and of his brother 
monarchs of Mexico and Tlacopan.’’^ ♦

This story, which furnishes so obvious a counterpart to 
that of David an^ Uriah, is told with great circumstantiality, 
bdth hy the king’s son and grandson, from whose narratives 
Ixtlilxochitl derived it.t They stigmatise the action as the 
basest in their great ancestor’s life* It is indeed too base 
not to leave an indelible stain on any character^ however 
pure in other respects, and exalted. ,The king was stnct in the execution of his laws, though 
his natural disposition led him to temper justice with mercy. 
Many anccd<]j,tes are told of the benevolent interest he took 
in the concerns of his subjects, and of his anxiaty to detect , 
and reward merit, even in the most humble. It was common 
for him to ramble among them in disguise, like the cele- 
brated caliph in the ‘‘ Arabian Nights,” mingling freely in 
conversation, and ascertaining their actual condition with Ids 
own eyes. J

On one such occasion, when attended only by a single 
lord, he met with atboy who was gathering sticks in a field 
for fuel. 9e inquired of him “ why he did not gb into the 
neighbourmg forest, where he would find a plenty of them.” 
To which lad answerech “ It was the king’s wood, an(| 
ha would punish him with death if he trespassed thei^* ’* 
The royal forests were very extensive in Tezouco, and:.ite*!^ * 
guarded by laws full as severe as thdtee of 
tyr^ts in England. “ ^’^at kind|^ man is yotr king ? ” 
asked the monarch, willing to the effect of these pro- 
hibitions on his own popularity. “ A very hard man,”

♦ HtHlxocMtl, Hist Chk., MS. cap. 43.

, ^ Idem, uM eupra. v

1 “ Ett traje de cazador, (que lo acoetumbraba 4 iiOieer, muy de ordiiiario,)

4 y dlgfrozado pai|i que no fuese conocido, k reconocer las 
faltas y necesidad jque havia dn la repOblica paxa remediadas.’* — Ixtlilxo- 
chitl, Hist Chich., MS. cap. 46,

ACCOMFIilSUED PBINCCS.

16 f^

answered the boy, “who denies his people what God has* 
given them.”^ Nezahnalcoyotl urged him not to mind - 
such arbitrary laws, but to glean his sticks in tlie foresi^%» 
there was no one present who would betray him ; but the 
boy sturdily refused, bluntly accusing the disguised king, at 
the same time, of being a traitor, and of wishing to bring 
him into trouble.Nezahualcoyotl, on returning to the palace, ordered the 
child and his parents to be summoned beforo him. They 
received the orders with astonishment, hut, on entering the 
presence, the boy at once recognised the person with whom 
he had discoursed so unceremoniously, and he was filled 
with consternation. The good^atured monarch, however, 
relieved his apprehensions, by thanking him for the lesson 
he had given him, and at the same time commended his 
respect for the laws, and praised his parents for the manner 
in which they had trained their son. He then dismissed 
the parties with a liberal largess ; and afterwards mitigated 
the severity of the forest laws, so as to allow persons to 
gather any wood, they might find on the ground, if they did 
not meddle with the standing timber.f

Another adventure is told of him, with a poor woodman 
jand his wife, who had brought their little load df billets for 
sale to the market-place of Tezcuco, The man was bitterly 
lamenting his bard lot, and the difficulty with which he 
l&arned a wretched subsistence, while the master of the 
palace which they were standing lived an idle life,

without and with all the luxuries in the world at his 
command.

He was going on in his complaints^ when the good woman 
stopped him, by reminding him that he might be overheard.

* '

* “tJn bombresillo miserable, pues quits fi loa hbmbres lo que Dios ^ 
manoB llenaa les — Ibid., loc. cit.

t Ixtlibcocbitl, cap. 46. ..

VOL. I,

M

AZTEC CIYILISATION,* '

* “tJn bombresillo miserable, pues quits fi loa hbmbres lo que Dios ^ 
manoB llenaa les — Ibid., loc. cit.

t Ixtlibcocbitl, cap. 46. ..

VOL. I,

M

AZTEC CIYILISATION,

was so, by Nezahualcoyotl himself, who standing, 
screened from observation, at a latticed window which 
overlooked the market, was amusing himself, as he was 
wont, with observing the common people chatfering in the 
square. He immediately ordered the querulous couple into 
his presence. They appeared trembling and conscience- 
struck before him. The king gravely inquired what they 
had said. As they answered him truly, he told them they 
should reflect, that, if he had great treasures at his com- 
mand, he had still greater calls for them ; that, far from 
leading an easy life, he was oppressed with the whole 
burden of government ; and concluded by admonishing them 
“ to be more cautious in future, as walls had ears.” * He 
then ordered his officers to bring a quantity of cloth, and a 
generous supply of cacao, (the coin of the country,) and dis^ 
missed them. Go,” said he ; ‘‘with the little you^i^ow 
have, you will be rich ; while, with all my riches, I Bhall 
still be poor.” * ^ .

It was not his passion to hoard. He i^jpensed his 
revenues munificently, seeking out pjHM*, ' but meritorious 
objects, on whom to bestow thej$4 He was particularly 
mindful of disabled soldiers, and those who had in any way 
sustained loss in the public service ; and, in case of their 
death, extended assistance to their surviving families^ Open 
mendicity was a thing he would never tolerate, but chastisei 
it with exemplary rigour.f ^

It would be inpredible, that a man of the 
and endowments of Nezahualcoyotl should acqmes^e in the

* “Porque ks paredes oian.” (Ixflilxocliitl.) A European proverb 
among the American aborigiiles looks tod Strange, fiOt to make one suspect 
the hand of the chronicler.

‘ “ Le dijo, que con aqnello poco le bastaba, y viviria bien aventurado ;‘ “ Le dijo, que con aqnello poco le bastaba, y viviria bien aventurado ;

y 41, con toda la m^quina quo le patCcia que tenia arto, no tenia nada ; y 
asi lo despidid.’^ — Ibid. J Ibid.

ACCOMPLISHED PEINCES,

163

sordid superstitions of his countrymen, and still more in the 
sanguinary rites borrowed by them from the Aztecs. In 
truth, his humane temper shrunk from these cruel ceremo- 
nies, and he strenuously endeavoured to recal his people to 
the more pure and simple worship of the ancient Toltecs. 
A circumstance produced a temporary change in his conduct.

He had been married some years to the wife he had s^ 
unrighteously obtained, but was not blessed with issue. The 
priests represented that it was owing to his neglect of the 
gods of his country, and that his only remedy was to propi- 
tiate them by human sacrifice. The king reluctantly 
consented, and the altars once more smoked with the blood 
of slaughtered captives. But it was all in vain ; and he 
indignantly exclaimed, These idols of wood and stone can 
neither hear nor feel ; much less could they make the 
heavens and the earth, and man, the lord of it. These must 
be the work of the all-powerful, unknown God, Creator of 
the universe, on whom alone I must rely foi? consolation and 
support.^’ *

He then withdrew to his rural palace of Tezcotzinco, 
where he remained forty days, fasting and praying at stated 
hours, and offering up no other sacrifice than the sweet 
incenso of copal, and aromatic herbs and gums. At the 
expiration of this time, he is said to have been comforted by 
a vision assuring him of the success of his petition. At all 
events, such proved to be the fact ; and this was followed 
by the cheering intelligence of the triumph of his arms in» Verdaderamente los Dioses que io adoro, que son fdolos de piedra 
que no iKifelan, ni sienten, no pudieron hacer ni formar la liennosura del 
cielo, el sol, luna, y estrcllas que lo hermoseaB, y dan luz 4 la tierra, rios, 
aguas, y fuentes, ^rboles, y plantas que la hermosean, las gentes que la 
poseen, y todo lo criado ; algim Dios muy poderoso, oculto, y no conocido 
es cl Criador de todo el uni verso. El solo es €i que puede consolarme en 
mi afliccion, y socorrerme en tan grande anguatia como mi corazon siento.'” 
— MS. de Ixtlilxocliitb

k2

cmmAnoyr.

• wiucre he bad latelj experkaced some bamUiating

meraea.*

Greatly strengtheoed in bis former reb'gions convictions, 
he txow openly professed his faith, and was more earnest to 
wean his subjects from their degrading superstitions, and to 
substitute nobler and more spiritual conceptions of the 
Deity. Be built a temple in the usual pyramidal form, and 
on the summit a tower nine stories high, to represent the 
nine heavens ; a tenth was surmounted by a roof painted 
black, and profusely gilded with stars on the outside, and 
incrusted with metals and precious s.tones within . He dedi- 
cated this to the un/cnotm God, the Cause of causes,^* t 
It seems probable, from the emblem on the tower, as well 
as from the complexion of his verses, as we shall see, that 
he mingled with his reverence for the Supreme the astral 
worship which existed among the Toltecs, J Various 
musical instruments were placed on the top df the tower, 
and the sound •£ them, accompanied by the ringing of a 
sonorous metal struck by a mallet, summoned the worshippers 
to prayers at regular seasons. § No image was allowed in 
the edifice, as unsuifced to the ^‘invisible God ; and the 
people were expressly prohibited from profaning the altars*MS. de Ixtlilxochitl. The manuscript here quoted is one of the many 
left by the author on the antiquities of his country, and forms part of a 
voluminous compilation made in Mexico by father Vega, in 1792, by order 
of the Spanish government. — See Appendix, Part 2, No. 2.

+ A1 Dios no conocido, Causa d© las causas.” — MS. de Ixtlilxochitl.

f Their earliest temples “were dedicated to the Sun. The Moon they 
worshipped as his wife, and the Stars as his sisters. (Veytia, Hist. Antiq., 
tom. i. ciip. 25.) Tho ruins still existing at Teotihuacan, about seven 
leagues from Mexico, are gppposed to have been temples raised by this 
ancient people in honour of the two great deities. — Boturini, Idea, p. 42.

$ MS. de Ixtlilxochitl. ‘‘ This was evidently a ffong,** says Mr. Ranking, 
who treads with enviable confidence over the ^ suppositos cineres,*’ in the 
path of the antiquary.— -See hU Historical Researches on the Conquest of 
Peru, Mexico, &c., by the Mongols, (London, 1827,) p. 310.

AOOOMmSHED PBINCES. 165

with blood, or any other sacrifices than that of the perfume 
of flowers and sweet-scented gums.

The remainder of his days was chiefly spent in his deli- 
cious solitudes of Tezcotzinco, where he devoted himself to 
astronomical and, probably, astrological studies, and to 
meditation on his immortal destiny, — giving utterance to his 
feelings in songs, or rather hymns, of much solemnity and 
pathos. An extract from one of these will convey .some idea 
of his religious speculations. The pensive teiiderness of the 
verses quoted in a preceding page is deepened here into a 
mournful, and even gloomy colouring : while the wounded 
spirit, instead of seeking relief in the convivial sallies of a 
young and buoyant temperament, turns for consolation to 
the world b(‘yond the grave.All things on earth have their term, and, in the most 
joyous career of their vanity and splendour, their strength 
fails, and they sink into the dust. All the round world is 
but a sepulchre ; and there is nothing, which lives on its 
Rurfacc, that shall not be hidden and entombed beneath it. 
Rivers, torrents, and streams move onward to their destina- 
tion. Not one flows back to its pleasant source. They rush 
onward, hastening to bury themselves in the deep bosom of 
the ocean. The things of yesterday are no more to-day ; 
and the things of to-day shall cease, perhaps, on the 
morrow.* The cemetery is full of the loathsome dust 
of bodies once quickened by living souls, who occupied 
thrones, presided over assemblies, marshalled armies, subdued

♦ “ Toda la redondez de la tierra es un sepulcro : no hay cosa quo 
Bustente quo con titulo de piedad no la esconda y eatierre. Corren los 
rioB, los aiToyos, las fuentes, y las aguas, y ^lingunas retroceden para sue 
alegres nacimientos : aceleranse con ansia para los vastos dominios de 
Tluldca [Neptuno], y ciianto mas sc arriman ^ sus dilatadag m^rgenes, 
tanto mas van labrando las melancdlicas urnas para sepultarse. Lo quo 
fue ayer no eg hoy, ni lo dc hoy se afianza que ser^ manana.”

166

AZTEC CIVILISATION.

provinces, arrogated to themselves worship, were puffed up 
with vain glorious pomp, and power* and empire.

** But these glories have all passed away, like the fearful 
smoke that issues from the throat of Popocatepetl, with no 
other memorial of their existence than the record on the 
page of the chronicler.“ The great, the wise, the valiant, the beautiful, — alas ! 
where a^e they now ? They arc all mingled witli the clod ; 
and that which has befallen them shall happen to us ; and 
to those that come after us. Yet let us take courage, illus- 
trious nobles and chieftains, true friends and loyal subjects, 
— let us aspire to that hearen, where all is eternal, and 
corruption cannot come.^ The horrors of the tomb are 
but the cradle of the Sun, and the dark shadows of death 
are brilliant lights for the stars/’ + The mystic import of 
the last sentence seems to point to that superstition respect- 
ing the mansions of the Sun, which foirms so .beautiful a 
contrast to the dark features of the Aztec mythology.

At length, about the year 1470,J Nezahualcoyotl, full of 
*

* “ Aspirenios dl cielo, que alli todo cs eterno y nada sc corrompe.”

“ El horror del sepulcro es lisongera cuna para dl, y las funcstas 
somhras, brillanics luces para los astros.” The original text and a Spanish 
translation of this poem first appeared, I helieve, in a work of Granados y 
Galvez. (Tardes Americanas, [Mexico, 1778,] p. 90, ct seq.) The 
original is in the Otomie tongue, and both, together with a French version, 
have been inserted by M. Temaux-Compans in the Appendix to his 
translation of IxtlilxochitTs Hist, des Chichiineques (tom. i. pp. 359-3G7).

• Bustamente, who has also published the Spanish version in his Galeria 
de Antiguos Principes Mcjicanos, [Prtebla, 1821,] (pp. IG, 17), calls it 
the “ Ode of the Flower,” which was recited at a banquet of the great 
Tezcucan nobles. If this last, however, be the same mentioned by Tor- 
quemada, (Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, cap. 45,) it must have been written In 
the Tezcucan tongue ; and, fTideed, it is not probable that the Otomie, an 
Indian dialect, so distinct from the langtiages of Anahuac, however well 
understood by the royal poet, could have been comprehended by a mis- 
cellaneous audience of his countrymen.tj: An approximation to a date is the most that one can hope to arrive a

. • AOOOVPIISHED PEINCES.

167

years and honours, felt himself drawing near his end. 
Almost half a century hhd elapsed since he mounted the 
throne of Tezcuco. He had found his kingdorr dismem- 
bered bj faction, and bowed to the dust beneath the yoke of 
a foreign tyrant. He had broken that yoke ; and breathed 
new life into the nation, renewed its ancient institutions, 
extended wide its domain ; had seen it flourishing in all thr 
activity of trade and agriculture, gathering strength from its 
enlarged resources, and daily advancing higler and higher 
in the great march of civilisation. All this he had seen, and 
might fairly attribute no small portion of it to his own wise 
and beneficent rule. His long and glorious day was now 
drawing to its close ; and he contemplated the event with 
the same serenity which he had shown under the clouds of 
its morning and in its meridian splendour.

A short time before his death, he gathered around him 
those of his children in whom he most confided, his chief 
counsellors, the ambassadors of Mexico and Tlacopan, and 
his little son, the heir to the crown, his only offspring by 
the queen. He was then not eight years old ; but had 
already given, as far as so tender a blossom might, the rich 
promise of future excellence.*

After tenderly embracing the child, the dying monarch 
threw over him the robes of sovereignty. He then gave 
audience to the ambassadors, and when they had retired, 
made the boy repeat the substance of the conversation. He 
followed this by such counsels as were suited to his compre- 
hension, and which, when remembered through the long 
vista of after years, would serve as lights to guide him inwith Ixtlilxochitl, who has entangled his chronology in a tnaaner beyond my 
skill to unravel. Thus, after telling us that Nezahualchyotl was fifte<3n years 
old when his father was slain in 1418, he says he died at the age of seventy- 
one, in 1462 . — Inatar omnium. — Comp. Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 18, 1 9, 49.

♦ MS. de Ixtlilxochitl, — also, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 49.

168

AZTEC CimiSATION.

his government of the hingdom. He besought him not to 
neglect the worship of “ the unknown God/’ regretting that 
he himself had been unworthy to know him, and intimating 
his conviction that the time would come when he should be 
known and worshipped throughout the land.*

He next addressed himself to that one of his sons in whom 
he placed the greatest trust, and whom he had selected as 
the guardian of the realm. “ From this hour,” he said to 
him, “you will fill the place that I have filled, of father to 
this child ; you will teach him to live as he ought ; and by 
your counsels he will rule over the empire. Stand in his 
place, and be his guide, till he shall be of age to govern for 
himself.” Then, tuniing to his other children, he admo- 
nished them to live united with one another, and to show all 
loyalty to their prince, who, though a child, already mani- 
fested a discretion far above his years. “ Be true to him,” 
he added, “ and he will maintain you in your rights and 
dignities.”!

Feeling his end approaching, he exclaimed, “ Ho not 
bewail me with idlfe lamentations. But sing the song of 
gladness, and show a courageous spirit, that the nations I 
have subdued may not believe you disheartened, but may 
feel that each one of you is strong enough to keep them in 
obedience ! ” The undaunted spirit of the monarch shone 
forth even in the agonies of death. That stout heart, how- 
ever, melted as he took leave of his children and friends, 
weeping tenderly over them, while he bade each a last 
adieu. When they had withdrawn, he ordered the officers* “ No consentiendo que haya sacrificios de gente humana, que Dios so 
enoja de cllo, castigando con figor ^ los que lo hicieren ; que el dolor que 
llevo cs no tener lu^j, ni conocimiento, ni ser merecedor dc conocer tan 
gran Dios, el qual tengo por cierto que ya que los presentes no lo conozcan, 
ha, de venir f/iempo en que sea conocido y adorado en esta tierray — MS. 
4e Ixtlilxochitl.

*t MS. de IxtUlaocliitl, ubi supra; also Hist. Chich., cap. 40.

accomplished peinces.

169

of the palace to allow no one to enter it again. Soon after 
he expired, in the seventy-second year of his age, and the 
forty-third of his reign.^accomplished peinces.

169

of the palace to allow no one to enter it again. Soon after 
he expired, in the seventy-second year of his age, and the 
forty-third of his reign.^

Thus died the greatest monarch, and, if one foul blot 
could he effaced, perhaps the best who ever sat upon an 
Indian throne. His character is delineated with tolerable 
impartiality by his kinsman, the Tozcucan chronicler. ‘‘ He 
was wise, valiant, liberal ; and, when we consider the mag- 
nanimity of his soul, the grandeur and success of his enter- 
prises, his deep policy, as well as daring, we must admit 
him to have far surpassed every other prince and captain of 
this New World. He had few failings himself, and rigor- 
ously punished those of others. He preferred the public to 
his private interest ; was most charitable in his nature, 
often buying articles at double their worth of poor and 
honest persons, and giving them away again to the sick and 
infirm. In seasons of scarcity he was particularly bountiful, 
remitting the taxes of his vassals, and supplying their wants 
from the royal granaries. He put no faith in the idolatrous 
worship of the country. He was well •Instructed in moral 
science, and sought, above all things, to obtain light for 
knowing the true God. He believed in one God only, the 
Creator of heaven and earth, by whom we have our being, 
who never revealed himself to us in human form, nor in any 
other ; with whom the souls of the virtuous are to dwell 
after death, while the wicked will suffer pains unspeakable. 
He invoked the Most High, as Him by whom we live, and 
‘ Who has all things in himself.^ He recognised the Sun 
for his father, and the Earth for his mother. He taught 
his children not to confide in idols, and only to conform to 
the outward worship of them from Reference to public opi- 
nion.! If he could not entirely abolish human sacrifices,

* Hist. Cbich., cap, 49.

f “ Solia amonestar h. bus hijos en eecreto q,ue no adomsen d aquellas* Hist. Cbich., cap, 49.

f “ Solia amonestar h. bus hijos en eecreto q,ue no adomsen d aquellas

AZTEC CimiSATION.

170

derived from the Aztecs, Le, at least, restricted them to 
slaves and captives.”^

I have occupied so much space witli this illustrious 
prince that but little remains for his son and successor, 
Nezahualpilli. I have thought it better, in our narrow 
limits, to present a complete view of a single epoch, the 
most interesting in the Tezcucan annals, than to spread the 
inquiries over a broader, but comparatively barren field. 
Yet Kezahualpilli, the heir to the crown, was a remarkable 
person, and his reign contains many incidents, which I regret 
to he obliged to pass over in silence. t

He had, in many respects, a taste similar to his fixthcr’s, 
and, like him, displayed a profuse magnificence in his way 
of living and in his public edifices. He was more severe in 
his morals : and, in the execution of justice, stern evdn to 
the sacrifice of natural afiection. Several remarkable in- 
stances of this are told ; one, among others, in relation to 
his eldest son, the heir to the crown, a prince of great 
promise. The young man entered into a poetical corres- 
pondence with one W his father’s concubines, the lady of 
Tula, as she was called, a woman of humble origin, but of 
uncommon endowments. She wrote verses with ease, and 
could discuss graver matters with the king and his ministers.

figuras de idolos, y que aqucllo que liiciesen eu puLlico fuese solo por cum- 
plimiento.'' — Hist. Chicli., c. 49.

* Ibid., ubi supra, ^

The name Nezothual;pilli signifies “ the prince for whom one bas 
fasted/’ — in allusion; no doubt, to the long fast of bis father previous to 
his birth. (See Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 45.) I have 
explained the meaning of the equally euphonious name of his parent, 
Nezahualcoyotl. (Ante, (!h. J:, p. 87.) If it he true, that 
“ Caesar or EpaininondasCould ne’er without names have been known to us,” 
it is no less certain that such names as those of the two Te7xncan princes, 
so difficult to he pronounced or remembered by a European, are most 
unfavouinble to immortality.

DECLINE OF THE MONARCHY.

171

She maintained a separate establishment, where she lived 
in state, and acquired, by her beauty and accomplishments, 
great ascendancy over her royal lover.* With this favourite 
the prince carried on a correspondence in verse, — whether 
of an amorous nature does not appear. At ail events, the 
offence was capital. It was submitted to the regular tri- 
bunal, who pronounced sentence of death on the unfortunate 
youth ; and the king, steeling his heart against all en- 
treat ies, and the voice of nature, suffered the ci*uel judgment 
to be carried into execution. We might, in this case, sus- 
pect tlie influence of baser passions on his mind, but it was 
not a solitary instance of his inexorable justice towards 
those most near to him. He bad the stern virtue of 
an ancient Roman, destitute of the softer graces which 
make virtue attractive. When the sentence was carried 
into effect, he shut himself up in his palace for many 
weeks, and commanded the doors and windows of his 
son’s residence to be walled up, that it might never again 
be occupied.!

•

* “ Do las concubinas la quo mas priv(5 con cl rej, la que llamaLan 
la Seiiora de Tula, no por linage, sino porque era hija de un mercader, y 
era tan sabia que couipetia con el rey y con los mas sabios de su reyno, 
y era cn la poe&ia muy aventajada, que con cstas gracias y dones naturales 
tenia dl rey muy sugeto d su voluntad de tal manera que lo quo queria 
alcanzaba de el, y asi vivia sola por si con grande aparato y magestad en 
nnos palacios que el rey le mand6 edificax.'* — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., 
MS., cap. 57.+ Ibid., cap. 67. The Tezcucan liistorian records several appalling 
examples of this severity; — one in particular, in relation to his guilty 
wife. The story, reminding one of the tales of an Oriental harem, has 
been translated for the Appendix, Part 2, No. 4. See also Torquemada, 
(Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, cap. 66,) and Zurita (Rapport, pp. 108, 10.0). 
Ho was the terror, in particular, of all unjustToiagistrates. They had little 
favour to expect from the man who could stifle the voice of nature in his 
own bosom, in obedience to the laws. As Suetonius said of a prince who 
had not his virtue, “ Vchemens et in cocrcendis quidem delictis immo- 
dicus. — Vita Galbec, sec. 0.

AZTEC CIVILISATION.

‘Nezahualpilli resembled bis father in his passion for astro- 
nomical studies, and is said to have had an observatory on 
one of his palaces.* He was devoted to war in his youth, 
but, as he advanced in years, resigned himself to a more 
indolent way of life, and sought his chief amusement in the 
pursuit of his favourite science, or in the soft pleasures of 
the sequestered gardens of Tezcotzinco. This quiet life was 
ill suited to the turbulent temper of the times, and of his 
Mexican rival, Montezuma. The distant provinces fell off 
from their allegiance ; the army relaxed its discipline ; dis- 
affection crept into its ranks ; and the wily Montezuma, 
partly by violence, and partly by stratagems unworthy of a 
king, succeeded in plundering his brother monarch of somS 
of his most valuable domains. Then it was that he arro- 
gated to himself the title and supremacy of emperor, hitherto 
borne by the Tezcucan princes, as head of the alliance. 
Such is the account given by the historians of that nation, 
who, in this way, explain the acknowledged superiority of 
the Aztec sovereign, both in territory and consideration, on 
the landing of the Spaniards.!These misfortunes pressed heavily on the spirits of Neza- 
hualpilli. Their effect was increased by certain gloomy 
prognostics of a near calamity which was to overwhelm 
the country. J He withdrew to his retreat, to brood in 
secret over his sorrows. His health rapidly declined ; and

* Torquemada saw the remains of this, or what passed for such, in his 
day. — Monarch. Ind., lib. 2, cap. 64.

+ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS. cap. 73, 74. This sudden transfer of 
empire from the Tezcucans, at the close of the reigns of two of their ablest 
monarchs is so improbable, that one cannot but doubt if they ever possessed 
it, — .at least to the extent diaimed by the patriotic historian.— See ante, 
Chap. 1, p. 15, note, and the corresponding text,

$ Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 72. The reader will find a 
particular account of these prodigies, better authenticated than most 
iniracles, in a future page of this History.

. DECLINE OF THE MONAIiCHT. 173'

in the year 1515, at the age of fifty-two, he sunk mto4he 
grave;* happy, at least, that, by his timely death, he 
escaped witnessing the fulfilment of his own predictions, in 
the ruin of his country, and the extinction of the Indian 
dynasties, for ever.tIn reviewing the brief sketch here presented of the 
Tezcucan monarchy, wo are strongly impressed with the 
conviction of its superiority, in all the great features of 
civilisation, over the rest of Anahuoc. The Mexicans showed 
a similar proficiency, no doubt, in the mechanic arts, and 
even in mathematical science.^ But in the science of govern- 
ment, in legislation, in the speculative doctrines of a religious 
%ature, in the more elegant pursuits of poetry, eloquence, 
and whatever depended on refinement of taste and a polished 
idiom, they confessed themselves inferior, by resorting to 
their rivals for instruction, and citing their works as the 
masterpieces of their tongue. The best histories, the best 
poems, the best code of laws, the purest dialect, were all 
allowed to be Tezcucan, The Aztecs rivalled their neigh- 
bours in splendour of living, and even "in the magnificence 
of their structures. They displayed a pomp and ostentatious 
pageantry, truly Asiatic, But this was the development of 
the material, rather than the intellectual principle. They 
wanted the refinement of manners essential to a continued

* Ibid., cap. 75. — Or, rather, at the age of fifty, if the historian is 
right, in placing his birth, as he does in a preceding chapter, in 1465. 
(See cap. 46.) It is not easy to decide what is true, when the writer does 
not take the trouble to he true himself.

+ His obsequies were celebrated with sanguinary pomp* Two hundred 
male and one hundred female slaves were sacrificed at his tomb. His 
body was consumed, amidst a heap of jewel% precious stuffs, and incense, 
on a funeral pile : and the ashes, deposited in a golden urn, were placed 
in the great temple of Huitzilopotchli, for whoso worship ^the king, not- 
withstanding the lessons of his father, had some partiality, — Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 75.

174

AZTEC CIVIUSATION.174

AZTEC CIVIUSATION.

civilisation. An insurmountable limit was put to 
'iifcteflrs, %j that bloody mythology, which threw its withering 
tmnt over the very air that they breathed.

The superiority of the Tezcucans was owing, doubtless, 
in a great measure, to that of the two sovereigns whose 
reigns w^ have been depicting. There is no position, which 
affords such Scope for ameliorating the condition of man, as 
that occupied by an absolute ruler over a nation imperfectly 
civilised. From his elevated place, commanding all tho 
resources of his age, it is in his power to diffuse them far 
and wide among his people. ^ Ho may ho the copious reser- 
voir on the mountain top, drinking in the dews of heaven, to 
send them in fertilising streajns along the lower slopes Siii9 
valleys, clothing even the wilderness in . heauty. Such 
were Nezahualcoyotl, and his illustrious successor, whose 
enlightened policy, extending through nearly a century, 
wrought a most salutary revolution in the condition of their 
country. It is remarkable that we, the inhabitants of th0 
same continent, should bo more familiar with the history of 
many a barbarian chief, both in the Old and New Worlds 
than with that of these truly great mOn, whose names are 
identified with the most glorious period in the annals of the 
Indian races.

What was the actual amount ol the Tezcucan civilisation, 
it is not easy to determine, with the imperfect light afforded 
us. It was certainly far anything which the word

conveys, measured by a European standard. In some of 
the arts, and in any walk .qf science, they could only have 
made, as it were, a beginning. But they had begun in the 
right way, and already showed a refinement in sentiment 
and manners, a capacity for receiving instruction, which, 
under good auspices, might have led them on to indefinite 
improvement. Unhappily, they were fast falling under the 
dominion of the warlike Aztecs. And that people repaidthe benefits received from their more polished nei|jhh^ 
by imparting to them tbeir own ferocious superstition, 
wbicb, falling like a mildew on the land, would soon hare 
blighted its rich blossoms of promise, and turned even its 
fruits to dust and ashes.Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl, who flourished in ihe hegmnmg of 
the seventeenth century, was a native of Tezcuco, and descended in a 
direct line from the sovereigns of that kingdom. The royal posterity 
became so numerous in a few generations, that it was common to see 
them reduced to great poverty, and earning a painful subsistence by 
the most humble occupations. Ixtlilxochitl, who was descended from 
tlie principal wife or queen of Nezahualpilli, maintained a very 
respectable position. He filled the office of interpreter to the viceroy, 
to which he was recommended by his acquaintance with the ancient 
hieroglyphics, and his knowledge of the Mexican and Spanish lan- 
guages. His birtli gave him access to persons of the highest rank in 
his own nation, some of whom occupied important civil posts under 
the new government, and were thus enabled to make large coUectiona 
of Indian manuscripts, which were liberally opened to him. He had 
an extensive library of his own, also, and with these means diligently 
pursued tlic study of the Tezcucan antiquities. He deciphered the 
hieroglyphics, made himself master of the songs and traditions, and 
fortified his naiTativeby the oral testimony of some very aged persons, 
who had themselves been acquainted with the Conquerors. From such 
authentic sources he composed various works in the Castilian, on the 
primitive history of the Toltec and the Tezcucan races, continuing 
it down to the subversion of the empire by Cortls. These various 
accounts, compiled under the title of BelacioneSf are, more or less, 
repetitions and abridgments of each other ; nor is it easy to understand 
why they were thus composed. The Historia Ohichemeca is the besi 
digested and most complete of the whole series ; and as such, has 
been the most frequently consulted, for the preceding pages*Ixtlilxochitrs writings have many of the defects belonging to his 
age. He often crowds the page with incidents of a trivial, and some- 
times improbable character. The improbability increases with the 
distance of the period ; for distance, which diminishes objects to the 
natural eye, exaggerates them to the mental. His chronology, as I 
have more than once noticed, is inextricably entangled. He has often

intLiLXocmrL.

ib\^ willmg ear to ttadiUons and reports which would staaftle the 
more seeptical criticism of the present time. Yet there is an appear- 
ance of good faith and simplicity in his writings, which may convince 
the reader that, when he errs, it is from no worse cause than national 
partiality. And surely such partiality is excusable in the descendant 
of a proud line, shorn of its ancient splendours, which it was soothing 
to his own feelings to revive again — though with something more than 
their legitimate lustre^ — on the canvas of history. It should also be 
considered, that, if his narrative is sometimes startling, his reseai ches 
penetrat^ into tlie mysterious depths of antiquity, where light and 
darkness me^t and melt into each other ; and when e\(‘rything 
is still further, to distortion, as seen through the misty medium

of hier©glyphi«*vof hier©glyphi«*v

Witli these j^wanoes, it will be found that the Tezcucan liistonaji 
has just' dahns to our admiration for the compass of his iiujuiries, 
and the sagacity with which they have been conducted. Ho has intro- 
duced us to the knowledge of the most polished people of Anahuac, 
whose records, if preserved, could not, at a much later period, have been 
comprehended ; and he has thus afforded a standard of'^comparison, 
which much raises our ideas of American civilisation. His language 
is simple, and occasionally eloquent and touching. His descriptions 
are highly picturesque. He abounds in familiar anecdote ; and the 
natural graces of his manner, in detailing the more striking events of 
history, and the personal adventures of liis heroes, entitle him to th© 
name of the Livy of Anahuac.

I shall be obliged to enter hereafter into his literary merits, in 
connexion with the narrative of the Conquest ? for which he is a pro- 
minent authority. His earlier .annals-^thou^h one of his manu-

scripts has been printed — have been4^igc«i% studied by the Spanish 
writers in Mexico, and liberally transferred to their pages ; and his 
reputation like Sahagun’s has detd^tdosB suffered by the process. His 
Historia ChicJicmeca is now turned into French by M. Temaux-Com- 
pans, forming part of that inestimable series of translations from 
unpublished documents, whhii have so much enlarged our acquaint- 
ance with the early American history. I have had ample opportunity 
of proving the merits of his version of Ixtiilxochitl ; and am happy 
to bear my testimony to the fidelity and elegance with which it is 
executed. ,

Note. — It was my intention to conclude this introductory portion of 
the work with an inquiry into the Origin of tliA Mexkom Civilisation,

But the general question of the origin of the inhabitants of a con- 
tinent,” says Humboldt, “ is beyond the limits prescribed to history ;

imHJDoomriiBut the general question of the origin of the inhabitants of a con- 
tinent,” says Humboldt, “ is beyond the limits prescribed to history ;

imHJDoomrii

perhai>s it is not even a philoaophic quottion,” « For the majority of 
readers,” says Lky, ^the origin and remote antiquities of a nation 
can have comparatiTely little interest.” The criticism of these great 
writers is just and pertinefat ; and, on further consideration, I have 
thrown the observaticais on this topic, prep^ed with "some c&re, into 
the Appendix {Part 1) ; to \^ich those, who feel sufficient curiosity 
in the discussion, can turn befoi’e entering on the narrative of the 
Conquest.

VOL. I.

BOOK SECOND.

THE DISCOVERT OF MEXICO.

181

BOOK 11.

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

CHAPTER I.

SPAIN UNDER CHARLES V. — PROGRESS OP DISCOVERY. — COLONIAL 
POLICY. — CON(iUE3T OP CUBA. — EXPEDITIONS TO YUCATAN.

" 1516—1518.

In the beginning of the sixteenth centuiy, Spain occu- 
pied perhaps the most prominent position on the theatre of 
Europe, The numerous states, into which she had been so 
long divided, were consolidated into one monarchy. The 
Moslem crescent, after reigning there for eight centuries, 
was no longer seen on her borders. The authority of the 
crown did not, as in later times, overshadow the inferior 
orders of the state. The people enjoyed the inestimable 
prkilege of political representation, and exercised it with 
manly independence. The nation at large could boast as 
great a degree of constitutional freedom, as any other, at 
that time, in Christendom. Under a system of salutary 
laws and an equitable administration, domestic tmnquillity 
was secured, public credit establishSd, trade, manufactures, 
and even the more elegant arts, began to flourish ; while a 
higher education called forth the first blossoms of that 
literature, which was to ripen into so rich a harvest, before

tS2

DISOOVEUr Of MEXICO.tS2

DISOOVEUr Of MEXICO.

the close of the century. Arms abroad kept pace with 
arts at home. Spain found her empire suddenly enlarged, 
by important acquisitions, both in Europe and Africa, while 
a JiTew World beyond the waters poured into her lap trea- 
sures of countless wealth, and opened an unbounded field 
for honourable enterprise.

Such was the condition of the kingdom at the close of 
the long and glorious reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, when, 
on the 23rd of January, 1516, the sceptre passed into the 
hands of their daughter Joanna, or rather* their grandson, 
Charles the Fifth, who alone ruled the monarchy during 
the long and imbecile existence of his unfortunate mother. 
During the two years following Ferdinand’s death, the 
regency, in the absence of Charles, was held by Cardinal 
Ximenes, a man whose intrepidity, extraordinary talents, 
and capacity for great enterprises, were accompanied by a 
haughty spirit, which made him too indifferent as to the 
means of their execution. His administration, therefore, 
notwithstanding the uprightness of his intentions, was, from 
his total disregard V>f forms, unfavourable to constitutional 
liberty; for respect for forms is an essential element of 
freedom. With all his faults, however, Ximenes was a 
Spaniard ; and the object he had at heart was the good of 
his country. •

It was otherwise on the arrival of Charles, who, after a 
long absence, came as a foreigner into the land of his 
fathers. (November, 1517.) His manners, sympathies, 
even his language, were foreign, for he spoke the Castilian 
with difl&culty. He knew little of his native country, of the 
character of the people or their institutions. He seemed to 
car^ still less for them ; while his natural reserve precluded 
that freedom of communication which might have counter- 
acted, to some extent at least, the errors of education. In 
everything, in short, he was a foreigner ; and resigned

• SPAIN UNDUE CHABLES V. 183• SPAIN UNDUE CHABLES V. 183

himself to the direction of his Flemish counsellors with a 
docility that gave little augury of his future greatness.

On his entrance into Castile, the young monarch was 
accompanied by a swarm of courtly sycophants, who settled, 
like locusts, on every place of profit and honour throughout 
the kingdom. A Fleming was made grand chancellor of 
Castile ; another Fleming was placed in the archiepiscopal 
see of Toledo. They even ventured to profane the sanctity 
of the cortes, by intruding themselves on its deliberations. 
Yet that body did not tamely submit to these usurpations, 
but gave vent to its indignation in tones becoming the 
representatives of a free people.*

The deportment of Charles, so different from that to 
which the Spaniards had been accustomed under the benign 
administration of Ferdinand and Isabella^ closed all hearts 
against him ; and, as his character came to be understood, 
instead of the spontaneous outpourings of loyalty, which 
usually greet the accession of a new and youthful sovereign, 
he was everywhere encountered by opposition and disgust. 
In Castile, and afterwards in Aragon, Catalonia, and Valen- 
cia, the commons Ijesitated to confer on him the title of 
King during the lifetime of his mother ; and, though they 
eventually yielded this point, and associated his name with* The following passage — one among many — from that faithful ^mirror 
of the times, Peter Martyr’s correspondence, does ample justice to the 
intemperance, avarice, and intolerable arrogance of the Flemings. - The 
testimony is worth the more, as coming from one who, though resident 
in Spain, was not a Spaniard. " Crumenas auro fukire inhiant ; huic 
uni studio invigilant. Nec detrectat juvenis Rex. Farcit quacunque 
posse datur ; non satiat tamcn. Quce qiialisve sit gens hsec, depingere 
adhuc ncscio. Insufflat vulgus hie in oiflne genus hominum non arctoum. 
Minoros faciunt Hispanos, quam si nati essent inter eorum cloacas. 
Rugiunt jam Hispani, lahra mordent, submurmurant taciti, fatorum 
vices tales esse conqueruntur, quod ipsi domitores regnorum ita floccifiant 
ab his, quorum Deus unictis (sub rege temperato) Bacchus est cum 
Citberea.” — Opus Epistolarum, (Amstelodami, 1610,) ep. 608.

184

DISCOTERY OF MEXICO.

hers in tiie soyereignty, yet they reluctantly granted the 
supplies he demanded, and, when they did so, watched over 
their appropriation with a vigilance which left little to gra- 
tify the cupidity of the Flemings. The language of the 
legislature on these occasions, though temperate and respect- 
ful, breathes a spirit of resolute independence not to be 
found, probably, on the parliamentary records of any other 
nation at that period. No wonder that Charles should have 
early imbibed a disgust for these popular assemblies, — the 
only bodies whence truths so unpalatable could find their 
way to the ears of the sovereign ! * Unfortunately, they 
had no influence on his conduct ; till the discontent, long 
allowed to fester in secret, broke out into that sad war of 
the comunidades^ which shook the state to its foundations, 
and ^ded in the subversion of its liberties.The same pestilent foreign influence was felt, though 
much less sensibly, in the Colonial administration. This 
had been placed, in the preceding reign, under the imme- 
diate charge of the two great tribunals, the Council of the 
Indies, and the Cctsa de Contratacion, or India House at 
Seville, It was their business to further the progress of 
discovery, watch over the infant settlements, and adjust the 
disputes which grew np in them. But the licences granted 
to private adventurers did more for the cause of discovery, 
than the patronage of the crown or its ofScers, The long 
peace, enjoyed with slight interruption by Spain in the 
early part of the sixteenth century, was most auspicious for 
this ; and the restless cavalier, who could no longer win

* Yet the nobles were not all backward in manifesting their disgust. 
When Charles would have eo]jfeiTed the famous Burgundian order of the 
Golden Fleece on the Count of Benaventc, tkat lord refused it, proudly 
telling him, ‘‘I am a Castilian. 1 desire no honours hut those of my 
own country, in my opinion, q[nite as good as — indeed, better than — those 
of any other.” — Sandoval, Historia de la Vida y Hechos del Emperador 
Carlos V., (Amhei’es, 1G81,) tom, i. p. 108.

SPAIN TTNDEE CHABLB8 T.

185

laurels on the fields of Africa and Europe, turned with eager- 
ness to the brilliant career opened to him beyond the ocean.SPAIN TTNDEE CHABLB8 T.

185

laurels on the fields of Africa and Europe, turned with eager- 
ness to the brilliant career opened to him beyond the ocean.

It is diflSicult for those of our time, as familiar from 
childhood with the most remote places on the globe as 
with those in their own neighbourhood, to pict^e to them- 
selves the feelings of the men who lived in the sixteenth 
century. The dread mystery, which had so lung hung over 
the great deep, had indeed been removed. It was no 
longer beset with the same undefined horrors as when 
Columbus launched his bold bark on its dark and unknown 
waters. A new and glorious world had been thrown open. 
But as to the precise spot where that world lay, its extent, 
its history, whether it were island or continent, — of all this, 
they had very vague and confused conceptions. Many, in 
their ignorance, blindly adopted the erroneous conclusion 
into which the great Admiral had been led by his superior 
scienccj — that the new countries were a part of Asia ; and, 
as the mariner wandered among the Bahamas, or steered 
his caravel across the Caribbean seas, he fancied he was 
inhaling the rich odours of the spice-i^ands in the Indian 
Ocean. Thus every fresh discovery, interpreted by this 
previous delusion, served to confirm him in his error, or, at 
least, to fill his mind with new perplexities.The career thus thrown open had all the fascinations of 
a desperate hazard, on which the adventurer staked all his 
hopes of fortune, fame, and life itself. It was not often, 
indeed, that he won the rich prize which he most coveted ; 
hut then he was sure to win the meed of glory, scarcely 
less dear to his chivalrous spirit ; and, if he survived to 
return to his home, he had wonderful storieif to recount, of 
perilous chances among the strange people he had visited, 
and the burning climes, whose raijt fertihity and magni- 
ficence of vegetation so far surpassed ftn;^thing he had 
witnessed in his own. These reports adde4 fresh fuel to

DISOOTmRY Of MEXICO.

[m

imaginations already wanned by the study of ^ those tales of 
chivalry which formed the favourite reading of the Spaniards 
at that period. Thus romance and reality acted on each 
other, and the soul of the Spaniard was exalted to that pitch 
of enthusia|m, which enabled him to encounter the terrible 
trials that lay in the path of the discoverer. Indeed, the 
life of the cavalier of that day was romance put into action. 
The story of his adventures in the New World forms one of 
the most remarkable pages in the history of man.Under this chivalrous spirit of enterprise, the progress of 
discovery had extended, by the beginning of Charles the 
Fifth’s reign, from the Bay of Honduras, along the winding 
shores of Darien, and the South American continent, to the 
Rio de la Plata. The mighty barrier of the Istliinus had 
been climbed, and the Pacific descried, by Nufiez de Balboa, 
second only to Columbus in this valiant band of “ ocean 
chivalry.” The Bahamas and Caribbee Islands had Hiteh 
explored, as well as the Peninsula of Florida on the northern 
continent. To this latter point Sebastian Oabot had arrived 
in his descent alon^the coast Labrador, in 1497. So 
that before 1518, the period when our narrative begins, the 
eastern borders of both the great continents had been aur^ 
veyed through nearly their whole extent. The shores of 
the great Mexican Gulf, however, sweeping with a wide 
circuit far into the interior, remained still concealed, with 
the rich realms that lay beyond, from the eye of the navi- 
gator. The time had now come for their discovery.

The business of colonisation had kept pace with that of 
discovery. In several of the islands, and in various parts 
of Terra Firma, and in Darien, settlements had been estab- 
lished, under the control of governors who afiected the 
state and authority «f viceroys. Grants of land were 
assigned to the colonists, on which tjjey raised the natural 
products of the soil, hut gave still more attention to the

SPAIN UNDEB OHABLBS V.

18 f

sugar-cane, imported from the Cananes. Sugar, indeed, 
together with the beautiful dye-woods of the country and 
the precious metals, formed almost the only articles of 
export in the infancy of the colonies, which had not yet 
introd.iced those other staples of the West Indian commerce, 
which, in our day, constitute its principal wealth. Yet the 
precious metals, painfully gleaned from a few tocantj sources, 
would have made poor returns, but for the gratuitous labour 
of the Indians’;The cruel system of repartimientos, or distribution of the 
Indians as slaves among the conquerors, had been sup- 
pressed by Isabella. Although subsequently countenanced 
by the government, it was under the most careful limita- 
tions. But it is impossible to license crime by halves, — to 
authorise injustice at all, and hope to regulate the measure 
of it. The eloquent remonstrances of the Dominicans, — 
who devoted themselves to the good work of conversion in 
the New World with the same zeal that they showed for 
persecution in the Old, — but, above all, those of Las Casas, 
induced tho regent Ximenes to send o«t a cofnmission with 
full powers to inquire into the alleged grievances, and to 
redress them. *[t had authority, moreover, to investigate 
the conduct of the civil officers, and to reform any abuses 
in their administration. This extraordinary commission- 
consisted of three Hieronymite friars and an eminent jurist, 
all men of learning and unblemished piety.

They conducted the inquiry in a very dispassionate 
manner ; but, after long deliberation, came to a conclusion 
most unfavourable to the demands of Las Caaas, who in- 
sisted on the entire freedom of the natives. ; This conclu- 
sion they justified on the grounds ^hat the Indians would 
not labour without compulsion, ^nd that, liuless they 
laboured, they could not be brought int^ communica- 
tion with tho whites, nor be converted tq Christianity.

DISOOVEEY OF MEXICO.DISOOVEEY OF MEXICO.

Whatever we may tlunk of this argumcBt, it was doubtlees 
urged with sincerity by its advocates, whose conduct 
through their whole administration places their motives 
above suspicion. They accompanied it with many careful 
provisions for the protection of the natives, — but in vain. 
The simple people, accustomed all their days to a life of 
indolence and ease, sunk under the oppressions of their 
masters, and the population wasted away with even more 
frightful rapidity than did the aborigines in our own country, 
under the operation of other causes. It is iiot necessary to 
pursue these details further, into which I have been led by 
the desire to put the reader in possession of the general 
policy and state of affairs in the New World, at the period 
when the present narrative begins.*

Of the islands, Cuba was the second discovered ; hut no 
attempt had been made to plant a colony there during tto 
lifetime of Columbus ; who, indeed, after skirting the wholo 
extent of its southern coast, died in the conviction that it 
was part of the continent. f At length, in 1511, J)iego, 
the son and successor of the “Admiral*’^ who still main- 
tained the seat of government in Qispaniola, finding the 
mines much exhausted there, propcicrt;|i> occupy the neigh- 
bouring island of Cuba, or F^mAndina, as it was called, in 
compliment to the Spanish monarch. { He prepared a small

* I will take the liberty to refer the reader, who is desirous of being 
more minutely acquainted with the Spanish colonial administration and the 
state of discovery previous to Charles V., to the History of the Reign of 
Ferdinand and Isabella,” (Part 2. ch. 9, 26,) where the subject is treated 
in extenso.

+ Sec the curious document attesting this, and drawn up by order of 
Columbus, ap. Navarrete, Coleccion de los Viages y de Descuhrimientos, 
(Madrid, 1025,) tom. ii. Col. Dipl., No. 76.+ Sec the curious document attesting this, and drawn up by order of 
Columbus, ap. Navarrete, Coleccion de los Viages y de Descuhrimientos, 
(Madrid, 1025,) tom. ii. Col. Dipl., No. 76.

4: The islapd was originally called, by Columbus, .Tuana, in honour of 
prince John, heir to the Castilian crown. After his death it received the 
name of Femaiidina, at the king^s desire. The Indian name has survived 
both.-^Herrera, Hist. General, dcscrip., cap. 6.

ommusLvmM.

fece for tke eonqtiest, i^hick k« t^l«r <l«i c<aaw»n4^ 
of Don Diego VelaiMitte® ; A man dtinribed hj a ms^m» 
porary, as “possessed of considerable experience in militaiy 
affairs, having served seventeen years in the Erropean wars ; 
as honest, illustrious by his lineage and reputation, covetous 
of glory, and somewhat more covetous of wealth.''* The 
portrait was sketched by no unfriendly hand.

Velasquez, or rather his lieutenant JSTarvaez, who took 
the office on himself of scouring the country, m’et with no 
serious opposition from the inhabitants, wbo were of the 
same family with the effeminate natives of Hispaniola. The 
conquest, through the merciful interposition of Las Casas, 
“the protector jof the Indians,” who accompanied the army 
in its march, was effected without much bloodshed. One 
chief, indeed, named Hatuey, having fled originally from 
St. Domingo to escape the oppression of its invaders, made 
a desperate resistance, for which he was condemned by 
Velasquez to be burned alive. It was he who made that 
memorable reply, more eloquent than a volume of invective. 
When urged at the stake to embrace Christianity, that his 
soul might find admission into heaven, he inquired if the 
white men would go there. On being answered in the 
affirmative, he exclaimed, “ Then I will not be a Christian ; 
for I would not go again to a place where I must find men 
so cruel !

After the conquest, Velasquez, now appointed governor,After the conquest, Velasquez, now appointed governor,

* Erat Didacus, ut hoc in loco de eo Bomel tWum dicamuB, yeteranus 
miles, rei militaris gnarus, quippe qui septem et decern annos in Hispania 
militiam excrcitus fuerat, homo probus, opibus, gen^M et fama clarus, 
honoris cupidus, pecuuia aliquanto cupidior.” — De Bwus Gestis Ferdi" 
nandi Cortesii, MS. •

■f* The story is told by Las Casas in his appalling record of the cruelties 
of his countrymen in the New World, which charity— apd common sense 
— may excuse us for believing the good father has greatly overcharged. — 
Brevissima Relacion de la Destruyeion de las Indias^ (Venetia, 1643,)

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

occupied himself with measures for promoting the 
of the Island. He formed a number of settle* 
ments, bearing the same names with the modem towns, 
and made St. Jago, on the south-east corner, the seat of 
government.* He invited settlers by liberal grants of land 
and slaves. He encouraged them to cultivate the soil, and 
gave particular attention to the sugar-cane, so profitable an 
article of commerce in later times. He was, above all, 
intent on working the gold mines, which promised better 
returns than those in Hispaniola. The aflfairs of his govern- 
ment did not prevent him, meanwhile, from casting many a 
wistful glance at the discoveries going forward on the con- 
tinent, and he longed for an opportunity to embark in these 
golden adventures himself. Fortune gave him the occasion 
he desired.An Jddalgo of Cuba, named Hernandez de Cordova, sailed 
with three vessels on an expedition to one of the neighbour- 
ing Bahama Islands, in quest of Indian slaves. (February 8, 
1517.) He encountered a successsion of heavy gales which 
drove him far out hf his course, and at the end of three 
weeks he found himself on a strange hut unknown coast. 
On landing and asking the name of the country, he was 
answered by the natives, ^^ Tectetan,^ meaning, I do not 
understand you,’’ — but which the Spaniards, misinterpret- 
ing into the name of the place, easily corrupted into Yucatan. 
Some writers give a different etymology. t Such mistakes,

* Among the most ancient of these establishments we find the Havana, 
Puerto del Principe, Trinidad, St. Salvador, and Matanzas, or Slaughter, 
so called from a massacre of the Spaniards there hy the Indians. — Bernal 
Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 3.

f Gomara, Historia de las^'lndias, cap. 52, ap. Barcia, tom. ii. Bernal 
Diaz says the word came from the vegetable yuca, and tale the name for a 
hillock in which it is planted. (Hist* de la Conquista, cap. 6.) M. 
Waldeck finds a much moiJe plausible derivation in the Indian word 
QuytmeJeatan, listen to what they say.”- — Voyage Piitoresque, p. 25.

prosperity

EXPEDITIONS TO YUCATAN.

191

however, were not uncommon with the early discoverers, 
and have been the origm of many a name on the American 
continent.*prosperity

EXPEDITIONS TO YUCATAN.

191

however, were not uncommon with the early discoverers, 
and have been the origm of many a name on the American 
continent.*

Cordova had landed on the north-eastern end of the 
peninsula, at Cape Catoche. He waS astonished at the size 
and solid material of the buildings constructed of stone and 
lime, so different from the frail tenements of reeds and 
rushes which formed the habitations of the islanders, lie 
was struck, also, with the higher cultivation of the soil, and 
with the delicate texture of the cotton garments and gold 
ornaments of the natives. Everything indicated a civilisation 
far superior to anything he had before witnessed in the New 
World. He saw the evidence of a different race, moreover, 
in the warlike spirit of the people. Rumours of the 
Spaniards had, perhaps, preceded them, as they were 
repeatedly asked if they came from the east 1 and wherever 
they landed, they were met with the most deadly hostility. 
Cordova himself, in one of his skirmishes with the Indians, 
received more than a dozen woimds, and one only of his 
party escaped unhurt. At length, whel! he had coasted the 
peninsula as far as Campeachy, he returned to Cuba, which 
he reached after an ^ absence of several months, having 
suffered all the extremities of ill, which these pioneers of 
the ocean were sometimes called to endure, and which 
none but the most courageous spirit could have survived. 
As it was, half the original number, consisting of one 
hundred and ten men, perished, including their brave com- 
mander, who died soon after his return. The reports he 
had brought back of the country, and, spl more, the* Two navigators, Solis and Pinzon, had ftescried the ^ast as far back 
as 1506, according to Herrera, though they had hot taken posseasion of it. 
(Hist. General, dec. l,lih. 6, cap. 17.) It is, indeed, rercaurkahle it shoiild 
80 long have eluded discovery, considering that it is hut two degrees 
distant from Cuba. <

192

BISOOVERY OF MEXICO.

specimens of cnriously wrought gold, conymoed Velasquez 
of the importance of this discovery, and he prepared with 
all despatch to avail himself of it.*

He accordingly fitted out a little squadron of four vessels 
for the newly-discoverftd lands, and placed it under the com- 
mand of his nephew, Juan de Grijalva, a man on whose 
probity, prudence, and attachnjent to himself he knew he 
could rely. The fleet left the port of St. Jago de Cuba, 
May 1, 1518.t It took the course pursued by Cordova, 
but was driven somewhat to the south, the first land that it 
made being the island of Cozumel. From this quarter 
Grijalva soon passed over to the continent and coasted the 
peninsula, touching at the same places as his predecessor. 
Everywhere he was struck, like him, with the evidences of 
a higher civilisation, especially in the architecture as he 
well might be, since this was the region of thdH ^elctra*^ 
ordinary remains which have become recently the swbject of 
so much speculation. He was astonished, also, nt the sight 
of large stone crosses, evidently obj^ts of worship, which 
he met with in vari6us places. Eemindad by these circum- 
Btances of his own country, he gave the peninsula the name 
“ New Spain,” a name since appropriated to a much wider 
extent of territory. ^

Wherever Grivalja landed, he experienced the same 
unfriendly reception as Cordova, though he suffered less,Wherever Grivalja landed, he experienced the same 
unfriendly reception as Cordova, though he suffered less,

• Oviedo, General y Natural Historia de las Indias, MS., lib. 33, cap, 1. 
— De Rebus Gestis^ MS. — Carta del Cabildo d© Vera Cruz, (July 10, 
1619,) MS. Bernal Diaz denies that the original object of the expedition, 
in which he took part, was to procure slaves, though Velasquez had proposed 
it. (Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 2.) But he is contradicted in this by the 
other contemporary records adbve cited.

•f* Itinemrio de la isola de luchathan, novamente ritrovata per il signor 
Joan de Grijalva, per il suo capellano, MS. The chaplain’s word may be 
taken for the date, which is usually put at the eighth of April,

De Rebus Gestis, MS. — Itinerario del Capellano, MS.

« EXPEDITIONS TO YUCATAN.

being better prepal^d to meet it. In th^,,feo de Tabasco 
or Grijalva, as it is often called, after he held an 
amicable conference with a chiej|^ who gii^ him a number 
of gold plates fashioned into a sort of Armour. As ho 
wound round the Me^^can coast, one of his captains, Pedlii^ 
de Alvarado, afterwdHs famous in the Conquest, enteredt^ 
river, to which he also left his own name. In a neighb4|fc 
ing stream, called the Eio de Vanderag, or “ Kiver^f 
Banners,” from the ensigns displayed by tjae natives onf^s 
borders, Grijalva had the first communication with |^e 
Mexicans themselves.The cacique who ruled over this province had received 
notice of the approach of the Europeans, and of their extra- 
ordi^aary appearance. He was anxious to collect all the 
information he could respecting them and the motives of 
their visS^ that he might transmit them to his master, the 
Aztec einperor.* A friendly conference took place between 
the parties on shore, where Grijalva landed with all his force, 
so as to make a suitable impression on the mind of the 
barbaric chief. The interview lasted norne hours, though,, 
as there was no one on cither side to interpret the language 
of the other, they could communicate only by signs. They, 
however, interchanged presents, and the Spaniards had the 
satisfaction of receiving, for a few worthless toys and 
trinkets, a rich treasure of jewels, gold ornaments and 
vessels, of the most fanfastic forme and workmanship. t

* According to the Spanish authorities, the cacique was sent with these 
presents from tho Mexican sovereign, who had received previous tidings 
of the approach of the Spaniards, I have followed SsJhagun, who ob- 
tained his intelligence directly from the natives. — Historia de laConquista, 
MS. cap. 2. •

+ Gomara has given the per and contra of this* neg^atiou, in which 
gold and jewels, of the value of fifteen or twenty thousimd pesos de oro, 
vrere exchanged for glass beads, pins, scissors, and other ^nkets common 
in an assorted cargo for savages. — Crdnica, cap. 6,

VOL. I.

0

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

194 ’VOL. I.

0

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

194 ’

-..Grijalva now thought that in this successful traffic — 
successful beyond his most sanguine expectations — he had 
accomplished the chief object of his mission. He steadily 
refused the solicitations of his followers to plant a colony on 
tlfe spot, — a work of no little difficulty in so populous and 
powerful a country as this appeared to be. To this, indeed, 
was inclined, but deemed it contrary to his instructions, 
v^ch limited him to barter with the natives. He therefore 
despatched Alvarado in one of the caravels back to Cuba, 
with the treasure and such intelligence as he had gleaned 
of the great empire in the interior, and •then pursued his 
voyage along the coast.

He toud^ed at St. Juan de Ulua, and at the Isla de los 
ASacriJicM^ BO called by him from the bloody remains of 
human victims found in one of the temples. He then held 
on his course as far as the province of Fanuco, ’?(^here 
ing some difficulty in doubling a boisterous headlitjfd, h© 
returned on his track, and after an absence jf n^rlj six 
months, reached Cuba in safety. Grijalvaf baa the glory of 
being the first navigp-tor who set foot on the Mexican soil, 
and opened an intercourse with the Aztecs.^

On reaching the island, he was surprised to learn that 
another and more formidable armament had been fitted out 
to follow up his own discovexies, and to find orders at the 
same time from the governor, couched in no very courteous 
language, to repair at once tp St. Jago, He was received 
by that personage, not merely with coldness, hut with 
reproaches for having neglected so fair an opportunity of 
establishing a colony in the country he had visited. 
Velasquez was one of those captious spirits, who, when 
things do not go exactly to their minds, are sure to shift the 
responsibility of the failure from their own shoulders, where 
it should lie, to those of others. He had an ungenerous

Itinerai'io de Capcllano, MS. — Carta de Vera Cruz, MS.Itinerai'io de Capcllano, MS. — Carta de Vera Cruz, MS.

EXPEDITIONS TO YUCATAN.

nature, says an old writer, credulous, and easily moved to 
suspicion.^ In the present instance it was most unmerited. 
Grijalva, naturally a modest, unassuming person, had acted 
in obedience to the instructions of his commander, given 
before sailing ; and had done this in opposition to his own 
judgment and the importunities of his followers. His conduct 
merited anything but censure from his employer.!

When Alvarado had returned to Cuba with his golden 
freight, and the accounts of the rich empire of Mexico which 
he had gathered from the natives, the heart of the governor 
swelled with rapture as he saw his dreams of avarice and 
ambition so likely to be realised. Impatient of the long 
absence of Grijalva, he despatched a vessel in search of him 
under the command of Olid, a cavalier, who took an import- 
Imt part afterwards in the Conquest. Finally he resolved 
to fit out lliother armament on a sufficient scale to insure the 
subjugation of the country.

He previously solicited authority for this from the Hiero- 
nymito comtn^eion in St. Domingo. He then despatched 
his chaplain to Spain with the royal *8hare of the gold 
brought from Mexico, and a full account of the intelligence 
gleaned there. He set forth his own manifold services, and 
solicited from the court full powers to go on with the con- 
quest and colonisation of the newly discovered regions. J

* “ Hombre de terrible condicion," says Hen’era, citing the good bishop 
of Chiapa, “para los que le Servian, i aiudaban, i que facilmente se in- 
dignaba contra aquellos.” — Hist. General, dec. 13^ lib. 3, ca|>. 10.

i* At least, such is the testimony of Las Oaaas, who knew both the parties 
well, and had often conversed with Grijalva upon his voyage. — Historia 
General de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 113.i* At least, such is the testimony of Las Oaaas, who knew both the parties 
well, and had often conversed with Grijalva upon his voyage. — Historia 
General de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 113.

! Itinerario del Capellano, MS. — Las Castfl, Hist, de Indias, MS., 
lib. 3, cap. 113. The most circumstantial account of Orijaiva’s expedition 
is to be found in the Itinerary chaplain above quoted. The original 
is lost, but an indifferent Italian version was published at Venice, in 1522. 
A copy, which belonged to Ferdinand Columbus, is still extant in the

DisooVBay Mexico.

Befote receiving an answer, he began his preparations for 
the armament, and, first of all, endeavoured to find a suitable 
person to share the expense of it, and to take the command. 
Such a person he found, after some difficulty and delay, in 
Hernando Cortes ; the man of all others best calculated 
to achieve this great enterprise, — the last man to whom 
Velasquez, could he have foreseen the results, would have 
confided it.

library of the great church of Seville. The hook had become so exceed- 
ingly rare, however, that the historiographer, Mufios, made a transcript of 
it with his Otm hand, and from his manuscript that in my possession was 
taken.

m

CHAPTEE II.

HERNANDO CORTES. — HIS EARLY IJPE.r- VISITS THE NEW WORLD. —

HIS RKSIDENCK IN CUBA. DIFFICULTIES WITH VELASQUEZ.

ARMADA INTRUSTED TO CORTES.

1518.

Hernando Cortes was born at Medellin, a town in the 
south-east corner of Estremadura, in 1485.* He came of 
an ancient and respectable family ; and historians have gra- 
tified the national vanity by tracing it up to the Lombard 
kings, whose descendants crossed the Pyrenees, and estab- 
lished themselves in Aragon under the Gothic monarchy.f 
This royal genealogy was not found out till Cortds had 
acquired a name which would confer distinction on any 
descent, however noble. His father, Martin Cortes de♦ Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 1. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de laConqnista, cap. 203. 
I find no more precise notice of the date of his birth; except, indeed^ by 
Pizurro y Orellana, who tells us “ that Cortds came into the world tlio same 
day that that infernal least, the false heretic Lather, entered it,— by way 
of compensation, no doubt, since the labours of the one to pull down the 
true faith were counterbalanced by those of the other to maintain and 
extend itl” (Varones Ilustres del Nuevo Mun'do, [Madrid, 1639,] p. 66.) 
But this statement of the ’good cavalier, which places the birth of our hero 
in 1483, looks rather more like a zeal for “the true faith,” than for 
historic. ^

Argensola, in particular, has bestowed great pains on the prosapia of 
the house of Cortds ; which he traces up, nothing doubting, to Names Cortds, 
king of Lombardy and Tuscany. — Anales de Aragon, (SJaragoza, 1630,) 
pp. 621-625. — Also, Caro de Torres, Historia de las Oxdenes Militares, 
(Madrid, 1629,) fol. 103.

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

Monroy, was a captain of infantry, in moderate circum- 
stances, but a man of unblemished honour ; and both ho 
and his wife, Doha Catalina Pizarro Altamirano, appear to 
have been much regarded for their excellent qualities.^In his infancy Cortes is said to have had a feeble consti- 
tution, which strengthened as he grew older. At fourteen, 
he was sent to Salamanca, as his father, who conceived 
great hopes from his quick and showy parts, proposed to 
educate him for the law, a profession whicli held out better 
inducements to the young aspirant than any other. The 
son, however, did not conform to these views. He showed 
little fondness for books, and after loitering away two ^ears 
at college, returned home, to the great chagrin of his 
parents. Yet his time had not been wholly mispont, since 
he had laid up a little store of Latin, and learned to write 
good, prose, and even verses '‘of some estimation, consider- 
ing’’ — as an old writer quaintly remarks — “ Corti^s -as the 
author.”! He now passed his days in the idle, unprofitable 
manner of one who, too wilful to be guided by ethers, pro- 
poses no object to hibsolf. His buoyant spirits were conti- 
nually breaking out in troublesome frolics and capricious 
humours, quite at variance with the orderly habits of his 
father’s household. He showed a particular inclination for 
the military profession, or rather for the life of adventure to 
which in those days it was sure to lead. And when, at the 
age of seventeen, he proposed to enrol himself under the

* De Rebus Gestis, MS. Las Casas, who hne^ the father, boars stronger 
testimony to his poverty than to his noble birth. Un escudoro,” he says 
of him, “ que yo conoci harto pobre y humilde, aunque Christiano, viejo 
y dizen que hidalgo,’''' — Hist.^e las Indias, MS.,’ lib. 3, cap. 27.

+ Argensola, Analos, p. 220. Las Casas and Bernal Diaz both state 
that he was Bachelor of Laws at Salamanca. (Hist, de las Iiidias, MS., 
nbi supra. — Hist de la Conquista, cap. 203.) The degree was given pro- 
bably in later life, when the University might feel a pride in claiming him 
among her sons.

HERNANDO CORt£s.

199HERNANDO CORt£s.

199

banners of tbe Great Captain, his parents, probably thinking 
a life of hardship and hazard abroad preferable to one of 
idleness at home, made no objection.

The youthful cavalier, however, hesitated whether to seek 
Ills fortunes under that victorious chief, or in the New World, 
where gold as well as glory was to be won, and where the 
very dangers had a mystery and romance in them inex- 
pressibly fascinating to a youthful fancy. It was in this 
direction, accordingly, that the hot spirits of that d^iy found 
a vent, especially from that part of the country where Cortds 
lived, the neighbourhood of Seville and Cadiz, the focus of 
nautical enterprise. He decided on this latter course, and 
an opportunity offer 0 <l in the splendid armament fitted out 
under Don Nicolas de Ovando, successor to Columbus. An 
unlucky accident defeated the purpose of Cortes.*

As he was scaling a high wall, one night, which gave 
him access to the apartment of a lady with whom he was 
engaged in an intrigue, the stones gave way, and ho was 
thrown down, with much violence and buried under the ruins. 
A severe contusion, though attended wilh no other serious 
consequences, confined him to his bed till after the departure 
of the fleet, t

Two years longer he remained at home, profiting little, 
as it would seem, from the lesson he had received. At 
length he availed himself of another opportunity presented 
by the departure of a small squadron of vessels bound to the 
Indian islands. He was nineteen years of age when he bade 
adieu to his native shgres in 1504, — the same year in which 
Spain lost the best and greatest in her long line of princes, 
Isabella the Catholic.

• * Do Rebus Gestis, MS. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 1.

+ De Rebus Gestis, MS. — Gomara, Ibid. — Argensola states tbe cause of 
bis detention concisely enough ; “ Suspendid el viaje, por enaniorado y 
poT quartanario.^^ — Anales, p. 621,

piscomnT OF Mexico.piscomnT OF Mexico.

vessel In which Cortc^s sailed was commanded by one 
Alonso Quintero. The fleet touched at the Canaries, as was 
common in the outward passage. While the other vessels 
wore detained there taking in supplies, Quintero secretly 
stole out by night from the island, with the design of 
reaching Hispaniola, and securing the market, before the 
arrival of his companions. A furious storm which he en- 
countered, however, dismasted his ship, and he was obliged 
to retur^ to port and refit. The convoy consented to wait 
for their unworthy partner, and after a short detention they 
all sailed in company again. But the faitliless Quintero, as 
they drew near the Islands, availed himself once more of the 
darkness of the night, to leave the squadron with the same 
purpose as before. Unluckily for him, he met with a suc- 
cession of heavy gales and head winds, which drove him 
from his course, and he wholly lost his reckdningt For many 
days the vessel was tossed about, and all on board , were 
filled with apprehensions, and no little indigtation against 
the author of their calamities. At length they were cheered 
one morning with tlie sight of a w^hite dove, which, w^earied 
by its flight, lighted on the topmast. • The biographers of 
Cortds speak of it as a miracle.* **’^ Fortunately it was no 
miracle, but a very natural ooetirrence, showing incontestably 
that they w^ere near land. In a short time, , by taking the 
direction of the bird’s flight, they reached the island of 
Hispaniola ; and, on coufing into port, the worthy master 
had the satisfaction to" find his companions arrived before 
him, and their cargoe# already sold.t

* Some thought it was the Holy Ghost in, the form of this dove ;* Some thought it was the Holy Ghost in, the form of this dove ;

Sanctum esse Spiritum, quil in illius alitis specie, ut mcestos et afflictos 
solaretur, venire emt dignatus;” (De RobusiGestis, MS. ;) a conjacture 
which seems very reasonable to Pizarro y Orellana, since tbe expedition 
was to redound so much to the spread of the Catholic faith, and the 
Castilian monarchy!” — Varones Ilustres, p. 70.

^ f Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 2. >

EESIDENCE IN CUBA.

201

Immediately on landing, Cortes repaired to the house of 
the governor, to whom he had been personally known in 
Spain. Ovando was absent on an expedition into the inte- 
rior, but the young man was kindly received by the secretary, 
who assured him there would he no doubt of his obtaining a 
liberal grant of land to settle on. “ But I came to get gold,” 
replied Cortds, “ not to till the soil like a peasant.”On the governor’s return, Cortes consented to give up his 
roving thoughts, at least for a time, as the other laboured to 
convince him that he would be more likely to realise his 
wishes from the slow, indeed, but sure, returns of hus- 
bandry, where the soil and thte labourers were a free gift to 
the planter, than by taking his chance in the lottery of 
adventure, in which there were so many blanks to a prize. 
He accordingly received a grant of land, with a reparti- 
miento of Indians, and was appointed notary of the town or 
settlement of Agua. His graver pursuits, however, did not 
prevent his indulgence of the amorous propensities which 
belong to the sunny clime where he was born ; and this 
frequently involved him in affairs of*honour, from which, 
though an expert swordsman, he carried away scars that 
accompanied him to his grave.* He occasionally, moreover, 
found the means of breaking up the monotony of his way of 
life by engaging in the military expeditions which, upder 
the command of Ovando’s lieutenant, Diego Velasquez, were 
employed to suppress the insurrections of the natives. In 
this school the young adventurer first studied the wild tactics 
of Indian warfare ; he became familiar with toil and danger, 
and with those deeds of cruelty which have too often, alas ! 
stained the bright scutcheons of the Castilian chivalry in the 
New World. He w^ only prevenfed by illness — a most for- 
tunate one, on this occasion,— from embarking in Nicuessa’s

Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquiata, cap, 203,

DISCOVERY Of MEXICO,

expedition, which furnished a tale of woe, not often matched 
in the annals of Spanish discovery. Providence reserved 
kim for higher ends.DISCOVERY Of MEXICO,

expedition, which furnished a tale of woe, not often matched 
in the annals of Spanish discovery. Providence reserved 
kim for higher ends.

At length, in 1511, when Velasquez undertook the con- 
quest of Cuba, Cort(^s willingly abandoned his quiet life for 
the stirring scenes there opened, and took part in the expe- 
dition. He displayed throughout the invasion an activity 
and courage that won him the approbation of the com- 
mander ; while his free and cordial manners, his good 
humour, and lively sallies of wit made him the favourite of 
the soldiers. “He gave little evidence, says a contem- 
porary, “ of the great qualitieswhieh he afterwards sliowed.” 
It is probable these qualities were not known to himself ; 
while to a common observer his careless manners and jocund 
repartees might well seem incompatible with anything serious 
or profound! as the real depth of the current is not sus- 
pected under the light play and sunny sparkling of the 
surface.*

After the reduction of the island, Cortds seems to have 
been held in great favour by* Velasquez, now appointed its 
governor. According to Las CasaSr he- was made one of his 
secretaries.! He still retained thife rsame fondness for gal- 
lantly, for which his handsome person afforded obvious 
advantages, but which had more than once brought him 
into trouble in earlier life; Among the families who had 
taken up their residence in Cuba was one of the name of 
Xuarez, from Granada in Old Spain. It consisted of a 
brother, and four sisters remarkable for their beauty. With 
one of them, named Catalina, the . susceptible heart of the

* De Rebus Gestis, MS. — Honiara, Crdnic^ cap. 3, 4. — Las Casas, 
Hist de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 27. *

•f* Hist de las Indias, MS., loc. cit Res omnes arduas difficilesque 
per Cortesium, quern in dies magis magisque amplectebatur, Vclasquius 
egit. Ex eo ducis favore et gratia magnd Cortesio invidia ost orta.’^ — 
Do Rebus Gestis, MS.DIFFICULTIES WITH VELASQUEZ.

203

joung soldier became enamoured.* How far the intimacy 
was carried, is not quite certain. But it appears he gave 
his promise to marry her, — a promise which, when the time 
came, and reason, it may he, had got the better of passion, 
he showed no alacrity in keeping. He resisted, indeed, all 
remonstrances to this effect from the lady’s family, hacked 
hy the governor, and somewhat sharpened, no doubt, in the 
latter by the particular interest he took in one of the fair 
sisters, who is said not to have repaid it with ingratitude.

Whether the rebuke of Valasquez, or some other cause 
of disgust, rankled in the breast of Cortes, he now became 
cold toward his patron, and connected himself with a dis- 
affected party tolerably numerous in the island. They were 
in the habit of meeting at his house and brooding over their 
causes of discontent, chiefly founded, it would appear, on 
what they conceived an ill requital of their services in the 
distribution of lands and offices. It may well be imagined, 
that it could have been no easy task for the ruler of one of 
these colonies, however discreet and well intentioned, to 
satisfy the indefinite cravings of speculafbrs and adventurers, 
who swarmed, like so many famished harpies, in the track 
of discovery in the New World.f

The malcontents determined to lay their grievances before 
the higher authorities in Hispaniola, from whom Velasquez 
had received his commission. The voyage was one of some 
hazard, as it was to be made in an open boat, across 
an arm of the sea, eighteen leagues wide ; and they fixed 
on Cortes, with whose fearless spirit they were well

* Solis has found a patent of nobility for this lady also , — ^ doncella noble 
yrccatada." (Historia de la Conquista de ^djico, [Paris, 1838,] lib. 1, 
cap. 9.) Las Casas treats l^ipr with less ceremony. " tJna hermana de un 
Juan Xuarez, gente pohre.^’ — Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib^ S, cap. 17.+ Gomara, Cr6nica, cap. 4. — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., ubi 
supra. — De Rebus Gestis, MS. — Memorial de Benito Martinez, capellan 
de D. Velasquez contra H. Cortes, MS.

DISCOTERY OF MEXICO.

acquainted, as the fittest man to undertake it. The con- 
spiracy got wind, and came to the governor’s ears before 
the departure of the envoy, whom he instantly caused to be 
seized, loaded with fetters, and placed in strict confinement. 
It is even said, he would have hung him, but for the inter- 
position of his friends.* The fact is not incredible. The 
governors of these little territories, having entire control 
over the fortunes of their subjects, enjoyed an authority far 
more despotic than that of the sovereign himself. They 
were generally men of rank and personal consideration ; the 
distance from the mother country withdrew their conduct 
from searching scrutiny, and, when that did occur, they 
usually had interest and means of corruption at command, 
sufficient to shield them from punishment. The Spanish 
colonial history, in its earlier stages, affords striking Instances 
of the extraordinary assumption and abuse of powers by 
these petty potentates ; and the sad fate of Vasquez Nunes 
de Balboa, the illustrious discoverer of the Pacific, though 
the most signal, is hy no means a solitary example^ that the 
greatest services cdlild be requited by persecution and an 
ignominious death.

The gov^or of Cuba, however, although irascible and 
suspicious in his nature, does not kemd to have been vindic- 
tive, nor particularly cruel, In the present instance, indeed, 
it may well be doubted Whether the blame would not be more 
reasonably charged on the -unfounded expectations of his 
followers than on himself.Cortes did not long remain in durance. He contrived 
to throw back one of the holts of his fetters ; and, after 
extricating his limbs, succeeded in forcing open a window 
with the irons so as to ifdmit of his escape. He was lodged 
mi the second floor of fhe building, and was able to let 
himself down to the pavement without injury, and unob-

* Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., ubi supra.

DIFFICULTIES WITH VELASQUEZ.

served. He then made the best of his way to a 
neighbouring church, where he claimed the privilege of 
sanctuary.

Velasquez, though incensed at his escape, was afraid to 
violate the sanctity of the place by employing force. But he 
stationed a guard in the . neighbourhood, with orders to 
seize the fugitive, if he should forget himself so far as to 
leave the sanctuary. In a few days this happened. Ab 
Cortes was carelessly standing without the walls in front of 
the building, an alguacil suddenly sprung on him from, 
behind and pinioned his arms, while others pushed in jind 
secured him. This man, whose name was Juan Escudero, 
was afterwards hung by Cortes for some offence in New 
Spain.*The unlucky prisoner was again put in irons, and carried 
•on board a vessel to sail the next morning for Hispaniola, 
there to undergo his trial. Fortune favoured him once 
Bi<)re. He succeeded after much difficulty and no little 
pain, in passing his feet through the rings which shackled 
them. He then came cautiously on deck, and, covered by 
the darkness of the night, stole quietly down the side of 
the ship into a boat that lay floating below. He pushed off 
from the vessel with hs little noise as possible.^ As he drew 
near the shore, the stream became rapid and turbulent. 
He hesitated to trust his boat to it ; and, as he was an 
excellent swimmer, prepared to breast it himself, and boldly 
plunged into the water. The current yyas strong, but the 
arm of a man struggling for life was jalDfcnger ; and after 
buffeting the waves till he was nearly exhausted, he suc- 
ceeded in gaining a landing*; when he sought refuge in 
the same sanctuary which had profteted him before. The 
facility with which Cortes a second time effected his escape,

^ Las Casas, Hist, de las Indlsfli, MS., loc. cit. — Memorial de Martinez, MS-

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

may lead one to doubt the fidelity of his guards ; who per- 
haps looked on him as the victim of persecution, and felt 
the influence of those popular manners which seem to 
have gained him friends in every society into which he was 
thrown.*For some reason not explained, — perhaps from policy, — 
he now relinquished his objections to the marriage with 
Catalina Xuarez. He thus secured the good offices of 
her family. Soon afterwards the governor himself relented, 
,and became reconciled to his unfortunate enemy. A strange 
story is told jn connection with this event. It is said, his 
proud spirit refused to accept the proffers of reconciliation 
made liim by Velasquez ; and that one evening, leaving the 
sanctuary, he presented himself unexpectedly before the 
latter in his own quarters, when on a military excm sion at 
some distance from the capital. The governor, startled by ; 
the sudden apparition of his enemy completely armojd 
before him, with some dismay inquired the meaning of 
Cortes answered by insisting on a full ’explanation of his 
previous conduct. After some hot^discuasion the interview 
terminated amicably ; the parties embraced, and, when a 
messenger Halved to announce the escape of Cort(?s, he 
found him in the apartments of his' Excellency, where, 
having retired to rest, both were actually sleeping in the 
same bed ! The anecdote is repeated without distrust by 
more than one biographer of Cortes. t It is not very 
probable, however, that a haughty irascible man like 
Velasquez should have given such uncommon proofs of

* Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 4. Herrera tells a silly story of his being 
unable to swim, and throwing Wmself on a plank, which, after being carried 
oat to sea, was washed ashore with him at flood tide. — Hist. General, 
dec. 1, lib. 9, cap. 8.

f Odmara, Crdnica, cap, 4. ® Coenat cubatque Cortesius cum Velasquio 
eodem inlecto, Qm postero die fupe Cortesii nuntius venerat, Velasquium 
et Cortesium juxta accubantes intuitus, miratur,” — De Rebus Gestis, MS,

•reconciliation with telasquez.•reconciliation with telasquez.

condescension and familiarity to one, so far beneath him in 
station, with whom he had been so recently in deadly 
feud ; nor, on the other hand, that Cortes should have had 
the silly temerity to brave the lion in his den, where a single 
nod would have sent him to the gibbet, — and that too with 
as little compunction or fear of consequences as would have 
attended the execution of an Indian slave.*

The reconciliation with the governor, however brought 
about, was permanent. Cortes, though not re-established 
in the office of secretary, received a liberal repartimiento of 
Indians, and an ample territory in the neighbourhood^ of 
St. Jago, of which he was soon after made alcalde. He 
now lived almost wholly on his estate, devoting himself to 
agriculture* with more zeal than formerly. He stocked his 
plantation with different kinds of cattle, some of which 
were first introduced by him into Cuba.t He wrought, 
also, the gold mines which fell to his share, and which in 
this island promised better returns than those in Hispaniola. 
By this course of industry he found himself in a few years 
master of some two or three thousand* caste^/anos, a large 
sum for one in his situation, God, who alone knows at 
what cost of Indian lives it was obtained,’^ e^plaims Las 
Casas, “will take account of it ! ” J His days glided smoothly 
away in these tranquil pursuits, and in the society of his

* Las Casas, who remembered Corte's at this time so poor and lowly 
that he would have gladly received any favour from the least of Velasquez’’ 
attendants,” treats the story of the bravado with contempt. ^ Por lo qual 
si (Velasquez) sintiera de Cortds nna punta de alfiler de cerviguillp 6 
presuncion, 6 lo ahorcara <5 d lo menos lo echara de la tierra y lo sumienv 
cn ella sin que alzara cabeza en su vida.” — Hist, de las Indlas, MS., lib. 
3, cap. 27. ^i* ‘‘ Pecuariam primus quoque habnit, in insuiamqne induxit omni 
pecorum genere ex Hispania petito,*’ — De Rebus Gestis, MS,

J “Los qne por sacarle el oro murieron Dios abrd tenido mejor 
cuenta que yo.” — Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib, 3, cap, 27. The text is 
a free translation.

DISCOVERT OP MEXICO.

Tamutiful who, however ineligible as a connexion, from 
the inferiority of her condition, appears to have fulfilled all 
the relations of a faithful and affectionate partner. Indeed, 
he was often heard to say at this time, as the good bishop 
above quoted remarks, “ that he lived as happily with her 
as if she had been the daughter of a duchess.” Fortune 
gave him the means in after life of verifying the truth of his 
assertion.*

Such was the state of things, when Alvarado returned 
with the tidings of Grijalva’s discoveries, and the rich fruits 
of his traffic with the natives. The news spread like wild- 
fire throughout the island ; for all saw in it the promise of 
more important results than any hitherto obtained. The 
governor, as already noticed, resolved to follow uj> the track 
of discovery with a more considerable armament ; and he 
looked around for a proper person to share the expense of it, 
and to take the command.

Several hidalgos presented themselves, whom, fl-om want 
of proper qualifications, or from his distrust of their ai^um- 
ing an independence of their employer, he, one after another, 
rejected. There were tw#perso|i» Sf Jagp in whom he 
placed great confidence, “-^niador de I^ares, the conta^or^ 
or royal treasurer,! and.his fewn stoetary, Andres de Duero. 
Cortes was also in close intiihiaey with both these persons ; and 
he availed himself of it to prevail on them to recommend him 
as a suitable person to be intrusted with the expedition. It 
is said, he reinforced the proposal, by promising a liberal* Estando conmigo, me lo dixo qtie estava tan contento con ella 
como si fuera hija de una Duquessa.*’— -Hist, de las Iiidias, MS., ubl 
supra. — Gomara, Crdnica, ca^. 4.

t The treasurer used to boast he bad passed some two and twenty 
years in the wars of Italy. He was a shrewd personage, and Las Casas, 
thinking that country a slippery school for morals, warned the governor, he 
says, more than once "to beware of the twenty-two years in Italy." — Hist, 
de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 113,

*abm:ada intrusted to cortes. soft

share of the proceeds of it. However this may he, the 
parties urged his selection by the governor with all the elo- 
quence of which they were capable. That officer had had 
ample experience of the capacity and courage of the candi- 
date. He knew, too, that he had acquired a fortune which 
would enable him to co-operate materially in fitting out the 
armament. His popularity in the island would speedily 
attract followers to his standard.* All past animosities had 
long since been buried in oblivion, and the confidence he 
was now to repose in him would insure his fidelity and 
gratitude. He lent a willing ear, therefore, to the recom- 
mendation of his counsellors, and, sending for Cortes, 
announced his purpose of making him captain-general of the 
armada.fCortds had now attained the object of his wishes, — ^the 
object for which his soul had panted, ever since he had set 
foot in the New World. He was no longer to be condemned 
to a life of mercenary drudgery ; nor to be cooped up within 
the precincts of a petty island ; but he was to be placed on 
a new and independent theatre of action, and a boundless 
perspective was opened to his vi^, which might satisfy not 
merely the wildest cravings of avarice, but, to a bold aspir- 
ing spirit like his, the far more importunate cravings of 
ambition. He fully appreciated the importance of the late 
discoveries, and read in them the existence, of the great 
empire in the far West, dark hints of which had floated 
from time to time in the islands, and of which more certain 
glimpses had been caught by those who had reached the

* “ Si ^ no fuera por Capitan, que no fuera la tercera parte de la gente 
que con fue.” — Declaracion do Puertocainero, MS. (Coruna, 30 d© 
Abril, 1529.)

+ Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 19. — De Rebut Gestis, MS. 
— Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 7. — Las Casas, Hist. General de lat Indias, MS., 
lib. 3, cap. 113.

VOL. I.

p

DISOOTERY OF MEXICO.

continent. This was the country intimated to thO Great 
Admiral” in his visit to Honduras in 1502, and which he 
might have reached, had he held on a northern course,, 
instead of striking to the south in quest of an imaginary 
strait. As it was, *‘he had but opened the gate,” to use 
his own bitter expression, for others to enteri” The time 
had at length come, when they were to enter it ; and the 
young adventurer, whose magic lance was to dissolve the 
spell which had so long hung over these mysterious regions, 
now Bt^d ready to assume the enterprise.this hour the deportment of Cortds seemed to 
undergo a change. His thoughts, instead of evaporating in 
empty levities or idle flashes of merriment, were wholly con- 
centrated on the great object to which he was devoted. 
His elastic spirits were shown in cheering and stimulating 
the companions of his toilsome duties, and he was roused to 
a generous enthusiasm, of which even those who knew hijh 
best had not conceived him capable. He applied ^t <mce aJl 
the money in his possession to fitting oit the armambht* 
He raised more ky the mortgage his estates, and by 
giving his obligations to some ‘yfe^thy merchants of the 
place, who relied for their reh^hiirsement on the success of 
the expedition j and, whe^hte* own credit was exhausted, he 
availed himself of that cf his friends.

The funds (bus acquired he expended in the purchase of 
vessels, provisions, ,'and military stores, while he invited 
recruits by offers of assistance to such as were too poor to 
provide for themselves, and by the additional promise of a 
liberal share of the anticipated'profits.^

All was now hustle and excitement in the little town of 
St. Jago. Some wefe busy in refitting the vessels and 
getting them ready for the voyage ; some in providing naval

• Declaracion de Puertocarrero, MS. — Carta de Vera Criiz, MS. — 
f Probanza eii la Villa Segura, MS. (4 de Oct., 1620.)

* ARMADA INTRUSTED TO CORTES. 211

stores ; Others in converting their own estates into money in 
order to equip themselves ; every one seemed anxious to 
contribute in some way or other to the success of the expe- 
dition. Six ships, some of them of a large size, had already 
been procured ; and three hundred recruits enrolled them- 
selves in the course of a few days, eager to seek their 
fortunes under the banner of this daring and popular 
chieftain.How far the governor contributed towards the expenses of 
the outfit, is not very clear. If the friends of Cortes are to 
be believed, nearly the whole burden fell on him ; since, 
while he supplied the squadron without remuneration, the 
governor sold many of his own stores at an exorbitant 
profit.* Yet it does not seem probable that Velasquez, 
with such ample means at his command, should have thrown 
on his deputy the burden of the expedition ; nor that the 
latter, had he done so, could have been in a condition to 
meet these expenses, amounting, as we are told, to more 
than twenty thousand gold ducats. Still it cannot be denied 
that an ambitious man like Cortes, who ^as to reap all the 
glory of the enterprise, would very naturally be less solicit- 
ous to count the gains of it, than his employer, who, inactive

* The letter from the Municipality of Vera Cruz, after stating that 
Velasquez hofe only one third of the original expense, adds, “ Y sepan 
Vras- Magestades que la mayor parte de la dicha tercia parte que el dicho 
Diego Velasquez gast6 en hacer la dicha armada fud, emplear sus dineros 
en vinos y cn ropas, y en otras cosas de poco valor paxa nos lo vender ncA 
en mucha mas cantidad de lo qu# 4 dl le costd, por manera que podemos 
decir que entre nosotros los EBpa3|ftle8 vasallos de Vra®. Beales Altezas 
ha hecho Diego Velasquez su rew^te y granosea de sus dineros cobrandoloa 
inuy bien/’ — (Carta de Vera Ornz, MS.) Buertocairero ;^d Montejo, 
also, in their depositions taken in Spain, bpth^speak of Cdvt^ having fur- 
nished two thirds of the cost of the Rotilla. (Declaracion de Fnertocarrero, 
MS. — Declaracion de Montejo, MS.) [29 de Abril, 1520.J The letter 
from Vera Cruz, however, was prepared under the eye of Citds ; and tlio 
lost two were his confidential oflacers.

y2

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

2 * 1 ^

ai HJid having no laurels to win, must lool: on they2

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

2 * 1 ^

ai HJid having no laurels to win, must lool: on the

pecuniary profits as his only recompense. The question 
gave rise, some years later, to a furious litigation between 
the parties, with which it is not necessary at present to 
embarrass the reader.

It is due to Velasquez to state, that the instructions 
delivered by him for the conduct of the expedition cannot 
be charged with a narrow or mercenary spirit. The first 
object of the voyage was to find Grijalva, after which the 
two commanders were to proceed in company together. 
Reports been brought bach by Cordova, on his return 
from thB ^rst visit to Yucatan, that six Christians were said 
to bo lingering in captivity in the interior of the country. 
It was supposed they might belong to the party of the unfor- 
tunate Nicuessa, and orders were given to find them out, if 
possible, and restore them to liberty. But the great object 
of the expedition was barter with the natives. In pursuing 
this, special care was to be taken that they should receive 
no wrong, but be treated with kindness and humanity. 
Cortes wks to hear in mind, above all things, that the object 
which the Spanish monarch had most at heart was the con- 
version of the Indians. He was to impress on them the 
grandeur and goodness of his royal master, to invite them 
** to give in their allegiance to him, and to manifest it by 
regaling him with such comfortable preseiita gkUd, pearls, 
and precious stones as, by showing tiiehr good-will, 
would secure his favour and protoetidn.” He was to make 
an accurate survey of the.epife^J|junding its bays and inlets 
for the benefit of future; He was to acquaint

himself with the natur«i,^|5p^<fe!%^|^ country, with the 
character of its dififerenf ’^ibir.iiiBtitutions and progress 
in civilisation ; and he was hj' send home minute accounts of 
all these, together with such articles as he should obtain in 
Ms intercourse with them. Finally, he was to take the* ARMADA. INTRUSTED TO OORTES. 213

most careful care to omit nothing that might redound to the 
service of God or his sovereign.^

Such was the general tenor of the instructions given to 
Cort6s, and they must be admitted to provide for the interests 
of science and humanity, as well as for those which had 
reference only to a commercial speculation. It may seem 
strange, considering the discontent shown by Velasquez 
with his former captain, Grijalva, for not colonising, that no 
directions should have been given to that effect here. But 
he had not yet received from Spain the warrant for investing 
his agents with such powers ; and that which had bqpn 
obtained from the Hieronymite fathers in Hispaniola con- 
ceded only the right to traffic with the natives. The com* 
mission at the same time recognised the authority of Cortes 
as Captain General of the expedition, t

* The instrument, in the original Castilian, 'will be found in Ajpj>endix, 
Part 2, No. 5. It is often referred to by writers who never saw it, as the 
Agreement between Cortes and Velasquez. It is, in fact, only the instnic- 
tions given by this latter to his officer, who was no party t(f it.

f Declaracion do Puertocarrero, MS. — Gomafa, Crdnica, cap. 7.— 
Velasquez soon after obtained from the crown authority to colonise the new 
countries, with the title of adelantado over them. The instrument was 
dated at Barcelona, Nov. 13th, 1518. (Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, 
lib. 3, cap. 8.) Empty privileges ! Las Casas gives a caustic etymology 
of the title of adelantado, so often granted to the Spanish discoverers. 
“ Adelantados porque se adelantaran en hazer males y danos tan gravisimos 
A gentes pacificas.” — Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 11 7.

2U

CHAPTER III.

JEALOUSY OF TELASQUEZ.—CORTfes EMBARKS.— EIJUIPMENT OF HIS 
FLEET. — HIS PERSON AND CHiVRACTER. — RENDEZVOUS AT HAVANA. 
—STRENGTH OF HIS ARMAMENT.

1519.2U

CHAPTER III.

JEALOUSY OF TELASQUEZ.—CORTfes EMBARKS.— EIJUIPMENT OF HIS 
FLEET. — HIS PERSON AND CHiVRACTER. — RENDEZVOUS AT HAVANA. 
—STRENGTH OF HIS ARMAMENT.

1519.

Tiie importance given to Cortes by his new position, and 
perhaps, a somewhat more lofty bearing, gradually gave 
uneasiness to the naturally suspicious temper of Velai^ijuez, 
who became apprehensire that his officer, when away where 
he would have the power, might also have <iie inclination, 
to throw off his dependence on him altogether. An acci- 
dental circumstancS at this time heightened these suspicions. 
A mad fellow, his jester, one of those crack-brained wits, — 
half wit, half fool, — who formed in those days a common 
appendage to every great man’s establishment, called out to 
|he governor, as he was taking his usual walk one morning 
with Cortds towards the port, “ Have a care, master 
Velasquez, or we shall have to go a hunting, some day or 
nther, after this same pf ours!’* ‘‘Do you hear

what the rogue says ? ’ governor to his com- 
paniop. “ Do not hed^^|^|^^i^Cortes, “ he is a saucy 
knave, and deserves arjgoW'^ktpp&g.’’ The words sunk 
deep, however, in the ‘mlid' Veiisquez, — as, indeed, tnie 
jests are apt to stick.

There were not wanting persons about his Excellency, 
who fanned the latent embers of jealousy into a blaze.

CORTES E1CBARK3*

215

These worthy gentlemen, some of them kinsmen of 
Vdasquez, who probably felt their own deserts somewhat 
thrown into the shade by the rising fortunes of Cortds, 
reminded the governor of his ancient quarrel with that 
officer, and of the little probability that affronts so keenly 
felt at the time could ever be forgotten. By these and 
similar suggestions, and by misconstructions of the present 
conduct of Cort(^s, they wrought on the passions of Velasquez 
to such a degree,, that he resolved to intrust tlie expedition 
to other hands.*He communicated his design to his confidential advisers, 
Lares and Duero, and these trusty personages reported it 
without delay to Cortes, although, “ to a man of half his 
penetration,” says Las Oasas, “ the thing would have been 
readily divined from the governor’s altered demeanour.” t 
The two functionaries advised their friend to expedite 
matters as much as possible, and to lose no time in getting 
his fleet ready for sea, if he would retain the command of it. 
Cortes showed the same prompt decision on this occasion, 
which more than once afterwards in a gjhnilar crisis gave the 
direction to his destiny.

He had liot yet got his complement of men, nor of vessels ; 
and was very inadequately provided with supplies of any 
kind. But he i^esolved to weigh anchor that very night. 
He waited on his officers, informed them of his purpose, and 
probably of the cause of it ; and at midnight, when the

* “ Detetre^at,” says the biographer, “ eum Cortesii natura

imperii avida, fiducia sui 'iftmius sumptus in classo parandA.

Timere itaquo Velasquius CjOepit, cum e& classe iret, nihil ad se

vel honoris vel lucri reditva^.’* — De Be^fes Gestis, Bernal Diaz,

Hist, de la Conquista, cap.rfs. — L m CAsIfei, Hist, de las Indias, MS., 
cap. 114.

f “ Cortds no avia menester mas para entendello de mirar el gesto & 
Diego Velasquez segun su astuta vivcza y mundana sahi^urla. — Hist, de 
las Indias, MS., cap. 114.

DISCOVERY OP MEXICO.

town was hushed in deep, they all went quietly on board, 
and the little squadron dropped down the bay. First, how- 
ever, Cortt?s had visited the person whose business it was to 
supply the place with meat, and relieved him of all his stock 
on hand, notwithstanding his complaini that the city must 
suffer for it on the morrow, leaving him, at the same time, 
in payment, a massive gold chain of much value, which he 
wore round his neck,*Great was the amazement Of the good citizens of St. Jago, 
when, at dawn, they saw that the fleet, which they knew 
was so ill prepared for the voyage, had left its moorings and 
was busily getting under way. The tidings soon came to 
the ears of his Excellency, who, springing from his bed, 
hastily dressed himself, mounted his horse, and, followed by 
his retinue, galloped down to the quay. Cortes, as soon as 
he descried their approach, entered an armed boat, and 
came within speaking distance of the shore. And is it thus 
you part from me!” exclaimed Velasquez; oourleous 
way of taking leave, truly!” '^Pardon mey” answered 
Cort(^s, “ time presLes, and there are some things that 
should be done before they are even thought of. Has your 
Excellency any commands ? ” the mortifled governor 
had no commands to give ; 4 Wid Cortes, politely waving his 
hand, returned to his '^^ssel, and the .fleet instantly 
made sail for the port of Macaca, about ’i|fteen leagues dis- 
tant. (November 18, 1516.) Velasquez* rode back to his 
house to digest his chagrin as he best might ; satisfied, 
probably, that be had made at least two blunders ; one in 
appointing Cortes to the command, — the other in attempt- 
ing to deprive him of it. For, if it he true, that by giving 
oilV confidence by halved, we can scarcely hope to make a

* Las Casas had the story from Cortes' own mouth. — Hist, de las 
Indias, MS., cap, 114. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap, 7. — De Rebus Gestis, MS.

BQUI^KT OP HIS FLEET. 217

friend, it is equally true, that, by withdrawing it when given, ' 
we shall make an enemy.*BQUI^KT OP HIS FLEET. 217

friend, it is equally true, that, by withdrawing it when given, ' 
we shall make an enemy.*

This cJandestine departure of Cortes has been severely 
criticised by some writers, especially by Las Casas.t Yet 
much may be urged in vindication of his conduct. He had 
been appointed to the command by the voluntary act of the 
governor, and this had been fully ratified by the authorities 
of Hispaniola. He had at once devoted all his resources to 
the undertaking, incurring, indeed, a heavy debt in addition. 
He was now to be deprived of his commission, without any 
misconduct having been alleged or at least proved against 
him. Such an event must overwhelm him in irretrievable ruin, 
to say nothing of the friends from whom he had so largely 
borrowed, and the followers who had embarked their fortunes 
in the expedition on the faith of his commanding it. There 
are few persons, probably, who under these circumstances 
would have felt called tamely to acquiesce in the sacrifice of 
their hopes to a groundless and arbitrary whim. The most 
to have been expected from Cortes was, that he should feel 
obliged to provide faithfully for the interests of his employer 
in the conduct of the enterprise. How far he felt the force 
of this obligation will appear in the sequel.

From Macaoa, where Cortes laid in such stores as he 
could obtain from the royal farms, and which, he said, heFrom Macaoa, where Cortes laid in such stores as he 
could obtain from the royal farms, and which, he said, he

* Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS. cap. 114. — Herrera, Hist. General, 
dec. 2, lib. 3, cap. 12. 80118,^110 followa Bernal Diaz in saying that Cortes 
parted openly and amicably from Velasquez, seems to consider it a great 
slander on the character of the former to suppose that he wanted to break 
with the governor so soon, when he had received so little provocation. 
(Conquista, lib, 1. cap. 10.) But it is not necessary to suppose that Cortes 
intended a rupture with his employer by tl^s clandestine movement ; but 
only to secure himself in the command. At all events, the text conforms 
in every particular to the statement of Las Casas, who, as he knew both the 
parties well, and resided on the island at the time, had ainple means of 
information.

f Hist, de las Indias, MS.) cap. 114.

DISCNOVEEt OP HEtlCO.f Hist, de las Indias, MS.) cap. 114.

DISCNOVEEt OP HEtlCO.

as a loan from the king/* he proceeded io 
TOmoad,: a more considerable town, on the southern coast 
of Cuba. Here he landed, and erecting his standard in 
front of his quarters, made proclamation, with liberal offers 
to all who would join the expedition. Volunteers came in 
daily, and among them more than a hundred of Grijalra’s 
men, just returned from their Toy age, and willing to follow 
up the discovery under an enterprising leader. The fame of 
Cortes attracted, also, a number of cavaliers of family and 
distinction, some of whom, having accompanied Grijalva, 
bro^ht much information valuable for the present expedi- 
tion. Among these hidalgos may be mentioned Pedro do 
Alvarado and his brothers, Cristoval de Olid, Alonso de 
Avila, Juan* Velasquez de Leon, a near relation of the 
governor, Alonso Hernandez de Puertocarrero, and Gonzalo 
de Sandoval, — all of them men who took a most important 
part in the Conquest. Their presence was of great moment, 
as giving consideration to the enterprise ; and, when they 
entered the little camp of the adventurers, the latter turned 
out to welcome thetti amidst lively strains of music and 
joyous salvos of artillery.

Cortds meanwhile was active ja purchasing military stores 
and provisions. Learning that' Sk trading vessel laden with 
grain and other commodities for the mines was off the coast, 
he ordered out one of his caravels to seize her and bring her 
into port. He paid the master in bills for both cargo and 
ship, and even persuaded this man, named Sedeho, who was 
wealthy, to join his fortunes to the expedition. He also 
despatched one of his officers, Diego de Ordaz, in quest of 
another ship, of which he had tidings, with instructions to 
seize it in like manner, and to meet him with it off Cape St. 
Antonio, the westerly point of the island.* By this he* Las Casas had this also from the lips of Cortes in later life. Todo 
esto me dixo cl mismo Cortes, con otras cosas cerca dello despues de

EQiriPiiBjirT OF wm fisibt.

2ti

effected Another object, that of getting rid of Ordaz, who 
WAS one of ihe governor’s household, and an inconyenient 
spy on his own actions.

While thus occupied, letters from Yol^^squez were received 
by the commander*of Trinidad, requiring him to seize the 
person of Cortes, and to detain him, as he had been de|X>sed 
from the command of the fleet, which was given to another^ 
This functionary communicated his instructions to the prin- 
cipal officers in the expedition, who counselled him not to 
make the attempt, as it would undoubtedly lead to a com* 
motion among the soldiers, that might end in laying the 
town in ashes. Verdugo thought it prudent to eonfom to 
this advice.*

As Cortes was willing to strengthen himself by still fur- 
ther reinforcements, he ordered Alvarado with a small body 
of men to march across the country to the Havana, while he 
himself would sail round the westerly point of the island, 
and meet him there with the squadron. In this port he 
again displayed his standard, making the usual proclamation. 
He caused all the large guns to be brought on shore, and, 
with the small arms and cross-bows, to be put in order. As 
there was abundance of cotton raised in this neighbourhood, 
he had the jackets of the soldiers thickly quilted with it, for 
a defence against the Indian arrows, from which the troops 
in the former expeditions had grievously suffered. He dis- 
tributed his men into eleven companies, each under the 
command of an experienced officer ; and it was observed, 
that, although several of the cavaliers in the service were 
the personal fnends and even kinsmen of Velasquez, he

appeared to treat them all with perfect confidence.

•

Marques ; reindo y mofando 6 con estas fomales palabras,appeared to treat them all with perfect confidence.

•

Marques ; reindo y mofando 6 con estas fomales palabras,

Ala mi fee anduhe por alU como v/n, gentil osa/rioJ ^ — de las Indias, 
MS., cap. 115.

* De Rebus Gestis, MS. — Gomani, Ordnica, cap. 8.— Las Casas, Hist, 
de las Indias, MS., cap. 114, 1 15. .

DISCOYERY OF MEXICO.

His principal standard was of black velvet embroidered 
with, gold, and emblazoned with a red cross amidst flames 
of blue and white, with this motto in Latin bbneath :

Friends, let us follow the Cross ; and under this sign, if 
we have faith, we shall conquer.'' He ‘now assumed more 
State in his own person and way of living, introducing a 
greater number of domestics and officers into his household, 
and placing it on a footing becoming a man of high station. 
This state he maintained through the rest of his life.*Cortes at this time was thirty-three, or perhaps thirty-four 
years of age. In stature he was rather above the middle 
size. His complexion was pale ; and his large dark eye 
gave an expression of gravity to his countenance, not to 
have been expected in onei of his cheerful temperament. 
His figure was slender, at least until later life *, but his chest 
was deep, his shoulders broad, his frame muscular and well- 
proportioned. It presented the union of agility and vigour 
which qualified him to excel in fencing, horsemanship, and 
the other generous exercises of chivalry. In his diet he wflto 
temperate, careless 6f what he ate, and drinking little ; 
while to toil and privation he seemed perfectly indifferent. 
His dress, for he did not disdain the impression produced by 
such adventitious 'aids, was sit^ as to set off his handsome 
person to advantage ; neither gaudy nor striking, but rich. 
He wore few ornaments, and usually the same ; but those 
were of great price. His manners, frank and soldier-like, 
concealed a most cool and calculating spirit. With his gayest 
humour there mingled a settled air of resolution, which made 
those who approached him feel they must obey ; and which 
infused something like awe into the attachment of his most

* Bemal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 24.-— Do Rebus Gestis, MS. 
— Gomara, CrCnica, cap. 8. — Las Casas, Hist, de lasindias, MS., cap. 115. 
The legend on the standard was, doubtless, suggested by that on the laharum, 
— the sacred banner of Constantine.

HIS PERSON AND CHARACTER, 22^

devoted followers. Such r combination, in which love was 
tempered bj authority, was the one probably best calculated 
to inspire devotion in the rough and turbulent spirits among 
whom his lot was to be cast.The character of Cort<?s seems to have undergone some 
change with change of circumstances ; or to speak more 
correctly, the new scenes in which he was placed called 
forth qualities which before lay dormant in his bosonf. 
There are some hardy natures that require the heats of 
excited action to unfold their energies ; like the plants, 
which, closed to the mild influence of a temperate latitude, 
come to their full growth, and give forth their fruits, only in 
the burning atmosphere of the tropics. — Such is the portrait 
left to us by his contemporaries of this remarkable man ; the 
instrument selected by Providence to scatter terror among 
the barbarian monarchs of the Western world, and lay their 
empires in the dust ! *

Before the preparations were fully completed at the 
Havana, the commander of the place, Don Pedro Barba, 
received despatches from Velasquez ordering him to appre- 
hend Cortes, and to prevent the departure of his vessels ; 
while another epistle from the same source was delivered to 
Cortes hiniself,. requesting him to postpone his voyage till 
the governor could- communicate with him, as he proposed, 
in person. ‘‘Never,'' exclaims Las Casas, “did I see so 
little knowledge of affairs shown, as in this letter of Diego 
Velasquez,--^that he should have imagined, that a man, who 
had BO re<lSeptly put such an affront on him, would defer 
his departure at his bidding !’'t It was, indeed, hoping to

* The most minute notices of the perso%and habits of Cortd^s are to be 
gathered from the narrative of the old cavalier Bernal Diax, who served so 
long under him, and from Gomara, the goneraVs chaplain. See in par- 
ticular the last chapter of Gomara’s Crdnica, and cap. 203 the Hist, de 
la Conquista.

t Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., cap. 115. ^

DISCOVERT OP MEXICO.

%tay the flight of the arrow* by a word, after it had left 
ib^bow.t Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., cap. 115. ^

DISCOVERT OP MEXICO.

%tay the flight of the arrow* by a word, after it had left 
ib^bow.

The captain-general, however, during his short stay had 
entirely conciliated the good will of Barba. And, if that 
officer had had the inclination, he knew he had not the 
power, to enforce his principal’s orders, in the face of a 
resolute soldiery, incensed at this ungenerous persecution of 
their commander, and all of whom,” in the words of the 
honest chronicler who bore part in the expedition, “ officers 
and privates, would have cheerfully laid down their lives for 
him.”* Barba contented himself, therefore, with explaining 
to Velapqtil the impracticability of the attempt, and at the 
same til||#"endeavoured to trauquillise his apprehensions by 
assertii^ his own confidence in the fidelity of Cortds. To 
this the latter added a communication of his own, couched 
“ in the soft terms he knew so well how to use,”f in which 
he implored his Excellency to rely on his devotion to his 
interests, and concluded with the comfortable assurance 
that he and the whole fleet, God willing, wonlil 
the following morning.

Accordingly on the 10th of February,^ 1619, the littli* 
squadron got under way, and directed^ it# eomm towards 
Cape St. Antonio, the appointed place ^ teni^viw* When 
all were brought together, ,the Vessels #ere found to be 
eleven in number; one of them, in which Cortls himself 
went, was of a hundred burden, thr^e others were 
from seventy to eighty tons, the remainder Were caravels 
and open brigantines. THe while was put undeJ^ the direc- 
tion of Antonio de Alamltm®, pilot ; a veteran navi-

gator, who had acted as pilot to Columbus in his last voyage, 
and to CordoYj^ and Grijalva in the former expeditions to 
Yucatan.

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de k Conquiata, cap. 24.

f Ibid,, loc. cit.

STRENGTH OP HIS ARMimENT.

223* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de k Conquiata, cap. 24.

f Ibid,, loc. cit.

STRENGTH OP HIS ARMimENT.

223

Landing on the Cape and mustering his forces, Cortes 
found they amounted to one hundred and ten mariners, fiye 
hundred and fifty-three soldiers, including thirty-two cross- 
bow-men, and thirteen arquebusiers, besides two hundred 
Indians of the island, and a few Indian women for menial 
offices. He was provided with ten heavy guns, four lighter 
pieces called falconets, and with a good supply of ammuni- 
tion.* He had, besides, sixteen horses. They were not 
easily procured ; for the difficulty of transporting them 
across the ocean in the flimsy craft of that day made them 
rare and incredibly dear in the island8.t But Cortes right- 
fully estimated the importance of cavalry, however sm^l in 
number, both for their actual service in the field, and for 
striking terror into the savages. With so paltry a force did 
he enter on a conquest which even his stout heart must 
have shrunk from attempting with such means, had he but 
foreseen half its real difficulties I

Before embarking, Cortes addressed his soldiers in a

* Bcra^.! Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 26. There is some dis- 
crepancy among authorities, in regard to the numbers of the army. The 
Letter from l^era Cruz, which should have been exact, speaks in round 
terms of only four hundred soldiers. (Carta dc Vera Cruz, MS.) Velasquez 
himself, in a ^nappnication to the chief judge of Hispaniola, states the 
number at sbff hundred. (Carta de Diego Velasquez al Lie. Figueroa, MS.) 
I have adopted the estimates of Bernal Diaz, who, in his long service 
seems to have become intimately acquainted with every one of his 
comrades, their persons, and private history.t Incredibly dear, indeed, since from thb statements contained in the 
depositions at Villa Segura, it appears that the cost of the horses for the 
expedition was from four to five liindred peSOB de oro each ! " Si saben 
quo de cahellos que el dicho Senor Capitan General Hernando Cortds ha 
comprado para servir en la dicha Conquista, que son diez 6 ocho, que le han 
coBtado a quatrociontos cinquenta 6 5 quinipntos pesos ha pagado, d que 
deve mas de ocho mil pesos de oro dellos.” (Prohanza e|i Villa Segura, MS.) 
The estimation of these horses is sufiBciently shown by thie minute infor- 
mation Bernal Diaz has thought proper to give of every one of them ; minute 
enough for the pages of a sporting calendar. — See Hist, de la Conquista, 
cap. 23.

224

DIBCOTERT OF MEXICO.

short but animated harangue. He told them they were 
about to enter on a noble enterprise; one that would make 
their name famous to after ages. He was leading them to 
countries more vast and opulent than any yet visited by 
Europeans. “I hold out to you a glorious prize, con- 
tinued the orator, “ but it is to be won by incessant toil. 
Great things are achieved only by great exertions, and 
glory was never the reward of sloth. ^ If I have laboured 
hwrd and staked my all on this undertaking, it is for the 
love of tl^t renown, which is the noblest recompense of 
man. But, if any among you covet riches more, be but 
true^’to me, as I will be true to you and to the occasion, 
and I will make you masters of such as our countrymen 
have never dreamed of ! You are few in number, but strong 
in resolution ; and, if this does not falter, doubt not but that 
the Almighty, who has never deserted the Spaniard in hiB 
contest with the infidel, will shield you, though encompas^^’ 
by a cloud of enemies ; for your cause is a just ^dyou are to fight under the banner of the Oross^ GbiorWard 
then,” he concluded, “with alacrity and cOnfiderice, and 
carry to a glorious issue the work so auspiciously begun. t 
The rough eloquence of the general, touching the various 
chords of ambition, avarice, and religious zeal, sent , a thrill 
through the bosoms of his martial audience ; and, receiving 
it with acclamations, they deemed eager to press forward 
under a chief who kM^them not so much to battle,

as to triumph. ‘

Cort<^s was well aatisSw to'.pnd his own enthusiasm so

* lo VOS propongo grinAw taw emtueltos en grandea trabajos ;

pero la vertud ne quiere ociosidad.^* (Gomara, Grdnica, cap. 9.) It is the 
thoug'ht BO finely expressed by^^homson :

“ For sluggard’s brow the laurel never grows ;

Renown is not the child of indolent repose.”

*f* The text is a very condensed abridgment of the original speech of 
Cortds, or of his chaplain, as the case may be.— See it in Gomara, Crdnica, 
cap. 9.

STRENGTH OF HIS ARMAMENT. 225

largely shared by his followers. Mass was then celebrated 
with the solemnities usu^ with the Spanish navigators, 
when entering on their voyages of discovery. The fleet was 
placed under the immediate protection of St. Peter, the 
patron saint of Cortes ; and, weighing anchor, took its 
departure on the eighteenth day of February, 1519, for the 
coast of Yucatan.** Las Casas, Hist, do las Indias, MS., cap. 1 15. — Gomara, Crdnica,cap. 
10. — De Rebus Gestis, MS. " Tantus fuit armorum apparatus,'’' exclaims 
the author of the last work, ‘‘quo afterum terrarum orbem bellis Cor- 
tesius cocnutit ; * ex tam parvis opibus tantum imperium Carolo facit ; 
aperitque omnium primus Hispanas genti Hispaniam novam ! ” The a\sthor 
of this work is unknown. It seems to have been part of a great com- 
pilation, “ De Orbe Novo,"' written, probably, on the plan of a series of 
biographical sketches, as the introduction speaks of a life of Columbus pre- 
ceding this of Cortda. It was composed, as it states, while many of the 
old conquerors were still surviving, and is addressed to the son of Cortes. 
The historian, therefore, had ample means of verifying the truth of his 
own statements, although they too often betray, in his partiality for his hero, 
influence of the patronage under which the work was produced. It runs 
into a prolixity of detail, which, however tedious, has its Uses in a contem- 
porary document. Unluckily, only the first book was finished, or, at least 
has survived ; terminating with the events of this Chapter. It is written in 
Latin, in a pure and perspicuous style ; and is conjectured with some plausi- 
bility to he the work of Calvet de Estrella, Chronicler of the Indies. 
The original exists in the Archives of Simancas, where it was discovered and 
transcribed by Muiios, from whose copy that in my library was taken.

VOL. I.

226

CHAPTER IV.

VOYAGE TO COZO^XL. — CONVERSION OF THE NATIVES. — JERONIMO DE 
AGUTLAR^rrrARMY ARRIVES AT TABASCO.— GREAT BATTLE WITH 
THE INBIANS. — CHRISTIANITY INTRODUCED.

^ 1519 .VOL. I.

226

CHAPTER IV.

VOYAGE TO COZO^XL. — CONVERSION OF THE NATIVES. — JERONIMO DE 
AGUTLAR^rrrARMY ARRIVES AT TABASCO.— GREAT BATTLE WITH 
THE INBIANS. — CHRISTIANITY INTRODUCED.

^ 1519 .

Orders were given for the vessels to keep as near together 
as possible, and to take the direction of the capitana, or 
admiral’s ship, which carried a beacon-light in the stern 
during the night. But the weather, which had been 
able, changed soon after their departure, and one ofth^se 
tempests set in, which at this season are often found- in the 
latitudes of the West Indies. It fell with terrible lofbe on 
the little navy, scattering it far asunder, dismantling some 
of the ships, and driving them all eensiderably south of 
their proposed destination.

Cortes, who had lingered behind ^ convoy a disabled 
vessel, reached the island of Cozumel last. On landing, he 
learned that one of hie. ^captains, Pedro de Alvai^do, had 
availed himself of tlSS^ori time he had been there, to 
enter the temples? ri&C' them of their few ornaments* and, 
by his violent conduct, so 'fi| to terrify the sithple natives, 
that they had fied f# reftig© into the interior of the island. 
Cortes, highly incased at these rash proceedings, so contrary 
to the policy he had jprJposed, could not refrain from severely 
reprimanding his officer in the presence of the army. He 
commanded two Indian captives, taken by Alvarado, to be 
brought before him, and explained to them the pacific pur-

TOYAGU TO COZUMEL.

227TOYAGU TO COZUMEL.

227

pose of his visit. This he did through the assistance of his 
interpreter, Melchorejo, a native of Yucatan, who had been 
brought back by Grijalva, and who, during his residence in 
Cuba, had picked up some acquaintance with the Castilian. 
He then dismissed them loaded with presents, and with an 
invitation to their countrymen to return to their homes 
without fear of further annoyance. This humane policy 
succeeded. The fugitives, reassured, were not slow in 
coming back ; and an amicable intercourse was established, 
in which Spanish cutlery and trinkets were exchanged for 
the gold ornaments of the natives ; a traffic in which each 
party congratulated itself — a philosopher might think with 
equal reason — on outwitting the other.

The first object of Coates was, to gather tidings of the 
unfortunate Christians who were reported to be still linger- 
ing in captivity on the neighbouring continent. From some 
traders in the islands, he obtained such a confirmation of 
the report, that he sent Diego de Ordaz with two brigantines 
to thccopposite coast of Yucatan, with instructions to remain 
there eight days. Some Indians went dfe messengers in the 
vessels,*' who consented to bear a letter to the captives, in- 
forming them of the arrival of their countrymen in Cozumel, 
with a liberal ransom for tlieir release. Meanwhile the 
general proposed to make an excursion to the different parts 
of the island, that he might give employment to the restless 
spirits of the soldiers, and albeii^iu 4he resources of the 
counfry.

It was poor and thinly peopled.^ Bht everywhere he 
recognised the vestiges of a higher civilisation than what 
he had before witnessed in the Indian islands. The houses 
were some of them large, and often fiuilt of stone and lime. 
He was particularly struck with the temples, in which were 
towers constructed of the same solid materials^ and rising 
several stories in height.

n2

DISOOVBBY OP ICEXIOO.n2

DISOOVBBY OP ICEXIOO.

In tbe court of one of these he was amazed by the. sight 
of a cross, of stone and lime, about ten palms high. It was 
the emblem of the God of rain. Its appearance suggested 
the wildest conjectures, not merely to tne unlettered sol- 
diers, but subsequently to the European scholar, who specu- 
lated on the character of the races that had introduced there 
the sacred symbol of Christianity. But no such inference, 
as we shall see hereafter, could be warranted.* Yet it must 
be regarded as a curious filet, that the Cross should have 
been venerated as the object of religious worship both in 
the New World, and in regions of the Old, where the light 
of Christianity had never risen. f

The next object of Cortes was to reclaim the natives from 
their gross idolatry, and to substitute a purer form of 
worship. In accomplishing this he was prepared to use 
force, if milder measures should bo ineffectual. There was 
nothing which the Spanish government had more earnestly 
at heart, than the conversion of the Indians. It forms the 
constant burden of their instructions, and gave to tlje mi]|-

» ' .

* See Appendix, Part 1, No. ],. Note 27.,

+ Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Bernal Diaz, ftiiat. dfe la Conqiiista, cap. 
26. et seq. — ^Gotnara, Crdnica, cap. Ift* 1®^— -Lai Casas, Hist, dfe las Indias, 
MS., lib. 3, cap. 1 15.— Herrera,, dec. 2, lib. 4, cap. 6. —

Mai'tyr, de Insulis nuper P- While these

pages were passing through the pptes, but not till two years after they 
were written, Mr. Stepheils* ' ftnportant and interesting volumes appeared, 
containing the account second eatpedition to Yucatan. In thelatter part of the work, h« desijribes his visit to Cozumel, now ah unin- 
habited island covered with impenetrable forests. Near the shore he saw 
the remains of ancient hi4h^n structures, which he conceives may possibly 
have been the same that met the eyes of Grijalva and Cortes, and which 
suggest to him some important inferences. He is led into further reflec- 
tions on the existence of^he cross as a symbol of worship among the 
islanders. (Incidents of Travel in Yucatan, [New^ork, 1843,] vol. ii. 
chap. 20.) As the discussion of these matters would lead me too far 
from the track of our narrative, I shall take occasion to return to them 
hereafter, when I treat of the architectural remains of the country.

coKvmmoN # IsrAfitEs. 2^9coKvmmoN # IsrAfitEs. 2^9

tary expeditions in this Western Hemisphere somewhat of 
the air’of a crusade. The cavalier who embarked in them 
entered fully into these chivalrous and devotional feelings. 
No doubt was entertained of the efficacy of conversion, 
however sudden might be the change, or however violent 
the means. The sword was a good argument, when the 
tongue failed ; and the spread of Mahometanim nad ilown 
that seeds sown by the hand of ^violence, far from per^Hlibg 
in the ground, would spring u^nd bear fruit to after fllme. 
If this were so in a bad cause, how much more would it be 
true in a good one ! The Spanish cavalier felt he had a 
high mission to accomplish as a soldier of the Cross. How- 
ever unauthorised or unrighteous the war into which he had 
entered may seem to us, to him it was a holy war. He was 
in arms against the infidel. Not to care for the soul of his 
benighted enemy was to put his own in jeopardy. The 
conversion of a single soul might cover a multitude of sinS. 
It was not for morals that he was concerned, but for 
the faith. Tljjs, though understood in its most literal and 
limited sense, comprehended the whole Icheme of Christian 
morality. Whoever died in the faith, however immoral had 
been his life, might be said to die in the Lord. Such was 
the creed of the Castilian knight of that day, as imbibed 
from the preachings of the pulpit, from cloisters and colleges 
at home, from monks and missionaries abroad, — from all 
save one, whose devotion, kindled at a purer source, was 
not, alas ! permitted to send forth its radiance far.; into the 
thick gloom by which he was encompassed.*

No one partook more fully of the feelings ab^wlescribed 
than Hernan Cortc^s. He was, in truth, the veryljalrror of the 
times in which he lived, reflecting its motley characteristics,

* See the biographical sketch of the good bishop Las Ga^, the “ Pro- 
tector of the Indians/* in the Postscript at the close of the present 
Book.* See the biographical sketch of the good bishop Las Ga^, the “ Pro- 
tector of the Indians/* in the Postscript at the close of the present 
Book.

DISCOVERY OF MEJQOO.

its speculative devotion, and practical licence, — but with 
an intensity all his own. He was greatly scandalised at 
the exhibition of the idolatrous practices of the people of 
Cozumel, though untainted, as it would seem, with human 
sacrifices. He endeavoured to persuade them to embrace a 
better faith, through the agency of two ecclesiastics who 
atteuHed the expedition, — the licentiate Juan Diaz and 
fathef^Bartolom^ de 01m edO/ The latter of these godly 
men^s^ifforded the rare exa^le — rare in any age — of the 
union of fervent zeal with charity, while he beautifully 
illustrated in his own conduct the precepts which he taught. 
He remained with the army through the whole expedition, 
and by his wise and benevolent counsels was often enabled 
to mitigate the cruelties of the Conquerors, and to turn aside 
the edge of the sword from the unfortunate natives.

Tliese two missionaries vainly laboured to persuade the 
people of Cozumel to renounce their abominations, and to 
allow the Indian idols, in which the Christians recognissfid 
the true lineaments of Satan, ^ to be thrown down and 
demolished. The ^mple natives, filled with^orror at the 
proposed profanation, exclaimed that these were the gods 
who sent them the sunshine and the storm, and, should any 
violence be offered, they would be sure to avenge it by 
sending their lightnings on the heads of its perpetrators.

Cortes was probably nut much of a polemic. At all 
events, he preferred op the present occasion action to argu- 
ment ; and thought that the b^t way to convince the Indians 
of their error was to prove the falsehood of the prediction. 
He accordingly, without further ceremony, caused the vene- 
rated images to be rolled down the stairs of the great 
temple, am^st the groans and lamentations of the natives.• ” Fuese que el Demonio se les aparecia como es, y dejaba en su 
imagiimcion aquellas espccies; con qne seria primorosa imitacion del 
artifice la fealdad del Biinulacro.” — Solis, Conquista, p. 39.

CONVERSION OP THE NATIVES.^ 231

An altar was hastily constructed, an image of the Virgin 
and Child placed over it, and mass was performed by father 
Olmedo and his reverend companion for the first time '^i^ithin 
the walls of a temple in New Spain. The patient mimsters 
tried once more to pour the light of the gospel into the 
benighted understandings of the islanders, and to expound 
the mysteries of the Catholic faith. The Indian interpreter 
must have afibrded rather a dubious channel for the trans- 
mission of such abstruse doJtrines. But they at length 
found favour with their auditors, who, whether overawed by 
the bold bearing of the invaders, or convinced of the impo- 
tence of deities that could not shield their own shrines from 
violation, now consented to embrace Christianity.*

While Cortes was thus occupied with the triumphs of the 
Cross, he received intelligence that Ordaz had returned from 
Yucatan without tidings of the Spanish captives. Though 
much chagrined, the general did not choose to postpone 
longer his departure from Cozumel. The fleet had been 
well stored with provisions by the friendly inhabitants, and, 
embarking hfs troops, Cortes, in the beginning of March, 
took leave of its hospitable shores. The squadron had not* Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 13. — Herrera, 
Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 4, cap. 7. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chicli. MS., cap. 
78, Las Casas whose enlightened views in religion would have done 
honour to the present age, insists on the futility of these forced conver- 
sions, by which it is proposed in a few^days to wean men from the idolatry 
which they had been taught to reverence from the cradle. The only 
way of doing this,’’ he says, “ is, by long, assiduous, and faithful preach- 
ing, until the heathen shall gather some ideas of the true nature of the 
Deity, and of the doctrines they are to embrace. Above all, the lives of 
the Christians should be such as to exemplify the truth of these doctrines, 
that, seeing this, the poor Indian may glorif|r the Father, and acknowledge 
him, who has such worshippers, for thq true and only God.”— feee the 
original remarks, which I quote m extensOf as a good specimen of the 
Bishop’s style, wlien kindled by his subject into eloquence, in Appendix, 
Part2iNo,Q, *

DISCOVERT GV MEXICO.

proceeded far, however, before a leak in one of the vessels 
compelled them to return to the same port. The detention 
was attended with important consequences ; so much so, 
indeed, that a writer of the time discerns in it ** a great 
mystery and a miracle.” *Soon after landing, a canoe with several Indians was 
seen making i^s way from the neighbouring shores of 
Yucatan. On reaching the island, one of the men inquired, 
in broken Castilian, “ if he #ere among Christians ; ” and, 
being answered in the affirmative, threw himself on his 
knees and returned thanks to Heaven for his delivery. He 
was* one of the unfortunate captives for whose fate so much 
interest had been felt. His name was Jeronimo de Aguilar, 
a native of Ecija, in Old Spain, where he had been regularly 
educated for the church. He had been established with the 
colony at Darien, and on a voyage from that place to Hispa- 
niola, eight years previous, was wrecked near the coast of 
Yucatan. He escaped with several of his companions in 
the ship’s boat, where some perished from hunger and 
exposure, while others were sacrificed, on tteir reaching 
land, by the cannibal natives of the peninsula. Aguilar 
was preserved from the same dismal fate by escaping into 
the interior, where he fell into the hands of a powerful 
cacique, who, though he spared his life, treated him at first 
with great rigour. The patience of the captive, however, 
and his singular humility, toijKshed the better feelings of the 
chieftain, who would have persuaded Aguilar to take a wife 
among his people, but the ecclesiastic steadily refused, in 
obedience to his vows. This admirable constancy excited 
the distrust of the cacique, who put his virtue to a severe 
test by various temptations, and much of the same sort 
as those with which the ‘devil is said to have assailed

* “ Muy gran miaterio y milagro de DioB.”— Carta de Vera Cruz, MS.

JERONIMO DB AGTiaAR.

233* “ Muy gran miaterio y milagro de DioB.”— Carta de Vera Cruz, MS.

JERONIMO DB AGTiaAR.

233

St. Anthony;* From all these fiery trials, however, like his 
ghostly predecessor, he came .out unscorched. Continence 
is too rare and difficult a virtue with barbarians, not to 
challenge their veneration, and the practice of it has made 
the reputation of more than one saint in the Old as well as 
the New World. Aguilar was now intrusted with the care 
of his master’s household and his numerous wives. Se was 
a man of discretion, as well as virtue ; and his counsels were 
found so salutary, that he was consulted on all important 
matters.. In short, Aguilar became a great man among the 
Indians.

It was with much regret, therefore, that his master 
received the proposals for his return to his countrymen, to 
which nothing but the rich treasure of glass beads, hawk 
bells, and other jewels of like value, sent for his ransom, 
would have induced him to consent. When Aguilar reached 
the coast, there had been so much delay, that the brigan- 
tines had sailed, and it was owing to the fortunate return of 
the fleet to Cozumel, that he was enabled to join it.

On appearing before Cortes, the poor man saluted him 
in the Indian style, by touching the earth with his hand, 
and carrying it to his head. The commander, raising him 
up, affectionately embraced him, covering him at the same 
time with his own cloak, as Aguilar was simply clad in the 
habiliments of the country, somewhat too scanty fdt a 
European eye. It was long, indeed, before the tastes 
which he had acquired in the freedom of the forest could be 
reconciled to the constraints either of dress or manners♦ They are enumerated by Herrera ■with a minuteness which may 
claim, at least, the merit of giving a mtch higher nation of Aguilar’s 
virtue than the barren generalities of the text. (Hist, General, dec. 2, 
lib. 4, cap. 6-8.) The story is prettily told by Washington Irving. — 
Voyages and Discoveries of the Companions of Columbus^(London, 1833,) 
p. 263, ct seq. .

2^34 DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

imposed by tbe artificial forma of civilisation. Aguilar’s 
long residence in tbe county bad familiarised him with 
the Mayan dialects of Yucatan, and, as he gradually 
revived his Castilian, be became of essential importance as 
an interpreter. Cortes saw the advantage of this from the 
first, but be could not fully estimate all the consequences 
that wwe to flow from it.**^

The repairs of the vessels being at length completed, the 
Spanish commander once more took leave of the friendly 
natives of Cozumel, and set sail on the 4th of. March. 
Keeping 'as near as possible to the coast of Yucatan, he 
doulfled Cape Catocbe, and with flowing sheets swept down 
the broad bay of Campeachy, fringed with tbe rich dye- 
woods which have since furnished so important an article 
of commerce to Europe. He passed Potonchan, where 
Cordova had experienced a rough reception from tbe natives; 
and soon after reached the mouth of the Eio de Tabasco, 
or Grijaha, in which tliat navigator had carried on so 
lucrative a traffic. Though mindful of the great object of 
his voyage, — the visit to the Aztec territories, — be was 
desirous of acquainting himself with the resources of this 
country, and determined to ascend the river and visit tbe 
great town on its borders.The water was so shallow, from the accumulation of sand 
at the mouth of the stream, that the generfiil was obliged t& 
leave the ships at anchor, and to embark in the boats with 
a part only of bis forces. The banks were thickly studded 
with mangrove trees, that, with their roots shooting up and 
interlacing one another, formed a. kiud of impervious screen 
or net* work, behind which the dark forms of the natives

'4

* Camargo, Historia d© TloscaU, MS. — Oviedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS., 
lib. 33, cap. 1,--Mai’tyr, I)e Insulis, p. 347. — Bemol Diaz, Hist, de la 
Conquista, cap. 29 . — Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Las Casas, Hist, de las 
Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 115, 116.

ARMY ARRITES AT TABASCO.

235

were seen glancing to and fro with the most menacing looks 
and gestures. Cortds, much surprised at these unfriendly 
demonstrations, so unlike what he had had reason to expwt, 
moved cautiously up the stream. When he had reached an 
open place, where a large number of Indians were assembled, 
he asked, through his interpreter, leave to land, explaining 
at the same time his amicable intentions. But the Indians, 
brandishing their weapons, answered only with gestures cf 
angry defiance. Though much chagrined, Cortet^s thought 
it best not to, urge the matter further that evening, but 
withdrew to a neighbouring island, i^where he disembarked 
his troops, resolved to effect a landing on the foll^ing 
morning.When day broke, the Spaniards saw the opposite banks 
lined with a much more numerous array than on the pre- 
ceding evening, while the canoes along the shore were filled 
with bands of armed warriors. Cortes now made his pre- 
parations for the attack. He first landed a detachment of 
a hundred men under Alonso de Avila, at a point somewhat 
lower down the stream, sheltered by a«»thick grove of palms, 
from which a road, as he knew, led to the town of Tabasco, 
giving orders to his officer to march at once on the place, 
while he himself advanced to assault it in front.*

Then embarking the remainder of his troops, Cortes 
crossed the river in face of the enemy ; but, before com- 
mencing hostilities, that he might “ act with entire regard 
to justice, and in obedience to the instructions of the Royal 
Council,’' t he first caused proclamation to be made through

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conqmsta, cap. 31.— -Osrta de Vera Cruzf 
MS. — Gomara, Cr6nira, cap. 18. — Las C^as, Hist, de las ladias, MS., 
lib. 3, cap. 118. — Martyr, De Insulis, p. 348. There, are some discre- 
pancies between the statements of Bernal Diaz, and the Letter from Vera 
Cruz ; both by parties who were present.

t Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, la Oonquista, 
cap. 31.

WSOOVEBT OP MEXICO.

• ^ ^ ^ , V!,

Hie interpreter, that he desired only a free passage for his 
men ; and that he proposed to revive the friendly relations 
which had formerly subsisted between his countrymen and 
the natives. He assured them that if blood were spilt, the 
sin would lie on their heads, and that resistance would be 
useless, since he was resolved at all hazards to take up his 
quarters that night in the town of Tabasco. This procla- 
mation, delivered in lofty tone, and duly recorded by the 
notary, was answered by the Indians — who might possibly 
have comprehended one word in ten of it — with shouts of 
defiance and a shower of arrows.*Cortes, having now complied with all the requisitions of a 
loyal cavalier, and shifted the responsibility from his own 
shoulders to those of the Royal Council, brought his boats 
alongside of the Indian canoes. They grappled fiercely 
together, and both parties were soon in the water, which 
rose tSbove the girdle. The struggle was not long, though 
desperate. The superior strength of the Europeans pre- 
vailed, and they forced the enemy back to land. Here, 
however, they were •supported by their countrymen, who 
showered down darts, arrows, and blazing billets of wood on

• *‘Sce,” exclaims the Bishop .of Chiapa, in his caustic vein, "the 
reasoiiahleuess of this ‘requisition,’ or, to speak more cprrectly, the folly 
and insensibility of the Royal Council who could fin^ in the refusal of the 
Indians to receive it, a good pretext for war.” (Hist, de las Indias, MS., 
lib. 3, cap. 118.) In another place, he pronouBces itm animated invective 
against the iniquity of those who covered up hotUllties under this empty 
form of words, the import of which was utterly incomprehensible to the 
barbarians. (Ibid., hb. 3, cap. 57.) The iamous formula, used by the 
ij^panish Conquerors on this occasion, wae drawn up by Dr. Palacios 
Reubios, a man of letters, and a member of the King’s council, “ But I 
laugh at him and his letters,” exclaims Oviedo, “ if he thought a word of 
it could he comprehended by the untutored Indians ! ” (Hist de las Ind., 
MS., lib. 29, cap. 7.) The regulmr Manifesto, reqmrimiento, may he 
found translated in the concluding pages of Irving’s “ Voyages of the 
Companions of Columbus.”

237

ARMY ARRIVES AT TABASOb,

the heads of the invaders. The hanks were soft and 
slippery, and it was with difficulty the soldiers made gocd 
their footing. Cortes lost a sandal in the mud, but con- 
tinued to fight barefoot, with great exposure of his person, 
as the Indians, who soon singled out the leader, called to 
one another, Strike at the chief! **At length the Spaniards gained the bank, and were able 
to come into something like order, when they opened a brisk 
fire from their arquebuses and crossbows. The enemy, 
astounded by the roar and flash of the firearms, of which 
they had had no experience, fell ha»k, and retreated behind 
a breastwork of timber thrown across the way. ^ The 
Spaniards, hot in the pursuit, soon carried these rude 
defences, and drove the Tabascans before them towards the 
town, where they again took shelter behind their palisades.

Meanwhile Avila had arrived from the opposite qu|rter, 
and the natives taken by surprise made no further a^mpt 
at resistance, but abandoned the place to the Christians. 
They had previously removed their families and effects. 
Some provisions fell into the hands o^ the victots, but little 
gold, “ a circumstance,” says Las Casas, “ which gave them 
no particular satisfaction.” * It was a very populous place. 
The houses were mostly of mud ; the better sort of stone 
and lime ; affording proofs in the inhabitants of a superior 
refinement to that found in the islands, as their stout 
resistance had given evidence of superior valour.t

* “ Hallaronlas llenas de maiz e gallinas y otros vastimentos, oro nm- 
guno, de lo que ellos no resci vision inucho plazer.*’ — ^Hist. de las Ind., 
MS., ubi supra.

f Peter Martyr gives a glowing picture of this Iinflaa capital. “ Ad 
fluminls ripam protentum dicunt esse oppiftum, quantum non ausim dicere ; 
mille quingentorum passuum, ait Alaminus nauclerus, et domorum quinque 
ac viginti millium : stringunt alij, ingens tamen falentur et celebre. 
Hortis intersecantur domus, quae sunt egregie la/pidihm et mice fahvefactcSf 
Tnuiximd industrid et a/rchitectorum arteJ** . (De Insulis, p. 349.) With

m^vmr m mxim.m^vmr m mxim.

Cartes, having thus made himself master of the town, 
took formal possession of it for the crown of Castile. He 
gave three cuts with his sword on a large ceiba tree, which 
grew in the place, and proclaimed aloud, that he took pos- 
session of the city in the name and behalf of the Catholic 
sovereigns, and would maintain and defend the same with 
sword and buckler against all who should gainsay it. The 
same vaunting declaration was also made by the soldiers, 
and the whole was duly recorded and attested by the notary. 
This was the usual simple but chivalric form, with which 
the Spanish cavaliers asserted the royal title to the con- 
quered territories in the New World. It was a good title, 
doubtless, against the claims of any other European 
potentate.

The general took up his quarters that night in the court- 
yard of the principal temple. He posted his sentinels, and 
took iall the precautions practised in wars with a civilised 
foe. Indeed, there was reason for them, A suspicious 
silence seemed to reign through the place and its neighbour- 
hood ; and tidings Vero brought that the interpreter, 
Melchorejo, had fled, leaving his Spanish dress hanging on 
a tree. Cortes was disquieted by the desertion of this man 
who would not only inform his countrymen of the small 
number of the Spaniards, but dissipate any illusions that 
might be entertained of their superior nacres.

On the following morning, as no traces of the enemy were 
visible, Cortes ordered out a detachment under Alvarado, 
and another under Francisco de Lujo, to reconnoitre. The

hia usual inquisitive spirit, he gleaned all the particulars from the old 
pilot Alaminos, and from two o% the officers of Cortm who revisited Spain 
in the course of that year. Tabasco was in the neighbourhood of those 
ruined cities of Yucatan, which have lately been the theme of so much 
speculation. The encomiums of Martyr are not so remarkable as the 
apathy of other contemporary chroniclers.latter officer had not advanced a league, before he learned 
the position ef the Indians, by their attaekmg him in such 
force that he was fain to take shelter in a large stone build- 
ing, where he was closely besieged. Fortunately the loud 
yells of the assailants, like most barbarous nations, seeking 
to strike terror by . their ferocious cries, reached the ears of 
Alvarado and his men, who, speedily advancing to the relief 
of their comrades, enabled them to force a passage through 
the enemy. Both parties retreated, closely pursued, on the 
town, when Corti^s, marching out to their support, compelled 
the Tabascans to retire.

A few prisoners were takeii in^ this skirmish. By them 
Cortds found his worst apprehensions verified. The country 
was everywhere in arms. A force consisting of many thou- 
sands had assembled from the neighbouring provinces, and 
a general assault was resolved on for the next day. To the 
general’s inquiries why he had been received in so different 
a manner from his predecessor, Grijalva, they answered, 
that “ the conduct of the Tabascans then had given great 
ofience to the other Indian tribes, who taxed them with 
treachery and cowardice ; so that they had promised, on 
any return of the white men, to resist them in the same 
manner as their neighbours had done/’ *

Cortt^s might now well regret that he had allowed himself 
to deviate from the direct object of his enterprise, and to 
become entangled in a doubtful war which could lead to no 
profitable result. But it was too late to repent. He had 
taken the, step, and had no alternative but to go forward. 
To retreat would dishearten his own men at the outset, 
impair their confidence in him as their leader, and confirm 
the arrogance of his foes, the tiding of whose success might

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 31, 82.i^omara, Crdnica, 
cap. 18. — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 118, 119. — Ixt- 
lilxocHitl, Hist. Chicli., MS., cap. 78, 79.* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 31, 82.i^omara, Crdnica, 
cap. 18. — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 118, 119. — Ixt- 
lilxocHitl, Hist. Chicli., MS., cap. 78, 79.

, DISCOVERY OP MEXICO.

him on his voyage, and p|:epare the way for greater 
mortifications and defeats. He 4id not hesitate as to the 
course he was to pursue ; but, calling his officers together, 
announced his intention to give battle the following morning.*

He sent hack to the vessels such as were disabled by 
their wounds, and ordered the remainder of the forces to 
join the camp. Six of the heavy guns were also taken from 
the ships, together with fill the horses. The animals were 
stiff and torpid from long confinement on board ; but a few 
hours’ exercise restored them to their strength and usual 
spirit. He gave the command of the artillery — if it may be 
digihfied with the name~|«fco it soldier named Mesa, who had 
acquired some experience as an engineer in the Italian wars. 
The infantry he put under the orders of Diego de Ordaz, 
and took charge of the cavalry himself. It consisted of 
some of the most valiant gentlemen of bis little band, among 
whom may be mentioned Alvarado, Velasquez de Leon, 
Avila, Puertocarrero, Olid, Montejo. Having thus made, all' 
the necessary arrangements, and settled his plan of battle, 
he retired to rest, — i)ut not to slumber. His feverish mindi 
as may well be imagined, was filled with anxiety fcH^^ the 
morrow, which might decide the fate of hirf expedition ; 
and as was his wont on such occasions, he was frequently 
observed, during the night, going the^ rounds, and visiting 
the sentinels, to see that no one sldpt upon his post.

At the first glimmering of light he mustered his army, 
and declared his purpose not to abide, cooped up in the 
town, the assault of the enemy, blit to march at once against 
him. Por he well knew that the spirits rise with action, 
and that the attacking party gathers a confidence from the* According to Soils, who quotes the address of Oortds on the occasion, 
he summoned a council of his captains to advise him as to the course he 
•should pursue. (Conquista, tap. 19.) It is possible, but I find no 
warrant for it anywhere.

‘ GBEAT BATti® WITH THE nJBlANS. 20

very movement, which is not felt by the one who is pas- 
sively, perhaps anxiously, awaiting the assault. The Indians 
were understood to be encamped on a level ground a few 
miles distant from the city, called the plain of Ceutla, The 
general commanded that Ordaz should march with the foot^ 
including the artillery, directly across the country, and 
attack them in front, while he himself would fetch a circuit 
with the horse, and turn their flank wh^ thus engaged, or 
fall upon thoir rear.

These dispositions being completed, the little army, heard 
mass, and then sallied forth from the wooden walls of 
Tabasco. It was Lady-day, *thdf 25th of March, —long 
memorable in the annals of New Spain. The district 
around the town was chequered with patches of maize, and, 
on the lower level, with plantations of cacao, — supplying 
the beverage, and perhaps the coin of the country, as in 
Mexico. These plantations, requiring constant irrigation, 
were fed by numerous canals and reservoirs of water, so 
that the country could not be traversed without great toil 
and .difficulty. It was, however, intensected by a narrow 
path cir causeway, over which the Cannon could be dragged.

The troops advanced more than a league on their labo- 
rious march, without descrying the enemy. The weather 
was sultry, but few of them were embarrassed by the heavy 
mail worn by the European cavaliers at that period. Their 
cotton jackets, thickly quilted, afforded a tolerable protec- 
tion against the arrows of the Indian, and allowed room for 
the freedom and activity of movement essenfial to a life of 
rambling adventure in the wilderness.At length they came in sight of the broad plains of 
Ceutla, and beheld the dusky lines df the enemy stretching, 
as far as the eye could reach, along the edge of the horizon. 
The Indians had shown some sagacity in the oli^ce of their 
position ; and, as the weary Spaniards came slowly on,

VOL. I. *

242

DISCOVERT OF MEXICO^

’floundering througli the morass, the Tabascans set up tlieir 
hideous battle-cries, and discharged volleys of arrows, stones, 
and other missiles, which rattled like hail on the shields and 
helmets of the assailants. Many were severely wounded, 
before they could gain the Arm ground, where they soon 
cleared a space for themselves, and opened a heavy fire of 
artillery and musketry on the dense columns of the enemy, 
which presented a fatal mark for the balls. Numbers were 
swept down at every discharge ; but the bold barbarians, far 
from being dismayed, threw up dust and leaves to hide their 
losses, and, sounding their war instruments, shot off fresh 
flights of arrows in return.

They even pressed closer On the Spaniards, and, when 
driven off by a vigorous charge, soon turned again, and, 
rolling back like the waves of the ocean, seemed ready to 
overwhelm the little band by weight of numbers. Thus 
cramped, the latter had scarcely room to perform their 
necessary evolutions, or even to work their guns Vffth 
effect.*The engagement chad now lasted more than an and 
the Spaniards, sorely pressed, looked with greai anxiety for 
the arrival of the horse, — which some unaccountable impe- 
diments must have detained ,r-.to relieve them from their 
perilous position. At this crisis, the furthest columns of the 
Indian army were seen to he agitated and thrown into a 
disorder that rapidly spread through the whole mass. It 
was not long before the ears of the Christians were saluted 
with the cheering war-cry of ** San Jago and San Pedro,” 
and they beheld the bright helmets and swords of the Cas- 
tilian chivalry flashing back the rays of the morning sun, as

Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 1 1 9. — Gornara, Crdnica, 
cap. 19, 20, — Herrera, Hist General, dec, 2, lib. 4, cap. 11. — Martyr, 
De InSulis, p. 350. — Ixtlilxothitl, Hist. Chicb., MS., cap. 79. — Bernal 
Piaz, Hist, de la Conq^uista, cap. 33, 36. — Carta de Vera Cruz, MS,

GREAT BATTLE WITH THE INDIANS,

243

they dashed through the ranks of the enemy, striking to the 
right and left, and scattering dismay around them. The 
eye of faith, indeed, could discern the patron Saint of Spain 
himself, mounted on his grey war-horse, heading the rescue 
and trampling over the bodies of the fallen infidels ! *

The approach of Cortes had been greatly retarded by the 
broken nature of the ground. When he came up, the 
Indians were so hotly engaged, that he was upon them 
before they observed his approach. He ordered his men to 
direct their lances at the faces of their opponents, t who, 
terrified at the monstrous apparition, — ^for they supposed 
the rider and the horse, which they had never before seen, 
to be one and the same,t — were seized with a panic. 
Ordaz availed himself of it to command a general charge 
along the line, and the Indians, many of them throwing 
away their arms, fled without attempting further resistance.was too content with the victory, to care to follow 
it up by dipping his sword in the blood of the fugitives. 
He drew off hk men to a copse of palms which skirted the 
place, and, under their broad canopy, tile soldiers offered up 
thanksgivings to the Almighty for the victory vouchsafed 
them. The field of battle was made the site of a town,

* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 79. “ Cortes supposed it was

his own tutelar saint, St. Peter,” says Pizarro y Orellana ; “ but the com- 
mon and indubitable opinion is, that it was our glorious apostle St, James, 
the bulwark and safeguard of our nation.” (Varones Ilustres, p. 73.)

Sinner that I am ! ” exclaims honest Bernal Diaz, in a more sbeptiqal 
vein, “ It was not permitted to me to see either the on© or the other of 
the Apostles on this occasion.” — Hist, de la Conquzsta, cap. 34.

f It was the order — as the reader may remember — given by Ceesar to 
his followers in his battle with Pompey:

Adversosque jubet ferro confundero vultus.”

Lucan, Pbarsalia, Ub. 7, v. 575.

$ “ Equites,” says Paolo Giovio, “ unum integrum Centaurorum specie 
animal esse existimarent,” — Elogia Virbrum lllustriam, j( Basil, 1696.) 
lib. 6, p. 229.

A 2

DISCOVERT OP MEXICO.$ “ Equites,” says Paolo Giovio, “ unum integrum Centaurorum specie 
animal esse existimarent,” — Elogia Virbrum lllustriam, j( Basil, 1696.) 
lib. 6, p. 229.

A 2

DISCOVERT OP MEXICO.

called in honour of the day on which the action took place, 
Santa Maria de la Vitoria, long afterwards the capital of 
the Province.* The number of those who fought or fell in 
the engagement is altogether doubtful. Nothing, indeed, is 
more uncertain than numerical estimates of barbarians. 
And they gain nothing in probability, when they come, as 
in the present instance, from the reports of their enemies. 
Most accounts, however, agree that the Indian force con- 
sisted of five squadrons of eight thousand men each. There 
is more discrepancy as to th^ number of slain, varying from 
one to thirty thousand ! In this monstrous discordance, 
the common disposition to exaggerate may lead us to look 
for truth in the neighbourhood of the smallest number. 
The loss of the Christians was inconsiderable ; not exceed- 
ing — if we receive their own reports, probably, from the 
same causes, much diminishing the truth — two killed, and 
less than a hundred wounded ! We may readily compre- 
hend the feelings of the Conquerors, when they declared, 
that ** Heaven must have fought on their side, since their 
own strength couldP never have prevailed against such a 
multitude of enemies ! t

Several prisoners were taken in the battle, among them 
two chiefs. Cortes gave them their liberty, and sent a 
message by them to their <^ntrymen, ‘‘that he would 
overlook the past, if they would come in at once, and tender

, .'f ^

• * Clavigero, del Mwiico, tom. iii. p. 11,, .'f ^

• * Clavigero, del Mwiico, tom. iii. p. 11,

+ “ Crean Vras. Reales Altezas pop cierto, que esta batalla fu^ vencida 
mas por voluntad de Dios que por nraa fueraas, porque para con quareuta 
mil hottibres de jofuerra. poca defensa fuera quatrozientos que nosotros 
eramoB.” (CartRie Vera Cruz, MS. — Gomara, Cr6nica, cap. 20. — Bernal 
I>iaz> Hist, de la Conquista, cip. 35.) It is Las Casas, who, regulating his 
mathematici, as usual, by his feelings, rates the Indian loss at the exorbi- 
tant amount cited in the text. “ This,” he concludes dryly, “ was the 
first preaching of the Gospel l?y Cort5s in New Spain ! Hist, de las 
Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 119.

CHRISTIANITY INTRODUOEP. 245

their submisBion. Otherwise he would ride over the land, 
and put every living thing in it, man, woman, and chUd, to 
the sword ! ” With this formidable menace ringing in 
their ears, the envoys departed.But the Tabascans had no relish for further hostilities, 
A body of inferior chiefs appeared the next day, clad in 
dark dresses of cotton, intimating their abject condition, ari 
implored leave to bury their dead. It was granted by the 
general, with many assurances of his friendly disposition ; 
but at the same time he told them, he expected their prin- 
cipal caciques, as he would treat with none other. These 
soon px’esented themselves, attended by a numerous train of 
vassals, who followtid with timid curiosity to the Christian 
camp. Among their propitiatory gifts were twenty female 
slaves, which, from the character of one of them, proved 
of infinitely more consequence than was anticipated by 
either Spaniards or Tabascans. Confidence was soon re-» 
stored ; and was succeeded by a friendly intercourse, and 
the interchange of Spanish toys for the rude commodities of 
the country, articles of food, C9tton, a«d a few gold orna- 
ments of little value. When asked where the precious metal 
was procured, they pointed to the west, and answered 
“Culhua,” “Mexico.’’ The Spaniards saw this was no 
place for them to traffic, or to tarry in.— Yet here, they 
were not many leagues distant from a potent and opulent 
city, or what once had been so, the ancient Palenque. But 
its glory may have even then passed away, and its name 
have been forgotten by the surrounding nations.

Before his departure the Spanish comi^der did not 
omit to provide for one great object of his p^^dition, the 
conversion of the Indians. He trst represented to "'the 
caciques, that he had been sent thither *by a powerful 
monarch on the other side Of tha water, to whom he had 
now a right to claim their allegiance. He then caused the

246 DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.246 DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

reverend fathers Olmedo and Diaz to enlighten their minds, 
as far as possible, in regard to the great truths of revela- 
tion, urging then! to receive these in place of their own 
heathenish abominations. The Tabascans, whose percep- 
tions were no doubt materially quickened by the discipline 
they had undergone, made but a faint resistance to either 
proposal. The next day was Palm Sunday, and the general 
resolved to celebrate their conversion by one of those pom- 
pous ceremonials of the Church, which should make a lasting 
impression on their minds.

A solemn procession was formed of the whole army with 
the Ecclesiastics at their head, each soldier bearing a palm- 
branch in his hand. The concourse was swelled by thou- 
sands of Indians of both sexes, who followed in curious 
astonishment at the spectacle. The long files bent their 
way through the flowery savannas that bordered the settle- 
ment, to the principal temple, where an altar was raised, 
and the image of the presiding deity was deposed to make 
room for that of the Virgin with the infant Saviour. Mass, 
was celebrated by father Olnjedo, and the soldiers tvho were 
capable joined in the solemn chant. The natives' listened 
in profound silence, and if we may believe the ehi^nicl# of 
the event who witnessed it, were mfelleti into tears ; while 
their hearts were penetrated with" r^e^ential awe for the 
God of those terrible boin|^"1ffho seemed to wield in their 
own hands the thunder ana the limning.

The Roman Catholic communion has, it must be ad- 
mitted, some decided advantages over the Protestant, for 
the purposes jrf proselytiam. The. dazzling pomp of its ser- 
vice and its TOUching appeal to the^ sensibilities affect the 
imalfeination of the rud^ child of nature much more power-

* Gomara, Crdnica, cap* "2 1^22. — Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Martyr^ 
Be Insulis, p. 361* — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., ubi supra.

CHBISTIANITY INTRODUCED.

247* Gomara, Crdnica, cap* "2 1^22. — Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Martyr^ 
Be Insulis, p. 361* — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., ubi supra.

CHBISTIANITY INTRODUCED.

247

fully tlian the cold abstractions of Protestantism, which, 
addressed to the reason, demand a degree of refinement 
and mental culture in the audience to comprehend them. 
The respect, moreover, shown by the Catholic for the 
material representations of Divinity greatly facilitates the 
same object. It is true, such representations are used by 
him only as incentives, not as the objects of worship. Bnt 
this distinction is lost on the savage, who finds such forms 
of adoration too analogous to his own to impose any great 
violence on his feelings. It is only required of him to 
transfer his homage from the image of Quetzalcoatl, the 
benevolent deity who walked among men, to that of the 
Virgin or the Redeemer ; from the Cross, which he has 
worshipped as the emblem of the God of rain, to the same 
Cross, the symbol of salvation.

These solemnities concluded, Cortds prepared to return 
to his ships,:^1ieU satisfied with the impression made on the 
new converts, and with the conquests he had thus achieved 
for Castile and CJiristianity. The soldiers, taking leave of 
their Indian friends, entered the bijats with the palm 
branches in their hands, and descending the river re-em- 
barked on board their vessels, which rode at anchor at its 
mouth. A favourable breeze was blowing, and the little 
navy, opening its sails to receive it, was soon on its vay 
again to the golden shores of Mexico.

248

CHAPTER V.

VOYAGE ALONG THE COAST. — DONA MARINA. — SPANIARDS LAND IN 
MEXICO.—INTERVIEW WITH THE AZTECS.

1 '*,^ 1519 .

: ,248

CHAPTER V.

VOYAGE ALONG THE COAST. — DONA MARINA. — SPANIARDS LAND IN 
MEXICO.—INTERVIEW WITH THE AZTECS.

1 '*,^ 1519 .

: ,

T«e fleet hpld its course so near the shore, that the Inha- 
bitants could he seen on it ; and, as it swept along the 
winding borders of the gulf, the soldiers, who had been on 
the former expedition with Grijalva, pointed out to their 
companions the memorable places on the coast. , Here was 
the Eio de AharadOf named after the gallant adventurer, 
who was present, also, in this expedition ; there the Bio de 
VanderaSy in which Grijalva had carried on so lucrative a 
commerce with the ^igiicans ; and there the Isla de los 
SacriJlcioSf where the Spaniards first saw the vestige^ of 
human sacrifice on the coast. Puertocarrero, as he listened 
to these reminiscences of the sailors^ repeated the words of 
the old ballad of Montesinos, “Here if France, there is 
Paris, and there the waters of th<p Puero,^* * <fec. “ But I 
advise you,” he added, tdfCort&, “to look out

only for the rich lands, way to govern them.”

dudad,

Cata lai. 'igoas de Duero 
Do van & dar cn la mar/*

They axe the words of the popular old ballad, first published, I believe, in 
the Eomancero de Amberes, anddately by Duran, Romances Cabellerescos 
d Histdricos, Parte 1 , p. 82.

DOKA HAEIKA. 24^

Fear not,” replied his commander, “ if Fortune but 
favours me as she did Orlando, and I have such gallant 
gentlemen as you for mj companions, I shall understand 
myself very well. ” *Fear not,” replied his commander, “ if Fortune but 
favours me as she did Orlando, and I have such gallant 
gentlemen as you for mj companions, I shall understand 
myself very well. ” *

The fleet had now arrived off St. Juan de Dlua, the island 
so named by Grijalva. The weather was temperate and 
serene, and crowds of natives were gathered on the shore 
the main land, gazing at the strange phenomenon, as the:; . 
vessels glided along under easy sail on the smooth bosom of 
the waters. It was the evening of Thursday in Passibn 
Week. The air came pleasantly off the shore, and Cort^s, 
liking the spot, thought he might safely anchor undcfr the 
lee of the island, which would shelter him from the nortes 
that sweep over these seas with fatal violence in the winter, 
sometimes even late in the spring.

The ships had not been long at anchor, when a light 
pirogue, filled with natives, shot off from the neighbouring 
continent, and steered for the gOneral’s vessel, distinguished 
by the royal ensign of Castile floating from the mast. The 
Indians came on board with a frank cc»ifidence, inspired by 
the accounts of the Spaniards sprUd by their countrymen 
who had traded with Grijalva. They brought presents of 
fruits and flowers and little ornaments of gold, which they 
gladly exchanged for the usual trinkets. Cortds was baffled 
in his attempts to hold a conversation with his visitors by 
means of the interpreter, Aguilar, who was ignorant of the 
language ; the Mayan dialects, with which he was conver- 
sant, bearing too little resemblance to the Ajetec. The 
natives supplied the deficiency, as far as possible, by the 
uncommon vivacity and significance, of their gestures,— the 
hieroglyphics of speech, — but the Spanish commander saw 
with chagrin the embarrassments he must encounter in

* Bernal Diaz,ilist. de la Jjonquista, cap. 37v t

DISCOTERT OF MEXICO,

350* Bernal Diaz,ilist. de la Jjonquista, cap. 37v t

DISCOTERT OF MEXICO,

350

^ future for want of a more perfect medium of communication.* 
In this dilemma, he was informed that one of the female

i*«laves given to him by the Tabascan chiefs was a native 
Mexican, and understood the language. Her name — that 
given to her by the Spaniards — was Marina ; and, as she 
was to exercise a most important influence on their fortunes, 
it is necessary to acquaint the reader with something of her 
character and history.

She was born at Painalla, in the province of Coatzacualco, 
On the south-ORstern borders of the Mexican empire. Her 
father, a rich and powerful cacique, died when she was very 
youn%. Her mother married again, and, having a son, she 
conceived the infamous idea of securing to this offspring of 
her second union Marina^s rightful inheritance. She accord- 
ingly feigned that the latter was dead, but secretly delivered 
her into the hands of some itinerant traders of Xicallanco. 
She availed herself, at the same time, of the death of a child 
of one of her slaves, to substitute the corpse of that of her 
own daughter, and celebrated the obsequies with mock 
solemnity. These particulars are related by the honest old 
soldier, Bernal Diaz, knew the mother, and witnessed 
the generous treatment of her afterwards by Marina. ^By 
the merchants the Indian maiden was again sold to the 
cacique of Tabasco, who delivered her, as we have seen, to 
the Spaniards.

From the place of her birth she was well acquainted with 
the Mexican tongue, which. Indeed, she is said to have 
spoken with great elegance. Her residence in TabascoFrom the place of her birth she was well acquainted with 
the Mexican tongue, which. Indeed, she is said to have 
spoken with great elegance. Her residence in Tabasco

* Las Casag notices the significance of the Indian gestures as im- 
plying a most active imagination. ‘*Seflas 6 meneos con que los Yndios 
mucho mas que otras generaciones entienden y se dan i entender, por 
tcner tnuy bivos los sentidos extqpo*'®* 7 tambien los interiores, mayor- 
mente ques admirable su imagii^acion.” — Hist de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, 
cap. 120.

l>Ol^A MARINA;

251

familiarised her with the dialects of that country, so that 
she could carry on a conversation with Aguilar, which he in 
turn rendered into the Castilian. Thus a certain, though 
somewhat circuitous channel was opened to Cortc^s for com- 
municating with the Aztecs ; a circumstance of the last 
importance to the success of his enterprise. It was not 
very long, however, before Marina, who had a lively genius, 
made hersplf so far mistress of the Castilian as to supersede 
the necessity of any other linguist. She learned it the more 
readily, as it was to her the language of love.

Cortes, who appreciated the value of her services from 
the first, made her his interpreter, then his secretary,* and, 
won by her charms, his mistress. She had a son by him, 
Don Martin Cort<Ss, comendador of the Military Order of 
St. James, less distinguished by his birth than his unmerited 
persecutions.

■ Marina was at this time in the' looming of life. She is 
said to have possessed uncommon personal attractions,^ and 
her open, expressive features indicated her generous temper.

•

♦ Herniosa como Diosa," heautiful as (PgoddesSf says Camargo of her. 
(Hist, de Tlascala, MS.) A modhrn poet pays her charms the following 
not inelegant tribute :

‘‘ Adraira tan lucida cabalgada 
Y espect^culo tal Doha Marina,

India noble al caudillo presentada,

De fortuna y belleza peregriuo.

« « « *‘‘ Adraira tan lucida cabalgada 
Y espect^culo tal Doha Marina,

India noble al caudillo presentada,

De fortuna y belleza peregriuo.

« « « *

Con despejado espiritu y viveza 
Gira la vista en el concurso mudo ;

Rico manto de extrema sutileza 
Con chapas de oro autorizarla pudo,

Prendido con bizarra gen^leza 
Sobre los peebos en ayroso nudo ;

Reyna parece de la Indiana Zona,

. Varonil y bermosfsima ^mazona/*

Moritiw, Las Naves de Cortls^Destruidas.

DISCOVERY Of MEXICO.

fi52

She always remained faithful to the countrymen of her 
adoption ; and her knowledge of the language and customs 
of the Mexicans, and often of their designs, enabled her to 
extricate the Spaniards, more than once, from the most 
embarrassed and perilous situations. She had her errors, 
as we have seen ; hut they should be rather charged to the 
defects of early education, and to the evil influence of him 
to whom in the darkness of her spirit she looked with simple 
confidence for the light to guide her. All agree that she 
was full of excellent qualities, and the important services 
which she rendered the Spaniards have made her memory 
deservedly dear to them ; while the name of Malinche — the 
name by which she is still known in Mexico — was pronounced 
With kindness by the conquered races, with whose misfortunes 
she showed an invariable sympathy.*

With the aid of his two intelligent interpreters, Cortes 
entered into conversation with his Indian , visitors. He 
learned that they were Mexicans, or rather subjects of the 
great Mexican empire, of which their own province formed 
one of the comparatively recent conquests. The country 
was ruled by a powerful monarch, called Moctheuzoma, or 
by Europeans more commonly Montezuma,! who dwelt on* Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 120. — Gomarjit, 
Cr6mca, cap. 25, 26. — Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. iii. pp. 12-14,— 
Onedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS., lib. 33, (Sap. 1. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., 
'MS., cap. 79 . — Oamargo, Hist, de Tiascala, ' MS.-nB««ial Diaz, Hist, do 
la Conquista, cap. 37, 38, There is sopae discordance in the notices of 
the eai’ly life of Marina. I have followed Bernal Diaz, — from his moans 
of observation, the best authority. TheifO is happily no difference in the 
estimate of her singular merits and servicsfi.

The name of the Aztec monarch, lilfe those of most persons and places 
in New Spain, has been "twisted' into all possible varieties of orthography. 
Modern Spanish historians usually callhim Motezuma, But as there is no 
reason to suppose that this is correct, I have preferred to conform to the 
na^e by which he is usually known to English readers. It is the one 
adopted by Bernal Diaz, and by no other contemporary as far as I know.

SPAJJIAEBS LAND IN MEXICO.

253

the mountain plains of the interior, nearly seventy lea^os 
from the coast ; their own province was governed by on6 of 
his nobles, named Teuhtlile, whose residence was eight 
leagues distant. Cort<^s acquainted them in turn with his 
own friendly views in visiting their country, and with his 
desire of an interview with the Aztec governor. He then 
dismissed them loaded with presents, having first ascertained 
that there was abundance of gold in the interior, like the 
specimens they had brought.Cortds, pleased with the manners of the people, and the 
goodly reports of the land, resolved to take up his quarters 
here for the present. The next morning, April 21, being 
Good Friday, he landed with all his force on the very spot 
where now stands the modern city of Vera Cruz. Little did 
the Conqueror imagine that the desolate beach, on which he 
first planted his foot, was one day to be covered by a 
flourishing city, the great mart of European and Oriental 
trade, the commercial capital of New Spain.*

It was a wide and level plain, except where the sand had 
been drifted into hillocks by the perpetual blowing of the 
norte. On these sand-hills he mounted his little battery of 
guns, so as to give him the command of the country. He 
then employed the troops in cutting down small trees and 
bushes which grew near, in order to provide a shelter from 
the weather. In this he was aided by the people of the 
country, sent, as it appeared, by the governor of the district, 
to stesist the Spaniards. With their help stakes were firmly 
set in the earth, and covered with boughs, and with mats

* Ixtlilxochitl, Hist, Chich., MS. cap. 79. — Clavigero, Stor. del Mes- 
sico, tom. iii. p. 16. New Vera Cruz, a^tbe present teWn is called, is 
distinct, as we shall see hereafter, from that established hy Cortes, and 
was not founded till the close of the sixteenth century, hy the Conde de 
Monterey, viceroy of Mexico. It recei^d its privileges as a city from 
Philip III. in 1616. — Ibid., tom. iii. p. 30, nota.

liSf!* DiaOOVEBY OF MEXIOj)*liSf!* DiaOOVEBY OF MEXIOj)*

anchoottwi. carpets, which the friendly natives brought with 
them, In this way they secured, in a couple of days, a good 
defence against the scorching rays of the sun, which beat 
with intolerable fierceness on the sands. The place was 
surrounded by stagnant marshes, the exhalations from 
which, quickened by the heat into the pestilent malaria, 
have occasioned in later times wider mortality to Europeans 
than all the hurricanes on the coast. The bilious disorders, 
now the terrible scourge of the tierra caliente, were little 
known before the Conquest. The seeds of the poison seem 
to have been scattered by the hand of civilisation ; for it is 
onlymecessary to settle a town, and draw together a busy 
European population, in order to call out the malignity of 
the venom which had before lurked innoxious in the 
atmosphere.*

While these arrangements were in progress, the natives 
fiocked in from the adjacent district, which was tolerably 
populous in the interior, drawn by a natural curiosity to see 
the wonderful strangers. They brought with them fruits, 
vegetables, flowers jn abundance, game, and many dishes 
cooked after the fashion of the country, with little articles 
of gold and other ornaments. They gave away some as 
presents, and bartered others for the wares of the Spaniards ; 
so that the camp, crowded with a motley throng of every

. f. f

* The epidemic of tbe matlazahuoSty bo fatal to the Aztecs, is shfo^irn. 
by M. de Humboldt to he essentially different from the wdwHto, of hiKous 
fever of our day. Indeed, this disease is not noticed by the earljwpon* 
querors and colonists ; and Clavigero asserts, was, not known in Mexico, 
till 1725. (Sfor. del Messico, tom. i. p. 117, uota,^ Humboldt, however, 
arguing that the same physical causes must have pw)4uced similar results, 
carries the disease back to a much higher antiqujty, of which he discerns 
some traditional and historic vtstiges. ^ H ne fattt pas confondre I’^poque,*’ 
he remarks with his usual penetration, h laquelle une maladie a et^ 
d^crite pour la premidre fois, parce qu'elle a fait de grands ravages dans un 
court espace de temps, avec T^Jpoque de sa premiere apparition.” — Essai 
Politique, tom. iv. p. 161 et seq., and 179,

mmnm with the aztecs.

256

age and sex, wore the appearance of a fair. From some of 
the visitors Cortds learned the intention of the governor to 
wait on him the following day*

This was Easter. Teuhtlile arrived, as he had announced, 
before noon. He was attended by a numerous train, and was 
met by Cortds, who conducted him with much ceremony to 
his tent, where his principal officers were assembled. The 
Aztec chief returned their salutations with polite, though 
formal courtesy. Mass was first said by father Olmedo, and 
the service was listened to by Teuhtlile and his attendants 
with decent reverence. A collation was afterwards served, 
at which the general entertained his guest with Spanish 
wines and confections. The interpreters were then intro- 
duced, and a conversation commenced between the parties.The first inquiries of Teuhtlile were respecting the country 
of the strangers, and the purport of their visit. Cortes told 
him, that ** he was the subject of a potent monarch beyond 
the seas, who ruled over an immense empire, and had kings 
and princes for his vassals! that, acquainted with the great- 
ness of the Mexican emperor, his maeter had desired to 
enter into a communication with him, and had sent him as 
his envoy to wait on Montezuma with a present in token of 
his good will, and a message which he must deliver in per- 
son.” He concluded by inquiring of Teuhtlile when he 
could be admitted to his sovereign’s presence.

To this the Aztec noble somewhat haughtily replied,

“ How is it, that you have been here only two days, and 
demand to see the emperor?” He then addell, with more 
courtesy, that ‘*he was surprised to learn there was another 
monarch as powerful as Montezuma ; but that if it were so, 
he had no doubt his master would Ufe happy to communicate 
with him. He would send his couriers with tlie royal gift 
brought by the Spanish commander, and, so soon as he had 
learned Montezuma’s will, woul^J^Oommunicate it*”

25 ^

DISCOVERY OP MEXICO.

Teuhtlile tten commanded his slaves to bring forward the 
present intended for the Spanish general. It consisted of 
ten loads of fine cottons, several mantles of that curious 
featherwork whose rich and delicate dyes might vie with 
the most beautiful painting, and a wicker basket filled with 
ornaments of wrought gold, all calculated to inspire the 
Spaniards* with high ideas of the wealth and mechanical 
ingenuity of the Mexicans.Cortes received these presents with suitable acknowledg- 
ments, and ordered his own attendants to lay before the 
chief the articles designed for Montezuma. These were an 
armchair richly carved and painted, a crimson cap of cloth, 
having a gold medal emblazoned with St. George and the 
dragon, and a quantity of collars, bracelets, and other orna- 
ments of cut glass, which, in a countiy where glass was not 
to be had, might claim to^hlva^ the value of real gems, and 
no doubt passed for th?e inexperienced Mexican,

Teuhtlile observed a in camp with a shining gilt

helmet on his head, wh^'ho.8fidd reminded him of one worn 
by the god Quetzalooatl in Mexico ; and he showed a desire 
that Montezuma should see it. The coming of the Spaniards, 
as the reader will soon see, was associated with some tradi- 
tions of this same deity. Cortes expressed his willingness 
that the casque should be sent to the emperor, intimating a 
hope that it would be returned filled with the gold dust of 
the country, that he might be able to compare its quality 
with that in his own ! He further told the governor, as we 
are informed by his chaplain, “that the Spaniards were 
troubled with a disease of the heart, for which gold was a 
specific remedy!”* “In short,’’ says Las Casas, “he 
contrived to make hisf want of gold very clear to the 
governor.

* Gomaia, Crdnica, cap. 2G. 
t Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 119.

INTBETlEW WITH TICB AZTBCS,

257* Gomaia, Crdnica, cap. 2G. 
t Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 119.

INTBETlEW WITH TICB AZTBCS,

257

While these things were passing, Cort^ observed one of 
Teuhtlile’s attendants busy with a pencil, apparently deli- 
neating some object. On looking at his work, he found that 
it was a sketch on canvas of the Spaniards, their costumes, 
arms, and, in short, different objects of interest, giving to 
each its appropriate form and colour. This was the cele- 
brated picture-writing of the Aztecs, and, as Teuhtlile 
informed him, this man was employed in portraying the 
various objects for the eye of Montezuma, who would thus 
gather a more vivid notion of their appearance than from 
any description by words. Cortes was pleased with the 
idea ; and, as he knew how much the effect wouM be 
lieightcned by converting still life into action, he ordered 
out tjie cavalry on the beach, the w'et sands of which afforded 
a firm footing for the horses. The bold and rapid move- 
ments of the troops, as ifchey ^through their military 
exercises j the apparent. WTto|™ph they managed the 
fiery animals on which tii»y^We)S|iS^j&ted ; the glancing of 
their weapons, and the sM!^^ ’^I^Jpthe trumpet, all filled 
the spectators with astonishmem ; but when they heard the 
thunders of the cannon, which Cortds ordered to be fired at 
the same time, and witnessed the volumes of smoke and 
fiame issuing from these terrible engines, and the rushing 
sound of the balls, as they dashed through the trees of the 
neighbouring forest, shivering their branches into fragments, 
they were filled with consternation, from which the Aztec 
chief himself was not wholly free. .Nothing of all this was lost on the painters, who faithfully 
recorded, after their fashion, every particular ; aot omitting 
the ships, — “ the water-houses,’" as they called them, of the 
strangers, — which, with their darl hulls and snow-white 
sails reflected from the water, were swinging lazily at anchor 
on the calm bosom of the bay. •All was depicted with a 
fidelity, that excited in their turn the admirftipn of the

VOL. I. s

DISCOVERT OP MEXICO.

258

Spaniards, who, doubtless unprepared for this exhibition of 
skill, greatly over-estimated the merits of the execution.

These various matters completed, Teuhtlile with his 
attendants withdrew from the Spanish quarters, with the 
same ceremony with which he had entered them ; leaving 
orders that his people should supply the troops with provi- 
sions and other articles requisite for their accommodation, 
till further instructions from the capital.*

* Ixtlilxochitl, Relaciones, MS., No. 13. — Idem. Hist. Chich., MS., 
cap. 79 . — Gomara, Cronica, cap. 25, 26. — Bemal Diaz, Hist, de la Con- 
quista, cap. 38. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 5, cap. 4. — Carta do 
Vera*Cruz, MS. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, cap. 13-15. — Tezo- 
zomoc, Crdn. Mexicana, MS., cap. 107.

259

CHAPTER VI.

ACCOUNT OP MONTEZUMA. STATE OF HIS EMPIRE. — STRANGE PROG- 
NOSTICS. EMBASSY AND PRESENTS. — SPANISH ENCAMPMENT.

1519.259

CHAPTER VI.

ACCOUNT OP MONTEZUMA. STATE OF HIS EMPIRE. — STRANGE PROG- 
NOSTICS. EMBASSY AND PRESENTS. — SPANISH ENCAMPMENT.

1519.

We must now take leave of the Spanish camp in the tierra 
calicMe, and transport ourselves to the distant capital of 
Mexico, where no little sensation was excited by the arrival 
of the wonderful strangers on the coast. The Aztec throne 
was filled at that time by Mont,^zuma the Second, nephew 
of the last, and grandson of a precedi^ monarch. He had 
been elected to the regal dj^mty in T502, in preference to 
his brothers, for his superior' qualifications, both as a soldier 
and a priest, — a combination of offices sometimes found in 
the Mexican candidates, as it was, more frequently, in the 
Egyptian. In early youth he had taken an active part in 
the wars of the empire, though of late he had devoted him- 
self more exclusively to the services of the temple ; and he 
was scrupulous in his attentions to all the burdensome cere- 
monial of the Aztec worship. He maintained a grave and 
reserved demeanour, speaking little and with prudent deli- 
beration. His deportment was well calculated to inspire 
ideas of superior sanctity.*

* His name suited his nature; Montezufha, according to Las Casas, 
signifying, in the Mexican, “ sad or severe man.” — Hist, de lae Indias, MS., 
lib. 3, cap, 120. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 70. — Acosta, lib. 7, 
cap. 20. — Col. de Mendoza, pp. 13-16. — Codex Tel.-Rem., p, 143, ap. 
Antiq. of Mexico, vol. vi.

82

DBCOTBBT OF iffiXItfO.82

DBCOTBBT OF iffiXItfO.

When his election was announced to him, he was found 
aweeplng down the stairs in the great temple of the national 
war-god. He received the messengers with a becoming 
humility, professing hitf unfitness for so responsible a station. 
The address, delivered us usual on the occasion, was made 
by his relative Nezahualpilli, the wise king of Tezcuco.* It 
has fortunately been preserved, and presents a favourable 
specimen of Indian eloquence. Towards the conclusion the 
orator exclaims, “ Who can doubt that the Aztec empire 
has reached the zenith of its greatness, since the Almighty 
has placed over it one whose very presence fills every 
beholder with reverence ? Kejoice, happy people, that you 
have now a sovereign who will be to you a steady column of 
support ; a father in distress, a more than brother in ten- 
derness and sympathy ; one whose aspiring soul will disdain 
all the profligate pleasures of the senses, and the wasting 
indulgence of sloth. And thou, illustrious youth, doubt not 
that the Creator, who lias laid on tfiee so weighty a charge, 
will also give strength to sustaM it ; that He, who has been 
so liberal in time^' past, mil ^hower yet more abundant 
blessings on thy head, and keep thee firm in thy royal seat 
through many long and glorious years.** — These golden 
prognostics, which melted the royal auditor into tears, were 
not destined to be realised.!

Montezuma displayed all the energy and enterprise in 
the commencement of his reign, which bad been anticipated 
from him. His first expedition against a rebel province in 
the neighbourhood was crowned with success, and he led 
back in triumph a throng of captives for the bloody sacrifice

For a full account of th& prince, see book 1, chap. 6, pp. 180*184.For a full account of th& prince, see book 1, chap. 6, pp. 180*184.

f The address is fully reported by Torquemada, (Monarch. Ind., lib, 3, 
cap. 88,) who came into the country little more than half a century after 
its delivery. It has been rec^tly republished by Bustamente. — Tezcuco 
en los Ultimos Tiempos, (Mexico, 1826,) pp. 266-258.

ACOOTJNT OF MONTEZUMA.

261

that was to grace his coronation. This Was celebrated 
with uncommon pomp. Games and religious ceremonies 
continued for several days, and among the spectators 
who flocked from distant quarters were some noble Tlas- 
calans, the hereditary enemies of Mexico. They were 
in disguise, hoping thus to elude detection. They were 
recognised, however, and reported to the monarch. But 
he only availed himself of the information to pro\nde 
them with hofiourable entertainment, and a good place 
for witnessing the games. This was a magnanimous 
act, considering the long cherished hostility between the 
nations. ' •

In liis first years, Montezuma was constantly engaged in 
war, and frequently led his armies in person. The Aztec 
banners were seen in the furthest provinces on the Gulf of 
Mexico, and the distant regions of Nicaragua and Honduras. 
The expeditions were generally successful ; and the limits 
of the empire were more widely extended than at any pre- 
ceding period.

Meanwhile the monarch was not inattentive to the interior 
concerns of the kingdom. He made some important changes 
in the courts of justice ; and carefully watched over the 
execution of the laws, which he enforced with stem severity. 
He was in the habit of patrolling the streets of his capital 
in disguise, to make himself personally acquainted with the 
abuses in it. And with more questionable policy, it is said, 
he would sometimes try the integrity of his judges by tempt- 
ing them with large bribes to swerve from their duty, and 
then call the delinquent to strict account for yielding to the 
temptation.He liberally recompensed all Vho served him. He 
showed a similar munificent spirit in his public works, 
constructing and embellishing the «tomples, bringing water 
into the capital by a new channel, and establishing a

262

BISCOVERT OP MEXICO.

hostpltal, or retreat for invalid soldiers, in the city of 
Colhuacan.*

These acts, so worthy of a great prince, were counter- 
balanced by others of an opposite complexion. The humility, 
displayed so ostentatiously before his elevation, gave way to 
an intolerable arrogance. - In his pleasure-houses, domestic 
establishment, and way of living, he assumed a pomp un- 
known to his predecessors. He secluded himself from public 
observation, or, when he went abroad, exfcted the most 
slavish homage ; while in the palace he would be served 
only, even in the most menial offices, by persons -of rank. 
He,* farther, dismissed several plebeians, chiefly poor sol- 
diers of merit, from the places they had occupied near 
the person of his predecessor, considering their attend- 
ance a dishonour to royalty. It was in vain that his 
oldest and sagest counsellors remonstrated on a conduct so 
impolitic.

While he thus disgusted his subjects by his haughty 
deportment, he alienated their afFefbtions by the imposition 
of grievous taxes. • These were demanded by the lavish ex-^ 
penditure of his^court. They fell with peculiar heaviness on 
the conquered cities. This oppression led to frequent insur- 
rection and resistance ; and the latter yeans of his reign 
present a scene of unintermitting hostility, in which the 
forces of one half of the empire were employed in suppress- 
ing the commotions of the other. Unfortunately there was 
no priilciple of amalgamation by which the new acquisitions 
could be incorporated into the ancient monarchy, as parts 
of one whole. Their interests, as well as sympathies, were 
different. Thus the more widely the Aztec empire was ex- 
tended, the weaker it •became ; resembling some vast and* Acosta, lib. 7, cap. 22. — Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, lib. 8, 
Prdlogo, et cap. 1. — TorquemSda, Monarch. Ind.,lib. 3, cap. 73, 74, 81. — 
Col. de Mendoza^ pp. 14, 85, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, voL vi.

STATE OE HIS EMSPIRE.

263

ill-proportioned edifice, whose disjointed mateariAls, having 
no principle of cohesion, and tottering under, their ow^ 
weight, seem ready to fall before the fir^t blast of the 
tempest.

In 151 6, died th$ Tezcucan king, NezahualpUli, in whom 
Montezuma lost his most sagacious counsellor. The succes* 
sion was contested by his two sons, Cacama and Ixtlil- 
xochitl. The former was supported by Montezuma. The 
latter, the yoilnger of the princes, a bold, aspiring youth, 
appealing to the patriotic sentiment of his nation, would 
have persuaded them that his brother was too much in the 
Mexican interests to be true to his own country. A« civil 
war ensued, and ended by a compromise, by which one half 
of the kingdom, with the capital, remained to Cacama, and 
the northern portion to his ambitious rival. Ixtlilxochitl 
became froxn that time the mortal foe of Montezuma.^

A more ^formidable enemy still was the little republic 
of Tlascala, lying midway between the Mexican Valley and 
the coast. It had maintained its independence for more 
than two centuries against the allied f(vces of the empire. 
Its resources were unimpaired, its civilisation i^rcely below 
that of its great rival states, and for courage and military 
prowess it had established a name inferior to none other of 
the nations of Anahuac.

Such was the condition of the Aztec monarchy, on the 
arrival of Cortes ; — the people disgusted with the arrogance 
of the sovereign ; the provinces and distant cities outraged 
by fiscal exactions ; while potent enemies in the neighbour- 
hood lay watching the hour when they might assail their 
formidable rival with advantage. Still the kingdom was 
strong in its internal resources, in^the will of its monarch,* Clavigero, Stor. delMeasico, tom. i. w. 267,274,275. — Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 70-76. — Acosta, liD. 7, cap. 21.

264

DISCOVERY OP MEXICO.

in ihe long habitual deference to his authoritj,-— in short, 
in the terror of his name, and in the valour and discipline 
of his armies, grown grey, in activ^e sendee, and well drilled 
in all the tactics of Indian warfare. The time had now 
come when these imperfect tactics and rude weapons of the 
barbarian were to he brought into collision with the science 
and enginery of the most civilised nations of the globe.

During the latter years of his reign, Montezuma had 
rarely taken part in his military expeditions, which he left 
to his captains, occupying himself chiefly with his sacerdotal 
functions. Tinder no prince had the priesthood enjoyed 
greater consideration and immunities. The religious festi- 
vals and rites were celebrated with unprecedented pomp. 
The oracles were consulted on the most trivial occasions ; 
and the sanguinary deities were propitiated by hecatombs 
of victims dragged in triumph to the capital from the con- 
quered or rebellious provinces. The religion, or, to speak 
correctly, the superstition of Montezuma proved a principal 
cause of his calamities.In a preceding chapter I have noticed the popular tradi- 
tions respecting Quetzalcoatl, that deity with a fair com- 
plexion and flowing beard, so unlike the Indian physi- 
ognomy, who, after fulfilling his mission of benevolence 
among the Aztecs, embarked on the Atlantic Sea for the 
mysterious shores of Tlapallan.* He promised, on his 
departure, to return at some future day with his posterity, 
and resume the possession of his empire. That day was 
looked forward to with hope or with apprehension, accord- 
ing to the interest of the believer, hut with general con- 
fidence throughout the wide borders of Anahuac. Even 
after the Conquest, it stifl lingered among the Indian races, 
by whom it was as fondly cherished, as the advent of their

Ante, book 1, chap. 3, pp. 54, 55-6, and note.

STATE OF HIS EMPIRE. 265

Icing Sebastian continued to be by the Portuguese, or that 
of the Messiah by the Jews.^Ante, book 1, chap. 3, pp. 54, 55-6, and note.

STATE OF HIS EMPIRE. 265

Icing Sebastian continued to be by the Portuguese, or that 
of the Messiah by the Jews.^

A general feeling seems to have prevailed in the time of 
Montezuma, that the period for the return of the deity, and 
the full accomplishment of his promise, was near at hand. 
This conviction is said to have gained ground from various 
preternatural occurrences, reported with more or less detail 
by all the most ancient historians.! In 1510, the great 
lake of Tezcuco, without the occurrence of a tempest, or 
earthquake, or any other visible cause, became violently 
agitated, overflowed its banks, and, pouring into the streets 
of Mexico, swept oif many of the buildings by the f5ry of 
the waters. In 151 L, one of the turrets of the great temple 
took fire, equally without any apparent cause, and continued 
to burn in defiance of all attempts to extinguish it. In the? 
following years, three’ comets were seen ; and not long 
before the coming of the Spaniards a strange light Broke 
forth in the east. It spread broad at its base on the horizon, 
and rising in a pyramidal form tapered off as it approached 
the zenith. It resembled a vast sheet^r flood of fire, emit- 
ting sparkles, or, as an old writer expresses it, “ seemed 
thickly powdered with stars.’ At the same time, low

* Tezozomoc, Cron. Mexicana, MS., cap. 107. — Ixtlilxocliitl, Hist. 
Chich., MS., cap. 1. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, cap. 14 ; lib.* 6, 
cap. 24. — Codex Vaticanus, ap. Antiq. of Mexico, rol. vi. — Sahagun, Hist, 
de Nueva Etpana, lib. 8, cap. 7. — Ibid., MS., lib. 12, cap. .3, 4.i* “ Tenia por cierto/’ says Las Casas of Montezuma, “ segun sus pro- 
pbetas <5 agoreros le avian certificado, quo su cstado erriquezas y prosperidad 
avia de perezer dentro de pocos anos por ^iertas gentes que avian de venir 
en BUS dias, que de su felicidad lo derrocasen, y por esto vivia siempre con 
temor y en triste 9 a y sobresaltado.” — Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, 
cap. 1^0, *

X Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — The Interpreter of the Codex 
Tel.-Rem. intimates that this scintillating phenomenon was probably 
nothing more than an eruption of one of the great volcanoes of Mexico. 
—•Antiq. of Mexico, vol. vi. p. 144. ^

DISCOVERY OE MEXICO.

voices were heard in the air, and doleful wailings, as if to 
announce some strange, mysterious calamity ! The Aztec 
monarch, terrified at the apparitions in the heavens, took 
council of Nezahualpilli, who was a great proficient in the 
subtle science of astrology. But the royal sage cast a 
deeper cloed over his spirit, by reading in these prodigies 
the speedy downfall of the empire.

Such are the strange stories reported by the chroniclers, 
in which it is not impossible to detect the glimmerings of 
truth. f Nearly thirty years had elapsed since the discovery 
of the islands by Columbus, and more than twenty since his 
visit ‘to the American continent. Bumours, more or less 
distinct, of this wonderful appearance of the white men, 
hearing in their hands the thunder and the lightning, so like 
many respects to the traditions of Quetzalcoatl, would 
naturally spread far and wide among the Indian nations. 
Such rumours, doubless, long before the landing of the 
Spaniards in Mexico, found their way up the grand plateau, 
filling the minds of men with anticipations of the near 
coming of the pericM when the great deity was to return 
and receive his own again. ♦In the excited state of their imaginations, prodigies 
became a familiar occurrence. Or rather, events not very 
uncommon in themselves, seen through the discoloured 
medium of fear, were easily magnified into prodigies ; and

•

* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, MS., lib. 12. cap. 1. — Camargo, 
Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Acosta, lib. 7, cap. 23. — Herrera, Hist. General, 
dec. 2, lib. 5, cap. 5. — Ixtlilxocbitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 74.

+ I omit the most extraordinary miiucle of all, — though legal attesta- 
tions of its truth were fimnished the Court of Rome, (See ClaNngero, Stor. 
del Messi(io, tom. i. p. 289,)-U-namely, the resurrection, of Montezuma's 
sister, Papantzin, four days after her burial, to warn the monarch of the 
approaching ruin of his empire. It finds credit with one writer, at least, 
in the nineteenth century ! — Sfee the note of Sahagun’s Mexican editor, 
Bustamente, Hist, de Nueva Espana, tom. ii. p. 270.

pROQHOsTics.

267

the accidental swell of the lake, the appearance of a comet, 
and the conflagration of a building* were all interpreted as 
the special annunciations of Heaven.* Thus it happens in 
those great political convulsions which shake the foundations 
of society, — the mighty events that cast their shadows 
before them in their coming. Then it is that the atmo- 
sphere is agitated with the low, prophetic murmurs, wit! 
which nature, in the moral as in the physical world, 
announces the march of the hurricane :

^ When from the shores 
And forest-rustling mountains comes a voice,

That, solemn sounding, bids the world prepare !*' •^ When from the shores 
And forest-rustling mountains comes a voice,

That, solemn sounding, bids the world prepare !*' •

When tidings were brought to the capital, of the landing 
of Grijalva on the coast, in the preceding year, the heart 
of Montezuma was filled with dismay. He felt as if the 
destinies which had so long brooded over the foyal line of 
Mexico were to he accomplished, and the sceptre was to 
pass away from his house for ever. Though somewhat 
relieved by the departure of the Spaniards, he caused sentinels 
to be stationed on the hj|^hts ; and when the Europeans 
returned under Cortes, he doubtless received the earliest 
notice of the unwelcome event. It was by his orders, how- 
ever, that the provincial governor had prepared so hospitable 
a reception for them. The hieroglyphical report of these 
strange visitors, now forwarded to the capital, revived all his 
apprehensions. He caUed without delay a meeting of his

* Lucan gives a fine enumeration of such prodigies witnessed in the 
Bomati capital in a similar excitement. (Pharsalia, lib. i, v. 523, et seq.) 
Poor human nature is much the same everywhere. Machiavelli has 
thought the subject worthy of a separate chapter in his Discourses. The 
philosopher intimates a belief even in the existence of beneficent intelli- 
gences who send these portents as a sort of premot^tories, to warn 
mankind of the coming tempest. — Dfecorsi sopra Tito Livio, lib. 1, 
cap. 56.

BBSCOVEBT OS' JOmCO.

prinpipal oouneellore, including tlje kings, of Tezcuco and 
Tlacppan, and laid the matter before them.*BBSCOVEBT OS' JOmCO.

prinpipal oouneellore, including tlje kings, of Tezcuco and 
Tlacppan, and laid the matter before them.*

There seems to have been much division of opinion in 
that body. Some were for resisting the strangers at once, 
whether by fraud, or by open force. Others contended, that, 
if they were supernatural beings, fraud and force would be 
alike useless. If they were, as they pretended, ambassadors 
from a foreign prince, such a policy would be cowardly and 
unjust. That they were not of the family of Quetzalcoatl 
was argued from the fact, that they had shown themselves 
hostile to his religion ; for tidings of the proceedings of 
the S.pamards in Tabasco, it seems, had already I'eached 
the capital. Among those in favour of giving them a 
friendly and honourable reception was the Tezcucan king, 
Cacama.

But Montezuma, taking counsel of his own ill-defined 
apprehensions, preferred a half-way course, — as usual, the 
most impolitic. He resolved to send an embassy, with such 
a magnificent present to the strangers, as should impress 
them with high idea% of his grandeur and resources ; while 
at the same time, he would fo^id their approach to the 
capital. This was to reveal, at once, both his wealth and 
his weakness, t

While the Aztec court was thus agitated by the arrival 
of the Spaniards, they were passing their time in the tierra 
caliente, not a little annoyed by the excessive heats and suffo- 
cating atmosphere of the sandy w^ste on which they were 
encamped. They experienced every alleviation that could be

* Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 120. — Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Cbich., MS., cap. 80, — Idem, Relaciones, MS.- — Sahagun, Hist, de 
Nueva Espaiia, MS., lib. 12, cap. 3, 4. — Tezozomoc, Crdu. Mexicana, 
MS., cap. 108.

+ Tezozomoc, Crdn. Mexican^ MS., loc, cit. — Camargo, Hist, do Tlas- 
cala, MS. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Cbicb., MS., cap. 80.

UMBASST AND PRESENTS.+ Tezozomoc, Crdn. Mexican^ MS., loc, cit. — Camargo, Hist, do Tlas- 
cala, MS. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Cbicb., MS., cap. 80.

UMBASST AND PRESENTS.

derived from the attentions of the friendly natives. These, 
by the governor’s command, had constructed more than a 
thousand huts or booths of branches and matting which 
they occupied in the neighbourhood of the camp. Here 
they prepared various articles of food for the tables of Cortes 
and his officers, without any recompense ; while the com- 
mon soldiers easily obtained a supply for themselves, in 
exchange for such trifles as they brought vith them for 
barter. Thus the camp was liberally provided with meat 
and fish dressed in many savoury ways, with cakes of corn, 
bananas, pine-apples, and divers luscious vegetables of the 
tropics, hitherto unknown to the Spaniards. The sdldiera 
contrived, moreover, to obtain many little bits of gold, of 
no great value, indeed, from the natives ; a traffic very 
displeasing to the partisans of Velasquez, who considered 
it an invasion of his rights. Cortds, however, did not 
think it prudent in this matter to baulk the inclinations of 
his followers.^

At the expiration of seven, or eight days at most, the 
Mexican embassy presented itself befofie the camp. It may 
seem an incredibly short 'space of time, considering the 
distance of the capital was near seventy leagues. But it 
may be remembered that tidings were carried there by means 
of posts, as already noticed, in the brief space of four-and- 
twenty hours ; t and four or five days would suffice for the 
descent of the envoys to the coast, accustSmed as the 
Mexicans were to long and rapid travelling. At all events, 
no writer states the period occupied by the Indian emissaries 
on this occasion as longer than that mentioned.

The embassy, consisting of two Aztec noble$, was accom- 
panied by the governor, Teuhtlile,^and by a hundred slaves,The embassy, consisting of two Aztec noble$, was accom- 
panied by the governor, Teuhtlile,^and by a hundred slaves,

* Bernal Diax, Hist, de la ConquiBta|^ cap. 39.— Gom^j Crduica, cap. 
27, ap. Barcia, tom. ii.

^ t Ante, book 1, ebap. 2, p. 38.

DISCOTERY OP MEXICO.

’beafifeg the princely gifts of Montezuma. One of the 
envoys had been selected on account of the great resem- 
blance which, as appeared from the painting representing 
the camp, he bore to the Spanish commander. And it 
is a proof of the fidelity of the painting, that the soldiers 
recognised the resemblance, and always distinguished the 
chief by the name of the “ Mexican Cortes.’*

On entering the general’s pavilion, the ambassadors 
saluted him and his officers with the usual signs of reverence 
to persons of great consideration, touching the ground with 
their hands and then carrying them to their heads, while 
the aff was filled with clouds of incense, which rose up from 
the censers borne by their attendants. Some delicately 
wrought mats of the country (petates) were then unrolled, 
and on them the slavps displayed the various articles they 
had brought. They were of the most miscellaneous kind ; 
shields, helmets, cuirasses, embossed with plates and orna- 
ments of pure gold ; collars and bracelets of the same 
metal, sandals, fans, panaches and crests of variegated 
feathers, intermingle with gold and silver thread, and 
sprinkled with pearls and precious stones ; imitations of 
birds and animals in WTought and cast gold and silver, of 
exquisite workmanship; curtains, coverlets, and robes of 
cotton, fine as silk, of rich and various dyes, interwoven 
with feather work that rivalled the delicacy of painting.* 
There were more thaif thirty loads of cotton cloth in addi- 
tion. Among the articles was the Spanish helmet sent to 
the capital, and now returned filled to the brim with grains* From the chequered figure of some of these coloured cottons, Peter 
Martyr infers, the Indians wep acquainted with chess ! Ho notices a 
Curious fabric made of the hair of animals, feathers, and cotton thread, 
interwoven together. “ Plumas illas et concinnant inter cuniculorum 
villos interque gossampij stamina ordiuntur, et intexunt operose adeo, ut 
quo pacto id faciant non bene intellexerimus.” — De Orbe Novo, (Parisiis, 
1587,) dec. 5, cap. 10.

EMBASSY AND PEESENTC.

27L

of gold. But the things which excited the most admiration 
were two circular plates of gold and silver, “ as large <1^ 
carriage- wheels.” One, representing the sun, was richly 
carved with plants and animals, — no doubt, denoting the 
Aztec century. It was thirty palms in circumference, and 
was valued at twenty thousand pesos de oro. The silver 
wheel, of the same size, weighed fifty marks.*

The Spaniards could not conceal their rapture at the 
exhibition of treasures which so far surpassed all the dreamsThe Spaniards could not conceal their rapture at the 
exhibition of treasures which so far surpassed all the dreams

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 89. — Oviedo, Hist, de las 
Ind., MS. lib. 33, cap. 1, — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. .8, cap. 
120. — Gomara, Crdriica, cap. 27, ap. Barcia, tom. ii. — Carta de Veri^Cruz, 
MS. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 5, cap. 5. Robertson cites 
Bernal Diaz as reckoning the value of the silver plate at 20,000 pesos^ or 
about 5,000Z. (History of America, vol. ii. note 75.) But Bernal Diaz 
speaks only of the value of the gold plate, which he estimates at 20,000 
pesos de oro, a different affair from the pesos, dollars, or ounces of silver, 
with which the historian confounds them. As the mention of the peso 
de oro 'nail often recur in these pages, it will be well to make tlie reader 
acquainted with its probable value. Nothing is more difficult than to 
ascertain the actual value of the currency of a distant age ; so many cir- 
cumstances occur to enrbarrass the calculation, besides tho general deprecia- 
tion of the precious metals, such as the adulteration of specific coins and the 
like. Seiior Clemencin, the secretary of the Royal Academy of History, 
in the sixth volume of its Memorias, has computed with great accuracy 
the value of the different denominations of the Spanish currency at tho 
close of the fifteenth century, the period just preceding that of the conquest 
of Mexico. He makes no mention of tho peso de oro in his tables. But 
he ascertains the precise value of the gold ducat, which will answer our 
purpose as well. (Memorias de la Beal Academia de Historia, [Madrid, 
1821,J tom. VI. Bust. 20.) Oviedo, a contemporary of the Conquerors, 
informs us thAt the peso de oro and the Castellano were of the same value, 
and that was precisely one third greater than the value of the ducat. 
(Hist, del Ind., lib. 6, cap. 8, ap. Ramusio, Navigation! et Viaggi, 
[Venetia, 1565,] tom. iii.) Now the ducat, as appears from Clemencin, 
reduced to our own currency, would he equ^jl to eight dollars and seventy- 
five cents. Tlie peso de oro, therefore, was egual to elevm dollars and 
sixty-seven cents, or two potmds, twelve shillings, and sixpence 
sterling. Keeping this in mind, it will ko easy for the reader to deter- 
mine the actual value, in pesos de OfV, of any sum that may he hereafter 
mentioned.DISCOVEUY OF MEXICO.

^^i!i whict they had indulged. For, rich as were the mate- 
rials, they were exceeded^according to the testimony of 
those who saw these articles afterwards in Seville, where 
they could coolly examine them-— by the beauty and richness 
of the workmanship.^

When Oortds and his officers had completed their survey, 
the ambassadors courteously delivered the message of 
Montezuma. It gave their master great pleasure,” they 
said, “ to hold this communication with so powerful a 
monarch as the King of Spain, for whom he felt the most 
profound respect. He regretted much that he could not 
enjoy a personal interview with the Spaniards, but the dis- 
tance of his capital was too great ; since the journey was 
beset with difficulties, and with too many dangers from 
formidable enemies, to make it possible. All that could be 
done, therefore, was for the strangers to return to their own 
land, with the proofs thus afforded them of his friendly 
disposition.”

Cortes, though much chagrined at this decided refusal of 
Montezuma to admit his visit, concealed his mortification as 
he best might, and politely expressed his sense of the 
emperor’s munificence. “ It made him only the more

* ^‘Cierto cosas de ver !” exclaims Las Casas, who saw them with the 
Emperor Charles V., in Seville, in 1520. “ Qued^ron todos los que vi^ron 
aquestas cosas tan ricas y tan hien artifi 9 iadas y hcnnosisimas como 
de cosas nunca vistas.” &c. (Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 
120.) * ** Muy hermosas says Oviedo, who saw them in Valladolid, anddescribes the great wheels more minutely ; “ todo era mucho de ver I ” 
(Hist, de las Indias, MS., loc. cit.) The inquisitive Martyr, who 
examined them carefully, remarks yet more emphatically, “ Si quid 
unquam honoris humana ingenia in huiusccmodi.artibu8 sunt adepta, piin- 
cipatum iure merito ista consc quentur. Aurum geramasque non admiror 
quidem, qua industria, qu6ve studio superet opus materiam, stupeo. Mille 
figtiras et facies mille prospexi quae scribere nequeo. Quid oculos hominum 
Bua pulchritudine ajque possit CtUicere meo iudicio vidi nunquam.” — Do 
Orbe Novo, dec. 4, cap. 9.

desirous,” he said, to have a personal interview with him. 
He should feel it, indeed, impossible to present himself 
again before his own sovereign, without having aocom- 
plished this great object of his vojage ; and one, who had 
sailed over two thousand leagues of ocean, held lightly the 
perils and fatigues of so short a journey by land.” He 
once more requested them to become the bearers of hip 
message to their master, together with a slight additional 
token of his respect.

This consisted of a few fine Holland shirts, a Florentine 
goblet, gilt and somewhat curiously enamelled, with some 
toys of little value, — a sorry return for the solid mfigni- 
ficence of the royal present. The ambassadors may have 
thought as much. At least, they showed no alacrity in 
charging themselves either with the present or the ihes- 
sage ; and, on quitting the Castilian quarters, repeated 
their assurance that the general’s application would be 
unavailing.* •The splendid treasure, which now lay dazzling the eyes 
of the Spaniards, raised in their bosoms very dWerent 
emotions, according to the difference of their characters. 
Some it stimulated with the ardent desire to strike at once 
into the interior, and possess themselves of a country which 
teemed with such boundless stores of wealth. Others looked 
on it as the evidence of a power altogether too formidable to 
be encountered with their present insignificant force. They 
thought, therefore, it would be most prudent to return and 
report their proceedings to the governor of Cuba, where 
preparations could be made Oommmsurate with so vast an 
undertaking. There can be little*doubt as to thA impression

* Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., Hb. 3, cap. I21.*v.-Bemal Diaz, 
Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 39. — lartlilxCcbitl, Hist. Chicb., MS., cap. 80, 
— Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 27, ap. Barcia, td!a, ii.

VOL. I.

DISCOTJJRY OF MEXK30.

m

Di%de on tho bold spirit of Cortes, on which difficulties ever 
operated as incentives rather than discouragements to enter- 
prise. But he prudently said nothing, — at least in public, 
— preferring that so important a movement should flow from 
the determination of liis whole army, rather than from his 
own individual impulse.Meanwhile the soldiers suflfered greatly from the incon- 
veuiences of their position amidst burning sands and the 
pestilent effluvia of the neighbouring marshes, while the 
venomous insects, of these hot regions left them no repose, 
day or night. Thirty of their number had already sickened 
and died ; a loss that could ill be afforded by the little baud. 
To add to tbeix troubles, the coldness of the Mexican chiefs 
had extended to their followers ; and the supplies for the 
camp were not only much diminished, but the prices set on 
them were exorbitant. The position was equally unfavour- 
able for the sliipping, which lay in an open roadstead, 
exposed to the fury of the first norte which should sweep the 
Mexican Gulf.

The general wa| induced by these circumstances to 
despatch two vessels, under Francisco de Montejo, with the 
experienced Alaminos for his pilot, to explore the coast in a 
northerly direction, and see if a safer port and more commo- 
dious quarters for the army could not be found there.

After the lapse of ten dijjs the Mexican envoys returned. 
They entered the Spanish quarters with the same formality 
as on the former visit, bearing with them an additional pre- 
sent of rich stuflfs and metallic ornaments, which, though 
inferior in value to those before brought, were estimated at 
three thousand ounqes of gold. ■ Besides these, there were 
four precious stones of . %iConMerable size, resembling eme- 
ralds, called by the riiliiv^ chalchuites^ each of which, as 
they assured the Spaniards, was worth more than a load of 
gold, and was designed as a mark of particular respect for

SPANISH ENCAMPMENT. 275

the Spanish monarch.* Unfortunately they were not worth 
as many loads of earth in Europe.SPANISH ENCAMPMENT. 275

the Spanish monarch.* Unfortunately they were not worth 
as many loads of earth in Europe.

Montezuma’s answer was in substance the same as before. 
It contained a positive prohibition for the strangers to advance 
nearer to the capital ; and expressed the confidence, that, 
now they^ had obtained what they had most desired, they 
would return to their own country without unnecessary delay. 
Cort(5s received this unpalatable response courteously, though 
somewhat coldly, and, turning to his officers, exclaimed, 
“ This is a rich and powerful prince indeed ; yet it shall go 
hard, but w'e will one day pay him a visit in his capital ! ”

While they were conversing, the bell struck for vespers. 
At the sound, the soldiers, throwing themselves on their 
knees, offered up their orisons before the large wooden cross 
planted in the sands. As the Aztec chiefs gazed with curious 
surprise, Cortes thought it a favourable occasion to impress 
them with what he conceived to be a principal object of his 
visit to the country. Father Olmedo accordingly expounded, 
as briefly and clearly as he could, the great doctrines of 
Christianity, touching on the atonement, the passion, and 
the Insurrection, and concluding with assuring his astonished 
audience, that it was their intention to extirpate the idola- 
trous practices of the nation, and to. substitute the pure 
worship of the true God. He then put into their hands* a 
little image of the Virgin with the infant Redeemer, request- 
ing them to place it in their temples instead of their san- 
guinary deities. How far the Aztec lords cotoprehended 
the mysteries of the Faith, as conveyed through; the double

*

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquistfii7dip,40. PAtber %hagun thus 
describes these stones, so precious that the use of them was*

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquistfii7dip,40. PAtber %hagun thus 
describes these stones, so precious that the use of them was

interdicted to any but the nobles. ^'^Ijas chct>hhmte8 son .verdes y no 
transparentes mezclades de bianco, usanlas Huicho los pribcipales, traytJn- 
dolas A las mu£lecas atadas en hilo, y aqn^lo es seual djs qhe es persona 
noble el que las trac.” — Hist, de Nueva Espaib, lib. 11, cap. 8.

276

DISCOVERY OP MEXICO.

^rsion of Agfiilar and Marina, or how well they perceived 
subtle distinctions between their own images and those 
of the Roman Church, we are not informed. There is reason 
to fear, however, that the seed fell on barren ground ; for, 
when the homily of the good father ended, they withdrew 
with an air of dubious reserve very different from their 
friendly manners at the first interview. The same night 
every hut was deserted by the natives, and the Spaniards 
saw themselves suddenly cut off from supplies in the midst 
of a desolate wilderness. The movement had so suspicious 
an appearance, that Cortes apprehended an attack would be 
made on his quarters, and took precautions accordingly. 
But none meditated.

The army was at length cheered by the return of Montejo 
from Als exploring expedition, after an absence of twelve 
days. He bad run down the Gulf as far as Panuco, where 
he experienced such heavy gales, in attempting to double 
that headland, that he was driven back, and had nearly 
foundered. In the whole course of the voyage he had fbuii® 
only one place tol<^rably sheltered Yrom the north winds. 
Fortunately, the adjacent country, well watered by fresh, 
running streams, afforded a favourable position for the camp ; 
and thither, after some deliberation, it was detef mined to 
repair.^* Camargo, Hist, do Tlascala, MS. — Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, 
MS., lib. 3. cap. 121. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 40, 41. — * 
Herrera, Hist. General, dec, 2, lib, 5, cap, 6. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 29, 
ap. Barcia, tom. ii.

277

CHAPTER VII.

TROUBLES IN THE CAMP, — PLAN OP A COLONY, — MANAGEMENT OF 
CORTfes. — MARCH TO CEMPOALLA. — PROCEEDINGS WITH THE 
NATIVES. — FOUNDATION OP VERA CRUZ.

1519.

There is no situation which tries so severely the patfence 
and discipline of the soldier, as a life of idleness in camp, 
where his thoughts, instead of being bent on enterprise and 
action, are fastened on himself and the inevitable privations 
and dangers of his condition. This was particularly the 
case in the present instance, where, in addition to the evils 
of a scanty subsistence, the troops suifered from excessive 
heat, swarms of venomous insects, and the other annoyances 
of a sultry climate. They were, moreovfe'r, far from possess- 
ing the character of regular forces, trained to subordination 
under a commander whom they had long been taught to 
reverence and obey. They were soldiers of fortune, embarked 
with him in an adventure in which all seemed to have ah 
equal stake, and they regarded their captain — the captain of 
a day — as little more than an equal.

There was a growing discontent among the men at theii* 
longer residence in this strange, land. They were still more 
dissatisfied on learning thh,jjenerars intention to remove to 
the neighbourhood of the port discovered by Montejo. ** It 
was time to return,*' they said, ‘‘^d report wh|t had been 
done to the governor of Cuba, and not linger on these barren 
shores until they had brought theVhole Mexican empire on 
their heads I’* Cortfo evaded their importunities as well as

' DifelCOTERT OF MEXICO.

h« could, assuring them there was no cause for despondency.' DifelCOTERT OF MEXICO.

h« could, assuring them there was no cause for despondency.

Everything so far had gone on prosperously, andi when 
they had taken up a more favourable position, there was no 
reason to doubt they might still continue the same profitable 
intercourse with the natives,*'

While this was passing, five Indians made their appearance 
in the camp one mdrning, and were brought to the general’s 
tent. Their dress and whole appearance were different from 
those of the Mexicans. They wore rings of gold and gems 
of a bright blue stone in their ears and nostrils, while a 
gold leaf delicately wrought was attached to the under lip. 
Marina was unable to comprehend their language ; but, on 
her addressing them in Aztec, two of them, it was found, 
could converse in that tongue. They said they were natives 
of Cempoalla, the chief town of the Totonacs, a powerM 
nation who had come upon the great plateau many centuries 
back, and descending its eastern slope, settled along the 
sierras and broad plains which skirt the Moxic<tn Gulf towards 
the north. Their country was one of : the recent conquests 
of the Aztecs, and^ey experienced SUCh vexatious oppres- 
sions from their conquerors as made them very impatient of 
the yoke. They informed Cqrtds of these and other parti- 
culars. The fame of the Spaniards had reached their master, 
who sent these messengers to request the presence of the 
wonderful strangers in his capital.

Tliis communication was eagerly listened to by the 
general, who, it will he remembered, was possessed of none 
of those facts, laid before the reader, respecting the internal 
condition of the kingdom, which ho had no reason to sup- 
pose other than stKmg and 'united. * An important truth 
now flashed on his inhill; as his quick eye descried in this 
spirit of discontent a potent lever by the aid of which he 
might hope to overturn this barbaric empire. He received 
the mission of the Totonacs most graciously, and, afterbiSOOTERT OE MEXICO.

informing himself, as far as posable, of their di^bsitions 
and resources, dismissed them with presents, promising soon 
to pay a visit to their lord.^ • *

Meanwhile, his personal friends, among whom may be 
particularly mentioned, Alonso Hernandez Puertocarrero, 
Christoval de Olid, Alonso de Avila, Pedro de Alvarado and 
his brothers, were very busy in persuading the troops to 
take such measures as should enable Cortes to go forward 
in those ambitious plans for which he had no warrant from 
the powers of Velasquez. “ To return now,’* they said, 
‘‘was to abandon the enterprise on the threshold, which, 
under such a leader, must conduct to glory and incalculable 
riches. To return to Cuba would be to surrender to the 
greedy governor the little gains they had already got. The 
only way was to persuade the general to establish a per- 
manent colony in the country, the government of which 
would take the conduct of matters into its own hands, and 
provide for the interests of its members. It was true, 
Cortt^s had no such authority from Velasquez. But the 
interests of the Sovereigns, which werfe paramount to every 
other, imperatively demanded it.

These conferences could not be conducted so secretly, 
though held by night, as not to reach the ears of the friends 
of Velasquez. t They remonstrated against the proceedings, 
as insidious and disloyal. They accused the general of 
instigating them ; and, calling on him to take measures 
without delay for the return of the troops to Cuba, announced 
their own intention to depart, with such followers as still 
remained true to the governor.

♦ Bernal Diaz, Hiat. de la Couquista, tap. 41. — Las CftjjKis, Hist, de las 
Ipdias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 121. — Gomara, Crtfnica, cap. 28.

f The letter from the cahildo of Vera Cntz says nothing of these mid- 
night conferences. Bernal Diaz, who Wias privy to them^ is a 8u:ficient 
authority,- — See Hist, de la Conquista, cap, 4^.

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

instead of taking umbrage at this high-handed 
proceeding, or even answering in the same haughty tone, 
mildly replied, “ that nothing was further from his desire 
than to exceed his instructions. He, indeed, preferred to 
remain in the country and continue his profitable intercourse 
with the natives. But, since the army thought otherwise, 
he should defer to their opinion, and give orders to return, 
as they desired.” On the following morning, proclamation 
was made for the troops to hold themselves in readiness to 
embark at once on board the fleet, which was to sail for 
Cuba.^ • ,

Grfcat was the sensation caused by their general's order. 
Even many of those before clamorous for it, with the usual 
caprice of men whose wishes are too easily gratified, now 
.regretted it. The partisans of Cortes were loud in their 
remonstrances. “ They were betrayed by the general,” 
they cried, and thronging round his tent, called on him to 
countermand liis orders. ‘‘We cam© here,” said 
“ expecting to form a settlement, if the State of the country 
authorised it. Now4t seems you have no warrant from the 
governor to make one. But there are interests, higher than 
those of Velasquez, which deBaaud it. These territories are 
not his property, but were discovered for the Sovereigns ; t

* Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 30.*^Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 
3, cap. 121. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist, Chich., MS., cap. 80. — Bernal Diaz, 
ibid., 1(^. fit, — Declaracion de Puertocarrero, MS. The deposition of a 
respectable person like Puertocarrero, taken in the course of the following 
year after his return to Spain, is a document of such authority, that I have 
transferred it entiife, iu the original to the Appendix^ Part 2, No. 7.+ Sometimes we find the Spanish Writers referring to “ the sovereigns,** 
sometimes to ‘‘ the emperor ;** in the former caser, intending queen Joanna, 
the crazy mother of Charles V?, as well as himself. Indeed, all public 
acts \and ordinances ran in the name of both. The title of “ Highness," 
which, until the reign of Charles V,, had usually — not uniformly, as 
Robertson imagines, (History of Charles V., vol. ii. p. 69,) — been applied 
to the sovereign, now gradually gave way to that of Majesty,** which

PLAN OF A COLONY.

281

and it is necessary to plant a colony to watch orer their 
interests, instead of wasting time in idle barter, or, still 
worse, of returning, in the present state of affairs, to Cuba. 
If you refuse,” they concluded, *‘we shall protest against 
your conuuct as disloyal to their Highnesses.”

Cortds received this remonstrance with the embarrassed 
air of one by whom it was altogether unexpected. He 
modestly requested time for deliberation, and promised to 
give his answer on the following day. At the time 
appointed, he called the troops together, and made them 
a brief address. “There was no one,” he said, “if he 
knew his own heart, more deeply devoted than himself to 
the welfare of his Sovereigns, and the glory of the Spanish 
name. He had not only expended his all, but incurred 
heavy debts, to meet the charges of this expedition, and had 
hoped to reimburse himself by continuing his traffic with 
the Mexicans. But, if the soldiers thpught a different course 
advisable, he was ready to postpone his own advantage to 
the good of the state.”* He concluded by declaring his 
-willingness to take measures for settlmg a colony in the 
name of the Spanish Sovereigns ^ and to nominate a magis- 
tracy to .preside over it.f

Charles affected after his election to the imperial throne. The same title 
is occasionally found in the correspondence of the Great Captain, and other 
courtiers of the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella.* According to Robertson, Cortes told his men that he had proposed 
to establish a colony on the coast before marching into the country *, but 
he abandoned his design, at their entreaties to set out at once on the expe- 
dition. In the very next page, we find him organising this same colony. 
(History of America, vol. ii. pp. 241, 242.) The historian would have 
been saved this inconsistency, if he had followed either of the authorities 
whom he cites, Bernal Diaz and Herrera, oj^the letter front Vera Cruz, of 
which he had a copy. They all concur in the statement in the text.

+ Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 122.— ^arta de Vera 
Cruz, MS. — Declaracion de Montejo, MS#— Declaracion de jPuertocarrero, 
MS. ‘‘ Our general, after some urging, acquiesced,” says the blunt old 
soldier, Bernal Diaz j for, as the proverb says, ‘ You ask me to do what

MSCOTEBT OF MEHCO.

* .r ‘ ■ *

For the he selected Puertocarrero and Montejo,

the former cavalier his fast friend, and the latter the#friend 
of Yelasquez, and chosen for that very reason ; a stroke of 
policy which perfectly succeeded. The rcgidores, alguacilt 
treasurer, and other functionaries, were, then appointed, all 
of them his personal friends and adherents. They were 
regularly sworn into office, and the new city received the 
title of Villa Elea de Vera Cruz, The Rich Town of the 
True Cross;*' a name which was considered as happily 
intimating that union of spiritual and temporal interests to 
which 'the arms of the Spanish adventurers in* the New 
WoM were to be devoted.^ Thus, by a single stroke of 
the pen, as it were, the camp was transformed into a civil 
community, and the whole framework and even title of the 
city were arranged before the site of it had been settledThe new municipality were not slow in coming together ; 
when Cort(?s presented himself, cap in hand, before that 
august body, and, laying the powers of Velasquez on the 
table, respectfulij tendered the resignation of his office of 
Captain General, ‘*%hich, indeed,** he said, ‘"‘had neces- 
sarily expired, since the authority of the governor w^as now 
superseded by that of the magistracy of Villa Rica de 
Vera Cruz.” He then, with a profound obeisance left the 
apartment .t

I have already made up my mind to.’ ” Tu me lo rogas, e yo me lo quiero. 
— Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 42.

* According to Bernal Diaz, the title of “Vera Cruz” was intended 
to commemorate their landing on Good Friday .-^Hist. do la Conquista, 
cap. 42.

+ Solis, whose taste for speech-making might have satisfied even the 
Abhe Mably, (see his Treatise, De la Manieilb d’ecrire THistoire,”) has 
put a very fiburishing baranguoSn this occasion into the mouth of his hero, 
of which there is not a vestige in any contemporary account. (Conquista, 
lih. 2, cap. 7.) Dr. Eohertson has transferred it to his own eloquent pages, 
without, citing his author, indeei^ who, considering he came a century and 
a half after the Conquest, must he allowed to he not the hcst, especially 
when the only, voucher for a fact.

MANAGEMENT OF CORTES.

283MANAGEMENT OF CORTES.

283

The council, after a decent time spent in deliberation, 
again requested his presence. “There was no one,” they 
said, “ who, on mature reflection, appeared to them so well 
qualified to take charge of the interests of the community, 
both in peace and in war, as himself ; and they unanimously 
named him, in behalf of their Catholic Hightie'^ses, Captain 
General and Chief Justice of the colony.” He was further 
empowered to draw, on his own account, one-fifth of the 
gold and silver which might ‘ hereafter be obtained by com- 
merce or conquest from the natives.'^ Thus clothed with 
supreme civil and military jurisdiction, Cort(^s was not back- 
ward in exerting his authoiity. He found speedy o(?basion 
for it.

The transactions above described had succeeded each 
other so rapidly, that the governor’s party seemed to be 
taken by surprise, and had formed no plan of opposition. 
When the last measure was carried, however, they broke 
forth into the most indignant and opprobrious invectives, 
denouncing the whole as a systematic conspiracy against 
Velasquez. These accusations led recrimination from 
the soldiers of the other side, until from Words they nearly 
proceeded to blows. Some of the principal cavaliers, among 
them Velasquez de Leon, a kinsman of the governor, Escobar 
his page, and Diego de Ordaz, were so active in instigating 
these turbulent movements that Cortes took the bold mea- 
sure of putting them all in irons, and sending, them on board 
the vessels. He then dispersed the common file by detach- 
ing many of them, with a strong party under Alvarado, to

* Lo peor de todb quo le otorgamos,*’ says Benml somewhat* Lo peor de todb quo le otorgamos,*’ says Benml somewhat

peeyishly, was, *'que la dariamos el quio^ del oro do lo ^tje sis huviesse, 
despues de sacado el Real quinto.” (Hist, de la Con^^sta, cap. 42.) 
The letter from Vera Cniz says nothing of this fifth. The reader, who 
would see the whole account of this renArkahl© transaction in the original, 
may find it in Appendix^ Part 2, No. 8. ^ *

DBCOYERT OF MEXICO.

forage tlie jieiglibouring country, and bring borne provisions 
for tbe destitute camp.

During their absence, every argument that cupidity or 
ambition could suggest was used to win tlie refractory to his 
views. Promises, and even gold, it is said, were liberally 
lavished ; till, by degrees, their understandings were opened 
to a clearer view of the merits of the case. And when the 
foraging party re>appeared with abundance of poultry and 
vegetables, and the cravings of the stomach — that great 
laboratory of disaffection, whether in camp or capital — were 
appeased, good humour returned with good cheer, and the 
rival factious embraced one another as companions in arms, 
pledged to a common cause. Even the high-mettled hidalgos 
on board the vessels did not long withstand the general tide 
of reconciliation, hut one by one gave in their adhesion to 
the new government. What is more remarkable is, that 
this forced conversion was not a hollow one, but from this 
time forward several of these very cavaliers became the 
most steady and devoted partisans of Cort(^s.*

Such was the addi%ss of this extraordinary man, apd such 
the ascendancy which in a few months he had acquired over 
these wild and turbulent spirits ! By this ingenious trans-Such was the addi%ss of this extraordinary man, apd such 
the ascendancy which in a few months he had acquired over 
these wild and turbulent spirits ! By this ingenious trans-

* Carta de Vera Ci*uz, MS. — Gomara, Cr6nica, cap. 30, 31. — Las 
Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MJS., lib. 3, cap. 122. — Ixtlilxocliitl, Hist. 
Chich., MS , cap. >80. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 42- — De- 
claraciones de Montejo y Puertocarrero, MSS. In the process of Narvaez 
against Cortes, the latter is accused of being possessed with the devil, as 
only Lucifer could have gained him thus the affections of the soldiery. 
(Demanda de Narvaez, MS.) Soils, on the other hand, sees nothing but 
good faith and loyalty in the conduct of the general, who acted from a 
sense of duty ! (Conquista, lib. 2, cap. 6, 7.J Solfs is even a more 
Steady apologist for his hero, thah his owd chaplain, Gomara, or the worthy 
magistrates of Vera Cruz. A more impartial testimony than either, pro- 
bably may he gathered from honest Bemal Diaz, so often quoted. A 
hearty champion of the cause, he was by no means blind to the defects nor 
the merits of his leader.

MAKC33: to CEMPOALLA.

285MAKC33: to CEMPOALLA.

285

formation of a military into a civil community, he had 
securcil a new and effectual basis for future operations. He 
might now go forward without fear of check or control from 
a superior, —at least from any other superior than the 
Crownj, under which alone he held his commission. In 
accomplishing this, instead of incurring the charge of usur- 
pation, or of transcending his legitimate powers, he had 
transferred the responsibility, in a great measure, to those 
who had imposed on him the necessity of action. By this 
step, moreover, he had linked the fortunes of his followers 
indissolubly with his own. They had taken their chance 
with him, and, whether for weal or for woe, must abi^e the 
consequences. He was no longer limited to the narrow 
concerns of a sordid traffic, but, sure of their co-operation, 
might now boldly meditate, and gradually disclose, those 
lofty schemes which he had formed in his own bosom for the 
conquest of an empire.*

Harmony being thus restored, Cprt^s sent his heavy guns 
on board the fleet, and ordered it to coast along the shore to 
the north as far as Chiahuitsala, the ^own near which the 
destined port of the new city was situated ; proposing, 
himself, at the head of his troops, to visit Cempoalla, on the 
march. The road lay for some miles across the dreary 
plains in the neighbourhood of the modern Vera Cruz. Jn 
this sandy waste no signs of vegetation met their eyes, 
which, however, were occasionally refreshed by glimpses of 
the blue Atlantic, and by the distant view of the magnificent* This may appear rather indifFereut logic to those who consider that 
Cortes appointed the very body, who, in turn, appointed him to the com- 
mand. But the affectation of legal forms afforded him a thin varnish for 
his proceedings, which served his purpose, fcr the present at least, with the 
troops. For the future he trusted to his good star, — in other words, to 
the success of his enterprise, to vindicate his conduct to the Emperor. He 
did not miscalculate. ■ •

DISCOTBST OF MEXICO.

towering with his spotless diadem of snow far 
above his colossal brethren of the Andes.^ As they 
advanced, the country gradually assumed a greener and 
richer aspect. They crossed a river, probably a tributary 
of the Rio de la Antigua^ with difficulty, on rafts, and on 
some broken canoes that were lying on the banks. They 
now came in view of very different scenery, — wide-rolling 
plains covered with a rich carpet of verdure, and over- 
shadowed by groves of cocoas and feathery palms, among 
whose tall, slender stems were seen deer, and various wild 
animals with which the Spaniards were unacquainted. Some 
of th^ horsemen gave chase to the deer, and wounded, but 
did not succeed in killing them. They saw, also, pheasants 
and other birds ; among them the wild turkey, the pride of 
the American forest, which the Spaniards described as a 
species of peacock, t

On their route they passed through some deserted villages, 
in which wore Indian temples, where they found censers, 
and other sacred utensils, and manuscripts of the ogamOn their route they passed through some deserted villages, 
in which wore Indian temples, where they found censers, 
and other sacred utensils, and manuscripts of the ogam

* The name of the mountain is hot given, and probably was not known, 
hut the minute description in the MS., of Y&m Crux leaves no doubt that it 
was the one mentioned in the text “ Entre las quales es una que excedo 
en mucha altura A. todas las otras y de clla se vec y descuhro gran parte 
de la mar y de la tierra, y es tan alta, que si el dia no, es bien ckro, no sc 
puede divisar ni ver lo alto de ella, porqne de la mitad arriba estd toda 
cubierta de nubes ; y algunas veces, cuando hace muy claro dia, se vee por 
cima de las dichas nubes lo alto de ella, y csti tan bianco, que lo jusgamos 
por nieve.” (Carta de Vera Cruz, MS.) This huge volcano was called 
Citlaltepetl or Star-mountain ” by the Mexicans, — perhaps from the fire 
which once issued from its ^nickl sumtait, far above the clouds. It stands 
in the intendancy of Vera Cruz, and rises, according to Humboldt’s mea- 
Eui^ment, to the enomous height of 17,368 feet hbove the ocean. (Essai 
Politique, tom. i. p. 265.) It it the highest peak but one in the whole 
range of the Mexican Cordilleras.

f Carta de Vera Cruz, MS; — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, 
cap. 44. *

liiAROH TO CffiMPOAIiLA. ;

fibre, coiitawikg the picture-writing, in which, probablji 
their religious ceremonies were recorded. They now beheld, 
also, the hideous spectacle, with which they became after- 
wards familiar, of the mutilated copses of victims who 
had been sacrificed to the accursed deities of the land. 
The Spaniards turned with loathing and indignation from 
a display of butchery, which formed so dismal a contrast 
to the fair scenes of nature by which they were sur-? 
rounded.They held their course along the hanks of the river, 
towards its source, when they were met by twelve Indians, 
sent by the cacique of Cenipoalla to show th^m the w^ay to 
his residence. At night they bivouacked in an open mea- 
dow, where they were well supplied with provisions by their 
new friends. They left the stream on the following morning, 
and, striking northerly across the country, came upon a wide 
expanse of luxuriant plains and woodland, glowing in all the 
splendour of tropical vegetation. The branches of the 
stately trees were gaily festooned with clustering vines of the 
dark-purple grape, variegated convolvidi, and other flowering 
parasites of the most brilliant dyes. The undergrowth of 
prickly aloe, matted with wild rose and honeysuckle, made 
in many places an almost impervious thicket. Amid this 
wilderness of sweet-smelling buds and blossoms fluttered 
numerous birds of the parrot tribe, and clouds of butterflies, 
whose gaudy colours, nowhere so gorgeous as in the tierra 
caliente, rivalled those of the vegetable creation ; while 
birds of exquisite song, the scarlet cardinal and the marvel- 
lous mocking-bird, that comprehends in his own notes the 
whole music of a forest, filled the air with deliciens melody. 
— The hearts of the stern Conquerors were not v<^y sensible 
to the beauties of nature. But the magical ch?^s of the 
scenery drew forth unbounded expressions of delight, and as 
they wandered through this ‘terrestrial paradise,*' as they

2»8

DISCOVEBY Ot MEXICO. ,

Called it, they fondly compared it to the fairest regions of 
their own sunny land.*2»8

DISCOVEBY Ot MEXICO. ,

Called it, they fondly compared it to the fairest regions of 
their own sunny land.*

As they approached the Indian city, they saw abundant 
signs of cultivation in the trim gardens and orchards that 
lined both sides of the road. They were now met by parties 
of the natives of either sex, who increased in numbers with 
every step of their progress. The women, as well as men, 
i^ngled fearlessly among the soldiers, bearing bunches and 
‘Wliftaths of flowers, with which they decorated the neck of 
general’s charger, and hung a chaplet of roses about 
^ his helmet. Flowers were the delight of this people. They 
bestowed much care in their cultivation, in which they were 
well seconded by a climate of alternate heat and moisture, 
stimulating the soil to the spontaneous production of every 
form of vegetable life. The same refined taste, as we shall

* Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 32, ap. Barcia,tom. ii — Herrera, Hist. General, 
dec. 2, lib. 5, cap. 8. — Oviedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap. 1, 
“ Mui liermosas vegas y riboras tales y tan hermosas que en toda Espafia 
no pueden scr mejores ansi de apaciblcs d la vista como de' fructifJgjjraiiiiv^ 
(Carta de Vera Cruz, M^.) The following poetical apostrophe, by Lord 
Morpeth, to the scenery of Cuba, equally applicable to that of the fierra 
fCaliente, will give the reader a more animated picture of the glories of 
these sunny climes, than luy own prose can. The verses which have never 
been published, breathe the generous sentiment characteristic of their noble 
author.

“Ye tropic forests of unfading green, *

Where the palm tapers and the orange glows,

■ AVhere the light bamboo weaves her feathery screen,

And her far shade the matchless celda tlirows !

“Ye cloudless ethers of unchanging blue,

Save where the rosy streaks of eve give way 
To the clear sapphire of your midnight hue,

The burnishM azure of your perfect day !

t

“ Yet tell me not my native skies are bleak,Save where the rosy streaks of eve give way 
To the clear sapphire of your midnight hue,

The burnishM azure of your perfect day !

t

“ Yet tell me not my native skies are bleak,

That flush’d with liquid wealth no cane fields wave ;

For Virtue pines and (Manhood dares not speak,

And Natm’e’s glories brighten round the Slave.”

289

PJROdUBMNGS WITH TSE NATIVES.

see, prevailed among the warlike Aztecs, and has survived^ 
the degradation of the nation in their descendants of the 
present day.*

Many of the women appeared, from their richer dress 
and numerous attendants, to he persons of rank. They 
were clad in robes of fine cotton, curiously coloured, which 
reached from the neck — in the inferior orders, from the<! 
waist — to the ankles. The men wore a sort of mantle of 
the same material, a la Morisca^ in the Moorish fashion, 
over their shoulders, and belts or sashes about the loins. 
Both sexes had jewels and ornaments of gold round their 
necks, while their ears and nostrils were perforated ^with 
rings of the same metal.

J ust before reaching the town, some horsemen who had 
rode in advance returned with the amazing intelligence,

“ that they had been near enough to look within the gates, 
and found the houses all plated with burnished silver ! ” 
On entering the place, the silver was found to be nothing 
more than a brilliant coating of stucco^ with which the 
principal buildings were covered ; a gircumstance which 
produced much merriment among the soldiers at the ex- 
pense of their credulous comrades. Such ready credulity is ^ 
a proof of the exalted state of their imaginations, which 
were prepared to see gold and silver in every object around 
them.t The edifices of the better kind were of stone and 
lime, or bricks dried in the sun ; the poorer were of clay♦ The same love of flowers,” observes one of the most delightful of 
modern travellers, ‘‘ distinguishes the natives now, as in the times of Cortes. 
And it presents a strange anomaly,” she adds, with her ustjal fiMJiiteness ; 
“ this love of flowers having existed along with their sangulhary worship 
and barbarous sacrifices.” — Madame Calder^ de la Barca, Lilfe in Mexico, 
vol. i. let. 12. )

+ “Con la imaginacion que llevaban, I buenos deeeofi, todo se les 
antojaba plata, i oro lo que relucia,”— CSomara, Cr<5nic% cap. 32, ip. 
Barcia, tom. ii. „ . *

290

BiaCOVEBY OY MEXICO.

earth. All were thatched with palm-leaves, which, 
though a flimsy roof, apparently, for such structures, were 
BO nicely interwoven as to form a very effectual protection 
against the weather.

The city was said to contain from twenty to thirty thou- 
sand inhabitants. This is the most moderate computation, 
and not improbable.* Slowly and silently the little army 
paced the narrow and now crowded streets of Cempoalla, 
inspiring the natives with no greater wonder than they 
themselves experienced at the display of a policy and re- 
finement so far superior to anything they had witnessed in 
the^jN’ew World. t The cacique came out in front of his re- 
sidence to receive them He was a tall and very corpulent 
man, and advanced leaning on two of his attendants. He 
“ received Cortes and his followers with great courtesy,; and, 
after a brief interchange of civilities, assigned the army its 
quarters in a neighbouring temple, into the spacious court- 
yard of which a number of apartments opened, affording ex- 
cellent accommodations for the soldiery.Here the Spanijtrds were well supplied with provisions, 
meat cooked after the fashion of the country, and maize 
* made into hiJe^id-cakes. . The general received, also, a pre- 
sent of coi|s£derable value from the cacique, consisting of 
ornaments of gold and fine cotto^. 13'otwithstanding these 
friendly demonstrations, Cortes "did not relax his habitual

* This is Las Casas* estimate. (Hist* dq las Ind., MS., lib. 3, cap. 121.) 
Torquemada hesitates between twenty, fifty, and one hundred and fifty 
thousand, each of which he names at different times 1 (Clavigero, Slor. 
del Messico, tom. ii. p* 27, nota.) The place was gradually abandoned, 
after the Conquest, for others, in a more favoprahle position, probably, for 
trade. Its ruins were visible at^the close of the last century. — See Loren- 
aana, Hist, de Nueva Espafia,‘^p. 39, nota.

+ “ Porque viven mas polftica y rasonahlemente que ninguna de las 
gentes que hasta oy eu est^ partes se ha visto, **— *-Carta de Vera 
Cruz, MS. «

PEOOEEDINCIS WITH THE NATIVES.

m

vigilance, nor neglect any of the precautions of a good soldien 
On his route, indeed, he had always inarched in order of 
battle, well prepared against surprise. In his present 
quarters, he stationed his sentinels with like care, posted 
his small artillery so as to command the entrance, and for- 
bade any soldier to leave the camp without orders, under 
pain of death.*The following morning, Cortes, accompsinied by fifty of 
his men, paid a visit to the lord of Cempoalla in his own 
residence. It was a building of stone and lime, standing 
on a steep terrace of earth, and was reached by a flight of 
stone steps. It may have borne resemblance in its itruc- 
ture to some of the ancient buildings found in Central 
America. Cortes, leaving his soldiers in the court-yard, 
entered the mansion with one of his officers, and his fair 
interpreter, Doha Marina. t A long conference ensued, 
from which the Spanish general gathered much light re- 
specting the state of the countiy. He first announced to 
the chief, that he was the subject of a great monarch who 
dwelt beyond the waters ; that he had^ come to the Aztec 
shores, to abolish the inhuman worship which prevailed 
there, and to introduce the knowledge of the true God.* 
The cacique replied that*their gods, who sent them the 
sunshine and the rain, were good enough for them ; that he 
was the tributary of a powerful monarch also, whose capital 
stood on a lake far off among the mountains ; a stem prince, 
merciless in his exactions, and, in case of resistance, or any 
offence, sure to wreak his vengeance by carrying off their 
yming men and maidens to be saerifioed to Ids deities.

' * Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS.,^b. 3, cap. 121.-^arta de Vera 
Cruz, MS. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 33, ap. I3arcia, tom. il«.4pviedo, Hist 
de las lud., MS., lib. 33, cap. 1.

i' The courteous title of doAa is usuall) given \>y the S^inush chroni- 
clers to this accomplished Indian. .

xr'2

293

BISCOTEBT 0? MEXICO.

Oortls assured him that he would never consent to such 
enormities ; he hal been sent by his sovereign to redress 
abuses and to punish the oppressor and, if the Totonacs 
would be true to him, he would enable them to throw off 
the detested yoke of the Aztecs.The cacique added, that the Totonac territory contained 
about thirty towns and villages, which could muster a hun- 
dred thousand warriors, — a number much exaggerated.t 
There were other provinces of the empire, he said, where 
the Aztec rule was equally odious ; and between him and 
the capital lay the warlike republic of Tlascala, which had 
alwagfs maintained its independence of Mexico. The fame 
of the Spaniards had gone before them, and he was well 
acquainted with their terrible victory at Tabasco. But still 
he looked with doubt and alarm to a rupture with “ the 
great Montezuma,** as he always styled him ; whose armies, 
on the least provocation, would pour down from the moun- 
tain regions of the west, and, rushing over the plains like a 
whirlwind, sweep off the wretched people to slavery and 
sacrifice ! ^

Cortes endeavoured to reassure him, by declaring that a 
single Spaniard was stronger than a host of Aztecs. At 
the same time, it was desirable fo know what nations would 
co-operate with him, not so much on his account, as theirs, 
that he might distinguish friend from foe, and know whom 
he was to spare in this war, of extermination. Having 
raised the confidence of the admiring chief by this comfort-

♦ « No venia Bino d deshacer agravios, i favorccer lo« presos, aiudir d 
lo8 mezquinoB, i quitar tiranias.” (Gomara, Ci’<5aica, cap. 33, ap. Barcia, 
tom. ii.) Are we reading the ^dventurea — ^it is the language — of Don 
Quixote, or Amadis de Gaula.*^

f Ibid., cap. 36. Cortes in his Second Letter to the emperor Charles V., 
estimates the number of fighting men at 50,000. — Relacion Segunda, ap. 
Lorenzana, p. 40. ^

PROCEEDINGS WITH THE NATIVES*. 29S

able and politic vaunt, he took an affectionate leave, With 
the assurance that he would shortly isturn and concert 
measures for their future operations, when he had visited 
his ships in the adjoining port, and secured a permanent 
settlement there.*The intelligence gained by Cortes gave great satisfaction 
to his mind. It confirmed his former views, and showed, 
indeed, the interior of the monarchy to bo in a state far 
more distracted than he had supposed. If he had before 
scarcely shrunk from attacking the Aztec empire in the 
true spirit of a knight-errant, with his single arm, as it 
were, what had he now to fear, when one-half of the n^ition 
could be thus marshalled against the other ? In the excite- 
ment of the moment, his sanguine spirit kindled with an 
enthusiasm which over-leaped every obstacle. He com- 
municated his own feelings to the oflScers about him, and, 
before a blow was struck, they already felt as if the banners 
of Spain were waving in triumph from the towers of Monte- 
zuma ! But many a bloody field was to be fought, many a 
peril and privation to be encountered, tbefore that consum- 
mation could be attained.

Taking leave of the hospitable Indian on the following 
day, the Spaniards took the road to Chiahuitzlan,f about 
four leagues distant, near which was the port discovered by 
Montejo, where their ships were now riding at anchor. 
They were provided by the cacique with four hundred 
Indian porters, tamenes, as they were called, to transport the

* Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 121.--t^Ixtlilj[ooMtl,* 
Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 81. — Oviedo, Hist, de las lad., MS., lib. 33, 
cap. 1.

f The historian, with the aid of Claiiigero, himself a tMexican, may 
rectify frequent blunders of former writers in the orthogi^phy of Aztec 
names. Both Robertson and Solis spell the name of this plac^ Qmabialom. 
Blunders in such a barbarous nome&clatA:6 must be admitted to be very 
pardonable.

* BIS0OinBBt OF MEXICO.* BIS0OinBBt OF MEXICO.

baggage. These men easily carried fifty pounds* weight 
fire or six leagues in a day. They were in use all over the 
Mexican empire, and the Spaniards found them of ^eat 
service, henceforth, in relieving the troops from this jmrt of 
their duty. They passed through a country of the same 
rich, voluptuous character as that which they had lately 
traversed ; and arrived early next morning at the Indian 
town, perched like a fortress on a bold, rocky eminence 
|hat commanded the Gulf. Most of the inhabitants had 
fled, but fifteen of the principal men remained, who received 
them in a friendly manner, offering the usual compliments 
of flewers and incense. The people of the place, losing 
their fears, gradually returned. While conversing with the 
chiefs, the Spaniards were joined by the worthy cacique of 
Cempoalla, borne by his men on a litter. He eagerly took 
part in their deliberations. The intelligence gained here by 
Cortes confirmed the accounts already gathered of the feel- 
ings and resources of the Totonac nation.

In the midst of their conference, they were interrupted 
by a movement ameng the people, and sooli Itfroiwards fife 
men entered the great square or markel^aee, where ilSej^ 
were standing. By their lofty pot't, their ^^culiar and mhch 
richet dress, they seemed not te be of the same race as 
these Indians. Their dark glossy hair was tied in a knot 
on the top of the head. 'T’lfey had bunches of flowers in 
their hands, and were fcdfewed by several attendants, some 
bearing wands with ccdds;" Others fans, with which they 
brushed away the flies and insects from their lordly 
masters. As these persons passed through the place, they 
cast a haughty look on the Spaniards; scarcely deigning to 
return their salutations, t Tk% were immediately joined, in 
great confusion, by the Tqfltiac chiefs, who seemed anxious 
to conciliate them by every kind of attention.

The general, much astonished, inquired of Marina whatThe general, much astonished, inquired of Marina what

PEOCtom0« WITH THE NATIVES, 2&S"‘

it meant. She informed him, they were Aztec nobles, 
empowered to receive the tribute for Montezuma. Soon 
after, the chiefs returned with dismay painted on their 
faces. They confirmed Marina’s statement, adding, that 
the Aztecs greatly resented the entertainment afforded the 
Spaniards without the Emperor’s permission ; and demanded 
in expiation twenty young men and women for sacrifice to 
the gods. Cortes showed the strongest indignatipn at this 
insolence. He required the Totonacs not only to refuse the 
demand, but to arrest the persons of the collectors, and 
throw them into prison. The chiefs hesitated, but he in- 
sisted on it so peremptorily, that they at length com^ied, 
and the Aztecs were seized, bound hand and foot, and 
placed under a guard.In the night, the Spanish general procured the escape 
of two of them, and had them brought secretly before him. 
He expressed his regret at the indignity they had expe- 
rienced from the Totonacs ; told them, he would provide 
means for their flight, and to-morrow would endeavour to 
obtain the release of their companions-^ He desired them 
to report this to their master, with assurances of the great 
regard the Spaniards entertained for him, notwithstanding 
his ungenerous behaviour in leaving them to perish from 
want on his barren shores. He then sent the Mexican 
nobles down to th^e port, whence they were carried to 
another part of the coast by water, for fear of the violence 
of the Totonacs. These were greatly incensed at the escape 
of the prisoners, and would have sacrificed the remainder 
at once, but for the Spanish commander, who evinced the 
utmost hprrbr at the proposal, and ordered them to be sent 
for safe custody on board the fleet- ^ Soon after, they 
permitted to join their companions, — Tins artfi^ proceed- 
ing, so characteristic of the policy of Cortes, had, as we 
shall see hereafter, all the effect ‘intended on jl&ntezuma.

2 %

DISCOTERT OF MEXICO.

It cannot be commended, certainly, as in the true spirit of 
cMvab-y ; yet it has not wanted its panegyrist among the 
national historians !'^2 %

DISCOTERT OF MEXICO.

It cannot be commended, certainly, as in the true spirit of 
cMvab-y ; yet it has not wanted its panegyrist among the 
national historians !'^

By order of Cortds, messengers were despatched to the 
Totonac towns, to report what had been done, calling on 
them to refuse the payment of further tribute to Monte- 
, zuma. But there was no need of messengers. The 
affrighted attendants of the Aztec lords had fled in every 
direction, bearing the tidings, which spread like wildfire 
through the country, of the daring insult offered to the 
majesty of Mexico. The astonished Indians, cheered with 
the §yreet hope of regaining their ancient liberty, came in 
numbers to Chiahuitzlan, to see and confer with the formid- 
able strangers. The more timid, dismayed at the thoughts 
of encountering the power of Montezuma, recommended an 
embassy to avert his displeasure by timely concessions. But 
the dexterous management of Cortds had committed them- v 
too far to allow any reasonable expectation of indulgence* 
from this quarter. After some hesitation, thei^efote^ it was 
determined to embi;^e the protection of tl|dl^eniards, and 
to make one bold effort for the recovery ^^Iteedom. Oaths 
of allegiance were taken, by the chiefs the Spanish sove- 
reigns, and duly recorded by GodOy; the royal notary. 
Cortes, satisfied with the important acquisition of so many 
vassals to the Crown, set oiit soon aftfr for the destined 
port, having first promised to revisit Cempoalla, where his 
business was but partially accomplished, t

The spot selected for the new city was only htilf a league

* “ Grande artifice,” exclaims Solis, “ de medir lo que disponia con lo 
quo recelaba ; y pmdente capitan €l que sabe caminar en alcance de las 
contingencias ! Conqtdsta,,iii^, 2, 6ap. 9.* “ Grande artifice,” exclaims Solis, “ de medir lo que disponia con lo 
quo recelaba ; y pmdente capitan €l que sabe caminar en alcance de las 
contingencias ! Conqtdsta,,iii^, 2, 6ap. 9.

f IxtliU’ocliitl, Hist. Cbich., MS,, cap. 81. — Rel. Seg. de Cortes, ap. 
Lorenzana, p. 40. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap, 34-36, ap. Barcia, tom. ii. — 
Bernal Diaz, Conquista, cap. 46^47. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 
5, cap. 10, 11.

PROCEEDINGS WITH THE NATIVES.

297

distant, in a wide and fruitful plain, affording a tolerable 
haven for the shipping. Cortds was not long in determining 
the circuit of the walls, and the sites df the fort, granary, 
town-house, temple, and other public buildings. The 
friendly Indians eagerly assisted, by bringing materials, 
stone, lime, wood, and bricks dried in the sun. Every 
man put his hand to the work. The general laboured with 
the meanest of the soldiers, stimulating theii exertions by 
his example, as well as voice. In a few weeks the task 
was accomplished, and a town rose up, which, if not quite 
worthy of the aspiring name it bore, answered most of the 
purposes for which it was intended. It served as ^ good 
point d'appui for future operations ; a place of retreat for 
the disabled, as ,well as for the army in case of reverses ; a 
magazine for stores, and for such articles as might be re- 
ceived from or sent to the mother country ; a port for the 
shipping ; a position of sufficient strength to overawe the 
adjacent country.*

It was the first colony — the fruitful parent of so many 
others^® New Spain. It was hailed , with satisfaction by 
the simple natives, who hoped to repose in safety under its 
protecting shadow. Alas ! they could not read the future,* Carta de Vera Cruz, MS. — Bernal Diaz, Conquista, cap. 48. — Oviedo, 
Hist, de las Ind,, MS,, lib. 33, cap. 1. — Declaracion de Montejo, MS. 
Notwithstanding the advantages of its situation, La Villa Rica was aban- 
doned in a few years for a neighbouring position to the south, not far from 
the mouth of the Antigua. The second settlement was known by the 
name of Vera Cruz Yuja^ “ Old Vera Cruz.'* Early in the 17 th century 
this place also was abandoned for the present city, Nuevdb Y&ra QruZy or, 
‘‘ New Vera Cruz,” as it is called. Of the true cause of these successive 
migrations we are ignorant. If,, as is pretended, it was on account of the 
vomitOf the inhabitants, one would suppoge, can have gained little by the 
exchange. (See Humboldt, Essai Politique, tom ii. p. 210.) A want of 
attention to these changes has led to much confusion inaccuracy in 
the ancient maps. Lorenzana has not eblMiped them in his ^art and topo- 
graphical account of the route of Corti^. , , ^

29 «

DISCOVERY or MEXICO.

or they would have found no cause to rejoice in this har- 
binger of a revolution more tremendous than any predicted 
by their bards and prophets. It was not the good Quetzal- 
coatl who had returned to claim his own again, bringing 
peace, freedom, and civilisation in his train. Their fetters, 
indeed, would be broken, and their wrongs be amply 
avenged on the proud head of the Aztec ; but it was to be 
by that strong arm which should bow down equally the 
oppressor and the oppressed. The light of civilisation 
would be poured on their lanad ; but it would be the light 
of a consuming fire, before which their barbaric glory, 
their institutions, their very existence and name as a nation, 
would wither and become extinct ! Their doom was sealed 
when the white man had set his foot on their soil.

299

CHAPTER Vm.

ANOTHER AZTEC EMBASSY. — DESTRUCTION OF THE IDOLS. — DESPATCHES 
SENT TO SPAIN. — CONSPIRACY IN THE CAMP — THE FLEET SUNK,

1519.299

CHAPTER Vm.

ANOTHER AZTEC EMBASSY. — DESTRUCTION OF THE IDOLS. — DESPATCHES 
SENT TO SPAIN. — CONSPIRACY IN THE CAMP — THE FLEET SUNK,

1519.

While the Spaniards were occupied with their new settle- 
ment, they were surprised by the presence of an embassy 
from Mexico, The account of the imprisonment of the 
royal collectors had spread rapidly through the country. 
When it reached the capital, all wer^ filled with amazement 
at the unpi^cedented daring of the strangers. In Monte- 
zuma every other feeling, even that of fear, was swallowed 
up in indignation ; and he showed hie wonted energy in 
the vigorous preparations which he instantly made to punish 
his rebellious vassals, and to avenge the insult offered to the 
majesty of the empire. But when the Aztec officers 
liberated by Cortc^s reached the capital and reported the 
courteous treatment they had received from the Spanish 
commander, Montezuma’s anger was mitigated, .and his 
superstitious fears, getting the ascendancy again, induced 
him to resume his former timid and conciliatory policy. He 
accordingly sent an embassy, consisting of two youths, his 
nephews, and four of the ancient nobles of his court, to 
the Spanish quarters. He provided them, in his usual 
munificent spirit, with a princely donation of gold, rich 
cotton stuffs, and beautiful ma^^les of the plwmaye, or 
feather embroidery. The envoys, on coming before €ort^s.

m

DISCOVERT OF MEXICO.

presented him with the articles, at the same time offering 
the acknowledgments of their master for the courtesy he 
had shown in liberating his captive nobles. He was sur- 
prised and afflicted, however, that the Spaniards should 
have countenanced his faithless vassals in their rebellion. 
He had no doubt they were the strangers whose arrival 
had been so long announced by the oracles, and of the same 
lineage with himself.* From deference to them he would 
spare the Totonacs, while they were present. But the time 
for vengeance would come.^ Cortes entertained the Indian chieftains with frank hos- 
pltal^y. At the same time he took care to make such a 
display of his resources, as, while it amused their minds, 
should leave a deep impression of his power. He then, 
after a few trifling gifts, dismissed them with a conciliatory 
message to their master, and the assurance that he should 
soon pay his respects ^ him in his capital, where all mis? 
understanding between them would be readily adjusted.

The Totonac allies could scarcely credit il||ir senses, 
when they gathered the nature of this interview. Not- 
withstanding the presence of the Spani|^ds, they had looked 
with apprehension to the consequeujpes of their rash act ; 
and their feelings of admiratioaa were heightened into awe 
for the strangers who, at this distance, could exercise so 
mysterious an influence over the terrible Montezuma, t

Not long after, the Spaniards received an application 
from the cacique of Cempi^l^a to aid him in a dispute in 
which he ivas engaged w^ a neighbouring city. Cortds 
marched with a part of his forces to his support. -On the 
route, one Morla, a common soldier, robbed a native of a

t

• “ Teniendo respeto i que tiene por cierto, que somos los que bus ante- 
passadoB les auian diclio, que auian de venir i sus tierras, € que deuemos 
dc ser de bub linajes.” — Bemal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 48,

*!• Oomara, Crduica, cap. 37. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist, Chicli., MS., cap. 82.

ANOTHEB AZTEC EMBASSY.

3§1*!• Oomara, Crduica, cap. 37. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist, Chicli., MS., cap. 82.

ANOTHEB AZTEC EMBASSY.

3§1

couple of fowls. Cortes, indignant at this violation of his 
orders before his face, and aware of the importance of main- 
taining a reputation for good faith wilfh his ^allies, com- 
manded the man to be hung up at once hj the roadside, in 
face of the whole army. Fortunately for the poor wretch, 
Pedro de Alvarado, the future conqueror of Quich^ was 
present, and ventured to cut down the body while there was 
yet life in it. He, probably, thought enough had been 
done for example, and the loss of a single life, unnecessarily, 
was more than the little band could afford. The anecdote 
is characteristic, as showing the strict discipline maintained 
by Cortes over his men and the freedom assumed his 
captains, who regarded him on terms nearly of equality, — 
as a fellow-adventurer with themselves. This feeling of 
companionship led to a spirit of insubordination among them, 
which made his own post as commander the more delicate 
and difficult. ^On reaching the hostile city, but a few leagues from the 
coast, they> were received in an amicable manner ; and 
Cort(^s, who was accompanied by his allies, had the satis- 
faction of reconciling these different branches of the 
Totonac family with each other, without bloodshed. He 
tlien returned to Cempoalla, where he was welcomed with 
joy by the people, who were now impressed with as favour- 
able an opinion of his moderation and justice, as they had 
before been of his valour. In token of his gratitude, the 
Indian cacioue delivered to the general eight Indian 
maidens, richly dressed, wearing collars and ornaments 
of gold, with a number of female slaves to wait on them. 
They were daughters of the principal chiefs, and the 
cacique requested that the Spanish captains might take 
them as their wives. Cortds received the damsels cour- 
teously, but told the cacique they must first he baptised, as 
the sons of the Church could We no comm^ree with

BIBCOTERT tf MtXlCO.

pe then declared that it was a great object of 
his mission to wean the natives from their heathenish 
abominations, andVesought the Totonac lord to allow his 
idols to be cast down, and the symbols of the true faith to 
be erected in their place.To this the other answered as before, that his gods were 
good enough for him ; nor could all the persuasion of the 
general, nor the preaching of father Olmedo, induce him to 
acquiesce. Mingled with his polytheism, he had concep- 
tions of a Supreme and Infinite Being, Creator of the 
Universe^ and his darkened understanding could not com- 
prel^nd how such a Being could condescend to take the 
form,<|f humanity, with its infirmities and ills, and wander 
ahoirt on earth, the .voluntary victim of persecution from the 
hands of those whom his breath had called into existence.! 
He plainly told the Spaniards that he would resist any 
violence offered to his gods, who would, indeed, avenge 
the act themselves, by the instant destruction of their 
enemies. * ,

But the zeal of <tho Christians had mounted too high to 
be cooled by remonstrance or menace. Dfiring their resi- 
dence in the land, they had witnessed" more than once the 
barbarous rites of the natives; theit' cruel sacrifices of human 
victims, and their disgusting cannibal repasts.f Their souls

* “ De buena gana recibirian laa Doncellaa como fueson Ohristianos ; 
porque de otra manera, no era pomltido i, hombrea, hijoa de la Iglesia de 
Dios, tener comercio con iddlatras.*' — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 5, 
cap. 13.

f Herrera, dec. 2, lib. 5, cap. 18. — Las Casas, Histde las Indios, MS., 
lib. *3, cap. 122. Herrera has pnt a very edifying harangue, on this oxaaion, 
into the mouth of Cortds, which savours much more of the priest than the 
soldier. Does he not confound him with father Olmedo ?

t “ Esto hahemos vistS,'** says the Letter of Vera Cruz, algunos de 
nosotros, y Idl que lo han vistp dizen que es la mas terrible y la mas 
espantosa cosa dever quo jamas hau visto.'' Still more strongly speaks

DEST^atTOTIOK OF THE IDOLS.

303

sickened at these* abominations, and they agreed with one 
voice to stand by their general, when he told them, thatDEST^atTOTIOK OF THE IDOLS.

303

sickened at these* abominations, and they agreed with one 
voice to stand by their general, when he told them, that

Heaven would never smile on theij^ enterprise, if they 
countenance such atrocities ; and that, for his own part, 
he was resolved the Indian idols should be demolished that 
very hour, if it cost him his life/* To postpone the work of 
conversion was a sin. In the enthusiasm of the moment, 
the dictates of policy and ordinary prudence were alike 
unheeded.

Scarcely waiting for his commands, the Spaniards moved 
towards one of the principal teocallis, or temples, which rose 
high on a pyramidal foundation, with a steep asc^t of 
stone steps in the middle. The cacique, divining their 
purpose, instantly called his men to arms. The Indian 
warriors gathered from all quarters, with shrill cries and 
clashing of weapons ; while the priests, in thaeir dark cotton 
robes, with dishevelled tresses matted with blood, flowing 
wildly over their shoulders, rushed frantic among the natives, 
calling on them to protect their gods from violation ! All 
was now confusion, tumult, and warlil|p menace, where so 
lately had been peace and the sweet brotherhood of nations.

Cortds took his usual prompt and decided measures. He 
caused the cacique and some of the principal inhabitants and 
priests to he arrested by his soldiers. He then cmnmanded 
them to quiet the people, for, if an arrow was i^ot against 
a Spaniard, it should cost every one of thep his life. 
Marina, at the same time, represented the madness of 
resistance, and reminded the cacique, that, if he now alien-Bernal Diaz (Hist, de la Conqaista, cap. 51.) The Letter, jcomputes that 
there were fifty or sixty persons thus butchered in each of the teooaUis 
every year, giving an annual consumption, in the countiij&s which the 
Spaniards had then visited, of three or four thousand victim! 1 (Carta de 
Vera Cruz, MS.) However loose this arithmetic may he, t^e general fact 
is appalling.

DISCOVEEV of MEXICO.

IP

ated the affections of the Spaniards, he would he left without 
a protector against the terrible vengeance of Montezuma. 
These temporal cSpsiderations seem to have had more 
weight with the Totonac chieftain than those of a more 
spiritual nature. He covered his face with his hands, 
exclaiming, that the gods would avenge their own wrongs.

The Christians were not slow in availing themselves of 
his tacit acquiescence. Fifty soldiers, at a signal from their 
general, sprang up the great stairway of the temple, entered 
the building on the summit, the walls of which were black 
with human gore, tore the huge wooden idols from their 
foun4f^tionB, and dragged them to the edge of the terrace. 
Their fantastic forma and features, conveying a symbolic 
meaning, which was lost on the Spaniards, seemed in their 
eyes only the hideous lineaments of Satan. With great 
alacrity they rolled the colossal monsters down the steps of, 
the pyramid, amidst the triumphant shouts of their own 
companions, and the groans and lamentations of the msibres. 
They then consummated the whole by burning them in the 
presence of the assembled multitude. ■ .The same effect followed as in Cozumel,, The Totonacs, 
finding their deities incapable of preventing Or even punish- 
ing this profanation of their ahrines, conceived a moan 
opinion of their power, compared with that of the mysterious 
and formidable strangers. The floor and walls of the teocalli 
were then cleansed, by command of Cortes, from their foul 
impurities ; a fresh coating of stucco was laid on them by 
the Indian masons ; and an altar was raised, surmounted by 
a lofty cross, and hung with garlands of roses. A pro- 
cession was next formed, in which ‘some of the principal 
Totonac priests, exchangimg their dark mantles for robes of 
white, carried lighted candles in their hands ; while an 
image of the Virgin, halj smothered under the weight of 
flowers, was borne aloft, and, as the procession climbed the

DESTRUCTION OP THE IDOLS,

305

steps of the temple, was deposited above the altar. Mass 
was performed by father Olmedo, and the impressive cha- 
racter of the ceremony and the j)a8sioimte eloquence of the 
good priest touched the feelings of the motley audience, 
until Indians as well as Spaniards, if we may trust the 
chronicler, were melted into tears and audible sobs. The 
Protestant missionary seeks to enlighten the underL>tanding 
of his convert by the pale light of reason. Bet the bolder 
Catholic, kindling tlie spirit by the splendour of the spectacle 
and by the glowing portrait of an agonised Bedeemcr, 
sweeps along his hearers in a tempest of passion, that 
drowns everything like reflection. He has secure^ his 
convert, however, by the hold on his afPections, — an easier 
and more powerful hold with the untutored savage, than 
reason.An old soldier named Juan de Torres, disabled by bodily 
inflrmity, consented to remain and watch over the sanctuary 
amd instruct the natives in its services. Cortes then em- 
bracing his Totonac allies, now brothers in religion as in 
arms, set out once more for the Villa Jlica, where he had 
some arrangements to complete, previous to his departure 
for the capital.*

He was surprised to And that a Spanish vessel had arrived 
there in his absence, having on board twelve soldiers and 
two horses. It was under the command of a captain named 
Saucedo, a cavalier of the ocean, who had followed in the 
track of Cortes in quest of adventure. Though a small, 
they aflbrded a very seasonable, body of recruits for the 
little army. By these men, the Spaniards were informed 
that Velasquez, the governor of Cuba, had lately received

•

♦ Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 122. — ^Bernal Diaz, 
Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 51, 52. — Gomam, Crdnica, cap. 43. — Herivi-a, 
Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 5, cap. 13, K. — Ixtlilxocbitl, Hi^t. Cliich., 
MS., cap. 83.

VOL. I.

X

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

306 .

a ■warrant from the Spanish government to establish a colony 
in the newly discovered countries.VOL. I.

X

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

306 .

a ■warrant from the Spanish government to establish a colony 
in the newly discovered countries.

Cortes now resoi^j'ed to put a plan in execution which 
he had been some time meditating. He knew that all the 
late acts of the colony, as well as his own authority, would 
fall to the ground without the royal sanction. He knew, 
too, that the interest of Velasquez, which was great at court, 
would, so soon as he was acquainted with his secession, he 
wholly employed to circumvent and crush him. Ho resolved 
to anticipate- his movements, and to send a vessel to 
Spain, with despatches addressed to the emperor himself, 
announcing the nature and extent of his discoveries, and 
to obtain, if possible, the confirmation of his proceedings. 
In order to conciliate his master’s good-will, he further 
proposed to send him such a present as should suggest lofty 
ideas of the importance of his own services to the crown. 
To effect this, the royal fifth he considered inadequate. He 
conferred with his officers, and persuaded them to relinquish 
their share of the treasure. At his instance, they mad© a 
similar application the soldiers ; representing that jt was 
the earnest wish of the general, who set the example by 
resigning his own fifth, equal to the share of the crown. 
It was but little that each man was asked to surrender, but 
the whole would make a present worthy of the monarch for 
whom it was intended. By this sacrifice they might hope to 
secure his indulgence for the past, and his favour for the 
future ; a temporary sacrifice, that would be well repaid by 
the security of the rich possessions which awaited them in 
Mexico. A paper was then circulated among the soldiers, 
which all, who were disposed,, to Relinquish their shares, 
were requested to sign. Those who declined should have 
their claims respected, ahd receive the amount due to them. 
^ Ho one refused to sign ; ^thus furnishing another example 
of the extraordinary power obtained by Cortds over theseDESPATCHES SENT TO SPAIN.

SOT

rapacious spirits, who, at liis call, surrendered up the 
very treasures which had been the great object of their 
hazardous enterprise !* ^

He accompanied this present with a letter to the emperor, 
in which he gave a full account of all that had befallen 
him since his departure from Cuba ; of his various dis-

* Bernal Diaz, Hist. <le la Conquista, cap. 53 — tlilxochitl, Hist. 
Chich., MS., cap. 32. — Carta tie Vera Cruz, MS. A complete inventory 
of tlic articles received from Montezuma is contained in the Carta drVera 
Cruz. — The following are a few of the items.

Two collars made of gold and precious stones.

A hundred ounces of gold ore, that their Highnesses might see in what 
state the gold came from < he mines. *

Two birds made of green feathers, with feet, beaks, and eyes of gold,— 
ajid, in the same piece with them, animals of gold, resembling snails.

A large alligator’s head of gold.

A bird of green feathers, with feet, Leak, and eyes of gold.

Two birds made of thread and featherwork, having the quills of their 
wings and tails, their feet, eyes, and the ends of their beaks, of gold, — 
standing upon two reeds covered with gold, which are raised on halls of 
fcatherwork and gold embroidery, one white and the other yellow, with 
seven tassels of featherwork hanging from each of them.

A large wheel of silver weighing forty mark^I and several smaller ones 
of the same metal.

A box of featherwork embroidered on leather, with a large plate of gold, 
weighing Si^enty ounces, in the midst.

Two pieces of cloth woven with feathers ; another with variegated 
colours ; and another worked with black and white figures.

A large wheel of gold, with figures of strange animals on it, and worked 
with tufts of leaves; weighing three thousand eight hundred ounces.

A fan of variegated featherwork, with thirty-seven rods plated with 
gold.A fan of variegated featherwork, with thirty-seven rods plated with 
gold.

Five fans of variegated feathers, — four of which have ten, and the other 
thirteen rods, embossed with gold.

Sixteen shields of precious stones, with feathers of various colours 
lianging from their rims. ^

Two pieces of cotton very richly wrought with black and white 
embroidery.

Six shields, each covered with a plate *'S gold, with something resembling 
a golden mitre in the centre.

X 2

808

DISCOVEEY OF MEXICO.

coveries, battles, and traffic with the natives ; their 
conversion to Christianity ; his strange perils and sufferings ; 
many particulars rcSnecting the lands he had visited, and 
such as he could collect in regard to the great Mexican 
monarchy and its sovereign. He stated his difficulties with 
the governor of Cuba, the proceedings of the army in 
reference to colonisation, and besouglit the emperor to con- 
firm their acts, as well as his own authority, expressing his 
entire confidence that he should be able, with the aid of 
his brave followers, to place the Castilian crown in possession 
of this great Indian empire.*

Thjs was the celebrated First Letter, as it is called, of 
Corte's, which has hitherto eluded every search that has been 
made for it in the libraries of Europe. f Its existence is 
fully established by references to it, both in his own subse- 
quent letters, and in the writings of contemporaries, f Its

* ** Una muy larga Carta,” says Gomara, in his loose analysis of it.; — 
Cr6nica, cap. 40.* ** Una muy larga Carta,” says Gomara, in his loose analysis of it.; — 
Cr6nica, cap. 40.

+ Dr. Robertson states that the Imperial Library at Vienna was 
examined for this dociim<|nt, at his instance, but without success. (His- 
tory of America, vol. ii. note 70.) I have not been more fortunate in the 
researches made for me in the British Museum, the Royal Library of Paris, 
and that of the Academy of History at Madrid. The last is a great 
depository for the colonial historical documents ; but a very thorough 
inspection of its papers makes it certain that this is wanting to the collec- 
tion. As the emperor received it on the eve of his embarkation for 
Germany, and the Letter of Vera Cruz, forwarded at the same time, is in 
the library of Vienna, this would seem, after all, to be the most* probable 
place of its retreat.

^ ‘‘ En una nao,” says Cortes, in the very first sentence of his Second 
Letter to the emperor, “ que de esta Nueva Espana de Vuestra S4cra 
Magestad despache ^ 16 de Julio de el aiio 1519 embi6 d Vuestra Alteza 
muy larga y particular Relacion de las cosas hasta aquella razon desques 
quo yo d ella vine en ella sucei idas.** (Rel. Seg. de Cortds, ap. Loren- 
zana, p. 38.) “ Cortds escribid,” says Bernal Diaz, “ segun dl nos dixo,

con recta relacion, mas no vimos su carta.” (Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 
S3.) (Also Oviedo, Hist, de lal Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap, 1, and Gomara, 
ut supra.) W ere it not for these positive testimonids, one might suppose

DESPATCHES SENT TO SPAIN.

309DESPATCHES SENT TO SPAIN.

309

general purport is rwen by his chaplain, Gomara. The 
importance of the document has doubtless been much over- 
rated ; and, should it ever come to ligjft, it will probably bo 
found to add little of interest to the matter contained in the 
letter from Vera Cruz, which has formed the basis of the 
preceding portion of oui narrative. lie had no sources of 
information beyond those open to the authors of the latter 
document, lie was even less full and frank m his commu- 
nications, if it be true, that he suppressed all notice of the 
discoveries of his two immediate predecessors.*

The magistrates of the Villa Rica, in their epistle, went 
over the same ground with Cortes ; concluding "v^th an 
emphatic representation of the misconduct of Velasquez, 
whose venality, extortion, and selfish devotion to his per- 
sonal interests, to the exclusion of those of his sovereigns 
as well as of his own followers, they placed in a most clear 
and unenviable light. t They implored the government 
not to sanction his interference with the new colony, which 
would be fatal to its welfare, but to commit the undertaking 
to Ilernando Cortes, as the man most .^capable, by his expe- 
rience and conduct, of bringing it to a glorious termination. J

llint the Carta dc Vera Cruz had suggested an imaginary letter of 
Cortes, Indefid, the copy of the former document, belonging to the 
Spanish Academy of History — and perhaps the original at Vienna — Shears 
the erroneous title of “ Primera Relacion de Cortes.”

* This is the imputation of Bernal Diaz, reported on hearsay, as he 
admits he novrr saw the letter himself. — Ibid., cap. 54.

+ “ Fingiendo mill cautelas,” says Las Casas, politely, of this part of 
the letter, y afirmando otras muchas falsedades e mentims ! — Hist, de 
las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 122.+ “ Fingiendo mill cautelas,” says Las Casas, politely, of this part of 
the letter, y afirmando otras muchas falsedades e mentims ! — Hist, de 
las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 122.

X This document is of the greatest value and interest, coming as it does 
from the best instructed perso^is in the ^mp. It presents an elaborate 
record of all then known of the countries they had visited, and of the 
principal movements of the army, to the time of the foundation of the 
Villa Rica. The wiiters conciliate confidence by the circumspect 
tone of their narration, Querer dar,” they say, a Vuestia Magestad

BISCOTERY or MEXICO.

^310

With this letter went also another in the name of the 
citizen-soldiers of "ifilla Rica, tendering their dutiful sub- 
mission to the sovereY^ns, and requesting the confirmation of 
their proceedings, above all tliat of Cortes as their general.

The selection of the agents for the mission was a delicate 
matter, as on the result might depend the future fortunes of 
the colony and its commander. Corttis intrusted the affair 
to two cavaliers on whom he could rely ; Francisco de 
Montejo, the ancient partisan of Velasquez, and Alonso 
Hernandez do Pucrtocarrero. The latter officer was a 
near kinsman of the count of Medellin, and it was hoped 
his high connexions might secure a favourable influence at 
court.

Together with the treasure, wliich seemed to verify the 
assertion that “ the land teemed with gold as abundantly au 
that whence Solomon drew the same precious metal for his 
temple,^’* several Indian manuscripts were sent. Some 
were of cotton, others of the Mexican agave. Their unintel- 
ligible characters, says a chronicler, excited little interest in 
the Conquerors. As^ evidence of intellectual culture, how- 
ever, they formed higher objects of interest to a philosophic 
mind, than those costly fabrics which attested only thetodas las particularidades de esta tierra y gente de ella, podria ser quo en 
algo se errase la rclacion, porque muchas de ellas no se han visto mas do 
por infonnaciones de los iiaturales de ella, y por esto no nos entrem^temos 
a dar mas de aquello que por muy ciertd y verdadero Vras. Eeales Altezas 
podrdn mandar teiier.” The accouat given of Velasquez, however, must 
be considered as an ex 'parte testimony, and, as such, admitted with great 
reserve. It was essential to their own vindication, to vindicate Cortes. 
The letter has never been printed. The original exists, as above stated, in 
the Imperial Idbrary at Vienna. The copy in my possession, covering 
more than sixty pages folio, is taten from that of the Academy of tiistory 
at Madrid.

• “ A nuestra parecer se dehe creer, que ai en esta tierra tanto quanto 
en aquella de donde se dizo aver \levado Salomon el oro para el templo.” 
— Carta de Vera Cruz, MS.

DESPATCHES SENT TO SPAIN.

311

mecbauical ingenuity of the nation.* Four Indian slaves 
were added as specimens of the nativ^. They had been 
rescued from the cages in which th^y were confined for 
sacrifice. One of the best vessels of the fleet was selected 
fur the voyage, manned by fifteen seamen, and placed under 
the direction of the pilot Alaminos.* lie was directed to 
hold his course through the Bahama channel, north of Cuba, 
or Fernandina, as it was then called, and on no account to 
touch at that island, or any other in the Indian ocean. 
AVith these instructions, tho good ship took its departure on 
the 26th of July, freighted with the treasures and the good 
wishes of the community of the Villa Rica de Vera Cruz.After a quick run the emissaries made the island of Cuba, 
and, in direct disregard of orders, anchored before Marien, 
on the northern side of the island. This was done to accom- 
modate Montejo, who wished to visit a plantation owned by 
him in the neighbourhood. While off the port, a sailor got 
on shore, and, crossing the island to St. Jago, the capital, 
spread everywhere tidings of the expedition, until they 
reached the ears of Velasquez. It wa.i the first intelligence 
which had been received of the armament since its departure; 
and, as the govenior listened to the recital, it would not be 
easy to paint the mingled emotions of curiosity, astonish- 
ment, and wrath, which agitated his bosom. In the first 
sally of passion, he poured a storm of invective on the heads 
of his secretary* and treasurer, the friends of Cortes, who 
had recommended him as the leader of the expedition. After 
somewhat Sieving himself in this way, he despatched two 
fast-sailing vessels to Marien with orders to seize the rebel 
ship, and, in case of her departure, to follow and overtake 
her. ♦

* Peter Martyr, pre-eminent above his contemporaries for the enlightened 
views he took of the new discoveries, <J«voteB half a chapter to the Indian 
manuscripts, in which he recognised the evidence of a civilisation analogous 
to the Egyptian. — De Orbe Novo, dec. 4, cap. 8.

312

PISOOYERY OP MEXICO,312

PISOOYERY OP MEXICO,

But before the ships could reach that port, the bird had 
flown, and was far on her way across the broad Atlantic, 
Stung with mortiication at this fresli disappointment, 
Velasquez wrote letters of indignant complaint to the 
government at home, and to the fathers of St. Jerome, in 
Hispaniola, demanding redress. He obtained little satisfac- 
tion from the last. lie resolved, however, to take it into 
Ids own hands, and set about making formidable prepara- 
tions for another squadron, which should be more than a 
match for that under his rebellious officer, lie was inde- 
fatigable in his exertions, visiting every part of the island, 
and sy*aining all his resources to effect his purpose. The 
preparations were on a scale that necessarily consumed many 
months.

Meanwhile the little vessel was speeding her prosperous 
way across the waters ; and, aftfer touching at one of the 
Azores, came safely into the harbour of St. Lucar, in the 
month of October. However long it may appear in the more 
perfect nautical science of our day, it was reckoned a fair 
voyage for that. Of, what befell the commissioners on their 
arrival, their reception at court, and the sensation caused 
hy their intelligence, I defer the account to a future chapter.*

Shortly after the departure of the commissioners, an affair 
occurred of a most unpleasant nature. A number of persons, 
with the priest Juan Diaz at their head, ill-affected, from 
some cause or other, towards the adminikration of Cortes, 
or not relishing the hazardous expedition before them, laid 
a plan to seize one of the vessels, make the host of their* Bcmal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 64-57. — Gomara, Crdnica, 
cap. 40. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. S, cap. 14. — Carta de Vera Cruz, 
MS. Martyr’s copious information was chiefly derived from his conversa- 
tions with Alamiiios and the two envoys, on their arrival at court. — De 
Orbe Novo, dec. 4, cap. 6, et alitij,; also Idem, Opus Epistolarum, (Am- 
stelodami, 1670,) ep. 650.

CONSPIRACY IN THE CAMP.

313

waj to Cuba, and report to the governor the fate of the 
armament. It was conducted with so ^uch secresy, that 
the party had got their provisions, ^ter, and everything 
necessar^’’ for the voyage, on board, without detection ; 
when the. conspiracy was betrayed on the very night they 
were to sail by one of their own number, who repented the 
part he had taken in it. The general caused the persons 
implicated to be instantly apprehended. An examination 
was instituted. The guilt of the parties was placed beyond 
a doubt. Sentence of death was passed on two of the ring- 
leaders ; another, the pilot, was condemned to lose his feet, 
and several others .to be whipped. The priest, probahJy the 
most guilty of the wliole, claiming the usual benefit of 
clergy, was permitted to escape. One of those condemned 
to the gallows was named Escudero, the very alguacil who, 
the reader may remember, ^o stealthily apprehended Cortes 
before the sanctuary in Cuba.^ The general on signing the 
death-warrants was heard to exclaim, “ Would that I had 
never learned to write V It was not the first time, it was 
remarked, that the exclamation had b(feen uttered in similar 
circumstances.fThe arrangements being now finally settled at the Villa 
Rica, Cortes sent forward Alvarado, with a large part of 
the army to Cempoalla, where he soon after joined them 
with the remainder. The late affair of the conspiracy 
seems to have made a deep impression on his mind. It 
showed him, that there were timid spirits in the camp on 
whom he could not rely, and who, he feared, might spread

* See ante, p. 205.

f Bernal Diaz, Hist, cle la Conquista, cap. 57. — Oviedo, Hist, de las 
Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap. 2. — Las Casas, Hi^. de las Indias, MS., lib. 3, cap. 
122. — Demanda de Narvaez, MS. — ReL Seg. de Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, 
p. 41. It was tbe exclamation of Nero, as reported by Suetonius. * ** Et 
cum de suppHcio cujusdam capite damnatx ut ex more 8ub8cribe’'et, admo- 
neretur, ‘ Quam vellem,’ inquit, ‘nescire literas ! ’ ” — Lib. 6, cap. 10.

S14

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

the seeds of disaffection among their companions. Even 
the more resolute, tp. any occasion of disgust or disappoint- 
ment hereafter, mi:rht falter in purpose, and, getting 
possession of the vessels, abandon the enterprise. This was 
already too vast, and the odds were too formidable, to au- 
thorise expectation of success with diminution of numbers. 
Experience showed that this was always to he apprehended, 
while means of escape were at hand.* The best chance 
for success was to cut off these means. — He came to the 
daring resolution to destroy the fleet, without the knowledge 
of his army.When arrived at Cempoalla, he communicated his design 
to a few of his devoted adherents, who entered warmly into 
his views. Through them he readily persuaded the pilots* 
by means of those golden arguments which weigh more 
than any other with ordinary minds, to make such a report of 
the condition of the fleet as suited his purpose. The ships 
they said, were grievously racked by the heavy gales they 
had encountered, and, what was worse, the worms 
eaten into their sideJ and bottoms until most of them were 
not sea-worthy, and some indeed, could scarcely now be 
kept afloat.

Cortt^s received the communication with surprise ; “ for 
he could well dissemble,’^ observes Las Casas, with his 
usual friendly comment, “when it suited his interests.’^ 
“ If it be so,’^ he exclaimed, “ we must make the best of 
it I Heaven’s will be done ! He then ordered five of

* Y porque,’’ says Cortes, “ demas de los que por ser criados y amigos 
de Diego Velasquez tenian voluntad de salir (ie la Tierra, habia otros, que 
por verla tan gi’ande, y de tanta gente, y tal, y ver los pocos Espanoles que 
eramos, estaban del misnio propdeito;- crejendo, que si alli los riavios 
dejasse, se mo alzarian con ellos, y yendose todos los que do esta voluntad 
estavan, yo quedaria casi solo.”

*1* ‘‘ Mostrd quaudo se lo dixdron muebo sentimiento Cortds, porque 
savia bien bacer fingimientos quando le ei*a proveeboso, y respondidlcs que

THE FLEET SUNK.

315

the worst-conditioned vo be dismantled, their cordage, sails, 
iron, and whatever was moveable, to bePbrought on shore, 
and the ships to be sunk. A survey W£j^ made of the others, 
and, on a similar report, four more were condemned in the 
same manner. Only one small vessel remained !When the intelligence reached the troops in Cempoalla, 
it caused the deepest consternation. They saw themselves 
cut off by a single blow from friends, family, country ! 
The stoutest hearts quailed before the prospect of being 
thus abandoned on a hostile shore, a handful of men arrayed 
against a formidable empire. When the news arrived of 
the destruction of the five vessels first condemned, they- had 
acquiesced in it, as a necessary measure, knowing the 
mischievous activity of the insects in these tropical seas. 
But, when this was followed by the loss of the remaining 
four, suspicions of the truth flashed on their minds. They 
felt they were betrayed. Murmurs, at first deep, swelled 
louder and louder, menacing open mutiny. Their general,” 
they said, “ had led them like cattle to be butchered in 
the shambles ! ”* The affair wore a iHost alarming aspect. 
In no situation was Cortes ever exposed to greater dodger 
^ from his soldiers.f

His presence of mind did not desert him at this crisis. 
He called his men together, and employing the tones of per- 
suasion rather than authority, assured them that a survey 
of the ships showed they were not fit for service. If he

mirasen vien cn ello, ^ que si no catavan para navegar quo diesen gracias i 
Dioa por ello, pues no se podia hacer mas.” — Las Casas, Hist, do las Indias, 
MS., lib. 3, cap. 122.

* Decian, que loa queria meter en el matadero.” — Gomara, Crdnica, 
cap. 42. •

t « A1 cavo lo ovieron de sentir la gente y aytia se le amotinaran muchos, 
y esta fud uno dc los peligros que pasdron por Cortds de muchos que para 
matallo de los mismos, Espanoles cstuvo.’^—Las Casas, Hist, de las Indias, 
MS., lib. 3, cap. 122.

DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

316DISCOVERY OF MEXICO.

316

had ordered them to bo destroyed, they should consider, 
also, that his was greatest sacrifice, for they were his 
property, — all, indeed, be possessed in the world. The 
troops on the other Aand, would derive one great advantage 
from it, by the addition of a hundred able-bodied recruits, 
before required to man the vessels. But, even if the fleet 
had been saved, it could have been of little service in their 
present expedition ; since they would not need it if they 
succeeded, while they would be too far in the interior to 
profit by it if they failed. He besought them to turn 
their thoughts in another direction. To be thus calculating 
chances and means of escape Avas unworthy of brave souls. 
They had set their hands to the work ; to look back, as 
they advanced, would be their ruin. They had only to 
resume their former confidence in themselves and their 
general, and success was fcertain. ** As for me,” he con- 
cluded, “ I have chosen my part. I will remain here, 
while there is one to bear me company. If there be any 
so craven, as to shrink from sharing the daUgOrs ©f our 
glorious enterprise, ,let them go home, in God’S name. 
There is still one vessel left. Let them take that and return 
to Cuba. They can tell tbere ho\v they deserted their 
commander and their comrades, and patiently wait tiU we 
return loaded with the spoils of the Aztecs.”*

The politic orator had touched the right chord in the 
bosoms of the soldiers. As he spoke, their resentment 
gradually died away. The faded visions of future riches 
and glory, rekindled bj his eloquence, again floated* Que ningun^ seria tan cobarde y tan puaillnime que queria estimar 
su vida mas que la suya, ni de tan debil corazon que dudase de ir con fSl d 
Mexico, donde tanto bieu le estaba aparejado, y que si acaso se determinaba 
algruno de dejar de hacer, este se podia ir bondito de Dios d Cuba en el 
navio que liabia dexado, de qu© antes de muebo se arrepentiria, y pelaria 
las barbas, viendo la buena venlfara que esperaba la sucederia,” — Ixtlil-

xochitl, Hist. Chicb., MS. cap. 82,

THE FLEET SUNK.

317

before tboir imaginations. The first shock over, they felt 
ashamed of their temporary distrust, enthusiasm for

their leader revived, for they felt that under his banner only 
they could hope for victory ; and they testified the revulsion 
of their feelings by making the air ring with their shouts,

“ To Mexico ! to Mexico ! ”

The destruction of his fleet by Cortds is, perhaps, the 
most remarkable passage in the life , of this remarkable 
man. History, indeed, affords examples of a similar expe- 
dient in emergencies somev»hat similar ; but none whore 
the chances of success wo’-e so precarious, and defeat would 
be so disastrous,* Had ho failed, it might well segm an 
act of madness. Yet it was the fruit of deliberate cal- 
culation, lie had set fortune, fame, life itself, all upon the 
cast, and must abide the issue. There was no alternative 
in his mind but to succeed or perish. The measure he 
adopted greatly increased the chance of success. But to 
carry it into execution, in the face of an incensed and des- 
perate soldiery, was an act of resolution that has few 
parallels in history.!* Porhiips tlic most remarkable of these examples is that of Julian, 
who, in his unfortunate Assyrian invasion, burnt tho fleet which had car- 
ried him up the Tigris, The story is told by Gibbon, who shows very 
satisfactorily that the fleet would have proved a hindrance rather than a 
help to the emperor in his further progress. — See History of the Decline 
and Fall, (vol. ix. p. 177,) of Milman^s excellent eflition.

t The account given in the text of the destruction of the fleet is not 
that of Bernal Diaz, who states it to have been accomplished, not only with 
the knowledge, hut entire approbation of the army, though at the sug- 
gestion of Cortes. (Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 58.) This version is 
sanctioned by Dr. Robertson (History of America, vol. ii. pp. 253, 254). 
One should bo very slow to depart from the honest record of the old soldier, 
especially when confirmed by the discrimi|jp,ting judgment of the historian 
of America. But Cortes expressly declares in his letter to the emperor, 
that he ordered the veSbels to he sunk, without the knowledge of his men, 
from the apprehension, that, if the meaits of escape were open, tho timid 
and disaffected might, at some future time, avail themselves of them.

318

LAS CASAS.318

LAS CASAS.

Fray Bartoloro^ de las Casas, bishop of Chiapa, whose History of 
the Indies ” forms an, important authority for the preceding pages, 
was one of the most remarkable men' of the sixteenth century. He 
was born at Seville in 1474. His father accompanied Columbus, as 
a common soldier, in h\s first voyage to the New World ; and he 
acquired wealth enough by his vocation to place his son at the Univer- 
sity of Salamanca. During his residence there, he w^as attended by 
an Indian page, whom his father had brought with him from Hispa- 
niola. Thus the uncompromising advocate for freedom began his 
career as the owner of a slave himself. But he did not long remain 
so, for his slave was one of those subsequently liberated by the 
generous commands of Isabella,

In 1498, he completed his studies in law and divinity, took his 
degree of licentiate, and, in 150‘2, accompanied Oviedo, in the most 
brilliant armada which had been equipped for the Western World. 
Eight years after, he was admitted to priest’s orders in St. Domingo, 
an event somewhat memorable, since he was the first person conse.

(Rel. Scg. de Cortds, ap. Lorenzana, p. 41.) The cavaliers Montejo y 
Piiertocarrcro, on their visit to Spain, stated, in their depositions, that the 
general destroyed the fleet on information received from tlio j)ilots. (De- 
claraciones, MSS.) Narvaez, in his accusation of Cortes, and Las Casas, 
speak of the act in terms of unquiilified reprobation, charging him, uioreovcr, 
with bribing the pilots to bore holes in the bottoms of the ships, in, order 
to disable them. (DemaTida de Narvaez, MS. — Hist, de las Indias, MS., 
lib. 3, cap. 122.) The same account of the transaction, though with a 
very different commentary as to its merits, is repeated by Oviedo, (Hist, 
de las Iiid., MS., lib. 33, cap. 2,) Gomara, (Crdnica, cap. 42,) and Peter 
Martyr, (De Orbe Novo, dec. 5, cap. 1,) all of whom had access to the 
best sources of infonnation.The affair, so remarkable as the act of one individual, becomes absolutely 
incredible, when considered as the result of so many independent wills. It 
is not improbable, that Bernal Diaz, from his known devotion to the cause, 
may have been one of the few to whom Cortes confided his purpose. The 
veteran, in writing his narrative, many years after, may have mistaken a 
part for the whole, and in his zeal to secure to the army a full share of the 
glory of the expedition, too exclusively appropriated by the general, (a 
great object, sis he tells us, of his history,) may have distributed among 
his comrades the credit of an exploit, which, in this instance, at least, 
properly belonged to their commander. — Whatever <be the cause of the dis- 
crepancy, his solitary testimony cg.n hardly be sustained against the weight 
of contemporary evidence from such competent sources.

LAS CASAS,

319

crated in that holy office in the colonies. On the occupation of Cuba 
by the Spaniards, Las Casas passed over to that island, where he 
obtained a curacy in a small settlement. H# soon, however, made 
himself known to the governor, Velasquez, by the fidelity with which 
he discharged his duties, and especially by •the influence which his 
mild and benevolent teaching obtained for him over the Indians. 
Through his intimacy with the governor. Las Casas had the means of 
ameliorating the condition of the conquered race, and from tliis time 
he may be said to have consecrated all his energies to this one great 
object. At this period, tlie scheme of introduced soonafter the discoveries of Columbus, was in full operation, and the 
aboriginal population of the islands was rapidly melting away under a 
system of oppression, which has been seldom paralleled in the annals 
of mankind. Las Casas, outraged at the daily exhibition of crime 
and misery, returned to Spain, to obtain some redress from govern- 
ment. Ferdinand died soon after his arrival, Charles was Absent, 
but the reins were held by Cardinal Ximenes, who listened to the 
complaints of the benevolent missionary, and, with his characteristic 
vigour, instituted a commission of three llieronomite friars, with full 
authority, as already noticed in the text, to reform abuses. Las 
Casas was honoured, for his exertions, with the title of Protector 
General of the Indians.”

The now commissioners behaved with great discretion. But their 
office was one of consummate difficulty, as it required time to intro- 
duce important changes in established institutions. The ardent and 
impetuous temper of Las Casas, disdaining* every consideration of 
prudence, overleaped all these obstacles, and chafed under what he 
considered the lukewarm and temporising policy of the commis- 
sioners. As he was at no pains to conceal his disgust, the parties 
soon camo to a misunderstanding with each other ; and Las Casas 
again returned to the mother country, to stimulate the government, 
if possible, to more effectual measures for the protection of the 
natives.He found th>3 country under the administration of the Flemings, 
who discovered from the first a wholesome abhorrence of the abuses 
practised in the colonies, and who in short, seemed inclined to tolerate 
no peculation or extortion but their own. They acquiesced, without 
much difficulty, in the recommendations of Las Casas, who proposed 
to relieve the natives by sending out Castilian labourers, and by 
importing negro slaves into the islands. This last proposition has 
brought heavy obloquy on the head of its author, who hss been freely 
accused of having thus introduced negiro slavery into the' New Worlds

320

LAS CASAS.

Others, with equal groundlessness, have attempted to vindicate his 
memory from the reproach of having recommended the measure at all. 
Unfortunately for the Matter assertion, Las Casas, in his History of 
the Indies, confesses, with deep regret and humiliation, his advice on 
this occasion, founded on the most erroneous views, as he frankly 
states ; since, to use his own words, the same law applies equally to 
the negro as to the Indian.” But so far from having introduced 
slavery by this measure into the islands, the importation of blacks 
there dates from tlie beginning of the century. It was recommended 
by some of the wisest and most benevolent persons in the colony, as 
the means of diminishing the amount of human suffering ; since the 
African was more fitted by his constitution to endure the climate 
and the severe toil imposed on the slave, than the feeble and effemi- 
nate islander. It was a suggestion of humanity, however mistaken, 
and, considering the circumstances under which it occurred, and the 
age, it may well be forgiven in Las Casas, cs]>ecially taking into view 
that, as he became more enlightened himself, he was so ready to 
testify his regret at having unadvisedly countenanced the measure.The experiment recommended by Las Casas was made ; but, 
through the apathy of Fonseca, president of the Indian Council, not 
heartily, — and it failed. The good missionary now proposed another, 
and much bolder scheme. He requested tliat a large tract of country 
in Tierra Firme, in the neighbourhood of the famous pearl ffqhefies, 
might be ceded to him for the purpose of planting a colony thelre, and 
of converting the native to Christianity. He required tha;^ none of 
the authorities of the islands, and no military force, especially, should 
be allowed to interfere with his movements. He pledged himself by 
peaceful means alone to accomplish all that had been done by violence 
in other quarters. He asked only that a certain number of labourers 
should attend him, invited by a boimty from government, and that he 
might further be accompanied by fifty Dominicans, who were to be 
distinguished like himself by a peculiar dress, that should lead the 
natives to suppose them a different race of men from the Spaniards. 
This proposition was denounced as chimerical and fantastic by some, 
whose own opportunities of observation entitled their judgment to 
respect. These men declared the Indian, from his nature, incapable 
of civilisation. The question was one of such moment, that Charles 
the Fifth ordered the discussion to be conducted before liim. The 
opponent of Las Casas was fiist heard, when the good missionary, in 
answer, warmed by the noble cause he was to maintain, and notliiug 
daunted by the august presence in which he stood, delivered himself 
with a fervent eloquence that went directly to the hearts of his

LAS CASAS«

321LAS CASAS«

321

auditors. The Christiwn religion,” he concluded, " is equal in its 
operation, and is accommodated to every natio^ on the globe. It robs 
no one of his freedom, violates none of his inherent rights, on the 
ground that he is a slave by nature, as preteiyied ; and it well becomes 
your Majesty to banish so monstrous an oppression from your king- 
doms in the beginning of your reign, that the Almighty may make it 
long and glorious.”In the end Las Casas prevailed. He was furnished with the men 
and means for establishing his colony ; and, in 1520. embarked for 
America. But the result was a lamentable failure. The country 
assigned to him lay in the neighbourhood of a Spanish settlement, 
which had already comniitted some acts of violence on the natives. 
To quell the latter, now thrown into commotion, an armed force was 
sent by the young Admiral ” from Hispaniola. The very people, 
among whom Las Casas was to appear as the messenger ot« peace, 
were thus involved in deadly strife with his countrymen. The enemy 
had been before him in his own harvest. While waiting for the close 
of these turbulent scenes, the labourers, whom he had taken out with 
him, dispersed, in despair of effecting their object. And after an 
attempt to pursue, with his faithful Dominican bretliren, the work of 
colonisation further, other untoward circumstances compelled them to 
abandon the project altogether. Its unfortunate author, overwhelmed 
with chagrin, took refuge in the Dominican monastery in the island of 
Hispaniola. — The failure of tlie enterprise should, no doubt, be partly 
ascribed to Circumstances beyond the controib of its projector. Yet 
it is impossible not to recognise, in the whole scheme, and in the 
conduct of it, the hand of one much more familiar with books than 
men, who, in the seclusion of the cloister, had meditated and matured 
his benevolent plans, without fully estimating the obstacles that lay in 
their way, and who counted too confidently on meeting the same 
generous enthusiasm in others which glowed in his own bosom.He found in his disgrace the greatest consolation and sympathy 
from the brethren of St. Dominic, who stood forth as the avowed 
champions of the Indians on all occasions, and showed themselves as 
devoted to t&e cause of freedom in the New World, as they had been 
hostile to it in tlie Old. Las Casas soon became a member of their 
order, and, in his monastic retirement, applied himself for many years 
to the performance of his spiritual duties, and the cotiaposition of 
various works, all directed, more or l^s, to vindicate the rights of 
the Indians. Here, too, he commenced his great work, the Historia 
General de las Indias,” which he pursued, at intervals of leisure, 
from 1527 till a few years before his Jeath. His time, however, was

VOL. I. y

not by these labours, and he found means to engage

in sereral laborious n^issions. He preached the gospel among the 
natives of Nicaragua and Guatemala ; and succeeded in converting 
and reducing to obedience some wild tribes in the latter province, who 
had defied the arms of his countrymen. In all these pious labours, 
he was sustained by his Dominican brethren. At lengtli, in 1539, he 
crossed the waters again, to seek further assistance and recruits 
among the members of his order.A gi'eat change had taken place in the board that now presided 
over the colonial department The cold and narrow-minded Fonseca, 
who dmdng his long administration had, it may be truly said, shown 
himself the enemy of every great name and good measure connected 
with tfie Indians, had died. His place, as president of the Indian 
Council, was filled by Loaysa, Charles’s confessor. This functionary, 
generaj of the Dominicans, gave ready audience to Liwa Casas, and 
showed a good-will to his proposed plans of reform. Chaides, too, 
now grown older, seemed to feel more deeply the responsibility of 
his station, and the necessity of redressing the wrongs, too long toler- 
ated, of his American subjects. The state of the colonies became a 
common topic of discussion, not only in the council but in the court ; 
and the representations of Las Casas made an impression that mani- 
fested itself in the change of sentiment more clearly every day. He 
promoted this by the publication of some of his writings at this time, 
and especially of his ** Brevfsima Relacion, or short account of the 
Destruction of the Indies,” in which he sets before the reader the 
manifold atrocities committed by his countrymen in different parts of 
the New World in the prosecution of their conquests. It is a tale of 
woe. Every line of the work may be said to be written in blood. 
However good the motives of its author, we may regret that the book 
was ever written. He would have been certainly right not to spare 
Ills countrymen ; to exhibit their misdeeds in their true colours, and 
by this appalling picture — for such it would have been-~to have 
recalled the nation and those who governed it, to a proper sense of 
the iniquitous career it was pursuing on the other side of the water. 
But, to produce a more striking effect, he has lent a willing ear to 
every tale of violence and rapine, and magnified the amount to a 
degree which borders on the ridiculous. The wild extravagance of 
his numerical estimates is of itself sufficient to shake confidence in the 
accuracy of his statements generally. Yet tlie naked truth was too 
startling in itself to demand the aid of exaggeration. The book found 
great favour with foreigners ; was rapidly translated into various 
languages, and ornamented with characteristic designs, which seemedLAS CASAS. SWt

to put into action ail the recorded atrocities of the text It excited 
somewhat different feelings in his own countponen, particularly the 
people of the colonies, who considered tliemselves the subjects of a 
^ross, however undesigned, naisrepresenta^on ; and in his future 
intercourse with them it contributed, no doubt, to diminish his 
induenco and consequent usefulness, by the spirit of alienation, and 
even resentment, which it engendered.

Las Casas’ honest intentions, his enlightened views and long expe- 
rience, gained him deserved credit at home. This was visibfe in the 
important regulations made at this time for the better government of 
the colonies, and particularly in respect of tlie aborigines. A code 
of Laws, Zas JVuevas LeyeSy was passed, having for their avowed 
object the enfranchisement of this unfortunate race ; and, in the 
wisdom and humanity of its provisions, it is easy to, recognise the 
hand of the Protector ol the Indians. The history of Spaninh colo- 
nial legislation is tlie history of the impotent struggles of the govern- 
ment in belialf of the natives, against the avarice and cruelty of its 
subjects. It proves that an empire powerful at home — and Spain 
then was so — may be so widely extended, that its authority shall 
scarcely be felt in its extremities.The government testified their sense of the signal services of Las 
Casas, by promoting him to the bishopric of Cuzco, one of the richest 
sees in tlie colonies. But the disinterested soul of the missionary did 
not covet riches or preferment. He rejected the proffered dignity 
without hesitation. Yet he could not refusetthe bishopric of Chiapa, 
a country which, from the poverty and ignorance of its inhabitants, 
offered a good field for his spiritual labours. In 1544, though at th^ 
advanced age of seventy, he took upon himself these new duties, and 
embarked, for tlie fifth and last time, for the shores of America. His 
fame had preceded him. The colonists looked on his coming with 
apprehenskm, regarding him as the real author of the new code, 
which struck at their ancient immunities, and which he would be 
likely to enforce to the letter. Everywhere he was received udth 
coldness. In some places his person was menaced with violence. 
But the venerable presence of the prelate, his eai^st expostulations, 
which flowed so obviously from conviction, and his generous self- 
devotion, so regardless of personal considerations, preseirired him from 
this outrage. Yet he showed no disposition to conciliate his oppo- 
nents by what he deemed an unworthy concesrion ; and he even 
stretched the arm of authority so far as to refuse the iBcraments to 
any, who still held an Indian in hondap. This high-hafided measure 
not only outraged tlie planters, but incurred the disappnriiation of his

T 2

324

LAS CASAS.T 2

324

LAS CASAS.

own brethren in the Church. Three years were spent in disagreeable 
sdtercation without coining to any decision. The Spaniards, to borrow 
their accustomed phraseology on these occasions, ** obeying the law, 
but not fulfilling it,” applied to the Court for further instructions ; 
and the bishop, no longer supported by his own brethren, thwarted 
by the colonial magistrates, and outraged by the people, relinquished 
a post where hig presence could be no further useful, and returned to 
spend the remainder of his days in tranquillity at home.Yet, though witlidrawn to his Dominican convent, he did not pass 
his hours in slothful seclusion. He again appeared as the champion 
of Indian freedom in the famous controversy with Sepulveda, one of 
the most acute scholars of the time, and far surpassing Las Casas in 
elegance and correctness of composition. But the Bishop of Chiapa 
was his superior in argument, at least in this discussion, where he had 
right a^jd reason on his svlc- lu his Thirty Propositions,” as they 
are called, in which he sums up the several points of his case, he 
maintains, that the circumstance of infidelity in religion cannot deprive 
a nation of its political rights ; that the Holy See, in its grant of the 
New World to the Catholic sovereigns, designed only to confer the 
right of converting its inhabitants to Christianity, and of thus winning 
a peaceful authority over them ; and that no authority could be valid, 
which rested on other foundations. This w'as striking at the root of 
the colonial empire, as assumed by Castile. But the disinterested 
views of Las Casas, the respect entertained for his principles, and the 
general conviction, it may be, of the force of his arguments, prevented 
the Court from taking umbrage at their import, or from pressing them 
to their legitimate conclusion. While the writings of his adversary 
were interdicted from publication, he had the satisfaction to see his 
own printed and circulated in every quarter.

From this period his time was distributed among his religious duties, 
his studies, and the composition of his works, especially his History. 
His constitution, naturally excellent, had been strengthened by a life 
of temperance and toil ; and he retained his faculties unimpaired to 
the last. He died after a short illness, July, 1566, at the great age 
of ninety-two, in his monastery of Atoeba, at Madrid.The character of Las Casas may be inferred Ijom his career. He 
was one of those, to whose gifted minds are revealed those glorious 
moral truths which, like the lights of heaven, are fixed and the same 
for ever ; but which, though IfUw familiar, were hidden from all but a 
few penetrating intellects by the general darkness of the time in which 
he lived. He was a reformer^ and had the virtues and errors of a 
reformer. He was inspired by one great and glorious idea. This was

LAS CASAS*

325LAS CASAS*

325

the key to all his thoughte^ all that he said and wrote, to every act of 
his long life. It was this which urged him to lift the voice of rebuke 
in the presence of princes, to brave the menaces of an infuriated po- 
pulace, to cross seas, to traverse mountains and deserts, to incur the 
alienation of friends, the hostility of enemies, to endure obloquy, insult, 
and persecution. It was this, too, which made him reckless of obsta- 
cles, led him to count too confidently on the co-operation of others, 
animated his discussion, sharpened his invective, too often steeped his 
pen in the gall of personal vituperation, led him into gross exaggera- 
tion and over-colouring in his statements, and a blind credulity of evil 
that rendered him unsafe as a counsellor, and unsuccessful in the 
practical concerns of life. His motives were pure and elevated. But 
his manner of enforcing them was not always so commendable. This 
may be gathered not only from the testimony of the colonists, generally, 
who, as parties interested, may be supposed to have been prejudiced ; 
hut from that of the members of his own profession, persons high in 
office, and of integrity beyond suspicion, not to add that of missionaries 
engaged in the same good work with himself. These, in theii* letters 
and reported conversations, charged the Bishop of Chiapa with an 
arrogant, uncharitable temper, which deluded his judgment, and vented 
itself in unwarrantable crimination against such as resisted his 
projects, or differed from him in opinion. Las Casas, in short, was a 
man. But, if he had the errors of humanity, he had virtues that 
rarely belong to it. The best commentary on his character is the 
estimation which he obtained in the court ofjiiis sovereign. A liberal 
pension was settled on him after his last return from America, which 
he chiefly expended on charitable objects. No measure of import- 
ance, relating to the Indians, was taken without his advice. He lived 
to see the fruits of his efforts in the positive amelioration qf their 
condition, and in the popular admission of those great truths which it 
had been the object of his life' to unfold. And who shall say how 
much of the successful efforts and arguments since made in behalf of 
persecuted humanity may be traced to the example and the widtings 
of this illustrious philanthropist 1His compositions were numerous; most of them of no great length. 
Some were printed in his time ; others have since appeared, especially 
in the French translation of Llorente, His great work, which occu- 
pied him at intervals for more than thirty years, the Mutoria General 
de 1(18 IndiaSf still remains in manuscript. It is in three volumes, 
divided into as many parts, and embraces the colonial history from the 
discovery of the country by Columbus to the year 1520. The style of 
the work, like that of all his writings, ?s awkward, disjointed, and ex-

IAS CASAS,

mIAS CASAS,

m

idfessively diffuse ; abounding in repetitions, irrelevant digressions, and 
pedantic citations. Bi|t it is sprinkled over with passages of a different 
kind ; and, when he is roused by the desire to exhibit some gross 
Wrong to the natives, hi| simple language kindles into eloquence, and 
he expounds those great and immutable principles of natural justice 
which, in his own day, were so little understood. His defect as a 
historian is, that he wrote history, like everything else, under the in- 
fluence of one dominant idea. He is always pleading the cause of the 
persecuted native. This gives a colouring to events which passed 
under his own* eyes, and filled him with a too easy confidence in those 
wtiich he gathered from the reports of others. Much of the preceding 
portion of our narrative which relates to affairs in Cuba must have 
come under his personal observation. But he seems incapable of 
shaking off his early deference to Velasquez, who, as we have noticed, 
treated^him, while a poor curate in the island, with peculiar con- 
fidence. For Cortes, on the other hand, he appears to have felt a 
profound contempt. He witnessed the commencement of his career, 
when he was standing, cap in hand, as it were, at the proud governor’s 
door, thankful even for a smile of recognition. Las Casas remembered 
all this, and, when he saw the Conqueror of Mexico rise into a glory 
and renown, that threw his former patron into the shade,— and most 
unfairly, as Las Casas deemed, at the expense of that patron, — the 
good bishop could not withhold his indignation ; nor speak of him 
otherwise than with a sneer, as a mere upstai’t adventurer.It was the existence SJf defects like these, and the fear of the mis- 
conception likely to be produced by them, that have so long prevented 
the publication of his history. At his death, he left it to the oonvent 
of San Gregorio, at Valladolid, with directions that it should not be 
printed for forty years, nor be seen during that time by any layman or 
member of the fraternity. Herrera, however, was permitted to con- 
sult it, and he liberally transferred its contents to his own volumes, 
which appeared in 1 601 . The^Ro^al Academy of History revised the 
first volume of Las Casas some years since, with a view to the publi- 
cation of the wJioie work. But the indiscreet and imaginative style of 
the composition, according to Navarrete, and the consideration that its 
most important facts were already known through other channels, 
induced that body to abandon the design. With deference to their 
judgment, it seems to me a mistake. Las Casas, with every deduction, 
is one of the great writers df the nation ; *great from the important 
truths which he discerned when none else pould see them, and from 
the courage with which he proclaimed them to the world. They are 
scattered over his history as we^l as his other writings. They are not.

LAB CASAS.

327LAB CASAS.

327

however, the paesages transcribed by Herrera. In the statement of 
fact, too, however partial and prejudiced, no one will impeach his 
integrity ; and, as an enlightened eontempo:?ary, his evidence is of 
undeniable value. It is due to the memory of Las Casas, that, if his 
work be given to the public at all, it should dot be through the garbled 
extracts of one who was no fair interpreter of his opinions. Las Casas 
does not speak for himself in the courtly pages of Herrora. Yet the 
History should not be published without a suitable commentary to 
enlighten the student, and guard him against any undue prejudices in 
the writer. We may hope that the entire manuscript will one day be 
given to the world under the auspices of that distinguished boiy, 
which has already done so much in this way for the illustration of 
the national annals.

The life of Las Casas has been several times written. The two 
memoirs moat worthy of notice are that by Llorente, late secretary of 
the Inquisition, prefixed to his French translation of the bishop’s con- 
troversial writings, and that by Q,uintana, in the third volume of his 
“ Espaiioles Cedebres,” where it presents a truly noble specimen of 
biographical composition, enriched by a literary criticism as acute as 
it is candid. — I have gone to the greater length in this notice, from the 
interesting character of the man, and the little that is known of him 
to tlio English reader. I have also transferred a passage from his 
work in the original to the Appendix, that the Spanish scholar may 
form an idea of his style of composition. He ceases to be an authority 
for us hereafter, as his account of the expecjjtion of Cortes terminates 
with the destruction of tlie navy.

BOOK THIRD.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

BOOK III.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

CHAPTER I.

PROCEEDINGS AT CEMPOALIA.— -THE SPANIARDS CLIMB THE TABLE- 
LAND. — PlCTURfi.S<iUE SCENERY. — TRANSACTIONS WITH THE 
NATIVES, — EMBASSY TO TLASCALA.

1519.BOOK III.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

CHAPTER I.

PROCEEDINGS AT CEMPOALIA.— -THE SPANIARDS CLIMB THE TABLE- 
LAND. — PlCTURfi.S<iUE SCENERY. — TRANSACTIONS WITH THE 
NATIVES, — EMBASSY TO TLASCALA.

1519.

While at Cempoalla, Cortes received a message from 
Escalante, his commander at ViIl^i»Rica, informing him 
there were four strange ships hovering off the coast, and 
that they took no notice of hi^ repeated signals. This ihtel-' 
ligence greatly alarmed the general, who feared they might 
he a squadron sent by , tile governor of Cuba to interfere 
with his movements. In much haste, he set out at the 
head of a few horseu^^U, and, ordering a |iarty ef light 
infantry to follow, posted back to Villa Rica. The i’est of 
the army he left in charge of Alvarado and of Gonzalo de 
Sandoval, a young officer, who had begun to give evidence 
of the uncommon qualities which have secured to him so 
distinguished a rank among the conquerors of Mexico, 
Escalante would have persuaded the geiieral, on his 
reaching the town, to take some rest* and altow him to go* 
in search of the strangers ; hut Cortes replied with the

332

HAECH TO MEXICO.332

HAECH TO MEXICO.

homely proverb, ‘'Abounded hare takes no nap,”* and, 
without stopping to (refresh himself or his men, pushed on 
three or four leagues to the north, where he understood the 
ships were at anchordr On the way, he fell in with three 
Spaniards, just landed from them. To his eager inquiries 
whence they came, they replied, that they belonged to a 
squadron fitted out by Prancisco de Oaray, governor of 
Jamaica. This person, the year previous, had visited the 
Florida coast, and obtained from Spain — where he had some 
interest at court — authority over the countries he might dis- 
cover in that vicinity. The three men, consisting of a notary 
and two witnesses, had been sent on shore to warn their 
countrymen under Cortes to desist from what was considered 
an encroachment on the territories of Garay. Probably 
neither the governor of Jamaica, nor his officers, had any 
very precise notion of the geography and limits of these 
territories.

Cortes saw at once there was nothing to apprehend from 
this quarter. He would have been glad, however, if he 
could, by any means, Jiave induced the crews of the ships 
to join his expedition. He found no difficulty in persuading 
the notary and his companions. But when he came in sight 
of the vessels, the people on board, distrusting the good 
terms on which their comrades appeared to be with the 
Spaniards, refused to send their boat ashore. In this 
dilemma, Cortes had recourse to a stratagem.

He ordered three of his own men to exchange dresses 
with the new comers. He then drew off his little band in 
sight of the vessels, affecting to return to the city. In the 
night, however, he came back to the same plac$, and lay in 
ambush, directing the disguised Spaniards, when the morn- 
ing broke, and they could be discerned, to make signals to

♦ « Cabra coja no tenga siesta.”

PROCEEDINGS AT CEMPOAtLA.

333♦ « Cabra coja no tenga siesta.”

PROCEEDINGS AT CEMPOAtLA.

333

those on board. The artifice succeeded. A boat put off, 
filled with armed men, and three or fwir leaped on shore. 
But they soon detected the deceit, and Cortds, springing 
from Lis ambush, made them prisonene. Their comrades in 
the boat, alarmed, pushed off at once for the vessels, which 
soon got under weigh, leaving those on shore to their fate. 
Thus ended the affair. Cortes returned to Cempoalla, with 
the addition of half a dozen able-bodied recruits, and, what 
was of more importance, relieved in his own mind from the 
apprehension of interference with his operations.*

He now made arrangements for his speedy departure 
from the Totonac capital. The forces reserved for the 
expedition amounted to about four hundred foot an(f fifteen 
horse, with seven pieces of artillery. Ho obtained, also, 
thirteen hundred Indian warriors, and a thousand tamaneSy 
or porters, from the cacique of Cempoalla, to drag the guns, 
and transport the baggage. He took forty more of their 
principal men as hostages, as w^ell as to guide him on the 
way, and serve him by their counsels among the strange 
tribes he was to visit. They were# in fact, of essential 
service to him throughout the inarch.f

The remainder of his Spanish force he left in garrison at 
Villa Bica de Vera Cruz, the command of which ho had 
intrusted to the alguacil, Juan de Escalante, an officer de- 
voted to his interests. The selection was judicious. ' It was 
important to place there a man who would resist any hostile

* Oviedo, Hist, do las Ind., .MS., lib. 33, cap. 1. — Rel. Seg, de Cortes, 
ap. Lorenzana, pp. 42-45. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap, 59, 60.* Oviedo, Hist, do las Ind., .MS., lib. 33, cap. 1. — Rel. Seg, de Cortes, 
ap. Lorenzana, pp. 42-45. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap, 59, 60.

+ Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 44,— Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chicb,, MS., cap. 83. 
— Bernal Diaz,«Hi8t. de la Conquista, cap. 61. The num^rof the Indian 
auxiliaries stated in the text is much l^ger than that a|h)wed by either 
Cortes or Diaz. But both these actors in the drama shqiji? too obvious a 
desire to magnify their own prowess, by exaggerating the numbers of their 
foes, and diminishing their own, to he elltitled to much confidence in their 
estimates.

334

MARCH TO MEXICO.

ititerference from his European rivals, on the one hand, and 
maintain the preseift friendly relations with the natives, on 
the other. Cortds recommended the Totonac chiefs to apply 
to this officer, in case^f any difficulty, assuring them, that, 
so long as they remained faithful to their new sovereign and 
religion, they should find a sure protection in the Spaniards.Before marching, the general spoke a few words of encou- 
ragement to his own men. He told them, they were now 
to embark in earnest, on an enterprise which had been the 
great object of their desires ; and that the blessed Saviour 
would carry them victorious through every battle with their 
enemies. “ Indeed,*’ he added, “ this assurance must be 
our stay, for every other refuge is now cut off, but that 
afforded by the providence of God, and your own stout 
hearts.”* He ended by comparing their achievements to 
those of the ancient Romans, in phrases of honeyed elo- 
quence far beyond anything I can repeat,” says the bravo 
and simple-hearted chronicler who heard them, Oortds was, 
indeed, master of that eloquence which went to the soldiers* 
hearts. For their sympathies were his, and he shared in 
that romantic spirit of adventure which belonged to them. 
“ We are ready to obey you,” they cried as with one voice. 
** Our fortunes, for better or worse, are cast with yours.”! 
Taking Igave, therefore, of their hospitable Indian friends, 
the little army, buoyant with high hopes and lofty plans of 
conquest, set forward on the march to Mexico.

It was the sixteenth of August, 1519. During the first 
day, their road lay through th&*tierra ealientef the beautiful 
land where they had been so long lingering ; the land of

* No teniamos otro isocorrf, ni ayuda sino el de Dios ; porque ya no 
teniamoa naoioa para ir i, Cuba, salvo nuestro buen pelea, y cora^ones 
fuertee.” — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquiata, cap. 59.

f “ y todoS d Una lo respondiihos, quo hariamos lo que ordonaase, quo 
ecbada estaua la suerte de la buena, 6 mala ventura.” — Loc. cit.

PROCEEDINGS AT OEMPOADLA. 335f “ y todoS d Una lo respondiihos, quo hariamos lo que ordonaase, quo 
ecbada estaua la suerte de la buena, 6 mala ventura.” — Loc. cit.

PROCEEDINGS AT OEMPOADLA. 335

tlie vanilla, cochineal, cacao, (not till later days of the 
orange, and the sugar-cane,) products Which, indigenous to 
Mexico, have now become the luxuries of Europe ; the land 
where the fruits and the flowers rfhase one another in 
unbroken circle through the year; where the gales are 
loaded with perfumes till the sense aches at their sweet- 
ness ; and the groves are tilled with many-coloured birds, 
and insects whose enamelled wings glisten like diamonds in 
the bright sun of the tropics. Such are the magical splen- 
dours of this paradise of the senses. Yet nature, who gene- 
rally works in a spirit of compensation, has provided one 
here ; since the same burning sun which quickens i^to life 
these glories of the vegetable and animal kingdoms, calls 
forth the pestilent malariat ’^ith its train of bilious disorders, 
unknown to the cold skies of the North. The season in 
which the Spaniards were there, the rainy months of sum- 
mer, was precisely that in which the vdmito rages with 
greatest fury ; when the European stranger hardly ven- 
tures to set his foot on shore, still less to linger there a 
day. We find no mention made of* it in the records of 
the Conquerors, nor any notice, indeed, of an uncommon 
mortality. The fact doubtless corroborates the theory of 
those who postpone the appearance of the yellow fever till 
long after the occupation of the country by the wjiites. It 
proves, at least, that, if existing before, it must have been 
in a very much mitigated form.After some leagues of travel over roads made nearly 
imp^sable by the summer rains, the troops began the gra- 
dual ascent — more gradual on the eastern than the western 
declivities of the Cordilleras— which leads up to the table- 
land of Mexico. At the close *0! the second day, they 
reached Xalapa, a place still retaining the same Aztec name 
that it has communicated to the^rug raised in its environs, 
the medicinal virtues of which are now known > throughout

'Jit: ^ fo

Uli^ irarld.^ This town stands midway up the long ascent, 
it an elevation whe^e the vapours from the ocean, touching 
in tibeir westerly progress, maintain a rich verdure through- 
out the year. Though somewhat infected with these marine 
fogs, the air is usually bland and salubrious. The wealthy 
resident of the lower regions retires here for safety in the 
heats of summer, and the traveller hails its groves of oak 
with delight, as announcing that he is above the deadly 
influence of the isdmito.i From this delicious spot the 
Spaniards enjoyed one of the grandest prospects in nature. 
Before theni was the steep ascent — much steeper after this 
point— which they were to climb. On the right rose the 
Sierra MadrCt girt with its dark belt of pines, and its long 
lines of shadowy hills stretching away in the distance. To 
the south, in brilliant contrast, stood the mighty Orizaba, 
with his white robe of snow descending far down his sides, 
towering in solitary grandeur, the giant spectre of the 
Andes. Behind them, they beheld, unrolled at their feet, 
the magnificent tkrra calientet with its gay confusion of 
meadows, streams, and flowering forests, sprinkled over 
with shining Indian villages ; while a faint line of light on 
the edge of the horizon told them that there was the ocean, 
beyond which were the. kindred and country — they were 
many of them never mei^e to see.Still winding their Way upward, amidst scenery, as differ- 
ent as was the temperature from that of the regions below, 
the army passed through settlements containing some hun- 
dreds of inhabitants each, and on the fourth day re^hed

* Jalap, Convolvuliis jalapce. The x and j are convertible consonants 
in the Castilian.

+ Tho hesights of Xakpa are browned with a convent dedicated to St. 
Francis, erected in later days by Cortes, showings, in its solidity, like others 
^ of the period built under the samj* auspices, says an agreeable traveller, a 
military as well as religious design. — Tudor’s Travels in North America, 
(London, 18S4,) vol. ii. p, 186.

PIOTVRmtIS SOENERT.

a ‘^strong as terms it, stairfiog on R rocky

eminence, supposed to he that now known hy the Mexican 
name of Naulinoo. Here ihey were hospitably entertained 
by the inhabitants, who were frieois of the Totonacs. 
Cortes endeavoured, through father Olmedo, to impart to 
them some knowledge Christian truths, wlich were 
kindly received, and the Spaniards were allowed to erect a 
cross in the place, for the future adoration of the natives* 
Indeed, the route of the army might be iraclced by these 
I emblems of man’s salvation, raised wherever a willing popu- 
lation of Indians invited it, suggesting a very different idea 
from wdiat the same memorials intimate to the travehor in 
these mountain solitudes in our day.* # .The troops now entered a rugged defile, the Bishop’s 
Passjt as it is called, capable of easy defence against an 
army. Very soon they experienced a most unwelcome 
(change of climate. Cold winds from the mountains, mingled 
with rain, and, as they rose still higher, with driving sleet 
and hail, drenched their garments, apd seemed to penetrate 
to their very bones. The Spaniards, indeed, partially 
covered by their armour and thick jackets of quilted cotton, 
Avere better able to resist the weather, though their long 
residence in the sultry regions of the valley made them still 
keenly sensible to the annoyance. But the poor Indians, 
natives of the tierra caliente, vrith little protection in the

* Oviedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS., lib. 83, cap. 1. — Rel. Seg. d© Cortes, 
ap. Lorenzana, p. 40. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 44. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. 
Cliich., MS., cap. 83. ‘‘Every hundred yards of our route," says the 
traveller last quoted, speaking of this very region, " was njarked by the 
melancholy erection of a wooden cross, denoting, according to the custom 
of the country, the commission of some ho*ible murder on the spot whore 
it was planted." — Travels in North America, vol. ii. p.

f El Paso del Obispo. Cortes named it Puerto del de Dios.

— Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p. 2.

VOL. I.

z

338 Uk^CU TO MEXtCO.

«'ay of covering, sunTc under tlie rude assault of the 
elements, and sevej%l of them perished on the road.— Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p. 2.

VOL. I.

z

338 Uk^CU TO MEXtCO.

«'ay of covering, sunTc under tlie rude assault of the 
elements, and sevej%l of them perished on the road.

The aspect of the country was as wild and dreary as the 
climate. Their route wound along the spur of the huge 
€ofre de Perote, which borrows its name, both in Mc.xican 
and Castilian, from the coffer-like rock on its summit.* It 
is one of the great volcanoes of New Spain. It exhibits 
now, indeed, no vestige of a crater on its top, hut abundant 
traipe® of volcanic action at its base, where acres of lava, 
hlacfeened scoriso, and cinders, proclaim the convulsions of 
nature, while numerous shrubs and mouldering trunks of 
enormous trees, among the crevices, attest the antiquity 
of these •rents. Working their toilsome way across tliis 
scene of desolation, the path often led them along tlie 
borders of precipices, down whose sheer depths of two or 
three thousand feet the shrinking eye might behold another 
climate, and see all the glowing vegetation of the tropics 
choking up the bottom of the ravines.

After three days of this fatiguing travel, the way-worn 
army emerged through another defile, the Sierra del Agua.\ 
They soon came upon an open reach of country, with a 
genial climate, such as belongs to the temperate latitudes of 
southern Europe. They had reached the level of more than 
seven thousand feet above the ocean, where the great sheet 
of table-land spreads out for hundreds of miles along the 
crests of the Cordilleras. The country showed signs of 
careful cultivation, but the products were, for the most part, 
not familiar to the eyes of the Spaniards. Fields and

* The Aztec name is Nauhcampatepetl, from atiything

square,” and tepetl^ “ a mountain.” — Humboldt, who waded through forests 
and snows to its summit, ascertained its height to be 4089 metres = 1 3,414 
feet, above the sea. — See his Vues des Cordilldres, p. 234, and Essai 
Politique, vol. i. p. 266. ^The same mentioned in Cortds’ ‘letter as the Pv^rto dt la Lena* 
— -Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p. 3.

PICTURK6QTJB SCBKBRT. 339

hedges of the yariou: tribes of the cactus, the towering 
organum, and plantations of aloes with*rich yellow clusters 
of flowers on their tall stems, aflbrding drink and clothing 
to the Aztec, were everywhere seem The plants of the 
torrid and temperate zones had disappeared, one after 
another, with the ascent into these elevated regions. The 
glossy and dark-leaved banana, the chief, as it is the 
cheapest, aliment of the countries below, Lad long since 
faded from the landscape. The hardy maize, however, still 
shone with its golden harvests in all the pride of cultivation, 
the great staple of the higher, equally with the lower 
terraces of the plateau, ^

Suddenly the troops came upon what seemed thre environs 
of a populous city, which, as they entered it, appeared to 
surpass even that of Cempoalla in the size and solidity of its 
structures.^ These were of stone and lime, many of them 
spacious and tolerably high. * There were thirteen teocallis 
in the place ; and in the suburbs they had seen a receptacle, 
in which, according to Bernal Diaz, were stored a hundred 
thousand skulls of human victims, alk piled and ranged in 
order ! He reports the number as one he had ascertained 
by counting them himself, t Whatever faith we may attach 
to the precise accuracy of his figures, the result is almost 
equally startling. The Spaniards were destined to become 
familiar with this appalling spectacle, as they approached 
nearer to the Aztec capital.

The lord of the town ruled over twenty thousand vassals.

* Now known *t)y the euphonious Indian nanae of Tlatlauqnitepec, 
(Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p. 4.) It is the Cocotlm of Bemal Diaz. (Hist, 
de la Conquisla, cap. 61.) The old conquerors made sorry work with the 
Aztec names, both of places and porsons^ifor which they must he allowed 
to have had ample apology.+ "Puestos tantos rimeros do calaveras do muertos, qui© se podian bien 
con tar. Begun el concierto con quo estau^ puestas, que me parece que eran 
mas de even mil, y digo otra vez sobre cien mil.'’ — Ibid., supra.

MAKCH TO MEXICO.

He was tributary to Montezuma, and a strong Mexican 
garrison was quartered in the place. He had probably 
been advised of the approach of the Spaniards, and doubted 
how far it would bet. welcome to his sovereign. At all 
events, he gave them a cold reception, the more unpalatable 
after the extraordinary sufferings of the last few days. To 
the inquiry of Cortes, whether he were subject to Monte- 
zuma, he answered with real or affected surprise, Who is 
there, that is not a vassal to Montezuma ? ” * The general 
told him, with some emphasis, that he was not. He then 
explained whence and why he came, assuring him that he 
served a monarch who had princes for his vassals as powerful 
as the Aztec monarch himself.

The cacique in turn fell nothing short of the Spaniard in 
the pompous display of the grandeur and resources of the ' 
Indian* emperor. He told hia guest that Montezuma could 
muster thirty great vassals, each master of a hundred 
thousand men ! t His revenues were immense, as every 
subject, however poor, paid something. They were all 
expended on his magnificent state, and in support of his 
armies. These were continually iu the^ field, while garrisons 
were maintained in most of the large cities of the empire. 
More than twenty thousand victims, the fruit of his wars, 
were annually sacrificed on the altars of his gods ! His 
capital, the cacique said, stood in a lake in the centre of a

• qual caai admirado de lo que le preguntaba, me respondio,

diciendo ; que quien no era vasallo de Muctezuma ? queriendo decir, que 
alU era Senor del Mundo.” — Rel. Seg. de Covtds, ap. Lqrenzana, p. 47.diciendo ; que quien no era vasallo de Muctezuma ? queriendo decir, que 
alU era Senor del Mundo.” — Rel. Seg. de Covtds, ap. Lqrenzana, p. 47.

•f ** Tiene mas de 30 Pnneipes 6 si subjectos, que cada iino dcllos tione 
dent mill hombres d mag de pelea,” (Oviedo, Hiat. de las Ind., MS., lib* 
33, cap. 1.) This marvellous tde is gravely repeated by more than one 
Spanish writer, in their accounts of the Aztec monarchy, not as the osser- 
^ Uon of this chief, hut as a veritable piece of statistics. — See among others, 
Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, Kb, 7, cap. 12. — Solis, Conquista, lib. 3, 
cap. 16.

TRANSACTrONS WITH THE NATIVES. 341

spacious valley. The lake was commanded by the emperor’s 
vessels, and the app'*oach to the city wa% by means of cause- 
ways, several miles long, connected in parts by wooden 
bridges, which, when raised, cut off .fll .communication with 
the country. Some other things he added, in answer to 
queries of his guest, in which as the reader may imagine, 
the crafty or credulous cacique varnished ovlt the truth 
with a lively colouring of romance. Whether romance or 
reality, the Spaniards could not determine. The particulars 
they gleaned were not of a kind to tranquilise their minds, 
and might well have made bolder hearts than theirs pause, 
ere they advanced. But far from it. “ The word§ which 
we heard,’' says the stout old cavalier, so often quoted, 
** however they may have filled us with wonder, made us — 
such is the temper of the Spaniard — only the more earnest 
to prove the adventure, desperate as it might appear.”*

In a further conversation Cortes inquired of the chief, 
whether his country abounded in gold, and intimated a 
desire to take home some, as specimens to his sovereign. 
But the Indian lord declined to givB him any, saying, it 
might displease Montezuma. “ Should he command it,” 
he added, “ my gold, my person, and all I possess, shall 
be at your disposal.” The general did not press the matter 
further.The curiosity of the natives was naturally excited by the 
strange dresses, weapons, horses, and dogs of the Spaniards. 
Marina, in satisfying their inquiries, took occasion to mag- 
nify the prowess of her adopted countrymen, expatiating on 
their exploits and victories, and stating the extraordinary 
marks of respect they had received from Mont^uma. This

•

* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Coiiquista, cap. 61. There ili a slight ground- 
swell of glorification in the captain’s naijative, which may provoke a smile, 
— not a sneer, — for it is mingled with too much real courage, and sim- 
plicity of character.

t'^2 MAJIOH TO MEXICO,

ii^lKgeEce seems to have had its effect ; for soon after, the 
ieacique gave the general some curious trinkets of gold, of 
no great value, indeed, but as a testimony of his good will. 
He sent him, also, Ijome female slaves to prepare bread 
for the troops, and supplied the means of refreshment and 
repose, more important to them, in the present juncture, 
than all the gold of Mexico.*The Spanish general, as usual, did not neglect the occa- 
sion to inculcate the great truths of revelation on his host, 
and to display the atrocity of the Indian superstitions. The 
cacique listened with civil, hut cold indifference. Cortes, 
finding him unmoved, turned briskly round to hln soldiers, 
exclaiming that now was the time to plant the Cross I 
They eagerly seconded his pious purpose, and the same 
scenes might have been enacted as at Cempoalla, with, 
perhaps, very different results, had not father Olmedo, with 
better judgment, interposed. He represented that to in- 
troduce the Cross among the natives, in their present state 
of ignorance and incredulity, would be to expose the sacred 
symbol to desecration; so soon as the backs of the Spaniards 
were turned. The only way was to wait patiently the sea- 
son when more leisure should be afforded to instil into their 
minds a knowledge of the truth. The sober reasoning of 
the good father prevailed over the passions of the martial 
enthusiasts.

It was fortunate for Cortds that Olmedo was not one of 
those frantic friars who would have fanned his fiery temper 
on such occasions into a blaze. It might have had a most 
disastrous influence on his fortunes ; for he held all tem- 
poral consequences light in comparison with the great work

* For the preceding pages, besides authorities cited in course, see Peter 
Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 5, 1. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS.,

cap. 83. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap, 44. — Torq^uemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, 
cap. 26.

TEAK^iCTlbir» WITH THB NAtiTES, S4|cap. 83. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap, 44. — Torq^uemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, 
cap. 26.

TEAK^iCTlbir» WITH THB NAtiTES, S4|

of conversion, to effect which the unscrupulous mind of the 
soldier, trained to the stern discipline iof the camp, would 
have employed force, whenever fair means were ineffectual.^ 
But Olmedo belonged to that class #f benevolent mission- 
aries — of whom the Roman Catholic church, to its credit, 
has furnished many examples — who rely on spiritual weapons 
for the great work, inculcating those doctrine., of love and 
mercy which can best touch the sensibilities and win the 
affections of their rude audience. These, indeed, are the 
true weapons of the Church, the weapons employed in the 
primitive ages, by which it has spread its peaceful banners 
over the farthest regions of the globe. Such were not the 
means used by the conquerors of America, who, rather 
adopting the policy of the victorious Moslems in thei^ early 
career, carried with them the sword in one hand and the 
Bible in the other. They imposed obedience in matters of 
faith, no less than of government, on the vanquished, little 
hee<ling whether the conversion were genuine, so that it 
conformed to the outward observances of the Church. Yet 
the seeds thus recklessly scattered n^st have perished but 
for the missionaries of their own nation, who, in later times, 
worked over the same ground, living among the Indians as 
brethren, and, by long and patient culture, enabling the 
germs of truth to take root and fructify in their hearts.

The Spanish commander remained in the city four or 
five days to recruit his fatigued and famished forces ; and 
the modern Indians still point out, or did, at the dose of 
the last century, a venerable cypress, under the branches of

* The general clearly belonged to the church militant mentioned by 
Butler ;

Such as do build their^itb upon 
The holy text of pike and gun ;

And prove their doctiines orthodox 
By apostolic blows and knocks.”Such as do build their^itb upon 
The holy text of pike and gun ;

And prove their doctiines orthodox 
By apostolic blows and knocks.”

344

MARCH TO MEXICO*

whidi was tied the horse of the conquistador , — the Con- 
queror, as Cortes WAS styled, par excellence,^ Their route 
now opened on a broad and verdant valley, watered by a 
noble stream, — a cir«umstance of not too frequent occur- 
rence on the parched table-land of New Spain. The soil 
was well protected by woods, a thing still rarer at the pre- 
sent day ; since the invaders, soon after the Conquest, swept 
away the magnificent growth of timber, rivalling that of our 
Southern and Western States in variety and beauty, which 
covered the plateau under the Aztecs, f

All along the river, on both sides of it, an unbroken line 
of Indian dwellings, “ so near as almost to touch one 
another,’’ extended for three or four leagues ; arguing a 
population much denser than at present.}; Cn a rough and 
rising ground stood a town, that might contain five or six 
thousand inhabitants, commanded by a fortress, which, 
with its walls and trenches, seemed to the Spaniards quite 
‘'on a level with similar works in Europe.” Here the 
troops again halted, and met with friendly treatment. §

t

* ^^Arbol grande, dicho, (Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p. 3.)

The ^presms dUticka of Linnaeus. — Seo Humboldt, Essai Politique, 
tom. ii. p. 54, note.

•f* It is the same taste which has made the Castiles, the table-land of 
the Peninsula, so naked of wood. Prudential reasons, as well as taste, 
however, seem to have operated in New Spain. A friend of mine on a 
visit to a noble hadenda, but uncommonly barren of trees, was informed 
by the proprietor, that they W'ere cut down to prevent the lazy Indians on 
the plantation from wasting their time by loitering in their shade !X It confirms the observations of M, de Humboldt. “ Sans doute lors 
de la premiere arrivde des Espagnols, toute cette c6te, depuis la riviere de 
Papaolapan (Alvarado) jusqu’a Huaxtecapan, dtait plus habitue et mieux 
cuUiv^e qu’elle ne Vest aujourd’hui. Cependant a mesure que les con- 
qu^rans montirent au plateau, ijs trou-v^rent les villages plus rapproebds 
les uns des autros, les champs divises en portions plus petites, le peuplo 
plus polled.” — Humboldt, Essai Politiqud^ tom. ii. p. 202.

§ The correct Indian name of the town, T^taeamaxtitldn^ Tztacmas- 
titan of Cortes, will hardly be recognised in the Xcdacingo of Diaz. The

EMBASSY TO TJi;.ASCALA. 345

Cortes now determined bis future line of march. At the 
last place he had been counselled by •the natives to take 
the route of the ancient city of Cholula, the inhabitants of 
which, subjects of Montezuma, were a mild race, devoted to 
mechanical and other peaceful arts, and would be likely to 
entertain him kindly. Their Oempoallan allies, however, 
advised the Spaniards not to trust the Cholulans, “ a false 
and perfidious people,” but to take the road to Tlascala, 
that valiant little republic which had so long maintained its 
independence against the arms of Mexico. The people were 
frank as they were fearless, and fair in their dealings. 
They had always been on terms of amity with the Totonacs, 
which aflPorded a strong guarantee for their amicat)le dis- 
position on the present occasion.The arguments of his Indian allies prevail^ with the 
Spanish commander, who resolved to propitiate the good- 
will of the Tlascalans by an embassy. He selected four of 
the principal Cempoallans for this, and sent by theji a 
martial gift, — a cap of crimson cloth, together with a sword 
and a crossbow, weapons^ which, it «^as observed, excited 
general admiration among the natives. He added a 
in which he asked permission to pass through their country, 
lie expressed his admiration of the valour of the Tlascalans, 
and of their long resistance to the Aztecs, y^hose proud 
empire he designed to humble.* It was not to be expected 
that this epistle, indited in good Castilian, Would be very 
intelligible to the Tlascalans. But Cortfe communicated its 
import to the ambassadors. Its mysterious characters might

town was removed, in 1601, from the top of the hill to the plain. On th^ 
original site are still visible remains of carved stones of la||e dimensions,

attesting the elegance of the ancient fortress or palace of ihe cacique.

Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p. v.

• Estas cosas y otras de gran persuasion contenia la eftrta, pero como 
no sabian leer no pudidron en tender lo que contenia.’* — ^Caiqnargo, Hist, de 
Tlascala, MS.

346

MAECH TO MEXICO,

"popress the natives with an idea of superior intelligence, 
and the letter ser\ffe instead of those hieroglyphical mis- 
sives which formed the usual credentials of an Indian 
ambassador.* •"popress the natives with an idea of superior intelligence, 
and the letter ser\ffe instead of those hieroglyphical mis- 
sives which formed the usual credentials of an Indian 
ambassador.* •

The Spaniards remained three days in this hospitable 
place, after the departure of the envoys, when they re- 
sumed their progress. Although in a friendly country, they 
marched always as if in a land of enemies, the horse and 
light ti*oops in the van, with the heavy-armed and baggage 
in the rear, all in battle array. They were never without 
their armour, waking or sleeping, lying down with their 
Weapons by their sides. This unintermitting and restless 
vigilance was, perhaps, more oppressive to the spirits than 
even bodily fatigue. But they were confident in their supe- 
riority in if fair field, and felt that the most serious danger 
they had to fear from Indian warfare was surprise. “ We 
are few against many, brave companions,” Cortes Wduld 
sajj^to them ; ^*he prepared, then, not as if.ybu^Were going 
to battle, but as if actually in the midst ef it.

The road taken hy< the Spaniards was the same which at 
pre|pnt leads to Tlascala ; that, however, usually fol- 
lowed in passing from Veta Cruz to the capital, which 
makes a circuit considerably to the south, towards Puebla, 
in the neighbourhood of the ancient Cholula. They more 
than once forded the stream that rolls through this beautiful 
plain, lingering several days on the way, in hopes of receiv- 
ing an answer from the Indian republic. The unexpected 
delay of the messengers could not he explained, and occa- 
sioned some uneasiness.

• ,

• For an account of the diplomatic usages of the people of Anahuac, 
see ante, p. 36. *• ,

• For an account of the diplomatic usages of the people of Anahuac, 
see ante, p. 36. *

f “ Mird, seflores componeros, ya veis que somos pocos, hemos de estar 
ftiempre tan apercibidos, y apareja^os, como si ahoia vi^semos venir los con> 
trarios 6 pelear, y no solamente vellos venir, sino ha 2 er cuanta que estamos 
ya en la hatalla con ellos,'" — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap, 62.

EMBASSY TO TLASCALA.

347

As they advanced into a country of rougher and bolder 
features, their progress was suddenly afrested by a remait- 
able fortification. It was a stone wall nine feet in height, 
and twenty in thickness, with a parapet a foot and a half 
broad, raised on the summit for the protection of those who 
defended it. It had only one opening, in the centre, made 
by two semicircular lines of wall, overlapping each other fq” 
.the space of forty paces, and affording a passage-way be- 
tween, ten paces wide, so contrived, therefore, as 4o be 
perfectly commanded by the inner wall. This fortification, 
which extended more than two leagues, rested at either end 
on the bold natural buttresses formed by the sierra. The 
work was built of immense blocks of stones nicely ^aid to- 
gether without cement ; * and the remains still existing, 
among which are rocks of the whole breadth of the rampart, 
fully attest its solidity and size.fThis singular structure marked the limits of Tlascala, and 
was intended, as the natives told the Spaniards, as a barrier 
against the Mexican invasions. The army paused, filled with 
amazement at the contemplation of ithis Cyclopean monu- 
ment, which naturally suggested reflections on the str^gth 
and resources of the people who had raised it. It caused 
them, too, some, painful solicitude as to the probable result 
of their mission to Tlascala, and their own consequent 
reception there. But they were too sanguine to allow such 
uncomfortable surmises long to dwell in their minds. Cortds 
put himself at the head of his cavalry, and calling out,

♦ According to the writer last cited, the stones were held by a cement 
so hard that the men could scarcely break it with their pikes, (Hist, de la 
Conquista, cap. 62.) But the contrary statement, in the gonerars letter, 
is confirmed by the present appearance oi the wall. — Viaje, Lorenzana, 
p, vii.

f Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, p, vii. The attempts of the archbishop to« 
identify the route of Cortds, have been very successful. . It is a pity that 
his map illustrating the itinerary should he so worthless.

I ' % . : ' '■ ; ■ .' '

lie fidly OrdiA & dtf banner, anf 
tiad^ toit Me sliaS conquer/' led liis little artny through 
tbe undefended passage, and in a few moments they trod 
the soil of the free republic of Tlascak.**^

* Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 44, 45. — 
Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 83. — Heirera, Hist, (leneral, dec. 2, 
lib. 6, cap. 3. — O\iedo, Hist, de las lud., MS. lib. 33, cap. 2. — Pctci 
Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 5, cap. 1.

CHAPTEE II.

hepuelic of tlascila. — its institutions. — eauly history,— bis-

CUSSIONS IN THE SENATE. — DESPERATE BATTLES. «

1519.CHAPTEE II.

hepuelic of tlascila. — its institutions. — eauly history,— bis-

CUSSIONS IN THE SENATE. — DESPERATE BATTLES. «

1519.

Befoke advancing further with the Spaniards into the ter- 
ritory of Tlaacala, it v ill be well to notice some traits in the 
character and institutions of the nation, in many respects 
the most remarkable in Analmac. The Tlascalans belonged 
to the same great family with the^Aztecs.* They came on 
the plateau about tbe same time with the kindred

races, at the close of the twelfth century, and planted them- 
selves on the western borders of the lake of Tezcuco. Here 
they remained many years engaged iiBthe usual pursuits of 
a bold and partially civilised people. From some cause or 
other, perhaps their turbulent temper, they incurred the 
enmity of surrounding tribes. A coalition was formed 
against them ; and a bloody battle was fought on the plains 
of Poyauhtlan, in which the Tlascalans were completely 
victorious.

... ,

Disgusted, however, with their residence among nations

with whom they found so little favour, the conquering people

* The Indian chronicler, Camargo, considers his nation a branch of the 
Chichemec. (Hist, de Tlascala, MS.) So, also Torquemada. (Monarch, 
Ind., lib; 3, cap. 9.) Clavigero, who has caiwfully investigated the antiquities 
of Anahuac, calls it one of the seven Nahuatlac tribes. (Stor. del Messico, 
tom. i. p. 153, nota.) The fact is not (^f great moment, since they were 
all cognate races, speaking the same tongue, and, probably, migrated from 
their country in the far North at nearly the same time.

350

lCA3fM3E fO HEXICO.350

lCA3fM3E fO HEXICO.

resoked to migrate* They separated into three divisions, 
the largest of whicM^ taking a southern course by the great 
volcm of Mexico, wound round the ancient city of Cholula, 
and finally settled in the district of country overshadowed by 
the sierra of Tlascala. The warm and fruitful valleys locked 
up in Ae embraces of this rugged brotherhood of mountains, 
afforded means of subsistence for an agricultural people, 
while the hold eminences of the sierra presented secure 
positions for their towns.

After *the lapse of years, the institutions of the nation 
underwent an important change. The monarchy w'as divided 
first into two, afterwards into four separate states, hound 
together hy a sort of federal compact, probably not very 
nicely defined. Each state, however, had its lord or supreme 
chief, independent in his own territories, and possessed of 
co-ordinate authority with the others in all matters concern- 
ing the whole republic. The affairs of government, especially 
all those relating to peace and war, were^settled in a senate 
or council, consisting of the four lords with their inferior 
nobles. <

The lower dignitaries held of the superior, each in his 
own district, by a kind of feudal tenure, being bound to 
supply his table, and enable him to maintain his state in 
peace, as well as to serve him in war.^ In return he expe- 
rienced the aid and protection of his suzerain. The same* The descendants of these petty nobles attached as great value to their 
pedigrees, as any Biscayan or Asturian in Old Spain. Long after the 
Conquest, they refused, however needy, to dishonour their birth by resorting 
to mechatiuial or other plebeian occupations,^ ojlcios viles y hajos. Los 
descendientes de estos son estiraados por hotnbres calificados, que aunque 
Bean pobrfsemos no usan ofici^s mecanicos ni tratos bajos ni viles, ni 
jamas se permiten cargar ni cabar con coas y azadones, diciendo que son 
^ hijos Idalgos en que no ban de aplicarse & estas cosas soeces y bajas, sino 
servir en guerras y fronteras, como idal^os, y morir como hombres peleando,” 
— Hist, de Tlascala, MS,

mutual obligations existed between him and the followers 
among whom his own territories were dJltributed.* Thus a 
chain of feudal dependencies was established, which, if not 
contrived with all the art and legal refinements of analogous 
institutions in the Old World, displayed their most prominent 
characteristics in its personal relations, the obligations of 
military service on the one hand, and protectior on the 
other. This form of government, so different from that of 
the surrounding nations, subsisted till the arrival of the 
Spaniards. And it is certainly evidence of considerable 
civilisation, that so complex a polity should have so long 
continued undisturbed by violence or faction in the confede- 
rate states, and should have been found competent to*protect 
the people in their rights, and the country from foreign 
invasion.

The lowest order of the people, however, do not seem to 
have enjoyed higher immunities than under the monarchical 
governments ; an(|^ their rank was carefully defined by an 
appropriate dress, and by their exclusion from the insignia 
of th-e aristocratic orders. t •The nation, agricultural in its habits, reserved its highest 
honours, like moat other rude — unhappily also, civilised — 
nations, for military prowess. Public games were instituted, 
and prizes decreed to those who excelled in such manly and 
athletic exercises, as might train them for the fatigues of

* “ Cualqiiier.Toouhtli que forroaba tin Tecalli ; qu© es casa do May- 
orazgo, todas aquellas tierras que le caian en suerte de repartiroiento, con 
montea, fuentes, rios 6 lagunas tomase para la casa principal la mayor y 
niejor suerte <5 pages de tierra, y luego las demas que quedaban se partian 
por 8U8 soldadoB amigos y ^rientes, igualmente, y todos pstos cstan obli- 
gados € reconocer la casa mayor y aciidir 6, ©11a i, alzarla y repararla, y H 
ser continuos en reconocer d ella de ^es, caza, flores, y ramos para el 
anstento de la casa del Mayorazgo, y cl que lo es estd obligado 4 susten- 
tarlos y ^ regalarlos como amigos de aq|iella c^a y parientes de olla.” — * 
Ibid., MS. t Camargo, Hist, de Tiascala, MS.

MARCH TO MRXIOO.

m

liflSilttr. Triumphs were granted to the victorious general, who 
entered the city, lllading his spoils and captives in long 
procession, while his achievements were commemorated in 
national songs, and his effigy, whether in wood or stone, 
was erected in the temples. It was truly in the martial 
spirit of republican Rome.*An institution not unlike knighthood was introduced, very 
similar to one existing also among the Aztecs. The aspirant 
to the honours of this barbaric chivalry watched his arms 
and fasted fifty or sixty days in the temple, then listened to 
a grave discourse on the duties of his new profession. Various 
whimsical ceremonies followed, when his arms were restored 
to him ; he "was led in solemn procession through the public 
streets, and the inauguration was concluded by banquets 
and public rejoicings. — The new knight was distinguished 
henceforth by certain peculiar privileges, as well as by a 
badge intimating his rank. It is worthy of remark, that 
this honour was not reserved exclusively military merit ; 
hut was the recompense, also, of public services of other 
kinds, as wisdom ini council, or sagacity and success in 
trade. For trade was held in as high estimation by the 
Tlascalans, as by the other people of Anahuac.f

The temperate climate of the table-land furnished the 
ready means for distant traffic. The fruitfulness of the soil 
was indicated by the name of the country, — Tlascala signi- 
fying the “ land of bread.’’ Its wide plains to the slopes of

* Los grandes recibimientos quo liacian d los capitanes que venian y 
alcanzaban victoria en las guerras, las fiestas y solenidades con qwe se solcn- 
izaban a manera do triunfo que los metian en andas en su puebla, trayendo 
consigo 4 los vencidos, y por etemizar sus hazafias se las cantaban publica- 
mente y ansi quedaban memora^as y con estatuas que Ics ponian en los 
tewplos.’’ — Hist, de Tlascala, MS.

^ + For tbe whole ceremony of inauguration, — though as it seems having

especial reference to the merchant-fknights, — see A^j^ndix^ Pmii IL^ No, 
9p where the original is given from Camargo.

Its INSTITUtlONS.especial reference to the merchant-fknights, — see A^j^ndix^ Pmii IL^ No, 
9p where the original is given from Camargo.

Its INSTITUtlONS.

its rocky hills, waved with yellow harvests of maize, 
with the bountiful meguey, a plant whiih, as we h^vi'seeil,r 
supplied the materials for some important fabrics^ With 
these, as well as the products of agricultural industry, the 
merchant found his way down the sides of the Cordilleras, 
wandered over the sunny regions at their base, and brought 
back the luxuries which nature had denied to his own.*

The various arts of civilisation kept pace with increasing^ 
wealth and public prosperity ; at least, these arts were cul- 
tivated to the same limited extent, apparently, as among the 
other people of Anahuac. The Tlascalan tongue, says the 
national historian, simple as beseemed that of a mountain 
region, was rough compared with the polished Tezcucan, or 
the popular Aztec dialect, and, therefore, not so well fitted 
for composition. But they made like proficiency with the 
kin<|^ nations in the rudiments of science. Their calendar 
formed on the same plan. Their religion, their archi- 
tecture, many of their laws and social usages were the same, 
arguing a common origin for all. Their tutelary deity was 
the same ferocious war^^od as that the Aztecs, though- 
with a different name ; their temples, in like manner, were 
drenitked with the blood of human victims, and their boards 
groaned with the same cannibal repasts, t

Though not ambitious of foreign conquest, the prosperity 
of the TIascalans, in time, excited the jealousy of their 
neighbours, and especially pf the opulent state of Cholula. 
Frequent hostilities arose hetween them, in which the

Ha bel paese, says the Anonymous Conqueror, speo-Ving of Tlascala, 
at the time of the invasion, pianure et mSt^ghe, et e provthcia popolosa 
et vi si raccoglie molto pane.” — Rel. d* un gent., ap. j^amusio, tom. iii. 
p. 308.t A full account of the manners, customs, and domestic policy of Tlaa- 
cala is given by the national histonan, throwing much light^^n^e other 
states of Anahuac, whose socid institutions' seem to have h^iSl cast in ^ 
the same mould.

KlkaOH ICO

iipilTantages was almost alifajs on tlie side of the former. 
A stiU mere formiiable foe appeared in later da3r8 in the 
Asteos ; who could ill bi-ook the independence of Tkscala, 
when the surrounding, nations had acknowledgedv one after 
another, their influence or their empire. Under the ambi- 
tious Axayaoatl, they demanded of the Tlascajans the same 
tribuio and obedience rendered by other people of the 
country. If it were refused, the Aztecs would raze tlieir 
citieo^^ their foundations, and deliver the land to their 
eneij^i

|s^o this imperious summons, the little republic proudly 
Hfeplied, ‘‘Neither they nor their ancestors had ever paid 
tribute* or homage to a foreign power, and never would pay 
it. If their country was invaded, they knew how to defend 
it, and would pour out their blood as freely in defe^ nf 
their freedom now, as their fathers di4„of yore, 
routed the Aztecs on the plains

This resolute answer brought on t^i^ Ae

monarchy. A pitched battle^^^ . and the sturdy

republicans were viej^rious. .pei’iod hostilities

between tbe two nations coi^li;nie*d vtith more or less activity, 
hut with unsparing ferocity. . Every captive was mercilessly 
sacrificed. The childi^^n wore trained from the cradle to 
deadly hatred against the* Mexicans ; and, even* in the brief 
intervals of war, none of those intermarriages took place 
between tbe people of the rejp^tive countries which knit 
together in social bonds’ other kindred races of 
Anahuao. ■ 'In this ^6|i:tiggle^,lSifi„^*1]lascalan8 received an important 
support in ,the aoSfOTsibn of the Othomis, or Otomies, — as 
usually spelt by Castilian yriters, — a wild and warlike race 
originally spread over the table-land north of the Mexican 
« vaBoy^ A portidh of thenj obtained a settlement in the

^ Caniax^o, Hist, de t'la&csda, MS.-— Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 
2 , cap. 70, *

- EJkAtY mwtmr. 3SS^ Caniax^o, Hist, de t'la&csda, MS.-— Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 
2 , cap. 70, *

- EJkAtY mwtmr. 3SS

republie, and were speedily i|icorpoTated in its amief f 
Their oeurage and fidelity to the nation of their adoption 
showed them worthy of trust, and the frontier places were 
consigned to their keeping. The gaountain barriers, by 
which Tlascala is encompassed, afforded many strong natural 
positions for defence against invasion. The country was 
open towards the east, where a valley, of some six miles in 
breadth, invited the approach of an enemy. Bui here it 
was, that the jealous Tlasealans erected the formidable 
rampart which had excited the admiration. of the Spaniards, 
and which they manned with a garrison of Otomies. ^ 
Efforts for their subjugation were renewed on a greater 
scale, after the accession of Montezuma. His victorious 
arms had spread down the declivities of the Andes to the 
distant provinces of Vera Paz and Nicaragua,* and his 
haughty spirit was chafed by the opposition of a petty state, 
whose territorial extent did not exceed ten leagues in 
breadth by fifteen in length.f He sent an army against 
them under the command of a favourite son. His troops 
were beaten and his son was slai% The enraged and 
mortified monarch was roused to still greater preparations. 
He enlisted the forces of the cities bordering on his enemy, 
together with those of the empire, and with this formidable 
army swept over the devoted valleys of Tlascala. But the 
bold mountaineers withdrew into the recesses of their hills, 
and, coolly awaiting their opportunity, rushed like a torrent 
on the invaders, and droT#*4hem back, with dreadful 
slaughter, from their territories. *

lH V >.

• Camargo (Hist, de Tlascala, MS.) noticed tie extent isf Montezuma’s 
conquests, — a debatable ground for tbd historian.lH V >.

• Camargo (Hist, de Tlascala, MS.) noticed tie extent isf Montezuma’s 
conquests, — a debatable ground for tbd historian.

t Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 3, «ap. 16; SoUsMy% “Th© Tlas- 
calan territory was fifty lei^ues in cimumference, ten long, from east to 
west, and four broad, from north to sou^.” (Conquista de ll^jico, lib. 3, • 
cap. 3.) It must have made a curious figure m geometry !

aa2>

Still, notwithstanding tfio advantages gained over the 
enemy in the field, <ihe Tlascalans wore sorely pressed by 
their long hostilities with a foe so far superior to themselves 
in numbers and resources. The As toe armies Jay between 
them and the coast, cutting off all communication with that 
prolific region, and thus limited their supplies to the products 
of tlieir own soil and manufacture. For more than half a 
century they had neither cotton, nor cacao, nor salt. Indeed, 
their taste had been so far aifected by long abstinence from 
these articles, that it required the lapse of several genera- 
tions after the Conquest, to reconcile them to the use of 
salt at their meals. ^ During the short intervals of war, it 
is saidj the Aztec nobles, in the true spirit of chivalry, 
sent supplies of these commodities as presents, with many 
courteous expressions of respect, to the Tlascalan chiefs. 
This intercourse, we are assured by the Indian chronicler, 
was unsuspected by the people. Nor did it lead to any 
further correspondence, he adds, between the parties, pre- 
judicial to the liberties of the republic, “• which maintained 
its customs and good government inviolate, and the worship 
of its gods.^t

Such was the condition of Tlascala, at the coming of the 
Spaniards ; holding, it might seem, a precarious existence 
under the shadow of the formidable power which seemed 
suspended like an avalanche over her head, but still strong 
in her own resources, stronger in the indomitable, temper

* * Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS.* * Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS.

+ Lo§ Sehores Mejicanos y Tezcacaaos, en tiempo que ponian treguas 
por algunas t«mporadas etnblaban 4 los Seiioros de Tlaxcalla grandes 
presentee y dddivas de oro, ropa, y caeao, y sal, y de todas las cosas de que 
Grecian, sin que la gente plebei^a lo entendiese, y se saludaban secreta- 
luente, guard4ndo8e el decora que se debian ; mas con <tsPR| estos trabajos

drden de sn repdhlica janias se dejaba de gobemar la rectitud de 
BUS costnmbres guardando inviolatlemente el culto de sus Dioses.*’ — 
Ibid., MS.

DISCUSSIONS IN tHE SENATE.

of her people; with e repattSion esteMished throughout 
the land, for good faith and moderatioi in peace, for valour 
in war, while her uncompromising spirit of independen<^ 
secured the respect even of her Enemies* With such 
qualities of character, and with an animosity sharpened by 
long, deadly hostility with Mexico, her alliance was obviously 
of the last importance to the Spaniards, m their present 
enterprise. It was not easy to secure it.*

The Tlascalans had been made acquainted with the 
advance and victorious career of the Christians, the intel- 
ligence of which had spread far and wide over the plateau. 
But they do not seem to have anticipated the appjjpach of 
the strangers to their own borders. They were now much 
embarrassed by the embassy demanding a passage through 
their territories. The great council was convened, and a 
considerable difference of opinion prevailed in its members. 
Some, ^adopting the popular superstition, supposed tbe 
Spaniards might be the white and bearded men foretold by 
the oracles, f At all events, they were the enemies ofMexico, and as such might co-opertte with them in their 
struggle with the empire. Others argued that the strangers 
could have nothing in common with them. Their march 
throughout the land might be tracked by the broken images 
of the Indian gods, and desecrated temples. How did 
Tlascalans even know that they were foes to Montezuma ? 
They had received his embassies, accepted his presents, 
and were now in the company of his vassals on the way to 
his capital.

* The Tlascalan chronicler discerns in this deep-rooted hatred of Mexico 
the hand of Providence, who wrought out of it an impoartant means for 
subverting the Aztec empire. — Hist, do^lascala, MS.

f “ Si bien os acordais, como tenemoe de nuestra antigti^ad como ban 
de venir gentes £ la parte donde sale sol, y ijue han de emparentar con® 
nosotros, y que hemos de ser todos unoB;y que han dis ser hlancos y 
barbudos.” — Ibid., MS.

o58 itARCJt TO imxro6.

These last were the relictions of an aged chief, me of 
the four who presided over the republio. His name was 
Xicotencatl. He was nearly blind, having lived, as is said, 
far beyond the limits 6f a century.* His son, an impetuous 
young man of the same name with himself, commanded a 
powerful army of Tlascalan and Otomie warriors, near the 
eastern frontier. It would be best, the old man said, to fall 
with this force at once on the Spaniards. If victorious, the 
latter would then be in their power. If defeated, the 
senate could disown the act as that of the general, not of 
the republic. t The cunning counsel of the chief found

favour ,with his hearers, though assuredly not in the" spirit of 
chivalry, nor of the. good faith for which his countrymen 
were celebrated. But with an Indian, force and stratagem, 
courage and deceit, were equally admissible in war, a» they 
were among the barbarians of ancient Rorae.{-^The 
poallan envoys were to be detained tmder pretence of 
assisting at a religious sacrifice.Meanwhile, Cortds and his pliant band, as stated in the 
preceding chapter, hafi arrived before the rocky rampart on 
the eastern confines of Tlascala. From some cause or 
other, it was not manned by its Otomie garrison, and the 
Spaniards passed in, as we have seen, without resistance. 
Cortes rode at the head of his body of horse, and, ordering 
the infantry to come on at a quick pace, went forward to

♦ To the ripe age of oae hundred and forty ! if we may credit Camargo, 
Solis, who confounds this veteran with his son, has put a flourishing ha- 
rangue in the mouth of the latter, which would be a rare gem of Indian 
eloquence, were it not Castilian. — Conquista, lib. 2, cap. 16.

f Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Herrera, Hist, General, dec. 2, 
lib. 6, cap. 3. — Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, cap. 27. There is 
sufficient contradiction as well as obscurity, in the proceedings reported of 
« the council, which it is not Aosy reconcile altogether with subsequent 
events.

± «

Dolus an virtus, quis in hoste requirat ?

BSiSPBEATE BATtLES.

35S

reconnoitre. After advancing Ithree or four leagues, he 
descried a small party of Indians, ar&ed with sword and 
buckler, in the fashion of the country. They fled at his 
approach. He made signs for theai to halt, but, seeing 
that they only fled the faster, he and his coni|».nions put 
spurs to their horses, and soon came up with them. The 
Indians, finding escape impossible, faced round, and, instead 
of showing the accustomed terror of the natives at the 
strange and appalling aspect of a mounted trooper, they 
commenced a furious assault on the cavaliers. The latter, 
however, were too strong for them, and would have cul 
their enemy to pieces without much difficulty, when a body 
of several thousand Indians appeared in sight, and coming 
briskly on to the support of their countrymen.Cortds, seeing them, despatched one of his party, in all 
haste, to accelerate the march of his infantry. The Indians, 
after discharging their missiles, fell furiously on the little 
band of Spaniards, They strove to tear the lances from 
their grasp, and to drag the riders from the horses. They 
brought one cavalier to the ground, •who afterwards died of 
his wounds, and they killed two of the horses, cutting 
through their necks with their stout broadswords — if we 
may believe the* chronicler — at a blow.* In the narrative 
of these campaigns, there is, sometimes hut one step — and 
that a short one — from history to romance. The loss of 
the horses, so important and so few in number, was seriously 
felt by Cortds, who could have better spared the life of the 
best rider in the troop. .

The struggle was a hard one. But the (^da were as 
overwhelming as any recorded by ithe Spanlairds in their 
own romances, where a handful af knights is ai^yed'against

• “ I les matiron dos Cab^los, de cuchilladas, i aefin algunos, qu* 
lo vieron, cortdron A cercen de xm. golpe cada peecue^o, con riendas, i 
todas.” — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 45, ^

TO MEXICO.

legions of enemies. The linces of the Christians did terri- 
ble execution here hlso ; but they had need of the magic 
lance of Astolpho, that overturned myriads with a touch, to 
carry them safe through so unequal a contest. It was with 
no 'little satisfaction, therefore, that they beheld their 
comrades rapidly advancing to their support.1^0 sooner had the main body reached the field of battle, 
than, hastily forming, they poured such a volley from their 
muskels and crossbows as staggered the enemy. Astounded, 
rathe^ tb^n intimidated, by the terrible report of the fire- 
arms, now heard for the first time in these regions, the 
Indians made no further effort to continue the fight, but 
drew off in good order, leaving the road open to the 
Spaniards. The latter, too well satisfied to be rid of the 
annoyance, to care to follow the retreating foe, again held 
on their way.

Their route took them through a country sp^nklnd atlsr 
with Indian cottages, amidst flourishing fields of maui and 
maguey, indicating an industrious and thriving peasantry. 
They were met here b}' two Tlascalan envoys, accompanied 
by two of the Cempoallans. The fornjer, presenting them* 
selves before the general, di|aV 0 Wed the assault on his 
troops, as an unauthorised act^fnd assured him of a friendly 
reception at their capital. .Cqi^s received the communica- 
tion in a courteous manner, n^ffeeting to place more confidence 
in its good faith than he p^ably felt.

It was now growing date, and the Spaniards quickened 
their march, anxious to reach a favourable ground for 
encampment before nightfall. They found such a spot on 
the borders of a stream that rolled sluggishly across the 
plain. A few deserted cottfliges stood along the banks, and 
the fatigued and famished soldiers ransacked them in quest 
nf food. All they could find iwas some tame animals resem- 
bling dogs. These they killed and dressed without cere-

B£SP£BA1?E BATTLES.B£SP£BA1?E BATTLES.

toony, and, garnishing their unsivoury repast with the fruit 
of the t\ma^ the Indian fig, which grew wild in the neigh- 
bourhood, they contrived to satisfy the cravings of appetite. 
A careful watch was maintained by Cortea, and companies of 
a hundred men each relieved each other in mounting guard 
through the night. But no attack was made. Hostilities 
by night were contrary to the system of Indian tactic^.*

By break of day on the following morning, it being the 
second of September, the troops were under arms. Besides 
the Spaniards, the whole number of Indian auxiliaries might 
now amount to three thousand ; for Cortes had gathered 
recruits from the friendly places on his route ; three hun- 
dred from the last. After hearing mass, they resumed 
their march. They moved in close array ; the general had 
previously admonished the men not to lag behind, or wander 
from the ranks a moment, as stragglers would be sure to be 
cut off by their stealthy and vigilant enemy. The horsemen 
rode three abreast, the better to give one another support ; 
and *Coft6s instructed them in the heat of fight to keep 
together, and never to charge singly* He taught them 
how to carry their lances, that they might not be wrested 
from their hands by the Indians, who constantly attempted 
it. For the same reason they should avoid giving thrusts, 
but aim their weapons steadily at the faces of their foes.f

They had not proceeded far, when they were met by the * 
two remaining Cempoallan envoys, who with looks of terror 
informed the general, that they had been treacherously 
seized and confined, in order to be sacrificed at an approach-

* Rel. Seg. de Cortea, ap. Lorenzana, p. 50. — Camai^o, iJist. de Tlaa- 
cala, MS. — ^ernal Diaz, Hiat. de la Conquista, cap. 62. — d-oiuftra, Crdnica, 
cap* 45.— Oviedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS^ lib. 33, cap. 8, 41. — Sahagun, 
Hist, do Nueva Eapafia, MS. lib. 12, cap. 10.“ Quo quando rompieaseraoa por jpa esquadronea, quo . lleuasaoa las « 
Ian 9 a 8 por las caras, y no parassen 4 dar Ian 9 ada 8 , porque no les echassen 
piano dellas,*’ — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 62.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

4iig festiral of the Tlascalats, hut in the night had succeeded 
k iiaking their eschpe; They gave the unwelcome tidingg, 
Also, that a large force of the natives was already assembled 
to oppose .the progresa of the Spaniards.

Soon after, they came in sight of a body of Indians, 
about a thousand, apparently all k*med and brandishing 
their Weapons, as the Christians approached, in token of 
defiance. Cortds, when he had come within hearing, ordered 
the interpreters to proclaim that he had no hostile inten- 
tions ; Imt. wished only to be allowed a passage through 
their country, ^vhich he had entered as a friend. ^ This 
declaration he commanded the rCyal notary, Godoy, to 
record on the spot, that, if blood were shed, it might not be 
charged on the Spaniards. This pacific proclamation was 
met, as usual on such occasions, by a shower of darts, stones, 
and arrows, which fell like rain on the Spaniards, rattling 
on their stout harness, and in some instances penetrating 
to the skin. Galled hy the smart of their wounds, they 
called on the .|^heral to lead them on, till he sannddd the 
well knownji#attle^cryt ** St. Jago* and 1* ♦The Indians maintained gi#nd for a while with 
spirit, when they retwli.ted willh precipitation, but not in 
disorder, t The Spamaards, whose blood was heated by the 
encounter, followed up their advantage with more zeal than 
prudence, sufferiiig the enemy to draw them iuto a 
narrow glen or defile, intersected by a little stream of water, 
where the broken ground was impracticable for artillery, as 
well as for the movements of cavalry. Pressing forward 
with eagerness, to extricate themselves from their perilous 
position,, to their great dismay, on turning an abruj)t angle 
of the pass, Ithey came in presence of a numerous army

* “ Entoooes duco Cortdi, ‘ Saptingo, y 6 , ” — Bernal Diaz, Hist,

de la Conquista, eap. 03.

+ “Una gejitil contienda,” says Gomara of this skirmish. — Crdnica, 
cap. 46.

MSPBRAf® BAmUS.

choiring up the gorge of the valAy, and stretching far over 
the plains beyond. To the astonished eyes of Cort<5s, they 
appeared a hundred thousand men, while no account estimaites 
them at less than thirty thousand.* •

. They piesented a confused assemblage of helmets, wea- 
pons, and many-coloured plumes, glancing bright in the 
morning sun, and mingled with banners, above which 
proudly floated one that bore as a device the heron a 
rock. . It was the well-known ensign of the house of Titcala, 
and, as well as the white and yellow stripes on the bodies, 
and the like colours on the feather-mail of the Indians, 
showed that* they were the warriors of Xicotencatl.f

As the Spaniards came in sight, the Tlascalans set up a 
hideous war-cry, or rather whistle, piercing the ear with its 
shrillness, and which, with the beat of their melancholy 
drums, that could be heard for half a league or more,|Rel, Seg. de Cortfes, ap, Lorenzana, p. 51. According to Gomara, 
(Crdnica, cap. 46,) the enemy mustered 80,000. So, also, Ixtlilxochitl. 
(Hist. Cliich., MS., cap. 83.) Bernal Diaz says, more than 40,000. 
(Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 63.) But HerHsra (Hist. General, dec, 2. 
lib. 6, cap. 5) and Torquemada (Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, cap. 20) reduce 
them to 30,000. One might as easily reckon the leaves in a forest, as the 
numbers of a confused throng of barbarians. 'As this was only one of 
several armies kept on foot by the Tlascalans, the smallest amount ft, 
probably,- too large. The whole population of the state, according to 
Clavigero, who would not be likely to underrate it, did not exceed half a 
million at the time of the invasion. — Stor. del Messico, tom. i. p. 156.

“ La divisa y armas de la casa y cabecera de Titcala es una garza 
hlanca sobre un penasco.” (Camai^o, Hist, de Tlascalft;, MS.) 
capitan general,” says Bernal Diaz, se dezi^ Xicotenga, y con bus 
divisas de bianco y Colorado, porqne aquella divisA^y librea era de aquel 
Xicoteiiga.” — Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 63.

J Llaman Teponaztle que es de un trozo de madero concava^o y de 
una pieza rollizo y, como deoimos, hueco de dentro, que luena algunas 
veces mas de media legua y con el tambor hace estrana y suave conso- 
nancia.” (Cfttnargo, Hist, de Tlascalj^ MS.) Clavigero, who gives a« 
drawing of this same drum, says it is still used by the Indians, and may be 
heqrd two or three miles. — Stor. Messico, tom. ii. p, 179;

Sit IIAEOH TO Mmcb.Sit IIAEOH TO Mmcb.

tnight weii have filled the Stoutest heart with dismay. l*his 
formidable host came rolling on towards the Christians, as 
if to overwhelm them by their very rumbers. But the cou- 
rageous. band of warriors, closely serried together and. 
sheltered under their strong panoplies, received the shock 
unshaken, while the broken masses of the enemy, chafing 
and heaving tumultuously around them, seemed to recede 
only to return with new and accumulated force.

Cortes, as usual, in the front of danger, in vain endea- 
voured, at the head of the horse, tQ open a passage for the 
infantry. Still his men, both cavalry and foot, kept their 
array unbroken, offering no assailable point to their" foe. A 
body of the Tlascalans, however, acting in concert, assaulted 
a soldier named Moran, one of the best riders in the tr0.op. 
They succeeded in dragging him from his horse, which they 
despatched with a thousand blows. The Spaniards, on foot, 
made a desperate effort to rescue their comrade from .the 
hands of the enemy, — and from the horrible doom of the 
captive. A fierce struggle now began over the body of the 
prostrate horse. Ten* of the Spaniards were wounded, when 
they succeeded in retrieving the unfortunate cavalier from 
his assailants, but in so disastrous a plight that he died on 
the following day. The horse was borne off in triumph by 
the Indians, and his mangled remains were senf* a strange 
trophy, to the different towns of Tlascala. The circumstance 
troubled the Spanish commander, as it divested tbe animal 
of the supernatural terrors with which the superstition of the 
natives had usually surrounded it. To prevent such a conse- 
quence; he had caused the two horses, killed on the preceding 
day, to be secretly buried on the spot.The enemy now began «»to give ground gradually, borne 
down by the riders, and trafiapled under the hoofs of their 
^ horses. Through the whdSe of this sharp encounter, the 
Indian allies were of great service to the Spaniards. Thpy

BAxmnr. 9w’'

mailed into the wajOT, wd gra}^d their enemies,- with the 
desperatiou of men who felt that “ theit only safety was in 
the despair of safety.”**^ “ I see nothing but death for us/* 
exclaimed a Cempoallan chief to Marj^a ; ** we shall never 
get through the pass alive. “ The God of the Christians is 
with us,” answered the intrepid woman: “ and He will carry 
us safely through.”!

Amidst the din of Tbattle the voice of Cortes was heard, 
cheering on his soldiers. If we fail now,*’ he cried, ** the 
cross of Christ can heV'er be planted in the land. Forward, 
comrades ! When was it ever known that a Castilian turned 
his hack on a foe Animated hy the words and heroic 
bearing of their generul, the soldiers, with desperate Efforts, 
at length succeeded in forcing a passage through the dark 
columns of the enemy, and emerged from the defile on the 
open plain beyond.

Here they quickly recovered their confidence with their 
superiority. The horse soon opened a space for the ma- 
noeuvres of the artillery. The close files of their antagonists 
presented a sure mark ; and the thm^ders of the ordnance 
vomiting forth torrents of fire and sulphurous smoke, the 
wide desolation caused in their ranks, and the strangely 
mangled carcasses of the slain, filled the barbarians with 
consternati^in and horror. They had no weapons to cope 
with these terrible engines, and their clumsy missiles, dis-. 
charged from uncertain hands, seemed to fall ineffectual on 
the charmed heads of the Christians. What added to their 
embarrassment was, the desire to carry off the dead and

* ‘^Unaillis fuit spes aalutis, desperfisse de s«lute.” — (?. Martyr, De 
Orbe Novo, dec. 1, cap. 1.) It is said with the classic energy of T^citiis.* ‘^Unaillis fuit spes aalutis, desperfisse de s«lute.” — (?. Martyr, De 
Orbe Novo, dec. 1, cap. 1.) It is said with the classic energy of T^citiis.

f Respondidle Marina, que no tuvie«e miedo, porque 4 Diot d© los 
Christianos, que es muy poderoso, i los queria mucho, los Bacai||si de peligro,” 
—Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 6^cap. 5.

t Ibid, ubi supra.

MAKCH TO MEXICO.

y^^ounded from the field, a general practice among the people 
0$ Anahuac, hut which necessarily exposed them, while thus 
employed, to still greater loss.

Eight of their pjpncipal chiefs had now fallen ; and 
Xicotencatl, finding himself wholly unable to make head 
against the Spaniards in the open field, ordered a retreat. 
Ear from the confusion of a panic-struck mob, so common 
among barbarians, the Tlascalan force moved off the ground 
with ail the order of a well-disciplined army. Cortes, as on 
the preceding day, was too well satisfied with his present 
advantage to desire to follow it up. It was within an hour 
of sunset, and he was anxious before nightfall to , secure a 
good {position, where he might refresh his wounded troops, 
and bivouac for the night. ^

Gathering up his wounded, he held on his way, without 
loss of time ; and before dusk reached a roo%^eminjdtw!^» 
called Tz0mpachtepetlt or ** the hill of 'Tzompach^^^ It was 
crowned by a sort of tower or temple, the remains of which 
are still visible.! His first car«^ Was given to the wounded, 
both men and .horses.*, Fortunately, an abundance i?f provi- 
sions was found in some neighbpiiring cottages ; and the 
soldiers, at least all who were net disabled by their injuries, 
celebrated the wctory of the day with feasting and rejoicing.As to the number of killed or wounded on eitjier side, it 
is matter of loosest conjecture. The. Indians must have 
suffered severely, hut the practice of carrying off the dead 
from the field made it* impossible to know to what extent. 
The injury sustained by the Spaniards appears to have been 
principally in the number of their wounded. The great 
object of the natives of Anahuftib in their battles was, to make

• Oviedo, HiBt. de las Ind., MS., lib. S3, cap. 3, 45.— Ixtlilxoohitl,

Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 83. — Rel. Seg. de Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, p. 51. — 
Bemal Diaz, Hist, de la Oonquista, cap. 63. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 40. 
f Viaje de Cort^, ap. Lorenzana, p. ix.

DESPEEATE BATTLES.

367 #

prispneirs,’ who might grace theii| triumphs, and supply 
tims for sacrifice. To this brutal superstition the Christiaiyi 
were indebted, in no slight degree, for their personal pre- 
servation. To take the reports of the ponquerors, their own 
losses in action were always inconsiderable. But whoever 
has had occasion to consult the ancient chroniclers of Spain 
in relation to its wars with the infidel, whether Arab or 
American, will place little confidence in numbers.**The events of the day had suggested many topics for 
painful reflection to Cortds. He had nowhere met witli so 
determined a resistance within the borders Anahuac ; 
nowhere had he encountered native troops so formidable for 
their weapons, their discipline, and their valour. Fsfi* from 
manifesting the superstitious terrors felt by the other Indians 
at the strange arms and aspect of the Spaniards, the 
TIascalans had boldly grappled with their enemy, and only 
yielded to the inevitable superiority of hif military science. 
How important would the alliance of such a nation be in a 
struggle with those of their own race — for example, with the 
.j^ztecs I^But how was he to secure this alliance ? Hitherto, 
all overtur4i4^d been rejected with disdain ; and it seemed 
probable, that every step of his progress in this populous 
land was to be fi^Fffelj contested. His army, especially the 
Indians, celebrated . the events of the day with feasting and 
dancing, songs of merriment, and shouts of triumph. Cortes 
encouraged it, well knowing how important it was to keep.

• According to Cortee not a Spaniard fell — though many were wounded 
— in this action so fatal to the infidel I Diaz allows one. lii the famous 
battle of Navas de Tolosa, between the Spaniards and Ara1|»s, in 1212,

equally matched in military science at that time, there were left 200,000 
of the latter on the field ; and, to halan^ this bloody roll, only Uve and 
twenty Christians 1 See the estimate in Alfonso IX.’s veracious letter, op. 
Mariana (Hist, de Espana, lib. 2, cap. 24). The oflScitd r|turn8 of the 
old Castilian crusaders, whether in the did World or the New|!we scarcely * 
more trustworthy than a French im^rial bulletin in our day.

MARCH TO MEXICO.MARCH TO MEXICO.

j|jp the spirits of his soldie|6. But the sounds of revelrj at 
|ftngth died away ; and in the still watches of the night, 
many an anxious thought must have crowded on th*o mind 
of the general, while {lis little army lay buried in slumber in 
its encampment around the Indian hill.

369

CHAPTEE m.

DECISIVE VICTORY. — INDIAN COUNCIL. — NIGHT ATTACK— NEGOTIATIONS 
WITH THE ENEMY. — TLASCALAN HERO.

1519.

Tnii: Spaniards were allowed to repose undisturbed the 
following day, and to recruit their strength after the 
fatigue and hard fighting of the preceding. They found 
sufficient employment, however, in repairing and cleaning 
their weapons, replenishing their diminished stock of arrows, 
and getting everything in order for further hostilities, should 
the severe lesson they had inflicted on the enemy prove in- 
sufficient to discourage him. On the second day, as Cortds 
received no overtures from the Tlascaiians, he determined to 
send an embassy to their camp, proposing a cessation of 
hostilities, and expressing his intention to visit their capital 
as a friend. He selected two of the principal chiefs taken 
in the late engagement, as the bearers of the message.

Meanwhile, averse to leaving his men longer in a dan- 
gerous state of inaction, which the enemy might interpret 
as the result of timidity or exhaustion, he put himself at 
the head of the cavalry and such light troops as were most 
fit for service, and made a fomy into the neighbouring 
country. It was a mountainous region, formed by a rami- 
fication of the great sierra of Tlascala, with verdant slopes 
and valleys teeming with maize and plantations (rf maguey, 
while the eminences were cro%ned with populous towns * 
and villages. In one of these, he tells us, he found three

VOL. I.

B B

.370 MARCH TO MEXICO.VOL. I.

B B

.370 MARCH TO MEXICO.

thousand dwellings/^' In B|me places he met with a resolute 
resistance, and on these occasions took ample vengeance by 
laying the country waste with fire and sword. After a suc- 
cessful inroad he returned laden with forage and provisions, 
and driving before him several hundred Indian captives. 
He treated them kindly, however, when arrived in camp, 
endeavouring to make them understand that these acts of 
violence were not dictated by his own wishes, but by the 
unfriendly policy of their countrymen. In this way he 
hoped to impress the nation with the conviction of his power 
on the one hand, and of his amicable intentions, if met by 
them in the like spirit, on the other.

On ‘reaching his quarters, he found the two envoys re- 
turned from the Tlascalan camp. They had fallen in with 
Xicotencatl at about two leagues’ distance, where he lay 
encamped with a powerful force. The cacique gave them 
audience at the head of his troops, lie told them to return 
with the answer, “ Tliat the Spaniards might pass on as 
soon as they chose to Tlascala ; and, when they reached it, 
their fleSh would be l^ewn from their bodies, for sacrifice to 
Jhe gods ! If they preferred to remain in their own quar- 
ters, he would pay them a visit there the next day.”t The 
ambassadors added, that the chief had an immense force 
with him, consisting of five battalions of ten thousand men 
each. They were the flower of the Tlascalan and Otomic

* Rel. Seg. de Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, p. 52. Oviedo, who made free 
use of the muivuscripts of Cortes, writes thirty-nine liouscs. (Hist, de las 
Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap. 3.) This may, perhaps, be explained by tlie sign 
for a thousand, in Spanish notation, Iwiaring great resemblance to the 
figure 9. Martyr, who had access also to the Conqueror’s manuscript, 
confimts the larger, and, d priori, less probable number.+ “ Que fucsseraos A su pueblo adondc estA su padre, q’allA liarian las 
pazes CO hartarse de nnestras carnes, y honrar sus dioscs con nnestros cora- 
' ^ones, y sangre, A que.para otpo de maiiana veriamos su respuosta.” — 
Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 64.

PECISITE VICTORY.

371

warriors, assembled under the|banners of tbeir respective 
leaders, by command of the senate, who were resolved to 
try the fortunes of the state in a pitched battle, and strike 
one decisive blow for the extermination of the invaders.*

This bold defiance fell heavily on the ears of the Spaniards, 
not prepared for so pertinacious a spirit in their enemy. 
They had had ample proof of his courage and formidable 
prowess. They were now, in their crippled condition, to 
encounter him with a still more terrible arrfty of numbers. 
The war, too, from the horrible fate with which it menaced 
the vanquished, wore a peculiarly gloomy aspect, that pressed 
heavily on their spiiits. ‘'We feared death,” says the lion- 
hearted Diaz, with his usual simplicity, “ for we wer^ men.” 
There was scarcely one in the army that did not confess 
himself that night to the reverend father Olmedo, who was 
occupied nearly the whole of it with administering absolu- 
tion, and with the other solemn offices of the Church. 
Armed with the blessed sacraments, the Catholic soldier lay 
tranquilly down to rest, prepared for any fate that might 
betide Him under the banner of the (iross.t

As a battle was now inevitable, Cortes resolved to marcTi 
out and meet the enemy in the field. This would have a 
show of confidence, that might serve the double purpose of 
intimidating the Tlascalans, and inspiriting his own men, 
whose Enthusiasm might lose somewhat of its heat, if* More than one writer repeats a story of the Tlascalan general’s sending 
a good supply of provisions, at this time, to the famished army of the 
Spaniards ; to put them in stomach, it may be, for the fight. (Goulara, 
Cr6n., cap. 46. — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 83.) This ultra- 
chivalrous dis])lay from the barbarian is not very probable, apbd Coptds’ own 
account of his successful foray may better explain the abundance 
which reigned in his camp.

f Rel. Seg. de Cortds, ap. Lorenzana, p. 62, Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., 
MS. cap. 83. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. A', 47. — Oviedo, de las Ind.,*

MS. lib. 3.S, cap. .3. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conouista, caa. 64.

B B 2

372 IdARCH TO MEXICO.

compelled to await the assai^t of their antagonists, inactivg in 
their own intrenchments. The sun rose bright on the fol- 
lowing morning, the 5th of September, 1519, an eventful 
day in the history of /lie Spanish Conquest. The general 
reviewed his army, and gave them, preparatory to marching, 
a' few words of encouragement and advice. The infantry 
he instructed to rely on the point rather than the edge of 
their swords, and to endeavour to thrust their opponents 
through the body. The horsemen were to charge at half 
speed, with their lances aimed at the eyes of the Indians, 
The artillery, the arquehusiers, and crossbowmen, were to 
support one another, some loading while others discharged 
their pieces, that there should he an unintermitted firing 
kept up through the action. Above all, they were to main- 
tain their ranks close and unbroken, as on this depended 
their preservation.They had not advanced a quarter of a league, when they 
came in sight of the Tlascalan army. Its dense array 
stretched far and wide over a vast plain or meadow ground, 
about six miles squarer Its appearance justified the report 
which had been given of its numbers.* Nothing could he 
more picturesque than the aspect of these Indian battalions, 
with the naked bodies of the common soldiers gaudily 
painted, the fantastic helmets of the chiefs glittering with 
gold and precious stones, and the glowing panoplies of 
feather- work, which' decorated their persons. f Innumerable

* Through the magnifying lens of Cort«?s, they appeared to be 150,000 
men ; (Rel. Seg., ap. Lorenzana, p. 52 a number usually preferred by 
succeeding writers.

Not half BO gorgeous, for their May-day mirth 
wreath’d and riban^ed, our youths and maids.

As these stern Tlascalam in war attire !

The golden glitt’rance, and the feather-mail 
More gay than glitt’ring gold ; and round the helm 
A eoronal of high upstanding plumes.

DECISIVE VICTORY.

373

sp^rs and darts tipped witli pofits of transparent itztli, or 
fieiy copper, sparkled bright in the morning sun, like the 
phosphoric gleams playing on the surface of a troubled sea, 
while the rear of the mighty host was dark with the sha- 
dows of banners, on which were emblazoned the armorial 
bearings of the great TIascalan and Otomie chieftains.* 
Among these, the white heron on the rock, the cognisance 
of the house of Xicotencatl, was conspicuous, and, still 
more, the golden eagle with outspread wings, in the fashion 
of a Roman signum, richly ornamented with emeralds and 
silver work, the great standard of the republic of Tlascala.t 
The common file wore no covering except a girdle round 
the loins. Their bodies were painted with the appropriate

Green as the spring grass in a sunny shower ;

Or scarlet bright, as in the wintry wood 
The cluster’d holly ; or of purple tint ;Green as the spring grass in a sunny shower ;

Or scarlet bright, as in the wintry wood 
The cluster’d holly ; or of purple tint ;

Whereto shall that be liken’d ? to what gem 
Itidiadem’cl, what flower? what insect’s wing?

With war songs and wild music they came on ;

W c, the while kneeling, raised with one accord 
The hymn of supplication.”

Southey’s Madoc, Part I. canto 7.

• The standards of the Mexicans were carried in the centre, those of 
tlie Tlascalans in the rear of the array. (Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, 
vol. ii. p. 145.) According to the Anonymous Conqueror, the banner 
staff was attached to the hack of the ensign, so that it was impossible to be 
torn away. lla ogni copagnia il suo Alfiere con la sua insegna inhastata, 
et in tal modo ligata sopra le spalle, che non gli dk alcun disturbo di p«|ier 
comhattere ne far ciiS che vuole, et la porta cosi ligata bene al coi’po, che 
fie nd fanno del tiio corpo pezzi, non se gli puo sligare, no torgliela mai.” 
— Rel, d'un gent., ap, Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 305.

■f Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, 
lib. 6, cap. 6. — Gomtira, Crdnica, cap. 46. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Con- 
quista, cap. 64. — Oviedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS., lib. 33, cSj||^ 4S. The 
last two authors speak of the device of white bird like ah ostrich," as 
that of the Republic. They have evidently confounded it ^th that of the 
Indian general. Camargo, who has ^ven tfio heraldic exfthlems of the* 
four great families of Tlascala, notices the white hcrohi as that of 
Xicotencatl.

MABCH TO MEXICO.MABCH TO MEXICO.

colours of the chieftaia wl^>se banner they followed. I^be 
feather-naaii of the higher class of warriors exhibited, Blso, 
a similar selection of colours for the like object, in the same 
manner as the colour»of the tartan indicates the |>eculiar 
clan of the Highlander.* The caciques and principal war- 
riors were clothed in a quilted cotton tunic, two inches thick, 
which, fitting close to the body, protected also the thighs 
and the shoulders. Over this the wealthier Indians wore 
cuirasses of thin gold plate, or silver. Their legs were 
defended by leathern boots or sandals, trimmed with gold. 
But the most brillant part of their costume was a rich 
mantle^ of the plumaje or feather-work, embroidered witli 
curious art, and furnishing some resemblance to the gorgeous 
surcoat worn by the European knight over his armour in 
the Middle Ages. This graceful and picturesque dress was 
surmounted by a fantastic liead-piece made of wood or 
leather, representing the head of some wild animal, and 
frequently displaying a formidable array of teeth. With 
this covering the warrior’s head was enveloped, producing a 
most grotesque and 'hideous effect. t From the crown 
floated a splendid panache of the richly variegated plumage 
of the tropics, indicating, by its form and colours, the rank 
and family of the wearer. To complete their defensive

• The accounts of tlie Tlascalan chronicleraro confirmed by the Anony- 
vHlfm Conqueror and by Bernal Diaz, both eye-witnesees ; though the 
latter frankly declares, that, Lad he not seen them v?ith his own eyes, 
he should never have credited the existence of orders and badges among 
the barbarians, like those found among Ae civilised nations of Europe. 
— rilist. do la Oonquiita, cap. 64, et alibi. — Camargo, Hist de Tlascala, 
MS. — Rel, d’ un gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 305.f “ It QX0XiO in testa,’’ says the Anonymous Conqueror, " per difeaa una 
com come teste di serpeti, 5 di tigri, 5 di leoni, d di lupi,che ha lo mascelic, 
et la testa deU’ huomo mossa nella testa di q’sto animale come ao lo 
vol^sse diuorar© : aono di legno, et aopra vi s lapena, ct di piaati-a d’oro ct 
di pietre precaoae copte, die e marauiglioaa da vedcre.” — Rek d’ un 
gent., ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 305.

DECISIVE TIOTOEY.

37 '^

amour, they carried shields or|fargets, made sometim^ of 
wood covered with leather, but more usually of a light frame 
of reeds quilted with cotton, which were preferred, as 
tougher and less liable to fracture than the former. They 
had other bucklers, in which the cotton was covered with an 
elastic substance, enabling them to be shut up in a more 
* compact form, l?ke a fan or umbrella. These shields were 
decorated with showy ornaments, according to the taste or 
wealth of the wearer, and fringed with a beautiful pendant 
of featherwork

Their weapons were slings, bows and arrows, javelins, 
and darts. They were accomplished archers, and would 
discharge two or even three arrows at a time, fiut they 
most excelled in throwing the javelin. One species of this, 
with a thong attached to it, which remained in the slinger’s 
hand, that he might recall the weapon, was especially 
dreaded by the Spaniards. These various weapons were 
pointed •trith bone, or the mineral itztli (obsidian,) the hard 
vitreotwr substance already noticed, as capable of taking an 
edge lijie a razor, though easily bluftted. Their spears and 
arrows were also frequently headed with copper. Instead of 
a sword, they bore a two-handed stafiF, about three feet and 
a half long, in which, at regular distances, were inserted, 
transversely, sharp blades of itztli, — a formidable weapon, 
which, an eyewitness assures us, he had seen fell a horse at 
a blow.* #Such waii the costume of the Tlascalan warrior, attd, 
indeed, of that great family of nations generally, who

* lo viddi che cobattedosi un di, diede un IndioAo ana corteliata a un 
caiiallo sopra il qual era un cauaHier^ co ebi cobatteua, che

glielo aperse fin alle iteriora, et cade icotauete morto, et il medesimo giemo 
viddi che un altro Indiano diede ua altra cortellata a un nitre cauallo su 
il collo che 86 lo gettd morto a i — Rol. d’uu gent, ap. Bamusio,

tom. iii. fol. 3G5.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

«(f!cupied tlie plateau of Anij^uac. Some parts of it, as 
targets and the cotton mail or escaupilf as it was called in 
Castilian, were so excellent, that they were subsequently 
adopted by the Spaniards, as equally eiFectual in the way of 
protection, and superior, on the score of lightness and con- 
venience, to their own. They were of sufficient strength to 
turn an arrow, or the stroke of a javelin, although impotent 
as a defence against fire-arms. But what armour is not ? 
Yet it is probably no exaggeration to say, that, in conve- 
nience, gracefulness, and strength, tjie arms of the Indian 
warrior were not very inferior to those of the polished nations 
of antiqui|y,*As sbgMi as the Castilians came in sight, the Tlascalans 
set up their yell of defiance, rising high above the wild 
barbaric minstrelsy of shell, atabal, and trumpet, with 
which they proclaimed their triumphant anticipations' of 
victory over the paltry forces of the invaders. When the 
latter had come within bowshot, the Indians hurled a tem- 
pest of missiles, that darkened the sun for a mogient as 
with a passing cloud, strewing the earth around with heaps 
of stones and arrows.f Slowly and steadily the little band 
of Spaniards held on its way amidst this arrowy shower, 
until it had reached what appeared the proper fiistance for 
delivering its fire with full effect. Cortds, then halted, and, 
hastily forming his troops, opened a general well-directed 
firo along the whole line. Every shot bore its errand of 
death ; and the ranks of the Indians were mowed down

* Particular notices of the military dress and appointments of the 
American tribes on the plateau may be found in Camargo, Hist, de Tlas- 
cala, MS.— Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. ii. p. 101, et. seq.— Acosta, 
lib. 6, ca^r. 26.— Eel. d’ un gent^ ap. Ramusio, tom. iii. fol. 305, et 
auci. al.

^ f “ i Que granizo de piedra de los honderos ! Pues flechas todo el suelo 
hecho parva de varas todas de»l|^ dos^^ajos, que passau qualquiera arrna, y 
las entranas adonde no ay defensa.” — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquistaj 
cap. 65.

DECISIVE VICTOnr.

377

falter than ♦their comrades in rear could carry off their 
bodies, according to custom, from the field. The balls in 
their passage through the crowded files, bearing splinters of 
the broken harness and mangled limj^s of the warriors, scat- 
tered havoc and desolation in their path. The mob of 
barbarians stood petrified with dismay, till, at length, galled 
•to desperation by their intolerable suffering, they poured 
forth simultaneously their hideous war-shriek, and rushed 
impetuously on the Christians.On they came like an avalanche, or mountain torrent, 
shaking the solid earth, and sweeping away every obstacle 
in its path. The little army of Spaniards opposed a bold 
front to the overwhelming mass. But no strengfh could 
withstand it. They faultered, gave way, were borne along 
before it, and their ranks were broken and thrown into 
disorder. It was in vain the general called on them to close 
again and rally. His voice was drowned by the din of fight 
and the fierce cries of the assailants. Eor a moment, it 
seemed that all was lost. The tide of battle had turned 
against them, and the fate of the Christians was sealed.

But every man had that within his bosom, which spote 
louder than the voice of the general. Despair gave unna- 
tural energy to his arm. The naked body of the Indian 
afforded no resistance to the sharp Toledo steel ; and with 
their good swords, the Spanish infantry at length succeeded 
in staying the human torrent. The heavy guns from a 
distance thundered on the flank of the assailants, which, 
shaken by the iron tempest, was thrown into disorder. Their 
very numbers increased the confusion, as they were precipi- 
tated on the masses in front. The horse at the same 
moment, charging gallantly under Cortes, followed up the 
advantage, and at length compelled the tumultuons throng to 
fall hack with greater precipifti.fiop and disorder than thjffc 
with which they had advanced.

m

MAaCH TO MEXICO.m

MAaCH TO MEXICO.

More than once in the ^ourse of the action, a simijar 
assault was attempted by the Tiascalans, but each time with 
less spirit, and greater loss. They were too deficient in 
military science to profi^b by their vast superiority in numbers. 
They were distributed into companies, it is true, each serving 
under its own chieftain and banner. But they wore not 
arranged by 'rank and file, and moved in a confused mass,*" 
promiscuously heaped together. They knew not how to 
concentrate numbers on a given point, or even how to sustain 
an assault, by employing successive detachments to support 
and relieve one another. A very small part only of their 
array could be brought into contact with an enemy inferior 
to them^ in amount of forces. The remainder of the army, 
inactive and worse than useless, in the rear, served only to 
press tumultuously on the advance, and embarrass its mover 
ments by mere weight of numbers, while, on the least al^m, 
they were seized with a panic and threw the whole body into 
inextricable confusion. It was, in short, the combat of the 
ancient Greeks and Persians over again.

Still, the great numerical superiority of the Indians might 
Gave enabled them, at a severe cost of their own lives, 
indeed, to wear out, in time, the constancy of the Spaniards, 
disabled by wounds, and incessant fatigue. But, fortunately 
for the latter, dissensions arose ft.mong their enemies. A 
Tlascalan chieftain, commanding one of the great divisions, 
had taken umbrage at the haughty demeanour of Xicoten- 
catl, who had charged him with misconduct or cowardice in 
the late action. The injured cacique challenged his rival to 
single combat. This did not take place. But, burning 
with resentment, he chose the present occasion to indulge it, 
by drawing off his forces, amounting to ten thousand men,

^ from the field. He also persuaded another of the com- 
. zanders to follow his example.^ from the field. He also persuaded another of the com- 
. zanders to follow his example.

Thus reduced to about half his original strength, and that

DECISIVE VICTOBY.

379

g»atly crippled by the losses the day, Xicotencatl could 
no Ibnger maintain hifc ground against the Spaniards. After 
disputing the field with admirable courage for four hours, he 
retreated and resigned it to the ejiemy. The Spaniards 
were too iiiuch jaded, and too many were disabled by wounds, 
to allow them to pursue ; and Cortes, satisfied with the 
* decisive victory he had gained, returned in triumph to his 
position on the hill of Tzompach.

The number of killed in his own ranks had been very 
small, notwithstanding the severe loss inflicted on the enemy. 
These few he was careful to bury where they could not be 
discovered, anxious to conceal not only the amount of the 
slain, but the fact that the whites were mortal.* 6ut very 
many of the men were wounded, and all the horses. The 
^trouble of the Spaniards was much enhanced by the want of 
many articles important to them in their present exigency. 
They had neither oil, nor salt, which, as before noticed, was 
not to be obtained in Tlascala. Their clothing, accommo- 
dated to a softer climate, was ill adapted to the rude air of 
the mountains ; and bows and arrcfws, as Bernal Diaz sar- 
castically remarks, formed an indifterent protection against 
the inclemency of the weather. t

* So says Bernal Diaz ; who at the same time, by the epithets, lo8 
maartosf los cuerpoa, plainly contradicts his previous boast that only one 
Christian fell in the fight. (Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 65.) Cortds has 
not the grace to acknowledge that one.•t Oviedo, Hist, de las Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap. 3. — Rel. Seg. de Cortds, 
ap. Loreiizaua, p, 52. — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 6, cap. 6.*—* 
Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Cbich., MS., cap. 83. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 46. — 
Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, cap. 32. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la 
Conquista, cap. 65, 66. The warm and chivalrous glow of feeling, which 
colours the rude composition of the dast chronicler, makes bun a better 
painter than his more correct and classical rivals. Add, if there is some- 
what too much of the self-complacei^ lone of the quorum parf magna^d * 
in his writing, it may be pardoned in the hero of more than a hundred 
battles, and almost as many wounds.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

^0MARCH TO MEXICO.

^0

they had much to c|jfeer them in the erents of Ijie 
day.; and they might draw from thens a reasonable ground 
for confidence in their own resources, such as no other expe- 
rience could have supplied. Not that the results could 
authorise anything like contempt for their Indian foe. 
Singly and with the same weapons, lie might have stood his 
ground against the Spaniard.^ But the success of the day * 
established the superiority of science and discipline over mere 
physical courage and numbers. It was fighting over again, 
as we have said, the old battle of the European and the 
Asiatic. But the handful of Greeks who routed the hosts 
of Xerxes and Darius, it must he remembered, had not so 
obvious •an advantage on the score of weapons, as was 
“^enjoyed by the Spaniards in these wars. The use of fire- 
arms gave an ascendancy which cannot easily be estimated ; 
one so great, that a contest between nations equally civilised, 
which should be similar in all other respects to that between 
the Spaniards and the Tlascalans, would probably be attended 
with a similar issue. To all this must be added the effect 
produced by the cavalryr The nations of Anabuac had no 
Targe domesticated animals, and were unacquainted with any 
beast of burden. Their imaginations were bewildered, when - 
they beheld the strange apparition of the horse and his rider 
moving in unison ahd obedient to one impulse, as if pos- 
sessed of a common nature ; and as they saw the ferriblo 
animal, with his “ neck clothed in thunder,*’ bearing down 
their squadrons and trampling them in the dust, no wonder 
they should have regarded him with the m3^sterious terror

* The Anonymous Conqueror bears emphatic testimony to the valour 
of the In<jlip.ns, specifying instances in which he had seen a single wanior 
, defend himself for a long time agaiiftt two, three, and even four Spaniards !„ “ Sono fra loro di valetissimi huomini et che ossano morir ostinatissima- 
mAte. Et io ho veduto un d’essi difondersi valetemente da duoi caiialli 
leggieri, et un altro da tre, et quattro.” — Rcl. d*un gent., ap. Ramusio, 
tom. iii. fol. 305.

INDIAN ooxmcii.. 38l

fe|jb for a supernatural being. ^ very little reflection on the 
manifold grounds of superiority, both moral and physical, 
possessed by the Spaniards in this contest, will surely 
explain the issue, without any disparagement to the courage 
or capacity of their opponents.’’^

Cortes, thinking the occasion favourable, followed up the 
►important blow he had struck by a new mission to the capital, 
bearing a message of similar import with that recently 
sent to the camp. But the senate was not yei; sufficiently 
humbled. The late defeat caused, indeed, general conster- 
nation. Maxixcatzin, one of the four great lords who pre- 
sided over the republic, reiterated with greater force the 
arguments before urged by him for embracing the proffered 
alliance of the strangers. The armies of the state had been 
beaten too often to allow any reasonable hope of successful 
resistance ; and he enlarged on the generosity shown by the 
politic Conqueror to his prisoners, — so unusual in Anahuac, 
— as an additional motive for an alliance with men who knew 
how to be friends as well as foes.

But in these views he was oveiruled by the war-par^^ 
whose animosity was sharpened, rather than subdued, by 
the late discomfiture. Their hostile feelings were further 
exasperated by the younger Xicotencatl, who burned for an 
opportunity to retrieve his disgrace, and to wipe away the stain 
which iTad fallen for the first time on the arms of the republic.

In their perplexity, they called in the assistance of the 
priests, whose authority was frequently invoked in the deli- 
berations of the American chiefs. The latter inquired, with 
some simplicity, of these interpeters of fate, whether thestrangers were supernatural beings, or men of flesh and

0

•

* The appalling effect of the cavalry on the natives reminds one of the 
confusion into which the Roman legions were thrown by the strange ap- 
pearance of the elephants in their first engagements with I^yrrhus, as told 
by Plutarch in his life of that prince.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

iblood like tliemselves. The priests, after some consultatipn, 
are- said to have made wie strange answer, that . the 
Spaniards, though not gods, were children of the Sun ; 
that they derived their^ strength from that luminary, and, 
when his beams were withdrawn, their powers would also 
fail. They reconimended a night attack, therefore, as one 
which afforded the best chance of success. This apparently* 
childish response may have had in it more of cunning than 
credulity. It was not improbably suggested by Xicotencatl 
himself, or by the caciques in his interest, to reconcile the 
people to a measure, which was contrary to the military 
usages, — indeed, it may be said, to the public law of 
Anahutfe. Whether the fruit of artifice or superstition, it 
prevailed ; and the Tlascalan general was empowered, at 
the head of a detachment of ten thousand warriors, to try the 
effect of an assault by night on the Christian camp.

The affair was conducted with such secrecy that it did 
not reach the ears of the Spaniards. But their general was 
not one who allowed himself, sleeping or waking, to be sur- 
mised on his post. Bortunately the night appointed was 
illumined by the full beams of an autumnal moon ; and one 
of the videttes perceived by its light, at a considerable distance, 
a large body of Indians moving towards the Christian lines. 
He was not slow in giving the alarm t© the garrison.The Spaniards slept, as has been said, with thfeir arms 
by their side ; while their horses, picketed near them, stood 
ready saddled, with the bridle hanging at the bow. In five 
minutes the whole camp was under arms ; when they beheld 
the dusky columns of the Indians cautiously advancing over 
the plain, their heads just peering above the tall maize 
with which the land was partially covered. Cortes deter- 
mined not to abide the assault in his intrenchments, hut 
fb sally out and pounce on tbb enemy when he had reached 
the bottom of the hill.

NIGHT ATTACK.

383

Slowly and stealthily the Indians advanced, while the 
Christian camp, hushed in proAund silence, seemed to them 
buried in slumber. But no sooner had they reached the 
slope of the rising ground, than they were astounded by the 
deep battle-cry of the Spaniards, mllowed by the instanta- 
neous apparition of the whole army, as they sallied forth 
^from the works, and poured down the sides of the hill. 
Brandishing aloft their weapons, they seemed to the troubled 
fancies of the Tlascalans, like so many spectres or demons 
hurrying to and fro in mid air, while the uncertain light 
magnified their numbers, and expanded the horse and his 
rider into gigantic and unearthly dimensions.

Scarcely waiting the shock of their enemy, tile panic- 
struck barbarians let otf a feeble volley of arrows, and, 
offering no other resistance, fled rapidly and tumultuously 
across the plain. The horse easily overtook the fugitives, 
riding them down and cutting them to pieces without 
mercy, until Cortes, weary with slaughter, called off his 
men, leaving the field loaded with the bloody trophies of 
victory.* ^The next day, the Spanish commander with his tflIUal 
policy, after a decisive blow had been struck, sent a new 
embassy to the Tlascalan capital. The envoys received 
their instructions through the interpreter, Marina. That 
remarkable woman had attracted general admiration by the 
constancy and cheerfulness with which she endured all the 
privations of the camp. Far from betraying the natural 
weakness and timidity of her sex, she had shrunk from no 
hardship herself, and had done much to fortify the drooping 
spirits of the soldiers ; while her sympathies, whenever

#

♦ Rel. Seg. de Cortds, ap. Lorcnzana, pp. 58, 54. — Ovi^o, Hist, de las

Tnd., MS., lib. 33, cap. 3.--P. Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 2, cap. 2.

Torquemada, Monarch. Ind., lib. 4, tip. 32. — Herrera, Hiftt. Oeneral, dec. 
2, lib, 6, cap. 8. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, dc la Conquista, cap, 66.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

Cwecasion offered, had been aetirelj exerted in mitigating 
calamities of her Indian coiifttrymen.^

Through his faithful interpreter, Cortes communicated 
the terms of his message to the Tkiicalan envoys. He 
made the same professions of amity as before, promising 
oblivion of all past injuries ; but, if tins proffer were rejected, 
he would visit their capital as a conqueror, raze every house^r 
in it to the ground, and put every inhabitant to the sword ! 
He then dismissed the ambassadors with the symbolical 
presents of a letter in one hand, and an arrow in the other.The envoys obtained respectful audience from the council 
of Tlascala, whom they found plunged in deep dejection by 
their retent reverses. The failure of the night attack had 
extinguished every spark of hope in their bosoms. Their 
armies had been beaten again and again, in the open field 
and in secret ambush. Stratagem and courage, all their 
resources, bad alike proved ineffectual against a foe whose 
hand was never weary, and whose eye was never closed. 
Nothing remained but to submit. They selected four 
principal caciques, whopa they intrusted with a mission to 
flifi Christian camp. They were to assure the strangers 
of a free passage through the country, and a friendly 
reception in the capital. The proffered friendship Of the 
Spaniards was cordially embraced, with many awkward 
excuses for the past. The envoys were to touclr at the 
Tlascalan camp on their way, and inform Xicoteneatl of 
their proceedings. They were to require him, at the same 
time, to abstain from all further hostilities, and to furnish 
the white men with an ample supply of provisions.

• “ Di^mos como Dom Marina, con ser muger de la tierra, que esfuer^o 
tan varonir tenia, que con oir cad* dia que nos auian de inatar, y comer 
nuostras carnes, y auemos visto ccrcados en las batallas passadas, y que 
agra todos estauamos heridos y dqj^ientes, jamas vimos flaqueza en ella, 
sino muy mayor e8fuer9o que de muger.** — Denial Diaz, Hist, de la Con- 
quista, cap. C 6 .

NE&OTIATIONS WITH THfe ENEMY.

385NE&OTIATIONS WITH THfe ENEMY.

385

put tlie Tlascalan deputies, on arriving at the quarters 
of that chief, did not find him in the humour to comply 
with these instructions. His repeated collisions with 
the Spaniards, or, it may be, his /jonstitutionai courage, 
left him' inaccessible to the vulgar terrors of his country- 
men. He regarded the strangers not as s’^pematural 
■feeings, hut as men like himself. The animosity of a 
warrior had rankled into a deadly hatred from the mortifica- 
tions he had endured at their hands, and his head teemed 
with plans for recovering his fallen honours, and for taking 
vengeance on the invaders of his country. Ho refused to 
disband any of the force, still formidable, under his com- 
mand ; or to send supplies to the enemy’s camp. He 
further induced the ambassadors to remain in his quarters, 
and relinquish their visit to the Spaniards. The latter, in 
consequence, were kept in ignorance of the movements in 
their favour, which had taken place in the Tlascalan capital.* 
The conduct of Xicotencatl is condemned by Castilian 
writers, as that of a ferocious and sanguinary barbarian. 
It is natural they should so regard ik But those who have 
no national prejudice to warp their judgments may come 
tq a different conclusion. They may find much to admire 
in that high, unconquerable spirit, like some proud column, 
standing alone in its majesty amidst the fragments and 
ruins it. They may see evidences of a clear-sighted

sagacity, which, piercing the thin veil of insidious friendship 
proffered by the Spaniards, and penetrating the future, dis- 
cerned the coming miseries of his country ; the noble 
patriotism of one who would rescue that country at any cost, 
and, amidst the gathering darkness would infuse his own 
intrepid spirit into the hearts tof his nation, to animate 
them to a last struggle for independence.• • 
* Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 67. — Caniargo, Hist, de 
Tiascala, MS. — Ixtlilxocliitl, Hist. Chicb., MS., cap. 83,

VOL. I. c C

386

CHAPTER lY.

DISCONTENTS IN THE ARMY.— TLASCALAN SPIES.— PEACE WITH THE 
REPUBLIC. — EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA.

1519.

Desirous to keep up the terror of the Castilian name, by 
leaving,the enemy no respite, Cortes on the same day that 
he despatched the embassy to Tlascala, put himself at the 
head of a small corps of cavalry and light troops to scour 
the neighbouring country. He was at that time so ill from 
fever, aided by medical treatment,* that he could hardly 
keep his seat in the saddle. It was a rough country, and 
the sharp winds from the frosty summits of the mountains 
pierced the scanty covering of the troops, and chilled bdth 
ine-a and horses. Four or five of the animals gave out, and 
the general alarmed for their safety, sent them back to the 
camp. The soldiers, discouraged by this ill omen, would 
have persuaded him to return. But he made answer, “We 
fight under the banner of the Cross ; God is stronger than 
nature, and continued his march.

It led through the same kind of chequered scenery of 
rugged hill and cultiv§.ted plain as that already described,

* The effect of the medicine — though rather a severe dose, according 
to the precise Diaz— was suspended during the general’s active exertions. 
Gomara, 'iaowever, does not consider this a miracle. (Crdnica, cap. 49.) 
Father Sandoval does. (Hist, de C^los Quinto, tom. i. p. 127.) Soli's, 
after a conscientibus inquiry into this perplexing matter, decides— strange 
Is it may seem — against the fether f— Conquista, lib. 2, cap. 20.

f ‘‘Dios es sombre natura.” — Rel. Seg. de Cortds, ap. Lorenzana, 
p. 54.

DISCONTENTS IN THB ARMY.

387f ‘‘Dios es sombre natura.” — Rel. Seg. de Cortds, ap. Lorenzana, 
p. 54.

DISCONTENTS IN THB ARMY.

387

wgll ■ covered with towns and villages, some of them the 
frontier posts occupied by the Otomies, Practising* the 
Roman maxim of lenity to the submissive foe, he took full 
vengeance on those who resisted, ,and, as resistance too 
often occurred, marked his path jpvith fire and desolation. 
After a short absence, he returned in safety, laden with the 
""plunder of a successful foray. It would have been more 
honourable to him, had it been conducted with less rigour. 
The excesses are imputed by Bernal Diaz to the Indian 
allies, whom in the heat of victory it was found impossible 
to restrain.* On whose head soever they fall, they seem 
to have given little uneasiness to the general, who declares in 
his letter to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, “ As we fought 
under the standard of the Cross,+ for the true Faith, and 
the service of your Highness, Heaven crowned our arms 
with such success, that, vrhile multitudes of the infidel were 
slain, little loss was suffered by the Castilians. The 
Spanish Conquerors, to judge from their writings, uncon- 
scious of any worldly motive lurking in the bottom of their 
hearts, regarded themselves as sciidiers of the Church, 
fighting the great battle of Christianity ; and in the same 
edifying and comfortable light are regarded by most of the 
national historians of a later day.§

* Hist^ de la Conquista, cap. ^4. Not so Cort(?8, who says boldly,

Queme mas de diez pueblos.” (Ibid. p. 52.) His reverend commentator 
specifies the localities of the Indian towns destroyed by him, in his forays. 
— Viaje, ap. Lorenzana, pp. ix.-xi.

t The famous banner of the Conqueror, with the Cross emblazoned on 
it, has been preserved in Mexico to our day,t The famous banner of the Conqueror, with the Cross emblazoned on 
it, has been preserved in Mexico to our day,

4: “ E como trayamos la Bandera de la Cniz, y pufiahamos por nnestra 
Fe, y por servicio de Vuestra Sacra Magestad, en su muy Real ventum nos 
did Dios tanta victoria, que les matamoi^mucha gente, sin que nuestros 
recibiessen dano.” — Rel. Seg, de Cortds, ap. Lorenzana, p, 52.

§ “ Y fudeosa notable,” exclaims ^Herrera, “ con quanta humildad, j 
devocion, bolvian todos alabando d Dios, que tan milagrosas victorias les 
daba ; de donde se conocia claro, que losfavorecia con su Divinaasistencia.”

oc 2

MARCH TO MEXICO.

On his return to the cam^, Cort(?s found a new caiase^f 
disquietude in the discontents whicli had broken out among 
the soldiery. Their patience was exhausted by a life of 
fatigue and peril, to |ehich there seemed to be no end. 
The battles they had wen against such tremendous odds 
had not advanced them a jot. The idea of their reach- 
ing Mexico, says the old soldier so often quoted, “ wai 
treated as a jest by the whole army;”* and the inde- 
finite prospect of hostilities with the ferocious people among 
whom they were now cast, threw a deep gloom over their 
spirits.

Among the malcontents were a number of noisy, vapour- 
ing persons, such as are found in every camp, who, like 
empty bubbles, are sure to rise to the surface and make 
themselves seen in seasons of agitation. They were, for 
the most part, of the old faction of Velasquez, and had 
estates in Cuba, to which they turned many a wistful glance 
as they receded more and more from the coast. They now 
waited on the general, not in a mutinous spirit of resistance, 
— for they rememberedfthe lesson in Villa Rica, — but with 
the design of frank expostulation, as with a brother adven- 
turer in a common cause. t , The tone of familiarity thus 
assumed was eminently characteristic of the footing of 
equality on which the parties in the expedition stood with 
one another. ‘Their sufferings, they told him, were too great to be

* ‘‘ Porque entrar on Mexico teniamoslo por cosa de risa, i causa de 
BUS grandes fiierzas.” — Bernal Diaz, Hist, dc la Conquista, cap. 66.

+ Diaz indignantly disclaims the idea of mutiny, -wliich Gomara, attached 
to this pr(]geeding. Las palabras que le dezian era por via de acosejarle, 
y porque les parecia que eran bienciichas, y no por otra via, porque siempre 
le siguieron muy hien, y lealmete ; y no es mucho que en los exercitos 
aigUDoa bueiios soldados aconsejen d^Bu Capitan y mas si se ven tan traba- 
jados corao nosotros andauamos.” — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, 
cap. 71.

DISCONTENTS IN THE ARMY,

389

ei^ured. All the men had received one, most of them two 
or thre e wounds^ Mhre than i?fty had perished, in one 'way 
or another, since leaving Vera Cruz. There was no beiatst 
of burden but led a life preferably ito theirs. For when 
the night came, the former could rest from his labours ; 
but they, fighting or wat^*hing, had no rest, day nor night.

***^8 to conquering Mexico, the very thought of it was mad- 
ness. If they had encountered such opposition from the 
petty republic of Tlascala, what might they not expect from 
the great Mexican empire ? There was now a temporary 
suspension of hostilities. They should avail themselves of 
it to retrace their steps to Vera Cruz. It is true, the fleet 
there was destroyed ; and by this act, unparalleled for 
rashness even in Roman annals, the general had become 
responsible for the fate of the whole army. Still there was 
one vessel left. That might be despatched to Cuba, for 
reinforcements and supplies ; and, when these arrived, they 
would be enabled to resume operations with some prospect 
of success,

Cortes listened to this singular etpostulation with perfect 
composure. He knew his men, and, instead of rebuke or 
harsher measures, replied in the same frank, and soldier-like 
vein which they had affected.There was much truth, he allowed, in what they said. 
The sufferings of the Spaniards had been great *, greater 
than those recorded of any heroes in Greek or Roman 
story. So much the greater would be their glory. He 
had often been filled with admiration as he had seen his 
little host encircled by myriads of barbarians, and felt 
that no people but Spaniards could have triumphed over 
such formidable odds. Nor cfuld they, unless tfie arm of 
the Almighty had been over them. And they might 
reasonably look for His proteftion hereafter ; for was it nt)t 
in His cause they were fighting ? They had encountered

MARCH TO MEXICO,MARCH TO MEXICO,

Gaugers and difficulties, it was true ; but they had not cojj^e 
here* expecting a life of idle clalliance and pleasure. Glory, 
as he had told them at the outset, was to be won only by 
toil a^d danger. They , would do him ibc justice to acknow- 
ledge, that he bad never shrunk from his share of both. — 
This was a truth, adds the honest chronicler, who heard 
and reports the dialogue, — which no one could deny. Butf" 
if they had met with hardships, he continued, they had 
been everywhere victorious. Even now they were enjoying 
the fruits of this, in the plenty which reigned in the camp. 
And they would soon see the Tlascalans, humbled by their 
late reverses, suing for peace on any terms. To go back 
now was impossible. The very stones would rise up against 
them. The Tlascalans would hunt them in triumph down 
to the water’s edge. And how would the Mexicans exult 
at this miserable issue of their vain-glorious vaunts ! Their 
former Mends would become their enemies ; and the 
Totonace, to avert the vengeance of the Aztecs, from 
which the Spaniards could no longer shield them, would 
join in the generiil cry. There was no alternative, then, 
but to go forward in their career. And he besought them 
to silence their pusillaniraouB scruples, and, instead of turn- 
ing their eyes towards Cuba, to fix them on Mexico, the 
great object of their enterprise.

'While this singular conference was going on, many other 
soldiers had gathered round the spot ; and the discontented 
party, emboldened by the presence of their comrades, as 
well as by the general’s forbearance, replied, that they were 
far from being convinced. Another such victory as the last 
would be their ruin. They were going to Mexico only to 
be slaugtitered. Until, at«>length, the general's patience 
being exhausted, he cut the argument short by quoting a 
\’%rse from an old song, implying that it was better to die 
with honour, than to live disgraced ; a sentiment which wasTLASCALAN SPIES.

391

lo]jdly eclioed by tlie greater part of bis audience, who, not^ 
withstanding their occasional tnurmurs, had no design to 
abandon the expedition, still less the commander, to whom 
they were passionately devoted. The malcontents, discon- 
certed by this rebuke, slunk back to their own quarters, 
muttering half- smothered execrations on the leader who had 
»^rojected the enterprise, the Indians who had guided him, 
and their own countrymen who supported him in it.

Such were the difficulties that lay in the path of Cortds ; 
a wily and ferocious enemy ; a climatb uncertain, often un- 
healthy ; illness in his own person, much aggravated by 
anxiety as to the manner in which his conduct would be 
received by his sovereign ; last, not least, disaffectidh among 
Ills soldiers, on whose constancy and union he rested for the 
success of his operations, — the great lever by which he was 
to overturn the empire of Montezuma.

On the Booming following this event, the can^was sur- 
prised by the appearance of a small body of Tlascalans, 
decorated with badges, the white colour of which intimated 
peace. They brought a quantity provisions, and some 
trifling ornaments, which, they said, were sent hy^the 
Tlascalan general, who was weary of the war, and desired 
an accommodation with the Spaniards. He would soon 
present himself to arrange this in person. The intelligence 
diffused general joy, and the emissaries received a friendly 
welcome.

A day or two elapsed, and while a few of the party leftA day or two elapsed, and while a few of the party left

* This conference is reported, with some variety, indeed, by nearly 
every historian. (Rel. Seg. de Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, p, 55. — Oviedd, 
Hist, de las Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap. 3, — Gotnara, Crdnic^ cap. 51, 52. — 
Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 8^ — Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, 
lib. 6, cap. 9. — P. Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 5, cap. 2.) I have 
abridged the account given by Berij^l Diaz, one of the audience, thoi^h 
Hot one of the parties to the dialogue,— for that retHton, the better 
authority.

MABOH TO KEXI0O.

4m

the Spanish cjuarters, the others, about fifty in number, 
wha remained, excited someMistrust in the bosom of Marina. 
She communicated lier suspicions to Corti^s that they were 
spies. He caused several of them, consequence, to bo 
arrested, examined them separately, and ascertained that 
they were employed by Xicotencatl to inform him of the 
state of the Christian camp, preparatory to a meditatedp 
assault, for which he was mustering his forces. Cortes, 
satisfied of the truth of this, determined to make such an 
example of the delinquents, as should intimidate his enemy 
from repeating the attempt. He ordered their hands to he 
cut off, and in that condition sent them hack to their 
countrymen, with the message, “that the Tlascalans might 
come by day or night ; they would find the Spaniards ready 
for them.”*

The doleful spectacle of their comrades returning in this 
mutilatedl^tate filled the Indian camp with horror and con- 
sternation. The haughty . crest of their chief was humbled. 
From that moment, he lost his wonted buoyancy and 
fidence. His soldiers, i^lled with superstitious fear, refused 
to Serve longer against a foe who could read their very 
thoughts, and divine their plans before they were ripe for 
execution.!The punishment inflicted by Oortes may well shock the 
reader by its brutality. But it should be considered in 
mitigation, that the victims of it were spies, and, as such, 
by the laws of war, whether among civilised or savage

* Diaz says only seventeen lost their hands, the rest their thumbs, 
(Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 70.) Cortes does not flinch from confessing, 
the hands of the whole fifty. Los mande tomar d todos cincuenta, y 
cortarles las. manos, y los embie, dixessen & su Senor, que de noche, y

d.e dia, y cada, y quando el viniesse, verian quien cramos.” — Rel. Seg. de 
' Oortds, ap. Lorenzana, p. 53.

^ ** De que los Tlascaltccas se adrSiriron, entendiepdo que Cortd's, lea 
entendia sus pensamientos.” — Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 83.

PEACE WITH THE REPUBLIC. 393

nations, had incurred the penalty of death. The amputa- 
tion of the limbs was a milder^puiiishment, and reserved for 
inferior offences. If we revolt at the barbarous nature of 
the sentence, we should reflect that it was no uncommon 
one at that day ; not more uncommon, indeed, than whip- 
ping and branding with a hot iron were in our own country 
••at the beginning of the present century, or than cropping 
the ears was in the preceding one. A higlier civilisation, 
indeed, rejects such punishments, as pernicious in them- 
selves, and degrading to humanity. But in the sixteenth 
century, they were openly recognised by the laws of the 
most polished nations in Europe. And it is too much to 
ask of any man, still If'ss one bred to the iron tracte of war, 
to be in advance of the refinement of his age. We may be 
content, if, in circumstances so unfavourable to humanity, 
he docs not fall below it.All thoughts of further resistance being abantoned, the 
four delegates of the Tlascalan republic were now allowed 
to proceed on their mission. They were speedily followed 
by Xicotencatl himself, attended *by a numerous train of 
military retainers. As they drew near the Spanish fines, 
they were easily recognised by the white and yellow colours 
of their uniforms, the livery of the house of Titcala. The 
joy of the army was great at this sure intimation of the 
close bf hostilities ; and it was with difficulty that Cortes 
was enabled to restore the men to tranquillity, and the 
assumed indifference which it was proper to maintain in 
presence of an enemy.

The Spaniards gazed with curious eye on the valiant 
chief who had so long kept his enemies at bay, and who 
now advanced witj^ the firm %nd fearless step of one who 
was coming rather to bid defiance than to sue for peace. , 
He was rather above the middle size, with broad shoulders, 
and a muscular frame intimating great activity and strength.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

'#4

’ ti'

His head was large, and his countenance marked with t^e 
lines* of hard service rath ei^’ than of age, for he was ‘but 
thirty-five. When he entered the presence of Cortes, he 
made the usual salutation, by touching the ground with his 
hand, and carrying it to his head ; while the sweet incense 
of aromatic gums rolled up in clouds from the censers car- 
ried by his slaves.Far from a pusillanimous attempt to throw the blame on 
the senate, he assumed the whole responsibility of the. war. 
He had considered the white men, he said, as enemies, for 
they came with the allies and vassals of Montezuma. Ho 
loved his country, and wished to preserve the independence 
which shte had maintained through her long wars with the 
Aztecs. He had been beaten. They might he the strangers, 
who, it had been so long predicted, would come from the 
east, to take possession of the country. He hoped they 
would use their victory with moderation, and not trample 
on the liberties of the republic. He came now in the name 
of his nation, to tender their obedience to the Spaniards, 
assuring them they would find his countrymen as faithful in 
peach as they had been firm in war.

Cortes, far from tahing. umbrage, was filled with admira- 
tion at the lofty spirit which thus disdained to stoop beneath 
misfortunes. The brave man knows how to respect bravery 
in another. He assumed, however, a severe aspect', as he 
rebuked the chief for having so long persisted in hostilities. 
Had Xicotencatl believed the word of the Spaniards, and 
accepted their profiered friendship, sooner, he would have 
spared his people much suffering, w’hich they well merited 
by their obstinacy. But it was impossible, continued the 
^ general, lb retrieve the paste He was filling to bury it in 
, oblivion, and to receive the Tlascalans as vassals to the 
emperor, his master. If they«proved true, they should find 
him a sure column of support ; if false, he would take such

EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA.

395

vengeance on them as he had intended to take on their 
capital, had they not speedily %iven in their submission.—^ 
It pi:oved an ominous menace for the chief to whom it was 
addressed.395

vengeance on them as he had intended to take on their 
capital, had they not speedily %iven in their submission.—^ 
It pi:oved an ominous menace for the chief to whom it was 
addressed.

The cacique then ordered his slaves to bring forward 
some trifling ornaments of gold and feather embroidery, 
"i^esigned as presents. They were of little value, he said, 
with a smile, for the Tlascalans were poor. They had little 
gold,, not even cotton, nor salt ; the Aztec emperor had left 
them nothing but their freedom and their arms. He offered 
this gift only as a token of his good-will. ** As such I ' 
receive it,” answered Cortes, “ and, coming from the 
Tlascalans, set more value on it than I should fA)m any 
other source, though it were a house full of gold a politic, 
as well as magnanimous reply, for it was by the aid of this 
good-will that he was to win the gold of Mexico.*

Thus ended the bloody war with the fierce republic of 
Tlascala, during the course of which, the fortunes of the 
Spaniards, more than once, had trembled in the balance. 
Had it been persevered in but a little longer, it must have 
ended in their confusion and ruin, exhausted as they ^ere 
by wounds, watching, and fatigues, with the seeds of disaf- 
fection rankling among themselves. As it was, they came 
out of the fearful contest with untarnished glory. To the 
enemy* they seemed invulnerable, bearing charmed lives, 
proof alike against the accidents of fortune and the assaults 
of man. No wonder that they indulged a similar conceit in 
their own bosoms, and that the humblest Spaniard should 
have fancied himself the subject of a special interposition of 
Providence, which shielded him in the hour of battle, and 
reserved him for a higher destiny. ^* Rel. Scg. do Cortds, ap. Lorenzana, pp. 56, 57. — Oviedo, Hist, de las ’ 
Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap. 3.— Gomara, t^rdnica, cap. 53. — Bernal Diaz, Hilt, 
de la Conquista, cap. 71, et seq.— Sahagun, Hist, do Nueva Espaila, MS., 
lib. 12, cap. 11.

396

MARCH TO MEXICO.

While the Tlascalans were still in the camp, an emba^y 
was announced from Montefuma. Tidings of the exploits 
of the Spaniards had spread far and wide over the plateau. 
The emperor, in particukr, had watched every step of their 
progress, as they climbed the steeps of the Cordilleras, and 
advanced over the broad table-land on their summit. He 
had seen them, with great satisfaction, take the road 
Tlascala, trusting that, if they were mortal men, they would 
find their graves there. Great was his dismay, when courier 
after courier brought him intelligence of their successes, 
and that the most redoubtable warriors on the plateau had 
been scattered like chaff by the swords of this handful of 
strangeils.His superstitious fears returned in full force. He saw in 
the Spaniards ** the men of destiny*’ who were to take pos- 
session of his sceptre. In his alarm and uncertainty, he 
sent a new embassy to the Christian camp. It consisted of 
five great nobles of his court, attended by a train of two 
hundred slaves. They brought with them a present, as 
usual, dictated partly by fear, and, in part, by the natural 
muriificence of his disposition. It consisted of three thou- 
sand ounces of gold, in grains, or in various manufactured 
articles, with several hundred mantles and dresses of embroi- 
dered cotton, and the picturesque feather-work. As they 
laid these at the feet of Cortds, they told him, they had 
come to offer the congratulations of their master on the late 
victories of the white men. The emperor only regretted 
that it would not be in his power to receive them in his 
capital, where the numerous population was so unruly, that 
their safq^y would be placed in jeopardy. The mere intima- 
^ tion of tHh Aztec emperor’s i/ishes, in the most distant way, 
, would have sufficed with the’ Indian nations* It had very 
little weight with the Spaniaffis ; and the envoys, finding 
this puerile expression of them ineffectual, resorted to another

EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA.

397

arjgument, oiFenng a tribute in their master’s name to the 
Castilian sovereign, provided thfe Spaniards would relinquish 
thei^ visit to his capital. This was a greater error ; it was 
displaying the rich casket with one hand, which he was 
unable to defend with the other. *Yet the author of this 
pusillanimous policy, the unhappy victim of superstition, 
was a monarch renowned among the Indian nations for his 
intrepidity and enterprise, — the terror of Anahuac !Cortes, while he urged his own sovereign’s commands as 
a reason for disregarding the wishes of Montezuma, utt<Ted 
expressions of the most profound respect for the Aztec prince, 
and declared that if he had not the means of requiting his 
munilicence, as he could wish, at present, he trusted to 
repay Mm, at some future day, with good works I*

The Mexican ambassadors were not much gratified with 
finding the war at an end, and a reconciliation established 
between their mortal enemies and the Spaniards. The 
mutual disgust of the two parties with each other was too 
strong to bo repressed even in the presence of the general, 
who saw with satisfaction the evidei^ces of a jealousy, which, 
undermining the sti'ength of the Indian emperor, waij to 
puove the surest source of his own success, t

Two of the Aztec mission returned to Mexico, to acquaint 
their sovereign with the state of affairs in the Spanish camp. 
The others remained with the army, Cortds being willing

♦ Cortes recibid con alcgria aquel presente, y dixo que se lo tenia en 
merced, y que el lo pngaria el senor Monte 9 uina en buenas obras.” — 
Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 73.

d* He dwells on it in his letter to the Emperor. “ Vista la diacordia y 
desconforniidad de los unos y de los otros, no huve poco placer, porqiie me 
parecid haccr mucho d mi propdsito, y que podria tener manera de mas 
ayna sojuzgarlos, e aun acorddmo de 'ilha autoridad Evangelica, que dice, 
Omne Regnum in seipsum diviavm desolahitur : y con los unos y con los 
otros maueaba, y cada uno eh secr^o le ngradecia el aviso, que me da^a, 
y le daba erddito de mas amistad que al otro.” — Rel. Seg. de Cortds, ap, 
Lorenzana, p. 61.

rTTT'’-' iMBCir w» mxicd.rTTT'’-' iMBCir w» mxicd.

ilmid be pemnal apectutora of the deference 
him fy the Tlaaeakis. Still he did not iaeten bis 
for their eapltal. Not that be placed relianQo^ on 
the injurious intimations of the Mexicans respecting their 
good faith. Yet lie was willing to put this to some longer 
trial, and, at the same time, to re-establish his own health 
more thoroughlj, before his visit. Meanwhile, messengerp* 
dailj arrived from the citj, pressing his journey, and were 
finally followed by some of the aged rulers of the republic, 
attended by a numerous retinue, impatient of his long delay. 
They brought with them a body of five hundred tamaneSy or 
men of hurden^ to drag his cannon, and relieve his own 
forces fi^m this fatiguing part of their duty. It was impos- 
sible to defer his departure longer ; and after mass, and a 
solemn thanksgiving to the great Being who had crowned 
their arms with triumph, the Spaniards bade adieu to the 
quarters which they had occupied for nearly three weeks on. 
the hill of Tzompach. The strong tower, or teocallif which 
commanded it, was called, in commemoration of their resi- 
dence, “ The Tower of Victory and the few stones which 
stiirsurvive of its ruins, point out to the eye of the traveller 
a spot ever memorable in histoty* for the courage and con^ 
staiicy of the early Conquerors.*

* Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib. 6, cap. 10. — Oviedo, Higt. de las 
Ind., MS., lib. 33, cap, 4. — Gotnara, Crdnica, cap. 54. — Martyr, De Orbo 
Novo, dec. 5, cap 2. — Bernal Diai^ Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 72-74. — 
Ixtlilxochitl, Hist. Chich., MS., cap. 88.

399

CHAPTEE V.

SPANrARDS ENTER TLASOALA. — DESCRIPTION OF THE CAPITAL. —

ATTEMI»TED CONVERSION. — AZTEC EMBASS3'. — INVITED TO CHOLUi-A.

1519.399

CHAPTEE V.

SPANrARDS ENTER TLASOALA. — DESCRIPTION OF THE CAPITAL. —

ATTEMI»TED CONVERSION. — AZTEC EMBASS3'. — INVITED TO CHOLUi-A.

1519.

The city of Tlascala, the capital of the repuhl^ of the 
same name, lav at the distance of about six leagues from 
the Spanish camp. The road led into a hilly region, exhi- 
biting in every arable patch of ground the evidence of labo- 
rious cultivation. Over a deep barranca, or ravine, they 
crossed on a bridge of stone, which, according to tradition, 
— a slippery authority, — is the same still standing, and was 
constructed originally for the passage of the army.* They 
Ja^sed some considerable towns on^their route, where jthey 
experienced a full measure of Indian hospitality. As they 
advanced, the approach to a populous city was intimated by 
the crowds who flocked out to see and welcome the strangers ; 
men ai^d women in their picturesque dresses, with bunches 
and wreaths of roses, which th^ gave to the Spaniards, or 
fastened to the necks and capaftons of their horses, in the

♦ A distancia de un quarto de legua caminando k csta dicha ciudad se 
encuentracuna barranca honda, que tiene para pasar un Pumte de cal y 
cmito de hoveda, y es tradicion en el pueblo de San Salvador, que se hizo 
en aquellas dias, que estubo alli Cortds pai’aque pasasse.”-— (Viaje, ap. 
Lorenzana, p. xi.) If tbe antiquity o^ tbia oirched stone bridge could bo 
established, it would settle a point much mooted in respect to Indian archi- 
tecture. But the construction of scDsoIid a work in so short a time i* a 
fact requiring a better voucher than the villagers of San Salvador.

MARCH TO MEXICO. .

400MARCH TO MEXICO. .

400

same manner as at Ceinpoalla. ■ Priests, with their white 
robes, and long matted tresif:3s floating over them, mingled 
in the crowd, scattering volumes of incense from tJ^eir 
burning censers. In this way, the multitudinous and 
motle)' procession defileS through the gates of the ancient 
capital of Tlascala. It was the twenty-third of September, 
1519, the anniversary of which is still celebrated by th« 
inhabitants as a day of jubilee.*^

The press was now so great, that it was with difficulty 
the police of the city could clear a passage for the army ; 
while the azoteas, or flat-terraced roofs of the buildings, 
were covered with spectators, eager to catch a glimpse of 
the wonderful strangers. The houses were hung with 
festoons^ of flowers, and arches of verdant boughs, inter- 
twined with roses and honeysuckle, were thrown across the 
streets. The whole population abandoned itself to rejoicing ; 
and the air was rent with songs and shouts of triumph 
mingled with the wild music of the national instruments, 
that might have excited apprehensions in the breasts of the 
soldiery, had they not gathered their peaceful import from 
the Assurance of Marina, and the joyous countenances of the 
natives. ^

With these accompaniments, the procession moved along 
the principal streets to the mansion of Xicotencatl, the aged 
father of the Tlascalan general, and one of the four rulers 
of the republic. Cortds |ismounted from his horse, to 
receive the old chieftain’s embrace. He w’^as nearly blind ; 
and satisfied, as far as he could, a hatural curiosity respecting

* Clavigero, Stor. del Messico, tom. iii. p. 53. ** Redbimiento el

mas solene v famoso que en el mundo se ha visto,” exclaims the eiithusi- 
• astic historiin of the republic. lie adds, that " more than a hundred 
thousand men flocked ouC to receive the Spaniards : a thing that appears 
imfo^ible,” qiu*. parece <i08a impodhB/ It does indeed. — Camargo, Hist, 
de Tlascala, MS.DESCRIPTION OF TLASCALA.

401

tli<^ person of tlie Spanish general, by passing his hand 
over'his features. lie then led^the way to a spacious hall 
in Ifiik palace, where a banquet was served to the anny. In 
the evening, they were shown to theii^ quarters, in the build- 
ings and open ground surrounding one of the principal 
toocallis; while the Mexican ambassadors, at the desire of 
t5^>rtes, had apartments assigned them next to his own, 
that he might the better watch over their safety, in this city 
of their enemies.*

Tlascala was one of the most important and populous 
towns on the table-land. Cortes, in his letter to the 
emperor, compares it to Granada, affirming, that it was 
larger, stronger, and more populous than the Moorish 
capital, at the time of the conquest, and quite as well 
built, t But, notwithstanding, we are assured by a most 
respectable writer at the close of the last century, that its 
remains justify the assertion,]: we shall be slow to believe 
that its cdifio#6 could have rivalled those monuments of 
Oriental niagaii^nce, whose light, aerial forms still survive 
after the lapse of ages, the admirat^n of every traveller of 
sensibility and tttSte. The truth is, that Cortt^, like Colum- 
bus, «%w objects through the warm medium of his own fond 
ima^ation, giving them a higher tone of colouring and 
larger dimensions than were strictly warranted by the fact,

It was natural that the man who had made such rare disco-

*

* Sahagun, Hist, do Nueva Espana, MS., lib. 12, cap. 11. — Rel. Seg. 
do Cortds, ap. jLorenzana, p. 59. — Camargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — 
Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 54. — Henera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib 6, cap. 1 1,■t “ La qual ciudad es tan gi’ande, y de tanta admiracion, quo aunque 
muebo dc lo, quo de clla podria decir, dexe, lo poco quo dir^ creo es casi 
increible, porque os muy mayor que Grajjada, y muy mas fuertflS y de tan 
buenos Edificios, y de muy mueba mas gente, que Granada t0tiia al tiompo 
que se gand.” — Rel. Sog. de Cortds, ag. Lorenzana, p. 58.

J ‘‘ En las Ruinas, que ann hoy se vdn cn Tlaxcala, se conoce, qufl§no 
CB pondcracion.’* — Ibid., p. 58. Nota del editor, Lorenzana. .

VOL. I. D D

402

MARCH TO MEXICO*

veries should unconsciously magnify their merits to his 
eyes, and to those of othersi^

The houses were built, for the most part, of mjiwl or 
earth ; the better sort^of stone and lime, or bricks dried in 
the sun. They were unprovided with doors or windows, 
but in the apertures for the former hung mats fringed with 
pieces of Copper or something which by its tinkling souii#f 
would give notice of any one’s entrance. The streets were 
narrow and dark. The population must have been consider- 
able, if, as Cortes asserts, thirty thousand souls were often 
gathered in the market on a public day. These meetings 
were a sort of fairs, held, as usual in all the great towns, 
every hfth day, and attended by the inhabitants of the 
adjacent country, who brought there for sale every descrip- 
tion of domestic produce and manufacture with which they 
were acquainted. They peculiarly excelled in pottery, which 
was considered as equal to the best in Europe.* It is a 
further proof of civilised habits, that the Spaniards found 
barbers’ shops, and bathe, both of vapotir and hot water 
familiarly used by the inhabitants. A still higher proof of 
re^nement may be discerned in a. vigilant police which 
repressed everything like disorder among the people.t »Ae city was divided into four quarters, which might 
rather be called so many separate towns, since they were 
built at different times, and separated from each other by 
high stone walls, defining their respective limits. Over 
each of these districts ruled one of the four great chiefs of

♦ “ Nullum cat fictile vas apud nos, quo4 ^rte superet ab illis voSa 
formata.’’ — Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 6, c^p. 2.

f Caiqargo, Hist, de Tlascala, MS. — Rel. Seg. de Cortes, ap. Lorenzana, 
p. 59. — Oviedo, Hist, de las Idd., MS., lib. 33, cap. 4. — Ixtlilxochitl, 
Hist. Chich., MS. cap. 83. The last historian enumerates such a number

j|^n temporary Indian authorities u>r his narrative, as of itself argues no 
inconsiderable degree of civilisation in the people.

DESCRIPTION OF TLASCALA.

403j|^n temporary Indian authorities u>r his narrative, as of itself argues no 
inconsiderable degree of civilisation in the people.

DESCRIPTION OF TLASCALA.

403

republic, occupjini^ his own spacious mansion, and sur- 
rounded by bis own iinmediati vassals. Strange arrange- 
ment — and more strange that it should have been compa- 
tible with social order and tranquillity ! The ancient 
capital, through one quarter of which flowed the rapid 
current of the Zahuatl, stretched along the summits and 
mdes of hills, at whose base are now gathered the giiserable 
remains of its once flourishing population.^ Far beyond, to 
the »^outhwest, extended the bold sierra of Tlascala, and the 
huge Malinche, crowned with the usual silver diadem of the 
highest Andes, having itsshaggy sides clothed with dark- 
green forests of firs, gigantic sycamores, and oaks whose 
towering sterns rose to the height of forty or fifty fdet, unin- 
cumbered by a branch. The clouds, which sailed over 
from the distant Atlantic, gathered round the lofty peaks of 
tire sierra, and, settling into torrents, poured over the plains 
in the neighbourhood of the city, converting them, at such 
seasons, into swamps. Thunder-storms, more frequent and 
terrible here than in other parts of the table-land, swept 
down the sides of the mountains, And shook the frail tene- 
ments of the capital to their foundations. But, altlibugh 
the bleak winds <>£ the sierra gave an austerity to the 
climate, unlike the sunny skies and genial temperature of 
the lower regions, it was far more favourable to the develop- 
ment oT both the physical and moral energies. A bold and 
hardy peasantry was nurtured among the recesses of the 
hills, fit equally to cultivate the land in peace, and tc 
defend it in war. Unljjie the spoiled child of Nature, who 
derives such facilities of subsistence from her too prodigal* Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2. lij,. 6, cap. 12. The poptilaticm of a 
place, which Cortes could compare with Granada, had dwindled by the 
beginning of the present century to 3A00 inhabitants, of which less than a 
thousand were of the Indian stock.— aee Humboldt, Elasai I^olitique, tom.'*ii, 
.p. 168.

n D 2

MAUCB fO MEXICO.

m

band, as supersede the necessity of cjcrtfon on his ojn 
part* the Tlascalan earnecf his bread — from a soil -not 
ungrateful, it is true — by the sweat of bis brow. He lad a 
life of temperance and toil. Cut off by his long wars with 
the Aztecs from commercial intercourse, he was driven 
chiefly to agricultural labour, the occupation most propitious 
to purity of morals and sinewy strength of constitution?^ 
His honest breast glowed with the patriotism, — or local 
attachment to the soil, which is the frUit of its diligent 
culture ; while he was elevated by a proud consciousness of 
independence, the natural birthright of the child of the 
mountains. — Such was the race with whom Cortes was now 
associatSd, for the achievement of his great work.Some days were given by the Spaniards to festivity, in 
which they were successively entertained at the hospitable 
boards of the four great nobles, in their several quarters of 
the city. Amidst these friendly demonstrations, however, 
the general never relaxed for a moment his habitual vigi- 
lance, or the strict discipline of the camp ; and he was 
careful to provide for the security of the citizens by prohi- 
biting, under severe penalties, any soldier from leaving his 
quarters without express permission. Indeed, the severity 
of his discipline provoked the remonstrance of more than 
one of his officers, as a superfluous caution ; and the Tlas- 
calan chiefs took some exception at it, as inferring an 
unreasonable distrust of them. But, when Cortes explained 
it, as in obedience to an established military system, they 
testified their admiration, and the#mbitiou8 young general 
of the republic proposed to introduce it, if possible, into his 
own ranks.*

1 .

* Sahagun, Hist, de Nueva Espana, MS., lit. 12, cap. 11. — Camargo, 
Hiet. de Tlascala, MS. — Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 54, 55. — Herrera, Hist. 
General, dec. 2, lib. 6, cap. 13, — ikraal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, 
cap. 75.

ATTEMPTED CONVERSION.

405ATTEMPTED CONVERSION.

405

^The Spanisli commander having assured himself of the 
loyalty of his new allies, nexf proposed to accomplish one 
of great objects of his mission — their conversion to 
Christianity. By the advice of father Olmedo, always 
opposed to precipitate measures, iie had deferred this till 
a suitable opportunity presented itself for opening the 
^^fubject. Such a one occurred when the chiefs of the state 
proposed to strengthen the alliance with the Spaniards, by 
the intermarriage of their daughters with Cortes and his 
officers. lie told them this could not be, while they con- 
tinued in the darkness of infidelity. Then, with the aid of 
the good friar, he expounded as well as he could the 
doctrines of the Faith ; and, exhibiting the ima^ of the 
Virgin with the infant Redeemer, told them that there was 
the God, in iflfhose worship alone they would find salvation, 
while that of their own false idols would sink them in 
eternal perdition.

It is unnecessary to burden the reader with a recapitula- 
tion of his homily, which contained, probably, dogmas quite 
as incomprehensible to the untutoired Indian, as any to bo 
found in hfc OAvn rude mythology. But, though it failed 
to convince his audience, they listened with a deferential 
^we. When he had finished, they replied, they had no 
doubt that the God of the Christians must be a good and a 
great *God, and as such they were willing to give him 
a place among the divinities of Tlascala. The polytheistic 
system of ffie Indians, like that of the ancient Greeks, was 
of that accommodating, kind which could admit within its 
elastic folds the deities of any other religion, without 
violence to itself.* But every nation, they continued,

• •• •

♦ Caniargo notices this elastic property in the religions of Anahuac. 
" Este modo de hablar y decir que ^es qnerri dar otro 0ioa, es saber ^u© 
cuando estas gentes tenian noticia de algun Dios de huenas propiedades y 
costumbres, que le rescibiesen admitiendole por tal, porqur ofras gentes

MARCH TO MEXICO.

must li«ave its own appropriate and tutelary deities. 2jpr 
could they, in their old agl, abjure the service of tliose 
who bad watched over them from youth. It would Wug 
down the vengeance of their gods, and of their own nation, 
who were as warmly attached to their religion as their 
liberties, and would defend both with the last drop of their 
blood !

It was clearly inexpedient to press the matter further, at 
present. But the zeal of Cortes, as usual, waxing warm 
by opposition^ had now mounted too high for him to cal- 
culate obstacles ; nor would he have shrunk, j)robably, from 
the crown of martyrdom in so’ good a cause. But for- 
tunatelyf at least for the success of his temporal cause, this 
crown was not reserved for him.The good inonjv, his ghostly adviser, seeing the course 
things were likely to take, with better judgment interposed 
to prevent it. He had no desire, he said, to see the same 
scenes acted over again as at Cempoalla. He had no relish 
for forced conversions. They could hardly be lasting. The 
growth of an hour might well die with the hour. Of what 
use 'was it to overturn the altar, if the idft remained 
enthroned in the heart ? or to destroy the idol itself, if it 
were only to make room for another ? Better to wait» 
patiently the effect of time and teaching {o soften the heart 
and open the understanding, without which there could he 
no assurance of a sound and permanent conviction. These 
rational views were enforced by the remonstrances of Alva- 
rado, Velasquez de Leon, and those in whom Cort<5s placed 
most confidence ; till, driven from his original purpose, the 
military polemic consented to relinquish the attempt at 
^ conversion, for the present, ind to refrain from a repetition

adv,^nedizas truj^ron muchos idolos i,que tubitJron por Dioscs, y A esto 
fin y propdsito decian, que Cortds les traia otro Dios,” — Hist, do 
Tlascala, MS*

ATTEMPTED CONVERSION.

407

of the scenes, which, considering the different mettle of the 
population, might have been |tttendcd with very different 
resiijts from those at Cozumel and Cempoalla.*ATTEMPTED CONVERSION.

407

of the scenes, which, considering the different mettle of the 
population, might have been |tttendcd with very different 
resiijts from those at Cozumel and Cempoalla.*

In til., course of our narrative, we have had occasion to 
witness more than once the good effbcts of the interposition 
of father Olmedo. Indeed, it is scarcely too lauch to say, 
'^lat his discretion in spiritual matters contributed as essen- 
tially to the success of the expedition, ao did the sagacity 
and courage of Cortes in temporal. He was a true disciple 
in the school of Las Casas. His heart was unscathed by 
tiiat fiery fanaticism which sears and hardens whatever it 
touches. It melted witli the warm glow of Christian charity, 
lie had come out to the New World as a missiona^ among 
the heathen, and he shrunk from no sacrifice but that of 
tlie welfare of the poor benighted flock to whom he had 
consecrated his days. If ho followed the banners of the 
warrior, it was to mitigate the ferocity of war, and to turn 
the triumphs of the Cross to a good account for the natives 
themselves, by the spiritual labours of conversion. He 
afforded the uncommon example-^not to have been looked 
for, certainly, in a Spanish monk of the sixteenth century — 
of enthusiasm controlled by reason, a quickening zeal 
tempered by the mild spirit of toleration.

But though Cortes abandoned the ground of conversion 
for tlfO present, ho compelled the Tlascalans to break the 
fetters of the unfortunate victims reserved for sacrifice ; anBut though Cortes abandoned the ground of conversion 
for tlfO present, ho compelled the Tlascalans to break the 
fetters of the unfortunate victims reserved for sacrifice ; an

* Txtlilxochitl, Hist. Cliich., MS., cap. 84. — Gonmra, Cr6nica, cap, 56. 
— Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 76, 77. This is not the 
account of Camargo. According to him, Cortes gained his point; the 
nobles led the way by embracing Christianity, and the idols were broken. 
(Hist, de Tlascala, MS.) But Charge was himself a* Christianised: 
Indian, who lived in the next generation after the Conquest ; and maV 
very likely have felt as much desire to relieve his nation from the reproach 
of infidelity, as a modern SpaniarJ would to scour out the stain — Ihalch 
raza y mancha — of Jewish or Moorish lineage, from hit escutcheon.

MARCH TO MEXICO.

of humauitj unhappily only transient its effects, sfneo 
the prisons were filled with ^esh victims on his departure.

He also obtained permission for the Spaniards to pejjjjrm 
the services of their own religion unmolested. A large cross 
was erected in one of fhe great courts or squares. Mass 
was celebrated every day in the presence of the army and 
of crowds of natives, who, if they did not comprehend its fuUk 
import, were so far edified, that they learned to reverence 
the religion of their conquerors. The direct interposition 
of Heaven, however, wrought more for their conversion 
than the best homily of priest or soldier. Scarcely had the 
Spaniards left the city, — the tale is told on very respectable 
authority!, — when a thin, transparent cloud descended and 
settled like a column on the cross, and, wrapping it round 
in its luminous folds, continued to emit a soft, celestial 
radiance thrpugl^ the night, thus proclaiming the sacred 
character of tli§ 'symbol, on which was shed the halo of 
divinity ! *The principle of toleration in religious matters being 
established, the Spanish , general consented to receive the 
daughters of the caciques. Five or six of the most 
beautiful Indian maidens were assigned to as many of 
his principal officers, after they had been cleansed from 
the stains of infidelity by tl^ waters of baptism. They 
received, aer usual, on this occasion, good Castilian rfaines, 
in exchange for the barbarous nomenclature of their own 
vernacular, f

Among them,"Xicotencatr& daughter, Doha Louisa, as

• The miracle is reported by Herrera, (Hist. General, dec. 2. lib. 6, 
pap. 15,) and believed by Solis. — Conquista de M(Jjico, lib. 3, cap. 5.

^ + To avoid the perplexity of selection, it .was common for the missionary 
to give the same names to all the Indians bajitised on the same day. Thus, 
one day was set apart for the Johns, ai^ther’for the Peters, and so on ; an 
ingenious arrangement, much more for the convenience of the clergy, than 
of the converts. — See Camargo, Hist, de Tlaiscala, MS,

ATTEMPTED CONVERSION.

409

sHe was called after her baptism, was a princess of the 
highest estimation and autljprity m Tlascala. SHe was 
gijjgn by her father to Alvarado, and their posterity inter- 
married with the noblest families of Castilo. The frank 
and joyous manners of this caAlier made him a great 
favourite with the Tlascalans ; and his bright open 
•countenance, fair complexion, and golden locks, gave him 
the name of Tonatiuh, the “ Sun.’’ Tho Indians often 
pleased their fancies by fastening a sobriquet, or some cha- 
racteristic epithet, on the Spaniards. As Cortes was 
always attended, on public occasions, by Doha Marina, or 
Malinche, as she was called by the natives, they distin- 
guished him by the same name. By these epith#ts, origin- 
ally' bestowed in Tlascala, the two Spanish captains were 
popularly designated among the Indian nations.*While these events were passing, another embassy arrived 
from the court of MexicA It was charged, as usual, 
with a costly donative of embossed gold plate, aq^ rich 
embroidered stuffs of cotton and feather- work. The terms 
of the message might well argue a vacillating and timid 
temper in the monarch, did they not mask a deeper policy. 
He now invitbd the Spaniards to his capital, with the 
assurance of a cordial welcome. He besought them to 
enter into no alliance with the base and barbarous Tlas- 
caldlSb ; and he invited them to take the route of the 
friendly, city of Cholula, where arrangements, according to 
his order.i, were made for their reception, t

* Ibid., MS. — Bernal Diaz, Hist, de la Conquista, cap. 74, 77. Ac- 
cording to Camargo, the Tlascalans gave the Spanish commander three 
hundred damsels to wait on Marina ; and the kind treatment and instruc- 
tion they received led some of the c^^fs to surrender their •wn daughters,

con prop<5sito de que d acaso algunas se empreuaaan quedase entre ellos 
generacion de homhres tan valientes y temidos.”

f Bernal Diaz, Hist de la Cmiquista, qap. 80. — R^J. Seg. de C^rtds, 
ap. Lorenzana, p. 60. — Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 6, cap. 2. Cortds

MARCH TO MEXICO.

' 41 ^f Bernal Diaz, Hist de la Cmiquista, qap. 80. — R^J. Seg. de C^rtds, 
ap. Lorenzana, p. 60. — Martyr, De Orbe Novo, dec. 6, cap. 2. Cortds

MARCH TO MEXICO.

' 41 ^

, The Tlascalans viewed with deep regret ‘the general’s 
proposed visit to Mexico. Tl:^ir reports fully confirmed -afi 
he had before heard of the power and ambition of Moj^- 
zuma. His armies, they said, were spread over every part 
of the continent. His capital was a place of great strength, 
and as, from its insular position, all communication could be 
easily cut off with the adjacent country, the Spaniards,* 
once entrapped there, would be at his mercy. Ills policy, 
they represented, was as insidious as his ambition was 
boundless. “Trust not his fair words,” they said, “hip 
courtesies, and his gifts. His professions are liollow^ and 
his friendships are false.” When Cortes remarked, that he 
hoped to ibring about a better imderstanding between the 
emperor and them, they replied. It would he impossible ; 
however smooth his words, he would hate them at heart.

They warmly protested, also, against the general’s taking 
the rbiito of Cholula. The inhabitants, not brave in the 
open £eld, were more dangerous from their perfidy and 
craft. They were Montezuma’s tools, and would do his* bid- 
ding, The Tlascalans see^ped to combine with this distrust a 
superstitious dread of the ancient city, the hoa^uarters of 
the religion of Anahuac, It was here that tlie god Quetzal- 
coatl held the pristine seat of his empire. His temple was 
celebrated throughout the land, and the priests were con- 
fidently believed to have the po#er, as they themS^ives 
boasted, of opening an inundation from the foundations of 
his shrine, which should bury dieir enemies in the deluge.notices only one Aztec mission, while Diaz speaks of three. The former, 
from brevity, falls so much short of the whole truth, and the latter, from 
forgetfulness perhaps, goes so much beyond it, that it is not always easy 
Jp decide between them. Diaz did Lot compile his narrative till some fifty 
years after the Conquest ; a lapse of time which may excuse many errors, 
hut ^ust considerably impair our confl^nce in the minute accuracy of his 
details. A more intimate acquaintance with his chronicle does not 
strengthen this confidence.

INVITED TO OHOLULA..

4ir

^^fie Tlascalans further reminded Cortes, that while so many 
other and distant places ha| sent to him at Tlascala, to 
testify their good will, and offer their allegiance to his 
sovereign, Cholula, only six leagues distant, had done 
neither. The last snggo^tion ptruck the general more 
forcibly than any of the preceding. He instantly despatche.l 
•a summons to the city, requiring a formal tender of its 
submission.

Among the embassies from different quarters which had 
waited on the Spanish commander, while at Tlascala, was 
one from Ixtlilxochitl, son the great Nezahualpilli, and an 
unsuccessful compcititor with his elder brother — as noticed 
in a former part of our narrative — for the crown of ezcuco.^ 
Though defeated in his pretensions, he had obtained a part 
of the kii^dom, over which he ruled with a deadly feeling 
of animO^y towards his- rival, and to Montezuma, who had 
sustained him. He now^ Offered his services to Cfortds, 
asking Eis aici, in return, to place him on the throneyof his 
ancestors. The politic general returned such an answer to 
the aspiring young prince, £).s might encourage his expecta- 
tions, and attach him to Els interests. It was his aim 
to strengtSen his cause by attracting to himself every 
particle of disaffection that was floating through the land.It was not long before deputies arrived from Cholula, 
profuse in their expressions of good-will, and inviting the 
presence of the Spaniards in their capital. The messengers 
were of low degree, far beneath the usual rank of ambas- 
sadors. This was pointed out by the Tlascalans ; and 
Cortes regarded it as a fresh indignity. He sent in con- 
sequence a new summons, declaring, if they did not 
instantly send him a deputiPtion of their principal men^ 
he would deal with them as rebels to his own sovereign, 
•

• Ante, p, 263.

412

MARCH TO MEXICO.

the rightfhl lord of these realms ! * The menace had fi^e 
desired effect. The Cholul^is were not inclined to con- 
test, at least for the present, his magnificent pretensions. 
Another emlmssy appeared in the camp, consisting of some 
of the highest nobles ; Who repeated the invitation for the 
Spaniards to visit their city, and excused their own 
tardy appearance by apprehensions for their personal safet/' 
in the capital of their enemies. The explanation was 
plausible, and was admitted by Cortes.

The Tlascalans were now more than ever opposed to his 
projected visit. A strong Aztec force, they had ascertained, 
lay in the neighbourhood of Cholula, and the people were 
actively, placing their city in a posture of defence. They 
suspected ' some insidious scheipe concerted by Montezuma 
to destroy the Spaniards.

These suggestions disturb^ the "mind of Cartes, hut 
did not iurn him from his p#!j)ose. He felt a natural 
curio^ty to see the venerable city so celebrated in the 
history of' the Indian nations. He had, besides, gone too 
far to recede, — too far, at^jleast^ to do so without a show of 
apprehension, implying a distrust in his own resources, 
which could not fail to have a bad effect on his.i|homies, his 
allies, and his own men. After a brief consultation with 
his officers, he decided on the route to Cholula. t* ** Si no viniessen, iria sobro ellos, y Iob dcstruiria, y procederia contra 
ellos, como contra personas rebeldes ; dicitindoles, como todas estas Partes, 
y otras muy mayores Tierras, y. Senorfos eran de Vuestra Alteza.” (Rel. 
Seg. Ae Cortes, ap. Loren^^ln, p. 63.) “ Rebellion ** was a very con-

venient term, fastened in like manner by the countrymen of Cortes on the 
Moors, for defending the possessions which they bad held for eight cen- 
turies in the Peninsula. It justified very rigorous reprisals. — See the 
Jlistory of Ferdinand and Isabella, R^rt I. Chap. 13, et alibi.

+ Rel. Seg. de Cortes, ap Lorenzana, pp. 62, 63. — Oviedo, Hist, de las 
Ind., MS. lib. 33, cap. 4. — Ixtlilxocbitl, Hist. Cbich., MS., cap. 84. — 
Gomara, Crdnica, cap. 68. — Martyr, i)e Orbe Novo, dec. 5, cap. 2. — 
Herrera, Hist. General, dec. 2, lib, 6, cap. 18. — Sabagun, Hist, de Nueva 
Espafia, MS., lib. 12, cap. 11,

INVITED CHOLULA,

413

ft was now lliroe weeks since tlie Spaniards had taken 
u^hcir residence within the |i08pitable walls of Tlascala ; 
and yearly six since they entered her territory. They had 
been met on the threshold as an enemy, with the most 
determined hostility. They were* now to part with the 
same people, as friends and allies ; fast friends, who wero 
H) stand by them, side by side, through the whole of their 
arduous struggle. The result of their visit, therefore, was 
of tJie last importance ; since on the co-operation of these 
bravo and warlike republicans, greatly depended the ultimate 
success of the expedition.

END OF VOL I.

LONDON :

jaSADBUny AND EVANS, PJllNTERS, WHITEFRrAn.S.