


“THE


ot oe
=


piPAVAMSA:


AN ANGYENT BUDDHIST HISTORICAL RECORD.


EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY


HERMANN OLDENBERG.


WILLIAMS AND NORGATE.


p 14, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON;
axp 90, SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH.


1879.


THE


DIPAVAMSA.


“THE


ot oe
=


piPAVAMSA:


AN ANGYENT BUDDHIST HISTORICAL RECORD.


EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY


HERMANN OLDENBERG.


WILLIAMS AND NORGATE.


p 14, HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON;
axp 90, SOUTH FREDERICK STREET, EDINBURGH.


1879.


= ce


INTRODUCTION.


The DIPAVAMSA, an edition of which I here lay
before the public, is a historical work composed in Cey-
lon by an unknown author. George Turnour, who first
drew the attention of European scholars to the Dipa-
vasa), declared it to’ be identical with a version of the
Mehavarisa to which the Mahavamsa Tika occasionally
alludes,- the version preserved in the Uttaravihara mo-
-nastery. This }s certainly wrong *), We musi undertake,
therefore, a research of our own as to the origin of the
Dipavamsa and its position in the ancient literofure. of
the Ceylonese.

The Mahavamsa Tika, when comménting“on the title


1) See the Journal As. Soe. Bengal, vol. VI, p. 790° 1064; Vil, p. 919
et, seq. 3 .

2) The“argunents by which Turnour ‘supports his theory are entirely
founded on ebrors and inaccuracies. Turnour says, for instance, that the
opening lines ofthe Dipavamsa are quoted in that Tiki as contained in
the Uttaravihara -Mahavam The ‘TikA quotes those lines indeed (india
Office MS. of the. Mahay. Tiki fol, ko’), but without the slightest reference
torthe Utt.-Mahavamsa. The only passage referring to the Mahévamsa of
the Uttaravihara which I know, is quite sufficient, to show jhat this work
was different from the Dipavamsa: In the Mahavamsa Tika (India Of. MS,
fol. gha’) we are told, that the Uttaravihdra-Mahavamsa contained .a state. |
ment somewhat different from the ust one, with regard tq the descen-
dants pf king Sihassara: » Uttaraviharavdsinain pana Mahavamse Sihasaarassa ‘


tahoe puttapaputtaka caturdsitisahassani rajino ahesum, tesam kanitthako
BiNgeusakko (corrected to Bhagusakko) nama raja. tassa puttapaputtaka


dvavisatisahassini rajano ahesum, tesam kanitthako dayaseno, “ti vuttam.*
The Dinaygmsa (3, 43. 44) in the contrary agrees with the statementseof
sur Mab*vamse (p. 9) which are-in contradiction to the Mahfvamsa of the
Ustaravinara,- .


«
1


2 Introdaction.


of the Mahavamsa, contains the following important. re
marks ‘): : ;

»Mahavamsam pavakkhamtti mahantinam vamso tant
paveniparampara ‘ti pi sayam eva vd mahantatié ubh
yattha paridipitatta va Mabavamso, tam Mahavamsan
tesam pi buddhabuddhasdvakadinam pi gunamahantanar,
_Mahasammatadinam pi va rijamAhAmattinam (rajamahan
tinam?) pavenidipitatté ca buddhagamanddipakarehi mab
dhikaratté sayam eva mahantattam veditabban.

anupamavamsaanuggabadinam (°dinam Parig- MS.)
sabbam aiihatam (aiiiiatam Par. MS.) katam suppaka-
sitam
apariyagatam (ariyabhatam Par. MS.) uttaniasdobhi van-
nitam
sunantu dipatthutiya sidhusakkatan ti (comp. Dipav. 1, 5)
imina AtthakathAnayen’ ev’ assa “mahantattam paridipi-
tam (paridipitattam?) ca veditabbam. — tenahu porana:
dipagamanam buddhassa dhatui ca bodhiagamain (bodhi-
ydgamam Par. MS.)
samgahattheravidafi ca dipamhi sisandgamam
narindigamanam vamsam kittayissam sunitha me ‘ti
(comp. Dipav. 1,4). imaya pana githaya nayena (gAtha-
nayena Par. MS.) pi assa sakhy’ (samkhya Par. MS.) ma-
hantattaparidipitattam heyyam. evam Mahdvamsan ti lad-
dhandmam Mabaviharavasinam vicanamaggam porAn-
atthakatham ettha Sthalabhisam hitva Magadhikabhasdya
pavakkhamiti. adhippayo.«

As two stanzas are quoted here,. the first of which
is said to be taken from an Atthakatha, the sécond from
a work of the ,Porina‘, and as immediately afterwards
mentior- is*made of the Sinhalese »Poranatthakathas, the
. cOntentg of which are expressed in the Mahivamsa in Pali,

there ¢art be very little doubt that this Atthakatha and


1) I giye this pasgage according to the India Office MS. Gol. ko’),
together with’ the various readings of the Paria MS. (fol. ko’) whigh BL. Peer
has kindly communicated to me. — Comp. Turnour’s Intred. to the Maha»


vamsa, p. XXXI.


Introduction. 3


that work of the Poran4 are identical with each other
and with the Poranatthakath& mentioned afterwards. -If-I
am right in asserting the identity of the worke- alluded
to under these various expressions, we learn from this
passage the following important fact, viz.: there was an
Atthakathad handed dona and probably also composed in
the Mahavihara, written in Sinhalese, the introductory,
stanzas of which allude to a historical account of Bud-
dha’s visits to Ceylon, of the Councils, of Mahinda ete.,
intended te be given in that very Atthakatha, and these
stanzas are almoet identical with the opening lines of the
Dipavamsa. There must, therefore, most probably be some
relation “befween this Atthakath’ and the Dipavamsa which
will be of a sufficient interest to justify a further i inquiry.

Let us see what results we may obtain as to the
contents of this Atthdkatha and as to its literary form? Let
us ask~particularly in what way the Pali stanzas quoted
from this Atthakatha were connected with its main sub-
stance which was composed in Sinhalese?

The Mahavamsa Tika, after the passage quoted above,
goes on to give some details about the way in whch the
author of the Mahivamsa made use~of this Sinhalese
Atthakatha on which his own work is based. It is said
in the Tika: ,ayam hi Acariyo poranamhj Sihala[ttha]-
katha -Mahavamse ativitthdrapunarattidosabhavam pa-
haya tam sukhaggahanadippayojanasahitam Ratva ’va_ ka-
thesi*. Phe work in question is called here, as repeatedly
afterwards; Sthalatthakatha-Mah4vaméa.. It is not
difficult. to account for this expression where the two at
first sight contradictory elements of a (theological) com-
mentary (Atthakatha) and of an extensive historical nar-
rative (Mahdvamsa) are combined tog@ther: If Wwe look
at Buddhaghosa’s Atthakatha on the Vinaya, We find that:
‘the author. has there prefixed to his explanation: of ‘the
sacred texts a detailed historical account of the origin


of the“Tipitaka, its redaction in the three Coyncils, and
‘ah . sieintink: 2: Cling lae hiss Bee a Se ee.


4 : Introdnuetion.


known, on that very Sinhalese Atthakatha of the Maha-
vihira, which we are now discussing, and we may assume
almost with certainty, that to this Atthakatha a similar
historical introduction was prefixed which may have been’
even’ of a greater extent than that of Buddhaghosa. If
our inference is correct, we have found in what way the-
title ,Sihalatthakatha-Mahivamsa“ could apply most pro-
perly to this work: it is a historical acccunt (Maha-
vamsa) which forms a constituent part of a theologicai
commentary (Atthakath4), and which is composed in ordei
to give to the dogmatical contents of tke latter the indis-
pensable historical foundation 2). :
We are not very likely to go. too far aStray, if-we
try to form an idea of the style of composition of this
Sinhalese Atthakatha-Mahavamsa according to the analogy
of what we have before us in Buddhaghosa’s comment.
According to this, the Atthakatha-Mahivamsa appears to
have been written, in the main, in prose; it was inter-
mixed, however, with a considerable number of stanzas
in order to emphasize the more important points. of the
narration and to raise them above the level of the rest.
The Pali verses quoted above, which are taken apparently
from the introduction to the whole work, render it highly
probable that.ajl these stanzas were composed in Pali.
It was necestary, of course, to convey to the Sinbalese
clergy of that “time the understanding of the sacred Pali
texts by a commentary written in Sinhalese; ifs-however,
in the course of such a commentary the most important
and remarkable points were to be expressed in a metri-
cal form, we may easily understand, that for such a pur:


1) Im order io show how an Atthakathd could contain extensive and
- detailed hjstovical statements, we may refer also to the quotations which
the Mallavamsa gives from the Atthakath& of the Uttaravihara,,
coneerning the history of Susuniga (Turmour's Introduetion, p. XXXVI), of
the nine Nanda kings (1.1. p. XXXVIII), of Candagutta (1. 1. p. XLII), ot
the descendants of Mabisammata (1. ]. p. XXXV). It we comparg, the fast
Passage with ,the statements about the same subject given above (p. 1, n. 2)
from the Mahavamsa of the Uttaravihara, we are lead to believe, that
the Mah@vamga also of the Uttaravilira formed a part of the Att™katha
that monastery in the same way as was the case in the MalMwihdra.


” Introduction. ‘ 5


pose the language of the sacred texts which contained
so abundant a stock of models for metrical composition,
appeared much more appropriate than the popular dialect
of the Sinhalese.

A considerable number of verses ascribed to the
»Poréna*, i. e, taken from the ancient Sinhalese Attha-
katha, and quoted by Buddhaghosa or in the Mahavanisa
Tika, present the same close resemblance and almost
identity with passages of the Dipavamsa, which we have
observed in the two verses given above.. In proof of this
I give the folléwing examples:

Samanta-PasadikA (MS. Orient. 1027 of the Brit. Mu-
scum) fol. ga’: tendhu pordna:

Vedisagirimhi Rajagahe vasitva timsa rattiyo
kalo ’va gamanassa"’ti gacchama dipam uttamam.
palina_ Jambudjpato hamsaraja va ambare
evam uppatité thera nipatimsu naguttame. [
purato purasetthassa pabbate meghasannibhe
patitthahimsu kitamhi hamsA va nagamuddhaniti.
Comp. Dipay. 12, 35—a7.
Samanta-Pas. fol. kah' — kha: si pandyam (i. c. the
second Council)
yehi therchi samgitd samgitesu ca vissuta
Sabbakami ca SAlho ca Revato Khuddhasébhito
Yaso ca SAnasambhito, ete saddhiviharika *
thera Anandatherassa ditthapubba tathagatam,
Sumano Vasabhagdmi ca fieyyA saddhivihatika
dve ime Anuruddhassa ditthapubba tathagatam.
dutiyo pane samgito yehi therehi samgaho
sabbe pi pannabhara te katakicc’ andsava ’ti.
Comp. Dipav. 4, 50-54. ee

Mahav. Tika fol. khau: tendhu pordna:

yakkhanam buddho bhayajananam akasi,
te tajjita tam saranam akamsu -buddham,
lokénukampo lokabite sada rato *

~ 8Q oyatayi attasukham acintamassa. |
imaii ca~Zankathala manusinam


6 Introduction:


poranakappatthitam vutt[hjavdsam:

vasanti Lafikathala m4nusd bahu

pubbe va Ojamandavaradipe ‘ti.
Comp. Dipav. 1, 66. 73.

Mahav. Tika fol. tam: tendhu porana:
Suppatitthitabrahma4 ca Nandiseno Sumanadeviy&
putto mata pita ¢’ eva gihibhitté tayo jana,’ti.

Comp. Dipav. 19, 9.

Mahbay. Tika fol. dbri’: tendhu porana:
Anulé nama yé itthi s4 hantvana naruttame
catumasam Tambapannimhi issariyam anusasita ’ti.

Comp. Dipav. 20, 30.

These passages which we may almost with certainty
pronounce to belong to the ancient Atthakatha~Mahivamsa
of the Mahavihara, will suffice to show, to what extent
the author of the Dipavamsa borrowed not only-the ma-
terials of his own work, but also the mode of expression
and even whole lines, word for word, from that Attha-
katha. In fact, a great part of the Dipavamsa -has th
appearance not of an independent, continual work, bu
of a composition of such single stanzas extracted from ;
work or works like that Atthakatha; many of the repeti
tions and om¥sions') which render some chapters of th:


1) The most striking example of such repetitions is the account of th
three Councils, each of which is described twice, the authog, no doub
having had before him two different authorities, The case is similar in the
folowing passages: .

(12, 51-5 33) i

samano “ti mam manussalokeyam khattiya pucehasi bhimipila,

samaya mayam mahfrija dhammardjassa savaka

tam eva anukampaya Jambudipa idhagata. |

fvudham nikkhipitvana ekamantam, upavisi,

nisajja r@ji sammodi bahum atthdpasarhitam. |

sutv@ fherassa vacanam nikkhipitvina avudham

tato theram upagantva sammoditva ¢’ upavisi.
(17, 27:)

pupnakatfarako nama abt pajjarako tada

tasmim samaye manussinam rogo pajjarako aba. -~

An instructive example of the abrupt and fragmentary character of
some parts of. the Dipavamsa is contained in the account of the conversion
‘of young Moggallana (5, 55— 68), which would be almost univvelligible

_ if we did not possess the same narrative in the Mahavamea tbe. 28 — 38).


Introducti¢n. q


Dipavaméa almost illegible; we. may account for not by
the inadvertence of copyists, but by. this peculiar method
of compilation.
* ‘Phé-results we have obtaitied regarding the connexion
‘between the Dipavamsa and the ancient Atthakatha of the
Mahavihara, furnish us with a clue for gaining an insight
into the relative position of the Dipavamsa and the second
important historical text of the Pali literature, the Maha-
vamsa. The two works are, indeed, in the main nothing
but two ‘versiofis of the same substance, both being based
on the historical Introduction to the great Commentary of
the Mahavihara. Each work represented, of course, their
common ‘gubject ji in its own way, the Dipavamsa following
step by step and almost word for word the traces of the
priginal , the Mahavamsa proceeding with much greater
ikdependence and perfect literary mastersbip. The Dipa-
Wasa, as regards its style and its grammatical peculia-
tities, betrays the characteristics of an age in which the
Sinhalese first tried to write in the dialect of the sacred
ixts brought over from India; there are passages in the
/pavamsa which remind us of the first clumsy attempts
the ancient German tribes, to write Latin. The Maha-
‘#insa is composed very differently; its author masters
fe Pali grammar and style with a perfegt ease which
mnot have been acquired but after many” fruitless at-
mpts, and which may be compared with the elegant
astership of Latin composition by which the Italian poets
ad scholafs of the renaissance excelled. The turning-


careful consideration, however, of this passage shows that the boundary-

ne between what is said and what is omitted does not present those signs
° capricious irregularity which inevitably characterize gaps eaused by a
ypyist’s carelessness. The omissions are governed by a certain principle.
ne important and interesting parts of the story are fully told; the-less
‘ominent events which form only the connecting links between*the chief
vints*of the narrative, are altogether omitted. I think that both these
nissions and those repetitions are to be accounted for, in the main, by
e extremely awkward method in which the author compiled his work,
rough I do not deny, of course, that many of the. gaps which are found
troughout® the whole work, are to be referred to a different origin, viz.
2 te af Asfortynes to which the tradition of the Dipavamsa has, from then
ay jow, beef exposed.


8 Tafroduction.


point between the ancient and the modern époch of Pali
Hterature in Ceylon, is marked, no doubt, by the great .


“works ‘of Buddhaghosa, which were not less important,


y


from a literary than from & theological point of view.

Both Mahavamsa and Dipavamsa finish their records
at the same point, viz. with the death of king Mahasena.
This coincidence is, of course, nothing but a consequence
of the two works’ being derived from the game source.
We may find in this a new confirmation of our opinion.
that this source is the Atthakatha-MahAvamsa of the Maha-
vibéra Monastery. The reign of that véry -king Mahasena
was a fata] time to this monastery. A hostile party suc-
ceeded in obtaining king Mahasena’s sanction for destroy-
ing the Mahavibara; during a period of nine years the’
monastery remained deserted by its former inhabitants?
afterwards, after long and violent ecclesiastical straggleg,
it was reconstructed. We may easily understanc, thege-
fore, why historical writers belonging to the Mahavihtra
fraternity should stop just at the epoch of Mahdsenla’s
reign, where the past destinies of their spiritual abode
were divided from the present.

After these remarks about the relation of the Dips.
vamsa to the ancient theological commentaries and to tl! e
Mahavamsa, we now proceed to collect the data whic’
throw a light on the question, at what time the Dips
yvamsa was composed. Turnour infers its anterior origi:
compared with the Mahavamsa, from the fact of the fir:
line’s, as be says, of the Dipavamsa being quoted in th
Mahavamsa Tika, the authorship of which he ascribes t.
Mahanama, the author of.the Mahavamsa itself. But apar
from Turnour’s opinion on the age of the Mahavamsa Tiki
being totally wrong, we bave seen, that those lines: arr


‘quoted in the Mahavamsa Tika not from the Dipavams


itself, but from the Atthakathd on which the Dipavams:
is foamed: So we lose the date on which Turnour’s ofi
nion is based. What remains, are the following data:
1) The Dipavamsa cannot. have been written _before
A. D. 302, because its narrative extends till th» year,


Introduction. 9


2) Buddhaghosa was acquainted with a version of the
Dipavamsa which, however, differed in some details from
_that which we possess *).

3) The continuator of the Mahavamsa (p. 257, ed. Tur-
nour) tells us, that king Dhatusena (A. D. 459—477) or-
dered the Dipavamsa to be recited in public at an annual
festival held in honour of an image of Mahinda. *

4) These data being given, it is only of a secondary
importance, that the Mahavamsa Tika, which was com-
posed in much later times, mentions an Atthakatha on
the Dipavamsa?}.

The result is, that the Dipavamsa — be it in that
véry version which We possess or in a similar onc — was
written between the beginning of the fourth and the first
‘third of the fifth century. We do not know as yet the
éxact date of the composition of the Mahavamsa’), but if
we compare the language and the style in which the two
works are written, there will scarcely be any doubt as to
the priority of the Dipavainsa. The words, besides, by
which Mahanima characterizes the works of hig prede-
¢essors: .

pordnehi kato p’ éso ativittharito kvaci
ativa kvaci samkhitto anekapunarattako,


apply so extremely well to those peculiarities, of the Dipa-
vamsa of which we have spoken above, “that they appear
to have. been written most probably “sith reference to
this very .work.


1) Some lines from that version of the Dipav, are quoted in the Sa-
mantapasidika. They partly agree with our text; partly they differ in such
a way that they cannot be reconciled with it. See my notes on Dip. 11, 175
12,1. — The Dipav. is also quoted in the AttakathA on the Kathavatthu;
see the note on 5, 30.

«. 2) fol. ne (with reference to the ecclesiastical quarrels in Mahasena’s
reign) : aye keci bhikkhd v4 ussApitanikAyantaraladdhik& va tath’ eva amha-
kam dcariya akamsi 'ti vadeyyum, tesam pi tém parikappitavipphanditam
eva, tesa abhilapamattam va ’ti Dipavamsatthakathiyam vuttam.

“ 3% The arguments of Turnour who brings it under the reign of Dhatu-
sena (intro. Pp LW), are extremely weak.


10


Introduction.


I have made use in editing the text of the Dipa-


_vamsa, of. the following MSS.:


LB


I. MSS. written in Burmese characters,
i] MS. belonging to Major Fryer who brought it: to
England from British Burmah. About the third part
of the Dipavamsa (6, 87 ~ 15, 91) is wanting; instead
of this the MS. contains a fragment of the Thipa-


-vamsa. The MS. has been written Sakkaraj 1190 ==


2)


3)


4)


A. D. 1828. s

N: A Collation of the MS. presented Sy the late king
of Burmah to the Colonial Library in Colombo. This‘
MS. was collated by Gombadde Watte Dewa Aranolis
with the MS. M (see below), for the use of Mr. Rhys
Davids; its readings are indicated, for the most part,
in English characters, sometimes in Sinhalese writing,

at the margin of M. If the reading of N is rot ex

pressly indicated by Dewa Aranolis, but if we are’

from the silence of the collation, to draw the conclu

sion, that N agrees with M ~— a conclusion which is

of course, by no means always a safe one —, I de-
signate such readings by . If only a part of the
single words is indicated, I include in brackets those
parts which. we are to supply from M.


Il. Mss. awritten in Sinhalese characters.

G: MS. of the Paris National Library (collection Grim-
blot; fonds Pali 365). Although this MS. is writ-
ten in Sinhalese characters, its readings agree at a
good many passages with the Burmese MSS. The
text of G has been corrected from a MS: very simi-
lar to B. 3

A: MS. of the India Office (Pali Collection no, 95).


5. 6) B: C: Copies of two MSS. of the Dadalle Wihare,


made for Mr. Rhys Davids, now in the Cambridge
University Library (Add. 945. 946). In the five, first
Bhanavaras theré are frequent corrections in C made
from andther MS. than that from which C has -been


- copied. I designate these corrections by, .”


Iatroduetion. 4k


1 M: Copy made by Gombadde Watte Dewa Aranolis
for Mr. Rhys Davids from. a-MS. of the Busse Wihare.

- Written on paper. Now in the Cambridge University
‘Library (Add. 944).

8) R: MS. of the Cambridge University Library*{Add*
1255). This is 4 copy of a MS. belonging’ to Mr.
James d’Alwis.

9) D::MS. in the possession of Mrs. Childers, London;
it is a copy made for the late R. C. Childers.

10) #: MS. of the Paris National Library (Coll. Grim-

. blot, fonds Pali 366).

11) S:_A copy written on paper, which the priest Subhati

* of Vaskaduve was kind enough to send me. There
are some good corrections, written with pencil, on
the first leaves, which I designate by s.

I have used, besides, the following abbreviations:
_X = all Burmese MSS.
Y = all Sinhalese MSS.
4 = the class of MSS. represented by CDEMRS.
All our MSS. are derived from the same -original
source which was very incorrectly written in Burmese
characters, as we may infer from some of the blunders
common to all of our MSS.'). Perhaps this was the MS.
rought in 1812 from Siam to Ceylon” ‘bx the Modliar
seorge Nadoris”).
The way in which the single MSS. are atied from
their common source, will be shown by the following table:


Burmese Archetype


ele eee ee 7
NFsG: Gi ae
tro ements ABcG: CDEMRS.
combined,


- As to their critical value, the Burmese MSS. CD
deserve to ‘be classed first; least is.the value of Z, the


19 See,.for instance, 1, 6, 55; 4,45; 11,3; 22, 18.
2) See Journ. As. Soc. Bengal VI, p- 790.


12 Introduction.


apparent correctness of which. is owing not to real an-
cient tradition, but to arbitrary attempts of emendators,

It appeared desirable to print not the text corrected
as far as possible, but the text of the codex archetypus,
and to give in the footnotes my own emendations as well
as those tried already in the MSS. In many passages I
kave refrained from correcting manifest grammatical blun-
ders, errors in numbers of years ete., because I was
afraid of correcting not the copyist but the author him-
self. Many passages also appeared to me too hopelessly.
corrupt for me to try to correct them. Of the various,
readings I could give, of course, only a selection, or the
work would have increased to its threefold extent. :

I cannot finish without having expressed my sincere
thanks to the librarians and owners of MSS. who very,
liberally lent them to me or allowed me to collate them.
My special thanks are due also to Dr. R. Rost whe
aided my undertaking from its beginning to its end witl
the greatest kindness in many various ways, and to my
learned friends Dr. G. Bithler and Mr. Rhys Davids.
but for whose kind and indefatigable assistance I should
not have been able to add to-the Pali text of the Dipa-
vamsa a translation written in the language of a foreign
country.


Berlin, September 1879.


The Editor.


13


Namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammiisam-
buddhassa.


Dipigamanam buddhassa dhatu ca bodhiyagamam
samgahacariyavadafi ca dipambi sisandgamam
narindigamanam vamsam kittayissam, sunatha me, °|
* pitipAmojjajananam pasideyyam manoramam
nekdk“rasampannam cittikatva sunatha me. |
Tecan sumana pahattha tutthamdnasa
widdosam bhadravacanam sakkaccam sampaticchatha, |
sindtha sabbe panidliaiya manasam, vamsam pavakkhami
! + paramparagatam
tihutippasattham babunabhivannitam etamhi nandkusumam

va ganthitan, |
nipamam vamsavaraggavasinam apubbam, anaffiam tatha

suppakastam
riyagatam uttamasabbhi vannitam sunatha dipatthuti si-

dhusakkatam. |


Those readings of the MSS. which the Editor thinks to be correct, are
‘paced out, as well as his own conjectures.


I, 1. This verse is quoted in the Mahavamsa Tiki (Turnour’s MS.).
hatu ca ABGX, dhatusi ca Z, Mabay. T. dhatu may be the genitive;
vompare some examples of similar genitives and locatives at 15, 21. 27;
6, 5; 17,53. — 4. “abhatam ABeG2, Mahav. abhabhatam F, ° dgatam
{G1Z, — nandkusumavarabhdtaganthitan N, nanfikusumam varabhutagau-
itam X, nandkusumavadasutapagditam GI, etamhi nandkusumam va ganthi-
am Y, Mabav. T. — 5. This Cloka which is tuoted in the Mahavamsa
Pika, ruvs there thas: anupamavamsaannggahddinam sabbam aihatam katam
Uppak@eitam apariyagatam uttamasabbhi vaggitam suyantu dipatthutiya sd-
thusakkataw “i.


“44 (2 6220.


Asablian thandpallatkam acalam dalham akampitam
caturafige patitthaya nisidi purisuttamo. |
nisajja pallaikavare nardsabho dumindamtle diadaan ut
tamo
na chambhati vitabhayo va kesari disvana Maram: saha-
senavahanam. |
Maravadam bhinditvana vitrasetva sasenakam
jayo attamano dhiro santacitto samahito |
vipassanakammatthanam manasikarafi ca yoniso
sammasi bahuvidham dhammam anekikaran‘ssitam. |
pubbenivasaiianaii ca dibbacakkhui ca cakkhuma
19 sammasanto mahafiani yAme tayo atikkami. |
tato pacchimayimamhi paccayakaram vivattayi
anulomam patilomaii ca manas’ 4kA sirighano, |
fiatva: dhammam parififidya pahinam maggabhivanam
anusési mab4iani vimutto upadhisamkhaye. |
sabbafinutafidnavaram abhisambuddho mahdmuni
buddho buddho *ti tam némam samafiia pathamam ahi,
bujjhitva sabbadhammanam udanam katva pabhamkaro °
tad’ eva pallaikavare, sattiham vitindmayi. |
samitasabbasantaso katakicco anisavo
45 ndaggo sumano hattho vicintesi babuin hitam. |
khane khane laye buddho sabbalokam avekkhati,
paficacakkbu vivgritva olokesi baht jane. |
anAvaranaii4nén tam pesesi dipaduttamo,
addasa virajo satthA Laikadipam varuttamam |
sudesam utusampannam subhikkbam ratandkaram
pubbabuddharhanucinnam ariyaganasevitam. |
LankAdipavaram disva sukhettam ariydlayam
fiatva kdlam akAlai ca vicintesi anuggaho: |
Lankadipe imam kilam yakkhabhita ca rakkhasa
20 sabbe buddhapatikuttha, sakka uddharitum balam. |


6. isabhan thinam pallaikam? Dasabalasutta: dasabalacar
annagato bhikkhave tathigato catihi vesdrajjehi samannigato &sabha
thanam patijanati parisisu sihanidam nadati. — dalham X, duttham Y.
eaturo afige X. Compara Abhidhinapp. 157. — 7. sahasenam gatam 2
{sahasena]vi[gatam] N, sahasenavahanam ARFG. The reading of Z may b
correct, —- 12. anus’si Ns, anufiasi F, anuasibbi (corrected into ganussfsi
Gi, anuss&hi ABG2, snussari Z. — 16. pafica cakkhum a,


1.2183. 15.


ntharitva yakkhaganeé pisice avarnddhake- :
khemam katvana iam dipam vas&pessimi mAnuse. |
titthantesu ca ime pape yavatiyum asesato, *
sdsanantaram -bhavissati LankAdipavare tahim. |
uddharitvan’ aham satte pasidetva babi jane
acikkhitvana tam maggam aiijasam ariydpatham |
anupada parinibbayi suriyo atthamgato yatha.
parinibbute catumase hessati pathamasamgaho, |
tato param vassasate vassAn’ attharasdni ca
tatiyo samgabo hoti pavattatthaya sisanam. 25
imasmim Jambudipamhi bhavissati mahtpati
mahapuiifio tejavanto Asokadhammo "ti vissuto. |
tasga reifio Asokassa, putto hessati pandito
Mahindo sutasampanno Lankadipam pasddayam. |
baddho fiatva imam hetum bahum atthipasamhitam
kalakalam imam dipam érakkham sugato kari. |
* allankam animisai ca caikamam ratanégharam
iapAlamucalindo khirapalena sattamam. |
ttasattahakarantyam katvana vividhafi jino

4ranastm gato viro dhammacakkam, pavattitum. | 80
hammacakkam pavattento pakasento dhammam uttamam
ttharasannam kotinam dhammébhisamayo abt. |
ondaiiiio Bhaddiyo Vappo Mahanimo ca Assaji

‘e pafica mahithera ‘vimutta anattalakkhane. |

‘asasahayd cattAri, puna paiiidsa darake *

arnasi Isipatane vasanto uddhari jino. [°


22, titthantoham ime pape XG1s, titthantesncam ime Pipe Z, titthan-
asu_ca papesu ABG2. I think that at least one line is wanting. We may
ll ap the gap thus:

»pisice pavesessimi Giridipam manoramam,

titthantu ca ime papa yAvatiyumr asesato.“
4. parinibbiyi G1XZ, parinibbeyan ABG2. parinibbeyyam? —
sfinatth® XZ G1, dve vassasatanatth® A2 B G2, vassasata tth?,
1, I think that the reading of XZG1 is correct, and tltat a Cloka which
mtained a mention of the second Council has been omitted in our MSS. —
7. pasddaye Y yum G1), °yam Xs. — 31. pavattento all the MSS.; pa~
ittente? — pakdsente AB. — 88, Yasusahdye cattaro? — Bara-
si may be a locative; compare the note on dhaqw 1, 1, and, the expression
jati vijjante* in the Buddhavamsa (Jat. vol. I, p. 4). But perhaps we
roid jyrite Bardinasim, comp. v.34 and the comment on Kaccéyana’s
rammar, 2,48,

r


16 1, 34—49.


BarAnasim vasitvana vutthavasso tathagato
KappAsike vanasande uddhari Bhaddavaggiye.
anupubbafi caramano Uruvelam avasari,

35 addasa virajo sattha Uruvelakassapaii jatim. |
agyigire ahinigam damesi purisuttamo.
disvA acchariyam sabbe nimantimsu tathagatam: |
hemantafi cAtum4samhi idha vihara Gotama,
mayam tam niccabhattena sad& upatthahamase. |


+
|


Uruvelayam hemante vasamano tathigato
jatile saparisajje vinesi purisdsabho. | “
mahayafiiam pakappimsu Afgi ca Magadha ubho,
disvé yafifie mahdlabham vicintesi ayoniso: |
mahiddhiko mahdsamano anubhavaii.ca tam maha}
4osace mahajanakaye vikubbeyya katheyya va, |
parihayissati me labho Gotamassa bhavissati,
aho nfina mahisamano nigaccheyya samagamam. |
caritam adhimuttifii ca Asayaii ca andsayam
cittassa solasikare vijanati tathagato. |
jatilassa cintitam fatva paracittavidfi muni
pindapatam Kurudipe gantvana mabdiddhiya |
Anotattadahe buddho paribhufjitvana bhojanam
tattha jhanasamapattim samapajji bahum hitam. |
buddhacakkhihi lokaggo sabbalokam vilokayi,
addasa virajo satthd LankAdipavaruttamam. |
mahavanam-riahdbhimam Ahu Lankatalam tada,
nandyakkha mahaghord Indda lohitabhakkhasa |
canda ruddé ca pisicd ndnartpavihesika
ndnddhimuttiki sabbe sannipate samagata. |
tattha yantvana tammajjhe vimamsetvdna rakkhase
nikaritva pisicdnam mannssd hontu issard. |
imam attham mahaviro cintayitva bahum hitain


4


&


37. catumasambi? — 40. ca (,ca* is wanting in BG) mahi sa
mahajanakaye ABG, ca tam mah& 5° m’ Xs, ca mahi sace mahante jan
kaye ca Z If we take the reading of X as correet, dnubhavam instead
Anubhavo is well in keeping with the style of the Dipavamsa, and perha
we may even accept mahi (or maham?) as a neuter nominative. -
46. aha? — .47. nanartipa vihesaka? — 48. gantvana tammajjhe FG
gantvanabham majjhe N, gantvin’ aham majjhe s, gautvana te majjhe Y. -
48. yibhimsetvana (vibh® G2) ABecG2, vimamsetvana (vim? X}XG1i
viddhamsetvana? ~


1, 49-86. 17


nabham abbhuggamitvana Jambudips idhagato. |:

yakkhasamagamamajjhe upari siramatthake

nisidanam gahetvana dissamano nabhe thito." |

thitam passanti sambuddham yakkhasen& samagata

buddho ’ti tam: na maiiianti yakkho afinataro iti. |

gangatire Mahiyasu pokkhalesu patitthite thapatthdne Sn-
: bhaigane

tasmim padesasmi thito naruttamo samappito jhanasama-

dhim uttamam. |
jbainam lahump “ khippanisantikaro muni samapajjati citta-


kkhane, :
sahasa tam utthati jhdnakhaniyaé samapayi sucittehi para-
: . migato. | .
thito naro iddhi vikubbamAno yakkho va mahiddhi maha-
: nubhavo,


““haniyam ghana meghasahassadhara pavassati sitalavata-
gaia Gets duddini. |
m karomi te unham, mama detha nistditum,
ri tejabalam mayham parissayavinodanam. |
e vinoditum sakk& nistdahi yathicchitam,


52. Gaiigatire — Subhaiyaye is wanting in BG2Z. — Mahiyapu A G1,

iissisn X. I have written Mahiydsu, this being the site of the Mabi-
ganathipa, as is said in the Mahivamsa (p. 3), omopf the ,Mahi nama
Anam“ (Mahdv. Tika). — Sutamkhaye AGI, Subhaiigan® N, Sutafigaye F
ich may be correct). — 58. khippanisantikaro NGi, °kéto BG2, °ka A,
ppanippantikaro F, khippati santikéro Z. In several passages of the Aiig-
ua-Nikiys, a man who is endowed with promptitnde of attention, is
ted ,khippanisanti kusalesu dhammesu*. — cittakkhanegF, cittakbane N,
tane A, cittaye Gt, cintaye BG2. Z has the following “reading: muni
rapajji sacintaye tadd. There is in the Kathavattha (Phayre MS. fol. yh)
hapter called ,khanikakatha‘, in which the proposition is discussed: neka-
akkbauika sabbe dhammé’ti This means, I believe: ,all qualities may
considered in a moment by one thought*. Perhaps we may compare
y Lal. Vist. p. 447: ,sarvam tad ekacittekshayasamayuktam*. I feel in-
red, therefore, to correct: muni samapajjat’ ekacittaRkhanpe, and
translate: ,he entered upon meditation (by revolving) in a moment by’
' thought (the whole system of Dhamma’s).“ — ‘The following hemistich
y be corrected thus: sabae& tamh’ utthati, jbanem khane viya
nfpayi sucittaparamigato. — 54. naro AGIX, nabhe Z, which
y be sorrect. — iddhi AGIFZ, iddhim N. — khaniyam ghana meghasa-
sadhira X (khapiyamkhaya® F), kbanayamahameghasahassddharo (kthay°
) AGI, ‘khanfya m? dhare Z. ghatayam (ganthayam?) gh° m°? —
WvitCiuddipi AFG, °dundubhi ZN. Compare Mahavagga [, 3, 2. —
» karomi VO unham ?


2


18 1, 66—66.


sabbehi samanuiifidtam, tava tejabalam kara. |
unham ydcatha mam sabbe, bhiyyo tejam mahdtapam
khippam karoma accunham tumhchi abhipatthitam. |
thite majjhantike kale gimhanam suriyo yatha
evam yakkhanam ataépo kaye thapita darunam. |
yatha kappaparivatte catusuriyadtapo ~
evam nisidane satthu tejo hoti tatuttari, |
yatha suriyam udentam na sakka avaritum nabhe
socvam nisidanahi cammam n’ atthi avaranam nabhe. |
nisidanam kappajdlam va tejam suriyam va pathavi
mahatapam vikirati aggijalam v’ anappakam. |
algdrardsijalitatapam tahim nisidanam abbhasamam pa-
- dissati = 7
pakkam va ayomayapabbatipamam. |
dipesu unham nidasseti dusszham, yakkhasu patisaranam -
gavesayum —.
puratthimam pacchimadakkhinuttaram uddham adho d°
dis& imayo. +
katham gamissima sukhi arogA kadi pamuicama in
subherayam, |
sace ayam yakkho mahinubhivo tejo samapajjati pajjala,
sabbeva yakkhi vilaya bhavissare bbusam va mutthi


65 jam vatakhittam. |
buddho ca khoisinisabho sukhavaho disvana yakkhe
2 kkhite bhayattite


anukampako kAruniko mahesi vicintayi attasukham amanw


56. tavartejabalam phara? Comp. Buddhavamsa (Jat. T, p. 24, ve Le
— 58. bhavittha dammam, s; ¢hapito d°? — 59. tahuttari ri B)
taduttari FZ, tatuttari N. tat’ uttarim? — G0. naro Y, nabhe X (at
two places). — 61. AIGLE omit va. --- pathavi X, patthapi ABG, ;
Mahivamsa Tik3 (fol. kho): te pathavisuriyatejacammakhan
(sic) yakkhagan’. — 62. pattam, va N, s 1 F, pakka ve
— 63. dipisu XG1, dipesn ¥ (dipeta B1). — nidasseti N, nidasoti F, n
+ yeti Y. I do not think: that nidasseti is correct, but 1! do not know hoy
correct it, — patissaranam N, serauan ¥, maranam Y. — gavesayum
gavesisum F, bhavepisu Gt, bhavesupi ABG2, bhavataj
ham gamissama? — 66. nisabha = rishabha or
this word af the following passages: in the Samy -Nikiya (Phayre
part I, fol. ko) Buddhais compared with a naga, a sia, an djaniya, a
sabha, a dhoravha. ‘In the Majjhima-Nikiya (Turnour’s MS., fol. iii) it is +
of Buddha ,nisabhassa appameyyassa*. Sutta-Nipata (Phayre MS. fel. sa
»gantvana disva isinisabham pasanno“, Buddhavamsa (Phayfe MS., fol.
-


1, 67—~74, 19


ath’ afifiadipam patiropakam imam ninnam thalam sabba-
thanekasAdisam
nadipabbatatalakasunimmalam dipam Girim Lankatalasamo-
pamam |
sunibbhayam gopitasigarantakam pahfitabhakkham babu-
dhafifamakulam
utusamattham harisaddalam mahim varam Giridipam imassa
uttarim |
rammam manufiiam haritam susitalam dramavanardmaney-
- yakam varam,
santidha phullaphaladharino duma, sufiiam vivittam, na ca
: koci issaro, |
mahannave sAgaravarimajjhe sngambhire tmi sada pabhij-
jare,
suduggame pabbatajalamussite sudukkaram attha anittham-
2 antaram, |
“vavanurosd parapitthimamsika akdrunika parahethane rata
da ca ruddha rabhasa ca niddaya vidappanika sapathe
idha ime. |
a rakkhasd yakkhagand ca duttha dipam imam Lafika-
ciranivasitam
lami sabbam Giridipaporanam, vasantu sabbe supaja
anigha. |
i ca Laikatalam manusinam poranak“ppatthitavuttha-


visam,
santu Lafkatale manusa baht pubbe va Ojavaramanda-
° sidisam.. |
bd


shi affichi guneh’ upeto manussavaso anekabhaddako
resu dipissati sisan’ Agate supuunacando va nabhe upo-
sathe. |


> padakkhivam katva bodhimaddam narattamo apar
pallaikamuttame pallafikena nisiditvA bujjhissati 1


68. gopitas’ N, gopikas® F, sobhitas® Y, gobhitas" GJ. gopitam 6°?


uttari XG. uttaram? — 71. ca rudda (comp, v. 47) AB, va rudda
2, ca ruddhd Zn, varuddh’ F. I cannot correct the last words. —
°nivasitam X G1, °nivasinam Y. — v. 73 js quoted in the Mahavamsa Tika,
khan {,tenfha pordna*), Laikathalamanusanam,.° tthitam, vasanti Laiké-
amanued, Ojamandavaradipe Mahav. T. °maydapadipam F. Ojavara-
udadipe? — 74. anek® APG1, va anck® N, api nek” BG2Z, — dipesu
SSati ‘sieapdgate AHG2, dipassa dipi sadisa anagate Z, dipissati (dis-
aty F) sasanigate EG1, dipissati sisanam etthanagate N.
Qe


15


80


20 1, -75—81,


dipam ubho manus rakkhasé ca ubho ubhinnam tulayam
sukham ‘muni
bhiyyo sukham lokavidt ubhinnam parivattayi gonayugam |
va phasukam. |
samkaddhayi Gotamo _dipam iddbiyé bandham va gonam
dalharajjukaddhitam,
‘dipena dipam upandmayi muni yugam va ndyvam dalha-
dhammaveditam. {
dipena dipam* yugalam tathdgato katvan’ ularam viparf ca
rakkhase,
vasantu sabbe Giridipa rakkhasd sapakkamdsA vasanam va
vatthitam. | _ :
gaigam'gimhamhi yatha pipAsita dnAvanti yakkha Giridi-
pam atthika,
pavittha sabbe anivattane puna, pamuica dipam yathabha-
miyam muni. |+
yakkha sututthd supahattharakkhasd laddhi sudipam
nasdbhipatthitam
abhayimsu sabbe atippamodita, otarimsu sabbe chane
kkhattamaham. |
fiatvina buddho sukhite amanuse katvana mettam parit
bhani jino.
katvana dipam tividham padakkhinam sadi rakkham
kkhaganavinodana
santappayitva pisice aminuse rakkhah ca katva dalb
; mettibhavanain
upaddavam .dipe vinodetvé gato Uruvelam pina tat
i gato “ti. | >
bhanavaram pathamam. yakkhadamanam nitthitam.


75. mfinuse rakkhase ca? —: 76. dalhadamavethitam?
77. vipariva AN G1, °rica BM G2, °rica CRE. — Giridipe? — sapakkar
vasanam va vatthitam Y, sapakkasd capanam pavattititam F, disam pa
wanasi va, vatthitam N. I do not try any corr _— 78.6
imh®? — Giridfpavattika N, Giripavattiia F. — pamufei
G2, —"79. Compare Mahav. Tika ful. khau’: ,atha te (rakkhasa) ambi
iechitam patthitam nippannan ti mabdhasitan nama hasitva nakkbattach
kilam kilimsu. 1 propose to read, therefore: ahasimsu sabbe; chat
nakkh®. — 81. [dalJha{mettabhava}jnam N. — Z, apparently “for the
of metrical correctness, reads thus: ,up° dipa vinodayitva gateruftlan™
pi tath®.« a


eo {Wee 14


*


7


ew


2, 1-11, 21


Il.


Araham pana sambuddho Kosalinam puruttamam
upanissaya vihdsi Sudattarame sirighano. |
tasmift, Jetavane buddho dhammaraj& pabhamkaro
sabbalokam avekkhanto Tambapannivar’ addasa. |
atikkante paficavassamhi Tambapannitalam aga,
avarnddhake vinodetvi sufifam dipam aka sayam. |
uragé ajja dipamhi pabbateyya samutthita
ubhoviytlhasamgamam yuddham karinsu darunam. |
sabbe mahiddhik& naga sabbe ghoravisa aht
sabbeva kibbisA candi madamana avassita. | 5
khippak«pi mahateja paduttha kakkhala khard
ujjbanasafifif sukopa uraga vilarattbika. |
Mahodaro mahatejo Cillodaro ca tejaso
ubho pi balasampanna ubho pi vannitisaya. |
na passati koci samam samuttari, Mahodaro manamattena
. tejasa i
“am vindsesi saselakananam: ghitemi sabbe patipakkha-
; pannage. |
‘odaro gajjati mananissito:' 4gacchantu nagasahassako-
os a tiyo,
‘ami sabbe ranamajjham Agate, thalam karomi satayoja-
. nam dipam. {
fasayanti visavegadussah4 © sampajjalanti “uragi mahi-


; ddhika
sadbanrna bhujagindamucchita ussahanti ranasatthu ma-
dditum.4 . 10
svana buddho uragindakuppanam idipam vinassanti niva-
 ttahetukam


Ul, 2. samutthiti G1XZ, samuddik& ABG2, comp. Mahavamsa, p. 5,
‘.2.—~ 4, ubhatoviyG@]has°? Mab. Tika fol. ga: samgiman ti ubhato-
fhasamgamam. —. 5. avassuta? — 6. viralattika Z, viralatthika N,°
rathika F, vilarattika ABG, vilayatthika? bilaratthik&? — 8. sam-
ri“AFG1nZ, °rim BeG2. samuttaram (instead of samuttaram)? —
padhap4yanti? comp. Mabavagga I, 15, 4. —~ °sattu ABG2, °satthu
4a, °pattum F. — pararosadhamma (comp. 1, 71) bhujaginda
echit& ussahayanti ragasatta madditum? — it. *kuppanam F,
bbanan? N, °dwbbalam Y. — vindsanti F, vinasenti N, vinassanti G1Z,
“sase® ABG2, uragindakuppanam d° Vinassantam nivattihe-
am? iat °


22 2, 11—25.


lokassa cari sugato bahum hitam vicintayi aggasukham
sadevake. |
sace na gaccheyyam na pannaga sukht, dipam vinésam na
. ea sidhu ‘nagate,{
nige anukampaméno sukhatthiko’ gaccham’ aham dipasu-
kham samicchitum. |
Eankidipe gunam disva pubbe yakkhavinoditam
mama sddhukatam dipam m4 vindsentu pannaga. |
idam vatvana sambuddho utthahitvana Asana
15 gandhakutito nikkhamma dvare atthasi cakkhumi. |
yavaté Jetavane ca ardme vanadevata
sabbe ’va upatthahimsu mayam gacchama cakkhuma. |
alam sabbe pi titthantu Samiddhi yeko *vagacchatu,
avagaccha saharukkho dharayitvina pitthito. |
buddhassa vacanam sutva Samiddhi sumano aht
samilam rukkham Adaya saba gacchi tathagatam, | .
naruttaman tam sambuddham devaraja mahiddhike"
chiyam katvana dharesi buddhasetthassa pitthito. |
yattha nigdnain samgdmam tattha gantva naruttamo
20 ubhonagavaramajjhe thito satthdnukampako. !
nabhe gantvana sambuddho ubhonaganam upari
tibbandhakiratamam ghoram akasi lokanayako. |
andham tamam tada hoti kesaramayaiddhiya,
andhakarena onaddho sihité yarukkho ahd. |
aliflamaiiiam ha passanti tasitd nag’ bhayattita
jitam pi na passanti kuto samgima karitum. |.
sabbe samgimam bhinditva pamuficitvana Avudham
namassamari” sambuddham sabbe thita katanjali. |
salomahatthe fatvana disva nage bhayattite
.- #8 mettacittena pharitvana unharamsim pamuficayi. |


11. attasukham? comp. 1, 66. In the Mahav. Tika (fol. khau
‘stanza of the Poriya is quoted which contains the words »80 Cintayi a


sukham acintamassa (sic). — 13, disapamukham icchitum ABG, dipav
Qhim samicchitum Z, dipasamukham iechitum F, dipasukham sami}


samiechitum — sk. sam-irts? dipasukbam sa mijjhatu? — 17. avagac
FGIN, dgaccha ABcG2, agaccha Z. avagacchi? — 20, sattanuks
pako? comp. v. 47, — 2. kesarimahdiddbiya? — onaddha AIX, de
A2BGZ. — sahita Y, patita F, sihita N, — yarukkho ahu ¥, yartkkbo al
F, yadukha ahum N. on® pihito sarakkho aha? — 23. jitan® pi ~
Jinam pi A, jiyam pi te Z, jivitam pi ¥, jvitam pi N. jinai® pi te2
« if


2, 26—49. 23


aloko ’va maha Asi abbhuto lomahamsano

sabbe passanti sambuddham nabhe candam va nimmalam. |

chahi vannehi upeto jalanto nabhakantare_

dasa dis& virocanto thito nige abhdsatha: |

kimatthiyam mahardja nigdnam vivido ahi?

tumheva anukampdya javagacchim tato aham. |

ayafi Calodaro nago ayan nago Mahodaro

matulo bhagineyyo ca vivadanto dhanatthiko. |

anudayait candanagdnam sambuddho ajjhabhasatha:

appo hutvé mahi hoti kodho balassa Agamo. | 3

kim udisv4 baht niga mahidukkham nigacchatha,

tman parittamn pallatkam ma tumhe nasayissatha,

afifamatifiam vindsetha akatam jivitakkhayam. |

samvejesi tadd nige nirayadukkhena cakkhumi.*

manussayonim dibbafi ca nibbanafi ca pakittayi. |

pakigayantam saddhammam sambuddham dipaduttamam

sabbe »Aga nipatitva khamapesum tathagatam. |

sabbe nigi samagantvé samagg4 hutvana pannaga

upesum saranam sabbe asiti panakotiyo. |

subbe nig& vinassama imam pallankahetukam. | 35
‘dya pallankavaram ubho niga samatthika:
tiganhatha pallankam anukampdya cakkhuma. |
hivasesi sambuddho tunhibhavena cakkhuma,
bivasanam viditvana tuttha mahoraga ubho: |
sidatu ‘mam sugato pallaikeun veluriyamazam
ibhassarafi jativantam niganam abhipatthitam.
atitthapimsu pallaikam naga dipanam antare,
isidi tattha pallanke dhammaraja pabhamkteo.
asddetvana sambuddham asiti nagakotiyo
attha nagé parivisum annapinai ca bhojanam.
nitapattapdnin tam asiti nigakotiyo
arivaretva nisidimsu buddhasetthassa santike. |
calyanike gajigimukhe ndgo ahd saputtako
vahanagaparivaro namenapi Maniakkhiko, |


>
Ss


27, jalante Y, which may be correct. — virocento F. — 28. kim-
tthaye? comp. 13,2. — 3. kim udisva ABG2, kim d® Z, kimad®
1, kamam d° F, kimam d° N. kim uddissa? — 36. samatthika ABG,
waggiki-Z, sapattika N, papattikd F. — 42. ndmendsi AZ, °api BGX.


4 9, 4356.


saddho saranasampanno sammdditthi ca silava,
nagasamagamam gantva bhiyyo abhipasidati. |.
disva buddhabalam ndgo- -anukampam phanimayam
abhivAdetva nistdi ayacesi: tathagatam: |
imam dipAnukampaya pathamam yakkhavinoditam,
45idam naginam ‘nuggaham dutiyam dipanukampanam, {
puna pi bhagava imam anukampam mahémuni,
ahafi c’ upatthahissimi veyyavaccam karom’ aham. |
ndgassa bhasitam’ sutvé buddho sattanukampako
Lafikadipahitatthaya adhivasesi sugato. |
paribbuiijitva pallankam vutthahitva pabhamkaro
divaviharam akasi tattha dipantare muni. |
dipantare dipdn’ aggo’ divasam vitindmayi
samapatti samapajji brahmaviharena cakkhuma. |
gayanhakalasamaye nage Amantay? jino:
idh’ eva hotu pallanko, khtrapalo idhdgacchatu, .
50 ndgd sabbe imam rukkham pallaikei’ ca namassatha. |
idam vatvina sambuddho anusdsetvana pannage — -
paribhogacetiyam datva puna Jetavanam gato. |
ndgadamanam nitthitam,


Aparam pi atthame vasse nagarajA Manikkhiko
nimantayi mahaviram paicabhikkhusate saha. |
parivaretvana sambuddham vasibhata mahiddhika,
uppatitva Jetavane kamamano nabhe muni
Lafikadipam anuppatto gafgam Kalydnisammukham. |
sabbe ratanamandapam. uragd katvé mahatale .
nandrangehi »atthehi dibbadussehi chadayun. |
nanaratanalamkaré nanaphullavicittaka
nindrangadhaja nek& mandapam nandlamkatam. |
sabbasanthatam santharitva pafiiapetvana 4sanam
buddhapamukhasamghassa pavesetva nistdimsn. |


5


a


44. phanimayam ACG2R, papim® G1, phanim® BM, manimayam .
phayibhayam? — 46. imam AB2G1X, mam B1G2, ambam Z. — @n
kampa A, °pam BGX, °paya Z. — 49. samapattim N. Ramapattiis.
50. idha gacchata XG@1, idhag* ABeG2, idhacchatu Z. 53. gafiga:
ABFG, gaiigam k° N, ‘gaigik’.Z. gaigam Kalyanikam mukhay
comp. v. 42, — 54. sabbaratanam®? — mahitale? — 56. nisflasum
°disam BG, °dayum Z, °dimsu F, °disy N. visidayum appears tobe £
correct reading. ” 2


2,87 £.3,1, 25


nisiditvana sambuddho paiicabhikkhusate saha.
samapatti samapajji mettam sabbadisam phari. {
sattakkhattum samapajji buddho jhanam’ sasivako
“tasmim thine mahathipo patitthasi cetiyam uttamam. f
mahadanam_ pavattesi nagaraja Manikkhiko,
patiggahetva sambuddho nagadénam sasivako
bhutvana anumoditva nabh’ uggacchi sasavako. { *
arohitva nabhe buddho thane Dighavapicetiye
samapajji samapattim jhdnam lokanukampako. | “60
vatthahitva samapatti tamhi thane pabhamkaro
vehayasam kamamiino dhammardji sasivako
Mahameghavane tattha bodhitthanam upigami. |
purima tini mahAbodh? patitthimsu mahitale
tam thanam upagantvana tattha jhdanam samapayi. |
tisso bodhi imam thane tayo buddhana sasane,
mamaf ca bodhi idh’ eva patitthissat’ andgate. |
sasivak¢ samipatti vutthahitva narattamo
“vattha Meghavandrammam agamisi narAsabho. |
“thapi so samapattim samapajji sasavako.
“hahitva samapatti bydkarosi pabhamkaro: | 65
n padesam pathamain Kakusandbo lokanayako
m pallaikathanamhi ‘nisiditva patiggahi, |
m padesam dutiyam Kondgamano narasabho
m pallankathanamhi nisiditva patiggabi.| _
m padesam tatiyam Kassapo lokanayako
m pallankathdnamhi_ nistditva patiggahi. |
m Gofamasambuddho Sakyaputto nardsabbo
in pallakathanamhi nisiditva samappito >|
bhanavaéram dutiyam.


TE.
Atitakappe rajano thapetvana bhaydbhave
ahi, kappe rajano pakdsissAmi sabbaso, |


57. samfpattim N. samapatti? — 60. nabbe X, nate GI, nage AB
nabhain Z. nabha? — 62. mahAbodhi? — 63. tisso bodhi? —
“vant ramme GIN, ®vane rame F, °vandramam ABcG2, °vanérammam Z.
aam raimam?


26 8, 2—16.


jatifi ca namagottafi ca dyufi ca anupalanam
sabban tam kittayissAmi, tam sundtha yathakatham. |
pathamabhisitto raja bhdmipalo jutindharo
Mahdsammato nadma ndmena rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
tassa putto Rojo nama, Vararojo nama khattiyo,
Kalyanavarakalyana, Uposatho mahissaro, |
MandhatA sattamo tesai catudipamhi issaro,

5 Caro, Upacaro raja, Cetiyo ca mahissaro, |
Mucalo, Mahamucalo, Mucalindo, Sagaro pi ca,
Sagaradevo, Bharato ca, Angiso nama khattiyo, |
Ruci, Maharuci nima, Patapo, Mahapatapo pi ca,
Panido, Mahdpanado ca, Sudassano nama khattiyo, |
Mahasudassano nima, duve Nerfi ca, Accima, i
atthavisati rijano, ayu tesam asamkhaya. |
Kusivati, Rajagahe, Mithiliyam puruttame
rajjam karimsu rajano, tesam dye asamkhaya. |
dasa dasa satafi ¢’ eva, satam dasa sahassiyo,
sahassam dasa dasasahassafi ca, dasa dasasahassamm satasa~

10 hassiyo, |
dasa satasahassai ca koti, dasakoti, kotippakotiyo,
nahutaii ca, ninnahutafi ca, abbudo ca, nirabbudo, |
ababam, atatati e’ eva, ahaham, kumudani ca,
sogandhikam, uppalako, pundarikapadumako, |
ettaka ganita, samkhepa gananiganika tahim,

‘tato uparimabbiimi asamkheyya ‘ti vuceati. |
cekasatafi_ ca rajano Accimassapi atraja
maharajjam akaresum nagare Pakulasavhaye. |
tesam paccfitmako rij Arindamo nama khattiyo,
putta paputtaké tassa chapaiifidsai ca khattiya

w mahdrajjam akdresumm Ayujjhanagare pure. |
tesam pacchimako raj4 Duppasaho mahissaro,


III, 2. yathatatham? — 6, Bhagiraso nama? — 8.9. asamki
ABcG2, — 9. karesum? — 11. dasa satasahassai ca koti, pak
kotippakotiyo? compare Burnouf, Lotus, p. 854; Sp. Hardy, Ma
p. 6. — 12. kumuden’ ca? — 13. gauanaguyika ABGX, °t2 Z. e
ganiti samkheyya ganandganiya tahim? — uparima X@1Z, °


ABcG2. — bhimi XCtGIR, °mim ABcG2M, — 14, Sakulasavbrye 4
Bakulasavhaye N, Pagulavhaye F, Kapilavhaye Z. SagalasOvhaye?
- *


3, 16—27. 27


putta paputtaka tassa satthi te bhimipalaka

maharajjam akdresum Baranasipuruttame. |

tesam pacchimako rAjA Abhitatto nama khattiyo,
“catursiti sahassani tassa puttapaputtaka

mahdarajjam akaresum Kapilanagare pure. |

tesam pacchimako r4j4 Brahmadatto mahissaro,

putté paputtaka tassa chattimsApi ca khattiya

mabarajjam akdresum Hatthipuravaruttame. |

tesam pacchimako raja Kambalavasabho aht,

putta paputtaka tassa battimsapi ca khattiyé

nagare Ekacakkhtimbi rajjam karesuin te idha. |

téesam pacchimako raja Purindado Devaptjito

putta paputtaka tassa catthavisati khattiya

mahdrajjam akdresum Vajirayam puruttame. | 20
tesam pacchimako raja Sadhino nima khattiyo,

putta paputtaka tassa dvavisa rijakhattiya

maharajjam akdresum Madhurayam puruttame. |
“tesam pacchimako rajA Dhammagutto mahabbalo,

“td paputtaké tassa attharasa ca khattiya

sare Aritthapure rajjam karesum te idha. }

un pacchimako raja narindo Sitthinimako,

té paputtaka tassa sattarasa ca khattiya

gare Indapattamhi rajjam karesum te idha. |
am pacchimako raja Brahmadevo mahipati,
‘td paputtaka tassa pannarasa ca khattiya

sare Ekacakkbumhi. rajjam karesum te idha. |
am paéchimako raja Baladatto mahipati,

ta paputtaka tassa cuddasa rajakhattiya
barajjam akéresum Kosambimhi nagare pure. |
um pacchimako raja Bhaddadevo ‘ti vissuto,
ta paputtaka tassa nava rja ca khattiya

are Kannagocchamhi rajjam karesum te idha. |
am pacchimako raja Naradevo "ti vissuto,

t& paputtaka tassa satta ca rajakhattiya


we
&


17, Ajitajano (instead of Abhitatto) A2. — 21. Sadino Z. Maha-
ga Tika: Sddhanv. — 23. Mabav. Tika: Brahmasivi, — 24. 25. Mahav.
ie Brahnfadatta, Baladeva. — 26. Mahav. Tika: Hatthideva.


28 8, 27—~40.


maharajjam akdresum Rojananagare pure. |
tesam pacchimako raja Mahindo nama khattiyo,
putt® paputtaka tassa dvddasa rajakhattiya
mahiarajjam akdresum Campakanagare pure. |
tesam pacchimako rfji Nagadevo mahipati,
puttd paputtaké tassa paficavisa ca khattiya ‘
‘aabarajjam karayimsu Mithilanagare pure. |
tesam pacchimako rajA Buddhadatto mahabbalo,
putté paputtaka tassa paiicavisa ca khattiya

30 maharajjam kArayimsu Rajagahapuruttame. |
tesam pacchimako r4jd Dipamkaro nama khattiyo,
putta paputtakd tassa dvadasa rajakhattiya
maharajjam karayimsu Takkasilapurattame. |
tesam pacchimako raji Talissaro nama khaitiyo,
patté paputtak’ tassa dvadasa rdjakhattiya
maharajjam karayimsu Kusindripuruttame. |
tesam pacchimako raja Purindo nama khattiyo,
pufté paputtaka tassa nava raji ca khattiya
maharajjam karayimsu nagare Malitthiyake. |
tesam pacchimako raja Sagaradevo mabissaro,
tassa putto Makhadevo mahAdanapati aha. |
caturasiti sahassdni tassa puttapaputtaka

45 maharajjam karayimsu Mithilanagare pure. |
tesam pacchimako raja Nemiyo Devapdjito ©
balacakkavatti raja sgarantamahipati. {
Nemiyaputto Kalarajanako, tassa puito Samamkaro,
Asoko nima a so raja muddhavasittakhattiyo. {
caturasiti sdfassini tassa puttapaputtaka
maharajjam karayimsu Bardnasipuruttame. |
tesam pacchimako raj4 Vijayo nama mahissaro,
tassa putto Vijitaseno abhijatajutindharo. |
Dhammaseno, Nagaseno, Samatho nama, Disampati,

. 40 Renu, Kuso, Mahakuso, Navaratho, Dasaratho pi cd, |


27. Rocanagare N. Mabdv. Tiki: Rojanamambi nagare. — 80. Ma’


Tika: Samuddadatto. — ‘32. Talissaro ABG2X, Taliyaro G1, TAlisaj:
Mah. Tika: Kalissaro. — 33. Purindo ABG, [Purijudo N, Parindado Zz,
dinno F, Mahay. Tika. Mahav. Tika: Tamalittiyanimamhi nagare,


37. Samaikuro ABcG2, Mah. Tik4.


3, 41—53. 29


Ramo, Bilaratho nama, Cittadassi, Atthadasst,

Sujato, Okkako @ eva, OkkAmukho ca, Nipuro, |

Candima, Candamukho ca, Sivi raja ca, Saiijayo,

“Vessantaro janapati, Jali ca, Sihavahano,

Sthassaro ca yo dhiro pavenipalo ca khattiyo, |

dveasiti sahassani tassa puttapaputtaka

rajjam karesum r4jano nagare Kapilasavhaye. |

tesam pacchimako raja Jayaseno mahipati,

tassa putto Sthahanu abhijatajutindharo. |

Sthahanussa ye puttd yassa te pafica bhataro

Suddhodano ca Dhoto ca Sakkodano ca khattiyo | 45.

Sukkodano ca so raja raja ca Amitodano,

ete, patiGa pi rajano sabbe Odananamaka. |

Suddhodanassayam putto Siddhattho lokandyako

janetva Rahulabhaddam bodhaya abhinikkhami. |

sabbe, te satasabassani cattéri nahutani ca

apare tini satardjano mahesakkha siydyaca, |

ettaka pathavipala bodhisattakule vutta. |

nice’ vata samkhard uppadavayadhammino, 7
pajjitva nirujjhanti, tesam voipasamo sukho °ti. | 50

Mahirajavamso nitthito.


Suddhodano néma raja nagare Kapilasavhaye
1ahanussdyam putto rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
acannam pabbatamajjhe Rajagahe puruttame
dhiso nama so raja rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
dy atiiamania te Suddhodano ca Bhatiyo.
‘amhi pathame kappe pavenipa janddhipa.N
iy& atthavassamhi uppanna pajica asaya: |


. Bilaratho AZ, Biliratho BG, Pi{laratho] N, Pilaratho F. Viléra-
2 Mab. 'F. — Mah. T.: Cittarasi Ambarasi. — ca Nipuno N, va Ni-
¥, ca Nipuro A, va Nimukho BGC, va Timukbo R, va Timukho M,

. Tu: Nipuros Eokadipasira (India Of. MS., fol. kha): Nipuno. — 42. yo
o Y (ye dhiré Az), bodhiro N, rodhiro FL, — 45. tassa te? —
pare AQN, aparo ALBGZ¥. — mahayakayiyiya ca GIN, mahfiyananiyéya
3, mahesakkhi (°sakka 2) siyaya (siyapi A) ca Y. mahesakkha vina-
:@, or something like that? — 49. vutta X, puté G1, jata Y. —
pabbatamajjhe Y, °tamajjhe B, "tina m° N.—~ Bodhiso XG1, Bodhi Z,
itiyo"ABG2. — 53, Bhitiyo AZ, Bhatiso B, Bhati G2, Bodhiso GiN,
‘hiyF, — imamhi — janddbip& appears to be the second hemistich of v. 49.
: or two“lines containing a mention of: Bimbisira, are wanting here.


30 8, 54 — 4, 5.


pita mam anusdseyya attho rajjena khattiyo,
yo mayham vijite buddho uppajjeyya narasabho, |
dassanam pathamam mayham upasamkame tathagato,
55 deseyya amatam dhammam, pativijjheyyam uttamam. |
uppanna Bimbisdrassa paiica asayaka ime.
jatiy& pannarase vasse “bhisitto pitu accaye, {
so tassa vijite ramme uppanno lokanayako,
dassanam pathamam tassa upasamkami tathagato,
desitam amatam dhammam abbhaiiidst mabfpati. |
jativassam mahiviram pajicatimsa antinakam,
Bimbisaéra sama timsa jatavasso mahipati.
viseso paiicahi vassehi Bimbisarassa Gotamo. |
paisa ca dve vassini rajjam karesi khattiyo,
sattatimsam pi vassini saha buddhehi karayi. |
Ajatasattu battimsa rajjam kéresi khattiyo,
60 atthavassabhisittassa sambuddho parinibbuto. |
parinibbute ca sambuddhe lokajetthe narasabhe
catuvisativassini rajjam karesi khattiyo. |


bhanavaram tatiyam.


IV.

Satt? eva satasahassini bhikkhusamgh’ samagata
araha khindsavg, suddha sabbe gunaggatam gati. |
te sabe vicinitvana uccinitva varam varam
paficasatanam theranam akamsu samghasammatam. |
dhutavadanam aggo so Kassapo jinasdsane, :
bahussutinaya Anando, vinaye Bed ae aie |
dibbacakkhumbi Anuruddho, Vaigiso patibhanava,
Punno ca dhammakathikanam, vicitrakathi Kumarakassa
vibhajjanamhi Kaccdno, Kotthito patisambhida.

safe p’ atthi mahdthera agganikkhittaka baht. {


54. atthe rajana(m)? Comp. Mahavagga V, 1, 3. — so may
vijite? — 58. mahavira ALFG, °ram N, °viro A2. .mahaviram® is
rect, comp, »Upalipauditam* 4, 28 (5, 76). — sama hisi AIGF,
hissa N, samatimsi A2. Bim bisfro sam& timsa (or: samatimsa) j.
vasso m°. — 59. buddhena ABcG2.

IV, 5. Kotthite Yn, Kotthiko G, Kotipakoti F.


4, 6—19. 31


tehi c’ aiifiehi therehi katakiccehi sidhubi
paficasatehi therehi dhammavinayasamgaho
therehi katasamngaho theravado "ti vuceati. |
Upalim vinayam pucchitva dhammam Anandasavhay am
akamsu dhammasamgabam vinayaii cApi bhikkhavo. |
Mahdikassapathero ca Anuruddho mahagant
Upilithero satima Anando ca bahussuto |
afiie bahuabhiffiata sAvaka satthuvannita
pattapatisambhidad dhira chalabhiifia mahiddhika
samadhijhanam anucinna saddhamme paramigata, |
sabbe paficasatd thera navaiigam jinasdsanam
uggahetvana dharcsum buddhasetthassa santike. | 10
bhagavato sammukha sut& patiggahita ca sammukh
dhammafi ca vinayaii capi kevalam buddhadesitam, |
dhammadhara vinayadhar& sabbe pi Agatagama
asamhira asamkuppa satthukappa sada gard, |
aggasantike gahetvé aggadhamméa tathigata
agganikkhittaka thera aggam akamsu samgaham.
sabbo pi so theravado aggavado “ti vuccati. |
“Sattapannaguhe ramme thera pajicasata gant
““nna pavibhajjimsu navaiigam satthusdsanam. |
am geyyam veyydkaranam gAthudanitivattakam -
cabbhutavedallam navangam satthusdsanam. | 1b
bhatté imam theré saddhammam avindsanam
zapaifidsakan nima samyuttai ca nipatakam
napitakam nama akamsu suttasammatam. |
» titthanti saddhamma samgaham na vinassati
ta sisan’ addhinam ciram titthati satthure. |
dhamman ca vinayam samgaham sisandraham
ikampi acalam bhimi dalham appuativattiyam. |
oci samano vapi brahmano ca balussuto
ppavadakusalo valavedhi samagato
akka pativattetum, Sineru va suppatitthito. |


6, paiicasatehi samgito (er a similar word) dhammav°? comp. 5, 10. —
aha abhi @Alwis (Caial., p. 133). 13. aggadhammam
igat&m? comp. 5, 14.— 14. pavibhajimsn? — 18 katam dha-
mona A, — samkampi BG2. — ubbi ABG2, bhimi M2n, bhumi F;


32 45 20—34.


devo’ Maro va Brahm& ca ye keci pathavitthita

20 na passanti anumattam kijici dubbhasitam_padam.
evam sabbaigasampannam dhammavinayasamgaham 3
suvibhattam supaticchannam satthu sabbaiiiutaya ca |
Mahakassapapamokkha thera paiicasaté ca te

. katam dhammafi ca vinayasamgaham avinasanam i

-saminisambuddhasadisam dhammakayasabhavanam
fatva janassa sandeham akamsu dhammasamgaham. |
anafifiavado sdrattho saddhammamanurakkhano
thiti sisanaaddhanam theravado sahetuko. |
yavata ariya atthi. sAsane- buddhasavaka&

25 sabbe pi samanuiifianti pathamam dhammasamgaham. |
milanidinam pathamam Adipubbargamam dhurain .
ther& paficasata katé agga ajaniya kulan ti. |

Mahakassapasamgaham nitthitam.


Nibbute lokanathasmim vassini solasam tada,
Ajatasatiu catuvisam, Vijayassa solasam aha, |
samasatthi tad& hoti vassam Upalipanditam,
Dasako upasampanno Upilitherasantike. |
yavaté buddhasetthassa dhammappatti pakdsita
sabbam Upali vacesi navaigam jinabbdsitam. |
paripunnam kevalam sabbain ‘jmavangam suttamagatam

so uggahetvana vacesi Upali buddhasantike. |
samghamajjlte Yiyékasi buddho Upalipanditam:
aggo vinayapAmokkho Upéli mayha sasane. |
evamn upanito santo samghamajjhe mahagani
sabassam Dasakapimokkham vacesi pitake tayo. |
khindsavanam vimalanam santanam atthavadinam
therdnam paiicasatinam Updali vacesi Dasakam. |
parinibbutamhi sambuddhe Updlithero mabagant
vinayam tava vacesi timsa vassain animakam. {


21. suparich? N. — 22. kati Y, katam N, kata F; comp. v. 18.
bayam samgaham Z, — 23. °kayasabhavanann AFGLZ, °kayass,
BNG2, °ké&yam sabhavato, d’Alwis. — 24. °rakkhano? — thitiya s
ddhanam, d’Alwis. thati sasanaaddhanam (nit will last as long ¢
Doctrine*}? — 26. I do not know how to correct kulam. — 29.°dha
pali? — 38. atthav? ABe, athay’ GZ, tathav° N, tatthavadimam
Upali vacesi sAganam? 7


4, 85—47. 33


caturasiti sahassini navaigam satthusisanam
vacesi Upali sabbam Dasakam nama panditam. | 35
Dasako pitakam sabbam Upilitherasantike.
uggahetvana vacesi upajjhayo va sAsane. |
saddhiviharikam theram Dasakam nama panditam
vinayam sabbam thapetvana nibbuto so mahaganf. |
Udayo solasa vass4ni rajjam karesi khattiyo,
chabbasse Udayabhaddamhi Upalithero sa nibbuto, |
Sonako manasampanno vanijo KaAsira agato
Giribbaje Veluvane pabbaji satthusasane. |
Disako ganapamokkho Magadhanam Giribbaje
vihdsi eattatimsamhi pabbajesi ca Sonakam. | 40
paiicatalisavasso so Dasako nama pandito,
NagadAsadasavassam, Pandurajassa visati,
upasampanno Sonako thero DAsakasantike. |
vaéesi Dasako thero navaigam Sonakassa pi,
uggahetvana vacesi upajjhdyassa santike. |
Dasako Sonakam theram saddhivihari anupubbakam
_katva vinayapimokkham catusatthimhi nibbuto. |
‘Saris’ eva vasso so thero Sonakasavhayo,
“sokassa dasavasse addhamasafi ca sesake, |
rasannam vassinam thero Asi pagunako,
antekadasavassam chamdsaii cavasesake, | 45
ifi ca samaye thero Sonako ganapumgavo
avam Candavajjiii ca akasi upasampadam: |
kho pana samayena vassasatamhi nibbute bhagavati
sdlik® Vajjiputtaka Vesdliyam dasa vatthtini dipenti:
pati singilonakappo, kappati dvaigulakappo, kappati
mantarakappo, kappati 4vasakappo, kappati anumati-
ppo, kappati Acinnakappo, kappati amathitakappo, ka-
ati jalogim patum, kappati adasakam nisidanam, ka-
uti jatardparajatan ti. |


. vinayatthdne thapetvana? — 39, RKasiyagato A2, comp. Ma-
‘a, p. 29, 1.9, — 41. Dasakatherasantike ABC2G2. Probably we


to adopt this reading and to expunge ,thero“, — 43. saddhivihéri-
akam N. saddhiviharim anuppadam? comp. 5, 91. 104, —
ham@saii F, — 45. satt® vass° coro asi Pakundako? comp. 11, 2.


. Instead of Candavajji, °vajjim, the MSS. often have Candavajjo,
a


34 4, 48°— 5,9.


‘dasadasakavassamhi. sambuddhe parinibbute
Vesiliyam Vajjiputt’ dipenti dasa vatthuke. |
tathagatena patikkhittam sabbam dipenti akappiyam..
Sabbakami ca Salho ca Revato Khujjasobhito |
Yaso ca Sanasambhiito ete saddhiviharika
so ther. Anandatherassa ditthapubba tathagatam, |
-Sumano Vasabhagami ca seyyd saddhivihariké
dve ime Anuruddhassa ditthapubba tathagatam, |
ete sattasaté. bhikkhd Vesaliyam sama4gata
vinayam patiganhanti thapitam buddhasasane. |
sabbe pi visuddhacakkhft samapattimhi kovida
pannabhéra visamyutté sannipate samagata. |
dutiyasamgaham nitthitam, bhanavaram catuttham.


V.


Parinibbénasamaye Kusinariyam naruttame
satta satasahassani jinaputta. samagata. |
etasmim sannipatambi thero Kassapasavhayo
satthukappo mahanago, pathavya n’ atthi idiso, |
araantanam paficasatam uccinitvana Kassapo
varam varam gahetvina akisi dhammasamgaham,
paninam anukampaya sdsanam dighakdlikam
akasi dhammagamgaham tinnam masinam accaye
sampatte catutthe mdse dutiye vassupandyike. | °
Sattapannaguhadvare Magadhinam Giribbaje .

5 sattamasehi .nitthisi pathamo samgaho ayam. | ~
etasmim samgahe bhikkhd agganikkhittaka baht
sabbe pi paramippatta Iokanathassa sAsane. |
dhutavidinam aggo so Kassapo jinasasane,
bahussutanam Anando, vinaye Upilisavhayo, |
dibbacakkhumhi Anuruddho, Vangiso patibhanava,
Punno ca dhammakathikanam, vicitrakathi’ Kumarakas
vibhajjanamhi Kaceano, Kotthiko patisambhida,


48. °vassamhi Y, °vassini FGt, °vassinam N, ~— 51. The San
sidika, in which this stanza is quoted, has fieyy& instead of seyya.


V, 1. puruttame Z. — 4: comp. 7, 57. — 5. Magadhan:


“6, 92s. ; 35


aiiie p’,atthi mahathera agganikkhittaka baht.-|
-tehi c’ afifiehi therehi katakiccehi sadhuhi
paficasatehi therehi dhammavinayo ca samgito. | :
therehi katasamgaho theravado ’ti vuccati. _ 10
Upalim vinayam pucchitva dhammam Anandapanditam
akamsu dhammasamgaham vinayaf capi kevalam. |
Jinassa santike gahita dhammavinaya ca te ubho
Upalithero ca Anando saddhamme paramigato |
pariyayadesitafi cApi atho nippariyayadesitam
nitatthai c’ eva neyyattham dipimsu suttakovida, |
aggassa santike aggam gahetva vakyam tathagatam
agganikkhittaka thera aggam akamsu samgaham,
tasma hi so theravado aggavado ’ti vuccati. |,
visuddho apagatadoso theravadinam uttamo
pavattittha cirakaélam vassinam dasadha dasa ‘ti. | 15
“ Nikkhante pathame vassasate sampatte dutiye sate
meahabhedo ajayittha theravadanam uttamo. |
Vesilivajjiputtaka dvadasa salfassA samagata
dasa vatthini dipesum Vesaliyam puruttame. |
‘lonadvangulakappam gAmantar4ramavisanam
idcipnamathitajalogifi capi rdpiyam
nam adasakam dipimsu buddhasdsane.*
wamam ubbinayafi ca apagatam satthusdsane
*~ dhammaii ca bhinditva vilomani dipayinsu te. |
niggahanatthaya baht buddhassa savaka
sa satasahassani jinaputta samagata. | : 20
m sannipatasmim pamokkha attha bhikkhavo
kapp& mahandg& durasada mahagani: |
kami ca Salho ca Revato Khujjasobhito
hagami Sumano ca Sanaydsi ca Sambhuto |
Kakandakaputto jinena thomito isi,
‘m niggahatthaya Vesaliyam samagata. |


The words ,,paiicasatehi therehi* are wanting in all the MSS. ex-

Comp. 4, 6. — 12. dhummavinayam Z. — 15. vassani? —
‘avadanam AF. — anumati® Z. — 19 et seq. Compare d’Alwia,
o Kaccfyana, p. 64 et seq., Catalogue, p. 142 et seq. — 19. apa-
satthusasana? apagatasatthusasanam?  Cullavagga: iti p’
tkam uddhammam ubbinayam apagatasatthtsdsanam. — vilomayi
’masi F, °mani N, °mam Z.


36 - «5B, 24-88.


Vasabhagami ca Sumano Anurnddhassanuvattaka,

avasesé therdnandassa ditthapubba. tathagatam. |

Susundgassa putto Asoko tadA Asi mahipati,
25 Pataliputte nagarambi rajjam, karesi khattiyo. |
tafi ca pakkham labhitvana attha thera mahiddhika
dasa vatthfni bhinditva pape niddhamayimsn te. |
niddhametva pApabhikkhti madditva vadapapakam
sakavadasodhanatthaya attha thera mahiddhika |
arahantanam sattasatam uecinitvana bhikkhavo
varam varam gahetvina akamsu dhammasamgaham. |
Kitagarasilay’ eva Vesiliyam puruttame
atthamasehi nitthdsi dutiyo samgaho ayan ti. |

Nikkaddhitva papabhikkht tkerehi Vajjiputtaka .

afiiam pakkham labbitvina adhammavadi bahi jana |
dasa sahassi samigantv’i akamsu dhammasamgaham,
tasmayam dhammasamgiti Mahisamgiti vuceati. | .
Mahasamgitika bhikkhi vilomam akamsu sisanam,
bhinditva mtlasamgaham afifiam akamsu samgalam. |
aiiiattha samgahitam suttam afiattha akarimsu te,
attham dhammaii ca bhindimsu ye nikayesu pajicasu>
pariyayadesitafii cApi atho nippariyéyadesitam ;
nitatthai ¢’ eva neyyattham. ajinitvana bhikkhavo |
aiifiam sandhaya bhanitam anfiattham thapayimsu te.
byafijanacchayaya te bhikkht bahu attham vindsayr
chaddetva ekadesafi ca suttam vinayaii ca gambhira
patir(ipam suttavinayam tai ca aftiam karimsu te. |
pariviram atthuddharam abhidhammappakaraném
patisambhidaii ca niddesam ekadesaii ca jétakain
ettakam vissajjetvana anfdni akarimsu te. |
nimam lingam parikkharam Akappakaranini ca
pakatibhavam vijahetvé tai ca afiiam akamsnu te. |


Be


5


Py
&


30—33. These stanzas are quoted in the Kath®vatthu-Atthak
of the Paris National Library, fonds Pali, 229); I designate the re
this MS. by K. — 30. nikkadd@hita K, d’Alwis. -- 31. sah
d@Alwis. — mahisamgiti vuecati NK, @Alwis, vuccati (omitting :
git) FG1, sattasatika ti v° %, samgititi pavuccati ARG2. mahas
vuceati? — 38. bh® nik@yesu ea paieasu, d’Alwis; bh? vinay
yesu ca pafiicasu K. — 35. bahum K, d’Alwis. — 36. Vinay
ram ZK, d'Alwis. —- abhidhammam chappakaragam, Kw
38. vijahitva AK.


5, 8953. ; 37


pubbamgama bhinnavada Mahasamgitikaraka,
tesafi ca anukérena bhinnavada bahti abi. |
tato aparakdlamhi tasmim bhedo ajayatha:
Gokulikaé Ekabyohara duvidha bhijjittha bhikkhavo. | 40
Gokulikanam dve bhed& aparakalamhi jayatha:
‘Bahussutaka ca Pafifiatti duvidha bhijjittha bhikkhavo. |
Cetiya ca punavidi Mahasamgitibhedaka.
pajica vida ime sabbe Mahdsamgitimtilaka |
attham dhammai ca bbindimsu ekadesai ca samgaham
ganthii ca ekadesamhi -chaddetya afifiam akamsu te. |
namam lingam parikkharam akappakaranini ca
pakatibhavam vijahetva tah ca afifiam akamsu te. |
visuddbatheravadamhi puna bhedo ajayatha:
Mahimsasaka VajjiputtakA duvidha bhijjittha bhikkhavo. | 45
Vajjiputtakavadamhi catudha bhedo ajayatha:
Dhammmuttariké Bhaddayanika Chandagarika ca Sammiti. |
Mahimsisakinam dve bheda aparakalamhi jayatha:
Sabbatthdvada Dhammagutta duvidha bhijjittha bhikkhavo.
Sabbatthavada Kassapika Kassapika Samkantiké,
Suttavada tato aiid anupubbena bbijjatha. |
-ime.ekddasa vad pabhinna theravadato
wm dhammai ca bhindimsu ekadesah ca samgaham
ii ca ekadesamhi chaddetvana akamsu te. |
1 Higam parikkharam akappakarandni ca
shavam vijahetva taf ca ahham akamsu te. | 50
sa bhinnavaddé eko vado abhinnako,
’ attharasa honti *bhinnavadena te saha. |
ho va maharukkho theravidinam uttamo
n anadhikafi c’ eva kevalam jinasisanam,
& viya rukkhamhi nibbatta vadasesaka, |
te vassasate n’ atthi, dutiye vassasatantare
sattarasa vida uppanna jinasisane. |


ahum N. — 41. Bahussutika K, d'Alwis: Bahulika ABG2. —-
of — 42. punayadi. — 44. vijahit AK. — 46. Channa-
ca Sammiti? — 47. 48. Sabbatthivada, d’Alwis. — 48. aiiie?
votikanam Suttuvidi anupubbena bhijjatha. — 49. chaddetva
akamau te K, — 50. vijahitva AK.


38 ; 5, 54—68.


Hemavatika Rajagirika Siddhattha Pubbaparaselika
aparo Rajagiriko chattha uppannd aparapara. |
Acariyavadam nitthitam.


Anigate vassasate vassin’ atthdrasani ca
55 uppajjissati so bhikkhu samano patirapako, |
- brahmaloka cavitvana uppajjissati_ manuse
jacco brahmanagottena sabbamantana pfragu, |
Tisso ‘ti nama namena Putto Moggalisavhayo.
Siggavo Candavajjo ca pabbajessanti darakam. |
pabbajito tad& Tisso pariyattin ca pApimi
bhinditva titthiyavadam patitthapessati sAsanam. |
Pataliputte tada raj4 Asoko néma-nayako
anusasati so rajjam dhammiko ratthavaddhano. |
sabbe sattasaté bhikkbt anusdsetvana sdsanam
60 dasa vatthiini bhindityé thera te parinibbuta. {
brahmaloka cavitvana uppanno manuse bhave,
jatiya solasavasso sabbamantana paragu. |
pucchimi samanam pafham ime pafhe viyakara,
iruvedam yajuvedam simavedam pi nighandum itihasai ca
paficamam. |
therena ca katokdso panham pucchi anantaro.
paripakkafidnam manavam Siggavo etad abravi: |
aham pi minava paiiham pucchdmi buddhadesitam,
yadi pi kusalo paftham byakarohi yathatatham. |
bhasitena saha pafhe: na me dittham na me sutam.
65 pariyapundmi tam mantam, pabbajjA mama ructati.
sambadhaya gharavasa nikkhamitvana mdnavo
anagariyam santibhavam pabbaji jinasdsane. |
sikkhakamam garucittam Candavajjo bahussuto
anusdsittha simaneram navaigam satthusdsanam, |
Siggavo niharitvana pabbajapesi darakam,
susikkhitam mantadharam Candavajjo balfussuto
navaligam anusasetva thera te parinibbuta ’ti. |
54. Apararajagirika? — chadha N. — 57. The MSS. alm
stantly read Candavajjo instead of Candavajji. — 60. anusdsity.
62. samaua? comp. v. 65: mapava. — 63. anantaram Al, °rg


°ri BG2F, °re Z. anuttaram? comp. 6,28. — 65. bhasitena s
fihena? — 66, sambadhasm&?


5, 69—82. 39


Candaguttassa dvevasse catusatthi ca Siggavo tada, .
atthapafifidsa vassini Pakundakassa rajino,
upasampanno Moggaliputto Siggavatherasantike. |
Tisso Moggaliputto ca Candavajjassa santike
vinayam uggahetvana vimutto upadhisamkhaye. | 70
Siggavo Candavajjo ca Moggaliputtam mahajutim
vacesum pitakam sabbam ubhatosamgahapunnakam. |
Siggavo fianasampanno Moggaliputtam mahajutim
katva vinayapamokkham nibbuto so chasattati. |
Candagutto rajjam karesi vassini catuvisati,
tasmifi cuddasavassamhi Siggavo parinibbuto |
araiiiako dhutavado appiccho kanane rato
sabhaso so rato danto -saddhamme paramigato |
pantasendsane ramme ogahetvé mahavanam
eko adutiyo stro siho va girigabbhare. | 18
nibbute lokanathassa vassani solasam abt,
samasatthi tad& hoti vassam Upilipanditam, |
Ajatasattu catuvisam, Vijayassa solasam aha, ”
Dasako upasampanno Upilitherasantike, |
cnttalis’ eva vassini Dasako nama pandito,
yaddse dasavasse, Pakundakasga visati, |
iampanno.Sonako thero Dasakasantike.
ilisavasso dhiro thero Sonakasavhayo, |
sokassa dasavasse, Tambapanniantardvdse vassam ekA-


dasam bhave,
vo upasampanno Sonakatherasantike. | 80
gutiassa dvevasse, catusatthi Siggavo tada,
anidsa vassini Pakundakassa rajino,
ampanno Moggaliputto Siggavatherasantike. |
adhammassa chavasse chasatthi Moggaliputto abt,
rattarisa [vassini] Mutasivassa rajino,
ido upasampanno Moggaliputtassa santike. |
esi vinayan ca Upali buddhasantike,


. ubhosamgahasuttakam? Comp. 7,28. — 76. lokanathasmim?
1, 27. — 78, Pandur&jassa visati? comp. 4,41. — 82. Instead
atfhi it ought to be satthi. — atthacattalisam Mutasivassa réjino N,
Aifisaam (°sa A) ABG, omitting the following words; athavattadi-
: atthacattaérisavassambi Mahindo nama yatissaro upasampanno suvi-


Mogg” 5°.


40 5, 88-98.


Dasako vinayam sabbam Upialitherasantike
uggahetvana vacesi-upajjbayo va sdsane. |
vacesi Dasako thero vinayam Sonakassa pi,
pariyapunitva vacesi upajjhdyassa santike. |
Sonako buddhisampanno dhammavinayakovido

85 vacesi vinayam sabbam Siggavassa anuppadam. |
‘Siggavo Candavajjo ca Sonakasaddhiviharika,
vacesi vinayam thero ubho saddhiviharike. |
Tisso Moggaliputto ca Candavajjassa santike
vinayam uggahetvana vimutto upadhisamkhaye. |
Moggaliputto upajjhayo Mahindam saddhiviharikam
vacesi vinayam sabbam theravadam antinakam. |
parinibbute sambuddhe Upalithero mahajuti
vinayam tava yacesi timsa vassam antinakam. |
saddhiviharikam theram Dasakam nama panditam

90 vinayatthane thapetvina nibbuto so mahamati. |
Dasako Sonakam theram saddhiviharim anuppadam
katva vinayapamokkham catusatthimhi nibbuto. rs
Sonako chalabbijitiano Siggavam ariyatrajam
vinayatthine thapetvana chasatthimbhi ca nibbuto. |
Siggavo fidnasampanno Moggaliputtai ca dirakam
katva vinayapamokkham nibbuto so chasattati. |
Tisso Moggaliputto ca Mahindam saddhiviharikam
katva vinayapamokkham chasitivassamhi nibbuto. |
catusattati Upali ca, catusatthi ca Dasako,
chasatthi Sonako thero, Siggavo tu chasattati,

5 asiti Mogyaliputto, sabbesam upasampada. |
sabbakalamhi pamokkho vinaye Upilipandito,
paihdsam Dasako thero, catucattdrisafi ca Sonako,
pahcapafihasavassam Siggavassa, atthasatthi Moggali;

savhayo. |
Udayo solasa vassini rajjam karesi khattiyo,

‘chavasse Udayabhaddamhi Upilithero nibbuto. |
Susundgo dasavassam rajjam karesi issaro,
atthavasse Susundgamhi Dasako parinibbuto. |


Ea


85. dhammavinayiko muni N, °yako muni F, °soka muni
94. chasitivassambi N, atthatimsamhi Y, atthatisambi F. The cores
ber would be eighty.


5,99 — 6,3. 41


Susunagass’ accayena honti te dasa bhataro,

sabbe bavisati vassam rajjam karesu vameato.

imesam chatthe vassinam Sonako parinibbuto. |

Candagutto rajjam karesi vassani catuvisati,

tasmifi cuddasavassamhi Siggavo parinibbuto. | 100
Bindusarassa yo putto Asokadhammo mahayaso

vassani sattatimsam pi rajjam karesi khattiyo. |

Asokassa chavisativasse Moggaliputtasavhayo

sisanam jotayitvana nibbuto Ayusamkhaye. |
catusattativassamhi thero Upalipandito

saddhivibarikam theram Dasakam nama panditam
vinayatthane thapetvana nibbuto so mahagani. |

Dasako Sonakam theram saddhiviharikam anuppadam

katva vinayapamokkham catusatthimhi nibbuto. |

Sonako chalabhinfiano Siggavam ariyatrajam

vinayatthane thapetvana chasatthimhi parinibbuto. | 105
Siggavo fdnasampanno Moggaliputtah ca darakam

katva vinayapamokkham nibbuto so chasattati. |

Tisso Moggaliputto so Mahindam saddhiviharikam

katv&é vinayapamokkham asitivassambi nibbuto. |


bhanavaram paficamam nitthitam.


Vi.
ve satani ca vassini atthare
ddhe parinibbute abhisitto Piyadassano. |
rajaiddhiyo abhisitte Piyadassane,


sa yassani ca


puihatejan ca uddham adho ca yojanam,
dipe mahirajje balacakke pavattati. |
Anotatto daho Himavapabbatamuddhani,
sadhena samyutta solasam pi kumbhiyo
levasikam niceam deva abhiharanti te. |


KAlisokass’ accayena? — vissuto AZ, vissuti BG2, vamsato X.

chasiti N; asiti, the other MSS.

2. mahfrajje AB G2, °jja CGLR, °jjam Mn¥. — balacakkam? —
» Anotatto yo A, vasso Anodatto dayo G, vaso Anotatte dahe N,
odattadahe F, Anodattodakam yeva Z. In B these words are wanting.
Ma° daho? tassa Anotatte dahe? Samantapas.: ,devasikam eva
jevaté... aharanti.“ — solasambi k® Al, sam pi A2, °sam pi BG,


42 By 4-17.


nagalatadantakattham sugandham pabbateyyakam
mudusiniiddham madhuram rasavantam manoramam
tada devasikam niccam devatabhiharanti te. |
amalakam osadhafi ca sugandham pabbateyyakam
mudusiniddham rasavantam mahibhiteh’. upatthitam
5tada devasikam niccam devatabhiharanti te. |
-dibbapanam ambapakkait ca rasavantam sugandhakam
tada devasikam niccam devat&bhiharanti te. |
Chandadahato va paficavannam papurananivasanam
tada devasikam niccam- devatabhiharanti te. |
sisanhanagandhacunnam tathd cdnuvilepanam
mudukam pdrupattaya sumanadussam asuttakam |
maharaham afijanai ca sabban tam: naigalokato
tada devasikam niccam nagarAjabaranti te. |
ucchuyatthiphgamattam pitakam- hatthapufichanam
io tad& devasikam niceam devatabhiharanti te. | 7
nava vihasahassani suvaharanti saliyo undurehi visodhita,
makkhika madhukam karum, accha kfitamhi kotayum, |
sakund suvaggajata karavika madhurassara,
Asokapuniiatejena sada siventi: manuse. |
kappayuko mahanago catubuddhaparicarako
suvannasamkhalikabaddho pufjfiatejena agato, |
pijesi rattamalehi Piyadassi mahayaso.
vipaéko pindapatassa patiladdho sudassano. |
Candaguttassiyam natté Bindusdrassa atrajo
rajaputto tad4 asi Ujjenikaramolino, :
15 anupubbena gacchanto Vedissanagaram gato. |
tatrapi ca setthidhita Devi nama ’ti vissuta
tassa samvasam anvaya aj4yi puttam uttamam. |
Mahindo Samghamitta ca pabbajjam samarovayum,


°sam ca Z, °sam pi ca N, °sa pi caca F. solasa ambukum!
.80]° paniyakumbhiyo? Samantapis.: ,Anotattadakato ... sola.
yaghate ... devatdé dharanti.*

5. Chupatthite A, “hapatthitam B, “hupatthitam G, °au patthitar
pattbitam N, hi patitthitam F, mah&bhapehi patthitam? — vv. 6-
wanting in all the Sinhalese MSS., vv. 6B—9 in F also. — 7. Chadd
paic*? — pfrupanatthdya? Samantapas.: pirupanatthaya asu
kam sumanapupphapatam.“ — 11. kfitehi kotgayum? — 1%.
uagara[molijao N, Ujjenikaramolino (“yo Z) Y, Uccenikaramolico
16. tassi Y. — uttamo YF.


6, 17—80.. 43


ubho pi pabbajitvana bhindimsy bhavabandhanam. |
Asoko rajjam karesi Pataliputte puruttame,
abhisitto tini vassani pasanno buddhasdsane. |
yada ca parinibbayi sambuddho Upavattane
yada ca Mahindo jato Moriyakulasambhavo
etthantare yam ganitam vassam bhavati kittakam? |
dve vassasatani honti catuvassam pan’ uttari
samantaramhi so jato Mahindo Asokatrajo. | 20
Mahindadasavassamhi pita bhate aghatayi,
Jambudipam ‘nusdsento catuvassam atikkami, |
hantva ekasate bhate vamsam katvina ekato
Mahindacuddasame vasse Asokam abbisiiicayum. |
Asokadhammo ’bhisitto patiladdha ca iddhiyo,
mahitejo pufifiavanto dipe cakkapavattako. |
paripunnavisavassamhi Piyadass’ abhisificayum.
pasandam pariganhanto tini vassam atikkami. |
dvasatthiditthigatika pasandé channavutika,
sassataucchédamila sabbe dvihi patitthita,*| 25
niganthacelaka ¢’ eva itard paribbajaka
itara brahmana *ti ca afhe ca puthuladdhika. |
_niyantisassatucchede sammilhe hinaditthike
“iddhapasande titthiye nanaditthike
ram gavesanto puthuladdhi nimantayi. |
ane nimantitva pavesetva nivesanam |
Anam padatvana pafibam pucchi anuttaram. |
m puttha na sakkonti vissajjetum saka bala,
1 puttham labujam va bydkarimsu apaijnaka. |
ttam pi sabbesam alan te puna desanatp.
tva sabbapdsandam haritva puthuladdhike | 30


Mahindacuddasavasse Z, °dacuddasame vasso (°sse A) ABG,
dasamavasse F, de cuddasame vasse N. — 24. pasayde A. Comp.
— 26, itarabrahmana N; itard is wanting in the other MSS. —.
anipi ca? — 27. niyatisass°? nigavthasass°? — 28. niman-
A. — nivesane YF. — 29>. puttho AZ, °ttham BGN, suttham F.
1 puttho (puttha?) labujam va? — 80. The king, as is related
Jamantapasddika, invited the ascetics to sit down on what seats they’
due to themselves. They placed themselves on different kinds. of
its} whereas Nigrodha took his seat on the royal throne. I there-
Jpose to correct this line thus: anumattam pi sabbesam alan tesam
nam. :


a


44 6, 31—43.


iti raja vincintesi: aie pi ke labhdmase

ye loke arabanto ca arahattamaggaii ca. passanti? |
samvijjanti ime loke, na yimam lokam asufiiatam,
kadabam sappurisinam dassanam upasamkame?

tassa subbisitam sutva rajjam demi savijitam. |

iti raj4 vicintento dakkhineyye na passati,

niccam gavesati raja silavante supesale. |

caikaman tamhi paside pekkhamano baht jane .
rathiya pindaya carantam Nigrodham samanam addasa. |
pasddikum abhikkantam patikkantam vilokitam
ukkhittacakkbusampannam arahantam santamanasam |
uttamadamathappattam dantam guttam surakkhitam
kulagane asamsattham nabhe candain va nimmalam, |
kesari va asantisam, aggikkhandham va tejitam,
garam durasadam dhiram santacittam samahitam, |
khindsavam sabbaklesasodhitam purisuttamam «
ciraviharasampannam sampassam samanuttamam |
sabbagunagatam Nigrodham pubbasahayam vicintayi
pubbe sucinnakusalam ariyamaggaphale thitam, |


40 rathiya pinda&ya carantam munim moneyyavussati. |


jigimsamano sa dhiro cintayi:
baddho ca loke arahd savako lokuttaramaggaphale tk’
mokkhai ca nibbanagato asamsayam aifataro esa


< gurinam. |
so paficapttipasddam’ patilabhi ularam pamojjamar
sadito,
nidhim va laddha adhano pamodito iddho manoicc
va Sakkopamo.


32. apafiakam N. suitatam? Comp. the following stanza
Buddbavamsa: evam nirdkulam asi suiiiatanm titthivehi tam, vicitte
hantehi vasibbitehi tadihi. — sajivitam A, savifitam BG, yam ji
savijitam N, samvajitam F. — 85. okkhittac® A. Comp. Mahdav.
23, 2. — 36, kulafigape A. — 88. sampassam X, °ssa G1, °ssi
39. pubbasamayam? — 40. pindaya is wanting in all the MS’
cept in N. — 40. 41. sunimonavayitam jigimsamano virdeintayi AG:
monavassitam jigisamano sa viro cintayi F, munim moneyyavussati jigi
sa dhiro cintayi N, passitva so vi tayi Z. These words arc wanting is
munim moneyyavusitam ... jigimsam&no sa dhiro viecinta
42, buddho va? — sasivako A. — After ,thito“ we ought &
»muni“ or a similar expression. — 43. pimojjam manappasadit


6, 44—52. 45


Amantayf afiiatarekamaccam: handa bhikkhan tam tara-
manariipo

nayehi pasddikam santavuttim nAgo va yantam rathiyd

7 te kumarakam |

asantasam santagunddhivasitam. |

raj& pasidavipulam patilabhi udaggahattho manasabhicin-


tay: a
nissamsayam uttamadhammapatto aditthapubbo ayam puris-
uttamo. |
vimamsaméno punad evam abravi: supafiiattam dsanam ...
. patthatam,
nisidayi pabbajitattham Asane, may& anniifitam tassAbhi-
. . patthitam. |
Adaya raiifio vacanam padakkhinam ... gahetva abbirdhi
Asane,
nisidi, pallankavare asantiso Sakko va devaraja Pandu-
kambale. |


vicintayf raja: ayam aggadarako niccalo asantay? .. atthi nu,


tam ....... |
disvA raja tam taranam kumdrakam ariyavattapariharakam
a varam
susikkhitam dhammavinayakovidam disvA raja tarunam ku-
‘rakam pasannacitto punad evam abravi: |
: dhammam tava sikkhitam mama, tvam eva sattha,
anusisitam tayd
ui tuyham vacanamn mahamuni, anusdsa mam ... su-
a noma desanam, |
a rafiio vacanam sutejitam navaigasatthe patisam-
bhidatthito


« bhikkhantam Y, ‘nto GIN, °nte F. bhikkhun tam? — 45. na-
~~ santagdnavasitam (°kam F) YF, santaguofidhivasitam N. santa-
hivasitam? — 46, pas&idam v°? — uttamadamathapatto N. —
sid&hi pabbajitagghamasane.(Mahavamsa, p. 25, 1. 6: ,anurfipe
maya anuffiatam tayabhipatthitam? — 48. ca dakkhinam
a dakkhigam karam (see Mahavamsa, p. 25, 1. 8) gahetva? —
ntapiti (°piti BG2) tam ABG2, asantapi akatthinu tam G1, asan-
yi N) atthi nu tam X, santapiti atthi Z. asantaso ...? — 50. va-
\ ari F, dhari ¥Y. — The repetition of ydisva — kumarakam“ ought
expunged. — 51. sutepadesanam (sun® G1) ABG, which maybe
In*Z, v. 52 and the last Pada of y. 51 are wanting.


45


50


46 6, 52—62.


vilolayt tepitakam mahdraham, tam addasa appamAdasu-
desanam: |
appamado amatapadam, pam&ado maccuno pa@am,
appamatta na miyanti, ye pamatta yatha mata. |
Nigrodhadhiram anumodayantam raja vijaniya tam agga-
hetum,
-ye keci sabbaiifiubuddhadesita sabbesam dhammanam imasga
“ milaka. |
ajj’ eva tumbe saranam upemi buddhafi ca dhammam sara-
nafi ca samgham,
55 saputtadiro sahafidtakajjano upasakattam pativedayami tam. |
_Saputtaddro sarane patitthito Nigrodhakalyanamittassa *
. - agama: 5
pijemi caturo satasahassaripiyam atthatthakam niccabha-
ttafi ca theram. |
tevijja iddbippatta ca cetopariyayakovidé
khindsava arahanto baht buddhassa savaka. |
theram avoca punad eva raja: icchdmi samgharatanassa


dassanam,
samagamam sannipatanti yavata abhivadaydmi sundmi dham-
mam. |
samagatd satthisahassabhikkhi, dfita ca rafifio pativeds-
yimsu:
samgho mahasannipAto sututtho, gacchasi tvam icchas
. ghadassanam. |


ditassa vacunam sutva. Asokadhammo mah{pati
60 Amantayi fiatisamghamittamacce ca bandhave: | ~
dakkhinadinam dassama mahdsamghasamagame,
karoma veyyavatikam yathasattim yathabalam. |
mandapam Asanam udakam:upatthdnam danabhojana
patiyAdentu me khippam dandrabam- anucchavam. [


54. vijaniya tam aggahetum ABG2, vijiniman tanmaggahetum 2
“@nt_N) bahuni (hoi N) gahetum (ggehetm G1) XG1. — “bur
desit® ABG2, — imassa malaka XGI, imam milakam ti Ckan t
ti B) ABG2, imassa mulaka Z. im(am) assu milakam? — 58
patanti ABG, santi patanti Z, sannipatantu X. — 59. satinipatims:
(sant? A; kutthd Z) Y,«annipata sututth4 Gi, sannipato sututtho N
padata sunduttha F.— gacchahi Z. — vicchami F. gacchahi tva
tam s°? — 61. dakkhinadhammam (°dammam N) XG1. dakk&
nam? — 62. panabbojanam? — anucchavim ABG2.


6, 68—74, © 47


supeyyabhattakara ca suciyAgususamkhaté ‘
patiyidentu me khippam manudiiiam bhojanam sucim. |
mahdd4nafii @& dassimi bhikkhusamghe ganuttame,
nagaramhi bheriyo vajjantu, vithi sammajjantu: te,
vikirantu valukam setam pupphaii ca paficavannakam, |
mialagghiyam toranafi ca kadalt punnaghatam subham
utukkamaparam thdpam thapayantu tahim-tahim, | 45
vattlichi ca dhajam katva bandhayantu tahim-tabim,
maladimasamayutta sobhayantu imam puram. |
khattiya brahmana vess& sndda afifakulasu ca
vattham Abharanam puppham nandlamkarabhasita
Adaya dipafi jalaminam gacchantu samghadassanam. |
4 . *
sabbafi ca tilavacaram gandhabba nanakuld sikkhita
vajjantu vaggusavaniya sussara, gacchantu aggavaram sam-
; _ ghadassanam. |
lanikarakémada c’ eva sotthiyanatanataka ;
sabbe samgham ‘upayantu hasayantn samagatam. |
pupphaii-ca anekavidham punnakai ca anekadha vividham
vannakafi c’ eva karontu pfijam anekardsiyo. | 10
nagarassa patihdram antare
danam/sabbam patiyantu patthitam. |
~ofijam, samadaya sabbam divasam ratthavasika
ca sabbam niydme asesato karontu samghadhikarassa
arabhi. |
itiyé aceayena bhattam sakanivesane
asasampannam patiyadetvana khattiyo |
2 siparivare Andpesi mahdyaso:
suciyaga susamkhata? — 64. vithivam Z. vithiyo? —
amaparam (°param ce F) XG1, upakkamma param ABG2, ussa-
a Z.— topum Gl. — thapayantu N, pathayanta F, upayantu G1,
ABG2, ussipetum Z. I prefer no to iry any conjecture, —
ni BG2, *kulésu AZ, Ckulesu XGt. afifiakulapi pa? — 68, va-
— 69. laikdrapamadi ABG2. Comp. 21, 27. — 70. poygakam
ignaghatam Z, cugnakam ABG2. — puijam? — 71. patiyantu
2 FZ, °ntu BGI, °tta AG2. — patthitam N, patthitam YF. —
daya N, °yi FG1M, °yi ARC, °yum BG2. — rattim ... arabhi
anting in BG2Z. — niyame ascsato F, niyamenasesato N, niyame
‘1. —~ samghadh® N, samgha adh® AFG1.
Afinam sabbam asesato patiyadentu patthitam. |


‘am samadaya sabbam divasam ratthavasika
‘tii Sa sabbam tiyamam karontu samghabhirata. j??
ay


48 6, 7488.


gandhamalapupphakttam pupphachattadhajam babum |
diva dipafi jalamanam abhiharantu mahdajana.
7 yavaté may& Anata tavata abhiharantu te. |
imamhi nagare sabbe negamA ca catuddisA
sabbeva rAjaparisa sayoggabalavahana
sabbe mam anugacchantu bhikkhusamghassa dassanam. |
-mabata rAjanubhavena niyasi rAjakuijaro
Sakko va Nandavanuyyanam evam sobhi mahfpati. |-
gatvana raja taraminardpo bhikkhusamghassa santike
abhivadetvana sammodi vedajito kataijali. |
drocayi bhikkhusamgham: mam’ atthaia anukampatn.
yava bhikkhu anuppatte sabbe antonivesane, |
samghassa pitaram theram’ pattam. Adaya khattiyo
80 phjaméno bahupupphehi pavisi nagaram puram. |
nivesanam pavesetva nisiddpetvana dsane
yAgum nindvidham khajjam bhojanaii ca mabaraham
adasi payatapani yavadattham yadicchakam. | c
bhuttivi bhikkhusamghassa onitapattapénino
ekamekassa bhikkhuno adasi yugasitakam. |
pidasambbafijanam telam chattaii capi updhanam
sabbam samanaparikkharam adasi phinitam madhum..{
parivaretvina nistdi Asokadhammo mabipati, ;
nisajja raja pavaresi bhikkhusamghassa paccayam: |
35 yAvata bhikkhd iechanti tava demi yadicchakam. {
santappetvad’ parikkharena sampavaretvina paccaye
tato pucchimsu gambhiram dhammakkhandham sude
atthi bhante paricehedo desit’ adiccabandhuna -
namam lingam vibhattii ca kotthdsaii cipi samkh:
ettakam ’va dhammakkhandham gananam atthi pa
atthi raja ganitvana desit’ adiccabandhuna
suvibhattam supafifiattam suniddittham sudesitam |


76. The words ,sabbeva rajaparis&“ are wanting in the Sinha
sabbe ca rajapurisA? — 77. Nandanuyyanam Z. — 78. The
correct if we expunge ,raja“. — 79. The second hemistich see
out of its place here; we should insert it perhaps before v. 84,
bhikkh® anuppattd? — 83, pidukam aijanam? Coma
dana (Phayre MS., fol. ie): ,pidake .. datva... osadham nfjenam 4
84. pavaretvina? — 86. pucchi sugambhiram BCGAR.


6,89 — 7,3. 49


sahetum atthasampannam khalitam n’ atthi subhisitam,
satipatthinam sammappadhanam iddhipadai ca indriyam |
balam bojjhahgam maggaigam suvibhattam sudesitam,

evam sattappabhedaii ca bodhipakkhiyam uttamam, | 90
lokuttaram dhammavaram navafigam satthusdsanam
vittharitam suvibhattam desesi dipaduttamo ;
caturasitisabassini dhammakkhandham andinakam *
paininam anukampaya desit’ Adiccabandhuna. | =
amatuttamam varadhammam samsdraparimocanam
sabbadukkhakkhayam maggam desesi amatosadham. |
sutvina vacanam raja bhikkhusamghassa bhasitam
pitnojjahisabahulo devajito narisabho

sarajikiparisiya imam vikyam udahari: |

caturdsitisahassani paripunnam antinakam

desitam buddhasetthassa dhammakkhandham maharaham, | 95
eaturasitisahassini arimam karayam’ aham
- ekekadhammakkhandhassa ekekirimam pijayam. |
channavetikotidhanam vissajjetvana khattiyo

tam eva divasam r4ja anapesi ca tavade. |

tasmim samaye Jambudipe nagaraii caturasttiyo -
ekekanagaratthane paccckéramam karayi. |

‘tini ca vassini vihiram katvana khattiyo
thitamhi arame pijam sattaha karayi. |


bhanavarai chattham.


Vil.


asamigamo hoti Jambudipasamantato,

asiti kotiyo bhikkhuni channavuti sahassiyo,
ca bhikkhuniyo ea chalabhifia bahdtara. |
iddbanubhavena samam katvA mahitalam
‘mam katvaé dassesum pijiye mahe. |

me thito rajA Jambudipam avekkhati,
ddhinubhavena Asoko sabbattha passati. |


Y the words ,evam satt. ca are wanting, — 92. pdninam? —
“to? — sardjikfya par° Z — 97. ca tavade N, ca kovide
uijane Z. — 98. caturdsiti sahassiyo? With regard to the
TPL, .


50 1, 4—17.


addasa viharam sabbam sabbattha mahiyam katam
dhajam ubhopiyam puppham toranai ca malagghiyam |
kadali punnaghatafi c’ eva nandpupphasamohitam,
saddasa dipamandalam vibhfisan tani catuddisam. |
pamodito hatthamano pekkhanto vattate mahe
samagate bhikkhusamghe bhikkhuni ca samagate |
-mahadanail ca paiifattam diyamine vanibbake
caturasitisahassini vihare disvana ptijite |
Asoko ’pi attamano bhikkhusamgham pavedayi:
ahaii ca bhante dayAdo satthu buddhassa sdsane. |
bahu mayham pariccdgo sdsane sdravadino; |
channavutikotiyo ca vissajjetva maha4dhanam
10 caturasitisahassani drima karité maya |
ptjaya dhammakkhandhassa buddhasetthassa desite;
cattiri satasahassini devasikam pavattayi, |
ekaii ca cetiyam pijam ekam Nigrodhasavhayam |
ekafi ca dhammakathikanam ekam gilanapaccayam;,
diyati devasikam niccam Mahagaiga va odanan..|
afifio koci pariccAgo bhiyyo mayham na vijjati,
saddha mayham dalhatara, tasma diyAdo sasane. |
sutvana vacanam raiiio Asokadhammassa bhasitam
pandito sutasampanno nipunatthavinicchayo |
samghassa tesu vihdram anuggahatthdya sdsanam
15 anagate ca addhane pavattim sutva vicakkhano |
bydkasi Moggaliputto Asokadhammapucchitam:
paccayaddyako néma sasane patibahiro, |
yassa puttam va dhitaram va urasmifi jatam anva:
pabbajesi cajetvina so ve dayddo sasane. |


. sabbattha mahiy& katam A, s° mahiyam k° B, 8° 5
is crossed), 8° mahitamkatam N, sabbatthapi mahit


pitam? — 5. *samihitam A. — 6. ca sami
9, sfravadino ABG2, ravadino G1, garav? Z, varav? N. gar
(= dinne)? — 11. pavattayim. — 12. cetiyapijam ABG2.


ghassa‘thero suvihiro ABG2, samghassa theram tasuvihdram G1, [
tesu (vibiram] N, samghassa tinj vihtram Z. samghassa phasu:
As to the construction, comp. vv. 55. 57. — Instead of ,sutv
prefer ,fiatv a“, which looks very similar in Burmese characters. —
jeti Z. — dayAdasdsane NGI. — yo saputtam vA... pabbaj-
vana? As to the preterite tense ,pabbajesi*, comp. Mahvamsa,+
and the Thiipavamsa: ,paccayadiyako nima tvam mahdaraja, yo p


7, 18—83. 51


sutvana vacanam raja Asokadhammo mahipati
Mahindakumaram puttam Samghamittafi ca dhitaram |
ubho amantayi raja: d&yddo homi sAsane.
sutvana pituno vakyam ubho puttédhivasayum: | -
sutthu deva sampaticchama karoma vacanam tava,
pabbajehi ca no khippam, dayAdo hohi sAsane. | 20
paripunnavisativasso Mahindo Asokatrajo
Samghamitt& ca jatiya vassam atthdrasam bhave. |
chavassamhi Asokassa ubho pabbajita paja,
tath’ eva upasampanno Mahindo dipajotako, |
Samghamitta tada yeva sikkhayo ’va samadiyi.
aha Moggaliputto va theravado mahagani. |
catupaiifidsavassamhi Asokadhammo abhisitto,
AsokassAbhisittato chasatthi Moggalisavhayo,
tato Mahindo pabbajito Moggaliputtassa santike. |
pabbajesi- Mahadevo, Majjhanto upasampade.
ime te ndyaka tini Mahindassdnukampaka. | 25
Moggaliputto upajjhdyo Mahindam dipajotakam
vacesi pitakam sabbam attham dhammaii ca kevalam. |
Asokassa dasavassamhi Mabindo catuvassiko
sabbam sutapariyattim ganipacariyo aht. |
sudesitam suvibhattam ubhosamgahasuttakam
‘sMahindo theravadakam uggahetvana dharayi. |
“oggaliputto Mahindam Asokaatrajam .
id chalabhiiita caturo patisambhida. |
‘oggaliputto ca Mahindam saddhiviharikam
akam sabbam sikkhapesi nirantaram. |- 30
mhi Nigrodho, catuvassamhi bhitaro,
thi pabbajito Mahindo Asokatrajo. |
4 ubho thera Tisso cipi Sumittako
amhi ‘sokassa parinibbimsu mahiddhika. |
ara pabbajité ubho thera ca nibbuta. | *


ticchima Y. — 23. theravade B. — 24. Asok&bhisitte
satthi M°?? — 25. upasampado Z. — 27. sutapariyattim AGI,
im Z, sutapariyatti BG2N. — gani® BG, gayi? A, gani* CR,
aybi N. gayi dcariyo? ,paeariya* does not mean 4a pupil,
Says, but ,the teacher's teacher. — 28. chalabbifiia M2n; the
omit these words. chal ahhiaia. — catasso? — 32. Cémp.
p68


4*


52 7, 34—49.


upisakattam desimsu khattiy’ brahmana baht,
mahalabho ca sakkaro uppajji buddhasasane, |
pahinalabhasakkara titthiyé puthuladdhika,
pandarafiga jatild ca niganthacelakadika |
atthamsu satta vassAni, ahosi vagguposatho.
ariya pesal& lajji na pavisanti uposatham. |
“gampatte ca vassasate vassah chattimsa satini ca
satthi bhikkhusahass4ni Asokirame vasimsu te.
Ajivaka afnaladdhika nana dfisenti sasanam,
sabbe kisdyavasand disenti jinasdsanam, |
bhikkhusahassaparivuto chalabhififio mahiddhiko
Moggaliputto ganapAmokkho akdsi dhammasamgahamn. ;
Moggaliputto mahapajfifio paravadappamaddano :
40 theravadam dalham katva samgaham tatiyam kato. |
madditva ninavadani ntharitvi alajjino baht
sdsanam jotayitvina kathavatthum pakisayi. | — - .
tassa Moggaliputtassa Mahindo saddhiviharilo
upajjhayassa santike saddhammam pariyapuni. | +
nikaye pajica vacesi satta ¢’ eva pakarane,
ubhatovibhaigam yinayam parivarai ca khandhakam
uggahi viro nipuno upajjhayassa santike “ti. |
Nikkhante dutiye vassasate vassini chattimsati
puna bhedo ajayatha theravadinam’ uttamo. |
Pataliputtanagaramhi rajjam karesi khattiyo
45 Dbammasoko maharaji pasanno buddhasasane. |
mabadinam pavattesi samghe ganavaruttame,
cattiri satasahassini ekAhen’ eva nissaji. |
cetiyassa yaji ekam dhammassa savanassa ca
gilaninaii ca paceayam ekam samghassa nissaji. |
titthiya labham disvina sakkarafi ca mahdraham


9
&


satthimattasahassini theyyasamvasaka ahi. |


Asokaramavihiramhi patimokkho paricchi
karapento pitimokkham-amacco ariydénam aghdtay


84. desayimsu Z. — 37. ca vassasate GINZ, dve vassasate
vassa Ny m Y. — chattimsatini ABG2, chattimsa
43. dhiro N, viro Y. -— 44. vassani ca chattimsati? — 47.


N, yajijakam G1, ca ckam ABG2, ca ekassa Z piijam ekam
nassd ca N, cassa ca G1, ca tatheva ca AZ, ca tatheva ki
48. ahum N. — 49. paricchaji A, “ceaji BZ, °cehijji N, °cchiji


7, 50 — 8, 5. 53


titthiye niggahatthaya baht buddhassa sdvaka
satthimattasahassdni jinaputté samagata. | 50
ekasmim sannipatamhi thero Moggaliatrajo
satthukappo mahanago pathavya n’ atthi idiso. |
ariyanam ghatitam kammam raja theram apuechatha,
patihiram karitvana rafifio kaikham vinodayi. |
therassa santike riji uggahetvina sisanam
theyyasamvisabhikkhuno niseti litgandsanam. |
titthiy’ sakavadena pabbajitva anadard
buddhavacanam bhindimsu visuddhakaiicanam iva. |
sabbe pi te bhinnavad’ viloma theravadato,
tesaii.ca niggahatthdya, sakavidavirocanam, | 55
desesi thero abhidhamntum kathivatthuppakaranam.
niggaho fdiso n’ atthi paravidappamaddanam. |
desetva thero ubhidhammam kathdvatthuppakaranam
sakavadasodhanatthaya, sdsanam dighakalikam, |
arabantinam sahassam uecinitvana ndyako
varam varam guhetvina akasi dhammasamgaham. |
Asokirdmavihiramhi Dhammarajena karite
navamischi nitthdsi tatiyo samgaho ayan ti. |
suddhammusamgaham navamisam nitthitam.
bhanavaram. sattamam.


Vill.


ggaliputto dighadassi sdsanassa anagate
mhi patitthdanam disva dibbena cakkhund {
ikidayo there pahesi attapaficame:
: patitthay paccante sattabuddhiya |
Anam desinam anukampaya paninam
i balappatta desetha dhammam uttamam. |
fendharavisayam Majjhantiko mah4 isi
nigam fasaidetva mocesi bandhand bahu. |
rattham Mahisam Mahadevo mahiddhiko
airayadukkhena mocesi bandhana bahu. | 6


asmim ABG2. — 53. “bhikkhunam G2, °bhikkhinam B. —
iG2, — 54, °kaiicanam riva N, °kaiicanam iva Y.

3. pabbataka N. sabh&tuka? (comp. 15, 18). — 4. bahum AB
5. codgtva? — bahup ABG2. bahia? 3


54 "8,6 — 955.


athaparo pi Rakkhito vikubbanesu kovido
vehisam abbhuggantvana desesi anamataggiyam. |
Yonakadhammarakkhitathero ndma mahamati :
‘aggikkhandhopamasuttakathaya Aparantakam pasadayi. |
Mahadhammarakkhitathero Mahdrattham pasadayi
Naradakassapajatakakathaya ca mahiddhiko.
Maharakkhitathero pi Yonakalokam pasadayi
kalakirdmasuttantakathaya ca mahiddhiko. |
Kassapagotto ca yo thero Majjhimo Durabhisaro

10 Sahadevo Milakadevo Himavante yakkhaganam pasadayum, |
kathesum tattha suttantam dhammacakkappavattanam. |
Suvannabhimim gantvina Sonuttara mahiddhika :
niddhametvé pisdcagane mocesi bandhand bahu. |
Laikadipavaram gantva Mahindo attapaficamo
sisanam thdvaram katv& mocesi bandhana bahu. |


bhanavdram atthamam.


Ix.

Lankadipo ayam aht sthena Sithala iti.
dipuppattim imam vamsan sunitha vacanam mama.
Vaigarajasstyam dhité araiiie vanagocaram
sihasamvasam anvaya bhataro janay? duve.
Sthabahu ca Sivali kumara cérudassand
mata ca Susima nama "pita ca Sihasavhayo. |
atikkante solasavasse nikkhamitva guhantara
mipesi nagaram tattha Sihapuram varuttamam. ]
Lalaratthe tahim raj Sthaputto mahabbalo

‘5 anusasi maharajjam Sthapuravaruttame. |


6. The country which was converted by Rakkhita, is not r
even in a work so fall of the greatest blunders, as the Dipavamsa
seareely be justified in changing ,athaparo* into ,Wanavase*
conjecture: atha thero pi R°. — 10. Dundubhissaro ABG2, ]
GI, Durabhiyaparo N, durdsado Z. The Mahav Tiki bas Du:
ssarathero; the Sam. Pisadikf, Dundubhissara (Paris MS.) and J
(MS. of the British Museum); the Inscription given by Cumninghan
Topes, p. 816), Dadabhisara. — 12, mocesum A2. — 12. 13

TX, 1. Sihulam ABG2, Sihali G1Zn. — dipuppattim N, d
which may be the correct reading; comp. the note on .,dhatr
2, siham »° N, which possibly is correct. — 4. rahantage Y, gul


9, 6—20. - +55


battimsa bhAtaro honti Sihaputtassa atraja,

Vijayo ca Sumitto ca subhajetthabhatard ahum. |

Vijayo nama so kumaro pagabbho asi asikkhito

karoti vilopakammam atikiceam suddrunam. |

samagaté jamapadd negama ca samagatd

upasamkamma rajanam Vijayadosam pakasayum. {

tesam vacanam sutvina raji kupitamanaso

Andpesi amaccinam: kumdram ntharatha imam, |

paricariké ime sabbe puttaddra ca bandhava

dasidasakammakare niharantu janappada. | - 10

tato tam ntharitvana visum katvana bandhave

aropetvana te ndvam vuyhittha annave tada. |

pakkamantu yathakaématmn honti sabbe adassanam

ratthe janapade visam ma puna aAgamicchati. |

kumarinam drilhanava gata dipam avassakam,

namadheyyam tad’ asi Naggadipan ti vuccati. |

mahilanam ArilhanavA gata dipam avassakam,

ndmadheyyam tadA asi Mahildratthan ti vuccati. |

purisinam arilhanavé apilavantaé va ségaram

vippanattha disdmilhd gata Sapparapattanam. | 15

orohetvana Supparam sattasatai ca te tadd

vipulam sakkarasammanam akamsu te Suppdraka, |

tesu sakkariyamanesu Vijayo ca sahayaka

sabbe luddani kammini kurumaina nabujjhaka, |

painam adinnam paradaram musav&dai ca pesunam

andcdrafi ca dussilam Acaranti sudarunam. |

kakkhalamh pharusam ghoram kammam katv4, sudarunam

ujjhayetvina mantimsu: khippam ghatema dhuttake. |
Ojadipo Varadipo Mandadipo ’ti va abt

Lankadipo ca pannatti Tambapanniti fayati. | 20


6. subhajetthabhatara ABG, subhajetthamatara Z, sutajetthabhatara N,
— 9, nibatha N, —710. paricdrake? — bandhave? — if. vuyhathum
ABG2, vayhatthe G1, vuyhittha N, uyihapetum Z. — 12. yantu sabbe
adassanam? -—— adassané N. — ratthe N, vuttha Y. — vasam GIN. —
Agamicehati N, agamicchatu G1, gacchantu ABG2, Agamantu yam Z. Aga-
missati? — 18, apilavantiva N, apilavanto G1, uplavanti A, upailavanta
BG2, upalavanto ca Z. pilavant& ‘ya? comp. v.27. — 16. sambharam Y,
Suppfram N. — 17. uabujjhaka N, na bujjhati Gt, caranti te Y. nabvjjhaka
= ‘a-badbya-ka? — 19, kat& suddrunam ujjhayitvana? — 20. ti
va N, cea ABG, ca tadi Z, d’Alwis (Attanag., p. 7).


56 9, 21-33.


parinibbanasamaye sambuddhe dipaduttame
Sthabahussiyam putto Vijayo nama khattiyo |
Lakadipam anuppatto jahetva Jambudipavhayam,
byakasi buddhasettho: so raja hessati khattiyo. |
tato dmantayi sattha Sakkam devénam issaram:
Laikadipassa ussukkam ma pamajjatha Kosiya. |
~sambuddhassa vaco sutva devarajé Sujampati
Uppalavannassa Acikkhi dipam arakkhakdranam. |
Sakkassa vacanam sutva devaputto mahiddhiko

25 Lankadipassa arakkham sapariso paccupatthati. |
tayo mase vasitvana Vijayo Bharukacchake
ujjhdyetva janakayam tam eva navam aruhi. |
arohitvé sakam navam pilavanta ‘va sfigaram
ukkhittavitavegena nadimtlha mahajana |
Lankadipam upagamma orohitva thale thita,
patitthit’ dharanitale atijighacchita have
pipasita kilanta ca, padasagamanam jayati. |
nbhopanihi janndhi yogain katva puthuviyam
majjhe vutthaya thatvana pani passanti sobhana. |
surattam pamsu bhiimibbage hatthapanimhi -makkhite,

3ondmadheyyam tadai Asi Tambapanniti tam abt. |
pathamam nagaram Tambapanni Lankadipavaruttame,
Vijayo tuhim vasanto issariyam anusasi so. |
Vijayo Vijito ca so navam anurakkhena ca
Accutagimi Upatisso p&thaman to idh’ Agato. |
akinnd naranarihi baht sabbe samagata
tabim tahim disdbhage nagarain mapesi khattiyo: |


. jahitya
dayo pacenbandhati N, thape:
in BG2. sapuriso paceupal
nam A, kayam nam G2) ABC
G1, ujjhdyetva janak


+ — 25. sapariso (sapariso G1) paccupatthati AGH, saba-
Vasudevako Z: the whole stanza is wanting


iy - ukkhitta vat"? — dis&amal
ABGY, dAlwis (Att : G1nZ. Comp. v. 15.— 28. have
AZ, bhave BG, vade N. — padasigamanam jayati , °gamanen ati
G1Z, *wamanam na jatayum (jauaynm A) AB G2: padasdyamanena ca, d'Aliwis.
Dr. Bibler proposes to read: padasigamanam jhayati. — 29. yoxam N,
iyigam Y, viyatan d’Alwis, — majjhe G1Zn, d'Alwis, paceh4
@Alwis. — 30. surattapamsu A. — mak
makkbitamn Z, d’Alwis, makkhite N. makkhito? — y.32 is ting in B
G2Z. — navam anurakkhana ea AG, °kkhenz ca N. Anuradhanakkha-
ttena ca? comp. v. 35. — pathamanto idhagato GN, °nte idbagats A.*pa-
thaman te idhagata? — 33. baha satta? coup. 12, 27713, 10.


9, 34 — 10, 8. 57


Tambapanni dakkhinato naditire varuttame

Vijayena mapitam nagaram samantaputabhedanam. |
Nijito Vijitam mApesi, so Uruvelam mapayi,
Nakkhattan’mako ’macco mApesi Anurddhapuram. | 35
Accutagimi yo nama Ujjenim tattha mapayi,
Upatisso Upatissam nagaram suvibhattantardpanam
iddham phitam suvitthdram ramaniyam manoramam. |
Lankadipavhaye ramme Tambapannimhi issaro
Vijayo nama namena pathamam rajjam_ akarayi. |
agate sattavassamhi Akinno janapado abt.

atthatimsati vassdni rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
sambuddhe navame mise yakkhasenam vidhamitam,
sambuddhe paficame visse niganam damayi jino, .
‘sambuddhe atthame vasse samapatti samapayi. |
imani tini thandni idhagami tathigato.

sambuddhe pacchime vasse Vijayo idham Agato. | 40
manussavasam akarayi sambuddho dipaduttamo.
anupidisesiya sambuddho nibbuto upadhisamkhaye. |
parinibbutamhi sambuddhe dhammarije’ pabhamkare
atthatimsati vassdni rajjam karesi khattiyo. |

ditam pahesi Sthapuram Sumittavhassa santike,
lahum Agacchatu ‘mheko Laikadipavaruttamam. |

n’ atthi koci mam’ accaye imam rajjdnusasako,
niyyddemi imam dipam mamam kataparakkamam, |


bhanavaram navamiam.


Xx.
Pandusakkassayam dhita Kac
kulavamsanurakkhanatthaya Jambudipa idhagata. |
abhisitta khattiyabhisekena Panduvasamahesiy.,


va nama khattiya


tassd. samvasamn _invaya jayimsu ekadasa atraja, |
Abhayo Tisso ca Utti ca Tisso Asclapaficamo


85. Vijito N, Vijayo Y. — so BGN, vo AZ, — Nakkhattanamako N,
Nakkhattaradhanama so (°ndmo so ABG2) Y. —- 89. vidhamitain GIN,
vidhamsitam ABG2, vimadditam Z. — sam&patti? — 43. °tumeko BG2.
— A. mamam N, wama Gl, mayi ABG2Z.


X,; 2, manesiya ZGin, mahesi sa A, mahesi BG2,


58 10,3 — 11,6.


Vibhato Ramo ca Sivo ca Matto Mattakalena ca,
tesam kanitthadhita tu Citté nama ti viseuta,
rafijayati jane ditthe Ummadacitta °ti vuccati. |
sankabhisekavassena A4gami Upatissagimake.

5 paripunnatimsavassini rajjam kéresi khattiyo. |
Amitodanassa natté te ahesum satta Sikiya,
“Ramo Tisso Anurddho ca Mahali Dighavu Rohint
Gamant sattamo tesam lokanfthassa vamsaja. |
Panduvasassa atrajo Abhayo nama khattiyo
visati c’ eva vassani rajjam karesi tavade. {
Dighavuss’ atrajo dhiro GAmanipandito ca yo
Panduvasam upatthanto Cittakafifidya samvasi. |’
tassa samvdsam anvaya ajiyi Pandukasavhayo,
attdnam anurakkhanto avasi Dovarikamandale. |

bhanavaram dasamam.


XI.


Abhayassa visativasse Pakundassa visati aha,
sattatimsavasso jatiy’ abhisitto Pakundako. {
Abhayassa visativasse coro asi’ Pakundako.
sattarasamhi vassamhi hantvana satta matule
abhisitto rijabhisekena nagare AnurAdhapure. |
atikkante desavassamhi satthivassam anagate
thapesi gamasimayo abhayani galham karayi.
ubhato paribhuijitva yakkhamanusakani ca £
antindni sattati vassani Pakundo rajjam akarayi. |
Pakundassa ca atrajo Mutasivo nama khattiyo

sissaro Tambapannimhi satthi vassam akarayi.
Mautasivassa atrajd ath’ afifie dasa bhatuka,
Abhayo Tisso Nago ca Utti Mattibhayena ca |


4, rafijayanti AZ, °yati NG1, °yamti BG2.-rafijafanti jane dittha?
— 5. safikabh® BGZ, Laikabh® N, sakabhisekavassena A. — 6. te is
wanting, in NGI. nattiro ahesum? — Rohano A,, Rohini BCR, Rohini
GMn. Comp. Mahavamsa, p. 57, 1.1. — 7. visatim Z. —- 8. upattha-
hanto A, — 9. tassa N, vassa G1, va asso B, assi AG2Z.

XI, 1. Pakundasaa N,, Pandukassa (Pandakassa G1) Y. — sattatimsa-
vasso ABG2, sattatimsativassehi Z, sattatimeavassa GJ, sattatimsdya N. —
3. °simani N, °simani G1. °simani may be correct; comp. 14, 34. 37. 74;
13, 6; 22, 1. — gilha N, kulam Y.


It, 717. 59


Mitto Sivo Aselo ca Tisso Kirena te dasa,

Anuladevi Sivala ca Mutasivassa dhitaro. |

Ajatasattu atthame vasse Vijayo idham Agato,

Udayassa cuddasavassamhi Vijayo kalamkato tada.
Udayassa solase vasse Panduvdsam abhisificayi. |

Vijayassa Panduvasassa ubhorajinam antare

samvaccharam tada asi Tambapanni apardjika. |

ekavisam Nagadaso Panduvasg tada gato,

Abhayam pi Nagadasassa ekabhisckam sificayum. | 10
++. sattaras’ eva vassani catuvisati. |

Candagutte cuddase ‘ca vasse gato Pakundakasavhayo,
Candaguttassa cuddasavasse Mutasivam abbisiiicayi. |
Asokassibhisittato satfarasavasso alt Mutasivo tada gato. |
tamhi sattarase vasse chamase ca andgate

hemante dutiye mise Asalhinakkhattamuttame

abhisitto Devanampiyo Tambapannimhi issaro. |
Chatapabbatapadamhi veluyatthi tayo ahi:

seta rajatayatthi ca lata kaficanasannibha, | 15
nilam pitam lohitakam odatafi ca pabhassaram
kalakam hoti sassirikam pupphasanthanatadisam, |
tathdpi pupphayatthi sa, dijayatthi tathete,

diji yattha yathavanne evam tattha catuppade. |


7. Khirena N, — Sivalé A, Sivald BG, Sila N, Sivali Z.. Comp.

17, 76. — 8. Pauduvaso abhisificayi A, °sam abhisidcayi OG, °sam -bhisifi-
i isi Z. Comp. vv. 12. 39, It seems to me
yum in all these passages. —
babhari Gt. — hoti GIN, asi ¥. —


rather doubtful if we are to ri
9. samvaccharam Y, sabbabhiri N, s
arajika A. — 10. Nagadise? — el isekam abhis® N; ekavise ‘bhisia-
cayum A2. — vy, {1—14 [anagate] ng in BG2Z, — 11. sattarase:
vasaani Y. — 12, Mutasivo abhisificayi (°sivftis?’ Gl, °sivabhis® G2) Y,
Mutasivam abhisificayi N. Comp. v. 8. — 14. asalhAnakkh®, — 15, ve-
Juyatthi? — vv. 16 [kélakam] 17 {tath’ eva te] are wanting in BG2. —
17. °[ya}tthi s& N, yatthalata CM, -°yatthilata R, °latthita AG1. — tath’
eva te AGI, tathete N, tatheteti Z, — (dija va}ttha yatha{vanne evam] tattha
cat{uppade] N, dijayatthi (*latthi BG1) latavayya (ayo Z, °une G1M2) evam
yatthi Gatthi Gt) catuppade Y. — The SamantapasAdika contains the following
quotation: vuttam pi ¢ etam Dipayamse:


Chétapabbatapidamhi venuyatthi tayo ahd,
seta rajatayatthi ca lata kaficanasannibha,
niladiy: am puppham pupphayatthimhi tadisam,
sakuy#sakunayatthimbi saripen’ eva saythita "ti.
We may try to cotrect vv. 15--17 in some such manner:
fan
seta xajatuyatthi ca, lata kaficanasannibha; .
tath&pi pupphayatthi sa, (tattha atimanoramam] |


60 LI, 18—28.


hayagajaratha patt4 dmalakavalayamuddika

kakudhasadisA nama ete attha tada mutta. |

uppanne Devanampiye tassibhisekatejasa

tayo manf Aharimsu Malaya ca janappada,

tayo yatthi Chatapada, attha mutta samuddaka. |

maniyo Malayé jaté rAjarahd mahajana
20’Devanampiyapuiifiena anto sattaham dharam. |
disvana raja ratanam mahagghafi ca mahiraham
asamam atulam ratanam acchariyam pi dullabham |.
pasannacitto giram-abbhudirayi: aham sujato kulino naragyo,
sucinnakammassa me idisam phalam, ratanam babusatasa-

hassajatikam | .

Jaddham mama puiifiakammasambhavam. :
ko me arahati ratandnam abhiharam sampaticchitum, |
miata pita ca bhatd va fatimittd sakhd ca me?
iti raj& vicintento Asokam khattiyam sari, |
Devanampiyatisso ca Dhammasoko narabhibht
aditthasahaya ubho kalyand dalhabhattika. |
atthi me piyasahdyo Jambudipassa issaro
Asokadhammo mahapufifio sakba panasamo imaina, |
so me arahati ratandnam abbiharam samputicchitum,
abam pi datum arahimi aggam sisanam dhanam. |
utthehi kattara taramdno Adaya ratanam imam
Jambudipavhayam gantvé nagaram Pupphandimakam
aggaratanam payacchchi Asokam mama sahdyakam. |


2


a


nilam pitam leohitakam odataf ca pab ~

kalakam hoti sassirikam pupphasanthdnasidisam; |

dijayatthi tath’ eva [sajiva viya dissare]

dija yattha yathavauya evam tattha catuppada. |
Comp. Mabivamea, p. 68.

18. kekudhayayisd Z, kakudbasadisa N, kakudhdsavisa ABG. kaku-
dhapakatika? — etd attha? — Between vv. 18 and 19 probably a de-
scription was given of the three kinds of maui (see Mahavamsa, p. 69, 1. 2).
Possibly the words ,maniyo Malaya jitfi< (v. 20) belonged to this lost pas-
sage. — 22. balam Y, phalam N. — bahnanckasah® SN, bahuchakenasah®
Gi. — 28. In the collation of N, in the first hemistich the word ,,passatha“
is given, without any indication of the word it is intended to replace.
laddham mama passatha pufiiasambhavam? — 26. Jambadipassa Y,
Jambumandassa G1N. — 27. sisanam dhanam ABG2, sfsanakam dhanam Z,
sisanacdanam N, sasanam odakam Gi. pasidhanam dhanam? — 28. ut-
thehi kattdra N, utth® satta G1, atthehi muttehi Y. utthehi tata? — pa-
vacchehi GIN, payacchehi Y. paticchehi? — mama sahayakam‘N, saha-
yam mama Y."


HL, 29—40. 61


Mahiarittho Salo ca brihmano Parantapabbato Putto Tisso
ca ganako

:+- ime caturo dite pahesi Devanampiyo. |

pabhassaramant fay attha muttAvarani ca

patodayatthittayafi c? etam saikharatanam uttamam

bahuratanam parivdrena pihesi Devanampiyo. | 30

amaccam senipatim Arittham Salai ca Paramcapabbatam *

Puttam Tissaganakaii ca hatthe pahesi khattiyo. |

chattafi cimarasaikhai ca vethanam kannabhisanam

Gangodakaii ca bhinkaram saikhaii ca sivikena ca |

nandiyavattam vaddhamanam rajabhiseke pesita

adhovimam vatthayugam aggafi ca hatthapufichanam |

haricandanam mahdaggham arunavannamattikam

haritakam dmalakam imam sisanam pi pesayi: |.

buddho dakkhineyy&n’ aggo,. dhammo aggo virdginam,

samgho .ca pufiiakkhettaggo, tini aggA sadevake. | 25

imafi ciham namassimi uttamatthdya khattiyo. |

patica mise vasitvana te dita caturo jana

Adaya te pannikéram Asokadhammena pesitam |

visikbamase dvddasapakkhe Jambudipa idhagata.

abbisekam Sapariviram Asokadhammena ‘pesitam |

dutiyam abhisificittha rijanam Devanampiyam.

abhisitto dutiyabhiseko visdkhamase uposathe. |

tayo mase atikkamma jetthamase uposathe — -

Mahindo sattamo butv’ Jambudipa idhagato. | 40


rajabhisckabhandam nitthitam.
bhanavaram ekAdasamam.


29. Comp. Mahivamsa Tika: dijan ti Halipabbatam nama brahmagam,
amacean ti Mallanimakafi ca amaccum, ganakun ti Ganakaputtatissam nama
gayakafi cA "tii — 80. °ttayam cetam ABG2, “ttiyam ceva Z, aayam cA-
tam G1, sayaijita N. — bahuratanapar® A. — 31. Parantapabba-
tam? — hatthe? “~ 32. chattam ca sirap&imaigaa? con
1%, 88. — kannasivakam G1N, kannabhisanam Y; kannabhisa
samkham Y, kadiiam N. — 98. rajabhisekapesit? X.— dussayngam N, du-
Kkavhagam (corr. into dukkavagam) G1, vatthayngam ABG2Z. vatthako-
tim? comp. 12, 2. 17, 84. — aggam B, aggham AG2, anaggam CR, anag-


gham M, ekam GIN. — 36, attamattiya ABG. After ,khattiyo“, one
or two lines similar to 12, 6 are wanting. — 38. vesikhamase A. —
39. Gutiyabhisekena? comp, 17, 87. — vesdkhamase! — 40. tato


masam ABGz.


62° 12, 112.


Xi.

Valavijanim unhisam khaggafi chattai ca padukam
vethanam sdrapamaigam bbiikaéram nandivattakam | 7
sivikam saikham Ganhgodakam adhovimam vatthakotiyam
suvannapatikatacchum mahaggham hatthapufichanam |
‘Anotattodakam kéjam uttamam haricandanam
arupavannamattikam aiijanam nagamébatam |
haritakam 4malakam mahaggham amatosadham
satthivahasatam sdlim sugandham sukamahatam
pufifiakammabhinibbattam pahesi Asokasavhayo. |
abam buddha ca dhammaii ca samghai ca saranam gato

supdsakattam desemi Sakyaputtassa sdsane. | *
imesu tisu, vatthusu uttame jinasasane
tvam pi cittam pasddebhi saranam upehi satthuno. |
imam sambhdvanam katva Asokadhamino mahdyaso
pahesi Devanampiyassa; gatadftena te saha |
Asokarame pavare baht thera mahiddhika .
Lankatalanukampaya Mahindam etad abravum: |
samayo Lankadipamhi patitthapetu sdsanam,
gacchatu tvam mahdpuiiia pasdda dipalafijakam. |
pandito sutasampanno Mahindo dipajotako.

tosamghassa vacanam sutva sampaticchi sahaggano |
ekamsaii civaram katvd paggahetvana ajijalim
abhivAdayitva sirasa: gacchami dipalafijakam. |

. Mahindo nama némena samghathero tada aha,
Itthiyo Uttiyo thero Bhaddasalo ca Sambalo |


XU, 1—6. Comp. 17, 83 et seq. These verses are quoted (,vuttam pi
¢’ etam Dipavamse*) in the Samantapasidika. — 2. Instead of »Gaiigoda-


kam adhovimam* the Samantap. reads ,vatamsafii ca adhovim*. — °koti-
kam, the Samantap. — 5. up&sakattam vedcsim, the Samantap. — 6. sad-
dhisaranam upehisi, the Samantap. — 7. samasamam N, chamagham (cor-


rected into samasamam) G1, sambhivanam ABG2Z. —* gatam ditena BGZ.
— 9 gaccha tuvam A. — pasida (°da BG) dipalamcakam ABG, pasida
dipalaijakem N, Laiikidipam pasaditum Z. pasddaya dip°? I cannot
give any satisfactory explanation of the last word, which is spelt in N with
ij, in the other MSS. frequently with fic, sometimes with fich. In the Apa-
dina (Phayre MS., fol. khai) it is said of a Buddha wo is going to cross the
Gaga: agantvina ca sambuddho aruhi nivalaficakam. Prof. E. Kuhn
proposes to take °laiijaka as connected with sanse. laiija which the leZico-
graphers give as a synonym of kaccha.


42, 18—26. 63-


sdmanero ca Sumano chalabhiiifio mahiddhiko,


“ime pafica mahatherA chalabhifiia mahiddhika”
Asokérémamhé nikkhantd caramand sahaggani, |
anupubbena caramind Vedissagiriyam gata.

vibare Vedissagirimhi vasitva yAvadicchakam |

mataram anusasetva sarane sile uposathe

patitthapesi saddhamme sdsane dipavasinam. | 15
sayanhe patisallana Mahindathero mahagant
“samayam va asamayam va vicintesi rahogato. |
terasamkappam aiiiidya Sakko devanam issaro

patur abi therasammukhe santike ajjhabhasatha: |

kalo te hi mahavira Lankadipapasddanam,

khippam gaccha varadipam anukampaya paninam. |
Laikadipavaram gaccha dhammam desehi paninam,
pakasaya catusaccam satte mocehi bandhana. |

sisanam buddhajetthassa Lankadipambi jotaya,

byakatam c’ asi ndgassa bhikkhusamgho ca sammato,| 20
aham ca-veyyavatikam Laikadipassa cigame

karomi sabbakicc4ni, samayo pakkamitum tay. |

Sakkassa vacanam sutvi Mahindo dipajotako

bhagavata subydkato bhikkhusamghena sammato |

Sakko ca mam samayaci, patitthissimi s4sanam,

gacchim’ aham Tambapannim, nipund Tambapannika, |
sabbadukkhakkhayam maggam na sunanti subhasitam.
tesam pakasayissami, gamissam dipalafjakam. |

kalafifid samayafiit ca Mahindo Asokatrajo

gamanam “Lafkatalam fatvi Amantayi sahaggane

Mahindo ganapimokkho samanupajjhayake catu, | 25
samanero ca Sumano Bhanduko ca updsako,

channafi ca chalabhififianam pakdscsi mahiddbiko: |


14, Vedissagiriyamgaté N, Vediyagirisamgati G1, Cetiyagirisamgata Y.
Vedissagirikam gata? — Cetiyagirimhi ABG, Cetiyagiri Z, Vedissagi-
rimhi N. — 16. patisallino? 17. terasamkappam N, tesam samk°® Y,
therasumkappam? — 20. byfkatam casi (cfsi N) nagassa GIN, byakato
Sukyasiho ca (*siho A) ABG2, byikate Sakyasihassa Z. by&kato c’ asi
nigassa? — 23. patitthassimi Gi. patitthapessAmi? — 25. »baika-
talam“ ‘may be the correct reading; 1 should prefer, however, ,kalak alam“
(the ght and the wrong time). — sahaggano N, sabagano BG2, sahagane
AZ, samagane “31.


64 12, 27—32.


aydma babulain ajja LaikAdipam varuttamam,
pasidema babi satte, patitthdpessima sdsanam.
sidhd ’ti te patissutva sabbe attamana ahd:
gacchima bhante samayo nage Missakandmake,
raja ca so nikkhamati katvana migavam pura. |
Sakko tuttho vasavindo Mahindatherassa santike
‘patisallinagatassa idam vacanam abravi: |
marisa tvam .pi bhagavatd subyakato: andgatamaddhane
Mahindo bhikkhu dipam ps sidayissati, vittharikam kari-
ssati jinasdsanam, anupavattissati dhammacakkam, satte
mahadukkha uddharitva thale patitthdpessati, bahujanahi-
tiya patipajjissati bahujanasukhaya lokinukampaya _atth-
30 Aya hitaya sukhaya devamanussaaan ti. | 5
evaii ca pana bhagavata niddittho idani etarahi therena ca
anatto bhikkhthi ca dipapasddanaya. kalo mahavira di-
pam pasddetum, samayo mahavira dipam pasAdetum,
tuyh’ eso viro anuppatto, vahassu etam bharam, pasddehi
Tambapannim, vittharikam karohi Jinasdsanam. aham tava
sisso pubbutthay! patthacaro veyyavaecakaro homiti. |
bhagavato satthuno vacanam sampaticchitva Tambapannim
taressami Aloka ca dassessami, jinatejam samma vaddhi-
ssami. aiihaénabhavatimirapatalapihitapatikujjité issima-
echeraparetadandhaduddhammavipallasanuggata kummag-
gapatipanna vipathe pakkhanta tanta kulakajata gulagun-
thikajita mufijababbajabhata aitidnabhavatimiraavijjan-
dhakara nivaranakilesasakalabhita mahatimiraavijjandha-
karena Avutaophutapihitapaticchannapariyonaddha Tam-
bapanni. |


27, Iahum ABG2, balam Z, bahulam GIN. — 28. nagam °makam
ABG2. —- 30, Mahindo nfma bhikkhn A. Comp. the following pas-
sage whieh occurs identical both in the Samantapis. and in the Thipa-
vasa: ,sammésambuddhena ea tumhe bydkat’ anagate Mahindo nama bhi-
kkhu Tambapannidi dudessatiti*. — anuppavattessati? — phale
ABG2. — 31. pathacaro N. pitthacaro? T owe this conjecture to M. Se-
nart, — homiti N, niddittham A, nidditthim B, ni¢thitthim G, niceam Z. —
32. taressimi AZ, tar. i BG, tarissimi N. — sambhayissami N, samma
vaddhissani AB G2, samma vayissimi G1, vaddhissimi Z. samma vaddhe-
asimi? — °pareta dandha®? — °patipanna? — Comp. Grimblot,
Sept. 8., p. 245. — °kilesajalabh® A, *kilesajalabh® BG2, °kitesasalabh® G1,
°kilesasalilabh® Z, kilesasakalabh® N. kilesasakalabhibhata? — ° ophuta®
N, °omuka® A, °omukka® BG2, °omuta® G1Z. a


12, 3845. 65:


avijjandhakaram bhinditva alokam dassayissimi, jotayissimi
kevalam Tambapannim jinasdsanan ti. evam ussahito ca
pana vasavindena devarajena evamvacasimhkena utthaya
* patisallana viriyapdramippatto apalokayi bhikkhusam-
ghan ti. | :
‘gacchima mayam Tambapannim, nipund Tambapannika,
sabbadukkhakkhayam maggam na sunanti subhdsitam.
tesam santappayissima gacchdma dipalafijakan ti. |
Vedissagiriye ramme vasitva timsa rattiyo:
kalafi ca gamanam dani, gacchama dipam uttamam. | 35
palina Jambudipato* hamsaraji va ambare,
evam uppatitd therd nipatimsu naguttame. |
purato purasetthassa pabbate meghasannibhe
patitthahimsu Missakaktitamhi hams& va nagamuddhani. |
Mahindo néma namena samghatthere tada aha,
‘Itthiyo Uttiyo thero Bhaddasalo ca Sambalo |
sAmanero ca Sumano Bhanduko ca upasako,
sabbe mahiddhika ete Tambapannipasadaka. |
tattha uppatito thero hamsaraji va ambare
purato purasetthassa pabbate meghasannibhe | 40
patitthito Missakakdtamhi hamsa va nagamuddhani.
tasmifi ca samaye rdji Tambapannimhi issaro |
Devanampiyatisso so Mutasivassa atrajo.
Asoko abhisitto ca vassam attharasam ahi, |
Tissassa ca abhisitte sattamase antmake
Mahindo dvAdasavasso Jambudipé idhagato. |
gimhane facchime mase jetthamase uposathe anuradha-
jetthanakkhatte |
Mahindo ganapamokkho Missakagirim gato. |
migavam nikkhami raja, Missakagirim upagami.
- devo gokannarttpena rijanam abhidassayi, | 45


33. jotayissdmi is wanting in Y. — alokam dassayissami keval
Tambapannim, jotayissami jinasisanan ti? — °vacayitena A, °
yimtena BG2. evamviicakena? — 34, tesam pakasayissima? (comp.
v. 24.) — 85. Ceti ive AZ, Cetiye g° BG, Vedissagiriye N. — Samantap.:
kalo ca gamanassa 'ti. FE believe that we ought to adopt this reatling in
the Dipavamsa also. — 36. patit? AG2, patina B, patina G1, palina N,
Samantap.; idam vatya mahdviro uggamehi Z. palina? — 40. uppatita
therf? — 41, patitthita? — 44. gimhfinam GN, °na B, °ne AZ.
*girim igato AMG2, girim uggato N, °giripabbato G1, °giripabbate Z.

7 :
é . 5


66 12, 46—59.


disvAna rAjA gokannam tararfipo ’va pakkami,
pitthito anugacchanto pavisi pabbatantaram. |
tatth’ eva antaradhayi yakkho therassa sammukha,
nisinnam theram adakkhi, bhito rj& ahi tada. |
mamam yeva passatu raja eko ekam, na bhayati,
samagate balakéye atho passatu bhikkhunam. |

“ tatth’ addasam khattiyabhtimipalam paduttharhpam miga-

. vail carantam,


ndmena tam dlapi khattiyassa: 4gaccha Tissa “ti tad& avoca. |
ko ’yam kasavavasano mundo samghatiparuto
so cko adutiyo vacam bhasati mam amanusim? |
samano “ti mam manussalokeyam khattiya pucchasi bhimi-
~ pfila.
samani mayam maharaja dhammarajassa sAvaki
tam eva anukampaya Jambudipa idhagata. |
Avudham nikkhipitvana ekamantam upavisi,
nisajja raj4 sammodi bahum atthtipasambitam. |
sutva therassa vacanamn nikkhipitvana 4vudbam
tato theram upagantva sammoditvA ca pavisi. |
amaccabalakayo ca anupubbam samagata
parivaretvana atthamsu cattairisa sahassiyo. |
disva nisinnathcranam balakAye samagate:
afific atthi bali bhikkhd sammasambuddhasavaka? |
tevijja iddhipatti ca cetopariyakovidd
khindsava arahanto baht buddbassa sivaka. |
ambopamena janitva pandit’ yam arindamo
desesi tattha suttantam hatthipadam anuttaram.’|
sutvana tam dhammavaram saddhajato va buddhima
cattarisasahassini saranam te upagamum. |
tato attamano raja tutthahattho pamodito
Amantayi bhikkhusamgham: gacchima nagaram purain. |


2
&


46. tararfipo N, tadarépo G1, tathdripo Y. — 49. addasa A. — du-
ar? ABG, padutthat® Zn, — 51. The first line (samayo — bhiimipala)
s given in AGLN only, the second (samayi — sivaka) in ABG2Z; in A
in which both lines are given manu prima, the first is included in brackets.
I believe, that both are written by the author of the Dipavamsa; see the
Introduction, p. G. — °lokiyam? — pnechasi N, passasi A, pacchasi Gi, —
53. sammoditvana ¥, °tva ca N. — ec’ upAvisi! — 59. 60. Probatty we
ought to transpose these two verses. -


12, 60—74. 67


Devanavhayardjanam subbatam sabalavAhanam

panditam buddhisampannam khippam eva pasadayi. | 60
sutvana rafifio vacanam Mahindo etad abravi:

gacchasi tvam mahdrdja, vasissima mayam idha, |
uyyojetvana rajanam Mahindo dipajotako

amantayi bhikkhusamgham: -pabbajessima Bhandukam. |
therassa vacanam sutva sabbe turitamanasa

gimasimam vicinitv’, pabbajetvana Bhandukam,
upasampadafi ca tatth’ eva arahattaii ca papuni. |
girimnddhani thito thero sarathim ajjhabhasatha:

alam yanam na kappati patikkhittam tathagatam. |
uyyojetvana sirathim thero vasi mahiddbiko

gagane hamsaraja va pakkamimsu vehayasa,

orohetvana gagana pathaviyam patitthita. | 65
nivisanam nivasente parupite ca civaram

disvana- sdrathi tuttho rajénaii ca pavedayi. |

pesetvA sdrathim raj& amacce ajjhabhasatha:

mandapam patiyddetha antonivesane pure. |

“kumara kumariyo ca itthagdraii ca deviyo

dassanam abbikankhanta there passantu agate. |

sutvdna rafiio vacanam amaccd kulajatika
antonivesanamajjhe akamsu dussamandapam. |

vitanafi chaditam vatthan suddham setam sunimmalam
dhajasaikhaparivaram sctavatthchi ‘lamkatam, |~ 70
vikinnavaluka set’ setapupphasusanthata

alamkatamandapa seta himagabbhasamtipama. |

sabbasetehi vatthehi alamkiretvdna mandapam


abbhantaram samam katva rajinam pativedayum: |
parinitthitam mahardja mandapam sukatam subham,
dsanam deva janahi pabbajitinulomikam. |
tamkhane sdrathi raiifio anuppatto paveditum:


60. Devanavhayarajinam (°vharaj? M)-Y, Devanampiyarajanam N. —
G1. gacebahi? — 64, tathagate? -With regard to the grammatical con-
struction comp. 14, 22. 62. — 65. thera v° mahiddhik&? — &rohitvana
2, arohetvina ABG, crohetvana N, orohityana? — 66. [parupijte N,
parupitam Z, “pitam A, phérupitai B, phardpitai G. parupante? —
69. kulapubbaj G1, kalapabbaja N. — antonivesane majjhe ¥.— 71. alam-
katamgndap& seems to be corrupted; only one mandapa was constructed (see
also Mahavamaa,ap. 82, 1. 2). °mandapam setam °mam? — 72. abhutta-
ram N, abbbuntara 41. — 74, pavedayi (°yi A, yim B) ABG2.


be


68 “49, 7486.


~ yanam deva na kappati bhikkhusamghassa nistditam. |
aya acchariyam deva sabbe thera mahiddhika _

75 pathamam mam uyyojetva paccha hutvd pur’ Agata. |
uccasayanamahasayanam bhikkhinam na ca kappati,
bhummattharanaii janatha te thera Agacchanti, |

_ sarathissa vaco sutva rajapi tutthamanaso
paccuggantvana therinam abhivadetvé sammodayi. |
pattam gahetva theranam salia therehi khattiyo
pijento gandhamilehi rajadviram upagami. |
rafifio antepuram thero pavisetvana mandapam
addasa santhatam bhdmim asanam dussavaritam. |
nisidimsu yathapafiiatte dsane dussavarite,

go nisinne udakam datva yagum datvana khajjakam |
panttam bhojanam rafifio sahattha sampavarayi.
bhuttavibhojanam theram onitapattapaéninam |
Amantayi Anuladevim saba antoghare jane: oe
okasafi jAnatha devi, kilo te payirupasitum. |
theranam abhivadetva ptijetva yavadicchakam
Anula nama mahesi kafiApaficasatavata |
apasamkamitva therdnam abhivadetva upivisi.
tesam dhammam adesesi petavatthum bhayanakam |
viniinam saccasamyuttam pakasesi mahdgani.

gs sutvana tam dhammavaram saddhajata vibuddhima |
Anula maltest sahakafijdpaiicasata tadaé
sotapattiphale "tthamsu, pathamabhisamayo abt. |


bhanavaram dvddasamam. 7
74. Ssamghena N, °samghe Gl. — 73. aho acchariyam? — 76. aga-
echanti Y (agacchante G1), agacchante N, — 79. pavisitvana! — dsane
dussaciruke ABG2, asanam (sana G1) dussavaritam GIN, fisanam dussa-


lamkatam Z.  jis® dussacchiditam? — 80. yathibuddham santhate dussa-
pithake A, yathfpaiiiiatte dsane dussavarite (dussavirite Gi, dussasanthate
BG2, dussapasirite Z) BGNZ. dussacchidite? — 8. raja sahatth&?
vy. 81. 82 give a fair specimen of the grammatical incorrectness which pre-
vails through the whole Dipavamsa. I do not think fhat we ought to make
any corrections, or that anything is wanting. The passage of the ancient
Sinhalese Atthakathd of which this is a metrical paraphrase, has been rén-
dered thus in the Samantap.: ,rja there panitena khadaniyena bhojaniyena
sahatthd santappetva sampavaretva Anulddevipamukhani pajica itthisatani
therinam abhivadanam pfjasakkarait ca karonti ‘ti pakkosipetva ekamantam
nisidi.¢ — 88. This stanza is wanting in BG2. — vati AGI, ca ta.Zn, —
84. tisam? — 85. vibuddhima N, phibuddhima Y. sadghajato va ba-
ddhim& (comp. v. 58)?


13, 1—14. 69.


: ~ XUI.

Aditthapubba gana sabbe janakiyé samagata
rajanivesanadvare mahasadd’ anusavayum. |
sutva raj4 mahdsaddam ‘upayuttamakampuram :
kimatthaya puthdi sabbe mahdsend samagata? |
ayam deva mahisend samghadassanam Agata,
dassanam alabhamand mahdsaddam akamsu te. |
antepuram susambadham janakaya patitthitum,
hatthisAlam asambidham, theram passantu te jana. |
bhuttavi anumodetvé utthahitvina dsana
rajagharé nikkhamitva hatthisilam upagami. | 5
hatthisdlamhi pallaikam panifidpesum maharahain,
nisidi pallankavare Mahindo dipajotako. |
nisinna pallahkavare Mahindo ganapumgavo
kathesi tattha suttantam devadiitam varuttamam. |
sutvana devadiitan tam pubbakammam sudarunam
bhita sainvegam Apadum nirayabhayatajjita. |
fiatva bhayattite satte catusaccam pakasayi.
pariyosine sahassinam’ dutiyabhisamayo abd. |
hatthisdlamhad nikkhamma mahajanapurakkhato
tosayanto baha satte buddho Rajagahe yatha. { 10
nagaramhd dakkhinedvare nikkhamitva mahajana
Mahanandavanam nima uyyanam dakkhina pure, |
rajuyyanamhi pallaikam pafifiApesum mahdraham,
tattha thero nistditva kathesi dhammam uttamam. |
kathesi tattha suttantam balapanditam uttamam,
tattha pAnasahassinam dhammabhisamayo aha. |
mahisamigamo asi uyyane Nandane tada,
kulagharanit kumart ca kulasunha kulaputtiyo |


XIH, 1. gan N vand G2, te Y. -- 2 upasakamma tepitam A, upa-
samkamma tam janam Z, upasamkamma kiritam B, upayamkamma kiritam
G2, upayuttam akampuram N, upayuttanakam mayam Gt. I refrain from
offering any conjecture. — 7. nisinno AB. — 8. bhit& samvegam apa
dum N, bbit& samtemaparum G1, Dhitim satt& (sate Z) papunimsu Y. —
10. °slaya Y, “sdlama G1, °silamha N. — Jt. dakkhinadvéro Al, °ra
A2BG2, "re GiZn. dakkhigadvar4? comp. 14, U1. 55. — MahAnanda-
van/#p BGN, °nandanavanam AZ. — dakkhind pure N, dakkhine pure ~
ABG2, dakkbTyam puram G1Z, dakkhigi (gam?) pura?


70 18, 15—29.


samgharita tad hutva theram dassanam Agata.

15 tchi saddhim sammodento sayanhasamayo ahi. |
idh’ eva ther4 vasantu uyyane Mahanandane,
atisiyam gamfyanta ito dire giribbaje. |
accdsannan ca gimantam vippakinnamahajanam,
rattim saddo maha hoti, Sakkasal{pamam imam

‘ patisallinasaruppam alam gacchdma pabbatam. |
Mahameghavanam nima uyyaénam vivittam mama
gamanagamanasampannam nitidtire na santike, |
atthikanam manussinam abhikkamanasukhagamam,
appakinnam diva saddena, rattim saddo na jayati, |
patisallanasaruppam pabbajitannlomikam

20 dassanachayasampannam pupphaphaladharam subham |
vatiya. suparikkhittam dvdrattilasugopitam,
rijadvaéram suvibhattam uyydne me-manorame, |
suvibhatté pokkharant samchannam padumuppalam |
sittdakam supatittham sAdupupphabhigandhiyam. |
evam rammam mam’ uyydnam sahasamghassa phasukam,
Avasatu tahim thero, mam’ attham anukampatu. |
sutvéna rafifio vacanam Mahindo thero sahaggano
amaccasamghaparibbtilho agami Meghayanam tada. |
dydcito narindena Mahindathero mahagant
Mahdmeghavanuyydnam pavisi yuttajatikam,

26 uyydne rajayatthumhi avasi thero mahdgant. |
dutiye puna divase raja therin’ upagami
abhivadetva strasi raji therinam abravi: |
kacci te sukham sayittha, phdsuvaso tuyham idfia?
vivittam utusampannam manussarahaseyyakam |
patisallanasdruppam sappayafi ca sendsanam.
tato attamano raja hattho samviggaménaso |
afijalim paggahetvina idam vacanam abravi,
sovannabhiikaram gahectvi onojesi mahipati: |


Se .
15. samghariti N, samghariva (riva M) Y. samghatit&? — tahi
saddhim sammodente? — 16. gamiyanté BG, gamayanta A, gamiyanti


Zo. Samantap.: ,akilo bhante idani tattha gantum.* J conjecture ,aga-
maniyam“.— 19 app&kingam BG. — 22. sidupupphabhigandhiyam N,
sidusuppagandhiyam G1, sddha- (sidhuka- Z) suppagandhiyam Y. sadu-
pupphabhigandhitam? — 23. avasatu N, fsevatu BGZ, asavete A. —
25. yattajatikam (suttaj? G1) Y, suddhajatikam N. — 26. kacei vo? —
29. We ought to transpose the two hemistichs. :


13, 30—45. 71


im 4ham bhante uyydnam Mahameghavanam subham

cituddisassa samghassa dadami, patiganhatha. | 30

narindavacanam sutva Mahindo dipajotako

patiggahesi uyyanam samghardmassa karan. |

dadantam patiganhantassa Mahdmeghavanam tada

kampittha pathavi tattha ndndgajjitakampanam. |

patitthapesi samghassa narindo Tissasavhayo,

Mahameghavanuyydnam Tissiramam akamsu tam. |

patitthapesi samghassa pathamam Devinampiyo

Mahdmeghavanam nama 4rdmam sdsandraham. |

tatthapi pathavt kampi abbhutam lomahamsanam.

lomahattha jani sabhe there puechittha sardajika. | 38

imam pathamam vihiram Lankadipe varuttame,

sdsdnarihanataya pathamam pathavikampanam. |

disvA acchariyam sabbe abbhutam lomahamsanam

celukkhepam pavattimsu, n’ atthi idisakam pure. |

tato attamano rAj& vedajato kataijali

upandmesi bahum puppham Mahindam dipajotakam. |

puppham thero gahetvina ekokase pamuiicayi,

tatthapi pathavi kampi dutigam pathavikampanam. |

idam pi acchariyam disva rajasend saratthaka

ukkutthisaddam pavattinsu dutiyam pathavikampanam. | 40

bhiyyo cittam pasidetvaé rajApi tutthamanaso:

mama kankham vitarehi dutiyam pathavikampynam. |

samghakammam karissanti akuppam sasandraham,

idh’ okdse mahardja malakan tam bhavissafi. |

bhiyyo aftamano rij& puppham theram abhihari,

thero puppham gahetvana aparokise pamuiicayi.

tatthapi pathavi kampi tatiyam pathavikampanam. |

kimatthadya mahavira tatiyam pathavikampanam?

sabbe kankha viharehi akkhahi kusalo tuvam. |

jantagharapokkharant idh’ okase bhavissati,

bhikkht jantaigkaram ettha pariptrissanti sabbada. | 5
32. patigaphante (pat? A) ABG2, — 36, sisanardhanatiya N, sisxanar®

AG, sasanaribataya B, sasanardhanataya Z. sasanassaralhataya? —

40. pi is wanting in Y.— 41, vibarehi ABG, vinodehi Z.— 44. AZ omit


sabP?-tuvam. — vitdarehi? — 45. paripirissanti N, paripiriyvavanti ABG,
paripirayanti 2.


72 13, 46—89.


“alaram pitipamojjam janetva. Devanampiyo
upandmesi therassa jatipuppham suphullitam, |
thero ca puppham Adfya aparokase pamuiicayi, 7
tatthapi pathavi kampi catuttham pathavikampanam: {
-idam acchariyam disva mabdjand samagata
afijalim paggahetvana namassanti mahiddhikam. | -
‘tato attamano rAja tuttho pucchi anantaram:
kimatthdya mahavira catuttham pathavikampanam? |
Sakyaputto mahaviro assatthadumasantike
sabbadhammam patibujjhi buddho Asi anuttaro,
50 so dumo idham okase patitthissam diputtame. |
sutva attamano raja tuttho samviggamanaso
upandmesi therassa jatipuppham varuttamam. |
thero ca puppham Adaya bhimibhige pamuiicayi,
tatthapi pathavi kampi paficamam pathavikampanam. |
tam pi acchariyam disva rdjAsend saratthaka ve
ukkutthisaddam pavattimsu, celukkhepam pavattitha. |
kimatthaya mahapaiiia paficamam pathavikampandm?
etam attham pavakkhahi tava chandavasanuga. |
anvaddhamasam pétimokkham “uddisissanti te tada,
66 uposathagharam nfma idh’ okise bhavissati. |
aparam pi ca okase theram papphavaram ada,
thero ca puppham Adaya tamokase pamuiicayi.
tatthapi pathavi kampi chattham pathavikampanam.
idam pi acchariyam disva mahajana samagata
afifiamaiiiam pamodanti vibiro hissati idha. |
bhiyyo cittam pasddetva raja theranam abravi:
kimatthéya mahipafiia chatthan pathavikampanam ? |
yavaté samghika Jabham bhikkhusamgha samaigata
idh’ okdse maharaja labhissanti andgate. |
_ 50. patibujjhi N, paticchi G1, pativijjhi Y. — dham okase patiq¢hi-
ssanti (“ssamti G2) uttamo ABG2, i? o° putitthissam diputtame GIN, idha
hessati Z. i° o° patitthissati diputtame (comp. Mab., p. 86, lL 11)? —
58. rajasend! — ukkhepe pavattitha ABG, [ukkhepan pavalttitha N,
Sukkhepa (°pam M) pavattayuin % — 54. etam attham mam’ akkbahi?
— *anugam ABG2, “Anugi GiZn. — 57. e kamkbanti vihfire-
hirfjeti idha ABG2, afiiamaiifam pamodanti ‘0 hissati (birahiati G1)


idha GIN; in Z the hemistich is wanting. afiflamafifiam pamoaenti
viharo hessati idha? — 59, labba?


13, 60 —414, 10. 73°


sutva therassa vacanam rajaépi tutthamanaso
upandmesi therassa raja puppham varuttamam, |
thero ca puppham Adaya aparokise pamuiicayi,
tutthapi pathavi kampi sattamam pathavikampanam. |
disv& acchariyam sabbe rajasend saratthaka
celukkhepam pavattimsu kampite dharanitale. |
kimatthaya mahapafa sattamam pathavikampanam?
byakarohi mahipafifia, ganam kaikha vitiratha. |
yavaté imasmimn vihdre dvasanti supesala
bhattaggam bhojangsilam idh’ okAse bhavissati. |
bhanavaram terasamain.


XIV.

Therassa vacanam sutya riji bhiyyo pasidati,
aladdhA campakam puppham therassa abhiharayi. |
thero campakapupphani pamuacittha mabitale,
tatthapi pathav? kampi atthamam pathavikampanam. |
imam acchariyam disva rijasend saratthaka -
ukkutthisaddam pavattimsu, celukkhepam pavattitha, |
kimatthiya mahavira atthamam pathavikampanam?
byikarohi mahapafiia, sunoma tava bhasado. |
‘tathagatassa dhatuyo attha don& saririka,
ekam donam mahirdja aharitvaé mahiddhika | -
idh’ okase niharitva thipam kahanti sobhanam
samvegajananatthanam bahujanapasadanam. |
samagata jana sabbe rajasend saratthaka
ukkutthisaddam pavattimsu mahapathavikampane. |"
Tissdirame vasitvana vitivattdya rattiya
nivasanam nivisetva pdrupetvana civaram |
tato pattam gahetvina padvisi nagaram puram.
pindacaram caramano rajadvéram updgami. |
pavisi nivesanam rafifo, nistditvana Asune


63. gayi BG, gayi A, gayam N, jana? Z. — viharatha ABG, viti-
ratba N, vinodatha Z. pan
1V, 3. In ¥ the second hemisttch runs thus: celukkbepe pavattittha
aggérimo bhayissati. — 6. niharitva BG, niharitva N, nidahitva AZ. —
karenti Y. — vv. 42.8 are wanting in Y. — 8. parupitvana?


74 14, 10—24.


10 bhojanam tattha bhuijitva pattam dhovitvana panina {
bhuttavi anumodetva nikkhamitva nivesand
nagaramha dakkhinadvaraé uyyane Nandane tada |
kathesi tattha suttantam aggikkbandham varuttamam.
tattha panasahassinam dhammibhisamayo abt. |
desayitvana saddhammam uddharitvana paninam

‘ utthaya dsand thero Tissirame pundvasi. |
tattha rattim vasitvana vitivattdya rattiya
nivasanam nivdsetva parupitvana civaram |
tato pattam gahetvana pavisi nagaram puram.

18 pindacdram caramano rajadvaram upagami. |
pavisi nivesanam rafifio, nisiditvina Asane
bhojanam tattha bhufjitvA pattam dhovitvana panina
bhuttavi anumoditva nikkhami nagara pura.
divaviharam karitva Nandanuyyanamuttame |
kathesi tattha suttantam dsivisipamam subham.
pariyosane sahassinam pajicamabhisamayo ahi. |
desayitvana saddhammam bodhayitvana paninam +
dsané vutthahitvana Tissdramam upaigami. |
bhiyyo raja pasanno ’si atthamam pathavikampane.

20 hattho udaggo sumano r4ji theranam abravi: |
patitthito vih4ro, ca samgharémam maharaham
abhiiifiapadakam bhante mahapathavikampane. {
na kbo raja ettavati samghirdmo patitthito.
simasammannanam nima anufiatam tathigato. {
samanasamvasakasimam avippavdsam ticivaram
atthahi simanimittehi kittayitva samantato |
kammavacaya sdventi samghd sabbe samagata,
evam baddhank simani ekAvaso "ti vuccati;
viharam thavaram hoti 4rdmo suppatitthito. |


17. anumodetya! — karitva N, katvina Y. -« 18. saccibhisamayo
N. — 20. atthamam AG1, pathamam N, atthame BZ. atthahi path*?
atthapath’? — 21. abhiffapfidaka, as is seen from several passages of


the Samantap., is an epithet of the fourth jhina which an Arahat enters
upon when desiring to produce a miracle, for instance an earth-quake. —
22. kho N, vo AGI, ve BG2Z. — anndfatam AGIN, affidtam Z, anu-
ffato B, anufihata G2. — tathagate G1. See 12, 64. — 24. kammava-
cam A, ‘kammavacdyo? — Between v. 24 and 25 Z inserts the folP\wing


words: idam vutte ca therena rajipi etad abruvi. B!


g 14, 25—35, i}


mama putté ca dara ca simaccé saparijjand

sabbe upasaka tuyham pénena saranam gaté. | 25
yécimi tam mahavira, karohi vacanam mama,
antostmamhi okase avasantu mahajana; |
mettékarundparetaya sadarakkho bhavissati.
pariccdgafi ca janeti raja tuyham yadicchakam, |
samgho katapariccago simam sammannayissati.
Mahapadumo Kuijaro ca ubho naga sumangala |
sovannanafigale yutta pathamam Kotthamalake,
caturaiigini mahasend saha therehi khattiyo |
suvanpanafigalasitam dassayanto arindamo,
samalamkatam punnaghatam nanaragam dhajam subham | 50
ndnapupphadhajakinnam" toranafi_ ca mahalamghiya,
bahucandijalamala, suvannanaigale kasi. |

mahajanapasidiya saha therehi khattiyo

nagaram -padakkhinam katva naditiram upagami. |
mahasimapariccaga siti suvannanaigale

yam yam pathaviyam yattha agama Kotthamalakam. |
simam simena ghatite mahajanasamagame

akampi pathavt tattha pathamam pathavikampanam. |

disva acchariyam sabbe rajasend saratthaka

aiamaniam pamodimsu: simaramo bhavissati. | 35


27. °paretd Z mettikarunaparittay — sadar@kkho AGIN,
°kkha BG2Z. — janesi C. — raja ABG2R2, GIZn. — Mabinda asks
the king to point out what direction the boundary line should take (see
Mahavamsa, p. 98, 1.4), ‘This does not imply an act of liberality (pari-
cedga) on the part of the king, for the ground included by the boundary
line does not become locus saces, Now we see that the MSS. have con-
founded at vv. 83. 36 the werds »pariccdga* and ,pariccheda*. I therefore
believe that a similar confusion has taken place here also, and I propose to
read: paricchedad ca janahi raja tuyham yadicchakam, samgho
kate paricchede .. — 29. caturafiginimahaseno? (see Mah: p. 99,
Ne 1, 2.) — 30, samalambkatam N, sumalamgha G1, sumalagghi (° ggi MR) Y:
— 31, mahalamghiya BGZn, mahagghiyam A. m&lagghiyam? — baha-
candijalamala BG bahum ca dipamalisu A. bahum ca dipam jala-
manam (comp. 6, 757? — 32. mahfjonam pasidiya N, mahajana pasadiya
G1, mabajanapasidaya . mahasimaparitogd ABG2, °pariccheda Z,
°pariceigo N, °pariccigi G1. — sitam N, sita Gt. I propose to correct
this stanza thus:


mahdsimapariecchedam sitam suvannanafigale

kasam pathaviyam tattha agama Kotthamalakam —
34. sam simena (°me G1) GIN, simaya simam Y, — mahdjane (°nam
G1, °na Z) samigate Y, [mahajanasamiga]mo N.


40


i
a


50


1% : ’ 14, 8651."


yavata simaparicchede nimittam bandhimsu mdlake
pativedesi theranam Devanampiyaissaro. | -

katva kattabbakiccani simassa malakassa ca

viharam thavaratthaya bhikkhusamghassa phasukam t
mamaii ca anukampaya thero simani bandhatu.
sutvana rafifio vacanam Mahindo dipajotako |


‘Amantayi bhikkhusamgham: simam bandhama bbikkhavo.


nakkhatte uttarasilhe sabbe samghd samagata, |
patitthapetva malakam samdnasamvasakam nama simam ban-
dhittha cakkhuma.
vibaram thavaram katva Tissdrimam varuttamam |
Tissirame vasitva vitivattdya rattiy’
nivasanam nivdsetva parapitvana civaram |
tato pattam gahetvana pavisi nagaram puram.
pindacdram caramano rajadvaram updgami. |
pavisitva nivesanam raffho nisiditvina dAsane 3
bhojanam tattha bhuijitvé pattam dhovitvana panina |
bhuttavi anumoditva nikkhami nagar’ pura. .
divaviharam karitvéna uyyéne Nandane vane |
kathesi‘tattha suttantam Asivisipamam tada,
anamataggiyasuttam ca cariydpitukam anuttaram |
gomayapindaovadam dhammacakkappavattanam
Mahinandanamhi tatth’ eva pakisesi punappunam. |
imind ca suttantena sattdhani pakasayi
attha ca samghasahassini pafica janghasatani ca |
mocesi bandhan& thero Mahindo dipajotako.
dnamasam vasitvana Tissirdme sahaggano |
Asalhiy&a punnamdse upakatthe ca vassake
dmantayi nagare sabbe: vassakAlo bhavissati. {
Mahiaviharapatiggahanam nitthitam.


Senasanam samsémetvé Mahindo dipajotako
pattacivaram Adaya Tissaramamha nikkhami. |
nivasanam nivasetva parupitvana civaram


36. simapariecigo GIN. — 37. simassa GIN, simaya Y. — 41. vasi-
tva N, vasetva G1, vasayitva ABG2Z. vasitvana? — 44. annmodetva
BG. —~ 47, imAui ca suttant&ni? — attha jamghas’ N. — paica™sam-


ghasatdni ca A. a


14, 51-65. 11


tato pattam gahetvdna’ pavisi nagaram puram. |

pindacdéram caramano rajadv4ram upagami,

pavisi nivesanam raiifio, nisidimsu yathdsane. |

bhojanam tattha bhufijitva pattam dhovitvana panind
mahdsamayasuttantam ovAdatthaya desayi. |

ovaditvéna rajanam Mahindo dipajotako

Asanad vutthahitvina anapuccha apakkami. |

nagaramha pacinadvara nikkhamitva mahdgani

nivattetva jane sabbe agama yena pabbatam. | 55
rajinam pativedesum amacca ubbiggamanasi
sabbe deva mahathera gata Missakapabbatam. |


sutvina raj& ubbiggo sigham yojetvana sandanam
abhiruhitva ratham khifpam saha devihi khattiyo. |
gantvana pabbatapadam Mahindathero sahaggano, -
Nagaracatukkam nama rahadam selanimmitam,

tattha nahatva pivitvana thito pasanamuddhani. |

sigham vegena sedani nippahetvana khattiyo

Girato addasa’ theram: pabbatamuddhani thitam. |

deviyo ca rathe thatva ratha oruyha khattiyo
upasamkamitva therdnam vanditva idam abravi: | 60
rammam rattham jahetvana mamaf c’ ohdya panino
kimatth4ya mahavira imam Agami pabbatam? |

idha vassam vasissima tini misam antnakam
purimam pacchimakam nama anufifditam tathagate.
karomi sabbakiccini bhikkhusamghassa phasukam,
anukampam upddaya mam’ attham anusasatu. |
gimantam va arafifiam vi bhikkhuvassdpanayiko
sendsane samvutadvare visam buddhena antumatam. |
anuifidtam ctam vacanam attham sabbam sahetukam,


, 54. anapuccha ’va pakkami A. — 57. yojetva Y.— abhiruhi? —
58 is wanting in BG2. — Nafigacatakkam A, Nagaram catukkam C121,
Naguram catukkam C1MN. Na&gacatukkam? comp. Mahay., p. 103, L. 2.
— selanippitam AGI. sclanissitam? — 59. pantitvana A, nanipatitvina
BG2, nippahitvana Z, nibbahetvina N, nipphambitvana Gl. nibbatte-
tvani?.— 60. The words ,deviyo ca rathe thaiva® are wanting in ARG2.
— kovediye GIZ, deviyo N. — rathe thapet — 61. jahitvdna? —
agami? —-62. tathagata A, °to BG2, °te G1Zn. See 12,64. — 64. “na
yiko GZn, °ka By °k& A. bhikkhnyassipanéyikam (adj. construed
with’ visam)? — anumatam CRG1, andmatam Mn, annjfiatam ABG2.. —
65. anubfidtam Zn, afifitam ABG. Comp. 15, 5.


78 14, 65—78.


65 aj’ evaham karissAmi Avasam vasaphasukam. |
gahatthasiddhim sodhetva oloketva mahdyaso
theranam patipadesi: vasantu anukampaka. |
sidhu bhante imam Ienam aramam patipajjatu,
vihiram thavaratthaya simam bandha mahAmuni. |
rafifio bhaginiya putto Maharittho ’ti vissuto

" paficapafifidsa khatteca kulejaté mahayasa |
upasamkamitva rajAnam abhivadetva idam abravum:
sabbeva pabbajissima varapaiifiassa santike, |
brahmacariyai carissima,:tam devo anumaiifatu.

zo sabbesam vacanam sutvA rajapi tutthamAnaso |

theranam upasamkamma adrocesi mahipati:

Mahiaritthapamukha paiicapaiiiasa’ nayaka,

pabbajehi anuiifidtam mahavira tav’ antike. |

sutvana rafifio vacanam Mahindo dipajotako

amantayi bhikkhusamgham: simam bandhima bhikihavo. :

samanasamvasaka c’ eva avippavasa ticivaram

viharam thavaratthaya stmam bandhasimapana, | -

simam ca sfmantarikam ca thapetva Tumbamilake

mahasimani kittesi Mahindo dipajotako. |

bandhitvé mdlakam sabbam simam bandhitvana cakkhuma

viharam thévaram katva dutiyam Tissapabbate |

punndya punnamdasiyA dsdlhamase uposathe
nakkhatte yttarasaJhe simam bandhitvana pabbate |
pabbajesi Maharittham pathamam dutiyamalake,
upasampédesi tatth’ eva Tambapannikulissaro, |
paficapaiifidsa tatth’ eva pabbajjd upasampada.
battimsa malak& honti pathamarame patitthita, |


x
&


65. vasgaphasukam? — v. 66 is wanting in BG2Z. — °siddhi AGI,

~ °saddhin N. —- sidhetvA? — 68. khatti ca A, khatiyé ca B, khatte
ca ZGn. tatth’ eva? comp. v. 78. — 71. pabbajehi N, “jeti AGI, °jetu
BG2Z. — 73. saminasamvésakam BG2, °kA AGIZ, samfinavaisaka N. —
avippavisa ABG2Z, °si GIN. samfnasamyvAsakam c’ eva avippav
sam ticivaram? Comp. v. 23. —.bandhisim&pava G, bandhasimam pana
N, bandhisiyapana A, bandhayimapana B, bandhama CR, bandhima bhi-
kkhave M: simam bandhimsu malakam? — v, 74 and the first hem.
of v.75 are wanting in Z. — 74. Tambamflake BG2, Pattasam@lake Gi,
Tumbamalake A, biittimsa malake N. Comp. Mahdv., p. 103, 1 12. —
mahasima ca kittesi ABG2. — Cetiyapabbate BG2. Cetiyapabbate?
Missakapabbate? (see Mahav., p. 106, 1.4.) — 77. °kulissaram B, °r@
AG2, °ro GLZn, :


14, 79 — 15, 10. 79


dutiyarame battimsa vihdre Tissapabbate,
avasesakhuddakdrame paccek’ ekekaméalake. |
patitthapetva 4rdmam vihiram pabbatuttame
dvasatthi arahant4 sabbe pathamam vass’ updgata. | 80
Cetiyapabbatapatiggahanam nitthitam.
bhanavaram cuddasamam.


XV.


Gimhane. pathame mdse punnamdse uposathe
agatd Jambudipamha vasimha pabbatuttame. |
paficamase na vutthamha Tissdrame ca pabbate,
gacchima Jambudipadnat, anujina rathesabha. |
tappema annapinena vatthasenisanena ca,
saranam gato jano sabbo, kuto vo anabhirati? |
abhivadanapaccupatthanam afjaligarudassanam
ciram dittho maharaja sambuddham dipadattamam. |
afiidtam vat? aham bhante, karomi thipam uttamam,
vijanitha bhimikammam, thipam ‘kahami satthuno. |
ehi tvam Sumana naga Pataliputtapuram gantva
Asokam dhammarajinam evam ca Arocaydhi tvam: |
sahdyo te tmahrdja pasanno buddhasasane,
dehi dhatuvaram tassa, thfipam kahasi satthuno. |
bahussuto sutadharo subbaco vacanakkhamo  .
iddhiyé paramippatto acalo suppatitthito |
pattacivaram ddaya khane pakkami pabbata.
Asokam dhammarajinam rocesi yathatatham: |


a


upajjhayassa maharaja sunohi vacanam tuvam,
sahayo te mahardja pasanno buddhasdsane,
dehi dhatuvaram tassa, thipam kahati satthuno. | 10


79, Tissap? GiZn, Missakap® AB2G2, Missap° Bt. See v. 75. —
avasese kh° BGI, ‘Arama °m4flaka?


XV, 2. vutthimha BG2. — Jambudipinam ABGMaR, °pantam ©,
°pannam d’Alwis (Attanag., p. 134). Jambudipavham? — 4. °pacent-
thinam A. — ciradittho A. — sambuddho °uttamo? — Comp. Ma-


ho no mabfraja sammasambuddho, abhi-


hav., p. 104, and Sam. Pas.: ,cirad


yddanapaccutthinaijalikammasimicikammakaranatthdna n’ atthi. — 5. bhii-
mikampam Y, bhimikammam N. bhiimibhagam? Sam. Pas.: ,karomi
bhant thipam, bhiimibhagam dani vicinatha.¢ — karomi Y. — 7. kahati


BG2. — 8, acale Z, d’Alwis.


80 15, 1125.


sutyana vacanam r4j& tuttho samviggamfnaso —
dhatu pattam apiresi: khippam gacchahi subbata. |
tato dhdtum gahetvana subbaco vacanakkhamo
vehasam abbhuggantvana agama Kosiyasantike. | — -
upasamkamitva subbaco Kosiyam etad abravi:
upajjhayassa maharaja sunohi vacanam tuvam, | -
Devanampiyo raj so pasanno buddhasdsane,
dehi dhituvaram tassa, karissati thipam uttamam. |
sutvana vacanam tassa Kosiyo tutthamanaso

15 dakkhinakkhakam pAdasi: khippam gacchahi subbata.
simanero ca Sumano gantva Kosiyasantike
dakkhinakkhakam gahetvana patitthito pabbatuttame.
sampannahirottappako garubhayo ea pandito
pesito therarajena patitthito pabbatuttame. |
sabhituko mahdseno bhikkhusamghe varuttame
paccuggami tada raja buddhasetthassa dhatuyo. |
citumisam komudiyam divasam punnarattiya
Agato ca mahiviro ... |

20.... gajakumbhe patitthito.
akasi so kuficanidam kamsathalaggiyabatam,
akampi tattha pathavi paccante Agate muni. |
saikhapanavaninnddo bherisaddo samahato,
khattiyo parivdretva pijesi purisuttamam. |
pacchimukho hatthinago pakkami pattisammukha,
puratthimena dvarena nagaram pavisi tadé. |
sabbagandham ca mialam ca pdjenti parandriyo.
dakkhinena ca dvarena nikkhamitva gajuttamo, +
Kakusandhe ca satthari Konagamane ca Kassape

2% patitthite bhimibhage poran4 isayo pure |


11, dhitum Z, @Alwis. This may be correct. — 13. subbato ABG2, °te
G1Z, °co N. —~ 16. Kos’ antikam AN, °santike BGZ, d’Alwis. °santika?
— 18. bhikkhusamghapurakkhato, d’Alwis. — 19. 'catumasam ABG, cft®? Zn
—_komudiyim A2. D'Alwis: catumise komudiy’ dive#e punnarattiya. catu-


misikomudiya& divasam? — 19%, 20, These fragments do not form one
hemistich, for ,pati{thita* does not refer te Sumana, but to the relic dish,
see Mahav., p. 106, 1.8. — 21. kampsapitim (°ti A) va ahatam ABG2,


kamsith@laggivihatam G1Z, kamsamilaggiyahatam N.  D’Alwis: kameata-

lam viydhatam. — 22. purisuttame GIN, — 25. poriina ABG2Z, d’Alwis,
porta GLIM2n, — “issaro ABG2Z; issare G1, d’Alwis; isayo N. Lomp.
the Jataka quoted by Minayeff, Grammaire P., p. 1X.


15, 26—87. 81


upagantva hatthindgo bhimisisam gajuttamo
dhatuyo Sakyaputtassa patitthapesi nardsabho. |
saha patitthite dhatu devA tattha pamodita,
akampi tattha pathavi abbhutam lomahamsanam. |
sabhatuko pasddetva mahdmacce saratthake
thipitthakam ca kdresi sAmancro Sumanavhayo. |
paccekaptjam akamsu khattiyA thipam uttamam
vararatanehi samchannam dhatudipam varuttamam. |
sachattam paccckachattam dvethanavekachattam
tathartpam alamkéram valavijani dassaniyam | 30
thipatthine catuddisi padipehi vibhataka
sataramsi udcente va upasobhanti samantato. |
pattharilani dussini nAitiraigehi cittiyo
Ak4so vigatabbho hi upari ca parisobhati, |
ratanamayaparikkhittam aggiyaphalikani ca
kaiicanavitinam: chattam sovannavalikavicittam. {
ayam passati sambuddho Kakusandho viniyako
cattalisasahasschi tadihi parivarito. |
karunacodito buddho satte passati cakkhuma
Ojadipe *bhayapure dukkhappatte ca manuse | 36
Ojadipe baht satte bodhaneyye mahajane
buddharamsAnubhavena Adicco padumam yatha. |
cattilisasahassehi bhikkhthi parivirito
abbhutthito suriyo va Ojadipe patitthito. |


26. hatthinigo N, °ndingo A, °nige BGZ. — gajuttame G1Z. —
28. dasa bhRuke N. — sar ake N, karamdake A, karatthake BG, va-
ratthake Z, ca ratthake d'Alwis. — The words ysimayero Sumanavhayo“
seem to belong to another passage, perhaps to v. 19. — vy. 80 is wanting
in BG2. — sachattam AGN; setacchattam Z, comp. Mahiv., p. 104,
1 U1, — @vethanaveka- (°meka- A) chattam (*jattam A) AGZ, dvemapussa-
devachattam N, vethanam anekachattakam? — valavijanim? —
dassaneyyam AGZ, dassaniyam N. — 31. ,padipehi vibhataki* is wanting

eS udantave A, udenteya BGZ. — 82. pattharilini N, pakatikani Y.
iG, viya abbayi B, viya
Asi Z. _ ngardean “sobhati AZ, inst ca paris” BG, upari ca paso-
bhati N. — I do not pretend fully to restore this stanza, but I will try
at least to correct same of the blunders.


pattharitani dussani nandraigehi cittiya (cetiye? sce
Mah., p. 108, 1. 10 et seq.),
ik&so vigatabbho va uparapari sobhati, |
33. aggiphalikini ca A, aggiyathalikaui ca (° phalikani ca M2) BGZ, [aleghi-
{yaphalikéni ca] N.


6


82 : : 15, 38—52.


Kakusandho Mahidevo Devakito ca pabbato
Ojadipe ’bhayapure Abhayo nama khattiyo. |
nagaram Kadambakokase nadito asi mapitam
suvibhattam dassaneyyam ramaniyam manoramam. |
punnakanarako n4ma pajjaro 4si kakkhalo,
40 jano samsayam 4panno maccho va kumindmukhe. [
buddhassa Anubhavena pakkanto pajjaro tada.
desite amate dhamme patitthite jinasdsane |
caturasitisahassinam dhammabbisamayo ahi.
Patiyéramo tadi 4si dhammakarakacetiyam. |
bhikkhusahassaparivuto Mahadevo mahiddhiko,
pakkanto ’va jino tamha sayam ev’ aggapuggalo °ti. |
ayam passati sambuddho Konagamano mahamuni
timsabhikkhusahassehi sambuddho parivirito. {
dasasahassehi sambuddho karuna pharati cakkhuma,
45 Varadipe mahaviro dukkhite passati minuse. |
Varadipe baht satte bodhaneyye mahijane
buddharamsinubhavena Adicco padumam yathi. |,
timsabhikkhusahassehi sambuddho parivarito
abbhutthito suriyo va Varadipe patitthito. |
Kondgamano Mahdsumano Sumanakito ca pabbato,
Varadipe Vaddhamaine Samiddho nama khattiyo. |
dubbuttbiyo tadi 4si dubbhikkhi Asi yonaka, i
dubbhikkhgdukkhite satte macche vappodake yatha |
Agate lokavidumhi devo sammabhivassati,
khemo Asi janapado, assdsesi baht jane. |
TissatalakasAmante nagare dakkhindmukhe
vihéro Uttaririmo kayabandhanacetiyam. |
caturisitisahassinam dhammabhisamayo ‘abt.


‘


48. Mahfdevo patitthito pakkanto ca jino? comp. vv. 53.64. —
44>, sambuddho AGInZ, tadihi BG2.— 45. dasasabasscht AGIN, dasa-
sahassi ca BG24Z. — karund passati Y. karunaya pharati? comp.
vy. 56. — 49. dubbhikkham (°kkha A) setatthikam A‘3G2, dubdbhikkhi 4si
yonak& GIN, dubbhikkhe bhayapilite Z. dubbutthika tadé asi dubbhi-
kkham isi chatakam? comp. Cariya Pitaka: ,avutthiko janapado dub-
bhikkho chétako mahi‘; Sam. Pis.: ,,Varadipe dubbuttbika ahosi
dubbhikkham dussassum, satta chitakarogena anayavyasanam Apajjanti.“
-— maccho N. — appodake? comp. Suttanipfta: ,phandamanam pajam
disva macche appodake yath’.“ — 50. janussavo ABG2, °ve Z, °da Gl.
— 51. nagaradakkh° GIN.


- 15; 62—67,. 83


desite amate dhamme suriyo udito yatha |
bhikkhusahassaparivuto Mahdsumano patitthito
pakkanto ca mahaviro sayam ev’ aggapuggalo "ti. |

“ ayam passati sambuddho Kassapo lokanayako
visatibhikkhusahassehi sambuddho parivarito. |
Kassapo ca lokavidti voloketi sadevakam
visuddhabuddhacakkhuna bodhancyye ca passati. | 5S
Kassapo ca lokavidtt Ahutinam patiggaho :
pharanto mahakaruniya vivadam passati kuppitam |
Mandadipe baht satte bodhaneyye ca passati
buddharamsanubhavéna Adicco padumam yatha. |
gacchissimi Mandadipam jotayissimi s4sanam
patitthapemi sammabhain andhakare va candima. |
bhikkbuganchi parivuto ‘ikAse pakkami jino,
patitthito Mandadipe suriyo abbhutthito, yatha. |
Kassapo Sabbanando ca Subhakito ca pabbato,
Visalam nama nagaram, Jayanto nana khattiyo, | 60
Khematalakasimante nagare pacchime mukhe
viharo Pacinarimo, cetiyam dakasatikam. |
assasetvana sambuddho samagge katvina bhatuke
desesi ainatam dhammam patitthapesi sisanam. [
desite amate dhamme patitthite jinasisane
caturasitisahassinam dhammabhisamayo ahi. |
bhikkhusahassaparivuto Sabbanando maha&yaso |
patitthito Mandadipe, pakkanto lokandyako "ti. |

ayam hi loke sambuddho uppanno lokandyako:

sattinam cnukampiya tarayissimi pininam. | 65
so ’vapassati sambuddho lokajettho nardisabho
niginam samgématthiya mahdisena samigata. |
dhtimayanti pajjalanti verdyanti caranti te


52. suriye Y. — udite Y (except G1). — 53. ca ¥, va N. — 54. sam-
buddho GinZ, tidihi ABG2. — 58. patitebissimi ABG2, patitthapemi GZ,


(patitthapesi N. — summi A, sammabhi B, sammibham G2, sattanam
(nna G1) GIN, yam dhatum Z — 59. suriye (yo R) abbhntthite yathd
¥ (except Gi). — 6}. pacchimamukhe? comp. v. 88: uttaramukho. —


°sitakam? Comp. 17,10. -— 62. bhaituke ABG2Z, bhiasite G1, tasike N.
Comp. Mahav., p. 93, 1. 18, —~ 65. tarayanto (nto ca BG2) payino AB G2,
tarayissimi pauinam GIN, desesi dhammam uttamam Z. — 66. so va"
ABG so ca Z, te so N. — 67. dhipayanti? see Mahavagga, 1, 15. —
verfyanti Z, verayanti ABG2, veranai ca GIN.

a 6*


84 : 15, 67—81.


mahabhayan ti vipulam dipam ndsenti pannaga. |
agamA ekibhiito ’va: gacch4mi dipam uttamam
matulam bhagineyyam ca nibbapessimi pannage. |
aham Gotamasambuddho, pabbate Cetiyandmake,
Anuradhapure ramme Tisso nimasi khattiyo. |
Kusindradyam bhagavi Mallanam Upavattane
anupddisesaya sambuddho nibbnto upadhikkhaye. |
dve vassasat’i honti chattimsa ca vass4 tatha,
Mahindo nama némena jotayissati sdsanam. |
nagarassa dakkhinato bhimibhage manorame
drimo ca ramaniyo Thapirimo ’ti suyyare. |
Tambapanniti sutvana dipo abbhuggato -tada.
saririkam mama dhatum patitthissain diputtame, |

buddhe pasanna dhamme ca samghe ca ujuditthika
bhave cittam virijeti Anula nima khattiya. |
deviyA vacanam sutvd raja theram id’ abrayi:
buddhe pasannd dhamme ca samghe ca ujuditthika |
bhave cittam virdjeti, pabbajchi Andlakam. .
akappiya maharaja itthipabbajja bhikkhuno, |
dgamissati me riji Samghamitti bhaginiya,
Anulam pabbajetvana mocesi sabbabandban. |
Samghamitta mahApaiii


vi


s


~
a


fd Uttara ca vicakkhana
Hema ca Masagalla ca Aggimitté mitavada
Tappa Pabbatachinnd ca Malla ca Dhammadasiya, |
ettak’ ti bhikkhuniyo dhutaragé samahita
oddtamanasamkappa saddhammayinaye rata |
khindsavd vasi patté tevijji iddhikovida

80 uttamante thité tattha Agamissanti ti idha. |
mahdmattaparivuto nisinno cintiye tad


67. muhum bhayanti (bhay? A) ABG2. — yepullam Zn. pharanti
te mahfibhayam ativipulam? — vv. 69—76 are wanting in BG2.
69. ayam? — pabbato "nimako? — 72. suyyate? — 7 patigghissa
; patitthassam CG, patitthissam AMR. sariri ° dhata patitrhi-
ssanti? — vv. 74—77 are given in the MSS. with a number of omissions
and transpositions which it is superfinons here to indicate. — 77. mocesi
AG1Zn, mogeti BG2. — 78. Comp. 18, 11. 12. —~ Masa BGZ, Maya A,
Hema N. — Maragallad N. — Tapp4 Pabbatachinné ca N, Sabbat& (subb?
ABG2) Sinnaé va (ca M) Y. — Mala Y. — Dhammatasiyé Y, Dhammadii-
piyd N, — 80. uttamatthe AZ. This may be the correct reading. — 8. ui-
sinne BG2Z. — cintiye GiZ, cintaye N, khattiye AB, khantiye G2.


15, 81-95, 85


mantitukamo nisiditva mattanam etad abravi. |

Arittho néma khattiyo sutvaé devassa bhasitam |

therassa vacanam sutva uggahetvana sisanam

dayakam anusdsetva pakkAmi uttaramukho. |

nagarassa ekadesamhi gharam katvana khattiya

dasa sile samddinni Anulidevipamukha |

sabba paficasaté kaffid abhijaté jutindhara

Anulam parikkaronté sdyampato baht jana. | 85
navatittham upagantva dropetva mahindvam

sigaram samatikkanto thale patva patitthito. |

Vinjhatavim atikkanto mahdmatto mahabbalo

Pataliputtam anuppatto gato devassa santike. |

putto deva maharaja atrajo Piyadassano

Mahindo nama so thero pesito tava santikam. |
Devanampiyo so raja sahdyo Piyadassano

buddhe abhippasanno so pesito tava santike. |

bhatuno vacanam tuyham Amantesi maha isi.

rajakaifie Samghamitte Anuld nama khattiya | 90
sabba tam apalokenti pabbajjdya purakkhaka.

bhatuno sdsanam sutva Samghamitté vicakkhana |

turiti upasamkamma rajanam idam abravi:
anujana maharaja, gacchami. dipalaijakam.
bhatuno vacanam mayham Amantesi maha isi.
bhagineyyo ca Sumano putto ca jetthabhatu te |
gati tava piyo mayham gamanam varenti dhituyda.
bharikam me mahdrdja bhatuno vacanam mama, |
rajakaifié mahardja Anula nama khattiya


sabbé mam apalokenti pabbajjaya purakkhaka. | 95
bhanavdram pannarasamam.
81, mantetukamo? — khattiyam Z, khattam ABG, mattinam Na
(a)maccinam? mantinam? — 83. dasakam Z, diy? ABG, dar” N.
ayyakam abhivadetva? Comp. Mabav.; p. 110, 1.6. — 85. parikkha-


ronta? — 86, aruhitva? —- thale patva N, thapetvana N. — 88. pntto
deva N, putto (“tte Aj te ABG, putto te deva Z — Piyadassana BG2. —
89. Piyadassana B. — vv. 90 and 91%

in AGL. — 90, bli? vw & dmante:


comp. v. 93. — 91. purakk
rekkhar&? Comp. Sam. Pa
pbajjapurckkhara mam patimaneti. y
G2Z.—- 98, jetthabhata te (i. e, Mahinda)? —
ca pitaro (pitayo F) AFG. gata tava piye? —
yekkhara? see v.91.


ik’ ame at v.95). pu-
i khattiya itthisabassaparivuta pa-
93> and 944 are wanting in B
até tava piyo N, laddha
iresi AFG. — 95. pu-


86 16, 1-15.


« XVI.


Caturaiginim mabdsenam sannayhitvana khattiyo
tathigatassa sambodhim Adaya pakkami tada. | :
tisu rajjesu atikkanto Vinjhatavisu khattiyo
atikkanto braharafifiam anuppatto jalasagaram, |
caturaigint mahdsen’ bhikkhunisamghasivika
‘mahdsamuddam pakkanti Adaya bodhim uttamam. |
upari devinam turiyam hetthato ca manussakam
citudisaminusaturiyam, pakkanto jalasdgare. |
muddhani avaloketva khattiyo Piyadassano-

sabhivadayitva tam bodhim imam attham abhisatha: |
bahussuto iddhimanto silava susamabito ;
dassane akappiyam mayham atappaneyyam mahijanam. |
tattha kanditvd roditva oloketvana dassanam
khattiyo patinivattetva agama’ sakanivesanam. |. .
udake ‘ca nimmit& niga devatikise ca nimmita
rukkhe ca nimmiti deva nigdnivaisanam pi ¢a*} +
parivarayimsu te sabbe gacchantam bodhim utiamam.
amanipa ca pisicd bhitakumbhandarakkhasa
bodhim paccantam Ayantam parivarimsu aménusa. |
tavatimsA ca yama ca tusitapi ca devata
1o nimmanaratino deva ye deva vasavattino |
bodhim peccantam Ayantam tutthabatth’ pamodita,
tettimsa ca devaputté sabbe Indapurohita |
bodhim paccantam dyantan appothenti hasanti ca.
Kuvero Dhatarattho ca Virtpakkho Virtlhako t
cattaro te amahdrija samanta caturodisa
parivarayimsu sambodhimn gacchantam dipalaijukam. |
mahimukhapatahiro divillatatadindima
bodhim paccantam ayantim sadhu kilanti devata. |
paricchattakapuppham ca dibbamandaravani ca
i a


XVI, 3. bhikkhunisamghapimukha?
cAatuddisaminusaturiyam? — 5. apaloketva N, acaloketva F, avalo-
ketya Y. —.6. 1 do not try to correct the second hemistich. — 7. pati-
nivattitvad A. — v.8 is wanting in BG2, — n&ga (namga A) nivesanam
pi ca AGZ, nga nivdsanam pi ca F, vagddhivasané pi ca N. naganiva-
sane pica? — 9% parivarayimsu A. — y. 14 is wanting in BGZZ. —
°patahd ca? :


4. catuddisiman® ABG,


A


16, 15—80. 87


dibbacandanacuninam ca antalikkhe’ pavassati,
bodhim paccantam ayantam pdjayanti ca devata. | 15
campak& salla nimba nagapunnagaketaka

jalasigare mahabodhim deva pijenti satthuno. |
nagaraja nigakafifid nagapota bahia jana

bhavanato nikkhamitvi pijenti bodhim uttamam. |
nanavirdgavasand nanadragavibhisita

jalasdgare mabibodhim naga kilanti sidbu no. |
uppalapadumakumudanilani satapattakam

kallaharam kuvalayam adhimuttamadhugandhikam |
takkarikam kovilaram patalim bimbajalakam

asokam sdlapuppham ca missakam ca piyangukam
naga pdjenti te bodhim sobhati jalasigare. | 20
Amodita nigakahid nagardji pamodit’

bodhim paccantam Ayantam naga kilanti sadhu no.
tattha manimayé bhtimi muttaphalikasanthata,
aramapokkharaniyo nindpupphehi vicitta. |
sattahakam vasitvana sadevi sahamAnusd

bhavanato nikkhamantam pfjenti bodhim uttamanm. |
malidimakalap& ca nagakafiia ca devata

Avijjhanti ca cclani sambodhiparivarita. |

bodhim paccantam Ayantam sidhu kilanti devata.
paricchattakapuppham ca dibbamandaravani cz
dibbacandanacugnam ca antalikkhe pavassati. | 25
nagé yakkhd ca bhtita ca sadevi sahamanusi
jalasigaram Ayantam sambodhiparivarita |

tattha Mfccanti gayanti vadayanti hasanti ca
pothenti digunam bhujam te bodhiparivarita. |

nagé yakkh& ca bhita ca sadevi sahamanusa
kittenti mafigalam sotthim niyate bodhim uttamam. |
nigi dhajapaggahita nilobhasé manorama

kittenti bodhim uttamam patitthitam dipalaiijake. |
Anuradhapura -ramma nikkhamitva bahti jana


162, One syllable is wanting. We should probably for qsallA* read
jsatalaX or ,sallaka*; comp. Apadana (Phayre MS., fol. k@): ,,cam-


paka salajé nimba niina- (sic) punndgaketaka.* — 18. sidhu-no Zn, sidhuyo
AFG, sadhuso B. — 19. atimuttam m°? — 21. sidhbu no N, sadhuso
BG2, sadhuyo AFGIZ. — 22. tattha ABG2Z, tassa GiX. — 28. niyate


AZ, viyatam B, niyate F2G, niyato Fl, niyate N. niyantam? — °ut-
tame F, °uttamam Yn. 2


88 16,30 17,1. :


30 sambodhim upasamkant&é saha devehi khattiyo |
parivdrayimsu sambodhim saha puttehi khattiyo
gandhamalam ca pdjesum gandhagandhinam uttamam. |
vithiyo ca susammatthd agghiya ca alamkata. f
saha patitthite bodhi kampittha pathavi tada °ti, |
dapesi rija atthattha khattiyesu pan’ atthasu

- sabbajettham bodhiguttam rakkhitum bodhim uttamam. |
adasi sabbapariharamn sabbalamkaraphasukam,
solasa lamka mahilekhi dharani bodhigarava. |
tatha susiticattharam capi mahalckhatthane thape.

3580 kulasahassakain katva ketuchiditta palanam, |
suvannabheriya ratthaabhisekAdimangale,

_ekafi janapadam datva Candaguttam thapesi ca |
Devaguttapasidam bhtmi cekam yathdiraham,
kulanan tadaiiticsam va gimabhoge pariccaji. |

Raniio paficasati kanid aggajata yasassini
pabbajimsu ca ta sabb& vitaragA samahita. |
kumirika paiicasaté Anulaparivarita
pabbajimsu ca t& sabba vitaraga saméhita. |
Arittho nama khattiyo nikkhanto bhayaanduto
paticasatapariviro pabbaji jinasdsane.

4o sabbeva arahattappatti sampunnd jinasasane. |
hemante pathame mise supupphite dharantruhe
gato so mahabodhi patitthito Tambapannike ’ti. |

bhanavaram solasamam.


XVIL -
Battimsa yojanam digham atthdrasahi vitthatam
yojanasatadvattam sdgarena parikkhitam |
30. saha devihi? — 31. gandhagandhanam N, gandho gandhanam
“(Cram F) AP, gandho gandhddim (dam G1) BG, gandhodakam Z. gan-
dhagandhinam? — 33. bodhiguttim? — vv. 34—37 are wanting in
BG2Z, — 34. sabbalamkarupagata N, » Agatam F, sabbalam-
karapisukam AGI. — lamki AGIN, samgh — mehilekham AFG. —
dharani AF. solas’ aka mahflekha dharani (locative) bodhigdrava?
— 85. tathapi supificattharapincapi AG, tath tthah capi N, tatha
susaficittharai capi F. tatha sucisantharat cApi (comp. Mahav., p. 118,
1.4)? — kulayakam AG, kulasahassakam N, kusalassakam F. — ketum
chadittha (’tta G) AFG. I do not try any conjecture. — 36. °bheriyo?
~—— rattha AG. — datvd datvé Cand? AG. — 87. Dev? ca bhimigga-
‘gam? — dadaiifiesam va F, tarasamvis’ AG. tadaiifesafi ca? — 40, bha-
yaicuto Y, bhayaanduto N, bhayaaiicato F. aA


: 17, 2—18. 89


Lankadipavaram nama sabbattha ratandkaram

upetam naditalikehi pabbatehi vanebi ca. |

dipam purafi ca raj ca upaddutaii ca dhatuyo

thitpam dipafi ca pabbatam uyyanam bodhi bhikkhunt |
bhikkhu ca buddhasettho ca terasa honti te tahim;
ekadese caturondmam sunatha mama .bhisate. |
Ojadipam Varadipam Mandadipan ti vuceati
Lankadipavaram nama Tambapanniti nayati. {
Abhayapuram Vaddhaminam Visdlam Anurddhapuram
purassa caturonimam catubuddhina sdsane. |

Abhayo ca Samiddho ca Jayanto ca naridhipo
Devanampiyatisso ca rajino honti caturo. |
rogadubbutthikafi c’ ev4 vivadayakkhadbivasanam
caturo upadduta ete catubuddhavinodita. |
Kakusandhassa bhagavato dhatu dhammakarako ahi,
Kondgamanassa buddhassa dhatu kAéyabandhanam abi, |
Kassapassa sambuddhassa dhitu udakasitakam,
Gotamassa sirtmato donadhatu saririka. | 10
Abhayapure Patiydramo, Vaddhaminassa Uttara,

Visile Pacinaramo, Thiparamo ’nurddhassa :
dakkhine caturo thfipé catubuddhana sasane. |
Kadambakassa sAmanta nagaram Abhayapuram, e
Tissatalakasimanté nagaram Vaddhamanakam, |
Khematalakasimanta Visdlam nagaram ...
..... Anurddhapuram,

.... tatth’ eva caturodipavicdranam. |
Devakité Sumanaktito Subhakito °ti vuccati,

Silakito n4ma dani catupannatti pabbate. |

Mahatittham nama uyyénam Mahanimaii ca Sigaram
Mahaimeghavanam’ nama vasantam ariy4patham
caturolokandthanam pathamam sendsanam ahi. | 15


> -


XVII, 3. thipam dahaii ca? — 4. ekadese catnro (cattiro BG2) nima


ABFG, ekadesena vakkhami Z, ekadesam caturonimam N. — 8 catu-
buddha vin® BGFZ; this may be the correct reading. — 11. Uttaro
Al. — dakkhigo ABG, °ne ZFn. — 13. After the words_,Vistlam na-


garam“ N inserts ,puram“, Z: yabu“. Evidently some words are wanting.
-—~ tath’ eva caturodis&vicdragam? — 14. Silaktito Z — 15. Ma-
hanctham N, -Mahanopaii F. (Comp. Mabav., pp. 92. 93.) — pasattham?
—catunnam lok° AB G2.


90 2 17, 16—30.°


Kakusandhassa bhagavato sirfsabodhim uttamam
Adaya dakkhinam sikham Rucdnanda& mahiddhika
Ojadipe Mabatitthe arame tattha ropita. |
Konagamanassa bhagavato udumbarabodhim uttamam
Adaya dakkhinam sikham Kandananda mahiddhika |
Varadipe Mahanomamhi 4rame tattha ropita.
Kassapassa bhagavato nigrodhabodhim uttamam |
adaya dakkhinam sikham Sudhammé nima mahiddhika -
Sagaramhi nama drame ropitam dumacetiyam. |
Gotamassa bhagavato assatthabodhim uttamam

90 Adaya dakkbinam sékbam Samghamitta mahiddhika |
Mahameghavane ramme ropita dipalaiijake.
Rucinandé Kanakadatté Sudhamma ca mahiddhika |
bahussuté Samghamitta chalabhiiia vicakkhand
catasso té bhikkhuniyo sabb& ca bodhim Abarum. |
sirisabodhi Mahatitthe, Mahaname udumbaro, C
Mahasigaramhi nigrodho, assattho Meghavane tada |
acale caturarame catubodhi patitthita, .
acale sendsanam rammam catubuddhana sisane. |
Mahadevo chalabhiiifio Sumano patisambhido
mahiddhiko Sabbanando Mahindo ca bahussuto

pete thera mahapaiid Tambapannipasadaka. |

Kakusandho sabbalokaggo pafcacakkhthi cakkhuma
sabbalokam avekkhanto Ojadipavar’ addasa. |
punnakanarako nama ahi pajjarako tada.
tasmim samaye manussdnain rogo pajjarako ahi. |
rogena phutthd bahujand bhantamacchd va thalamhi thita
: socanti dummana |

bhayattita na labhanti cittasukhasatam attano.
disvana dukkhite satte rogabandhena disite |
cattilisasahasschi Kakusandho lokandyako


17. Kanakadatta A, Kandananda (°nta G1) SiN, Kanandi BFG2,


Nandi nima Z. — 18. Mahdn&imamhi A, Majamgénomamhi BG, Janv-
mamhi Z, Mabinomamhi X. — 19. reopita? — 21. Kandananda X, Kanda-
nandaé Gl.—> 22. sabba va F. — 23. Mahinome XG1. — 24. caturorame


YF. — catubodhi? — 24», acalo Y, ajalo F. — saisanam GIN, °ne YF.
— 28. bhantam® X, pantam® G1, mattam® A, patté m®? BG2Z. — thita N,
utthita Y, utthito utthito F. — 29. rogabhayena A, rogabhantena ‘BGZ,


rogabandena F, rogabandhena N. a


17, 30-45. ‘91


roganam bhindanatthaya Jambudipa idhagato. |
cattalisasahassehi chalabhififiaé mahiddhika
parivarayimsu sambuddham nabhe candam va taraka. |
Kakisandho lokapajjoto Devaktitamhi pabbate
obhasetvana devo va patitthasi sasavako.
Ojadipe Devaktitamhi obhdsetva patitthitam

devo ’va maffianti sabbe na jananti tathagatam. | :
udentam arunuggamamhi punnamdse uposathe

ujjaletvana tam selam jalaminam sakananam |

disvana sclam jalamaénam obhdsentam catuddisam
tutthabatthd jana sabbe saraji Abhaye pure. | 35
passantu mam jana sabbe Ojadipagata nara

iti buddho adhitthisi Kakusandho lokandyako. |

isisammato Devakiito manusse abhipatthito.

upaddave pajjarake manussabalaydhana |

nikkhamitva jan sabbe sardja nagard pura

tattha gantva namassanti Kakusandham naruttamam. {
abhivAdetvana sambuddham rajasend saratthaka

devé ‘ti tam majifiaménd Agata te mahajand. |

anuppattaé jand sabbe buddhasettham nardsabham.
adhivisetu me bhagavé saddhim bhikkhugane saha | 40
ajjatanaya bhattena, gacchama nagaram puram.
adhivaseti sambuddho tunhi rdjassa bhasitam. |
adhivAsanam viditvana rdjasend saratthaka — .
pjdsakkarabahute tadi puram upAgamum. |

maha ayam bhikkhusamgho, janakayo anappako,
nagarakée atisambidhe akatabhimi pure mama. |
atthi mayham bahuyydnam Mahatittham manoramam
asambadham adirattham pabbajitanulomikam |
patisallinasdruppam patiripam tathagatam
tatthaham buddhapamukham samgham dassimi dakkhinam. |%


80. bhindanatthdya N, bandhan® BG, bandan® F, mocanatthaya AZ. —
BL. °sahassd hi BG2. °sahassini? — vv. 33¢— 354 are wanting in A.
— 33. devo va X, na (omitting devo) YF; devo ti (comp. v. 89)? —
84. udaya aruy° N. — 87. manusse abhipatitthito Y, m°.abhipatthito F.
wanusseh’ abhipatthito? — upaddute N. ~ manusseabalayahane N, °nam
FGIZ, °ni ABG2. — 39. devo ti? — 41. adhivasesi AZ. — 42. piija-
sakkféram katvana te ABG2, °kkdrabahuna te Z, °kkarabahute N, °kka bahu
ca Te (va te) FGI. pijasakkarabahula? — 44, bahuyyinam FG1Zn,
brahuyy&nam ABG2.


92 17, 46—59.


sabbo jano passeyya tam buddham samghaii ca dassanam.
cattalisasahassehi bhikkhusamghapurakkhato |
Kakusandho lokavidt’ Mahatitthamhi papuni.
patitthite Mahatitthamhi uyydne dipaduttame |
akflapupphehi safichanndé yam kijici ca lata duma.
sovannamayabhinkaram samadaya mahipati |
onojetvana Lamkattham jalam hatthe akivayi.
im’ Sham bhante uyyinam daddmi buddhapdmukhe.
samghassa phasuvihiram rammam sendsanam aht. |
patiggahesi uyy’anam Kakusandho lokanayako,

50 prkampi dharani tattha pathamam sendsanam tada. |
pathaviacalan kampetam thito lokaggandyako:
aho nina Rucdnandé bodhim hariiva idhigata. |
Kakusandhassa bhagavato cittam afiidya bhikkhunt
gantvi sirfsamahibodhimile thatvé mabiddhika, |
buddho ca icchati bodhi Ojadipamhi rohanam, . ,
manusa cintayam tattha bodhim Aharitum gama, |
anumatam buddhasetthena anukampiya p&nino +
mama iddhinubbivena dakkhinasakha pamuccatu. |
Rucdnanda imam vakyam yacamand kataiijali

ss muccitvi dakkkinasdkh’ patitthist katahake. |
gahetvina Rucainanda bodhim, suvannakatahake
pancasatabhikkhunthi parivaresi mahiddhika. |
tadapi pathavi kampi sasamuddam sapabbatam
aloko ’va maha dsi abbhuto lomahamsano. |
disv4 attamana sabbe rdjasend saratthaka
aiijalim paggahetvina namassanti bodhim uttamam. |
Amoditad marti sabbe devata hatthaménasa
ukkutthisaddam pavattesum disva bodhivaruttamam. |


47. patitthe N, titthite A, saha patitthite BGZ, saha patitthe F, —


48. samchantam kimei ca A. — Instead of ,yamm kiiici* we should expect
a preterite ending in -imsu. — 49. lamkattha R, lamtagtha C, lamtattham M,
lamkatam FP. — fikiri A. — rammam N, mam F, imam Y. — 50. aha A


(instead of tada). Perhaps we should transpose ahii (v. 49), and tada (v. 50).

— 451. [paltha{vijAjatlam] N, pathaviajalan FL — kampento ABG2. —

52. Y omits gantva. — 53. rohanam (sic) BG, repanam AZ rilanam X, —
& T >


manusi N, manasi F, manussi ABG, manussa Z. — cintayam Zn, cintayan
Gt, cintayum ABG2, cittayan F. — pianusicintiyam tattha bodbim
abaritum gam&? — 57. sasamuddé Z. — aloko ca AGZ. — 59. “nara


ABG, maru Z, manu F, narfi N. mn


1T, 60—76.: 93


cattaro ca mahdrajé lokapala yasassino

arakkham sirisabodhissa akamsu devata tada. | 60

tavatims’ ca ye devi ye deva vasavattino

Yame Sakko Suyémo ca Santusito Sunimmito

sabbe te parivadrimsu sirfsabodhim uttamam. |

afijalim paggahetvina devasamghé pamodita

Rucanandaya sah’ eva pfjenti bodhim uttamam. |

sirisabodhim Adaya Rucdnandad mahiddhika

bhikkhunisamghaparibbtlha Ojadipavaram gami. |

deva naccanti hasanti pothenti digunam bhujam

Ojadipavaram yantam sirisabodhim uttamam. |

devasamghaparibbilh’i’ Rucdnand’ mahiddhika

Adaya sirisabodhim Kakusandham upagami. | 65

tamhi kale mahaviro Kakusandho lokaniyako

Mahatitthamhi uyyane bodhitthane patitthito. {

Rucanandé sayam bodhim obhisentam na ropayi,

disva sayam Kakusandho paggahi dakkhinam bhujam. |

bodhiyé dakkhinam sikham Rucénanda mahiddhika

buddhassa dakkhinahatthe thapayitvabhivadayi. |

pardmasitvé lokaggo Kakusandho nardsabho

adAsi rafifio “bhayassa: imam thdnamhi ropaya. |

yamhi thanamhi Acikkhi Kakusandho lokaniyako

tamhi thanamhi ropesi Abhayo ratthavaddhano. | 70

patitthite sirisabodhimhi bhimibhige manoramg

buddho dhammam adesayi catusaccam sanhakéranam. |

pariyosine satasahassam cattalisa sahassiyo

abhisama¥o manussinam, devanam timsa kotiyo. |

sirisabodhi Kakusandhassa, Kondigamanassa udumbaro,

Kassapassipi nigrodho tayobodhiviharana. |

Sakyaputtassa asamassa bodhi assattham uttamam

aharitvana ropimsu Mahameghavane tada. |
Mutasivassa atraji ath’ aiiie dasa bhataro

Abhayo Tisso Nago ca Utti Mattabhayo pi ca | rr

Mitto Sivo Aselo ca Tisso Khiro ca bhataro,


71. °ceam sayhakaranam GIX, °ecappakisanam A, °ecam sattakira-
yam BG2, °ceappakisato Z. — 73. tayo bedbim idh’ Abarum (°ram B)
AB@2Z, tayobodhivihiraya (raka N, °rupi G1) FGIN. tayobodhivica-
ranam? comp. v.13. — 74. bodhim? — 76. Sivo AG. — Kiro ca?


94 ; 17, 76-91. *


anudevt Anuld ca Mutasivassa dhitaro. |
tad& ca bilayo agd Lankadipavaruttamam,
yada abhisitto raja Mutasivassa atrajo re
etthantare yam ganitam vassam bhavati kittakam? | ,
dve saténi ca vass4ni chattimsa ca samvacchare
sambuddhe parinibbute abhisitto DevAnampiyo. | .

- Agata rAjaiddhiyo abhisitte Devanampiye,
pharati pufifiatej4ni Tambapannimhi issaro. |
ratandkaram tadd dsi Laikadipam varuttamam,

80 Tissassa puiifiatejena uggata ratana baha. |
disvina ratanam rij hattho samviggamanaso
pannikfram karitvana Asokadhammassa pahini. |
disvana tam panndkféram Asoko attamano aha,
abhisekam ndndratanam puna pahesi Devanampiyassa. | -
valavijanim unbisam chattam khaggait ca pidukam
vethanam sdrapimafigam bhiikfram nandivattakam |
sivikam safikhavatamsam adhovimam vatthakotikam
_ Sovannapatikatacchum mahaggham hatthapuiichanam |
* Anotattodakam kajam uttamam haricandanam

85 arunavannamattikam afijanam ndgamahatam |
haritakam Smalakam mahaggham amatosadham
satthivabasatam salim sugandham sukamahatam
pufiiakammabhinibbattam pahesi Asokasavhayo. |
Lankabhisekatisso ca Asokadhammassa pesito |
abhisitto dutiyabhisekena Tambapannimhi issaro. |
dutiyabhisittam -Tissam atikkami timsa rattiyo
Mahindo ganapamokkho Jambudipé idhagato. |
karapesi viharam so Tissdramam varuttamam,
patitthapesi mahaibodhim Mahameghavane tada, |
patitthapesi so thipam mahantam ramancyyakam,

6 akasi Devanampiyo Arama Cetiyapabbate, |
Thiparamam akaresi vihiram Tissadrimam,


-


76. anudevi GIN, adudevi F, ahudevi BG2, atfua® Z, abid® A, —
Anuladevi Sival&é ca (comp. 10,7)? — 77. pilayo N. yad& ca Vi-
jayo agi (comp. 6, 19)? — yad hisitto? — 79. °tejena GIX. —
87. Lankabhisgkatissassa BG2. Lankabhiseke Tisso ca .. pesite? —
88. atikkami Y, atiggayha N, atikkayha F. atikkamma? — 91. Tissaara-
mam N, Tissaigamam F, Pissairimam AUG2, Vissadr® Gi, Missakirimam Z.
The Tissframa having been mentioned in v. 89, I propose to tead v@h4-
ram [ssarasamanam, comp. Mahay., p. 119, 1. 14; P1238, IL. 3. 9.


“1, 91—106.. ; . 95


‘Vessagirifi ca kAresi ‘Gsickodeenahainbaas |

tato yojaniko 4rémo’ Tissarfjena kérito.

patitthapesi mahadanam mahapelavaruttamam.

cattarisam pi vass4ni rajjam karesi khattiyo. *ti. |
Mutasivassa atraj& ath’ afijie catubhataro,

Uttiyo dasavassamhi rajjam karesi kbattiyo. |

atthavassabhisittassa nibbuto dipajotako.

akasi sariranikkhepam Tissdrame puratthime. |

paripunnadvAdasavasso Mahindo ca idhagato,

satthivasse paripunne nibbuto Cetiyapabbate. | 95

samalamkaritvana punnaghatam toranafi ca malagghiyam

padipa ca jalamana nibbuto dipajotako |

r§ji kho Uttiyo nama kitagdram varuttamam

dassaneyyam akaresi, ptijesi dipajotakam. |

ubho dev4 manussé ca nig gandhabbadanava

sabbeva dukkhita hutva pdjesum dipajotakam. |

sattaham pijam katvina Cetiye pabbatuttame

ekacce evam Ahamsu: gacchdma nagaram puram. |

ath’ ettha vattati saddo tumulo bheravo maha,‘

idh’ eva jhaipayissima Lankaya dipajotakam. | 100

raj sutvana vacanain janakayassa bhdsato: ae

mahathipam karissimi Tissaramapuratthime. |

Addya saktitigdram Mahindam dipajotakam

nagaram puratthimadvaéram pavisimsu sardjika. |,

majjhena nagaram gantva nikkhamitvana dakkhine

Mahavihare sattiham mahdptjam akamsu te. |

katvana gandhacitakam ubho deva ca manusa

thapayimsu rajuyyane: jhdpayissima subbatam. |

sakitagdram gahetvina Mahindam dipajotakam

viharam padakkhinam katva vandépesum thipam uttamam. | 105

arama puratthimadvara nikkhamitva mahdjand -


92. yojanik& Grim& .. karita? comp. Mahav., p. 120, 1.2. —
mabameghavaruttaman, Y, mahapelavaruttamam N, mah&pelagarattamam F.
Comp. Mahav., p. 225, 1.15: on p. 202, 1 13 we have the following remark
in the Tika: ,mahépelabhattadi pathamam samghanavakinam dapayiti attho.“
— 93. dasavassapi N. dasa vassani? — 94. Tisstramapuratthime?
comp. v. 101, — 96>, va X, ca Y. —- nibbute °jotake A2BG2. —
97. pajesi N, pijesum FZ, pijetum ABG. — 101. Tissdramapuratthito XG1.
Comp- v. 93; Mahavamsa, p. 125, 1.5. — 103. dakkhing B, dakkhina A. —
105. kitaégaram Y, kitakGram BF


96 17, 106 — 18, 10.


.
akamsu sariranikkhepam bhimibhage samantato. |
aroha citakam sabbe rodamana kataijalt
abhivadetvina sirasd citakam dipayimsu te. [ :
sadhatum eva tathisesam jhdyamano mahagani. :
akamsu thipavaram sabbe 4rdme yojanike tada. |
katam sartranikkhepam Mahindam dipajotakam
Isibhamiti tam ndmam.samafia pathamam ahd. |


bhanavaram sattarasamam.


XVIII.

Idani atthi afte pi thera ca majjhima nava
vibhajjavadé vinaye sdsane pavenipalaka, |
bahussutd silasampanné obhasenti mahim imam,
dhutaiigicérasampanna sobhanti dipalaijake. |
Sakyaputté bahdi ¢’ ettha saddhammavamsakovida.
bahunnam vata atthdya loke uppajji cakkhuma,
andhakiram vidhametva alokam dassesi so jino. |
yesam tathigate saddha acal& suppatitthita
sabbaduggatiyo hitva sugatim upapaijjare. |
ye ca bhaventi bojjhangam indriyani balani ca

5 satisammappadhane ca iddhipade ca kevalam |
ariyam atthaigikam maggam ‘dukkhtipasamagéminam,
chetvina Maccuno senam te loke vijitavino ‘ti. |

Mayadevi ca kanittha sahajata ekamatuka
bhagavantam thanam payesi mata va anukampika |
kittita agganikkhitta chalabhiiiiid mahiddhikA =~
Mahapajapati nima Gotamt iti vissuta. |
Khema Uppalavanna ca ubho ti aggasivika
Patécira Dhammadinné Sobhita Isidasika {

“ Viskha Sona Sabalad ca Samghadasi vicakkhand
Nanda ca dhammapala ca vinaye ca visdirada
1o etd Jambudipavhaye vinayafii maggakoyida. |


Y, dipisn teja G1, dipimsu (dipisu F) te jana X.—
i yamino F, jhiyamane Z.

XVII, f thera pi Y. — vibhajjavadi A. — vv, 83—44 are wanting in
BG2. — 3. Sikyaputtd N, Suky® YF. Sakyaputtiy4? (or Sakyaputti?
see schol. Kace., p. 186, ed. Senart.) — 10. Soya X, SokA AG, Yokial. —
Sapala ca YF.


18, 11-23. 97


therika Samghamitté ca UttarA-ca vicakkhan&

Hema Pasddapala ca Aggimitta ca Dasika |

Pheggu Pabbat& Matté ca Malla ca Dhammadasiya

etA deharabhikkhuniyo Jambudipa idhagata. |

vinayam vacayimsu pitakam Anurddhapuravhaye

vynaye pafica vacesum satta c’ eva pakarane. |
Saddhammanandi Soma ca Giriddhi pi ca Dasiya

Dhamma ca dhammapala ca vinaye ca visdrada |

dhutavad’ ca Mahila Sobhand ca Dhammatapasa

Naramitta mahapaiifia vinaye ca visdrada | ib
theriyovadakusala Sata Kali ca Uttara,

eta tada bhikkhuniyo upasampanna dipalaijake. |

abhiifiata ca Sumana saddbammavamsakovida,

et tada bhikkhuniyo dhutardgd samahita |
sudhotamanasamkappa saddhammavinaye rata
visatibhikkhuntsahasschi Uttara sidhusammata

sujati kulaputtena Abhayena yasassina. |

vinayam tava vacesum pitakam Anurddhasavhaye

nik&ye paiica vacesum satta c’ eva: pakarane. |

abhifiidt’ ca Mahilé saddhammavamsakovida

Samanté Kakavannassa et rajassa dhitard | 20
purohitassa dhita ca Girikalt babussuta

Dasi Kali tu dhuttassa dhitaro sabbappika, |
eté tad bhikkhuniyo sabbapAli durasada
odatamanasamkappa saddhammavinaye rata |
visatibhikkhunisahassehi saha Rohanam Agata,
ptijita nafadevena Abhayena yasassina
vinayam vacayimsu pitakam Anurddhapuravhaye. |


1. 12, Comp. 15, 77. 78. — 11. Hema AGZn, Soma F. Hema? — ,
Pasidapala N, Pasfdassala FY. — 12. SallA YF. — ekadasa bhikkhuniyo? =
Comp. Mahivamsa, p. 115, 1.10. — 13. nikaye paiica (comp. vv. 19. 33)?
~~ 14, Saddbammanandi N, Sadhammanavantamga F, Saddhammacandabha
(ba A) Y. — Naramittd (Narim® F) mahapaiai X, Nagamissima Y, —

18. Uttaré sidhusammati X, Uttara simasammata Z, Uttara sisammata (si-
samatti A1) AG. We probably ought to read thus: visatibhikkhunisahassehi


saha ... Agati. Comp, wv. 23. 25. $2. — pajita kulaputtena? (comp.
vy. 23. 26, 37.).— 20. dhitaro? —- 21. DasikAlasiguttassa,Y, DAsikali
tu dhuttassa N, Dé&sikalabu bhuttassa F. — dhitaro sabbapalika? —


22, sabbap4li? — 23. As the Bhikkhunis mentioned here lived in Anura-
dhapv«a, I believe that we ought to read: Rohanamh[&} agaté. Probably
these Bhikkhunis came from Rohana to Anuridhapura at the time when


7


98. , 18, 24—88.
Mahidevi ca Paduma Hemisi ca yasassint Unnal’ Aijalt
Suma | '

eta tada bhikkhuniyo chalabhifiia. mabiddhika

2% solasabhikkhunisahassehi saha Samghamittagata, | -
pijit Tissarajena Devinampiyayasassind
vinayam vacayimsu pitakam Anuridhapuravhaye. | 4
Mahasona ca Datt& ca Sivalé ca vicakkhand
Rapasobhint appamatta pajiti Devamanusé |
Naga ca N&gamitta ca Dhammagutt& ca Dasiya
cakkhubhité Samudda ca saddhammavamsakovida |
Sapatté Channa Upali ca Revata sédhusammatd
eta venayagginam aggi Somanadevassa atraja |
Mala Khem4 ca Tiss ca dhammakathikamuttama

80 vinayam tiva vacayimsu pathamam apagate bhaye. |
Sivala ca Maharuha saddhammavamsakovida
pasidika Jambudipa sdsanena bahia jané |
visatibhikkhunisahassehi saha Jambudipigata
yacité naradevena Abhayena yasassina. | ‘
vinayam vacayimsu pitakam Anuridhapuravhaye
nikaye paiica vAcesum satta c’ eva pakarane. |
sa-Samuddanava devi Sivala rdjadbitaro
visirada Nagapfli Nagamitta ca pandita |
Mahilé bhikkhunipal ca vinaye ca visdrad4
Naga ca Nagamitté ca saddhammavamsakovida,

as et tadd bhikkhuniyo upasampann4 dipalaiijake |
sabba ‘va jitisampanna sisane vissuta tadd
solasannam bhikkhunisahassinam uttama dhurasammatd |
pjita Kutikannena Abhayena yasassind
vinayam vicayimsu pitakam Anuradhapuravhaye. [
Calanagi ca Dhannaé ca Sona ca sadhusammata
abhifiaté ca Sanha ca saddbammavamsakovida |


Abhaya Dutthag&mani, whose father Kikavanga had been king of Rohana,
and whose sister was the chief of these Bhikkheni®, transferred hia resi-
dence to Anuradhapura, after the defeat of El

"24, Unala YF. — 25. saha Samghamitta idbagata N. This passage is
hopelesay cogrupted. The names both of Samghamitta and of Devanampiya


(v. 26) seem to be out-ef place here. — 29. venayikanam agga? —
Chanda Y. — 30. apagato Y. —~ 31. pisidika CM. — pasadita Tambu-
dipe sasanena bahia jane? — 34. °samuddanara Z. — 38. Phanva


ca N, Dhamma ca F; these words are wanting in Y.


18, 8954, 99


. f a

Gawikadhita mahApaiifié MahAtiss4 visdrada
Cilasumand Mahasumand Mahakalt ca pandita |
sambhavita kule jata Lakkhadhamma mahayasa,
Dipanay& mah4pafifid Rohane sAdhusammata | 40
abhifiiaté ca Samudda saddhammavamsakovida
. Vibhajjavadi vinayadharad ubho ta samghasobhani, |

eta c’ afifid ca bhikkbuniyo upasampanna dipalafjake
odatamanasamkappi saddhammavinaye raté |

bahussuta sutadhara pApabahiraka ca ta

Jalitva aggikkhandha va nibbuta ta mahayasa. |

idani atthi afifidyo therika majjhima navi

vibhajjavadi vinayadhar4 sdsane pavenipalaka

bahussuta silasampanna obhasenti mahim iman ti. |

Sivo ca dasa vassini rajjam karesi khattiyo,

patitthapesi dramam vihdram Nagaraiganam. | 45
Stratisso dasa vassdni rajjam karesi khattiyo,

Kéresi paficasatéramam uliram puiifiam anappakam. |
Stratissata gahetvana Damilé Senaguttaka :

duve dvadasa vassini rajjam dhammena karayum. |

atrajo Mutasivassa Aselo Senaguttake

hantvana dasa yassAni rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
. Eléro néma namena Aselam hantvina khattiyo

catutalisa vassani rajjam dhammena kérayi. |

chandagatim agantvana na dosabhayamohagatim®

tulabhito va hutvina dhammena anusasi so. | 50
hemantam, pi ca gimb4nam vassinam pi na vassati,
satatam megho vassati sattasattaham pi vassati. |

tint adhikaranani Asi .. viniechi bhipati,

rattim ’va vassati megho diva pana na vassati. {
Kakavannassa yo putto Abhayo nama khattiyo
dasayodhaparivaro, varano Kandulo tabim, |

hanitva battimsa rajanam vamsam katvana ekato,

catuvisati vassAni rajjam karesi khattiyo. { ’

bhanavaram atthdrasamam. mahavaram nitthitam.

40. Robane X, Rosiimano Z, Rosimane (°ne.G) AG. — 41. vibhajja-
vidi? — 44. vibhajjavadi Y, °dd X.— obhasenta A, obhaseti GX, obha-*


senthZ. Comp. v. 2. — 45. Sive BF, Sivo AGZn. — vv. 47. 48 are
wanting in YF. — vv. 61—58 are wanting in BG2Z. — 51. vutthabi X,
vatthati (corrected iZto vassati) Gi, vassati A. — 52. ca AFG, va N.


7*


100 ; 19, 1-10.


XIX.


PSsidam mapayi raja ubbedham navabhimikam
anagghikai catumukham, pariccigé timsa kotiyo. |
sudhabhimi thilaselam mattikam itthakéya ca ls
visuddhabhimika c’ eva ayojalam tato marumpam |
fsasakkharapasana atthaatthalika sila phalikarajatena dva-
‘ . dasa, |
etni bhimikammani kirdpetvina khattiyo
bhikkhusamgham samodhanetva cetiydvattasammiti. |
Indagutto Dhammaseno Piyadassi mahikathi

5 Buddho Dhammo ca Samgho ca Mittanno ca visirado |
Anattano Mahadevo Dhammarakkhito bahussuto
Uttaro Cittagutto ca Indagutto ca pandito |
Suriyagutto mahandgo patibhanayisirado,
ete kho cuddasa sabbe Jambudipa idhagata. |
Siddhattho Maiigalo Sumano Padumo capi Sivali
Candagutto Suriyagutto Indagutto ca Sagaro-
Mittaseno Jayaseno Acalena ca dvadasa, |
Suppatitthito Brahma ca Nandisena Sumanadevi ca
putto mitu pitu ce’ eva gihibhita tayo jani. |
kérdpesi Mahathdpam mahaviharam uttamam

10 anaggham visati datva pariccago ... |


®


a


XIX. vv. 2—4 are wanting in BG2. — 2. mattikad A. — parup-
pam G, parupapam ca Z, marumpam N, badumam F, pari A. We ought
to read marumbam; comp. Mahfivamsa, p. 169, 1.8 (with the correction,
p. XXIV); Thipavamsa (MS. Burnouf 142, fol. kho’): ,{assopari ay
tassopari khindsav anerehi Himavantato ahatam sugandhamarumbam.* —
3. °pisina N, °p a G. — atthaatthalika (attha + Mi) sila? —
4. cetiydcattasamiti A, °Avattasammuti Z, ° Avattasamiti G, °avatthasamiti F,
Avattasammiti N. cetiyavatta[m] sammitam? comp. Mahav., p. 172,

=~ 1.10; p. 178, 14, — 5. Mittako (ke G1) ¥, Mittano F, Ttunno (sic, in-
stead of [MiJttunno?) N. Mahay. Tiki: Mittagya, — 9. Nandiseno. — maté
pita c? eva? Comp. Mahiiy. : »pathavikampanadihi aechari-
yehi vimhito raja attano samipe thitam paribbhamanadaydakagahakam amacea-
puttam tvam konimo tata ‘ti pucchi. aham SuppatittSitabrahma nama mahi-
raja ti aha. tava piti ko nama ti vatva mayham pité Nandiseno nama
maharaja ‘ti vutte, tava mata kanamaé “ti pucchi. mama miité Sumayadevi
nama mahérajé "ti aha. tenahu porana:


Sappatitthitabrabma ca Nandiseno Sumayadeviy’

putto mata pita c’ eva gihibhata tayo jana ’ti.< —
10.-The end of the verse may be written thus: pariccdgam catt&7i ca;
see Mahfv., p. 195, 1. 8.


a


19; 11 — 20,1. 101


gamikavattam sunitva bhikkhusamghassa bhasato

adasi gamikabhesajjam phasuvibiram .... |

bhikkhuninam vaco sutv4 harikale subhdsitam

adasi-c’ eva bhikkhuninam yadiccham rAjaissaro. |

gilikathtpam akdresi vihdrah Cetiyapabbate

).aresi Asanasilam Jalakam nima uitamam. |

Girinamaniganthassa vutthokise tahim kato

Abhayagiriti paiiiatti vohiro samajiyatha. |

Alavatto Sabhiyo ca Panayo Palaya-Dithika

cuddasavassam satta mas’ paiica rijano karayun. | 15

Saddhatissassdyam putto Abhayo nama khattiyo

Dathikam Damilam hantvé r nt m kéresi khattiyo. |

Abbayagirim patitthapesi silathtipam cetiyamantare.

dvidasavassam paiica masini rajjam kiresi khattiyo. |

satta yodhd Abhayassa arimam pafica karayum ;

Uttiyo_ca Saliyo ca Milo Tisso ca Pabbato

Devo ca Utiaro ¢’ eva ete kho satta yodhino. |

viharam -Dakkhinam nima Uttiyo nama kérayi,

Saliyo Saliydramam, Milo ca Miladsayam, |

Pabbato Pabbatarimam, Tisso Tissiramam kare,

evo ca Uttaro e’ eva Devagéram akamsu te. | 20

Kakavannassa atrajo Mahitisso mahipati

dinne kathikam katvina salikkhette mahfpati

adasi Summatherassa santacitiassa jhayino. |

yantam kathikam katvina tipi vassam antinakam

mahddanam pavattesi bhikkhu kotisahassiyo. {|

katapuiifio mahapaiiiio Abhayo Dutthagimani

kAyassa bhed& sappaiifio tusitam kayam upagami. |
bhanavaram ektmavisatimam.


XX. -
Kakavannassa yo putto Tisso nima “ti vissuto
kardpesi mabathfipam Tisso vibaram uttamo. |


11. gamikavattham Y, kamikavattam F, gamikavattakam N. — 12. hani-
kile N, marikale F. 1 do not understand this word. — 13. silathipam A,
comp. Mahdv., p. 202, 1.1. — vibire A. — 14. vutthokfse N, phuttho-
kase F, putthokise BGZ, vatthokase A. Comp. Mabav., p. 208, 1. 6. —
gata BFGZ, kato AN, — 15. The first two names ought to be Pula-
hattho and B&ahiyo. — sattamasam? satta mfs&ni? — 17, Abhaya-
giri YF. — 22. xante? — bhikkha kot’? — 23. mahapuiiio FY.


102 20, 2—15.


Viharam kérSpayati Kallakalena uttamam
afifiaii ca babu vih’ram Saddhatissena kAritam. |
caturasitisahassini dhammakkhandham mahdraham,
ekekadhammakkhandhassa piijam ekekam akdrayi. |.
pasddafi ca akdrayi manuiifiam sattabhimikam,
lohitthakena chAdesi Saddhatisso mahayaso; |

. Lohapdsddakam nama samafifia pathamam aha.
5kSrapesi kharapindam, Mahathipe varuttame {
hatthipakaram karesi parivaram manoramam,
caturassafi ca karesi talakam tavakdlikam. |
atthdrasani vassAni rajjam karesi khattiyo.
katva aiifiam babu pufiiiam datva danam anappakam
kAyassa bheda sappajiiio tusitam kéyam updgami. |
Saddhatissassa atrajo Thilathano ti vissuto
karaépesi mah4rémam vihiram Alakandaram.
dastham ekamdsaii ca rajjam kéresi khattiyo. |
Saddhatissassa atrajo Laiijatisso ‘ti vissuto
navavassam chamasam ca issariyam anusisi so. | ,
k4rapesi tilaficanam Mahathtpe varuttame,

to patitthapesi aramam Kumbhiladhimanoramam, |
karApesi DighathOpam Thipardmapuratthito,
silakaicuke karesi Thipamérémamuttame. |
Lajjitissambi uparate kanittho tassa karayi
rajjam chal ‘eva vassini Khallatanagandmako. |
kam Maharattako nama hantva Khallitakam camtpati
rajjam karesi dinekam paduttho akataiiiuko. |
tassa raiifio kanittho tu Vattagdmaninamako =
duttham sendpatim hantva paiicamdsam rajjam kari. |
Pulahattho tu Damilo tipi vassini karayi.


~ XX, 2, Gallakfélena ABG, Gallakalenam Z, Kallabalena N, Kallaka-
lena F. Kallakalenam? comp. Mahay., p. 200, 1.10. — aftiam G1X,
afifie Y. — bahi AB, bahu GFZn. — viharam GIXZ, vibire ABG2. —
7. bahum ABG2. — 9. Lajicatisso FG1Z, Laijatisse N, Lajjitisso, Lajji-
tisso BG@2 (comp. Mah., pp. 201. 202.) — 10. Kumbliladim® Z, Kumbhi-
lidim m° A, Kumbhilédhim® BG X, Kumbhilatimanoramam? See Mab.,
p. 201, 1. 6. — 12, Lafjatissamhi N, Laiicatissamhi FG1, Lajjikat? ABG2,
Lajjit? Z. —- 13. Maharantako AB, Kammaharattako’ZG@1, Kammahdrantako
G2, Kammaharathako F, Kammahiratthako N. — Khallatabhipatim A BG2Z,
tam Mahfrattako nama hantva Khallatakam camupati? Comp.
Mahav., p. 202, 1.10; the excellent Mahivamsa MS, of the India ae.
Library (no. 91) reads Mabfrattako.
a


g 20, 15—31. 103


duve vassdni Bahiyo camfpati rajjam kari. | 15
hantva tam Panayamaro satta vassini karayi.

tam hantv4 Palayamaro satta masani karayi. |

tam kantvi D&thiyo nima duve vassani karayi.

ete pafica Damilajata antariké ca bhipati

gatta masini cuddasa vassini kaérayum rajjam. |
Vattagamani maharaji Agantvana mahdyaso

Dathikam Damilam hantvd sayam rajjam akdrayi. |
Vattagamani Abhayo so evam dvddasa vassini
paficamasesu Adito rAja rajjam akarayi. |

pitakattayapalifi ca tass& atthakatham pi ca

mukhapathena anesum pubbe bhikkhu mahdmati. | 20
hanim disvana sattinan’ tadi bhikkhu samagata
ciratthitattham dhammassa potthakesu likhdpayum. |

tass’ accaye Mahactli Mahdtisso akarayi

rajjam cuddasa vassani dhammena ca samena ca. |
saddhasampanno so raj& katvé puifdni nekadha
catuddasannam vassinam accayena divam aga. |
Vattag’manino putto Coranago ‘ti vissuto

rajjam dvddasa vassdni coro hutva akarayi. |

Mahacilissa yo putto Tisso ndmé ’ti vissuto

rajjam karesi dipamhi tipi vass4ni khattiyo. | 25
Sivo nama yo raja Anulddeviyd samvasi,

ekavassaii ca dvemisam issariyam anussi so. |,

Vatuko nama yo raja Damilo aiiiadesiko

ekavassafi ca dvemasam issariyam anusisi so. |

Tisso nfmasi so raja katthabhatiti vissuto,

ekavass’ ekamasaii ca rajjam karesi tivade. |

Niliyo ndma némena Damilaraja “ti vissuto

karesi rajjam temisam issariyam anusisi so. |

Anulé néma s4 itthi hanitvana naruttame , °
catumasam Tambapannimhi issariyam anus4si sa. | 30
Kutikannatisso pama Mahdacilissa atrajo


17. antarika ca bh® ABGR, antaniki va bh° F, anantariké ca bh®
CMnu. antarikaé camtipati? — 19. °masesu FY, °masehi N. — 20. *ka-
tham pi ca XG, °kathini ca M, °katani ca COR, °katha pi°ca AB. bhi-
kkhG mahamati! — 21. bhikkhai! — 26. Sivo AC. — S° ca (or: ’ti)
nan? — so Y.— 27% so AZ.— 380% si BFGZn, ya A and the stanza
of the Pordyd, Introd., p. 6.


104 20, 81 — 21,6. :


uposathagharam karesi vihadre Cetiyapabbate, |
gharassa purato karesi silathipam manoramam,
rop3pi bodhim tatth’ eva, mahavatthum akdrayi. {
bbikkbuninam dadatthaya jantigharam akarayi,
Padumassare ca uyydne pakaraii ca akarayi, |
nagarassa gopanatthiya parikham khaniipesi 80,
pakarafi ca akaresi sattahattham antinakam. {


Khemam va Duggam ¢ nhipesi talékam vatikMlikam,
Setuppaladi ganhapesi V
46 dvevisati ca vassani raj


annakilam manoramam.


am karesi khattiyo. |


bhanavaram visatimam.


XXi.

Kautikannassa atrajo Abhayo nima khattiyo
Mahithipavare ramme saya dassanam Agami. | _
Khinisava vas? patti vimald suddhamanasa
sajjhayanti dhatugabbhamhi ptjanatthiya ganhati..|
raja sutvana sajjhdyam dhitugabbhe manorame
thiipam padakkhinam katya eatudvaresu naddasa. |
samantato namassitva narindo sajjhayam uttamam
iti rAja vicintesi: sajjhayam tattha ganhati? |
catudvare na ganhati, bahiddhapi na ganhare,

santo pi dhatugabbhasmim sajjhayam ganhanti pesala. |
aham pi datthukimo ‘mhi dhitugabbham varuttamam


33, atthiya AZ B2G2, adatthiya B1G1F, dadatthiya N. tad(a) atth-
fya? — 35. setuppaladim AB. — yaynamalam Z. — I conjecture:
Khemam ca Duggam khanapesi (or: gayhapesi? see 29, 64)
taldkam tivakalikam,


Setuppalavipim Khandpesi (ganhapesi?) Vannakalim ma-
4 : noramam.
Comp. 21, 17; 20,6; Mah, p. 210, 1.10,
XXI, 1. samgham dassanam agami? comp. v. 6: 13, 15. —
2. sajjhiyam dhitug?? — wSauhativ is said here and at v. 4 metri
causa instead of ,gayhanti*. Comp. ‘Therigith’ (Phayf MS., fol. fa):
»ko nu te idam akkhasi ajanantassa ajanato?*
Sampy. Nikaya (Phayre MS. vol. I, fol. ku):
nakkheyyasafiiino satta akkheyyasmim patitthita,
akkheyyam apariiidya yogam mti maccuno,
akkheyyam ca pariifiaya akkhatiran na mafpati —
4, tattha X, tassa Y. kattha? — 5a, ganbanti?


21, 6—21. 105


sajjhayam pi sunissimi bhikkhusamghafi ca dassanarg. |

rafifio samkappam ajifidya Sakko devinam issaro

paturaht dhatugabbhasmim there hi ajjhabhdsatha: | “?

raja bhante datthukamo dhatugabbhassa dassanam.

saddhinurakkhanatthaya dhatugabbham nayimsu te.

asva dhatugharam rija vedajato kataiijali

akési dhatusakkaéram mahaptjd ca sattaham. |

madhubhandapijam karesi sattakkhattum varuttamam,

akasi sabbapdjafi ca sattakkhattum anagghikam, | 10

afifiam pojati ca karesi sattakkhattum yathdraham,

sattakkhattum ca karesi dipapfijam punappunam, |

pupphaptjam akaresi sattakkhattum manoramam,

ptritajalaptijam sattaham dakaptijai ca sattéham. |

pavalamayajalaa ca kArdpesi anagghikam

Mahiathipe patimukka civaram iva pirutam. |

dalham, katvi dipadandam thipapAdasamantato

sappinalifi ca ptretva dipaii jalapesi sattadha. |

telanalim ptretva thipapédasamantato

teladipaii jalipesi cuddasakkhattum punappunam. | 15

gandhodakena pirctv4 kilaijam katvana matthake

pattharetv’ uppalahatthe sattakkhattum akarayi. |

thiipassa pacchimokise talake Khemandimake

yojetva yantakam tattha udakapfjam akarayi. |

samanté yojanam sabbam kusumanafi ca ropays,

akdsi pupphagumbait ca Mahathipe varuttame. |

makulapupphitam puppham samanetvina khattiyo

akaresi pupphagumbam cuddasakkhattum punappunam. |

nanadpuppham samocitvé sdlindam sahapdkaram

pupphathambham karetvana sattakkbattum punappunam. | 20
. addasa nandripam vicitrakam


7. there hi X, there ti G, there AIS, theranam Z. — 8. saddhanu-
rakkhanatthaya G. te XG1, tam Y. — 9 mahaptijafi ca N, mabapa-
jini Z. — 10, sabbapajam ABG2Z, gabbhapijam G1X. sappipijam? —
11. afijanaptijam ca karesi? Comp. Mahav., p. 212, 2. ~ 19. thipa-
paijam G1X. — ckapajam Y, dakapijam X.— 13. patimukkam? — pa-
rutam N, paéruto AFG1Z, paruti BG2. — 16. pattharitva AZ. — 17. Tissa-
nimake ABG2Z. — dakapijam N. — 18. kusumani (which may be the
corréet reading) ABG2, kusumfinam FG1Z, kusum&gam N. — akaresi N. —
19. makulap’ G1X, vakulap® Y. —- akasi FY. — 20. samocinitva Z.


"106 al, 21-34.


... akdsi samanaripani khattiyo. |
sudhakammam akaresi Mahathipe varuttame.
abhisekam karitvana akasi sudhamafigalam. |
Sakyaputto mabaviro assatthadumasantike é
sabbadhammapatividdho akarayi anuttaro. |
thito Meghavane ramme yo rukkho dipajotano
- tam bodhim pi abhisekam khattiyo ak4si sinanam. |
vassam vutthd pavaresum bhikkhusamghasukh4vaha,
25 pavarandnuggahdya pavaranadanam akasi so. |
adAsi candanam danam bhikkhusamghe ganuttame,
balabherifi ca addsi Mahathipe varuttame. |
lankamadamada c’ eva setthakanatandtaka
sabbesam samkharitvana Mahathtpe adasi so. |
visikhamdse punnamaiyam sambuddho upapajjatha,
tam masam ptijanatthaya atthavisati akarayi. |
Mahameghavane ramme Thiparame varuttame
karesi uposathdgaram ubhovihdramantare. | :
aka afifiam bahum puffiam dana cépi anappakam,
30 atthavisati vassdni rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
Kutikannassa yo putto Naganimo ‘ti khattiyo
karesi ratanamayam itthakadim varuttame, |
dhammasanaii ca sabbattha Ambatthalathtpamuttame.
giribhandagahanam ndma mahapijam akarayi. |
yavaté Lankadipambi bhikkha atthi supesala
sabbesafi civaram datva bhikkhusamghe ganuttame,
dyddasani so vassini rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
MahAdathikassa putto Amandagimani nama Abnayo iti
vissuto


21. samanar® X, samm&ni r? G1Z, sabbani r° G2B, sammir® A, —
22. akfresi ABG2, ca kiresi Z, karissanti XG1.— vy. 22b.. 28 are wanting
in B. — subham? N, sudhim® F, thapam? Z, maigalam AG. Comp. Mahiv.,
p. 212, 17. — 23. pakdsesi Z. akarayi is corrupted; at 13,50 we have
instead of it: ,buddho asi*. — 24. thite N, pitthito (°te M) AFGZ.
— yo F, gho AGZn. — dipajotako AZ. — sinanggy N, dhinnimanam
(‘tam A) AFG, bbipati Z. sin&panam? — 25. bhikkhusamgha su-
khavaha? — pavarapad® C. — adisi Z. — 27. lamkamamada Y, lam-
kamamadasadi F. Comp. 6, 69. V. 27 seems to be a conglomeration
of fragments ef two different verses, the first beginning (comp. 6, 69):
»sabbe sam(gham]...“ — 28. vesikham4ase. — 81. itthakadim N, °di
YF. — 32. girigayhigabanan F, giribhaudikan BG2, gitibhandikakan Z, giri-
gandikakan G1, girim bhandikam A. Comp. Mahay., p, 214, 1.2. — 34. ~na-
mako Y.


21, 34-48. 107


khandpesi udapanam GAmenditalakam pi ca, |
Rajatalenam karesi, thipassa rajatimayam
chattitichattam karesi Thipardme varuttame, | 25
Mahavihare Thiparame ubhopasddamuttame
bhandagaram akaresi bhandalenam ca sabbaso, |
maghatai ca akaresi Tambapannitale pi ca.
nava vass’ attha mds@ni rajjam karesi khattiyo. |
tass’ eva kanitthako raj4 Kanirajant ’ti vissuto
paripunnatini vassani rajjam kéresi khattiyo. |
Amandagimaniputto Calabhayo ’ti vissuto
patitthdpesi so raja Gaggardrdmam uttamam. |
rajjam karesi vass’ ekam Calabhayo mahifpati.
Sivalf nama sa itthi Revati iti vissuta | 40
catumasam rajjam karesi raifio Amandadhitaro.
Amandabhagineyyo tu Sivalim apaniya tam |
Ilandgo ’ti ndmena rajjam akarayi pure.
Tlanigo™ nama raj& sunitva kapijatakam |
Tissadtiratalike ca khanapesi arindamo.
chahi vassehi so rajjam karesi dipalafjake. |
Sivo ’ti ndma’nimena Candamukho "ti vissuto
akdsi Manikaramam vihdre Issaravhaye. |
tassa rafifio mahesi ca Damiladeviti vissuta
tafi fieva game attano vattam adasi drame.
satta mas’ attha vassani rajjam karesi khattiyo. J 45
Tisso ca nama so raj& Yasalalo “ti vissuto
satta mas’ attha vasséni raja rajjam akarayi. |
dvarapalassa atrajo Subharaja "ti vissuto
karapesi Subharamam Villaviharam manoramam, |
parivenani karesi attandmena samakam.
chamhi vassamhi so raja issariyam anusisi so. |
bhanavaram ekavisatimam,


34. pi ca ABG2, ea karayi Z, iva G1, idha X. — 36. bhandagharam
(instead of bhandalenava) X. — 38. tasseva kanitthako N, Tisso nama so
(yo C) YF. — 41. I believe that dhitaro ought to be corrected into dhi-
tik& which looks very much like it in Burmese characters. — 44, Mani-
karfimam Mn, Manik” ABCGR, Sayik® F. Manikaragamam? Comp.
Mahav., p. 218, 1.9. — 45%.¢ is wanting in BG2. — taifieva game N,
tafiecagime F, tafitekome AG1Z. — vattam F, vattam N, vannam A, vag-
nam @1Z. — 47. Mahav.: Vallivibaérakam. — 48. samakam YF, simakam N.
~- chahi AZ, chambi BGX. — vassehi C. chahi vassehi? comp. vy. 43.


108 22, 1-13. : ge


XX.

Vasabho nama so riji vihdre Cetiyapabbate
dasa thipani karesi kittiphalavaruttame. | -
Issariye nama drame vihdramr ca manoramam
karesi uposathagharam dassaneyyain manoramam. |
balabherifi ca karesi Mucelam vibaram uttamans.
sampatte tint vassAni chalani civaram ada. |
sabbattha Lankadipasmim ardme santi jinnake,
karesi sabbattha Avasain dhammikapdjam mabarahan. |
cetiyagharam karesi Thfipardme varuttame.

5 karesi ptijay? raja catucattalisa anfimakam. |
Mahiavihire Thtip4rame vihare Cetiyapabbate
paceekani sahassAni teladipafi jalapayi. |
Mayantim Rajuppalavapin Vaham Kolambandimakam
Mahanikkhavattivipim Maharimettim eva ca {
Kehilam Kalivapiii ca Jambutiii Cathamanganam
Abhivaddhaminakafi ca ice ckadasa vapiyo. | +
dvddasa matikai ¢ eva subhikkhattham akarayi.
puiifiam nandvidham katva pdkdram parikham pure, |
dyirattilam akdrayi, mabavatthui ca karayi.

1otahim tahim pokkharani khanjpesi nagare pure, |
ummaggena pavesayi udakam rajakuijaro. F
catucattalisa vass4ni rajjam karesi issaro ‘ti. |
Vasabhassa atrajo putto Tisso 'ti vissuto
dramam Mangalanimakam kirdpesi mahipati.
kresi rajjam dipasmim tini vassdni tavade ‘ti. | ~
Tissassa atrajo putto Gajibahukagdmani
kardpesi mahithipam Abhdyarame manorame. |


XXII, 1, kittip@lo v° BG2, kittipalav? AG1. Pessibly we should cor-
rect: Cittalakite varuttame. Comp. vy, p. 221, 1. 2. — 3. chalani
ABFZ,-chalani G, {chalaJnam N. A chacivaram instead of the ticivara is men-
tioned in the Mah., p. 229, 1.6, — 4. santi Y, panti X. famkhari? — 5. pu-
jayo? — 7. Mayenti A, Mayanti BGI, Yanti 7.G2 Cayantim N, V: sant F,
— Kolambagamakay — Mahanikkavittivapim
ca A, Mahayikavidh: imettim X, Mahamettiyam Y,
Mabagamadviin Maha . . — dJambidim F, ‘Jambu-
tim GIN, Jambuttim Z, Jambuttham B, Jambuvim A. Cambuddhim Ma-
hay, — V&tamafiganam Manav. — 9. parikhapikéram pure Y, parinapaka-
ram pure F.


108 22, 1-13. se


XXIL
Vasabho nama so raja vihdre Cetiyapabbate
dasa thipini karesi kittiphalavaruttame. | é


Issariye nama drime vihdram ca manoramum
karesi uposathagharam dassaneyyam manoramam.
balabherifi ca karesi Mucelam viharam uttamam.
sampatte tini vassini chalani civaraim ada. |
sabbattha Lank&dipasmim drime santi jinnake,
karesi sabbaitha avasam dhammikaptjiun mabdraham. |
eetiyagharam karesi Thipdrame varuttame.

skaresi phjayi raja catucattalisa antnakam. |
Mahavihare Thtparime vihare Cetiyapabbate
paccekini sahassAni teladipaii jalapayi. |
Mayantim Rajuppalavapim Vaham Kolambandmakam
Mahanikkhavattivapim Maharamettim eva ca |
Kehilam Kalivapii ca Jambutifi Cathamanganam
Abhivaddhamanakaii ca ice eckadasa vapiyo.
dvadasa matikai ¢ eva subhikkhattham akarayi.
piiviam nandvidham katva paikaram parikhamn pure, |
dvarattilam akarayi, mahavatthud ca karayi.

totabim tahim pokkharani khandpesi nagare pure, |
ummaggena pavesayi udakam rajakuijaro. :
catucattalisa vassini rajjam karesi issaro ‘ti. |
Vasabhassa atrajo putto Tisso ‘ti vissuto
drimam Majigalanimakam kirdpesi mahipati.


karesi rajjam dipasmim tint vassani tavade "ti. |
Tissassa atrajo putto Gajdbahukagamani
karfpesi mahathipam Abhaydrime manorame. |


XXII, 1. kittipilo v° BG2, kittipalav? AGI. Possibly we should cor-
rect: Cittalakite varuttame. Comp. Mahiv., p. 221, 1.2. — 3. chalani
ABF4Z,-chalani G, [chaljuam NX. A chacivaram instead of the ticivara is men-
tioned in the Mab., p. 229, 1. 6. — 4. santi Y, panti X. Samkhari? — 5. pit-
jayo? — 7. Mayenti A, Mayanti BG1, Ya z nti F,
— Kolambagdmakam, Mahiv —  Mahanikkavittivapim
ca A, Mahinikavidh i nettim X, Malhdmettiyam Y,
Mahdgamadviin Mahay. livasan + — Jambidim F Tambu-
tim GIN, Jambuttim Z, Jambuttham B, Jambuvim A. Cambuddhi
hav. — Vatamaiiganam Malidy. — 9. parikhapakaram pure Y, paringpaka-
ram pare F.


- 22,1428. - 109


matattham GAmanindmam taldkam karesi ndyako, —+
karApesi ca 4rimam Rammakam nama issaro.
dvevisati vassini dipe rajjam akarayiti. |
Mahallanigo “ti nimena Tambapannimhi issaro


Sajilakandakiramam, dakkhine Gotapabbatan, | 16
Hakapasinadrimam, vihiram SAlipabbatam
kArapesi Tanavelim, Rohane Nagapabbatam. { .


framam Gir Mtikam karApesi vindyako.

chavassam rajjam kArctv’ gato so dyusamkhaye “ti. |

Mahallandgassa yo putto Bhitutisso ‘ti vissuto

MahaAmeghavanuyyanam kardpanatthaya issaro |

parikkhepesi parikkhepam pakiram dvirattalakam

karapesi ca so raja drdmam Varanimakam. |

Gamanim nima talakam khandpetva vindyako

padasi bhikkhusamghassa Bhatutisso viniyako. | 20

khanapesi talakam tam Randhakandakanimakam,

kares’ uposathagdram Thiparime manorame. |

mahidinam pavattesi bhikkhusamghe vindyako

catuvisati vassAni rajjam dipe akarayiti. |

tassa kanittho nimena Tisso iti suvissuto

kiresi uposathigarain Abhayarime manorame. |

karesi dvadasatthanam Mahavibdramuttame,

vibirgm karesi so thipam Dakkhindrimasavhaye, |

tato aiifiam bahu puiiiam kalydne buddhasisane,

atthirasini vassani issariyam akdrayiti. | 25

Tissassa atrajo putto rajaraha dve bhatuka

rajjam Karesu dipamhi tini vassani nayaka. |
Vaikanasikatisso tu Anuradhapure rajjam

tint vassini karayi puriiakammanurtipava, |

Vaikanisikatissassa accaye karayi suto


14. matattham N, yatthava FG4Z, yattha ca AB. Comp. Mahav., p. 223,

~ Saj ramam N, Pajilakandak® F, Sajilakandhak? BG.
. — Gotapabbatam X, Golapabbatam G1, Kotip? B@2.
div.; Golap” A, Holakapabbate 4. -— 16. Mabav.: Naceli. — 17. Giri-
bilikam F. Mahav.: Antogiririhalikam, — 18. Ahutisso Y. — Bhavaran® F.
Gavaran°? Comp. Mabiv., p. 224, 1.10. — 21. Rannakanandakanamakam F,
Rannakapdakan® B, Rattakandakun® A, Rannakagandakan® G, Rannakagua-
kar* Z. — 24, dvadasattbine A, comp. Mahav., p. 225, 1. 6. — 25. ba-
hum A. — 26. atraja putta? — vv. 27—81 are wanting in N.


110 22, 2844.


rajjam dvavisa vassini GajababukagAmani. |
Gajababuss’ accayena pasuro tassa rajino
rajjam Mahallakanago chabbassani akérayi. |
Mahallandgass’ accayena putto Bhatikatissako
30 catuvisati vassini Lankdrajjam akérayi. |
Bhatikatissaccayena tassa kanittha-Tissako
atthdrasa samA rajjam Laikadipe akarayi. |
Kanitthatissaccayena tassa putto akdrayi
rajjam dve yeva vassini Khujjanago ‘ti vissuto. |
Khujjandgakanittho tam raja ghatiya bhatikam
ekavassam Kufijandgo rajjam Lankaya karayitti. |
Sirinago laddhajayo Anuradhapure vare
Lafkarajjam akaresi vassin’ ektnavisati. |
Sirm4go nama nimena Mahathipam varuttamam
36 ptjesi ratanamdlena, chattam thipe akérayi. |
kdresi posathagdram Lohapasidam uttamam,
dnavisati vassini rajjam kéresi khattiyo ‘ti. |
Sirindgassa atrajo Abhayo ndma mahfpati
adisi bhikkhusamghassa dvesatasahassardpiya. |
pasanavedim akasi mahabodhivaruttame.
dvavisa vassini raja issariyam anusasi so ’ti. |
tassa kanittho raja tu Tissako isi vissuto
Abhaydrame Mahathtpe karesi chattam uttamam, |
Mahimeghavane ramme Abhayarame manorame
4o akasi suvannathfipam ubhoviharamuttame. |
sutvd gildnasuttantam Devatherassa bhasato
adasi gilanabhesajjam paficdvisam varuttamam. |
rattim acchariyam disvA 4ramam Dassamialinim,
mahibodhimanorame dipartpe patitthasi. |
tassa rafiiio tu vijite dipanti akappiyam bahum,
“vitandavade dipetva dasesum jinasdganam. |
disvana raja papabhikkhu disentam jinasdsanam


.

28. dvavisati BGZ. — 29. pasuro Z, payuro F, sapasuro ABG. sa-
suro? — 33. raji ABG2Z, raja G1, rijam N, bhajam F. — Kuijanago
G1Zn, Kuficanago F, Khujjanamgo A, Kojjanigo BG2. — 37. riipiyam A.
— vv. 42.43 are wanting in BG2Z. — 42. rattim acch® N, rattiniech® F,
vargssa aceh® AG. — Dipamélinim N, Dassamélini (ni F) AFG. — dipa-
ripe (°ruse F) X, disaripe AG. — patitthayi A, patitthasi GX. Pati-
tthapi? — 43. cipanti AG, dipanti X. dipenti? — 44. °bhikkbum Mn.
°bhikkha? — dusaente A, diisente BG2, disentam GiZn, dasantam F,


22, 4458. 111


Kapilamaccam Adaya ak4si pApaniggaham. |

vitandavadam madditva jotayitvana sdsanam

+Hatthapanhthi pdsinam ad& Meghavanodanam.

dvevisati tu vassini rajjam kéresi issaro "ti. | 45
Tissassa atrajo putto- Sirinago "ti vissuto

rajjam kAresi dipamhi dve vass4ni andnakam. |
mahabodhissa sAmant& pakarafi cata mandapam

akarayi pisddikam Sirindgavhayo ayam. |

Asaiigatisso "ti ndmena Mahdthfipe varuttame
sovannamayani chattini karesi thtpamatthake. |

manimayam sikhathtpam Mahathtpe varnttame

tassa kammassa nissande pdji kiresi tavade. |
Andhakavindasuttantam’ Devatherassa bhisato

catudvare dhuvayagum patthapesi arindamo. | 50
Vijayakumarako nama Sirindgassa atrajo

pituno accaye rajjam ekavassam akdrayi. |

rajjam “cattari vassAni Samghatisso akdrayi,

Mahathijpamhi chattam so hemakammaii ca karayi. |
Samghabodhi nama namena rAja Asi susilava,

dve vassn’ eva so raja rajjam karesi khattiyo. |

ramme Meghavanuyyane dhuvayégum arindamo

patthapesi salakaggam Mahavihdramuttame. |

Abhayo ndma naémena Meghavanno ’ti vissuto

karesi sildmandapam Mahaviharamuttame. | 55
padhanabbimim karesi Mahavihdrapacchato,

k&resi bodhiparivaram silavedim anuttamam, |

silapariktaii ca karesi toranafi ca mahdraham,

karesi silapallaikam mahdbodhigharuttame. |
uposathagharam karesi Dakkhinéramamantare.

adasi sv mahddanam bhikkhusamghaganuttame. |


45. vetullavidam Y (except G1). This may be the correct reading
(see Mahav., p. 227, 1. 6), — Hatthapanhihi N, Hatthapagibi F, Hatthipannihi
Cntihi M) Z, Hatthiyanuihi (gnihi B) ABG. — pasdgam B, sihanam F,
balinam N. Hattha- (or: Satta-) paunikap&isidam? comp. Mahav.,
p. 226, L 11. — 47, citha? — I give this stanza according to N, the
reading of which is confirmed by Mabav., p. 228, 11. 8.9. YF (instead of
the whole stanza): panakam (patakum Z; F omits this word) pakaram ca
samaydapam akavayi pisidakam. — 484 is wanting in N. — Asamgahatisso
BG.~ Read: Samghatisso. — 52" is wanting in YF. — 57. mah@bodhi-
yaruttame ABG2Z, °garuttame G1.

a


112 > 22, 59-78.


katva rAjagharam r4jA mahavatthum manoramam
bhikkhusamghassa datvana paccha raj patiggabi. |
vesikhapijam karesi raj Meghavane tada.

60 terasini hi vassini issariyam akdsi so ‘ti. |
atrajo Meghavannassa Jetthatisso mahipati
rajjam karesi dipamhi Tambapannimhi issaro. |
manim mahaggham piijesi Mahathipe varuttame.
katvana lohapdsddam ptjetva manim uttamam |
Manipasido ’ti pannattim k4rdpesi nardsabho.
kardpetvana araémam Pacinatissapabbatam |
padasi bhikkhusamghassa narindo Tissasavhayo.
Alambagamatalakamn ganhapetva mahipati |
attha samvaccharam pijam kdrdpesi nardsabho.

65 rajjam karesi so rija dasa vassini Tambapannike. |
Jetthatissaccaye tassa Mahiseno kanitthako
sattavisati vassini rij& rajjam akérayi. |
tada so raja cintesi sisane dvisu bhikkhusu
ke dhammavadino bhikkhd ke ca adhammavadino, ke lajjt

ke alajjino? |

vicinetva imam attham gavesanto lajjipuggale
addasa pipake bhikkhi assamane patirtipake. |
piitikunapasadise vattam va nilamakkhike
asante assamanake addasa patirtipake |
Dummittam Papasonam ca aiifie ca alajjipuggale;

wo upento pipake bhikkhd attham dhammaii ca pucchi so. |
Dummitto Papasono ca ajiiie ca alajjipuggala
rahogaté mantayanti disanatthaya subbate. |
ubhosamaggabhavissam anufifidtam Kumirakassape
akappiyan ti dipesum dussilé mohaparuti. |
Chabbaggiyanam vatthusmim ananufiidtam dantavattakam


64. As to ,gaghapetva* (or ,khanapetva?*) comp. 20, 34.35. —
68. vicintetva ABG2, viriyetva F, vicinetva G1Zn. vicinitva? — patird-
papake (sic) N, [pa]yapatiddsake [,,pa“ is expunged]eF, pake G1, papake
-ABG2, papakimike Z.— 69. vattam va Y, vattava N, cattam ca F. —
72, ubhosamaggabhiviyam N, ubhosamaggam bhavissam F, ubhosamaggam
vibhavissam Y. The way for correcting these words is shown by the Ma-
hav. ‘Tika, folt ori: ,, Kumfrakassapavatthumhi (Mahavagga, I, 75) anufiadtam
gabbhamisena paripuggavisativassipasampadam pi na vattatiti.“ I therefore
conjecture: upasampadam gabbhavisam (or: °vise). — 73%. anafia-
tam Y. — dunnivatthakam (°ttakam BG) Y, dantavattakam X, The reading

a


22, 78-76, : 113


anufifidtan ti dipesum alajji dantaganika. |

imafi c’ afifiam bhikkhi attham afifie babu akarane
adhammo iti dipesum alajji labhahetukam, |
asAdbusamgamen’ eva yavajivam subhasubham

katvA gato yathdkammam so Mahisenabhtipati. | ®
tasmi asidhusamsaggam arakA parivajjiya

ahim yasivisam visi karcyy’ atthabitam bhave ‘ti. |


2 Ske ,


Dipavamsam nitthitam.-.
nibbanapaccayo hotu.


of X is confirmed by the Mahay. Tika, 1. 1: ,Chabbaggiyanam bbikkhd-
nam vatthumhi anuiidtam (anannihate?) dantamaye vijanimhi.s As to the
reading of ¥, compare the following passaye of the Cullavagya (Paris MS.,
fonts Pili 20, fol. ari’): wtena khg pana samayena Chabbaggiya bhikkld
dunnivatthd doppairata anikappasampanna bhattaggaw gacchanti* eée, For
further details, see my note on this passage in the Translation.


— 74. bahG? — 76. vasi?


7 -dantagaghika X. dandhaganik
Comp. Mahivanisa, p. 238, 1. 5.


TRANSLATION.


1, 1-7 117.


Adoration to the venerable, holy, universal Sambuddha.


: L

1. I will set forth the history of Buddha’s coming
to the Island, of the arrival of the relic and of the Bo
(branch), of the doctrine of the teachers who made the
_recensigns (of Dhamma and Vinaya), of the propagation
of the Faith in the Island, of the arrival of the chief of
men (Vijaya); listen. -2, Listen attentively to (the history
proclaimed by) me, which inspires joy and delight, which
causes serenity and gladdens the mind, which comprises
many various forms, 8. With elated minds, satisfied, de-
lighted and joyful, attentively receive the faultless, auspi-
cious discourse. 4. Listen all, giving your minds (to the
subject); I will proclaim a history, handed down from ge-
neration to generation, highly praised, adorned in many
ways, joined together in this (work), just as flowers of
various kinds (form a garland). 5. Attend to this incom-
parable praise of the Island (Ceylon), which dwells’ upon
the most excellent successions (of teachers and kings),
which is new and unrivalled and well narrated, which has
been handed down by Saints, which is praised by all good”
men and revered by the holy ones.


6. On the immovable, firm, unshaken throne, a place
worthy of the eminent onc, the highest of mer sat down,
establishing himself in the four branches (of fortitude).
7. Seated on this most excellent throne, at the foot of


118 Th DS 8,


the king of trees, the chief of men, the highest among
human beings, like a fearless lion, did not tremble, when
he saw Mara with the hosts of his army. 8. Having over-
come the dispute of Mira and put him to flight tegether
with his army, the Conqueror, fall of joy, wise, tranquil,
and steadfast, 9. mastered the state of meditation which
consists in spiritual insight, and the thorough perfection
of attention, (and also the knowledge of) many various
qualities, distinguished by manifold attributes. 10. Ma-
stering the knowledge of former existences and the gift of
supernatural vision, the enlightened great Sage spent three
watches of the night. 11. Thereafter, in the last’ watch,
he revolved (in his mind) the causes of existence; the
glorious One fixed the mind on them in direct and reverse
order. 12. Having thoroughly understood the Dhamma,
the highly wise One, who had reached emancipation by
the destruction of human passions, taught (created beings)
the abandonment (of temporal obstacles) and the attain-
ment of the path (to sanctification). 13. The great Sage
obtained (,abhisambuddhu*) the most execllent knowledge
of omniscience. Thus first arose the title ,Buddha, Bud-
dha‘. 14. Having penetrated all qualities and uttered his
proclamation (of triumph)'*), the light-giver then spent seven
days on that most excellent throne. 15. He in whom all
fear had ceased, who had performed his duties and was
free from sin, delighted, glad, and joyful, thought many
kind thoughts. 16. In one moment, in one instant a
Buddha surveys the whole world; he unveiled his five-
fold power of vision and looked down over many people.
17. The highest of men sent forth the irresistible power
“of his knowledge; the stainless teacher then saw the most
excellent Lankadipa, — 18. an exquisite country, endowed
with a beautiful climate, fertile, a mine of treasures, which
had been visited by former Buddbas and had been inha-
bited by multitudes of Saints. 19. Perceiving the most
excellent tsland of Lanka, a fertile region, a dwelling-place


1) This proclamation of triumph is the famous stanza, Dbp., v. 153,


1, 19—82. 119


fit for Saints, the compassionate One who well under-
stood the right and wrong time, thus thought: 20.

the present time Yakkhas, Bhitas and Rakkhasas (inhabit)
Laikésdipa, who are all too low for (adopting the doctrine
of) the Buddhas; their power J can outroot. 21. Having
driven out the hosts of Yakkhas, the Pisivas and Ava-
ruddhakas, I will establish peace in the island and cause
it to be inhabited by men, 22. ... Let those wicked
beings fully live out their span of life; (afterwards) there,
in the most excelent Lankadipa, an opportunity will arise
for (the propagation of) the Faith. 23. Having removed
(those) beings, having comforted many people and taught
them the way, the road, the path of Saints, — 24. I shall
reach complete Parinibbina like the setting sun. Four
months after’ my Parinibbina the first convocation will be
held ...; 25. a bundred and eighteen years later’) the
third convocation will take place, for the sake of the pro-
pagation. of the Faith, 26. Then there will be a ruler
over this Jumbudipa, a lighly virtuous, glorious monarch
known as Dhammisoka. 27. This king Asoka will have
a son, a clever man, Mahinda, the learned converter
of Laikadipa.“ 28. Having foreseen these circumstances
which were full of importance, (and understanding) the
right and wrong time, the blessed Buddha placed a (di-
vine) guard over this island. 29. 30. The Jina, having
performed bis various duties during the seven-times seven
days (at the following places, that is) the throne, the
Animisa (Cetiya) the cloister, the jewel-house, the Aja-
pala and Mucalinda trees, and seventhly near the Khira-
pala grove, the hero went to Baranasi in order to esta~
blish the kingdom of the Truth. 31. When he establishee
the kingdom of the Truth and preached the most exccl-
lent Truth, the conversion of cighteen kotis of beings took
place. 32. Kondafiia, Bhaddiya, Vappa, Mahinama, and
Assaji, these five great Theras attained emancipation when


1) A mention of the second convucation, which was beld a hundred
yeats after Buddha’s death, is wanting in the MSS.; the third is said to
have been held 118 years after the second.


120 1, 32—48,


he had preached the Anattalakkhana discourse. 33. Ke-.
siding in Baranasi, in Isipatana, the Jina released the four
friends of Yasa and, besides, the fifty youths. 34. Having
spent the rainy season in Baranasi, the Tathagata released
in the Kappasika grove the Bhaddavaggiyas. 35. Wan-
dering thence from place to place, he came to Uruvela;
- there the stainless Teacher saw Uruvelakassapa, un ascetic
of the Jatila sect. 36. In the room where Kassapa kept
his sacred fire, the highest of men conquered a serpent.
Witnessing this miracle they all invited the Tathagata:
37. »Reside here, o Gotama, during the four winter months;
we will daily provide you with rice.“ 38. The Tathagata,
the chief of men, residing during the winter in Uravela,
devoted himself to the conversion of the Jatilas together
with their followers. 39. (Once, during that period,) both
Ajgas and Magadhas prepared a great sacrifice. (Kassapa),
seeing that great gains (could be obtained) at this sucri- -
fice, conceived the following ignoble thought: 40. 41. »The
great Samana possesses high (magical) powers and great
faculties; if he shall perform miracles or preach in the
great assembly, the fee will escape me and go to Gotama.
Well, the great Samaya should not appear in the assem-
bly.“ 42. The Tathiyata understands action and resolu-
tion, intention and desire, the sixteen constituent parts .of
thought. 43. Having understood the thought of the Jatila,
the Sage, who looks through the minds of other men,
went by his high (magical) power to (Uttara-) Kurudipa
collecting alms. 44. Near the Anotatta lake Buddha took
his meal; there he gave himself up to meditation (jhana)
and compassionate thoughts.
“45. With his Buddha-eye, the highest in the world
looked over the universe; the stainless Teacher (then) saw
the most excellent Lafkadipa. 46. At thatgime the ground
of Laika was covered with great forests and full of hor-
rors; frightful, cruel, blood-thirsty Yakkhas of various kinds,
— AT. andesavage, furious, pernicious Pisdcas of various
shapes and full of various (wicked) thoughts, all had gs-
sembled together. 48. ,I shall go there, in_their midst;


1: 48-61 “PP


I shall dispel the Rakkhasas and put away the Pisdcas;
men shall be masters (of the island).*

49. Having considered this matter full of compassion,

the great hero rose into the air and came hither from
Jambudipa. 50. In the midst of the assembly of Yakkhas,

above their heads, he was secn, standing in the air, bold-

ing his seat (in his hands), 51. The assembled hosts of

_ Yakkhas saw the Sambuddha standing there, but they did
not think that he was the Buddha; they supposed him to

be another Yakkha. 52. On the bank of the river, near

Mahiya Pokkhala, on the site of the Subhangana Thipa,

there the highest of men stood, and entered upon the

highest eestatic meditation. 53, The Sage, the awakener

of quick attention, speedily entered upon that meditation

(by revolving) in a moment by one thought (the whole

system of qualities). Suddenly he thence rose; he who

had reached (all) perfections by -his virtuous resolutions,

... finished his meditation. 54. There the hero stood,

performing miracles by his (magical) power, lika a Yakkha

of high (magical) power and great (supernatural) faculties ;

gathering (?) thick clouds, cgntaining thousands of rain

drops, he sent rain, cold winds, and darkness. 55, (He

then spoke to the Yakkhas:) ,1 will send you heat; give

unto me a place where I may sit down. I possess such

power over the fire as will dispel these dangers.“ 56. (The

Yakkhas replied: ,If thou art able to dispel them, sit

down whereever thou likest; we all consent; show thy

power over the fire. 57. (Buddha replied:) ,You all ask

me for warmth; I shall quickly produce the great heat

which you «re desiring, a fierce, burning fire.“ 58. As

the sun shines in summer at noon, so fearful heat pene-

trated the assembly of Yakkhas. 59. Like the heat spread
by the four suns at the end of a Kappa, such and greater

still was the glow sent forth by the seat of the Teacher.

60. As the rising sun cannot be restrained in the sky,

thus (Buddha’s) carpet of skin cannot be restrained in the
air.. 61. The carpet diffused great heat, like the fire at
the end of the Kappa, us the sun (scorches) the earth,


422 1, 61-73.


or like a great flame of fire. 62. Diffusing heat like a
heap of burning coals, the carpet appeared similar to a
cloud, or to a glowing iron mountain. 63) It spread in-
supportable heat over the islands. The Yakkhas quickly
fled in all ten directions, to the east, the west, the south,
* the north, above, and beneath. 64. ,Whither shall we ge
for safety and refuge? How shall we be released from
this fearful being? 65. If this powerful Yakkha assumes
the form of the fiery element, and burns us, all of us
Yakkhas will perish like a handfal of chaff, like dust blown
away: by the wind.“ 66. And Buddha, the chief among
Sages, the bringer of happiness, the compassionate, merci-
ful great Sage, when he saw the afflicted, frightened Ya-
kkhas, thought how to administer joy to the minds of
these non-human -beings. 67. (IIc) then (thought of) an-
other island, similar to this, with low ground and high
ground, with many various aspects, beautifally adorned
by rivers, mountains, and lakes, the island of Giri, most
similar to the country of Lanka. 68. (It was) free from
danger, well protected, surrounded by the ocean, full of
excellent food and rich grain, with a well tempered cli-
mate, a green, grassy land, the beautiful island of Giri,
superior to this (island). 69. It was charming and de-
lightful, green and cool, adorned by gardens. and forests,
exquisite; there were trees, full of blossoms and fruits;
it was empty and solitary, subject to no master. 70. (It
was situated) in the great sea, in the midst of the ocean
and of the deep waters, where the waves incessantly break;
around it there was a chain of mountains, towering, diffi-
cult to pass; to enter it against the wish (of the inhabi-
“tants) was difficult. 71. Full of desire and anger towards
other beings, backbiting, pitiless, given to injuring other
beings, cruel and furious, violent, merciless,... 72. (Bud-
dha thus spoke:) ,Ye Rakbtasss and ye wicked hosts of
Yakkhas, I give unto you this island which is not far
from Lank&, the whole old island of Giri; may they all
inhabit it aid multiply undisturbed. 73. This country of
Lanka is a residence inhabited by men since remote Kappas;


x “8 4 va—si. oe “493


may many men dwell in the country of Lanka, as they
did in former times in the Oja, Vara, and Manda island.
74, Adorned with these and other good qualities, a resi-
dence fit for men, auspicious in many ways, it will shine
among the islands, when the Doctrine will have been
drought there, like the full moon in the sky at the time
of Uposatha.“ 75. Weighing the prosperity and the high -
happiness of the two, the Sage who knew all worlds, in-
terchanged the two islands and the two (kinds of beings),
men and Rakkbasas, (as a peasant) casily (interchanges)
his pairs of bullocks. 76. ‘Gotama by his (magical) power
drew the island towards himself, like the headstalls of
bullocks which are drawn (towards the driver) with a
strong rope. The Sage drew together one island towards
the other, like two ships which are surrounded by stout
ropes. 77. Ilaving joined the beautiful island to the
other, the Tathagata transported (?) the Rakkhasas, (say-
ing:) ,May all Rakkhasas dwell in Giridipa...“ 78. The
eager Yakkhas ran to Giridipa, like thirsty people in sum-
mer to a river; they all entered it never to return; the
Sage (then) restored the island to its former place. 79. The
highly satisfied Yakkhas and the highly pleased Rakkha-
sas, having received this excellent island which they de-
sired, all began to laugh with great joy, and all went to
celebrate the festival called Nakkhattamaha. 80. When
Buddha saw that joy had been restored to these non--
human beings, he the Jina, having exerted his benevolence
towards them, pronounced the spell of protection. Having
walked three times round the island, for the sake of its
ever-lasting protection and the expulsion of the Yakkha
hosts, — 81. having comforted the Pisacas and (other)
non-human beings, having established a guard and restored
a lasting peace, having put down all distress in the island,
the Tathigata returned to Uruvela.
Here ends (Buddha’s) subjection of the Yakkhas.


124 2, t—12.


I.


1. Again, the holy, glorious Sambuddha (once) dwelt
near the most excellent capital of Kosala, in the garden
of Sudatta (And ithapindika). 2. In this Jetavana garden
Buddha, the light-giving king of the Truth, looking aH
over the world, saw beautiful Tambapanni. 3. When five
years had elapsed (after he had attained Buddhahood), he
went to the country of Tambapanni. By dispelling the
Avaruddhaka (demons) he (once) himself had made the
island empty. 4. (But) now the mountain serpents and
the sea serpents fought a battle in the island, having
arranged their arrays on both sides, an awful struggle.
5. All those Nagas possessed great (magical) powers, all
were frightfully venomous, all were wicked and. violent,
furious and filled with desire. 6. The Serpents were quick
and excessively powerful, corrupt, cruel, and harsh, hasty,
given to anger, longing for destruction (2). 7. Powerful
Mahodara und resplendent Cilodara, both were valiant,
both had an exceedingly brilliant appearance. 8. No one
saw a way how peaceably to compose that struggle (?).
Mahodara whose fierceness was furiously excited by pride,
was destroying the island with its mountains and its fo-
rests: J vill kill all hostile serpents.“ 9. Ctlodara,. filled
with pride, roared: ,May thousand kotis of Nagas ap-
proach; I will slay all them who dare to enter the battle;
I will change the island, all its hundred yojanas, Ynto one
desert.“ 10. The Serpents whose venomous fury could
not be restrained, who possessed high (magical) powers,
aged and sent forth flames (sent forth smoke and flames?);
“the Serpent kings, infatuated with anger, incited them to
destroy the foes (who opposed them) in the battle.

11. Buddha, the blessed wanderer through the world,
when he perceived the anger of the Serpent kings, (and
saw) that the island was being destroyed, thought, in or-
der to prevent this, many kind thoughts, for the sake of
the highest bliss of (men) and gods. 12. (He thus re-
flected:) ,If I do not go (to Lanka), the Serpents will not


-@, 12-28, - 195


become happy; the island will be destroyed, and there
will be no welfare in future time. 13. Out of compassion
fer the Nagas, for the sake of happiness (of men) I shall
go there; may the happiness of the island prosper (?).
14. I perceive the excellent qualities of Lankadipa; the
Serpents shall not destroy the island from which I for-
merly have driven ont the Yakkhas, and to which I have
done good.“ 15, Speaking thus the Sambuddha rose from
his seat; he who possessed the gift of (supernatural) vi-
sion, left the Gandhakuti, and stood in the door (of the
Jetavana garden). 16. All the gods who resided in the
trees of the Jetavana garden, offered their services to
him: ,Let us go (with’ thee, o Sage who art) possessed
of (supernatural) vision.“ 17, (Buddha replied:) ,,Nay, re-
main ye all, Samiddhi alone may go (with me).“ (Sam-
iddhi) went, taking up the tree (where his residence
was,) and holding it from behind (over Buddha’s head).
18. Samiddhi, when he heard what Buddha had said, was
delighted; he took up the tree, roots and all, and followed
the Tathagata. 19. The highly powerful king of gods
gave shade to the Sambuddha, the highest among men,
and held (the tree) from behind over the most excellent
Buddha. 20. The highest of men went to the place where
the Nagas fought their battle; the merciful Teagher (there)
stood in the middle of both*noble Nagas. 21. Going
through the air over the heads of both Nagas, the Sam-
huddha} the chief of the world, produced a deep, terri-
fying darkness, 22, There arose a thick darkness, caused
by the great (magical) power of the lion (among men);
he was covered and veiled (?) by the darkness, and the
tree too (?). 23. The frightened, terrifyed Nagas did not
see each other, nor did they see the Jina (?), (or) to
what side they should direct their attacks. 24, They all
forsook the battle, threw down their weapons, and stood
all with clasped hands, paying reverence to the Sam-
buddha. 25. When (Buddha) perceived that-they were
stryck with horror, when he saw that the Nagas were
, terrifyed, he Sent forth bis thonghts of kindness towards


196. 2, 2689. .


them, and emitted a warm ray of light. 26. A great sight
it was, astonishing and terrifying; they all saw the Sam-
buddha like the bright moon in the sky. 27. Standing
there, resplendent with all the six colours, shining in the
air, illuminating the ten regions (of the world), he thus
addressed the Nagas: 28. ,From what cause, 0 great king,
- did this contention among the Nagas arise? Out of com-
passion towards yourself 1 have come speedily hither.4 ,
29. (They replied:) ,,This Naga Calodara and that Niga
Mahodara, the maternal uncle and the nephew, are quarrel-
ling with each other, desirous of treasure.“ 30. The Sam-
buddha addressed a speech full of compassion to the savage
Nagas: ,Anger which arises in the mind of the fool, begins
small, and grows great. 31. For what reason do you un-
dergo, all these many Nigas, great suffering? Destroy that
small throne, but do not destroy cach other. Destroying
one the other you are going to cause an unheard of de-
struction of life. 32. Then he who possessed the gift of
(supernatural) vision, agitated the Nagas by (the description
of) the sufferings in hell; he unfolded to them the (laws
of) birth in the worlds of men and devas, and the nature
of Nibbana. 33. As the Sambuddha, the highest of men,
thus preached the true doctrine, all the Nagas, casting
themselves .down, propitiated the Tathagata. 34. All the
Nagas (then) came together, the Serpents reconciled them-
selves to each other, and all took their refuge (in Bud-
dha), eighty kotis of living beings. 35. (Thus they spoke:)
»We might perish, all we Nagas, on account of this
throne.“ 36. The two Naga (kings), for the sake of re-
storing peace, took that most excellent throne (and thus
Spoke to Buddha:) ,Accept this throne out of compas-
sion, (o Sage who art) gifted with (supernatural) vision.¢
37. The Sambuddha who possessed the gift of (superna-
tural) vision, accepted it by remaining silent. When they
understood that he had accepted it, the two great Ser-
pents were delighted. 38. (They thus addressed Buddha:)
»May the blessed One sit down on this splendid, noble
Veluriya throne which the Nagas were longing for.“ 39. The


2, 39—51. . 127
Nagas placed that throne in the midst of the two islands.
There, on that throne, the light-giving king of the Truth
sat down. 40. When those eighty kotis of Nagas had
propitiated’ the Sambuddha, the Nagas there served to him
a meal, food and drink. 41. When he had removed his
hands from the bowl, the eighty kotis of Nagas, surroun-
ding him, sat down near the supreme Buddha.

42. At the mouth of the Kalyant river there lived a
Naga together with his children and with a great retinue
of Nagas; his name was Maniakkhika. 43. (He was) full
of faith, and had taken his refuge (in Buddha), a true
and righteous believer. When he came, to that assembly
of Nagas, his faith still increased. 44. When this Naga
perceived the Buddha’s power, his compassion, and the fear
of the Serpents (?), he bowed to him, sat down, and thus
entreated the Tathagata: 45. ,Qut of compassion to this
island thou hast first dispelled the Yakkhas; this kindness
towards the Nagas is thy second act of compassion to-
wards the Island. 46. May the holy, great Sage show his
compassion still another time; I shall attend and do ser-
vice to thee. 47. Ulaving heard what the Naga said,
Baddha, full of compassion for created beings, the blessed
One, accepted (his invitation,) for showing kindness to
Lankadipa. 48. Having sat on the throne, the Jight-giver
arose; the Sage then rested during the midday time in


the-interior of the island. 49. In the interior of the island
the suprtme light spent the day; he who possessed the
gift of (supernatural) vision, entered upon the Brahma-
vihdra meditation. 50. At evening time the Jina thus
spoke to the Nagas: ,Let the throne remain here; may
the Khirapala tree) station itself here. Worship, o Na-~
gas, all of you this tree and the throne.“ 51, Having
spoken thus, and preached to the Serpents, and given
them that sacred object used by (himself), the Sambuddha
returned to the Jetavana.
Here ends the conquering of the Nagas. -


7) This is the tree which the god Samiddhi had taken to the island;
see y. 17 et seq. -


128 , 9, 52-63. ,


52. Again, in the eighth year (after Buddha ‘ad
reached Sambodhi), the Naga king Maniakkhika invited the
great hero together with five hundred’Bhikkhus. 53. (These
Bhikkhus) whose senses were subdued, who possessed the
high (magical) powers, surrounded the Sambuddha; the
Sage rose up into the air in the Jetavana, and proceeding
“through the air, he came to Lanka, to the mouth of the
Kalyani river. 54. All the Serpents constructed a pavi-
lion of precious stones on the ground, and covered it
with garments of different colours, with divine clothes.
55, (There’ were) ornameuts of various precious stones,
various blossoms of many descriptions, many flags of va-
rious colours; the pavilion was adorned in many ways.
56. They spread (cloth over the) entire (floor) and pre-
pared seats; (then) they introduced the Fraternity with
Buddha at its head, and invited them te sit down, 57. Sit-
ting down together with five hundred Bhikkhus, fhe Sam-
buddha entered upon ecstatic meditations; he diffused (the
rays of) his kindness to all quarters (of the horizon).
58. Seven times Buddha together with his pupils attained
mystical trance; at that place (subsequently) the Maha-
thapa was built, the most excellent Cetiya. 59. The Naga
king Maniakkhika distributed a great donation (to the
Bhikkbus), Having accepted the donation of that Naga,
having taken food, and gladdened (the Nagas by prea-
ching to them,) the Sambuddha together with his pupils
rose up into the air, 60. At the place of the Dighavapi
Cetiya, Buddha, he who was full of compassion to the
world, descended from the air and again entered upon
mystical meditation, 61. Having arisen. from the trance

“at that place, the light-giving king of the Truth together
with his pupils, wandering through the air, then procee-
ded to the place where the Bo tree wag to be stationed
in the Mahimeghavana garden. 62. The Bo trees of three
former Buddhas (there also) had been established on the
ground; to that place he went, and there he entered upon
meditation. 63. (He thus prophesied:) ,Three Bo trees
(have stood) at this place at (the time of) the teaching of


2,68 — 3,9. -129-


ve Buddhas; my Bo tree also will stand on this very:
pot in future time.“ 64. The highest being, the chief of
men, having arisen from that meditation together with his
pupils. went to the delightful Meghavana garden. 65. There
also he plunged himself in meditation together with his
pupils. Having arisen from that meditation, the light-giver
proclaimed: 66. ,This place first Kakusandha, the chief
of the world, has accepted, sitting down on this spot
where a throne has been erected. 67. This place secondly
Konagamana, the chief of men, has .... 68, This place
thirdly Kassapa, the chief of the world, has ... 69. My-
self, Sambuddha Gotama, the descendant of the Sakya
tribe, the chief of men, have attained (trance), seated on
this spot, where a throne is to be érected.*


* TIL.


1. Setting aside the kings who reigned in the past
kappa, to whatever forms of existence they may have
passed, I shall completely enumerate the kings of the pre-
sent kappa. 2. Their descent, their name and tribe, their
age and (the length of) their reign, all that I will pro-
claim, listen to it according to the truth,

“8. The first inaugurated king, a ruler ofthe earth,
full of brilliancy, prince Mahdsammata by name, reigned
over his kingdom. 4. His son was called Roja by name;
(then followed) the prince called Vararoja, Kalyana and
Varakalyana, Uposatha, the lord of the earth; — 5, the
seventh of them was Mandhatd who reigned over the four
Dipas. (Then followed) Cara, king Upacara, and Cetiya, |
the lord of the earth; — 6. Mucala, Mahamucala, Muca-
linda, and also SAigara, Sagaradeva, and Bharata, the prince
called Bhagtrasa,— 7. Ruci, and he who was called Maha-
ruci, Patipa, and also Mahapatapa, Panada, and Mahi-
pandda, the king called Sudassana, — 8. he who was
called Mahasudassana, two Nerus, and Accima. These were
twenty-eight kings by number; their age extended to an
Asamkheyya (of years). 9. In Kusavati, in Rajagaha, in Mi-

9


130 3, 9-23.


thilA, best of towns, these kings reigned; their age
tended to an Asamkheyya (of years).

10. Ten times ten is one hundred; ten times a hun-
dred is one thousand; ten times a thousand is ten thou-
sand; ten times ten thousand is a hundred thousand;
— 11. ten times a hundred thousand is one koti; (the
following numerals are) pakoti, kotippakoti, nahuta, and
ninnabuta, abbuda, and nirabbuda, — 12. ababa, and also
atata, ahaha, and kumuda, sogandhika, uppala, pundarika,
paduma. 13, All these numbers are numerable and caleu-
lable by the means of’ calculation; the stage (of numbers)
beyond these is called asamkheyya (not calculable).

14. One hundred kings, sons of Accimi, governed
their great kingdom in the town called Pakula (?). 15. The
last of these kings was the prince called Arindama; his
sons and grandsons, fifty-six princes, governed their great
kingdom in the town of Ayujjhanagara. 16. Thé last of
these kings was Duppasaha, the lord of the earth; his sons
and grandsons, sixty rulers of the earth, reigned over their
great kingdom in Baranasi, best of towns. 17. The last
of these kings was the prince called Ajitajana; his sons
and grandsons, cighty-four thousand by number, reigned
over their great kingdom in the town of Kapilanagara.
18. The last of these kings was Brahmadatta, the Tord
of the earth; his sons and grandsons, thirty-six princes,
reigned over their gredt kingdom in Hatthipura, best of
towns. 19. The last of these kings was Kambalévasabha;
his sons and grandsons, thirty-two princes, reigned there
in the town of Ekacakkhu. 20. The last of these kings
was Purindada, honoured by the surname Deva; his sons

“and grandsons, twenty-eight princes, reigned over their
great kingdom in Vajira, best of towns. 21. The last of
these kings was the prince called Sadhina. His sons and
grandsons, twenty-two royal princes, reigned over their
great kingdom in Madhura, best of towns. 22. The last
of these kings was valiant Dhammagutta; his sons and
grandsons, eighteen princes, reigned there in the town of
Aritthapura. 23. The last of these kings was the chief


3, 23-—36. 131 |


of men called Sitthi; his sons and grandsons, seventéen
princes, reigned there in the town of Indapatta. 24. The
last of these kings was Brahmadeva, the lord of the earth;
his sons and grandsons, fifteen princes, reigned there in
the town of Ekacakkhu. 25. The last of these kings was
Paladatta, the lord of the earth; his sons and grandsons,
fourteen royal princes, governed their great kingdom in
the town of Kosambi. 26. The last of them was the king
known as Bhaddadeva; his sons and grandsons, nine
royal princes, reigned there in the town of Kannagoccha.
27. The last of them was the king renowned by the name
of Naradeva; his sons and grandsons, seven roy:l princes,
governed their great kingdom in the town of Rojanana-
gara. 28. The last of these kings was the prince ealled
Mahinda; his sons and grandsons, twelve royal princes,
governed their great kingdom in the town of Campi-
nagara. 29. ‘The last of these kings was Nagadeva, the lord
of the earth; his sons and grandsons, twenty-five princes,
governed their great kingdom in the town of Mithila-
nagara. 30. The last of these kings was valiant Buddha-
datta; his sons and grandsons, twenty-five princes, go-
verned their great kingdom in Rajagaha, best of towns.
31. The last of these kings was the prince called Dipam-
kara; bis sons and grandsons, twelve royal princes, go-
verned their great kingdom in Takkasila, best of towns.
32. The last of these kings was the prince called Talissara;
his sons ‘and grandsons, twelve royal princes, reigned over
their great kingdom in Kusinara, best of. towns. 33. The
last of these kings was the prince called Purinda; his
sons and grandsons, nine royal princes, reigned over their,
great kingdom in the town of Malitthiya (Témalitti?).
34. The last of these kings was Sigaradeva, the lord of
the earth; his sou. Makhadeva was a great, liberal giver.
35. His sons and grandsons, eighty-four thousand by
number, reigned over their great kingdom in the town of
Mithilanagara. 36. The last of these kings wag Nemiya,
- honoured by the surname Deva, a universal monarch,
a lord of the whole earth which the ocean surrounds,
gt


132 : 3,-87—B0.


37; Nemiya’s son was Kalktganake; his son. was Samam-
kura; (then followed) king Asoka, an inaugurated prince.
88. His sons and grandsons, eighty-four thousand by num-
ber, reigned over their great kingdom in Baranasi, best
of towns. 389. The last of these kings was the lord of
the earth called Vijaya; his son was high-born, brilliant
- Vijitasena; — 40. (then followed) Dhammasena, Nagasena,
the (king) called Samatha, Disampati, Renu, Kusa, Maha-
kusa, Navaratha, and also Dasaratha, —- 41. Rama, the
(king) called BilAratha, Cittadasst, Atthadasst, Sujata, and
Okkaka, Okkamukha, and Nipura, — 42. Candima, and
Candamukha, king Sivi, Saijaya, Vessantara, the ruler of
men, Jali, and Sihavihana, prince Sthassara, the wise pre-
server of royal succession. 43. His sons and grandsons,
eighty-two thousand kings, reigned in the town called -
Kapila(vatthu). 44. The last-of these kings was Jayasena,
the lord of the earth; his son was high-born, brilliant
Sihahanu. 45, The sons of that (?) Sibahanu were five
brothers, Suddhodana, and Dhota (Dhotodana), prince Sa-
kkodana, — 46. king Sukkodana, and king Amitodana; all
these five kings had names containing the word odana.
47. He the son of Suddhodana, Siddhattha, the chief of
the world, begot Rahulabhadda, and then left his home
in order to strive for Buddhaship.

48. The total number of these highly ‘cw obi’:
kings is four Nahutas, one hundred thousand, and Dires
hundred more. 49, So many lords of the earth are men-
tioned who originated from the family of the Bodhisatta
in this first (?) kappa, preservers of royal succession, ru-
_lers of men'). —

50. Perishable, alas! is whatever exists, subject to
origin and decay; it appears and perishes; its extinction
is bliss. .

End of the great lineage of kings.


1) The last words, which I think belong to this place, form, ™ the *
MSS., the second part of y. 53.


3,51 — 4,2. 133


61. The .king called Suddhodana reigned. in the
town called Kapila(vatthu), he the royal son of Sthahanu.
52. Amid the ‘five mountains, in Rajagaha, best of. towns,
reigned the prince who was called king Bodhisa (Bha-

- tiya!*), 53. Suddbodana and Bhatiya were friends of each
cther. When (Bimtbisira) was eight years old, five wishes
arose (in his mind): 54. ,May my royal father instruct

“mein the duties of royalty; may he the Buddha, the
highest of men, arise in my kingdom; — 55. may the
Tathigata show himself first to me (before going to other
kings); may he preach to me the eternal Truth; may I
penetrate that most excellent Truth.“ 56. These were the
five wishes which arose in Bimbisdra’s mind. When he
was fifteen years old, he received the royal coronation after
his father’s death; — 57. he (Buddha) the chief of the world
arose in his beautiful kingdom; the Tathagata showed
himself to him first; when he preached his eternal Truth,
the lord of the earth apprehended it. 58. The great hero
then was full thirty-five years old; Bimbisara, the lord of
the earth, was thirty years old. Gotama was five years
older than Bimbisdra. 59. Fifty-two years this prince
reigned; thirty-seven years he reigned after having for-
med that connection with the Buddha. 60. Prince Ajata-
satty reigned thirty-two years. Light years after his co-
ronation the Sambuddha reached Parinibbana. 61. After
the Parinibbana of the Sambuddha, the highest One in
the world, the chief of men, that prince reigned (still)
twenty-four years.


IV. Ee


1. The congregation of Bhikkhus, seven hundred thou-
sand (in number), assembled, holy men who having sub-
dued their passions and having become pure, had all at-
tained the summit of perfection. 2. They all, having made’
enquiry and determined which were the most worthy,
elected by vote of the congregation five hundred Theras.


1) The father of Bimbisara.
.


134 4, 3—14.


3..Kassapa was the chief propounder of the Dhutafiga pre-
cepts according to the doctrine of the Jina; Ananda was
the first of those learned (in the Suttas), wise Upali was
chief in the Vinaya, — 4. Anuruddha in the (supernatu-
ral) visions, Vafigisa in promptly comprehending, Punna
among the preachers of the Dhamma, Kumiarakassapa
among the students of various iales, — 5. Kaccana in
establishing distinctions, Kotthita in analytical knowledge.
There were, besides, many other great Theras who were
original depositaries (of Buddha’s doctrine). 6. By these
and other saintly Theras who had fulfilled their duties,
to the number of five hundred, was the collection of the
Dhamma and of the Vinaya made; because it was col-
lected by the Theras, it is called the doctrine of the Theras
(theravdda). 7. The Bhikkhus composed the collection of
Dhamma and Vinaya by consulting Upali about the Vi-
naya, and by asking the (Thera) called Ananda regarding
the Dhamma. 8. Thera Mahakassapa and the great tea-
cher Anuruddha, Thera Upali of powerful memory, and
the learned Ananda, — 9. as well as many other distin-
guished disciples, who had been praised by the master,
who possessed analytical knowledge, firmness, the six
(supernatural) “faculties and the great (magical) powers,
who had attained the mystic trance proceeding from self-
concentration, who had completely mastered the true faith,
— 10. all these five hundred Theras bore in their minds
the nine-fold doctrine of the Jina, having acquiréd it from
the best of Buddhas. 11. They who had heard and re-
ceived from Bhagavat himself the whole Dhamma and
Vinaya taught by the Buddha, — 12. they who knew the
“Dhamma, who knew the Vinaya, who all were acquainted
with the Agamas, who were unconquerable, immovable,
similar to their master, ever worshipful,,— 13. they who
had received the perfect doctrine, first (among religions),
from the first (among teachéxs), (o were Theras and
original depositaries (of the Fafth), made this first col-
lection. Hence this whole doctrine of the Theras is also
called the first (or primitive) doctrine. 14, Assembled in


’


4, 14—26. 135


the beautiful Sattapanna cave, the five hundred Theras,
the teachers, arranged the nine-fold doctrine of the Tea-
cher. 15. The nine-fold doctrine of the Teacher (compri-
ses) Sutta, Geyya, Veyyakarana, Gatha, Udana, Itivuttaka,
Jataka, Abbhuta, Vedalla. 16. The Theras who arranged
this true imperishable doctrine, according to Vaggas, Pa-
fldsakas, Samyuttas, and Nipitas'), composed the col-
lection of the Agamas which is known by the name of
the Suttas. 17. As long as the true doctrines remain, as
long as the collection does not perish, so long — a long
time — will the teaching of the Master last. 18. The
immovable, firm, insubvertible earth quaked on the appear-
ance of the Collection of the Vinaya and of the Dhamma,
which is worthy of the Faith. 19. Nobody, may a Sa-
mana come or a Brahmana of great learning, skilled in
disputation and hair-splitting, can subvert it; firin it stands
like Sineru. 20, Neither a deity nor Mara nor Brahma
nor any earthly beings can find in it even the smallest ill-
spoken sentence. 21. Thus the collection of the Dhamma
and of the Vinaya is complete in every part, well arran-
ged and well protected by the omniscience of the Teacher.
22, 23. And those five hundred Theras, chief among whom
was Mahakassapa, as they knew the doubts of the people,
composed the imperishable collection of the Vinaya and of
the Dhamma, which is an incarnation of the Faith like the
highest Buddha, the collection of the Dhamma. 24. The
doctrine “of the Theras, which is founded on true reasons,
which is free from heresies, full of true meaning, and
supports the true faith, will exist as long as the Faith.
25. As long as holy disciples of Buddha’s faith exist, all
of them will recognize the first Council of the Dhamma.
26. The five hundred pre-eminent Theras, noble by birth (?),
laid the first firm, original, fundamental base (of the
Faith).
Here ends the Gouncil of Mahakassapa.


*) These are the sections into which the Digha-, Majjhima-, Sam-
yuttaka-, and Aigattara-Nikdya respectively are divided.


4


136 4, 27—41.


- 27. Sixteen years had elapsed after the protector of
the world had entered Nibbana; it was the twenty-fourth
year of Ajatasattu’s (reign), and the sixteenth of Vijaya’s;
— 28. learned Upiili had just completed sixty years, (then)
Dasaka received the Upasampada ordination from Thera
Upali. 29. The entire sacred Dhamma texts which the
most excellent Buddha had set forth, the whole of the
nine-fold speeches of the Jina, Upali recited. 30. Upali
received from Buddha and (afterwards) recited the entire,
complete, and whole nine-fold doctrine contained in the
Suttas. 31. Buddha spoke regarding the learned Upéli in
the assembly (of the Bhikkbus): ,Up4li is the first chief
of the Vinaya in my church.“ 32. The great teacher,
_ being thus installed in the midst of the Assembly, recited
the three Pitakas to a thousand (pupils), chief among
whom was Disaka. 33. Upiali taught five hundred The-
ras whose passions bad been extinguished, who were
pure, holy, and speakers of truth, the (texts of the) faith.
34, After the Sambuddha had attained Parinibbana, the
great teacher Thera Up4li taught then the Vinaya fall
thirty years. 35, Upali taught the clever Dasaka the whole
nine-fold doctrine of the Teacher, eighty-four thousand
(divisions). 36. Dasaka, having learned all the Pitakas
from Thera Upali, taught it just as his teacher in the
Faith (had done). 37. The great teacher (Upali) entered
Nibbana; after having appointed his pupil, the clever Thera
Dasaka, (to be chief) of the Vinaya, 38. Prince Udaya
reigned sixteen years; when Udayabhadda had completed
six (years), Thera Upali attained Nibbana.

39. Sonaka, a respectable merchant who came from
Kasi, received the first ordination according to the doc-
trine of the Teacher at. Giribbaja (Rajagaha) in the Velu-
vana (monastery). 40. Dasaka, the leadgr of the school,
dwelt at Giribbaja in the Magadha country, and in. his
seven and thirtieth year gave Sonaka the first ordination.
41. (When) clever Dasaka had completed forty-five years,
and Nagad4sa had reigned ten years, and king Pagdu-
(vasa) twenty, then Sonaka received the Upasampada ordi-


4, 4152. : ; ¥37.-

j 6 :

nation from Thera Dasaka. 42. Thera Dasaka taught So-

naka also .the nine-fold. (doctrine); he having learned it

from his teacher, (again) taught it (to others). 43. Dasaka

in hig turn, having made his pupil Thera Sonaka chief of
the Vinaya, attained Nibbana in his sixty-fourth year.


- 44, The Thera called Sonaka had just completed
. forty years; Kalasoka had then reigned ten years and half


a month in addition; — 45. Pakundaka was a robber
during seventeen years; (of this period) eleven years and
six months more had passed, — 46. when Thera Sonaka,:


the chief of the school, admitted Siggava and Candavajjf
to the Upasampada ordination.

47. At that time, when Bhagavat had been dead a
hundred years, the Vajjiputtas of Vesali proclaimed at
Vesili the ten indulgences: the practice of (keeping) salt
in a horn is permissible; the two inch alternative is per-
missible; the practice of (taking food after the regular
meal when going to) the village is permissible; the prac-
tice of (holding Uposatha in different) residences (within
the same boundary) is permissible; the practice of (ob-
taining) the consent (of the Fraternity not before, but
after an act) is permissible; the practice of (acting accor-
ding to) example is permissible; the practice of (drinking)
milk-whey is permissible; the practice of (drinking) toddy
is permissible; sitting (on seats covered with clothes) with-
out fringes is permissible; (the possession of) gold and
silver ig permissible. :

48. When Sambuddha had entered Parinibbana ten
times ten years, the Vajjiputtas proclaimed at Vesali these
ten indulgences. 49. They proclaimed (the allowableness
of) impermissible practices which all had been forbidden
by the Tathagata. Sabbakami, and Salba,-and Revata,
(and) Khujjasobhita, — 50. and Yasa, Sambhita of Sana,
these Theras who had formerly seen the Tathagata, the
pupils of Thera Ananda; — 51. Sumana and VAsabha-
gami, who had formerly seen the Tathagata; these two
most excellent pupils of Anuruddha; — 52. these (and
other) Bhikkhus, seven hundred in number, came to Vesali


138 4,52 — 5,9. mh


and. expressed their assent to the discipline as it Kad
been estublished in the doctrine of the Buddha. $$3. All
these who had obtained a (supernatural) insight, who
were expert in reaching meditation; who were quit of-their
load, and saved, assembled together.


Here ends the history of the second Council.


Vv.


1, At the time of the Parinibbana (which Buddha at-
tained) at Kusinara, best of towns, seven hundred thou-
sand (spiritual) sons of the Jina assembled. 2. In this
assembly Thera Kassapa was chief, he who resembled
the Teacher, a great leader; on earth is not his equal.
3. Kassapa, after having selected five hundred -amongst
the Arahats, taking always the most worthy ones,’ Gompo-
sed the collection of the Dhamma. 4. Out of compassion
for created beings, in order to establish the Faith for a
long time, he made, after the lapse of three months, when
the fourth month and the second beginning of the Vassa')
had arrived, the collection of the Dhamma. 5, At the
entrance of the Sattapanna cave, in the Magadha town
Giribbaja (Rajagaha), this first council was finished after
seven months. 6. At this council many Bhikkbus (were
present), the original depositaries (of the Faith), and who
had all reached perfection in the doctrine of the protector
of the world. 7. Kassapa was the chief propounder of
the Dhutavada precepts according to the doctrine of the
Jina; Ananda was the first of those learned (in the Sut-
tas), (the Thera) called Upali was chief in ‘the Vinaya,
— 8. Anuruddha in the supernatural visions, Vafgisa in
promptly comprehending, Punna among the preachers of
the Dhamma, Kumarakassapa among the students of various
tales, — 9. Kaccana in establishing distinctions, Kotthita
in analytical knowledge. There were, besides, many other


1) See Mah&vagga, 3, 2.


5, 9—22. 139


grtat Theras wha were original depositaries (of the Faith).
10. Bygthese and other saintly Theras who had fulfilled
their duties, to the number of five hundred, was the col-
lection of the Dhamma and of the Vinaya made; because
it was collected by the Theras, it is called the doctrine
of the Theras (theravdda). 11. They composed the col-
lection of the Dhamma and of the whole Vinaya by con- .
sulting Upali about the Vinaya and learned Ananda about
the Dhamma. 12.13. Both these, Thera Upali and Ananda
who had obtained perfection in the true Doctrine, had
learned the Dhamma and Vinaya from the Jina; and, cle-
ver in the Suttas, they, proclaimed what had been taught
in long expositions and also without exposition, the natural
meaning as well as the recondite meaning. 14. Having
received the perfect word (of Buddha), thé first (among
doctrines), from the first (among teachers), these Theras
and original depositaries (of the Faith) made the first col-
lection. -Hence this doctrine of the Theras is also called
the first (or primitive) doctrine. 15. The most excellent
Theravada remained pure and faultless for a long time,
for ten times ten years.

16. When the first hundred years had been comple-
ted and the second century had begun, a great schism
happened, a most violent one, in the doctrine of the The-
ras. 17. 18. Twelve thousand Vajjiputtas of Vesali assem-
bled and proclaimed at Vesalf, best of towns, the ten in-

* dulgences in the doctrine of Buddha, viz.: the indulgence
of (keeping) salt in a horn, of the two inches, of the
village and the monastery, of residences, of (obtaining)
consent, of example, of milk-whey, of toddy, of silver, of
seats without fringes. 19. They proclaimed (a doctrine)
which was against the Faith, against the discipline, and
repugnant to the doctrine of the Teacher; splitting the
(trne) meaning and the Faith, they proclaimed what was
contrary to it. 20. In order to subdue them, many pupils
of Buddha, twelve hundred thousand (spiritual) sons of
the. Jina, assembled. 21. In this congregation the eight
chief Bhikkhus, resembling the Master, great leaders, diffi-


140 5, 21—36.


cult. to conquer, great teachers, were — 22, Sabbakami


and Salha, Revata, Khujjasobhita, VasabhagAmi and Su-
mana, Sambhita who resided at Sana, — 23. Yasa, the


son of Kakandaka, a sage praised by the Jina. In-order
to subdue those wicked men (the Vajjiputtas), they came
to Vesali. 24. Vasabhagdmi and Suinana were pupils of
Anuruddha, the other Theras (pupils) of Ananda; they had
all formerly seen Tathagata. 25. At that time Asoka, the
son of Susundga, was king; that prince ruled in the town
of Pataliputta. 26. The eight Theras of great (supernatu-
ral) power gained one party for themselves, and destroy-
ing (the doctrine of) the ten indulgences they annihilated
those wicked ones. 27. 28. After having annihilated the
wicked Bhikkhus and after having crushed the sinful doc-
trine, those tight Theras of great (supernatural) power,
those Bhikkhus selected seven hundred Arahats, ‘choosing
the best ones, in order to purify their own doctrine, and
held a council. 29. This second council was finished in
eight months at Vesali, best of towns, in the hall called
Kitagara,

30. 31. The wicked Bhikkhus, the Vajjiputtakas who
had been excommunicated by the Theras, gained another
party; and many people, holding the wrong doctrine, ten
thousand, assembled and (also) held a council. Therefore
this Dhamma council is called the Great Council (mahd-
samgiti). .

32. The Bhikkhus of the Great Council settled a doc-
trine contrary (to. the true Faith). Altcring the original
redaction they made another redaction. 33. They trans-
posed Suttas which belonged to one place (of the col-
lection), to another place; they destroyed the (true) meaning
and the Faith, in the Vinaya and in the five Collections
(of Suttas). 34. 35. Those Bhikkhus, who understood
neither what had been taught in long expositions nor
without exposition, neither the natural meaning nor the
recondite meaning, settled a false meaning in connection
with spurious speeches of Buddha; these Bhikkhus de-
stroyed. a great deal of (true) meaning under the colour


5, 35-50. 141 -


of she letter. 36. Rejecting single passages of the Suttas
and of the profound Vinaya, they composed other Suttas
and another Vinaya which had (only) the appearance (of
the genuine ones). 387. Rejecting the following texts, ‘viz.:
the Parivara which is an abstract of the contents (of the
Vinaya), the six sections of the Abbidhamma, the Pati-


sambhida, the Niddesa, and some portions of the Jataka, .


they composed new ones. 38. Forsaking the original rules
regarding nouns, genders, composition, and the embellish-
ments of style, they changed all that.

39. Those who held the Great Council were the first
schismatics; in imitation of them many heretics arose.
40. Afterwards a schism occurred in that (new school);
the Gokulika and Ekabyohara Bhikkhus formed two divi-
sions. 41. Afterwards two schisms took place amongst
the Gokulikas: the Bahussutaka and the Pafifiatti Bhikkhus
formed’ two divisions. 42. 43. And opposing these were
the Cetiyas, (another) division of the Mahasamgitikas.
All these five sects, originating from the Mahasamgitikas,
split the (true) meaning and the Doctrine and some por-
tions of the Collection; setting aside some portions of dif-
ficult passages, they altered them. 44, Forsuking the ori-
ginal rules regarding nouns, genders, composition, and the
embellishments of style, they changed all that..

45. In the orthodox school of the Theras again a
schism occurred: the Mahimsasaka and Vajjiputtaka Bhi-
kkhus formed two sections. 46. In the school of the Vajji-
puttakas four sections arose, viz.: the Dhammuttarikas,
Bhaddayanikas, Channagarikas, and Sammitis. 47. In later
times two divisions arose among the Mahimsdsakas: the
Sabbatthivada and Dhammagutta Bhikkhus formed two
divisions. 48. The Sabbatthivadas and Kassapikas, the
Kassapikas and. Samkantikas, and subscquently another
section, the Suttavadas, separated themselves in their turn.
49. These eleven schools which separated themselves from
the Theravada, split thé (true) meaning and. the Doctrine
and some portions of the Collection; setting aside some
portions of difficult passages, they altered them. 50.-For-


142 5, 50—61,


saking the original rules regarding nouns, genders, com-
position, and the embellishments of style, they changed
all that.

51. Seventeen are the heretical sects, and there is
one orthodox sect; together with the orthodox sect they
are eighteen at all. 52. The most excellent Theravada
. which resembles a large banyan tree, is the complete doc-
trine of the Jina, free from omissions or additions. The
other schools arose as thorns grow on the tree. 53. In
the first century there were no schisms; in the second cen-
tury arose the seventeen herctival schools in the religion
of the Jina. 54, The Hemavatikas, Rajagirikas, Siddha-
tthas, Pubba- and Aparaselikas, and sixthly the Apara-
Rajagirikas arose one after the other.

Here ends the description of the schools of the

; teachers. .


(At the time of the second Council the Theras fore-
saw the following events !):

55. »In the future time, after a hundred and eighteen
years, a certain Bhikkhu will arise, a Samana able (to
suppress the schisms of that time), 56. Descending from
Brahma’s world he will be born in the human race, ori-
ginating from a Brahmana tribe, an accomplished master
of all Mantras (Vedas). 57. His name will be Tissa, his
surname Moggaliputta; Siggava and Candavajjt will confer
on the youth the Pabbajja ordination. 58. Then, having *
received the Pabbajja ordination and attained the know-
ledge of the sacred texts, Tissa will destroy the Titthiya
doctrines and establish the (true) faith. 59. A roy@l chief
called Asoka will govern at that time in Pataliputta, a
righteous prince, an increaser of the empire.“

60. All the seven hundred Bhikkhus, the Theras, having
taught the (true) doctrine and destroyed (the heresy of)
the ten indulgences, had attained Parinibbana. 61. Descend-


1) Here follows an account of the birth and conversion of Tissa MogzZali-
putta who presided at the third Council. See Mah&vamsa, pp. 28—33.


5, 61—71. 148


ing from Brahma’s world he was born in the human race;
at the age of sixteen he had mastered the whole Veda.
62. (Once young Tissa thus addressed the Thera Si-
ggava, who had come to his father’s house:) ,I ask the
Samana a question, answer these questions (concerning) the
Rigveda, the Yajurveda, the Samaveda and also the Ni-
ghantu, and fifthly the Itihdsa*;— 63. and the Thera ha- .
ving given his permission, he asked an exceedingly difficult
question. Siggava then spoke to the youth possessed of
mature knowledge: 64. ,I also will ask you, young man, a
question set forth by the Buddha; if you are clever, answer
my question truly.“ 65. When the question had been
pronounced, (Tissa said:) ,That J have neither seen nor
heard; I will learn this Mantra, I desire to receive the
Pabbajja ordination.“ 66. Leaving the narrow way of the
life of a layman, the youth went forth into the houseless
state and to the condition of calm, according to the Jinv’s
faith. 67. The disciple, desirous of learning and full ‘of
reverence, was taught the nine-fold doctrine of the Tea-
cher by learned Candavajjt. 68. Siggava who had van- ~
quished the young man, conferred on him the Pabbajja
ordination; learned Candavajji taught the well trained
(disciple), versed in the Vedas, the nine-fold (doctrine);
Chaying done so,) these Theras attained Parinihbana.


* 69.*) Two years of Candagutta, fifty-eight of king
Pakundaka having elapsed, Siggava having just completed
his sixty-fourth year, Moggaliputta received from Thera
Siggava the Upasampada ordination. 70. Tissa Moggali-
puttay having learned the Vinaya from Candavajji, reached
emancipation by the destruction of the substrata (of exi-
stence). 71. Siggava and Candavajji taught the glorious
Moggaliputta all the Pitakas which are filled with col-
lections referring to both (Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis) (or:


1) In the following account, some of the numbers mentioned are evi-
dent wrong; I have preferred, however, not to correct them, since the cause


144 ; - 5, 7184:


the Sutta collection, as it had been settled at the two
conyocations?). 72. Siggava, possessed of (true) know-
ledge, made the glorious Moggaliputta chief of the Vinaya,
and attained Nibbana after having completed seventy-six
years. 73, Candagutta ruled twenty-four years; when he
had completed fourteen years, Siggava attained Parini-
bbana. 74. (Siggava was) a dweller in the forest, keeping
the Dhutaiga precepts, of limited desires, attached to
forest life, full of goodwill, of subdued passions, and
perfect in the true Doctrine. 75. In a remote, delightful
abode, in the depth of a great forest, this hero (lived)
alone without a companion, like a valiant lion in his
mountain cave. ‘

76. Sixteen years had elapsed after the protector of
the world had attained Nibbana, learned Upali had com-
pleted sixty years; ~ 77. it was the twenty-fourth year
of Ajatasattu’s (reign) and the sixteenth of Vijaya’s, (when)
Tidsaka received the Upasampada ordination from Thera
Upali. 78. The learned (Thera) called Dasaka had com-
pleted forty years; ten years of Nagadasa’s (reign) and
twenty of Pakundaka’s (Panduvisa’s!) had elapsed, _—
79. (when) Thera Sonaka received the Upasampada from
Dasaka. The wise Thera called Sonaka had completed
forty years; — 80. ten years of Kalasoka’s (reign) had
elapsed; it was in the eleventh year of the interregnum
in Tambapanni, (when) Siggava received the Upasampada
ordination from Thera Sonaka. 81. Two years of Canda-"
gutta’s (reign) had elapsed; Siggava had completed sixty-
four, and king Pakundaka fifty-eight years, (when) Moggali-
putta received the Upasampada ordination from Thera
Siggava. 82. Six years of Asokadhamma’s (reign), *sixty-
six of Moggaliputta, forty-eight (years) of. king Mutasiva
had elapsed, (when) Mahinda received the Upasampada
ordination from Moggaliputta.

83. Upali received the Vinaya from Buddha, Dasaka
received the whole Vinaya from Thera Upali and taught
it just as his teacher in the Faith (had done). 84. Thera
Dasaka taught Sonaka also the Vinaya; (Sonaka) taught it,


5, 84—99.- : 145


after having learnt it from his teacher. 85. Wise Sonaka
who well knew the Dhamma and the Vinaya, in his turn
taught: Siggava the whole Vinaya. 86. The pupils of So-
naka were Siggava and Candavajji; the Thera taught both
these pupils the Vinaya. 87. Tissa Moggaliputta, having
learnt the Vinaya from Candavajji, reached emancipa-
tion by the destruction of the substrata (of existence).
88. Teacher Moggaliputta taught his pupil Mahinda the
whole Vinaya, the complete doctrine of the Theras.

89. After the Sambuddha had attained Parinibbana,
resplendent Thera Upili taught the Vinaya full thirty years.
90. This great Sage, after having made his pupil; the
dearned Thera called Dasaka, chief of the Vinaya, attained
Nibbana, 91. Dasaka‘in his turn made his pupil Thera
Sonaka chief of the -Vinaya, and attained Nibbana sixty-
four years (after his Upasampada). 92. Sonaka who pos-
sessed the six supernatural faculties, after having made
Siggava, the descendant of an Arya family, chief of the
Vinaya, attained Nibbana sixty-six years (after his Upa-
sampada). 93. Wise Siggava made young Moggaliputta
chief of the Vinaya and attaincd Nibbana seventy-six years
(after his Upasampada). 94. Tissa Moggaliputta made his
pupil Mahinda chief of the Vinaya and attained Nibbana
eighty-six years (after his Upasampada). a

95. Seventy-four years of Upali, sixty-four of Dasaka,
sixty-six of Thera Sonuka, seventy-six of Sigzava, eighty
df Moggdiiputta: this is the Upasampada of them all (2. e.
the number of years which elapsed between their Upa-
sampada and their death),

96. Learned Upali was the whole time chief of the
Vinaya, Thera Dasaka fifty years, Sonaka fourty-four years,
Siggava fifty-five years, the (Thera) called Moggaliputta
sixty-cight years. _

97. Prince Udaya reigned sixteen years; when six
years of Udayabhadda’s reign had elapsed, Thera Upali
attained Nibbana. 98. The ruler Susuniga reigned ten
yearg; after eight years of Susunaga’s reign DAsaka at-
tained Parinibbana, 99. After Susundga’s (Kalasoka’s!)


146 . 5, 99 — 6, 3,


death the ten brothers succeeded; they’ reigned all jointly
twenty-two years. In the sixth year of their reign Sonaka,
attained Parinibbina. 100. Candagutta reigned twenty-
four years; after fourteen years of his reign Siggava at-
tained Parinibbana. 101. The son of Bindusara, illustrious
prince Asokadhamma, reigned thirty-séven years. 102. When
twenty-six years ‘of Asoka’s reign had elapsed, the (Thera)
called Moggaliputta, after having exalted the splendour
of the Religion, attained the end of his life-and reached
Nibbana. :

103. Learned Thera Upali, a great teacher, attained
Nibbana: seventy-four years (after his Upasampada), after
having made his pupil, the learned Thera Dasaka, chief
of the Vinaya. 104. Dasaka attained Nibbana sixty-four
years (after his Upasampada), after having in his turn made
his pupil, Thera Sonaka, chief of the Vinaya.- 105. So-
naka who possessed the six (supernatural) faculties, at-
tained Parinibbana sixty-six years (after his Upasampada),
after having made Siggava, the descendant of an Arya
family, chief’ of the Vinaya. 106. Wise Siggava attained
Nibbana seventy-six years (after his Upasampada), after
having made young Moggaliputta chief of the Vinaya.
107. Tissa Moggaliputta attained Nibbana eighty years
(after hig Upasampada), after having made his pupil Mah-
inda chief of the Vinaya.


VI.


1. Two hundred and eighteen years after the Parini-
bbana of the Sambuddha Piyadassana was anointed king.
2. When Piyadassana was installed, the miraculous facul-
ties of royal majesty entered into him; he diffused the
splendour which he had obtained in consequence of his
merits, one yojana above and one beneath (the earth); the
wheel of his power rolled through the great empire of
Jambudipa. 3. The Devas constantly brought to him (?)
every day sixteen jars of water (?), filled with medical
herbs of every description, from the Anotatta lake at the


6, 8—18. ee AT


top “of the Himavat mountains. 4. The Devas then con-
stantly brought every day fragrant teeth-cleansers made
of the betel vine, which were grown in the mountains,
soft, smooth, sweet, endowed with flavour, and delightful:
5. The Devas then constantly brought every day fragrant
myrobalans, which were grown in the mountains, soft ‘and
smooth, endowed with flavour, desirable to great kings (?).
6. The Devas then constantly brought every day divine
drinks and ripe mangos endowed with flavour and fra-
grance. 7. The Devas then constantly brought every day
from the Chaddanta lake upper and under garments dyed
with the five colours. 8. 9. The Naga kings then con-
stantly brought every day: fragrant powder for washing
the head, and also unguents, and fine seamless clothes to
put on of the colour of jessamine, and precious collyrium ;
all these “things (they brought) from the Naga world.
10. The Devas then constantly brought every day sugar
cane, quantities of Areca-nuts, yellow towels. 11. The
parrots brought nine thousand loads of hill paddy which
was picked out by rats; the bees made honey; the bears
forged with sledge-hammers. 12, Heaven-born birds, sweet-
voiced cuckoos constantly sang to men, (attracted) by the
splendour of Asoka’s merit. 13. The great Naga whose
age .endures through a Kappa, the attendant of “our Bud-
dhas, wearing a golden chain, came, (attracted) by the
splendour, of (Asoka’s) merit. 14. The glorious Piyadassi
honoured him with garlands of jewels. Splendid rewards
were received for alms (given to religious mendicants).
15. This grandson of Candagutta, the son of Bindu-
sara, (king Asoka), whilst a mere prince, was subking of.
Ujjeni, charged with collecting the revenue (of that pro-
vince). During his progress he came to the town of Ve-
dissa. 16. There the daughter of a Setthi, known by the
name of Devt, having cohabited with him, gave birth to
a most noble son. 17. Mahinda and Samghamitta chose to
receive the Pabbajja ordination; having obtained “Pabbaja,
they -both destroyed the- fetter of (individual) existence.
18. Asoka, ruled in Pataliputta, best of towns; thr
10* 2s


148 6, 18—30.


years after his coronation he was converted to Bud-
dha’s faith.

19. How great is the number of years betsveen the
time when the Sambuddha attained Parinibbina jn the
Upavattana (at Kusinara), and when Mahinda, the issue
of the Moriya family, was born? 20. Two hundred years
and four years more had elapsed: just at that time Mah-
inda, the son of Asoka, was born.

21. When Mahinda was ten years old, his father put
his brothers to death; then he passed four years reigning
over Jambudipa. 22. Having killed his hundred brothers,
alone continuing bis race, Asoka was anointed king in
Mahinda’s fourteenth year. 23. Asokadbamma, after his
coronation, obtained the (above-mentioned) miraculous fa-
culties; exceedingly splendid and rich in meritorious works
(he was), universal monarch of (Jambu)dipa. “24. They
crowned Piyadassi after full twenty years (?); he passed
three years doing honour to Pasanda infidels. 25. (There
were) adherents of the sixty-two false doctrines, nincty-
six kinds of Pasandas who proceeded from the Sassata
and Uccheda doctrines, all of them established on these
two principles; —- 26. Niganthas and Acelakas and other
ascetics and other Brahmans and sectarians. 27. Search-
ing whete truth and where falschood was, he inyited
the infatuated, infidel Niganthas (?) and sectarians of the
Sassata and Uccheda doctrines, and Pasanda and Titthiya
infidels of different creeds outside the Faith, sectarian
people. 28, After having invited the numbers of Titthiyas
and having introduced them into his palace and having
-bestowed on them great gifts, he asked them an excecd-
ingly difficult question. 29, Being asked this question,
they could not answer it by their own power; the ignorant
people answered like a man who being asked about the
mango tree, replies concerning the Lakucha tree. 30. They
all were content with low seats (?) (in the royal hall) 1),


ee et

1) The king invited all the ascetics of different ereeds to take the
seats of which they deemed themselves worthy. All were conte with
lower seats, except Nigrodha, a Buddhist noyice, who took his seat on the
royal throne. Ss


6, 80—42. 149


Aftcr having annihilated all the Pasandas and defeated the
sectarians, — 31. the king thought: ,Which other men
may we find who are Arahats in this world or see the
path towards Arahatship? 32. (Surely) they are to be
found in the world; this world cannot be void of them ().
How may I obtain the sight of such worthy men? If I
hear his (2. e. such a man’s) well spoken words, I will
give up to him my paternal realm and my conquests.
33. The king, thinking thus, found nobody worthy of his
presents; unceasingly the king searched after, virtuous,
clever men. 34, Walking about in his palace and looking
at many people, he saw the Samana Nigrodha who went
along the road for alms. 35--41. When he saw Nigrodha
whose walking, turning back and looking was graceful,
who turned his eyes to the ground, who was adorned (by
decent deportment), an Arahat, whose mind was peaccful,
who had reached perfect self-control, who had subdued
himself and protected and well defended himself (against
human passions), who did not mix with noble people, who
was stainless like the moon amidst clouds, fearless like a
lion, brilliant like a fire-brand, venerable, unconquerable,
firm, of a peaceful disposition, steadfast, who had destroyed
his passions, had cleansed himself of all sins, who was
the.most excellent of men, who led a wandering life, the
most excellent Samana, who was endowed with all vir-
tues, the thought occurred to him, that he had been his
“companion during a former life (?)'). (Seeing) that asce-
* tic who led a life worthy of a Muni, who was happy in
consequence of his meritorious deeds in former existences,
who had reached the fruition which is obtained by the


path of Arahats, walking along the road in search of alms,


that wise man thought, full of longing: 42. ,Indeed this
Thera is one of. the venerable ones; like Buddha, the
holy One in this world, and like his disciples, he has
reached the fruition which is obtained by the transcen-
dent path, and has reached Liberation and salvation.“


1) See the story in the Mahavamsa, p. 24.


150- : "4G, 48-64.


43. (Asoka) obtained the enjoyment of the five-fold:
delight, high bliss; delighted, he who was comparable. to
Sakka rejoiced like a poor man who has found a trea-
sure, like one who has gained the desire of his heart ().
44. 45. He spoke to one of his ministers: » Well, quickly
conduct hither that Bhikkhu, that handsome young man
of tranquil appearance, who walks along the road like an
elephant, fearless and endowed with the ornament of tran-
quillity.“ 46. The king felt great content; highly delighted
he thought in his mind: ,Without doubt this excel-
lent person whom Ihave never seen before, has reached
the highest perfection.“ 47. Thinking thus, he again spoke
thus: ,Well prepared seats are spread; sit down on the
seat which is worthy of an ascetic; I grant thee which-
soever thou desirest.“ 48. After hearing the speech of
the king, he took (the king’s) right hand (?) and mounted
the throne. Fearlessly he sat down on the most excellent
seat, just as Sakka, king of the gods, seats bimself on
the Pandukambala.

49. The king thought: ,This most excellent boy is
certainly immovable and fearless; him ...

50. The king, recognizing that excellent tender boy
who observed the customs of the Saints, (to be) well in-
structed and expert in Dhamma and Vinaya, again spoke
thus, full of delight: 51. ,Teach me the Faith which thou
hast learnt; thou alone shalt be my teacher; I will obey
the words which thou teachest me, o great Sage. In-*
-struct me, I listen to thy preaching.“ 52. Having heard -
this exceedingly acute speech of the king, he who was
well versed in the analytical distinctions of the nine-fold
doctrine, thought over the precious Tipitaka and found
the excellent sermon on Earnestness: 53.4) ,Earnestness
is the way to immortality, indifference is the way to death;
the earnest do not die, the indifferent are like the dead.¢
‘54. When wise Nigrodha had pronounced this gladden-
ing sentence, the king understood that highest motive


1) Dhammapada, v. 21.


6, 54—65. 151


(viz; earnestness): ,This is the foundation of all doctrines
whatsoever that have been preached by the omniscient
Buddha. 55. To-day I choose as my refuge thee and
Buddha with the Dhamma and the Samgha; together with
my children and wives, with the number of my relatives
I-announce to thee my having become a lay -disciple.
56. Abiding together with children and wives in the refuge
(of the Faith), in consequence of the arrival of Nigrodha,
my spiritual guide, I offer four lacs of silver and eight
(daily) portions of rice to the Thera.“

57, (The king having asked, whether there are many
ascetics like Nigrodha, ke replied:) ,,There are many dis-
ciples of Buddha, versed in the three-fold science, pos-
sessed of (magical) power, well acquainted with the expo-
sition of the qualities of mind, who have subdued their
passions, and reached Arahatship.“ 58. The king again
spoke to the Thera: ,I desire to meet with that precione-
Assembly; I will pay my respect to all (Bhikkhus) who
come to the Assembly; I will listen to the Dhamma.“
59, Sixty thousand ascetics assembled, and the messen-
gers announced to the king: ,A large congregation which
is full of great joy, has assembled; go thou to see the con-
gregation, as thou desiredst (to do).“ 60. Asokadhamma,
the ruler of the earth, having heard what the messenger
said, thus addressed the circle of his relations, his friends
and counsellors and his kinsmen: 61. , We will offer pre-
‘sents on the occasion of the assembling of the great
Samgha; we will show them attention as much as we
can, as much as we are able. 62. Let them quickly make
ready for me a hall, seats, water, attendants, gifis, and
food, such as are worthy of being offered, and guitable.
63. Let the makers of curry and rice quickly make
ready for me well cooked rice-milk, sweet, pure dishes.
64, I will bestow a great donation on the congregation
of the Bhikkhus, the most excellent community. Let them
beat the drums in the city, let them sweep the-roads, let
them scatter white sand and flowers of the five colours;
— 65. let them place here and there garlands and trium-


152 6, 65—78.


pkal arches,: plantain trees, auspicious brimming jars,~and :
_ let them place here and there ..., — 66. and let them
make flags of cloth and fasten them here and tkere; let
the people, adorned with flower garlands, make this city
resplendent. 67. Khattiyas, Brahmans, and Vessas, Suddas,
and people of different extraction, adorned with variots
ornaments, shall take clothes, ornaments, flowers, burn-
ing torches, and shall proceed to meet the Congregation.
68. All kinds of bands of music, well trained musicians
of various schools who are pleasant to hear and sweet-
voiced, shall ‘play (various melodies) ... and proceed
to meet the Congregation, (a) -most meritorious (act).
69. ... dancers and acrobats in auspicious attitudes (?),
all shall go to meet the Congregation and shall amuse
them, when they have assembled. 70. And let them wor-
ship (the Assembly) with large heaps of flowers’ of differ-
ent kinds, (aromatic) powder of various descriptions, and
unguents. 71. Let them prepare in the city every kind
of pomp (?) and desirable gifts. 72. The inhabitants of
the kingdom, devoted (?) to the Fraternity, shall under-
take to do homage (to the Samgha), and shall do so du-
ring the whole day and during all the three watches (?)
of the night.“

73—15. That night having elapsed, the illustrious
prince, causing food of excellent flavour to be prepared
in his own residence, gave the following orders to his
counsellors and his attendants: ,Lcet all people procure’
heaps of perfumed garlands and flowers, many flowers,
parasols, flags, lamps burning in the day-time; let them
procure as much as I have ordered. 76. Let all (people
dwelling) in this city, the merchants from the four quar-
ters of the horizon, and all the royal officers, with their
oxen, troops, and vehicles, follow me to,meet the congre-
gation of Bbikkhus. 77. The best of kings proceeded
with great pomp; the ruler of the earth shone like Sakka
(when he goes) to the Nandana garden. 78. The king in
whose mind wisdom had arisen, proceeding in great haste
towards the Bhikkhu congregation, saluted them, raising


6, 78—91. 153


hig joined hands, and received greetings in return. 79.-He
spoke to the Bhikkhu congregation: ,May (the Samgha)
have @ompassion on me.“ 80. Taking the alms-bowl of
the Thera, the Samgha’s (spiritual) father, and paying re-
yerence to him by (offering) various flowers, he entered
‘the city. 81. Inviting them to enter his residence and
to be seated, he offered to them with outstretched hands
rice-milk and various highly precious food, hard and soft,
as much as they wanted and desired. 82. When the con-
gregation of Bhikkhus had finished their meal and re-
moved their hands from the bowls, he offered to each Bhi-
kkhu a suit of robes» 83. He distributed slippers (2),
collyrium, oil, parasols, and also shoes, all the requisites
of an ascetic, molasses and honey. 79%. 84. Tutroducing
all the Bhikkhus, as many had assembled, into his inte-
rior appartments, Asokadhamma, the ruler of the earth,
sat down. Sitting down the king invited the congregation
of Bhikkhus (to accept) their gifts, (saying): 85. ,J give
as much as the Bhikkhus desire, whatever they choose.“
86. After having gratified them with (a present of priestly)
requisites and offered to them what was required (for their
use), he asked them about the very profound, well pro-
pounded divisions of the Dhamma: 87. ,Are there, vene-
rable Sirs, sections taught by the kinsman ef the Sun,
by the indication of a certain number of divisions of the
Dhamma, (according to) nouns, gender, and inflections,
and also according to sections and to the composition? —
88. ,It has been taught, o king, and has been numbered
by the kinsman of the Sun; it is well divided, well pro-
mulgated, well explained, well taught, — 89. accompanigd
by reasons and replete with sense, well spoken without a
fault: fixed attention, right exertion, the (magical) powers,
the (five) organs (of spiritual life), — 90. the (ten) powers,
the requisites for attaining supreme knowledge, and those
leading to the supreme path, all of these are well divided
and well taught: these are the seven divisions~of the most
exeellent elements of supreme knowledge. 91. The doc-
trine preached by the Teacber, the highest among men,


154 . “6, 9f 7, 8.

the ‘supreme, transcendent Truth. which has been expanced
and well divided, consists of nine Aigas'). 92. Full
eighty-four thousand sections of the Doctrine have been
taught by the kinsman of the Sun out of compassion for
created beings, 93. He has preached the highest Trath,
the most excellent ambrosia, which frees from transmigra-”
tion, which is the path leading to the extinction of all
suffering and an ambrosia-like medicine.“ 94. After hear-
ing the speech pronounced by the Congregation of the
Bhikkhus, the king, the chief of men, filled with joy ‘and
mirth, wisdom having arisen in his mind, pronounced _
these words to his royal court: 95. ,Full and complete
eighty-four thousand most precious sections of the Truth
have been taught by the most excellent Buddha; — 96. I will
build eighty-four thousand monasteries, honouring each
single section of the Truth by one monastery.“ “97. The
prince expending ninety-six kotis of treasure, he the king,
gave immediately on that same day the order (for the
erection of the buildings). 98. At that time there were
in Jambudipa eighty-four (thousand) towns; near each
town he built one monastery. 99. And having completed_
the monasteries in three years’ time, (the construction off


‘the Ardmas being finished, the prince held during seven


days a festival of offerings. :


VII.


1. There was a great assemblage from all parts of
Jambudipa, eighty kotis of Bhikkhus, nincty-six thousand
Bhikkhunis, the greater part of the Bhikkhus and Bhi-
kkhunts possessing the six (supernatural) faculties. 2. The
Bhikkhus, by the greatness of their magical power level-
ling the surface of the earth, producing (the miracle called)
the world-show, made visible the (84000 consecration-)
festivals, worthy of veneration. 3. The king standing on

rT) The Afigas of Buddha’s doctrine are the well-known nine divisions,


viz. Sutta, Geyya, Veyyikarapa, Gath’, Udana, Itivuttaka, Jataka, ‘Ab-
bhuta, Vedalla.


1, 8—18; ‘155


the Asokér§ma, looked’ over (the whole of) Jambudipa;
by the Bhikkhus’ magical power Asoka saw everything.
4. He-saw all the Viharas built all over the earth, the
raised (?) flags, the flowers and arches and garlands, —
5. the plantains, the filled jars adorned with various
dowers; he ‘saw the whole extent of the great continent,
the pomp all over the four quarters. 6. 7. Delighted,
glad, looking at the festivals which were being celebra-
ted, at the assembled fraternities of Bhikkhus and the
assembled Bhikkhunis and the beggars receiving rich alms
which were prepared for them, seeing all the eighty-four
thousand Viharas, which were honoured (by festivals of
consecration), — 8. Asoka joyfully made known to the,
‘fraternity of Bhikkhus: ,I am, venerable Sirs, a relative
of the religion of the teacher Buddha. 9. Great liberality
has been’ shown by me out of reverence (?) for the Fra-
ternity. 10. 11. By expending ninety-six kotis, a great
treasure, eighty-four thousand monasteries have been erected —
by me in honour of the (84000) sections of the Truth
taught by the most excellent Buddha. I have daily made
offerings of four lacs: — 12. one Cetiya offering, one to
the (Bhikkhu) called Nigrodha, one to the preachers of
the Religion, one for the requirements of the sick; boiled ©
rice is distributed constantly every day, just as the Maha-
gaigd (gives her water). 13. I cannot find any other
greater act of liberality. My faith is most firm; I am,
“therefore, a relation of the Faith.“ 14—16. After having
heard the word spoken’ by king Asokadhamma, learned
Moggaliputta who was well versed in the Scriptures, a
clever decider of cases, answered the question of Asoka-
dhamma, in order to secure a comfortable existence to the
Fraternity, for the sake of the propagation of the Dov-
trine, and because he the wise one had learnt the future
destiny (of the Faith): ,The donor of the requisites (for
the Bhikkhus) remains a stranger to the Faith, — 17. but
that man who gives up his’ son or daughter, the issug of
his body, and causes them to receive the Pabbajji ordina-
tion, becomes really a relation of the Faith.“ 18.19. King


156 7, 1830.


Asokadhamma, the ruler of the éarth, having heard +his
speech, addressed both prince Mahinda, his son, and his
daughter Samghamitta: ,I presently shall be a relation of
the Faith. Both children hearing what their father had
said, agreed, (saying:) — 20. Well, Sire, we agree, we
will do what you have said; make us quickly receive
the Pabbajja ordination, become a relative of the Faith.«
21. Mahinda, Asoka’s son, had completed twenty years,
and Samghamitté might be eighteen years of age. 22. When
Asoka had completed six years, both bis children received
the PabbajjA ordination, and Mahinda, the enlightener
of the Island, received at once the Upasampada ordina-~
tion; — 23. at the same time Samghamittd began to exer-
cise herself, in the Sikkha precepts. Ile (Mahinda) was
like Moggaliputta a great teacher of the doctrine of the
Theras. er

24. Fifty-four years (after Moggaliputta’s Upasampada)
Asokadhamma was crowned; (six years?) afters Asoka’s
coronation, when Moggaliputta had completed sixty (?)
years, Mahinda received the Pabbajja ordination from Mo-
ggaliputta. 25. Mahadeva conferred the Pabbajjé ordina-
tion on him and Majjbanta the Upasampada!); these were
the chiefs who acted compassionately towards Mahinda
in (those)-three ways. 26. Moggaliputta, his Upajjhaya,
taught Mahinda, the enlightener of the Island, all the Pi-
takas, their whole meaning, and the Doctrine. 27. Ten
years after Asoka’s coronation Mahinda had completed 5
four years (after his Upasampada), and had become a tea-
cher of the whole scripture as handed down, and he had
many pupils. 28. Mahinda studied and retained in his
mind the well propounded, well divided Sutta (collection)
as it had been settled at the two convocations, the doe-
trine of the Theras. 29. Moggaliputta insgructed Mahinda,
the son of Asoka, in the three sciences, (the doctrine re-
garding) the six (supernatural) faculties, the four analyti-
eal doctrines. 30. And Tissa Moggaliputta continuously
taught Mahinda, his pupil, the whole Pitaka of the Aga-


1) See Mahaévamsa, p. 37, 1. 2.


7, 80-43. 157


mas (i. e. the Sutta-Pitaka). 31. When (Asoka) had com-
pleted three years, (the story of) Nigrodha (happened),
after the fourth ycar (he put his) brothers (to death), after
his sixth year Mahinda, the son of Asoka, received the
Pabbajja ordination. 32. Both sons of Konti, the Theras
‘fissa and Swmitta, who possessed the great (magical)
faculties, attained Parinibbina after Asoka’s eighth year,
33. Those royal children received the Pabbajjé ordination,
and both Theras attained Nibbana.

34, Many Khattiyas and Brahmans declared their in-
tention of becoming lay disciples, and great gain and
honour accrued to the,faith of Buddha; — 35. the schis-
matics and heretics Jost both gain and honour. Panda-
rangas and Jatilas, Niganthas, Acelakas, and others —
36. resided (in the Buddhist Viharas) during seven years;
the Uposatha ceremonies were performed by incomplete
congregations; saintly, clever, and modest men did not
appear at the Uposatha ceremonies. 37. When a hundred
years and (another) hundred and thirty-six had elapsed
(after the-Parinibbana of the Buddha), sixty thousand Bhi-
kkhus dwelt in the Asokarima. 38. Ajivakas and secta-
rians of different descriptions ruined the Doctrine; all of
them wearing the yellow robe injured the doctrine of the
Jiga. .89. Surrounded by one thousand Bhikkbus, Mo-
ggaliputta, the chief of the school, who possessed the six
(supernatural) powers and the great (magical) faculties,

* convenéd a Council. 40. Wise Mogealipatta, the destroyer
of the schismatic doctrines, firmly established the Thera-
vada abd held the third Council. 41. Having destroyed
the difterent (heretical) doctrines and subdued many shame-
less people and restored splendour to the (true) faith, he
proclaimed (the treatise called) Kathavatthu. 42. From
that Moggaliputta Mahinda, who was the pupil of that
teacher, learnt the true religion. 43. (Moggaliputta) taught
him the five Nikaéyas and the seven sections (of the Abhi-
dhamma); he the hero, the clever one learnt from his
teacher the two Vibhaigas of the Vinaya, thé Parivara,
and the Khandhaka. i


158° ” "4458.

~ 44, When the second century and thirty-six years
more had elapsed (since the Buddha’s death), again a most
dreadfal schism arose in the Theravada. 45. In the city
of Pataliputta ruled prince Dhammasoka, a great king,
who was a believer in the faith of Buddha. 46. He be-
stowed great gifts on the Samgha, the best and most ex*
cellent of congregations; in one day he expended four
lacs. 47. One he gave in honour of the Cetiyas, another
for the preaching of the Dhamma, one for the require-
ments of the sick, one to the Samgha. 48. Infidels, sixty
thousand in number, seemg this gain and these great
honours, furtively attached themselves (to the Samgha).
49, The Patimokkha ceremonies in the monastery of the
Asokarama were interrupted; a minister who ordered the
Patimokkha ceremonies to be performed, killed (some) of
the Saints. 50. In order to destroy the infidels, many dis-
ciples of Buddha, sixty thousand sons of the Jina assem-
bled. 51. At that convocation the son of Moggali was
the president, a great chief, similar to the Teacher; he
had not his like on carth.. 52, The king asked-the Thera
about the case of the slaughter of the Saints; having per-
formed a miracle, he satisfied the desire of the king.
53, Having received the Doctrine ‘from the Thera, the
king destroyed the Bhikkhu emblems of those who had
furtively attached thernselves (to the Samgha). 54. The
reckless infidels, performing the Pabbajja rite according to
their own doctrine, injured the faith of the Buddha just ~
aa (men mix) pure gold (with baser metals). 55. They all
were sectarian, opposed to the Theravada; and in order
to_annihilate them and to make his own doctrine resplen-
dent, —. 56. the Thera set forth the treatise belonging to
the Abhidhamma, which is called Kathavatthu. A similar
punishment, a similar destruction of an apposite doctrine
never occurred. 57, 58. After having promulgated the
treatise called Kathdvatthu which belongs to the Abhi-
dhamma, the presiding Thera, in order to purify his own
doctrine and (to establish) the Faith for a long time, .se-
lected one thousand Arahats, choosing the best ones, and


7,58 — 8, 12. ice 159:


held a Council. 59. In the monastery of the Asokarima
which had been built by king Dhammisoka, this. third
convocation was finished in the space of nine months.
Here ends the Council of the true Faith which
lasted nine months.


VU.


1, Far-seeing Moggaliputta who perceived by his su-
pernatural vision the propagation of the Faith in the future
in the neighbouring countries, — 2. sent Majjhantika and
other Theras, each with’ four companions, for the sake of
establishing the Faith in foreign countries (and) for the
enlightenment of men. 3. ,Preach ye together with your
brethren (?) powerfully the most excellent religion to the
foreign countries, out of compassion for created beings.*

4. The great sage Majjhantika went to the country
of the Gandharas; there he appeased an enraged Naga and
released many people from the fetters (of sin). 5. Maha-
deva who possessed the great (magical) powers, went to
the realm of Mahisa; urging (the people) by (the deserip-
tion of) the suffering in hell, he released many people
from their fetters. 6. Then another (Thera), Rakkhita,
skilled in magical transformations, ‘rising intg the air,
preached the Anamataggiya discourse‘). 7. The wise Thera
called Yonakadhammarakkhita converted the Aparantaka

+ country*by preaching the Aggikkhandhopama Sutta.. 8, The
Thera Mahadhammarakkhita who possessed .the great (ma-
gical) powers, converted Maharattha by preaching the
Naradakassapajataka. 9. The Thera Maharakkhita who
possessed the great magical powers, converted the Yavaua
region by preaching the Kalakirama Suttanta. 10. The
Thera who originated from the Kassapa tribe, Majjhima,
Durabhisara, Sanadeva, Milakadeva, converted the multi-
tude of Yakkhas in the Himavat. 11. They preached there
the Suttanta called Dhammacakkappavattana. 12. Sona and


“1) The country converted by this Thera is called by Buddhaghosa
Vanavasa.


160 , 8, 12 — 9, 18.


Uttara who possessed the great magical powers, went
to Suvannabhimi; there they conquered the multitudes
of Pisicas and released many people from their -fetters.
13. Mahinda, going with four companions to the most ex-
cellent island of Lanka, firmly established (there) the “Faith
and released many people from their fetters. -


1X.


1. The island of Lanka was called Sihala after the
Lion (stha); listen ye to the narration of the origin of
the island which I (am going to) fell.

2. The daughter of the Vanga king cohabited in the
forest with a lion dwelling in the wilderness, and in con-
sequence gave birth to two children. 3. Sthabahu and
Sivalf were beautiful youths; the name of their mother was
Susima, and their father was called the Lion. 4. When
their sixteenth year had clapsed, (Sthgbahu) departed from
his cave, and then built a most excellent town called
Sthapura, 5. The son of the Lion, a powerful king, ruled
over a great kingdom, in Lalarattha, in the most excel-
lent town of Sihapura. 6. Thirty-two brothers were the
sons of Sihabahu; Vijaya and Sumitta were the eldest
among them, beautiful princes, 7. Prince Vijaya was dar-
ing and uneducated; he committed most wicked and fear-
ful deeds, plundering the people. 8. The people from the
country and the merchants assembled; they went to the
king and complained against the bad conduct of Vijaya.
9. The king, having heard their speech, full of anger, gave
this order to the ministers: ,Remove ye that boy. 10. Let
tifem remove from the country all those attendants, his
wives, children, relations, maid-servants, man-servants, and
hired workmen.* 11. He was then remoyed, and his rela-
tions were separated from him; so they went on board
ship, and (the ship) sailed away on the sea. 12. ,May they
drift, whereever they like; they shall not show their faces
again nor shall they ever come back to dwell in our king-
dom and country.“ 13. The ship in which the children had


9, 1328. ‘161


embarked was helplessly driven to an island, the name .of
which was then called Naggadipa. 14. The ship in which
the wives had embarked was helplessly driven to an island,
the name of which was then called Mahilarattha. 15. The
ship in’ which the men had embarked went, sailing on

_ilte“sea,, losing: her way and her bearings, to the port of
Suppara. 16. The people of Suppdra then invited those
seven hundred men to disembark, and offered them lavish
hospitality and honours. 17. During this hospitable re-
ception Vijaya and all his followers unnoticed (?) commit-
ted barbarous deeds. 18. They made themselves guilty
of drinking, theft, adultery, falsehood, and slander, of an
immoral, most dreadful, bad conduct. 19. (The people)
indignant at such cruel, savage, terrible and most dread-
ful deeds being committed against themsclves, consulted
together: -,Let us quickly kill those rascals.

20° There is an island (formerly) called Ojadipa, Vara-
dipa, or Mandadipa, the (recent) name of which is Lanka-
dipa, and which is (besides) known by the name of Tamba-
panni. 21. 22. At the time, when Sambuddha, highest of
men, attained Parinibbina, that son of Sthabahu, the prince
called Vijaya, having left the land called Jambudipa,
Janded on Lankidipa. It had been foretold by the most
excellent Buddha, that that prince one day would be (its)
king. 28. The Teachor at that time had addressed Sakka,
the chief of gods: ,Do not neglect, Kosiya, the care of
sLankadifa.* 24, Sunaniutt the king of gods, having heard
the Sambuddha’s command, committed to Uppalavanna the
business of guarding the island. 25. Having heard the
command of “Gakka that powerful Devaputta itl his ae
tendant demons kept guard over the island.

26. Vijaya, having stopped three months at Bbaru-
kaccha and exasperated the inhabitants, went again on
board his ship. 27. That crowd of men having gone on

board their ship, sailing over the sea, were driven away

by, the violence of the wind, and lost’ their_ bearings.

28. They came to Laikadipa, where they disembarked

and went on shore. Standing on dry ground, being ex-
fe il


162 9p 2841.


hausted by great hunger, thirst and fatigue, they were
unable (?) to walk on foot.’ 29. They crawled about on
the ground with both hands and knees; afterwarée, when
they rose and stood upright, they saw that tt reir, hands
were resplendent (copper-coloured). 30. The red- coloured
dust of the ground covered their arms and hands; hente-__
the name of that place was called Tambapanni (copper-
palmed). 31. Tambapanni was the first town in the most
excellent Lafkadtpa; there Vijaya resided and governed
his kingdom. 32. Vijaya and Vijita together with Anurd-
dhanakkhatta, Accutagimi, and Uipatieen are those who
came first to this country. 33. Many people, crowds
of men and women, came together; (hence each) prince
founded a town in the different parts. 84. The town of
Tambapanni surrounded by suburbs was built by Vijaya in
the south on the most Jovely bank of the river. "35. Vijita
founded Vijita(pura), the same founded Uruvela. The
minister who was called after thegasterism (Anuradha)
founded Anuridhapura, 36. Ile who was called Accuta-
gimi then founded Ujjent, Upatissa founded Upatissanagara
which had well arranged markets, which was prosper-
ous, opulent, large, charming, and lovely. 37. The
king called Vijaya by name was the first ruler who
reigned is Tambapanni over the delightful island of Lapka.
38. When seven years (of his reigir) had passed, the land
was crowded with people. That prince reigned thirty-
cight years. . ie =

39. In the ninth month after (Gotama) had become
Buddha, the host of Yakkhas was destroyed; in the fifth
year after his attaining Buddhaship the Jina conquered
the Nagas; in the cighth ycar after his attaining Buddha-
ship he completed the Samapatti meditations (in Lanka).
40. On these three occasions the Tathagata came hither.
In the last year of the Buddha Vijaya came hither. 41. The
Sambuddha, the most excellent of men, made (the island
fit boy the residence of men; the Sambuddha (afterwards)
reached complete Nibbana by the entire annihilation of the
substrata, of existence.


9,42 = 20;9, ~ 163


’42, Prince’ (Vijaya) reigned. thirty-eight years after
the Parinibbana of the Sambuddha, the light-giving king
of Trutl:. 43. He despatched a messenger to Sthapura to
the (prince) called Sumitta, (with this message): ,Come
one (of you) quickly to us, to the most excellent island
of Lanka; — 44. there is nobody to govern this kingdom
after my death. I hand over to you this island which
I have acquired by my exertions.“


: Xx)

1. The daughter of* the Sakka prince Pandu, the prin-
cess called Kaceand, came over hither from Jambudipa in
order to preserve the dynasty. 2. She was crowned as
the queen-consort of Panduvasa; from this marriage eleven
childrer ‘were born: 3. Abhaya, Tissa, and Utti, Tissa,
and Asela the fifth, Vibhita, Rama, and Siva, Matta to-
gether with Mattaka&. 4. The youngest of them was a
daughter known by the name of Citt&; because she fasci-
nated the hearts of the men who saw her, she was called
Umunidacitta. (fascinating Citta). :

5. (Panduvisa) arrived in Upatissag&ma in the same
year in which he was crowned. This king reigned fall
thirty years, :

6. There were seven Sakiya princes, the grand-child-
ren of Amitodana, born in the family of the Lord of the
world: Rama, Tissa, and Anuradha, Mahali, Dighava,
Rohana, Gamant the seventh of them.

7 The son of Panduvisa, prince Abhaya by name,
reigned immediately (after his father) twenty years. 8. Tk-
wise son of Dighavu, the clever Gamant, who attended
Panduvisa, cohabited with the princess Citta, 9. In con-


1) This chapter belongs to the most fragmentary parts of the whole
work. First is related the marriage of Panduviisa and Kaccfna (vv. 14-4).
After a stanza referring to the length of Paudavisa's reign (v. ), thg names
of Kacefnii’s brothers are given who came over to Ceylon (see Mahivamsa,
p. 56). The following verses contain a short abstract of whet is related at
length in the Mahiyamsa, pp. 57 et seq.


11*


164 10, 9 — 11, 12.


sequence of that intercourse the prince called Parduka
was born. Saving his life (from the persecutions of his
uncles), (Panduka) resided in Dovirikamandala. -


Xf.


1. Abhaya’s twentieth year having clapsed, Pakunda
had completed his twentieth year. Pakundaka was crowned
when the thirty-seventh year from his birth had clapsed.
2. After Abhaya’s twenticth year Pakundaka lived as a
robber; seventeen years later he put to death seven of
his maternal uncles, and received the royal coronation in
the town of Anuradhapura. 3. When ten years (of his
reign) had clapsed and sixty years (of it) were still to
follow, he fixed the boundaries of the villages and com-

- pletely tranquillized (the country). 4. Enjoying sove-
reignty both over men and Yakkhas, Pakunda reigned
during full seventy years. 5. The son of Pakunda was the
prince called Mutasiva; this king reigned sixty years over
Tambapanni. ;

6.7. There were then ten brothers, the sons of Muta-
siva: Abhaya, Tissa, and Naga, Utti together with Matta-
bhaya, Mitta, Siva, and Ascla, Tissa, and Kira completing
the number of ten, and princess AnulA and Sivala, the
daughters of Mutasiva, 8. When eight years of Ajata-
sattu had elapsed, Vijaya came hither; ‘after the fourteenth
year of Udaya Vijaya expired. After the sixteenth year of
Udaya they crowned Panduvasa. 9. In the interval be-
tween the two kings Vijaya and Panduvisa, Tambapanni
was without a king during one year, 10. In the twenty-
first year of Naigadasa, Panduvasa died, and they crowned
Abhaya in the twenty-first year of Nagadasa,

11. ... seventeen years‘); twenty-four ...

12. In the fourteenth year of Candaguita the king
called Pakundaka died; in the fourteenth year of Canda-


-*
1) The first words of this fragment seem to refer to the interreign after
Abhaya’s death, which lasted seventeen years. The number of twenty-four


T cannot explain.


11, 12—25. 165


gutta they crowned Mutasiva. 13. Seventcen years had
elapsed after the coronation of Asoka, then Mutasiva died,
14,-When seventeen ycars of that king (that is, Asoka)
and six months of the next year had clapsed, in the second
month of the winter season, under the most auspicious
Bakkhatta of Asilha, Devinampiya was installed in the
kingdom of Tambapanni. 15. At the foot of the Chita
mountain three bamboo poles were te be found. (The
first was) white like silver; its creeper shone like gold.
16.17. There was also (the second), the flower pole,
(whereon most beautiful,) delightful (figures) like the
shapes of flowers (presented themselves), dark blue, yellow,
ved, pure white, and black; and so also (the third), the
bird-pole on which birds (appeared), each with its natu-
ral colours, and also quadrupeds. 18. The eight descrip-
tions of, pearls (also presented themselves), viz. the borse
pearl, the elephant pearl, the chariot pearl, the myrobalan
-fearl, the bracelet pearl, the signet pearl, the Kakubha
pearl, the Sadisa (Pakatika?) pearl, 19. When Devinam-
piya had succeeded to the throne, (the people) moved by
the splendour of his coronation, brought the three kinds
of gems from the Malaya country, the three bamboo poles
from the foot of the Chita hill, and the cight kinds of
peayls from the sea-shore. 20. Great crowds hrought in
the space of sevén days, in conseqnence of Devanampiya’s
merit, the gems which were produced in Malaya and
“which were worthy of a king. 21. When the king saw
these costly, precious treasures, the unequalled, incompar-
able, wonderful, rare treasures, — 22. 23. he spoke with
a heart full of joy: ,I am high-born, noble, the chief of
men; such is the reward of my righteous deeds; look at
the treasures I have gained, which are worth many lacs
and are produced in consequence of my merit. Who is—
worthy to receive the donation of these treasures, —~ 24. my
mother or my father, a brother, relations, friends, or com-
panions ?* Thus meditating the king remembered pfince
Asoka. 25. Devinampiyatissa and Dhammasoka, the Tna-
ster of men, were both intimate friends, united by faithful


166 Hi, 25—86.


affection, though they never had seen each other. 26. ,I
have a dear ally, the ruler of Jambudipa, the righteous
Asokadhamma, a friend dear.as my life. 27. He is worthy
to receive from me the gift of these treasures, cand I
also‘am. worthy to present unto him the treasure of these
most precious ornaments (?). 28. Arise, my dear (?)}}
quickly take these treasures, go to Jambudipa, to the city
called Puppha(pura), and present these most precious trea-
sures to Asoka, my ally.“

29. Mahdarittha, Sala, the Brahmana Parantapabbata,
the astrologer Puttatissa, these four men were the messen-
gers despatched by Devanampiya.. 30. Devanampiya sent
the three resplendent gems, the eight-excellent pearls, and
the three (bamboo poles which had the size of) chariot
poles, besides a’ collection of the most precious chanks,
together with many valuable objects. 31. The ‘king sent
his minister Sala and his commander-in-chief Arittha, Pa-
rantapabbata, and his astrologer Puttatissa, who.were de-
lighted (?) (with this service).

32. (Asoka in return sent) a royal parasol, a... of
Sara wood (?), a diadem, ear ornaments, water from the
Ganges, and an (anointing) vase, a chank trumpet, and a
palanquin, — 33. a right hand chank, a virgin, all that
being worthy (?) of a royal coronation; a suit (a koti?)
of clothes which are (cleansed by being passed through
the fire) without being washed *), costly towels, -—- 34. most
precious yellow sandal wood, and measures of rouge,”
yellow, and emblie myrobalan; and therewith he sent this
message: 35. ,The Buddha is the best among those who
are worthy of presents, the Faith is the best of all things
wauich refer to the extinction of the passions, and the
Samgha is the best field of merit: these are the three
best objects in the world of men and Deyas, 36. To this
(triad) I, the prince, pay my reverence for the sake of
the highest bliss.“


a
A) The King addresses his nephew Arittha; see the Mahivamsa, p. 69.


2) I have Adopted Turnour's translation of ,adhovimam* (Mahavémsa,
p. 70).


11, 37 = 19,7. Pers i)


-87. Those four messengers having sojourned five
months (in Pataliputta, departed,) taking away the pre-,
sents sent by Asokadhamma, 38. and arrived in this
island_from Jambudipa on the twelfth day of the increas-
ing moon in the month of Vesikha. The requisites for
the coronation having been sent by Asokadhamma, —
39. they celebrated a second coronation of king Devanam-
piya. This second coronation took place on the full moon
day of the month of Vesikha; — 40. one month after
that day, on the full moon day of the month of Jettha,
Mahinda arrived in this island from Jambudipa together
with his six companions.


Here ends the description of the things for the
royal coronation.


a XU.


1. The (monarch) called Asoka sent (to Devanampiya)
a chowrie, a turban, a sword, a royal parasol, slippers,
a diadem, a ... of Sara wood, an (anointing) vase, a right
hand chank, — 2. a palanquin, a conch trumpet, water
from the Ganges, a koti of clothes which are (cleansed
by being passed through the fire) without being washed,
a golden vessel and spoon, costly towels, — 3. a man’s
load of water from the Anotatta lake, most prectous yellow
sandal wood, a measure of rouge, eye collyrium brought
“by the Nagas, —- 4. yellow and cmblic myrobalan, costly
Amata drags, one hundred and “sixty cart loads of fra-
grant bill paddy which had been brought by parrots} (all
these things: being) the rewards for his meritorious actions.
5. (Besides he sent the following message:) ,I have taken
my refuge in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Samgha;
I have avowed myself a lay pupil of the Doctrine of the
Sakyaputta. 6. Imbuc*your mind also with the faith in
“this triad, in the highest religion of the Jina, take your
refuge in the Teacher. 7. Doing honour .(to Dev§-
nampiyatissa by) this (commission), Asoka the illustrious
despatched the messengers to Devanampiya. *


168 oY 12, 720.


As soon as the messengers had departed, — 8. many
Theras who possessed the great (magical) powers ad-
dressed Mahinda, in the most excellent Asokaramz, out of
compassion for the country of Lanka, (as follows:) 9, ,The
time has come to establish the Faith in the island of
Lanka; go, most virtuous one, convert the island of Lanka.*
10. The wise and learned Mahinda, the enlightener of the
island, having heard the specch of the Fraternity, con-
sented together with his companions. 11. Adjusting his
robe so as to cover one shoulder, raising his clasped
hands, and saluting them with an inclination of the head,
(he said:) 1 go to the island of Lanka. 12. The (prince)
called Mahinda became then the chief of that number;
Tithiya and the Thera Uttiya, Bhaddasala and Sambala, —
13. and the novice Sumana who was possessed of the six
(supernatural) faculties and of the great (magical) powers,
those five great Theras being possessed of the (same) six
(supernatural) faculties and great (magical) powers, depart-
ing from the Asokirama went forth together with their
retinue, 14. Wandering from place to place they reached
Vedissagiri. They sojourned as long as they liked in the
monastery of Vedissagiri. 15. Théra (Mahinda), having
instructed his mother Gi the doctrine of) the refuges, the
moral precepts, and the Uposatha ceremonies, made the
inhabitants of the island firm in the true faith and in the
religion.

16. (Once) in the evening, Thera Mahinda, the great
teacher, retiring into soliudu,. reflected whether the time
would be favourable or unfavourable (for the conversion
of f Lanka). 17. Perceiving the thought of the Thera, Sakka
the chief of gods oie to the Thera, and thus ad-
dressed him face to face: 18. The time has come to thee,
great hero, to convert Langa: go quickly to the best
of islands out of compassion for ercated beings. 19. Go
to the most excellent Lankadipa, preach the Dhamma to
created beings; proclaim the four Truths, release men
from the fetters (of sin); — 20. make illustrious the doe-
trine of the ‘supreme Buddha in Lankadipa. Thy (advent)


12, 20—30. 169


has-been foretéld by the Chief (of the Faith); the frater-
nity of Bhikkhus has elected thee, — 21. and I shall do
service to thee at thy arrival in Laikadipa and perform all
that is necessary; it is time for thee to depart.“ 22. Hav-
ing heard the specch of Sakka, Mahinda, the enlightener
‘of: the island, reflected (thus): ,Bhagavat has rightly pro-
phesied about me, the fraternity of Bhikkhas has elected
me, — 23. and Sakka has exhorted me; I shall establish
the Faith; I will go to Tambapanni; subtle is the people
of Tambapanni, — 24. (yet) they have not heard of the
well proclaimed path which leads to the destruction of all
suffering. J shall proclaim it to them; I shall go to the
island of Lanka. 25. Mahinda, the son of Asoka, who
well knew the time and the scason, having resolved to
go to Lanka, told his companions (to come). Mahinda was
the chief’ of that number; there were (then) his four fellow-
pupils, — 26. the novice Sumana, and the lay-disciple
Bhanduka. To these six men who were endowed with
the six (supernatural) faculties, (Mahinda) who possessed
the great (magical) powers, thus made known (his inten-
tion}: 27. Let us go now to the extensive, most excel-
lent island. of Lanka, Jet us convert many people and
establish the Faith.“ 28. Expressing their assent (by ex~-
claiming:) ,Be it so“, they all were joyful. (They added:)
ylt is time, venerable sir, let us go to the mountain called
Missaka; the king (Devinampiyatissa) is just leaving the
town in order to hunt.*

29. Sakka, the clef of the gods, was delighted and ~
addressed Thera Mahinda who had retired into solitude,
with the following specch: 30. Venerable sir, Bhagayat
has given this prediction about thee: ,In future times the
Bhikkhu Mahinda will convert the island, he ,will propa-
gate the religiop of the Jina, he will set on foot there the
kingdom of Righteousness, he will deliver created beings
from great pain, and will establish them on firm. ground,
he will act for the welfare of many people, for the joy
of many people, out of compassion for the world, for the
good, for the welfare, and for the joy of gods and men.‘


170 "42,8136. .


31. Thus Bhagavat has indicated thee, amd now, at.the
present time, the Thera and the Bhikkhus have charged

_ thee with the conversion of the island. It is time, great
hero, to convert the island; the hour has come, great hero,
to convert the island; upon thee this task has devolved;
bear this burden, convert Tambapanni, propagate the relic
gion of the Jina. J am thy obedient pupil who gets up
before thee and walks behind thee.“ 32. (Mahinda re-
plied:) ,I accept what Bhagavat, our Teacher, has said;
I will save Tambapanni, I will show the light (to the
island) and cause the splendour of the Jina to increase.
(Tambapanni) is covered, and enclosed by the overcloud-
ing darkness of ignorance and of (worldly) existence; it is:
ruined by envy and selfishness; it cannot rise from the
delusions which are produced by the fault: of idleness; it
has entered on a wrong way and goes far astray’ fyom the
true path; it is exhausted; high born people have become
(as it were) people covered with sores, and have become
(feeble like) Mufija or Babbaja grass. Tambapanni has
entirely been subdued by obstacles and passions in con-
sequence of the obscurity of error and of the darkness of
ignorance and of (worldly) existence; it is covered, per-
vaded, veiled, overshadowed, and girt round with that great
darkness, the obscurity of error, 33. I shall destroy the
darkness of error and throw light on all Tambapanni, I
shall cause to shine the religion of the Jina.“

Being thus exhorted by Vasavinda, the chief Of gods,
by such a speech, he rose up from his solitude, and hav-
ing attained to the fullness of resolve, he thus asked for
the assent of the fraternity of Bhikkhus: 34. ,Let us go
toLambapanni; the people of Tambapanni are subtle; (yet)
they have not heard of the well proclaimed path which
leads to the destruction of all suffering. a shall proclaim
it to them, I shall go to the island of Lanka.“

35. Having resided thirty days on the delightful bill
of Védissa,,(they reflected thus:) ,It is now time to start;
let Us. go to the best of islands.“ 36, They flew through
the air from*Jambudipa, as the king of swans flies in the |


12, 86—50. é 171:


air.. Having thus risen, the Theras alighted on the best
of mountains (Missaka). 37. To the east of the most ex-.
cellent own (Anuraddhapura), on the cloud-like mountain ©
they stationed themselves, on the top of Missaka, as swans
(alight) on the summit of a hill. 38. The (Thera) called
“Mahinda was then the chief of that fraternity; Itthiya,
Thera Uttiya, Bhaddasala, and Sambala, — 39. the novice
Sumana, and the lay-pupil Bhanduka, all these possessing
the great (magical) powers, were the converters of Tamba-
panni. 40. The Thera, rising into the air as the king of
swans rises to the sky, stationed himsclf to the east of
the most excellent town on the cloud-like mountain, —
41. 42. on the top of Missaka, as swans (alight) on the
summit of a hill. At that time Devdnampiyatissa, the son
of Mutasiva, was king and ruler of Tambapanni. The
eighteenth year had elapsed since the coronation of Asoka,
— 43, and full seven months since the coronation of Tissa,
when Mahinda, twelve years (after his Upasampada ordi-
nation), arrived in this island from Jambudipa. 44. In
the last month of summer, on the full moon day of the
month Jettha, under the asterisms Anuridha and Jettha,
Mahinda at the head of his companions arrived on mount
Missaka. 45, The king, going a hunting, (also) came to
mont Missaka. A god who had assumed the form of an
elk appeared to the king. 46. The king, seeing the elk,
quickly rushed on bim and running behind him he came
“to a place enclosed by hills. 47. There the Yakkha dis-
appeared near the Thera; seeing the Thera sitting there,
the king was frightened. 48. (The Thera reflected:) ,As
the king is alone, he shall see also me alone lest he
should be frightened; when his troops have come up, then
be may see the Bhikkhus (also). 49. There (Mahinda)
saw the prince, the protector of the earth, who appeared
like a wicked person, going to hunt; he called him by
_ the name of that prince: ,Come hither, Tissa“, thus he
then addressed him. 50. (The king thought thus:) , Who is
that solitary, bald-headed man without companion, wearing
a yellow garment and wrapped in a mantle; who addresses


172 12, 50—63.


me-in the language of non-human beings?“ - 51, (Mahinda
replied:) ,I whom you ask, o prince, o protector of the
earth, am a Samana belonging to the world of mes.. We
are Samanas, great king, pupils of the king of Truth;
out of compassion towards thee we have repaired hither
from Jambudipa.“ 52. The king laid aside his weapons
and scated himself by the side (of Mahinda); having seated
himself, the king exchanged grectings with words full of
deep meaning. 53. Having heard the speech of the Thera,
he laid aside his weapons; then he approached the Thera,
exchanged greetings with him, and sat down. 54. Gra-
dually the ministers and the troons also arrived; fourty
thousand men in number they surrounded (the king and
the Theras). 55. When the troops had come up, the king
perceived the (other) seated Theras (and asked:) ,Are
there many other Bhikkhus, pupils of the universa] Bud-
dhi?* 56. ,There are many disciples of Buddha, versed
in the threefold science, possessed of the (magical) powers,
well acquainted with the exposition of the qualities of
mind, who have subdued their passions and reached Ara-
hatship.“

57. After having ascertained by means of the Amba
parable that this victorious king was a clever person,
(Mahinda) preaehed to him the most excellent Hatthipada
Sutta. 58. When they had heard that most excellent (por-
tion of the) Doctrine, these forty thousand men took their
refuge (with Buddha), like a wise man in whose mind *
faith has arisen. 59. Then the king, glad, highly delighted
and joyful, addressed the fraternity of Bhikkhus: Let
us proceed to the town, my capital. 60. Quickly (Ma-
hinda) converted the pious, learned and wise king called
Devinam(piya) together with his army. 61. Hearing what
the kind said, Mahinda replied: ,Go you, great king;
we shall stay here.“ 62. When he had sent away the
king, Mahinda, the enlightener of the island, addressed
the fraternity of Bhikkhus: ,Let us confer the Pabbajja
ordination on Bhanduka.* 63. Having heard what the
Thera said, “they all quickly turning their thoughts (to-


12, 68-75. 173 -


wards that object) examined the village boundary and con-
ferred the PabbajjA ordination on Bhanduka. At the same
time he received the Upasampada ordination. and attained
Arahatship.

64. The Thera standing on the top of the mountain
~said to the charioteer): ,Nay, a chariot is not suitable
(to us); the Tathagata has rejected (its use).“ 65. Having
sent away the charioteer, the Theras who had subdued
their senses and possessed the great (magical) powers,
started throught the air, as the king of swans (rises) to
the sky. Descending from the sky, they alighted on the
ground, 66. When the charioteer saw them who put on’
their under garments and dressed themselves in their robes,
he joyfully went to tell the king. 67. When the king had
(first) despatched the charioteer, he had thus addressed
his ministers: ,Erect a pavilion in the town within the
precinets of the palace. 68. The princes and princesses,
the queens, and the women of the harem who desire to
meet them, may see the Theras who have arrived. 69. The
high-born ministers, after having heard the speech of the
king, constructed in the middle of the precincts of the
palace a payilion canopied with cloth. 70. A canopy was
spread, a clean, white and spotless cloth; it was decora-
ted with flags and shells, and adorned with white strips
of cotton, 71. White sand was scattered, well mixed with
white flowers; (such was) the white, decorated hall, similar
to the ‘snowy regions (of the skies). 72. Having decora-
ted the hall with entirely white cloth and having made
the floor level, they spoke to the king: 73. ,The well con-
structed, beautiful hall, great king, is completed; choose
now, Sire, seats which are suitable for ascetics. 74> At
that moment the charioteer arrived announcing to the king:
»A chariot, ‘Sire, is not suitable for the Bhikkhu frater-
nity to sit down (therein). 75. O wonderful, Sire! all the
Theras who possess the great: (magical) powers, first re-
mained bchind me after having sent me away, (but-now)


1) The king had sent his chariot the next moming for bringing the
Theras to the town; see Mahav., p. 81.


ye 19,48 "18, 2.


“they have arrived before me. 76, A high seat anda great
‘seat are not suitable for the Bhikkhus; order a carpet (for
them); the Theras approach.“ 77. The king, delighted at
hearing the speech of the charioteer, went forth to meet
the “[heras, and, having saluted, he exchanged greetings
(with them). 78. Taking the alms-bowls of the Theras-
and honouring them with perfumed garlands, the’ prince
together with the Theras arrived at the gate of the royal
palace. 79. The Thera, having entered the hall in the
interior appartments of the king, saw the floor strewn
(as above described) and the seat covered with cloth.
80. They sat down on the seats prepared for them which
were covered with cloth, When they had seated them-
selves, the king gave them water, rice-gruel and food, —
81. and served to them with his own hands a most ex-
cellent meal. When the Thera had finished his meal and
removed his hand from the bowl, — 82. (the king) ad-
dressed queen Anuli together with the women of the in-
terior appartments: ,You know the opportunity, queen;
‘it is time to pay your respects to them (the Theras).¢
83. Queen Anula, surrounded by five hundred girls, bowed
to: the Theras and honoured them to her heart’s content.
84, Having approached the Theras and saluted them, she
sat down. (Mahinda) preached to them the Dhamma; the
great teacher exposed the fearful Peta stories, — 85. 86. the
Vimana stories, the Saccasamyutta. When they had heard
that most excellent (portion of the) Doctrine, princess *
Anula and her five hundred attendants, like a wise man @)
in whose mind faith has arisen, attained the reward of
Sotipatti; this was the first case of the attainment (of a
stage of sanctification which occurred in Lanka),


XU. :


1. The whole crowd, the multitude of people who
had fot seen the Theras before, assembled at the gate of -
the foyal palace and set up a great shout, 2. The king
hearing the gteat noise ... (asked:) ,For what reason have


%


“18,216. +38
all these numerous. people, has this great. crowd assem-
bled?“ .3..(The ministers. said:) ,This great crowd, Sire,
has assembled for seeing the Fraternity; as they did not
obtain a sight (of them), they set up that great shout.“
4, (he king replied:) ,,The palace is much too small for
liis multitude to place themselves therein; the elephant
stables are not too small; (there) these crowds may see
the Thera.“ 5. When (Mahinda) had finished his meal and
gladdened (the king by preaching the Dhamma), he rose
from his seat, Jeft the royal palace, and went to the ele-
phant stables. 6. In the elephant, stables they prepared a
magnificent couch; on that excellent conch Mahinda, the
enlightener of the island, sat down. 7. Seated on that
most excellent couch Mahinda, the chief of (that) com-
pany (of Bhikkhus), then preached the most excellent
Devadata Sutta. 8. Having heard that Devadita. discourse
(which treats of) the most fearful (consequences of) former
deeds, they were frightened and scized by great emotion,
being terrified by the fear of hell. 9. When he saw that
the people were oppressed by fear, he proclaimed the
four Truths; at the end (of his discourse) one thousand
men attained (sanctification); this was the second case of
the attainment (of sanctification which occurred in Laika).

_ 10. Leaving the clephant stables (he went forth), fol-
lowed by a great crowd, delighting many people, as Bud-
dha had done in Rajagaba. 11. The crowd left the town
by the Southern gate; there was a pleasure garden called
Mahanandana, to the south of the town. 12. In (this)
royal pleasure garden they prepared a magnificent conch;
there the Thera sat down and preached the most ex-
cellent Dhamma. 13. There he preached the most “éx-
ceHent Balapandita Suttanta. At that time one thousand
created beings attained sanctification through the Dhamma.
14. 15. A great crowd then gathered in the Nandana
pleasure garden; noble women and maidens, the daugh-
ters-in-law and the daughters of noble familigs crofvded
together in order to see the Thera. While he exchanged
greetings with them, night had fallen. 16. (Tife king there- .


17% CO 18, 16-29.”


” fore addressed Mahinda :) »The Theras may pass the night
here in the Mahanandana garden; it is too late for going
hence to the distant dwelling in the mountains.“ 17, (Ma-
hinda replied:) ,The town which is filled with so many
people, is too close by; in the night there will be a great
noise; nay, let us go to that mountain which is like the
palace of Sakka and well fitting for a retired existence.“
18. (Tissa answered:) ,There is a solitary garden of mine,
the Mahameghavana, suitable for going and coming, not
too far and not too near, — 19. easily accessible for people
who want (to see you), by day not exposed to much
noise, at night ‘there is no noise at all, 20. It is well
fitted for a retired existence, and suits ascetic people; it
is endowed with prospects and shadow, it is beautiful,
and produces flowers and fruits, — 21. it is well enclosed.
by a wall and well protected by towers at the gates,
There is a well arranged royal gate in my delightful gar-
den, — 22. a well constructed lotus-pond ‘covered with
white and blue lotuses, cold water in suitable reservoirs,
which is sweetly scented by flowers, 23. So delightful is
my garden, appropriate for (you) and the fraternity of
Bhikkhus. There, o Thera, reside; have. compassion on
me.“ 24. Hearing what the king said, Thera Mahinda
with his companions, surrounded by the host of ministers,
proceeded then to the Meghavana garden. 25. Being” in-
vited by the chicf of men, Thera Mahinda, the great
teacher, entered the suitable Mahdmeghavana garden. Ine
that garden, in the royal pavilion; the Thera, the great
teacher, passed the night.

26. On the second day the king again visited the
Tkeras. Having bowed to them, he spoke thus to the
Theras: 27. ,Have you had a good night’s rest? do you
find this residence comfortable? (The Theras replied:)
» The dwelling is solitary, well fitting the Season, agreeable
to lie in for men, — 28. convenient for a retired existence
and-desirable.* The king, delighted by that speech, re-
joicing and excited, — 29. he the ruler of the earth, took
a golden vessel and dedicated the garden (to the Frater-


13, 39-48. , 174


nity). Raising -his clasped hands, he pronounced the fol-
lowing words: 30. »Here, venerable Sir, I give up the
beautiful MahSmeghavana garden’ to the Fraternity of the
four quarters of the world; accept it.“ 31. Mahinda, the
enlightener of the island, hearing what the chief of men
said, accepted the garden for the sake of the construction
of a monastery for the Fraternity. 32. At the moment
when the Mabdmeghavana garden was given and accepted,
the earth began to quake, and again and again thunder
(was heard). 33. The chief of men called Tissa bestowed
it on the Fraternity; they turned the Mahimeghavana
garden into (a monastery called) the Tissirkma, 34. The
Mahameghavana was the first Arama, worthy of the Re-
ligion, which Devanampiya bestowed on the Fraternity.
35. Then the earth quaked, a horror-exciting portent. All
people and the king, being terrified, asked the Theras
(about the reason of that earth-quake). 36. ,This is the
first monastery in the most excellent island of Laik’; the
reason of this first carth-quake is that the Faith has been
established here.“ 37. Witnessing that astonishing, terri-
fying miracle, they all waved their garments, as nothing of
the kind had been experienced in the town. 38. Thence
the-rejoicing king in whose mind wisdom had arisen, raising
his clasped hands, presented many flowers to Mahinda,
the* enlightener of the island. 89. The Thera accepted
the flowers and threw them down in one place; then
“the earth again quaked; this was the second carth-quake.
40. Witnessing this miracle also, the royal retinue together
with the people of the kingdom shouted; this was the
second earth-quake. 41. The delighted king who rejoiced
still more, (then asked:) ,Satisfy my desire (to learn the
reason of) this second earth-quake.* 42. »The Fraternity
will (here) perform its business which’ is irreproachable
and worthy of the Faith. At this very spot, o great king,
will be the consecrated , enclosure.“ 43. The king, still
more delighted, presented flowers to the Thera; the Thera
accepted the flowers and threw them down on another
‘spot; then the carth quaked again; this was the third
* 12


178 13, 48—59.


earth-quake. 44. (The king asked:) ,What is the reason,
o great hero, of this third earth- quake? Satisfy all my
wishes, tell-me, you are ‘well experienced.* 45. .-On this
spot will be the bath-house with a tank; here the Bhi-
kkhus always will fill the bath.“ 46. Devanampiya, filled
with high joy and delight, presented full-blown jasmine
flowers to the Thera. 47. The Thera accepted the flowers
and threw them down on another spot. Then the carth
quaked again. This was the fourth earth-quake. 48. Wit-
nessing that miracle, the great crowds who had assem-
bled, raising their clasped hands, paid reverence to (the
Thera) who possessed the great (magical) powers. 49. The
king, glad and delighted, quickly asked: ,What is the
reason, o wreat hero, of this fourth earth-quake?* 50. ,The
descendant of the Sakyas, the great hero, was enlightened
regarding the whole Truth near the Assattha tree;, (there)
he became the highest Buddha. That tree will be esta-
blished on this very spot in this most excellent island.‘
51. Hearing that, the king, glad, joyful, and excited, pre-
scented most excellent jasmine flowers to the Thera. 52. The
Thera accepted the flowers and threw them down on the
ground; at that moment also the carth quaked; this was
the fifth earth-quake. 53. Witnessing that miracle also,
the royal retinue together with the people of the kingdom
shouted and waved their garments. 54. (The king asked:)
»What is the reason, o great sage, of the fifth earth-
quake? Tell me this matter, if that is consistent (?) with*
your pleasure and will. 55. ,Kach fortnight they will

here recite the Patimokkba; on this very spot the Upo-
satha hall will stand.“ 56. (The king) presented beautiful
fldwers to the Thera also in another place; the Thera
accepted the flowers and threw them down on that spot.

Then the carth quaked again; this was the sixth earth-
quake. 57. Witnessing this miracle also; the crowds who

had assembled, joyfully thus addressed cach other: ,Here

a Vihara will stand.“ 58. The king who was still more
delighted, said to the Theras: , What is the reason, 0 great

Sage, of thé sixth earth-quake?“ 59. ,As long as in fu-


13, 59 — 14,8. “479


ture times the alms due to the Fraternity (will be distri-
buted), the assembled Fraternities of Bhikkhus will receive
them, a great king, on this very spot.“ 60.-Hearing the
Thera’s speech, the delighted king presented most beauti-
ful flowers to the Thera. 61. The Thera accepted the
“flowers and scattered them on another spot; then the earth
quaked again; this was the seventh- earth-quake. 62. Wit-
nessing this miracle, the whole royal retinuc and the people
of the kingdom waved their garments, when the ground
of the earth quaked. 63. (The king asked:) , What is the
reason, o great sage, of the acyanths earth-quake? Ex-
plain it, o great sage, gatisfy the desire of the multitude.*
64. (Mahinda replied:) ,As long as learned people will
reside in this monastery, the refectory and the dinncr hall
will be on this spot.“


XIV.


1. Having heard the speech of the Thera, the king
was still more delighted. Not accepting the Campaka
flowers (offerred to him by the gardener), he presented
them to the Thera. 2. The Thera threw down the Cam-
paka flowers on the ground; then the earth quaked again;
this was the eighth earth-quake. 3. Witnessing this mi-
racle, the royal retinue and the people of the kingdom
shouted and waved their garments. 4. (The king asked :)
»What fs the reason, o great hero, of the eighth carth-
quake? Explain it, 0 great sage, we listen to your specch ?¢
5. 6. The relics of Tathdgata’s body consist of eight
Dona-measnres, men possessed of magical power will con-
vey hither one Dona, o great king, and deposit it at this
very spot, and erect (here) a deahlandent Thipa which
will be the means whereby hearts will be touched and
many people will be converted.« 7. The whole crowd
that had assembled, the royal retinue and the people of
the kingdom shouted at the quaking of the great earth.

8. (The Thera) resided (during the next night) in the


Tissarama, and when the night had passed; he put on
< 12*


180 iE 14, 922.


his under garment and wrapped himself in his robe; —
9. then he took his alms-bowl and entered the town, the
capital. Going about in quest of alms he came to the
gate of the palace. 10. He entered the royal palace and
sat down on a seat; there he took his meal and cleansed
the bowl with his hand. 11. 12. Having finished his méaT
and gladdened (the king by preaching the Dhamma), he
left the palace and the town by the southern gate. He
then preached in the Nandana garden the most excellent
Aggikkbandha Suttanta. There one thousand men attained
sanctification. 13. Having preached the true Faith and
having delivered many created beings (from their sinful
condition), the Thera rose from his seat and resided again
(during the next night) in the Tissirima. 14. Having re-
sided there during the night, when the night had passed,
he put on his under garment and wrapped himéelf in his
robe; — 15. then he took his alms-bowl and entered the
town, the capital. Going about in quest of albus he came
to the gate of the palace. 16. He entered the royal pa-
lace and sat down on a seat; there he took his meal
and cleansed his bowl with his hand. 17. 18. Having
finished his meal and gladdened (the king by preaching
the Dhamma), he left the town, the capital. When he had
rested at noon in the most excellent Nandana garden,
he preached there the beautiful Suttanta of the ‘Asivisa
parable. At the end (of this sermon) one thousand men
attained sanctification; (this was) the fifth ease of the*
attainment of sanctification (which occurred in Lanka).
19. Having preached the true Faith and awakened created
beings, he rose from his seat and went to the Tissdrama.
20. The king was greatly delighted at the eight-
fold (?) earth-quake; glad, rejoicing and satisfied the king
thus addressed the Theras: 21. ,The mgnastery has been
firmly established, an excellent resting-place for the Fra-
ternity. (Your) ‘AbhiniapAdaka meditation, venerable Sir,
(has caused) this great earth-quake.* 22. (The Thera re-
plied:) ,By. this alone, o king, the rest-house for the Fra-
ternity has "not yet been firmly established; the Tathagata


14, 2284. 481


has. instituted (the ceremony) éalled the determination: of
boundaries. 23. 24. Having defied on all sides by the
eight classes of landmarks the boundaries within which
all Bhikkhus are considered as one section, and (having
decreed about) not parting with the three robes *), all the
‘sections (of the Fraternity) assemble and vote on their
affairs. A place enclosed by boundaries which have been
fixed in that way, is called one community. (Then) the
monastery is well established, and the rest-house duly
founded. 25. (The king answered:) ,My sons and wives
together with my ministers and my retinue, all have be-
come your lay pupils .and have taken for all their life
their refuge (in the Faith). 26. I ask you, great hero,
do what I say; let the whole multitude (of the town’s-
people) ‘reside on the ground included by the boundaries.
27. Here’ always they will find a defence through the pro-
tecting power (?) of charity and compassion.“ (Mahinda
said:) Determine you the limits, o king, as-you like; —
28. the limit being given, the Fraternity will settle the
boundaries.“ Mahapaduma and Kujfjara, the two state-
elephants, — 29. were first harnessed to a golden plough
in Kotthamalaka, The great army consisting of four hosts
(proceeded), and together with the Theras the king, —
30.,the destroyer of his enemies, made a furrow with the
golden plough. (During this progress there were seen)
adorned full vases, beautiful flags of different colours, -~
“81. triumphal arches decorated with various flowers and
flags, garlands (?), and many burning lights (2). (Thus the
king) ploughed with the golden plough. 32. For the sake
of the conversion of many people, the prince together with
the Theras, turning his right hand towards the. city, walked
around it and came to the bank of the river. 33. Draw-
ing (?) the furrow which indicated the line of the great
boundary, on the ground with the golden plough, he
then (?) arrived (again) at Kotthamalaka. 34. The two
ends of the furrow having been united in the presence of


1), See the rules about the definition of boundaries and-about the gtici-
varena avippavasas, Mahavagga, II, 6—12.


182 14, 34—48.


a great crowd, the earth quaked; this was ‘the first eayth-
quake. 35. Witnessing that miracle, the whole royal re-
‘tinue together with the people of the kingdom 4oyfully
said to each other: ,There will be a monastery within the
boundary.“ 36. The ruler Devanampiya indicafed to the
Theras how far they had fixed the marks of the boundary*
line, of the enclosure, (and spoke thus:) 37. 38. ,As the
preparatory ceremonies for fixing the boundary aad the
enclosure have been performed, may the Thera now out
of compassion for me settle the limits, in order to esta-
blish firmly the Vihara which will be suitable for the fra-
ternity of Bhikkhus.* Having heard what the king said,
Mahinda, the enlightener of the island, — 39. thus ad-
dressed the fraternity of Bhikkhus: ,O Bhikkhus, let us
fix the boundary. Under the constellation of Uttarasalha
the whole Fraternity assembled. 40. Having détermined
the extent of the sacred enclosure, (Mahinda) who was
gifted with (supernatural) vision, fixed the boundary within
which the Bhikkhus were to be considered as one section.
Having firmly established the most excellent Tissiraéima
monastery, — 41. he resided (during the next night) in-
the Tiss4rama, and when the night had passed, he put on
his under garment and wrapped himself in his robe; —
42. then he took his alms-bowl and entered the town, the
capital. Going about in quest of alms, he came to the
gate of the palace. 43. He entered the royal palace and
gat down on a seat; there he took his meal and Cleansed *
the bowl with his hand. 44. Having finished his meal
and gladdened the king (by preaching the Dhamma), he
left_the town, the capital. When he had rested at noon
in the Nandana pleasure garden, —- 45. he then preached
the Asivistipama Suttanta, the Anamataggiya Sutta, and
the incomparable Cariya Pitaka; — 46.,he also repeat-
edly propounded the Gomayapindaovada and the Dhamma-
cakkappavattana in that same place, in the Mahanan-
dana garden. 47. 48. These Suttantas he preached during
(those) seven days, and (in this time) Thera Mahinda, the
enlightener of the island, delivered eight thousand and five


14, 48—61. 183


hundred people from the fetters (of sin). Having resided
in the Tissérama together with his companions something
less then a month, — 49. he thus addressed all the towns-
men on the full-moon day of Asatha, when the time of
Vassa hat approached: ,The time of Vassa is near.“


Here ends the acceptance of the Mahavihara.


50. Having arranged his sleeping-placc, Mahinda, the
enlightencr of the island, took his alms-bowl and his robe,
and left the Tissar
ment and wrapped himself in his robe; then he took his
alms-bow!] and entered .the town, the capital. 52. Going


dma. 51. He put on his under gar-


about in quest of alms, he came to the gate of the pa-
lace. He entered the royal patace, and (there the Theras)
sat down on the becoming seats. 53. There (Mahinda)
took his ‘meal and cleansed the bowl with his hand; (then)
he preached the Mahasamaya Suttanta in order to exhort
(the king). 54. Having exhorted the king, Mahinda, the
enlightener of the island, rose from his scat and departed
without taking leave. 55. The great teacher left the town
‘by the eastern gate, and sending back ali people he pro-
ceeded to the (Missaka) mountain. 56, The ministers were
filled with anxiousness, and announced to the king: ,All
the great Theras, Sire, have gone to the Missuka moun-
tain. 57, The king, frightened at this news, ordered
the horses quickly to be put to the chariot. The prince
“taking the queens-with him, quickly ascended the chariot.
58. Thera Mahinda together with his companions had pro-
ceeded to the foot of the mountain. There was a lake
called Nagacatukka, situated amidst the rocks; after bath-
ing at that place and drinking (the water of that lake),
he ascended the summit of the mountain. 59. The prince _
who profusely perspired in consequence of his great haste,
saw from afar the Thera, standing on the summit of the
mountain. 60. Leaving the queens in the chariot, the
prince descended from the chariot, approached the Tlferas,
saluted, and addressed them thus: 61. ,Why, great Bero,
have you Jett the delightful kingdom, mysélf, and the


184 . 14, 6f—74,


people, and retired, to ‘this mountain?“ - 62. (Mahinda
replied:) ,Here we shall spend, three full months, the
Vassa which Tathagata has allowed to begin ealier or
later**). 63. (The king replied:) ,J do everything that is
required for the comfort of the Bhikkhu fratertity ; have
compassion on me, and instruct me.“ 64. ,The Bhikkhus*
have been permitted by Buddha to begin thie Vassa in a
village as well as in the forest, (provided they) dwell in
a room with shut doors.“ 65. ,I have understood what
you have said, the whole sense with its reasons; this
very day I shall erect a residence suitable for the Vassa.«
66. The illustrious monarch who had reached the full per-
fection attainable by a layman, looked out (for a place),
and dedicated (it) to the Theras, (saying:) ,Reside here
out of compassion; — 67. well, venerable Ther: Ay take pos-
session of these rock-cut cells (and of this) Arama. In
order to establish firmly the Vihara, fix the boundary,
great Sage.“ ‘

68. 69. The son of the king’s sister, renowned by the
name of Maharittha, and also fifty-five illustrious noble-
men approached the king, saluted him, and said: ,We alle
desire to receive the Pabbajji ordination from that man
endowed with highest wisdom; — 70. 71. we will embrace
a life of holiness; give us your consent, Sire.“ . Hearing
what they all had said, the delighted king, the ruler of
the earth, approached the Theras, and thus addressed (Ma-
hinda): ,(There are) fifty-five chiefs with Mabaarittha at *
their head; confer on them personally the Pabbajja ordi-
nation, great hero; I give my consent.“ 72. Hearing the
king’s speech, Mahinda, the enlightener of the island, thus
addressed the Bhikkhu fraternity: ,Let us fix the boun=
dary, o Bhikkhus.“ 73. (The Theras), in order to esta-
blish firmly the Vihara, consecrated the boundary within
which all Bhikkhus were to be considered as one section,
and the enclosure (?),- aud proclaimed the decree about
not parting with the three robes. 74. Having fixed the


,


1) See Mahfvagga, III, 2, 2.


14,74 — 15,4. 185


inner and the- outer boundary at the Tumba enclosure,
Mahinda, the enlightener of the island, proclaimed the (ex-
tent of) the great boundary. 75. The (Thera) who was
gifted with (supernatural) vision, consecrated the whole
enclosure and the boundary, and firmly established the
“second monastery which was situated on the Tissapabbata.
76. After having consecrated the boundary on the moun-
tain precistly on the full-moon day of the month Asalha,
on the Uposatha day, under the constellation of Uttar-
asalha, — 77, he conferred the Pabbajja ordination on
Mabarittha who was the first person (who received it) in
this second enclosure; at the same time he conferred the
Upasampadé ordination on this prince who belonged to the
royal. family of Tambapanni. 78. At the same time (those)
fifty-five (other noblemen received) the Pabbajjé and Upa-
sampada ‘ordinations.

In the first Arama thirty-two consecrated enclosures
were established; — 79. thirty-two in the second Ardma,
in the monastery of the Tissa mountain. The other small
Aramas contained one enclosure each. 80. The Arama
‘and the monastery being founded on that most excellent
mountain, sixty-two persons, who were all Arahats, entered
on the Vassa residence; this was the first time (that this
evgnt occurred in Lanka).


Here ends the acceptance of the Cetiya mountain.


XV.


1. (Mahinda said to the king:) ,In the first month
of the summer, on the full moon, on the Uposatha ay;
we have come hither from Jatnbadtpas we have dwelt on
this most excellent mountain. 2. During five months we
have not left the Tissiraéma nor the mountain; now we
will’ go to Jambudipa; permit it, o lord of charioteers.“
3. (The king replied:)-,We serve you with food and
drink, with clothes and dwelling-places; the whole people
has taken refuge (in the Faith); what causes you’ dis-
satisfaction?“ 4. (Mahinda said: ,We have rfo object here


186 . 15, 4—17.


to-which we may pay respect by) salutations and by rising

from our seats, or by raising our clasped hands, and by

respectful contemplation. For a long time, o great king,

we have not seen the Sambuddha, the highest among |
men.“ 5. (The king answered:) ,Verily I have under-

stood you, venerable sir; I will erect a most cxcellent™
Thipa; find you out a suitable place (?); I wall build a

Thipa in honour of the Teacher.*

6. (Mahinda gave the following order to Sumana:)
Go, chief Sanaais repair to Pataliputta, and address thus
the righteous king Asoka: 7. ,Your ally, great king, has’
been converted to the faith of Buddha; grant to him
(some of) the most excellent relics; he is going to erect
2 Thipa in honour of the Teacher. 8 Learned (Su-
mana) who was versed in the scriptures, a powerful, elo-
quent speaker, who had reached the perfect possession of
(magical) power, who was firm and well grounded (in
the Faith), — 9. took his alms-bow! and his robe, and
instantly departed from the mountain. According to the
truth hie thus addressed king Dhammasoka: 10. ,Hear,
great king, the message which my teacher sends you.-
Your ally, great king, has been converted to the faith of
Buddha; grant to him (some of) the most excellent relics;
he is going to crect a Thfpa in honour of the Teacher.*
11. Having heard this speech, the rejoicing and excited:
king filled the alms-bow] with relics, (saying:) ,Quickly
‘depart, pious man.“ 12, The powerful, eloquent ‘speaker *
then took the relics, rose into the air and repaired .to
Kosiya (dra). 13. The eloquent man having approached
Kosiya thus addressed him: ,Hear, great king, the mes-
sagé which my teacher sends you. 14, King "Devinn,
piya has been converted to the faith of Buddha; grant
to him a most excellent relic; he is going to erect a
splendid Thfipa.“ 15. Having heard his speech, Kosiya re-
joicing gave him the right collar-bone (of Buddha, saying:)
»Quickly depart, pious man.“ 16. The novice Sumana,
leaving Kosiya and taking away the right collar-bone, de-
scended on tlie most excellent mountain (Missaka). 17. The


15, 4731 187


wise, man who ‘was filled with modesty, fear of sin, and
reverence, despatched by the king of Theras, placed him-
self on g@he most excellent mountain. 18. The king to-
gether | with his brothers, at the head of a great army,
and accotipanied by the most excellent Bhikkhu frater-
nity, then went to meet the relics of the highest Buddha.
19. 20..On the day of the full moon of the month Kattika,
on the day of the Catumasa festival, the great hero ar-
rived. (The dish with the relics) was placed on the frontal
globe of the (state) elephant. 21. (The clephant) roared,
like a struck gong; at that moment the earth quaked,

_ when the Sage in the.ncighbourhood (of the mountain)
approached. 22. The sound of the chanks and the roll
of the drums mixed with the boom of the kettle-drums
(was heard), The prince escorting (the relic) paid reve-
rence to‘the highest of men, 23. The noble elephant
turning westward proceeded together with the foot
soldiers; -he then entered the town by the castern gate.
24, Men and women (there) offered various perfumes and
garlands. The most excellent clephant leaving (the town)
by the southern gate, — 25, proceeded to the very spot
which teacher Kakusandha, Kondgamana and Kassapa, the
old Sages, formerly had visited. 26. When the most ex-
cellent elephant had procecded to that hill, the chief of
men (there) deposited the relics of Sakyaputta. 27. At the
moment when the relics were placed (there), the gods
“expressed their delight, and the earth began to quake in
an astonishing, terrifying manner. 28. (The king) with
his brothers, gladdening the ministers and the people of
the kingdom (by his order), caused _ the bricks for_the
Thipa to be manufactured.

29. The noblemen paid singly their reverence to the
most excellent Thttpa; the highly precious relics which
shone like a light, were covered with excellent gems.
30. (There were) white (?) canopies, separate canopies,
covers (?), various (?) canopies, suitable ornaments, béauti-
ful chowries. 31, Near the Thapa a brilliancy spread in
all directions over the four quarters from thé lamps, like


188 i, 3-48.


the brilliancy of the rising sun. 32. Cloths brilliant with
various colours were spread (?), and above (the Cetiya?)
shone like () the cloudless sky. 33. A canopy -covered
with gold, which was encircled by (ornaments) made of
gems “aad uny most precious crystal, and adorned by gold
sand .


(Mahinda related to the king the story of the relics
of the three former Buddhas:) 34. Here Sambuddha Kaku-
sandha, chief of men, surrounded by forty thousand (Bhi-
kkhus who were holy) like (bimself), looked (over this
island). 35. The Buddha, gifted by (supernatural) vision,
moved by compassion, looked on created beings, and on
the suffering men in Ojadipa, Abhayapura. 36. In Oja-
dipa (he looked) with the power of the rays of his Bodhi
on many created beings, on a great multitude that was
to attain (supreme) knowledge, as the sun (awakens) the
lotuses. 37, Accompanied by forty thousand Bhikkhus
he repaired to Ojadipa, resembling the rising sun, 38. (The
Buddha’s name was) Kakusandha, (that of the chief Thera)»
Mahadeva, the mountain (was called) Devaktta; (there
reigned in the island of) Ojadipa, (in the town of) Abhaya-
pura, a prince named Abhaya. 39. The well constructed
town which was worth seeing, delightful, and pleasant,
was situated near the Kadambaka river. 40. (At that time
there raged in the island) a fearful epidemic fevef called
Punnakanaraka; the pcople were in a state of affliction
like fishes in a net. 41. In consequence of the power of
the Buddha the fever ceased. When (the Buddha) had
preached the Truth’which delivers from death, and had
established the Faith ‘of the Jina, — 42. eighty-four thou-
sand men attained sanctification. At that time the mo-
nastery was the Patiydrima, and .(the Cetiya was)" the
Dhammakarakacetiya (Cetiya where the drinking vessel of
the Guddha is preserved). 43. Mahadeva accompanied by
one “thousand Bhikkhus, remained (there), and the Jina,
the highest Being, himself departed from that place.


. 1, 44-87." ; 189


_44.-Here Sambuddha Konfgamana, the great Sage,
accompanied by thirty thousand Bhikkhus, looked (over
- the island). 45. The Sambuddha gifted with (supernatu-
ral) vision, diffused his compassion through ten thousand
worlds; the great hero looked on the suffering people of
-Varadipa, 46. In Varadipa (he looked) with the power
of the rays of his Bodhi on many created beings, on a
great multitude that was to attain (supreme) knowledge,
as the sun (awakens) the lotuses. 47. Accompanied by
‘thirty thousand Bhikkhus the Sambuddha repaired to Vara-
dipa, resembling the rising sun. 48. (The Buddha’s name
was) Konagamana, (that of the chief Thera) Mahasumana,
the mountain (was called) Sumanakita; (there reigned in
the island of) Varadipa, (in the town of) Vaddhamana, a
prince named Samiddha. 49.50. At that time the island
suffered from a drought; there was a famine... When
the, created beings were afflicted by the famine like fishes
in shallow water, abundant rain fell, when the Omniscient
had arrived; the country became prosperous; ,he brought
consolation to many people. 51. To the north d€ the town
-which was situated near the Tissatalaka, there Was the
Uttarirama monastery; (the Cetiya at that time was)the
Kiyabandhanacetiya (Cetiya where the girdle of the Bud-
dha is preserved), 52. Eighty-four thousand men attained
sanctification. When the Truth which delivers from death,
had been preached, — 53. Mahasumana, similar to the
“yising San, accompanied by one thousand Bhikkhus, re-
mained (there), and the great hero himself, the highest
being, departed.

54. Here Sambuddha Kassapa, the ruler of the world,
accompanied by twenty thousand Bhikkhus, looked (over
the island). 55. Omniscient Kassapa looked down on the
world of men and gods, and discerned by the pure vision
of the Buddhas the beings who were to attain (supreme)
knowledge. 56. Omniscient Kassapa, the receiver of offer-
ings, diffusing (the rays of) his high compassion, ~per-
ceived the furious contest (between king Jayanta and his.
brother Samiddha), — 57. and by the power of the rays


190 15, 57—70.


of, his Bodhi, as the sun (awakens) the lotuses, he saw
many beings in the island of Mandadipa who were to
attain (supreme) knowledge. 58. ,1 shall go to, Manda- -
dipa and cause the Religion to shine there; I shall pro-
duce there high splendour like that of the mdon" in the
darkness (of the night)“. 59. Surrounded by multitudes “of
Bhikkhus the Jina proceeded through the air; resembling
the rising sun he repaired to Mandadipa. 60. (The Bud-
dha’s name was) Kassapa, (that of the chief Thera) Sabba-
nanda, the mountain (was called) Subhaktita, the name
of the town was Visdla, that of the prince was Jayanta.
61, To the east of the town which was situated near the
Khema tank, there was the Pacindréma monastery; (the
Cetiya at that time was) the Dakasatika Cetiya (Cetiya
where the rain-cloak of the Buddha is preserved). 62. The
Sambuddha, after having comforted and reconciled the
(two) brothers, preached the Truth which delivers from
death, and established the Faith. 63. When the Truth
which delivers from death, had been preached, and the
doctrine of the Jina had been established, eighty-four
thousand men attained sanctification. 64. Glorious Sabbas
nanda, surrounded by one thousand Bhikkhus, remained
in Mandadipa; the ruler of the world departed.

"65. Here (also stood) the Sambuddha who has 2p-
peared in the world (in the present age), the ruler of
the world. ,OQut of compassion for the living I will save
created beings.“ 66. The Sambuddha, the chief of the*
world, the highest among men, looked on the great ar-
mies of Nagas which had assembled, ready for a battle.
67. The Serpents emitted smoke and flames, they raged,
thef spread great horror, they were destroying the great
island. 68. (The Buddha) went alone (to the island:)
»l shall go to the most excellent island; I shall pacify
the two Serpents, the uncle and the nephew.* 69. ‘This
Sambuddha was called Gotama; (it was) on the mountain
called Cetiya(pabbata); there reigned in the delightful
town called Annradhapura a prince named Tissa. 70. In
Kusirara, ins the Upavattana of the Mallas, the holy Sam-


15, 70—81. 191


buddha reached complete Nibbana by the destruction of
the ‘substrata (of existence). 71. (He at that time fore-
told:) ,Two hundred and thirty-six years will elapse; then
(a Thera) called Mahinda by name will cause the splen-
dour of tke Religion to shine (in Laika). 72. In the south
of the town, at a delightful place (will be) a beautiful
Arama culled the Thapirama. 73. At that time the island
(will be known) by the name of *Tambapanni; they will
deposit a relic of my body in that most excellent island.


74. The queen called Anuli was a believer in the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Fraternity; she confessed
the true doctrine, and put away the desire of existence.
(She expressed to the king her desire of being admitted
into the Order.) 75. Having heard what the queen said,
the king addressed the Thera thus: (,Queen Anula) be-
lieves in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Fraternity;
she confesses the true doctrine, — 76, and .puts away the
desire of existence. Confer the Pabbajjé ordination on
Anula.* (Mahinda replied:) It is not permitted to Bhi-
kkhus, o great king, to confer the Pabbajji ordination on
women; — 77. my sister Samghamitta, o king, shall come
hither. She will confer the Pabbajjd ordination on Annla
and will release ler fronr all fetters, 78. Wise Samgha-
mitt& and clever Uttara, Hema and Masagalla, Aggimitta,
~chary of speech, Tappa and Pabbatacchinna, Malla and
Dhammadasiyaé, — 79. these Bhikkhunis who are free from
desire and firm, whose thoughts and wishes are pure, who
are firmly established in the true Dhamma and Vinaya, —
80. who have subdued their passions, who have their scises
under control and have attained (perfection), who possess
the three-fold science and know well the (magi¢al) powers,
who- are well grounded in the highest bliss, will also
come hither. ,

81. (Devanampiya) sat down, surrounded by his mi-°
nisters, and deliberated (about inviting princess Samgha-
mitta). Having sat down in order to hold a cauncil (about


-


192 0 “15, 81-— 16, 1.


“this matter), he thus addressed the ministers... 82. Prince
Arittha, having heard what the king said, — 83.~and-
having heard the speech of the Thera and received his
commission, respectfully saluted his uncle (?) and departed
in the northern direction. =

84. 85. Having established their residence in a ceér-
tain quarter of the town, the noble ladies, five hundred
virgins, queen Anula at their head, all high-born and illu-
strious, having undertaken to observe the ten moral pre-
cepts, all this multitude late and early surrounded Anula.

86. (Arittha) having proceeded to a sea-port went
on board a great ship; when he had crossed the sea and
reached the shore he stood (on dry ground). 87. The.
powerful minister (then) crossed the Viijha range; having
arrived at Pataliputta, he presented himself to the king.

’ 88, (Arittha thus addressed Asoka:) , Your son, Sire, your
offspring, o great king Piyadassana, Thera Mahinda has
sent me in your presence. 89. King Devanampiya, your
ally, o Piyadassana, who is converted to Buddha, hag sent
me in your presence.* 90. (Then) the great Sage (went
to Samghamitt’ and) communicated to her the message of
her brother: ,The royal virgins, o Samghamitté, and prin-
cess Anula, — 91. all look to you for the Pabbajja. ordi-
nation.“ Wise Samghamitti, when she had heard the
message of her brother, — 92. quickly went to the king
and thus addressed him: ,Give your consent, great king;
I shall go to the island of Lanka; -- 93. the great Sages
has communicated to me the message of my brother.“
(Asoka replied:) ,,Your sister's son Sumana and my son,
your elder brother, —- 94. being gone, prevent, dear, that
you; my daughter, should go also. (Samghamitta replicd:).

» Weighty, o great king, is my brother’s command. 95. The
royal virgins, o great king, and princess Anula, they all
look to me for their Pabbajja ordination.* *


- XVI.


on The (prince (Asoka) fitted out a great army con-
sisting of four parts, and then went forth, taking with


4


: 16,1 1938


him.a branch of the Bo tree of the Tathagata. 2. Having
passed through three kingdoms and the Viiijha range, having
passed “hrough the great forest, the prince came to the
ocean. 3. The great four-fold army with the Bhikkhunt
Congregation at its head (?), proceeded to the great sea,
“carrying the excellent Bo tree. 4. When (the Bo branch)
was carried to the sea, on high the musical instruments
of the gods (were heard,) and below those’ of men, the ©
instruments of men from all four quarters. 5. Prince Piya-
dassana bowing paid his reverence to the Bo tree, and
spoke thus: 6. Learned, possessed of (magical) power,
virtuous, most firm ..:* 7. The prince then (when the
Bo branch had been despatched) wept, shed tears, and
looked (on the parting vessel). Then he returned and
came to his residence.
8.- The Nimmita Nagas in the water, the Nimmita
. Devas in the heavens, the Nimmita Devas in the tree
(itself), and (the Nagas) of the Naga world, — 9. they
all surrounded the most excellent branch of the Bo tree
which was carried away.. The wild Pisicas, the Bhittas,
“‘Kumbhandas, and Rakkhasas, these non-human beings sur-
rounded the branch of the Bo tree as it approached,
10. The Tavatimsas and Yamas and also the Tusita gods,
the NimmAnarati gods and the Vasavatti gods — 11. (were):
glad, joyful and delighted, when the Bo branch approached,
And all_the Tettimsa Devaputtas with Inda as their leader,
“_ 19. 13. snapped their fingers and laughed when the Bo
branch approached. The four (divine) Maharajas of the
four quarters (of the horizon), Kuvera and Dhatarattha,
Virtipakkha and Virtlhaka, surrounded the Sambodhi tree
which was carried to the island of Laika. 14. Maba-
mukhas and kettle-drums, Divillas (?), leather -covered
drums, and tabors (resounded); the gods joyfully shouted
»Sadhu* when the Bo branch approached. 15. Pariccha-
ttaka flowers, celestial Mandarava flowers, and celestial
sandale powder rained through the air, and the gods adid
homage to the Bo branch when it approached. 16. The
, gods offered on the ocean to the Bo tree of the Teacher
18


194, 16, 16—80.


Campaka flowers, Salla, Nimba, Naga, Piinndga, Kejaka
flowers. 17. The Naga kings, the Naga princesses, the
young Nagas, great crowds, left their residence and-showed _
honour to the excellent Bo branch. 18. The Nagas, dressed
in garments of various colours and wearing ornaments of
various colours, joyfully sported around the great Bodhi*
on the ocean (shouting:) ,Hail to us.* 19. 20. The Nagas
offered to the Bo branch on the glittering ocean red,
white and blue lotuses of various kinds, Atimutta of
honey-sweet scent, Takkarika and Kovilara flowers, trum-
pet flowers, and quantities of Bimbajala flowers, Asoka
and Sala flowers mixed with Piyaigu. 21. The delighted
Naga virgins, the joyful Naga kings, (all the) Nagas joy-
fully sported around the Bo branch which was carried
along, (shouting:) ,Hail to us.“ 22. There the ground
consisted of gems, and was covered with pearls’and cry-
stals; there were gardens and tanks adorned with various
flowers. 23. Having remained there seven days,*(the Na-
gas) together with gods and men paid honour to the ex-
cellent Bo branch on its departure from their residence.
94. The Naga virgins and the gods, surrounding the Sam-*
bodhi branch, (offered) strings of garlands and flower
wreaths, and waved their garments. 25, The gods sported
around the Bodhi which was carried along, (shouting:)
Hail.“ Pariechattaka flowers, celestial Mandarava flowers,
and celestial sandal power rained through the air. 26. The
Nagas, Yakkhas, and Bhitas, together with gods and men, *
surrounded the Sambodhi branch which was carried along
on the ocean. 27. There, surrounding the Bo branch, they
danged, sung, played (instruments), laughed, and snapped
the fingers of both hands. 28. The Nagas, Yakkhas, and
Bhitas, together with gods and men, when the most ex-
cellent Bodhi was carried along, exclaimed: ,Oh auspi-
cious event, hail. 29. Beautiful Nagas of brilliantly “blue
colour, holding flags, praised the most excellent Bodhi
whigh wag being established in the island of Lankg.

30. Great crowds, the prince with the queens, left
the delightful (town of) Anurddhapura, and went to meet


2 16, 80—41. 2 195


the fambodhi tree. 31. The prince together with his sons
surrounded the Sambodhi tree; they offered. scented gar-
lands and most excellent perfumes (?). 32. The streets
were well swept and offerings were prepared. When the
Bedhi was established, the earth quaked.

33. The king appointed eight (persons of each class?)
and the chiefs of each of cight Warrior clans (?) to be
Bodhi gards (?), for the custody of the most excellent
Bodhi. 34. He fitted them out with great state, and be-
stowed on them beautiful ornaments of every description;
out of reverence for the Bo branch he ordered sixteen
great lines to be traced on the ground (7). 85. Then
he caused also pure white sand (?) to be scattered on
that spot where the great lines had been drawn. He ap-
pointed one thousand families ... 36. He bestowed on
them golden drums for the performance of the rites of
royal coronations and other festivals. He gave (to them)
one province and erected (for them) the Candagutta (pa-
lace?) — 37. (and) the Devagutta palace, (and) duly (be-
stowed on them) land donations (?); to other families he
gave the revenue of villages.

38. The five hundred high-born, illustrious virgins of
the royal court who were free from passion and steadfast,
all feceived the Pabbajja ordination. 39. The five hundred
virgins who surrounded Anuli, who were free from pass-
ion and ,steadfast, all received the Pabbajja ordination.
40: Prince Arittha, released from the chain of fear, received
the PabbajjA ordination according to the doctrine of the
Jina, together with five hundred companicns. All these
persons attained Arahatship and full perfection in the ddc-
trine of the Jina. 41. In the first month of the winter
season, when the tree was full of blossoms, the’ great Bo
branch was brought (hither) and established in Tamba-
panni.


1) If my translation of this very corrupted passage is correct, the Six-
teen lines mentioned here may stand in some connexion with the sixteen


lines drawn on the ground by Mara near the Bo tree at Urovela (Jitaka,
I, p. 78). “


13*


196° 3 Te es.


XVII.


1.2. The excellent island of Lanka is thirty-two yoje-
nas long, éighteen yojanas broad, its circuit is one~hun-
dred yojanas; it is surrounded by the sea, and one great
miné of treasures. It possesses rivers and lakes, moun- °
tains and forests. 3. The island, the capital, the king, the
affliction (which vexed the island), the relics, the Thipa,
the lake, the mountain, the garden, the Bodhi tree, the
(chief) Bhikkhunt, — 4. the (chief) Bhikkhu, and the most
excellent Buddha: these are the thirteen subjects (to be
treated in the following exposition). Listen to my enumer-
ation of the four names of each of these subjects (in the
time of the four last Buddhas).

5. (The island) was called Ojadipa, Varadipa, Manda-.
dipa, and the excellent LankAdipa or Tambapanni. 6. Abhba-
yapura, Vaddhamana, Visila, Anuradhapura are the four
names of the capital at (the time of) the teaching of the
four Buddhas., 7. Abhaya, Samiddha, the ruler of men
Jayanta, and Devanampiyatissa are the four kings. 8, The
fever, the drought, the contest (of the two kings), and
(the island’s) being inhabited by the Yakkhas, these are
the four afflictions which the four Buddhas have removed. |
9. The relic of holy Kakusandha was the drinking vessel,
the relic of Buddha Konagamana the girdle, — 10. the
relic of Sambuddha Kassapa the rain-cloak; of, glorious,
Gotama there is a Dona of corporeal relics. .11. In Abha-
yapura was the Patiyarama, in Vaddhamanapura the Uttara-
rama, in Visala the Pactnarima, in AnurAdhapura the
Thpardma which is situated in the southern direction:
(there) the four Thiipas at (the time of) the teaching of :
the four Buddhas (were situated). 12.13. The town of
Abhayapura was situated near the Kadambaka (lake), the
town of Vaddhamana near the Tissa lake, the town of
VisAlapura near the Khema lake; Anuradhapura ....; the
indication of the four directions (?) is as above. 14. The
four names, of the mountain are Devakita, Sumanaktite,
and Subhakiita; now it is called Silaktta. 15. The fam-


17; 16—26. 497


ous (?) garden’ (which was called in the four periods
respectively) Mahatittha, Mah4nama, Sagara, and Maba-
meghavana, a path worthy of Saints, was the. first resting -
place of the four chiefs of the world. 16. The Bodhi tree
of holy Kakusandha was the most excellent Sirfsa; Ruca-
“nanda who possessed the great (magical) faculties, took its
southern branch and planted it in Ojadipa, in the Maha-
tittha garden. 17. The Bodhi tree of holy Konagamana
was the most excellent Udumbara; Kanakadatté who pos-
sessed the great (magical) faculties, took its southern branch
— 18. and planted it in Varadipa, in the Mahanama gar-
den. The Bodhi tree of holy Kassapa was the most ex-
cellent Nigrodha; — 19. (the Ther?) called Sudhamma who
possessed the great (magical) faculties, took its southern
branch and planted the sacred tree in the garden called
Sagara.. 20. The Bodhi tree of holy Gotama was the most
excellent Assattha; Samghamitté who possessed the great
(magical) -faculties, took its southern branch — 21. and
planted it in the island of Lanka, in the delightful Maha-
meghavana. Rucdnanda, Kanakadatta, Sudhamma who pos-
sessed the great (magical) powers, — 22. and learned,
wise Samghamitté who was endowed with the six (super-
natural) faculties, these were the four Bhikkhunts who
brought each a Bo branch (to this island). 23. The Sirfsa
Bo tree (was planted) in the Mahatittha garden, the Udum-
bara in the Mahandma, the Nigrodha in the Mahasagara
‘garden; “so the Agsattha was planted in the Mahamegha-
vana. 24. On a mountain, in those four gardens, the four
Bo trees have been planted; on a mountain was the de-.
lightful resting-place (of the four Buddhas), when the four
Buddhas proclaimed their doctrine. 25. Mahadeva who
possessed the six (supernatural) faculties, Sumana versed
in the analytical, knowledge, Sabbananda possessing the
great (magical) powers, and learned Mahinda, these ‘highly
wise Theras were the converters of Tambapanni. :
26. Kakusandha, the highest in the whole world, who
was endowed with the five kinds of ernatural) vision,
looking on the whole world, saw the exvellent Ojadipa.


198 “1, 2741.


27. There raged then an epidemic fever called Punnakana-
raka; at that time there raged an epidemic fever among
the people.- 28. Many people, attacked by this sickness,
became distressed and disconsolate like fish which lie Jost
on the bank (of a river). 29. 30. Vexed by* fear they
were unable to regain happiness and tranquillity of mind
Kakusandha, the chief of the world, when he saw the
afflicted beings who were being decteayed by the bonds
of sickness, came hither from Jambudipa together with
forty thousand companions, for the sake of subduing the
disease. 31. Forty thousand (Saints) who possessed the
six (supernatural) faculties and the great (magical) powers,
surrounded the Sambuddha, as the stars in the sky sur-
round the moon. 32. Kakusandha, the illuminator of the
world ,~established’ himself with his pupils on the Deva-
ktita mountain, shining in splendour like a god. 33, When
he stood resplendent in Ojadipa on the Devakdta moun-
tain, all people believed him to be a god. They did not
understand that he was the Tathagata. 34. (When they
saw him) who arose with the rising dawn, on the day of
the full moon, on the Uposatha day, and who illumined
that’ mountain with its forests as if it were burning, —

35. when they saw the burning mountain which diffased
light through the four quarters, all the people of Abhaya-
pura with the king were joyful and delighted. 36. Buddha
Kakusandha, the ruler of the world, formed the following
resolution: May all people, all men who live in*Ojadipa,
see me.“ 37. 38. The Devakitta mountain was honoured
among Rishis and liked by men; to that place went the
hosts of people (who had been ‘afflicted) by the distress
of that fever, all the citizens together with the king, leaving
the town, the capital, and there they paid homage to
Kakusandha, the highest among men. 39. The royal re-
tinue together with the people of the Kingdom, a “great
-crowd, arrived respectfully saluting the Sambuddha whom
they believed to be a god. 40. 41. All this multitude ap-
pidsched? the most excellent Buddha, the highest among
men. (The-king thus addressed him:) ,Consent, o Bhaga-,


17, 41-53. 199


vat, to dine to-day together with the Bhikkhu fraternity
(in my palace); let us go to the town, to the capital.“
The Sambuddha agreed to the request of the “king by re-
maining silent. 42. Having understood’ his consent, the
royal retinue and the people of the kingdom, paying great
“honour and respect (to the Buddha), then returned to the
town. 43. (The king thus reflected:) ,This fraternity of
Bhikkhus is numerous, the crowd of the people is great;
there is no place prepared for its reception in this narrow
town, in my capital. 44. I possess a great pleasure gar-
den, the delightful garden of Mahatittha which is not too
narrow nor too distant, which will be convenient for the
ascetics — 45. and will be suitable for a retired existence
and for the Tathagata. There I will bestow presents on
the Buddha and on the Bhikkhu fraternity. 46.47. May
all peaple obtain the sight of the Buddha and of the Fra-
ternity.“ Omniscient Kakusandha, followed by forty thou-
sand Bhikkhus, arrived at the Mahdtittha garden. When
the highest among men had entered the Mahatittha gar-
den, — 48. the creepers and trees (were covered?) with
-flowers out of season, The king took a golden water-pot,
— 49. and dedicated (the garden) for the sake (of the
welfare) of Lanka, by pouring water over the hand (of
the Buddha, saying): ,I give, o Lord, this garden to the
Samgha and to the Buddha, its chief.“ It was a delight-
ful resting-place, an appropriate residence for the Frater-
“nity, 50. Kakusandha, the ruler of the world, accepted
the garden. At that moment the earth’ quaked; this was
the first resting-place (of the Samgha in Laika). 51. The
highest leader of the world stood there, causing the im-
movable earth to quake.’ (He then formed the following
wish:) ,Oh that Rucdnanda might take the Bo branch
and come hither.“ 52. The Bhikkhuni who possessed the
high (magical) powers, understanding the thought of holy
Kakusandha, went to the great Sirisa Bodhi, and standing
at its foot (she thought:) 53. ,The Buddha: desires~that
the Bodhi tree shall grow in Ojadipa.* Thithet she Went
in order to fetch the Bodhi tree, (the majesty of) which


200 £7, 5B


* is beyond human reason (°). 54. (She then expressed the’
following resolution:) ,May, with the consent of the most
excellent Buddha, out of compassion for mankind, the
southern branch ‘sever itself through my magical power.“
55. When Rucdnandai had pronounced this demand with
clasped hands, the right branch severed itself (from the-
tree) and fixed itself in the vase. 56. Rucdnand& who
possessed the high (magical) powers, took the Bo branch
in the golden vase, and ordered five hundred Bhikkhanis
to surround it. 57. At that moment the earth quaked
together with oceans and mountains; it was a grand sight,
wonderful and astonishing. 58. Witnessing this, the royal
retinue and the people of the kingdom delighted all raised ©
their clasped hands and paid reverence to the excellent
Bodhi branch. 59. All the gods were delighted; the Devas
joyfully shouted when they perceived the most - excellent
Bodhi branch. 60. The four (divine) Maharajas, the glo-
rious guardians of the world, all these gods kept guard
over the Sirisa Bodhi branch. 61. The Tavatimsa gods,
the Vasavatti gods, Yama, Sakka, Suydma, Santusita, Su-
nimmita, all surrounded the most excellent Bo branch.,
62. The delighted crowds of gods, raising their clasped
hands, together with Rucananda, paid reverence to. the
most excellent Bo branch. 63. Rucdnandé who possessed
the high (magical) powers, carrying the Sirtsa Bo branch,
went to the excellent Ojadipa, accompanied by the sister-
hood of Bhikkhunis. 64. The gods danced, laugked, and *
snapped the fingers of both hands, when the most excef-
lent Sirtsa Bo branch was carried to the excellent Ojadipa.
65. Rucdnanda who possessed the high (magical) powers,
accotipanied by a host of Devas, approached Kakusandha,
carrying the Sirisa Bo branch. 66. At that moment the
great hero ‘Kakusandha, the ruler of the world, repaired
to the spot in the Mahatittha garden destined for the re-
ception of the Bo tree. 67. Rucdinanda herself did not
plans the resplendent Bo branch; Kakusandha, perceiving
that; himsdlf stretched out his right hand. 68. Rucdnanda
who possessed the high (magical) powers, placed the.


17, 68~+82. 20%


southern binnch of the Bo tree in the Buddhe’s.right hand,
and “respectfully saluted him. 69. Kakusandha, the chief
of the world, the highest among men, took -it and gave
it. to king Abbaya (saying:) ,Plant it on this spot.“
10. Abvhsya, the increaser of the kingdom, planted it on
“the “spot which Kakusandha, the leader of the world,
had indicated. 71. When the Sirisa Bo branch had been
planted in that delightful place, the Buddha preached
the Doctrine, the four Truths which soothe (the mind of
men). 72, When he had finished, one hundred and forty
thousand men and thirty kotis of gods attained (sancti-
_ fication).

73. The Bo tree of Kakusandba was a Sirsa, that of
Konigamana an Udumbara, that of Kassapa a Nigrodha;
(this is) the description of the three Bo trees. 74. The
Bo tree ‘of the incomparable Sakyaputta is the most ex-
cellent Assattha; taking it (hither) they planted it in the
Meghavana garden.

75. 76. The children of Mutasiva were ten [other]
brothers, Abhaya, Tissa, and Naga, Utti and also. Mattd-
- bhaya, Mitta, Siva, and Asela, Tissa, and Kira; these were
the brothers. Princess Anula and Stvali were the daugh-
ters of Mutasiva.

. 17, How great is the number of years which elapsed
between the time when Vijaya came over to the most ex-
cellent Lankadipa, and the royal coronation of the son of
“ Matasita? 78. Devanampiya was crowned two hundred
years and thirty-six years. more after the Sambuddha at-
tained Parinibbana. 79. When Devanampiya was crowned,
the royal (magical) powers came over him; the lord of
Tambapanni diffused rays of pure splendour. 80. Ac that
time the most excellént Laikadipa was .a storehouse of
treasures. Produced by the pure splendour of Tissa many
tressures came to light. 81. When the glad and excited
king saw these treasures, he sent them as a present to
Asckadhamma. 82. Asoka was delighted when he saw
these presents. He sent in return to DevanampiyS va-
rious treasures destined to be used at his coronation.


-


202 ; 17, 88—96.


~ 83—86. The (monarch) called Asoka sent a chowrie, a
turban, a royal parasol, a sword, slippers, a diadem, a...
of Sara woed, an (anointing) vase, a right hand chank,
a palanquin, a conch trumpet, earrings, a koti of clothes
-which are (cleansed by being passed through the fire)
without being washed, a golden vessel and spoon, costly *
towels, a man’s load of water from the Anotatta lake, most
precious yellow sandal ‘wood, a measure of rouge, eye col-
lyrium brought by the Nagas, yellow and emblic myro-
balan, costly Amata drugs, one hundred and sixty cart
loads of fragrant hill paddy which had been brought by
parrots; (all these things being) the rewards for his merit- .
orious actions, 87. The requirements for his coronation
as king of Lanka having been sent by Asokadhamma,
Tissa, the lord of Tambapanni, celebrated his second co-
ronation. 88. When thirty nights had elapsed ‘after the
second coronation of Tissa, Mahinda together with his com-
panions arrived on this island from Jambudipa. 89. (King
Devanampiya) erected the most excellent monastery called
Tissirima. He also planted the great Bo tree in the
Mahameghavana garden, 90. He built the great, delightful .
Thipa, Devanampiya erected a monastery on the Cetiya
mountain; — 91, he constructed the Thapd4rdma, the Tissa-
rama (Issarasamana?) Vihara, the Vessagiri (Vihara), apd
the Colakatissa (Vihara?). 92. Aramas too (where the
minor Bo branches were planted) at the distance of a
yojana from each other, were made by king Tiséa. He *
gave the great donation (which is called) the most excel
lent Mahapela. This prince reigned forty years.

93. Then (followed his) other four brothers, the sons
of Mitasiva. Prince Uttiya reigned ten years. 94. Eight
years after the coronation (of Uttiya), the enlightener of
the island attained Nibbana. (The king) caused the fu-
neral ceremonies to be performed to the east of the Tissa-
rama. 95. When the twelfth year (after his Upasampada)
had keen completed, Mahinda came hither; at the end of
his. s‘xtieth?year he attained Nibbana on the Cetiya moun-
tain. 96. 97.. When the enlightener of the island has at-


17, 96—109. “903 :


tained Nibbana, king Uttiya, having ordered full vases,”
-trinmphal arches, garlands, and burning lamps to be pre-
pared, erected a most excellent hearse which was worth
. seeing. (Thus) he paid reverence to the enlightener of
the Isianc. 98. Both gods and men, Nagas, Gandhabbas,
- and Danavas, all were grieved and paid reverence to the
enlightener of the Island. 99. When they had performed
the ceremonies during seven days on the most excellent
Cetiya mountain, some people spoke thus: ,Let us go to
the town, to the capital. 100. (Other people replied :)
»There (in the town) is a great, fearful noise and uproar;
let us here burn the enlightener of the island of Lanka.‘
101. When the king” heard what the crowd said, (he
answered:) yI will erect a great Thipa to the east of the
Tissirama*. 102. Carrying Mahinda, the enlightener of the
island, together with the funeral hearse, (the people) to-
gether with the king, entered the eastern trate of the town.
103. Marching through the centre of the town, they left
it by the southern gate, and performed great ceremonies
during seven days in the Mahfvihara. 104. Both gods
and men erected a funeral pile of odoriferous drugs and
placed it in the royal garden, (saying:) ,Let us burn the
virtuous one.“ 105. They took Mahinda, the enlightener
of the island, together with the funeral hearse, circum-
ambulated the Vihara, and caused (the people) to pay
reverence to the most excellent Thipa. 106. The great
crowds leaving the Arama by its eastern gate, performed
the funeral ceremonies at a place close by it. 107. They
all, weeping, raising their clasped hands, ascended the
pile, and bowing they set the pile on fire. 108. The great
teacher having thus been burnt entirely, they erétted a
most excellent Thapa which contained his relics,. and
Aramas at the distance of one yojana from ‘each other.
10¢. After the inneral cercmonics for Mahinda, the enlight-
ener of the island, had been performed, that place first
received the name of Isibhimi.


204 : 18, 110.


- XVII. Fo Ae Re
1.) At the present time there are other aged, middle-


aged, and young (Bhikkhus), holders of the Vibhajja doc- -


trine, preservers of the tradition of the Vinafa and of
the Faith. 2. Learned and virtuous they illuminate this
earth; by a conduct which conforms to the Dhutaiga rules
they shine in the island of Lanka. 3. Many followers of
Sakyaputta. are here who well understand the true re-
ligion and (its) history. Truly, for the sake of many people


the possessor of (supernatural) vision has appeared in the ”


world; the Jina has dispelled the darkness and shown the
light. 4, They whose faith is well and firmly grounded
on the Tathagata, leave all wretched states of existence and
are born again in heaven. 5. And those who penetrate
the constituent members of Bodhi, the organs. (of spiritual
life), the (ten) powers, attention, right exertion, and the
complete system of (magical) powers, — 6. the haly eight-
fold path which leads to thé destruction of suffering, con-
quer the army of Death and are victorious in the world.

7. The younger twin-sister of queen Maya, born from
the same mother, kind like a mother, suckled Bhagavat.
8. (She was) called Mahapajapati, known by the name of
Gotami, renowned, an original depositary (of the Faith),
possessing: the six (supernatural) faculties and the high
(magical) powers. 9. The two chief female pupils were
Khema and Uppalavanna; (besides, there was) Patacara,
Dhammadinnad, Sobbita, Isidasika, —- 10. Visakha, Sona,
and Sabala, wise Samghadasi, and Nanda, a guardian of
the Dhamma and well versed in the Vinaya. These (Bhi-
kkhurfis) who well knew the Vinaya and the paths (of
sanctification), (lived) in Jambudipa.


1) The opening lines of this chapter were evidently intended to Torm

the conclusion of a list of Theras which, however, is wanting in the Dipa-

- vamsa or at least in the MSS. we possess. Vv. 1. 2 exactly correspond to

y. 44 “hich ends the great list of Theris. Buddhaghosa gives in the Intro-

duction. of theeSamanta Pisadika a list of Theras which he says is com-

posed by the Forapd (comp. Introd., pp. 2—5). This list presents a close
resemblance to the list of Theris contained in this chapter.


.


48, 11-24. 205


11. The Thert Samghamitté, and wise Uttara, Hema,
and Pasadapala, and Aggimitta, Dasiké, — 12. Pheggu,
Pabbats, and Matta, Malla, and Dhammadasiya; these young
Bhikkhunis (these eleven Bhikkhunis?) came hither from
Jambudipa. 13. They taught the Vinaya Pitaka in Anu-
radhapura. They (also) taught the five Collections (of
the Sutta Pitaka) and the seven Treatises (of the Abhi-
dbamma). ;

14,’ Saddhammanandi, and Soma, and also Giriddhi,
Dasiya, and Dhamma, a guardian of the Dhamma and well
versed in the Vinaya, — 15. and Mahil&é who kept the
Dhutafga precepts, and Sobhani, Dhammatapasa, highly
wise Naramitta who was well versed in the Vinaya, —
16. Sata, versed in the exhortations of Theris, Kalt and
Uttara, these Bhikkhunis received the Upasampada ordi-
nation-in the island of Lanka. ; :

17. 18. ... and renowned Sumand who well under-
stood the true religion and (its) history, these Bhikkhunis
who were passionless and tranquil, the resolutions of whose
minds were pure, who were firmly grounded in the true

‘Faith and in the Vinaya, came together with twenty thou-
sand Bhikkhunis ..., honoured by illustrious, noble Abhaya.
19. They taught the Vinayapitaka in Anuradhapura; they
(also) taught the five Collections (of the Sutta Pitaka) and
the seven Treatises (of the Abhidbamma).

f 20. Renowned Mahila who well understood the true
religion and (its) history, and Samanta, the daughters of
king KAkavanna, — 21. and learned Girikali, the daugliter
of his Purohita, Dast and Kall, the danghters of a rogue,
well versed in the whole of the sacred Scriptures (?), —
22. these Bhikkhunts, well versed in the whole of the
sacred Scriptures, unconquerable, the resolutions of whose
minds were pure, who were firmly grounded in the true
Faith and in the Vinaya, — 23. came from (?) Rohana
together with twenty thousand Bhikkhunis, honoured by
illustrious king Abhaya. They taught the Vinayapitdka in

’ AnurAdhapura. , . 7

24. Mahadevi and Paduméa, illustrious “Hem4sa, Un-.


206 . 18, 24—89.


nat, Adjall, Suma, — 25. these Bhikkhunis who possegsed
the six (supernatural) faculties and the great (magical)
powers, came ... together with sixteen thousand Phikkhu-
nis. 26. Hoasaced by illustrious king Tissa Devanam-
piya (°), they taught the Vinayapitaka in Anuradhapura.,

27. Mahasona and Datta, wise Sivala, zealous Rapaso-
bhini, venerated Devam§nusa, — 28. Nagd and Nagamitta,
Dhammagutta, and Dasiy&, and Samudda gifted with (su-
pernatural) vision, who well understood the true Religion
and (its) history, — 29. Supatta, Channa, and Upali, ex-
cellent Revata, these were the highest among the Vinaya-
studying Bhikkhunis, the daughters of Somanadeva, —
30. Mala and Khema and Tiss, the highest among the
preachers of the Dhamma, these taught the Vinaya first
after the death of ‘Alina: (or: when the danger | nee dis-
appeared ?).

31. 32. Stvala and Mabaruha who well bean the
true Religion and (its) history, and had converted to the
Faith many people in Jambudipa, came hither from Jambu-
dipa together with twenty thousand Bhikkbunis, invited
by illustrious king Abhaya. 33. They taught the Vinaya-
pitaka in Anurddhapura; they (also) taught the five Col-
lections (of the Suttapitaka) and the seven Treatises ie
the Abhidhamma).

34, Sivala together with queen Samuddanava, dein.
ters of a king, wise Nagapali, and clever Nagamitta, —
35. Mahila, a guardian of the Bhikkbunis and well “verseds
in the Vinaya, Naga, and Nagamitta who well knew the
true Religion and (its) history, these Bhikkhunts then re-
ceived, the Upasampada ordination in the island of Laaka.
36. All these were high-born and renowned in the Doc-
trine, the most excellent ones among sixteen thousand Bhi-
kkhunts, acknowledged to be the leaders, 237. Honoured
by Kutikanna (and by his son,) illustrious Abhaya, they
mee the Vinayapitaka in Anurddhapura.

. Ciilanigd and Dhannd, venerated Sond, and re-
saeat Sarfha who well knew the true Religion and (its)
history, — 3%. highly learned and wise Mahatissa, the *


18, 89—63. 207


daughter of Garhika, Cilasumand, Mahdsumana, and clever
Mahakali, — 40. illustrious LakkhadhammA, honoured and
high-borp, wise Dipanayé who was venerated in Rohana,
~~ 41. renowned Samudda who well knew the true Reli-
gion and (its) history, holders of the Vibhajja doctrine
“and of the Vinaya, who both were ornaments of the Sister-
hood, — 42. these and other Bhikkhunis received the Upa-
sampada ordination in the island of Lanka. (These Bhi-
kkhunis,) the resolutions of whose minds were pure, who
were firmly grounded in the true Faith and in the Vinaya,
— 43. learned, versed in the Tradition, free from evil
passions, and illustrious, went out (attained Nibbana) after _
having spread radiance, like fire-brands.

44, At the pre&ent time there are other aged, middle-
aged, and young (Bhikkhunis), holders of the Vibhajja
doctrine ‘and of the Vinaya, preservers of the tradi-
tion of the Faith. Learned and virtuous they illuminate
this earth:

45. Prince Siva reigned ten years; he established the
Arama and the Vibara of Nagarahgana. 46, Prince Stra-
tissa reigned ten years; he constructed five hundred mo-
nasteries, a liberal, great, and meritorious deed. 47. Having
conquered Sdratissa, the two Damila princes Sena and
Gutta righteously reigned during twelve (twenty-two?)
years, 48. Prince Asela, a son of Mutasiva, put Sena
and Gutta to death, and reigned ten years. 49. A prince,
Elara by name, having killed Ascla, reigned righteously
forty-four years. 50. Avoiding the fuur evil paths of lust,
hatred, fear, and ignorance, this incomparable monarch
reigned righteously. 51. (Once) no rain fell during a whole
winter, summer, and the rainy season. (Then) continually
the cloud rained, rain fell during seven times seven days.
52. There were three cases which the king décided‘);
(after that) rain fell only during the night and not in day-
time. 53. A prince, Abhaya by name, the son of Kaka-
vanna, whom the ten warriors surrounded, whose elepiiant


1) In the Mabfvamaa (p. 128) an account of these thre¢”cases is given.
a


208 18, 64° — 19, 5.


was Kandula, — 54. put thirty-two° kings t to death: and
alone continued the royal succession. This ‘prince reigned
twenty-four’ years.


End of the Mahavara.


XIX.


1.4) The king (Dutthagamani) built an exceedingly
costly, quadrangular palace (the Lohapasada) of nine stories
in height, at an expense of thirty kotis. 2.. (He also erected
the Mahathtpa, at the foundation of which the following
materials were used:) chunnam work, great stones, clay,
bricks ,: pure earth, a plate of iron, then marumba*), —
3. small gravel, eight layers (?) of stofies, twelve (layers?)
of crystal and silver. 4. After the prince had caused these
foundations to be laid, the Fraternity of Bhikkbus was
called together, and the circle (of the base) of the Cetiya was
described. 5. Indagutta, Dhammasena, the great preacher
Panel, Buddha, Dhamma, and Samgha, wise Mittanna, —


1) This chapter is very confused and fragmentary. However by com
paring the Mahfivamga it is possible to ascertain what the single verses
refer to. Verse 1 relates to the great pulace called Lohapasida which was
erected by king Dutthagamani (comp. Mahfv., p. 165, 1. 2). Vv. 2—4 con-
tain a description of the different preparatory, works for the construction of
the Mabathfipa built by the same king. There is nothing, however, td” in-
dicate the transition of the narrative from the Lohap&sada to the Mahi-
thiipa; perhaps v. !0 which would answer to this purpose, originally be-
longed to the place between vv. { and 2, — Vv. 5—9 refer to thg Bhikkbus,
presem at the solemn inauguratory ceremonies at the foundation of the
Mahithipa (see Mahavamsa, p. 171). —- Vv. 11—17 refer to the acts of
liberality performed by king Lajjitiesa (Mah., p. 202), and to the history. of
his successors. -—- Vv. 1820 give an account of the buildings erected by
the seven great warriors of Abhaya Vattagamani (Mah., p. 206). — Vv. 21
—22 mfer to Mahicili Mahftissa, the successor of Vattagdmani (Mah., p. 208).
The last verse relates to the death of Dutthagamani.


2) I cannot define the exact meaning of ,marumba“. Turnour trans-
latea this word by ,incense“ (Mah., p. 169), which is decidedly wrong. To
me it seems to mean something like ,gravei*. In the egplanation of the tenth
Pacittiya Rule, in the Sutta Vibhafiga, I find the following passage which ‘I
give exactly according to the Paris MS. (fonds Pali 6) which is written in
Rurmese characters: ,pathavi nama dve pathaviyo jata ca pathavi ajéta ca
pathévi. jatd nama pathavi suddhapameu suddhamattiké appapasina appa-
sakkard appfkathalé appamarumpaé appavalik& ...; ajat& nama pathavi
saddhapisig? suddhasakkhara suddhakathala suddbamarump& seddbavs-s
lika*, ete.


19, 6—18. 209


‘6. Anattana, Mahadeva, learned Dhapmarakéhita, Uttara,
and Uittagutta, and clever Indagutia, — 7. the great chief
Suriyagutta of prompt wisdom, all these fourtéen (Theras)
came from Jambudipa to this country (when the foundation
of the Mahathtpa was laid). 8. (Besides these there were
“present) Siddhattha, Mafgala, Sumana, Paduma, and also
Stvali, Candagutta, and Suriyagutta, Indagutta, and Sa-
gara, Mittasena, Jayasena, and Acala, the twelfth of them.
9. (The person that held the circle by which the base of
the Thdpa was described, and his parents, had the fol-
lowing auspicious names, viz.:) Suppatitthitabrahma, the
son, Nandisena, the father, Sumanadevi, the mother, these
three lay persons. 10. (The king constructed) the Maha-
thipa, the most excellent Mahavihara , expending twenty
(twenty-four?) invaluable treasures.

11, (King Lajjitissa,) having heard the precepts for
the conduct of itinerant Bhikkhus, which were propounded
by the Fraternity, gave medicaments for the itinerant Bhi-
kkhus, for the sake of their comfort, ... 12. Having heard
the well-spoken speech of the Bhikkhunis, which had been
Aelivered at the ... time (at Harikéla?), the royal lord
gave to the Bhikkhunis whatever they desired. 13, He:
constructed the Silathtpa, a Vihara on the Cetiya moun- :
tain, and the most excellent assembly hall which is called :
Jalaka,

14. (By the next king, Vattagamani, a monastery) was
“constructed at the place where the Nigantha Giri ehad
dwelt. (From this circumstance,) the appellation and the
name of Abhayagiri derived its origin. 15. The five kings
Alavatta (Pulahattha!), and Sabhiya (Bahiya!), Panaya,
Palaya, and Dathika reigned fourteen years apd Seven
months. 16. Prince Abhaya (Vattagamani), the son of
Saddhatissa, put the Damila Dathika to death and became
king? 17. He erected the Abhayagiri (monastery) between
the Silathipa and the Cetiya. This Prince reigned twelve .
years and five months. 18. The seven champions of AbRaya
constructed five Ardmas. Uttiya and Saliya, Mila, Tissa,
and Pabbata, Deva, and Uttara, these weae the seven

- 14


210 19, 19° — 20,'8.


“ghampions (of that king). 19. The (warrior) called Uitiya
constructed the (monastery) called the Dakkhinavthara,
Saliya the Saliy4rama, Mila the Milasaya, — 20, Pabbata
the Pabbatarama, Tissa constructed the Tissframa, Deva
and Uttara constructed the Devagara.

21. The son of Kakavanna, Mahatissa, the ruler’of
the earth, made an ‘agreement to work for wages in the
paddy fields, and gave (the money) to the tranquil, thought-
ful Thera Summa. 22. Having made an agreement for full
three years’ labour at a (sugar-) mill, he bestowed a great
donation of a thousand kotis on the Bhikkhus.

23. Wise, enlightened Abhaya Dutthagdmani, after
having performed meritorious deeds, entered after the dis-
solution of his (human) body, the body of a Tusita god.


XX.

1. The illustrious son of Kakavanna, known by the
name of Tissa, built the Mahathipa (and) a Vihara. 2. He
ordered the most excellent Kallakadlena monastery to be
constructed; and many other Viharas have been erected by
Saddhatissa. 8. The number of the highly precious divit
sions of the Dhamma is eighty-four thousand; he paid
reverence to each single division of the Dhamma separa-
tely. 4. Hlustrious Saddhatissa constructed a beautifulepa-
lace with seven stories, and ordered it to be roofed with
iron plates; — 5. 6. (hence) it first received the name,
Loliapasdda (iron palace). He made a lump of glass @.
Around the: most excellent Mahathfipa he constructed a
wall, decorated with figures of elephants, a beautiful enclo-
sures he (also) constructed a quadrangular tank (and gave
it) for a certain time (to the Fraternity). 7. This prince
reigned eighteen years. Having done many other merit-
orious deeds and distributed rich dongtions, this - wise
monarch after the dissolution of his (human) body entered
the, body of a Tusita god.

” 8. The son of Saddhatissa , known by. the name of
Tholathaha, constructed a great Arama, the Alakandara
monastery. “This prince reigned one month and ten days?


20, 9-28." 211


9. The soti of Saddhatissa,, known. by the name of
Lajjitissa, goverfied nine years and six months. 10, He
constructed a ....1) at the most excellent Mahathipa and
established the most delightful Kumbhila Arama, 11, He
built the Dighathtpa to the east of the Thiparéma; in
the most excellent Thiparama he constructed receptacles
‘cased in stone. eee,

12. After the death of Lajjitissa his younger brother
named Khallatandga reigned six years. 13. His com-
mander-in-chief, Maharattaka by name, put this Khallataka
to death and reigned one day, a wicked, ungrateful person.
14. The younger brother of the king, called Vattaga-
mani, killed that wicked general and‘reigned five months.
15. (After that time) the Damila Pulahattha reigned: three
years, and the general Bahiya two years. 16. Having killed
this (king), Panayamara reigned seven years. Having killed
this (king), Palayamara reigned seven months. 17, Having
Killed this: (king), a person Dathiya by name reigned two
years. These five sovereigns belonging to the Damila tribe
governed fourteen years and seven months in the interval
(between the two parts of Vattagamani’s reign).18, Then
the glorious, great king Vattagimani came back and having
put to death the Damila Dathika, gained the sovereignty
himself. 19. This king Abhaya Vattagimani reigned twelve
years and in the beginning (before the above-mentioned
interruption) five months. 20. Before this time, the wise
Bhikkhus* had orally handed down. the text of the tHree
Pitakas and also the Atthakatha. 21. At this time, the
Bhikkhus who perceived the decay of created beings, as-
sembled and in order that the Religion might endure for
a long time, they recorded (the above-mentioned texts) in
written books. : ; .

22. After his (Vattagamani’s) death Mahactli Maha-
tissa reigned fourteen years justly and righteously. 23. This
king, full of faith, having done many meritorious deeds,


1) Probably this passage refers to the three »pupphay4na‘, mentioned
in the Mahfvamsa (p. 201, 1. 14), .thongh I do not know haw to explain
orto correct the word used here (tilaficanam).

a
14*


212 20, 23 — 21, 4.


went to heaven after fourteen years. 24. The son of Yatta-
gimani, known by the name of Corandga, reigned twelve
years living like a robber. 25. The son of MabAcili, ‘the
prince known by the name of Tissa, reigned three years
over the Island. 26. King Siva cohabited with queen
Anula; he ruled one year and two months. 27. A king,
from a foreign country, Vatuka by name, a Damila, go-
verned one year and two months. 28. Then followed king
Tissa, known by the surname ,the wood-cutter“; he then
ruled one year and one month. 29. (A person) called
Niliya by name, known as the Damila king, ruled the
kingdom and governed three months. 30. A woman, Anula,
killed these excellerit penom and governed four months
over Tambapanni.

31. The son of Mahactli, called-Kutikannatissa, con-
structed an Uposatha hall near the Cetiyapabbata mona-
stery. 32. In front of the building he erected a beautiful
stone Thipa; there he planted a Bo branclt and con--
structed a great structure (around the Bo branch?). 33. He
built a bath ... for the Bhikkhunis. He also made a fence
round the Padumassara garden. 34. He caused a ditch
to be dug for the protection of the town, and a wall to
be constructed full seven yards (in height). 35..He (also)
caused the ponds Khema and Dugga to be dug (which he
gave) for a certain time (?) (to the Fraternity). He (also)
caused the Setuppala well and the beautiful Vapnaka dike (2)
tobe constructed. This prince reigned twenty-two yeaxs.


XXI.


1. Prince Abhaya, the son of Kutikanna, went to visit
the Fraternity (?) in the beautiful Mahathipa. 2. The (Bhi-
kkhus) who had subdued their passiong and obtained self-
control, who were spotless and pure of heart, recited
(the Dhamma) in the relic room in honour (of the relics).
3, The king, when he heard them reading in the delight-
ful relic room, walked round the Thipz; but he could
not see them at any of the four gates. 4. The royal rifier


21, 4-19. ; 213


of men, having’ paid in every way reyerence to the most
venerable recitation, thus thought: ,Were do they read?
5. They do not recite at the four gates nor outside; surely
the wise ‘men read in the relic room. 6. I also desine to
see the most excellent relic coom, I will hear the recital
‘and see the Bhikkhu fraternity.“ 7, Sakka, the king of
gods, when he perceived the desire of the king, appeared
in the relic room and thus addressed the Theras: 8. ,The
king, venerable sirs, desires to see the relic room.* For
the sake, of the preservation of his faith they conducted
him into the relic-room. 9. As the king beheld the relic-
room, wisdom arose in his mind; he raised his clasped
hands and worshipped the relics and made great offerings
during seven days.* 10. He seven times made most ex-
cellent offerings, prepared with honey. He seven times
made priceless offerings of ghee (?), — 11. and (also) duly *
seven times other (?) offerings. Seven times he made
offerings of lamps, repeating them, — 12. and seven times
-beautiful offerings of flowers. During seven days he made
offerings of water full (of flowers), and during seven days
offerings of (common) water. 13. He ordered a priceless
net-work of corals to be made, covering the surface of the
Mahathiipa as if it were dressed in a garment. 14. He.
made strong pillars for placing lamps around the foot of
the Thfpa, and got a tube filled with ghee; then he or-
dered the lights seven times to be lit. 15. He caused a
“tybe (to” be laid) around the foot of the Thipa and te be
filled with oil, and ordered the oil-lamps fourteen times
to -be lit. 16. Having caused (a tube?) to be filled with
scented water, he fixed mats at the top (of the Thipa);
(on these) he caused handsfull of blue lotuses to be scat-
tered; this offering was made seven times. 17. Having
dug a channel (from the Thipa) to the Khema pond
(which was situated) to the west of the Thipa, he made
there a water offering. 18. An entire Yojana around (the
Thipa) he caused flowers to be planted, and mad a
flower thicket at the most excellent Mahathipa.” 19. The
frince, having collected flowers covered with cpeuing buds,


214 21, 1938.


nrade a flower thicket fourteen times. 20. Having gathered
various flowers, he constructed seven times. a flower-
‘pillar with "a terrace and an enclosure. 21. He.saw ...
of various shapes, ornamented ...; the prince made them
similar in shape. 22. He ordered cbunnam, work. to be
executed at the most, excellent Mabathipa. Having cele-"
brated the coronation {of the Bo tree?), he held a festi-
val connected with the execution of chunnam work (at
the buildings around the Bo tree?). 23. Sakyaputta,, the
great hero, penetrated the whole Truth near the Assattha
tree (and became?) the supreme (Buddha?). 24. Of this
Bo tree which stood ‘in the delightful Meghavana garden,
illuminating the island, the prince held a coronation and
a bathing festival. 25. The Bhikkhu fraternities who bring.
happiness (to the people), after having spent the rainy
‘season (in the prescribed manner), celebrated the Pavarana
‘ceremony; (the king) bestowed on them a Pavadrand do-
nation in order to show his liking for the Pavaran4 cere-
mony. 26. He bestowed a donation of sandal wood on.
the Bhikkhu fraternity, the most excellent assembly. To
the most excellent Mahathtipa he made the donation of a*
great kettle-drum. 27. ... dancers and acrobats in auspi-
cious attitudes (?), all ... He constructed ... and made
a donation of it to the Mahathtpa, 28. At the full meon
day of the month Vesikha the Sambuddha was born;
he celebrated a festival twenty-eight times in honour of |
this month. 29. Between the two monasteries of” the de
lightful Mah4meghavana and of the most excellent Thapa-
rdma he constructed an Uposatha hall. 30. He did many
other, meritorious acts and distributed rich donations. This
prince reigned twenty-eight. years.

31. Prince Naga, the son of Kutikanna, made bricks
and: other things (?) of costly substances,in the most, ex-
cellent (Ambatthala Thapa?), — 32. and ‘erected seats for
the Dhamma preachers everywhere in the beautiful Am-
battiala Thipa. He made a great offering called Giri-
bhandagabfana. 33. As many wise Bhikkhus were in Lan-
kadipa, he pve a robe to each one of the Bhikkhu con


21, 38—48.° 215


gregation, of the most excellent assembly: “This prinee
reigned twelve years. .

34, -Amandagimani, the son of Mahadathika,. known
by the, surname Abbaya,’ caused a well and also the Ga-:
menditalatea to be dug. 35: He constructed the Rajata-
Jena .(Vibara). Over the Thipa, in the most excellent
Thoparama, he constructed a double canopy made of silver.
36. In the two most excellent palaces of the Mahavibara
and of the Thaparama, he completely constructed treasu-
ries and treasure-caves. 37. He also interdicted the de-
struction of animal life in the territory of Tambapanni.
This prince reigned nine years and eight months.

38. His younger brother, known as king Kanirajanu,
reigned full three Fears. 39. The royal son of Amanda-
gimani, known as Cilabhaya, constructed the most excel-
lent Gaggarérama. 40. King Cilabhaya reigned one year.”
A woman called Stvali, known by the surname Revati, —
41—43. the daughter of king Amanda, reigned four months.
The son of Amanda’s sister, Ilanaga by name, removed
this Sivali and reigned in the town, King Ilanaga, the
“destroyer of his enemies, having heard the Kapi-Jataka,
ordered the Tissa and Dira ponds to be dug. This king
reigned six years in the island of Lanka. 44. The king
cailed Siva, known by the surname Candamukha, con-
structed the Manikérama (Manikaragima tank?) near the
_monastery called Issara. 45.. The queen-consort of that
king, known by. the name of Damiladevi, bestoweé her
own revenues from that very village on that Arami. This
king reigned efght years and seven months.

46, King Tissa, known by the surname of Yasalila,
governed eight years and seven months‘). 47. King Subha,
the son of a doorkeeper, constructed the Subhardma and
the delightful Villavihara. 48. Likewise he constructed her-
mit’s cells which were called after his own name. This
king governed six years over his a on:


1) According to the Mahavamsa: seven years and eight inonthe.


216 22, 1—14.


XXIL.

1. King Vasabha constructed in the Cetiyapabbata
monastery ten Thipas, a most glorious deed by which
high reward is to be gained. 2. In the Issariya Arama he
constructed a delightful Vibara (and) a pleasing and de-
lightful Uposatha hall+ 3. He also ordéred a large kettle-
drum to be made for tke most excellent Mucela monastery.
Every three years he gave six robes (to each monk).
4. Throughout the whole of Lankadipa he repaired dilapi-
dated Aramas. Everywhere he constructed residences and
made most precious offerings to the pious (Bhikkbus), 5. In
the most excellent Thiparima he constructed a relic-
chamber; full forty-four times the king held (Vesdkba)
festivals. 6. In the Mabavibara, in the Thiparama, and
in the Cetiyapabbata monastery, at each of these places
he ordered a thousand oil-lamps to be lit. 7. 8. The’eleven
tanks (formed by this king were) the Mayanti, the Raju-
ppala tank, the Vaha, Kolamba, Mahanikkhavatti tank and
also the Mahdrametti, the Kehala and Kali tanks, the Jam-
buti, Cathamafgana, and Abhivaddhamanaka tanks.

9.10. He also constructed twelve irrigation canals in
order to augment the fertility (of the land). Various me-
ritorious acts he did; he made a wall and a ditch around
the town with towers at the gates, and a great palace.
He ordered lotus-ponds to be dug at different places in
the town, the capital. 11, The most eminent king con-
ducted water by means of an underground aqueduct (t6
those ponds). This ruler governed forty-four years.

12. The son of Vasabha, known as Tissa, the rayal
lord, srdered the Arama called Mafgala to be constructed.
He reigned straightway (after his father’s death) three
years over the Island.

13. Tissa’s son, Gajabahukagamani,«caused a gteat
Thipa to be built in the delightful Abhayarama. 14. This
royal, Chief constructed the pond called Gamani, according
to the wishes of his mother; this lord (also) ordered the
Arama called | Rammaka to be built. He ruled twenty-two
years over jhe Island.


92, 15-33, 217


15-17. The ruler of Tambapanni called king Ma-.
hallanaga caused the Sajilakandakarima, the Gotapabbata
in the south, the Dakapasina Arama, the Salipabbata Vihara,
the Tanaveli (Vihara), and in Rohana the NAgapabbata (Vi-
hara) ana the Girisalika Arama to be constructed. Having

* reigned six years he reached the end of his life and died.
18. 19. The son of Mahallangga, known by the name
of Bhatutissa, caused for the sake of (re-)establishing the
Mahdmeghavana garden, a wall fence with towers at the
gates to be constructed (around it); this king also founded
the Vara- Arama (Gavara-Ar.?). 20. Having caused the
pond called Gamani to be dug, Bhatutissa, the lord (of the
Island), gave it to the Bhikkhu fraternity. 21. He (also)
ordered the pond” called Randhakandaka to be dug. In
the delightful Thtod4rama he constructed an Uposatha hall.
22. This king bestowed a great donation on the Bhikkhu
- fraternity. He reigned twenty-four years over the Island.
23. His younger brother, well known by the name of
* Tissa, erected an Uposatha hall in the delightful Abhaya-
rama. 24. He constructed twelve edifices within (the limits
- of) the most excellent Mahavihara. In the Dakkhindrama
he built a Vihara aud a Thipd. 25. Many other merito-
rious acts he did in honour of the blessed religion of the
Buddha. He reigned eighteen years.
26. The sons of Tissa’s own body, two brothers
. worthy of royal dignity, reigned as rulers three years
over the Island. a -

. 27. Vankanasikatissa reigned three years in Anuradha-
pura, a king of proper and meritorious conduct. 28. After
the death of Vankandsikatissa bis son Gajabahukagaémani
reigned twenty-two years. 29. After Gajababu’s death the
father-in-law of that king, M&hallakanaga, reigned six
years. 30. After the death of Maballanaga his son Bha-
tikatissa reigned twenty-four years over Lanka. 31. After
Bhbatikatissa’s death his younger brother Kanit+hatissa
reigned eighteen years over Lankadipa. 32. After the death
of Kanitthatissa his son, known by the name of Khujja-
“naga, reigned two years. 33. Kuijanagas the younger


218 22, 88—47.


orother of Khujjanage, put his royal brother to death and
reigned one year over Lanka.

$4, Having gained the victory (over Khujjanag-), Siri-
naga reigned nineteen years in the most excellent Anu-
radhapura over Lanka. 35.. Tae king called Sirinaga by,
name made an offering of a garland of costly substances
to the Mahathapa and wrested a parasol oyer the Thipa.
36. He constructed an Uposatha hall; the most excellent
Lohapasida. This prince reigned nineteen years. :

37. The son of Sirinaga, the royal lord called Abhaya,
gave two hundred thousand silver pieces to the Bhikkhu
fraternity. 38. At the most excellent great Bo tree he
constructed a stone ledge. This king governed twenty-two
years. 39. His younger brother, known as king Tissaka,
erected a most excellent parasol over the Abbayarama and
over the Mahathtpa, 40. In the delightful Mabantegha-
vana and in the beautiful Abhayarima, at both most excel-
lent Viharas, he constructed a golden Thhpa. 41. Having
heard the Gilana discourse (of Buddha) which was preached
by Thera Deva, he gave medicaments for the sick and
(constructed). five most. excellent residences (for the Sam-
gha?). 42. Having seen a portent in the night, (he -con-
structed) the Dassamalint Arama; near the delightful Be
tree he erected figures formed by lamps.

43. In the reign of that king they proclaimed many

wrong doctrines; proclaiming captious doctrines they ruined
the réligion of the Jina. 44. The king, when he perceivede
that wicked Bhikkhus ruined the religion of the Jina, to-
gether with the minister Kapila subdued those wicked
ones. -45. Having destroyed these captious doctrines and
caused the (true) religion ‘to shine, he gave (to the Frater-
nity) the Hatthapannika (Sattapannika?) palace and (caused)
boiled rice (to be provided) in the Meghavana. This royal
ruler governed twenty-two years.
: 46 Tissa’s own son, known by the name of Sirindga,
reigned full, two years over the Island. 47. This Sirinaga
constructed, an enclosure around the great Bo. tree and
also a beautiff 1 pavilion.


22, 4859. 219


. 48. (The king) called Asafigatissa (Samghatissa) fixed
golden parasols over the most excellent Mahathapa, on
the top- of the Thipa. 49. (He also constructed) of jewels
a Thapa_ of the shape of a flame at the most excellent


. Mahbathapa, and in connection (?) with that work he also


brought offerings. 50. (Having héard) the Andhakavinda
Suttanta'), which was preached by Thera Deva, this vic-
torious king ordered rice-milk continually to be distributed
at the four gates (of the town).

51. Vijayakum4ra?), the son of Sirinaga, reigned after
his father’s death one year.

52, Samghatissa reigned four years; he fixed a para-
sol and goldsmith’s work on the Mahathdpa.

53. King Samghabodhi by name was a virtuous prince;
this king reigned 4wo years. 54, This victorious king or-
dered -ricé-milk continually to be distributed in the delight-


’ ful’ Meghavana garden, and in the most excellent -Maha-


vibara he constructed a room whére food was distributed


_ by tickets.


.


55. The king called Abhaya, known by the surname
Meghavanna, constructed a stone pavilion in the most ex-
cellent Mahavihara. 56.57. To the west of the Maha-
vibara he built a cloister for monks given to meditation.
Ee (also) constructed an incomparable stone altar around
the Bo tree and ordered a trench to be’ made, lined with
stones, and a very costly triumphal arch. In the most
excellent Bo tree sanctuary he erected a throne of Stone.
58. Within the Dakkhinarima he constructed an Uposatha
hall. He distributed a great donation to the fraternity of
Bhikkhus, the most excellent community. 59. The king,
having constructed a royal palace, a great, delightful build-
ing. gave it to the Bhikkhu fraternity and then’ received


1) This discourse of Buddha whicb contains praises of those who pro-
vide rice-milk for the Fraternity, is contained in the Mahavagga of the
Vinaya-Pitaka, VI, 24.

2) The stanza treating of Vijaya is interposed between two sections
which refer to king Samghatissa’s reign. The: confusion seems brought on
-by an -injudicious employment. of different sources; I do nat believe that
we ought to alter the succession of these verses.


220 , 22, 59—78.


it back. 60. In the Meghavana garden the king also cele-
brated a Vesakha festival. He reigned thirteen years.

61. The son of Meghavanna was king Jetthatissa;
this royal lord reigned over the island of TamSapanni.
62—-65. In the most excellent Mahathtpa he Offered a
very costly jewel. Having built a palace covered with
iron and offered to it that.most excellent jewel, the chief
of men gave (to that palace) the name , Manipasida® (,pa-
lace of the gem“). Having constructed the PAcinatissa-
pabbata Arama, the ruler of men called Tissa gave it to
fraternity of Bhikkhus. The ruler of the earth, the chief
of men, having ordered the Alambagéma pond to be dug,
held festivals (there) during eight years. _This king reigned
ten years over Tambapanni.

66. After Jetthatissa’s death his youager brother, king
Mahasena, reigned twenty-seven years. 67. This king once
thought thus: ,There are two kinds of Bhikkhus in the
Religion (of Buddha); which of them hold the right doc-
trine and which hold the wrong doctrine, which are mo-
dest and which are shameless?“ 68. When thinking about
this matter and searching after modest persons, he saw
wicked Bhikkhus who were no (true) Samanas and (only)
looked like (Samanas). 69. He saw people who were like
stinking corpses, and in behaviour like blue flies, wicked
persons, who were no (true) Samanas and (only) looked
like (Samanas), — 70. Dummitta and Papasona and other
shametess men. He went to those wicked Bhikkhis and,
asked them about the sense (of the Religion) and the doc-
trine. 71. Dummitta and Papasona and other shameless
men secretly consulted in order to mislead the pious (king).
72, These wicked, infatuated men taught that (computing)
the twenty years (required for) the Upasampada ordina-
tion from the conception, which has been admitted hy
Buddha) in (the story about) Kumarakassapa'), is “not
apae 13. The practice of (wearing) ivory (fans)?)


isimtatones I, 75.
21 have, trayslated this passage according to the indications given in
the Mahivamsa Tita (see the quotation in the footnote, p. 213), although
«


22, 78—76. 221


‘which has not been admitted in the_ story about the Cha-
bbaggiyas, these shameless, idle (?) teachers taught to be
allowable. 74. Regarding these and other matters many
other suameless Bhikkhus, without a reason, for the sake
of their own advantage, taught that (the true doctrine)
was a false doctrine. x

75, Having performed through his life, in consequence
of his intercourse with those wicked persons, evil as well
as ‘good deeds, this king Mahdsena passed away (to an-
other existence) according to his actions,

76. Therefore one sbould fly far from intercourse with
wicked men, as* from.a serpent or-a snake, and self-con-
trolled one should perform acts of benevolence as long as
his existence last’.


poet nN .


I do riot known any story in the Vinaya mentioning the Chabbaggiya Bhi-
kkhus, which relates to the use of ivory fans. There is in the Khuddaka-
vatthukhandha (Cullavagga, V, 28,1) a precept which implicitly excludes
the use of fans made of ivory (,anujandmi bhikkhave tisso vijaniyo vika-
mayam usiramayam morapifichamayam“). I think that this is the passage
alluded to, though the Chabbaggiyas are not expressly mentioned in it; in
the short stories which precede.and follow this one, moat frequently méntion
is made of the transgressions of the Chabbaggiyas, so that the expression
»Chabbaggiyanam vatthu“ may have been extended to this passage also, by
an inaccuracy which scarcely will be deemed strange.


» 222


Index of proper namiea,


INDEX OF PROBER NAMES.


(An asterisk indicates that the passage is corrupt or the reading doubtfal.)~


Aggimitth 16, 78; 18, 11.
Accim& 3, 8. 14.
Accutagimi. 9, 82. 35.
Afigi 1, 89.

*Atigisa 8, 6.

Acalh 19, 8,

Ajatasattu 8, 60; 4, 27;
5, 77; £1, 8 :

*Ajitajana 3, 17.

Afjali 18, 24.

Atthadassi 3, 41.

Anattana 19, 6.

Anurfdha 10, 6.

Anoridhanakkhatta *9,
82. 85.

Anuradhapura 9, 35; 1
2; 15, 69; 16, 30; 17,
6 ete.

Anuruddha 4, 4. 8. 503;
5, 8. 24.

Anulaé 11, 7; 12, 82 et
seq.; 15, 74 et eq;
16, 89; 17, 76, — 20,
26, 80. °

Anotatta 1, 39; 6,3; 12,
8; 17, 85.

Aparantaka 8, 7

Aparaselika 5, 54.

Abhaya (ancient king at
Kakusandka’s time) 15,
88; 17, 7. 69 et seq.

— (son of Pagduvasa) 10,
3.7; 11, 1. 2.10.

— (son of Mutasiva) 11,
6; 1%, 75.

— (Dutyhagimani) 18,18.
283. 32.753; 19, 23.
— (Vaftagimani) 19, 16.

18; 90, 19. «

—— (son of Kutikanag) i8,

87; 21; 4. a


Abhaya (Amandagimani)
QE, 84.

— (son of Sirinaga) 22,
37.

— (Meghavauna) 22, 55.

Abhayagiri 19, 14. 16. +

Abbayapura 15, 88; 17,
6 et seq. 35.

*Abhitatta 3, 17.

Aimitodapa 8, 46; 10, 6.

Ayujjha 8, 15.

Arittha 11, 29. 31; 14,
68 et seq.; 15, 82;
16, 40.

Aritthapura 3, 22.


1,| Arindama 3, 15.


Asela (son of Panguvasa)
10, 3.

— (son of Mutasiva) 11,
7; 17,76; 18, 48. 49.

Asoka (ancient king) 3,
37.

— (comp. Kalisoke) 5,
25.

— (Dhammisoka, comp.
Piyadassi) 1, 26. 27;
5, 59, 82. 101 et seq.;
6, 12 et seq.; 7, 3 et


seq.3 11, 18.24 et seq.; j


12, 4 et seq.; 15, 6 et
3 17, 81 et seq.
Assaji 1, 32.

Ananda 4, 8. 7. 8. 50;
b, 7. 11. 12, 24.
Amandagimani 21,. 34.

39. 41.
*Alavatta 19, 15.
Itthiya 12, 12. 38.
Indagutta 19, 5. 6.—~ 8.
Indapatta 8, 23.


liandga 21, 42.


Tsidasik& 18, 9.
Isipatana 1, 33.
Isibhimi 47, 109.
Ujjeni (in India) 6, 15,
2- (in Ceylon) 9, 86."
Uttara 8, 12. — 19, 6. —
719, 18. 20.

Uttara 15, 78;°18, 11. —
18, 16. — 18, 18.
Utti (son of Panduvisa)

10, 3.
Utti, Uttiya (son of Mu-
tasiva 11, 6; 17, 75.
Ut93. 97.
tiya (a Thera) 12, 12.
38.
— (a warrior) 19, 18, 19.
Udaya (Odayabhadda) 4,
88; 56, 97; 11, 8


Unnalf 18, 24. -

Upacara 3, 5.

Upatissa 9, 32, 36,

Upatissanagara 9, 86;
10, 5. - i


Upavattana 6,19; 15,70.¢
Upali 4, 3. 7. 8. 28 et
seq.; 5, 7. 11. 12, 76
et seq. ba
Upili 18, 29,
Uposatha 8, 4.
Uppalavanna 18, 9.
Ummadacitta 10, 4.
Uruvela (in Ifdia) 1" 35.
38m 81.
— (in Ceylon) 9, 55.6
Ekacakkhu 8, 19. 24.
Ekabyohara 5, 40.
Elfra 18, 49.
Okkaka 3, 41.
Okkamukha 8, 41,
Ojadipa"1, 73; 9, 20; 18, *


. 35 et -seq.; 17, 5. 16.
28, et seq.
Kakusandha 2, 66; 15,
25. 34. 38; 17, 9. 16.
26 et ~aq., 73.
Kaccfoa 4 6; 5, 9.
Kaceiné 1€, 1.
Kanirajann 21, 38.
Kandgula 18, 53.
Kanggagoccha 3, 26.
Kadambaka 15, 39; 17,
12.
Kanakadatta *17, 17 et
seq.
Kanit¢hatisaa 22, 23. 26.
81 et seq.

Kapila, Kapilavatthe 3,
17, 48. 52. is
Kapila (a minister) 22, 44.
Kappasika 1, 34. 2
Kambalavasabha 8, 19.

Kalfrajanaka 8, 87.

Kalyana 3, 4.

Kalyan? 2, 42. 58.

Kassapa (the Buddha) 2,
68; 15, 25. 54 et seq.;
17, 10. 18. 73.

— (a Thera) 4, 3.8.22;
6, 1 et seq.

— (a Jatila) 1, 35.

Kassapagotta 8, 10,

-Kassapika 5, 48.

Kakangekaputta 5, 23.

Kakavanna 18,+20, 58;
19, 21; 20, 1.

Ralisoka (comp. Asoka)
4, 44; 5, 80. *99.

*Kalissara 8, 32.

Kali 18, 16. — 18, 21.


+ Kasi 4,°39,


Kira 11, 7; *27, 76.
Kufiijaniga 22, 33.
Kufijara 14, 28.
Krjikanpa 18, 37; 20,
81; 21, 1. 81.
Kumarakassapa 4, 4; 5,
8; 22, 72.
Kursdipa 1, 38.
Ke 8, 40.
Ku. ~ati 3, 9.
Kusinaré 3, 32; 5, 1;
15, 70.
Rasagarasalé 5, 29.
Kotthamflaka 14, 29.33.


‘ndex of proper. names.


Kondaifia 1, 32.
Konfizamana 2, 67; #,
25.44.48; 17, 9.17.
73.
Kontiputta 7, 32.
Kosambi.8, 25. *
Kosala 2. 1.
Khallatanaga 20, 12 et
seq. Aa
Khujjandga 22° 82. 3.
Khujjascbhit *, 473 5,
22. x“
Khema 16, 9. — 18, 30.


Gaigi 7, 12; 11, 32;
12, 2.

Gajabahukagimani 22,
18. 28. 29. -


Gandhara $4.0 +

Gamika 18, 39. 2

Gimani 10, 6. — 10,

iri (Giridipa) 1, 67 et

seq.

— (a Nigaptha) 19, (4.

Girikali 18, 21.

Giriddhi 18, 14,

Giribbaja 4, 39. 40; 5, 5.

Guttaka 18, 47, 48.

Goknulika 5, 40. 41.

Gotama 1, 86. 41, 76;
2, 69; 3, 58; 15, 69;
17, 10. 20.

Gotami 18, 8.

Candagutta (a king) 5,
69. 73. 81.100; 6, 15;
11, 12.

— (a Thera) 19, 8.

— (a palace?) 16, 36.

;Candamukha 3, 42. —

21, 44.

j Candavajji 4, 46; 5, 58

, _ et seq. 86 et seq.

Candima 8, 42.

(Campi 3, 28.

Cara 3, 5.

Cittagutta 19, 6.

{ Cittadassi 3, 41.

: Citta 10, 4. 8.

| Calanag& 18; 38.

| Calasumana 18, 39.

; Calabhaya 21, 39. 40.

Ciilodara 2, 7 et seq. 29.

Cetiya 3, 5.

; Cetiyapabbata 15,69; 17,

90 ete.


Kotthita (Kotthika) 4, 5; | Cetiva 5, 42.


5, 3.


a


Pr


Coranaga 20, 24.


923


*Chaddanta 6, 7.
Channagarika 5, 46.7
Channé 18, 29. |
Chabbaggiyé 22, 73.
Chatapabbata 11, 15.19.
Jambudipa 1, 26. 49; 6,
2 ete,
Jayanta 15, 60; 17, 7.
Jayasena 3, 44.— 19, 8.
Jali 3, 42,
Jetthatissa 22, 61. 66.
Jetavana 2, 2. 16. 51.
53.
Takkasila 3, 31.
Tappa 15, 78.
Tambapangi (name
Ceylon) passim.
-~ (town in Ceylon) 9,
30 et seq.


of


8.|*Tamalittiya 3, 33.


*Talissara 3, 32.

Tissa (see Moggaliputta,
Devanampiya).

~~ (Kontiputta) 7, 82,

~— (a Sakiya) 10, 6.

— (son of Panduvisa)
10, 3.

— (son of Mutasiva) 11,
6. 7; 17, 75. 76.

— (a warrior) 19,18. 20,

— (different princes) 20,
1, — 20, 26. — 20,
28. — 20, 31. — 21,
46.— 22, 12.13. —
22, 23. 26. — 22, 39.
46. — 22, 61. 64.°

TissA 18, 30.

Tumbamalaka 14, 74.

Thilathana 20, 8.

Datti 18, 27.

| Damila 18, 47; 19, 16; -
20, 15 ete.

Damiladevi 21, 45.

Dasaratha 3, 40.

| Dithika 19, L& 16; 20,

17, 18,

, Dasaka 4, 28 et seq.; 5,
77 et, seg.

Dasi (Dasiy&, Dasika) 18,
11.— 14,— 24 — 28,

Disampati 8, 40.

| Dighavapi 240.

| Dighavu 10, 0.

Dipamkara 3, 81:

Dipanayé 18, 40.

! Dupppsaba 3, 16.


*Durabhisara 8, 10. i


224


Dummitta 22, 70-71.


Deva.(royal surname) 8:
20. 86, :

—~ (a warrior) 19, 18.20. |

—— (a Thera) 22, 41.50.;

Devakita 15, 88; 17, 14.
32 et seq.

Devagutta 16, 37.

Devamanus& 18, 27. 7


Devanampiya 11, 14 et,
seq.; 12,7 - 17, 92;
*18, 26.

Devi 6, 16. i


Dovarikamagydala 10, 9.
Dhanna 18, 38.
Dhamma 19, 5. |
Dhammagutta 3, 22. i
Dhammagutt& 6, 47. —
18, 28. i
Dhammatapasa 18, 15.
Dhammadisiva 16, 78;
18, 12.
Dhammadinnaé 18, 9.
Dhammarakkhita 19, 6.
Dhammasena 3, 40. —|
19, 5,
Dhammé 18, 14.
Dhammasoka, see Asoka.
Dhammuttariké 5, 46.
Dhota 3, 45.
Nagaracatukka 14, 58.
Naggadipa 9, 13.
Nandanavana 13, 12 et
seq.; 14,11.17.44.46,
Nand& 18, 10.
Nandisena 19, 9.
Naradeva 3, 27,
Naramitta 18, 15.
Navaraha 3, 40.
Nfiga (son of Mutasiva)!
11, 6; 17, 75. i
(son of Kutikanna)'
21, BL.
Nigadasc 4, 41;
11, 10. i
Nigadeva 3, 29. i
Nagapali 18, 34. |
NAgamitta 18, 28. — 34.
— 85. i
Nagasena 3, 40.
Nagi 18-778. — 35. |
Nigrog. 6, 34 et seq.;
7, 12. 31.
*Nipuna (Nipura?) 3, 42.
Niliya 20, 29¢ 2


a


5, 78;


Inde:: of proper name’
Aa
Nemiya 8, 36. 87,
RNeru 8, 8.
Pakuuda, see Pavduka.
| *Pakula 8, 14.
Paifiattl 5, 41.
Pathcéra 18, 9.


Paudaka (Pakenda) *4,|


45; 5, 69. *78. 81;
9,93 II, Let seq. 12.
Pai,duvasa Pangaraja) 4,
4.0 FF 2 2. Tei
83158


neds


: Pandesakku To, 1.


Patipa 3, 7.
Paduma 19, 8.


= Paduma 18, 24.


Par‘iyamara 19, 15; 20,


Panada 3, 7.

Pabbata 19, 18. 20.

*Pabbatachinna 15, 78
18, 12.

| Parantapabbata 11, 29.
*31.

‘Palayamara 19, 15; 20,
16.

*Pasidapali 15, 78; 18,
11,


Pataliputta 5, 25. 59; 6,
18; 7, 45; 11, 28; 15,
6. 87.

Papasoua: 22, 70. 71.
Piyadassana 6, 1. 2; 15,
88 et seq.; 16, 5.
Piyadassi (Asoka) 6, 14.

24,
— (a Thera) 19, 5.
Punna 4, 4; 5, 8.
Puttatissa 11, 29. 31.
Pupphapura, see Patali-
putta.
Pobbaselika 5, 54.
*Purinda 3, 33.


' Purindada 8, 20.


.Pulahattha *19, 15; 20,
15.
*Pheggu 18, 12.
*Baladatta 3, 25.
*Baladeva 3, 25.
Bahussutaka 5, 41.
Baranasi 1, 30. 38, 34;
8, 16. 38.
Bahiya *19, 45; 20, 15.
Bilératha 3, 41.
Bindusara 5, 101; 6, 15.
Bimbisara 3, 56. 58.


1 Buddha 19, 6.
Buddhadatta 3, 3Q-
Brahmadatta 8, 18. *24.
|*Brahmadeva 8, 24.
i*Bhagirasa 8,7.
'Bhayduka 127, 26.39, 62.
63.
Bhaddadeva 3,26. — -
| Bhaddayanika 5, 46.
' Bhaddavaggiya 1, 34.
Bhatdasala 12, 12. 38.
[Been 1, 82.
Bharata 3, ’s.
Bhatiya 3, *52. 53.
Bbatutissa (Bh&tikatiasa)
22, 18. 20. 30, 31.
Bharokaccha 9, 26.
Makhfideva 3, '33.
Magadb& 1, 89; 4, 40;
~ 5, 5.
‘Maiigala 19, 8.
Majjhanta 7, 25.
‘Maj antika & 2. 4...
Majjhima 8, 10.°
'Maniakkhika 2, 42, 52
et seq.
Mandadipa 1, 73; 9, 20;
15, 57 et seq.; 17, 5.
Matta 10, 4.
Mattakala 10, 4
Pare 18, 12.
Mattibhaya 11,6; 17,75.
i Madhura 3, 21.
Mandhata 8, 5.
Malaya 11, 19. 20.
*Malitthiyaka 3, 33.
Malla (a people) 15, 70.
— (@ Theri) 15, 78; 18,
12.
Mahallanaga 22, 15. 18.°
29. 30.
Mahakali 18, 39.
Mahfkusa 8, 40.
;Mabacéli (comp. Mana-
tissa) 20, 22. 25. 81.
Mahatissa 19, 21; 20, 22.
Mahatissa 18, 397
‘Mahadathika 21, 34.
Mahadeva 7, 25;.8, —
19, 6. — 16, 8°. 4a.
17, 25.
Mahadevi 18, 24.
Mahadhammarakkhita
8, 8.
Mahanama 1, 32.
Mabapciapati 18, “87


“ Maharattha 8, 8.


Mahinda Gon of Asoka)!


/*Masagalla 15, 78;


-Mittanna, 19, 5. i
“Mittasena 19, 8


MabApatdpa 3, 7. !
Mahapaduma 14, 28. i
Mahfipendda 3, 7.
Mahimuci‘a 3, 6.
Mahameghs. ana, ‘see Me-
ghavana,
Mabfrakkhita $, 9.


Mahdrattaka 20, 13. |
Maharuci 3, 7.
*Maharnha 18, 31.
Mahili 10, 6.
Mabasamgiti 6, 31, 32.
B9. 42. I
Mahdsammata 3, 3.
Mahisudassana 3, 8.
Mahasumana 18, 39.7
Mahdsena 22, 66. 75.
Mahfisoya 18, 27. ™


-


Mahimsasaka 6, 45. 47.8 Renu 3, 40.


Mahiyé 1, 51. a
1, 27; 5, 82 et seq.;
6, 17 et seq.; 7, 18 et
seq. 42; 8,13; 11, 403,
12, 8 > 17, 109.

— (a king) 3, 28. H

Mahila 18, 15. — 20. —
85.

Mahilarattha 9, 14.

Muhisa 8, 5.

Mahodara 2, 7 et seq. 29.

Maya 18, 7.

Mala 18, 80,


18,
11.
Mitta 11, 7; 17, 76.


Mithila 3, 9. 29. 35.
Missakagiri 12, 28. 37 et
@seq.; 14, 56. *75. *79.
Mivcala 3, 6.
Mucalinda 3, 6.
Mutasiva 5, 82;
seq” 12. 18; 12, 42;/
aT, 76. 77; 18, 48.
Maly 19, 18. 19. _
Ait. “adeva 8, 10.
Meghavanna 22, 55. 61.
Meghavana 2, 61.64; 13,
18 et seq.; 17, 16, 23.
74 ete.
Moggaliputta 5, 57 et
seq.; 7, 16. 2 et seq.


11,6 et!


| Roja 3, 4


| Rohana (a prince) 10, 6.
|. (@ province) 18, 28.


| Varadipa 1, 73; 9, 20;/


39 et seq.; 7, 1.


.adex of proper names.
v


| Moriy - 6, 19.
Yasa 1 33. —4 50; 5,
28.
Yasalala 21,46. j
Yonaka 2, 9% i
Yonakadh mmaraki hita
8,7
Rakkhita 8, 6...
Rajagaba (com arc $ ri-


| Rapasobhini 18, 27,
aRevata 4, 49; 5, 22,
Revat&é 18, 29.
Revati 21, 40. |


*Rojiina 3, 27.


40; 22, 16.
Lakkhadhamma 18, 40.
Laak4, passim. |
Lajjitissa *20, 9 et seq. |
Lalarattha 9, 5. i
Vaiikandsikatissa 22, 27.

28. i
| Vaiga 9, 2.
| Vaigisa 4, 4; 5, 8
Vajira 8, 20.
Vajjiputtaki 4, 47. 48;

3, 17. 80. 45, 46. [| S
Vatuka 20, 27.
Vattagamani 20,

19. 24,
Vaddhamanapura 15, 48.

17, 6 et seq.

Vappa I, 32. H
Varakalyaga 3, 4. !


14. 18,


15, 45 et seq.; 17, 5.
17.

Vararoja 3, 4.

Vasabha 22, 1. 12.

Vasabhagimi 4, 51; 5,
22. 24.

Vijaya 8, 39. — 4, 27;


5, 77; 9, 6 etseq.; 11, /*
| Saha 4, 49; 5, 22.
“15


8. 9. —- 22, 51.


| Visakha 18,


225
Vijita 9, 32. 35. *
Vijitasena 3, 39.
Vitjhatavi 15, 87; 16, 2.


| Vibhajjavadi 18, 41. 44.


Vibbata 10, 4.
10.
Visila 15, 60;
seq.
Veluvana 4, 39.


17, 6 e&


baja) 3, 4. 3) 7 52; | Vedissa 6,15; 12, 14.35,
13, 1%. 0% { Vesali 4, 47. 48. 52; 5,
Rajagirik . 5, 54. 17, 23, 29.
Rama 3, 41. — 0, 4.| Vessantara 3, 42.
— 6 *Sakula 8, 14.
»Rahula 3, 47. . (Sakkodana 3, 45.
| Ruc&uanda 17, 16 et iq. Sakyaputta 2, 69; 12, 5;
| bret se 13, 50; 16, 26; 17,74;
| Ruei 3, 7 (18, 3]; 21, 23.


Samkantika 5, 48.


;Samgha 19, 5,
| Samghatissa 22, *48. 52.


Samghadfsi 18, 10.
Samghbabodhi 22, 53.
Samghamitt’ 6,17; 7,18


et seq.; 35, 77. 90 et
seq.; 17, 20 et seq.;
18, 11. *25.


Safjaya 8, 42.
Sagha 18, 88.
Sattapangaguha
6, 5.
Saddhammanandi 18, 14.
Saddhatissa 19, 16; 20,


4, 14;


2 et seq.
Sapatti 18, 29.
;Sabala 18, 19,


Sabbakami 4, 49; 5, 22.


| *Sabbatthivada 5,47. 48.


Sabbananda 15,060. 64;
17, 25.

Samaakura 3, 37.

Samatha 3, 40.

Samanta 18, 20.


j Samiddha 15, 48; 17, 7.


Samiddhi 2, 17 et seq.
Samuddanava 18, 84.
Samuddg 18, 28. — 41.
Sambala 12, 12. 38.
Sambhita 4, 50> 5, 22.
Sammiti 5, 46.


| Sahadeva 8, -%0.


Sakiya 10, 6..>.
Sagara 3, 6. — 12, 8.
Sagaradeva 3, 6. — 34.
Saggla a, 14.


226


Saga, 60; 5, 22.
satac 78, 16.
Sadhina 8, 21. ,
*Sabbiya 19, 15.
*Sfla 11, 29. 31.
Séliya 19, 18. 19.
Siggava 4, 46; 5, 57 et!
seq.; 80 et seq.

“Sitthi 3, 23.

Siddhattha 3,47.— 19,8.:

Siddhattha 5, 54.

Sirinaga 22, 34 et seq. —
46 et seq.

Silakdta 17, 14.

Siva (comp. Siva) 10, 4%:
— 11,7; 17, 76; 18,
45,

Sivi 3, 42.

Siva (comp. Siva) 20, 26. |
— 21, 44

Sivala 11, 7; *17, 76. —:
18, 27, — 30. — 34,

Sivalt 9, 3. 19, 8. —
21, 40, 42.

Siha 9, 1 et seq.

Sihaputta 9, 5. 6. H

Sibapura 9, 4. 5. 48. |


: Sumanakita 15, 48;


Index of . proper. names.


Sihabahu 9, 8. 2).
Sthalé 9, 1.

Sibavahna 8, 4).
Stbasse'a 3, 42."
Sihaheam 3, 44% 45. 51.


| Sukkedana 3,.46.


Snjat. 3, 415°
:*Suafigana I, 51.
i Sut a oo 5, 43.
Suc
| Sndan 5 aa 3,
*Sadi na 3,
udd! odana 3,45 et seq.
udh mma 17, 19 et seq.
up .titthita 19, 9.
Sup fra 9, 15 et seq.
Sulna 21, 47.
ovbhukdta 15,60; 17, 14,
*Suvhafigana 1, 51.


'Sumrna 4,51; 5,22. 24,


— 12, 18. 26. 39; 16,
5 et seq. 28. 93.
16, 48.53; 17, 25.
19, 8.


17,
14,
Svmanadevi 19, 9.


Suman& 18, 17.
Suma 18,24.
Sumitta (comp.Dummitta)
9, 6. 48. -" 7, 82.
Summa 19, / 4.
{ Suriyagutta- '9, £. — 8.
{Suvagpabbimi 8, 12.
Susima 9, 3.
Susundga 5, 25.98 et seq.
Stratissa 18, 46 et seq.
Sena 18, 47. 48.
Sona, comp. Sona, Papa


sonua.
jSona 18, 10. $8.
Sona 8, 12. °


Sonaka 4, 39 et seq.; 5,
78 et seq.
Sobhapi 18, 15,
Seyhitd 18, 9.
Loomanadeva 18, 29,
Soma 18, 14,
tlatthipura 3,018.
Himava 6, 3; 89 10.
| Hemavatika 5, 54.
| Hema | 15, 78; 18, 11.
*Hemisi 18, 24.


TABLE OF THE CEYLONESE KINGS
ACCORDING TO THE DIPAVAMSA.


Vijaya (reigned 38 years) .
Interregntim (1 year) .


Pandavfsa (80 y.)
Abhaya (20 y.) . .
Interregnam (17 y-
Pandukabhaya (70 y.) .
Mutasiva (60 y.).
Deviants Tissa ao y:
Uttiya (10 y.) 2.
Siva (10 y.),.-
Sfiratissa (10 y.y..
Sena and vane oe y- ».
Asela (£0


Thilathena (1 month and


Cn
1) 22 years according to
-


Elira (44 te Be J Bs
Abhaya hagamani (24 y.
Saddhaysa (18 y.).


)


)


)
10) days)


the Mahdvamea.


28-44.
9.
i—6.


~


4952.


53 — 19, 10. 23.


i—7.


‘able of the Ceylonese Kings. Pyy4


“ Laijitissa (9 y. 6 mo... . 1X 1118; 20, 9-42.
Kiallitanaga (6%y.). °. 2 ewe 20, 22
Mabarattaka (one day). Pa 20, 1B
Abhay” Vattagimani (5 month;) . . . 20, 14.


Pulahat. +a (Alavatta) (By... 2...

Bahira ( ‘abhiya):(2 y.) ee {

Panayamara (7 y.) - . - 2. 19, 15; 20. 15—17.
Palayamira (7 months)... . = 7 {

Dathika (2 y.) .°. ee
Abhaya Vattagdmani ae ye
Mahfcili Mahatissa (14 y.)


19, 14. 16—20; 20, 18—21
19, 2t—22; 20, 2298.


Coranga (IZ yy.) 2... we 20, 24.
Tissa (By)-. 6 ee 20, 25.
Siva (Ly. 2m). 2 2 1 1 1. . 20,96,
Vatuka (Ly. 2m). 2... 0... .5 20°27.
Tissa (1 y. 1 m.) By ho oh ok el. an “ey 20 28.
Niliya Gm?) 07. 0 ee DD
Anula (4m)... ap tty Senst Bee fe Za 30.

* Kupikangatissa (22 7 oo a Heyy 20, BIA8K,
Abhaya (28 y.) 20.4. 2 0. 2 7 BL, 180.
Mahiidathika Niga+(12 #. ) see ee) Bl, BI-—33.
Abhaya Amandagimaui (9 oo 8 m) +. 21, 84-87.
Kanirjanu (3 y.) . . > » 25, 38.
Calibhaya (1 y.) . . eee ee 21, 89~—40,
Sivali Revati (4 months) « see ee D1, 40—41.
Nlanaga (6 y.) 4 2h id eeag:
Siva Candamukha ic y7 ie) soe wT, 44—45,
Tissa Yasalila (8 y. 7 m. 2) eS eS

_Subha (Gy)... 2. 1 1 wee 2, 4748.


' Vasabha (44 y.)- 2. 2 6 we 22, ETL
Vaiikanisikatissa (3 y. iS 22, 12. 27.
Gajabahukagémani (22 y.) 2. 2... 22, 183-14. 28,
Mahallanfga (6 y.). . . . 2 . . . 22, 15—17. 29.


«Bhatutissa (24 y)>. 2 2. 2 1 1 1.) 22, 18 — 282. 80,
Kanittha-Tissa (18 y.). . soe 6 2 22, 23—25. 31.
Khujjaniga (2 y.) .

Kuijanaga (1 ) See, dated i 22, 26. 82. 83.

Sirindga (19 y. BE sa, AS ae 22, 34-36.
Abhays 4) (2 a BPs “ay fo eh Ger waite 99, BIN BR:
Tissa4) (22 y.) 2... 1. ee.) 22, 8945,
Siriniga (2y.) 2... 2. 1...) 29, 46—47,
fijaya (ly... fide a OR Bhs
S~cuatissa (Asamgatissa) (4 ” soe) 22, 4850. 52.
Samgbabodhi (2 y.). so. 28, 58. BA.
Abhaya Meghavanga (13 9. woe.) 22, 55-60,
Jetth-tissa CRORES ices de sa ie SG Laeh Ge 22, 61—65.
Mahisena Qi Yoo. 5 2 2 wee (29, 66—76.


“ * According to the Mabavams
+6 months accotding to the amsa.

3) According to the MahAvams years and 8 months. . -
4) In the Mahavamsa, Tissa and Abbaya are transposed, and to Abhay Sealy eight
years are given.


ears and § months,


~—


Baeuix, printed by A. W. ScHave.
