# The Secret Doctrine Vol 1: Cosmogenesis (Blavatsky, 1888)

*Extracted from archive.org PDF | 772 pages in source*

---

6? 561 .B52 V 1
T B h l e a v a s f e s c k r y e , t d H o . c ' t P r . i n 1 e 8 31-1891

---PAGE BREAK---

THE SECRET DOCTRINE

---PAGE BREAK---

Newnham, Cowell & Gripper, Ltd.,
Printers,
75, Chiswell Street,
London, E.G. i.

---PAGE BREAK---

^\^N OF PR/iV^.
SEP 22 1.927
THE
Secret Doctrine :
THE SYNTHESIS
OF
SCIENCE, RELIGION, AND PHILOSOPHY.
BY
H. P. BLAVATSKY.
AUTHOR OF "ISIS UNVEII,ED.
THIRD AND REVISED EDITION.
SATYAT NASTI PARO DHARMAH.
"There is no Religion higher than Truth."
Volume I.
COSMOGENESIS.
LONDON :
The Theosophical Publishing House,
1S93.
Reprinted 1902, 1905. 1908, 1911, 1913, 1918, 1921.

---PAGE BREAK---

^^ Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1888, by H. P. Blavatsky,
ill the Office of the Librariati of Congress at Washington, D.C."
ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HAIyly.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

---PAGE BREAK---

This Work
I D edicate to all True Theosophists,
In every Country,
And of every Race,
For they called it f orth, and for them it w as recorded.

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

This Work
I D edicate to all True Theosophists,
In every Country,
And of every Race,
For they called it f orth, and for them it w as recorded.

---PAGE BREAK---

TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Introduction .... I
The Need of .such a Book 3
The Antiquity of Documents and MSS. 7
What the Book is Intended to Do 12
Proem .......
The Oldest MSS. in the World and its Symbolism
The One Life ......
The Secret Doctrine— Pantheism — Atheism 35
"Space" in all Religions and in Occultism .
Seven Cosmic Elements — Seven Races of Mankind 37 67 69
The Three Propositions of the Secret Doctrine
Description of the Stanzas from the Book of Dzyan
PART I.
31
31
Cosmic Evolution.
32
STANZA I.
Seven Stanzas from the Book of Dzyan 55 40 83
Commentaries .
42
Time and Universal Mind 85
87
The Cau.ses of Being . 48
The Seven Sublime- Lords 73
The Causes of Existence 75
The One Form of Existence 7 7 9 7
81
Alaya, the Universal Soul
Can the Finite conceive the Infinite.?
STANZA II.
The Builders
71
The Absolute Knows Itself Not
The Germ of Life

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

89
Vlll CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Astral Light is not Anima Mundi
Divine Thought
STANZA III.
The Awakening of Cosmos 103
The Universe, a Flitting Shadow 93
Nature's Symbols 95
The Churning of the Ocean 97 109
Darkness and Light 99
Androgynous Deities . lOI 113
The Serpent Symbol .
The Magical Agent ■. 110075
I Am That I Am
91
Primeval Differentiations
III -15
The Web of Being »
117
Conscious Electricity .
119
STANZA IV. 91
The Septenary Hierarchies 0 > * o 0 e ol 13
125
The Seven Mystic Senses • • •
The Vehicle of the Universe . ^ 129
The Immaculate Conceptions. • • • 121
The Potency of Speech and vSouiid .
• 123
The Seven Senses »
The Boundless Circle .
* 0 • . 127
Fire, the Great Symbol of Deity • ■ •
133
The Stellar Sons of Light . .
The Divine Recorders . • • • 135
131
137 139
STANZA V.
143
Fohat : the Child of the Septenary Hierarchies 131
The Celestial Buddhas 145
The Theogony of the Creators
147
149
The Protean Spirit-Substance
The Correlation of the Gods . 153
The Seven Worlds 141
The Antiquity of Physical Sciences 155
The One Flame .
The Winged Wheels .
Monism and Materialism
The Four Celestial Beings
The Lipika 151
The Ring " Pass Not" .

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

iX
CONTENTS.
PAGE.
The God of Man and the God of the Ant
163
The Day of "Come To Us" . 165
167
STANZA VI 169
160
Our "World, its Growth and Development .
The Mystery of the Female I/Ogos . 161
From No-Number to Number Seven
Were the Ancients Ignorant of the Physical Scien ces?
The Sleep of the Eternal Mother 1 1 7 7 7 9
The Cosmic Plane, an Illusion
Primordial Substance, a Reality 171
183
Laplace's Mistake
185
A Digression
A few Earl}' Misconceptions concerning Planets, Rounds and Man 1 1 8 8 7 9
Descending and Reascending States 176
Exchange of Life-Principles .
Opinions Differ and yet Agree 181 19139 3
The Transmigrations of the Ego
A Readjustment of Facts 195
Like Questions, like Answers , 197
199
An Authoritative Letter
The Number 777 191
The Monadic Evolutions 203
Additional Facts and Explanations concerning the Globes and the Monads 205
Transfer of Life-Elements 20270
9
The Monadic Host
The Elemental Kingdoms
Monads and Atoms 201 213
The Lunar Ancestors .
The Fourth Globe
2
2
1
1
5
7
Man or Ape ; which was First ?
219
An Erroneous Opinion .
A Master's Letter 211 223
The Preliminary Creation of Man
225
The First Cause of Sin
The Codex Nazarc^us repeats the Allegory
2 22 27
9
Ilda-Baoth -Jehovah
The Seven Planes 221 233
The War in Heaven
The Birth of the Worlds
The Seven Grades of Initiation
The Lost Canon of Proportion
The Origin of Devotion
The Creative Powers . 231

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

233
235
237
CONTENTS.
239
STANZA VII. 243
PAGE.
The Parents of Man on Earth 245
One Parent Flame, Countless Flames
Teachings Contrasted .
247
249
The Hierarchies of Spirits
Nature-Spirits, or Elementals 253
241
The Mystery of Being .
The Ancestry of Man . 255 257
The "Seven Souls" in Egyptology 259
The Moon God .
263
Jehovah a Female Sephira
The Origin of Man
251
265
Dii Sunt Demones Inversi
267
The Immortal Root 269
Chaldsean Metaphysics 273
The True and the False Kabbalah
261
Occult and Kabbalistic Doctrines 275
Occultists and Kabbalists Differ 277
Spirit Alone is Helpless on Earth
The "Devourers"
279
The Four Dimensions of Space
271
283
Oceans of Carbonic Acid 285
The Great Magic Agent 287
Akasha is not Ether
289
Atoms are Invisible Lives
Occult Chemistry
281
293
The Fiery Lives
Man, the Shadow of his Prototype 295
Earth Peopled from Heaven . 297 299
The "Second Advent" .
Summing Up
290
291
The Upanishads
A Recapitulation
The Guiding Intelligence of the Universe
The Unity of All in Nature .
The Three Universes .
Matter is the Shadow of Spirit
The Yliaster of Paracelsus
Hermes Christianized . 303
The Eternal alone is Real 305
A Few Occult Aphorisms 309
Extracts from an Eastern Private Commentary hitherto Secret 307
309
Yoga Powers . . * 301
Akasha . . . • 313
315
Nothing New under the Sun .
317

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XI
CONTENTS.
PART II.
The Evolution of Symbolism.
SECTION I.
?AGE.
Symbolism and Ideographs
The Egyptian Cat-Symbol
Magic Potency of Sound
The Mystery Language 3 3 2 2 5 7
SECTION II.
The Mystery Language and its Keys ...... 329 321
Eg}-pt's many Religions ..... •• 333313
The Great Pyramid Measures ..... • 335
The Quadrature of the Circle ..... • 337
Truth must Prevail at Last ..... • 339
Moses and the Ark of Bulrushes copied from Sargon
Occult Numbers ...... .. 334413
Identity of the Ancient Symbols .... . 345
The "Satanic" Races ......
SECTION III.
Primordial Substance and Divine Thought ..... 347
Divine Thought ...... 349
The Universal Illusion .....
Pater Omnipotens ^ther ...... 353
The Cosmogenesis of Manu ......
The Seven Prakritis . . . . . 355
357
The Gods of "Genesis" ...... 359
The Mystic Fire .......
^ther ....... 351
363
SECTION IV.
Chaos: Theos: Kosmos . ........ 365
The Soul of the World 367 361
The Birth of Mind 369
The Mystic Elements ....... • •
SECTION V.
On the Hidden Deity, its Symbols and Glyphs 373
The Gnosis of Marcus . . , . .
The Great Mind 375
371
377

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Xll CONTENTS.
PAG3E7.9
Symbols of the Creative Powers
International Correlation of Gods
Ancient Symbology
383
SECTION VI.
The Mundane Egg • ■ • • 384
Egg and Ark • • • . 385 381
Lunar and Solar Deities • • • . 387
Fiery Serpents . • *. • . 389
The Winged Globe • • • •• 3399i3
.
Tvro Aspects of "God"
SECTION VII.
The Days and Nights of Brahma
Three Kinds of Pralaya 3 3 9 9 5 7
399
The Reabsorption of All
A Kabalistic Key 403
The Coming of Night . 405
The Return of Moru .
SECTION VIII.
401
The Lotus, as a Universal Symbol
The Ideal becoming Material . 4 4 0 0 7 9
Hebrew Anthropomorphism .
Brahman and Semite . 413
The Letter M .
406
SECTION IX
415
The Moon; Deus Lunus, Phcebe 411
417
419
The Christian Lunar God
The Physiological Key to the Moon Symbol
The " Double Womb"
423
An Allegory from the Zohar .
425
Hecate-Luna the Counterpart of Jehovah
429
The Moon Bi-Sexual . 427
The Dignity of Sais
Ante-historical Catholicism 443231
Identity of Typology .
431

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

xni
CONTENTvS.
rSshEiCp TION X.
• P A G4E3.4
Tree, Serpent, and Crocodile Worship . 435
The Serpent, the vSymbol of Initiaattiioonn • 437
The Ashvattha Tree . 439
.
"Sevening"
The Dual Logos
SECTION XI.
Demon est Deus Inversus 443
No I/ife without Death 445
441
Theological Etymologies 447
449
The Angels Slandered .
The War of the Gods .
453
Wilson's Criticism Criticized 455
The Deception of the Gods
SECTION XII.
457 451
The Theogony of the Creative Gods
459
Jehovah not the Supreme Deity
The Primeval Theogony of the Vedantiiis 463
Synonyms of the Logos
465
"Female" Logoi
446697
The Pythagorean Idea
Antiquity of the Pyramids
Cosmic Gods
473
Incredible, but True 461
The Same Idea in Confucianism 4 47 77 5
The Myster}' of Blackness
God is our Higher Self 479
471
SECTION XIII.
The Seven Creations .
The Seven Creations of the Puranas 483
The Ogdoad ....
The Primary and Secondary Creations 485
Many Versions of the One Truth 487
489
The Seven Creations .
449830
Who the Kumaras are .
495
481
The "Virgin Ascetics" 497
Importance of the Number Seven

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XIV CONTENTS.
SECTION XIV
PAG4E9.7
The Four Elements 499
On the Elements
The Cosmic Gods
St. Paul Believed in Cosmic Gods
503
Jehovah, a God of the Elements
505
Astarte and the Virgin Mary. 507
Physical Forces, the Vehicles of the Elements 509
501
SECTION XV.
On Kwan-Shi-Yin and Kwan-Yiu
Diseased Imagination .....
Crinolines, or the Dragon-Garb? 513
PART III.
Addenda. 510
517 511
On Occult and Modern Science
SECTION I.
Reasons for these Addenda
517
Forces are Devas and Genii . 519
Light is both Spirit and Matter
SECTION II.
523
Modern Physicists are playing at Blind Man's Buff
" Is Light a Body or Not ? " . 525
A Selection of Contradictory Hypotheses . 521
529
Actio in Distans ..... 527
Cauchy's Views ......
SECTION III.
Is Gravitation a Law ? .
533
Gravity or what ?
531
Jehovah, one of the Elohim . 535
Newton then and Newton now
Perpetual Motion 5 5 3 3 7 9
Kepler's Ideas .
The Cause of Rotation 543 532
541

---PAGE BREAK---

XV
CONTENTS.
SECTION IV
PAGE.
The Theories of Rotation in Science 544
Contradictory Hypotheses
545
Scientific Aberrations .
547
549
The Paradoxes of Science
Forces are Realities
SECTION V.
The Masks of Science
553
Academical Misnomers
551
The Fixing of Light . 555
What is Force ? 5555 79
They Agree to Disagree
The Mystic Rays
The Causes and the Effects 563 552
What is an Atom ?
565
Chemical Gods .
556679
The Vishishthadvaita System
561
SECTION VI.
An Attack on the Scientific Theory of Force by a Man of Science
573
Dr. Richardson's Heresy ....••
The Spirit and Soul of Kosmos . . . • • 575
SECTION VII.
Life, Force, or Gravity 579 571
577
Sun-force and Earth-force
Pantheism or Monotheism
The Seven Physical Senses 583
The Tree of Life 585
What is Nervous Ether ?
587
The Life Principle 589
SECTION VIII. 581
The Solar Theory
The Heart of the Solar System
The Quintessence of Kosmos 559953
The Original Base
597
Elements and Non-Elements
What is the Directive Force ?
599
590
591

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

603
XVI CONTENTS.
PAG6Eo.i
A Scientific Caduceus . 605
Occultism in Chemistry
66070
9
SECTION IX.
613
615
The Coming Force 6(7
An Unconscious Occultist
Occult Mysteries and Society
Limits to Discoveries . 611
Keely's Ether . T 619
A Premature Discovery
What is the New Force ? 623
625
SECTION X.
627
629
On the Elements and Atoms .
621
The Whirling of the Soul
The Eternal Pilgrim .
Buddhas of the Three Worlds
The Crest-jewel of Wisdom .
Uranus and Neptune . a 0 a • « , , 6 63 33
5
Cyclic Fall of the Gods
(• a 9 a ft • ■ 631 637
639
SECTION XL
Ancient Thought in Modern Dress
Chemistry and Occult Science
The Trinity in Unity .
Genesis of the Elements
643
Puranas versus Royal Society . 641 645
647
SECTION XII.
649
653
Scientific and Esoteric Evidence for, and Objections to, the Modern Nebular 655
Theory
Modern Science and Occultism
657
Forces are Emanations
Unanswerable Queries .
What are the Nebulae.^
651
Cometary Matter
Wnat is Primitive Matter ?
The Future Synthesis .

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

659
CONTENTS. XVll 663
665
SECTION XIII 667
PAGE.
Forces— Modes of Motion or latelligences ? 658
Kant and Occultism
Mind in Nature .
661
Occult and Physical Sciences
669
Plurality of Worlds
The Geology of Enoch
673
675
SECTION XIV. 6 6 7 7 7 9
Gods, Monads, and Atoms
683
Who are the Blind ?
The Mathematical Point 671 685
Space, Force, and Matter 6 6 8 8 7 9
Phantoms of the Mind
Atomic Souls
693
The Chemistry of the Future
681
Aryan and Western Science
Hermes or Huxley ?
Leibnitz and Occultism
Spinoza and Leibnitz . 695
The Nature of the Monad
Spirit and Matter One 6916 6 9 9 7 9
SECTION XV.
Cyclic Evolution and Karma .
Is Man a God or a Beast ?
The Swing of Karma .
The Network of Destiny
703
Cvclic Wheels within Wheels
Karma-Nemesis 705
Ancient and Modern Prophecies 707
709
Astrology a Science
701
SECTION XVI.
The Zodiac and its Antiquity
The Zodiac in the Bible
Antiquity of Zodiac 713
The Zodiac and the Patriarchs
715
The vSign of Jonas
Chaldseo-Judean Gods .
771179
The Dragon aud the Bull
710
711
721

---PAGE BREAK---

XVlll CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Bailly's Conclusions
The Beginning of Kali Yuga .
727
Hindu Astronomical Methods
729
The Aryan Hindus Vindicated
SECTION XVII.
Summary of the Position
733
The Exact Science of — Negation 735
Forces are Gods
The Aliases of Fohat . 737
Legend and History 739
731

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
The author — the writer, rather — feels it necessary to apologize
for the long delay which has occurred in the appearance of this work.
It has been occasioned by ill-health and the magnitude of the under-
taking. Even the two volumes now issued do not complete the
scheme, nor do these treat exhaustively of the subjects dealt with in
them. A large quantity of material has already been prepared, deal-
ing with the history of Occultism as contained in the lives of the
great Adepts of the Aryan Race, and showing the bearing of Occult
Philosophy upon the conduct of life, as it is and as it ought to be.
Should the present volumes meet with a favourable reception, no
effort will be spared to carr>' out the scheme of the work in its
entiretv.
This scheme, it must be added, was not in contemplation when
the preparation of the work was first announced. As originally
announced, it was intended that The Secret Doctrine should be
an amended and enlarged version of his Unveiled. It was, how-
ever, soon found that the explanations which could be added to
those already put before the world, in the last-named and other
works dealing with Esoteric Science, were such as to require
a different method of treatment; and consequently the present
volumes do not contain, in all, twenty pages extracted from his
Unveiled.
The author does not feel it necessary to ask the indulgence of her
readers and critics for the many defects of literary style, and the

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XX PREFACE.
imperfect English which may be found in these pages. She is a
foreigner, and her knowledge of the language was acquired late in
life. The English tongue is employed because it offers the most
widely-diffused medium for conveying the truths which it had
become her duty to place before the world.
These truths are in no sense put forward as a revelation; nor does
the author claim the position of a revealer of mystic lore, now made
public for the first time in the world's history. For what is contained
in this work is to be found scattered throughout thousands of
volumes embodying the Scriptures of the great x^siatic and early
European religions, hidden under gl3^ph and symbol, and hitherto
left unnoticed because of this veil. What is now attempted is to
gather the oldest tenets together and to make of them one harmo-
nious and unbroken whole. The sole advantage which the writer
has over her predecessors, is that she need not resort to personal
speculations and theories. For this work is a partial statement of
what she herself has been taught by more advanced students, sup-
plemented, ina few details only, by the results of her own study and
observation. The publication of many of the facts herein stated has
been rendered necessary by the wild and fanciful speculations in
which many Theosophists and students of Mysticism have indulged,
during the last few years, in their endeavour, as they imagined, to
work out a complete system of thought from the few facts previously
communicated to them.
It is needless to explain that this book is not the Secret Doctrine
in its entirety, but a select number of fragments of its fundamental
tenets, special attention being paid to some facts which have been
seized upon by various writers, and distorted out of all resemblance
to the truth.
But it is perhaps desirable to state unequivocally that the teach-

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE. xxi
ings, however fragmentary and incomplete, contained in these
volumes, do not belong to the Hindu, the Zoroastrian, the Chaldaean,
or the Eg}'ptian religion, nor to Buddhism, Islam, Judaism or Chris-
tianity exclusively. The Secret Doctrine is the essence of all these.
Sprung from it in their origins, the various religious schemes are
now made to merge back into their original element, out of which
every mystery and dogma has grown, developed, and become
materialized.
It is more than probable that the book will be regarded by a large
section of the public as a romance of the wildest kind ; f or who has
ever even heard of the Book of Dzyan?
The writer, therefore, is fully prepared to take all the responsi-
bility for w hat is contained in this work, and even to face the charge
of having invented the whole of it. That it has many shortcomings
she is fully aware; all that she claims for it is that, romantic as it
may seem to many, its logical coherence and consistency entitle this
new Genesis to rank, at any rate, on a level with the ''working
hypotheses" so freely accepted by Modern Science. Further, it
claims -consideration, not by reason of any appeal to dogmatic
authority, but because it closely adheres to Nature, and follows the
laws of uniformity and analogy.
The aim of this work may be thus stated : to show that Nature
is not "a fortuitous concurrence of atoms," and to assign to man
his rightful place in the scheme of the Universe; to rescue from
degradation the archaic truths which are the basis of all reli-
gions; to uncover, to some extent, the fundamental unity from
which they all spring; finally, to show that the Occult side of
Nature has never been approached by the Science of modern
civilization.
If this is in any degree accomplished, the writer is content. It is

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

xxii PREFACE.
written in the service of humanit)-, and by humanity and the future
generations it must be judged. Its author recognizes no inferior
court of appeal. Abuse she is accustomed to; calumny she is daily
acquainted with ; at slander she smiles in silent contempt.
De mmimt's non curat lex.
H. P. B.
lyONDON, October^ 1888.

---PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE TO THE THIRD AND REVISED EDITION.
In preparing tliis edition for the press, we have striven to correct
minor points of detail in literaiy form, without touching at all more
important matters. Had H. P. Blavatsky lived to issue the new
edition, she would doubtless have corrected and enlarged it to a very
considerable extent. That this is not done is one of the many
minor losses caused by the one great loss.
Awkward phrases, due to imperfect knowledge of English, have
"been corrected ; most of the quotations have been verified, and exact
references given — a work involving great labour, as the references
in the previous editions were often very loose; a uniform system of
transliteration for Sanskrit words has been adopted. Rejecting the
form most favoured by Western Orientalists as being misleading to
the general reader — we have given to the consonants not present in
our English alphabet combinations that approximately express their
sound-values, and we have carefully inserted quantities, wherever
they occur, on the vowels. In a few instances we have incorporated
notes in the text, but this has been very sparingly done, and only
when they obviously formed part of it.
We have added a copious Index for the assistance of students,
and have bound it separately, so that reference to it may be facili-
tated. For the great labour in this we, and all students, are the
debtors of Mr. A. J. Faulding.
Annie Besant.
G. R. S. Mead.
London, 1893.

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY.
Gently to hear, kindly to judge.
Shakespeare.
Since the appearance of Theosophical literature in England, it has
become customary to call its teachings "Esoteric Buddhism." And,
having become a habit— as an old proverb based on daily experience
has it — "Error runs down an inclined plane, while Truth has to
laboriously climb its way up hill."
Old truisms are often the wisest. The human mind can hardly remain
entirely free from bias, and decisive opinions are often formed before a
thorough examination of a subject from all its aspects has been made.
This is said with reference to the prevailing double mistake (a) of limit-
ing Theosophy to Buddhism ; and (d) of confounding the tenets of the
religious philosophy preached by Gautama, the Buddha, with the
doctrines broadly outlined in Esoteric Buddhism. Any thing more
erroneous than this could hardly be imagined. It has enabled our
enemies to find an effective weapon against Theosophy, because, as an
eminent Pali scholar very pointedly expressed it, there was in the
volume named " neither Esotericism nor Buddhism." The esoteric
truths, presented in Mr. Sinnett's work, ceased to be esoteric from the
moment they were made public ; nor did the book contain the religion
of Buddha, but simply a few tenets from a hitherto hidden teaching,
which are now explained and supplemented by many more in the
present volumes. And even the latter, though giving out many funda-
mental tenets from the Secret Doctrine of the East, raise but a small
corner of the dark veil. For no one, not even the greatest living Adept,
would be permitted to, or could— even if he would— give out promis-
cuously to a mocking, unbelieving world that which has been so
effectually concealed from it for long aeons and ages.
Esoteric Buddhism was an excellent work with a ver>' unfortunate
title, though it meant no more than does the title of this work, Thb

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

2 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
Secret Doctrine. It proved unfortunate, because people are always
in the habit of judging things by their appearance rather than by their
meaning, and because the error has now become so universal, that even
most of the Fellows of the Theosophical Society have fallen victims to
the same misconception. From the first, however, protests were raised
by Brahmans and others against the title ; and, in justice to myself, I
must add that Esoteric Buddhism was presented to me as a completed
volume, and that I was entirely unaware of the manner in which the
author intended to spell the word " Budh-ism."
This has to be laid directly at the door of those who, having been the
first to bring the subject under public notice, neglected to point out the
difference between "Buddhism" — the religious system of ethics preached
by the lyord Gautama, and so named from his title of Buddha, the
"Knlightened" — and "Budhism," irom. Budha, Wisdom, or Knowledge
(Vidya), the faculty of cognizing, from the Sanskrit root Budh, to know.
We Theosophists of India are ourselves the real culprits, although, at
the time, we did our best to correct the mistake.* To avoid this
deplorable misnomer was easy ; the spelling of the word had only to be
altered, and by common consent both pronounced and written
" Budhism," instead of " Buddhism." Nor is the latter term correctly
Spelt and pronounced, as it ought to be called, in English, Buddhafsm,
and its votaries " Buddhaists."
This explanation is absolutely necessary at the beginning of a work
like the present. The Wisdom- Religion is the inheritance of all the
nations, the world over, in spite of the statement made in Esoteric
Buddhism \ that " two years ago {i.e., in 1883), neither I, nor any other
European living, knew the alphabet of the Science, here for the first
time put into a scientific shape," etc. This error must have crept in
through inadvertence. The present writer knew all that is " divulged "
in Esoteric Buddhism, and much more, ma7iy years before it became her
duty (in 1880) to impart a small portion of the Secret Doctrine to two
European gentlemen, one of whom was the author of Esoteric Buddhism ;
and surely the present writer has the undoubted, though to her, rather
equivocal, privilege of being a European by birth and education.
Moreover, a considerable part of the philosophy expounded by Mr,
Sinnett was taught in America, even before Isis Unveiled was published,
to two Europeans and to my colleague. Colonel H. S. Olcott. Of the
three teachers the latter gentleman has had, the first was a Hungarian
• See Thessophist, June, 1883. t Preface to the original edition.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 3
Initiate, the second an Egyptian, the third a Hindu. As permitted,
Colonel Olcott has given out some of this teaching in various ways ; if
the other two have not, it has been simply because they were not
allowed, their time for public work having not yet come. But for
others it has, and the appearance of Mr. Sinnett's several interesting
books is a visible proof of the fact. Moreover, it is above everything
important to keep in mind that no Theosophical book acquires the least
additional value from pretended authority.
Adi, or Adhi Budha, the One, or the First, and Supreme Wisdom, is
a term used by Ar3^asanga in his secret treatises, and now by all the
mystic Northern Buddhists. It is a Sanskrit term, and an appellation
given by the earliest Aryans to the Unknown Deity; the word
"Brahma" not being found in the Vedas and the early works. It
means the Absolute Wisdom, and Adibhuta is translated by Fitzedward
Hall, " the primeval uncreated cause of all." ^ons of untold duration
must have elapsed, before the epithet of Buddha was so humanized, so
to speak, as to allow of the term being applied to mortals, and finally
appropriated to one whose unparalleled virtues and knowledge caused
him to receive the title of the " Buddha of Wisdom Unmoved." Bodha
means the innate possession of divine intellect or understanding;
Buddha, the acquirement of it by personal efforts and merit; while
Buddhi is the faculty of cognizing, the channel through which divine
knowledge reaches the Ego, the discernment of good and evil, also
divine conscience, and the Spiritual Soul, which is the vehicle of
Atma. "When Buddhi absorbs our Ego-tism (destroys it) with all its
Vikaras, Avalokiteshvara becomes manifested to us, and Nirvana, or
Mukti, is reached," Mukti being the same as Nirvana, i.e., freedom from
the trammels of Maya or Illusion. Bodhi is likewise the name of a
particular state of trance-condition, called Samadhi, during which the
subject reaches the culmination of spiritual knowledge.
Unwise are those who, in their blind and, in our age, untimely hatred
of Buddhism, and, by reaction, of Budhism, deny its esoteric teachings,
which are those also of the Brahmans, simply because the name sug-
gests what to them, as Monotheists, are noxious doctrines. Unwise
is the correct term to use in their case. For in this age of crass and
illogical materialism, the Esoteric Philosophy alone is calculated to
withstand the repeated attacks on all and everything man holds most
dear and sacred in his inner spiritual life. The true philosopher,
the student of Esoteric Wisdom, entirely loses sight of personalities.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

4 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
dogmatic beliefs and special religions. Moreover, Esoteric Philosophy-
reconciles all religions, strips every one of its outward human garments,
and shows the root of each to be identical with that of every other great
religion. It proves the necessity of a Divine Absolute Principle in
Nature. It denies Deity no more than it does the sun. Esoteric
Philosophy has never rejected God in Nature, nor Deit}' as the absolute
and abstract Ens. It onl}^ refuses to accept any of the gods of the
so-called monotheistic religions, gods created by man in his own image
and likeness, a blasphemous and sorry caricature of the Ever-Unknow-
able. Furthermore, the records we mean to place before the reader
embrace the esoteric tenets of the whole world since the beginning of
our humanity, and Buddhistic Occultism occupies therein only its
legitimate place, and no more. Indeed, the secret portions of the Da}i
or J a nna (Dhyana)* oi Gautama's metaphysics — grand as they appear to
one unacquainted with the tenets of the Wisdom-Religion of antiquity
— are but a very small portion of the whole. The Hindu reformer
limited his public teachings to the purely moral and physiological
aspect of the Wisdom-Religion, to ethics and man alone. Things
"unseen and incorporeal," the mysteries of Being outside our terrestrial
sphere, the great Teacher left entirely untouched in his public lectures,
reserving the Hidden Truths for a select circle of his Arhats. The
latter received their Initiation at the famous Saptaparna Cave (the
Sattapanni of Mahavansa) near Mount Baibhar (the Webhara of the
Pali MSS.). This cave was in Rajagriha, the ancient capital of
Magadha, and was the Cheta Cave of Fa-hian, as is rightly suspected by
some archaeologists.!
Time and human imagination made short work of the purity and
philosophy of these teachings, once that they were transplanted from
the secret and sacred circle of the Arhats, during the course of their
work of proselytism, into a soil less prepared for metaphysical con-
ceptions than India; i.e., once they were transferred into China, Japan,
Siam, and Burmah. How the pristine purity of these grand revelations
was dealt with may be seen in studying some of the so-called "esoteric"
Buddhist schools of antiquity in their modern garb, not only in China
* Dan, in modem Chinese and Tibetan phonetics Ckhan, is the general term for the esoteric schools
and their literature. In the old books, the word Janna is defined as " reforming- one's self by
meditation and knowledge," a second inner birth. Hence Dzan, Djan phonetically; the Book of
Dzyan. See Edkins, Chinese Buddhism, p. 129, note.
t Mr. Beglor, the chief engitieer at Buddhagaya, and a distinguished archsologist, was the first, we
believe, to discover it.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY, 5
and other Buddhist countries in general, but even in not a few schools
of Tibet, which have been left to the care of uninitiated llamas and
Mongolian innovators.
Thus the reader is asked to bear in mind the ver>^ important differ-
ence between orthodox Buddhism — i.e., the public teachings of Gautama,
the Buddha — and his esoteric Budhism. His Secret Doctrine, however,
differed in no wise from that of the initiated Brahmans of his da5^ The
Buddha was a child of Ar}'an soil, a born Hindu, a Kshatriya and a
disciple of the Twice-born (the initiated Brahmans) or Dvijas. His
teachings, therefore, could not be different from their doctrines, for the
whole Buddhist reform consisted merely in giving out a portion of that
which had been kept secret from every man outside of the "enchanted"
circle of ascetics and Temple-Initiates. Unable, owing to his pledges,
to teach all that had been imparted to him, though the Buddha taught
a philosophy built upon the ground-work of the true esoteric know-
ledge, he g ave to the world only its outward material body and kept its
soul for his Elect. Many Chinese scholars among Orientalists have
heard of the "Soul-Doctrine." None seem to have understood its real
meaning and importance.
That doctrine was preserved secretly — too secretly, perhaps — within
the sanctuary. The mystery that shrouded its chief dogma and aspira-
tion— Nirvana — has so tried and irritated the curiosity of those scholars
who have studied it, that, unable to solve it logically and satisfactoril}'
by untying its Gordian knot, they have cut it through by declaring
that Nirvana means absolute annihilation.
Toward the end of the first quarter of this century a distinct class of
literature appeared in the world, which with every year became more
defined in its tendency. Being based, soi-disant, on the scholarly
researches of Sanskritists and Orientalists in general, it was considered
scientific. Hindii, Egyptian, and other ancient religions, myths, and
emblems were made to yield anj^thing the symbologist wanted them to
yield, and thus often the rude outward form was given out in place of
the inner meaning. Works, most remarkable for their ingenious deduc-
tions and speculations, circulo vicioso — foregone conclusions generally
taking the place of premisses in the syllogisms of more than one San-
skrit and Pali scholar — appeared rapidly in succession, over-flooding the
libraries with dissertations on phallic and sexual worship rather than
on real symbolog>% and each contradicting the other.
This is the true reason, perhaps, why the outline of a few funda----PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

6 THE s:ecRET doctrine;.
mental truths from the Secret Doctrine of the Archaic Ages is now
permitted to see the light, after long millenniums of the most profound
silence and secrecy. I say advisedly "a few truths," because that
which must remain unsaid could not be contained in a hundred such
volumes, nor could it be imparted to the present generation of Saddu-
cees. But even the little that is now given is better than complete
silence upon these vital truths. The world of to-day, in its mad career
towards the unknown, which the Physicist is too ready to confound
with the unknowable, whenever the problem eludes his grasp, is rapidly
progressing on the reverse plane to that of spirituality. It has now
become a vast arena, a true valley of discord and of eternal strife,
a necropolis, wherein lie buried the highest and the most holy aspira-
tions of o ur Spirit-Soul. That soul becomes with every new generation
more paralyzed and atrophied. The " amiable infidels and accom-
plished profligates" of Society, spoken of by Greeley, care little for the
revival of the dead sciences of the past ; b ut there is a fair minority of
earnest students who are entitled to learn the few truths that may be
given to them now ; and 7iow much more than ten years ago, when his
Unveiled appeared, or even when the later attempts to explain the
mysteries of esoteric science were published.
One of the greatest and perhaps the most serious objection to the
correctness and reliability of the whole work will be the preliminary
Stanzas. How can the statements contained in them be verified ?
True, though a great portion of the Sanskrit, Chinese, and Mongolian
works quoted in the present volumes is known to some Orientalists,
yet the chief work — that one from which the Stanzas are given — is not
in the possession of European I^ibraries. The Book of Dzyan (or
Dzan) is utterly unknown to our Philologists, or at any rate was never
heard of by them under its present name. This is, of course, a great
drawback to those who follow the methods of research prescribed by
official Science; but to students of Occultism, and to every genuine
Occultist, this will be of little moment. The main body of the doc-
trines given, however, is found scattered throughout hundreds and
thousands of Sanskrit MSS., some already translated — disfigured in their
interpretations, as usual — others still waiting their turn. Every
scholar, therefore, has an opportunity of verifying the statements
herein made, and of checking most of the quotations. A few new
facts, new to the profane Orientalist only, and passages quoted from
the Commentaries will be found difficult to trace. Several of the---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. y
teachings also have hitherto been transmitted orally, yet even these
in every instance are hinted at in the almost countless volumes of
Brahmanical, Chinese and Tibetan temple-literature.
However it may be, and whatsoever is in store for the writer
through malevolent criticism, one fact is quite certain. The members
of several esoteric schools — the seat of which is beyond the Himalayas,
and whose ramifications may be found in China, Japan, India, Tibet,
and even in Syria, and also South America — claim to have in their
possession the sum total of sacred and philosophical works in MSS.
and print, all the works, in fact, that have ever been written, in what-
ever language or character, since the art of writing began, from the
ideographic hieroglyphs down to the alphabet of Cadmus and the
Devanagari.
It has been constantly claimed that, ever since the destruction of the
Alexandrian Library,* every work of a character that might lead the
profane to the ultimate discover}^ and comprehension of some of the
mysteries of the Secret Science, owing to the combined efforts of the
members of these Brotherhoods, has been diligently searched for. It
is added, moreover, by those who know, that once found all such
works were destroyed, save three copies of each which were preserved
and safely stored away. In India, the last of these precious manu-
scripts were secured and hidden during the reign of the Emperor
Akbar.
Prof Max MiiUer shows that no bribes or threats of Akbar could
extort the original text of the Vedas from the Brahmans, and yet
boasts that European Orientalists have it.f That Europe has the
complete text is exceedingly doubtful, and the future may have very
disagreeable surprises in store for the Orientalists.
It is maintained, furthermore, that every sacred book of this kind,
the text of which was not sufficiently veiled in symbolism, or which
had any direct references to the ancient mysteries, was first carefully
copied in cryptographic characters, such as to defy the art of the best
and cleverest palaeographer, and then destroyed to the last copy.
During Akbar's reign, some fanatical courtiers, displeased at the
Emperor's sinful prying into the religions of the infidels, themselves
helped the Brahmans to conceal their MSS. Such was Badaoni,
• See Isis Unveiled, Vol. II, p. 27.
t Introduction to Uie Science of Religion, p. 23.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

8 . THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
who had an tmdisguised horror of Akbar's mania for idolatrous religions.
Badaoni, in his Muntakhab at Tawarikh, writes :
As they [the Shramana and Brahmans] surpass other learned men in their treatises
on morals and on physical and religious sciences, and reach a high degree in their
knowledge of the future, in spiritual power, and human perfection, they brought
proofs based on reason and testimony, . . . and inculcated their doctrines so firmly
.... that no man .... could now raise a doubt in his Majesty even if moun-
tains were to crumble to dust, or the heavens were to tear asunder His
Majesty relished inquiries into the sects of these infidels, who cannot be counted, so
numerous they are, and who have no end of revealed books*
This work "was kept secret and, was not published till the reign of
Jahangir."
Moreover in all the large and wealthy Lamasaries, there are subter-
ranean crypts and cave-libraries, cut in the rock, whenever the Gonpa
and lyhakhang are situated in the mountains. Beyond the Western
Tsaydam, in the solitary passes of Kuen-lun there are several such
hiding-places. Along the ridge of Altyn-tag, whose soil no European
foot has ever trodden so far, there exists a certain hamlet, lost in a
deep gorge. It is a small cluster of houses, a hamlet rather than a
monastery, with a poor-looking temple in it, and one old lyama, a
hermit, living near by to watch it. Pilgrims say that the subterranean
galleries and halls under it contain a collection of books, the number
of which, according to the accounts given, is too large to find room
even in the British Museum.
According to the same tradition the now desolate regions of the
waterless land of Tarim — a veritable wilderness in the heart of
Turkestan — were in days of old covered with flourishing and wealthy
cities. At present, a few verdant oases only relieve its dread solitude.
One such, carpeting the sepulchre of a vast city buried under the
sandy soil of the desert, belongs to no one, but is often visited by
Mongolians and Buddhists. The tradition also speaks of immense
subterranean abodes, of large corridors filled with tiles and C3dinders.
It may be an idle rumour, and it may be an actual fact.
All this will very likely provoke a smile of doubt. But before the
reader rejects the truthfulness of the reports, let him pause and reflect
over the following well-known facts. The collective researches of
Orientalists, and especially of late years the labours of students of
Comparative Philology and the Science of Religion, have enabled them
' Ain i A kbari, translated by Dr. Blochmann, quoted by Max Miiller, op. cit.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 9
to ascertain that an incalculable number of MSS., and even of printed
works known to have existed, arc now to be 710 more found. They have
disappeared without leaving the slightest trace behind them. Were
they works of no importance they might, in the natural course of
time, have been left to perish, and their very names would have been
obliterated from human memory. But this is not so, for, as now
ascertained, most of them contained the true keys to works still
extant, and now entirely incomprehe?isible, for the greater portion of
their readers, without these additional volumes of commentaries and
explanations.
Such, for instance, are the works of Lao-tse, the predecessor of
Confucius. He is said to have written nine hundred and thirty
books on ethics and religions, and seventy on magic, one thousand
in all. His great work, however, the Tao-te-King, the heart of his
doctrine and the sacred scripture of the Tao-sse, has in it, as Stanislas
Julien shows, only "about 5,000 words,"* hardly a dozen of pages; yet
Professor Max Miiller finds that " the text is unintelligible without
commentaries, so that M. Julien had to consult more than sixty
commentators for the purpose of his translation, the earliest going
back as far as the year 163 B.C.", and not earlier, as we see. During
the four centuries and a half that preceded this "earliest" of the
commentators there was ample time to veil the true L,ao-tse doctrine
from all but his initiated priests. The Japanese, among whom are
now to be found the most learned of the priests and followers of
Lao-tse, simply laugh at the blunders and hypotheses of European
Chinese scholars ; and tradition affirms that the commentaries to which
our Western Sinologues have access are not the real occult records, but
intentional veils, and that the true commentaries, as well as almost all
the texts, have long disappeared from the eyes of the profane.
Of the works of Confucius we read :
If we turn to China, we find that the religion of Confucius is founded on the
Five King and the Four Shu books — in themselves of considerable extent and
surrounded by voluminous Commentaries, without which even the most learned
scholars would not venture to fathom the depth of their sacred canon. t
But they have not fathomed it; and this is the complaint of the
Confucianists, as a very learned member of that body, in Paris, com-
plained in 1 88 1.
• Tao-te-King, p. xxvii. t Max MuUer, op. cit., p. 114.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

lO THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
If our scholars turn to the ancient literature of the Semitic reli-
gions, to t he Scriptures of Chaldea, the elder sister and instructress, if
not the fountain-head of the Mosaic Bible, the basis and starting-
point of Christianity, what do they find ? To perpetuate the
memory of the ancient religions of Babylon, to record the vast cycle
of astronomical observations of the Chaldean Magi, to justify
the tradition of their splendid and preeminently occult literature,,
what now remains? Only a few fragments, which are said to be by
Berosus.
These, however, are almost valueless, even as a clue to the character
of what has disappeared, for they passed through the hands of his
Reverence, the Bishop of Caesarea — that self-constituted censor and
editor of the sacred records of other men's religions — and they doubt-
less to this day bear the mark of his eminently veracious and trust-
worthy hand. For what is the history of this treatise on the once
grand religion of Babylon ?
It was written in Greek for Alexander the Great, by Berosus, a priest
of the temple of Belus, from the astronomical and chronological records
preserved by the priests of that temple — records covering a period of
200,000 years — and is now lost. In the first century B.C. Alexander Poly-
histor made a series of extracts from it, which are also lost. Kusebius
(270-340 A.D.) used these extracts in writing his Chronicon. The
points of resemblance — almost of identity — between the Jewish and
the Chaldean scriptures,* made the latter most dangerous to Eusebius,
in his role of defender and champion of the new faith which had
adopted the former scriptures and together with them an absurd
chronology.
Now it is pretty certain that Eusebius did not spare the Egyptian
synchronistic tables of Manetho — so much so that Bunsenf charges
him with mutilating history most unscrupulously, and Socrates, a
historian of the fifth century, and Syncellus, vice-patriarch of Con-
stantinople int he beginning of the eighth, denounce him as the most
daring and desperate forger. Is it likely, then, that he dealt more
tenderly with the Chaldean records, which were already menacing the
new religion, so rashly accepted?
* Found out and proven only now, through the discoveries made by George Smith (see his
Chaldean Account of Genesis), and which, thanks to this Armenian forger, have misled all the
"civilized nations" for over 1,500 years into accepting Jewish derivations for direct Divine Revela-
tion.
+ Egypt's Place in History, i. 200.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. I I
So that, with the exception of these more than doubtful fragments,
the entire Chaldean sacred literature has disappeared from the eyes of
the profane as completely as the lost Atlantis. A few facts that were
contained in the Berosian History are given later on, and may throw
great light on the true origin of the Fallen Angels, personified by Bel
and the Dragon.
Turning now to the oldest specimen of Aryan literature, the Rig
Veda, the student if he strictly follows in this the data furnished by
the Orientalists themselves, will find that although the Rig Veda
contains only about 10,580 verses, or 1,028 hymns, yet in spite of the
Brdhma7ias and the mass of glosses and commentaries, it is not under-
stood correctly to this day. Why is this so? Evidently because the
Brahmanas, "the scholastic and oldest treatises on the primitive
hymns," themselves require a key, which the Orientalists have failed
to secure.
What, again, do the scholars say of Buddhist literature? Do they
possess it in its completeness? Assuredly not. Notwithstanding the
325 volumes of the Kanjur and Tanjur of the Northern Buddhists,
each volume, we are told, "weighing from four to five pounds,"
nothing, in truth, is known of real Lamaism. Yet the sacred canon
is said in the Saddharmdlankdra* to contain 29,368,000 letters, or,
exclusive of treatises and commentaries, five or six times the amount
of the matter contained in the Bible, which, as Professor Max Miiller
states, rejoices in only 3,567,180 letters. Notwithstanding, then, these
325 volumes (in reality there are 2>33, the Kanjur comprising 108, and
Tanjur 225 volumes), "the translators, instead of supplying us with
correct versions, have interwoven them with their own commentaries,
for the purpose of justifying the dogmas of their several schools." f
Moreover, "according to a tradition preserved by the Buddhist schools,
both of the South and of the North, the sacred Buddhist Canon com-
prised originally 80,000 or 84,000 tracts, but most of them were lost, so
that there remained but 6,000" — as the Professor tells his audience.
Lost, as usual — for Europeans. But who can be quite sure that they
are likewise lost for Buddhists and Brahmans?
Considering the reverence of the Buddhists for every line written
upon Buddha and the Good L,aw, the loss of nearly 76,000 tracts does
• Spence Hardy, The Legends and Theories of the Buddhists, p. 66.
tE. Schlagintweit, Buddhism in Tibet, p. 77.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

12- THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
seem miraculous. Had it been vice versa, every one acquainted with the
natural course of events would subscribe to the statement that, of these
76,000, 5,000 or 6,000 treatises might have been destroyed during the
persecutions in, and emigrations from, India. But as it is well ascer-
tained that the Buddhist Arhats began their religious exodus, for the
purpose of propagating the new faith beyond Kashmir and the Hima-
laj'^as, as early as the year 300 before our era,* and reached China in
the year 61 A.D.,f when Kashyapa, at the invitation of the Kmperor
Ming-ti, went there to acquaint the "Son of Heaven" with the tenets
of Buddhism, it does seem strange to hear the Orientalists speaking
of such a loss as though it were really possible. They do not seem to
allow for one moment the possibility that the texts may be lost only for
the West and for themselves, or that the Asiatic people should have the
unparalleled boldness to keep their most sacred records out of the reach
of foreigners, thus refusing to deliver them to the profanation and mis-
use even of races so "vastly superior" to themselves.
Judging by the expressed regrets and numerous confessions of almost
every one of the Orientalists,:]: the public may feel sufficiently sure,
{a) that the students of ancient religions have indeed very few data
upon which to build such final conclusions as they generally do about
the old faiths, and {U) that such lack of data does not in the least
prevent them from dogmatizing. One would imagine that, thanks to
the numerous records of the Eg>''ptian theogony and mysteries, pre-
served in t he classics and in a number of ancient writers, the rites and
dogmas of Pharaonic Egypt, at least, ought to be well understood;
better, at any rate, than the too abstruse philosophies and Pantheism
of India, of whose religion and language Europe had hardly any idea
before the beginning of the present century. Along the Nile and on
the face of the whole country, there stand to this hour, yearly and
daily exhumed, ever fresh relics which eloquently tell their own history.
Still it is not so. The learned Oxford Philologist himself confesses
the truth by saying:
We see still standing the pyramids, and the ruins of temples and labyrinths,
their walls covered with hieroglyphic inscriptions, and with the strange pictures of
gods and goddesses. On rolls of papyrus, which seem to defy the ravages of time.
* Lassen [Ind. Althersumkunde, II, 1,072) shows a Buddhist monastery erected in the Kailas
Range in 137 B.C. ; and General Cunning-ham, one eariier than that
t Rev. J. Edkins, Chinese Buddhism, p. 87.
X See, for example, Max Miiller's lectures.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

13
INTRODUCTORY.
we have even fragments of what may be called the sacred books of the Eg>'ptians.
Yet, though much has been deciphered in the ancient records of the mysterious
race, the mainspring of the religion of Egypt and the original intention of its
ceremonial worship are far from being fully disclosed to us.*
Here again the mysterious hieroglyphic documents remain, but the
keys by which alone they become intelligible have disappeared.
In fact so little acquainted are our greatest Egyptologists with the
funerary- rites of the Eg}-ptians and the outward marks of the difference
of sex on the mummies, that it has led to the most ludicrous mistakes.
Only a year or two ago, one of this kind was discovered at Boulaq,
Cairo. The mummy of what was considered the wife of an unimportant
Pharaoh, has, thanks to an inscription found on an amulet hung round
its neck, turned out to be that of Sesostris — the greatest King of
Egypt!
Nevertheless, having found that "there is a natural connection
between language and religion"; and that "there was a commofi Aryan
religion before the separation of the Aryan race ; a common Semitic
religion before the separation of the Semitic race; and a common
Turanic religion before the separation of the Chinese and the other
tribes belonging to the Turanian class " ; having, in fact, discovered
only "three ancient centres of religion" and "three centres of
language"; and though as entirely ignorant of those primitive religions
and languages as of their origin — the Professor does not hesitate to
declare "that a truly historical basis for a scientific treatment of the
principal religions of the world" has been gained!
A "scientific treatment" of a subject is no guarantee for its "his-
torical basis"; and with such scarcity of data on hand, no Philologist,
even among the most eminent, is justified in giving out his own
conclusions for historical facts. No doubt, the eminent Orientalist has
thoroughly proved to the world's satisfaction that, according to the
phonetic rules of Grimm's law, Odin and Buddha are two different
personages, quite distinct from each other, and has proved it
scientifically. When, however, he takes the opportunity of saying in
the same breath that Odin "was Vv^orshipped as the supreme deity
during a period long anterior to the age of the Veda and of Homer,"t
he has not the slightest "historical basis" for it, but makes history and
fact subservient to his own conclusions, which may be verv' "scientific"
in the sight of Oriental scholars, but yet very wide of the mark of actual
* op. cit., p. 118. + Op. cit., p. 318.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

14 1*HE SECRET DOCTRINE.
truth. The conflicting views of the various eminent Philologists and
Orientalists, from Martin Haug down to Prof Max Miiller himself, on
the subject of chronolog}^ in the case of the Vedas, are an evident proof
that the statement has no "historical" basis to stand upon, "internal
evidence" being very often a Jack-o'-lantern, instead of a safe beacon
to follow. Nor has the Science of modern Comparative Mythology any
better argument to bring forward to crush the contention of those learned
writers who have insisted for the last century or so that there must
have been "fragments of a primeval revelation, granted to the ancestors
of the whole race of mankind . . . preserved in the temples of Greece
and Italy." For this is what all the Eastern Initiates and Pandits
have been proclaiming to the world from time to time. And while a
prominent Singhalese priest assured the writer that it was well known
that the most important tracts, belonging to the Buddhist sacred canon,
were stored away in countries and places inaccessible to the European Pan-
dits^ the late Svami Dayanand Sarasvati, the greatest Sanskritist of his
day in India, assured some members of the Theosophical Society of the
same fact with regard to ancient Brahmanical works. When told that
Professor Max Miiller had declared to the audiences of his Lectures that
the theory " that there was a primeval preternatural revelation granted to
the fathers of the human race, finds but few supporters at present" —
the holy and learned man laughed. His answer was suggestive. " If
Mr. 'Moksh Mooller' [as he pronounced the name], were a Brahman,
and came with me, I might take him to a gupa cave [a secret crypt]
near Okhee Math, in the Himalayas, where he would soon find out that
what crossed the Kalapani [the black waters of the ocean] from India to
Europe were only the bits of rejected copies of some passages from our sacred
books. There was a ' p rimeval revelation,' and it still exists ; nor will it
ever be lost to the world, but will reappear ; though the Mlechchhas
will of course have to wait."
Questioned further on the point, he would say no more. This was at
Meerut, in 1880.
No doubt the m^^stification played by the Brahmans upon Colonel
Wilford and Sir William Jones, in the last century, at Calcutta, was
cruel, but it had been well deserved, and no one was more to blame in
that affair than the missionaries and Colonel Wilford himself The
former, on the testimony of Sir William Jones himself,* were silly
enough to maintain that "the Hindus were even now almost Christians,
* Asiatic Researches, I, 272.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 1 5
because their Brahmt, Vishnu and Mahesha were no other than the
Christian trinity."* It was a good lesson. It made the Oriental
scholars doubly cautious ; but perchance it has also made some of them
too shy and, in its reaction, has caused the pendulum of foregone
conclusions to swing too much the other way. For "that first supply
from the Brahmanical market," in answer to the demand of Colonel
Wilford, has now created an evident necessity and desire in the
Orientalists to declare nearly every archaic Sanskrit manuscript so
modern as to give the missionaries full justification for availing them-
selves of t heir opportunity. That they do so and to the full extent of
their mental powers, is shown by the absurd attempts of late to prove
that the whole Puranic story about Krishna was plagiarized by the
Brahmans from the Bible ! But the facts cited by the Oxford Professor
in his Lectures concerning the now famous interpolations, for the
benefit, and later on to the sorrow, of Colonel Wilford, do not at all
interfere with the conclusions to which one who studies the Secret
Doctrine must unavoidably come. For, if the results show that
neither the New nor even the Old Testament borrowed anything from
the more ancient religion of the Brahmans and Buddhists, it does not
follow that the Jews have not borrowed all they knew from the Chaldean
records, the latter being mutilated later on by Kusebius. As to the
Chaldeans, they assuredly got their primitive learning from the
Brahmans, for Rawlinson shows an undeniably Vedic influence in the
early mythology of Babylon ; and Colonel Vans Kennedy has long ago
justly declared that Babylonia was, from her origin, the seat of Sanskrit
and Brahman learning. But all such proofs must lose their value, in
the presence of the latest theory worked out by Prof. Max Miiller.
What it is everyone knows. The code of phonetic laws has now become
a universal solvent for every identification and " connection " between
the gods of many nations. Thus, though the Mother of Mercury
(Budha, Thot-Hermes, etc.) was Maia, the mother of Gautama Buddha,
also Maya, and the mother of Jesus, likewise Maya (Illusion, for Mary is
Mare, the Sea, the great Illusion symbolically) — yet these three charac-
ters have no connection, nor can they have any, since Bopp has "laid
down his code of phonetic laws."
In their efforts to collect together the many skeins of unwritten
* See Pdax Miiller, op. cit., pp. 288 et seq. This relates to the clever forgery, on leaves inserted in old
Puranic MSS., and written in correct and archaic Sanskrit, of all that the Pandits had heard from.
Colonel Wilford about Adam and Abraham, Noah and his three sons, etc., etc.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

l6 THE SKCRET DOCTRINE.
hisfoJT, it is a bold step for our Orientalists to take, to deny a priori
everything that does not dove-tail with their special conclusions.
Thus, while new discoveries are daily made of great arts and sciences
having existed far back in the night of time, yet even the knowledge of
writing is refused to some of the most ancient nations, and they are
credited with barbarism instead of culture. Nevertheless traces of an
immense civilization, even in Central Asia, are still to be found. This
civilization is undeniably prehistoric. And how can there be civiliza-
tion without a literature in some form, without annals or chronicles?
Common sense alone ought to supplement the broken links in the
history of departed nations. The gigantic and unbroken wall of the
mountains that hem in the whole table-land of Tibet, from the upper
course of the river Khuan-Khe down to the Karakorum hills, witnessed
a civilization during millenniums of years, and should have strange
secrets to tell mankind. The eastern and central portions of these
regions — the Nan-chan and the Altyn-tag — were once upon a time
covered with cities that could well vie with Babylon. A whole
geological period has swept over the land, since those cities breathed
their last, as the mounds of shifting sand and the sterile and now
dead soil of the immense central plains of the basin of Tarim testify.
The borderlands alone are superficially known to the traveller. Within
those table-lands of sand there is water, and fresh oases are found
blooming there, wherein no European foot has ever yet ventured, or
trodden the now treacherous soil. Among these verdant oases there
are some which are entirely inaccessible even to the profane native
traveller. Hurricanes may "tear up the sands and sweep whole plains
away," they are powerless to destroy that which is be5'ond their reach.
Built deep in the bowels of the earth, the subterranean stores are
secure ; and as their entrances are concealed, there is little fear that
anyone would discover them, even should several armies invade the
sandy wastes where —
Not a pool, not a bush, not a house is seen,
And the mountain-range forms a rugged screen
Round the parch'd flats of the dry, dry desert
But there is no need to send the reader across the desert, when the
same proofs of ancient civilization are found even in comparatively
populated regions of the same country. The oasis of Tchertchen, for
instance, situated about 4,000 feet above the level of the riv^r
Tchertchen- Darya, is now surrounded in every direction by the ruins---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. I7
of archaic towns and cities. There, some 3,000 human beings repre-
sent the relics of about a hundred extinct nations and races, the ver)-
names of which are now unknown to our ethnologists. An anthro-
pologist would feel more than embarrassed to class, divide and
subdivide them ; the more so, as the respective descendants of all
these antediluvian races and tribes themselves know as little of their
own forefathers as if they had fallen from the moon. When ques-
tioned about their origin, they reply that they know not whence their
fathers had come, but had heard that their first, or earliest, men were
ruled by the great Genii of these deserts. This may be put down to
ignorance and superstition, yet in view of the teachings of the Secret
Doctrine, the answer may be based upon primeval tradition. Alone
the tribe of Khoorassan claims to have come from what is now
known as Afghanistan, long before the days of Alexander, and brings
legendary lore to that effect in corroboration. The Russian traveller
Colonel (now General) Prjevalsky found quite close to the oasis of
Tchertchen the ruins of two enormous cities, the oldest of which,
according to local tradition, was destroyed 3,000 years ago by a hero
and giant, and the other by Mongolians in the tenth century of our era.
The emplacement of the two cities is now covered, owing to shifting sands and
the desert wind, with strange and heterogeneous relics; with broken china and
kitchen utensils and human bones. The natives often find copper and gold coins,
melted silver ingots, diamonds, and turquoises, and what is the most remarkable —
broken glass Coffins of some undeca3-ing wood, or material, also, within
which beautifully preserved embalmed bodies are found. . . . The male mummies
are all extremely tall powerfully built men with long wavy hair A vault was
found with twelve dead men sitting in it. Another time, in a separate coffin, a
young girl was discovered by us. Her eyes were closed with golden discs, and the
jaws held firm by a golden circlet running from under the chin across the top of
the head. Clad in a narrow woollen garment, her bosom was covered with golden
stars, the feet being left naked.*
To this, the famous traveller adds that all along their way on the
river Tchertchen they heard legends about twenty-three towns buried
ages ago by the shifting sands of the deserts. The same tradition
exists on the L,ob-nor and in the oasis of Kerj-a.
The traces of such civilization, and these and like traditions, give us
the right to credit other legendary lore, warranted by well educated and
learned natives of India and Mongolia who speak of immense libraries
• From a lecture by N. M. Prjevalsky.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

l8 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
reclaimed from the sand, together with various relics of ancient Magic
Lore, which have all been safely stowed away.
To recapitulate. The Secret Doctrine was the universally diffused
religion of the ancient and prehistoric world. Proofs of its diffusion,
authentic records of its history, a complete chain of documents, show-
ing its character and presence in ever}^ land, together with the teaching
of all its great Adepts, exist to this day in the secret crypts of libraries
belonging to the Occult Fraternity.
This statement is rendered more credible by a consideration of the
following facts: the tradition of the thousands of ancient parchments
saved when the Alexandrian library was destroyed ; the thousands of
Sanskrit works which disappeared in India in the reign of Akbar; the
universal tradition in China and Japan that the true ancient texts with
the commentaries, which alone make them comprehensible, amounting
to many thousands of volumes, have long passed out of the reach of
profane hands ; the disappearance of the vast sacred and occult litera-
ture of Babylon; the loss of those keys which alone could solve the
thousand riddles of the Eg>'ptian hieroglyphic records ; the tradition in
India that the real secret commentaries which alone make the Vedas
intelligible, though no longer visible to profane eyes, still remain for
the Initiate, hidden in secret caves and crypts ; and an identical belief
among the Buddhists, with regard to their secret books.
The Occultists assert that all these exist, safe from Western spoliating
hands, to reappear in some more enlightened age, for which, in the
words of the late Svami Dayanand Sarasvati, "the Mlechchhas [out-
casts, savages, those beyond the pale of Aryan civilization] will have to
wait."
For it is not the fault of the Initiates that these documents are now
"lost" to the profane; nor was their policy dictated by selfishness, or
any desire to monopolise the life-giving sacred lore. There were por-
tions of t he Secret Science that for incalculable ages had to remain
concealed from the profane gaze. But this was because the imparting
to the unprepared multitude secrets of such tremendous importance
was equivalent to giving a child a lighted candle in a powder magazine.
The answer to a question which has frequently arisen in the minds of
students, when meeting with statements such as this, may well be out-
lined here.
We can understand, they say, the necessity for concealing from
the herd such secrets as the Vril, or the rock-destroying force, dis----PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. ig
covered by J. W. Keely, of Philadelphia, but we cannot understand
how any danger could arise from the revelation of such a purely philo-
sophical doctrine, for instance, as the evolution of the Planetary-
Chains.
The danger was that such doctrines as the Planetar>^ Chain, or the
seven Races, at once give a clue to the seven-fold nature of man, for
each principle is correlated to a plane, a planet, and a race, and the
human principles are, on every plane, correlated to seven -fold occult
forces, those of the higher planes being of tremendous power. So that
any septenary division at once gives a clue to tremendous occult
powers, the abuse of which would cause incalculable evil to humanity;
a clue which is, perhaps, no clue to the present generation — especially
to Westerns, protected as they are by their very blindness and ignorant
materialistic disbelief in the occult — but a clue which would, neverthe-
less, have been very real in the early centuries of the Christian era to
people fully convinced of the reality of Occultism, and entering a
cycle of degradation which made them rife for abuse of occult powers
and sorcery of the worst description.
The documents were concealed, it is true, but the knowledge itself
and its actual existence was never made a secret of by the Hierophants
of the Temples, wherein the Mysteries have ever been made a disci-
pline and stimulus to virtue. This is very old news, and was repeatedly
made known by the great Adepts, from Pythagoras and Plato down to
the Neo-Platonists. It was the new religion of the Nazarenes that
wrought a change for the worse in the policy of centuries.
Moreover, there is a well-known fact — a very curious one, corro-
borated to t he writer by a reverend gentleman attached for years to a
Russian Embassy — that there are several documents in the St. Petersburg
Imperial Libraries to show that, even so late as the days when Free-
masonry and Secret Societies of Mystics flourished without hindrance
in Russia, namely at the end of the last and the beginning of the
present centur>^ more than one Russian Mystic travelled to Tibet via
the Ural Mountains in search of knowledge and initiation in the un-
known crypts of Central Asia. And more than one returned years
later, with a rich store of information such as could never have been
given him anywhere in Europe. Several cases could be cited and well-
known names brought forward, but for the fact that such publicity
might annoy the surviving relatives of the late Initiates referred to.
Let any one look over the annals and history of Freemasonry in the---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

20 THE SECRKT DOCTRINE.
archives of the Russian metropolis, and he will assure himself of the
fact above stated.
This is a corroboration of what has been stated many times before,
unfortunately, too indiscreetly. Instead of benefiting humanity', the
virulent charges of deliberate invention and imposture with a purpose,
hurled at those who asserted a veritable, even if a little known fact, have
only generated bad Karma for the slanderers. But now the mischief is
done, and truth should no longer be denied, whatever the consequences.
Is Theosophy a new religion, we are asked? By no means; it is not
a "religion," nor is its philosophy "new"; for, as already stated, it is
as old as thinking man. Its tenets are not now published for the first
time, but have been cautiously given out to, and taught by, more than
one European Initiate — especially by the late Ragon.
More than one great scholar has stated that there never was a religious
founder, whether Arj^an, Semitic or Turanian, who had hivented a new
religion, or revealed a new truth. These founders were all tr-ansmitters,
not original teachers. They were the authors of new forms and inter-
pretations, while the truths upon which their teachings were based were
as'old as mankind. Thus out of the many truths revealed orally to man
in the beginning, preserved and perpetuated in the Ad3^ta of the
temples through initiation, during the Mysteries and by personal
transmission, they selected one or more of such grand verities — actual-
ities visible only to the eye of the real Sage and Seer, and revealed
them to the masses. Thus every nation received in its turn some of
the said truths, under the veil of its own local and special symbolism.,
which, as time went on, developed into a more or less philosophical
cultus, a Pantheon in mythical disguise. Therefore is Confucius, a
very ancient legislator in historical chronology, though a very modern
sage in the world's history, shown by Dr. Legge* to be emphatically a
transmitter, not a maker. As he himself says, "I only hand on: I
cannot create new things. I believe in the ancients and therefore I
love them."t
The writer loves them too, and therefore believes in these ancients,
and the modern heirs to their Wisdom. And believing in both, she now
transmits that which she has received and learnt herself, to all those who
will accept it. As to those who may reject her testimony — the great
majority — she will bear them no malice, for they will be as right in
* lyiin-Yii {? I a) ; S chott, Chinesische Literahir, p. 7 ; quoted by Max Muller.
t Life and Teachings 0/ Confucius, p. 96.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 21
their way in denying, as she is right in hers in affirming, since they
look at Truth from two entirely different stand-points. Agreeably with
the rules of critical scholarship, the Orientalist has to reject a priori
whatever evidence he cannot fully verify for himself. And how can a
Western scholar accept on hearsay that which he knows nothing about ?
Indeed, that which is given in these volumes is selected from oral, as
much as from written teachings. This first instalment of the esoteric
doctrines is based upon Stanzas, which are the records of a people
unknown to ethnolog}'. They are written, it is claimed, in a tongue
absent from the nomenclature of languages and dialects with which
philology is acquainted; are said to emanate from a source repudiated
by Science — to-wit, Occultism ; and finally they are offered through an
agency, incessantly discredited before the world by all those who hate
unwelcome truths, or have some special hobby of their own to defend.
Therefore, the rejection of these teachings may be expected, and must
be expected beforehand. No one styling himself a "scholar," in what-
ever department of exact Science, will permit himself to regard these
teachings seriously. They will be derided and xeyecieA. a priori in this
centur}^ but only in this one. For in the twentieth century of our
era scholars will begin to recognize that the Secret Doctrine has neither
been invented nor exaggerated, but, on the contrary, simply outlined;
and finally that its teachings antedate the Vedas. This is no pretension
to prophecy, but simply a statement based on the knowledge of facts.
Every century an attempt is being made to show the world that
Occultism is no vain superstition. Once the door is permitted to
remain a little ajar, it will be opened wider with every new century.
The times are ripe for a more serious knowledge than hitherto per-
mitted, though still, even now, very limited.
For have not even the Vedas been derided, rejected and called "a
modern forgery" even so recently as fifty years ago? Was not
Sanskrit proclaimed at one time the progeny of, and a dialect derived
from, the Greek, according to Lempriere and other scholars? About
1820, as Prof. Max Miiller tells us, the sacred books of the Brahmans,
of the Magians, and of the Buddhists, "were all but unknown, their
very existence was doubted, and there was not a single scholar who
could have translated a line of the Veda ... of the Zend Avesfa, or
... of the Buddhist Tripitaka, and now the Vedas are proved to be
the work of the highest antiquity, whose ' p reserv'ation amounts almost
to a marvel'."---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

22 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
The same will be said of the Secret Archaic Doctrine, when undeniable
proofs are given of its existence and records. But it will be centuries
before much more is given from it. Speaking of the keys to the Zodiacal
Mysteries as being almost lost to the world, it was remarked by the
writer some ten years ago in Isis Unveiled that : "The said key must be
turned seven times before the whole system is divulged. We will give it
but one turn, and thereby allow the profane one glimpse into the mystery.
Happy he, who understands the whole ! "
The same may be said of the whole Esoteric System. One turn of the
key, and no more, was given in Isis Unveiled. Much more is explained
in these volumes. In those days the writer hardly knew the language
in which the work was written, and the disclosure of many things, freely
spoken about now, was forbidden. In Century the Twentieth, some
disciple more informed, and far better fitted, may be sent by the
Masters of Wisdom to give final and irrefutable proofs that there exists
a Science called Gupta Vidya ; and that, like the once mysterious
sources of the Nile, the source of all religions and philosophies now
made known to the world has been for many ages forgotten and lost to
men, but it is at last found.
Such a work as this has to be introduced with no simple preface, but
with a volume rather — one that would give facts, not mere disquisitions,
since The Secret Doctrine is not a treatise, or a series of vague
theories, but contains all that can be given out to the world in this
century.
It would be worse than useless to publish in these pages even those
portions of the esoteric teachings that have now escaped from confine-
ment, unless the genuineness and authenticity, or at any rate the
probability, of the existence of such teachings were first established.
Such statements as will now be made, have to be shown as warranted
by various authorities, such as ancient philosophers, classical writers
and even certain learned Church Fathers, some of whom knew these
doctrines because they had studied them, had seen and read works
written upon them ; and some of whom had even been personally
initiated into the ancient Mysteries, during the performance of which
the arcane doctrines were allegorically enacted. The writer will have
to give historical and trustworthy names, and to cite well-known
authors, ancient and modern, of recognized ability, good judgment, and
truthfulness, as also to name some of the famous proficients in the
secret arts and science, together with the mysteries of the latter, as they---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 23
are divulged, or rather partially presented before the public in their
strange archaic form.
How is this to be done ; what is the best way for achieving such an
object, has been the ever-recurring question. To make our plan clearer,
an illustration may be attempted. When a tourist, coming from a well-
explored country, suddenly reaches the borderland of a terra incog?iita,
hedged in, and shut out from view by a formidable barrier of impassable
rocks, he may still refuse to acknowledge himself baffled in his explora-
tory plans. Ingress beyond is forbidden. But if he cannot visit the
mysterious region personally, he may still find a means of examining
it from as short a distance as can be arrived at. Helped by his know-
ledge of the landscapes left behind, he can get a general and pretty
correct idea of the transmural view, if he will only climb to the loftiest
summit of the altitudes in front of him. Once there, he can gaze at it
at his leisure, comparing that which he dimly perceives with that which
he has just left below, now that he is, thanks to his own efforts, beyond
the line of the mists and the cloud-capped cliffs.
Such a point of preliminar>^ observation, cannot in these two volumes
be offered to those who would like to get a more correct understanding
of the mysteries of the pre-archaic periods given in the texts. But if the
reader has patience, and will glance at the present state of beliefs and
creeds in Europe, compare and check it with what is known to history
of the ages directly preceding and following the Christian era, then he
will find all this in a future volume of the present work.
In the latter volume a brief recapitulation will be made of all the
principal Adepts known to history, and the downfall of the Mysteries
will be described, after which began the disappearance and the system-
atic and final elimination from the memory of men of the real nature of
Initiation and the Sacred Science. From that time its teachings became
occult, and Magic sailed but too often under the venerable but fre-
quently misleading name of Hermetic Philosophy. As real Occultism
had been prevalent among the Mj^stics during the centuries that
preceded our era, so Magic, or rather Sorcery, with its Occult Arts,
followed the beginning of Christianit3^
However great and zealous the fanatical efforts, during these early
centuries, to obliterate every trace of the mental and intellectual labour
of the Pagans, thej^ were a failure ; but the same spirit of the dark
demon of bigotry and intolerance has ever since systematically per-
verted every bright page written in the pre-Christian periods. Kven---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

24 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
history, in her uncertain records, has preserved enough of that which has
survived to throw an impartial light upon the whole. Let, then, the
reader tarry a little while with the writer on the spot of observation
selected. He is asked to give all his attention to that millennium of
the pre-Christian and the post-Christian periods, divided by the year
One of the Nativity. This event — whether historically correct or not —
has nevertheless been made to serve as a first signal for the erection of
manifold bulwarks against any possible return of, or even a glimpse
into, the hated religions of the Past ; hated and dreaded, because
throwing such a vivid light on the novel and intentionally veiled
interpretation of what is now known as the " New Dispensation."
However superhuman the efforts of the early Christian Fathers to
obliterate the Secret Doctrine from the very memory of man, they all
failed. Truth can never be killed ; hence the failure to sweep away
entirely from the face of the earth every vestige of that ancient Wisdom,
and to shackle and gag every witness who testified to it. I^et one only
think of the thousands, perhaps millions, of MSS. burnt; of monuments,
with their too indiscreet inscriptions and pictorial symbols, pulverized
to dust; of the bands of early hermits and ascetics roaming about among
the ruined cities of Upper and Lower Egypt, in desert and mountain,
valley and highland, seeking for and eager to destroy every obelisk and
pillar, scroll or parchment they could lay their hands on, if only it bore
the symbol of the Tau, or any other sign borrowed and appropriated by
the new faith — and he will then see plainly how it is that so little has
remained of the records of the past. Verily, the fiendish spirit of
fanaticism of early and mediaeval Christianity and of Islam has loved
from the first to dwell in darkness and ignorance ; and both have made
. . . . the sun like blood, the earth a tomb,
The tomb a hell, and hell itself a murkier gloom !
Both creeds have won their proselytes at the point of the sword;
both have built their churches on heaven-kissing hecatombs of human
victims. Over the gateway of Century I of our era, the ominous words
"The Karma of Israel," fatally glowed. Over the portals of our own,
the future seer may discern other words, that will point to the Karma
for cunningly made-up history, for events purposely perverted, and for
great characters slandered by posterity, mangled out of recognition,
between the two cars of Jagannatha — Bigotry and Materialism; one
accepting too much, the other denying all. Wise is he who holds to
the golden mid-point, who believes in the eternal justice of things.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 25
Says Faizi Diwan, the "witness to the wonderful speeches of a
freethinker who belongs to a thousand sects" :
In the assembly of the day of resurrection, when past things shall be forgiven,
the sins of the Ka'bah will be forgiven for the sake of the dust of Christian churches.
To this. Professor Max Miiller replies :
The sins of Islam are as worthless as the dust of Christianity ; on the day of
resurrection both Muhammadans and Christians will see the vanity of their religions
doctrines. Men fight aboi:t religion on earth ; in heaven they shall find out that
there is only one true religion — the worship of God's Spirit.*
In other words, "The;re is no Religion [or Law] higher than
Truth" — (^Satydt Nasti Paro DhainnaJi) — the motto of the Maharajah of
Benares, adopted by the Theosophical Societ}'.
As already said in the Preface, The Secret Doctrine is not a version
oi his Unveiled, as originally intended. It is rather a volume explanator>^
of the latter, and, though entirely independent of the earlier work, an
indispensable corollary to it. Much of what was in the former work
could hardly be understood by Theosophists in those days. The
Secret Doctrine will now throw light on many a problem left un-
solved in t he first work, especially on the opening pages, which have
never been understood.
As it was concerned simply with the philosophies within historical
times and the respective symbolism of the fallen nations, only a hurried
glance could be thrown at the panorama of Occultism in the two
volumes of his. In the present work, detailed cosmogony and the
evolution of the four Races that preceded our fifth-race Humanity
are given, and now two large volumes explain that which was stated
only on the first page of his Unveiled alone, and in a few allusions
scattered hither and thither throughout that work. Nor can the vast
catalogue of the Archaic Sciences be attempted in the present volumes,
before we have disposed of such tremendous problems as cosmic and
planetary Evolution, and the gradual development of the mysterious
humanities and races that preceded our Adamic Humanity. There-
fore, the present attempt to elucidate some mysteries of the Esoteric
Philosophy has, in truth, nothing to do with the earlier work. The
writer must be allowed to illustrate what is said by an instance.
Volume I of his begins with a reference to an "old book" :
So very old that our modern antiquarians might ponder over its pages an in-
definite time, and still not quite agree as to the nature of the fabric upon which it
is written. It is the only original copy now in existence. The most ancient Hebrew
• Op. cit., p. 257.---PAGE BREAK---26 THB SECRET DOCTRINE. document on occult learning — the Siprah Dzeniouta — was compiled from it, and that
at a time when the former was already considered in the light of a literary relic. One of its illustrations represents the Divine Essence emanating from Adam* like
a luminous arc proceeding to form a circle; and then, having attained the highest
point of its circumference, the ineffable Glory bends back again, and returns to
earth, bringing a higher type of humanity in its vortex. As it approaches nearer
and nearer to our planet, the Emanation becomes more and more shadowy, until
upon touching the ground it is as black as night. This very old book is the original work from which the many volumes
oiKiu-ti were compiled. Not only the latter and the Siphrah Dzeniouta,
but even the Sepher Jetzirah f— the work attributed by the Hebrew
Kabalists to their Patriarch Abraham (!), the SJm-kiiig, China's primi-
tive Bible, the sacred volumes of the Egyptian Thoth- Hermes, the
Picrdnas in India, the Chaldean Book of Numbers and the Pe7itateuch
itself, are all derived from that one small parent volume. Tradition
says, that it was taken down in Senzar, the secret sacerdotal tongue,
from the words of Divine Beings, who dictated it to the Sons of Light,
in Central Asia, at the very beginning of our Fifth Race ; f or there was
a time when its language (the Senzar) was known to the Initiates of
every nation, when the forefathers of the Toltec understood it as
easily as the inhabitants of the lost Atlantis, who inherited it, in their
turn, from the sages of the Third Race, the Manushis, who learnt it
direct from the Devas of the Second and First Races.Not only the latter and the Siphrah Dzeniouta,
but even the Sepher Jetzirah f— the work attributed by the Hebrew
Kabalists to their Patriarch Abraham (!), the SJm-kiiig, China's primi-
tive Bible, the sacred volumes of the Egyptian Thoth- Hermes, the
Picrdnas in India, the Chaldean Book of Numbers and the Pe7itateuch
itself, are all derived from that one small parent volume. Tradition
says, that it was taken down in Senzar, the secret sacerdotal tongue,
from the words of Divine Beings, who dictated it to the Sons of Light,
in Central Asia, at the very beginning of our Fifth Race ; f or there was
a time when its language (the Senzar) was known to the Initiates of
every nation, when the forefathers of the Toltec understood it as
easily as the inhabitants of the lost Atlantis, who inherited it, in their
turn, from the sages of the Third Race, the Manushis, who learnt it
direct from the Devas of the Second and First Races. The illustra-
tion spoken of in his relates to the evolution of these Races and of
our fourth- and fifth-race Humanity in the Vaivasvata Manvantara, or
Round; each Round being composed of the Yugas of the seven periods
of Humanity; four of which are now passed in 02ir I^ife-Cycle, the
middle point of the fifth being nearly reached. This illustration is
symbolical, as every one can well understand, and covers the ground
from the beginning. The old book, having described cosmic evolution
and explained the origin of everything on earth, including physical
man, after giving the true history of the Races, from the First down to
our own Fifth Race, goes no further. It stops short at the beginning
of the Kali Yuga, just 4,989 years ago, at the death of Krishna, the
bright Sun-god, the once living hero and reformer. » The name is used in the sense of the Greek word avdpoiTTO?. t Rabbi Jehoshua Ben Chananea, who died about A.D. 72, openly declared that he had performed
" miracles " by means of the book Sepher Jetzirah, and challenged every sceptic.---PAGE BREAK---

t Rabbi Jehoshua Ben Chananea, who died about A.D. 72, openly declared that he had performed
" miracles " by means of the book Sepher Jetzirah, and challenged every sceptic. Franck, quoting
from the Babylonian Talmud, names two other thaumaturgists, Rabbis Chanina and Oshoi. (See
Jerusalem Talmud, Sanhedrin, c. 7, etc. ; a nd Franck, Die Kabbalah, pp. 55, 56). Many of the mediaeval
Occultists, Alchemists, and Kabalists have made the same claim ; and even the late modern Magus,
Eliphas Levi, publicly asserts it in his books on Magic.

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. 11
But there exists another book. None of its possessors regard it as
very ancient, as it was born with, and is only as old as the Black Age,
namely, about 5,000 years. In about nine years hence, the first cycle
of the first five millenniums, that began with the great cycle of the
Kali Yuga, will end. And then the last prophecy contained in that
book — the first volume of the prophetic record for the Black Age — will
be accomplished. We have not long to wait, and many of us will
witness the dawn of the New Cycle, at the end of which not a few
accounts will be settled and squared between the races. Volume II
of the prophecies is nearly ready, having been in preparation since
the time of Buddha's grand successor, Shankaracharya.
One more important point must be noticed, one that stands foremost
in the series of proofs given of the existence of one primeval, universal
Wisdom — at any rate for Christian Kabalists and students. The
teachings were, at least, partially known to several of the Fathers of
the Church. It is maintained, on purely historical grounds, that
Origen, Synesius, and even Clemens Alexandrinus, had themselves
been initiated into the Mysteries before adding to the Neo-Platonism of
the Alexandrian school that of the Gnostics, under the Christian veil.
More than this, some of the doctrines of the secret schools, though by
no means all, were preserved in the Vatican, and have since become
part and parcel of the Mysteries, in the shape of disfigured additions
made to the original Christian programme by the Latin Church. Such
is the now materialised dogma of the Immaculate Conception. This
accounts for the great persecutions set on foot by the Roman Catholic
Church against Occultism, Masonry, and heterodox Mysticism generally.
The days of Constantine were the last turning-point in history, the
period of the supreme struggle, that ended in the Western world
throttling the old religions in favour of the new one, built on their
bodies. From thence the vista into the far distant past, beyond the
Deluge and the Garden of Eden, began to be forcibly and relentlessly
shut out by every fair and unfair means from the indiscreet gaze of
posterity. Every issue was blocked up, every record upon which hands
could be laid, destroyed. Yet there remains enough, even among such
mutilated records, to warrant us in saying that there is in them ever}^
requisite evidence of the actual existence of a Parent Doctrine. Frag-
ments have survived geological and political cataclysms, to tell the
story ; and every survival shows evidence that the now secret Wisdom
was once the one fountain head, the ever-flowing perennial source,---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

28 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
from which were fed all the streamlets — the later religions of all
nations — from the first down to the last. This period, beginning with
Buddha and Pythagoras at the one end and finishing with the Neo-
Platonists and Gnostics at the other, is the only focus left in History
wherein converge for the last time the bright rays of light streaming
from the asons of times gone by, unobscured by the hand of bigotry and
fanaticism.
This accounts for the necessity under which the writer has laboured
of ever explaining the facts given from the hoariest past by evidence
gathered from the historical period, even at the risk of being once more
charged with a lack of method and system. No other means w^as at
hand. The public must be made acquainted with the efforts of manj^
world-adepts, of initiated poets and writers in the classics of every age,
to preserve in the records of humanitj^ the knowledge at least of the
existence of such a philosophy, if not actually of its tenets. The
Initiates of 1888 would indeed remain incomprehensible and even a
seemingly impossible myth, were not like Initiates shown to have lived
in every other age of histor5^ This could be done only by naming
chapter and verse where mention may be found of these great
characters, who were preceded and followed by a long and interminable
line of other famous antediluvian and postdiluvian Masters in the arts.
Thus only could it be shown, on semi-traditional and semi-historical
authority, that occult knowledge and the powers it confers on man, are
not altogether fictions, but that the}^ are as old as the world itself.
To my judges, past and future, therefore — whether they are serious
literary critics, or those howling der\nshes in literature w^ho judge a
book according to the popularity or unpopularity of the author's name,
who, hardly glancing at its contents, fasten like lethal bacilli on the
weakests points of the body — I have nothing to say. Nor shall I con-
descend to n otice those crack-brained slanderers — fortunately very few
in number — who, hoping to attract public attention by throwing
discredit on every writer whose name is better known than their own,
foam and bark at their very shadows. These, having first maintained
for years that the doctrines taught in the Theosophist, and which
culminated in Esoteric Buddhism, had been all inveiited by the present
writer, have finally turned round, and denounced Isis Unveiled and the
rest as a plagiarism from Eliphas lycvi (!), Paracelsus (! ! ), and, 7nirabile
dictu, Buddhism and Brahminism (!!!). As well charge Renau with
having stolen his Vie de Jesus from the Gospels, and Max Miiller his---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

INTRODUCTORY. - 20
Sacred Books of the East or his Chips from the philosophies of the
Brahmans and of Gautama, the Buddha. But to the public in general
and the readers of The Secret Doctrine I may repeat what I have
stated all along, and which I now clothe in the words of Montaigne :
Gaitlemen, "/ have here made orily a nosegay of culled floivers, arid have
brought nothing of my own but the string that ties thetur
Pull the "string" to pieces and cut it up in shreds, if you will. As
for the nosegay of facts — you will never be able to make away with
these. You can only ignore them, and no more.
We maj' close with a parting word concerning this first volume. In
an introduction prefacing chapters dealing chiefly with cosmogony,
certain subjects brought forward may be deemed out of place, but one
more consideration added to those already given has led me to touch
upon them. Every reader will inevitably judge the statements made
from the stand-point of his own knowledge, experience, and conscious-
ness, basing his judgment on what he has already learnt. This fact
the writer is constantly obliged to bear in mind; hence, also the
frequent references in this first volume to matters which, properly
speaking, belong to a later part of the work, but which could not be
passed bj' in silence, lest the reader should look upon it as a fairj^ tale
indeed — a fiction of some modern brain.
Thus, the Past shall help to realize the Present, and the latter to
better appreciate the Past. The errors of the day must be explained
and swept away, yet it is more than probable — nay in the present case
it amounts to certitude — that once more the testimou)^ of long ages and
of history will fail to impress any but the very intuitional — which is
equal to sajang the very few. But in this as in all like cases, the true
and the faithful may console themselves by presenting the sceptical
modern Sadducee with the mathematical proof and memorial of his
obdurate obstinacy and bigotr>'. There still exists somewhere in the
archives of the French Academ)% the famous law of probabilities
worked out by certain mathematicians for the benefit of sceptics by an
algebraical process. It runs thus : I f two persons give their evidence to
a fact, and thus impart to it each of them f of certitude; that fact
will have then |ij of certitude; i.e., its probability will bear to its im-
probability the r atio of 35 to i. If three such evidences are joined
together the certitude will become f ff . The agreement of ten persons
giving each | of certitude will produce \%^^, etc., etc. The Occultist
may remain satisfied with such certitude, and care for no more.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

PROEM.
PAGES FROM A PRE-HISTORIC RECORD.
An archaic Manuscript — a collection of palm leaves made imperme-
able to water, fire, and air, by some specific and unknown process — is
before the writer's eye. On the first page is an immaculate white disk
within a dull black ground. On the following page, the same disk, but
with a central point. The first, the student knows, represents Kosmos
in Eternity, before the reawakening of still slumbering Energy, the
Emanation of the World in later sj^stems. The point in the hitherto
immaculate disk, Space and Eternity in Pralaya, denotes the dawn oi
differentiation. It is the Point in the Mundane Egg, the Germ within
it which will become the Universe, the All, the boundless, periodical
Kosmos — a Germ which is latent and active, periodicallj' and by turns.
The one circle is divine Unity, from which all proceeds, whither all
returns: its circumference — a forcibly limited symbol, in view of the
limitation of the human mind — indicates the abstract, ever incognizable
Presence, and its plane, the Universal Soul, although the two are one.
Only, the face of the disk being white, and the surrounding ground
black, clearly shows that its plane is the sole knowledge, dim and hazy
though it still is, that is attainable by man. It is on this plane that
the manvantaric manifestations begin; for it is in this Soui. that
slumbers, during the Pralaya, the Divine Thought,* wherein lies
concealed the plan of every future cosmogony and theogony.
* It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that the term Divine Thought, like that of Universal
Mind, must not be regarded as even vaguely shadowing forth an intellectual process akin to that
exhibited by man. The "Unconscious," according to von Hartraann, arrived at the vast creative,
or rather evolutionary plan, "by a clairvoyant wisdom superior to all consciousness," which in
Vedintic language would mean absolute Wisdom. Only those who realize how far intuition soars
above the tardy processes of ratiocinative thought can form the faintest conception of that absolute
Wisdom which transcends the ideas of Time and Space. Mind, as we know it, is resolvable into states
of consciousness, of varying duration, intensity, complexity, etc., all, in the ultimate, resting on sensa-
tion, which is again Maya. Sensation, again, necessarily postulates limitation. The Personal God of
orthodox Theism perceives, thinks, and is affected by emotion; he repents and feels "fierce anger."
But the notion of such mental states clearly involves the unthinkable postulate of the externality of
the exciting stimuli, to say nothing of the impossibilitj' of ascribing changelessness to a being whose
emotions fluctuate with events in the worlds he presides over. The conceptions of a Personal God as
changeless and infinite are thus unpsychological and, what is worse, unphilosophical.---PAGE BREAK---

32 THE SECRET DOCTRINE.
It is the One Life, eternal, invisible, yet omnipresent, without
beginning or end, yet periodical in its regular manifestations — between
which periods reigns the dark mystery of Non-Being; unconscious, yet
absolute Consciousness, unrealizable, yet the one self-existing Reality:
trul}^ "a Chaos to the sense, a Kosmos to the reason." Its one abso-
lute attribute, which is Itself, eternal, ceaseless Motion, is ca

*[772 pages in source — text truncated at 100000 characters]*