ORIENTAL TEXTS APPROVED ‘

BUT NOT FINANCED BY THE TRUSTEES
AND SOLD

BY MESSRS LUZAC & CO.

The Safar-nima, Rawshan 4 ’f-ndma and Sa'adat-nama of
Nasir-i Khusraw (“Kaviani” Press, Berlin, 1923). 8r.

The Zadu ’l-Musafirfn of Nasir-i Khusraw (“Kaviani” Press,
Berlin, 1923). 155.

The Wajh-i Dm of Ndsir-i Khusraw (“Kaviani” Press, Berlin,
1924). 4f.

The Silsilatu ’n-Nasab-i Safawiyya of Shaykh Husayn ibn
Shaykh Abdal-i Zdhidi (“frdnshahr” Press, Berlin, 1343/
1924). 2S.


“E. J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL”
SERIES

NEW SERIES, IV. 2


THE MATHNAWl

OF

JALALU’DDf.N RIJMl

EDITED FROM THE OLDES^i' MANUSCRlRrvS
AVAILABLE: WITH CRITICAL NOTES,
ITANSI.A^i^lON, & COIVIMENTARV

BY

REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON

i.rrr.D., ll.d., f.b.a,

Sn Vlmmm .hlunn's /»/ . bahu' atu! somvtimv

LvctuH'} in in the Unh'cnity of (nnnfnuif^r


VOI.UME n

CONTAINING THE TRANSLA'l'ION
OF THE FIRST & SECOND BOOKS


PRIN'I'Kl) HY THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
FOR THE TRlkSTEEH OF THE “ K. J. W. GIBfi MEMORIAL”
AND PUBLISHED BY MESSRS LUZAC a? CO.

46 GREAT RUSSELL S'l’REE'l’, LONDON, W.C.


PRINTED IN GRMT BRITAIN


“E. J. W. GIBB MEMORIAL” PUBLICATIONS

OLD SERIES, (as works, 39 published volumes.)

I. Bib-ur-ndma (Turki text, fac-simile), ed. Beveridge,
1905. Out of print.

II. History of Tabaristan of Ibn Isfandiyar, abridged transl.
Browne, 1905. 8 j.

III, 1-5. History of Rasdli dynasty of Yaman byal-Khaz-
raji; 1,2 transl. of Sir James Redhouse; 1907-8, 'js. each;
3, Annotations by the same, 1908, 5J.; 4, 5, Arabic text
ed. Muhammad ‘Asal, 1908-1913, Zs. each.

IV. Omayyads and ‘Abbasids, transl. Margoliouth from the .-
Arabic of G. Zaiddn, 1907, 55. Out of print.

V. Travels of Ibn Jubayr, Arabic text, ed. de Goeje, 1907,
Io^. Out of print.

VI, 1,2,3, 5,6, 7 . Y^qiit’s Diet, of learned men 7 -

Arib), Arabic text, ed. Margoliouth, 1908-1926; 20^.,
izs., lOi'., I5J., 15.V., 1 5^. respectively. V0I.4 in preparation.

VII, I, 5, 6. Taj 4 ribu’l-Umam of Miskawayhi (Arabic text,
fac-simile), ed. le Strange and others, 1909-1917, ‘js.
each vol.

VIII. Marzuban-nama (Persian te.xt), ed. Mi'rza Muhammad,

1909, I2J. Out of print.

IX. Textes yduroQtis (French and Persian), by Huart and
Rizd I’evffq, 1909, lOf.

X. Mu ‘jam, an old Persian system of prosody, by Shams-i-
Qays, ed. Mirzd Muhammad, 1909, i^s. Out of print.

XI, 1, 2. Chahar Maqila; i, Persian text, ed. and annotated
by Mirzd Muhammad, 1910. 12s. Out of print. 2, English
transl. and notes by Browne, 19ZI, I5^.

XII. Introduction d I’Histoire des Mongols, by Blochet,

1910, lOS.

XIII. Dlwdn of l^assdn b. Thdbit (Arabic text),ed.Hirschfeld,
1910, 75. Q.

XIV, I, 2. Ta’rlkh-i-Guzfda of Ijlamdu’lldh Mustawfl;

1, Persian text, fac-simile, 1911, Out of print.

2, Abridged translation and Indices by Browne and
Nicholson, 1913, icw.

XV. Nuq^tu’l-Kdf (History of the Bdbls) by Mirzd Jdnl
(Persian text), ed. Browne, 1911, 12S.


XVI, 1,2,3. Ta’rikh-i-Jahan-gush 4 y of Juwayni, Persian text,
ed. Mfrza Muhammad; i, Mongols, 1913, 15s. Out of
print. 2, Khwdrazmshahs, 1917, 15^.; 3, Assassins, in
preparation.

XVII. Kashfu’l-Mahjiib (Siifi doctrine), transl. Nicholson,

1911, 15^. Out of print.

XVIII, 2 (all hitherto published), Jdmi'u’t-Tawarfkh of Ra.shi-
du’d-Di'n Fadlu’llah (Persian text), ed. and annotated
by Blochet, 1912, i5f.

XIX. Kitibu’l-Wul 4 t of al-Kindf (Arabic text), ed. Guest,

1912, 15s.

XX. Kitabu’l-Ansab of as-Sam'ani (Arabic text, fac-simile),

1913, 20^. Out of print.

XXI. Di'wans of ‘Amir b. at-Tufayl and ‘Abi'd b. al-Abras
(Arabic text and transl. by Sir Charles J. Lyall), 1913,1 2.«.

XXII. Kit^bu’l-Luma‘ (Arabic text), ed. Nicholson, 19x4, 15.V.

XXIII, I, 2, Nuzhatu-’l-Quldb of yamdu’llah Mustawfi;
I, Persian text, ed. le Strange, 19x5, iSr.; 2, linjjlisli
transl. le Strange, 1918, 8r. ^ ^ ^

XXIV. Shamsu’l-'Ullim ofNashwdn al-Ij[imyan', extracl.s fnim
the Arabic text with German Introduction and Notes by
‘Azimu’d-Di'n Ahmad, 1916, ^s.

[XXV. Diw_ 4 ns of af-Tufayl b. ‘Awf and at-TirimmSh b.
Hakim (Arabic text), ed. Krenkow, in the Press.]


NEW SERIES

I. Fars-nama of Ibnu’l-Balkhf, Persian text,ed. le Strange
and Nicholson, 1921, 20^.

II. R 4 hatu’s-§uddr (History of Saljdqs) of ar-Ruwandi,
Persian text, ed. Muhammad Iqbal, 1921, 475. bii.

III. Indexes to Sir C. J. Lyall’s edition of the Mufad-
daliyat, compiled by A. A. Bevan, 1924, 4^.

IV. Mathnawf-i Ma'nawi of Jaldlu’ddin Rdmi. i. Persian
text of the First and Second Books, ed. Nicholson, 192?,

2o^. ; 2, Translation of the First and Second Book's
1920, 20^. ^

Mazandardn and Astarabdd, by II. L. Rabino. with
Maps (m the Press).

Diwdn of aI-A‘sh^d, Arabic text with German tran.'ilati<.n
by R. Geyer (m the Press).


Jawami‘u-’1-Hikayat of *Awfi, a critical study of its
scope, sources and value, by NizamuMdm (in the Press).

Turkistan at the time of the Mongolian Invasion, by
W. Barthold, English transL, revised by the author, aided
by H. A. R. Gibb (in the Press).

Letters of Rashidu’d-Dm Fadlu’llah, abridged English
transl. by Muhammad Shaff, followed by transl. of.
Tansdq-nama (on Precious stones) by the late Sir A.
Houtum-Schindler (in preparation).

A History of Chemistry in Mediaeval Isl^m, by E. J.
Plolmyard.


WORK SUBSIDISED BY THE TRUSTEES

Firdawsu-’l-Hikmat of *Ali ibn Rabban at-Tabari, ed.
Muhammad az-Zubayr as-Siddiqi (in the Press).


INTRODUCTION

T h ere are complete translations of the Mathnawim Turkish
Arabic*-^, and Hindustani^, but only the first two of the six
Rooks of the poem have hitherto been made accessible in
their entirely to European readers, though a number of extracts
from Books tii-vi are translated in E. H. Whinfield’s useful
abridgment. While it may seem surprising that a work so cele-
brated, and one which reflects (however darkly at times) so much
of the highest as well as the lowest in the life and thought of the
Mohammedan world in the later Middle Ages, should still remain
imperfectly known to Western students, I think that this gap in our
knowledge can at least be excused. Judged by modern standards,
the iVIaifunmi is a very long poem: it contains almost as many
verses as the Iliad and Odyssey together and about twice as many
as the Divhia Oommedia \ comparisons make it appear

shorter than it actually is, since every verse of the Mathnawi has
twenty-two syllables, whereas the hexameter may vary from
thirteen to seventeen, and the terssa rima^ like the Spenserian
stanica, admits only ten or eleven in each verse, so that the Math-
natoi with 35,700 verses is in reality a far more extensive work than
the Faerie Queene with 33,500* On the other hand, it is easily
surpassed in length by several Persian poems; and the fact that
the Shdhmma has been translated from beginning to end into
Itnglisli, French, and Italian answers the question asked by
Georg Rosen — * Who would care to devote a considerable part of
his lifetime to translating thirty or forty thousand Persian distichs
of unequal poetical worth?’’ The si^e of the Mathnawi is not the
chief or the worst obstacle by which its translator is confronted.
He at once finds himself involved in the fundamental difficulty,
from which there is no escape, that if his translation is faithful, it
nuist be to a large extent unintelligible, and that if he tries to make
it intelligible throughout he must often substitute for the exact
rendering a free and copious paraphrase embodying matter which
properly belongs to a commentary, though such a method cannot

' In prose, by Ismd*fl Anqiravl in his commentary entitled Fdtiliu ^l-abydt
(BUMq, A,H. X251 and Constantinople, a.h. 1:^89). A Turkish verse-translation
by Sulaymdn accompanies the Persian text in the BdMq edition of the

Mathnawi (A*m ia68). For Nabffi {oh. a.h. 1151) sec E. J. W. Gibb, History
of Ottoman Poetry, vcl. iv, pp. 78-85, where an account is given of the circum-
stances which led him to compose his version of the Mathnawi. Gibb's descrip-
tion of it as “ a literal and line for line rendering" seems to me to require much
qualification, _ ^ ,

* In prose, by Ydsuf b, Afemad al-Mawlawi in his commentary entitled aU
MardmaUqjawi{fiuxo^hM.tz%<f),

* I do not think that a complete prose translation m Hindustani has yet
appeared, but there is one in verse, entitled Pirdhan-i Yusufi, by Muhammad
Ydsuf *AM Shdh (Lucknow, 1889; Cawnpore, 1897).


xiv INTRODUCTION

satisfy any one who wants to understand the text and know what
sense or senses it is capable of bearing. Therefore a complete
version of the Mathnawi means, for scientific purposes, a faithful
translation supplemented by a full commentary ; and considering
the scarcity of competent Persian scholars in Europe, no one need
wonder that the double task has not yet been accomplished. The
most important European translations are enumerated in the
following list, which shows incidentally that the greater part of the
work already done stands to the credit of this country.

1. Mesnewi oder Doppelverse des Scheich Mewldnd Dscheldl-cd-
din Rumt^ am dem Per^sischen ubertragen von Georg Rosen.
{Leipzig^ 1849.)

* * Being written in rhymed verse, this excellent version of about
a third of Book i (w.' 1-1371 in my edition) does not preserve the
literal form of the original, but as a rule the meaning is given
correctly even where misunderstanding would have been pardon-
able, while the explanatory notes keep the reader in touch with the
mystical background of the poem. The translator has left out a
good deal — and in verse-translations of Oriental poetry this k a
merit rather than a fault. His book, which was reprinted in 1913
with an introduction by his son. Dr F. Rosen, should help to
quicken the growing interest of Germany in Persian literature.

2. The Mesnevi of Mevldnd Jelalu^d-din Muhammed vr-Rutui,
Book the First, together with some account of the life and acts
of the Author, of his ancestors, and of his descendants, illus-
trated by a selection of characteristic anecdotes, as collected by
tJmr historian, Mevldnd Shemsu'd-din Ahmed el-Eflaki ef
'Arif I, Translated and the poetry versified by James ll\ Red-
house. {London, 1881.)

Sir James Redhouse’s translation of Book i is much less accurate
than Rosen’s. Its peculiarities cause us to speculate why this
eminent Turkish scholar, who was not quite at home in Persian
mysticism, should have embarked upon a task so formidable; or
how, with the sagacity to perceive and the candour to confess
his lack of skill in versifying, he allowed himself to be misletl bv
the idea that any kind of verse is superior to prose as a medium for
the translation of poetry. The excerpts from Aflaki’s Mamkiihu
'IfArifin, though legendary in character, supply valuable informa-
tion concerning the poet and the circle of Stiffs in which he lived,

3. Masnavi-i Ma^navi, the Spiritual Couplets of Maulmni
JaldliCd-din Muhammad Rdmi, translated mid (thridml by
E. H. Whinfield. {London, 1887; znd ed., 1898.)

All students of the Mathnawi owe gratitude to Whinficlti, whii
was the first to analyse its contents and illustrate their rich qualiiv
by his prose translation of selected passages from the six Hooks,


INTRODUCTION


XV


amounting to something like 3500 verses altogether. His wide and
sympathetic knowledge of Oriental mysticism, already exhibited
in the notes to his edition and translation of the Gulshan-i Rdz
(1880), makes- him an admirable guide through the mazes of the
Mathnawi^ and in general his work deserves the high esteem which
it enjoys. I do not wish to criticise it in detail and will only
remark that the apparent simplicity of the Persian language is
snare for translators :

4. The Masnavi by JalaWd-dln Ruml^ Book II translated for the
first time frofn the Persian into prose ^ with a Commentary^ by
C.E, Wilson, {London^ 1910.)

^ I'his is ‘‘a plain literal prose translation/’ based on sound prin-
ciples and carefully executed. Comparing it with my own version
of the Second Book, I found that as similar methods produce
similar results the two versions often agreed almost word for word,
and that where they differed, the point at issue was usually one for
discussion rather than correction. My obligations to Professor
Wilson are not confined to the turns of phrase which I have
borrowed from him now and then: every translator, and particularly
the translator of such a poem as the Mathnatoiy must feel the
advantage of being able to consult the work of a trustworthy
predecessor who has gone step by step over the same ground.

The present translation, in which the numeration of the verses
corresponds with that of the text of my edition, is intended primarily
as an aid to students of Persian ; it is therefore as exact and faithful
as I can make it, but it does not attempt to convey the inner as
distinguished from the outer meaning: that is to say, it gives the
literal sense of the words translated without explaining either their
metaphorical or their mystical sense^. While these latter senses
have sometimes been indicated by words in brackets'**, I have on
the whole adhered to the principle that translation is one thing,
interpretation another, and that correct interpretation depends on
correct translation, just as the most fertile source of misinterpreta-
tion is inability or neglect to translate correctly. It follows that a
translation thus limited in scope will contain a great number of
passages which do not explain themselves and cannot be fully
understood without a commentary. I should have preferred, as

* .Somo day I hope to try in a volume of selected passapfes whether a
translator of the Mathnav^i may not merit the praise which Jerome bestowed
on Hilary: ** quasi captivos sensus in suam lin^uum victoris jure transposuit.^'

* Frequently too the terseness of the original demands expansion in order to
bring out even the literal sense. The brackets in this version mark off what
belongs to a strict rendering of the original text from what has been added for
the purpose of explanation. I have not, however, been so pedantic as always to
indicate the insertion of certain auxiliary parts of speech which an English
translator would naturally use, though they are omitted in the Persian text.


XVI


INTRODUCTION


a matter of practical convenience, to include the commentary in
the same volume as the translation, but on the other hand 1 saw
grave objections to annotating part of the poem before the whole
had been studied and translated. “The Mathnawiy^ it has been
said, “is easier than easy to the ignorant, but harder than hard to
the wise ; and I confess that for me there are still many difficulties,
.which may perhaps be removed by further study of the poem itself,
of works historically connected with it, and of relevant Persian and
Arabic literature. The Oriental commentaries, with all their
shortcomings,
this translation

of Isma‘il Anqiravf

• Rumi (Persian) of Wall Muhammad Akbarabadf; I have also con-
sulted the Mukdshafdt-i Radawi (Persian) of Muhammad Rida, the
Shark-i Mathnawi (Persian) of Muhammad ‘Abdu *I-'AI{, who is
better known by his title of Bahru 1 -‘Ulum, al-Mauhaj al-qaui
(Arabic) of Yusuf b. Ahmad al-Mawlawi, and for R(>ok i the
Sharh-i Mathnawi-yi (Turkish) of ‘Abidin IMsha.

As stated in the Introduction to the first volume, no finality is
claimed for this edition. Where the text is uncertain, the transla-
tion can only be provisional; but even where we feel confidence in
the text, cases occur in which every translator of the Mathumi can
but offer the rendering that seems to him possible or probable,
and take comfort in the reflection that esf quadam prodire fmus si
non datur ultra. Some passages, I believe, will always remain
mysterious, since the key to them has been lost: one knows
that words uttered by a great spiritual teacher may be almost
meaningless outside the group of his intimate friends and disciples,
become so by lapse of time. The loose and rambling stnicturc
of the poem leads to other perplexities. When our author gives no
sign whether he is speaking in his own person or by the voice of
one of his innurnerable puppets — celestial, infernal, human, or
ariimal— who talk just like himself; when he mingles his comments
with Aeir discourse and glides imperceptibly from the narrative
into the exposition; when he leaves us in doubt as to whom he is
addressing or what he is describing— the translator is driven to
conjecture, and on occasion must leap in the dark, llencc a trans-
lation of the Mathnawi, however careful it may be, is necessarily
tentative in some respects and capable of being improved, thotmh
the process takes time. The corrections which I look forward to
publishing at a later stage, when the commentary on this volume
appears, are likely to be fewer, but also more important, than those
contained m the long list of textual corrections (vol. j, pp. 21
three-fourths of which any reader could have made for himself.

jl 3 ji jXXXm


INTRODUCTION


XVll


Although the question of literary form does not enter very
largely into a' version so literal as this, I have attempted to pre-
serve the idiomatic flavour of the original^ — which can be more
firmly caught -and retained in a prose translation — and also its
variety of style, ranging from a plain semi-colloquial manner of
expression to a noble and elevated diction like that employed by
the author in his mystical odes. On certain topics he is too out-^
spoken for our taste and many pages are disfigured by anecdotes
worthy of an Apuleius or Petronius but scarcely fit to be trans-
lated into the language of these writers. To omit them, however,
would defeat the object I have in view, namely, to provide a
complete version of the work which, notwithstanding the author’s
paKSsion for sclf-cfFacement, reveals the breadth and depth of his ■
genius most adequately. It is important, for our comprehension of
him, to know that he could tell ribald stories in the easy tone of a
man of the world, and that the contrast often drawn between him
and Sa‘df takes no account of some marked features which the
authors of the Mathnawi and the Gulistdn possess in common.

This is a translation for students of the text, but^ I venture
to hope that it may attract others neither acquainted with
Persian nor specially concerned with Stifism. To those interested
in the history of religion, morals, and culttire, in fables and folk-
lore, in divinity, philosophy, medicine, astrology and other
branches of mediaeval learning, in Eastern poetry and life and
manners and human nature, the Maihnatd should not be a sealed
book, even if it cannot always be an open one.

T'he prose headings inserted at short intervals throughout the
poem, transliterated words with the exception of proper names,
and all direct quotations from the Qur’an except such as occur in
the headings are printed in italics, A few foot-notes have been
added, some of them for the benefit of the general reader.

^ It may he said that this aim is inconsistent with the translator’s duty to
write his own Ian idiomatically. That is true, and no compromise will unite
the contraries, but I have done my best to combine them.

REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON

CAMKHIDGK,

December 1925


POSTSCRIPT

It would not be fitting that this volume, the first to apipear in the
J, W. Gibb Memorial” Series since the death of Professor
E, G. Browne, should leave my hands without giving some ex-
pression to the great sorrow felt by the Trustees at the loss of the
Scholar who presided over the foundation ot the Trust, took the


xviii INTRODUCTION

chief part in organising and administering it, and for more than
twenty years so fully enjoyed the confidence and affection of IiivS
surviving colleagues . Amongst the works published by the 1 Vustces
or now in course of publication there are few that were not in-
spired, suggested, supervised, or in some way influenced by him ;
and his colleagues can never forget how much they have owed to
his^ energy, enthusiasm, and experience — energy sustained by
patience, enthusiasm controlled by judgement, experience as ready
J^istake of his own as to excuse it in others.
The T^stees hope eventually to include in the Series yet another
book from his pen, the Catalogue, which he has left almost
complete, of his fine collection of Arabic, Persian, and Turkisli
• manuscripts.


K. A. N*


TABLE OF CONTENTS


BOOK I

PAGE -

Preface (in prose) 3

Proem 5

The King and the Handmaiden . 6-17

1'hc Greengrocer and the Parrot 17-21

I'he Jewish King whose Vizier contrived a plot against the

Christians 21-41

The Caliph and Layld

The description of Mohammed in the Gospel .... 41

Another Jewish King who persecuted the Christians. . . 43-50

The punishment inflicted on a man who scoffed at Mohammed 46

'Phe Wind which destroyed the people of *Ad .... 48

The Lion and the Beasts of chase, ...... 50-76

Azrael and the man who took refuge with Solomon ... 54

Solomon and the Hoopoe 67

The P'all of Adam 69

The Holy War against the Flesh 76

'i'he Caliph *Umar and the Ambassador 77“‘85

How Adam acknowledged, while Iblfs denied, responsibility for

sin 8r

And He is with you, wheresoever ye.be 83

"‘Let him who desires to sit with God sit with the Sufis'* . 84

I'he Merchant and the Parrot which gave him a message to the

parrots of India 85-101

'The Spiritual Birds that arc Divine Intelligences ... 87

Conimcntary on a saying of Farfdu'ddfn ^Attir .... 88

respect paid to Moses by Pharaoh's magicians ... 89

Commentary on a saying of Sand’f, and a Discourse on a
'Tradition of the Prophet concerning the jealousy of God . 96

'The harinfulness of being honoured by the people . . . 10 1

"‘Whatsoever ( 5 od wills cometh to pass'* ..... X02

The Story of the Harper 1 04-1 21

Explanation of a Tradition of the Prophet concerning Divine

inspiration 106

si A Story of ‘A'isha and the Prophet 109-112

Commentary on a verse of Sand'i • . , . . . .

** Take advantage of the coolness of the spring season " . . in


XX


CONTENTS


VMil'


The Moaning Pillar ' - •

A miracle performed by the Prophet in the presence of Abu jahl

The Prodigal for whom the angels pray

The munificent Caliph

The Arab of the Desert and his wife

* False saints

The power of Faith

Light and colour

Explanation of the Tradition that women prevail over the \Nise
man, while the ignorant man prevails over thetn .

The mystery of Moses and Pharaoh

“He has lost this life and the life to come* ^ .

The prophet Salih and the people of Thamiid . . . ►

The barrier between the righteous and the wicked .

What is meat to the saint is poison to the disciple
The Divine Bounty and those who beg for it .

>The two kinds of “ poor **

The World's lovers

The proverb, *Tf you commit fornication, commit it with a bee

woman, and if you steal, steal a pearl "

The Grammarian and the Boatman

The Spiritual Guide

The Prophet's injunction to ‘AM

The man of Qazwin who wanted to have a Hon tattooed on liis
shoulder

The wolf and the fox who went to hunt with the Lion ,

The man who knocked at his friend's door and, on being askt‘<i

who he was, answered, “'Tis I"

Description of Unification

Noah as the God-man


Km


Why the Siifis who know God are sealed in front of kings

Joseph and the guest-friend who could find no suitable gift ibr
him except a mirror

Mohammed and the scribe who wrote down the Qtir'^nic
Revelations

Balaam son of Bd‘fir

Hdnit and Mdnit

The deaf man and his sick neighbour

IbMs Ae originator of analogical reasoning applied to the Word
or God ....

Mystical experiences must be kept hidden from the vulgar ,
The contention between the Greek and Chinese artists


115

117

IZZ
I ho


124

IZi)


ly;

140

141

150


* 5 .>

*55

tOo

ihx


th\

*70

lb;

tUH

170

171

172
176

m

iHi

1 H 3

»8S

186

189


CONTENTS


XXI


PAGE

The Vision of Zayd . . , 190-201

Luqman and his fellow-servants 195

The conflagration in Medina in the days of the Caliph ‘Umar 201
‘Alf and the infidel who spat in his face - . , 202-208, 215

‘All and his murderer 208-214

The self-conceit shown by Adam towards Iblis . . . , 21 1 *

The unworldliness of the Prophet 214


BOOK 11

Preface (in prose) . 221

Proem . * , 222-227

The Caliph ‘Umar and the man who thought he saw the new

moon 227

The fool who entreated Jesus to bring some bones to life 229, 245-247
The Stifi who enjoined the servant to take care of his ass .230-238

The King and his lost falcon 238-241

Shaykh Ahmad son of Khizriiya and his creditors . . 241-244

The answer of an ascetic who was warned not to weep, lest he

should become blind 244

The peasant who stroked a lion in the dark .... 247

The Sufis who sold the traveller’s ass 248-252

The greedy insolvent 252-259

Parable for those who say “if” 259

The man who killed his mother because he suspected her of

adultery 261

The King and his two slaves ^65-275

The King’s retainers who envied his favourite slave 275-279, 301-303

The falcon amongst the owls . 279-282

The thirsty man who threw bricks into the water . . . 282

The man who planted a thornbush in the road and delayed to

uproot it 284-292

Dhu ’l-Niin and the friends who came to visit him in the mad-
house . . 292-296

The sagacity of Luqmdn 296-301

The reverence of Bilqis for the message of Solomon which was

brought to her by the hoopoe 303

The philosopher who showed disbelief in the Qur’dn . . 305

Moses and the shepherd , . 3 10-3 17

The Amir and the sleeping man into whose mouth a snake had
crept


318


XXll


CONTENTS


The fool who trusted the bear . . . 320-326, 327-32^,

The blind beggar who said, ‘‘ I have two blindnesses .

Moses and the worshipper of the golden calf , . . ,

Galen and the madman . . ,

The cause of a bird^s flying and feeding with a bird that is not

• of its own kind

Mohammed’s visit to the sick Companion 332, 335, 338-341, 34S
The gardener who separated three friends in order to chastise

them singly

Bayazid and the Shaykh who said, ‘‘I am the Ka‘ba ” . .33f>

• The novice who built a new house

Dalqak and the Sayyid-i Ajall

The Saint who rode a cock-horse 342

The dog and the blind mendicant

The Police Inspector and the drunken man ....

Iblis and Mu‘dwiya 356

The Cadi who wept whilst he was being installed

The bitter grief of a man who missed the congregational praycfvS

The thief who escaped because his accomplice gave a false
alarm

The Hypocrites and the Mosque of Opposition . . 367 371,

The true believer’s stray camel 372

The four Indians who lost their prayers . , , , .

The Ghuzz Turcomans and the two villagers . . . ,

The self-conceit and ingratitude shown by the worldly towards
the prophets and saints .

The old man who complained to the doctor ....

Jdhi and the child

The boy who was afraid of an effeminate man ....

The archer and the horseman

The Arab of the desert and the philosopher ....

The miracles of Ibrdhim son of Adham

The beginning of the gnostic’s illumination . . , -

The stranger who reviled the Shaykh

The man who declared that God would not punish his sins, and
Shu ayb’s answer to him

The answer of the Prophet to ‘A’isha, who said tliat he per-
formed the ritual prayer in unclean places .... ;

The mouse and the camel

The miracles of a dervish who was accused of theft
The gaOTlous, greedy, and somnolent and his reply to
tne onaykh who enjoined him to observe moderation , * . '


CONTENTS


XXlll


PAGE


The nature of intuitive knowledge 407

John the Baptist and Jesus 408

Mute eloquence 410

The search for the Tree of Life 41 1

How four persons quarrelled about grapes, which were known

to each of them by a different name 413 '

How Mohammed established unity amongst the Ansar . . 414

Solomon and the birds 415-417

The ducklings that were fostered by a hen 417

The miracles wrought by an ascetic in the desert . . . 418


®00i^ /


In the Name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful.

This is the Book of the Mathnavd, which is the roots of the
roots of the roots of the (Mohammedan) Religion in respect of
(its) unveiling the mysteries of attainment (to the Truth) and of
certainty; and which is the greatest science of God and the
clearest (religious) way of God and the most manifest evidence
of God.

The likeness of the light thereof is 05 a niche in which is a
candle shining with a radiance brighter than the dawn. It is
the heart’s Paradise, having fountains and boughs, one of them
a fountain called Salsabll amongst the travellers on this Path ;
and in the view of the possessors of (mystical) stations and
(Divine) graces, it (the Mathnawi) is best as a station and most
excellent as a {spiritual) resting-place. Therein the righteous cat
and drink, and thereby the (spiritually) free are gladdened and
rejoiced ; and like the Nile of Egypt it is a (pleasant) drink to
them that endure patiently, but a grief to the people of Pharaoh
and the unbelievers, even as God hath said, He lets many be
misled thereby and He lets many be guided thereby. It is the cure
for (sick) breasts, and the purge of sorrows, and the expounder
of the Qur’4n, and the (source of) abundance of (Divine) gifts,
and the (means of) cleansing (sordid) dispositions ; (written) by
the hands of noble righteous scribes who forbid (with the words)
None shall touch it except the purified. Falsehood doth not ap-
proach it cither from before or behind, since God observes it and
watches over it, and lie is the best guardian and He is the most
?nerciful of them that show mercy. And it hath other titles of
honour which God hath bestowed upon it.

We have confined ourselves to this little (tltat has been
mentioned), for the little is an index to the much, and a mouthful
(of water) is an index to tlie (quality of the) pool, and a handful
(of wheat) is an index to (serves as a sample of the contents of)
a great threshing-floor (granary).

Saith the feeble slave who hatn need of the mercy of God most
High, Muhammad son of Muhammad son of al-IJusayn of (the
city of) IJalkh— may God accept (this offering) from him: “I
have exerted myself to give length to the Poem in Rhymed
Couplets, which comprises strange tales and rare sayings and
excellent discourses and precious indications, and the (religious)
path of the ascetics and the (spiritual) garden of the devotees —
(all this being) brief in expression^ but manifold in meaning —
at the request of my master and stay and support, (who holds)
the place of the spirit in my body, and (who is) the treasure of

^ Literally, ** short in respect of the constructions (of its phraseology).”


4 MATHNAWi, BOOK I

my to-day and my to-morrow, namely, the Shaykh, the exempl r
for them that know God and the leader of them that p(>8ses.s
right guidance and certainty, the helper of hmnankind, thv
trusted keeper of (their) hearts and consciences, the charue
deposited by God amongst His creatures, and 1 lis choicv amonust
His creation, and (the object of) His injunctions to i lis Proph<‘t
and (of) His secrets (imparted) to His chosen one, the kt‘\ oi
the treasuries of the empyrean, the trustee of the riclies stortni
in the earth, the father of virtues, the Sword (Ijiisan ) ol the
Truth and Religion, Hasan son of Muhammad son ot al-IJasan,
generally known as Ibn Akhf Turk, the Abu "S axid of the time,
the Junayd of the age, the entirely veracious son of an entireK
veracious sire and grandsire^ — may God be wcll-pleaset! with
him and with them!— a native of Unniya, tracing his di*seeni
to the Shayldi who is honoured for having said, ‘ In the eveniiig
I was a Kurd, and in the morning I was an Arab/ May that
sanctify his soul and the souls of his successors! How gt>odl\
is the ancestor and how goodly the successor !

His is a lineage upon which the sun hath cast its mantle, and
a renown of ancestry before which the stars have iiiinmetf tlu’ir
beams. Their (his family’s) courtyard halli ever been h‘r»rttme'^
cynosure (qibla), whither turn the sons of ifie (spiritual) rulers,
and Hope’s Ka^ba which is circumambulated by deputatintis
the suitors for bounty; and may it never cease to be tints, su
long as a star rises and an orient sun appears above the liori/ott,
to the end that it may be a fastness for the godly, spiritual,
heavenly, super-celestial, illuminated ones who possess {ntystieal )
insight, the silent ones who behold, the absent ones \vho ar**
present, the kings beneath threadbare garments, the nobles
the nations, the owners of excellences, tlie luminaries who
display the’ (Divine) evidences. Amen, O Lord of all created
beings! And this is a prayer that will not be rejected, Ibr it ts
a prayer that includes (in its benefits) all classes of the creation,
Glory be to God, the Lord of all created l>eingsS, aiul ( Uni bless
the best of His creatures, Mohammed, and his kin, tin* nobb ,
the pure ! ”

^ Literally, "a $iddiq, the son of a ^iddiq (who was) the stni ui tlir


PROEM


5


In the Name-of God the Merciful, the Compassionate,

Listen to the reed how it tells a tale, complaining of separa-
tions —

Saying, ‘‘Ever since I was parted from the reed-bed, my
lament hath caused man and woman to moan.

I want a bosom torn by severance, that I may unfold (to such *
a one) the pain of love-desire.

Everv one who is left far from his source wishes back the
time when he was united with it.

In every company I uttered my wailful notes, I consorted 5
with the unhappy and with them that rejoice.

Every one became my friend from his own opinion; none
sought out my secrets from within me.

My secret is not far from my plaint, but ear and eye lack the
light (whereby it should be apprehended).

Body is not veiled from soul, nor soul from body, yet none
is permitted to see the soul.

This noise of the reed is fire, it is not wind : whoso hath not
this fire, may he be naught!

^Tis the fire of Love that is in the reed, ^tis the fervour of 10
Love that is in the wine.

The reed is the comrade of every one who has been parted
from a friend: its strains pierced our hearts^.

Who ever saw a poison and antidote like the reed? Who ever
saw a sympathiser and a longing lover like the reed?

The reed tells of the Way full of blood and recounts stories
of the passion of Majniin.

Only to the senseless is this sense confided : the tongue hath
no customer save the ear.

In our woe the days (of life) have become untimely: our days 15
travel hand in hand with burning griefs.

If our days arc gone, let them go 1— 'tis no matter. Do Thou
remain, for none is holy as Thou art!

Whoever is not a fish becomes sated with His water; whoever
is without daily bread finds the day long.

None that is raw understands the state of the ripe: therefore
my words must be brief. Farewell!

O son, burst thy chains and be free! How long wilt thou be
a bondsman to- silver and gold?

If thou pour the sea into a pitcher, how much will it hold? 20
One day's store.

The pitcher, the eye of the covetous, never becomes full;
the oyster-shell is not filled with pearls until it is contented.

Literally, rent our veils.^' ® Literally, (in) the bonds of/*


6


MATHNAWI, BOOK I

He (alone) whose garment is rent by a (mighty) love is purged
of covetousness and all defect.

Hail, 0 Love that bringest us good gain thou that art tlu'
physician of all our ills,

Theremedyofourprideandvainglor}',our Plato and oiirt Juieii !
25 Through Love the earthly body soared to the skies; the
mountain began to dance and became nimble.

Love inspired Mount Sinai, O lover, (so that) Hinai (was nvuie)
drunken and Moses fell in a swoon.

Were I joined to the lip of one in accord with me, 1 too, like
the reed, would tell all that may be told ;

(But) whoever is parted from one who speaks his language
• becomes dumb, though he have a hundred songs.

When the rose is gone and the garden fadetl, thou wilt lie.ii-
no more the nightingale’s st try.

30 The Beloved is all and the lover (but) a veil ; the Bel<t\’eil iy
living and the lover a dead thing.

When Love hath no care for him, he is left us a bird without
wings. Alas for him then!

How should I have consciousness (of aught) before or be-
hind when the light of my Beloved is not before me and behind?

Love wills that this Word should be shown forth: if tin*
mirror does not reflect, how is that?

Dost thou know why the mirror (of thy soul) reflects itothing?
Because the rust is not cleared from its face.

35 0 my friends, hearken to this talc: in tnith it is the verv

marrow of our inward state.


The story of the king's falling in love with a hmdmaiikn
and buying her.


4 °


In olden time there was a king to whom belongeti the power
temporal and also the power spiritual.

It chanced that one day he rode with his courtiers to the chase.

On the king’s highway the king espied a handmaiden : the
soul of the king was enthralled by her.

Forasmuch as the bird, his soul, was fluttering in its cage, he
gave money and bought the handmaiden.

After he had bought her and won to his desire, bv Divine
destiny she sickened.


A certain man had an ass but no pack-saddle: (jis soon as) he
got a saddle, the wolf carried away his ass.

He had a pitcher, but no water could be obtained: when he
found water, the pitcher broke.

The Hng gathered the physicians together fnjm left am! ricltt

is in your hands.


iv/r IT • r ywuj

My Me IS of no account, (but) she is the life of my life,
m pam and wounded : she is my remedy.


I am


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN 7

Whoever heals her that is my life will bear away with him my -(3
treasure and pearls, large and small^.”

They all answered him, saying, “We will hazard our lives®
and summon- all our intelligence and put it into the common
stock.

Each one of us is the Messiah of a world (of people) : in our
hands is a medicine for every pain.”

In their arrogance they did not say, “ If God will ” ; therefore
God showed unto them the weakness of Man.

I mean (a case in which) omission of the saving clause is (due
to) a hardness of heart; not the mere saying of these words, for
that is a superficial circumstance.

How many a one has not pronounced the saving clause, and 311 •
yet his soul is in harmony with the soul of it !

The more cures and remedies they applied, the more did the
illness increase, and the need was not fulfilled.

The sick girl® became (thin) as a hair, (while) the eyes of the
king flowed with tears of blood, like a river.

By Divine destiny, oxymel produced bile, and oil of almonds
was increasing the dryness.

From (giving) myrobalan constipation resulted, relaxation
ceased; and water fed the flames, like naphtha.

How it became manifest to the king that the physicians were unable

to cure the handmaiden, and how he turned his face towards

God and dreamed of a holy man.

When the king saw the powerlessness of those physicians, he 55
ran bare-footed to the mosque.

He entered the mosque and advanced to the mihrdb (to pray) :
the prayer-carpet was bathed in the king’s tears.

On coming to himself out of the flood of ecstasy {fand) he
opened his lips in goodly praise and laud.

Saying, “ O I'hou whose least gift is the empire of the world,
what shall I say, inasmuch as Thou knowest the hidden thing?

O' Thou with whom we always take refuge in our need, once
again we have missed the way.

But Thou hast said, ‘Albeit I know thy secret, nevertheless 60
declare it forthwith in thine outward act.’ ”

When from the depths of his soul he raised a cry (of supplica-
tion), the sea of Bounty began to surge.

Slumber overtook him in the midst of weeping: he dreamed
that an old man appeared

And said, “Good tidings, O king! Thy prayers are granted.

If to-morrow a stranger come for thee, he is from me.

• ^ Or> **my pearls and coral/*

* Le, will exert ourselves to the utmost/*

* Literally, that slave-girl from sickness/*


8


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When he comes, he is the skilled physician: deem him
veracious, for he is trusty and true.

65 In his remedy behold absolute magic, in his temperament
behold the might of God ! ”

When the promised hour arrived and day broke and the siin,
(rising) from the east, began to burn the stars,

The king was in the belvedere, expecting to see that wliieh
had been shown mysteriously.

He saw a person excellent and worshipful, a sun atniilsl a
shadow.

Coming from afar, like the new moon (in slenderness anti
radiance): he was non-existent, though existent in tiie form of
• phantasy.

70 In the spirit phantasy is as naught, (yet) behold a worUi
(turning) on a phantasy !

Their peace and their war (turn) on a phantasy, and their
pride and their shame spring from a phantasy ;

(But) those phantasies wWch ensnare the saints are the re-
flexion of the fair ones' of the garden of God.

In the countenance of the stranger-guest was appearing that
phantasy which the king beheld in' his dream.

The Mng himself, instead of the cluimherlains, went forvwu'd
to meet his guest from the Invisible.

75 Both were seamen who had learned to swim, the .stjtils of
both were knit together without sewing.

The king said, “Thou wert my Beloved (in reality), not she;
but in this world deed issues from deed.

O thou who art to me (as) Mu.stafa (Mohammed), while 1 atn
like unto ‘Umar — I will gird my loins to do thee service.’’

Beseeching the Lord, who is our Jlc/pcr, to help us to okmr .u lf-

control in all circumstances, and explainintt htinnfuf and

pernicious consequences of indiscipline.

Let us implore God to help us to s(‘lf-contr<il : one who lacks
^ self-control is deprived of the grace of the laird.

The undisciplined man does not maltreat himself a!<me, hut
he sets the whole world on fire.

80 A table (of food) was coming down from heaven witiiout
headache (trouble) and without selling atui buying,

people of Moses crieti disrespectftilly.
Where is garlic and lentils ? ”

(Straightway) the heavenly bread and dishes (of ftKid) were
cut off: there remained (for all of them) the toil of sowing and
(labounng with) mattock and scythe.

Again, when Jesus made intercession, CJod sent foo»i and
bounty (from heaven) on trays,

‘ Literally, “the moon-faced ones."


* Literally^ ** amidht***


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN 9

But once more the insolent fellows omitted to show respect
and, like beggars, snatched away the viands,

(Although) Jesus entreated them, saying, ‘‘This is lasting and 85
will not fail from off the earth.’’

To show suspicion and greed at the table of Majesty is
ingratitude.

Because of those impudent wretches who were blinded by
greed, that gate of mercy was closed upon them.

On account of withholding the poor-tax no rain-clouds arise,
and in consequence of fornication the plague spreads in all
directions.

Whatever befalls thee of gloom and sorrow is the result of •
irreverence and insolence withal.

Any one behaving with irreverence in the path of the Friend 00
is a brigand who robs men, and he is no man.

Through discipline this Heaven has been filled with light,
and through discipline the angels became immaculate and holy.

By reason of irreverence the sun was eclipsed, and insolence
caused an ‘AzaziF to be turned back from the door.

The meeting of the king with the divine physician whose
corning had been announced to him in a dream.

He (the king) opened his hands and clasped him to his breast
and received him, like love, into his heart and soul,

And began to kiss his hand and brow and inquire concerning
his home and journey.

(So) with many a question he led him to the dais. “At last,” 05
said he, “ I have found a treasure by being patient.”

He said (also), “ O gift from God and defence against trouble,

(O thou who art) the meaning of ‘ Patience is the key of joy ’ ! #

O thou whose countenance is the answer to every question,
by thee hard knots are loosed without discussion.

Thou interpretest all that is in our hearts, thou gives t a
helping hand to every one whose foot is in the mire.

Welcome, O chosen one, O approved one! If thou vanish,

D jstiny will come (upon us) and the wide room will be straitened.

Thou art the protector of the people. He that desires (thee) u)o
not hath gone to perdition. Nay^ verity ^ if he do not refrain . , . / ”

How the king led the physician to the bedside of the sick girf
that he might see her condition.

When that meeting and bounteous (spiritual) repast was over,
he took his hand and conducted him to the harem.

He rehearsed the tale of the invalid and her illness, and then
seated him beside the sick (girl).

^ Literally, ** beggar^faced onCsS.** - The name borne by Iblls before his fall.


10


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

The physician observed the colour of her face, (felt) her pulse,
and (inspected) her urine ; he heard both the symptoms and the
(secondary) causes of her malady.

He said, ‘‘None of the remedies which they have applied
builds up (health): they (the false physicians) have wrought
destruction.

105 They were ignorant of the inward state. I seek refuge with
God from that which they invent.”

He saw the pain, and the secret became open to him, but he
concealed it and did not tell the king.

Her pain was not from black or yellow bile : the smell of every
firewood appears from the smoke.

From her sore grief he perceived that she was heart-sore;
well in body, but stricken in heart.

Being in love is made manifest by soreness of heart : there is
no sickness like heart-sickness.

no ^ The lover's ailment is separate from all other ailments : love
is the astrolabe of the mysteries of God.

Whether love be from this (earthly) side or from that
(heavenly) side, in the end it leads us yonder.

Whatsoever I say in exposition and explanation of Love, when
I come to Love (itself) I am ashamed of that (explanation).

Although the commentary of the tongue makes (all) clear, yet
tongueless love is clearer.

Whilst the pen was making haste in writing, it split upon
itself as soon as it came to Love.

115 ^ In expounding it (Love), the intellect lay down (helplessly)
like an ^s in the mire : it was Love (alone) that uttered the
explanation of love and loverhood.

The proof of the sun is the sun (himself) : if thou require the
proof, do not avert thy face from him!

^ If the shadow gives an indication of him, the sun (himself)
gives spiritual light every moment.

The shadow, like chat in the night-hours, brings sleep to
thee ; when the sun rises the moon is cloven asunder*

There is nothing in the world so wondrous strange as the
^un, (but) the Sun of the spirit is everlasting : it hath no yester-

120 ^ Although the external sun is unique, still it is possible to
imagine one resembling it;

^ The spiritual Sun, which is beyond the aether, hath no peer
in the mind or externally.

Whem is room in the imagination for His essence, that the
like of Him should come into the imagination?

When news arrived of the face of Shamsu'ddm (the Sun of

fourth heaven drew in its head

(hid Itself for shame).


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN /[II

Since his name has come (to my lips), it behoves me to\^t
forth some hint of his bounty.

At this moment my Soul^ has plucked my skirt : he has caughi^
the perfume of Joseph’s vest.

(He said): “For the sake of our years of companionship,
recount one of those sweet ecstasies.

That earth and heaven may laugh (with joy), that intellect
and spirit and eye may increase a hundredfold.”

(I said): “Do not lay tasks on me, for 1 have passed away
from myself {fund)] my apprehensions are blunted and I know
not how to praise.

Ever3rthing that is said by one who has not returned to c'on-
sciousness, if he constrains himself or boastfully exaggerates, is
unseemly.

How should I — not a vein of mine is sensible — describe that 130
Friend who hath no peer?

The description of this severance and this heart’s blood do
thou at present leave over till another time.”

He said: “Feed me, for I am hungry, and make haste, for
Time is a cutting sword.

The Sdfi is the son of the (present) time, O comrade: it is
not the rule of the Way to say ‘To-morrow.’

Art not thou indeed a Sdfi, then? That which is (in hand)
is reduced to naught by postponing the payment.”

I said to him : “ It is better that the secret of the Friend should i is
be disguised : do thou hearken (to it as implied) in the contents
of the tale.

It is better that the lovers’ secret should be told in the talk
of others.”

He said: “Tell it forth openly and nakedly and without un-
faithfulness : do not put me off, O trifler !

Lift the veil and speak nakedly, for I do not wear a shirt
when I sleep with the Adored One.”

I said: “If He should become naked in (thy) vision, neither
wilt thou remain nor thy bosom nor thy waist.

Ask thy wish, but ask with measure : a blade of straw will not i.(o
support the mountain.

If the Sun, by whom this world is illumined, should approach
a little (nearer), all will be burned.

Do not seek trouble and turmoil and bloodshed: say no more
concerning the Sun of Tabriz I ”

This (mystery) hath no end: tell of the beginning. Go, relate
the conclusion of this tale.


^ yusdmu’ddfn.


12


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


How that saint demanded of the king to he alone with the
handmaiden far the purpose of discovering her malady.

He said: “O king, make the house empty; send away both
kinsfolk and strangers. , ^

145 Let no one listen in the entrance-halls, that I may ask certant
things of this handmaiden.”

The house was left empty, and not one inhabitant (remained ) :
nobody save the physician and that sick girl.

Very gently he said (to her), “Where is thy native town?
for the treatment suitable to the people of each town is separate.

And in that town who is related to thee? With what hast thou
kinship and affinity?”

He laid his hand on her pulse and put questions, one by one,
about the injustice of Heaven.

150 When a thorn darts into any one’s foot, he sets his foot upon
his knee,

And keeps searching for its head with the point «)f a needle, aiul
if he does not find it, he keeps moistening it (the place) withhi.s lip.

A thorn in the foot is so hard to find: how (then) is it with a
thorn in the heart? Answer (that) !

If every base fellow had seen the thorn in the heart, wlieit
would sorrows gain the upper hand over any one?

Somebody sticks a thorn under a donkey’s tail: the donkey
does not know how to get rid of it : he starts jumping.

155 He jumps, and the thorn strikes more firmly (pierces deeper) :

it needs an intelligent person to extract a thorn.

In order to get rid of the thorn, the donkey from irritation
and pain went on kicking and dealing blows in a hundred places,

(But) that thorn-removing physician was an expert: putting
his hand on one spot after another, he tested (it).

He inquired of the girl concerning her friends, by way (if
narrative.

And she disclosed to the physician (many) circumstance,s
touching her home and (former) masters and fellow-townsmen.

160 He listened to her story (while) he continued to observe her
pulse and its beating.

So that at whosoever’s name her pulse should begin to throb,
(he might know that) that person is the object of her soul’s
desire in the world.

He counted up the friends in her native town; then lie
mentioned another town by name.

He said : “When you went forth from your own town, in which
town did you live mostly? ”

She mentioned the name of a certain town and from that too
she passed on (to speak of another, and meanwhile) there was
no change in the colour of her face or in her pulse.


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN 13

Masters and towns, one by one, she told of, and about
dwelling-place and bread and salt.

She told stories of many a town and many a house, (and still)
no vein of her quivered nor did her cheek grow pale.

Her pulse remained in its normal state, unimpaired, till he
asked about Samarcand, the (city) sweet as candy.

(Thereat) her pulse jumped and her face went red and pale
(by turns), for she had been parted from a man of Samarcand,
a goldsmith.

When the physician found out this secret from the sick (girl),
he discerned the source of that grief and woe.

He said : '‘Which is his quarter in passing (through the town) ? 170
'' Sar-i Pul (Bridge-head),'’ she replied, “and Ghatafar street.”

Said he: “I know what your illness is and I will at once
display the arts of magic in delivering you^.

Be glad and care-free and have no fear, for I will do to you
that which rain does to the meadow.

I will be anxious for you, be not you anxious: I am kinder
to you than a hundred fathers.

Beware! tell not this secret to any one, not though the king
should make much inquiry from you.

When your heart becomes the grave of your secret, that desire ^75
of yours will be gained more quickly.”

The Prophet said that any one who hides his inmost thought
will soon attain to the object of his desire-.

When seeds are hidden in the earth, their inward secret be-
comes the verdure of the garden.

If gold and silver were not hidden, how would they get
nourishment (grow and ripen) in the mine?

The promises and soothing words of the physician made the
sick (girl) safe (free) from fear.

There are true promises, grateful to the heart; there are false
promises, fraught with disquietude.

The promise of the noble is current (sterling) coin ; the pro-
mise of the unworthy becomes anguish of soul.

How the saint, having discovered the {cause of) the illness,
laid it before the king,

I'hen he arose and went to see the king and acquainted him
with a portion of that matter.

“The (best) plan,” said he, “is that we should bring the man
here for the sake of (curing) this malady.

Summon the goldsmith from that far country; beguile him
with gold and robes of honour.”

^ /.tf. ‘T will perform miracles on your behalf/’

Titerally, ** will soon be wedded to the object of his desire.”


MATHNAWf , BOOK I


How the king sent messengers to Samar cand to fetch the
goldsmith.

183 The king sent thither one or two messengers, clever men and
competent and very just.

To Samarcand came the two messengers for the goldsnrith
debonair and wanton’-,

Saying, “O fi ne master, perfect in knowledge, thou whose
quality (of perfection in thy craft) is famous in (all) the lands,

Lo, such-and-such a king hath chosen thee for (thy skill in)
the goldsmith’s craft, because thou art eminent.

Look now, receive this robe of honour and gold and silver;
when thou comest (to the king), thou wilt be a favourite and
boon-companion.”

190 The man saw the much wealth and the many robes : he was
beguiled, he parted from his town and children.

Blithely the man came into the road, unaware that the king
had formed a design against his life.

He mounted an Arab horse and sped on joyously: (what
really was) the price of his blood he deemed a robe ot honour.

0 (fool), who with a hundred consents thyself with thine
own foot didst enter on the journey to the fated ill !

In his fancy (were dreams of) riches, power, anil lonlship.
Said ‘Azrd'il (the Angel of Death), “ Go (thy way). Yes, thou
wilt get (them) ! ”

19s When the stranger arrived (and turned) from the road, the
physician brought him into the presence of the king.

Proudly and delicately they conducted him to the king of
kings, that he might burn (like a moth) on that candle of 'I'iniz.

The king beheld him, showed great regard (for him), and
entrusted to him the treasure-house (full) of gold.

Then the physician said to him : “ O mighty Sultan, give the
handmaiden to this lord,

In order that the handmaiden may be happy in union with
him, and that the water of union with him may put out the fire
(ofpassion).”

300 The king bestowed on him that moon-faced one and wedded
those twain (who were) craving (each other’s) company.

During the space of six months they were satisfying their
desire, till the girl was wholly restored to health.

Thereafter he prepared for him a potion, so that when he
drank it he began to dwindle away before her.

When because of sickness his beauty remained not, the soul
of the girl remained not in his pestilence (deadly toils).

/ Literally, “one who exceeds the due measure” or “one who busies
himself with vain things.**


THE KING AND THE HANDMAIDEN IS

Since he became ugly and ill-favoured and sallow-cheeked,
little by little he became cold (irksome and unpleasing) in her
heart.

Those loves, which are for the sake of a colour (outward 205
beauty) are not love: in the end they are a disgrace.

Would that he too had been disgrace (deformity) altogether,
so that that evil judgement might not have come to pass upon
him!

Blood ran from his eye (that flowed with tears) like a river;
his (handsome) face became the enemy of his life.

The peacock’s plumage is its enemy : O many the king who
hath been slain by his magnificence 1

He said, I am the muskdeer on account of whose gland that
hunter shed my pure (innocent) blood.

Oh, I am the fox of the field whose head they (the hunters 210
springing forth) from the covert cut off for the sake of the fur.

Oh, I am the elephant whose blood was shed by the blow of
the mahout for the sake of the bone (ivory).

He who hath slain me for that which is other than P,
does not he know that my blood sleepeth not (will not rest
unavenged)?

To-day it lies on me and to-morrow it lies on him : when does
the blood of one such as 1 am go to waste like this?

Although the wall casts a long shadow, (yet at last) the shadow
turns back again towards it.

This world is the mountain, and our action the shout: the 215 •
echo of the shouts comes (back) to us.”

He said this and at the (same) moment went under the earth
(gave up the ghost). The handmaiden was purged of pain and
love,

Because love of the dead is not enduring, because the dead
one is never comir^g (back) to us ;

(But) love of the living is every moment fresher than a bud in
the spirit and in the sight.

Choose the love of that Living One who is everlasting, who
gives thee to drink of the wine that increases life.

Choose the love of Him from whose love all the prophets 220
gained power and glory.

Do not say, ** We have no admmion to that King.” Dealings
with the generous are not difficult.

^ J,e, on account of my beauty, which is not my real self,’^


l6 MATHNAWI, BOOK I


Setting forth how the slaying and poisoning of the goldsmith teas

{prompted) by Divine suggestion, not by sensual desire and

wicked meditation.

The slaying of this man by the hand of the physician was not
(done) on account of hope or fear.

He did not slay him to humour the king, (he did nut slay
him) until the Divine command and inspiration came.

As for the boy whose throat was cut by Khadir, the vulgar
do not comprehend the mystery thereof.

225 He that receives from God inspiration and answer (to his
prayer), whatsoever he may command is the essence oi right.

If one who bestows (spiritual) life should slay, it is allowable:
he is the (Divine) vicegerent, and his hand is the hand oi God.

Like Isma'il(Ishmael), lay your head before him; gladly atul
laughingly give up your soul before his dagger,

In order that your soul may remain laughing unto eternitv ,
like the pure soul of Ahmad (Mohammed) with the ( )ne (( Jod).

Lovers drain the cup of joy at the moment w^hen the fair ones
slay them with their own hand.

230 The king did not commit that bloodshed because of lust :
cease from thinking evil and disputing.

You thought that he committed a foul crime, (but) in (the
state of) purity how should the sublimation leave (any) alloy
(behind)?

The purpose of this (severe) discipline and this rough treat-
ment is that the furnace may extract the dross from the silvei*.

The testing of good and bad is in order that the gold may
boil and bring the scum to the top.

If his act were not the inspiration of God, he would !ta\’e
been a dog that rends (its prey), not a king.

235 He was unstained by lust and covetousness and passion:
(what) he did (was) good, but good that wore the aspect of evil.

If Khadir stove the boat in the sea, (yet) in Khadir’s staving
there are a hundred rightnesses.

The imagination of Moses, notwithvStanding his (spiritual)
illumination and excellence, was screened from (the cotnpre-
hension of) that (act of Khadir). Do not thou fly without wings !

That (deed of the king) is a red rose (worthy of praise); do
not call It blood (murder). He is intoxicated with Reason; do
not call him a madman.

Had it been his desire to shed the blood of a Moslem, I am
an infidel if I would have mentioned his name (with praise).

240 The^ highest heaven trembles at praise of the wicked, uml
by praise of him the devout man is moved to think evil.

He was a king and a very heedful king; he was elect and the
elect (favourite) of God.


THE GREENGROCER AND THE PARROT 17

One who is slain by a king like this, he (the king) leads him
to fortune and to the best (most honourable) estate.

Unless he (the king) had seen advantage to him (the gold-
smith) in doing violence to him, how should that absolute
Mercy have sought to do violence?

The child trembles at the barber^s scalpel (but) the fond
mother is happy in that pain (of her child).

He takes half a life and gives a hundred lives (in exchange) : 245 '
he gives that which enters not into your imagination.

You are judging (his actions) from (the analogy of) yourself,
but you have fallen far, far (away from the truth). Consider
well!

The story of the greengrocer and the parrot and the parrot’s
spilling the oil in the shop.

There was a greengrocer who had a parrot, a sweet-voiced
green talking parrot.

(Perched) on the bench, it would watch over the shop (in
the owner’s absence) and talk finely to all the traders.

In addressing human beings it would speak (like them); it
was (also) skilled in tlie song of parrots.

(Once) it sprang from the bench and flew away; it spilled .-.ii
the bottles of rose-oil.

Its master came from the direction of his house and seated
himself on the bench at his ease as a merchant docs.

(Then) he saw the bench was full of oil and his clothes greasy ;
he smote the parrot on the head : it was made bald by the blow.

For some few days it refrained from speech ; the greengrocer,
in repentance, heaved deep sighs,

Tearing his beard and saying, “Alas 1 tlte sun of my prosperity
has gone under tlic clouds.

Would tliat my hand had been broken (pi)wcrless) at that j,,
moment! How (ever) did I strike (such a blow) on the head of
that sweet-tongued one?”

He was giving presents to every dervish, that he might get
back the speech of his bird.

After three days and three nights, he was seated on the bench,
distraught and sorrowful, like a man in despair,

Showing the bird every sort of marvel (in the hope) that
maybe it would begin to speak.

Meanwhile a bare-headed dervish, clad in a jaiolaq (coarse
woollen frock), passed by, with a head Imirless as the outside
of bowl and basin.

Thereupon the parrot began to talk, screeched at the dervish a6o
and said, “Hey, fellow!

How were you mi.xcd up with the bald, 0 baldpate? Did you,
then, spill oil from the bottle?”


N M


2


l8 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

The bystanders laughed at the parrot’s inference, because it
deemed the wearer of the frock to be like itself.

Do not measure the actions of holy men by (the analogy of)
yourself, though sher (lion) and shir (milk) arc similar in
writing.

On this account the whole world is gone astray: scarcely any
one is cognisant of God’s Abddl (Substitutes) K
265 They set up (a claim of) equality with the prophets; they
supposed the saints to be like themselves.

“Behold,” they said, “we are men, they are men; both we
and they are in bondage to sleep and food.”

In (their) blindness they did not perceive that there is an
infinite difference between (them).

Both species of zanhur ate and drank from the (same) places
but from that one (the hornet) came a sting, and from this
other (the bee) honey.

Both species of deer ate grass and drank water: from this one
came dung, and from that one pure musk.

270 Both reeds drank from the same water-source, (but) this one
is empty and that one (full of) sugar.

Consider hundreds of thousands of such likenesses and observe
that the distance between the two is (as great as) a seventy ycars^
journey.

This one eats, and filth is discharged from him; that one cals,
and becomes entirely the light of God.

This one eats, (and of him) is born nothing but avarice and
envy; that one eats, (and of him) is born notliing but love of
the One (God).

This one is good (fertile) soil and that one brackish and bad ;
this one is a fair angel and that one a devil and wild beast.

275 If both resemble each other in aspect, it may well be (so):
bitter water and sweet water have (the same) clearness.

Who knows (the difference) except a man possessed of
(spiritual) taste? Find (him): he knows the sweet water from
the brine.

Comparing magic with (prophetic) miracle, he (the ignorant
one) fancies that both are founded on deceit.

The magicians (in the time) of Moses, for contention’s sake,
lifted up (in their hands) a rod like his,

(Buri between this rod and that rod there is a vast difference;
from this action (magic) to that action (miracle) is a great way.
280 This action is followed by the curse of God, (while) that
action receives in payment the mercy (blessing) of God.

- The infidels in contending (for equality with the prophets and
saints) have the nature of an ape: the (evil) nature is a canker
within the breast.

^ The saints next in rank to the Qu\h, who is the head of the spiritual hierarchy.


THE GREENGROCER AND THE PARROT 19

Whatever a man does, the ape at every moment does the
same thing that he sees done by the man.

He thinks, “ I have acted like him ” ; how should that quarrel-
some-looking one know the difference?

This one (the holy man) acts by the command (of God), and
he (the apish imitator) for the sake of quarrelling (rivalry). Pour
dust on the heads of those who have quarrelsome faces !

That (religious) hypocrite joins in ritual prayer with the (sincere) 285
conformist (only) for quarrelling’s sake, not for supplication.

In prayer and fasting and pilgrimage and alms-giving the true
believers are (engaged) with the hypocrite in (what brings)
victory and defeat.

Victory in the end is to the true believers ; upon the hypocrite
(falls) defeat in the state hereafter.

Although both are intent on one game, in relation to each
other they are (as far apart as) the man of Merv and the man of
Rayy.

Each one goes to his (proper) abiding-place; each one fares
according to his name.

If he be called a true believer, his soul rejoices ; and if you 290
say “hypocrite,” he becomes filled with fire (rage).

His (the true believer’s) name is loved on account of its
essence (which is true faith) ; this one’s (the hypocrite’s) name
is loathed on account of its pestilent qualities.

(The four letters) mini and wdw and mim and nim do not
confer honour: the word mumin (true believer) is only for the
sake of denotation.

If you call him (the true believer) hypocrite, this vile name
is stinging (him) within like a scorpion.

If this name is not derived from Hell, then why is there the
taste of Hell in it?

The foulness of that ill name is not from the letters; the 295
bitterness of that sea-water is not from the vessel (containing
it).

The letters are the vessel : therein the meaning is (contained)
like water; (but) the sea of the mcamng is (with QoS)— with
Him is the Unanu ’l-Kitdb.

In this world the bitter sea and the sweet sea (are divided) —
between them is a harrier which they do not seek to cross.

Know that both these flow from one origin. Pass on from
them both, go (all the way) to their origin!

Without the touchstone you will never know in the assay
adulterated gold and fine gold by (using your own) judgement.

Any one in whose soul God shall put the touchstone, he will 300
distinguish certainty from doubt.

A piece of rubbish jumps into the mouth of a living man, and
only when he ejects it is he at ease.


20 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When, amongst thousands of morsels (of food), one little
piece of rubbish entered (his mouth), the living man’s sense
(of touch or taste) tracked it down.

The worldly sense is the ladder to this world ; the religious
sense is the ladder to Heaven.

Seek ye the well-being of the former sense from the physician ;
beg ye the well-being of the latter sense from tlie Beloved.

305 The health of the former arises from the flourishing stale of
the body; the health of the latter arises from the ruin of the
body.

The spiritual way ruins the body and, after having ruined it,
restores it to prosperity ;

Ruined the house for the sake of the golden treasure, and
with that same treasure builds it better (than before) ;

Cut off the water and cleansed the river-bed, then caused
drinking-water to flow in the river-bed ;

Cleft the skin and drew out the iron point (of the arrow or
spear) — ^then fresh skin grew over it (the wound) ;

310 Rased the fortress and took it from the infidel, then reared
thereon a hundred towers and ramparts.

Who shall describe the action of Him who hath no like? 'I’his
that I have said fis only what the present) necessity is ailbrding.

Sometimes it (the action of God) appears like this and some-
times the contrary of this: tlie work of religion is naught but
bewilderment.

(I mean) not one bewildered in such wise that his back is
(toned) towards Him; nay, but one bewildered (with ecstasy)
like this and drowned (in God) and intoxicated with tlte
Beloved.

The face of the one is set towards the Beloved, (while) the
face of the other is just his own face (he is facing himself).

315 Look long on the face of every one, keep watch attentively ;
it may be that by doing service (to Siifi's) you will come to
know the facgi (of the true saint).

Since there is many a devil who hath the face of Adam, it is
not well to give your hand to every hand,

Because the fowler produces a whistling sound in order to
decoy the bird^,

(So that) the bird may hear the note of its congener and
come down from the air and find trap and knife-point.

The vile man will steal the language of dervishes, that he may
thereby chant a spell over (fascinate and deceive) one who is
simple.

320 The work of (holy) men is (as) light and heat; the work of
vile men is trickery and shamelessness.

^ Literally, "in order that the birdcatcher may decoy.”


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 21

They make a woollen lion for the purpose of begging ; they
give the title of Ahmad (Mohammed) to Bu Musaylim;

(But) to Bii Musaylim remained the title of Kadhdhdb (Liar),
to Mohammed remained (the title of) Ulu ’l-albdb (Endowed
with understanding).

The wine of God, its seal (last result) is pure musk, (but) as
for (the other) wine, its seal is stench and torment.

Story of the Jewish king who for bigotry's sake used to
slay the Christians.

Amongst the Jews there was a king who wrought oppression,
an enemy of Jesus and a destroyer of Christians.

Twas the epoch of Jesus and the turn was his' : he was the 325
soul of Moses, and Moses the soul of him;

(But) the squint-eyed (double-seeing) king separated in the
way of God those two Divine (prophets) who were (really) in
accord (with each other).

The master said to a squint-eyed (pupil), “Come on; go,
fetch that bottle out of the room.”

Said the squint-eyed one: “Which of the two bottles shall
I bring to you? Explain fully.”

“There are not two bottles,” replied the master; “go, leave
off squinting and do not be seeing more (than one).”

“O master,” said he, “don’t chide me.” Said the master, 330
“ Smash one of those two.”

The bottle was one, though in his eyes it seemed two ; when
he broke the bottle, there was no other.

When one was broken, both vanished from sight: a man is
made squint-eyed by (evil) propensity and anger.

Anger and lust make a man squint-eyed, they change the
spirit (so that it departs) from rectitude.

When self-interest appears, virtue becomes hidden : a hundred
veils rise from the heart to the eye.

When the cadi lets bribery gain hold of his heart, how should 33s
he know_ the wronger from the wretched victim of wrong?

The king, from Jewish rancour, became so squint-eyed that (we
cry), “ Mercy, O Lord, mercy (save us from such an affliction) ! ”

He slew hundreds of thousands of wronged (innocent) be-
lievers, saying, “ I am the protection and support of the religion
of Moses.”

Ilow the vizier instructed the king to plot.

He had a vizier, a miscreant and ogler (deceiver), who by
reason of (his exceeding) guile would tie knots on water.

“The Christians,” said he, “seek to save their lives; they
hide their religion from the king.

^ /.«. it was his turn to appear as a prophet.


22


MATHNAWI, BOOK I

340 Slay them not, for slaying (them) is useless: religion hath no
smell, it is not musk and aloes- wood.

The secret is concealed in a hundred coverings : its outward
form is (in agreement) with thee, resembling thee, (but) the
inward (reality) is (in) disagreement.’^

The king said to him: ‘‘Tell (me), then, what is the (best)
plan? What is the remedy against that? deceit and imposture? —

So that there may not remain a single Christian in the world,
neither one whose religion is manifest nor one who is con-
cealed.”

“O king,” said he, “cut off my ears and hands, rip my nose
by bitter (cruel) decree;

345 Then bring me under the gallows, that an intercessor may
plead for me.

Do this deed in the place for (public) proclamation, on u
highway where roads run in four directions.

Then banish me from thy presence to a distant land, that 1
may cast mischief and confusion amongst them.


How the vizier brought the Christians into doubt
and perplexity.

Then I will say (to them), ‘I am secretly a Christian. 0 God
who knowest (all) things hidden, Thou knowest me.

The king was informed of my (Christian) faith and from
bigotry sought to take my life.

350 I wished to hide my religion from the king and profess his
religion,

(But) the king got a scent of my inmost beliefs, and my
words were suspected (when I stood) before the king.

He said, “ Your words are like a needle in bread (specious but
pernicious); there is a window between my heart and yours.

Through that window I have seen your (real) state: 1 sec
your state and will not heed your words.”

Had not the spirit of Jesus been my aid, he would in Jewish
fashion have torn me to pieces.

355 For Jesus’ sake I would yield my life and give my head and
lay on myself (confess) myriads of obligations to him.

I do not grudge Jesus my life, but full well am I versed in
the knowledge of his religion^.

Grief was coming over me (it seemed to me a pity) that that
holy rehgion should perish amongst those who are ignorant
(of It). ®

Thanks be to God and to Jesus that I have become a guide
to the true faith. • ^

1 In this way he excuses himself for not having died a martyr’s death.


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 23

I have escaped from Jews and Judaism so (entirely) that I
have bound my waist with a (Christian) girdle .

The (present) epoch is the epoch of Jesus. O men, hearken 360
with your souls unto the mysteries of his religion!”'

The king did to him that deed (mutilation) which he had
proposed: the people remained in amazement at his deed.

He (the king) drove him away to the Christians. After that,
he (the vizier) began to proselytise.

How the Christians let themselves he duped by the vizier.

Myriads of Christian men gathered round him, little by little,
in his abode,

(While) he secretly expounded to them the mysteries of
Gospel and girdle and prayer.

Outwardly he was a preacher of (religious) ordinances, but 365
inwardly he was (as) the whistle and snare (of the fowler).

On this account^ some Companions (of Mohammed) begged
of the Prophet (that he would acquaint them with) the deceit-
fulness of the ghoul-like souP,

Saying, “What of hidden selfish interests does it mingle in
acts of worship and in pure spiritual devotion?*'

They were not seeking from him excellence of piety; they
were not inquiring where lay the outward defect.

Hair by hair, speck by speck, they were recognising the de-
ceitfulness of the fleshly soul as (plainly as the difference of)
the rose from parsley.

Even the hair-splitters (the most scrupulous) of the Com- 3^0
panions used to become distraught in spirit at the (Prophet's)
admonition to them (the inquirers) .

Ilow the Christians followed the vizier.

The Christians all gave their hearts to him: what (how great),
indeed, is the strength of the (blind) conformity of the vulgar!

They planted love of him within their breasts, they were
regarding him as the vicar of Jesus.

He inwardly (in reality) was the accursed one-eyed Antichrist.

O God, do Thou (hear and) answer the cry (of those in trouble)

— ^what a good helper art Thou !

O God, there arc myriads of snares and baits, and we are as
greedy foodlcss birds.

From moment to moment wc are caught in a fresh snare, 575
though wc become, each one, (like) a falcon or a Simurgh.

Every moment Thou art delivering us, and again we are
going to a snare, O Thou who art without want!

^ Because it is hard to distinguish truth from falsehood.

^ I'he appetitive soul, " the flesh.’*


24 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

We are putting com in this barn, (and then) we are losing the
com that has been garnered.

(Why), after all, do not we consider with intelligent mind
that this damage to the corn arises from the deceitfulness ot
the mouse?

Since the mouse has made a hole in our bam, and our bam
has been ravaged by its guile,

380 O soul, in the first place avert the mischief of the mouse,
and then show fervour (zeal) in gamering the corn.

Hear (one) of the sayings related from the Chiefest of the
Chief (the Prophet) : “ No prayer is complete without ‘ presence ’
(concentration of the mind on God).”

If there is no thievish mouse in our barn, where is the corn
of forty years’ works (of devotion)?

Why is the daily sincerity (of our devotions) not being stored,
bit by bit, in this barn of ours?

Many a star (spark) of fire shot forth from the iron (of good
works), and that burning heart received (it) and drew (it) in;

385 But in the darkness a hidden thief is laying his finger upon
the stars.

Extinguishing the stars one by one, that no lamp may shine
from the (spiritual) sky.

Though there be thousands of snares at our feet, when Thou
art with us there is not any trouble.

Every night Thou freest the spirits from the body’s snare,
and dost erase (the impressions on) the tablets (of the mind).

The spirits are set free every night from this cage, (they are)
done with ordinance and talk and tale.

390 At night prisoners are unconscious of their prison, at night
governors are unconscious of their power.

There is no sorrow, no thought of gain or loss, no fancy of this
person or that person.

This is the state of the ‘drif (gnostic), even without sleep :
God said, {Thou wouldst deem them auoakA zohilst they slefit.
Shy not at this^.

He is asleep, day and night, to the affaire of the world, like
a pen in the hand of the Lord’s control.

One who sees not the hand in the writing thinks (that) the
act (of writing proceeds) from the pen by means of movement.

393 ^ ^ He (God) hath shown forth some part of this state of the
“on/, (inasmuch as) the vulgar too are carried off (overtaken)
by sleep of the senses.

Their souls are gone into the desert that is without descrip-
tion: their spirits and bodies are at rest;

And with a whistle thou leadest them back to the snare,
leadest them all (back) to justice and to the judge.

^ J.fi. “ do not deny this or disbelieve in it.”


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS Z5

Like Israfil (Seraphiel), He (God) who causes the dawn to
break brings them all from those lands (of spirit) into (the
world of) form.

He embodies the spirits divested (of body), He makes each
body pregnant (laden) again (with actions and works).

He makes the steed of the souls bare of saddle ; this is the 400
inner meaning of ‘‘ Sleep is the brother of Death’';

But in order that they may return in the daytime, He puts
a long tether on its leg,

So that in the daytime He may lead it back from that meadow
and bring it from the pasture (to go) under the load.

Would that He had guarded this spirit as the Men of the
Cave or as the Ark of Noah,

That this mind and eye and ear might be delivered from the
Flood of wakefulness and consciousness !

Oh, in the world there is many a Man of the Cave beside to5
you, before you, at this time:

The Cave is with him, the Friend is in converse with him;
but your eyes and ears are sealed, (so) what does it avail?


Story of the CalipKs seeing Layla.

The Caliph said to Layla: ‘‘Art thou she by whom Majmin
was distracted and led astray?

Thou art not superior to other fair ones.” “Be silent,” she
replied, “since thou art not Majntin.”

Whosoever is awake (to the material world) is the more asleep
(to the spiritual world) ; his wakefulness is worse than his sleep.
When our soul is not awake to God, wakefulness is like clos- ^ 10
ing our doors (to Divine influences).

All day long, from the buffets of phantasy and from (thoughts
of) loss and gain and from fear of decline,

There remains to it (the soul) neither joy nor grace and glory
nor way of journeying to Heaven,

The one asleep (to spiritual things) is he who hath hope of
every vain fancy and holds parley with it.

Diabolum per somnum videt tanquam virginem caelestem,
deinde propter libidinem eftundit cum diabolo aquam (seminis).

Postquam semen generationis in terram salsuginosam infudit, 415
ipse ad se rediit, fugit ab eo ilia imago,

Hinc percipit languorem capitis et (videt) corpus pollutum,
Proh dolor ob illud simulacrum visum (sed revera) non visum 1
The bird is flying on high, and its shadow is speeding on the
earth, flying like a bird:

Some fool begins to chase the shadow, running (after it) so
far that he becomes powerless (exhausted),


26 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Not knowing that it is the reflexion of that bird in the air,
not knowing where is the origin of the shadow.

420 He shoots arrows at the shadow; his quiver is emptied in
seeking (to shoot it) :

The quiver of his life became empty ; his life passed in running
hotly in chase of the shadow.

(But) when the shadow of God is his nurse, it delivers him
from (every) phantom and shadow.

The shadow of God is that servant of God who is dead to
this world and living through God.

Lay hold of his skirt most quickly without misgiving, that
you may be saved in the skirt (end) of tlie last days (of the
world).

425 (The shadow mentioned in the words) 11 ow He {God)
tended the shadow is the form of the saints, which guides to
the light of the Divine Sun.

Do not go in this valley without this guide; say, like Khalil
(Abraham), “7 love not them that set.*'

Go, from the shadow gain a sun: pluck the skirt of the
(spiritual) king, Shams-i Tabrfei (the Sun of 'Fabriz) !

If you do not know the way to this feast and bridal, ask of
Ziyd’u ’ 1 -Haqq (the Radiance of God) Husamu'ddm.

And if on the way envy seize you by the throat, it belongs
to (is characteristic of) Iblis to go beyond bounds in envy ;

430 For he because of envy hath disdain for Adam, and because
of envy is at war with felicity.

In the Way there is no harder pass than this. Oh, fortunate
he who is not companioned by envy !

This body, you must know, is the house of envy, for tlie
household are tainted with envy.

If the body is the house of envy, yet CJod made that body
very pure.

(The text) Cleanse My house ^ ye twain ^ is the explanation of
(such) purity; it (the purified heart) is a treasure of (Divine)
light, though its talisman is of earth.

435 When you practise deceit and envy against one who is without
envy, from that envy black stains arise in your heart.

Become (as) dust under the feet of the men of (Jod; throw
dust on the head of envy, even as we do.


Explanation of the en%)y of the vizier^

That petty vizier had his origin from envy, so that for vanity
he gave to the wind (sacrificed) his ears and nose,

In the hope that by the sting of envy his venom might enter
the souls of the poor (Christians).


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 27

Any one who from envy mutilates his nose makes himself with-
out ear and without nose (unable to apprehend spiritual things).

The nose is that which catches a scent, and which the scent 440
leads towards an abode (of spiritual truth).

Whoever hath no scent is without a nose ; the scent (referred
to) is that scent which is religious.

When he has caught a scent and given no thanks for it,
(that) ingratitude comes and devours his nose (deprives him
of the organ of spiritual perception).

Give thanks (to God) and be a slave to those who give thanks :
be in their presence (as one) dead, be steadfast.

Do not, like the vizier, m^e brigandage your stock-in-trade ;
do not turn the people away from the ritual prayer.

The miscreant vizier had become (in appearance) a true re- 445
ligious counsellor, (but) he had craftily put garlic in the almond
cake.


How the sagacious among the Christians perceived the
guile of the vizier.

Whoever was possessed of (spiritual) discernment was feeling a
sweet savour in his words and, joined therewith, bitterness,

He (the vizier) was saying fine things mixed (with foul) : he
had poured some poison into the sugared julep.

The outward sense of it was saying, Be diligent in the Way,'"
but in effect it was saying to the soul, “Be slack.

If the surface of silver is white and new, (yet) the hands and
dress are blackened by it.

Although fire is red-faced (bright and glorious) with sparks, 450
look at the black behaviour (displayed) in its action.

^ If the lightning appears luminous to the eye, (yet) from its
distinctive property it is the robber of sight (it strikes men blind).

^ (As for) any (Christian) who was not wary and possessed of
discernment, the words of him (the vizier) were (as) a collar
on his neck.

During six years, in separation from the king, the vizier
became a refuge for the followers of Jesus,

To him the jDeople wholly surrendered their religion and
their hearts: at his command and decree they were ready to die.

How the king sent fnessages in secret to the vizier.

Messages (passed) between the king and him : the king had 455
words of comfort from him^ in secret.

^ The king wrote to him, saying, “O my fortunate one, the
time is come: quickly set my mind at ease.’*

He replied : “ Behold, O king, I am preparing to cast disorders
into the religion of Jesus.”

^ Literally, '‘through him the king had comforts,’*


28


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


Explanation of the twelve tribes of the Christians.

The people of Jesus had twelve ami'rs as rulers in authorit}'
over them.

Each party followed one amir and had become devoted to its
own ami'r from desire (of worldly gain).

460 These twelve amirs and their followers became the slaves of
that vizier of evil sign.

They all put trust in his words, they all took bis procedure
as a pattern.

Each amir would have given up his life in his presence at
the time and hour (on the spot), if he (the vizier) had bidden
him die.


Sow the vizier confused the ordinances of the Cospel.

He prepared a scroll in the name of (addressed t<i) each one,
the (written) form of each scroll (of) a different ten«)r,

The ordinances of each (of) a diverse kind, this contradicting
that from the end to the beginning.

465 In one he made the path of asceticism and hunger to he the
basis of repentance and the condition (necessary) for conversion.
_ In one he said : “ Asceticism profits naught : in this Way there
is no place (means) of deliverance but generosity.”

In one he said: “Your hunger and generosity are (intply)
assocktion on your part (of other objects) with (Him who is)
the object of your worship.

Excepting trust (in God) and complete resignation in sorrow
and joy, all is a deceit and snare.”

In one he said: “It is incumbent (on you) to serve ((»od)‘;

else the thought of putting trust (in Him) is (a cause of) sus-
picion.” V / V /


470 In one he sad: ‘There are (Divine) commands and prohi-
bitions, (but they) are not for practice (observance): they arc
(oiffy) to show our weakness (inability to fulfil them),

_ So that we may behold our weakness therein and at that
time recognise the power of God.”

In one he said : “ Do not regard your weakness : that weakness
IS an act of ingratitude. Beware!

Regard your power, for this power is from Him: know tliut
your power is the gift of Him who is lU (the Absolute God).”

in one he said: “Leave both these (qualities) behind; whut-
soever is contained in sight (regard for other than God) is an
idol (somethmg which involves dualism).”

“1^0 not put out this candle (of sight), for
ttation ^ ^ candle (lighting the way) to (interior) conccn-


I.e. to perform the outward acts of worship,"


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 29

When you relinquish sight and phantasy (too soon), you will
have put out the candle of union at midnight/’

In one he said: ‘‘Put it out^ — ^have no fear — that you may
see myriads of sights in exchange ;

For by putting it out the candle of the spirit is increased:
by your self-denial your Layla (beloved) becomes your Majmin
(lover).

If any one abandons the world by his own (act of) renuncia-
tion, the world comes to him (with homage) more and more/’

In one he said: “That which God hath given you He made 480
sweet to you in (at the time of) bringing it into existence.

He made it easy (blessed) to you, and do you take it gladly:
do not throw yourself into anguish.”

In one he said: “Let go all that belongs to self, for it is
wrong and bad to comply with your nature,”

(Many) different roads have become easy (to follow) : every
one’s religion has become (to him) as (dear) as life.

If God’s making (religion) easy were the (right) road, every
Jew and Zoroastrian would have knowledge of Him.

In one he said: “That (alone) is made easy (blessed) that 485
(nothing but) spiritual food should be the life of the heart/’

When the enjoyments of the (sensual) nature are past, like
brackish soil they raise no produce and crop.

The produce thereof is naught but penitence ; the sale thereof
yields only loss, nothing more.

That is not “easy” in the end; its (true) name ultimately
is “hard.”

Distinguish the hard from the easy: consider (what is) the
goodliness of this and tlaat in the end.

In one he said: “Seek a master (teacher); you will not find 490
foresight as to the end among the qualities derived from
ancestors.”

Every sort of religious sect foresaw the end (according to
their own surmise) : of necessity they fell captive to error.

To foresee the end is not (as simple as) a jband-loom ; other-
wise, how would there have been difference in religions?

In one he said: “ You are the master, because you know the
master.

Be a man and be not subject to men. Go, take your own
head (choose your own way), and be not one whose head is turn-
ing (bewildered in search of a guide).”

In one he said: “All this (multiplicity) is one: whoever sees 495
two is a squint-eyed manikin.”

In one he said; “How should a hundred be one? He who
thinks this is surely mad,”

^ X,e, “extinguish the sight which regards ‘other/ see nothing but
God.”


30 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

The doctrines, every one, are contrary to each other: how
should they be one? Are poison and sugar one?

Until you pass beyond (the difference of) poison and sugar,
how will you catch a scent of unity and oneness?

Twelve books of this style and fashion were drawn up in
writing by that enemy to the religion of Jesus.

Shomng how this dijference lies m the form of the doctrine,
not in the real nature of the Way.

500 He had no scent (perception) of the unicolority of Jesus, nor
had he a disposition from (imbued with) the tincture of the
dyeing-vat of Jesus.

From that pure vat a garment of a hundred colours would
become as simple and one-coloured as light.

(This) is not the unicolority from which weariness ensues;
nay, it is (a case) like (that of) fishes and clear water :

Although there are thousands of colours on dry land, (yet)
fishes are at war with dryness.

Who is the fish and what is the sea in (iny) simile, that the
King Almighty and Glorious should resemble them?

505 In (the world of) existence myriads of seas and fishes prostrate
themselves in adoration before that Munificence anti Hounty.

How many a rain of largesse hath rained, so that the sea
was made thereby to scatter pearls !

How many a sun of generosity hath shone, so that ch>ud and
sea learned to be bountiful !

The sunbeams of Wisdom struck on soil and clay, so that
the earth became receptive of the seed.

The soil is faithful to its trust, and whatever you have sown
in it, you carry away the (equivalent in) kind thereof' without
fraud (on the part of the soil),

5J0 It has derived this faithfulness from that (Divine) faithfulness,
inasmuch as the sun of Justice has shone upon it.

Until springtide brings the token of (Jod, the soil does not
reveal its secrets.

The Bounteous One who gave t(j an inanimate thing these
informations and this faithfulness and this righteousness,

His grace makes an inanimate thing informed, (while) His
wrath makes blind the men of understanding.

Soul and heart cannot endure that ferment: to whom shall
I speak? There is not in the world a single ear (capable of
apprehension).

513 Wherever there was an ear, through Him it became an eye;
wherever there was a stone, through Him it became a jasper.

He IS an alche^st— what is alchemy (compared with His
action)? He is a giver of miracles (to prophets) — ^what is magic
(compared with these miracles)?


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 31

This uttering of praise (to Him) is (really) the omission of
praise on my part, for this (praise) is a proof of (my) being,
and being is a sin.

It behoves (us) to be not-being in the presence of His Being :
in His presence what is (our) being? Blind and blue.

Were it not blind it would have been melted (consumed) by
Him: it would have known the heat of (the Divine) sun;

And were it not blue from mourning, how would this region 520
(of phenomenal existence) have (remained) frozen like ice?

Setting forth houo the vizier incurred perdition {by engaging)
in this plot.

The vizier was i^orant and heedless, like the (Jewish) king:
he was wrestling with the eternal and inevitable.

With a God so mighty that in a moment He causes a hundred
worlds like ours to come into existence from non-existence :

A hundred worlds like ours He displays to the sight, when
He makes your eye seeing by (the light of) Himself.

If the world appears to you vast and bottomless, know that
to Omnipotence it is not (so much as) an atom.

This world, indeed, is the prison of your souls: oh, go in 535
yonder direction, for there lies your open country.

This world is finite, and truly that (other) is infinite: image
and form are a barrier to that Reality.

The myriads of Pharaoh’s lances were shattered by (the hand
of) Moses (armed) with a single staff.

Myriads were the therapeutic arts of Galen: before Jesus
and his (life-giving) breath they were a laughing-stock.

Myriads were the books of (pre-lslamic) poems : at the word
of an illiterate (prophet) they were (put to) shame.

(Confronted) with such an all-conquering Lord, how should 530
any one not die (to self), unless he be a vile wretch?

Many a mind (strong and firm) as a mountain did He uproot;
the cunning bird He hung up by its two feet.

To sharpen the intelligence and wits is not the (right) way:
none but the broken (in spirit) wins the favour of the King.

Oh, many the amassers of treasure, digging holes (in search
of treasure), who became an ox’s beard (dupe) to that vain
schemer (tire vizier) !

Who is the ox that you should become his beard? What is
earth that you should become its stubble^ ?

When a woman became pale-faced (ashamed) of (her) wicked- 535
ness, God metamorphosed her and made her Zuhra (the planet
Venus).

To make a woman Zuhra was metamorphosis: what (then) is
it to become earth and clay, O contumacious one?

^ Literally, '‘dry herbage/*


32 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Your spirit was bearing you towards the highest sphere (of
heaven) : you went towards the water and the clay amongst the
lowest (of the low).

By this fall you metamorphosed yourself from that (state of)
existence which was the envy of the (spiritual) intelligences.

Consider, then, how is (what is the character of) this meta-
morphosis: compared with that metamorphosis (of the woman)
this (which you have suffered) is exceedingly vile.

540 You urged the steed of ambition towards the stars: you did
not acknowledge Adam who was worshipped (by the angels).

After all, you are a son of Adam. 0 degenerate! how long
will you regard lowness as nobility?

How long will you say, will conquer a whole world, I will
make this world full of myself’’?

If the world should be filled with snow from end to end, the
glow of the sun would melt it with a single look.

God by a single spark (of His mercy) maketh naught his
(the vizier’s) burden (of sin) and (the burden) of a hundred
viziers and a hundred thousand.

5-45 He maketh the essence of that (false) imagination to he
wisdom; He maketh the essence of that poisoned water to he
a (wholesome) drink.

That which raises doubt He turncth into certainty; He
maketh lovingkindnesses grow from the causes of hatred.

He cherisheth Abraham in the fire; He turncth fear into
security of spirit.

By His burning (destroying) of secondary causes I am dis-
traught; in (my) fancies of Him I am like a sophist (sceptic or
agnostic).

How the vizier started another plan to mislead the
{Christian) folk.

The vizier formed in his mind another plan: he abandoned
preaching and sat alone in seclusion.

550 He inspired ardour in his disciples from (their) longing (to
see him) ; he remained in seclusion forty or fifty days.

The people became mad from longing for him and on
account of being separated from his (spiritual) feeling and dis-
course and intuition.

They were making supplication and lament, while he in
solitude was bent double by austerities.

They said, ‘‘Without thee we have no light: how (what) is
the state of a blind man without a leader?

By way of showing favour (to us) and for God’s sake, do not
keep us jparted from thee any longer.

555 We are as children and thou art our nurse: do thou spread
over us that shadow (of thy protection).”


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 33

He said, “My soul is not far from them that love (me), but
there is no permission to come forth.”

Those amirs came for intercession, and the disciples came
in reproach.

Saying, “O noble sir, what a misfortune is this for us!
Without thee we are left orphaned (deprived) of our hearts and
our religion.

Thou art making a pretence while we in grief are heaving
cold (fruitless) sighs from the burning heat of our hearts.

We have become accustomed to thy sweet discourse, we have 560
drunk of the milk of thy wisdom.

Allah! Allah! do not thou (O vizier) treat us with such
cruelty: show kindness to-day, do not (put off till) to-morrow.

Does thy heart give to thee (consent) that these who have
lost their hearts (to thee) should at last, being without thee,
become (numbered) amongst them that have nothing left?

They all are writhing like fishes on dry land: let loose the
water, remove the dam from the stream.

O thou like whom there is none in the world, for God’s sake,
for God’s sake, come to the aid of thy people ! ”


How the vizier reftised the request of the disciples.

He said: “Beware, O ye enslaved by words and talk, ye who 505
seek admonition (consisting) of the speech of the tongue and
(the hearing) of the ear.

Put cotton-wool in the ear of the low (physical) sense, take
off the bandage of (that) sense from your eyes !

The ear of the head is the cotton-wool of the ear of the
conscience: until the former becomes deaf, that inward (ear)
is deaf.

Become without sense and without ear and without thought,
that ye may hear the call (of God to tlie soul), ‘ Return!**’

So long as thou art (engaged) in the conversation of wake-
fulness, how wilt thou catch any scent of the conversation of
sleep?

Our speech and action is the exterior journey: the interior 570
journey is above the sky.

The (physical) sense saw (only) dryness, because it was born
of dryness (earth): the Jesus of tne spirit set foot on the sea.

The journey of the dry body befell on dry land, (but) the
journey of the spirit set foot (took place) in the heart of the sea.

Since thy life has passed in travelling on land, now mountain,
now river, now desert.

Whence wilt thou gain the Water of Life? Where wilt thou
cleave the waves of the Sea?

The waves of earth are our imagination and understanding 575


N M


3


34 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

and thought ; the waves of water are (mystical) sclf-efracement
and intoxication and death (fund).

Whilst thou art in this (sensual) intoxication, thou art far
from that (mystical) intoxication; whilst thou art drunken with
this, thou art blind to that cup.

Outward speech and talk is as dust: do thou for a time make
a habit of silence. Take heed!

How the disciples repeated their request that he should
interrupt his seclusion.

They all said: “0 sage who scekcst a crevice (means of
evasion), say not to us this (word of) guile and harshness.

Lay on the beast a burden in proportion to its endurance,
lay on the weak a task in proportion to their strength.

580 The bait for every bird is according to its (the bird’s) measure
(capacity): how should a fig be the food (lure) for every bird?

If you give a babe bread instead of milk, lake it (for granted)
that the poor babe will die of the bread;

(Yet) afterwards, when it grows teeth, that babe will t)f its
own accord ask for bread.

When an unfledged bird begins to fly, it becontes a mouthful
for any rapacious cat ;

(But) when it grows wings, it will fly of itself without trouble
and without whistling (prompting), good or bad,

585 Thy speech makes the Devil silent, thy words make our ears
(full of) intelligence.

Our ears are (full of) intelligence when thou art spesiking;
our dry land is a river when thou art the ocean.

With thee, earth is better to us than heaven, () thou by
whom (the world from) Arcturus to the Fish is illumined!

Without thee, darkness is over heaven for us, (but) com-
pared with thee, O Moon, who is this heaven at all?

The heavens have the form of sublimity, (but) the es.sence
of subhmity belong to the pure spirit.

390 The form of sublimityis for bodies ; beside the essence (reality)
bodies are (mere) names.” '

The refusal of the vissier to interrupt his seclusion.

He said: “Cut short your arguments, let my advice make its
way into your souls and hearts.

If I am trustworthy, the trustworthy is not doubted, even
though I should call heaven earth.

If I am (endowed witli) perfection, why (this) disbelief in
my perfection? and if I am not (perfect), why this molestation
and annoyance?

I Mil not go forth from this seclusion, because I am occupietl
with mward experiences.” *


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 35


How the disciples raised objections against the vizier's
secluding himself.

They all said: “O vizier, it is not disbelief: our words are 595
not as the words of strangers.

The tears of our eyes are running because of our separation
from thee ; sigh after sigh is going (up) from the midst of our
souls.

A babe does not contend with its nurse, but it weeps, although
it knows neither evil nor good.

We are as the harp and thou art striking (it with) the plectrum
(playing on it) : the lamentation is not from us, it is thou that
art making lamentation.

We are as the flute, and the music in us is from thee; we are
as the mountain, and the echo in us is from thee.

We are as pieces of chess (engaged) in victory and defeat: our 600
victory and defeat is from thee, O thou whose qualities are comely !

Who are we, O thou soul of our souls, that we should remain
in being beside thee?

We and our existences are (really) non-existences: thou art
the absolute Being which manifests the perishable (causes
phenomena to appear).

We all are lions, but lions on a banner: because of the wind
they are rushing onward from moment to moment.

Their onward rush is visible, and the wind is unseen: may
that which is unseen not fail from us !

Our wind (that whereby we are moved) and our being are of 605
thy gift ; our whole existence is from thy bringing (us) into being.

Thou didst show the delightfulness of Being unto not-being,
(after) thou hadst caused not-being to fall in love with thee.

Take not away the delightfulness of thy bounty ; take not away
thy dessert and wine and wine-cup !

And if thou take it away, who is there that will make inquiry?
How should the picture strive with the painter?

Do not look on us, do not fix thy gaze on us : look on thine
own kindness and generosity.

We were not, and there was no demand on our part, (ytt) 6ro
thy grace was hearkening to our unspoken prayer (and calling
us into existence).*^

Before the painter and the brush the picture is helpless and
bound like a child in the womb.

Before Omnipotence all the people of the (Divine) court of
audience (the world) are as helpless as the (embroiderer's)
fabric before the needle.

Now He makes the picture thereon (one of) the Devil, now (of)
Adam ; now He makes the picture thereon (one of) joy, now (one
of) grief.


3-3


36 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

There is no power (to any one) that he should move a hand
in defence; no (right of) speech, that he should utter a word
concerning injury or benefit.

615 Recite from the Qur’dn the interpretation of {i.e. a text which
interprets) the (preceding) verse: God said, Thou didst not
throw when thou threwest.

If we let fly an arrow, that (action) is not from us: we are
(only) the bow, and the shooter of the arrow is God.

This is noxjahr (compulsion); it is the ineaning of jahbdri
(almightiness) : the mention of almightiness is for tire sake of
(inspiring us with) humility.

Our humility is evidence of necessity, (but) our sense of
guilt is evidence of freewill.

If there were not freewill, what is this shame? And what is
this sorrow and guilty confusion and abashment?

620 Why is there chiding between masters and pupils? Why is
the mind changing (so as to depart) from plans (already foi’med)?

And if you say that he (the assertor of freewill) takes no heed
of His (God’s) compulsion, (and that) God’s moon has become
hidden in His cloud.

There is a good answer to this; if you hearken, you will re-
linquish unbelief and incline towards the (true) religion.

Remorse and humility occur at the time of illness : the time
of illness is wholly wakefulness (of conscience).

At the time when you are becoming ill, you pray God to
forgive your trespass ;

625 The foulness of your sin is shown to you, you resolve to
come back to the (right) way;

You make promises and vows that henceforth your chosen
course (of action) will be nothing but obedience (to God):

Therefore it has become certain that illness gives to you con-
science and wakefulness.

Note, then, this principle, 0 thou that seekest the principle;
every one who suffers pain has caught the scent (thereof):

The more wakeful any one is, the more full ol suffering he
is; the more aware (of God) he is, the paler Ine is in coun-
tenance.

630 If you are aware of His jahr (compulsion), where is your
huinility? Where is your feeling of (being loaded with) the
chain of fdis jabbdri (almightiness)?

How should one make merry wno is bound in chains? When
does the captive in prison behave like the man who is free?

And if you consider that your foot is shackled (and that) tlie
king s officers are sitting (as custodians) over you,

Then do not act like an officer (tyrannously) towards the
helpless, masmuch as that is not the nature and habit of a
helpless man.


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 37

Since you do not feel His compulsion, do not say (that you
are compelled); and if you feel it, where is the sign of your
feeling?

In every act for which you have inclination, you are clearly 635
conscious of your power (to perform it),

(But) in every act for which you have no inclination and
desire, in regard to that (act) you have become a necessitarian,
saying, ‘‘This is from God/'

The prophets are necessitarians in regard to the works of
this world, (while) the infidels are necessitarians in regard to
the works of the next world.

To the prophets the works of the next world are (a matter
of) freewill; to the foolish the works of this world are (a matter
of) freewill.

Because every bird flies to its own congener: it (follows)
behind, and its spirit (goes) before, (leading it on).

Inasmuch as the infidels were congeners of Sijjt^n (Hell), they 640
were well-disposed to the prison {sijn) of this world.

Inasmuch as the prophets were congeners of ^Illiyyin (Heaven),
they went towards the ^Illiyyin of spirit and heart.

This discourse hath no end, but let us (now) relate the story
to its completion.

How the vizier made the disciples lose hope of his
abandoning seclusion.

The vizier cried out from within, “O disciples, be this made
known to you from me.

That Jesus hath given me a such-like message: ‘ Be separated
from all friends and kinsfolk.

Set thy face to the wall, sit alone, and choose to be secluded 645
even from thine own existence.'

After this there is no permission (for me) to speak; after this
I have nothing to do with talk.

Farewell, O friends ! I am dead: I have carried my belongings
up to the Fourth Heaven,

In order that beneath the fiery sphere I may not burn like
firewood in woe and perdition,

(But) henceforth may sit beside Jesus at the top of the Fourth
Heaven/'

How the vizier appointed each one of the amirs separately
as his successor.

And then he summoned those amirs one by one and con- 650
versed with each (of them) alone-

He said to each one, “In the religion of Jesus thou art the
vicar of God and my khalifa (vicegerent),


38 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

And those other amirs are thy followers: Jesus hath made
all of them thy assistants.

Any amir who lifts his neck (in rebellion), seize him and
either kill him or hold him captive;

But do not declare this whilst I am alive: do not seek this
supreme authority until I am dead.

655 Until I am dead, do not reveal this: do not lay claim to
sovereignty and dominion.

Here is this scroll and the ordinances of the Messiah : recite
them distinctly, one by one, to his people.”

Thus he spoke to each amir separately, (saying), “'i'hcro is
no vicar in the religion of God except thee.”

He honoured each, one by one, (in this way) : whatever he
said to that (amir) he also said to this.

To each he gave one scroll: every one was purpo-sely the
contrary of the other.

660 All the scrolls were different, like the forms of the letters (of
the alphabet) from ya to alif.

The rule (laid down) in this scroll was cftntrary to the rule
in that: we have already explained (the nature of) this con-
tradiction.

How the vizier killed himself in seclusmi.

After that, he shut the door for other forty days (aiui then)
killed himself and escaped from his existence.

When the people learned of his death, there came to pass at
his grave the scene of the Resurrection’.

So great a multitude gathered at his grave, tearing their hair,
rending their garments in wild grief for him,

665 That only God can reckon the number of them -Arabs aiul
Turks and Greeks and Kurds.

They put his (grave’s) earth on their heads; they deemed
anguish for him to be the remedy for themselves.

During a month those multitudes over his grave made a
way for blood from their eyes (shed tears of angui.sh).

How the people of Jesus — on him be peace !~asked the amirs,

“ Which one of you is the successor? ”

After a month the people said, “O chiefs, which of (the)
amirs is designated in his place.

That vre may acknowledge him as our religious leader instead
ot mm (the vizier), and give our hands and skirts into his hand ?

6 ;o bince the sun is gone and has branded us (left the brand of
stSd? li®arts), is not a lamp the (only) resource in his

J.e. a scene of tumultuous grief and lamentation.


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 39

Since union with the beloved has vanished from before our
eyes, we must needs have a vicar as a memorial of him {i.e,
one who will recall him to our memory).

Since the rose is past and the garden ravaged, from whom
shall we get the perfume of the rose? From rosewater.'*

Inasmuch as God comes not into sight, these prophets are
the vicars of God.

Nay, I have said (this) wrongly; for if you suppose that the
vicar and He who is represented by the vicar are two, it (such
a thought) is bad, not good.

Nay; they are two so long as you are a worshipper of form, 675
(but) they have become one to him who has escaped from
(consciousness of) form.

When you look at the form, your eye is two ; look at its (the
eye's) light, which grew from the eye.

'Tis impossible to distinguish the light of the two eyes, when
a man has cast his look upon their light.

If ten lamps are present in (one) place, each differs in form
from another : .

To distinguish without any doubt the light of each, when
you turn your face towards their light, is impossible.

If you count a hundred apples or a hundred quinces, they 680
do not remain a hundred (but) become one, when you crush
them (together).

In things spiritual there is no division and no numbers ; in
things spiritual there is no partition and no individuals.

Sweet is the oneness of the Friend with His friends: catch
(and cling to) the foot of spirit. Form is headstrong^.

Make headstrong form waste away with tribulation, that be-
neath it you may descry unity, like a (buried) treasure;

And if you waste it not away, His favours will waste it — oh,
my heart is His vassal.

He even showeth Himself to (our) hearts, He seweth the 685
tattered frock of the dervish*^.

Simple were we and all one substance; we were all without
head and without foot yonder.

We were one substance, like the Sun; we were knotless and
pure, like water.

When that goodly Light took form, it became (many in)
number like the shadows of a battlement.

Rase ye the battlement with the manjamq (mangonel), that
difference may vanish from amidst this company (of shadows),

I would have explained this (matter) with (eager) contention, 690
but I fear lest some (weak) mind may stumble.

The points (involved in it) are sharp as a sword of steel ; if you
have not the shield (of capacity to understand) , turn back and flee !

^ /.«. opposed to spiritual unity, * J.6. He unites the mystic with Himself,


40 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Do not come without shield against this adamant (keen blade),
for the sword is not ashamed of cutting.

For this cause I have put the sword in sheath, that none who
misreads may read contrariwise (in a sense contrary to the true
meaning of my words).

We come (now) to complete the tale and (speak) of the
loyalty of the multitude of the righteous,

695 Who rose up after (the death of) this leader, demanding a
vicar in his place.


The quarrel of the amirs concerning the succession.

One of those amirs advanced and went before that loyal-
minded people.

“Behold,” said he, “I am that man’s vicar: 1 am the vicar
of Jesus at the present time.

Look, this scroll is my proof that after him the vicarate
belongs to me.”

Another amir came forth from ambush : his pretension re-
garding the vicegerency was the same;

700 He too produced a scroll from under his arm, so tluit in
both (amirs) there arose the Jewish anger.

The rest of the amirs, one after anotlrer, drawing swords of
keen mettle,

Each with a sword and a scroll in his hand, fell to combat
like raging elephants.

Hundreds of thousands of Christians were slain, so that there
were mounds of severed heads;

Blood flowed, on left and right, like a torrent; mountains of
this dust (of battle) rose in the air.

705 The seeds of dissension which he (the vizier) had sown had
become a calamity (cause of destruction) to their heads.

The walnuts (bodies) were broken, and those which had the
kernel had, after being slain, a spirit pure and fair.

Slaughter and death which befalls the bodily frame i.s like
breaking pomegranates and apples :

That which is sweet becomes pomegranate-syrup, and that
which is rotten is naught but noise :

That which has reality is made manifest (after death), and
that which is rotten is put to shame.

710 Go, strive after reality, 0 worshipper of form, inasmuch as
reality is the wing on form’s body.

Cohort with the followers of reality, that you may both win
the gift and be generous (in giving yourself up to God).

Beyond dispute, in this body the spirit devoid of realitv is
even za a wooden sword in the sheath : ^

Whilst it remains in the sheath, it is (apparently) valuable,


THE JEWISH KING AND THE CHRISTIANS 41

(but) when it has come forth it is an implement (only fit) for
burning.

Do not take a wooden sword into the battle! First see
(whether your sword is a real one), in order that your plight
may not be wretched.

If it is made of wood, go, seek another; and if it is adamant,
march forward joyously.

The sword (of reality) is in the armoury of the saints : to see
(and associate with) them is for you (as precious as) the Elixir.

All the wise have said this same thing: the wise man^ is
a {Divine) mercy to created beings.

If you would buy a pomegranate, buy (it when it is) laughing
(having its rind cleft open), so that its laughter (openness) may
give information as to its seeds.

Oh, blessed is its laughter, for through its mouth it shows
the heart, like a pearl from the casket of the spirit.

Unblest was the laughter (openness) of the red anemone, yzo
from whose mouth appeared the blackness of its heart.

The laughing pomegranate makes the garden laughing (gay
and blooming) : companionship with (holy) men makes you one
of the (holy) men.

Though you be rock or marble, you will become a jewel when
you reach the man of heart (the saint).

Plant the love of the holy ones within your spirit; do not
give your heart (to aught) save to the love of them whose
hearts are glad.

Go not to the neighbourhood of despair: there are hopes.

Go not in the direction of darkness : there are suns.

The heart leads you into the neighbourhood of the men of 7^5
heart (the saints) ; title body leads you into the prison of water
and earth.

Oh, give your heart food from (conversation with) one who
is in accord "with it; go, seek (spiritual) advancement from one
who is advanced.

How honour was paid to the description of Mustafa {Mohammed)^
on whom be peace^ which was mentioned in the Gospel.

The name of Mustafd was in the Gospel — (Mustafd) the
chief of the prophets, the sea of purity.

There was mention of his (external) characteristics and ap-
pearance; there was mention of his warring and fasting and
eating,

A party among the Christians, for the sake of the Divine
reward, whenever (in reading the Gospel) they came to that
name and discourse,

^ l.e, the prophet or saint who knows God.


43 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

730 Would bestow kisses on that noble name and stoop their faces
towards that beauteous description.

In this tribulation of which we have told, that parly were
secure from tribulation and dread,

Secure from the mischief of the amirs and the vizier, seeking
refuge in the protection of the Name of Ahmad (Mohammed).

Their offspring also multiplied: the Light of Ahmad aided
and befriended them.

And the other party among the Christians (who) were holding
the Name of Ahmad in contempt,

735 They became contemptible and despised through dissensions
caused by the evil-counselling and evil-plotting vizier;

Moreover, their religion and their law became corrupted in
consequence of the scrolls which set forth all perversely.

The Name of Ahmad gives such help as this, so that (one
may judge) how his Light keeps guard (over his followers).

Since the Name of Ahmad became (to the Christians) an
impregnable fortress, what then must be the lisscnce of that
trusted Spirit?

The story of another Jewish king who endeavoured
to destroy the religion of Jesus,

After this irremediable bloodshed which befell through the
affliction (brought upon the Christians) by the vizier,

740 Another king, of the progeny of that Jew, addressed himself
to the destruction of the people of Jesus.

If you desire information about this second outbreak, read
the chapter of the Qur’an (beginning): By Heaven which hath
the {zodiacal) signs.

This second king set foot in the evil way that was originated
by the former king.

Whosoever establishes an evil way (practice), towards him
goes malediction every hour.

The righteous departed and their ways remained, and from
the vile there remained (nothing but) injustice and execrations.
745 Until the Resurrection, the face of every congener of those
wicked men who comes into existence is turned towards that
one (who belongs to his own kind).

by vein^ is this sweet water and bitter water, flowing in
(God’s) creatures until the blast of the trumpet (at the Resur-
rection).

^ To the righteous is the inheritance of the sweet water. What
Trr 7 inheritance? We have caused {those of Our servants whom
We have chosen) to inherit the Book,

If you will consider, the supplications of the seekers (of God)
are rays (proceeding) from the substance of prophethood.

^ l.e, separate and never mingling with each other.


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 43

The rays are circling with the substances (whence they spring) :
the ray goes (ultimately) in the direction where that (substance) is.

The window-gleam runs round the house, because the sun 750
goes from sign to sign of the zodiac.

Any one who has affinity with a star (planet) has a concur-
rence (of qualities) with his star.

If his ascendant star be Venus, his whole inclination and love
and desire is for joy;

And if he be one born under Mars, one whose nature is to
shed blood, he seeks war and malignity and enmity.

Beyond the (material) stars are stars in which is no conflagra-
tion or sinister aspect,

(Stars) moving in other heavens, not these seven heavens 755
known to all,

(Stars) immanent in the radiance of the light of God, neither
joined to each other nor separate from each other.

When any one’s ascendant (fortune) is (from) those stars, his
soul burns the infidels in driving (them) off.

His anger is not (like) the anger of the man born under Mars
— perverse ^ , and of such nature that it is (now) dominant and
(now) dominated.

The dominant light (of the saints) is secure from defect and
dimness between the two fingers of the Light of God.

God hath scattered that light over (all) spirits, (but only) the 7^0
fortunate have held up their skirts (to receive it) ;

And he (that is fortunate), having gained that strown largesse
of light, has turned his face away from all except God.

Whosoever has lacked (such) a skirt of love is left without share
in that strown largesse of light.

The faces of particulars are set towards the universal:
nightingales play the game of love with the rose.

The ox has his colour outside, but in the case of a man seek
the red and yellow hues within.

The good colours are from the vat of purity; the colour of 705
the wicked is from the black water of iniquity.

The baptism of God is the name of that subtle colour ; the curse
of God is the smell of that gross colour.

That which is of the sea is going to the sea: it is going to
the same place whence it came —

From the mountain-top the swift-rushing torrents, and from
our body the soul whose motion is mingled with love.

^ Literally, ** with face inverted,** z.e, directed towards base ends.


44


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


How the Jewish king made a fire and placed an idol beside it, saying,
“ Whoever hows down to this idol shall escape the fire."

Now see what a plan this currish Jew contiived ! He set up
an idol beside the fire,

no Saying, “He that bows down to this idol is saved, and if he
bow not, he shall sit in the heart of the fire.”

Inasmuch as he did not give due punishment to this idol of
selH, from the idol of his self the other idol was born.

The idol of jrour self is the mother of (all) idols, because that
(material) idol is (only) a snake, while this (spiritual) idol is a
dragon.

The self is (as) iron and stone (whence fire is produced),
while the (material) idol is (as) the sparks: those sparks are
quieted (quenched) by water.

(But) how should the stone and iron be allayed by water?
How should a man, having these twain, be secure?

775 The idol is the black water in a jug; the self is a fountain for
the black water.

That sculptured idol is like the black torrent ; the idol-making
self is a fountain full of water for it.

A single piece of stone will break a hundred pitchers, but
the fountain is jetting forth water incessantly.

’Tis easy to break an idol, very easy; to regard the self as
easy (to subdue) is folly, folly.

O son, if you seek (to know) the form of the self, read the
story of Hell with its seven gates.

780 Every moment (there proceeds from the self) an act of deceit,
^d in every one of those deceits a hundred Pharaohs are
drowned together with their followers.

to the God of Moses and to Moses, do not from
Pharaoh’s quality (rebellious insolence) spill the water of the
Faith.

Lay your hand on (cleave to) the One (God) and Ahmad
(Mohammed) ! O brother, escape from the Bii Jahl of the body !

How a child began to speak amidst the fire and urged the
people to throw themselves into the fire.

That Jew brought to that idol a woman with her child, and
the fire was blazing. ’

He took the child from her and cast it into the fire: the
ESlT^ “righted and withdrew her heart from (abandoned)

‘‘iol (when) the child

cnea, Veniy, I am not dead.

* Nafs, the appetitive soul, “the flesh.”


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 45

Come in, O mother; I am happy here, although in appear-
ance I am amidst the fire.

The fire is a spell that binds the eye for the sake of screening
(the truth); this is (in reality) a Divine mercy which has
raised its nead from the collar (has been manifested from the
Unseen).

Come in, mother, and see the evidence of God, that thou
mayst behold the delight of God’s elect.

Come in, and see water that has the semblance of fire ; (come
away) from a world which is (really) fire and (only) has the
semblance of water.

Come in, and see the mysteries of Abraham, who in the fire 790
found cypress and jessamine.

I was seeing death at the time of birth from thee : sore was
my dread of falling from thee ;

(But) when I was born, I escaped from the narrow prison
(of the womb) into a world of pleasant air and beautiful
colour.

Now I deem the (earthly) world to be like the womb, since
in this fire 1 have seen such rest :

In this fire I have seen a world wherein every atom possesses
the (life-giving) breath of Jesus.

Lo, (it is) a world apparently non-existent (but) essentially 795
existent, while that (other) world is apparently existent (but)
has no permanence.

Come in, mother, (I beseech thee) by the right of mother-
hood: sec this fire, how it hath no fieriness.

Come in, mother, for felicity is come; come in, mother, do
not let fortune slip from thy hand.

Thou hast seen the power of that (Jewish) cur: come in, that
thou mayst see the power of God’s grace.

’Tis (only) out of pity that I am drawing thy feet (hither), for
indeed such is my rapture that I have no care for thee.

Come in and call the others also, for the King has spread a 800
(festal) table within the fire.

O true believers, come in, all of you: except this sweetness
{‘adhbf) all is torment {‘adhdb).

Oh, come in, all of you, like moths ; (come) into this fortune
which hath a hundred springtimes.”

(Thus) he was crying amidst that multitude : the souls of the
people were filled with awe.

Mter that, the folk, men and women (alike), cast themselves
unwittingly^ into the fire —

Without custodian, without being dragged, for love of the 805
Friend, because from Him is the sweetening of every bitter-
ness —


*■ Literally, “ beside themselves.”


46 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Until it came to pass that the (king’s) myrmidons were
holding back the people, saying, “Do not enter the fire!”

The Jew became black-faced (covered with shame) and dis-
mayed; he became sorry and sick at heart,

Because the people grew more loving (ardent) in their Faith
and more firm in mortification {fand) of the body.

Thanks (be to God), the Devil’s plot caught him in its toils;
thanks (be to God), the Devil saw himself disgraced’.

sio That which he was rubbing (the shame he was inflicting) on
the faces of those persons (the Christians) was all accumulated
on the visage of that vile wretch.

He who was busy rending the garment (honour and integrity)
of the people — his own (garment) was rent, (while) they were
unhurt.

How the mouth remained awry of a man who pronounced
the name of Mohammed, on whom he peace, derisively.

He made his mouth wry and called the name of Ahmad
(Mohammed) in derision ; his mouth remained awry.

He came back, saying, “Pardon me, O Mohammed, O thou
to whom belong the (Divine) gifts oi' esoteric knowledge.

In my folly I was ridiculing thee, (but) I myself was related
to ridicule and deserving it.”

815 When God wishes to rend the veil of any one (expose him
to shame). He turns his inclination towards reviling holy men.

When God wishes to hide the blame of any one, he (that
person) does not breathe a word of blame against the blame-
worthy.

When God wishes to help us. He turns our inclination to-
wards humble lament.

Oh, happy the eye that is weeping for His sake ! Olx, fortunate
the heart that is seared" for His sake !

The end of every weeping is laughter at last ; the man who
foresees the end is a blessed servant (of God).

8ao Wherever is flowing water, there is greenery: wherever are
running tears, (the Divine) mercy is shown.

Be moaning and moist-eyed like the water-wheel, that green
herbs may spring up from the courtyard of your soul.

If you desire tears, have mercy on one who sheds tears; if
you desire mercy, show mercy to the weak.

How the fire reproached the Jewish king.

The king turned his face to tlie fire, saying, “O fierce-
tempered one, where is thy world-consuming natural dis-
position?

How art thou not burning? What has become of thy specific
^ Literally, “black-faced.” * Literally, “roasted.”


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 47

property? Or has thy intention changed because of our
fortune?’-

Thou hast no pity (even) on the fire-worshipper: how (then) 825
has he been saved who does not worship thee?

Never, O fire, art thou patient: how burnest thou not? What
is it? Hast thou not the power?

Is this a spell, I wonder, that binds the eye or the mind?
How does the lofty pyre not burn?

Has some one bewitched thee? Or is it magic, or is thy
unnatural behaviour ^ from our fortune?”

The fire said: “ I am the same, I am fire: come in, that thou
mayst feel my heat.

My nature and element have not changed : I am the sword of 830
God and by (His) leave I cut.

The Turcoman dogs fawn at the tent- door before the guest.

But if any one having the face of a stranger pass by the tent,
he will see the dogs rushing at him like lions.

I am not less than a dog in devotion, nor is God less than a
Turcoman in life (living power).”

If the fire of your nature make you suffer pain, it burns by
command of the Lord of religion;

If the fire of your nature give you joy, (that is because) the 835
Lord of religion puts joy therein.

When you feel pain, ask pardon of God: pain, by command
of the Creator, is efficacious.

When He pleases, pain itself becomes joy; bondage® itself
becomes freedom.

Air and earth and water and fire are (His) slaves: with you
and me they are dead, but with God they are alive.

Before God, fire is always standing (ready to do His behest),
writhing continually day and night, like a lover.

If you strike stone on iron, it (the fire) leaps out : ’tis by 840
God’s command that it puts forth its foot.

Do not strike together the iron and stone of injustice, for
these two generate like man and woman.

The stone and the iron are indeed causes, but look higher,

O good man !

For this (external) cause was produced by that (spiritual)
cause : when did a cause ever proceed from itself without a cause?

And those causes which ^ide the prophets on their way are
higher than these (external) causes.

That (spiritual) cause makes this (external) cause operative; 843
sometimes, again, it makes it fruitl^s and ineffectual.

(Ordinary) minds arc familiar with this (external) cause, but
the prophets are familiar with those (spiritual) causes.

^ T e, because Fate has so ordained.

* Literally^ *‘the contrariety to thy nature.’*


® Literally, **the fetter.”


48 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

What is (the meaning of) this (word) “cause” (sahah) in
Arabic? Say: “cord” (rasan). This cord came into this well
(the world) by (Divine) artifice.

The revolution of the water-wheel causes the cord (to move),
(but) not to see lixe mover of the water-wheel is an error.

Beware, beware! Do not regard these cords of causation in
the world as (deriving their movement) from the giddy wheel
(of heaven),

850 Lest you remain empty and giddy like the (celestial) wheel ,
lest through brainlessness you burn like markli wood.

By the command of God air becomes fire: both are drunken
with the wine of God.

0 son, when you open your eyes you will sec that from God
too are the water of clemency and the fire of anger.

Had not the soul of the wind been informed by Cxod, how
would it have distinguished (the believers and unbelievers)
amongst the people of ‘Ad?

The story of the wind which destroyed the people of ‘Ad in the
time of {the prophet) Hud, on whom he peace.

Hfid drew a line round the believers : the wind would become
soft (subside) when it reached that place,

855 (Although) it was dashing to pieces in the air all who were
outside of the line.

Likewise Shaybdn the shepherd used to draw a visible line
round his flock

Whenever he went to the Friday service at prayer-time, in
order that the wolf might not raid and ravage there :

No wolf would go into that (circle), nor would any sheep
stray beyond that mark;

The wind of the wolf’s and sheeps’ concupiscence was barred
because of (by) the circle of the man of God.

860 Even so, to those who Imow God {Uirifdn) the wind of 1 )cath
is soft and pleasant as the breeze (that wafts the scent) of (loved)
ones like Joseph.

The fire did not set its teeth in Abraham : how should it bite
him, since he is the chosen of God?

The religious were not afliicted by the fire of lust which bore
all the rest down to the bottom of the earth.

The waves of the sea, when they charged on by God’s com-
mand, discriminated the people of Moses from the Egyptians.

The earth, when the (Divine) command came, drew Q 4 r 6 n
(Korah) with his gold and throne into its lowest depth.

S65 The water and clay, when it fed on the breath of Jesus,
spread wings and pinions, became a bird, and flew.

Your glorification (of God) is an exhalation from the water


ANOTHER JEWISH KING 49

and clay (of your body) : it became a bird of Paradise through
the breathing (into it) of your heart’s sincerity.

Mo-unt Sinai, from (seeing) the radiance of Moses, began to
dance, became a perfect Siifi, and was freed from blemish.

What wonder if the mountain became a venerable Sdfi? The
body of Moses also was (formed) from a piece of clay.

How the Jewish king scoffed and denied and would not accept
the counsel of his intimates.

The king of the Jews beheld these marvellous things, (but)
he had naught (to say) except mockery and denial.

His counsellors said, “Do not let (this injustice) go beyond 870
bounds, do not drive the steed of obstinacy so far.”

He handcuffed the counsellors and confined them, he com-
mitted one injustice after another^.

When the matter reached this pass, a shout came — “Hold
thy foot (stop), O cur! for Our vengeance is come.”

After that, the fire blazed up forty ells high, became a ring,
and consumed those Jews.

From fire was their origin in the beginning : they went (back)
to their origin in the end.

That company were born of fire: the way of particulars is S75
towards the universal.

They were only a lire to consume tlie true believers: their
fire consumed itself like rubbish.

He whose mother is Hdwiya (Hell-fire) — Udwiya shall become
his cell (abode).

The mother of the child is (always) seeking it: the funda-
mentals pursue the derivatives.

If water is imprisoned in a tank, the wind sucks it up, for it
(the wind) belongs to the original (source):

It sets it free, it wafts it away to its source, little by little, so sso
that you do not see its wafting;

And our souls likewise this breath (of ours) steals away, little
by little, from the prison of the world.

I'he perfumes of our (good) words ascend even unto Him,
ascending from us whither God knoweth.

Our breaths soar up with the choice (words), as a gift from
us, to tlie abode of everlastingness ;

Then comes to us the recompense of our speech, a double
(recompense) thereof, as a mercy from (God) the Glorious;

Then fie causes us to repair to (makes us utter) good words sss
like tihose (already uttered), that His servant may obtain (some-
tUng more) of what he has obtained.

Thus do they (our good words) ascend while it (the Divine
^ Literally, “ he made injustice (to be) link on link, ».e. continuous.’*


50 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

mercy) descends continually: mayst thou never cease to keep
up that (ascent and descent) !

Let us speak Persian’: the meaning is that this attraction
(by which God draws the soul towards Himself) comes from
the same quarter whence came that savour (spiritual delight
experienced in and after prayer).

The eyes of every set of people remain (turned) in the direc-
tion where one day they satisfied a (longing for) delight.

The delight of (every) kind is certainly in its own kind (con-
gener) : the delight of the part, observe, is in its whole;

890 Or else, that (part) is surely capable of (attachment to) a
(different) kind and, when it has attached itself thereto, be-
comes homogeneous with it.

As (for instance) water and bread, which were not our con-
geners, became homogeneous \vith us and increased within u.s
(added to our bulk and strength).

Water and bread have not the appearance of being our con-
geners, (but) from consideration of the end (final result) deem
them to be homogeneous (with us).

And if our delight is (derived) from something not honto-
geneous, that (thing) will surely resemble the congener.

That which (only) bears a resemblance is a loan: a loan is
impermanent in the end.

895 Although the bird is delighted by (the fowler’s) whistle, it
takes fright when it (sees him and) does not find its own coti-
gener.

Although the thirsty man is delighted by the mirage, he runs
away when he comes up to it, and seeks for water.

Although the insolvent are pleased with base gold, yet that
(gold) is put to shame in the mint.

(Take heed) lest gildedness (imposture) cast you out of the
(right) way, lest false imagination cast you into the well.

Seek the story (illustrating this) from (the book of) Kalt'la
(and Dimna), and search out the moral (contained) in tlte story.


Setting forth how the beasts of chase told the linn to trust
in God and cease from exerting himself.

900 A number of beasts of chase in a pleasant valley were harassed
by a lion.

In^much as the lion was (springing) from ambush and carry-
mg^em away, that pasturage had become unpleasant to them all.

They made a plot: they came to the lion, saying, "We will
keep thee full-fed by means of a (fixed) allowance.

Do not go after any prey beyond thy allowance, in order that
this grass may not become bitter to us.”

‘ The five preceding verses are in Antliic.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


51


How the lion answered the beasts and explained the
advantage of exertion.

“Yes/' said he, “if I see (find) good faith (on your part),
not fraud, for often have I seen (suffered) frauds from Zayd
and Bakr^.

I am done to death by the cunning and fraud of men, I am 905 .
bitten by the sting of (human) snake and scorpion ;

(But) worse than all men in fraud and spite is the man of
the flesh {nafs) lying in wait within me.

My ear heard ‘The believer is not bitten (twice),' and
adopted (this) saying of the Prophet with heart and soul.'^

How the beasts asserted the superiority of trust in God to
exertion and acquisition.

They all said: “O knowing sage, let precaution alone: it is
of no avail against the Divine decree.

In precaution is the embroilment of broil and woe: go, put
thy trust in God : trust in God is better.

Do not grapple with Destiny, O fierce and furious one, lest yio
Destiny also pick a quarrel with thee.

One must be dead in presence of the decree of God, so that
no blow may come from the Lord of the daybreak.^'

How the lion upheld the superiority of exertion and acquisition
to trust in God and resignation.

“Yes," he said; “(but) if trust in God is the (true) guide,

(yet use of) the means too is the Prophet’s rule {Sunnd).

The Prophet said with a loud voice, ‘ While trusting in God
bind the knee of tixy camel.’

Hearken to the signification of ‘The earner (worker) is be-
loved of God’: through trusting in God do not become neg-
lectful as to the (ways and) means."

How the beasts preferred trust in God to exertion.

The party (of beasts') answered him, saying, “Regard acqui- 915
sition (work), arising from the infirmity of (God’s) creatures,
as a mouthful of deceit proportionate to the size of the gullet.

There is no work better than trust in God : what, indeed, is
dearer (to God) than resignation?

Often do they flee from affliction (only) to (fall into) affliction ;
often do they recoil from the snake (only) to (meet with) the
dragon.

^ Zayd and Bakr arc typical names of men in Arabic.


52 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Man devised (something), and his device was a snare (wherein
he was trapped) : that which he thought to be life was (actually)
the drainer of his blood (his destroyer).

He locked the door while the foe was in the house : the plot
of Pharaoh was a story of this sort.

920 That vengeful man slew hundreds of thousands of babes,
while the one he was searching after was in his (Pharaoh ’s) house.

Since in our eyesight (foresight) there is much defect, go, let
your own sight pass away (/at/fl) in the sight of the Iwiend (CJod).

His sight for ours — ^what a goodly recompense! In Ilis sight
you will find the whole object of your desire.

So long as the child could neither grasp (exert strength) nor
run, he had nothing to ride on but his father’s neck ;

_ ’V\^en he became a busybody and plied hand and foot (exerted
himself), he fell into trouble and wrctcheilness

925 The spirits of created beings, before (the creation of) hand
and foot, by reason of their faitlifulness were Hying in (the
realm of) purity;

When they were constrained by the (Divine) command. Get
ye dozm, they became engaoled in anger and covetousness and
contentment.

We are the family of the Lord and craving after milk (like
infants): he (the Prophet) said, ‘The people arc (lod’s family.’

He who gives rain from heaven is also able, from 1 1 is mercy,
to give us bread.”

How the lion again pronounced exertion to be superior
to trust in God.

Yes,” said the lion; “but tlie Lord of Ilis servants set a
ladder before our feet.

930 Step by step must we climb towards the roof; to he a necessi-
tarian here is (to indulge in) foolish hopes.

You have feet: why do you make yourself out to he lame? you
conceal the fingers (whereby you grasp) ?

When the master put a spade in the slave’s hand, his object
was made known to him (the slave) widiout (a word falling from
tus) tongue.

Hand and spade alike are Ilis (God’s) implicit signs ; (our
thinking upon the end are Ilis explicit declarations.

y*??.y®'^,take His signs to heart, you will devote your life
to fulfilling that indication (of I lis will).

935 He will give you many hints (for the understanding) of
mystenes, He will remove the burden from you and give you
(spiritual) authority* ^ ^

Do you bear (His burden)? He will cause you to be borne
blueT^* rendered by “wretchedness*’ arete ti kabUd, “blind and


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 53

(aloft). Do you receive (His commands)? He will cause you
to be received (into His favour).

If you accept His command, you will become the spokesman
(thereof); if you seek union (with Him), thereafter you will
become united.

Freewill is the endeavour to thank (God) for His beneficence :
your necessitarianism is the denial of that beneficence.

Thanksgiving for the power (of acting freely) increases your
power; necessitarianism takes the (Divine) gift (of freewill) out
of your hand.

Your necessitarianism is (like) sleeping on the road: do not 940
sleep ! Sleep not, until you see the gate and the threshold!

Beware! do not sleep, O inconsiderate necessitarian, save
underneath that fruit-laden tree.

So that every moment the wind may shake the boughs and
shower upon the sleeper (spiritual) dessert and provision for
the journey.

Necessitarianism is to sleep amidst highwaymen: how should
the untimely bird receive quarter?

And if you turn up your nose at His signs, you deem
(yourself) a man, but when you consider (more deeply), you
are (only) a woman.

Tnis measure of understanding which you possess is lost: 945
a head from which the understanding is severed becomes a
tail,

Because ingratitude is wickedness and disgrace and brings
the ingrate to the bottom of Hell-fire.

If you are putting trust in God, put trust (in Him) as regards
(your) work: sow (the seed), then rely upon the Almighty.


How the beasts once more asserted the superiority of trust
in God to exertion.

They all lifted up their voices (to dispute) with him, saying,
“Those covetous ones who sowed (the seed of) means^,

Myriads on myriads of men and women — ^why, then, did
they remain deprived of fortune?

From the beginning of the world myriads of generations have 950
opened a hundred mouths, like dragons:

Those clever people devised plots (of such power) that the
mountain thereby was torn up from its foundation.

The Glorious (God) described their plots (when He said) :
(though their guile be such) that the tops of the mountains might
be moved thereby.

(But) except the portion which came to pass (was predestined)

^ l.e. had recourse to exertion as a means of attaining to their desire.


54 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

in eternity, nothing showed its face (accrued to them) from
their scheming^ and doing.

They all fell from (failed in) plan and act: the acts and
decrees of the Maker remained.

955 O illustrious one, do not regard work as aught but a name!
O cunning one, think not that exertion is aught but a vain
fancy!’’


How ^AsrdHl {Azrael) looked at a certain man, and how that man
fled to the palace of Solomon; and setting forth the superiority
of trust in God to exertion and the uselessness of the latter.


One forenoon a freeborn (noble) man arrived and ran into
Solomon’s hall of justice,

His countenance pale with anguish and both lips blue. I’hen
Solomon said, ‘‘ Good sir, what is the matter? ”

He replied, “Azrael cast on me such a look, so full of wrath
and hate.”

‘‘Come,” said the king, “what (boon) do you desire now?
Ask (it)!” “0 protector of my life,” said ho, “commaiul the
wind

960 To bear me from here to India. Maybe, when thy slave is
come thither he will save his life.”


Lo, the people are fleeing from poverty: hence are they a
mouthful for (a prey to) covetousness and expectation.

The fear of poverty is like that (man’s) terror: know thou
that covetousness and striving are (like) India (in this talc).

He (Solomon) commanded the wind to bear him qinekly over
the water to the uttermost part of India.

Next day, at the time of conference and meeting, Solomon
said to Azrael : *

965 “Didst thou look with anger on that Moslem in order that
he might wander (as an exile) far from his home?”

.^rael said. When did I look (on him) angrily? I saw him
^y> looked at him) in astonishment,

For God had comm^ded me, saying, ‘Hark, tej-day do thou
take his spirit m India.’

From wonder I said (to myself), ‘(Even) if he has a himdrcd
wings, tis a far journey for him to be in India (to-day).’”

In like m^ner judge of all the affairs of this world and open
your eye and see! ^

970 From whom shall we flee? From ourselves? Oh, absurdity!

we take (ourselves) away? From God? Oh,


> Reading for jli:*,.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


55


How the lion again declared exertion to be superior to trust
in God and expounded the advantages of exertion.

‘‘Yes/’ said the lion; “but at the same time consider the
exertions of the prophets and the true believers.

God, exalted is He, prospered their exertion and what they
suffered of oppression and heat and cold.

Their plans were excellent in all circumstances: everything
done by a goodly man is goodly.

Their snares caught the Heavenly bird, all their deficiencies
turned to increment.”

0 master, exert thyself so long as thou canst in (following) 975
the way of the prophets and saints !

Endeavour is not a struggle with Destiny, because Destiny
itself has laid this (endeavour) upon us.

1 am an infidel if any one has suffered loss a single moment
(while walking) in the way of faith and obedience.

Your head is not broken: do not bandage this head. Exert
yourself (in doing good works) for a day or two {i.e. during
this brief life), and laugh unto everlasting!

An evil resort sought he that sought this world ; a good state
sought he that sought the world to come.

Plots for gaining (the things of) this world are worthless, »)So
(but) plots for renouncing this world are inspired (by God).

The (right) plot is that he (the prisoner) digs a hole in his
prison (in order to escape) ; if he blocks up the hole, that is a
foolish plot.

This world is the prison, and we arc the prisoners: dig a
hole in the prison and let yourself out !

What is this world? To be forgetful of God; it is not mer-
chandise and silver and weighing-scales and women.

As regards the wealth that you carry for religion’s sake, “ How
good is righteous wealth (for the righteous man)!” as the
Prophet recited.

Water in the boat is the ruin of the boat, (but) water under- 985
neath the boat .is a support.

Since he cast out from his heart (the desire for) wealth and
possessions, on that account Solomon did not call himself (by
any name) but “poor.”

The stoppered jar, (though) in rough water, floated on the
water because of its wind-filled (empty) heart.

When the wind of poverty is within (any one), he rests at
peace on the surface of the water of the world;

Although the whole of this world is his kingdom, in the eye
of his heart the kingdom is nothing.

Therefore stopper and seal the mouth of your heart, and fill 990
it from the inward ventilator.


56 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Exertion is a reality, and medicine and disease are realities :
the sceptic in his denial of exertion practised (and thereby
affirmed) exertion.

How the superiority of exertion to trust in God
was established.

The lion gave many proofs in this style, so that those necessi-
tarians became tired of answering (him).

Fox and deer and hare and jackal abandoned (the doctrine of)
necessity and (ceased from) disputation.

They made covenants with the furious lion, (ensuring) that
he should incur no loss in this bargain,

995 (That) the daily ration should come to him without trouble,
and that he should not need to make a further demand.

Day by day the one on whom the lot fell would run to the
lion as (swiftly as) a cheetah.

When this cup (of death) came round to the hare, the hare
cried out, ‘‘Why, how long (are we to endure this) injustice?”

How the beasts of chase blamed the hare for his delay
in going to the lion.

The company (of beasts) said to him: “All this time wo have
sacrificed our lives in troth and loyalty.

Do not thou seek to give us a bad name, O rebellious one !
Lest the lion be aggrieved, go, go ! Quick ! Quick !

How the hare answered the beasts,

1000 ** 0 friends, said he, “ grant me a respite, that by my cunning

ye may escape from calamity,

That by my cunning your lives may be saved and this
(safety) remain as a heritage to your children.”

Every prophet amidst the peoples used to cull them after
this manner to a place of deliverance,

For he had seen from Heaven the way of escape, (though) in
(their) sight he was contracte d (despicable) like the pupil of the eye .

Men regarded him as small like the pupil: none attained to
(understanding of) the (real) greatness (worth) of the pupil.

How the beasts objected to the proposal of the hare,

1005 The company (of beasts) said to him; “() donkey, listen
(to us) ! Keep thyself within the measure of a hare !

Eh, what brag is this— (an idea) which thy betters never
brought into their minds?

Thou art self-conceited, or Destiny is pursuing us ; else, how
is this speech suitable to one like thec?^’


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


57


Hov) the hare again answered the beasts.

He said: “O friends, God gave me inspiration: to a weakling
there came a strong judgement (wise counsel)/'

That which God taught to the bees is not (belonging) to the
lion and the wild ass.

It (the bee) nrakes houses of juicy halwd (sweetmeat) : God i°io,
opened to it the door of that knowledge ;

That whicli God taught to the silkworm — does any elephant
know such a device?

Adam, created of earth, learned knowledge from God: (his)
knowledge shot beams up to the Seventh Heaven.

He (Adam) broke the name and fame (pride) of the angels,
to the confusion of that one who is in doubt concerning God.

1 le (( lod) made the ascetic of so many thousand years (Iblis)
a muz/.Ic for that young calf (Adam),

'I'hat he (Adam) might not be able to drink the milk of 1013
knowledge of religion, and that he might not roam around that
lofty castle.

'I’he sciences of the followers of (external) sense became a
muzzle, so that he (the believer in sense-perception) might not
receive milk from that sublime knowledge.

(But) into the blood-drop (core) of the heart there fell a
jewel which I le (God) gave not to the seas and skies.

Mow long (this regard for) form? After all, O form- wor-
shipper, has thy reality-lacking soul not (yet) escaped from form?

If a human being were a man in virtue of form, Ahmad
(Mohammed) and Bu Jahl would be jtist the same.

The painting on the wall is like Adam : see from the (pictured) 1020
form what thing in it is wanting.

The spirit is wanting in that resplendent form: go, seek that
jewel rarely found 1

I'he heads of all the lions in the world were laid low when
They (God) gave a hand to (bestowed favour on) the dog of
the Companions (of the Cave).

What loss does it suffer from that abhorred shape, inasmuch
as its spirit was plunged in the ocean of light?

’Tis not in pens to describe (the outward) form^: (what is
written) in letters is (qualities like) “learned” and “just";

(And qualities like) “ learned” and“just” are only the spiritual 1025
essence which thou wilt not find in (any) place or in front or
behind.

I’he sun of the spirit strikes (with its beams) on the body
from the quarter where (the relation of) place does not exist:
it (that sun) is not contained in the sky.

' J.«. “it is not the external features of a man that are praised in com-
plimentary letters addressed to him.”


MATHNAWI, BOOK I


S8

An account of the knowledge of the hare and an explanation of the
excellence and advantages of knowledge.

This topic hath no end. Give heed ! Listen to the story of
the hare.

Sell your asinine (corporeal) ear and buy another ear, for the

* asinine ear will not apprehend this discourse.

Go, behold the foxy tricks played by the hare; behold how
the hare made a plot to catch the lion.

1030 Knowledge is the seal of the kingdom of Solomon : the whole
world is form, and knowledge is the spirit.

Because of this virtue, the creatures of the seas and those of
mountain and plain are helpless before man.

Of him the pard and lion are afraid, like the mouse ; from
him the crocodile of the great river is in pallor and agitation.

From him peri and demon took to the shores (sought refuge) :
each took abode in some hiding-place.

Man hath many a secret enemy: the cautious man is a wise
one.

1035 (There are) hidden creatures, evil and good : at every instant
their blows are striking on the heart.

If you go into the river to wash yourself, a thorn in the water
inflicts a hurt upon you.

Although the thorn is hidden low in the water, you know it
is there, since it is pricking you.

The pricks of (angelic) inspirations and (satanic) temptations
are from thousands of beings, not (only) from one.

Wait (patiently) for your (bodily) senses to be transmuted,
so that you may see them (the hidden beings), and the dilHculty
may be solved,

1040 So that (you may see) whose words you have rejected and
whom you have made your captain.


How the beasts requested the hare to tell the
secret of his thought.

Afterwards they said, ‘‘O nimble hare, communicate what is
in thy apprehension.

0 thou who hast grappled with a lion, declare the plan which
thou hast thought of.

Counsel gives perception and understanding: the mind is
helped by (other) minds.

Prophet said, ‘ O adviser, take counsel (with the trust-
worthy), for he whose counsel is sought is trusted.^**


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


59


How the hare withheld the secret from them.

He said, One ought not to say forth every secret: sometimes 1045
the even number turns out to be odd, and sometimes the odd
number to be even/’

If from guilelessness you breathe words to a mirror, the
mirror at once becomes dim to us.

Do not move your lip in explanation of these three things,
(namely) concerning your departure and your gold and your
religion ;

For to these three there is many an adversary and foe standing
in wait for you when he knows (about any of them).

And if you tell (only) one or two (a few people), farewell (to
your secret): every secret that goes beyond the twain (who
share it) is published abroad.

If you tie two or three birds together, they will remain on 1050
the groixnd, imprisoned by grief;

(But in truth) they hold a consultation well-disguised and
mingled, in its (apparent) significance, with that which casts
error (into the mind of any one who observes them).

(Similarly) the Prophet used to take counsel, (speaking) crypti-
cally, and they (his companions) would answer him and (would
be) without knowledge (of his real meaning).

He would speak his opinion in a covert parable''^, in order that
the adversary might not know foot from head.

He (the Prophet) would receive his answer from him (the
adversary), while the other would not catch the smell (drift)
of his question.


The story of the hare's stratagem.

He delayed awhile in going, then he went before the lion 1055
who rends (his prey) with claws.

Because he tarried late in going, the lion was tearing up the
earth and roaring.

said,” cried the lion, “that the promise of those vile ones
would be vain-vain and frail and unfulfilled.^

Their palaver has duped how long will this Time de-
ceive me, how long?”

The prince that hath no strength in his beard ^ is left sorely
in the lurch when by reason of his folly he looks neither back-
wards nor forwards.

The road is smooth, and under it are pitfalls: amidst the ^060
names there is a dearth of meaning.

^ Literally, ** wrapped in a parable.*'

“ Literally. ‘*has thrown me from the ass."

® I,e. foolish.


6o MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Words and names are like pitfalls : the sweet (flattering) word
is the sand for (the sand that sucks up) the water of our life.

The one sand whence water gushes is seldom to be found :
go, seek it.

He that searches after wisdom becomes a fountain of wisdom ;
he becomes independent of acquisition and (ways and) means.

The guarding tablet^ becomes a Guarded Tablet ^ ; his under-
standing becomes enriched by the Spirit.

1065 When a man’s understanding has been his teacher, after this
the understanding becomes his pupil.

The understanding says, like Gabriel, “O Ahmad (Mo-
hammed), if I take one (more) step, it will burn me;

Do thou leave me, henceforth advance (alone): this is my
limit, O sultan of the soul!”

Whoever, through heedlessness, remains without thanks-
giving and patience (self-control), knows (no resource) but this,
that he should follow in the heels of necessity (jabr).

Any onewho pleads necessity (as an excuse) feigns himself to be
ill, with the result that the (feigned) illness brings him to the grave.

1070 The Prophet said, “Illness (assumed) in jest brings (real)
disease, so that he (the jester) dies like a lamp.”

What is (the meaning oi) jabr} To bind up a broken (limb)
or tie a severed vein.

Inasmuch as you have not broken your foot in this path,
whom are you mocking? Why have you bandaged your foot?

But as for him who broke his foot in the path of exertion,
Burdq came up to him, and he mounted (and rode).

He^ was a bearer of the (true) religion, and he became one
who is borne; he was an accepter of the (Divine) command,
and he became accepted.

1075 Until now, he was receiving commands from the King;
henceforth he delivers the (King’s) commands to the people.

Until now, the stars were influencing him; henceforth he is
the ruler of the stars.

If (on this account) perplexity arise in thy sight (mind), then
thou wilt have doubts concerning The moon was cloven asunder.

Refresh thy faith, (but) not with talk of the tongue, 0 thou
who hast secretly refreshed thy (evil) desire.

So long as desire is fresh, faith is not fresh, for ’tis this
desire that locks (against thee) that gate.

1080 Thou hast interpreted (and altered the meaning of) the virgin
(uncorrupted) Word: interpret (alter) thyself, not the (Divine)
Book.

Thou inte^retest the Qur’dn according to thy desire: by
thee the sublime meaning is degraded and perverted.

^ Hs heart, which guards and preserves the lessons of wisdom.

I,e, an inviolable source of Divine knowledge.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 6i

The baseness of the foul interpretation given by the fly.

The fly was lifting up his head, like a pilot, on a blade of
straw and (a pool of) ass’s urine.

“I have called (them) sea and ship,” said he; “I have been
pondering over that (interpretation) for a long while.

Look ! here is this sea and this ship, and I am the pilot and
skilled (in navigation) and judicious.”

He was propelling the raft on the “sea” : that (small) quantity 10S5
appeared to him illimitable.

That urine was boundless in relation to him: where was the
vision that should sec it truly?

His world extends (just) as far as his sight reaches; his eye
is so big, his “sea” is big in the same proportion.

So with the false interpreter (of the Qur’dn) : like the fly, his
imagination is (foul as) ass’s urine and his conception (worthless
as) a straw.

If the fly leave off interpreting by (following his own) opinion.
Fortune will turn that fly into a humdy.

One who possesses this (Divine) indication (of the true looo
meaning) is not a fly : his spirit is not analogous to his (outward)
form.


How the lion roai ed wrathfully because the hare
was late in coming.

As (for example) the hare who struck against the lion: how
was his spirit analogous to his stature?

The lion from fury and rage was saying, “ By means of my
ear the enemy has bound up my eye^.

The tricks of the necessitarians have bound me (in captivity) ;
their wooden sword has wounded my body.

After this I will not hearken to their palaver: all that is (only
meant to deceive, like) the cry of demons and ghouls.

O my heart, tear them to pieces, do not lag; rend their skins, 1005
for they have naught but skin.”

What is skin? Specious words, like ripples on water which
have no continuance.

Know that these words are as the skin (rind), and the meaning
is (as) the kernel ; these words are as the form, and the meaning
is like the spirit.

The skin hides the defect of the bad kernel; it (also) hides
jealously the secrets of the good kernel.

When the pen is of wind and the scroll of water, whatever
you write perishes speedily;

It is written on water: if you seek constancy from it, you will noo
return biting your hands (in disappointment).

^ I.e. “ I have let myself be blinded by listening to the beasts.”


62


MATHNAWI, BOOK I

The wind in men is vanity and desire ; when you have aban-
doned vanity , (then) is (the time for) the message from Him (God) .

Sweet are the messages of the Maker, for it (that message)
from head to foot (from first to last) is enduring.

The khutbas^ for kings change (and pass), and their empire ;
(all will pass) except the empire and khutbas (insignia) of the

prophets, • / r -i \

Because the pomp of kings is from (earthly) vanity, (Avmie)
the glorious privilege of the prophets is from (Divine) Majesty.

1105 The names of kings are removed from the dirhems, (but)
the name of Ahmad (Mohammed) is stamped on them for ever *

The name of Ahmad is the name of all the prophets : when
the hundred comes (is counted), ninety is with us as welD.

Further setting forth the stratagem of the hare.

The hare made much delay in going; he rehearsed to himself
the tricks (which he was about to play).

After long delay he came on (took) the road, that he might
say one or two secrets into the ear of the lion.

Think, what worlds are in commerce with Reason! I low
wide is this ocean of Reason!

mo In this sweet ocean our forms are moving fast, like cups on
the surface of water :

Until they become full, (they float) like bowls on the top of
the sea, (but) when the bowl is filled it sinks therein.

Reason is hidden, and (only) a world (of phenomena) is
visible: our forms are the waves or a spray of it (of that hidden
ocean).

Whatsoever (thing) the form makes (uses as) a means of
approach to It (to Reason), by that (same) means the ocean
(of Reason) casts it (the form) far away.

So long as the heart does not see the Giver of (its) conscience,
so long as the arrow does not see the far-shooting Archer

1115 He (who is thus blind) thinks his horse is lost, though (all
the while) he is obstinately speeding his horse on the road.

That fine fellow thinks his horse is lost, while his horse is
sweeping him onward like the wind.

In lamentation and inquiry that scatterbrain (runs) from door
to door in every direction, asking and searching:

Where and who is he that stole my horse?*’ What is this
(animal) under thy thigh, O master?

"‘Yes, this is the horse, but where is the horse? ” O dexterous
rider in search of thy horse, come to thyself 1

^ The khufha is a prayer for the Prophet and the reigning sovereign,
which forms part of the public worship of Moslems.

® Mohammed, being the last of the prophets, includes them all, us the
final sum includes all the units of which it is composed. ^ Cf. v. 1 143.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 63

The Spirit is lost (to view) because of its being so manifest 1120
and near: how, having thy belly full of water, art thou drv-
lippcd like a jar?

How wilt thou see red and green and russet, unless before
(seeing) these three (colours) thou see the light?

But since thy mind was lost (absorbed) in (perception of) the
colour , those colours became to thee a veil from (debarred thee
from contemplating) the light.

Inasmuch as at night those colours were hidden, thou sawest
that thy vision of the colour was (derived) from the light.

There is no vision of colour without the external light: even
so it is with the colour of inward phantasy.

I'his outward (light) is (derived) from the sun and from 1125
Suhah while the inward (light) is from the reflexion of the
beams of (Divine) (iloiy.

'I’hc light w’hich gives light to the eye is in truth the light of
the heart : the light of the eye is produced by the light of hearts.

Again, the light w^hich gives light to the heart is the Light
of CJod, which is pure and separate from the light of intellect
and sense.

At night there was no light: thou didst not see the colour;
then it (the light) was made manifest by the opposite of light
(by darkness).

(First) comes the seeing of light, then the seeing of colour;
and this thou knowest immediately by the opposite of light
(darkness),

God created pain and sorrow for the purpose that happiness ujo
might be made manifest by means of this opposite.

Ilidden things, then, are manifested by means of their
opposite; since CJod hath no oppasite, He is hidden;

For the sight fell (first) on the light, then on the colour: op-
posite is made manifest by opposite, like Greeks and Ethiopians.

'Fherefore thou knewest light by its opposite : opposite reveals
opposite in (the process of) coming forth.

'The Light of God hath no opposite in (all) existence, that by
means of that opposite it should be possible to make Him
manifest :

Necessarily (therefore) our eyes do not perceive Him, though 11^5
He perceives (us) : see this (fact) from (the case of) Moses and
tlie mountain (Sinai).

Know that form springs from spirit (reality) as the lion from
the jungle, or as voice and speech from thought.

'Inis speech and voice arose from thought; thou knowest not
where is the sea of thought,

But since thou hast seen that the waves of speech are fair,
thou knowest that their sea also is noble.

^ A small star.


64 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When the waves of thought sped on from (the sea of) Wisdom,
it (Wisdom) made (for them) the form of speech and voice,
up The form was born of the Word and died again, the wave
drew itself back into the sea.

The form came forth from Formlessness and went back
(thither), for Verily unto Him are we returning.

Every instant, then, thou art dying and returning: Mustafa
declared that this world is (but) a moment.

Our thought is an arrow (shot) from Him {Hu) into the air
{hawd): how should it stay in the air? It comes (back) to
God.

Every moment the world is renewed, and we are unaware of
its being renewed whilst it remains (the same in appearance).
1145 Life is ever arriving anew, like the stream, though in the body
it has the semblance of continuity.

From its swiftness it appears continuous, like the spark which
thou whirlest rapidly with thy hand.

If thou whirl a firebrand with dexterity, it appears to the
sight as a very long (line of) fire.

The swift motion produced by the action of God presents
this length of duration (Time) as (a phenomenon arising) from
the rapidity of Divine action.

Even if the seeker of this mystery is an exceedingly learned
man, (say to him), ‘‘Lo, ^usamu’dd^n, who is a sublime book
(where you will find the mystery revealed).^’


The harems coming to the lion and the liorCs anger with him.

1130 The lion, incensed and wrathful and frantic, saw the hare
coming from afar.

Running undismayed and confidently, looking angry and
fierce and fell and sour,

For by coming humbly (he thought) suspicion would be
(excited), while by boldness every cause of doubt would be
removed.

When he came further on, near to the “shoe-row^** the lion
shouted — ‘ ‘ Ha, villain I

I who have torn oxen limb from limb, I who have rubbed
the ear of (chastised and vanquished) the ferocious elephant —
1135 Who (what) is a half-witted (feeble) hare, that he should thus
throw on the ground (disregard) my behest?*'

Abandon the hare's slumber and heedlessness 1 Give ear,
0 donkey, to the roaring of this lionl^

^ The place near the door, where visitors take off their shoes before
advancing to the dais at the upper end of the room.

^ This verse is an admonition addressed to the reader.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS


65


The hare's apology.

“Mercy!” cried the hare, “I have an excuse, if thy Lord-
ship’s pardon come to my aid'.”

“ What excuse ? ” said he. “ Oh, the shortsightedness of fools I
Is this the lime for them to come into the presence of kings?

Thou art an untimely bird: tiry head must be cut off. One
ought not to hear the excuse of a fool.

I'he fool’s excuse is worse than his crime; the excuse of the nCo
ignorant is the poison that kills wisdom.

'I’hy excuse, O hare, is devoid of wisdom: what hare^ am I
that thou shouldst put it in my ear? ”

“ O king,” he replied, “account a worthless one to be worthy :
hearken to the excuse of one who has suffered oppression.

In particular, as an alms (thank-offering) for thy high estate,
do not drive out of thy way one whose way is lost.

'I'he ocean, which gives some water to every stream, lays on
its head and face (surface) every piece of rubbish.

By this bounty the sea will not become less : the sea is neither 1165
increased nor diminished by its bounty.”

'i'he lion said, “1 will bestow bounty in its (proper) place,

I will cut every one’s clothes according to his stature.”

“Listen,” cried the hare, “if 1 am not a fit object for (thy)
grace, I lay my head before the dragon of (thy) violence®.

At breakfast-time I set out on the way, I came towards the
king with my comrade.

'i'hat party (of beasts) had appointed, for thy sake, another
hare to go along with me as consort and companion.

On the road a lion attacked thy htimble slave, attacked both
the companions in travel who were coming (to thee).

1 said to him, ‘ We are the slaves of the King of kings, the
lowly fellow-servants of tliat (exalted) court.’

He said, “rhe King of kings! Who is he? Be ashamed! Do
not make mention of every base loon in my presence.

Both thee and thy king I will tear to pieces, if thou and thy
friend turn back from my' door.’

I said to him, ‘ Let me behold once more the face of the king
and bear the news of thee (to him).’

He said, ‘Place thy comrade with me (in my keeping) as a ji 175
pledge; otherwise, thou art a sacrifice (tny life is forfeit) ac-
cording to my law.’

We entreated him much: it was no use. He seized my friend
and left me to go alone.

' Literally, “ give me a (helping) hand,” i.e. ‘‘ if thou wilt pardon my
presumption and permit me to excuse myself, I will do so.”

* l.e, ‘‘ ass.” The Persian word for hare is kkargtish — ass-eared.

* I.e, “ I surrender myself to thy vengeance.”


66 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

My friend, from his plumpness, made three of me both in
comeliness and beauty and (size of) body.

Henceforth this road is barred by that lion : the thread of our
covenants is broken.

Cut off (abandon) hope of the allowance henceforth; I am
telling thee the truth, and truth is bitter.
ii8o If thou want the allowance, clear the way! hey, come on
and repel that irreverent one!”


How the lion answered the hare and set off with him.

“Come on in God’s name,” said he, “let me see where he is !
Go thou in front, if thou art speaking truth,

That I may give him and a hundred like him the punishment
they deserve, or if this is a lie, that I may give thy deserts to
thee.”

The hare set out on the way, (going) in fi'ont like a guide,
that he might lead him towards his snare.

Towards the well which he had designated: he had made
the deep well a snare for his (the lion’s) life.

1185 (Thus) were these twain going till (they arrived) near the well.
Look you, (this was) a hare (deceitful) as a (pool of) water
(hidden) under straw.

The water bears a blade of straw (down) to the plain: how,
I wonder, will the straw bear away a mountain?

The snare of his (the hare’s) guile was a noose for the lion :
a marvellous hare (he), who was carrying off a lion (as his prey) !

A Moses draws Pharaoh, with his army and mighty host,
into the river Nile ;

A single gnat with half a wing cleaves intrepidly the suture
of Nimrod’s skull.

1190 Behold the state of him who hearkened to the words of his
enemy, and the retribution of him who became the friend of
the envious one —

The state of a Pharaoh who hearkened to llaman, and the
state of a Nimrod who hearkened to Satan.

Albeit the enemy speak to thee in friendly wise, know (his
words to be) the snare, though he speak to thee of the grain
(bait).

If he give thee some candy, regard it as poison; if he do a
kindness to thy body, regard it as cruelty.

When the (Divine) destiny comes to pass, you see naught but
the skin (outward appearance): you do not distinguish enemies
from friends.

1195 Since the case is thus, begin humble supplication; set about
lamenting and glorifying (God) and fasting.

Lament continually, crying, “O Thou who well knowest the


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 67

hidden things, do not crush us beneath the stone of evil
contrivance.

O Creator of the lion, if we have wrought currishness, do
not set the lion (to spring) on us from this covert.

Do not give to sweet water the form of fire, do not put upon
fire the form of water.

When Thou makest (us) drunken with the wine of Thy
wrath, I'hou givcst to things non-existent the form of existence.”

What is (this) drunkenness? That which binds (prevents)
the eye from (true) eyesight, so that a (common) stone appears
a jewel, and wool (pashm) a jasper (yasfnn).

What is (this) drunkenness? The perversion of the senses,
the change of tamarisk-wood into sandal-wood in the (per-
verted) sight.


Story of the hoopoe and Solomon, showing that when the
fyivine destiny comes to pass, clear eyes are sealed.

When the tent-pavilion was pitched for Solomon, the birds
came before him to pay obeisance.

I'hey found (him) speaking the same tongue (as themselves)
and familiar with them: one by one they sped vrith (eager) soul
into his presence.

All the birds, having ceased from twittering, (in converse)
with Solomon became more distinct (spoke more articulately)
than your own brother.

To speak the same tongue is a kinship and affinity: a man,
(when he is) with those in whom he cannot confide, is like a
prisoner in chains.

Oh, many are the Indians and Turks that speak the same
tongue; oh, many the pair of Turks that are as strangers (to
each other).

Therefore the tongue of mutual understanding is different
indeed : to be one in heart is better than to be one in tongue.

Without speech and without sign or scroll, hundre<£ of
thousands of interpreters arise from the heart.

The birds, all and each, their secrets of skill and knowledge
and practice

Were revealing, one by one, to Solomon, and were praising
themselves by way of submitting a request (for his considera-
tion).

Not from pride and self-conceit, (but) in order that he might
give them access to him^.

When a captive wants a lord (to buy him as a slave), he
offers a preface (summary account) of his talent;

^ I.e. grant them the privilege of being freely admitted to his presence.

5-a


1300


1305


1310


68


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

(But) -wheDL he is ashamed (disgusted) at his buying him, he
makes himself out to be sick and palsied and deaf and lame.

The turn came for the hoopoe and his craft and the explana-
tion of his skill and thoughtfulness.

1315 “O king,” said he, “I will declare (only) one talent, which
is an inferior one; ’tis better to speak briefly.”

“Tell on,” said Solomon; “let me hear what talent that is.”
The hoopoe said, “At the time when I am at the zenith,

I gaze from the zenith with the eye of certainty and I see the
water at the bottom of the earth.

So that (I know) where it is and what is its depth ; what its
colour is, whence it gushes forth — from clay or from rock.

O Solomon, for the sake of thine army’s camping-place keep
this wise one (beside thee) on thy expeditions.”

1320 Then said Solomon, “O good companion in waterless far-
stretching wastes ! ”

How the crow impugned the claim of the hoopoe.

When the crow heard (this), from envy he came and said to
Solomon, “He has spoken false and ill.

_ It is not respectful to speak in the king’s presence, in par-
ticular (to utter) lying and absurd self-praise.

If he had always had this (keen) sight, how would not he
have seen the snare beneath a handful of earth?

How would he have been caught in the snare? How would
he have gone into the cage willy-nilly?”

1325 Then Solomon said; “ O hoopoe, is it right that these dregs
have risen from thee at the first cup?

0 Aou who hast drunk buttermilk, how dost thou pretend
intoxication and brag in my presence and tell lies besides?”

The hoopoe's answer to the attack of the crow.

He said, “O king, for God’s sake do not listen to the enemy ’.s
words against me, bare beggar as I am.

If this which I claim is not (true), I lay my head (before
thee) : sever this neck of mine.

The crow, who disbelieves in the (absolute) authority of the
Divine destiny, is an infidel, though he have thousands of
wits.

1230 Whilst there is in you a single k (derived) from the kdfirdn
(infidels), you are the seat of stench and lust, velut rima femoris.

1 see the snare (when I am) in the air, if the Divine destiny
do not muffle the eye of my intelligence.

When the Divine destiny comes, wisdom goes to sleep, the
moon becomes black, the sun is stopped (from shining).


SOLOMON AND THE HOOPOE 69

How is this disposal (of things) by the Divine destiny (to be
called) singular?^ Know that it is by the Divine destiny that he
(the infidel) disbelieves in the Divine destiny.

'I'he story of Adam, on whom he peace, and how the Divine destiny

sealed up his sight so that he failed to observe the plain meaning

of the prohihitimi and to refrain from interpreting it.

'rhe father of mankind, who is the lord of He {God) taught
{Adam) the Names, hath hundreds of thousands of sciences in
every vein.

To his soul accrued (knowledge of) the name of every thing, 1235
even as that thing exists (in its real nature) unto the end (of the
world).

No title that he gave became changed: that one whom he
called ‘brisk’ did not become ‘lazy.’

Whoso is (to be) a believer at the last, he saw at the first;
whoso is (to he) an infidel at the last, to him it became manifest.

Do thou hear the name of every thing from the knower:
hear the inmost meaning of the mystery of He taught the Names.

With us, the name of every thing is its outward (appearance) ;
with the Creator, the name of every thing is its inward (reality).

In the eyes of Moses the name of his rod was ‘staff’; in the 124°
eyes of the Creator its name was ‘ dragon.’

Here the name of ‘Umar was ‘idolater,’ but in Alast'^ his
name was ‘believer.’

That of which the name, with us, was ‘seed’ was, in the
sight of God, thou who art at this moment beside me.

This ‘seed’ was a form (idea) in non-existence (potentiality),
existent with frod, neither more nor less (than the form in
which it appeared externally). _

In brief, that which is our end is really our name with God.

He bestows on a man a name accor(fing to his final state, not 1245
according to that (state) to which He gives the name of ‘ a loan.’

Inasmuch as the eye of Adam saw by means of the Pure
Light, the soul and inmost sense of the names became evident
to him.

Since the angels perceived in him the rays of God, they fell
in worship and hastened to do homage.

The Adam like this whose name I am celebra^g, if I praise
(him) till the Resurrection, I fall short (of what is due).

All this he knew; (yet) when the Divine destiny came, he was
at fault in the knowledge of a single prohibition.

Wondering whether the prohibition was for the purpose of iz$o
making unlawful (the thing prohibited), or whether it admitted
of an interpretation and was a cause or perplexity.

Le. “How i» it strange that I should have been deceived? “

* in the world of pre-existence.


70 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

When (the view that it admitted of) interpretation prevailed
in his mind, his nature hastened in bewilderment towards the
wheat^.

When the thorn went into the foot of the gardener (Adam),
the thief (Satan) found an opportunity and quickly carried off
the goods.

As soon as he escaped from bewilderment, he returned into
the (right) road; (then) he saw that the thief had carried off
the wares from the shop.

He cried, ‘O Lord, we have done wrong, ^ and ‘Alas,’ that is
to say, ‘ darkness came and the way was lost.’

1255 This Divine destiny is a cloud that covers the sun : thereby
lions and dragons become as mice.

If I (the hoopoe) do not see a snare in the hour of Divine
ordainment, ’tis not I alone who am ignorant in the course of
Divine ordainment.”

Oh, happy he that clave to righteousness, he (that) let (his
own) strength go and took to supplication !

If the Divine destiny shrouds thee in black like night, yet the
Divine destiny will take thy hand (and guide thee) at the last.

If the Divine destiny a hundred times attempts thy life, yet
the Divine destiny gives thee life and heals thee.

1260 This Divine destiny, if a hundred times it waylays thee,
(nevertheless) pitches thy tent on the top of Heaven.

Know that this is from the lovingkindness (of God), that He
terrifies thee in order that He may establish thee in the kingdom
of security.

This subject hath no end. ’Tis late^. Hearken (now) to the
story of the hare and the lion.

How the hare drew back from the lion when he
approached the well.

When the lion came near the well, he saw that the hare lagged
on the way and stepped back.

He said, “Why have you stepped back? Do not step back,
come on ! ”

1365 The hare said, “Where is my (power to move a) foot? for
(both) hand and foot are gone. My soul trembles and my
heart (courage) has fled.

Seest thou not the colour of my face (pale) as gold? My
colour indeed is giving knowledge of my inward state.

Since God has called the (external) sign (aspect) informative,
the eye of the gnostic has remained turned towards the sign.

Colour and scent are significant like a bell: the neigh of a
horse makes (one) acquainted with the horse.

The sound made by any thing conveys knowledge of it, $0

^ I.e, the forbidden fniit. | * there has been a long digression.*^


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 71

that you may distinguish the bray of an ass from the creak
of a door.

Touching the discrimination of persons (one from another), 127°
the Proph et said , ‘ A man is hidden when his tongue is folded up

The colotir of the face indicates the state of the heart : have
pity on me, implant love of me in thy heart.

A red complexion has the sound of (declares and expresses)
thankfulness (satisfaction); the sound (signification) of a pale
complexion is patience and unthankfulness.

There has come upon me that which took away hand and
foot, took away colour of face and strength and (every outward)
mark ;

That which shatters every thing it comes upon, tears up
every tree from root and bottom;

There has come upon me that by which man and animal, 1275
mineral and plant have been checkmated.

These indeed are (only) parts, (but) wholes (too) are by him
(Doom) made yellow in hue and corrupt in odour,

So that the world is now patient, now thankful; the garden
now puts on a robe (of verdure) and again is bare.

The sun, which rises fire-coloured, at another hour sinks
headlong.

Stars shining in the four quarters (of the sky) are, from time
to time, afflicted with (consumed by) burning.

'Phe moon, which excels the stars in beauty, becomes like a 1280
phantom from the malady of a hectic fever.

I'his earth, quiet and controlled, is thrown by earthqualces
into feverish tremors.

Oh, from this inherited woe many a mountain in the world
has become tiny fragments and (grains of) sand.

This air is conjoined with the (vital) spirit, (but) when the
Divine destiny comes, it turns foul and stinking.

The sweet water that was a sister (congenial) to the spirit,
(after standing) in a pool, became yellow and bitter and turbid.

The fire that has wind in its moustache* — a single puff of 1285
wind calls death upon it.

The state of the sea (is such that) from its agitation and com-
motion (you may) perceive the changes of its mind.

The whirling heaven, which is (ever engaged) in seeking and
searching — ^its state is like the state of its children ;

Now nadir, now middle, now zenith: therein are host on
host of stars fortunate and unlucky.

From thyself, O part made up of wholes, apprehend the state
of every simple (uncompounded) thing.

Inasmuch as wholes suffer grief and pain, how should their 1390
part not be pale-faced (sick and subject to decay)?

^ 1 , 0 . **that is puffed up with pride.”


72 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Especially a part which is composed of contraries — of water
' and earth and fire and air.

It is no wonder that the sheep recoiled from the wolf ; the wonder
is that this sheep set its heart on (became friendly with) the wolf.

Life is the peace (harmony) of contraries; death is the fact
that war arose between them.

The grace of God has given amity to this lion and wild-ass —
these two far distant contraries.

' 1295 Since the world is sick and a prisoner, what wonder if the
sick one is passing away? ”

From this point of view he (the hare) recited counsels to the
lion. “ I have lagged behind,^’ said he, “ because of these bonds.”

How the lion asked the reason of the harems drawing back.

The lion said to him, ‘‘Amongst (all) the causes of your
malady tell (me) the special cause, for this is my object.”

“That lion,” he said, “lives in this well: within this fortress
he is safe from harms.”

Every one who is wise chose the bottom of the well (to live
in), because spiritual joys are (to be attained only) in solitude.

1300 The darkness of the well is better than the dark shades of
the world : he that followed at the heels of the world never saved
his head.

“Come on,” said the lion; “my blow subdues him: see thou
whether that lion is in the well at present.”

The hare answered, “I am consumed with (dread of) that
fieriness (wrath) : perhaps thou wilt take me beside thee,

That with thy support, O mine of generosity, I may open
my eyes and look into the well.”

How the lion looked into the well and saw the reflexion of
himself and the hare in the water.

When the lion took him to his side, under the lion’s pro-
tection he began to run towards the well.

1305 As soon as they looked at the water in the well, there shone
forth in the water the light (reflected) from the lion and him
(the hare).

The lion saw his own reflexion: from the water shone the
image of a lion with a plump hare at his side.

When he beheld his adversary in the water, he left him (the
hare) and sprang into the well.

He fell into the well which he had dug, because his iniquity
was coming (back) on his own head.

The iniquity of evil-doers became (for them) a dark well : so
have said all the wise.


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 73

The more iniquitous one is, the more frightful is his well: 1310
(Divine) Justice has ordained worse (punishment) forworse (sin).

0 you who from iniquity are digging a well (for others), you
arc making a snare for yourself.

Do not weave (a cocoon) round yourself, like the silkworm.

You are digging a well for yourself (to fall in) : dig with modera-
tion (not too deep).

Deem not the weak to be without a champion: recite from
the Qur’dn (the words). When the help of God shall come.

If you are an elephant and your foe fled from you, lo, the
retribution came upon vfni, birds in flocks.

If any poor man on the earth beg for mercy, a loud tumult 1313
falls on (arises among) the Host of l-Ieavcn.

If you bite him with your teeth and make him bleed, tooth-
ache will attack you - how will you do (then)?

'Fhc lion saw himself in the well, and in his fury he did not
know himself at that moment from the enemy.

1 Ic regarded his own reflexion as his enemy : necessarily he
drew a sword against himself.

Oh, many an iniquity that you see in others is your own
nature (reflected) in them, O reader !

In them shone forth all that you are in your hypocrisy and 1330
iniquity and insolence.

■V’ou are that (evil-doer), and you are striking those blows at
yotirself: ’tis yourself you arc cursing at that moment.

You do not see clearly the evil in yourself, else you would
hate yourself with (all) your soul.

You are assaulting yourself, O simpleton, like the lion who
made a rush at himself.

When you reach the bottom of your own nature, then you
will know that that vilencsis was from yourself.

At the bottom (of the well) it became manifest to the lion tliat 1335
he who seemed to him to be another was (really) his own image.

Whoever tears out the teeth of a poor wretch is doing what
the falsely-seeing lion did.

O you who see the bad reflexion on the face of your uncle,
it is not your uncle that is bad, it is you ; do not run away from
yourself!

I'hc Faithful are mirrors to one another: this saying is related
from the Prophet.

You held a blue glass before your eye: for that reason the
world seemed to you to be blue.

Unless you are blind, know that this blueness comes from 1330
yourself : speak ill of yourself, speak no more ill of any one (else).

If the true believer was not seeing by the Light of God, how
did things unseen appear naked (plainly revealed) to the true
believer?


74 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Inasmuch as you were seeing by the Fire of God, you did
not discern the difference between good and evil.

Little by little throw water on the fire, that your fire may
become light, O man of sorrow !

Throw Thou, O Lord, the purifying water, that this world-
fire may become wholly light.

,1335 All the water of the sea is under Thy command; water and
fire, O Lord, are Thine.

If Thou wiliest, fire becomes sweet water ; and if Thou wiliest
not, even water becomes fire.

This search (aspiration) in us is also brought into existence
by Thee ; deliverance from iniquity is Thy gift, O Lord.

Without (our) seeking Thou hast given us this search, Thou
hast given (us) gifts without number and (without) end.


How the hare brought to the beasts of chase the news that
the lion had fallen into the well.

When the hare was gladdened by deliverance (from the lion),
he began to run towards the beasts until (he came to) the desert.

1340 Having seen the lion miserably slain in the well, he was
skipping joyously all the way to the meadow.

Clapping his hands because he had escaped from the hand
of Death; fresh and dancing in the air, like bough and leaf.

Bough and leaf were set free from the prison of earth, lifted
their heads, and became comrades of the wind;

The leaves, when they had burst (forth from) the bough,
made haste to reach the top of the tree ;

With the tongue of [seed that put forth) its sprouts each fruit
and tree severally is singing thanks to God,

1345 Saying, '‘The Bounteous Giver nourished our root until the
tree grew big and stood upright'^

(Even so) the spirits bound in clay, when they escape glad
at heart from their (prisons of) clay.

Begin to dance in the air of Divine Love and become flawless
like the full moon’s orb.

Their bodies dancing, and their souls — nay, do not ask (how
their souls fare) ; and those things from which comes the soul’s
delight — nay, do not ask (of those things) !

The hare lodged the lion in prison. Shame on a lion who
was discomfited by a hare !

1350 He is in such a disgrace, and still — this is a wonder — he
would fain be addressed by the title of Fakhr-i Din^,

0 thou lion that liest at the bottom of this lonely well, thy
hare-like soul {nafs) has shed and drunk thy blood;


^ “Pride of the Relitrion (of Islam).**


THE LION AND THE BEASTS 75

'I'hy hare-soul is feeding in the desert, (whilst) thou art (lying)
at the bottom of this well of “How?” and “Why?”

That lion-catcher (the hare) ran towards the beasts, crying,

“ Rejoice, O people, since the announcer of joy is come.

Glad news ! Glad news, O company of merry-makers ! That
hell-hound has gone back to Hell.

Glad news! Glad news! The enemy of your lives — his teeth 1355 ,
have been torn out by the vengeance of his Creator.

He who smote many heads with his claws — ^him too the
broom of Death has swept away like rubbish.”


Uaw the. beasts j>athered rotmd the hare and spoke
in praise of him.

'rhen all the wild beasts assembled, joyous and laughing
gleefully in rapture and excitement.

They formed a ring, he (tire hare) in the midst like a candle :
all the animals of the desert bowed (in homage) to him.

“Art thou a heavenly angel or a peri? No, thou art the
Azrael of fierce lions.

Whatever thou art, our souls are offered in sacrifice to thee. 1360
Thou hast prevailed. Health to thy hand and arm!

God turned this water into thy stream. Blessing on thy
hand and arm I

Explain how thou didst meditate with guile, and how thou
didst guilefully wipe out that ruffian.

Explain, in order that the tale may be the means of curing
(our malady); explain, that it msiy be a salve for our souls.

Explain! for in consequence of the iniquity of that tyrant
our souls have myriads of wounds.”

“O Sirs,” said he, “it was (by) God’s aid; else, who in the tiSs
world is a hare (who am I, that I should have been able to
do this)?

He (God) bestowed power on me and gave light to my heart:
the light in my heart gave strength to hand and foot,”

From God come preferments (to high position), from God
also come changes (which bring one to low estate).

God in (due) course and turn is ever displaying this (Divine)
aid tb doubters and seers (alike).

Take heed! Do not exult in a kingdom bestowed in turns
(passing from one to another). O thou who art the bondsman
of Vicissitude, do not act as though thou wert free 1

(Bu^ those for whom is pr^ared a kingdom beyond Vicissi- 1370
tude, for them the drums (of sovereignty) are beaten beyond
the Seven Planets.

Beyond Vicissitude are the kings everlasting: their spirits are
circling with the Cupbearer perpetually.


76 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

If thoju wilt renounce this drinking (of worldly pleasures) for
a day or two (for thy brief lifetime), thou wilt dip thy mouth
in the drink of Paradise.

Commentary on {the Tradition) “ We have returned from the
lesser Jihad to the greater Jihdd”

0 kings, we have slain the outward enemy, (but) there re-
mains within (us) a worse enemy than he.

To slay this (enemy) is not the work of reason and intelli-
gence : the inward lion is not subdued by the hare.
i3?5 This carnal self {mfs) is Hell, and Hell is a dragon (the fire
of) which is not diminished by oceans (of water).

It would drink up the Seven Seas, and still the blazing of
that consumer of all creatures would not become less.

Stones and stony-hearted infidels enter it, miserable and
shamefaced,

(But) still it is not appeased by all this food, until there comes
to it from God this call —

“Art thou filled, art thou filled? ” It says, Not yet; lo, here
is the fire, here is the glow, here is the burning ! ”

1380 It made a mouthful of and swallowed a whole world, its
belly crying aloud, “Is there any more? ”

God, from (the realm) where place is not, sets His foot on it:
then it subsides at (the command) Be, and it was.

Inasmuch as this self of ours is a part of Hell, and all parts
have the nature of the whole.

To God (alone) belongs this foot (power) to kill it : who, indeed,
but God should draw its bow (vanquish it)?

Only the straight arrow is put on the bow, (but) this bow
(of the self) has (its) arrows bent back and crooked.

1385 Be straight, like an arrow, and escape from the bow, for
without doubt every straight (arrow) will fly from the bow (to
its mark).

When I turned back from tlie outer warfare, I set my face
towards the inner warfare.

We have returned from the lesser Jihdd, we are engaged
along with the Prophet in the greater Jihdd.

1 pray God to grant me strength and aid and (the right of)
boasting^, that I may root up with a needle'-* this mountain
of Qdf .

Deem of small account the lion (champion) who breaks the
ranks (of the enemy) : the (true) lion is he that breaks (conquers)
himself.

^ Le. the success which would entitle me to boast of having conquered
my “self.’*

® Le. slowly and painfully.


‘UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR


77


Hotv the ambassador of Rtini came to the Commander of the
Faithful, ‘ Umar, may God be zoell-pleased with him, and wit-
nessed the gifts of grace with which ‘ Umar, may God be well-
pleased with him, teas endozoed.

To ‘Umar in Medina there came through the wide desert an 1390
ambassador from the Emperor of Riim.

He said, “ O ye attendants, where is the palace of the Caliph,
that I may take thither my horse and baggage? ”

The folk said to him, “He has no palace: ‘Umar’s (only)
palace is an illumined spirit.

Though he has a (great) renown from being Commander (of
the Faithful), he has (no dwelling except) a hut, like the poor.

O brother, how wilt thou behold his palace, when hair has
grown in the eye of thy heart?

Purge thy heart’s eye of hair and defect, and then hope to 1395
behold his palace.

Whoever hath a spirit purged of (sensual) desires will at once
behold the Presence and the Holy Porch.

When Mohammed was purged of this fire and smoke (of
huntan passions), wheresoever he turned his face, was the Face
of Allah.

Inasmuch as thou art a friend to the evil suggestions of the
malign one (Satan), how wilt thou know (the true meaning of)
There is the Face of Allah}

Every one in wliose breast the gate is opened will behold
from every city the sun (shining).

CJod is manifest amon^t others as the moon amidst the stars. i too
Lay two finger-ends on thy two eyes, and wilt thou see aught
of the world? Deal justly (confess that thou wilt sec nothing).

If thou dost not see this world, (yet) it is not non-existent:
the fault lies not save in the finger of thy evil self.

Come, lift the finger from thine eye, and then behold what-
soever thou wishest.

'Po ISoah his people said, ‘ Where is the Divine recompense?’

He said, ‘On the other side of they cover themselves zmih their
garments.

Ye have wrapped your faces and heads in your clothes: of 140s
necessity ye have eyes and see not.’

Man is eye, and (all) the rest is (worthless) skin: the sight of
that (eye) is (consists in) seeing the Beloved.

When there is not sight of the Beloved, it (the eye) is better
blind; the beloved who is not everlasting is better afar (away
and out of sight).”

When the ambassador of Rdm admitted these fresh (spiritual)
words into his hearing (gave ear to them), he became more
full of longing.


78 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

He fixed his eye on seeking ‘Umar, he let his baggage and
horse be lost.

1410 He was going in every direction after that man of (great)
accomplishment, inquiring madly for him,

Saying, “ Can there be in the world such a man, and he be
hid, like the spirit, from the world? ’’

He sought him, that he might be as a slave to him : inevitably
the seeker is a finder.

An Arab woman of the desert saw that he was a stranger-
guest. “Look,’’ said she, “there is ‘Umar under that palm.

There he is under the palm-tree, apart from the people:
behold the Shadow of God asleep in the shade!”

How the ambassador of Riim found the Commander of the

Faithful^ ^Umar^ may God he well-pleased with him^ sleeping

under the palm-tree,

1415 He came thither and stood afar off; he saw ‘Umar and fell
a-trembling.

An awe came upon the ambassador from that slumbering
man, a sweet ecstasy lodged in his soul.

Love and awe are contrary to each other : he saw these two
contraries united in his heart^.

He said to himself: “I have seen (many) kings, I have been
great (in esteem) and chosen (for honour) in the presence of
sultans :

I had no awe or dread of kings, (but) awe of this man has
robbed me of my wits.

1420 I have gone into a jungle of lions and leopards, and my face
did not change colour because of them;

Often where the ranks are arrayed on the field of battle have
I become (fierce) as a lion at the time when the affair is grievous
(desperate) ;

Many a heavy blow have I suffered and inflicted, I have been
stouter in heart than (all) the others.

This man is asleep on the earth, unarmed, (and yet) I am
trembling in my seven limbs (my whole body): what is this?

This is awe of God, it is not from created beings, it is not
awe of this man who wears the frock of a dervish.

1425 Whoever is afraid of God and has chosen fear of God (as
his religion), the Jinn and mankind and every one who sees
(him) are afraid of him.”

Thus meditating, he folded his hands reverently. After a
while ‘Umar sprang up from sleep.


^ Literally, “liver.”


UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR


79


How the ambassador of Rum saluted the Commande}- of the
Faithful, may God be well-pleased with him.

He did homage to ‘Umar and salaamed: the Prophet said,
“(First) the salaam, then the talk.”

Then he (‘Umar) said, “To thee (greeting),” called him (to
come) forward, reassured him, and bade him sit down by
his side.

Fear ye not is the hospitality offered to those who fear: that
is proper (entertainment) for one who is afraid.

When any one is afraid, they make him (feel) secure; they 1430
soothe (his) fearful heart.

How should you say “Fear not” to one who has no fear?
Why give lessons (to him)? Fie needs no lessons.

Fie (‘Umar) made that disturbed mind (be) of good cheer
and made his desolate heart (be) flourishing (happy).

Afterwards he addressed to him subtle discourses and (spoke)
of the holy attributes of God — how good a F'riend is He! —

And of the lovingkindnesses of God to the Abddl (saints),
in order that he (the ambassador) might know (the meaning of)
tnaqdm (permanent station) and hdl (passing state).

The hdl is like the unveiling of that beauteous bride, while 1435
the maqdm is the (king’s) being alone with the bride.

The unveiling is witnessed by the king and by others as well,
(but) at the time of being alone (with the bride) there is no one
c-TCept the mighty king.

The bride unveils before commons and nobles (alike) ; in the
bridal chamber the king is (alone) with the bride.

There is many a one of the Sufi's who enjoys Ipil, (but) he
that has attained to maqdm is rare amongst them.

He (*Umar) reminded him of the stages traversed by the soul,
and he reminded him of the journeys of the spirit.

And of the 'rime which has (ever) been void of time, and of 144°
the Station of Holiness which has (ever) been majestical.

And of the atmosphere wherein the Simurgh of the spirit,
before this (material life), has flown and experienced (the bounty
of Divine) grace*,

Kvery single flight thereof (being) greater than the horizons
(of this world) and greater than the hope and greed of the longing
lover.

When ‘ Umar found tlie stranger in appearance a friend (in
reality), ho found (that) his soul (was) seeking (to learn) the
(Divine) mysteries.

The Shaykh (‘Umar) was adept and the disciple (the am-
bassador) eager: the man (rider) was quick (dexterous) and the
beast belonged to the royal court (was nobly bred and docile).

^ Literally, “ has seen flight and (Divine) bounty.”


8o


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

, That spiritual guide (‘Umar) perceived that he (the am-
bassador) possessed (the capacity for receiving) guidance: he
sowed the good seed in the good soil.


Hoi^ the ambassador of Riim questioned the Commander of
the Faithful^ may God he well-pleased with him.

The man said to him, “O Commander of the Faithful, how
did the spirit come to the earth from above?

infinite bird go into the cage?'’ He replied,

WK spells and incantations over the spirit.

When He recites spells over the non-existences which have
no eye or ear, they begin to stir.

Because of His spells the non-existences at that very moment
are dancing joyously into existence.

1450 again, He recited a spell over the existent, at His

word the existent marched (back) post-haste into non-existence.

He spake into the ear of the rose and made it laughing
(blooining) ; He spake to the stone and made it a cornelian of
the mine.


^ (message), so that it became
spirit; He^spake to the sun, so that it became radiant.

Agam He puts into its ear a fearful saying, and upon the face
of the sun falha hundred eclipses.

Consider what that Speaker chanted into the ear of the cloud,
so mat It poured tears from its eye, like a waterskin.

1455 Consider what God has chanted into the ear of the earth, so
that It became regardful and has (ever since) remained silent,”

4.1. ill perplexity is sorely troubled, God has spoken

the riddle into his ear,

That He may imprison him in two (doubtful) thoughts,
AereoP” I what He told (me) or the contrary


1460


From (the decree of) God also, one side obtains the prepon-
aerance, and from that (Divine) quarter he chooses one of the
two (alternatives).

If thou wouldst not have the mind of thy spirit in (a state of)
pemle^ty, do not stuff this cotton-wool into thy spiritual car,

bo mat mou mayst understand those riddles of His, so tliat
thw mayst apprehend (both) the secret sign and the open.

nen me spiritual ear becomes the place where toaky (in-
spiration) descends. What is wahy} A speech hidden from
sense-perception.

The spiritual e^ and eye are other than this sense-perception,
(h^imtP'Y^ reason and the ear of opinion are destitute

The word compulsion” {jabr) made me impatient (uncon-


‘UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR 8l

trollable) for love’s sake, while it confined in (the prison of)
compulsion him who is not a lover.

This is union with God, and it is not compulsion: this is the
shining forth of the moon, this is not a cloud.

And if this be compulsion, it is not the compulsion of (suffered 1465
by) the vulgar : it is not the compulsion of (exerted by) the evil-
commanding self-willed (soul).

O son, (only) they know (the real meaning of) compulsion
in whose hearts (Jod has opened the sight (of the spiritual eye).

To them the unseen things of the future became manifest;
to them recollection of the past became naught.

Their freewill and compulsion is different (from that of
ordinary men): in oyster-shells drops (of rain) are pearls.

Outside (ol the shell) it is a drop of water, small or great,

(but) within the shell it is a small or big pearl.

liiose persons have the nature of the muskdecr’s gland: 1470
externally they arc (as) blood, while within them is the fragrance
of musk.

Do not say, **This substance externally is blood: how should
it become a musky perfume when it goes into the gland?

Do not say, “This copper externally was despicable: how
should it assume nobility in the heart (midst) of the elixir?’^

In thee (the matter of) freewill and compulsion was a (mere)
fancy, (but) when it went into them it became the light of (Divine)
Majesty.

When bread is (wrapped) in the tablecloth it is the inanimate
thing (so-called), (but) in the human body it becomes the glad
spirit (of life).

Itdoesnot become transmuted in the heart of (within) the table- 1475
cloth : the (animal) soul transmutes it with (the water of) Salsabil.

O thoti who rcadest aright, such is the power of the soul:
what, then, must he the power of that Soul of soul?

The piece of flesh which is Man, endowed with intelligence
and soul, cleavcsS motmtain and sea and mine.^

'J'hc strength of the mountain-riving soul is (shown in) the
splitting of rocks ; the strength of the Soul of soul in the moon
toas split asunder.

If the heart should open the lid of the wallet of (this) mystery,
the sSoul woxild rush (in rapture) towards the highest heaven.

IIow Adam imputed that fault {which he had committed) to himself ,
saying, ** O Lord, we have done wrong,” and how Ihlis imputed
his own sin to Cod, saying, “ Because Thou hast seduced me.”

Consider both our action and the action of God. Regard our 14^0
action as existent. This is manifest.

If the action of created beings be not in the midst (obviously
existent), then say not to any one, “Why have you acted thus? ”


82 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

The creative act of God brings our actions into existence:
our actions are the effects of the creative act of God.

A rational being perceives either the letter (the outer sign)
or the (inner) purpose (the spirit) : how should he comprehend
two accidents at once?

If he goes (turns his mind) to the spirit, he becomes un-
heedful of the letter : no eye sees forward and backward at the
same moment.

1485 At the time when you look in front, how at the same time
can you look behind you? Recognise this.

Inasmuch as the soul does not comprehend (both) the letter
and the spirit, how should the soul be the creator of them
both?

O son, (only) God comprehends both: the (one) action does
not hinder Him from the other action.

Satan said Because Thou hast seduced me: the vile Devil con-
cealed his own act.

Adam said We have done wrong unto ourselves: he was not,
like us, unheedful of the action of God.

1490 From respect he concealed it (the action of God) in (regard
to) the sin: by casting the sin upon himself he ate fruit (was
blessed).

After his repentance, He (God) said to him, “O Adam, did
not I create in thee that sin and (those) tribulations?

Was it not My foreordainment and destiny? How didst thou
conceal that at the time of excusing thyself?

He (Adam) said, “I was afraid, (so) I did not let respect go
(did not fail to observe due respect).’’ He (God) said, “I too
have observed it towards thee.”

Whoever brings reverence gets reverence (in return) : whoever
brings sugar eats almond-cake.

1495 For whom are the good women} For the good men. Treat thy
friend with honour; offend (him) and see (what will happen).

O heart, bring (forward) a parable for the sake of (illustrating)
a difference, that thou mayst know (what distinguishes) com-
pulsion from freewill.

(Take the case of) a hand that is shaking from (morbid or
involuntary) tremor and (the case of) a person whose hand you
cause to shake (by knocking it away) from its place.

Know that both (these) movements are created by God, but
it is impossible to compare the latter with the former.

You are sor:^ for having caused it (his hand) to shake: how
is the man afflicted with (a morbid) tremor not sorry?

1500 This is the intellectual quest. What is (the use of such a)
quest, 0 ingenious one? That perchance (by its means) a man
of weak understanding may find his way to that place (gain
some idea of the truth).


‘UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR 83

(Yet) the intellectual quest, though it be (fine as) pearls and
coral, is other than the spiritual quest.

The spiritual quest is on another plane : the spiritual wine
has another consistency.

At the time when the intellectual quest was in keeping (with
the circumstances), this ‘Umar was intimate with Bu ’ 1 -Hakam,

(But) when Umar went away from intellect towards spirit,

Bu 1 -Hakam became Bu Jahl (the father of ignorance) in
searching into that (subject).

He^ is perfect on the side of sense-perception and under- 1505
standing, though indeed he is ignorant in regard to the spirit.

Know that the quest of the intellect and the senses is (con-
cerned with) efl'ects or secondary causes. The spiritual quest
is either wonder or the father of wonder (either wonderful or
beyond wonder).

The illumination of the spirit comes: (then) there remains
not, O thou who seekest illumination, conclusion and premise
or that tvhich contradicts (a statement) (or) that which renders
(its acceptance) necessary.

Because the seer on whom His (God’s) Light is dawning is
quite independent of the (logical) proof which resembles a
(blind man’s) staff.

Commentary on “And lie is with you wheresoever ye be.”

Once more we come back to the talc; when, indeed, did we
go forth from the tale?

If we come to ignorance, that is His prison, and if we come 1510
to knowledge, that is His palace;

And if wc come to sleep, wc are His intoxicated ones; and if
to w'akefulness, we are in His hands;

And if we weep, we are a cloud laden with the bounty dis-
pensed by Him; and if wc laugh, at that time we are His
lightning;

And if (we come) to wrath and war, ’tis the reflexion of His
Might; and if to peace and forgiveness, ’tis the reflexion of
Ilis Love.

Who are we? In this tangled (complex) world what (thing
other than I Ic) indeed hath He (who is single) like alifi Nothing,
nothing.

Hozo the ambassador asked ‘ Umar, may God be well-pleased with

him, concerning the cause of the tribulation suffered by spirits

in these bodies of clay.

He said, “0 ‘Umar, what was the wisdom and mystery of 1515
imprisoning that pure one (the si)irit) in this dirty place?

The pure water has become hidden in mud : the pure spirit
has become bound in bodies.”


6-3


84 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

He (‘Umar) said, “Thou art making a profound inquiry,
thou art confining a meaning in a word.

Thou hast imprisoned the free (unconditioned) meaning,
thou hast bound the wind in a word.

This thou hast done for a benefit (good purpose), O thou
who thyself art blind^ to the benefit (good purpose) of God.

' 1520 He from whom (every) benefit was born, how should He not
see that which was seen by us?

There are myriads of benefits, and every myriad is (but) a
few beside that one^.

The breath of thy speech, which is a part of the parts (bodily
members), became beneficial: why (then) is the whole of the
whole (the universal connexion of spirit and body) devoid (of
benefit)?

Thou who art a part — ^thy act (of speaking) is beneficial:
why (then) dost thou lift thy hand to assail the whole?

If there is no benefit in speech, do not speak; and if there is,
leave off making objections, and endeavour to give thanks."

1525 Thanksgiving to God is a collar on every neck (every one's
duty); it is not (thanksgiving) to dispute and make one’s face
look sour.

If thanksgiving is only to look sour, then tliere is no thanks-
giver like vinegar.

If vinegar wants (to find) the way to the liver, let it become
oxymel by (being mixed with) sugar.

The meaning in poetry has no sureness of direction : it is like
the sling, it is not under control.

On the inner sense of Let him who desires to sit with God
sit with the SufisJ^

The ambassador became beside himself from these one or
two cups (of spiritual discourse) : neither embassage nor message
remained in his memory.

1530 He became distraught at the power of God. The ambassador
arrived at this place (state) and became a king.

When the torrent reached the sea, it became the sea ; when
the seed reached the cornland, it became the crop of corn.

When the bread attained to connexion with the animal (man),
the dead bread became living and endowed with knowledge.

When the wax and firewood were devoted to the fire, their
dark essence became (filled with) light.

When the (powdered) stone of antimony went into the eyes,
it turned to sight and there became a scout (one who observes
the enemy from some point of vantage).

J Literally, “in a veil.”

® The confinement of the spirit in the body.


'UMAR AND THE AMBASSADOR 85

Oh, happy is the man who was freed from himself and united 1535
with the existence of a living one !

Alas for the living one who consorted with the dead! He
became dead, and life sped away from him.

When you have fled (for refuge) to the Qur’an of God, you
have mingled with the spirit of the prophets.

The Qur’an is (a description of) the states of the prophets,
(who are) the fishes of the holy sea of (Divine) Majesty.

And if you read and do not accept (take to heart) the Qur’an,
suppose you have seen the prophets and saints (what will that
avail you.?);

But if you arc accepting (the Qur’an), when you read the 1540
stories (of the prophets), the bird, your soul, will be distressed
in its cage.

The bird that is a prisoner in a cage, (if it) is not seeking to
escape, ’tis from ignorance.

The spirits which have escaped from their cages are the
prophets, (those) worthy guides.

From witlxout comes Aeir voice, (telling) of religion, (and
crying), ‘‘This, this is the way of escape for thee.

By this we escaped from this narrow cage : there is no means
of escape from this cage but this way,

(That) thou shouldst make thyself ill, exceedingly wretched, 15^5
in order that thou mayst be let out from (the cage of) repu-
tation.”

Worldly reputation is a strong chain: in the Way how is this
less than a chain of iron?


The story of the merchant to whom the parrot gave a message for

the parrots of India on the occasion of his going {thither) to

trade.

There was a merchant, and he had a parrot imprisoned in a
cage, a pretty parrot.

When the merchant made ready for travel and was about to
depart to India,

Because of his generosity he said to each male slave and each
handmaid, “What shall 1 bring (home) for you? Tell (me)
quickly.”

Each one asked him for some object of desire: that good man 1550
gave his promise to them all.

He said to the parrot, “What present would you like me to
bring for you from the land of India? ”

The parrot said, “When thou seest the parrots there, explain
my plight (and say),

‘Such and such a parrot, who is longing for you, is in my
prison by the destiny of Heaven.


86 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

She salutes you and asks for justice and desires (to learn)
from you the means and way of being rightly guided,

1555 She says, ‘‘Is it meet that I in yearning (after you) should
give up the ghost and die here in separation?

Is this right — (that) I (should be) in grievous bondage, while
ye are now on green plants, now on trees?

The faith kept by friends, is it like this? — I in this prison
and ye in the rose-garden.

O ye noble ones, call to mind this piteous bird, (and drink
in memory of me) a morning-draught amongst the meadows !

^ Happy it is for a friend to be remembered by friends, in par-
ticular when that (beloved) is Layld and this (lover) Majmin.

1560 O ye who consort with your charming and adored one, am
I to be drinking cups filled with my own blood?

(O thou who art my beloved), quaff one cup of wine in
memory of me, if thou desirest to do me justice,

Or (at least), when thou hast drunk, spill one draught on the
earth in memory of this fallen one who sifts dust.

Oh, where, I wonder, is that covenant and oath? Where are
the promises of that lip like candy?

If thy having forsaken thy slave is because of (his) ill service
(to thee) — when thou doest ill to the ill-doer, then what is the
difference (between master and slave)?

1565 Oh, the ill thou doest in wTath and quarrel is more delightl'ul
than music and the sound of the harp.

Oh, thy cruelty is better than felicity, and thy vengeance
dearer than life.

This is thy fire: how (what) must be thv light! This is (thy)
mourning, so how (what) indeed must be thy festival!

In respect of the sweetnesses which thy cruelty hath, and in
respect of thy beauty, no one gets to the bottom of theeh
^ I complain, and (yet) I fear lest he believe me and from
kindness make that cruelty less.

1570 I am exceedingly enamoured of his violence and his gentle-
ness: ’tis marvellous (that) I (am) in love with both these
contraries.

By God, if (I escape) from this thorn (of sorrow) and enter
the garden (of joy), because of this I shall begin to moan like
the nightingale.

This is a wondrous nightingale that opens his mouth to eat
thorns and roses together.

What nightingale is this.? (Nay), ’tis a fiery monster: because
of (his) love all unsweet things are sweetness to him.

He is a lover of the Universal, and he himself is the Universal ;
he is in love with himself and seeking his own love.’’ ’ ”

^ Le. thy sweetness and beauty is unfathomable.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 87


Description of the wings of the birds that are Divine
Intelligences.

Such-like is the tale of the parrot which is the soul: where is 1575
that one who is the confidant of (the spiritual) birds?

Where is a bird, weak and innocent, and within him Solomon
with (all) his host?

When he moans bitterly, without thanksgiving or complaint,
a noise of tumult falls on (arises in) the Seven Spheres (of
Heaven).

At every moment (there come) to him from God a hundred
missives, a hundred couriers: from him one (cry of) ‘'O my
Lord!*’ and from (iod a hundred (cries of) ''Labbayka^'
(“Here am I”).

In the sight of (Jod his backsliding is better than obedience;
beside his infidelity all faiths are tattered (worthless).

Every moment he hath an ascension (to God) peculiar to him-
self: He (God) lays upon his crown a hundred peculiar crowns.

His form is on earth and his spirit in “no-place,” a “no-
place” beyond the imagination of travellers (on the mystic
Way):

Not such a “no-placc” that it should come into thy under-
standing (or that) a fancy about it should be born in thee every
moment ;

Nay, place and “no-place” are in his control, just as the
four (Paradisal) rivers are in the control of one who dwells in
Paradise.

Cut short the explanation of this and avert thy face from it :
do not breathe a word (more) — and CJod knows best what is
right.

We return from this (matter), O friends, to the bird and the 15^5
merchant and India.

The merchant accepted this message (and promised) that he
would convey the greeting from her (the parrot) to her con-
geners.

How the merchant saw the parrots of India in the plain and
delivered the parrot's message.

When he reached the farthest bounds of India, he saw a
number of parrots in the plain.

He halted his beast; then he gave voice, delivered the greeting
and (discharged) the trust.

One of those parrots trembled exceedingly, fell, and died,
and its breath stopped.

The merchant repented of having told the news, and said, 1590
“I have gone about to destroy the creature.


88


MATHNAWI, BOOK I

This one, surely, is kin to that little parrot (of mine): they
must have been two bodies and one spirit.

Why did I do this? Why did I give the message? I have
consumed the poor creature by this raw (foolish) speech.*’

This tongue is like stone and is also fire-like, and that which
springs from the tongue is like fire.

Do not vainly strike stone and iron against each other, now
for the sake of relating (a story), now for the sake of boasting,
1595 Because it is dark, and on every side are fields of cotton:
how should sparks be amongst cotton ?

Iniquitous are those persons who shut their eyes and by such
(vain) words set a whole world ablaze.

A single word lays waste a (whole) world, turns dead foxes
into lions.

Spirits in their original nature have the (life-giving) breath
of Jesus, (but while they remain embodied) one breath of it
(the spirit) is a wound, and the other a plaster.

If the (bodily) screen were removed from the spirits, the
speech of every spirit would be like (the breath of) the Messiah.
1600 ^ If you wish to utter words like sugar, refrain from concu-
piscence and do not eat this sweetmeat (the desires of the flesh).

Self-control is the thing desired by the intelligent ; sweetmeat
is what children long for.

Whoever practises self-control ascends to Heaven, whoever
eats sweetmeat falls farther behind.

Commentary on the saying of Faridu'ddin 'Attar, may God
sanctify his spirit —

"Thou art a sensualist: O heedless one, drink blood {mortify
thyself) amidst the dust {of thy bodily existence),

For if the spiritualist drink a poison, it will be {to him as) an
antidoteF

It does^ not harm the spiritualist (saint) though he drink
deadly poison for all to see,

Because he has attained to (spiritual) health and has been
set free from (the need for) abstinence, (while) the poor seeker
(of God) is (still) in the (state of) fever.

1605 The Prophet said, ‘‘O bold seeker, beware! Do not contend
with any one who is sought.”

In thee is a Nimrod: do not go into the fire. If thou wish to
go in, first become Abraham!

When thou art neither a swimmer nor a seaman, do not cast
thyself finto the sea) from a (feeling of) self-conceit.

He (the saint) fetches pearls from the bottom of the sea, from
losses he brings gain to the surface.

^ If a perfect man (saint) take earth, it becomes gold; if an
imperfect one has carried away gold, it becomes ashes.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 89

Since that righteous man is accepted of God, his hand in i6io
(all) things is the hand of God.

The hand of the imperfect man is the hand of Devil and
demon, because he is in the trap of imposition and guile.

If ignorance come to him (the perfect man), it becomes
knowledge, (but) the knowledge that goes into the imperfect
man becomes ignorance.

Whatever an ill man takes becomes illness, (but) if a perfect
man takes infidelity, it becomes religion.

O thou who, being on foot, hast contended with a horseman,
thou wilt not save thy head. Now hold thy foot (desist) !

How the magicians paid respect to Moses, on whom be peace,

saying, “ What dost thou command? Wilt thou cast dozen thy

rod first, or shall we?"

I'hc magicians in the time of the accursed Pharaoh, when 1615
they contended with Moses in enmity.

Yet gave Moses the precedence— the magicians held him in
honour—

Because they .said to him, “ ’Tis for thee to command : (if)
thou wishest to be the first, do thou cast down thy rod first
(of all).”

“Nay,” said he, “first do ye, O magicians, cast down those
tricks (objects of enchantment) into the middle (where all can
see them),”

This amount of respect purchased their (belief in) (the true)
religion, so that it (the true belief) cut off the hands and feet
of tlieir contention (prevented them from disputing further with
Moses).

When the magicians acknowledged his (Moses’) right, they 16^0
sacrificed their hands and feet (as a penance) for the sin of that
(contention).

To the perfect man (every) mouthful (of food) and (every)
saying is lawful, 'I'hou art not perfect: do not eat, be mute,

Inasmuch as thou art an car and he a tongue, not thy con- .
gener: God said to the ears, “ Be silent."

When the sucking babe is born, at first it keeps silence for
a while, it is all ear.

For a while it must close its lips (and refrain) from speech,
until it learns to speak ;

And if it is not (silent like) an ear but makes babbling sounds, 1625
it makes itself the dumbest creature in the world.

He that is deaf by nature, he that had no ear at the beginning,
is dumb : how should he burst into speech?

Since, in order to speak, one must first hear, do thou come
to speech by the way of hearing.


90 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Enter ye the houses by their doors, and seek ye the ends in
their causes.

There is no speech independent of the way of hearing except
the speech of the Creator who is without want.

1630 He is the Originator, He follows no master ; He is the support
of all things, He hath no support,

(While) the rest, (engaged) in handicrafts and talk, follow a
master and have need of a pattern.

If thou art not alien to (unfit to hear) this discourse, assume
the frock of a dervish and (take to shedding) tears in some
deserted place.

Because Adam by means of tears escaped from that reproof :
moist tears are the breath (speech) of the penitent.

For weeping’s sake Adam came (down) to the earth, that he
might be weeping and moaning and sorrowful.

1635 Adam, (cast out) from Paradise and from above the Seven
(Heavens), went to the “shoe-row”^ for the purpose of ex-
cusing himself.

If thou art from the back of Adam and from his loins, be
constant in seeking (forgiveness) amongst his company.

Prepare a dessert of heart-fire (burning grief) and eye-water
(tears): the garden is made open (blooming) by cloud and sun.

What dost thou know of the taste of the water of the eyes.?
Thou art a lover of bread, like the blind (beggars).

If thou make this wallet empty of bread, 3iou wilt make it
full of glorious jewels.

1640 Wean the babe, thy soul, from the Devil’s milk, and after
that make it consort with the Angel.

Whilst thou art dark and vexed and gloomy, know that thou
art sucking from the same breast as the accursed Devil.

The mouthful that gave increase of light and perfection is
obtained from lawful earnings.

The oil that comes and quenches our lamp — ^when it quenches
a lamp, call it water.

From the lawful morsel are born knowledge and wisdom;
from the lawful morsel come love and tenderness,

1645 When from a morsel thou seest (arise) envy and guile, (and
when) ignorance and heedlessness are born (of it), know that
it is unlawful.

Wilt thou sow wheat and will it produce barley? Hast thou
seen a mare bring forth an ass’s colt?

The morsel is seed, and thoughts are its fruit; the morsel
is the sea, and thoughts are its pearls.

From the lawful morsel in the mouth is born the inclination
to serve (God) and the resolve to go to yonder world.

^ See p. 64, note i. The meaning is that he stood in the place of re-
pentance.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT


91

How the merchant related to the parrot what he had witnessed
on the part of the parrots of India.

The merchant finished his trading and returned home glad at
heart.

He brought a present for every male slave, he gave a token 165a
to every slave-girl.

‘'Where is my present?” asked the parrot. “Relate what
thou hast said and seen.”

“Nay,” said he, “indeed I am repenting of that (which I
said), gnawing my hand and biting my fingers (in remorse).

Why, from ignorance and folly, did 1 idly bear (such) an
inconsiderate message?”

“O master,” said the parrot, “what is thy repentance for?
What is it that causes this anger and grief? ”

“1 told thy complaints,” said he, “to a company of parrots 1055
resembling thee.

One parrot got scent of (understood) thy pain: her heart
broke^, and she trembled and died.

1 became sorry, (thinking) ‘why did I say this?' but what
was the use of repenting after I had said it?”

Know that a word which suddenly shot from the tongue is
like an arrow shot from the bow.

O son, that arrow does not turn back on its way: you must
dam a torrent at the source.

When it left the source behind, it swept over a world (of 1660
country) : if it lays waste the world, 'tis no wonder.

There is an unseen bringing forth of effects to (our) action, and
the results born of it are not in the control of (human) creatures :

Those results are all created by God without any partner,
though they are imputed to us.

Zayd let ily an arrow in the direction of ‘Amr: his arrow
gripped *Amr like a leopard.

During a long time, a (whole) year, it was producing pain:
pains are created by God, not by man.

If Zayd who shot (the arrow) died of fright at the moment i6b5
(when ‘Amr was wounded), (nevertheless) pains are continually
being produced there (in ‘Amr's body) until (‘Amr’s) death.

Inasmuch as ho (‘Amr) died from the results of the hurt
(inflicted on him), for this cause call Zayd, w'ho shot (the arrow),
the murderer.

Impute those pains to him, though all of them are the work
of the Creator.

So with sowing and breathing (speaking) and (laying) snares
and sexual intercourse: the results of those (actions) are amen-
able to (determined by the will of) God.

^ laterally, her gall-bladder burst.’'


92 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

The saints possess power (derived) from God : they turn back
from its course the arrow that has sped.

1670 When the saint repents, he closes the doors of the results
(shuts off the results) from the cause^ by that hand (power) of
the Lord.

Through the opening of the door (of Divine grace), he makes
unsaid what has been said, so that neither spit nor roast-meat
is burnt thereby^.

He wipes out the saying from all the minds that heard it,
and makes it imperceptible.

O sire, if thou must needs have demonstration and proof (of
this), recite ^'(Whatever) verse (We cancel) or cause to be for-
gotten,''^

Read the verse “ They made you forget My warning'' : acknow-
ledge their (the saints’) power to put forgetfulness (in men’s
hearts).

1675 Since they are able to make (you) remember and forget, they
are mighty over all the hearts of (God’s) creatures.

When he (the saint) has blocked the road of (your) mental
perception by means of forgetfulness, it is impossible (for you)
to act, even if there be virtue (in you).

Think ye those exalted ones are a laughing-stock? Recite
from the Qur’an as far as (the words) “ They made you forget."

He that owns a village is king over bodies; he that owns a
heart'"* is king over your hearts.

Without any doubt, action (practice) is a branch of (sub-
ordinate to) seeing (theory)^: therefore Man is nothing but
‘‘the little man” (the pupil of the eye).

1680 I dare not expound the whole of this (subject): hindrance
thereto is coming from those who are at the centre.

Inasmuch as the forgetfulness and recollection of (God’s)
creatures are with him (depend on the perfect saint), and he
comes at their call for help,

Every night that glorious one is emptying from their hearts
hundreds of thousands of good and evil (thoughts),

(While) in the daytime he is filling their hearts therewith —
he is filling those oyster-shells with pearls.

By (Divine) guidance (after sleep is past) all those thoughts
of former things recognise the spirits (to which they were
attached).

1685 Your handicraft and skill come (back) to you, that they may
open to you the door of (ways and) means.

The goldsmith’s craft did not go to the ironsmith ; the dis-

J I.e. he renders the cause inoperative.

^ Le. so that no harm is done,

® Le. the saint.

^ I e. the miraculous actions of the saints depend on mystical knowledge
and insight.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 93

position of the good-natured man did not go to the disagreeable
one.

On the day of Resurrection the handicrafts and dispositions
will come, like articles of property, to the claimant (owner).

After sleep also, the handicrafts and dispositions come back
in haste to him that claims them as his.

At the hour of dawn the handicrafts and thoughts went to
the same place where that good and evil (formerly) were.

Like carrier pigeons, they bring things useful (to know) from 1690
(other) cities to their own city.


How the parrot heard what those parrots had done, and died in
the cage, and how the merchant made lament for her.

When the bird heard what that (other) parrot had done, she
trembled exceedingly, fell, and became cold.

The merchant, seeing her thus fallen, sprang up and dashed
his cap on the ground.

When he saw her in this guise and in this state, the merchant
sprang forward and tore the breast of his garment.

He said, beautiful parrot with thy sweet cry, what is
this that has happened to thee? Why hast thou become like
this?

Oh, alas for my sweet-voiced bird! Oh, alas for my bosom- 1695
friend and confidant !

Oh, alas for my melodious bird, the wine of my spirit and
my garden and my sweet basil 1

Had Solomon possessed a bird like this, how indeed should
he have become occupied with those (other) birds?

Oh, alas for the bird which I gained cheaply, and (so) soon
turned my face away from her countenance !

0 tongue, thou art a great damage to me, (but) since thou
art speaking, what sShould I say to thee?

O tongue, thou art both the fire and the stack: how long wilt 1700
thou dart this fire upon this stack?

Secretly my soul is groaning because of thee, although it is
doing whatsoever thou biddest it.

O tongue, thou art a treasure without end, O tongue, thou
art also a disease without remedy.

Thou art at once a whistle and decoy for birds, and a com-
forter in the desolation of absence (from the Beloved).

How long wilt thou grant me mercy, O merciless one, 0 thou
who hast drawn the bow to take vengeance on me?

Lo, thou hast made my bird fly away. Do not browse (any 1705
more) in the pasture of injustice!

Either answer me or give redress or mention to me (what
will be) the means of (producing) joy.


94 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Oh, alas for my darkness-consuming dawn ! Oh, alas for my
day-enkindling light !

Oh, alas for my bird of goodly flight, that has flown from
my end (my last state) to my beginning (my first state).

The ignorant man is in love with pain unto everlasting. Arise
and read (in the Qur’dn) I swear^ as far as (the words) in trouble,

1710 With thy face I was free from trouble, and in thy river I was
unsoiled by froth*

These cries of ‘ Alas ^ are (caused by) the phantasy (idea) of
seeing (the Beloved) and (by) separation from my present
existence.

’Twas the jealousy of God, and there is no device against
God: where is a heart that is not (shattered) in a hundred pieces
by God’s love?

The jealousy (of God) is this, that He is other than all things,
that He is beyond explanation and the noise of words.

Oh, alas! Would that my tears were an ocean, that they
might be strewn as an offering to the fair charmer !

1715 My parrot, my clever-headed bird, the interpreter of my
thought and inmost consciousness,

She has told me from the first, that I might remember it,
whatsoever should come to me as my allotted portion of right
and wrong.”

The parrot whose voice comes from (Divine) inspiration and
whose beginning was before the beginning of existence —

That parrot is hidden within thee: thou hast seen the re-
flexion of her upon this and that (the things of the phenomenal
world).

She takes away thy joy, and because of her thou art rejoicing;
thou receivest injury from her as though it were justice.

1720 O thou who wert burning the soul for the body’s sake, thou
hast burned (destroyed) the soul and illumined (delighted) the
body.

I am burning (with love of God) : does any one want tinder,
let him set his rubbish ablaze with fire from me.

Inasmuch as tinder is combustible, take tinder that catches
fibre (readily).

O alas, O alas, O alas that such a moon became hidden under
the clouds 1

How should I utter a word ? — for the fire in my heart is grown
fierce, the lion of separation (from the Beloved) has become
raging and blood-shedding.

1725 One that even when sober is violent and furious, how will it
be when he takes the wine-cup in his hand?

The furious Lion who is beyond description is too great for
(cannot be contained in) the wide expanse of the meadow.

^ Literally, SeeWright*s.<^m^7cGm7;zw^r,3rdcd ,vol.n,p. 305 .


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 95

I am thinking of rhymes, and my Sweetheart says to me,

Do not think of aught except vision of Me,

Sit at thy ease, My rhyme-meditating (friend): in My
presence thou art rhymed with (attached to) felicity.

What are words that thou shouldst think of them? What are
words? Thorns in the hedge of the vineyard.

I will throw word and sound and speech into confusion, that 1730
without these three I may converse with thee.

That word which I kept hidden from Adam I will speak to
thee, O (thou who art the) consciousness of the world.

(I will tell to thee) that word which I did not communicate
to Abraham, and that pain (love) which Gabriel does not know.”

That word of which the Messiah (Jesus) breathed not a word
God, from jealousy, did not utter even without md.

What is md in language? Positive and negative^ I am not
positive, 1 am selfless and negated.

1 found (true) individuality in non-individuality: therefore I 17^5
wove (my) individuality into non-individuality.

All kings arc enslaved to their slaves, all people are dead
(ready to die) for one who dies for them.

All kings are prostrate before one who is prostrate before
them, all people are into.xicatcd with (love for) one who is
intoxicated wdth them.

The fowler becomes a prey to the birds in order that of a
sudden he may make them his prey.

The hearts of heart-ravishers arc captivated by those who have
lost their hearts (to them) : all loved ones are the prey of (their)
lovers.

Whomsoever thou didst deem to be a lover, regard (him) as 1740
the loved one, for relatively he is both this and that.

If they that are thirsty seek water from the world, (yet) water
too seeks in the world them that are thirsty.

Inasmuch as He is (thy) lover, do thou be silent: as He is )
p\illing thine car, be thou (all) ear.

Dam the torrent (of ecstasy) when it runs in flood; else it
will work shame and ruin.

What care I though ruin be (wrought)? Under the ruin there
is a royal treasure.

He that is drowned in CJod wishes to be more drowned, (while) 1745
his spirit (is tossed) up and down like the waves of the sea,

(Asking), Is the bottom of the sea more delightful, or the
top? Is His (the beloved's) arrow more fascinating, or the
shield?”

O heart, thou art torn asunder by evil suggestion if thou
recognise any difference between joy and woe.

Although the object of thy desire has the taste of sugar, is
^ Literally, ** affirmation and ne^?ation,’'


96 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

not absence ot any object of desire (in thee) the object of the
Beloved’s desire?

Every star of His is the blood-price of a hundred new moons :
it is lawful for Him to shed the blood of the (whole) world*
1750 We gained the price and the blood-price: we hastened to
gamble our soul away.

Oh, the life of lovers consists in death : thou wilt not win the
(Beloved’s) heart except in losing thine own.

I sought (to win) His heart with a hundred airs and graces,
(but) He made excuses to me (put me oS) in disdain.

I said, ‘‘After all, this mind and soul (of mine) are drowned
in Thee.” “Begone,” said He, “begone! Do not chant these
spells over Me (do not seek thus to beguile Me).

Do not I know what thought thou hast conceived? O thou
who hast seen double, how hast thou regarded the Beloved?
1755 O gross-spirited one, thou hast held Me in light esteem,
because thou hast bought Me very cheaply.

He that buys cheaply gives cheaply: a child will give a pearl
for a loaf of bread.”

I am drowned in a love (so deep) that therein are drowned
the first loves and the last.

I have told it summarily, I have not explained it (at length),
otherwise both (thy) perceptions and (my) tongue would be
consumed.

When I speak of “lip,” ’tis the lip (shore) of the Sea; when I
say “not,” the intended meaning is “ except.”

1760 By reason of (inward) sweetness I sit with sour face : from
fullness of speech I am silent,

That in the mask of sour-facedness my sweetness may be
kept hidden from the two worlds.

In order that this subject may not come to every ear, I am
telling (only) one out of a hundred esoteric mysteries.

Commentary on the saying of the Hakim {Sand'i):

"'Any thing that causes thee to be left behind on the Way, what
matter whether it be infidelity or faith?

Any form that causes thee to fall far from the Beloved, what
matter whether it be ugly or beautiful ?^' —
and {a discourse) on the meaning of the words of the Prophet, on
whom be peace: "Verily, Su'd is jealous, and I am more jealous
than Sa'd, and Allah is more jealous than I; and because of His
jealousy He hath forbidden foul actions both outward and
inwar dP

The whole world became jealous because God is superior to
all the world in jealousy.

He is like the spirit, and the world is like the body ; the body
receives from the spirit (both) good and evil.


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 97

Any one whose prayer-niche is turned to the (mystical) reve- 1765
lation, do thou regard his going (back) to (the traditional) faith
as shameful.

Any one who has become Master of the robes to the King,
it is loss for him to traffic on the King’s behalf.

Any one who becomes the intimate friend of the Sultan, it is
an injury and swindle (for him) to wait at his door.

When (the privilege of) kissing the (King’s) hand has been
bestowed on him by the King, it is a sin if he prefers to kiss
the (King’s) foot.

Although to lay the head on the (King’s) foot is an act of
obeisance, (yet) compared with the former act of obeisance it
is a fault and backsliding.

The King is jealous of any one who, after having seen the 1770
face, prefers the (mere) scent.

'I'o speak in parables, God’s jealousy is the wheat, (while)
men’s jealousy is the straw in the stack.

Know that the root of (all) jealousies is in God: those of
mankind are an offshoot from God, without resemblance (being
implied).

I will leave the explanation of this and will begin to complain
cif the cruelty of that fickle Beauty.

I wail because wailings are pleasant to Him : He wants from
the two worlds wailing and grief.

How' should I not wail bitterly on account of His de- 1775
ceit, since 1 am not in the circle of those intoxicated with
Him?

How should I not mourn, like night, without His day and
without the favour of His day-illuming countenance?

His unsweetness is sweet in my soul: may my soul be sacri-
ficed to the Beloved who grieves my heart !

I am in love with my grief and pain for the sake of pleasing
my peerless King.

I make the dust of sorrow a salve for mine eye, that the two
seas of mine eyes may be filled with pearls.

'I'he tears which people shed for Ilis sake are pearls — and 17S0
people think they are tears.

I am complaining of the Soul of the soul, (but in truth) I am
not complaining : I am (only) relating.

My heart is saying, “I am tormented by Him,” and I have
(long) been laughing at its poor pretence.

Do (me) right, O glory of the righteous, O Thou who art the
dais, and 1 the threshold of Thy door !

Where are threshold and dais in reality? In the quarter where
our Beloved is, where are “we” and “ 1 ”?

O Thou whose soul is free from “we ” and “I,” O Thou who 1785
art the subtle essence of the spirit in man and woman,

N M


7


98 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When man and woman become one, Thou art that One;
when the units are wiped out, lo, Thou art that (Unity).

Thou didst contrive this “I’’ and “we’’ in order that Thou
mightst play the game^ of worship with Thyself,

That all “I’s” and “thou’s” should become one soul and
at last should be submerged in the Beloved.

All this is (true), and do Thou come, O (Lord of the) Creative
Word^, O Thou who transcendest “ Come” and (all) speech!

1790 The body can see Thee (only) in bodily fashion: it fancies
(pictures to itself) Thy sadness or laughter.

Do not say that the heart that is bound (conditioned) by
(such bodily attributes as) sadness and laughter is worthy of
seeing Thee (as Thou really art).

He who is bound by sadness and laughter is living by means
of these two borrowed (transient and unreal) things.

In the verdant garden of Love, which is without end, there
are many fruits besides sorrow and joy.

Love is higher than these two states of feeling : without spring
and without autumn it is (ever) green and fresh.

1795 Pay the tithe on Thy fair face, O Beauteous One: relate the
story of the soul that is rent in pieces.

For by the coquetry of a glance One who is given to glancing
amorously has branded my heart anew.

I absolved Him if He shed my blood: I was saying, “It is
lawful (I absolve Thee),” and He was fleeing (from me).

Since Thou art fleeing from the lament of those who are (as)
dust, why pourest Thou sorrow on the hearts of the sorrowful?

O Thou, whom every dawn that shone from the East found
overflowing (with abundant grace) like the bright fountain (of
the sun),

1800 How didst Thou give (nothing but) evasion to Thy frenzied
lover, 0 Thou the sugar of whose lips hath no price?

O Thou who art a new soul to the old world, hear the cry
(that comes) from my body (which is) without soul and heart.

Leave the tale of the Rose! For God’s sake set forth the tale
of the Nightingale that is parted from the Rose 1

Our emotion is not caused by grief and joy, our consciousness
is not related to fancy and imagination.

There is another state (of consciousness), which is rare: do
not thou disbelieve, for God is very mighty.

1S05 ^ Do not judge from the (normal) state of man, do not abide
in wrong-doing and in well-doing.

Wrong-doing and well-doing, grief and joy, are things that

^ Literally, nard, a kind of backgammon.

j ** (which is) ‘Bel*’* Another reading is

Thou who givest the Command.**


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT 99

■come into existence; those who come into existence die; God
is their heir.

’Tis dawn. O Thou who art the support and refuge of the
dawn, ask pardon (for me) of my Lord Husdmu’ddin!

Thou art He who asketh pardon of the Universal Mind and
Soul, Thou art the Soul of the soul and the Splendour of the coral.

The light of dawn has shone forth, and from Thy light we
are engaged in drinking the morning-drink with the wine of
Thy Mansur’.

Inasmuch as Thy gift keeps me thus (enravished), who (what) tSio
is (other) wine that it should bring me rapture?

Wine in ferment is a beggar suing for our ferment; Heaven
in revolution is a beggar suing for our consciousness.

Wine became intoxicated with us, not we with it; the body
came into being from us, not we from it.

We are as bees, and bodies arc as wax (honeycomb): we have
made the body, cell by cell, like wax.


Reverting to the tale of the merchant who went to trade
{in India).

This (discourse) is very long. Tell the story of the merchant,
that wc may see what happened to that good man.

The merchant in fire (burning grief) and anguish and yearning tsis
was uttering a hundred distracted phrases like this.

Now self-contradiction, now disdain, now supplication, now
passion for reality, now metaphor (unreality).

The drowning man suffers an agony of soul and clutches at
every straw.

For fear of (losing) his head (life), he flings about (both)
hand and foot to see whether any one will take his hand (help
him) in peril.

The Friend loves this agitation: it is better to struggle vainly
than to lie still.

He who is the King (of all) is not idle, (though) complaint 1820
from I lim would be a marvel, for He is not ill.

For this reason said the Merciful (God), O son, “Every day
lie is (busy) in an affair,” O son.

In this Way be thou ever scraping and scratching (exerting
thyself to the utmost) : until thy last breath do not be unoccupied
for a moment,

So that thy last breath may be a last breath in which the
(Divine) favour is thy bosom-friend.

Whatsoever the soul which is in man and woman strives to
■ do, the car and eye of the soul's King are at the window.

^ i.ialliij, who said


7-2


100


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


How the merchant cast the parrot out of the cage and how
the dead parrot flew away,

1825 After that, he cast her out of the cage. The little parrot flew
to a lofty bough.

The dead parrot made such a (swift) flight as when the
orient sun rushed onward.

The merchant was amazed at the action of the bird : without
understanding he suddenly beheld the mysteries of the bird.

He lifted up his face and said, ‘‘O nightingale, give us profit
(instruction) by explaining thy case.

What did she (the parrot) do there (in India), that thou didst
learn, devise a trick, and burn us (with grief)*’?

1830 The parrot said, “She by her act counselled me — ‘Abandon
thy charm of voice and thy affection (for thy master).

Because thy voice has brought thee into bondage*: she
feigned herself dead for the sake of (giving me) this counsel.

Meaning (to say), ‘ O thou who hast become a singer to high
and low, become dead like me, that thou mayst gain release.* **

If you are a grain, the little birds will peck you up; if you
are a bud, the children will pluck you off.

Hide the grain (bait), become wholly a snare; hide the bud,
become the grass on the roof,

1S35 Any one who offers his beauty to auction, a hundred evil fates
set out towards him (and overtake him).

Plots and angers and envies pour upon his head, like water
from waterskins.

Foes tear him to pieces from jealousy; even friends take
his lifetime away.

He that was heedless of the sowing and the springtide, how
should he know the value of this lifetime?

You must flee to the shelter of God’s grace, who shed
thousandfold grace upon (our) spirits,

1840 That you may find a shelter. Then how (will you lack) shelter?
Water and fire will become your army.

Did not the sea become a friend to Noah and Moses? Did it
not become overbearing in vengeance against their enemies?

Was not the fire a fortress for Abraham, so that it raised
smoke (sighs of despair) from the heart of Nimrod?

Did not the mountain call Yahya (John the Baptist) to itself
and drive off his pursuers with blows of stone?

“ 0 Yahyd,** it said, “ come, take refuge in me, that I may be
' thy shelter from the sharp sword.”


THE MERCHANT AND THE PARROT


lOI


How the parrot hade farewell to the merchant and flew away.

The parrot gave him one or two counsels full of (spiritual) 1845
savour and after that bade him the farewell of par ting .

The merchant said to her, “ Go, God protect thee ! Just now
thou hast shown to me a new Way.”

Said the merchant to himself, “This is the counsel for me;

I will take her Way, for this Way is shining with light.

How should my soul be meaner than the parrot? The soul
ought to follow a good track like this.”


The harmfulness of being honoured by the people and of
becoming conspicuous.

The body is cage-like: the body, amidst the cajoleries of those
who come in and go out, became a thorn to the soul.

This one says to him, “I will be thy confidant,” and that 1850
one says, “Nay, I am thy partner.”

This one says to him, “There is none in existence like thee
for beauty and eminence and for kindness and liberality.”

That one says to him, “Both the worlds are thine, all our
souls are thy soul’s parasites.”

When he sees the people intoxicated with (desire for) him,
because of arrogance he loses self-control.

He does not know that the Devil has cast thousands like him
into the water of the river (of destruction).

The world’s flatteiw and hypocrisy is a sweet morsel : eat less 1855
of it (eat it not), for it is a morsel full of fire.

Its fire is hidden and its taste is manifest: its smoke becomes
visible in the end.

Do not say, “How should I swallow that praise? He is
speaking from desire (for reward) : I am on his track (and see
quite well what he is after).”

If your belaudcr should satirise you in public, your heart
would burn for (many) days on account of those scorches (of
vituperation).

Although you know that he (only) said it in disappointment
because the hopes he had of you brought him no gain,

(Yet) the effect thereof is remaining within you. The same i860
experience happens to you in the case of praise.

I’he effect of that too lasts for many days and becomes a
source t>f arrogance and deception of the soul.

But it docs not show itselt, because praise is sweet; (in the
case of blame) the evil shows itself, because blame is bitter.

It (blame) is like (bitter) decoctions and pills which you
swallow and for a long time you are in disturbance and pain.


102 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Whereas, if you eat halwd (sweetmeat), its taste is momentary :
this effect, like the other, is not enduring for ever.

1865 Since it does not endure (perceptibly), it endures imper-
ceptibly : recognise every opposite by means of its opposite.

When the effect of sugar endures (remains latent), after a
while it produces boils that call for the lancet.

Pharaoh was made (what he was) by abundance of praises :
be lowly of spirit through meekness, do not domineer.

So far as you can, become a slave, do not be a monarch.
Suffer blows: become like the ball, do not be the bat.

Otherwise, when this elegance and beauty remains with you
no more, you will be loathed by those companions.

1870 The set of people who used to flatter you deceitfully, when
they behold you will call you a devil.

When they see you at their doors, they all will cry, “A dead
man has risen from his grave,”

(You will be) like the beardless youth whom they address as
‘‘Lord” that by this hypocrisy they may make him infamous.

As soon as he has grown a beard in infamy, the Devil is
ashamed to search after him.

The Devil approaches Man for the sake of wickedness: he
does not approach yow because you are worse than the Devil.

1S75 So long as you were a man the Devil was running at your
heels and bidding you taste (his) wine.

Since you have become confirmed in devilry, the Devil is
fleeing from you, O good-for-nothing!

At that (former) time they clung to your skirt: when you
became like this they all fled.

Explanation of {the Tradition) “ Whatsoever God wills
cometh to pass

We have spoken all these words, but in preparing ourselves
(for the journey before us) we are naught, naught without the
favours of God.

Without the favours of God and God’s elect ones, angel
though he be, his page is black.

1880 0 God, O Thou whose bounty fulfils (every) need, it is not

allowable to mention any one beside Thee.

This amount of guidance Thou hast bestowed (upon us) ; till
this (present time) Thou hast covered up many a fault of ours.

Cause the drop of knowledge which Thou gavest (us) hereto-
fore to become united with Thy seas.

In my soul there is a drop of knowledge: deliver it from
sensuality and from the body’s clay.

Before these clays drink it up, before these vdnds sweep it
away,


THE ALMIGHTINESS OF GOD 103

Although, when they sweep it away, Thou art able to take it 1885
back from them and redeem it.

The drop that vanished in the air or was spilled (on the
earth)— when did it flee (escape) from the storehouse of Thy
omnipotence?

If it enter into non-existence or a hundred non-existences, it
will make a foot of its head (will return in headlong haste) when
Thou callest it.

Hundreds of thousands of opposites are killin g their oppo-
sites I Thy decree is drawing them forth again (from non-
existence).

There is caravan on caravan, O Lord, (speeding) continually
from non-existence towards existence.

In particular, every night all thoughts and understandings iSqo
become naught, plunged in the deep Sea ;

Again at the time of dawn those Divine ones lift up their
heads from the Sea, like fishes.

In autumn the myriads of boughs and leaves go in rout into
the sea of Death,

(While) in the garden the crow clothed in black like a mourner
makes lament over the (withered) greenery.

Again from the Lord of the land’ comes the edict (saying) to
Non-existence, “Give back what thou hast devoured!

Give up, O black Death, what thou hast devoured of plants 1895
and healing herbs and leaves and grass 1 ”

O brother, collect thy wits for an instant (and think) : from
moment to moment (incessantly) there is autumn and spring
within thee.

Behold the garden of the heart, green and moist and fresh,
full of rosebuds and cypresses and jasmines ;

Boughs hidden by the multitude of leaves, vast plain and
high palace hidden by the multitude of flowers.

These words, which are from Universal Reason, are the scent
of those flowers and cypresses and hyacinths.

Didst thou (ever) smell the scent of a rose where no rose was? 1900
Didst thou (ever) see the foaming of wine where no wine was?

I'he scent is thy guide and conducts thee on thy way: it will
bring thee to Eden and Kawthar.

The scent is a remedy for the (sightless) eye; (it is) light-
making: the eye of Jacob was opened by a scent.

The foul scent darkens the eye, the scent of Joseph succours
the eye.

Thou who art not a Joseph, be a Jacob: be (familiar), like
him, with weeping and sore distress.

Hearken to this counsel from the Sage of Ghazna®, that thou 1905
mayst feel freshness in thy old body ;

^ Literally, “the headman of the village.*’


® Sand’f.


104 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

‘‘Disdain needs a face like the rose; when thou hast not
(such a face), do not indulge in^ ill-temper.

Ugly is disdain in an uncomely face, grievous is eye-ache in
an unseeing eye.”

In the presence of Joseph do not give thyself airs and behave
like a beauty: oifer nothing but the supplication and sighs of
Jacob.

The meaning of dying (as conveyed) by the parrot was
supplication (self-abasement) : make thyself dead in supplication
and poverty (of spirit),

191^ That the breath of Jesus may revive thee and make thee
fair and blessed as itself.

How should a rock be covered with verdure by the Spring?
Become earth, that thou mayst grow flowers of many a hue.

Years hast thou been a heart-jagging rock: once, for the sake
of experiment, be earth !

The story of the old harper who in the time of ‘ Umar^ may God be
well-pleased with him^ on a day when he was starving played
the harp for God's sake in the graveyard.

Hast thou heard that in the time of ‘Umar there was a harper,
a fine and glorious minstrel?

The nightingale would be made beside herself by his voice :
by his bputiful voice one rapture would be turned into a
hundred.

^915 His breath was an ornament to assembly and congregation,
and at his song the dead would arise.

(He was) like Israfil (Seraphiel), whose voice will cunningly
bring the souls of the dead into their bodies,

Or he was (like) an accompanist ^ to Israfil, for his music would
make the elephant grow wings.

One day Israfil will make a shrill sound arid will give life to
him that has been rotten for a hundred years.

The prophets also have (spiritual) notes within, whence there
comes life beyond price to them that seek (God).

19^0 The sensual ear does not hear those notes, for the sensual ear
is defiled by iniquities.

The note of the peri^ is not heard by man, for he is unable
to apprehend the mysteries of the peris,

Although the note of the peri too belongs to this world. The
note of the heart is higher than both breaths (notes)

For peri and man (alike) are prisoners : bofh are (captive) in
the prison of this ignorance.

^ Literally, *‘do not roam round.”

^ Literally, “accompanists,” Cf. Book III, 1473.

® /.€. one of the Jinn.

^ Le, the note (voice) of man and the note of the peri.


THE STORY OF THE HARPER


105

Recite O community of Jinn {and men) in the 1’- ,

Rahman ; recognise (the meaning of) if ye be able to

The inward notes of the saints say, at first, “O ye
of Id (not =- not-being).

Take heed, lift up your heads from the Id of negation, put
forth your heads from this fancy and vain imagining.

O ye who all are rotten in (the world of) generation and cor-
ruption, your everlasting soul neither grew nor came to birth.”

If I tell (even) a tittle of those (saintly) notes, the souls will
lift up their heads from the tombs.

Put thine ear close, for that (melody) is not far off, but ’tis
not permitted to convey it to thee.

Hark! for the saints are the Israfils of the (present) time; 1030
from them to the dead comes life and freshness.

At their voice the dead souls in the body’s grave start up in
their winding-sheets.

He (that is thus awakened) says, “This voice is separate from
(all other) voices : to quicken (the dead) is the work of the voice
of God.

We (had) died and were entirely decayed: the call of God
came: we all arose.”

The call of God, (whether it be) veiled or unveiled, bestows
that which He bestowed on Mary from His bosom.

O ye who are rotten with death (in your hearts) underneath 1935
the skin, return from non-existence at the voice of the Friend 1

Absolutely, indeed, that voice is from the King (God), though
it be from the larynx of God’s servant.

He (God) has said to him (the saint), “I am thy tongue and
eye ; I am thy senses and 1 am thy good pleasure and thy wrath.

Go, for thou art (he of whom God saith), ‘ By Me he hears
and by Me he sees ’ : thou art the (Divine) consciousness (itself) :
what is the occasion (propriety) of (saying), ‘Thou art the
possessor of the (Divine) consciousness ’ ?

Since thou hast become, through bewilderment, ‘He that
belongs to God,’ I am thine, for ‘God shall belong to him.’

Sometimes I say to thee, ‘’Tis thou,’ sometimes, ‘’Tis I’: nuo
whatever 1 say, I am the Sun illuminating (all).

Wheresoever I shine forth from the lamp-niche of a breath
(Divine word), there the difficulties of a (whole) world are
resolved.

The darkness which the (earthly) sun did not remove,
through My breath that darkness becomes like bright morning.”

To an Adam He in His own person showed the (Divine)
Names; to the rest He was revealing the Names by means of
Adam.

Do thou receive His light either from Adam or from Himself :
take the wine either from the jar or from the gourd (cup).


io6 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

1945 For this gourd is very closely connected with the jar: the
blessed gourd is not rejoiced (by the same causes) as thou
art.

Mustafd (Mohammed) said, “Happy he that has seen me
and he that looks at him that saw my face.’'

When a lamp has derived (its) light from a candle, every one
that sees it (the lamp) certainly sees the candle.

If transmission (of the light) occurs in this way till a hundred
lamps (are lighted), the seeing of the last (lamp) becomes a
meeting with the original (light)^.

Either take with (all) thy soul from the hindmost light — there
is no difference — or from the candelabrum.

1950 Either behold the light (of God^ from the lamp of the last
(saints), or behold His light from the candle of those who have
gone before.


Explanation of the Tradition^ “ Verily, your Lord hath, during

the days of your time, certain breathings: oh, address your^

selves to {receive) them.^^

The Prophet said, “In these days the breathings of God
prevail :

Keep ear and mind (attentive) to these (spiritual) influences^
catch up such-like breathings.”

The (Divine) breathing came, beheld you, and departed: it
gave life to whom it would, and departed.

Another breathing has arrived. Be thou heedful, that thou
mayst not miss this one too, O comrade.

1955 The soul of fire gained therefrom an extinguisher of (its) fire,
the dead soul felt within itself a movement (of life).

This is the freshness and movement of the Tuba-tree, this is
not like the movements of animals.

If it fall on earth and heaven, their galls will turn to water
at once (they will be consumed with terror).

Truly, from fear of this infinite breath (they were filled with
dismay): recite (the words of the Qur'an) but they refused to
bear it (the trust offered to them).

Else, how should (the words) they shrank from it have been
(in the Qur’an), unless from fear of it the heart of the mountain
had become blood?

i960 Yesternight this (breath) presented itself (to me) in a different
guise (but) some morsels (of food) came in and barred the way.

For a morsel’s sake a Luqmdn has become (held in custody
as) a pledge : ’tis the time for Luqman : begone, O morsel !

1 I.e. the eye sees the light of the last lamp, but what really meets the
eye is the light of the candle.


DIVINE INSPIRATIONS 107

These pricks (of the flesh) for the sake of a morsel ! Pluck ye
forth the thorn from the sole of Luqmdn.

In his sole there is (really) no thorn or even the shadow of it,
but because of concupiscence ye have not that discernment.

Know that the thorn is that which thou, because thou art
very greedy and very blind, hast deemed to Ise a date.

Inasmuch as Luqman’s spirit is the rose-garden of God, why 1965 .
is the foot of his spirit wounded by a thorn?

This thoi-n-eating existence is (like) a camel, and upon this
camel one born of Mustafa (Mohammed) is mounted.

O camel, on thy back is a bale of roses, from the perfume
of which a hundred roseries grew within thee.

Thy inclination is towards thorn-bushes and sand : I wonder
what roses thou wilt gather from worthless thorns.

O thou who in this search hast roamed from one quarter
to another, how long wilt thou say, “Where, where is this rose-
garden? ”

Until thou extract this thorn in thy foot, thine eye is dark 1970
(blind): how wilt thou go about?

Man, who is not contained in the world, becomes hidden in
the point of a thorn !

Mustafa (Mohammed) came (into the world) to make har-
mony: (he would say) “Speak to me, O Humayrd, speak!”

O Humayrd, put the hoi-se-shoe in the fire, that by means of
thy horse-shoe this mountain may become (glowing with love,
like) rubies.

This “Humayrd” is a feminine word, and the Arabs call the
(word for) “spirit” feminine;

But there is no fear (harm) to the Spirit from being feminine: 1975
the Spirit has no association (nothing in common) with man
and woman.

It is higher than feminine and masculine: this is not that
spirit which is composed of dryness and moisture.

This is not that spirit which is increased by (eating) bread,
or which is sometimes like this and sometimes like that.

It is a doer of (what is) sweet, and (it is) sweet, and the
essence of .sweetness. Without (inward) sweetness there is no
sweetness, O taker of bribes M

When tlrou art (made) sweet by sugar, it may be that at some
time that sugar will vanish from thee ;

(But) when thou becomest sugar from abundance of faithful- igso
ness, then how should sugar be parted from sugar?

When the lover (of God) is fed from (within) himself with
pure wine, there reason will remain lost and companionless.

Partial (discursive) reason is a denier of Love, though it may
give out that it is a confidant.

^ The taker of bribes is he who takes pleasure in anything other than God.


I08 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

It is clever and knowing, but it is not naught (devoid of self-
existence) : until the angel has become naught, he is an Ahriman
(Devil).

It (partial reason) is our friend in word and deed, (but) when
you come to the case of inward feeling (ecstasy), it is naught
(of no account).

- 1985 It is naught because it did not (pass away) from existence
and become non-existent; since it did not become naught
willingly, (it must become naught nevertheless, for) there is
many a one (who became naught, i.e. died) unwillingly.

The Spirit is perfection and its call is perfection : Mustafa
(Mohammed) used to say, ‘‘Refresh us, O Bilal!

0 Bilal, lift up thy mellifluous voice (drawn) from that breath
which I breathed into thy heart,

From that breath by which Adam was dumbfounded and
the wits of the people of Heaven were made witless/’

Mustafd became beside himself at that beautiful voice: his
prayer escaped him (was left unperformed) on the night of the

1990 He did not raise his head from that blessed sleep until the
(time of the) dawn-prayer had advanced to (the time of)
forenoon.

On the night of the tdrts his holy spirit gained (the privilege
of) kissing hands in the presence of the Bride.

Love and the Spirit are, both of them, hidden and veiled:
if I have called Him (God) the Bride, do not find fault.

1 would have been silent from (fear of) the Beloved’s dis-
pleasure, if He had granted me a respite for one moment

But He keeps saying, “Say on! Come, ’tis no fault, ’tis but
the requirement of the (Divine) destiny in the World Unseen.”

1995 The fault is (in him) who sees nothing but fault: how should
the Pure Spirit of the Invisible see fault?

Fault arises (only) in relation to the ignorant creature, not
in relation to the Lord of favour (clemency).

Infidelity, too, is wisdom in relation to the Creator, (but)

, when you impute it to us, infidelity is a noxious thing.

And if there be one fault together with a hundred advantages
(excellences), it resembles the wood (woody stalk) in the
sugarcane.

Both (sugar and stalk) alike are put into the scales, because
they both are sweet like body and soul.

2000 Not idly, therefore, the great (mystics) said this: “The body
of the holy ones (the saints) is essentially pure as (their) spirit.”

Their speech and soul and form, all (this) is absolute spirit
without (external) trace.

^ This word is used of travellers who halt for repose in the latter part
of the night.


'a'isha and the prophet 109

The spirit that regards them with enmity is a mere body;
like the plus in (the game called) nard, it is a mere name.

That one (the body of the enemy of the saints) went into the
earth (grave) and became earth entirely; this (holy body) went
into the salt and became entirely pure —

The (spiritual) salt through which Mohammed is more refined
(than all others) : he is more eloquent than that salt-seasoned
(elegantly expressed) Hadith,

This salt is surviving in his heritage : those heirs of his are 2005
with thee. Seek them !

He (the spiritual heir of Mohammed) is seated in front of
thee, (but) where indeed is thy ‘‘front’'? He is before thee,
(but) where is the soul that thinks “before”?

If thou fancy thou hast a “before” and “behind,” thou art
tied to body and deprived of spirit.

“Below” and “above,” “before” and “behind” are attri-
butes of the body : the essence of the bright spirit is without
direction (not limited by relations of place).

Open thy (inward) vision with the pure light of the King.
Beware of fancying, like one who is short-sighted.

That thou art only this very (body living) in grief and joy. 2010
O (thou who art really) non-existence, where (are) “before”
and “behind” (appertaining) to non-existence?

’Tis a day of rain: journey on till night — not (sped) by this
(earthly) rain but by the rain of the Lord.

The story of ^ Alisha, may God be welUpleased with her ^ how she
asked Mustafa {Mohammed)^ on whom be peace^ sayings
rained tO'^day: since thou wentest to the graveyard^ how is it
that thy clothes are not wet?^^

One day Mustafa went to the graveyard: he went with the
bier of a man (who was one) of his friends.

He made the earth so that it filled his grave: he quickened
his seed under the earth.

These trees arc like the interred ones: they have lifted up
their hands from the earth.

They are making a hundred signs to the people and speaking 2015
plainly to him that hath ears (to hear).

With green tongue and with long hand (fingers) they are
telling secrets from the earth’s conscience (inmost heart).

(Sunk in earth) like ducks that have plunged their heads in
water, they have become (gay as) peacocks, though (in winter)
they were (dark and bare) as crows.

If during the winter He imprisoned them (in ice and snow),
God made those “crows” “peacocks” (in spring).

Although He put them to death in winter, He revived them
by means of spring and gave (them) leaves.


no MATHNAWI, BOOK I

2020 The sceptics say, ‘‘This (creation), surely, is eternal: why
should we fix it on a beneficent Lord? ’’

God, in despite of them, caused (spiritual) gardens and plots
of sweet flowers to grow in the hearts of His friends.

Every rose that is sweet-scented within, that rose is telling
of the secrets of the Universal.

Their scent, to the confusion of the sceptics, is going round
the world, rending the veil (of doubt and disbelief).

The sceptics, (shrinking) from the scent of the rose like a
beetle, or like a delicate (sensitive) brain at the noise of the drum,

2025 Feign themselves to be occupied and absorbed, and with-
draw their eyes from the flash and the lightning.

They withdraw their eyes, but no eye is there: the eye is
that which sees a place of safety.

When the Prophet returned from the graveyard, he went to
the Siddiqa^ and confided (in her).

As soon as the eye of the Siddfqa fell upon his countenance,
she advanced and began to lay her hand on him.

On his turban and his face and his hair, on his collar and
chest and arm.

2030 Said the Prophet, “What art thou seeking so hastily?’* She
replied, “ To-day rain fell from the clouds :

I am searching thy garments in quest (of moisture), I do not
feel them wet with the rain. Oh, how wonderful ! ”

The Prophet said, “What wrap hast thou thrown over thy
head?” Said she, “I made that ridd (plaid) of thine (serve as)
a head-covering.**

He said, “O pure-bosomed one, that is why God revealed
to thy pure eye the rain of the Unseen.

That rain is not from your clouds : there are other clouds and
another sky.**


Commentary on the verse of Hakim {SandH):

** In the realm of the soul are skies lording over the sky of this world.
In the Way of the spirit there are lowlands and highlands^ there

are lofty moimtains and seas,''

2035 The Unseen World has other clouds and water (than ours),
it has another sky and sun.

That is not discerned save by the elect; the rest are in doubt
as to a new creation.

There is rain for the sake of nurture ; there is (also) rain for
the salce of decay.

Marvellous is the benefit of the rain of springtime, (but) to
the garden the autumnal rain is like a (consuming) fever.

^ ‘‘The exceedingly veracious woman,’* a name given to ‘A’isha.


Ill


‘a’isha and the prophet

That vernal (rain) makes it tenderly nurtured (flourishing),
while Ais autumnal (rain) makes it sickly and wan.

Similarly know that cold and wind and sun are at variance 20+D
(produce various effects) ; and find the clue.

Even so in the Unseen World there are these different sorts,
(consisting) in loss and gain and in profit and defraudment
(damage).

This breath of the Abddl (saints) is from that (spiritual)
springtide : from it there grows a green garden in heart and soul.

From their breaths there comes (is produced) in him who is
fortunate the (same) effect (as that) of the spring rain on the tree.

If there be in the place a dry tree, do not deem its defect to
be due to the life-quickening wind.

The wind did its own work and blew on : he that bad a soul 2045
chose it in preference to his soul.


On the meaning of the Tradition, “ Take advantage of the
coolness of the spring season, etcT

The Prophet said, “Give heed, my friends! Do not cover
your bodies from the cold of spring,

For it does to your spirits the same thing that spring does
to the trees ;

But flee from the cold of autumn, for it does what autumn
did to the garden and the vines.”

I'he traditionists have referred this (saying) to the outward
(sense), and have been content with that same (outward) form.

That class (of people) were ignorant of the spirit: they saw 2050
the mountain, they did not see the mine in the mountain.

In the sight of God that “autumn” is the flesh {nafs) and
(its) desires : tlic reason and the spirit are the essence of spring
and are everlasting life.

Thou hast a partial reason hidden (within thee) : (now) in this
world seek one whose reason is perfect.

I’hrough his whole thy part is made whole (and perfect):
Universal Resison is like a shackle on the neck of the flesh.

I’herefore, according to the (right) interpretation, it (the
meaning) is this, that the holy breaths are like spring and the
life of leaf and vine.

I’hc sayings of the saints, whether soft or rough, do not thou 2055
cover thy body (against them), for they are the support of thy
religion.

Whether he (the saint) speak hot or cold, receive (his words)
with joy: thereby thou wilt escape from the hot and cold
(of Nature) and from Hell-fire.

Ilis “hot” and “cold” is life’s new season of spring, the
source of sincerity and faith and service.


II2 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Inasmuch as the garden of the spirits is living through him,
and the sea of (his) heart is filled with these pearls,

Thousands of griefs lie (heavy) on a wise man’s heart, if from
the garden of his heart (even) a toothpick fail (be missing)^.

How the Siddiqa Alisha) ^ may God be well-pleased with her ^

asked Mustafa {Mohammed)^ God bless him and give him peace,

saying, ‘‘ What was the inner meaning of to-day's rain?"

060 The Siddiqa said, “O (thou who art the) cream of existence,
what was the (true) reason of to-day’s rain?

Was it (one) of the rains of mercy, or (was it) for the sake
of menace and the justice of (Divine) Majesty?

Was it from the favour of the vernal attributes, or from a
baneful autumnal attribute?”

He said, ‘‘This (rain) was for the purpose of allaying the
grief that is upon the race of Adam in calamity.

If man were to remain in that fire (of grief), much ruin and
loss would befall.

065 This world would at once become desolate : (all) selfish desires
would go forth from men.”

Forgetfulness (of God), O beloved, is the pillar (prop) of this
world: (spiritual) intelligence is a bane to this world.

Intelligence belongs to that (other) world, and when it
prevails, this world is overthrown.

Intelligence is the sun and cupidity the ice; intelligence is
the water and this world the dirt.

A little trickle (of intelligence) is coming from yonder world,
that cupidity and envy may not roar (too loudly) in this world.

070 If the trickle from the Unseen should become greater, in this
world neither virtue nor vice will be left.

This (topic) has no bound. Go to the starting-point, go back
to the tale of the minstrel.

The remainder of the story of the old harper and the explanation
of its issue {moral).

That minstrel by whom the world was filled with rapture,
from whose voice wondrous phantasies grew (arose in the minds
of those who heard him).

At whose song the bird of the soul would take wing, and at
whose note the mind of the spirit would be distraught —

When time passed and he grew old, from weakness the falcon,
his soul, became a catcher of gnats.

^ I. e. the wise man feels bitter remorse if he neglects the least oppor-
tunity of enriching himself with the spiritual blessings dispensed by the
saints.


THE STORY OF THE HARPER 113

His back became bent like the back of a wine-jar, the brows 207s
over his eyes like a crupper-strap.

His charming soul-refreshing voice became ugly and worth
nothing to any one.

The tone that had (once) been the envy of Zuhra (Venus)
was now like the bray of an old donkey.

Truly, what fair thing is there that did not become foul, or
what roof that did not become a carpet? —

Except the voices of holy men in their breasts, from the
repercussion of whose breath is the blast of the trumpet (of
Resurrection).

(Theirs is) the heart by which (all) hearts are made drunken, 2080
(theirs is) the non-existence whereby these existences of ours
are made existent.

He (the saint) is the amber (magnet) of (all) thought and of
every voice; he is the (inward) delight of revelation and in-
spiration and (Divine) mystery.

When the minstrel grew older and feeble, through not earning
(anything) he became indebted for a single loaf of bread.

He said, “Thou hast given me long life and respite: O God,
Thou hast bestowed (many) favours on a vile wretch.

For seventy years I have been committing sin, (yet) not for
one day hast Thou withheld Thy bounty from me.

I (can) earn nothing : to-day I am Thy guest, I will play the 2085
harp for Thee, I am Thine.”

He took up his harp and went in search of God to the grave-
yard of Medina, crying “Alas!”

He said, “I crave of God the price of silk (for harpstrings),
for He in His kindness accepts adulterated coin.”

He played the harp a long while and (then), weeping, laid his
head down : he made the harp his pillow and dropped on a tomb.

Sleep overtook him: the bird, his soul, escaped from cap-
tivity, it let harp and harper go and darted away.

It became freed from me body and the pain of this world in 2090
the simple (purely spiritual) world and the vast region of the soul.

There his soul was singing what had befallen (it), saying,

“If they would but let me stay_ here.

Happy would bemysoul in this garden and springtide, drunken
with this (far-stretching) plain and mystic anemone-field.

Without head or foot I would be journeying, without lip or
tooth I would be eating sugar.

With a memory and thought free from brain-siclmess, I would
frolic with the dwellers' in Heaven.

With eye shut I would be seeing a (whole) world, without a 2095
hand I would be gathering roses and basil.”

The water-bird (his soul) was plunged in a sea of honey —
the fountain of Job, to drink and wash in.


II4 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Whereby Job, from his feet to the crown of his head, was
purged of afflictions (and made pure) like the light of the
sunrise.

If the Mathnawi were as the sky in magnitude, not half the
portion of this (mystery) would find room in it.

For the exceeding broad earth and sky (of the material world)
caused my heart, from (their) narrowness (in comparison with
the spiritual universe), to be rent in pieces;

2100 And this world that was revealed to me in this dream (of
the minstrel) has spread wide my wings and pinions because
of (its vast) expansion.

If this world and the way to it were manifest, no one would
remain there (in the material world) for a single moment.

The (Divine) command was coming (to the minstrel) — ‘‘ Nay,
be not covetous: inasmuch as the thorn is out of thy foot,
depart ” —

(Whilst) his soul was lingering there in the spacious demesne
of His (God’s) mercy and beneficence.

How the heavenly voice spoke to * XJmar^ may God be welUpleased
with him^ while he was asleep^ sayings ^^Give a certain sum of
gold from the public treasury to the man who is sleeping in the
graveyard,*^

Then God sent such a drowsiness upon ‘Umar that he was
unable to keep himself from slumber.

2105 He fell into amazement saying, “This is (a thing) unknown.
This has fallen from the Unseen, ’tis not without purpose.”

He laid his head down, and slumber overtook him. He
dreamed that a voice came to him from God: his spirit heard
That voice which is the origin of every cry and sound : that
indeed is the (only) voice, and the rest are echoes.

Turcoman and Kurd and Persian-speaking man and Arab
have understood that voice without (help of) ear or lip.

Ay, (but) what of Turcomans, Persians, and Ethiopians?
(Even) wood and stone have understood that voice.

2110 Every moment there is coming from Him (the call), not
I {your Lord)?^' and substance and accidents are becoming
existent.

If (the answer) “ Yea'' is not coming from them, yet their
coming from non-existence (into existence) is (equivalent to)
“ Yea,"

Listen to a goodly tale in explanation of what I have said
concerning the friendliness (awareness) of stone and wood.


THE MOANING PILLAR


“5

How the moaning pillar complained when they made a pulpit for
the Prophet, on whom be peace— for the multitude had become
great, and said, “We do not see thy blessed face when thou
art exlmrting us ’’—and how the Prophet and his Companions
heard that complaint, and how Mustafa conversed with the
pillar in clear language.

The moaning pillar was complaining of (its) separation from
the Prophet, just as rational beings (might do).

The Prophet said, “ O pillar, what dost thou want? ” It said,
“My soul is turned to blood because of parting from thee.

I was thy support: (now) thou hast run away from me; thou 2115
hast devised a place to lean against upon the pulpit.”

“Dost thou desire,” said he, “to be made a date-palm, (so
that) the people of the East and the West shall gather Wt
from thee?

Or that He (God) should make thee a cypress in yonder
world, so that thou wilt remain everlastingly fresh and flour-
ishing?” _

It replied, “I desire that whereof the life is enduring for
ever.” Hearken, O heedless one! Be not thou less than a
piece of wood !

He (the Prophet) buried that pillar in the earth, that it may
be raised from the dead, like mankind, on the day of Resur-
rection,

That (hence) thou mayst know that every one whom God sizo
has called (to Himself) remains disengaged from all the work of
this world.

Whosoever hath his work and business from God, gains
admission there and goes forth from (abandons worldly) work.

Pie that hath no gift (portion) of spiritual mysteries, how
should he believe in the complaining of inanimate things ?

He says “Yes,” not from his heart (but) for agreement’s sake,
lest people should say that he is a hypocrite (in his religion).

Unless there were knowers of the (Divine) command “Bel”,
this doctrine (that inanimate things are capable of speech) would
have been rejected in the world.

Myriads of conformists and legalists^ are cast into the abyss 2125
(of destruction) by a single taint (of doubt).

For their conformity and their drawing evidence from logical
proofs and all their wings and wing-feathers (every means which
they employ in order to arrive at the truth) depend on opinion.

The vile Devil raises a doubt (in their minds) : all these blind
ones fall in headlong.

The leg of the syllogisers is of wood: a wooden leg is very
infirm,

^ Literally, ‘^followers of signs (external evidences).'*

S-a


Il6 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Unlike the Qutb (supreme saint) of the age, the possessor of
(spiritual) vision, by whose steadfastness the mountain is made
giddy-headed (amazed).

2130 The blind man’s leg is a staff, a staff, so that he may not fall
headlong on the pebbles.

The cavalier that became (the cause of) victory for the army,
who is he for (the army of) the religious? One possessed of
(spiritual) sight.

If, with (the aid of) a staff, the blind have seen their way,
(yet only) under the protection of (other) people are they clear-
sighted.

Were there no men of vision and (spiritual) kings, all the
blind in the world would be dead.

From the blind comes neither sowing nor reaping nor culti-
vation nor tradings and profit.

2135 If He (God) did not bestow mercy and grace upon you, the
wood of your logical deduction would break.

What is this staff? Inferences and (logical) demonstration*
Who gave them (the blind) that staff? The all-seeing and almighty
One.

Since the staff has become a weapon of quarrel and attack,
break that staff to pieces, O blind man!

He gave you the staff that ye might approach (Him) : with
that staff ye struck even at Him in your anger.

O company of the blind, what are ye doing? Bring the seer
between (you and God)^ 1

2140 Lay hold of His skirt who gave thee the staff: consider what
(dreadful) things Adam suffered from disobedience.

Consider the miracles of Moses and Ahmad (Mohammed),
how the staff became a serpent and the pillar was endowed
with knowledge.

From the staff (came) a serpent and from the pillar a moaning :
they (the staff and the pillar) are beating (the drums of honour)
five times daily for the sake of the Religion^.

Unless this savour (perception of spiritual truths) were non-
intellectual, how should all these miracles have been necessary?

Whatever is intelligible, the intellect is swallowing (receiving)
it without the evidence of miracles and without contention.

2145 This virgin (untrodden) Way deem unintelligible, deem (it)
accepted in the heart of every fortunate (elect) one.

As in fear of Adam devil and wild beast fled to the islands,
from envy,

So in fear of the miracles of the prophets have the sceptics
slunk away under the grass,

^ I,e. “seek access to God by means of the seer.”

^ I. e, these miracles are a perpetual proclamation of the sovereignty of
the true Religion.


MOHAMMED AND AStir JAHL II7

That they may live in hypocrisy with the reputation of being
Moslems, and that you may not know who they are.

Like counterfeiters, they smear the base coin with silver and
(inscribe on it) the name of the King.

The outward form of their words is profession of the Divine 2150
Unity and the religion (of Islam): the inward meaning thereof
is like darnel (?) seed in bread.

The philosopher has not the stomach^ (courage) to breathe
a word: if he utter a word, the true Religion will confound
him.

His hand and foot are inanimate, and whatever his spirit says
(commands), those two are under its control.

Albeit they (the sceptics) propound (reasons for) suspicion
with their tongues, their hands and feet give testimony (against
them).

How the Prophet^ on whom be peace, manifested a miracle by
the speaking of the gravel in the hand of Abujahl — God's curse
on him ! — and by the gravel's bearing witness to the truth of
Mohammed, on whom be God's blessing and peace.

There were some pebbles in the hand of Bii Jahl:
Ahmad,” said he, ‘‘tell quickly what this is.

If thou art the Messenger (of God), what is hidden in my fist? 2x55
(Speak), since thou hast knowledge of the mysteries of Heaven.”

He said, ‘"‘How dost thou wish (me to do)? Shall I say what
those (hidden) things are, or shall they declare that I am
truthful and right?”

Bii Jahl said, “This second (thing) is more extraordinary.”
“Yes,” said the Prophet, “(but) God hath greater power than
that.”

Without delay, from the middle of his (closed) fist every
pebble began to pronounce the (Moslem’s) profession of faith.

Each said, “ There is no god" and (each) said, except Allah " ;
(each) threaded the pearl of Ahmad is the Messenger of Allah''
When Uii Jahl heard this from the pebbles, in his anger he 2160
dashed those pebbles on the ground.

The rest of the story of the minstrel, and how the Commander of
the Faithful, ^Umar, may God be well-pleased with him, con-
veyed to him the message spoken by the heavenly voice.

Turn back and hear the plight of the minstrel, for the
minstrel had (now) become desperate from waiting (so long).

The voice (of God) came to ‘Umar, saying, “O ‘Umar,
redeem Our servant from want.


^ Literally, *‘the gall-bladder.’*


Il8 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

We have a servant, a favourite and highly esteemed one:
take the trouble to go on foot to the graveyard..

O ‘Umar, spring up and put in thy hand full seven hundred
dindrs from the public treasury.

2165 Carry them to him (and say), ‘O thou v^ho art Our choice,
accept this sum nowand excuse (Us for offering such a small gift).

Spend this amount on the price (purchase) of silk : when it
is spent, come here (again).* ”

Then ‘Umar in awe of that voice sprang up that he might
gird his loins for this service.

‘Umar set his face towards the graveyard with the purse
under his arm, running in search (of God*s favourite).

Long did he run round about the graveyard: no one was
there but that poor old man.

2170 He said, “This is not he,** and ran once more. He became
tired out and saw none but the old man.

He said, “God said, ‘We have a servant: he is a pure and
worthy and blessed one.*

How should an old harper be the chosen of God? O Hidden
Mystery, how excellent, how excellent art Thou ! **

Once again he wandered about the graveyard, like the hunting
lion about the desert.

When it became certain to him that none was there except
the old man, he said, “Many an illumined heart is (to be found)
in darkness.’*

2175 He came and sat down there (beside him) with a hundred
marks of respect. ‘Umar happened to sneeze, and the old man
sprang to his feet.

He saw ‘Umar and stood fixed in amazement: he resolved to
go and began to tremble (with fear).

He said within himself, “O God, help, I beseech thee! The
Inspector has fallen upon a poor old harper.”

When ‘Umar looked on the old man*s countenance, he saw
him ashamed and pale.

Then ‘Umar said to him, “ Fear not, do not flee from me, for
I have brought thee glad tidings from God.

2180 How often has God praised thy disposition, so that He has
made ‘Umar in love with thy face!

Sit down beside me and do not make separation (between us),
that I may say into thine ear the secret (message) from (the
Divine) favour.

God sends thee greeting and asks thee how thou farest in
thy distress and boundless sorrows.

Lo, here are some pieces of gold to pay for silk. Spend them
and come back to this place.*’

The old man heard this, trembling all over and biting his
hand and tearing his garment,


THE STORY OF THE HARPER iig

Crying, “O God who hast no like!” inasmuch as the poor 2185
old man was melted^ with shame.

After he had wept long and his grief had gone beyond (all)
bounds, he dashed his harp on the earth and broke it to bits.

He said, “O thou (harp) that hast been to me a curtain
(debarring me) from God, O thou (that hast been) to me a
brigand (cutting me off) from the King’s highway,

0 thou that hast drunk my blood for seventy years, O thou
because of whom my face is black (disgraced) before (the
Divine) perfection!

Have mercy, O bounteous God who keepest faith, on a life
passed in iniquity !

God gave (me) a life, the value of every single day whereof 2190
none knoweth except Him.

1 have spent my life, breath by breath: I have breathed it all
away in treble and bass.

Ah me, that in minding the (musical) mode and rhythm of ‘ Iraq
the bitter moment of parting (from this world) went out of
my mind (was forgotten).

Alas that from the liquid freshness of the minor zirajgand
the seed sown in my heart dried up, and my heart died.

Alas that from (my preoccupation with) the sound of these
four-and-twenty (melodies) the caravan passed and the day grew
late.”

0 God, help (me) against this (self of mine) that is seeking 2195
help (from Thee) : I seek justice (redress) from no one (else,
but only) from this justice-seeking (self).

1 shall not get justice for myself from any one except, surely,
from Him who is nearer to me than I ;

For this “I-hood” comes to me from Him moment by
moment: therefore when this has failed me, I see (only) Him,

As (when you are with) one who is counting out gold to you,
you keep your gaze (directed) towards him, not towards your-
self.

How ‘Umar, may God be well-pleased with him, hade him {the
harper) turn his gaze from the stage of weeping, which is {self-)
existence, to the stage of absorption {in God), which is non-
existe 7 ice {of self).

Then ‘Umar said to him, “This wailing of thine is also (one
of) the marks of thy sobriety (self-consciousness).

The way of him that has passed away (from self-conscious- 2200
ness) is another way, because sobriety is another sin.

Sobriety exists (arises) from recollection of what is past : past
and future are to thee a curtain (separating thee) from God.

^ Literally, “became water/’


120 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Cast fire on them both: how long, because of these twain,
wilt thou be full of knots (joints) like a reed?

Whilst the reed is knotted, it is not a sharer of secrets : it is
not the companion of the (flute-player's) lip and voice.

When thou art (engaged) in going about (seeking God) thou
art indeed wrapped in (thy) going ab^out^ : when thou hast come
, home, thou art still with thyself (self-conscious).

3205 O thou whose knowledge is without knowledge of the Giver
of knowledge, thy repentance is worse than thy sin.

O thou that seekest to repent of a state that is past, say, when
wilt thou repent of this repentance?

At one time thou turnest to the (low) sound of the treble,
at another thou dost kiss (art in love with) weeping and wailing.”

When Fdniq (‘Umar) became a reflector of mysteries, the old
man’s heart was awakened from within.

He became without weeping or laughter, like the soul: his
(animal) soul departed and the other soul came to life.

2210 In that hour such a bewilderment arose within him that he
went forth from earth and heaven —

A seeking and searching beyond (all) seeking and search:
I know not (how to describe it); fif) you know, tell !

Words and feelings beyond (all) feelings and words — he had
become drowned in the beauty of the Lord of majesty,

Drowned, not in such wise that there should be for him any
deliverance, or that any one should know him except the
(Divine) Ocean.

Partial reason would not be telling of (the mysteries of) the
Universal (Reason), if there were not demand after demand
(perpetual Divine impulses necessitating the manifestation of
these mysteries).

2215 Since demand after demand is arriving, the waves of that
Sea (Universal Reason) reach this place (the world of partial
reason).

Now that the story of the old man’s (spiritual) experiences
has come to this point, the old man and his experiences have
withdrawn behind the veil.

The old man has shaken his skirt free from talk and speech :
half of the tale has remained in our mouth (has not been
told).

' It behoves (us), for the sake of procuring (such) delight and
enjoyment, to gamble away (sacrifice) hundreds of thousands of
souls (lives).

In chase of the spiritual forest be (as) a falcon, be one who
gambles his soul (life) away, Uke the sun of this world.

2220 The lofty sun is life-diffusing: every moment it becomes
empty and is filled.

^ I.e, *‘thou art absorbed in thy search, not in God/’


THE STORY- OF THE HARPER I2I

O Sun of Reality, diffuse spiritual life, show forth newness to
this old world!

Soul and spirit are coming from the Unseen into human
existence, like running water.

Commentary on the prayer of the two angek who daily make
proclamation in every market, saying, “ O God, bestow on every
prodigal some boon in exchange! O God, bestow on every
niggard some bane {in return)”; and an explanation that the
prodigal is he that strives earnestly in the Way of God, not he
that squanders his wealth in the way of sensuality.

The Prophet said, “For admonishment’s sake two angels are
always making goodly proclamation.

Saying, ‘O God, keep the prodigals fully satisfied, give
hundred-thousandfold recompense for every dirhem that they
spend.

O God, do not give the niggards in this world anything but 2225
loss upon loss 1

Oh, (there is) many an act of niggardliness that is better
than prodigality ; do not bestow what belongs to God except by
the command of God,

That thou mayst gain infinite treasure in return, and that
thou mayst not be numbered among the infidels

Who were offering camels in sacrifice in order that their
swords might prevail against Mustafa.

Endeavour to find out the command of God from one who
is united (with God) : not every heart understands the command
of God,

As (for example) the slave, the enemy (of God), who did 2230
justice (in his own opinion, and) bestowed what belonged to
the King upon those who rebelled against Him —

In the Qur’dn there is warning to the heedless that all their
spendings are a (cause of) bitter grief to them —

What increase does the equity and justice of this enemy
produce in the sight of the King? Banishment and a black
countenance (disgrace).

The chiefs of Mecca (when) at war with the Prophet offered
sacrifice in hope of (Divine) favour

On this account the true believer is saying in his prayer, from
fear, “Lead (us) in the right path!”

It beseems the generous man thus to give money, (but) verily 2335
the generosity of the lover is the surrender of his soul (life).

If you give bread for God’s sake, you will be given bread (in
return) ; if you give your life for God’s salte, you will be given ■
life (in return).

If the leaves of this plane-tree drop off,_ the Creator will
bestow on it the provision of leaflessness (spiritual poverty).


122


MATHNAWI, BOOK I

If because of your liberality no wealth remains in your hand»
how should the bounty of God let you be down-trodden?

When any one sows, his barn becomes empty (of seed), but
there is goodliness in his cornfield ;

2240 And, if he leaves it (the seed) in the barn and saves it up,
weevils and mice and calamities (of time and decay) devour it.

This world is negation (of reality): seek (reality) in affirma-
tion (of God). Your form (body) is void (of reality): seek in
your essence.

Bring- the briny bitter (animal) soul to the sword: buy the
(heavenly) soul that is like a great sweet river.

And if you cannot become (one of the frequenters) of this
threshold (sublime court), at least hear from me the following
tale.


The story of the Caliph who in his time surpassed Hdtim of Tayyi*
in generosity and had no rival.

In former days there was a Caliph who made Hdtim the
slave of his liberality.

2245 He had raised high the banner of munificence and largesse,,
he had removed poverty and want from the world.

He was a sea of pearls, pure bounty: his largesse reached
from Qaf to Qdf.

In this world of dust he was the cloud and the rain : he was
the centre wherein the bounty of the Giver of all displayed itself.

His gifts caused sea and mine to quake (tremble with shame) :
caravan on caravan (were hastening) towards his liberality.

His gate and portal was the point to which Need turned: the
fame of his munificence had gone (far and wide) into the world.

2250 Persians and Greeks, Turcomans and Arabs, were lost in
amazement at his liberality and generosity.

He was the Water of Life and the Ocean of Bounty: by him
both Arabs and foreigners were revived.


Story of the poor Arab of the desert and his wife's altercation
with him became of {their) penury and poverty.

One night a Bedouin woman said to her husband — and she
carried (her) talk beyond bounds —

“We are suffering all this poverty and hardship : all the world
are (living) in happiness, we (alone) are unhappy.

We have no bread, our (only) condiment is anguish and envy:
we have no jug, our (only) water is the tears (that flow) from
our eyes.

2255 Our garment by day is the burning sunshine; at night our
bed and coverlet is (made) of the moonbeams.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 123

We fancy the disk of the moon is a disk (round cake) of bread
and lift up our hands towards the sky.

The (poorest of the) poor feel shame at our poverty: day is
turned to night (darkened) by our anxiety about our daily
portion (of food).

Kinsfolk and strangers have come to flee from us in like
fashion as Sdmiri from men.

If I beg a handful of lentils from some one, he says to me,

‘ Be silent, O death and plague ! ’

The Arabs take pride in fighting and giving : thou amongst 2260
the Arabs art like a fault in writing.

What fighting (can we do)? We are killed without fighting,
we are made giddy (utterly distracted) by the sword of want.

What gifts (can we make)? We are continually in beggary,
we are slitting the vein of (slaughtering) the gnat in the air.

If an3r guest arrive, if I am I (as sure as I am living) I will
go for his tattered cloak when he falls asleep at night.


How disciples {novices in Sufism) are beguiled in their need by fake
impostors and imagine them to be ^aykhs and venerable per-
sonages and {saints) united {with God), and do not know the
difference between fact (naqd) and fiction (naql) and between
what is tied on {artificially) and what has grown up {naturally).

For this reason the wise have said with knowledge, ‘One
must become the guest of those who confer benefits.’

I’hou art the disciple and guest of one who, from his vileness, 2263
robs thee of all thou hast.

He is not strong : how should he make thee strong? He does
not give light, (nay) he makes thee dark.

Since he had no light (in himself), how in association (with
him) should others obtain light from him?

(He is) like the half-blind healer of eyes; what should he put
in (people’s) eyes except wool?

Such is our state in poverty and affliction: may no guest be
beguiled by us !

If thou hast never seen a ten years’ famine in (visible) forms, 2270
open thine eyes and look at us.

Our outward appearance is like the inward reality of the
impostor; darkness in his heart, his tongue flashy (plausible).

He has no scent or trace of God, (but) his pretension is
greater than (that of) Seth and the Father of mankind (Adam).

The Devil (is so ashamed of him that he) has not shown to
him even his portrait, (yet) he (the impostor) is saying, ‘We
are of the AbddV- and are more (we are superior even to them).’


^ See p, 18, note i.


124 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

He has stolen many an expression used by dervishes, in order
that he himself may be thought to be a (holy) personage.

3275 In his talk he cavils at Bayazid, (although) Yazfd would be
ashamed of his existence.

(He is) without (any) portion of the bread and viands of
Heaven: God did not throw a single bone to him.

He has proclaimed, ‘I have laid out the dishes, I am the
Vicar of God, I am the son of the (spiritual) Khalifa:

Welcome (to the feast), O simple-hearted ones, tormented
(with hunger), that from my bounteous table ye may eat your
fill ’ — of nothing.

Some persons, (relying) on the promise of ‘ To-morrow,’ have
wandered for years around that door, (but) ‘ To-morrow ’ never
comes,

2280 It needs a long time for the inmost conscience of a man to
become evident, more and less (both in great and small matters),
(So that we may know whether) beneath the wall of his body
there is treasure, or whether there is the house of snake and
ant and dragon.

When it became clear that he was naught (worthless), (by
that time) the life of the seeker (disciple) had passed: what use
(was) the knowledge (to him)?

Explaining how it may happen^ {though) rarely, that a disciple
sincerely puts his faith in a false impostor {and believes) that he
is a Qioly) personage, and by means of this faith attains unto a
{spiritual) degree which his Shaykh has never {even) dreamed of,
and {then) fire and water do him no hurt, though they hurt his
Shaykh; but this occurs very seldom.

But exceptionally comes (the case of) a disciple to whom,
because of his (spiritual) illumination, that falsehood (of the
impostor) is beneficial.

He, by his goodly purpose, attains unto a (high) degree,
although he fancied (the impostor to be) soul, and that (soul)
proved to be (only) body.

2285 (It is) like trying to find the qfbla in the heart (depth) of night :
the qibla is not (found), but his (the seeker’s) prayer is valid.

The impostor has a dearth of soul within, but we have a
dearth of bread without.

Why should we conceal (our poverty) like the impostor and
suffer agony for the sake of false reputation? ”


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 125

How the Bedouin hade his wife be patient and declared to her
the excellence of patience and poverty.

Her husband said to her, “How long wilt thou seek income
and seed-produce? What indeed is left of (our) life? Most
(of it) is past.

The sensible man does not look at increase or deficiency, be-
cause both (these) will pass by like a torrent.

Whether it (life) be pure (clear and untroubled) or whether 2290
it be a turbid flood, do not speak of it, since it is not enduring
for a moment.

In this world thousands of animals are living happily, without
up and down (anxiety).

The dove on the tree is uttering thanks to God, though her
food for the night is not (yet) ready.

The nightingale is singing glory to God (and saying), *I rely
on Thee for my daily bread, O Thou who answerest (prayer).’

The falcon has made the king’s hand his joy (the place in
which he takes delight), and has given up hope of (has become
indifferent to) all carrion.

Similarly you may take (every animal) from the gnat to the 2295
elephant : they all have become God’s family (dependent on Him
for their nourishment), and what an excellent nourisher is God!

All these griefs that are within our breasts arise from the
vapour and dust of our existence and wind (vain desire).

These uprooting griefs are as a scythe to us : (to think that)
this is such and such or that that is such and such is a tempta-
tion (of the Devil) to ush

Know that every pain is a piece of Death: expel (that) part
of Death from thee, if there be a means (of doing so).

When thou canst not flee from the part of Death, know that
the whole of it will be poured upon thy head.

If the part of Death has become sweet to thee, know that 2300
God will make the whole sweet.

Pains are coming from Death as (his) messengers: do not
avert thy face from his messenger, O foolish one I

Whoever lives sweetly (pleasantly) dies bitterly (painfully):
whoever serves his body does not save his soul.

Sheep are driven from the plains (to the town) : the fatter they
are, the quicker they are killed.

The night is past and dawn is come. O my soul, how long
wilt thou take up (again) the tale of gold from the beginning^?

Thou wert young (once), and (then) thou wert more con- 2305
tented: (now) thou hast become a seeker of gold, (but) at first
thou wert gold indeed (precious and perfect).

^ Le, ‘*we oui?ht not to complain of our lot but put our trust in God.”

2 Le, ‘^how long will you begin again and again to talk about money? ”


126 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Thou wert a fruitful vine : how hast thou become unsaleable
(worthless)? How hast thou become rotten when thy fruit is
ripening?

Thy fruit ought to become sweeter and not move farther
backwards like rope-makers^.

Thou art my wife : the wife must be of the same quality (as
the husband) in order that things may go rightly.

The married pair must match one another : look at a pair of
shoes or boots.

2310 If one of the shoes is too tight for the foot, the pair of them
is of no use to thee.

Hast thou ever seen one leaf of a (folding) door small and
the other large, or a wolf mated with the lion of the jungle?

A pair of sacks on a camel do not balance properly when one
is small and the other of full size.

I march with stout heart towards contentment : why art thou
betaking thyself to revilement?”

In this fashion the contented man, moved by sincerity and
ardour, was talking to his wife till daybreak.

How the wife counselled her husband^ sayings ^^DonH talk any
more about thy merit and {spiritual) rank — ‘why say ye that
which ye do not? ^ — for although these words are true^ yet thou
hast not attained to the degree of trust in God, and to speak thus
above thy station and devotional practice is harmful and ‘ ex-
ceedingly hateful in the sight of God.’’’

2315 The wife cried out at him, saying, “O thou who makest
reputation thy religion, I will not swallow thy spells (deceiving
speeches) any more.

Don’t talk nonsense in thy presumption and pretension: be-
gone, don’t speak from pride and arrogance.

How long (wilt thou utter) pompous and artificial phrases?
Look at thine own acts and feelings and be ashamed !

Pride is ugly, and in beggars (all the) more ugly: (it is like)
wet clothes after a cold snowy day^.

How long (this) pretension and palaver and bluster^, O thou
whose house is (frail) as the house of the spider?

3320 When hast thou illumined thy soul by contentment? Of con-
tentment thou hast learned (only) the name.

The Prophet said, ‘ What is contentment? A treasure.’ Thou
canst not distinguish the gain from the pain.

This contentment is the soul’s treasure: do not thou boast
(of possessing it), O (thou who art) grief and pain to my soul.

^ Le. retrogress and deteriorate.

® Literally, “The day cold and snow — and then the clothes wetl”

® Literally, ^‘wind of the moustache.’*


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 127

Don’t call me thy mate, don’t flap so muchh I am the mate
of justice, I am not the mate of fraud.

How art thou walking (consorting) with amir and bey, when
thou art slitting tire veins of (killing for food) the locust in
the air?

Thou art contending with dogs for the sake of a bone, thou 3335
art wailing like an empty-bellied reed-pipe.

Don’t look at me dully (coldly) with contempt, lest I tell
(others) what is in thy veins (disclose thy hidden faults).

Thou hast deemed thy understanding superior to mine, (but)
how hast thou (truly) seen me, who am deficient in under-
standing?

Don’t spring upon me like a reckless wolf! Oh, better be
without understanding (mad) than (suffer) the disgrace of
(having) thy understanding. _

Since thy understanding is a shackle for mankind, it is not
understanding: it is a snake and scorpion.

May God b^e the enemy of thy iniquity and deceit! May the 2330
deceitfulness of thy understanding fall short of (fail to injure) us !

Thou art both the snake and the charmer — oh, wonderful!
Thou art (both) the snake-catcher and the snake, O thou dis-
grace to the Arabs !

If the crow knew its ugliness, from grief and sorrow it would
melt like snow.

The charmer chants (a spell) as an enemy (does); he is
(casting) a spell upon the snake and the sna^e is (casting) a
spell upon him.

If his trap were not (devised by him as) a spell for the snake
(a means of catching it), how would he become a prey to the
snake’s spell?

The charmer, from greed and (desire of) getting and making 3335
(money), is not conscious of the snake’s spell at the time.

The snake says, ‘O charmer, beware, beware! Thou hast
beheld thine own spell (and its effect upon me) : now behold
mine !

Thou bcguilest me with the Name of God in order that thou
mayst expose me to shame and confusion.

The Name of God enthralled me, not thy contrivance: thou
madest the Name of God a trap : woe to thee !

The Name of God will take vengeance from thee on ray
behalf : I commit my soul and body to the Name of God.

Either it will sever the vein of thy life by my stroke, or it 2340
will bring thee into a prison as (it has brougiht) me.’ ”

Rough speeches of this sort, (whole) volumes, the woman
recited to her youthful husband.


* I.e. “ don’t make such a show of affection.”


128


MATHNAWI, BOOK I


How the man counselled Ms wife, saying, “Do not look with
contempt on the poor, but regard the work of God as perfect,
and do not let thy vain thought and opinion of thine own penury
cause thee to sneer at poverty and revile the poor ^

“O woman,” said he, “art thou a woman or the father of
sorrow? Poverty is (my) pride, and do not thou beat me on
the head (lash me with thy reproaches).

Wealth and gold are as a cap to the head: 'tis the bald man
that makes a shelter of his cap,

(But) he that has curly and beautiful locks is happier when
his cap is gone.

2345 The man of God (the saint) resembles the eye : therefore (his)
sight is better bare (unveiled) than covered.

When a slave-dealer offers (slaves) for sale, he removes from
the (sound) slave the garment that hides defects.

But if there be any defect, how should he strip (the slave)?
Nay, he tricks him (the purchaser) by means of the garment.

‘This one,’ says he, ‘is ashamed of good and evil: stripping
him would cause him to run away from thee.’

The (rich) merchant is plunged in vice up to the ears, (but)
the merchant has money, and his money covers his vice,

2350 For because of cupidity none that is covetous sees his vice:
feelings of cupidity are a bond uniting (men’s) hearts ;

And if a beggar speak a word like the (pure) gold of the mine,
his wares will not find the way to the shop.

The affair of (spiritual) poverty is beyond thy apprehension :
do not look on poverty with contempt,

Because dervishes are beyond property and wealth: they
possess an abundant portion from the Almighty.

The High God is just, and how should the just behave
tyrannously to the dispirited (poor and weak) ?

2355 (How should they) give fortune and goods to that one, while
they put this one on the fire?

The fire burns him because he hath this (evil) thought about
the Lord who created both worlds.

Is (the saying) ‘Poverty is my pride’ vain and false? No;
’tis thousands of hidden glories and disdains.

Thou in anger hast poured nicknames on me; thou hast
called me a catcher (deceiver) of friends and a catcher of snakes.

If I catch the snake, I extract its fangs in order that I may
save it from having its head crushed.

2360 Because those fangs are an enemy to its life, I am making
the enemy a friend by means of this skill.

Never do I chant my spell from (motives of) cupidity: I have
turned this cupidity upside down (I have entirely vanquished
it).


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 129

God forbid! I desire nothing from created beings: through
contentment there is a (whole) world within my heart.

Thou, (sitting) on the top of the pear-tree^, seest (things) like
that : come down from it, that the (evil) thought may not con-
tinue.

When thou turnest round and round and becomest giddy,
thou seest the house turning round, and ’tis thou (thyself) art
that (revolving object).

Explaining how every one’s movement {action) proceeds from the
place v^ere he is, {so that) he sees every one {else) from the circle
of his own self -existence: a blue glass shows the sun as blue,
a red glass as red, {but) when the glass escapes from {the sphere
of) colour, it becomes white, {and then) it is more truthful than
all other glasses and is the Imam {exemplar to them all).

Abii Jahl saw Ahmad (Mohammed) and said, ‘ ’Tis an ugly 2365
figure that has sprung from the sons of Hdshim I ’

Ahmad said to him, ‘Thou art right, thou hast spoken truth,
although thou art impertinent.’

The Siddiq (Abii Bakr) saw him and said, ‘ O Sun, thou art
neither of East nor of West: shine beauteously ! ’

Ahmad said, ‘Thou hast spoken the truth, 0 dear friend,

0 thou that hast escaped from this world of nothingness.’

They that were present said, ‘O king, why didst thou
call both of them truth-tellers when they contradicted each
other?’

He replied, ‘ 1 am a mirror polished by the (Divine) hand : 2370
Turcoman and Indian behold in me that which exists (in them-
selves).’

O wife, if thou deemest me very covetous, rise above this
womanish care (for worldly things).

This (state of mine) resembles cupidity and (in reality) it is
a (Divine) mercy: where that (spiritual) blessing is, where is
cupidity?

Make trial of poverty for a day or two, that thou mayst see
(find) in poverty double riches.

Have patience with poverty and abandon this disgust, be-
cause in poverty there is the light of the Lord of glory.

Do not look sour'-^, and (thou wilt) see thousands of souls 2375
plunged, through contentment, in an ocean of honey.

Behold hundreds of thousands of bitterly suffering souls
steeped in rose-syrup, like the rose.

Oh, alas, would that thou hadst comprehension, so that the
unfolded tale of my heart might be shown forth to thee from
my soul.


N M


^ Alluding to a story told in Book IV, 3548 foil.
^ Literally, “ do not sell vinegar/'


9


130 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

This discourse is milk in the teat of the soul : it will not flow
well without some one to suck (the teat).

When the hearer has become thirsty and craving, the preacher,
(even) if he be (as good as) dead, becomes eloquent.

2 3 So When the hearer is fresh and without fatigue (not bored), the

dumb and mate will find a hundred tongues to speak withal.

When a stranger comes in at my door, the women of the
harem hide themselves in the veil,

But if a harmless relative should come in, those covered ones
will lift up their face- veils.

Everything that is made beautiful and fair and lovely is made
(so) for the eye of him that sees.

How should the sound of melody and treble and bass be
(made) for the insentient ear of one who is deaf?

2385 Not in vain did God make musk fragrant: He made it (so)
for the sense (of smell), He did not make it for one whose
nostrils are stopped (by disease).

God hath fashioned the earth and the sky. He hath raised in
the midst much fire and light.

(He made) this earth for those (created) of clay, (He made)
heaven to be the abode of the celestials.

The low (base) man is the enemy of what is high : the pur-
chaser (seeker) of each place (Heaven or Hell) is manifest (made
known by his actions).

0 chaste woman, hast thou ever risen up and decked thyself
for the sake of him that is blind?

2390 If I should fill the world with hidden pearls (of wisdom),
how should I fare (what good would it do me), since they are
not thy portion (since thou art unfit to receive them)?

0 wife, take leave of quarrelling and waylaying, and if thou
wilt not, (then) take leave of me!

What room have I for quarrelling with the good or the bad?
— for this heart of mine is recoiling (even) from acts of peace.

If thou keep silence, (’tis well), and if not, I will so do that
at this very moment I will leave my house and home.*'

How the wife paid regard to her husband and begged God to
forgive her for what she had said.

When the wife saw that he was fierce and unmanageable, she
began to weep : tears in sooth are a woman^s lure.

3595 She said, “When did I imagine such (words) from thee?
I hoped of thee something different.”

The vdfe approached by the way of self-naughting (self-
abasement). “1 am thy dust,” said she, “not (worthy to be)
thy lady-wife.

Body and soul and all I am is thine : the entire authority and
command belongs to thee.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 131

If because of poverty my heart has lost patience^, it is not
for my own sake, but for thine.

Thou hast been my remedy in afflictions : I am unwilling that
thou shouldst be penniless.

On my soul and conscience, this is not for my own sake : this 3400
wailing and moaning is on account of thee.

(I swear) by God that at every moment my self would fain
die for thy self before thee.

Would that thy soul, to which my soul is devoted, were aware
of my soul’s inmost thoughts!

Inasmuch as thou hast such (an ill) opinion of me, I am grown
weary both of soul and of body.

I cast earth on (renounce) silver and gold, since thou be-
havest thus to me, O comfort of my soul.

Thou who dwellest in my soul and heart, wilt thou declare 2 ^05
thyself to be quit of me for this (small) amount (of offence)?

Be quit (then)! for thou hast the power, (but) oh, my soul
pleads against thy making this declaration.

Remember the time when I was (beautiful) as the idol, and
thou ( adoring) as the idolater.

Thy slave has kindled her heart (in eagerness) to comply
with thee: whatever thou callest ‘cooked,’ she says it is
‘ burnt

Whatever thou mayst cook me with, I am thy spinach®:
whether ^hou art) sour broth (to me) or sweet, thou art worthy
(of my affection).

I uttered infidelity (blasphemy) : lo, I have returned to the 4410
true faith, I am come (to submit) with all my soul to thy
command.

I did not know thy kingly nature, I rudely urged my beast
(intruded) before thee.

Since 1 have made (for myself) a lamp of thy forgiveness, I
repent, I cast away (abandon) opposition.

I am laying before thee sword and winding-sheet: I am
bending my neck towards thee: smite!

Thou art talking of bitter separation (from me) : do whatever
thou wilt, but do not this.

Thy conscience within thee is a pleader on my behalf, it is 2415
a perpetual intercessor with thee in my absence.

What pleads within thee for me is thy (noble) nature: from
reliance on it my heart sought (to) sin (a^nst thee).

Have mercy, unbeknown to thyself (without any self-conceit),

0 angry one, O thou whose nature is better than a hundred
maunds of honey.”

^ Literally, ** sprang away from patience.”

* Le. “she outdoes you in ardour.”

® Le. “ it matters not how you treat me; I am devotedly attached to you.”

P-2


132 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

In this fashion was she speaking graciously and winningly:
meanwhile a (fit of) weeping came upon her.

When the tears and sobs passed beyond bounds — from her
who was fascinating even without tears —

2^20 There appeared from that rain a lightning-flash (that) shot a
spark of fire into the heart of the lonely man.

She by whose beauteous face man was enslaved, how will it
be when she begins to play the (humble) slave?

She at whose haughtiness thy heart is trembling, how wilt
thou fare when she falls a- weeping before thee?

She from whose disdain thy heart and soul are bleeding, how
will it be when she turns to entreaty?

She in whose tyranny and cruelty we are snared, what plea
shall we have when she rises to plead?

2425 {The love of desired things^ women^ etc) is decked out for men
(made attractive to them) : God has arranged it : how can they
escape from what God has arranged?

Inasmuch as He created her (the woman) that he (Adam)
might take comfort in her^ how can Adam be parted from
Eve?

Though he (the husband) be Rustam son of Zdl and greater
than Hamza (in valour), as regards authority he is his old
woman ^s (his wife’s) captive.

He (the Prophet), to whose words the (whole) world was
enslaved (obedient), used to cry, “Speak to me, O Humayra!”

The water prevailed over (extinguished) the fire by its dread
onset, (but) the fire makes it seethe when it (the water) is screened
(hidden in the cauldron).

2430 When a cauldron comes between (them), O king^, it (the fire)
annihilates the water and converts it into air.

If outwardly thou art dominating thy wife, like the (fire-
quenching) water, (yet) inwardly thou art dominated and art
seeking (the love of) thy wife.

This is characteristic of Man (alone) : to the (other) animals
love is wanting, and that (want of love) arises from (their)
inferiority (to Man).

Explanation of the Tradition^ “ Verily, they {women) prevail over
the wise man, and the ignorant man prevails over them^^

The Prophet said that woman prevails exceedingly over the
wise and intelligent,

(While), on the other hand, ignorant men prevail over woman,
for in them the fierceness of the animal is imprisoned.

2435 They lack tenderness, kindness, and affection, because
animality predominates over their (human) nature.

^ The reader is addressed.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 133

Love and tenderness are human qualities, anger and lust are
animal qualities.

She (woman) is a ray of God, she is not that (earthly) beloved :
she is creative, you might say she is not created.


How the man yielded to his wife's request that he should seek the
means of livelihood, and regarded her opposition (to him) as a
Divine indication. (Verse) :

To the mind of every knowing man it is a fact that with the re-
volving oJyect there is one that causes it to revolve.

The man became as sorry for that speech (of his) as at the
hour of death a tyrannical officer (is sorry) for his tyranny.

He said, “ How did I become the adversary of (her who is)
the life of my soul? How did I bestow kicks on the head of
my soul?”

When the (Divine) destiny comes, it muffles the sight, so that 2440
our intellect cannot distinguish foot from head.

As soon as the destiny is past, it (the intellect) devours itself
(with grief) : rending the veil (without regard for appearances),
it tears its bosom.

The man said, “O wife, I am repenting: if I have been an
infidel, I will (now) become a Moslem.

I am a sinner against thee : have mercy, do not dig me up all
at once from root and foundation (do not bring me to utter
ruin).”

If the old infidel is repenting, he becomes a Moslem when
he pleads for pardon.

He (God) is the merciful and bountiful Lord: both existence 244s
and non-existence are in love with Him.

(Both) infidelity and faith are lovers of that Majesty, both
copper and silver are slaves to that Elixir.

Explaining that both Moses and Pharaoh are subject to the Divine
Will, like antidote and poison and darkness and light, and how
Pharaoh conversed in solitude with God, praying that He would
not destroy his (good) reputation.

Moses and Pharaoh were servants (worshippers) of Reality,
(though) outwardly the former keeps the way (is rightly guided),
while the latter has lost the way.

In the daytime Moses was making lament (supplication) to
God: at micmight Pharaoh would begin to weep.

Saying, “O God, what shackle is this on my neck? Were it •
not for me shackle, who would say ‘ I am I ’?

By that (will) whereby Thou hast made Moses to be illumined, 2450
by that (same will) Thou hast made me to be darkened;


134 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

By that whereby Thou hast made Moses' face like the moon
Thou hast made the moon of my soul to be black-faced
(eclipsed).

My star was not better than a moon (so that it should be exempt
from eclipse) : since it has suffered eclipse, what help have I?

If they beat drums in my honour (proclaiming me) as Lord
and Sultan, (’tis like as when) the moon is eclipsed and the
people beat bowls (of metal).

They beat those bowls and raise a clamour: they put the
moon to shame by their blows.

24^5 I, who am Pharaoh, oh, woe is me because of (what is being
done by) the people : my (title of) ‘ My supreme Lord ’ is (like)
the blows on the bowl (since it proclaims my eclipse).

We (Moses and I) are fellow-servants (to Thee), but Thy
axe is cleaving the sappy boughs in Thy forest ;

Then it makes one bough to be firmly planted, another bough
to be left uncared for.

The bough has no power against the axe : no bough escaped
from the power of the axe.

(I entreat Thee) by the truth of the might which belongs to
Thy axe, do Thou graciously make these crooked (perverse)
actions (of ours) straight (righteous)."

2460 Once more Pharaoh said to himself, ‘‘Oh, wonderful! Am
not I (occupied) the whole night in (crying) ‘O our Lord'?

In secret I am growing humble and harmonious: when I
reach Moses, how am I becoming (so different)?

The colour (gilt) of base gold is (laid on) in ten coats : how is
it becoming black-faced in the presence of the fire?

Is it not (true) that my heart (spirit) and body are under His
control, (so that) at one moment He makes me a kernel, at
another moment a rind?

When He bids me be a cornfield, I become green; when He
bids me be ugly, I become yellow.

2465 At one moment He makes me a moon, at another black."
How, indeed, is the action of God other than this?

Before the (blows of the) bat of His decree, “5^, and it was''
we are running (like balls) in Space and beyond L

Since colourlespess (pure Unity) became the captive of
colour (manifestation in the phenomenal world), a Moses came
into conflict with a Moses.

When you attain unto the colourlessness which you (originally)
possessed, Moses and Pharaoh are at peace (with each other).

If it occurs to you to ask questions about this mystery, (I reply),
how should (the world of) colour be devoid of contradiction?

2470 The marvel is that this colour arose from that which is colour-
less: bow did colour arise to war with the colourless?

^ Literally, “in space and non-space.’*


MOSES AND PHARAOH


13s

Inasmuch as oil has been formed (by God) from water, why
have oil and water become opposites?

Since the rose springs from the thorn, and the thorn from
the rose, why are both of them at war and (engaged) in re-
crimination?

Or is this not (really) war? Is it for (the Divine) purpose,

(and is it) an artifice, like the bickering of those who sell asses?

Or is it neither this nor that? Is it bewilderment? The
treasure must be sought and this (bewilderment) is the ruin
(where it is hidden).

That which you imagine to be the treasure — through that 2475
vain imagination you are losing the treasure.

Know that fancies and opinions are like the state of cultiva-
tion: treasure is not (to be found) in cultivated spots.

In the state of cultivation there is existence and strife (con-
trariety): the non-existent is ashamed of (all) existent things.

It is not the case that the existent implored help against
(sought to escape from) non-existence; nay, (^twas) the non-
existent (that) repelled the existent.

Do not say, ‘‘I am fleeing from the non-existent^’; nay, it is
fleeing from you. Stop ! (Do not fancy yourself to be fleeing.)

Outwardly it is calling you towards itself, but inwardly it is 2480
driving you away with the cudgel of rejection.

O man of sound heart (mind), ’tis (a case of) reversed shoes^ :
know that the rebelliousness of Pharaoh was (really) from
(caused by) Moses

The reason why the unblest are disappointed of both worlds^

{according to the text) ‘‘he has lost this life and the life to

come.”

The wretched philosopher being firmly convinced that the sky
is an egg and the earth like its yolk.

Some one asked him how this earth remains, in the midst of
this surrounding expanse of sky.

Suspended in the air like a lamp, moving neither to the
bottom nor to the top.

The philosopher said to him, “It remains in the air because 2485
of the attraction exerted by the sky from (all) six directions.

(The sky is) like a vault moulded (made) of lodestone : (the
earth like) a suspended piece of iron remains in the middle.”

Said the other, “How should the pure sky draw the dark
earth to itself?

Nay, it is repelling it (the earth) from (all) six directions:

^ Le, a case in which the appearance is contrary to the reality.

^ Le. it was the effect of the inward repudiation of Pharaoh by Moses,
who was his opposite.


136 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

hence it (the earth) remains (suspended) amidst the violent
winds (currents).’’

(Similarly), then, because of the repulsion exerted by the
hearts of the perfect (saints), the spirits of Pharaohs remain in
perdition.

2490 Therefore, through being rejected by this world and by that
world, these lost ones have been left without either this or that.

If you turn away your head from the (holy) servants of the
Almighty, know that they are disgusted by your existence.

They possess the amber: when they display it, they make the
straw of your existence frenzied (with desire for it).

When they conceal their amber, they quickly make your sub-
mission (to God) rebellion (against Him).

That (position which you hold in relation to them) is like
the stage of animality, which is captive and subject to (the
stage of) humanity.

2495 Know that the stage of humanity is subject to the power of
the saints as the animal (is subject to man), O master.

Ahmad (Mohammed) in righteousness called (the people of) the
whole world his servants : read (the text), Say, O My servants.

Your intellect is like the camel-driver, and you are the camel :
it drives you in every direction under its bitter controT.

The saints are the intellect of intellect, and (all) intellects (from
the beginning) to the end are (under their control) like camels.

Come now, look upon them with (profound) consideration:
there is (but) one guide, and a hundred thousand souls (fol-
lowing him).

2500 What is the guide and what the camel-driver? Get thee an
eye that may behold the Sun !

Lo, the world has been left nailed fast in night, (while) day
is waiting expectantly, depending on the sun.

Here is a sun hidden in a mote, a fierce lion in the fleece of
a lamb.

Here is an ocean hidden beneath straw: beware, do not
step on this straw with hesitancy.

(But) a feeling of hesitancy and doubt in the heart (of the
foolish) is a Divine mercy in regard to the (spiritual) guide.

2505 Every prophet came alone into this world ; he was alone, and
(yet) he had a hundred unseen worlds within him.

By his power he enchanted the macrocosm (universe), he
enfolded himself in a very small frame

The foolish deemed him to be lonely and weak: how is he
weak who has become the King’s companion?

The foolish said, ‘‘He is a man, nothing more”: woe to him
that recks not of the end!

^ Le. ** a control which you cannot avoid, whether you like it or not.’^

® l.e, in the body of man, who is the microcosm.


137


SALIH AND THE PEOPLE OF THAMT^D

How the eyes of {external) sense regarded Salih and his she-camel
as despicable and without a champion; {for) when God is about
to destroy an army He makes their adversaries appear despicable
and few in their sight, even though the adversary be superior in
strength: “and He was making you few in their eyes, that
God might bring to pass a thing that was to be done.”

The she-camel of Salih was in (outward) form a camel : that
bitter (graceless) tribe hamstrung (and slaughtered) her in their
folly.

V^en they became her foes on account of the water (which 2510
she shared with them), they were blind to bread and blind to
water (ungrateful for the blessings of God).

God’s she-camel drank water from brook and cloud: they
(really) withheld God’s water from God.

The she-camel of Salih became, like the bodies of righteous
men, an ambush for the destruction of the wicked.

That (you may see) what (the Divine command). Let God’s
she-camel have her portion of water, wrought against that people,
through the ordainment of death and woe.

The vengeance, which is God’s minister, demanded from
them an entire town as the blood-price of a single camel.

His (the prophet’s or saint’s) spirit is like Sdlih, and his body 2515
is the she-camel: the spirit is in union (with God), the body
in want (distress).

The Sdlih-spirit is not susceptible to afflictions: the blows
'fall on the camel (body), not on the essence (spirit).

No one gains victory over their (the saints’) hearts: harm
comes (only) to the oyster-shell, not to the pearl.

The Sdlih-spirit is not capable of being hurt: the light of
God is not subject to infidels.

The Soul (God) attached to it (the spirit) the earthly body,
that they (the infidels) might hurt (it) and suffer tribulation.

Not knowing that to hurt this (body) is to hurt (offend) Him: 2.S20
the water in this jar is joined with the water in the river.

God connected (the spirit) with a body, in order that he (the
prophet or saint) might become a refuge for the whole world.

Be a slave to the camel, which is the saint’s body, that you
may become l^ie fellow-servant of the Sdlih-spirit^.

SAlih said (to the people of Thamfid), “ Inasmuch as ye have
shown this envy, after three days the punishment will arrive
from God.

After three more days there will come from the Taker of life
a calamity that hath three signs.

The colour of all your faces will be changed, (they will be of) 2525
colours different to look at.

‘ I.e, join the saint’s spirit in worship of God.


138 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

On the first day your faces will be like saffron, on the second
your faces will be red like arghawdn (flowers of the Judas-tree).

On the third, all your faces will become black: after that, the
vengeance of God will arrive.

If ye desire from me the sign of this threatened chastisement,
the she-camers foal has run towards the mountains :

If ye can catch him, there is help (for you) ; else the bird of
hope hath surely escaped from the snare.”

2530 None was able to overtake the foal: he went into the moun-
tains and vanished.

Salih said, “Ye see, the (Divine) destiny has been ratified and
has beheaded the phantom of your hope.”

What is the she-camers foal? His (the saint’s) heart, which
ye may bring back to its place (win again) by means of well-
doing and piety.

If his heart comes back (is reconciled), ye are saved from
that (Divine punishment) ; otherwise ye are despairing and biting
your fore-arms (in remorse).

When they heard this dark threat, they cast down their eyes
and waited for it (to be fulfilled).

2535 On the first day they saw their faces yellow: from despair
they were sighing heavily.

On the second day the faces of all became red : the time for
hope and repentance was (irretrievably) lost.

On the third day all their faces became black: the prediction
of Salih came true without (possibility of) dispute.

When they all were cast away (and plunged) in despair, they
fell on their knees, like (crouching) birds.

Gabriel, the trusted (angel), brought in the Qur’dn the
description of this kneeling, (which is described by the word)
jdthmin.

2540 Do thou kneel at the time when they (the saints) are teaching
thee and bidding thee dread such a kneeling as this.

They (the people of Thamfid) were waiting for the stroke of
vengeance: the vengeance came and annihilated this town.

Sdlih went from his solitude to the town: he beheld the
town amidst (wrapt in) smoke and heat.

He heard (the sound of) wailing from their limbs : the lamenta-
tion was plain (to hear), those who uttered it (were) invisible.

He heard wailings from their bones : tears of blood (poured)
from their spirits, like hailstones.

2545 Sdlih heard that and set to weeping ; he began to lament for
them that made lamentation.

He said, “O people that lived in vanity, and on account of
you I wept before God !

God said (to me), ‘Have patience with their iniquity: give
them counsel, not much remains of their (allotted) period.’


SALI 9 AND THE PEOPLE OF THAMIJd 139

I said, ‘ Counsel is barred by ill-treatment : the milk of counsel
gushes forth from love and joy.

Much ill-treatment have they bestowed on me, (so that) the
milk of counsel is curdled in my veins.’

God said to me, ‘ I will give thee a boon, I will lay a plaster 2550
on those wounds (of thine).’

God made my heart clear as the sky. He swept your op-
pression out of my mind.

I went (back) once more to admonition, I spake parables and
words (sweet) as sugar,

I produced fresh milk from the sugar, I mingled milk and
honey with my words.

In you those words became like poison, because ye were
filled with poison from the root and foundation.

How should I be grieved that grief is overthrown? Ye were 2555
grief (to me), 0 obstinate people.

Does any one lament the death of grief? Does any one tear
out his hair when the sore on his head is removed? ”

(Then) he turned to himself and said, “0 mourner, those
folk are not worth thy mourning.”

Recite correctly — do not regard my misquotation — (the
words in the Qur’an) “ Say, hoio shall I he grieved for an unjust
people^?”

Again he felt a weeping in his eye and heart: an uncaused
(involuntary) compassion shone forth in him.

He was raining drops of water (shedding tears) — and he 2560
had become distraught — an uncaused drop from the Ocean of
Bounty.

His intellect was saying, “Wherefore is this weeping? Ought
one to weep for such scoffers?

Tell me, what art thou weeping for? For their fraud? For
the host of their ill-shod (miserable) hatreds?

For their murky hearts full of rust? For their venomous
snake-like tongues?

For their j<^w-like breath and teeth? For their mouths and
eyes teeming with scorpions?

For their wrangling and sneering and scoffing? Give thanks, 2565
since God has imprisoned (restrained) them.

Their hands are perverse, their feet perverse, their eyes
perverse, their love perverse, their peace perverse, their anger
perverse.”

For the sake of blind conformity and (for the sake of fol-
lowing) the standards of tradition, they set their feet (trampled)
on the camels of Reason, the venerable guide.

They were not eager for a guide {pir-khar)‘. they all had

* This verse, which interrupts the story, is addressed to the reader. The
Qur^dnic text has been altered for metrical and other reasons.


140 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

become (like) an old donkey {ptr khar) from paying hypocritical
observance to each other’s eyes and ears.

God brought the (devout) worshippers from Paradise that
He might show unto them the nurslings of Hell-fire.

On the meaning of “'He let the two seas go to meet one another :

between them is a barrier which they do not seek (to cross).”

2570 Behold the people of (destined for) the Fire and those of
Paradise dwelling in the same shop, (yet) between them is a
harrier which they do not seek to cross.

He hath mixed the people of the Fire and the people of the
Light : between them He hath reared the mountain of Qaf .

He hath mixed (them) like earth and gold in the mine : be-
tween them are a hundred deserts and caravanserays.

(They are) mixed even as pearls and jet beads in the necklace,
(soon to be parted) like guests of a single night.

One half of the sea is sweet like sugar: the taste sweet, the
colour bright as the moon.

2575 The other half is bitter as snake’s venom: the taste bitter and
the colour dark as pitch.

Both (halves) dash against one another, from beneath and
from the top, wave on wave like the water of the sea.

The appearance of collision, (arising) from the narrow body,
is (due to) the spirits’ being intermingled in peace or war.

The waves of peace dash against each other and root up
hatreds from (men’s) breasts.

In other form do the waves of war turn (men’s) loves upside
down (confound and destroy them).

2580 Love is drawing the bitter ones to the sweet, because the
foundation of (all) loves is righteousness.

Wrath is carrying away the sweet one to bitterness : how should
the bitter sort with (be suited to) the sweet?

The bitter and the sweet are not visible to this (ocular) sight,
(but) they can be seen through the window of the latter end.

The eye that sees the end (akhir) can see truly; the eye that
sees (only) the stable (dkhur) is delusion and error.

Oh, many the one that is sweet as sugar, but poison is con-
cealed in the sugar.

2585 He that is more sagacious (than the rest) will know it by the
smell; another (only) when it touches his lips and teeth:

Then his lips will reject it before (it reaches) his throat,
although the Devil is shouting, “Eat ye!”

And to another it will declare (itself) in his throat, while to
another it will unmask in his body;

And to another it will give burning pain in evacuation: its
outgoing will give him instruction as to its incoming (will show
him what he has swallowed);


THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED 141

And to another (it will become manifest) after days and
months; and to another after death, from the depth of the
grave ;

And if he be given a respite in the depth of the grave, (then) 2590
it will inevitably become manifest on the Day of Resurrection.

Every piece of candy and sugar (desirable thing) in the world
manifestly has a period granted to it from the revolution of Time.

Years are needed in order that the ruby in (exposed to the
rays of) the sun may obtain (the perfect) tint and splendour and
brilliance.

Vegetables, again, reach maturity in two months, while the
red rose comes to perfection in a year.

For this reason the Almighty and Glorious God in the Suratu
^UAn^dm has made mention of an appointed term {ajal).

You have heard this (discourse): may the whole of you, hair 2595
by hair, be an ear (to receive it)! ’Tis the Water of Life: (if)
you have drunk, may it do you good!

Call it the Water of Life, call it not a discourse: behold the
new spirit in the body of the old letter !

(Now), my friend, hearken to another saying (which is), like
the soul, veiy clear (to mystics) and abstruse (to the rest):

In a certain place (spiritual degree), through Divine disposi-
tions even this poison and snake (worldliness and sensuality) is
(rendered) digestible.

In one place (it is) poison and in one place medicine, in one
place infidelity and in one place approved.

Although there it is injurious to the soul, when it arrives 2600
it becomes a remedy.

In the young grape (ghiira) the juice is sour, but it is sweet
and good when the ghtira comes to be an angtir (ripe grape).

Again in the wine-jar it becomes bitter and unlawful, (but)
in the state (form) of vinegar how excellent it is as a seasoning !

Concerning the impropriety of the disciple^ s (murid) presuming to
do the same things as are done by the saint (wall), inasmum as
sweetmeat does no harm to the physician^ but is harmful to the
sickf and frost and snow do no harm to the ripe grape^ but are
injurious to the young fruit; for he {the disciple) is (still) on the
way ^ for he has not (yet) become (the saint to whom are applicable
the words in the Qufdn): “That God may forgive thee thy
former and latter sins.”

If the saint drinks a poison it becomes an antidote, but if the
seeker (disciple) drinks it, his mind is darkened.

From Solomon have come the words, “O Lord, give me
(a kingdom that it behoves not any one after me to obtain),'^ that
is, “ do not give this kingdom and power to any but me.


142 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

2605 Do not bestow this grace and bounty on any but me,” This
looks like envy, but it was not that (in reality).

Read with your soul the mystery of “zY behoves not^' do not
deem the inward meaning of after me^^ (to be derived) from
his (Solomon’s) avarice.

Nay, but in sovereignty he saw a hundred dangers: the
kingdom of this world was (has ever been), hair by hair (in
every respect), fear for one’s head.

Fear for head with fear for heart with fear for religion —
there is no trial for us like this.

Therefore one must needs possess the high aspiration of a
Solomon in order to escape from these myriads of colours and
perfumes (enticing vanities).

2610 Even with such (great) strength (of spirit) as he had, the
waves of that (worldly) kingdom were stifling his breath (choking
him).

Since dust settled on him from this sorrow^, he had com-
passion for all the kings of the world.

Hence he interceded (with God on their behalf) and said,
‘‘Give this kingdom (to them) with (accompanied by) the
(spiritual) perfection which Thou hast given to me.

To whomsoever Thou wilt give (it), and (on whomsoever)
Thou wilt confer that bounty, he (that person) is Solomon, and
I also am he.

He is not ‘ after he is with me. What of ‘ with me,’ indeed ?

I am without rival,”

2615 ’Tis my duty to explain this, but (now) I -will return to the
story of the man and wife.


The moral of the altercation of the Arab and his wife.

The heart of one who is sincere^ is seeking (to find) a moral®
for the altercation of the man and wife.

The altercation of the man and wife has been related (as a
story) : know that it is a parable of your own flesh {nafs) and
reason.

This man and wife, which are the flesh and the reason, are
very necessary for (the manifestation of) good and evil ;

And this necessary pair in this house of earth are (engaged)
in strife and altercation day and night.

2620 The wife is craving requisites for the household, that is to
say, reputation and bread and viands and rank.

Like the wife, the flesh, in order to contrive the means (of

^ I,e. he was sorry and ashamed that love of the world made him for-
getful of God,


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 143

gratifying its desires), is at one time seeking (having recourse to)
humility and at another time to domination.

The reason is really unconscious of these (worldly) thoughts :
in its brain is nothing but love of God.

Although the inner meaning of the tale is this bait and trap^,
listen now to the outward form of the tale in its entirety.

If the spiritual explanation were sufficient, the creation of the
world would have been vain and idle.

If love were (only spiritual) thought and reality, the form of 2625
your fasting and prayer would be non-existent.

The gifts of lovers to one another are, in respect of love,
naught but forms ;

(But the purpose is) that the gifts may have borne testimony
to feelings of love which are concealed in secrecy,

Because outward acts of kindness bear witness to feelings of
love in the heart, O dear friend.

Your witness is sometimes true, sometimes false, sometimes
drunken with wine, sometimes wiffi sour curds.

He that has drunk sour curds makes a show of intoxication, 2630
shouts ecstatically, and behaves like one whose head is heavy
(with the fumes of wine) ;

That hypocrite is (assiduous) in fasting and praying, in order
that it may be supposed that he is drunken with devotion
(to God).

In short, external acts are different (from internal feelings),

(and their purpose is) to indicate that which is hidden.

O Lord, grant us according to our desire such discernment
that we may know the false indication from the true.

Do you know how the sense-perception becomes discerning?

In this way, that the sense-perception should be seeing by the
light of God.

And if there be no effect (outward sign), the cause too makes 2635
manifest (that which is hidden), as (for example) kinship gives
information concerning love (enables you to infer the presence
of love).

When the light of God comes into the sensorium (and be-
comes the medium of perception), you will not be a slave to
effect or cause —

So that Love will throw a spark within, wax mighty, and
make (the illunained one) independent of effect.

He has no need for the signs of love, since Love has shot its
radiance over the sky (of his heart).

There are detailed explanations (which I could give) in order
to complete this subject; but seek them (for yourself), and (now)
farewell.

And as for him that perceived the inner meaning in this 2640

^ l,e, the temptation of the reason by the flesh.


144 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

outward form, the form is (both) near to the meaning and far
(from it).

In regard to indication, they (the meaning and the form) are
like the sap and the tree; (but) when you turn to the quiddity,
they are very far (removed from each other).

(Let me) take leave of quiddities and essential properties, and
relate what happened to those twain with faces like the moon.

How the Arab set his heart on {complying with) his beloved^ s request

and swore that in thus submitting {to her) he had no {idea of)

trickery and making trial {of her).

The man said, “Now I have ceased to oppose (thee); thou
hast authority (to do what thou wilt) : draw the sword from the
sheath.

Whatsoever thou biddest me do, I will obey : I will not con-
sider the bad or good result of it.

2645 I will become non-existent in thy existence, because I am
thy lover : love makes blind and deaf.’’

The wife said, “Oh, I wonder if thou art (really) my friend,
or whether thou art (bent on) discovering my secret by trickery ?

He said, ‘'(No), by God who knows the thought most deeply
hid, who out of dust created Adam pure (chosen above all).

Who, in the body three cubits long which He gave him, dis-
played everything that was contained in the tablets (of destiny)
and the (world of) spirits.

Through his He (pod) taught him {Adam) the Names (through
his God-given knowledge) he at the very first gave instruction
(to the angels) concerning everything that shall come to pass
unto everlasting,

2650 So that the angels became beside themselves (in amazement)
at his teaching, and gained from his glorification (of God) a
holiness other (than they possessed before).

The revelation that appeared to them from Adam was not
(contained) in the amplitude of their heavens.

In comparison with the spaciousness of the range of that
pure spirit (Adam), the expanse of the seven heavens became
narrow.

The Prophet said that God has said, ‘ I am not contained in
the jar of ‘ 'high and “ low ” (spatial dimensions) ;

I am not contained in earth or heaven or even in the em-
pyrean — ^know this for certain, O noble one;

2655 (But) I am contained in the true believer's heart; oh, how
wonderful ! If thou seekest Me, search in those hearts.'

He (God) said (also), 'Enter among My servants^ thou wilt
meet with a Paradise (consisting) of vision of Me, O God-
fearing one.'


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 145

The empyrean, notwithstanding its wide (far-extending) light,
when it beheld that (spirit of Adam), was confounded^.

Truly, the magnitude of the empyrean is very great, but who
(what) is form when reality has arrived?

Then the angels were saying (to Adam), ‘Before this (time)
we had a friendship (with thee) on the dust of the earth.

On the earth we were sowing the seed of service (worship) : 2660
we were marvelling at that connexion.

Marvelling what connexion we had with that dust, inasmuch
as our nature is of heaven.

(We said), Why (this) friendship in us, who are light, with
darkness? How can light live with darkness?

O Adam, that friendship was owing to the scent of thee,
because earth was the woof and warp of thy body.

From this place (the earth) thy earthly body was woven, in
this place thy pure light was found.

This (light) that our souls have obtained from thy spirit shone 2665
erstwhile from the dust.

We were in the earth, and heedless of the earth, heedless of
the treasure that lay buried there.

When He (God) bade us journey from that place of abode
our palates were soured (we were bitterly grieved) by the change,

So that we were arguing (and saying), ‘ O God, who will come
in oar stead?

Wilt Thou sell the splendour of the praise with which we
glorify and magnify Thee for babble and palaver?^

The decree of God spread for us the carpet (of indulgence), 2670
(and He said), ‘ Speak ye, in the way of boldness

(And) without fear, whatever comes upon your tongues, like
only children‘s with their father;

For what if these words (of yours) are unseemly? My mercy
likewise is prior (superior) to My wrath.

In order to manifest this priority, O angel, I will put in thee
incitement to perplexity and doubt.

That thou mayst speak and I not take offence at thee, (so
that) none who denies My clemency may dare to utter a
word.

Within My (infinite) clemency (the clemencies of) a hundred 2675
fathers and a hundred mothers at every moment are born and
vanish.

Their clemency is (but) the foam of the sea of My clemency :
the foam comes and goes, but the sea is (always) there.’ ’

What indeed shall I say? Compared with that pearl (Divine
clemency) this oyster-shell (human clemency) is naught but the
foam of the foam of the foam of foam.

^ Literally, **went from its place.”

® /.e. like an only child, who is loved beyond measure.


NM


10


146 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

By the truth of that foam^, by the truth of that pure sea,
(I swear) that these words (of mine) are not (meant to make)
trial of thee and are not vain.

They are from (inspired by) love and sincerity and humble-
ness, (I swear) by the truth of that One to whom I turn.

26S0 If this affection (which I am showing) seems to thee a trial,
do thou for one moment put the (supposed) trial (of thee) to
the test^.

Do not hide thy secret (but reveal it), in order that mine may
be revealed: command anything that I am able to do.

Do not hide thy heart (but reveal it), in order that mine may
be revealed and that I may accept whatever I am capable of
(performing).

How shall I do? What remedy is in my power? Look what
a plight my soul is in.’’

How the wife specified to her husband the way to earn daily
bread and how he accepted {her proposal).

The wife said, ‘'A sun has shone forth, a (whole) world has
received light from him —

2685 The Vicar of the Merciful (God), the Khalifa of the Creator:
through him the city of Baghdad is (gay and happy) as the
season of spring.

If thou gain access to that King, thou wilt become a king:
how long wilt thou go after every (kind of) misfortune?”

Companionship with the fortunate is like the Elixir: indeed,
how is an Elixir like (to be compared with) their looks (of
favour) ?

The eye of Ahmad (Mohammed) was cast upon an Abii Bakr :
he by a single act of faith became a Siddiq.

Said the husband, ‘‘ How should I go to meet the King? How
should I go to him without a pretext?

2690 I must have some reference or device : is any handicraft right
(possible) without tools?

As (to mention a similar case) the famous Majniin, when he
heard from some one that Layld was a little unwell.

Cried, ‘Ah, how shall I go (to her) without a pretext? And
if I fail to visit her when she is ill, how (wretched) shall I be!

Would that I were a skilled physician! I would have gone
on foot to Layla first of all (before any one else).’

God said to us/ Say, Come ye,' in order to signify to us the
(means of) vanquishing our feeling of shame,

2695 If bats had sight and means (ability to bear the sunshine),
they would fly about and enjoy themselves by day,”

^ Here the Arab begins once more to plead with his wife.

^ I.e. “try by experiment whether your suspicions are just.”


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 147

The wife said, ‘‘When the gracious King goes into the field
(mayddn)^, the essence of every lack of means (inability) be-
comes a means (ability),

Because the means (ability) is (involves) pretension and self-
existence: the (pith of the) matter lies in lack of means (in-
ability) and non-existence.”

“ How,” said he, “should I do business without means, unless
I make it manifest that I (really) have no means?

Therefore I must needs have attestation of my want of means,
that he (the King) may pity me in want.

Do thou produce some attestation besides talk and show, so 3700
that the beauteous King may take pity,

For the testimony that consisted of talk and show was (ever)
invalidated before that Supreme Judge.

He requires truth (veracity) as witness to his (the indigent
man’s) state, so that his (inner) light shall shine forth (and pro-
claim his indigence) without any words of his.”

How the Arab carried a jug of rain-water from the midst of the
desert as a gift to the Commander of the Faithful at Baghdad^
in the belief that in that town also there was a scarcity of water.

The wife said, “When people with all their might (endeavour
to) rise up entirely purged of self-existence — that is veracity.

We have the rain-water in the jug : ’tis thy property and capital
and means.

Take this jug of water and depart, make it a gift and go into 2705
the presence of the King of kings.

Say, ‘We have no means except this: in the desert there is
nothing better than this water.’

If his treasury is full of gold and jewels, (yet) he does not get
water like this: ’tis rare,”

What is that jug? Our confined body: within it is the briny
water of our senses.

O Lord, accept this jar and jug of mine by the grace of “ God
hath purchased {from the believers their lives and wealth in return
for Paradise)

(’Tis) a jug with five spouts, the five senses: keep this water 2710
pure (and safe) from every filth,

That there may be from this jug a passage to the sea, and that
my jug may assume the nature of the sea,

So that when you carry it as a gift to the King, the King may
find it pure and be its purchaser;

(And) after that, its water will become without end : a hundred
worlds will be filled from my jug.

Stop up its spouts and keep it filled (with water) from the jar
(of Reality): God said, Close your eyes to vain desire,'^

^ Le, displays himself.


10-2


148 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

2715 His (the husband’s) beard was full of wind (he was puffed
up with pride): “Who (thought he) has such a gift as this?
This, truly, is worthy of a King like him.”

The wife did not know that in that place (Baghdad) on the
thoroughfare there is the great stream (of water) sweet as sugar.

Flowing like a sea through the city, full of boats and fishing-
nets*.

Go to the Sultan and behold this pomp and state! Behold
the senses of {those for whom God hath prepared gardens)
beneath which the rivers flow !

Our senses and perceptions, such as they are, are (but) a
single drop in those rivers.

How the Arab's wife sewed the jug of rain-water in a felt cloth

and put a seal on it because of the Arab's utter conviction {that

it was a precious gif t for the King),

2720 ‘‘Yes,” said the husband, “stop up the mouth of the jug.

Take care, for this is a gift that will bring us profit.

Sew this jug in felt, that the King may break his fast with
our gift,

For there is no (water) like this in all the world: no (other)
water is so pure as this.”

(This he said) because they (people like him) are always full
of infirmity and half-blind from (drinking) bitter and briny
waters.

The bird whose dwelling-place is the briny water, how should
it know where to find in it Ae clear (and sweet) water?

2725 O thou whose abode is in the briny spring, how shouldst
thou know the Shatt and the Jayhiin and the Euphrates?

O thou who hast not escaped from this fleeting caravanseray
(the material world), how shouldst thou know (the meaning of)
“self-extinction” and (mystical) “intoxication” and “expan-
sion”?

And if thou knowest, 'tis (by rote, like the knowledge) handed
down to thee from father and grandfather : to thee these names
are like abjad^.

How plain and evident to all children are abjad and hawwas '^^
and (yet) the real meaning is far away (hard to reach).

Then the Arab man took up the jug and set out to journey,
carrying it along (with him) day and night.

2730 He was trembling for the jug, in fear of Fortune’s mischiefs :
all the same, he conveyed it from the desert to the city (Baghdad).

His wife unrolled the prayer-rug in supplication ; she made
(the words) Rabbi sallim (Save, O Lord) her litany in prayer,

^ I,e. like the alphabet. Abjad is a mnemonic word composed of the
Arabic letters equivalent to ABJD.

^ A similar word consisting of the Arabic letters equivalent to HWZ,


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


149

Crying, ‘‘Keep our water safe from scoundrels! O Lord, let
that pearl arrive at that sea 1

Although my husband is shrewd and artful, yet the pearl has
thousands of enemies.

Pearl indeed^ 1 Tis the water of Kawthar : ’tis a drop of this
that is the origin of the pearl.”

Through the prayers and lamentation of the wife, and 2735 •
through the husband’s anxiety and his patience under the heavy
burden,

He bore it without delay, safe from robbers and unhurt by
stones, to the seat of the Caliphate (the Caliph’s palace).

He saw a bountiful Court, (where) the needy had spread
their nets ;

Everywhere, moment by moment, some petitioner gained (and
carried away) from that Court a donation and robe of honour :

’Twas like sun and rain, nay, like Paradise, for infidel and
true believer and good folk and bad.

He beheld some people arrayed (with favour) in the sight 2740
(of the Caliph), and others who had risen to their feet (and
were) waiting (to receive his commands).

High and low, from Solomon to the ant, they (all) had be-
come quickened with life, like the world at the blast of the
trumpet (on the Day of Resurrection).

The followers of Form were woven (entangled) in pearls, the
followers of Reality had found the Sea of Reality.

Those without aspiration — how aspiring had they become!
and those of high aspiration — to what felicity had they attained !

Showing that^ as the beggar is in love with bounty and in love with
the bountiful giver ^ so the bounty of the bountiful giver is in love
zvith the beggar: if the beggar have the greater patience^ the
bountiful giver will come to his door; and if the bountiful giver
have the greater patience^ the beggar will come to his door; but
the beggar's patience is a virtue in the beggar ^ while the patience
of the bountiful giver is in him a defect.

A loud call was coming (to his ears): “Come, O seeker!
Bounty is in need of beggars: (it is needy) like a beggar.

Bounty is seeking the beggars and the poor, just as fair ones 2745
who seek a clear mirror.

The face of the fair is made beautiful by the mirror, the face
of Beneficence is made visible by the beggar.

Therefore on this account God said in the Sdra Wa'd-Duhd,

“O Mohammed, do not shout at (and drive away) the beggar,”

‘ Literally, *‘what indeed is the (ordinary) pearl (compared with this
"pearP of ours)?’" Pearls were supposed to be rain-drops caught by the
oyster-shell.


150 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Inasmuch as the beggar is the mirror of Bounty, take care!
Breath is hurtful to the face of the mirror.

In the one case, his (the giver’s) bounty makes the beggar
manifest (causes him to beg), while in the other case he (the
giver), (without being asked), bestows on the beggars more
(than they need).

2750 Beggars, then, are the mirror of God’s bounty, and they that
are with God are (united with) the Absolute Bounty;

And every one except those two (types of beggar) is truly a
dead man: he is not at this door (the Divine Court), he is
(lifeless as) a picture (embroidered) on a curtain.

The difference between one that is poor for (desirous of) God and

thirsting for Him and one that is poor of {destitute of) God and

thirsting for what is other than He.

He (that seeks other than God) is the (mere) picture of a
dervish, he is not worthy of bread (Divine bounty): do not
throw bread to the picture of a dog 1

He wants a morsel of food, he does not want God: do not
set dishes before a lifeless picture 1

The dervish that wants bread is a land-fish: (he has) the
form of a fish, but (he is) fleeing from the sea.

2755 He is a domestic fowl, not the Simurgh of the air : he swallows
sweet morsels (of food), he does not eat from God.

He loves God for the sake of gain : his soul is not in love with
(God’s) excellence and beauty.

If he conceives that he is in love with the Essence (of God),
conception of the (Divine) names and attributes is not the
Essence.

Conception is begotten of qualities and definition: God is
not begotten, He is lam yulad.

How should he that is in love with his own imagination and
conception be one of them that love the Lord of bounties?

2760 If the lover of that (false) conception be sincere, that metaphor
(unreal judgement) will lead him to the reality.

The exposition of this saying demands a commentary, but I
am afraid of senile (feeble) minds.

Senile and short-sighted minds bring a hundred evil fancies
into their thoughts.

Not every one is able to hear rightly: the fig is not a morsel
for every little bird,

Especially a bird that is dead, putrid; a blind, eyeless (fellow)
filled with vain fancy.

27C5 To the picture of a fish what is the difference between sea
and land? To the colour of a Hindoo what is the difference
between soap and black vitriol?


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 151

If you depict the portrait on the paper as sorrowful, it has
no lesson (learns nothing) of sorrow or joy.

Its appearance is sorrowful, but it is free from that (sorrow) ;

(or) its appearance is smiling, but it has no (inward) impression
of that (joy).

And this (worldly) sorrow and joy which are delineated in
the heart are naught but a picture in comparison with that
(spiritual) joy and sorrow.

The picture’s smiling appearance is for your sake, in order
that by means of that picture the reality may be established
(rightly understood by you).

The pictures (phenomena) which are in these hot baths (the 2770
world), (when viewed) from outside the undressing-room (of
self-abandonment), are like clothes.

So long as you are outside, you see only the clothes
(phenomena): put off your clothes and enter (the bath of
reality), O kindred spirit,

Because, with your clothes, there is no way (of getting) inside :
the body is ignorant of the soul, the clothes (are ignorant) of
the body.

How the Caliph'' s officers and chamherlains came forward to
pay their respects to the Bedouin and to receive his gift.

When the Bedouin arrived from the remote desert to the
gate of the Caliph’s palace.

The court officers went to meet the Bedouin : they sprinkled
much rose-water of graciousness on his bosom.

Without speech (on his part) they perceived what he wanted: 2775
it was their practice to give before being asked.

Then they said to him, “O chief of the Arabs, whence dost
thou come? How art thou after the journey and fatigue?”

He said, *'I am a chief, if ye give me any countenance
(favour); I am without means (of winning respect) when ye
put me behind your backs.

O ye in whose faces are the marks of eminence, O ye whose
splendour is more pleasing than the gold of JaTar,

O ye, one sight of whom is (worth many) sights, O ye at the
sight of whom pieces of gold are scattered (as largesse),

0 ye, all of whom have become seeing by the light of God, 2780
who have come from God for the sake of munificence.

That ye may cast the elixir of your looks upon the copper of
human individuals^,

1 am a stranger: I have come from the desert: I have come in
hope of (gaining) the grace of the Sultan.

^ J.e. “in order that you may transmute the base metal of human nature
and endue it with Divine qualities.'*


152 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

The scent of his grace covered (took entire possession of) the
deserts: even the grains of sand were ensouled (thereby).

I came all the way to this place for the sake of dinars:
as soon as 1 arrived, I became drunken with sight (contem-
plation).’’

2785 A person ran to the baker for bread: on seeing the beauty of
the baker, he gave up the ghost.

A certain man went to the rose-garden to take his pleasure,
and found it in the beauty of the gardener^,

Like the desert Arab who drew water from the well and
tasted the Water of Life from the (lovely) face of Joseph^.

Moses went to fetch fire: he beheld such a Fire (the Burning
Bush) that he escaped from (searching after) fire.

Jesus sprang up, to escape from his enemies: that spring
carried him to the Fourth Heaven.

2700 The ear of wheat^ became a trap for Adam, so that his
existence became the wheat-ear (seed and origin) of mankind.

The falcon comes to the snare for food : it finds the fore-arm
(wrist) of the King and fortune and glory.

The child went to school to acquire knowledge, in hope of
(getting) its father’s pretty bird (as a prize) ;

Then, by (going to) school, that child rose to the top, paid
monthly fees (to his teacher), and became perfect^ (in know-
ledge). ^

‘Abbas had come to war for vengeance’ sake, for the purpose
of subduing Ahmad (Mohammed) and opposing the (true)
religion :

2795 He and his descendants in the Caliphate became a back and
front (complete support) to the (true) religion until the Resur-
rection.

“I came to this court in quest of wealth: as soon as I entered
the portico I became (a spiiitual) chief®.

I brought water as a gift for the sake of (getting) bread : hope
of bread led me to the highest place in Paradise.

Bread drove an Adam forth from Paradise : bread caused me
to mix (made me consort) with those who belong to Paradise.

I have been freed, like the angels, from water and bread
(materiality): without (any worldly) object of desire I move
round this court, like the (revolving) sphere of heaven.”

-yoo Nothing in the world is without object (disinterested) in its
movement (activity) except the bodies and the souls of (God’s)
lovers.

^ Literally, ‘*the beauty of the gardener (not the charm of the garden)
turned out to be his recreation.”

® Joseph is said to have escaped from the well by clinging to a bucket.

“ 7.S. the forbidden fiuit.

^ Literally, full moon.”

® Literally, I became the seat of honour.”


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


153


Showing that the lover of this world is like the lover of a wall on
which the sunbeams strike^ who makes no effort and exertion to
perceive that the radiance and splendour do not proceed from
the waif hut from the orb of the sun in the Fourth Heaven;
consequently he sets his whole heart on the waif and when the
sunbeams rqoin the sun {at sunset), he is left for ever in despair:
‘‘and a bar is placed between them and that which they
desire.”

The lovers of the Whole are not those who love the part:
he that longed for the part failed to attain unto the Whole.

When a part falls in love with a part, the object of its love
soon goes (returns) to its own whole.

He (the lover of the particular) became the laughing-stock
of another's slave : he became (like a man who was) drowning
and clung to some one weak (and powerless to help him).

He (the loved slave) possesses no authority, that he should care
for him: shall he do his owm master's business or his (the
lover's)^?


The Arabic proverb, If you commit fornication, commit it with
a free woman, and if you steal, steal a pearlP

Hence (the saying), ‘‘ Commit fornication with a free woman,” 2805
became proverbial; (and the words) “steal a pearl” were trans-
ferred (metaphorically) to this (meaning).

The slave (the loved one) went away to his master: he (the
lover) was left in misery. The scent of the rose went (back) to
the rose: he was left with the thorn.

He was left far from the object of his desire — ^his labour lost,
his toil useless, his foot wounded,

Like the hunter who catches a shadow — how should the
shadow become his property?

The man has grasped tightly the shadow of a bird, (while)
the bird on the branch of the tree is fallen into amazement,

(Thinking), “I wonder who this crack-brained fellow is sSro
laughing at? Here's folly for you, here’s a rotten caused”

And if you say that the part is connected with the whole,
(then) eat thorns: the thorn is connected with the rose.

Except from one point of view^, it (the part) is not connected
with the whole: otherwise, indeed, the mission of the prophets
^would be vain,

^ “he must do his master’s business and not concern himself with
the lover’s.”

2 J.e, a cause that cannot lead to any good result.

® Reading


154 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Inasmuch as the prophets are (sent) in order to connect (the
part with the whole): how, then, should they (the prophets)
connect them when they are (already) one body?

This discourse hath no end. O lad, the day is late: conclude
the tale.

How the Arab delivered the gift, that is, the jug to the
Caliph’s servants.

2815 He presented the jug of water, he sowed the seed of homage
in that (exalted) court.

“Bear this gift,” said he, “to the Sultan, redeem the King’s
suitor from indigence.

’Tis sweet water and a new green jug — some of the rain-
water that collected in the ditch.”

The officials smiled at that, but they accepted it (the jug) as
(though it were precious as) life.

Because the graciousness of the good and wise King had
made a mark (impressed itself) on all the courtiers.

2820 The disposition of kings settles (becomes implanted) in their
subjects: the green sky^ makes the earth verdant.

Regard the king as a reservoir with pipes in every direction,
and water running from all (the pipes) like hoppers (in a mill).

When the water in all (the pipes) is from a pure reservoir,
every single one gives sweet water, pleasant to taste;

But if the water in the reservoir is brackish and dirty, every
pipe brings the same to view.

Because every pipe is connected with the reservoir. Dive,
dive into (ponder deeply) tlie meaning of these words.

2825 (Consider) how the imperial grace of the homeless Spirit “
has produced effects on the whole body ;

How the grace of Reason, which is of goodly nature, of goodly
lineage, brings the entire body into discipline;

How Love, saucy, uncontrolled, and restless, throws the
whole body into madness.

The purity of the water of the Sea that is like Kawthar (is
such that) all its pebbles are pearls and gems.

_ For whatever science the master is renowned, the souls of
his pupils become endued with the same.

2 S 30 With the master-theologian the quick and industrious pupil
reads (scholastic) theology.

With the master-jurist the student of jurisprudence reads
jurisprudence, when he (the teacher) expounds it, not theology.

Then the master who is a grammarian — the soul of his pupil
becomes imbued by him with grammar.

Again, the master who is absorbed in the Way (of Sdfism) —

^ Equivalent to our “blue sky.”

® Le, the spirit, which has no spatial relations*


THE GRAMMARIAN AND THE BOATMAN 155

because of him the soul of his pupil is absorbed in the King
(God).

Of all these various kinds of knowledge, on the day of death
the (best) equipment and provision for the road is the know-
ledge of (spiritual) poverty.

The story of what passed between the grammarian
and the boatman.

A certain grammarian embarked in a boat. That self-con- 2835
ceited person turned to the boatman

And said, “Have you ever studied grammar?” “No,” he
replied. The other said, “Half your life is gone to naught.”

The boatman became heart-broken with grief, but at the
time he refrained from answering.

The wind cast the boat into a whirlpool : the boatman spoke
loud (shouted) to the grammarian,

“Tell me, do you know how to swim?” “No,” said he,

“O fair-spoken^ good-looking man!”

“O grammarian,” said he, “your whole life is naught, be- 2S40
cause the boat is sinking in these whirlpools.”

Know that here mahw (self-effacement) is needed, not nahw
(grammar): if you are mahw (dead to self), plunge into the sea
without peril.

The water of the sea places the dead one on its head (causes
him to float on the surface) ; but if he be living, how shall he
escape from the sea?

Inasmuch as you have died to the attributes of the flesh, the
Sea of (Divine) consciousness will place you on the crown of its
head (will raise you to honour).

(But) O thou who hast called the people asses, at this time
thou art left (floundering), like an ass, upon this ice.

If in the world thou art the most learned scholar of the time, 2845
behold the passing-away of this world and this time I

We have stitched in (inserted) the (story of the) grammarian,
that we might teach you the grammar {nahw) of self-effacement
{m.ahw).

In self-loss 2, O venerated friend, thou wilt find the jurispru-
dence of jurisprudence, the grammar of grammar, and the
accidence of accidence*"*.

That jug of water is (an emblem of) our different sorts of
knowledge, and the Caliph is the Tigris of God’s knowledge.

We are carrying jugs full (of water) to the Tigris : if we do
not know ourselves to be asses, asses we are.

^ Literally, “ answering pleasantly.

^ Literally, “in becoming less.”

® l.e. the cream and essence of these sciences.


156 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

2850 After all, the Bedouin was excusable, for he was ignorant of
the Tigris and of the (great) river.

If he had been acquainted with the Tigris, as we are, he
would not have carried that jug from place to place ;

Nay, had he been aware of the Tigris, he would have dashed
that jug against a stone.

How the Caliph accepted the gift and bestowed largesse^ notwith-
standing that he was entirely without need of the gift {the water)

and the jug.

When the Caliph saw (the gift) and heard his story, he filled
the jug with gold and added (other presents).

He delivered the Arab from penury, he bestowed donations
and special robes of honour,

2S55 Saying, “Give into his hand this jug full of gold. When he
returns (home), take him to the Tigris.

He has come (hither) by way of the desert and by travelling
(on land): it will be nearer for him (to return) by water.’’

When he (the Arab) embarked in the boat and beheld the
Tigris, he was prostrating himself in shame and bowing (his
head).

Saying, “Oh, wonderful is the kindness of that bounteous
King, and ’tis (even) more wonderful that he took that water.

How did that Sea of munificence so quickly accept from me
such spurious coin as this?”

2860 Know, O son, that everything in the universe is a jug which
is (filled) to the brim with wisdom and beauty.

It (everything in the universe) is a drop of the Tigris of His
beauty, which (beauty) because of its fullness is not contained
under the skin (that should enclose it).

’Twas a hidden treasure: because of its fullness it burst forth
and made the earth more shining than the heavens.

’Twas a hidden treasure: because of its fullness it surged up
and made the earth (like) a sultan robed in satin.

And if he (the Arab) had seen a branch of the Divine Tigris,
he would have destroyed that jug, destroyed it.

2865 They that saw it are always beside themselves : like one beside
himself, they hurled a stone at the jug (of their self-exist-
ence).

O thou who from jealousy hast hurled a stone at the jug,
while the jug has (only) become more perfect through being
shattered.

The jar is shattered, (but) the water is not spilled from it :
from this shattering have arisen a hundred soundnesses.

Every piece of the jar is in dance and ecstasy, (though) to the
partial (discursive) reason this seems absurd.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE 157

In this state (of ecstasy) neither the jug is manifest nor the
water. Consider well, and God knoweth best what is right.

When you knock at the door of Reality, it will be opened to 2870
you : beat the pinion of thought, in order that you may be made
a king-falcon.

The pinion of your thought has become mud-stained and
heavy because you are a clay-eater: clay has become to you as
bread.

Bread and meat are (originally) clay: eat little thereof, that
you may not remain in the earth, like clay.

When you become hungry, you become a dog: you become
fierce and ill-tempered and ill-natured.

When you have eaten your fill, you have become a carcase :
you have become devoid of understanding and without feet
(inert), like a wall.

So at one time you are a carcase and at another time a dog : 2875
how will you run well in the road of the lions (follow the saints)?

Know that your only means of hunting is the dog (the a nimal
soul) : throw bones to the dog but seldom.

Because when the dog has eaten its fill, it becomes rebellious :
how should it run to the goodly chase and hunt?

Want of food was leading the Arab to that (exalted) court,
and (there) he found his fortune.

We have related in the (foregoing) story the kindness shown
by the King to that needy one who had no refuge.

Whatsoever the man in love (with God) speaks, the scent of 2880
Love is springing from his mouth into the abode of Love.

If he speak (formal) theology, it all turns to (spiritual) poverty :
the scent of poverty comes from that man of sweet and beguiline
discourse.

And if he speak infidelity, it has the scent of (the true) re-
ligion, and if he speali doubtfully, his doubt turns to certainty.

The perverse froth that has risen from a sea of sincerity —
that turbid (froth) has been set out by the pure source.

Know that its froth is pure and worthy: know that it is like
revilement from the lips of the beloved.

Whose unsought reproaches have become sweet (to the lover) 2885
for the sake of her cheek which he desires.

If he (the lover of God) speak falsehood, it seems (like) the
truth. O (fine) falsehood that would adorn (even) the truth !

If you cook (a confection) of sugar in the form of a loaf of
bread, it will taste of candy, not of bread, while you are
sucking it.

If a true believer find a golden idol, how should he leave it
(there) for the sake of a worshipper?

Nay, he ■will take it and cast it into the fire: he will break
(destroy) its borrowed (unreal) form,


158 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

2890 In order that the idol-shape may not remain on the gold,
because Form hinders and waylays (those who seek Reality).

The essence of its gold is the essence of Lordship (Divinity) :
the idol-stamp on the sterling gold is borrowed (unreal).

Do not burn a blanket on account of a flea, and do not let
the day go (to waste) on account of every gnat’s headache^.

You are an idol-worshipper when you remain in (bondage
to) forms: leave.its (the idol’s) form and look at the reality.

If you are a man (bound) for the Pilgrimage, seek a pilgrim
(as your) companion, whether he be a Hindoo or a Turcoman
or an Arab.

2S95 Do not look at his figure and colour, look at his purpose and
intention.

If he is black, (yet) he is in accord with you : call him white,
for (spiritually) his complexion is the same as yours.

This story has been told up and down (confusedly), like the
doings of lovers, without foot (end) or head (beginning).

It hath no head, inasmuch as it existed before eternity; it
hath no foot: it has (always) been akin to everlastingness.

Nay, it is like water: every di*op thereof is both head and foot,
and at the same time without both.

2900 This is not a story, mark you ! God forbid ! This is the ready
money (presentation, here and now) of my state and yours.
Consider (it) well,

Because the Sufi is grand and glorious (in his spiritual vision) :
whatever is past is not remembered (does not enter his mind).

We are both the Arab and the jug and the King; we are all:
he that has been turned away from it {the Truth) shall be turned
away.

Know that the husband is Reason, and the wife is greed and
cupidity : these twain are dark and deniers (of Reason) ; Reason
is the (bright) candle.

Now hear Ae origin of their denial, whence it arose : (it arose)
from the fact that the Whole hath various parts.

2905 The parts of the Whole are not parts in relation to the Whole
— (they are) not like the scent of the rose, which is a part of
the rose.

The beauty of (all) green herbs is a part of the Rose’s beauty,
the coo of the turtle-dove is a part of that Nightingale.

If I become occupied with a difficulty (difficult question) and
the answer (explanation), how shall I be able to give water to
the thirsty?

If you are wholly perplexed and in straits, have patience:
patience is the key to joy*'*,

l.e, “every trivia vexation.’*

® Faraj is properly the feeling of relief produced by the removal of pain
or anxiety.


THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE


159

Abstain from (distracting) thoughts, abstain: thought is (like)
the lion and the wild ass, and (men’s) hearts are the thickets
(which they haunt).

Acts of abstinence are superior to medicines, because scratch- 3910
ing is an increase (aggravation) of the itch.

Assuredly abstinence is the first principle of medicine : abstain,
and behold the strength of the spirit.

Receive these words, like the (open) ear, that I may make
for you an earring of gold :

(Then) you will become a ring in the ear of (devoted to) the Moon
that works in gold, you will ascend to the moon and the Pleiades.

First, hear (and learn) that the diverse created beings are
spiritually different, from yd (Y) to alif^ (A).

Amongst the various letters there is a confusion and un- 3915
certainty, though from one point of view they are (all) one from
head (beginning) to foot (end).

From one aspect they are opposites, and from one aspect
they are unified; from one aspect they are jest, and from one
aspect they are earnest.

Therefore the Resurrection is the day of the supreme in-
spection: inspection is desired by him (only) who is glorious
and splendid.

Whoever is like a fraudulent Hindoo^ for him the day of
inspection is the time of exposure.

Inasmuch as he hath not a face like the sun, he desires nothing
but night (to cover him) like a veil.

Since his thorn hath not a single rose-leaf, Spring is the 2920
enemy of his conscience.

While to one that is roses and lilies from head to foot Spring
is (welcome as) a pair of bright eyes.

The unspiritual thorn wishes for autumn, for autumn, in
order that it may jostle with (contend as a rival with) the
rose-garden.

And that it (autumn) may hide the beauty of that (the rose)
and the shame of this (the thorn), so that you may not see the
colour of that and the colour of this.

Therefore autumn is its (the thorn’s) Spring and life, (for
then) the (worthless) stone and the pure ruby appear one.

The Gardener knows that (difference) even in autumn, but 2925
the One’s sight is better than the world’s sight.

Truly that One Person is (essentially) the (whole) world: he
is unaware of evil (does not know evil as such). The stars,
every one, are all part of the Moon.

Therefore every fair form and shape (in the world) is crying,

Good news! good news 1 Lo, here comes the Spring.”

^ Literally, “a Hindoo who does bad trade,** i.e. a reprobate whose
dealings wztii God result in his perdition.


l6o MATHNAWI, BOOK I

So long as the blossom is shining like a coat of mail, how
should the fruits display their knobs?

When the blossom is shed, the fruit comes to a head : when
the body is shattered, the spirit lifts up its head.

-930 The fruit is the reality, the blossom is its form : the blossom
is the good news, the fruit is the bounty (given as a reward)
for it.

When the blossom was shed, the fruit became visible: when
that diminished this began to increase.

How should bread give strength until it is broken? How
should uncrushed clusters (of grapes) yield wine?

Unless myrobalan is pounded up with medicines, how should
the medicines by themselves become health-increasing (act as
tonics) ?

Concerning the qualities of the Pir {Spiritual Guide) and
{the duty of) obedietice to him,

O Splendour of the Truth, Husamu'ddm, take one or two
sheets of paper and add (them to the poem) in description of
the Pir.

2935 Although thy slender body hath no strength, yet without the
sun (of thy spirit) we have no light.

Although thou hast become the lighted wick and the glass
(lamp)^, yet thou art the heart's leader (the Spiritual Guide):
thou art the end of the thread (which serves as a clue).

Inasmuch as the end of the thread is in thy hand and will,
the beads (of spiritual knowledge) on the heart's necklace are
(derived) from thy bounty.

Write down what appertains to the Pfr (Guide) who knows
the Way: — Choose the Pir and regard him as the essence of
the Way.

The Pir is (like) summer, and (other) people are (like) the
autumn month; (other) people are like night, and the Pir is
the moon.

2940 I have bestowed on (my) young Fortune (Husdmu'ddin) the
name of Pir (old), because he is (made) old by the Truth, not
(made) old by Time.

So old is he that he hath no beginning: there is no rival to
such a unique Pearl.

Verily, old wine grows more potent; verily, old gold is more
highly prized.

Choose a Pir, for without a Pir this journey is exceeding full
of woe and affright and danger.

Without an escort you are bewildered (even) on a road you
have travelled many times (before) :

^ I,e, “ although thou hast attained to the uttermost degree of illumina-
tion.” Cf. Qur’dn, XXIV, 35.


THE SPIRITUAL GUIDE l6l

Do not, then, travel alone on a Way that you have not seen 2945
at all, do not turn your head away from the Guide.

Fool, if his shadow (protection) be not over you, then the cry
of the ghoul will keep you (wandering about) with your head
in a whirl.

The ghoul will (entice you) from the Way (and) cast you into
destruction: there have been in this Way many craftier than
you (who have perished miserably).

Hear (learn) from the Qur’an the perdition of the wayfarers,
what the evil-souled Iblis did unto them :

He carried them far — a journey of hundreds of thousands of
years — from the Highway, and made them backsliders and
naked (devoid of good works).

Behold their bones and their hair! Take warning, and drive 2950
not your ass towards them!

Seize the neck of your ass (the flesh) and lead him towards
the Way, towards the good keepers and knowers of the Way.

Beware ! do not let your ass go, and do not remove your hand
from him, because his love is for the place where green herbs
are plentiful.

If you carelessly leave him free for one moment, he will go
(many) leagues in the direction of the herbage.

The ass is an enemy to the Way, (he is) madly in love with
fodder: oh, many is the attendant on him that he has brought
to ruin !

If you know not the Way, whatsoever the ass desires, do the 2055
contrary thereof: that, surely, will be the right Way.

(The Prophet said), Consult them (women), and then oppose
(them in what they advise) : he that disobeys them not will be
ruined.”

Be not a friend to (sensual) passion and desire, since it leads
you astray from the Way of God.

Nothing in the world will break (mortijfy) this passion like
the shadow (protection) of fellow-travellers.

How the Prophet^ on whom be peace^ enjoined ^Ali — may God
make his person honoured — sayings “ When every one seeks to
draw nigh to God by means of some kind of devotional act^ do
thou seek the favour of God by associating with His wise and
chosen servant^ that thou mayst be the first of all to arrive {to
gain access to Him)P

The Prophet said to ‘AU, ‘‘ O ‘All, thou art the Lion of God,
thou art a courageous knight.

But do not even rely upon thy lion-heartedness : come into 2960
the shade of the palm-tree of hope.

Come into the shade (protection) of the Sage whom no con-
veyer can carry off from the Way.


N M


II


i62 mathnawi, book I

His shadow on the earth is like Mount Qaf, his spirit is (like)
the Simurgh that circles (soars) exceedingly high.

If I should tell of his qualities until the Resurrection, do not
seek (expect) any conclusion and end to them.

The (Divine) Sun has veiled Himself in Man: apprehend
(this mystery), and God knows best what is right.

2965 O ‘AH, above all devotional acts in the Way (of God) do thou
choose the shadow (protection) of the servant of God.

Every one took refuge in some act of devotion and discovered
for themselves some means of deliverance.

Go thou, take refuge in the shadow of the Sage, that thou
mayst escape from the Enemy that opposes (thee) in secret.

Of all acts of devotion this is the best for thee : (thereby) thou
wilt gain precedence over every one that has outstripped (the
rest).”

When the Pir has accepted thee, take heed, surrender thyself
(to him) : go, like Moses, under the authority of Khi/r.

2970 Bear patiently whatever is done by a Khi^r who is without
hypocrisy, in order that Khizr may not say, “Begone, this is
(our) parting,

Though he stave in the boat, do not spealc a word; though he
kill a child, do not tear thy hair.

God has declared that his (the Pir’s) hand is as His own,
since He gave out (the words) the Hand of God is above their
hands.

The Hand of God causes him (the child) to die and (then)
brings him to life. What of life? He makes him a spirit ever-
lasting.

If any one, by rare exception, traversed this Way alone
(without a Pir), he arrived (at his goal) through the help (and
favour) of the hearts of the Pirs.

2975 The hand of the Pir is not withdrawn from the absent (those
who are not under his authority) : his hand is naught but the
grasp of God.

Inasmuch as they give such a robe of honour to the absent,
(what must they give their disciples?) : undoubtedly the present
are better than the absent.

Since they are bestowing (spiritual) food on the absent, see
what bounties they must lay before one who is present.

Where is one that girds himself (for service) before them to
{i,e, how far superior is he to) one that is outside the door?

When thou hast chosen thy Pir, be not faint-hearted, be not
weak as water and crumbly as earth.

2980 If thou art enraged by every blow, then how wilt thou be-
come a (clear) mirror without being polished?


THE MAN OF QAZWfN


163


How the man of Qazwin was tattooing the figure of a lion in blue

on his shoulders^ and [then) repenting because of the [pain of

the) needle-pricks.

Hear from the narrator this story about the way and custom
of the people of Qazwin.

They tattoo themselves in blue with the point of a
needle on body and hand and shoulders, so as to suffer no
injury.

A certain man of Qazwin went to a barber and said, “Tattoo
me (and) do it charmingly (artistically).”

“O valiant sir,” said he, “what figure shall I tattoo?” He
answered, “Prick in the figure of a furious lion.

Leo is my ascendant: tattoo the form of a lion. Exert your- 29S5
self, prick in plenty of the blue dye.”

“On what place,” he asked, “shall I tattoo you?” Said he,
“Prick the design of the beauty^ on my shoulder-blade.”

As soon as he began to stick in the needle, the pain of it
settled in the shoulder,

And the hero fell a-moaning — “O illustrious one, you have
killed me: what figure are you tattooing?”

“Why,” said he, “you bade me do a lion.” “What limb (of
the lion),” asked the other, “did you begin with?”

“I have begun at the tail,” said he. “O my dear friend^,” 2990
he cried, “leave out the tail!

My breath is stopped by the lion’s tail and rump : his rump
has tightly closed (choked) my windpipe.

Let the lion be without a tail, O lion-maker, for my heart
is faint from the blows of the prong (the tattooer’s needle).”

That person commenced to prick in (the blue) on another
part (of the man’s shoulder) without fear, without favour,
without mercy.

He yelled — “Which of his members is this?” “This is his
ear, my good man,” the barber replied.

“O Doctor,” said he, “let him have no ears: omit the ears 2995
and cut the frock short.”

The barber began to insert (his needle) in another part: once
more the man of Qazwin set out to wail,

Saying, “What is the member (you are pricking in) now on
this third spot? ” He replied, “ This is the lion’s belly, my dear
sir.”

“Let the lion have no belly,” said he: “what need of a belly
for the picture that is (already) sated®?”

The barber became distraught and remained in great be-

^ Literally, “idol.”

® Literally, “O my two eyes.”

® I.e. “it has already imbibed as much of the blue dye as I can bear.”


1 1-2


164 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

wilderment: he stood for a long time with his fingers in his
teeth ;

3000 Then the master flung the needle to the ground and said,
‘‘Has this happened to any one in the world?

Who (ever) saw a lion without tail and head and belly? God
himself did not create a lion like this.”

O brother, endure the pain of the lancet, that you may escape
from the poison of your miscreant self (nafs).

For sky and sun and moon bow in worship to the people who
have escaped from self-existence.

Any one in whose body the miscreant self has died, sun and
cloud obey his command.

3005 Since his heart has learned to light the candle (of spiritual
knowledge and love), the sun cannot burn him.

God hath made mention of the rising sun as turning aside —
like that^ — -from their cave.

^ The thorn becomes entirely beautiful, like the rose, in the
sight of the particular that is going towards the Universal.

What is (the meaning of) to exalt and glorify God? To deem
yourself despicable and (worthless) as dust.

What is (the meaning of) to learn the knowledge of God’s
unity? To consume yourself in the presence of the One.

3010 If you wish to shine like day, burn up your night-like self-
existence.

Melt away your existence, as copper (melts away) in the
elixir, in the being of Him who fosters (and sustains) existence.

You have fastened both your hands tight on (are determined
not to give up) “I ” and “we”: all this (spiritual) ruin is caused
by dualism-.

How the wolf and fox went to hunt in attendance on the lion.

A lion, wolf, and fox had gone to hunt in the mountains in
quest (of food),

That by supporting each other they might tie fast the bonds
and fetters (of captivity) on the hunted animals,

3015 And all three together might seize much and great quarry
in that deep wilderness.

Although the fierce lion was ashamed of them (the wolf and
fox), yet he did them honour and gave them his company on
the way.

To' a king like this the (escort of) soldiers are an annoyance,
but he accompanied them : a united party is a mercy (from God).

A moon like this is disgraced by the stars : it is amongst the
stars for generosity’s sake.

^ I.e, “towards the right hand ** as is stated in Qur’dn, xvni, 16.

® Literally, “by two existents.^’


THE LION, THE WOLF, AND THE FOX 165

The (Divine) command, Consult them, came to the Prophet,
though no counsel is to be compared with his own.

In the scales barley has become the companion of gold^, 3020
(but that is) not because barley has become a substance like
gold.

The spirit has now become the body’s fellow-traveller: the
dog has become for a time the guardian of the palace-gate.

When this party (the wolf and fox) went to the mountains at
the stirrup (side) of the lion majestic and grand,

They found a mountain-ox and goat and fat hare, and their
business went forward (prosperously).

Whoever is on the heels of him that is a lion in combat,
roast-meat does not fail him by day or by night.

When they brought them (the animals which they had caught) 3035
from the mountains to the jungle, killed and wounded and
dragging along in (streams of) blood,

The wolf and fox hoped that a division (of the prey) would
be made according to the justice of emperors.

The reflexion of the hope of both of them struck the lion :
the lion knew (what was) the ground for those hopes.

Any one that is the lion and prince of (spiritual) mysteries,
he will know all that the conscience thinks.

Beware ! Guard thyself, O heart disposed to thinking, from
any evil thought in his presence.

He knows and keeps riding on ^ silently : he smiles in thy face 3030
in order to mask (his feelings).

When the lion perceived their bad ideas, he did not declare
(his knowledge), and paid (courteous) regard (to them) at the
time,

But he said to himself, “ I will show you what (chastisement)
ye deserve, O beggarly villains !

Was my judgement not enough for you? Is this your opinion
of my bounty,

0 ye whose understanding and judgement are (derived) from
my judgement and from my world- adorning gifts?

What else (but good) should the picture think of the painter, 3035
since he bestowed thought and knowledge upon it?

Had ye such a vile opinion of me, O ye who are a scandal to
the world?

1 will strike off the hypocritical heads of them thaV think ill
of God,

I will deliver the Sphere (of Time) from your disgrace, so
that this tale shall remain in the world (as a warning).”

While thus ^meditating, the lion continued to smile visibly :
do not trust the smiles of the lion !

^ Le, both are weighed.

2 Literally, “driving his ass.”


l66 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

3040 Worldly wealth is (like) the smiles of God: it has made us
drunken and vainglorious and threadbare (deprived of the means
of salvation).

Poverty and distress are better for thee, O lord, for (then)
that smile will remove its lure.


How the lion made trial of the wolf and said, Come forzvard,

O wolf, and divide the prey amongst tis”

The lion said, “ O wolf, divide this (prey) : O old wolf, make
justice new (give it new life by thy example).

Be my deputy in the office of distributor, that it may be seen
of what substance thou art.”

‘‘O King,” said he, “the wild ox is thy share: he is big, and
thou art big and strong and active.

3045 The goat is mine, for the goat is middle and intermediate;
do thou, O fox, receive the hare, and no mistake!”

The lion said, “O wolf, how hast thou spoken? Say! When
I am here, dost thou speak of ‘ P and ‘ thou ’?

Truly, what a cur the wolf must be, that he regarded himself
in the presence of a lion like me who am peerless and unrivalled ! ”

(Then) he said, “ Come forward, O thou self«es teeming ass ! ”
He approached him, the lion seized him with his claws and
rent him.

^ Inasmuch as he (the lion) did not sec in him the kernel of
right conduct, he tore the skin off his head as a punishment.

3050 He said, “Since the sight of me did not transport^ thee out
of thyself, a spirit like this (thine) must needs die miserably.

Since thou wert not passing away (from thyself) in my
presence, ’twas an act of grace to smite thy neck (behead thee).”

Everything is perishmg except His face: unless thou art in His
face (essence), do not seek to exist.

When any one has passed away (from himself) in my face
^ (essence), (ffie words) everything is perishing are not applicable
(to him),

Because he^ is in except, he has transcended not (nonentity) :
whosoever is in except has not passed away (perished).

3055 Whosoever is uttering ‘ I ’ and Ve ’ at the door (of the Divine
Court), he is turned back from the door and is continuing in
not (nonentity).

^ Read j .


167


THE FRIEND WHO SAID ‘"l”

The story of the person who knocked at a friend's door: his friend
from within asked who he was: he said^ ‘‘ 'Tis I'' and the friend
answered^ “ Since thou art thou^ I will not open the door: I know
not any friend that is ' I'"

A certain man came and knocked at a friend’s door: his
friend asked him, “Who art thou, O trusty one? ”

He answered I . ” The friend said,‘ ‘ Begone , ’tis not the time (for
thee to come in) : at a table like this there is no place for the raw.”

Save the fire of absence and separation, who (what) will cook
the raw one? Who (what) will deliver him from hypocrisy?

The wretched man went away, and for a year in travel (and)
in separation from his friend he was burned with sparks of fire.

That burned one was cooked : then he returned and again 3060
paced to and fro beside the house of his comrade.

He knocked at the door with a hundred fears and respects,
lest any disrespectful word might escape from his lips.

His friend called to him, “Who is at the door? ” He answered,

“ ’Tis thou art at the door, O charmer of hearts.”

“ Now,” said the friend, “since thou art I, come in, O myself:
there is not room in the house for two Fs.

The double end of thread is not for the needle: inasmuch as
thou art single, come into this needle.”

’Tis the thread that is connected with the needle: the eye of 3065
the needle is not suitable for the camel.

How should the existence (body) of the camel be fined down
save by the shears of ascetic exercises and works?

For that, O reader, the hand (power) of God is necessary, for
it is the Be, and it was (bringer into existence) of every (seem-
ingly) impossible thing.

By His hand every impossible thing is made possible; by
fear of Him every unruly one is made quiet.

What of the man blind from birth and the leper? Even the
dead is made living by the spell of the Almighty,

And that non-existence which is more dead than the dead — 3070
non-existence is conapelled (to obey) when He calls it into being.

Recite (the text), Every day He is {engaged) in some affair: do
not deem Him idle and inactive.

His least act, every day, is that He despatches three armies :

One army from the loins (of the fathers) towards the mothers,
in order that the plant may grow in the womb ;

One army from the wombs to the Earth, that the world may
be filled with male and female ;

One army from the Earth (to what is) beyond death, that 3075
every one may behold the beauty of (good) works.

This discourse hath no end. Come, hasten (back) to those
two sincere and devoted friends.


i68


MATHNAWI, BOOK I


Description of Unification,

His friend said to him, “Come in, O thou who art entirely
myself, not different like the rose and thorn in the garden/'

The thread has become single. Do not now fall into error
if thou seest that the letters K and N are two^.’

K and N are pulling like a noose, that they may draw non-
existence into great affairs.

3080 Hence the noose must be double in (the world of) forms,
though those two (letters) are single in effect.

Whether the feet be two or four, they traverse one road, like
the double shears (which) makes (but) one cut.

Look at those two fellow- washermen : there is apparently a
difference between that one and this :

The one has thrown the cotton garments into the water,
while the other partner is drying them.

Again the former makes the dry clothes wet: 'tis as though
he were spitefully thwarting his opposite ;

3085 Yet these two opposites, who seem to be at strife, are of one
mind and acting together in agreement.

Every prophet and every saint hath a way (of religious
doctrine and practice), but it leads to God: all (the ways) are
(really) one.

When slumber (heedlessness) overtook the concentration
(attention) of the listener, the water carried the millstones
away.

The course of this water is above the mill : its going into the
mill is for your sakes.

Since ye had no further need of the mill, he (the prophet or
saint) made the water flow back into the original stream.

3090 The rational spirit (the Logos) is (coming) to the mouth for
the purpose of teaching: else "(it would not come, for) truly that
speech hath a channel apart:

It is moving without noise and without repetitions (of sound)
to the rose-gardens beneath which are the rivers,

O God, do Thou reveal to the soul that place where speech
is growing without letters,

That the pure soul may make of its head a foot (fly headlong)
towards the far-stretching expanse of non-existence —

An expanse very ample and spacious; and from it this
phantasy and being (of ours) is fed.

3095 (The^ realm of) phantasies is narrower than non-existence
(potential existence) : on that account phantasy is tlie cause of
pain.

(The realm of actual) existence, again, was (ever) narrower
The letters K and N, when united make up the Creative Word KvN^


THE UNITY OF BEING 169

than (the realm of) phantasy: hence in it moons become like
the moon that has waned.

Again, the existence of the world of sense and colour is
narrower (than this), for ’tis a narrow prison.

The cause of narrowness is composition (compoundness) and
number (plurality) : the senses are moving towards composition.

Know that the world of Unification lies beyond sense: if you
want Unity, march in that direction.

The (Divine) Command KuN (Be) was a single act, and the 3100
(two letters) N and K occurred (only) in speech, while the
(inward) meaning was pure (uncompounded).

This discourse hath no end. Return, that (we may see) what
happened to the wolf in combat (with the lion).

How the lion punished the wolf who had shown disrespect
in dividing {the prey).

That haughty one tore off the head of the wolf, in order that
two-headedness (dualism) and distinction might not remain (in
being).

’Tis (the meaning of) So we took vengeance on them^ O old
wolf, inasmuch as thou wert not dead in the presence of the
Amir.

After that, the lion turned to the fox and said, “Divide it
(the prey) for breakfast.’’

He bowed low and said, “This fat ox will be thy food at 3105
breakfast, O excellent King,

And this goat will be a portion reserved for the victorious
King at midday,

And the hare too for supper — (to be) the repast at nightfall
of the gracious and bountiful King.”

Said the lion, “O fox, thou hast made justice shine forth:
from whom didst thou learn to divide in such a manner?

Whence didst thou learn this, O eminent one? ” “O King of
the world,” he replied, “ (I learned it) from the fate of the wolf.”

The lion said, “Inasmuch as thou hast become pledged to 3110
love of me, pick up all the three (animals), and take (them)
and depart.

0 fox, since thou hast become entirely mine, how should I
hurt thee when thou hast become myself?

1 am thine, and all the beasts of chase are thine : set thy foot
on the Seventh Heaven and mount (beyond) !

Since thou hast taken warning from (the fate of) the vile wolf,
thou art not a fox: thou art my own lion.

The wise man is he that in (the hour of) the shunned tribu-
lation^ takes warning from the death of his friends.”

^ Literally, *‘the trial or calamity against which precautions are taken.’*


lyo MATHNAWI, BOOK I

3115 The fox said (to himself), ‘‘A hundred thanks to the lion for
having called me up after that wolf.

If he had bidden me first, saying, ‘Do thou divide this,’ who
would have escaped from him with his life?”

Thanks be to Him (God), then, that He caused us to appear
(be born) in the world after those of old.

So that we heard of the chastisements which God inflicted
upon the past generations in the preceding time,

That we, like the fox, may keep better watch over ourselves
from (considering) the fate of those ancient wolves.

3120 On this account he that is God’s prophet and veracious in
explanation called us “ a people on which God has taken mercy.”

Behold with clear vision the bones and fur of those wolves,
and take warning, O mighty ones !

The wise man will put off from his head (lay aside) this self-
existence and wind (of vanity), since he heard (what was) the
end of the Pharaohs and ‘Ad ;

And if he do not put it off, others will take warning from
what befell him in consequence of his being misguided.


How Noah, on whom be peace, threatened his people, saying, “Do
not struggle with me, for I am (only) a veil: ye are really
struggling with God (who is) within this {veil), O God’-forsaken
men! ”

Noah said, “O ye headsti'ong ones, I am not I; I am dead to
the (animal) soul, I am living through the Soul of souls.

3125 Inasmuch as I am dead to the senses of the father of mankind
(human sense-perceptions), God has become my hearing and
perception and sight.

Since I am not I, this breath (of mine) is from Him: in the
presence of this breath if any one breathes (a word) he is an
infidel.”

In the form of this fox there is the lion: ’tis not fitting to
advance boldly towards this fox.

Unless thou believe in him from his exterior aspect (accept
him in the form in which he appears), thou wilt not hear from
him the lions’ roar.

If Noah had not been the Eternal Lion, why should he have
cast a whole world into confusion?

3130 He was hundreds of thousands of lions in a single body; he
was like fire, and the world (like) a stack.

Forasmuch as the stack neglected (to pay) the tithe due to
him, he launched such a flame against that stack.

Whosoever in the presence of this hidden Lion opens his
mouth disrespectfully, like the wolf.


NOAH AS THE GOD-MAN 171

That Lion will tear him to pieces, as (he tore) the wolf, and
will recite to him (the text) So we took vengeance upon them.

He will suffer blows, like the wolf, from the Lion’s paw:
foolish is he that waxed bold in the presence of the Lion,

Would that those blows fell upon the body, so that it might 3135
be that (the sinner’s) faith and heart would be safe !

My power is broken (fails me) on reaching this point: how
can I declare this mystery?

Make little of your bellies, like that fox: do not play fox’s
tricks in His presence.

Lay the whole of your “we” and “ I ” before Him: the king-
dom is His kingdom: give the kingdom to Him.

When ye become poor (selfless) in the right Way, verily the
Lion and the Lion’s prey are yours.

Because He is holy, and Glory is His attribute: He hath no 31-10,
need of good things and kernel or rind.

Every prize and every gift of grace that exists is for the sake
of the servants of that King (God).

The King hath no desire (for anything) : He hath made all
this empire for His creatures. Happy is he that knew!

Of what use should the possession of empires be to Him who
created (all) empire and the two worlds?

In the presence of His Glory keep close watch over your
hearts, lest ye be put to shame by thinking evil.

For He sees conscience and thought and quest (desire) as 314 s
(plainly) as a thread of hair in pure milk.

He whose clear breast has become devoid of (any) image (im-
pression) has become amirrorfor the impressions of the Invisible.

He becomes intuitively and undoubtingly aware of our
inmost thought, because the true believer is the mirror of the
true believer.

When he rubs our (spiritual) poverty^ on the touchstone, then
he knows the difference between faith and doubt.

When his soul becomes the touchstone of the coin, then he will
see (distinguish) the (true) heart and the false money (of hypocrisy) .

How kings seat in front of them the Sufis who know God, in order
that their eyes may be illumined by {seeing) them.

Such is the custom of kings: you will have heard of this, if 3150
you remember.

The paladins stand on their left hand, because the heart (the
seat of courage) is fixed on the left side (of the body).

On the right hand are the chancellor and the secretaries,
because the science of writing and book-keeping belongs (in
practice) to this hand.

^ Cf. V. 3139. But \jlc jJu> coin,” is perhaps the better reading.


172 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

They give the Siifis the place in front of their countenance,
for they (the Siifis) are a mirror for the soul, and better than
a mirror,

(Since) they have polished their breasts (hearts) in com-
memoration (of God) and meditation, that the hearths mirror
may receive the virgin (original) image.

3155 Whoever is born beautiful from the loins of Creation, a
mirror must be placed before him.

The beauteous face is in love with the mirror : it (such a face)
is a polisher of the soul and (a kindler) of the fear of God in
[men's) hearts.

How the guest came to Joseph^ on whom be peace^ and how Joseph

demarided of him a gift and present oji his return from abroad.

The loving friend came from the ends of the earth and
became the guest of Joseph the truthful,

For they had been well acquainted in childhood, reclining
(together) on the sofa of acquaintance.

He spoke to him (Joseph) of the injustice and envy of his
brethren: Joseph said, '^That was (like) a chain, and I was
the lion.

3160 The lion is not disgraced by the chain; I do not complain
of God’s destiny.

If the lion had a chain on his neck, (yet) he was prince over
all the chain-makers.”

He asked, “How wert thou in regard to the prison and the
well? ” “ Like the moon,” said Joseph, “ in the interlunar period
(when she is) on the wane.”

If in that period the new moon is bent double, does not she
at last become the full moon in the sky?

Though the seed-pearl is pounded in the mortar, it becomes
the light of eye and heart and looks aloft,

31C5 They cast a grain of wheat under earth, then from its earth
they raised up ears of corn ;

Once more they crushed it with the mill : its value increased
and it became soul-invigorating bread ;

Again they crushed the bread under their teeth : it became
the mind and spirit and understanding of one endowed with
reason ;

Again, when that spirit became lost in Love, it became (as
that which) rejoiceth the sowers after the sowing.

This discourse hath no end. Come back, that we may see
what that good man said to Joseph.

3170 After he (Joseph) had told him his story, he (Joseph) said,
“Now, O so-and-so, what traveller’s gift hast thou brought
for me?”


JOSEPH AND THE MIRROR 173

To come empty-handed to the door of friends is like going
without wheat to the mill.

God, exalted is He, will say to the people at the gathering (for
Judgement) , ‘ ‘ Where is your present for the Day of Resurrection ?

Ye have come to Us and alone without provision, just in the
same guise as We created you.

Hark, what have ye brought as an offering — a gift on home-
coming for the Day when ye rise from the dead?

Or had ye no hope of returning? Did the promise of (meeting 3175
Me) to-day seem vain to you? ”

Dost thou (O reader) disbelieve in the promise of being
His guest? ^ Then from the kitchen (of His bounty) thou wilt
get (only) dust and ashes.

And if thou art not disbelieving, how with such empty hands
art thou setting foot in the Court of that Friend?

Refrain thyself a little from sleep and food: bring the gift
for thy meeting with Him.

Become scant of sleep {like them that) were slumbering {but a
small part of the night); in the hours of dawn be of {those who)
were asking pardon of God.

Stir a little, like the embryo*, in order that thou mayst be 31S0
given the senses which behold the Light,

And (then) thou art outside of this womb-like world: thou
goest from the earth into a wide expanse.

Know that the saying, “ God’s earth is wide,” refers to that
ample region into which the saints have entered.

The heart is not oppressed by that spacious expanse: there
the fresh boughs of the palm-tree do not become dry.

At present thou art bearing (the burden of) thy senses : thou
art becoming weary and exhausted and (ready to fall) headlong.

Since, at the time of sleep, thou art borne (on high), and art 3185
not bearing (the burden), thy fatigue is gone and thou art free
from pain and anguish.

Regard the time of sleep as a (mere) taste (sample) in com-
parison with the state in which the saints are borne (on high).

The saints are (like) the Men of the Cave, O obstinate one:
they are asleep (even) in rising up and turning to and fro.

He (God) is drawing them, without their taking trouble to
act, without consciousness (on their part), to the right hand and
to the left.

is thzt right hand} Good deeds. What is that /^/^ AotJ?

The affairs of the body.

These two (kinds of) actions proceed from the saints, (while) 3190
they are unconscious of them both, like the echo:

If the echo causes thee to hear good and evil, the mountain
itself is unconscious of either.

1 Reading


174


MATHNAWf, BOOK I


How the guest said to Joseph, have brought thee the gift of a

mirror, so that whenever thou lookest in it thou wilt see thine

own fair face and remember me.^^

Joseph said, ‘‘Come, produce the gift/’ He (the guest), on
account of shame (confusion) at this demand, sobbed aloud.

“How many a gift,’’ said he, “did I seek for thee! No
(worthy) gift came into my sight.

How should I bring a grain (of gold) to the mine? How
should I bring a drop (of water) to the (Sea of) ‘Uman?

3195 I shall (only) bring cumin to Kirman, if I bring my heart
and soul (as a gift) to thee.

There is no seed that is not in this barn, except thy beauty
which hath no equal.

I deemed it fitting that I should bring to thee a mirror like
the (inward) light of a (pure) breast,

That thou mayst behold thy beauteous face therein, O thou
who, like the sun, art the candle of heaven.

I have brought thee a mirror, O light (of mine eyes), so that
when thou seest thy face thou mayst think of me.”

3200 He drew forth the mirror from beneath his arm: the fair
one’s business is with a mirror.

What is the mirror of Being? Not-being. Bring not-being
(as your gift), if you are not a fool.

Being can be seen (only) in not-being: the rich bestow
(exhibit) generosity on tne poor.

The clear mirror of bread is truly the hungry man; tinder,
likewise, is the mirror of that (the stick or flint) from which
fire is struck.

Not-being and defect, wherever they arise (appear), are the
mirror which displays the excellence of all crafts.

3205 When a garment is neat and well-stitched, how should it
enable the tailor to exhibit his skilH?

Trunks of trees must be unhewn in order that the woodcutter
may fashion the stem or the branches (and thus exercise his
craft).

The doctor who sets broken bones goes to the place where
the person with the fractured leg is.

How shall the excellence of the art of medicine be made
manifest when there is no emaciated invalid?

How shall the (power of the) Elixir be shown if the vileness
and baseness of coppers is not notorious?

3210 Defects are the mirror of the quality of perfection, and that
vileness is the mirror of power and glory,

Because (every) contrary is certainly made evident by its

^ Literally, “how should it be a place for the tailor to display his skill in?


JOSEPH AND THE MIRROR 175

contrary; because honey is perceived (to be sweet by contrast)
with vinegar.

Whoever has seen and recognised his own deficiency has
ridden post-haste^ (made rapid progress) in perfecting himself.

The reason why he (any one) is not flying towards the Lord
of glory is that he supposes himself to be perfect.

There is no worse malady in your soul, O haughty one, than
the conceit of perfection.

Much blood must flow from your heart and eye, that self- 3215
complacency may go out of you.

The fault of Iblis lay in thinking ''I am better (than Adam),”
and this disease is in the soul of every (human) creature.

Though he regard himself as very broken (in spirit), know
that it is (a case of) clear water (on the surface) and dung under
the stream.

When he (the Devil) stirs you in trial, immediately the water
becomes dung-coloured.

There is dung in the bed of the stream, my man, though to
you the stream appears pure.

’Tis the Pir full of wisdom, well-acquainted with the Way, 3220
that digs a channel for (draining off) the streams of the flesh
and the body.

Can the water of the (polluted) stream clear out the dung?

Can man’s knowledge sweep away the ignorance of his sensual
self?

How shall the sword fashion its own hilt? Go, entrust (the
cure of) this wound to a surgeon.

Flies gather on every wound, so that no one sees the foulness
of his wound.

Those flies are your (evil) thoughts and your (love of) pos-
sessions : your wound is the darkness of your (spiritual) states ;

And if the Pir lays a plaster on your wound, at once the pain 3225
and lamentation are stilled.

So that you fancy it (the wound) is healed, (whereas in reality)
the (healing) ray of the plaster has shone upon the (wounded)
spot.

Beware ! Do not (scornfully) turn your head away from the
plaster, O you who are wounded in the back, but recognise
that that (healing of the wound) proceeds from the ray : do not
regard it as (proceeding) from your own constitution.


^ I^iterally, **has galloped with two horses.”


176


MATHNAWI, BOOK I


How the writer of the (Qur'dnic) Revelation fell into apostasy
because {when) the ray of the Revelation shot upon him^ he
recited the {revealed) verse before the Prophet ^ on whom be peace y
{had dictated it to him); then he saidy So I too am one upon
whom Revelation has descended.'"'

Before (the time of) ‘Uthman there was a scribe who used
to be diligent in writing down the Revelation.

Whenever the Prophet dictated the Revelation, he would
write out the same (portion) on the leaf.

3230 The beams of that Revelation would shine upon him, and
he would find Wisdom within him.

The substance of that Wisdom was dictated by the Prophet :
by this (small) amount (of reflected Wisdom) that meddling
fool was led astray,

Thinking, have in my conscience the Truth of that which
the illumined Prophet is saying.”

The ray of his thought struck the Prophet : the wrath of God
descended on his (the scribe’s) soul.

He abandoned both his work as a scribe and the Religion
(Islam) : he became the malignant foe of Mustafa (Mohammed)
and the Religion.

32^3 Mustafa said, obstinate miscreant, if the Light was from
thee, how shouldst thou have become black (with sin)?

If thou hadst been the Divine fountain (whence the Revelation
issued), thou wouldst not have let out such black water as this.”

Lest his reputation should be ruined in the sight of all and
sundry^, this (pride) kept his mouth shut.

Plis (a sinner’s) heart is being darkened, hence he is unable
to repent: this is wonderful.

He (the scribe) was crying “Alas,” but “Alas” was of no
use to him when the sword came on and took off his head.

3240 God has made reputation (to be like) a hundred maunds’
weight of iron: oh, many a one is bound in the unseen chain!

Pride and infidelity have barred that Way (of repentance) in
•such wise that he (the sinner) cannot utter a sigh.

He (God) said, “(ITl? have put on their necks) shackles {chin-
high) ^ and thereby they are forced to lift up their heads": those
shackles are not (put) on us from outside.

“ {And We have put) behind the^n a barrier ^ and We have made
a covering {of darkness) over them ” : the uncle (old sinner) is
not seeing the barrier in front (of him) and behind.

The barrier that arose has the appearance of open country^:
he does not know that it is the barrier of the Divine destiny.

^ Literally, “in the sight of this one and that one/*

- Literally, “the desert** or “the wide plain*’; t.e, the barrier is invisible
to the sensual eye.


THE PROPHET AND THE SCRIBE


177

Your (earthly) beloved is a barrier to the face of the (Divine) 3245
Beloved: your (worldly) guide is a barrier to the words of the
(true spiritual) guide.

Oh, many are the infidels that have a passionate longing for
the Religion (Islam) : his (such a one’s) chain (stumbling-block)
is reputation and pride and that and this (object of desire).

The chain is hidden, but ’tis worse than iron: the iron chain
is cloven by the axe.

The iron chain can be removed: none knows how to cure
the invisible chain.

If a man is stung by a wasp, he extracts the wasp’s sting
from his body,

But since the stinging wound is from (inflicted by) your self- 3250
existence, the pain continues with violence and the anguish is
not relieved.

The (full) explanation of this (matter) is springing forth
(seeking to escape) from my breast, but I am afraid it may give
(you cause to) despair.

Nay, do not despair: make yourself cheerful, call for help to
Him who comes at the call.

Saying, “Forgive us, O Thou who lovest to forgive, OThou
who hast a medicine for the old gangrenous disease ! ”

The reflexion of Wisdom led astray that miserable one (the
Prophet’s scribe): be not self-conceited, lest it (your self-
conceit) raise up the dust from you (utterly destroy you).

0 brother, Wisdom is flowing in upon you : it comes from 3253
the AbddP-y and in you it is (only) a borrowed thing.

Although the house (your heart) has found a light within
it, that (light) has shone forth from a light-giving neighbour.

Render thanks, be not beguiled by vanity, do not turn up
your nose (in disdain)^, hearken attentively, and do not show
any self-conceit.

’Tis a hundred pities and griefs that this borrowed (unreal)
state (of self-assertion) has put the religious communities far
from religious communion,

1 am the (devoted) slave of him who does not regard himself in
eve^ caravanseray (at eveiy stage in his spiritual progress) as
having attained to (the privilege of sitting at) the table (of union
with God).

Many is the caravanseray that must be quitted, in order that 3260
one day the man may reach home.

Though the iron has become red, it is not red (by nature) :
it (the redness) is a ray borrowed from something that strikes fire.

If the window or the house is full of light, do not deem aught
luminous except the sun.


N M


^ See p. 18, note.

® Literally, “do not make a nose.’'


12


178 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Every door and wall says, am luminous: I do not hold
the rays of another, I (myself) am this (light).’*

Then the sun says, “ O thou who art not right (in thy belief),
when I set ’twill become evident (thou wilt see what the
truth is).”

3265 The plants say, *'We are green of ourselves, we are gay and
smiling (blooming) and we are tall (by nature).”

The season of summer says (to them), “O peoples, behold
yourselves when I depart!”

The body is boasting of its beauty and comeliness, (while)
the spirit, having concealed its glory and pinions and plumes,

Says to it, “O dunghill, who art thou? Through my beams
thou hast come to life for a day or two.

Thy coquetry and prideful airs arc not contained in the
world (go beyond all bounds), (but) wait till I spring up (and
escape) from thee 1

3270 They whose love warmed thee will dig a grave for thee, they
will make thee a morsel for ants and reptiles.

That one who many a time in thy presence was dying (with
desire for thee) will hold his nose at thy stench.”

The beams of the spirit are speech and eye and ear: the
beam (effect) of fire is the bubbling in the water.

As the beam of the spirit falls on the body, so fall the beams
of the Abddl on my soul.

When the Soul of the soul withdraws from the soul, the soul
becomes even as the soulless (lifeless) body. Know (this for
sure) !

3275 For that reason I am laying my head (humbly) on the earth,
so that she (the earth) may be my witness on the Day of Judge-
ment.

On the Day of Judgement, when she shall he made to quake
mightily, this earth will bear witness to all that passed (in and
from us);

For she will plainly declare what she knows x earth and rocks
will begin to speak.

The philosopher, in his (vain) thought and opinion, becomes
disbelieving: bid him go and dash his head against this wall!

The speech of water, the speech of earth, and the speech of
mud are apprehended by the senses of them that have hearts
(the mystics),

3280 The philosopher who disbelieves in the moaning pillar^ is a
stranger to the senses of the saints.

He says that the beam (influence) of melancholia brings many
phantasies into pecmle’s minds.

Nay, but the reflexion of his wickedness and infidelity cast
this idle fancy of scepticism upon him.

^ See p. US.


THE PROPHET AND THE SCRIBE 179

The philosopher comes to deny the existence of the Devil,
and at the same time he is possessed by a devil.

If thou hast not seen the Devil, behold thyself: without
diabolic possession there is no blueness in the forehead.

Whosoever hath doubt and perplexity in his heart, he in this 3285
world is a secret philosopher.

He is professing firm belief, but some time or other that
philosophical vein will blacken his face (bring him to shame).

Take care, O ye Faithful! for that (vein) is in you: in you
is many an infinite world.

In thee are all the two-and-seventy sects: woe (to thee) if
one day they gain the upper hand over thee.

From fear of this, every one who has the fortune {barg) of
(holding) this Faith (Islam) is trembling like a leaf {barg).

Thou hast laughed at Iblis and the devils because thou hast 3290
regarded thyself as a good man.

When the soul shall turn its coat inside out (and be revealed
as it really is), how many a “Woe is me^’ will it extort from
the followers of the (Mohammedan) Religion !

On the counter (of the shop) everything (every gilded coin)
that looks like gold is smiling, because the touchstone is out of
sight.

O Coverer (of faults), do not lift up the veil from us, be a
protector to us in our test (on the Day of Judgement).

At night the false coin jostles (in rivalry) with the gold: the
gold is waiting for day.

With the tongue of its (inward) state the gold says^, “Wait, 3295
O tinselled one, till day rises clear.’ ^

Hundreds of thousands of years the accursed Iblis was a
saint and the prince of true believers ;

On account of the pride which he had, he grappled with
Adam and was put to shame, like dung at morningtide.

How BaV am son of prayed (to God), saying, “ Cause Moses

and his people to turn back, without having gained their desire,

from this city which they have besieged.^'

To BaPam son of Bd‘ur the people of the world became
subject, (for he was) like unto the Jesus of the time.

. They bowed (worshipfully) to none but him: his spell was
(giving) health to the sick.

From pride and (conceit of) perfection he grappled with 3300
Moses : his plight became such as thou hast heard.

Even so ttiere have been in the world, manifest or hidden, a
hundred thousand like Iblis and Balaam.

God caused these twain to be notorious, that these twain
liiight bear witness against the rest.

^ I.e. “the gold, without yvords, seems to say.’*


12-3


l8o MATHNAWf, BOOK I

These two thieves He hanged on a high gallows (to be a
warning to all); else there were many (other) thieves in (the
pale of) His vengeance.

These twain He dragged by their forelocks to the city (for
slaughter); (bat) ’tis impossible to number (all) the victims ot
His wrath.

3305 You are a favourite (of God), but within your (due) bounds.
(Fear) God, (fear) God, do not set foot beyond (those) bounds.

If you combat with one who is a greater favourite than
yourself, ’twill bring you down to the lowest depth of the
seventh earth.

For what purpose is the tale of ‘Ad and Thamiid? That you
may know that the prophets have disdain (for the wicked).

These signs — the (earth’s) swallowing up (sinners), the hurling
of stones (upon them), and the thunderbolts — ^were evidence of
the might of the Rational Soul.

Kill all animals for the sake of man , kill all mankind for the
sake of Reason.

^310 What is Reason? The Universal Intelligence of the man
(prophet or saint) endowed with reason. Partial reason is
reason (too), but it is infirm.

All the animals that are wild (unfriendly) to man are inferior
to the human animal.

Their blood is free^ to mankind, since they have not become
capable of human actions.

The honour of the wild animals is fallen (has come to be of
no account) because they have grown hostile to man.

What honour, then, will be thine, O marvel (of folly), since
thou hast become {like) timorous wild asses^}

3315 Because of his usefulness, the (domesticated) ass ought not
to be killed; (but) when he turns wild, his blood becomes
lawful.

Although the ass had no knowledge to restrain him (from
becoming wild), the Loving One is not excusing him at all.

How, then, shall man be excused, O noble friend, when he
has become wild (refractory and hostile) to that Word (the
voice of Reason)?

Of necessity permission was given to shed the blood of the
infidels, like (that of) a wild beast before the arrows and lances.

All their wives and children are free spoil, because they are
wildly averse to the august Reason.

3320 Once more, a reason that flees from the Reason of reason
(Universal Reason) is transported from rationality to (the grade
of) the animals.

^ Literally, “in the way (of God)/’ i,e. their slaughter is a religious act
which God has sanctioned and approved.

* Le. “ since thou hast turned away from the prophets and saints,”


hartSt and mari5t


i8i


How Hdrut and Mdrilt relied upon their immaculateness and

desired to mix with the people of this world and fell into tempta-
tion.

As (for example), because of their arrogance, the celebrated
Hanit and Mariit were smitten by the poisoned arrow (of
Divine wrath).

They had confidence in their holiness, (but) what (use) is it
for the buffalo to have confidence in the lion?

Though he make a hundred shifts (to defend himself) with
his horn, the fierce lion will tear him to pieces limb by limb.

(Even) if he become as full of horns (prickles) as a hedgehog,
the buffalo will inevitably be killed by the lion.

(But) though the Sarsar wind uproots many trees, it makes 3325
every blade of grass glisten with beauty.

That violent wind had pity on the weakness of the grass : do
not thou, O heart, brag vainly of thy strength.

How should the axe be afraid of the thickness of the branches?

It cuts them to pieces.

But it does not beat itself against a leaf, it does not beat its
edge except against an edge (something hard and solid like
itself).

What does the flame care for the great quantity of firewood?
How should the butcher flee in terror from the multitude of
sheep?

What is form in the presence of (in comparison with) reality? 3330
Very feeble. ’Tis the reality of the sky that keeps it upside
down (like an inverted cup).

Judge by the analogy of the celestial wheel : from whom does
its motion proceed? From directive Reason.

The motion of this shield-like body is (derived) from the
veiled spirit, O son.

The motion of this wind is. from its reality, like the wheel
that is captive to the water of the stream.

The ebb and flow and incoming and outgoing of this breath
— from whom does it proceed but from the spirit that is filled
with desire?

Now it (the spirit) makes it (the breath) j/w, now hd and ddl\ 3335
now it makes it peace, now strife.

Even so our God had made this (Sarsar) wind like a (raging)
dragon against ‘Ad.

Again, He had also made that wind (to be) peace and regard-
fulness and safety for the true believers.

“The Reality is Allah,” said the Shaykh of the (Moham-
medan) Religion, (who is) the sea of the spiritual realities of
the Lord of created beings.


iSz MATHNAWI, BOOK I

All the tiers of earth and heaven are (but) as straws in that
flowing sea.

3340 The rushing and tossing of the straws in the water is pro-
duced by the water when it is agitated.

When it (the sea of Reality) wishes to make them (the straws)
cease from struggling, it casts the straws toward the shore.

When it draws them from the shore into the surge it does
with them that which the Sarsar (wind) does with the grass.

This topic is endless. Speed back, O youth, to (the story of)
Hanit and Marut.

The rest of the story of Hdrut and Mdruty and how an exemplary

punishment was inflicted on them^ evert in this worlds in the pit

of Babylon,

Inasmuch as the sin and wickedness of the people of the
world was becoming clearly visible to them both from the
latticed window (of Heaven),

3345 They began to gnaw their hands in wi*ath, but had no eyes
for their own fault.

The ugly man saw himself in the mirror : he turned his face
away from that (spectacle) and was enraged.

When the self-conceited person has seen any one commit a
sin, there appears in him a fire (derived) from Hell.

He calls that (hellish) pride defence of the Religion: he
regards not the soul of arrogance in himself.

Defence of the Religion has a different character, for from
that (religious) fire a (whole) world is green (verdant and
flourishing).

3350 God said to them, ‘‘If ye are enlightened^, (nevertheless)
look not (with scorn) upon the doers of black deeds who have
been made forgetful (of God).

Render thanks, O Host (of Heaven) and Servants (of God)!
Ye are freed from lust and sexual intercourse.

If I impose that kind of nature on you, Heaven will accept
you no more.

The preservation (from sin) which ye have in your bodies is
from the reflexion of My preservation and care (of you).

Oh, beware! Regard that as (coming) from Me, not from
yourselves, lest the accursed Devil prevail against you/*

3355 As (for example) the writer of the Revelation given to the
Prophet deemed the Wisdom and the Original Light (to be
residing) in himself.

He was reckoning himself a fellow-songster of the Birds of
God, (whereas) that (which proceeded from him) was (only) a
whistle resembling an echo.

^ Literally/* polishers.”


THE DEAF MAN AND THE INVALID 183

If you become an exponent (imitator) of the song of birds,
how will you become acquainted with the (real) meaning of
the bird?

If you learn the note of a nightingale, how will you know
what (feelings) it has towards a rose?

Or if you do know, ’twill be from analogy and surmise, like
the conjectures formed by deaf people from those who move
their lips.


How the deaf man went to visit his sick neighbour.

One possessed of much wealth said to a deaf man, “A 3360
neighbour of thine is fallen ill.”

The deaf man said to himself, “Being hard of hearing, what
shall I understand of the words spoken by that youth? —

Especially (as) he is ill and his voice is weak; but I must go
thither, there’s no escape.

When I see his lips moving, I will form a conjecture as to
that (movement) from myself.

When I say, ‘ How are you, O my suffering (friend)? ’ he will
reply, ‘I am fine’ or *1 am pretty well.’

I will say, ‘Thanks (to God)! What posset have you had to 3365
drink? ’ He will reply, ‘ Some snerbet ’ or ‘ a decoction of kidney-
beans.’

(Then) I will say, ‘May you enjoy health 1 Who is the doctor
attending you? ’ He will answer, ‘ So-and-so.’

‘He is one who brings great luck with him^,’ I will remark;
‘since he has come, things will go well for you.

I have experienced (the luck of) his foot: wherever he goes,
the desired object is attained.’”

The good man made ready these conjectural answers, and
went to see the invalid.

“How are you?” he asked. “I am at the point of death,” 3370
said he. “Thanks (to God)!” cried the deaf man. At this, the
patient became resentful and indignant,

Saying (to himself), “What (cause for) thanksgiving is this?

He has been my enemy.” — The deaf man made a conjecture,
and (as now appears) it has turned out to be wrong.

After that, he asked him what he had drunk. “Poison,” said
he. “May it do you good and give you health!” said the deaf
man. His (the invalid’s) wrath increased.

Then he inquired, “Which of the doctors is it that is coming
to attend you? ”

He replied, “Azrael (the Angel of Death) is coming. Get
you gone!” “His foot (arrival),” said the deaf man, “is very
blessed: be glad!”

^ Literally, “one whose foot is very blest.”


184 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

3375 The deaf man went forth. He said gaily, “Thanks (to God)
for that! Now I will take leave.”

The invalid said, “This is my mortal foe: I did not know he
was (such) a mine of iniquity.”

The mind of the invalid was seeking a hundred abusive terms,
that he might send him a message (filled with abuse) of every
description.

As, when any one has eaten bad (indigestible) food, it is
turning his heart (stomach) until he vomits.

Suppression of anger is (like) this: do not vomit it, so that
you may gain sweet words in recompense.

3380 Since he had no patience, he was tormented. “Where,” he
cried, “is this cur, this infamous cuckold,

_ That I may pour upon him what he said (make a retort in
his own style)? — for at that time the lion of my thought' was
asleep (I was too weak to contend with him).

Inasmuch as visiting the sick is for the purpose of (giving
them) tranquillity, this is not a visit to the sick : it is the satis-
faction of an enemy’s wish.

(His motive was) that he should see his enemy enfeebled
and that his wicked heart should be at peace.”

Many are they that do works of devotion and set their hearts
on being approved and rewarded for the same.

3385 ’Tis in truth a lurking sin : that which he (the pietist) thinks
pure is (really) foul.

As (in the case of) the deaf man, who fancied that he did a
kindness, but it had the opposite result.

He sits down well-pleased, saying, “ I have paid my respects,
I have performed what was due to my neighbour”;

(But) he has (only) kindled a fire (of resentment) against
himself in the invalid’s heart and burned himself.

Beware, then, of the fire that ye have kindled : verily ye have
increased in sin.

33(jo The Prophet said to our desert Arab, “ Pray\ for indeed thou
hast not prayed (aright), my man.”

As a means of preventing these dangers, “Guide us” comes
in every (ritual) prayer.

That is to say, “O God, do not mingle my prayer with the
prayer of the erring and the hypocrites.”

By the analogical reasoning which the deaf man adopted a
ten years’ friendship was made vain.

Especially, O master, (you must avoid) the analogy drawn by
the low senses in regard^ to the Revelation which is illimitable.

3.395 If your sensuous ear is fit for (understanding) the letter (of
the Revelation), know that your ear that receives the occult ^
(meaning) is deaf.

‘ I.e. “perform the ritual prayer.” “ Read


THE DANGERS OF ANALOGY


185'


The first to bring analogical reasoning to hear against the
Revealed Text was Iblis.

The first person who produced these paltry analogies in the
presence of the Lights of God^ was Iblis.

He said, ‘‘Beyond doubt fire is superior to earth: I am of
fire, and he (Adam) is of dingy earth.

Let us, then, judge by comparing the secondary with its
principal: he is of darkness, I of radiant light.”

God said, “Nay, but on the contrary there shall be no re-
lationships: asceticism and piety shall be the (sole) avenue^ to
pre-eminence.”

This is not the heritage of the fleeting world, so that 3400
thou shouldst gain it by ties of relationship: ’tis a spiritual
(heritage).

Nay, these things are the heritage of the prophets; the in-
heritors of these are the spirits of the devout.

The son of Bii Jahl became a true believer for all to see;
the son of Noah became one of those who lost the way.

“The child of earth (Adam) became illumined like the moon;
thou art the child of fire : get thee gone with thy face black (in
disgrace) ! ”

The wise man has made (use of) such reasonings and investi-
gation on a cloudy day or at night for the sake of (finding) the
qibla\

But with the sun and with the Ka‘ba before your face, do 3405
not seek to reason and investigate in this manner.

Do not pretend that you cannot see the Ka‘ba, do not avert
your face from it because you have reasoned (that it is not to
be seen). God knows best what is right.

When you hear a pipe from the Bird of God, you commit its
outward (meaning) to memory, like a lesson,

And then from yourself (out of your own head) you make
some analogies : you make (what is) mere fancy into a (thing of)
substance (reality).

The Abddl have certain mystical expressions of which the
doctrines (of external religion) are ignorant.

You have learned the birds’ language by the sound (alone), 3410
you have kindled (invented) a hundred analogies and a hundred
caprices.

The hearts (of the saints) are wounded by you, as the invalid
(was hurt by the deaf man), (while) the deaf man became
intoxicated (overjoyed) with the vain notion of success.

^ 7.C. the Word of God.

^ Literally, “the mikrdh or niche (of a mosque),” which shows the direction
that the Moslem must face in prayer.


l86 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

The writer of the Revelation, from (hearing) the Bird’s voice,,
supposed that he was the Bird’s equal :

The Bird flapped a wing and blinded him: lo, it plunged him
in the abyss of death and bale.

“Beware! do not ye also^, (beguiled) by a reflexion or an
opinion, fall from the dignities of Heaven!

3415 Although ye are Hdriit and Mariit and superior to all (the
angels) on the terrace of We are they that stand in ranks,

(Yet) take mercy on the wickednesses of the wicked: do not
cleave to egoism and self-conceit.

Beware, lest (the Divine) jealousy come from ambush and
ye fall headlong to the bottom of the earth.”

They both said, “0 God, Thine is the command: without
Thy security (protection) where indeed is any security?”

They were saying that, but their hearts were throbbing (with
desire) — “How should evil come from us? Good servants (of
God) are we!”

3420 The prick of desire in the two angels did not leave (them)
until it sowed the seed of self-conceit.

Then they were saying, “O ye that are composed of the
(four) elements (and are) unacquainted with the purity of the
spiritual beings,

We will draw curtains (of light) over this (terrestrial) sky,
we will come to earth and set up the canopy,

We will deal justice and perform worship and every night we
will fly up again to Heaven,

That we may become the wonder of the world, that we may
establish safety and security on the earth.”

2425 The analogy between the state of Heaven and (that of) the
earth is inexact: it has a concealed difference.

Explaining that one must keep one^s own {spiritual) state and
{mystical) intoxication hidden from the ignorant.

Hearken to the words of the Sage (Hakim) who lived in
seclusion-, “Lay thy head in the same place where thou hast
drunk the wine,”

When the drunken man has gone astray from a tavern, he
becomes the children’s laughing-stock and plaything.

Whatever way he goes^, he is falling in the mud, (now) on
this side and (now) on that side, and every fool is laughing at him.

He (goes on) like this, while the children at ms heels are
without knowledge of his intoxication and the taste of his wine.

3430 All mankind are children except him that is intoxicated with

^ Here God is addressing Hdrdt and Mdrdt,

“ Literally, “the Sage of a purdah,” The poet Sana’l is meant.

® Literally, “on every road.”


THE DOCTRINE OF RESERVE 187

God; none is grown-up except him that is freed from sensual
desire.

He (God) said, ‘‘This world is a play and pastime, and ye
are children’’; and God speaks truth.

If you have not gone forth from (taken leave of) play, you
are a child: without purity of spirit how will you be fully in-
telligent (like an adult)?

Know, O youth, that the lust in which men are indulging
here (in this world) is like the sexual intercourse of children.

What is the child’s sexual intercourse? An idle play, com-
pared with the sexual intercourse of a Rustam and a brave
champion of Islam.

The wars of mankind are like children’s fights — all meaning- 3435
less, pithless, and contemptible.

All their fights are (fought) with wooden swords, all their
purposes are (centred) in futility;

They all are riding on a reed-cane (hobby-horse), saying,
‘‘This is our Buraq^ or mule that goes like DulduP.”

They are (really) carrying (their hobby-horses), but in their
folly they have raised themselves on high: they have fancied
themselves to be riders carried along the road.

Wait till the day when those who are borne aloft by God shall
pass, galloping, beyond the nine tiers (of Heaven)!

“ The spirit and the angek shall ascend to Him^^ : at the ascen- 3440
sion of the spirit Heaven shall tremble.

Like children, ye all are riding on your skirts: ye have taken
hold of the corner of your skirt (^to serve) as a horse.

From God came (the text), “ Verily, opinion doth not enable
{you) to dispense {with the Truthy': when did the steed of
opinion run (mount) to the Heavens?

While preferring (in case of doubt) the stronger of the two
(alternative) opinions, do not doubt whether you see the sun
when it is shining 1

At that time (when the spirit returns to God) behold your
steeds! Ye have made a steed of your own foot.

Come, recognise that your imagination and reflection and 3445
sense-perception and apprehension are like the reed-cane on
which children ride.

The sciences of the mystics^ bear them (aloft) ; the sciences
of sensual men^ are burdens to them.

When knowledge strikes on the heart (is acquired through
mystical experience), it becomes a helper {ydri)\ when know-
ledge strikes on the body (is acquired through the senses), it
becomes a burden {bdri),

^ The animal ridden by the Prophet when he ascended to Heaven.

® A mule belonging to the Prophet. ® Literally, “ the men of heart.’'

* Literally, “the men of body."


i88


MATHNAWf, BOOK I

God hath said, '^{Like an ass) laden with his books burden-
some is the knowledge that is not from Himself.

The knowledge that is not immediately from Himself does
not endure, (it is) like the tirewoman’s paint.

3450 But when you carry this burden well, the burden will be
removed and you will be given (spiritual) joy.

Beware ! Do not carry this burden of knowledge for the sake
of selfish desire (but mortify yourself), so that you may ride on
the smooth-paced steed of knowledge,

So that you may mount the smooth-paced steed of know-
ledge, (and that) afterwards the burden may fall from your
shoulder.

How wilt thou be freed from selfish desires without the cup
of Hu (Him), O thou who hast become content with no more
of Hu Aan the name of Hii}

From attribute and name what comes to birth? Phantasy;
and that phantasy shows the way to union with Him.

3455 Hast thou ever seen a subject that shows without (the exist-
ence of) an object that is shown: unless there is the road, there
can never be the ghoul (which entices travellers to stray from
the road).

Hast thou ever seen a name without the reality (denoted by
the name)? Or hast thou plucked a rose {gul) from the (letters)
gdf and Idm of (the word) guU

Thou hast pronounced the name: go, seek the thing named.
Know that the moon is on high, not in the water of the stream.

If thou wouldst pass beyond name and letter, oh, make
thyself wholly purged of self.

Like (polished) iron, lose the ferruginous colour; become in
thy ascetic discipline (like) a mirror without rust.

3^60 Make thyself pure from the attributes of self, that thou mayst
behold thine own pure untarnished essence,

And behold within thy heart (all) the sciences of the prophets,
without book and without preceptor and master.

The Prophet said, Amongst my people are some who are
one with me in nature and aspiration ;

Their spirits behold me by the same light by which I am
beholding them,”

Without the two Sahihs^ and Traditions and Traditionists ;
nay, (they behold him) in the place where they drink the Water
of Life.

3465 Know the secret of *‘In the evening I was a Kurd”; read
the mystery of '‘In the morning I was an Arab.”

And if you desire a parable of the hidden knowledge, relate
the story of the Greeks and the Chinese.

^ The title Sahih is given to two works, by Bukh^rf and Muslim, which
contain well-authenticated Traditions of the Prophet.


THE GREEK AND CHINESE ARTISTS 189


The story of the contention between the Greeks and the Chinese
in the art of painting and picturing ,

The Chinese said, “We are the better artists the Greeks
said, “The (superiority in) power and excellence belongs to us.’’

“I will put you to the test in this matter,” said the Sultan,
“(and see) which of you are approved in your claim.”

The Chinese and the Greeks began to debate: the Greeks
retired from the debate.

(Then) the Chinese said, “Hand over to us a particular room, 3470
ana (let there be) one for you (as well).”

There were two rooms with door facing door: the Chinese
took one, the Greeks the other.

The Chinese requested the King to give them a hundred
colours : the King opened his treasury that they might receive
that (which they sought).

Every mprning, by (his) bounty, the colours were dispensed
from the treasury to the Chinese.

The Greeks said, “No tints and colours are proper for our
work, (nothing is needed) except to remove the rust.”

They shut the door and went on burnishing: they became 3475
clear and pure like the sky.

There is a way from many-colouredness to colourlessness:
colour is like the clouds, and colourlessness is a moon.

Whatsoever light and splendour you see in the clouds, know
that it comes from the stars and the moon and the sun.

When the Chinese had finished their work, they were beating
drums for joy.

The King entered and saw the pictures there; that (sight),
as he encountered it, was robbing him of his wits.

After that, he came towards toe Greeks : they removed the 34S0
intervening curtain.

The reflexion of those (Chinese) pictures and works (of art)
struck upon these walls which had been made pure (from stain).

All that he had seen there (in the Chinese room) seemed
more beautiful here: ’twas snatching the eye from the socket.

The Greeks, 0 father, are the Siifis: (they are) without
(independent of) study and books and erudition,

But they have burnished their breasts (and made them) pure
from greed and cupidity and avarice and hatreds.

That purity of the mirror is, beyond doubt, the heart which 3485
receives images innumerable.

That Moses (the perfect saint) holds in his bosom the formless
infinite form of the Unseen (reflected) from the mirror of his
heart.

Although that form is not contained in Heaven, nor in the


igo MATHNAWf, BOOK I

empyrean nor in the sphere of the stars, nor (in the earth which
rests) on the Fish,

Because (all) those are bounded and numbered — (yet is it
contained in the heart) : know that the mirror of the heart hath
no bound.

Here the understanding becomes silent or (else) it leads into
error, because the heart is with Him (God), or indeed the heart
is He.

3490 The reflexion of every image shines unto everlasting from the
heart alone, both with plurality and without.

Unto everlasting every new image that falls on it (the heart)
is appearing therein without any imperfection.

They that burnish (their hearts) have escaped from (mere)
scent and colour : they behold Beauty at every moment without
tarrying.

They have relinquished the form and husk of knowledge,
they have raised the banner of the eye of certainty^.

Thought is gone, and they have gained light: they have
gained the throat (core and essence) and the sea (ultimate source)
of gnosis.

3495 Death, of which all these (others) are sore afraid, this people
(the perfect Siifis) are holding in derision.

None gains the victory over their hearts: the hurt falls on
the oyster-shell, not on the pearl.

Though they have let go grammar [nahw) and jurisprudence
{fiqh)y yet they have taken up (instead) mystical self-effacement
\mahw) and spiritual poverty {faqr).

Ever since the forms of the Eight Paradises have shone forth,
they have found the tablets of their (the Siifis^) hearts i^eccptive.

(They receive) a hundred impressions from the empyrean and
the starry sphere and the void: what impressions? Nay, ’tis the
very sight of God.


How the Prophet, on whom be peace, asked Zayd, ''How art thou
to-day and in what state hast thou risen?'' and how Zayd
answered him, saying, " This morning I am a true believer, O
Messejiger of Allah''

3500 One morning the Prophet said to Zayd, 'HIow art thou this
morning, O sincere Companion?*'

He replied, ‘‘(This morning I am) a faithful servant of God.’*
Again he (the Prophet) said to him, “ Where is thy token from
the garden of Faith, if it has bloomed?"

He said, “I have been athirst in the daytime, at night I have
not slept because of love and burning griefs,


^ Le. mystical intuition.


THE VISION OF ZAYD 191

So that I passed through (and beyond) day and night, as the
point of the spear passes through the shield ;

For beyond (the realm of contraries) nativity and continued
growth are one: hundreds of thousands of years are the same
as a single hour.

Everlastingness and eternity are unified (yonder) : the under- 3505
standing hath no way thither by means of inquiry.’’

The Prophet said, “Where is the traveller’s gift (that thou
hast brought home) from this journey? Produce it. Where is
the token of sincerity (that thou hast brought) from yon fair
land?”

Zayd said, “When (other) people see the sky, I behold the
Empyrean with those who dwell there.

The Eight Paradises and the Seven Hells are as visible to
me as the idol to the idolater.

I am distinguishing the people (here), one by one, like wheat
from barley in the mill.

So that who is for Paradise and who shall be a stranger (to 3510
Paradise) is as clear to me as (the difference between) snake
and fish.”

The day of birth for Anatolians and Ethiopians and every
race (of mankind) is the Day when faces shall become white or
blach?-.

Before this (birth), however sinful the spirit was, it was in
the womb (of the body) and was hidden from the people.

The damned are they that are damned in the mother’s womb :
all of them are known by the marks of God.

The body, like a mother, is big with the spirit-child: death
is the pangs and throes of birth.

All the spirits that have passed over (to the next life) are 3515
waiting to see in what state that proud spirit shall be born.

The Ethiopians (the damned spirits) say, “It belongs to us”;
the Anatolians (the blessed spirits) say, “Nay, it is comely.”

As soon as it is born into the world of spirit and (Divine)
grace, there is no further difference (of opinion) between the
whites (the blessed) and the blacks (the damned).

If it is an Ethiopian (a damned spirit), the Ethiopians carry
it off; and if it is an Anatolian (a blessed spirit), the Anatolians
lead it away.

Until it is born (into the next life), it is a riddle for (all) the
world: few are they that know (the destiny of) the unborn.

Such a one surely is seeing by the light of God, for he has 3520
the way (the means of knowing what is hidden) within the skin.

Principium aquae seminis candidum est et pulchrum, but the
reflexion of the spirit, (whether the spirit be) Anatolian or
Ethiopian,


^ The Day of Resurrection.


193 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Is giving colour (glory) to those (the Anatolians) who are
most excellent in their [original) constitution^ (while) it is
bearing this (other) half [i,e, the Ethiopians) down to the
lowest depth.

This discourse hath no end. Hasten back, that we may not
be left behind by the caravan’s file of camels.

On the Day when faces shall become white or black, by whom
shall reverence still be paid to Turk and Hindoo (alike)?

1525 In the womb (of this world) Hindoo and Turk are not dis-
tinguishable, (but) when each is born (into the next world) he
(the seer) sees that each is miserable or glorious (according to
his spiritual nature).

“I am seeing them all plainly, as (they shall be) on the Day
of Resurrection, like (multitudes of) people, men and women.

Hark, shall I tell or shall I stop my breath (keep silence)?”
Mustafa (Mohammed) bit his (Zayd’s) lip, as though to say,
Enough!”

“O Messenger of Allah, shall I tell the mystery of the
Gathering (on the Day of Judgement), shall I make the
Resurrection manifest in the world to-day?

Let me be, that I may rend the curtains asunder, that my
(spiritual) substance may shine forth like a sun ;

That the sun may be eclipsed by me, that I may show (the .
difference between) the (fruitful) date-palm and the (barren)
willow.

I will show forth the mystery of Resun*ection, the sterling
coin and the coin mixed with alloy,

The people of the left^ with their hands cut off; I will show
forth the colour of infidelity and the colour of the (Prophet’s) folk.

I will lay bare the seven rifts (sins) of hypocrisy in the light
of the moon that suffers no eclipse or waning.

I will display the woollen frocks of the damned, I will cause
the drums and kettle-drums of the prophets to be heard.

:,535 Hell and the Gardens (of Paradise) and the intermediate state
I will bring clearly before the eyes of the infidels.

I will display the pond of Kawthar heaving (with waves),
which dashes water on their (the blessed ones’) faces, (while)
its sound (rings) in their ears ;

And those who arc running athirst round Kawthar 1 will
name one by one (and tell) who they are :

Their shoulders are rubbing against my shoulder, their cries
are piercing my ears.

Before my eyes the people of Paradise, from free choice,
clasp each other to their bosoms,

3540 Visiting one another’s high places of honour and snatching
kisses from the lips (of the houris).

* The damned.


THE VISION OF ZAYD 193

This ear of mine has become deafened by the cries of ‘Alas,
Alas!’ (uttered) by the vile wretches (in Hell) and by the
screams of ‘ O sorrow 1 ’

These are (only) hints. I would speak from the depth (of
my knowledge), but I fear to offend the Messeiiger (of Allah).”

He was speaking in this wise, intoxicated and distraught: the
Prophet twitched his collar

And said, “ Beware 1 Draw (rein), for thy horse has become hot.
(When) the reflexion of God is not ashamed {to speak the truth)
strikes (on the heart), shame is gone.

Thy mirror has shot out of the case : how shall mirror and 3545
balance speak falsehood?

How shall mirror and balance stop their breath (suppress the
truth) for fear of hurting and shaming any one?

Mirror and balance are noble touchstones : if thou do service
(sue) to them for two hundred years,

Saying, ‘ Conceal the truth for my sake, display the surplus
and do not display the deficiency,’

They will say to thee, ‘Do not laugh at thy beard and mous-
tache: mirror and balance, and then deceit and trickery P

Since God has raised us up in order that by means of us it 3550
may be possible to know the truth,

If this do not happen (if we fail to display the truth), what
worth have we, O young man? How shall we become a standard
for the face of the fair?’

But (said the Prophet) slip the mirror (back) into the cloth,
if (Divine) illumination has made thy breast a Sinai.”

He (Zayd) said, “Why, shall the Sun of the Truth and the
Sun of Eternity be contained any wise under the armpit?

It bursts asunder both armpit {baghal) and imposture (daghal ) ;
in its presence neither madness nor (soundness of) under-
standing remains.”

He (the Prophet) said, “When thou layest one finger on an 3555
eye, thou seest the world empty of the sun.

One finger-tip becomes a veil over the moon — and this is a
symbol of God’s covering —

So that the (whole) world may be covered (hidden from view)
by a single point, and the sun be eclipsed by a splinter.”

Close thy lips and gaze on the depth of the sea (within thee) :

God made the sea subject to man,

Even as the fountains of Salsabfl and Zanjabil are under the
control of the exalted ones of Paradise.

The four rivers of Paradise are under our control; this is not 3560
(by) our might, ’tis (by) the command of God :

We keep tixem flowing wheresoever we will, like magic (which
takes its course) according to the desire of the magicians,

^ Le. ‘‘The idea that mirror and balance should deceive is absurd.’*


N M


13


194 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

Just as these two flowing eye-fountains (the two eyes) are
under the control of the heart and subject to the command of
the spirit.

If it (the heart) will, they turn towards poison and the snake,
and if it will, they turn to (edifying) consideration.

If it will, they turn to sensuous things, and if it will, they
turn to things clothed (in the forms of thought and phantasy).

3565 If it will, they advance towards universals, and if it will, they
remain turned towards particulars.

Similarly all the five senses are passing (in movement) ac-
cording to the will and command of the heart, like the spool
(in the hand of a weaver).

All the five senses are moving and trailing their skirts (sweep-
ing along) in whatever direction the heart indicates to them.

Hand and foot are plainly under command of the heart, like
the staff in the hand of Moses.

If the heart will, at once the foot begins to dance, or flees
from defect towards increase.

3570 If the heart will, the hand comes to terms with the fingers
to wTite a book.

The hand remains in (the grasp of) a hidden hand : it (the
hidden hand) within has set the body outside (as its instrument).

If it (the hidden hand) will, it (the external hand) becomes a
snake to the enemy ; and if it will,it becomes a helper to the friend ;

And if it will, a spoon in food ; and if it will, a mace weighing
ten maunds.

I wonder what the heart is saying to them (the members of
the body). Tis a marvellous connexion, a marvellous hidden link.

3575 Surely the heart has gotten the seal of Solomon, so that it
has pulled the reins of (exerted control over) the five senses.

Five external senses are easy for it to manage, five internal
senses (faculties) are under its command.

There are ten senses and seven limbs (of the body) et cetera :
count over (to yourself) what is not mentioned (here).

O heart, since thou art a Solomon in empire, cast thy seal-
ring (powerful spell) upon peri and demon.

If in this kingdom thou art free from deceit, the three demons
will not take the seal out of thy hand;

3580 After that, thy name will conquer the world: the two worlds
(will be) ruled by thee like thy body.

And if the demon take the seal off thy hand, thy kingdom is
past, thy fortune is dead ;

After that, O servants (of God), “O sorrow!” is your in-
evitable doom till the day when ye are gathered together (for
Judgement).

Amd if thou art denying thy deceit, how wilt thou save thy
soul from the scales and the mirror?


LUQMAN AND HIS FELLOW-SERVANTS 195

How suspicion was thrown upon Luqmdn by the slaves and fellow-

servants who said that he had eaten the fresh fruit which they

were bringing (to their master).

In the eyes of his master, amongst (in comparison with) the
(other) slaves, Luqmdn was despicable on account of his body
(outward aspect).

He (the master) used to send the slaves to the garden, that
fruit might come (be brought to him) for his pleasure.

Amongst the slaves Luqmdn was (despised) like a parasite;

(he was) full of (spiritual) ideas, dark-complexioned as night.

Those slaves, being impelled by greed, ate the whole of the
fruit with enjoyment,

And told their master that Luqmdn had eaten it, (whereupon)
the master became bitter and sorely displeased with Luqmdn.

When Ltiqman inquired (and ascertained) the cause (of this),
he opened his lips to rejn'oach his master.

‘‘O sire,” said Lucimdn, *‘an unfaithful servant is not ap- i5')o
proved in the sight of God.

Put us all to the lest, C) noble sir: give us our fill of hot
water (to drink),

And afterwards make us run into a great plain, thou being
mounted and we on foot.

Then behold the evil-doer, (behold) the things that are done
by Him who rcvealeth mysteries!”

’ The master gave the servants hot water to drink, and they
drank it in fear (of him).

Afterwards he was driving them into the plains, and they
were running amidst the cornfields.

From distress thejj began to vomit: the (hot) water was
bringing up the fruit from them.

When Luqmdn began to vomit from his navel (belly), there
was coming up from within him (only) the pure water.

Inasmuch as Luqmdn's wisdom can show forth this, then
what must be the wisdom of the Lord of existence!

On the day when all the inmost thoughts shall he searched outy
there will appear from you something latent, (the appearance
of) which is not desired.

When they shall be given hot wafer to drinks all the veils will ;<m.u
be cut asunder (torn off) from that which is abhorred.

'Phe fire (of lIcU) is made the torment of the infidels because
fire is the (proper) test for stones.

I low oft, how oft, have we spoken gently to our stony hearts,
and they would not accept the counsel !

h^or a bad wound the vein gets (requires) a bad (severe)
remedy: the teeth of the dog arc suitable for the donkey's
head.


196 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

The wicked women to the wicked men is wisdom : the ugly is
the mate and fitting (consort) for the ugly.

3605 Whatever, then, you wish to mate with, go, become ab-
sorbed in the loved (object), and assume its shape and qualities.

If you wish for the light, make yourself ready to receive the
light; if you wish to be far (from God), become self-conceited
and far ;

And if you wish (to find) a way out of this ruined prison, do
not turn your head away from the Beloved, but bow in worship
and draw nigh.


The remainder of the story of Zayd {and what he said) in
answer to the Prophet^ on whom be peace.

This discourse hath no end. ^‘Arise, O Zayd, and tie a shackle
on the Buraq (steed) of thy rational spirit.

Since the rational spirit exposes faults, it is rending the
curtains of concealment.

3610 Concealment is desired by God for awhile. Drive away this
drummer, bar the road !

Do not gallop, draw rein, ’tis better it (thy spirit) should be
veiled; ’tis better that every one should be gladdened by his
own fancy.

God is wishing that even His despairing ones should not
avert their faces (refrain) from this worship (of Him).

Even on the ground of a hope they become ennobled: for a
few days (a short time) they are running at its stirrup (following
Divine worship).

He wishes that that mercy should shine upon all, on the evil
and the good, because of the universality of His mercy.

3615 God is wishing that every prince and captive should be
hopeful and fearful and afraid.

This hope and fear are in the veil (separating the seen from
the unseen), that they may be fostered behind fiiis veil.

When thou hast rent the veil, where are fear and hope? Might
and majesty and (the power to inflict) probation belong to the
unseen.”

A young man on the bank of a river thought (to himself),
**Our fisherman (here) is Solomon.

(But) if this is he, why is he alone and disguised? And if not,
why has he the aspect of Solomon?”

3620 Thus thinking, he remained in two minds until Solomon
(once more) became king and absolute ruler.

The demon departed and fled from his (Solomon’s) kingdom
and throne: the sword of his fortune shed that devil’s blood.

He put the ring upon his finger, the hosts of demons and
, peris assembled.


THE VISION OF ZAYD 197

The men came to look, amongst them he who had the fancy
(that the fisherman was Solomon in disguise).

When he opened his (Solomon’s) hand and saw the ring, his
pondering and seeking (to decide rightly) vanished all at once.

Anxiety occurs (only) at the time when that (object of desire) 30J5
is hidden: this searching is after the unseen.

Whilst he was absent, fancy waxed strong in his breast: as
soon as he was present, his fancy departed.

If the radiant sky is not without rain, neither is the dark
earth without vegetation.

(God said), “I want (what is signified by the words) they
believe in the unseen-, on that account I have shut the window
of the fleeting world.

If I open its window as on the day of the (last) trump, how
should I say, 'Dost thou see any clefts therem?’”

In order that in this darkness they may make endeavours (to in ',(>
find the way), they are turning, every one, their faces in some
direction.

For awhile things are reversed: the thief brings the magis-
trate to the gallows,

So that many a sultan and man of lofty spirit becomes the
slave of his own slave for awhile.

Service (performed) in absence (through faith in the unseen)
is fair and comely; when service is demanded (by God from us),

’tis pleasing (to Him) that the absent should be remembered
(that we should remember to perform what is due to Him,
though He is unseen).

Where (in what position) is one that praises the king in his
presence, compared with one that is shamefaced in absence
(from him)?

The governor of a fortress who, on the border of the kingdom, .tijs
far from the sultan and the shadow (protection) of the sultanate,

Guards the fortress from enemies and will not sell it for
boundless riches.

Who, though absent from the king on the outskirt of the
frontiers, keeps faith (with him) like one who is present —

He in the king’s sight is better than the rest who are serving
in his presence and ready to devote their lives.

Therefore half an atom of regard to one’s duty in absence is
better than a hundred-thousandfold observance thereof in
presence.

Obedience (to God) and faith are praiseworthy now; after !u.io
death, when all is plainly shown, they will be spurned.

“Inasmuch as the unseen and the absent and the veil arc
better, close thy mouth : ’tis better for us to be silent.

O brother, refrain^ from speech: God himself will make

^ Literally, “withhold thy hand.”


198 MATHNAWI, BOOK I

manifest the knowledge that is with Him (in His posses-

' Witness enough for the sun is its face: what thing is the
greatest witness (of all)? God/’

‘‘Nay, speak I will, since both God and the angels and the
men of learning are allied in setting forth (this truth).

3645 God and the angels and those learned in the sciences
divinity) bear witness that there is no Lord except Him who
endureth for ever.”

Since God hath given testimony, who are the angels, that
they should be associated in the testimony ?

(They are associated) because unsound (weak) eyes and
hearts cannot support the radiance and (clear) testimony of
the Sun,

Like a bat, which cannot bear the glow of the sun and
abandons hope.

Know, then, that the angels, as we also, are helpers (co-
witnesses) — displayers of the sun in heaven —

3650 Who say, “We have derived (our) light from a Sun, we have
shone upon the weak, like vicegerents (of a mighty King).”

(Whether they be like) the new moon or the moon seven days
old or the full moon, every angel has his (particular) rank in
respect of light and (spiritual) worth.

Every angel, according to their (different) degrees, has (a
portion of) that radiance, consisting of three or four (pairs of)
luminous wings.

Just as the wings of human intellects, amongst which there
is great difference (in quality).

Hence the associate of every human being in good and evil
is that angel whose dignity is corresponding to his or hers.

3655 The stars shine, for the sake of guidance, upon the dim-
sighted man who cannot bear even (the light of) the moon.

How the Prophet^ on whom be peace ^ said to Zayd, ^'Do not tell

this mystery more plainly than this^ and take care to comply

(with the religious law)P

The Prophet said, “My Companions are (like) the stars, a
candle to travellers (on the Way), and meteors to be cast at the
devils.”

If every one had the eye and the strength to receive light
from the sun of heaven,

No moon and stars would be needed to serve as witnesses to
(the existence of) a sun.

The Moon (the Prophet) is saying to earth and cloud and
shadow, “I am a man, I am one like you, (hut) it is revealed to
me (that your God is one God).


THE VISION OF ZAYD


199

Like you, I was dark in my nature: the Sun's revelation gave 3660
me such a light as this.

I have a certain darkness in comparison with the (spiritual)
suns, (but) I have light for the darknesses of (human) souls.

I am faint (less bright than the Sun) in order that thou mayst
be able to bear (my beams), for thou art not the man for (a man
who can bear) the most radiant Sun.

I was woven (mingled) together, like honey and vinegar, that
I might find the way to (cure) sickness of heart

Since thou hast recovered from thine illness, O thou (that
wert) in thrall (to it), leave the vinegar and continue to eat the
honey.”

(If) the throne of the heart has become restored to soundness 30G5
and purged of sensuality, thereon the Merciful God is seated on
His Throne,

After this, God controls the heart without intermediary, since
the heart has attained to this relation (with Him).

This discourse hath no end. Where is Zayd, that 1 may
counsel him not to seek notoriety?

The {author^s) return to the story of Zayd,

You will not find Zayd now, for he has fled: he has darted
away from the shoe-row and dropped his shoes.

Who arc you (that you shoxild hope to find him)? Zayd
cannot even find himself, (he has vanished) like the star on
which the sun shone.

You will find neither mark nor trace of him, you will not find 3670
a straw (star) in the straw-strewn Way (the Milky Way).

Our senses and finite speech (reason) are obliterated in the
knowledge and wisdom of our (Uivine) King.

Their (the God-intoxicated mystics’) senses and under-
standings within (them) are (tovssed), wave on wave, in (the
sea of) they are assembled before Us,

When night cotnes, ’tis again the time of (bearing) the burden :
the stars, which had become hidden, go (again) to work.

God gives back to the senseless ones their (lost) senses : (they
return to consciousness) troop after troop, with rings (of mystic
knowledge) in their cars,

Dancing, waving their hands in praise (of God), triumphing 3075
(and crying), I.rord, Thou hast brought us to life.”

Those crumbled skins and bones have become (like) horsemen
and have raised the dust :

At Resurrection both the thankful and the ungrateful rush
along from non-existence towards existence.

Why do you turn away your head and pretend not to see?

^ Literally, '‘liver,’*


200 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Did you not turn away your head at first, (when you were) in
non-existence (and disbelieved that you would ever come into
existence) ? ^ .

You had planted your foot (firmly) in non-existence, saying,
“Who will uproot me from my place?

36S0 Are not you beholding the action of your Lord^, who dragged
you (into existence) by the forelock,

Until He drew you into (all) these various states (of being),
which were not in your thought or fancy?

That non-existence is always His slave: work (in His service),
O demon! Solomon is living.

The demon is making large howls like watering-troughs: he
dare not say a word in refusal or in retort.

Look at yourself, how you are trembling with fear (of non-
existence) : know that non-existence also is constantly trembling
(lest God should bring it into existence).

3685 And if you are grasping at (worldly) dignities, ^tis from fear
too that you are suffering agony of spirit.

Except love of the most beauteous God everything, though
(outwardly) it is (pleasant like) eating sugar, is (in truth) agony
of spirit.

VCliat is agony of spirit? To advance towards death and not
grasp the Water of Life.

People fix both their eyes on earth and death: they have a
hundred doubts concerning the Water of Life.

Strive that the hundred doubts may become ninety (may
decrease): go (towards God) in the night (of this world), for if
you slumber, the night will go (from you).

3690 In the dark night seek that (shining) Day : put in front (follow)
the darkness-consuming Reason.

In the evil-coloured night there is much good : the Water of
Life is the mate of darkness.

How is it possible to lift up the head from slumber, whilst
you are sowing a hundred such seeds of slothfulness?

Dead (heavy) slumber and dead (unlawful) food became
friends^: the merchant fell asleep and the night-thief got to
work.

Do you not know who your enemies are? Those made of
fire® are enemies to the existence of those made of earth^.

3695 Fire is the enemy of water and its children, even as water is
an enemy to the life of fire.

Water kills fire because it is the enemy and foe of the children
of water.


^ Literally, ‘‘the Diviae action in regard to you.**
^ I.e. spiritual lethargy is closely allied with sm.

® The devils.

* Mankind.


201


‘UMAR IN THE BURNING CITY

To proceed^, this fire is the fire of lust, wherein is the root
of sin and error.

The external fire may be quenched by some water, (but) the
fire of lust is bringing (you) to Hell.

_ The fire of lust is not allayed by water, because it has the
(insatiable) nature of Hell in respect of (inflicting) torment.

What is the remedy for the fire of lust? The light of the 3700
Religion: your (the Moslems’) light is the (means of) extin-
guishing the fire of the infidels.

What kills this fire? The Light of God. Make the light of
Abraham your teacher,

That this body of yours, which resembles wood (faggots),
may be delivered from the fire of the Nimrod-like flesh (nafs).

Fiery lust is not diminished by indulging it: it is diminished,
without any escape (inevitably), by leaving it (ungratified).

So long as thou art laying faggots on a fire, how will the fire
be extinguished by a carrier of faggots*?

When thou withholdest the faggots, the fire dies out, because
fear of God carries (as it were) water to the fire.

How should the fire blacken the beauteous fece (of a soul)
which lays (on itself) rose-colour (derived) from the fear of
God that is in (men’s) hearts?


flow a conflagration occurred in the city {Medina) in the days
of ‘ Umar, may God be well-pleased with him.

A conflagration occurred in the time of ‘Umar: it was de-
vouring stones as though they were dry wood.

It fell upon buildings and houses, until (at last) it darted at
the wings and nests of birds.

Half the city caught fire from the flames: water was afraid
of it (the fire) and amazed.

Some intelligent persons were throwing skins of water and i?i(>
vinegar on the fire,

(But) out of spite (obstinacy) the fire was increasing: aid was
coming to it from One who is infinite*.

'The people came in haste to ‘Umar, saying, “Our fire will
not be quenched at all by water.”

He said, “That fire is one of God’s signs: ’tis a flame from
the fire of your wickedness.

Discard water and deal out bread (in charity), discard avarice
if ye are my people (followers).”

The folk said to him, “We have opened our doors, we have .-,715
been bountiful and devoted to generosity.”

’ Literally, “after that.”

* Or, with incorrect rhyme, “by carrying faggots.”

* Or, with incorrect rhyme, “from (the realm of) infinity.”


202 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

He replied, Ye have given bread by rule and habit, ye have
not opened your hands for the sake of God —

(Only) for glory and for ostentation and for pride, not be-
cause of fear and piety and supplication.’’

Wealth is seed, and do not lay it in every salty ground: do
not put a sword in the hand of every highwayman.

Distinguish the friends of the Religion {ahUi Din) from the
enemies of God {ahl-i kin): seek the man that sits with God,,
and sit vith him,

3720 Every one shows favour to his own folk : the fool (who shows
favour to the foolish) thinks he has really done (good and religious)
work.

How an enemy spat in the face of the Prince of the Faithful, "‘All,

may God honour his person^ and how ^AU dropped the sword

from his hand.

Learn how to act sincerely^ from ‘All : know that the Lion of
God (‘All) was purged of (all) deceit.

In fighting against the infidels he got the upper hand of (van-
quished) a certain knight, and quickly drew a sword and made
haste (to slay him).

He spat on the face of ‘AH, the pride of every prophet and
every saint ;

He spat on the countenance before which the face of the
moon bows low in the place of worship.

3725 ‘AH at once threw his sword away and relaxed (his efforts) in
fighting him.

That champion was astounded by this act and by his showing
forgiveness and mercy without occasion.

He said, “You lifted your keen sword against me: why have
you flung it aside and spared me?

What did you see that was better than combat with me, so
that you have become slack in hunting me down?

What did you see, so that such anger as yours abated, and so
that such a lightning flashed and (then) recoiled?

3730 What did you see, that from seeing (only) the reflexion
thereof a flame appeared in my heart and soul?

What did you see, beyond (material) existence and space,
that was better than life? — and (so) you gave me life.

In bravery you are the Lion of the Lord: in generosity who
indeed knows who (what) you are?

In generosity you are (like) Moses’ cloud in the desert,
whence came the dishes of food and bread incomparable.”

The clouds give wheat which man with toil makes cooked
(easy to digest) and sweet as honey.

3735 (But) Moses’ cloud spread the wings of mercy and gave

^ I.e, to act for God’s sake alone, without any regard to self-interest.


‘ALf AND THE INFIDEL KNIGHT 203

cooked and sweet food that was (ready to be eaten) without
trouble.

For the sake of those (beggars) who partook of its bounty,
its (the cloud’s) mercy raised a banner (displayed itself) in the
world.

During forty years that ration and largesse did not fail the
hopeful people (of Israel) for a single day,

Until they too, because of their vileness, arose and demanded
leeks and green herbs and lettuce.

O people of Ahmad (Mohammed), who are of the noble, (for
you) that food is continuing till the Resurrection.

When (the Prophet’s saying), “I pass the night with my 37^0
Lord,” was uttered, (the words) “He gives (me) food” and
“He gives (me) drink” referred metaphorically to (spiritual)
food (and drink).

Accept this (saying) without any (perverse) interpretation, that
it may come into your throat (as agreeably) as honey and milk.

Because interpretation (alteration of the meaning) is a re-
jection of the gift, since he (the interpreter) regards that real
(original) meaning as faulty.

The view that it is faulty arises from the weakness of his
understanding; Universal Reason is the kernel, and our reason
is like the rind.

Alter yourself, not the Traditions (of the Prophet): abuse
your (dull) brain, not the rose-garden (the true sense which
you cannot apprehend).

“O ‘AH, thou who art all mind and eye, relate a little of that .57+5
which thou hast seen !

The sword of thy forbearance hath rent my soul, the water
of thy knowledge hath purified my earth. _

'Pell it forth! I know that these are His (God’s) mysteries,
because ’tis His work (way) to kill without sword.

He that works without tools and without limbs. He that
bestows these profitable gifts.

Causes the intelligence to taste myriads of wines in such wise
that eyes and ears are unaware.

Tell it forth, O falcon of the empyrean that findest goodly ’,750
prey, that (I may know) what thou hast seen at this time from
the Maker.

I’hine eye has learned to perceive the Unseen, (while) the
eyes of bystanders are sealed.”

One man is beholding a moon plainly, while another sees the
world dark.

And another beholds three moons together. These three
persons (beholders) are seated in one place, yea (verily).

The eyes of all three are open, and the ears of all three arc sharp
(attentive) ; (they are) fastened on thee and in flight from me.


204 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

3755 Is this an enchantment of the eye? (Or) is it a marvellous
hidden grace? On thee is the form of the wolf, and on me is
the quality (beauty) of Joseph.

If the worlds are eighteen thousand and more, these eighteen
(thousand) are not subject (accessible) to every eye.

“Reveal the mystery, O ‘All, thou who art approved (by
God), O thou who art good fate after evil fate.

Either do thou declare that which thy reason hath found, or
I will tell that which hath shone forth on me.

From thee it shone forth on me: how shouldst thou hide it?
Without tongue thou art darting rays of light, like the moon.

3760 But if the moon’s orb come to speech, it more quickly leads
the night- travellers into the (right) way.

They become safe from error and heedlessness : the voice of
the moon prevails over the voice of the ghoul.

Inasmuch as the moon (even) without speech is showing the
way, when it speaks it becomes light upon light.

Since thou art the gate of the city of Knowledge, since thou
art the beams of the sun of Clemency,

Be open, O Gate, to him that seeks the gate, so that by means
of thee the husks may reach the core.

3765 Be open unto everlasting, O Gate of Mercy, 0 Entrance-hall
to None is like unto Him''

Every air and mote is indeed a place for vision (of God),
(but so long as it is) unopened, who says “Yonder is a door”?

Unless the Watcher open a door, this idea never stirs within.

When a door is opened, he (on whom this idea has dawned)
becomes amazed, grows wings, and begins to fly on (the wings
of) the idea.

A careless man suddenly found the treasure in the ruin : after
that, he was hastening to (search in) every ruin.

3770 Till you gain the pearl from one dervish, how should you
seek the pearl from another dervish?

Though opinion run with its own feet for (many) years, it
will not pass beyond the cleft of its own nostrils.

Say, are you seeing aught except your nose? Say, how will
you see if you turn up your nose (in self-conceit)?

How that infidel asked "AU, may God honour his person^ sayings

“ Since thou wert victorious over such a man as I am, how didst

thou drop the sword from thy hand?"

He said, “Speak, O Prince of the Faithful, that my soul may
stir within my body, like the embryo.”

How hath the embryo the means (of stirring) during the
period when it is ruled (by the stars)? It comes (turns) from
the stars towards the sun.


‘ALf AND THE INFIDEL KNIGHT 205

When the time comes for the embryo to receive
spirit, at that time the sun becomes its helper.

This embryo is brought into movement by the sun, for the
sun is quickly endowing it with spirit.

From the other stars this embryo received only an impression,
until the sun shone upon it.

By which way did it become connected in the womb with
the beauteous sun?

By the hidden way that is remote from our sense-perception.

The sun in heaven hath many ways :

The way whereby gold receives nourishment, and the way 3780
whereby the (common) stone is made a jacinth,

And the way whereby it makes the ruby red, and the way
whereby it gives the lightning-flash to the (iron) horse-shoe,

And the way whereby it ripens the fruit, and the way whereby
it gives heart to one distraught (with fear).

Say it forth, O falcon with shining wings who hast learned
(to be familiar) with the King and with his fore-arm.

Say it forth, 0 royal falcon that dost catch the ‘Anqa, O thou
that dost vanquish an army by thyself, not with (the aid of)
an army.

Thou alone art the (whole) community, thou art one and a 3785
hundred thousand. Say it forth, O thou to whose falcon thy
slave has fallen a prey.

Wherefore this mercy in the place of vengeance? Whose way
is it to give the hand to a dragon? ’’

How the Prince of the Faithful made anszver (and explained) what
was the reason of his dropping the sword from his hand on that
occasion.

He said, am wielding the sword for God's sake, 1 am the
servant of God, I am not under the command of the body.

I am the Lion of God, I am not the lion of passion : my
deed bears witness to my religion.

In war I am (manifesting the truth of) thou didst not throw
when thou threwest: I am (but) as the sword, and the wielder is
the (Divine) Sun.

I have removed the baggage of self out of the way, I have 3700
deemed (what is) other than God to be non-existence.

I am a shadow, the Sun is my lord; 1 am the chamberlain,

1 am not the curtain (which prevents approach) to Him.

I am filled with the pearls of union, like a (jewelled) sword:
in battle I make (men) living, not slain.

Blood does not cover the sheen of my sword : how should the
wind sweep away my clouds ?

I am not a straw, I am a mountain of forbearance and patience
and justice : how should the fierce wind carry off the mountain?


2o 6 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

3795 That which is removed from its place by a wind is rubbish,
for indeed the contrary winds are many.

The wind of anger and the wind of lust and the wind of
greed swept away him that performed not the (ritual) prayers.

“I am a mountain, and my being is His building; and if I
become like a straw, my wind (the wind that moves me) is
His wind.

My longing is not stirred save by His wind; my captain is
naught but love of the One.

A^ger is king over kings, and to me it is a slave : even anger
I have bound under the bridle.

3800 The sword of my forbearance hath smitten the neck of my
anger; the anger of God hath come on me like mercy.

I am plunged in light although my roof is ruined; I have
become a garden although I am (styled) Bil Turab (the father
of dust).

Since (the thought of something) other than God has inter-
vened, it behoves (me) to sheathe my sword,

That my name may be he loves for God's sake^ that my desire
may be he hates for God's sake^

That my generosity may be he gives for God's sake, that my
being may be he withholds for God's sake,

3805 My stinginess is for God’s sake, my bounty is for God’s sake
alone: I belong entirely to God, I do not belong to any one
(else) ;

And that which I am doing for God’s sake is not (done in)
conformity, it is not fancy and opinion, it is naught but intuition.

I have been freed from effort and search, I have tied my
sleeve to the skirt of God.

If I am flying, I behold the place to which I soar ; and if I
am circling, I behold the axis on which I revolve ;

And if I am dragging a burden, I know whither: I am the
moon, and the Sun is in front of me as the guide.”

3810 There is no means (possibility) of communicating more than
this to the people: in the river there is no room for the Sea.

I speak low according to the measure of (their) understand-
ings: ’tis no fault, this is the practice of the Prophet.

“lam free from self-interest: hear the testimony of a freeman,
for the testimony of slaves is not worth two barleycorns.”

In the religious law the testimony of a slave has no value at
(the time of) litigation and judgement.

(Even) if thousands of slaves bear witness on thy behalf, the
law does not accept their testimony as worth a straw.

3815 In God’s sight the slave of lust is worse than menials and
slaves brought into servitude,

For the latter becomes free at a single word from his master,
while the former lives sweet but dies sour and bitter.


‘ali and the infidel knight 207

The slave of lust hath no (means of) release at all except
through the grace of God and His special favour.

He has fallen into a pit that has no bottom, and that is his
(own) sin : it is not (Divine) compulsion and injustice.

He has cast himself into such a pit that I find no rope capable
of (reaching) its bottom.

I will make an end. If this discourse go further, not only 3S20
hearts but rocks will bleeds

(If) these hearts^ have not bled, ’tis not because of (their)
hardness, 'tis (because of) perplexity and preoccupation and
ill-fatedness.

They will bleed one day when blood is no use to them : do
thou bleed at a time when (thy) blood is not rejected.

Inasmuch as the testimony of slaves is not accepted, the
approved witness is he that is not the slave of the ghoul (of
sensuality).

(The words) JVe have sent thee as a witness came in the
Warning (the Qur’an), because he (the Prophet) was entirely
free^ from (creaturely) existence.

‘‘Since I am free, how should anger bind me? Nothing is 3S25
here but Divine qualities. Come in!

Come in, for the grace of (jod hath made thee free, because
His mercy had the precedence over His wrath.

Come in now, for thou hast escaped from the peril: thou
wert a (common) stone, the Elixir hath made thee a jewel.

Thou hast been delivered from unbelief and its thorn-
thicket: blossom like a rose in the cypress-garden of IIu
(God).

Thou art 1 and I am thou, O illustrious one: thou wert ‘All —
how should I kill ‘All ?

Thou hast committed a sin better than any act of piety, thou sfSio
hast traversed Heaven in a single moment,”

Very fortunate (was) the sin which the man committed: do
not rose-leaves spring from a thorn?

Was not the sin of ‘Umar and his attempt on (the life of) the
Prophet leading him to the gate of acceptance?

Was not Pharaoh because of the magic of the magicians
drawing them (to himself), and did not (spiritual) fortune come
to their aid?

Had it not been for their magic and denial (of Moses), who
would have brought them to rebellious Pharaoh?

How would they have seen the rod and the miracles? Dis- 3835
obedience (to God) became obedience, O disobedient people *.

^ Literally, “what of the liver? for the hard rock will become blood.’'

- Literally, “liverii.*’

® Literally, “free, the son of the free.*’

* Ix the sin of the mu^ijicians ultimately led them to faith in God.


2o 8 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

God hath smitten the neck of despair, inasmuch as sin and
disobedience have become obedience.

Since He changes evil acts (into good), He makes it (the
disobedience) an act of obedience in despite of slanderers (devils).

By this (mercy of God) the stoned (accursed) Devil is driven
away and bursts with envy and is cloven asunder.

He strives to foster a sin (in us) and by means of that sin
bring us into a pit ;

3840 When he sees that the sin has become an act of obedience
(to God), there comes round for him an unblest hour.

‘'Come in! I open the door to thee. Thou spattest (on me)
and I give thee a present.

Such things I am giving to the doer of iniquity : (thou seest)
in what fashion I lay my head before the left foot^.

What then do I bestow on the doer of righteousness? Know
thou, (I bestow) treasures and kingdoms everlasting.

How the Prophet^ on whom hepeace^ said in the ear of the stirrup-

holder of the Prince of the Faithful {^AU)^ may God honour his

pei'sony “/ tell thee^ ^ Ali will be slain by thy handP

I am such a man that the honey of my kindness did not
become poison in wrath (even) against my murderer.

38^5 The Prophet said in the ear of my servant that one day he
would sever this head of mine from my neck.

The Prophet by (Divine) inspiration informed my friend that
in the end my destruction would be (wrought) by his hand.

He (my friend) says, ‘Kill me first, in order that this hateful
crime may not proceed from me.’

I say, ‘Since my death is (to come) from thee, how can I
seek to evade the destiny (of God) ? ’

He falls before me, saying, ‘O generous man, for God’s sake
cleave me in twain,

3850 That this evil end may not come upon me, and that my soul
may not bum (with grief) for (thee who art) its (very) life.’

I say, ‘ Go : the Pen (of Divine ordainment) is dry^ ; by that
Pen many a (lofty) landmark^ is overthrown.

There is no hatred of thee in my soul, because I do not
regard this (act) as (proceeding) from thee.

Thou art God’s instrument, God’s hand is the (real) agent:
how should I assail and oppose God’s instrument?”’

He (the knight) said, “For what reason, then, is retaliation
(sanctioned)? ” “ ’Tis from God, too,” said ‘All, “and that is a
hidden mystery.

^ Le. “ I expose myself to contumely from the wicked.”

® /,e. the Divine decree is written and unalterably fixed.

® Or, “many a man of mark.”


'ali and his murderer 209

If He takes offence at His own act, (yet) He causes gardens 3855
(of good) to grow from that taking offence.

It beseems Him to take offence at His own act, inasmuch as
in vengeance and mercy He is One.

In this city of phenomena He is the Prince ; in (all) the realms
(of the world) He is the Ruler.

If He breaks His own instrument. He mends that which has
become broken.”

Recognise, O noble sir, the indication of (the text), {Whatever)
verse We shall cancel or cause to be forgotten^ followed by We shall
bring a better.

Every (religious) law that He (God) has cancelled — He has >S6o
taken away grass and brought roses in exchange.

Night cancels the business of day : behold an inanimatencss
(inertia) that enlightens the intellect !

Again, night is cancelled by the light of day, so that the
inanimateness is consumed by that fire-kindling one.

Although that sleep and rest are darkness, is not the Water
of Life within the darkness?

Did not minds become refreshed in that darkness? Did not
a pause (in recitation) become the source of (increased beauty
in) the voice?

For contraries are manifested by means of contraries: in the 5865
black core (of the heart) lie (God) created the everlasting light
(of love).

The wars of the Prophet became the pivot (determining cause)
of peace : the peace of this latter age was (produced) from those
wars.

That heart-ravisher cut off hundreds of thousands of heads,
in order that the heads of the (whole) world’s people might win
security.

The gardener lops the harmful bough, in order that the date-
palm may gain (tallness of) stature and goodness.

The expert (gardener) digs up the weeds from the garden, in
order that his garden and fruit may look flourishing.

The physician extracts bad teeth, in order that the beloved 3870
(patient) may be saved from pain and sickness.

Many advantages are (concealed) within defects : for martyrs
there is life in death.

When the (martyr’s) throat has been cut that swallowed
the daily bread, (the spiritual blessings implied in the text)
receiving the {Divine) bounty^ rejoicings shall be delicious (to
him).

When the throat of an animal is cut duly (in the manner
prescribed by law), there grows (from it) the throat of man\
and its excellence is increased (thereby).

^ Because the slaughtered animal is eaten and assimilated by man.


14


210 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

When a (martyred) man’s throat is cut, come, consider what
the result will be ! Judge of this (case) by the analogy of that
(case).

3875 A third throat will be born, and care of it will be (taken by)
the sherbet of God and His lights.

The throat that has been cut drinks (the Divine) sherbet,
but (only) the throat that has been delivered from Nay and
has died in Yea.

Make an end, O pusillanimous short-fingered (infirm) one!
How long will the life of thy spirit be (sustained) by bread?

Like the willow, thou hast no fruit, because thou hast lost
thine honour for the sake of white bread.

If the sensual soul cannot refrain from this bread, take the
elixir and turn thy copper into gold.

3880 Wouldst thou wash Ay garment (clean), O so-and-so, do not
avert thy face from Ae bleachers’ quarter.

Although the bread has broken thy fast, cling to Him that
binds what is broken, and ascend I

Inasmuch as His hand binds what is broken, it follows that
His breaking is assuredly mending.

If thou break it. He will say to thee, “Come, make it whole
(again)”; and Aou hast neither hand nor foot (Aou art
helpless).

Therefore He (alone) has Ae right to break, for He (alone)
can mend what has been broken.

3885 He Aat knows how to sew (together) knows how to tear
(asunder) ; whatsoever He sells. He buys (someAing) better (in
exchange).

He lays the house in ruins, upside down; then in one moment
He makes it more habitable (than it was before).

If He sever one head from Ae body, He at once raises up
hundreds of Aousands of heads (for Ae beheaded person).

If He had not ordained a retaliation upon Ae guilty, or if
He had not said, “In retaliation there is (for you) a life^^

Who would have Ae stomach (would dare) of himself (on
his own responsibility) to wield (draw) a sword against him that
is a Arall to Ae decree of God? —

3890 Because every one whose eyes He (God) hath opened would
know Aat the slayer was constrained (to slay) by (Divine)
predestination.

Any one on whom that predestination became a collar (any
one subjected to it) would strike a sword-blow even at the head
of his (ovm) child.

Go, fear (God) and do not rail at the wicked: know thine
own impotence before the snare of the (Divine) decree.


THE SELF-CONCEIT OF ADAM


211


How Adaniy on whom be peace, marvelled at the perdition
of Iblis and showed vanity.

One day Adam looked with contempt and scorn on Iblis
who is damned.

He behaved with self-conceit and became self-approving: he
laughed at the plight of accursed Iblis.

The jealousy of God cried out (against him) — O chosen one, 3S95
thou art ignorant of the hidden mysteries (of His providence).

If He should turn the fur inside out^, He would tear up from
root and bottom (even) the (firmest) mountain (of faith);

At that instant He would rend the veil of (put to shame) a
hundred Adams and bring (to light) a hundred Devils newly
converted to Islam.”

Adam said, “I repent of this look; I will not think so dis-
respectfully again.”

O Help of them that call for help, lead us (aright)! There is
no (cause for) pride in knowledge or riches.

Do not let a heart stray that Thou hast guided by Thy grace, 3900
and avert the evil which the Pen has written.

Let the evil of Thy ordainment pass from our souls: do
not cut us off from those who are well-pleased*-^ (with Thee).

There is naught more bitter than separation from Thee:
without Thy protection there is naught but perplexity.

Our (worldly) goods waylay (and plunder) our (spiritual)
goods: our bodies tear the garment (of spirituality) from our
souls.

Inasmuch as (the evil wrought by) our hand devours (the
good towards which we move) our foot, how shall any one save
his soul without Thy security?

And (even) if (unaided) he save his soul from these awful 3905
dangers, he will (only) have saved a stock of misfortune and fear,

Because the soul, when it is not united with the Beloved, is
blind and blue (miserable) with itself for ever.

When Thou wilt not give him admission (to Thy presence)

— even suppose he has saved his soul, regard as dead the soul
that would live without Thee.

If Thou art upbraiding Thy slaves, that is suitable to Thee,

O Thou whose every wish is fulfilled.

And if Thou say that the sun and moon are scum, and if Thou
say that the (straight) stature of the cypress is (bent) double,

And if Thou call the empyrean and the sky contemptible, and v^to
if Thou say that the mine and the sea are poor —

^ l,e, “if God were to manifest His wrath instead of His mercy or His
mercy instead of His wrath.”

® Literally, “the brethren of acquiescence.”


14-2


212 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

That is proper in reference to Thy perfection: Thine is the
power of perfecting (all) mortalities,

For Thou art holy (and free) from danger and from non-
existence : Thou art He that brings the non-existent ones into
being and endows (them with existence).

He that made to grow can burn (destroy), because when He

has torn, He can sew (mend). ^ i / 1 \ t t

Every autumn He burns (withers) the garden; (then) lie
makes to grow again the rose that dyes (the garden)^,

3915 Saying, ‘‘ O thou who wert withered, come forth, be fresh, once

more be fair and of fair renown r’

The eye of the narcissus became blind: He restored it; the
throat of the reed was cut: He himself fostered it^ again (and
revived it).

Since we are made (by God) and are not makers, we are not
(entitled to be anything) but humble and content.

We all are of the flesh and busy with fleshliness: if Thou call
us not (to Thyself), we all are Ahrimans (Devils).

(If) we have been delivered from Ahriman, (it is only) be-
cause Thou hast redeemed our souls from blindness.

3920 Thou art the Guide of every one that hath life : who (of what
account) is the blind man without staff and guide?

Excepting Thee (alone), whatsoever is sweet or unsweet is
man-destroying^ and the essence of fire.

Any one to whom fire is a refuge and support becomes both
a Magian and a Zoroaster.

Everything except Allah is vain : verily the grace of Allah is
a cloud pouring abundantly and continually.

Returning to the story of the Prince of the Faithful, ^Ali — 7nay
God honour his person! — and how generously he behaved to
his murderer.

Go back to ‘All and his murderer, and the kindness he showed
to the murderer, and his superiority (moral and spiritual ex-
cellence).

3925 He said, “Day and night I see the murderer with my eyes,
(but) I have no anger against him,

Because death has become sweet as manna to me : my death
has laid fast hold of resurrection^.’'

The death of deathlessness is lawful to us, the provision of
unprovidedness is a bounty to us.

’Tis death outwardly but life inwardly: apparently *tis a

^ I.e, “fills the garden with colour.”

2 Or, “played on it (and breathed life into it),” i.i\ He cut the reed
and made it a fiute.

* Literally, “man-burning.”

^ I.e, “my death holds and possesses (as its real nature) resurrection.”


‘ALi AND HIS MURDERER 213

cutting-off rdecease)^, in secret (in reality) ’tis permanence (life
without end).

To the embryo in the womb birth is a going (to another state
of existence) : in the world it (the embryo) blossoms anew^.

“ Since I have intense love and longing for death, the prohi- 3930
bition do not cast yourselves {into destruction) is (meant) for me,

Because (only) the sweet berry is prohibited ; (for) how should
it become necessary to prohibit the sour one?

The berry that has a sour kernel and rind — its very sourness
and disagreeableness are (serve as) a prohibition of it.

To me the berry of dying has become sweet: (the text) 7 iayy
they are living has come (from God) on my account.

Slay me, my trusty friends, slay me, vile as I am: verily, in
my being slain is my life for evermore.

Verily, in my death is my life, O youth — how long shall 1 3935
be parted from my home? Until when?

If there were not in my staying (in this world) my separation
(from God), He would not have said, ‘ Verily^ we are returning
to Himr^

The returning one is he that comes back to his (native) city,
and (fleeing) from the revolution of Time approaches the Unity.


How the stirrup-holder of ^ Aliy may God honour his person^ came
{to hirn)y sayings For God^s sake, kill me and deliver me from
this doomF

He came back, saying, * O ‘All, kill me quickly, that I may not
see that bitter moment and hour.

Shed my blood, I make it lawful to thee, so that my eye may
not behold that resurrection^®.

I said, ‘ If every atom should become a murderer and, dagger ',94^^
in hand, go to attack thee.

None (of them) could cut from thee the tip of a single hair,
since the Pen has written against thee such a line (of doom).

But do not grieve: I am intercessor for thee: I am the spirit
master, I am not the body^s slave.

This body hath no value in my sight: without my body I am
the noble (in spirit), the son of the noble.

Dagger and sword have become my sweet basil: my death
has become my banquet and narcissus-plot.’ ”

He that hamstrings (mortifies) his body in this fashion, how 3945
' should he covet the Princedom and the Caliphate?

^ Literally, '‘its outward (aspect) is cut short.”

“ And, by the same analogy, death opens a new world to the spirit.

* /.a, “ do not let me be raised from the dead with this crime to answer
for.”


214 MATHNAWf, BOOK I

Outwardly he strives after power and authority, (but only)
that he may show to princes the (right) way and judgement ;

That he may give another spirit to the Princedom; that he
may give fruit to the palm-tree of the Caliphate.


Explaining that the motive of the Prophet^ on whom he peace ^ in
seeking to conquer Mecca and other [places) than Mecca was not
love of worldly dominion^ inasmuch as he has said “ This world
is a carcase^^ but that on the contrary it was hy the command
[of God).

Likewise the Prophet’s struggle to conquer Mecca — how can
he be suspected of (being inspired by) love of this world?

He who on the day of trial shut his eyes and heart to tlie
treasury of the Seven Heavens,

3950 (When) the horizons of all the Seven Heavens were full of
houris and genies (who had come) to gaze upon him,

Having arrayed themselves for his sake — how indeed should
he care for anything except the Beloved?

He had become so filled with magnification of God, that even
those nearest to God would find no way (of intruding) there.

‘Hn Us (in Our unity) is no room for a prophet sent as an
apostle, nor yet for the Angels or the Spirit. Do ye, therefore,
understand ! ”

He (also) said, “ W'e are md zdgh (that is, Our eye did not rove),
we are not (looking for carrion) like crows [zdgh); We are
intoxicated with (enraptured by) the Dyer, we are not in-
toxicated with the garden (of flowers with their many dyes).”

3955 Inasmuch as to the eye of the Prophet the treasuries of the
celestial spheres and intelligences seemed (worthless) as a straw,
What, then, would Mecca and Syria and ‘Iraq be (worth to
him), that he should show fight and longing (to gain possession
of them)?

That thought and opinion (of his motive) is the hypocrite’s,
who judges (the Prophet) from the analogy of his own wicked
soul.

When you make yellow glass a veil (between your eyes and
the sun), you see all the sunlight yellow.

Break those blue and yellow glasses, in order that you may
know (distinguish) the dust and the man (who is concealed
by ia

3960 The dust (of the body) has lifted up its head (risen) around
the (spiritual) horseman: you have fancied the dust to be the
man of God.

Iblis saw (only) the dust, and said, “How should this off-
spring of clay (Adam) be superior to me of the fiery brow? ”


THE UNWORLDLINESS OF THE PROPHET 215

So long as thou art regarding the holy (prophets and saints)
as men, know that that view is an inheritance from Iblfs.

If thou art not the child of Iblis, O contumacious one, then
how has the inheritance of that cur come to thee?

“ I am not a cur, I am the Lion of God, a worshipper of God:
the lion of God is he that has escaped from (phenomenal)
form.

The lion of this world seeks a prey and provision ; the lion 3965
of the Lord seeks freedom and death.

Inasmuch as in death he sees a hundred existences, like the
moth he burns away (his own) existence.’’

Desire for death became the badge^ of the sincere, for this
word (declaration) was (made) a test for the Jews.

He (God) said in the Qur‘an, “O people of the Jews, death
is treasure and gain to the sincere.

Even as there is desire for profit (in the hearts of the worldly),
the desire to win death is better than that (in the eyes of the
sincere),

0 Jews, for the sake of (being held in) honour by men of 3970
worth, let this wish be uttered on your tongues.”

Not a single Jew had so much courage (as to respond), when
Mohammed raised this banner (gave this challenge).

He said, “If they should utter this on their tongues, truly
not one Jew would be left in the world.”

Then the Jews brought the property (tribute in kind) and
land-tax, saying, “Do not put us to shame, O Lamp (of the
world).”

“There is no end in sight to this discourse: give me thy
hand**^, since thine eye hath seen the Friend.”

How the Prince of the Faithful^ ^ AH — may God honour his person!

— said to his antagonist^ “ When thou didst spit in my face^

my fleshly self was aroused and I could no longer act with entire

sincerity {towards Godfl: that hindered me from slaying thee'"

The Prince of the Faithful said to that youth, “In the hour 3973
of battle, O knight,

When thou didst spit in my face, my fleshly self was aroused
and my (good) disposition was corrupted.

Half (of my fighting) came to be for God’s sake, and half
(for) idle passion: in God’s affair partnership^ is not allowable.

Thou art limned by the hand of the Lord: thou art God’s
(work), thou art not made by me.

1 Literally, ‘^collar/’

These words are addressed by *A1£ to the infidel knight.

* Literally, ‘‘acting sincerely (towards God) was no more.**

* Le. to associate the worship and service of God with any other object.


2i6 mathnawi, book I

Break God’s image, (but only) by God’s command; cast
(a stone) at the Beloved’s glass, (but only) the Beloved’s
stone.”

3980 The fire-worshipper heard this, and a light appeared in his
heart, so that he cut a girdle^.

He said, ‘T was sowing the seed of wrong: I fancied thee
(to be) otherwise (than thou art).

Thou hast (really) been the balance (endued) with the (just)
nature of the One (God); nay, thou hast been the tongue of
every balance.

Thou hast been my race and stock and kin, thou hast been
the radiance of the candle of my religion.

I am the (devoted) slave of that eye-seeking Lamp from
which thy lamp received splendour.

39S5 I am the slave of the billow of that Sea of Light which brings
a pearl like this into view.

Offer me the profession of the (Moslem) Faith, for I regard
thee as the exalted one of the time.”

Near fifty persons of his kindred and tribe lovingly turned
their faces towards the Religion (of Islam).

By the sword of clemency he (‘AH) redeemed so many throats
of such a multitude from the sword.

The sword of clemency is sharper than the sword of iron;
nay, it is more productive of victory than a hundred armies.

3990 Oh, alas, two mouthfuls were eaten, and thereby the ferment
of thought was frozen up.

A grain of wheat eclipsed the sun of Adam, as the descending
node is (the cause of) eclipse to the brilliance of the full-
moon. *

Behold the beauty of the heart, how its moon scatters the
Pleiades (how its light is broken and disordered) by a single
handful of clay.

When the bread was spirit, it was beneficial ; since it became
form, it rouses disbelief.

M (for example) die green thistles which a camel eats, and
gains from eating tihem a hundred benefits and pleasures :

3995 When the camel from the desert eats those same thistles,
after their greenness is gone and they have become dry,

They rend his palate and cheek — oh, alas that such a nourish-
ing rose became a sword !

^ When the bread was spirit, it was (like) the green tliistles ;
since it became form, it is now dry and gross.

According as thou hadst formerly been in the habit of eating
it, O gracious being.

In die same hope thou (still) art eating this dry stuff, after the
spirit has become mingled with clay.

^ I.e, the sacred thread {kushti) which Zoroastrians wear on their waists.


‘ALf AND THE INFIDEL KNIGHT 217

It has become mixed with earth and dry and flesh-cutting : 4000
abstain now from that herbage, O camel!

The words are coming (forth) very earth-soiled; the water
has become turbid ; stop up the mouth of the well,

That God may again make it pure and sweet, that He who
made it turbid may likewise make it pure.

Patience brings the object of desire, not haste. Have
patience — and God knoweth best what is right.


‘Boos^n


In the Name of God the Merciful the Compassionate


Touching this Second Book (of the Mathnawi)^ part of the
reason of its postponement is (here) set forth, namely, that if
all the Divine Wisdom (shown in any particular act) be made
known to His slave, the slave (absorbed) in (contemplation of)
the benefits of that act will be left without the power to perform
it; and the infinite Wisdom of God will destroy his under-
standing, (so that) he will not engage in that act. Therefore the
High God makes a small portion of that infinite Wisdom (to
be as) a toggle in his nose and leads him towards that act ; for
if He give him no information about those benefits, he will not
move at all, inasmuch as the motive (of human actions) arises
from advantages to ourselves or others ^ for the sake of which
we act accordingly; while (on the other hand), if He should
pour down upon him the (whole) wisdom of that (act), he will
also be unable to move ; just as a camel will not go (forward)
unless there be a toggle in his nose, and if the toggle be (too)
big he will likewise lie down (and refuse to go on). And there
is nothing hut We have the storehouses thereof^ and We do not send
it down but in a certain measure. Without water, earth does not
become a brick, nor (again) does it become a brick when there
is (too) much water. And the heaven^ He raised it and set up
the scales. He giveth every thing by the scale, not without
calculation and balance, save (only) to those who have been
transmuted from the creaturely state of existence and have
become (like those described in the text) And He bestoweth on
whom He pleaseth without calculation^ albeit whoso hath not
tasted (experienced) doth not know.

Some one asked, “What is love?” I answered, “Thou wilt
know when thou becomest (lost in) me.”

Love is uncalculated alfection. For that reason it has been
said to be in reality the attribute of God and unreal in relation
to (man who is) His slave. He {God) loveth them {yuhtbbuhum)
is the entire sum. Which (of them) is (really the subject of the
word yuhibhunahii) they love Him?


^ Literally, *‘to human beings.’^


222


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


In the Name of God the Merciful the Compassionate

This Mathnam has been delayed for a while : an interval was
needed in order that the blood noight turn to milk.

Blood does not become sweet milk until thy fortune gives
birth to a new babe. Hearken well (to my words).

When the Light of God, Husamu’ddm, drew the reins (of
his spirit) back from the zenith of Heaven —

(For) after he had gone in the ascension to (spiritual) realities,
without his (life-giving) springtide the buds (of mystic know-
ledge) were unburst (in my heart) —

5 When (I say) he returned from the Sea towards the shore,
the lyre of the poesy of the Maihnawi became attuned (again).

The Mathnam^ which was the burnisher (purifier) of spirits
— ^his return was the day of (my) seeldng (an auspicious) com-
mencement (for it).

The date of beginning^ this gainful (spiritual) traffic- was in
the year six hundred and sixty-two.

A nightingale went hence and returned: it became a falcon
for hunting these spiritual truths.

May this falcon’s resting-place be the fore-arm of the King !
May this gate (to the Truth) be open to (all) the people unto
everlasting !

10 The bane of this gate is sensuality and lust; else, draught on
draught (of spiritual knowledge) is (to be found) here.

Gullet and mouth are the eye-bandage (which makes you blind)
to yonder world : close this mouth, that you may see (it) plain.

0 mouth, verily thou art the mouth of Hell; and, O world,
thou art like the intermediate stated.

The everlasting light is beside this low world, the pure milk
is beside rivers of blood.

When you take one step in it (the world) without precaution,
your milk will be turned to blood through commixture.

15 ^ Adam took one step in sensual pleasure : separation from his
high place in Paradise became a collar on the neck of his
(fleshly) soul.

The angels were fleeing from him as from a devil: how many
tears did he shed for the sake of a single loaf!

Although the sin which he had compassed was (but) a hair,
yet that hair had grown in his eyes.

Adam was the eye of the Eternal Light : a hair in the eye is
a great mountain.

\ H^^rally, “the rising-point of the date (of composition).”

Literally, “this trading and profit.”

. ® spirit came from God and will return to God. The present life is
Its intermediate state.”


THE FRIEND OF GOD 223

If Adam had taken counsel in that (matter), he would not
have uttered excuses in penitence,

Because when one intellect is joined with another intellect, it 20
prevents evil action and evil speech;

(But) when the fleshly soul is associated with another fleshly
soul, the partial (individual) intellect becomes idle and useless.

When because of loneliness you fall into despair, you become
(bright as) a sun (if you go) under the shadow (protection) of
the friend.

Go, seek at once the friend of God: when you have done so,
God is your friend.

He who has fixed his gaze upon seclusion (and made it his
object), after all ’tis from the friend (of God) that he has
learned that (lesson).

One must seclude one’s self from strangers, (but) not from 25
the friend: the fur-coat is for winter, not for spring.

(If) the intellect is paired with another intellect, light increases
and the way becomes plain;

(But if) the fleshly soul makes merry^ with another fleshly
soul, darkness increases, the way becomes hidden.

The friend is thine eye, O huntsman: keep him pure from
(unsoiled by) sticks and straws.

Beware! Do not make a dust with thy tongue’s broom, do
not make a present of rubbish to thine eye.

Since the tme believer is a mirror for the true believer, his ;,o
face is safe from defilement

The friend is a mirror for the soul in sorrow : breathe not on
the face of the mirror, O my soul!

Lest it cover its face on account of thy breath, thou must
swallow (suppress) thy breath at every moment.

Art thou less than earth? When a plot of earth finds a friend,
that is, a springtide, it finds (gains) a hundred thousand flowers.

The tree that is united with a friend, that is, the sweet air
(of spring), blossoms from head to foot;

In autumn, when it secs (meets with) a repugnant com- 35
panion, it withdraws its face and head under the coverlet

And says, ‘*A bad comrade is (the means of) stirring up
trouble; since he has come, my (best) course is to sleep.

Therefore I will sleep, I will be (like) one of the Men of the
Cave (the Seven Sleepers); that prisoner of woe (that sorely
distressed one) is better tlian Decianus.”

Their time of waking was expended by (was at the disposal of)
Decianus; their sleep was the capital (fundamental source) of
their renown.

^ Literally, “ becomes laughing,^’ i,e. friendly and familiar-

® /.e* he, being entirely pure, reflects thy spiritual state and shows thee
what thou really art.


224 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Sleep, when it is accompanied by wisdom, is (spiritual)
wakefulness; (but) alas for the man awake who consorts with
the ignorant!

40 When the crows pitch their tents on Bahman (January), the
nightingales hide themselves and are mute,

Because the nightingale is silent without the rose-garden : the
absence of the sun kills (the nightingale’s) wakefulness.

0 sun, thou takest leave of this rose-garden (the earth) in
order to illumine (the region) below the earth;

(But) the Sun of Divine knowledge has no motion : its place
of rising is naught but the spirit and the intellect ;

Especially the perfect Sun which is of yonder (world of
Reality) : day and night its action is (giving) illumination.

45 If tibou art an Alexander, come to the Sun’s rising-place:
after that, wheresoever thou goest, thou art possessed of goodly
splendour.

After that, wheresoever thou goest, ’twill become the place
of sunrise: (all) the places of sunrise will be in love with thy
place of sunset.

Thy bat-like senses are running towards the sunset; thy
pearl-scattering senses are faring towards the sunrise.

The way of (physical) sense-perception is the way of asses,
O rider: have shame, O thou that art jostling (vying) with asses !

Besides these five (physical) senses there are five (spiritual)
senses: those (latter) are like red gold, while these (physical)
senses are like copper,

50 In the bazaar where they (the buyers) are expert, how should
they buy the copper sense like (as though it were) the sense
of gold?

The bodily sense is eating the food of darkness ; the spiritual
sense is feeding from a Sun.

0 thou that hast borne the baggage of thy senses to the
Unseen, put forth thy hand, like Moses, from thy bosom.

0 thou whose attributes are (those of) the Sun of Divine
knowledge, while the sun in heaven is confined to a single
attribute.

Now thou becomest the Sun, and now the Sea; now the
mountain of Qdf, and now the ‘Anqa.

55 In thine essence thou art neither this nor that, O thou that
art greater Ap (all) imaginations and more than (all) morel

The Spirit is associated (endued) with knowledge and reason :
what has the Spirit to do with Arabic and Turkish?

Both the muwahhid (who asserts the transcendence of God)
and the mushabbih (who asserts His immanence) are bewildered
by thee, O thou who, being without image (external appearance),
art (appearing) in so many forms.

Sometimes ihtmuwahhad (God regarded as the only real Being)


THE FRIEND OF GOD 225

is destroying the mushabbih (who asserts that God is immanent in
forms) ; sometimes (these) forms are waylaying the muwahhid (so
that he cannot gain access to God who transcends all forms).

Sometimes Abu ’ 1 -Hasan in drunkenness (ecstasy) says to
thee, ‘‘O thou whose teeth are small (whose years are few),

O thou whose body is tender!’’

Sometimes he is laying waste (raining and defacing) his own 60
image : he is destroying (it) in order to assert the transcendence
of the Beloved (God).

The doctrine held by the eye of sense is Mu^tazilism, whereas
the eye of Reason is Sunnite (orthodox) in respect of (its) union
(vision of God).

Those in thrall to sense-perception are Mu^tazilites, (though)
from misguidedness they represent themselves as Sunnites.

Any one who remains in (bondage to) sense-perception is a
Mu'tazilite; though he may say he is a Sunnite, ’tis from
ignorance.

Any one who has escaped from (the bondage of) sense-
perception is a Sunnite: the man endowed with (spiritual)
vision is the eye of sweet-paced (harmonious) Reason.

If the animal sense could see the King (God), then the ox 65
and the ass would behold Allah.

If, besides the animal sense, thou hadst not another sense
outside of (unconditioned by) the desire of the flesh,

Then how should the sons of Adam have been honoured?
How by means of the common sense* should they have become
privileged (to know these mysteries)?

Your calling (God) ‘‘formless” (transcending forms) or
“formed” (immanent in forms) is vain, without your liberation
from form (unless you yourself are freed from sense-perception).

(Whether God is) “formless” or “formed,” He is with him
that is all kernel and has gone forth from the husk.

If you are blind, ^tis no crime in the blind\ (but) if not, go 70
(persevere in purifying yourself), for patience is the key to
success.

The medicine of patience will burn the veils over your eye
and will also effect the opening of your breast (to Divine know-
ledge).

When the mirror of your heart becomes clear and pure, you
will behold images (which are) outside of (the world of) water
and earth.

You will behold both the image and the image-Maker, both
the carpet of (spiritual) empire and the carpet-Spreader.

The phantom (seen in mystical vision) of my Friend seemed
(to me) like Khalil (Abraham) — its form an idol, its reality a
breaker of idols.

^ /.e. the senses which Man has in common with other animals.


NM


*5


226 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

75 Thanks be to God that when he appeared, my spirit beheld
in his phantom its own phantom (reflected image).

The dust of thy threshold was bewitching my heart; dust
(woe) on him that was patient without thy dust !

I said, “If I am beautiful, I shall receive this (dust of Divine
grace and love) from him; and if not, he has indeed laughed at
ugly me.

The (best) plan is this, that I look at myself (to see whether
I am worthy of him); otherwise (if I am not worthy), he will
laugh at me : how shall I buy (gain his love)? ”

He is beautiful and a lover of beauty: how should a fresh
young man choose a decrepit old woman

So The Beautiful attracts the beautiful^ (to itself) : know this (for
sure). Recite thereon (the text) the good women for the good men*

In this world everything attracts something: the hot draws
the hot (to itself) and the cold the cold.

The worthless sort attract the worthless ; the lasting (those of
lasting worth) are rejoiced by the lasting.

Those of the Fire attract those of the Fire, those of the Light
seek those of the Light.

When you shut your eye, you felt uncomfortable ^ : how could
the light of the eye do without the light of the window?

85 Y our discomfort was (caused by) the light in your eye straining
to be joined speedily with the daylight.

If you feel distress (within) while your eyes are unclosed,
know that you have shut the eye of your heart, (and) open it.

Recognise that that (distress) is the craving of the eyes of
your heart which is seeking the immeasurable Light.

Inasmuch as separation from those two impermanent lights
brought you discomfort, (so that) you opened your eyes.

Separation, then, from those two steadfast (everlasting) lights
will bring you discomfort : guard them (well) !

90 Since He is calling me, I will look to see whether I am wortliy
to be drawn (to Him) or whether I am ill-favoured.

If a charming person makes an ugly one (follow) at his heels,
’tis (but) a modiery that he makes of him.

How, I wonder, shall I behold my own face, so as to see
what complexion I have and whether I am like day or like night?

For a long while I was seeking the image of my soul, (but)
my image was not displayed (reflected) by any one.

“After all,” I said, “what is a mirror for? (The use of it is
thi^, that every one may know what and who he is.”

95 The mirror of iron is (only) for husks (external forms) ; the
mirror that shows the aspect of the heart is of great price.

The souFs mirror is naught but the face of the friend, the

^ Literally, “beauty** or “a beautiful one.*’

® Literally, “discomfort overtook you.*’


THE FRIEND OF GOD 227

face of that friend who is of yonder country (the spiritual
land).

I said, “O heart, seek the Universal Mirror, go to the Sea:
the business will not succeed (be successfully accomplished) by
means of the river.”

In this quest thy slave (at last) arrived at thy dwelling-place,

(as) the pains (of childbirth) drew Mary to the palm-tree.

When thine eye became an eye for my heart, my blind heart
went and became drowned in vision.

I saw that thou art the Universal Mirror unto everlasting: 100
I saw my own image in thine eye.

I said, “At last I have found myself: in his eyes I have found
the shining Way.”

My false instinct said, “Beware! That (image) is (only) thy
phantom: distinguish thy essence from thy phantom”;

(But) my image gave voice (spoke) from thine eye (and said),

“I am thou and thou art I in (perfect) oneness;

For how should a phantom find the way into this illumined
eye which never ceases from (contemplating) the (Divine)
realities?”

(Thou saidst), “If you behold your image in the eyes of any ms
other than me, know that ’tis a phantom and reprobate,

Because he (every one except me) is applying (to his eye) the
collyrium of non-existence (unreality) and is imbibing the wine
of Satan’s illusion-making.

Their eye is the home of phantasy and non-existence:
necessarily it sees as existent the things which are non-existent;

(But) since my eye saw (got) collyrium from the Glorious
(God), it is the home of (real) existence, not the home of
phantasy.”

So long as a single hair of you is before your eye, in your
phantasy a pearl will be as jasper.

You will know jasper from pearls (only) at the time when no
you pass away from (abandon) your phantasy entirely.

O connoisseur of pearls, listen to a story, that you may dis-
tinguish actual seeing from (mere) inference.

How in the time of ‘ Umar, may God he well-pleased with him, a

certain person imagined that what he saw was the new moon.

The Fasting-month (Ramaddn) came round in ‘Umar’s time.
Some people ran to the top of a hill.

In order to take (the appearance of) the new moon as a good
omen, and one of them said, “Look, O ‘Umar, here is the new
moon ! ”

As ‘Umar did not see the moon in the sky, he said, “This
moon has risen from thy phantasy.


li-i


228 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

1 15 Otherwise, (since) I am a better seer of the heavens (than
thou), how is it that I do not see the pure crescent?

Wet thy hand,” said he, “and rub it on thine eyebrow, and
then look up towards the new moon.”

When he wetted his eyebrow, he did not see the moon.
“O King,” he said, “there is no moon; it has disappeared.”

“Yes,” said ‘Umar, “the hair of thine eyebrow had become
(curved) like a bow and shot at thee an arrow of opinion.”

When one hair became crooked, it waylaid him (hindered
him from seeing truly), so that, making a false claim, he boasted
to have seen the moon.

120 Inasmuch as a crooked hair veils the sky, how will it be when
all your members are crooked?

Straighten your members by (the help of) the straight (the
righteous), O you who (would) go straight, turn not your head
aside from that threshold (where the righteous dwell).

Balance makes balance correct; balance also makes balance
defective^.

Whoever weighs the same (adopts the same standard) as the
unrighteous falls into deficiency, and his understanding becomes
dazed.

Go, he hard on the infidels^ sprinkle dust on (renounce)
fondness for the strangers.

125 Be as a sword upon the heads of the strangers: come, do not
play foxy tricks, be a lion,

In order that the friends (of God), moved by (righteous)
jealousy, may not break with you, because those thorns (the
wicked) are the enemies of this rose (the friend of God).

Set fire to the wolves as (to) rue-seed, because those wolves
are the enemies of Joseph.

Iblis calls you “father’s soul” (darling son) — beware (of
him) ! The accursed Devil (does that) in order that he may
beguile you with (vain) words.

He practised the like imposture on your father: this black-
faced one checkmated an Adam.

130 This crow is busy on the chessboard; look not you upon his
game with an eye that is half-asleep,

Because he knows many formidable moves which will stick
in your throat like a straw.

His straw vrill stay in your throat for years. What is that
straw? Love of rank and wealth.

Wealth is the straw, since in your throat, 0 infirm one, it is
an obstacle (barrier) to the Water of Life.

If an artful enemy carry off your wealth, a robber will have
carried off a robber.

^ l.e, a true standard corrects a false one, and a false standard corrupts
a true one.


THE MAN WHO THOUGHT HE SAW THE MOON 229

How a snake-catcher stole a snake from another snake-catcher.

A petty thief carried off a snake from a snake-catcher and in 135
his folly was accounting it a prize.

The snake-catcher escaped from the snake’s bite; the man
who had robbed him was miserably killed by the snake.

The snake-catcher saw him (dead) ; then he recognised him
and said, ‘‘ My snake has emptied him of life.

My soul was desiring of Him (God) in prayer that I might
find him and take the snake from him.

Thanks to God that that prayer was rejected: I thought ’twas
loss, but it has turned out to be gain.*’

Many are the prayers which are loss and destruction, and 140
from kindness the Holy God is not hearing them.


How the companion of Jesus^ on whom be peace, entreated
Jesus, on whom be peace, to give life to the bones.

A certain foolish person accompanied Jesus (on his way).

He espied some bones in a deep-dug hole.

He said, companion, (teach me) that exalted Name by
which thou makest the dead to live;

Teach (it) me, that I may do good and by means of it endow
the bones with life.”

Jesus said, Be silent, for that is not thy work: ’tis not meet
for thy breath and speech,

For it wants breath purer than rain and more piercing in t-is
action than the angels.

(Many) lifetimes were needed that the breath might be
purified, so that he (its owner) was entrusted with the treasury
of the Heavens.

(Suppose that) thou hast grasped this rod firmly in thy hand:
whence will accrue to thy hand the cunning of Moses ”

He said, ‘Hf 1 am not one to pronounce (such sacred)
mysteries, do thou pronounce the Name over the bones.”

Jesus cried, Lord, what are these hidden purposes (of
Thine)? What is (the meaning of) this fool’s inclination (to
engage) in this fruitless work?

How has this sick man no care for himself? How has this
corpse no care for (spiritual) life?

He has left (uncared for) his own dead (soul) and seeks to
mend (revive) the dead (bones) of a stranger.”

God (answered and) said, “The backslider seeks backsliding^ :
the thistle that has grown (in him) is the retribution for (conse-
quence of) his sowing.”


^ Le. “those who are doomed to perdition seek their own perdition.*"


230 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

He that sows the seed of thistles in the world, be warned not
to look for him in the rose-garden.

If he take a rose in his hand, it becomes a thistle ; and if he
go to a friend, he (the friend) becomes a snake.

155 The damned wretch is an elixir which transmutes into poison
and snakes; (his elixir is) contrary to the elixir of the God-
fearing man.

How the Sufi enjoined the servant tp take care of his beast
and how the servant said^ hawl^J^

A Siifi was wandering round the world till one night he
became a guest at a monastery (for Siifis).

He had a beast (ass): he tied it in the stable, (while) he
(himself) sat at the top of the dais with his friends.

Then he engaged with his friends in (mystical) meditation :
the presence of the friend (of God) is a book, (and) more.

The Sufi’s book is not (composed of) ink and letters: it is
naught but a heart white as snow.

160 The scholar’s provision is (consists of) pen-marks (written
letters and words). What is the Sufi’s provision? Footmarks.

He (the Siifi) stalks the game, like a hunter: he sees the
musk-deer’s track and follows the footprints.

For some while the track of the deer is (the) proper (clue)
for him, (|but) afterwards ’tis the navel (musk-gland) of the
deer that is his guide.

When he has given thanks for (having been favoured with
knowledge of) the track and has traversed the way, of necessity
by means of that track he arrives at a goaP.

To go one stage (guided) by the scent of the musk-gland is
better than a hundred stages of (following) the track and
roaming about.

165 The heart that is the rising-place of the moonbeams (of
Divine light) is the opening of the doors (of Reality) for the
gnostic.

To you it is a wall, to them it is a door; to you a stone, to
(those) venerated ones a pearl.

What you see plainly in the mirror — the Pir sees more than
that in the brick.

The Firs are they whose spirits, before this world existed,
were in the Sea of (Divine) bounty.

^ Before (the creation of) this body they passed (many) life-
times ; before the sowing they took up (harvested) the wheat.

170 They have received the spirit before (the creation of) the
form ; they have bored the pearls before (the creation of) the sea.

^ Equivalent to “ Good gracious ! ”

2 Literally, **an object of desire.’*


THE SxJfI and the UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 231

(Whilst) consultation was going on as to bringing mankind into
existence, their spirits were in the Sea of (Divine) Omnipotence
up to the throat.

When the angels were opposing that (creation of man), they
(the Pits) were secretly clapping their hands (in derision) at the
angels.

He (the Pir) was made acquainted with the (material) form
of every existent being, before this Universal Soul became
fettered (by materiality).

Before the (creation of the) heavens they have seen Saturn,
before the (existence of) seeds they have seen the bread.

Without brain and mind they were full of thought, without 175
army and battle they gained victory.

That immediate intuition (intuitive knowledge) in relation to
them is thought; else, indeed, in relation to those who are far
(from God) it is vision.

Thought is of the past and future; when it is emancipated
from these two, the difficulty is solved.

The spirit has beheld the wine in the grape, the spirit has
beheld thing (entity) in nothing (nonentity) ;

It has beheld every conditioned thing as unconditioned, it
has beheld the genuine coin and the alloyed before (the ex-
istence of) the mine ;

Before the creation of grapes it has quaflfed wines and shown 180
the excitements (of intoxication).

In hot July they (the Pirs) see December; in the sunbeams
they see the shade.

In the heart of the grape they have seen the wine ; in absolute
fund (privation of objectivity) they have seen the object.

The sky is draining draughts from their circling cup, the
sun is clad in cloth of gold by their bounty.

When you see two of them met together as friends, they are
one, and at the same time (they are) six hundred thousand.

Their numbers are in the likeness of waves: the wind will 185
have brought them into number (into plurality from unity).

The Sun, which is the spirits, became separated (broken into
rays) in the windows, which are bodies.

When you gaze on the Sun’s disk, it is itself one, but he that
is screened by (his perception of) the bodies is in some doubt.

Separation (plurality) is in the animal spirit; the human spirit
is one essence.

Inasmuch as God sprinkled His light upon them (manhinc^,
(they are essentially one) : His light never becomes separated (in
reality).

0 my comrade on the way, dismiss thy weariness for a lyo
moment, that I niay describe a single mole (grain) of that
Beauty.


232 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

The beauty of His state cannot be set forth : what are both
the worlds (temporal and spiritual)? The reflexion of His mole.

When I breathe a word concerning His beauteous mole, my
speech would fain burst my body.

Like an ant, I am so happy in this granary that I am dragging
a burden too great for me.

How the explanation of the (inner) meaning of the tale was stopped

because of the hearer^ s desire to hear the superficial form of it.

When will He who is envied by Light allow me to tell that
which is obligatory and ought to be told?

195 The sea casts foam in front (of it) and makes a barrier: it
draws back and after drawing back flows in (again).

Hear what has interfered (hindered my exposition) at the
present time: methinks the hearer’s mind has wandered else-
where.

His thoughts have turned to the Sufi guest: he is sunk up
to the neck (wholly absorbed) in that business^.

(Therefore) it behoves me to go back from this discourse to
that story in order to describe what happened (to him).

0 dear friend, do not fancy the Siifi is the (external) form
(which you behold): how long, like children, (will you be
content) with walnuts and raisins?

200 Our body is (as) walnuts and raisins, O son; if you are a man,
relinquish these two things ;

And (even) if you do not relinquish them (by your own act),
the grace of God will enable you to pass beyond the nine tiers
(of Heaven).

Now listen to the outward form of the tale, but take heed to
separate the grain from the chaff.

How the people of the caravan supposed the Sufi's beast was ill.

When at last (the meditation of) that circle of Sufis who were
seeking (spiritual) profit came to an end (culminated) in ecstasy
and enthusiasm.

They brought dishes of food for the guest, and he then be-
thought him of his beast.

205 He said to the famulus (the servant of the Siifis), ‘‘ Go into the
stable and make the straw and barley all right for the animal.”

‘‘Good gracious^!” he replied, “why this saying overmuch?
These things have been my care since long ago.”

The Siiff said, “First wet his barley, for ’tis an old ass, and
his teeth are shaky.”

^ Or ** passion (to hear the story).”

® Ld hawlf lit. “there is no power (except in God).*’


THE SlJFf AND THE UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 233

‘‘Good gracious!” said he, “why are you telling (me) this,
Sir? They are taught by me (to make) these arrangements.”

The Sufi said, “ First of all take off^ his saddle and (then) put
the salve of manbal on his sore back.”

“ Good gracious 1 ” exclaimed the servant. “ Why, O purveyor 2x0
of wisdom, I have had a thousand guests of your sort,

And all have departed from us well-pleased: the guest is
(dear to us as) our life and our kinsman.”

The Siifi said, “Give him water, but (let it be) luke-
warm.” “Good gracious!” cried the other, “I am ashamed
of you.”

The Siifi said, “Put (only) a little straw in his barley.”

“ Good gracious! Cut short this speech,” he replied.

The Siifi said, “Sweep his place (clear) of stones and dung,
and if it is wet, sprinkle dry earth on it.”

“Good gracious!” cried he, “implore God’s grace*^, O 2x5
father, and say little (give few instructions) to a messenger who
knows his business.”

The Siifi said, “Take the comb and curry the ass’s back.”

“ Good gracious ! do have some shame, O father,” said he.

The servant said this and briskly girded up his loins. “ I go,”
said he; “first I will fetch the straw and barley.”

Off he went and never thought of the stable at all : he gave
that Siifi (a pretence like) the sleep of the hare'^

The servant went off to (join) some rascals and made a
mockery of the Siifi’s admonition.

The Siifi was fatigued by his journey and stretched his limbs 220
(lay down to sleep) : with his eyes closed he was dreaming

That his ass was left (helpless) in the clutch of a wolf, (which)
was tearing pieces (of flesh) from its back and thighs.

“Good gracious!” he exclaimed, “what sort of melancholy
(madness) is this? Oh, where is that kindly servant?”

Again he would see his ass going along the road and falling
now into a well and now into a ditch.

He was dreaming various unpleasant dreams ; he was reciting
the Fdtiha and the Qdri^a.

He said (to himself), “What can be done to help? My friends 225
have hurried out: they have departed and made all tlxe doors
fast.” ^

Again he would say, “Oh, I wonder — that wretched servant!
Did not he partake of bread and salt with us?

I showed him nothing but courtesy and mildness : why should
he on the contrary show hatred towards me?

^ Literally, *‘put down (aside).”

“ Literally, **say Ld hawV^

* Le, he caused him to believe in his vigilance, while he was really
negligent.


234 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Every enmity must rest on some cause; otherwise, our
common humanity^ would dictate faithfulness (in friendship).'^

Then he would say again, “When had Adam, the kind and
generous, done an injury to Iblis?

230 What was done by man to snake and scorpion that they wish
(to inflict) death and pain upon him?

To rend is the instinct of the wolf: after all, this envy is
conspicuous in mankind.”

Again he would say, “It is wrong tlius to think evil: why
have I such thoughts against my brother? ”

Then he would say, “Prudence consists in your thinking evil :
how shall he that thinks no evil remain unhurt? ”

The Siifi was in (this) anxiety, and (meanwhile) the ass was in
such a plight that — ^may it befall our enemies^ !

235 That poor ass was amidst earth and stones, with his saddle
crooked and his halter tom.

Killed (exhausted) by the journey, without fodder all the
night long, now at the last gasp and now perishing.

All night the ass was repeating, “ O God, I give up the barley ;
(but am I to have) less than one handful of straw?”

‘ With mute eloquence he was saying, “O Shaykhs, (have)
some pity, for I am consumed (with anguish) because of this
raw impudent rogue.”

What that ass suffered of pain and torment, the land-bird
suffers (the same) in a flood of water.

240 Then (all) that night till dawn the wretched ass, from ex-
ceeding hunger, rolled on his side.

Day rose. Tlxe servant came at mom and quickly looked for
the saddle and laid it on the ass's back.

After the fashion of ass-dealers he gave him two or three blows
(with a goad) : he did to the ass what is befitting from such a cur
(as he was).

The sharpness of the sting set the ass jumping ; where is the
tongue (has an ass such a tongue) that he may describe his own
state (feelings)?

When the Sufi mounted and got going, he (the ass) began to
fall on his face every time,

245 (And) every time the people (the travellers) lifted him up:
they all thought he was ill.

One would twist his ears hard, while another sought for the
(lacerated) part under his palate.

And another searched for the stone in his shoe, and another
looked at the dirt in his eye.

Also they were saying,“ O Shaykh,whatisthecauseof this? Were
not you saying yesterday, ‘ Thanks (to God) , this ass is strong ’ ? ”

^ Literally, **our being congeners.”

^ Literally, “ may it be the retribution of enemies ! ”


THE SiJfi' and the UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 235

He replied, “The ass that ate Ld lj,awl^ during the night
cannot get along except in this manner.

Inasmuch as the ass’s food by night was Ld hawl, he was 350
glorifying God by night and (is engaged) in prostrating himself
by day.”

Most people are man-eaters: put no trust^ in their saying,
“Peace to you,”

The hearts of all are the Devil’s house : do not accept (listen
to) the palaver of devilish men.

He that swallows Ld hawl from the breath (mouth) of the
Devil, like that ass falls headlong in the fight.

Whoever swallows the Devil’s imposture in this world and
(swallows) veneration and deceit from the foe that has the face
(semblance) of a friend,

In the Way of Islam and on the bridge Sirat he will fall upon 255
his head from giddiness, like that ass.

Beware! Do not hearken to the blandishments of the bad
friend: espy the snare, do not walk securely on the earth.

See the hundred thousand devils who utter Ld hawl \ 0 Adam,
in the serpent behold Iblis !

He gives (you) vain words, he says to you, “O my soul and
beloved,” that ne may strip the skin off his beloved, like a
butcher.

He gives vain words that he may strip off your skin : woe to
him that tastes opium from (the mouth of) enemies.

He lays his head at your feet (in flattery) and butcher-like 260
gives (you) vain (wheedling) words, that he may shed your
blood miserably.

Like a lion, hunt your prey yourself : leave (pay no heed to)
the blandishment of stranger or kinsman.

Know that the regard of the base is like that servant; ’tis
better to have nobody (as your friend) than (to accept) the
flattery of nobodies (worthless people).

Do not make your home in (other) men’s land : do your own
work, don’t do the work of a stranger.

Who is the stranger? Your earthen body, for the sake of
which is (all) your sorrow.

So long as you are giving your body greasy (rich) and sweet 265
(food), you will not see fatness in your (spiritual) essence.

If the body be set in the midst of musk, (yet) on the day of
death its stench will become manifest.

Do not put musk on your body, rub it on your heart. What
is musk? The holy name of the Glorious (God).

The hypocrite puts musk on his body and puts his spirit at
the bottom of the ash-pit.

^ l.e. ** implored God to help him/*

* Literally, “do not seek safety/*


236 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

On his tongue the name of God, and in his soul stenches
(arising) from his infidel thought.

270 In relation to him praise of God is (like) the herbage of the
ash-pit: it is roses and lilies (growing) upon a dunghill.

Those plants are certainly there on loan (and belong to some-
where else) ; the proper place for those flowers is the symposium
and (the scene of) festivity.

The good women come to the good men ; there is (also the text)
to the wicked men the wicked women, Mark!

Do not bear malice: they that are led astray by malice, their
graves are placed beside the malicious.

The origin of malice is Hell, and your malice is a part of that
whole and is the enemy of your religion.

275 Since you are a part of Hell, take care 1 The part gravitates
towards its whole.

He that is bitter will assuredly be attached to those who are
bitter: how should vain breath (false words) be joined with the
truth?

O brother, you are that same thought (of yours) ; as for the
rest (of you), you are (only) bone and fibre.

If your thought is a rose, you are a rose-garden; and if it is
a thorn, you are fuel for the bath-stove.

If you are rose-water, you are sprinkled on head and bosom ;
and if you are (stinking) like urine, you are cast out.

280 Look at the trays in front of druggists — each kind put beside
its own kind,

Things of each sort mixed with things of the same sort, and
a certain elegance produced by this homogeneity ;

^ If his (the druggist’s) aloes-wood and sugar get mixed, he
picks them out from each other, piece by piece.

The trays were broken and the souls were spilled : good and
evil ones were mingled with each other.

God sent the prophets with scrolls (of Revelation), that He
might pick out (and sort) these grains on the dish.

2S5 Before this^ we were one community, none knew whether we
were good or bad.

False coin and fine (both) were current in the world, since

, all was night, and we were as night-travellers.

Until the sun of the prophets rose and said, “Begone, 0 alloy !
Come, O thou that art pure!”

The eye can distinguish colours, the eye knows ruby and
(common) stone.

The eye knows the jewel and the rubbish; hence bits of
rubbish sting the eye.

290 These vile counterfeiters are enemies of day, those pieces of
gold from the mine are lovers of day,

^ I.e. before the prophets were sent.


THE SIJfI and the UNFAITHFUL SERVANT 237

Because day is the mirror that makes it (the fine gold) known,
so that the ashrafi (the coin of sterling gold) may see (receive)
its (day’s) gift of honour.

Hence God bestowed the title of ‘‘ Day ” on the Resurrection,
(for) day displays the beauty of red and yellow.

In reality, then, day is the inmost consciousness of the saints,
(though) beside their moon day is (dim) as shadows.

Know that day is the reflexion of the mystery (the illumined
consciousness) of the man of God, while eye-sealing night is
the reflexion of his occultation^.

For that reason God said, By the morn: by the morn is (refers 295
to) the light of the hidden mind of Mustafa (Mohammed).

The other view, that the Beloved (God) meant this morn
(in the literal sense), is (held) just for the reason that this too
is the reflexion of him ;

Else it is wrong to swear by a transient thing : how indeed is
transiency proper to the speech of God?

That Friend (Abraham) said, **/ love not them that set'' : how
should the glorious Lord mean transiency by this (oath)?

Again, and by the night is (refers to) his occulta tion and his
earthen rust-dark body.

When his sun rose from that sky, it said to the night of the 300
body, **Lo, He hath not forsaken thee,"

Union was made manifest out of the essence of affliction:
that sweetness (of union) was expressed by (the words) He hath
not hated {thee).

In fact, every expression is the symbol of a state : the state
is as a hand, while the expression is a tool.

The goldsmith’s tool in the hand of a shoemaker is like a
seed sown in sand;

And the cobbler’s tool (put) before the husbandman is (as)
straw before a dog (or) bones before an ass.

I am God” on the lips of Mansdr’*^ was the light (of truth) ; J05
*‘I am Allah” on the lips of Pharaoh was a lie.

In the hand of Moses the rod became a witness (to the truth) ;
in the hand of the magician the rod became (worthless as) motes
in the air.

On this account Jesus did not teach his fellow-traveller that
Name of the Lord,

For he would not know (its proper use) and would attribute
imperfection to the tool (whiefx he misused). Strike stone on
clay, and how should fire leap forth?

Hand and tool are as stone and iron ; there must be a pair :
(the existence of) a pair is the condition (necessary) for bringing
to birth,

^ Le, the state in which the saint's consciousness is not illumined by God.


238 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

310 The One is He who hath no consort and no tool; in number
there is doubt, and that One is beyond doubt.

Those who say ‘‘two’’ or “three” or more than these
(numbers) are certainly agreed in (affirming the existence of) One.

When squinting has been put aside (so that they see correctly),
they become alike : the assertors of two or three become assertors
of Unity.

If you are a ball^ in His polo-field, keep spinning round from
(the blows of) His polo-stick.

The ball becomes right and flawless (only) at the time when
it is made to dance by the stroke of the King's hand.

315 Give ear heedfully to these (sayings), O squinting one: apply
the eye-salve by way of the ear.

Holy words, then, do not abide in blind hearts, (but) go to
the Light whence they came,

While the (guileful) spell of the Devil goes into crooked
(perverse) hearts as a crooked shoe on to a crooked foot.

Though you may learn Wisdom by rote, it becomes quit of
you when you are unworthy (to receive it)*;

And though you write it and note it (down), and though you
brag (about it) and expound it,

320 ^ It withdraws its face from you, O disputatious one : it snaps
its bonds and (takes) flight from you.

(But) if you read not and it sees your ardour (of love), Know-
ledge will be a bird docile (and obedient) to your hand.

It does not abide with every unskilled tiro: (it is) like a
peacock (which does not stay) in the house of a peasant, >

How the King found his falcon in the house of a
decrepit old woman.

It is not like the falcon that fled from the King to the old
crone who was sifting flour

That she might cook tutmdj for her children. (When) she
saw the beautiful well-born falcon,

325 She tied its little foot and clipped its wings ; she cut its talons
and fed it with straw.

“Unworthy folk,” said she, “have not kept thee in (good)
trim : thy wings are overgrown and thy talons have become long.

Every unworthy one’s hand makes thee ill: come to thy
mother that she may take care of thee.”

Know, O friend, that such is the affection of the fool : the fool
ever walks crookedly on the way.

The King’s day became late (far-spent) in searching (for the
falcon) : he went (at last) to the old woman and the tent (where
she lived),

1 The words translated “if you are a ball** may also signify “if you arc
an assertor of Unity.’*


THE KING AND THE FALCON


239

Suddenly he espied the falcon amidst smoke and dust : the 330
King wept sorely over it and made lament.

He said, “Albeit this is the retribution for thy deed, in that
thou art not firm in keeping faith with me,

(Yet) how shouldst thou make Hell thy abode after Paradise,
heedless of (the text) the people of the Fire {and those of Paradise)
are not equrni

This is the fitting reward for one that unconscionably flees
from the King who knows (him) well to the house of an old hag.”

(Meanwhile) the falcon was rubbing its wings against the
King’s hand: without tongue it was saying, “I have sinned.”

Where then should the vile (sinner) plead piteously, where 335
should he moan, if Thou wilt accept naught but good, O
bountiful (King)?

The King’s grace makes the soul sin-seeking, because the
King makes every foul thing fair.

Go, do not commit foulness, for (even) our fair deeds appear
foul in the sight of our beauteous (Loved One).

You deemed your service worthy: thereby you raised the
banner of sin.

Forasmuch as praise and prayer were vouchsafed to you,
through making that prayer your heart became vainglorious.

You regarded yourself as speaking (confidentially) with God. .ho
O h, (there is) many a one that becomes separated (from God)
by this opinion.

Although the King sit with you on the ground, know yourself
and sit better (with more decorum and reverence).

The falcon said, “O King, I am penitent, I am converted,

I am embracing Islam anew.

He whom Thou makest drunken and pot-valiant ^ — if from
drunkenness he walk crookedly, do Thou accept his excuse.

Though my talons are gone, when thou art mine I tear off the
forelock of the sun ;

And though my wings are gone, when Thou art kind to 345
me the heavenly sphere lessens its play (slackens the speed of
its revolution in amazement) at my play (swift and sportive
flight).

If Thou bestow a belt on me, I will uproot the mountain; if
Thou give me a pen, I will break the banners^.

After all, my body is not inferior to (that of) a gnat: with my
wings I confound the kingdom of Nimrod.

Suppose me to be (as) the flocks of (small) birds® in weakness,
suppose every one of my enemies to be as the elephant*,

^ Literally, “lion-catching.”

* Le. the lances to which flags are attached.

® Referring to Qur^^n, cv, 3.

* Qur^dn, cv, i.


240 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

(Yet if) I cast a baked (clay) pellet the size of a hazel-nut, my
pellet in its effect is like (equal to) a hundred mangonels
(ballistas).”

350 Moses came to battle with his one rod and made an onset
against Pharaoh and (all) his swords.

Every Prophet who by himself has knocked at that door (and
besought God to help him) has alone (single-handed) fought
(victoriously) against the whole world.

When Noah begged of Him (God) a sword, through Him (at
His command) the waves of the Flood became of sword-like
temper.

0 Ahmad (Mohammed), who (what) indeed are the armies
of the earth.? Behold the moon in heaven (and) split her brow^.

In order that the ignorant astronomer^ may know that this
cycle is thy cycle, not the cycle of the moon.

355 It is thy cycle, because (even) Moses, he who spoke (with
God), was constantly yearning after this cycle of thine.

When Moses beheld the splendour of thy cycle, in which the
dawn of Revelation was arising.

He said, Lord, what cycle of mercy is that? It is beyond
mercy: there (in that cycle) is vision (of Thee).

Plunge Thy Moses in the seas (of Time) and bring him up
(to the surface) from the midst of the cycle of Ahmad (Moham-
med).’’

God said, “0 Moses, on that account® I have shown (it) to
thee; on that account I have opened to thee the way to that
(spiritual) communion (with Mohammed),

360 Because in this (present) cycle, O Kalim^, thou art far from
that (cycle of Mohammed and canst not attain to it) : draw back
thy foot, for this blanket is (too) long (for thee).

1 am kind, I show My servant bread in order that desire (for
it) may cause that living one to weep.

A mother rubs the nose of her babe, that it may wake and
seek some food —

For it may have fallen asleep hungry unawares; and (on
waking) it prods her two breasts for the sake of (getting)
milk.

I was a treasure, a hidden mercy, so I sent forth a rightly
guided Imam.”

365 Every (Divine) grace that you are seeking with (all) your soul,
He showed it to you that you might desire it.

How many idols did Ahmad (Mohammed) break in the world,
that the (religious) communities might cry “ O Lord ” !

^ Referring to Qur’dn, liv, i.

s ** observer of) the stars which bring good or bad luck.*’

, . ’ . ^ order that the sight of it may cause thee to desire it (spiritually),

though It IS out of thy reach (temporally).”

* Interlocutor. Moses is so called, because he conversed with God,


THE KING AND THE FALCON 241

Had it not been for the efforts of Ahmad, you also, like your
ancestors, would be worshipping idols.

This head of yours has been delivered from bowing to idols,
in order that you may acknowledge his rightful claim upon the
(gratitude of the religious) communities.

If you speak, speak thanks for this deliverance, that he may
also deliver you from the idol within.

Since he has delivered your head from idols, do you deliver 370
your heart also by means of that strength (which you have gained
from him).

You have neglected^ to give thanks for the Religion because
you got it for nothing as an inheritance from your father.

How should a man who inherits know the value of wealth?

A Rustam tore his soul (suffered agonies in acquiring it),
(whereas) Zal got it cost-free.

“When I cause (any one) to weep. My mercy is aroused: that
wailer drinks of (enjoys) My bounty.

If I do not wish to give, (then) indeed I do not show him (the
desired gift), (but) when I have closed (contracted) his heart
(with grief), I open (expand) it (with joy).

My mercy is dependent on that goodly weeping : when he 375
weeps, waves rise from the sea of (My) mercy.”


Houo by Divine inspiration Shaykh Ahmad soti of Khizriiya,
may God sanctify his revered spirit, bought halwd
{sweetmeat) for his creditors.

There was a Shaykh who was continually in debt because of
the generosity which that illustrious one had (in his nature).

He used to make myriads of debts (by borrowing) from the
great, and spend (all the money) upon the poor (dervishes) of
the world.

He had also built a monastery (for Sdffs) by (running into)
debt; he had devoted life and wealth and monastery (to God).

God was paying his debts from every quarter: God made
flour out of sand for the Friend’s (Abraham’s) sake.

The prophet said that two angels are (always) praying here 380
in the markets, (saying),

“ O God, do Thou give the prodigal a boon in return, and
O God do Thou give the miserly a bane (in return).”

Especially (does this apply to) the prodigal who has freely spent
his soul (life) and made his throat a sacrifice to the Creator.

He offers his throat, like Ismd'fl (Ishmael) : the knife cannot
do anything to (hurt) his throat.

On this account, then, the martyrs are living in joy: do not,
infidel-like, look at the body (alone),

^ Literally, ** turned your head aside/*


N M


16


242 MATHNAWI, BOOK H

385 Since God hath given them in return the spirit of everlasting-
ness — a spirit safe from grief and pain and misery.

The debtor Shaykh acted in this fashion for years, taking
and giving like a steward.

He was sowing seeds till the day of death, that on the day of
death he might be a most glorious prince.

When the Shaykh ’s life reached its end and he saw in his
(bodily) existence the signs of death,

The creditors were seated together around him, (while) the
Shaykh was gently melting on himself, like a candle.

390 The creditors had become despairing and sour-faced: the
pain in (their) hearts was accompanied by pain in (their) lungs ^

“Look at these evil-thinking men,*’ said the Shaykh. “Hath
not God four hundred gold dinars ?^*

A boy outside shouted ''HalwdV and bragged of (the
excellence oH the halwd in hope of (getting) some ddngs'^.

The Shaykh with (a nod of) his head directed the famulus
to go and buy the whole of the halwd^

(Saying to himself), “so that the creditors, when they eat the
halwd ^ for a (short) while may not look bitterly on me.”

395 The famulus at once went out through the doorway to buy
with gold the halwd entire.

He said to the boy, “How much is the halwd in the lump? ”
The boy said, “Half a dinar and some small change.”

“Nay,” he replied; “don’t ask too much from Siifis: I will
give you half a dinar. Say no more.”

The boy put the tray before the Shaykh. Behold (now) the
mysterious secret thoughts of the Shaykh !

He made a sign to the creditors (as though to say), “Look,
this gift (of sweetmeat) is a present (to you) : eat this gladly, it is
lawful (food).”

400 When the tray was emptied, the boy took it and said, “ Give
me the gold, O Sage.”

The Shaykh said, “ From where shall I get the money? I am
in debt and going towards non-existence.”

The boy in (his) grief dashed the tray upon the ground ; he
raised (his voice in) lamentation and weeping and moaning.

The boy was weeping with loud sobs because of the swindle,
(and crying), “Would that both my legs had been broken (ere
I came hither) !

Would that I had loitered round the bath-stove and had not
passed by the door of this monastery !

405 Lickspittle gluttonous^ Sufis, dogs at heart and washing their
faces like cats!”

Q anguish of mind caused them to breathe hard and painfully.

I The ddng IS the sixth part of a dirhem.

Literally, seeking (dainty) morsels.”


THE SHAYKH AND THE CONFECTIONER’S BOY 243

At the boy’s clamour all and sundry^ gathered there and
crowded round the boy.

He came to the Shaykh and said, “O cruel Shaykh, know
for sure that my master will kill me (with blows).

If I go (back) to him empty-handed, he will kill me : wilt thou
give (him) leave (to do that)?”

And those creditors too turned to the Shaykh with disbelief
and denial, saying, “What game was this?

Thou hast devoured our property and art carrying off thy a 10
iniquities (to the next world) : for what reason was this other
injustice (put) on the top (of all the rest)?”

Till afternoon prayers the boy wept; the Shaykh closed his
eyes and did not look at him.

The Shakyh, unconcerned with abuse and opposition, had
withdrawn his moon-like face under the coverlet,

Pleased with eternity, pleased with death, joyous, unconcerned
with revilement and the talk of high or low.

He in whose face the Beloved smiles sweetly^, what harm can
befall him from the sour looks of (other) people?

He on whose eye the Beloved bestows a kiss, how should he 415
grieve at Heaven and its anger?

On a moonlight night what cares the moon in (the mansion
of) Simak for dogs and their barking?

The dog is performing his task ; the moon is smoothly fulfilling
her task by means of her (bright) countenance.

Every one is executing his little business : water does not lose
purity because of a bit of weed (rubbish).

The weeds float weedily (contemptibly) on the surface of the
water: the pure water flows on undisturbed.

Mustafd (Mohammed) splits the moon at midnight; Abu 420
Lahab from hatred talks drived.

The Messiah (Jesus) brings the dead to life, and the Jew tears
his moustache in wrath.

Does the dog’s bark ever reach the moon’s ear, especially
that Moon who is the chosen of God?

The king drinks wine on the bank of the stream till dawn,
and in listening to the music is unaware of the croaking of the
frogs.

The division of (the money due to) the boy (amongst the
creditors) would have been (onM a few ddngs (for each to pay) ;
(but) the Shaykh ’$ (spiritual) influence stopped that generosity,

So that no one should give the boy anything : the power of 42s
the Pirs is even greater than this.

(When) it was (time for) afternoon prayers, a servant came
with a tray in his hand from one like IJAtim,

^ Literally, ‘‘good and had.'* ® Literally, “like candy.”

® Literally, “chews thistles.”


16— SP


244 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

A man of property and condition : he sent it as a present to
the Pir (Shaykh), for he knew about him.

(There were) four hundred dinars, and in a corner of the tray
another half-dinar in a piece of paper.

The servant advanced and did honour to the Shaykh, and
laid the tray before the peerless Shaykh.

430 When he (the Shaykh). uncovered the face of the tray, the
people beheld the miracle (manifested) from him.

Immediately cries of sorrow and lamentation arose from all
— head of the Shaykhs and (spiritual) kings, what was (the
meaning of) this?

What secret is this? Once more, what sovereignty is this, O
lord of the lords of mystery?

We knew not. Pardon us. Very deranged were the words
that went out from us.

We who blindly brandish staffs cannot help breaking lamps.

435 We, like deaf men, without having heard a single thing spoken
(to us), are answering idly from our own surmise.

We have not taken warning from Moses, who was made
shamefaced^ by disbelief in a Khizr,

Notwithstanding (that he had) an eye that sped aloft, and
the light of his eye was piercing heaven.

0 Moses (of this age), through foolishness the eye of a mill-
mouse has fanatically set itself against thine eye.’^

The Shaykh said, “I forgive all that talk and palaver: it is
lawful to you^.

440 The secret of this (matter) was that I besought God: con-
sequently He showed me the right way,

And said, ‘Though that dinar is little, yet (the payment of)
it is dependent on the boy’s outcry.

Until the^a/2(;d-selling boy weeps, the sea of (My) mercy is
not aroused’.”

O brother, the child (boy) is the child (pupil) of your eye :
know surely that (the gaining of) your desire is dependent on
(tears of) distress.

If you wish that that robe of honour (which you desire)
should come (to you), then make the child (pupil) of your eye
weep over your body.

How a certain person frightened an ascetic^ sayings
“ Weep little^ lest thou become hlindy

445 A comrade in the work (of religion) said to an ascetic, “Weep
little, lest thine eye come to harm,”

The ascetic said, “The case is not outside of (admits only)

^ Literally, “yellow-faced.**

® /.€. “ I acquit you of responsibility for it.**


THE SHAYKH AND THE CONFECTIONER'S BOY 245

two (alternatives): the eye will see, or it will not see, that
(Divine) Beauty.

If it see the Light of God, what is there to grieve about?
How little are two eyes (to him that is) in union with God !

And if it shall not see God, let it go ! Let such a miserable eye
become blind !

Do not grieve for your eye when that Jesus is yours; do not
go to the left (but to the right), that he may give you two right
(sound) eyes.

The Jesus of your spirit is present with you: beg aid from 450
him, for he is a goodly aider;

But do not every moment lay on the heart of (that) Jesus the
unprofitable work of (providing for) a body full of bones,

Like the fool whom we mentioned in the story for the sake
of the righteous.

Seek not you from your Jesus the life of the body, ask not
from your Moses the wish of a Pharaoh.

Burden not your heart with thoughts of livelihood ; livelihood
will not fail: be (constant in attendance) at the (Divine)
Court.

This body is a tent for the spirit, or like an ark for Noah. 455

When the Turcoman is there, he will find a tent, especially
when he is one held in honour at the Court (of God).

Conclusion of the story of the coming to life of the bones at the
prayer of Jesus, on whom be peace!

Jesus pronounced the Name of God over the bones on account
of the young man’s entreaty.

For the sake of that foolish man the decree of God gave life
to the form which those bones had possessed,

A black lion sprang forth, smote once with its paw, and
destroyed his (bodily) image.

It tore up ms skull: his brain was scattered on the spot — the .| 5 o
brain (kernel) of a nut, for in him was no brain.

If he had had a brain, his being broken to pieces would have
been no injury at all except to his body,

Jesus said (to the lion), “ How did you maul him so quickly? ”
The lion said, ‘‘Because thou wert troubled by him.”

Jesus asked, “How did not you drink the man’s blood?”
“In the (Divine) dispensation ’twas not granted to me to drink
(it),” replied the lion.

Oh, many a one that like that raging lion has departed from
the world without having eaten his prey !

His (ordained) portion is not (even) a straw, while his greed 465
is as (great as) a mountain ; he hath no means (of satisfying his
desires), though he has gotten the (material) means.


246 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

O Thou who hast made it easy for us to do unrewarded and
fruitless labour in the world, deliver us !

To us it seems a (tempting) bait and ’tis (really) a hook : show
it to us even as it is.

The lion said, “ O Messiah, (my killing) this prey was merely
for the purpose that warning might be taken (by others).

Had there (still) been for me in the world an allotted portion
(of food), what business indeed should I have had with the
dead?’’^

470 This is the punishment deserved by him that finds pure
water, and like an ass stales impertinently in the stream.

If the ass know the value of that stream, instead of his foot
he will put his head in it.

He (the fool) finds a prophet like that, a lord of the (life-
giving) Water, a cherisher of life :

How does not he die before him, saying “O lord of the
Water, make me living by the command ‘ Be’?

Take heed! do not wish your currish (fleshly) soul alive, for
it is the enemy of your spirit since long ago.

475 Dust be on the head of the bones that hinder this cur from
hunting the spirit^ 1

(If) you are not a cur, how are you in love with bones? Why
are you in love with blood, like a leech?

What (sort of) eye is that that hath no sight, and gets nothing
but dis^ace from the tests (to which it is put)?

Opinions are sometimes erroneous, (but) what (sort of)
opinion is this that is blind to the (right) road?

O eye, thou makest lament for others : sit down awhile and
weep for thyself!

4S0 The bough is made green and fresh by the weeping cloud,
for the (same) reason that the candle is made brighter by (its)
weeping.

Wheresoever people are lamenting, sit you there (and lament),
because you have a better right to moan (than they have).

Inasmuch as they are (concerned) with parting from that
which passes away, and are forgetful of the ruby of everlasting-
ness that belongs to the mine (of Reality) ;

Inasmuch as the stamp of blind imitation is (as) a lock upon
the heart; — go, scrape off (dissolve) its lock with tears — ;

Inasmuch as imitation is the bane of every good quality;
imitation is (but) a straw, (even) if it is a mighty mountain.

485 If a blind man is big and choleric, deem him (only) a piece of
flesh, since he has no eye (eye-sight).

Though he (the blind imitator) speak words finer than a hair,
his heart has no knowledge of those words.

J l,e. '*how should I have died?"'

I.e. from seeking to become spiritualised.


THE fool's prayer GRANTED BY JESUS 247

He has a certain intoxication from his own words, but there
is a good way (distance) between him and the Wine.

He is like a river-bed : it does not drink any water ; the water
passes through it to the water-drinkers.

The water does not settle in the river-bed because the river-
bed is not thirsty and water-drinking.

Like a reed-flute, he makes a piteous lament, but he (only) 490
seeks a purchaser (admirer).

The imitator in nis discourse is (like) a professional mourner :
that wicked man has no motive except cupidity.

The professional mourner utters burning words (of grief), but
where is the glow of heart (heartfelt sorrow) and the rent skirt?

Between the true knower and the blind imitator there are
(great) differences, for the former is like David, while the other
is (but) an echo.

The source of the former’s words is a glow (of feeling),
whereas the imitator is one who learns old things (by rote).

Beware ! be not duped by those sorrowful words : the ox 495
bears the load, but it is the cart that moans (creaks)^.

Even the imitator is not disappointed of the (Divine) recom-
pense : the professional mourner gets his wages at the (time of)
reckoning.

(Both) infidel and true believer say ^*God,” but there is a
good diference between the two.

The beggar says “God” for the sake of bread; the devout
man says “ God” from his very soul.

If the beggar distinguished (God as He really is) from his
own saying (the name of God), neither less nor more would
remain before his eye-.

For years that bread-seeker says “God”; like the ass, he 500
carries the Qur’in for the sake of (being fed with) straw.

Had the word on his lips shone forth in his heart, his body
would have been shivered to atoms.

In sorcery the name of a demon finds the way (to success) ;
you are earning a petty coin by means of the Name of God.

How a peasant stroked a lion in the darky because he
thought it was his ox.

A peasant tied an ox in the stable : a lion ate his ox and sat in
its place.

The peasant went into the stable to (see) the ox: the man,
groping into corners, was seeking the ox at night.

He was rubbing his hand on the limbs of the lion, back and 505
side, now above, now below.

^ Literally, “the load is on the ox and the moaning on the cart."'

^ Le, he would lose all consciousness of self-interest.


248 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

The lion said, “If the light were to become greater, his gall-
bladder would burst and his heart would turn to blood.

He is stroking me like this so boldly because in this (dark)
night he thinks I am the ox.”

God is saying, “O blind dupe, did not Tur (Sinai) fall in
pieces at My Name?

For if We had sent down (revealed) a Book to the mountain,
it would have been riven asunder, then cut to pieces, and then
it would have departed (disappeared).

510 If Mount Uhud had been acquainted with Me, blood would
have gushed in jets from the mountain.”

You have heard this from your father and mother; in con-
sequence you have embraced it thoughtlessly.

If you become acquainted with Him without blind imitation,
by (His) grace you will become immaterial^, like a voice from
Heaven.

Hear this (following) story as a deterrent, in order that you
may know the banefulness of blind imitation.

How the Sufis sold the traveller's beast [to pay) for
the (expenses of the) mystic dance.

A Siifi, after journeying, arrived at a monastery (for Siifis);
he took his mount and led it to the stable.

515 With his own hand he gave it a little water and some fodder :
(he was) not such a S\ifi as the one we told of before.

He took precaution for it against neglect and craziness, (but)
when the (Divine) destiny comes to pass, of what avail is pre-
caution?

The Sufis were destitute and poor : poverty almost comprises
an infidelity that brings (the soul) to perdition.

O thou rich man who art full fed, beware of laughing at the
unrighteousness of the suffering poor.

On account of their destitution that Sdfi flock, all of them,
adopted (the expedient of) selling the ass,

520 Saying, “(In case) of necessity a carcase is lawful (food);
(there is) many a vicious act that necessity made a virtuous
one.”

They instantly sold the little ass ; they fetched dainty viands
and lit candles.

Jubilation arose in the monastery: (they cried), “To-night
there are dainties and music and dancing and voracity.

How much (more) of this (carrying the) wallet and this
beggary? How much (more) of this patience and of this
three-day fasting?


^ Literally, “without trace (of self-existence).”


THE Sl^FIS WHO SOLD THE TRAVELLER’S ASS 249

We also are of (God’s) creatures, we have soul. Good luck
(is ours) to-night: we have the guest (to entertain).”

Thereby they were sowing the seed of falsehood, for they 525
deemed soul that which is not soul.

And the traveller, too, was tired by the long journey and
(gladly) saw that favour and fondness (with which they regarded
him).

The Siifis, one by one, caressed him: they were playing the
game of (bestowing) pleasant attentions (on him).

When he saw their affection towards him, he said, If I don’t
make merry to-night, when (shall I do so)?”

They ate the viands and began^ the samd^ (musical dance) ;
the monastery was filled with smoke and dust up to the roof —

The smoke of the kitchen, the dust of (raised by) beating the 530
feet (dancing), the tumult of soul (caused) by longing and
ecstasy.

Now, waving their hands, they would beat (the ground with)
their feet; now, in (religious) prostration, they would sweep the
dais (with their foreheads).

(Only) after long (waiting) does the Stiff gain his desire (the
satisfaction of his appetite) from Fortune: for that reason the
Stiff is a great eater ;

Except, to be sure, the Stiff who has eaten his fill of the Light
of God : he is free from the shame of beggary ;

(But) of these Stiffs there arc (only) a few among thousands;
the rest are living in (under the protection of) his (the perfect
Stiff’s spiritual) empire.

When the sanid!^ had come (run its course) from beginning to 533
end, the minstrel struck up a heavy (deejp-sounding) strain.

He commenced (to sing), ‘‘The ass as gone, and the ass is
gone”; he made the whole (company) sharers in this en-
thusiasm.

From this enthusiasm (they continued) beating their feet
(dancing) till dawn, clapping their hands (and singing), “The
ass is gone, the ass is gone, O son!”

By way of imitation that Siiff began (to sing) in (tones of)
impassioned feeling this same (phrase), “The ass is gone.”

When the pleasure and excitement and music and dancing
were over, day dawned and they all said, “Farewell!”

The monastery was deserted, and the Soiff remained (alone) : 540
that traveller set about shaking the dust from his baggage.

He brought out the baggage from has cell, in order that he
might tie it on the ass, (for he was) desirous of (finding) people
to travel with.


^ This archaic construction = occurs several times in the

MathnazoL


250 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

He was hurrying that he might overtake his fellow-travellers ;
he went into the stable but did not find the ass.

He said, ‘‘ The servant has taken it (the ass) to water, because
it drank little water last night.”

The servant came, and the Siifi said to him, Where is the
ass?” ‘‘Look at your beard, replied the seiwant, and a
quarrel arose.

515 He (the Sufi) said, “I have entrusted the ass to you, I have
put you in charge of the ass.

Discuss (the matter) with propriety, don^t argue: deliver
back to me what I delivered to you.

I demand from you what I gave to you: return that which
I sent to you.

The Prophet said that whatever your hand has taken must in
the end be restored (to its owner).

And if you, from insolence, are not content with this, look
here, let us (go) to the house of the Cadi of (our) religion.”

550 The servant said, “I was overpowered: the Siifis rushed (on
me), and I was in fear for my life.

Do you throw a liver with the parts next it amongst cats, and
(then) seek the trace of it?

One cake of bread amongst a hundred hungry people, one
wasted (starved) cat before a hundred dogs? ”

“I suppose,” said the Sfifi, “that they took it (the ass) from
you by violence, (and thereby) aimed at the life of wretched me;

(And seeing this) you would not come and say to me, ‘They
are taking away your ass, O poor man ! ’

555 So that I might buy back the ass from (the purchaser)
whoever he is, or else, they might divide my money (amongst
themselves and return the ass to me).

There were a hundred ways of mending (the injury) when
they (the Sufis) were present, (but) now each one is gone to a
(di&rent) clime.

Whom should I seize? Whom should I take to the Cadi? 'Tis
from you in sooth that this judgement has come upon me.

How wouldn’t you come and say (to me), ‘O stranger, such
a terrible outrage has occurred’? ”

“By God,” said he, “I came several times to inform you of
these doings,

560 (But) you were always saying, ‘The ass is gone, 0 son,’ with
more gusto than all (the others) who said it.

(So) I was (always) going back, (thinking), ‘He himself is
aware; he is satisfied with this (Divine) judgement : he is a man
that knows (God)

The Siifi said, “They all were saying (it) merrily, (so) I also
took delight in saying it.

^ Le. “recollect how old you are (and don't ask such a foolish question).’'


THE SiJfIS who SOLD THE TRAVELLER’S ASS 251

Blind imitation of them has brought me to ruin : two hundred
curses be on that imitation !

Especially (on) imitation of such good-for-nothing rascals —
the wrath of Abraham be on them that sink !

The delight of that company (of Siifis) was casting a re- 565
flexion, and this heart of mine was becoming delighted by that
reflexion/’

The reflexion (cast) from goodly friends is necessary until
you become, without (the aid of any) reflexion, a drawer of
water from the Sea.

Know that the reflexion first cast is (only) imitation, (but)
when it has become successive (continually recurrent) it turns
into (direct) realisation (of the truth).

Until it has become realisation, do not part from the friends
(by whom you are guided) ; do not break away from the shell :
the rain-drop has not (yet) become a pearl.

If you wish eye and understanding and hearing to be pure,
tear in pieces the curtains of selfish desire.

Because the Sufi’s imitation, (which arose) from desire, 570
debarred his understanding from the light and radiance.

Desire for the viands and desire for that delight (shown by
the Sfifis) and for the samd hindered his understanding from
(gaining) knowledge (of what had happened).

If desire were to arise in the mirror, that mirror would
be like us in (respect of) hypocrisy.

If the balance had desire for riches, how would the balance
give a true description of the case?

Every prophet has said in sincerity to his people, ‘‘I ask not
from you the wages for my message.

I am (only) a guide ; Goa is your purchaser : God has appointed 575
me to act as broker on both sides.

What are the wages for my work? The sight of the Friend
(God), even though Ab\i Bakr give me forty thousand (dirhems).

My wages arc not his forty thousand (dirhems) : how should
glass beads be like the pearls of Aden? ”

I will tell you a stoiy: listen to it attentively, that you may
know that selfish desire is a plug in the ear.

Whosoever hath (such) desire becomes a stammerer (morally
confused) ; with desire (present), how should the (spiritual) eye
and the heart become bright?

The fancy of power and wealth before his eye is just as a hair
in the eye,

Except, to be sure, (in the case of) the intoxicated (saint)
who is filled with God : though you give (him) treasures (vast
riches), he is free;

(For) when any one enjoys vision (of God), this world becomes
carrion in his eyes.


252 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

But that Siifi was far removed from (spiritual) intoxication ;
consequently he was night-blind (purblind) in (his) greed.

The man dazed by greed may hear a hundred stories, (but)
not a single point comes into the ear of greed.


How the criers of the Cadi advertised an insolvefit round the towfi.

585 There was an insolvent person without house or home, w’^ho
remained in prison and pitiless bondage.

He would unconscionably eat the rations of the prisoners ; on
account of (his) appetite he was (a burden) like Mount Qaf on
the hearts of the people (in the gaol).

No one had the pluck to eat a mouthful of bread, because that
snatcher of portions would carry off his entire meal^.

Any one who is far from the feast of the Merciful (God) has
the eye of a (low) beggar, though he be a sultan.

He (the insolvent) had trodden virtue underfoot ; the prison
had become a hell on account of that robber of bread.

590 If you flee in hope of some relief, on that side also a calamity
comes to meet you.

No corner is without wild beasts ; there is no rest but in the
place where you are alone with God.

The corner (narrow cell) of this world^s inevitable prison is
not exempt from the charges for visitors and (the cost of) house-
warming.

By God, if you go into a mouse-hole, you will be afl&icted by
some one who has the claws of a cat.

Man has fatness from (thrives on) fancy, if his fancies are
beautiful ;

595 And if his fancies show anything unlovely he melts away as
wax (is melted) by a fire.

If amidst snakes and scorpions God keep you with the fancies
of them that are (spiritually) fair,

The snakes and scorpions will be friendly to you, because
that fancy is the elixir which transmutes your copper (into
gold).^

Patience is sweetened by fair fancy, since (in that case) the
fancies of relief (from pain) have come before (the mind).

That relief comes into the heart from faith : weakness of faith
is despair and torment,

600 Patience gains a crown from faith : where one hath no patience,
he hath no faith.

The Prophet said, “God has not given faith to any one in
whose nature there is no patience.”

^ Literally, “would carry off his ox.” The greedy insolvent is compared to
a lion.


THE GREEDY INSOLVENT 253

That same one (who) in your eyes is like a snake is a picture
(of beauty) in the eyes of another,

Because in your eyes is the fancy of his being an infidel, while
in the eyes of his friend is the fancy of his being a (true) believer ;

For both the effects (belief and unbelief) exist in this one
person: now he is a fish and now a hook.

Half of him is believer, half of him infidel; half of him 605
cupidity, half of him patience (and abstinence).

Your God has said, "(Some) of you (are) believing”-, (and)
again, “(Some) of you (are) unbelieving” (as) an old fire-wor-
shipper.

(He is) like an ox, his left half black, the other half white as
the moon.

Whoever secs the former half spurns (him) ; whoever sees the
latter half seeks (after him).

Joseph was like a beast of burden in the eyes of his brethren;
at the same time in the eyes of a Jacob he was like a houri.

Through evil fancy the (bodily) derivative eye and the original 610
unseen eye (of the mind) regarded him (Joseph) as ugly.

Know that the outward eye is the shadow of that (inward)
eye: whatever that (inward) eye may see, this (outward) eye
turns to that (eye).

You are of where’^, (but) your origin is in Nowhere^: shut up
this shop and open that shop.

Do not flee to the (world of the) six directions, because in
directions there is the shashdara-*, and the shashdara is mate,
mate.

How the prisoners laid a complaint of the insolvent's high-
handedness before the agent of the Cadi.

The prisoners came to complain to the Cadi’s agent, (who
was) possessed of discernment.

Saying, “Take now our salutations to the Cadi and relate 615
(to him) the sufferings inflicted on us by this vile man;

For he has remained in this prison continuously, and he is an
idle gad-about, a lickspittle, and a nuisance.

Like a fly, he impudently appears at every meal without
invitation and without salaam.

To him the food of sixty persons is nothing; he feigns himself
deaf if you say to him, ‘ Enough ! ’

No morsel reaches the (ordinary) man in prison, or if by
means of a hundred contrivances he discover some food,

That hell-throat at once comes forward (with) this (as) his 620
argument, that God has said, ‘Eat ye."

> Literally, “place.” * Literally, “not-place.”

^ A certain disastrous position in the game of nard.


254 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Justice, justice against such a three years’ famine ! May the
shadow of our lord endure for ever !

Either let this buffalo go from prison, or make him a regular
allowance of food from a trust-fund.

0 thou by whom both males and females are (made) happy,
do justice! Thy help is invoked and besought.

The courteous agent went to the Cadi and related the com-
plaint to him point by point.

625 The Cadi called him (the insolvent) from the prison into his
presence, and (then) inquired (about him) from his own officers.

All the complaints which that flock (of prisoners) had set
forth were proved to the Cadi.

The Cadi said (to him), “ Get up and depart from this prison ;
go to the house which is your inherited property.”

He replied, ‘‘My house and home consist in thy beneficence ;
as (in the case of) an infidel, thy prison is my Paradise.

If thou wilt drive me from the prison and turn me out^, verily
I shall die of destitution and beggary.”

630 (He pleaded) like the Devil, who was saying, “O Preserver,
0 my Lordy grant me a respite till the day of Resurrection ;

For I am happy (to be) in the prison of this world, in order
that I may be slaying the children of mine enemy,

(And), if any one have some food of faith and a single loaf as
provision for the journey (to the life hereafter),

1 may seize it, now by plot and now by guile, so that in re-
pentance they may raise an outcry (of lamentation) ;

(And in order that) sometimes I may threaten them with
poverty, sometimes bind their eyes with (the spell of) tress and
mole.”

635 In this prison (the world) the food of faith is scarce, and that
which exists is in (danger of being caught in) the noose (of
destruction) through the attack of this cur.

(If) from prayer and fasting and a hundred helplessnesses
(utter self-abnegations) the food of spiritual feeling come (to
any one), he (the Devil) at once carries it off.

I seek refuge with God from His Satan : we have perished,
alas, through his overweening disobedience.

He is (but) one cur, and he goes into thousands (of people) :
into whomsoever he goes, he (that person) becomes he (Satan).

Whoever makes you cold (damps your spiritual ardour) know
that he (Satan) is in him : the Devil has become hidden beneath
his skin,

640 When he finds no (bodily) form, he comes into (your) fancy,
in order that that fancy may lead you into woe :

Now the fancy of recreation, now of the shop ; now the fancy
of knowledge, and now of house and home.

^ Literally, “drive me with repulsion.”


256 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

They sped from quarter to quarter and from street to street,
till the whole town knew him by sight.

Before every bath and market-place all the people gazed on
his (features and) figure.

(There were) ten loud-voiced criers, Turks and Kurds and
Anatolians and Arabs, (proclaiming),

‘‘This man is insolvent and has nothing: let no one lend him
a single brass farthing;

665 He does not possess a single mite, patent or latent: he is a
bankrupt, a piece of falsehood^, a cunning knave, an oil-bag^.

Beware and beware! Have no dealings with him; when he
brings the ox (to sell), make fast the knot.

And if ye bring this decayed fellow to judgement, I will not
put a corpse in prison.

He is fair-spoken and his throat is very wide®; (he is clad)
with a new inner garment (of plausibility) and a tattered outer
garment.

If he puts on that (inner) garment for the purpose of deceiving,
it is borrowed in order that he may beguile the common folk.’^

670 Know, O simple man, that words of wisdom on the tongue of
the unwise are (as) borrowed robes.

Although a thief has put on a (fine) robe, how should he whose
hand is cut off^ take your hand (lend you a helping hand)?

When at nightfall he (the insolvent) came down from the
camel, the Kurd said to him, “My abode is far (from here) and
a long way off.

You have ridden on my camel since early morning: I (will)
let the barley go, (but I will not take) less than the cost of (some)
straw.’’

“Why, then,” he rejoined, “have we been going round (the
city) until now? Where are your wits? Is nobody at home?

675 The (sound of the) drum (giving notice) of my insolvency
reached the Seventh Heaven, and you have not heard the bad
news!

Your ear has been filled with foolish hope; (such) hope, then,
makes (one) deaf (and) blind, my lad.”

Even clods and stones heard this advertisement — “he is
insolvent, he is insolvent, this scoundrel.”

^ They (the criers) said it till nightfall, and it made no impres-
sion on the owner of the camel, because he was full of (idle)
hope, full.

God’s seal lies upon the hearing and sight: within the veils
is many a form and many a sound.

J Literally, “false coin.”

^ I.e. smooth-tongued and deceitful, “a windbag.”

® I.e. he pours forth fine words in abundance.

* The usual penalty for theft.


THE GREEDY INSOLVENT


257

He communicates to the eye that which He wills of beauty 680
and of perfection and of amorous looks ;

And He communicates to the ear that which He wills of music
and glad tidings and cries (of rapture).

The world is full of remedies, but you have no remedy till
God opens a window for you.

Though you are unaware of that (remedy) just now, God will
make it plain in the hour of need.

The Prophet said that the glorious God has created a remedy
for every pain ;

But of that remedy for your pain you will not see (even) the 685
colour or scent without His command.

Come, O you that seek the remedy, set your eye on non-
spatiality^, as the eye of one (about to be) killed (turns) towards
the spirit.

This (spatial) world has been produced from that which is
without spatial relations, for the world has received (the relation
of) place from placelessness.

Turn back from existence towards non-existence, (if) you
seek the Lord and belong to the Lord.

This non-existence is the place of income : do not flee from
it; this existence of more and less is the place of expenditure.

Since God’s workshop is non-existence, outside of the work- 6<;o
shop there is (only) worthlessness.

Put into our heart subtle words which may move Thee to
mercy, O Gracious One!

From Thee (come) both the prayer and the answer ; from Thee
safety, from Thee also dread.

If we have spoken faultily, do Thou correct it: Thou art the
Corrector, O Thou (who art the) Sultan of speech.

Thou hast the alchemy whereby Thou mayst transmute it,
and though it be a river of blood, mayst make it a Nile.

Such alchemical operations are Thy work, such elixirs are Thy
secrets.

Thou didst beat water and earth together: from water and
clay Thou didst mould the body of Adam.

Thou gavest him (Man) lineage and wife and uncles, maternal
and paternal, with a thousand thoughts and joys and griefs.

Again, to some Thou hast given deliverance: Thou hast
parted them from this grief and joy ;

Thou hast borne them away from kindred and relatives and
(their own) nature, Thou hast made every fair thing foul in his
(such a one’s) eyes.

He spurns all that is perceived by the senses, and leans for ;oo
support on that which is invisible.

^ J.e. the Divine consciousness which transcends space.

® Literally, “has become place.**


258 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

His love is manifest and his Beloved is hidden: the Friend is
outside (of the world), (but) His fascination is in the world.

Give up this (belief)^. Loves (felt) for what is endued with
form have not as their object the (outward) form or the lady’s
face.

That which is the object of love is not the form, whether it be
love for (the things of) this world or yonder world.

That which you have come to love for its form — why have
you abandoned it after the spirit has fled.^^

705 Its form is still there: whence (then) this satiety (disgust)?
O lover, inquire who your beloved (really) is.

If the beloved is that which the senses perceive, every one
that has senses would be in love (with it).

Inasmuch as constancy is increased by that (spiritual) love,
how is constancy altered (impaired) by the (decay of the material)
form?

The sunbeam shone upon the wall: the wall received a
borrowed splendour.

Why set your heart on a piece of turf, 0 simple man? Seek
out the source which shines perpetually.

710 You who are in love with your intellect, deeming yourself
superior to worshippers of form,

That (intellect) is a beam of (Universal) Intellect (cast) on your
sense-perception; regard it as borrowed gold on your copper.

Beauty in hxxmankind is like gilding; else, how did your
sweetheart become (as ugly as) an old ass?

She was like an angel, she became like a demon, for that
loveliness in her was a borrowed (transient) thing.

Little by little He (God) takes away that beauty: little by
little the sapling withers.

715 Go, recite (the text) to whomso We grant length of days, him
We cause to decline. Seek the heart (spirit), set not thy heart on
bones ;

For that beauty of the heart is the lasting beauty; its lips give
to drink of the Water of Life.

Truly it is both the water and the giver of drink and the
drunken; all three become one when your talisman is shattered.

That oneness you cannot know by reasoning. Do service (to
God) and refrain from foolish gabble, O undisceming man !

Your reality is the form and that which is borrowed: you
rejoice in what is relative and (secondary like) rhyme,

730 Reality is that which seizes (enraptures) you and makes you
independent of form.

Reality is not that which makes blind and deaf and causes a
man to be more in love with form.

The portion of the blind is the fancy that increases pain ; the

^ I.e, the belief in phenomena.


THE NATURE OF TRUE LOVE 259

share of the (spiritual) eye is these fancies (ideas) of dying to
SQlf (fand).

The blind are a mine (full) of the letter of the Qur’an : they
do not see the ass, and (only) cling to the pack-saddle.

Since you have sight, go after the ass which has jumped (away
from you) : how long (will you persist in) stitching the saddle,

O saddle- worshipper?

When the ass is there, the saddle will certainly be yours : bread 735
does not fail when you have the (vital) spirit.

(On) the back of the ass is shop and wealth and gain ; the pearl
of your heart is the stock (which provides wealth) for a hundred
bodies.

Mount the ass bare-backed, O busybody : did not the Prophet
ride the ass bare-backed?

The Prophet rode (his beast) bare-backed; and the Prophet,
it is said, journeyed on foot.

The ass, your fleshly soul, has gone off; tie it to a peg. How
long will it run away from work and burden, how long?

It must bear the burden of patience and thanksgiving, whether 730
for a hundred years or for thirty or twenty.

None that is laden supported another’s load; none reaped
until he sowed something.

’Tis a raw (absurd) hope ; eat not what is raw, O son : eating
raw brings illness to men.

(Do not say to yourself), ‘‘So-and-so suddenly found a trea-
sure; I would like the same: neither work nor shop (for me)!”

That (discovery of treasure) is Fortune's doing (a piece of
luck), and moreover it is rare: one must earn a living so long as
the body is able.

How does earning a livelihood prevent the (discovery of) 735
treasure? Do not retire from work: that (treasure), indeed, is
(following) behind (the work).

See that you are not made captive by “if,” saying, “ If I had
done this or the other (thing),”

For the sincere Prophet forbade (people) to say “if,” and
said, “That is from hypocrisy”;

For the hypocrite died in saying “if,” and from saying “if”
he won nothing but remorse.

Parable.

A certain stranger was hastily seeking a house : a friend took
him to a house in ruins.

He said (to the stranger), “ If this (house) had a roof, it would 740
be a home for you beside me.

Your family too would be comfortable, if it had another room
in it.”

17-3


26 o MATHNAWI, book II

“Yes/' said he, “it is nice (to be) beside friends, but my dear
soul, one cannot lodge in ‘if’/'

All the world are seekers of happiness, and on account of a
false happiness they are in the fire.

Old and young^ have become gold-seekers, but the common
eye does not distinguish alloy from gold.

745 The pure (gold) shot a beam on the alloy: see that you
choose not the gold on the ground of (mere) opinion, without
a touchstone.

If you have a touchstone, choose; otherwise, go, devote your-
self to^ him that knows (the difference).

Either you must have a touchstone within your own soul, or
if you know not the Way, do not go forward alone.

The cry of the ghouls is the cry of an acquaintance — an
acquaintance who would lure you to perdition.

She (the ghoul) keeps on crying, “Hark, O caravan people!
Come towards me, here is the track and the landmarks."

750 The ghoul mentions the name of each, saying “ O so-and-so,"
in order that she may make that personage one of those who sink.

When he reaches the spot, he sees wolves and lions, his life
lost, the road far off, and the day late.

Prithee say, what is the ghoul's cry like? (It is) “I desire
riches, I desire position and renown."

Prevent these voices from (entering) your heart, so that
(spiritual) mysteries may be revealed.

Repeat (in prayer) the name of God, drown® the cry of the
ghouls, close your narcissus-eye to this vulture.

755 ^ Know the difference between the false dawn and the true,
distinguish the colour of the wine from the colour of the cup,

That, perchance, from the eyes which see the seven colours-
patience and waiting may produce a (spiritual) eye,

(With which) you may behold colours other than these, and
may behold pearls instead of stones.

What pearl? Nay, you will become an ocean, you will become
a sun traversing the sky.

The Worker is hidden in the workshop: go you and in the
workshop see Him plain.

760 Inasmuch as the work has woven a veil over the Worker, you
cannot see Him outside of that work.

Since the workshop is the dwelling-place of the Worker, he that
is outside is unaware of Him.

Come, then, into the workshop, that is to say, non-existence,
that you may see the work and the Worker together.

As the workshop is the place of clairvoyance, then outside of
the workshop there is (only) blindfoldness.

^ Literally, “raw.”

* Literally, “put yourself in pawn to.” » Literally, “burn.”


THE QUEST FOR REALITY 261

The rebellious Pharaoh kept his face towards existence,
consequently he was blind to His (God’s) workshop.

Consequently he was wishing to alter the (Divine) pre- 765
destination, that he might turn back the (Divine) destiny from
his door.

Truly the (Divine) destiny every moment was laughing
derisively under its lip at the moustache (arrogance) of that
cunning plotter.

He killed hundreds of thousands of innocent babes, in order
that the ordainment and predestination of God might be averted.

In order that the prophet Moses might not come forth, he
laid on his neck (made himself responsible for) thousands of
iniquities and murders.

He wrought all that bloodshed, and (yet) Moses was born and
was made ready for his chastisement.

Had he seen the workshop of the Everlasting (God), he would 770
have ceased to move hand or foot^ in plotting.

Moses (lay) safe^ within his (Pharaoh’s) house, while outside
he was killing the infants in vain,

Even as the sensual man who pampers his body and suspects
some one else of a bitter hatred (against him),

Saying, ‘^This one is a foe, and that one is envious and an
enemy,” (though) in truth his envier and enemy is that body
(of his).

He is like Pharaoh, and his body is his Moses: he keeps
running (to and fro) outside, asking, "‘Where is my enemy? ”

His fleshly soul (is) luxuriating in the house, which is his body, 775
(while) he gnaws his hand in rancour against some one else.


How men blamed a person who killed his mother because he
suspected her {of adultery),

A certain man killed his mother in wrath, with blows of a
dagger and also with blows of his fist.

Some one said to him, “From evil nature you have not borne
in mind what is due to motherhood.

Hey, tell (me) why you killed your mother. What did she
do? Pray, tell (me), O foul villain!”®

He said, “She did a deed that is a disgrace to her; I killed
her because that earth (her grave) is her coverer (hides her
shame).”

The other said, “0 honoured sir, kill that one (who was her 780
partner in guilt).” “Then,” he replied, “I should kill a man
every day.

^ Literally, **his hand and foot would have become dry (paralysed).**

® Literally, '‘preserved from harm (by God).**

* Literally, “ O man of wicked disposition.**


262 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

I killed her, I was saved from shedding the blood of a multi-
tude: ’tis better that I cut her throat than the throats of (so
many) people.’’

That mother of bad character, whose wickedness is in every
quarter, is your fleshly soul.

Come, kill it, for on account of that vile (creature) you are
every moment assailing one who is venerable.

Through it this fair world is narrow (distressful) to you, for
its sake (you are at) war with God and man.

785 (If) you have killed the fleshly soul, you are delivered from
(the necessity of) excusing yourself: nobody in the world remains
your enemy.

If any one should raise a diiSiculty about my words in regard
to^ the prophets and saints,

(And should say), ^‘Had not the prophets a killed (mortified)
fleshly soul? Why, then, had they enemies and enviers?” —

Give ear, 0 seeker of truth, and hear the answer to this
difficulty (born) of doubt.

Those unbelievers were (really) enemies to themselves : they
were striking at themselves such blows (as they struck).

790 An enemy is one who attempts (another’s) life; he that is
himself destroying his own life is not an enemy (to others).

The little bat is not an enemy to the sun : it is an enemy to
itself in the veil (of its own blindness).

The glow of the sun kills it; how should the sun ever suffer
annoyance from it?

An enemy is one from whom torment proceeds, (one who)
hinders the ruby from (receiving the rays of) the sun.

All the infidels hinder themselves from (receiving) the rays
of the prophets’ (spiritual) jewel.

795 How should (unbelieving) people veil the eyes of that peerless
one (the prophet or saint)? The people have (only) blinded and
distorted their own eyes.

(They are) like the Indian slave who bears a grudge and kills
himself to spite his master:

He falls headlong from the roof of the house (in the hope)
that he may have done some harm to his master.

If the sick man become an enemy to the physician, or if the
boy show hostility to the teacher,

In truth they act as brigands against themselves : they them-
selves waylay tiheir own mind and spirit.

800 If a fuller take offence at the sun, if a fish is taking offence at
the water,

Just once consider whom that (anger) injures, and whose star
is eclipsed^ by it in the end.

^ I.e, “As regards their being applicable to.**

® Literally, “who is black-starred,**


THE MORTIFICATION OF THE FLESHLY SOUL 263

If God create you with ugly features, take care lest you
become both ugly-featured and ugly-natured ;

And if your shoes are ripped, do not go into stony ground;
and if you have two spikes, don't become four-spiked^.

You are envious, saying, “I am inferior to so-and-so: he (by
his superior position) is increasing my inferiority in fortune."

(But) indeed envy is another defect and fault; nay, it is worse S05
than all inferiorities.

That Devil (Satan), through the shame and disgrace of
inferiority (to Adam), cast himself into a hundred damna-
tions

Because of envy, he wished to be at the top. At the top,
forsooth! Nay, (he wished) to be a blood-shedder.

Abu Jahl was put to shame by Mohammed, and because of
envy was raising himself to the top.

His name was Abu 'l-Idakam, and he became Ab\i JahP: oh,
many a worthy has become unworthy because of envy.

I have not seen in the world of search and seeking (trial and Sio
probation) any worthiness better than a good disposition.

God made the prophets the medium (between Him and His
creatures) in order that feelings of envy should be displayed in
the agitation (produced by something that rankles in the mind).

Inasmuch as no one was disgraced by (inferiority to) God,
no one was (ever) envious of God;

(But) the person whom he deemed like himself — he would
bear envy against hun for that reason.

(Now), as the grandeur of the Prophet has become established,
none feels envy (of him), since he is accepted (by all the Faith-
ful);

Therefore in every epoch (after Mohammed) a saint arises 815
(to act as his vicegerent): the probation (of the people) lasts
until the Resurrection,

Whosoever has a good disposition is saved; whosoever is of
frail heart^ is broken.

That saint, then, is the living Imam who arises (in every age),
whether he be a descendant of ‘Umar or of ‘AH.

He is the Mahdi (the God-guided one) and the Hddi (the
Guide), O seeker of the (right) way: he is both hidden (from
you) and seated before your face.

Fie is as the Light (of Mohammed), and (Universal) Reason
is his Gabriel ; the saint that is lesser than he is his lamp (and
receives illumination from him).

^ l,e. ‘‘if you are being tortured with a two-spiked collar, do not put on
one with four spikes,”

“ Literally, “deprivation (of spiritual blessings),”

3 Abu ’1-Hakam means “ Father of the (wise) judge.” The nickname, Abd
Jahl, means “ Father of ignorance,”

* Literally, “glass-hearted,” i.e. weak and vicious.


264 MATHNAWf, BOOK 11

820 That (saint) who is lesser than this lamp is our lamp-niche :
the Light has gradations in degree,

Because the Light of God has seven hundred veils: regard
the veils of the Light as so many tiers.

Behind each veil a certain class (of saints) has its place of
abode : these veils of theirs are (in ascending order), rank by rank,
up to the Imam.

Those in the last (lowest) rank, through their weakness, (arc
such that) their eyes cannot endure the light in front (of
them) ;

And that front rank, from weakness of sight, cannot support
the light that is more advanced.

825 The light that is the life of the first (highest rank) is heartache
and tribulation to this squinter;

(But) the squintnesses, little by little, grow less, and when he
passes beyond the seven hundred (veils), he becomes the Sea.

The fire that does good to iron or gold — how is it good for
fresh quinces and apples?

The apple and quince have (only) a slight crudity: unlike
iron, they want a gentle heat;

But those flames are (too) gentle for the iron, for it is (eagerly)
drawing to (itself) the heat of that (fiery) dragon.

830 ^ That iron is the dervish who bears hardship (self-mortifica-
tion) : under the hammer and the fire he is red and happy.

He is the chamberlain of the fire (and) in immediate touch
(with it) : he goes into the heart of the fire without (any) link
(between the fire and him).

Without some screen, water and water’s children get no
cooking or conversation from the fire.

The medium is a pot or a pan — as (the medium) for the foot
in walking (is) a sock (shoe) —

Or a space between, so that the air becomes burning hot and
brings (the fire) to the water.

835 The dervish, then, is he that has no intermediary: the flames
have (direct) connexion with his being.

Therefore he is the heart of the world, because by means of
this heart the body attains to (its proper) art (function).

(If) the heart be not there, how can the boay talk and speak?
(If) the heart seek not, how can the body seek and search?

Therefore the theatre of the (Divine) rays is that iron ; there-
fore the theatre of God is the heart, not the body.

Again, these partial (individual) hearts are as the body in
relation to the heart of the man of heart (the perfect saint),
which is the original source.

840 This argument wants much illustration and exposition, but
I fear lest the opinion of the vulgar should stumble (and fall
into error).


THE ILLUMINATION OF THE SAINTS 265

(And) lest my goodness should be turned (by them) to
badness ; — even this that I have spoken was (from) naught but
selflessness^.

The crooked shoe is better for the crooked foot ; the beggar’s
power reaches only as far as the door^.


How the King made trial of the two slaves whom he had
recently purchased,

A King bought two slaves cheap, and conversed with one of
the twain.

He found him quick-witted and answering sweetly: what
issues from the sugar-lip? Sugar- water.

Man is concealed underneath his tongue : this tongue is the S45
curtain over the gate of the soul.

When a gust of wind has rolled up the curtain, the secret of
the interior of the house is disclosed to us,

(And we see) whether in that house there are pearls or (grains
of) wheat, a treasure of gold or whether all is snakes and
scorpions ;

Or whether a treasure is there and a serpent beside it, since
a treasure of gold is not without some one to keep watch.

Without premeditation he (that slave) would speak in such
wise as others after five hundred premeditations.

You would have said that in his inward part there was a sea, 850
and that the whole sea was pearls of eloquence,

(And that) the light that shone from every pearl became a
criterion for distinguishing between truth and falsehood.

(So) would the light of the Criterion (Universal Reason), (if it
shone into our hearts), distinguish for us truth and falsehood and
separate them mote by mote ;

The light of the (Divine) Pearl would become the light of
our eyes : both the question and the answer would be (would
come) from us.

^ (But) you have made your eyes awry and seen the moon’s
disk double: this gazing in perplexity is like the question.

Make your eyes straight in the moonshine, so that you may 855
see the moon as one. Lo, (that is) the answer.

Tell your thought not to see awry and to look well (rightly) :
that thought is the radiance of that Pearl.

Whenever an answer comes to the heart through the ear, the
eye says, “Hear it from me; let that (answer given through the
ear) alone!”

The ear is a go-between, while the eye is possessed of union

I,e. spoken under the influence of ecstasy.

® Literally, **the beggar has power over the door (only),’' i,e, he cannot
penetrate to the interior of the house.


366 MATHNAWi, BOOK II

(immediate vision); the eye has direct experience (of reality),
while the ear has (only) words (doctrine).

In the ear's hearing there is a transformation of qualities;
in the eyes’ seeing there is a transformation of essence.

860 If your knowledge of fire has been turned to certainty by
words (alone), seek to be cooked (by the fire itself), and do not
abide in the certainty (of knowledge derived from others).

There is no intuitive (actual) certainty until you burn ; (if)
you desire this certainty, sit down in the fire.

When the ear is penetrating, it becomes an eye; otherwise,
the word (of God) becomes entangled in the ear (and does not
reach the heart).

This discourse hath no end. Turn back, that (we may see)
what the King did to those slaves of his.


How the Kinp smt away one of the two slaves and interrogated

the other.

When he saw that that laddie^ was possessed of keen intelli-
gence, he made a sign to the other to come (to him).

865 (If) I have called him by (a word which has) the suffix of pity
(tenderness)^, ’tis not to belittle him: if a grandfather say “my
sonny,” it is not (in) 'contempt.

When the secona (slave) came before the King, he had a
stinking mouth and black teeth.

Although the King was displeased by his speech®, still he made
some inquiry concerning his hidden thoughts.

He said, “With this aspect and this stinking mouth, sit at a
distance, but do not move too far off^ —

For (hitherto) you have been (with regard to me in the posi-
tion of) a writer of letters and notes; you have not been a
companion and friend and comrade —

8;o That we may treat (and cure) that mouth of yours : you are
(now) the beloved (patient), and we are the skilful physician.

’Tis not fitting to bum a new blanket on account of one flea;
(nor would it become me) to shut my eyes to (turn my back on)
you (because of superficial faults).

Notwithstanding all (this), sit down and talk on a few topics®,
that I may well see the form of your mind.”

Then he sent that keen-witted one away to do (his behest) :
(he sent him) to a bath-house, saying, “Go, scrub yourself.”

^ Literally, little slave” {ghuldmak).

^ Literally, “the kdf of pity,” i,e, the diminutive suffix ak^ used to express
affection.

® J.e. becaxfte of his foul breath,

* Literally, “more to that side.”

^ Literally, “tell two or three stories.”


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 267

And to this other one he said, ‘‘Good! you are a clever lad:
in truth you are a hundred slaves, not one.

You are not such as your fellow-servant declared : that envious 875
one would (fain) have made me cold to (disgusted with) you,

(For) he said that you are^ thievish and dishonest and ill-
behaved, immoral and infamous and so forth.”

The slave said, “He (my fellow-servant) has always been
veracious; I have not seen any one so truthful as he is.

Veracity is inborn in his nature; whatever he says, I do not
say it is void (of truth).

I deem not that good-minded one malicious: I (rather)
suspect my own person.

Maybe, he sees in me faults I do not see in myself, O King.” sso

Any one who saw his own faults before (seeing those of others)
—how indeed should he be unconcerned with correcting himself?

These people (of the world) take no heed of themselves, O
father: consequently they blame one another.

O idolater (dualist), (if) I do not behold my own face (reality),

I behold thy face and thou beholdest mine.

He that beholds his own face (reality) — his light is greater
than the light of the creatures (of God),

Though he die, his sight is everlasting, because his sight is 885
the sight of the Creator.

That light by which he sensibly beholds his own face (reality)
before him, is not the light of sense.

The King said, “Now tell his (your fellow-servant’s) faults,
just as he spoke of yours,

That I may know whether you are solicitous for me and a
(good) house-steward of my property and business.”

He replied, “ 0 King, I will tell his faults, though he is to me
a pleasing fellow-servant.

His faults are affection and loyalty and humanity ; his faults sqo
are sincerity and keen-wittedness and cordial comradeship.

His least fault is generosity and bounty — the generosity that
even gives up life.”

God has brought to view myriads of lives (in return for the
life given up) : what generosity would there be (in him) that saw
not those?

And if he saw them, how should he grudge his life? How
should he become so grieved for the sake of one life?

On the river-bank, water is grudged by him (alone) that is
blind to the stream of water.

The Prophet said,“ Whosoever knows for sure his recompense 895
on the day of Resurrection —

That his compensation will be ten for one — at every moment
a different (act of) munificence will issue from him.”

1 Literally, *‘he is.”


268


MATHNAWI, BOOK II

All munificence is from seeing compensations; therefore
seeing the compensation is opposed to fearing (and shrinking
from the act of munificence).

Miserliness consists in not seeing compensations : the prospect
of pearls keeps the diver glad.

Hence no one in the world is miserly, since no one hazards
anything without (seeing) what is to be received in exchange.

900 Generosity, then, comes from the eye, not from the hand:
’tis seeing that matters; none but the seer is saved.

“Another fault (of his is) that he is not self-conceited ; he is
anxious to find fault with his self-existence.

He has (always) been one who speaks in blame of himself and
seeks to blame himself ; he has (always) been good (kind) to all
and bad (unkind) to himself.”

The King said, “Do not show (such) eagerness in praising
your friend, do not introduce praise of yourself in the mask of
(your) praise of him ;

Because I will bring him to the test, and shame will befall
you in the upshot.”


How the slave y from the purity of his thought y swore to the
truth and loyalty of his friend.

903 He said, “Nay, by Allah, and by the great God, the possessor
of kingdom, and by the Merciful and Compassionate One;

By the God who sent the prophets, not in (His) need (of them) ,
but in grace and majesty;

By the Lord who from the lowly earth created (those)
glorious princely riders^,

(And) purified them from the temperament of earthly beings,
and caused them to outrun the celestials ;

(By Him) who took up from the Fire and fashioned into pure
Light — and then it outstripped all (the other) lights —

910 That splendour of lightning which shone over the spirits,
so that Adam gained from that Light (his) knowledge (of
God).

The hand of Seth gathered that which grew from Adam:
^ therefore Adam, when he saw that (Light in him), made him
his vicar.

Since Noah had enjoyment of that Jewel, he showered pearls
(of Divme wisdom) in the air of the Sea of Soul.

From (possession of) that mighty radiance the spirit of
Abraham went fearlessly into the flames of the fire.

When Ismd^fl (Ishmael) fell into the stream thereof, he laid
his head before his (Abraham’s) flashing knife.


^ I.e. riders of supreme dexterity.


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 269

The soul of David was heated by its rays : iron became soft 915
in his hand-loom^.

When Solomon was suckled on (the milk of) union with it,
the demon became a thrall to his command and obedient.

When Jacob bowed his head (in submission) to the (Divine)
destiny, it (the Light) illumined (gladdened) his eye with the
scent of his (lost) son.

When the moon-faced Joseph beheld that Sun, he became so
wide-awake (wise) in the interpretation of dreams.

When the rod drank water (was imbued with the influence of
the Light) from the hand of Moses, it made one mouthful of
Pharaoh’s empire.

When Jesus, the son of Mary, found its ladder, he sped to the 9^0
topmost height of the Fourth Dome (of Heaven).

When Mohammed gained that Kingdom and Felicity, he in a
moment clave the disk of the moon in two halves.

When Abu Bakr became a signal example of (God’s) favour,
he became the Companion of such a King (as Mohammed) and
(received the name) Siddiq^.

When ‘Umar became distraught with that Beloved, he
became a Fdruq (discerner)^, like the heart, between truth and
falsehood.

When ‘Uthman became the fountain of that clear (Essence),
he was light overflowing and became Dhu H-Nilrayn (Lord of
the Two Lights)**.

When at (the sight of) its countenance Murtaza (‘AH) began 925
to scatter pearls (of spiritual truth), he became the Lion of God
in the pasture of the soul.

When Junayd received that support (which he received)
from its army, his maqdmdt (stages of progress in the mystical
life) became innumerable.

Biyazid saw the way into its superabundance, and heard
from God (heard God bestow upon him) the name, “Pole of
the Gnostics.”

When Karkhi became the guard of its city, he became the
vicar of (Divine) love and inspired by the Divine breath.

The son of Adham joyously rode his steed towards it, and
became the supreme sovereign of justice.

And that (famous) Shaqiq by cleaving (traversing) that vener- 930
able Way became a sun of (clear) judgement and keen-sighted.

Hundreds of thousands of hidden (spiritual) kings are holding
their heads high (in the region) beyond this world ;

^ For dasthdf cf. i. 49a and n. 2651, and for the metaphor Ka*b b. Zuhayr
in Ndldeke*s Delectus y p. 144, v. 55, God taught David the art of making
coats of mail (Qur^dn, xxi, 80).

® /.e. “exceedingly veracious.*'

® Fdniq was a title given to *Umar.

* He was so named because he had married two daughters of the Prophet.


270 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Because of God’s jealousy their names remained hidden:
every beggar did not pronounce their names.

By the truth of that Light and by the truth of those illumined
ones who are as fishes in that Sea —

’Tis not fitting if I call it the Sea of the Soul and the Soul of
the Sea : I am seeking a new name for it ; —

935 By the truth of that That from which this and that arc
(derived), and in relation to which (all) kernels are as rinds,

(I swear) that the (good) qualities of my fellow-servant and
friend exceed my description (of them) a hundredfold.

That which I know of the (spiritual) endowments of that
comrade (of mine) would not be believed by thee: what shall
I say, O noble (king).^ ”

The King said, ''Now speak of your own (case); how long
will you speak of what concerns this or that one?

What do you possess and what have you gained? What
pearls have you fetched from the bottom of the Sea?

940 On the day of death this sense-perception of yours will
vanish: have you the spiritual light that should be the com-
panion of your heart?

When dust shall fill these eyes in the tomb, have you that
which will make the grave bright?

At the time when your hands and feet shall be torn in shreds,
have you wings and plumes that your spirit may fly aloft?

At the time when this animal soul is no more, it behoves you
to set the everlasting spirit in its place.

The stipulation of (implied in) he that comes with good {shall
be rewarded tenfold) does not consist in doing (good) ; it consists
in bringing this good to the presence of God*

945 You have a substance (essence) human or asinine (bestial):
(bring that to God) : how can you bring (to Him) these accidents
(of word or deed) which have passed away?

As regards these accidents of prayer and fasting — since (that
which) does not endure for two moments becomes naught —

Tis impossible to carry over the accidents (into another state) ;
but they (may) take away diseases (defects) from the substance,

So that the substance becomes changed by means of this
accident, as when disease is removed by abstinence.

By exertion abstinence, (which is) the accident, becomes the
substance: through abstinence the acrid mouth becomes (sweet
as) honey.

950 Land, through sowing, is turned into ears of corn; remedies
for the hair turn the hair into chains (make it long and curly).

Conjugal intercourse was the accident ; it passed away, and
the substance, (which is) the child, was produced from us.

The mating of horse or camel is the accident; the object is
the birth of the colt, (which is) the substance.


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 271

Similarly, the planting of the garden is the accident; the
produce of the garden became the substance — ^behold the object
(for which the garden was planted) !

Regard, also, the practice of alchemy as the accident; if a
substance is produced by that alchemy, bring (it into view).

Burnishing is the accident, O prince; from this accident is 955
born the substance, purity.

Do not say, then, ‘I have done deeds’; show the income
(fruit) of those accidents, do not evade (my request).

This attribution of qualities is (only) an accident. Be silent:
do not kill for sacrifice the goat’s shaaow!”

The slave said, “ O King, the mind cannot but despair^ if you
say that accidents are not carried over.

O King, there is nothing but despair for the servant (of God),
if the accident that has gone is not coming back.

If there were no carrying over and resurrection of accidents, 9^^^^
action would be vain and words (mere) babble.

These accidents are carried over in another guise: the
resurrection of everything mortal is another (mode of) existence.

The carrying over of everything is just as befits it^ : what befits
the herd is its drover.

At the time of the Resurrection every accident has a (particular)
form, and the form of every accident has a turn (of appearing
before God).

Look on thyself. Wert not thou an accident — the movement
of copulation, and copulation with a purpose?

Look on houses and edifices : they were as tales in the (mind 9^55
of) the architect.

Such-and-such a house, which seemed to us beautiful, of
which the hall, roof, and door were well-proportioned —

(’Twas) the accident (design) and ideas (proceeding) from the
architect (that) brought the tools and pillars (into existence)
from (their respective) handicrafts.

What but some fancy and accident and idea is the origin and
source of every handicraft?

Look disinterestedly on all the (various) parts of the world:
they are not the result of (anything) except accident.

The beginning, which is thought, comes to an end in action;
know that in such wise was the construction of the world in
eternity.

The fruits are first in the mind’s thought, (but only) at the
last do they become manifest actually :

When you have done work (and) planted the tree — at the end
(when the fruit appears) you read the first words.

^ Literally, “it is not without despair of the understanding:.”

- Le, everything is carried over into the form of existence that is suitable
to its nature.


272 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Although its boughs, leaves, and roots are first, (yet) all those
are sent for the sake of the fruit.

Hence that hidden Thought which was the brain (core) of
those (nine) heavens was in the end the lord of lawldk}.

975 This discussion and talk are (involve) the carrying over of
accidents; this lion and jackal are (examples of) the carrying
over of accidents.

Indeed, all created beings were accidents (once), so that in
this sense (the text) was revealed — Did there not come,,.}

Whence arise those accidents? From ideas. And whence
arise these ideas? From thoughts.

This world is one thought (emanating) from the Universal
Intellect: the Intellect is like a king, and the ideas (are his)
envoys.

The first world is the world of probation ; the second world
is the (world of) recompense for this and that.

9S0 Thy servant, O King, commits a sin : that accident becomes
(a substance, namely) chains and prison.

When thy slave performed goodly service, did not that
accident become a robe of honour in the battle (between the
flesh and the spirit)?

This accident with the substance (belonging to it) is egg and
bird: this is produced by that, and that by this, in succes-
sion.”

The King said, “Take the meaning (to be) so: (why then)
have these accidents of yours not produced any substance? ”

“ (Divine) Wisdom,” replied the slave, “has kept it concealed,
in order that this world of good and evil may be a mystery,

985 Because, if the (substantial) forms of thought were to become
manifest, infidel and believer (alike) would speak naught but
praise (of God).

Then, were this clearly seen, O King, not hidden, and were
the mark of religion or infidelity (visible) on the forehead,

How would there be idol and idolater in this world? How
would any one have the stomach^ to mock (at holy things)?

Then this world of ours would be (like) the Resurrection:
who commits sin and wrong at the Resurrection? ”

The King said, “ God has veiled the retribution of evil, but
(only) from the vulgar, not from His own elect.

990 If I entrap one Amir, I keep it hidden from the (other)
Amirs, (but) not from the Vizier.

God, then, has shown to me the retribution of work and
myriads of the (substantial) forms of actions.

^ I.e, the Prophet Mohammed regarded as the final cause of the Creation.
Latoldk (“but for thee”) refers to God*s words, ‘*But for thee I should not
have created the heavens.'*

® Literally, “gall-bladder.”


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 273

Give a sign (outwardly), for I know all: the cloud does not
veil the moon from me.”

The slave said, ‘ ‘ Then what is the object of my speaking, since
thou knowest what is (the real nature of) that which has been? ”

The King said, ‘^The wisdom (of God) in making the world
manifest (was) that the (thing) known should come forth (to be
seen) plainly.

Until He made visible that which He knew, He did not lay 995
upon the world the pain of parturition and the throes (thereof).

You cannot sit inactive for one moment: (you cannot rest)
till some badness or goodness has issued from you.

These demands (cravings) for action were appointed in order
that your inward consciousness should come clearly into (out-
ward) view.

How, then, should the reel, which is the body, become still,
when the thread’s end, which is the mind, is pulling it?

The sign of that pulling is your anguish : to be inactive is to
you like the death-agony.

This world and that world are for ever giving birth: every looo
cause is a mother, the effect is born (from it as) a child.

When the effect was born, that too became a cause, so that it
might give birth to wondrous effects.

These causes are generation on generation, but it needs a
very well illumined eye (to sec all the links in their chain).”

The King, in conversation with him, arrived at this point,
that he saw from him a sign (which was) not apparent.

If that searching King saw (such a sign), ’tis not strange; but
we are not permitted to mention it.

When that (other) slave came from the warm bath, that King 1005
and lofty personage called him to his presence,

(And) said, '‘Health (to you)! Lasting happiness be yours
You are very fine and elegant and good-looking.

Oh, alas! If there were not in you that which so-and-so says
about you,

Whoever belield your face would become glad; the sight of
you would be worth the empire of the world.”

He said, “O King, utter some hint of what that miscreant®
said about me. ”

The King said, " In the first place he described you as double- 1010
faced, saying that you are ostensibly a remedy (but) secretly a
disease,”

When he heard from the King the malice of his companion,
at once the sea of his anger surged up.

That slave foamed and reddened, so that the billows of his
vituperation exceeded (all) bounds.

* Or possibly, “May (the wish) * lasting happiness* come true for you!**

* Literally, “ he whose religion is corrupt,”


274 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

He said, From the first moment that he was associated with
me, he was a great eater of dung^, like a dog in (time of)
famine.”

As he satirised him moment after moment (continuously), ,
like a bell, the King put his hand on his (the slave’s) lips, saying,
“Enough!”

1015 He said, “I know you from him by that (which you have
spoken) : in you the spirit is foul, and in your companion (only)
the mouth.

Therefore do you sit far off, O foul-spirited one, that he may
be the commander and you under his command.”

It is (said) in the Hadith (Traditions of the Prophet) : “ Know%
sire, that glorification (of God) from hypocrisy is like the verdure
on a midden.”

Know, then, that a fair and goodly form with bad qualities
(within) is not worth a farthing;

And though the form be despicable and unpleasing, (yet)
when his (that person’s) disposition is good, die at his feet!

1030 Know that the outward form passes away, (but) the world of
reality remains for ever.

How long will you play at loving the shape of the jug? Leave
the shape of the jug; go, seek the water.

You have seen its (outward) form, you are unaware of the
reality; pick out from the shell a pearl, if you are wise.

These shells of bodies in the world, though they all are living
by (grace of) the Sea of Soul —

Yet there is not a pearl in every shell : open your eyes and look
into the heart of each one,

1035 And pick out what that one has and what this, because that
costly pearl is seldom found.

If you go (turn your attention) to the form, by external
appearance a mountain is a hundred^ times as much as a ruby
in bigness;

Also, in respect of form, your hands and feet and hair are a
hundred times as much as the contour of the eye ;

But this (fact) is not hidden from you, that the two eyes are
the choicest of all (your) members.

By one thought that comes into the mind a hundred worlds
are overturned in a single moment.

1030 If the body of the Sultan is, in form (appearance), one (only),
(yet) hundreds of thousands of soldiers run behind (it).

Again, the figure and form of the excellent King are ruled by
one invisible thought.

Behold people without end who, moved by one thought,
have gone over the earth like a flood ;

^ I,e. very scurrilous.”

® “Hundred,” of course, is not to be taken in its strict numerical sense.


THE KING AND HIS TWO SLAVES 275

Small is that thought in the people’s eyes, but like a flood it
swallowed and swept away the world.

So, when you see that from a thought every craft in the world
(arises and) subsists —

(That) houses and palaces and cities, mountains and plains 1035
and rivers,

Earth and ocean as well as sun and sky, are living (derive their
life) from it as fishes from the sea —

Then why in your foolishness, O blind one, does the body
seem to you a Solomon, and thought (only) as an ant?

To your eye the mountain appears great: (to you) thought is
like a mouse, and the mountain (like) a wolf.

The (material) world in your eyes is awful and sublime : you
tremble and are frightened at the clouds and the thunder and
the sky,

While in regard to the world of thought, O less (lower) than 1040
the ass, you are secure and indifferent as a witless stone,

Because you are a (mere) shape and have no portion of in-
telligence; you are not of human nature, you are an ass’s colt.

From ignorance you deem the shadow to be the substance :
hence to you the substance has become a plaything and of slight
account.

Wait till the Day when that thought and phantasy unfolds its
wings and pinions without any veil (encumbrance).

You will see that the mountains have become like soft wool,
(and that) this Earth of hot and cold has become naught;

You will see neither the sky nor the stars nor (any) existence 1045
but God, the One, the Living, the Loving.

Here is a tale, (be it) true or false, to illustrate (these) truths.

How the {King^s) retainers envied the favourite slave,

A King had, of his grace, preferred a certain slave above all his
retinue.

His allowance was the stipend of forty Amirs; a hundred
Viziers would not see (receive) a tenth of its amount.

Through the perfection of (his) natal star and prosperity and for-
tune he was an Ayiz, while the King was the Mahmdd of the time.

His spirit in its origin, before (the creation of) this body, was X050
near-related and akin to the King’s spirit,

(Only) that matters which has existed before the body; leave
(behind you) these things which have newly sprung into being.

That which matters belongs to the knower (of God), for he
is not squinting; his eye is (fixed) upon the things first sown.

That which was sown as wheat (good) or as barley (relatively
evil) — day and night his eye is fastened on that place^ (where it
was sown).

^ Literally, ** (deposited as) ’"a pledge in that place.”


276 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Night gave birth to nothing but what she was pregnant withal :
designs and plots are wind, (empty) wind.

1055 How should he please his heart with fair designs who sees the
design of God (prevailing) over them?

He (who trusts in his own devices) is laying a snare within
the snare (of God) : by your life, neither this (snare) will escape
(destruction) nor will that (man).

Though (in the meanwhile) a hundred herbs grow and fade,
there will grow up at last that which God has sown.

He (the cunning man) sowed new seed over the first seed;
(but) this second (seed) is passing away, and (only) the first is
sound (and enduring).

The first seed is perfect and choice ; the second seed is corrupt
and rotten.

1060 Cast away this contrivance of yours before the Beloved —
though your contrivance indeed is of His contriving.

That which God has raised (and that alone) has use : what He
has at first sown at last grows.

Whatever you sow, sow for His sake, inasmuch as you are
the Beloved’s captive, O lover.

Do not hang about the thievish fleshly soul and its work:
whatsoever is not God’s work is naught, naught.

(Sow the good seed) ere the Day of Resurrection shall appear
and the night- thief be shamed before Him whose is the Kingdom ,

1065 With the goods stolen by his contrivance and craft (still)
remaining on his neck at the Day of Judgement.

Hundreds of thousands of minds may jump together (conspire)
to lay a snare other than His snare ;

(But) they only find their snare more grievous (to themselves),
(for) how can straws show any power (of resistance) against the
wind?

If you say, “What was the profit of (our created) being?” (I
reply), “There is profit in your question, O contumacious
one.

If this question of yours has no profit, why should I listen to
it in vain and fruitlessly?

1070 And if there are many profits in your question, then why,
pray, is the world unprofitable?

^d ^again), if from one standpoint the world is unprofitable,
from otner standpoints it is advantageous.

If your profit is no profit to me, (yet) since it is a profit to
you, do not withdraw from it.”

The beauty of Joseph profited a (whole) world (of people),
though to his brethren it was a vain superfluity.

The melodies of David were so dear (to the faithful), but to the
interdicted (unbeliever) they were (no more than) the noise of
wood.


THE ENVIOUS RETAINERS


277

The water of the Nile was superior to the Water of Life, but 1075
to the interdicted and unbelieving it was blood.

To the true believer martyrdom is life; to the hypocrite it is
death and corruption.

Tell (me), what single blessing is there in the world, from
which some group of people is not excluded?

What profit have the ox and the ass in sugar? Every soul has
a different food ;

But if that food is accidental to it (and not according to its
real nature), then admonition is the (proper) correction for it.

As (in the case of) one who from disease has become fond of 1080
(eating) clay — though he may suppose that that (clay) is indeed
his (natural) food,

He has (in reality) forgotten his original food and has betaken
himself^ to the food of disease.

Having given up honey, he has eaten poison; he has made the
food of disease (to be his nourishment) as (though it were) fat.

Man’s original food is the Light of God : animal food is im-
proper for him;

But, in consequence of disease, his mind has fallen into this
(delusion) , that day and night he should eat of this water and clay. ,

(He is) pale-faced, weak-footed, faint-hearted — where is the 1085
food of by Heaven which hath [starry) tracks}

That is the food of the chosen ones of the (Divine) sovereignty ;
the eating thereof is (done) without throat or instrument.

The food of the (spiritual) sun is (derived) from the light of
the (celestial) Throne; (the food that belongs) to the envious
and devilish is (derived) from the smoke of the (terrestrial)
carpet.

God said concerning the martyrs, they are [alive with their
Lord) receiving sustenance. For that food there was neither
mouth ni>r dish.

The heart is eating a (particular) food from every single
companion ; the heart is getting a (particular) excellence from
every single (piece of) knowledge.

Every human being’s (outer) form is like a cup ; (only) the
(spiritual) eye is a percipient of his (or her) reality.

You cat (receive) something from meeting with any one, and
you carry away something from conjunction with any associate.

When planet comes into conjunction with planet, the effect
appropriate to them both is assuredly produced,

As (for example) the conjunction of man and woman brings
to birth the human being, and (as) sparks arise from the con-
junction of stone and iron ;

And (as) from the conjunction of earth with rains (there are
produced) fruits and greenery and sweet herbs ;

* Literally, ^*has turned his face.’^


278 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

1095 And (as) from the conjunction of green things (plants and
verdant spots) with man (there is produced) joy of heart and
carelessness and happiness ;

And (as) from the conjunction of happiness with our souls
are born our goodness and beneficence.

Our bodies become capable of eating and drinking when our
desire for recreation (in the open air) is satisfied.

Redness of countenance is (derived) from the conjunction of
blood (with the face); blood is (derived) from the beautiful
rose-coloured sun.

Redness is the best of (all) colours, and that is (born) of the
sun and is arriving (to us) from it.

1100 Every land that has been conjoined with Saturn has become
nitrous and is not the place for sowing.

Through concurrence power comes into action^, as (in the
case of) the conjunction of the Devil with hypocrites.

These spiritual truths without (possessing) any (worldly)
pomp and grandeur, have pomp and grandeur from the Ninth
Heaven.

The pomp and grandeur belonging to (the world of) creation
is a borrowed (adventitious) thing; the pomp and grandeur
belonging to the (world of) Command^ is an essential thing.

For the sake of (earthly) pomp and grandeur they endure
abasement; in the hope of glory they are happy in (their) abase-
ment.

1105 In the hope of a ten days’ (transient) glory (full) of annoyance,
they have made their necks, from anxiety, (thin) as a spindle.

How do not they come to this place where I am? — for in this
(spiritual) glory I am the shining Sun.

The rising-place of the sun is the pitch-coloured tower (of
heaven), (but) my Sun is beyond (all) rising-places.

His ‘‘rising-place” (is only) in relation to His motes: His
essence neither rose nor set.

I who am left behind (surpassed in eminence) by His motes
am (nevertheless) in both worlds a sun without shadow.

mo Still, I am revolving round the Sun — ’tis wonderful ; the cause
of this is the majesty of the Sun.

The Sun is acquainted with (all secondary) causes; at the
same time the cord of (all secondary) causes is severed from
Him®.

Hundreds of thousands of times have I cut off (abandoned)
hope — of whom? Of the Sun? Do you believe this?

Do not believe of me that I can endure to be without the Sun,
or the fish to be without water;

^ l.e, what is potential becomes actual.

* The supersensible world.

* J.e. He is independent of them.


THE ENVIOUS RETAINERS 279

And it I become despairing, my despair is the objective mani-
festation of the Sun’s work, O goodly (friend).

How should the objective manifestation of the work be cut off ms
from the very self of the Worker? How should any object of
(contingent) being pasture on (derive existence from) aught
but (Absolute) Being?

All (contingent) beings pasture on this Meadow, whether
they be Buniq or Arab horses or even asses;

And he that has not regarded (all) becomings (movements
and changes) as (proceeding) from that Sea, at every instant
turns his face towards a new point of orientation.

He has drunk salt water from the sweet Sea, so that the salt
water has made him blind.

"^rhc Sea is saying, ‘‘Drink of my water with the right hand,

O blind one, that thou mayst gain sight.”

Here “the right hand” is right opinion, which knows con- 1120
cerning (both) good and evil whence they are.

O lance, there is a Lancer^, so that sometimes thou becomest
straight, sometimes (bent) double.

Through love of Shams-i Din (the Sun of the Religion) I am
withoxit claws (powerless) ; else would not I make this blind one
see?

Hark, O Light of the Truth, Husamu’ddin, do thou speedily
heal him, to the confusion of the eye of the envious;

(Heal him with) the quick-acting tutty of majesty, the dark-
ness-killing remedy of the recalcitrant,

Which, if it strike on the eye of the blind man, will dispel 1125
from him a hundred years’ darkness.

Heal all the blind ones except the envious man who from
envy is bringing denial against thee.

To thy envier, though it be 1 , do not give life, (but let me
alone) so that I may be suffering the agony of (spiritual) death
even as he is.

(1 mean) him that is envious of the Sun and him that is
fretting at the existence of the Sun.

Look you, this is the incurable disease which he has, alas;
look you, this is one fallen for ever to the bottom of the pit.

What he wants is the extinction of the Sun of eternity. Tell n-o
(me), how should this desire of his come to pass?

The falcon (seeker of God) is he that comes back to the King ;
he that has lost the way is the blind falcon.

It lost the way and fell into the wilderness ; then in the wilder-
ness it fell amongst^ owls.

It (the falcon) is wholly light (derived) from the Light of
(Divine) approval, but the marshal, Fate®, blinded it.

Literally, **one who turns or wields the lance.”

- Literally, “beside,” ® Literally, “the (Divine) destiny.”


zSo


MATHNAWI, BOOK II

He threw dust in its eyes and took it (far) away from the
(right) road; he left it amidst owls and (in) the wilderness.

1135 To crown all^, the owls attack it and tear its. lovely wing-
feathers and plumes.

A clamour arose amongst the owls — “Ha! the falcon has
come to seize our dwelling-place.”

('Twas) as (when) the street-dogs, wrathful and terrifying,
have fallen upon the frock of a (dervish) stranger.

“How am I fit,” says the falcon, “for (consorting with) owls?
I give up to the owls a hundred wildernesses like this.

I do not wish to stay here, I am going, I will return to the
King of kings.

1140 Do not kill yourselves (with agitation), O owls, for I am not
settling (here) : I am going home.

This ruin is a thriving abode in your eyes; for me, however,
the King’s fore-arm is the place whither one returns.”

The owl (that was warning the others) said, “The falcon is
plotting to uproot you from house and home.

He will seize our houses by cunning, he will tear us out of
our nests by (his) hypocrisy.

This devotee of guile pretends to be perfectly satisfied (with
what he has) ; by God, he is worse than all the greedy together.

1145 From greediness he eats clay as (if it were) date-syrup:
0 friends, do not entrust the sheep’s tail to the bear.

He is boasting of the King and the King’s hand, in order that
he may lead us astray 2, simple-minded as we are.

How, indeed, should a petty bird be the congener of the King?
Do not listen to him, if you have (even) a little understanding.

Is he the King’s or the Vizier’s congener? Is garlic at all
suitable to sweetmeat made with walnut kernels?

(As for) his saying, from deceit and feint and artifice, ‘ The
King with his retinue is searching after me,’

1150 Here’s an absurd® mad fancy for you, here’s a vain boast and
a snare to catch blockheads !

Any one who believes this — ’tis because of (his) foolishness :
how is a slender little bird fit for (friendship with) royalty?

If the smallest owl should strike at his brain, where is succour
for him from the King? ”

The falcon said, “If a single feather of mine be broken, the
King of kings will uproot the (whole) owlery.

What is an owl? Even if a falcon vex my heart and maltreat
me,

1155 The King will heap up in every lowland and highland hundreds
of thousands of stacks of falcons’ heads.

^ Literally, “any small thing put on the top of a load,^’ “a last straw.”

® Literally, “ take us from the (right) road.^*

* Literally, “unacceptable.”


THE FALCON AMONGST THE OWLS 281

His favours keep watch over me; wherever I go, the King is
(following) behind.

The phantasy of me is abiding in the King’s heart: sick
(would be) the King’s heart without the phantasy of me.

When the King bids me fly in His Way I fly up to the heart’s
zenith, like His beams.

I fly as a moon and sun, I rend the curtains of the skies.

The light of intellects is from my thought; the bursting forth 1160
of heaven (into existence) is from my original nature.

I am a falcon, and (yet) the hiimd becomes lost in amaze-
ment at me: who is an owl, that it should know my secret?

For my sake the King bethought him of the prison (this world),
and set free hundreds of thousands of those in bondage.

He made me familiar with the owls for a moment, and by
means of my breath (words) he made the owls (to be) falcons.

Oh, happy (is) the owl that in my (soaring) flight (towards
God) had the good fortune to apprehend^ my mystery.

Cling to me, that ye may become exultant (enjoying bliss),
(and that) ye may become royal falcons, although ye are owls.

He that is dear to such a iCing — wheresoever he light, why
should he be a stranger?

Any one for whose pain the King is the remedy — though he
wail like the reed (flute), he is not witliout plenty.

I am the owner of the (spiritual) kingdom, 1 am not a lick-
spittle: the King is beating the falcon-drum for me from the
shore^.

My falcon-drum is the call, * Return!' God is my witness in
despite of adversary.

I am not a congener of the King of kings — far be it from 1170
Him! — but 1 have light from Him in (His) self-manifestation.

Homogeneity is not in respect of form and essence: water
becomes homogeneous with earth in the plant.

Wind (air) becomes homogeneous with fire in consistency ; wine
at last^ becomes homogeneous with the constitution (of the body).

Since my genus is not the/f<?w?/^ of my King, my ego has passed
away {fmei) for the sake of His ego.

Inasmuch as my ego passed away, He remained alone: I roll
at the feet of Ilis horse, like dust.

The (individual) soul (self) became dust, and the (only) signs 1175
of it are the mark of His feet on its dust.

Become dust at His feet for the sake of this mark, in order
that you may become the crown on the head of the lofty. ,

Let not my form beguile you : partake of my dessert before
my departure.”

^ Literally, «ood fortune apprehended.*’

® Literally, *'from the farther side,” i.e, from the world beyond.

" /,e. after it has been digested and assimilated.


282 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Oh, (there is) many a one whom the form waylaid: he aimed
at the form (of the holy man) and (in reality) struck at God.

After all, this soul is joined to the body, (but) has this soul
any likeness to the body?

iivso The sparkle of the eye’s light is paired with the fat^ ; the light
of the heart is hidden in a drop of blood ;

Joy (has its seat) in the kidneys, grief in the liver; intellect,
(bright) as a candle, inside the brain in the head.

These connexions are not without a how and a why, (but) as
regards knowledge of the why (our) minds are impotent.

The Universal Soul came into contact with the partial (in-
dividual) soul, and the (latter) soul received from it a pearl and
put it into its bosom.

Through that touch on its bosom the (individual) soul
became pregnant, like Mary, with a heart-beguiling Messiah,

1185 Not the Messiah who is (a traveller) on land and water, (but)
the Messiah who is beyond (the limitation of) measuring (space).

So when the soul has been impregnated by the Soul of soul,
by such a soul the world is impregnated.

Then the world gives birth to another world, and displays to
this congregated people a place of congregation (for the realities
which are raised to life).

Though I should speak and recount till the Resurrection,
I lack the power to describe this (spiritual) resurrection.

These sayings (of mine), indeed, are really an “O Lord”
(a prayer addressed to God); the words are the lure for the
breath of a sweet-lipped One^.

1190 How, then, should he (that seeks the answer) fail (to pray)?
How should he be silent, inasmuch as ‘‘ Here am I ” is (always)
coming in response to his Lord”?

It is a “Here am I ” that you cannot hear, but can taste (feel
and enjoy) from head to foot^.

How the thirsty man threw bricks from the top of the wall
into the stream of water.

On the bank of the stream there was a high wall, and on the
top of the wall a sorrowful thirsty man.

The wall hindered him from (reaching) the water ; he was in
distress for the water, like a fish.

Suddenly he threw a brick into the water : the noise of the
water came to his ear like spoken words,

1195 Like words spoken by a sweet and delicious friend: the noise
of the water made him drunken as (though it were) wine.

^ J.e. the white of the eye.

* I.e. they seek to capture the Divine answer to prayer.

® I.e. it is a mystical experience absorbing every sense and faculty.


THE THIRSTY MAN WHO THREW BRICKS 283

From the pleasure of (hearing) the noise of the water, that
sorely tried man began to hurl and tear off bricks from that
place.

The water was making a noise, that is to say, (it was crying),
“Hey, what is the advantage to you of this hurling a brick at
me? ”

The thirsty man said, “ O water, I have two advantages : I will
nowise x'efrain from this work.

The first advantage is (my) hearing the noise of the water,
which to thirsty men is (melodious) as a rebeck.

The noise thereof has become (to me) like the noise of (the 1200
trumpet of) Isrdfil: by this (noise) life has been transferred
(restored) to one (that was) dead ;

Or (it is) like the noise of thunder in days of spring — from it
(the thunder) tlie garden obtains so many (lovely) ornaments;

Or like the days of alms to a poor man, or like the message of
deliverance to a prisoner.

^'Fis like the breath of the Merciful (God) which, without
mouth, comes to Mohammed from Yemen;

Or 'tis like the scent of Ahmad (Mohammed), the Apostle
(of God), which in intercession comes to the sinner;

Or like the scent of beauteous, graceful Joseph, (which) 1205
strikes upon the soul of lean Jacob.

The other advantage is that, (with) every brick I tear off this
(wall), I come (nearer) to rxinning water,

Since by diminution of the bricks the high wall becomes lower
every time that one is removed h

The lowness (destruction) of the wall becomes a means of
access (to the water) ; separation from it is the remedy bringing
about a union (with the water).’*

The tearing away of the adhesive (firmly joined) bricks is
(analogous to) prostration (in prayer) : (it is) the cause of near-
ness (to God), for (God has said), ‘ And prostrate thyself and draw
near {to Me)'

So long as this wall is high-necked (lofty and proud), it is an 1210
obstacle to this bowing of the head (in prayer).

*Tis impossible to perform the prostration on the Water of
Life, until I gain deliverance from this earthly body.

The more thirsty any one on the top of the wall is, the more
quickly docs he tear off the bricks and turfs.

The more any one is in love with the noise of the water, the
bigger clods does he tear away from the barrier. ^

He, at the noise of the water, is filled with wine (ecstasy) up
to the neck, (while) the stranger (to love) hears nothing but the
sound of the splash.


^ I^iterally, “every time that he (the clilapidator) tore off (a brick).’’


284 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

1215 Oh, blest is he that deems his early days an opportunity to
be seized, and pays his debt —

In the days when he has the power, (when) he has health and
strength of heart and vigour,

And (when) that season of youth, like a garden green and
fresh, is bringing (to ripeness) produce and fruit without any
stint;

(When) the fountains of strength and lust (are) flowing, (so
that) thereby the soil of the body is made verdant;

(When he is still like) a well-kept house, with its roof very
lofty, its sides (walls) symmetrical, without buttressing^ and
clamps —

1220 Ere the days of eld arrive and bind your neck with a halter of
palm-fibres ;

(Ere) the soil becomes nitrous (barren), crumbling, and poor
— never did good herbage grow from nitrous soil ;

(When) the water of strength and the water of lust (is) cut off,
and he has no profit from himself or others :

The eyebrows fallen down like a crupper-strap; the eyes
grown moist and dim ;

The face, from wrinkling, like the back of a lizard; speech
and taste and teeth gone out of use;

1225 The day late, the ass lame, and the way long ; the shop ruined
and the business in disorder^;

The roots of bad habit firmly set, and the power to tear them
up decreased.

How the Governor commanded a certain man^ sayings
^^Root up the thornbush which you have planted on the road,^'

As (for example) that callous fair-spoken person planted a
thornbush in the middle of the road.

The wayfarers reproached him and oftentimes told him to
dig it up : he dug it not up.

Every moment the thornbush was growing bigger ; the people’s
feet were streaming with^ blood from its pricks.

1230 The people’s clothes were being rent by the thorns : the feet
of the poor were being wounded pitiably.

When the Governor said to him with earnestness, *‘Dig this
up,” he replied, ** Yes, I will dig it up some day.”

For a long while he promised (to dig it up) to-morrow and
to-morrow; (meantime) his thornbush became robust in con-
stitution.

^ Literally, the “mixture’* (contaminatio) caused by the necessity of
repairing and supporting the original framework.

^ Literally, “ gone out of order.”

® Literally, “full of.”


THE MAN WHO LET HIS THORNBUSH GROW 285

One day the Governor said to him, “O false promiser, go
forward with my affair, do not creep back.”

He replied, “O uncle, the days are between us^.” ‘‘Make
haste,” said he, “do not put off payment of my debt.”

You who say “To-morrow,” be aware of this, that with every 1235
day that time is coming (and going).

That evil tree is growing younger, while this digger is waxing
old and sorely distressed.

The thornbush (is) in (process of gaining) strength and (in)
ascent; its digger (is) in (process of) aging and decline.

The thornbush every day and every moment is green and
fresh; its digger is every day more sickly and withered.

It is growing younger, you older: be quick and do not waste
your time !

Know that every single bad habit of yours is a thornbush: 12^0
many a time, after all, have its thorns pierced your foot.

Many a time have you been wounded by your own (evil)
habits — you have no sense, you are very senseless.

If to the wounding of other persons, which comes to pass
from your evil nature,

You are indifferent, at any rate you are not (indifferent) to
your own wounds : you are the torment of yourself and of every
stranger.

Either take up the axe and strike like a man — like ‘All, destroy
this gate of Khaybar —

Or unite these thorns with the rosebush: unite the light of 1245
the friend (of God) with the (sensual) fire,

In order that his light may extinguish your fire, (and that)
union with him may make your thorns roses.

You are like Hell, he is a true believer: the extinction of the
fire (of Hell) by means of a true believer is possible.

Mustafd (Mohammed) said concerning the speech of Hell, that
on account of fear it begins humbly to entreat the true believer,

And says to him, “Pass quickly away from me, O king: hark,
for thy light has taken away the burning of my fire.”

Therefore the true believer’s light is the death of the fire, 1250
because without an opposite the removal of the (other) opposite
is impossible.

On the Day of Justice (Judgement) the fire will be the
opponent of the light, since the former was aroused by (God’s)
wrath, the latter by (His) grace.

If you are wishing to remove the evil of the fire, direct the
water of (Divine) mercy against the heart of the fire.

The true believer is the fountain of that water of mercy : the
pure spirit of the well-doer is the Water of Life.

^ Le. ** there is still some time before the account between us need be
settled.


286 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Hence your fleshly soul is fleeing from him, because you are
of fire, (while) he (is) the water of the stream.

1255 Fire becomes fleeing from water for the reason that its fire
(flame and heat) is ruined by water.

Your sense and thought are wholly of the fire; the sense of
the Shaykh (spiritual guide) and his thought are the beauteous
Light.

When the water of his light trickles on the fire, chak chak (a
gnashing sound) rises from the fire, and it leaps up (in fury).

When it makes (the sound) chak chak^ say you to it, ‘‘Death
and woe (to thee),” in order that this hell, (which is) your
fleshly soul, may become cold (quenched),

So that it may not burn your rose-garden, so that it may not
burn your justice and well-doing.

1260 After that, anything that you sow will yield fruit (or flowers) ;
it will yield anemones and wild roses and thyme.

Once more we are going wide of the straight way: turn back,
O master — ^where is our way?

We were (engaged) in showing, 0 envious one, that your ass
is lame and the place of alighting (journey’s end) far off, (so you
must be) quick.

The year has turned late; it is not sowing-time, (and you have
produced) nothing except black shame^ and foul deeds.

The worm has entered the root of the body’s tree : it must be
dug up and put in the fire.

1265 Hark and hark (again), O wayfarer! ’Tis late, life’s sun is
gone towards the pit (is about to set).

(During) these (one or) two brief days when you have (some)
strength, (be) quick, flap your wings generously^.

Devote this (small) amount of seed that you have remaining,
in order that long life may grow from these (one or) two
moments.

Whilst this jewelled lamp is not (yet) extinguished, see you
trim its wick and (supply it with) oil immediately.

Beware ! Do not say “To-morrow ” — for (many) to-morrows
have passed. Let not the days of sowing pass away alto-
gether.

1270 Listen to my admonition that the body is a strong bond : put
off the old, if you have desire for newness.

Shut the lips and open the palm filled with gold: leave off
being a miser with the body, exhibit munificence.

Munificence is the abandonment of lusts and pleasures ; no
one who is sunken in lust rises up (again).

This munificence is a branch of the cypress of Paradise : woe
to him that lets such a branch go from his hand I

^ Literally, ‘‘blackness of face.”

® I,e, exert yourself unsparingly in doing good works.


THE EVILS OF PROCRASTINATION 287

This abandonment of sensuality is the firmest handle : this
branch draws the spirit up to Heaven.

(So act) that the branch of munificence, O righteous man^, 1275
drawing you aloft may bear you to its origin.

You are Joseph (full) of beauty, and this world is as the well,
and this rope (to draw you forth) is patience with (submission
to) the command of God.

O Joseph, the rope is come: put your two hands upon it.

Do not neglect the rope, (for) it has grown late.

Praise be to God, that this rope has been dangled, (and that)
grace and mercy have been blended together,

So that you may behold the world of the new spirit, a world
very manifest, (though) invisible.

This (phenomenal) world of non-existence has become like uSo
(real) existence, while that world of (real) existence has become
very hidden.

The dust is on the wind: it is playing, it is making a false
show and forming a veil.

This, which is busy (in appearance), is (really) idle and
(superficial, like) a husk; and that which is hidden is its core
and origin.

The dust is as a tool in the hand of the wind : deem the wind
high and of high descent.

I'he gaze of the eye of dust falls on the dust ; an eye that sees
the wind is of another sort.

A horse knows a horse, because it (one horse) is associated 12S3
(homogeneous with other horses) ; likewise (only) a rider knows
the things appertaining to a rider.

The sensuous eye is the horse, and the Light of God is the
rider: without the rider the horse itself is useless.

Therefore train the horse (so as to cure it) of bad habits ; else
the horse will be rejected befoi'e the King.

The horse^s eye finds the way from the King’s eye : without
the King’s eye its eye is in desperate plight.

The eye of horses, whithersoever you call it except to grass
and pasture, says, **Nay, why (should we go)?”

The Light of God mounts (as a rider) on the sensuous eye, 1290
and then the soul yearns after God.

How should the riderless horse know the marks of the road?
The King is needed (to ride it) in order that it may know the
King’s road.

Go towards a sense on which the Light is riding : that Light
is a good companion for the sense.

The Light of God is an ornament to the light of sense : this
is the meaning of light upon light.


^ Literally, “O man of good religion.”


288


MATHNAWI, BOOK II

The light of sense draws (a man) towards earth ; the Light of
God bears him aloft,

1295 Because sensible things are a lower world: the Light of God
is (as) the sea, and the sense as a dew-drop.

But that which rides on it (on the sense) is not manifested
save by good effects and words.

The sensuous light, which is gross and heavy, is hidden in
the black of the eyes.

Inasmuch as you are not seeing the light of sense with (your)
eye, how should you see the light of that religious one (the saint)
with (your) eye?

The light of sense is hidden notwithstanding this grossness :
how (then) should not that radiance be hidden which is pure
(and subtle)?

1300 This world, like straws in the hand (sway) of the wind, (which
is) the (world) unseen, has adopted helplessness as its (only)
resource^ ; and the dispensation of the Unseen

Makes it now lofty, now low ; makes it now sound (and whole),
now broken ;

Now carries it to the right, now to the left; now makes it
roses, now thorns.

See (how) the Hand (is) hidden, while the pen is writing; the
horse careering, while the Rider is invisible.

See the arrow flying, and the Bow not in sight ; the (individual)
souls manifest, and the Soul of souls hidden.

1305 Do not break the arrow, for it is the arrow of a King ; it is not
shot at long range (at random), it is from the thumb-stall of
One who knows (how to hit the target).

God said, ''Thou didst not throw when thou threwesV: the
action of God has precedence over (our) actions.

Break your own anger, do not break the arrow: the eye of
your anger reckons milk (to be) blood.

Give the arrow a kiss and bring it to the King — the blood-
stained arrow, wet with your blood.

That which is seen is helpless and confined and feeble ; and
that which is unseen is so fierce and uncontrollable.

1310 We are the (hunted) prey: to whom belongs such a (fearful)
snare? We are the ball (for the blows) of the polo-bat — and
where is the Batsman?

He tears, He sews : where is this Tailor? He blows, He burns :
where is this Fire-kindler^?

At one hour He makes the true saint an unbeliever ; at another
hour He makes the (impious) deist an (orthodox) ascetic;

For the mukhlis (sincere worshipper) is in danger of the snare
until he becomes entirely purged of self,

^ Literally, “trade” or ** practice.*’

2 Literally, “one who throws naphtha.”


THE LIGHT OF GOD 289

Because he is (still) on the Way, and the brigands are number-
less: (only) he escapes who is under God’s safeguard.

(If) he has not become (selfless, like) a pure mirror, he is (no 1315
more than) mukhlis: (if) he has not caught the bird, he is (still)
hunting;

(But) when the mukhlis has become mukhlas^, he is delivered:
he has reached the place of safety and has won the victory.

No mirror (ever) became iron again ; no bread (ever) became
the wheat in the stack.

No full-grown grape (ever) became a young grape; no mature
fruit (ever) became premature fruit.

Become mature and be far from (the possibility of) change
for the worse: go, become the Light, like Burhan-i Mu-
haqqiq.

When you have escaped from self, you have become wholly 1330
the proof (of God) : when the slave (in you) has become naught,
you have become the King.

[And if you wish to behold (this mystery) plainly, Salahu’ddm
has shown it forth : he has made the eyes to see and has opened
(them).

From his eyes and mien every eye that hath the Light of
Hit ^God) has discerned (mystical) poverty.

Ine Shaykh (Salahu’ddm) is one who, like God, acts without
instrument, giving lessons to his disciples without anything
said.]^

In his hand the heart is submissive like soft wax: his seal
makes (the impression) now (of) shame, now (of) fame.

The seal impressed on his wax is telling of the seal-ring; of 1325
whom, again, does the device tell, (which is) graven on the stone
of the ring?

It tells of the thought of the Goldsmith — (all this) is a chain,
every link (inserted) in another.

Whose voice is this echo in the mountains of (our) hearts?
Sometimes this mountain is full of the voice, sometimes it is
empty.

Wheresoever he is, he is the Sage, the Master — may his
voice not forsake^ this mountain !

There is a mountain that (only) doubles the voice; there is
a mountain that makes it hundredfold.

At thatvoice and speech the mountain lets gush forth hundreds 1330
of thousands of springs of clear water.

^ The mukidif is he who worships devotedly, but regards his devotion as
his own, while the mukhla$, whom God has purged of self, attributes all his
actions to God.

* Vv. 1321-553 are omitted in the two oldest MSS. As they refer to
§aldhu*ddin Zarkdb (the Goldbeater), their insertion here was probably
suggested by a misinterpretation of v. 1326.

* Literally, **not be quit of.**


N M


^9


zgo MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Inasmuch as that grace emanates (even) from the mountain,
the waters in the springs become blood.

’Twas on account of that monarch of auspicious gait^ that
Mount Sinai was (turned to) rubies from end to end.

(All) the parts of the mountain received life and intelligence —
after all, are we inferior to stone, O people?

Neither is there gushing from the soul a single spring, nor is
the body becoming one of those clad in green ;

1335 Neither is there in it the echo of the cry of longing, nor the
purity (born) of the draught of (wine bestowed by) the Cup-
bearer.

Where is (so great) zeal, that they should entirely dig up such
a mountain as this with axe and with pick? —

(In the hope that) maybe a Moon will shine upon its particles,
(that) maybe the radiance of the Moon will find a way into it.

Inasmuch as the (temporal) Resurrection shall dig up the
mountains, how shall it cast the shadow (of protection) over us?

How is this (spiritual) Resurrection inferior to that (temporal)
Resurrection? That (temporal) Resurrection is the wound, and
this (spiritual) Resurrection is as the plaster.

1340 Every one that has seen (experienced) this plaster is safe from
the wound : every evil one that has seen this good is a well-doer.

Oh, happy is the ugly one to whom the beauteous one has
become a companion; alas for one of rosy countenance with
whom autumn has consorted !

When lifeless bread is companioned with life, the bread
becomes living and is turned into the substance of that (life).

Dark faggots become the companions of fire: the darkness
departed, and all was turned into light.

When the dead ass fell into the salt-mine, it put aside asininity
and mortality.

1345 The baptism of Allah is the dyeing-vat of Hu (the Absolute
God) : therein (all) piebald things become of one colour.

When he (the mystic) falls into the vat, and you say to him,

Arise,^* he says in rapture, I am the vat: do not blame (me),^’

That ‘T am the vat^’ is the (same as) saying ‘*I am God’^:
he has the colour of the fire, albeit he is iron.

The colour of the iron is naughted in the colour of the fire :
it (the iron) boasts of (its) fieriness, though (actually) it is like
one who keeps silence.

When it has become like gold of the mine in redness, then
without tongue its boast is am the fire.”

1350 ^ It has become glorified by the colour and nature of the fire:
it says, ‘T am the fire, I am the fire.

I am the fire; if thou have doubt and suspicion, make trial,
put thy hand upon me.


^ Moses.


THE UNITIVE STATE 291

I am the fire; if it seem dubious to thee, lay thy face upon
my face for one moment.”

When Man receives light from God, he is worshipped by
the angels because of his being chosen (by God).

Also, (he is) worshipped by that one whose spirit, like the
angel, has been freed from contumacy and doubt.

What fire? What iron? Close your lips: do not laugh at the 1355
beard of the assimilator's simile^.

Do not set foot in the Sea-, speak not of It: on the shore of
the Sea keep silence, biting your lips (in amazement).

Though (one equal to) a hundred like me would not have the
strength to bear the Sea, ycl I cannot refrain from the drowning
waters of the Sea.

May my soul and mind be a sacrifice to the Sea: this Sea has
paid the blood-price of mind and soul.

I will march in It as long as my feet move; when feet remain
not, I am (plunged) in It, like ducks.

An unrespcctful person present is better than one absent: 1360
though the ring be crooked, is it not on the door?

O defiled in body, frequent® the tank: outside of the tank,
how shall a man be cleansed?

The pure one who has been banished from the tank becomes
far also from his purity.

The purity of this tank is infinite ; the purity of bodies is of
little weight,

Because the heart (though it) is a tank, yet in ambush (out of
sight) it has a hidden channel to the Sea.

Your finite purity wants reinforcement; otherwise, number is 1305
diminished in (the course of) expenditure.

The water said to the defiled one, “Hasten (to come) into
me.” The defiled one said, “I feel shame before the water.”

Said the water, “Without me how shall this shame go?
Without me how shall this defilement be removed? ”

Every defiled one who hides from the water is (an example of
the saying that) “ Shame hinders Faith.”

The heart is muddied by the steps of the body’s tank; the
body is cleansed by the water of the heart’s tanks.

Haunt the steps of the heart’s tank, O son ; take heed and 1370
always beware of the steps of the body’s tank.

The sea of the body is dashing against the sea of the heart,
(but) between them is a barrier which they shall not cross.

Whether you be straight (righteous) or crooked, always creep
forwards to Him; do not creep backwards.

^ X,e. do not mock the comparison by suggesting that it corresponds with
the reality.

^ I,e. leave the Sea of Divine Unity untouched and unprofaned by your
comparisons.

® Literally, “move round about.**


I9-Z


zgz MATHNAWI, BOOK II

If in the presence of kings there be danger to life, yet they
that aspire cannot refrain from (presence with) Him.

Since the King is sweeter than sugar, ’tis better that life
should go (as a sacrifice) to (that) sweetness.

1375 O blamer (of lovers), safety be thine! 0 seeker of safety,
thou art infirm^.

My soul is a furnace : it is happy with the fire : ’tis enough for
the furnace that it is the fire’s house.

For Love, as (for) the furnace, there is something to be
burned^: any one that is blind to this is not a furnace.

When the provision of unprovidedness has become your
provision, you have gained life everlasting, and death is gone.

When the pain (of love) has begun to increase your (spiritual)
joy, roses and lilies have taken possession of the garden of your
soul.

I ^ 8 o That which is the dread of others is your safety (safeguard) :
the duck is (made) strong by the river, the domestic fowl weaL

Once more have I become mad, O Physician! Once more
have I become frenzied, O Beloved!

^ The rings (links) of Thy chain are multiform: every single
ring gives a different madness.

The gift of every ring is (consists in) different forms : there-
fore I have a different madness at every moment.

So “Madness is of different forms” — this has become a
proverb ; especially (is it true) as regards the chain of this most
glorious Prince.

i 3 fi 5 Such a madness has broken the bonds (of my reason) that all
madmen would give me admonition.

How friends came to the madhouse for Dhu ’l-Nun — may
God sanctify his honoured spirit!

It so happened to Dhu ’l-Niin the Egyptian that a new
agitation and madness was born within him.

His agitation became so great that salt (bitterness) from it
was reaching (all) hearts up to above the sky,

^ Beware, 0 (thou of) salty soil, do not put thy agitation beside
(in comparison with) the agitation of the holy lords (saints).

The people could not endure his madness: his fire was
carrying off their beards®.

1390 When (that) fire fell on the beards of the vulgar, they bound
him and put him in a prison.

There is no possibility of pulling back this rein, though the
vulgar be distressed by this way^.

^ Literally, ** having weak stays or handles.*'

^ I,e, the dross of sensual qualities.

» I.e. in his ecstasy he had no regard for their formal religion.

* 7.e. the way of mystical transport and ecstasy.


DHU ’L-NIJn and his FRIENDS 293

These (spiritual) kings have seen (themselves in) danger of
their lives from the vulgar; for this multitude are blind, and
the kings (are) without (a visible) mark.

When authority is in the hands of profligates, (a) Dhu ’l-Niin
is inevitably in prison.

The great king rides alone ! Such a unique pearl in the hands
of children !

What pearl? (Nay), the Sea hidden in a drop, a Sun concealed 1395
in a mote.

A Sun showed itself as a mote, and little by little uncovered
its face.

All motes vanished in it ; the (whole) world became intoxicated
by it and (then) became sober.

When the pen (of authority) is in the hand of a traitor, un-
questionably Mansur^ is on a gibbet.

When this affair (dominion) belongs to the foolish, the
necessary consequence is (that) they kill the prophets.

Through folly the people who had lost the (right) way said 1400
to the prophets, we augur ill from youJ'

See the ignorance of the Christian appealing for protection
to the Lord who was suspended (on the Cross) !

Since, according to his (the Christian’s) belief, He was crucified
by the Jews, how then can He protect him?

Inasmuch as the heart of that King (Jesus) bleeds on account
of them (the Christians), how should there be (for them) the
inviolable defence of whilst thou art a?nongst them}

To the pure gold and to the goldsmith the danger from the
false counterfeiter is greater (than from any one else).

Josephs are concealed on account of the jealousy of the ugly , for 1405
because of enemies the beautiful live in the fire (of tribulation).

Josephs are in the pit through the guile of (their) brethren,
who from envy give Joseph to the wolves.

What happened to Joseph of Egypt on account of envy? This
envy is a big wolf in covert.

Of necessity, kind Jacob always had fear and dread for
Joseph because of this wolf.

The outward (visible) wolf, indeed, did not prowl about
(approach) Joseph ; (but) this envy has actually surpassed wolves
(in malignity).

This wolf dealt its wound, and by way of specious excuse 1410
came (the words), ‘‘Lo, we went to compete with one another,^'

Hundreds of thousands of wolves have not this cunning;
(but) this wolf will at last be put to shame — stop (and see) ! — '

Because on the Day of Bale the envious will without doubt
be (raised from the dead and) brought together (to Judgement)
in the shape of wolves.


^ UalUj.


294 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

The resurrection of the greedy vile eater of carrion (unlawful
food) will be in the shape of a hog on the Day of Reckoning,

Adulteris (erit) foetor membri latentis; wine-drinkers will
have stinking mouths.

1415 The hidden stench that was reaching (only) to (people’s)
hearts will become sensible and manifest at the Resurrection.

The being of Man is a jungle : be on your guard against this
being, if you are of that (Divine) Breath.

In our being there are thousands of wolves and hogs ; (there
is) goodly and ungoodly and fair and foul.

To the disposition that is preponderant belongs the decision
(as to what you are) : when the gold is more than the copper, it
(the mixture) is gold.

The manner of acting that preponderates in your nature — in
that same form you must needs rise (from the dead).

1420 At one hour a wolf enters into Man, at another hour a moon-
like beauty with the face of Joseph.

Good and hateful qualities pass from bosoms into bosoms by
a hidden way ;

Nay, indeed, wisdom and knowledge and excellence pass
from Man into the ox and the ass.

The stumbling (restive) horse becomes smooth-paced and
docile; the bear dances, the goat also salaams.

Volition has passed from human beings into the dog, so that
he has become a shepherd or a hunter or a guardian (of the
house).

1425 Into the dog of the Companions (of the Cave) there passed
from those Sleepers a (moral) disposition, so that he had become
a seeker of God.

At every moment a (diiSFerent) species bursts up in the breast :
now a devil, and now an angel, now wild beasts.

From that marvellous Jungle with which every lion is
acquainted, there is a hidden way to the breasts which ensnare
(the spiritual prey)^.

O you who are less than a dog, steal the spiritual pearl from
within — from within (the breasts of) them that know God.

As you (must) steal, at any rate (let it be) that lovely pearl;
as you are going to bear a burden, at any rate (let it be) a noble
one.


How the disciples understood that Dhu 1-Nun had not
become mad^ {but) had acted with intention,

1430 The friends went to the prison (to inquire) about the story of
Dhu 1 -Nun, and expressed an opinion concerning it,

Saying, “Perchance he does this purposely, or there is some
^ Literally, **to the snare of the breasts.


DHU ’l-NXJn and his FRIENDS 295

(deep) wisdom (in it): he is an exemplar^ and a shining light^
in this religion.

Far, far be it from his sea-like (profound) intelligence that
madness should prompt him to folly !

God forbid, in view of the perfection of his (spiritual) attain-
ments, that the cloud of sickness should cover his moon!

He has gone into the house (and taken refuge) from the
wickedness of the vulgar: he has become mad on account of
the infamy of the sane.

From (feeling) the disgrace of the dull body-serving intellect, 1435
he has purposely gone and become mad,

Saying, ‘Bind me fast and with the tail^ of a cow smite me
on head and back, and do not dispute this (matter),

That from the stroke of the part (of the cow) I may gain life,
as the murdered man (gained life) from the cow of Moses,

O trusty ones ;

That I may be made happy by the stroke of a part of the cow ;
(that I may) become well (whole), like the murdered man (by
means) of the cow of Moses

The murdered man was revived by the stroke of the cow’s
tail: he became pure gold (in spirit), even as copper (is trans-
muted) by the elixir.

The murdered man sprang up and told the secrets: he 1.1^0
revealed that bloodthirsty gang.

^ He said plainly, “I was killed by these people who are now
disturbed (with anger) in contending against me.”

When this gross body is killed, the essence that knows
(spiritual) secrets is brought to life.

Its spirit beholds Paradise and Hell-fire and discerns all the
mysteries.

It reveals the devilish murderers, it reveals the snare of deceit
and guile.

To kill the cow (the fleshly soul) is the stipulation of (imposed 45
by) the (Sdfi) Path, in order that the spirit may be restored to
consciousness by the stroke of her tail.

Kill most quickly the cow, your fleshly soul, so that the hidden
spirit may become alive and conscious.


Resumption of the story ofDhu ^l-Nun, may God sanctify his spirit !

When those persons arrived near him, he shouted, ‘‘Hey,
who are ye? Take care!”

They said respectfully, “We are some of thy friends: we
have come hither in devotion to ask after thee.

^ Literally, *^one to whom all turn.”

- Literally, .sign or evidence.”

® Literally, instrument,”


296 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

How art thou, O Sea of manifold intelligence? What aspersion
on thy intelligence is this (alleged) madness?

1450 How should the smoke of the bath-stove attain unto the Sun?
How should the ‘ Anqa be crushed by the crow? '

Do not withhold (the truth) from us : explain this matter ; we
are lovers (of thee) : do not behave to us in this fashion.

One ought not to drive lovers away or dupe them by mask
and false pretence.

Communicate the secret, O King: do not hide^ thy face in
the cloud, O Moon !

We are loving and true and with wounded (bleeding) hearts :
in the two worlds we have fixed our hearts on thee (alone).”

1455 He began (to use) foul words and bad names recklessly : he
spoke gibberish^ like madmen.

He jumped up and let fly stones and sticks ; the whole party
fled for fear of blows.

He laughed loudly and tossed his head (in scorn). “Look,”
said he, “at the vain bluster^ of these friends!

See the friends! Where is the sign of (true) friends? To
(true) friends pain is as (dear as) life.”

How should a friend turn aside from the pain inflicted by
his friend? Pain is the kernel, and friendship is (only) as the
husk to it.

1460 Has not joy in tribulation and calamity and suffering become
the sign of (true) friendship?

A friend is like gold, tribulation is like the fire : the pure gold
is glad in the heart of the fire.


How Luqmdn^s master tested his sagacity,

(Was it) not (the case) that (this happened) to Luqman, who
was a pure (unselfish) slave, and day and night was brisk in
service?

His master used to prefer him (to all others) in the work (of
service) and deem him better than his own sons,

Because Luqmdn, though he was slave-born, was the master
(of himself) and was free from sensual desire.

1465 A certain king said to the Shaykh (spiritual Director) in
conversation, “Ask me to bestow some bounty upon thee.”

He answered, “O King, are not you ashamed to say such a
thing to me? Come higher!

I have two slaves, and they are vile, and those two are rulers
and lords over you.”

^ Literally, covertly,*^

® Literally, “(the letters) mi and gdfj"

* Literally, “the wind of the beard.


THE SAGACITY OF LUQMAN 297

Said the King, “What are those two? That is a mistake/’ He
replied, “The one is anger and the other is lust.”

Regard as a king him that is unconcerned with kingship, him
whose light shines forth without moon or sun.

(Only) that one whose essence is the treasury (of spiritual 1470
truths) possesses the treasury : (only) he that is an enemy to (his
own) existence possesses (real) existence.

Luqmdn’s master (was) like a master outwardly; in reality
his (Luqman’s) master (was) Luqman’s slave^.

In the topsy-turvy world there is many a one of this (kind) :
a pearl is less than a straw in their sight.

Every desert has been named niafdza (place of safety) : a name
and specious form has ensnared their understanding.

In the case of one class of people, the dress makes (a man)
known : (if he is dressed) in a qabd^ they say that he belongs to
the vulgar.

In the case of one class of people (the distinguishing mark is) 1475
the hypocritical appearance of asceticism; (but) light is needed,
that (any one) may be a spy on asceticism (and detect its true
character).

Light is needed, (a light) purged of cant and noxiousness,
that he may know a man without (the evidence of) deed or word,

And enter into his heart by way of the intellect, and behold
his real state and not be confined to tradition^.

The chosen servants of (God) the Knower of things unseen
are, in the spiritual world, the spies on hearts.

He (such a one) enters within the heart like a fancy: the
mystery of the (real) state is unveiled to him.

In the body of the sparrow what power and faculty is there 14^0
that is hidden from the intellect of the falcon?

He vdio has become acquainted with the secrets of Hd (God),
what to him is the secret (inmost consciousness) of created
beings?

He whose walk is on the spheres, how should it be hard for
him to walk on the earth?

Since iron became wax in the hand of David, what should
wax be in his hand, O man of iniquity?

Luqman was a slave in appearance, a master (in reality):
servitude was (only) a frontispiece® on his outside.

When the master goes to a place where he is not known^, he 14^5
puts (his own) clothes on his slave.

He (himself) puts on the slave’s clothes and makes his slave
the leader,

^ Or, “he was a slave, (and) Luqmdn was his master.*’

- I.e. derived, as opposed to immediate, knowledge.

® Literally, “ a coloured title-page and preface ” ; i.e, his external aspect was
that of a slave, in contrast with what lay underneath.

* And where he does not wish to be recognised.


298 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

He goes behind him on the road, as slaves do, lest any one
should recognise him (as the master).

"‘O slave,” says he, ‘‘go you and sit in the place of honour:
I will take (your) shoes, like the meanest slave. •

Treat (me) roughly and revile me; do not bestow any respect
on me.

1490 I hold neglect of service to be your (proper) service, since I
have sown the seed of contrivance by dwelling in a foreign land^.”

Masters have performed these slavish offices in order that it
might be thought that they were slaves.

They saw their fill of masterdom and were sated (with it) :
(hence) they have made ready for (doing) the work (of slaves).

On the contrary, these slaves of sensuality have represented
themselves as masters of intellect and spirit.

From the master (the spiritual man) comes the practice of
self-abasement ; from the slave (the sensual man) comes naught
but slavishness.

1495 So topsy-turvy, then, are the arrangements between that
world and this world. Know this (for sure).

Luqmdn’s master was aware of this hidden state (of Luqmdn) ;
he had seen signs (thereof) in him.

That traveller (Luqman’s master) knew the secret, (but)
quietly pursued his way^ for the sake of the good (which he had
in view).

He would have set him free at the first, but he sought to
content (comply with the wish of) Luqmdn,

Because it was Luqmdn’s desire (to remain a slave), in order
that none might know the secret of that brave® and generous
youth.

1500 What wonder (is it) that you should hide your secret from the
evil (one)? The wonder is this, that you should hide the secret
from yourself.

Hide your work from your own eyes, that your work may be
safe from the evil eye.

Yield yourself up to the snare of the (Divine) reward, and
then, (being) beside yourself, steal something from yourself.

They give opium to the wounded man, in order that they
may extract the point (of a spear or arrow) from his body.

At the hour of death he is torn with pain ; he becomes pre-
occupied with that, and (meanwhile) his spirit (life) is taken away.

3505 Inasmuch as, to whatsoever thought you give up your mind,
something will secretly be taken away from you,

(And inasmuch as) whatsoever you may cogitate and
(whatsoever) acquisition you may make, the thief will enter
from the side where you feel safe,

^ he, ** since I have gone abroad for the sake of carrying out a secret design,**

2 Literally, “drove his ass.*' a Literally, “that lion.’*


THE SAGACITY OF LUQMAN 299

Become occupied, therefore, with that which is better, in
order that the thief may take away from you something that is
less (in worth).

When the trader’s bales fall into the water, he lays his hands
upon the better merchandise.

Since something will (certainly) be lost in the water, take
leave of the less (worse) and gain (possession of) the better.


How the excellence and sagacity of Luqmdn became mafiifest
to those zoho made trial {of him).

Whatever food they brought to him (Luqman’s master), he 1510
would send some one to Luqman after (receiving it).

That Luqman might put his hand to (partake of) it, on purpose
that the master might eat his (Luqman’s) leavings.

He would eat his remnants and be enraptured^ : any food
that he (Luqman) did not taste, he (the master) would throw
away;

Or if he ate (of it), (’twould be) without heart and without
appetite: this is (the sign of) an affinity without end.

They had brought a melon as a present. “Go,” said he,
“call (hither) my son, Luqman.”

When he cut it and gave him a slice, he ate it as if it were sugar 1515
and honey.

On account of the pleasure with which he ate (it), he gave
him a second (slice), (and went on) till the slices (given him)
reached the seventeenth.

One slice remained. He said, “I will eat this (myself), so
that I may see what a sweet melon this is.

He (Luqman) eats it with such pleasure that from his delight
(all) natures have become eager and craving the morsel.”

As soon as he (the master) ate it, by its sourness there was
kindled fire (whicm blistered his tongue and burnt his throat.

He became besiae himself for a while on account of its sour- rs^o
ness; after that, he said to him, “O (you who are) soul and
world,

How did you make all this poison an antidote.^ How did you
deem this cruelty to be kindness?

What patience is this? For what reason is this great fortitude?

Or, perchance, in your opinion this life of yours is an enemy
(which you would fain destroy).

Why did not you cunningly bring (forward) a plea, saying,

‘I have an excuse (for declining to eat): desist for a while’.”

Luqmdn said, “From thy munificent hand I have eaten so
much that I am (bent) double with shame.

^ Literally, “ he would raise (a feeling of) enthusiasm.*'


300 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

1525 I was ashamed not to eat one bitter thing from thy hand, O
thou who art possessed of knowledge.

Since all parts of me have grown from thy bounty and are
plunged in thy bait and snare —

If I make outcry and complaint because of one bitter thing,
may the dust of a hundred roads be on (all) parts of me !

It (the melon) had the enjoyment of thy sugar-bestowing
hand: how could it (such enjoyment) leave any bitterness in
this melon?’’

By love bitter things become sweet; by love pieces of copper
become golden ;

1530 By love dregs become clear; by love pains become healing;

By love the dead is made living ; by love the king is made a slave .

This love, moreover, is the result of knowledge : who (ever)
sat in foolishness^ on such a throne?

On what occasion did deficient knowledge give birth to this
love? Deficient (knowledge) gives birth to love, but (only love)
for that which is (really) lifeless.

When it sees in a lifeless being the colour (appearance) of
a desired one, (’tis as though) it heard the voice of a beloved
in a whistle.

1535 Deficient knowledge cannot discriminate; of necessity it
deems the lightning to be the sun.

When the Prophet called the ** deficient” (man) accursed,
(his meaning) as interpreted was deficiency of mind,”

Because one whose body is deficient is the object of (Divine)
mercy: cursing and repulse (directed) against the object of
(Divine) mercy are improper.

Tis deficiency of mind that is the bad disease: it is the cause
of (God’s) curse and merits banishment (from His presence),

Forasmuch as the perfecting of minds is not remote (im-
possible), but the perfecting of the body is not within our power.

1540 ^ The miscreance and Pharaoh-like pride of every infidel who
is far (from God) have all been produced by deficiency of mind.

Relief for bodily deficiency has come in the (words of the)
Qur’an — it is no crime in the blind man.

Lightning is. transient and very faithless: without clearness
(of mind) you will not know the transient from the permanent.

The lightning laughs : say, at whom is it laughing? At him that
sets his heart upon its light.

The lights of the sky are hamstrung (feeble and imperfect):
how are they like (that Light which is) neither of the east nor
of the west?

1545 Regard the lightning as (what) taketh away the sight \ regard

^ Reading ditji If be retained, translate: ‘*When did he the

fool) in his vanity sit on such a throne?*^


THE SAGACITY OF LUQmAn 301

the everlasting Light as entirely Helpers^ (to the attainment of
vision).

To ride (your) horse upon the foam of the sea, to read a letter
in a flash of lightning,

Is, to fail, because of covetousness, to see the end; it is, to
laugh at your ow^n mind and intellect.

Intellect, by its proper nature, is a seer of the end (conse-
quence) ; ’tis the fleshly soul that does not see the end.

The intellect that is vanquished by the flesh becomes the
flesh : Jupiter is checkmated by Saturn and becomes inauspicious.

Still, turn this gaze (of yours) upon this inauspiciousness, look 1550
on that One who made you ill-starred.

The gaze (of him) that surveys this ebb and flow pierces from
the inauspicious influence to the auspicious.

He (God) continually turns you from one state (of feeling) to
another, manifesting opposite by means of opposite in the
change.

For the purpose that fear of the left hand side may bring to
birth in you the delight of “ the (blessed) men are led to hope
for the right hand side,”

So that you may have two wings (fear and hope) ; for the bird
that has (only) one wing is unable to fly, O excellent (reader).

(O God), either let me not come to speech (at all), or give me 1555
leave to tell (the whole) to the end.

But if Thou wiliest neither this nor that, ’tis Thine to com-
mand : how should any one know what Thou intendest®?

One must needs have the spirit of Abraham to see in the fire
Paradise and its palaces by the light (of mystic knowledge) ;

And mount step by step above the moon and the sun, lest he
remain like the door-ring fastened on the door ;

And, like the Friend®, pass beyond the Seventh Heaven,
saying, “/ love not them that set.”

This bodily world is deceptive, save to him that has escaped 15G0
from lust.

Conclusion of {the story) how the {other) retainers envied
the King’s favourite slave.

The story of the King and the amirs and their envy of the
favourite slave and lord of wisdom

Has been left far (behind) on account of the powerful attrac-
tion of the discourse. (Now) we must turn back and conclude it.

The happy and fortunate gardener of the (Divine) kingdom —
how should not he know one tree from another?

1 “Helpers” (Atifdr) is the name given to the people of Medina who
assisted Mohammed after he had quitted Mecca.

* Literally, where is Thy destination.”

* Abraham.


302 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

The tree that is bitter and reprobate, and the tree whose one
is (as) seven hundred (of the other) —

1565 How, in rearing (them), should he deem (them) equal, when
he beholds them with the eye (that is conscious)* of the end,

(And knows) what (different) fruit those trees will ultimately
bear, though at this moment they are alike in appearance^?

The Shaykh who has become seeing by the light of God has
become acquainted with the end and the beginning.

He has shut for God’s sake the eye that sees the stable (the
world); he has opened, in priority, the eye that sees the end.

Those envious ones were bad trees; they were ill-fortuned
ones of bitter stock.

1570 They were boiling and foaming with envy, and were starting
plots in secret.

That they might behead the favourite slave and tear up his
root from the world ;

(But) how should he perish, since the King was his soul, and
his root was under the protection of God?

The King had become aware of those secret thoughts, (but)
like Bii Bakr-i Rabdbi he kept silence.

In (viewing^ the spectacle of the hearts of (those) evil-
natured ones ne was clapping his hands (derisively) at those
potters (schemers).

1575 Some cunning people devise stratagems to get the King into
a beer-jug^;

(But) a King (so) exceedingly grand and illimitable — how
should He be contained in a beer-jug, O asses ?

They knitted a net for the King; (yet) after all, they (had)
learned this contrivance from Him.

Ill-starred is the pupil that begins rivalry with his master
and comes forward (to contend with him).

With what master? The master of the world, to whom the
manifest and the occult are alike;

1530 Whose eyes have become seeing by the light of God and have
rent the veils of ignorance.

(Making) a veil of (his) heart, (which is as) full of holes as an
old blanket, he (the disciple) puts it on in the presence of that Sage.

The veil laughs at him with a hundred mouths, every mouth
having become a slit (open) to that f master).^

The master says to the disciple, O you who are less than a
dog, have you no faithfulness to me?

Even suppose I am not a master and an iron-breaker^, suppose
I am a disciple like yourself and blind of heart,

^ Literally, “alike in the sight.” ® I,e. “to entrap and deceive him.”

® Possibly the true reading is “(velut) rima in femore” (cf,

1. 1230) ; every mouth exposes the disciple’s folly and puts him to shame.

* l.e, “one endowed with great spiritual power.”


THE ENVIOUS RETAINERS 303

Have not you help in spirit and mind from me? Without me 15S5
no water is set flowing for you.

Therefore my heart is the factory of your fortune : why would
you break this factory, O unrighteous one?”

You may say that you kindle the flame^ (of rivalry) against
him in secret (not openly) ; but is there not a window between
heart and heart?

After all, he sees your thought through the window: your
heart gives testimony as to what you are meditating.

Suppose that, from kindness, he does not rebuke you to your
face, (and that) whatever you say, he smiles and says “Yes” —

He does not smile from pleasure at your stroking (flattering 15^0
him) ; he smiles at that (concealed) thought of yours.

So a deceit is paid with a deceit; strike with a cup, (and you)
get struck with a jug — seiwe you right!

Were his smile at you one of approval, hundreds of thousands
of flowers would blossom for you.

When his heart works (for you) in approval, deem it (to be)
a sun entering Aries,

Because of whom‘^ both the day and the spring smile, and
blossoms and green fields are mingled together.

And myriads of nightingales and ringdoves pour their song 15* **5
into the unplenished world.

When you see the leaves of your spirit yellow and black, how
know you not the anger of the King?

The King’s sun, in the (zodiacal) sign of reproach, makes faces
black as a piece of roasted meat.

Our souls are leaves for that Mercury (to write on) : that white
and black (writing) is our standard (criterion).

Again, he writes a patent in red and green, that (our) spirits
may be delivered from melancholy and despair.

Red and green are Spring’s cancellation (of winter); in regard 1600
(to their significance they are) like the (coloured) lines of the
rainbow.


How reverence for the message of Solomon, on whom be peace, was
reflected in the heart of Bilqisfrom the despicable form of the hoopoe.

Hundredfold mercy be on that Bilqis to whom God gave the
intellect of a hundred men 1

A hoopoe brought the letter with the (royal) sign-manual
from Solomon — a few eloquent words.

(When) she read those pregnant sayings, she did not look
with contempt on the messenger.

* Literally, “strike the fire-stick.’’

“ Literally, “from it.’’


304 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Her eye saw him as a hoopoe, (but) her spirit saw him as the
'Anqa; her senses saw him as a fleck of foam, (but) her heart
saw him as the sea.

1605 Because of these two-coloured (diverse) talismans (appear-
ance and reality) the intellect is at war with the senses, as
Mohammed with the likes of Abu JahL

The infidels regarded Ahmad (Mohammed) as (only) a man,
since they did not see in him (the Prophetic nature which was
manifested by the miracle) the moon was cleft asunder.

Throw dust on your sense-perceiving eye : the sensuous eye
is the enemy of intellect and religion.

God has called the sensuous eye blind ; He has said that it is
an idolater and our foe,

Because it saw the foam and not the sea, because it saw the
present and not to-morrow.

t6io The master of to-morrow and of the present (is) before it;
(yet) of a (whole) treasure it sees not (even) a groat

(If) a mote bring a message from yonder Sun, the sun would
become a slave to that mote.

The drop that has become an envoy from the Sea of Unity —
the seven seas would be captive to that drop.

If a handful of earth become His courier, His heavens will
lay their heads (in homage) before His earth.

When the earth of Adam became God's courier, God's angels
laid their heads (in worship) before His earth.

1615 Wherefore (was it), pray, that heaven was rent asunder 'i
Because of one (spiritual) eye that an earthly creature opened.

Earth, from its grossness, settles beneath water; (but) see
how earth has sped beyond the empyrean!

Know, then, that the subtlety (of water) is not (derived) from
the water: 'tis only the gift of the Bounteous Originator.

If He make air and fire low (in place), and if He let the thorn
surpass the rose,

He is the Ruler and (the One who said) God doeth what He
willeth: from the very self of pain He raises the remedy.

If He make air and fire low (in place), and make (them
assume the qualities of) darkness and grossness and heaviness.

And if He make earth and water high (in place), and make
the path of heaven (to be) traversed by foot —

Then it has become certain that Thou exaltest whomso Thou
wilt : He (God) said to an earthly creature, “ Unfold thy wings."

To the creature of fire He said, “Go, become Iblis: begone
under the Seventh Earth with (thy) imposture I

O earthly Adam, go thou above (the star) Suhd; 0 fiery IbHs,
go to (the bottom ox) the Earth.


^ Literally, “a tasu (equivalent to two or four barley-corns).


HOW BILQIS RECEIVED SOLOMON’S MESSAGE 305

I am not the four temperaments or the first cause, I am ever 1625 '
remaining in (absolute) control.

My action is uncaused and upright (independent) : I have (the
power of) pre- determination, (I have) no cause, O infirm one.

I alter My custom at the time (I choose) : at the time (I will)

1 lay the dust (that rises) in front.

I say to the sea, ‘ Hark, be full of fire ! ’ I say to the fire, ‘ Go,
be a rose-garden ! ’

I say to the mountain, 'Be light as wool!’ I say to heaven,

' Be rent asunder before the eye 1 ’

I say, ' O sun, be joined to the moon 1 ’ I make them both like 1630
two black clouds.

We make dry the fountain of the sun : by Our art We turn into
musk the fountain of blood.”

Sun and moon (shall be) like two black oxen : God will fasten
a yoke upon their necks.


How a philosopher showed disbelief at the recitation of {the text),

“if your water shall have sunk into the ground.”

A teacher of Qur’an-recitation was reading from the page of
the Book, “(^/) your water {shall have) sunk into the ground:
(that is, if) I stop the water from (reaching) the spring,

And hide the water in the depths, and make the springs dry
and a place of drought,

Who shall bring the water to the spring again except Me who 1635
have no like, the Gracious, the Glorious?”

A contemptible philosopher and logician was passing beside
the school at that moment.

When he heard the verse (of the Qur’dn), he said in dis-
approval, “We bring the water (back) with a mattock;

With strokes of the spade and (with) the sharpness of the axe
we bring the water up from below.”

At night he fell asleep and saw (in dream) a lion-hearted man
(who) gave (him) a blow on the face and blinded both his eyes,

And said, “ O wretch, if you are speaking the truth, bring up 1640
some light with an axe from these two springs of vision.”

At (dawn of) day he jumped up and found (he had) two blind
eyes : from both his eyes the overflowing light had vanished.

If he had moaned and asked pardon (of God), the departed
light would have appeared (again) through (God’s) kindness ;

But (the power of) asking pardon, also, is not in (our) hands:
the savour of repentance is not the dessert of every inebriate.

The wickedness of (his) actions and the disastrousness of
(his) denial (of the Truth) had barred the way of repentance to
his heart.


N M


20


3o 6 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

1645 His heart became in hardness as the face of a rock : how should
repentance cleave it for sowing?

Where is one like Shu‘ayb, that by prayer he may make the
mountain earth (fit) for sowing?

Through the supplication and (firm) belief of that Friend
(Abraham) the thing that was hard and impossible became
possible.

Or, (to give another example), through the Muqawqis’
begging the Prophet a stony ground became a goodly^ cornfield.

So, contrariwise, a man’s disbelief turns gold into copper and
peace into war.

1650 This falseness draws after it^ an evil transformation: it turns
ground capable (of tillage) into stones and pebbles.

Nor is it granted to every heart to fall down in prayer; the
wages of (Divine) mercy are not the (allotted) portion of every
hireling.

Beware! Do not commit crime and sin in reliance on (the
thought), will repent and come to (take) refuge (with God).”

For (true) repentance, there must needs be a glow (of inward
feeling) and a flood (of tears) : (such) lightning and clouds are
the condition indispensable to repentance.

There must needs be fire and water (rain) for the fruit:
clouds and lightning are necessary for this accomplishment.

1655 Until there is the lightning of the heart and the rain-clouds
of the two eyes, how shall the fire of (Divine) menace and wrath
be allayed?

How shall the herbage grow, (the herbage) of the delight of
union (with God)? How shall the fountains of clear water gush
forth?

How shall the rose-beds tell their secret to the garden? How
shall the violet make an engagement with the jasmine?

How shall a plane-tree open its hands (spread its leaves) in
prayer? How shall any tree toss its head in the air (of love-
desire) ?

How shall the blossoms begin to shake out their sleeves full
of largesse in the days of Spring?

1660 How shall the cheeks of the anemone flame like blood? How
shall the rose bring gold out of its purse?

How shall the nightingale come and smell the rose? How
shall the dove say “coo, coo®,” as one that seeks?

How shall the stork utter with (all) its soul the cry lak^ laKi
What is (the meaning of) /aA? (It means) “ Thine^ is the kingdom,
O Thou whose help is invoked.”

J Literally, “with capital qualities.*’

® Literally, “becomes the amber attracting,” i,e, “becomes the means of
producing.”

® Ku, ku in Persian means “where, where? ”

* This is the meaning of lak in Arabic.


THE STUBBORN PHILOSOPHER 307

How shall the earth show forth the secrets of its inmost
mind? How shall the garden become radiant as the sky?

Whence have they fetched those garments (fair qualities)?
(They have derived) all of them from One who is Bounteous
and Merciful.

Those graces are the signs of a Witness^: they are the foot- 1665
prints of a man devoted to (God’s) service.

(None but) that person that has seen the King is gladdened
by the sign ; when one has not seen Him, there is no recognition.

The spirit of that one who at the time of Am not I {your
Lord) ? saw his Lord and became beside himself and intoxicated —

He (that spirit) knows the scent of the wine because he drank
it (before) ; when he has not drunk it, he cannot scent it.

For Wisdom is like a stray camel : like a go-between, it guides
(those who find and recognise it) to (the presence of) kings.

You behold in dream a person of pleasing countenance, who 1670
gives you a promise and a sign

That your desire will come to pass; here is the sign — such
and such a person will meet you to-morrow.

One sign is that he will be riding; one sign is that he will clasp
you to his breast ;

One sign is that he will smile before you ; one sign is that he
will fold his hands in your presence;

One sign is that when the morrow comes you will not tell this
dream to any one, though you would fain do so^.

Concerning that (last-mentioned) sign, He (God) said to the 1675
father of Yahyi (John the Baptist), “Thou shalt not begin to
speak at all till three days (have passed).

For three nights keep silence as to thy good and ill^: this will
be the sign that Yahyd will come (be born) to thee.

During three days do not breathe a word^, for this silence is
the sign of (the fulfilment) of thy purpose.

Beware ! do not thou speak of^ this sign, and keep this matter
hidden in thy heart.”

He (the person dreamed of) will sweetly® tell these signs to
him (the dreamer). What are these signs (alone)? (He will tell
him) a hundred signs besides.

This (which follows) is the sign that you will gain from God igso
the (spiritual) kingdom and power that you are seeking —

That you weep continually in the long nights, and that you
are always ardent in supplication at the hour of dawn ;

That, in the absence of that (which you seek), your day has
become dark ; (that) yotir neck has become thin as a spindle ;

^ I,€. a saint who is the representative of God.

“ Literally, “you will not from desire tell this dream.'*

^ J.e. “all that happens to thee.**

* Literally, “ do not breathe in speaking.**

® Literally, “bring to speech,** * Literally, “like sugar.’*


jjO-2


3o8 MATHNAWI, book II

And what you have given in alms (is) all that you possess,
(so that) your belongings (are entirely bestowed in charity) like
the alms of those who gamble all away^ ;

(That) you have given up your belongings and. sleep and the
(healthy) colour of your face, and sacrificed your head (life) and
become as (thin as) a hair;

1685 (That) you have sat — how often ! — in the fire, like aloes-wood ;

that you have gone — how often! — to meet the sword, like a
helmet.

A hundred thousand such acts of helplessness are habitual
to lovers (of God), and (their number) cannot be reckoned.

After you have had this dream at night, the day breaks;
through hope thereof^ your day becomes triumphant.

You have turned your eye to left and right, (wondering) where
is that sign and those tokens.

You are trembling like a leaf (and saying), “Alas, if the day
depart and the sign come not to pass I ’’

1690 You are running in street and market and into houses, like
one that should lose a calf.

(Somebody asks), “Is it good (news), Sir? Why are you
running to and fro? Who belonging to you is it that you have
lost here?’^

“It is good (news),” you tell him, “but none may know my
good (news) except myself.

If I tell it, lo, my sign is missed, and when the sign is missed,
the hour of death is come.”

You peer into the face of every rider : he says to you, “Do not
look at me like a madman.”

1695 ^ You say to him, “ I have lost a friend ; I have set out® to seek
him.

May thy fortune be lasting, 0 rider! Have pity on lovers
and excuse (them).”

When you have made search (and your) looking has been in
earnest — earnest endeavour does not fail : so the Tradition has
come down (from the Prophet) —

Suddenly comes a blessed rider; then he clasps you very
closely to his breast.

You become senseless and fall to vaunting (ecstatically); the
ignorant (uninitiated) man says, “Here is fraud and hypocrisy.”

1700 How does he see what this enthusiasm in him (the enraptured
person) is? He knows not (who it is) with whom that is the sign
of union.

This sign concerns (only) him that has seen (before): how
should the sign appear to the other one?

2 who sacrifice everything for God's sake.

I,e. of seeing the signs announced in the dream.

® Literally, I have set my face.”


THE SIGNS GIVEN TO SEEKERS 309

Every moment that a sign was coming from Him, a (new)
spirit was coming into that person’s spirit.

Water has reached the helpless fish. These signs are (those
mentioned in the text) those are the signs of the Book,

Hence the signs which are in the prophets are peculiar to
(known exclusively by) him who is a friend (knower and lover
of God). ^

This discourse remains imperfect and unsettled ; I have no 1705
heart (understanding), I am out of my mind^; excuse me.

How can any one number the motes, especially that one
whose understanding has been transported by Love?

Shall I number the leaves of the garden ? Shall I number the
cries of the partridge and the crow?

They come not into computation, but I enumerate them for
the guidance of him that is put to trial.

The sinister influence of Saturn and the auspicious influ-
ence of Jupiter come not into computation, though you may
enumerate ;

But still, some of these two* (diverse) effects must be ex- 1710
plained — that is, the benefit and injury (which they involve) —

In order that some little part of the effects of the (Divine)
decree may be made known to the good-fortuned and the
ill-starred.

He whose ascendant (ruling planet) is Jupiter will be rejoiced
by vivacity (of disposition) and eminence ;

And it will be necessary for him whose ascendant is Saturn
to take precautions against every (kind of) mischief in his affairs.

If I should speak to one whose (ruling) planet is Saturn of his
(Saturn’s) fire, it (my discourse) would burn (torment) that
hapless man.

Our King (God) has given permission, (saying), ''Commem- 1711
orate Allah '' : He saw us in the fire and gave us light.

He has said, ** Although I far transcend 2 your commemora-
tion (of Me), (and although) the pictorial ideas (of human
speech) are not suitable to Me,

Yet he that is intoxicated with (pictorial) imagination and
fancy will never apprehend My essence without (the help of)
similitude.”

Bodily commemoration® is an imperfect fancy: the Kingly
attributes are remote from those (forms of speech).

If any one say of a king, “He is not a weaver,” what praise
is this? He (that person) is surely ignorant.

^ I./iterally, ‘T am without heart (mind).'^

® Literally, **I am exempt from.”

^ Le. praise and prayer uttered by the tongue.


310


MATHNAWf, BOOK 11


How Moses ^ on whom be peace, took offence at the prayer
of the shepherd,

17^0 Moses saw a shepherd on the way, who was saying, “ O God
who choosest (whom Thou wilt).

Where art Thou, that I may become Thy servant and sew
Thy shoes and comb Thy head ?

That I may wash Thy clothes and kill Thy lice and bring
milk to Thee, O worshipful One;

That I may kiss Thy little hand and rub Thy little foot, (and
when) bedtime comes I may sweep Thy little room,

O Thou to whom all my goats be a sacrifice, O Thou in
remembrance of whom are my cries of ay and ah ! ’’

1725 The shepherd was speaking foolish words in this wise. Moses
said, “Man, to whom is this (addressed)?’’

He answered, “To that One who created us; by whom this
earth and sky were brought to sight.”

“Hark!” said Moses, “you have become veiy backsliding
(depraved); indeed you have not become a Moslem, you have
become an infidel.

What babble is this? what blasphemy and raving? Stuff
some cotton into your mouth 1

The stench of your blasphemy has made the (whole) world
stinking: your blasphemy has turned the silk robe of religion
into rags.

1730 Shoes and socks are fitting for you, (but) how are such
things right for (One who is) a Sun?

If you do not stop your throat from (uttering) these words,
a fire will come and burn up the people.

If a fire has not come, (then) what is this smoke? Why has
your soul become black and your spirit rejected (by God)?

If you know that God is the Judge, how is it right for you (to
indulge in) this doting talk and familiarity?

Truly, the friendship of a witless man is enmity: the high
God is not in want of suchlike service.

1735 To whom are you saying this? To your paternal and maternal
uncles? Are the body and (its) needs among the attributes of
the Lord of glory?

(Only) he that is waxing and growing drinks milk ; (only) he
that has need of feet puts on shoes.

And if these words (of yours) are (meant) for His servant,
of whom God said, ‘He is I and I myself am he’;

(For him) of whom He (God) said, ‘Verily, I was sick and
thou didst not visit Me,’ (that is), ‘I became ill, not he (the
sick man) alone’;

(For him) who has become seeing by Me and hearing by Me—


MOSES AND THE SHEPHERD 311

this (talk of yours) is foolish nonsense even in regard to that
servant.

To speak irreverently to one chosen of God causes the heart ^740
(spirit) to perish and keeps the page (record) black.

If you should call a man ‘Fatima’ — though men and women
are all of one kind —

He will seek to murder you, so far as it is possible (for him),
albeit he is good-natured and forbearing and quiet.

(The name) Fatima is (a term of) praise in regard to women,
(but) if you address it to a man, ’tis (like) the blow of a spear-
head.

Hand and foot are (terms of) praise in relation to us; in
relation to the holiness of God they are pollution.

(The words) He begat not^ He was not begotten are appropriate 1745
to Him: He is the Creator of begetter and begotten.

Birth is the attribute of everything that is (a) body : whatever
is born is on this side of the river.

Because it is of (the world of) becoming and decay and (is)
contemptible: it is originated and certainly requires an Origi-
nator.”

He (the shepherd) said, “O Moses, thou hast closed my
mouth and thou hast burned my soul with repentance.”

He rent his garment and heaved a sigh, and hastily turned
his head towards the desert and went (his way).

How the high God rebuked Moses ^ on whom he peace^ on
account of the shepherd.

A revelation came to Moses from God — “Thou hast parted 1750
My servant from Me.

Didst thou come (as a prophet) to unite, or didst thou come
to sever?

So far as thou canst, do not set foot in separation: of (all)
things the most hateful to Me is divorce.

I have bestowed on every one a (special) way of acting: I have
given to every one a (peculiar) form of expression.

In regard to him it is (worthy of) praise, and in regard to thee
it is (worthy of) blame : in regard to him honey, and in regard
to thee poison.

I am independent of all purity and impurity, of all slothful- 1755
ness and alacrity (in worshipping Me).

I did not ordain (Divine worship) that I might make any profit ;
nay, but that I might do a kindness to (My) servants.

In the Hindoos the idiom^ of Hind (India) is praiseworthy ;
in the Sindians the idiom of Sind is praiseworthy.

^ J.e. the local and traditional forms of speech used in the practice of
eligion.


312 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

I am not sanctified by their glorification (of Me) ; ’tis they
that become sanctified and pearl-scattering (pure and radiant).

I look not at the tongue and the speech ; I look at the inward
(spirit) and the state (of feeling).

1760 I gaze into the heart (to see) whether it be lowly, though the
words uttered be not lowly,

Because the heart is the substance, speech (only) the accident ;
so the accident is subservient, the substance is the (real) object.

How much (more) of these phrases and conceptions and
metaphors? I want burning, burning: become friendly with
that burning !

Light up a fire of love in thy soul, burn thought and expression
entirely (away) !

O Moses, they that know the conventions are of one sort,
they whose souls and spirits burn are of another sort.’’

1765 To lovers there is a burning (which consumes them) at every
moment : tax and tithe are not (imposed) on a ruined village. ^

If he (the lover) speak faultily, do not call him faulty ; and if
he be bathed in blood, do not wash (those who are) martyrs.

For martyrs, blood is better than water: this fault (committed
by him) is better than a hundred right actions (of another).

Within the Ka*ba the rule of the qibla does not exist : what
matter if the diver has no snow-shoes?

Do not seek guidance from the drunken : why dost thou order
those whose garments are rent in pieces to mend them?

1770 The religion of Love is apart from all religions: for lovers,
the (only) religion and creed is — God.

If the ruby have not a seal (graven on it), ’tis no harm: Love
in the sea of sorrow is not sorrowful.


How the [Divine) revelation came to Moses, on whom be
peace, excusing that shepherd.

After that, God hid in the inmost heart of Moses mysteries
which cannot be spoken.

Words were poured upon his heart: vision and speech were
mingled together.

How oft did he become beside himself and how oft return
to himself ! How oft did he fly from eternity to everlastingness !

1775 If I should unfold (his tale) after this, ’tis foolishness (in me),
because the explanation of this is beyond (our) understanding ;

And if I should speak (thereof), ’twould root up (men’s)
minds; and if I should write (thereof), ’twould shatter many
pens.

When Moses heard these reproaches from God, he ran into
the desert in quest of the shepherd.


MOSES AND THE SHEPHERD 313

He pushed on over the footprints of the bewildered man, he
scattered dust from the skirt of the desert^.

The footstep of a man distraught is, in truth, distinct from
the footsteps ‘of others :

(At) one step, (he moves) like the rook (straight) from top to 1780
bottom (of the chessboard) ; (at) one step he goes crossways, like
the bishop ; ,

Now lifting his crest like a wave ; now going on his belly like
a fish;

Now writing (a description of) his state on some dust, like a
geomancer who takes an omen by drawing lines (on earth or
sand).

At last he (Moses) overtook and beheld him; the giver of
glad news said, “Permission has come (from God).

Do not seek any rules or method (of worship) ; say whatsoever
your distressful heart desires.

Your blasphemy is (the true) religion, and your religion is 17S5
the light of the spirit : you are saved, and through you a (whole)
world is in salvation.

0 you who are made secure ,by God doeth whatso He zoilleth,
go, loose your tongue without regard (for what you say).”

He said, “O Moses, I have passed beyond that: I am now
bathed in (my) heart’s blood.

1 have passed beyond the Lote-tree of the farthest bourn, I
have gone a hundred thousand years’ journey on the other side.

Thou didst ply the lash, and my horse shied, made a bound,
and passed beyond the sky.

May the Divine Nature be intimate with my human nature — 1790
blessings be on thy hand and on thine arm!

Now my state is beyond telling: this which I am telling is not
my (real) state.”

You behold the image which is in a mirror : it is your (own)
image, it is not the image of the mirror.

The breath which the flute-player puts into the flute — does
it belong to the flute? No, it belongs to the man (the flute-
player).

Take good heed! Whether you speak praise (of God) or
thanksgiving, know that it is even as the unseemly (words) of
that shepherd.

Though your praise is better in comparison with that, yet in 1795
relation to God it too is maimed (feeble).

How often will you say, when the lid has been raised®, “This
was not what they were thinking (it was) ! ”

This acceptance (by God) of your praise is from (His) mercy :
it is an indulgence (which He grants), like (the indulgence

^ made great haste.

“ I.e. when you shall sec things as they really are.


314 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

granted in the case of) the prayers of a woman suffering from
menorrhagia.

Her prayers are stained with blood^; your praise is stained
with assimilation and qualification.

Blood is foul, and (yet) it goes (is washed away) by a (little)
water; but the inward part (the inner man) hath impurities
3800^ Which fail not (are not removed) from the interior (the heart)
of the man of works except by the water of the grace of the
Maker.

Would that in your bowing low in prayer you would turn
your face (to attentive consideration) and apprehend the meaning
of “ Glory to my Lord ! ”

Saying, *‘Oh, my prostration (in prayer), like my existence,
is unworthy (of Thee): do Thou give good in return for evil!’^

This earth has the mark of God’s clemency, in that it got
filth and gave flowers as the produce ;

In that it covers our pollutions, (and that) buds grow up from
it in exchange.

1805 Therefore, when the infidel saw that in giving and lavishing
he was meaner and unwealthier than the earth,

(That) flowers and fruit did not grow from his being, (and
that) he sought (and achieved) nothing but the corruption of
all purities.

He said, have gone backwards in (my) course. Alas!
would that I had (still) been earth 1

Would that I had not chosen to travel away from earthiness,
(and that) like a clod of earth I had gathered some grain 1

When I travelled, the Way tried me; what was the present I
brought (home) from this travelling? ”

3S10 ’Tis from all that propensity of his towards earth that he
sees before him no profit in the journey.

His turning his face back is that greed and cupidity (of his) ;
his turning his face to the Way is sincerity and supplication.

Every herb that has a propensity for (moving) upwards is in
(the state of) increase and life and growth ;

When it has turned its head towards the earth, (it is) in (the
state of) decrease and dryness and failure and disappointment.

When the propensity of your spirit is upwards, (you are) in
(the state of) increase, and that (lofty) place is the place to which
you will return;

1815 But if you are upside down, (with) your head towards the
earth, (then) you are one that sinks: God loves not them that
sink.


^ Literally, “with her prayers blood is mixed so as to stain them.”


MOSES AND THE SHEPHERD 315

How Moses ^ on whom be peace ^ asked the high God {to
explain) the secret of the predominance of the unjust.

Moses sard, “ O Bounteous Disposer, O Thou whom to com-
memorate for one moment is (worth) a long life,

I have seen the crooked , misshapen image in (the mould of) water
and clay, and like the angels, my heart has raised an objection,

As to what is the purpose of making an image and casting
therein the seed of corruption.

To kindle the fire of iniquity and corruption; to burn the
mosque and those who bend low in prayer ;

To set boiling the source of bloody tears^ for the sake of 1820
(receiving) humble entreaties (from the suffering and oppressed) —

I know for certain that it is the essence of wisdom (on Thy
part), but my aim is (to know this by) actual seeing and vision.

That certainty (of mine) says to me, ‘keep silence^; the
craving for vision says to me, ‘Make a stir (and outcry).’

Thou hast shown Thy secret to the angels, (namely) that
such honey as this is worth the sting.

Thou hast displayed the Light of Adam manifestly to the
angels, (so that all) the difficulties were explained.

Thy Resurrection declares what is the secret of death: the 1825
fruits declare what is the secret of the leaves.”

The secret of blood and seed is the excellence of Man ; after
all, inferiority is antecedent to every superiority.

The ignorant (child) first washes the tablet, then he writes
the letters upon it.

(So) He (God) turns the heart into blood and abject tears,
then He writes the (spiritual) mysteries upon it.

At the time of washing the tablet (of the heart) one must
recognise that it will be made into a book (of mysteries).

When they lay the foundation of a house (to rebuild it), they 1830
dig up the first foundation.

(Also), people first fetch up clay from the depths of the earth
in order that at last you may draw up flowing water.

Children weep piteously at cupping, for they know not the
secret of the matter;

(But) a man, in sooth, gives the cupper gold and fondles the
blood-drinking lancet.

The porter runs to the heavy load : he snatches the load from
others.

Behold the struggle of the porters for the load! Such is the 1835
endeavour of him that sees (the truth of) things.

Inasmuch as burdens are the foundation of ease, and bitter
things, too, are the forerunners of enjoyment.

^ Literally, “blood-stained and yellow water/* The words may also be
rendered, “serum and pus,** i,e, festering wounds.


3i 6 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Paradise is compassed about with the things we dislike (to
do); the fires (of Hell) are compassed about with our lusts.

The seed (source) of the substance of your fire (of torment)
is the fresh bough (of lust) ; (but) he that is burned' by the fire
(of renunciation) is the comrade of Kawthar^.

Whosoever is the comrade of affliction in prison — that is the
retribution for a mouthful (of unlawful food) and a lust.

1S40 Whosoever is the comrade of a high fortune in a palace —
that is the reward for some battle-field and sore trial.

Whomsoever you have seen unrivalled in (his store of) gold
and silver — know that he has been patient in earning.

When the (spiritual) eye has become piercing, he (the owner)
sees without causes. You who are in (the bondage of) sense-
perception, pay you heed to causes!

He whose spirit is beyond (the world of) natural properties —
to him belongs the position of power to rive (the chain of)
causes.

The (spiritual) eye regards the fountain of the miracles of the
prophets as (being) without cause, not as (arising) from water
and herbage^.

1845 These causes are (linked together) like the physician and the
sick: these causes are like the lamp and the wick.

Twist a new wick for your night-lamp, (but) know that the
lamp of the sun transcends these things.

Go you and make plaster for the roof of your house, (but)
know that the roof of the sky is undefiled by plaster.

Alas that, after our Sweetheart had burned (utterly destroyed)
our pain, the night-time of being alone (with Him) passed away
and became day 1

Except at night there is no unveiling of the moon: except
through heartache do not seek your heart’s desire.

1850 Forsaking Jesus, you have fostered the ass: of necessity, like
the ass, you are outside of the curtain.

Knowledge and gnosis are the fortune of Jesus; they are not
the fortune of the ass, 0 you asinine one!

You listen to the moaning of the ass, and pity comes over you ;
then you know not (that) the ass commands you to be asinine.

Have pity on Jesus ana have no pity on the ass: do not make
the (carnal) nature lord over your intellect.

Let the (carnal) nature weep sore and bitterly : do you take
from it and pay the debt of the (rational) soul.

1855 For years you have been the ass’s slave. It is enough, for the
ass’s slave is behind (even) the ass.

The thing meant by (tlxe Prophet’s words) “put them (the
women) behind ” is your fleshly soul ; for it must be last, and your
intellect (must be) first.

^ A river in Paradise.


* /.e. not dependent on material causes.


THE SECRET OF PAIN AND TRIBULATION 317

This base intellect has become of the same temperament as
the ass : its (only) thought is how it shall get hold of fodder.

The ass of Jesus took (to itself) the temperament of the
(rational) spirit : it took its abode in the place of the intelligent,

Because (in Jesus) intellect was ruling, and the ass (was) weak
— the ass is made lean by a strong rider —

While from the weakness of your intellect, O you who have i860
(no more than) the value of an ass, this worn-out ass has become
a dragon.

If through Jesus (the spiritual guide) you have become heart-
sick, (yet) health too comes from him: do not leave him.

How art thou as to affliction, O thou Jesus who hast the
(healing) breath of Jesus? for there never was in the world a
treasure without a snake.

How art thou, O Jesus, at the sight of the Jews? How art
thou, O Joseph, in respect of the envious plotter?

Night and day for the sake of this foolish people thou, like
night and day, art a replenisher of life.

Alas for those bilious ones who are without excellence! What 1865
excellence is born from bile ? Headache.

Do thou the same thing that the sun of the east does with
(our) hypocrisy and craft and thieving and dissimulation.

Thou art honey, we are vinegar in (the affairs of) this world
and in religion ; the (means of) removing this bile is oxymel.

We folk who suffer from colic have added more and more
vinegar ; do thou add more and more honey, withhold not thy
bounty.

This was meet in us; such (acts naturally) issued from us:
what is increased by sand in the eye? Blindness.

(But) ’tis meet in thee, O precious collyrium, that every 1R70
nothing should gain from thee something.

Thy heart is roasted by the fire of these unrighteous men,

(yet) all thy appeal (to God) has been, ‘‘ Guide my people!’*

Thou art a mine of aloes- wood: if they set thee afire, they will
fill this world with otto of roses and sweet basil.

Thou art not that aloes-wood that is minished by the fire:
thou art not that spirit that is made captive by grief.

Aloes-wood burns, (but) the mine of aloes-wood is far from
burning : how should the wind (of evil words) assail the source
of (spiritual) light?

Oh, ’tis from thee the heavens have (their) purity; oh, thy 1S75
unkindness is better than kindness,

Because if an unkindness come from the wise it is better than
the kindness of the ignorant.

The Prophet said, ‘‘Enmity (proceeding) from wisdom is
better than the love that comes from a fool.’^


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


318


How an Amir harassed a sleeping man into whose mouth a
snake had gone.

A wise man was riding along (at the moment when) a snake
was going into the mouth of a man asleep.

The rider saw that, and was hurrying to scare away the snake,
(but) he got no chance (of doing so).

1880 Since he had an abundant supply of intelligence, he struck
the sleeper several powerful blows with a mace.

The strokes of the hard mace drove him in flight from him
(the rider) to beneath a tree.

There were many rotten apples which had dropped (from the
tree) : he said, “Eat of these, O you in the grip of pain ! ”

He gave the man so many apples to eat that they were falling
out of his mouth again.

He was crying, “O Amir, pray, why have you set on me.?
What have I done to you?

1885 If you have an inveterate and mortal feud with me^, strike
with your sword and shed my blood at once.

Ill-omened (was) the hour I came into your sight: oh, happy
he^ that never saw your face !

Without guilt, without sin, without (having done) anything
great or small® — (even) the heretics hold not such oppression
allowable.

Blood gushes from my mouth together ■with (my) words.
O God, I beseech Thee, give him the retribution (which he
deserves)!”

Every instant he was uttering a new curse, (while) he (the
rider) kept beating him and saying, “Run in this plain.”

1890 Blows of the mace, and the rider (swift) as the wind! He
(therefore) went on running and (now and) again falling on his
face.

He was full-fed and sleepy and fatigued: his feet and face
became (covered -with) a hundred thousand wounds.

Till nightfall he (the rider) drove (him) to and fro*, until
vomiting caused by bile overtook him.

All the things he had eaten, bad or good, came up from him :
the snake shot forth from him along with what he had eaten.

When he saw the snake outside of him, he fell on his knees
before that beneficent man.

1895 As soon as he saw the horror of that black, ugly, big snake,
those griefs departed from him.

\ Literally, “ if you have from the beginning a quarrel with my soul (life).

® Literally, happiness to him.*’

® Literally, “without more or less.”

* Literally, “drew him in and let him out.”


THE MAN WHO SWALLOWED A SNAKE 319

“Truly,’’ said he, “you are the Gabriel of (Divine) mercy,
or you are God, for you are the lord of bounty.

Oh, blest (is) the hour that you saw me : I was dead, you have
given me new life.

You (were) seeking me like mothers (in search of their
children); I (was) fleeing from you like asses.

The ass flees from his master because of asininity ; his owner
(runs) after (him) because of good-nature.

He seeks him, not on account of profit or loss, but in order 1900
that a wolf or (other) wild beast may not tear him.

Oh, happy he that espies your face or suddenly lights upon
your abode.

O you whom the pure spirit hath praised, how many foolish
and idle words have I spoken to you !

0 lord and emperor and amir, I spoke not, my folly spoke :
do not punish that (offence).

If I had known a tittle of this matter, how could I have spoken
foolish words?

1 should have spoken much praise of you, O man of good 1905
qualities, if you had given me a single hint as to the (actual) case ;

But you, keeping silence, showed perturbation and silently
continued to beat me on the head.

My head became dizzy, the wits flew out of my head —
especially as this head has (but) little brain.

Pardon, O man of goodly countenance and goodly behaviour:
let pass that which I said in frenzy.”

He answered, “ If I had uttered a hint of it, your gall would
instantly have turned to water.

Had I told you the qualities of the snake, terror would have 1910
made you give up the ghost^.”

Mustafi (Mohammed) said, ‘If I should tell aright the
description of the enemy which is in your souls.

The gall-bladders even of courageous men would burst: he
(such a one) would neither go his way nor care for any work.

Neither would there remain to his heart endurance in suppli-
cation, nor to his body strength for fasting and (ritual) prayer.

He would become (good for) nothing as a mouse before a
cat; he would be distraught as a lamb before a wolf.

No power to plan or move would remain in him: therefore 10 r 5
I tend you without speaking.

I am mute, like Bii Bakr-i Rababi; I handle the iron, like
David,

So that by my hand the (seemingly) impossible is brought to
pass^, and wings are restored to the bird whose plumes were
torn away.

^ Literally, “would have fetched up the breath from your soul.”

® Literally, “becomes a state (of actuality).”


320 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Since there is (the text) the hand of God is above their hands ^
the One (God) has declared our hand to be His hand.

Therefore mine is surely a long hand that has passed beyond
the Seventh Heaven.

1920 My hand showed (its) cunning upon the sky: O teacher of
the Qur^an, recite the moon hath been cleft asunder,^

This characteristic^, moreover, is on account of the weakness
of (men’s) understandings: how is it possible to explain the
(Divine) omnipotence to the weak?

You will surely know when you lift your head from (this
sensuous) sleep. ’Tis the end (of my discourse), and God knows
best what is right.

‘‘(If I had told you about the snake), you would not have
been able to eat, nor would you have been capable of vomiting
or cared (to do so)^.

I heard (your) abuse and went on with my work^ ; I kept
repeating under my lip (breath), ‘0 Lord, make (it) easy!’

1925 I had not permission to speak of the cause, and I had not
power to abandon you.

From the grief in my heart I was saying continually, ‘ Guide
my people; verily, they know not’.”

The man that had been delivered from woe was falling on
his knees and saying, “ 0 (thou who art) my bliss, O my fortune
and treasure,

Thou wilt get rewards from God, O noble one; this weakling
has not the power to thank thee.

God will say thanks to thee, O leader ; I have not the lips and
the chin and the voice for that.”

1930 Of this fashion is the enmity of the wise: their poison is
gladness to the soul.

The friendship of the fool is woe and perdition : hear this tale
as a parable.

On putting trust in the fawningness and good faith of the bear.

A dragon was pulling a bear (into its jaw’s); a valiant man
went and succoured it.

The valiant (holy) men are a help in the world when the wail
of the oppressed reaches (them).

From every quarter they hear the cry of the oppressed and
run in that direction, like the mercy of God.

1935 Those buttresses for the breaches of the world, those physi-
cians for hidden maladies.

Are pure love and justice and mercy; even as God, they are
flawless (incorruptible) and unbribed.

^ Silence.

® Literally, “nor would you have had the way (means) or care to vomit.

® Literally, ** I was driving my ass along.”


THE FOOL WHO TRUSTED THE BEAR 321

(If you ask one of them), ‘‘Why dost thou give him this aid
all at once? he says, “ On account of his grief and helplessness.’’

Lovingkindness is fallen a prey to the valiant (holy) man, (for)
medicine seeks naught in the world but the pain (which it should
cure).

Wherever a pain is, the remedy goes there: wherever a
lowland is, the water runs there.

If thou want the water of mercy, go, become lowly, and then 1940
drink the wine of mercy and become drunken.

Mercy upon mercy comes (and rises like a flood) up to the
head; do not thou come down to (and dwell upon) a single
mercy, O son !

Bring the sky under thy feet, O brave one ! Hear from above
the firmament the noise of the (celestial) music !

Put out of thine ear the cotton of evil suggestion, that the
cries from heaven may come into thine ear.

Purge thy two eyes from the hair of defect, that thou mayst
behold the garden and cypress-plot of the world unseen.

Eject the phlegm from thy brain and nose, that the wind of 1945
God may come into the centres of thy (spiritual) sense of smell.

Do not leave (in thyself) any trace of fever and bile, that thou
mayst get from the world the taste of sugar.

Remedium virilitatis adhibe neu virilitate carens cucurreris,
that a hundred kinds of fair ones may come forth.

Tear the fetter, which is the body, from the foot of thy soul,
so that it may race round the arena.

Take off the shackle of avarice from thy hands and neck:
seize (and enjoy) a new fortune in the old heaven.

And if thou art unable (to do that), fly to the Ka‘ba of (Divine) 1950
grace: lay thy helplessness before the Helper.

Lamentation and weeping are a mighty stock-in-trade (re-
source) ; the Universal Mercy is the mightiest nurse (to comfort
and cherish).

The nurse and mother seeks a pretext (for giving relief):

(she waits to see) when her child will begin to weep.

He (God) created the child, (namely) your wants, in order that
it might moan and that milk might (then) be produced for it.

He said, “ Call ye upon God!"" Refrain not thou from lamen-
tation, in order that the milk of His lovingkindnesses may
flow.

The howling of the wind and the pouring forth of (rain like) 1955
milk from the cloud are for care of us: (have) patience one
moment !

Hast not thou heard (the text) ‘ ‘ in the sky is your daily bread " " ?
Wherefore hast thou stuck to this low place?

Deem thy fear and despair to be the voice of the ghoul
drawing thine ear (down) to the abyss of degradation.


N M


21


322 MATHNAWI, BOOK 11

Every call that draws thee upward — know that that call has
come from on high.

Every call that excites cupidity in thee — know that it is the
howl of the wolf which tears men (to pieces).

i960 This (afore-mentioned) height is not (high) in respect of
position; these “heights” are towards (refer to) mind and
spirit.

Every cause is higher than the effect: the stone and iron (from
which fire is struck) are superior to the sparks.

Such and such a person is (really) seated above that one who
lifts up his head so haughtily, though in appearance he is seated
beside him. _

The superiority of that (person’s) place is in respect of (his
spiritual) nobility; the place (that is) far from the (spiritual)
seat of honour is held in slight regard.

Forasmuch as the stone and iron arc prior in action, the
superiority of these twain is proper;

19O5 But those sparks, in respect of their being the final cause’,
are from this point of view far in front of (superior to) the iron
and stone.

The stone and iron arc first, and the sparks last; but these
twain are the body, and the sparks are the soul.

If those sparks are posterior in time, (yet) in quality they are
higher than the stone and iron.

The bough is prior to the fruit in time, (but) it (the fruit) is
superior to the bough in excellence.

Since the fruit is the final cause of the tree, it follows that the
fruit is (really) first, the tree last.

1970 When the bear cried out for help against the dragon, a valiant
man rescued it from the (dragon’s) claws.

Cunning and courage gave support to each other: by this
strength he slew the dragon.

The dragon has strength, (but) it has not cunning; again,
there is a cunning above your cunning.

When you have regarded your own cunning, go back (and
see) whence it came: go to the origin.

Whatever is below has come from above: come on, turn your
eye towards the height.

1975 Looking aloft gives light, though at first it produces dazzle-
ment as a trial.

Accustom your eye to the light; if you are not a bat, look in
that direction.

Vision of the end is the sign of your (having the) light; the
lust of the moment is in truth your (dark) grave.

"^e man with vision of the end, who has seen a hundred
artifices, is not like him that has (only) heard of one artifice,

^ Literally, “the object aimed at.”


THE FOOL WHO TRUSTED THE BEAR 323

(And who) has been so befooled by that one artifice that in
his pride he has become alienated from the masters.

Like Samiri, when he has seen in himselJf that (little) skill, 1980
through pride he has rebelled against (a) Moses.

He has learned that skill from (a) Moses and (then) closed his
eyes to his teacher,

Moses, of course, exhibited another artifice, so that it swept
away (both) that artifice (of Samiri) and his life.

Oh, many is the knowledge (talent) that runs in the head (and
urges) that he (the owner) should become eminent — ^in truth,
through that (knowledge) his head goes (he loses his life).

If you wish not your head to be lost, be (lowly as) a foot : be
under the protection of the Qutb who is possessed of discern-
ment.

Though you be a king, deem not yourself above him: though 1985
you be honey, gather naught but his sugar-cane.

Your thought is the outward form, and his thought is the
soul : your coin is false, and his coin is (pure as) the mine.

You are (really) he: seek yourself in his ‘‘he’’ (personality).

Say coo, coo^ : become a dove (flying) towards him.

And if you are unwilling to serve the (holy) men of (human)
kind, you are in the dragon’s mouth, like the bear.

It may be that a Master will deliver you and pull you out of
danger.

As you have no strength, keep making a lamentation; since 1990
you are blind, take care, do not turn your head away from him
that sees the road.

You are less (worse) than the bear, (for) you are not wailing
at the pain. The bear was freed from pain when it made an
outcry.

0 God, make our stony hearts (soft as) wax; make our wailing
sweet (to Thee) and an object of (Thy) mercy!


How a sightless beggar said^ “ J have two blindnesses,^*

There was a blind man who used to say, “Pity! I have two
blindnesses, O people of the time.

Therefore, hark ye, show unto me twice as much compassion,
since I have two blindnesses, and I (live) between (them,)”

(Somebody) said, “We see one blindness of yours: what may X995
the other blindness be? Explain.”

He answered,* “I have an ugly voice and unpleasing tones:
ugliness of voice and blindness are double (blindness).

My ugly cry becomes the source of annoyance : the people’s
love is lessened by my cry,

^ K1I the cry of the dove, also means where? where?’’


2I-J?


324 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Whithersoever my ugly voice goes, it becomes the source of
anger and annoyance and hatred.

Double your compassion for (these) two blindnesses : make
room (in your hearts) for one who gets so little room^.^’

2000 The ugliness of (jfiis) voice was diminished by this plaint:
the people became of one mind in (showing) compassion for
him.

When he had told the secret (and explained his meaning), his
voice was made beautiful by the graciousness of the voice of his
heart ;

But that one whose heart’s voice also is bad — (for him) those
three blindnesses are banishment everlasting (from the favour of
God);

Yet it may be that the bounteous (saints), who give without
cause, will lay a hand (of blessing) upon his ugly head.

Since his (the blind beggar’s) voice became sweet and
pitiable^, the hearts of the stony-hearted were made (soft) as
wax thereby.

2005 Inasmuch as the infidel’s lament is ugly and (like) braying,,
for that (reason) it meets with no (favourable) response®.

Be stlenV' has come down (has been revealed in the Qur’dn)
against the ugly- voiced (infidel), for he was drunken with the
people’s blood, like a dog.

Inasmuch as the lament of the bear attracts compassion,
(while) your lament is not like this, (but) is unpleasing.

Know that you have behaved with wolfishness to (a) Joseph,
or have drunk of the blood of an innocent.

Repent, and empty yourself of what you have drunk; and if
your wound is old (and unhealed), go, cauterise (it).

Continuation^ of the story of the hear and of the fool who
had put trust in its good faith.

2010 The bear, too, when it was delivered from the dragon and
received such kindness from that brave man —

Like the dog of the Men of the Cave, that poor bear became
an attendant at the heels of him that bore the burden (of the
fight with the dragon).

That Moslem, from fatigue, laid down his head (to rest); the
bear, from devotion (to him), became (his) guard.

A certain man passed by and said to him, ‘ * What has happened ?
O brother, who is this bear (in relation) to you? ”

^ Literally, cause one who is so uncontained (in your hearts) to be con-
tained (in them).’’

® Literally, ** wronged,” and hence apt to excite compassion.

® Literally, “it does not become the companion of acceptance.”

* Literally, “completion”; but see the section beginning with v. 2124.


THE FOOL WHO TRUSTED THE BEAR 325

He recounted the adventure, and the story of the dragon.

The other said, “Do not set your heart on a bear, O fool!

The friendship of a fool is worse than (his) enmity: it (the 2015
bear) ought to be driven away by every means you know.’^

He (the man with the bear) said (to himself), “By God, he
has said this from envy; otherwise,’’ (he said aloud), “why do
you look at the bearishness (of the bear)? Behold this aflFection
(which it has for me) ! ”

“The affection of fools,” said the other, “is beguiling; this
envy of mine is better than its (the bear’s) affection.

Hey, come with me and drive away this bear: do not choose
the bear (as your friend), do not forsake one of your own kind!”

“Go, go,” said he, “mind your own business, O envious
man! ” Said the other, “ This was my business, and it was not
your fortune (to follow my advice)^.

I am not less than a bear, O noble sir: abandon it, in order 2030
that I may be your comrade.

My’ heart is trembling with anxiety for you : do not go into
a forest with a bear like this.

This heart of mine has never trembled in vain; this is the
Light of God, not pretence or idle brag.

I am the true believer who has become seeing by the Light of
God. Beware and beware 1 Flee from this fire-temple ! ”

He said all this, and it entered not his ear: suspicion is a thick
barrier to a man.

He took his hand, and he (the man with the bear) withdrew 2025
his hand from him. The other said, “I will go, since you are
not a well-guided friend.”

“ Go,” cried he; “ be not troubled for me; don’t carve (retail)
so much wisdom, O meddlesome one!”

He answered him, (saying), “lam not your enemy: it would
be a kindness if you would come after me.”

“I am sleepy,” said he; “let me alone, go!” He replied,
“Pray, give in to your friend,

So that you may sleep under the safeguard of a sage, under
the protection of one loved (by God), a man of heart (spiritual
in^ht),”

The man was thrown by his (the other’s) earnestness into a 2030
(groundless) fancy: he became angry and quickly averted his
race.

Thinking, “Mayhap this man has come to attack me — ^he is
a murderer; or he has hope (of gain) — he is a beggar and a tout;

Or he has wagered with his friends that he will make me
afraid of this companion.”

From the wickedness of his heart, not (even) one good surmise
came into his thoughts at all.

^ Literally, **it was not your fore-ordained portion (rissq)/^


336 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

His good opinions were wholly for the bear: to be sure, he
was of the same kind as the bear.

2035 Through currishness, he suspected a sage and deemed a bear
affectionate and just.


How Moses^ on whom he peace^ said to 07ie who worshipped the
{golden) calf, Where is {what has become of) thy vain
scepticism and precautioii^}^^

Moses said to one drunken with (deluding) fancy, thou
who thinkest evil because of (thy) unblessedness and perdition.
Thou hast had a hundred suspicions concerning my prophet-
hood, notwithstanding these proofs and this noble nature
(which I have shown).

Thou hast seen from me hundreds of thousands of miracles,
(and all the time) a hundred fancies and doubts and (vain)
opinions were growing in thee.

Thou wert sorely pressed by fancy and devilish suggestion,
thou wert sneering at my prophethood.

2040 I raised up dust from the sea‘*^ before your eyes, so that ye
might be delivered from the wickedness of the people of
Pharaoh.

During forty years the platter and tray (of food) came (to
you) from heaven, and at my prayer the river ran from a rock.

These (miracles) and a hundred times as many, and all these
diverse^ (evidences), did not make that vain imagination fade
away from thee, O cold (hard-hearted) man !

Through sorcery a calf lowed; (then) thou didst fall to
worship, saying, ‘Thou art my God.’

(Then) those imaginations were swept away (as) by a flood,
and thy silly shrewdness went to sleep.

2^45 How^ wert not thou suspicious in regard to him (Samiri) ?
Why didst thou lay thy head (on the ground) like that, O ugly
one?

How did no idea come to thee of his imposition and of the
corruptness of his fool-catching magic?

Who, indeed, is a Sdmiri, O ye curs, that he should hew up
a God^ in the world?

How didst thou become of one mind (with him) as to this
imposture of his, and become devoid of all perplexities?

Is a cow (calf) worthy to be deified on (the strength of) a

^ I. f Yon regarded me as a false prophet and obstinately refused to
believe in God: why are you now so credulous as to worship an idol?^*

^ I.e, I caused the sea to vanish.**

® Literally, **hot and cold.”

*■ I.e, set up a graven image as God.


THE WORSHIPPER OF THE GOLDEN CALF 327

vain boast, (while there are) a hundred disputes as to the
prophetic mission of one like me?

Through asinine dullness thou didst cast thyself down in 2050
worship before a cow (calf); thy understanding fell a prey to
Samiri’s magic.

Thou didst steal thine eye away from the Light of the
Glorious (God) : here is plenteous folly for thee and the essence
of perdition !

Fie upon such an understanding and (faculty of) choice as
thou hast! ’Twere fitting to kill a mine of folly like thee.

The golden calf uttered a cry; prithee, what did it say, that
all this desire (for it) blossomed in the fools?

Ye have seen from me many a thing more wonderful than
that, but how should every rascal accept God?”

What carries away (enraptures) worthless folk? Worthless- 2055
ness. What pleases futile folk? Futility,

Because every kind is carried away (enraptured) by its own
kind: how should the ox turn its face towards the fierce lion?

How should the wolf bear love for Joseph, unless, perchance,
through cunning, in order to devour him?

When it is delivered from wolfishness, it will become familiar
(with him) ; like the dog of the Cave, it will become one of the
sons of Adam.

When Ab\i Bakr smelt (made his first acquaintance with)
Mohammed, he said, '^This is not a face that lies;”

(But) since Bfi Jahl was not of those in sympathy (with 2000
Mohammed), he saw a hundred cleavings of the moon^, and
believed not.

The sorrowful (lover of God), whose bowl has fallen from
the roof‘d — ^we Twould) hide the Truth from him, (but) it does
not become hia;

While he that is ignorant (of God) and a stranger to His
sorrow (love) — how often has it been shown, and he has not
seen it !

The mirror of the heart must be clear, in order that you may
know therein the ugly form from the beautiful.

Hozo the man of sincere counsely after having done his utmost in

{the way of) admonition y took leave of him who was deluded hy

\his confidence in) the bear.

That Moslem left the foolish man and quickly, saying Ld hawl
under his lip (breath), went back (to his abode).

He said, inasmuch as from my earnestness in admonition 2065

^ l.e. a hundred miracles like the famous miracle of the cleaving of the
moon.

® I.e. **who has fallen into ecstasy.**


328 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

and from (my) disputing (with him), (the only result is that)
vain fancies are being born in his mind more (and more),

Therefore the road of admonition and counsel has become
barred: the command, ' Turn aside from them^ has arrived.’’

When your remedy increases the disease, then (leave him
who will not be cured, and) tell your story to one that seeks (to
hear the Truth). Read (the chapter of the Qur’an, which begins
with the word) ^Abasa (he frowned) :

“As the blind man has come seeking the Truth^, ’tis not meet
to wound his breast (by turning aside from him) on account of
his poverty.

Thou (Mohammed) art eager for the great ones to take the
right way, in order that the common folk may learn from the
rulers.

2070 O Ahmad (Mohammed), thou hast seen that a company of
princes have become ready to listen (to thee), and thou art
pleased (with the hope) that, maybe.

These chieftains will become good friends of the Religion
(Islam), (for) they are lords over the Arabs and the Abyssinians,

(And that) the fame of this will pass beyond Basra and Tabxik,
since ‘people follow the religion of their kings,’

For this cause thou hast averted thy face from the blind man
that was led into the right way, and hast become vexed,

Saying (to him), ‘This gathering (of strangers) seldom falls
out so opportunely, (whereas) you are one of my friends, and
your time is ample.

2075 You are urgent with me at an inconvenient time. I give you
this admonition, (but) not in anger and strife.’

O Ahmad, in the sight of God this one blind man is better
than a hundred emperors and a hundred viziers.

Take heed, remember (the adage), ‘ Men are mines ’ : one mine
may be more than a hundred thousand.

The mine of lurking ruby and cornelian is better than myriads
of mines of copper.

O Ahmad, here riches have no use; a breast is wanted, full
of love and pain and sighs.

2080 The blind man of enlightened heart is come : do not shut the
door; give him counsel, for counsel is his right.

If two or three fools have disbelieved in thee, how shouldst
thou be soured when thou art a mine of candy?

If two or three fools impute falsehood to thee, God is giving
testimony on thy behalf.”

He (Mohammed) said, “I am unconcerned with the
acknowledgment of the world; what care (for the world) hath
he whose witness is God?


^ Verses 2068-2082 are a free paraphrase of Qur’an, LXXX. i-io.


MOHAMMED AND THE BLIND MAN 329

If a bat receives anything agreeable (to it) from a sun, ’tis a
proof that that (sun) is not the (real) sun.

The disgust of the wretched bats is a proof that I am the 2085
shining glorious sun.

If the beetle feels a desire for some (particular) rose-water,
that constitutes a proof of its not being rose-water.

If any false coin is eager for the touchstone, uncertainty and
doubt enter into (the fact of) its being a touchstone.

The thief wants night, not day — mark this ! I am not night,

I am day, for I shine throughout the world.

I am discerning, I am exceedingly discriminating and sieve-
like, so that the chaff finds no passage through me.

I make the flour distinct from the bran, in order to show that 2090
this is the (external) forms, and that the (inward) souls (essences).

I am as the scales of God in the world : I reveal (the difference
of) every light thing from the heavy.

A calf deems the cow God; the ass (deems God) one who is
fond (of it) and that which accords with its desires^.

I am not a cow, that the calf should be fond of me ; I am not
thistles, that a camel should browse on me.

He (the unbeliever) supposes that he has done me an injury;
nay, he has wiped away the dust from my mirror.’’


How the madman sought to ingratiate himself with Jdlinus
{Galen) ^ and how Jdlinus was afraid,

Jdlfmis said to his companions, “Let (one of you) give me 2095
such-and-such a medicine.’'

Then said that person to him, “O master of (many) sciences,
this medicine is sought (as a cure) for madness.

Far be this from thy intellect! Say no more (about it).” He
replied, “A madman turned his face to me.

Looked pleasantly on my face for a while, made little eyes at
me, and plucked my sleeve.

Had there not been in me congeniality with him, how would
that ill-favoured man have turned his face towards me?

Had he not seen (in me) one of his own kind, how should he 2100
have approached? How should he have thrown himself upon
(attached himself to) one of another kind? ”

When two persons come into touch with each other, without
any doubt there is something in common between them.

How should a bird fly except with its own kind? The society
of the uncongenial is the grave and the tomb.


^ Literally, ** suitable goods.**


330


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


The cause of a bird^s flying and feeding with a bird that is
not of its own kind.

Said a certain sage, I saw a crow running about with a stork.

I marvelled long^, and I investigated their case, in order that
I might find the clue (as to) what it was that they had in common^.

2105 When, amazed and bewildered, I approached them, (then)
indeed I saw that both of them were lame/’

In particular, (how should) a royal falcon, which is of the
highest heaven, (consort) with an owl, which is of the low earth?

That one is the sun of Tlliyyiin, while the other is a bat which
belongs to Sijjin,

That one is a luminary, free from every defect, while this
(other) one is a blind man begging at every door.

That one is a moon that strikes (its beams) upon the Pleiades^
while this (other) one is a worm that cleaves to dung.

2110 That one has the face of a Joseph, the breath of a Jesus, while
this (other) one is a wolf or an ass with a bell.

That one has flown to Spacelessness, while this (other) one
is in the straw-barn, like the dogs.

With the tongue of (unspoken) meaning the rose is saying to
the beetle this — '‘0 stinking (creature)^.

If thou art fleeing from the rose-bed, doubtless that aversion
(shown by thee) is (a sign of) the perfection of the rose-garden.

My jealousy (sense or dignity) smites thee on the head with a
baton, (warning thee to) keep far away from here, O vile one;

2115 For if, base wretch, thou shouldst mix with me, it will be
thought that thou art of my stock^.

For nightingales the garden is the proper place; for the
beetle the best home is in ordure.”

Since^ God has kept me pure from filth, how were it seemly
to appoint a foul one for (companionship with) me?

I had (in me) a vein of them (of their nature). He (God) cut
it out: how (then) will he with the vein of evil attain unto me?

One mark of Adam from eternity was this, that the angels
should lay their heads (on the ground) before him, because it
was his place (proper to his dignity).

2120 Another mark was that Iblis, saying, *‘I am the king and
chief,” should not lay down his head before him.

But if Iblis too had become a worshipper (of Adam), he (Adam)
would not have been Adam : he would have been another.

At once the worship of every angel is the test® of him, and
the denial (of him) by that enemy (Iblis) is the proof of him.

^ Literally, “ I remained in astonishment.”

® Literally, “what (was) the common quantity.”

! Literally, “with stinking aimpits.” * Literally, “of my mine."

Literally, the balance (in which he is weighed).”


SPIRITUAL AFFINITY


331

At once the acknowledgment (made) by the angels is witness
for him, and the disbelief of that petty cur (Iblis) is witness for
him.


Conclusion of the {story concerning the) trust of that deluded
man in the fawningness of the hear.

The man fell asleep, and the bear kept driving the flies away,
but in spite of him they soon came back again.

Several times he drove them from the youth’s face, but soon 2125
they came hurrying back once more.

The bear was enraged with the flies and went off. He picked
up a very big stone from the mountain-side.

He fetched the stone, and saw the flies again settled comfort-
ably"*- on the face of the sleeper.

He took up that millstone and struck at the flies, in order that
they might retire.

The stone made powder^ of the sleeping man’s face, and
published to the whole world this adage — .

‘‘The love of a fool is for sure the love of a bear: his hate is 2130
love and his love is hate.”

His promise is infirm and corrupt and feeble ; his word stout
and his performance lean.

Do not believe him, even if he take an oath : the man whose
speech is false will break his oath.

Inasmuch as, without the oath, his word was a lie, do not be
entrapped^ by his deceit and oath.

His fleshly soul is in command, and his intellect captive; even
suppose that he has sworn on a hundred thousand Qur’dns,

(Yet), since without (taking) an oath he will break his pact — 2135
if he take an oath, he will break that too ;

Because the fleshly soul becomes (all) the more infuriated by
your binding it with a heavy oath.

When a captive^ puts bonds upon a governor^, the governor
will burst them and leap out;

He will bang those bonds on his (the captive’s) head in wrath,
dashing the oath in his face.

Wash your hands (give up hope) of his (obeying the Divine
command), Fulfil your promises*^; do not say to him, ^^Keep
your oathsy

But he that knows to whom he (really) makes the promise will 2140
make his body (thin) as a thread and wind (himself) about Him.


^ Literally, ‘‘having taken a place of comfort.^’
® Literally, “poppy-seeds.”

® Literally, “do not fall into buttermilk.”

* The intellect,
s The fleshly soul.


332


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


How Mustafa {Mohammed)^ 07 i whom be peace ^ went to visit the sick
Companion; and an exposition of the profit of visiting the sick,

A notable amongst the Companions (of Mohammed) fell ill,
and in that illness of his became (thin) as a thread.

Mustafd went to visit him, since his (Mustafa’s) nature was
all kindness and generosity.

There is profit in your visiting the sick : the profit thereof is
returning to you again.

The first profit is that the sick person may perchance be a
Qutb and a glorious (spiritual) king ;

2145 And if he be not a Qutb, he may be a friend of the (Siiff) Way ;
if he be not the king, he may be the cavalier of the host.

Deem it, then, incumbent (on you) to attach yourselves to
the friends of the Way, whosoever it may be, and whether (he
be) footman or rider.

And if he be a foe (to you), still this kindness is good, for by
kindness many a foe hath been made a friend ;

And though he do not become a friend, his enmity is lessened,
because kindness becomes the balm for enmity.

There are many profits besides these, but I am afraid of being
tedious, good friend.

2150 The gist (of the matter) is this: be the friend of the whole
community (of Siiffs) : like the idol-maker, carve a friend out of
the stone,

Because the throng and multitude of a caravan will break the
backs and spears of the highwaymen.

• Inasmuch as you have not the heart’s two eyes, O contu-
macious man, so that you cannot distinguish firewood from
aloes-wood,

(You may despair of finding the true friend of God; but)
since there exists a treasure in the world, do not grieve : deem
no ruined place empty of treasure.

Betake yourself to every dervish at random, and when you
find the mark (of the true saint), frequent (him) assiduously.

2155 As the inward-seeing eye was not (granted) to you, think
always -(that) the treasure (may be) in everybody.

How the high God revealed to Moses^ on whom be peace^ {the
words ), '' Wherefore didst not thou visit Me in sickness?^'

To Moses there came from God this reproach : 0 thou who
hast seen the rising of the moon from thy bosom,

Thou whom I have illumined with the Divine Light! I am
God, I fell sick, thou earnest not.”

Moses said, “ O Thou transcendent in Thy glory, Thou art clear
of loss (defect). What mystery is this? Explain this, O Lord!”


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANiON 333

God said unto him again, “Wherefore in My sickness didst
not thou kindly ask after Me? ”

He answered, “O Lord, Thou hast no imperfection. (My) 2160
understanding is lost: unfold (the meaning of) these words.’*

God said, “Yea; a favourite and chosen slave (of Mine) fell
sick. I am he. Consider well !

His excusability (infirmity) is My excusability, his sickness is
My sickness.”

Whoever wishes to sit with God, let him sit in the presence
of the saints.

If you are broken off (divided) from the presence of the
saints, you are in perdition, because you are a part without the
whole.

Whomsoever the Devil cuts off from the noble (saints), he 2165
finds him without any one (to help him), and he devours his
head.

To go for one moment a single span apart from the
community (of saints) is (a result of) the Devil’s ^ile. Hearken,
and know (it) well^.

How the gardener isolated the Stlfiy the jurist^ and the
descendant of ^ AM from one another,

A gardener, when he looked into the orchard, saw three men
in his orchard, as (though they were) thieves:

A jurist and a Sharff and a Suff: each one an impudent,
knavish and perfidious rogue.

He said, “I have a hundred arguments against these fellows,
but they are united, and a united party is (a source of) strength.

I cannot cope singly with three persons, so first I will sunder 2170
them from one another.

I will isolate each one from the others, and when each is alone,

I will tear out his moustache.”

He employed a ruse and got the §iiff away, that he might
poison^ (the minds of) his friends against him.

He said to the Stiff, “Go to the house and fetch a rug for
these companions (of yours).”

(As soon as) the Stiff departed, he (the gardener) said in
private to the two friends, “Thou art a jurist, and this (other)
is a renowned Sharff.

’Tis according to thy legal decision that we eat a loaf (of 2175
bread) : ’tis by the wings of thy knowledge that we fly.

’ And this other is our prince and sovereign : he is a Sayyid,
he is of the House of Mustafd (Mohammed).

^ Reading with A. D, Bui, ^ >1^. Cf. the Introduction to

Vol. I. p. 9, note I, where the number of the verse (Till) has been acci-
dentally omitted. 2 Literally, “ corrupt.^’


334 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Who is this gluttonous vile Siifi, that he should associate
■with kings like you?

When he comes (back), drive him away^ and take possession
of 2 my orchard ana field for a week.

What is (it to offer you) my orchard? My life is yours, O ye
who have (always) been (as dear to me) as my right eye.”

2i8o He made evil suggestions and beguiled them. Ah, one must
not patiently suffer the loss of friends.

When they had turned the Suff away and he was gone, the
enemy went after him with a stout cudgel.

“O dog,” he cried, “is it Sufism® that of a sudden you come
into my orchard in spite (of me) ?

Did Junayd or Bayazfd direct you to behave in this way?
From what Shaykh and Pfr did this (instruction) reach you?”

He beat the Siiff when he found him alone; he half killed
him and cracked his head.

2185 Said the Stiff, “Mine is over, but 0 comrades, take good
care of yourselves !

Ye regarded me as an alien. Look out! I am not more alien
than this scoundrel.

That (cup) which I have drunk must be drunk by you, and
such a draught as this is the due of every cad.”

This world is (like) the mountain, and (all) thy words come
back to thee from the echo.

After the gardener had finished with the Stiff, he invented a
pretext of the same kind as the former,

2190 Saying, “0 my Sharif, go to the house, for I have baked
(some) thin cakes of bread for breakfast.

At the house-door tell Qaymaz to fetch those cakes and the
goose.”

Having sent him off, he said (to the other), “0 keen-sighted
one, thou art a jurist; this is manifest and sure.

(But) he (thy friend) a Sharif! ’Tis an absurd claim he is
making. Who knows who committed adultery with his mother?

Will ye set your hearts (rely) on woman and the deeds of
woman? (Will ye acknowledge her to be of) weak mind, and
then (put) trust (in her) ?

ai9S He has tacked himself on to ‘Alf and to the Prophet — and
there is many a fool in the world (who will believe him).”

Whoever is (born) of adultery and (is one) of the adulterous
will think this concerning the men of God.

Any one whose head is made giddy by (his own) gyrations
sees the house turning round like himself.

What that vain talker, the gardener, said was (indicative of)

^ Literally, “make cotton of him,” “comb him out.”

® Literally, “strike upon,” “lay (hands) on.”

» Read ^3-0.


THE GARDENER AND THE THREE FRIENDS 335

his (own) condition ; (it was) far from (being applicable to) the
descendants of the Prophet.

If he had not been the issue of apostates, how should he have
spoken thus as regards (the Prophet’s) House?

He used spells (guileful words), and the jurist hearkened to 2^00
them. (Then) that insolent bully went after him (the Sharif).

He said, “O ass, who invited you into this orchard? Has
robbery been left to you as an inheritance by the Prophet?

The lion’s cub resembles him (the lion): in what do you
resemble the Prophet? Tell (me that)!”

The man (the gardener) who had sought refuge (in craft) did
to the Sharif that which a Kharijite would do to the Family of
Yd-sin (Mohammed).

(I marvel) what hatred devils and ghouls like Yazid and
Shimr always have towards the Prophet’s Family.

The Sharif was devastated by the blows of that ruffian. He 2205
said to the jurist, “ I have jumped out of the water.

Do thou stand fast, now that thou art left alone and deprived
(of our support). Be as a drum, suffer blows on the belly!

If I am not a Sharif and worthy (of thee) and a (true) bosom-
friend, (at any rate) I am no worse for thee than such a ruffian
as this.”

He (the gardener) finished with him (the Sharif), and came
up, saying, “O jurist, what (sort of) jurist are you, O you
disgrace to every fool?

Is it your legal opinion, O convicted thief^, that you may
come (into my orchard) without asking leave^?

Have you read such a license in the Wastt, or has this question 2210
been (so decided) in the Muhit'i ”

“You are right,” he replied; “beat (me): you have got the
upper hand. This is the fit penalty for him that parts from
friends.”

Returning to the stcrry of the sick man and the visit paid {to him) hy
the Prophet, God bless him and grant him peace!

T his visiting of the sick is for the sake of this (spiritual)
attachment*, and this attachment is pregnant with a hrmdred
lovingkindnesses .

The peerless Prophet went to visit the sick man ; he found that
Companion at the last gasp.

When you become far from the presence of the saints, you
have in reality become far from God.

Inasmuch as the result of parting from fellow-travellers is 2215

^ Literally, *'one whose hand has been cut off.**

^ Literally, “without saying, * Is it the command? ***

^ See V. 2145.


336 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

sorrow, how is separation from the countenance of the kings
(saints) less (grievous) than that?

Hasten every moment to seek the shadow (protection) of
(those) kings, that by means of that shadow you may become
superior to the sun.

If you have a journey (to make), go with this intention ; and
if it be (that you stay) at home, neglect not this.


How a certain Shaykh said to Bdyazid, “I am the Ka‘ha:
perform a circumambulation round me."

Bayazfd, the Shaykh of the community, was hurrying to
Mecca for the greater pilgrimage {hajf) and the lesser {‘umra).

In every city to which he went he would at first make search
after the venerable (saints).

2220 He would roam about, asking, “Who is there in the city that
is relying on^ (spiritual) insight?”

God has said, “Whithersoever thou goest in thy travels, thou
must first seek after a (holy) man.”

Go in quest of a treasure, for (worldly) profit and loss come
second: regard them as the branch (not as the root).

Whoever sows is in quest of wheat; the chaff comes to him
indeed, (but only) secondarily.

If you sow chaff, no wheat will come up : seek a man, seek a
man, a man !

2225 When it is the season of pilgrimage, go in quest of the Ka'ba ;
when you have gone (with that purpose), Mecca also will be seen.

In the M^rdj (Ascension of the Prophet) the quest was (for)
vision of the Beloved ; ’twas but secondarily that the empyrean
and the angels were also shown.


Story.

A novice one day built a new house; the Pfr came (and) saw
his house.

The Shaykh said to his new disciple — he put to the test him
that had good thoughts —

“Wherefore hast thou made a window, O comrade?” Said
he, “ In order that light may come in by this way.”

2230 He (the Shaykh) said, “That is (only) the branch (secondary-
object); (thy) want (desire) must be this, (namely) that through
this channel thou mayst hear the call to prayer.”

Bdyazid, on his journey (to the Ka‘ba), sought much to find
some one that was the Kdii?r of his lime.

He espied an old man with a stature (bent) like the new moon ;
he saw in him the majesty and (lofty) speech of (holy) men;

^ Literally, ** supporting himself on the pillars of.”


BAYAZID AND THE SHAYKH ' 337

His eyes sightless, and his heart (illumined) as the sun: like
an elephant dreaming of Hindustan.

With closed eyes, asleep, he beholds a hundred delights;
when he opens (his eyes), he sees not those (delights) — oh,

(’tis) wonderful !

Many a wonder is made manifest in sleep : in sleep the heart 2235
becomes a window.

One that is awake and dreams fair dreams, he is the knower
(of God) : smear your eyes with^ his dust.

He (Bdyazid) sat down before him and asked about his
condition; he found him to be a dervish and also a family man.

He (the old man) said, “Whither art thou bound, O Baya2id?

To what place wouldst thou take the baggage of travel in a
strange land? ’’

Bayazid answered, “I start for the Ka‘ba at daybreak.’"
“Eh,” cried the other, “what hast thou as provisions for the
road?”

“I have two hundred silver dirhems,” said he; “look, (they 2240
are) tied fast in the corner of my cloak.”

He said, “Make a circuit round me seven times, and reckon
this (to be) better than the circumambulation (of the Ka"ba) in
the pilgrimage ;

And lay those dirhems before me, O generous one. Know
that thou hast made the greater pilgrimage and that thy desire
has been achieved ;

(That) thou hast (also) performed the lesser pilgrimage and
gained the life everlasting; (that) thou hast become pure (sdf)
and sped up (the Hill of) Purity (Safa),

By the truth of the Truth (God) whom thy soul hath seen,

(I swear) that He hath chosen me above His House.

Albeit the Ka‘ba is the House of His religious service, my 2245
form too, in which I was created, is the House of His inmost
consciousness.

Never since God made the Ka‘ba hath He gone into it, and
none but the Living (God) hath ever gone into this House (of
mine).

When thou hast seen me, thou hast seen God: thou hast
circled round the Ka‘ba of Sincerity.

To serve me is to obey and glorify God: beware thou think
not that God is separate from me.

Open thine eyes well and look on me, that thou mayst behold
the Light of God in man.”

Bdyazid gave heed to those mystic sayings^ and put them in 2250
his ear as a golden ring.

Through him (the old man), Biyazid came into an increase
(of spiritual endowment) : the adept at last attained unto the end.

^ Literally. **draw into your eyes.^*


N M


22


338


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


How the Prophet — God bless and save him! — perceived that the
cause of that person's sickness was irreverence in prayer.

When the Prophet saw the sick man, he dealt sweetly and
tenderly with that familiar friend*.

He became alive when he saw the Prophet; you might say,
that moment created him.

He said, “Sickness has given me this good fortune, that this
Sultan has come to my side at morn,

2255 So that health and well-being have accrued to me from the
arrival of this King who is without retinue.

O happy pain and sickness and fever ! O blessed anguish and
wakefulness in the night !

Lo, in (my) old age God of Plis grace and bounty hath
bestowed on me such a sickness and malady !

He too hath given me pain in the back, so that every midnight
I cannot help springing up quickly from sleep.

In order that I may not slumber all night like a buffalo, God
of His grace hath given me pains.

2260 Through this infirmity the mercy of Kings has been aroused,
and Hell’s threatening of me has been silenced.”

Pain is a treasure, for there are mercies in it: the kernel
becomes fresh when you scrape off the rind.

O brother, (to dwell in) a dark and cold place, to endure
patiently sorrow and weakness and pain.

Is the Fountain of Life and the cup of (spiritual) intoxication,
for those heights are all in lowliness.

That Spring is implied in autumn, and that autumn is
(fulfilled) in the Spring : do not flee from it.

2265 Be a fellow-traveller with grief, agree with desolation, seek
long (lasting) life in thy death (to self).

Do not listen to what thy fleshly soul says, that tliis place (of
self-mortification) is bad, inasmuch as her doings are contrary
(to thy spiritual advancement).

Do thou oppose her, for such (is the) injunction (that) has
come from the prophets in the world.

It becomes necessary to take counsel concerning things to be
done, so that there may not be repentance in the end.

The community said, “With whom shall we take counsel?”
The prophets answered, “With intellect, (which is) the Imdm
(leader).”

2270 He (the questioner) said, “ (But) if a child should come in, or
a woman who has no judgement or clear understanding,”

“Take counsel with her,” said he (the prophet), “and do
the contrary of what she bids (thee), and go thy way.”

^ Literally, **the friend of the Cave.’*


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 339

Know that your fleshly soul is woman and worse than woman,
because woman is a part (of evil), but your fleshly soul is evil
entire.

If you take, counsel with your fleshly soul, oppose that vile
one (in) whatsoever she may say.

If she bid you pray and fast — the fleshly soul is a great
plotter, she will bring some plot against you to birth.

(When you take) counsel with your fleshly soul concerning 2275
(your) actions — ^whatsoever she tells (you to do), the reverse
of that is perfectly right.

(If) you cannot cope with her and her contumacy, go to a
friend and mix with him.

Mind gains strength from another mind: the sugar-cane is
made perfect by the sugar-cane.

I have seen (wondrous) things (arising) from the deceitfulness
of the fleshly soul, for by her magic she takes away the faculties
of discernment.

She will proffer afresh to you promises that she has broken
thousands of times.

If your life be prolonged^ even for a hundred years, she will 2280
lay before you a new pretext every day.

She utters cold (vain) promises (as though) warm (from
the heart); (she is) a witch, she ties up the manhood of a
man.

O (thou who art the) radiance of God, Husdmu’ddin, come !
for without thee no herbs will grow from the brackish soil.

A curtain has been let down from heaven because of the
curse of one whose heart is sorely vexed.

This destiny only the (Divine) destiny can cure : the under-
standing of His creatures is stunned at His destiny, stunned.

The black serpent that was (as) a worm fallen on the road 2285
has become a dragon ;

(But) in thy hand, O thou with (love for) whom the soul of
Moses is intoxicated, the dragon or serpent became (as) the rod
(in the hand of Moses).

God gave thee command, saying, “ Take it; fear noty so that
the dragon may become a rod in thy hand/’

Hark, show the white hand, O King: out of the black nights
reveal a new dawn !

A hell hath blazed forth; breathe (thy) enchantment over it,

O thou whose breath is more (excellent) than the breath of the
sea.

She (the fleshly soul) is the guileful sea that shows (but) a 3290
(little) foam; she is the hell that from guile shows (but) a (little)
heat.

She appears exiguous in your eyes, to the end that you may

^ Literally, “grant a respite.*'


22-2


340 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

regard her as feeble and that your wrath may be stirred (against
her);

Even as there was a dense host (of infidels), (but) to the
Prophet^s eye it seemed small,

So that the Prophet set upon them without (fear of) the danger ;
but if he had deemed (them) more (in number), he would have
acted cautiously in that (affair).

That was the Divine favour, and thou wert worthy of it, O
Ahmad (Mohammed); else, thou wouldst have become faint-
hearted.

2295 God caused the outward and inward warfare to seem little
to him and his Companions,

In order that He might make it easy for him to gain ease
(success), and that he might not turn away his face from
difficulty.

For him, (God's) causing (the warfare) to seem little was
victory, since God was his friend and taught him the way.

(Bu^ he that hath not God for his victorious support, alas
if the fierce lion seem to him a cat.

Alas if from afar he see a hundred as one, so that in vain
confidence he enters on the fray.

2300 He (God) causes a Prophet's sword to seem a dart and makes
the fierce lion appear as a cat,

To the end that the fool may fall boldly to fighting, and that
He may catch them by this device;

(And besides He is acting thus), in order that those dolts may
have come towards the fire-temple by means of their own feet
(by their own free will).

He is showing (what seems to you) a blade of straw, in order
that you may quickly give a puff so as to make it vanish out of
existence.

Beware ! for that straw has uprooted mountains : through it
the world is weeping, while it (the straw) is in laughter.

2305 He makes this river- water seem (only) up to the ankle, (but)
a hundred such as ‘Aj son of ‘Anaq have been drowned
therein.

He makes the wave of blood seem to him a mound of musk ;
He makes the bottom of the sea seem dry land.

Blind Pharaoh deemed that sea dry, so that in (the pride of
his) manhood and strength he drave into it.

When he enters (it), he is at the bottom of the sea : how should
the eye of Pharaoh be seeing?

The eye is made seeing by meeting with God: how should
God become the confidant of every fool?

2310 He (the fool) sees (what he thinks is) candy: it is, in sooth,
deadly poison; he sees (what he thinks is) the road: it is, in
sooth, the cry of the ghoul (luring him to destruction).


THE DEVICES OF GOD 341

O sky, in the tribulation of (these) latter days thou art
revolving swiftly; pray, give (us) time (respite and relief).

Thou art a keen dagger to assail us ; thou art a poisoned lancet
to bleed us.

0 sky, learn mercy from the Mercy of God: do not, like a
snake, inflict wounds on the hearts of ants.

By the truth of Him who hath set the wheel of thy sphere
turning above this (earthly) abode,

(We beseech thee to) revolve in another wise and show mercy, 2315
ere thou uproot us.

(We beseech thee by) the truth of thy having fostered us at
first, so that our (young) shoot grew up from (the nurture given
by) water and earth;

By the truth of that King who created thee pure and displayed
so many cressets in thee,

Who hath kept thee so flourishing and lasting that the
materialist hath thought thee (existent) from eternity.

Thanks (to God), we have come to know thy beginning: the
prophets have told that secret of thine.

A man knows that a house is made (at some time or other) ; 2320
the spider which plays idly in it (knows) not (this).

How should the gnat know of what date this prden is? — for
’twas born in spring, and its death is in the (following) winter.

The worm that is born miserably in (dry) wood — how should
it know the wood at the time when it was a (sappy) shoot?

And if the worm should know (this), it would be intellect in
its essential substance ; the worm would be (only) its (outward)
form.

Intellect shows itself (in. many) guises, (but) like the Jinn is
leagues removed from them (in its real nature).

It is above the angels — what occasion is there for (comparing 2325
it with) the Jinn? (But) you have the wings of a gnat, you are
flying downwards.

Although your intellect is flying upward, the bird of your
conventional notions is feeding below.

Conventional knowledge is the bane of our souls ; it is a
borrowed thing, but we rest (at ease in the belief) that it is ours.

It behoves us to become ignorant of this (worldly) wisdom;
(rather) must we clutch at madness.

Always flee from whatever you deem profitable to your (lower)
self : drink poison and spill the water of life.

Revile any one that praises you : lend (both) interest and 2330
capital to the destitute.

Let safety go, and dwell in the place of fear (danger): leave
reputation behind and be disgraced and notorious.

1 have tried far-thinking (provident) intellect; henceforth I
will make myself mad.


342


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


Hov) Dalqak excused himself to the Sayyid-i Ajall (who asked
him) why he had married a harlot. .

One night the Sayyid-i Ajall said to Dalqak, “You have
married a harlot in haste.

You ought to have disclosed this (matter) to me, so that we
might have made a chaste (woman) your wife.”

S333 Dalqak replied, “I have (already) married nine chaste and
virtuous women: they became harlots, and I wasted away with

I married this harlot without (previous) acquaintance (with
her), in order to see how this one (also) would turn out in the
end.

Often have I tried (sound) intelligence; henceforth I will
seek a nursery for insanity.”


How an inquirer managed to draw into conversation an
eminent (saintly) man who had feigned to be mad.

A certain man was saying, “I want some one of intelligence,
(that) I may consult him about a difficulty.”

One said to him, “ In our city there is nobody of intelligence
except yonder man who appears to be mad.

Look, there is (one named) so-and-so: mounted on a canc,
he rides (it as a cock-horse) amongst the children.

He is possessed of judgement and (keen as) a spark of fire ;
he is as the sky in dignity, and as the stars in high estate.

His glory has become the (rational) soul of the Cherubim;
he has become concealed in this (feigned) madness.”

But you must not account every madman a (rational) soul :
do not, like Sdmiri, lay down your head (in worship) to a calf.

When a manifest saint has declared unto you hundreds of
thousands of unseen things and hidden mysteries,

8345 And you have not had the (proper) understanding and
knowledge, (so that) you have not distinguished dung from'
aloes-wood —

How, when the saint has made for himself a veil of madness,
will you recognise him, O blind one?

If your eye of intuitive certainty is open, behold a (spiritual)
captain under every stone.

To the eye that is open and (as) a guide, every dervish-cloak
hath a Moses in its embrace.

’Tis only the saint (himself) that makes the saint known and
makes fortunate whomsoever he will.

2350 No one can recognise him by means of wisdom when he has
feigned to be mad.


THE SAINT WHO RODE A COCK-HORSE 343

When a seeing thief steals from a blind man, can he at all
detect (the identity of) the thief (who is) in the act of passing?

The blind man does not know who it was that robbed him,
even though the wicked thief may knock against him.

When a dog bites a blind ragged mendicant, how should he
recognise that ferocious dog?


Hotjo the dog attacked the mendicant who was blind,

A dog was attacking, as (though it were) a warlike lion, a
blind mendicant in a certain street.

The dog rushes angrily at dervishes; the moon smears her 2355
eyes with dust of (the feet of) dervishes.

The blind man was made helpless by the dog's barking and
by (his) fear of the dog ; the blind man began to pay honour to
the dog,

Saying, '*0 prince of the chase, and O lion of the hunt, thine
is the (upper) hand: refrain thy hand from me!" —

For, (moved) by necessity, that (renowned) philosopher paid
honour to (one vile as) the tail of an ass, and gave him the title
of ‘‘noble."

He (the blind man) too, of necessity, said, “O lion, what
(good) will come to thee from such a meagre prey as I am?

Thy friends are catching onagers in the desert; thou art 2360
catching a blind man in the street: this is bad.

Thy friends seek onagers by hunting (them) ; thou in (mere)
malice seekest a blind man in the street."

The knowing dog has made the onager his prey, while this
worthless dog has attacked a blind man.

When the dog has learned the knowledge (imparted to him),
he has escaped from error: he 'hunts lawful prey in the
jungles.

When the dog has become knowing (‘a/m), he marches
briskly; when the dog has become a knower of God (‘dn/), he
becomes (as) the Men of the Cave.

The dog has come to know who is the Master of the hunt. 2365
O God, what is that knowing light?

(If) the blind man knows it not, ’tis not from (his) having
no eye (to see) ; nay, 'tis because he is drunken with ignorance.

Truly, the blind man is not more eyeless than the earth; and
this earth, by the grace of God, has become a seer of (God's)
enemies.

It saw the Light of Moses and showed kindness to Moses;
(but) Qdnin it engulfed, (for) it knew Qardn.

It quaked for the destruction of every false pretender: it
understood (the words that came) from God, “ O earthy swallow
(thy water)!


344 MATHNAWf, BOOK II


2370 Earth and water and air and sparking fire are unacquainted
with us, but acquainted with God.

Contrariwise, we are aware of (things) other than God, (but)
unaware (heedless) of God and of so many warners (prophets).

As a necessary consequence, they (the elements) all shrank
from {accepting) it {the trust offered to them)-, (the edge of) their
impulse to partake of life was blunted.

They said, “We all are averse to this life, (namely), that one
should be living in relation to created beings and dead in rela-
tion to God.”

When he (any one) remains away from created beings, he is
orphaned (single); for intimacy with God, the heart must be
free (from relations with aught besides).

2375 When a Aief steals some article of property from a blind
man, the blind man is blindly lamenting.

Until the thief say to him, “ ’Tis I that stole from thee, for
I am an artful thief,”

How should the blind man know his thief, since he hath not
the eye’s light and that radiance (of vision)?

When he (the thief) speaks (and confesses), at once take tight
hold of mm, that he may tell the marks (descriptive) of the
(stolen) goods.

^r® 3 .ter Jthdd (Holy War), then, consists in squeezing
(him) to the dregs, in order that he may tell what he has stolen
and what he has carried off.


2380 Fpt, he has stolen your eye-salve; when you take it (from
him), you will regain (your) insight.

The goods of wisdom, which have been lost by (your) heart
be found with the man of heart (the saint).

Ihe blind of heart, notwithstanding (his possession of) life
ma hearing and sight, is never knowing the devilish thief bv
the traces (which he leaves).

Seek (that knowledge) from the man of heart; do not seek
It from the inanimate, for (all other) people arc inanimate
beside (in comparison with) him.

The seeker of counsel approached him (the saint who was
feigning inadriess), saying, “O father who hast become (as) a
child, tell (me) a secret.” ' ’

^wered, “Begone from this door-ring, for this door is
not open. Turn back: to-day is not the day for secrets.

(any) access to the non-spatial, I should be
‘s’™® »■= A* Shaykhs


THE POLICE INSPECTOR AND THE DRUNKARD 345

How the Police Inspector summoned the man who had fallen
dead-drunk {on the ground) to {go to) prison.

The Inspector came at midnight to a certain place : he saw a
man lying at the bottom of a wall.

He cried, ‘‘Hey, you are drunk: tell (me), what have you
been drinking? ” Said the man, “I have drunk of this which is
in the jar.”

“Pray,” said he, “explain what is in the jar.” He replied,
“Some of what I have drunk.” “(But),” said the Inspector,
“this is hidden (from sight).”

He asked (again), “What is it that you have drunk?” He 2390
rejoined, “That which is hidden in the jar.”

These questions and answers were becoming a (vicious)
circle. The Inspector was left (stuck) in the mud, like an ass.

The Inspector said to him, “Come now, say ‘Ah’”-; (but)
the drunken man, at the moment of utterance, said “Hu, Hii.”

“I told you to say ‘Ah’,” said he; “you are saying ‘Hu’.”
“(Because) I am glad,” he replied, “while you are bent with
grief.

‘Ah’ is (uttered) on account of pain and grief and injustice;
the ‘Hd, Hu’ of the wine-drinkers is from joy.”

The Inspector said, “I know nothing about this. Get up, 2395
get up! Don’t retail mystic lore, and leave off this wrangling.”

“ Go away,” said the man; “what have you to do with me? ”
“You are drunk,” the Inspector said. “Get up and come to
prison.”

Said the drunken man, “O Inspector, let me alone and go
away. How is it possible to carry off pledges from one that is
naked?

If indeed I had had the power to walk, I should have gone to
my house — and (then) how would this (affair between us) have
occurred?

Were I (still) possessed of understanding and of contingent
(unreal) existence, I should be on the bench, (giving instruction)
like the Shaykhs.”

How the inquirer^ for the second time^ drew that eminent {saint)

into conversation^ in order that his condition might be made

better known {to the inquirer).

That seeker said, “O thou mounted on the cane, pray, ride 2400
thy horse this way for one moment.”

He rode towards him, crying, “Hark, say as quick as you can
(what you want) , for my horse is very restive and fierce-tempered .

Be quick, lest he kick you; explain clearly what you are
asking about.”


346 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

He (the inquirer) saw no opportunity to tell his heart’s secret :
he at once made an evasion and drew him into jesting talk.

He said, “I wish to marry a woman in this street: who is
suitable for one like me? ”

2405 “There are three kinds of women in the world,” said he:
“two of those are a sorrow, and one is the soul’s treasure.

The first, when you marry her, is wholly yours; and the
second is half yours and half separate (from you) ;

And the third, know she is not yours at all. You have heard
this. Away (with you) ! — I start in a trice —

Lest my horse let fly a kick at you, so that you fall and never
rise up (again).”

The Shaykh rode off amongst the children, (but) the young
man shouted to him once more,

2410 “Come, prithee declare the exposition of this. Thou hast
said that these women are of three kinds: pick (them) out.”

He rode towards him and said to him, ^‘'Fhc virgin of your
choice will be wholly yours, and you will gain freedom from
sorrow ;

And she that is half yours is the (childless) widow ; and she
that is nothing (to you) is the married woman with a child:

When she has a child by her first husband, her love and
whole heart will go there.

(Now) get away, lest my horse launch a kick, and the hoof of
my restive horse land upon you.”

2415 The Shaykh gave a loud ciy of jubilation and rode back: he
again called the children to him.

That inquirer shouted to him once more, “Come (hither),
I have one question left, O sovereign king.”

He rode back in this direction. ‘‘Say what it is,” he cried,
“as quick as you can, for yonder child has enraptured my
heart

Said the other, “0 king, with such intelligence and erudition
(as thou hast), what dissimulation is this? What acting is this?
Oh, ’tis a marvel !

Thou transcendest the Universal Intellect in (thy power of)
elucidatiori. Thou art a sun: how art thou hid in madness?”

2420 ^ He replied, “These rascals are proposing to make me Cadi
in this their city.

I raised objections, (but) they said to me, ‘Nay, there is none
so learned and accomplished as thou.

Whilst thou art in existence, it is unlawful and wicked that
any one inferior to thee should cite Prophetic Traditions in the
office of Cadi.

Permission is not (given) in the Law, that we should appoint
one less than thee as (our) prince and leader.’

1 Literally, **has carried off my polo-ball from the ficld.^'


THE SAINT WHO RODE A COCK-HORSE 347

By this necessity I was made distraught and mad (in appear-
ance), but inwardly I am just the same as I was.

My intelligence is the (hidden) treasure, and I am the ruin 2425
(which covers it); if I display the treasure, (then) I am mad
(indeed).

The (real) madman is he that has not gone mad, he that has
seen this night-patrol and has not gone home.

My knowledge is substantial, not accidental ; and this precious
(thing) is not for (the purpose of gaining) every (worldly)
interest.

I am a mine of candy, I am a plantation of sugar-canes: it is
growing from me, and at the same time I am eating (of it).

Knowledge is conventional and acquired (not real), when he
(its owner) laments because the hearer is averse to (hearing) it.

Since it is (learned) as a bait (for popularity), not for the sake 2430
of (spiritual) enlightenment, he (the seeker of religious know-
ledge) is just as (bad) as the seeker of vile worldly knowledge ;

(For) he is seeking knowledge on account of the vulgar and
the noble, not in order that he may win release from this
world.

Like a mouse, he has burrowed in every direction, since the
light drove him (back) from the door (the entrance to the hole)
and said, ‘Away!'

Inasmuch as he had no way (of getting out) to the open
country and the light, he continued to make (such) an exertion
even in that darkness.

If God give him wings, the wings of Wisdom, he will escape
from mousiness and will fly like the birds;

But if he seek not* wings, he will remain underground with 3435
no hope of traversing the path to Simdk^.

Dialectic knowledge, which is soulless, is in love with (eager
for^ the countenance of customers ;

(But) though it is robust at the time of disputation, it is dead
and gone when it has no customer.

My purchaser is God : He is drawing me aloft, for God hath
purchased.

My bloodwit (the reward of my self-sacrifice) is the beauty of
the Glorious One: I enjoy my bloodwit (as) lawful earnings.

Abandon these insolvent customers: what purchase can be 2440
made by a handful of (worthless) clay?

Do not eat clay, do not buy clay, do not seek clay, because
the eater of clay is always pale-faced.

Eat your heart (in love of God), that you may be young
always, (and that) your visage (may be rosy) with Divine illu-
mination, like the arghawdn^

O Lord, this gift is not (within) the compass of our work

^ The name of a star.


348 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

(achievement) : verily, (the gift of) Thy grace is (not according
to our work, but) according to Thy mysterious grace.

Take our hands (help us) ; buy (redeem) us from our hands
(self-existence); lift the veil (between Thee and us), and do not
tear our veil (do not expose us to shame).

2445 Redeem us from this filthy self (mfs) : its knife has reached
our bones.

Who will loose these strong chains from helpless ones like us,
0 king uncrowned and unthroned?

Who except (Thee in) Thy bounty, O Loving One, can loose
such a heavy lock?

Let us turn our heads from ourselves towards Thee, inasmuch
as Thou art nigher unto us than we (unto ourselves).

Even this prayer is Thy gift and lesson (to us) ; else, wherefore
has a rose-bed grown in an ash-pit?

2450 Save through Thy munificence, ’tis impossible to convey
understanding and reason into the midst of blood and entrails.

This flowing light (proceeds) from two pieces of fat (the two
eyeballs) : their waves of light reach up to the sky.

The piece of flesh which is the tongue — from it the flood of
Wisdom is flowing, like a stream.

Towards a cavity, whereof the name is “cars,” up to the
orchard of the (rational) soul, whereof the fruit is intellections.

Its main course is the highway of the orchard of souls ; the
orchards and gardens of the world are its branches.

2455 That, that, is the source and fountainhead of joy: quick,
recite (the text), (gardens) beneath which flow the rivers.


Conclusion of the admonishment given by the Prophet, God
bless and save him, to the sick man.

The Prophet said to the sick man, when he visited (his)
suffering friend,

“Maybe you have made a prayer of some (peculiar) sort, and
from ignorance have (as it were) eaten some poisoned food.

Bring to mind what (sort of) a prayer you said when you were
being vexed by the guile of the fleshly soul.”

_ He answered, “I do not remember; but direct a (spiritual)
influence towards me, and it (the prayer) will come to my
memory in a moment.”

2460 Through the light-giving presence of Mustafd (Mohammed),
that prayer came into his mind ;

(From) the aspiration of the Prophet who dwells in light,
there came into his mind that which had been lost ;

Through the window which is between heart and heart
flashed the light that separates truth and falsehood.


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 349

He said, “Look now, I have remembered, O Prophet, the
prayer which I, impertinent fool, spoke.

When I was being caught in (the toils of) sin, and drowning
(therein) was. clutching at straws —

(Whilst) there was coming from thee to sinners a threat and 2465
menace of punishment exceedingly severe —

(And) I was becoming agitated, and there was no help (for
me), (since) there were chains made fast and a lock not (to be)
opened :

Neither room for patience nor means of flight, neither hope
of repenting nor opportunity for rebelling —

I, like Harut and Manit, was crying in sorrow, ‘AlasP and
saying, ‘ O my Creator ! ”*

Because of the dangers (of the Last Judgement) Hariit and
Mariit openly chose the pit of Babylon,

So that they might suffer here (in this world) the punishment 2470
of the world to come ; and they are cunning and intelligent and
magician-like.

They acted well, and ’twas fitly done : the pain of smoke is
lighter than (that of) fire.

The pain of that (future) world is beyond description; light
is the pain of this world beside it.

Oh, happy he that wages a holy war (of self-mortification), and
puts a restraint upon the body and deals justice (against it),

And, in order that he may be delivered from the pain of that
world, lays upon himself this pain of serving God.

“I was saying, ‘O Lord, quickly inflict on me in this world %a 15
that punishment,

So that I may have exemption (from it) in yonder world.’
About such-like a request was I knocking at the door^.

(Thereupon) such a (painful) sickness as this appeared in me :
through pain my soul was deprived of rest.

I have been left without power to perform my dhikr (com-
memoration of God) and litanies: I have become unconscious
of myself and of (all) good and ill.

If I had not now beheld thy face, O thou whose scent is
fortunate and blessed,

I should have passed altogether from the bondage (of this 2480
life). Thou in kingly fashion hast bestowed on me this sympathy.”

Said the Prophet, “Hey! do not offer this prayer again: do
not dig yourself up from root and base.

What strength have you, O wretched ant, to endure that He
should lay on you such a lofty mountain? ”

He answered, “O Sultan, I repent (and vow) that in no wise
will I (henceforth) brag recklessly.

This world is the Desert (of the Israelites), and thou art
^ I,e. ‘*such was the petition I made to God.**


350 ' MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Moses, and we because of (our) sin remain in the Desert in
tribulation.

2485 We are wayfaring for years, and at the end we are still held
captive in the first stage (of the journey).

If the heart of Moses were pleased with us, there would be
shown (to us) the way through the Desert and the (farthest)
border (thereof) ;

And if he were wholly disgusted with us, how by any means
would trays of food come to us from heaven ?

How would springs gush from a rock, (and how) would there
be security for our lives in the desert?

Nay, truly, fire would come instead of trays: flames would
beat upon us in this abode.

2490 Forasmuch as Moses has become of two minds concerning
us, he is sometimes our enemy and sometimes our friend.

His anger sets fire to our goods; his clemency becomes a
shield against affliction.

When (how) may it be that anger shall again become clemency ?
This is not extraordinary (as proceeding) from thy grace, O
venerable one.

To praise any one present is (a cause of) embarrassment; on
this account I am purposely using the name of Moses, like this.

Otherwise, how should Moses deem it right that I make
mention of anybody before thee?

2495 Our covenant hath been broken hundreds and thousands of
times; Thy covenant, like a mountain, stands firm and stable.

Our covenant is straw and subject to every wind (of passion) ;
Thy covenant is a mountain, and even more than a hundred
mountains.

By the truth of that power (which is Thine), have some mercy
upon our mutability, O Ruler of (all) mutations !

We have seen ourselves (as we really are) and our shame. Put
us not to further trial, O King,

So that (by sparing us) Thou wilt have concealed other
disgraces’^, O Bounteous One whose help we implore !

2500 Thou art infinite in beauty and perfection ;■ we are infinite
in wrongness and error.

Direct Thy infinity, O Bounteous One, upon the infinite
wrongness of a handful of vile wretches (such as we are).

Oh, come, for of our cloth-piece (only) a single thread remains :
we were a city, and (only) a single wall remains.

(Save) the remnant, (save) the remnant, O Sovereign, that
the soul of the Devil may not rejoice entirely —

Not for our sakes, (but) for the sake of the primal grace
through which Thou didst seek out them that had lost the
way.

^ I,e* other acts of ours which would expose us to disgrace.


MOHAMMED AND THE SICK COMPANION 351

As Thou hast shown Thy power, (so now) show Thy mercy, 3505
O Thou who hast implanted feelings of mercy in flesh and fat.

If this prayer increase Thy wrath, do Thou teach (us) to pray,

O Lord,

Even as, (when) Adam fell from Paradise, Thou gavest him
(leave) to turn (in penitence) toward Thee, so that he escaped
from the ugly Devil.”

Who is the Devil that he should surpass Adam and win the
game from him on such a board?

In truth, it all turned out to Adam’s advantage: that guile
became a curse to the envious one.

He (the Devil) saw one game, (but) he did not see two hundred 2510
games (which he should lose) : therefore he cut down the supports
of his own house.

He set fire by night to the cornfield of others ; (meanwhile)
the wind (was) carrying the fire into his own field.

The (Divine) curse was a blind to the Devil, so that he
regarded that trickery (of his) as harm to (his) enemy.

The (Divine) curse is that which makes him (any one) see
falsely, and makes him envious, self-conceited, and malicious,

To the end that he may not know that whoever does evil, it
(that evil) will at last come back and smite him.

He sees all the master-moves invertedly: (hence) they result 2515
in check-mate to him and (in) failure and defeat.

(The curse blinds him), because, if he regard himself as
naught, (if) he regard the wound (his moral and spiritual blind-
ness) as deadly and festering,

Pain will arise from such looking within, and the pain will
bring him out from the veil (of self-conceit).

Until mothers are overtaken by the pains of childbirth, the
child finds no way to be born.

This (God-given) trust is in the heart, and the heart is
pregnant (with it) : these counsels (of the prophets and saints)
are like the midwife.

The midwife may say that the woman has no pain; (but) pain 2520
is necessary, pain is (makes) a way for the child (to be born).

He that is without pain is a brigand, because to be without
pain is to say “I am God.’*

To say that out of the (proper) time is a curse (to the
speaker); to say that “I” at the (proper) time is a mercy (from
God).

The ‘‘P’ of Mansiir (Hallaj) certainly became a mercy; the

” of Pharaoh became a curse. Mark (this) !

Consequently, it is incumbent (on us) to behead every
untimely bird (every cock that crows too soon), in order to give
notice (warning)^.

^ /.e,we must die to self in order that we may show to others the evils of egoism.


352 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

2525 What is “beheading”? Killing the fleshly soul in the holy
(spiritual) war, and renouncing self,

Just as you would extract the scorpion’s sting in order that it
might be saved from being killed,

(Or) pull out the venomous fan^ of a snake, in order that the
snake might escape from the calamity of being stoned (to death).

Nothing will slay the fleshly soul except the shadow (protec-
tion) of the Pir : grasp tightly the skirt of that slayer of the flesh.

When you grasp (it) tightly, that is (done by) the aid of Him
(God) : whatever strength comes into you is (the effect of) His
drawing (you towards Him).

2550 Know that true is (the text) thou didst not throw when thou
threwest : whatsoever the soul soweth is from the Soul of the soul.

He is the One that takes the hand (to help), and (He is)
burden-bearing (long-suffering): have hope, from moment to
moment, of (receiving) that breath (of inspiration) from Him.

’Tis no harm if you have remained long without Him: you
have read that He is long in gripping (sinners), (though) gripping
(them) tight.

His’Mercy is long in gripping, (but) grips tight: His Presence
does not keep you absent (from Him) for one moment.

If you desire the explanation of this union and friendship,
read thoughtfully (the Siira) Wa'l-I)u}td {By the Morri).

2535 And if you say that evils too are from Him, (that is true), but
how is it a defect in His grace ?

(His) bestowing this evil is even His perfection : I will tell you
a parable (in illustration), O respected one.

A painter made two kinds of pictures — beautiful pictures and
pictures devoid of beauty.

He painted Joseph and fair-formed houris, he painted ugly
afreets and devils.

Both kinds of pictures are (evidence of) his mastery: those
(ugly ones) are not (evidence of) his ugliness ; they are (evidence
of) his bounty.

25.(0 He makes the ugly of extreme ugliness — it is invested with all

(possible) uglinesses — ^

In order that the perfection of his skill may be displayed, (and
that) the denier of his mastery may be put to shame.

And if he cannot make the ugly, he is deficient (in skill):
hence He (God) is the Creator of (both) the infidel and the sincere
(faithful).

From this point of view, then, (both) infidelity and faith are
bearing witness (to Him): both are bowing down in worship
before His Lordliness.

But know that the faithful (believer) bows down willingly,
because he is seeking (God’s) pleasure and aiming (at that).

^ Literally^ “all uglinesses surround it.*’


WHY GOD CREATES GOOD AND EVIL 353

The infidel too is a worshipper of God, (though) unwillingly ; 2545
but his aim is (directed towards) another object of desire.

(It is true that) he keeps the King’s fortress in good repair ;
but he is claiming to be in command.

He has become a rebel, to the intent that it may be his domain ;
(but) verily, in the end the fortress comes to be the King’s.

The faithful believer keeps that fortress in good repair for
the sake of the King, not for place (and power).

The ugly one (the infidel) says, “O King who createst the
ugly. Thou art able for (able to create) the beautiful as well as
the despicable (and) ugly.”

The beautiful one (the faithful believer) says, “ O King of 2550
beauty and comeliness. Thou hast made me free from defects.”


How the Prophet, God bless and save him, gave injunctions
to the sick man and taught him to pray.

The Prophet said to the sick man: “Say thus: — ‘O Thou
that makest easy that which is hard.

Give good unto us in our present abode, and give good unto
us in our future abode !

Make the way agreeable to us as a garden : Thou indeed, O
Glorious One, art our goal.’ ”

At the Gathering (for Judgement) the true believers will say,

“O angel, is it not (the case) that Hell is the common road,

(And that) true believer and infidel (alike) pass by it? We 2555
saw no smoke or fire in this road (which we have traversed).

Lo, here is Paradse and the Court of safety: where, then, was
that vile place of passage? ”

Then me angel will say, “The garden of greenery which ye
saw in a certain spot as ye passed —

That was Hell and the terrible place of chastisement, (but)
unto you it became gardens and pleasaunces and trees.

Inasmuch as with this soul of hellish nature, (this) miscreant
fiery one that seeks (to lead you into) temptation,

Ye have striven (oft), and it hath become full of purity, and ssOo
ye have quenched the fire (thereof) for God’s sake ;

(Inasmuch as) the fire of lust, which was flaming, hath become
the verdure of piety and the light of guidance (unto the true
faith) ;

(Inasmuch as) at once the fire of anger in you hath turned
to forbearance, and the darkness of ignorance in you hath turned
to knowledge;

(Inasmuch as) the fire of greed in you hath turned to un-
selfishness, and that envy (which) was like thorns hath turned to
roses ;


M M


354 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Inasmuch as ye formerly extinguished all these fires of your
own for God's sake;

2565 And made the fiery soul like an orchard and cast in it the
seed of fealty,

(Whilst) therein the nightingales of commemoration and
glorification of God (were) singing sweetly in the garden by the
river-side ;

(Inasmuch as) ye have answered the call of God and have
brought water into the blazing hell of your soul —

Our Hell also in regard to you hath become greenery and
roses and plenty and riches."

What is the requital for well-doing, O son? Kindness and
well-doing and valued recompense.

2570 “Did not ye say, "We are devoted (to God) : we arc passing
away before the attributes of Everlastingncss?

We, whether we be cunning (sane) or mad, arc intoxicated
with that Cupbearer and that cup.

We lay our heads (submissively) upon His writ and mandate:
we give our sweet lives in pawn (to Him).

So long as the thought of the Friend is in our inmost
hearts, (all) our work is to serve (Him) and yield up our
lives.'"

Wheresoever the candle of tribulation hath been lighted,
hundreds of thousands of loving souls are burnt.

2575 Those lovers that are within the house (and nigh unto Him)
are (as) moths to the candle of the face of the Friend.

O heart, go where they are bright^ toward thee and are as a
coat of mail to thee against afflictions,

And give thee a place within their souls, that they may fill
thee with wine, like a cup.

Take thy abode within their souls: O radiant full-moon,
make thy home in the sky!

Like Mercury, they will open the book of the heart, that they
may reveal mysteries unto thee.

2580 Stay beside thy kinsfolk — how art thou roaming abroad?
Cleave to the perfect Moon if thou art a piece of the moon.

What is the (cause of the) part's keeping aloof from its whole?
What is (the cause of) all this mixture with (that which is)
diverse?

^ Behold how the genus hath become species in the process (of
differentiation): behold how the unseen things have become
visible in emanation.

So long as thou wouldst fain be wheedled- like a woman,
O man without wisdom, (thou wilt remain imperfect) : how
wilt thou be helped by lies and wheedling?

^ I,e. unveiled and sincere.

2 Literally, “thou art a buyer of blandishment.**


THE LOVERS OF GOD ' 355

Thou art taking flattery and sweet words and cajolement and
putting them like gold in thy bosom.

For thee the revilings and blows of the (spiritual) kings would 2585
be better than the praise of the unrighteous^.

Swallow the slaps of the (spiritual) kings, do not swallow the
honey of the rabble, to the end that through the fortune of
(those) personages thou mayst (thyself) become a personage ;

Because from them come felicity and robes of honour : under
the shelter of the spirit, body becomes soul.

Wherever thou seest one (that is) naked and destitute, know
that he hath fled from the (spiritual) master,

In order that he may become such as his heart desires — that
blind, wicked, worthless heart of him.

If he had become such as his master desired, he would have 2590
graced himself and his kindred.

Whoever in the world flees from his master is fleeing from
felicity. Know this (for sure) !

Thou hast learned a trade to earn a livelihood for the body:
(now) set thy hand to a religious (spiritual) trade.

In this world thou hast become clothed and rich : when thou
comest forth from here, how wilt thou do?

Learn such a trade that hereafter the earning of God^s
forgiveness may come in as revenue (to thee).

Yonder world is a city full of trafficking and earning: think 2595
not that the earnings here (in this world) are a sufficiency.

The high God hath said that beside those (the next world’s)
earnings these earnings in the (present) world are (but) children’s
play —

As a child that embraces another child modo coitum facientis
contactum facit;

(Or as) children at play set up a shop, (but) it is of no use (to
them) except as a pastime.

Night falls, and he (the child who acted as shopkeeper) comes
home hungry: the (other) children are gone, and he is left alone.

This world is a playground, and death is the night : thou 2600
returnest with an empty i^urse, tired out.

The earnings of religion are love and inward rapture —
capacity to receive the Light of God, O thou obstinate one !

This vile fleshly soul desires thee to earn that which passeth
away: how long wilt thou earn what is vile? Let it go! Enough!

If the yile fleshly soul desire thee to earn what is noble, there
is some trick and plot behind it.

1 Literally, “them that have lost the way.”


23-2


356


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


How IbUs awakened Mu^dwtya — may God be well-pleased
with kirn! — sayings Arise^ it is time for prayer.

’Tis related in Tradition that Mu'dwiya was asleep in a nook
of the palace.

2605 The palace-door was fastened from the inside, for he was
fatigued by people’s visits.

Suddenly he was awakened by a man, (but) when he opened
his eyes the man vanished.

He said (to himself), ‘‘No one had entrance to the palace:
who is he that has shown such impudence and boldness?”

Then he went round and searched in order to find the trace
of that one who had become hidden (from sight).

Behind the door he espied a luckless man who was hiding his
face in the door and the curtain.

“Hey,” he cried, “who are you? What is your name?” “(To
speak) plainly,” said he, “my name is Iblis the damned.”

He (Mu‘dwiya) asked, “Why did you take pains to awaken
me^? Tell the truth, don’t tell me what is reverse and contrary
(to the fact) 2.”

How Iblis gave Mu^dwiya^ may God he well-pleased with him^

a falP, and practised dissimulation and pretence^ and how

Mu^dwiya answered him.

He said, “The time for prayer is (all but) come to an end : you
must run quickly to the mosque.

Mustafd (Mohammed) said, boring the pearl of the idea,
‘ Make haste to perform your devotions before the time is past.’ **

He (Mu‘awiya) said, “Nay, nay; ’tis not thy purpose to be
my guide unto any good.

2615 (If) a thief come secretly into my dwelling-place and say to
me, ‘I am keeping watch,’

How shall I believe that thief? How should a thief know the
recompense and reward for good works?”

How IbUs again ?nade answer to Mitdwiya,

He said, “At first I was an angel: I traversed the way of
obedience (to God) with (all my) soul.

I was the confidant of them that follow the path (of devotion) :
I was familiar with them that dwell by the Throne of God.

How should (one’s) first calling go out of (one’s) mind? How
should (one’s) first love go forth from (one’s) heart?

^ Literally, “why did you awaken me with earnestness?^*

Literally, “do not tell me reversely and contrariwise.**

Literally, “ threw M. from his ass,** t.e. sought to mislead him and cast
him into error.


IBLIS AND MU'AwIYA ' 357

If in travel you see Anatolia or Khutan, how should love of 262°
your own country go from your heart?

I too have been one of those drunken with this wine : I have
been a lover at His court.

They cut my navel in (predestined me from birth to) love of
Him : they sowed love of Him in my heart.

I have seen good days from Fortune: I have drunk the water
of (Divine) Mercy in (my) spring-time.

Was it not the hand of His bounty that sowed me? Was it
not He that raised me up from non-existence?

Oh, many is the time I have received kindness from Him and 2025
walked in the rose-garden of (His) approval.

He would lay the hand of mercy on my head, He would open
(let flow) from me the fountains of grace.

Who found milk for me in the season of my infancy? Who
rocked my cradle? He.

From whom did I drink milk other than His milk? Who
nourished me except His providence?

The disposition which has entered with the milk into (their)
being — ^how can it be discharged (expelled) from folk?

If the Sea of Bounty has given (me) a rebuke, (yet) how have 2630
the doors of Bounty been shut?

Giving and grace and favour are the fundamental substance
of His coin : wrath is (only) as a speck of alloy on it.

He made the world for kindness’ sake : His sun caressed the
motes (in its beams).

If separation (from Him) is big with His wrath, ’tis for the
sake- of knowing the worth of union with Him,

So that separation from Him may give the soul chastisement,

(and that) the soul may know the value of the days of union.

The Prophet has declared that God said, ‘ My purpose in 2635
creating was to do good :

. I created to the intent that they (My creatures) might draw
some gain from Me, and that they might smear their hands
with My honey;

Not to the end that I might draw some gain (from them),
and that I might tear off a coat from one (who is) naked.’

During the short while since He drove me from His presence,
mine eye hath remained (fixed) upon His beauteous face ;

(And my thought has always been), ‘ Such wrath from such
a face ! Oh, wonderful ! ’ (whereas) every one (else) has become
occupied with (considering) the (secondary) cause (His wrath).

I do not look at the cause (His wrath), which is temporal, 2040
inasmuch as the temporal (only) produces something temporal
(like itself).

I am re^rding (His eternally) precedent mercy: whatsoever
is temporau I rend in twain.


358 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Grant that my declining to worship (Adam) was from envy ;
(yet) that envy arises from love (of God), not from denial (of
obedience to His command).

’Tis certain, all envy arises from love, (for fear) lest another
become the companion of the beloved.

Brooding jealousy is the necessary consequence of love, just
as saying 'Live long!’ must follow the sneezed
2645 Since there was no play but this on His board-, and lie said,
‘Play,’ what more can I do?

I played the one play (move) that there was, and cast myself
into woe.

Even in woe I am tasting His delights: I am mated by Him,
mated by Him, mated by Him!

^ How shall any one, O noble sir, in (this world of) six direc-
tions deliver himself from the shashdara (the place with six
doors) ?

How shall the part of the six escape from the whole of the
six, especially when the Unconditioned sSets it wrong?

2650 Whoever is in the six is in the fire ; (only) He that is the creator
of the six will deliver him.

Truly, whether it be infidelity or faith in Him (to which he
is predestined), he is the hand-loom (instrument) of the Lord
and belongs to Him.”

How Mu'dwiya again exposed the deceiffulness of Ihlh,

The Amir said to him, These things arc true, but your share
in these things is wanting.

You have waylaid hundreds of thousands like me: you have
made a hole and have come into the treasure-house.

You are fire and naphtha : you burn, you cannot help it*h Who
is there whose raiment is not torn to pieces by your hand?

2655 Inasmuch as it is your nature, 0 fire, to be a cause oi burning,
there is no help but you must burn someti\ing.

This is God’s curse (on you), that He makes you burn (things)
and makes you the master of all thieves.

You have spoken with God and heard (Him speak) face to
face : what should I be (able to do) before your deceit, O enemy ?

Your stock of knowledge is like the sound of (the fowler’s)
whistle: it is the cry of birds, but it is bird**ensnaring.

That (whistle) has waylaid myriads of birds, the bird (in each
case) being duped (by the fancy) that a friend is come.

2660 When it hears in the air the sound of the whistle, it comes
(down) from the air and is made captive here.

a ^^udition of the obligation imposed by sneezing.*'

1 he board used in the game of nard.

Literally, *qif) you do not bum, there is no help.**


IBLfs AND MU‘AWIYA ' 359

Through your deceit the people of Noah are in lamentation:
they have hearts charred and bosoms (torn) to shreds.

You gave ‘Ad in this world to the wind (of destruction) : you
cast (them) into torment and sorrows.

Through you was the stoning of the people of Lot : through
you were they sunk in the black rain-water.

Through you was the brain of Nimrod crumbled, O you that
have raised thousands of turmoils !

Through you the intelligence of Pharaoh, the acute and sage, 2665
became blinded, (so that) he found no understanding.

Through you also Bii Lahab became an unworthy one;
through you also Bu ’ 1 -Hakam became a Bu JahL

O you that on this chessboard, for the sake of remembrance^,
have checkmated hundreds of thousands of masters,

O you by whose difficult attacking moves (our) hearts have
been burned and your (own) heart has been blackened,

You are the sea of cunning, (and all) the creatures (are but)
a drop : you are like a mountain and (we) simple ones (are but)
a mote.

Who shall escape from your cunning, O adversary.^ We are 2670
drowned in the flood, except them that are protected (by God).

By you many a fortunate star has been burned : by you many
an army and host have been scattered.’’


How Iblis again replied to Mu^dwiya.


Iblis said to him, “Unravel this knot (and apprehend the
matter) : I am the touchstone for the false coin and the true.

God hath made me the test of lion and cur, God hath made
me the test of genuine coin and counterfeit.

When have I blackened the false coin’s face? I am the
money-changer: I have (only) valued it.

To the good I act as guide, the dry branches I rip off.

I lay these (different) sorts of fodder (before people) — for
what purpose? In order that it may be seen of what kind® the

animal is. , , .

When a wolf bears® young to an antelope, and there is some
doubt whether it (the young one) has the nature of wolf or


antelope,

Drop you grass and bones in front of it (and see) to which
side it quickly steps.

If it comes towards the bones, it is canine ; and if it craves the


2675


grass, it is assuredly of the antelope race.

A wrath and a mercy were wedded to one another: from 2680
these twain was born the world of good and evil.


1 I.e- ^‘as a memorial (of your skill),**

“ Literally, *Vhose congener.’* ^ Or ** begets.


360 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Offer grass and bones, offer the food of the flesh and the food
of the spirit.

If he seek the food of the flesh, he is bobtailed (worthless),
and if he desire the food of the spirit, he is a (spiritual)
chief.

If he serve the body, he is an ass ; and if he go into tire sea of
the spirit, he will find pearls.

Although these twain — ^good and evil— are different, yet
these twain are (engaged) in one work.

2685 The prophets offer devotions, the enemies (of God) offer
lusts.

How should I make the good man bad? I am not God. I am
(only) a prompter, I am not their creator.

(How) should I make the fair foul? I am not the Lord. I am
(only) a mirror for the foul and the fair.

The Hindoo burnt a mirror in ve.\:ation, saying, ‘ This (mirror)
causes a man to look black-faced.’

He (God) hath made me an informer and truth-teller, that
I may tell where the ugly one is and where the beautiful.

2690 I am a witness: how is prison (the right place) for a witness?
I do not deserve (to go to) prison, God is the witness (to mv
innocence).

Wherever I see a fruitful sapling, 1 foster (it) diligently like
a nurse.

Wherever I see a sour and dry tree, I cut it down, in order
that the musk may be delivered (separated) from the dung.

The dry (tree) says to the gardener, '0 young man, why do
you cut off my head without fault (on my part) ? ’

The gardener says, ‘Be silent, O cvil-natured one! Is not
thy dryness sin enough in thee? ’

2695 The dry (tree) says, ‘ I am straight, I am not crooked : why
are you houghing me (who am) without guilt?’

The gardener says, ‘Hadstthou been blest, would that thou
wert crooked (if only) thou wert moist (full of sap).

Thou wouldst have drawn (into thyself) the Water of Life:
thou wouldst have been steeped in the Water of Life.

Thy seed and thy root were bad, and thou ha.st not been
joined to a good tree.

If the sour branch be joined to a sweet one, that sweetne.ss
will strike (impress itself) on its nature.’”


How Mu'dwiya dealt sternly with JbKs,

2700 Said the Amir, “O brigand, do not argue: there is no way
tor you (to penetrate) into me, (so) do not seek the way.

You ^e a brigand, and I am a stranger and merchant: how
should I purchase any garments that you may bring?


IBLIS AND MU‘AwIYA ’ 361

Do not prowl about my property, infidel as you are : you are
not one to buy the property of anybody.

The brigand is not a buyer for (from) any person, and if he
seem to be a buyer, *tis (only his) deceit and artfulness.

I wonder what this envier has in his gourd ! O God, help us
against this enemy !

If he pronounce one more screed (of his spells) over me, this 2705
brigand will rob me of the mantle (of my faith).

How Mu'dwiya complained of Iblis to the most high God
and besought His aid,

0 God, this talk of his is like smoke : take my hand (and help
me), or else my raiment is blackened.

1 cannot prevail in argument with Iblis, for he leads every
one, noble and base (alike), into temptation.

Adam, who is the lord of He taught {him) the Names, is power-
less before the lightning-like onset of this cur.

He cast him from Paradise upon the face of the earth: he
(Adam) fell from Simdk^ into his net, like a fish,

Crying in lamentation, * Verily, we have wronged {ourselves)' 2710
There is no bound to his (Satan’s) guile and imposture.

In his every saying there is mischief: myriads of enchant-
ments are concealed in his mind.

He unmans^ men in a moment: he kindles vain desire in
man and woman.

O Iblis, you that consume the people and seek to tempt them
(to their ruin), on what ground did you awaken me? Tell the
truth!”


How Iblis once more exhibited his deceit.

He said, “No man that thinks evil (is suspicious) would
hearken to the truth notwithstanding a hundred signs (that
pointed it out).

Eveiy mind that has conceived fancies (suspicions) — when 271$
you bring forward proof, its fancy is increased.

When (sound and true^ words enter it, they become a disease
(they are corrupted ana falsified): the holy warrior’s sword
becomes a tool for the thief.

Therefore the answer to him is silence and rest: to talk with
a fool is 'madness.

Why do you complain to God of me, O simpleton? Complain
of the wickedness of that vile fleshly soul.

You eat halwd (sweetmeat), (then) boils break out in you,
fever lays hold of you, your health is disordered.

^ I,e. from high estate.

^ Literalfy, “ties up the manhood of.’*


362 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

2^20 You curse Iblis, guiltless (though he is). How do you not
see (that) that deception (proceeds) from yourself?

It is not (the fault) of Iblis, it is (the fault) of yourself, O
misguided one, that you are running like a fox towards the sheep’s
fat tail.

When you see the fat tails in the green field, ’tis a snare. Why
are you ignorant of this?

You are ignorant because desire for the fat tail has made you
far from knowledge and has blinded your (spiritual) eye and
intelligence.

Your love of (sensual) things makes you blind and deaf; your
black fleshly soul is the culprit: do not quarrel (with others).

2725 Do not put the guilt on me, do not see upside down. I am
averse to evil and greed and enmity.

I did an evil deed and am still repenting : I am waiting that
my night may turn to day.

I have become suspect amongst mankind: every man and
woman lay their (evil) actions on me (at my door).

The helpless wolf, though he is hungry, is suspected of being
in luxury^.

When, because of feebleness, he cannot go his way, people
say it is indigestion (arising) from gross (rich and heavy) food.’"

How Mu^dwiya once more pressed Iblis hard.

$730 He said, ‘‘Nothing but the truth will save you: justice is
calling you to (speak) the truth.

Tell the truth, so that you may be delivered from my hand:
cunning will not lay the dust of my war (will not induce me to
leave you in peace).”

He (Iblis) said, “How do you know (the difference between)
falsehood and truth, O thinker of vain fancies, (you that are)
filled with (idle) thoughts (about me)?”

He answered, “The Prophet has given an indication : he has
laid down the touchstone (criterion) for (distinguishing) the
base coin and the good.

He has said, ‘Falsehood^ is (the cause of) disquiet in (men’s)
hearts’; he has said, ‘Truth is (the cause of) a joyous tran-
quillity.’

2735 The (tpubled) heart is not comforted by lying words: water
and oil kindle no light.

(Only) in truthful speech is there comfort for the heart:
truths are the bait that entraps the heart®.

1 Literally, magnificence,*' “splendid condition.*'

^ Read

® Literally, “the grain of the snare of the heart.”


IBLfs AND MU‘AwIYA ' 363

Sick, surely, and ill-savoured^ is the heart that knows not
(cannot distinguish) the taste of this and that.

When the heart becomes whole (is healed) of pain and disease,
it will recognise the flavour of falsehood and truth.

When Adam’s greed for the wheat^ waxed great, it robbed
Adam’s heart of health.

Then he gave ear to your lies and enticements : he was 2740
befooled and drank the killing poison.

At that moment he knew not scorpion {kazhdum) from wheat
(gandum) : discernment flies from one that is drunken with vain
desire.

The people are drunken with cupidity and desire : hence they
are accepting your cheatery.

Whoever has rid his nature of vain desire has (thereby) made
his (spiritual) eye familiar with the secret.

How a cadi complained of the calamity of {holding) the
office of cadi, and how his deputy answered him.

They installed a cadi, (and meanwhile) he wept. The deputy
said, ‘O cadi, what are you weeping for?

This is not the time for you to weep and lament : it is the time 2745
for you to rejoice and receive felicitations.’

‘Ah,’ said he, ‘how shall a man without insight pronounce
judgement — an ignorant man (decide) between two who know?

Those two adversaries are acquainted with their own case:
what should the poor cadi know of those two tangles?

He is ignorant and unaware of their (real) state : how should
he proceed (to give judgement) concerning their lives and
property?’

He (the deputy) said, ‘The litigants know (the truth of their
case) and (nevertheless) are unsound (prejudiced); you are
ignorant (of the facts), but you are the luminary of the whole
body (of Moslems),

Because you have no prejudice to interfere (with your dis- 2750
cernment), and that freedom (from prejudice) is light to the
eyes;

While those two who know are blinded by their self-interest;
prejudice has put their knowledge into the grave.

Unprejudicedness makes ignorance wise; prejudice makes
knowledge perverse and iniquitous.

So long as you accept no bribe, you are seeing; when you act
covetously, you are blind and enslaved,’

I have turned my nature away from vain desire : I have not
eaten delicious morsels.

My heart, which tastes (and distinguishes), has become 2755
bright (like a clear mirror) : it really knows truth from falsehood.

1 Literally, “ill-mouthed,” ® /.e. the forbidden fruit.


364


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


How Mu'dwiya — may God be well-pleased with hmi ! —
induced Iblts to confess.

Why did you awaken me? You are the enemy of wakefulness,
O trickster.

You are like poppy-seeds: you put every one to sleep. You
are like wine : you take away understanding and knowledge.

I have impaled you. Come, tell the truth. I know what is
true: do not seek evasions.

I expect from every person (only) that of which by nature
and disposition he is the owner.

2760 I do not look for any sugar from vinegar ; I do not take the
catamite for a soldier.

I do not, like (idolatrous) infidels, seek (expect) from an idol
that it should be God or even a sign from God.

I do not seek the smell of musk from dung ; I do not seek dry
bricks in river-water.

From Satan, who is other (than good), I do not look for this —
that he should awaken me with good (intent).’’

How Iblts told truly his hidden thought to Mti^dwiya --may
God be well-pleased with him!

Iblfs spoke many words of deceit and treachery, (but) tlie
Amir hearkened not to him and strove (against him) and showed
fortitude.

2765 (At length), with the bitterest pangs^ he (Iblis) said : O such-
and-such, know that I awakened you for the purpose

That you might join the congregation (of Moslems) in praying
after the Prophet of high estate.

If the time of prayers had passed, this world would have
become dark to you and without a gleam of light;

(And then) from disappointment and grief tears would have
flowed from your two eyes in the fashion of (water from) water-
skins,

(Because) every one has delight in some act of devotion and
consequently cannot bear to miss it (even) for a short while.

2770 That disappointment and grief would have been (as) a
hundred prayers: what is (ritual) prayer in comparison with
the (spiritual) glow of humble supplication? ”

^ Literally, ‘*from the roots of the teeth, i.c, with the utmost reluctance.”


IBLfS AND MU'AwIYA 3^5

The excellence of the remorse felt by one who was sincere [in his
devotion) for having missed the congregational prayers,

A certain man was going into the mosque (when) the people
were coming out of the mosque.

He began to ask (one of them), saying, ‘‘What ails the con-
gregation that they are coming out of the mosque (so) soon?’'

That person said to him, “The Prophet has prayed with the
congregation and finished (his) communion.

How art thou going in, O foolish man, when the Prophet has
given the blessing?”

He cried, “Ah!” and smoke issued from that (burning) sigh: 2775
his sigh was giving forth the smell of blood from his heart.

One of the congregation said, “Give me this sigh, and my
prayers are thine.”

He answered, “I give the sigh and accept the prayers.” He
(the other) took that sigh with a hundred yearnings (towards

God). ^ . . UT.1

At night, whilst (he was) asleep, a Voice said to him. Thou

hast bought the Water of Life and salvation. ^

In honour of this choice and this appropriation the prayers
of all the people have been accepted.”


Conclusion of the confession made by Iblis to Mi^dmya
of his deceit,

l^hen ‘Azazil^ said to him, “O noble Amir, I must lay my 2780

deceit before (you), ^ x.

If you had missed the prayers, you would then from heartache

have uttered sighs and lamentations, ^ / r. n

And that regret and that lamentation and that (sorrowrul)
yearning woula have exceeded (in value) two hundred litanies

and prayers. -i

I awakened you in fear lest such a sigh might burn the veil

^ In order tlat such a sigh should not be yours ; in order that
you should not have any way to it.

1 am envious: from envy I acted thus. I am the enemy, my 27S5
(proper) work is deceit and malice.”

He (Mn'awiya) said, “Now you have told the truth, you are
veracious. 'I'his (deceit) comes (naturally) from you: to this you

arc adapted. t ^

You are a spider, you have flies as your prey ; O cur, 1 am not

a fly, (so) do not worry. ..

1 am a white falcon : the King hunts me. How should a spider

weave his web about me?

1 The name of Iblls before his fall.


366 MATHNAWi, BOOK II

Go now, continue to catch flies as far as you can : invite the
flies to (partake of) some buttermilk ; . . .

2790 And if you call (them) to honey, that too will certainly be lies
and buttermilk (fraud).

You awakened me, (but) it (that awakenment) was (really)
slumber: you showed (me) a ship, (but) that was (really) a
whirlpool.

You were calling me to good for the purpose that you might
drive me away from the better good.”

How a thief escaped because some one gave the alarm to the master
of the house, who had nearly overtaken and caught the thief.

This (behaviour of Iblis) is like that (which is told in the
following story), how a certain man saw a thief in the house
and ran after him.

He ran after him (the length of) two or three fields, till the
fatigue threw him into a sweat.

2/95 At the moment when, rushing on, he had come so near to
him that he might spring upon him and seize him.

The second thief cried out to him, “ Come, that you may see
these signs of calamity.

Be quick and turn back, O man of (prompt) action, that you
may see (how) very pitiable (is) the state of things here.”

He (the householder) said (to himself), “Maybe a thief is
yonder: if I do not return at once, this (fate) will befall me.

He may lay hands upon my wife and child, (and in that case)
how would it profit me to bind this thief (whom I am pursuing)?

2800 This Moslem is calling me in kindness: unless I return
quickly, evil will come to me.”

In (confident) hope of the compassion of that well-disposed
(friena), he left the thief and again set off (in another direction).

“0 good friend,” said he, “what is the matter? By whose
hand (violence) is this lamentation and outcry of yours (caused) ? ”

“Look here,” said (the other). “See the thief’s footprints!
The pimping^ thief has gone this way.

Look at the cuckold tmef ’s footprints! Follow him by means
of these marks and traces.”

2805 He answered, “O fool, what are you telling me? Why, I had
(as good as) caught him,

(But) at your cry I let the thief go. I deemed you, ass (as you
are), a (reasonable) man.

What silly gabble and nonsense is this, 0 fellow? I (had)
found the reality: what (use to me) is the clue?”

He replied, “ I am giving you a clue to the real (thing). This
is the clue ; I am acquainted with the reality.”

^ Literalljr, “ cujus uxor pro mercede (conducitur).”


THE ACCOMPLICE WHO GAVE A FALSE ALARM 367

He (the householder) said, “You are an artful knave or else
you are a fool; nay, you are a thief and cognisant of this affair.

I was (on the point of) dragging my adversary along, (when) 2S10
you let him escape, saying (to me), ‘Here are (his) traces/’'

You speak of (external) relations, (but) I transcend (all)
relations. In union (with God) where are signs or evidences?

The man that is debarred (from the Essence) sees the (Divine)
action (as proceeding) from the Attributes : he that has lost the
Essence is in (confined to) the Attributes.

Inasmuch as those united (with God) are absorbed in the
Essence, O son, how should they look upon His Attributes?

When your head is at the bottom of the river, how will your
eye fall on the colour of the water?

And if you come back from the bottom to the colour of the 28 15
water, then you have received a coarse woollen garment and
given (fine) fur^ (in exchange).

The piety of the vulgar is sin in the elect; the unitive state of
the vulgar is a veil in the elect^.

If the king make a vizier a police inspector, the king is his
enemy, he is not his friend.

Also, that vizier will have committed some offence : necessarily
change (for the worse) is not (does not occur) without cause.

He that has been a police inspector from the first — to him that
(office) has been fortune and livelihood from the beginning ;

But he that was first the king’s vizier — evil-doing is the cause 2S20
of making him a police inspector.

When the King has called you from the threshold into His
presence, and again has driven you back to the threshold.

Know for sure that you have committed a sin and in folly
have brought forward (pleaded) compulsion (as the cause).

Saying, “This was my (predestined) portion and lot.” (But)
then, why was that good luck in your hands yesterday?

Through folly you yourself have cut off your lot. The worthy
man augments his lot.

The story of the Hypocrites and their building the Mosque
of Opposition,

It is fit if you will hearken to another parable concerning 2825
perversity (taken) from the narrative in the Qur’an.

The Hypocrites played against the Prophet (just) such a
crooked game at odd and even® (as was played by Iblfs against
Mu‘dwiya),

^ Literally, ‘‘hair.”

® l.e, in their case it would be a state of separation from God.

s A passage in Book V, where this phrase occurs, would seem to indicate
that the meaning is “at every point,”


368 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Saying, “ Let us build a mosque for the glory of the Moham-
medan religion ” ; and that was (really) apostasy (on their part).

Such a crooked game were they playing : they built a mosque
other than his mosque.

They constructed (well) its floor and I'oof and dome, but they
desired to disunite the (Moslem) community.

2830 They came to the Prophet with (guileful) entreaty : they knelt
as camels before him.

Saying, “ O Messenger of God, wilt thou for kindness’ sake
give thyself the trouble^ (to walk) to that mosque,

To the end that it may be made blessed by thy approach —
may thy days flourish until the Resurrection !

It is a mosque for muddy and cloudy days, a mosque for
days of sore distress in times of poverty.

That a (poor) stranger may get charity and room (to shelter)
there, and that this house of service may be frequented,

283s So that the rites of the Religion may be multiplied and
abound; because a bitter plight is sweetened (by being shared)
with friends.

Honour that place (by thy presence) for a short while:
declare us to be sincere, and give a good account of us.

Show favour to the mosque and its founders. Thou art the
moon, we are the night: comply with us for a moment.

In order that by thy beauty night may be made like day, O
thou whose beauty is a night-illumining sun.”

Alas! would that those words had been from the heart, so
that the desire of those folk might have been accomplished I
2840 Courtesy that comes to the tongue without (sincerity of)
heart and soul is like herbs on the ash-heap, O friends.

Look at them from afar and pass on : they are not fit for eating
or smelling, O son.

Do not, indeed, go (incline) towards the courtesy of the
faithless, for it is a ruined bridge: heed well (my warning).

If a fool set foot on it, the bridge will break, and will shatter
that foot of his.

Wherever an army is routed, it is because of two or three
effeminate weaklings.

2845 He (the poltroon) comes armed into the battle-line, like a
man : they (the soldiers) put their trust in him®, saying, “ Here’s
the Comrade of the Cave®.”

He turns his face (in flight) when he sees wounds : his going
breaks your back*.

This (topic) is long and is expanding, and that which is aimed
at is becoming hidden (from sight).

1 Literally, “trouble thy feet.’’ = Literally, “set their hearts on him.”

® I.e. Abii Bakr, the trusted friend of the Prophet*

* Le. deals a fatal blow to your hopes of victory.


THE MOSQUE OF OPPOSITION'


369


How the Hypocrites cajoled the Prophet— God bless and save

him! that they might take him to the Mosque of Opposition,

They chanted spells over (spoke deceitful words to) the
Messenger of God : they were driving (hard) the steed of cunning
and craft.

The kind and compassionate Messenger proffered (in reply)
nothing but smiles, nothing but “Yes.’’

He expressed (his) thanks to that company (deputation) : he 2850
gladdened the envoys in (by) assent.

Their deceit was apparent to him, point by point, in the same
way as hairs in milk.

That courteous one feigned not to see the hairs : that polite
one said ‘‘Bravo!’' to the milk.

Myriad hairs of deceit and fraud (he beheld), and at that time
he closed his eyes to it all.

That ocean of bounty spoke truly (when he said), “I am
kinder unto you than you (yourselves are).

I am seated at the edge of a fire with an exceedingly unpleasant 2855
blaze and flame ;

Ye are hastening towards it like moths, (while) both my
hands have become moth-flaps (to beat you off)."

When the Prophet had resolved to set out (to the Mosque),
the jealousy of God cried, “Do not hearken to the ghouP!

For these wicked men have used deceit and cunning: what
they have put forward is entirely the reverse (of the truth).

Their intent was nothing but (to bring) black shame (upon
thee): when have Christians or Jews sought the welfare of the
(true) Religion?

They (the Hypocrites) have built a mosque upon Hell's 2860
bridge: they have played the game of trickery with God.

Tneir aim is to cause disunion amongst the Companions of
the Prophet : how should any vain fool understand the grace of
God?

(They have built the Mosque) in order that they may fetch
hither a Jew from Syria, with whose preaching the Jews are
intoxicated."

The Prophet said (to the Hypocrites), “Yes (I will do as ye
wish), but (just now) we are intending to march and starting on
a campaign.

As soon as I return from this expedition, I will then set out
to that Mosque at once,"

He (thus) put them off and hurried to the field of war: he 2865
played a game of trickery with the tricksters.

When he came back from the campaign, they returned and
sought (the fulfilment of) that past promise.

^ I,e, ** do not listen to the voice of temptation.’’


M M


24


370 ‘ MATHNAWf, BOOK II

God said to him, “O Prophet, proclaim the treachery (with
which they have acted), and if war be (the consequence), say,
‘Letitbe!’’^

He (the Prophet) said, ‘"O false people, be silent! Hush, lest
I tell your secret thoughts.’’

When he had declared (to them) a few indications of their
inmost thoughts, they were in evil plight^.

2Syo Thereupon the envoys turned back from him crying, ‘‘God
forfend I God forfend 1 ”

Every Hypocrite, by way of fraud, brought a Qur’an under
his arm to the Prophet,

In order to take oaths — for oaths are a shield ; (this they did)
because (taking) oaths is a custom followed by the wicked.

Since the wicked man does not keep faith in (matters of)
religion, he will break (his) oath at any time.

The righteous have no need of (taking) oath, because they
have two clear (discerning) eyes.

2875 Breach of compacts and covenants is (the result) of stupidity ;
keeping of oaths and faithfulness (to one’s word) is the practice
of him that fears God.

Said the Prophet, “Shall I take your oaths as true, or the
oath of God?”

Again those people, the Qur’an in their hands and the seal of
fasting on their lips, swore another oath,

Saying, “ By the truth of this holy and true Word (we swear)
that the building of the Mosque is for God’s sake.

In that place there is no contrivance of deceit: in that place
there is (only) commemoration (of God) and sincerity and calling
unto the Lord.”

3880 The Prophet answered, “The voice of God is coming into
my ear like an echo.

God hath put a seal upon your ears, so that they make not
haste to (hear) the voice of God.

Lo, the voice of God is coming to me distinctly: it is filtered
clear for me, like the pure (liquor) from the dregs” —

Even as Moses from the direction of the Bush heard the voice
of God saying, “ O thou of blessed fortune I ”

From the Bush he was hearing (the words), “ Lo, I am Allahy'
and together with the words there appeared (Divine) lights.

3885 Inasmuch as they (the Hypocrites) were left in the lurch by
the light of (Divine) inspiration, they once more began to recite
oaths anew.

Since God calls an oath a shield, how should the quarreller
lay down the shield from his hand?

Again the Prophet, giving (them) the lie direct, said to them
in plain terms, “Ye have lied,”

^ Literally, their affair became bad.”


THE MOSQUE OF OPPOSITION


371


How one of the Companions — may God be well-pleased with
them! — thought {to himself) disapprovingly, “Why does not
the Prophet — God bless and save him! — throw a veil {over their
hypocrisy)?"

(Their request was ignominiously refused), so that one of the
Prophet’s Companions conceived in his heart dislike^ of that
recoilment,

Thinking, “ Grey-haired and venerable old men like these —
this Prophet is putting them to shame.

Where is generosity? Where cloaking (of sins)? Where 2890
modesty (respect for the feelings of others) ? The prophets cover
up hundreds of thousands of faults.”

Quickly, again, in his heart he asked pardon of God, lest he
should be disgraced® for objecting (to the Prophet’s behaviour).

The turpitude® of befriending the Hypocrites made the true
believer wicked and rebellious like them.

Again he was crying in supplication, “O Thou who knowest
the inmost consciousness, do not leave me persisting in unbelief !

My heart is not in my control, as (my) eyesight (is); else I
would at this moment burn my heart in anger.”

(Whilst he was) in this thought, slumber seized him. To him 2895
(dreaming), their mosque seemed full of dung:

A corrupted place, its stones (steeped) in filth : from the stones
floated up black smoke.

The smoke went into his throat and made it smart : terrified*
by the bitter smoke, he sprang from sleep.

Forthwith he fell on his face and wept, saying, “O God,
these things are the sign of (their) disbelief.

Wrath (against them) is better, O God, than such forbearance
(as mine), which separates me from the light of Faith.”

If you scrutinise the labour of them that follow falsehood, 2900
(you will see that) it is stinking, coat upon coat, like an onion —
Every one (of their efforts) more pithless than another,
(while), in the case of the sincere, (every effort) is more excellent
than the other.

Those folk (the Hypocrites) tied a hundred belts on their
mantles® in order to destroy the Mosque of the people of
Qubd —

Even as the Lords of the Elephant (who abode) in Abyssinia
made a Ka'ba, (but) God set it a&e;

(And then) they (the Abyssinians) made an attempt on the

^ Literally, “ disapproval came into his heart.’*

* Literally, ** become pale-faced.”

® Literally, ** inauspiciousness,”

* Literally, “from terror of.”

* /.e, “girt themselves up with the utmost zeal.”

24-2


372 ■ MATHNAWi, BOOK II

Ka'ba in revenge: read from the Word (of God) how they
fared!

2905 The reprobates^ of the Religion have indeed no equipment
but cunning and deceit and contentiousness.

Every Companion saw plainly (in sleep) some vision of that
Mosque, so that the secret (purpose) of it became to them
certain knowledge.

If I should relate the visions, one by one, then the purity (of
the Companions) would become certain to them that doubt;

But I am afraid of revealing their mystery: they are the dis-
dainful loved ones (of God), and disdain beseems them.

They have received the (religious) Law (directly from God)
without mechanical imitation (of others) : they have taken that
(unadulterated) coin without (applying) the touchstone.

2910 The Wisdom of the Qur’to is like the true believer’s stray
camel : every one has certain (intuitive) knowledge of his own
stray.


Story of the person who was seeking after his stray camel
and inquiring about it.

(If) you have lost a camel and sought it busily, how should
you not know, when you find it, that it is yours?

What is the stray? You have lost a she-camel: (she has) fled
from your herd into a veil (of concealment).

The caravaneers have begun to load, (but) your camel is lost
(and has disappeared) from the midst (of the caravan).

You are running to and fro with parched lips; the caravan
is (now) far away, and night is near.

2915 Your baggage is left on the ground, (lying) on the road of
peril, (whilst) you are running about in search of the camel.

Crying, “O Moslems, who has seen a camel which this
morning escaped from a stable?

Whoever will tell (me) a clue to my camel, I will give so many
dirhems as a reward (for the information).”

You are requesting clues from every one: every rascal is
making a mock of you on this account.

Saying, “We saw a camel going in this direction, a reddish
camel (going) towards yonder pasturage.”

2920 One (of l£em) says, “It was crop-eared,” and another says,
“Its saddle-cloth was embroidered.”

One says, “ The camel had (only) one eye,” and another says,
“It (was suffering) from mange (and) had no hair.”

For the sake of the reward every rascal, (speaking) at random,
sets fortih a hundred clues.


1 Literally, “the black-faced ones.”


THE TRUE believer’s STRAY CAMEL 373


On being perplexed amidst discordant doctrines and finding
{a tneans of) escape and deliverance.

(This is) evea as in the matter of knowledge (of God) every-
one describes (differently) the Unseen Object of description.

The philosopher gives an explanation of another (a particular)
kind ; a scholastic theologian invalidates his statement ;

And some one else jeers at both of them, while another 2925
hypocritically tires himself to death (trying to prove that he
has real knowledge of God).

Each one (of them) gives these indications of the Way, in order
that it may be supposed that they belong to that Village.

Know the truth to be this, (that) all these (various persons)
are not in the right ; nor (again) are this herd entirely astray,

Because nothing false is shown without the True: the fool
bought (desired) spurious coin in the hope of (its being) gold.

If there were no current (genuine) coin in the world, how
would it be possible to issue false coins?

Unless there be truth, how should there be falsehood? That 2930
falsehood receives brilliance (prestige and reputation) from
truth.

They buy (desire) the wrong in hope of (its being) the right :

(if) poison go into a piece of sugar, then (and then only) they
eat (poison).

If there be no savoury^ wheat, what shall he get who sells
barley, pretending that it is wheat?

Do not say, then, that all these utterances are false : the false
(pretenders) are a snare to the heart on the ground of (because
they give) hope of truth^.

Do not say, then, that all (this) is phantasy and error : without
truth phantasy exists not in the world.

Truth is the Night of Power (which is) hidden^ amidst the 2935
(other) nights in order that the soul may make trial of every
night.

Not all nights are (the Night of) Power, O youth, nor are all
nights void of that (Night).

Amongst the wearers of the dervish-cloak there is one (true)
dervish : make trial, and accept him that is true.

Where is the sagacious and discerning believer, that he may
distinguish effeminate wretches from men?

If there be no faulty things in the world, all fools would be

(shrewd) merchants. , rx j

Then it would be very easy to know (the value of) goods : 2940

1 Literally, “ plaasant to taste and eat.” .

* /.€. they win the heart because it is hoped or believed that they are not
false, but true,


374 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

when there is no defect, what (is the difference between) the
incompetent and the competent (appraiser)?

And if everything is faulty, knowledge is of no advantage:
since everything here is (common) wood, aloes-wood is not
(to be found).

He that says, '‘All are true” — ’tis folly (on his part); and he
that says, '*A 11 are false” — ^he is damned.

Those who trade with the prophets have gained (thereby);
those who trade with colour and scent (worldly vanities) are
blind and blue (miserable).

The snake {mar) appears in the eye as riches {mdl) : rub both
your eyes well !

2945 Do not consider the happiness of this (worldly) traffic and
profit: consider the perdition of Pharaoh and Thamdd.

On making trial of everything^ so that the good and evil
v^ich are in it may be brought to view.

The sky, which is beautiful and glorious — God saith. Then
turn thy gaze again (towards it).

As regards this roof of light, be not content with one look;
look (many) times, see. Are there any flaws?

Since He hath told you to look ofttimes at this goodly roof,
as a man seeking faults,

You may know, then, how much seeing and discerning the
dark earth needs, to gain approval.

2950 In order that we may strain the pure (folk) from the dregs,
how much tribulation must our minds endure !

The trials of winter and autumn, the heat of summer, spring
like the spirit (of life),

Winds and clouds and lightnings — (all these are to the end)
that (such) happenings may bring distinctions into view ;

(To the end) that dust-coloured (dusky) earth may bring
forth all that it holds in its bosom, (whether) ruby or stone.

Whatsoever this dark earth has stolen from the Treasury of
God and the Sea of Bounty —

2955 Providence, the (Divine) governor, says, "Tell the truth!
Declare what thou hast carried off, hair by hair.”

The thief, that is, the earth, says, "Nothing, nothing!” The
Governor (tlxen) puts it to the torture.

Sometimes the Governor speaks to it with kindness (sweet)
as sugar; sometimes he hangs it up (in the air), and does his
worst^,

In order that, between force and favour, those concealed
things may be brought to sight through the fire of fear and
hope.


^ Literally, “whatever is worst.’'


THE TRUE believer’s STRAY CAMEL 37S

Springy is the kindness^ of the Almighty Governor, and
Autumn is God’s intimidation and menace,

And Winter is the allegorical crucifixion, to the end that thou, 2960
O hidden thief, mayst be exposed.

Then (again), he that wages the (spiritual) warfare has at one
time (joyous) expansion of heart, at another time (grievous)
oppression and pain and torment^.

Because this water and clay, which is (the stuflF of) our bodies,
is the denier (enemy) and thief of the light of (our) souls.

The High God lays upon our body, O man of fortitude®, heat
and cold and grief and pain.

Fear and hunger and impairment of wealth and body — all for
the sake of the soul’s coin being brought into sight (and use).

These threats and promises He hath sent forth on account of 2965
this good and evil which He hath mingled.

Inasmuch as truth and falsehood have been mingled®, and
the good and bad coin have been poured* into the travelling-
bag®,

'therefore they need a picked touchstone, one that has under-
gone (many) tests in (assaying) realities,

So that it may become a criterion for these impostures; so
that it may be a standard for these acts of providence.

Give him milk, O mother of Moses, and cast him into the
water : be not afraid of (putting him to) the trial.

Whoever drank that milk on the Day of Alast^ distinguishes 2970
the milk (in this world), even as Moses (distinguished and knew
his mother’s milk).

If thou wishest fondly for thy child’s discrimination (and
recognition), suckle (him) now, O mother of Moses,

That he may know the taste of his mother’s milk, and that
his head may not sink to (desire and accept the milk of) a bad
nurse.


Explaining the moral of the story of the person seeking
{the lost) camel.

You have lost a camel, 0 trusty (friend), and every one is
giving you a clue to the camel.

You know not where the camel is, but you know that these
clues are wrong.

And he that has not lost a camel — ^he (too) in contention 2975
seeks a camel, just like him who has (really) lost it,

* “Torment ” is used to translate ghishsh u ghiU, literally, “ latent spite and
rancour,” (or “insincerity and dissimulation"), which torment the heart.

“ Literally, “lion-man.” * Literally, “ they have mingled.”

‘ Literally, “they have poured.”

' Hurumadn, literally, “ receptacle for things which are jealously guarded.

“ The Primal Covenant in the state of pre-existence.


376 “ MATHNAWf, BOOK II

Saying, ‘'Yes; I too have lost a camel: I have brought a
reward for any one who may find it.”

(He says this) that he may take a partner's share with you in
the camel: he plays this trick because of coveting -the camel.

If you say to any one, “ That clue was false,” he (the pretender) ,
in imitation of you, says the same.

He does not know wrong clues from right, but your words
are a cue^ to that imitator.

29S0 When they mention right and likely clues, then comes to you
the certainty in which there is no doubt.

That (clue) becomes balm^ to your sick soul; it becomes
(brings) colour to your face and health and strength to you.

Your eye becomes bright, your foot nimble^; your body
becomes (the vital) soul, and your (vital) soul (the rational)
spirit.

Then you will say, “O trusted (friend), you have spoken the
truth: these clues are a clear deliverance (communication and
message).

Therein are (manifest) signs, sure informations, (distinct)
evidences; this is a title-deed and an ordainment of salvation.”

2985 When he has given this clue, you will say, “Go before (me) !
It is time for (setting out on) the enterprise : be thou the leader !

I will follow thee, O tmth-teller; thou hast got scent of my
camel: show (me) where (it is).”

(But) to that person who is not the owner of a camel, and
who is (engaged) in this quest of the camel for contention's
sake —

His certainty is not increased by this right clue, save through
reflexion from the true camel-seeker.

From his (the latter's) earnestness and ardour he (the imi-
tator) gets a scent (inkling) that these wild outcries of his arc
not (mere) babble.

2990 He (the imitator) had no just claim to this camel, but he too
has lost a camel; yes, (he has).

Desire for another's camel has become a veil to him, (so that)
he has forgotten what he (himself) has lost.

Wherever he (the owner) runs, this one (the imitator) runs :
from cupidity, he becomes a partner in the owner's pain.

When a liar sets out (to journey) with a truthful man, his
falsehood turns to truth of a sudden.

In the desert whither that camel had hastened, the other one
(the imitator) also found his own camel.

2995 As soon as he saw it, he remembered his own, and ceased to
covet the camels of friend and kinsman.

That imitator became a true searcher when he saw his camel
browsing there,

^ Literally, ® Literally, ** remedy ® Literally, “running.


THE TRUE believer’s STRAY CAMEL 377

(Only) at that moment did he become a seeker of the camel :
he was never (truly) seeking it till he saw it in the desert.

After that, he began to go alone: he opened his eyes (and
went) towards- his own camel.

The sincere one said, “You have left me, (although) till now
you were paying regard to me.'*

He replied, “Hitherto I have been an idle scoffer and, from 3000
cupidity, have been (engaged) in flattering (thee) ;

(But) now, when corporeally I have become parted from thee
in the search, I have become sympathetic with thee (in spirit).

I was stealing the cameFs description from thee; (but when)
my spirit saw its own camel, it had its eye filled (with seeing).

Till I found it, I was not seeking it; now the copper is over-
come, the gold overpowers it.

My evil deeds have become pious acts entirely — thanks (to
God) ! Jest is vanished and earnest is realised — thanks (to God) !

vSince my evil deeds have become the means of (my) attaining 3005
unto God, do not, then, throw any blame on my evil deeds.

Thee thy sincerity had made a seeker; for me, toil and search
opened (the way to) a sincere feeling.

Thy sincerity led thee to seek; my seeking led me to a feeling
of sincerity.

1 was sowing the seed of fortune in the earth, (though) I
fancied it was labour without wages and hire.

*Twas not labour without hire; ’twas an excellent earning:

(for) every grain that I sowed, a hundred grew.

The thief went underhand (by stealth) to a certain house: 3010
when he entered, he saw that it was his own house.’’

Be hot, O cold one, that heat may come: put up with rough-
ncvss, that ease may come.

That (subject of my discourse) is not two camels ; it is a
single camel. Verbal expression is confined, the meaning (to
be expressed) is very full.

The expression always fails to reach the meaning ; hence the
Prophet said, “(Whoso knows God), his tongue falters.”

Speech is (like) an astrolabe in (its) reckoning: how much
does it know of the sky and the sun? —

Especially, of that Sky whereof this heaven is (no rriore than) 3015
a blade of straw; (that Sky) of whose Sun the (terrestrial) sun is
(but) a mote?

Showing that there is in every soul the mischief of the
Mosque of Opposition.

When it appeared that that was not a mosque, (but) was a
house of intrigue and a trap laid by the Jews,

The Prophet then gave the command (and said), Rase it and
make it a dumping-place for rubbish and ashes.”


378 ’ MATHNAWI, BOOK II

The founder of the Mosque was false, like the Mosque
(itself) : ’tis not munificence if you sprinkle grain upon a snare.

The meat that catches the fish on the hook — such a morsel is
neither bounty nor generosity. ^ ^ ^ ^

3020 The Mosque of the people of Quba, which was inanimate —
he (the Prophet) did not admit to (equality with) it that which
was not its equal.

(Even) in the case of lifeless things such a wrong did not
come to pass : the lord of justice (Mohammed) set fire to that
unequal (and incongruous Mosque),

Therefore {a fortiori) in the case of the (human) essences ,
which are the foundation of all fundamentals, know that there
(too) there are differences and divisions.

Neither is his (one man’s) life like his (another man’s) life,
nor is his death like his death.

Never deem his (this one’s) grave like his (that one’s) grave*
How indeed shall I describe the difference (between them) in
that (other) world?

3025 Put thy work to the touchstone, 0 man of work, lest thou
build the Mosque of the Opposers.

Oft hast thou mocked at those Mosque-makers ; (but) when
thou consider est (carefully), thou thyself hast been one of them.

Story of the Indian who quarrelled with his friend over a certain

action and was not aware that he too was afflicted with {guilty

of) it.

Four Indians went into a mosque: they bowed their heads
and prostrated themselves for worship’s sake.

Each one performed the takbir (following) upon a niyyat^ and
began to pray with lowliness and contrition.

(When) the muezzin came, from one of them fell a remark’ —
muezzin, have you given the call to prayers? Is it time? ”
3030 The second Indian said on the spur of the moment^, ^‘Hey,
you have spoken, and (so) your prayer is null.”

The third one said to the second, ‘*0 uncle, why do you rail
at him? Tell yourself (how to behave).”

Said the fourth, ‘^Praise be to God that I have not fallen into
the pit (of error), like those three persons,”

Hence the prayers of all the four were marred ; and the fault-
finders went astray more (than he who made the original
mistake).

Oh, happy the soul that saw its own fault, and if any one
told (found) a fault, wished eagerly (to take) that (fault) upon
itself!—

^ Literally, “an utterance escaped,’^

2 Literally, “from the need (which he felt of expressing his feelings).**


THE FOUR INDIANS 379

Because half of him (every man) has always belonged to the 3035
realm of faults\ and the other half of him to the realm of the
Unseen.

Since you have ten sores on your head, you must apply the
plaster to yourself.

Finding fault with the sore (in yourself) is the (right) remedy
for him (who is at fault) ; when he has become broken (contrite),
it is (then) the (proper) occasion for (obeying the Prophet’s
injunction), “Have pity.” v j 6 . f

(Even) if you have not the same fault, be not secure; maybe,
that fault will afterwards become notorious in you.

You have not heard from God (the comforting words) Do
not fear : w'hy, then, have you deemed yourself secure and happy?

For years Iblis lived in good renown ; (afterwards) he was 3040
disgraced mark what is (the meaning of) his name.

llis eminence was famed throughout the (celestial) world;
(then) his fame turned to infamy® — oh, alas for him !

Do not seek fame till you are secure: wash your face of fear,
then show your face.

Until your (own) beard grows, my good man, do not jeer at
another whose chin is smooth.

Consider this, that his (Satan’s) soul was tried (by the wrath
of God), so that he is fallen in (sunk in perdition) ; and (in his
fall) he became a warning to you.

You did not fall, so that you should be a warning to him. He 3045
drank the poison: eat you his sugar!

Hem the Ghusas set about killing one man in order that
another might be terrorised.

Those blood-shedding (murderous) Ghuzz Turcomans came,
and entered a village (on a raid) for plunder.

They found two 01 the notables of that village, and made
(ready in) haste to put one (of the two) to death.

They tied his hands in order to sacrifice (kill) him. He said,

“O princes and high pillars (of the empire),

For what reason are ye seeking to slay me? Wherefore, pray,
are ye thirsting after my blood?

What is the wisdom, what is the object, in killing me, when 3050
I am so poor and bare-bodied?”

He (one of the Ghuzz) replied, “To strike awe into this
friend of yours, so that he may be afraid and produce (his) gold.”

He (the man) said, “Why, he is poorer than I.” “He has
done it (made himself out to be poor) on purpose,” replied the
other; “he has gold.”

^ Le. the world of evil.

® Literally, “was reversed.”


380 * MATHNAWI, BOOK II

He (the man) said, ‘‘Since it is (a matter of) opinion, we
are both the same: we are (equally) exposed to^ (mere) proba-
bility and doubt.

Kill him first, O ‘princes, in order that I may be afraid and
point out the way to the gold.”

3055 See, then, the lovingkindnesses of God, in that we have come
(into the world) in the latter days, at the very end.

The last epoch is in front of the (other) epochs : in the Tradi-
tions of the Prophet is (the saying) — “(We are) the last (in
time), the foremost (in excellence).”

In order that the destruction of the people of Noah and the
people of Hud might display to our souls the proclaimer^ of
(Divine) Mercy (who calls us to repentance).

He (God) slew them, that we might fear Him ; and if indeed
He had done contrariwise, alas for thee!

Explaining the state of those who are self-conceited and unthankful

for the blessing of the existence of the prophets and saints — peace

be unto them!

Whosoever of them (the proclaimers of Divine Mercy) has
spoken of fault and sin, and of a heart like stone, and of a black
soul ;

3060 And of holding light His commands, and of being free from
cafe for His To-morrow*^;

And of being, like women, enslaved to the fleshly soul by
passion and by love of this vile world ;

And of fleeing from the pungent sayings of sincere coun-
sellors, and of shrinking from the countenance of the righteous ;

(And of) estrangement from the spirit and spiritual folk, (and
of) fraud and fox-like behaviour towards the (spiritual) kings ;

(And of) thinking the fully satisfied (saints) to be (greedy)
beggars, (and of) secretly regarding them with enmity (arising)
from envy —

3065 If he (such a saintly man as has been described) accept any-
thing, you say he is a beggar; and if not, you say it is (from)
hypocrisy and deceit and guile.

If he mix (in society), you say he is covetous; and if not, you
say he is excessively given to pride;

Or you hypocritically excuse yourself, saying, “I am held
back (by what I have to do) in maintaining my wife and
children.

Neither have I leisure to scratch my head, nor have I leisure
to cultivate religion,

J Literally, the position of.’*

“ Le. the prophet.

® The Day of Judgement.


THE SCORNERS OF HOLY MEN ’ 381

O so-and-so, remember me in thy benedictions^, that in the
end I may become one of the saints.”

These words he does not even speak from (true) passion and 3070
ardour; (’tis as. though) a drowsy man muttered some idle talk
and went to sleep again.

(He says), “I cannot help feeding my family: I strain every
nerve to earn^ a lawful livelihood.”

How lawful, O thou that hast become one of the lost? I
deem nothing lawful but (to shed) thy blood.

He can do without God, but not without food; he can do
without the Religion, but not without the idols.

O thou that canst not refrain thy self from this vile world,
how canst thou refrain thyself from Him who spread the earth
as a carpet}^

O thou that canst not refrain thyself from delight and luxury, 3075
how canst thou refrain thyself from the Bountiful God?

O thou that canst not refrain thyself from aught pure or foul,
how canst thou refrain thyself from Him who created this ?

Where is (one like) the Friend (of God)*, who came forth
from the cave (of idolatry), and said, “ This is my Lord (as ye
assert). Take heed! Where is the Maker (of all)?” —

(One who shall say), “ I will not look at the two worlds until
I sec to whom these two assembly-places (really) belong.

If I eat bread without the view of God’s attributes, it will
stick in my throat.”

How should a morsel digest without the sight of Him, without 3080
the view of His roses and rose-garden?

Save in hope of God, who but an ox or ass would for one
moment drink from this pond?

(Who but) he that was like the cattle, nay, more lost! — though
(indeed) that stinl^rd is full of cunning.

His cunning went headlong (to ruin), and he went headlong:
he passed a little while, and his day set.

His brain became dull, his mind doting: his life is gone — and
like (the letter) alif_ he hath nothing.

(As for) his saying, “I am thinking about it” — that too is 3085
only (part) of the deceit of the fleshly soul;

And (as for) his saying, “He (God) is forgiving and merciful”

— that is naught but a trick of the villainous flesh.

O thou that art dead with anxiety because thy hands are empty
of bread, what is this fear, since He is forgiving and merciful?

' Literally, “will-power.”

'■* Literally, “from the roots of my teeth I earn. , ,,

“ Literally, “from Excellent are They that made (tt) smooth!' (Quran,

1.1, 48).

* Abraham.


382


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


3090


3095


3100


3105


How an old man complained of hts ailments to a doctor , and
how the doctor amwered him.

An old man said to a doctor, “I am in torment because of my
brain.”

The doctor replied, “That weakness of brain is from age. ’
Said the old man, “There are spots of darkness on my eyes.”

“It is from age, O ancient Shaykh,” said the doctor. “Awful
pain comes in my back,” said he.

“It is from age, O emaciated Shaykh” said the doctor.
“Whatever I eat,” said he, “is not digested.”

The doctor replied, “Weakness of stomach also is (the result)
of age.” Said he, “When I breathe, respiration is hard for me.”

“Yes,” he said, “it is asthma^; when old age arrives, two
hundred diseases come on.”

“O fool,” he exclaimed, “you have stuck at this“: this is all
that you have learned of medicine.

0 crack-brained man, your intellect has not given you this
knowledge, that God hath appointed a remedy for every pain.

You, stupid ass, from poorness of ability have remained
(fallen) on the ground for want of a sufficient foothold.”

Then the doctor said to him, “O sexagenarian, this anger
and this choler are also from old age.

Since all the functions and parts (of your body) are atrophied,
your self-control and patience have become weak.”

He (an old man) cannot endure two words, he cries out
thereat; he cannot retain one draught, he vomits (it) —

Except, to be sure, the Ancient (Pir) that is drunken with
God, and in whose inward being there is “a goodly life®.” _

Outwardly he is old, but within he is young. What thing,
verily, is he? He is the saint and the prophet.

If they are not manifest to the good and the evil (alike), what
is this envy which the worthless bear against them?

And if they do not know them with certain knowledge, what
is this hatred and hatching of plots and enrnity?

And (again), if they know of the Resurrection and rising from
the dead, how should they dash themselves against a sharp
sword?

He (the prophet or saint) smiles upon you, (but) do not deem
him to be such (as he appears); in his inward consciousness
are hidden a hundred Resurrections.

Hell and Paradise are entirely parts of him : he is beyond any
thought that you may conceive (of him).

^ Literally, stoppage of breath/^

* Literally, “ you have sewn (every stitch) on this (one spot),” or you have
fixed (all your answers) on this (single point).”

® Cf. Qur^in, xvi, 99.


THE OLD MAN AND THE DOCTO'R 383

All that you may think of is liable to pass away ; he that comes
not into thought is God.

Wherefore (then do they behave with) presumption at the
door of this hpuse, if they know who is within the house?

Fools venerate the mosque and endeavour to destroy them
that have the heart (in which God dwells).

That (mosque) is phenomenal, this (heart) is real, O asses ! The 3110
(true) mosque is naught but the hearts of the (spiritual) captains.

The mosque that is the inward (consciousness) of the saints is
the place of worship for all : God is there.

Until the heart of the man of God was grieved, neyer did
God put any generation to shame.

They were going to make war on the prophets : they saw the
body (of the prophet), they supposed he was a man.

In thee are the moral natures of those peoples of yore : how
art not thou afraid lest thou be the same (as they)?^

Forasmuch as all those marks are in thee, and thou art (one) 3115
of them, how wilt thou be saved?

The s^tory of Jiihi and the child who cried lamentably beside
his father^s bier.

A child was crying bitterly and beating his head beside his
father^s coffin.

Saying, ‘‘Why, father, where are they taking you to press
you tight under some earth?

They are taking you to a narrow and noisome house: there is
no carpet in it, nor any mat;

No lamp at night and no bread by day; neither smell nor
sign of food is there.

No door in good repair, no way to the roof ; not one neighbour 3120
to be (your) refuge.

Your body, which was a place for the people's kisses— how
should it go into a blind and murky house?—

A pitiless house and narrow room, where neither (your) face
will be lasting nor (your) colour."

In this manner was he enumerating the qualities of the house,
whilst he wrung tears of blood from his two eyes.

Jiihi said to his father, “O worthy (sir), by God they are
taking this (corpse) to our house."

The father said to Jiihi, “Don't be a fool! " “O papa," said 3125
he, “hear the marks (of identity).

These marks which he mentioned one .by one— our house
has them (all), without uncertainty or doubt.

(It has) neither mat nor lamp nor food; neither its door is in
good repair, nor its court nor its roof."

^ Le, *‘lest the same fate befall thee.”


384 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

In this wise the disobedient have a hundred marks upon
themselves, but how should they see them?

The house, namely, the heart that remains unlighted by the
beams of the sun of (Divine) Majesty,

3130 Is narrow and dark as the souls of Jews, (being) destitute of
(spiritual) savour of the loving King.

Neither has the radiance of the Sun shone into that heart,
nor is there (in it any) spaciousness^ or opening of the door.

The tomb is better for thee than a heart like this. Come now,
arise from the tomb which is thy heart !

Thou art living and born of the living. 0 gay and winsome
one, art not thou choked by this narrow tomb?

Thou art the Joseph of the time and the sun of heaven : arise
from this pit and prison, and show thy face!

3135 Thy Jonah has been cooked^ in the fish’s belly: for his
deliverance there is no means but® glorification of God.

If he had not glorified (God), Sue fish’s belly would have
been his gaol and prison until they shall be raised (from the dead)^

Through glorification he escaped from the body of the fish.
What is glorification? The sign (and token) of the Day of AlastK

If thou hast forgotten that glorification (rendered to God)
by thy spirit, hearken to the glorifications of (uttered by) those
Fishes (the prophets and saints).

Whosoever hath seen God is of God: whosoever hath seen
that Sea is that Fish.

3140 This world is a sea, and the body a fish, and the spirit is the
Jonah debarred from the light of the dawn’^

If it be a glorifier (of God), it is delivered from the fish;
otherwise, it becomes digested therein and vanishes.

The spiritual Fishes abound in this sea (the world), (but)
thou seest them not, (though) they are flying around thee.

Those Fishes are darting at® thee : open thine eye, that thou
mayst see them clearly.

If thou art not seeing the Fishes plain — after all, thine ear
hath heard their glorification (of God).

3145 To practise patience is the soul of thy glorifications: have
patience, for that is the true glorification.

No glorification hath such a (high) degree (as patience hath) ;
have patience: patience is the key to relief (from pain).

Patience is like the bridge Sirdt, (with) Paradise on the other
side: with every fair (boy) there is an ugly pedagogue.

So long as you flee from the pedagogue, there is no meeting

^ Literally, “openness of space.”

^ J.e. “digested and assimilated”; cf. v. 3141.

® Literally, “no means of escape from.” * See p. 375 note 6.

® Read This anomalouslform occurs again in Book III,

verse 333*

® Literally, “throwing themselves upon,” “bringing themselves into
contact with.”


AND THE CHILD 385

(with the boy), because there is no parting of the handsome
boy from the pedagogue.

What should you know of the (sweet) savour of patience,

O you of brittle heart — especially, of patience for the sake of
that Beauty of Chigil?

A man’s delight is in campaigns (for Islam) and in the glory 315°
and pomp (of war) ; pathico voluptas e pene est.

Nihil est religio et precatio ejus nisi penis: his thought has
borne him down to the lowest depth.

Though he rise to the sky, be not afraid of him, for (it is
only) in love of lowness (degradation) he has studied (and
gained eminence).

He gallops his horse towards lowness, albeit he rings the bell
(proclaims that he is going) aloft.

What is there to fear from the flags of beggars? — ^for those
flags are (but) a means for (getting) a mouthful of bread.

Timet puer quidam hominem corpulentum. “Ne timueris,”
inquit, “O puer; ego enim vir non sum.”

Juvenis robustus puerum deprehendit solum. Palluit timore 31S5
puer ne forte homo impetum faceret.

“ Securus esto,” inquit, “mi pulcher ; tu enim super me eris.

Etiamsi terribilis (aspectu) sum, scito me impotentem esse
ad coitum: me sicut camelum conscende, propelle.”

(With) the appearance of men and the reality like this —
Adam without, the accursed Devil within —

O you that are big as the people of ‘Ad, you resemble the
drum against which a branch was beaten by the wind.

A fox abandoned^ his prey for the sake of a drum like a wind- 3160
filled leathern bag,

(But) when he found no (real) fatness in the drum, he said,

“A hog is better than this empty bag.”

Foxes arc afraid of the noise of the drum; (but) the wise man
beats it ever so much, saying, “Speak not!”

The story of an archer and his fear of a horseman who was
riding in a forest.

A horseman, armed and very terrible (in appearance), was
riding in the forest on a high-bred horse.

An expert archer espied him, and then from fear of him drew
his bow.

To shoot an arrow. The horseman shouted to him, I am 3165
a weakling, though my body is big.

Take heed! Take heed! Do not regard my bigness, for m
the hour of battle I am less than an old woman.”

1 Literally, “gave to the wind.”

N M


25


386 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

“Pass on,” said he; “thou hast spoken well, else by reason
of my fear I should have shot a barb at thee.”

Many are they whom implements of war have slain, (since they
held) such a sword in their hands, without the- manhood (to
use it).

If you don the armour of Rustams, your soul goes (your life
is lost) when you are not the man for it^.

3170 Make your soul a shield and drop the sword^, O son : whoever
is headless (selfless) saves his head from this King.

Those weapons of yours are your (selfish) contriving and
plotting; they have sprung from you and at the same time have
wounded your soul.

Since you have gained nothing by these contrivings, abandon
contrivance, that happy fortunes may meet (you).

Since you have not for one moment enjoyed (any) fruit from
the arts (of the schools), bid farewell to the arts, and seek always
the Lord of bounties.

Since these sciences bring you no blessing, make yourself a
dunce and leave ill-luck behind.

3175 Like the angels, say, “ We have no knowledge, O God, except
what Thou hast taught us^.”

Story of the desert Arab and his putting sand in the sack
and the philosopher's rebuking him.

A certain Arab of the desert loaded a camel with two big
sacks — (there was) one full of grain.

He was seated on the top of both sacks. A glib philosopher *
questioned him.

He asked him about his native land and led him to talk and
said many fine things® in the course of (his) enquiry.

Afterwards he said to him, “What are those two sacks filled
with? Tell (me) the truth of the matter.”

3180 He replied, “In one sack I have wheat; in the other is some
sand — not food for men.”

“ Why,” he asked, “ did you load this sand? ” “ In order that
the other sack might not remain alone,” he replied,

“For wisdom’s sake,” said he, “pour half the wheat of that
pannier into the other,

So that the sacks may be lightened, and the camel too.” He
(the Arab) cried, “ Bravo 1 O clever and noble sage !

Such subtle thought and excellent judgement ! And you so
naked, (journeying) on foot and in fatigue ! ”

^ I.e. ‘*not able to defend yourself 'with it.’*

® ‘^bear what God sends and do not resist.”

® Qur’dn, ii, 30, slightly altered.

* Literally^ “a slinger of discourse.”

® Literally, ** bored many pearls,”


THE BEDOUIN AND THE PHILOSOPHER 387

The good man took pity on the philosopher and resolved to 3183
mount him on the camel.

He said to him again, “O fair-spoken sage, explain a little
about your own circumstances as well.

(With) such intelligence and talent as you have, are you a
vizier or a king? Tell the truth.”

He answered, “I am not (either of) these two: I am of the
common folk. Look at my appearance and dress.”

He asked, “How many camels have you? How many oxen? ”

“I have neither these nor those,” he replied: “do not dig at
me^.”

He said, “At any rate, what goods have you in your shop?” 3190
He answered, “Where have I a shop, and where a dwelling-
place?”

“Then,” said he, “I will ask about money. How much
money (have you)? — ^for you are a solitary wanderer and one
whose counsel is prized.

With you is the elixir which changes the copper of the world
(into) gold : your understanding and knowledge are inlaid with
pearls“.”

“By God,” he replied, “O chief of the Arabs, in my whole
property there is not the means of (buying) food for the night.

I run about with bare feet and naked body. If any one will
give me a loaf of bread — ^thither I go.

From this wisdom and learning and excellence (of mind) 1 3195
have got nothing but phantasy and headache.”

Then the Arab said to him, “ Begone far from my side, so
that your ill-luck may not rain upon me.

Take far away from me that unlucky wisdom of yours : your
speech is unlucky for (all) the people of the time.

Either go you in that direction, and I will run in this direction ;
or if your way be forwards, I will go back.

One sack of wheat and the other of sand is better for me than
these vain contrivings.

My foolishness is a very blessed foolishness, for my heart is 3-00
well-furnished (with spiritual graces) and my soul is devout.”

If thou desire that misery should vanish (from thee), endea-
vour that wisdom may vanish from thee —

The wisdom which is born of (human) nature and phantasy,
the wisdom which lacks the overaowing grace of the Light of
the Glorious (God).

The wisdom of this world brings increase of supposition and
doubt; the wisdom of the Religion soars above the sky.

The ingenious rascals of (this) latter time have aggrandised
themselves over the ancients ;

^ Le, ‘‘do not worry me with your questions.”

“ Literally, “have pearls, layer on layer,” i.e. “are very precious.”

25--2


388 ' MATHNAWI, BOOK II

3205 The (apt) learners of cunning have burnt (consumed) their
hearts (in study) and have learned feints and tricks ;

They have thrown to the winds patience and altruism and
self-sacrifice and generosity — (qualities) which are. the elixir of
(spiritual) profit.

The (right) thought is that which opens a way: the (right)
way is that on which a (spiritual) king advances.

The (true) king is he that is king in himself, and is not made
king by treasuries and armies ;

So that his kingship remains unto everlasting, like the glory
of the empire of the Mohammedan Religion.

The 7niracles of Ibrahim son of Adham — rnay God sanctify
his holy spirit! — on the sea-shore,

3210 Thus, it is related of Ibrahim son of Adham that after a
journey he sat down (to rest) by the edge of the sea.

(Whilst) he was stitching his Siifi mantle, an Amir, walking
on the shore, suddenly came to that spot.

That Amir had been one of the Shaykh^s servants; he
recognized the Shaykh and at once bowed low.

He was astounded at the Shaykh and at his dervish garb —
(for) his nature and outward guise had become transformed —

(Marvelling) that he gave up such a grand kingdom, and chose
that very pettifogging (spiritual) poverty j*- ;

3225 (And why) he lets the sovereignty of the Seven Climes be
lost (by him), and plies the needle on his dervish-cloak, like a
beggar.

^ The Shaykh became aware of his thought: a Shaykh is as the
lion, and (people’s) hearts are his jungle.

He is entering, like hope and fear, into (their) hearts : not hid
from him are the secrets of the world.

Keep watch over your hearts, 0 fruitless ones, in the presence
of the majesty of the men of heart (saints).

Before the men of body (worldlings), respect is (shown)
outwardly, for God is veiling the occult from them.

3220 Before the men of heart (saints), respect is (shown) inwardly,
because their hearts have insight into the secret thoughts.

Thou art contrariwise : for the sake of (worldly) position thou
comest with reverence before them that are blind (to spiritual
things), and sittest in the vestibule;

(But) before the seers thou behavest disrespectfully: hence
thou hast become fuel for the fire of lust.

I think is best taken as a compound adjective. The alter-

native rendering would be: (spiritual) poverty — a very subtle (slender and

unsubstantial) affair.*’ In any case there is an antithesis between and


ibrAhIm son of adham 389

Since thou hast not (spiritual) perception and the light of
(Divine) guidance, continue to polish (cleanse and brighten)
thy face for the sake of the blind !

Before the seers, daub thy face with dirt! Act haughtily (to-
wards them) notwithstanding such a stinking state (as thou art in) 1
The Shaykh quickly threw his needle into the sea, and with 3225
a loud voice called for the needle.

Myriads of Divine fishes — in the lips of each fish a needle of
gold —

Lifted their heads from God’s sea, saying, “Take, O Shaykh,
God’s needles.’’

I le turned his face towards him (the Amir) and said to him,

“0 Amir, is the kingdom of the heart (spirit) better, or such
a despicable kingdom (as I once possessed)? ”

This (miracle) is the outward sign, this is nothing: wait till
you enter the inward (shrine and) see (what is there) !

h'rom the garden they bring to town (only) a branch: how 323®
should they carry thither the (whole) garden and orchard? —
lispecially, a Garden whereof this heaven is (but) one leaf;
nay, that is the kernel, and this other (world) is as the husk.

(If) you are not stepping on (briskly) towards that Garden,
seek tnorc scent, and get rid of (your) rheum,

In order that that scent may draw your soul (thither) ; in order
that that scent may become the light of your eyes.

For the scent’s sake Joseph, son of Jacob the prophet, said:
^'Cast {my shirt) up 07 i my father’s face.”

For this scent’s sake Ahmad (Mohammed) constantly said in 3235
(his) exliortutions: “In the ritual prayer is the delight of mine
eye.’’

The five (spiritual) senses are linked with one another,
because all these five have grown from one root.

The strength of one becomes the strength of the rest: each
one becomes a cup-bearer to the rest.

Seeing with the eye increases speech ; speech increases pene-
tration in the eye.

I’cnetration (of sight) becomes the (means of) awakening
(stimulating) every sense, (so that) perception (of the spiritual)
becomes familiar to (all) the senses.

The beginning of the gnostic's illumination by the Light
which sees the invisible world.

When one sense in (the course of its) progress has loosed (its) 3240
bonds, all the rest of the senses become changed.

When one sense has perceived things that are not objects of
sense-perception, that which is of the invisible world becomes
apparent to all the senses.


390 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

When one sheep of the flock has jumped over a stream, then
they all jump across on each other’s heels.

Drive the sheep, thy senses, to pasture: let them browse on
(the pasture indicated in the text ) — He who hath brought forth
the herbage^

That there they may browse on hyacinth and wild-rose ; that
they may make their way to the verdant meadows of the
Realities ;

3245 (That) every sense of thine may become an apostle to the
senses (of others), and lead all senses into that Paradise;

(And then those) senses will tell their secret to thy senses,
without tongue and without (conveying either) the proper or
the metaphorical meaning;

For this proper meaning admits of (different) interpretations,
and this guess-work is the source of (vain) imaginings ;

(But in the case of) that truth which is immediate and intui-
tive, there is no room for any interpretation.

When (all) senses have become subject to thy sense, the
heavenly spheres cannot avoid (obedience to) thee,

3250 When a dispute takes place as to the ownership of the husk,
the husk belongs to him who possesses the kernel.

When there happens to be a quarrel about a load of straw,
observe who is the owner of the grain.

The heavenly sphere, then, is the husk, and the light of the
spirit is the kernel. This (sky) is visible, that (spirit) is concealed ;
(but) do not stumble on this account.

The body is manifest, the (vital) spirit is concealed : the body
is as the sleeve, the spirit as the hand.

Again, the intellect is more concealed than the (vital) spirit:
fyour mental) perception makes its way to (apprehends) the
(vital) spirit sooner (than it apprehends the intellect).

3255 (If) you see a movement, you know that he (who moves) is
alive; (but) this you do not know, that he is full of intellect.

Until regulated movements appear, and he by means of
knowledge turns the motion of copper into gold.

From manual actions being conformable (to reason) you
may perceiye that there is intellect (behind them).

The spirit (that partakes) of Divine inspiration is more con-
cealed than the intellect, because it is (of) the Unseen : it belongs
to that side.

The intellect of Ahmad (Mohammed) was not hidden from
any one; (but) his spirit of (prophetic) inspiration was not
apprehended by every soul.

3260 The spirit of prophecy also has actions conformable (to
reason) (but) the intellect does not apprehend (them), for that
(spirit) is exalted (above intellectual apprehension).

Sometimes he (the man of intellect) regards (the actions of


MYSTICAL ILLUMINATION ’ 391

one endowed with the spirit) as madness, sometimes he is be-
wildered, since It (all) depends on his becoming that (other one)^ •

As (for example) the intellect of Moses was troubled bv
seeing the reasonable actions of Khadir.

His actions seemed unreasonable to Moses, since he (Moses)
had not his (Khadir ’s) state (of Divine inspiration).

Iniismuch 21s the intellect of ]\^oses becomes tied up fper-
plexed and helpless) in ^the matter of) the mysterious (inspira-
tion), who (what) is the intellect of a (mere) mouse, O excellent
(reader)?

Conventional knowledge is (only) for sale (self-advertise- 3265
ment) : when it finds a purchaser, it glows with delight.

The purchaser of real knowledge^ is God: its market is
always splendid.

Ho (the owner of real knowledge) has closed his lips (and is)
enraptured in (his) trading: the purchasers are without end,
for God hath purchased.

The angels purchase Adam’s® teaching; the devils and J inn
are not privileged to receive it.

Adam, inform them of the Names, give (them) teaching,
explain the mysteries of God, hair by hair.

Such a person as is short-sighted, plunged in variability and 3270
without steadfastness,

1 called a “mouse,” because his place is in the earth (of the
body) : earth is the place of living for the mouse.

lie knows (many) ways, but (only) underground: he has
pierced the earth in every direction.

The mouse-soul is naught but a nibbler: to the mouse is
given a mind proportionate to its need.

Because without need the Almighty God does not give any-
thing to any one.

If the earth had not been needed by the (inhabitants of the) 3275
world, the Lord of all beings would not have created any (earA) ;

And if this quaking earth had not needed mountains, He
would not have created them sublime (as they are) ;

And if there had not been need of the heavenly spheres also,

1 le would not have created from non-existence the Seven Skies.

The sun and moon and these stars — ^how did they come plain
into view except through need?

Need, then, is the noose for (all) things that exist: Man has
instruments in proportion to his need.

'rherefore quickly augment thy need, O needy one, in order 3280
that the Sea of Bounty may surge up in lovingkindness.

' X,e. the intellectual man can never understand the spiritual man until
he himself becomes spiritualised.

» Literally. ** the knowledge that is verified (by mystical experience)/*

» **Adam** in this and the following verse is the saint, regarded as the
perfect type of humanity.


392 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

These beggars (are) on the (public) road, and every sufferer
(among them) is displaying his need to the people —

Blindness and palsy and sickness and pain — that men’s pity
may be aroused by this need.

Does he (any one) ever say, “Give bread, O people, for I
have riches and granaries and trays (of viands) ? ”

God has not put eyes in the mole, because it does not need
eyes for (getting) food.

3285 It is able to live without eyes and sight : in the dank earth it
is independent of eyes.

It never comes out from the earth but for theft, to the end
that the Creator may purge it of that thievishness.

After that (purification), it will get wings and become a bird,
flying (aloft) and glorifying the Creator.

Every moment, in the rose-garden of thanksgiving to
God,_ it will produce a hundred (sweet) notes, like the
nightingale.

Singing, “O Thou that delivercst me from evil qualities! O
Thou that makest a hell Paradise I

3200 Thou puttest light in a piece of fat; Thou, O Self-sufficing
One, givest (the sense of) hearing to a bone.”

What connexion have those concepts {e.g. sight and hearing)
with the body? What connexion has the apprehension of things
with (their) names?

The word is like the nest, and the meaning is the bird : the
body is the river-bed, and the spirit is the rolling water.

It is moving, and you say it is standing : it is running, and you
say it is keeping still.

If you see not the movement of the water through the clods
of earth — (yet it is moving) ; what are the sticks and straws (ever
appearing) anew on it?

3295 Your sticks and straws are the forms (ideas) of thought:
(these) virgin forms are always coming on anew.

The surface of the water of the stream of thought, as it rolls,
is not without sticks and straws, (some) pleasing and (some)
unsightly.

The husks on the surface of this rolling water have sped along
from the fruits of the Invisible Garden,

Seek the kernels of the husks (not on the water, but) in the
Garden, because the water comes from the Garden into the
river-bed.

If you see not the flow of the Water of Life, look at this move-
ment of weeds in the stream.

3300 When the water begins to pass by in fuller volume, the husks,
(which are) the ideas, pass along it more quickly.

When this stream has become extremely rapid in its flow, no
care lingers in the minds of the gnostics.


MYSTICAL ILLUMINATION ’ 393

Since it is (then) exceedingly full and swift, on that account
there is no room in it for anytmng but the water.

llow a stranger reviled the Shaykh and how the Shaykh’s
disciple answered him.

A certain man brought charges against a Shaykh, saying,

“He is wicked and not on the path of righteousness;

He is a wine-drinker and a hypocrite and a scoundrel: how
should he be one to succour his disciples?”

One (of the disciples) said to him, “Observe respect: ’tis no 3305
light matter to think so ill of the great.

Far is it from him and far from those (saintly) qualities of his
that his clear (spirit) should be darkened by a flood (of sin).

Do not put such slander on the people of God ! This is (mere)
fancy on your part. Turn over (a new) leaf.

I'his (which you say) is not (true) ; and (even) if it should be,

O land-fowl, what harm (comes) to the Red Sea from a carcase?

He (the Shaykh) is not less than the (statutory) two jugfuls
or the small tank, so that a single drop (of impurity) should be
able to discjualify him (for religious purposes).

'Fhc fire is no damage to Abraham, (but) let any one who is a 3310
Nimrod beware of it!”

The fleshly soul is Nimrod, and the intellect and spirit are
the Friend of God (Abraham): the spirit is concerned with
reality itself, and the fleshly soul with the proofs.

These indications of the way are for the traveller who at
every moment becomes lost in the desert.

For them that have attained (to union with God) there is
nothing (necessary) except the eye (of the spirit) and the lamp
(of intuitive faith): they have no concern with indications (to
guide them) or with a road (to travel by).

If the man that is united (with God) has mentioned some
indication, he has mentioned (it) in order that the dialecticians
may understand (his meaning).

For a new-born child the father makes babbling sounds, 3315
though his intellect may make a survey of the (whole) world.

The dignity of the master’s learning is not diminished if he
say that (the letter) «/i/has nothing (has no diacritical mark).

For the sake of teaching that tongue-tied (child), one must
go outside of one’s own language (customary manner of speech).

You must come into (adopt) his language, in order that he
may learn knowledge and science from you. , , ,

All the people, then, are as his (the spiritual Teaches)
children: this (fact) is necessary for the Pir (to bear in mind)
when he gives (them) instruction. , , . r ^

Infidelity hath a fixed limit and range-know (this for sure); 333°
(but) the Shaykh and the light of the Shaykh have no bound.


394 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

Before the infinite all that is finite is naught : everything except
the Face of God is passing away.

Infidelity and faith do not exist in the place where he (the
Shaykh) is, because he is the kernel, while these twain are (only)
colour and husk.

These fleeting things have become a veil over that Face, like
a lantern concealed beneath a bowl.

So then, this bodily head is a screen to that (spiritual) head
(source of mystic consciousness): before that head this bodily
head is an infidel.

3325 Who is the infidel? One forgetful of the faith of the Shaykh.
What is the dead? One ignorant of the (spiritual) life of the
Shaykh.

(Spiritual) life is naught but knowledge in (the time of) trial :
the more knowledge one has, the more (spiritual) life one has.

Our spirit is more than the spirit of animals. Wherefore?
In respect that it has more knowledge.

Hence the spirit of the angels is more than our spirit, for it
is exempt from (transcends) the common sense ;

And the spirit of mystical adepts is more than (that of) the
angels. Cease from bewilderment (on this subject) !

3330 For that reason Adam is their object of worship : his spirit
(spiritual life) is greater than their being.

Else, (why were they commanded to worship him?) : it would
not be at all a suitable thing to command the superior to worship
an inferior.

How can the justice and kindness of the Maker approve that
a rose should fall down in worship before a thorn?

Since the spirit (of the perfect saint) has become superior and
has passed beyond the utmost limit (reached by men and angels),
the soul of all things has become obedient to it — >

Birds and fishes and Jinn and men — because it exceeds (them),
and they are deficient (in comparison with it).

3335 The fish make needles for his (the saint’s) mantle: (they
follow him as) threads follow needles.


The rest of the story of Ibrahim son of Adham — may God
sanctify his spirit! — on the seashore.

When that Amir saw the Shaykh ’s command take effect in
the coming of the fish, he fell into an ecstasy.

He said, *‘Ah, the fish know the Pirs. Fie on a person who
is an outcast of the (holy) Court !

The fish have knowledge of the Pir, and we afar (from him)!
We (are) damned to lack this fortune, and they blest (with
enjoyment of it) ! ”

He bowed low, and departed weeping and desolate: he


THE SHAYKH AND HIS REVILER' 395
became mad for love of the opening of the door (to union with

Then, O you with unwashed face, what are you about? 3340
Whom are you* combating and envying?

You are playing with a lion’s tail: you are making a foray
against the angels.

Why are you speaking evil of pure good? Beware, deem not
that lowness (vilifying the saints) to be eminence !

What is evil? The needy, despicable copper. Who is the
Shaykh ? The infinite elixir.

If the copper was incapable (of being transmuted) by the
elixir, (yet) the elixir was never turned into copper by the copper.

What is evil ? A rebel that works like fire. Who is the Shaykh? 3345
The very Sea^ of Eternity.

Fire is always terrified by water. When was water ever afraid
of being set aflame?

You are observing defects on the face of the moon: you are
picking thorns in a Paradise.

Picker of thorns, if you go into Paradise, you will find there
no thorn but yourself.

You are covering a sun with a sod : you are seeking flaws in a
perfect full-moon.

A sun which shines throughout the world — ^how shall it be 3350
hidden for the sake of a bat?

Sins are made sinful by the disapproval of Pirs; mysteries
are made mysterious by the jealousy of Pirs.

If you arc far (aloof in spirit from the saints), at any rate be
joined (with them) through (paying) respect (to them) : be alert
and active in (showing) penitence,

(In the hope) that a breeze may be coming to you from that
way (quarter). Why do you shut off the water of mercy by
(your) enviousness?

Though you are far aloof, at (that) distance wag your tail
(ingratiate yourself with them) : wherever ye be, turn your faces

(thither). ^ ., ,

When an ass falls in mire through (going at) a rapid pace, he 3355
moves incessantly for the purpose of rising.

lie does not make the place smooth (and comfortable) to stay
in; he knows that it is not the place where he should live.

Your sense has been less than the sense of the ass, for your
heart has not recoiled from these clods of mud. ^

You interpret (some canonical text) as an indulgence (authoris-
ing you to stay) in the mud, since you are not willing to tear
your heart from, it.

(You say), “ This is allowable for me : I am under compulsion.
God in His kindness will not chastise a helpless one (like me).”

1 Or **the objective manifestation of the Sea/*


396 MATHNAWI, BOOK II

3360 Indeed He has (already) chastised you, (but) like the blind
hyena from self-deception you do not see this chastisement.

They (the hunters) are saying, ‘'The hyena is not in this
place; look for him outside, for he is not in the’ cave.*’

This they say and (at the same time) put bonds on him,
(whilst) he is saying, "They do not know of me (where I am).

If this enemy had known of me, how should he have exclaimed,
‘Where is this hyena’.?”

The statement of a certain individual that God most High would
not punish him for $m^ and Shu^ayVs answer to him.

In the time of Shu‘ayb a certain man was saying, ‘‘ God hath
seen many a fault from me.

3365 How many sins and trespasses hath He seen me commit!
And (still), God in His kindness does not punish me.”

In answer to him God most High by the mysterious way
spoke clearly into the ear of Shu‘ayb,

Saying, "(Tell him), Thou hast said, ‘How many sins have
I committed I And (still) God in His kindness hath not punished
me for my trespasses.’

Thou art saying the opposite and reverse (of the truth) , O fool,
0 thou that hast abandoned the road and taken to the wilderness I

How oft, how oft do I chastise thee, and thou unaware!
Thou art lying (bound) in chains from head to foot,

3370 Thy rust, coat on coat, O black pot, hath marred the visage
of thy heart.

Layers of rust have collected upon thy heart, so that it hath
become blind to (the spiritual) mysteries.”

If that smoke should beat upon a new pot, the traces of it
would show, though it were (only as much as) a barley-corn,

Because everything is made manifest by (its) contrary ; upon a
white object the black becomes conspicuous ;

(But) when the pot has been blackened, then after this who
will at once perceive the eifect of the smoke upon it?

3375 The ironsmith who is an Ethiopian— the smoke is of the
same colour as his face;

The Greek who does the w’ork of an ironsmith — his face,
from gathering smoke ^ becomes piebald (spotted with black).

Therefore he will quickly recognise the effect of sin, so that
he will soon lament (and) say, "O God! ”

(But) when he persists (in sin) and makes a practice of evil,
and puts dust in the eye of meditation,

He thinks of penitence no more; that sin becomes so sweet
to his heart that (in the end) he comes to be without the Faith
(he turns infidel).

^ Literally/* from smokiness.” Ct .


THE CALLOUS SINNER ' 397

That repenting and (crying) “O Lord!” are gone from him: 3380
fivefold nist has settled on the mirror (of his heart).

I he coats of rust have began to eat his iron (mirror) : the rust
has begun to lessen its sheen.

When you \\Tite upon white paper, that writing may be read
at sight.

\Vhen you write script over that which has been (already)
written, it is not understood : the reading of it will be erroneous ;

bor that (second) blackness has fallen (been made) upon
blackness ; (hence) both scripts have become obscure and have
given no meaning.

And if you write a third time on the top of it, then you make 3385
it black as the infidel’s soul,

\\ hat help is there, then, but (to take) refuge with (God) the
Helper? Despair is copper, and the elixir for it is (God’s)
regard.

Lay your despairs before Him, that ye may escape from
irremediable pain.

When Shu‘ayb had told him these deep sayings, at that
breath of the spirit roses blossomed in his heart.

1 lis soul hearkened to the inspiration from Heaven ; he said,
(however), “ If He hath punished me, where is the sign?”

1 le (Shu'ayb) cried, “ O Lord, he rebuts me, he seeks the sign 3390
of that punishment.”

! le (God) said, “I am the Coverer (of sins): I will not tell his
.secrets, (I will give) but one indication for the sake of trying him.

One sign of My punishing him is this, that he has (to his
credit) pious acts of fasting and orison

And ritual prayer and almsgiving et cetera, but he has not one
atom of spiritual savour.

He performs high acts and deeds of devotion, but he has not
one atom of (spiritual) relish.

His devotions are good (in form), but the spirit is not good: 3395
the walnuts arc many, but there is no kernel therein.”

Spiritual savour is required, in order that devotions may
yield fruit: a kernel is required, in order that the berry may
produce a tree.

How shall a berry without kernel become a sapling? The
soulless form is naught but phantasy.

Remainder of the story of the stranger's reviling the Shaykh.

'I’hat malign wretch was gabbling silly nonsense about the
Shaykh: the squinting (envious) man is always of distorted
understanding.

(He said), ‘‘ I saw him amidst a company (of revellers): he is
one denuded and destitute of piety.


398 MATHNAWf, BOOK H

3400 And if you do not believe it, arise (and go) to-night, that you
may see plainly your Shaykh’s depravity.”

At night he took him to a window and said, “Behold a (fine)
debauch and merry-making !

Behold such hypocrisy by day and profligacy by night! — in
the daytime (he is) like Mustafa (Mohammed), at night (like)
Bii Lahab.

By day his name has become ‘Abdullah (the servant of God) ;
by night — God save us! And (see), the wine-cup in his
hand ! ”

He (the disciple) saw a full glass in the Shaykh’s hand.
“O Shaykh,” said he, “is there a tumour even in thee?

3405 Nonne dicebas? — ‘In vini poculo mingit Diabolus festinans
lente ’. ”

He (the Shaykh) replied, “They have made my cup so full
that there is not room in it for a single rue-seed.

Look, is there any room here for a single mote? A deluded
man has wrongly apprehended this matter.”

This is not the apparent cup (or) the apparent wine: deem
this (allegation) far from (far below the dignity of) the Shaykh
who sees the Unseen.

The wine-cup, O fool, is the being of the Shaykh, in qua
(essentia) urina Diaboli non continetur.

3410 He is full and brimming with the Light of God: he has
shattered the bodily cup, he is the Absolute Light.

If sunlight fall upon filth, it is the same light (still) : it suffers
no defilement.

The Shaykh said, “ Indeed this is not a cup, nor (is this) wine.
Hey, unbeliever, come down and look at it! ”

He came, and saw it was fine honey. That miserable enemy
(of God) became blind (with shame and confusion).

Thereupon the Pi'r said to his disciple, “Go, seek wine for
me, O noble sir;

3415 For I have a pain; I am reduced to necessity: because of the
pain, I have passed beyond starvation ^

In sore need any carcase is clean (lawful to eat) — may curses
fall like dust® on the head of him that denies it ! ”

The disciple went round the wine-cellar, tasting of every iar
on the Shaykh’s behalf.

In all the wine-cellars (that he visited) he found no wine:
the jars of wine had become full of honey.

He said, “O topers, what state of things is this? What is the
matter? I find no wine in any jar.”

3440 All the topers came to that Shaykh, weeping and beating
their heads with their hands.

' Literally, “ the condition of one whose stomach is empty/*

“ Literally, “may the dust of execration be.**


THE SHAYKH AND HIS REVILER 399

(They said), “Thou earnest into the tavern, O most exalted
Shaykh, and in consequence of thy coming all the wines have
turned to honey.

Thou hast changed the wine (and purified it) from filth:
change our souls also (and purify them) from defilement!”

If the (whole) world be filled to the brim with blood, how
should the servant of God drink aught but what is hallowed?

Ilov) ‘A'isfia — may God he welUpleased with her! — said to

Mustafa {Mohammed), on whom be peace, “ Thou performest

the prayer anywhere, without a prayer-carpet,^"

One day ‘A’isha said to the Prophet, “O Messenger of Allah,
openly and secretly

Thou performest a prayer in whatever place thou mayst find, 3425
(even whilst) unclean and low (people) are running about in the
lumse ;

(Qtianquam) femina cui fluit sanguis post menstruorum dies
vel infans vel (quivis) inquinatus et sordidus facit usu tritum
(pollutum) qucracunque locum advenerit.”

'I’he Prophet said, “Know that God makes impure (things)
pure for the (spiritually) great.

On that account the grace of God has made my place of
wcirship to be pure (everywhere, even) up to the seventh tier
(of I leaven).”

Ikware and beware! Cease from envying the (spiritual)
kings, else you will become a devil in the world.

For if he drink poison, it turns to honey; (but) if you eat 3430
honey, it is poison (to you) ;

For he has been changed, and his action has been changed:
he has become the Grace (of God), and every fire in him has
been turned into Light.

The abdhU (swifts) had the power of God (in them) ; else,
how should a bird kill an elephant?

A number of little birds broke an (entire) army— so that you
may know that that strength is from God.

If temptation of this kind^ come to you, go, read the Sdra
concerning the Possessors of the Elephant.

And if you contend and engage in rivalry with him (the saint), 3435
deem me an infidel if you save your head from them®.

^ I,e, envy. Cf. v. 3429.

“ the saints will punish you.


400


MATHNAWf, BOOK II


How the mouse pulled {the rope attached to) the camel's
nose-ring and became self -conceited.

A little mouse caught in his forelegs a camel’s leading-rope
and from emulation went off (with it).

By reason of the readiness with which the camel set out along
with him, the mouse was duped into thinking himself a hero.

The ray of his thought struck the camel. He (the camel) said
(aside), “I will show thee (presently) ! Enjoy thyself! ”

(All went well) till he (the mouse) came to the bank of a great
river, at which any lion or wolf would have lost heart^.

3440 There the mouse stopped and became paralysed®. The camel
said, “ O my companion o’er hill and plain.

What is this standing still (for)? Why art thou dismayed?
Step (forward) like a man I Go into the river I

'Thou art my guide and leader: don’t halt midway and be
dumbfounded I ”

He (the mouse) said, “This is a huge and deep river: I am
afraid of being drowned, O comrade.”

Said the camel, “Let me see the limit (depth) of the water,”
and he quickly set foot in it.

3445 “The water,” he said, “is (only) up to the knee. O blind
mouse, wherefore didst thou become dismayed and lose thv
wits?”

He (the mouse) replied, “ It is (as) an ant to you, but to me it
is a dragon, for there are differences between one knee and
another.

If it is (only) up to your knee, O excellent one, it is a hundred
ells higher than the crown of my head.”

He (the camel) said, “Another time, do not behave (so)
boldly, lest thy body and soul be consumed by these sparks.

Contend with mice like thyself ; a mouse has nothing to say
to a camel.”

3450 He (the mouse) said, “I repent. For God’s sake, get me
across this deadly water!”

The camel took pity. “Hark,” said he, “jump up and sit
on my hump.

This passage has been vouchsafed to me : I would take across
hundreds of thousands like thee.”

Since you are not a prophet, go on the road (after the prophets),
that one day you may come from the pit (of fleshliness) to
(spiritual) place and power.

Be a vassal since you are not a lord : do not steer (the boat)
yourself, since you are not the boatman.

3455 Since you are not (spiritually) perfect, do not take a shop (by

^ Literally, ** would have become helpless.**

® Literally, “ dry.**


THE MOUSE AND THE CAMEL ’ 401

yourself) alone. Be pliant to the hand, in order that you may
become leavened (like dough).

(live ear to (the Divine command), Keep silence” be mute;
since you have not become the tongue (mouthpiece) of God,
be an ear.

.\nil if you speak, speak in the form of a request for explana-
tion : speak to the (spiritual) emperors as a lowly beggar.

'I’he beginning of pride and hatred is in (worldly) lust, and
the rootedness of your lust is from habit.

When an evil disposition becomes confirmed by habit, you
are enraged with any one who restrains you.

Alter you have become an eater of clay, any one who restrains 3460
you from (eating) clay is your enemy.

Since idolaters are accustonaed to the idol, they are foes to
them that stop the way to the idol.

Since Ibh's had become accustomed to being leader, he looked
on Adam with disbelief (and denial).

Saying, “ Is there another leader superior to me, so that he
should be wonshipped by one like me?”

Leadership is poison, except to the spirit that from the
beginning hath (in himself) abundance of the antidote’.

If the mountain is full of snakes, have no fear, for it is a mine 3465
of antidote within.

When leadership has become a bosom-friend to your brain®,
any one who breaks (thwarts) you becomes (as) an ancient
adversary.

When any one contradicts your disposition (habit of mind),
many feelings of hatred against him arise in you.

“ 1 Ic is tearing me (you say) from my (engrained) disposition,
he is making me a pupil and follower (of himself).”

Unless the evil disposition has become strongly implanted,
how .should the fire-temple (of passion) blaze up through being
opposed?

1 le may show some feigned courtesy to the opponent, he may
make a place for himself in his heart®,

(But lie really hates him), because the evil disposition has
waxed strong: the ant of (worldly) lust has through habit
become as a snake.

Kill the snake of lust at the beginning; else, look you, your
snake is become a dragon.

But every one deems his own snake an ant: do you (then)
seek the explanation of yourself (your real state) from him that
is lord of the heart.

Until copper becomes gold, it does not know itself to be

t Literally, a place abounding in the antidote.’*

“ haunts your brain.

I,c. “he may seek to win his favour by flattering him,*’


N M


225


402 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

copper : until the heart becomes a king, it does not know itself
to be an insolvent.

3475 Do service to the elixir, like copper: endure oppression, O
heart, from him that holds the heart in fee.

Who is it that holds the heart in fee? Know well, it is the lords
^ of the heart who, like day and night, are recoiling from the
world.

Do not find fault with the Servant of God: do not suspect
the King of being a thief.


The miracles of the dervish who was suspected of theft
hi a ship,

A dervish was in a ship : he had made a bolster (for himself)
from the goods of saintly fortitude^.

A purse of gold was lost. He was asleep (at the time). They
searched all (in the ship) and brought him also to view‘d,

3480 Saying, “Let us search this sleeping mendicant as well.”
(So) the owner of the money, (excited) by grief, awakened him.

“A bag of valuables,” said he, “has been lost in this ship.
We have searched the whole company: you cannot escape
(suspicion).

Put off your dervish-cloak, strip yourself of it, in order that
the people’s suspicions may be cleared away from you*^”

He cried, “0 Lord, these vile wretches have made an accusa-
tion against Thy slave; bring Thy command to pass!”

When the heart of the dervish was pained by that (suspicion),
at once there put forth their heads on every side
34«5 From the deep sea myriads of fishes, and in the mouth of
each (was) a superb pearl :

Myriads of fishes out of the full sea, each with a pearl in its
mouth — and what (marvellous) pearls ! —

Every pearl the revenue of a kingdom. “ These,” they said (to
him), “are from God, they have no association (with any one
but God).”

He dropped a quantity of pearls on the ship and sprang
(aloft): he mrfde the air his high-seat and sate (thereon),

(Resting) at ease, cross-legged, as kings upon their thrones—
he above the zenith, and the ship before him.

5490 He said, “Begone! The ship for you, God for me, $0 that a
beggarly thief may not be with you !

Let us see who will be the loser'^ by this separation ! I am

* Literally, “manliness” or “the quality of a (holy) man,”

“ I take namud as equivalent to namudand. This archaic construction occurs
elsewhere in the Mathnawi, Cf. p. 249, note i.

® Literally, “freed from concern with you.”

^ Literally, “ to whom will be the loss.**


THE DERVISH ACCUSED OF THEFT 403

pleased, (being) paired (united) with God and singled (isolated)
from (His) creatures.

He does not accuse me of theft, He does not hand me over
to (the mercy ’of) an informer^.’’

The people in the ship cried out, ‘‘O noble chief, wherefore
has such a high estate been given to thee? ”

He answered, “For throwing suspicion on dervishes and
offending God on account of a despicable thing (as ye have done) !

God forbid! Nay, (it was) for showing reverence to (the 3495
spiritual) kings, inasmuch as I did not conceive ill thoughts
against dervishes —

Those gracious dervishes of sweet breath (pure spirit), for
whose magnification (the chapter of the Qur’an entitled) 'Abasa
was revealed.”

That dervishhood is not for the sake of (avoiding) entangle-
ment (with the world) ; no, (it is) because nothing exists but God.

How should I hold in suspicion those whom God hath
entrusted with the treasury of the Seventh Heaven?

The fleshly soul is suspect, not the sublime Reason: the
senses are suspect, not the subtle Light.

The fleshly soul is a sophist : beat it constantly, for beating 3500
does it good, not arguing with it.

It sees a miracle (wrought by a prophet), and at the moment
it glows (with belief); (but) afterwards it says, “’Twas (only) a
phantasy ;

For if that wondrous sight had been real, then it would have
been abiding, day and night, in the eye.”

It is abiding in the eyes of the pure, (but) it does not haunt^
the eyes of animals (sensual men) ;

For the miracle is ashamed and scornful of these (bodily)
senses: how should a peacock be (confined) in a narrow pit?

Take heed not to call me garrulous: I say (only) one in a 3505
hundred, and that (one) like a hair.

How sofne Stifis abused a certain Sufi^ saying that he talked
too much in the presence of the Shaykh,

Some Sufis abused a certain Sflfi, and came to the Shaykh of
the convent,

And said to the Shaykh, “ Demand justice for our souls from
this Silfi ,0 Guide!”

He ^said, “Why, what is the complaint, O Sufis?” He (their
spokesman) replied, “This Sufi has three annoying habits:

In speecn he is garrulous as a bell ; in eating he eats more than
twenty persons ;

‘ Literally, “does not give my leading-rope to an informer.*'

- Literally, “ become attached to.**


26-2


404 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

3510 And if he sleep, he is like the Men of the Cave.” (Thus) did
the Siifis march to war^ (against him) before the Shaykh.

The Shaykh turned his face towards that derv'ish, saying, “In
every case that exists, take the middle (course). •

(It is stated) in Tradition that the best things are the mean
(those between the two extremes): the (four) humours are
benefieial through being in equipoise.

If by accident (any) one humour become excessive, disease
appears in the human body.

Do not exceed in (any) quality him that is thy yoke-fellow,
for that will assuredly bring about separation (between you) in
the end.

3515 The speech of Moses was in measure, but even so it exceeded
the words of his good friend.

That excess resulted in (his) opposing Khadir; and he
(Khadir) said, ‘ Go, thou art one that talks too much : l/iis is a
{cause of) separation {between us).'

O (thou who resemblest) Moses, thou art garrulous. Go far
off, or else be dumb with me and blind !

And if thou goest not, but remaincst sitting (here) in despite
(of me), thou art gone in reality and severed (from my company).”

When suddenly you commit an act of (legal) impurity in
the ritual prayer, it (the prayer) says to you, “Go speedily
to purify yourself” ;

35?o And if you go not, you will be moving (exerting yourself) in
vain ; verily your prayer is gone (is void) : sit down, O misguided
man!

Go to them that are your mates, (them) that are enamoured
of your discourse and thirsting for it.

One who keeps watch is superior to those wiio slumber: the
(spiritual) fish have no need of one who keeps watcli.

Those who wear clothes look to the launderer, (but) the soul
of the naked hath (Divine) illumination as its adornment.

Either withdraw (and turn) aside from the naked, or like
them become free from body-garments.

:,jas And if you cannot become wholly naked, make your garments
less, so that you may tread the middle path.

How the dervish excused himself to the Shaykh.

Then the dervish told the Shaykh how the case stood, and
coupled excuses with the discharge of that obligation.

To the Shaykh ’s questions he gave answer good and right,
like the answers of Khadir —

(Namely) those answers to the questions of Moses which
Khadir, (inspired) by the all-knowing Lord, set forth to him,

^ I,e. ‘*made a disturbance and uproar/’


THE GARRULOUS AND GREEDY £

(So that) his difficulties became solved, and he
to him (Moses) the key to every question (in a
telling.

The dervish also had (a spiritual) inheritance from Khadir; 3530
(hence) he bent his will to answering the Shaykh.

He said, “Although the middle path is (the way of) wisdom,
yet the middle path too is relative.

Relatively to a camel, the water in the stream is little, but to
a mouse it is like the ocean.

If any one has an appetite for four loaves and eats two or
three, that is the mean ;

But if he eat all the four, it is far from the mean: he is in
bondage to greed, like a duck.

If one has appetite for ten loaves and eats six, know that that 3535
is the mean.

When I have appetite for fifty loaves, and you for (no more
than) six scones, we are not equivalent.

You may be tired by ten rakas (of prayer), I may not be worn
thin by five hundred.

One goes bare-foot (all the way) to the Ka‘ba, and one
becomes beside himself (with exhaustion in going) as far as the
mosque.

One in utter self-devotion gives his life, one is agonised at
giving a single loaf.

This mean belongs to (the realm of) the finite, for that (finite) 3540
has a beginning and end.

A beginning and end are necessary in order that the mean or
middle (point) between them may be conceived in imagination.

Inasmuch as the infinite has not (these) two limits, how
should the mean be applicable to it^?

No one has shown it to have beginning or end. He (God)
said, ^ If the sea were to become ink for it {the Word of God),..^

If the Seven Seas should become entirely ink, (still) there is
no hope of coming to an end.

If orchards and forests should become pens altogether , there 3545
would never be any decrease in this Word^.

All that ink and (all those) pens pass away, and this number-
less Word is everlasting, ^

At times my state resembles sleep : a misguided person may

think it is sleep. ^ . 1 1

Know that my eyes are asleep, (but) my he^t is awake: know

that my (seemingly) inactive form is (really) in action.

The Prophet said, ‘My eyes sleep, (but) my heart is not
asleep to the Lord of created beings.’

^ Literally, ‘‘how should the mean be that to which it (the infinite) is
referred? **

* f.t'. “no progress would be made in defining it.”


iUF^ 405
way) beybi^


4o 6 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

3550 Your eyes are awake, and your heart is sunk in slumber; my
eyes are asleep, (but) my heart is in (contemplation of) the
opening of the door (of Divine grace).

My heart hath five senses other (than the physical) : both the
worlds (external and spiritual) are the stage (theatre) for the
senses of the heart.

Do not regard me from (the standpoint of) your infirmity : to
you ’tis night, to me that same night is morningtide.

To you ’tis prison, to me that prison is like a garden : to me
the most absolute state of occupation (with the world) has
become (a state of spiritual) freedom.

Your feet are in the mud; to me the mud has become roses.
You have mourning; I have feasting and drums.

3555 (Whilst) I am dwelling with you in some place on the earth,
I am coursing over the seventh sphere (of Heaven), like Saturn.

Tis not I that am seated beside you, 'tis my shadow : my rank
is higher than (the reach of) thoughts,

Because I have passed beyond (all) thoughts, and have
become a swift traveller outside (the region of) thought.

I am the ruler of thought, not ruled (by it), because the builder
is ruler over the building.

All creatures are subjugated to thought; for that reason they
are sore in heart and practised in sorrow.

35(30 I yield myself to thought purposely, (but) when I will I spring
up from the midst of them (that are under its sway).

I am as a bird of the zenith, thought is a gnat: how should a
gnat have power over me?

Purposely I come down from the lofty zenith, that those of
base degree may attain to me.

When disgust at the qualities of the low (world) seizes me, I
soar up like the birds which spread their pinions.

My wings have grown out of my very essence : 1 do not stick
two wings on with glue.

35t>5 The wings of Ja‘far-i Tayydr are permanent; the wings of
JaTar-i ‘Ayydr are borrowed (unreal and transitory).

In the view of him that has not experienced (it), this is (mere)
pretension;^ in the view of the inhabitants of the (spiritual)
horizon, this is the reality.

This is brag and pretension in the eyes of the crow : an empty
or full pot is all one to the fly.

When morsels of food become (changed to) pearls within you,
do not forbear: eat as much as you can.’*

One day the Shaykh, in order to rebut (these) ill thoughts,
vomited in a basin, and the basin became full of pearls.

35i7o On account of the (abusive) man*s little understanding, the
clairvoyant Pfr made the intelligible pearls objects of sense-
perception.


THE DOCTRINE OF RELATIVITY 407

When pure (lawful food) turns to impurity in your stomach,
put a lock upon your gullet and hide the key;

(But) any one in whom morsels of food become the light of
(spiritual) glory, let him eat whatever he will, it is lawful to him.


Explaining {that there are) some assertions the truth of which
is attested by their very nature.

If you are my soul’s familiar friend, my words full of (real)
meaning are not (mere) assertion.

If at midnight I say, ‘‘I am near you: come now, be not
afraid of the night, for I am your kinsman,”

These two assertions are to you reality, since you recognise 3575
the voice of your own relative.

Nearness and kinship were (only) two assertions, but both
(of them) were reality to the good understanding.

The proximity of the voice gives him (the hearer) testimony
that these words spring from a friend^ ;

Moreover, (his) delight at (hearing) the voice of his kinsman
has borne witness to the truthfulness of that dear relative.

Again, the uninspired fool who in his ignorance does not
know a stranger’s voice from a kinsman’s — ■

To him his (the speaker’s) words are (mere) assertion: his 3580
ignorance has become the source of his disbelief;

(But) to him of keen insight, within whom are the (spiritual)
lights, the very nature of this voice was just the (immediate
evidence of its) reality.

Or (for example) one whose mother- tongue is Arabic says in
Arabic, I know tlxe language of the Arabs.”

The very fact of his speaking in Arabic is (evidence of) the
reality (of his assertion), although his saying (that he knows)
Arabic is (only) an assertion.

Or a writer may write on a piece of paper, “ I am a writer and
a reader, and I am a most accomplished person.”

Although this written (statement) itself is a (mere) assertion, 3585
still the script is evidence of the reality (of the assertion).

Or a Sufi may say, *‘Last night, while asleep, you saw some
one with a prayer-carpet on his shoulder.

That was I ; and what I said to you in the dream, whilst you
slumbered, in explanation of clairvoyance —

(Jive ear (to it), put it in your ear like an ear-ring : make those
words (of mine) your mind’s guide.”

I with The point is, not that the friend is near at hand

(which is obvious), but that the nearness of his voice enables the listener to
recognise him as a friend and verify his statement.


4o 8 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

When you recollect the dream, these words (of his) are (as
real to you as) a new miracle or old gold.

3590 Although this seems to be (mere) assertion (on his part), yet
the soul of the dreamer says, “Yes, (it is true).”-

Therefore, since Wisdom is the faithful believer’s stray
camel, he knows it with certainty, from whomsoever he has
heard it ;

And when he finds himself absolutely in front of it, how
should there be doubt.? How should he mistake himself?

When you say to a thirsty man, “Make haste! there is water
in the cup : take the water at once,”

Will the thirsty man say in any event? — “This is (mere)
assertion : go from my side, 0 pretender I Get thee far away I
3595 Or (else) produce some testimony and proof that this is of
aqueous kind and consists of the zoater that runs from a
spring.

Or (suppose that) a mother cries to her suckling babe, “ Come,
I am mother: hark, my child I ” —

Will the babe say? — “O mother, bring the proof (of it), so
that I may take comfort in thy milk.”

When in the heart of any community there is savour (spiritual
perception) from God, the face and voice of the prophet are (as)
an evidentiary miracle.

When the prophet utters a cry from without, the soul of the
community falls to worship within,

3000 Because never in the world will the soul’s car have heard
from any one a cry of the same kind as his.

That stranger (the soul), by immediate perception of the
strange (wondrous) voice, has heard from God’s tongue (the
words), “ Verily I am near."


Hmo Yahyd^, on tolioin be peace, in his mother's womb bowed
in worship to the Messiah {Jesus), on whom be peace.

The mother of Yahya, before disburdening herself (of him),
said in secret to Mary,

“ I see (it) with certainty, within thee is a King who is possessed
of firm purpose and is an Apostle endowed with knowle<.lgc

When I happened to meet thee, my burden (the unborn
child) at once bowed in worship.

3605 This embryo bowed in worship to that embryo, so that pain
arose in my body from its bowing.”

Mary said, “I also felt within me a bowing performed by
this babe in the womb.”


^ John the Baptist.


JOHN THE BAPTIST AND JESUS' 409

On raising a difficulty as to this story.

The foolish say, “Caned this tale, because it is false and
erroneous.

Mary in (her) pregnancy was not joined (met) by any one :
she did not return from without the town.

Until that woman of sweet address was delivered outside of
the town, she indeed came not into it.

When she had given birth to him, she then took him up in 3610
her lap and carried him to her kinsfolk.

Where did the mother of Yahyd see her to speak these words
to her about what had happened?”

The answer to the difficulty.

Let him (the objector) know that to one who receives ideas
(from God) all that is absent in the world is present.

To Mary, the mother of Yahyd would appear present, though
she was far from her (bodily) sight.

One may see a friend (even) with eyes shut, when one has
made the skin (the bodily envelope) a lattice (to let in spiritual
ideas).

And if she saw her neither from without nor from within, 3615
take the (essential) meaning of the story, O imbecile !

Not like him who had heard (some) fables, and like sh stuck
to the (literal) ^Aape of them^.

So that he would say, “How should Kalila, having no
language, hear words from Dimna who had no power of expres-
sion?

/\nd (even) if they knew each other’s accents, how should
man understand it (their talk), (since it was) without any
articulation ?

I low did Dimna become a messenger between the lion and
the ox, and cajole them both with his palaver^?

1 low did the noble ox become the vizier of the lion? How was 3620
the elephant terrified by the reflection of the moon?

This Kalila and Dimna is entirely fiction, or else how has
the stork a quarrel with the crow?”

O brother, the story is like a measure: the real meaning in it
resembles grain (in the measure).

'rhe man of intelligence will take the grain of meaning: he
will not pay any regard to the measure, (even) if it is removed
(altogether).

Listen to what passes between the rose and the nightingale,
though in that case there is no overt speech.

‘ T'hc simile in the Persian is “ like shin stuck to the naqsh of them,” shin
In^inK the final letter of the word naqsh.

Literally, “pronounce spells over them both?’


410


MATHNAWI, BOOK II


On mute eloquence^ and the understanding of it,

3625 Listen also to what passes between the moth and the candle,
and pick out the meaning, O worshipful one^.

Albeit there is no speech, there is the inmost soul of speech.
Come, fly aloft, do not fly low, like the owl.

He (the player) at chess said, “This is the house of the rook.*’
“By what way,” said he (the literalist), “did the house come
into its hands }

Did it buy the house, or inherit it?” — Happy is he that sped
towards the (real) meaning!

A grammarian said, “ Zayd has struck ‘Amr.” Said (the fool),
“How did he chastise him without any offence (on his part)?

3630 What was ‘Amr’s offence, that that rude Zayd struck him,
innocent (though he was), as (if he were) a slave?”

He (the grammarian) replied, “This (form of words) is (only)
the measure (container) of the meaning signified: take some
wheat, for the measure is (to be) rejected.

Zayd and 'Amr are a device for (showing) the declension; if
that (statement that Zayd struck ^Amr) is untrue, make up with
the declension^.”

“Nay,” said he, “I don’t know about that. How did Zayd
strike ‘Amr without (his committing any) crime or fault? ”

He (the grammarian) in desperation started a joke and said,
“*Amr had stolen a superfluous wdzu^,

3635 Zayd became aware, and struck the stealer of it: since he
(‘Anar) carried it beyond bounds (transgressed the law), the
punishment serves him right.”


Hozv worthless sayings find acceptance in the minds of
worthless folk.

He (the fool) said, “Here you are, this is the truth! 1 accept
(it) with (all) my soul.” Wrongseems right to the wrong-minded.

If you say to a squinting man, “The moon is one,” he will
say to you, “These are two (moons); and there is a (great)
doubt as to (the moon’s) being one”;

And if somebody laughs at him and says, “There are two,”
he deems it the truth. This (mockery) is what the ill-natured
(ignorant and contumacious) fellow deserves.


I Literally, “on speaking with the tongue of the (inward) state.''

Literally, “O idol.”

\ Le. “let the instruction conveyed by means of the statement reconcile
and satisfy you.”

* In Arabic name JAmr is written ‘Amrw, in order to distinguish it
from the name ^Umar, with which it would otherwise be identical as f^ar as
the consonants are concerned.


MUTE ELOQUENCE ’ 411

Lies muster round (those who are living) lies: (the text)
the wicked women for the wicked men has thrown light (upon this
point). ^

1 hey whose hearts are (opened) wide (to receive spiritual 3640
truths) have wide (far-reaching) hands^; they whose (spiritual)
eyes are blind have to stumble on stony ground.


On seeking the tree whereof none that eats the fruit shall die.

k learned man (once) said, for the sake of (telling) a story,

“ In India there is a certain tree:

Whoso takes and eats^ of its fruit, he grows not old nor ever
dies.”

A king heard this (tale) from a veracious person : he became
a lover of the tree and its fruit.

From the Divan of culture he sent an intelligent envoy to
India in search (of it).

For (many) years his envoy wandered about India in quest 3645
(of the tree).

He roamed from town to town for this object: neither island
nor mountain nor plain was left (unvisited).

Every one whom he asked made a mock of him, saying,
“Who would search after this, unless perhaps a madman in
confinement? ”

Many slapped him jocosely; many said, “0 fortunate man.

How should the enquiry of a clever and.clear-minded person
like you be devoid (of result)? How should it be vain?”

And this (ironical) respect was to him another slap, and it 3650
was harder-(to bear) than the visible slap.

They extolled him sarcastically, saying, “ O great sir, in such
and such a place there is a very huge tree.

In such and such a forest there is a green tree, very tall and
broad, and every branch of it is big.”

The king's envoy, who had braced his belt for the quest, was
hearing a diflFercnt kind of report from every one;

So he travelled there for years, (whilst) the king kept sending
money to him.

After he had suffered much fatigue in that foreign land, at 3635
last he became too exhausted to seek (any longer).

No trace of the object of pursuit was discovered: of what he
wanted nothing appeared but the report.

The thread of his hope snapped, the thing he had sought
became unsought in the end.

He resolved to return to the lung, (and set out) shedding
tears and traversing the way.

^ Le, they enjoy spiritual power and freedom.

Literally, “eats and takes.”


412


MATHNAWf, BOOK 11


How the Shaykh explained the hidden meaning of the tree to
the seeker who was in the bondage of formalism.

There was a wise Shaykh, a noble Qutb, at the.hal ting-place
where the king’s intimate fell into despair.

3660 He (the envoy) said, “Being without hope, I will go to him,
and set out on the road (again) from his threshold,

In order that his prayer (blessing) may accompany me, since
I have no hope of (winning) my heart’s desire.’’

With tearful eyes he went to the Shaykh: he was raining
tears, like a cloud.

“O Shaykh,” he cried, “it is the time for mercy and pity;
I am in despair: now is the time for kindness.”

He (the Shaykh) said, “ Say plainly what is the cause of thy
despair: what is thy object? what hast thou in view'? ”

3665 He answered, “The Emperor chose me oiit to seek a certain
branching tree,

For there is a tree, unique in (all) the quarters (of the world) :
its fruit is (of) the substance of the Water of Life.

I have sought (it) for years and seen no sign (of it) e.xcept the
gibes and ridicule of these merry men.”

The Shaykh laughed and .said to him, “() simpleton, this
is the tree of knowledge in the sage -

Very high and very grand aiui very far-spreading: (it i.s) a
Water of Life from the all-encompassing .Sea (of (lod).

3670 Thou hast gone after the form, thou hast gone astray : thou
canst not find (it) because thou hast abandoned the reality.

Sometimes it is named ‘tree,’ sometimes ‘sun’; sometimes it
is named ‘sea,’ sometimes ‘cl«)ud.’

(It is) that one (thing) from which a Inmdreil thousand efl'ecls
arise: its least effects are everlasting life.

Although (in essence^ it is single, it hath a thousand effects :
innumerable names befit (may he properly applied to) that one
(thing).

One person may be father in relatum to thee; in regard to
another individual he may be son.

3675 In regard to another he may be wratii and a foe; in regard t(j
another he may be graciousness and a friettd.

(He hath) hundreds of thousands of names, (but) he is one
rnan: the owner of every quality belonging to him is blind to
(incapable of) giving any (true) description (of him).

Whoever seeks the (mere) name, if he is entrusted (with a
confidential mission) he is hopelesss and in distraction, even as
thou art, 1 ^

Why dost thou stick to the name ‘tree,’ .so that thou art left
bitterly disappointed and ill-fortuned?

^ Literally, “towards what is thy face (turned)?"


THE TREE OF LIFE


413

Pass on from the name and look at the attributes, in order
that the attributes may show thee the way to the essence.”

The disagreement of mankind is caused by names : peace 3680
ensues when they advance to the reality (denoted by the name).

How four persons quarrelled about ^apes^ which were known
to each of them by a different name,

A certain man gave a dirhem to four persons : one of them
(a Persian) said, “I will spend this on angiiry

'The second one was an Arab : he said, “No, I want 'inab^ not
ang^r, O rascal ! ”

The third was a Turk; and he said, “This (money) is mine:
i don*t want Hnab, I want uzum.^^

The fourth, a Greek, said, “Stop this talk: I want istdfil”

'These people began fighting in contention with one another, 3685
because they were unaware of the hidden meaning of the names.

In their folly they smote each other with their fists : they were
full of ignorance and empty of knowledge.

If a master of the esoteric had been there, a revered and many-
languaged man, he would have pacified them ;

And then he would have said, “With this one dirhem I will
give all of you what ye wish.

When without deceit ye surrender your hearts (to me), this
dirhc'm will do all this for you.

Your one dirhem will become four^ — the result desired 13690
four enemies will become one through unanimity^.

What each one of you says produces strife and separation;
what I say brings you agreement.

'Tliercforc be ye mute, keep silence^ that I may be your tongue
in speech and talk.”

(Kven) if in their agreement with each other your words are
(as) a strong rope, in effect they are a source of contention and
distraction. ^

borrowed (accidental) heat produces no (essential) effect;
natural heat hath (its own) virtue.

If you have made vinegar hot by means of fire, (still) when 3695
you drink it, it will undoubtedly increase the coldness (of your
constitution), ' ^ , . o .

because that (artificially produced) heat of it is exotic : its
fumlaniental nature is coldness and tartness.

And (on the other hand), though grape-syrup be frozen, my
son, it will add heat to the liver when you drink it.

Hcncc the Shaykh^s hypocrisy is better than our sincerity,

* /.t*. “will serve to gratify the wishes of all the four.*’

* Literally, “Einswerden.” ^

’’ Literally, “belonging to the outer hall.


414 MATHNAWf, BOOK II

for the former arises from (spiritual) insight, while the latter
arises from (spiritual) blindness.

From the Shaykh’s discourse comes union (concord); the
words of the envious bring separation (discord). .

3700 As (for example) Solomon, who sped (on his prophetic
mission) from God, and who knew the language of all birds —

In the time of his just sway the deer made friends with the
leopard and ceased from war.

The dove became secure from the talons of the hawk, the
sheep took no precaution against the wolf.

He (Solomon) became an arbitrator between enemies: he
became a (means of establishing) oneness between the creatures
that fly with wings.

Thou art running after grain, like an ant. Hark! seek for
Solomon! Why art thou still astray?

3705 To the seeker of grain his grain becomes a snare, but the
seeker of Solomon may have both (Solomon and the grain).

In these latter days the soul-birds have no security from each
other for a moment ;

(Yet) even in our epoch there is a Solomon who would give
(us) peace and not suffer our injustice to continue.

Call to mind (the text), There is no people down to (the words)
hut in the past a Warner dwelt among them.

God said that verily there has never been a people devoid
of a vicar of God and a man of spiritual power;

3710 And he makes the soul-birds so unanimous that, in respect
of sincerity, he purges them of (all) guile and rancour.

They become (as) kind as a mother: he (Mohammed) said
of the Moslems, “(They are as) one soul/*

(*Twas) through the Messenger of Allah they became one
soul; else, they were absolute enemies, every one (to the other).

How dissemion and enmity amongst the Ansar were removed by the
blessings of the Prophet — may God bless and save him !

The two tribes which were named Aws and Khascraj had a
blood-thirsty spirit towards each other.

Through (the preaching of) Mustafa (Mohammed) their
ancient feuds vanished in the light of Islam and of pureness
(of heart).

3715 First, those enemies became brethren like the units of (a
bunch of) grapes in the garden;

And (then) at the admonition given in the words^ The true
believers are brethren, they dissolved (and mingled) and became
one body.

. reading be adopted, ** in consequence of the !>inding
obligation involved in the words.”


MANY NAMES AND ONE REALITY 415

1 he appearance of the (clustered) grapes is (that of) brethren :
when you squeeze them they become one juice.

I he immature and the full-grown grape are opponents, but
when the imthature grape has ripened, it becomes a good friend.

I he immature grape that has remained stone-hard and crude
-Crod m eternity has called it an original unbeliever.

, js neither a brother nor one (in) soul (with 3720

rf Moslems): he is an ill-starred heretic in (the state

of) damnation.

If 1 should tell that which he keeps hidden (in his heart),
there would arise in the world a sore temptation of (men’s)
minds.

’'i'is better that the secret of the blind infidel should be
untold; ’tis better that the smoke of Hell should be banished
from Irani,

The good immature grapes, which are capable (of ripening),
are at last (made) one in heart by the breath of the masters of
heart (the saints).

They push on rapidly to grapehood (maturity), so that
duality and hatred and strife depart (from them).

Then in grapehood they rend their skins till they become one : 3725
unity is the (proper) attribute of him (who is one with others).

A friend becomes a foe because he is still two: is any one
(engaged) in a quarrel with himself?

Blessings on the universal love of the Master, (which) gave
oneness to hundreds of thousands of motes !

('rhey were) as dust scattered on the thoroughfare: the hand
ot the Butter made them one jug.

(But the simile fails as applied to souls), for the oneness of
bodies (formed) of water and clay is imperfect : the (oneness of)
soul is not like this.

If 1 should here utter similitudes in comparison (illustration), 3730
1 fear it might disorder (perplex) the understanding.

Mven now there exists (a) Solomon, but we are blinded by
exulting in (our) far-sightedness.

Far-sightedness keeps a man blind, just as one sleeping in a
house is blind to the house.

We are much addicted to subtle discussions, we are exceed-
ingly fond of solving problems;

And to the end that we may tie knots and (then) undo them,

(we are) making many rules for (posing and stating) the difficulty
and for answering (the questions raised by it).

Like a bird which should undo the fastenings of a snare, and 3735
tie (them together) at times, in order that it might become perfect
in skill :

It is deprived of the open country and meadowland, its life
is spent in dealing with knots;


4i6 MATHNAWI, book II

And even (then) the snare is nowise subdued by it, but its
wings are always getting broken.

Do not struggle with knots, lest thy wings and feathers be
snapped asunder one by one through this vain display (of effort)
on thy part.

Myriads of birds have had their wings broken, and have not
stopped that calamitous ambuscade^ (from doing its work).

37.10 Read in the Qur'an (concerning) their state, O covetous one:
— They explored {and wandered) in them {the lands of the earth ) ;
• mark (the words), Was there any refuge?

The difficulty over angiir and Hnab was not solved by the
contest between the Turk, the Greek, and the Arab.

Until the spiritual Solomon, skilled in tongues, shall inter-
vene, this duality will not disappear.

O all ye wrangling birds, hearken, like the falcon, to this
falcon-drum of the King.

Hark, from every quarter set out with joy, (flying away) from
your diversity towards oneness.

37^5 Wheresoever ye be^ turn your faces towards itr: this is the thing

which He hath not forbidden unto you (at any time).

Blind birds are w^e and very inept, in that we have not once
recognised that Solomon,

Like the owls, we have become hostile to the falcons: con-
sequently we are left behind (to dwell) in the place of ruin.

Because of (our) extreme ignorance and blindness wc arc
seeking to hurt those honoured of God.

How should the flock of birds which are enlightened by
Solomon tear out the wings and plumes of the innocent?

3750 Nay, they would bring grain to the helpless ones: gentle are
those birds and without pugnacity or hatred.

Their hoopoe, for the sake of glorifying (Solomon), xmfokis
the way (towards Him) to a hundred like Bilqis,

Their crow, (even) if it was a crow in outward aspect, was
(really) a falcon in aspiration and (one whose gaze) turned not
aside.

Their stork, which cries lak lak^^ casts upon doubt (and
disbelief) the fire of the profession of Unity;

And their dove is not scared by hawks: the hawk lays his
head (in homage) before their dove.

3755 Their nightingale, which throws thee into ecstasy, hath the
rose-garden in its heart.

Their parrot was (always) independent of sugar, for the
sugar of everlastingness showed its face (was revealed) to it
from within.

^ Literally, “that plac$ where the (predestined) events lie in ambush.”

® Qur’dn, n, 139 and 145, slightly altered,

® Cf. Book II, verse 1663.


SOLOMON AND THE BIRDS 417

The feet of their peacocks are fairer to see than (all) others in
peacock’s plumage.

The speeches of princely birds^ are (meaningless as) an echo;
where is the speech of the birds of Solomon?

I low wilt thou know the cries of the birds, when thou hast
never seen Solomon for a single moment?

_ I he wings of that bird whose note thrills (them that can hear 3760
It) are beyond East and West.

Its every course is from the Footstool of God to the earth,
and from the earth to the Throne’bf God it moves in glory and ’
majesty.

I he bird that goes without this Solomon is in love with
darkness, like a bat.

Make thyself familiar with Solomon, O reprobate bat, in
order that thou mayst not remain in darkness for ever.

When thou goest one ell’s length in that direction, like the'
ell tliou wilt become the standard of measurement;

.•\nd (even by) thy hopping lamely and limply in that direc- 3765
lion, thou wilt be freed from all lameness and limpness.


Thv story of the ducklings which were fostered by a domestic fowl.

'I'hou art the offspring of a duck, though a domestic fowl has
nursed thee beneath her wing.

I'hy mother was the duck of that Sea; thy nurse was of the
earth and devoted to the dry land.

'I'he desire which is in thy heart for the Sea — ^thy soul hath
that nature (instinct) from thy mother.

'The desire thou hast for the dry land is from this nurse.
Leave the nurse, for she is an evil counsellor.

Leave the nurse on the dry land, and press on: come into the 37?°
Sea of spiritual reality, like the ducks.

(Even) if thy mother should bid thee be afraid of the water,
fear not thou, but push speedily into the Sea.

Thou art a duck : thou art one that lives (both) on dry and
wet; thou art not one like the domestic fowl, whose house is
dvig (in the ground).

Thou art a king in virtue of (the text), We have ennobled the
sons of Adam : thou settest foot both on the dry land and on the
Sea.

For in spirit thou art (what is signified by the text). We have
fonvtyed them on the Sea: push forward (then) from (the state
implied in the words). We have conveyed them on the land.

The angels have no access to the land; the animal kind, again, 3775
are ignorant of the Sea.

* the great ones of this world.


4 i8 MATHNAWI, book II

Thou in (thy) body art an animal, and in (thy) spirit thou
art of the angels, so that thou mayst walk on the earth and also
in the sky ;

So that the seer with heart divinely inspired may be, in
appearance, a man like yourselves.

His body of dust (is here), fallen upon the earth; (but) his
spirit (is) circling in yonder highest sphere (of Heaven).

We all are water-birds, O lad : the Sea fully knows our language.

^780 Therefore the Sea is (our) Solomon, and we are as the birds
(familiar with Solomon) : in Solomon we move unto everlasting.

With Solomon set thy foot in the Sea, that the water, David-
like, may make a hundred rings of mail (ripples).

That Solomon is present to all, but (His) jealousy binds
(our) eyes (with spells) and enchants (us).

So that from folly and drowsiness (forgetfulness) and vanity —
He is beside us, and (yet) wc are sick of Him.

The noise of thunder gives the thirsty man headache, when
he does not know that it (the thunder) brings on the rain-clouds
of felicity.

3785 His eye remains (fixed) upon the running stream, unaware of
the delicious taste of the Water of Heaven.

He has urged the steed of (his) attention toward^ (secondary)
causes : consequently he remains debarred from the Causer.

^ (But) one that sees the Causer plainly — how should he set
, his mind upon the (secondary) causes in the world?

How the pilgrims were amazed at the miracles of the ascetic
whom they found (livmg) alone in the desert.

Amidst the desert lived an ascetic, absorbed in devotion like
• the people of ‘AbbAdan^.

The pilgrims from (different) countries arrived there: their
eyes fell upon the parched ascetic.

3700 The dwelling-place of the ascetic was dry, (but) he was moist
in temperament : in the simoom of the desert he had a remedy
(for his moistness).

The pilgrims were amazed at his solitude and his welfare in
the midst of bane.

He stood on the sand, (engaged) in the ritual prayer — sand
from the heat whereof the water in a pot would boil.

You would have said he was (standing) enraptured amongst
herbs and flowers, or mounted on Burdq or Duldul'^;

J The use of *Abb^diya for *Abbddlxuyya is justified by the fact that
*Abb 4 ddxi was originally named *Ahhid. Cf. Ydqdt, Mu'jam aUBulddn,

ed. Wiistenfeld, in, 598,2 foil,, and Dozy, SupplSment, n, 91 (under a bC^^) .
The town had a great reputation for asceticism ni, 598, 6^d 17).

* See p. 187, notes 1 and 2,


THE ASCETIC AND THE PILGRIMS 419

Or that his feet were on silk and broidered cloths ; or that to
him the simoom was more pleasant than the zephyr.

They (the pilgrims) stood waiting, (whilst) he remained 3795
standing in prayer, (sunk) in long meditation.

When the dervish came back (to himself) from (his state of)
absorption (in God), one of that company, a man (spiritually)
alive and of enlightened mind,

Observed that water was trickling from his hands and face,

(and that) his garment was wet with the traces of ablution ;

So he asked him, ‘‘Whence hast thou water? ’’ He lifted his
hand, (indicating) that it came from heaven.

He (the pilgrim) said, “Does it come whenever thou wilt,
without (any) well and without (any) rope of palm-fibre}

Solve our difficulty, O Sultan of the Religion, in order that 3800
thy (spiritual) experience may give us certain faith.

Reveal to us one of thy mysteries, that we may cut from our
waists the cords (of infidelity).’’

He (the ascetic) turned his eyes to heaven, saying, “(O God),
answer the prayer of the pilgrims !

I am accustomed to seeking daily bread from above: Thou
hast opened to me the door from above,

O Thou who from non-spatiality hast brought space into
view, and hast made manifest (the fact that) in heaven is your
daily bread, ”

In the midst of this orison a fair cloud suddenly appeared, 3805
like a water-bearing elephant,

And began to pour down rain, like water from a water-skin :
the rain-water settled in the ditch and in the hollows.

The cloud kept raining tears, like a water-skin, and the
pilgrims all opened their water-skins.

One party (among them), in consequence of those marvellous
happenings, were cutting the cords (of unbelief) from their
waists.

The certainty (faith) of another group was on the increase
because of this miracle — and God knows best how to guide
aright.

Another group (were) unreceptive, so^gj^nd unripe, eternally 3810
imperfect ones. (Here) ends the


CAMBRIDGE
Printed by w. lewis, m.a.
At the University Press


THE GREEDY INSOLVENT 255

Beware! say at once “God help me!” again and again^, not
with tongue alone but from your very soul.

The Cadi said, “ Show plainly that you are insolvent.” “ Here
are the prisoners,” he replied, “ as thy witnesses.”

“They,” said the Cadi, “are suspect, because they are fleeing
from you and weeping blood (on account of your ill-treatment
of them) ;

Also, they are suing to be delivered from you: by reason of 645
this self-interest the testimony they give is worthless.”

All the people belonging to the court of justice said, “We
bear witness both to his insolvency and to his (moral) de-
generacy.”

Every one whom the Cadi questioned about his condition
said, “My lord, wash thy hands of this insolvent.”

The Cadi said, “March him round the city for all to see, (and
cry), ‘ This man is an insolvent and a great rogue.’

Make proclamations concerning him, street by street; beat
the drum (as an advertisement) of his insolvency everywhere
in open view.

Let no one sell to him on credit, let no one lend him a I'so
farthing.

Whosoever may bring here a claim against him for fraud, I
will not put him in prison any more.

His insolvency has been proven to me : he has nothing in his
possession, (neither) money nor goods.”

Man is in the prison of this world in order that peradventure
his insolvency may be proven.

Our God has also proclaimed in our Qur’an the insolvency of
Iblis,

Saying, “He is a swindler and insolvent and liar®: do not 635
make any partnership or (play any) game with him.”

And if you do so (and) bring (vain) pretexts to him®, he is
insolvent: how will you get profit from him?

When the trouble started*, they brought on the scene the
camel of a Kurd who sold firewood.

The helpless Kurd made a great outcry ; he also gladdened the
oflScer (appointed to seize the camel) with (the gift of) a ddng;

(But) they took away his camel from the time of forenoon
until nightfall, and his lamentation was of no use.

Upon the camel sat that sore famine (the insolvent), while the eoo
owner of the camel was running at its heels.

^ Literally, ‘‘say many times (the litany which begins with the words)

Ld fiawiy

^ Literally, “one whose words are evil.’*

® lx, “if you become his partner and then plead with him to save you
from the consequences of your folly.”

* Literally, ‘^was kindled.” The “trouble” refers to the business of
parading the insolvent.
