1)9“*


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2010  with  funding  from
Research  Library,  The  Getty  Research  Institute


http://www.archive.org/details/theatrvmchemicvmOOashnn


Elias  ashmole


7 //-  rv£  fr/r/i  rf ,


THSATXOM  QHEM1  CV  M

BRITANNICUM

CONTAJNING

Severall  Poeticall  Pieces  of  our  Famous
Engh/h  CP bilofopbers,  vvho  have  vvritten

tke  Hemetique  Myfleries  in  thcir  owne
Ancicnt  Language.

Faithfully  Colledted  into  one  Volume ,

with  Annotations  thercon,

S;  Elias  As  HMOLEj  Ef([ .

SlB  efi  Mercuri  ophilus  Angit  eas.


The  First  Part.


L O N © 0 2V,

Printed  by  f.  Qrirmond  for  N a t h:  B r o o % 2 , at  ths

AngeI  m Cornhill,  CW  D c L 1 1.


-


T O

All  Ingenioufly  Elaborate  Stndents,
In  the  moli: Divine  Myfteries  of
Hermetiquc  Learning.

He  Subjedt#/  thls  enfuing  Worke,  is  a Philofo-
phicall  accomt  of  that  Eminent  Secrcc  treafit/d
up  in  the  Bo forne  of  Nature*  rvhtch  bath  been  foHgh1
for  of  Many,  butfonnd  by  a Few,  not  ivit bftanding
Experienc\i  Antiquity  hath  afforded  faichfull
(though  not  frequent)  Difcoveries  thereof.  Pafi
Ages  have  liks  Rivers  conveied  dorvne  to  us%  (upon  the  fioate ,)  the
more  light,  And  Sophifticall  pieces  of  Learning  ; 'but  Vehat  wsre
Profound  <*WMifterious,  the  weight  and  foliduy  thereof  fmke  to
the  Bottome  ; JVhence  every  oneVoho  attempts  to  dive , cannot  eafily
fetchthemup : So,  that  rvhat  ottr  Saviour  faid  to  his  Difciples,  may
( Ihope  mthsut  ojfencej  be  fpoken  to  the  ElettedSons  of  Art ; Unto
youicisgivento  knowthe  Myfteries  ofthe  Kingdome  of  God;
but  to  others  in  Parables,  that  feeing  they  raight  not  fee,  and  hea-
ring  they  might  not  underlhnd,

Otir  Englilh  Philofophers  Cjenerallj^  (like  Prophets,)  have  re-
ceived  little  honour  (unleffe  rvhat  hath  beene  privately  paid  them)
in  thcir  owne  Countrey ; nor  have  they  done  any  mighty  Workes
amongft  us }except  in  covertly  adminiflring  their  Medicine  to  a fcw
Sick,  Whealing  them.  (Eor greater  Experiments  then  Vehat  it  per-
formes in  VhyRck.they  never  pnblikely  made  (hero  of)  Thns  did  I.O.
(one  ofthe  firftfoure  Fellowes  ofthe  Fratres  R.  CJ  in  curhg  the
young  Earle  0/Norfolke,  ofthe  Lcprofie  • and  Do&or  B.  in  carrj -
ing  ofthe  viruiency  of  the  Smalb  pox,  tVoice.fr  om  Qucen  Elizabeth;
infomuch  that  they  never  appeared,  But  in  Parts  abroad  they  have
fonnd  more  robie  Receprion,  and  the  vvorld  greedy  ofobteyning  their
Workes  \ nayfyatber  then  want  the  fight  thereof ) contented to  vitro

A 2 them


Prolegomena.'

tktm  threugha  Trarflation,  though  never  fo  imperfett.  TFitmffe
rvbat  Maierus,  Hermannus,  Combachius,  Faber,  andmany  others
have  done  ;*thc  firfl  of  Which  came  out  of  Germanie,  to  live  in
England ipurpofely  that  he  might  fo  underfland  cur  Englifla  Tongue,
asto  Tranjlate  Norton'*  Ordinali  into  \jit\nverfe]  Which  moflju-
dicioufy  and  learnedly  he  did : Tu  ( to  our  [hame  be  it  ffoken)  his ,
Entertainctnent  Was  too  too  courfefor  fo  deferving  a Stholler.

How  great  a blemi/b  is  it  then  to  tu,  that  refufe  to  reade  fo  Famous
Authors  in  our  Naturali  Language, &£///?  Scrangers  are  necejfitated ,
to  Reade  theminQots,  to  underfland  them  in  their  Own,  Tetthinl ^
the  dignity  efthe  *S,ubjed',  much  mere  deferving,  then  their  Paines.

Jf  t his  ttv  do  bnt  ingeniou flyffonftder , Wefhalljudge  it  more  o/Reafon
that  \to  tookje  backjspon,  then  neglett  fkch  pieces  of  Learning  as  are
Natives  ofour  orvne  Countrey,  and  bj  this  Jnquifition,  finde  no
Nation  hath  Written  morey  or  better,  although  at  prefent  (as  well
through  our  oiyne  Supinenefle,  as  the  Decrees  o/Fate,)  fero  of  their
- Workes  can  befound.  John  Leland  tooke  ver y much  paines,  even
ai  theyeilding  up  of  the  Ghoft,  of  our  Englilh  Learning,  to  preferve
its  lat &(but  vveakeft/ovw/f  almoft  (pent)Rttith\andfrom  Wwjohn
Bil e,with  J ohn  Pittsf rvho  indeed  is  but  Balc’s  Plagiary)  hath  left  as
a Cacalogue  of  the  Writers  ofthis  Nation,  and  that*s  neerc  alL  Tet
Pofterity  for  this  is  deeply  obliged . What  punifhment  then  did  their
pejiilent  Malice  deferve , Who  rob*d  as  of  their  whole  Workes  ?

A Juditious  Author  /peaking  of  the  Diflolution  of  our  Monade*
ikSijditb  thus : Many  Manufcripts,guilty  of  no  other  fuperftiti.
on  then  Red  letters  in  the  Front,were  conderaned  to  the  Fire ;
and  here  a principali  Key  of  Antiquity  was  lodco  the  great  pre-
judice  of  Pofterity./«dlW  ( fuch  Was  Learnings  misfortune , at  that
great  ‘Devaflation  of  our  Englifh  Libraries,  that ) vehere  a Red  let*
ter  or  a Mathematicall  Diagram  appeared,  they  Wcre  fuffcient  to
intitle  the  Booke  to  be  Popifh  or  Diabolicall.

Our  Englifh  Nation  hath  ever  beene  happy  for  Learning  and
Learned  men,  andto  illuflrate  this,  1 hope  it  will  not  prove  dtjlaft-
fnB.y

As  firfl)  the  Druyfse  (the  famous  andmyfterious  Druydar)  that
veere  Priefts,  Diviners, and  Wife  men  ; and  took  their  Originali  and
Nam efrom  Druys  Sarron>us  the  fonrth  Kxngoftbe  Celts,  (fiyled
Sapicmum  & Augurum  DoftorJ  rvho  dyedAnm  Mmduio69 •


Prolegomena.'

7{ext  the  Bardi,  veho  celebrat  ed  the  Illuftrious  Deeds  o/Famoiis
Men,  which  thej  ingeniostjly  dif$os'd  in  Heroique  Verfe,  and  fttng
them  to  the  fweete  Melody  ofthe  Harpe ; Amongfl  otker  Tjsftimo-
nies  hereafreceive  Chaucer's ;

tfSlje  o!0  gcntlc  ®aitt6wJ  fn  !)cr  tmpeg
:3>f  Bifecrg  abmturcrt  tnaBen  E apes,

IRymeti  fltft  in  Ijcr  il^otijcr  fCongur,
iPIjtcb  Sottb^»3lnftramcmSt^cpfe«Bc.

The/e  Philofophers  had  their  Ifamefrom  Bardus  Druydns  ( the  5
King  ofthe  Gelts,)  Veho  was  the firft  Inventor  o/Verfes,  as  Berofius
telis  tu ; and djcd  An.Mundi  2138.  Neither  of  thefe  Se&s  e/PlvIo-
fophers  nfed  any  writing  ( indeed  it  Veos  net  lawfstll  ;for,)  fuch  Veos
the  Policy  and  Curiofity  of  Elder  Ages  ( to  defend  thtir  Learning
WMyfteries/w»  the  Iny.irj  0/ Ignorant  Intcrpretations)t&«  thej
delivered  them  to  Pofterity,  bj  Tradition  only.

Csefar  tejlifies,  (andtisanoble  Teti itnony  ) That  the  Learning
ofthe  Druydf,  Veos  firft  invented  in  Britaine,  and  thence  transferrd
into  Francc;  andtkat,  in  all  his  time,  thofe  of  France  came  over
hither  to  be  Inftrutted.  Agricola  ( in  Tzcitvti)preferrs  the  Britaines
before  the  Scudents  0/ France  ( notwithftanding  that  thej  Veereofa
docible  Wit,  and  aft  t»  Learne)  in  that  thej  were  curiotu  in  attain-
ingthe  Eloquence  of  the  Latin  Tongue.

As  fer  Mtgick,  Pliny  telis  tu.  It  flourijhed  in  Britaine,  and  that
the  People  thtre  were  fo  devoted  to  it  ( jea , with  all  Complemtnts  of
Cercmony)  a man  wottld  think  that  evtn  the  Perfian  learnedhis  Ma-
gick  thence.

ts4  Germane  Poet,  fajesyhat  when  the  tVorld  rvas  troubled  with
Pannonicklnvafions.England  fioisrijbed  in  thekytVeltdge  ofall  good
Arts;  and  Veos  able  to  fend  ofher  Learned  Men  into  other  Comtries ,
topropogate  Learning ; and  injlances  Winifrid  ( alias  Boniface  the
Devonuiire  Man)and  Willebroad(r^  Northeme  Man) that  were
fent  into  Germany.

Naj  more,  England  t vas  trvice  Schoole-Miftris  to  France  ( for  fo
faith  Peter  Ramus ) viz.  Firft  bj  the  Druydse  (Veho  tatsght  them
their  Difcipline)»?»^  afterwards  bj  Alcunius,»»  Charles  the  Great’<
timtjthrongh  whoft perfwaftons  the  Etnperour  fotsnded the  Univeifity
of  Paris.

For  the  Saxons.it  is  not  to  be  denied  btst  that  mahj  of  them , aft  er

A 3 their


Prolcgomena*

their  converficn  to  Chriftianitv,  ivere  exceedingl)  Learned  , andbi*
fore  that,  much  addittedto  Soathfaying,  Augury.  Divinatio*  by  the
Ncighing  of  Horfcs,  c rc.  And  tis  Vcorth  the  Enqttiry  ( tbere  being
more  in  it  then  we  ordinarii)  apprehend)rvhy  tbey  in  Generali  worjhip
ed  $crti)U0  [_  i.  e . Dame  Earth  1 for  a Goddeffe,  and  honoured
Mercury  above  ali  the  Gods  o/  the  Germines , Vehor»  tbey  cafled
3X>oo$en,  ( hence  WiQtontow  noVo  our  Cae&ncftap  i ) Fory  tbey  be -
hevedthat  this  'Dame  Intermediated  in  Humine  Affaires

and  Relieved  the  Poore;  whofe  Image  rvasmade  Armed,y?^/«g
among  Flower sjbaving  in  its  righc  hind  a Scaff t^and m it  a Banner,
wberein  was  pdmted a Rofe ; In  the  other  Hand  a Ballance,  and  upon
the  Head  thereofa  Cock  ; on  the  Breft  a carved  Beare  , and  before
the  Midle,*  fixed  Scutchion $ in  Chiefe  rvhereofwas  alfo  a Ballance  •
in  Face,  a Lyon  ; and  in  Poinr,  a Rofe.i And  for  their  God  JDoofcsn
thej  efieemedhim  as  their  God  o/Battaile,  reprefenting  himby  an
Armed  Man.  Infomuch  that  me  te  thisveryday  retaine  the  Word
CdlOaD  among  us>  to  Signifie  Fierce , Ftsrious,  Raging,  £ as  Vvben  one
is  in  agreat  Rage , m ufnally  fay  be  is  SP00&  So  the  Mercury  of
the  Philofophers  is  fbaddowednnder  the  fierce  and  terrible  Names  of
LyonjDragonjPoyfonjCh:.  Bnt  this  is  not  Ali,  although  it  be  Some-
thing.

And  now  to  come  y et  ne  er  er  to  our  Selves ; ive  mufi  needs  fay  that
o/Later  Times  (fince  the  Conqueft)  ottr  Tfation  bath  producedfitcb
Famous  and  eminendy  learned  Men3^  kavc  eqnatrd(jf  not  fitrpafi)
the greateft  Schollers  of  other  Nations,  and  happj  wereVve  ifnorv
m cou/d  bnt  partake  ofthofe  Legacies  tbey  leftt  and  rohich  Envy  and
Ignorance  has  defratsded  us  of:  ( Howfoever  the fmall  remainder
which  is  lefti  m havegood  reafon  to  prize,

#o?  owtofolue  ajsf^cn  fastije,

C oracth  alie  tfcte  neS»  C ojne  fro  ^eatc  to  ?wtcj
3Jnt>  oat  of  oltJClEofefs  *n  gooOfa^c
Corneti)  alie  tyte&cpcnce^at ^eattare.)

That  England  hath  beene  fucctjfively  enricfrd  rvith  ftsch  Men,
our  (fountry  men  John  Leland  ( and  Inever  heard  be  was  Partiali)
abtindantly  Teftifies  ; who  avers>That  Generally  Vvtehave  hada
great  number  of  excedent  Wits  andWnlttsJearned  Vtith  the  befi  as
Times  ferve  wbo  b e fides  their  kttorvledge  in  the  foure  Tongues,  in

Vphich


Prolegomena.

rrhich  part  of  them  t xcelled , there  watno  Liberali  Science  or  any
Feate  concerning  Learning  , in  which  thty  have  not  fje\\>cd  certainte
Arguments  of great  Felicity  and  Wic.  And  thus  much  for  the  Gene-
rality  of  Learning.

fliowfor  a Particular  acccunt  of  the  Hermetique  Scien ce,voucb-
fafe  ( Ingenious  Reader ) eo  accept  the  enfning  Colleftions,  yet  not
fo,  m if  therein  tetre  contained  aU  the  W orkes  of  our  Englifh  Her-
metique Philofophers,  ( for  more  are  dejign‘din  a Second  Partho
folloVeand  compleat  e this  afttli  Theatrum  j the  \\'hich  G O D allotv-
ing  ntefurther  Time  and  Trar.quility  to  rttn  throngb  it,  at  I have
alreadj  t his,  I inttnd  fiortlj  to  m-  k_e  ready  for  the  Prefie.)  IVhtrtby
jet  more  to  manifeft  what  Men  ree  have  had,'-ro  lejfefamont  for  this
kinde  of  Philofophy,  then  for  ali  other  Commendabit  Arts  and
Sciences.

To  adde  any  thir.g  to  the  praife  tbereof,  uvere  bnt  to  hold a Candle
before  the  Sunne ; or  fhottld  Ihere  deliver  afull  Account  ofthe  Mar-
veilous  Operations  and  Effefts  thereof,  it  would  be  at  far  beyor.d  the
limits  ofa  Pteface,  at  remote frem  the  Beliefe  of  the  gcneralitj  of  the
World.  2for  doe  I expeti  that  ali my  Readers  fiottld  come  rvith  an
Engagement,  to  bclieve  what  I here  write  , or  that  there  votu  ever
anj  fttch  thing  in  rerum  natura  as  what  we  caB  A Philofophers
Stone,»«r  will  I perftvade  thtm  to  it,  ( though  Imttft  teB  them  Ihave
not  the  ranity  to  publifh  thefe  Sacred  and  Serioris  Myfteries  and
Arcana,  at  Romances)  tit  enottgh  that  I k»«)to  Incredulity  is  given
£0  the  vvorld  as  a punifhmenr.  Tet  Ile  teli  them  what  one  of  tar
Ancient  Poeticall  Philofophers  fayes,

3Bf  poto  topi  IpBcn  to  mp  Hap,

^cmftljtng  tbcrcbp  feto  matt  fintf,

Chat  tnap  contmt  pour  minbe :

3]  toill  not  Ctotarc  to  tnafee  roto  g ite  «cbtncc,
droja  ^tlofopbcr  totll  BnDe,  tjcre  m Cbibcute
Ot  the  Ctntbjanb  to  St^en  t^at  bt  llap,

3 (bili  not  greatlg  tohtt  tl;tg  fap«

lmn(l  profeffe  I kttow  enottgh  to  holdm)  Tongue,  bnt  not  er.ostgh
to  Speake  ; and  the  no  leffe  Reall  then  Miracnlous  Fruits  1 have
fonnd  in  my  diligent  enquiry  into  thefe  Arcana,  Itad  me  on  to  fttch
degtecs  of  Admiration,  thty  command  Silence,  andforce  me  to  lofe

my


Prolegomena.

my  Tongue.  Tet,  <u  onegreatlj  affetting  my  Native  Countrey,  and
the fatisfatlion  ofall  Ingenious  Ar  tifts,  I hxve  publifhed  (for  tkeir
t*fe)  tbefe  enfuing  Colle&ed  Antiquities  $ and  Jhallhere  fky  fomv
thhg  more  then  they  fpeak  of.

He  rebo  JhaS  have  the  happineffe  to  meet  with  S.  Dunftans  tVorki.
De  Occulta  Philofophia,  (a  Booke  rvhlch  E.G.  A.I.  made  much  ufe
of  and  whicb  Jhad  chtefy  bacl^  wh.it  here  I amabotit  to  fay)  may
thereinreadefuchStotizs  as  will  maki  him  amaz’d  to  thinhjvhat
Rupendious  and  Immenfe  things  are  to  bee  performed  by
vertue  of  the  Philofophers  Mercury,  ofwhich  a Tafte  onely  and  no
TJtore»

tsdnd  firFt,  of  the  Minerali  Scone,  theVehichis  wrougbt  np  io  the
degree  onely  that  hath  the  poVoer  of  Tranfmuting  any  Jraperfe&
Earthy  Macter  into  its  utntojl  degree  of  Perfeftion  • that  ii,  to  con-
vert  the  bafcfl  of  Metalli  into perfect  Gold  and  Stlver  j Flints  inio
a llmanner  a/Precious Stones ; \_as  Rubies, Saphirs, Emeralds,^
Diamond',  j and  many  more  Experimenti  ef  the  like  nature ®
But  as  this  ii  but  a part , fo  it  ii  the  leafi  Jhare  of  that  Blefling
which  may  he  acqnired  by  the  Philofophers  Mittih,ift%efull  vertue
thertofWere  knoVone.  Gold  Iconfefe  is  adelicious  Objeft,  agoodly
Light,  which  we  admire  and  gaze  upon  ut  Pueri  in  Junonis  avem;
but,  as  to  mak.e  Gold  ( faith  ar.  incomparable  Authour)  ii  the  cheif*
ellintentof  the  Alchimifts,  fo  vvas  itfcarce  anyintentof  the
ancient  Philofophers,  and  the  Imefi  ufe  ,the  Adept i made  ofthii
Materia.  \ , . ,0  . . . ,

For  they  btinglovers  a/Wifdome  more  then  Worldly  Wealth,
drove  at  higher  and  more  Excellent  Operationi : And  certainly  Hs
to  Vehom  the  Whole  Courfe  e/Nature  lyes  open,  rtjoyceth  not  fo  mttch
that  he  can  mahp  Gold  and  Silver,  or  the  Divells  to  btcome  Subjeft
to  him, as  that  he  fees  the  Heavens  open,  the  Angelis  of  God  Afctnd-
ing  and  ‘Defcending,  and  that  his  cftin  Name  ii  fairety  written  in  the
Bookoflife.

"F^ext,  to  come  to  the  Vegitable,Magicall,a«i/  Angelicall  Stones;
the  whichhave  tnthemno  part  of  the  Minerali  Stone  ( Quatenut  a
Stone.Ferroented  with  Metalline  and  Earthy  Nature  ) for  they  are
marvelonflif  Subtile , and  taich  of  theta  differing  in  Operation  and
Nature,  btcaufe  Fitted  and  Fermented  for  ftverall  Effefti  and
Ptirpofes.  Dsuhtlefe  Adam  ( with  the  Fathexs  befare  the  Fiood,'


Prolcgomena.

and  fuce)  Abrsham,  Mofes,  and  Solomon , verotsght  mar.y  Won-
ders  by  them,  jet  the  utmofl  of  their  Vertues  they  neverfully  under »
food-,nor  indeed  any  but  GOD  the  Maker  of  All  things  in  Heaven
and  Earth,bleiled  for  evermore.

For,  bj  the  Vegitable  may  be perfeSlly  know»  the  Nature  o/Man,
Beafts,  Foules,  Filhes,  together  with  all  kinds  o/Trees , Plants,
Flowers ,&c.and horv  to  produce  and  make  them  Grow,FIourifla  er
beare  Fruit ; horv  to  encreafe  tkem  in  Colour  and  Stnell , and  Vehen
and  vehere  rve  pleafe,  and  ali  this  net  or.ely  at  an  inflant,  Experimenti
gratia,  but  Daily,  Monethly,  Yearly,<*r  any  Time,<if  a^Seafon;
jta,in  the  depth  o/Winter.  And  therefore  not  unlikf  > but  the  W alf-
nut-Tree  vehich  ancientlj  greve  in  Glaflenbury  Church-yard,  and
never  putforth  Leaves  before  J.Barnibies  Day  , yet  then  veas  fully
loaded  Veith  them , tu  alfo  the  Hawthorne  there,  fo  greatlj  fam’dfor
flooting  ferth  Leaves'  W Flowers  at  Chriftmas , together  \\'ith  the
Oake  tn  New-Forreft  tn  Hampfhire  that  boregreene  Leaves  at  the
fame  Seafon ; maj  be  ftme  Eiperiments  made  of  the  Vegitable
Stone.

Be  fides  the  Mafculine  part  of  it  Vehich  is  verought  ttp  to  a Solar
Quality,  and through  its  exceeding  Heat  Veill  burne  up  and  deftroy
any  CreaturejPlant.erc.T/W  Vehich  » Lunar  & Feminine  ( ifimme -
diatelj  applytd)  veill mitigate  it  veith  its  extreme  Cold  : and  in  likp
manner  the  Lunar  Quality  benums  and  congeals  any  Animali,  &c.
Unltfft  it  be  prefently  helped  and  refolved  by  that  ofthe  Sun  j For
though  they  botb  are  made  out  c/one  Natural  Subftance  jef  in  Veorks
ing  they  havecontrary  QynUticsinevertheleJfe  there  is  fuch  a naturali
Afliftance  bttVeeen  thtm,  that  rvhat  the  one  cavnot  doe,  the  other  both
can,  and  veill perform.

Nor  are  their  inward  Vertues  more  then  their  outward  Beauties-
for  the  Solar  part  is  of  fo  refplendent,  tranfparent  Luftre , that  the
Eye  o/Man  isfcarce  able  to  indure  it ; and  if  the  Lunar  part  be  ex-
pos‘d  abroad  in  a dark  Night,  Birds  will repaire  to  (and circulate
about  ) it, as  a Fly  rottnd  a Candle , and  fubmit  themfelves  to  the
Captivity  of  the  Hand  .•  And  this  invites  mee  to  believe,  that  the
Stone  vehich  the  ancient  Hermet( being  then  140  Tears  old)  tooke  out
ofthe  Wall*«j&«  Cell , and  fheveed,  Cornelius  Gallus,  Ann.  1602.
veas  of  the  Nature  of  this  Vegitable  Stone : Forfupon  the  opening
^«•Gplden  Box  Vehtrein  it  Veas  inclofed  ) it  dilated  its  Beames  all

„ B over


Prolegomena.’

over  ffoRoome,  ani  that  withfogrtat  Splendor,  that  it  overcame
the  Light  that  Veos  hir, ilei  therein  ; Befidet  tht  Hermet  refstfti  te
projeft  it  upon  Met  a II  (at  being  unworthy  ofit)but  madt  his  Experi-
ment  upen  Veronica  arti  Rae.

B)  the  Msgicall  cr  Profpedtive  Stone  it  is  pojfible  to  iifcover  anj
Perfon  in  irh.it  part  cf  the  World  foever,  altkough  never  fo  fecretlj
concade  dor  hii  \in  Charnbers,  Clofets,  cr  Cavernes  of  the  Earth;
Fer  there  it  mahjs  a finiti  Inquifition.  In  a !Vorii  it  fairelj  prefents
tojottr  i neVf  tvtn  the  whole  World,  whercin  to  behold,  heare , or
kejettr  Delire.  Naj  mert,  It  tnabltt  Man  to  underftand  the  Lan-
gttage  of  the  Creatures,  at  the  Chirping  o/Birds,  Lowing  ef  Beafts,
&c.  To  Convey  a Spirie  into  a»  Image,  which  bj  obftrving  the
Influence  */Heavenly  Bodie*,/&d//  become  et  trnc  Oracle ; And  j et
ibis  at  E.  A.  afiitresjou , is  net  anj  w^wNecromanticall,*r  Devi-
lilhj  bttt  eafy  .wonderous  eafy,  Naturali  ani Honeft.

Lafilj,  as  touching  the  Angelicall  Stone,  itis  f»  iubtiW,  faith  the
aftrefaii  Author,<^r  it  can  neither  be  feene,  felt , er  weighed ; bnt
Tafted  only.  The  voyce  cfMzn(Ve>hicb  bcars  forne proportim  to  thtft
fubtill properties,)  comes  fbort  in  comparifon  j Naj  the  Air  it  ftlft  is
not  fo  penetrabit , andjet  ( Oh  mjfieriotts  Veonder  ! ) A Stone  , that
wiUlodge  in  the  Fire  to  Eternity  Veithout  being  prejuiicei.  It  hath  <t
Divine  Power,  Celeftiall,  and Invifiblc, above  the  rtfi ; ani  enitrvtt
the  pofejfor  Vcith  Divine  Gifts.  It  afforis  the  Apparition  of  Angelis,
anigives  a power  ofconverfingVeith  them , bj  Dreames ani Reve-
lations : nor  dare  anj  Evill  Spirit  approach  the  Place  where  it  lodg»
ctb.  Becaseftit  is  a Quinteflence  wherein  there  is  no  corruptible
Thing.-and  where  the  Elements  are  not  corrupt3no  Devill  can  (lay
or  abide.

S.  Dunfion  calls  it  the  Food  of  Angels,  ani  bj  othertitis
tearmei  The  Heavenly  Viaticum  ; The  Tree  of  Life  ;ani  is  un-
donbteily  ( next  tsnier  Cj  0 I)  ) the  trut  Alchochodon,w  Giver  of
Years  ;for  bj  it  Mans  Body  is  prefervei  from  Corroption,  being
therebj  inabled  to  live  a long  time  without  Foode:  naj  * iit  maie  a
cjHtfiion  Vehet  her  anj  Mali  can  Dy  e that  tsfet  it.  tvhich  Idoe  not  fo
much  aimire,  as  to  think  Vehj  the  Pofleflors  of  it  fbonld  iefirt  to  live,
that  have  thofe  Manifeftations  cf  Glory  andEtermiy,prefenttd  ttnte
their  Flefhly  Eyes ; but  rather  iefirt  to  be  Diflolved/wi  to  enjoj  the
full  Fruition,  thtn  live  where  tbej  mufi  be  content  with  tht  bar  *-Spe-
culation,.  Afttr


Prolegomena.

Aftcr  Hermes  bad  once  obtained  tbe  Knovvledge  of  this  Stone,  he
gave  over  tbe  ufe  of  ali  ttksr  Stones  , and  t here  in  onlj  delighted :
Mofcs,andSo\omon,(together  Veitb Hermes  ivere  tbe  onlj  threejtbat)
txccllcd  in  tbe  Knowlcdge  thereof,  and  who  thertrvitb  Verought
Wonders.

That  there  ii  a Gifc  o/  Prophefie  hid  in  tbe  Red-ftone,  Racis  rvill
telljou  •,  for  therebj  ( faith  he ) Philofophers  have  foretold  things
to  come : And  Petrus  Bonus  averi,  that  thej  did  Prophefie,  not  on-
lj Generally  but  Specially ; kaving  a Fore-knowledge  of  tbe  Re-
furredion,  Incarnition  «/Chrift,  day  o/Judgement,  and  that  tbe
World  Jhould  be  confumed  rvith  Fire ; and  thts  not  otberwife , that
from  tbe  Infight  of  thtir  Operatione,

In  Uritfe , bj  tbe  trtse  and various  ufe  ofthe  Philofophers  Prima
maceria  (for  there  are diverficiesof  Gifcs,  but  the  fame  fpirit^
tbe  perfettio»  o/Liberall  Sciences  are  made  k*oivn , tbe  Vehole  Wif-
dome  o/Nature  maj  begrafped : And  ( Notwithjlanding  Vehat  hat
beenfaid,  I mufl  furtbtr  adde)  There  are  yet  hid  greater  things
then  thefe,for  we  ha  ve  feen  but  few  of  his  Workes.

Horvbeit , there  are  but  a feVe  Stocks  that  are  fitted  to  Inoculate
the  Grafcs  oftkit  Science  on : Thej  are  Myfteries  Incommnnicabje
ti  any  but  the  Adepti , and  thofe  that  have  beene  Devoted  even
from  tbeir  Cradies  to  ferve  and  waite  at  thU  Altar:  And  bove  rare^
Ij  fuch  have  been  heard of  maj  appear  bj  Norton:

irejfeSis  (fiitfa  he;  oj Ccamlp  4) ne

3!  n ^ifteene  tx  msDomwJ  ottt  15  eh  tone.

And  they  perhaps  were  ( Veitb  .f.Paul ) Caught  up  into  Paradice,
and  m be,  heard  unfpeakeable  Words,  fo  thej , wrought  unoperable
Work.es ; fuch  as  it  is  not  lawfull  for  to  utter.

Of  fuch  as  thefe  therefore  will  I glory,yet  of  my  felfe  1 will  not
glory,but  of  mine  Infirmities.  And  trulj  whether  fuch  were  in  the
Body  or  ouc  of  the  Body  I cannot  teli,  GOD  knoweth,  doubt\
leffe  they  were  not  far  from  the  Kingdome  of  G O D.

But  Ifeare  I have  waded  too  farre  j and  therefore  now  to  give
fome  Particular  Account,  afVeell  touching  tbe  Publication  of  thte
Worke,  asalfo  the  Difpofition  thereof, and  the  Nature  ofthe  Obfe-
lete  Language  wherein  tis  Veritten : I fhall  in  tbeFirfl  place  accjuaint
the  Rcader , that  the  kinde  Accepcance  my  former  Endeavours  rc-
ceivedat  the  Hands  of  Candid  kxt\fc,in publijbingfome  Chemicali
Coiiedions ; verj  earnefUj  invited  me  to  finae  out  a Second  Piece

B i vehere*


Prolcgomcna»

whtrewith  to  prefent  thofe  Gratefull  Perfons,  W here upon  J inten-
dedto  rally  np  fome  of  my  otvn  Conceptions  in  this  Science,  and  ex‘
psfe  tbem  alfo  to  tbe  Teii : Best  ( to  thii  end,  reviemng  the  Philofo-
phers)  I fornd  that  many  (affuming  that  Name ) Wrote  what  their
Fancies,  not  their  Hindshadwrought,  an  i furthrr  then  in  Appre-
henfion  hadnot  feene  Pfojeftion  ; ( amongft  ivlom  o«rRip!ey  rvas
fometime  One , ai  appeares  by  his  Ingeniosis  Retrstftation,  hereafter
mentioned  : ) and  being  trulj  Jenfible  of  the  great  Injury  fuch
Workes  have  done  joung  Students  ( at  the  fifl  not  able  to  diflin-
Zui(b,  voho  have  written  ttpon  their  undeceveablz  Experience,  ivho
‘not  • and  confequently , not  whicb  tofollorv , or  Vohich  to  avoj  s le)  I
rvithdrew  my  Thoughts  ( having  never  asyet  fet  my  felfe  Effe&u  •
ally  ttpon  the  Manuali  Praftifc  ) lefl  IJhould  adde  to  the  many  In-
juries the  World  has  alreadyfuffered,  by  delivering  thebare  Med-
ley  of  my  Dubious  Apprehenfions , Voithout  the  confident  Attefta-
tion  o/Praftife  : and  bejufily  efieensed  as  indifcreete  at  thofe  vehon>
Ripley  mentioni,  that  prate

£>f  ffiobtni*ot»eaut>  of  !>ftf  U&oSo,
neber  ft)ot  tfjcrctn  % ttroio.

Tet  fiillcafiing  about  vehat  to  make  clioyce  of , at  length  {by  the
'tncouragement  of  fome  that  are  Induflrious  after  publique  benefic  )
Centred  my  Thoughts,  and fixd them  on  this  defigne  of  ColietSing
AU  ( or  as  many  as  I could  meete  Voith)  ofottr  own  Englilh  Herme*
tique  Philofophers,  and  to  make  them  publique.

Nor  did  I change  this  Refolution  Voith  my  Clothes .notwithfland-
irsg  the  DifficuUies  / faw,  readj  to  tncomter  and  obftrutl  the  Un-
dertaking:  For , befides  the  Paines  and  Care  that  voas  thereunto  re-
qui  fit  e , the  Feare  ofnot  meeting  voith,  or  obtaining  the  Originali
Manufcripts,  er  Authentique  Copies  efthtt  Nature,  {vohich  Iknew
to  bein  /s.wMenshands,  yetwantingthemmyfelfe,)  [hreVodly  be-
fet  ,jhough  nothing  difcouragd  mesyetwas  I thsrewith  freely  and
plentifully  fupplyedby  fome  worthy  and  intimate  Friends , Vehor»  I
veould  gladly  htre  mention  , but  that  I Veell kntVe  they  delight  not  to
fee  their  Narnes  in  Print.  Thefe  had,  My  Cire  Veos  next  te  difpofe
thene  in  fuch  a Series  as  tnight  be  anfrterable  to  f&f  Refpe&iveTirnes,
Vehcrein  each  Author  Flourilhcd  ; and  withall  to  the  befi  Advantage
of  the  laboriosa  Student  : the  vehich  I have  managd  voith  fojufi  an
Adcquition,<«  ( Ihope ) VeiU neither  detratt  from  the due  Honour*/
the  On e,neryet  difturbt  er  darken  tht  dirett  path  ofthe  Other.


Prolegomcna.

Uti t whilfi  Iwas  doing  this}  I made  a Queftion  ( in  regar d forne
Philofophers  had  n>rit  in  Yerfe,  others  in  Profe  ) \X>hicb  ofthefe
fbouldtake  Precedcncy ; and  aft  er  feme  ConfiJeration  adjudged  it  to
the  Poetique  part  : And  tbaty  not  onlj  bccaufe  its  Originali  may
frobablj  Anticipate  the  time  of  Orpheus  ( although  he  be  noted  bj
Maierus, Primus  AntifteSjSacerdos,Theologus>^r£i'}&  Doftor
totius  Graecorum  nationis)  bccaufe  rW Linus  isfiidtobethemojl
Perite  of  any  Lyrick  Poet,  and  fo  Ancient  that  forne  fuppofehim
Mafier  to  Orpheus,  Xtifarvritthat  admirable  Allegor y of  theGo  1-
denFleece,  and  Sfras  thefrflef  all  the  Grecians  that  brought  the
Chemick  Learning  ( rvith  other  Sciences)  ettt  of  dEgipt,  as  the  other
the  fir/l  that  brought  the  Phaenician  Learning  to  the  Grecians : Ifaj
not  only  for  that  it  is  the  Ancienteft,^^  Prole  but  0/Titter  ufe  rvith
other  Nations:£#r  bccaufe  Poetry  hath  binmofl  Anciencly  ufed  mth
us}and ( as  iffrom  a Grant  fl/Naturc)Ar4/ unqueftionable .

Againjiht  FxxeUent^AeXody  thtreof  is  fo  Naturali  Univer-
fallar  that  it fe  emes  to  be  borne  V?it  h att  the  Nations  of  the  Wor\d,
^^Hereditary  Eloqumce  proper  to  aSMmkindc : Norivas  this
aflyfor  I confderedthat  it  Claimes  a Generali  fucceffion,  and  Re-
ception,  in  ^f/ZNations,  *?#Ages,  Vvhowere  never  Vcithout  a Ho-
mer,  a Virgi1,<?r  Ovid  ; No  not  thisfmall  Segment  ofthe  World
CEngland]  Withotit  a Rafis  Ceftrenfis  and  an  Hortulanus  • For  the
Firft  ofthefe , His  Liber  Luminum,  and  his  Lumen  de  Luminum,  are
the  Ancienteft  now  extant  in  LatineVerfe  : In  the  latter  of  ft>hicbs  I
cannotomii  thisT\t\tofhis3  [ Refponfio  Rafis  Ceftrenfis  Filio  fuo
Merlino  ; ] 'fthtrebj  it  appeares  he  was  Merlin*s  Contemporary  (at
leajt)  ifnotbislAittcrdntbis  Abftrufe  Myftery.  ThefeVfotkes  of
his  are  both  Fublijbed  bj  Herraannus,  but  ver)  Imperfe&ty  , as  I
found  b)  Comparing  themVrith  a Manufcript,  as  ancient  as  King
Johnfs  Time,  And  for  the  Second  He  rvas  thefrfl  Chriftian  Philo-
fopher  afteMotkms:who  ( traveSing  abroad.and  retttrning  hither  in
the  Raigne  #/WiIliam  the  ConqueTOUrybccaufe  he  was  the  firft  that
Tranfplanted  the  Chemicali  Muf zsfrom  remoteft  Parts  Into  his  orvn
Country ft  called  Garland,ab  Coronam  Hermecicam  & Poeticam.  .
Buty  to  returne  to  our  Matter.

Ifneither  its  Antiquity,  mr  the  Naturali  Ratification,GeneraIl
Succeflion,4w/Reception  thereof  rvere  enough  to  aliow  it  the  Righ'-
hand  of  Fellowfliip , jet  I fuppofe  tbeUffc&s  tbereo?,  ( which  fo
afetl  and  delight  the  Eare,  rejojce  the  Heart , fatisfie  the  Judge-

ment.


Prolegomena,

ment,  and  indulge  the  Hearers ) fisfily  may  t In  regar d Poefy  has  a
Life,  a Pulfe,  and  fuch a fecret  Energy,  as  leaves  ia  the  Minde,«  far
deeper  Imprefliory&r»  Vehat  runs  in  the  flore  and  evenleffe  Numbers
of  Profe:  vehercbj  itveonfo  mttchupon  the  World,  That  in  Rude
Times,  and  evenamongH  Barbarous  Nations,  Vehenother fortsof
Learning/?e«d  excluded,  there  reas  nothing  more  in  Eftimation .And
for  that  vee  call  Rythme  ; the  Cuftome  of  divers  ofour  Saxon  and
Norman  Poets,  fh  erres  the  Opinion  thej  had  thereof ; rehiljl  the
Latine  ( notwithfianding  its  Excellency ) cottld  not  fufficiently  delight
their  Eires,  mleffe  their  Verfes  ( in  that  Language,  ) were  ftrmd
with  an  Hirmonicall  Cadencc , andbrought  into  Rythme:  Ner
did  the  Ancients  rvrap  ssp  their  Chiefeft  Myfteries,  any  Vehere  elfet
then  in  the  Parobolical  ef  Allufive  part  o/Poetry,#  the  woiZSacred,
and  Venerable  in  their  Efteeme,<i»^  thefecurefifrom  Prophane  and
Vulgar  Wits.  For  fac  h reas  the  goodneffe  of  onr  Fathers,f£tf  the)
Veouldnot  widingly  haz,ard(much  leffe  throVe) their  Childrens  Bread
among  Dogs  ; And  therefore  their  Wifdome  and  Policy  reas,  Firft,
to  finde  out  a way  to  Teach , and  then  an  ArC  ( which  veat  this)  to
Conceale.  In  a Word,  to prtfer  Profe  before  Poetry,  is  no  other , er
better , then  to  let  a Rough.hewen-Clowne,  takf  the  Wall  of  a
Rich  clad-Lady  o/Honour : or  to  Hang  a Prefence  Chamber  Veith
Tarpalin,  inflead  of  Tapeflry.

And  for  thefe  Reafons,  and  out  ofthefe  Refpefts,  the  PoeticalI(«
Iconeeiv’d)  dcferved  the  Preeedency.

HoVebeit  probably  fome  of  thefe  Pieces  ( note  brought  to  publiqus
Light ) had  welnigh  periflVd  in  a filent  Ruine ; and  Deftru&ion^j
a compleat  e Viflory  over  them , but  that  my  Diligence  and  Labori-
ous  Inquifition  refcued  them  from  the  Jawes  thereof beingalmofi
quite  pjroudedin  the  Duft  o/Antiquity,(J«^  involv‘d  in  the  obfcurity
s/forgotten  things,  with  their  Leaves  halfe  Worme-eaten.  And  a
wonder  it  is,  that  ( like  the  Crcatures  in  Noahs  Arke)  they  were
hitherto  fo  fafcly  prefervedfrom  that  UniverfalI  Deluge,  Vehich  ( at
the  DilTolution  of  Abbies  ) overfioVeed  ourgreatefl  Libraries.

tsind  in  doing  thus,  / prefume  it  no  Arrogance  to  challengetht
Reputation  efperforming  a Worke,  nextthatof  a Mans  own : and
fome thing  more,  in  that  ( as  ifhavingthe  Elixir  it  felfe  ) I have
made  Old  Age  btcome  Young  and  Liveiy,  by  reftoring  each  of  the
Ancient  Writers.wf  only  to  the  Springa/ their feveraH  Beauties ,but
n the  Snmmer  of  their  Strcngth  and  Perfc&ion.


Prolegomcna.

As  for  the  rehele  Worke  it  felfe  , it  is  (heav*d  up  from  a ferp
gfeanings  in  part  ofour  Englifh  Fields;  rvhere  though  Ihave  beflew-
td  my  Induftry  to  pick L up  here  And  there , rektt  Icould  finde  in  my
way,  yet  I believe  thcn  are  many  other  Pieces  of  this  Nature  in
private  Hands,  rvhich  ifany  are  pleas' d ( out  ef  the  fame  Iogenious
fcore  that  Ihave  pnblifhed  thefe,)  to  Communicate  to  me : I fhall
fet  thercon  a value  futable  to  the  vvorth  of  their  Fivours,  and lei  the
World  its  Obligation  to  them  befides *

The  Style andLtngctigcthereof,  may>I confejfe  (to  forne)  feeme
Irkfome  and  Uncouth,  and  fi  it  itindeed  to  thofe  that  are  ftrangers
theremto ; butmthall  very  Significant*  Old  words  bave  ftrong
Emphafis ; othtrs  may  look  upon  them  as  Rubbifh  or  Trifles,  but  thej
are  groflj  Miftaken  : for  what  fome  light  Bratnes  may  efleem  as
Foolilli  Toys ; deeper  Judgeraents  canandmll  value  as  fiundand
ferious  Matter.

We  Englifh  have  often  varied  ourFafiions(fuch  is  the  levity  ofour
Fancies)  and  therefore  ifyou  meet  rvith  Spellings  different  from  thofe
in  ufe\or  uncouth  Words  as firangely  ridiculotss}as  a Maunch,Hood,
Cod*piece,or  Trunke-hofe  , know;as  thej  Were  the  fafiionable
Attyres,  fo  thefe  the  ufuallDhk&s  of  thofe  Times ; And  Pofterity
WiUpay  usinourorvn  Coyne , fhould  rve  deride  the  behaviour  and
drefie  ofour  Anceftors.  For  We  mufl  confder  that  Languages  rvhich
are  daily  ufed  in  our  Difcourfe,  are  in  as  continuati  Mutation  : what
Cuftome  brings  into  habic,*/  beft  likjd for  the  Prefent pvhether  it  be  to
revive  What  is  loft,  or  intreduce  fomething  new  ; or  to  piecetipthe
prefent , rvith  the  retained  fhreds  of  What  preceded  % Eut  learned
ToT\gK\t$(which  are  containd  inBook$)injoy  a more  immutable  Fate,
tecaufe  net  fubjedl  to  be  Wafbt  aWay  rvith  the  daily  tyde  and  current
efTmcs.They  are  like  the  faftiion  and  Drapery  rvrought  on  Marble
Szxims.rvhich  mufl  ever  be  retainedrritkoHt  alteration;

Andtherefore  that  the  Truth  and  Worth  of  their  Workes  might
receive  no  Diminution  by  my  Tranfcription,/ purpofely  retained  the
old  Words  and  manner  of  their  Spelling,*/ 1 fomdthem  in  the  Ori*»
ginalls  ( exceptenly  fime  palpable  Miftakcsrf#^  Blemifties  of  former
Tranfcribers tvrhich  Itook  upon  me  to  correft  and  purge  as  litle  more
ehen  Litterali  Imperfeflions;)jrfr  not  to  Have  rieReadei  unfatisfied$
have  added dCompendious  Table , for  the  Interpretation  o/Old,
unufuaIIj^«^obfolete  Words, and thereby  fmooth'd  (as  I fuppofe)  the
Paffkge  for  fuch  as  have  not  hitherto  ^wConverfant  in  thefe  An*^

cient  Rough-bew^dExprcffions,  Where*


Prolegomena.

Whereforejcu  th.it  love  to  converfe  with  the  Dead,  or  confnlt-rrith
their  Monuments,  draw  near/,  perhaps  joh  may  find  more  benefit  i»
them, then  the  Living (There joh  may  meet  vrith  the  Genii  of  cur  Her-
metique  Philofophers , lea' ne  the  Linguagc  in  Vehich  thej  troo'dand
courtedDime  Nature,  and  enjoy  them  more  freely,  and  at  Gr  exter
Comtnind)(fe  fatisfie  yourDouba)then  when  they  Veere  in  the  Fit  111;
For, they  have  Written  more  then  they  would  Speake  j andleft  their
Lines/e  Rich,  as  if  they  had  diffolved  Gold  in  their  Inke,  and clad
their  Words  with  the  Soveraign  Moyflure.

My  Annotations  are  limited  Voithin  the  JBounds  of  what  is  Hifto-
ricall , or  vehit  occafionally  muftneeds  intrenchon  the  Confines  of
other  K\ts,andall Gloffes  upon  the  Philofophicall  Worke  pesrpofely
omittedyfor  the  Jam  e Reafons  that  I chofe  to  fendforth  other  Mens
Children  into  theW  ot\di,rather  then  my  oVon,  And  what  prefumptu-
ousMiftaks,  or  Errors,  the  Cindid  Reader  [ball  meet  with, will(I
hope)be  Cenfured.ttw^  no  le(fe  Favour  and  Charit y,then  that  where-
by  they  are  wont  to  Judge  r^fFaults  of  thefe  they  ejlcem  their  Friends
WWell-wifhers.

And  nai\\'  to  Conclude : May  the  QOD  ofNATVRE  be grati •
oufly  pleafed(out  of  the  Immevfe  Treafury  ofhis  Goodn  ef$)tovouch‘
fafe  ali fuch(whofe  good  Angelis  diretl  them  to,or  have  alreadly  Reli -
gioufy  Engaged  them  in  this  Myflerious  knowledge)theFull  and  En.
'tire  Accomplifliments  of  a Trtte  and  Piotts  Philofopher,  [ To  witt
Learning,  Humility,  Judgemenr,  Courage,Hope,Patience,Difcre-
tion,Charity  & Secrecie:]Tto  /o  they  may  enjoy  the  Fruits  of  their
Labours,  which  otherwife  Veill  be  but  vain  >and  unplcafantrdW  c au  fe-
le (ly  rtnder  the  Divine  Science  and  Secret  it  felfe, Contemptible.

Farewed  (Indaftrious  Students ) and  letyossr  Goodnefle  fili  in,
vite  me  to  accomplijb  the  End  I have  prepofed  : In  doing  \\'hich,  (/
prefnme ) you  may  one  Day  efieeme  me,  better  dcfcrvingyour  Patro*
nage  j At  leaft-Voife,  your  charitahle  Cenfure  : which  ii  aS  the  Re-
compence  Expefted  or  Merited,  by  him,  Veho  is

Yours  Really  Devoted,

i6jan.  j 6<)\,

E.  <tAJhmolc-j,


THE

ORD  INALL

ALCHIMY.

VVritten  by

THOMAS

O F

BR.ISTOL  L.

b*r^r^  i O j.  1 b U'  /6T?\.  t°t  ^


Liber  ifie  Clericis  monfirat fidentiam
Liber  fedLzlds  auget  infcitiam  :
Liber,  honores  juvans  fer  copiam  :
Et  Liber  pauperum  fugans  inopiam :

Liber  fiducia  e(t  & veritatis  :

Regibus  confilittm,  dottrina  Pr  alat  is  :

Et  Liber  utilis  viris  beatis
Vivere  qui  cupiunt  ab  fi  fi  peccatis.

Liber  fecretum , Liber  doni  Dei ,

Elettis [emit a,  vires  bona  (pei}

Valens  conflantibus  firma  fidei  '

Ve  non  credentibus  verbis  oris  mei.
Quarunt  Alchimiam^falfi  quoque  reffi :
Falfi  fine  numero , f r d hi  fiunt  rejeffi ,

Et  cupiditatibus  {heu)  tot  fiunt  in f e fili,
Quod  inter  mille  milliajvix  fiunt  tres  eletfi
Iflam  ad  fidentiam  multi  fiunt  vocati
Nobiles  pauperes  Jnficii,  literati •

Qui  noelunt  labores,  neque  tempus  pati  •
ideo  non  perficient ,qui  a fitmt  ingrati.
Liber  Artis  filios  docet  i fle  fiatis , J
Quibus  hac  percipere  deus  dedit  gratis^
Verficulis  propheticis  quatuor  his  credatis
Omnia  dat  gratis  divinae,  fons  pietatis.
Hac  nobilis  fidentia  efil  tantum  illis  data3
Qtii  diligunt  jufiitiam } mente  cum  beata  •
Dolo  fis } efi  raptoribus  Jed  e[l  denegata.
Propter  peccata  tardantur  mweragrata


i


iit


THis  Booke  the  grcatc  ft  Clearkcs  maytcacb,

But  fl)Ortencth  the  Fulgar-  Re  ac  h :

A Bookc  thargets  'by  Wealthj  Renorvne ,

And  Boggles at  zthred-bare-Gowne :

A trufly- Booke  offa  it hfull- T bings  •

Inftrudting  Priefts,  Advifing  Ktngs:  ‘

A Booke  that’s  fitted  for  the fenee
Of  Man,  vvho  lives  'without  ejfence :

A Booke  of fecrets  given  by  Gods,

To  men  Elect,  a Bcaten-  T, rod :

Availing  fuch  as  conflant  be  ^

In  Faith^  and  Hope^ndtruflingMe.

Good  Men  and  Bad,  even  Numberlefle,

(The  latter,  but  without  fuccefle)

Defire  the  kIa rt : But  ftill  (Alas  1)

Thcy  are  fo  given  to  Avarice^

That  of  a Mi  Ilion , hardly  three
Were  ere  Ordaind  for  Alchim/.

Yenriany  ca/led  every  Hottre ,

Learnd  and  Unleamed \ Rich 3 and  Boor  e •

"W  ho’ll  neither  T 'endjaot  take  the  Paine:  *,

And  therefore7V«%e  without  the  Gaines.

On  whom  God  doth  this  Art  beftow,

Her  Sons  may  herein  fully  know :

By  thefe  * foure-lines  you  may  believe

Hearven  doth  all  things gratis give.

This  Art  in  fuch  you  only  finde
As  fiflice  love,  with  (poties- Minde :

But  tis  deny’d  to  guilefull  Men  •,

ForfmprotraBs  thegiftsof  Heaven.

C 2 Thcfc


* Thefe  fourc
Piophecick
lines  exrra&ei
from  S Jr  tfobn
zAbbot  of  Brid~
livgtons  Pro-
pheci zsjibi  dc
TmOj  <?c.


Sape  Reges  Anglia  decorajfet  hac  res,
Fima  fi  in  domino fuijfet  eorum  (pes  5
Jllefedqni  capiet  per  hanc  rem  honores.
Antiquos  mores  mutabit  in  meliores.

1 fle  cumque  venerit,  regnum  reformabit ,
Virtutibus  & moribus } & exemplum  dabit
Sempiternum  Regibus • plebs  tunc  jubilabit ,
Et  mutuo  fe  diligens  laudes  Deo  dabit:

O Rex,  hac  faci  urus ! Deum  Regem  ora,

Et  ejus  auxilium  pro  re  hac  implora :

Tunc  regi  ju  flo  fulgenti  mente  decora
Grata  fupervenient  qua  non  (perabitur  hora .


5


Thefe  hadadorn’d  the  EngltfhThrone,

If  they  had  truftcd  God  alone :

For  he  that  hercby  Honor  vvinns,

Shall  change  the  old for  better  things .

And  whcn  hc  comes  to  rule  the  Land,

Reforme  it  with  a vertuous  band  :

Lcaving  ex  amples  of  good  deedes
To  every  King  that  him  fucceedes :

Then  fhall  the  People  fubili^e
In  mutuall  love  • and  faeriffe
Pr  ai  festo  God.  O King  that  fhall
Thefe  Workes ! implore  the  God  of  ali
For  timely  helpe,in  thi sgoodthing :

So  to  a and  Gloriom  King ,

'fMoftgoodly  Graczsjbatt defcend \

Whcn  lcaft  look’d  for : 7o  Crome  his  End.


The


6


'%'$'%'%  °4^*4*4'y4%t:&4'J4'$'4tJ4

The  Proh  em  e.

0 the  honor  of  God, One  in  Perfons  threc,
This  Boke  is  made, that  Lay-tnen  fhulde  it
And  Clcrks  alfoe,  after  my  dcceafc,  (fee,
Whercby  ali  Lay-men  which  putteth

(them  in  preafc,
To  fccch  by  Alkimy  great  ryches  to  vvinn
May  finde  goodCounfell  er  they  fuch  warke  begin^

And  greacc  dcceipts  they  tnay  hereby  cfchewe.

And  by  this  do&rine  know  falf  men  from  trewe.
NathlesClerks  greate  feacreats  hecrc  may  leare,

But  ali  Lay  men  fiiall  finde  heei  c caufe  to  feare,

And  to  bcwarc  of  falfillufions,

Wh.ch  Mnltiplyers  worke  with  their  Conclufions  :

But  for  that  I defire  not  worldly  fame,

But  your  good  prayers,  unknowne  fhall  be  my  namc.

That  no  man  fhulde  therafter  fearch,  ne  looke,

But  wifely  Confider  the  flovvers  of  this  booke :

Of  every  eftate  that  is  within  Mankind
Ifyce  make  fearch  much  people  yemay  finde,

Which  to  Alkimy  their  Corage  doe  addrefs
Only  for  appetite  of  Luere  and  Riches,

As  Popes  with  Cardinalis  of  Dignity ,

Archbyfhopes  with  Byjhcpes  of  bigh  degree$

With  Abbots  and  Priors  ofRchgion,

With  Friars^Heremites , and  Preesis  manie  one ,

And  Kings  with  Princes  and  Lords  great  of  blood,

For  every  eftate  defiretb  after  good  *,


And


7


The  Proheme,

And  Mcrchaunts  alfo  which  dwell  in  thc  fiere
Of  brenning  Covetifc,  have  thcreto  delire;

And  Common veorkemen  will  not  bc  out-lafte.

For  as  well  as  Lords  they  lovc  this  noble  Crafte ;

As  Gouldfmithes  whome  we  Ihulde  left  repreve
For  ftghts  in  their  Craft  mevech  thcm  to  belceve :

But  wonder  it  is  that  Wevers  deale  with  luch  warks,

Free  Mafons  and  T anner s with  poorc  Parijh  Clerks ;

T <tilors  andGlaficrs  woll  not  thercof  ccafe,

And  eke  fely  Tinkers  will  put  them  in  thc  preafe
With  greate  prcfumption;but  yet  forne  collour  there  was.
For  ali  fuch  Men  as  give  Tindture  to  GlalTe :

But  many  Artificers  have  byn  over-fwiftc
With  haftyCrcdence  to  fume  away  their  thriftc:

And  albeit  that  lolTes  made  themtofmarte,

Yet  everin  hopc  continued  their  hearte ,

Trufting  fometyme  to  fpeederight  well,

Of  many  fuch  truly  1 can  teli,

Which  in  fuch  hope  continued  all  their  Iyfc,

Whereby  they  were  pore  and  made  to  unthrife :

It  had  byne  good  for  them  to  have  left  off
In  feafon,  for  noughte  they  founde  but  a fcoffc.

For  trewly  he  that  is  not  a greate  Clerke
Is  nice  and  levvdc  to  medie  with  this  warke ;

Ye  may  truft  me  well  it  is  no  fmall  inginn
To  know  all  fecreats  pertaining  to  the  Myne ;

For  it  is  moft  profound  Philefophic ,

The  fubtill  fciencc  of  holy  Alkirny ,

Of  which  Science  here  I intend  to  write,

Howbeitlmay  not  curioully  indite.

For  he  that  fhuldc  all  a common  people  teache,

Hemuft  for  them  ufe  plaine  and  common  fpcache;
Though  that  I write  in  plaine,  and  hoemely  wifc
No  good  Man  then  lhuldc  fuch  writenge  diipiie.

All


8 The  Proheme,

Ali  CMttters  that  write  of  this  Solcmc  werkc
Thcy  made  their  Bokes  to  many  Men  full  derke,

In  Poyfes,  Parables,  and  in  Metaphors  alfoe,

Which  to  Shollers  caufeth  peine  and  vvoc:

For  in  their  pradtife  whan  they  would  it  aflay,

Thcy  lecfe  their  Cofts,  as  men  fec  aldayc.

Hermes,  Rafis,  Ceber,  and  Avicen ,

Merlin,  Hortolan,  Demeer  it,  and  Morietf ,

Bacoti j and  Raimend,  with  orhers  many  moe
Wrote  under  covert,  and  i^iriftotle  alfoe.

For  whar  hereof  thcy  wrote  with  their  penn,

Their  Cloudy  Claufes  dullcd  many  Men :

Fio  Laymen,  Fro  Clearks,  and  fo  fro  every  Man
They  h:d  this  Art  that  no  Man  finde  it  cann.

By  their  bokes  do  they  (bew  Reafons  faire,

Whereby  much  people  arebrought  into  difpaire.

Yct  Awtxageras  wrote  plaincft  of  them  all
Tn  his  bokeo { Convergens  naturali  t,

Of the  old  Fathers  that  ever  I founde
He  moft  difclofed  of  this  Science  the  grownde  5
Whereof  AriHetle  had  greate  envy,

Andhim  rcbuked  unrightfully
In  many  places,  as  I can  well  report,

Intending  that  men  to  him  fhuldc  not  refort :

For  he  was  large  of  his  cunning  and  love,

God  have  his  foulc  in  blifie  with  him  above :

And  fuche  as  fowed  envious  feede,

Godforgive  them  their  mifdeede.

As  the  Mounke  which  a Boke  did  write
Of  a thoufand receipts  in  mallice  for  defpight;

Which  be  coppied  in  many  a place
Whereby  hath  beene  made  pale  many  a Face  $

And  many  Gewndshavc  byne  made  bare  of  hewc.

And  men  made  fals  which  before  tyme  were  trewc.

Wherefore


The  Proheme.

Whcrcfore  my  Pitty  doth  me  conftreyne
To  flicw  thc  trewth  in  fcwc  words  and  plakie ,

Soc  that  you  may  fro  falfc  do<ftrinc  flcc,

If  yc  give  Credencc  to  thisbokc  and  mce  5
Avoidcyour  Bokcs  writtcn  of  Receipts,

For  all  fuch  Rcccipcs  arc  full  of  Dcccipts ;

Truftnot  fuch  Receipts,  and  lernc  wcllthis  Claufe,
—Nothing  is  rvronght  but  bj  bis  profer  Caufe  : \

Whcreforethat  Pradtifc  falleth  farr  bchindc
Wher  Knowlcdge  of  thc  caufe  is  not  in  minde:

Thcrcfore  remember  ever  morewifcly,  (whie.

-That  you  woorke  nothing  but  you  knovrc  kowe  and
AHoc  hc  that  would  in  this  Arte  procccdc  ■,

To  cfchewc  falfhood  hc  hath  greate  need : 1

For  trcvvth  is  good  which  this muft  guide,  ;

Whercforc  to  falfhood  ye  may  never  flidc  j
But  ftedfaftly  your  minde  muft  bc  fet,

Fals  Gollourcd  Metall  never  to  Counterfett  $ ?

As  thchhat  fcckc  Blanchcrs  or  Citrinacions,

Which  woll  not  abidc  all  Examinacions,

Whercwith  fals  Piate  they  make  as  they  cann
Or  Money  to  beguile  fome good  trew  Mann :

But  God  hath  made  that  of  this  blcfTed  Arte ,

All  that  bc  fals  fhall  have  thereof  noc  parte $

Hc  muft  have  Grace  that  would  for  this  Arte  fue,
Thcrcfore  of  right  him  needeth  robe  trew :
Alfohcmaynotbctroblcd  in  his  Minde
Wich  outward  charges > which  x.h\s  Arte  would  finde :
And  he  that  would  have  his  intent,

He  muft  have  Riches  fufficicnr.

-In  many  wayes  hc  maie  not  looke
But  only  purfuc  the  order  of  this  Bokc  5
Named  of  i^Alkmy  the  Ordinali,

The  Crede  mihi,  the  Standard  perpetuali :

D ' For


IO


The  Proheme,

For  iike  as  the  Ordinali  to  Pfeefts  fetteth  out
The  Cervice. of  the  dayes  aS  they  goc  dboute  :

Soe  of  ali  the  Bokes  unordered  in  ^.Alkmy
The  effed  is  here  ftt  out  Orderly :

Therefore  this  Boke  to  an  Alchimisler  wife.

Is  a Boke  of  incomparable  pricc  •,

WholVtfewth  fhall  never  be  defiled,

Though  it  appeatt  in  homely  wife  compiled  :

And  as  I had  this  Ane  by  Grace  from  Heaven,

I give  you  the  fame  here  in  Chapters feaven :

As  largely  as  by  my  feahy  I may,

By  licetis  ot  the  dreadfull  Judge  at  domes  daye.

rhc  firjl  Ch apter  fliall  ali  Men  teache
What  m anner  People  may  this  Science  rcache,

And  vvhie  the  trevv  Science  of  lA Ikimy ,

Is  of  old  Fathers  called  Plejfed and  Holy.

In  the  fecond  Cbapter  maie  be  fayne,

The  nice  Joycs  thereof,  with  the  greate  paine.

The  third  Chapter  for  the  love  of  One,

Shall  trewly  difclofc  the  Matters  of  our  Stone  5
Which  the  Ar  abies  doon  Elixir  call,

Whereofit  is,thereundcrftondcyou  fliall.

Th tforverth  Chapter  teacheth  the  groflc  Werke,
Afoulelabourenotkindly  fora  Clerke.

In  which  is  found  full  greate  travaile,
Withmanyperills,  and  nunyafaile.

The  fift  Chapter  is  of  the  fubtill  Werk,

Which  God  ordcyncd  only  for  a Clerke  5
Full  few  Clerks  can  it  comprehcnd,

Therefore  to  few  Men  is  the  Science  fend.

The  fixt  Chapter  i.s  of  Concord  and  love,
Betwecn  low  natures , and  heavenly  fphcares  above  :
Whercof trew  knowledge  advanceth  greatiy  Clerks,
And  caufeth  furtherancein  our  wondcrfull.wcrks.


The


II


The  Probeme.

The feaventh  Cbaptcr  trcwly  teach  you fliali,

The  doubtfull  Rcgiments  of  your  Fircs  all.

NOw  Soveraignc  Lord God me  guidc  and  fpeedc.
For  to  my  Matteis  as  now  I will  proceede,
Praying  all  men  which  this  Boke  fhall  finde,

With  devoute  Prayers  to  have  my  foule  in  minde  ■ '<
And  that  noe  Man  for  better  ne  for  worfe,

Chaunge  my  writing  for  drede  of  Gods  curfe  :

For  whcrc  quick  fentence  fliall  feame  not  to  be
Ther  may  wife  men  finde  fclcouthe  previtye  5
And  chaunging  of  fome  one  fillable
May  makcthis  Bokeunprofitable.
rThcrcforc  truft not toone  Reading  or  tvvaine,  £.*;
-But  tvventy  tymes  it  would  be  over  fayne5  ' |

For  it  cdntcyneth  full  ponderous  fentence,  •

Albeit  that  it  faute  forme  of  Eloquence  •,  i |j

But  the>  beft  thing  thatye  doe  mali,

Is  to  reade  many  Bokes,  and  than  this  withalf.  =


i :


ii  e.


D z


Chap


! , >


Nortons  Ordinali.


C H A P.  I.

AIS[  ryefull  merveylons  and  Archimaftryc
Is  the  tin&ure  of  holi  ^Alkimy :

A wonderfull£a'f»ir<r,fecrete  Philofophie,
A fingular  grace  & gifte  of  th’almightie :
Which  never  was  founde  by  labourof
But  it  by  Teaching,  or  Revdacion  begann.  (M  ann.

It  was  nevcr  for  Mony  fold  nebought,

By  any  Man  vvhich  for  it  hath  fought :

But  given  to  an  able  Man  by  grace,  ( fpacc.

Wroughtwith  grcate  Coft,  vvith  longlayfirand
It  helpcth  a Man  when  he  hath  ncedc.

It  voydeth  vaine  Glory,  Hope,  and  alfo  drcade :
Itvoydeth  Ambitioufnefle,  Extorrion,and  Excefle,

It  fenceth  Adverfity  that  fliee  doc  not  opprefle.

Hc  that  thcreof  hath  his  full  intent,

Forfaketh  Extremitics,.with  Meafurc  is  contcnt,

Somc  pcople  would  not  have  itcauled  Holy,

And  in  this  wife  thei  doe  replyc ,

Thcifay  how  Painims  maic  th  s Arte  have,.

Such  as  our  Lord God  woll  never  fave :

For  their  wilfull  fals  infidclitie,

The  caufc  of goodncs,  pofleflours  cannotbe.

Alfoe  it  maketh  none  other  thing

But  Gold  or  Silver,  for  Mony,  Cupp,.  or  Ring.

Whiche  of  vvifc  men  is  provcd  and  wcll  founde
Leaft  verteous  thing  that  is  upon  thc  Ground.

Whereforc  conduding  ali  men  of  that  fed,

Say,  how  this  Sdencc  n’is  holy  in  cffeft.

To  this  vvc  fay  and  vvittnes  as  we  cann

How  that  this  Science  was  never  tought  to  Man  ^

D 3 But


i/j.  JA(ortons

Chap « i . But  hc  wcre  provcd  pcrfedtly  vvith  fpace,

Whcther  he  vvereable  to  rcceyvethis  Gracc  :

For  his  Trewth,  Vertue,  and  for  his  ftablc  Witt,
Which  iF he  faulte  hc  fliall  never  havc  it  *

Alfo  no  man  coulde  yet  this  Science  reach,

But  if  God  fend  a Maji  er  him  to  tcach  :

For  it  is  foc » vonderfull  and  foc  felcouth,

That  it  muft  needes  be  tought  frotn  mouth  to  raouth
Alfo  he  muft  (behe  never  foc  loath1)  . .

Reccive  it  with  a moft  facred  dreadfull  Oath,

That  as  werefufe  greate  dignitie  and  fame,

Soe  he  muft  needly  rcfufc  the  fame.

And  alfo  that  he  fliall  not  be  fo  wilde
Toteach  thisfeacret  to  his  owne  childe  5
For  nighnes  of  Blood  ne  Confanguinity
May  not  accepted  be  to  this  dignity:

Soe  blood  as  blood,  may  have  hereof  noe  part,

But  only  vertue  winneth  this  holy  Arte :

Thcrefore  ftraightly  you  fliall  fearch  and  fee,

All  manners  and  vertues  with  th’abilitie
Of  theperfon  which  fliall  this  Scyence leere.

And  in  likewife  mah-e  him  ftraightlie  fwere :

Soe  that  noe  man  fliall  leave  this  Arte  behinde,

But  he  ad  able  and  approved  Man  can  finde  5
When  Age  fliall  greeve  him  to  ride  or  goe,

One  he  may  tcach,  but  then  never  no  moc :

For  this  Science  muft  ever  fccret  be,

The  Caufc  whereof  is  this  asye  may  fee ;

If  one  evill  man  had  hereof  all  his  will
AII  Chriftian  Peafe  hc  might  haftilie  fpill.

And  with  his  Pride  he  might  pull  downe
Rigbtfull;A'/«g\r  and  Princcs  of  rcnowne :

Whcrcfotjc  the  fenrence  of  pcrilland  jcopardy ,

Upoh  the  'Te.tcber  refteth  drcadfully.


Soe


Ordina  ll.  15

So  than  for  doubt  of fuch  pride  and  wreach,  Chap.  \ ,

Hc  muft  be  warc  thar  will  this  Science  teach  :

No  Man  thereforc  maic  reach  thisgreate  prefent,

But  hc  that  hath  vertues  excellent.

Soe  though  Men  wecne  Poffeffours  notto  aide,

T 0 hallow  this  Science  as  beforc  is  faid  5
Neither  fceme  not  bldTed  effedually ,

Yet  in  her  Order  this  Science  is  holy.

And  forafmuch  as  noe  Man  maie  her  finde
But  only  by  grace,  fhe  is  holy  of  her  kinde.

Alfo  it  is  a worke  and  Cure  divine,

Foule  Copper  to  make  Gold  or  Silver  fine .*

No  man  maie  finde  fuch  chaunge  by  his  thought,

Of divers  kinds  which  Gods  hands  have  wrought.

For  Gods  Conjundions  Man  maie  not  undoe,

But  ifhis  Grace  fully  confent  thereto,

By  helpe  of  this  Science , which  our  Lerd  above
Hath  given  to  fuch  Men  as  he  doth  love ;

Whcrefore  o\dFatbers  conveniently
Called  this  Science  Holy  Alkimy.

Thcrefore  noe  Man  fhulde  be  too  fwifte,

To  caft  away  our  Lords  blefled  guift  :

Confideringe  hovv  that  Almighty  God
From  great  Dodours  hath  this  Science  forbod,

And  graunted  itto  few  Men  ofhis  mercy,

Such  as  be  faithfull  trew  and  lovv/y.

And  as  there  be  but  Planets  feaven
Amonge  the  multitude  of ftarrs  in  Heaven  :

Soe  among  millions  of  millions  of  Manhinde,

Scarflie  feaven  men  maie  this  Science  finde.

Wherefore  Laymen  ye  may  Iere  and  fee
How  many  Doflors  of  great  aurhoritie,

With  many  fearchers  hath  this  Science  fought,

Yet  ali  their  labours  hav^  turned  into  noughr^


If


i<5  J\ortom

chif.  > . Ifthei  did  coft,  yet  found  thei  none availe.

For  of  their  purpofe  cvcry  tyme  thei  faile  5
And  in  defpaire  thei  reafon  and  deparce.

And  then  thei  faid  how  there  is  noc  fuch  arte  $

' Buc  fained  Fablcs  thei  name  it  wherc  thei  goe,

A fals  fond  thing  thei  fay  it  is  alfoe : /

Such  Mcn  prefumc  too  much  upon  their  mindeu
They  wcene  their  witts  fufficient  this  Arte  to  finde.
But  of  their  flaunder  and  words  of  outrage,

We  cake  thereof trewlie  little  Chargc :

For  fuch  be  not  invited  to  our  fcaft,

Which  weeneththemfelvcs  wifc  andcandoclcafte.
Albeit  fuch  Men  lift  not  lenger  to  perfue,

Yet  is  this  Sciente  of  <_ Alkimy  fall  trew  5
And  albeit  fome  proude  Clerks  fay  nay
Yet  every  wife  Clorke  well  confider  may,

How  he  whiche  hereof might  no  trewth  fec
Maienot  hereoflawfuli  wittnes  bc,

For  it  vvere  a vvonderous  thing  and  queinte,

A man  that  never  had  fighr  to  peinte.

How  llroulde  a borne  blinde  Man  bc  fure
To  wrice  or  makc  good  Portraturc.

To  build  Poules  fteeplc  might  be  greate  doubr.

For  fuch  proude  Clerks  to  bring  aboute  5
Such  might  well  happ  to  breake  their  crownCj
Ere  they  coude  wifely  take  it  downc.

Whcrefore  ali  fuch  are  full  farr  behinde,

To  feteh  out  the  fecreateft  pointe  ofkinde-,
Therefore  all  Men  take  theire  fortune  and  chaunce,
Remit  fuch  Clerks  to  their  Ignorance.


w yc  that  will  this  Science  purfue,

Lcarnc  ye  to  know  fals  Men  from  trew.
All  trew  fearchers  of  this  Science  of  Alkimy ,
Muftbe  full  learned  in  their  firft  Philofophic :


Elfc


Ordinall,

Elfe  ali  thcir  labourc  fhall  them  Iet  and  greive,
Ashethat  fetchcth  WaterinaSive  $

The  trew  men  fcarcft  and  feeke  all  alone
In  hope  to  finde  our  dele&able  ftone.

And  for  that  thei  would  thatnoMan  fiiulde  have  lofic
They  prove  and  feeke  all  at  their  ovvnc  Coftc
Soe  thcir  ovvne  Purfes  they  will  not  fpare,

They  make  their  Coffers  thereby  full  bare,

Withgreate  Patiencethei  doeproceedc,

Trufting  only  in  God  to  be  thcir  fpeede.

THe  fals  man  walketh  from  Towne  to  Towne,

For  themoft  parte  in  a threed  bare-Gowne*

Ever  fearching  with  diligent  awaite
To  winn  his  praye  with  forne  fals  deceit
Of  fwcaringandleafing;  fuchwill  notceafe,

To  fay  how  they  can  Silver  piate  incrcafe.

And  ever  they  raylc  with  perjury*,

Saying  how  they  can  Multiplie
Gold  and  Silver, and  in  fuch  wife
With  promife  thei  pleafe  the  Covetife,

And  Caufcth  his  minde  to  be  on  him  fett,

Thcn  Falfehood  and  Covetife  be  wellmett.

But  aftcrwards  within  a little  while
The  Mulciplier  doth  him  beguile
With  his  faire  promife,  and  with  his  fals  othes,

The  Covetife  is  brought  to  thrced-bare  elothes :

But  if  he  can  haftily  be  well  aware,

Of  the  Multiplier  and  of  his  Chaffare ,

Of  whofe  deceipts  much  I can  reporte,

But  I dare  not  leaft  I give  comforte
To  fuch  as  be  difpofcd  to  Treachery  5
For  fo  much  hurte  mought  come  thereby ;

Wherefore  advifcyouandbe  wile,

Of  them  which  proffer  fuch  fervife.

E


ig  JA (ortons

Ibap.  i.  If  they  had  Cunning  havc  ye  no  doubt,

Tbey  vvoll  be  loath  to  ftiew  it  out : ?
Whenfuchmenpromifc  toMultiplic,

They  compafle  to  doe  forne  Villony ,

Somc  trew  mans  goods  to  beare  awayc  5
Of  fuch  fcllowcs  what  fhulde  I faye  ?

All  fuch  falfe  men  where  ever  thei  goe,

They  fhulde  be  punifhed,  thei  bc  not  fo.

Upon  Nature  thei  falfely  lye
For  Mettalls  doe  not  Multiplic;

Of  this  Sentencc  all  men  befure,

Evermore  Arte  muft  ferve  Nature.

Nothing  mulnplieth  as  Au<5tors  fayes,

But  by  one  of  theis  tvvo  waycs,

One  by  rotting,  called  Putrcfa&ion,

That  other  as  Beafts,  by  Propagation ;

Propagation  in  Mettalls  maie  not  be,

But  in  our  Stone  much  like  thing  ye  may  fcc.
Putrefa&ion  muft  deftroy  and  dcfacc ,

But  it  be  don  in  its  proper  place.

CMettalls  of  kinde  growlowc  under  ground, '
For  above  erth  ruft  in  them  isfoundj
Soc  above  erth  appeareth  corruption,
Ofmettalls,andin  longtyme  deftru&ion,
Whereof  noe  Caufe  is  found  in  this  Cafe,

But  that  aborte  Erth  thei  be  not  in  their  place»
Contrarie  places  to  nature  caufeth  ftrife.

As  Fifhes  out  of  vvater  lofen  their  Lyfc  :

And  Man,  with  Beafts,  and  Birds  live  in  ayer,

But  Stone  and  Mineralis  under  Erth  rcpaier.
Phyficians  and  Appoticariesfaut  appetite  and  will,
To  feech  vvater  flowers  on  a dryhill:
t^or  Ged  hath  ordcyned  of  his  wifdome  and  grace,
All  things  to  grow  in  their  naturali  place.


Againft


Ordinall,

Againft  this  do&rine  fomc  Mcn  replie,

And  fay  that  Mettalls  doc  Multiplic  :

ForofSilver,  Lead,Tinn,  andalfo  Brafle,

Some  vcyne  is  more,  and  fome  is  lafle,

Or  which  diverfitie  Nature  Ihulde  ccafe,
IfMettallsdidnot  multiplie  and  increafe^.

Whcrefore  they  fay  thatreafon  fhewethnowe,

How  that  under  Erththey  multiplie  and  growe  ;

Why  not  then  above  Erth  in  veffells  clofe  and  faire,
Sucfi  as  (bulde  preferve  them  from  FireWater  and  Aieri
Hercto  we  fay  this  reafon  is  but  rude,

For  this  is  noe  perfeft  fimilitude ;

For  caufc  efficient  of  Mettalls  finde  ye  fhall
Only  to  be  the  vertue  Minerali,

Which  in  everie  Erth  is  not  found,

But  in  ccrtaine  places  of  eligible  ground ;

Into  which  places  the  Heavenly  Spheare,

Sendeth  his  beames  diredly  everie  yeare.

And  as  the  matters  there  difpofed  be
Such  Mettalls  therco!  formed  fhall  you  fee.

Few  grownds  be  apt  to  fuch  gencration  :

\ How  ffioulde  then  above  ground  be  Multiplicationi
Alfo  all  mcn  percey  ven  that  be  wife,

How  Watcr  conjealed  with  Cold  is  yfc  •/■c*

And  before  tyme  it  harded  was

Some  lay  in  more  places  and  fome  in  Iaffe,

As  water  in  fofles  of  the  Carte-wheele,

Were  veyncs  imale  whan  they  began  to  kecle,

But  water  in  ditehes  made  veynes  more,

For  plenty  of  water  that  was  thercin  froare.

Hereupon  to  fay  it  were  noe  good  advice,

That  thereforeof  yfefhould  multiply  more  yfe.

Soe  though  there  be  of  Mettalls  veynes  more  and  lafle.

It  proveth  nott«hat  they  increafe  more  then  it  was ,

E 2 Alfoe


Chi f/.  i.


20  J\or'tom

Chap*  i.  Alfoc  ye  may  truft  vvithout  any  doubr,

If  Multiplying  fhould  bc  brought  about :

Ali  th'engredience  muft  drawto  fimplcity,

Andbreake  Compofition  asyearly  yemayfee:

For  Multiplying  ofHearbes  how  N/iture  hath  provided,
That  all  things  joyned  in  the  feede  be  divided : .

Elfe  ftalke  and  lcavcs  which  vertually  thcrein  bc,

May  not  come  forth  a&ually  that  eye  mought  thetn  fec.
But  Mettall  holdeth  his  holle  Compoficion,

When  corrafive  waters  have  made  diflolucion:
Thereforeryth  yfe  is  nerrertofimplicity,

T hen  is  Mettall,  and  maie  not  increafed  be,

Trewly  ye  maie  truft  as  I faid  before,

How  of  one  ounce  of  Silver,  maie  Silver  be  noe  more.-  * -
Alfo  nothing  multiplyed  fiiall  ye  finde,

But  it  be  of  Vegetative  or  of  Senfitive  kinde:

Where  Mettalls  bc  only  Elamentative,

Having  noe  feede;  nether  feeling  of  life  5
Whcrefore  conduding  all  Multipliers  muft  ceafe.

For  Mettalls  once  Mettalls  fhall  noe  more  increafe  3 .
Nathlefleonc  Mettall  tranfmuted  we  finde,

Unto  a Mettall  of  another  kinde,

For  propinquity  of  matter  that  in  them  vvas.

As  it  is  knownebetwixt  Trcn  and  Brafie.

But  to  make  trew  Silver  or  Gold\s  noe  ingin,

Exceptonly  the  Philofophers  medicine.

Wherefore  fuch  leafings  as  Multipliers  ufe,

Clerks  reprove  and  utterly  rcfufe*,

Soch  art  of  Multiplying  is  to  bc  reproved,'

But  holy  x^ilkim)  of  right  is  to  be  lovcd,

Which  treateth  of  a precious  Medicine,

Such  as  trewly  maketh  Gold  and  Silver  fine  ■:
Whereofexample  for  Tcftimonic,

Is  in  a Citty  of  Catilovy.


Which


21


Ordinall.

Which  Raymond  Lul/y,Knight-,  men  fuppofe,

Made  in  feaven  Images  the  trewth  to  difclofc  ♦

Thrce  were  good  Silver , in  fhape  like  JLadies  bright,
Everie  each  of  Foure  were  Gold  and  ditfca  Knight :

In  borders  of their  Clothing  LctterSlike  appeare,
Signifying  in  Sentencc  as  it  Iheweth  here.

i.  Ofold  Horfhoes  (faid  onc)I  was  yre,

Now  I am  good  Silver  as  good  as  yc  defire.

2.  I was  (faidanother ) Iron  fet  frora  the  Mine3
But  now  I am  Gotild  pure  perfe&  and  fine.

3.  Whilomc  was  I Copper  of  an  old  red  pann,

Now  am  I good  Silver , faid  the  third  woman.

4.  The  fourth  faide,  I was  Copper  growne  in  the  filthy
Now  am  I perfeft  Gould  made  by  Gods  gra ce.  (place,

5.  The  fiftfaid,  I was S/V-wperfe&through fine,

Now  am  I perfeft  Goulde,cxce llent5better  then  the  prime.
6. 1 was  a Pipe  of  Leade  well  nigh  two  hundred  yeare.
And  now  to  ali  men  good  Silver  I appeare.

7. The  feventh  faid,I  Leade  am  Gettld  made  for  a Maiftrie,
But  trevvlic  my  fellowes  are  nerer  thereto  then  I.

This  Science  beareth  her  name  of  a King,

Called  Alchimus,  without  leafing  r -
A glorious  Prince  of  moft  noble  minde;

His  noble  vertues  holpe  him  this  arte  to  finde  5
He  fcarched  Nature,  he  was  nobil  Clerke ,

He  left  Extorcion,  than  fought  and  found  this  werke. .
King  Hermes  alfoe  he  did  the  fame,

Bcing  a Clerke  of  Excellent  fame  •,

In  his  Quadripartite  made  of  Aflrologic,

Of  Phyfique  and  of  this  Arte  of  Alkimy,

And  alfo  of  Magique  naturali,

Asoffour  Sc/mrej  in  nature  palfing  ali.

And  therehe  faid  thatblcfied  is  hec-
That  knowcththings  truly  as  thei  bee,

E 3 And


2i  5\( ortons

Cbap,  i . And  bleflcd  is  hc  that  maketh  due  proofc.

For  thac  is  roote  of  cunning  and  roofe ;

Forby  opinion  is  many  a Man
Dcccived,  which  hcreof  litlc  cann.

An  old  Proverbe,  In  a Bujhell  efweeningei
Is  notfonnd  one  handfull  of  Cunning  e :

With  due  proofc  and  witn  difcrcct  aflaye,

Wifemen  may  learc  ncw  things  cvcry  day.

By  Cunninge,Men  knovv  themfclvcs  and  cvcry  thinge ;
Man  is  but  a Beaft  and  worfe  without  Cunninge :

But  litlc  favou  r hath  cvery  Man
To  Science  whereof  he  litlc  can;

And  lide  Cunning  maketh  men  proud  and  wilde.
Sufficient  Cunning  maketh  men  full  milde.

Nobil  men  now  in  manner  have  defpighte
Of  them  that  have  to  Cunning  appetite  .*

But  noble  Kings  in  auncient  dayes,

Ordained  ( as  olde  Au&ors  faies , )

That  the  feven  Sciences  to  learne  and  can,

Shulde  none  but  only  a Noble  man ;

And  at  the  leaft  he  (huldc  be  fo  free,

That  he  mought  Studic  with  libertic-
Whcrefore  old  Sages  did  them  call
The  feaven  Sciences  liberali :

For  hc  that  vvould  leare  them  perfedlly  and  welf3
In  cicere  liberty  he  muft  dwell.

From  worldly  warkes  hc  muft  withdrawe,

That  would  lernc  but  Mans  Lawe :

Much  more  the  Worlde  hc  muft  forfake,

Which  many  Sciences  vvoulde  overtake.

And  for  that  caufe  Men  may  wcll  fee,

Why  Cunninge  men  difpifed  be.

Yet  nobil  Memory  fhall  never  ceafc,

Of  him  which  Cunninge  doth  incrcafe.


Hee


O R D I N A L L.  23

Hee  vvhich  loveth  Cunning,  Juftice,  and  Gracc  Chap,  2.

Is  fct  afide  in  many  a place  5

But  vvhoe  to  Courte  bringcth  in  with  guile,

Profit,  or  prefent,  he  is  thc  Man  that  vvhile.

Whercforc  rhis  Science  and  many  Graces  moe,

Be  loft  and  bc  departed  all  ye  fro.

And  furthcrmorc  rcmembcr  what  I fay,

Sinn  calcth  faft  for  his  cnding  day :

Covetife  and  Cunningc  have  difcorde  by  kinde  $

Who  luere  coveteth  this  Science  fliall  not  finde  5
But  he  that  loveth  Science  for  her  owne  kinde,

He  may  purchafeboth  for  his  blefled  minde.

Of  this  Chapter  more  I need  not  teach,.

For  here  appeareth  what  men  may  it  reach
That  is  to  lemember  only  the  trewe.

And  he  that  is  confiant  in  minde  to  purfue,

And  is  not  Ambitious,  to  borrow  hath  no  neede,

And  can  bc  Pattent,not  hafty  for  to  fpcedej
And  that  in  God  he  fet  fully  his  truft.

And  that  in  Cunning  be  fixed  all  his  luft ;

And  with  all  this  he  leade  a rightfull  lyfc,

FaKhoodc  fubduinge,  fupport  no  finfull  ftrife :
vSuch  Men  be  apt  this  Science  to  attaine.

The  Chapter  following,is  of  Joy  and  painc.


C H A P.  I L

OT^mandy  nuriihed  a Monke  of  late,
Which  deceived  Men  of  every  ftate.
But  before  that  done  he  in  his  fantazie,
Weened  he  had  caught  this  Art  fully.
Such  rejoycing  thereof  he  had,

That  he  began  to  dote  and  to  be  madde.


Of


2^

Cbttp.z,


?h(ortons


Of  vvhofc  tpoyes  (albeit  they  were  fmallc)

For  an  enfample  I write  this  Tale.

This  Monke  had  walked  about  in  Fraunce,
Raunging  Apoftata  in  his  plefaunce.

And  after  he  came  into  this  lond,

Willing  Mcn  fliould  underftonde;

How  that  of  Alkimy  he  had  the  groundc,

By  a Bokc  of  Receipts  which  he  had  founde.
In  furety  thereof  he  fet  ali  his  minde,

Some  nobil  A&e  to  leave  bchindc;

Whereby  his  name  fhould  be  immortali.
And  his  greate  Fame  in  laude  perpetuali.
And  ofte  he  mufed  wherc  to  beginne,

To  fpcnd  the  riches  that  hc  fhulde  winn.

And  ever  he  thought  loe  this  I cann,

Wherc  mought  I finde  forne  trufty  Man, '
Which  vvould  accorde  now  with  my  will.
And  help  my  purpofe  to  fulfill.

Then  would  I makcupon  the  plainc
QfSalisbury  glorious  tobefaine,

Fifteen  Abbtes  in  alittlc  while,

One  Abbie  in  the  cnd  of  every  mile.
Hereupon  this  Monke  to  me  reforted,

Of  truft  (he  faid)  which  men  of  me  reported.
His  forefaid  mind  he  did  to  me  teli.

And  prayd  meto  kecp  hisgreat  Councell.

I faid  before  an  Image  of  Saint  J-ame>

That  I would  ncvcr  difclofe  his  name ;

YetI  may  write  without  all  vice,

Of  his  defircs  that  were  fo  nice.

When  he  had  difcovered  hisgreat  Cunning,
He  faid  that  he  faughted  nothing,

But  a good  meane  for  his  folace,

To  labour  to  the  Kings  good  gracc.


To


O R D I N A L L.  15

Toget  lycenceof  hiseftate,  , , .jCbtp..  a.

And  of  his  Lords  mediate,  : i\  o,  vriv;  KnA

To  purchafe  lond  for  the  Abbies  aforefaid,

For  which  ali  cofte  ihould  be  wcll  paied  ^

But  yec  he  had  great  doubt  and  feare,

How  to  purchafe, of  \vhom,and  where.

When  I had  heard  of  this  greate  werke,  , :■  t . I ?;  f
I fearched  (to  wit ) what  manner  of  Clerke
He  vvas,  and  what  he  knew  of  Schoolc,

And  therein  he  was  but  a Foole.

Yct  I fuffercd,  and  held  me  ftill,

More  to  lerneof  his  lcwd  Will.  ..

Thenfaid  I,  it  were  alevvd  thinge,

Such  matter  to  fliesv  unto  the  Kinge  •

But  if  the  proofe  were  reafonable,

He  would  thinke  it  a foolifh  Fable.

The  Monkc  faide  how  that  he  had  in  fircj
A thing  which  fhulde  fulfill  his  defire,

Whercof the  trcwth  within  forty  dayes,

I fhulde  well  know  by  trew  afiaies.

Then  I faid,  I would  no  more  that  tyde, . .

But  forty  dayes  I faid  I would  abide.

When  forty  dayes  were  gone  and  paft,

The  Monkts  Crafte  was  deanc  overcaft.

Then  all  his  Abbies  and  ali  his  thought,

Was  turned  to  a thing  ofnought-.

And  as  he  came,he  went  full  lcwde,

Departing  in  a minde  full  Ihrewd:

For  foone  after  within  a littlc  while,

Many  trewc  mCn  he  did  beguile*

And  aftcrwards  went  into  Fraunce.

Loc  ! this  was  a pittifull  charice,

That  fifteene  ^mwofRcligion,

Shulde  in  this  wife  fall  to  confufiom

F


Greate


"ortons


Grcat  tvonder  was  what  thing  hc  meant,
And  why  he  fet  ail  his  intent
Abbies  to  build;  then  was  it  vvonderj
Why  nould  hc  live  Obediennmder,

But  bc  Apoftata,  and  range  about,

This  blcfled  Science  to  finde  our.

But  as  I vvrote  above  in  this  Boke,

Lct  no  Deceiver  after  this  Science  looke.


o


AN  other  Enfample  is  good  to  teli,
Ofonc  that  trufted  todoeas  vvell
As  Raymond  Lttlly , or  Baccn  the  Frier,
Wherefore  he  named  himfelfe  fanttee  feere -
He  was  Parfon  of  a little  Tovvn,

Not  farr  from  the  Citty  of  London ,

Which  was  taken  for  halfe  a Leach,

But  little  cunning  had  he  to  Preach  •,

He  vveened  him  fure  this  Arte  to  finde ;

His  Name  he  vvould  have  ever  in  minde
By  meanes  of  a £w(^,.imagined  in  dotage,
To  bc  made  over  Tbames  for  light  paffage  *
Whereof  fhulde  grow  a Common  eafe,

Ali  the  Countrey  thereabout  to  pleafe.v  ’> '
Yct  though  hc  might  that  warke  fulfill.

It  might  in  no  vvife  fuffice  his  will  •,
Wherefore  he  would  fet  up  in  hight,

That  Bridge  for  a wonderfull  fight ,

With  Pinacles  guilt  fhining  asgoulde,

A glorious  thing  for  men  to  beholde.

Then  he  remembred  of  the  ncwe,
Howgreater  fame  fhulde  him  purfue ,

If  he  moughtmakethat  Bridge  fo  bright,
Tfiat  it  mought  fhine  alfo  by  Nighte.

And  fo  continue  and  not  breake,

Than  ali  the  Londe  of  him  would  fpeake.


O R D I N A L L


ZJ


But  in  his  minde  ran  many  a doubt,

How  he  mightbring  that  warke  about  *

He  trowcd  thar  Lampes  with  Iights  of fuc,  , .

Shulde  well  perforine  his  nicc  dcfirc ;

Whcrefore  Lampes  for  that  intent,

He  would  ordainc  fufficicnt :

But  thcn  he  feli  in  full  great  dreade,

Howafter  the  time  thac  he  werc  dcade  5 •)  , :
That  light  to  find  Men  would  refufe,

And  chaungc  the  Rent  to  forne  other  ufe.

Then  thoughte  he  well  is  him  that  wifte.

In  whom  he  mought  fet  all  his  truft ;

At  the  laftc  he  thought  to  make  the  light,.

For  thar  Bridge  to  fliine  by  nighte , ' 4 „

With  Carbuncle  Stones , to  Make  men  wonder,
With  dubie  reflexion  above  and.  under :

Thcn  new  thoughts  troubled  his  Minde,

Carbuncle  Stones- how  he  mought  find  5
And  where  to  find  wife  men  and  trcwc,

Which  would  for  his  intent  purfue ,

In  feeking  all  the  Worlde  about,

Plenty  oiCarbuncles  to  find  out ;

For  this  he  tooke  foe  miclc  thought,

That  his  fatt  flefh  waftcd  nigh  to  nought  :

And  where  he  trufted  without  defpairc,

O f this  Science  to  have  been  heire,

When  the  yeare  was  fully  come  and  goc,  \ V*' £

His  Crafte  was  loft,  and  thrift  alfo  $

For  when  that  he  tooke  up  his  Glaffe,

There  was  no  matter  for  Gold ne  Brajft : .

Then  he  was  angry  and  well  neere  wood.

For  he  had  wafted  away  his  good  :

In  this  wife  ended  all  his  difportc,

Whatfhould  I more  of  him  report.


F 2


But


28
',ht tp.  2.


Z\(ortons


But  thac  Lay-mc»  and  Clerks  in  Schoolcs,

Maie  know  the  dotage  of  theis  two  foolcs,
Rcmcmbcr  this  examplc  whcrc  yc  goc,

For  in  fuch  Mindesbetrcwliemany  moc:

Theie  Icwdly  bcleeveevcry  Condufion,

Bc  it  ncver  fo  falfc  an  elufion :

If  it  in  bokc  written  thcy  may  finde,

Thei  vvcene  it  tretve,  thei  be  fo  lewde  of  minde.
Such  lewde  and  hafty  confidence,

Caufeth  poveity  and  lewde  expence.

Oftruft  ofthis  Arte  rifcth  Joyes  nice.

For  lewde  bope  is fooles  Par  adi  ce.

The  trcwe  tought  Childien  made  this  confcffionj
Lord without  thee  ali  is  digrefiion ;

For  as  thou  arte  of  our  Science  begininge,
Soe.without  thee  may  bc  noegood  endingc*.


~ of  t a this  c havc
AX  Soe  fliall  ye  now  hcarc  fome  deale  of  the  Paine :
Albeit  contrary  to  the  appetite
Of  them  that  hath  to  this. Science  dclight.


The.


Ordinall.

The  firft  Paine  is  to  remeraber  in  mindd,

Hovv  many  feeken,  and  how  few  doe  finde.

And  yet  noe  Man  may  this  Science  wynn,

But  it  bc  cought  him  beforc  that  hc  bcginn  $

He  is  well  lerned,  and  of  full  clecrc  vvitr,

Which  by  teaching  can  furcly  lcarnc  it :

Gf  many  diverfities  he  muft  bc  fure,

Which  fecreats  woulde  know  of  working  Nature :
Yet  teaching  maie  not  furely  availe,

But  that  fometime  fhall  happa  mantofaile  *

As  all  that  be  now  dead  and  gor.e
Failed  before  theie  found  our  Stone  :

Gne  tyme  or  other,  firft  tyme  or  lafte,

All  Mcn  failed  till  trew  PradTtfc  were  pafte  5
No  Man  fooner  faileth  in  heate  and  colde,

Then  doth  the  Mafler  which  hafty  is  and  boulde:
For  noe  Man  fooner  maie  our  Worke  fpill,

Then  he  that  is  prefuminge  his  purpofe  to  fulfilh
But  he  that  fhall  trewlic  doe  the  decde
He  muft  ufe  providence  and  ever  worke  with  dreade
For  of  all  painesthe  moftgrevious  paine.

Is  for  one  faile  to  bcginn  all  againe.

Every  man  fhall  greate  Paine  have
When  he  fhall  firft  this  Arte  covet  and  crave,

He  fhall  uft  tymes  Chaunge  his  defirc,

With  new  tydings  which  he  fhall  heare  5
His  Councell  fhall  oftentimes  him  beguile.

For  that  feafon  he  dreadeth  noe  fubtile  wile:

And  oftentymes  his  minde  to  and  fro,

With  new  Oppinions  he  fhall’  chaunge  in  woe  :
And  foe  long  tyme  continue  in  Phantafici
A greate  adventure  for  him  to  come  thereby  :

Soc  of  this  Arte  be  ye  neverfo  faine ,

Yet  he  muft  tafte  of  manie  a bitter  paine.


OF  Tatnes  yet  I rauft  flicwe  more,

Againft  your  appetite  though  it  be  fuil  fore;
Itisgreate  Paine,  as  all  wife-mengefle,

To  witt  where  a trewe  Mafier  is  *

And  if  yc  finde  him,  it  vvill  be  Paine ,

Of  his  trewe  love  to  becerteyne.

Forafmuch  as  noe  Man  maie  tcach  but  one,

Of  the  making  oF  our  delicious  ftonc  5
And  albeit  yce  finde  him  that  will  ye  teach,

Yet  much  trouble  and  paincs  may  ye  reach
For  if  your  mindc  be  vcrteoufly  fer,

Then  the  Devii  will  labour  you  to  lett ;

In  three  wifes  to  let  he  woll  awaite,

With  HaJle , with  Defpaire,  and  with  Deceipte :

For  dreade  of  Vertue  which  yc  maie  doe,
Whcnyelhulde  attaincthis  grace  unto.

The  firft  perill  aforefaide  is  of  Hafte,

Which  caufcth  moft  deftru&ion  and  wafle  •

Ali  Au&ors  writing  of  this  t .Arte,

Saye  hafte  is  of  the  Deviis  parte :

Thelittlc  Boke  writ  ofthc  Philofophersfeaft,

Saith,  omnis fejlinatio  ex partsdiaboli  ejl  :

Whercfore  that  Man  fliall  fooneft  fpeede,

Which  with  greateLeafure  wifely  woll  proccede;

Uponaftayye  fhalltrewly  knowe

That  who  moft  hafteth  he  trewly  flialbe  flowe  ^

For  he  with  hafte  fhall  bringe  his  warke  arrcare,
Somctymesa  Moneth,  and  fomctymes  a whole  Yearc
And  in  this  K^irte  it  fhall  ever  be  fce,

That  a hafty  Man  fhall  never  failc  of  woc :

Alfoe  of  hafte  ye  may  trewly  be  fure
That  fhe  leaveth  nothing  cleane  and  pure  •

The  Devii  hath  none  fo  fubtill  vvilc
As  with  haftineffc  you  to  beguile  ^


Thcreforc


O R D I N A L L.


Thereforc  oft  tymcs  hc  will  aflault,

Your  minde  with  hafte  to  makc  default;
He  fhall  finde  gracc  in  Towne  and  Land,
Which  can  haftincsall  tymcs  withftand :
I fay  all  tymes,  for  in  one  pointe  of  tyme,
Hafte  may  deftroy  allyourenginc^
Thcrefore  all  hafte  efchcvvc  and  fcare.

As  if  that  flie  a Devii  were.

My  witt  trevvly  cannot  fuffice,

Hafte  fufficiently  for  to  defpiie ;

Many  Men  have  byne  caft  in  greatc  care,
Becaufe  thei  would  not  of  hafte  bcware :
But  ever  call  upon  to  fee  an  end,

Which  is  temptation  of  the  Fcndc :

Noe  more  of  hafte  at  this  prefcnt,

But  blefled  be  ever  the  Patient*


. • . ii

e the  Feind  hath  nocavaile.


Then  with  Defpaire  your  mind  he  will  aflaile


And  oft  prefent  this  Sentence  to  your  minde,
How  many  feelcen,  and  how  few  maic  finde  5
Of  wifer  Men  then  ever  were  yee :

What  furetic  than  to  you  maie  be?

He  woll  move  yc  to  doubt  alfo
Whcther  your  Teacher  had  it  or  noe ;

And  alfo  how  it  mought  fo  fall,

That  part  hc  toughc  you  but  not  all  5
Such  uncertainety  hc  woll  caft  out,

Tolet  your  minde  with  greevous  doubt  5
And  foc  your  Paines  he  woll  repaire
With  wann  hope  and  with  much  Defpaire  5
Againft  this  affault  is  no  dcfence,

But  only  the  vertuc  of  Confidence :

To  whomc  reafon  (hulde  you  leade,

That  you  fhall  have  noe  caufe  todrcade^


CJjdp.2,


If  you  wifely  call  to  your  mindc


The  vertuous  manners,  fuch  as  you  finde
In  your  Mafter  and  your  Teacher ,

Soe  fhall  you  have  noe  ncede  to  feare*

If  you  confider  ali  Circumftanccs  about,

Whether  hc  rought  you  for  Love  or  for  Doubt  5
Or  whethei;lMotion  of  hitn  began,

Por  it  is  hard  to  trufl:  fuch  a Man :

Por  he  that  profereth  hath  more  necde
Ofyou>thcn  you  of  himtofpeede.

This  wife  certainely  ye  maie  tvell  win,

Before  that  you  your  warkes  do  begin  5
When fuch certainetyye truly  have,  t
pro  Difpairc  ye  maie  bc  fure  and  fave.

Buc  who  can  finde  fuch  aMaJlerout,

As  was  my  Mafler , him  ncedeth  not  to  doubt :
Which  right  nobil  was  and  fully  worthy  laude,

He  lovcd  Juftice,  and  he  abhorred  fraude*

Hc  was  full  fecretc  when  other  men  were  lowde,
Loath  to  be  knowne  that  hereof  ought  hc  Could*
When  men  difputedof  Colours  of  theRofe,

He  would  not  fpeake  but  keepe  himfelfcfull  elofe  *
To  whome  I laboured  long  and  many  a day,

But  hc  was  folleyn  to  prove  with  ftraight  afiaye ,

To  fearch  and  know  of  my  Difpofition,

With  manifold  proofes  to  know  my  Gondition : • f
And  when  he  found  unfeigned  fidclity,

In  my  greate  hope  which  yet  nothing  did  fec,
Atlaftlconqueredbygrace  divine
His  love,  which  did  to  me  incline.

Wherefore  he  thought  foone  after  on  a tyde,

That  longer  delayes  1 ne  fliulde  abide'*

My  manifold  letters.my  heavic  heart  and  cheerc,
Moved  his  Compafiion,  thei  pcrced  him  full  necrc ;


Wherefore


OaDINALL.  ^

Whcrefore  bis  Permhe  wouldnoe  more  refraine,  Chap.  t.
But  as  hecre  followech  foe  wrote  hc  againc.

MY  vcry  trufty,my  deere  beloved  'Brotber,

I muft  you  anfwcr,  it  may  be  none  othcr ;

The  tyme  iscomeyou  fliallreceive  thisGrace,

Toyourgreate  comfort  and  to  your  folace :

Your  honeft  dcfirc  with  your  greatc  Confidence,

Your  Vertue  proved  with  your  Sap:ence  5
YourLovc, your  Trewth, your  longPerfeverance,

Your  ftedfaft  Minde  fhall  your  Defire  advance :

Wherefore  it  is  neede  that  within  fhort  fpace,

Wee  fpcake  together,  and  fee  face  to  face :

If  I fhulde  writc,  I fhulde  my  fcalty  breake,

ThereforcMouth  to  Mouth  I muft  needcs  fpeakc;

And  when  you  come,  mine  Heier  unto  this  Arte
I vvill  you  make,  and  fro  this  londe  departe.

Ye  fhallbeboth  my  Brother  and  mync  Heier,

Of  this  greate  fecrete  whereofC/*r£«  defpaire:

Thercfore  thanke  Ged  which  giveth  this  renovvnc.

For  it  is  better  then  to  vvere  a Crowne :

Next  after  his  Saints,  our  Lord  doth  him  call
Which  hath  this  Arte  to  honour  him  withall:

Noe  more  to  you  at  this  prefent  tyde,

But  haftily  to  fee  mc,  difpofe  you  to  ride.

* I 'His  Letter  rcceiving,  I hafted  full  fore,

■**  To  ride  to  my  Mafter  an  hundrcd  miles  and  more  *

And  there  Forty  daycs  continuallj,

I learned  ali  thc  fccrcats  of  Alkimy :

Albeit  Pbilofopbj  by  me  was  underftonde.

As  much  as  of  many  other  in  this  Londe  5
Nethles  fooles  which  for  their  Science  fought,

Ween  that  in  forty  dayes  it  vvilbc  wrought.

Betweene  Forty  daycs  warkenowye  may  fee.

And  Forty  dayes  lerningc  is  greate  diverfitie ;


Then


34-

'hap.  2.'  Then  darkc  doubts  to  mc  appcarcd  pure,
r * There  fownd  I difclofed  the  Bends  of  Nature:

The  caufe  of  Wonders  were  to  me  ioc  faire.

And  fo  rcafonable,  that  T could  not  difpaier.

If  your  Majter  and  ye  refemble  all  aboute
My  good  Majler  and  me,  than  have  ye  no  doubre.

THe  third  impediment  deceipt  we  call,

Amongft  other  to  me  the  worft  all  j
And  that  is  of  Servaunts  that  Ihould  awaite
Upon  your  warke,  for  forne  can  much  decciptc ;

Somc  be  negligent,fome  fleeping  by  the  firc,

Some  be  ill-vvilld,  fucn  fhall  let  your  delire ;

Somebc  foolifh,  and  forne  be  over  bold,

Somc  keepe  no  Counfell  of  Do&rine  to  them  tould  $
Some  be  filthie  of  Hands  and  of  fleevcs,

Some  meddle  ftraunge  Mattcr,  that  greately  greeves  5
Some  be  drunkcn,  and  forne  ufe  much  to  jape,

Beivarc  of  thes  if  you  will  hurt  efcape,

The  Trew  be  foolifli,  the  Wicty  be  falfe?

That  one  hurts  me  Sore,  that  other  ais :

For  when  I had  my  watke  well  vvrougKt,

Such  ftale  it  avvay  and  lcft  me  nought.

Then  Iremembring  the  coft/the  tyme,  and  the  .paine,
Which  I fliulde  have  to  begin  againe  ,

With  heavie  hearte  farevvell  adieu  faid  Ij
I will  noe  more  of  Jlkimy.

But  hovve  that  chaunce  befell  that  Scafon^

Few  men  would  it  beleeve  by  reafon :

YetTcnn  perfons  be  tvitnestrevv  all
How  that  mifliapp  did  me  befalle,

Which  might  not  be  only  by  Man,

Without  the  Devii  as  they  teli  can.

I made  alfo  the  Elixer  of  life,-
Which  me  bereft  a Merchaunt’swife  v


The


O R D I N A L L„

The  SOuintefsens  I made  alfo,

With  other  fccrcts  manie  moe,

Which  finfull  people  tookc  me  fio,

To  my  greate  paine  and  much  more  woe  :

Soe  in  this  worke  there  is  no  more  to  faine,

But  that  every  Ioy  is  medled  with  his  paine.

OF  Paine  there  is  a litle  yet  behinde,

Which  is  convenient  to  be  had  in  minde;
That  feli  upon  a blefled  Man  5
Whereof  the  trewth  report  I cann.

Thomas  Daulton  this  good  man  hcighr,

Hc  ferved  (Wboth  day  and  night,

Of  the  Red  Medicine  he  had  greate  Store,

I trovve  never  Englilh  man  had  more.

A Sqiier  for  the  body  of  King  Ehward,

Whofc  name  was  Jhornas  Harbert ,
TookethisD4ff/;ti»againfl:  his  defier,

Out  of  an  Abbie  in  Gloucefter-fbitr,

And  brought  him  in  prefenceof  the  Kingy
Whereof  Deluis  had  forne  tiding,

For  Daulton  was  whilome  Deluis  $ Clerke  5
Deluis  difclofed  of  Daultons  werke.

Deluis  was  Squier  in  confidence
With  King  Edward  oft  in  his  prefence.

Deluis  reported  that  in  a little  ftounde,

How  Daulton  had  made  to  him  a thoufand  pound
Of  as  good  Goulde  as  the  Royall  was,
Withinhalfea  daye  and  forne  dele  lafl e;

For  which  Deluis  fwarc  on  a Booke.

Then  Daulton  on  Deluis  caft  his  looke.

And  faid  to  Deluis , Sir  you  bc  forfwore,
Whereforeyour  hert  hath  caufe  to  be  fore.

Of  nothing  faid  hc,  that  I now  have  told,
f Witnesour  Lord  \\hom  fadas  fould.

G 2


But


6 j\ortons

Cbdp.2.  But  once faid  Deluis  I fware  tothce,

, Thatthoufhouldft  not  be  uttered  by  me ;

Which  I may  breake  well  I underftand.

For  the  Kings  wealeand  for  all  his  Lande.

Then  faid  Daulton  full  foberlie,

Thisanfwer  voydeth  noperjury.

How  fliould  thc  King  in  you  have  Confidcnce,
Your  untrewrh  confeffed  in  his  prefence.

But  Sir  faid  Daulton  tothc  Kings  Grace,

I have  bin  troubled  of t in  many  a place
For  this  Medicine  grevioufly  and  fore.

And  novv  I thought  it  fliould  hurt  me  no  more :
Wherefore  in  the  t^ibbie  where  I vvas  take,

I caftit  in  a foule  and  Common  lake
Going  to  the  River  which  doth  ebb  and  flovve,
There  is  deftroycd  as  much  riches  nowe,
Asvvouldhave  ferved  to  the  Holy  land.

For  twenty  thoufand  men  upon  a band.

I kept  it  longe  for  our  Lords  bleffed  fake,

To  helpe  a King  e which  that  journey  would  makc»
Alas  Daulton  then  faide  the  Kinge ,

Itwasfowly  don  to  fpill  fuchathinge.

He  would  have  Daulton  to  make  it  againe,

Daulton  faid  it  might  not  bc  certeine :

Why  (faid  the  Kinge)  how  came  ye  therebyf
He  laid  by  a Cbarmonofi.  Lichfielde  trewly,

Whofe  workcs  Daulton  kept  dilligently,

Many  yearcs  till  that  Channon  muli  dye.

And  for  his  fervice  he  faid  in  that  fpace,

The  Cannongave  him  all  that  thereof  was;

The  Kinge  gave  to  Daulton  Marks  fo-ure,

With  liberty  to  goe  where  he  would  that  houre.
Then  vvas  thc  Kinge  in  his  herte  fore,

That  he  had  not  knowneI>4#//e#  beforc.


And


Ordinall^

Andevcr  it  happncth  without  leafinge,

That  Tyrants  bc  full  nigh  to  a Kinge.

For  Herberte  lay  for  Daulton  in  waight,

And  brought  him  to  Stepney  vvith  deccipte.

The  fcrvaunts  of  Herbert  the  mony  tookc  away
Which  the  King  gave  to  Daulton  that  day.

And  after  Herbert carried  Daulton  farr,

From  thence  to  the  Cafle  of  ClouceJler ,

There  vvas  Daulton  prifner  full  longe,

Herbert  to  Daulton  did  mickle  wronge :

Fro  thence  he  had  hira  to  prifon  faft
To  T 'cy,  till  foure  yeares  vvere  nigh  paft.

And  after  he  brought  him  out  to  dye;

Daulton  to  death  obcyed  lovvly.

And  faid  Lord  -fefue  bleffed  thou  be.

Me  thinks  I have  bync  too  longe  from  thee.

A Science  thou  gaveft  me  vvith  fullgreate  charge,
Which  I have  kept  without  outrage.

I founde  noe  man  yet  apt  thereto,

To  bc  myne  Hcyer  vvhen  I am  goe :

Wherefore  'fweete  Lord)  now  I am  faine
To  refigne  this  thy  guift  to  thee  againe.

Then  Daulton  made  devout  prayers,  and  ftill
Withfmilingchecrehe  faid  now  doe  your  wil.
When  Herbert  fawe  him  fo  glad  to  dye5
Then  ran  water  from  Herberts  Eye:

For  Prifon  ne  Death  could  him  not  availe
To  winn  this  Arte , his  Crafte  did  him  failc.

Now  let  him  goe  faid  Herbert  than.

For  he  fhall  never  hurt  neprofett  man*

But  when  Daulton  from  theblock  fhould  rife*
Helookedforthinfull  heaviewife,

And  fo  departed  with  full  heavie  cheere5
It  was  not  his  will  to  live  one  yearc.

C3


n

Chap,  2.


This


?8

Chap.  2.  This  was  his  Paine  as  I you  teli,

By  men  that  had  no  drcad  of  Hell.

Berbert  dyed  foone  aftcr  in  his  bed.

And  Deluis  at  T tuxbury  loft  his  hcad ;

This  vvife  greate  Paine, as  you  may  fees
Followeth  this  Arte  in  cvery  degree.

Hecre  loft  thc  King  all  his  intent.

For  Berbert  was  proude  and  violent ,

Soe  nobil  a man  to  opprefte  with  pride,

And  like  a f ellone  him  leade  and  guide5
Wherc  that  by  goodnefte  patience  and  grace,

There  might  have  growen  full  great  folace ,

As  well  to  the  King , yc  may  underftonde.

As  for  th’eafe  of  Commons  of  this  londe ;

But  wonder  not  that  grace  doe  not  fal1.

For  finn  rcygneth  in  this  londe  over  all.

Loe  he  re  was  grace  full  ready  at  honde,

To  have  ccafed  Taxes  and  Tallages  of  this  londe  •
Whereby  much  Love  and  Grace  would  have  be,
Betweene  Knight-hood  Prieft-hoode  and  Comminaltie.
Here  yc  maie  lee  how  vicious  violence
Maie  not  purchafc  the  vertuc  of  fapiencc :

For  vice  and  vertue  be  things  contrary,

Thcrefore  the  vicious  maie  not  come  thereby  5
If  Vicious  men  mought  lerne  this  Science ,

They would  therewith  doe wondrous  violence:

And  with  Ambitioufneffe  grow  evermore
Worfe  of  Conditions  then  they  were  before.

Now  is  this  Chapter  of $oy  and  Paine  gone,

The  Chapter  following  lhewcth  Matters  ofeur  Stone.


Chap


99

Cbap.  j.


o


RDINALL.


H A P.


III.


02^ file  was  a labourer  in  the  fire
Thrcelcore  ycars  and  more  to  win  his  defire:
Brian  was  another,with#o//<w  in  thc  Wcftei
Thes  vvere  ever  bufic,  & could  pra&ice  with
But  yet  this  Science  thci  never  founde,  (the  beft :

For  thci  knew  not  the  Matters,  ne  the  Grounde,

But  rumbled  foorth,and  evermore  they  foughr,

They  fpent  their  lyfe  and  their  goods  to  nought ;

Much  lofle,  much  coft,  much  anguifli  they  bought,
Amonge  their  Receipts  which  they  had  wrought :

Then  nndcTonftle  to  me  his  greate  complainte,

With  wecping  Teares  he  faid  his  hcart  was  fainte.

For  he  had  fpendcd  all  his  lufty  dayes
In  fals  Receipts,  and  in  fuch  lewdc  affayes ;

Of  Herbes,  Gommes,  of  Rootes  and  of  GrafTe,

Many  kindes  by  him  aflayed  was,

As  Crowefoote,  Celondinc  and  Mizerion,

Vervaine,  Lunara,  and  Martagon  :

In  Antimony,  Arfenick,Honey,Wax  and  Winc,

In  Haire,  in  Eggs,  in  Mcrds,  and  Urine,

In  Calx  vive,  Sandifcr,  and  Vitriall,

In  Markafits,  T utits,  and  every  Minerali ,

In  Malgams,  in  Blanchcrs,and  Citrinacions,

All  feli  to  nought  in  his  opperacions :

For  he  confidercd  not  hovv  he  did  rage,

When  to  Cods  proportions  he  layde  furchargc:

After  ali  this,  he  thought  nothing  fo  good,

To  workc  upon  as  fhulde  be  mans  Blode  5
Till  that  I faid  how  blode  would  wafte  and  fume
In  mighty  firc,and  utterly  confume.

For


J\(ortons


For  Chrift  his  love  then  faide  he  tcach  me,

Whereof  the  fubftancc  of  our Stone  fhould  bc :

Tonfile  (faid  I > what  fhulde  it  you  avayle
Such  thing  to  know  < your  ltms  doth  you  faile
Forvery  Age,  therefore  ceafe  your  lay.

And  love  your  Beades,  it  is  high  time  to  Prayc*

For  if  you  knew  the  Materialis  of  our  Stone ,

Ere  you  couldmake  ityourdayes  would  begone.

Thereof  no  charge  good  Mafter  faid  hc.

It  vvere  fafficient  Comfort  now  to  mc
T o know  the  tre we  Materialis  without  wronge
Of  that  Stone  which  I have  fought  foe  longe :

Tonfile  (faid  I ) It  is  noe  litle  thinge,

Whereof  you  would  have  trcwe  tydinge;

For  many  Au&ors  write  of this  doubte,

But  none  of  them  fhcwcth  it  Clecrly  oute :

For  Au&ors  which  of  this  Arte  doc  write,

Befought  God  as  witndfeth  Democrite , )

That  he  unpained  would  fro  this  Worlde  take
Their  Soules  whom  he  tought  Bokes  thereofto  mak.ej
For  greatly  doubtcd  evermore  ali  fuche,

That  of  this  Scyence  they  may  write  too  muche :

Every  cach  of  them  tought  but  onc  pointe  or  twayne,
Whereby  his  fellowes  vvere  made  certayne ;

How  that  hc  was  to  them  a Brother,

For  every  ofthcm  undcrftooae  each  other;

Alfoe  they  wrote  not  every  man  to  Teache,

But  to  (hew  themfelvcs  by  a fecret  Speache :

Truft  not  therefore  to  reading  ofonc  Boke,

But  in  many  Au&ors  vvorks  yc  may  looke ; .

Liber  librum  ap perit  biiihArnold  the  greateC/^r^,
Anaxagoras  faid  the  fame  for  his  werke :

Who  that  flothf  ali  is  in  many  bokes  to  fee,

Such  one  in  Pra&ice  prompt  fhall  never  bc  5

But


¥

Cbap,  j.


Ordinale.

But  Tonjile  for  almes  I will  make  no  ftore
Plainly  to  difdofe  it  that  never  was  done  before ,

By  way  of  anfwer  for  your  recreation,

If  ye  cann  wifely  make  Interrogation.

Good  Matter  ( faide  he')  then  teach  me  trewly,
Whether  the  matters  be  Sol  or  Mercury ?

Or  whether  of  Sol  or  Lune  it  maic  be,

Or  whether  I fhall  take  them  all  three ,

Or  Sol  by  it  felfe,  or  Mercury  alone,

Or  Sulpher  vvith  them,for  matters  of  our  Stone  ?

Or  whether  I fhall/*/  Almoniack  take,

Or  Minerali nseanes,  our  Stone  thereof  to  make  i
Here  bemany  queftions  Tonfile^  faid  I,

Wifely  remembred  and  full  craftily ;

Youname  it  notyet  but  onely  in  generali,

For  you  muft  take  fome  deale  of  theis  things  all ;

Of  thefe  and  of  other  you  muft  take  a parte,

One  time  or  other  to  minifter  this  Arte  •

Many  things  helpeth  to  apt  our  Stonei
But  two  be  Materialis , yct  our  Stone  is  onc;

Bctweene  which  two  is  fuch  diverfity.

As  betwecne  the  Motberand  the  Childe  may  be :

An  other  diverfity  betwecne  them  find  ye  fhall,
Suchas  isfoundbetweene-Afa/eand  Fetnale :

Theis  two  kindes  fhall  doe  all  your  fervice,

As  for  the  White  voorke  (if  you  can  be  wife  ^ )

One  of  thes  kindes  a Stone  ye  fhall  finde.

For  it  abideth  fire  as  ftones  doe  by  kinde :

But  it  is  no  Stone  in  touching  ne  in  fight,

But  a fubtill  Earth,  browne,  roddy,  and  not  bright :
And  when  it  is  feparate  and  brought  to  his  appearage,
Then  we  natne  it  ourground zLitharge.

Firft  it  is  browne,roddy,and  after  forne  deale  white.
And  then  it  is  called  our  chofen  CMarkafite :

H


One


(ortons


One  ounce  thereof  is  better  then  fifty  poundc5
It  is  not  to  be  fould  in  ali  Chriftian  grounde*

But  he  that  would  have  itbe  fhalbe  faine
To  doe  it  make,  or  take  himfelfe  the  painc :

But  onc  greate  grace  in  that  labour  is  faine,

Make  it  once  wdl  and  never  more  againe.

Olde  fathers  called  it  thinge  of  vile  price,

For  it  is  nought  vvorth  by  way  of  Marchandife  t
Noe  man  that  findeth  it  woll  beare  it  awaie,

Noe  more  then  thei  would  an  Ounce  of  Clayc ;

Men  will  not  beleeve  that  it  is  of  high  price.

No  man  knoweth  it  therefore  but  he  be  wife.

Here  have  I difclofcd  agreate  fecret  wonder,'

- Which  never  was  writ  by  tbem  which  bcen  erth  under»


f A Nother  Stone  Tonjile  you  muft  have  withall,
***  Or  elfe  you  fawte  your  cheefe  Materiali  5
Which  is  a Stoneglorioufe  faier  and  bright,

In  handling  a Stone,  and  a Stone  in  fight-,

A Stone  glittering  with  perfpecuitie,

Being  of  wonderfull  Diaphanitie  •

The  price  of  an  Ounce  Convenicntly,

Is  twenty  fhillings  or  well  neere  thereby  :

Her  name  is  Magnetia,  few  people  her  knowe,

Shc  is  fownde  in  high  places  as  well  as  in  lowe ;

Plato  knew  her  property  and  called  her  by  her  name.
And  Chaucer  rcherfeth  how  T it  anos  is  the  fame ,

In  the  Channons  Yeomans  TaileJ, aying  whatis  thus,
But  quid  ignotum  per  magis  ignotius  :

That  is  to  fay,  what  may  this  be,

But  unknowne  by  more  unknowne  namedis  flie  *,
Nethles  Tonfile  now  I will  trewlietcach
What  is  Magnetia  to  fay  in  our  fpeache :

Magos  is  Greeke, Mirabile  in  Latine  it  ys,
is  Monej^cos  ScicnceyA  is  God  y wiffe..


Ordinall.  4.3

That  is  to  fay  it  is  fuch  a thingc,  Chap.  3,

Whcrein  ofMoney  is  wonderous  divine  Cuhiiinge -5 — -~~~:
Nbw  here  you  may  knovv  what  is  Magnetia,

Res  aris  in  qua  latet  [cientia  divinaque  mira. .

Thes  two  S tones  Tt onfileyt  mufttakc  '=*"■'  !

For  your  materialis,  Elixir  if  ye  make.  ; i

Albeit  the  firft  tyme  materialis  be  no  more^  i j

\Y" et  many  things  helpeth  as  I faide  before.

This  fccrcte  was  never  before  this  daye

So  trevvly  difeovered,  take  it  for  your  praye$  1 1

I pray  God  that  this  tume  not  me  to  Charge,

For  I dread  fore  my  penn  goeth  too  large:

For  though  much  peoplc  pcrceive  not  this  Sentence,

Yct  fubtill  Clerks  have  too  much  Evidence ;

For  many  Clerks  be  fo  cleere  of  vvitt,

Ifthei  had  this  ground,theiwere  fure  of  it;  ii

Wher  our  Lord  hath  ordained  that  no  man  it  finde,

But  only  he  that  is  of  verteous  minde :

Wherefore  oldc  Fathcrs  Covcred  for  great  rcafon,

The  Matters  of  our  Stone  difclofed  at  this  feafon.

Ocher  Materials  yc  fhall  none  take,

But  only  theis  two  oure  xvhite (Ione  to  make  5
Except  Sal  Armoniack  with  Sulphur  of  kinde,

Such  as  out  of  Mettals  ye  can  finde  5
T heis  two  woll  abidc  to  fulfill  your  defire,

The  remnant  will  void  when  thei  come  to  fire  5
Sulpher  woll  brenn  and  chaunge  Gollours  faft,

But  our  Litharge  zb\deth.  firft  and  laft:

Yc  may  not  with  mettals  or  Quickfilver  beginn,

To  make  Elixir  if  you  intend  to  winn  :

Yet  ifyou  deftroy  the  whole  Compofition,

Some  of  their  Compounds  will  help  in  Conclufion ;

And  that  is  nothing  Eis  of  that  one  or  that  other,

But  only  Magnetia  and  Litharge  her  Brother.

H z Cha*.


O R D I N A L L.


4?

Cbap.  4.


k


H A P.


IV.


P thc  groflfe  Warkc  now  I wil  not  fpare,
Though  it  be  fecrete,  largely  to  declare  :
T 0 teach  you  the  trewth  is  myne  intente.
As  far  forth  as  I dare  for  Gods  Com-

( maundemcnt.


1 1 will  informe  and  guide  you  in  the  way.


In  fuch  wife  as  you  may  finde  your  praye :

Ifyou  confider  howthc  partes  of  Werkes,

Be  out  of  Ordcr  fet  by  the  old  Clerks. .

As  I faide  before,  the  Maflers  ofthis^rM,.

Evcry  each  of  them  difdoled  but  a parte  *.

Wherefore  though  ye  perceived  them  as  yc  woulde,

Yet  ye  cannot  order  and  joyne  them  as  yc  fhulde.
Arnold fhc  weth  in  his»  writinge,

How  our  finali  fecret  is  to  knovv  thc  thirrge
Whereuponour  worke  fhulde  take  hergrounde.

And  how  pure  Natures  & fimple  may  bc  found :

In^his  Boke  begining  multipharie ,

Hc  faith  in  our  grounded  Matter  two  kindes  be  5
But  how  to  find  them  he  kept  that  in  ftore,

Yc  havetheir  Names  the  laft  Cbapter  before.

Treer  Bacon  difclofed  more  of  that  pointe,

When  he  faid,  Departe  ye  every  joynte
Jn  Elementa  propinqua : takc  good  heede  theretO;

But  unwife  Dodours  never  worken  foe,

But  hcadly  they. proceed  as  men  well  nigh  madd,

To  the  Matters  divifible  moc  Matters  they  adde :

Soc  when  thei  wcenc  to  bringe  forth  a Fiower,

They  doc  nothinge  but  mulr.ply  Errour.

There  ccfed  Bacon  b and  fodoe  other  fuch,

For  very  dread  leaft  they  fhulde  fliew  too  m uch

H 3 Avi cen .


4<5

Chap.  4.


i\ortom


Avicen  in  Porta  wrote,  if  ye  remembcr,

How  ye  fhulde  proceede  perfc&ion  to  ingendcr,
Trewly  teaching  as  the  pure  trewth  was,

Comedas  ut  bibas , et  bibas  ut  Comedas ,

Eatc  as  it  drinkcth,  and  drinke  as  it  doth  eate,

And  in  the  meanc  feafon  take  it  a perfeft  fwcate.
Rafis  fet  the  Dietary  and  fpake  forne  dealc  farr ,

Non  tamen  comedat  res  feflinanter ,

Let  notyour  Mattcrs  eate  over  haftilie,

But  wifely  confume  their  foode  leafurelic.

Hereof  the  Prepbet  made  wondrous  mention,

Y f ye  applie  ic  to  this  intention.

Vifitafti  terram,  & inebriajli  eam ,

CMultiplicaffi  locupletare  eam
T erram  frugiferam  in falfuginem ,

Et  terram  fine  aqua  in  exitus  aquarum,

If  itThave  plcnty  of  Meate  and  of  Drinke,

Mcn  muft  wake  when  they  defier  to  winke:

-For  it  is  laboure  of  watch  and  paines  greate.

Alfo  the  Foode  is  full  coftly  meate*

Thercforeall  Poore  men  beware  faid  Arnold ,

For  this  Arte longeth  to  greate  men  ofthe  worlde.
Truft  to  his  tvords  ye  Poore  men  ali.

For  I am  witnes  that  foc  ye  finde  fhall.

Efto  longanimis  & fitavis  faid  he,

For  hafty  men  th’  end  fhall  never  fee.
Thelengtheof  elenfing  of  Matters  infe&cd,
Deceyvcth  much  People,  for  that  is  unfufpc&ed.
Whcrefore  Poore  men  put  ye  not  in  preafe,

Such  wonders  to  feech,  but  in  feafon  ceafe.
ExcefTc  for  onc  halfe  quarter  of  an  howre,

May  deftroy  all : therefore  checfe  luccoure
Is  Primam  pro  quo , cf  'fyultimum  pro  quo  non,

To  know  of  the  fimperinge  of  our  Stone.


1


OrD  INALL.

Till  it  may  noe  more  fimper  doe  notceafc.

And  yet  longe  Continuance  may  not  caufc  increafe.
Reme  mber  that  Watcr  will  buble  and  boyle,

But  Butter  muft  fimper  and  alfo  Oyle.

And  foe  with  long  leafure  it  willwafte,

^nd  not  with  bubling  made  in  haftc :

For  doubt  of  perrills  many  moe  then  one.

And  for  fupergreflion  of  our  ftone.

Amongft  grofle  Workes  the  fovvleft  of  ali
Is  to  clarifie  our  meanes  Minerali.

Extrcmities  may  notbcwell  wrought,

Without  many  Meanes  wifely  fought.

And  cverieMeane  muft  be  made  pure,

If  this  workc  fhuldc  be  made  fure.

For  foulc  and  deanc  by  naturali  lawe

Hath  greate  difeord,  and  foe  hath  ripe  and  rawc.

Stedfaft  to  ftedfaft  will  it  felfe  combinde.

And  fleeting  to  fleeting  will  drawe  by  kinde :

And  ever  where  as  the  Concordancc  is  more ,
Natures  will  drawe  that  were  elfwherc  beforc  \
Thisgrofie  Workc  is  fowle  in  her  kinde,

And  full  of  perrills  as  ye  Ihall  it  finde.

No  mans  witt  can  him  foe  much  availe,

But  that  fometyme  he  ftiall  make  a fayle.

As  well  as  the  Layntani be  Ihall  the  Cltrke }

And  all  that  labour  the  grofie  werke :

Whereof  Anaxagoras  faid  trcwlic  thus,

Nemo  primo  fronte  reperitur  diferetus.

And  once  I heard  a wife  man  fay,

How  in  Caulonia,  at  this  day,

Magnetia  with  Minerali  meanes  ali,

Be  made  to  fale  if  yc  for  them  call,

Whereby  the  honds  of  a cleanly  Clcrktr
Shall  not  be  filed  about  fo  foule  a werke.


47

Chap.  4.


And


^.g  J\(ortons

chnp.  4.  And  longe  tyme  fooner  your  Worke  I underftondc,
Shulde  be  farr  onvvard  before  honde.

For  if  yotilhulde  make  all  chings  as  I cann,

Ye  might  be  weary  before  your  worke  begann.

The  Philofophers  warke  doe  not  begin,
vjillall  things  bcpure  wirhout  and  within.

We  that  muft  fceke  Tin&ure  moft  fpecious,

Muft  needely  avoyd  all  things  vild  and  vicious»

Of  manifold  meanes  each  hath  his  propertie,

T o doe  his  Office  after  his  degree :

Withthcm  hid  things  beout  fetr^

Some  that  will  helpe  and  forne  that  would  Ictt.

Our  appoti  caries  to  d re  fle  them  can  no  skill.

And  vve  to  teach  them  have  no  manner  of  will :
Whereofthe  caufe  trewly  is  none  othcr,

But  that  they  will  counterfaitft  to  beguile  thcir  Brother,
Rather  then  they  will  take  the  paine
Thereto  bclonging,  ere  they  (hould  it  attainc  :

It  is  there  ufe  vvhereof my  hert  is  fore,

Much  to  delire  and  litle  to  doe  thcrefore.

Who  would  have  trewc  warke  he  may  no  laboure  fpare,
Neither  yet  his  Purfe,  though  he  make  itbare  :

A nd  tn  the  Groflc  Warke  he  is  furtheft  behinde,

That  daily  dcfireth  the  end  thereofto  finde.

If  the  grofle  warke  with  all  his  Circum  ftance,
v Werc  don  in  three  yeares,  it  werea  bleflcd  chance  :

For  he  that  fliall  end  it  once  for  certeyne,

Shall  never  have  necde  to  begin  againe,

If  he  his  Medicine  wifely  can  Augmcnt  ^

For  that  is  the  Maftrie  of  all  our  intcnr/

It  needcth  not  to  namc  the  meanes  Minerali,

For  Albert  writeth  openiyof  them  all.

Much  I might  write  of  nature  of  Myncs,

Which  in  tliis  Grolfe  Warke  be  butenffines;


For


O R n I N A L L.

For  in  this  Warke  finde  yc  nothing  fhall,
Buthandie-crafte  called  ArteMechanicall :
Whcrein  an  hundreth  wayesand  moc,
Yemaiecommitt  afaulte  asye  thereingoe.
Whcrefore  beleeve  what  old  Audors  teli,
Without  Expericnce  ye  maic  not  doc  well.
Confider  all  Circumftances,  and  fet  your  delight
To  keepe  Uniformity  of ali  things  requifitc.

Life  one.manner  of  Veftcll  in  Matter  and  in  Shape,
Bcwarcof  Commixtion  that  nothing  mifcape.
And  hundreth  faultes  in  fpcciall,

Ye  maic  make  under  this  warning  generali
Nethles  this  Do&rine  woll  fuffice,
Tohimthatcan  in  Pra&ifebe  wife.

If  your  Minifters  be  witty  and  trew,

Such  iliall  not  necde  your  warkes  to  renetv.
Thcrefore  if  ye  woll  avoyde  all  dreade,

Iri  the  Grofie  Warke  doc  by  my  read  :

Take  never  thereto  no  Houfhold-man,

Thci  be  foonc  weary  as  I teli  cann  $

Therefore  takenoc  man  thereto,

But  hebe  Waged,however  you  doe;

NOt  by  the  Moneth,  as  nigh  as  ye  maie5
Nebythe  Weeke,  but  bytheDaye:

And  that  your  Wagesbc  to  their  minde,

Bettcr  then  thci  elfcwhere  can  finde ;

And  that  thei  needc  not  for  Wages  fue,

But  that  their  Payment  be  quick  and  trewe  -
For  that  fhall  caufe  them  to  love  and  dreade.

And  to  their  Warks  to  take  good  hecde,
Fordoubtlcaft  theibe  putawaye,

For  Ncgligencc  of  them  in  one  daye :
Houfhold-men  woll  not  doe  foe,

Fromthis  Warke  therefore  lct  themgoc.  •


50  ^orton' s

Chip  4.  lf  I had  knowne  this,  and  had  done  foe,

I had  avoyded.  mickle  woe.

AI  foe  in  this  Warke  mufibe  Liberty,

Without  impediment,  in  everic  degree,

With  divers  Comforts  pcynes  to  releafc

Of labours  continuall  vvhich  maie  not  Ceafe ;

Eis  anguifti  of  Labour  and  Melancholly,

Mought  be  Caufe  your  Warkes  to  deftroy.

Of  the  groffe  Warke  it  necdes  to  fhew  noe  more.

For  old  men  havctought  the  remnant  beforc ;

And  what  is  neceffary  that  thei  laft  out,

This  Boke  ftieweth  it  without  doubt.

Whereforc  this  litle  Boke  the  Ordinali ,

Is  in  Alkirny  the  Complement  of  all  *

The  Chapter  following  convenient  for  a Clerke ,

Sheweth  the  Councclls  of  the  fubtill  Werkc.

• •


Chap.


Re  Vaufjnan  fcu/y  ■


5*

Chap. 5,


C H A P.  V.


J\IJIZ  by  Sumame  when  thc  chaunge  of

f Coyne  was  had,
Made  fome  Men  forry,and  fomc  Men  glad:
And  as  to  much  pcople  that  chaunge,
Seemed  a ncvrc  thinge  and  a ftraungc ;

Soe  that  feafon  befell  a wonderous  thinge,

Tuching  this  Science  without  leafinge.

That  three  Mafters  of  this  Science  ali
Lay  in  one  Bed  nigh  to  Leaden-Hall ,

Which  had  Elixirs  parfite  White  and  Red,

A wonder  fuch  Three  to  reft  in  onc  Bed,

And  that  within  the  fpace  of  dayes  Tenn,

Whilehard  it  is  to  finde  One  in  Millions  of  Men.

Of  the  Dnkedeme  of  Loraine  one  I undcrftand
Wasborne,that  other  nigh  the  Midle  of  England ;

Under  a Crofie,  in  the  end  of  Shires  three,

The  thirdwas  borne  • theyoungcftof  them  is  he.

Which  by  his  N at  ivit y is  by  Clerks  found,

That  he  fhulde  honour  ali  Englifh  ground  •

A Man  mought  walke  all  the  World  aboute,

And  faile  fuch  Three  CMajlers  to  finde  oute  5
Twayne  be  fleeting,  thc  Youngeft  fliall  abide.

And  doc  much  good  in  this  Londe  at  a Tydc.

But  finne  of  Princes  fhall  let  or  delaye
The  Grace  that  he  fhulde  doe  on  a daye.

The  eldeft  Mafier  chaunted  of  him  a Songe,

And  iaid  that  he  fhulde  fuffer  much  xvronge.

Of  them  which  vverc  to  him  greately  behould.

And  manie  things  moe  this  Mafier  tould,

Which  fith  that  tyme  hath  trewly  bcfall,

And  fome  of  them  hcrcafter  fliall,


Whereof


ORDIN  ALL,

Whereof  onc  is  trevvlic  /faid  he)

After  T roubles  great  Joy  ftialbe
In  every  quarcer  of  thts  Londt,

Which  ali  good  Men  ftiall  anaerftondc  :
The  Younger  asked  vvhcn  that  inulde  be,
The  old  Man  faid  when  Men  ftiall  Tee
The  holi  Crojfe  honored  both  day  and  ntghc5
IntheLond  of  Gcd in  theLona  ofLig  t;
Which  maic  be  done  in  right  good  fealon,
But  long  delayed  it  is  without  rcafon :

When  that  beginneth  note  well  this  thinge,
This  Science  ftiall  drawc  towards  the  Kwge  •
And  many  moc  Graces  ye  maic  be  boulcle,
Moe  then  of  us  ftiall  now  be  tould ;

Grace  on  that  Kwg  ftiall  defcend,

When  he  ould  Manners  ftiall amcnde :

Hc  ftiall  make  full  fccreate  fearch,
p0r  this  Science  with  doulccd  fpcech$
Andamonge  the  Solitary,

He  ftiall  have  tidings  certainly.

So  fought  King  Kalid  of  manie  Mena
Till  he  met  with  Morior ,

Which  helped  Kalid  at  his  neede.

His  Vcrtues  caufed  him  to  fpeede.

NOwe  of  fuch  Mattcrs  lct  us  ceafc.

And  of  the  futtill  Warke  reherfe ;
Greate  necd  hath  he  to  be  a Clerke ,

That  would  perceive  this  futtill  Werkc.

He  muft  know  his  firft  Philofophie,

If  he  truft  to  come  by  Alkimje :

And  firft  ye  ftiall  well  underftonde,

All  that-  take  this  Werke  in  horade ;

/When  your  materialis  by  preparation*


53

Chap.  5


Be


5zj.  ^(ortoifs

Ch4p.$+  Be  made  well  apt  for  Gcneration,

Then  thei  muft  be  departed  a twinn,

Into  foure  Elements  ifye  would  tovvinn:
Whichthingtodoe  ifye  ne  can,

Gocand  lerne  it  of  Hortolan.

Which  made  his  Boke  of  that  Dodrine,

Hovv  ye  fhulde  part  the  Elements  of  Winc.
Moreover  ye  muft  for  your  fuccour,

Know  th’effeds  of  the  quallities  fower  5
Called  Heate,  Colde,Moifture,  and  Drine$,

Of  which  fower  ali  things  Compounded  is ;

And  fith  in  this  Arte  your  cheefe  defire
Ts  to  have  Colour  wnich  fhulde  abide  fier,

Ye  muft  know  beforc  you  can  that  fee,

How  everie  Colour  ingendred  fliall  be.

For  every  Colour  whichc  maie  be  thought,
vShall  heere  appeare  beforc  that  White  be  wrought»
Yet  more  ye  would  have  to  this  fumme,

Swiftly  to  melt  as  Wex  or  Gumme :

Eis  mought  it  not  enter  and  perce
The  Ccnter  ofMcttalls  as  Audors  rehcrfe 5
Soe  ye  would  have  it  both  fix  and  flowe,

Wit  h Colour  plenty  if ye  wift  howe  5
Such  three  Contraries  joyntly  to  meete
In  one  accord  is  a greate  Secret.

Nethles  he  that  is  cleere  of  Mindc,

In  this  Chapter  maie  it  well  finde  •,

And  firft  to  givc  you  a fhort  Dodrine,

Ofthe  aforefaid  qualities  prime :

Heate,and  Cold,  be  qualities  Adive
Moifture,  and  Drines,  be  qualityes  Paflivc  $

For  they  fuffren  the  Adives  evermore.

As  Stones  to  be  Lyme,  and  Water  to  be  Froare.
Hcreuponto  Judge,  ye  maie  be  bold.


No


O R D I N A L L.

Nothing  is  full  wrought  but  by  Heatc  and  Cold  *
v Nethles  thc  Paffives  have  fome  A&ivity,

As  in  Handicrafts  mcn  ye  maie  daily  fee ;

In  Bakinge,  and  Brewingc,  and  othcr  Crafts  all,
Moifture  is  opperativc  and  foe  Drines  bc  fliall.
Arijlotle  in  his  Pbiftcks  and  other  manie  moe,
Said  ab  actionibus  procedit  fpeculatio  •

They  faid  that  Pra&ifc  is  roote  and  beginning,
Of  Spcculation  and  of  ali  Cunning :

For  the  properties  of  every  thinge,

(JBe  pcrccavcd  by  their  working  5
As  by  Colours  of  Urins  we  may  be  bold
To  givc  fcntcnce  of  Hcate  and  Colde  *

By  thesaforefaid  foure  qualities  prime,

We  feechc  Colours  with  lcngth  of tyme  5
Of  White  Colour  we  be  not  full  fure,

To  feeche  it  but  in  a fubftance  pure :

Grcatc  Do&rine  thereof  lerne  nowye  maie,
Whcn  ye  knovv  how  Colours  growc  all  day.


55

Chap,$,


f^Olour  is  the  utmoft  thinge  of  a Body  cicere,

Cleerc  fubftance  well  termincd  is  his  matter  heere  j
If  Heate  hath  maiftery  in  matter  that  is  drye,

White  Colour  is  ever  thereof  certainely ;

As  it  appeareth  in  fight  of  brent  Bones,

And  in  making  of  all  Lyme  Stones.

Where  Cold  worketh  in  matter  moift  & cleere,

Yet  of  fuch  working  Whitnes  woll  appearc :

As  it  fheweth  in  Ice  and  Frofts  hore-,

The  caufe  is  fet  out  in  Philofophie  before  :

I write  not  here  of  common  Philofophie,

But  byexampleto  tcach  Alkinty *

That  one  maie  be  pcrceived  by  that  other,

As  is  the  Child  perceived  by  the  Mother.


56

Cbap,<p.


^(ortoivs

If  Heatein  moyft  matter  and  grofifc  withall,
Warke,  thcreof  Black  Colour  ingender  Ihall  5
Examplc  hereof  if  ye  of  me  defire,

Behold  when  you  fee  greene  Wood  fer  on  a fire  * .
When  Cold  worketh  in  matter  thick  and  drye,
Black  Colour  fhall  be,  thisisthecaufewhie;
Such  matter  iscompa&ed  and  mere  thick,

Wich  Cold  conftreyning,  enimy  to  ali  quick,
Thicknes  made  Darknes  with  privationof  Lighr,
Soe  Collour  is  private,  then  Black  it  is  to  Sight ,
Therefore  evermore  remember  th:Si,

How  deere  matter  is  matter  ofWhtter.es  5
The  caufe  efficient  maiebe  manyfold.

For  fomewhile  it  is  Heate,  and  fometime  Cold : •
But  Whire  and  Black,  as  ali  men  maie  fee,

Be  Colours  contrary  in  moft  extremitic :
Wherefore  your  warke  with  Black  muft  beginn,

If  the  end  fhulde  be  with  Whitenes  to  winn.

The  midle  Colour  as  Pbilofophers  write.

Is  Red  Colour  betweene  Black  and  Whitc:
NethlclTe  truft  mecertainlyy
Red  is  laft  in  work  of  Alkirny.

Alfce  they  fay  in  their  Dodrine,

How  theis  two  Colours  Rufe  and  Citrine/

Be  meane  Colours  betweene  Whitc  and  Red,

And  how  that  Greene,  and  Colour  wan  as  Lead,
Betweene  Red  and  Black  be  Colours  meane,

\ And  frefheft  Colour  is  of  matter  moft  Cleane.
Pbyfitians  in  Urines  have  Colours  Nyntcene,
Betweene  Whiteand  Black  asthei  weene;
Whereof  Colour  underwhite  Subalbidus  is  one,-
Like  in  Colour  to  Onycbyne  ftone :

Of  fuch  likc  Colour  Magnetia  found  is,

But  C*,{agnetia  glittercth  with  Cleerenes :


In


Ordinall.

In  our  futtill  vvarke  of  Alkimy
^Shallbeall  Colours  that  hath  becne  feen  with.  Eyc:

An  hundrcth  Colours  more  in  certcyne,

Thcn  evcr  hath  becn  feene  in  Urine.

Wherein  fo  many  Colours  mought  not  bc,

(But  if  our  Stone  conteyned  evcry  degrcc,

Of  all  Compofitions  found  in  warkeof  kinde.

And  of  all  Compofitions  imaginable  by  mindc.

Of  as  manie  Colours  as  fhall  thercin  be  faine,
i^So  manie  graduations  your  wifdome  rauft  attaine :

And  if you  knowe  not  fuch  graduations  all,

Lerne  them  of  Raymond  in  his  Atre  Generali.-
Gilbert  Kymervnoiz  after  bis  devife,

Ofiy.  Proportions,  but  thei  maie  not  fuffice
In  this  Science^ which  he  coude  neverfinde^

And  yct  in  Phtfick  he  had  a nobil  minde.

Wher  the  royalty  of  the  nature  of Man,

Advaunceth  ofte  Medicines  ofthe  Phifitian:

And  fo  honoreth  oft  times  his  Craftc,

When  that  the  Medicines  peradventure  mought  be  lafte ;
But  it  is  not  fo  in  Phifick  of  Mines ,

For  that  Arte  exccedeth  all  otherengines:

And  refteth  only  in  the  wifdome  of  Man,

As  by  experience  wife  m«i  witncs  can.


57

Chap,^,


A Nd  foe  of  Alkimj  the  trew  foundation,
^Msin  Compofition  bywife  graduation  .

Of  Heate  and  Cold,  of  Moift  and  of  Drye,
Knowing  other  Qualities  ingendered  thereby  *,
As  hard  and  foft,  heavy  and  light,

Rough  and  fmoothe , by  ponders  right,  ,
vWithNumber  and  Meafure  wifely  foughr,
ln  which  threc  refteth  all  that  God  wrought :
For  God  made  all  things,  and-fet  it  fure,

K


In


58  «!A (oy  toris

Cbap.  j; , In  Number  Ponder  and  in  Mcafure,

Which  numbers  if  you  doc  chaungc  and  breake,
Upon  Nature  you  muft  doc  wreake.

Wherefor cAnaxagoras  faidTake  good  hcede,
That  to  Conjnnttion  yc  not  proceede,

Tillye  knowthe  Ponders  full  compleate
Ofall  Components  which  fliulde  thereinmeete^
Bacon  faid  that  old  Mcn  did  nothing  hide,

But  only  Proportio n wherein  was  noe  guide :

Por  none  old  Au<ftor,King,  Prince,nc  Lord,
Writing  of  this  Science  with  others  did  accorde
In  the  Proportions  •,  which  if  ye  would  reach,
Raymond,  with  Bacon,  and  Albert,  done  it  teach,
With  old  Anaxagoras , ofthem  fowrc  ye  Ihall
Have  perfeft  knowledge,  but  not  of  one  have  ali :
Andifyou  would  joy ne  fowre  Qualitics  to  intent,
Then  muft  yc  Conjoyne  every  Elcment :

As  Water  and  Ertheafrer  your  delire,

\Well  compounded  with  Ayer,  and  Pier :
Knowing  the  wortlfeft  in  his  a&ivitie,

T he  fecond,  the  third,  every-each  in  his  degree  •.
The  fourth,  and  the  vileft  maie  liot  be  refufedy
Por  it  is  profitable  and  beft  to  be  ofed  $

And  beft  maie  extend  his  Multiplication,

In  whome  is  the  virtue  of  our  Generation  *?

And  that  is  the  Erthly  Lytbarge  of  our  Sto  ne, ,
Without  him  Generation  fliall  be  none ^ . . . i '

Ney  ther  of  our  Tintture  fixation  >

For  nothing  is  fixt  but  Erthe  alone  5
Ali  other  Elements  movcablc  be.

Pier,  Ayer,  and  Water,  as  ye  daily  fee : •

But  Pier  is  caufe  of  extendibility.

And  caufeth  matters  permifcible  to  be.

And  cleere  brightnes  in  Coiours  fairc


O R D I N A L U

Is  caufcd  of  kinde  evermore  of  Ayer,

And  Ayer  alfo  wich  his  Coadtion ,

Maketh  things  to  be  oflight  liquefa&ioni
As  Wax  is  and  Butter,  and  Guinmcs  ali,

A little  heatc  maketh  them  to  melt  and  fall :

Watcr  denfeth  with  ablutlon  blive.

And  things  morrifyed  caufcth  to  revive.

Of  multiplying of  Fier  is  no  greater  wonder,
x^Than  is  of  multiplying  oi  Erth  fet  under :

For  Erth  bearcth  Herbes  daily  new  and  newe,
Without  number,  therefore  it  is  trevve
That  Erth  is  wonderfullas  well  as  Fier,

Though  one  fparke  maie  foone  fili  a Shcere :

If  ali  a Shcere  werc  filled  with  Flaxe,

One  fparke  than  vvould  wonderfully  waxe :

Fier  and  Erth  bc  multipliers  alonc,

And  thei  be  caufers  of  multiplying  our  Stene.

Of  this  Erth  fhoweth  Albert  our  great  Brother,

In  his  Minentis , which  Lytharge  is  better  than  other.
For  the  white  Elixir  he  doth  it  there  rehcarfe.

And  the  bookc  of  Meeter  fhoweth  it  in  a verfe.


19

Chap.


NOw  to  Conjunctiori  let  us  reforte.

And  forne  wiie  Councell  thercof reporte :
Conjoyne  your  Elements  Grammaticali y,

With  all  their  Concords  conveniently :

Whiche  Concords  to  healpea  Clerke,

Bc  cheefe  lnftruments  of  all  this  wcrkc :

For  nothinge  maie  be  more  contrary  nowe,

Than  to  be  fixt  and  unperfe<5fly  flowe :

All  the  Grammarians  of  England  and  of  Fraunce ,
Cannot  tcach  you  this  Concordance : ^

This  Ordinali  telleth  where  ye  maie  it  fec.

In  PJjifick  in  the  Boke  de  Arbore.


K 2


Joyne


60  ^(or toris

Chap.  5.  Joyne  them  alfo  in  RbetoricaQ  guife,

With  Natures  Ornate.in  purified  wife.

Sithensour  Tintfture  muft  be  moftpurc  and  fairc,

Bc  fure  of  pure  Erth,  Water,Fier  and  Ayrc*  . :

In  Logic  ali  wifc  bcit  early  or  late,

Joyne  trewc  kindes  nor  fophifticate ;

Ignorance  hereof  hath  made  many  Clerks,

Lewdly  to  leefc  their  labour  and  their  vvcrkes.

Joyne  them  together  alfo  Aritbmetica/ly,

By  futtill  Numbers  proportionally.

Whereof  a litle  mention  made  thcre  was,

When  Boetius  faid  tn  numeris  elementa  ligas.

Joyne  your  Elements  Mufically^

For  ttvo  caufes,  onc  is  for  Melody.: .

Which  there  accords  will  make  to  your  mind,

The  trewe  effedt  when  that  ye  fhall  finde..

And  alfo  for.like  as  Diapafo»,.

With  Diapente  and  wit h Diatejf  ’.ron,

Wnhypate ypaton-,  and  Lecnnos  mufe , .

With  other  accords  which  in  Mufick  be,

With  their  proporcions  caufen.Harmony,

Much  like  proportions bc  in  Alkitny ,

^As  for  thcgreat  Numbers  Adfuall:  '

But  for  the.fecreate Numbers  Intellectuali-,

Ye  muft  feeche  them  as  I faid  before,,

Out  of  Raymond and  .out  of  Bacons  lore.

Bacon  fheweth  it  darkly  in  his  three  letters  all.

And  Raymonde  bettcr  in  his  Arte  Generali.

Many  men  weene  whidvdoth  them  reade,

That  theie  doe  underftonde  them  when  theie  doe  not
With  Ajlrelegie  joyne  Elements  alfo,  . (indeede.

Tofortune  their  Workings  as  theie  goc:-
Such  firaple  kindes  unformed  and  unwrought,

Muft  craftily  bc  guided  till.thc  end  be  fought...  V *J


RDINALL,

AU  which  feafon  thcic  have  more  obedicncc,
Above  formed  Natures  to  Sterrs  influence.

And  Science  Perfpeffive  giveth  great  cvidcnce,
To  ali  the  Minifters  ofthis  Science.

And  fo  done  other  Sciences  manie  moe
And  fpccially  the  Science  de  Pleno  & Vacuo,

But  chcchiefc  Miftris  among  Sciences  ali.

For  hclpc  ofthis  Arte^  is  Magick. Natur  ali.

WHcn  the  fourc  Eleraents  wifely  joyned  be,
And  cvery-each  of  them  fet  in  his  degree,
Then  of  divers  degrees  and  of  divers  digeftion,
Golours  will  arife  towards  perfe&ion;

For  then  worketh  inward  heate  naturali,

Which  in  our  fubftancc  is  but  Intclle&uall : -
To  fight  unknowne,  hand  maie  it  not  fcele.

His  working  isknowne  to  fcw  Men  and  feild  j-
And  vvhcn  this  heate  naturali  moved  be  fhalL
By  oar  outward  heate  artificiali,

Then  Nature  excitcd  to  labour  will  not  ccafe  J(
Many  diverfities  of  degrees  to  increafe.

Which  is  one  caufe  by  reafon  you  maie  fee,

Whie  in  our  vvarke  fo  manie  Colours  be :
Thcrforeit  caufethin  this  Aegreat  doubr,,.
Ignorance  of  heate  withinand  without,

To  know  how  theis  two  heates  fhulde  accord,'.
And  which  of  them  in  working  ihulde  be  Lord  .•>

"Y^gefiion  in  thiswarke  hatlfgreat  likcncffe
To  digeftion  in  things  of  Quicknes:  .

And  before  other  (as  1 witneffc  can)

Itis  moft  likc  to  digeftion  of  Man. ■

Ihercfore  faid  Monen , our  Stent  in  generatione
is  moft  likething  to  Mans  Greation,

K 3


j\(ortori  s

In  whom  faith  Rajmond  thc  fowre  dcgrees  all
Of  thc  fowre  Complexions  togcthcr  finde  yc  fhall.
And  that  a&ually,  which  ye  cannot  finde
Amongft  Creatures  in  none  other  kinde.
Wherefore  araongc  Creatures  theis  two  alonc
Be  called  Micrccofmm , Man  and  our  Siotie.

Novv  of  Digeftion  thc  aliment  and  foodc
Perfe&ly  to  know  is  needfuli  and  full  good.

It  is  humor  follid  confiant  with  ficcitie,

Mightily  medled  after  fome  degrce.

In  oppofite  paffives  mixcd  duiy,

Ingendered  by  inward  and  outvvard  heat  trewly.
Soe  nothing  clfc  is  ourDigeftion,

But  of  humour  fubftantiall  a create  perfe&ion.

I pray  ye  Layme tt  have  me  excufcd,

Though  fuch  Tearmcs  with  you  be  not  ufed,
Imuft  ufe  them,  for  all  Audors  affirmes,

How  every  Science  hath  bis  proper  T e armes.
Digeftion  fometimcs  advanced  maic  be
By  outward  cold,  as  yearly  ye  maie  fcc
How  in  W inter  men  eaten  more  meate
Than  in  Summcr,  whcn  expanfed  is  their  heatc  5
For  colde  maketh  heate  inward  then  to  flye.

And  ligge  nigh  together,  then  ftronger  is  he ;
Which  by  his  ftrength  his  power  is  more
To  make  Digeftion  than  hc  mought  before.

But  our  cheefe  Digefture  for  our  intent,

Is  virtuall  heatc  of  the  matter  digerent  5
Nethlcs  heate  of  the  digeftible  thingc,

Helpeth  digeftion  and  her  working  :

Feaverly  heatc  maketh  no  digeftion,

Baines  maie  helpe  and  caufe  alfo  deftru&ion.
Winc  digefted  hath  more  heate  naturali,

Than  hath  new  Mufte3whofe  heate  is  accidentali :


Ordinal  l.

Coagulation  is  noc  formc  fubftantiall,
But  onlic  paffion  of  things  materiali.


■XT  Ore  ye  muft  know,  when  Colours  appeare,
iVl.  who  is  principali  Agent  in  that  matrer  Cicere.
For  fometimes  it  is  Heate,  and  fometimes  Cold  it  is.
And  fometime  Moyfturc,  and  fomewhile  Drines.
The  principali  Agent  to  know  at  every  feafon,
Rcquireth  great  fearch  made  by  futtill  rcafon :

Which  is  not  peteeived  but  of  Maflers  fewe,

For  thei  mark  not  hovv  Colours  arife  by  rcwc :

The  principali  Agent  of  the  qualities  fowre,

Hath  power  royall  as  Lord  of  moft  honour
iJThc  remnant  of  qualities  to  Converte  to  his  kinde,
Of  which  converfion  Anaxagoras  maketh  minde
In  his  Boke  of  Converfions  Naturali ,

Whereof  Raymond  fheweth  caufes  fpeciall :

It  is  no  Jape  neither  light  to  lerne

Your  principali  Agent  ali  feafons  to  difccrne  ••

Which  I teach  you  to  knowi$fcby  fignes  fowre,

By  Coleur , Odeur,  Sapor  and  Liquore .


C hap,  j i


A Nd  firfl:  by  Colour  to  ferve  your  intente,

To  know  thereby  your  principali  Agent.
Looke  in  your  Velfell  which  Colour  flieweth  moft,;
He  that  caufeth  him  is  principali  of  the  hoft
As  for  that  feafon,  vvhofe  pride  ye  maie  Avage,

By  this  our  Do&rinc,  if  ye  fcc  him  rage  :

Which  yc  maie  doe  when  ye  well  underftonde,

The  caufe  of  ali  Colours  which  ye  have  in  honde.
Which  I woll  teach  you  now  fhortly  withall,

By  caufe  here  and  there  feeke  them  yc  ne  fhall :
VVhitnes  is  caufed  of  manie  matters  cleere,

In  another  thing  termined,  a nd  foe  it  isheerc ;


Blackncs-'


I 7\(ortons

Blacknes  is  whcn  parts  of  a body  darke,
Withthicknes  oppreffech  thc  clcernes  oftheWarkc
Oreis  it  is  of  aCombuft  tcrrcftrietie^

But  of  fuch  Combuftion  greate  hardnes  fliall  be  5
And  by  Commixionof  Darke  Cleere  andCleane,
Shall  be  ingendered  all  the  Colours  mcanc:

Every  deerc  thinge  perfpicuate  and  fayrc,

Standeth  by  the  matters  of  Water  and  Aire,
Whomeapure  Erthdoth  apprchend,

Such  as  fball  not  their  cleerenes  offend ;

And  if  in  fuch  cleerenes  and  perfpicuitie,

Ye  can  noe  fpeciall  Colour  fee,

Thercupon  to  Judge  you  maic  bebold,

Thecaufe  of  fuch  things  was  exceeding  Colde  :

As  Cbriftall , Beri and  other  things  moe,

Diverfitie  bctwecne  them  lcrne  ere  ye  goe ;

Chriftall  hath  Water  dedyning  toward  Aycr,
Wherefore  it  is  cleere,  perfpicuous  and  fairc  5
But  where  it  declineth  tovvards  Water  more.

Itis  darke  as  Berill  orlcehard  frore;

But  whcn  matters  drawcth  toward  ficcitie,
Darkneswith  hardnes  ingendred  fliall  be  i
As  it  appearcth  in  the  Adamant  Stone,

And  in  other  things  manic  one.

Twinckling  and  glittcring  as  in  Magnetia  is,

Light  is  caufe  thcreof  within  matter  of  Cleerenes  5
Whichis  fuperduced  upon  waterly  vapour,
Bcforetyme  inccnccdwith  Heatebeyc fure*

Now  after  cleerenes  and  Colours  in  cxtremitie,
Ofmeane  Colours  a litlc  fhew  will  I.

Rubj  colour  is  of  a thinn  fume  fuccendcd
In  a cleere  Body,  which  alfoeis  amended
Whcn  in  that  Body  reyncth  plenty  of lighr.

For  more  or  les  thcreof  maketh  more  or  les  bright  .*


O R D I N A L L.

As  thc  Amattjl  followeth  the  Ruby  in  dignity,  Chap,  5

Inlcfs  Clecrcncs  and  more  Obfcuritie :

And  a Calcedonie  in  Slymy  fubftance,

Followeth  thc  BeriU  in  degrees  of  variancc.

Qreene  as  a Smaragde  is  of  Water  cicere,

I AVitli  Erthy  fubftance  Combuft  mixt  full  ncere :

And  thecleerer  fubftance  that  the  Erth  bc ,

The  deerer  greenefs  thereof  ye  fhall  fee.

JTaxvney  is  of  Cleerenes  terminate,

Infufed  with  thick  Fumofity  congregate
Of  Water,  and  alfoe  of  Erth  fuccended,

Whereby  the  cleerenes  of  Aier  is  fufpended.

Wam  or  leady  Colour  ingendred  is
Of  Waterie  and  Erthy  parts  without  amilTc  j
And  where  fuch  parts  becold  and  thick,

Ever  Wann  Colour  theron  fhall  ftick  5
As  it  appeareth  in  old  laycn  Lead,

And  in  Men  that  be  wcllnecre  dead  .•

This  Wann  Colour  called  Lividitic,

In  Envious  Men  ufeth  much  to  bc  5
Naturali  heate  and  blood  done  reforte,

To  thc  Hert,them  to  comfort.

And  leaveth  Cold  and  Dry  the  Facc,

For  heate  and  blood  is  parted  fro  that  placc.

Likewife  when  Fevers  be  in  extreraitic,

The  Nailes  ofHands  of  this  Colour  wilbc.

The  Saphirc  Colour,  that  Orient  Blewe,

Like  in  Colour  to  thc  hcavenlie  huc.

Is  much  fairer  than  Wann  Colour  to  fight.

For  therein  is  more  of  Aier  Water  and  Light
Than  is  in  Wann  Colour,  and  that  by  manifold,

Wherefore  fuch  Colour  is  more  deerer  folde  j
Allother  Bleives  thc  fadder  that  they  be,

Thci  have  leffe  of  Aier  and  more  of  Tcrreftriety.  5

L Silver


<5<5  3\(or  totis

Chap.<$.  Silver  to  Azure  foone  broght  will  be ;

The  caufe  thercofis  pcrfpicujtie ,

Whichisin  Silvcr  caufed  of  Aycr,

Wherefore  it  turneth  to  hcvcnly  Colour  faire ;

And  Quickfilvcr  plenty  within  him  is,

Caufeth  in  Silver  ali  this  brightncs :

Subtiler  Erth,  pure  Water,  vvith  cleerenes  of  Air,

Caufeth  fuch  brightnes  to  Quickfilver  to  repaire.

Citrine  Colour  Yellowe  as  ye  fet  in  Gould,

Is  Colour  moft  liking  for  fome  men  to  behould :

Caufed  of  mighty  and  ftrong  digeftion.

For  humor  in  him  have  ftrong  deco&ion  *

Such  Colour  with  Hcate  ingendred  be  fhall.

Asm  in  Honey,  Urine,  Lyc,  and  Gall:

The  fliining  of  Gould  is  caufed  as  I teli,

Of  pure  ana  fubtile  Water  termined  full  well ,
Perfpicuoufly  condenfed  5 for  Water  pure  and  fine,

The  more  it  is  Condenfed,  the  better  it  woll  fhinc  5
For  of  a Mirrour  the  caufe  none  other  is,

But  moifture  termined,  as  ali  Clerks  gefle ,

Soe  that  it  bc  polible  withall  5
For  Aier  Figures  receive  never  fhall  •

For  Aier  maie  not  bc  terminate  in  his  kinde  •,

So  caufe  of  fhining  in  Water  ye  fliall  finde.

With  White  and  Red  well  medled  pure  and-fine
Wollbe  ingendred  faire  Colour  Citrine.

Soe  divers  Comixtions  of  Blements ,

Maketh  divers  Colours^  for  divers  intents :

With  divers  Digeftions,  and  divers  degrees,

AI/  Colours  bc  made  which  your  Eyen  fees.

OfElements  ye  muft  the  proper  Colour  lerne,
Whereby  of  Colours  ye  maie  better  difeerne;
Phifttiam  faie  of  good  Herbs  and  foote,

Some  be  colde  outward  and  hot  within  therootc$

Ex  ample


Cbap.j.


Ordinall.

Example  hereof  if  yc  lift  to  gctr,

Bchold  the  working  of  the  gcntle  Violet :
Comraon  Philofophie  the  caufe  dothdifdofe,
Whiccolde  is  within  and  red  withouttheRofc:
AmxAgoras  faid  in  his  Coverfions  natur  aU,
Imvard  and  Outward  becontrary  in  thingsall,
Which  is  trevve  exccpt  fuchthings  as  be
Of little  compofition,  and  nigh  fimplicitie  ?

As  is  Scammonye , and  Lawrell  the  Laxative,
j W-hich  bc  not  nourifhing  to  vegetative.
Remember  hovvin  every  mixt  thinge,
Evermore  one  Element  defireth  to  be  Kinge :

I Which  proudc  appetite  of  Elements  and  vicious,

1 Moveth  men  to  be  Ambitious :

Whereforc  our  Lord  that  beft  difpofc  cann,

Hath  made  Ordeynance  for  finfull  Man,

All  proude  appetites  to  equalitie  to  bringe*

Wh cnRequiem  sternam  the  Church  fhall  finge,

' Than  fhall  everic  ambitious  thought,

Plainely  appeare  how  that  it  was  nought :
Lcrds,and  Beggars,and  all  fhall  be
In  the  Charnell  brought  to  equalitie.

IYour  Principali  Agent  fo  rebate  fhall  ye,

When  he  ufurpeth  above  cquality  5
Therefore  Aristotle  faid  Compound  ye  our  Stone
Equall,  that  in  him  repugnance  be  none  5
Ncither  divifion  as  ye  proceede ;

Take  heede  thercto,  for  it  is  greatc  neede  5
And  when  it  falleth  that  yc  fhall  fee
All  Colours  at  once  that  named  maie  be  5
Than  fuffer  Nature  with  her  operation.

At  her  owne  leafure  to  make  Generation :

Soc  that  amongc  fo  manie  Colours  all.

Nature  maie  fhew  one  principali :


Such


68  J\(ortonvs

Chap.  5.  Such  as  ftiall  draw  towards  your  intent,

According  to  your  dcfired  Elcment.

This  wifc  by  Colours  yec  maie  provide
Howinyourworkes  yeefball  yeeguide.

Manicmoe  things  of  Colours  I maiewrite,

But  this  Is  fufficient  my  promife  to  acquitc.

As  farr  forth  as  Colours  maie  ferve  your  intent,

By  them  to  know  your  principali  agent.

But  manic  Clcrks  wonder  why  you  may  fee
Soe  manie  Colours  as  in  our  Stone  woll  be
Before  that  perfeft' White  and  Cicere,

And  unchaungcable  woll  appearc,

Confidcring  the  fewncs  of  the  ingredients  5
I woll  that  anfwer  to  pleafe  thcir  intents.

And  teach  them  the  trcwth  of  that  greate  doubte.

By  kinde  of  CMagnefia  fuch  Colours  paffc  out,
Whofe  nature  is  of  fuch  Convertibilitie,

To  everic  proportion,  and  to  everie  degree.

As  Chriftall  to  his  Subjeft  is  founde ; .

For  of  everic  thing  that  is  upon  the  grounde,

Which  that  ye  woll  Chriftall  fet  under,

SuchColour  hath  Chriftall,  therefore  ceafeto  wonder  r
Wherefore  Hermes  faid  not  untruly  ne  Envious,

Ad  perpetranda  miracula  rei  unita :

God  hath  fo  ordeyned  faith  Hermes  the  Kinge,

To  fulfill  the  miracles  of  one  thinge:

Common  Philofopbers  thercof  cannot  finde
The  vertuesof  our  Stone  cxceeding  far  their  minde.

SCMeUingx&i\z  helpe  forth  your  intente,

To  know  your  reigning  Elemente5
And  be  with  Colour  a Teftimony,

To  know  your  principali  Agent  thereby;

And  ye  which  vvould  by  fmelling  Icrne


Of


OrDINAU.  (Jp

Ofyour  principali  Agent  trewly  to  difeeme.  Chap.  j.

As  White,  and  Black,  be  Colours  in  extremitic ,

Soe  of  Odors,  foote  and  ftinking  be  :

But  like  as  F;lhes  know  not  by  fight

Noe  mcane  Colours,  bccaufe  their  Eyne  bright

IHave  none  Eyelidds  for  their  fight  elofinge,

Soe  meane  Odors  fhall  not  by  fmellinge
Be  knoivne  of  you,  this  is  the  caufe  whie.

For  Noftrills  be  open  as  the  filhes  Eyc :

Thereforc  ' meane  Odors  be  not  in  certainc
Smelled  by  the  NoXe,  as  mcane  Colours  be  feene.

Heavie  Smell  is  not  as  Clerks  thinke
The  midlc  Odor,  but  only  the  lefle  Stinkc.

Old  Fathers  wrote  by  their  Do&rine,

Of  their  Experience  which  is  maturine,

That  if  ye  medie  fwecte  Savour  and  redolente
Equally  vvith  ftinking  to  prove  your  intent ;

The  foote  Ihall  be  fmelled,  the  ftinking  not  foc  ~

The  caufe  ye  may  lerne  now  ere  ye  goc;

Allfweete  fmelling  things  have  more  puritie.

And  are  more  fpirituall  than  ftinking  maie  be : >

Wherefore  it  is  in  Aicr  more  pcnctrative,’

And  is  more  cxtendible,  and  is  alfoe  to  life
More  acceptablej  as  friend  to  Nature,

And  therefore  rather  received  be  ye  fure.

OVor  is  a fmokifh  vapour  refolved  with  heate,.

Out  of  fubftance,  by  an  invifiblc  fwcarc^

Which  in  the  Aier  hath  free  entringe.

And  chaungeth  the  Aier  and  your  Smellinge ;

As  Sapor  of  Meates  chaungeth  your  Taftingc,.

And  as  Sounds  chaungeth  your  Hearinge ,

And  as  Colour  chaungeth  your  Sight,

Soe  Odor  chaungeth  Smelling  by  might .

L 3


The


jq  3\(or  toris

Cbap.f,  The  caufcof  Odours  to  know  if  you  delighr,

Foure  things  thereto  bc  requifite;

Firft  that  futtill  matter  be  Obedient
To  the  working  of  Heate,  for  to  prefent
By  a fume  the  liknes  of  the  fame  thinge,

From  whome  that  fume  had  his  beginninge ;

Alfoto  beare  forth  that  pure  fume  andfairc,

There  is  required  a cicere  thinn  Aier :

For  thick  Aier  vvoll  not  beare  it  farr,

But  it  woll  reteyne  it  much  fafter  ?

And  foe  thick  matter  Obedience  hath  none,

To  the  working  of  Heatc,  as  it  ihcweth  in  Stone  :

Heate  maketh  Odours,  Cold  ihrinketh,  by  reafon
Dunghills  in  Summer  ftink  morethan  in  Winter  feafonj
Plcafant  Odours  ingendered  be  ihall
Of  deane  and  Pure  fubftance  and  fumigale,

As  it  appeareth  in  Amber^Narde,  and  Mirrhe,

Good  for  a Woman,  fuch  things  pleafeth  her ;

But  of  Pure  fubftance  vvith  a Meane  heate,

Be  temperate  Odours,  as  in. the  Violet?

Of  a Meane  heate  with  fubftance  Impure,

Is  Odours  mifliking , as  Aloes  and  Sulphure :

But  when  Naturali  heate  beginneth  to  fpill,

Then  thereof  arifeth  heavie  fmcll  ?

As  Fifli  fmelleth  that  is  kept  too  longe,

Naturali  heate  rotteth,  foe  the  fmell  is  ftronge;

STivcb  is  a Vapour,  a refolved  fumolitie
Of  things  which  of  Evill  Complexions  be.

And  when  Humor  onlie  is  in  Corruption ,

Soe  that  the  Subftance  be  not  in  Deftrudion,
Thereof  Iball  onlie  heavie  fmell  arife,

But  not  verie  Stinch  come  in  that  wife.

Of  everie  Stinch  the  caufc  of  that  Chaunce


Is


Ordinall.  7 i

Is  only  corruption  of  thc  felfe  fubftance  5 Cb.tp.^.

And  when  Evill  fubftance  ftiall  putrifie,

Horriblc  Odour  is  gendrcd  thereby :

As  of  Dragons  and  Mcn  thatlong  dead  be,

Their  ftcnch  maic  caufc  greate  Mortalitie.

It  is  not  wholfome  to  fmell  to  fome  Cole,

For  quenching  of  fome  Snuffe  a Mare  woll  caft  her  Foalc.

Whcn  the  Qualities  of  a thing  according  is
To  your  Nature,  good  Odour  will  not  miffe:

»But  when  the  fubftance  is  contrary  to  your  kinde,

The  Odours  thereof  odious  you  ftiall  finde.

Fiftics  Iove  Soote  fmell,  alfo  it  is  trewe,

Thei  love  not  old  Kydlcs  as  thei  doe  the  new.

Ali  things  that  are  or  good  Odour,

Have  naturali  Heate  for  their  fuccour;

Though  Camphire,  Jlofes,  and  things  coldc,

Have  foote  Odours,  yet  Audtors  tould,

How  Heate  virtually  inclofed  is  the  skell,

With  Purcnes  of  fubftance,  whie  they  fo  fmell :

This  oldc  opinion  you  maie  teach  your  Brother,

How  noe  good  Odour  is  contrary  to  ariother ;

But  it  is  not  foe  of  ftinking  fmells.

For  ftinch  of  Garlick  voydeth  ftinch  of  Dunghills.

Of  Odours  this  Dodtrine  is  fufficientc.

As  in  Alkk ny  to  ferve  your  intente ,

Your  Warks  to  underftonde  thereby,

When  things  begin  to  putrifie
Alfoe  by  Odours  this*you  maie  lerrte,

Suttilnes  and  grofnes  of  Matters  to  difeerne :

Alfoe  of  Mcane  fubftance  knowledge  ye  may  get,

With  knowledge  of  Corruption  of  Naturali  heate  5
And  knowledge  of  Diverfitic  by  good  attendance,

When  Humour  corrupteth  and  when  the  Subftance.

But  our  Subftance  was  made  fo  pure  and  cleane,

And  {


7*

Chap.  5.


J\(orton  s

And  is  confcrvcd  by  vertue  of  the  mcane ,
That  ye  no  ftinke  thercof  fhall  finde,

Albeit  that  it  putrifie  fro  his  owne  kinde.

THe  third  figne  and  the  third  Teftimony
To  undcrftand  your  principali  Agent  by ,
Is  Sapor  called,  ofMouth  the  Tafte,

Which  evermore  is  caufe  of  waftc
Of  the  fubftance  of  the  fame  thinge
Whereof  ye  makc  proofe  by  Taftinge
Sapor  fhulde  be  much  better  Judgc
Tnen  Colour  or  Odour,  and  more  refuge,
Were  not  Tafte  a pcrillous  thinge,

While  our  Stone  is  in  workinge  5
For  it  is  hurting  to  health  and  life,

It  is  fo  greatly  penetrative ;

Above  all  fubtill  things  it  hath  Vidory,

And  pcirceth  folid  things  haftily,

Wherefore  it  is  perill  and  not  good,

Much  or  oft  to  Taft  of  that  foode :

It  Comfortcth  Mettalls  as  we  well  finde,

But  it  is  Pcrillous  for  all  Mankinde,

Till  pcrfcdl  Red  thereof  be  made,

Such  as  inFier  woll  never  fade.

A levvde  Man  late  that  ferved  this  Arte,
Tafted  of  our  tvhite  Stone  a parte,

Trufting  thereby  to  find  releefe
Of  all  ficknes  and  of  all  greefe,

Whcreby  the  Wretch  was  fodenly,

Smitt  with  a ftrong  Paralific  5
Whom  my  Majler  with  great  Engine,

Cured  with  Be^oars  of  the  Mine.

Therefore  though  Taft  by  Common  reafon,
Shulde  be  beft  judge  at  every  feafon,


>


Vou


O R D I N A L L.

Yet  for  that  Taft  is  abominable
Sapor  is  hccrc  not  profitable.

Yct  of  fome  parts  feperable,

A Taft  maie  wdl  be  Convcnablc
Bcforc  Conjun&ions  to  rnake  afiay,

Whether  they  be  well  wrought or nay ;

Howbcit  a Wifcman  hath  helpe  fufficienr,

By  Colour  and  Odour  to  havc  his  intent:

For  manie  Men  can  chufe  good  Wine,;  .

By  Colour  and  Odour  when’ it  is  fine;

But  for  new  Wine  not  fined  in  generali,

The  trewTaft  is  moft  fucrtie  of  ali;

For  Smclling  hath  Organalls  but  one,

Nothing  difceming  but  fumous  things  alone  5
But  Taft  hath  fix  Organalls  without  doiibt,

To  feele  qualitic  of  things  within  and  without,
Which  Nature  ordain'd  againft  perill  and  ftrife.
For  more  fuertie  of  things  haveing  life :

An  Ape  chufeth  hcr  Meate  by  Smelling,

Men  and  Popinjayes  truften  to  Tafting:

For  manie  things  be  of  good  Smell,

Which  toTaft  be  found  full  ill :

For  they  maie  be  abhominable  fower,
Over-lharpe,  too  bitter,  orof  grcate  horrour,

Or  Venamous,  ftinking,  or  ovcr-ftronge,

(The  Taft  is  judgc  and  voideth  fuch  wrongc.

Old  men  vvrote  in  anticnt  time,

How  that  of  Sapors  there  be  fully  Nync ;

Which  yc  maie  lerne  in  halfe  an  hower,

!\s  Sharpe  taft,  Un&uous,  and  Sower,

Which  three  doe  futtill  mattcr  fignifie ;

\nd  othcr  three  doe  meane  raatter  tcftifie,

\s  Bitinge  taft,  Saltiih  and  Weerifii  alfo,

Dthei*  three  come  thicke  fubftanccs  fro,

M


75

Chap.'). 1


*


74

CUp.<$.


3\(ortons

As  Bitter  taft,  under  Sower,  and  Douce;

Thes  Nyne  be  found  in  manie  a Noble  Houfe;

Five  of  thefe  Nync  be  ingendrcd  by  Heat,

Unduons,  Sharpe,  Salr,  Bitter,  and  Doulcet  5
Butof  the  Nyne  the  remnant  ali  fovver,

Be  made  with  cold,  as  is  the  Sapor  Sower,

And  fo  is  Sowerifh  taft  called  Sapor  Pontick,

And  Ieffe  Sower  allfo  called  Sapor  Stiptick,

Alfo  is  Wceriih  taft  called  Unfavoury,

With  Cold  ingendered  effedually.

Sapor  of  two  things  hath  his  Conception,

Of  divers  Subftance  and  of  divers  Compledion.

OF  Hot  and  Moyft  in  the  Second  degree,

With  a Thick  fubftance,  Doulcet  Taft  willbe  j
The  fame  degrees  of  the  fame  Complexion,

To  a Meane  fubftance  knit  by  cpnnexion,

Unduous  Sapor  ingender  ever  fhall  5
But  where  it  is  Hott  and  Dry  withall,

With  a Meane  fubftance  in  the  Second  degree,

The  Taft  thereof  muft  needs  Saltifh  be  5
When  a thing  in  the  Third  degree  Hot  and  Dry  is,
With  a fubftance  Thick,  there  is  Bitternes  5
But  in  the  Fowerth  degree'  matter  Hot  and  Dry,
With  a Suttill  fubftance,  Sharpe  Taft  is  thereby;

So  five  Tafts,  as  I faid  before,

Be  ingendered  with  Heat,  and  not  onc  more.

Gf  Cold  and  Dry  in  the  Second  degree  by  kinde,
With  a Suttill  fubftance,  full  Sower  ye  fhall  it.  finde;
As  by  Faces  of  People  ye  maic  Decme,

When  thei  taft  Ctabs  while  thei  be  greene :

The  fame  Complexion  in  the  fame  degree.

In  a thing  which  of  Meane  fubftance  fhall  be,

Of that  is  ingendred  ye  maie  well  fuppofe,.


O R D I N A L L.

A Bitingc  Taft  as  is  of  the  Roafc,

But  Sower,  and  Sowrilh,  and  leaft  Sower,  all  three

(Be  of  Cold  and  Dry  in  High  and  Low  degrce :
And  Cold  and  Moyft  in  the  Firft  degree  of  all,

IA  Wcerifh  Taft  ingcnder  evcr  Ihall,

As  of  an  Egg  it  Ihoweth  in  the  glaere.

And  in  pale  Women  over  White  and  Fayer:

For  fuch  be  Cold,  and  of  Humiditye
Thei  have  trewly  grcate  fuperfluity,

Therefore  to  Mcn  thei  have  iclfc  delighc ;

Cold  rcbateth  luxurious  appetite.

Ifiac  faid  there  bebut  Taftcs  feaven.

For  Sower  and  leflc  Sower  was  onc  but  uneven,

But  in  Complexion  thei  vvere  of  onc  foundation.
For  Unfavoury  was  but  of  Taft  privation ;
Compound  Tafts  be  found  alfo.

As  Doulce  Eger  and  others  manie  mo  ;

So  by  Taft  mcn  maie  Craftily  know  ; ?

Divcrs  complexions  and  degrecs  high  And  Iow  j
And  when  yc  doubt  by  Taft  to  make  report,

Than  to  your  other  tcftimonics  refort.

As  in  Pfnficke  truft  not  to  Urine  : ....

Onely,  but  alfo  takc  witnes  and  Dodtrine
Of  your  Pulfes,  and  wifely  confidering
Six  things  not  naturali  the  Body  conccrning  \

Having  rcfpedt  alfo  thcrewithall,

Unto  thefc  Scaven  things  naturali  5
And  take  heed  if  ye  woll  be  fure,

OfThree  things  contrary  to  nature:

Compleat  theis  Sixteene  wifely  to  your  ground,

A lewd  Pbifition  leaft  that  yc  be  found  :

For  fo  of  t Md  I wifl)  ye  maie  bcware.

And  helpe  thc  Sick  man  from  his  care :

So  fo  this  Science  if  ye  woll  advaunce,

Mz


71

Chap,<).


You


J\(or toris

Your  works,  take  hccd  of  cvcrie  Circumftancc,

Wifely  Confidering  yoiir  teftimonyes  fowcr,

Thrce  bc  now  pafled,  thefowerth  is  Liquor.

1 1»

Liquer  is  the  Comfort  of  this  Werke;

Liquor  giveth  cvidencc  to  a Clerke
Thercby  to  faftcn  his  Elements,

And  alio  to  loofc  them  for  fome  intcnts ;

Liquor  conjoyneth  Male  with  Female  Wife,

And  caufeth  dead  things  to  refort  to  Life;'

Liquors  clenfeth  with  theire  ablution,

Liquors  to  our  Stom  be  Gheefe  nutrition;.

Without  Liquor  no  Meate  is  good ;

Liquors  conveieth  ali  Aliment  and  Food
To  every  part  of  Mans  Body,

And  fo  theidoe  with  us  In  Alkimy,

Ye  muft  confuter  the  puritie
Of  ali  your  Liquors  and  quantitie;

And  how  thick  thei  be  or  thinn,

Or  elfc  thereof  fhall  ye  litle  winn ;

But  not  as  Phifiuons  maketh  mention.

For  Blixir  is  a thing  of  a fecond  intention ;
Whereforeye  fhall  more  Wondrous  natures  find
In  his  working,  than  in  ali  other  kind ;

Fhifitions  fay  the  thicker  Urine  be,

The  more  it  Fgnifieth  Humidity,

Where  thick  Liquor  with  us  hath  ficcity,-
And  futtill  Liquor  betoknetb  Humidity:

MAnic  Liquors  be  requifit

To  our-  Stene  for  his  appetite.

In  the  Booke  of  Turba  AriBeus  depofed,

How  Ayre  in  Watcr  was  fecreatly  indofed,

Which  barc  up  Erth  with  his1  Aierly  might»

Pithagoras


O R D I N A L L.

fithagoras  faid  that  vvas  fpoke  with  righc.

Arijlotle  Craftilyc  his  words  fct  hc,

Saying,  cum  habueris  aquam  ab  Aere,
flato  wrote  full  fapiently.

And  named  it  (lilia  roris  madidi :

Which  vvas  kmdly  fpokcn  for  Alkimj,

But  common  Studcnts  in  firft  Philofophie,

Say  Ayre  condcnfed  is  turned  into  Raine,

And  Water  rarificd  bccomes  Ayre  againe.

Sorae  faid  hovv  May  vvas  firft  feaion  and  faire
To  take  fuch  Water  as  is  made  of  Ayre.

Some  faid  fuch  Waters  come  hcavcn  fro,

When  the  Sunn  entereth  mto  Scorpio.

Some  faid  ali  Liquors  fhulde  bc  refufed,

Which  Froft  infetted  fhulde  not  be  ufed:

The  caufe  vvhie  as  telleth  Autors  old.

Is  that  theire  accuity  is  duld  with  cold.

Some  Philofophers  faid  that  ye  fhulde  takc
Milke  for  the  Liquor  Elixir  to  make:

And  othcr  fort  faid  after  their  intent.

No  Liquor  fo  good  for  the  Complcmcnv
As  Water  of  Litharge  which  would  not  mitte,
With  Water  of  A^ot  to  make  lac  virginis:

But  Democrit  faid  bcft  Liquor  to  prefent
Elixir  vvithall  vvas  Water  permanent:

Whofe  naturali  vertue  and  propcrtie,

Was  fier  to  abide  and  ncver  to  flyc :

Rupifcijfa.  faid  that  chcefe  Liquor
Was  Aqua-viu  Elixir  to  fuccour  5
For  fhe  vvas  fpirituall,  and  would  revive
Dead  things  fro  dcath  to  live,

Shee  was  ^uinteffence , the  fift  thing,

Whercof  Arijlotle  by  his  writing
In  his  Boke  of  Secrets  faith  foe,

M 3 Hovv


77

Cbap


chap,$.


S^ortons

How  that  ali  pcrfe&ion  was  in  quinarie,

Rupifcifia  callcd  it  bcft  Liquor  of  ali.

For  it  maketh  groflc  matter  Lpirituall :

But  of  Pithagoras  ye  maie  finde,

Our  Aqua-vita  of  another  kinde  5
He  faith  it  was  Vivificam  in  his  fentcnce.

Fac  fugiens  fixum  & fixum  fugiens,  < ,

For  in  fuch  wife  vvith  ftrong  Coa&ion,

Fixt  mattcrs  wcre  made  of  Iight  liquefattion.
Another  fort  faid  no  Liquor  was  above
The  Liquor  which  Congersmoft  defier  and  love:
Therefore  fuch  Liquors  are  beft  found,

Nigh  to  Iflands,  and  to  fuch  ground  i

Which  the  Ocean  Sca  hath  compalfed  about.

For  therc  fuch  Liquors  be  fooncft  fct  out.

Of  another  Liquor  wife  men  teli,

Which  is  frefhcr  than  Water  of  the  Well ;

Frciher  Liquor  thcre  is  none  in  taft,

Yet  it  woll  ncver  confume  ne  wafte ;

Though  it  be  occupicd  evcrmore.

It  will  ncver  be  lefle  in  ftore  5
Which  Democrit  named  for  his  intent.

Lux  umbra  carens,  Water  moft  Oricnt;

Hermes  faid  no  Liquor  fo  neccflarie.

As  was  Water  of  crude  Mercury :

For  he  fhall  ftand  faid  that  Noble  Clerke,

For  the  Water  within  our  werke.

Now  lernc  ye  which  for  this  Science  have  fought,

By  ali  thcfe  Liquors  our  Stone  muft  be  wrought.

r~

r Iquor  is  a thing  moveable,

Of  fleeting  fubftance  and  unftable.

All  fuch  things  follow  the  Moene ,

More  thcn  ftanding  kindes  doonej

' And


Ordinall.

And  thacappeareth  to  a Clerkc,

In  working  of  thc  white  Werke;

Liquors  walhen  and  maken  cleanc
Both  Extremities  and  the  Meanc ;

Gtd  made  Liquors  for  Mans  ufe,

To  denfe  foule  things  in  everie  howfc;

Liquor  bringeth  without  doubt,

Hiddcn  things  in  Bodycs  out.

As  Landres  witncs  cvidentlv,

When  of  Aihes  thei  make  thcir  Lye ;

Liquor  comfortcth  the  roots  of  Graflc,

And  of  Trees  fuch  as  drye  was*

For  Liquors  of  Nature  woll  reftore
Humors  that  were  loft  bcforc.

Liquors  departcth  Qyalitics  afunder,

Subftance  refolving  in  Attomcs  with  wondcr ;
Liquors  alfo  bringeth  into  one
Many  things  to  be  one  Stone.

Liquors  helpeth  to  flux  and  to  flowe
Manie  things,  and  lerne  yc  maie  now
How  Liquor  is  in  manie  manners  found
Out  of  things  that  be  on  the  ground,

Some  by  cutting,  as  Turpentine?

Some  with  Preffing,  as  Sider  and  Wine;
Some  with  grinding,  as  Oyle  is  had ;

Some  with  ftilling,  as  Waters  be  made ;
Some  with  Brenning,  as  Colophonic  5
And  fomc  with  Water,  as  Women  make  Lye*
Some  be  othcrwife  brought  about.

And  by  naturali  working  fet  out.

As  Urin,  Sweat,  Milk,  and  alfo  Blood ,

And  Renniet  which  for  Cheefc  is  good:

\By  as  manie  manners  and  moe  by  one,

Wc  feek  Liquors  for  our  Stone .


79

chap.$.


Evcry


Cbap.j.  Every  of  the  forcnamed  woll  clcavc

To  that  thei  touch,  and  fomc  dcale  lcave?

But  Quickfilver  albcit  it  is  fleeting,

Yet  hc  woll  ncver  deave  to  any  thingc,

But  to  a Mettall  of  onc  kinde  or  other.

For  there  hc  findeth  Sifter  or  Brother.

Medling  with  futtill  Erth  doth  him  Ict,

To  cleave  to  things  fuch  as  he  mcct :

All  the  faid  Liquors  which  rchcaifcd  be,

Contcyne  fower  Elements  as  well  as  hc ; *

As  Milke  conteyneth  Whey,  Butter,  and  Chcefe,

So  done  trewly  every-cach  of  all  thefe :

Which  fower  maie  be  dcparred  a twinn.

And  after  conjoynd  to  makeycwinn.

But  much  more  craftily  they  be  heere  fought,

Thcn  Checfc,  and  Butter,  and  Whey  be  wrought;
And  drawe  necrer  to  fimplicitic,

Then  Cheefe,  Butter,  or  Whey  maie  bc.

Of  all  Liquors  which  bc  in  our  Stone ,

None  is  called  fimple  but  Watcr  alone.

Of  every  Liquor  which  to  our  Stone  fliall  goc,

Ye  muft  know  complcxion  and  degrec  allfo.

And  than  with  Liquor  ye  maie  abate
The  principali  Agent  from  his  Eftate,

If  he  permanent  and  abiding  be,

In  any  point  of  fuperfluitye  :

As  if  the  rcigning  qualitie  beDrinefs,

Ye  maie  amend  it  with  humour  ofMoiftnes.

Now  more,  now  lcflc,  as  ye  fee  need.

And  fo  in  all  qualities  proceede  :

And  in  fuch  wife  order  at  your  will,

The  principali  Agent,  your  purpofe  to  fulfill:

With  knovvlcdge  of  diverfity,  contrarietie,  and  accord,
Ye  maie  chufc  which  auality  ihallbe  Lord.


Your


Ordinall.  8i

Your  Liquors  be  ordained  to  addand  fubtray,  Chap,^.
To  makc  cqualitie  by  vvifdomc  of  affay  5
But  truft  not  that  any  thing  maie  bc
Hot  and  Moift  both  in  onc  Degree  :

For  all  that  truft  two  qualities  to  bc  foe,

Shall  bc  deceived  where  cver  thci  goc.

Common  Schooles  ( fo  teaching)  be  not  true,

Lcave  that  Opinion,  and  Icrnc  this  of  new
All  Old  mcn  in  that  wcreoverfeene,

To  fet  in  one  degree  anie  qualities  twainc :

Elfe  thei  faid  fo  tnat  Schollers  Ihulde  not  finde
The  fecret  mixtures  of  Elementall  kind.

Thercforc  who  cannot  his  graduations,

Maie  not  be  perfeft  in  our  operations  :

-For  in  true  Number  God  made  every  thing ;

Without  true  Number  no  Man  trulie  maie  fingj
Who  faileth  of  his  Number  faileth  of  his  Song,

Who  faileth  with  us  muft  doe  Nature  wrong.

COnfidcr  alfo  the  nature  of  the  mcanc,

When  it  is  in  the  Third  degree  made  cleanej
The  purcr  that  your  meanes  be,

The  more  pcrfe&ion  thereof  ye  ihall  fee.

The  meanes  reteync  a great  pare
Of  the  vertues  of  this  Arte  :

For  the  Principle  maie  not  give  influcncc
To  the  Finali  end,  ncither  the  refluence
Unto  his  Principali  without  fuccour  and  aid
Of  meanes  conteyning  thecxtrcmitiesaforefaid :

For  like  as  by  meanes  of  a treble  Spirit,

The  Soulc  of  Man  is  to  his  Body  knir,

Of  which  three  Spirits  onc  is  called  Vitali,

The  fecond  is  called  the  Spirit  Naturali.

The  third  Spirit  is  Spirit  Animali,

N


And


gi  'ortons

Chap.  5.  And  where  they  dvvcll  now  lernc  yc  fhallt
The  Spirit  Vitali  in  thc  Hcrt  doth  dvvell,

The  Spirit  Naturali  as  old  Auftors  teli  >”  '

To  dwell  io  the  Liver  is  thereof  faine,

But  Spirit  Animali  dwelleth  in  the  Braine :

And  as  long  as  thefe  Spirits  three
Continue  m Man  in  there  profperitie :

So  long  the  Soule  without-all  ftrife  ' > :

Woll  dvvell  with  the  Body  in  profperous  life,

But  vvhen  theis  Spirits  in  Man  maie  not  abidc,

The  Soule  forthwith  departeth  at  thattide:

For  the  futtill  Soule  pure  and  immortali ,

With  the  grofle  Body  maie  nevei;  dvvell  vvithall ,

He  is  fo  heavie,.  and  She  fo  light  and  cleiine,

Were  not  the  (uttilnefle  of  this  Spirit  meane.
Therefore  in  our  vvorke  as  Audtors  teach  us,

There  rauft  be  Corpus  Anima  & Spiritus  :

Alfo  in  our  worke  ye  ihall  fo  finde,

That  our  meancs  muft  accord  in  every  kindc
Of  both  extremities  with  wifd&me  fought.

Eis  all  our  worke  fhall  turnc  cleere  tonought:

For  prudent  Nature  maie  not  by  workinge,

Make  Complement  of  appetite  of  a thing ,

And  fo  paffe  betvveene  extremities,

But  if  flie  firft  paffe  by  all  degrees
Of  everie  meane,  this  is  truth  unfained,

Wherefore  Nature  manic  meanesordained.

NOw  after  all  this  to  lerne  ye  had  need,

Of  feven  Circulations of Elements  for your  fpecde,
According  to  number  of  the  Planets  fcaven ;

Which  no  man  knoweth  but  he  have  grace  from  heaven.
Old  Pbilofcpbers,  men  of  great  engine,

Said  hovv  of  Circulations  there  fhulde  be  Nine;


It


O R D I N A L L.

It  is  thc  furcr  to  doe  by  their  advice,

Nethles  Seaven  maie  your  workc  fumee,

By  inventions  late  found  of  ncw,

Of  later  Pbihfopbers  whos  workes  b£  trewe.

But  for  Circulacions  of  Elements,

Some  Clerks  ween  to  have  their  intents.

Whcn  they  fro  Fier  ordaine  to  dcfccnd,

To  Aire  (thei  ween  not  to  offend)

If  thei  to  Water  doe  then  procecd.

And  thens  to  Erth  whcn  thei  fee  need.

And  in  fuch  wife  by  order  fall,

From  the  higheft  to  the  Ioweft  of  ali:

Upon  thefc  words  they  tookc  their  ground,

That  Aer  efi  cibus  ignis  found.

But  truft  me  that  fuch  Circulation,

Is  but  only  a re<ftification,

Better  ferving  for  feparation.

And  for  corre&ion  than  for  tranfmutation
But  thc  truth  is  that  appetite  of  the  Fier,

Hath  to  worke  in  Erth  nis  cheefe  delire.

As  upon  his  cheefc  foode  materiali.

For  Fier  with  Erth  hath  moft  concord  of  ali  5
Bccaufe  that  ficcitie  is  the  lyme  of  heate,

But  Ayrcof  her  kind  is  moft  wet;

" Yet  Fire  withoot  Ayre  worketh  not.

For  Faces  of  Elements  bc  knit  with  a knOt
Of  Gods  hand  that  they  maie  not  depart,

By  noe  engine  he  craft  of  Mans  art  5 .

As  in  Plomps  ye  have  exampie  fairc,

Wherc  heavie  Water  arifeth  after  Ayre*,

Whereof  noe  caufc  reafonable  ye  Ihall  finde,

But  Connexion  of  faces  of  Elementall  kinde.

But  our  Circulation  is  from  Fier  on  high,

Which  endeth  with  Water  his  moft  contrary.

N 2 Ano-


85

Cb.ip.  5.


84.  3\(orton'  s

Cbap. 5.  Another  Circulation  beginneth  vvich  Ayre,

, Ending  vvich  his  Coatrary  cleane  Erth  and  faicr.

Fro  Ficr  to  Erth,  fro  thencc  to  Wacer  cleanc,

Fro  thcnce  to  Ayre,  thcn  fro  thence  by  a meanc ,
Pafling  to  Erth,  then  eftfoones  to  Fier,

To  fuch  Circulations  the  Red  workc  hath  defire,
Other  Circulations  be  bctter  for  the  White,

That  be  rchearfea  for  her  appetite.

Every  Circulation  hath  her  propcr  feafon.

As  her  lightneffe  accordeth  with  reafon.

For  as  one  Planet  is  more  ponderous
Then  is  another  and  flovver,  in  his  courfe:

So  fome  Circulations  wnich  Clerks  feeks,

Muft  for  her  time  have  full  thirtie  Wecks?

Other  Circulations  lhall  oft  time  have  lcflc.

As  one  Planet  is  lighter  thfcn  another  vvas :

But  the  time  of  or.e  with  another  will  amount
To  tvventy  fix  Wcekes  proved  by  accompt.

After  all  grolfe  vvorkes  made  beforc  hand.

And  after  all  Circum  ftances  had  I underftandc;
Ignorance  hercof  dccciveth  raanic  a Man,

Caufing  them  to  ceafe  vvhere  Wifemenbegan.
Common  Peoplc  vvhich  for  this  Science  have  fought,
Wcen  how  in  forty  dayes  it  mought  be  wrought.
They  know  not  how  Nature  andthings  of  Arte,
Have  a proper  time  aifigned  for  their  part.

As  it  appcareth.by  this  Similitude,

The  Elcphant  for  that  ihe  is  great  and  rude,

Goeth  with  Foalc  years  full  twaync.

And  fifty  yeares  ere  that  Foalc  gender  againe.
Anaxegoras  faid  in  his  Confideration,

That  Mcttals  had  for  their  generation
A thoufand  Yeares,  wherefore  him  lift  to  fay.

In  rcfpeft  thereof  our  Workc  is  butoncDay.'

Alfoe


%

Cbsp.i,


Ordinall^

Alfo  yc  muft  worke  by  good  advice,

When  yc  fec  Erth  abovc  Water  rifc;

For  as  Water  bcarethErth  which  we  goeon,
So  woll  it  doe  in  working  of  our  Stone :
Whcrcforc  Wcll-fprings  with  ftrokcs  foft,
Soberly  make  ye  muft  in  tymes  oft  5
Whcrcby  Water  maie  foberly  flowc.

For  violent  Fluxcs  bc  perilous  as  nowe.


MOreover  it  hcalpeth  in  Alkimy

To  know  fcaven  Waters  effe&uafly.*
Which  be  Coppied  with  manie  a Man,

While  thci  be  common  fecke  thcm  as  ye  can,
Dcfirc  not  this  Boke  to  fhow  things  ali,

For  this  Boke  is  but  an  Ordinali.  .

By  thofe  Waters  men  Weene  in  mind
Aii  faults  to  amcnd  of  Metaline  kinde  5
Alfo  thei  weene  of  the  Elcments  fower,

The  cffc&s  to  weene  by  their  fuccour:

For  thei  fuppofc  with  confidence  unfeined,
That  all  Vertucs  requifit  in  them  bc  conteyned;
Some  to  molifie  Mettalls  hard  wroght.

And  forne  to  harden  Mettalls  that  be  fofc,
Some  to  purific,  fome  to  make  malleable ;
Everic-cach  according  that  hewas  ablc,

Such  Liquors  to  know  it  is  profitt  and  good,
Howbcit  thei  maie  not  to  our  Stone  bc  food:
Noblc  Au&ors  men  of  glorious  fame,

Called  our  Stone  CMicrtcofmut  by  name :

For  his  compofition  is  withouten  doubr,

Likc  to  this  World  in  which  wc  walke  about :
Of  Hcate,  of  Cold,  of  Moyft  and  of  Drye,
Of  Hard,  of  Soft,  of  Light  and  of  Heavy,

Of  Rough,  of  Smooth,  and  of  things  Stablc,


N3


Medled


%6  toris

Cbap.f,  "Mcdled  vvith  things  fleetinge  and  movca61e ;

Of  ali  kinds  Contrary  broght  to  one  accord ,

Knic  by  the  do&rine  of  Coa  our  blcflcd  Lord :
Whcreby  of  Mettalls  is  made  tranfmutation,

Not  only  in  Colour,  but  tranfubftantiation ,

In  which  ye  have  need  to  know  this  thing,

Hovv  ali  the  vertucs  of  the  Elemcnts  tranfmuting,
Upon  the  tranfmuted  muft  have  full  domination,
Before  that  the  fubftancc  be  in  tranfmutation  j
And  all  partes  tranfmuted  muft  figured  be
In  the  Eletnents  tranfmuting  imprefled  by  degrce.

So  that  the  third  thinge  elemented  of  them  all,

Of  fuch  condition  evermore  be  Ihall.

That  ic  trevvly  have  it  maie  be  none  other,  (otheiv
But  her  Subftance  of  that  one,  andher  Vertueofthat
A Child  at  his  Nativitie  can  eate  his  meate  and  cry,
Our  St  one  at  his  Nativity  woll  Colour  largly.

In  thrce  years  after  a Child  can  fpeake  and  goe,

Then  is  our  St  one  more  Colouring  alfo»

One  upon  a Thoufand  his  tin&ure  trewly  is,

Of  clean  walhen  Mettall  I am  trew  witnes,

Faftiely  (beleeve  it)  and  fully  in  your  thought.

It  maketh  good  Silver  as  of  the  Myne  is  wroughts
And  alfo  our  Stone  woll  augment  and  increafe,

In  quantitic,  and  qualitie,  and  thereof  never  ceafe.3
And  therefore  his  growing  and  augmentation.

Is  likned  to  Man  in  waxing  and  creation.

Nathles  one  pointe  of  trewth  I woll  reporte,

Which  to  forne  Men  maie  be  difcomfone  5
At  the  firft  making  of  our  Stone ,

That  time  for  winninge  looke  for  none  3
If  ye  then  ceafe,  I underftande  0
Ye  Ihall  departe  with  loofingc  hand  d ' -
The  Cofts  be  fo  grcat  before,

Expended


O R D I N A L L.

Expended  and  fct  upon  the  fcorC}


87


But  at  the  firft  augmsnt  of  all
Which  tyme  our  Stont  depart  ye  fhall
In  parts  tvvaine  full  equally,

With  fubtill  ballance  andnot  withEyc.*

One  for  the  Red}  that  other  for<hc  White,
To  mainteync  both  foryour  delight  5
Then  winning  firft  beginneth  to  arifc:
Butafterwards  if  ye  be  wifc.

At  every  augment  continually,

Profit  fhall  grow  comodioufly^

In  this  our  White  Warke  alone,

As  well  as  in  the  Ruby  Stone*

Whereof  faid  CMaria  Sifter  of  t^Arcn?

Lyfe  is  Jhort , and  Science  is  full  long,
Nathles  it  grcatcly  retardeth  Age,

When  it  is  endcd  by  ftrong  Courage;

But  fome  that  have  byne  tought  trcwlie,
Have  forfooke  their  workc  lewdly ;

When  their  greatc  labour  have  byne  pafte.
For  thei  know  not  how  at  the  lafte
Groweth  the  profit  and  the  winningc,

Which  thei  would  have  at  the  bcginninge,
Thcrcfore  I finde  that  ic  is  necde,

The  trewth  to  teli  when  ye  fhulde  fpeede.
For  when  I am  paft  and  out  of  mindc ,
This  my  Witnes  fhall  reft  behinde.

For  which  caufe  I doe  not  fpare,

Of  this  Arte  the  trewth  to  declare  ?

As  much  as  I dare,  that  I be  not  fhcne
For  breaking  of  Gods  Commandement.

This  wife  endeth  all  our  White  Werke
Shewed  fufficiently  for  anable  Clerkc,


Aftcr


88  toris

Chap.$,  A Fter  ali  this  upon  a day

I hcard  my  noblc  Maficr  fay,

How  that  manie  mcn  patient  and  wife,
Found  our  White  Stone  with  Exercifc  ^

After  that  thei  were  trevvlic  tought,

With  great  labour  that  Stone  they  Caught;
But  few(faid  hc}or  fcarccly  onc.

In  fiftcenc  Kingdomes  had  our  Red  Stone  :
And  with  that  vvord  he  caft  hisEyc,

Looking  on  me  full  ftcadilye,

Of  his  words  hc  faw  me  woc,

I faid  alas  what  fliall  I doc  f
For  above  ali  Erthly  thinge,

I moft  defire  and  love  Cunninge.

And  for  the  Red  Stone  is  prefervative,

Moft  predous  thinge  to  length  my  Life  5
The  Red  Stone  faid  I is  lever  to  me,

Thcn  ali  were  Gould  that  I would  foc  to  be*
He  faid  I vvas  to  younge  of  Age,

Of  Body  lufty  and  likely  to  outrage,

Scantly  of  the  age  of  twenty  eight  yeares,

He  faid  Philofophtrs  had  noe  fuch  Compeers  5
This  woefull  anfwer  thcn  he  madeto  me3
Till  ye  be  eldcr  hc  faid  it  maie  not  be.

Alas  good  Mafier  remember  faid  T,

Howbeit  my  Body  be  light  and  luftie,

Prove  and  affay  and  you  fhall  finde
Age  fufficient  within  my  Minde,

He  held  his  words  full'  ftill  that  tyde ,

And  fo  long  tyme  hc  did  abidc^

After  this  fudaincly  in  wonderous  wife,

He  tempted  me  after  the  Phihfopkers  guifc»-
Which  to  reherfe  it  were  too  longe.

And  to  Ihew  how  I fhould  doe  wronge;


For


O R D I N A L L.
For  that  muft  be  kept  fecreare.


8p


For  them  which  fhall  with  this  Science  mcetc;

Yet  at  thc  laft  with  lcafure  and  with  fpace
I w’an  his  Iove,  by  help  of  Gods  Grace  $

So  that  I had  with  Grace-  the  trewe  do&rinc
Of  Confe&ion  of  thc  Red  medicine  5 ,

Whom  to  feeke  it  availcth  right  nought,  ‘

Till  the  White  medicine  be  fully  wrought.'

Alfoc  both  Medicines  in  their  beginningc
Have  onc  manner  ofVeffell  and  Workinge,

As  well  for  the  White  as  alfo  for  the  Red,

Till  all  qu:ck  things  be  made  dead  5
Then  Veficlls  and  forme  of  operation
Shall  chaunge,  in  Matter,  Figure,  and  Graduation.
But  my  hertc  quaketh,  my  hand  is  tremblinge,
When  I write  of  this  moft  felcouth  thinge.

Hermes  brought  forth  a true  fcntence  and  blounte,
Whenhe  faid  Ignis  & A\ot  tibi  [afficiant.

The  Expolitor  of  Hermes  and  Arifiotle  joynte, .

In  that  joynte  worke  fliewd  a ftraunge  pointe,

He  faid  Albertus  Magnus  thc  Black  Freere,

Nether  Freer  Bacon  his  compeere,

Had  not  of  our  Red  ftene  confideration,

Him  to  increafe  in  multiplication.

The  Expolitor  knew  it  fufficicntly.

And  my  Mafier  tought  me  trewly,

Albeit  that  I never  made  aflayc
Of  the  Red tvorke  before  this  Daye
The  caufe  appcarcth  in  this  Boke  before,

When  1 was  robbed  then  I would  no  more..
NcthlefTe  I have  put  me  fo  farr  in  preafs,

That  fecreate  Trcwth  to  fhew  I cannot  ceafe^  .
Reherfing  fuch  aswere  greately  toobold,

So  great  fccrcats  to  fhew  as  thei  tolde :


O


Thei


po

Chap.f.


J\(ortons

Thei  faid  that  within  the  Ccnter  of  incorapleate  White
Was  hid  our  Red  Stone  of  moft  dclight :

Which  maic  with  ftrcngth  and  kindc  of  Fier,

Be  made  to  appeare  right  as  vve  defier.

Pandttlpbus  in  Turba,  faide,  mente  fecura,  ]

Et  ejus  umbra  in  vera  tinflura.

Maria  confirmed  it  in  fide  oculata^

£>uod_  in  ipfa  albedine  efi  rubedo  occultata.

The  Boke  Laudabile  Sanciunt  madeby  Hermes ,

Of  the  Red  Worke  fpeaketh  in  this  wi(e:

Candida  tunc  rubeo  jacet  uxor  nupta  marito  t
That  is  to  faie,  if  ye  take  heede  thercto,

Thcn  is  the  faire  White  Woman
Married  to  the  Ruddy  Man.

Underftandinge  thereof  if  yc  would  gett,

When  our  White  Stone  fhall  fuffer  heate.

And  reft  in  Fier  as  red  as  Blood,

Then  is  the  Marriage  perfeft  and  good ;

And  ye  maie  trevvly  know  that  tyme,

How  the  feminali  feed  Mafculine,

Hath  wrought  and  won  the  Vi&ory,

Upon  the  menftrualls  worthily  5
And  well  convertcd  them  to  his  kindc.

As  by  cxpcriencc  ye  fhall  finde :

Paffing  the  Subitanee  of  Embrien ,

For  thcn  compleate  is  made  our  Stone»

Whom  wife  Men  faid  that  yc  fhulde  feedc
With  his  owne  Venome  when  it  is  need.

Thcn  ride  or  goe  where  ye  delight.

For  ali  your  Colis  he  woll  you  quite.

Thus  endeth  the  fnbtill  iVarke  with  ali  her  ftorc,
_I  need  nor,  I maie  not,  I woll  fhcw  no  more.

Chap.


— **  x'


91

Chap.  6,


JA (ortoris


X


Chap.  VI


Qwardsthe  Matters  of  Concordance,
Confider  there  be  no  variance  '


Betvveene  fuch  things  as  fhulde  ^ccorde 5
For  of  variance  maie  grovvdifcoifd,  ,


‘ysw'  *•»»  '•“'•'".“J  .

VVhercby  your  VVarkes  maie  b^  lofti


Vynth  all  your  labour /and.  ali  your  coft.>:  .;.,
He‘  that  \vol  takc  our  ViVarke  in  .handc,;  .* ; •
Five  Concords  he  muft  underftande.

The  firfi  Concord  i s-heede!to  marke
VVhether  his  Minde  accorde  with  th
VVhich  fhalbe  Lord  to.pale  for.  all,  J

Eis  all  your  labour  deftroy  ye  fhall.  '*  !•

Thafecond  Concord  is  needfulltd  kenn,

Bdvveen  this  Crafte  andher  Workemen.  / ;
Thb  Thirdi hall  ferve  wcll  your  intents,

VVhcn  Warke  accprdeth  with ; Inftr timent s.

The  fourth  Cor.cord  muft  welbe  lought,

With  the  Place  vvherc  it  fhall  be  wrought:

For  trewlie  it  is  no  little  grace
To  find  a perfed  working  Place.

The  Fift  is  of  Cohcord  and  of  Love^

Betvveene  your  VVarkes  and  the  Spheare  above.
Of  theis  five  Concords  reherfe  vve  fhall,r
Beginriing  with  the  firft  of  all.

TJOr  the  firfi  ye  fhall  well  finde

-I/  That  full  few  Lords  be  ftable  of  Minde  ;

Thci  be  hafty,  the  VVarke  is  longe,

Thci  woulde  liave  you  doe  Nature  wronge.

Some  now  be  onward  as  Iiafty  as  ficr.


Halfe


O R D 1 N A L Lc

Halle  a yeare  after  havc.noe  defire  5 . , • t«,  ; chap,6.

And  fomc  in  a Wccke^ityis  noe  Nayj  ... . 'io  \in.  'i
Wollchaungc  thcir  niindcs,  and  fome  in  a dayiiiio
And  for  onc  Moncth  havc  full  beleife,

And  the  next  Moneth  thei  woil  the  Arte  repreeve.

It  vverc  much  better  for  luch  to  ccafe,  'j  ;

Than  for  this  Arte  to  pirtitbcnj  in  preafle  ; .

Lee  fuch  like  But.terflies  vvanderand  pafTe»  >.  •

And  lerne  this  leifon  bothmore  and  lafle.

Folio wing  the  Scntence  of-  this  holie  letter.

Attingens  a fine  nffi  aa  finem  fert  it  er ,

Dt/panens  omnia  fttaviter  f^tn  hnf'  .)  c.i;.d  i no
That  is,  pioceede  nughtily  to  the  End
From  the  Beginning,  maugre  the  feinde,

Ali  things  difpofing  in  th6  raeane  fpace,

Wich  great  fuavity  that  commeth  of  graee.

All  ihort-.vvittcd:  Men  and  -jtnutabie3  j ^

Such  rauft  needs  be  variable  v’ ■ '

And  fome  doc  every  Man  beleive,

Such  credencedoth  their  Cofers  greive;

To  everie  .new  Tale  to  them  tolde,

Thcy  give  Credencc  and  leave  thcolde. .

But  fome  Lords  bc  ftable-of  vvit,  £ ,

Such  be  apt  to  finilh  it.  •

Everie  fucli  Lord  or  Mafier  of  this  Werke,

Be  hc  Layman  or  be  he  Clerke ,

Be  he  rich  man,  Knigbt , Abbotot  Lordey
Hc  hath  tvith  this  Arte  greate  Concorde.


r|  'He  feconde  Concorde  with  this  Arte  is
When  ye  can  finde  apt  Minifiers.
Noe  Minifter  is  apt  to  this  intenr,

But  he  be  fober,  vvife,  and  diligent  5
Trewe,and  watchfull,  and  alfo  timerous,

03


Clofe


p+

Chap.6.


^(ortons

Clofe  of  Tongue,  of  Body  not  vitious^

Clenly  of  hands,  in  Tuching  curious,

Not  difobedienr,  neithcr  prcfumptuous  5
Such  Scrvants  maie  your  workes  of  Charge
Minifter,  and  fave  from  ali  outrage;

But  truft  not  that  two  fuch  Servants  or  three,
Maie  fuificicnt  for  your  worke  bc;

If  your  Matter  be  of  quantity  reafonablc,
Then  Eight  fuch  Servants  be  convenablc;

But  upon  litle  quantity,  finde  ye  ihall
Foure  men  ablc  to  performe  all  5
That  onc  halfe  of  them  muftwerke
While  the  other  Sleepcth  or  gocth  to  Kerke  5
For  of  this  Arte  ye  ihall  not  havcyour  praye,
But  it  be  miniftred  as  well  by  Night  as  Daye
Continually,  except  thc  holy  Sonday  alonc ;
From  Evenfong  bcgin  till  Evenfong  be  done.
And  while  thei  worke  thci  muft  neeaes  efchevve
All  Ribaudry,  eis  thei  ihall  finde  this  trewe,
That  fuch  miihap  ihall  them  bcfall,

Thei  ihall  dcftroy  part  of  their  Works  or  all;
Therefore  all  the  Minifters  muft  be  Men,

Or  elfe  thei  muft  be  all  Wcomen  5
Sct  them  not  occupied  onc  with  another,
Though  forne  to  you  be  Sifter  or  Brother :
Yet  thei  muft  have  fome  good  difporte
Their  greate  labours  to  recomforte  :

Then  nothinge  ihall  better  avaunce
Your  worke  than  ihall  this  Concordance»  ^


l"T’lHe  Third  C oncor d is  to  manic  full  derke,

A To  ordeync  Jnftruments  according  to  thc  Werke:
As  everie  Cbapter  hath  divers  intents ,

Soe  hath  it  divers  Inftruments,


Both


O R D \ N A L L.

Bo.h  in  Mattcr  and  alfo  in  Shape,
InConcord  that  nothingmay  mis-  happ;

As  workes  ofD.vifion  and  Seperation
Have  fmall  Veflells  for  thcir  Operation*

But  Veflells  broadc  for  Hume&ation,

And  fomc  deale  broad  for  Circulation  5
But  longe  Veflells  for  Precipitation  •

Both  fhort  and  long  ferve  Sublimation :
Narrowe  Veflells  and  foure  inches  high
Serve  Corredtion  moft  properly.

Of  Veflells,  fome  bc  made  of  Leade,

And  fome  of  Clay  both  quick  and  deade ;
Dcad  Clay  is  called  fuch  a thinge
As  hath  fuffered  greate  roaftingc ;

Such  mcdled  in  powdcr  with  good  raw  Claye,
Will  Ficr  abide  and  not  goe  away*,

But  manie  Claics  woll  leape  in  Fier,

Such  for  Veflells  doe  not  defire.

Other  Veflells  be  made  of  Stone,

For  Fier  fufficient  but  few  or  none ;

Amonge  Workemen  as  yetis  founde
In  any  Country  of  Englifh  grounde,

Which  of  Water  nothing  drinke  fhall.

And  yet  abide  drie  Fier  withall,

Such  Stones  large  for  our  intente,

Werc  a precious  Inftrument*

All  other  Veflells  be  made  of  Glaflc,

That  fpirituall  matters  fhould  not  out-pafle ;

Of  Alhcs  of  Fernc  in  thls  Lond  cveri*each  one
Bc  made,  but  els-where  be  of  Stone :

Of  our  Glafles  the  better  kinde,

The  morning  ftuffe  ye  fhall  it  finde,

Which  was  Afhes  the  night  before,

Standing  in  Heate  all  night  and  more.


96


3\(ortoris

The  hardcr  ftuflfe  is  called  Freton,

Of  clipping  of  other  Glafles  it  come:

Tindure  with  anealing  of  Glafiers
Will  not  perfe  him  as  thei  rehcrfe.-
By  this  Dodrine  chafe  Or  rcfufe,

Takc  which  you  woll  unto  your  ufey
Biit  for  figures  of  Veflells  kinde,-
Everie  Man  followeth  his  owneminde3
The  beft  fafhion  is  ye  maie  be-fure/f*  •

She  fhat  beft  concordeth  with  Vefiell  of  Nature*,
Andfigure  that  beft  Concordeth  with  quantity.
And  with  ali  Circumftances,  to  matter  beft  is  fhe>*
And  this  fheweth  well  Albertus  M*gnw}

In  his  Boke  De  Mineralibus .

Hereof  a.Secreate  difclofed  wasj
By  my  good  MaBer,  to  more  and  leffe,

Saying,  Si  Deus  , non  dediffet  nobis  vas «

Hihil  dedijfet 3 and  that  is  Glafic*


INftruments  needefull  there  be  more.

As  be  Furnaces  ordeyned  therefore.

Olde  Men  imagined  for  this  Arte
A fpeciall  Furnace-  for  everie  parte,

Everie-  each  divifing  after  his  owne  thought-$

But  manie  Furnaces  of-them  be  naught;

Some  were  too  broade  and  fome  too  longe*

Manie  of  them  did  Nature  wronge  :

Therefore  fome  Furnaces  maie  be  well  ufed,

But  manie  of  them  muft  be  refufed,

For  theie  were  made  but  by  -advice
Of  them  which  feemcd,  and  were  not  wifc  :

The  moft  Commcndable  Fafbion  of  them  ali,*  \

In  this  Boke  portraied  finde  ye  fhall.

O.ne  Furnace  by-  me  is  found  of  newcs*

Such


Ordinall.  .

Such  as  Oldc.  Mcn  nem  knewe,


97


Whofe  fecreatc  Power  with  ftudy  fought.

And  with  grcacc  Coft  was  dcarely  bought*

In  him  wilbe  at  one.  tyme  wroughtj
Threefcore.  Warkes,  andeoft  right  nought.

More  than  it  fhulde  for  one  Warke  or  twainc,
Therefore  profitable  it  is  ccrtaine;.

Threefcore  degrees  divers  yc  maiegett;

For  threefcore  warkes,  and  everie-cch  of  divers  Heate,
Within  that  Furnace,  to  ferve  your  defire ,

And  ail  rhei  ferved  with  one  litle  Fier,

Which  of  a Fooce  fquare  onlie  fhalbe,

Yet  everie-ech  of  the  threefcore  asgreatefpacc  as  he:
Manie  purpofes  ye  maie  thereby  fulfill.

For  here  yon  fhall  have  Heate  after  your  will.

Of  this  Inftrument  all  Men  maie  not  be  fure,
Therefore  it  is-  not  formed  in  Pi&ure.

Another  Furnace  woll  fcrve  threefcore
Glaffes  trevvly,  and  yet  farr  more,-
Everie-ech  of  them  ftanding  in  likc  Heate,

As  by  the  Pi&ure,  Do&rine  yc  maie  gett : -
Another  Furnace  for  this  operation,

By  me  was  found  by  Imagination,^

Notably  ferving  for  Seperation
Of  dividents,  and  for  Altification,

And  for  Dis-jun&ion  called  Divifion,

And  for  Corrc&ion  called  Ablution,  .

Yt  woll  for  forne  things  ferve  Deficcation, ,

Yt  fervethfull  well  for  Preparation  *

Soe  for  fix  things  it  ferveth  well.

And  yet  for  all  at  oncc  as  I can  teli :

This  is  a new  thinge  which  fhall  not  be
Sct  out  in  Pidfure  for  all  men  to  fec  5
Another  Furnace,  in  Pi&ure  be  fhall, ,


P


More


P8

cbapfi.


. J\^or  toris

More  full  of  perilis  than  other  Furnaces  ali,

Made  for  Magnetia,  whercof  bould  Men  had  doubte,
To  tuch  vvith  hands  a poorc  lynine  Cloute,

Which  in  the  raidle  rhereof  unbrenned  ftoode,

For  fearc  of  flames  brenning  fiercc  and  woode j
Which  futtill  Furnace  I devifed  alfoe.

In  which  I found  manie  wonders  moc
Then  is  convenient  at  this  fcafon  to  teli,

Whofe  graduation  is  doubtfull  and  cafuell:

Wherein  UMagnetia,  matter  of  greate  cofte,

Muft  quickly  be  ferved  or  fuddainly  be  lofte  :

Of  whofe  graduation  if  you  woll  not  mifle
Confider  your  Stoples,  and  leme  vvell  this,

The  more  is  the  Stople  the  leffe  is  the  Heate,

By  manifould  Stoples  Degrees  ye  maie  gett;

Wlioe  knoweth  the  povver,  the  vvorking  and  kinde,
Of  everie  Furnace,  he  maie  wcll  trewth  finde.

And  he  which  thereof  dweileth  in  Ignorance,

Ali  his  Warke  falcth  uponChaunce:

Noe  man  is  fure  to  have  his  intent,

Without  full  concord  of  Arte  with  Inftrumcnt.

Manie  more  Inftruments  occupied  ye  iliall  fe,

Than  in  this  Chapter  now  rchearfed  be,

Which  ye  muft  ordeyne  by  good  or  fadadvice
Andprovethem  before  hand  oftifye  be  wife.


THe  foartb  Concerd  is  full  notable

Ectwcene  this  Arte  and  Places  Convenahlc,

Some  Places  muft  nccdes  be  evermore  dry,

Clofc  from  Aier,  nowaies  Windy;

Some  muft  be  darke  and  dimme  of  fighr.

In  which  Sun-beames  none  maie  lightj
But  for  forne  Places  the  trewth  fo  is,

Thei  cannot  have  to  much  brightnes :

Some


O R D I N A L L.  92

Somc  Places  muft  necdcs  be  Moift  and  Gold  Chap,6.
For  fome  workes  as  Au&ors  toulde  j.

But  in  our  Work  es  in  everie  place,

Winde  will  hiirc  in  everie  Cafc :

Therefore  for  everie  Worke  in  feafon,

Ye  muft  ordaine  Places  by  reafon.

Philofopbers  faid  by  their  engine,

How  it  fliulde  be  wrought  within  locks  Kyne;
i^iflrologers  faid  it  was  a grace,

To  finde  a Chofen  Working  Place-,

For  manie  things  vvoll  vvonderous  doe
In  fome  Places  and  clfcvvhere  not  foe,

But  contrarie  wondcrs  be  of  one  thinge
In  contrarie  Countries  wrought  without  leafing ; .

Whereof  none  other  caufe  tnaie  appcare,

But  only  contrarie  places  of  thc  Spbere :

Whercto  Places  contrarie  of  thc  groundc,

To  them  Concordaunt  and  Obedient  be  foundj
Hereof  great  Evidcnceand  wittnes  full  cleerc.

In  thc  Magntts  Stone  openly  doth  appeare,

Whofe  North  pointe  draweth  towatd  his  Countrie,

Which  under  tne  Southe  ftarr  drivcth  Needles  awaye*
Whercfore  wife  Men  which  for  xtisArtc  fought,

Found  fome  Places  concordanr,  fome  Places  nought  5
Trewly  fuch  Places  where  Lechery  is  ufed
Muft  for  this  Arte  be  utterly.  refufed.


THc  fftConcordis  knowne  well  of  Cltrks,  ( Werks .

Betwcene  the  Spbere  of  Hcaven  and  our  SnttiU
Nothing  in  Erth  hath  more  Simplicitie, .

Thcn  tn  elemcnts  of  our  Stone  woll  be,

Whcrefore  thci  being  in  warke  of  Gcneration^

Have  moft  Obedience  to  Conftcllation:

Whereof  Concord  moft  kindly  and  convenient,

P a Is


ioo  3\(or  toris

Chup.6.  Is  a diredt  and  fine  Afcendent,

Being  figne  common  for  rh.s  Operation,

For  die  raultitude  of  thcir  Iteration  :

Fortune  your  Afcendent  with  his  Lord  alfo,

Keeping  th’  afpedt  of  Sbrcms  them  fro^

And  if  thei  muft  let,  or  needely  infcft,

Caufe  them  to  looke  with  a Trine  afytQ.

For  the  Wbite  tvarke  make  fortuna  eth e Aleone,

For  the  Lord  of  the  Fottrth  hottfc  hkewife.be  itdone;
For  that  is  Tbeftur.um  abfcond.tnm  of  olde  Cie  ks  5
Soe  of  the  Sixt  hottfe  for  Servanti  ot  the  Wcrks  *
Save  all  them  wcll  frora  greace  impcdunents,"  -
As  it  is  in  Pi&urc,  or  hkc  the  fame  intenrs.

Unleflc  then  your  Nattvity  pretend  infcChon,

In  contrariety  to  this:Ele&ion,

The  vertue  of  the  Mover  of  the  Orbe  is  formali,

The  vertue  of  theEight  Spherc  is  here  Inftrumentall,
With  her  Signes  and  Figures  and  parts  .afpcdtuall,  o
The  Planets  vertue  is  proper  and  fpeciall,

The  vertue  of  the.Elements  is  here  materiali,

The  vertue  infufed  refultcth  of  them  all:

The  firft  islikc  to  a workmans  Minde,

The  fecond  like  his  Hand  ye  fliall  finde.

The  third  is  like  a good  Inftrument,

The  remnant  like  a Thing  wrought  to  your  mtertt-i
Make  all  the  Premifes  with  other  well  accord,

Thcn  fliall  your  merrits  make  you  a greate  Lord.

In  this  wife  the  Elixir  of  whom  ye  make : mentioni
Is  ingendered,  a thing  of  a fecond  intention.

Truft  nor  in  Geomantie  that  fuperftitious  Arte,

For  God  madcRcafon  whichthereis  fet  aparte.

Truft  not  to  all  Ajlrologers , I faie  whic,  ,

For  that  Arte  is  as  fccreat  as  Atkimy.  ) (I

That  other  is  difprovcd  and  plainely  forbod,


By


Ordinall^


ioi


By  holy  Saitifis  of  thc  Ghurch  of  Cod,

Truft  not,  nc  love  not  Negromancyy
For  it  is  a propcrty  of  thc  Dcvill  to  Iyc.

Truft  to  this  Detfrint^  fet  herein  your  delires,'
And  now  icrnc  thc  Rcgimcnt  of  your  Fiers#


! I


/


r


O R D I N A L U

Chap.  VII.


10^

Cbap.j.


parfet  Mafler  ye  maic  him  tali  trowc,
Which  knoweth.his  Hcates  high  and  lowc.
Nothing  maic  let  more  your  defires,
Than  ignorance  of  Heates  ofyourFjers^
Of  manic  Au&ors  written  ye  maie  fec.
Totum  conftfiit  in  ignis  regimine :

Wherefore  in  all  Chaptcrs  you  muft  fo  procecd,

That  Hcate  workc  not  more  ne  ldfe  then  it  need;

Where  n manie  of  Gtbars  Cookes ,

Dcceived  vvere  though  thei  be  wifc  in  Bokes.

Such  Heatc  wherewith  Pigg  or  Goofc  is  Scaldcd,

In  this  \^lrte  Deco&ion  it  is  called?

For  Minerali  meanes  ferveth  fuch  hcate.

And  to  makc  our  Letharge  to  give  fwcatc.

Such  Heatc  as  drycih  lawne  Karchecfes  fayre.

In  thirty  operations  ferveth  for  our  Ayre ;

But  for  Div;fions  you  muft  ufe  fuch  heatc.

As  Cookes  make  when  they  roaft  grofte  Meate 5
The  fame  Heate  vvith  a circular  Fier,

For  Separation  of  dividents  wc  defire;

But  for  Circulation  of  Elements,

Ignis  candens  obferveth  our  intents*

Which  Fier  muft  everbe  Coequall
In  every  minute,  and' yet  perpetuali:

For  it  maie  never  abate  ne  increafe.

And  yet  the  Fier  maie  never  ccafc.

Study  wifely  and  looke  about,

Such  a Fier  trewlic  to  finde  out.

And  in  that  Fier  no  moifture  maie  be,'

Which  Hand  maie  feele  or  Eyc  maic  fce.’


io4

Chap.  7,.


3\(orton's


Ignis  humidus  an  othcr  Fier  alfoe
Is,  and  yet  it  fecmcth  oppofitum  in  adjetto  r
Such  Heatc  difsevereth  at  certaine  tydes
Matters  cleving  to  Veflclls  fides.

Manie  moe  things  that  Heate  maie  wynn,

It  makcth  . oft  thick  Matters  to  bc  thynn.

A Philo fopher  miftely  fpake  of  this  Heate,

And  faide,  thc  higheft  degree  thcreof  to  get
Shall  caufe  and  gcnder  fuch  Skcitie,

As  of  dric  heate  fliall  be  in  the  Firft  degree.
Anothcr  Fier  is  F.re  ot  Dificcation,

For  matters  which  be  imoibed  with  Humedlation»
An  other  Fier  is  Fier  of  Confervation,  ...

For  all  dric  things  of  his  operation  ;

For  Magnetia,  is  Fier  of  effufion*

Full  of  pcrills  and  full  of  illufion *

Not  onely  perill  which  to  the  Warkc  maie  fall,
But  fuch  alfoe  which  the  Majler  hurte  fhall  5,
Againft  which  once  received  is  noe  boote*

Ordainc  thereforc  to  feteh  breath  from  your  footej
Provide  for  Mouth,  Eyes,  Eares,  and  Nofe, .

For  it  is  worfe  than  ten  times  thc  Pofe.

Men  hereby  hath  foundpaines  fore,.

Becaufe  they  had  not  this  warning  beforeii
Jgnis  corrodens  ferveth  in  this  Arte ,

Elementa  propinqua  wifely  to  departe.

By  one  point  of  excefic  all  your  Warkc  is.fhenf.
And  one  point  too  litcle  is  infuflicient  5
Who  can  bc  fureto  finde  his  trewc  degree,
Magifler  magnus  in  igne  lhall  he  bc.

It  is  the  harder  to  know  trewly  his  might» .

There  is  no  triall  for  it  but  our.  Eyefight:
Thercfore  all  men  failcin  his  prefence,

Where  Heate  is  .lerned  with  coft  of  Experiencc. .


O R D I N A L L.

Of  this  Heate  in  fpeciall  Ana*  agor  as  faid  thus,

Nemo  primo  fronte  repentur  difcretus.  , ,

Anothcr  is  Heate  of  mighty  Coa&ion,

For  Mineralis  that  be  pf.na.rd  Liquefa<fIion :

This  Heate  cannot  be  too  ftronge,

Be  he  continued  never  fo  longe.

Another  is  Heate  of  Calcination
Forfowle  Mcttalls  for  theirPreparation?
Whichmaie  not  brenn,  ne  doe  them  melte,

For  fo  all  thei  maic  foone  be  fpilte.

The  tvvelfte  is  Heate  for  to  Sublime
AU  rhe  Spirits  of  the  Mine.

The  laft. Heate  of.theis  goeth  for  all,
WhentoProje&ion.  our  Stone  fhall  fall.

Life  maketh  Mafterie,  there  is  noe  more  to  fayne,.
But  he  that  faileth.  muft  needs.begin  againe.

Now  hav.e-Ltought  youeverie  thing  by  name.

As  Men  teach  other  the  way  to  Walfngbat» ,

Of  every  Village,  Water,  Bridge,  and  Hili,
Whereby  wife  Men  their  Journey  maie  fulfill : >

Soe  maie  a Clerkc  by  this  Do&rinc  finde
Tkls  Science  well  if  he  be  cleere  of  minde  ?

A]1  other  maie  finde  himfelfc  hereby.  a foole
To  dealc  therewith,  vvhichtifle  can  ofSchoole'5
For  this  is  the  end  of  all  worldly  Cunninge ,

Where  to  attaine  can  neither  Popc  ne  King
By  their  Honours,  ne  by  their  great  Councell,

But  only  by  Vertue  ar.dGraceas  Auftors  teli*

This  precious  Stone  willnot  be  found  ne  wroughti
But  hc  be  right  devotely  fought.

The  Audtors  forenamed  vvith  this  Boke  of  miacp
Sheweth  of  Alkimy  all  the  Do&rinc,

If  ye  compleate  their  Sentenccs  all,

Not  by  Opinion,  but  after  this  Ordinali  -

Q For


Chap.  7.


Chap.j.  For  in  this  Ordinali  I fct  you  from  ali  doubt.

Is  nothing  fct  wronge,ncrr  orte  poinc  left  out.

The  dayes  werc  when  that  this  Doftrine  and  ground
Had  pleafcd  me  more  than  a Thoufand  pound*
Three  Hundred  pounds  was  not  for  my  defirc.

As  would  have  byne  this  cbapter  of  the  Ficr.

And  mervaile  not  Lords,  ne  ye  freinds  all,

Why  foe  noble  a Scjence , as  all  Mcn  this  Arte  ca!ls
Is  here  fct  out  in  Englijb  blunt  and  rude,

For  this  is  foe  made  to  tcach  a Multitude
Of  rude  pcople  which  dclcn  with  this  Werkes,

Tcn  Thoufand  Lagmen  againft  ten  ablc  Clerks :
Whereby  yearely  greate  Riches  in  this  Lende
Is  lewdly  loft,  as  Wifemen  undcrftondcj
And  manic  mcn  of  Everic  degree
Yearely  be  brought  to  great  Povertee.

Cease  Laymeit,  cease,  bc  not  in  follic  everj
Lewdnes  to  leave  is  better  late  than  never.

All  that  hatb  pleafure  in  this  Bokc  to  rcade,

Pray  formy  Soulevand  for  all  both^uick  and  deade.

In  this  yearc  of  Chrift  One  thoufand  fourc  Hundred

(feaventyandfcaven,

This  Warkc  was  bcgun,  Honour  to  Qod  in  Heavcv.

J


107


THE

C0MT0V&CD

ALCHYMIE.

A moft  excellent,  learned,  and  worchy
worke/vvritten  by  Sir  (jeorge  cRiplcj>>
Chanon  of  ‘Bridlington  in  %r\e~
jhire , Conteining  twelve
Gates.


Titulus  Operis.

re  - - rr-

HEre.  begynncth.T/^  Compound  »f  Alchymie t
Made  by  'a  Ghanoii  of  Bridlivgto »,

Afcer  his  learning  in  Jtaly
At  Txmngfor  tyme  he  there  did  wonne :

In  which  be  declared  openly  " > s ~~

T*he  fccrets  both  of  Sunne  and  Moonei
How  they  their  kinde  to  multiplye.

In  one  body  togeder  muft-  wonne.

Which  Chanon  Si pGeorge  Ripley  highr,

Exempt  from  Clauftrall  obfervance.

For  whom  pray  ye  bdth  day  and  night,

Sith  he  did  labour  you  to  advance.  •

1-Ie  turned  darknes  into  light,

Intending  to  helpc  you  to  happy  chaunce,

Gyving  Counfell  that  ye  live  right,

Doeing  to  God  no  dilpleafaunce.


Gecrgc


g EO %G E %I  F L EY

UHTO

\ '

King  E d w a r d the  fburth.


OHonorable.  Lord , and  moft  vifforyous  Knyght,
With  Gracc  and.  Fortune  abundanti-]  enderved,

. The favegardof  Erigland.  ^ mayntey ner  cfrigbt-,
ibat  God  ysu  lovetb  indeede  hehathrvell  Jherved : ;*  •

Whcrefore  I trufi  thyi  Lond  jhalbe  renerved
Witb  foy  and  Riches 5 w:th.  Cbaryty  and  Peacei
So  that  old  ranckors  underjlrerved,

‘lempefluous  troubles  and  rvretcbednes  Jh.all  ceafe.


And  ncw  fyth  I fee  by  tokens  right  evjdent ,

That.  God  you  gnydetb^and  that  ye  be  'vertuous,
Hating.fynne,  and  fuch  as  be  infolent,

Hoiv  that  alio  Manfaughter  to  yoti  is  ediotts}
llpon  the  Infygent  alfo  that  ye  be  piteous , . -
Greate  rutb  it  werc  if  ye  Jhould  not  lyve  longe  :

For  of  your.gr eat  fortune  ye  be  not  preftimptnous}

Nor  uengeable  of  mynde  to  tvreke  every  tvrong.

Theis  conftdertd , rvifb  otbers)  inytur  moftnoblc  E fate ,
Like  as  God  knomtth,  and  people  doe  j vitnejfe  beare ,

So  cntyrcly  me  mevetb^that  1 mujl  algate
Recorfle  tbe  fame , and  therein  be  no  jlatterer  :

And  that  not  onely,  but  alfo  to  verite  here,

And  to  jour  Highnes  humbly.  for  to  prefent  ■ t
Great  Secretts  rvhich  I tn  far  re  Countryes  did  Iere , .
And.  wlnch . by  grace  to  me  mofl  umvorthy  are  lent ..
a _ ff  3 ‘ Once


lio


The  Epiftle.

Orice  te  your  Lordfhip  fuch  thyngs  I did  prOtnife,
What  tyme  ye  did  command  to  fend  unto  me  j
K^ind  fwce  that  I tvrote  in  full  fecret  rvife ,

Unto  your  Grace  from  the  Univerfitie
0/  Lovayne,  tvhen  God  fortuned  me  by  Grace  te  fee  '
Greater  fecretts  and  moch  more  profytt,

Which  onely  to  yott  I tvyll  difclofed  to  be :

7hat  is  to  fay  the  great  Elixirs  both  Red  and  White.

For  like  it  yott  te  truji  that  tretvlie  1 have  found
7he  perfetf  tvayc  of  mofl  fecrete  Alchimy,

Which  1 tvyU  ne  ver  tretvly  for  M er  ke  ne  for  Poundt
Make  common  but  10  yott,  and  that  conditionally
7 ‘hat  to  your  felfe  y e fhall  keepe  it  full  fecret  ly.

And  onely  it  ufe  as  may  be  to  Gods  pleafure i.

Eis  in  tyme  comming  , of  God  I jhould  abye
For  my  difcovering  of  bis  fecrete  treafure.

7 here  for  e advife  yott  tvell  tvyth  good  delyberation3
For  of  this  Secrete  fia/l  knorv  none  other  Creature
But  onely  yon,  as  1 make  faithfuH  Protejlation ,

For  all  the  tyme  that  1 here  in  lyfe  endure  :

Whereto  I tvyll  yotir  Lordfhip  me  to  enfure ,

7o  my  defjre  in  thys  by  othe  to  agree ,

Leaft  I Jhould  to  me  the  tvrath  of  God  procuro*

For  my  rtvealing  his  greate  gift  and  previtie.

And  yet  mOttover  I tvyll  your  Hyghnes  to  pardonmt ,
, For  openly  tvyth  ptn  I tvyll  it  never  tvryte,

But  tvhen  that  ye  lifi  by  praclice  ye  jball  (eo  •

By  Mouth  alfo  this  pretious  fecret  mo(l  of  delyghr3
Hcw  may  be  made  Elixirs  Red  and  Whyte,

Playne  unto  your  Hyghnes  it  fhall  declar ed  be,
nd  if  it  pleaje  yeu  tvith  ea/y  expence  and  refpytc
7o  help3  J tvyll  thtm  make  by  htlpe  of  the  7rimtit.

But


SII


The  Epiffle.

But  notrvythfl.mding  for  p erili  that  might  befall,
Thtugb  I dare  tsct  here  plainly  tbe  knot  unbtndt ,

Xtt  in  my  rvriteing  I rvyll  not  be  fo  Myfticall ,

Sut  tbat  ye  may  by  /ludie  tbe  knotvleige  fi  fide :

Hero  that  ecbe  thing  multiplicable  is  in  hp  kinde,

And  tbat  likenes  of  bodies  Metalline  be  tranfnmablt
rvyll  deelare,  that  ifi  ye  feele  me  ut  your  minde
Te  jhall  prove  my  mytitfg  true  And  not  fayned  fable.

And  if  God graunt yott  byme  to  wynne  thys  treafrre,
serve  bim  devoutlj  rvith  more  Laud  and  thanking,
Praying  bis  Godhead  in  lyfe  ye  may  fo  endure  ,

His  gifts  of  gr ac  e and  fortune  to  u/e  to  bis  pleafing,
Moft  jpecially  intending  over  ali  tbing,

To  yeur  potver  and  connyng  his  prtcepts  tennt
to  keepj  tbat  into  no  daunger  yeur  felfeye  bring ;

5 'stt  tbsi.yc  may  i»  glorit  fee  bim  hereafter , Arnen»

As  tbe  Philofopher  in  tbe  boke  cf  Mctcors  dotb  rvryte,
That  tbe  lykenejfe  of  body es  Metalline  be  not  tranfmutable,
Butlafter  be  added  theis  rvords  of  more  delyte ,

Without  they  be  redueed  to  theyr  begin  ning  materiabit .
Whtrefore  fucb  bodies  rvhicb  in  nature  be  liquabit.
Minerali  and  Mettaline  may  be  CWercuri^ate,

Conceave  ye  may  that  this  Scyence  is  not  opinabit,

But  very  true  by  Raymond  and  otbers  determynate.

In  tbe  faid  Boke  tbe  Philofopher  (peaketb  alfo ,
Thtrein  if  it  pleafe  your  Higbnes  for  to  reade,

Of  divers  Sulphurs,  but  efpecially  of  trvo  -
And  of  trvo  Mctcurycs  fieyned  to  tbem  indede :

Whereby  be  dotb  true  under (tanders  leade

To  tbe  'knowledge  of  tbe  principies  rvhicb  be  true ;

Both  Red  moft  pure , ana  White , as  have  I (pede,

Vbich  be  nevcrtbele/fc  faunden  but  of  rigbt  fctv.

And


Ili


The  Epiftte.

And  tbefe  ttvo  tbings  be  befi  he  addetb  anone
For  tbem  tbat  rvorketh  the  Alchimy  to  take,

Our  Gold  and  our  Silver  tbertxvitb  to  make  alone  •
Wb  er  e for  e 1 fay , tvbo  ivi  ll  our  Tearle  and  Rnby  make,
The  fiaid  principies  looke  tbat  he  not  forfake  :

For  at  the  begmning  if  bis  principies  be  trerve ,

And  tbat  he  can  by  crafte  tbem  fio  bake ;

\Trervly  at  the  end  bis  Worke  Jhall  hir»  not  rervt.

But  one  greate  fecret  rygbt  nedefull  it  is  to  knotvep
ihat.tbougb  the  Philofophers  fpeake  plurally,

All  is  but  one  Tbing,  ye  rnay  me  trcwe ,

In , kinde , vohicb  is  our  Baje  principally ,

Wbereof dotb  ffring  botb  Wbyte  and  Red  naturaHy  5
And  yet  the  Whyte  mufi  come  fyrjl  ofthe  Red :

Whicb  tbyng  is  not  xvrougbt  manually  ,

But  naturally,  Graft  helping  cute  of-ourLeade

For  all  the  paris  of' our  mcfl'  precicur-SiOnc,

As  I can  preve,  be  Cocjjentia/l  and  concrete  5
Mortover  there  is  no  trne  principio  but  one  3
Fud  len°e  7 1 xvas  er  l therxvitb  cculd  mete  :

O

Who  can  reduce  it , and  knowetb  his  Heate, ,

\_And  only  kinde  rvitb  kinde  can  redrejfe.

Fili  fiith  originali  be  clenfed  frons  his  Seat,

Likely  he  isto fi  fide  our  fecret  s botb  more  and  Icjfe 3

Onlie  there  fore  rvorke  Kyndejwithbis  otvne  Kyndt,
And  all  jour  Elements  Ioyne  tbat  tbey  not  siri.ve ,
Fhis  poyntc  alfo  forany  tbing  beare  in  m-pnde  ;
ibat  pafiive  natures'ye  tcurne  into  aci: ve,

Ofi  Water , Fi  re,  andWinde , cfErtbe  make  blive  $
And  cf  the  Qtudrangle  make  ye  a Figttre  round,

1 hcn  have  ye  bcnie  ofi  our • bene  hive ;

One  ounce  ivell  rmtb  a thoufiand  'poundc  '


The  Epiftle.

The  principali  fecrete  of  fecretes  ali
Is  true  Propertio»  which  may  net  be  bthinde ,

Wherein  I councell  yow  be  not  fuperfciall '}

The  true  cenclufion  if  ever  ye  thinke  to  fynde,

Turne  Erth  to  Water , and  IVater  into  Wynde3
Therof  make  Tire,  and  betvare  of  the  Floode
, \0f  Noe,  rv  here  i n many  one  be  blinde  5
That  by  this  Science  thei  get  but  little  good,  i

J councell  yon  to  eate  and  drinke  temperatly,

'And  be  well  rvare  that  Ipofarcha  come  not  in  place -
Ftejh  notyonr  Wombe  by  drinking  ymmoderatly
Ledi  ye  qttencb  your  naturali  Heate  in  lyttle  ff>acc$

The  colour  rvyll  teli  appearing  in  your  Face:

Drinke  no  more  therefore,  then  ye  may  cate--
Walke  up  and  dorvne  after  an  eafie  pace ,

Cbafe  not  your  Body  too  fore  for  to  frveatei

Witb  eafy  Fire  after  meving  tvhen  ye  fweatej
Warme  your  Body  and  make  it  dry  againe-y
By  Ri-uers  and  Fountaines  walke  after  meate :
fsit  morrowe  tymely  vifit  the  high  Mountaine ,

That  Ph:iicke  fo  byddeth  I reade  certeyne  :

So  hygh  the  Mountaine  nevertheles y e not  afeende,

But  that  ye  may  downeward the  rvay  have  plaine ,

And  with  your  Manteli  from  cold  ye  yew  defende . -

Such  labotir  is  holfome^your  fiveat  if  ye  rvyll  drie *

With  a ■ napkin,  and  after  it  take  no  coldy
For  grofehumon  be  purged  by  Sweat  krndly ;

Ufe  Diacamcron,  then  confeft  with pcrfett  Gold
Hcrmoda&ilus  for  watrie  kumors  good  I held >

Ufe  Hipericon  Perforate  with  mylke  of  Tirhimall;  •
•^WSp:rma  Cete  ana  with  redd  Wyne  whenye  wax  old.
And  Gates  Mylke  fodde  withGold  neunjheth  moijhtre  radical ,

R But


114«


The  Epiftle.

But  a good  Pbifytian  wbo  fo  intendetb  to  be,

Our  lowtr  Aftronomy  bim  nedeth  xvtll  to  knervt
And  after  that  to  lerne,  well,  Urine  in  agUjfe  to  fee.

And  tf  it  nede  to  be  cbafed , tbe  Fyre  to  blowe,

Then  wyttily,  it,  by  divers  wayes  to  tbrowe ,

And  after  tbe  caufe  to  mabe  a Medicine  blive,

Trtdy  tellingthe  ynfirmities  ali  on  a rcwe  :

Wbo  thus  candeo  by  bis  Pbyftcbe  isliketo  tbrive .

We  have  an  Ueauen  yncorruptible  of  tbe  guinteffence,
Ornate  witb  Elementi,  Signes,  Planetts , and  Starrs  brigbt i
Wbich  moifletb  our  Ertbe  by  Suttile  influence :

And  crvt  tbereof  a Secrete  Sulphure  hid  frem  figbt,

It  fetteth  by  'u  er  tue  of  his  attrattive  might
Ltke  as  tbe  Bee  fetcbeth  Hony  out  of  tbe  Flowre
Wbich  tbing  can  doo  none  otber  Erthly  xvigbt ;
Therefore  to  God  only  be  glory  and  honour.

And  like  as  Tfe  toWatcr  dotbrelente ,

Wbereof  congealed  it  was  by  •vielence  ofgreate  Cold,
Wbence  Phebus  it  fmiteth  rvitb  his  Ueate  influent :
Figbt  fo  to  Water  mynerall , reduced  is  our  Gold,

(As  rvritetb  playnly  Albert,  Raymond,  and  Arnold)
With  beate  and  moiflure  by  craft  occafonate ,

Witb  congelation  of  tbe  Spyrite , Lo  l nerv  bave  I told
Ilowe  our  materialis  togeatber  mufl  be  proportionate,

Att  tbe  Dyers  craft  ye  may  lerne  tbis  Science,
Bebolding  witb  Water  hotv  tbey  decociions  mabe
Uppon  theyr  Woad  and  Maddre  eafyly  and  rvitb  patience,
hll  tbe  Tmciures  appeare  wbich  tbe  Cloath  dotb  tabe
Tberein  fo  fxcd  that  tbey  wyll  never  forfake
The  Cloib  for  wafhing  after  tbey  joyned  be-,

Rigbt  fo  our  Find ures  with  Water  of  our  Labe
We  draw  by  boyling  witb  \^/ifhes  of  Hermes  tree.

Wbich


The  Epiftlel

Which  7 inaures  when  they  by  craft  are  made  par  jit  e,
So  dieth  CM  et  talis  with  Colours  evermore  permanent,
y^ifter  the  qualitie  of  the  CMtdycine  Red  or  Whitc*
7hat  never  away  by  eny  Pirei  tvill  be  brente:

Te  ih  is  Ex  ample f tf  you  take  good  tent
Unio  your  purpofe  the  rather  fia/lye  tvynne.

And  [te  your  Fire  be  eafy  and  not  fervent  •

Where  Nature  did  leave  ojf  ’ wbat  tyme  look  ye  begynn.

Fir(l  Calcine , and  after  that  Putrefye ,

’ tyjjotve,  Dyftid)  Sublyme , Defcende,  and  Fyxe,

With  Aquavite  oft  times , both  rvafn  and  drie ,

And  make  a marriage  the  Body  and  Spirit  bettvixt  •
Which  thus  togeather  naturally  if  ye  can  myXe,

In  loftnge  the  Body  the  Water  fha/l  cotigealed  bee^

7 'hen  Jhall  the  Body  dy  utterly  of  the  Flixe,

Bleeding  and  chattnging  Colours  as  ye  Jhall  fee.

.

7he  third  dayt  againe  to  Life  he  Jhall  uprife i
\ydnd  devour  Byrds,  and  Beajls  of  the  Wilderfiit ,

Crowes\  Popingayes , Pyes,  Pekocks , and  CMavies  •,

7he  Phenix 5 the  Bgle  whyte , the  Grijfon  of  fearfttlnes^

7he  Greer.e  Lyon  and  the  Red  Dragon  he  Jhall  dejlres •
7be  white  Dragon  alfo , the  Antlope,  Unicorne  Panther ,
With  other  Byrds s and  Beafls  both  more  and  leffe  y
1 he  Baftliske  alfo  which  allmoH  eche  one  doth  feare.

* In  Bus  and  Nubi  he  Jhall  arife  and  afcend
Up  to  the  Moone,  and  fith  up  to  the  Sonne,

Through  the  Ocean  Seai  tvhich  round  is  rvitbout  end  :

Only  Shypped  rvithin  a little  glafen  Tonne,

When  he  cemmeth  thither,  then  is  the  tMaiJirie  Wonne:

bout  which  Iourney  greate  good  Jhall  ye  not  fjend,
JmTytt  ye  flall  be  glad  that  ever  it  was  begonne  •

Patiently  if  ye  lijle  to  your  worke  attendi

R 2 For


ii  6


The  Epiftk.

For  then  both  Body  And  Spirit  alfe  both  Oyle  and  Water,
Sowle  and  Tintture  one  thing  both  White  and  Red,
After  Colours  variable  it  contejneth  rvhat  fo  mehclatter^
V/hich  alfo  called  is  rvhen  he  hatb  once  bene  Dedd :

And  is  revived 0#rMarchafite,o//r  Magnete, and our  Lead,
Ottr  Sulphure,  cur  Arfenicke,  and  otirtrue  Galcevive:
Our  Sonne,  our  Metone,  our  Ferment  of  our  Bread  :
Ottr  Toadc iour  Bafiliske,  cur  unknowne  Body,  our  Man,

{our  Wifc.

Our  Rody  thus  naturally  by  crafte  rvhen  it  is  renovate
Of  the  firjl  ordre  is  CMedicine  caHed  in  our  Philofophy,
Which  oftentimes  mujl  againebe  Spirituah^ate :

The  rounde  Whele  ttirmng  of  our  forefaid  Aftronomy:
And  fo  tothe  Elixir  of  Spirites  mttfl  y e come, for  tvhy
Till  the  fame  of  the  fixed  by  the  fame  of  the  flier  be  over -
Elixir  of  Body  es  named  it  is  only  • (g°ne

<^And  this  fecrete  poynt  truly  deceaveth  many  one ,

This  naturali proceffe  by  helpe  oferaft  thus  confummate
Diffolvetb  the  Elixir  fpiruuall  in  our  uncluous  Humiditie $
Tnen  ih  Balneo  0/Mary  togeather  let  them  be  Circulat ,
Like  nerv  Hon j or  Oyle  till  they  perfettly  thicked  be ,
Then  rvill  that  Medicine  heale  ali  manner  Infrmitie , \
And  tume  ad  Mettalls  to  Sonne  dr  Moone  mofl  perfeftly:
Thus  fhallye  have  bothgreate  Elixir \and  Auruqa  Potabile,
By


Here  followetfi  tlie  Tigure  comeynmg  ali
the  fecret5  of  iheTreatife  Lotii  £reat  cSfmall


johnjfoJJardjcn  Ig/it .


Our  keaven  -th-is^Fignre  calLil  u

‘f t^lP  ^nv  er

jynUh-  vtUajhod  tkau  mav  nctmifie
‘ao  maJce  our  Me  th-c  e-TL  p arjelly
On  it  tkere-fore.  Jit  thv  ytudy
- ind  vnto  Qod  lot/i  nicjht  and  day
‘For jjrace  and for  y Mnt/ier  yray


> Cttlu  nffifi tlosvmhru  nv .


Fd  »7


117


Incipit  Trologus.


Hyld  of  thys  Dyftyplync  incline  to  me

(thyne  Ere,

And  harkyn  to  my  do&ryne  with  ali  thy

_ (dylygencej
Thes  words  of  vvyfdome  in  mynde  doc
Which  of  old  Fathcrs  be  trew  in  fentence , (thou  barc.
Live  clenc  in  foule , to  God  doe  none  offence  :

Ex  ait  thee  not  but  rather  keepe  thee  Lowe,

Elis  wyll  thy  God  in  thee  no  Wyfdome  lowe.


Fro  fayned  Do&ryne  and  wycked  thought,

The  holy  fpryt  doth  hym  wythdraw*

Nylling  to  dvvell  vvhcre  Syn  is  yvrought,  ,

Dred  God  therefore  and  obay  his  Lawe,

A ryghteous  Manforfookc  ineyer  fawe:

Mether  hys  feed  begg  bread  for  need,  ^

(n  holy  Scrypture  thus  doe  I rede.

Make  Wyfdome  therefore  thy  Sifter  tobe,

And  call  on  Prudcnce  to  be  thy  Frynd,

By  pathes  of  trrnh  they  wyll  gyde  thee,
tfVyth  ipve  and  honcfty  wher  (o  thou  wend*
f Both  vertuofe  to  be,  curteous  and  hend :

• Pray  God  therefore  that  thou  may  fynde
Wyfdome  and  Prudence  with  mouth  and  mynde.

. K 3 All

i

t

t


Tbe  Trologue.

Ali  manncr  good  cum  wyth  thera  Ihall,

And  honcftie  by  ther  hands  innumcrablc,

Thcn  into  combraunce  ftiall  thou  not  fall ;

Soc  bc  they  in  rychcs  Incomparable  :

Toworfhyp  and  profyc  they  vvyllthce  able,

To  conyng  and  to  all  manncr  cf  grace,

Both  here  and  after  thy  lyvrys  fpace.  ,

'for  thefc  bencfyts  which  they  don  bryng,

In  parte  ynnumeryd  by  fapyence ,

To  them  I can  compare  no  thyng  5
No  rychys,  no  fpyces  of  redolence :

Above  all  trefure  fuch  is  ther  exellence,

That  whatfoever  crthly  that  precyous  y$,

To  tliem  comparyd  ys  but  as  cley  ywys.

Infynyte  trcafure  to  Man  they  be,

Who  ufyth  them  fliall  fryndihyp  have
With  God  in  Heven,  and  there  hym  fe5
After  them  vyvelyche  therefor  thou  crave.

For  Body  and  Soule  both  wylt  they  (ave^

And  herein  Goods  doth  mukiplye,

And  afore  Prynces  they  dygnyfy.

Thynke  how  <^4  dum  loft  hys  wyfdomc3
Sampfott  hys  myght  that  was  foe  ftrong,

Kyng  Saule  alfo  loft  hys  Kyngdome  j
And  Davyd  was  punnylhed  foare  for  hys  wrong :
In  the  Oake  by  the  here  fayre  Abfolon  hong3
Kyng  E^eky  by  fycknefle  had  punifhment.

And  many  one  moe  ior  fynne  was  flient.


The  Trologue .

But  Tee  how  other  that  livyd  wdl,

And  to  their  God  did  none  offencc,

Such  chaftyfment  did  nerer  fele,

Buc  God  Ihewed  ever  to  them  bcnevolencc  j
Enok  and  Ely  were  caryed  hence,

To  Paradyfe,  and  other  good  livers  were
Of  God  revvardcd  in  dyvers  raanner.

Sum  had  gret  Fortune,  fum  gret  Cunnynge,

Sum  had  gret  Pcace,  fum  gret  Ryches,

Sum  conquered  Londs  to  ther  vvonyng  ;

Sum  were  exalted  for  ther  gret  mckenes ,

Sum  other  were  faved  fro  the  cruelncs
Of  Tyrants,  Lyons,  and  hot  Fornacys,

As  Vanyell  and  other  in  many  places.

Thus  to  good  Livers  God  fend  gret  grace,

Amd  unto  Sy.nners  fore  ponilhment  5
Sum  to  amend  in  thys  lyfc  had  fpace ,

Sum  fodenly  with  fyrc  fro  Heavyn  were  brent,

Synfull  Sodomyts  for  ever  were  (bent;

Mth  Datha»  and  Abyron  and  other  moe,

Which  fank  for  Syn  to  endles  wo.

Thus  ever  fyth  the  World  was  wrought,'

3od  hath  rcwardyd  both  cvyll  and  good;

Thus  yf  it  maye  reft  in  thy  thought ,

:ro  fynfull  livyng  wyll  chaung  thy  moode.
ff  fynfull  people  thys  underftood,

They  ought  to  bc  aferd  God  to  offend,

^nd  foone  ther  fynfull  lyfcs  to  amend.
j ; • Thercfore


119


izc


The  Trologue .

Therefore  vvith  God  looke  thoubegyne,
That  hc  by  gracc  may  dwell  with  thee,

So  fhall  thou  beft  to  Wyfdom  wyn,

And  knowledge  of  our  grete  prevyte  5
Nory(h  Vertues,  and  Vices  looke  thou  flee.
And  truftyng  thou  wylt  thee  well  difpofe,
Our  fecrets  to  thee  I wyll  dyfclofe.

Kecp.thou  them  fccret  and  for  me  pray,
Looke  that  you  ufe  them  to  Gods  pleafurc;
Do  good  tvyth  them  what  evet  thou  may.
For  tyme  thou  flialt  thys  lyfc  endure,

That  after  thy  endyng  thou  may  be  fure
In  Hevyn  for  to  rewardyd  be,

Whych  God  graunt  both  to  thee  and  me»


121


'Ihe  Treface.

Hygh  Yncomprehenfyble  and  gloryous

(Magefte,

Whofe  Luminos  Bemes  obtundyth  our

(fpeculation  5

One-hode  in  Subftance,  O Tryne  hodc

C in  Deite ,

Of  Hierarchycall  Jubyleftes  the  gratulant  gloryfycation;

SO  pytewoufe  puryfyerofSoulcs  and  puer  perpetuation  5
O deviaunt  fro  dangcr,  O dravver  raoft  dcboner;

Fro  thys  envyos  valey  of  vanyte,  O our  Exalter.


O Power,  O Wyfdom,  O Goodnes  incxplycable  ♦

ISupport  mc,  Tech  me,  andbe  my  Governour,

That  never  my  lyvyng  be  to  thec  dyfplycable ,

But  that  I aquy te  me  to  thee  as  a trew  profeflfor :

Att  thys  begynnyng  good  Lord  here  my  prayer ;

Be  nygh  with  Grace  for  to  enforce  my  wyll,

Graunt  well  that  I may  my  entcnt  fulfyll.


Moft  curyofc  Coffer  and  copyofc  of  ali  trefure
Thou  art,  fro  whom  all  goodnes  doth  deffend,
iTo  Man)  and  alfo  to  every-ech  Creature;

Thyne  Handy-warke  therefore  vouchfafe  to  dcfend,
That  we  no  tyme  in  lyvying  here  myfpend,

With  truth  thou  graunt  us  our  lyvelodc  to  wyn
That  in  no  daunger  of  Synfulncs  we  rennc.

S And


0


The  Treface.

And  for  foc  much  as  we  have  for  thy  fakc
Renowncyd  thc  World,  our  Wylls,and  thc  Flejfhys  Luft,
As  thyne  owne  wylfull  profcflyors  us  take5
Syth  in  thee  only  dependyth  ali  our  truft,

We  can  no  fercher,  to  thce  enclync  we  muli :

Thy  fecrct  Treforars,  vouchfafc  to  make  us,

Show  us  thy  Secrets,  and  to  us  be  bounteous.

Among  other  which  be  profeflyd  to  thee
I me  prefent,  as  one  wyth  humble  Submyflyon,

Thy  Servant  befechyng  that  I may  bee,

And  trew  in  levyng  acording  to  my  profefifyon :

In  order  Chanon  reguler  of  Brydlyngton  j
Befechyng  thc  Lord  that  thou  wylt  me  fpare,

To  thy  trew  Scrvaunts  thy  fecretts  to  declare.

In  the  begynnyng  when  thou  madyft  ali  of  nought,
A globofe  Mater  and  darke  under  confufyon,

By  thee  Begynner  merveloufly  was  wrought,
Conteynyng  naturally  all  thyngs  withoute  dy vyfyon,
Of  whych  thou  madyft  in  fix  Dayes  dere  dyftyndtion ;
As  Gencfys  apertly  doth  rccorde
ThenHeavynandErthperfeytyd  werewyth  thy  word*

So  thorow  thy  Wyll  and  Power  owte  of  onc  Mafe
Confufyd  was  made  all  thyngs  that  being  ys;

But  yn  thy  gloty  afore  as  maker  thou  was,

Now  ys  and  Ihall  be  wythout  end  I wys:

And  puryfyed  Sowls  upp  to  thy  blys
Shall  come  a pryncyple,  thys  may  be  one.

For  the  declaryng  of  our  Stone .


For


The  Treface.

For  as  of  one  Mafe  was  made  ali  thyng,

Ryght  foe  muft  hyt  in  our  pra&yfe  be,

All  our  fecrets  of  one  Image  muft  fpryng :

In  Phylofophen  Bokes  thereforc  who  luft  to  fe,

Our  Stone  ys  callyd  the  lejfe  World  one  and  three,
Magnefu  alfo  of  Sulphure  and  UHercury ,
Propotionat  by  Nature  moft  perfytly.

But  many  one  mervelyth  whych  mervel  may,

And  mufe  on  fuch  a mervelous  thyng,

What  ys  our  St  one  fyth  Phylofophers  doth  fay,

To  fuch  as  ever  be  hyt  fcchyng  :

Yet  Fovvles  and  Fyfhys  to  us  doth  yt  bryng,
Every-ech  Man  yt  hath,  and  ys  in  every  place.

In  thee,  in  me,  in  every  tymeand  fpace.

To  thys  I anfvvcr,  that  Mercttry  it  ys  I wys
But  not  the  comyn  callyd  Quickfylver  by  name,

But  Mercury  withoute  whych  nothyng  beyng  ys ;

All  true  Phylofophen  record  and  fay  the  fame :

But  fymple  ferchers  puttyth  them  in  blame,

Saying  they  hyd  hyt,  but  they  beblame  worthy,
Which  be  no  Clerks^  and  medlyth  with  Phylofophy.

But  though  hyt  Mercury  be  yett  wyfely  underftond,
Wherein  it  ys,  where  thou  fhalt  it  feech,

Elis  I thee  Councell  take  not  this  warke  in  hond,

For  Phtlofophers  flattryth  Foolys  with  fayre  Speche :
But  lyft  to  me,  for  trewly  I wyll  thee  techc,

Whych  ys  thy  Mercury  moft  profyttable,

Beyng  to  thee  nothing  dyfteveable.


It


nq.  The  Treface .

It  ys  more  nythe  in  fum  things  than  in  fum,
Therefore  take  tent  what  I unto  the  wsyt,

Foryf  thou  ncvertothe  knowledge  cum,

Therof  yet  fhalt  thou  me  not  twytt:

For  I wyll  trevvly  novv  thee  excite,

To  underftand  well  Mercurjs  three,

The  keys  which  of  our  Scyens  be.

i

Raymond  hys  Menftrues  doth  them  call,

Without  which  trewly  no  truth  ys  done,

But  two  of  them  are  Superfycyall  :

The  third  effentyall  of  Soon  and  Moone  $

Theyr  propertyes  I wyll  declareryght  foone.

And  Mercury  of  other  Mettalls  eflencyall,

Ys  the  pryncipall  of  our  Stone  materyall.

In  Soon  and  Moone  our  Menftrue  ys  not  fene  .

Hyt  not  appeareth  but  by  cffett  to  fyght,

That  ys  the  Stone  of  whych  we  mene ;

Who  fo  our  vvrytyng  concevyth  aryght,

Hyt  ys  a Soule,  a fubftance  bryght :

Of  Soon  and  Moone,  a fubtyll  influence,

By  whych  the  Erth  receyvech  refplendence.

For  what  ys  Gold  and  Sylver  fayth  Avycen,

But  Erth  whych  ys  pure  Whyte  and  Red,

Take  fro  that  the  fayd  clernes,  and  then
That  Erih  wyll  ftond  but  lyttyll  in  ftcdej
The  hole  compound  ys  called  our  Lede,

The  qualyte  of  clernes  fro  Soon  and  Moone  doth  com
Thtfe  be  our  Menftrues  both  ali  and  fum.


Bodyes


The  Treface.

Bodyes  vvyth  the  fyrft  wc  Calcene  naturally
Perfyt,  but  none  vvhych  be  unclene,

Except  one  vvhych  ufually

Namyd  by  Phylofophers  the  L)on  Greene ,

Hc  ys  the  meane  the  Soon  and  Moone  betweenc :

Of  joynyng  Tynttures  vvyth  perfytnes.

As  Geber  thereto  beryth  vvytnes.

Wyth  the  Second  vvhych  ys  an  Humydytc
Vegetable  revyvyng  that  earft  was  dede,

Both  pryncyplcs  matcryalls  muft  loofed  bc;

And  formalis,  eis  ftandyth  they  lytlc  in  ftead  :

The  Menftrues  therefore  know  I the  rede:

Wythout  vvhych  neyther  trevv  Calcynatyon,

Don  may  bc,  ncther  yet  naturali  Dyfiolutyon.

Wyth  the  thyrd  humydyty  moft  permanent
Incombuftyble  and  un&uous  in  hys  nature,

Hermes  Tre  to  afhes  muft  be  brent  :

Hyt  is  our  Naturali  Fyre  moft  fure,

Our  UUercuryi  or  Sulphure , or  Tynliure  pure :

Our  Soule3  our  St  one  ^ borne  up  vvyth  vvynd
In  the  Erthe  ingendered,  bere  thys  in  thy  mynde.

Thys  St  one  alfoe  teli  thec  I dare.

Is  the  vapor  of  Mettalls  potcntyall,

Hovv  thou  ftiall  gett  hyt  thou  muft  bevvare :

IFor  invyfible  ys  truly  thys  Menftruall :

Hovvbehytt  with  the  fecond  Water  phylofophycall ,

By  leperatyon  of  Elements  yt  may  appeare,

To  fyght  in  formeof  Water  deere.

,v  S 3 Of


n6


The  Treface.

Of  our  Mcnftrue  by  labour  exuberate
And  wyth  hyt  maybe  made  Sulphure  of  nature
If  itt  be  well  and  kyndly  acuate ;

And  cyrculate  into  a Spryt  pure :

Then  to  dyifolve  thou  muft  be  fure
Thy  Bafe  wyth  hyt  in  dyvers  vvyfe.

As  thou  fhalt  knovv  by  thy  pra&yfe.

That  poynt  therefore  in  hys  dew  place
I wyll  declare  wyth  other  mo,

If  God  wyll  graunt  me  fpace  and  grace :

And  mep  referve  in  lyfc  from  wo  5
As  I thee  teche  loke  thou  doe  fo.

And  for  thy  fyrft  ground  pryncypall
Undcrftond  thy  Water  menftruall.

And  when  thou  haft  madetrueCalcination,.
Encrefyng  and  not  Waftyng  moyfture  radycall,
Tyll  thy  Bafe  by  ofter  fubtylyatyon
Wyll  lyghtly  flow  as  Wex  uppon  Mettall  *
Then  lowfe  hyt  wyth  thy  vcgctable  Mcnftruall,
Tyll  thouhave  Oyle  thcrcof in  Colour  bryght,
Then  ys  your  Menftruevifible  to  fyght.

And  Oyle  is  drawne  ovvte  in  colour  of  Gold,
Or  lyke  thereto  out  of  our  fine  Red  Lead5
Whych  Raymond  fayd  when  he  was  old,
Much  more  then  Gold  wold  ftond  hym  in  ftede.
For  wban  he  was  for  age  nygh  dede,

He  made  thereof^«r«w  Potabile ,

Whych  hym  rcvyvyd  as  Mcn  myght  fce.


The  Treface.

For  fo  togethcr  may  thcy  be  Cyrculate,

That  ys  to  fay,  Oyle  and  the  vegetable  Menftruall,
Ethcr  fo  by  labour  exuberate,

And  made  by  Crafte  a Stonc  Celeftyall :

Of  Nature  fo  fyrye  that  \ve  yt  call
Our  Bafelysk , othcrwyfc  our  Cokatryfei
Our  great  Eltxir  moft  of  pryfe.

Whych 'as  the  fyght  of  a Bafjlysk  hys  objeft
Kylyth,  fo  fleyth  it  crude  Mercury,

When  thereon  itt  ys  projcdt.

In  twynkc  of  an  Eye  moft  fodenly,

That  c JMercury  teynyth  permanently  5
All  bodyes  to  Son  and  Moone  perfyt,

Thus  gyde  thy  bafe  both  Red  and  Whyte.

Aurum  fotahile  thus  ys  made,

Of  Gold,  not  comyn  calcynat ;

But  of  our  Tyn&ure  whych  wyll  not  vade,

Dut  of  our  Bafe  drawen  wyth  the  Menftrue  circulate,
iut  naturali  Calcynatyon  muft  Algate
5c  made,  ere  thy  Gold  dyflolved  be,

That  Pryncypall  fyrft  I wyll  teli  thcc.

But  into  Chapters  thys  Treatis  I fliall  dcvyde,
n number  T wclve  with  dew  Recapytulatyon ;
Juperfluous  rehearfalls  I ley  afyde,
ntendyng  only  to  geve  trcw  Informatyon,
k>th  of  the  Theoryke  and  Pradlycall  opcratyon :

That  by  my  wrytyng  who  fo  wyll  guyded  be,

)f  hys  intente  perfytly  fpced  lhall  he.


llj


The


iz8


T^be  Trefke.

The  Fyrft  Chapter  Ihalbe  of  naturali  Calcinatien-
The  Second  of  Dyffolutio»  fecret  and  Phylofopbycall*
The  Thyrd  of  our  Elementall  Separatio» 5
The  Fourth  of  Co»\unCion  matrymonyall;

The  Fyftheof  Putrefacio»  then  followe  ihall  •,

Of  Congelatio»,  albyfycacive  Ihall  be  the  Syxr,

Then  of  Cybatyon  the  Seaventh  fhall  follow  next.

The  fecret  of  our  Sublymatio»  thecyght  Ihall  fhew
The  nynth  Ihall  be  of  Fementatio»,

The  Tenth  of  our  Exaltatio»  I trow *,

The  Elcvcnth  of  our  mervelofc  CMultyplycatyo»$

The  Twclfth  of ProjeCyon ; then  Recapytulatyo» ;

And  fo  thys  Treatyfe  Ihall  take  an  end,

By  the  help  of  God  as  I entend.

• )

. * 1

, . • V ,1

!

I


t


12?


r^>  <4v  <rfo  rV  rl»  ek  c|>  ,<rN  rt»  fJ’  .tfc  flv  *#>  ffo  cfo  Jjfc  VL  ^ tfo  r%  ffo  *K

i * 4 \ <

Of  Calcinat  ion.


The  firjl  Cjate.

4 X • * * - r • ; ’ • ? r .'  ',  n • . ,

CAlcinacion  is  thc  purgacyon  of  our  Stone0

Reftauryng  alfo  of  hys  naturali  hcate;

Of  radycall  moyfture  it  lcfyth  none*  ,

\Inducyng  Solucion  into  our  Storie  moft  mete,

After  Pbilofophy  I you  behyte  ,.

Do  not  after  thc  comyn  gyfe,

Wyth  Sulphure  and  Salts  preparat  indyvers  wyfe.

. ' Nether  with  Corrofyves  nor  with  Pire  alone,

Nor  with  Vyneger  nor  Watcr  ardent,.

Nether  with  the  vapour  of  Lede  our  'Stone
Is  Calcyncd  to  our  intente :

AU.  they  to  Calcync  whych  fo  b'e  bent  .

, r Fro  thys  hard  Scyence  yvithdraw  theyre  hond,
Till  they  oirr  Calcynmg  better  underftonde.

, For  by-fuch  Calcynyng  theyre  bodyes  be  fhenrs
Whych  mynyfheth  rhe  moyfture  of  our  Stone. j
Thereforc  when  bodyes  to  powder  be  brent,  ,v-
Dry  as  askys  of  T.re  or  Bone,  ' ;‘j0u  : ' ;;J

Of  fuch  Calx  then  wyll  we  none,

For  moyfture  we  multiply  radycall,

. In  Calcynyng,  mynyfbyng  none  at  ali.

T And


Of  falcinatlon.


And  for  a fure  ground  of  our  trew  Calcjrxtcyori,
Woorcb  wyttyly  kynde  only  wyth  kynde  5
For  kynd  to  kynde  hath  appctyblc  inclynacyon  5
Who  knoweth  not  thys  yn  knowiedgc  is  but  blynd :
He  may  forch  wander  as  Myft  doth  wyth  the  Wynd  5
Woting  never  wyth  perfytnes  wherc  to  lyght,
Becaufe  he  cannoc  confcvc  our  words  aryght.


Joyne  kynd  to  kynd  therefore  as  rcafon  ys,

For  every  Burgeon  anfwercth  to  his  owne  Seed ;

Man  begetteth  Man,  a Beaft  a Beaft  lykewyfe ;
Ferthcr  of  thys  to  trere  it  is  no  nced,

But  underftond  thys  poynt  yf  thou  wylt  fpede ;

Every  thyng  ys  fyrft  Calcyncd  in  hys  owne  kynd,
Thys  well  confcvyng,frute  thcreyn  fhalt  thou  fynde.


6.


And  wemakc  Calxes  un&ious  both  Whyteand  Hed,
Of  three  degrees.  or  our  Bafe  be  pcrfyt  *,

Fluxyble  as  Wcx,  elis  ftond  they  Iyttle  in  fted  5
By  ryght  long  procefle  as  Plylofophen  wryte,

A yerc  we  take  or  more  for  our  rcfpyte  :

For  in  lefle  fpaceourCalxcwyll  not  be  made,
Ablc  totaync  with  colour  whych  wyll  not  vade.


As  for  the  Proporcyon  thou  muft  beware.
For  thcrcin  many  onc  ys  beguylyd,
Therefore  thy  warke  that  thow  not  nfatre;
Lat  the  Body  be  fotclly  fylya
With  Mercury , as  mucn  then  fo  fubtylyd :
One  of  the  Sonn , two  of  the  Moonc ,
Tyll  altogether  lyke  pap  be  donc.


Then


Of  Qalcmation.

r;,  Then  makc  thc  Mtrcurj  fourc  to  thc  Some,
Two  to  thc  Mone  as  hyt  fhould  bc,

And  thus  thy  worke  muft  bc  begon,

In  fygurc  of  theTrynyte*,

Thrce  of  thc  Body  and  of  thc  Spryt  three :

And  for  thc  unytyc  of  thc  fubftance  fpirituall,
One  more  than  of  thc  fubftance  corporali.

By  Rtymonds  Rtpcrtorj  thys  ys  trew,
Proporcyon  there  who  lyft  to  looke,

The  fame  my  Dottour  to  me  did  fhew ;

But  three  of  thc  Spryt  Btcon  tooke,

To  one  of  the  Body  for  thys  Iwookc:

Many  a nyght  or  I hyt  wyft,

And  both  be  trew  take  whych  you  lyft.

If  the  Water  bc  cquall  in  Proporcyon
To  the  Erthe  whych  hete  in  dcw  mefure,

Of  hym  fhall  fpryng  a new  burgyon  $

Both  Whyte  and  Red  in  pure  tyntturc,

Whych  in  the  Fyre  fhall  ever  endure:

Kyll  than  thc  quyck,  thc  ded  rcvyve,'
MakcTrynyte  Unytewythout  any  ftryve.

Thys  ys  the  beft  andthefureft  Proporcyon,

For  here  ys  Icft  of  the  part  fpyrytuall,

The  better  thereforc  fhall  bc  Solucyon  ;

Thcn  yf  thou  dyd  it  wyth  Water  fmall,

Thyne  Erth  over  glutyn  whych  lofyth  ali
Take  hcede  t^creforc  to  potters  Ioome,

And  make  you  never  to  neih  thy  wome.

T 2


Th


z Of  Calcination.

12.  That  loome  behold  how  yt  tempercd  ys,

The  mcane  alfo  hovv  thou  hyt  Calcenate*

And  ever  in  mynd  loke  thou  bare  tftys,

That  ncver  thyne  Erth  wyth  Water  be  fuffocatc,

Dry  up  thy  moyfture  wyth  heate  moft.  temperate:

Hclpe  Dyftolueyon  wyth  moyfture  of  the  Mone,
And  Congdlacyoti  wyth  the  Son,thcn  haft  thou  done.

13.  Foure  Naturcsfhallintqthefyfth  fo  tume,

Whych  ys  a Nature  moft  perfeft  and  temperate  3
But  hard  hyt  ys  with.  thy  bare  foote  to  fpurnc,
Agaynft  a brodyke  of  Iyron  or  Stelc  new  acuatc  : . I
Soe  many  one  doth  whych  bene  infatuate,  - ,

When  they  fuch  hygh  thyngs  don  take  in  hond,
Whych  they  in  noe  wyfe  underftondc.


14.  Tn  Eggs,  in  Vitryoll,  or  in  Blod,

What  ryches  wene  they  there  tofyndej
Yf  they  Pbylofophy  underftode,

They  wold  not  in  worchyng  be  fo  blynd,
Gold  to  feke  or  Sylver  out  of  kynd :


For  lyke  as  Fyre  of  brennyng  the  pryncyple  ys,
So  ys  the  pryncyple  of  gildyng,  Gold  I wys.

ij.  Yf  thou  intend  therefore  to  make

Gold  and  Sylver  by  craft  of  our  Pbilojophy  •
Therto  nother  Eggs  nor  Blood  thou  takc,

But  Gold  and  Sylver  whych  naturally,

Calcyned  wyfely,  and  not  manually.

And  new  generacyon  wyll  forth  bryng,
Increfyng  yheyr  kynde  as  doth  ech  thyng.


And


Of  Qalcinatioiu

it  And  yf  yt  truc  were  that  pcrfyt  myght  be.

In  thyngs  which  bc  not  mettallyne  :

In  which  bc  Colours  plefaunc  to  fee.

As  in  Blood,  Eggs,  Here,  Uryn,  andWyne,

Or  in  mcanc  Mettalls  dyggyd.out  of  the  Myne ;

Yct  muft  chcyr  Elements  beputrcfyed  and  feparate,
And  wyth  Elements  of  perfyt  Bodys  be  dy fppnfate.


>33


ui-


n sjc  - - J-i


",  But  fyrft  ofthefe  Elements  makc  tfiou  Rotacyon,
And  into  Watcr  thy  Erth  tume  fyrft  of  all  5
Then  of  thy  Watcr  make  Ayre  by  Levygacyon  ;

And  Ayre  make  Fyre»,  then  Master  I wyll  thee  call
Of  all  our  fecretts  greate  and  fmall:

,\  The  Whcelc  of  Elements  thou  canft  tume  about,
Trcwly  confcvyngour  Wrytyngs  wythowt  dowte.

Thys  donc,  go  backward,  turnyngthy  Wheeleagaine,
And  into  thy  Water  then  tume  thy  Fyre  anon ; j
And  Ayre  into  Erth,  ells  laboryft  thowbutinvayne:
For  foe  to  temperment  ys  brought  our  Stone,

And  Natures  contraryofe,  fowcr  be  made  one,
Afterthey  have  threc  times  ben  Cyrculat,

And  alfee  thy  Bacc  pcrfytly  confummate.

> Thus  under  the  moyfturc  of  the  Moone ,

And  under  the  temperate  hete  of  the  Sonne ,

Thy  Elements  fhalbe  incynerate  fone.

And  then  thow  haft  the  Maiftery  wone  5
Thanke  God  thy  worke  was  then  begon :

For  there  thow  haft  one  token  trew,

— Whych  fyrft  in  blacknes  to  thee  wyll  fhcw.

T 3 The

/7r  ^ * -

(Us*  «■  L .

^ 4 /V"  / 'V  ‘U. 'i  LA } ( t

71^  j 1 ~ j r<

j rr,  V..  A.  tv,  - 1!>  . 1 7 V


c Of  Qalcination.

The  hcde  of  the  Crow  that  tolcyn  call  we.

And  Tura  men  call  hyt  the  Crows  byll  ?

Sura  call  hyt  the  Afhesof  Hermes  Tre,

And  thus  they  narae  hyt  after  theyer  wyll,

Our  Tode  of  the  Erth  whych  etyth  hys  fyll:

Sum  namc  hyt  by  whych  it  ys  mortyfycat
Thefpyrytof  the  Erth  wyth  venome  intoxycate.

But  hyt  hath  Names  I fay  to  the  infynyte.

For  after  each  thyng  that  Blacke  ys  to  fyght  ?
Namyd  hyt  ys  tyll  the  tyme  that  hyt  wex  Whyte,
For  after  biacknefle  when  yt  vvcxeth  bryghr,

Then  hath  hyt  names  of  more  delyght :

After  Whyte  thyngs,  the  Red  after  the’  fame,
Rulc  of  Red  thyngs,  doth  take  hys  namc.

At  the  fyr(l  Gate , now  art  thou  in,

Of  the  Phylcjbphers  Cafile  where  they  dwell  5
Proccede  wyfdy  that  thou  may  wyne
In  at  mo  Gates  of  that  Caftcll,

Whych  Caftle  ys  round  as  any  Bell : ■

And  Gates  hath  Eleven  yet  mo,  v

One  ys  conqucred, now  to  the  Seccnd  go.  '


The  cnd  of  the  firf  Gate .


I


'a


Of  Solutio»,


I «V,  jk.


'Ihejecond  (jate.

1,  /"\VSolmon  now  wyli  I fpcke  a word  of  two,

' Vy  Whych  (heweth  owt  that  err  was  hyd  from  fyght.
And  makyth  intenuate  thyngs  that  were  thyk  alfo ;

By  thc  vertue  of  our  fyrft  Menftrue  clere  and  bryght »
In  whych  our  Bodycs  eclypfyd  ben  to  fyght :

And  of  thcr  hard  and  dry  Compa&yon  fubtylyat
Into  thcr  owne  fyrft  nature  kyndly  retrogradate.

2.  One  in  Gender  they  be  and  in  Nomber  not  fo,
Whofe  Father  the  Son,  the  Moone  truly  ys  Mother,
The  rocan  ys  Mercury,  thefc  two  and  no  mo

Be  our  Magnefta,  our  Cddrop,  and  noncother;
Thyngs  there  be,  but  only  Syjler  and  Brother :

That  ys  to  wene  Agent  and  Pacyent ,

Sulphure  and  CMercury  coeifentyall  to  our  entent.

?<  Betvvyxt  thefe  two  in  qualytc  cotraryofe,

Ingcndrcd  ys  a Mene  moft  mervyllofely
Whych  ys  our  Mercury  and  Menftrue  un&uofe?

Our  fecrett  Sulphur  worchyng  invyfybly.

More  fer fely  tban  Fyre  brcnnyng  the  body,^

Into  Water  dyflolvyng  thc  Body  mynerall,

Which  Nyght  fro  darkncs  in  thc  North  parte  we  call,

But


i


5 1 Of  Solution.

4.  But  yct  I trow  thou  underftandyft  not  utterly
The  very  fecrett  of  Phylofopers  DjJfolucion ; ;
Thcrefore  conceve  me  I cour.cell  thee  wyttyly  :

For  I wyll  teli  thee  trewly  wythout  dclufyon  5
Our  Solncyon  ys  caufe  of  our  Congelacyon  5

For  the  Dyjfolucyon  on  the  onc  fyde  corporali
Caufyth  Congelacyonon  the  other- fyde  Spyrytuall.

5.  And  We  Dylfolve  into  Water  whych  vveytyth  no  hond.
For  when  the  Erth  ys  integrally  yncynerat ;

Then  ys  the  Water  congelyd,  thys  underftondj  -
For:the  Elements  be  fo  concatenat,  ! .

That  when  the  body  fro  hys  fyrft  forme  ys  alterate :
A nevv  forme  ys  inducyd  immcdiately,

- For  nothyng  bcing  wythout  all  forme  ys  utterly.

6.  And  here  a fecret  tothee  I wyll  dyfclofe,

Whych  ys  the  ground  of  our  fecrcts  all  5
And  yf  thou  hyt  not  know  thou  fhaltbut  lofe
Thy  labour  and  cofts  both  great  and  fmall,

Take  hedc  therefore  in  Errour  that  thou  not  fall  .*

The  more  thyne  Erth  and  the  lelfe  thy  Water  be3
The  rather  and  bettcr  Solucyon  fhallthou  fee.

Behold  how  Yfc  to  Water  doth  relenr.

And  fo  hyt  muft>  for  Water  hyt  was  beforej
Ryght  foe  agayne  to  Water  our  Erth  is  bent,

And  Water  thereby  congelyd  for  cvermore,

For  aftcr  all  Phylofcyhers  whych  ever  was  borc :

* Evcry  Mettall  was  ons  Water  myrierall,

Therefore  wyth -Water- theyturne  to  Water  all<

In


Of  Solutiori .


*J7


In  whych  Water  of  kyndc  occafyonate
Of  qualytes  bene  rcpugnaunce  and  dyverfyte,

Thyngs  into  thyngs  muft  therfore  be  rotate,

Untyll  dyverfyte  be  brought  to  parfyc  unyte,

For  Scrypture  recordyth  when  the  Erth  ftiall  be
Trovvbclyd,  and  into  the  depe  Sea  fhall  be  caft
Mountayncs,  our  Bodyes  lykcwyfe  at  the  laft.

. Our  Bodyes  be  lekcnyd  convenyently
To  Mountaynes  whych  after  hygh  Plancts  wc  narae  *
Into  the  depenes  therfore  of  CMercury.

Turne  them  and  kepe  the  out  of  blamc,

Then  fhall  ye  fe  a Nobyll  game5

Hovv  all  ftiall  become  powder  foft  as  fylke,

So  doth  our  Runnett  by  kynde  curd  our  Mylkc.

i-  Then  hath  our  Bodys  ther  fyrft  forme  lofte,

And  other  be  cnducyd  ymedyately
Then  haft  thow  well  befet  thy  coft,

Wheras  fome  other  uncunning  muft  goe  by, 1
Not  knowyng  the  fccrctts  of  our  Phylofophy :

Yet  one  poynt  I more  muft  teli  thee,

Every  Body  how  hyt  hath  dymencyons  three.

i Alt yt  ude,  Latjtude , and  Profundyte ,

By  whych  algates  turne  we  muft  our  Whcle  *
Knowyng  thy  entraunce  in  the  Weft  fhall  be*

Thy  paflage  forth  into  the  North  yf  thou  do  well,
And  there  thy  Lyghts  lofe  theyre  Lyght  cche-dele:^
For  there  thou  muft  abyde  by  Ninety  Nyght
darknes  ofPurgatory  wythowtcn  Lyght!


V


Then


12«


l3'


j^g  0/  Solution.

Thcn  take  thy  courfc  up  to  thc  Efte  anon
By  Colours  paffyng  varyablc  in  manyfold  wyfe.

And  thcn  beWynter  and  Vere  nyghover-gon
To  the  Eft,  therfore  thyne  atfendyng  devyle.

For  there  the  Son  wyth  Day-lyght  doth  upryfe
In.  Sotncr,  and  there  dyfporte  the  wyth  delyght,
For  there  thy  Warke  fhall  becom  parfyt  Whyte».

Forth  fro  the  Eft  ynto  the  South  aflend.

And  fett  thou  up  therein  thy  Chayrc  of  Fyre,

For  there  ys  Harveft,  that  ys  to  fay  an  end
Of  ali  thys  Warke  after  thyne  ownc  defyrc:

Thcr  fliynyth  thc  Son  up  in  hys  owne  fphyre,

And  after  the  Eclyps  ys  in  rednes  wyth  glory
As  Kyng  to  rayne  uppon  all  Mettalls  and  Mercuryi.

14.  And  in  one  Glafife  muft  be  doneall  thys  thyngi
Lyke  to  an  Egg  in  fhape,  and  clofyd  well,

Then  muft  you  know  thc  mefurc  of  fyryng ;

The  whych  unknowen  thy  Warke  ys  loft  cch  dele,
Lctt  never  thy  GlafTe  be  hotter  thcn  thow  may  feelc::

And  fuffer  ftyll  in  thy  bare  hand  to  holde
For  dread  of  lofyng  as  Philefoyhers  have  the  tolde..

15.  Yett  to  myDo&rync  furthermore  intend,

Bcwarc  thy  Glaflc  thou  never  opyn  ne  meve
Fro  thy  bcgynnyng,  tyll  thou  have  made  an  end;

If  thou  do  contrary  thy  Warke  may  never  cheve.t
Thus  in  thys  -Chapter ^ whych  ys  fo  breve,

I have  the  taught  thy  trew  Solutio n 5
Now  to  the  ThyrA.  Cate  goe,  for  thys  ys  won.

OE


n?


M


Of  s


E P A R A T I O N.


The  thirdGate.

*

SEparacyo dothcch  parte  from  otherdcvydc,

The  fubtill  fro  the  groce,  fro  the  thyck  the  thyn  *,
But  Separacyo n manuali  look  thou  pue  afyde :

For  that  pertaynyth  to  folys  whych  lyctyll  good  don
But  in  our  Separacyo»  nature  doth  not  blyn  : (vvyn,

Makyog  dyvyfyon  of  qualytes  Elementall
Into  the  fyfth  degree  tyll  they  be  tumcd  ali.

Erth  ys  turnyd  into  Watcr  black  and  bloe.

And  Water  after  into  Ayrc  under  very  whyte :

Ayre  ys  turned  into  Fyrc,  Elements  therc  bc  lio  mo ;
Of  thys  ys  made  by  crafte  our  Steve  of  grete  delyte,
But  of  thys  Separ acyon  much  more  muft  we  wryte;
And  Separ acyon  ys  callyd  by  Pbylofophers  dyffynycyon
Of  the  fayd  Elements  tetraptatyve  dyfpcrfyon.

And  of  thys  Separ  acyon  I fynde  a lyke  fygure
Thus  fpoken  by  the  Propbtt  yn  the  Pfalmody,

God  brought  out  of  aStone  a fludof  Watcr  pure.
And  out  of  the  hardyft  Stone  Oylc  abundantly :
Ryght  fo  of  our  precyofe  Stone  yt  thou  be  wytty ,
Oyle  incombufteble  and  Water  thoullialtdraw.
And  thcrcabout  thou  nedyft  not  at  the  Coles  to  blow.

V 2 Do


#


1^0


.


I


Of  Seperation.

Do  thys  wyth  hcte  cfy  and  mefuryng
Fyrft  wyth  moyft  Fyre,  and  after  wyth  the  dry ;
The  flewme  by  Pacyence  owt  drawyng  •,

And  after  that  thy  other  natures  wyttyly,

Dry  up  thyne  Erth  tyll  hyt  be  thryfty  :

By  Calcenyng  eis  thou  laboryft  ali  in  vayne,
And  then  make  hyt  drynke  up  his  moyfture  agayne*

Separ acyott  thus  muft  thou  ofte  tymes  make,

Thy  Matter  dyvydyng  into  parts  two  5 ^

So  thatythe  Symple  fro  the  groce  thou  take  ^ ■
Tyll  Erth  remayne  benethe  in  color  bloe,

That  Erth  ys  fyx  for  to  abyde  ali  wo :

The  other  parte  ys  Spyrytuall  and  fleyng,

But  thou  muft  turne  hem  ali  into  one  thyng.


Than  Oyle  and  Water  wyth  Water  fhall  dyftyll
And  thorow  her  help  receve  mehyng  :

Kepe  well  thys  two  that  thou  not  fpyll*

Thy  Wark  for  lack  of  dew  clofyng,

Make  thy  Stopcll  of  glas  meltyng

The  top  of  thy  Vefsle  together  wyth  yt,

Than  Phylofopher-lyke  ufyd  ys  hyt.

7.  The  Water  wherwyth  thou  muft  renevv  thy  Stont
Looke  thou  dyftyll  afore  thou  vvarke  wyth  hyt
Oftentymcs  by  it  felfe  alone :

And  by  thy  fyght  thou  fhalt  well  wyt.

Ero  fcculent  feces  when  hyt  ys  quytt :

For  fum  men  can  wyth  Saturne  it  multeply.

And  other  Subftance  which  wc  defyc.

Dyftyll*


Of  Seperation.

$ Dyftyll  hyt  therfore  tyll  hyt  bc  clene,

And  thyn  iylce  Watcr  as  hyt  fhold  be.

As  Hevyn  in  Color  bryght  and  Ihyne,

Kepyng  both  fygure  and  pondcrofytc,

Therwith  dyd  Hermes  moyfture  hys  Tre  :

Wythyn  hys  Glas  he  made  to  grow  upryght,
Wyth  Flowers  dyfcoloryd  bevvtyofely  to  fyghr.

p,  Thys  Water  ys  Iyke  to  the  venemous  Tyre,
Whcrevvyth  the  myghty  Tryacle  yswroughtj
For  ytys  Poyfon  moft  ftronge  of  yrc»  . ,

A ftronger  Poyfon  can  none  %e  thought :

Att  the  Potecarys  therfore  oftyn  yt  ys  bought :
Butno  manihall  beby  hyt  intoxycate,

After  the  tyme  yt  ys  into  Medycyne  Elevate»

),  For  then  as  ys  the  Tryacall  trew,

Hyt  ys  of  poyfons  moft  expulfyfe  ;

And  in  hys  working  doth  mervells  ftiewe,

Prefervyng  many  from  deth  to  lyfe,

Lokc  thou  meng  yt  wyth  no  corrofyve :

But  chefe  hyt  pure  and  quick  rennyng,

Yf  thou  thcreby  wylt  liave  vvynnyng.

[,  It  ys  a mervclofe  thyng  in  kynde,

And  Wythout  hyt  may  nought  be  done ;

Thcreforc  Hermes  calleth  hyt  hys  Wynde ,

For  it  ys  up  flying  fro  Sonn  and  Mone,

And  makyth  our  Stone  flye  wyth  hyt  Sone :
Revyvyng  the  ded  and  gcvyng  lyfe
To  Son  and  Mone,  Husband  and  Wyfc.

V 3 Which


/


I \z


Of  Separatiori .

Whych  yf  thcy  werc  not  by  crafc  made  quick.
And  ther  fatnes  wyth  Water  drawn  out$

And  fo  the  thyn  dyflevered  from  the  thyke,

Thou  {hould  never  bryng  thys  vvorkc  about:

Yf  thou  wylt  fpeed  therefore  wythout  doubt,
Reyfe  up  thy  Byrds  out  of  theyre  neft.

And  after  agaync  bryng  them  downe  to  reft.


13,  Water  wyth  Water  accord  wyll  and  affend.

And  Spryt  wyth  Spryt,  for  they  be  of  kynde ;
Whych  after  they  bc  exalted  makc  to  dyflend,

And  foc  thou  fhalt  devyHe  that  nature  before  dyd  bynde,
Mcrcury  effencyall  turnyng  into  wynde  .•

Wythout  whych  naturali  and  fubtyll  Seperacyo»,
May  never  bc  compleat  profytable  Gcneracyon.

14,  Now  to  help  thec  in  at  thys  Gate,

The  laft  Secret  I wyll  teli  to  thee  *,

Thy  Water  muft  be  feven  tymes  Sublymate,

Elis  fhall  no  kyndly  Dyflolucyon  bc.

Nor  Putryfyyng  fliall  thou  none  fee,

Likc  lyquyd  pyteh  nor  colours  apperyng.

For  lack  of  fyre  wythin  thy  Glaffc  workyng.

15,  Fower  Fycrs  therc  be  whych you  muft  underftond
Naturali,  Innaturall,  againft  Nature,  alfoe
Elcmcntall  whych  doth  bren  the  brond  ;

Thefe  fourc  Fyres  ufe  we  and  no  mo:

Fyre  againft  Nature  muft  doc  thy  bodyes  WO5
That  ys  our  Dragen  as  I thee  teli,

Ferfcly  brcnnyng  as  Fyre  of  Hell,


Fyr


'4-3


Of  Separatiori.

Fyre  of  Nature  ys  thc  thyrd  McnftrualI,

That  fyrc  ys  naturally  in  evcry  thyng  •

But  fyre  occafionat  we  call  Innaturall,

And  hetc  of  Askys  and  balnys  for  putrefying  :
Wythout  thefe  fyres  thou  may  not  bryng
To  Putrefaccyon  for  to  bc  feperar,

Thy  matters  togcathcr  proportyonat.

l'  Therefore  make  fyre  thy  Glafle  wythin,

Whych  brcnnyth  the  Bodycs  raorc  then  fyre

Elcmcntall  * yf  thou  wyh  wyn

Our  Secrct  accordyng  to  thy  delire,

Then  fhall  thy  fceds  both  roote  andfpyre,

By  help  of  fyrc  Occafionate,

That  kyndly  aftcr  they  may  bc  feperar.

I!1

Of  Seperacyo»  the  Gate  muft  thus  be  wone,

That  furthermore  yet  thou  may  procede,

Toward  thc  Gate  of  fccrct  Conjunctio»,

Into  thc  Caftle  whych  wyll  the  Inner  leade.

Do  aftcr  my  Councell  therefore  yf  thou  wylt  fpedej
Wyth  two  ftrong  locks  thys  Gate  ys  ihyt,

As  confequcntly  now  thou  fhalt  vvyt.


The  end  of  the  third  Gate..


i


i44


Of  Conjunction.


<Thefourtb  C ~fate .

1.  A Fter  the  Chaptcr  of  naturali  Separatiori

By  which  the  Elcments  of  our  Stone  dyflcveryd  bf
The  Chapterhere  follovvythof  fecrec  Conjunction *
Whych  natures  repugnant  joyneth  to  perfyt  Unyte,
Ane  fo  theift  knyttythchat  none  from  othermayflc
Whan  they  by  Fyre  fhall  be  examynate,

Soc  be  they  together  furely  conjugate.

2.  And  therfore  Pbylcfophcrs  geveth  thys  deffynycyon,
Seyng  thus  Conjunction  ys  nought  ells

But  of  dyflevetyd  qualytcs  a Copulacyon $

Or  of  Pryncypylls  a cocquacyon  as  other  telis,

But  fome  wyth  Mercury  whych  the  Potecarys  felis,
Medleth  Bodyes  whych  cannot  dy vyde
Ther  matter,  and  therefore  they  ftep  afyde.

3.  For  unto  tyme  the  Sowlc  be  Separate
And  clenfyd  from  hys  orygynall  Syn
Wyth  the  Water  and  purely  fpyrytuallyzatc :

Thy  trew  Conjunction  may  thou  never  begyn,
Therfore  the  Soule  fyift  fro  the  Body  twyn/

Then  of  the  corporali  parte  and  of  the  fpyrytuall,
The  Soule  Conjunctio n fhall  caufc  perpetuali.

Of


Of  ConjunBion.

Of  two  Conjunccio»s  Phjlefophert  don  mentyon  mafce,
Groce  vvhen  the  Body  with  Mercury  ys  rcincendat,

But  let  hyt  pafle,and  to  thc  fecond  tent  thou  takc,

Which  as  I fayd  ys  after  Separacicn  celebrat :

In  whych  the  partys  be  left  whych  left  fo  collygate ;

And  fo  promotyd  unto  moft  perfyr  temperance,
Then  never  after  may  be  among  them  Repugnancc-.

, Thus  caufyth  Separacien  trew  Con\unccion  to  be  had
Of  Water,  Ayrc,  Earth  and  Fyre,

But  that  every  Eiement  may  into  other  be  lad.

And  fo  abyde  for  ever  to  thy  delyre  ^

Do  as  done  Laborours  with  Clay  and  Mycr,

Tempcr  them  thyke,and  make  them  notto  thyn.
For  fo  to  up  drying  thou  Ihalt  the  rather  wyn.

r y But  manners  therebe  ofthys  Cenjnnccion  three,

The  fyrft  ys  callyd  by  Phjlofophers  Dyptative,
Betwyxt  tne  Agent  and  thc  Patyent  which  muft  be
Male  and  Female,  Mercury  and  Sulphure  vive ;

Matter  and  forme,  thyn  and  thyke  to  thry  ve.

Thys  leflon  wyll  helpe  thee  wythout  any  dowtc,
Our  Con\uncci9n  trewly  to  bryng  about.

The  fecond  manner  ys  cailed  Tryptativc,

Whych  ys  Con\unccion  made  of  thyngs  three,

Of  Body,  Sowlc,  and  Spyrit  tyll  they  not  ftiy ve,
Whych  Trynite  muft  be  brought  to  perfyt  unyte.

For  as  thc  Sowle  to  the  Spyrit  the  bond  muft  be ;
Ryght  to  the  Body  tne  Sowle  to  hymmuftknyt,
Out  of  thy  mynde  let  not  thys  lelfon  flyt.

X


The


Of  ConjunUion

The  thyrd  manncr  and  alfo  thc  laft  of  ali,

Fowre  Elemcnts  togethcr  whych  joynyth  to  abyde,
Tetraptative  content-ly  Phylefopbers  doth  hyt  call,

And  fpccyally  Guydo  de  Montayno  whofe  fame  goyth
And  therfore  the  moft  laudable  manncr  thys  tyde,<  wyde*,
In  our  Conjunccion  four  Elemcnts  muft  be  aggregat
In  dew  propordon  fyrft  whych  afonder  wcre  feparat,

Thcreforelykeasthe  Woman  hath  Vaynes  fyftcene,,
The  Man  but  five  to  the  a&  of  hcr  fccundyte,
Requyryth  in  our  Cenjunccio n fyrft  I mene,

So  muft  the  Man  our  Sun  have  of  hys  water  three ;
And  (nine)  hys  Wyfe,  whych  three  to  hym  muft  bc  :
Thcn  lyke  whych  lykc  wyll  joy  have  for  to  dwell,
More  of  Conjunccion  me  nedyth  not  to  teli.

Thys  Chapter  I will  conclude  right  fone  therefore,
Groce  Conjunccion  chargyng  the  to  make  but  one.

For  feldome  have  Strumpctts  Chyldren  of  them  I bore.
And  fo  thou  fhalt  never  cum  by  our  Stone,

Wythout  you  fuffer  the  Woman  to  lygg  alontj
That  after  fhe  hath  conceyvcd  of  the  Man,

The  Matrycc  of  her  be  Ihyt  from  ali  other  than.

For  fuch  as  addyth  evermore  crude  to  crude,
Openyng  theyr  velfells,  and  lettyhg  ther  matter  kele :
The  fperme  concevyd  they  noryfli  nor,  but  delude
Themfelfes,  and  fpyllyth  ther  Work  every  dclc5
If  thou  therefore  lyft  for  to  do  well,

.'i  Clofe up thc Matryce and noryfh the feed,  (fpede.
Wyth  heat  contynuall  and  temperate  if  thbu  wilt

And


Of  QonjmBion.  14.7

1.  And  whan  thy  VcfTIc  hath  ftondby  Monythsfive,

And  Clowds  andSClypfys  bc  paffed  cch  one*

That  lyght  appcrcn  increafe  thy  hete  thenblyve,

Tyll  bryght  and  fliyneing  in  Whycnefte  bc  thy  Stone ,

Then  may  thou  opyn  thy  Glafle  anonc.

And  fede  thy  Chyld  whych  ys  then  yborc
Wyth  mylkc  and  mete  ay  more  and  more.

For  now  both  moyft  and  dry  be  fo  contemperate,

That  of  the  Water  erth  hath  rccevyd  impreflyon  *

Whych  never  aflunder  after  that  may  be  feperate.

And  ryght  foe  Water  to  Erth  hath  given  ingreflyon,

That  both  together  to  dvvell  hath  made  profeflyon:.

And  Water  of  Erth  hath  purchafyd  rctentive,

They  fower  be  made  one  never  more  to  ftrive.

H ^

b And  in  two  thyngs  all  our  entent  doth  hing,

In  dry  and  moyft  whych  be  contraryous  two ;

In  dry  that  hyt  the  moyft  to  fyxing  bryng,

In  moyft  that  hyt  geve  lyquyfaccion  the  Erth  unto,

That  of  them  thus  contemperate  may  forth  go
A temperament  not  fo  thyk  as  the  Body  ys,

Nother  fo  thyn  as  Water  wychout  mys.

1 • Lofyng  and  knyttyng  thereforc  be  Princypalis  two
Of  thys  hard  Scyence,  and  Poles  moft  pryncypall  5
How  be  hyt  that  other  pryncyples  be  many  mo.

As  ihyneyng  fauclis  whych  ihew  I ihall:

Proceed  therefore  unto  another  wall

Of  thys  ftrong  Caftlc  of  our  wyfdome,

That  Inner  at  the  Fyft  Cate  thou  may  come.

X 2 of


1


148


Of  Putrefaction.


The  fift  Cjate.

l*  ^TOvv  begynnyth  the  Chaptcr  of  P utref accio»,

-LN  Wythout  whych  Pole  no  fede  may  multyply,
Whych  muft  be  done  only  by  contynuall  accyotT
Of  hete  in  the  body,  moyft,  not  manually,

For  Bodies  ells  may  not  be  alterat  naturally : t Whcte

Syth  Chryft  do  it  wytnes,  wythowt  the  grayne  of
Dye  in  the  ground,  encrcfe  may  thou  not  gete.

2*  And  in  Iykewyfe  wythout  thy  Matterdo  Putrefye,
It  may  in  no  wyfe  trevvly  be  alterate,

Nor  thyne  Elcments  may  be  devydcd  kyndly;

Nor  thy  Con\mccion  of  them  pcrfytly  celebrat :

That  thy  labor  therfore  be  not  fruftrate,

The  prcvyte  of  Putrefjing  well  undcrftofid,
Orever  thou  take  thys  Warkc  in  hond.


3.  And  PtttrtfaccyM  may  thus  defyned  be,

After  Phylofophers  fayings  itys  of  Bodyes  the  fleyng,.
And  in  our  Compound  a dyvyfyon  of  thyngs  thre,
The  kyllyng  Bodyes  into  corrupcyon  fortn  ledyng,
And  after  unto  Regeneratyon  them  ablyng  r
For  thyngs  beyng  in  Erth  wythowt  dowte
Be  engendryd  of  rotacyon  of  the  Hevyns  aboutc.

And


OfTutrefaBion.

And  therfore  as  I have  feyd  aforc
Theyn  Elcmcnts  comyxt  and  wyfely  coequat,

Thou  keepe  intctnperat  heate,  efchuyng  evermore,
That  they  by  violent  bete  bc  never  incyneratj
To  powdcr  dry  unprofytably  Rubyfycate,

But  into  powder  blacke  as  a Crowes  byll
Wyth  hete  of  Balne,  or  ells  of  our  Dounghyll.

To  tyme  that  Nyghts  be  paft  nynty,_

In  moyft  hete  kepe  them  fro  eny  thyng ;

Sone  after  by  blacknes  thow  fhalt  efpy
That  they  draw  faft  to  putrcfying,

Whych  thow  fhalt  after  many  colers.bryng
To  perfyt  Why tenes  wyth  Pacyencc  cfyly.

And  fo  thy  fede  in  hys  nature  fliall  multeply.

Make  ech  on  other  to  hawfc  and  kyffc.

And  lyke  as  Chyldren  to  play  them  up  and  downe3
And  when  ther  flierts  be  fylyd  wyth  pyfTc,

Then  Iat  the  Woman  to  wafli  be  bound,

Whych  oftyn  for  fayntncs  wyll  fa!l  in  a found :

And  dye  at  the  laft  wyth  her  Chyldren  all.

And  go  to  Purgatory  to  purg  ther  fylth  orygynall.

When  thcybc  therc,  by  lyttyll  and  lyttyll  encrefe
Ther  paynys  by  hete  ay  more  and  more,

The  Fyrc  from  them  lat  never  cefe :

And  fc  thy  Fornace  be  apt  therfore,

Whych  wyfe  men  do  call  Athtnor  :

Confervyng  hete  requyryd  moft  temperately,

By  whych  the  Water  dotlrkyndly  putrefy.

X 3 Of


I+P


Of  TutrefaBion,

Of  thys  Pryncypufl  fpekyth  Sapyent  Guydo,

And  fey  th  by  rottyng  dycth  thc  Compouna  corporali,
And  then  after  Moryen  and  other  mo ,

Upryfyth  agayne  Regenerat,  Sympill,and  Spyrytuall,
And  were  noc  hete  and  moyfture  contynuall,

Sperme  in  the  wombe  myght  have  noty  abydyng,
And  fo  ther  Ihold  therof  no  frute  upfpryng.

Therfore  at  the  begynnyng  onr  Stonys  thou  rake,
And  bery  ech  on  wyth  other  wythin  ther  Grave  5
Then  equally  a Marryage  betwyxt  them  makc
To  ly  together  fix  wekys*,  then  lat  them  have
Ther  fede  confevyd  kyndly  to  noryfh  and  fave  5
From  thegrqund  of  ther  grave  not  ryfyng  that  while,
Whych  fecret  poynt  doth  many  on  begyle.

Thys  tyme  of  Conceptyon  wyth  efyc  hete  abyde,
The  Blacknes  Ihowing  Ihall  teli  the  when  they  dye;
For  they  together  lykc  lyquyd  Pychc  that  tyde,

Shall  fwell  and  burbyll,  fetyll,  and  Putrefit,

Shyning  Colors  therin  thou  fhalt  efpye :

Lykc  to  the  Raynbovv  mervelofe  unto  lyght,
The  Water  then  begynnyth  to  dry  upryght.

For  in  moyft  Bodys  hete  noryfhyng  temperate,
Ingcndryth  Blacknes  fyrft  of  ali  whicfTys
Of  kyndly  Commyxyon  to  the  tokyn  alTygnate}
And  of  trew  Putrefiittg,  remember  thys,

For  then  to  alter  perfy tly  thou  may  not  myfle  5
And  thus  by  the  Gatc  of  Blacknes  thou  muft  cum  ir
Tolyght  of  Paradyce  in  Whytencs  yf  thou  vvylt  wyn.

Foi


Of  cPutrefa(tHon .

For  fyrft  thc  Son  in  hys  upryfyng  obfcuratc
Shalbc,  and  paffc  the  Watcrs  of  Noyes  fl-ud
On  Erth,  whych  were  a hundred  daycs  contynuate
lAnd  fyfiy,  away  or  allthys  Watcrs  yode}

Ryght  fo  ourWaters  as  wyfc  men  underftode
Shall  paffc,  that  thou  wyth  Davyd  may  fay
Abierunt  in  ficco  flumina : barc  thys  away.

31  Sone  after  that  Nce  plantyd  hys  Vyncyard,

Whych  really  floryfhed  and  brought  forth  Graps  anon :
After  whych  fpace  thou  fhalt  not  be  aferd  *

For  in  Iykewyfe  fhali  follow  thc  floryfhyng  of  our  Stone:
And  fonc  uppon  that  thyrty  dayes  overgone ,

Thou  fhalt  have  Graps  ryght  as  thc  Rubyred,
Whych  ys  our  Adrop,  our  Ulyfer  ted  and  our  Lede.

4.  For  Iyke  as  Sowles  after  paynys  tranfytory
Be  brought  into  paradycc  wherc  ever  ys  yoyfull  lyfc  5
So  fhall  our  Stone  after  hys  darknes  in  Purgatory
Be  purgcd  and  joynyd  in  Elcments  wythoutc  ftryfe,
Rcjoyfc  the  why tenes  and  bewty  of  hys  wyfe:

And  paffe  fro  the  darknes  of  Purgatory  to  Iyght
Of  paradycc,  in  Whytncs  Elyxer  of  gret  myght. .

5 And  that  thou  may  the  rather  to  Putrefaccyon  wyn
Thys  Exampull  thou  takc  to  thc  fora  trevv  conclufyon.
For  all  thc  fccrett  of  Putrefaccyon  reftyth  thcrcin  5
The  heartofOke  that  hath  of  Water  contynuall  infufyon
Wyll  not  foneputrefy,  I tdl  the  wythout  delufyon:

For  though  yt  in  Water  ly  a hundred  yeres  and  more,

■ Yct  fliold  thou  fynd  it  found  as  ever  it  was  aforc.

But


i$i  Of  TutrefaBlon .

1 6 . But  and  thou  kepe  hyt  fomtymc  wcte,&  fometyme  dry,

As  thow  many  fe  in  Tymbcr  by  ufuall  experyment,
By  profles  of  tyme  chat  Oke  fhall  utterly  Putrefy:
And  foe  in  lykevvyfe  accordyng  to  our  entent,
Somecymc  our  Tre  muft  wyth  thc  Son  be  brcnt :
r. 7—  And  thcn  wyth  Water  fone  aftcr  we  muft  hyt  kelc,
That  by  thys  mcnes  thou  fhalt  to  rottyng  bryng  hyt

(Avcle

17*  For  nowc  in  wcte  and  nowc  agayne  in  dry,

Now  in  grctc  hot  and  now  agayne  in  cold
To  be,  fhall  caufe  yt  fonc  for  to  putrefy:

And  fo  fhalt  thow  bryng  to  rottyng  thy  Gold,
Entrcte  thy  Bodys  therforc  as  1 have  thee  told :

And  in  thy  Putrefying  wyth  hete  be  not  fo  fwyft,
Left  in  the  Askys  thou  feke  after  thy  thryft,

18.  Therforc  thy  Water  out  of  the  Erth  thow  dravv,
And  makc  the  foule  thcrwyth  for  to  aflend  5
Then  downe  agayne  into  thc  Erth  hyt  throvv,

That  they  oft  tymes  fo  aflend  and  deflend,

From  vyolent  hete  and  fodayne  cold  defend
Thy  Glaflc,  and  makc  thy  fyre  fo  temperat,

That  by  the  fydys  thy  Water  be  never  vytryfycate.

19.  And  be  thou  wyfe  in  chcfing  of  thy  Water,
Medyll  with  no  Salt,  Sulphure,  nor  mene  Minerali,
For  whatfocvcr  any  Water  to  thc  do  clatter?

Our  Sulphure  and  Mercury  be  only  in  Mettall,

Which  Oylys  and  Waters  fom  men  call:

Fowlys,  and  Byrds  wyth  other  namys  many  one,
Bccaufe  that  folys  fliold  never  know  our  Stone.

For


OfTutrefaUion.

For  of  thys  World  our  Stone  ys  callyd  the  fement,
Whych  mcvyd  by  craft  as  Nature  doth  requyre ;

In  hys  cncrefe  fhall  bc  full  opulent ,

And  multeply  hys  kynd  of  thyne  owne  defyrc:
Therfore  yf  God  vouchfafc  thee  to  enfpyre
To.know  the  trewth,and  fancies  to  cfchew,

Lykc  unto  the  fhalbe  in  ryches  but  few.
i

But  many  be  mevyd  to  worke  after  ther  fantafy
In  many  fubje&s  in  whych  be  Tyndtors  gay,

Both  Whyre  and  Red,  devydyd  manually  --
To  fyght,  but  in  the  Fyre  they  fle  avvay,

Such  brckyth  Potts  and  Glaflys  day  by  day:
Enpoyfonyng  themfelfs,  and  lofyng  of theyr  fyghts
Wyth  Odors  and  fmoks  and  wakeyng  up  by  nyghts.

Their  Clothes  be  bawdy  and  woryn  threde-bare,
Mcn  may  them  fmell  for  Multyplyers  where  they  go ;
To  fyle  theyr  fyngers  wythCorrofy  vcs  they  do  not  fpare
Theyr  Eyes  be  bleryd,&  theyr  Chekys  both  lene  & bloe:
And  thus  for  ( had  I tvytf)  they  fuffer  loflean  d Wo;
Such  when  they  have  loft  thatwasin  theyr  purfe,
Then  do  they  chyd  and  Phylofophers  fore  accurfe.

For  all  the  whylc  that  they  have  Phylofophers  ben,
Yet  cowde  they  never  know  our  Stone  *

Som  fought  in  Soote,  Dung,  Uryne,  fom  in  Wyne :
Som  in  Sterr  flyme,  for  thyng  yt  ys  but  one  5
In  Blood,  Eggs  •,  Som  tyil  theyr  thryft  was  gone :
Devydyng  Elements,  and  brekyng  many  a potr,
Multyplying  the  iherds,but  yet  they  hyt  yt  not.

Y To


Of  TutrefaUion,

24>  To  fe  theyr  Howfys  it  ys  a noble  fporr,

v/hat  Fornaces,  what  Glaflysthcrc  beofdivers  fliapej
What  Salts,  what  Powders,what  Oyles,and  waters  fort,
How  cloqucntly,  de  materia  prima  thcy  clape,

And  yet  to  fynde  the  trewth  they  have  no  hap  .*

Of  our  Mercury  thcy  medie  and  of  our  Sulphur  vyve,
Wherein  they  dote,  and  more  and  more  unthryve.

25.  They  takc  of  the  Red  Man  and  hys  whyte  Wyfe,
That  ys  a fpcciall  thyng  and  of  Elixers  two,

Of  the  %ui»tef[ence  and  of  the  Elixers  of  lyfc,

Of  Hony,  Cclydony,  and  of  Sccundyns  alfo,

Thefc  they  devydc  into  Elements  wyth  other  mo ;
fclo  Multeplycrs  but  Phylofophcrs  callyd  wyll  they  bc,
Y/hych  naturali  Phyloiophyc  dydnever  rede  nor  fec.

26.  Thys  felyflbyp  knpwyth  our  Stone  ryght  welc,
They  thynke  them  rychcr  then  ys  the  Kyng\

Thcy  wylf  hym  helpe,  he  fliall  not  fayle
Fraunce  for  to  wyn,  a wonders  thyng ;

The  bolj  Crejfe  home  wyll  thcy  bryng:

And  yf  thq  Kittg  wcre  pryfoner  I.  take>

Aponi  hys  Raunfome  would  they  makc.


27,  A racr.vell  yt.  ys  that  Wefimmjler  Ghurch,
To  whych  thefe  Pbjlofcphers  do  haunte  j
Syth  thcy  fp  much  rychcs  can  woorche.

As  they  njakc  bofte  of  and  avaunte,
Drynkyng  dayly  the  wyne  a duc  taunte,

Ys  not  made  up  perfytly  at  ons,

For  truly  hyc  lackyth  yet  many  Stonys.


Folys


Of  TutrefaBwn.

x8  Folys  doe  folow  thcm  at  the  taylc,

Promoryd  to  rychcs  wcnyng  to  be ;

. But  wyll  yc  here  what  worfhyp  and  avaylc,

They  wyn  in  Lendon  that  nobyll  cytc,

Wyth  Sylver  Macys  as  ye  may  fe:

Sarjaunts  awayting  on  thcm  every  owre,

So  be  they  men  of  great  honour.

:S  Sarjaunts  fekyth  them  fro  Stretc  to  Stretc,

Marchaunts  and  Goldfmy ths  leyeth  after  them  watch *
That  wcllys  hc  that  wyth  thcm  do  mete.

For  the  great  advantage  that  they  doe  cachc,

They  hunt  about  as  doth  a Rache  :

Wcnyng  to  wyn  fo  grete  trefure,

That  ever  in  ryches  they  ihall  endure.

S'  m wold  cachc  theyr  goods  agayne»

And  forne  more  good  vvould  aventure  5
Som  for  to  have  wold  be  full  fayne,

Of  Tcn  pound  one  Iyou  enfuer:

Som  whych  hath  lent  wythout  mefure

Theyr  goods,  and  be  with  powerce  beftad,’

To  cacne  a Nubyll  wold  be  full  glad*

!i  But  when  the  Sarjaunts  do  them  areft,

Ther  Paukcners  be  ftuffed  wyth  Parrys  balls ;

Or  wyth  Sygnctts  of  Seynt  Martynes  at  the  lcff,

But  as  for  Mony  yt  ys  pyflyd  on  the  walls:

Then  be  they  led  as  well  for  them  befalls
To  Nervgate  or  Ludgutt  as  l you  teli,

Bccaufc  they  fhall  in  fafegard  dwcll.
i Y 2


Whcrc


1 5 6 OfTutrefaBion ,

32.  Where  ys  my  Mony  bccom  feyth  onc.

And  where  ys  myne  leyth  he  and  he  ?

But  wyll  yc  here  how  futtell  they  be  anon,

In  anfweryng,  that  they  cxcufed  may  be,

Saying,  Of  our  Elyxers  robbyd  we  be  :

Elis  myght  we  have  payd  you  all  your  Gold,
Yf  yt  had  been  more  by  ten  folde.

33*  And  then  theyer  Creditors  they  begyn  to  flattery
Promyfyng  to  worke  for  them  agayne  5
The  Elyxers  two  in  fliort  fpace  after,

Dotyng  the  Merchaunts  that  they  be  fayne'

To  let  them  go,  butever  in  vayne:

They  worke  fo  long,  tyll  at  the  la£t
They  be  agayne  in  Pryfon  caft.

34.  Yf  any  then  aske  them  why  they  be  not  ryche,
They  fey  they  make  fyne  Gold  of  Tynn5

But  he  they  fey  may  furely  fwym  in  dyche,

Whych  ys  upholden  by  the  chyn,

We  have  no  ftock,  thereforc  may  we  nought  wyn :
Whych  yf  we  had  we  wold  fome  worche,

I ndvv.  to  fynyfli  up  Wejlmynfter  Churche<,-

35.  And  fome  of  them  be  fo  Devowte,

They  wyll  not  dvvell  out  of  that  place  ^

For  there  they  may  wythowten  dowte,.

Do  what  them  lyft  to  their  Solace,

The  Anhedeacon  ys  fo  full  of  grace:

Yf  that  they  pleafe  hym  wyth  the  Crofle,

Hc  forfyth  lyttyll  of  other  menys  lofle.

. > And


Of  Tutrefattion.


\6


And  when  they  there  fyt  at  the  vvyne,

Thefe  Monkys  thcy  fcy  have  many  a pound,
Woldc  God  (feyth  one)  that  fom  were  myne$  i
Hay  hoe,  carcaway,  lat  the  cupgo  rounde
Drynk  on, -feyth  another,  the  mene  ys  founde:

I am  a Mafter  of  that  Arte,

I warrant  us  we  fhall  have  parte.


1 n


7 Such  caufyth  the  Monkys  then  evyll  to  don,
To  waft  thcr  Wagys  thorovv  theyr  dotage  •

Som  bryngeth  a Mazer  and  fom  a Spone;
There  Phylejophers  gcvyth  thcm  fuch  coragc,
Bchotyng  thcm  wynnyng  vvythout  damage:

A pound  for  a pcny  at  the  left  agayne,
And  fo  fayre  promys  makyth  folys  fayne.


8.  A ryall  Medycyne  one  upon  tvvelve  f -V'
They  promys  thcm  thcreof  to  have,  r„  .

Whych  they  could  never  for  themfelfe
Vet  bryng  abowte,  To  God  me  fave  :>

Beware  fuch  Phylofophers,  no  man  deprave :

Whych  helpyth  these  Monkys  to  rychesfo,.
Wyth  thread-bare  Cotvlys  that  they  do  go<


u The  Abb&t  weU  otight  to  cheryfh  rhys  Company,
For  they  can  tech  hys  Monkys  to  leve  inpovertc,

And  to  go  clocnyd  and  monyed  relygyoufly ,

As  dyd  Seynt  Bcm , efchuyng  fuperfluyte,

Efyng  them  alfo  of  the  ponderofyte

Of  theyr  purfys,  wyth  pounds  fo  aggravate,.
Whych  by  Pbyicfopby  bc  now  allevyat.

T 3 Lo


I


.58


Of  TutrefaBion.


40  Lo  who  fo  medlyth  wyth  thys  rych  Company,
Grct  boft  oF  ther  wynnyng  may  they  make.

For  they  ihall  havc  as  much  by  ther  Phylefophy,

As  thcy  of.the  cayle  of  ari  Ape  can  take*

Bcware  thcrFore  for  Jcfus  fake :

And  racdyll  wyth  nothyng  of  grct  coft.

For  and  thou  do,  yt  ys  but  loft.

41.  Thcfe  Phylofophers  (of  whych  I fpake  aforej
Mcdlyth  and  blondryth  wyth  many  athyng,
Rcnuyng  in  errors  more  and  more.

For  lac  of  trew  undcrftandyng,

But  lyke  muft  lyke  alway  fenh  bryng :

So  God  hath  ordeyncd  in  every  kynde,

Wold  Jefus  thcy  wold  thys  bere  in  mynde.

42.  Wene  thcy  of  a Ncttyll  to  havc  a Rofc
Or  of  an  Eldcr  an  Apple  fwete.

Alas  that  vvyfc  men  ther  goods  Ihold  lofe:

Truftyng  fuchLo  clls  when  they  them  mete,

Whych  fcyth  our  Stenc  ys  trodyn  under  fete  .*

And  makyth  them  therfore  vyle  thyngsfor  toftyll
Tyll  at  theyr  howfys  wyth  ftenchthey  fyll.

43.  Som  of  them  never  lernyd  a tvord  in  Scolys,

Such  thynk  by  reafon  to  underftond  Phylofopbj  :

Be  thcy  Phyloftphers  i nay,  they  be  folys :

Therfore  ther  Waikes  provyth  unwytty ;

Mcdyll  not  wyth  them  yf  thou  be  happy :


Spend


Of  TutrefaBion.

, Spcnd  not  thy  Mony  away  in  tvafte,

i Gcvc  not  to  cvery  fpeche  creaencc  5
But  fyrft  examyn,  grope  and  tafte  j
And  as  thou  provyft,  fo  put  thy  confydcnce.

And  cvcr  bcware  of  grete  cxpcncc  1

But  yf  thy  Phylofopher  ly  ve  vertuofcly,

Truft  the  bettcr  to  hys  Pbjlefophy.

4 Prove  hym  fyrft  and  hym  oppofc
Of  ali  the  Sccrctts  of  our  Stone,

Whych  yf  he  know  not  thou  nedyth  not  to  lofc  j
Medyll  thou  not  ferther,  but  let  hym  gone,.

Make  he  never  fo  pytyofc  a mone :

For  than  the  Fox  can  fagg  and  fayne
When  he  wold  faynyft  hys  prey  attayne.

’•  Yf  he  can  anfwer  as  oughta  Clarke,

How  be  hyt  he  hath  not  pravyd  indede  5
And  yf  thou  wylt  helpe  hym  to  hys  Warke,

Yf  he  be  vertuofe  I hold  hyt  mede.

For  he  wyll  the  quyte  yf  evcr  he  fpede:

And  thou  fhalt  wcete  by:  a lytyll  anon
Yf  he  ha  ve  knowledge  of  our  Sterte.

J • One  thyng,  one  Glaffe,  onc  Furnace  and  no  mo,
3ehold  thys  pryncypyll  yf  he  take,

\nd  yf  he  do  not,  then  lac  hym  go ;

?or  he  lhall  never  tKee  rych  man  make:

Frcwly  yt  y$  bettcr  thou  hym  forfake,

Then>  after  wytlr  lofie  and  varyauncc.

And  other  manner  of  dyfplcfauncc.

But


'19


Of  TutrefaBion.

But  and  God  fortune  the  for  to  havc
Thys  Scyence  by  do&rine  whych  I have  told;
Dyfcover  yt  not  whocverthee  cravc,  / • . , ;;
For  Favor,  Fere,  Sylver,  nor  Gold : , ,

Bc  none  Opprefifor,  Lecher,  nor  bofter  bold  5
Serve  thy  God,  and  helpe  thepowre  among,
Yf  thou  thys  lyfe  jyft  to  continew  Iong.

4 p.  Unto  thy  felfe  thy  fecretts  kepe

From  fynners  whych  hath  not  God  in  dred  5
But  vvyll  the  caft  in  Pryfon  depe,

Tyll  thou  thera  tech  to  do.  hyt  in  dede,

Then  flander  on  the  fholde  fpryng  and  fprcde,
That  thou  dyd  coyne  then  wold  thcy  fey}
And  fo  undo  the  for  ever  and  aye.

50.  And  yf  thou ; teche  them  thys  conyng,

Their  fynfull  levyng  for  to  mayntayne  j
In  Hell  thcrfore  rnyght  be  thy  wonnyng.

For  God  of  the  then  would  difdayne.

As  thow  nought  cowd  for  thy  felfe  fayne:

That  Body  and  Soule  you  may  bothe  fave.
And  here  in  pece  thy  levyng  have.

51,  Now  in  thys  Chapter  I have  the  tought,

How  thou  the  bodys  muft  Putrefy :

And  fo  to  guide  the  thou  be  not  cawght.

And  put  in  duraunce,  lolfe,  andvylanye:

My  do&ryne  thcrefore  rcmember  wyttyly.

And  pafTe  forth  toward  the  Syxth  Gate,

For  thys  the  Fyftbe  ys  tryumphate.


l60

48.


l6t


OfCongelation.

‘ Thefixt  Cjate .

) /~\F  Congel/tcfon  I nedc  not  much  towryte,

But  what  yt  ys  now  I wyllfyrft  dedare  :

It  ys  of  foft  thyngs  Induracyon  of  Colour  Whytc,
And  confyxacyon  of  Spyrits  whych  fleyng  arc :

How  to  congelc  thcc  ncdyth  not  much  to  carc  *

For  Elements  wyll  knyt  together  fone,

So  that  Putreftccyon  bc  kyndly  donc.

i But  Congelacyons  be  made  in  dyvcrs  wyfir.

And  Spyryts  and  Bodys  dyflolvyd  to  water  clere,
Of  Salts  alfo  dyflolvyd  ons  or  twyfe.

And  then  to  congelc  in  afluxyble  Mater;

Of  fuch  Congelyng  folys  do  clatter  :

And  fome  ay fsolvyth  devydyng  manually
Elements,  them  afccr  congelyng  to  powdcrdry.

’ But  fuch  Congelyng  ys  not  to  our  dcfyrc :

For  unto  owcrs  yt  ys  contraryofe.

Our  Congthcion  drcdyth  not  thc  fire  :

For  yt  muft  ever  ftond  in  yt  un&uos,1
And  alfo  in  hys  Tin&urc  be  full  bounteous,

Whych  in  thc  Ayre  congelyd  wyll  not  relcnt
To  Water,  for  then  our  Worke  were  ftient.

Z Morcover


Of  (fongelation.

4.  Moreover  Congele  not  into  fo  hara  a Stene
As  Glafle  or  Cryftall  vvhych  meltyth  by  fufyon;

Bur  .fo  that  hyt  lyke  wax  wyll  mek  anon
Wythouten  blaft : and  beware  of  Delufyon  5
For  fuch  Ccngelyng  1'ongyth  not  toour  Conclufyon
As  wyll  not  flow  and  ren  to  water  agen,

Lyke  Saks  congelyd,  thenlaboryft  thou  in  vayne.

S . '

5*  Whych  Congducyon  avaylyth  us  never  a dell,"'  >
Hyt  longythtoMultyplyers  whych  Congele  vulgatly;
Ykthow  thcrcforc  lyft  to  do  vvell,  . , . r j

(Syth  thy  Medcyne  Ihall  never  flow  kyndly,  ( ) .
Nether  C^ongelcr  wythout  chow  fyrft  yt  Putrefye)  ;
Fyrft  Purge  and  Fyx  the  Elements  of  our  Stotie,
Tyll  they  together  Congele  and  flow  anone.

6.  For  when  the  Matter  ys  made  parfyt  Whyte,  \
Thenkyyfl  thy  Spryte  wyth  thcBody  Congelyd  bc$
But  of  thattyme  thou  muft  have  long  refpytc,

Yer  yt  appere  Congelyd  lyke;  Pearles  unto  the ,

Such  CongeUcyon  bc-glad,  fpr  to  fee  5

And  aftcr  lyke  graynys  red  as  blod,  . : ,

Rychyr  then  any  worldly  good.

,

7.  The  erthly  Grofnes  thereforc  fyrft  mortyfyed

In  Moyftnes,  Blackncsingendtyd  ys%  : ,4

Thys  pryncypell  may  not  be  denyed,  - Yj
For  naturali  Phylofephers  fo  feyth  I wys,

Whych  had,  of  Whytenes  thou  may  not  mys:

And  into  Whytenes  yf  thou  Congele  hyt  ons,
Thou  haft  a Stone  moft  prefyole  of  ali  Stonys.
■v  vrM .Y  And


»


0/  Congelation.

And  by  thc  Dry.Iykc  as  theMoyft  dyd  putrefy,
Why.ch  eaufyd  imcolors -BlackiieS'  td:appcie‘-
Uyght  fo  the  Moyft  Congclyd  by  fhfe  Dry1,'  “ ' '
Ingendryth  Whytenes  fhyneyng  \\ith  myght  fuUdere,
And  Dryncs  procedyth  as  'Whytyththe  matter:-
Lykc  as  m Blaekyng  Moyfture  dothhym  fhow,
By  colorsvaryante  aye  ncw  and  bcvv«.  11  ■ '

The  caufc  ofallthys  ys.Hett  moft  temperate,
Workyngand  mevyng  the  Mater  eontynually  5
And  thereby  a!fo  the  Mater  ys  alterate,  '

Both  invvard  and  outward  fubftancyally,

And  not  to  as  doth  folys  to  fyght  fophyftycally i
But  every  parte  ali  fyrc  for  to  endure,

• Huxybly  fyxe  and  ftabull  in  tyndurd  <

And  Phyfycke  determyneth  of  eche  Dygeftyori,

Fyrft  don  in  the  Stotnack  in  whych  ys  Dryncs,
Caufyng  Whytnes  wythout  queftyon,

Lyke  as  the  iecond  Dygeftyon  caufyth  Redncs,
Complet  in  the  Ly  ver  by  Hete  and  tempefatnes  5
And  fo  ouf  Stone  by  Dryncs  and  by  Hctc,
Dygeftydys  to  Whyte  and  Red  complete.

But  here  thou  ttiuft  another  fecret  knowe,  : 'C,
How  the  Pfajlofcpbers  Chyid  in  the  Ayre  ys  borne  \
Befy  thee  not  to  ^aft  at  the  Cole  to  blowe.

And  takc  that  nether  for  mocknor  skorne,  ■ " 1 * r
But  truft  me  truly  elfe  thy  work  ys  ali  forlorne:
Wythout  thyne  Ettli  \vyth*  Water  revyvycl  be,
Our  trew  Ccngelyng  fhalt  thbn  never  ■lee.'

Z 2


A


Of  Qongdation.

A fovvlc  betwyxt  Hevyn  and  Erth  bcyng,

Aryfyng  fro  the  Erth  as  Ayre  wyth  Water  pure.

And  caufyng  lyfe  in  every  lyvely  thyng,

Inccfiably  runnyng  uppon  our  forefayd  Nature,
Enforfyng  to  better  them  wyth  ali  hys  cure*

Whych  Ayre  ys  the  Fyrc  of  our  Phylofopby ,
Namyd  now  Oyle,  now  Water  myftyly.

And  thus  mene  Ayre,  whych  Oyle,  or  Water we  call,
Our  Fyrc,  our  Oyntmcnt,  our  Spryte,  and  our  Shne ,
In  whych  one  thyng  wc  grownd  our  wyfdomes  ali,
Goytn  nether  out  nor  yn  alone,

Nether  the  Fyer  but  the  Water  anonc*

Fyrft  yt  outeledyth , and  after  bryngyth  yt  yn.

As  Water  vvith  Water  whych  wyll  not  lyghtly  twyn*

And  fo  may  Water  only  our  Water  meve,

Whych  mevyng  caufyth  both  Deth  and  Lyfe,

And  Water  doth  kyndly  to  Water  cleve
Wythout  repugnance , or  any  ftryfe,

Whych  Water  to  Folys  ys  nothyng  ryfe  j
Beyng  of  the  kynd  wythowten  dowte
Of  the  Spryte,  callyd  Water  and  leder  owte.

And  Water  ys  the  fecret  and  lyfe  of  every  thyng.
That  ys  of  fubftance  in  thys  world  y found  •

For  of  the  Water  eche  thyng  hath  begynnyng.

As  Ihowyth  in  Woman  wnen  fhe  Ihallbc  unbound'
By  water  whych  paffyth  afore,  if  ali  be  found,

Callyd  Mbyen t fyrft  from  them  rennyng,

Wyth  grevofe  throwys  afore  ther  chyldyng.

And.


Of  Congelation .

6-  And  truly  that  ys  thc  caufc  pryncypall,

Why  Phjlcfephen  chargyd  us  to  bcpacycnt
Tyll  tymc  the  Watcr  were  dryed  to  powdcr  ali,
Wyth  nurryfhyng  hctc  contynuall  but  not  vyolcnt,
•for  qualytes  be  contrarious  of  every  dement,

Tyll  after  Black  in  Whyte  bc  made  a unyon.
And  then  forcvcr  congelyd  wytho.ut  dyvyiyon.

y And  furthermore  the  preparacion  of  thys  converfyon
Fro  thyng  to  thyng,  fro  one  ftate  to  anothcrj  ^

Ys  done  only  by  kyndly  and  defcretc  operacion
Of  Nature,  as  ys  or  Spermc  wythin  the.Mothcr:

For  Spcrme  and  Hctc  as  Syfter  be  and  Brothcr,
Whych  be  converted  wythin  themfclf  as  Nature  can
By  accion,and  pafTyon,and  at  the  laft  to  parfyt  Man.

^ For  as  thc  bodely  part  byNature  whychys  confumatc
Into  Mari,  ys  fuch  as  the  begynncr  wasprx,  r
Whych  thoughyt  thus  fro  thyng  to  thyng  was  alterat,
Notovvtofkynd  to  menge  withother  kynds  dyd  yt  pasj
And  fo  our  Mater  fpermatycall’  wythin  one  Glas,
Wythin  hyt  felfe  muft  turne  fro  thyng  to  thyng,
By  hetc  moft  temperate  only  hyt  noryiliyng.

, Another  cxamplc  naturali  I may  thee  tellj
How  the  fubftance  of  an  Egg  by  nature  ys  wrought
Into  a Chyk,  not  pafyng  out  of  the  fhcll,vr
A playner  example  covvd  I not  have  thought.

And  there  eonverfionsbe  made  tyll  forth  be  broughc
Fro  ftate  to  ftate  thc  lyke  by  lykc  yn  kynd,

Wyth  nurryihyng  hete : only  bcre  thys  yn  mynd.

Z 3 Another


i 66  Qp  Congelat  ion .

20.  Another*  eXjample  feerc  raay  ypu  alfo  rcdc,

Of  Vcgct^lc  tijyngs  t^yng  ^onryderjcypn;  7
How  ;£yery  ftiapt  grpwy  thoi,  hyf  yyvrt^fede,.

T hpijpvy /tjetc  and  ;fy^qy fture  by  naturali  operacyqn.
And  thercfpieiyiinerailsBe  nurryihyd.by  mynyftracyon;
Of  Moyfture  radycall,vyhych  theyr  begynnyng  vvas,

ope  Glas.


21. no  There,  we  tliem  turne  fro  .thyng  to’ thyng  agaync,

Into  th^r  Modcr  the  Water  when  rhey  goy
Whycb  prynfy|>lcj unkpqy/en  thou  laboureft  in  vaypc:
Then:  yscJl|  $|>prtp$ay3ndfthyng&  the?  be.namp,  q
But  JsyridoWyth  kynd  in  rtumber^twqs  n ; ./.»  •

' ' ■>  Male 'and  Femalc,  Agent  and  Pacyent,

[/“Wythin  the  matryce  of  the  Erth  moft  oryent.-

22.  s:.  And  thefe  .be  tUrnyd  by  Hete  fro  thyng  to  thyng

Wythin  one  Glas;  and  fo  fro  ftate  to  ftate,

Tyll  tyme  .that  Nature  do  them  bryng
Into  one  fubftancc  of  the  Water  regenerate,

And  fo  the  Spelme  \Vythio  hy.skynde  ysaltcrate,
rT  n-  rAoyll  in  lykcncs  by$  ;kynde,for  to  Multcplye,
As  doth  in*kynde  ali,  other.  thyngs  naturaily.


23.  In  the  tyme 'ofalrysifcydeiprocelfe  naturali,  jnf'
W.Hyle  th^t  iheSperme  confevyd  ysgrowyng,  > >'<  i
The  fubftanHeyis  'nurfyilred  vvyth  hys  owne  Menftruall ,
Whych  Warer  only  out  of  the  Erth  dyd  bryng,
Whofe  colbiir  yfc  Greene  in 'the  fyrft  iliovving,  1 /.
And  for  that  tyme  the  Sbn  hydych  hys  lyght,

•f  T&kinghy.s  eourfc  thorow  ome  theNorth  by  hyghr.
^rl;;  nA  ,1'  . The


Of  Qjngalhti otii)  \0

. The  feyd  Menftrue  ys,  ( I fayito.  the  m councdlj
The  blod  ofour  GrencLyon,  and  nQt  of  YytriolJ^
Dame  Venus  can  the  trcwth  of thys  the  tejl.

At  thy  begynnyng  to  connccll  and  yfnhou  her  caJI ;
Thys  fccret  ys  hyd  by  Phylcfephers  grete  and  fmall ;
Whych  blode  draweh  owte  of  the  feyd  LyPn,
For- lac  of  Hete  had  not.pcrfyt  DVgeftyono.,

But  thys  blode  our -fccret  Menftruall,

Whcrewyth  our  Sperme  ys  nurrylhed  temperatly,
When  it  ys  turnyd  into  the  fecys  Corporali,

And  becom  Whyte  perfytly  and  vcfy  Dry,< a;  •
Congelyd  and  Fyxyd  inio  hys^-owne  body  ?i.i  n i r
Then  bruftyn  blod  to  fyght  yr  may  well  feme,
Of  thys  wlrkc  namyd  the  tnylke  whyte  Dyademe.

dnderftonde  now  that  our-  fyery  Water  thus  acuite.
Is  called  our  Menftruall  water,  vchcrein,  A e \ r'?\ 77
Our  Erth  ys  lofyd  and  naturally  Calcenat
By  CongeUcyon  that  they  may  ne  ver  twync : •
YcttoCongele  more  water  thou  naay  npt  blyn  h •
.'-^Into  thre  parts  of  the  acuate  ivatcr?(eydr  afore,

‘ Wyththc4th  part  of  the  Erth  congelyd  :&  no  more.-

Unto  that  fubftance  therefore  fo  congdar,

The  fowcrth  part  put  of  water  Cryftallyn
And  make  them  then  together  to  be  Dyfponfat
By  CongeUcyon  into  a myner  metallyne,

Whych  lyke  a fworde  new  flypyd  then  wyll  fliync,
Aftcr  the  Blackncs  whych  fyrft  wyll  lhowe,

The  fovverth  parte  geve  yt  them  of  water  new.

Mo


i68  i Con^c  & ion.  i

38.  Mo  hibybyfyoHs  many  muft  vve  have  yctt;

Gcvc  yt  thefccond,  andafter  the  thyrd  alfo,

The  feyd  proportyon  kepe  well  in  thy  wyt  5
Then  to  anotncr  the  fowerth  tyme  loke  thou  go,

The  fyfth  tyme  and  the  fyxth,  pafle  not  therc  fro :
But  put  two  parts  at  eche  tyme  of  them  three,
And  at  the  fevcnth  tyme  fyve  parts  lcc  there  bec.

2p,  W hen  thou  haft  made  thus  feven  tymes  Inbjbjcio #,
Ageync  then  muft  thow  turne  thy  Whele,

And  Putrefy  ali  that  Mattcr  wythowte  addycyon:
Fyrft  Blacknefte  abydyng  yf  thow  wylt  do  well,

Then  into  Whytenes  congele  yt  up  eche  dele.

And  by  Redncs  into  the  Sowth  aflend,

Then  naft  thou  brought  thy  Bafe  unto  an  end.

30.  Thus  ys  thy  Water  then  devydyd  in  partyes  two,
Wyth  the  fyrft  party  the  Bodys  be  Putryfycat,

And  to  thync  Inbybytms  the  fecond  part  muft  go,
Wyth  whych  the  Matter  ys  afterwards  Dcnygrat,
And  Cane  uppon  by  efy  Dececcyon  Albyfycatc :

Thenyt  ys  namyd  by  Phjlcfiphers  our  Sterry  Stone ,
Bryng  that  to  Rcdnes,  then  ys  the  fyxth  Gate  woon.


. I


0


i6p


OfC


1 B A T I O N.


The  feventh  (jate.

i*  VTOiv  of  Cibmon  I turnc  my  pen  to  wryte,

Syth  yt  muft  here  the  fcventh  place  occupyc ;
But  in  few  words  yt  wylbc  expedyte,

Takc  tent  therto,  and  undcrftond  me  wyttyly  5
Cibacion  ys  callyd  a fedyng  of  our  Matter  dry

Wyth  Mylke,  and  Mete, whych  moderady  they  do,
Tyll  yt  bc  brought  the  thyrd  order  unto.

i.  But  geve  yt  not  fo  much  that  thou  hyt  glut,
Bewarc  of  the  Dropfy,  and  alfo  of  Noyes  Flood  j
, By  lyttyll  and  lyttyll  therforc  thou  to  hyt  put
Of  Mete  and  Drynkc  as  femyth  to  do  hyt  good,
That  watry  humors  not  overgrow  the  blood :

«i  The  Drynke  therforc  let  hyt  bc  mefuryd  fo,
m That  kyndly  appetyte  thounever  quench  therfro.

For  yf  yt  drynkc  to  much,  then  muft  yt  have
A Vomyte,  clls  wyll  yt  be  fyk  tolong;

^ Fro  the  Dropfy  therfore  thy  Wombe  thou  fave ,
And  fro  the  Flux,  ells  wyll  hyt  be  wrong,

Whych  rather  lat  yt  thyrft  for  drynke  amonge :
Then  thou  Ihold  geve  yt  ovcrmuch  at  ons
Whych  mullin  youth  be  dyattyd  for  the  nons.

A a - And


170  Of  Qibation,

4’  And  yf  thou  dyatt  hyt  (as  Nature  doth  requyre^
Modcratly  tyll  hyt  be  growen  to  age,

Fro  Cold  hyt  kepyng  and  nurrylhyng  wyth  moyft  Fyre;
Than  fliall  yt  grow  and  wax  full  of  corrage,

And  do  to  thec  both  plcfure  and  advauntage :

For  hc  fhall  make  darkc  Bodys  hole  and  bryght,
Clenfyng  theycr  Lcprofenes  thorovv  hys  myght.

j,  Thrc  tymes  thus  muftthou  tume  about  thy  Whele
Abovvte  kepyng  the  rewle  of  the  feyd  Cibacyon,

And  then  as  fone  as  yt  the  Fyre  doth  fele,

Lyke  Wax  yt  wylbc  redy  unto  Lyquacyon  $

Thys  Chaptcr  nedyth  not  longer  proteftacion  *.

For  I have told  thec  the  dyatory  mofi:  conrenycnt
After  thync  Elements  bc  made  cquypolcnt.

6.  And  alfo  how  thou  to  Whytnes  Hialt  bryng  thy  Gold,
Moft  lyke  in  fygure  to  the  lenyi»  of  an  hawthorn  tre,
Callyd  tMagnefya  aforc  as  I have  told ;

And  our  Whyte  Sulfar  wythowte  conbuftebyllyte,
Whych  fro  the  fyer  away  wyll  never  fle :

And  thus  the  feventb  Gate  as  thow  defyred
In  the  upfpryng  of  the  Spn  ys  conqueryd.


IJl


Of  SuBLIMATION.


The  eight  Gate .

1.  TT Ere  of  our  Sublimmon  a word  or  two,

I havc  to  fpeke,  whych  thc  eyghth  Gate  ys
Folys  do  Sublymc,  but  Sublyme  thou  not  fo,

For  we  Sublymc  not  lyke  as  they  do  I wys$

To  Sublymc  trewly  therforethou  fhall  not  mys:

If  thou  can  makc  thy  Bodys  firft  fpirituall.

And  thcn  thy  Spyryts  as  I have  tought  the  corporali.

2.  Som  do  Mercury  from  Vitrhll  and  Salt  fublymc.

And  othcr  fpryts  fro  Scalcs  of  Ycrn  or  Stcele,

Fro  Eggfhells  calcynyd  and  quyk  lyme.

And  on  thcyer  manner  hyt  thcy  Sublyme  ryghtwell,
But  fuch  Sublymyng  accordyth  nevcr  adelc
To  our  entem,  fdr  we  Sublyme  not  16,

To  trewe  Sublymyng  therforc  now  wyll  I go.

. In  Sublymacyon  fyrft  bcware  of  one  thyng,

That  thou  Sublymc  not  tothc  top  ofthy  Velfcll,

For  without  vyolence  thou  Ihalt  yt  not  downe  bryng
Ageyne,  but  there  yt  wyll  abyde  and  dwdl  $

So  hyt  rcjoyfyth  wyth  rcfrygcracion  I thc  teli:

Kepc  hyt  rhcrfore  wyth  temperat  hete  adownc
Full  forty  dayes,  tyll  hyt  wcx  black  abowcn.

Aa  2 For


lji  Of  Subltmation .

4.  for  then  thc  Sowle  begynnyth  for  to  com  owte,
Fro  hys  ovvnc  vaynys  5 for  ali  that  fubtyll  ys,

Wyll  wyth  thc  Sprytsaflend  withouten  dowtc:

Bere  in  thy  myndc  therforc  and  thynkeon  thys,

How  here  eclypfyd  byn  thy  Bodys :

As  they  do  Putrify  Sublymyng  more  and  more,.
Into  the  Water  tyll  they  be  ali  np  bore.

5.  And  thus  ther  venom  when  they  have  fpowtyd  out
Into  the  water,  than  Black  yt  dotn  appeare.

And  become  fpirituall  every  dele  witnoute  dowte,
Sublymyng  efyly  on  our  manner
Into  the  water  which  doth  hym  bere :

For  in  the  Ayrc  one  Chyld  thus  muft  bc  bore
Of  thc  Water  ageyne  as  I have  fcyd  before.

54  But  when  thcfe  to  Sublymacyon  continuall

Bc  laboryd  fo,wyth  hete  both  moyft  and  temperate,
That  ali  ys  Whyte  and  purcly  made  fpirituall  *

Than  Hcvyn  uppon  Erth  muft  be  reitterate,

Unto  thc  Sowle  wyth  thc  Body  be  reincorporatc
That  Erth  bccom  all  that  afore  was  Hcvyn,
Whych  wyll  be  done  in  Suhljmacjom  fevyn.

7.  And  Subljmacjcn  we  make  for  caufys  thre,  .

The  fyrft  caufc  ys  to  make  thc  Body  Spirituali  5
The  fecond  that  thc  Spryt  may  Corporali  bc.

And  becom  fyx  wyth  hyt  and  fubftancyall:

The  Thyrd  caufc  ys  that  fro  hys  fylth  orygynall
He  may  be  dcnfyd,  and  hys  fatnys  fulphuryofe
Be  mynyihyd  in  hym  whych  ys  infe&uofc.

Then


'71


Of  Sublimation,

tt,  , Then  whcn  they  thas  togcder  dcpuryd  be,

They  wyll  Sublyme  up  whytcr  then  Snow  5
That  fyght  wyll  grctly  comfort  the ;

For  than  anon  parfytly  fhalt  thou  know
Thy  Sprytts  Ihall  fo  be  a downe  1 throw :

That  thys  Gate  to  the  Ihalbe  unlockyd,

Out  of  thys  Gate  many  one  be  Ihyt  ana  mockydr


O f Fermentation,

'The  nintb  Gate .


TRew  Fermentacyon  fcw  Workers  do  underftond,
That  fccrett  therfore  I wyll  expoundc  to  the,

I travelyd  trcwly  thorow  many  a Lond :

Or  evcr  I myght  fyndc  any  that  cold  teli  hytme;
Yct  as  God  woldc,  (evermore  blcflcd  hc  be,1)

At  the  laft  I cum  to  knowlcdge  therof  parfyt,
Take  hecdc  therfore,  therof  what  I do  wryte.


Fertnentyng  in  dyvers  mancrs  ys  don,

By  whych  our  Medcyns  muli  be  perpetuate,

Into  a clere  Water,  fom  lefythSox»  and  Mone  y
And  wyth  ther  Medcyns  makyth  them  to  be  Congelate  j
Whych  in  the  Fycr  what  tyme  they  be  examynate,
May  not  abyde  nor  alter  wyth  Complemcnt,

For  fuch  Ferments  ys  not  to  our  intent.

Aa  3


But


174-  Of  Fermentaturi.

But  yet  more  kyndly  (om  other  men  don
Fermentyng  thcyer  Medcynes  in  thys  wyfe.

In  c JMercttry  dyflolvyng  both  Son  and  UMcne,

Up  vvyth  the  Spryts  tyll  tyme  vvyll  aryfe,
Sublymyng  them  togethcr  twyfe  or  thryfe  :

Then  Fermentacyon  therof  they  make,

That  ys  a way,  but  yet  vve  hyt  forfake.

4.  Som  other  ther  bc  whych  hath  more  hap
To  touch  the  trothe  in  parte  of  Fermentyng  •,

They  t^Amalgamx her  Bodys  wyth  c JWercury  lyke  papp;
Thcn  theruppon  ther  Medcyns  relentyng,

Thcfc  of  our  Sccretts  have  fom  hentyng  :

But  not  the  trcwth  wyth  parfyt  Complcment,
Becaufe  they  ncther  Putrefy  nor  alter  ther  Fer ment.

5.  That  poyntthcrforel  wyll  dyfclofe  to  thec,

Looke  how  thou  dydyft  wyth  thy  unparfyt  Body,
And  do  fo  wyth  thy  parfyt  Bodys  in  every  degre ;
Thatys  to  fey  fyrft  thou  them  Putrefyc

Her  prymary  qualytes  dcftroying  uttcrly :

For  thys  ys  wholey  to  our  entent,

That  fyrft  thou  alter  before  thou  Fcrment.

6.  To  thy  Compound  make  Fcrment  the  fovverth  parte,
Whych  Ferraents  bc  only  of  Son  and  Monet,

If  thoutherfore  be  Mafter  of  thys  Arte ,

Thy  Fermentacion  lat  thys  be  donc,

Fyx  Water  and  Erth  together  fone:

And  when  the  Medcyn  as  wax  doth  flowe,

Than  uppon  CMalgams  lokc  thou  hyt  throw.

And


Of  Fermentation.

And  vvhen  all  that  togethcr  ys  myxyd
Above  thy  Glaflfc  vvell  clofyd  makc  thy  fyrc,

And  fo  contcncw  hyt  tyll  ali  be  fyxid.

And  wcll  Fcrmentcd  $o  defyrc  •,

Than  make  Projeccyon  aFrer  thy  pleafure:

For  that  ys  Medcyn  than  cch  dele  parfyr.

Thus  muft  you  Fcrment  both  Red  and  Whyte.

For  lyke  as  flowcr  of  Whete  made  into  Paft,
Requyrerh  Ferment  whych  Leven  we  call
Of  Bred  that  yt  may  havc  the  kyndly  taft.

And  bccom  Fode  toManand  Womanmoftcordyall  ;
Ryght  fo  thy  Medcyn  Ferment  thou  fhall,

That  yt  may  taft  wyth  the  Ferment  pure.

And  all  aflays  evermorc  cndure.

i And  underftond  that  ther  bc  Ferments  thrce,

Two  be  of  Bodys  in  nature  clene,

Whych  muft  bc  altryd  as  I have  told  thec  5
The  thyrd  moft  fecret  of  whych  I mene,

Ys  the  fyrft  Erth  to  hys  owne  Water  grene :

And  thcrfore  when  th c Lyo»  doth  thurft,

Make  hym  drynke  tyll  hys  Belly  burft.

1 Of  thys  a Queftyon  yfllhold  mcve.

And  aske  of  Workcrs  what  ys  thys  thyng,

Anon  therby  I fholde  them  preve ;

Yf  thcy  had  knowledge  of  our  Fermentyng,

For  many  man  fpekyth  wyth  wondrcng :

Of  Robyn  Hode , and  of  his  Borv,

Whych  ntver  fhot  therin  I trovs>,

But


j6  Of  Fermentation.

ii.  But  Fermentacio n trcw  as  I thc  teli

Ys  of  the  Sowle  wyth  the  Bodys  incorporacyon,
Rcftoryng  to  hyc  thc  kyndly  fmcll  *

Wyth  taft  and  color  by  naturali  confpyfacyon
Of  thyngs  dyffcveryd,  a dew  rfcdyntegracyon  :

Wherby  the  Body  of  thc  Spryte  takych  impreflion,
That  eythcr  othcr  may  hdpc  to  have  ingrcfllon.

12«  For  lyke  as  the  Bodys  in  thercompaccyori  corporali
May  not  fhow  out  ther  qualytes  effe&ually
Untyll  the  tytne  that  thcy  becom  fpyrituall :

No  more  may  Spryts  abyde  wyth  thc  Bodys  ftcdfaftly,
But  thcy  wyth  them  bc  fyrft  confyxat  proportionably :
For  then  the  Body  tcchyth  the  Spryt  to  fuffer  Fycr,
And  the  Spryt  thc  Body  toendurc  to  thydefyrc.

13.  Therforc  thy  Gold  wyth  Gold  thou  muft  Ferment,
Wyth  hys  ownc  Water  thyne  Erth  clentydlmene
Not  clls  to  fay  but  Elemcnt  wyth  Elemcnt  5

The  Spryts  of  Lyfc  only  goyng  bctwccne.

For  lykc  as  an  Adamand  as  thow  haft  fenc :

Yern  to  hym  draw,  fo  doth  our  Erth  by  kynde
Draw  downe  to  hym  hys  Sowle  borne  up  wyth  Wynd.

14.  Wyth  mynd  therforc  thy  Sowle  lede  out  and  in,
Mcng  Gold  wyth  Gold,  that  is  to  fay

Makc  Elcmcnts  wyth  Elcments  together  ryn  5
To  tyme  all  Fyre  they  fuffer  may,  -
For  Erth  ys  Ferment  ivvthouten  nay

To  Water,  and  Water  the  Erth  untoj
Our  Fermentacion  in  thys  wyfe  muft  be  do.

Erth


Of  Ferment  ation.

i.  Erth  ys  Gold, foysthe Sowlealfo,  -
Not  Comyn  but  Ovvers  thus  Elemcntate,

Andyec  the  Sontherto  muft  go,

That  by  our  Whelc  yt  may  'oe  alterate.

For  fo  to  Ferment  yt  muft  bc  preparat :

That  hyt  profoundly  may  joynyd  be
Wych  other  nature  s as  I fey  d to  thee.

' . And  whatfoever  I have  here  feyd  of  Gold,

The  fame  of  Sylver  I wyll  thou  underftond,

That  thou  them  Putrefyc  and  alter  as  I have  told  $
i Ere  thou  thy  Medcyn  to  Ferment  take  in  hond,
Forfowth  I cowde  never  fynde  hymwythin  Englond:
tvhych  on  thys  tvyfe  to  Ferment  cowdc  me  teche
Wythout  errour,  by  pra&yfe  or  by  fpeche.

Now  of  thys  Chapter  me  nedyth  to  trete  no  more,
Sythlintend  prolixite  toefchew*

Remember  well  my  words  therfore,

Whych  thou  flialt  preve  by  praftys  tretv.

And  Soft  and  CMone  loke  thou  renew  ••

That  they  may  hold  of  the  fyfth  nature,

. | Then  ftiall  theyr.  Tyn&urcs  ever  endure.  •

. 1 And  yet  a way  there  ys  moft  excellent,

Belongyng  unto  another  tvorkyng,

A Water  we  makc  moft  redolent :

Ali  Bodys  to  Oyle  whenvyth  we  bryng,

Wyth  whych  our  Medcyn  vvemake  floyng:
AQuyntclfens  thys-Waterwc  call
In  man,  whych  helyth  Dyfefys  all.
u ' Bb  But


177


178  OfFermentation.

19'  But  wyth  thy  Bace  after  my  Do&ryne  preperat,
Whych  ys  our  Calx,  thys  muft  bc  don;

For  whcn  our  Bodys  be  fo  Calcenat ,

That  Water  wyll  co  Oyle  dylfolve  thcm  fonc;

Makc  thcrfore  Oyle  of  Son  and  CMone

Which  ys  F ement  moft  fragrant  for  to  fmcll,
And  fo  the  9th  Gate  ys.  Conquered  of  thys  Caftdl.


O f Exaltatio  n.


The  tenth  (jate .

PRocede  \ve  now  to  the  Chapter  of  Ex  altae  ion,

Of  whych  truly  thou  muft  have  knowlcdgc  pure,
Full  lyttyll  yt  ys  dyfferent  from  Snblymuyon,

Yf  thou  concevc  hym  ryght  I thee  enfure :

Herto  accordyth  thc  holy  Scrypture:

Chryfte  feyng  thus,  Tf 1 exalted  be,

Fben  jhall  I dras>  aII  thyngs  unto  me.


2.  Ower  Medycyn  yf  wc  Exalt  ryght  fo,

Hyt  fhall  therby  be  Nobylyfcate,

That  muft  be  done  in  manners  two ;

Fro  tyme  the  parts  bejdyfponfatr,

Whych  muft  be  Crufyfycd  and  examynat :

And  then  contumulate  both  Man  andWyfe,

And  after  revyvyd  by  the  Spyryts  of  Lyfe.

Thar


iOf  Exaltatum.

Than  up  to  Hevyn  thcy  muft  Exaltyd  be,

Thcr  to  be  in  Body  and  Sowlc  gloryfycate
For  thou  muft  bryng  them  to  fuch  fubtylyte ,

Thac  thcy  affend  together  to  be  intronyzate.

In  Clowds  of  clerencfle,  to  Angelis  confociate :

Then  fhall  they  draw  as  thou  fhalt  fc
Ali  other  Bodys  to  thcr  owne  dygnytc.

IY f thou  thcrforc  thy  Bodys  wyll  Exaltat,

* Fyrft  vvyth  the  Spryts  of  Lyfc  thou  them  augmcnr,
Tyll  tyme  thy  Erth  be  wcll  fubtylyate,

By  naturali  re&yfyyng  of  echc  Element;

Hym  up  cxaltyng  into  the  Fyrmament :

Than  much  more  prefyofc  fhall  they  be  than  Gold,
Beeaufe  they  of  tne  Quynteftencc  do  hold.

For  when  the  Cold  hath  overcum  the  Hete,

Then  into  Water  the  Ayre  (liall  turnyd  bc-.

And  fo  tvvo  contrarys  together  fhall  mete,

Tyll  ether  wyth  other  ryght  well  agre,

So  into  Ayre  thy  Water  as  I teli  the  ?

When  Hete  of  Cold  hath  gott  domynacyon,
Shalbe  convertyd  by  craft  of  CjrcuUcyon .

, And  of  the  Fycr  then  Ayer  have  thou  fhall,

By  lofyng  Putrefyyng  and  Sublymyng;

And  Fyer  thou  haft  of  the  Erth  materyall:

Thyne  Elemcnts  by  craft  thus  dyfleveryng,

Moft  fpecyally  the  Erth  well  Calccnyng :

And  when  they  bc  echc  on  made  pure,

Then  do  they  hold  ali  of  the  fyfth  nature.


'79


i8o  0/  Exaltatio».

7.  On  thys  vvy  fc  therfore  make  them  to  bc  Cyrcular,
Ecn  unto  other  exaltyng  by  and  by,

And  in  one  Glas  do  all  thys  furely  fygylate,

Not  wyththy  honds,  butasl  tcchethe  naturally,
Fyer  into-Water  then  tume  fytft  hardely^

For  Fyer  ys  in  Ayer  wych  ys  in  Water  exyftent,
And  thys  Converfyon  accordyth  toourenrent.

S.  Than  ferthermore  tume  on  thy  Whele,
ThatintoErth  thy  Ayrc  convertyd  be,

Whych  wylbe  don  alfo  ryght  vvell :

For  Ayre  ys.  in  Water  beyng, in  the  Erth  truft  raer,
Then  Water  into  Fyre  contraryofe  in  ther  qualyte:.  !
Sone  turne  thou  may,  for  Water  in  Erth  ys,
Whych  ys  in  Fyer  converfyon,  true  ys  thys-


9.  Thy  Whele  ys-novy  nygh  turnyd  abowte,

Into  Ayrc  tume  Erth,  whych  ys  the  propcr  nefl-
Of  other  Elenicnts  ther  ys  no  dowte, ,

For  Erth  in  Fyre  ys,  whych  in  Ayretakyth  reft,

Thys Cyrculacyon  thou  begynmuftin  theWeft  ?

Then  forth  into  the  Sowth  tyjl  thcy  exaltyd  bc.
Procede  devvly  as  in  the  Fygure  I have  towght  the.


20.  In  whych  proces-  thou  may  clerly  fe,

From  anextreame  how  to  anotherth.ou  maynotgo..
But  byamene,  fyththcy  in  qualytc.contraryofebe  *, .
And  rcfon  vvyllforfoth  that  hytbefo,?  T

As  hctc  into  cold  wyth  other  contraryofe  mo :

Wythout  theyr  mcnys  as  moyft  to  hete  and  cold,
^ Examples  fuffycyenc  afore  thys  havel  told.

, ’ ' * , ,-f'  * ~ Thus


Of  Exaltat  ion.

n Thus  have  I tavvght  the  how  for  to  make,

Ofall  thy  Elements  a parfyt  CyrcttUcyon^

And  at  thy  Fygure  example  for  to  takc ,

How  thou  Ihalc  make  thys  forefayd  Exaltacyon ,

And  of  thy  Medcyn  in  the  Elements  trcvV  graduacyon :
Tyll  hyt  be  brought  to  a quynaryte  temperat,

And  then  thou  haft  conqueryd  the  7" enth  Gate.


O F M U


LTIPLI-  CATI  O.N.


he  eleventh  (fate.

\J[tlltyplycacyon  nowto  dedare  I procede,

JLVJL  Whych  ys  by  Pbylofopberi  in  thys  wyfe  dyfynyd^
Augmentacyon  yt  ys  ofthat  Elixtr  indede,  i
IngoodneSj  in  quantyte,  both  for  Whyt  and  Redc,
Multyplycacyo n ys  therfore  as  they  have  feyd : ('degt  e,

That  thyng  that  doth  Augment  the  Medcyns  in  ech
In  Color,  in  Odor,  in  Vertue,  and  alfo  in  Quantyte.

And  why  thou  may  thy  Medcyn  multeply,

Infynytly  the  caufeforfoth  ys  thys.

For  yt  ys  Fyer  whych  tyned  wyll  never  dye :

Dwcllyng  wy th  the  as  Fyer  doth  in  houfys,

Of  whych  one  fparkc  may  make  more  Fycrs  I wys*

As  musk  in  Pygmcnts,  and  other  fpycys  mo,

In  vertue  multyplyeth  and  our  Medcyn  ryght  fo.

Bb  3 So


lSl


Of  Multiplicat  ion .

3.  So  he  ys  ryche  the  whych  Fycr  hath  les  or  more
Becaufe  hc  may  fo  gretly  Multeply  5
And  ryght  fo  ryche  ys  he  whych  any  parte  hath  in  ftore
Of  our  Elixers  whych  be  augmentable  infynytly  :

One  way  yf  thou  dyflolve  our  Powders  dry.

And  oft  tymes  of  them  make  Congelacyon,

Of  hyt  in  goodnes  thou  makyft  then  Augmenracyon.

4*  The  fecond  way  both  in  goodnes  and  in  quantyte,
Hyt  Multyplyeth  by  Iterat  Fermentacio#,

As  in  that  Chapter  I fhowyd  playnly  unto  the,

By  dyvers  manners  of  naturali  Opcracyon,

And  alfo  in  the  Chapter  of  our  Cybacyon :

Where  thou  may  knowhow  thou  fhait  Multeply
Thy  Medycyn  wyth  Mercury  Infynytly-

5.  But  and  thou  bothe  wyil  Loofe  and  alfo  Ferment,
Both  more  in  quantyte  and  better  wyll  hyt  bej
And  in  fuch  vvyfe  thou  may  that  fo  augment,

That  in  thy  Glas  yt  wyll  grow  lyke  a Tre,

The  Tre  of  Hermes  namyd,  fecmly  to  fc:

Of  whych  cne  Pcpyn  a thowfand  wyll  Mahypiy.
Yf  thou  can  make  thy  Fro\eccyon  wyttyly.

6.  And  lyke  a$  Saffron  when  yt  ys  pulveryzate,

By  lyttyll  and  lyttyll  yf  hyt  in  Lycour  be
Temperyd,  and  then  wyth  niykyll  more  Lycour  dylare  5
Tyngyth  much  more  of  Lycour  in  quantyte,  ffc
Than  beyng  hole  in  hys  owne  grofe  nature : fo  ihall  thoi

That  our  Elixers  the  more  they  be  made  thyn,
The  farther  in  Tyn&urc  fothfaftly  wyll  renne.

Kept


Of  Multiplication.

' Kepe  in  thy  Fyer  therfore  both  cvyn  and  morotv,
Fro  houfe  to  houfc  that  thou  nede  not  fo  rennc
Amonge  thy  Neyghbors,  thy  Fyer  to  fech  or  boroiv,
The  more  thou  kepyft  the  more  good  fhall  thou  tvyn,
Multyplyyng  ey  more  and  morcthy  Glas  wythin:

By  fedyng  wyth  CW  ercury  tothy  Iyvys  end,

So  fliall  thou  have  more  than  thou  nedyft  ro  fpend.


Thys  mater  ys  playne,  I wyll  no  more
Wryte  now  theroi,  lac  Refon  the  guyde;

Bc  never  the  bolder  to  Syn  therfore,

But  ferve  thy  God  the  better  at  echtydc  ?

And  whylls  that  thou  Ihall  in  thys  lyfe  abyde;

Bere  thys  in  mynde,  forget  not  I thepray.

As  thoufhaltaperebcforethy  God  atdomys  day.


Hys  owne  gret  Gyfts  thefore  and  hys  Trefure,
Dyfpofe  thou  vertuofcly,  helpyng  the  poore  at  nede,
That  in  thys  World  to  the  thou  may  procure

IMercy  and  Grace  with  Hevcnly  blys  to  mede,

And  pray  devoutly  to  God  that  he  the  lede
In  at  thys  cleventh  Gate  zs  he  can  beft.

Sone  aftcr  then  thou  flialc  cnd  thy  conquett:.

Of


184.


O F P Roj  ECTION.

The  tmlfth  Gatc.


1.  TN Projeccyon  hytfhalbeprovydyfourpra&ifcbeprofy-
-*Of wchyt  bchovyth  me  che  fecrets  here  to  mcve;  (table
Therforc  yf  thy  Tyn&ure  be  fure  and  not  vatyable,

By  a lyttyll  of  thy  Medcyn  thus  fhall  thou  preve
Wyth  Mettall  or  wyth  Mercury  as  Pyche  yt  wyli  cleve :
And  Tynsft  in  Projeccyon  ali  Fyers  to  abyde,
Andfone  yt  wyllenterand  fpred  hym  fullwyde.


2~,  But  many  for  Ignorans  doth  mar  that  they  made,
Whenon  Mettalls  unclenfyd  Projeccyon  they  make.
For  bc  caufe  of  corrupcyon  theyr  Tyndtures  muft  vade ;
Whychthey  vvold  not  awey  fyrft  fro  theBodys  take,
Whych  after  Projeccyon  be  bryttyl,  bloe,  and  blackc :
That  thy  Tyn&ure  therfore  may  evcrmore  Jaft,
Uppon  Ferment  thy  Medcyn  loke  fyrft  that  thou  caft.

3.  Then  brottyl  vvyll  thy  Ferment  as  any  glas  be,
llppon  Bodys  clenfyd  and  made  very  pure,

Caft  thy  brottyll  fubftance  and  fone  fhall  thou  fe,
That  they  flialbc  curyofely  coleryd  wyth  Tyn&ure,
Whych  at  ali  aflays  for  ever  fhall  endure :

But  at  the  Pfalmys  of  the  Sawter  examplc  thou  take
Profytable  Projeccyon  parfytly  to  make.

On


OfTrojeftion.

On  Fundamenta  caft  fyrft  thys  Pfalmt  Nunc  Dimittis,

’ Uppon  Verba  mea  thcn  caft  Fundamenta  bly  ve  5
Than  Verba  mea  uppon  Dilgam , confevc  me  wyth  thy  wytts  *
And  Diligam  on  attende  yf  thou  lyft  to  thryvc:

Thus  mafce  thou  Projeccyons  thre  fowre  or  fy ve  ,

Tyll  the  Tyndure  of  thy  Medcyn  begyn  to  decrefe.
And  then  yc  ys  tymc  of  Projeccyon  to  cefe.

j,  By  thys  myfty  talkyng  1 mcnc  nothyng  ells,

But  that  thou  muft  caft  fyrft  the  lefle  on  the  more,
Increfyng  evcr  the  Number  as  wyfe  mcn  the  telis,

And  kcpe  thou  thys  Secrett  to  rhy  felfe  in  ftorc,

Be  covetuofe  of  connyng  yt  ys  no  burden  fore :

For  who  that  joyneth  not  the  Elixers  wyth  Bodys  made  dene,
He  wot  not  what  fykerly  Projeccyon  aoth  mene.

6,  Ten  yf  thou  Multyply  fyrft  into  ten,

One  hundreth,  that  number  wyll  makcfykcrly*

Yf  onehundreth  into  an  hundreth  be  Multyplycd  thcn,

Ten  thoufand  ys  that  number  countc  hyt  wyttyly,

Then  into  as  much  more  ten  thoufand  multyply:

That  ys  a thoufand  thoufand,  whych  multyplycth  I wys,
Into  as  much  more  as  a hundred  myllyons  ys.

7.  That  hundred  myllyons  bcyng  multyplyed  lykewys,

Into  ten  thoiifand  myllyons,  that  ys  for  to  fcy,

Makyth  fo  grete  a number  I wote  not  whatytys,

Thy  number  in  Projeccyon  thus  Multyply  alvvey :

Now  Chyld  of  thy  curcefy  for  me  thou  prayj

Syth  that  I have  told  the  our  fecretts  ali  and  fome,

To  whych  I befcchc  God  by  Grace  thou  may  com.

Cc  Now


Of  ‘ TrojeBion .

8.  Now  thovv  haft  conqueryd  'the  ttvelve  Gates ,

And  ali  the  Caftcll  thou  holdyft  at  wyll,

Kcpe  thy  Secretts  in  ftore  unto  thy  felvc;

And  thecomaundcmentsof  God  looke  thou  fulfulh
In  fyer  contcinue  thy  glas  ftyll.

And  Multeply  thy  Medcyns  ay  more  and  more,
For  vvy  fe  men  done  fey  ftore  ys  no fore.  ■


The  cnd  ofthe  Twefae  (j cites.


-The  Re  capitulation.

1.  "COr  to  bryng  thys  Tretys  to  afynall  end,

JT  And  brevcly  here  for  to  conclude  thefe  Secretts  ali,
Dylygently  lokc  thou,  and  to  thy  Fygure  attend:
Whych  doth  inhytconteync  thefe  fecrets  grete  & fmall,
Andyf  thouconceve  both  Theorycalland  Pra&ycall :
By  Fygures,  and  by  Colors,  and  by  Scrypturc  playne,

Whych  vvy ttely  confevyd  thou  mayft  not  work  in  vayn.

*

2,  Confydcr  fyrft  the  Latytude  of  thy  PrecyoUs  Stone^
Begynnyng  in  the  fyrft  fyae  notyd  in  the  Weft,

Where  the  Red Man  and  the  Whyte  Weman  be  made  one,
Spowfyd  vvyth  the  Spryts  oflyfe  to  lyve  in  loveand  re-ft,
Erthand  Watcr  equaly  proportyond  that  ys  beftj

And  one  of  the  Erth  ys  good  and  of  the  Spryts  thre,
Whych  twelve  to  fowre  alfo  of  the  Erth  may  be.

Thrce.


c The  ^Recapitulaticn.  187

j,  Thrc  of  ihe  Wyfe  and  one  of  thc  Man  thcn  muft  thou  take,

And  the  lelfeof  the  Spryts  thcre  beinthys  dyfponfation,

The  rather  thy  Calcynatyon  for  ccrteync  fiiall  thou  makc,

Then  forth  into  the  Noith  procede  by  obfcuratyon^

Of  the  Red  Man  and  hys  Whyte  Wyfe  callyd  Ecl^fation :

Lofyng  them  and  altcryng  betyxtWynter  and  Vere,

Into  Water  turnyngErth  darkeand  nothyng  clere.

4.  Fro  thens  by  colors  many  one  into  the  Eft  alfends,

There  Hiall  the  Mone  be  fullapperyng  by  day  lyght;

Then  ys  Ihe  paffyd  her  Purgatory  and  courfe  at  an  end ;

There  ys  the  upryfyng  of  the  Son  apperyng  whyt  andbryghr,

T here  ys  Somcr  after  Vere,  and  day  after  nyght : ( Ayrc;

Than  Erth  and  Water  whych  vvere  fo  black  be  turnyd  into

Than  douds  of  darknes  be  ovcrblowyn  & all  apery  th  faire.

And  lyke  as  the  Weft  begynnyng  was  of  the  Pra&yfe,
AndtheNorth  thcparfyt  meneof  profound  Alteratyon,

So  thc  Eft  after  them  the  begynnyng  of  Speculacyon  ys-,  ition
But  ofthys  courfe  up  in  the  Sowth  the  Son  makyth  Confuma-
Ther  be  thy  Elements  into  Fyre  turnyd  by  Cyrculacyon :

Thento  wynto  thy  defyrethou  needft  notbein  dowte,

FortheWhele  ofourPbylofephy  thou  haft  turnyd  abowte.

But  yet  ageyne  turneabowtc  two  tymys  thy  Whele,

In  whych  be  comprehcndyd  all  the  Secretts  of  our  Phylojepky^

In  Chapters  i z made  playne  to  the  if  thou confeve  them  well;

,;j  And  all  the  Secretts  by  and  by  of  our  lower  Aflonomye,

How  thou  Calcin  thy  Bodys,parfit3diflblve>devide  & putrefiet
Wyth  parfytknowledgeof  all  thc  polys  whych  in  our  Hevyn
Shynyng  with  colors  incxplycable  never  were  gayer  fene.  tben

Cc  z And


7*  And  thys  oncSecrctt  conclufyonal  know  thou  wythoutcn  faylc,
Our  Red  Man  teyncth  nor  tyll  hc  teynyd  be  5
Therfbreyf  thou  lyft  thy  lclfc  b.y  thy  crafr  to  avayle,

The  Altytude  ofthy  Bodys  hyde  & fliow  out  thcyr  profundyte,
Inevery  ofthy  Materyalls  dyftroyyng  the  fyrftqualyte:
Andfecundary  qualytcs  morcgloryofe  repare  in  them  anon
And  in  oneGlas  wyth  one  governauncc  4 Naturs  tume  into  one.

8.  Pale,  and  Black,  wyth  falce  Citryne,  unparfyt  Whyte  & Red,
Pekoks  fethers  in  color  gay,  the  Raynbow  whych  fliall  overgoe
TheSpottyd  Panther  wyth  the  Lyon  grcenc,theCrowys  byll

(bloc  as  ledej

Thefe  fhall  appcre  before  the  parfyt  Whyte,  & many  other  moe
Colors,  and  after  the  parfyt  Whyt,Grey,  and  falce  Citrinc  alfo :
And  after  ali  thys  fhall  appere  the  blod  Red  invaryablc,
Then  haftthou  a Medcyn  of  the  thyrd  orderof  hys  owne

(kynde  Multyplycable.

6.  Thow  muft  devydc  thy  Elixer  whyte  into  partyes  two,
After  thou  rubify  and  into  GlafTys  let  hyra  be  don,

If  thou  vvylt  have  the  Elixer s both  for  Son  and  Mone  do  fo»,
Wyth  Mereury  then  hem  Multeply  unto  gret  quantyte  fone:
Yf  thow  at  the  bcgynnyng  had  not  as  much  as  wold  into  afpone :
Yet  moght  thou  them  fo  Multeply  both  the  Whyte  & Red,
Thatyf  thou  levyd  a thoufand  yerc  they  fhold  the  ftond  in

(ftede.

jo.  Have  thou  recourfc  to  thy  Whcle  I councell  the  unto,

And  ftody  tyll  thou  undcrftond  eche  Chaptcr  by  and  by,
Medyll  with  no  falce  Fantefys,  Multeplycrs,  let  them  go,  (pbje}
Which  wyll  the  flatter  Si  falcely  fey  they  are  connyng  in  Pbjlefo -
Do  as  I byd  the  and  then  dyfiblvc  thefe  forcfcyd  Baces  wy  ttcly ;
And  tume  hym  into  parfyt  Oylys  with  our  trew  water  ardenr,
By  Cyrculacion  that  muft  be  don  accordyng  to  our  entent.

Thefe


Tigcapitulation.

i.  Thcfe  Oylys  wyll  fyx  crude  Mercury  and  convcrt  Bodys  ali,
Inro  parfyt  Sol  and  Lune  when  thou  fhalt  make  P rojeecyon,

That  Oylyfli  fubftancc  pure  and  fyx  Raymond  Lully  dyd  call
Hys  Bafylyske^of  whych  he  made never  fo  plaync  deteccyon,
Pray  for  me  to  God  that  I may  be  of  hys  clcccyon :

And  that  he  wyll  for  one  of  hys  on  Domys  Day  me  kene.

And  graunt  me  in  hys  blys  to  reygne  for  ever  wyth  hym,  Arne».

Gloria  tibi  Domine.


An  Admonition,  vckerein  the  Author

declaretb  his  Erronious  experimento.

, A Ftcr  ali  thys  I wyll  thou  underftonde,

For  thy  favegarde  what  I have  done,

Many  Experymcnts  I havehadin  hond;

As  I found  wryten  for  Son  and  Mone,

Whych  I wyll  teli  the  rehcrfyng  fone :

Begynnyng  wyth  Vermylion  whych  provyd  nought.
And  Mcrcury  fublymyd  whych  I derc  boughu

* I made  Solucyens  full  many  a one,

Of  Spyrytts,  Fcrments,  Salt«,Yerne  andStcclc;
Wenyng  fo  ro  make  the  Phylofophers  Stone:

But  fynally  I loft  eche  dele,

Aftcr  my  Boks  yet  wrought  I well  5
Whych  evermore  untrew  I provyd,

That  made  me  oft  full  fore  agrevyd*

Gc  3


Waters


Ipo


3


Erromous


Watcrs  corrofy  ve  and  waters  Ardcnr,

With  which  I wrought  in  divers  wyfc,

Many  one  I made  buc  ali  'was  flicnt*,

Eggs  fhells  I calcenyd  tvvife  or  thryfe,

Oylys  fro  Calcys  1 made  up-ryfe ;

And  every  Elemcnt  fro  other  I did  tvvyne,
But  profyt  found  I ryght  none  thercin.


. AIfo  I wrought  in  Sulphur  and  in  Vitriall,

Whych  folys  doe  call  thc  Grene  Lyon,

In  Arfenike,  in  Orpement,  fowle.mot  them  fall';

In  debili  principio  was  myne  Inccpcyon :

Therefore  was  frawde  in  fyne  the  Condufyon ;

And  I hlew  my  thryft  at  the  Cole,

My  Clothys  were  bawdy,  my  Stomache  was  never  hole,


5*  Sal  Armonyakc  and  Sandcver,

Sal  Alkaly,  fal  Alembrokc,  fal  Attinckarr,
Sal  Tarter,  fal  Comyn,  fal  Geme  moft  clere;
Sal  Petcr,  fal  Sodc,  of  thefe  beware;

Fro  the  odor  of  Quyckfylver  kepe  the  fare :
Medyll  not  wyth  Mercury  prccipitate,
Nethcr  wyth  imparfyt  Bodys  rubyfycate.


I provyd  Qryns,  Eggs,  Here,  and  Blod,

The  Scalys  of  Ycm  whych  Smethys  do  of  fmyte,
M s Uft,  and  Crokefer  whych  dyd  me  never  good:
The  fowle  of  Saturne  and  alfo  Marchafyte,

Lythage  and  Antemony  not  worth  a myte :

Of  whych  gey  Tyntures  I made  to  fhew,

Both  Red  and  Whycc  whych  were  untrew.


Oyk


Experiments.

7 Oyle  of  Lune  and  water  wyth  labour  gretr,

I made  Calcynyng  yc  with  falt  precipytate.

And  by  hyt  felfc  with  vyolent  hett
Gryndyng  with  Vyncgar  tyll  I was  fatygate  :

And  alfo  with  a quantyte  of  Spyces  acuate*

Uppon  a Marble  whych  ftode  me  oft  in  coft,

And  Oyles  with  Corrofyves  I made-,  butail  wasloft.

! Many  Amalgame  dyd  I make,

Wcnyng  to  fix  thefe  to  grctt  avayle.

And  thercto  Sulphur  dyd  I take  *,

Tarter  Egges  whyts,  and  the  Oyle  of  the  Snayle,

But-  c/cr  of  my  purpofe  dyd  I fayle  :

For  what  for  the  more  and  what  for  the  leffe,
Evermore  fomethyng  wantyng  there  was.

9 Wyne,  Mylke,  Oyles,  and  Runnctt,

The  Slyme  of  Sterrs  that  falleth  to  the  grownde,
Celydony  and  Secundynes  wyth  many  moe  yett.

In  thefe  I pradyfyd  as  in  my  books  I found ,

I wan  ryght  nought,butloft  many  a pownde  *,

Of  Mercury  and  Mettalls  I made  Chryftall  ftones,
Wenyng  that  hyrhad  ben  a worke  for  thenonys.

o Thus  I roftyd  and  boylyd  as  one  of  Gebers  Cooks,

And  oft  tymes  my  wynnyng  in  the  Asks  I foughtj
For  I was  dyfcevyd  wyth  many  falce  Books
Wherby  untrue  thus  truly  I wrought:

But  ali  fuch  Experyments  avaylyd  me  nought;

But  broughc  me  in  danger  and  in  combraunce,

By  loffe  of  my  goods  and  other  grevauncc.


Erronious

i*  For  thc  lovcofour  Lady  fuchlcwdncs  cfchue,

Mcdyll  wyth  no  falfhood  whych  ncvcrprcvyd  wcll$

AlTay  when  thovv  wyic  and  thovv  Ihalt  fynde  mc  trcuc  ;
Wynn  fhalt  thou  nought  but  lofe  every  dclc,

Penee  in  thy  Pauvvkner  fewc  fhalt  thou  fcele :

ln  fmokcs  and  fmclls  thow  Ihalt  have  myckle  wo,

That  unnethe  for  fykncs  on  Erth  faalt  thovv  go.

I never  faw  true  worke  treuly  but  onc,

Of  whych  in  thys  tretys  thc  trevvth  I have  told.

Stody  only  therfore  to  make  our  Sttnc  :

For  therby  may  thovv  vvyn  both  Sy^ver  and  Gold,

Uppon  my  wrytynge  therfore  to  ground  the  be  bold  :k  .

So  fhalt  thovv  lofe  nought  yf  God  bc  thy  gyde,

Truft  to  my  Do&ryne  and  therby  abyde.

•i  j Remembcr  hovv  Man  ys  moft  noblc  Creature,

In  erths  Corapofycyon  that  ever  God  vvroughr,

In  vvhom  are  the  fowre  Elements  proportyonyd  by  natare ;
A naturali  Mercuryalytc  whych  coft  ryght  nought,

Out  oThys  myncr  byArte  yt  muft  be  brought;

For  our  Mettalls  be  nought  ells  but  myners  too,

Of  our  Soon  and  our  Moone,  vvyfc  Rejvtond  fcyd  fo.

14»  The  clerenes  of  the  c Moone  and  of  the  Soone , bryght,
Into  thefe  tvvo  Myners  defendyth  fecretly,

Howbeyt  thc  clcernes  bc  hyd  fro  thy  fyght :

By  craft  thou  flialt  make  ytt  to  appere  openly,

Thys  hyd  Stone , thys  one  thyng  therfore  putrcfyc:

Wadi  hym  wyth  hys  owne  broth  tyllvvhytehebecoomi
Then  Ferment.hym  wyttely,  novvehere  ys  allandfoom.

Nou


Experiments.


l9i


Novv  to  God  Almyghty  I tliee  Recommend,

Whych  grauntc  thc  by  Grace  to  knowe  thys  onc  thing.
For  now  ys  thys  Ereatys  brought  to  an  end:

And  God  of  hys  Mcrcy  to  hys  blyflc  us  bryng,
Sanftus,  San5tus,  Sanffus',  tvherc  Angelis  do  fyng :
Prayfyng  without  ccafyngc  hys  gloriofe  Magcftye,
‘Whych  he  in  hys  Kyngdome  graunte  us  for  to  fec.


An.  Dom,  1471.


Explicit  Alchimi <*  Tr  aci  at  ut  Fhilofophit,

Cujut  RyplaGeorge,  Canonicus^  Auttor  erat  $
rjAlille,  quadringentis  feptuaginta  unoq-
Annis  qui  feriptus  empofitufq-,  fuit.

K^Anilon  Icfferpr&beprtce^  qtufo  Iuvamen ,
fllt  purgamen  leve  pojl  vitam  ut  fit  Arnen.


Englijhed.


Thus  hecre  the  Er  aci  of  \_Alchimy  doth  end,
Whych  (Eraci)  was  by  George  Ripley  Chanon  pen’dj
x was  Compofed,  Writt,  andSign’d  his  owne,
n Anno  twice  Seav’n  hundred  feav’nty  one :

Readerl  Aflift  him,  make  it  thy  defire,

That  after  Lyfe  he  may  have  gentle  Fire.


men.


Dd


1 94


LIBER  PATRIS

S A P I E N T I AEi


How  that  in  thys  Boke  bcginnetb  to  rede,  (fpede
Keepe  vvel!  thys  Councell  the  better  fchalt  thow
Be  thovv  in  a place  fecret  by  thy  felfe  alone,  (done
That  noe  man  fee  or  here  vvhat  thovv  fchalt  fay  o

, Yet  er7 thovv  begyn  to  rede  mach,  take  thovv  good  hede,
Wyth  whom  thovv  kepcft  company  I councell  thee  indede  j
Truft  not  thy  freind  too  much,  wherefoere  thov$  goe,  *

For  he  that  thovv  truftefl  beft  fometyme  may  be  thye  Foe.


3 . And  take  hede  to  the  vvords  of  the  Fader  of  Wyfdoro,
How  he  techeth  hys  Sonne  how  he  fchould  done  ;

Tokepe  hys  preiepts  of  bodely  governance

And  wyih  hys  Conyng  he  wyll  the  gretly  advance.

4.  And  yf  thow  vvylt  not  to  hys  wordys  take  hede,
Thowjfchale  ftand  here  oft  in  gret  feare  and  dred.

For  he  that  hath  a fore  wytt  he  nedes  not  do  amyfie,

And  he  that  doth  Folly  the  Folly  fchalbe  hys.

5.  Now  my  dere  Senne  be  thow  not  a know
To  Lerned  nor  to  Leud,  to  Hygh  nor  to  Low  :

Neyther  to  Young  nor  Old,  Rych  nor  Poore,

Unto  them  thow  tech  nothyng  my  Lore.

6.  Al


I 'Pater  Sapientia .

6.  Alfo  to  fcuche  raen  that  hold  therafelves  wyfe.

And  fo  forth  to  the  foolys  that  glyde  on  the  Ice  ;

They  weene  in  grete  Bokes  fchould  be  the  Art

Of  the  Science  of  Alchemy,  but  they  be  not  worth  a fart.

I

7.  Therefor  my  Sonn  to  thec  thys  Science  I may  well  teach.
And  yf  thow  wylt  upon  thy  enemy  be  wreach;

Or  to  purchafe  or  build  any  good  thyng,

]t  fchalbe  to  thy  gret  furtheryng.

8.  Thys  vvorthy  Scjence  of  Alchemj  if  thoiv  vvylt  it  Icare,
Alyttlemonyoutofthy  purfethow  muft  forbeare;

To  buy  therewyth  Flos  Floram  it  is  moft  worthieft,

And  to  build  well  her  Cabyn  and  her  Neft.

9.  And  if  thow  put  out  mony  for  any  other  thing,

It  is  to  thy  loflc ; and  tothygreat  hindring.*
Exceptytbeforthy  workes  naturali  Foode,

Which  is  had  out  of  Stone,  Ayre  and  Wood.

I o.  And  if  thow  have  all  thyngs  wythin  thegrowing,
Then  thow  needeft  not  to  buy  any  manner  of  thing,

That  fchould  be  to  thys  Science  belonging,

But  beware  of  thy  felfe  for  feare  of  hanging.

11.  For  then  thow  and  thys  Science  were  forever  loft,
If  thow  makethereof  any  manner  ofboaft,

To  any  Man  or  Woman,  Old  or  Young,

Beware  of  thy  felfe  for  feare  of  difcovering.

1 2.  For  if  thow  make  any  man  privie
Of  thy  Councell,  Rich  or  Needy,

Thow  muft  fo  beware  Sleeping  or  Waking,

For  once  y magining  of  Money  making.

13.  For  yf  God  fends  thee  grace  and  underftanding,

Wyth  thys  Scjence  thow  mayft  have  good  lyving :

But  beware  offpeach  ofWomen  liberali,

And  of  the  voice  and  fight  of  Children  generali.

Dd  2


14.


Tater  Sapientia .

14.  Som  in  thyne  ownehowfe  thow  maift  well  gett
A good  Morfeli  of  meat  tby  mouth  to  fvveet,

Both  Pheafant,  Partridge,  Plover  and  Leveret,

Though  thow  cry  yt  not  owte  in  the  common  Market.

1 5 . Thercfore  kepe  clofe  of  thy  Tongue  and  of  thy  Hand,
From  the  Officers  and  Governours  of  the  Land  ;

And  from  other  men  that  they  of  thy  Craft  nothing  know,
For  in  vvytnes  thereof  they  wyll  thee  hang  and  draw.

16.  And  thereof  the  People  will  the  at  Sefiions  indighr,
And  great  Trealon  againft  the  they  wyll  write}

Wythowt  that  the  Kings  grace  be  to  thee  more,

Thow  fchalt  for  everin  thys  world  be  forlore.

17.  Alfoe  wythowt  thow  be  fure  of  another  thyng,

To  purchafe  the  Lycence  of  thy  King ;

For  ali  manner  of  doubts  thee  fchall  betide,

The  better  thow  maifte  Worke,  and  both  goe  and  ride.

18.  Alfo  another  thing  I fchall  thee  Iere,

The  poorc  People  take  thpw.nothing  deare,

But  ever  ferve  thy  God  alway  at  the  begynnyng,

And  among  the  poore  People  the  better  fchalbe  thy  Jivyng.

1 9-  Now  my  Ctylde  to  my  precepts  looke  thow  take  hede,
Whatfoever  fall  after  the  better  fchall  thow  fpede.

Better  it  ys  to  have  a thyng,  then  for  it  to  wifh.

For  when  thow  fcelft  a Sore  tis  hard  for  thee  to  get  a Leech*

20.  Now  my  deare  Sor.  to  the  I wyll  declare,

More  of  thys  Warke  which  fchalbe  thy  welfaire  $

If  thow  canft  confider  all  my  fayings*

For  therewyth  thow  mayeft  finde  a full  precious  thing.

2 1 . And  «SWthough  thys  Writing  be  made  in  Ryme,

Yet  take  thow  thereat  noe  greate  difdaine.

Till  thow  bafi  proved  my  words  in  deede  and  in  thought,
i watt  it  well  it  fchalbe  fet  at  nought.


Tater  Sapientia,

22.  Thereforof  ali  Bodyes  and  Spyrits  more  or  lefle,

Mercury  iscalled  Flos  Florum  and  woithieft  Prynccflc  :

For  her  Birth  and  marveious  dealing,

i Scheys  moft  worthieft  to  have  byne  King.

23.  For  fche  ys  Erthand  Water  moft  hevicft,

And  fche  will  conjoyne  wyth  Fire  and  Aire  moft  lyghteft  ;

And  fo  forth  wyth  her  love  fche  will  run  and  flee.

For  fche  delighcech  noe  othcr  game  or  glee.

*

24.  Sorae  fay  that  of  Sulphur  and  Mercury  ali  Bodyes  minerali
Ingendered  in  the  Erth  with  divers  Colours  dadd  : (are  made,
By  the  vertue  of  Decoccion  before  Preperacion,

To  the  lykenes  of  every  body  Mynerall  in  ther  fafhion.

2J.  I will  firft  begin  wyth  Saturne  after  other  mens  fayings,
How  he  ys  ingendered  in  the  Erth  wyth  unclene  Mercury  flying  :
Andof  Mercury  heys  moft  hevieft  wyth  black  Sulphury  Erth
Save  he  ys  fofc  of  fufion,  and  hys  Sulphur  nothing  fixed.  (mixed,

2 6.  lupit  er  is  a whyte  Body  made  of  pure  Mercury  outward,
\nd  of  clere  Sulphur  fomewhat  Erthly  and  vvhiteinward  ;

-fe  ys  in  kynde  fofteft  and  vvell  in  his  fixation.

For  he  is  almoft  fixr,  but  he  iacketh  Decoftion.

27.  Mars  ys  a white  Body  moft  of  unclene  5 in  the  Erth  y'made,
\nd  he  ys  hardeft  of  fufion  with  Sulphur  Erthly  cladd  j
fo  blacknes  and  redneshe  will  fooneft  confume,

1 Jy  heate  or  by  corrofivc  when  the  Spirit  beginneth  to  fume.

1 28.50/ isthe  pureftTomwhat  red,&  is  made  of  dene  £ & Sulphur
• gendered  with  clere  red  Sulphur,  in  the  Erth  well  mixed,  (fixed,
I Ind  therefor  he  ys  without  defalt  and  Iacketh  no  degree ;
lar  heys  almoft  hardeft  of  Fufion  and  hevieft  m ponderofiicy.

I 2 9.  Venus  ys  a Body  more  red  of  pure  £ made  in  hys  fubftance,
I ^aft  of  red  Sulphur  and  greene  and  therein  is  greate  variance  ;

1 ) the  Erth  ingendered  with  Corrofive  and  bitter  fubftance,-
1 /eil  fixed  and  hard  of  fufion,  rude  in  governance. f!

D d 3 30 .Mercury


ipS


‘Pater  Sapientia ?.

50.  Mtrcury  ys  a Body  if  he  be  with  a Subfiance  moved,
Mixing  one  kinde  with  his  kinde,  fo  fchall  he  be  loved  ;

One  Spirit  received  vvyth  another,the  which  of  chcm  be  maine,

Is  caufe  of  ingeneration  of  every  body  Mettalyne.

31  ,Lum  ys  a pure  white  Body  of  clene  Mercury  & Sulphur  white
And  fcheis  a litle  hard  of  fufion  & almoll  weli  fixed,  (ingendercd
And  fche  is  next  cleaneft  in  Tinfture  of  whitenes,

Of  Ponderofity  light,  of  lupiter  bearir.g  his  whitenes.

32.  And  foe  after  che  Colour  of  that  Erth  ys  Sulphuri  and  re-
Some  men  do  fay  ys  engendered  every  Mettall ; . (ceptuail,

But  my  Son  the  perfeft  worke  of  thys  alteration,

I fchall  informe  the  true  vvay  of  another  fafhion.

3 3.  Now  have  I dedared  the  working  of  the  Bodies  Mynerall,
Whereof  they  be  ingendered  after  other  mens  fayings  over  ali  j
And  as  in  place  of  the  Erth  one  Body  was  fully  wrought,

Soe  muli  the  artificiali  Medicine,  beor  elfe  ic ys  nought.

34.  Now  will  I declare  the  worthines  of  Mercury  in  fpeciall,
How  fche  ys  the  notableft  Spirit  that  ys  mynerall,

Moli  marvelous  in  working  and  in  degree,

Sche  yscalled  the  Matter  principalleft  of  the  three*

35.  Alfo  fche  ys  very  fubtile  in  many  things  artificiali,

Sche  will  both  give  and  take  Tin&ure  moli  fpeciall,

To  hym  or  of  hym  that  fche  loveth  raofl  bell,

In  fpeciall  when  fche  ys  warmed  in  her  Nell.  ^

3 6.  My  Son  Mercury  ys  called  the  mightieft  Flos  florum ,

And  moli  royall,  and  richtftofall  Singulorum ;

Sche  ys  very  Patron  and  Princes  moli  royall.

And  fche  ys  very  Mother  of  every  Mettall.

37.  Sche  ys  Vegitable,  Animalle  and  Minerali,

Sche  ys  Foure  in  kinde,  and  One  in  generali.’

Sche  ysErth,  Aire,  Water  and  Fyre,

Araong  all  other  fchc  hath  no  Peere,

38.  Sci


"Tater  Sapientia.

38.  Sche  kylleth  and  fliyeth,  and  alfo  doth  calcine,
Sche  dyeth,  and  alfo  doth  fche  live  againe  j

Sche  giveth  lyfe  and  alfo  ingreflion,

For  joyntly  iche  ys  three  in  one.

39.  Scheysa  very  frendly  mixar,

The  progeneration  of  a greate  Elixar :

Scheysboth  Body  Soule  and  Spirite,

Coloiir  very  red,  black  and,,  white.

40.  Many  be  the  wooers  that  hang  on  her  tayle,
fche  will  noc  with  them  1'deale;

They  would  her  wedd  againft  her  will,

Withfoemen  thatliken  her  full  ili.

41.  Sche  will  deale  with  no  rnanner  of  wight,

But  with  her  Husband  as  it  ys  greate  right  ;

With  him  fche  will  beare  much  fruite,

For  he  ys  by  nature  of  her  felfe  fame  fute.

42.  My  Je«of  hem  Fooles  have  much  difpight,

And  therin  fuch  Fooles  loofe  their  light  :

For  fometymes  he  ys  darke,  and  fometymes  bright,

For  he  ys  lyke  no  other  wight.

43-  For  if  they  have  their  kynde  ingendering,

Their  naturali  foode  and  good  keeping,

They  fchall  increafe  frute  by  dene,

Very  red  and  white,  King  and  Quecne.

44-  My  Son  in  thys  Scjence  I doe  deny,

AII  things  that  be  difcording  truly,

AH  rnanner  of  Sales  I doe  dcfie,

And  all  rnanner  of  Sulphurs  in  vvaters  of  Corrofie.

45.  Alfo  AIloome,Vitriall,  Auripigmentum  andHaire,
Gold,Silver,  Alkaly  and  Sandiver ;

Honey,  Wax,  and  Oyles  or  Calx  elfe,

Gumms,  Galls,  and  alfo  Egg  fhells.


1 99


46.  Alfo


200


'Pater  Sapienti#*

4 6.  Alfo  I defie  Arttimony.B- ■: rall,  and  ChriftaH,
Rofin,  Pitch,  alfo  Amber,  Jett  and  Corrall  ■,

Hearbs,  Dated  Stones,  Marble,  or  Tmglas,  .

If  there  come  any  of  ali  thefe  ic  ys  the  worfe.

47.  Alfo  Berrills,  Gotts  Hornes,  and  Alome  plome,
Good  with  them  will  none  be  done ;

All  chings  that  difcordeth  from  Mettall,

It  ys  contrary  to  thys  worke  in  generali.

48.  My  Son  many  fooles  to  me  have  fought,

But  they  and  I accord  right  nought ;

I leave  them  there  a9 1 them  finde,

And  as  Fooles  I makc  them  blinde.

49.  For  whych  Mercury  they  have  errd  full  fore
And  then  when  they  had  they  could  doe  no  more,
Therefor  in  Phylofophen  fche  beat’th  the  floower.

For  fche  ys  King,  Prirfce,  and  Emperour.

50.  Yet  my  deare  Son  be  thovv  not  a knowne
To  Learned,  nor  to  Lewde,  to  High,  nor  to  Low ;

That  thys  worke  (hndeth  by  Mercury  and  in  her  fire,
Her  owne  fpeciall  Love  both  life  and  deare.

51 . For  he  ys  her  Son,  fche  ys  hysFright,

In  whome  fche  worketh  all  her  myghe :

He  ys  her  Son,  fche  ys  hys  Mother,

Sche  loveth  him  peramore  and  no  other.

5 2 . In  Sol,  and  Lune,  in  her  meeting  ys  all  love,

For  of  Mercury  only  ys  al!  her  behove,

And  with  them  fche  worketh  all  her  inight,

Bntthey  may  never  increafe  on  fright.

53.  Therefor  it  ys  poffible  to  cafl:  a Projedtion  pure,
Upon  a Million  to  make  a perfed  Body  of  tinSure :
Wyth  Medicine  of  Spirits  well  joyr.ed  and  fixed.

It  fchall  not  be  perceived  where  it  ys  well  mixed.


^Pater  Sapientia.  201

54.  And  therefor  if  there  com  Silver  or  Gold  In  at  thy  Gate,

The  which  roen  ufe  in  $Oyne  or  in  common  Piate •

Ifweareby  Godthatall  thys  world  hath  wrought,

AII  thy  labour  and  warke  fchall  turne  to  nought.

55.  For  with  what  Mettal!  foever  that  Mercttry  be joyned,

Becaufe  ofher  Coldnes  and  Moiftnes  fche  ys  acloyd:

Putthem  never  fodofe  togeder  fche  will  fumeanon.

And  when  they  come  into  the  fire  fche  wil  fonc  be  gone.

56.  Therefore  Mercurj  hath  a Lover  that  pafleth  them
A thoufandfold,  who  fo  will  him  ken

And  he  ys  her  Lover  and  her  Leman  fweete,

And  fo  hys  Counccll  fche  will  keepe.

57.  Both  in  hys Chamber  and  alfo  in  hys  Bedd,

Alfo  alive  and  when  they  bynedead  j

Seeke  yee  forth  fooles  as  Xe  have  fought,

For  in  ali  other  things  finde  yee  right  nought.

58. N0W  my  deare  So»  to  thee  I will  indight,

The  truth  in  word  and  deede  I will  write : > .

How  that  a precious  Stent  (halbe  made,

Thee  to  rejoyce  and  make  thee  full  glad,

59.  As  I faid  in  the  3 a.  Chapter  unto  my  Conclufion,

How  I fchould  informe  the  truth  after  another  falhion.

And  to  performe  thys  Scyence  both  in  word  and  deede.

In  making  of  our  Medicine  God  muft  us  fpeede.

60.  The  which  ys  called  the  greate  Elixer,

Andysverily  made  with  a ftronge  mjxar;

The  which  is  a Stone  very  Minerali,

And.  thow  maifthim  wellgetteverall.

61.  My  Se»  thow  fchalt  take  to  Mercurj  no  other  thing,

But  Erth  that's  heavy  and  hard  and  ftiffftanding:

The  which  in  himfelfe  ys  derke  bright  dry  and  cold,

To  joyne  them  togeder  thow  maift  be  full  bold.

Ec


6:.  One


202


Tater  Sapientia.

<52.0ne  of  ehem  to  io  parts  of  that  Water  running  moft  heavieft
And  they  fchalbe  both  one,  and  to  thywarke  moft  mighticft.*

Then  haft  thow  Manand  Woman  togeder  brougbt,

The  w hich  ys  done  by  greate  love  in  a thought.

63.  The  which  twobe  both  Spirits,  & one  Body  moft  heavieft,
When  they  be  in  your  Chamber  and  bed  joyned  in  the  Elemenc
The  which  ys  more  bigger,  and  bigger  hott  and  dry,  (lighteft,
And  therein  they  will  both  kifs  togeder  &neither  weepenor  cry.

6 4.  For  when  Erth  and  Water  ys  well  mixed,

By  the  vertue  of  the  lighteft  Eiement  well  hardned  and  fixed :
For  before  that  time  they  be  Water  running  both,

And  then  fchall  turne  to  fix  body  be  they  never  fo  loath.

65.  For  in  theyr  bed  they  fchall  make  a perpetuali  Conjun&ion,
After  thefceding  of  thelight  Eiement  and  of  their  proportion ;
Soe  fchould  they  be  decoft,  having  the  parfeit  fixafeion,

Tn  the  likcnes  of  a body  in  fufien  having  hys  fafhion.

66.  But  at  the  firft  in  their  Bed  they  may  indure  no  greate  heate,
Soe  as  they  may  well  labourin  their  Bed  for  fweate  :

Att  the  firft  if  there  be  in  their  Chamber  overmuch  red  Colour,
Haftily  going  thereto  will  caufe  greate  Dolour.

67.  Forin  their  firft  Ncft  they  fchould  be  both  water  running,
And  becaufe  of  heate  they  fchould  be  ever  drying.

And  fo  therein  become  a fubtill  dry  Subftance,

The  which  warke  fchall  thee  greately  avsunce.

68.  Therefor  their  Ncft  muftbemadeof  aftrongkinde,

Of  the  moft  hardeft  and  deereft  Body,  that  they  not  out  winde  j
For  if  it  fo  be  that  their  Chamber  or  Neft  begin  to  breake,

Anon  out  thereof  they  will  begin  to  Creake,  - •

69.  And  then  ys  ali  thy  warke  and  thy  greate  labour  loft,
Then  thou  maift  begin  againe  upon  a new  coft,

And  fo  thow  mayft  not  be  negligent  and  hafty,  but  of  the  bed  be
Without  it  be  hard  ftnff  and  deere  it  will  not  indure.  (fure,

70.  And


Tater  Sapienti#.

70.  And  if  thow  wil  at  the  firft  hartd  give  fuddaine  heate,
It  will  unto  thy  Watke  be  nothing  meete ; . • 1

And  if  thow  Icc  him  have  any  fu  Idaine  gte*te  Cold,

AII  thys  fchall  brekcthy  warke,  then  att  thow  to  bold.


20}


71.  Let  their  Neft  be  fomewhat  large  with  a broade  roufe,
And  thercin  they  fchall  abide  if  it  be  ftrong  and  dofe  above ;

And  in  proportion  put  thereto  nothing  more  nor  lefle,
Butasysfayd  beforeif  thowdocyt  ystheworfe.

72.  Alfo  from  the  beds  head  there  muft  rife  a highe  Spoute,

And  another  almoft  downe  to  the  bottome  that  the  Spirh  go  not
For  thou  muft  fave  the  flyers  that  fwim  into  the  upper  place,  (out;
For  they  may  hereafcer  ingendera  body  as  well  as  the  otherin

(fpace.

73.  Alfo  be  fure  that  thow  put  in  their  Red  no  other  thing,
Then  thereof  thow  fchalt  have  no  greate  winnyng,

If  thow  do  thys  it  fchall  be  to  thee  for  the  beft
To  keepe  them  clofe  from  flying  and  warme  in  their  Neft.


74.  Firft  with  foft  fyre  her  Neft  muft  be  warmed,

With  a litle  bigger  Fyre  with  overmuch  they  fchalbe  harmed,


Under  thy  Chamber  flowre  meafure  thy  Fyre  with  tytne,

Then  comrneth  the  reward,  Gold  and  Silver  fine.

7;.  Afterthe  quantity  fpace  and  tyme  muft  be  had,

For  to  deale  togeder  they  be  in  their  dealing  glad.

And  how  long  fpace  and  tyme  I cannot  well  fay,

That  they  in  their  Chamber  and  Neft  wilbe  in  fport  and  play.


76.  Behold  the  uppermoft  of  their  Neft  what  there  comrneth
The  fweting  of  their  Bodys  labouring  round  aboute,  (ont,

And  when  they  have  played  and  fweate  and  laboured  fo  fore,
They  wilbe  ftill,and  neither  labour  nor  fweate  any  more.


1


77.  Then  let  them  coole  eafily,  and  draw  their  breath,
And  then  there  fchalbe fome  above  and  fome  beneath  :
There  thou  fchalt  fee  a Stone  as  it  were  grey  pouther,
Which  fchalbe  to  the  a ryght  greate  wonder.

Ee  2


78.  And


Tater  Sapienti#.

78.  Then  take  ehem  out  of  their  Chatnber  and  Bed  anon.

And  lay  them  upon  a Marble  ftone  and  breake  them  thereon :

And  looke  whac  thow  haft  in  of  Colonr  and  Ponderofity,

Pue  to  him  as  much  of  Flos  florum  greateft  in  dignity.

79.  That  ys  the  fame  Spirit  that  thow  hadft  before,

And  fo  medie  them  togeder  and  leare  them  the  fame  lore ;

A ltogeder  in  another  Bed  and  in  their  Chamber  they  muft  be,

For  a marvelous  warke  thereof  thow  fcbalt  undctftand  and  fee.-

80.  And  thus  fo  oft  thow  muft  Multiplie  thy  Warke,

To  afcend  and  defcend  intothe  Aire  asdoth  the  Larke,*

For  when  the  Larke  ys  weary  above  in  hys  ftound,

Anon  he  falleth  right  downe  to  the  ground.

81.  Behold  well  their  Body,  and  to  their  head  lay  thineEire,.
And  harken  thow  well  what  warke  they  make  there ;

lf  they  begin  to  fing  any  manner  of  voyce,

Give  them  more  heate  till  thow  heare  no  noyee.

82.  And  thus  give  them  more  heate  in  their  Chamber  and  Bed
Till  thou  heareft  no  manner  of  noyfe  rumbling  to  nor  fro:  (alfo,
And  thus  continue  in  their  Bed  in  their  fporting  playes,

Afrer  the  quantity  thereof  continue  fo  manydayes.

83.  When  their  play  and  wreftling  ys  ali  welldone,

]n  their  voyce  finging  and  cryirg  and  fweating  up  and  downe  j;
Give  their  Chamber  bigger  heate  till  their  Nelt  be  red,

And  fo  bring  them  downe  low  and  have  no  feare  nor  dread.

84.  For  thus  with  heate  they  fchalbe  brought  full  low,

That  they  fchall  in  their  Bed  ne  cry  nor  crow,

But  as  a Body  Iye  ftill  downe  in  their  Bed;

In  their  owne  liknes  as  they  were  bodyes  deadi  ■>

' 85.  Of  Grey  and  White  ys  ali  hys  cheife  Colour,

For  then  he  ys  patt  allhysgreate  Dolour:

I fweare  by  Almighty  God  that  ai!  hath  wronghr,

Thow  haft  found  out  that  many  other  Mcn  hath  foughr.

K6.  Then


205


Tater  Sapientia.

86.  Then  take  thow  hym  out  of  hys  Cchamber  and  Bed,

And  thow  fchalt  then  finde  a fixe  Body  as  he  were  dead ;

Keepe  thow  hym  clofe  and  fecretly  within  thy  place,

And  thanke  Almighty  God  of  hys  grace.

ffought

87.  Now  my  Son  before  thys,  after  thys  Science  I have  right  well
And  thus  to  thee  I have  the  Whitc  Elixer  parfetly  wrought ;

And  if  thow  wilt  of  the  Red  Elixer  parfetly  underftand*

Thow  muft  take  luch  another  warke  in  hand.

88.  My  Son  whan  thow  haft  wrought  more  upon  mora,
Dublingeach  time  as  I faid  before  •

Make  thow  what  thow  wilt  of  Red  fubftmce,

As  i did  the  White  warke  in  manner  of  Governance;

89.  Then  thow  muft  take  the  Red  Stone  that  ys  all  ponder,

IAnd  hy  on  a Mable  Stone  and  breake  him  afunder ;

And  to  medie  him  with  the  white  Spirit  and  Water  cleere,

And  fo  puthim  in  hys  Bed  and  Gharober  in  theFire.

90.  And  fb  in  hys  Chamb.  & in  hys  Bed,  he  muft  ali  thys  while  be
Till  thow  haft  turn*d  and  broght  him  to  another  manner  ofglce:.
Thys  Red  Elixer  if  thow  wilt  open  workeheare,

Thys  manner  of  Schoole  thow  muft  right  well  leare,

91.  Thow  muft  hang  him  in  his  Chambcr  with  red  Golour,

Till  he  be  fixed  and  brought  from  hys  great  Dolour :

Then  of  thys  worthy  warke  be  not  thow  agaft,

For  in  the  warke  all  the  worftyspaft.

92. And  fo  in  hys  fiery  Neft  and  Chambcr  let  him  befure,

For  the  longer  he  be  in,  the  better  fchalbe  hys  tindure  ;

Soethathe  runn  not  like  blood  overcoming  hys  fufion,

Then  haft  thow  parfedly  thys  worke  in  conclufion.

93.  Thus  he  muft  continue  in  thys  greate  heate  of  Firing,

Tillhe  bc  full  fixed  that  he  be  not  running  nor  flying  ;

Then  he  will  give  tindure  without  Number  running  like  W3X,

Jnto  hys  like  of  fufion  he  will  both  joyne  and  mix,

E e 3 94.  And


i


20  6


Tater  Sapientia»

94.  And  yfthy  Warke  be  thus  well  guided  and  fo  forth  led,
Then  hift  thow  in  thy  Warke  right  well  and  wittily  fped  :

For  if  thow  do  otherwife  then  I have  thee  could,

In  thc  adventure  of  thy  warke  thow  maift  beto  bold.

95.  For  if  thow  warke  by  good  meafure  and  parfeft  tyme,
Thow  fchalt  have  very  good  Gold  and  Silver  fine  ;

Than  fchalt  thow  be  richer  in  thy  felf  than  any  King,

Wythowt  he  labour  thc  Science  and  have  the  fame  thing.

96.  Now  my  deare  Son  I fchall  teach  thee  how  to  caft  a Projcfti-
Therein  lyeth  ali  the  greate  prafetnes  with  the  Conclufion:  ( on,
To  leade  an  imparfeft  Body  to  hys  greate  parfeftnefle,

In  joyning  that  like  to  hys  like  thow  ftandeft  in  no  diftres.

97.  For  when  thow  haft  joyned  the  milke  to  the  Bodyes  dry,
Than  haft  thow  the  White  and  Red  Elixer  truly :

The  which  ys  a Marvilous  and  very  precious  Stone,

For  therein  lieth  in  thys  Science  ali  the  worke  upon.

' 98.  In  thys  Science  thefe  Stones  be  in  themfelves  fo  precious,
That  in  their  working  and  nature  they  be  marvelous :

To  fchew  thee  the  greate  vertue  furthermore  I will  declare,

That  if  thow  canft  with  thys  manner  of  working  well  fare.

99.  Firft  thow  muft  take  of  that  Body  which  ys  next  Sol  in  per-
And  of  his  colour  toward  in  ponderofity  & proportion:  (feftion,
Being  foluble  as  it  were  cleere  blood  running,

In  the  hot  Element  yt  ys  alwayes  lighteft  and  fleeting.

x 00.  Then  take  parte  of  the  Red  Slixtr  that  ys  the  precions
And  caft  him  upon  that  body  that  ys  blood  running  anon : (Stone
And  whan  thow  haft  thus  parfeflly  thys  warke  wrought,

It  fchalbe  turned  into  parfe3  Sol  with  licte  labour  or  nought.

toi.On  the  fame  wife  do  for  Luna  that  is  in  the  Colour  fo  white,
In  joyning  with  that  body  that  is  fchining  and  fomewhat  light  j
In  thc  fame  proportion  caft  him  the  very  white  Stone,

And  then  ys  all  thy  greateft  warke  both  made  and  done.

102;  Thar


207'


'Pater  Sapienti ce.

ici.  Than  haft  thow  both  the  Red  warke  and  the  White,
'hereforbleffeibe  thattyme  both  dayand  night:

:or  tbys  warke  that  ftandeth  by  greate  vertue  and  love,

"how  mufi:  thanke  Almighty  God  in  heaven  above.

lo^Sonn  in  the  21.  Chapter  there  write  I a full  true  Ritne,
That  ys  to  fay  unto  thys  warke  thow  have  no  greate  difdaine ;

Cill  thow  have  proved  my  words  in  deede  and  thought,
know  it  weJI  thys  Science  fchalbe  fet  at  nought.

104.  My  Son  to  thefe  laft  precepts  looke  thow  takefgood  hede
!or  better  ’cys  to  have  then  to  wilh  for  in  time  of  neede :

<or  who  fo  ys  bold  in  time  to  a Freind  to  breake,
dethatysthy  Freindmay  bethy  Fo  and  hys  emnity  wreake.

105.  And  therefor  my  Soni  fchall  give  theea  greate  charge,
n uttering  of  fpeech  be  thow  not  to  large ;

fo  teli  every  man  what  thow  haft  in  Silver  or  Gold,

;or  to  have  it  from  thee  many  men  wilbe  right  bold.

io<5.  Alfo  ufe  not  to  revill  or  ryott  that  fchould  exceede
'0  thy  bodily  health,  the  better  fchalt  thow  fpeede ;

Jfe  temperate  dyet  and  temperate  travell,

'or  when  Phyfician  thee  fayleth  thys  fchall  thee  availe.

(Conclulions

107.  And  leave  all  blind  warkes  that  thow  hall  feene  or  heard  of
)r  proved  by  Subii mations,  Preperations,  Diftillations,  or  Diflo-
)f  fuch  manner  of  things  greatcBokes  do  greatly  fpecifie  (lutions;
knd  all  thofe  contrary  fayings  in  this  Craft  1 do  plainly  deny  .

108.  Alfo  my  Son  remember  how  thow  art  mortali,
kbiding  but  a while  in  thys  World  which  ys  terreftriall :

'how  wotteft  not  how  long  nor  hence  how  foone,

'hat  death  fchall  thee  vifitt  and  unto  thee  Come.

109.  And  remember  thee  well  at  thy  departing,

Vhome  thow  lovedft  and  truftedft  beft  old  and  young  .*
like  him  thineHeire  and  moft  of  thy  Councell,

ind  give  him  thy  Cunning  or  thy  Boke  every  deale.

jio.  But


2o8


'Tater  Sapientia .

i lo.Butbeware  of  flittering  and  glofing  People,
OfBoaftersand  Crackers  for  they  will  thee  beguile  :

Ofthy  precious  Cunning  behinde  or  beforne,

And  when  they  have  .their  intent  they  will  give  thee  a fcorne.

m.Thereformake  no  Man  ofthy  Councell  rude  norruftie,
Bnt  him  that  thow  knoweft  both  true  and  truftie ;

In  ryding  and  going  fleeping  and  waking,

Both  in  word  and  deede  and  in  hys  difpofing.

1 1 2.  Alfo  in  thy  owne  Chamber  Iooke  thow  be  fecree,

That  thy  dores  and  windowes  be  clofe  Ihet ;

For  fome  wyll  corae  and  Iooke  in  every  Comer,

And  anon  they  will  aske  whac  thow  makeft  there.

x 1 3.  And  therefore  a good  excufe  muft  foone  be  ha d,

Or  elfe  thow  fchalt  verily  wine  for  co  run  madd ;

Say  thow  laboureftfore  both  fleeping  and  waking,

To  the  perfeft  way  of  flrange  Colours  making.

114.  Asytbe  fure  B:ce,VermilIion,  Aurum  Muficum,  & others
Or  elfe  with  fome  people  thow  fchalt  never  have  a doe ; (mos
Alfo  thereof  thow  muft  have  many  famples  to  fchew,

Or  elfe  they  that  harmes  thinke  will  fay  fo.

11 5.  Alfo  furthermore  I give  thee  right  good  warning,

Beware  of  thy  warking  and  alfo  of  thy  uttering.

For  the  examination  of  the  People  better  or  worfe.

Ere  thow  have  for  thy  warke  thy  mony  in  thy  purfe.

11 6.  Therefor  take  heede  my  Stn  unto  thefe  Chaptersiixfcore
And  all  mannerof  things  faid  what  fchould  be  don  before :

For  in  AJlronemy  thow  muft  have  right  good  feeling,

Or  elfe  in  thys  Boke  thow  fchalt  have  fimple  belicving.

117.  For  thow  muft  know  well  of  feaven  principle  Charaifters,
To  what  Bodyes  in  heaven  moving  that  they  be  likned  in  thofe
And  to  underftand  their  properties  and  their  Conditions,  (figures
In  Colours,  qualicies,  foftnes,  hardnes,  & in  their  proper  faftiionr,

u 8.  Now


IT  ater  Sapientia.  iop

1 18.  Now  Son  to  thee  that  underftandeft  parfeftion  & Sciences
Whether  it  be  Speculative  or  Pracktick  to  my  fentences  ?

Iln  thys  Science  and  labour  I thinke  it  greate,  ruthe,  JhJ  \ . 1 i’ . *

Therefore  I write  to  thee  very  trtith.


n$>.  And  to  thee  that  underftandeft  no  parfe&ion  nor  praftike

Iln  no  conclufion  proved  that  fchould  be  to  hys  warke  like,

By  Almighty  God  that  all  thys  world  hath  vyrought,

I have  faid  and  performed  to  thee  right  nought.

i , « 4 y %

120.  Therefore  my  Son  before  that*  thow  thys  Boke  begin,
Underftand  wifely  in  thys  what  ys  written  therein  :

Ifor  if  thow  canft  not  finde  by  thys  Boke  neither  Sei  nor  Moj/ne,
Then  go  forth  and  feeke  thow  faither  as  other  fooles  haye  done.

Explicit  Liter  ditius  Pater  Sapienti*.


I.  -A

U

i f v #


IU  tbe  nante  of  the  bolj  Trmiti ,
Uotv  flendus  gr


tue  noiy  Tr
grafe/o  hit
botn  Angel


hit  he .

Fyrfl  Godmade  both  An  gei  and  Heaven,  .

Na  alleflo  the  World  roythPUnetsfleaven  -
<jMan  and  Woman  wjtbgret  fenflewalite,

Sum  ofle(latey  andptber  in  hyrdegree .*

Both  Befl  andWorme  for  inthegrojvn  erepe ,
Everyech  in  hys  kynd  to  receve  hys  mete .

Egles  and  Forvles  in  the  Ey re  don fle.

And  fwemynge  oflFycbeys  aifo  in  the  See  :

Tytb  vygital  meyft  i er  and  ofihe  red  Graf*
And  allefo  of  the  why  £ hos  can  hymtake:
^Alle  meneral  tbyngtbdt  grorvyth in grotond.
Sum  to  encrefe  and fum  to  tnake  an  ena :

Alie  thes  bryngetb  noto  to  otvre  botofe,

Tbe  mightti  Ston  that  js flo precitts,

Thysryche  Reby , that  flo  n ofprjce 'a
The  tvbych  tvojfe  flendowtof  Paradyce :
Tbusmade  thegret  Ged  oflheveny
tyhychalle  ben  retoled under  Planets  fleaven :
j.  Godflend ut  parte  ofltbys  flecrete,

' ' And  oftbat  heven  that  ys flbeet.


n


A


M E N.


i i V


f ‘t


HV


i


iir


IYfethow  mi  It  thys  marke  begyn,

Than Jchrevy  the  clene  ofadethy  Seyne  :

Contrytt  in  bert  wyth  aliethythomght.

And  ever  thenke  on  hym  that  the  der  bvrvght*, , ,

Satis fadion  thow  t nake  wyth  allethy  myghtx
Thanthre  fayreflowers  thow  hafl  tnfyght jj  .

7 'et  nedeththemortd  ibycondefyiiqj . yav  ■

Take  thow  good  hede  nome  to  thys  lejjittty ...  H ^ ^ « -v  . ,
Tbowmujt  have  Grafe,  Nature,  and  Refen,

Spekelatif,  and  Coning,  wyth  goed  Conditio»:

T et  thow  mufl  have  more  nom  herto}  ]

Experiencc,  wyth  Pracktik,'  Prudent  alfo  •

Patien  t tbat  thow  bex  and  Hoii  in  Lyfyogs*  ^ . , y
Thenke  thow  on  thys  in  thy  beginings  .5
Thesfowrtyn  Hettys  as  I tbe  faye,

Ever  kepe  thow  man  botb  nyght  and  day,

Ofthy  defyres  thow  mayfi  not  tny(fe ,

Andaliefo  of  heven  thatfwe^thlej?.


HERMES  BIRD-


Roblemis  of  olde  likenes  and  fuguris,

Wych  proved  bynfru&uosoffcntens;

And  have  auftorite  grouided  in  Scripture,

By  refemblaunce  ofnotabil  apperence  ;

Wych  rooralices  concludyngonpcudence:
Lyke  as  the  Bibel  reherfeth  be  vvryting,

How  Trees  fum  tyme  cbefe  hemfelfc  a Kyng.

' . * > ,

i.Fitft  in  theyre  choife  they  namyd  the  Olyve
T.o  regne  amonghem, /«^ic^wdoth  expres ; .

But he hymfelfe can excufe hym  biyve,  . a .-

He  myghc  not  forfake  hys  fatnes : . '

Nor  the  Fig-tree  hys  jmorus  fwetnes : , *•'  >

Nor  the  Vyne  hys  holfum  frefche  terrage :

Wych  gyveth  cotnfort  to  all  manner  of  age.

Ff  3 3,  And


Hermes  TSirA.


*s


3.  And  fembleabil  Po jettt  laurtAt,

By  dctke  parabks  full  convenient  * „
Feyneinthac  Birdis  andBeltsof  eltate
As  rial  Egeles  and  Lyons  by  affent,

Sent  owte  writtes  to  holde  a Parleracnt  j

And  made  degrees  brevely  for  to  fey,

■ Sum  to  have  Lordfchip  and  fum  to  Obey.
,x\  r .*  ' 1 ' . *'•

4.  Egeles  in  the  Eyre  hyghelt  take  theyre  flyght,
Power  of  Lyons  onthe  growndeys  fene;

Cedre  amonge-Trees  highelt  ys  of  fight,

And  the  Laurer  of  natnre  ys  ever  grene,

Of  flowris  ali  Florra  Goddes  and  Quene
Thus  of  ali  thyng  ther  byh  diverfites.

Sum  of  eltate  and  fum  of  lower  degres.


5.  Pojetjs  write  wonderfull  lyknes.

And  Covert  kepe  hcmfelfe  full  clos  5 -
They  take  Beftes  and  Fowles  to  witnes :

Of  whos  feynyng  Fabelis  furit  a ros.

And  herfe  I cadunto  iny  purpos,

OtVte  of  the  PrcHfche  a tale  to  tranfedate,
Whych  in  a Pamphlet  I red  and  faw  as  I fate.

6.  Thys  Talo  wych  y rnake  of  mencion.

In  gros  reherfeth  playnelyto  dedate ,

The  Provirbjj  piyed  forraunfome

Of  a Tayr  tHjrde  that  vvas  take  in  a fnare,

Wond.  r delirus  to  fcape  owte  of  hir  care ;

Of  my ne  Au&or  followyng  the  profles,

So  as  it  fel  in  Ordery  fchall  expres,

7.  Whilom  ther  was  in  a fmill  vilage.

As  my  Auftor  miketh  reherfal  4

A Chorie  the  wich  had  luit  and  gs^t  corage,

Within  hymfelfe  by  hys  dekgeftc  traVel,

To  aray  hys  Garden  WffbhOtibil  reparel :

Oflenght  and  bredey  lyche  fquireand  long,
'Heggyd  and  dychyd  to  makeyt  fure  and  Itrong.


1


Hermes  Bird.

8.  AII  the  Aleys  made  playne  with  Sande,
Benches  coverid  with  new  Turves  grene,

5et  Erbes  with  Condites  at  the  endej
That  weliid  up  agen  the  Sun  fchenc,

Lyke  Silver  ftremys  as  any  criftal  dene :

The  burbely  Waves  upther  on  boylyng,
Rownde  as  Beral  theyr  bemys  owte  chedyng.

9.  Mides  the  Gatden  ftode  a frefh  Lawrer,
rher  on  a Byrde  fyngyngjboth  day  ahd  nyght  •

With  (hinyng  federis  brighter  then  Gold  weer,
Vych  wyth  hir  fong  made  hevy  hertis  lyght }

:or  to  behold  hit  was  an  hevenfy  fyght :

How  towerd  evyn  and  in  the  dawnyng,

Sche  dyd  her  paynd  moft  ameris  to  fyng.

10. Efperus  enforced  hyr  corage,

'owerd  evyn  when  Phebus  went  to  neft ;
vmonges  the  brauncbcs  to  hir . avauhtage :

‘0  fyng  hir  complyn  as  y t was  befl,

ind  at  the  ryfyng  to  the  Quene  Alcefl:

To  fyng  ageyne  as  hit  was  to  hit1  dew,

Erly  on  the  morow  the  day-fter  to  faU  w.

11.  Hit  was  a Very  hevenly  melody,

.vyn  and  Morne  to  her  the  Byrd  fong
.nd  the  fote  fugeryd  Armony :

)f  uncoud  Warbelis  and  twenes  drcw  along,
hat  al  the  Garden  of  the  noyferong:

Tyll  on  a morpw  that  Ty  tan  fchone  fui  cler,

The  Byrd  was  trapped  and  cavvein  a Panter.

1 2.  The  Chorie  was  glad  that  hd  thys  Byrdhitix  take
Iere  ofcher  loke  and  ofvifage';
nd  in  ali  haft  he  caft  for  to  make
/ithin  hys  howfe  a lycii  prati  Cage,
nd  with  hir  fongco  rejpyce  hVsTcdttge  ••  ‘1  'r
And  at  the  lati  the  fefyByrd  afrrayde.

And  fobirly  to  the  Chorie  fche  ftyde  ;


W


21 6


Hermes  Bird.

1 3. 1 am  now  take  and  ftond  under  daunger,

Hold  Areyte  that  y may  not  fle ;

Adew  iny  fong  and  al  my  notes  cler,  , ,

Now  that  y have  Ioft  my  liberte,

Now  y am  thrall  and  fumtyme  was  fre:

And  trufl  wel  y ftand  in  diftres,

Y can  nat  fyng  ne  make  no  gladnes.

14.  And  thogh  my  Cage  forged  were  of  Gold
And  the  penacles  of  Beral  and  Criftal :

Y remember  a Provcrbe  fayde  of  olde  ;

Who  lifit  hjsfrcdom  in  footh  hejs  in  tbral}

For  me  had  laver  upon  a branche  fmale ,

Metle  to  fyng  amonge  the  wodis  grene,

.Than  in  a Cage  of  Golde  bryght  and  chene.

1 5.  Songe  and  Prefun  have  non  acordiunce,
Trowys  thow  y wyl  fyng  in  Prefun,

Song  procedet  of  joy  and  plefaunce  ;

And  Prefun  caufeth  deth  and  deftiuftion,

Ryngyng  of  Feteris  maketh  no  mere  fown ;

Or  how  fchoulde  he  be  glad  and  jocownde,
Ageyn  hys  wil  that  lyth  in  cheynys  bownde.

1 6.  What  avayleth  a Lyon  to  be  a Kyng  of  Beftes
Fift  fchut  in  a Tower  of  fton  alone  j

Or  an  Egell  under  ftryte  cheynys,

CaJled  alfo  the  Kyng  of  Fowlys  everichon,

Fy  on  Lordfchyp  whan  Liberte  ys  gon :

Anfwer  herto  and  hit  nat  a ftart,

Who  fyngeth  mere  that  fyngeth  not  with  hert.

17.  If  thow  wilt  re/oyce  the  of  my  fyngyng,

Let  me  go  fleen  fre  fro  dawnger :

And  every  day  in  the  mornyng  * n

Y wyllrepayreto  thy  Lawrer,

And  fre fleiy  to  fyng  with  notis'  cler ; t

Under  thi  Chaumber  or  aforethy  Hal,

■ Every  fcafon  whenthow  lyft  mecal.


Hermh  'Bird .

x 8.  To  be  fchut  and  pyned  under  drede,'

No  thyng  acordyng  to  my  nature :

Though  I were  fed  with  Mylke  and  Waftelbrede ;

And  fwete  Crudis  broughc  to  my  paliure,

Yet  had  y lever  do  m y befe  cure  :

Erly  inchemorowto  Ihrape  in  the  Vale,

To  fynde  my  dener  amongs  the  Wormys  finale.

ip.  The  Laborer  ys  gladder  at  hys  PJough,

Erly  on  the  morow  to  fede  hym  on  bakon  :

Then  fum  ben  that  have  trefour  y nowgh ;

And  of  ai  deyntes  plente  and  foyfon  $

And  no  fredom  with  hys  pocefllon ;

To  go  at  large  but  as  Bere  at  the  ftake,

To  pas  hys  bondes  but  yf  he  leve  take.

20. Takcthysanfwer  fui  for  condufion,

To  fynge  in  prifon  thow  fchalt  not  me  conftreyne  :

Tyll  y have  fredom  in  woddis  up  and  downe :

To  fle  at  large  on  bowys  both  rough  and  plaine,

And  of  refon  thow  fchuldeft  not  difdeyn :

Of  my  defyre  buc  laugh  and  have  good  game,

But  who  ys  a Chorie  wold  every  man  wer  the  fame.

21.  Weil  quod  the  Chorie  fithhit  woll  not  be,

That  y defyre  by  my  talkyng ;

Magre  thy  wyll  thow  fchalt  chefe  on  of  threa
Within  a Cage  merele  to  fyng,

Or  to  the  Kychyn  y fchall  thy  bode  brynge :

Pul  thy  federis  that  byn  fo  bryght  and  clere.

And  after  roft  or  bake  the  to  my  dynere.

B ' *

22.  Then  quod  the  Bjrde  to  reflon  y fey  not  ney,

ITovvchyng  my  fbng  a fui  anlwer  thow  haft :

And  when  my  federis  pufled  byn  awey,

Ify  be  rofted  or  bake  in  a pali,

Thow  fchalt  of  me  have  a fmal  repatie:

But  yf  thow  wylt  werke  by  my  councel,

Thow  mayft  by  me  have  a gret  avayle.

Gg  a*.lf


217


Hermes  Bird.

23.  If  thow  wolt  to  my  rede  a flent,

And  fuffer  me  go  ftele  fro  Prefon  :

Witowte  raunfom  or  any  oder  rent ;

Y fchall  thegyfanotabil  gtete  gwerdon,

The  thre grete  fVjfdomys  acordyng  to  refon  ;

Mor  of  valew,  take  hede  what  y profer,

Than  al  the  Gold  that  ys  fhec  in  thy  Cofer.

24.  Trufl  me  wel  y fchal  the  not  deceyve.

Weli  quod  the  Chorie  tel  and  let  fe :

Nay  quod  the  Bjrde  a forne  confeyve ;

Who  fchal  teche  of  Refon  he  moft  go  fre,

Hit  ficteth  a Mafler  to  have  hys  Liberte :

And  at  large  to  teche  hys  leflon,

Hafe  me  not  fufpefte  y raene  no  trefon.

25:.  Wcl  quod  the  Cherle  y holde  me  content,

Y trufl  the  promys  which  thow  haft  made  to  me  j
The  Bjrde  fle  forth  the  Chorie  was  of  fent :

Andtoke  hys  flightupto  theLawrer  tre,'

Then  thought  fche  thus  now  that  y ftand  fre :

With  fnaris  panters  y caft  not  al  my  lyve,

Nor  wyth  no  lyme  twygges  no  mor  to  ftrive.

26.  He  ys  aFolethat  fchaped  ys  daungere,

That  broke  hys  feteris  and  fled  ys  fro  Prefon ,

For  to  refort  agene : for  brentechildedreds  fyre  ?
Eche  man  bewar  of  Wifdom  and  refon,

Of  fuger  ftrawed  that  hidethfalfe  poyfon  j
Ther  ys  no  venom  fo  perilus  in  fcherpnes,

As  whan  yt  hath  triakde  of  lyknes.

27.  Who  dredeth  no  perell  in  perellhe  fchal  falle,.
Smothe  Watres  byn  of  fithes  depe :

The  Quaylc  pipe  can  moft  falfely  calle ;

Tyl  the  Quayle  under  the  net  doth  erepe ;

A bleryed  Fowler  trufl  not  thogh  he  wepe :

Exchevv  hys  thumbe,  of  weping  take  no  hede,
That  fmale  Byrdys  can  nyp  by  the  hede.


Hermes  Bird.

28.  And  now  that  y fuch  da  unge  r am  fcaped,

Y wyl  bewar  and  afore  provide :

That  of  no  Fowlar  y wil  no  mora  be  Japed,

From  theyre  lyme  twyggcs  to  fly  far  afyde,

There  perei  ys  perel  to  abyde :

Com  ner  thow  Chorie,  take  hede  to  my  fpechej
Of  thre  Wyfdomys  that  y fchal  the  teche.

19.  Yefnotof  Wyfdom  to  hafty  credens,

To  every  Tale  nor  eche  tydyng  .*

Butconfyder  ofRefon  and  Prudens;
AmongTalysys  many  a grete  lcfyng,

Hafty  credens  hath  cawfed  grete  hynderyng :
Report  of  talis  and  t.y  dyngys  broght  up  new,
Maketh  many  a man  fui  on  trew.

30.  For  on  party  take  thys  for  my  Raunfom,
Lerne  the  fecond  grownded  of  fcripture :

Defyre  thow  not  by  no  condicion
Thyng  that  ys  ympoflybyl  to  recure,

World  ly  defyres  flante  alie  in  a venture  t
And  who  defyreth  to  foare  hygh  a lofte,

Oft  tyme  by  foden  turne  he  falleth  onfofte.

31. The  thyrd  is  thy$,bewar  both  even  and  morrow,
Forget  ytnoughtbut  lerne  thys  of  me:

For  Trefor  loft,  make  never  to  grete  Sorrow ;

Wych  in  no  wyfe  may  not  recovered  be,

For  who  that  taketh  forrow  for  loff  in  that  degree :
Reken  fyift  bys  loffe,  and  after  reken  hys  peyne,
Of  one  forrow  he  miketh  Sorrowys  tweyne.

32.  Aftur  thys  LefTon  the  Hyrde  began  a fonge,
Ofhyrafcapegretely  rejoycyng:

And  fche  remembrcd  hyr  allefo  of  the  wronge
Don  by  the  Chorie , fyrft  at  hyr  takyng,

And  ofthe  affray,  and  of  hyr  imprefonyng  :

Glad  that  iche  was  at  large  and  owce  of  drede,
Seyde  unto  bym  hoveryng  above  hys  hede,

Gg  2


2I£


33.  Thow


Hermes  \Birct.

33.  Thow  were  quod  fche  a very  natura!  Fole
To  fuffer  me  deparce  of  thy  lewdncs :

Thow  owthtys  of  right  to  complaine  and  raake  dole.
And  in  thy  hert  have  grete  hcvenes,

That  thow  haft  loft  fo  paflyng  grete  riches :

Wych  myght  fuffice  by  valew  in  rekeyng
To  pay  the  raunfom  of  a myghty  Kyng.

34.  Ther  ys  a Stone  wych  ys  calied  fjgo*ftce,

Of  olde  engendered  within  myne  entrayle :

Wych  of  fyne  Golde  poyfeth  a grete  unce  j
Setryne  of  Colors  lyke  Garnetis  ofentayle,

Wych  makyth  men  viftorius  in  batayle ;

And  who  that  bereth  on  hym  thys  Stone,

Ys  fui  afured  'ageyne  hys  mortal  Fone.

35. Whothathath  thys  inpofceflion,

Schal  fuffer  no  Povert  ne  non  Indygens  r ‘

But  of  Trefour  have  plente  and  foyfon.

And  ev&ry  Man  fchal  don  hym  reverence.

And  non  Enemy  fchal  don  hym  non  offence ;

But  fro  thi  hondes  now  that  I am  gone,

Pleyne  gyf  thow  Wilt  for  thy  parte  ys  none»

3 6.  As  y the  abrayde  her  before,

Of  a ftone  now  that  I had :

The  wych  now  thow  hafl  forlore  } - 1

Be  alie  refon  thow  fchuldys  ben  fad,

And  in  thi  hert  nothyng  glad  :

Now  Chorie  y the  cel  in  my  device,

I was  eyred  and  bred  in  fwite  Paradycei

37.  Now  mo  namys  y fchal  the  tcl,

Of  my  ftone  that  y cal  fagomce ;

And  of  hys  vercuis  with  hys  fmel ;

That  ben  fo  fwete  and  fo  odeferus,

Wyth  Ennock.  and  Elj hath  be  my  fervis :

My  fwete  fonge  that  fowndcth  fo  fcherpe,
Wyth  Angellcsjoyfe  that  pafleth  eny  harpe.


221


Hermes  Bird.

3 8.  The  nigrum  deamond  that  ys  in  Morienis  fees
\nd  the  white  Charbonkkei  that  roileth  in  wave ;
fhe  fetrync  Reby  of  rycbe  degrees :
rhat  paffeth  the  ftonys  of  comen  fawc,

[n  the  Lapidery  ys  grown  by  oide  lavve  •

He  paffeth  all  ftonys  that  ys  under  hevyn,

After  the  cowrfe  of  kyiide  by  the  Planets  fevyn.

jp.Hyt  ys  for  cone  Chorie  to  have  fchuch  trefour,
That  exfedeth  alie  Stonys  in  the  lapidery :

And  of  alie  vertuis  he  bereth  the  flowr,

VVyth  all  joy  and  grace  yt  maketh  man  roery,
rhat  in  thys  worlde  fchal  never  byn  fory }

Now  very  Chorie  thow  paffeth  thy  gras,

Y am  at  my  leberte  even  as  I was.

40.  As  Clerkys  fyndeth  in  the  Bybell,


Soche  ftonys  in  place  tew  Den  y orougni,

Soroful  ys  the  Chorie  and  hevy  in  hys  thowte.

4r.  Now  more  Ch°rh  y1  te*  y csn»

And  thow  wolt  to  me  take  hede :

The  Hyrie  ofErmes  ys  my  name*,

In  all  the  worlde  that  ys  fo  wyde»

VVyth  gletering  of  grace  by  every  fyde,

Hofe  memyght  have  inhyscovertowr,

He  wer  rychcher  than  eny  Emperowr.

41.  Elyfabnder  the  conquerowf  my  Srn  fmotdowne
Upon  hys  helme  whan  hyt  pyght :

No  mor  then  a pefe  that  ys  fo  rowndc,

Hyt  was  ther  to  no  manys  fyght,  _

That  leyde  fo  pleynethe  manly  Knyght ;

Now  y tel  the  wyth  melde  Stevyn,

Thys  myghty  grace  cam  owte  fro  Hevyn,

Gg  3


At  Faradys  yatis  wnan  nc  was  tau  j
By  an  Angel  both  fayr  and  ftylJ,

A downe  Kyng  Ely feUtridtr  ther  I threft.
And  of  all  ftonys  y t was  y left ;


43.  Hyt


Zll


Hermes  Hird.

43.  Hit  cawfeth  Love  aud  makcth  raen  Gracius,

And  favorabel  in  ever  mannes  fyght :

Hit  maketh  acorde  of  two  Folks  envyus ;

Comfortech  Sorowful  and  maketh  hevy  herts  lyght,
Lyke  paffyng  of  colur  Sunny  bryght  ;

Yama  fole  to  tel  the  at  onys,

Or  to  teche  a Chorie  the  pryce  of  precioui  Stonys.

44.  Men  fchalle  not  put  a precius  Margareyt ,
AsRubeys,  Saferys,  and  odther  Stonys  ynde;
Emeraudys,  nor  rownde  Perlys  whyte,

Byfore  rude  Swyne  tbat  love  draffe  of  kynde :

For  a Sowe  delyteth  hyr  as  y fynde

Mor  in  fowle  draffe  hyr  Pygges  for  to  glad,
Than  al  the  Perry  that  comes  owte  of  Granad.

45.  Heche  thyngdrawesto  hys  femblable,

Fylthes  in  the  See,  Beftys  on  the  Stronde  j
The  Eyr  for  Fowlys  ys  commendabyl,

To  the  Plowghman  for  to  tyll  hys  Londe,

And  to  a Chorie  a Muk-forke  in  hys  honde.

Y lefe  my  tyme  eny  more  to  tare
To  teli  the  bewar  of  the  Lapidare.

4 6.  That  thow  haddefl:  thow  getyft  no  more,

Thi  Lyme-twygges  and  Panters  y defie ;

To  let  me  gon  thow  were  fowle  over  feen,

To  lefe  the  richches  only  of  folye  .•

Y am  now  fre  to  fyng  and  to  fle

VVher  that  my  iyft : and  he  is  a Fole  at  all
That  goth  at  large,  and  maketh  hymfelfe  thrall.

47I  To  here  of  Wifdome  thi  neres  behalfe  defe,
Like  a Naffe  that  lyfteth  upon  an  Harpe ;

Thow  muft  go  pype  in  a Ive  leffe:

Better  ys  to  me  to  fyng  on  Thorncs  fcharpe,

Than  in  a Cage  wyth  a Chorie  to  carpe :

For  hyt  was  feyd  of  Folkes  many  yere  agone,
A £hcrles  Chorie  js  oft  vtot  bt  gone.


4S.  Now


Hermes  \ Bird .

48.  Now  Chorie  y have  the  her  tolde,

My  vertuys  her  wyth  grcte  experience ;

Hyt  were  to  fume  man  bctter  thanGolde;
Totheytysno  fruttius  a fentence,

A Chepys  Croke  to  the  ys  better  than  a Launce :
Adew  now  Globbe  wyth  herte  fore.

In  Charles  dowchys  com  y never  more.

49.  The  Chorie  felt  hys  herte  part  in  tweyne,

For  very  forow  and  in  funder  ry  ve :

Alas  quod  he  y may  wel  wepe  and  pleyne  j
Asawrecheneverlyketo  thryre,

But  for  to  indure  in  povert  ali  my  lyve :

For  of  foly  and  of  wylfulnes,

Y have  now  loft  all  holy  my  ryches.

yo.  1 was  a Lorde  y crye  owte  on  Fortune,

And  had  grete  Trefor  late  in  my  kecpyng  j
Wych  myght  have  made  me  long  to  contune ;

Wyth  that  ilke  Stone  to  have  levyd  a Kyng,

Yf  y had  fet  hyt  in  a Ryng :

Borne  it  opon  me  y had  gode  y nowe,

Than  fchuld  y no  mor  have  gon  to  the  plowe."

51.  Whan  the  Byrde  faw  the  Chorie  thus  morae,
That  he  was  hevy  of  hys  chere,

Sche  take  her  flyght  and  agayne  returne ;

Toward  hym  and  fayd  as  ye  fchal  here,

Odull  Chorie  wifdom  for  to  Iere  }

That  y the  taute  allys  lefcbyhynde,

Reyfed  awey  and  dene  owte  of  thy  meynde.

5i.TawjeV)he  not  thys  Wyfdome  in  fentens,

To  every  tale  brought  up  of  new,

Not  to  haftyle  gyf  not  ther  to  credens  j
Untotymethow  know  hiebetrew,

All  ys  not  Gold  that  fcheweth  Goldys  hew  t
Nor  ftonys  all  by  nature  as  y fynde,

, Byn  not  Saferus  that  fchewyth  colour  ynde.


Hermes  TZirL

53.  In  thys  Do&ryne  y loft  my  labour,

To  teche  the  fuch  Proverbys  of  fubftaunce ;

Now  mayft  thow  fee  thy  lewd  blynde  error;

For  ali  ray  body  poyfed  in  Bilans,

Weych  not  a nounce  lewde  ys  thi  remembrannce }

Yec  have  y mor  poyfe  dofyd  in  rayne  entrayle,
Than  all  my  Body  fet  for  Countervayle.

54.  All  my  Body  weyth  not  an  unce,

Hovv  myghc  y have  then  in  me  a fton :

That  poyfethmor  thandoth  a gr ttzfagouHce'.

Thy  brayne  ys  dull  thi  wicce  almoft  gon,

Of  ftire  Wyfdomys  thow  haft  loft  on  ;

Thow  fchulds  not  after  my  fentence,

To  evcry  tale  gefe  to  haftyly  credence.

55.I  badde  alfo  bewar  both  even  and  morowe,

For  thynge  loft  by  fuden  adventur ;

Thow  fchulds  not  make  to  moche  forow ;

Whan  thow  feyft  thow  mayft  not  hit  recover,

Her  thow  faylefl  wych  doth  thy  bely  cure ;

In  the  fnare  to  catch  me  agayne,'

Thow  art  a Fole  thy  labor  ys  in  vayne.

5 6.  In  the  thyrde  alfo  thow  doft  rave,

Y bad  thow  fchulds  in  no  maner  wyfe  -
Covet  thyng  the  wych  thow  mayft  not  have.

In  wych  thow  haft  fogetyn  myne  empryfe,

Thaty  may  fay  playnly  to  devyfe,

Thow  haft  in  madnes  fdrgetyn  all  thre,

Notabyl  Wyfdorays  that  y taute  the.

57.  Hit  wer  but  foly  mor  wyth  the  to  carpe,

Or  to  teche  of  Wyfdomys  mor  or  lefle  ;

Yholdehym  madde  that  bryngs  forth hys Harpe,
Theron  to  teche  a rode  for  doilyd  Afle,

And  mad  ys  he  that  fyngyth  a Fole  a Maffe :

And  he  ys  moft  madd  that  doth  liys  befynelTe,

To  teche  a Chorie  the  termys  of  Gentlenefle.

58.  And


Hermes  cBird.

58.  Andfemeblabilly  inApryll  and  in  May,
Whan  gentyl  Byrds  moft  make  melody  ;

Buc  the  Cockow  can  fyng  buteo  liy  ;

Inodthir  tevvnys  fche  hath  no  fantefy :

Thus  every  thyng  as  Clerks  do  fpecify ;

As  Frute « n the  Trees,  and  Folke  of  every  age,
Fro  whenfe  they  come  they  have  a tallage.

59.  The  Wynter  tretyth  of  hys  Welfom  wyndys^
Of  the  gentyll  Frute  bofiys  the  Gardener;

The  Fyfher  cafty th  hys  hokys  and  hys  lynys,

To  catche  Fyffhe  in  the  frefh  Revyr,

Of  tyliyth  of  Londe  tretyth  the  powre ;

-The  Gentylman  tretyth  of  Genfry,

The  Chorie  dely tith . to  ffieke  rebawdry»

* V • * ‘ * ‘ / 'v  - .

60.  Ali  on  to  a Faucon  and  a Kyte„  f '

AsgoodanDvvle  asaPopyngayij.  t<;.C

Adunghyll  Douke  as  deyntieth  as  a Snyte, .

Who  fervys  a Chorie  hafe’  mSriy  a wofull  day ,

Y caft  me  never  her  affer  mor  withthe  play  j V
To  fore  a Chorie  any  more  to  fyng,  .

Of  Wyfdome  to  carpe  in  my  lyfyng;

61.  The  Folke  that  fchall  thysFabylfeandrede,
New  ForgedTaljsy  councel  themtofle

For  lojfe  of  Good  take  not  togrete  foede,  ;

Bt  not  to  Sorowjull for  neo»  adverfjte  ;

Cevet  not  thjng  that  may  not  be.

And  remerober  wherye  goan,

A Chorljs  Chorie js  ofte  -wo  begoyt;

6t.  Unto  purpofe  thys  Proverbe  ys  fui  ryve,

Redde  and  reportedby  olde.  remembraunce  •*
eA  Ctyfdfi  Bjrde,  and  a Chorljs  fVjfe ,
BdtliofteJjthfsfotow  and  mifch/tmce .

Who  hath  fredotn  hath  fnfficiaunce :

• BetterysFredom  wythlytlein  glddnes,

Than  to  be  a 'Chorie  wyth  ali  worldly  rychches .]

Hh


ii  6 Hermes  *Bird.


'}utfuttjinqipruni  flatas
0mrir&f(jf!aiu:ar  mu*
wrwntjiatueras  2) omth
&cce  nota  ftifJuttfiMuP  i

Wl  ZS  Oeten


tas  ter  maximus  o litti  |
imtnr  /wcJttmu/o  ; i
fi  tempora  vita  I
fi  cuttcia ttotanh

,s  i/jx-  ^ j

rutnnamm  rejtuas  t/ibrs.
(jfwtn  fosjeat  m^mnmme/um^tm>


(VmujbanJctilp


' >

63.  Go  lytyl  Quiar  and  reorniqaunde  me
To  my  Majfter  wy th  humbyl  affeccyon,

Be  fekyng  hym  lowly  of  merfy  and  pete
Of  thys  rude  raakyng  to  ha  compaflion  :

And  as  towchyng  thys  Tranflacyon
Owte  of  the  Frenfte;  how  fo  ever  the  Engljfbhe ,
AH  thyng  ys  f3yd  under  correccyon,

V Vyth  fupportacion  of  yowr  benygnite.

FINIS.


217


THE  TALE  OF  THE

Q HA 3^01 \S  YSOMAtN^

Written  by  our  An  cient  and  famous
Englifh  Poet,  Cjeoffry  Cbaucer .


THEPROLOGUE  OF

The  Chanons  Yeoman.

Ha»  ended  nas  the  Lyfe  o/Saint  Cccyle,
j Eme  fully  had  rydden  fyve  myle :

Att  Boughton  under  theblee  usganatake
A Man  that  clothed  nas  inclothes  blakc  *
And  under  that  hehad  a nhyte  Surplyfei
His  haktny  that  nas  ali  pomelygryfe  •

Se  f, nete  that  itt  nonder  nas  to  Jee  •

It  feerned  that  he  hadprecked  myles  three.

The  horfe  eke  that  his  Torna»  rode  uppov „

A j L l J

Se  Swete } that  vimeth  nvgtyhegon:

About  the  yaytrell fiode  the fome full  hyei
He  nas  of  fome  as  flecked  as  a py e :

A Male  tnyfolde  on  his  croper  lay  -
Itt  femed  that  be  carryed  letel  Aray  •

AUjight  for fomer  rode  thts  northy  Ma»}

And  in  my  heart  nondren  I began,

H h 2


What  '


228  The  Prologue  of

Whst  that  be  was,  till  I underjlode ,

How  tbit  his  cloke  wasfewed  to  his  hode:

For  rvhich  xvhtw  I had  long  avyfed me  ;

I demyd  him  fome  Chanon/or  to  be  :

His  hatt  hynge  att  his  backe  by  a Lace ,

For  he  had  rydden  more  then  trot  er  pace.

Ple  rode  aye  pryckyng  as  he  ivere  tvode ,

A Clote  leafe  he  had  layd  tinder  his  hode.

For  Srvett  and  for  to  keepehis  heede  jrom  bete,

But  itt  wasjoyfor  tofe  him  foete  :

Hisforeheed  droppea  as  a Stillatorie,

But  full  of  Playntaine  or  of  Peritorie :

And  when  he  tvas  come  hegan  crye,

Godfave  (quod  he)  this  Io/iy  company  :

Fajl  bave  I pricked  (quod  he)  for  your  ftke 9
Bycaufe  tbat  Irvcld  you  overtake ,

Toryden  in  this  mery  company.

His  Toman  was  eke  full  of  curtefy,

And fayd , Syrs , novo  in  the  morotve  tyde ,

Out  of  your  hofirye  I fatv  you  ride ,

. Andxvarned  heremy  Lordand  Soverayne ,

Which  that  to  ryden  xoith  you  is  full  fayne :

F or  his  difporte , he  loveth  dalyance.

Frede for  thy  warning  Godyeve  theegood  cbance .
Then fayd  our  Hoft , certayne  itt  wold fetne
Thy  Lord  werewyfe,  andfo  l may  rvell  deme  : .

He  is  full  Iocunde,al(oe  dare  llay ,

Canhe  ought  teli  a mery  Taleor  trody  }

With  rvhich  he  glad  may  this  company  ?

Who  Sir  my  Lord  c’  ye  with  out  lye}

He  can  of  myr the  and  eke  oflolyte,

Not  but  ynough  alfo  Sir  triifleth  me  i,

Andye  him  knew  alfo  well  as  do  e '*v  <


V*  \\


the  Ghanons  Y eoman.

i Tevoold  monder  hom  meli  and  thriftely
He  con  the  tverke  and  that  infondry  myfe-3
He  bathtaken  en  him  many  a gr eat  Empryfe :

Wbich  rverc  full  hard  for  any  that  is  here ,

To  bring  about , but  they  of  him  itt  Iere.

As  homely  as  he  rideth  amongyou ,

, Ifye  him  knetv  itt  mold  ben  for  your  prome  :

Tenoldenot  forgon  his  aquajntatince ,

For  Mochel  good  I dare  lay  in  balaunce
Ali  that  I have  in  my  pojjefion^

Heisa  manof  hye  difcrefien  :

Imrneyou  meli  he  is  a pafing  tvyfe  man.

Wel  quod  onr  Hojle ) 1 pray  thee  teli  me  than ,

Is  he  a Clerke  or  non  ? teli  rvhat  he  is.

A Clerke  ! nay  greater  then  a Clerke  I mys3
Sayd  the  Toman3  and  in  rnords  fevoe ,

Hofle  of  his  Crafte  fomwhatwoll  Jhem  ^

Ifay  my  Lord  can  fucb  a fubteltc ,

But  of  his  Crafte  y e may  net  mete  of  me  :

And fomewbat  helpe  Iyctt  to  his  morchyng3
That  all  the  ground  that  me  be  en  rydyng,

Till  me  come  to  Canterbury  T omne3
Hecould  all  cleane  tume  itp  and  domne  :

And  pave  it  all  of  Sil ver  and  of  Gold.

And  mhen  this  Yoman  had  thusltold
Unto  onr  Hojle , he fajd  benedicite,

Thisthing  is  monder  and  marvellom  to  me  :

Sensthat  thy  Lord  is  of  fohigh  prudence3
Becaufe  of  mhich  men  Jhold  him  reverencej)

That  of  his  morjhip  recketh  he  fo  lyte3
His  overejl  fopp  is  not  morth  a myte ;

As  in  effeti  to  him  fo  mote  I go3
It  is  all  bamdy  and  to  tore  aljoe.

Hh  3 Why


22?


230


The  Prologue  or

Wby  is  tby  Lordfoe  Jlotlychel  thee  pray ,

And  is  ofporver  better  clotbes  to  bey  ?

Jf  tbat  his  dede  accordxvith  tby  fpeecb3
Teii  me  tbat  and  tbat  I thee  befeech.

Wby  (quod  this  Toman)  rvbereto  askeye  me  ?
God  helpe  mee fo3  for  he  Jhall  never  ythe  :

But  I wol  not  avow  tbat  l faye ,

t^And  tberefore  keepe  itt  fecrett  I you  pray  e ;

He  is  to  tvyfe  in  fay as  1 beleeve,

Tbat  is  overdone  rvil  not  preve  $

And  rigbt  as  Clerfces  fayne  itt  is  a vyce3
Wberefore  I bolde  him  in  tbat  leude  and  nyce  5
For  xvhana  manhatb  over  greate  a mitte,

Full  ofte  it  bappetb  him  to  mifufen  itt :

So  dotb  my  Lord,  and  tbat  me  grevetb  fore ;
God  amend  itt3 1 can  fay  you  no  mere.

Tbereofnoforcegood  Toman  (qttodour  Hofi)
Sens  oftbe  connyng  ofthy  Lord  thoti  tvojl  .*

Teli  how  be  dotb  1 pray  the  hertely,

Sens  tbat  be  is  fo  erafty  and  fo  fy3
Where  dwellen  ye  if  itt  te  teli  be  ?

In  the  Subbarbes  ofa  T otvne  (quod  he)
Lurkeyng  in  hernes  and  in  lanes  blynde,
Where  tbefe  Robbers3  and  Tbeeves  by  kynde
Holden  her  privy  fearefull  re(idence3
As  they  tbat  dare  not  Jheiven  her  prefencey
Soefare  rve  if  tbat  I fhall  fay  the  fethe,

Tett  (quod  our  Hofejlett  me  talketothe.

Wby  art  tbon  foe  difcolored  in  tby  face  ?

Pcter  (quod  be)  God  yeve  itt  hard  grace ;

I arn  fo  ufed  in  the  hott fyre  to  blowe ,

Tbat  itt  batb  changed  my  colour  as  1 trorv  :

I am not  xvonte inno mirrourto  prye3


the  Chanons  Yeoman.

But fwynke  fore  and  lerne  to  Multiplye.

We  blondren  ever  and  pooren  in  the  fyre^

And  for  ali  that  wefaylcn  of  cur  defyre  :

For  ever  we  lacken  cur  conclufton,

Tomoche  folkc  we  do  illufion:

yjl nd  berrowe  Golde  be  itt  a petind  or  ttvo,

Orten  or  twelve  or  manyjomes  rno.

And  make  hem  wene  at  the  lefle  way,

That  of  a pound  we  ceulde  make  tway  *,  .

Tett  is  itt  falfe , and  ay  hav  wegood  hope
Itt  for  to  dene 3 and  after  it  we  grepe.

But  that  Science  is  fo  ferre  us  by  forne,

Wemewe  not  all  though  we  had  itt  fworne
Itt  overtake } itt flytte  away  foe  fajle ,

Itt  wol  us  make  Beggeri  at  the  lafle.

Whiles  this  Teman  was  thus  in  his  talking
This  Chanon  drew  him  nere  and  herde  all  thing
Which  this  Teman  Jpake,  for  fufpeffion
Of  mennes  fpeche  ever  had  this  Chanon :

For  Qztofaythe^  he  that  giltye  /*,

Deemeth  all  thing  be  fpeke  ofhim  Iwys  :

Bycatife  ofthat  he  gan  fo  nyghe  to  draw,

Te  his  Teman  to  herken  all  bisjaw  \

And  thus  he  fayd  unto  his  Teman  tho,

Helde  nowe  thy  peace  and  fpeke  no  words  mo ,

For  if  thou  dee,  thou  Jhalt  it  (ore  abye,

Thou Jlandereft  me  here  in  this  Companye :

And  eke  difcoveresi  that  thou  fholdeff  hyde.

Te  {quod  our  Hofie)  teli  on  what  foever  betyde ,
Ofall  his  thretynge  recke  the  not  a myte,
Infayth  ( quod  he)  no  more  doe  I but  lyte.

And  whan  this  Chanon  faw  itt  wolde  not  be,
But  his  Teman  wolde  tel  bis  privyte.


23z


The  Prologue , &c.

He fledde  atvay  for  very  forrotv  and  (hame.

A ' quodthe  Teman)  here  Jhall  ryfe  a gamey
Ali  that  / can  anon  ivoll  1 you  teli ,

Sens  he  is  gone  the  foule  Fend him  quell -
Fvr  never  hereafter  tvol  I xvith  him  metey
For  penny  ne  for  pounde  I you  behete •

He  that  me  hrought  firjl  tirno  thatgame ,

Er  that  he  dye (orrorve  have  he  and  (hame  5 ,

For  it  is  ernejl.to  meby  my  faith)

T h at  fele  I rvell  whatfoe  any  man  faith:

Andyettfor  ali  my  fmerte  and  ali  my  greife ,

For  ali  my  forrowe,  labour  and  mlftbeife ,

Icouthe  never  leave  it  in  noe  wyfe:

Nojv  voolde  Codmy  jvitt  mtght  fujfyfe ,

Totellen  ali  that  longeth  to  that  Arte.

But  natbele(fey  yet  tvol  I teli  you  a parte  .*

Sens  that  my  Lord isgon  I rvolnot ( pare ;

Stich  thyng  as  1 knoiv  I tvol  dedar  e.

Here  endeththe  Prologue  ofthe  Cfianons
Yeoman,  and  here  folio weth  his  Tale.


Th(


233


M


U


THE  TALE  O f

TbeCbanons  Yeoman.


Iththis  Chanon  I dwelt  fcaven  yere.

And  of this  Science  am  I never  the  nere :
All  that  I had  I have  loft  thereby.

And  God  wotte  foe  hath  many  moe  then  I,
There  I was  wonte  to  bc  right,  frefh  and  gay,

Of clothing  and  eke  of  other  good  aray  5
Now  may  I weare  an  hofe  uppon  myne  hecd :

And  where  my  colour  was  both  frefh  and  rced  ,

Now  itt  is  wanne  and  of  a leaden  hcwe,

Whoe  foe  itt  ufeth,  fore  ftiall  him  rcwe.

And  of  my  fwynke  yett  blcred  in  myne  Eye,
Lovvhichavauntage  itt  is  to  Multiply :

Thatflyding  Science  hath  me  made  fo  bare,

That  I have  noe  good  where  that  ever  I fare : •

And  yett  I am  indetted  fo  thercby,

OfGold,that  I have  borrowed  truly,

That  whilel  live  I fhall  ittquitt  never,

Let  every  man  beware  by  me  ever  *

Whatmanner  man  that  caftethhim  thereto,

If  he  contynue  I hold  his  thrifte  I do :

So  helpe  me  God  thercby  fhall  hc  never  wyn,

But  empte  his  purfe  and  make  his  witts  thyn;

And  whan  he  thorow  his  madnefle  and  folye,

Hath  loft  his  owne  good  through  Jeopardye :

Than  he  exiteth  other  men  thereto,

Ii


To


2^4-  TheTaleof

To  lefe  her  good  as  himfelfe  hath  do ;

For  unto  fhrcwes  joy  it  is  and  efe,

To  havc  her  fellowes  in  paine  and  difefe ;

For  thus  was  I ones  ferved  of a Clerke  5
Of  that  noe  charge,  I wol  fpeke  of  our  werke.

When  we  be  there  as  vvc  Ihall  exercife
Our  elvifli  Craft,  vvc  femen  wonder  vvife.
Our  termes  ben  fo  Clcrgiall  and  fo  quaynte,
I blow  the  fyrc  tyll  myn  hearte  faynte.

Whatfhold  I teli  each  proportion
Of  things  vvhich  we  werchen  uppon  ?
AsonfyveOr  fyxe  unces,  may  vvcllbe
Of  Silver  or  of  forne  other  quantite  •
Andbefyeme  totellen  youthe  names,

Of  Orpiment,  brent  Bones,  Yron  fquames?
Thatinto  pbvvder  gtbUnden  ben  fullfmall.
And  in  an  Erthen  pott  howputtis  ali  *

And  falt  y put  irr  'artd  alfo  pepere,

Bcfore  thefe  povVdres  that  1 fpeke  of  here:
And  vvell  y covered  vvith  a lompe  of  <jla(Tes
And  of  moch  othei-  thing  that  there  was.
Andofthe  pbfts  artd  glaflenglutyng,

That  of  the  ayre  might  paffe  out  nothing;
And  ofthe  eafyfyreahd  fmerte  alfoe,
Which  that  was  made,  and  ofthe  care  and  wd
Thatwe  hadin  our  fnatters  Sublymeing,
And  in  Atnalgamyrfg  and  £alfehyhg :
OfQuickfilver  iclcped  Mercurye  flrude.

For  all  our  flcight  vve  conne  not  conclude.
Our  Orpyment  and  Suilymcd  Mercury  $
Our  grounde  Litarge  tkc  on  the  porphirye :
Ofechcof  thefe  unces  a certayne
Kot  helpcth  us,  our  labour  .is  in  vayne


the  Chanons  Yeoman.

Ne  eke  our  Spyrites  alfifccioun,  ,
Neyetour  mattcrs,  thac  lyen  alfyxeadoun:
Mowc  ia  our  werkyng  nothing  avayle,
Forloftisour  laboure  andopr  travayle.

And  alit heCofte,  atwenty  dyvel  avvay.

Is  loft  alfoc  which  we  uppon  itt  lay.

There  is  alfoc  full  many  another  thing,
That  is  to  our  Craft  apcrtaynyng :

Though  I by  ordre  hem  ne  rcncrce  can,
Bycaufe  that  I am  a leud  man.

Yet  wol  I tellen  hem  as  they  come  to  mynde,
Though  I ne  can  fette  hem  in  her  kynde.

As  bole  Armonyake,  Verdcgreecc,  Boras,
And  fondry  Veflles  madeofErth  andGlas.
OurUrynalls  and  our  Difcenfories,

Vyols,  Croflelctts  and  Sublimatorics:
Concurbytcs  and  Alembykcs  eke.

And  other  fuch  dere  ynough  a Ickc :

It  ncedeth  not  to  reherce  them  ali,

Waters  rubyfycng  and  Boles,  Gall ;

Arfneke,  Sal  Armonyake  and  Brymftonc,
And  herbes  could  I teli  eke  many  one :

As  Egrimonye,  Valeryan,  and  Lunaryc,
And  other  fuch  if  that  mc  lifte  to  tarye ;

Our  Lampes  brennyng  both  night  and  day,
To  bringen  about  our  Crafte  if  that  vvc  may ;
Our  Fournycc  eke  of  Calcination,  .

And  ofour  Waters  Albifycation.

Unfleked  Lyme,  Chalke,  and  glerc  of  an  Eyc,
Poudres  divers,  Afhes,Dong,Pi(Te,and  Cley:
Scrcd  pokettes,  falt  Peter,  and  Vitriole,

And  divers  fyres  made  of  wood  and  cole •
Sal  Tartre,Alkaly,and  Sal  prepaiatc.


l


And


The  Tale  of

And  combuft  matters,  and  coagulate,

Clcy  made  with  horfc  donge,  mans  hecre  and  Oylc,
Gf  Tartrc,  Alym,  Glas,  Bermc,  Worte  and  Argoylc
Rcfalgor  and  other  matcrsenbybyng,

Andcke  ofour  Maters  encorporing  •,

And  of  our  Silver  Citrynacion,

Our  Cementyng,  and  cke  Ferraentacyon ;

Our  lngottes,  Teftes  andmanymo.

I wol  you  tel  as  was  me  taught  alfo,

The  fowre  Spyritcs  and  the  bodies  feven,

By  order  as  oft  I herd  my  lord  nemene.

The  firft  Spyrite  Quickfilver  deped  is,

The  fccond  Orpymenr,  the  third  I wis
Armonyake,  the  fourth  Brimftone.

The  Bodyes  feven  eke  lo  here  hem  anone,

Sol  Gold  is,  and  Luna  Sylver  wc  threpe,

CMars,  Iron,  Mercury , Quickfilver  we clepe:
Saturnus  Lede,  and  lusiter  isTynne,

And  Venus  Copper,  by  my  father  kynne.

This  curfed  Crafte  whoe  foc  vvolexercyfe,

He  fhall  noe  good  have  thatmayhim  fuffyfei
For  all  the  good  he  fpendeth  thereaboute,

Helele  fhall  thereofhave  I nodoute;

W hofo  that  lyften  to  utter  his  folye,

Let  hira  com  forth  and  lerne  to  Midtiptye  r
And  every  man  that  hath  ought  in  his  cofcr5
Let  him  apere  and  wexe  a Pbilofopher :

Askaunce  that  Crafte  is  fo  light  for  to  Iere-;

Nay  God  wot  all  behe  Monke  ox  Frere,

Preift,  or  Cbanon , or  any  other  wight,

Though  he  fytte  at  hys  bokc  both  day  and  night-,

In  lcrnyng  of  this  Elvyih  nyce  lore,

Aliis  in  vayne,  and  parde mochc  more*


the  Qhanons-  Yeoman.

[s  to  lerc  a leude  man  this  fubtelte,

Fye  fpeke  not  thereof,  itt  wol  not  be  5
Alcoulde  helettrure  or  couldehe  none.

As  in  effed  hc  fhall  fynd  itt  all  one ;

For  bothc  two  by  my  Salvacyon
Conduden  in  Multyplycacyon :

Ilychewell  whan  they  have  alydo,

This  is  to  fayen,  thcy  faylen  both  two.

Yet  forgatc  I moche  reherfayle,

Of  waters  Corofyfe  and  lymayle :

And  of  Bodyes  molifycacion.

And  alfo  of her  Induration  .•

Oyles,  Ablucyons,  Mcttall  fufyble
To  tdlen  you  all,  wolde  pafle  any  Byble  :
That  O where  is,  whcrefore  as  for  the  beft
Of  all  thefe  namcs  nowe  woll  I rcft.

Foras  I trowe  I have  you  told  ynowe
To  rcyfe  a Fende,  al  lokc  hc  never  fo  rowe.

A nay  let  be  the  Pbilefphers  Stent  5
Alixer  dcped,  we  fcken  fafte  echeone,

For  had  we  him,  than  were  we  fyker  ynowe:
But  unto  God  of  Heaven  I make  a vowe,

For  al  our  crafte  whan  that  we  han  al  ydo.
And  all  our  fleyght,  hc  wol  not  come  us  to  3
Hchath  made  us  ipend  moche  goode.

For  forrow  of  which  almoft  we  wexen  wodc  5
But  that  good  hope  crepethinour  herte,
Suppofyng  evcr  though  we  fore  fmerte,

To  bcnrelevcd  by  him  afterwarde,
Suppofyng,  and  hope  is  iharpc  and  hardej
I warnc  you  wcl  it  is  to  fyken  evcr,

That  future  temps  hath  mademen  difcever.
In  truft  therof,  all  that  cver  they  had,

Ii  3


237


Yet


The  Tale  of

Yct  of  that  Arte,  they  could  not  waxe  fad  5
Foruntohim  itt  isabytter  fwete,

So  femeth  itt,  fer  ne  had  they  but  a ihete :

Which  that  they  might  wrappen  hem  in  anight.
And  a bratte  to  walken  in  a aay  light  %

They  woldcn  hem  fel  and  fpend  it  on  this  Crafte,
Theyconnenot  ftynte,  tyl  nothingbe  lafte-,

And  evermore  where  that  ever  they  gone,

Men  may  hem  ken  by  fmell  of  Brimftone :

For  al  the  vvorld  they  ftynkenasa  Gotc,

Her  Savouris  fo  rammifli  and  fo  hote:

That  though  a man  a myle  from  him  be,

The  (avour  wol  infede  him  trufteth  me.

Lo  thus  by  fmelling  and  by  threde-bare  aray,  /

If  that  men  lift  this  folke  know  they  may :

Andifa  man  wol  aske  him  prively,

Why  they  be  clothed  fo  unthriftely:  . y . ,
Right  anon  they  wil  rowne  in  his  ere.

And  fayne  if  that  they  afpyed  wcre ,

Men  wold  hem  flee  bycaufe  of  her  Science,

Lo  thus  thefc  folke  betrayen  innocence.

Pafle  over  this  I goe  my  tale  unto.

Ere  that  the  pott  be  on  the  fvreydo:

Of  Metalls  with  a certaync  quantyte,

My  Lord  hem  tempreth  and  no  man  but  he :

Now  he  is  gon  I dare  fay  boldly.

For  as  men  fayne,  he  can  done  craftcly  •

Algate  I wotte  wel  he  hath  fuch  a name,

And  yet  full  oft  he  renneth  in  the  blame,

And  wotte  yc  how  full  oft  itt  happeth  fo,
Thcpottcto  breaketh  and  farewel  ali  is  go.

Thefc  Mcttalls  ben  of  foe  greate  violencc,

Our  walls  may  not  make  hem  refyftence  5


tbe  Qhanons  Yeoman.

But  if  they  were  wrought  of  lyme  and  ftonc,
They  pcrcen  foe  and  through  the  wall  they  gone  $
And  fome  of  them  fynken  into  the  ground.

Thus  have  we  loft  by  tymcs  many  a pound :

And  fomc  are  fcattcred  all  the  floore  aboute,
Sorae  Iepeninto  the  rofe  withouten  doute:
Thothat  the  fende  not  in  our  fyght  him  fhcwc,
Itrowthat  hc  with  usbe,  thatilkefhrewe :

In hellwhere that  he  is  Lord  and  fyre,
Neisthere  no  more  wo,  ne  angre,  neyre:
When  that  our  potte  is  brokc  as  I have  faid,
Every  man  chyte  and  holte  him  yvell  apaydc.
Sorae  fayd  itt  was  long  of  the  Fyre  makeing,
Some  fayd  nay,  it  was  on  the  blowing:

Than  was  I ferd,  for  that  was  myn  offycc,

Straw  (quod  the  third)  ye  ben  Icwde  and  nyccj
It  was  not  tempeied  as  it  ought  to  bee,

Nay  (quod  the  fourthe)  ftynte  and  herken  me :
Bycaufe  our  fyre  was  not  made  of  bechc
That  is  the  caufe,  and  none  otfier  fo  techc  5
I can  not  teli  whercon  itt  is  alonge,

But  well  I wotte  greate  ftrifc  is  us  among.

What  (quod  my  lord)  ther  nys  no  more  to  donc,
Ofthcfe  perill  1 will  bewarc  ofte  foone  ^

I am  right  Syker  that  the  potte  was  crafed,

Be  as  be  may,  be  ye  not  amafed

Asufagc  is,  let  fwcpe  the  floore  as  fvvythe,

Pluckeupyourheart  and  be  glad  and  blythe.  <

The  Mullockc  on  an  heapcyfwepte  was,  ! ' ' '

And  on  the  floore  caft  a Canvas

And  all  this  Mullocke  inafyve  ythrowe,

And  yfyftcd  andyplucked  many  athrowe.

Parde  (quodone)  fomcwhat  of  our  Mettall;


YheTaleof

Yetisthcrc  here  though  we  have not  ali;

And  though  this  thyng  mifhapped  hath  as  now,
Another  tyme  it  may  ben  wel  ynovve
Wemotcput  our good  inaventure,

A Marchant  parde  may.not  aye  endure*

Trufteth  me  wel  in  his  profperyte,

Sometyme  his  good  is  drowned  in  the  fec  .*

And  fometyme  it  cometh  fafe  unto  the  londe.

Peace  (quod  my  lord)  the  next  tymc  I wol  fonde,
To  bring  our  Crafte  ali  in  another  plyte,

And  but  I doe  Syrslett  me  have  the  wyte :

There  was  default  in  fomewhat  wel  I wote.

Another  fayd  the  Fyre  was  over  hotc.

But  be  it  hotte  or  coldc  I dare  fay  this,

That  we  concluden  evermorc  amys:

We  faylen  ofthat  which  we  wolde  have,

And  in  our  madneflc  evermorc  we  £rave  j
And  whan  we  be  togythcr  every  chon,

Every  man  femeth  as  wyfe  as  Solomon,
Butallthing  which  that  Ihyncth  asthcGoIdc,

Is  not  Golde  as  I have  here  tolde  :

Ne  every  Apple  that  is  faire  at  Eye,

Nys  not  good  what  fo  men  clappe  or  cry.

Right  foe  itt  fareth  among  us  *,

He  that  femeth  the  wyfeft  by  lefus
Is  moft  foole  when  it  cometh  to  the  prcfe,

Andhe  that  femeth  trueft  isaTheefe:

That  fball  ye  know  er  that  I from  you  wende,

By  that  I ofmy  Tale  have  made  an  end.

There  was  a Chanon  of  Religyoun
Amonge  us,  wolde  enfe<5t  ali  aTowne,

Reme,  Alyfaundere^roy,  and  other  thre,

7T~ r iT  es  jgrvwvy*  tv&rf  xs  A/fa  fV  &-


the  Chanons  Yeoman.

His  fleyght  and  his  infynyte  falfeneffc,

.There  couthe  no  manwrittenaS  I gcflc  5
Thoughthat  he  mightlyve  a thoufandycre
In  all  this  worlde  of  falfeneffc  nye  his  perc :

For  in  his  termes  he  woi  him  fo  wynde,

And  fcepe  his  words  in  fo  flyc  a kyndc,

Whan  he  comen  fhall  with  any  wight,

That  he  vvol  make  him  dote  anon  right.

But  it  a fetide  be  as  himfelfc  is,

Full  many  a man  hath  he  begy  fed  er  this  $

And  mo  vvol,  if  that  he  may  Iyve  a vvhyle,

And  yet  men  ryden  and  gone  full  many  a myle
Him  for  to  feeke  and  havc  acquayntauncc,

Not  .knowing  of  his  falfe  governauncc:

And  ifyelufte  to  give  me  audiencc,

I vvol  it  tellen  here  in  your  prefence.

But  vvorfhipfull  Chanons  relygyoufe.

Ne  dcmeth  not  that  I fclaunder  your  houfe  5
Although  my  tale  of  a Chanon  be ,

Of every  ordre  fome  fhrcvvc  is  parde:

And  God  forbid  that  al  a Companye
Shouldc  rue  a fynglc  manncs  folye.

To  flaundcr  you  is  not  myn  ententc,

But  to  corred  that  myfTc  is  mente ;

This  tale  was  not  only  told  for  you ,

But  eke  for  othcr  moe  ye  vvotte  wcl  howe ;

That  among  Chrifts  Apoftles  tvvelvc,

There  was  no  traytour  but  ludas  himfelvc:
Then  why  fhouldc  the  remenant  have  blame
That  gyltlcffe  wcre  ? by  you  I fay  the  fame :

Savc  only  this,  if  you  wol  herken  me 5
Ifany  tfudas  in  your  Cov.-«'  be,

Remcveth  him  betymel  you  rede,

Kk


z\z


The  Tale  of

If  (hame  or  loflc  may  caufen  any  drcdc.

And  bc  nothing  difplefcd  I you  pray,

But  in  chis  cafe  herkcnneth  what  I fay.

In  LON DO N was a Preefi  annuellere,
Thattherin  haddwelt  many  ayere,

Which  was  foe  plefaunt  and  fo  fervy  fable
Unto  thc  Wyfcj  wherc  hc  was  att  table  5
That  fhc  woldc  fuffcr  him  nothing  to  pay
For  borde,  nc  clothing,  went  hc  nevcr  fo  gay;

And  fpcnding  Sylver  had  he  right  ynowc,

There  of  no  forcc  I wol  procccd  asnowe:

And  teli  forth  ray  taleof  thc  Chanen,

That  brought  this  Preefi  to  confufyon.

This  h\(tChanon  came  uppona  dayc
Unto  this  PreeBs  chamber  whcre  hc  laye,
Befccchyng  him  tol^  him  acertayne
Of  Gold,  and  hewolde  quyte  him  agen:

Le^eth  me  a Marke  (quod  he)  but  daycs  thre.
And  att  my  day  I wol-quytc  itt  thc  ^

And  ifitfobe,  that  thou  fyndc  me  falfe,
Another  day  hang  me  by  rhe  halfe.

This  Preefi  tokc  him  a Marke  and  that  fwythj  •’
And  this  Chanon  him  thankcd  oft  fyth  5
And  toke  his  leve,  and  went  forth  his  vvey.

And  att  his  third  day  brought  his  money.

And  to  this  Preefi  hc  toke  this  Gold  ayen,
Whercof  this  Preefi  was  gladde  and  fayn.

Certes  (quod  he)  nothing  anoycth  me
T o lend  a man  a Noble,  tvvo  or  thre  5
Orwhatthing  were  in  my  poffeflion,

Whan  he  foe  true  is  of  Condition  :

That  in  no  wyfc  he  brekc  wol  his  day,

To  fuch  a man  I can  never  fay  nay.


What


tbe  Qbanom  Yeoman.

What(quod  this  Chanon ) Iholdc  I be  untrcwe,
May  ! that  wcre  a thyng  (alfen  of  newe,

Trouthe  is  a thyng  that  wol  cvcr  I kepc
Unto  thc  day,  in  vvhich  I fhall  erepe
Intomy  Grave,  oreis  God  forbede:

Beleveth  this  as  fyker  as  your  Crede:

God  thanke  I and  in  good  tyme  be  it  fayd,

That  there  was  never  man  yett  y vel  apayd  *

For  Gold  ne  Sylver  that  he  to  me  lent,

Ne  never  falfehede  in  myn  herte  I mcnc.

And  Sir  (quod  he)  now  of  my  privy te,

Sens  ye  fo  goodlych  have  ben  to  me  5
And kythe tome  fo  great  gentleneflfc,

Somwhat  toquytcvvith  your  kyndnefle*

I wol  you  fliewe  if  yc  wol  it  Iere,

(I  ihall  it  fhewc  to  you  anon  right  here)

Hovv  I can  werche  in Phylofofhye :
Takethgoodhcdeye  ihall  itfe  withyourEyc,
That  I woll  done  a Maiftrye  or  I goe.

Yc  Sir  (quod  thc  Preejl)  and  wol  ye  fo?
MaryethcreofI  pray  youhertely.

Att  your  Commandement  Sir  truly,

(Quod  the  Chanen)  and  eis  God  forbede,

Lo  how  this  thcfc  conjthc  his  fervyce  bede.

Fui  fothe  itt  is  that  fuch  profered  fervyfe
Stynketh,as  wittneffeth  theoldcwyfe:

And  that  fui  fone  I wol  it  verefye,

In  this  Chanen  rote  of.all  trechery,
Thatevermore  delyte  hath  and  gladncffe:

Such  fendly  thoughts  in  his  herte  emprefle,

How  Chrifts  people  he  may  to  mifchiefe  bring,
Godkepeusfrom  his  falfe  diflymuling.

What  wyft  this  Preeft  with  whom  that  he  delte,

Kk  2


244


Tbe  Tale  of

Ne  of  his  harme  comyng  noihing  hc  felte*

O fely  Preeft , O fely  Innocente.

With  Covetyfe  anon  thou  (balt  beblente'

O gracelefte  fulblynde  is  thy  conccyte,

Nothyng  arte  thou  ware  of  his  deceyte.

Which  that  this  foxe  hath  iliapen  to  the3
Hswylyewrenchcs  thou  mayftnotfls.
'Whcreforetogoc  to  thy  Conclufyon3
That  referreth  to  thy  confufyon :

Unhappy  man  anon  I wol  me  hyc,

To  teli  thyn  unwitte  ne  thy  folye :

And  eke  the  falfencffe  of  that  other  wretche.

As  fer  forthe  as  my  connyng  wol  ftretche.

This  Chanen  wasmy  Lord  yewoldvvcne,
Syr  hofte  in  fayth  and  by  the  hevcn  Qgene :

It  was  another  Chanon  and  not  he,

Thatcanan  hundredfold  more  fubtelte  t
He  hath  betrayed  folke  many  a tyme,

Of  his  falfeneffe  it  doleth  me  to  ryme ;
Everwhan  Ifpeke  ofhis  falfeheed.

For  fhame  of  him  my  chekes  waxcn  rccd:
Algaces  they  begennen  for  to  glowe.

For  rednelfe  have  I non  right  well  I knowe
Inmy  vifage,  for  fumes  dyverce
Of  Mctalls  which  ye  have  herde  me  rehercc  }
Confumed  and  wafted  hath  my  rednefTc,

Novv  take  hced  of  this  Chanens  Curfedneffe.
Syr  (quod  he;to  the  Preeft,  fet  your  Man  gon.
For  Quickfilver  that  we  it  had  anon  5
And  lett  him  bring  unces  two  or  thre.

And  whan  he  cometh  as  fafte  lhul  ye  fc
A wonder  thyng  which  ye  faw  never  er  this;

Syr  (quod  the  Preeft)  itt  fhalbedonc  iwys :


the  Qhanons  Yeoman .

Hc  badd  his  fervauntc  fetch  him  this  thyng,
Andhealready  was  att  hisbydding-,

And  went  him  forth  and  came  anon  agaync
With  this  Quickfylver  fhortly  for  to  fayne  :

And  toke  thjcfe  unces  therc  to  the  Cbanoun,

And  he  hem  fayd  vvell  and  fayre  adoun  :

Andbade  the  fervaunt  Coles  fortobryng,

That  he  anon  might  go  to  his  werkyng.

The  Coles  right  anon  were  yfet.

And  this  Chanon  toke  out  a Croffelett
Ofhis  bofomc,  and  Ihewed  ittothe  Preefi :

This  Inftrument  (quod  he)  which  that  thoufeeft
Takeinthy  hond,  andput  thy  felfe  therein
Of this  Quickfylver  an  uncc  and  begyn
In  the  namc  of  Chift  to  vvexe  a Pbilsfopber ,

There  be  fui  fewe  whichl  vvoldeitproferj
To  fhevve  him  this  moche  of  my  Science,

For  here  ihulye  fe  by  experience,

That  this  Quickfylver  I wol  mortifye
Right  in  your  fyght  anon  withouten  lye.

And  make  itas good  Sylver  and  asfyne.

As  thcre  is  any  in  your  purfe  or  myne,

Orelfewhere,  and  make  it  malliable,

Or  eis  hold  me  falfe  and  unftable  5
Amonges  folke  ever  to  appere.

I have  a poudre  that  coft  me  decre,

Shall  make  ali  good,  for  it  is  caufe  of  ali
My  connyng,  which  I you  flietvc  fhall  y
Voydeth  your  Man,  and  let  him  be  therout,,

And  iherte  the  dore,  vvhyles  vve  ben  about
Our  privctie,  that  no  man  us  efpy,

Whyles  that  we  Werken  in  our  Philofophyc.

AI  as  he  bade  fulfylled  was  indcde:

K k 3 This


245


T he  Tale  of

This  ylkc  fervant  arion  out  yede,

And  his  Maifter  Ihette  the  aorc  anon,

And  to  her  labour  fpcdily  they  gone.

This  Precfi  at  this  curfed  Chanons  byddyng,
Uppon  thefyre  anon  fet  this  thyng  *

And  blewe  the  fyre  and  befyed  him  fui  faftc,
And  this  Chanon  into  this  croflet  cafte
A pouder,  I not  vvherof  it  was,

Ymade  either  of  Chalkc,  Erthe,  orGlafle
Or  fomwhat  eis,  was  not  worthe  a fly,
Toblyndewith  this  Preeft,  andbadehim  hye
Thefe  Coles  forto  couchen  alabove
TheCrofflet  forintoken  that I the love ;

(Quod  this  Chanon)  thyn  hondes  two,

Shal  werke  al  thing  that  here  fhalbc  do  5
Graunr  mercy  (quod  the  Preefi)  and  was  fui  glad,
And  couched  coles  as  the  Chanon  bad.

And  whyle  he  befy  was,  this  fendely  wretch,

This  falle  Chanon^  the  foule  fende  him  fetehe  •,
Out  of  his  bofome  toke  a bechen  cole.

In  which  fui  fubtclly  was  made  an  hole,

And  therein  was  put  of  Sylver  lymayle,

An  unce,  and  ftoppcd  was  without  fayle,

The  hole  with  waxe  to  kepe  the  Limaylc  in.

And  underftandeth  that  this  falfe  gyn
Was  not  made  there,  but  it  was  made  byfore  5
And  other  thynges  that  I fhall  you  teli  more  •
Herafter,  th2t  whiche  he  with  him  brought,

Er  he  came  there  to  begyle  him  hethought :

Anci  fo  he  did  er  they  went  a twynne

Till  he  had  turned  him,  coulde  he  not  blynne,

It  dulleth  me  whan  that  I of  him  fpeke,

On  his  falfe  hede  faync  wolde  I me  wreke ,


the  Qhanons  Yeoman .

Ifl  wyfte  how,  but  he  is  here  and  there,

Hc  is  fo  varyaunt  hc  bydeth  no  wherc.

But  taketh  hecd  Syrs  nowe  for  Godds  love,

He  toke  his  Cole  of  which  1 fpake  above ,

And  in  his  honde  he  barc  it  prively,

Andwhylcs  the  Preefl couched  befily
The  Coles,  as  I told  you  er  this,

This  Chanon  fayd,  Frende  ye  done  aroys  ;

This  is  not  couched  as  ic  ought  to  be  5
But  fone  I fhall  amend  it  (quod  he)

Nowelet  me  medie  thervvith  but  a whyle.

For  of  you  have  I pyre  by  Saint  Gyle  :

Te  ben  right  hotte,  I fewelhowye  fwete,

Have  here  a clothe  and  wype  away  the  wcte :

And  while  the  Preelt  him  wyped  hace,

This  Chanon  toke  the  Cole,  I fhrewc  his  face :
Andlaydit  aboven  uppon  the  mydwarde
Ofthc  Crofler,  andblewe  wcl  afterwarde,

Till  that  the  Coles  gonne  fafte  brenne.

Nowc  yeve  us  drinke  (quod  this  Chanon)  then.

As  fvvythc  al  fhall  be  wel  I undertake,

Syttc  we  downc  and  let  us  mery  make  •,

And  whan  this  Chanons  bechen  Cole
Wasbrenr,al  the  Limaylc  outof  the  hole
Into  the  Croflet  anon  feli  adoun,

And  foe  it  muft  necdes  by  refoun ,

Scns  it  fo  even  above  couched  was,

But  thereof  wyfte  the  Preefl  nothing'  alas  ••

Hc  demed  ali  the  coles  lyche  goode.

For  of  the  fleyght  nothing  he  underftoode.

And  whan  this  Alkamijtre  fawe  his  tyme,
fyfeth  up  Syr  Preefl  (quod  he)  and  ftondeth  byme  5
And  for  I wott  well  yngot  have  1 none :

Gothe


H7


The  Tale  of

Gothc  walketh  forth  and  bryngea  chalkeftone,
For  I wol  make  it  of  the  fame  fliappe,
Thatanyngott  isif  I may  havc  happc*

And  bring  eke  with  you  a bolle  or  a panne
Full  of  water,  and  you  ihall  fe  thanne,

How  that  our  befynefle  fliall  happe  and  preve,
Andyet  forye  ihall  have  no  misbyleve,

Ne  wronge  conceyte  of  me  in  your  abfence,

I wol  not  ben  out  of  your  preiencc :

But  goc  with  you  and  come  with  yon  agaync.

The  Chamber  dore  lhortly  to  fayne,

They  opened  and  fhette  and  went  forth  her  wcy.
And  forthe  with  him  they  carryed  the  kcy  *

And  comen  agen  withouten  any  delay,

What  fhulde  I tarry  all  the  long  day?

He  toke  the  Chalke  and  fliope  it  in  the  wy fe
Of  an  yngot  as  I fliall  you  devy  fe.

I fay  he  toke  out  ofhis  owne  fleve
A teyne  of  Sylver,  y vel  mote  he  chevc ;

Which  that  was  but  an  unce  of  weight.

And  taketh  heed  now  of  his  curfed  fleight,

He  ihope  his  yngot  in  lenght  and  in  breae
Of  the  teyne  withouten  anydrede,

Soflily  that  the  Preeft  it  not  afpyde.

And  in  his  fleve  agayne  he  gan  it  hyde  5
And  from  the  fyre  toke  up  his  Matterc,

And  into  the  yngot  it  put  with  mery  cherc :

And  into  the  water-vclfele  he  it  caftc
Whan  that  him  lift,  and  bade  the  Preeft  as  faftc
Looke  what  there  is  put  in  thyn  honde,and  grope,
Thou  fhalt  finde  there  Sylver  as  I hopej
What  dy  vel  of  hell  fliulde  it  eis  be?

Shaving  of  Sylver,  Sylver  is  parde.


the  Qbanons  Yeoman.

Hc  put  in  his  hondc  and  toke  up  a Teyne
Of  Silver  fync,  and  glad  in  cvery  veyne
Was  this  Preefi,  whan  he  favv  ite  was  fo,

Gods  bleflynge  and  his  Mothcrs  alfo  :

And  al  hallowcs  have  ye  Sir  Chanon
Saydthis  Preefi^  and  1 her  Malyfon.

But  and  ye  vouchfafe  to  teche  me
Thisnoble  Crafte,  and  this  fubtelte;

I wolbeyours  in  althat  everl  may.

Qpod  the  Chanon  yet  woll  I make  aflay
The  feconde  tyme,  that  ye  mowe  take  heede,
And  ben  expert  of  this  and  in  your  neede
Another  day  afTay  in  myn  abfence,

This  Difciplyne  and  this  crafty  Science.

Lette  take  onother  ounce  (quod  hc)  tho
Of  Quiekfylver  withouten  words  mo.

And  don  thervvith  as  I have  don  er  this,

With  that  other  which  thatnowe  filveris.

This  Preefi  him  bcfycth  in  ali  that  he  can,

To  don  as  this  Chanon  this  curfed  man
Commanded  him,  and  faft  blew  the  fyre
For  to  come  to  the  effed  of  his  defyre ;

And  this  Chanon  right  in  the  meane  vvhile,

All  redy  was,  this  Preefi  efte  to  begyle  5
And  for  a Countenance  in  his  honde  bare
An  holow  fticke,  take  keepe  and  bcware  j
In  thendof  which  an  unce  and  no  more
Of  Sylver  Lymayle  putte  was,as  before,

Was  in  his  cole,  and  ftoppcd  with  wexe  wele,
Forto  kepenin  his  Lymaile  cvery  dele.

And  whiles  this  -Preefi  was  in  his  befynefTe
This  Chanon  with  his  fficke  gan  him  dreffe
Tohim  anon,  and  his  poudre  caftin,.

L1


2,50  The  Tale  of

Ashcdid  crfts  the  Dy  veli  out  of  hisskyn
Him  torne,  I pray  to  God  for  his  fallhede.

For  he  was  ever  falfe in  thought  and  dede:

And  with  his  fticke  abovethe  Crofllctre,

That  was  ordeyned  with  that  falfe  ictte,

Heftyrcth  the  coles  tyl  ali  relent  gan
The  waxe  agayne  the  fytr,  as  every  man,

But  he  a foole  be,  wote  wel  it  mote  nede.

And  al  that  in  the  hole  was  out  yede  :

And  into  the  crofflette  haftelyit  feli.

Th zPrcefl  fuppofcd  nothing  butwell,

But  befyed  him  faft  and  was  wonder  fayne,
Suppofing  nought  but  trouthe,  foth  to  fayne :

He  was  fogladd  that  I cannot  expreffe,

In  no  manere  his  mirth  and  his  gladnefle  5
And  to  the  Chanon  he  profered  eft  foone
Body  and  good : ye  ( quod  the  Chanen)  anone,
Though  I be  poore,  crafty  thou  fhalt  me  fynde,

I warne  the  yet  is  therc  more  behynde ,

Is  therc any  Copper  here  within  fayd  he?

Ye  Sir  (quod  the  Preeft)  I trowe  there  be.

Eis  go  bye  forne  and  that  afwythe.

Nowe  good  Sir  go  forth  thy  way  and  hythe.

He  went  his  way  and  with  the  Coper  he  came,
And  this  Chanen  in  his  honde  it  name;

And  of  that  Coper  wayed  out  but  an  unce,

Alito  fymple  is  my  tonge  to  pronounce  :

As  to  miniftre  by  my  wytte  the  doublencfle
Of  this  Chanon , roote  of  all  curfydnclTe :

He  femed  freindly  to  hem  that  knew  him  nought.
But  he  was  fcndly  both  in  werke  and  thought,
Itweryeth  me  totell  of  hisfalfenefle
And  nathleffe,  yet  wollic  expretfc.


the  Chanons  Yeoman.

To  the  entent  that  men  may  beware  thereby.

And  for  none  other  caufe  trnly.

He  put  this  unce  of  Coper  into  the  Crosfletf,

And  on  the  fyre  as  fwythe  he  hath  it  fett  •,

And  caft  in  pouder,  and  made  the  Preefi  to  blotve.
And  in  his  workeing  for  to  ftoupe  lotve  :

As  he  did  erfte, and  ali  nas  but  a jape,

Right  as  him  lyfte,  the  Preefi  he  made  his  Ape ;

And  afterward  in  the  yngot  hc  it  cafte.

And  in  the  panne  put  it  at  the  lafte
Of  water,and  in  hc  put  his  owne  honde.

And  in  his  flevc,  as  ye  by  forehonde
Herd  me  teli,  he  had  a Sylver  Tcyne,

Heflily  tokc  it  out,this  curfcd  heyne,

Unvvetyng  this  Preefi  of  his  falfe  crafte.

And  in  the  pannes  botome  hc  hath  it  lafte.

And  in  the  watcr  rombleth  to  and  fro :

And  wonder  prively  toke  up  alfo
The  copcr  Teyne,  not  knovving  this  Preefi ,

And  hydde  itt,  and  hent  him  by  the  brefl5
And  to  him  fpakc,  and  thus  fayd  in  his  game,

Stoupeth  adovvne,  by  God  ye  be  to  blame,

Helpeth  me  nowe,  as  Tdid  you  whylcre :

Put  in  your  honde,  and  lokeih  what  is  there.

This  Preefi  tokc  up  this  Sylver  Teyne  ano.ie.

And  then  faid  the  Cbanon , lette  us  gon
Withthefe  thrcTeynes  which  we  han  wrought
To  forne  Goldfmythe,and  wete  if  it  be  ought .

For  by  my  faith,  I nolde  for  my  hoode,

Butifitwere  Sylver  fyne  and  gocde.

And  that  as  fwythe  wellproved  ihalbe.

Untothe  Goldfmythe  vvith  thefe  Tcynes  three,
They  wentand  putthem  in  affaye,

L1  z To


251


T be  Tale  of

To  fyre  and  hammer,  might  no  man  fay  nay,
But  they  vvere  as  them  ought  for  to  be.

This  fotted  Preeft  tvho  wasgladderthcnhe,
Wasnever  Byrd  gladder  agenft  the  day.

Ne  Nightyngalc  agenft  the  ceafon  of  May,
Wasncver  none,  that  Iyft  better  to  fynge.

Ne  Lady  luftier  in  Carolyng :

And  for  to  fpeke  of  love  and  woman  hede.

Ne  Knight  in  armes  to  donc  a herdy  dede,
Toftonden  ingrace  of  his  Lady  dere,

Then  had  this  Preeft  this  crafte  to  Iere,

And  to  the  Chanon,  thus  he  'pakeand  fayd
For  the  loveot  God,  that  for  us  ali  deyd,

And  as  I may  deferve  ir  unto  yo \v,
'Whatfhall  this  receitecoft,  tcllethme  notve  ?

By  our  Lady  'quod  this  Chano» ) it  is  dere,

I vvarne  you  well,  fave  / and  <i  Frere :

In  ENG  LAN  D there  can  no  man  it  make»
Noforcefquod  hej  nowe  Sir  for  Gods  fake,
What  fhall  I pay  f teli  me  I you  pray.

I vvys  (.quod  hc,  it  is  fui  dere  I fay.

Syr  at  one  vvord  if  that  ye  lyft  it  have,
Ycfliallpay  fortye  pound,  lo  God  me  fave:
And  nere  the  freindibyp  that  ye  dider  this
To  me,  ye  fhulden  pay  more  y wys.

This  Preeft  the  forne  of  forty  pounde  anon
OfNobles  fette,  and  told  hem  everychon
TothisC&<«?0»  for  this  ilke  receyte,

All  his  worchyng  was  fraude  and  deceytc.

Syr  Preeft  he  faid  •,  Ikepe  for  to  have  noloos
Of my  crafr, fori  wold  itt  were kept cloos :

And  as  ye  love  rae  kepeth  it  fecre,

Forand  men  knowe  all  my  Subtelte,


the  Qhanons  Yeoman.

By  God  men  wolde  hav.e  foe  greatc  envye
Tomcbycaufeofmy  Phylofophye:  r
Ifliuldcbe  deed,.ther  wcre  none  other  way..

God  it  forbid  (quod  the  Preefi)  what  ye  fay:

Yet  had  I lever  fpend  ali  the  good,

Which  that  I have,  or  cis  waxe  I wood
Than  that  ye  fhoulde  fallen  in  fuch  mifcheife :

For  your  good  wy  11  have  ye  right  good  prefe,

(Quod  the  Chanen)  and  farewell  graunt  mercy:

He  vvent  his  way,  and  never  the  Preefi  hira  fey
Afcerthat  day : And  whan  that  this  Preefi  {[ loldc
Maken  affay  at  fuch  tyme  as  he  wolde,  o .

Of  this  receyte,  farwell  it  nold  not  be :

Lo  thus  bejaped  and  begyled  was  he.

Thus  raakcth  he  his  Introdu&ion,

Tobringcfolke  to  her  diftru&ion.

Confydereth  Sirs,  howeinechc  eftate:

Betwixt  Men  and  Gold  is  debate,

Soe  fer  forthe,  that  unncths  therc  is  none,

This  Multiplycng  blyndcth  fo  many  one ;

That  in  good  fayth,  I trowc  that  it  be
The  greateft  caufe  of  fuch  fcarlyte.*

Thefe  Phjlofephers  fpeken  fo  miftily ,

In  this  Craf  te,  that  men  cannot  come  thereby,

For  any  witte  that  men  have  nowe  adaycs,

They  may  well  chattre  and  jangle  as  doth  the  Jayes :
And  in  her  termes  fett  her  luftc  and  payne,

Butto  her  purpofe  fhall  they  never  attaine;

A man  may  lightly  lerne  if  he  have  ought,
ToMultiplyand  bring  his  good  to  nought:

Lo  fuch  a Luere  is  in  this  lufty  game,

Amansrayrthe  it  wol  turneall  togramc:

And  emptien  alfo.greate  and  hevy  purfes3

L 1 3 And


«»


2-54*


The  Tale  of

And  maken  folke  to  purchafe  curfes:

Of  hem  that  han  alfoe  hergood  ylcnt.

Ofye  for fliame,  they  that  han  bebrentc:

Alas  cannot  they  fly  thefyreshetc,

Ye  that  it  ufen,  I rede  thatye  it  letc  :

Left  yeflefen  ai,  for  bet  then  never  is  late,

Never  to  thry  ve  were  to  long  a date,

Though  thatye  prolle  aye  ye  fliall it  never  fynde,'

Y e ben  as  bold  as  is  Bayarde  the  blynde ; •

That  biondereth  forth,and  perill  cafteth  nonej
He  is  as  bolde  to  renne  agcnft  a ftone.

As  for  to  go  befyde  in  thc  way  5
So  faren  ye  that  multiplyen  I fay  5
If  that  your  Eyen  can  not  fcnc  aright,

Loketh  that  your  Mynde  lacke  not  his  fight  *

For  though  ye  lokc  never  foe  brode  and  ftare,

Ye  fliall  not  vvynne  a myte  in  that  chaffarc:

But  wafte  ali  that  ye  raay  repe  and  renne,

Withdrawe  thefyrcleaft  itto  faft  brenne:

Medleth  with  that  Arte  noemore  I menc ;

For  yf  ye  done  your  thrifte  is  gone  full  cleane.

And  right  as  fwythc  I vvoll  you  tellen  here,

Whatthat  the  Pbylofophers  fayncin  this  matterc.

Lochusfaith  Arnolde  of  the  newe  toune.

As  his  Roptrye  maketh  mencioune :

Hc  fayth  right  thus  withouten  any  lye,

There  may  noc  man  Merctny  mortifye  5
But  if  it  be  with  his  brothcrs  knowlegyng;

Lo  how  that  he  which  firfle  fayd  this  thyng
OfPhylofophcrs  fatherwas,//irmw.

He  faythe  how  that  thc  Dragon  doutlefle
Ne  dycth  not,  but  ifhe  be  flayne
With  his  brother ; and  this  is  for  to  fayne ,

B


the  Qbanons  Yeoman.

By  the  Dragon  Mercurje  and  none  othcr,

He  underftood  that  Brimftone  was  his  brother.

That  out  of  Sol  and  Luna,  were  ydrawc.

And  therefore  fayd  he,  take  hced  to  my  fawe.

Let  no  man  befye  hira  this  Jrte  for  to  fcche,

Buthe  that  the  Entention  and  fpeche

Of  Phylofopbers  underftondc  can,

Andifhedoheisalcudman.-

For  this  Science , and  this  connyng  ('quod  he)

Is  of  the  Secre,  of  the  Sccres  parde.

Alfoethere  was  a Difciple  ot  Plato  ^

That  on  a tyme  fayd  his  Maifter  to  :

As  his  booke  Senior  wol  bere  wytneffe,

And  this  was  his  deraaunde  in  fothfaftneffe.

Teli  me  the  namc  of  the  privy  Stone?

And  Plato  anfvvcred  unto  him  anone,

Take  theStone  that  Tytanos  mennamc.

Which  is  that  (quod  he?)  Uagnatia  is  the  fame,

Said  Plato : yc  Sir,  and  is  it  thus  1
This  is  ignotum  per  ignotius :

What  is  Magnatia  good  Sir  I you  pray  t .
ItisaWater  that  is  made  I fay
Of  Elcments  foure  (quod  Plato)

T ell  me  the  Rocke  good  Sir  ( quod  he  tho)

Of  that  Water,  if  it  be  your  wyll.

Naynay  (quod  Plato)  ccttayne  thatl  nyllv
The  Philofopbers  were  y fworne  cchone,

Thatthcy  fhulde  difcover  it  unto  none;

Nein  no  Boke  it  writc  in  no  manere.

For  unto  Cbrtft  it  is  fo  lefe  and  derc ,

That  he  wol  not  that  it  difcovered  bc,

But  where  it  liketh  to  his  deite ;

Man  to  enfpyre  and  eke  for  to  defende,

Whan


ay  6


The  Tale , &c.  .!c

Whan  that  him  lyketh,  lo  this  is  his  ende.

Tiien  conclude  I thus,  fens  the  God  of  heaven,
Ne  wyl  not  that  the  Phylofopbers  nemen:
Howc  that  a Man  fliall  come  unto  this  Stoney
I rede  as  for  the  beft,  lett  itt  gone5
For  who  fo  maketh  God  his  adverfary.

As  for  to  wcrche  any  thing  in  contrary :

Unto  his  will,  certes  never  fhall  he  thrive  5
Though  that  he  Multiplye  terme  ofhis  livq,

And  there  a poynte  .•  for  ended  is  my  Tale,

God  fend  every  truc  man  Bote  ofhiibalc.


i :


THE


THE  WORKE  OF

fOH3^_  T>  A STI  JA(.

• v • ! S . * . f ; V .1  i

Otyetfull  fleping,nor  yet  full  vvaking,
Butbetvvccne  ttvayne  lyingin  a traunce;
Halfc  clofed  mine  Eyne  in  my  flumbering,
Likc  a Ma  rapt  of  all  checr  & countcnancc; .
By  a manner  of  weninge  & Rcmembrancc
Towards  Aurora , cre  Phmhus  uprofe,

I dreamed  one  came  to  mc  to  doe  mc  plcafauncc
That  brought  mc  a Boke  with  feaven  fcales  clofe.


i.Following  upon  I had  a wonderf all  dreamc,  .
As  femed  unto  my  inward  thoughr,

Tliefaceof  himlhoneas  the  Sunbeamc:

Which  unto  me  thys  hevenly  Boke  brought,
OffogreateRichesthatytmay  notbe  bought,  , ‘
In  order  fet  by  Dame  Philofofhiei
The  Capitali  and  the  flowrilhing  wrought
By  a wife  Prince  called  Theolegie.


3.  Thys  Boke  was  written  with  letters  aurtat,
Perpetually  to  be  put  in  memory ,

Andto  A f ollo  the  Chapters  confecrate.

And  to  the  feaven  Gods  in  the  hevenly  Confiftory  .•

And  in  Mercuries  litle  Oratory,

Groweth  all  the  fruite  in  breefe  of  thys  Science ,

Who  can  exprefle  hem  and  haveof  hem  Vi&ory,

May  dayme  the  tryumph  of  his  Minerali  prudcnce.

Mrn  4.  Of


Dajlins  T>reme .

4.  Of  this  matter  above  bcttvecnc  Starrs  fcaven,

By  Cods  and  Coddtffes  ali  of  onc  affcnt,

Was  (cnt  Caducifer  to  Erth  doivnc  form  Heaven  .*
Saturuuc  as  Bcdell  by  great  advifcment ;

For  to  fummon  a generali  Parliamcnt,

By  concord  of  ali  both  old  and  younge  of  age,

To  fay  in  Brcife  their  Counccll  moft  prudent  ;

For  Common  proffit  to  knitt  up  a Marriage.

* *•••,*-  t • f • * ! j ~ *

$.Betweenetwaine  Bornc  of  the  Imperiali blood.
And  defcended  from  Iupters  line,

Of  their  Naturcs  moft  pure  and  moft  good  5
Wythovvte  infcccion  their  fcede  is  moft  divine  i
That  noe  Eclips  may  let  them  for  to  fhine,

So  that  Mercury  doth  ftint  ali  debate.

And  rcftrainc  their  Courageby  mcakncs  them  incline ;
That  of  frovvardnes  they  bc  not  indurate.

6.  For  the  Sume  that  fitteth  fo  hcigh  a lofr.

His  golden  detv-droppes  fhall  clcerely  raigne  downc,
Bythe  mcane  ofCMercury  that  movenfirft  madefoft:
Then  there  fchalbe  a glad  Conjunccion,

Whan  there  is  made  a Seperacion :

And  their  twoSpermesby  Marriage  are  made  one  5 ~
Andthefaid  Mercury  by  devifion,

Hath  taken  his  flight  and  from  both  is  gone.

7.  Thefebc  x.\\ttwoMercuyies  cheife  of  Philofophcrs
Revived  againe  with  the  Spiritoflyfe,

Richer  then  Rnbies  or  Pcarles  fhut  in  Cofcurs ;
Wafhed  and  Baptized  in.waters  vegitative,

Thcbody  diflevered  with  heate  nutrative :

By  moderate,  moyfturc  of  Putrefaccion-,

So  that  there  is  no  excefle  nor  no  ftrifc
Of  the  fourc  Elements  in  their  Conjunccion».

8»Th


Dajlins  ‘Dreame*

8.  Thegraineof  Whcatewhich  on  theground  <loth

Butit  be  dead  it  may  not  fru&ifie , (fall,

Ifit  bc  hole  the  vertae  doth  appayle;

And  in  no  wife  it  may  not  Multiplyc,

The  increafe  doth  begin  whan  it  doth  Putrefies
Ofgood  Grafts  commeth  Fruites  ofgood  laftage  5
Of  Crabs  Verjuycc,  of  Afh  is  made  Lye,

Of  good  Grapcs  followcth  a good  Vintage.

9.  Who  fovveth  good  Secde  repeth  good  againe,

Of  Cockles  fowne  therc  can  grow  no  good  Whcatc,
For  as  fuch  a floughman  travcleth  in  vainc ,
Tofiuitefull  Land  Cockle  is  not  mccte;

Gall  is  ever  bitter,  Honcy  is  ever  fwecte,

Of  ali  things  contrary  is  fals  Conncccions,

Let  Male  and  Fcmale  together  ever  meete ;

But  both  be  clenfcd  of  their  Complexions.

10.  A Man  of  Nature  ingendercth  but  aMan,

And  every  Beaft  ingendercth  his  femblable;

And  as  Philofofhers  rchearfe  well  can,

Diana  and  Venta  in  marriage  be  notablc,
AHorfewitha  Swinc  joyneth  not  in  aftable.

For  where  is  made  unkindly  geniture,

What  followcth  but  things  abominablc  t
Whichis  tofay  Mcnjlrum  in  Nature.

11.  AII  this  l finde  in  the  faidBoke,

Brought  to  me  when  I lay  a fleepe  s
And  of  one  thing  good  hccde  I toke ;

The  Wolf  in  kinde  is  Encmy  to  the  Sheepe.

TheRofe  fulldivers  to  the  wild  Necpe:

For  things  joyned  that  be  contrary  s

Damc  Nature  complayning  doth  fit  and  weepe :

For  falce  rcccipts  found  in  her  Library.

M m 2


And


- i6o  Dajlins  Vreame.

12.  And  there  it  was  fo  pitioufly  complained,

That  mcn  fo  err  by  falfc  Opinions

That  be  fo  farr  from  truth  avvay  reftrained,

Like  as  they  had  loft  vvholly  thcir'  Reafons , .

Noc  confidering  in  their  difcrerions?

What  mifcheife  followeth  as  is  oft  fecne,

By  thefe  falfe  frovvard  Conneccions  : j • <

As  doth  lcapers  with  folkes  that  byne  cleane.

1 3. Notwithftanding  he  that  is  fate  fo  high  in  hcavcn,
Crown’d  with  a Crowne  of  bright  ftoncs  decre,

Borne  there  to  raine  as  cheifechofen  of.  feaven:
Equall  with  Phcebus  flione  in  the  fame  fphere,

Without  difference  as  Clerkes  tous  Icare,

Sate  there  moft  royallin  his  diadem :

Vcry  Celcftiall  and  Angelikeof  chcarc;

And  in  all  vertue  like  as  he  did  feeme.

14.  And  in  that  Boke  I found  well  by  writing,

Like  as  the  procefle  made  mention :

How  that  there  was  once  a mighty  rich  King,

Cleane  of  nature  and  of  Complexion  :

Voyde  of  deformity  from  head  foc  forthe  downe,
Which  for  his  beauty  as  it  is  fpccificd.

And  for  his  eleanes  moft  foverayne  of  renowne :
Was  among  Planets  in  heaven  ftellcfycd.

15.  Ccrtaine Brcthren  I found  he  had  in  Number,
And  of  one  Mothcr  they  were  borne  every  each  one  :

But  a Sicknes  dicL  them  fore  cumber,

That  none  was  whole  on  his  feete  to  gone,

Hoarfe  of  language,  cleere  voice  had  they  none :

For  with  a fcabb  that  was  contagious,

They  wcre  infedcd,  hole  was  their  none  5
Forevcrcxilca  becaufc  they  wcrc.Leaprous,.

16.  The


DaJUris  T)reame,

1 6.  The  faid  King  rolc  up  in  his  Royall  fce,

Secing  this  mifcheife  caft  his  Eye  downe.

And  of  his  mercy,  and  fraternali  pittye,

Surprized  in  heart,  full  of  Compaffton  :

Andbeganto  complainc  of  their  Infeccion,

Alas  quoth  he  hovv  carae  this  adventure.

Under  what  frovvard  or  falfe  Conftclacion-j
Or  in  what  howre  had  yee  your  ingendurc.

17.  But  fithcnce  this  mifcheife  ys  to  you  befall,
There  is  nothingwhich  were  more  expedient,

Then  to  chufc  one  outamongft  us  ali,.

Without  fpott  ali  eleere  of  his  intent.

For  you  to  dye  by  his  ownc  afTent,

To  fave  the  people  from  their  Damnation :

Andwith  his  blood  ere  you  be  fully  fhent,

To  make  of  hisr  mercy  your  remiflion.

18.  The  vvhich  Liquor  moft  wholefome  is  and  good,.
Againft  leprous  humors  and  falfe  infeccions,

When  from  a vcyne  taken  is  the  blood ;

Clcanfing  each  parte  from  all  corrupcions,

The  Originali  taken  from  generacions :

Which  is  dcfcended  downe  from  ftock  royall,
Nourifhcd  with  Milke  of  pure  complcxion5
With.  menflrous  which  are  not  fuperficiall.

ip.  But  when  the  Brethrcn  of  this  worthy  King
Heard  the  Language  , they  feli  in  full  great  dread,
Full  fore  weeping  and  faid  in  Complayning
That  none  of  them  was  able  to  blecde,

Becaufe  their  blood  was  infeccious  indecde,

And-of  corrup:  blood  made  is  noc  Sacrifice3.
Wherefore  alas  there  is  noe  way  to  fpeedc  ,

That  wc  can  finde,  to  helpe  us  in  any  wife.

Mm-3  Of,


l6l


?,6i


Dajlin  s Creante,

20.  Of  our  Birth  and  ofour  Originali,

Clecrely  and  truly  to  make  mcncion  5
Excufe  is  therc  none  in  parte  nor  in  allj
In  fin  was  firft  our  concepcion  .*

Our  bringing  forth  and  generation,

Fulfilled  was  in  forrowc  and  wickedncfle.

And  our  Mothcrin  a fhort  conclufion
With  Corrupt  milke  us  foftrcd  in  diftrefle.

21.  For  who  may  make  that  fccde  to  be  cleane,
That  firft  was  conceivcd  in  uncleanes.

For  cancred  ruft  may  never  I meanc,

By  noe  crafte  fhew  forth  parfett  brightnes :

Now  lct  us  ali  ac  oncc  our  Courfe  addres ;

And  goe  unto  our  Mother  to  aske  by  and  by,

The  finali  caufe  of  our  Corrupt  ficknes  5
That  fhe  dedarc  unto  us  the  Caufe  and  why.

22.  The  faid  Childrcn  uprofe  in  a fury
Of  wofull  rage,  and  went  by  one  aflent
Unto  their  Mother  that  called  was  Mcrcury :
Requiring  her  by  greate  advifement,

Before  her  Goddejfes  bcing  every  one  prefent*

To  tcll  them  truly  and  in  noe  parte  to  faine,

Why  their  nature  was  corrupt  and  fhent ;

That  caufed  them  evermore  to  weepe  and  complainc

23.  To  whome  the  Mother  full  bright  offace  and  hcw
Cave  this  anfwer  remembred  in  Scripture,

Firft  when  I was  weddcd  a new ,

I conceived  by  profles  of  true  Nature  .*

AChild  of  fcedc  that  was  moft  cleanc  and  purej’
Undefiled,  moft  orient,  faire  and  bright,

Of  ali  the  P L A N ET  S cheife  ofingendurc  :
Which  now  in  Hcaven  giveth  fo  cicere  alight.

24-  Whol


' Vajlms  ‘Dreamc .

24.  Whofe  Complcxion  is  moft  temperate,

(n  heate  and  cold  and  in  humidity,

[n  Erth  alfo  that  there  is  noc  debate ,

Nor  noc  rcpugnaunce  by  noe  qualliry :

Nor  none  occafion  of  none  infirmity ,

That  among  them  there  may  be  none  difeord,

So  well  proportioned  every-each  in  his  degree ,

Each  howcr  and  ipace  they  be  of  fo  true  accord.

25.  Whofe  Nature  is  fo  imperiali,

That  fire  fo  burning  doth  him  noe  diftrcffc :

His  royall  kinde  is  fo  celeftiall ,

Of  Corrupcion  he  taketh  no  ficknefle ;

Fire,  Water,  Air,  nor  Erth  with  his  drines,

Neither  of  them  may  alter  his  Complcxion,

He  fixeth  Spirits  through  his  high  noblcnes;

Saveth  infe&ed  bodyes  from  their  Corrupcion.

16.  His  Heavenly  hclth  death  may  not  aflayle,
Hcdreadeth  noc  vcnomc,norncedcth  notreade,
Winde  Tempeft  ne  Wether  againft  him  may  prcvaile,
Soe  high  in  Heaven  is  his  Tabcrnade,

In  Erth  he  worketh  many  a miracle :

Hc  cureth  Lepcrs  and  feteheth  home  Fugitivej
And  to  gouty  Eyne  giveth  a cleere  Spe&acle :

Them  to  goe  that  lame  vverc  all  their  lief.

27»  He  is  my  Son  and  I his  Mother  dearc,

By  me  conceived  truly  in  Marriage;

As  touching  your  Birth  the  ficknes  doth  appeare ,

Of  Menftruous  blood  brought  forth  in  tender  age,
Your  Lepric  is  ihewed  in  Body  and  in  Vifagc,

To  makc  your  hole  Medicine  is  no  other
Drinkc,  norpotion  to  your  advantage,,

But  the  pure  blood  of  him  thac  is  your  deare  Brother.

. A


l6l


! Dajliris  T>reame.

28.  A good  Shcphard  muft  dye  for  his  Sheepc,
Without  grudging  co  fpeake  in  vvords  plaine,

And  femblable  take  hereof  good  keepe,

Your  Brother  muft  dyc  and  newe  be  bornc  againc,
Though  he  bc  old,  be  hereof  well  certaine ;

To  youth  againe  hc  muft  bc  rencwd.

And  fuffer  paflion  or  clfc  all  werc  vainc,

Then  rifing  againe  right  frefh  and  well  hewd.

2?.  Old  <Ls£fon  was  made  young  by  Medea,

With  her  drinks  and  with  her  potions,

Soe  muft  your  Brother  of  pure  Velunta
Dyeand  be  young  through  his  operation,

And  that  through  fubtile  natures  Confcttions,

By  whofe  death  plainely  to  exprefle  5
Ycc  fhalbe  purged  from  all  infcccions :

And  your  foulc  lcaprie  changed  to  deanes.

30.  With  the  faid  vvords.  the  King  began  to  abray
The  tale  adverting  that  fhc  had  tould>

How  might  a Man  by  nature  thus  he  faid
Bc  bornc  againe,  namely  when  he  ys  old  i
Then  faid  hys  Mother  by  reafon  manifold:

But  if  the  Gofpcll  thus  doth  meane,

In  Water  and  Spirit  bc  renovate  hotc  and  cold ,
That  he  ftiall  never  plainely  come  intoHeavcn.

31.  The  King  was  trifty  and  heavy  of  cheere,
Upon  his  Knees  mcekcly  kneelcd  downe,

Prayed  his  Father  in  full  low  manner,

To  tranflate  the  Challice  of  hys  paflion,

But  for  hc  thought  the  redempeion
Of  his  brethren,  might  not  be  fulfilled,

Without  his  death  nor  their  Salvation  ^

For  them  to  fuffer  hc  was  right  willed.

An


‘Dajliris  Dreame .

32.  And  for  toaccoraplilb  hys  purpofc  in  fentence,
By  cicere  example  who  fo  lookcth  righc ,

Hcavy  things  from  their  Circumferance ,

Muft  up  aflend  and  aftcr  be  made  lighr.

And  things  light  ready  to  the  flight
Muft  defcend  to  the  Center  downe,

By  interchaunging  of  natures  might ,

As  they  be  moved  by  meanc  of  Revoluciori.

33.  Soe  as  Iupiter  in  a Cloud  of  Gold,

Chaungcd  himfclfe  by  transformacion,

Anddefcended  from  hyshevenly  hold
JLikc  a Golden  dewe  unto  Dande  downe.

And  fhe  conceivcd  as  made  is  mencion ,

By  influence  of  hys  power  divine  5

Righc  fo  fhall  Phoebus  righc  foveraigne  of  renowne
To  be  conceived  of  his  Golden  rainc  decline.

34.  And  to  comfort  hys  Brethren  thatwcre  fullduil,
The  Sun  hath  chofen  without  warr  or  ftrifc ,

The  bright  Meone  when  fhe  was  at  the  full,

To  bc  his  Mother  firft,  and  afterhys  wedded  wifes
In  tyme  of  Fer  the  fcafon  yegetative,

In  Aries  when  Titan  doth  appeare,

Infpircd  by  grace  with  the  Spirit  of  lyfe,

This  marriage  hailovved  at  midday  Spheare.

35.  And  .at  this  fc.aft  were  theGodesall,

Saturne  from  blacknes  was  turned  to  white ;

And  lupiter  !et  his  ma.ntlc  fall5
Full  pale  a nd  meager  of  greate  delight,

Clothed  injlylies  thatevery  maner  wighr,  -
Of  Heaven  and  Erth,  and  Gods  of  the  Sea,
Rcjoyced  in  Heart,  and  were  full  glad  and  light,

To  be  prefent  at  this  gre.at  Solemnity.  '


161


CMars


‘DaJUris  Dreame .

■$6. Mars  forgot  thcre  hys  fturdy  black  hardines,

Caft  offliis  Habergeon  fret  with  old  ruft;

Venus  forfookc  her  minerali  rednes,

Tooke  Gold  for  greene  and  ilie  againc  alfo  forluft,
Becaufe  die  had  in  Phoebus  fucli  a truft,

That  he  fliould  this  feaft  hold  of  moft  noblencs :

Of  brotherly  pitty  needs  as  he  muft,  ,

Giveher  a mantleof  Orientali  brightncs.„

37.  After  this  Wedding  here  afore  devifed,

Of  faire  Phoebus  andfreili  Luci  ne  5
Philofophersl lave  prudently  pradifed,

A Cloflet  round  by  their  vvife  Dodrine,

Cleere  as  Chriftall  of  Glaffe  a licle  fhrine  5
With  heavenly  deawe  ftuffed  that  dungeon,

Kept  nightand  day  with  glorious  maidens  nynej
To  keepe  the  Quecne  in  her  Concepcion.-’

38.  Religioufly  tncykept  their  Sylenee,

Till  that  from  heaven  their  a royall  lighr,

And  theie  with  ali  in  open  audience*

Washeard  a voyce  almoft  at  mid  nighr,

Among  the  Virgins  moft  amiablc  of  fight,

That  faid  unto  them,  to  fave  that  was  forlorne-,

I muft  againe  through  rny  imperiali  myghr,

Be  of  my  Mothcr  new  conceived  and  borne.

39. 1 muft  palle  by  water  and  by  Fire,

The  bruntabide  and  therc  from  not  decline,

To  fave  my  brethren  I have  lo  greate  defirc,

With  new  light  their  darknes  to  yllumine,

But  fore  I dread  that  venomous  Serpentine,

Which  ever  advanceth  with  his  violence,

My  tender  youth  to  hurt  and  toinvenome,

But  in  your  keeping  doe  you  your  diligence.


Dajlins  'Dreame.

40.  The  King  thus  entred  in  his  beo  royall,

The  Queenc  conceived  under  a Sun  bright;

Under  her  fecte  a mount  like  Chriftall,

Which  had  devoured  her  husband  anon  right,

Dead  of  defire  and  in  the  Maidcns  fight  5
Loft  allthe  Collour  of  his  frelh  face.

Thus  was  hc  dead,  the  Maidcns  feeblc  of  mighr
Difpaired.  fiept  in  the  fame  place.

41.  The  Serpent  boldflied  out  his  poyfon,

The  Queenc  and  Maidens  for  fcarc  tooke  them  to  flight »
Seaven  tymes  afTending  upand  downe
With  in  a vaulr,  now  darke,  now  clecre  ofligltt,
Their  generation  was  fo  ftrong  of  might,

(Tfter  death  now  pafleth  Purgatory  ;
i£oRefurreccfon  as  any  Sun  bright,

Things  that  wcre  loft  to  bring  to  his  glory.

42.  The  Qucene  tooke  her  full  pofieffion,

The  Soule  reviving  of  the  dead  King;

But  of  old  hatred  the  toxicate  poyfon,

Was  by  the  Serpent  caft  into  their  hindring;

The  Prince  was  buried,  but  of  his  rifing,

The  Btethren  werc  glad  the!  truth  was  feene,

Whcn  they  wcre  waftied  by  his  naturali  clenfing;
And  their  old  Leprie  by  Miracle  was  made  cleane.

43.  The  full  Moonc  halfe fhaddowedthe  Sn>j)

To  putt  away  the  burning  of  his  light;

Black  fhaddowed  firft  the  skyes  wcre  fo  dunn,

The  Ravens  bili  began  wholooketh  righr,

Blaeker  then  Jett  or  Bugle  to  fight  5
But  T.tle  andlitle  by  ordinary  apparance,

The  temperate  fire  with  his  cherifhing  might
Turncd  all  to  white,  but  with  noe  violence.

N n 2


Tyme


268


‘ Dajliris  T>reame,

44.  Tymc  to  theQucene  approchcd  ofChilding,
The  Child  of  Nature  was  ready  to  fly,

Paflage  was  there  none  to  hys  out  going:

He  fpread  hys  wings  and  foundno  liberty  5
Of  nyne  Virgins  he  devoured  three,

The  othcr  fix  moft  excellent  and  fairc ,

Fearefull  for  dread  in  their  greateft  beauty,

Spread  their  feathers  and  flew  forth  in  the  Aire,

45.  The  Child  coloured  firft  Black  and  after  White,
Having  noc  heate  in  very  exiftence ,

But  by  cherifhing  of  the  Sun  bright,

Of  forraine  fire  there  was  noe  violence  .•

Save  that  men  fay  which  have  expericnce,

He  dranke  fuch  plenty  of  the  Water  of  thewell,

That  his  fix  fifters  made  noe  refiftance  5

But  would  have  devowred  *,  Dajlen  can  you  teli.

46.  Sometymes  black,  fometyraes  was  he  redd,
Now  like  alheSjnow  Citrine  of  Colour:

Now  of  Safforne  hew,now  fanguine  was  his  hcad,
Now  white  as.  a lylie  he  fhewed  him  in  his  bower,
The  Moone  gavc  nourifhment  to  him  in  his  labourj
And  with  all  their  force  did  their  buifnes,

To  cloath  hym  freiher  thcn  any  flowre,  •

With  a mantlc  of  everlafting  whitnes.


Pearo


P E A R C E

THE  BLACK  MONKE

upon  the  Slixir .

Ake  Erth  of Erth,  Erths  Moder ,

And  Watur  of  Erth  yt  ys  no  oder.

And  Ficr  of  Erth  that  beryth  the  pryfc,
But  of  that  Erth  louke  thow  bc  wyfe3
The  trevv  Eltxer  yf  thowwylt  make,"
Erth  owte  of  Erth  looke  that  thow  takc,

Pewer  futcl  faire  and  good.

And  than  take  the  Water  of  the  Wood:

Clecrc  as  Chryftall  fchynyng  bryght.*

And  do  hem  togeder  anon  ryght,

Thre  dayes  than  let  hem  lye,

And  than  depart  hem  pryvyly  and  flye,.

Than  fchale  be  browghr  Watur  fchynyng  5>

And  in- that  Watur  ys  afoulc  reynyngc,

Invifible  and  hyd  and  unfeene,

A marvelous  matter  yc  ys  to  vveene.

Than  departe  hem  by  dyftillynge.

And  you  fchallc  fee  an  Erth  apperinge,

Hevie  as  metalc  fchalle  yt  bc  5
In  the  vvych  is  hyd  grete  prevety,

Deftil  that  Erth  in  grene  hewe,

Three  dayes  during  wcll  and  trew  5
And  do  hem  in  a body  of  glaff.

In  the  wych  never  no  warke  was«

N n 3 In  s


'Black^Monkc

In  a Fumas  he  muft  bc  fett.

And  on  hys  hede  a good  lymbeck  5
And  draw  fro  hym  a Watur  clere
The  wych  Watur  hath  no  pecre,

And  aftur  macke  your  Fyer  ftrongcr,

And  thcrc  on  thy  Glafie  continew  longer,

So  fchal  yow  fc  come  a Fyer  5
Red  as  blode  and  of  grete  yre,

And  aftur  that  an  Erth  leue  therc  fchale,

The  wych  is  cleped  thc  Moder  of  alie ;

Then  into  Purgatory  fche  muft  be  doe,

And  have  the  paynes  that  longs  thereto,
Tylfchebe  bryghrer  than  the  Sune,

For  than  thow  haft  the  Mayftrey  wone*

And  that  fchalbe  vvythin  howres  three,
Thewych  forfooth  ys  grete  ferly:

Than  do  her  in  a clene  Glaft’,

Wyth  fome  of  the  Watur  that  hers  was.

And  in  a Furnas  do  her  againe,

Tyl  fche  have  drunke  her  Watur  certaine,

And  aftur  that  Watur  give  herBlood,

That  was  her  owne  pewre  and  good ,

And  whan  fche  hath'dranke  alie  her  Fyer}
Sche  wyll  wex  ftrong  and  of  grete  yre.

Than  take  yow  mete  and  mylcke  thereto.
And  fedc  the  Chylde  as  you  fchowlde  do,
Tyl  he  be  growne  t6hys  full  age,

Than  fchal  he  be  of  ftrong  courage^

And  tourne  alie  Bodiesthat  leyfull  be,

To  hys  owne  powreand  dignitye,

And  this  ys  the  makyng  of  ovvre  Stonc, .

The  trewth  here  ys  tovvldc  yow  evcreechcne.

For  ali  that  taketh  any  other  wey,

Mouch  they  loofeth  and  mouch  they  may.


upon  the  Elixir.  z y i

For  trevvly  therc  ys  no  othcr  way  of  righte,

But  Bodyof  Body  andLyghte  of  Lyghte,

VIan  of  Man  bcgottyn  ys,

And  Bcfte  of  Bcfte  to  hys  lykenes,

Alie  the  foolcs  in  the  worlde  feeken ;

Athyngcthat  they  may  never  mecten,

They  wolde  have  Metalle  owteofhem,

That  never  was  fownde  by  worldly  men:

Ne  never  was  fownde  by  Goddis  myghte,

Fhat  they  fchould  beare  any  fuch  fryghte.

Ali  Saltes  and  Sulphures  far  and  nere,

.interdite  hem  alie  in  fere,

Alie  Corofive  waters,  Blood  and  Hayre,

?y(T,  Hornes,  Wormesand  Saudivcr,

Alume,  Atriment,  alie  I fufpende,

Xafalger  and  Arfnick  I defende,

Calx  vive,  and  Calx  mort  hys  Brother,

[ fufpende  them  both,  one  and  other,

For  of  alie  things»I  wyll  no  moe,

But  fowre  Elements  in  Generali  I fay  foe,

>un  and  Moone,Erth  and  Water.;

And  here  ys  alie  that  men  of  clattcr,

Our  Gold  and  Sylver  ben  no  common  piate,

But  afpcrme  owte  ofaBodi  Itake,
n the  wych  ys  alie  Sei , Lune , Lyfe  and  Lyghtc
kVater  and  Erth,  Fyre  and  Fryght :

\nd  alie  commy  th  of  one  Image,

But  the  Water  of  the  Wood  makyththe  marryage;
rherefore  there  ys  none  othcr  Waye,

But  to  take  thee  to  thy  Beades  and  praye :

:or  Covctous  Men  yt  fyndyth  never,
rhoughthey  feek  yt  once  and  ever,
ict  not  your  Hearts  in  thys  thyng,

But  only  to  God  and  good  lyvynge.


And


‘BlacI^  Monkg

And  he  that  wyll  come  thercby,

Muft  be  meeke,  and  f ull  of  mercy  :

Both  in  fpyrit  and  in  Countcnannce ,

Full  of  Chcreti  and  good  Governaunce  •

And  cverraore  fuil  of  almes  deede,

Symple  and  pcwerly  hys  lyf  to  leade :

Wyth  Prayers,  Pennaunces,  and  Picty,

And  ever  to  God  a lover  be.

And  allethe  ryches  that  he  ys  fped,

To  do  God  worfchyppe  wyth  Almes  deede.

In  Arfcnyck  fublymcd  therc  ys  a way  ftreight,
Wyth  Mercury  calcyned  nyne  tymcs  hys  weight
And  grownde  together  with  the  Water  of  myght
That  bereth  ingreflion  lyfe  and  lyght.

And  anon  as  they  togyther  byne,

Alie  runnyth  to  Water  bryght  and  Ihenc,
Upon  thys  Fyre  they  grow  togcthyr,

Tyll  they  be  faft  and  flec  no  whythyr;

But  than  feede  hem  fowrth  wyth  thy  hond, ’r-
Wyth  mylke  and  meate  tyle  they  bc  ftronge,
And  thow  fchalt  have  there  a good  Stonc,
Whcrcof  an  Ounc  on  fowrty  wyll  gOne:
Upon  Fetius  or  on  Mercury,

Thys  Medicyn  wyll  make  thee  merry.

Ali  yow  that  have  fowght  mani  a day,
Leavc  worke,  take  yowre  Beades  and  pray.

For  the  longer  that  yow  fecken,

The  longer  yt  ysor  yow  'mceten  *

And  he  that  now  -fayne  wculd  be  fped,

Lyften  to  my  Daughter  Megg :

For  fchhe  fcall  teli  yow  trewth  and  ryghtc,
Hearken  now  wyth  ali  your  myght.

I am  Mercury  the  myghty  Tlotver,

I am  moft  worthy  of  Honour  ;


upon  the  Elixir .

I am  fours  of  Sol,  Lnna)  and  c JVtars,

I am  genderer  oilovis,  many  be  my  fnares:

I am  fctler  of  Saturne , and  fours  of  Venus  ,

I am  EmprcfTc,PrynceflTe  and  Regali  of  Qucenes,

I am  Mother  of  Myrrour,  and  maker  of  lyght,

I am  head  and  hygheft  and  fayreft  in  fyghc.'

I am  both  Sun,  and  Meone,

I am  fche  that  allc  thynges  muft  doone.

I have  a Daughter  hight  Saturne  that  ys  my  darlyng,

The  wych  ys  Mother  of  all  werkyng,

For  in  my  Daughter  there  byne  hydd,

Fovvre  thyngs  Commonly  I kydd  :

A Golden  feede,  and  a fpearrne  rych,

And  a Silver  feede  none  hym  lich  ^

And  a Mercur y feede  full  bryght.

And  a Sulphur  feede  that  ys  ryght.

Ofmy  Daughter  wythowten  dred,

Byn  made  Elyxirs-whytc  and  redd,

Thcrcfor  of  hcr  draw  a Water  der,

The  Scyence  yf  thovv  lyftto  Icare.

Thys  Water  rcduccth  every  thynge,

To  tendernes  and  to  fyxing  :

It  burgcneth  growyth  and  gy veth  fryght  and  Iyght,
Ingrcflion  lyfe  and  laftyng  in  fyght:

Alie  ryghteous  werkcs  footh  to  fay,

It  helpcth  and  bryngyth  in  a good  \yay:

Thys  ys  the  Water  that  ys  moft  worthy,

Aquaperfettifiima  & fios  mundi

For  alie  werkes  thys  Water  makyth  whyte,

Reducyng  and  fchyning  as  Sylvcr  bryght:

And  of  the  Gyle  grcate  marvcll  there  ys,

For  all  thyngs  yt  bryngyth  to  rednes:

As  Gytrinc  gold  hc  ys  full  high,

None  ye  fo  redd  nor  none  ys  fo  worthy :

O o And


z7i


Blaci [ Monl^Szc.

And  in  the  Erth  gretc  marvele  ys  hyd,

That  ys  firffc  fo  black,  and  than  fo  red::

And  alie  ys  done  in  howres  threc,

Thys  may  be  cleped  Gods  Prevetie  •

Than  the  Erch.fliall  torne  red  asblood,

Citrine  Gold,  naturali  cLeere  and  good ,

And  than  the  red  Oyle  .to  hem  fchall  goe,
Red  Fermcnt,  and  red  Mercury  alfoe.

And  grow  togeder  weekes  feaven,

BlefTed  be  Almyghty  God  of  Heven :

One  Ounce  of  thys  Medycine  worthy
Caft  upon  two  hundred  owncesof  Mercury:
Schall  make  Gold  moft  royall.

And  cvcr  enduring  to  holde  tryall;

Fyre  and  Hammer  Tuch  and  Teft,

And  all  eftayes  moft  and  leaft.

And  yt  ys  Medyccn  above  common  Gold,

To  mans  body  as  God  yt  would.

For  Gold  that  cometh  from  the  Oare,
Isnourifhed  with  fovvle  Sulphur:

And  Engendercd  upon  Mercury  heys,.

And  nouryftied  by  Erth  and  Sulphur  I wys,
And  ourGoldys  made  of  thre  pewre  foules,.
In  the  wych  ys  noe  Corrupcyon  foule:

But  purged  petvre ‘as  clene  as  Chryftall,
Body  and  Spyryt  and  Sowle  wythall;

And  fo  they  grow  into  a ftonc.

In  the  wych  Corrupcyon  thcre  ys  none.;

And  than  caft  hym  upon  Mercury
And  he  fchalbe  Gold  moft  worthy,

Now  have  yod  heard  the  makyng  of  our  Stone,
The  b^gynyng  and  endyng  ys  all  one.


iji


c^j  c$r> . &$>  * * $0  +?0*$P  :&c£g>

THE  WORICE  OF

2?  IQH:  C A^p  E HJ  e %

F 7 itan  Magnafia  take  thccler  lighr,

T he  redc  Gumme  ihat  ys  fo  bryght,

Of  Philofojris  the  Sttlfer  vife,

I called  Gold  wythoutcn  ftryfe ;

Of  hem  drawc  owte  a Tindture,

And  make  a matrymony  pure :

Becweene  the  husband  and  the  wyfe,

I fpoufed  wyth  the  Water  of  lyfe :

And  fo  that  none  dyvyfion  •

Be  there,  in  the  conjunccion
Of  the  CMoone  and  of  the  Somei
After  the  marriage  ys  begonne-.

And  that  Mercury  the  planete,

In  loef  make  hem  fo  to  mete  .*

That  cyder  wyth  oder  be  joyned  even,

As  a Stonc  engendered  fente  down  fro  heven  •,

Of  hem  make  water  clere  rennynge.

As  any  Chryftall  bryght  fchynyngei
Drawcn  out  of  bodycs  fyxed,

By  Nature  privclv  mixed
Within  a veffal  depured  clene,

Of  Philefofris  bright  and  fchenc ;

Bcvvarc  the  Fume  cfcape  the  nowghr.

And  allefo  marked  well  in  thy  thowght*

That  of  the  Fire  the  quali  itee,

Equal  to  FhebeT^  bcmes  be  v
In  the  moneth  of  June  and  Iule , <■

Underftand  mc  be  not  dulle$

Oo  2


For


276


Qarpenters  Workg.

For  thou  fchalt  fee  marvelcs  grete,
Colures  fpring  outc  of  thc  hcate  :

Fyrfte  Blakkc  and  Whyte,  and  fo  Redde,
And  after  Sctryne  wythouten  di  ede :

And  fo  wythin  howres  thre,

That  Stone  fchall  thorowe  perced  be
Wyth  Aier  that  fchall  upon  hym  lyght,
The  wych  ys  a wonder  fyght  ••

Wiienne  the  fpivyt  ys  refreyned,

And  wyth  the  Bodie  fo  conftrayned,
That  hem  afounder  maycnothyng  parte,
So  Nature  hem  doth  there  focoart,

In  matri fe  whenne  they  both  ben  knyte, '
Lett  never  thy  Velfelbe  unfhyttej
Tyl  thys  ingendred  have  a ftone,

That  in  thys  world  ys  not  fuche  on:

For  hyt  ys  called  Anymal,

Richer  then  the  Mincrah
Wyche  ys  founden  in  every  plafc,

Who  foundeth  hyt  myght  haye  grafe  .•

In  the  and  me  and  over  alie
Both  Vegctables  and  Sophifticall :

On  Hilles  hye  and  Valeys  lowe,

He  groweth  who  cowde  hyt  know,

Take  thys  for  an  informacion,

In  Caryt  and  in  Proporcion,

Lyth  alie  who  fo  coudc  feke  outc.

In  Bos  and  Nubi  ys  alie  the  doute  .*

He  that  puttes  hcmfelf  in  pres,

To  Genis  and  to  Species:

Qualitas  and  every  Quantite,

To  mane  a manhyt  wol  not  bc,

To  brynge  about  thys  trcfeur,

1 mene  owre  Stone  of  fuche  valourj


And


And  yct  who  coude  well  underftonde,
May  fyndc  hit  rcdy  at  hys  hondc  :

For  Fowles  that  in  the  Ayrc  done  flee,
And  alfo  Fifchcs  in  the  See :

The  moyftcr  of  the  rcde  Grapc
And  of the  Whyte,  who  coud  hymtake
Vcrtuesof  Erbcs  vcgetyff.

And  foules  of  Beffcs  fcnfytyff:

Reyfons  of  Angels  that  doth  difcerne,
Goude  and  Yeul  Man  to  govcrne,

Ali  bryngs  co  thyn  houfc
ThysNobleSftwfo  precious ,

And  Soverente  of  alie  thys  Wcrke  J;
Both  to  Lewd  and  to  Clerke:  ,

This  ly  th  alie  by  difcrecion.

In  Fyre,  and  in  Decoccion :

The  craft  recordethyif  he  can  rede,
Hovv  all  and  fume  who  fhal  fpedc
In  Bokes  cler  as  yc  mayc  fce.

Stat  in  Ignis  regimine : ■
Tobryngefosthat  my  dcvys,

Thys  rychc  Rubye,  thys  Ston  of  prys:
Hardc  hevy  and  pcrcyng,  . .

Now  ys  thys  a wondcr  thyng  .*•

I coude  never  fuche  on  a fpyc$

Save  that  I finde  howe  on  Marte :
Fyrftfoundhyt  vvythoutcn  l.efc^

The  wyche  was  fufter  to  Mejfe^:

But  who  hyt  be  that  fchall  hyt  vvcrkc,
Lct  hem  not  begenn  in  the  derke  .*

For  he  mai  faylcforfaute  of  lyght,

But  the  Sunne  fchync  full  bright  ••

Advy  fe  the  well  er  thow  begene,

Gr  clfe  lytel  fchalt  thow  wynne.

O03


THE  HUNTING


OF

ktQ%EE3^E  LYO^\

LL  haile  to  the  noblc  Companie
Of  true  Students  in  holy  Alchimic,
Whofe  uoble  prattife  doth  hem  teach
To  vaile  their  fecrcts  with  miftic  fpeach  5
Mought  yr  pleafe  your  worlhipfulncs
To  hearemy  filly  foothfaftnes,

Of  that  pra&ife  which  I have  feenc.

In  hunting  of  the  Lyon  Grane  :

And  becaufc  you  may  be  apaid,

That ys  truth,  that 'I  have  faid  5
And  that  you  may  for  furety  wcene,

That  I know  well  thys  Lyen.greene :

I pray  your  patience  to  attend
Tili  you  fee  my  fhort  writt  end,

Wherein  Ile  keepe  my  noble  Mafters  rede,

Who  while  he  lived  ftoode  me  in  fteede ;

At  his  death  he  made  me  fwearc  hym  to,

That  all  the  fccrets  I fchould  never  undoe
To  no  one  Man,  but  even  fpread  a Cloude
Over  my  wordsand  vvrites,  and  fo  it  fhroude,

That  they  which  do  this  Art  defire,

Should  firft  know  well  to  rulc  their  Fyrc :


For


i?9


Hunting  of

For  with  good  rcafon  yt  dorh  ftand,
iSwords  to  kcepc  fio  mad  Mens  hand :
jLcaft  th’cne  fhoul.d,  kill  th’other  burne,

Or  either  doc  forne  fore  fhroud  tume :

As  fomc  have  done  that  I have  feene,

Asthcy  did  hunt  thys  Lyon  greene.

Whofe  collour  doubtles  ys  not  foe,

And  that  your  wifdomes  vvell  doe  knotv  5
For  no  man  lives  that  ever  hath  feene
Upon  foure  fcete  a Lyon  colloured  greene :

But  our  Lyon  wanting  maturity,

Is  calkd  greene  for  unripencs  truft  me,

And  yct  Tuli  quickly  can  hc  run,

And  foone  can  overtake  the  Sun:

And  fuddainely  can  hym  devoure,

If  they  be  both  fliut  in  one  towre :

And  hym  Eclipfe  that  was  fo  bryght,

And  make  thys.  redde  to  turne  to  whyte :

IBy  vertue  of  hys  crudytic,

And  unripe  humors  vvhych  in  hym  be.

And  yet  wythin  he  hath  fuch  heate  ,

7 hat  vvhan  he  hath  the  Sun  upeate,

Hebringeth  hym  to  more  perfe&ion,

Than  ever  he  had  by  Natures  direccion»

This  Lyon  maketh.  the  Sun  fith  foone
Tobe  joyncd  to  hys  Siftcr  the  CMeone:

By  way  of  wedding  a wonderous  thing ,

(Thys  Lyon  llaould  caufc  hem  to  bcgcttaKing:

And  tis  as  ftrangc  that  thys  Kings  food,

Can  be  nothing  but  thys  Lyons  Blood  ^

And  tis  as  true  that  thys  ys  none  other,

Than  ys  it  the  Kings  Father  and  Mother.

A wonder  a Lyon , and  Sun  'and  Moone^

Ali  thefe  threcone  deede  have  done:.

The.


i8o


thegreene  L)on.

The  Z^ysthe  Preift,thc  Sa»and  Moone  thewedd,
Y et  they  were  boch  bornc  in  the  Lyom  Bedd  5
And  yet  thys  King  was  begott  by  none  othcr,

Butby  Sun  and  Moone  hys  owne  Sifter  and  Brother.

O noble  Majler  ofpardon  I you  pray,

Becaufe  I did  wcll-necrc  bewray
The  fecret  which  to  me  ys  fo  dearc,

For  I thought  none  but  Brothers  were  here  :

Than  fchould  I make  no  doubt
To  havc  written  plainely  out,

But  for  my  fealty  I muft  keepe  aye,

Ile  tume  my  pen  another  way,

To  fpeake  under  Benedicite
Of  thys  noble  Company  :

Wych  now  perceives  by  thys,

That  I know  what  our  Lyon  ys.

Although  in  Science  I am  noe  Clerke)

Yet  have  I labour’d  in  thys  warke :

And  cruly  wythouren  any  nay,

If  you  will  liften  to  my  lay :

Some  thing  thereby  yow  may  finde,

That  well  may  content  your  minde,

I will  not  fweare  to  make  yow  give  credence,

For  a Pbilo/opher  will  finde  here  in  evidence,

Of  the  truth,  and  to  men  that  bc  Lay,

I skill  not  greatly  what  they  fay.

For  they  weene^ that  our  Lyonys
Common  Quickfilver,  but  truly  they  mifT:

And  of  thys  purpofeevermore  fhall  fayle,

And  fpend  hys  Thrift  to  lideavaile ,

That  weeneth  to  warke  hys  wyll  thereby,

Becaufe  hedorh foe  readely  flie  *,

T herefore  leave  off ere  thou  begin,

Till  thow  know  better  what  we  meane  5


Whai


the  greene  Lyon .


z$$


Whych  vvhan  thow  doeft  than  wilt  thou  fay
That  I have  tought  thee  a good  lay.

In  that  whych  I have  faid  of  thee  before,

Whcrefore  lyften  and  marke  well  my  lore.

Whanthowhaft  thy  Lyon  with  Sol  ana  Luna  well  fedd.
And  layd  them  clcnly  in  their  Bcdd  j
An  eafie  heatc  they  may  not  mitte,

Till  cach  the  othcr  well  can  kiflc  5
And  that  they  fliroudc  them  in  a skin,

Such  as  an  Egg  yclke  lyeth  in :

Than  muft  thow  draw  from  thence  away,

A right  good  fecret  vvithouten  any  nay  ;

Wych  muft  ferve  to  doe  thee  good,

For  yt  ys  the  Ljens  Blood  :

And  thcrewith  muft  the  King  be  fedd,

Whcn  he  ys  rifcn  from  the  dead  *.

But  longe  tyme  it  wilbe,

Orere  his  death  appearc  to  thee ;

And  manyafleepe  thow  muft  lack,

Orthow  hym  fec  ofCollour  black.

Take  hccde  yow  move  hym  not  with  yrc,

But  kcepe  hym  in  an  eafy  fyre  *

Untill  you  fee  hym  feperate ,

From  hys  vile  Erth  vituperate  5
Wych  wilbe  black  and  light  withall,

Much  likc  the  fubftance  of  a fusball :

Your  magnet  in  the  midft  wilbe,

Of  Collour  faire  and  white  truft  me*,

Then  whan  you  fee  ali  thys  thing,  ‘m
Your  fire  one  degree  increafing ;

Untill  yow  well  may  fe  thereby,

Your  matter  to  grow  vcry  dry:

Thcn  yt  ys  fit  wythout  delay,

The  cxcrements  be  tane  away;


Pp


Prepaire


i%6


Hunting  of

Prcpaire  3 Bed  moft  bryght  aad  fhine
For  to  lodge  this  young  Chylde  in  :

And  thercin  let  hym  alone  lye,

Tillfhe  be  throughly  dry;

Than  ys  tytne  as  I doe  thinke ,

After  fuch  drouth  to  give  him  drinke :

But  thereof  the  truth  to  fliew.

Is  a greate  fecret  vvell  Iknowj
For  Philofopbers  of  tyme  old ,

The  fecret  of  Imbibition  never  out  tould  ?

To  create  Ullagnefia  they  made  no  care?

In  their  Bookes  largely^to  declare*

But  hotv  to  order  it  after  hys  creacion,

They  left  poore  men  without  confolacion  •,
Soe  many  men  thought  they  had  had  perfeccion,
But  they  found  nothing  in.  their  Projeccion :
Therefere  they  mard  what  they  had  made  before,
And  of  Alchitny  they  would  have  no  more.
Thus  do  olde  Fathers  hidc  it  from  a Clearke,
Becaufe  in  it  confifteth  the  vvhole  fubtill  warke;
Wych  if  ye  lift  of  me  to  kno.vv;  i.  '

I fhall  not  faile  the  truth  to  jhcw.

Whan  your  pure  matter  in  the  giaflc  is  fitt,
Before  thar  you  your  veffcll  fhitt*,

A portion  of  your  Lyons - fweate
Muft  be  given  it  for  to  eate  :

And  they  muft  begrounded  fo  .wcll  together,
That  each  fro  other  vvill  flee  noc  whitherj
Then  muft  you  feaic  up  your  Glafle,

And  in  hys  Furnace  wherc  he  was ,

You  muft  fet  them  there  to  dry.

Which  being  done  then  truly,

You  muft  preparc  like  a good  Phifitian,

For  another  Imbibition : ■


i


But


the  greencLyon.

But  evermore  lookc  that  you  dry
Up  ali  hys  drinke,  that  none  lye  by,

For  lf-yow  make  hym  drinke  too  free,

The  longer  will  your  workeing  be.

And  yf  you  let  hym  be  too  dry,

Than  for  thirft  your  Child  may  dye$
Wherefore  the  meane  to  hoid  is  beft,

T vvixt  overmoyft  and  too  much  roft  j
Six  tymes  thy  ImbMtions  make,

The  feaventh  that  Saboatffsrcfl:  betake.*
Eight  dayes  tvvixt  ilke  day  ofthe  fix,

To  dry  up  inoift  and  make  it  fix  ?

Thcn  at  the  nynth  tyme  thy  Glafle  up  feale.
And  let  him  ftand  fix  weekes  each  deale :

With  his  heate  temperd  fo  right,

That  Blacknes  paft  hemay  grorv  whitej
And  fo  the  feaventh  weeke  reil  him  ftill,

Till  thow  Termcnt  after  thy  will  5
Which  if  thow  wilc  Ferment  for  Whyte,
Thcreby  thow  gainft  noe  greate  profitt  5
Forlaflure  thee  thow  needeft  notdred,

To  procecde  with  fire  till  allbeRedd^

Than  muft  thow  procecde  as  did  Pbilofophers  old
Toprepairethy  Ferment  of  pcure  Gold,

Which  how  to  doe  though  fecret  that  it  be,

Yet  will  I truly  teach  it  thee.

In  the  next  Cbapter  as  erft  I did  fay,

That  foc  the  trutn  finde  yow  may,

Thereforc  of  Charity  and  for  our  Lords  fakc,
Let  noe  man  from  my  writings  take
One  word,  nor  add  thereto.

For  certainely  ifthat  hedoe,

He  ihall  fhew  malice  fro  the  which  I am  free,
Meaning  truth  and  not  fubtilty  •,

. Pp  2


287


Which


Hunting  of

Whxfi  I refer  to  the  Judgement
Ofthofewhich  kenthe  Philofephers  intent:

Now  liften  me  with  ali  your  might,

How  to  prepaie  yourFerment  right.

O noblc  Worke  of  workes  that  God  has  wroughr,
Whereby  each  thing  of  things  are  forth  aye  broght ;
And  fitted  to  their  gencracion,

• By  a noble  fcrmcntacion  5
Which  Forment  muft  be  of  fuch  a thing.

As  was  the  workes  begyning  5
And  if  thowdoe  progreffe  aright
Whan  thow  haft  brought  the  worke  to  vvhight ;
And  than  to  ftay  is  thy  intent,

Doe  after  my  Comandement  5
Worke  Luna  by  her  felfe  alone,

With  the  blood  of  the  gretne  Lyon  :

As  earft  thow  didft  in  the  begining,

And  of  three  didft  makc  one  thing,

Ordcrly  yeilding  forth  right,

Till  thy  Magnct  fchevv  full  whyte  •

Soe  muft  thow  warke  ali  thy  Fermtnt ,

Both  White  and  Red,  elfe  wcre  yt  lhcnt.

Red  byyt  felfe  and  foe  the  White,

With  th zLyons  Blood  muft  be  dcight;

And  if  thow  wilt  follow  my  lore,

Sct  in  thy  Ferment  the  fame  houre,

Of  Sol  for  Rcdd,  of  Lutu  for  White,

Each  by  him felfe  let  worke  tight  5
Soefhall  thy  Forment  be  ready  edreff,

To  feedethe  King  with  a good  mefT
Of  mcates  that  fitt  for  his  digeftion,

And  well  agreeing  to  his  Complexion  5
IfhebeofCollour  White,

Eeed  hym  than  with  Luna  brightj


28p


the  greene  Lyon.

If  his  flefh  bc  pcrfeft  Red,

Than  with  the  Sun  hc  muft  be  fedd,

Your  Ferment  one  fourth  parte  muft  be,

Into  your  Magnet  made  evenly ,

And  joyne  hem  warme  and  not  cold,

For  raw  to  ripe  you  may  bc  bold

Have  difagreement  foe  have  heate  and  cold :

Therefore  puthem  warme  into  thy  Glafle,

Then  fealeit  up  even  as  it  was  .*

And  Circle  ali  till  yt  be  vvonne,

By  pafling  degrees  every  each  one  .♦

Both  black  and  whyte,  and  alfo  redd,

Than  of  the  Firc  hecrehave  noc  dread ;

For  hc  will  never  dreade  the  fyre,

But  ever  abide  thy  delire.

And  heere  a fecret  to  thee  I muft  Ihcw,.

How  to  c Multeplie  that  thow  muft  know,

Or  clfe  it  wilbc  over  micle  paine
For  thee  to  begin  thy  vvorkc  againe :

I fay  to  thee  that  in  noe  fafhion,  tation..*

It’s  fo  vvell  Multeplied  as  with  continuall  Firmcn
And  fure  far  it  wilbc  exalted  at  the  laft.

And  in  Projcccion  ren  full  faft  .*

There  for  in  fyre  keepe  Firment  alway,

That  thy  Medicine  augment  mayft  aye ;

For  yf the  maid  doe  not  her  leaven  fave,  Ccrave;

Then  of  her  Ncighbours  fche  muft  necds  goe
Or  fche  muft  ftay  till  fche  can  makc  more,

Rcmember  the  Proverbc  that  fiere  is  no  fore :

Thus  have  I tought  thee  a leflon,  full  of  truth,

Ifthowbe  wickcd  therefore  my  heart is reuth
Remembcr  God  hys  blefling  hc  can  take,

Whan  hc  hath  given  it,  if  abufe  any  you  make,

For  furely  if  thow  be  a Clerke ,

Pp  3 Thou;


Thow  wilt  finde  trcwth  in  thys  wfcrkc'


But  if  fo  be  that  rhowbelay,

And  underftond  not  what  i fay ,

Keepe  Councell  then  and  leve  thy  Toy,

For  it  befitts  no  Ly miner  loy^  -
To  medie,  with.  fuch  grcte  feciefie  :

As  ys  thys  hygh  Phjlofophye.

My  Councell  takev  fbrtnovv  fichalt  finde  it  true,
Leaveof  feekingthys  Ljonio purfue r /

For  hym  to  hunt  that  ys  a prery  wyle,

Yet  by  hys  Craft  he  doth  moft  Folke  beguilc ,
And  hem  devour  artd  leave  hem  f ull  of  care,
Wherefore  I bidd  thee^tf  bewar£?‘  - J'  1 'l

And  Councell  give  thee  as  my  frend,

And  fo  my  Uunting  here  I end.

Praying  God  that  made  us  we  may  not  myflf


To  dwell  with  hym  in  hys  Heverilv  blvfT.


j .


zpi


«|l  -V'0-^P  ~h  & Sx-f(~ fi  J fo '>% - -V  ‘ -'V  '

THE  ® T^E  V 1 A%r  OF

Naturall  PhILOS  OF.HY.'

‘\  , , ' 'v,*  . .

Q 'ompiled  by  the  unlettered  Scholar

Thomas  Charnock.


Student  in  the  moft  worthy  Scyence  of

x_A(lronomy  and  Philofophy.  The  firft  of  lanuary
y^inno.  JDorn.  1557.

•Anno. Dom.  1557.  T he  firfl  day  ofthe  new  yeare
This  Treatife  jvas  begun  as  after  may  appeare.

The  Boohc  Speaketh.

COme  hither  my  Childrcn  of  this  Difcipline,  -

Which  in  naturali  Philofophy  have  fpcnt  fo  long  time  5
T o eafe  y our  painfull  Study  I am  well  willed
AndbythegraceofGod  it  fhall  be  fulfillcd  *,  .

If  he  in  me  ( my  Author ) will  fhed  one  drop  of  gracc,

The  better  he  fhall  finifh  me  and  in  fhorter  fpace.

And  if  you  will  know  vvhat  I am  furely,

I am  named  the  The  Breviary  of  naturali  Philofophy.

Declaring  all  Veffells  and  Inftruments^

Which  in  this  Science  ferve  our  intents.

For  moe  things  belong  unto  the  fame,

Morethen  any  Author  hath  vvritten  the  Name ;

Which  hath  brought  many  a one  in  great  doubt,

What  is  the  Implements  that  longeth  thereabout;.

Wherefore  ingood  order,  I will  anon  declare,

What  Injlnments  for  our  Arte  you  necde  to  preparc..


THE


ftty  rin  r*S  eth  t A .A.  ^ «Ait  A.  "h  et».  rA  A dh  fV

^ sis  ‘ $ ^ - $&&&  §-5  $&$&  «^vl*  §h

The  Preface  of  the  Author.


GOefoith  linit  Booke  in  volumebut fmall ,

7 et  hafi  thou  in  thee  that  is  not  in  them  Ali ,

For  fatisfying  the  minies  ofthe  Student s in  this  Arte,
jhen  art  thou  rvorth  as  many  Boekesi  as  tvill  lye  in  a Cart :
Glad  may  he  be  that  hatbthee  in  his  keeping,

For  he  may  fini  through  diligent  feeking ,

All  things  in  thee  tvbich  jhall  be  necejfary,

As  F e felis  and Inflrnments belongingto  Alchimy  5
Whieh  tveuld [et  many  a Mans  heart  onfire,

To  have  the fame  knotvledge  they  have  fo  great  deftre.

And  no  mervade  though  they  beglad  andfaine ,

For  they  have  fpent  many  a pound  in  vaine  j
In  making  of  Ve felis  of  many  divers  forts ,

And  have  brottght  them  out  of  many  frange  Forts :

Becaufe  they  did  not  t veli  underftand,

That  all  things  vae  need  tve  have  in  England.

JSloiv  think  you  that  this  tvill  not  fave  many  a Marke ,

Unto  thofi r that  have  tvrejlled  fo  long  in  cur  Warke  I
Tes  forne  rveuld  j fend  all  the  Money  in  their pouck ,

Jfthey  knexv  but  this  or  halfe fo  much.

Wherefore  ofpitty  I tvill  no  longer  refraine ,

But  dedar  e all  things  their  purpofe  to  attaine.

Wherefore  ifyou  do  happen  on  my  Booke ,

Either  by  Cafualty , Booke , or  by  Crooke  :

7 'et  prayfer  my  Soule  rvhen  Iam  dead androtten ,

That  of  Alchimy  Scycncc  the  dor  e hath  let  open  5
Sufficient  for  thee  if  thou  have  any  Braine,

Notv Jharpen  thy  rvttsthat  thou  ma/flit  attaine .


The  Treviary  of  Thilofopbie .


&


fV  .e*»

‘8JM*


i.

spissato


The firjl  Chapter .


‘^TOvvwilll  dcclare ali  things  at  large,

Of  Implementi  of  this  Work  and  what  is  the  chargc:
And  firft  vvitn  thc  Potter  I will  beg’n,

W'*.ich  cannotmakc  thatwhich  hehathncver  fecne5
Whether  thatthy  Veflels  be  made  to  thy  minde,
Stand  by  while  hc  worketh  more  furety  to  finde,

And  Ihcvv  him  what  to  doe  by  forne  figne  or  fimilitude,
Andif  his  witts  benotto  dullnor  tude,

Hcwill  underftand  what  thou  doeft  mcane.

For  Ithink  few  Potters  within  this  Realme
Have  made  at  any  tyme  fuch  cunning  ware,

Asvve  for  our  Scjence  doe  fafhion  and  prepairc;

And  vvhen  he  hath  formed  them  untothy  purpofe.

For  what  occafion  thou  needeft  not  difclofe  .*•

But  ifhe  fay  unto  you,  GoodMaftermyne,

Teli  me  for  what  purpofe  or  what  engme
Shall  thefe  VcfTels  ferve  that  thoucaufeme  to  make.

For  all  my  life  hicherto  I dare  undcrtakc
Inevcr  formed  fuch,  nor  the  likc  of  them  ;

Yetare  theybutplainc  without  wrinklc  orhem,

One  within  another,  it  isapretty  feate,

The  third  without  them  to  guide  up  the  heate  .*

Then  fay  unto  him  to  fatisfie  his  minde,

Thar  ye  have  a Father  which  is  forne  what  blinde,

Who  if  it  pleafc  God  you  will  indeavour,

Toftil  a water  his  blindnes  to  diffever:

Which  is  the  Elixir  of  lyfe  as  wife  men  fay  ,

And  in  this  doing  God  fend  me  my  pray  5

Q.q  Then


z8p


IpO


'Ihe  Brevi ary

Thcn  will  he  fay  this  or  the  like,

I pray  God  to  fend  ycethat  whichyou  fccke,

And  thus  with  the  Pctter  thou  haft  now  done,
Withoutthoubrcake  thy  Pots  with  the  heate  of  the  Sun:
Which  if  it  doe  it  turnes  thee  to  paine,

And  therc  is  no  way  but  to  make  them  new  againc.

Asfoonc  as  with  the  Potter  thou  haft  madeanendj,
Then  vvitha  tyner  thou  muft  Condefccnd,

Who  alfo  muft  have  this  Councell  and  witt,

To  make  a Tabernadc  the  Veffell  to  fut*

Which  wilbe  alfo  in  greatc  doubt.

For  what  purpofe  it  will  ferve  aboiit*

Inthat  he  never  made  nor  framcd  none  fuch ,
Although  it  be  made  like  to  a Hutch  .•

Thcn  teli  fum  a Tale  of  a roaftcd  Horfc,

Unto  the  which  hc  will  have  no  remorfe :

And  laugh  and  fay  itis  a Borrough  for  a Fox>
Although  it  be  made  fure  with  Keys  and  lockc.

And  thus  with  the  Ioyner  thou  haft  made  an  end,
Withoutthoufet  iton  fireasl  did  mine.

As  for  Glaftemakers  they  be  fcant  in  this  iand,

Yet  one  thereis  as  I doe  underftand;

And  in  Sujjex  is  now  his  hadtacion,

At  Chiddinffold  he  workcs  ofhis  Occupacion.*

To  go  to  hiin  it  is  neceflary  and  mcete,

Or  fend  a fervant  that  is  difereete : >

And  defire  him  in  moft  humble  wife
Itoblow  thee  aGlaffc  aftcrthy  devifej
lf  were  worth  raany  an  Arme  or  a Legg»

The  could  ftiapeit  like  to  an  egge  *

To  open  and  to  clofe  as  clofe  as  a haire,

If  thou  have  fuch  a one  thou  ncedeft  not  feare.

Yet  if  thou  hadfta  numberin  to  ftorc,

It  is  the  the  becrcr,  for  Stere  u ne  jore.


THE


of  \ Thilofopby .


zpi


A\  /*»,  A


A f*i  A.


NOW  L O R D of  thy  grace  1 befcech  thce  fuffer  mc,
Tofinifhmy  pretencein  this  rude  Studie:

Forthis  nor  ought  elfe  without  thy  helpc  can  bedonc.
As  neither  the  Conjuncion  of  Sun  nor  Moene :

Nor  yec  other  Plantts  can  motion  thcmfelves  an  honrc,
Without  thy  providcnce  and  thy  divine  power:  • '
Whcrcfore  in  all  tfaings  rhat  vve  doe  begin,

Lct  us  with  prayer  call  for  hclpe  of  him :

That  he  bring  our  doings  to  cffe<ft,

Which  muftbc  done  very  Circumfpetft :

Wherefore  if.you  thiriketo  obtaine  your  intent,

Fearc  God  and  keepe  his  Comandernent :

And  bewarc  of  Pr  de  and  let  it  pafle,

And  neverbe  looking  too  muchinthy  GlafTej
D^ceivc  noe  man  with  falfe  mcafure,

Fortruly  that  is  ill  gotten  treafure.’

Bit  lct  thy  weights  he  trueandjuft.

For  weighrand  meafure  every  man  muft:
llnto  his  Neighbour  yeild  uprightly»

And  fo  muft  thou  in  the  worke  of  Philofophf :

And  alfo  feedc  him  wfrch  is  hungry,

And  give  him  dr.nke  which  is  thirfty.

Givc  liberally  I fay  as  riches  doe  arife,

And  from  thirfty  body  turnenot  away  thyEyes.

WhatandtwopooreMenatonetymecomc  unto  thce
And  fay,  Mafter,  for  the  love  of  God  and  our  Lady,
Give  us  your  Charity  vvhatfoever  you  plcafc.

For  we  have  not  onc  peny  to  do  us  eafc  $

Qq  2


And


Zpl


The  'Brcviary

And  \ve  are  now  rcady  to  thc  Sea  preft,

Wlierc  wemuft  abide  three  moncths  ac  thelcafts
Ali  which  tyme  to  Land  we  Ihall  not  pafle.

No  although  our  Ship  be  made  butof  Glafle,

But  ali  tempeft  o!  the  Aire  wemuft  abide.

And  in  dangerous  roades  many  tymes  to  ride ;

Brcad  wcftiall  have  none,  nor  yet  otber  foode,

But  only  faircwater  dcfcending  from  a Cloudet
The  Moone  Ihall  us  burne  fo  in  proccfte  of  tyme,

That  wclhalbeas  blackas  men  of  Inde  :

But  fhortly  we  Ihall  pafteinto  another  Clymate*
Where  wc  Ihall  rcceive  a more  purer  eftatc5
For  this  our  Sinns  wc  makc  our  Purgatory,

For  thc  which  wc  Ihall  rcceive  a Spirituali  body  :
Abody  I fay  which  ifitlhould  bcfould,

Truly  1 lay  it  is  worthhis  weightin  Gold  :!  ’1  ■ . r

Son  give  theis  two,  onc  penny  in  their  Journey  to  drinke,
And  thou  ihalt  fpeedc  thc  better  truly  as  I thinkc.


.4r  rh  fPi>  4»  cfo  ve£  o.  cS  .♦*>  A A A

' . j . • • :•

cIbetbird  Cbapter.


NOvv  have  T good  will  largcly  to  write,

Although  Ican  but  flcnderly  indite  5..

But  whether  I can  or  cannot  indeede,  .
WirhtheChaptcrof  Fire  I will  proceedc:

Which  if thou  knowcft  not  how  to  governe  and  keepe,
Thou  vvertas  good  go  to  bed  and  fleepe ,

As  to  be  combred  thercwithabout,

Andthercfore  Iputthee  moftccrtainely  out  ofdoubt;
For  whenlftudicd  this  Scyence  as  thou  dceftnow,

I feli  to  pra€tifc  by  Godlvowc:


I


ofThi lofophy.

I was  never  fo  troubled  in  all  my  lyfc  beforne,

As  intcnding  to  my  Fire  boch  Midday  Eve  and  Mornc  ;
And  all  to  kepe  icataneven  ftay;

It  hath  wrought  me  woe  moc  then  I will  fay.

Yct  onc  thing  of  truth  I will  thee  teli,
Whatgreatemifhap  unto  my  Worke  befellj
Itwasupon  aNevvyeares  day  at  Noone,

My  T 'abernacle  caught  firc,  it  was  foonc  done  :

For  within  an  hourc  it  was  right  wellj
And  ftrcight  of  fire  I had  a fmell.

I ran  up  to  my  worke  right.

And  when  I cam  it  was  on  a fire  Iight :

Thcn  was  I in  fuch  feare  that  I began  to  ftagger,

Asifl  had  bynewounded  to  the  heartwith  adagger;
And  can  you  blamc  me  ? no  I think  not  much.

For  if  I had  beene  a man  any  thing  rich ,

Ihadrather  havc  given  iooMarkes  to  the  Poore,
Rathcr  thcn  that  hap  fliould  have  chanced  that  houre#
For  I was  well  onward  of  my  Work  truly,

God  fave  my  Maftcrs  lyfe,  for  when  he  thought  to  dye,
He  gave  me  his  worke  and  made  me  his  Hcire,
Wherefore  alwaies  he  filiali  have  my  prayer :

I obteyned  his  gracc  the  date  hercfro  not  to  varie,

In  the  firft  and  fecond  yeare  of  King  Phillip  & ^ueene
Yct  lewdly  Iloft  it  as  I have  you  tould,  (CMarj.
Andfol  began  thenew  anci  forgot  the  old,

Yet  many  a night  after  I could  not  fleepe  in  Bea.
For  ever  that  mifchance  troubled  my  head.

And  feare  thereof  1 would  not  abide  againe?

No  though  I flioulde  rcape.  a double  ga  ne,
Wherefore  my  charge  rofe  co  a greater  fumme,.

As  in  hyring  of  a good  ftoute  Groome ;

Which  might  abide  to  watch  and  give  attendance,
Ycrohcntymes  he  did  me  difpleafaunce.


2P3


And


The  Tmiary

And  would  fleepefolong  tillthc  Fire  wcntout,

Then  would  the  Knave  that  whorfon  Lout,

Caftin  Tallow  to  makc  the  fire  burne  quickcr,
Which  when  I knevv  made  me  more  ficker*

And  thus  wasl  cumbred  with  a drunkenfott,

That  vvith  his  hafty  fire  made  my  Worketoo  hott;
And  vvith  his  floth  againe  he  fct  my  workc  bchindc*
For  remedy  thereof  to  qaict  my  Minde ,

I thrufthim  outof  dotes,  and  tookemyfelfethe  paine^
Although  it  be  troublclome  it  is  the  more  certainc  5
For  fervants  doe  not  pafle  how  our  workcs  doc  framc ,
But  have  more  dclight  to  play  and  to  game.

A good  fervant  faith  Solomon  let  him  bc  unto  thee,

As  thyne  owne  heart  in  cach  degrce.

For  it  is  precious  a faithfull  fervant  to  finde,

Efteeme him above  trcafure  ifhebeto  thyminde;
Notwrctchles,  but  fober,  wife,  andquiet,

Such  a onc  were  even  for  my  dyet :

Thushaving  vvarn’d  thee  otan  ill  fervant  fufficicnt,

But  a good  fervant  is  for  our  intent.


The  fourth  Ch apter.

WHen  my  Man  was  gone  I began  it  anevve.

And  old  troubles  then  in  my  minde  did  renevv;
Astobreakfieepe  oftentimesin  the  night,

Forfeare  that  my  Worke  wcnt  notaright ;

And  oftentimes  I was  in  grcare  doubt,

Leaft  that  in  the  night,  my  fire  fliould  go  out:

Or  that  it  fliould  givetomuch  heate,

The  penfivenes  thereof  made  mc  tobreakcfleepc :


ofThilofophy.

Andalfo  inthe day lcaft  itihould  mifcary.

It  hathmade  my  mindc  oftcntimcs  to  varie  j
Wherefore  if  thou  wilt  follotv  my  reade,

See  thy  fire  fafe  when  thou  goeft  to  Bed :

At  Midnight  alfo  when  thou  doft  arife.

And  in  To  doing  I judge  thec  to  be  wife:

Beware  that  thy  Fire  do  no  man  harme,

For  thou  knoweft  many  a mans  Houfc  and  Barnc
Have  byne  fet  on  fire  by  mitchance.

And  fpecialJy  when  aFoolehaththegovernance;

Our  Fire  is  chargeablc,  and  wiil  amount
Above^.pound  a weeke,whohath  lift to caft account,
Which  is  chargcable  to  many  a poore  man,

And fpecally  to  me  as  I rell  can :

And  Geber  bids  poore  men  bc  content.

Hac  Scienti  a pauperi  & agente  non  convenit
Sed  potius  efi  illis  inimica , and  bids  them  betvare,
Becaufc  their  mony  they  may  nottvell  fpare  *

For  thou  mufthave  Fires  more  then  one  or  two,
What  they  be  Geerge  Ripley  will  thec  fiiew  *

Above  a hundred  pounds  truly  did  I fpend,

Only  in  fire  ere  p.  moneths  came  to  an  end ;
Butindeedc  I begun  when  ali  things  weredeare,
BothTallotv,  Candle,  Wood,  Coale  and  Fire:
Which  chargcs  to  beare  fometymes  I have  fold,

Now  ajewell,  and  then  aringofGold:

And  tvhcn  I was  within  a Moneths  rcckoning,
Warrsvvere  proclaimed  ngainft  the  French  King.

Then  aGentleman  thatought  me  greate  mallice,
Caufed  meto  be  preft  to  goe  ferve  a tCallys:

When  I faw  there  vvas  none  other  boote,

Butthat  I muftgoe  fpight  of  my  hearttoote  ^

Inmy  furyl  tooke  a Hatchet  inmy  hand,
Andbrake  allroy  Worke  whereasit  did  ftand;


295


And


ip6


The  Treyiary

And  as  for  my  Potts  I knockcd  them  together,

And  alfo  my  Glafles  inro  many  a fhiver;

The  CrowesheaJ  began  to  appeare  as  black  as  Iett
Yct  in  my  fury  1 did  norhing  let :

But  with  my  workc  made  fuch  a furious  faire,

That  the  Ouintejfence  flew  foith  in  the  Aire.
Farcwell  quoth  I,  and  feeing  thou  art  gon ,

Surely  I vvill  never  caft  of  my  Fawcon,

To  procure  thee  againc  to  put  me  to  hinderance,
Without  it  be  my  fortune  and  chaunce,

To  fpcake  with  my  good  Mafier  or  that  I dye$
Mafter  I.  S.  his  na  me  is  truly:

Nighe  the  Citty  of  Salubury  his  dwelling  is,

A fpirituall  man  for  footh  he  is  $

For  whofe  profpcrity  I am  bound  to  pray,

For  that  hc  wasmy  Tutor  many  a day,

And  underftood  as  much  of  Pbilofofbie ,

As  ever  did  Amold  or  Raymrtnd  Lttllie  :
Geber^Hermes^Arda^  nor  yct  King  Caleb,

Underftood  no  more  then  my  good  Mafier  did.

I travelled  this  Rcalmc  Eft  and  Weft  over,

Y et  found  I not  the  like  betwcene  the  Mount  and  Dover :
But  only  a Monke  of  whome  Uc  fpeake  anon,

Each  of  them  had  accompliftied  our  Wbite  Stone :
Butyettothe  Red  Workc  rhey  never  came  neere,

The  caufe  hereafter  more  plainely  fliall  appeare ;

And  thus  when  I had  taken  ali  this  paines,

And  then  could  not  reape  the  fruit  of  my  gaines:

I thought  tomy  felfe,  foto  feroutthis  Warke,

That  orhers  by  fortune  may  hit  right  the  Markc.


THE


ofTbilofophy.


*97


The  fift  Cbapter,

Iam  forry  I have  notbing  to  require  my  Majltrs  gentle-
But  only  this  Boke  a litlc  fhort  T reatife  ^ (nes,

Which  I dare  fay  Ihall  as  wclcome  be  to  him ,

As  if  I had  fent  him  a Couple  of  Milch  Kine  :

And  hccrc  for  his  fake  I will  difclofe  unto  thee,

A greate  feacret  which  by  God  andthe  Trinity,
Sincethat  our  Lord  this  world  firft  began,

Was  it  not  fo  opencd  I dare  lay  rtiy  hand  ,

No,  ali  thc  Philofophers  which  were  before  this  day,
Never  knew  this  iceret  1 dare  boldly  fay.

And  now  to  obteync  thy  purpofe  more  rathe.

Letthy  Fire  be  as  temperate  astheBath  ofthcBathe.
Ohwhata  goodly  and  profitable  Inftrument,

Is  the  Bath  of  thc  Bathe  for  our  ficry  intent !

To  fecke  all  the  World  throughout  I fhould  not  finde,
For  profic  and  liberty  a Fire  more  fitt  to  my  minde.

Goe  or  ride  where  you  lift  for  the  fpace  of  a yeare
Thou  needcft  not  care  for  the  mending  of  thy  Fire.

A Monke  of  Bath  which  of  that  houfe  was  Pryor,
Tould  me  in 'feacret  he  occupied  none  other  fire,

To  whome  I gave  credit  even  at  the  firft  feafon,
Becaufe  it  depended  upon  very  good  reafon : •

He  had  our  Stont , our  Medicine , our  Elixir  and  all,
Which  when  the  Abbie  was  fupprcft  he  hid  in  a wall :
Andtendayesafter  he  wcncto  fetch  itout.

And  there  he  found  but  the  ftopple  of  a Clout.

Then  he  tould  me  he  was  in  fuch  an  Agonie,

That  for  the  loflfc  thereof  he  thought  he  fhould  be  frenzie,

R r And


2C>8


The  TZreviary

And  a Toy  tookc  him  in  thc  head  to  run  fuch  a racc,-
That  many  yearc  aftcr  hc  had  no  fctling  place ;

And  more  hc  is  darke  and  cannot  fee,

But  hath  a Boy  to  leade  him  through  the  Country.

I hapned  to  come  on  a day  whereas  he  was,

And  by  a word  or  two  that  he  letpafle,

I underftood  ftrcight  he  was  a Philofopher,
Forthewhich  caufe  Idrewto  himneare;

And  when  the  Company  was  all  gone.

And  none  but  his  Boy  and  he  and  I alone,

Majter  quoth  I for  thc  love  of  God  and  Charity,

Teach  mcthcfeacrets  of  Nmrall  Philefopby.

NoSon,  quoth  hc,  Iknow  notwhat  thouart,

And  fhall  I rcveale  to  thee  fuch  a preeiuos  Arte  i
No  man  by  me  fhall  get  fuch  gaines.

No  not  my  Boy  which  taketh  with  me  fuch  paines,
That  to  difclofc  it  lyes  not  inmy  Bands,

For  I muft  furrender  it  into  thc  Lords  hands,

Becaufe  I heare  not  of  one  that  hath  thc  fame*

Which  lifts  up  his  minde  and  is  apt  for  thc  fame,
Which  if  I could  finde  I would  ere  I dye,

Reveale  to  him  that  fame  greate  miftery :

Yet  onethere  is  about  the  Citty  of  Salisbury,

A young  man  of  the  age  of  Eightand  Tvventy,
Chamock  is  his  namc  of  Tennet  that  //7e,

His  piaife  and  Comendacions  foundeth  many  a Mile  \
That  for  a Youngemanhe  istoward  and  apt,  .

In  all  the  fcaven  liberali  Scyenccs  fet  none  apart  ••

But  of  each  of  them  hc  hath  much  or  title,

Whereofin  our  Scyence  hc  may  claimc  a title :

His  praifc  fprcads  alfo  for  his  good  indighting,

And  of  forne  of  his  doings  I have  heard  thc  reciting
Both  of  Profc  and  Meetcr,  andofVcrfe  alfo,

And  fure  I commend  him  for  his  firft  fhewc,


of^Philofbphy.  zpp

I chinke  Chaucer  at  his  yearcs  was  not  thc  like,

And  Sktlton  at  his  ycares  was  further  to  fecke  5
Whercfore  for  his  knowledge,  gravityand  witt,

He  may  vvdl  be  Crowncd  Poet  Laure  at.

Gcafe  Fathcr  quoth  Iand  hearc  me  fpeakc,

For  my  namc  is  Charnock  upon  whorae  you  treatc  j
But  this  which  you  fay  to  me  is  greatc  wonder,
Forthcfcquallitics  and  I am  farr  aflunder ;

I am  no  fuch  Man  as  you  have  made  rcckoning,

But  you  fliall  fpeakc  for  mc  when  I go  a wiving :

Your  praifc  will  makc  me  fpeede,  though  it  be  not  truc,
Noryet  my  fubftance  worth  an  old  horfe  fhooe.

Is  your  namc  Cbarnocke,  and  thc  fame  Man  f
Yea  Sir  quoth  I : then  ftumbled  he  to  give  mc  his  hand :

And  talked  an  howrc  with  me  in  thc Philofephers  fpceche.

And  heard  that  in  no  queftion  I was  to  fecchc ,

My  Son  quoth  he  let  mc  have  thy  prayer,

For  of  this  Science  I will  make  thee  royne  heirc ;

Boy  quoth  he  lead  me  into  forne  fccret  place.

And  then  departe  for  a certaine  fpacc ,

Uutill  this  man  and  I have  talked  together.-
Which  being  done,  quoth  he,  now  gentle  Brother,

Will  you  with  me  to  morrow  be  content,

Faithfully  to  receivc  the  bldfed  Sacrament ,

Upon  this  Oath  that  I fliall  hccrc  you  give.

For  ne  Gold  ne  Silver  as  long  as  you  live,

Neither  for  love  you  beare  towards  your  Kinne,
Noryettonogreat  Man  preferment  to  wynne:

That  you  difclofc  the  feacret  thatl  fliall  you  teach,

Neither  by  vvriting  nor  by  no  fwift  fpeech ;

But  onlyto  him  which  you  be  fure
Hathcver  fcarched  after  the  fcacrcts  of  Nature  ?

To  him  you  may  reveale  the  feacret sof  this  Art , (depart.

Under  the  Covering  of  Philsfophie  before  this  world  yce

Rr  2 What


The  TreViary

What  anfwer  will  you  give  me.*  let  mc  heareV
Mafter  quoth  I,  I grant  your  defire.

ThenSon  quoth  he  keepe  thys  Oath  I chargethec  well
As  thinkeft  to  be  faved  from  the  pitt  of  Hell.  (cion_
The  next  day  we  went  toChurch,  and  after  our  devo*

A Preijl  of  his  Gcntlenes  heard  both  our  Confeffions*,
Which  being  done,  to  Maffc  ftrcight  we  went.

And  he  miniftred  to  us  theholy  Sacrament*,

But  he  never  wift  what  we  meant  therein :

For  with  a contrary  reafon  I did  him  blinde,

And  fo  horne  to  dinner  we  went  to  our*hoaft,

AII  which  refcccionl  paid  for  the  Coft.

Whcn  dinner  vvas  done  I walked  in  the  field
Large  and  plaine,  wherepeople  paffe  by  but  field,
Andwhcn  we  were  in  the  midds,  Boy  quoth  he  go  pick  a
And  come  not  againc  before  I for  thee  whiftlc.  iThiftle
Now  Mafter  quoth  I the  Coaft  from  hearers  is  deare,
Then  quoth  he  my  Senn  hearken  in  thyne  Earc ;

And  within  three  or  foure  words  he  revcaled  unto  me,
Of  Mineralis  prudcncc  the  greate  Miftcrie .

Which  whcn  I heard  my  Spirits  were  ravifhed  for  Joy,
ThcGreeians  were  never  gladder  for  the  wvnning  ofTroy:
AsI  vvas  then  remembring  mygood  Mafter  i hoe,

For  even  the  felfe  fame  fecrec  he  did  me  fhew  :

Nyne  dayes  and  no  more  I tarried  with  him  fure,.

But  Lord  in  this  tyme  what  fecrets  of  Nature
He  opened  ro  me  at  divers  fundry  tymes,

As  partly  I have  told  thee  in  my  former  Rimes:

The  reft  is  not  to  bc  tvritten  on  painc  of  Damnacion^

Or  elfe  in  this  Boke  truly  1 would  make  relation  *,

Now  Father  quoth  1,1  will  depart  you  froe,

And  for  you  I wil  pray  whether  foever  I goe ;

Son  quoth  he  Gods  blefiing  goe  with  thee  and  thyne.
And  if  thou  fpeede  well,  let  me  beare  of  thee  againc.

THE


ofTbilofopby .


The fixt  Cb apter.


WHenI  was  gonc  a mile  or  two  abroade,

With  fervent  prayer  I praifed  the  Lord :
Givcing  him  thankes  for  that  profperous  Journy,
Which  was  more  leaver  to  me  then  an  i oo  1.  in  mony :
Surely  quoth  I my  CMafler  fhall  knovvallthis,

Or  clfe  my  Braines  fhall  ferve  mc  amifle  5
Which  if  they  were  fo  good  as  the  Monke  made  mencioj
Then  would  I write  to  my  Majter  vvith  a better  invencio,
0 Lord  quoth  I vvhata  folemneOath  was  this  given  !
Surely  in  fheetes  of  BrafTc  it  is  worthy  to  be  graven  $

For  a perpetuali  memory  ever  to  remaine
Among  the  Pbilofopbers , for  an  Oath  cerraine  .*

And  when  I was  two  dayes  Journey  homeward,

To  aske  him  a queftion  to  him  againe  I farcd,

Which  I had  forgotten,  and  would  not  for  my  Land,
But  that  doubt  truly  I might  underftand.

I thought  it  not  much  to  goc  backe  with  ali  fpeedc,
Tofeeke  him  out,  &tothc  houfe  where  I left  him  I yed,
And  there  in  a Chamber  anone  I founde  him  out,
Fraying  upon  his  Beades  very  devout  .*

Father  quoth  I a word  vvith  you  I doe  befcech.*

Who  is  that  quoth  he  < my  Son  Chimock  by  his  fpeech :
Yea  forfooth  quoth  I,  I am  come  back  to  you,

Defiring  you  heartily  to  teli  me  one  thing  truc :

Which  is  this.  Who  was  in  Philofopbj  your  Tutor,

And  of  that  Scacret  to  youthcRevealcr  <

Marry  quoth  he  and  fpcake  it  with  harty  Joy,

Forfooth  it  was  Riplej  the  Canon  his  Boy :

Rr  3 Then


3 01


The  Ureyiary

Then  I remembred  my  good  Mafler  againe,

Which  tould  hc  did  it  nevcr  attaine
Ofnomanner  ofManbutof  God,  heputitin  his  head,
As  hc  for  it  was  thinking  lying  in  his  Bead  :

And  thus  I tarried  with  him  ali  that  night,

And  made  him  as  good  Cheere  as  I roight.

In  the  moming  I tooke  my  Icavc  of  him  to  depart.
And  in  the  proceffe  of  tyme  came  horne  with  a raerry
But  that  mirth  was  fhortly  turn'd  to  care,  (heart  j
For  as  I have  tould  you  fo  my  Worke  did  fare.

Once  I fet  it  on  iyxt  which  did  me  much  woe,
And  after  my  Man  hindred  me  a Moneth  or  two  *
Yce  the  Gentleman  did  me  more  fpight  then  the  reft,
As  when  hc  made  me  from  worke  to  be  preft,

Then  Bcdlam  could  not  hold  me  I was  fo  fretr,

But  fowft  at  my  worke  with  a greate  Hatchett;
Rathing  my  Potts  and  my  Glafles  altogcther,

I wiffc  they  coft  me  more  or  I gott  them  thither :
The  afhes  with  myftur  flewall  about,

One  Fire  I fpilt  and  the  other  I put  out:

Ali  the  Rubifh  to  the  dunghill  I carried  in  a Sack,
And  the  next  day  I tooke  my  Coates  with  the  Croffe  at
And  forth  I went  to  ferve  a Soldiers  rome  (the  back ;
And  furely  quoth  I,  therc  fhall  come  the  day  of  Dorac ;
Before  I pra&ife  againe  to  be  a Pbilofepher,

Wherefore  have  me  Commendedto  my  good  Mafler.
And  nowmy  ftudcnts  in  this/*rf,my  promile  I have  kcpt

(juftly,

And  thatyou  fhall  finde  truewhen  you  underftandme

(truly ;

Which  before  that  day  nevcr  thinkc  to  fpcede,

Fora plaincr Boke  then this never  defire  to  rcade:

And  true  it  is  alfo  yf  you  can  pick  it  out,

But  it  is  not  for  every  Cart- flave  orLoute;

This


of'Thilofopby.

This  to  underftand,  no  though  his  witts  wcrc  fyne,

For  it  fhalbe  harde  enough  for  a very  good  Divine
To  Confter  our  meaning  of  this  worthy  Scyence ,

But  in  theftudy  of  it  hc  hath  takcn  greatc  diligence:
Nowformy  good  Mafler  and  Me  I defircyou  topray.
And  if  God  fpare  me  Iyfclwill  mendthisanotherday.

Finifhed  thc  20th  of July,  1557.  Bythe  unletttrd
Scbollar  T h o v a s Charnoc  k,  Student
intbe  mft  rvertby  Scyence  of  Astronomy
and  Phylosophy.


JEnivma  ad  Alcbimiam.

O

When  vii.  tymes  xxvi.  had  run  theirrafe,
ThenNature  difcovered  his  blacke  facc.*

But  when  an  C.  and  L.  had  overcome  him  in  fighc,
Hc  made  him  wafh  his  facc  vvhitc  and  bright :

Then  camexxxvi.  wythe  greate  rialltie.

And  made  Blacke  and  White  away  to  fle :

Me  thought  he  was  a Prince  offhonoure.

For  he  was  ali  in  Golden  armoure;

And  one  his  head  a Crowne  off  Golde
That  for  no  riches  it  might  be  folde:

Which  tyll  I faw  my  hartte  was  colde
Tothinke  atlength  who  fliouldwync  thefildc
Tyll  Blacke  and  White  to  Red  dyd  yeldc ;

Then  hartely  to  God  did  I pray
That  everl  faw  that  joyfull  day.

1572.  T.  Charnocke.


5°3


Qharnocf^  s JEtugwa.


JEnlgma  de  Alcbimia .

WHen  vii  tymes  xxvi  had  runne  thcir  rafc,

Then  Nature  difcoved  his  blackc  facc.

But  whithan  C.  and  L.  came  in  wirhgreatbloft
And  made  Blackc  nye  to  flye  the  Cofte  :

Yct  one  came  aftcr  and  brought  30.  offgreate  might,
Which  made  Blacke  and  White  ro  fleesquite 5
Mc  thought  he  was  a Prince  offhonor,

For  he  was  all  in  Golden  Armoure,

And  one liis  hed  a Crowneoff  Golde :

That  fornoriches  it  myght  be  foldc.

And  trewly  with  no  Pbilofopher  I do  mockc  ;

For  I did  it  my  fellffe  Thomas  Charneckt :

Therefore  God  coomforte  the  in  thy  warke
For  all  our  wrettingcs  are  verye  darke,

Defpyfe  all  Bookes  and  them  defye,

Whcrein  is  nothing  but  Recipe  & Accipe  5
Fevvc  learncd  men  with  in  this  Realme,

Can  teli  the  aright  what  I do  meane;'

1 could  finde  ncver  man  but  one,

Which  cowlde  teaehe  me  the  fecrcts  offour  Stone:
And  that  was  a Prjfte  in  the  Clofc  off  Salcfeurie,
God  reft  his  Soli  in  heven  full  myrie.


1572.

T.  Charnocke.

Bloomfields


30$


BLOOMEEIELDS

'BLOSSOMS:

OR,  .

T/tf  G?/«/tf  of  Philosophy,


Hen  Pbcebm  was  entred  the  figne  of  the  Rmme,

In  theMoneth  of March  when  ali  things  do  fpring;  '
Lying  in  roy  bcd  an  old  Man  to  me  came ,

Laying  his  hand  on  my  buily  head  flurabering;
Iam,faidhe,  Tyme,  The  Produc  er  of  allthing;
rife,  prepaire  thy  felfe  quickly,

My  intent  is  to  bring  thee  to  the  fampe  ofPHlofopky.

2.  Bloomes  and  Bloffomes  plentifullyin  thatfield,

Bene  plefantly  flourifhing  dickt  with(ColIour  gay,

Lively  water  fountaines  eke  Beafts  both  tame  and  wild *

Over  ihaddowed  with  Trees  fruitefull  on  every  fpraye,
Mellodioufly  finging  the  Birds  do  fitt  and  fay :

Father  Son  and  holy  Ghoft  one  God  in  perfons  three,

Impery  and  honor  be  to  thee  O holy  Trinity,

3.  Lo  thus  when  he  had  faid  I arofe  quickly,

Doingonmy  Clothesin  had  withagility,

Towards  the  Campe  (we  went)  of  Philofophy :

The  wonderfull  fights  ther  for  to  fee ;

Toa  large  greate  Gate  father  Tyme  broughtme,

Whichclofed  wasthen  heto  me  faid,

■>  Each  thing  hath  his  Tyme,  be  thoi*  then  nothing  difmaid,-  -

Ss  " ^Them


5 Bloomfields  'Blojloms.

4.Thengreate  admiration  I tooke  unto  my  felfe,

With  fore  and  huge  perturbacion  of  minde,

Beholding  the  Gate  faftned  with  locks  twelve :

Ifantifedbut  fmally  that  Tyme  fhouldbe  my  frend:

Why  ftudieft  thouman,  quoth  hee,  art  thou  blinde  ?

With  a rodd  he  touched  me,  whereat  I did  downe  fall
Into  a ftrong  fleepe,  & in  a Dreame  he  ftiewed  me  al!„

1 . Igitur  audite  /omnium  meum  quod  vidi.  (feaven
In  the  thoufand  yeare  of  Chrift  five  hnndted  fifty  and
In  theMoneth  of  March  a fleepe  as  Idid  lye.

Late  in  the  night,of  the  clock  about  Eieven,

In  fpirit  wrapt  I was  fuddainely  into  Heaven  .•

Where  I faw  fitting  in  moft  glorious  Majeftie
Th ree  I beholding:  adored  but  one Deitie.

2.  A Spirit  incircumfcript,  with  burning  heate  incombuftible,
Shiningwith  brightnes,  permanent  as  fountaine  of  ali  light.
Three  knit  in  one  with  Glory  incomprehenfible ;

Which  to  behold  I had  a greate  delight;

This  truly  to  attaine  to,  furmounteth  my  might :

But  a voyce  from  that  Glorious  brightnes  to  me  faid,

I am  one  God  of  imraenfurablc  Majeftie  j'be  not  affraid»

3.  In  this  Vifion  cleere,  that  did  it  felfe  foe  extend
With  a voyce  moftpleafant  being  three  in  one;

Peirced  my  Minde , and  tought  me  to  Comprehend
The  darke  fayings  of  Philofophcrj  each  one  j

The  Altitude , Latitude,  and  Profmditj  of  the  St  one,

To  be  three  in  Subftance,  and  one  in  Eflence ;

A moft  Heavenly  Treafure  procreate  by  Quinteflence.

4-Then  fludied  I what  this  Quinteflence  fhould  be,

Of  vifible  things  apparant  to  the  Eye ;

The  fift  being  even  a ftrange  privetie,

In  every  fubftance  refting  invifibly  ;

The  invifible  Godhead  is  the  fame  thoughtl*

Priraer  caufe  of  being,  and  the  Primer  Eflence  :

And  of  the  Macmofmj  the  moft  foveraigne  Quinteflencei


3°7


‘Bloomficlds  ‘Blojjoms .

5.  This  is  that  heavcnly  feacret  potentiall ,

Thatdividedis,  and  refteth  invifible

In  all  things  Animali,  Vigetall  and  Minerali ;

Whofevertue  and  ftrength  in  them  is  indivifible:

From  God  it  cometh,  and  God  maketh  it  fenfible,

To  forne  Eleft,  to  others  he  dcth  it  denay,

As  I fat  thus  mufing  a voyce  to  me  did  fay.

6.  Study  thou  no  more  of  myBeing,but  ftedfaftly
Beleive  this  Trinity  equslly  knit  in  Qne ;

Further  of  my  Secretr  to  mufe  it  is  but  folly,

Pafllng  the  Capacity  of  all  humane  reafon ;

The  Heavens  clofed  up  againeat  that  feafon:

Then  Father  Tyme  fet  me  at  the  Gate,

And  delivered  me  a Key  to  enter  in  thereat.

7.  The  Key  of  knowledge  and  of  Excellent  Science ;
Whereby  all  fecrets  of  Philofophy  are  referate ;

The  feacrets  of  Nature  fought  out  by  diligence  j
Avoyding  fables  of  envious  fooles  inveterate :

Whith  Recipe  and  ‘Decipe  this  Scjence  is  violate.

Therefore  to  me  this  Key  he  did  difpofe
The  feacrets  of  this  Arte  to  open  and  difdofc.

8.  Thus  faid  Father  Tyme  this  Key  when  he  me  tooke  j
Unlock  quoth  he  this  Gate  now  by  thy  felfe,

And  then  upon  hira  forrowfully  did  I looke,

Saying  that  one  Key  could  not  undoe  Locks  twelve,

VVhofc  Axe  quoth  he  is  fure  both  head  and  helve
Hold  vvill  together,  till  the  Tree  downe  fall,

Soe  open  thou  the  firft  Lock  and  thou  haft  opned  all.

9. What  is  the  firft  Lock  named  tel!  me  then
I pray  thee,  faid  I,  and  what  ftiall  I it  call  J

It  is  faid  he  the  Seacret  of  all  Veife  Men  ;

Chaos  in  the  bodyes  called  the  firfi  Originali:

Prima  materia,  out  Mercitry , our  JMenJirnaH:

Our  VitrioU , our  Sulphur,  our  Lmary  mofl  of  pricej
'iPut  the  Key  in  the  Lock,  tvvilljopen  with  a trice.

Ss  2 so.Then


'Bloomfields  ‘Blofloms .

10.  Then  theKey  ofknowledgelbufilytookcinhand
And  began  to  fearch  the  hollownes  in  theLock,

_The  words  thereof  I fcatce  did  undetftand,

So  craftily  conveid  chey  were  in  their  ftock  ;

I provcd  every  way,  and  at  laft  I did  unlock
The  crafty  Gynns  thus  made  for  the  nonce,

And  vvith  it  the  other  Locks  feli  open  all  at  once.

1 1.  At  this  Gate  opening  even  in  the  entry

A number  of  Thilofophers  in  the  face  I met,  /

Working  all  one  way  the  fecrets  of  Philofophy
Upon  Chaos  darke  that  amoog  them  vvas  fet,

Sobermenofliving,  peaceable  andquiet;

They  buifily  difputedthe  Materia  Trima,

Reje&ing  deane  away  Simul  fulta  & frivola.

12.  Here  I faw  theFather  of  Philofophers,  Hermes,

Here  I faw  Ariftotle  with  cheerc  raoft  jocund  ;

Here  I faw  Morien,  and  Senior  in  Turba  more  or  lefle,

Sober  Democritus,  zAlbert,  'Bacon  and  Ramttnd,

The  Monke  and  the  Chanon  of  Bridlington  fo  profound,

Working  moft  feacretly,  who  faid  unto  me ;

Beware  thoubeleevenot  ali  that  thoudoeftfee.

13.  But  if  thou  wilt  enter  this  Campe  of  Philofophy
With  thee  take  Tyme  to  guide  thee  in  the  way ;

For  By-pathes  and  Broad  wayes  deepeValies  and  hilis  high
Here  fhalt  thou  finde,  vvith  fights  pleafant  and  gay,

Some  thou  fhalt  meete  vvith,  which  unto  thee  fhall  fay.

Recipe  this,  and  that  j with  a thoufand  things  more,

To  Decipe  thy  felfe,  and  others  • as  they  have  done  before.

14.  Then  Father  Tyme  and  I by  favour  of  thefe  men
Such  fights  to  fee  pafled  forth  tovvards  the  Campe,

Where  we  met  difguiTed  Philofophers  leane,

With  Porpheries,  and  Morters  ready  to  grinde  and  ftampe,'
Their  heads  fhaking,  their  hands  full  of  the  Crampe .•

Some  lamc  with  Spafmer,  forne  feeble,  yvan  andblind
With  Arfnick  and  Sulphus,  to  this  Art  moft  unkinde.

'1E__  Thcft

T:


‘Bloomfields  'Blojjoms.

i5.Thefe  were  'Brook.e  thePreitl.  and  Yorke  vvith  Coates gay,
Which  robbed  King  H E N RY  of  a Mtllion  of  Gold,
Martin  Pcrien,  Major,  & Thomas  De-la-hay
Saying  that  the  King  they  greatly  inrich  would,

They  whtfpered  in  his  Eare  and  this  Tale  they  him  could.

We  will  worke  foryour  highnes  the  Slixer  vita,

A princely  worke  called  Opw  Regale,

itf.Thcn  brought  they  in  the  Viccar  of  Malden
With  his  Qreene  Ljon  that  moti  Royall  feacrett,

Ricbard  Record,  and  litle  Matler  Eden,

Their  Mettalls  by  Corrafives  to  Calcinc  and  frett  j
Hrtgh  Oldcaftle  and  Sir  RobertGreene  with  them  mett,

Roatling  and  boyling  allchings  outofkinde.

And  like  Foolofephers  lefr  of  with  lofle  in  the  end.

17.  Yet  brought  they  forth  things  beautifull  to  fight,

Deluding  the  King  thitt  from  day  to  day,

With  Copper  Citrinate  for  the  Red,  and  albified  for  the  White
And  with  Mercury  rubified  in  a glafle  fuli  gay,

But  at  the  lati  in  the  fire  theywent  away.

Alt  this  was  becaufe  they  knew  not  the  verity,

Of  Altitttde,  Latitude  and  Profundit],

18.  Thence  Father  brought  me  into  aWildernes,
tnto  a Thicket  having  by-paths  manv  one ;

iteps  and  footeings  I faw  there  more  and  IetTe
.Vherein  the  aforefaid  men  had  wandred  and  gone,

There  I faw  MarcaGtes,  Mineralis,  and  many  a (Ione,

As  Iridis,  Tatck,  and  Alome,  lay  digd  from  the  ground
The  Mines  of  Lead,  and  Iron,  that  they  had  out  found.

19.  No  marvel  I trow  though  they  were  much  fet  by
That  with  fogreate  Riches  could  endue  the  King,

>0  many  Sundry  wayes  to  fili  up  his  Treafury  j
With  filty  matters  greate  charges  into  bring,

The  very  next  way  a Prince  to  bring  to  begging ;

And  make  a noblc  Realme  andCommon  wealth  decay,

Thefe  are  Royall  Pbilofephers  the  dcanecantrary  way.

~ Ssj  ■ ' ' ao.Frofn


‘BloomfieUs  Hlojfoms .

ic.frrom  thence  forth  I went  ( Tjme  being  my  guide,)
Througha  greene  Wood,  where  Birdsfing  deerely,

Tillwecame  to  a tfeld  pleafant  large  andwide
Which  he  faid  was  calledTTtf  Campe  ofPbi/ofopbj;

There  downe  we  fatt  to  heare  the  fweete  Harmony
Of  divers  Birds  in  their  fweete  Notes  finging,

And  to  receive  the  Savour  of  the  flovvers  fpringing.

j i.Here  Juno, here  Pallae, here  Apollo  do  dwcllj
Here  true  Philofophers  take  their  dwelling  place
Here  duly  the  Mufes  nyne  drinke  of  PjnenesWcW ,
Noboaftingbroylerhere  ihe  Arte  can  deface;

Here  Ladj  Phllofophj  hath  her  royall  Pallace :

Holding  her  Court  in  moli  high  Confiftory,

Sitting  with  herCouncellors  moft  famous  of  memory.

aa.There  one  faid  to  me,  an  ancient  Man  was  hee ,

Declaring  forth  the  Matter  of  the  Stone ;

Sayingthat  he  was  fent  thither  to  Councell  me,

And  of  his  Religion  to  chufe  me  to  be  one  j
A Cloath  of  Tifhue  he  had  him  upon,

Verged  about  with  Pearles  of  Collour  frefh  and  gay,

He  proceedeth  with  hit  Tale,  and  againe  he  did  thus  fay;

’

23.  Here  ali  occnlt  feacrets  of  Nature  knowen  are.

Here  all  the  Elements  from  things  are  drawne  out ;

Here  Fire,  Air  and  Water  in  Earth  are  knit  together :

Here  all  our  feacret  worke  istruly  brought  about.

Here  thou  mnft  learne  in  thy  buifines  to  be  ftoute,

L Night  and  day  thou  muft  tend  thy  worke  buifily,

Having  confiant  patience  never  tobeweary.

24.  A9  we  fett  talkingby  the  Rivers  running  deerej
I caft  myne  Eye  afide  and  there  I did  behold

A Ladj  mofi  excellent  fitting  in  an  Arbour
Which  dothed  was  in  a Robe  of  fine  Gold,

Set  about  with  Pearles  and  Stones  manifold.

Then  ask’t  I Father  Tjme  what  fhe  fhould  be.?

. Tbilofiphj  quoth,  hcmoft  excellent  of  beanty.

- 25.  Ther


<Blomfields  'BloJJoms *

25.  Then  was  I ftricken  with  an  ardenr  Audacity,
fhc  place  to  approach  co  where  I faw  this  fighr,
rofe  up  to  walke  and  the  other  went  before  tnc ,

\.gainft  the  Arbour,  till  I came  forth  right ,
fhere  we  all  three  humbly  as  we  might,

Bowed  downe  our  felres  to  her  with  humiiity}

With  greate  admiration  extolling  her  felicity.

2<5.Shc  (hewed  her  felfe  both  gentle  and  benigne,
Bergefture  and  Countenance  gladdedourcommingf
From  her  feate  imperiali  ftie  did  her  felfe  decline ,

As  a Lady  loving  perfeci  wifdorae  and  Cunning,

Her  goodly  Poems,  her  Beauty  was  furmounting :

Her  fpeech  was  decorate  with  fuch  aureat  fentence,

Far  excelling  famous  Tul/ies  Eloquence.

27.  Then  Father  Tjme  unto  that  LaJj  faid,

Pleafeth  it  your  highnes  this  poore  Man  to  heare,

And  bim  to  aflift  with  your  moft  gratious  aide  .*
ThenChecommandedhim  with  mc  todraw  neere
Son , faid  the  Ladj,  be  thou  of  good  Cheere.

Admitted  thou  (halt  be  among  greate  and  fmall
To  be  one  of  my  Schollers  principali.

28.  Then  fliecotnmitted  me  to  Rajmmd  Luilie ,
Commanding  him  my  fimplcnes  to  inftrud,

And  into  her  Secrets  to  induce  me  fully ,

Into  her  privy  Garden  to  be  my  condufl :

Firft  into  a Towre  moft  beautifull  conftruft,

Father  ^jwWmebroughc,  and  thenceimmediately
He  led  me  .into  her  Garden  planted  delicioufly.

29.  Among  the  faire  Trees  one  Tree  in  fpeciallj
Moft  vernant  and  pleafant  appeared  to  my  fight.

A name  infcribed,  The  Tree  Philofophicall ,

Which  to  behold  I had  greate  delight:

Then  to  Philofophy  my  troth  I did  plighc

Her  M3jefty  to  ferve  j and  to  take  greate  paine,

The  fruits  of  that  Tree  with  Rajmnnd  to  attaine.  ^


311


30  Then  Rajmmd  fhewed  me  Budds  fifteene
Sptinging  of  thac  Tree,  and  fruites  fifteene  moe,

Of  the  which  faid  Trce  proceedes  that  we  doe  meane  j
That  ali  TUlofophers  covet  to  attaine  unto
Theblefled  JVa»*? ; oneinNumber  and  no  moe:

Our  greate  Elixer  moft  high  of  price,

Oar  Azot,  our  'Eafaliske>  our  Adrop,  and  our  ficatrice.

%\.fVL\sK  om  Afttimny  and  our  RedLead
Glorioufly  (hining  as  Phoebus  at  midday,

This  is  our  Crowne  of  Glory  and  Diadem  of  our  head  ;
Whofe  beames  refplendant  fhall  never  fade  away ;

Who  attaines  this  Treafure,  never  can  decay :

It  is  a Jewell  fo  abundant  and  excellent,

That  one  graine  will  endure  ever  to  be  permanent.

32.I  leave  thee  heere  now  cur  feacrets  to  attaine,

Looke  that  thou  earneflly  my  Councell  do  enfue,.

There  needes  no  blowing  at  the  Cole,  bulfines  nor  paine  :
But  'at  thyne  owne  eafe  here  maift  thou  continue,

Old  Antient  writers  beleive  which  are  true :

And  they  fhall  thee  learne  to  paflfe  it  to  bring,

Beware  therefore  of  too  many,  and  hold  thee  to  one

3 3.  This  one  thing  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  Lyongreene ,
Which  fome  Fooles  imagine  to  be  Vitrioll Romaine,

It  is  not  of  that  thing  which  Philofophen  meane,

For  nothing  to  us  any  Corofive  doth  pertaine,
Underftand  therefore  or  elfe  thy  hand  refraine

From  this  hard  Scjence,  leaft  thou  doe  worke  amifle,
For  I will  teli  thee  truly ; now  raarke  what  it  is.

34.  Greene  of  Collor  our  Lyon  is  not  truly
But  vernant  and  greene  evermorc  enduring
In  moft  bitternes  of  death,  he  is  lively :

In  the  fire  burning  be  is  evermore  fpringing  j
Therefore  the  Salamandtr  by  the  fire  living,

Some  men  doe  him  call,  and  fome  ^other  name,

The  MettaRine  Aienjirual/,  it  is  ever  the  fame.


Bloomfields  BloJJoms.


35.  Some  call  it  alfo  a Subjlance  exuberate,

Sorae  call  it  Mercttry  ofMettaline  effence,

Some  Limus  deferti  from  his  body  evacuate ,

Some  the  Eaglefljing  from  the  North  with  violence :
Some  call  it  a 7* oade  for  his  greate  vehemence.

But  fevv  or  none  at  ali  doe  name  it  in  his  kindc,

It  is  a privj  Quinteffence  j keepe  it  well  in  rainde.

36.  This  is  not  in  fight,but  refteft  invifible ;

Till  it  be  forced  out  of  Chaos  darke,

Where  he  remaineth  ever  indivifible ,

And  yet  in  him  is  the  foundacion  of  our  warke,

In  our  Lead it  is,  fo  that  thou  it  marke.

Drive  it  out  of  him  fo  out  of  all  other,

I can  teli  thee  no  better  ifthou  wert  my  Brother.

37.  This  Chm  darke  theMettallsI  do  call,

Becaufe  as  in  a Prifon  it  refteth  thera  within,

The  feacret  of  Nature  they  keepe  in  thrall :

Which  by  a mcane  we  do  warily  out-twyne,

The  working  whereof  the  eafier  to  begin.

Lift  up  thy  head  and  looke  upon  the  heaven.

And  I will  Iearne  thee  tiuly  to  know  the  Plancti  feaven.


the  B o o k e.


SAturne  in  all,  to  this  Arte  hath  moti  refpeft,

Of  whom  we  draw  a Quinteflence  raoft  excellent,
Unto  ourMagiflery  himfelfe  he  doth  conneft,

United  in  quallitie,  and  alfo  made  equipolent
In  ftrength  and  in  vertue ; who  lifts  to  be  diligent ,
Shall  finde  that  we  feeke  an  heavenly  trefure
And  a precious  Jewell  that  ever  fhall  endurc.


Tt


i.Iupiter


?»+


‘Bloomfields  'Blojloms .

'i.fupiter  the  gentle,  endewed  with  Azure  blevv,

Examiner  by  Jultice  declareth  true  Judgement,

Akering  his  Colours  ever  frefli  and  nevv ,

In  his  occule  Nature  to  this  Arte  is  convenient ; '

To  Phi/ofophie  is  ferviceable  and  alfo  obedienr,

Joyned  with  Lunarj  afeer  his  cwne  kinde,

Conteyneth  this  Arte  and  leaveth  nothing  behinde.

3.  Mars  thit  is  Martiali  in  Citty  andTowne,

Fiercein  Battaile.fuliofdebateand  Ifrife,

A noble  Warriour,  and  famous  of  renowne,

With  fire  and  fword  defendeth  his  owne  lyfe,

Hefhineth  with  blood  and  flaieth  with  aknife
AI!  fpiries  and  bodye$,his  Arts  be  fo  bold,

The  harts  of  ali  others  he  wyns  to  him  with  Gold.

4 The  Sun  moft  glorious  fhining  with  power  potent,

Above  ai!  other  faire  Planets  feaven,

Sheddinghis  light  to  thera  all  indifferent,

With  his  glorious  Beames  and  glittering  fhine,

He  lightneth  the  Earth  and  the  Firmament  of  Heaven :

Who  can  him  diflolve  and  draw  out  his  Quinteflencej
Unto  ali  other  Planets  he  fhall  give  influence.

y.Lady  Venus  of  Iove  the  faire  Goddefle
With  her  Son  Cttpid  apperteyneth  to  this  Arte,

To  the  Iove  of  the  Sun  when  Ihe  doth  her  addreffe,

With  her  Darts  of  Iove  ftriketh  him  to  the  hearte,

Joyned  to  his  feede  of  his  fubftance  fhe  taketh  parte :

Her  felfe  fhe  enducth  with  excellent  Tiflue,

Her  conupt  nature  when  fhe  doth  renevv.

6.  Mercurj  this  feeing  begineth  to  be  fugitive,

With  his  rodd  of  Inchantment  licle  doth  he  prevaile,

Taken  often  Prifoner  himfelfe  doth  revive ;

Till  he  be  fnared  with  the  D/agons  Tajle
Then  doth  he  on  a hard  Coate  of  Male ,

Soudred  together  with  the  Smn and  Moone ,

Then  is  he  Maftered  and  his  Inchantment  done.

7.  The


FUloomfields  Hlojloms.

The  Moene  that  is  called  the  lefler  Lumrj,

VVife  unco  Phoebus,  Ihining  by  Nighr,

To  others  gives  her  Garments  through  her  hearbZ#»*^,

And  from  the  North  to  the  South  fhineth  full  bright,  *
Ifyoudoforher  looke  fhe  hydech  from  yourfighr.

But  by  faire  intreaty  fhe  is  won  at  the  Jaft,

With  Azot  and  Pire  the  vvhole  Maftery  thou  haft.

8.  The  Maiftcry  thougettefl  not  yet  of  thefe  Planets  feaven,
But  by  a tnifly  meaning  knowne  only  unto  us ;

Bring  them  fitft  to  Hell,and  afterwards  to  Heaven  ;

Betwixt  lyfe  and  death  then  thou  muft  difcufle,

Therefote  I councel!  thee  that  thou  wc  rke  thus.

‘Dijfolve  and  Seperate  them.  Sublime,  Fix  and  Congeale ,

Then  haft  thou  ali;  therefore  doe  as  I thee  teli.

9.  Diflblve  not  with  Corrofive  nor  ufe  Separacion
With  vehemence  of  Fire,as  Multipliers  doe  ufe,

Nor  to  the  GlaiTe  copp  make  thou  Sublimacion  j
Such  wayes  inordinai  Pbilofophers  refufe,

Their  fayiogs  follow  and  wilely  thetn  perufe  :

Then  fhalt  thou  not  chy  felfe  Icwdly  delude
In  this  goodly  Scjtnce : Adiew,  I thus  conclude.


Incipit  Tbeorica.

WEE  intend  now  through  grace  divine
In  few  wordsof  Chaor  fortowrite,

Light  from  Darknes  to  caufe  forth  to  Ihine,

Longbefore  hidden  as  I Ihall  recite,

In  every  thing  unknowne  it  is  requifite

A Seacret  to  fearch  out  vvhich  is  invifible,  r

Materiali  ofour  Maiftry,a  fubftanceinfenfible;

Tt  2 ..  2,Becaufe


6


cBloomfields  Tdloffoms .

а.  Bccaufe  I fhould  not  feeme  to  inclofe
Longhidden  feacretsunto  me  coramitted,

Of  my  Lord  God.  Therefore  plainely  of  Chaos,

My  purnofe  fhalbe  thercof  to  be  acquitted,

For  dangerous  burthens  are  no:  eafily  lighted.

In  faith  therfore  I fha’,1  my  felfe  endeavour,

Lightly  to  difcharge  me  befoic  God  for  ever.

3.  Devotely  therefore  unto  thee  O Lord  I call,

Stndmethy  Grace  co  make  explicacion

0 fChaor : For  thou  art  opener  of  feacrets  ali  -
Which  cver  art  ready  toheare  the  Suplicacion
Ofthy  meekeServants,  which  with  hearty  humiliacion

To  thee  do  I apply : fend  me  novv  thy  grace
O;  thy  Secrets,  to  write  in  due  order  tyme  and  place.

4.  £haos  is  no  more  to  fay,  this  is  doubtles,

(As  Ovid writeth  in  his  Mttamorphojln)

But  a certaine  rude  fubfiance,i»d/igcy?<*9;  molei,
HavingdiversNatures  refting  it  within  ,

Which  with  the  Contrary  we  may  it  out  twyne.

By  Philofopbers  Ane,  vvho  fo  the  feat  doth  know
The  foure  Elements  from  fhties  to  onc  draiv.

5.  This  £baoi as  ali  things  hath  Dimenfions  three,

Which  well  confidered  (hall  follow  the  efFeft,

That  \sAltitude}  LautM.de  and  'TrofurJitte ,

By  which  three  all  the  Water  is  dire fF:

Unto  thefe  Dimenfions  who  hath  no  refpcft
Shall  never  divide  the  ^baos  in  his  kinde,

Butafterhis  labourfiiall  finde  ftaud  in  the  end.

б.  Chnos  is  to  us  the  Vine-tree  white  and  red,

Chaos  iseach  Beafi,Fifhand  Fowle  in  his  kinde,

Cbxos  is  the  Oare,  and  Mine  ofTinn  andLead,

01  Gold  and  Silver  that  we  out  finde,

Iron  and  Copper  which  things  do  binde  :

And  hold  our  fights  and  witts  unto  thera  bound,

The  feicrets.hid.  in  thera  which  we  ne  underfiand.

7.  Out


3*7


<Blomfields  'Blojfoms.

7.0ut  of  this  mifty  Chaos,  the  Philofephtrs  expert,

Doea  lubfhnce  draw  calleda  Slttintefjence.

Craftily  deviding  the  foure  Elementsby  Art :

With  great  Wifdome  ftudy  and  Diligence,

The  which  high  Seacreat  hath  a divine  Influence;

That  is  fupernaturall  of  Foolcs  thought  impoflible,

An  Oylc  or  fuch  like  called  Incombudible.

8. The  Miydery  of  this  plaincly  to  Ihetv  thee,

In  forme  heareafter  I will  it  declare :

Setting  forth  here  the  Phtlofophers  Tree ,

Wherein  now  the  vvhole  Arte  I Ihall  Compare:

In  this  faire  Tree  Sixteene  frutes  are,

More  precious  then  Gold  in  the  Stomake  to  digefl ,

Put  thy  hand  thereto  and  take  of  the  beft.

9. And  left  the  fault  imputed  fhould  be.

In  me,or  jlothers  that  of  this  Arte  doth  write.

I fet  before  thee  the  true  figure  of  the  T, ree,

Wherein  orderly  the  t Arte  I will  recite  ;

Underfland  my  Sentence  that  thou  raaift  worke  right ,

Confider  that  I faid  that  Chaos  is  ali  thing
That  we  begin  of,  the  true  way  of  working.

10.  Put  cafe  thy  Chaos  be  Animali, Vegitall  or  Minerali,

Let  reafon  guide  thee  to  worke  after  the  fame ;

Ifthou  workell  out  of  kinde,then  loofelt  thouall :

For  Nature  with  Nature  rejoyceth  and  maketh  true  game,

Worke  Animali  with  his  kind  and  keepe  thee  out  of  blame;
Vegetable  and  Minerali  in  their  Order  due,

Then  fhalt  thou  be  counted  a Pkilcfopber  true.

11.  When  thouhaft  found  whatit  isindeede,

Then  knowefl  thouthy  forme  by  reafon  it  muQ  be,

Search  it  wittily  and  draw  from  him  his  feede :

Then  is  there  thy  Altiusde  fuperficiall  to  fee,

The  Latitude  Ihill  appeare  anon  beleeve  me.

When  thou  had  divided  the  Elcments  affunder,

Then  the  Projtsnditj  amongft  them  lyeth  hid  under,

Tt  3 i:. Here


'Bloomfields  'Blofjoms.

i i.  Here  is  Materia  Prima,  and  Corpus  confufum,

Buc  not  yec  che  Maner  of  which  Philofophers  doe  create,

Yet  this  one  conteyneth  che  other  in  Somme :

For  Forma , Materia  and  Corpus  cogecher  are  knic ;

YVith  che  Menftruall  Water  firlt  thou  muft  ehem  frete :

Thac  the  Body  firft  be  finely  Calcinate,

Afcer  diffolved  and  purely  evacuate,

1 3.  Then  is  it  the  true  Mercury  of  the  Philofophers,

Unco  the  Mayftery  apt  needefull  and  ferviceable ;

More  of  this  thing  I neede  not  much  rehearfe  ;

For  this  is  ali  the  Secret  molt  Comrrendable  j
Materia  Prima  it  is  called  Multiplicable,

The  which  by  Arte  rault  be  exuberate,

Then  it  is  the  Matter  of  which  Mettalls  were  generate’

14.  Sulphur  of  Nature  and  not  that  which  is  common,
OfMeecalls  multbemade ; if  that  thouwilt  fpeede,

Which  will  tume  them  to  his  kinde  every  each  one ;

His  Tindture  into  them  abroad  he  will  fpread  ,

It  will  fix  Mercury  common  at  thy  neede.

And  make  hira  apt  true  Tinfture  to  receive.

Worke  asl  have  tould  thee,  and  it  Qiall  not  thee  deceive.

1 5.  Then  of  Su»  and  CWoone  make  thou  Oyle  incorabuftible,
With  Mercury  vegetable  or  elfe  with  Lunary,

Inferate  therewith  and  make  thy  Sulphur  fluxible
ToabidethyFireand  alfo  thy  CMercury
Be  fixt  and  flowing,  then  halt  thou  wroughctruly.

And  fo  halt  thou  made  a Worke  for  the  nonce,

And  gotta  Stone  more  precious  then  allStones.

1 6.  Fix  it  up  now  with  petfefl  Decoccion,

And  that  with  eafy  heate,  and  not  vehement ,

For  feare  of  Induracion,  and  Vitrificacion,

Leafl  thou  loofe  ali  and  thy  labour  mifpenc:

Wich  Eight  dayes  and  nights,  this  Stone  is  fufficient,

The  greate  Elixir  molt  high  of  price,

Which  Raymond called  his  Bajiliske  and  Cocatrice,


Bloomfields  Blojjoms .

17.  To  this  excellent worke  greate  Coftneedenot  be,
Many  Glaffes  or  Potts  abouc  it  to  breake,

One  Gla(Te,one  Furnaceand  no  more  ofnecefficy,
Whomoredoth  fpill,  his  witcsare  butweake,

Ali  this  is  flillcd  in  a Limbeck  with  a Beake.

As  touching  the  Ordtr  of  Diftillacion,

And  with  a blinde  head  on  the  fame  for  Solucion.

18.  In  this  thy  Mercttry  taketh  his  true  kinde.

In  this  he  is  brought  to  Multiplicacion  ;

In  this  made  he  his  Sulphur,  beare  it  well  in  minde,

Tin&ure  he  hath  herein,  and  inceracion,

In  this  the  Stone  is  brought  to  his  perfeft  Creacion  •
InoneGlifle,one  Thing, oneFireand  nomo,

This  Worke  is  Compleate.  Da  gloriam  Deo,


Incipit  BraBica.


WE  have  fufficiently  declared  the  Thcoriqtte,

In  words  mifticall  making  declaracion.

Let  us  now  proceede  plainely  with  the  cPrattiqtee ,
Largely  of  the  Macter  to  make  explamcion  :

I will  therefore  that  you  marke  well  my  Narracion,
Astrue  Difciplesray  Doftrine  toattend
My  Tejlament , and  laft  YViU  to  you  I do  comend.


2.  Be  you  Holy  therefore,  Sober,  Honeft,and  Meeke;

Love  God  and  yourNeighbour,  to  the  Poore  bee  not  unkiad;
Overcome  Sathan,  Gods  Glory  feeyoufeeke,

My  Son  be  gentle  to  all  men,  as  a Frend  ;

Fatherles  and  Widdow  have  alwaies  in  thy  minde,

Innoccnte  love  as  Brothers,  the  wrcked  uo  elchew,

Let  Flafehood  and  Eiattery  goe,  leaft  thou  it  rue.

3. De.


VP


}20


! 'Bloomfields  ‘Blofioms.

5.Devoute!y  ferve  God,  call  daily  for  his  grace,

Worlhip  him  in  Spiric  with  heart  contrite  and  pure,

In  no  wife  lec  Sathan  thy  prayers  deface  :

Looke  thou  be  ftedfaft  in  faith  and  truft  moft  fure,

Lay  uptreafureinheaven  which  ever  Ihall  endure:

In  all  Adverfity  be  gentle  in  thy  heart
Againft  thy  Foe ; fo  ftialt  thou  him  convert.

4.  Moft  heartily  therefore  OLordtothee  I call,

Befeeching  thee  to  ayde  me  with  thy  heavenly  grace,

Lovingly  thy  Spiric  upon  me  downe  let  fall ;

Overlhaddowing  me  that  I at  no  tyme  trefpas,

My  Lord  and  my  God  grant  me  to  purchafe

Full  knowledge  of  thy  Secrets,  with  thy  mercy  towine,
Intending  thy  truth  this  Pra&ife  I begin.

5.  Liften  thou  my  Son,  and  thine  Eares  incline.

Delight  have  thou  to  learne  this  Pradife  fage  and  true,

Attend  my  faying,  and  nore  well  this  Difcipline :

Thefe  Rules  following  do  as  it  doth  enfue,

This  labour  once  begun  thou  muft  it  continue

VVithout  tediousfluggardice,  and  flothfull  wearines :

So  fhalt  thou  thereby  acquire  to  thee  greate  Riches.

6.  In  the  name  of  God  this  Seacret  to  attaine,

Joyne  thow  in  one  Eody  with  a perfeftunity:(

Firft  the  red  Man,  and  the  white  Woman  thefe  twaine :

One  of  the  Mans  fubftance,  and  of  the  Womans  three,

By  Liquefaction  /oyned  together  muft  they  be:

The  which  Conjunction  is  called  Diptative,

That  thus  iVmade  betweene  Man  and  Wife;

7.  Then  after  that  they  be  one  Body  made,

With  the  fharpe  teeth  of  a Dragon  finely,

B ing  them  to  Duft,  the  next  muft  be  had,

The  true  proporcion  of  that  Duft  truly,

In  a true  Ballance  weighing  them  equally  •

With  three  tymes  as  much  of  the  fiery  Dragon
Mixing  altogether,  then  haft  thou  well  done.

8.Th


‘Bloomfields  ‘BloJJoms .

8.  Thy  Sublhnce  thus  together  proportionate,

Pnt  in  a Bedd  of  Glafle  with  a bottome  large  and  round,

There  in  due  tyme  to  dye,  and  be  regenerate
Into  a new  Nature,  three  Natures  into  one  bound,

Then  be  thou  glad  that  ever  thou  it  found.

For  this  is  the  Jewell  Ihall  ftand  thee  moft  in  ftead,

The  Crowne  of  Glory,  and  Diadera  of  thy  head.

9.  When  thou  haft  thus  mixt  thy  Matter  as  is  faid,

Stop  well  the  Glafle  that  the  Dragon  goe  not  out ;

For  he  is  fo  fnbtiie  that  if  hebe  ovetiayd

With  Fire  uunatursll,  I put  thec  out  of  doubt,

For  to  efcape  he  will  fearch  ali  about ;

Therefore  with  gentle  Fire  looke  that  thou  keepe  it  in ,

So  Ihalt  thou  of  hira  the  whole  Mayftery  winne.

1 o.The  whole  May  ftery  hereof  duly  to  fulfill ,

Set  thy  Glafle  and  Matter  upon  thinc  Athenorj
Our  Furnace  called  the  Philofophert  cDmghiH>

With  a temperace  heate  working  evermore ;

Night  and  day  continuilly  have  Fuell  in  flore,

OfTurfe,  of  Sawduft,  ordrychoppedfeggesj
That  the  heate  be  equipolent  to  the  Hen  upon  herEggsi

1 1 . Such  heate  continually  loke  thou  doe  not  lack,

Forty  dayeslongfortheir  perfeft  union

In  them  is  made • For  fitft  it  turnes  to  Black,

This  Collour  betokens  the  right  Putrefaflion,

This  is  the  begining  of  petfeft  Conception
Ofyour  Infantintoanewgeneration,

A raoft  pretious  Jewell  for  our  Confolation.

1 2.  Forty  dayes  more  the  Matter  fhall  turne  White ,

And  deere  as  Pearles  j which  is  a declaration,

Ofvoiding  away  ofhisCloudesdarke  night  j

This  (beweth  our  Infantsfull  organization,

OucWhite  Slixir  moft  cleere  inhisCreation.

Frotn  White  into  ali  Colours  withoucen  faile,

Like  to  the  Rainebow  or  the  Peacocks  Tayle.

*'  . Uu  13.  So


P <


7,11


! Bloomfields  ‘Bloftoms .

13.  So  forch  augment  thy  Fire  continuilly,

Under  thy  Matter  eafily  they  muft  be  fedd,

Till  thefe  Collours  be  gone  ufe  it  wifely  j

Forfoone  after  appeareth  Yellow  the  ineftenger  of  the  Redd,
When  that  is  come  then  haft  thou  wel)  fped,

And  haft  broughc  forth  a Stone  of  price,

Which  Rajmund  calls  his  Bajiliske  and  Cocatrice.

14.  Then  40  dayes  to  take  his  whole  Fixation,

Let  it  ftand  in  heate  moft  temperate,

That  in  that  tyme  thou  fpare  thy  Fermentation ,

To  increafe  him  withall  that  he  be  not  violate,

Beware  of  Fire  and  Water,  for  that  will  it  fuffocate.  '
Takeone  to  a hundred  of  this  Confedtion,

And  upon  crude  (Jldercurj  make  thou  Projeflion.

15.  One  of  thy  Stone  I meane  upon  an  hundred  fold,

After  the  firft  and  fecond  right  Fermentation,

Of  Mtrcurj  crude , turneth  it  to  fine  Gold,

As  fine, as  good,  and  as  naturali  in  ponderation,

The  Stone  is  fo  vehement  in  his  penetrations,

Fixt  and  Fufible  as  the  Gold-fmiths  Souder  is,

Worke  as  I have  faid,  and  thou  canft  not  doe  amifle.

1 6.  Now  give  thankes  to  the  blefled  Trinity,

For  the  benefit  of  this  precious  Stone,

That  with  his  grace  hath  fo  much  lightned  thee,

Him  for  to  know  being  three  in  one,

Hold  up  thy  hands  to  his  heavenly  Throne.

To  his  Majefty  let  u?  fing  Hofanna,

Altiflimo^Deo  (it  honor  & gloria.


The


&&&&&&&&&&  # &&&&&&&&&&

The  Conclufion.

Olir  dtagijlery  is  Three,  Two,  and  One  .*

The  Animali,  Vegitablc  and  Minerali  Stone.
Firfi  I fay  in  the  nante  ofthe  holy  T rinity3
Lookethatthcujeyne  in  One , Per  fons  Three,

The  Fixt,*^  Variable  and  the  Fugitive,

Till they  together  tajl  Death  and  Live ,

The  firfi  is  the  Dragon/f#,

ThatjhaH  the  ether  tvoaine  both  Jlay  and quell :

The  Sun  and  Moonc  jhall loofe  their  light ,

And  in  mourning  S abies  they  Jhall  them  dight ,
Threefcore  dayes  long  orne  er  e thereahouts:

Then Jhall  Phoebus  appeare  JirJl  eut  9
With frange  Collours  in  ali  the  Firmament ,

Then  onr  foy  is  coming  and  at  handprefettt :

Then  Orient  Phoebus  in  his  hemifphere
7 o usfullglorioujly  Jhall  appeare :

Thm  who  can  tvorke  wifely
Shall  attaine  unto  our  Maiftcry.


FINIS.


SJ^ ET> WA% T>  KJULLE' S
WORK  E.

LL  you  that  faine  Philofepbers  would  be,

And  night  and  day  in  Geber' s kitchinbroyle,
Waftingthe  chipps  of  ancient  HermesTree ,
Weening  to  tume  them  to  a pretious  Oyle,

The  more  you  worke  the  more  you  loofeand
/,how  learned  foever  you  be,  (fpoile.

Goe  burne  your  Bookes  and  come  and  Iearne  of  me.

- . ' \ *

Although  to  my  one  Booke  you  have  red  tenn,  0 > v

Thats  not  inough.for  I have heard.it faid>  . r
The  greateft  Clarkes  ar  not  the  wifeft  men,

A Lion  once  a filly  Moufe  obeyd,

In  my  good  vvill  fo  hold  your  felves  appaid  t
And  though  I write  not  halfe  fo^fweete  as  Tu/lj}

Yet  flull  you  finde  I trace  the  ftepps  of  LuJlj;  '

Y t doth  you  good  to  thinke  how  your  defire,

And  felfe-conceit  doth  warrantize  vaine  hope,

You  fpare  no  coli,  you  vvant  no  coals  for  fier ,

You  know  the  vertues  of  theElitrope,

You  thinke  your  felves  farr  richer  theri  the  Pope.

What  thinge  hath  being  either  high  or  low,

But  their  Materia  prima  you  do  know.

Elixir  vita,  and  the  precious  Stone,

You  know  as  weil  as  how  to  make  an  Apple  ;

If’te  come  to  the  workinge  then  let  you  alone,

You  know  the  coullers  black  brown  bay  and  dapple,
Controwle  you  once  then  you  begin  to  fraple.

Swearingand  faying.whata  fellow  is  this?

Yet  ftill  you  worke  but  ever  worke  amifle.


No


3*5


I\elle>s  Worke

No  no,my  friends,  it  is  not  vauntingc  words.

Nor  mighty  oaths  that  gaines  that  facred  skillj
It  is  obteined  by  grace  and  not  by  fwords ;

Nor  by  greate  reading,  nor  by  long  fitting  ftiil,

Nor  fond  conceipt  nor  working  all  by  vviil.

But  as  I faid  by  grace  it  is  obteined,

Seekc  grace,  therefore,  let  folly  be  refrained.

Iit  is  no  coftly  thing  I you  a (Ture,

That  doth  beget  Magnefut  in  hir  kind.

Yet  is  hir  felfe  by  leprofie  made  pure'.*

Hir  eyes  be  cleerer  being  firft  made  blind.*

And  hethat  canEarths  faftnes  once  unbind,

Shill  quickly  knovv  that  I the  truth  have  tould,
Offweete  Magnejia,  Wife  to  pureft  Gold,

Now  what  is  meant  by  Man  and  Wife  is  this.

Agent  and  Patienr,  yet  not  tvvo  but  one,

Even  as  vvas  Eva,  Adams  Wife  I wifTe  :

Flefh  of  his  Flelh  and  Bone  of  his  Bone,

Such  is  the  Urionhood  of  our  precious  Stone.

As  Adam  flept  untill  his  Wife  was  made,

Evcn  fo  our  Stone,  ther  can  no  more  be  faid.

By  this  you  fe  hovy  thus  it  came  to  palTe,

That  firft  was  Man,  and  Woman  then  of  him  :

Thus  Adam  heere  as  firft  and  cheefeft  was,

And  ftill  remaineda  Man  of  perfeft  limme,

Then  Man  and  Wife  were  joynd  together  trimme.
And  each  in  love  to  other  ftraight  addreffed  them,

And  did  increafe  their  kind  whenGod  hadblefled  them.

Even  fo  the  Man  out  Stone  is  faid  to  flecpe,

Untill  fuch  time  his  Wife  be  fully  wroughtj
Then  he  awakes.and  joyfully  doth  kecpe
His  new  made  Spoufe,  which  he  fo  dearely  bought,
And  when  to  fuch  perfeftion  they  be  broughr,
Rejoyce  the  beauty  offo  faire  a bride,

Whofe  worth  is  more  then  halfe  the  world  befide.

Uu  3


I


felles  Wor\e.

I doubte  as  yet  youhardly  underftand,

What  Man  or  Wife  doth  truly  fignifie,

And  yet  I know  yoa  beare  your  felves  in  hand,

That  out  of  doubt  it  Sulpher  is  and  c Mercnry,

And  fo  yt  is,  but  not  the  common  certeinly :

But  Mercury  eflentiall  is  trewly  the  trew  Wife,

That  killes  her  felfe  to  bring  her  Chiid  to  life.

For  firft  and  forraoft  (he  receaves  the  Man,

Her  perefdt  love  doth  make  her  foone  conceive :

Then  doth  (he  ftrivc  with  all  the  force  (he  can,

In  fpite  of  love.of  life  him  to  bereave,

Whichbeingdone,then  wilHhe  nevcrleave,

But  labour  kindly  like  a loving  Wife,

Untill  againe  (he  him  have  brought  to  life.

Then  he  againe  her  kindneffe  to  requite,

Upon  her  head  doth  fet  a Crowne  of  glory,

And  to  her  praife  he  Poems  doth  indite,

Whofe  Poems  make  each  Poet  write  a ftory,

And  that  (he  (lew  him  then  (he  is  not  forry.

For  hebyvertueof  his  loving  Wife,

Not  only  lives,but  alfo  giveth  life.

But  here  I wi(h  you  rightly  underftand,

How  heere  he  makes  his  Concubine  his  Wife,

Which  if  you  know  not,  do  not  take  in  hand,

This  wdrke  which  unto  fooles  is  nothing  rife,

And  looke  you  make  attoncment  where  is  ftrife.

Then  ftrip  the  Man  into  his  (hirt  of  TiQiew,

And  her  out  of  her  fmock  to  ingender  yflue.

To  teli  you  troath  he  wanteth  for  no  Wives
In  Land,  or  Sea,  in  Water,  Air,  or  Fire,

Without  their  deaths  he  waieth  not  their  lives.

Except  they  live  he  wants  his  cheif  defire,

He  bindes  them  prentice  to  the  righteRDier,

And  when  they  once  all  Sorrowes  have  abidden,

Then  finde  they  Ioyes  which  from  them  firft  were  hidden.

Fc


Kelles  JVorkg.

For  then  they  finde  the  Joy  of  fweece  encreafe,

They  bring  forth  Children  beautifull  to  fighc.

The  which  are  able  Prifners  to  releafe  j
And  to  the  darkeft  Bodyes  give  true  light,
Theirhevenly  Tinflurcis  of  fuch  great  might.

IOh  1 he  that  can  but  light  on  fuch  a treafure,

Who  would  not  thinke  his  Joyes  were  ouc  of  meafure  ?

Now  by  this  queftion  I fhall  quickly  know
If  you  can  teli  which  is  his  Wife  indeede :

Is  fhe  quick  footed,  faire  faced  yea  or  no,

Flying  or  fixed  as  you  in  Bookes  do  reade  ?

Is  (he  to  be  fed  or  clfe  doth  fhe  feede?

Wherein  doth  fhe  joy,  where’s  her  habitation  ?

Heavenly  or  EarthIy,or  of  a ftrange  narion  ?

What  is  fhe  poore  ! or  is  fhe  of  any  wealth  }

Bravely  of  her  attyre,  or  meane  in  her  apparrellf
Or  is  fhe  fick?  or  is  fhe  in  pcrfeft  heilth  ?

Mild  of  her  Nature  ? or  is  fhe  given  to  quarrell  ?

Is  fhe  a Gluttor  ? or  loves  fhe  the  Barrell  ?

Ifany  one  of  thefe  you  name  her  for  to  be,

You  knoW  not  his  Wife,  nor  never  did  her  fce.

And  that  will  I prove  to  you  by  good  reafon,

That  truly  noe  one  of  all  thefe  is  fhe,

This  is  a qu  ftion  to  you  that  is  geafon  :

And  yet  fome  parte  of  them  all  fhe  muft  be,

Why  then,  forne  parte  is  not  all  you  may  fee.
Therefore  the  true  Wife  which  I doe  meane,

Of  all  thefe  Contraries  is  the  Meane  becweene.

AsMeale  and  Water  joyned  both  together,

Is  neither  Meale  nor  Water  now  but  Dow ;

Which  being  baked,  is  Dow  nor  Water  neither  ;

Nor  any  more  will  each  from  other  goe,

The  meane  betweene  is  Wife,  our  Wife  even  fo :

And  in  this  hidden  point  our  feaciet  lyes,

It  is  cnough,  few  words  content  the  wife»


]\elle's  JVorl^e.

Novv  by  this  fimile  heere  I do  reveale,

A raighry  Seacret  if  you  marke.it  vvell ;

Call  Mercuri  Water,  imagine  Sulphur  Meale,

What  Meale  I meane  I hope  the  wife  can  tel! :

Bake  them  by  craft,  make  them  together  dwell,

And  in  your  working  make  not  too  much  hift.

For  Wife  fhe  is  not  while  (he  is  in  Pafle.

This  leflbn  learn’d  now  give  me  leave  to  play,  >r.

I (ha  II  the  fitter  be  to  learne  another,

My  minde  is  turn'd  cleane  cam  another  way.

I doe  not  love  fweete  fecret  thoughts  to  fmother.

It  is  a Child  you  know  that  makes  a Mother.

Sith  fo  it  is  then  muft.we  have  a Childe,  ( (4'< , ■
OrclfeofMotherhood  we  are  beguild.  '

What  will  you  fay  if  I a wonder  teli  you,

And  prove  the  Mother  is  Child  and  Mother  too?
Doyounotthinkelgoe  aboutto  fellyou  rf; . s
A bargaine  in  fnort,  as  fome  are  wont  to  do?

Ift  poflible  the  Mother,  to  weare  her  Infants  (hoe  ?.
In  faith  it  is  in  our  Thilofophj,  ..  .

As  I will  prove  by  reafon  by  and  by.  ,

Rifley  doth  bid  you  take  it  for  no  (corne,

With  patience  to  attend  the  true  Conjunccion,

For  faith  he  in  the  Aire  our  Child  is  borne,

There  he  receiveth  the  holy  Unftion,

Alfa  with  it  a heavenly  funftion-  > •

For after death reviv’d againe to.lyfe,  ...

This  all  in  all  both  Husband  Child  and  Wife.

Whilft  all  is  Eirth  Concepti an  it  is  termed.

And  T3 utre factio»  tyme  of  lying  in,

Pcrfeft  Conjunction  fby  artes-menis  affirmd)
ThewomansChildingwhere  doth  allloybeg'
Who  knowes  not  this , his  witts  are  very  thin.

When  (he  is  flrong  and  (hineth  faire  and  bright,

Sht's  tearm’d  the  Wife  moft  beautifull  tofight.


Kelles  Wor{e.

loe  thas  you  fee  that  you  are  not  beguil’d ;

For  if  you  marke  it  I fiave  proved  by  Reafon ,
How  both  is  one  the  Mother  and  the  Child ,
Conception,  Breeding,  Childing,  every  feafon  s
I have  declared  to  you  without  all  Treafon,

Or  any  falfe  ambiguous  word  at  all;

And  hewn  you  vvorke  then  finde  it  truc  you  lhall.

This  is  that  Mercnry  eflentiall  truly,

Which  is  the  principali  of  the  Stone  materiali.
And  not  thofe  crpde  Amalgames  began  ne wly •
Thefe  irebatAfcrcuriej  fupeificiaH,  . ,

This  is  that  Menftrue  of  perfeft  timSuriall  .•  , ,

This  is  moft  truly  thatOne  thing,

Out  of  the  which  all  profitc  muft  fpringe.

If  this  content  you  not,  abide  difplea$'d  for  me,

For  I have  done.  If  Reafon  take  no  place,

What  can  be  faid,but  that  there  doubts  will be,
Doe  what  one  can,  where  folly  wins  the  race.

Let  it  fuffice,  this  is  the  perfeft  Bafe,

Which  is  the  Stone  that  muft  diffolved  be.

How  that  is  done  I will  dedareto  thee.

This  is  the  Stone  that  Riplej  bidds  you  take,

(For  untill  thus  it  be  it  is  no  Stone )

Be  rul'd  by  me,  my  councell  not  forfake,

And  he  commands,  Let  Crudities  alone,

If  thou  have  grace  to  Leep  thee  free  frora  moan .
Then  ftick  to  this,  let  Phanfey  noto'refway  thee,

Let  Reafon  rule,  for  Phanfey  will  betray  thee.

Take  thou  this  Stone,  this  Wife,  this  £hildy  this  AII,
Which  will  be  Gummous,  crumbling,  filken,  foft :
Upon  a Glalfc  or  Porphire  beat  itfmall,

And  as  you  grinde,  with  Mercury  feede  it  oft,

But  not  fo  much  that  Mercnrj  fwim  aloft,.

But  equall  parts,  nipt  up  their  feed  to  fave;

Then  each  in  other  are  buried  within  their  grave.

X x


When


K^elles  iVorke,

When  thus  and  there  you  have  it  as  is  faid,

Worke  in  ali  points  as  Nature  wroughc  at  firft ;
For  Blacknes  had  thow  needeft  not  be  afraid,

It  wilbe  White,  then  art  tbou  paft  theworft»
Except  th  ou  breake  thy  Glafle  and  beaccurft-
But  if  through  Blacknes  thou  to  Whitenes  raarch,
Then  will  it  be  both  White  and  foft  as  Starch.

This  very  place  is  cal'd  by  raany  names,

As  Imbibit  ion  ecAiKgxSublimat'ion  x
Clyming  kigh  Momtaints,  alfo  £hildrens  Qames  j
And  rightly  it  is  tertned  Exaltatio h,

When  ali  is  nothingelfe  but  Circulatio n
Of  the  foure  Elements  whatfoere  fooles  clatter,
Which  is  done  by  heatc  upon  Forme  and  Matter.

Earth  is  the  loweft  Element  of  AII
Which  Black,  is  exilted  into  Water,

Then  no  more  Earth  but  Water  wee  it  call ;
Although  it  feeme  a blackEarthy  raatter,
And  in  black  duft  all  about  will  fcatter,

Yet  when  foe  high  as  to  Water  it  hathclytn'd,
Then  is  it  ttuly  faid  to  be  Sublytrid

When  this  black  Maffe  againe  is  become  White,
Both  in  and  out  Iike  fnow  and  fhining  faire,
Then  this  Child,  this  Wife,  this  Heaven  fo  bright,
This  Water  Eirth  fublimed  icto  Aire,

When  there  it  is  it  further  will  prepare
It  felfe  into  the  Element  of  Fire,

Then  give  God  thankes  for  granting  thy  defire,

This  Black, this  White,  doe  vve  call  Seperatio»,
Which  is  not  manuali  but  Elementall;

It  is  no  cruie  Mercuriali  Sublimation,

But  Natures  true  worke  confnbflaritiall,

The  White  is  called  £ onjunction  naturali.
Sectet  and  perfeft  Conjunction  not  groffe  j
Which  bringeth  profitt  all  othet  loffe.


Kelle's  lVo?I{€.

When  thrice  yee  have  turned  this  Wheele  abour,
Feeding  and  working  itasl  havefaid,

Then  will  it  flow  likeWax  without  doubt :

Giving  a Tinfture  that  will  not  vade.

Abiding  ali  tryalls  Chat  can  be  made.

Ifwifely  Projeftyou  can  and  keepe  free,

Both  profice  and  credite  to  yon  it  wilbe.

Your  Medicine  fixed  and  perfe&ly  flowing,

White  you  muft  thinke  will  Whitenes  increafej
So  Red  begets  Red  as  Scede  in  the  fowing
Begetteth  his  like  or  as  kinde  doth  in  Beafle,

And  fire  muft  be  the  true  maker  of  peace  :

For  white  ottti  Firment  your  Medicine  augmenteth,
And  perfeftly  tinckteth  and  foone  it  relenteth.

Thae  is  to  fay,  your  Medicine  ended,
IfWhitemeltdowne  Silver  and  thereon  Projeft  it,
If  Red  melt  downe  Sol,  for  fo  it  is  intended  j
Like  unto  like  in  no  wife  rejefl  it,

And  ouc  of  the  pureft  looke  you  eleft  it.

Medicen  one  parte  upon  Firment  ten,

That  One  on  onc  Thoufand  of  fupiter  then.'

Your  fupiter  flanding  red  hot  on  the  fyre;

So  foone  as  your  Medicine  upon  him  is  caft,
Prefently  ftandeth  fo  hard  as  a Wyre ,
Forthenheisfixed  and  tneltethbyblaft,

Anthof a|l  your  working  thisis  the  laft.

Then  Iet  it  by  Teft  or  ftrong  water  bc  tryde,

The  beft  Gold  or  Silver  no  better  fhall  bide.

Mtrcury  crude  in  a Ctucible  heated,

Prefently  hardeneth  Iik  Silver  anealed  j
And  in  the  highThrowne  of  Luna  is  feated ,

Silver  or  Gold  as  Medicine  hath  fealed:

And  thus  our  greate  Secret  I have  reveled.

Which  divers  have  feene,  and  my  felfe  have  wrought,
And  dearely  I prize  it,  yet  give  it  for  noughc,

FINIS.  E.  K.


IV


SIR  ED  KELLEY

C 0 y^C  E 5^JA(  I 3^  G
the  Philofophers  Stone  mitten  to  V i

bis  efteciallgeed  Freind,  G.  S.Gent.

THcheavenly  Cope  hathin  him  Naturcs  fower,
Twohiddcn-,  but  the  reft  to  fight  appeare : , .
Wherein  the  Spermesofail  tlie  Bodics  lowcr;
Moft  fecrettare,yettfpring  forthonce  ayeare.

And  as  the  Earth  with  Water,  Authors  are,

So  ofhis  parte  is  Drines  end  ofcare.

No  Flood  foe  greate  as  that  which  floweth  ftill,

Nothing  morefixt  than  Earth  digefted  thrife:

No  Winde  fo  frefh  as  when  it  ferveth  vvill *

No  Profitt  more,  then  keepc  in,  and  be  wife.

No  better  happ,  rhen  dric  up  Airc  to  duft.

For  then  thou  maift  leave  of,and  fleepe  thy  luft.

Yett  will  I warne  thee  ieaft  thou  chaunce  to  faile,
Sublyme  thine  Earth  with  ftinkeing  Water  erft,

Then  in  a place  where  Phcebus  onely  tayle
Is  fecne  att  midday,  fee  thou  mingle  beft :

For  nothing  ihincth  that  doth  want  his  lighf,
l\or  doubleth  beames,  unlcfTe  it  firft  be  bright.

Lctt


Sr-  Edw.  I^elley  to  G .S.  Gent.

Lctt  no  man  leade,  unleffe  hc  know  the  way
That  wifemcn  teach,  or  Adrop  leadethin,

Whcrcof  the  firft  is  large  and  eaficft  pray •

The  other  hard,  and  raeane  but  to  begin.

For  furely  thefe  and  no  one  moreisfound,
Whercin  Apollo  wili  his  harp-ftrings  found.

Examplc  lcarne  of  GOD  that plaftc  the  Skyes3
Refle&ing  vertues  from  and  t’every  poynt,

In  vvhich  the  mover  wherein  ali  things  lycs ,

Doth  hold  the  verty&sail  of every  Joynt :

And  therefore  £{} fenee  fi ft  may  well  bc  faid,
Conteining  ali  and  ' yctt  himfelfe  a Maid«

Remember  alfo  how  the  Gods  fjegan,

And  by  Difcent  \yho  was  to  ejifih  the  Syre,

Then  learnp  their  IlWc^and  Kmgdomcs  ifyou  can,

Their  Manners  eke,  with  ali  their  wholc  Attire;

Which  if  thou  doe,  and  know  to  what  cfFe<5t *

The  learned  SophetsmW  thee  not  rejedt,

■%  | . t

If  this  my  Do&rine  bend  not  with  thy  brayne,

Then  fay  I nothing  though  I faid  too  tnuch :

Of  trutn  tis  good  wili  moved  me,  not  gaine,

To  write  thele  lynes : yctt  write  I not  to  fuch
As  catch  at  Crabs,vvhen  better  fruits  appearc.

And  want  to  chufe  at  fittcfl:  time  of  yeare.

Thou  maifl:  (my  F reind ) fay,  what  is  this  for  lore  ?

I anfwerc,  fuch  as  auncient  Phyficke  taught  .*

And  though  thou  read  a thoufand  Bookes  before,

Yett  in  refpsd  of  this,  they  teach  thee  Naught :

Thou  mayft  Jikewife  be  blind,  and  call  me  Foolc
Yett  ihall  thefe  Rules  for  ever  praife  their  Schoole.

Xx  3 TESTA.


. MMMiu  m&MMMM

“•  -


V '41'  ^ '4*  ***  *f*  <$*  V *$•  7$?

T 8S TAMESHTVM  f OHAS^

N1S  DEEPHILOSOPHI  SUMMI
ad Jobanntm  Grvynny  tranfmiffum  1 5 68.


THis  Letter  third  and  Iaft  I mindc  to  make.

At  your  requeft  for  very  vcrtues  fake  5
Your  written  panges,  and  methods  fet  afidc,
From  that  I byd  5 looke  that  you  nem  flide.

Cut  that  in  Tnree,  whichNature  hath  madeOne,

Then  ftrengthen  Iwt,  even  by  it  felf  alonc,

Whcrewith  then  Cuttethe  poudred  Sonnein  twayne,
By  length  of tyme,  and  heale  the  vvoondc  againe.

The  felf  fame  Sunne  twys  yetmore,  ye  muft  wounde.
Stili  with  new  Knives,  of  the  fame  kinde,  and  grounde  j
Our  Monas  trcwe  thus  ufe  by  natures  Law,

Both  binde  and  lewfe,  only  with  rype  and  rawc.

And  ay  thanke  God  who  only  is  our  Guydc,

All  is  ynngh,  no  more  then  at  this  Tydc.


Tho-


THOMAS  %p<BIVs(SO*{VS

VE  LAPIDE  PHILOSOPHORUM.

THe  Heavens,  the  Earth,  and  ali  that  in  thcm  is ,
Wcrc  in  fix  Daycs  perfc&ed  from  Abifle :
FromOnc  fprung  foure^from  fourc  a fccondOncj
This  laft  a Gritt  5 chac  firft  the  Comer  Stonc.

Without  thc  Firft  the  Laft  m3y  not  be  had }

Yet  to  the  Firft  thc  Laft  is  too  too  bad.

When  from  the  Earth  the  Heavcns  were  feperated,

Wcrc  not  thc  Heavcns  with  Earth  firft  cohobated  i
And  whcn  the  Heavcns,  and  Earth  and  ali  were  not  j
Were  onely  Heavens  create  •,  and  Earth  forgott  ?

No:  Heavens,  and  Earth  fprung  ali  from  onc  at  firft  .*
Then  who  can  fay  or  Heavens,  or  Earth  is  worft  f
Is  not  the  Earth  thc  Mother  ofthcm  all  i
And  what  thc  Heavcns,  but  Earths  cfifentiall  ?

Although  they  have  in  Heaven  no  Earchly  refidence,

Yet  in  the  Earth  doth  reft  their  Heavenly  influence  .*
Were  not  the  Earth,  what  were  thc  other  Thrcc  ?

Were  not  the  Heavcns,  what  on  the  Earth  could  bc  f
Thus  as  they  came,  fo  Ihall  they  pafte  together ;
ButuntoMan  not  knowne  from  -whence,  or  whither.
And  for  thc  tyme  of  Earths  Heaven  purifying,

Six  thoufand  yeares  they  live, and  have  their  dying :

Then  all  ihall  reft  cternall  and  divine.

And  by  the  Beauty  of  the  Godhead  fhine.

I fweare  there  is  noe  other  truth  but  this
Ofthat  great  Stonc  $ which  many  feckc  and  mifte.

FINIS .


njb  jfc  $&  •&  4b  ■&  -">^  £fa  -"&  "t  :&  •&  -4b  &e&4b<4k4k$J

E X P ERI  EN  C E

AND

T HI  L 0 S 0 T Hr.

\ ‘ i

HAve  you  not  heard  yee  Princes  great,you  Lords  & Ladies  ali,
Of  the  mifhap  and  heavy  chaunce  that  now  of  late  did  fall/j
A wofull  Tale  to  teli
Who  could  exprefle  it  well :

Oh  that  fome  learned  Poet  had  byne
• J With  me,  to  fe  that  I have  fene  .*

Or  elfe  fome  other  ftanding  by,

That  wejl  could  write  a Tragidy
Oflafting  fame  and  memory.  ■

For  yet  not  fince  this  World  began,

Such  cry,  fuch  clamour  as  was  than
Heard  never  any  earthly  Man.

Ex  perime  e that  Princefle  greate,I  faw  her  in  her  Throne
Ofglory,  where  her  Majefty  delightes  to  fitt  upon ;

....  ‘ , And  on  her  wayting  by

A blefled  Company
Of  Virgins  pare,  that  as  I geflfe,

Were  Children  to  that  great  Goddefle :

Their  Princely  port,  their  Comly  grace,

Their  pierles  featur’d  hands  and  face
Did  fhevv  them  of  moft  Noble  racc :

But  of  their  prudent  skill  to  teli,

In  Artes  where  in  they  did  excell,

No  earthly  Tonguecan  do  it  well.


and  Thilofcphy.

And:  as  I gazed  thus  upon  that  firange  and  dreadfutl  fight,
Ifaw  how  that  Sstperietiee  did  reachthefc  Ladies  right,
The  feven  Artes  Divine,

With  defcnt  difcipline,

By  divers  rules  and  orders  grave.

As  fhe  thought  good  for  them  to  have.

Buc  for  to  fee  how  diligent
And  buifily  theirtirae  they  fpent
To  learne  thofe  Artes  moft  excellent,

The  endleffe  travellr  that  they  tooke
From  place  to  place,  from  booke  to  booke,
Amazed  me  on  them  to  Iooke.


For  fome  in  divers  Langmges  did  reafon  and  difpute.

And  other  fome  did  fing  and  play  on  Organ, Harpe  and  Flute
And  forne  with  Compaflfe  found
AII  Meafnres  fquareand  round :

An^fome  by  Cyphering  could  teli
Infinite  Summes  and  Nnmbers  well :

And  fome  with  Eloquence  began
As  Poets  and  Orators  to  fcan
The  Caufes  betweene  Man  and  Man  :■

And  fome  upon  the  Stars  did  gaze,

And  other  fome  fat  in  a Maze,

To  judge  of  Seacrets  that  there  was.

Soe  that  nothing  created  was  under  the  Firmament,
Thathath-aBeing  or  Lifeby  any  Element,

No  Simple  nor  Compound
Tn-all  the  World  is  found
Under  the  Sky,  or  Clouds  that  fly,

But  they  fought  out  the  privity :

This  Rocky  Earth,  this  heavy  Malle,

This  Articfce  Virgin,  this  let  not  paflfi
To  feeke  the  thing  that  therein  was :

But  put  themfelves  in  preffe  to  creepe
IntotheCenterof  the  Dee  pe,  f
Where  fundry  Soules  and  Spirits  doe  fleepe.


Experience

This  thing  Experience  gan  prudently  to  debate,  (flate.

Wichcheerefulllookeand  voycefall  mylde,  as  feemed  tobcr
And  foone  decreed  fhe
O;  her  benignity  :

Not  for  their  fundry  paines  I take, .

But  only  for  her  Glory  fake,

That  allthefeLadiesin  arow
Should  further  of  her  Secrets  know,

That  from  her  Majtfty  did  grow ;

VVherewith  to  Counccllcalled  fhee
ALady  grave  ofgreate  degree,  <)

That  named  was  T hilofephj.

And  after  their  difeourfe  and  talke,  that  LaAj  feli  downe  flate
On  hands  & knees  before  the  £ueene  in  heaven  where  fhe  fatt.
Andlooking  upon  her  face
Did  fay  unto  her  grace:

Blefled  be  thou  Experience,  - £

Fullmighty  is  thy  Influence }

Thy  wondrous  workes  records  full  well
In  wordell  of  wordels  where  thou  doelt  dwell,

In  Earth,in  Heaven,  and  in  Hell ;

That  thou  att  now  the  very  fame,

That  of  No  thing  Ali  things  did  frame,

VVherefore  now  blefled  be  thy  Name.

Wherewith  the  Heavens  opened , and  fiery  flames  did  faM
Downe  from  the  Throne  of  endles  Joy  andfeate  impetiall,
Where  Angels  infinite
Like  gliftering  Starrs  didfittt.

So  pure  and  fimple  was  the  Light,

As  ali  the  World  had  burnt  bright ;

The  flames  and  floods  began  to  roare.

And  did  prefent  their  hidden  flore,

Of  Spirits  that  fing  for  evermore,

Ali  glory  and  magnificence,

All  humble  thankes  and  reverence  'j
Begivento  EXP  SRI6NC  €•

' Theo


and  cPhilofophy .


Then  fylence  feli  upon  the  face  of  Heaven  Chriftalline
Whereall  the  Powers  muftered  full  'ready  ro  encline  j
To  that  moft’  Sapient,

The  high  Omnipotent ; ' '

That  faid  bt  it,  and  it  was  don,

Our  Earth,  our  Heaven  wete  begun  ;

I am  faid  it  the  moft  of  might.

In  worde  in  lyfe  and  eke  in  light.
IamMercyand  Judgment  righe,

The  Depth  is  myne  fo  is  the  Hight :

The  Cold,the  Hoc,  the  Moyft,  theDry,
Where  All  in  All  is  there  am  I,


33  9


What  thing  can  teli  when  I began,or  when  Imake  in  end?

Wherewith  I wrought,  and  what  I mought,  or  what  I did  intende
To  doe  when  I had  done
Theworke  I had  begun.

For  when  my  Being  was  alone

One  thing  I made  when  there  was  none,

A Made  confufed  darkely  dad
That  in  it  felfe  all  Nature  had
To  form  and  (ha  pe  the  good  and  badj
And  then  as  Tyme  began  to  fall.

It  pleafed  me  the  fame  to  call
Th  efirft  diatter,  Mother  of  aH.

And  from  that  Lumpe  divided  f foure  fnndry  Elements , -

Whom  I coramanded  for  to  raigne  in  divers  Regimenti:

In  Kinde  they  did  agree,

But  not  in  Quality.

Whofe  fimple  Subdance  I did  take,

My  feate  invifible  to  make :

And  of  the  Qualices  compound,

I made  the  Starry  Sky  fo  round
VVith  living  Bodyes  on  the  ground  j
And  blelfed  them  infinitely,

VVith  lyfe  and  long  profperity,

And  bad  them  grow  and  Multiply.

Yy  2 Rc-’


Sxperience

Refpe&ing  thefe  divided  things  fo  created  by  me,

Tbeir  lightandHyely.fpreadingforth  ofthem  in  their  degree
Retourning  to  the  Mafle,

VVhere  there  begining  was,

And  faw  the  refufe  of  the  fame,

How  Voyd  and  Empty  it  became,

Alldarke,and  nothing  toremaine,

I put  with  wrath  and  greatedifdaine,

My  on!y  Curfe  there  for  to  raygne ;

For  I the  Author  of  all.Light
Did  banifh  Darknes  from  my  fight,

Andblefled  ali  things  that  Ibined  bright,

So  that  I raard  nothing  I made,  for  that  I made  is  Ilill,
jAadfofiul|)e  unto  the«nd,  on!y  to  worke  my  willt
One  thing  was  firft  imployd,

And  fhall  not  be  deftroid,

It  compalfeth  the  World  fo  round,

A Matter^eafy  to  be  found  :

And  yet  moli  hardeft  to  come  by;

A Secret  of  Secret*  pardye,

That  is  moli  vile  and  leaft  fet  by.

And  it  my  Love  and  my  Darling,

Conceived  with  allJiving  thing,

And  travells  to  the  Woilds  ending.

What  needebavei  ofmansDevifeofPeny  orof  Pound,

Of  Goldor  Silver,  Lead  or  Tynn,  or  Copper  in  the  ground.,
Iron  or  Silver  Quick,

Whereat  {the  blind  dogridt ; ■[

Of  Cankered  Corofives  that  rtifl:,  . rv/

By  Salts  and  fulphurs  ali  toruli  ? , ;

Seeke  out  therefore  my  darling  deare ;

For  unto  me  it  is  moft  neere ,

My  fpoufe  my  Love  and  my  Compeare:

And  unto  it  looke  thou  direft
My  feaven  Children  long  eledt,

That  all  things  elfe  they  raight  rejefh


and  ‘Philojophy .

A Child  begetting  his  owne  Father,  and  bearing  his  Mother,
Killing  himfelfc  togive  lyfe,  and  light  to  all  other:

Is  yt  that  I do  meane,

Moft  myld  and  moti  excreame.

Did  not  the  Word  that  dwelt  in  me
Take  forme  and  walked  vifibly  •

And  did  not  I then  dvvell  in  it,

That  dwelt  io  me  for  to  unice
Three  powers  in  one  feate  to  fit  ?

And  then  Experience  did  fay

Now  knoweft  thou  all,  heere  lyes  the  Key,

And  then  fhe  vanifhc  deane  away.

‘ fi

There  with  arofe  Thylofephy  as  one  filled  with  grace,

Whofe  looks  did  fiiew  that  fhe  had  bync  in  fome  Heavenly  place;
For  oft  flie  wipt  her  Eyes,

And  oft  fhe  bowd  her  knees.

And  oft  fhe  kift  the  Sceps  with  dread,

VVhereon  Experience  did  Cread  j
And  oft  fhe  caft  her  Head  on  high
And  oft  full  low  fhe  caft  her  Eye
Experience  for  to  efpy : •

But  when  fhe  faw  that  fhe  was  gon,

And  that  her  felfe  was  left  alone:

I never  hread  thing  make  fuch  mone.  ~ < ..


F 13VJS.


THE  MAqi  ST6%Y.

'HpHrough  want  of  Skill  and  Reafons  light

A OH  en  ftumblc  at  Noone  day  •

Whilft  buifily  our  Stone  they  fcckc,

That  lyethinthc  way.

Who  thus  do  feeke  they  know  not  what
Is’t  likely  they  ihould  finde  '

Or  hitt  the  Marke  whercat  they  ay me
Better  then  can  the  Blinde'

No,  Hermes  Sonns  for  Wifdome  askc
Your  foetefieps  fliec’lc  dire<fl :

Shee’le  Nat  ures  way  and  fecret  Cave

And  Tree  of  lyfe  deteft.  ;v  »

'i  i

Son  and  Moone  in  Hermes  veflell  a

Lcarnc  how  the  Collours  fliew , ; 'l

T he  nature  of  the  Elements ,

And  how  the  Daifies  grow.

Greatc  Python  how  Appello  flew,

Cadmus  his  hedow-Oake :

His  nerv  r ais’ d army , and  Iafon  how
The  Ftery  Steeres  didyoke.

The  Eagle  which  aloft  doth  fly
See  that  thou  bring  to  ground 5

And  givc  unto  the  Snake  fome  rvings3
Which  in  the  Earth  is  found.


The  Magiftery.

Then  in  ane  Roome  fure  bindc  thcm  both,

To fght  till  thcy  be  dead  5

And  that  a Prinee  of  Kingdomet  three
Of  both  them  fhalbe  bred.

Which  from  the  C radie  to  his  Crowne ,

Is  fed  vvith  his  owne  blood  5

And  though  to  fome  it  feemeth  ftrange,

He  hatn  no  othcr  Foode.

Intohis  Virgin-Motbers  wombe,

Againche  enter  muft;

Soc  Ihall  the  King  by  his  new-byrth3
Bc  ten  times fironger  juft.

And  able  is  his  foes  tofoile,

The  dead  hc  will  revive :

Oh  happy  maa  that  underfiands
This  lM  edic  en  teatchive  i

Htc  opus  exigium  nobis  fert  ire  per  altum,
December,


ANO


Y M 1:


O K,


SEVE%ALL  WO  %KES  0 F

, Mft  '•••  i. i(l

mknowne  <iA  Mors,

v •>  t

; > v;  <«  p'i  ”d  -■ ' ,


..i  01


Ow  I fchall  hcr  be  gynne,  V

Totechcthe  a Conclufion;

In  the  name  ofthc  Trehete
Send  us  grace  thac  w?II  hic  bc1;

Now  take  t wcf  Onces  as  hiych  of  anodcr.
And  dyflolvc  on  ther  with  the  todcr,

Y tel  the  trowthc  as  my  broder,

Put  in  to a Glas  tvy  th owtt.en  oder : .p.  •

Than  take  threc  Onees  of  thG  by  tter.

And  meng  hym  with  the  fwetter  5
And  put  them  than  into  a Glas,

Evcn  righras  the  toder  was:

T han  take  a unc  of  the  bcft,

And  do  with  hym  as  thou  didfterft.

In  a Glas  than  thou  him  put,

And  loke  thy  mowth  be  wcl  I fliut  5
Nowthowhaft  here  Glaflesthre,

Evenlykc  unto  theTrynete,

Than  hem  ftop  thefe  evervehon,

Evcn  a fute  as  thow  haft  on  .*

About  thy  Glafles  a wal  thow  make,

Laft  the  wynde  ham  al  to  crake.


Thar


Anonymu

Than  thy  GlafTys  nowall  I thre,

With  yn  that  grave  they  fchal  be  $

Notv  thys  I fed  with  moy  fty  hete,

To  make  that  GlafTys  fwynkc  and  fwete,

Then  let  hem  ftonde  thus  vvekys  thre ;

And  wel  the  beter  they  fchal  be.

Than  put  hem  ali  now  into  on,

The  wichyslyke than  bea  ftonej
Than  let  hem  ftonde  fo  theryn,

Whan  thou  haft  made  thy  Conjun&ion :

Tyl  fcvyn  dayes  be  al  I don,

Much  the  better  woll  be  thy  Ston  5
Than  upon  thy  Glas  thow  fett
A fayre  heed  and  wel  I mette,

Draw  up  thy  water  with  cfy  fyre ,

Within  a Rotunde  good  and  cler,

Tyl  thi  Mater  wol  ftyl  no  mer,

Than  fet  thow  hem  in  dry  Fyr,

Than  fc  thow  ftyl  with  reafonabyl  hete,

Tyl  thy  Mater  wol  no  more  lete.

Whan  he  ys  ther  both  good  and  dry.

Fui  fayne  wolde  he  than  be  moyfty  $

Than  wey  that  Stone  within  the  Glas,

And  put  hym  hys  Lecur  has  it  was ;

Now  whan  thys  fryft  drawtc  ys  don,

Thow  muft  Embybe  with  good  proporciun  :

Now  lookc  thow  wel  whatys  hys  whyght.

And  wy th  the  fourth  part  than  hym  dyght ,

And  evermorc  wyth  partys  fowr ,

Now  ty  1 he  be  of  Why te  colowr  5
And  thus  loke  thow  make  good  wachc,

Tyl  the  Body  thy  Spirit  can  cache  5
And  alfo  thy  Sowle  fo  muft  he,

Than  underftand  thow  haft  thre*

Zz  Now


3+r


3+6


Anonymi.

Now  fchyt  thy  Glas  as  hyt  was  er.

And  worke  hyt  forthe  on  thys  maner ;
Whan  tho  thre  to  gcdur  bcn  knyte,

With  moch  joy  than  thow  mayft  fittc.
For  than  art  thou  ricchar  than  the  Kingt
But  hc  have  the  fame  thyng.

T hus  is  alie  thy  Mcdcyn  wroght,

Evyn  aftcr  thin  ovvne  thoght ;

How  thys  Medcyn  thow  fchalt  encres.
And  makc  hyt  mor  tyll  thowlyft  fecs ;
The  trowth  I fchall  now  the  ccrtcfie,
How  thow  fchalt  hyt  thus  Multyply :
Loke  as  thow  did  thy  Werke  befor,
Encres  hit  forth  witn  mor  and  mor :

As  thow  did  at  the  begynnyng,

So  continu  forth  to  the  endyng  i
Thus  for  foth  infynytely
Thou  mayft  this  craft  forth  Multiply  ?
Lykcas  a man  hath  lytil  Fyr,

And  mor  to  make  ys  hys  defyr  5
He  bc  hovyth  this  ys  no  nay,

More  Wode  or  Cole  thcr  to  lay :

And  thus  he  may  hys  Fyr  encres,

That  he  fchall  nevcr  be  fyrclcs.

One  the  fame  wife.thou  underftandc,  <.
Ever  thy  Medcyn  muft  begrowande?
And  wnan  the  lyft  Projecciun  make,
Loke  to  this  lcffon  good  tent  thou  take ;
Whan  thy  Medcyn  is  very  parfit ,

Thow  fchalt  hym  caft  onhys  lykc;

Ais  evyn  than  as  thow  can  gcfe ,

On  part  on  Tcn  Iookc  thow  not  meflc,
The  trowthc  yf  thow  wil  wetc,

Than  ys  thy  Lcxer  evyn  complete;.


And


Anonymi .

And  thanof  that  On  part  thowtakc,

The  trew  Projeccion  thus  fchalt  thow  make ;
Caft  that  on  Ten  of  Tyn  or  Leedc ,

Or  Copcror  Mercury  thcrinthatftecde,

Into  fine  Lun  hit  fchal  bebroght , *’

Or  into  Sol  cvyn  after  thi  thoght:

After  that  thy  Lexer  ys , .

Be  hit  White  or  Rede  I wys,

If  thow  hit  caft  on  Iren  alfo,

If  it  fchal  bc  Lun  or  Sol  ther  to :

Thys  ar  the  Secfcts  qlPkjlefepbic,

I councel  the  kccpe  hit  fecrctlye  j
And  ferve  thy  God  both  nyght  and  day,

The  better  tnou  lhalt  fpcede,  thys  ys  no  nay.
Now  I have  taughtthe  how  thow  fchalt  do,<
The  blys  of  hevyn  God  biyng  hus  to.


34-7


34-8


)

ER  ys  an  Erbc  men  calls  Lunayrie,
I bleflct  mowte  hys  makcr  bec.
Afterion  he  ys,  I callet  alie  fo,

And  other  namys  many.andmo  %
Hcys  an  Jirbe  of  grete  myghti>

Of  Sol  the  Sunn  he  taketh  hys  lyght,

He  ys  the  Fader,  to  Croppe  and  Rote  5 ^ j.  ')
Wyth  fragrant  Flowris  that  ben  fote,

Flowrys  to  bere  in  that  ftede,

Swm  benWhyte,  and  fwm  ben  Red :

Hys  Lewys  grvvyih,  both  day  and  nyght,

Lykc  to  the  Ferment  that  ys  fo  bright :

I Ihall  declare,  thys  Erbe  fo  lyght,

To  many  a man  hyt  ys  a fayrc  feyght  j
Frift  at  the  Rote  I wolle  be  gynne,

That  cawfyth  alie  thingfor  tp  fprynge  j


Anonymi.


Agrowyth  a pon  a Mowntaynebrym,
Wnere  Ttbis  hath  grete  dominacion  :

The  Sune  by  day,  the  Mone  by  nyght,

That  makcth  hym  both  fayre  and  bryght,
The  Rote  growyth  on  ftonns  clere ,

Whyce  and  Rede,  that  ys  fo  peyre  :

The  Rote  ysblacke,the.Stalke  ys  rdd  9
The  wychefchall  iher  never  be  dede,

The  Levvis  ben  rownd,  as  a Nowbcl  fon.
And  wexfyth  and  vvanyth  as  the  Mon :

In  the  meddes  a marke  the  brede  of  a peni,
Lothys  is  lykc  to  ovvre  fweght  Lunayre :
Hys  JFlowrys  fchynith,  fayre  and  cler.

In  alie  the  Worlde  thaye  nave  non  pere,

He  ys  not  fowndc  in  no  maner  wyfe,
ButofaSchepehcrd  in  Godis  fcrvyft  :

The  good  Schepcherd  that  I her  rtiene,
Ys  he  that  keepeth  hys.Sowle  dene :

Hys  Flowrys  ben  gret  and  fum  ben  fmall,
Lykc  to  hem  thatgrowythin  Dale;

With  many  a vertu  both  fayre  and  cler.
As  ther  ben  dayes  in  alie  the  ycre,

Bro  fallyng  Ewel  and  alie  Sekeneys,

From  Sorowe  he  brengy th  man  to  Bles  5
Unto  that  blcfe  that  wce  maye  come,

Byth  the  Help  ofMarys  Sonne.*

And  of  hys  M oder  that  ys  fo  f re,

Amen  good  Zord  for  cherite.


Zx  3


Awnytni .


Schal  yow  td  wyth  hcftmodc,

Of  thre  Kynggys  thac  bcnfo  goudffj


And  hovv  thaye  cam  to  God  almyght,
Thcwich  wasthcra  fvvcct  fyght.


Ifigurc  now  hovvr  befiet  Stm3
FroHcven  wafe  fendc  downc  to  Sdmeit :


By  an  Angele  bothc  goudc  and  ftylle,"
The  wych  wafe  ihanChriftis  wylfc.  "


V1


Anonymu

The  prefent  of  hem  in  Bedlcm  than,

To  Cryft  brwght  Aurum  Tus  &Myrham.

Owre  Sol  and  Sulphir  wyth  his  Mercuri,

Both  Bodi  and  Soulc  wyth  oure  Luneyrc.

Aurum  betokeneth  hecr,  owre  Bodi  than,

The  wych  was  brwght  to  God  and  Man.

And  Tusallefo  owreSouIeoflyfc,

Wyth  Myrham  owre  Mercuryc  that  y$  hys  Wyfe

Herebe  the  thre  namys  fayre  and  good
And  alie  thaye  ben  but  onc  in  mode.

Lykc  as  the  Trenite  ys  but  on,

Ryght  fo  conclude  the  Thjlefefeers  Stent .

Thow  mayft  a fc  her  now  in  fyghr,

Off owre  Stem  figuriet  a right.  ;

How  fende  he  wafe  out  |of  Heven,

By  an  Angele  wyth  mylde  Stefyn.

And  by  hys  fygurc  thow  mayft  fe
That  hyt  ys  lyke  to  perfonis  Thrc.

To  Fader  and  Sonne  and  holi  Goft,

The  wych  was  and  ys  of  mytis  moft;

Into  hys  blyfc  now  come  wec,

Amen  goud  Lord  for  cheytc.


I


3«


zA  nonymi.

^fhewyouherea  fhort  Conclufion,

, To underftand  itifye havegrace ,
iWrighten  vvithout  any  deluEon*-
Comprehended  in  a litle  fpace .
All  that  in  this  Booke  wrighten  is,

Inthis  place  comprchended  is,

Hovv  Nature  worketh  inhcrkinde,

Kecpe  well  this  Leflon  in  your  minde :

I have  declared  miclc  thing,

If  you  have  grace  to  keepc  in  minde,

How  that  our  Principle  is  One  thing,
More  iirNumber  and  One  in  kindc  j
For  there  ben  things  Sevcn
That  in  a Principle  doe  dwell,

Moft  precious  under'  Hevcn,

I have  fo  fworne  I may  not  teli.

In  this  Booke  I fhew  to  you  in  wrighting,
As  my  Brethcren  doe  eachone,

A fimilitude  of  evcry  like  thing,

Of  thc  which  we  make  our  Stone.

Our  Stone  is  made  ofone  fimple  thing,
That  in  him  hath  both  Soule  and  Lyte,
HeisTwoand  Oneinkinde,

Married  togetheras  Man  andWife :

Our  Sulphur  is  our  Mafculine,

Our  Mercury  is  our  Femeninc,

Our  Earthis  our  Watercleerc*

Our  Sulphur  alfo  is  our  Fier,

And  as  Earth  is  in  our  Water  cleare,

Soc  is  Aer  in  our  Fier.

Now  have  yee  Elements  foure  of  might.
And  yet  thcrc  appereth  but  two  in  fight }
Water  and  Earth  ye  may  well  fee,

Fier  and  Aer  be  in  thcm  as  quality :


Anonymi .

Thys  Scyence  maie  not  bc  taught  to  evcry  one,

He  were  acurft  that  fo  fchould  donc  :

How  fchould  y.e  have  Scrvants  than  *

Than  non  for  other  vvould  ought  done,

To  tyl  thc  Lande  or  drive  the  Plough,

For  ever  cch  man  would  bc  proud  cnough ;

Lerned  and  leude  would  put  them  in  Preflc,

And  in  their  workcs  be  full  bufie,

Butyet  they  have  but  little  increfe,

The  writings  to  them  is  fo  mifty.

It  is  full  hard  this  Scyence  to  finde.

For  Fooles  which  labour  againft  kinde;

This  Science  I pray  you  toconcealc,

Or  elfe  with  it  ao  not  you  mcale,

For  and  ye  canot  in  it  prcvailc,

Ofmuchforrowrhenmay  you  teli  :

By  fuddain  mooving  of  Elements  Nature  may  be  letted,
And  whcr  lacks  Decottion  no  perfc&ion  may  be,
Forfome  Body  with  leprofy  is  infc&ed  5
Raw  watery  humors  caufe  fupcrfluity :

Therefore  the  Philofopher  in  his  reafon  hath  contrivcd
A pcrfeft  Medicine,  for  bodyes  that  be  fick,

Of  ali  infirmetycs  to  be  releeved,

This  heleth  Nature  and  prolongeth  lyfeeak;

This  Medicine  of  Elements  bcing  perfe&ly  wrought,
Receypts  of  thc  Potccary  wc  neede  not  to  buy,

Their  Druggs  and  Dragms  we  fct  at  nought,

With  qtiicfpro  que  they  make  many  a Iy.

Our  Aurum  potabile  Nature  will  incrcafe,

Of  Philofophers  Gold  if  it  be  pcrfe&ly  wrought,

The  Phifitians  with  Minerali  puteth  him  in  prcfe :

Litleit  availcth  or  elfe  right  nought.

This  Scyence  fhall  ye  finde  in  the  old  bokc  of  T nrb ;

Hovv  perfe&ly  thisMedicine  Philofophers  have  wrought.


?55


Anonymt.

Rofary  vvith  himalfo  doth  rccord,

More  thcn  four  Flements  wc  occupie  nought  •,
Comune  Mercury  and  Gold  wc  none  occupie,

Till  we  perfe&ly  havc  made  our  Stone ,

Then  with  them  two  our  Medicine  we  Multiply,
Other  rccepts  of  thc  Potecary  truly  wc  have  none.

A hundrcd  Ounces  of  Saturne  ye  may  welltake  *
Seeth  them  on  the  fire  and  melt  hira  in  a mould,

A Projc&ion  with  your  Medicin  upon  hem  makc,

And  anon  yec  fhall  alter  him  into  fine  Gold  *

One  Ounce  upon  a hundred  Ounces  is  fufficient,

And  fo  it  is  on  a thoufand  Ounces  perfe&ly  wrought,
Without  diflfolucion  and  Subtillant?

Encreafing  of  our  Medicine  eis  have  we  nought»

Ioy  eternall  and  everlafting  blifie,

Ite  to  Almyghty  God  that  never  fchal  mifif.


I n fome  Qopies  Ifound theje  following
Verfes  fet  before  tbis

EArthoutofEarthclenfed  pure,

By  Earth  of  himfelfc  through  his  nature,
Re&ifiedby  his  Milke  who  canittye,

And  afterward  united  vvith  Watcr  of  lyfe  truly :

A Dragon  lying  in  his  deepe  dennc,

Rotting  in  Water  to  Putrefic  thcn  :

Leproufe  hugeand  terrible  infight,

By  bathing  and  balning  the  Dragon  comcth  to  Iight  •,
Evcrmor  drovvned  in  chebottome  ofhis  Well,
Tylall  hisLeproufie  willnolonger  dwcll.

In  his  ovvne  Nature  he  altereth  cleanc
Into  a pure  fubftance,  ye  wat  what  I meanc.
Ijhewyott  here  a Jhort  Conclujton , &c.


Anonymi.

Hy  art  thou  fo  Poorc  and  I fo  Rich,
Aboundance  of  Trcfurc  in  me  thowmaift
In  ali  the  World  I am  nothing  fo  lichc;

As  Man  that  is  fo  proginitous  to  my  kynde,
TheRych  man  on  the  Poorc  hath  nopity.
In  methercfore  have  thowaffiance,

Itis  oft  tymes  feenein  Towne  and  Cittie  :

He  is  cvyll  at  eafe  that  hath  no  Craft  norScycnce.

The  Ryche  men  of  the  Poore  now  havegrcate  difpighr,
That  thcy  fhould  wyth  thyr  cunyng  any  good  thing  wyn$
And  togivcto  the  Poore  almes  they  have  no  delight,
Lytle  is  the  Charity  that  is  them  within,

And  Enfample  o f Dives  as  the  Scripture  can  teli,

Poore  La^er/fi  at  his  Gate  for  dcfault  dyed  •

Had  he  given  him  Almes  hc  had  not  gon  to  hell,

Now  for  to  repent  him  truly  it  is  too  late.

Man  thou  haft  no  goods  but  God  doth  them  fcnd,
Depane  with  thy  Brother  as  God  doth  thee  Comand.
Thy  lyfe  that  wyll  the  bctteramend,

Dtath  vvill  with  thee  make  a fuddainehand,

Thy  worldly  goods  thow  fchalt  forfaken  :

Give  every  Beaft  againe  his  duc.

And  than  fchall  thy  body  bc  full  nakcd  :

Death  on  the  will  nothing  rue.

Why  fo  far  and  I fo  nearc  ?

Haft  thou  no  grace  Man  mctomeetc,

SoofrynasI  to  the  doappcare;

And  yet  of  me  thou  takeft  no  keepc.

In  common  Mercury  thou  doeft  me  fecke  :

In  Alkaliand  in  Alembrok-e,

In  common  Sulphur  and  Arfenick  cke,

Which  makes  many  a man  to  dote.

Common  Mercury  is  not  good.

It  bringeth  many  a man  to  carc;

Aaa  2


It


Anonymi .

' It  makes  his  Haire  grow  through  his  hood.

And  his  Purfe  boin  thin  and  barc.

Mercury  and  I are  of  allye}

But  fhe  with  rae  may  not  compare  ;

In  nature  fhe  is  both  cold  and  dry,

Therefore  I counceli  thee  to  beware  :

Many  a man  fhe  makes  full  bare5
Becaufe  Hic  lacks  humidity,

On  her  to  fpend  they  would  fpare,

Shebrings  many  a man  to  poverty.

I am  Ilie  which  wife  men  feeke,

Mercury  which  is  moft  of  might ;

Hot  and  moyft,  light]and  weakc,

Of  the  Hlemcnts  I am  full  right,

Water,  Earth,  Aireand  Fire,

Quality,  and  Quantity,  you  can  never  have  your  defire,
Without  Concoction  perfe&ly,

Great  riches  in  us  bc,

Who  hath  grace  us  for  to  know3
By  vertue  of  her  humidity,

In  the  Fireour57(we  doth  grow.

Thou  needy  man,  where  is  thy  minde  *

I counceli  thee  this  leffon  leare :

Our  Mercury  is  but  of  one  thing,

In  our  Vtffell  thin  and  cleere.

Common  Mercury  in  him  is  none,

Neither  Gold  not  Silver  in  him  none  is  5
Of  Mcttalls  wc  make  not  our  Stone,

By  proportion  more  or  Icffe,

All  manncrofMettalls  vve  deny,

Untill  the  time  our  Stone  bc  wrought,

Ali  other  Receipts  wedtfie
Thatof  the  Potecaryes  bebought,

With  all  Spices,  favconely  Mercury.

Gould


Anonymi.

Gould  with  him  ftands  us  in  fteed,

Our  Medicine  for  to  Mulriplie,

After  our  Phificks  Stonc  be  Red.

A rrue  Leffon  I have  thee  tought,

Pray  for  me  and  forget  it  nought :

Many  Bookes  mayft  thou  fce,

That  is  not  writ  fo  openly.

And  as  I am  true  Chriftian  man,

A truer  Booke  Hndeft  thou  none  t

o 7

And  thou  wiltofthis  Scyence  leare
In  richcs  thou  ihalt  have  no  peare5
He  that  made  this  Booke  hath  it  well  preved,
Thebctter  therefore  he  maybe  beleived;
Thcrefoec  I pray  you  for  charity,

To  keepe  this  Booke  very  fecretly.

If  any  man  this  Science  of  you  will  cravc,
Knovv  he  be  Sapient  that  the  Coppy  fhall  have
I made  it  not  for  every  man,

Ncither  for  them  that  lirle  good  can,

But  for  me  and  for  my  Brothcr,

Such  as  have  Reafon  and  noother
Keepe  this  Leflon  well  in  minde,

Beware  thou  worke  not  againft  Kinde  -
And  in  thy  Worke  make  no  greate  haft,

That  thoulabour  not  in  waft:

Worke  in  light  and  not  in  darke,

And  ask  Councell  of  a Clerke  :

Elfc  may  you  both  lightly  fayle,

Without  you  have  both  good  Counfaylc.


Aaaj


Take


353


<tA  nonymi.


Ake  our  Rofe  with  the  red  Flo  wcr,
Which  thou  maift  know  by  his  Colour  3


(pjlplp!  And  him  knock  into  Flates  fmall,
A like  thin  beate  over  ali.

And  with  a Corofivc  good  and  fine,

F orthwith  drawe  the  fame  tyne  3
Of  things  that  bc  new  and  good,

And  diverfc  in  Nature  and  one  in  Moodc,
And  put  together  with  ftronggrinding,

In  Horfe  wombe  ever  abiding  *,

In  a Veflell  good  and  ftrong,

Thou  fo  it  rule  and  thinke  it  not  longe,

For  vvithin  a Moneth  or  litle  moe,

And  with  his  might  the  Body  flo  •,

Thy  Corrofive  will  thy  Rofe  fo  frett,

Till  hc  be  thin  as  Milke  in  Meate.

But  how  the  Corrofive  made  fhalbe,

I will  it  fhew  plainely  to  thee  3
As  I faid  to  thee  before,

ElfTknoweft  thou  litle  of  this  lore.

Take  Maidens  Urine  younge  of  age,
Afhes,  Salr,  and  Lyme,

Of  him  together  make  a mariage.

Then  the  Corrofive  is  both  good  and  fine:
For  without  this  Corrofive  lliortly  faid,
Wellcompound  together  in  One,

Ali  your  Worke  is  but  voyd  3
As  Pbilofophers  write  every  echone:

For  Dodors  both  to  lay  and  Clearke,
Written  that  our  firfl  Warke
Is  to  bring  our  Body  ali  and  fome  3
And  him  to  reduce  in  Mercurium.

Then  is  our  Worke  well  begun,

I f the  firft  love  be  thus  wonc.


Now


Anonymu

Novvfay  Philofephcrs  muchmore,
Our  fecond  Worke  if thou  wilr  know,
Labour  vvith  paine  and  travcll  thcreforc :
And  God  is  rcady  thce  i:  to  fhcvv,
Tobringour  Water  intoAir,

Of  Phile fophers  the  fccond  verfc,

Spare  not  to  worke  and  be  not  afraid  5
For  fo  it  vvill  be  without  lefe,

But  yet  be  wife  in  the  Warke,

For  hafty  men  ncvcr  lack  vvoe :

And  aske  the  Coundl  of  a Clarke,

For  fober  thrift  is  beft  thcreto.

And  fo  Continue  night  and  day
I thee  charge,  and  fleepe  thee  not.

For  in  fix  Weekes  truly  in  fay,

All  into  Earth  it  wilbe  brought  r
So  the  Fyre  continued  be,

Every  Deco&ion  to  even  meafurc.

And  after  that  fyre  his  quality,

Thou  muft  all  the  Worke  rule,

For  vvhen  it  is  in  Earth  fullblack,
Thenisitour  black  Stone,

Hc  is  fo  ftrong  he  may  not  lack,

Tyll  all  thy  Worke  be  y done.

The  third  degree  as  I thee  fay,

Of  our  Stone  now  black  as  pitch,
Thou  muft  him  wafh  with  waters  gay  5
Andvnake  him  whitefor  fodid  Ich*,
And  when  thou  haft  vvafhc  him  cleane,
Thenishis  blacknesgonej
Then  is  he  bright  and  fhine.

As  Carbuncle  or  Beril  ftone :

But  ere  he  come  to  that  degree,

It  wilbe  labour  but  thinke  not  long.


Anonymi,

For  many  a Colour  change  will  he,
Browne,  Red,  Ruflct,  evcr  amonge :
Aftcrtliat  tomany  othermo,

Greene,  Blevv,  Pale  and  Whytc,

But  all  thefe  let  them  goe,
Theyarenotto  thyprofit.

And  when  thou  haft  thus  wrought,

By  fiK  wcckes  and  aday,

Thcn  is  the  Earth  truly  fought,

A white  powder  collor’d  in  fay  :

But  then  fparc  the  fyre,

And  bate  him  even  to  meafurc  •,

And  vvithinamonth  and  litlemo,

The  Whyte  Stone  hath  nigh  fure  done,
Which  will  fliine  and  melt  as  vvax ,

He  rauft  needes  Maftcries  do,

The  Spirit  and  Soule  make  him  fo  laio*
That  all  other  kindes  he  tourne  him  to.
Then  Ferment  him  with  his  like,

By  joyning  of  true  Deco&ion,

And  feedc  him  forth  by  litle  and  lite,
That  both  rogether  be  brought  in  one,
In  Colour  fight  and  Demcane,

That  there  be  no  divihon :

As  thou  haft  wrought  fo  will  it  prove,
Take  heede  how  thou  haft  done
In  this  worke  of Conjundion  5
Thou  llialt  fe  marvells  greatc,

Both  going  up  and  Corning  downe,
OiColours  fpringing  bythehcate:
Forthefoule  that  is  fo  withhcld,
Andthefpiric  that  is  fobrighr,

If  meli  it  fcenc  fay  they  vvould,
Certainc  it  vvcrc  a wondrous  fight,


Anonymi.

And  all  this  is  paft,

That  God  and  K ndc  hath  done  his  curc,
OftheWhytc  Stoncbe  notagaft,

Hc  vvill  nor  flee  buc  bidethcFyrc.

Now  farthcr  if  thou  wilt  Worke,

To  havc  the  rcady  way,

Take  good  hecdc  and  bc  not  dull ,

For  ile  teli  thee  the  truth  in  fay:

Hold  ahvaie-s  as  thou  did
Bcfore  in  the  other  Stone,

Thou  cannot  faile  God  be  thy  fpede.

As  Clcrkes  write  every  one.

For  your  Fyrc  wilt  him  dere,

So  it  be  diy  and  laftingly ;

Save  other  while  the  changing  chearc,
Till  he  have  fottill  fafting  and  flye.

Firft  I wot  well  change  he  woll,

Into  Citrinc  and  pure  degree ;

And  after  that  Colour  is  full,

Hc  (hall  never  but  be  White  ay,

After  that  Tawny  and  Colour  de  Pale,
Hc  changeth  often  in  fuch  lay :

Till  he  be  Red  withouten  faile.

As  good  Coroll  or  Rofc  in  May.
Thendreadhc  nothingl  wis,

Of  this  Worlds  adverfity.

An  Eraperour  of  conqueft  then  he  is,
The  Philofethcrs  faync  worthy  to  be :
And  when thou haft  thus  done,

And  thercof  fcene  the  privity,

Thanke  God  and  Chrift  his  only  Son.
Togcther  with  our  bleflcd  Lady.


Anonymu


361


A


Ake  of  thc  egcr  bloud  that  is  fo  Red,

Anddiftill  that  by  Lymbick.dll  it  bebrighr,

Thcrcvvith  diflolvethe  Philofphers  lead,

Filtering  it  till  it  be  cleere  in  fight,

Evaporating  it  ifye  do  right.

And  from  the  Medicine  with  ftrong  Fier,  ,

Diftillour  Mercury  moftofmyght,

Rede  as  blood  and  ftrong  of  Eyre,

And  there  you  have  your  Stone  I wyfle,

Conteyning  in  them  all  that  you  neede ,

The  Erth  thereof  true  Ferment  is..

Of  our  purpofe  yf  you  will  fpeede ,

In  other  Bokes  vvhatfoever  you  Reede,

From  this  Do&rine  you  never  flitt ,

But  further  with  thefe  Stonesproceedc  *)

Intofoure  Elemcmsdividing  it  ,'77  ; '7  >:  oi.

Ayre,  Watcr  and  Qyle  well.  rc&ified,  i'

The  Earth  by  boyling  make  white  as  Whale  bone;,

Againe  together  them  neately  joyne,

And  of  them  make  a precious  ftonc ;

The  matter  goeth  to  the  White  alonc,  r !

This  Ariflotle  tought  Alexander. his  lore,,

The  Stone  thus  fixed  make  fugitive^

Againe  with  Aer  referved  in  Store  5
And  then  againe  make  fixbely ve:

Multiply  it  in  oneand  more,.  • ; 1,1 . - j oc.. ..  t -

With  Nature  and  Oyle  referved  in  ftore,  i 7 -
Both  white  and  red  as  you  did  firft,

This  fccrct  made  me  ftudy  full  fore,

Many  anighterclit  wyfte;  M


a


For


Anonymt .

For  ray  Mafter  from  me  it  hidd.

Now  is  one  point  yct  behind,

With  this  Stone  that  triuft  be  done :
Ingendering  him  of  Watcr,  Ayr  and  Windc,
The  Red  on  Sun  the  White  on  Moonc,
Molten  Iooke  thow  caft  full  foonc  ;

And  Multiply  in  them  their  Tinfturc,

And  then  take  of  the  powdcr  with  a fpoonc,
And  ftraine  it  on  Mercury  hott  and  pure 5
And  a marvelous  Battell  thow  flialt  fc  foonc
Bctwcenethat  and  the  faid  Mercury,

Eithcr  it  will  tume  it  Sun  or  Moone ,

And  then  thou  lbalt  theMaftery  unfold,

And  thus  proccedmg  Multiply,

In  every  tning  as  I have  tould*

And  thus  endeth  our  PHILOS  OP  HT.


He  World  is  in  a Maze,  and  wot  youwhy'
Forfooth  of  late  a great  rich  Man  did  dyc  5
And  as  he  lay  a dying  in  his  Bed,

Tire fe  words  ih  fecrct  to  his  Son  he  faid.
My  Son  quoth  he,  cis  good  for  thee  I dyc.
For  thou  ilulc  much  the  better  be  thereby ;

And  vvhcnthou  feeft  that  lyfe  hath  me  bereft,

Take  what  thou  findft,  and  where  I have  it  left
Thou  doftnotknow,  nor  what  my  richcs  be,

Ali  which  I will  declare,'give  Eare  to  me.

An  Earth  I had  ali  Venome  to  expell,

And  that  I caft  into  a mightyWell$

A Water  eke  to  elenfe  what  was  amifle,

I threw  into  the  Earth  and  there  it  is
My  Silvcr  ali  into  the  Sea  I caft,

B bb  z My


Anonymu

My  Gold  into  the  Air,  and  at  thc  laft
Into  the  Fyrc  For  Feare  it  ihould  be  found,

I threw  a Stone  worth  forty  thoufand  pound :
Which  Stone  was  given  me  by  a mighty  King,
Who  bad  me  wcareit  in  a fore-fold  Ringe :
Quothhe  this  Stone  isbythatRing  found  out,
If  wifely  thou  canft  turne  this  Ring  about  ?

For  every  Hoope  contrary  is  to  other,

Y^t  ali  agrce  and  of  the  Stone  is  Mothcr.

And  no  w my  Son  I will  declarc  a wonder,

That  fthen  I dye  this  Ring  muft  brcakc  affunder:
The  King  faid  fo,  but  then  he  faid  withall,
Althougn  the  Ring  bc  broke  in  peeces  fmall ;

An  cafy  Firc  ihall  foonc  it  clofe  againc  5
Who  this  can  doe  he  neede  not  worke  in  vainc,
Tyll  this  my  hidden  T reafure  be  found  out
(When  I am  dead)  my  Spirit  Ihall  walke  about ;
Makchimtobring  yourFier  from  the  Grave,
And  ftay  with  him  till  you  my  Richcs  havc  •,
Thcis  Words  a wordly  man  did  chance  to  here,
Who  daily  watcht  the  Spirit  but  nere  the  neerc ;
And  yet  it  meetes  with  him  and  every  one,

Yet  telis  him  not  where  is  this  hidden  $ TONE,


Anonymu


A

Dialogue  bttrvixt  tbe  Fatheb  and  the  S o n n e,
Conctrningthetmo  Principies  efthe BlessedStone.


Y Sonne  if  that  Sulphur  be  abfent  away,
Ourworke  is  reproved  what  ever  they  lay,
And  it  isWater  &Fire  as  tru  as  yourCreed
Which  conftraineth  a Body  till  it  be  dead  .•
Of  him  fhalt  thou  never  have  your  delire,
ivas  Lcad  through  his  otvneFire,
Idolikenour  Sulphur  to  the  MagnetStonc,

That  ftill  draweth  to  her  Naturally ,

So  with  our  Sulphur  the  firey  Woman  Mercury,

Whcn  fhe  would  from  her  husband  flye.

Father  I pray  you  for  Charity,

Whcre  fhall  I this  Sulphur  finde  ?

For  I never  did  him  fc  with  Eye  $

Nor  never  kncvv  him  in  his  kinde.

In  our  Water  my Sonne  keepe  it  in  your  minde,
Wherchewill  appeare  fo  white  as  any  fnow,
Grammercy  Father  yc  be  full  kinde.

For  through  your  teaching  full  well  I know.

Now  tcach  me  the  Red  ftone  when  it  is  in  minde,

Howii  is  made  by  Natures  Law.

The  White  and  Red  be  both  of  one  kinde,

Now  haft  thou  my  Son  ali  thy  defire,

Whofc  tindure  by  growing  thou  fhalt  it  fo  finde,
Through  vertue  of  the  Sun  and  regiment  of  Firc
His  riches  there  hedoth  increafc,

Farre  pafling  ali  that  I can  name ,

Ifthcy  in  Firc  fhall  come  in  preffe  .•

Gune  isthcirglory  but  he  the  fame,

Bbb  3 For


Ftitber.


Son .


Father.


Son.


Father.


( iA nonymu

Forthe  vcrtuesof  thc  Planets  fcaven
Shall  have,  andalfo  from  the  Pole  of  hevcn ,
Since  thc  World  began  noe  Gemmeisfound
Equall  him  till  in  vertues  all}

The  Saphir,  nor  the  Diamond ,

The  Ruby  rich  behind  ihall  fall,

So  ihall  the  Tufkie  and  Carbunclc : \

Iftheyinfire  togcather  ihall  fight,

All  One  cxcept  ihall  loofe  their  might,

The  fire  on  him  hath  power  none,

His  Elemcnts  bc  fo  coequall.

An  Incombuftible  Qyle  is  this  our  Stonc
In  power  farr  pafiing  others  all.

In  what  Element  Fathtr  is  our  Sulphur  bright?
Is  it  in  all,  oris  it  in  one?,  „•

In  all  Sonne  he  muft  need  be  o.f  tighr,

For  Seperacion  of  Elements.  we  make  none : , J •
And  yett  in  them  wc  can  itnot  fet.

For  fcnfuall  matter  is  he  none,

But  equallitie  only  intdlc&uall,

Without  vvhich  our  Stone  never  fixt  be  ihall .
Qualitie  .^««ralfoe  groweth  in  thc  fire  5
Bctvvixt  the  White  ftone  and  the  Read,

For  Colours  many  to  you  ihall  appcare,

Untill  the  tytne  the  Woman  be  dcad :

The  vvfiich  things  if  ye,  ihall  not  fee,

Red  ihall  your  Stonezt  noe  timebee ; , i/

For  vvhere  the  Woman  is  iri  prefencc,

There  is  fnuch  moyfture  and  Accidcncc:
Watryhumorsthat  in  herbee
V/ill  drowneand  devoUre  ourqualityej : •
Remembcrand  thinkeof  Noahs  flood,ii  rr  i
For  too  much  Water vvas  never  goodil,  ri  r7  r;i
And  yet  as  qualitie  is  hid  in  quantitie.


Anonymi.

So  muft  in  Water  our  Earth  be :

Riches  in  him  thou  lhalc  much  finde,
Aftcralteracions  all  due  to  his  kinde5
When  Oyle  in  him  is  coagulate,

Then  is  our  Stent  body  made  liquefa#.-
When  Sulphur  Water  and  Oyle  bc  one ,

Indue  ctwlth  riches  then  is  our  Stotte.

I cannot  thee  teli  a richer  thing  •

Then  is  our  Stent  when  he  is  fire  dureing,

Our  Fire  maketh  her  fo  ftrong.

Father  how  to  make  our  Stone,  ~

Faync  would  I knowe  that  have  we  done  •

My  Sonne  with  lent  and  eafic  heate,  i
The  Elements  togeather  vvill  kindly  meate :

Hafte  not  to  faft  whilcft  they  be  rawc ,

Keepe  well  theFier,  oeware  6/  the  lowe.

Shutt  well  thcVeflle  leaft  out  pafle  the  Spirir,

So  fiiall  you  all  things  the  better  keepe  5
For  if  the  Spiritts  doe  pafle  you  from,

Rcmedy  to  gett  them  againc  have  you  none :

And  how  marveillous  it  is  the  Elements  to  mecte
Keepe  this  as  your  principali  fecrete,

At  your  begining  give  God  the  prayfe ;

And  keepe  your  Mattcr  in  heate  forty  dayes,

But  fo  that  all  things  be  made  eleare,

Or  elfe  you  are  never  the.ncarc :

And  within  this  tyme  itt  wil  be  Black  j
And  oft  chainge  colour  till  it  be  White,

There  you  may  ceafe  and  further  proceede,

By  mendinge  the  heate  to  your  mefurc  indecd  5
And  there  withall  now  will  1 end.

And  to  God  onely  thee  Commend.


San.

Father.


jo;hn


Anonymi.


•'j.Jrr  K.K.


5?£  it  $'6  v1?  *f4  * $!§  ^ j -r,$  $4.  v5£  <5^  $[4

Ittf  ■


JOHN  GOVVER

CONCERN ING

The  Philosophers  Sto  ne.

>

NDalfo  withgreat  diligencc,

Theifondc  thilke  Expericncc :

Which  clcped  is  Alcenomie,

Wnercof  the  Silver  multeplie  5
Thei  made,and  ckc  the  Gold  alfo.

And  for  co  tcllc  howc  itt  is  fo :

Of  bodies  feven  in  Speciali ,

With  fowre  Spirites  joynt  withall  j
Stant  the  fubftancc  of  this  matere,

The  bodies  which  I fpcke  ofhere,

Of  the  Plannets  benbegonne,

The  Gold  is  titlcd  to  the  Sonne:

The  CMooneof  Silver  hath  his  part,

And  Iron  that  ftonde  uppon  Mart:

TheLecd  after  Saturne  grovvcth.

And  J-upiter  the  Brafle  bcftowcth  5
The  Copper  fette  is  to  Fenus :

And  to  his  part  Mercurius  '■>

Hath  the  Quickfilvcr,  as  it  fallcth,

The  which  after  the  Bokc  it  callcth ,

Is  firft  of  thilke  foure  namcd
OfSpirits,  which  ben  proclaymed.

And  thcSpirite  which  is  feconde.

In  Sal  Armoniake  is  founde :


The


upon  the  'Pbilofophers  Stone .

Thethird  SplnteSulpkur  is,  - .r'i.  U

The  fourth  Sewende  after  this,  r . .

Arcennitim  by  name  is  hotte
With  blowyng,  and  wich  fires  hotc :

In  thefe  things  which  I fay,

Thei  worchen  by  divers  waye.

For  as  the  Pbilofopher  tolde,

OfGoldand  Sylvcr  thei  ben  holde,

Tvvo  pnncpall  extremitees,

To  which  ali  other  by  degrees ,

Of  the  mettalls  ben  accordant.

And  fo  through  kinde  refcmblant :

That  what  man  couth  awaic  take,

The  ruft,of  which  they  vvaxen  tyakc.,

And  the  favour  of  the  hardnes ;

Thei  ihulden  take  the  likenes ;

Of  Gold  or  Silvcr  parfc&ly,

Bnt  for  to  wotche  ic  fykerly  5
Betweene  the  Corps  and  the  Spiritc,

Er  thac  the  Metall  be  parfite.

In  feven  formes  itt  is  fette
Of all,  and  if  one  be  lette,

The  remnant  may  not  avayle,

But  othcrwifc  it  maie  nought  faylc ;

For  thei  by  whome  this  Art  was  founde,

To  every  poynt  a certayne  bounde,

Ordeinen  that  a man  may  finde,

This  Craft  is  wroughtby  wey  of  kinde  j

So  that  there  is  no  fallace  in  5

But  what  man  that  this  wcrkc  bcgyn ;

He  mote  awaite  at  every  tyde,

So  that  nothynge  be  lcft  afyde.

Fyrft  of  the  Dftillacion,

Poith  with  the  Congelacion,

C c c Solucion


1*9


37®


John  Gower


Solucion,  Diffcencion,

And  kepc  in  his  entencion,

The  poynt  of  Sublimacion,

And  forthwith  Calcinacion,

Of  very  Approbacion,

So  that  there  bc  Fixacion,

With  temperate  hetes  of  the  fycr3


Maiegette,  ofwhich  that  manyons
Of  Pbilofephers  whilome  write:

And  if  thou  vvolt  the  names  wite,

Of  thilke  Stotte  with  other  two,

Which  as  the  Clerkes  maden  tho ;

So  as  the  Bokes  itt  recordcn,

The  kinde  of  hem  I fhall  recordcn.'

Thefc  old  Pbilofopbers  wyfe,  vj  .
By  wey  of  kynde  in  fond  ry  wife ;

Thr eStones  made  throughClcrgie3
The  fyrftl  fhall  fpccifie,

Was  cleped  Vegetabilis  5
Ofwhich  the  proper  vertuc  is3
To  mans  heale  for  to  ferve*

As  for  to  keepe,  and  to  preferve,
Thebodyfro  ficknesall,

Till  deathof kinde  upon  hymfalh
The  feco.nd  Srone  Ithcbchote,  r <

Is  Lapis  Animalis  hote  .*

The  whofe  vertue,  is  proper  andeouth,
ForEareand  Eye3Nofe  andMouth;
Whcreof  a man  may  here,  and  fee.

And  fmcll  and  taft,  in  his  degree3
And  for  to  feele  and  for  to  goe3
Itt  helpeth  a man  of  both  two  *


i


The


37l


upon  the  'Phtlofophers  Stone.

The  witts  five  he  underfongeth
To  keepe,  as  it  to  hym  belongeth.

The  third  Stone  in  fpeciall
by  name  is  cleped  Minerali #

Which  the  Mettalls  of  every  mync,
Attcmpreth,  tillthat  thei  6enfynej
And  pureth  hem  by  fuch  a wey,

Thatall  the  vice  goth  awey,

OfRuft,  ofStynkc,  and  ofHardncs:

And  when  they  ben  of  fuch  clennes ,

This  minerali  fo  as  I fynde,

Transformcth  ali  the  fyrft  kynde,
Andmaketh  hem  able  to  conceive,
Through  his  vertuc  and  receive
Both  in  fubftancc  and  in  figure,

Of  Gold  and  Silver  the  nature.

For  thei  two  ben  the  extremitees,

To  which  after  the  propertees,

Hath  every  mcttall  his  defire,

With  hclpe  and  comforte  of  the  fyre.

Forth  with  this  Stone  as  it  is  faid,

Which  to  the  Sonne  and  Mooncislaide  *
For  to  the  Red,  and  to  the  White,

This  Stone  hath  powcr  to  profitC;

It  maketh  Multiplicacion
Of  Gold  and  the  fixacion ,

It  caufeth  and  of  this  babite,

Hc  doth  the  werke  to  be  parfite  :

Of  thilke  Blixer  which  mencall
Alconomy,  as  is  bcfalle
To  hem,  that  whilome  wcre  wifej
But  now  it  ftant  all  othcrwife  :

Thei  fpcken  faft  of  thilke  Stone,

But  how  to  makc  it  now  wotc  none.

C c c z


After


John  Gower

After  thc  footh  Experience,

And  nathles  grcatc  diligenCe,

Thei  fettcn  up  thilke  dede.

And  fpillcn  more  then  thei  fpede ;

For  ahvcy  thei  fynde  a lette,

Which  bringeth  in  povetee  and  Dettc  5
To  hem  that  rich  were  to  fore,

The  Lofle  is  had  the  Luere  is  lore:

To  gette  apoundthei  fpenden  fwe,

I not  how  fuch  a Craft  fhall  thrive :

In  the  manner  as  it  is  ufed.

It  were  better  be  refufed,

Then  for  to  worchen  upon  wene.

In  thinge  which  ftant  not  as  thei  wcne :
Butnotforthy  whothatit  knew,  n

The  Science  of  himfelfe  is  treiv  :■  • * '
Uppon  theforme  as  it  wasfbunded,
Whercof  thc  namcsyett  begrounded
Ofhem,  thatfirft  itfounden  out:

And  thus  the  fame  goth  ali  about,

To  fuch  as  foughten  befinfes,

Of  vetuc  and  of  worthirtes,

Of  whom  if  I the  names  call,

Hermes  was  one  the  firft  of  ali ,

To  whom  this  Art  is  moftapplied,

Ceber  thereof  was  magnified.

And  Ortolane  and  CMorien,

Among  the  which  is  Avicen,

Which  founde  and  wrote  and  grcatc  partic,
The  practickc  of  Alconomie,

Whofc  bokes  plainlie  as  thei  ftonde,
Uppon  this  Crafte  fe w underftonde.

But  yet  to  put  hem  in  affay,

There  benfullmanicnowaday,


upon  the  TbitofophersStone.

That  knovven  litle  that  thei  mene,

It  is  not  one  to  witc  and  wcne,

Informeof  words  thciittrcte;

Butyetthei  failcn  ofbeyet.

For  of  to  much,  or  of  to  lite,

There isalgate  found  awite:

So  thatthei  follow  not  the  line,

Ofthepcrfcfr  Medicine,

Which  grounded  is  upon  nature  ;

But  thei  that  writen  the  Scriptute;

Of  Greke,  Arabe,  and  Caldec,

Thciwereof  fuch  Auftoritec,

That  thei  firfte  founden  out  the  vvey,

Of  ali  that  thou  haft  herd  me  fey,

Whereofthe  Cronicke  of  her  Lore,

Shall  fronde  in  price  for  evermore.


Ccc


373


THE


374-


THE


VISION  O F


S”  GEO%QE  ‘RJTLEY:


Chanon  of  Bridlington.

Hen  bufie  at  roy  booke  I vvas  upon  a certeine  nrght,


I //V  This  Vifion  here  expreft  appeat’d  unto  my  dim-
fj£  (med  fight,

JP  A Toade  full  rudde  I faw  did  drinke  the  juce  of

grapes  fo  faft,


Till  over  charged  with  thebroth,  his  bowells  ali  to  brafl;


And  afterthatfrompoyfoned  bulke  he  calthis  venome  feli.

For  greif  and  paine  whereof  his  Merabers  ali  began  to  fwell,
With  drops  of  poyfoncd  fweate  approaching  thus  his  fecret  Den,
His  cave  with  blafts  of  fumous  ayrc  he  ali  be-whyted  then ;

And  from  the  vvhich  in  fpace  a golden  humour  did  enfue,  (hew:
Whofe  falling  drops  from  high  did  ftaine  the  foile  with  ruddy
And  when  this  Corps  the  force  .of  vitali  breath  began  to  lacke,
This  dying  Toade  became  forthwith  like  Coale  for  colour  blacke:
Thus  drowned  in  his  proper  veynes  of  poyfoncd  flood.

For  tearme  of  eightie  dayes  and  fowre  he  rottirig  ftood  :

By  tryall  then  this  venotne  to  expell  I did  delire.

For  which  I did  committ  his  carkafe  to  a gentle  firc :

W7hich  done,  a wonder  to  the  fight,  but  more  to  be  rehear'ft,
The  Toade  with  Colours  rare  through  every  fide  was  pear*ft,

And  V Vhite  appeared  when  ali  the  fundry  hewes  were  paft,
Which  after  being  tinfted  Rudde,  for  evermore  did  laft.

Then  of  the  venome  handled  thus  a medicine  I did  make ;

Which  ver.omc  kills  and  faveth  fuchas  venome  chance  to  take.
Glory  be  to  him  the  graunter  of  fuch  fecret  wayes,

Dominion,  and  Honour,  both  with  Worfiiip,  and  with  Prayfe.


A Ai  £ N.


VERSES


»»)(*>)()(»*»**.

fc**»**»*.);***  !«*.,{*»•>{»»»*»**


VERSES

BELONGING

TO

Afr^E  MELE  MATI  CALL
SCROWLE:

Suppojed  tobeinventedby  Geo:  Riplev.


Shall  you  teli  with  plaine  declaracion ,
Where,  how,  and  what  is  my  generacion :
Omogeni  is  my  Father,

And  CMagnefia  is  my  Mother :

And  A\ot  truly  is  my  Sifter,

And  Kibriek  forfooth  is  my  Brothcr :

The  Serpent  of  Arabia  is  my  name,

The  which  is  leader  of  all  this  gamc  :

That  fometyme  was  borh  wood  and  wild>

And  now  Iamboth  meeke  and  mild;

The  Sm  and  the  Moone  with  their  might,

Have  chaftifed  me  that  was  fo  light :

My  Wings  that  me  brought,

Hitherandthither  where  I thought
Now  with  their  might  they  downe  me  pull,

And  bring  me  where  they  woll,

The  blood  of  myne  heart  I wiff,

Now  caulcth  both  Joy  and  bliffe  :


37<*


Verfes  belonging

And  diflolveth  the  very  Sto»e,

And  knitteth  him  ere  he  have  donc  5
Now  maketh  hard  that  was  lix,

And  caufeth  him  to  be  fix.

Of  my  blood  and  water  I wis,

Plenty  in  all  thc  World  chcreis-
It  runneth  in  every  place  5
Who  it  findeth  hc  nath  gracc :

In  the  World  it  runneth  over  all.

And  goeth  round  as  aball:

But  thou  underftand  well  this,

Of  the  worke  thou  fhalt  mifif.

Thereforc  know  ere  thou  bcgin,

What  he  is  and  all  his  kin,

Many  a Narr.e  hc  hath  full  fure.

And  all  is  but  one  Nature:
Thoumuftparthiminthree,  _

And  then  knit  him  as  the  Trinity :

And  makethem  all  but  one,

Loe  here  is  the  Pbilofepbers  St  one.

1 :

THe  Eird of  Hermes  ismy  name,

Eating  my  wings  to  make  mc  tame.


IN  the  Sea  withouten  kfle,

Standeth  the  Bird of  Hermes :

Eating  his  Wings  variable,.

And  thereby  maketh  himfclfc  more  ftable;

Whcnallhis  Ferhers  beagon,

He  ftandeth  ftill  there  as  a ftonc*

Here  is  now  both  White  aud  Red,

And  alfo  thc  Stone  to  quickcn  the  dead,

All


to  Ttyleys  Samie.

All  and  fume  withouten  fable,

Both  hard,  and  nelh  and  nviiliablc
Under  ftand  now  well  arighr.

And  thanke  God  of  this  light.


TAKE  thou  Phoebus  that  is  fo  bright,
That  fitteth  fo  high  in  Majefty ;

With  his  beamcs  that  fhineth  foe  light,
In  all  places  where  cver  that  he  be.

For  hc  is  Father  to  all  living  things,
Mayntcyncr  of  Ly fc  to  Crop  and  Roote,

And  caufeth  Nature  forth  to  fpring  5
With  his  wifc  being  foote.

For  hc  is  falve  tocvery  fore,
Tobringaboutthysprccious  worke;

Takc  good  hcede  unto  his  lore,

I fay  tolearned  and  to  Clerk,

And  Omogeny  is  ray  Namc :

Which  God  fliaped  with  his  owne  hand.

And  Magncjia  is  ray  Damcj
Thou  Ihalrverily  underftand,

Now  hccrc  I fhall  begin.

For  to  teach  thee  a ready  way  :

Or  elfc  litle  fhalt  thou  wyn,

Take  good  heed  what  I fay ;

Devidc  thou  Phcebui  in  many  a parte  5
With  his  bcames  that  byn  fo  bright,

And  thus  withNaturc  him  Coartc,

The  which  is  mirrour  of  all  light :

This  Phebus  hath  full  many  a Namc,

Which  that  is  full  hard  for  to  know  j
And  but  thou  take  the  vcry  fame,

The  Pbilofophers  Stent  thou  fhalt  not  know,

Ddd


There


Verfes  belonging

Therefore  I counccll  ere  thou  begin :
Knovv  him  vvcll  what  it  be,

And  that  is  thick  make  it  thin  ;

For  then  it  fhall  full  well  like  thc.
Now  underftand  well  what  I meane.
And  take  good  hced  thereunto,
Theworke  fhall  elfe  litle  be  feene:
And  tourne  thee  untomikle  woc,

As  I have  faid  in  this  our  Lore,
Many  a Namc  l wifT  it  have,
Somebchindc,  and  fomebeforej
As  Pbilofopbers  of  yorc  him  gave.


ON  the  Cround  there  is  a Hili ,

Alfo  a Serpent  vvithin  a Well :

His  Tay leis long  with  Wingswidc,
All  ready  to  fly  on  every  fide,

Rcpairc  the  Well  round  about,

That  the  Serpent  pas  not  out  j
For  if that  hebe  there  agone,

Thou  loofcft  thc  verue  of  the  Stcne-,

What  is  the  Cround  thou  mayft  know  hccre.
And  alfo  the  Well  that  is  fo,deerc  :

And  eke  thc  Serpent  with  his  Tayle,

Or  elfe  thc  worke  fhall  litle  availe,

The  Well  muftbrcnne  in  Watcr  cleare,

Take  good  heede  for  this  thy  Fyre,

The  Fire  with  Watcr  brent  fhabe.

And  Watcr  with  Fire  wafii  fhall  hc  5
Then  Earth  on  Fire  fhalbe  put,

And  Water  with  Air  ihalbeknir,

Thusyc  fhall  go  to  Putrefaccion,

And  bring  thc  Serpent  to  redudion.


to  %i$leys  Scrowle,  37P

Tirft  hi  Ihalbe  Black  as  any  Crow,

And  downe  in  his  Dcn  lhall  lye  full  lowe :

I fwel’  d as  aToadc  that  lycth  on  ground,

Burft  withbladdcrs  fitting  fo  round,

They  lhall  to  braft  and  lye  full  plaine»

And  thus  with  craft  thc  Serpent  is  flainc  •

Hc  lhall  Ihcw  Collours  thcre  many  a onc,

And  tournc  as  White  as  wilbe  the  bone,

With  the  Watcr  that  hc  was  in,

Walh  him  cleanc  from  his  fin :

And  let  him  drinke  a litle  and  a lite.

And  that  lhall  makc  hira  fairc  and  white,

The  which  Whitnes  is  ever  abiding,

Lo  here  is  the  vcry  full  finilhing  :

Ofthe  White  Stone  and  thc  Red,

Loe  here  is  the  true  deed.


$0


/V  tU  & tU  4*  tk  ffc  4t  . v#>  4v  *U  jjb  4*  ,jV  4»  ^ '


Son.

Father.

Son.

Father.

Soni


THE  MISTERY

0 F AL  C HY  M 1 ST  S,

Compofed  by  Sir  Geo:  Rjpley

Chanon  of  Bridlington.

'v&  Hen  o in  V and  Phoebus  fhines  bright,  (ing
wThe  Elements  reviving  the  new  Year  fpring-
^Thc  Son  by  his  vertue  givesNature  &Lighr,
j And  moyfture  refrefheth  ali  things  growing:
In  the  feafon  of  the  Yearewhenthe  Sun  waxctnwarme,
Frefhly  and  fragrante  the  Flowers  doe  grow,

Of  Natures  fubtill  working  we  cannot  difeerne,
Noryetbyour  Reafon  we  can  it  notknow.

In  foure  Elements  is  comprehended  thingsThrec,
Animalis,  Vegetabilis,  Mineralis  muft  be,

Of  this  is  our  Principle  that  we  make  our  Stone,

Qjrality  and  Quantity  is  unknownc  to  many  one.

Quality  ( Father ) would  I faine  know ,

Of  what  nature  it  is  and  what  it  hath  in  his  kinde.

As  Colours  divers  which  on  the  ground  do  grow,
Kccpe  well  this  fccret  {Son)  and  marke  it  in  thy  minde.

Without  Proportion  'Father)  how  fhould  I it  know,
This  working  now  is  far  from  my  minde.

Nature  and  kinde  Son ) together  do  grow,

Quality  by  waight '> Son)  ibaltthow  never  finde.

To  feperace  Elements  Father ) I muft  needes  know,
Either  in  Proportion  which  be  more  or  lcfT,

Out


Son.


Father.


The  Miftery  of  Alchymijls.  381

Out  of our  Principle  fourc  Elements  thou  (halt  dravv,  Father.
Thou  flialt  nccde  nothing  elfc  that  necdcfull  is  •,

Our  Principle  in  quality  is  fo  pcrfe&ly  mixed,

By  vertue  of  the  Son  and  his  quality,

So  cqualy  Joyncd,  fo  throughly  fixed.

As  nothing  fo  Well  mixed  raay  be.

This  Principle  {Father)  is  butonething,

Good  ( Father ) tcl  me  where  it  doth  grow.

In  every  place  ( So»)  you  fliall  him  wcll  finde ;

By  Taft  and  by  Colour  thou  flialt  him  well  know  j
Fowlcsinthe  Ayer  with  it  doefly.

And  Fifhes  doe  fwim  there  with  in  the  Sea,

With  Reafon  of  Angels  you  may  it  diferne,

Both  Man  and  Woman  to  governe,

With  our  fixed  Body  (So»)  wc  muft  thus  begin.

Of  him  makcMercury  and  Watcr  cleare,

Man  and  Woman  is  them  within,

Married  together  by  vertue  of  our  Fire,

The  Woman  in  her  working  is  full  wild,

Be  well  aware  flic  goc  not  out ;

Till  flie  have  conceived  and  borne  a Chylde,

Then  allhis  Kin  on  him  flial  lout  5
In  their  workes  they  be  unftablc,

The  Elements  theybe  fo  raw?

And  in  their  Colour  fo  variable,

As  forne  ty  me  like  the  head  of  a Crow,

When  he  is  black  ye  may  well  like,

Putrefaction  muft  go  beforne,

After  Blacke  he  wilbc  White,

Then  thanke  ye  God  the  Chyld  is  borne,

This  Child  is  both  King  and  Emperour,

Through  his  region  both  far  andneerej
Ali  the  World  doth  him  honour ,

By  the  vertue  he  hatb  taken  of  the  Fire:

D d d 3 His


The  Mijlcry

Hisfiift  Vefturc  is  Whitc  and  pure,

Asany  Chriftall  ihining  cicere,

Of  Whitc  tin&ure  then  bc  you  fure ;

By  verture  taken  of  our  Fire,

His  firftVefture  that  is  fo  Whitc,

Bctokencth  his  Virginity,

A fimilitude  even  thereto  Iike,

And  according  to  the  Trinity :

Our  Medicen  is  made  of  things  Thrcc,

Againft  whichthe  Philefophers  cannot  faynay,

The  Father,  the  Son  in  onedegree,

Corpus^  Spiritus  & Anima»

When  Nature  is  with  Nature,  thou  mayftfruitc  finde,
By  proportion  more  or  lefle,

Inpradiifc  hereofmany  men  beblinde,

Becaufc  they  underftand  not  what  Nature  is  5
His  fecond  Vefturc  as  Gold  is  Red,

Inhis  Vcflell  bright  ftiining,

A Diadem  fet  on  his  head,

Richer  then  any  earthly  thing.

His  third  Vefturc  is  Purple  pure,

Like  Sun-beames  he  fhineth  bright  and  clere,

Of  Red  tin&ure  then  be  you  fure  .*

By  the  vertuc  he  hath  taken  of  our  Pire.

Mybeloved  Son  I commande  thee.

As  thou  wile  have  my  lovc  and  bleffing,

That  thou  to  God  knecle  on  thyknee,

Unto  him  give  laude  and  thankeing  •

Forthcisguiftsof  gracc  geven  unto  thee,

To  have  trevv  knowledge  of  this  worthy  Scytnce ,

That  inany  men  feeke  by  land  and  fea,  •

And  cannot  finde  it  for  any  cxpcnce  .•

I lliali  iheiv  thee  my  Son  here  a hid  S cerer,

Bccaufe  thouart  vertuous  inthyliving,


Of me  elfe  lhouldft  thou  nevcr  it  wcer.

And  for  thou  art  wife  in  thy  Councell  kecping.

And  thcreforc  I charge  thce  on  my  blcfltng,
Nottolhewit  toany  man  living.

For  it  is  the  firft  Principlc  of  our  blefled  Stone ,

Through  which  our  noble  workc  is  releeved,

Note  well  that  I ihevv  novv  to  thee  my  Son ,

If  Sulphur  bcabfent  our  workeis  deprived ;

Our  Sulphur  my  Son  is  Watcr  and  Firc,

Conftraining  the  Body  till  it  be  dead,

Of  hem  thou  haft  nevcr  thy  defirc,

Till  he  be  bloc  as  any  Lcad ,

After  all  this  hedoth  revive,

That  in  his  Vcffell  beforc  was  dead  5
I can  no  bettcr  in  my  reafon  contrive,

Then  to  figure  him  to  the  greate  God  head.

Foras  there  dycd  no  more  then  One,

Howbcit  that  there  be  perfons  Threc,

The  Fathcr,  the  Son  by  might  is  one :

The  holy  Ghoft  makc  our  full  Trinity  .*

A fimilitude  Iike  unto  our^rwe.

In  himben  things  three  which  be  conduded  all  in  one,
Our  Sulphur  is  likencd  to  the  holy  Ghoft,

For  he  is  quick,  called.  the  Spirit  of  $lyfc3
In  his  workingot  might  he.  is  moft.

Hcraifeth  our  Body  from  death  to  lyfe,

Many(my^»)  with  him  do  rife,

The  holy  Gofpcll  therein  isexperc,

The  number  my  reafon  cannot  contrive,

CMultum  & quantum  fruElum  adfert :

I likcn  our  Sulphur  to  the  AdamantStone,

That  Steclc  drawes  to  him  naturally,

So  doth  our  Sulphur  the  woman,

Whcn  fhc  from  her  husband  would  flye.


I


The  Mijlery

I mufegreatly  ( Father ) and  mcrvaile  in  minde,
Whcrcof  this  Stone  is  ingcndcred,

And  alfoofwhat  manner  of  kinde.

For  I have  traveled  many  a Country,

In  vallics  low  and  on  hilis  high,

And  fpurrcd  thercfore  of  focs  and  freind,

Yet  could  I ncver  that  Sulphur  fcc,

Nor  in  any  place  wat  I where  hira  to  finde.

-SVtfheismadeof  the  Elements,

That  God  hath  given  both  foule  and  Iyfe,

From  Mettall  he  may  nevcr  be  abfent.

For  hcrules  both  man  and  wife.

Father  I pray  you  for  charity,

Where  (hall  I this  Sulphur  finde.

For  perfe&ly  I know  him  not  by  quality,

Nor  yet  to  fore  know  him  by  kinde.

In  our  Watcr  Son  keepe  this  in  mindc.

For  there  he  vvill  appeare  as  white  as  fnow.

Gramarcy^t^rtome  yc  be  full  kinde,
Forthrough  your  teaching  full  wclll  itknow,
Now  Father  I pray  you  for  charity,

The  while  it  is  in  your  minde,

To  ken  the  red  Sulphur  that  you  will  teach  me.
And  then  I truft  your  Do&rine  to  finde.

White  and  Red  Son  be  both  onein  kinde,
Nowhaft  thcuall  thy  defire,

Keepe  well  this  fecret  and  dofe  it  in  thy  minde.
His  t indi: ure  and  grovving  is  by  vcrtue  ofour  Fire,
For  in  our  Fire  our  Stone  will  grow.

And  there  his  riches  he  doth  encreafe,

And  fo  doth  no  Stone  that  I do  know,

That  in  the  fire  will  put  him  in  preafe^

We  liken  him  therefore  unto  the  Sun,

That  to  ali  Elements  giveth  light.


3%


of  Alchymifts*

Never  fith  the  World  was  begun,

Was  any  but  hc  of  fo  much  raighc,

Were  he  never  of  fo  high  degrce, .

Saphir,  Diamond  or  Emarald  Stone,

The  T urcas,  or  the  rich  Ruby,

Of  ali  vertuous  Stones  fet  ower  alone,

The  greateft  Carbuncle  that  is  full  of  light,

May  not  with  our  Stone  Compaire,

For  if  they  in  the  Firc  Ihould  fight,

The  Carbuncle  of  vertue  ihould  be  full  bare,

To  deftroy  our  Stone > Son  that  will  notbe,

The  Eiemcnts  in  him  be  fo  equall ;

He  is  an  Oyle  incumbuftible,

Andofall  things  moft  imperiali»

In  which  Elements  ( Father ) is  our  Sulphur  in?
Is  he  in  ali,  or  in  any  one  ?

In  all  [Son)  he  needcs  muft  be,

For  Seperation  of  Elemcncs  makc  wc  none.
Sulphur  in  Elements  son  we  may  notfee,

By  Nature  in  ihtm  hc  is  fo  privily  raixcd.

In  Elements  he  is  a quality,

Our  Stone  will  never  clfe  be  perfe&ly  fixed.
Quality  (Son)  growes  alfo  in  firc,

Bctwixt  the  White  Stone  and  the  Redd,

For  many  Colours  there  will  appere,

Whilc  the  tyme  the  Woman  be  dead.

Father  muft  the  Woman  needes  be  dead  ?

Our  Stone  clfe  my  Son  will  never  be  Redd  3
For  whereas  a Woman  is  in  prefcnce,

There  is  much  moyfture  and  accidence,

Wetnes  and  humours  in  her  be , '

The  which  would  drown’d  our  Quality;

Perceive  well  (Son)  by  Noahs  flood  ,

To  much  moyfture  was  never  good.

Like  as  quality  is  hid  in  quantity.


Stn.

Father.


StK.

Father.


So


The  Mijlery

SomuftourErth  in  Watersbe,

The  riches  in  him  thou  flialt  finde,

After  alteration  of  kinde,

His  Oylc  in  him  is  congelate,

This  makes  our  Body  liqucfaft.

Sulphur  and  Oyle  all  of  one  kinde,

Which  makes  our  stonexkh  and  couloringj
I cannot  teli  thee  son  a richer  thing,

Then  heis  in  the  Fire  during,

The  Fire  to  him  may  do  no  wrong,

Sulphur  of  Nature  makes  him  fo  ftrong.

How  to  make  our  Stone  ( Father ) I would  faine  know.

In  foft  heates  my  C Son)  Elements  will  mecte,

Haft  not  to  faft  whilft  they  be  rawe.

In  the  Veflell  (Son)  the  better  thou  flialt  him  keepe,

Rulc  well  the  Fire  and  and  beware  of  the  Lawe,

Shut  well  the  Veflell  for  going  forth  of  the  Spirit;

Soe  fliall  you  all  things  the  better  kcepe ;

For  how  toget  him  againc  it  is  ftrange  to  know,.

It  is  hard  for  forne  mento  make  Elements  mecte»'
Keepe  well  this  Secrct  Son  and  God  daily  praife,

Put  into  thy  Veflell  Watcr  cleare.

And  fetit  in  Fire  full  forty  dayes,

And  then  in  the  Veflell  biackncs  will  appearc^

When  that  he  is  black  hc  will  change  tyte,

Many  Colers  in  him  then  will  appeare,

From  coulour  to  colour  till  it  be  white,

Then  it  is  tyme  Son.  to  changc  the  Fire,

And  meltthehcat  to  yourdefire;

And  if  you  will  have  him  White  ftill,

Then  muft  you  your  Medicine  apply,

A dry  Fire  put  him  till.

And  a moyft  Fire  naturally,

Till  he  be  made  fixed.

For  to  take  Mercury  before  his  flight.


of Alchymljls.  387

As  he  is  by  nature  privily  mixed,

Of  fufion  then  he  fhalbe  light,

Andifyouto  his  proportion  take,

Fine  Luna  then  will  he  raakc ,

Somicleofpiercing  will  hebe,

Bothfluxible  with  penetrabilitie  •,

And  (ito)  if  thou  wilt  have  thy  Medicine  Red,

In  a dry  Firc  thou  fhalt  him  keepe,

E ver  ftiflinone  ftced,

That  ncvervour  Veflell  come  to  vvet.

So  hard,  fo  heavy  and  fopeircing,  Sm.

( Fathtr ) this  a wonderous  thing,

So  hot,  fo  moyft,  fo  light,  fo  wet,

This  greate  Sccret  Father  will  I keepe,

So  white,  fo  red,  fo  profitable,

Of  ali  Stones  moft  incomparablc.

He  may  do  more  then  any  King,  FatUr.

He  is  fo  rich  So»  in  his  working,

Gould  and  Silver  men  would  raine  have,

Poorc  and  rich  for  it  do  crave,

Thcy  that  of  it  have  moft  aboundancc,

Of  tne  people  have  moft  obaifance,

To  ferve  them  both  day  and  night.

And  in  the  feeld  will  for  it  fight,

Therefore  St»  upon  ray  bleffing,

Keepe  fccretly  this  precious  cunning,

Of  thy  Councellmake  neither  King  nor  Knight,

If  they  kncw  they  would  fet  it  light  j
For  vvhcn  they  have  what  they  will,

God’s  curfe  wil  come  they  fay  the  untill ,

For  had  I wift  and  had  I wend,

That  commethcvermorc  behinde,

Our  Mercury  my  (So»)  is  white  and  thin,

In  cur  Veflell  fhining  bright  and  cleere,

Our  Sulphur  is  in  him  within,

Eee  2 Bur-


3^8  Tfe  Mijlery  of  Alchymifis .

Burning  him  raorethenour  dry  Fire,

He  Hxes  him  more  in  one  yeare ,

By  his  naturali  working  I underftand,

Then  doth  thc  Sonne  by  his  dry  Fire,

In  yeares  a long  thoufand.

In  fhort  fpace  we  may  havc  done,

When  our  Medicine  thou  wilt  aflay,

Thou  maift  makeboth  Sol  and  Lune.

• In  lefle  fpace  then  in  one  day.

Se».  Father  is  ic  Water  in  the  well  fpringihg,

©r  is  it  Water  in  the  river  running?

Other  Water{Father)  can  I not  finde.

Father,  No e{Son)  it  is  of  another  kinde,

Howbeit  it  is  Water  cicere,

Our  Sulphur  in  him  is  foecleving,’

He  may  not  bc  departed  by  any  fire,

X teli  thee 'the  throath  in  thisthing.

Se».  By  no  fir t{Father)  how  may  that  bc?

Father,  Fire  he  is  ever  brenning,

Our  Sulphur  is  made  of  thc  Sun  and  fuch  humi-
That  in  the  Fire  hsis  ever  during.  (dity.

Sm,  The  tyme  of  our  working  would  I knov/,

In  what  fpace  might  be  made  our  Stone,

By  Corne  and  by  Frut  {Son)  thou  maift  it  wcl
Onceinayeareitisaforethecdonc;  (know.

The  Sun  in  the  Zodiack  about  doth  gonne,

Througti  thc  twclve  Signes  once  in  a yeare,

Soe  long  it  is  eie  we  can  make  our  St  one?

Father,  Hafte  not  to  faft  but  rule  well  thy  Fire,

The  vertue  of  our  Stone  few  men  can  teli,

The  Elements  in  him  be  fo  mighty,

Aboundance  of  treafure  in  him  do  dwcllj
For  in  richcs  all  Stoncs  exceeds  he.

F INIS.  ' Jhe


r


The  Preface  prefixt  to  Sir  Geo:  %iplej  s
MEDV  L L A-
Which  he  mote  Ann.  Dom.  14.76.  and

Dedicatedto  Geo:  Nevell  thtn  Arch-Bijhop  ef  Yorke.

JGHTnobh  Lord,  W Prehte  Deere ,

Vouchfafe  of  me  the/e  Verfes  take,

Which  I prefent  untoyou  beere,

That  mencion  ofthe  Stonc  dotbmake,

OfWife  men  meetered  foryoesr fahe.

For  Which  ofy$n  thus  much  Icrave,

Yotsr  gentle  favour for  to  have.

2.  This  Stone  divine  of  which  Irnitt ,

Is  kyowne  as  One,  and  it  is  Three-,

Which  though  it  have  his  for  ce  and  might,

Of  Triple  nature  for  tobe,

Tet  doe  they  Mettads  jstdge  andtrj.

'And  catted  is  ofWife  men  all,

The  mighty  Stone  that  Conqtter  (hall.

3.  ‘Difdaineyon  notnoryetrefssfe,

To  learne  the  vertues  of  them  noW ,

By  which  y eu  may  ifyou  them  ufey
Tour  felfe  preferve  and  eke  knotv  howt}

Old  age  to  hidet  and  Yonth  otst/herve.

AndBrajfe  by  them  tranfmutedis ,
tAnd  egtr  Bodyes  clenfed  I ruis .

4.  Fined  alfo  and  made  fssB pure,

And  Atsrified  be  at  the  /aji.

The  firfi  ofthefe  Iyou  ajfure,

Rigbt  htsrtfuB  is  for  Aian  to  tafiy
For  Life  it  wiH  refolve  andrvafl.

OfCorroJives  made  corrupting  ali.

And  named  k the  Minerali.

- — gt  - ~ 28*


The  Preface

5 <Btit  Animali  the  fecond  is9
The  third  frjooth  the  Vegitable,

To  cure  ali  ttihgs  their  ver  tue  is,

In  everj  caufe  Vehat  foe  btfall \

Aiankinde  in  health  pre/erve  they  fbaU :
Renerveth  Teuth  and  keepcth  it foundt
As  trerv  by  proofe  the  fame  isfcund.

6 . And  here  I Veill  teachyou  plainet
How  for  to  make  their  Mixtures  pure  ;

In  order  faire  without  difdaine *

Imlltelljou  no  T>r came  be  fure,
Tleleeve  me  Vvhile  mylifemay  dure .
Looky  rvhat  rvith  mouth  toyon  I fay ,
deedes  (baU  prcve  it  true  alway .

7.  Tett  Jballfome  Figure  my  Meet  er  hide f
Leafi  the  Arte  rvith  Vvings  (bouldfiy  arwy9

And  foe  ae  vile  abroad  to  flide9

IVhofc  fenee ,or  Truth  cannot  decaj ,

And  rvithout  fraude  iVciU  difplay
The  matter  plaine  on  everj  fidef
And  true  likwife  rvhot  foe  betidei

8.  tAlthough  ere  thisyou  have  heard faj9
That fisch  as  practice  doth  this  Arte,

Their  thrift  in  A/bcs  feek?  alxvay  :

And  hame  at  length  rvith  heavy  heart9
Not  more  but  lejfe  to  make  their  part9
Tet  be  not  you  difnajed  therefore ;

Ne  feore  nor  fimnkefor  it  the  more •

9.  E ut  trufl  the  rvords  \\>hich  I jou  teH9
For  tmlj  I doe  fixtlj  faj ,

1 have  both  feene  and  bnoVvn  it  rvell%

And  rcittneffc  wil!  the  fame  alVray,

This  the  Marrovv  called  is  Ifay ,
tA  truerText  fnll  rvell  I vpot  e.

In  ali  this  World  finde  jballjoH  not .


loTben


to Ripleys  Medulla.

10.  Then  as  this  Writing  of  our  Wine,

IVbereof  I bringyots  here  a tafie  •

tyhofe  heavenly  fVater  pure  and  fine,

Doth  ali  things  Works  mthouten  Wajie,

Toyour  defire  the  bodyes  fafi
It  doth  dijfolve,  makelight  and  ope»
fVithother  things ,not  yett  offpokfn .

1 1 . ssfgainft  Tuatur  e yet  is  it  not ,

But  naturaU  as  may  men  trow,

Which  being  cleanjed from  his  ffiott,

There  Phoebus  fplendor  {hallfortb  fbtrve,

And  caufe  it  fragranti)  togroW  j
For  horv  more  fragrant  it  fhalbe,

Soe  much  of  Valor  more  is  hee.

1 2 . For  Phoebus  nature  doth  furpajfe,

And  bodyes  pure,  and  ek.e  the  sky,

It  doth  befhine  botb  Gorne  andQraffe,

The  Sonn  reneWethfrom  on  hye.

And  caufeth  things  to  fmctifie.

' Doth  mix,  and fix,  and  natureth,

Drives  plagues  aWay  and  nourifieth*

1 3.  Abandoneth,  draweth,  and clenfeth  the  Aire ,
Maketh  derrs  fweete,floods  and  humor t dry  ,

Maketh fofte,  hard,frreete  andfayre  j
And  purifieth  T^atures  perfectly,

By  his  Working  incefantly  j
It  maketh  ali  things  to  grow  Ifay,

And  chafeth  Vgl ) things  away,

14.  In  LaureRTree,  it  is  fuSgreene ,

In  Gold  it  lodgeth  glifiringly ;

It  decketh  Stones  rvith  brightnes  jheene,

The  fhintning  bodyes  are  made  therebj  s
But  ifyou  rvill  more  certeinly,

0/Phcebus  vertue  have  kjsorvledging ,

Then  Saturus  Chyld  mufl  yjfue  bring.


jpz  The  Preface  to,  &c

IS.OPiftor  meekedraX^fVater  cleere ,
From  btids  ofVynes  out  of  a Glajfe ,

^ Gold  it  ivere  ;

Which  'Vvilljougive  a Gummy  Maffe>

As  frctiout  as  ever  reas.

Thus  ivithout  fraude  made  epen  is  by  rvyfe,
The  Arte  ^hichyon  fbati  mt  dtfpife.

1 6 • It  muhiplyeth  and  maketh  alfo%

Gold  Potable  knore  thisfor  trefre,

By  it  are  things  increafed  foe ,

That  healththereby you  mayrenewe^

Te  learne  thofe  Secreats  dajly  fuet
Which  formati)  prolong  veetimay
Tour  Life  injoyfrom  <U)  todaj .

17.  For  although  many  hate  thk  Arte,'

Tet  it  is  precious  over  ali ;

T ry  and  difcerne  rvit  hin  your  hearte ,

By  ali  the  Lejfons  mijiicall ;

AGift  it  is  £celeftiall
Which  here  is  taught  tc  you  himby
That  prov  d it  hatb<ss4(furedl] .

1 8.  Thk  have  Imittenfor your  fake>

Net  in  vaine  Jlilet  but  order  plaine  ,

This  little  Booke  ofhimyou  take  ,
tVhichfrankly  doth  beftorvehis  paine •

T 0 God  commit  tinge  you  againe ,

And  ali  that  doth  Vcifb  Veetl  to  thees
In  any  place  reherefoever  they  bee.

1 9.  Ifjott  unbroken  long  tyould  kfepe ,

In  psrfefl  health,your  Veffel flill ;

Then  foryeur  Cannon  looke you  feeke >
Remembring  him  that  hath  good  will ,
Byyour  ajjfjlance  tofulfill :

And  in  fuch  fort  jour  IVorke  diffilaj}

As  found  maj  to  your  lawd  alway .


SHORT  WORK!

* ' > 1 # * . ' '

T hat  beareth  the!h(ame  of  the  aforefaid,
Author,

Sr glJRJ  T L er.

AVcKeavy,  Soft,  Cold , and  Drye $ (ly  i
Clenfe  him,  and  tp  Calx  grind  him  fubti-
|j  Diffolve  him  in  Water  of  the  Wood  j
Ifthoucando  anygood
Thereof.  take  a Tin&ure
AndEarthy  Calx  good  and  pure.

Of  this  maift  thou  nave  with  thy  travaile,

Both  Mercury,  Water,  and  Oylc ;

Outof  the  Ayrewith  Flamcsgreat,

Fire  into  the  Earth  doth  Creepe ;

In  this  Workc  if  thou  wilt  winn,

Take  heed  wherewith  thou  doft  begin.

And  in  what  manner  thou  doft  work,

For  loofing  thy  way  in  the  darke ;

And  wherc,  with  what,  and  how,  thy  matter  fhal
Itelland  Councclltheeas  my  Frend : (end ;

Makc  Water  of  Earth,  and  Earth  of  Water  *

Thcn  art  thou  well  onward  in  the  matter.

Fff


For  '


AjhortWorkeof

For  thou  (halt  find  hid  in  the  myre,

Both  Earth,  Water,  Ayrc,  and  Fire :

I teli  thee  my  Brothcr,  I will  not  flatter,

Of  our  Earth  is  made  our  Water :

The  which  is  cleere  whitc  as  Snow ;

And  mafces  our  Earth  Calcine  and  growc.
Blackneflefirfttothee  doth/hcw.

As  by  thy  pra&ifc;  thou  (halt  know  .*  ,,  , .

Diflolve  and  Calcine  of f,  and  oft ; (broughu

With  Congelation  till  the  Body  to  vvhitncs  bc
Make  the  Body  fluxible,  and  flovving ;

With  the  Earth, pcrfedf, and  teyning.

Then  after  Fcrment  is  oncedone;

Whither  thou  wilt  with  Sunne  or  Moene  y
Diflolve  him  with  the  Water  of  life,

Ycalled  Mcrcury  withoutcn  ftrife:

Put  the  Soule  with  the  Body,  and  Spirite
Together  inonc  thatthey  may  mectCj
In  his  Dammes  belly  till  hewax  grcat,

With  giviog  Drinke  of  his  owne  fweate
For  the  Milkc  of  a Cow  to  a Child  my  brothcr
Is  not  fo  fweete  as  the  Milke  of  his  Mothcr :

This  Child  thatis  fo  marveiloufly  wrought,

Unto  his  Heritage  muft  be  brought :

His  livelyhood  is  fo  worthy  a thing,

Ofabilitye  to  fpend  with  a King :

He  that  beareth  ali  this  in  minde,

And  underftandeth  thefe  Parables  all ;

WithScperation  he  may  finde,

Poore  and  Rich,  great  and  fmall  5
With  our  Sulphur  we  make  our  Antimony,  White  and
And  thcreofwe  makcourMcrcuryquick,&  dcad.  (Red;
This  is  a Mcttall  that  I fpeake  of  one  of  the  fcaven,

If  thou  bc  a Clerk  rcad  whac  I raeane.


There


George  Ripley.

There  is  no  Plannet  of  fix  ncither  great  nor  fmall ,

But  if  he  be  put  to  them,  he  will  Calcine  them  ali,
Unto  red  blood  he  muft  be  brought  *

Elfe  of  him  thou  getteft  right  nought:

Reach  him  then  with  the  Wood  Water,

Man,and  Woman  Clothed  under  onc  hatter.

In  and  ofthem  isconceived  a Child
Lovcly  of beauty,  mceke  and  mild  5
Out  of  the  Earth  with  dropps  ilrong,

Kourifli  the  Child  in  his  Mothers  wombe*

Till  he  be  come  to  full  age  5
And  then  make  thou  a Mariagc,

Betwccnethe  Daughter,  and  the  Sonne ,

And  then  thou  haft  the  Maftery  wonn*

Thebeginning  ofthis  Worke,  if  thou  wiltcrave.

In  holly  Writ  thou  Ihaltithave :

Both  in  Maffe  Booke  and  in  Pfalter
Yca  wrighten  before  the  Prceft  at  the  Alter :

Andwhat  is  Antimony  that  thou  flialt worke,

I have  written  to  thec  if  thou  be  a Clcrke ;

Looke  about  before  if  thou  canft  finde
Plainely  written,  which  makcth  men  blind :

Our  Wcrkc  is  bringing  againe  our  Mercury,

And  that  Pbilofopbers  call  Solucion ;

And  if  thou  loofc  not  the  uncleane  body,

Thou  werkcft  without  diferetion  5

The  Inbibition  of  Water,  is  not  the  loofing ;

But  bringing  the  Body  into  water  againe  turning :

That  is  to  fay  into  fuch  water,

That  is  turning  the  Body  into  his  firft  Matter :

The  fecond  Werke  is  to  bring,

Earth  and  Water  to  Congealing ;
ThccleanfingoftheThird  is  another
Ulnto  Whitcncs  j my  owne  Brothers

Fff  2 With


i9t


A fhort  IVorfy,  &c.


With  this  Watcr  of  his  owne,

That  is  full  marvalous  to  bc  knowne :

The  fourth  werkc  is  diftilling
OfWater,and  Harth  upfweating.

And  thus  haft  thou  by  onc  aflfent,

Earth,  Ayre,  Watcr,  and  Fire  •,  the  foure  Elements :
The  Aflics  that  are  in  the  bottome  of  the  Vcflell,
Lookc  thou  difpife  'thern  not  though  lefc.

For  I teli  thee  right  well,


There  is  the  Diadem  of  our  Craft.


r


i


. ' t


Ia
' r


JOHN  LYDGATE

MONKE  OF

&.EDMUNDS  BURY,  n

In  his  'Tranflation  of  the  fecond  Efijlle
that  Kfig  Alexander  fent  to  his
Maji  er  Aristotle,


iHan  Aljfaundre  as  is  Rehcrfyd  heer
' This  Pbilofophre  for  vcrtucs  manyfoold;
Sent  unto  hym  a fecret  Mcflengcer ,

Without  cxskus  to  come  to  hys  houfoold^

But  bc  agcyn  for  he  was  fecble  and  old ,

And  irapotcnt  on  thc  tother  fyde.

And  unyveldy  for  to  goon  or  ryde.


Butchiefe  caufe  why  Aljfaundre  fentc,

A purpoos  takc  and  a fanrafye,  '

To  declare  pleynly  what  it  mente  5
He  wyft  in  footh  that  in  Pbilofopbye ,

Wyth  other  fecrcts  of  ^Jtronomyc  :

He  was  experte  and  moofte  cowdc  undet  ftonde,
Thys  was  in  cheefe  Caufe  of  thc  Kyngcs  fonde.

Fff  5 Powder


Lydgate  out  of  tAriflotles

Powdcr  of  Planetys  and  mevyng  of ali  Sterrys,

And  of  evcry  heavenly  Intelligence  *

Dyfpofirion  of  Pces  and  ck  of  Werrys ,

Andof  cch  othyrftraungc  hyd  Scyence,»'

As  thc  fcvcnc  Goddys  by  theyr  Influence
Dyfpofe  thc  Ordcrs  of  Incantadons,

Or  of  fcvcnc  Mctsllys  thc  Tranftnutscions*
i ‘ , 01*

Withothir  Craftys  whichthatbefecrc,

Calculacion  and  Geotnancye,

Dyfformacions  of  Circes  and  t JMeed:

Lokyngc  of  Facys  and  Pyromancyc,

OnLond,and  Watir,  Craftof  Geomctrye.  \
Heyghtc  and  Depneffc  with  all  Expcryencc,

Thcrefore  the  Kinge  defires  his  prcfcnce?

But  for  all  this  within  himfelfc  a thing
There  was  a Secre  hc  kcpt  not  to  difdofe ;

Nor  to  publifhe  opy nly  to  thc  Kyttge ,

Takeyng  Example  by  two  things  in  a Roofe,

Firft  how  thc  Flower  greet  fwcctncfTe  doth  difpoofc :

Yct  in  thc  T horne  racn  finde  great  fharpneffe,

And  thus  in  Konnyng  there  may  been  a lykcncflc.

In  Herbe  and  Flour,  in  Writeing,  Word  and  Stoon,
Ech  hath  his  vertue  of  God  and  of  Nature,

But  the  knowyng  is  hyd  froo  many  oon :

And  not  dedaryd  tocvery  Creature,  t c.

Whcrefor  he  caft  twcn  Reafon  and  Mcafure :

T o fliape  awcye  both  the  Kyng  to  plcfc,

Somewlut  to  undofe  and  fet  his  herte  at  efc.


Secreta  Secretorum .

There  is  of  ryght  a grccte  differenee,

Twecn  a Princes  royallDignite,

And  a tvvcn  Cotnmons  rude  In  telligencc,  •

To  whom  nat  longeth  to  meddlc  in  no  dcgre,

Of  Konnynges  that  fhould  be  kept  fccre.

For  toa  Kyngcs  famous  magnificence.

And  to  Clcrkys  whichc  have  Experiencc.

Itt  cordcth  well  tofearch  out  Scripture,

Myfteries  hid  of  Fowlys,  Beeftc,  and  Trce,

And  of  Angcllys  mooft  fotyl  of  Nature  5
OfMyneralls,and  Fysihes  in  the  Sce,

Andof  Sconys  fpecially  of  Thrcc.

Oon  Myneral  anothcr  Vegetat
Partydon  Foure  to  lengthe  a Mannys  lyflfe.

Off wliych  I radde  oonys  among  othir  Stonys,

There  was  oon  calyd  Anjmal -

Foure  Elements  wronght  out  for  the  noonys :

Erthc,  Watir,and  Ayre,  and  in  efpecyall,

Joyncd  with  Fyre  proporcyon  maad  egal.

I dar  feyn  brcefly  and  not  tarye,

Is  noon  fwych  Stoone  found  in  the  Lapidaryc.

Irad  Oonys  of  a Phylofephre ,

Ageyn  ech  fyckencflc  of valeiv  doth  mooft  cure,

All  the  Trefurc  and  Gould  in  Cr&fm  CofFre  5
Nor  all  the  Stoonys  that  grow  by  Nature,

Wrought  by  Craft  or  forgyd  by  Pi&urc.

Lupis  & non  Lapis , Stoon  of  grcctcft  fame,
Arifiotiles  gaffit  the  fame  name.

And


Lydgate  out  of

And  for  I have  but  little  rad  ©r  feyne,

To  vvriteor  medie  of fo  high  matecrys,
por  prefumcion  fome  vvould  have  difdeyn
To  be  fo  bold  or  clymbe  in  my  defires:

To  fcale  the  Laddere  above  the  nyne  Speerys,

Or  medie  of  Rubyes  that  yeve  fo  cicere  a light,
On  hooly  fhrines  in  the  dirk  night.

I was  nevir  noon  expert  Joweleere,

Infuych  mateerys  to  put  my  fylfe  in  prees,

With  Philofopbres  myn  Eycn  wcr  nat  cicer,
Novvthir  with  Plato  nor  with  Socratees :

Exccpt  the  Prynce  Arijlotilees,)  ■■  < y\.  y-
OfPhilofophres  to  ^Alifaurtdre  Kyng,

Wrott  of  tnis  Stone  the  mervaylle  in  ali  werking

In  prevy  wyfe  lych  to  hys  Ententys, 5 •:  i ’
Secretys  hyd  cloos  in  Pbylofopbye,

Fyrft  departyng  of  the  foure  Elementys ;

And  aftyrward  as  he  doth  fpeceffye,

Every  ech  of  hem  for  to  rectcffye.

And  after  thys  lyk  hys  Oppynyon,

Of  thys  foure  to  makc  a Conjunccyon.

In fuych  wyfe  performe  up  thys  Stoon,

Seene  in  the  joynynge  there  be  noonc  outrage
But  the  fals  erryng  hath  founyd  many  one  *

And  brought  hem  aftyr  in  full  grecte  rerage,

By  Expenfys  and  outragyous  Coftagc.

For  lak  of  brayn  they  wern  maad  foe  wood,
Thyng  to  begynne  whych  they  not  underftood.


Secreta  Secretorum . . 40  r

For  hc  that  lyft  puttc  in  Experiencc,

Forboode  fecrees  I hold  hym  but  a foolc,

Lyke  hym  that  tcmptyth  of  wylfull  ncglygence,

To  ftonde  up  ryght  on  a thrce  foote  ftoole,

Or  fparyth  a ftcwc,  or  fysfheth  a bareyn  poolc.

Whan  aliis  doon,  hc gct  noon  othir  grace,

Men  wyl  skorne  hym  and  mokke  hys  foltilh  face.

Itt  is  no  Crafft  poorc  men  t’aflaylc.

It  caufeth  Coffers  and  Cheftys  to  bc  bare,

Marryth  wytts,  and  braynes  doth  affray  5
Yit  by  vvryting  this  booke  doth  dedarc,

And  be  Refons  lyft  not  for  to  fpare,

Wyth  Goldcn  Refouns  in  taaft  mooft  lykerous,

Thyng^rr  Ignotum  prcvyd  per  Ignorim,

Title  of  this  Booke  Labor  Philojophorum ,

Namydalfoc  De  Regimine  principum s
Of  Philofophres  Secreta  Secretorum ,

T refour  compyled  omnium  Virtutum ;

Reivle  dire&ory  fet  up  in  a fom.

As  Complcxions  in  hclthc  and  fekeneffe,

Dyfpofe  thera  fylf  to  mornyng  or  to  gladneffc.

The  whych  booke  dired  to  the  Kyng
Alyfaundre  both  in  the  vverre  and  pees,

Lyke  hys  requeft  and  royall  commanding,

Full  accomplifhed  by  Arifiotiles ,

Feble  for  Age  and  impotent  doubtles,

Hoolc  of  corage  and  tretv  in  his  ententj
T’obeye  his  byddyng  this  booke  he  to  hym  fent.

Ggg  HOW


Lydgate  out  of  rijlotles


iliiiiiii


ffow  Ariftotle  declareth  to  IQng
Alyfaundre  ofthe  Stonys .


TOwching  the  Stone  ofPhilo/bphres  Oeldt

Of  which  they  make  mooft  Soveteyn  mencyon  j
But  there  is  oon  as  Arijlotle  toold ,

Which  alie  excelleth  in  Comparifon,

Stoonof  Stoonys  raooft  Soveteyn  of  renoune  j
Towching  the  vertue  of  this  rych  thyng,

Thus  he  wrote  to  the  moft  fovereyn  King.

O AljJaundre  gretteft  of  dignite,

Of  al  this  World  Monark  and  Regent,

And  of  al  Nacyons  haft  the  Sovereynte  j
Echoon  toobeye  and  been  obedyent,

And  to  conclude  the  fyn  of  our  entent,

All  worldly  Trefure  breefly  fhet  in  oon,

Is  dedaryd  in  vertue  of  this  Stoo».

Thou  muti;  firfl  conceiven  in  fubftance,

By  a maneer  uncouth  dyvyfion  j
Watir  from  Eyr  by  a difleverance  .•

And  fyr  from  Eyr  by  a departicion,

Echoon  prefervyd  from  all  Corruptyon.

As  Philofophres  a forme  have  fpeceffyed,

Which  by  Reafon  may  not  be  denyed.


Watir  from  Eyr  departyd  prudently,

Eyr  from  Fyr  and  Fyr  from  Erthe  don,

The  Craft  conceyved  devyded  truly ,

Withouten  Errour  or  Decepcyon,

Pure  every  Eleraenc  in  his  Complexion.

As  it  perteyneth  pleynly  to  his  parte.

As  is  remerabryd  perfyghtly  in  this  Arte.

This


Secreta  Secretorum .

This  Stone  of  Coloar  is  fometyme  Citrynade,
Lyke  the  Sonne  ftremyd  in  his  kynd,

Gold  treflyd  maketh  hertes  fui!  glade  ;

With  more  Trefour  then  hath  the  Kyng  of  Inde]

Of  pretyous  Stoonys  wrought  in.their  kynde*

The  Cetryn  Colour  for  the  Sonne  bryghc,
Whyte  for  the  Morne  that  Ihyneth  ali  the  nyght.

This  Phtlofophre  brought  forth  in  PAris,

Which  of  this  Stoonys  wroot  fully  the  nature,

AII  the  Dyvyfion  fet  by  grete  advys ;

And  thereuppon  did  his  befy  cure,

That  the  perfeccion  longflaould  endure,

Lyke  the  entent  of  Arifiotles  foede,

Which  none  bat  he  cowd  well  bryng  on  hpnie.

For  though  the  mateer  opynly  nat  toold,

Of  this  Stoonys  what  Phylofophres  mente,

Ariftotiles  that  was  experte  and  Oold  j
And  he  of  Taris  that  forth  this  prefent  fent.

And  in  al  I hys  behefte  fey  thful  I true  of  Entent :

With  Circumftances  of  Araby  Inde  & Ptrce ,
Towching  the  Stoonys  that  Clerkys  can  rcherfe.

Hermogenes  hadde  hymfelfe  alloone,

With  the  feyd  Thelip  that  with  him  was  fecre,

Knewh  the  vertue  of  every  prevy  Stone  j
As  they  were  difpoofyd  of  Degree,

From  him  was  hyd  noon  uncouth  prevyte.

This  Hermogenes  and  he  knewh  every  thing,
Ofalle  fuych  vertues  as  long  to  a Kyng,

Ggg  2


4°5


T HE


Jnonymi.


4°+


THE

FIRST  QHATTER^


N the  narae  of  the  ho!y  Trinitie,

| I will  writc  of  this  Worke  breiflie  j
' Leavingmattersofcircumftance,

And  promife  the  truth  to  advance :

I will  not  write  Figuratively,

But  dedare  the  Mattcr  plaincly.

And  howthingsmuftbe  made  to  accord,

By  Natures  true  worke  and  the  helpe  of  our  Lord :

The  World  is  but  onc  indofed  with  heavens  round,
Though  divcrs  mattcrs  and  formes  be  therein  found;
The  Earth  this  worlds  Center  borne  up  by  the  Airc,

In  kindc  Irath  noe  more  but  being  baire,

And  neercft  to  not  being,  Philofephers  havc  told.

In  kindc  of  Complexion  is  full  dry  and  cold  ;

And  now  for  my  Figure  of  rotundity,

I will  Ihcw  how  Elcments  accord  and  difagree :

And  though  the  Elements  be  fo  contrary,

Yett  by  heavens  Influencc  they  are  brought  to  unite,
And  when  once  togeather  a body  they  binde,

Nought  may  thein  loofen  without  wrccketo  the  kindc.
Firft  Fircin  Nature  is  hott  and  dry,

Airc  differs  from  Firein  raoifture  only:

Earth  only  for  coldncfic  froiii  Firc  difagrecs,

This  Concord  and  difeord  every  man  fees:

Airehot  and  moiftof  complexion  and  kindc,

Water  differs  from  Airc  but  in  heatcwe  finde:

$oc


Anonymi .

Soe  that  in  moyfturc  \ve  finde  tlicm  both  one;

Naturali  hcate  in  Watcr  wc  finde  none  5
Watercold  and  moifterof  Complcxion  is,

Earth  differs  from  Watcr  in  dryncs  1 wis  :

Earth  agrccs  with  Fire  in  drynes  noc  doubtc,

Thus  one  in  another  chc  Wheelc  turncs  about.

From  this  round  Circle  proceeds  a quadrant,

Each  line  unto  another  an  equall  diftant:

And  as  the  round  Figure  concludes  ali  in  One,

Soe  the  Quadrant  of  foure  things  makcs  diftimftion.
From  this  Quadrant  a Fire  muft  procced,

Which  is  Animali,  Vegltablt  and  Minerali  \ve  recdc :

And  with  the  Fire  I will  begin-,

Pray  God  I bc  not  too  bold  therein.

The  wholcCompofitionof this  world  is  fram’d,

Ofthe  Thrce  things  which  before  I have  nam’d:

Now  to  makc  things  of  Excellende,

Wc  muft  takc  things  neereft  Nobilitic ;

And  as  this  greate  Maffe  contcincs  things  Threc,

Soe  Blood,  Flefh  and  Bone  in  the  leaft  World  we  fee  $
Yctt  leffe  World  and  greate  World  is  ali  but  One;

Thus  ftill  we  keepe  an  Unyon :

Whatfoever  itt  is  that  is  alive,

Without  Blood  they  may  not  thrive.

Sperme  is  Generacion  ofeachthing,

Of  what  kinde  foever  itt  bene  ;

Blood  is  Sperme  be  itt  White  or  Redd,

For  without  Blood  each  thing  is  dead:

Blood  contcincththethrecth  ngs  1 havctold.

And  in  his  Tin&ure  hath  Nature  of  Gold:
WithoutGold  noe  Mcttle  may  {hinc  bright,

Without  Blood  noe  Body  hath  bene  fitt  of  light :
Thus  doth  the  greate  and  lcfTc  World  ftill,

Hold  the  Union  according  to  Gods  will :

G g g 3 Now


Anonymi.

Now  ofall  things  Blood  Nobleft  is.

For  nothing  in  thc  World  may  itt  rnilfTe,

Blood  hath  truc  proporcion  of  thc  Elements  foure.
And  of  the  three  fpecics  I fpoke  of  bcfore:

The  Blood  muft  be  the  principali  matter  of  each  thing,
Which  hath  anymannerof  increafing  :

Mercury  in  Mcttalls  is  thc  Blood  ccrteine,

Spcrme  in  Animalis  getts  the  like  againe  5
Vegetable  moyfture  from  heaven  fogood,

Yctt  all  thefe  three  are  but  Blood  :

Then  Blood  in  procreation  is  neereft  of  kinde,

This  Secrettgood  Brotber  keepe  clofe  in  thy  mynde  :
And  uppon  that  Condition,

Which  Blood  thou  fhalt  takc  I vvill  make  repeticion  5
The  true  Blood  of  Mettalls  is  hard  to  have.

And  long  tyme  of  gettting  itt  doth  crave  :

Blood  of  Vegetables  hath  moyfture  greate  ftore.

And  thereforeto  have  ittrequireth  muchlabour:
The  true  Blood  to  finde  without  labour  and  coft,
Thou  knowft  where  to  have  it  ere  thy  vvitts  bc  loft.
Seekc  ouc  the  nobleft  as  I faid  beforc.

For  now  of  the  Matter  I dare  fay  noe  more.

This  Secrert  was  never  revcal’d  till  this  tyme,

By  any  Mans  writings  that  ere  I could  finde,

But  I which  by  pradtice  have  found  itt  true,

Kncw  how  things  caufed  things  to  renew  :

God  grant  noe  Alchymifh  meete  vvith  my  Bookc,

For  they  would  have  Elixir  by  hookc  or  by  crooke;
And  he  vvould  fpend  what  his  Freinds  vvan.

And  be  as  neere  at  the  laft  as  when  hc  began.

And  would  promife  to  give  men  Gold  greate  flore,
But  beware  thou  of  Expence,  as  I faid  beforc.


CHAP


Anonymt.


407


Chap.  1 1.

Of  the  marmer  of the  JVorkg.

NOW  aftcr  the  Matter  the  Manncr  compute,

How  tobring  this  our  Workeaboutc:

Firft  take  the  Matter  crude  as  itt  is,

Which  will  coft  you  littlc  or  nought  I wis :

Scarce  it  foe  clcane  as  it  may  be,

Untill  from  filth  itt  is  ali  free,

Which  wilbec  done  in  houres  threc  or  toure,

Then  will  it  be  cleare  from  his  ili  humour :

Then  take  the  Faces  which  you  fhall  finde.

In  the  fame  which  the  Matter  left  behind  :

Purgehim  alfo  with  thenobleft  Element,

Untill  that  hc  to  Earth  be  brent :

Then  have  you  a Stone  of  wonderiull  mighr,

With  fmall  Coft  a fecrct  right.

Takcyc  this  Stont  and  ufe  Mulers  Crart,

Till  it  be  fine  powdcr  and  made  very  fofe :

Then  give  him  the  moifture  which  from  him  ye  tooke,

Then  ufe  him  as  yefliall  finde  in  this  booke.

But  sive  him  noe  other  Drinkc  but  of  his  owne  kinde.
For  elee  you  doe  not  after  my  tnynde.

Lct  him  drinkc  noe  more  then  will  fumee,

Bcware  of  Floods  I you  advife:  .

Then  fearch  him  twiceagame  as  you  did  before.

And  ftill  put  uppon  his  owne  liquor :

Thus  their  firft  Order  to  paffe  is  brought,

And your foulcft  Worke fully  wrought.  A p


oJ nmyrni.


&


C H A P.  I I I.

Of the  fecond  Orcier •

T^T  O W thc  fecond  Manner  I will  fticw  plaine,  c *
•J-N  How  you  fhall  workc  it  with  little  painc :
When  your  threc  fearfings  be  done  aftcr  my  lore,
Then  brcake  the  Stone  as  you  did  before:  c
Then  muft  you  have  one  Vefchell,

Which  muft  be  made  likc  an  Eggflicll,

Into  the  which  Veflell  thc  Matter  you  muft  putt,
Then  fee  that  itt  be  well  clofcd  upp:

The  Veflells  divided  in  parts  three,

VVhereof  two  ftill  voyde  muft  bcc:

This  Veflell  muft  be  fet  in  a kinde  heate,

That  the  Matter  may  kindly  fwcate*,

The  Spiritts  muft  not  bc  oppreft  with  Fire,

For  then  thou  flralt  never  have  thy  defire^

Neithcr  muft  thy  Veflell  have  cold,

For  then  itt  will  fpoile  as  Fbilofofhcrs  have  toldj
But  keepe  itt  in  a temperate  heate  alwayes,

For  the  fpace  of  fortie  dayes:

Then  Blackeflc  will  appeare  to  fight,

That  Blacknefle  thou  muft  bringtobe  White.
akeout  t heGlafleatthe  forty  dayesend.

And  fe  that  from  cold  thou  doe  ittdefcndj
And  fet  itt  in  a Furnace  with  dry  fire,

TilI  itt  bc  White  after  thy.defirc,

Which  wilbe  done  in  Weekes  three,

And  drycd  from  his  moyfture  utterly :


Then


<iA nonymi.

Thcn  with  thc  firft  Waterrthou  firft  didft  imbibe
Againe  thou  maift  fecde  it  att  this  ty  de,

But  give  itt  noe  more,  nor  you  doe  thinke
May  fuffice  at  once  for  itt  to  drinke,

This  donc  putrefyasyou  did  beforc,

Even  in  the  very  ielfe  fame  maner.

And  in  the  faid  tyme  which  it  ftoode  beforc,

Itt  will  bccom  of  blacke  Colour,

And  in  the  fame  Order  if  it  congealc  White,

Then  is  your  Workc  both  perfeft  and  right  $

Now  you  muft  goe  lerne  the  Bakers  occupacion,  '
How  ne  Leavens  Bread  by  Fcrmentacion?

And  truly  to  Ferment  take  noe  piate  of  Gold,
But  parte  of  that  the  plates  doe  hold.

Youknovv  that  if  Sol  ihcw  not  a faire  Tin&ure,

Itt  will  be  had  but  in  little  honour,

' Then  Tindture  of  Gold  is  a moft  noble  thing,
Withagracctonoblcmen  ofour  workcing.

For  that  true  proverbe  doth  wcll  accord,

Bafe  things  bcpt  not  a noble  Lord.

Now  have  I told  you  what  Fermentis,

To  teach  you  to  Ferment  I will  not  miffe ;

This  Chaptcr  is  now  brought  to  an  end.

And  now  the  third  Order  to  ihew  I intend.


C H A P.  I V.

Of  the  third  Order  of  this  IV irke.

RECIPE  Sol  that  is  pure  and  good.

And  fee  that  from  him  you  take  his  pureblood,
Your  Stone  you  muft  divide  in  parts  three.

And  the  fourth  of  the  Ferment  muft  be.

Hhh


if


Anonymi .


If  you  will  have  for  Red,  and  White  too,

To  Red  after  this  Ordcr  you  muft  doe.

And  the  White  after  the  fame,

Muft  be  ferment  with  Lune  by  name.

And  the  matter  cqually  divyde

One  for  the  Red,  the  other  for  the  White.

Another  likc  Vcflfell  for  the  White  you  muft  looke,
Asbeforeistaughtyou  in  this  Booke.

Whenyour  Fermentsto  your  mattersbe  put,

Then  your  Veffell  clofe  you  muft  fhut;

And  fett  it  to  Putrifyc  as  yoy  did  before,

The  full  tyme  as  I faid  of  yore :

And  ufe  itt  in  every  degree.

As  in  the  next  Chaptcr  before  you  may  fee.

But  looke  that  you  knowc  your  two  Ferments  a (funder,
Or  elee  of  your  folly  itt  werc  great  wonder:

And  vvhen  from  his  Blaekneffe  you  have  brought  itt
Then  have  you  Elixir  of  wondcrfull  might:.  White,
Your  Red  to  his  perfe&ion  is  not  fully  brought,

But  your  White  is  perfe&ly  wrought.

Your  Red  with  moftftrong  heate  muftbe  fedd
In  a clofe  Furnace  untill  itt  be  Rcdd :

Whcn  itt  is  Redd  and  will  melt  likc  waxe,

Then  of  all  that  fhould  be  nothing  laxe.

Now  have  you  a Stone  of  wonderfull  might,

Which  will  takc  Mercury  before  his  flight.

And  command  him  to  ftay,  and  caufe  him  to  bring
All  Mcttalls  unto  him,  and  call  him  their  Kinge,

And  make  fuch  obedycnce  without  Digreflion,

That  of  him  they  fliall  all  take  Imprcffion  j
Now  have  you  a Ste»e  of  wonderfull  power,

Which  conteineth  the  three  Species  and  the  Elcments


Earth  to  fight  without  dclufion.


Firc  in  Colour,  Water  by  Effufion


(fourc  ••


Airc


Anonymi.

Airc  is  in  Water  all  mcn  doe  knowc.

And  thus  thc  fourc  Elcraents  accordcth  nowe:

As  for  the  three  Species  I will  fhcwe,

How  in  your  Stone  you  may  them  lcnowe:

Tindure  for  Blood  pcrteincth  to  the  Animali,
Moyfturc  the  Vegetablcpart  poffefle  fliall ;

All  Earth  is  Minerali  without  anydoubr.

Thus  kccpe  we  in  one  Circle  and  ncvcr  goe  out.

Now  have  I my  Figure  pcrfcdly  wrought,

Yett  of  the  Center  I havc  faid  rightnought.

A Center  is  a pricke  of  whatfoever  itt  be,

Without  any  manncr  of  divifibilitie ;

And  made  as  Nature  doth  vvell  provide,

Soas  no  Accident  may  itt  divide :

Only  by  handbut  in  the  Quantitie,

But  by  noe  Elcment  fcperatc  the  Qitalitie ;
IfingreatcFirc  you  fett  it  downe,

A true  Salamander  itt  wilbe  found5
Ifin  thc  Water  thou  throwe  I wis.

It  will  live  therc  as  doth  a Fifh ;

If  in  the  Aire  you  caft  it  up  hye,

There  will  it  live,  and  never  dye :

Ifin  the  Earth  thou  bury  itt  faft,

Then  will  it  remaine  there,  and  ever  laft.

Thus  can  no  Elemcnt  divide  without  doubt,

The  Center  which  our  Whccle  tumes  about :

Now  how  to  Multiply  your  Medicine  I trow,
Woulddoeyoumuchgood  for  toknowc;

For  unlefle  you  know  howe  to  Multiply,

Your  Medicine  will  be  fpent  quickly:

Then  would  itt  put  thy  minde  to  much  painc,

To  thinke  that  thou  muft  make  itt  againe :

Thcrcfore  thc  next  Chapter  ftiall  teach  thceright,

To  Multiply  this  Stone  of  wondcrfull  might.

Hh h 2 CHAP.


4.11


Amnymi.

C H A P.  V.

How  to  Multijjly.

NOW  in  this  Chaptcr  I meane  to  flicwe,

How  toMultiply  that  thou  may  knowe :

If  Iron  to  thc  Load-ftonc  be  not  put  ccrtcinly,

Itt  will  decreace  wonderfully  5
The  Species  of  ali  things  both  more  and  lefie  each  one,
Are  mainteyned  by  rcafon  of  Multiplication  5
Then  if  they  be  not  Multiplyed  thcydecay,

But  Multiplication  makes  them  be  ali  away.

All  things  after  Conception  rcceive  naturali  Food,
Tomainteinetheir.kind  as  Nature  feeth  good  :

Soe  likewife  our  St  one  muft  needs  Multiply,j  r _ . ;
Or  elce  the  Species  of  that  Stone  will  dye:

And  Multiplication  muft  needs  be  of  fuch  thing,.

As  thc  thing  multiplied  takes  bcft  likcing.

Fire  vvhich  burneth  perpetually,

If  Mattcr  want  Fire  will  dye^

But  for  to  feed  our  Stone  rightly,

ThewayI  will  Ihewe  prefently.

T ake  your  Glaffc  and  Medicine  vvithall.

And  in  a vvarme  Fire  fett  itt  youfhall;
Andvvhenittbegins  to  liqiiefy,' ->1  u
Put  common  Mercury  to  itt  byandby$

And  itt  wilbe  devoured  anon
By  vertue  of  heatc  that  is  in  our  Stone,

And  as  much  as  you  putt  in  quantitic,

Soe  much  dothyour  Medicine  augment  truly :

Yett  you  muft  have  rcafon  not  for  to  cloye,

With  overmuch  cooling,  kind  heatc  thereby :


Anonymi.

And  as  of  a Dragmeyou  will  make  a Pounde,
You  may  well  do  itt,  if  you  keep  round  5
And  when  it  is  Multiplied  fufficiently,

Thcn  from  the  Firc  fet  it  by.

A man  in  this  Land  once  I knewe,

That  marred  that  hc  made,  and  fo  may  yowe  5
Exccpt  yc  doe  as  I have  taught.

And  thcn  neede  you  to  fcarenought.

Another  I knewe  which  wanted  good  aireccion.
And  at  once  fpent  all  at  one  proje&ion.

Thefe  knevv  not  hovve  itt  ihould  be  multiplyed,
Which  things  I have  taught  you  at  this  tyde ;
But  fee  that  the  Mercury  vvherewithye  Multiply^
Be  made  foe  cleane  as  itt  may  be.

Now  to  make  him  extend  his  perfe&ion,

It  is  needfull  to  know  how  to  make  projeccion  :
Whcreof  in  the  next  Chapter  I will  treate.

For  of  Multiplicacion  I will  noe  more  fpeake.


Chap.  VI.

Of  'TrojeclioH.

NOwIacke  we  but  oncly  this  Lefibn  to  take,

Pcrfettly  proje&ion  for  to  make  :

Takcone  parte  of  the  Medicine,  and  of^Tjor  Tinn,

But  fee  that  you  make  them  exceeding  cleane  $

And  when  your  Mettall  doth  Liquefy,

Then  caft  in  your  parte  of  Medicine  quickly.

Then  will  it  be  brought  to  fucn  a palfe,

That  all  will  be  as  brittle  a glafife  •,

Takethe  brittle  fubftanceas  it  is.

And  upon  an  (i  ooO  to  take  doe  not  milfc.

That  too.  uppon  iooo.  foe  ftill  increafe  you  may,'

Hhh  3 And,


4*3


Anonymi.

And  projc&noe  more  whenyour  Tin&uredothdecay.
This  projedion  is  fure  without  any  doubt.

Thus  is  our  Whccle  turned  round  about.

In  what  Veflell  to  projedl  I need  not  to  teli,

For  a Maifter  of  his  Arte  knoweth  it  very  wellj
To  projed  on  Mcttalls  novve  you  knowe.

And  to  proje&  on  mans  body  nowe  will  I (hewe.

Firft  the  Body  muft  be  purged  well.

And  by  fwetting  and  bathing  be  made  futtell.

And  when  you  are  deane  according  toyour  minde,

Takc  a dragmeof  yourMcdirine  with  thcQ.uintcflcnce  of
Such  a fuddeine  alteration  itt  will  ftiowe , (.Wincj
As  you  need  not  to  feare  Corruption  noe  moc  .*

Nowe  of  his  Vcrtues  I need  not  to  declare,

They  are  fully  fliewnc  by  others  elee-where.

Now  tothe  holy  Trinitie  I thee  commend,

Thankekig  him  my  Worke  is  at  an  end  .*

Chargeing  thee  this  Secrct  from  bad  men  to  keepe,
Though  withgreatc  Importance  ofthce  they  itt  feeke ;
And  beware  itt  goe  not  from  thy  hand,

Except  to  a perfed:  honefl:  man.

By  Bookcs  thetrue  Worke  I could  never  finde,
Thercfore  left  I this  Bookc  behinde,

Thatto  whofe  (liare  foeveritt  might  fajl,

By  itt  they  might  know  our  Secrctts  ali.

God  grant  noe  Multiplyer  mcete  with  my  Bookc,

Nor  noe  finifter  Clerkcsthereon  to  looke}

Then  will  they  pay  their  debts  furely.

And  build  Churches,  and  Steepfes  very  hye  5
Keepe  itt  from  thefc  folkcs  I thee  pray.

As  thou  wilt  anfwere  before  God  att  laft  day.*
for  whatfoeverhath  bin  faid  to  our  worke  doth  accord,
Thcrefore  give  honour,  prayfe,and  thankes  to  our  Lordj
Holy  and  Rcvcrend  be  hisName,

Which  to  rac  vile  Synncr  hath  rcvealcd  the  fame.


41?


i


HERME TS  TALE.

|N  Pilgrimage  onc  onely  thing  I found
Of  vvorth  in  Lemnes  nere  to  Vulcan’$  fliopp,

A Chriftall  fountcinc  running  under  ground  ,
Betwccna  Vally  and  a Monnteines  topp.
PIeas’d  with  this  fight,  I bid  a Hermite  teli
The  ftory  of  the  place,  who  there  dia  dwcll.


Within  this  Vale  a hallowe  dusky  Cave
There  is  (quoth  hc)  of  gteate  Antiquity,

Where  plumes  of  Mars  blciv  greene  and  red  you  have :
Torne  from  his  creft  for  his  Iniquity.

The  Troopeof  Smiths,  as  he  for  Fenus  lay,

Surpris’d  and  tookc  him,  yett  hc  gett  avvay.

For  as  the  Cyclops  him  in  tryumph  brought,

To  halting  Vulcan  to  receive  his  doome,

They  lifted  up  his  beaver,  and  found  nought
But  vacant  place  and  Arraour  in  the  roome.

Of  th’armour  then  they  thought  they  had  good  prize,
But  working  it  they  found  itt  fcyndarizc.

The  Smiths  amazd finding thcmfelves  dcluded,
Sattall  in  Counfaile  in  their  Mafters  Dennc ,
Deliberating  wcll,  at  length  concluded ,

There  is  nocquall  Wartwixt  Godds  and  men,

Lett’s  finde  the  Angry  God  and  pardon  crave,

LcttJs  give  him  Ventes  our  poore  felves  to  fave.


The  Hemel' s Tale.

They  fought  in  Heaven  Mars  knew  his  fa&  fo  bad,

He  camc  out  therc,  thcn  one  began  to  teli,

Saturne  rurn’d  from  his  Throne,  a Rlace  had
Not  far  from  thencc,hard  by  this  Chriftall  Well.
Thither  they  wentand  found  two  Gods  alone,

Sitting  within  a darkc,  but  glittering  throne.

Dovvne  feli  old  Vulcan  on  his  crooked  knce,

And  faid  forgive,  O mighty  God  of  Warr,

My  fervants  and  my  fclfe  (once  God  as  ycc)

Then  ufe  thy  will  with  Venus  my  faire  ftarr.

Saturne  (quoth<JW<*r*)and  1 muft  notyet  parr,
Though  fliee  for  whom  th’art  pard’ncd  hath  my  hcai  t.

With  this  the  Cuckold  with  his  fwcaty  Troope
Went  to  his  Forgc  and  fccm’d  to  make  a legg,

Att  every  fteppe,  where  halting  made  him  ftoope.

In  thankcs  to  Mars,  granting  what  he  did  begg  *

In  whofe  remembrance  you  fhallever  have
Syndars,  and  fetters  in  that  hollow  Cave.  , .

Butlettme  teli  you  ali  that  thenbefell,

Iove  feeing  this,  meaningthe  Smith  to  right,

Sent  dovvne  a winged  God,  he  trufted  well ,

Difguifd  in  habitt  of  a fhineing  light,

Which  to  the  Vally  from  the  Hill’s  high  topp,
Affrighted  ali  the  fmiths  in  Vulcam  fliopp.

A voyce  was  heard  from  Ioves  Embafladour,

To  fummon  Mars  t’appe.are  before  the  Gods:

With  Saturne  forth  came  Venus  Paramour :

Thtnkcing  with  might  to  gett  of  right  the  odds:
Downward  came  he  9.  myles*  they  upward  fower,
Ali  mett  in  mift,  he  fledd,  they  nere  wentlowcr.
Vulcan


+'7


The  Hermets  Tale.

Vulcan  came  hobling  up  to  fc  what’s  done,

He  findes  nor  light,  nor  Gods,  but  other  fhapej.

To  witnefle  of  this  fa&  he  calls  the  Sonney
Who  ftreght  crycs  Murther,and  made  haft  to  fcapc:
Some  dyeing  Soule  groan*d  forth,  Apollo  ftay,

Helpc  vvife  Apollo  ere  thou  goeft  away.

With  this  Ksipollo  lookeing  round  about,

Efpies  this  fountaineknowes  the  voicc  washcrc.

And  boweing  downe  to  finde  the  party  outs
Himfelfe  unto  himfelfe doth  ftreyght  appeare.

There  gaz’d  he  tili  a fturdy  flaowre  of  raync
Tookc  wik^A pello  from  himfelfe  againe.

HzxcwtW  Apollo  then  Apollo  fayd,  .

To  morrow  whcn  this  ftorme  is  rully  paft,

Ile  turnc  and  bring  forne  comfortablc  ayd,  .

By  vvhich  Ile  free  thee  ere  the  latter  caft.

Thcn  did  itt  cry  as  if  the  voyce  were  fpent,

Come  fweete  Apollo , foe  itt  dovvnwards  went.

Vulcan  vvcnt  to  his  Fbrge,  the  Some  to  bed,

But  both  wcre  up  bctimes  to  meete  againe?

Next  morne  after  the  ftorme  a pale  foule  dead
Wasfoundatt  bottomeof  thisfaire  Fountaine.

Smith  (faid  Apollo ) helpe  to  lade  this  fpring,

That  I may  raife  to  life  yonder  dead  thing.  ...

Then  Vulcan  hcld  Apollo  by  the  heele,
Whilehcladesoutthe  Watersofthe  Wcllj
Boweing  and  ftraining  made  Apollo  fecle
Blood  from  his  nofe,  that  in  the  fountaine  feli.

Vtdcan  fquoth  he)this  Accident  ofblood
Is  that  or  nought  muft  doe  this  Creature  good.

I ii  Hc


The  Hermets  Tale .

He  fpake  the  word,  and  Vale  an  fawe  itt  done,
LookcS<?/(faidhe)I  fec  itt  changeth  hue,

Fewe  Gods  havc  vcrtue  like  to  thec  o Sonne,
Ftom  pale  itt  is  becomc  a ruddy  bluc  *

Vale  An  (quoth  Phcebtts)  take  itt  to  thy  forge,
Warme  it,  rubb  it,lctt  itt  cafte  the  Gorge.


Thus  VttlcAn  did,itt  fpued  the  Waters  out.
And  then  itt  fpake  and  cry’de  itt  was  a cold;
Then  Vulcan  ftuft  and  cloath’d  it  round  about.
And  made  the  Stone  as  hott  as  ere  itt  would.
Thus  fourtecnc  dayes  itt  fickly  did  indure,
The  Sonne  came  every  day  to  fethe  eme.


As  itt  grewe  wcli  the  Golours  went  and  came,

Blcw,  Blacke,  White,  Redd,asby  thewarmth&  heate,
The  humours  moved  wcre  within  the  fame,

Then  Phcebut  bid  him  put  it  in  a fvveate ;

Which  Vulcan  plyde  foe  vvcll,  it  grue  all  Red,

Then  was  itt  found,  and  cald  for  drinke  and  bread.

Stay  fquoth  Apolle ) thoughitt  callfor  meate,
Difgeftion  yett  is  weekc,  'twill  breede  relapfe,

By  (urfett,  thereforc  ere  you  lett  itt  cate ,

Some  littlc  cxercife  vvere  good  perhapps,

Yett  bad  ittbroath  alowdethe  ftrength  tokcepe,

But  when  'twas  on  his  leggs  it  would  fcarcc  crccpe.

Sol  fawe  forne  reliques  left  of  thfould  difeafe,

A folutifte  (quoth  he)  were  good  to  clenfe,

With  which  the  ficknelfehc  didfo  appcafe,

Health  made  the  Patycnt  fecke  to  make  amenfej
Whowent  awaythree  weekes,  thenbroughta  Stone,
That  in  proje&ion  yeeldcd  ten  for  one.

This


The  Hermeis  Tale .

This  did  hc  lay  downe  att  Apollo' % feete,

And  faid  by  curcing  onc  th’haft  favcd  thrce  .•

Whiph  threc  in  this  onc  prefcnt  joyntly  raccte^
Offring  themfelves  whichare  thine  ownetothcc.

Be  our  Phyfitian,  and  as  vve  growc  old,

Wcc’le  bring  cnough  to  makencw  vvorlds  of  Gold.

With  that  this  Kemite  toofce  mc  by  the  hand
And  ledd  me  to  his  Cell ; Loe  here  (quoth  hej
Could’ft  thou  but  ftay,  and  truly  underftand
What  thou  now  fceft,  thou  kuowft  this  Myftcry.

I ftayd,  I faw,  I tryde , and  under ftood,

A Heav'»  on  Eartb,  an  everlafling  good,

■ 'i,-:'  '■■ri  !"


4' 9


r i • * • ‘ ^ i T_J  ..  V K

;,r!  * .

« . . *'  uJh  i/  i.  c : v *


' * vryj  • •*  > n

, ) i/  b*  ij

‘ * < L m V.’r#l  * *'

,<  . ?•  r u

J 1 ^ 2 • lh'  i I . il  i


‘un


j


1 >,M  I


s u c


'££*&&&

fiififffffrff


A

T>  I S C 2^7  T T I 0

of  the  S T O N E.


THough  Daphne  fly  from  Phoebus  bright,
Yet  ftiall  they  both  be  one,

And  ifyouundcrftand  thisright,

You  havcour  hidden  St  en  e.

For  Daphne  fhc  is  faire  and  white:

But  Volatile  is  ihej
Pbaebm  a fixed  God  of  might,

Andred  asbloodis  he.

Daphne  is  a WaterNymph,

And  hath  of  Moyfturc  ftore,

Which  Phoebus  doth  confumc  with  heate.
And  dryes  her  \rery  fore.

They  being  dryed  into  one,

Of  chriftall  flood  rnuft  drinke,

Till  they  be  brought  to  a whitc  Stone:

Which  waih  with  Virgins  milke,

So  longe  untill  they  flow  as  wax.

And  no  fume  you  can  fee,

Then  have  you  all  you  neede  to  aske,

Praife  Cod  and  thankfull  be.


7UB


4-21


The 'Jlanding  of  tbe  (jlaJJe  for  tbe  tyme  of
tbe  Putrifadtion,  (y  Congelation  of

^MEDICINE.

TH cGlaJfe  with  the  Medicine  muft  ftand  in  the  fyre
Forty  dayes  till  it  bc  Blackc  in  fightj  (dcfirc,
Forty  dayes  in  the  Blacfcnefle  to  ftand  he  vvill
And  then  forty  dayes  more,  till  itt  be  White,

And  thirty  in  the  drying  if  thou  lift  to  doe  right;

And  then  is  the  Sulphur  pcrfedly  Calcinate,

To  drinke  up  his  moyfturc  for  him,  bcing  prcparate.

In  this  tyme  the  Glajfe  neither  open  nor  fliutt,

But  ftill  let  him  ftand  all  the  aforcfaid  dayes,
Notonccfrom  the  Furnace  thatyctake  him  upp.*

For  by  Cooling  the  Matter  the  Medicine  decaycs,
Therefore  yeu  muft  Fire  continue  alwaycs,

Inone  meafureand  temperatenes of  heate,

Untill  all  be  White,  and  the  Sulphur  compleate.

T his  heate  fufficeth  for  this  principle  one,

Which  is  the  cheife  ground  of  our  Secretts  all,

Without  which  Knowledg  thou  muft  not  make  th tStone^
If  thou  labour  thy  lyfe  tyme,  not  profper  thou  fliall,
Therefore  merry  bewarethou  doenotfall.

But  firft  truly  learne,  before  thou  beginne,.

And  fo  to  truc  workeing  thou  llialt  the  better  wynne.

I i i 5 Follovv-


Follow  this  Booke,  and  ivander  not  afide
Out  of  thc  way,  to  the  left  hand,  nor  thc  right,
Butftrcight  betweene  both  dire&Iy  you  guide
Thy  Worke,  foe  as  I to  thee  doe  write.

For  in  this  Booke  I will  thec  plainely  excite,
Howthoufhalt  makc  the  Philofophers  Lcad,

That  is  £//*/>  to  thcWhite  and  the  Redd.

And  thcn  the  Goldcn  Oylc  called  Aurum  potabile,

A Medicine  moft  mcrvelous  to  preferve  Mans  health,
And  of  Tranfmutation  the  greateft  that  can  bee,

For  in  the  fame  Oyle  is  nothing  but  wcalth  •,

Then  glorious  hc  is  in  the  power  of  himfelFc:
Fornoefickncffecan  ftand  vvherc  he  is  in  place.
Nor  povertie  dtvell  in  the  plcafures  of  his  Face.

'i:.r  .


v&nigtn*


JEnigma ' Thilofopbicum .

h“T"1  Here  is  no  light,  but  vvhat  lives  in  the  Sunne 5
l There  is  no  Sunne , but  which  is  tvvicc  begottj
Nature  and  Arte  the  Parents  firft  begonne :
By  Nature  ’twas,  but  Nature  pcrfe&s  not.

Arte  then  what  Nature  left  in  hand  doth  take,

And  out  of  One  a Ttvofold  worke  doth  makc.

A Trvefold  worke  doth  make,  but  fuch  a worke
As  doth  admitt  Divifirn  none  atall
(See  here  whercin  the  Secret  moR  doth  lurke)

Unlcffc  it  bc  a c JMathentaticall.

It  muft  bc2>o,  yet  make  it  One  and  One,

And  you  do  take  the  way  to  make  it  None.

Lo  here  the  Primar  Secret  of  this  t-Arte ,

Contemne  it  not  but  underftand  it  right,

Who  faileth  to  attainc  this  formoft  part,

Shall  never  know  Artes  force  nor  Natures  might.

Nor  yet  have  povrer  of  One  and  One  fo  mixr,

To  make  by  Onef.xti  One  unfixid fixt.

I V

T>.T> . W.lZeclman.


42+


**************************

* * * * « *_*__*  * * *_


FRAGMEN  TS

COTT  I ET>

From  ThomasGharnocks
ovpne  hcind  miting.


Hen  an  hundreth  & fourfcore  had  run  their
i Then  fonc  after  in  ihort  rime  & fpace,  (race
Blackncs  began  to  fhevv  his  Face,  (in  fyght
But  when  a C.  and  L.  had  overcumde  hym
He  made  him  wafti  hisFace  white  & bright
Which  unro  me  was  a joyfull  fyght.

Yet  xx.  at  laft  came  in  withgreate  boft.

And  made  both  Black  and  White  to  flytheCoft.


Written  by  T.  Charnock  at  the  cnd o/Scotus  *
de  Bufone.


HEre  in  Gcds  name  takethy  reft,
Quietly  in  thy  warme  neft ,
For  fo  Charnocke  thinks  it  beft,

Tyll  the  Sune  hathe  runne  Weft ,
Seaven  tymes  600.  and  16.  juft,
Then  this  ChyU awake  thou  muft.


Written


Frdgments,

Written  at  the end of  R 1 P L? E’ S Carnalem,


ABovvte  ($53. 1 darebebold,

This  Chyldfa all.put  on  a Crownc  of  Gold ;
Or  at  6%6.  at  the  raofte,

7 "bis  C/»jf/</fhalIrulethc  rofte.


OTher  Fragmenti  fcattered  in  the  mfi  places  ofan  old
Manufcript , t vrittenmth  T.  Charnocffs  wnHand.

WEworke  this  Workc  of  wonder,

By  Wayght,  Meafure  and  Number.
XuothTHOMAS  CHARNOC  K.


t ( . »

WHcn  hc  is  full  Black  then  take  fomc  payne,

To  walh  him  7.tymes  in  the  vvater  of  J ourdayne.


CHARNOC  K,

TJRo  the  tyme  that  he  be  Black  and  Ded,
Walh  him  7 tymes,  or  hc  bc  perfeft  Red.


ANd  when  he  is  full  Black  then  take  fome  payne>

To  vvalhhym  7.  tyraes  in  the  watet  of  Jourdayne «


ANd  when  you  fec  hym  perfeft  Redd,

Then  take  a ftone  and  knock  him  on  the  hedd.


A


Idejl.

Nd  when  this  Woman  is  brought  a bed,

Take  the  Chyld  and  knock  hym  on  the  hedd.

CHARNQGKE , 1 575-

Kkk  Per-


4-1$


Fragments,

TnErfed  Whyte  will  not  be  accomplifhed,

A Untillichath  bynetwelve  tyracs  circulate d.


Id  (fi.

Six  tymes  Black,  and  vi.  tymes  Whyte.


BEtwixttrue  Black, and  true  Whyte;
Wyll  appearc  many  Collcrs  to  fyght.


BEtvvixtPurgatoryand  Paradyfe,
The  Raigne-bows  Collers  will  arifc.


B Et wixt  Black  and  Whyte  fartayne,  p>X.  O*

The  Pckokcsfcthers  wyll  appeare  plaine.


LOoke  you  conccive  my  words  aright.

And  markc  well  this  which  I have  fede;

For  Black  is  Fermentunto  the  Whyte,

And  Whyte  flialbe  Fermentunto  the  Redcr

Which  I never fdw  till  I md  rvhjte  heres  uponmy  bea#.

T.  C*  1574*

T he  joj/eare  of  my  age.


1K


Fragments.

In  fome  Coppies  I haye  found  theje  Verfes
placed  before  Pearcc  the  Black  Monk,

»pen  the  E L I X I R.

AN  and  Woman  God  hath  wrought.
And  full  mykle  fruite  forth  they  brought,
So  multiplyeth  the  workcs  of  our  heaven
And  yet  come  they  but  of  onc  thing.  (King
Now  quod  Martin  what  may  that  bc  ?

Tbe  flithe  of  the  Yearth  fo  fay  we:

Yearth  it  was,  fomc  Men  would  fay  nay ,

And  yet  was  it  nether  deane  yearth  fand  nc  clay,

But  the  feces  of  yearth  it  was  of  Colour  grey,

Which  then  turned  to  yearth  as  it  on  ’ yearth  lay.

The  Watcr  turned  to  bludc  to  make  man  ftronge,

The  Ayrc  and  Fire  was  medled  thcare  amongc.

How  be  Ayrc  and  Fire  quod  Martin  *

Through  the  workcs  of  our  Lord  quod  Martin.

For  the  brightnes  of  the  holy  Ghoft  is  the  Airc,

And  the  lightncs  that  gafe  lyfeisFyre.

Wheare  haft  thowe  goe  too  Scolle  to  learne  ali  this  ?

For  that  thou  fayeft  is  right  true  I wifTc  *

And  1 fuppofc  it  in  thic  thought,

That  with  iiii.  Spirits  it  miift  be  wrought.

Nay  your  Spirits  are  too  wilde  quoth  CMarlin  againe,
Therefore  I will  not  medie  with  them  certainc:

I will  have  a Spirit  made  by  kindc  naturally,

That  will abide  with  cvcry  body  kindly*

Such  a Spirit  could  I mackc  quod  Martin ,

And  yet  men  would  hold  yt  but  in  vcyne.

K k k 2 And


Fragmenti .

And  yet  of  all  workes  it  is  thc  bcft,

LcftofCoft  and  moft  fureft:

Por  if  it  ftiould  failc  then  wcre  wc  donc  aU,

And  therefore  for  the  moft  parfiteft  worke  wc  it  cal! j
It  is  fo  rich  when  it  is  wrought,

Though  all  the  world  were  turned  to  nought:
Asmennycrichbodyesagayn  make  wouldhe.

As  ever  were  or  ever  ftiould  bc.

Take  Earth  of  Earth}  Earths  Brother , &c«


I have  feene  ariold  Qoppy  of  the  faid  ytorf^
of?t arce  the  Black  Monk,  'to  the  end

of  whleh  thefe  following  Verfes  werejoyned.

NO  W of  this  Matter  derke  and  nothing  clere.

An  Expoficion  I doe  mack  hcre5
Wherein  I charge  you  fecre  to  be,

That  frcnd  ne  foe  doe  yt  fe ;

Erth  hyd  within  the  bodies  center  is  moft  fine,
WaterofWood  Eflcllof  Winc,

Por  by  thc  moyfter  of  thc  Grape,

This  centrali  Earth  who  can  it  take. ;

It  and  Sercio a do  our  Maiftry  make  ,

Por  it  fliall  becomc  ^Mercuriali,

And  after  that  Eflentiall.

Butnowbewarethat  you  notfaile,

Por  then  you  loofe  your  greate  travaile,

Whan  you  have  drawne  owte  of  the  Gura,

All  the  <JM ercury  that  wyll  come,

Underftand  that  Lycowres  threc
In  that  Mcrcury  conteyned  be  5


The


Fragments,

The  firft  is  the  Watur  oflyfe  Ardent,

By  Bath  dcparted  that  is  moft  lent  5
It  burneth  as  Aquavitc  by  live.

And  is  called  our  Mercury  attrattive,

Whcrewithis  made  Earth  Chriftallinc,

Out  of all  Collours  Metallyne:

I fpeke  no  more  thcrcof  as  yet ,

For  in  this  worke  vve  necdc  not  it.

Then  runneth  a Water  after  thilke,

Litle  in  quantity  white  as  mylke  5
Whych  ys  fperme  or  nature  of  our  Stonc3
That  is  earneftly  fought  of  many  one :

Forof  Man,  Bcfte,  and  every  thynge,

Sperme  is  there  begynyng,

T herefore  we  our  Mercury  do'  it  call.

Whych  ys  found  here  and  there  and  over  all.

For  wychout  yt  ys  nothyng  Iyvyng,

Whereforc  yt  ys  in  every  thyng :

As  well  in  thyngs  moft  precioufe.

As  in  thyngs  moft  vyle  and  odious ;

Ofyt  they  have  there  firft  nature,

Thys  moyfter  to  you  as  now  is  clere,

Thys  ys  the  Mercury  that  vve  call
Vigctablc,  Minerali  and  Animali :

Our  Quickfilvcr  and  our  lac  Virginis,

Our  Waterpermanentforfoothytys;

Wyththys  Water  Mercuriali,

We  wafch  the  fylth  Originali
Of  our  Erth  tyll  y t be  whyte,

Lykea  Gummthat  flovveth  lyte,

By  dry  fyrc  after  that  fchale  cume
Oylc  whercvvyth  we  make  red  Gumm  .*

Wych  ys  our  Tin&ure  and  our  Sulfur  vive,

Thefoulc  of  Saturne  the  Goldc  oflife.

Kkk  3 Our


^9


Fragments.

Our  Tin&ure  and  our  airy  Gould,

Wych  bcfore  was  ncver  fo  plaincly  tould ;
Godgraunt  that  I donodifpleafurc
To  hym  in  fulfillyng  your  defirc.

Novv  El.emcnts  be  dividcd  cvery  onc,
Wyth  thys  Oyle  make  red  your  Stone 5
Ovvre  Gurams  two  then  havc  fchall  yc,
Wythout  the  wych  no  Elixir  may  be.

Thcy  go  the  Body  and  the  Spirits  bctwixt,
Wythowte  the  wych  our  Ston  cannot  bc  fixr.
And  makyth  of  hym  in  a lytle  fpace,

Two  Elixirs  by  Gods  Grace  .•
Wherebyarc  trewly  alterate,

Ali  Metalline  Bodics  into  a better  flate,
Wyth  Sol  and  Luna  equall  to  be,

Tohclpe  us  in  our  neceflitie.
Novvthankedbe  God  moft  gracious,
Wych  hath  this  Secret  lent  to  us,

Hys  grace  thcrcwyth  to  us  he  leave,

Toour  Soules  helth  us  for  to  meve.


THIS


Fragmenti \


Thls follming  Fragment  in  fome  copies  I
bave  found  placed  at  the  end  of  the

aforegoing  Expofition  of  Pcarcc  the  Black
Monke.  Inothers , immediately  before

• With  Hic  and  with  H&c^  &c.

and  bearing  this  Tjtle,


A CONCLUSIO  N.


TAke  Wynde  and  Watcr,  white  and  grccnc.
And  thereof  draw  alae  Virgine ;

Whcre  fome  it  call  a watcr  clecre,

The  which  vvater  hath  no  Pcere  5
And  then  makc  your  Fier  ftronger,

When  the  white  fume  dothappeare»

Chaungc  your  Recciver  and  continue  longer :

And  then  ihall  you  fee  come  a Fire,

Red  as  blood  and  full  of  Yrc.

£upd  dicitur  menfiruum  fatens , & fol  pbilofophfrum3
In  quo  fit  noflra  dijfelutio,  & congelatio.

Sublimatio , attraffio^  & etiam fixatio.

Et  Sulphuri*  tntfri,five  foliati  creatio.


With


Fragments .


WIth  bic  and  with  hac  thus  may  ye  do,

As  Husband  and  Wifc  togeather  thcm  wcd$
Put  them  in  a chambcr  both  two ,

And  Ihet  faft  the  dore  vvhen  they  bc  abed.

The  woman  is  both  wanton  and  wilde,

With  her  husband  ihecannot  reft,

Till  fhc  have  conceived  a Child  5
Of  ali  his  kin  he  fhall  be  beft.

He  is  a Childe  of  thc  Elemcnts
Both  byFather  and  by  Mother,

None  fo  worthy  in  prcfencc ,

Not  perfed  Sol  his  owne  Brother*

Sol  and  Luna  owe  unto  him  obedicncc,

And  all  that  him  necdes  they  to  him  bring,

Saturne  doth  to  him  obefance,
Howbcitheisnextofhiskinne:

There  is  ncither  Emperour  or  Kinge,

But  of  his  prefence  they  would  be  glad,

If  he  from  them  vvere  one  yeare  vvanting ;

In  their  hearts  they  would  be  full  fad.

In  riches  he  exceedeth  all  other,

The  Elemcnts  in  him  are  fo  even ,

Luna  is  his  Sifter,  and  Sol  is  his  Brother,

His  Father  dwelleth  among  the  planets  feaven.

Nulla  virtus  mineralibus  where  fhall  we  him  feeke.

Sit  tibi  principium  principale  Councell  we  muft  it  keepe ;
Reperitur  ubtq , localis  by  way  in  every  ftreete.


I

1


Fragments.


(*An  other  Qonclujion.


Firft  Calcinc  and  after  Putrefie,  . -y

DilTolvc,  diftill,  fublime,  difcend  and  fix
With  Aquavit*  oftymes  walh  and  dry  5
And  makc  a marriagc  of  Body  & Soul  theSpirit  betwixt.
Which  thus  together  naturally  if  yc  cannot  mix,

Then  lhall  thfe  Body  uttcrly  dye  in  the  flix.

Blecding  and  changing  Collours  asyc  lhall  fec.

In  hus  and  nubi  hc  lhall  uprife  and  dcfcend ;

Firft  up  to  the  Moone  and  after  up  to  the  Sun,

Oncly  Ihipped  within  a litlc  glafcn  Tunnc.

Whcn  he  commcth  thether,then  is  ali  thcMaiftry  wonne,
About  which  Journcy  grcat  goods  ye  lhall  not  fpend.
And  ye  lhall  be  Glad  tnat  ever  it  was  begun ;

Patiently  if  ye  lift,  to  your  worke  to  attend*

Who  fo  lhall  our  Pearle  and  our  Ruby  makc,

Our  Principle  lec  him  not  forfake.

Forat  the  beginning  if  his  Principle  be  trcw.

And  that  hecanby  craft  fo  himbake;

Trewly  at  the  cnd  his  Worke  lhall  him  not  rew.


Lll


The


«4-


Fragmenti r.


Tbe  yphole  Scyence .

THere  is  a bodi  of  a Bodi,

And  a Soule  and  s Spryte,

Wyth  two  Bodycs  muft  be  kncte.

There  ben  two  Erthys  as  I thc  tellc.

And  two  Waters  wytn  hem  do  dwellc  5
Thctonys  Whytethetother  isRcd,  ' j ' 1 T i
To  quick  thc  Bodics  that  ben  dcd.

And  oon  Fyrc  in  Nature  y hydd,

And  oon  Ayre  with  hem  that  aoth  thc  dede.

And  all  hyteommeth  out  of  onn  kynde,

Marke  thys  wcll  Man  and  beare  yt  yn  mynde.


TAke  Mercury  from  Mercury  which  is  his  wyfe.

For  Mercury  wife  to  Mcrcury  maketh  greate  ftryfe :
But  Mercury  s wyfes  Wy  fc,

To  Mercury  maketh  no  ftryfe.


A ND  thou  wed  c Mercury  to  Mercury  with  her  wyfe,
Then  ftiall  Mercury  and  CMercury  be  merry  with-

(outen  ftryfe :

For  Mercurie  s Wyfe  ito  Mercury  maketh  greate  ftryfe,
But  Mercuries  wyfe  s wyfe  to  Mercury  maketh  no  ftryf.

A


Fragments,


ARidle  to  you  I will  propofe ,

Of  a Comon  thing  which  moft  men  knowes,
Which  now  in  the  Earth  vcry  recfe  doth  grow  >

But  is  of  fmall  Pricc  as  allmcnknow;  r
And  that  withoutroote,  ftalkcorfecde,
Wherewithofhiskindeanothcrto  brecde:

Yet  of  that  nature,  that  it  cannot  ccafc,

If  you  piant  it  by  pceces  it  fclfc  to  increafe , ' *

Right  heavy  by  kinde,  yct  forced  to  fly,

Starke  nought  in  the  purfe,  yet  good  in  the  Eye,
Thisfomcthing  is  nothing  which  :fcemcth  full  Rrange,
Having  tafted  the  firc  which  miaketh  the  change :
AndhathmanyColloursyet  Ihcweth  but  onc,

This  is  the  materiali  of  our  STON  E,

: -z:  ini.  v . ij;i


r'  r ■


nv'u  •;  TZ  i _v.  ;■  'I  i

IAsked  Philofophy  how  I Ihould
Have  of  her  the  thing  I would,

She  anfwered  me.when  I was  able,

To make the  Water  matliable,  „ v* - 3 hnA I
Or  elfe  the  way  if  I could  finde,  ■ * 0 n;r^  ^i^H  in  T
To  mefure  out  a yard  oFWinde  :

Thcn  fhalt  thou  have  thyne  owne  defire,

Whenthoij  canft  wcigh  an  ounce  of  Firc:

Unlefle  that  thou  canft  doe  thefc  three ,

Contcnt  thy  felfe,  thou  get’ft  notme.


Lll»


Lee


Fragments > . ; f

f Et  the  old  man  drinkc  wine  till  hc  piflc:
JLJ  The  mcanes  to  the  bleB  Sterte  is :

And  in  that  mcnftrous  water  drowne,
The  rabant  brightnes  of  the  Moone,

Thcn  caft  the  Sun  into  her  lapp*

That bottf  may  perifli  at  aclapp.yonb  ,;f.
Soe  ftiall  yv>u  have  your  full  defircy
When  yourevive  them  both  by  Fire.


IFye  wjolle  to  hys  Medycyn  aplyc,  *,  /.  : ^

rMake  furft  hcvy,  hard,  hotte  and  drye  i,
Nefllie,  lyght,  cold  and  wete,

Fut  hatn  togeder  and  make  ham  mctc3
Thus  may  yefpend  raorthann  theKing,

Yf  yc  have  connyng  of  fuche  a thynge?

' U r,jq  u.  .t


. 1


i —


* t y f ~ I ’

1F  thou  the  Fixid  can  ditfblve.

And  that  Diffblv’ddoeft  caufe  to  fly,
That  Flying  thcn  toFixing  bring,
Thcnmaift  thou  live  moft  happily.

*\  •

« e


;;v  ? t.

■tx J3..  m,  sild

5ri’  ijkm  cT

ov/  erfr-jHa  uO

r;0  oT

1 *

rT\


,‘jf  ri'  -i]j
s.u : 1 oi


i eob  3(003 fWrij  j*dJ  sMSlrJ  I

'.sg  ."•/o  „ j.  1 jj  v!t  ■)),■  ■


ANN  O-


f


sislrri
r^ea^unt
A>mints  ^


icrcurtc


fcfce  nrima,-


fraximrs'  in  Si  fisis

Tai,  ' ~


'3L  itxT&rris  operosissima,


GphesStP&ic  ujalijpfncki  Tdiblli  'lyi^Jdoiis  ^dUius
of  an  isnbcii^cfaJ  hculc  :1 The  $ozcn/h  cfxrnts
Cj&ejiilt  & nt&2jisz&t&z  : ffh.it  fxxn/s  ociicetiul  *
cc  thzoiu^h  fflLmj^nui fcra^xJj  U *


(437)


»***********+*************

* * * * < -X  **********  *****  * * * *


ANNOTATIONS

AND

DISCOUR.SES,

U P O N

«Sowe  fdrt  oftbe  preceding  VVorke.


Pag.tf.lin.i.  TO  tyz\)  ono$  of  <£oh

Rom  the  /?r/J  wd  of  this  T?roer/ic‘}  and  che  Initiali Ictters  of
the  fix  following  Chaptcn  ftlifcovered  by  AmmonofyUa-
biqttcs  and  SiUabique  tAcroftiqucs)  we  may  colled  the  Au-
tbors  Name  and  place  of  Rcfidence;  For  thole /ener/ ,
(togethcr  with  the firftlint  of  the  feventh  Chaptcr ) fpeak
thus,


Coma*  jftojtenoflBttfeto,

% t)ntfct£0  aft  er  nemate  tjirn  tjoSfrc.

Such  lik tFancies  were  the  refults  of  the  rvifdome  and  bumility  of  the  Aunci-
entT bilofopbcrs,  (who  wben  they  intendednot  an  abfolute  conce>ilement  of
Pcrfons,  Names,  Mifteriesj&c.)  were  wont  to  hide  them  by  Tranjpofitionr,
AcrodiquesyJfogrmmstiqucs^Sympbonkquesy  andtheiyke,  (which  the  fearch-
ing  tfenjof  Arte  mighc  poflibly  unridle,  buc)  with  defigne  to  continue  them
ro  otbersy  as  concealed  things  5 And  that  upon  the  Queftion  no  ocher  An-
fwer  friould  be  returned^then  the  like  of  the  (a)  Angeli' s to  ftUimh.  [His  uxme  jui*  r >"

3 T cliy  to  wit,  admirable  and  fecrct.']  1 £

y In  imitationofwhome^  tispfobable  our  Author  (not  fo  much  aftefting
itevmity  of  a Name  asto  afiift  the  lovers  of  iVifdome)  thus  modeftly  and  in-
gmioufly  unvailes  himfelfe  ; Although  to  the  generality  oftbe  world  he  meanc
topaf ttunlinomcy  as  appeares  by  his  owne  words ;

CfO  $ o^t^at  3 tJcflrcBOttnojiiMpfamr,  ( b ) Ncrt.Orli-

iSatpOttrgoohpwpcrsttnHnoione  ©ali bcmp name.  noli  pag.  6.

> (0  I°bn  &tts  ftom  lobn  Bole,  and  (d)  he  from  Rcbcrt  Rccord,  relates,  that  (c)  VciRuftr,  •
&\sTbomM Norton,  was  Alcbymifta  fuo  tempore  peritifiimt,  and  much  more  Argl.Scrip
corious  in  the  Studies  of  Pbilofopby  then  others,  yec  they  pafle  forne  undecent  pag.  666 .
and  abafiYe  Ctnfuru  uponhim,  whh  referrence  to  tbis  vme  (ini  frivolous  ( d)VcSeript .

LH  $ Scwc}Br.GmM.t.67


c)  Ord. p.jj.
()Ordin.  p.  88,


2 ) Ordiri.
P3g‘9‘

h)  Pag. 666.

i)  )Vcvtr'sfun
Mon.


<«8J

'Science,  as  they  are  pleVd  to  tearme  it,  (and  a better  opinion  I find  not  they
hadevenofthe  Hcrmctic^  It  Arni  vg  it  felfe .)  Incieed,  every  one  that  is  educa*
ted  a Scbollcr,  is  not  borne  to  afF&  or  be  happy  in  every  Art,  forne  Jove  onc,
fome  another,  bur  fcw  iAU !.  Andthis  arifeth  from  the  various  Ir.fluencts  of
the  Stirrs,  vvhich  beget  fundry  Inclinatioris  and  tAffeftim  in  Men,  according
to  the  diderent  Conftitutms  and  Temperatur  es  of  their  Bodics  $ fo  thit  com-
monly  what  eitheraman  docs  no:affe5i,  oi-tytow,  he  dcfpifes  or  condemnes,
yet  feldome  with  any  jhew  of  Rcafon.  Buc  ic  is  nogood  Qmlufion  for  Blinde
men  to  afhrme  the  tfwfl.has  no  ligbt,  becaufe  they  wete  never  To  happy  as  tb  fce
it.  For  though  thy  feifc  (faith  Conmatb)  art  ignorant  of  a Matter,  \is  not  de-
nied  to  others  to  know  ihe  fame.  However,  our  t Autbor  was  fo  happy  as  to
become  a CMafter  of  this  Scirnc  very  early : which  he  Icarned  in  (e)  forty  dt)esy
and  vvhen  he  was

(f)  £>cantlpef  tkc  age  of  t&>entgcfgtyt£e&YC0,

He  earneftly  moved  his  Mafter  (who  is  generally  thought  to  be  Riplcj)  to
communicate  the  Red  Medicine  to  him,  which  after  fome  tyme  (finding  him
capable  of  it)  be  accordingly  did.

Much  more  might  be  faid  in  Honour  of  this  Autbtr, but  I refer  the  Reader  to
the  Ordinali  it  felfe,  which  will  abundantly  fatisfie.

Belides  this  worfce  (which  is  called  both  by  Pitts  and  Balt j Epitomen  Alcbjf •
tnfa,  but  by  him  felfe

(g)  Jftatriev)  of  9IMme  t\)t  dDvtinall»

'SbcCreOe  mity,  tty  j|>tan?atOperpitnaU)

He  wrote  another  Booke  Ve  tranfmutationc  Metallorum  5 .and  to  thefc
(6)  Pitts  addsa  third  Ve  Lapide  Philo fopbico.

In  the  time  of  Hcn  8.  there  flourifhcd  Nyne  Brothers  of  the  family  of  the  *
Nortons  and  all  Rjiigbts,  one  of  them  fviz.)  Sir  Sampfon  Norton,  Mafter  of
the  Ordnauce  to  the  faid  Rjng  ( an  Office  of  greate  Honour, and  not  ufualiy  con-
• fer'd  but  upon  Men  very  eminent)  lyes  buried  in  (i)  Fulbam  Churcb  nere  Lon -
don,  whofe  Tombe  was  adorned  with  feverall  Hcrm&icfa  Hicroglipbicall  paint-
ings,  which  havelately  periflu  by  the  Ignorant  \ealc of  ahofe  that  undcrftood
ehem  not.

( # / .

The  Epitaph  this*

3Df  poSnr  egerite  prap  for  tl)C  j&ouie  cf  Sampfon  Norton
^mgbtjiatc^aHerofthc^Pi^nanceof  Sfcarrc,  Soitb  &in g

Henry  ttyeStb  anOfortI)c^ouIcof5DameElizabythbPOfSopff.
3*%cl;  £>iv Sampfon  OeccfffO  tbc  cpgbr^  oag  of  Jfcbruart
onctljouianb  fibefcttMneO  anofcbcntcc*:.


Pag* n.1.7*  ®f;at  1:0  2$ att,  for  better  nefbrfrorfc,

C^amtg?  rng  mrrtfng  for  Orche  of  tEfohjGCBrfe*

Doubt'efleAZ>rrrH  was  truly  fenJible  of  the  hi£h  injuries  dbne  to  Irarxed  men
ihrough  the  Erronious  Travfcriptms  of  their  Boc^cs, and  'had  ftiared  in  the
unimaginable  misforme  which  thereby  befell  the  then  Studeiits  in  *T bilofopby,
for  helived  in  ihofetymes  that  could  not  afford  him  the  ufe  of  arty  other

Bookes


0 B?)

Bookes  fate  onely  Mitiufcripts  (jPrintivg  having  not  lervcd  an  Apprentiiliip  to  k)  The  fu  ftPr/a-
E»gtowdfk)when  he  wrote  this  OridinaU)$c  in  that  regard  he  layes  tbis  wei&hty  ting-Prcj Je  was
charge  upon  unfauhfull  Scribes vvho  negligently  ozwtlfuUy  alcer  their  Cepy>  fetup  in
wherebytbc  warieft  Studenti  are  cncombred  vvich  doubts^nd  mified,or  plungcd  min,  Abbey  b y
itito  unhappy  Error* . Symon  Ijlip,

How  ordinary  a fault  thiswas  amongft  the  Tranfcribers  of  former  times  An. 147 1 and
may  appeare  b yCbaucer,  who  (l  am  confident)  tooke  asgreate  care  as  any  man  IViUum  Caxten
co  be  ierved  with  the  beft  and  hecdefulleft  Scribet 3 and  yct  we  finde  him  com*  che  firft  that
playning  againft  Adam  his  Scrivcncr  for  the  very  fame : praftifed  it

there.  ^

(l)  5)OOfteat)ape3imotctbptoojUercneS2),  SeeStraw

jdtto  Coercet  anoebeto  tubbe  ant>  ferape,  S wrv.w-

3Jnb  aii  is  tfjp  ncglesenceawb  rape.  1)  cbaucer  to

But  as  in  other  Artes  and  Sciences  the  fault  is  fcarce  pardomble,  fo  cbeifly  bis  Scrivcncr .
in  Hcrmetiquelearning,  where  the  Injury  may  prove  irreparablc,

(m)  3lr.bt^aw  agina  offome  one  jSillable,  m)  ori p.i  1.

, $9apmafc«ttyi0  OlSolte  unpjofltable.


Pag.j 31  fhttlbe Surite 31  flbutoempfealtp  brcafc

Cl}crefojc£9out^  to^outb  3 mnft  itcebcs  fpeafcc*

THisispart  ofthelcffcr  which  Norton* s Mafler  wrote  when  he  invired
him  to  come  and  receive  the  Secret  by  rvord  ofuMoutb , for  without  breaeb  of
hlsO^ffr  he  durft  not  commit  it  to  writing,  iefi  he  might  cajl  the  Cbildrens
'pred  to  Voggs .

Inlikemanner  tAriflctle  refufed  to  communicate  to  Alexander  by  Lettery
things  apperteyningto  thi  sMiftcry,  unrill  a perfonall  mceting  might  aliow  him
ro  do  it  viva  voce:  for  thus  writes  Ljdgatc  out  of  Ar  i fiotlcs  Secreta  fccrctorum.


(&btxz  bci&cerccsf  of  fateri#  frJ}  ant>  fofee,
iSatttrc  concripb  anb  fccrcc,
jbfcic^  ^l'yfandrebdhCbfo;tOfenoi33e;

Ariflotles  a ccrtpn  prebitee,
Jfratfprcifiebcioosun  Jjpm  fplff  fecptbe,
SPfctdj  Suao  bciipcb  of  grete  probtbencc,
^pIUjC  fcpiufplff  camctofifeprcfcnce.


And  this  was  for  fear  his  Writings  fhould  come  to  the  view  of  fuch  vvhofeE/ef
were  not  worthy  the  perufall  of  fo  fublhne  Secrctsy  and  chereby  fufter  under  the
contcmpt  of  tbe  prophane  Vulgarior  by  mcfedmcn  be  abufed  to  w:cf{tdufes.
('For  a Secret  difeovered  will  not  faile  of  doing  Injury  to  one  party  or  an  other)
which  (if  by  his  meanes  it  fliould  happen)  might  render  him  Criminali  before
§od>  and  a prefumptuoui  violator  of  the  Calejliall  Scalcs.

However  the  auncient  Pbilofopbcrs  have*  ufed  writings  y and  they  as  wcll
ohfcure  c/s  obviousjebe, tby  tbe  Ignorant  might  be  more  Ignorant , but  tbe  Wifc  un •
derjhmd  andprofttythe  one  be  deccived}  the  other  alurcd:  And  Iike  Ariliotle  wbo
(publifhing  his  AcromaticaU  Difciplinc  and)  being  therefore  taxed  by  Alex-
ander (becaufehealonehadlearned  them  ol  him)  anfwcred  Sc [critfjfc,  tr


Op


1.


G fcr.


C+40)

nonfcripfifle  i cdidijfe  pidtn  fid  legentibus  neu  ivtelligeniibui.  They  havetaken
much  paines  by  &£nigmmcoll  and  Porabolicoll  difcoveiies  ( according  to  their
afte&ed  ideoms)  to  point.out  the  T bilofopbcrs  Mcrcury , andfwith  an  univoCall
confent,)  ailerted  the  wonderous  operationsof  ant/dgent  and  Potient  united
Anenymi.  but  rte  muft  not  loo\cjor  ibeNomc  oftb&t  in  ploitic  veords  vcbicb  biikcrto  ntvtr>
ony  man  durji  nome:  For  thac  they  have  lockt  up  in  firinio  pcftorU,  and  pur-
pofely  deprived  of  ligbt .

Their  chiefeft  ftudy  wasto  wrapup  their  Secrcts  i:i  P abies,  and  fpin  oat
their  Pancies  in  Vailesandfltfdows,  whofe&ziii  feems  to  excend  cyery  way3
yct  fochat  they  all  meeee  in  a Common  Ccnter > and  point  onely  at  One  ihing.

q)  cbm . ProL  0 ) ^nt) pe  xoote  tl;at  eberp  dBbangclitf,

to  his  owne  C!)attc‘!ct^u0  tyz  paino  of  3eftt

nie.  /ftefaptbnotalttyngaa tygfeiiofoDotbe,

® nt  nap  tty  leC Te  ^er  fib  cntcncc  ttf  all  (ot^.

^itDaUaccotOeiUnbetr  ^cntcncc,

H!  ht  tbercitt  l;cr  teUing  Differ  cnce.

Jroj  Torne  of^es*  famemoje  auD  fomeieffe,

<Mtl)cn  t^et  l)!0  tuteotig?  pafeion  e^preffe*

31  rneanc  of  ^arfc^atbeto&ukeanD3oI)n,
^utDoufctiefTefeer  5)cntencei0allonc.

$)  Ve  cbim.  And  to  thi9  effed  is  that  of  Count  Trcvifw.  (p)  Hc  tbot  wcll  undcrftonds  the

!Mir . fecundo,  Philofopbers  fball  finde  tbcy  agrec  in  all  tbings,  but  fuchw  Are  not  tbe  Sonnsef
pars  Pag. 28.  Art  mll  tbink  they  cUJh  moftfouly.


Pag.  j 3 .1  .i  * . pue  ©cire  anto  t!;t$  Ifrt

3 Sofli  ton  mafce—

THere  bas  ever  beenea  contintied  Sutccfiw  of  Pbilofcpbers  in  all  tAges,  al-
though  the  beedlejfe  world  hath  feldome  taken  notice  of  them  5 For  the
Auncicnts  ufually  (before  they  dyed)  tAdopted  oneorother  for  their  Sonns,
whom  they  knew  well  fitted  vvithfuch  like  qualities,  as  aft  fett  downe  in  the
letter  ttnt  Norton' s Mafter  mote  to  him  when  he  fent  to  make  him  his  Heirt
unto  this  Science,  And  otherwife  then  for  pure  vert ucs  fake,  let  no  man  ex-
ped  to  attainc  it,  or  asin  the  cafe  of  Tonfile .

i)  Ordin . q) ;tfo*^!mf03fcnU  make  no  ftoje,

Pag  4r.  f Solatu Iff to  Difclofeit,  t^attoagncbcrDonc  bcfojc.

P^emrds  nor  Terrors  (be  they  never  fo  Munificent  or  Vreadfull ) can  wrcfl
r)  /0.\tpag,  5 y.  this (ecret  out  of  th ebofome  of  xPbilofQpbcriamongft.  ochers^  witneflfe  (r)Tbomas
2 ) ait  en*

Now  under  whac  Tya  and  Ingagemcnts  this  Sccret  is  ufually  delivered,
Avhen  beftosved  by  wcrd  of  moutb)  may  appeare  in  the  weighty  Obligotions
ofthatO^fe  which  Cbornc^  tooke  6efore  he  obtainedit,  for  thus  fpake  his
&U(tec  to  him :


(4+0

g)  tctrtl  fou  tttee  to  o jroto  be  contcnt  n)Brcv.o(Fbt.

Jra(tl)fnU}?  to  reccibc  t^c  OtcfTcD  jS>ncramcnt  hf  cap.f.

-antpon  tijts  iJDatJ?  tljat  3i  tyallljercpott  g(bc,
dro?  nc  <15  olo  nc  *>ilbcr  aj»  longast  powltbc,
i3citl)crfo?lobc  pou  beare  toSoarbo  pottr  fifnne,
ilioj^et  to.no  great  %an  pjcfcrment  to  winsc,

®fjat  pouOifeiofc  tl;c  pectet  tbat  3!  fbnll  pou  teaeb,
jfrettbcjbptfarlttng,  nojbrnofwjpft  iijpcttfjej
315  ut  onclp  to  Ijfm  Soljiclj  pou  bc  fure , '
i^atl;  eber  fcartJjcb  after  tfce  Recreta  cf  /datore,

<®o  Ijim  pou  map  r ebealc  tlje  Recreta  o?  tljia  3rte,
flflrioer  tl;c  Cobcring  of  ^Ijtlofopbte  befoje  tfyta  Kto^lOpee

(begart.

And  this  Ostb  he  charged  him  to  keepe  Flitbfully  and  witbout  fi  olit!  en.

r)  ifaije  tljouglR  tobefnbcD  frorti  tljcnitt  r)  Ghsp.ibid.

And  ifit  fo  fel!  out,  thatthey  met  not  wich  anv,  whome  they  conceivedin
ali  refpe&s  wotthy  of  tbekAdopiion,(f)thcy  iben  uf.gved  it  into  t bc  binis  of  Goi,  s)  Ord:paj.  J7«
who  beft  knew  wliere  to  beftow  it.However,they  feldome  left  the  World  before
they  left  fome  written  Lcgicy  bchind  them,  which  (being  the  iffuc  of  their
Brttir.c)  ftood  in  roomeand  place  cf Cbildnn,  and  becomes  to  ns  both  Pa-
re»: and  Schoolmtfler , througbout  which  they  were  fo  univerfally  k'nde,  as  to
call  all  Student  s by  the  deare  and  affedionate  T y tle  of  Sons  (t)  ( Hermes  giving  t)  in  T intni.
the  firft  Prcfident)  wifhingall  were  fuch5  that  take  the  paines  totteaa  their
Fathersftepps,  and  induftrioufly  follow  the  Rules  and  Diftates  they  made
over  to  pofterity^and  wherein  they  faithfully  difeovered  tbe  whole  Mjft crj  t

u)  2d0  Iaxofalip  a0  bp  tbcir  fcaltp  tljci  map,  u )Ordin,  pa,it,

® g ipcence  of  tbebjeabfuU^ubgc  at  fcQmegbap*

In  thefe  Legitimate  (jbildrcn  they  lived  longer  then  in  their  AdoptcdSons, for
though  thefe  certainly*perifhed  in  an  Agenti  their  Writings  fasifwben  they
dyed  their  Souls  had  beenTranfmigrated  intothem)feemed  asIwworwKjenough
at  leaft  to  perpetuate  their  Mcmmcs , tilh  Time  ftiould  be  no  more.  And  to  bc
the  Fdthcr  of  fuch  Sons,  is  fin  my  Opinion)  a n.oft  noble  happinefle.

w)  Let  Clowncs  gei  Heitcs , uni  iVulth  j rrben  I amgoney  vj)RandJS ctmt

And  tbe  gnate  Bugbcaregrijly  deaib  P^g-^3*

Sball  fnatcb  this  Idle  breatb ,

If  Ia Poem  leavc,  tbat  Poem  is  my  $on.


Pag  34.  li.3  $.  3!  maba  alfo  tbe  of  Ipfc,

tnebercfta  ^attbaunftfC&pfc.

THe  Ccnjefturt  has  rauch  of probability  in  it  which  fpeakes  thi»  the  iVifc  of
iVill.  CanningSy  who  was  y.  tymes  Major  of  ‘BrifloU,  contemporary.wich
Norton > and  whole  maltb  was  farr  beyond  the  beft  of  thofe  tymcs>  as  appeares

Mmm  by


fo

**7.  , .

b)  Camb.Bnt.
fo.  z*8.

c)  (Jbm.
fo.  4^7.

d)  Godv- pag.
3*7.


cC  by  thac  notable  Workeof  hisin  building  .fir&f  Mrfr/ of  Radcliff  without  thc
<c  IValls  ofBrijicdl,  ineo  which  Cburch  there  is  a Stately  afqenc  upon  ma.ny
« Staires,  fo  large  wichall,  fofinely  and  curioufly  wrought,  witb  anarched
« Roofe  over  hend  of  ftone,  artificially  Imbowedj  a Stetple  alfo  of  an  excceding
« heigbtj  thac  all  the  pariih  Cbntcbei  in  England  which  hitherto  I have  feene
cc  (faith  judicious  (0)  Comdex)  in  my  judgcment  it  furpaffeth  many  degrees.

Thzhi&WittimGtomngs  2\to{b)  Inftitutcd,(  Ifoaefon  faith  very  much  (c)
augmtited)  the  Colledge  of  tVeftbury  neere  Briftoll  (not  long  before  (d)  foun-
dedbyjcfcn  Carpenter^Bifhop  of  IVorcefter)  and  in  his  old  age  tookc  upon
him  the  Sacerdotali  funftion  and  becamePorae  thereof.


Pag.38.li, 4.  3nt>Delvi$at  Teuxbury  iofttyitf  beat)


t^AMay  1471  \7\7Ithin  twodayes  after  the  (e)  Vi&ory  which  Edax  %tbe  fourtb  obteyned
J V V over  ueene  Margaret  an dPrinceEdw  (the  Wift  and  Son  of  Henry  the

r*  ctQn  Ann  fix0*t  TeuxbnryiThis  (f)Z)clvk  (the  SonncoiSk  $ob?t  Velvii  then  flaine)
V * ’ w i$  btbcitded : Notwithftan  Jing  a Tardon  granted  unto  him  and  others  by  the

to.  414*  Fying  at  rhe  earneft  folicicationof  a T^ricft  who  withftood  his  enrrance  into  a
Cbuuby  whither  Hee  and  many  more  were  fled  for  San£huryy  till  the  faid
Pardon  was  obteyned.  A juft  puniflimenc  fqj?  bet^ying,  fo  honeft  ^Philofo-
fiber  as  P alum  into  'the  fnnds  of  fo  imminent  danger > as  the  Siory  at  the  lactee
*n4  of  itefwyt  CbtyW  roentions.


Pag.39.ll**  TonfileS»a0aJLabaurcrint^e  jfive.


*T^He  great  Lcttcr  T.  fet  inpi.  6.  wberein  th cGryph&n  is  cut,(hould  have  been
X placcd the firft  Lctur  cft he  Line:  Butthis  miftake  was  comittcd  in  my
abfence  from  the  Prcjje,  for  which  theT rinter  beggs  pardon,  as  alfo.  the  En -
graver 3for  giving  thc  ^rypboitshinder  Pecte , thofe  cloven  enes  of  a Hogg>  inftead
t?f  theri ptgued  pams  of  a Lycti.  m >

What  was  containcd  wichin  the  lower  compaffe  of  the  faid  T.  which  in
xh? Originali  Mavufcript  was  like  a Capitali  SccretaryT.  feemes  ftnmyjudge-
ment)  a Coateo£  Armes,  £01  alchough  ic  was  not  drawne  in  the  forme  ofa
flricld  or  S euebeon,  yet  wichin  the  compafle  of  the  Lttttt  (which  I take  to  be
#th eficld)  was  A\ure,  a Grypbon  Rampm,  wich  IVitigs  difplayei,  Argcnt.  But
to  what  Family  ic  belongsl  cannoc  yet  learne.


Pa.yrl. i.  Brife  fc^fc^tmiamexD^ent^ecijanseof Copnewajsijafc.

g)  An.  'T‘His  alterationof  our  E7;g/i/7;Ca>?ic  was  inthe(g)fth.  of  Edn?jrdthe  4tb.

X the  value  of  Money  at  one  rife  was  never  fo  great  before. or  fince^for  he

h ) $tow  Annal,  made  of  an  ( b ) old  fdoble  of  Gold  a Ryall,  and  ftom  the  value  of  6 s*  $ d.  with
41 Surv.  4 6.  adding  9.  d.  in  ^yraifed  it  to  10  s.  (and  fo  other  Cyties  in  like  preportioti),

andyetthicNoWewas  byHf4»made4d.  in  value leflc  tbenthe  Rofe  Hoblc

of


C+-B)

ofEdrv:  j.coyned  Anno  i^x.thc  (i)  Gold  whereof  as  is  affirmed  (by  an;  \ n r i?
umrttun-vcnty)  was  made  by  ProjcMon  or  Multiplicatio»  Alcbimicali  of  Rai-  } cmb'R(rr-
« mutui  Lully,  in  the  Torccr  of  Union , and  befides  che  Traditio»,  the  Itifcription  7 **
ct  is  Tome  proofe,  for  as  upon  tbe  one  fide  there  is  the  upon  a fbip

“ «o  notifie  that  he  was  L«rd  of  the  Scxr,  with  this  eide  fet  upon‘tbe  rcvcrfcz
“ Crcjjc  floury  m:h  Lioueux,  inferibed,  Iefus  autem  tranpcns  per  medium  eorum
“ ibat , charis, as  Jefus  paffed  invifible  and  in  moft  fecret  manner  by  the  midft
cc  of  Tbarifct,  fp  that  Gold  was  made  by  invifible  and  fccret  Art  amidfl  the  7>-
notant.  Mayem  confirmes  this,  and  faith  (/<)  Rajmond  mademoft  pure Gold^)  Simb  aur.
in  the  Tornr  which  is  yec  called  Raymcuds  noble,  obrj^i  fummaq-,  indicatura,  pag.418.
fome  of  which  himfelf  had  feen.Tis  alfo  worth  obferving  that(i)chere  was  no* ) Cambiem,
gold  coyned  in  England  before  the  faid  Edwird  tbe  tbird's  Reigne  An . 144j.pag.172.

& Raymond  Lully  was  long  in  Eugland  before  that,  for  (m) An.  1 $32.  he  wrotew)See  rhe  ht-
bis  r cjhmcntum  Noviffimum  in  St.  I&tberius  Churcb  neerech e Tomr  otLondon  ter  end  of  his
an iVedicated  it /with  other  .of  his  J^or^ex)  to  Edmrd tbe third , and  it  may  be  TeftMov .
ptefumed  be  W3S  fome  while  there  before  he  wrote  the  fame:  For,  that  he  was
brought  over  by  Cremer  Abbot  of  Wcfminficr,  afccrwards  made  knowne  to  the
K/^and  didfurnifh  him  with  mnch  Gold,  as  Ihall  appeare  hereafcer  in  the
Annotations  upon  Ionice  T&ixt).


Pa.tfi.Ii.7.  IBnttbec^ctfc^iftrtcf  arcons  &cfencc£aU

IU  dici  ali  Aflrologie  is  che  Kcy  of  Naturali  Magic^,  and  Naturali  Magici  the
7)oore  thatleads  to  this  Blcffed  Stem.

Howbeit,  the  Jgnerance  and  M alie  e of  fometimes,  and  thecommonC^ow*
ofourshasmoft  faifly  and  abuiively  call:d  Nccromancy  ("and  whac  other  Arts
are  raifed  from  the  Dodrine  of  Vivcls ,)  Magida  withouc  affording  that  juft
and  due  diftindion  which  ought  to  be  made  betwcene  them:  and  what  ®rca-
ter  Injury  tolearning  then  without  Diftindion  to  confound  Laudable  iptorr*
ledgc , with  what  is  Impiota  and  *Dcvrlip)  ? For,  if  there  be  any  thing  in
(what  we  call^  Magick  , other  then  a fearchivghtc  ibefe  bidden  vertues  rvbicb
God  bos  bcen  pleas* d to  bcjiow  upon  crcatcd  tbings  (though  cfofcly  lockt  up  by  the
generali Cmk)nbercby  rvcmay  aptly  and  mturally  apply  'A  genes  toPatients,  1 fay,
ifin  it  there  be  any  thing  elfe,theyarc  only  CubtiWfalfehoods  that  fhelterand
fiiroud  themfelvs  under  that  7>*/c,and  which  would  gladly  be  efteemed  Lcaves
of  that  Piant,  from  whofe  Root  they  never  fprung.  And  therefore  is  it  noc
lcfle  abfurd,  then  ftrange,  to  fee  how  fome  Men  (who  would  have  the  World
account  them  learned,  and  whome  I beleive  to  be  fo  learned,  35  to  haye  read
and  found  what  Laticudc  is  due  to  the  word  Magus , how  it  is  accepted  by  kthe
tyudkiout,  and  what  a vaft  difference  there  is,  betweene  tbe  Poffrme  of  a M*-
gician,  and  the  abufe  of  the  Ifard)  vvill  not  forbeare  to  ranke  Trite  Magici ans
with  Conjurer s,  Nccrcmmers  and  IVitcbcs  (tbofe  grand  Impoftors)  who(»Jw*  n)  Taroccl.de.
clently  intrude  ihemfclvts  imo  Magidi,  m if  S vehe  fhould  enter  imo  afairc  ani  dc-  occult  Pbilt  cap.
licatcgardcn , andfbeingin  ieagae  with  the  DevilT)  make  ufeofhis  Affi-  u,
ftance  in  their  worfys,  to  councerfeit  and  corrupt  the  admirall  mfdome  of  the
betweene  whom  there  is  as  large  a difference  a$b:tweene  Angelsznd
Deviis  ~ M m m 2,  The


\)  Dr.GcIls


(444)

The  M dgict{  here  intended3and  which  I ftrire  to  Vindicate, is yVnritte^True,

#.)  Cati  Curtos  of  ihzPyifdomofNamrCtSc  indeed  comprehcdeth  the  whokPbilofopby  ctNature,

J 66'  ‘ *bcin&  (0  a ^crfc^  ^(novclcdge  of  the  worfis of  God,andtheirEffc&h.  It  is  that,

p }Bac.adv.  fo,  which  (P)re&lCes  al1  naturali i^hilofophy  from  varicty  o/Speculattons  totbe  mag-
' nitude  of  workes,  and  ( q ) rrbofc  Mifteries  arcfargreatertben  ibe  naturali  Pby-
lofophy  novo  inufeandrcputation  roillrcacb  urito.  For  by  the  bare  application  of
Aftivcsio  Ttaffivcs  it  is  able  to  exercife  a kind  of  Empire  over  Nature  , and
wotke  roouders  : and  ’:is  from  the  ignorancc  of  ftich  marvelous  Opcrations
that  the  Ignoratu,  (yi\  the  tnoil  learned  in  ocher  thiugs  (as  weliastbe  J///re-
ntt)  ifthey  benot  learned  in  this,)  either  by  an  unwarrantable  adoration  e*
Iteeme  thein  as  Mir&dcr,  which  onely  are  the  recrees  of  Naturali  or  M atkc*
maticall  Pbilofopby : or  elfe  (which  is  an  Errour  as  wide  on  the  lefc  handj  forth-’
with  cenfure  and  flander  thofe  cruly  Naturali  as  Diabolically  becauie  wonder-
full  (frange  and  beyond  the  randome  of  their  Apprebcnfions . The  lacter  of  which

r) Gcft.$  i»  37*  mightas  weilfay  (r)  tfacobs  pra&ifing  to  make  fiis  of  a P/dColour

was  performed  by  the  aflift ance  or  miniftry  of  th z Devii l,  and  as  well  con-
demne  the  ufe  of  Pbificfi , becaufe  the  Dcvill  has  taught  iVitchcs  divers  harm*
full  and  uncharitableufcs  o PHtrbs,Minerallsy  Excrement*,  &c.

And  as  in  forne  dull  ages,  and  among  fome  Grojje  Spirits  has  proved  dan-
geroustobe  learned,  Witnt  fle  our  Renowned  Roger  Bacbon,  whom  (To*
gether  with  Artcphetcs,Arnold,de  villa  nova, who  were  T bilofophcrs  of  known  r^-*

s) PcT?  e^/>iwPucation  & cr^dic)  ( *)  iVicm  reckons  among  theDf plorati  ingemi  homines  (t)ali
V m ii  z ca  4 w^°fc  Worliesfairely  voritten  and  rvcll  boimdyVpere  by  Rtligma  pretending  Sciolijis

* dam*dMVeviltJhy  voiib  lovg  Nailes  througb  tbcmfajlncdto  des\s  intbe  Prancifcan

* * , Elbrary  at  Oxford,  and  there  rvitb  Du(i  and  SMotbs  con fumei ; Even  fo  our  other

\oHottCmordf  amous  Country-man  CProfwnd  Rrpley']  was  alio  abuiei,  (u)  xoboafierhU
x deatb  U faid  tobave  been  branded  votib  ibe  name  of  a Necromanccr.  PopcSUvefter

^ 6 * * the  fecond  paPd  fora  Magician  (in  the  worft  fenee)  becaufe  h e underftood

Geometry  -,  and  about  1 fo,  yeares  agoe  (fo  blind  an  age  was  it,)  that  to  know
GrccJie  and  Necromancy  were  one  and  the  fame  thing,  in  opinion  ofchel/-
litcrate  Howcver,lec  the  Ignorant  fcofte  and  attribute  that  to  Deceipt  and  Illufion
which  is  the  proper  worke  of  Nature  produced  by  exguifite  knowledge,  I am
confident  the  ingenoufly  learned  will  approve  and  admire  it.

Butto  teare  offthacugly  vitari  which  Emy  has  placed  before  the  Paceci
fo  Divine  a *Bcauty , and  to  inake  way  for  the  meaning  of  our  Autbor,  I thinkc
it  neceffary  (in  the  fi.ft  placet  that  I touch  upon  the  IVord , that  gives  a name
to  the  Pro feJZcrs ;

And  that  is  Magus  fprimicively  a Perftin  word)  which  onely  fignifies  or
impor  ts  a (fentcmplator  of  H caver, ly  and  Divine  Sciences  t a (fudious~Obfcrvcry
wjPanprimfo.  an  expounder  of  Divine  ibings,aname  ffaith  ( [w ) Marcellus  Ftcinus)  gratious  in
tbeCjoffclfmfignifyiKga  JVitcb  ora  Conjurer,  but  a rvifc  man  ani  a Ttriefi.
And  in  truth  a true  Magician,  acknowledges  God, to  be  the  true  Caufe  and  Qi-
ver  of  life  and  vcrtuc  to  Nature,  and  all  Naturali  things,  of  the  Caufcs  of
5)  Magia pra-  which  things  (m  alfo  of  (*)  Divine ) is  the  whole  fcopeand  effcS  of  ali  their
cipua&pars  IVriiiv.gs  and  Difcourfes  :

Theologia-  * In  the  Next  place3thac  I give  the  Definition  of  Magici  (becaufe  a sfy^Mjran-
y)Tic.M/r.fo.  dulahyn)  it  it  an  Artvcbicb  fexc  under (laud  and  many  reprebend,  and  therefore
gu  of  neceflity  to  be  clearly  evinced  : ) Receive  it  from  a learned  hand  :

youle  finde  it  wortbyout  obfetYance.  ' Ma*


C++0

Migick,  tbe  Comcxien  of  naturali  Agents  and  Patients,  au foc  rabie  eacb  to
‘ o tbcr,  wrougbt  by  a wife  Man  to  tbc  bringingfortb  offucbeffcfts  as  are  wcnierfull
totbofetkitknmnoi  tbcircaufes. Thus  Hee.T*  ar  acci fus  calle d it  (z)  a moji  fecret  z)  Ve  Occuli .
and  biddtn  Scyenceof  fupcrnaturall  things  in  the  Eartb,  ibat  wbatfoever  is  impefii-  PbiUzp.u.
ble  to  be  founi  oui  by  mans  Rcafon  may  by  this  Art.  And  Ihortly  afrer  to  cicere
k ftomviputationszddsy  tbattis  in  it  felfc  moft  pure  and  twt  defileirvhb  Ce-
rimonies  nor  Conjuratioris  as  Necromancy  is .

Agreeableto  both  (but  more  copioufly  delivered)  is  that  of  £orn:A -
grippAy  who  affirmes, (a,)  Magidi t0  containe  tbe profoundcil  Contemplation  ofmoft  aJ  Vc  qccuIu
fecrct  tbings , together  mtb  tbe  iuturey  power  yqui\ityy  fubftanceyand  vertues  tbereof  \ PbUMb.  i .ca. 2- .
as  alfo  tbe  hnowltdge  of  vpbole  nature:  That  inttrufts  va  concerning  tbe  diffcrtncc
and agrczmm,  tf  tbings  amongft  tbemfclvcs3  rvbcncc  rt  producetb  its  wonder -
fulltffcftsy  by  uniting  tbe  vertues  of  tbings  tbrougb  tbe  Application 'oftbtm
cnc  to  tbe  otbtr , ani  to  tbeir  inferionr  futable  Subjefts,  joynivg  ani  faiitting
tbtmtogctber  tbroughly  by  tbe  pomrs  ani  vertues  of  fuperiour  Bodies . This

briefly  is  an  accounc  of  that Lcarningy  whofe  Opemions  and  EffeSls  (being  full
of  Miftcries)  wasby  cbe  Ancients  efteemed  as  the  higheftand  facred  Pbylofo -
pbic.tht  fou)itair<e  of  alleci  doBrine: Animadverto  (faich  T liny)  fummum  Litcra -

Irum  rUrititm3gbrianqu:,cx  lue  (cientia  antiquitus , & penes  femper  petitam.

What  hach  been  hicherto  faid,  vvill  not  (I  prefume)  offend  the  Earts  of  the
moft  Pious,  for  here  is  no  Incantattins,  no  \Vordsy  no  no  Charmes,  110

other  fragments  of  inyented  Fcpperies ; roi*  needs  there  any  : Nature  (wich
whom  erue  MagicUns  on!y  deale)  can  wotke  without  ehem*  fhe  findes  &Ultery
and  they  Arty  to  helpe  and  aftlft  Her,and  here’s  s AlL

To  inlhnce  the  Geveraticn  of  Froggsy  Lycc,  }Vomcsy  Infcfts3  &c.  The
work e of  a Pbilofcpbcr  is  there  in  oneJy  to  (6)  ftrengthen  the  Seeds  of  Naturey
(for  lite  alone  Workes)  and  fo  coquicken  them  that  they  haften  the  workeof  °)

Gener ation  fand  by  fuch meanes  Tbo>  Aquinas fuppofes Pharos  Magitwu y pro-  k«S,c:iP,14»
duced  Proggs ) infomuch  as  it  feems  to  the  Ignorant  not  to  be  the  \Vor\ie  of
Nature3( that  ufually  operares  mere  leafurelyj  rather  the  Power  of  the  Vevill.

But  they  who  are  learned  in  thofe  Artsy  marvell  not  at  fwch  working,but  Glo-

rifie  the  Creator.  To  whofe  Honour  alone  thefe  Operations  muli  chiefly

tend, for(c)be  is  bcjipraifcd  in  bis  t former,  and  wc  knowing  him  in  and  by  thefe  c)  Dr.Gdk

vifible  things,  may  through  fuch  knowledgc  underftand  his  more  Sccret  and  Serw.i6$o.

Invifblc  things,  and  tbereby  be  better  inabied  to  Glcripe  him,  tben  men

otherwifecan.

Now  I deny  that  any  meafure  of  underftanding,  in  naturali  Magic how
large  foever,  or  the  utmoft  and  ^artheft  fearch  we  can  poffibly  make  inro  that
pure  and  primitive  knovvledge  of  Nature3  to  be  a prying  inro  thofe  Hiddtx  Se .
crcts3  which  God  would  have  concealed  and  rankcd  arnong  the  number  and
natur*  of  thofe  things  he  has  prohibiced  us  to  fearch  into,  (as  I know  there  are
that  will  teli  you  it  is,  and  they  fuch  as  weare  the  Coar3  and  would  be  Ioath  ro
want  thereputation  o(Scbollan)  And  this  is  fuliy  manifefted  from  tAdamy
who  (d)  before  his  Pali  vvas  fo  abfolute  a Pbilofopber3ihK  he  fuliy  underftood  d)  G:n,z;v.i^.
the  trae  and  pure  knowledge  of  Nature  (which  is  no  other  then  wha:  we  call  20.

Natur  ali  Magitli)  in  thehigheft  degree  of  Perfe&ion,  infomuch,  that  by  the
light  thereof,upon  the  prefent  view  of  tht  Creat  ures  he  perfe<flly  knew  thcirNit-
ures, and  was  as  able  to  beftow  names  futable  to  their  ^ 'ualitfcs  and  Pnpertics ,

Mmm  1 For


(44-0


For,  This  was  a larger  and  cleercr  Jty  of  rhe  Ljgbt.  of  Naturt,  tfcea  ali  the
induftry  of  man  ('fiticc  the  Fail)  was  able  to  hope  for  or  attaine  unto,  and  (to
atteftthe  aliowance)  beftowed  upon  him  by  God  bimfelfc : Nor  was  it  this
Suturali  knowledg  tbac  introduced  his  Fall,  or  can  be  any  Ofiencc  or  Sin  in  ais
(were  it  poffiblejto  arrive  at  his  (Perjcfticn.bdo  certainlysi/^rfwr  tranfgreffion
(for  wbich  he  feli)  was  of  ahigher  Nature ,[eyen  that  proud  inquiry  intotfce(c)
r;Bac.advancc-  tyWVPicdc  of  goodand  evill , with  nolejje  intent  tbc?i  to  ma\e  a totali  dcfcflion  from
menc  5 fol,  5.  and  dcpend  wbolly  upon  bimfclje  and  bis  frce  vcnll~\

and  43.  Belides,  tis  worthy  Obfeivation,thac  God  in  conftituttngA/o^to  beaGcw-

lior  over  his  ownepeople,  feemed  as  wiilingtomake  choyceof  fucb  a onefor
thachigh  0#tf,as  was  (/)  learned  in  ali  the  in  requeft  with  the

Egypttans,  among  whomA/tfg/Y^  was  the  chiefe.  And  we  find  that  upon  Salo-
non’ s Prayer  to  Cjod  for  Wifdme  he  granted  him  a Heart  as  Urge  as  the  Sea,
and  therein  lodged  fo  greate  knowledge  of  Humane  things,  that  he  penetrated
whacfoever  the  underftanding  of  CMan  might  comprehend  : and  (to  manifeft
the  inoffenfivenefle  of  Naturali  Magici)  never  teckons  it  up  in  ali  his  Re-
traftatms  Though  he  throughly  underflood  it,  and  in  his  praftifc  actempted
the  higheft  Experimcms,  which  had  it  been  unlawfuU,  certainly  he  would
not  have  omitted.

Thus  much  for  a Trcfirim^.  And  now  that  I may  come  clofer  to  what
A Ad7v  ix  Norton  intends,  and  bring  neerer  to  our  purpofe  5 We  muftwnder-

E h Phif  * that  the  anc*  symrA*lrJ°f  r^e  % river fe  is  fo  fetlcd  by  the  Larves  of
■p11»  ’ Creation,  that  the  loweft  tbingsfthe  SubceleftiaU  or  Elementa ry  Rfg/oTf}.  (hould

a)  C nnn'  7 » * be  immediately  fubfervient  to  the  Midle  5 the  Midfr  [or  C^leftiaW]  to  thofe
v"an  .3.  aboves  and  thefe  [the  Super  celcftiaU  or  ImeUigibl?]  to  the  Supreamc  Rulcrs
becke.  With  this  it  is  further  to  bc  knowne  that  thefe  (g)Sttferims  and  Infc-
<f  riours  have  ane/£ffdh>gic<ifllifeenefle,and  by  a fecret  Bortd  baveiikewife  a faft
cf  ccberence  between  themfelvs  through  infenfible  Mediumt , freely  combiening
f lin  Obcdknce  to  the  fame  fupreme  R//frr,  and  (alfo  to  the)  benefit  of  Nature :
Infomuch,  that  if  we  take  the  faid  Harmony  in  the  Reverfe,  we  /hajl  finde  that

h) Car  Aqv  da  £bings  b Supercelcfiull  may  be  diawnc  down  by  Cehfliall,  and  SnpernituraU,
oc  Phil  1 1 S.  Naturali.  For  this  is  the  Maxim  of  old  Hermcs,Q)^upd  efifuperius,  efl  [icut

o’  " ' ¥•  fafeyjng'

i)  Tab  Sma-  And  upon  this  ground  (k)  IVifcmtn  conceiveitno  way  Irratimll  ibu  it

' , " fhould  be  pcfllble  for  us  to  alcend  by  the  fame  degrees  through  cacb  World,  to

j^bor'  Aer  de  VCI7  Vaginali  world  it  fclfc,  the  Maker  of  ali  things  nnd  fitft  Caufe .

O ult  Phiiof  ^ut  how  t0  coni°yne  l^e  Monrs  with  the  vertue  of  the  Super  iours  (which

, »CvU  * * is  marrying  Elmcs  to  Vines)  or  how  to  call  out  of  thehidden  places  into  open

/ . j.  p.  1.  ijoht,  the  difperfed  and  feminated  VcrtucSj  (i  e.  Virtutes  in  centro  re«tr//4rc^-
tcSi')  is,  the  work  of  the  Magi,  or  Hcrmethfi  PbiUfcpbers  onelyj  and  depends
upon  the  aforefai dHa  mony.  For,

They  know  that  the  Produttion  of  things  is  Naturall}  but  the  bringing  fortb
of  the^mwcis  not  Naturali : becaufethe  things  are  Create,  but  the  Vertucs
Ivereate .

Hcnceicis  that  th e^Power  and  Vertue  is  not  in  Planis,  Stertes,  CMittf
rallSySt c.  (though  we  fenfibly  perceive  the  Effcfts  from  tbem)  buc  tis  that
MnivcrfaU  and  All-piertir.g  $pirit,\hztOne  operative  Veftue  an d immortali  Stedc  of
rrorldly  things,) hat  God  in  the  beginning  infufed  into  thc  Cbaos,  which  is  every

where


(4477

wberc  Active  and  ftill  flowes  through  the  world  in  ali  kindes  of  chings  by
UniverfaUextenfion3  and  manifefls  it  fclfe  bv  the  aforefaid  Productiotir.  VVbicb
Spirit  a true  Artiji  knowcs  how-foto  hindle  (though  its  aftivhy  be  af  it  wcrc
dul'd  and  ftrughtly  bouiid  up3  in  the  clofeTri/on  o (Grofic  and  Eartbie  bodics)
asto  take  ic  from  COlP0Ttcty>  frecjit  from  Captivity  , and  let  it  loofe  thatit
• may  fteely  rpor^c  as  it  doch  in  the  o/£tbctiall  Bodies .

But  the  ttieancs  whereby  it  is  to  be  done  (vvhich  is  the  firfl  Prefxration)  ali
Pbilofopbcrs  have  hitherto  concealed.  F or,


1)  Co  fm)  Create  ttycp  tnafoc no  care,  /)  Hunt.Green

Jn  thetr  SiSoabeg  largelp  i o bedate.  Lyon .

l!5otl?oiD  to^DrtJeritaftctitg  Cmtiow,  m)  /.e.Toteil

<®i)cpleft  poojei^enlrttfiout  Confolatton.  what  it  is,

though  a^Enig-

And  unlefle  Cjod  pleafe  to  nvc&le  it,  (likethe  Inoifb  Pire)  it  mnft  be  kept  nutically.
biddep^nd  till  he  doth  there  is  no  bumane  induftry  can  forcibly  wrejt  the
lyiGwtidgc  thereof  out  of  the  Almigbties  bxnds.  .

o)  Si  te  fata,  vocanty  aliter  noti.  Augurel*

Looke  not  chen  for  ic  at  the  hand  of  Man3  for  ti$  the  $ift  of £od  onely.


o)  31  finflltttt  gtftant)  grate  of  ®)  Ordin.p.  i j.

Mil  dat  quod  non  bibet,  Man  has  ic  not , (iku  is,)  he  has  it  nottobeftow
whete  he  wilL

pj  €f;e0fylofot>l)et0  S»crc  p ftoojtrc  edje  on?>

Cl>att^cp  ^nlDchifcotcj  ft  nntononc,

( \ i]5c,innoli5obctttorttc(nno  manete,

3r  o;  unto  Cfcrtft  itia  foldeant>Dcare :

^Ijattyrfral  net  tl;attt  htfeo^crch  bc,
li&at  ft^ctc  tthkcttytoljicfcmc ;

^antomfptreanhelicfo^to  uefenb,

Jp^ant^at  tnmfikctfi : lo  tyteent).

In  fine,  if  any*man  befo  bleft  as  to  difeover  and  unyaife  our  Diana,  hc
flnll  finde  and  confefle  tha:  hc  was  beholding  to  Natur  ali  Magici  fordire&i-
ons,  the  Beginmng , M idlc,  aad  End $ and  when  it  is  wrought  up  to  his  bigbeft
degretof  Perfcftion3  he  fhall  fce  th:ngs  not  fit  to  be  writtenj  for  (may  I ayer
irwith  awfull  Reveroncej  dngdic&U  mfdome  is  to  be  obteyncd  by  it.


p)Chan.Ycom

Tale.


Pag.71.li.zy.  ®saebant3^l)Uc5)toncaparte.

O-NIeQe  the  Medicine  be  qualified  as  ic  ought,  iisdeatb  to  caft  the  leaft  At*
tome  of  it.becaufe  its  Nature  is  fo  highly  Vigorous  and  ftrong  abovethat
q £Maus'}  Forificsleatt  parts  are  ableto  ftrike  fo  fiercely  and  throughly  ineo
ihtBody  cf  abafc  and  corrupt  Mettall>  asto  Tinge  and  Convcrt  i:  into  fo  bigh
adegree  a$  perfed  GWd,  ho\v  lefle  ableis  the  Bodyof  Mati  to  refift  fuch  a

loree


(448)

for  ce,  wh  en  its  greateft  ftrength  is  far  inferiour  to  the  weakeft  Met, tali  ? I doe
believe(and  am  confirmM  by  feveralM?rt&w)cbac  many  'Pbihfcpbert  (having
a defire  to  enjoy  perfedt  Healtby)  have  deftroycd  themlelves  by  adventuring
to  take  the  Medicine  inwirdly3  ere  they  knew  the  true  ufe  thereof,  or  how  to
qualific  it  to  be  icceived  by  the  Nature  of  M an  without  deflrudion.


Pa.88.1i.i?.' CljelRcb&tonctepjefcrbatifcc,

p^ecten#  ttyitig  to  lengtl?  rcflpfe,

THkb  ibe  Stoncwbicb  forne  bnilders  upof  life  have  refufed,  when  in  truth  it
wisthe  ebeife  \Stone  in  tbe  Comer  ylt  being  produced  from  that  undefiled
vertue  whichis  yet  left  with  the  Creare  (as  a fmall  rcmainder  of  the  FirjlBlcf-
fing)  and  able  to  make  a ( q ) perfeft  i inion  betweene  the  Body , Sonle  and  $pirity
i -ap.f)  whilftour  lively  Fire,  (thztMcdium  between  the  Body  and  Spirit)  byrecei-

vingthis  Q/£tberiall  Medicine  confifting  of  heavenly  vertuet  (that  confume'
the  Impurities  and  Superflui tics  of  the  Body)  is  dclivered  from  ali  Impedimentr,
and  the  Body  forced  to  agree  with  that  incomparable  Nature  into  wbich  it  is
changing  by  fo  fweete  and  powerfull  Q ompulflonsy  and  confequently  life  Pro-
rogucd.

Astouching  the  Prolmgation  of  life , wee  meete  with  fome  Prefldents  in
Hiftoriesy  and  they  not  F abies y whcre  by  the  Application  of  things  inwatd  or
outw3rd,  the  Spirit  hath  beene  renewed,  the  Body  ftrengthned  the  Vitali  and
Animali  faculty  <\u\eknt&ydecrtpid  and  rvitbered  lAge  renewedj&Ef/ie  iolarged.
Befides  thefe  Relatiom,  we  perceive  Nature  is  fo  curteous  to  fome  kind  of  Crea •
tutet y as  the  Hart>Eagle>and  Serpent, that  fhe  affords  them  meanes  to  obteinethe
benefit  of  Renovation  (here  Nature  teaches  them  Naturali  M agie^  for  tis  no  o-
r) Bach.  Ep.  ther)  and  why  then  may  it  not  be  granted  toManif  fought  after?  Nay  the  (r)
Jt)e  Secret.  confideration  of  thisF  avourablcBlcjftng  afforded  to  Animalis  has  been  the  princi-

Natur.fcfp.6.  pali  ground  whence  many  l! htlofopbers  have  addided  chemfelves  to  the  fearch
<c  ofthU  Miftery,  hoping  that  might  not  be  denyed  to  Man3  upon  his  featcb,
cr  which  is  beftowed  gratis  upon  the  Creature.

s) Severi n -Idea  h is  apparent  that  our  (s)Difcafes  proceed  cbicfiy  from  Tranfplantation  (though

Med.Philof.  * deny  not  but  ^ome  Hereditary  Corruption  is  intaiVd  upon  T ofierityy  from  the
eap:  i 2.  * decaying,  mouldering,  and  rotten  Natures  of  our  Ance  fler  s)  * for>  by  what  we

Eate  or  Drin\e  as  Nourijhment ; the  corrupt  and  barmfull,  nay  deathfull  qua-
Sir  IV  Raw  . lities,  which  the (t)  Divine  malediftion  lodged  in  created  things,  is  removed
Ybi\.fcL6<.  from  them  into  our  Rodyety and  there  grow  up  and  multiply  tili  fhaving  height-
ned  the  Sal,  Sulpbur  and  CMcrcury,  imo  an  irreconcileable  Conteflatmy  throngh
the  impurities  wherewith  they  are  loaded  and  burthened)  they  introducca
miferable  dccay,  which  confcquentiy  become  a Veatb  : and  this  is  the  fooner
haftned  i f theretinto  we  adde  the  heavy  loade  of  Luxurioufnejfe  an  dCjlutony.  Yec
is  not  this  Veatb  Naturali  but  Accidtntallyand(2sn)zy  appeareby  what  has  been
faid)  a ( u ) Dcath  arifingoutof  thefruits  oftbe  greate  World  which  growcsup
uj)  \\  .Epilt.  fo?  Trav[pUiita:iovy  the  Rebcllious  Difobedience  of  man  provoking  Cjoi  to  piam  a
Veatb  in  every  thing  that  he  had  made3by  the  Curfe  wherewith  he  had  curfed  the
xo)  z.Ef).cap.  jrartfot  And  to  this  the  Dodhine  which  the  MAngcll  nueht  E/tfr#  is  agree-
7. v. f 1.1  i-ij,  ab|e.

And  thoughitisappoioccd^w«/J  dyey  againft  which  Dccrec  noE//x/rhas

power


(44^0

power  tore (ift,  yet  this  M edicine  isaremedyfor  thc  particular corruptiori of
M an,  to  keep  back  thofegr«Y<?j  and  difcafes  which  ufually  accompany  & mo-
left  Old  Age,  infomuch,  that  that  Ucatb  which  man  eates  in  his  2$rcad  may  be
brougbe  to  a Scpcration , and  confeqtteDtly  (in  the  comfort  of  an  Unimtrruptei
Health)  fpin  oat  his  tbread  of  life  to  the  longeft  end  of  that  Nature  fallen  from
CriginaU  J ujlice , For  tisa  cettaine  truth  that  what  we  rcceive  intoourSo-
dies,  of  that,  Nature  findes  two  Subfhnccr,  the  (one  witha  Gladfome  appe-
tite,) fhe  retaines  to  feedeF/w/ny.the  other  (vvith  an  abhor'd  diflike)  fhe  ex-
pells,  as  not  onely  ufdeffe  buc  Putrcfaftive  and  Vavgerous:  and  if  thereupon
wctbroughly  advife  with  ourfelves  we  muft  needes  confeife  Hcr  way  is  beft
to  be  imitated,in  feperating  the  Pure  from  the  Impure,  fwhtch  are  joyned  to-
getber  in  every  thing)  before  we  make  ufe  of  them,  and  where Jhe  does  mani-
feftly  Subftraft  and  Divide,  let  us  not  th ere  aid  and  multiplie  $ for  doubtleflc
the  F*cfc(y)profir  nothing,my  in  (ick  perfons  they  plainely  opprefe  the  pene-  y )Rotbm*Ce*
trating  vertae  of  the  Spirit  it  feife,  and  commit  that  [eperating  eArt  to  the  difea*  ment.
fed  Body , which  through  mafyiejfe  is  nor  able  to  performe  the  Tat^e*

The  'Bnvity  of  Life  came  in  with  the  Fallof  Adan,  andthough  fome  ofthe

Avtients  before  the Flood  livedalmoft  a thoufand  ycares,  yet  certainely  their

lives  wcre prorogued  by  the  ufe  of  this  Medicine , with  which  theywellknew

how  to  fcprrate  and  corrctt  the  obnoxious  <§hul;tics  of  ali  things,  and  I much

queftion  whether  the  gmrality  of  Perfons  then  lived  fo  long,  or  onely  thofe  \ lzrv-»

whowereth e(z)true  Arcefiors^ol  Abrabam,thcy  not  being  cdwaies  th etldtftj,»  r ; *

and/Srfl  begotten  ofthe  Patriarb^s,  btit  fuch  as  Cjod  chofe  out  of  the  Family  to

continue  the  live,  and  had  (by  thepetmifllon  ofGoi,  asa  fingular  and  pe*

culiar  blcftivg)  this  Secret  Traditionally  commitced  totbem.


Pa.8p.li.17. — ?nebettmt>ea(rap

£Df  IBcb  S»o*fcc  Dap.


HEnce  fome  affirme  that  Norton  neither  had  nor  knew  how  to  make  the
Red  Medicine,  but  thaPsnot  fo,  forto  the  time  of  publi/hing  his  Ordi-
nall,  *tis  true,  he  had  not  a fecond  time  gon  about  to  make  it,and  why  ?


fa)  eaafc  appearet!)  in  bcfcjc,  a)0ri.pag.8^

eaijcn  tt  tobbcfc  tfjcn  1^  cc  froutt)  no  ntoje*

m


Yet  that  hewas  fomerly  at  tforfo  rnadt  it,  and  was  robFd  thercof  ap-
peares  alfo  (6)  before,  where  hefaith  the  (c)  Mcrcbams  IVifc  ftolc  it  from  MOrio  '
him,  and  that  the  misfortune  thereof  deterr’d  him  from  making  furthercyr  'E  3*3  4*
progreffe  therein.  Belides,  he  ayers  his  Mxfltr  taught  it  him,  and  that  he  fully  * nota*
nw'  how  to  make  it, for  fo  himfelf  witneffetb.  uPon  PaS-H-


(d)J^  S»itb  ©racctbc  tttrlDoctriitc
Confcctton  oft^e  IScb^cbtnne.


d)Ord,  pag.Sj.


And  laftly,  in  the  latrer  end  of  the  Cbxp.  of  the  aforefaid  OrdinaU ,
tou trulj  and  clcerdy  declares  how  it  is  made  5 unco  which/ refer  the
Keadcr,  Nnn


(45°)

V.xg  99M  3 T*  W!)crcfojc  ticp  bcfnguifravfce  of  <8>cnmcfott>
l£abcmoftobcbtcnceto  Cenfteiiatfon.

Here  our  Ainhor.  refers  to  the  Rules  of  Aftrologk  (os  Eleftingatime.  where-
into  begin  the  PhilofopbicaU  worke,  and  that  plainly  appeares  by  the  foilowing
lines,  in  which  he  chalkes  out  an  Eleftion  fitly  relating  to  the  Bufinefle.

Intheoprr^wpartofthis  Science  the  Rules  of  Aftronomie  and  Ajlrologic
(as  elfewherfc  I have  faid)  are  to  be  confulted  with.

a Pat,Sapient.  (c)  f o * in  SMlrenomie  tbou  mttft  ijabe  rfgty  gooD  f celfng,

$>  i clfe  tn  tfcte  115  oHc  ttyofr  fcijalt  ^abe  flrcpie  bclfebing*

So  that  Elcftwsy  (whofe  Calculator)  part  belongs  to  Aftrovomie , butthe
tfuMctary  to  Ajirologie)  are  very  ncceflfary  to  begin  this  worke  with  $ and  the
paines  that  Norw/thath  taken  manifefts  no  Ieffe,  moft  Authors  hincing  the
fame,  although  we  cake  but  little  notice  thereofi  For

f)  Ord  m.6o»  (O  £mcl)  ample  Wnbctftinfojtmb  anb  tuwjottfctjt,

*'  e^aftilp  beguftcb  tilltbc  cnbbefoug^t*

9U&M4  feafon  tijep^abcmojteabebitncc,
fo*meb$ature0  to  ftevrtf  Jnfiucncr.

Gencrally  in  ali  Elcflions  the  Efjjcacy  of  the  Starrs  are  ufed  as  it  were,  by  3
certaine  Application  made  thereof  to  thofe  unformcd  Natures  that  are  to  be
. wrought  uponj  whereby  to  further  the  working  thereof,and  make  them  more
*JMar*ricinus*  availabie  to  our  purpofe.  ( g ) For pnee  botbinftrmr  and  fuperiour  Caufcs  concur
to  every  cffcct , itfolloweib  ibat  if  tbe  one  be  not  conpdcred  as  mll  as  the  otbery  thk
Negligcnce  mU  beget  Error,  And  by  fuchE/efl/cw  as  good  ufe  may  bc  made  of
the  C cie  fi  iuli  ivftucrtces^s  a *T  bypiian  doth  of  the  Yariety  of  Herbes,  A greeabie  to
which  is  that  of  Ptolomy  Aphor,  8.  A liiditicus  man  hclpes  fcrmrd  tbe  Ce-
lepidi  opcntm&jtn  as  a difereet  Huibandmait  a[pjls}S[ature  in  bkplowing  and  pre-
p Afingtbe  Grouvd,  But  Nativitus  are  the  Radices  of  ELeftionr,  and  therefore
we  otight  chiefly  to  Iookc  backeupon  them  as  the  principali  Root  and  Foun -
dation  ofd\  Oper<tt/0ftf,and  next  to  them  the  quxliiy  of  the  Thing  weimend
to  fit,  muft  be  refpe&ed  : fo  that  by  an  apt  pofition  of  Hcaieny  and  fortifying
the  Plantts  and  Hcufes  in  the  Nativity  of  the  Operator,  and  makug  them
agree  with  the  thing  fignihed;  the  ImprcfiioJi  made  by  that  Infiuctice, will  abun*
dantly  augment  the  Operation.

h)  Sir  Cbr:  And  this  is  uphdd  by  very  evident  rcafon  of  Nature, (b)  for  ffaitb  * learned

Btjd.  Def.  of  Geiit,  whpfe  7)efmc  of  Iudiciall  A ftrologic  (io  long  fince  publifned)  ftands
.^ftrol^g.36^  hitherto  firme  & unconfuted,  notivithftanding  ali  the  whifiing  Aflaults  of  any
Advcrfary)  the  Celejliall  Irfluettccs  never  ccafe  toflorr  ivto  and  tbcrefore  not
unlittely  tht  tbe  li^e poptien  or  Configumion  to  tbat  under  which  m are  borne , mj
by  hfiCi  imprtfiion  and  influence  incrcafe  and  ftrcngtbcn  tbc  operation  of  tbe  former 3
porciken  it  rvould  iftbc Natfcity  wcre  conpdered  alone.  And  upon  thefe  grounds
ZUrton  adyifes  to  make  Electious  like  thofe  he  layes  dovvne.


(+50

i)©nIdtet!)Cn^owri3attbtt^pjete«t>  tufutiw,  i) Ordinfjo®

3ln  rontrariet^to  ttns  ®!cctlon.

Which  is  the  Jfame  in  cffcft  with  that  of  (\)  T tolomy,  where  he  faith  to  ]A  Aphor.  6.
thls  purpofe,  vi\.  1 ' Though  an  Elcflion  ofa  Vay  or  boure  be  vvell  made,  y et  1
<c  will  it  prove  of  litt’e  advantage  unlefle  furably  t criftituted  to  the  febcxmt
<c  of  the  Nativity, becaufe  elfe  it  cannoc  divert  that  cvill  which  in  the  Nxthity
uthe  PUticts  threatned : and  hence  it  comes  that  eAttionsTbrivcoeMifcarry
(tbough  begun  at  one  and  the  fame  time,)  according  as  the  pofitton  of  Hei-
ven  then  agrees  with  the  Nativit)  of  the  Pcrfous  that  manage  them.

As  touching  the  Hcctfiny  of  Eleftiohs , to  be  ufed  in  Vyet,  Building,  Vml -
Ihtg , Apparell,  and  the  feverall  Afticni  of  our  Life,  lec  any  thac  would  be  fatis*
fiedjread  Marce  Hui,  Fimus,  Hcfiodc,  Cato,  Virgil , Vxiro,  Columella,  Pliny,  who
(and  genfcrally  ali  PhilofopbersJ  ordeced  their  aftaires  of  planting,  fovving,
lopping,  &c*  by  them.

For  in  thofe  things  (here  below)  which  have  no  fcncc  (as  well  as  thofe  that
have)  the  Hcxvtnly  Influenees  alvvaies  make  Impnfiion  according  to  the  meafure
and  Capacity  of  the  SubjcH,  and  doeevidently  manifeft  their  Dominion  in
them,(J)for  vetbing  U morcporvcrfultbentbcir  Influenees, when  ImprefliSis  onc«  ,,  G c
made.  YVltnefle  their  power  in  Plans,  Herbes,  Corve,  and  wbat  is  Vegitable,  ' * **

whofe  Seeds  diverfly  profper,or  decay,  according  to  the  flate  oftheD  with  the  P3^*1  9*

O at  the  time  cf  their  forving.  This  the  Husbaud-mans  Expcrievce  cantelltbe
World,  and  the  Satt1*  AvmtxUAceefle  and  Recefle  mzkes  manifeft  to  the  fenee.

And  gteat  Reafon  chere  is  in  Mature  why  the  Mocns  condition  oughc  chiefly
to  be  obferved,  for  (he  is  the  Plavet  neereft  the  Exrtb,  and  appointed  as  it
wcre  the  Vi biculum  of  ali  other  heavenly  Irrflucnces  unto  what  isSublunary , and
inthat  regard  (he  is  properly  called  (m)  An  Inflrument  of  the  Armiet  from  rn)  Eccl.43*  8,
above  : according  to  whofe  prefent  Conditionthings  are  fleered  $ for  if  (he  be
Fortunate  by  good  Afpefts,  bappy  by  P opiion,  fxvift  of  Courfe , and  increafing  in
Ltgbt,  things  tbrive  apaceand  fioitrifb  i Buc  the  concrary  if  (hefuffer  Imptdi -
ments.  We  may  ordinarily  obferve  how  poorcly  and  jlowly  the  Seeds  of  PUnts
grow  up,  nay  many  times  Unguiflj  and  degenerate  ineo  an  unkindly  d^uxlity
and  Tafl,  iffowne  in  the  Waine  of  the  Moone,  and  the  Reafon  is  becaufe  the
CMcyflure and  Sapp  chat  (hould  feed  them  is  exceedingly  diminhhed  ; yet  it  is
the  fitccfl  tyme  for  cutting  downe  T imber,  or  what  e{fe  we  woufd  preferve
from  decaying.

(n)  Thurneiffcrus  (among  many  other  admirable  and  ufefull  Obfervations ) vj  Hift.Plam.
gives  us  the  Tofum  of  Heaven  under  which  feverall  PUnts  are  Imprcgvated
with  the  greateft  ver  tue,  the  gathering  of  which  at  fuch  times,  for  TbipcaU
ufes,  deferves  to  be  taken  notice  of ; for  the  ndtable  difference  that  evidemtly
appeares  betwixrtheir  virtues  and  the  vertues  of  fuch  as  are  gathered  without
that  Confideracion.  In  a word,  By  ElcBions  we  may  Govcrne,  Order  and  Tr$-
duee  things  as  we  pleafc ; Faber  qui fa  Fortuna  propria.


Pjct,


• Nnn;


o;  Or.ipig.ioo.


fJAriftcilc.


Pag.  roo.li.  i.  ^0 abtrcctant)  firfe  25ftenbfrttt.

IN  this  arui  the  firft  Ten  following  lines , are  laid  downe  thc  Autbors  Rulcs
forframingan  Elcftion  by,  agrceable  to  which  he  eredi’  you  Scbeames
(about  the  Latitude  of  jr.  dcgrees)  thac  are  placed  before  thc  fixth
Chap.  which  Ihavecaufed  to  bc  exadiy Copiei  fromthcOrjgi?Mtf,though  forne
Wlanetfy  I muft  acknowk*dg,ire  not  placed  in  thatexa&.order  (for  beufes  and
fgnes)  as  Aftrwomicall  Rulcs  d ireft,  and  the  *Dotilmc  of  Aftrologic  requirecb.
For  Example,  In  the  firft  Houfe  of  the  firft  Figure  you  have  g in  7.  degr . of
the  Afcendctit  in  i»  dcgr . of  y,  and  then  the  O in  the  1 8.2)cgr.  of  the  fame
pgne  j whereasthe  iJegr  of  f being  fewer  degrees  of  that  Signe  then  7.
(wherein  g is  placed,)  Ihould  Antecede  it.  Agarne  in  the  fecond  Figure  you
havebothg  and  the  D in  the  nth  Houfe  thereof,  who  ihould  of  Right  be
pofitedinthe  ioth.  becaufethe  *oth  degreeof  £;  is  the  Cufpeof  the  iith,
and  therefore  all Plancts  in  lefiTer  degrees  of  that  S igne  are  falling  ioto  the  iotb.
Belides  you  have  j placed  in  every  Figurt  fo  remote  from  theO,  that
Afironomcrs  muft  count  it  abfurd,  fxnee  (he  is  never  above  4 8, degr.  Elongatei
from  him  5 and  yet  in  the  third  Figure  (hz  comes  not  within  the  compafle  of  a
Ajpcfti  nay  in  the  fecond  fhe  is  almoft  in  8 to  him.

Fortheir  Pofitioif,  I could  have  placed  them  inHoufes  according  to  Art > '
but  I rather  let  them  ftand  as  I foundthem  in  the  Originali 3bzingwz\\  aflured
they  werc  thus  Pofited  by  Vtfignc,  and  not  through  Ignorance  or  Miflal^e^  for
cur  Autbor  manifefts  himfelfe  a IzavnzdAfirologiatt^nd  too  wary  a Pen-man  to
be  guihy  of  either.  And  though  it  may  feem  contrary  to  c An  for  the  Pofition
of  2 to  be  fo  far  diftant  from  the  O,  yet  tis  agreeahle  to  his  Rule  of  Elettion
tbatfhe  is  fo  often  placed  in  the  4th  Houfe  (efpecially  feeing  the  Signe  falis  out
to  be  there  in  which  flie  is  exaked)becaufe  he  appoines  the  Lord  thereof  to
be  fortunate,

(0)  :tf  Ofrty&is  finjcfatitttm  abfconfcrtttm  of  olh  Ctefeg.

VVichall,  thc  Plancts  as  they  ftand  here  placed  in  Signet  and  Houfcs  are  not
fo  as  thatthefe  Figures  were  the  ElcScd  times  for  the  Autbors  owne  Opemions
(or  anyothers  in  that  F acuhy ) b\ii  are  rather  fained  and  invented,  onely  to
bring  them  within  the  compafle  of  his  Rulcs . And  to  fatisfie  my  felfe  herein,  I
have  uken  fome  paines  to  Calculate  the  places  of  the  Tflatiets  for  feverall  years
about  the  Autbors  time,  but  cannot  finde  the  three  Superiors  and  place  of  the
O to  be  in  thofe  Signes  wherein  he  has  polited  them.

Itisalfo  worthypf  our  Obfervationto  fee  how  the  tAutbcr  continuem  his.
Vailcs  zndSbadows,  asinoiher  parts  of  the  Miftcrj,(o  likewife  in  the  vety.
Figures  of  fome  of  the  Ttaf/,  for  hedoes  not  exhibite  them  under  the  Cha-
raders  commonly  now  (or  then)  ufed,  but  Hieroglipbically  in  Figures  agree-
able  ro  their  Natures,  yet  fp)  diverfitie  of  Names  (or  Figures ) makcs  no  di-
verfitie  intheth  ngs  theyfignifie : For  ^ is  pointed  out  by  a $pade>  lf,  b y%
Mitcr,  g by  *n  Arrorv,  § by  a beautifull  Facc,  g by  the  figure  (in  thofe daies)
ufually  ftamped  upon  the  Reverfe  of  our  EnglifbCoync : Onely  thc  O and  D
ardefc  usin  thatfalhion  the  Aunticfiu  beftowed  upon  them.


Ow)

Pag.ioo.li. Cruft nottonli  aiftrologcrtf,  3!  fatefofjiet

Icas Iccrct ac  3Wrtt*ie.

AStrologie  is  a profound  Science : The  depththis  Att  lyes  obfcut*d  in,  is
not  to  be  reach*t  by  every  vulgar  Plumet  that  attempts  to  found  it.Nevcr
wasany  %Age  fo  peftet*d  wich  a multitude  of  Tretcndcrs , who  would  be  ac-
counted(and  fttck  notto  ftyle  themfeIves^Af^erx,yec  areoot  worthy  to  weare
the  Badgeof  illuftrious  Urania*  And  fobto  be  lartffented .')  r the  fmrmc  is
likelyto  increafe3umill  through  their  Ign<?rance  tbey  become  the  ridiculous
objedofthe  Enemus  to  Afirologie  $ (would  that  were  all,>  and  Eclipfe  the
glory  of  that  ligbt , which  if  Judicioufly  difpcvfidt o tbc  World  would  caufe,
admirationi  but  unsfalfully  txpopd , become  the  fcorne  andeontempt  of  the
Vulgar .

He  that  underftands  no  more  of  Afirologie  (nor  will  makea  further  ufe  of
it)  then  to  quack  with  a few  Tcarmes  in  an  Hcrarj/  d^uefim}  is  no  more  worthy
to  be  efteemed  an  Afirologianthta  Hce  who  hath  onely  learnt  Hcbrcw  may  be
accounted  a C&bxllifiicdU  Rabbi . Tis  true,  he  may  be  fo  fraught  with  wordsy  as
to  amufe  the  unlearned5with  the  Canting  noyfe  thereof,but  what  is  that  if  com-.
pared  to  the  full  and  intire  knowledge  of  the  Language  > -Yet  of  this  fort  at.
prefent  are  ftart  up  divers  Illiterate  Profcjjors  fand  Women  ace  of  the  Nuin-
ber)who  even  make  tAfirologie  the  Bawd  & Pander  to  ali  manner  of  Iniquicy,
pronituting  Chaft  Urania  to  be  abus*d  by  every  adulterate  Intercft . And  what
willbetbe  ilTue  fi  wilh  it  mayproveno  Prophcpc)  c re  long  Afirologie  fhal!
be  cried  down  as  an  Impofiory  becaufe  it  is  made  ufe  of  as  a Stale  to  ali  bad
Urafiifesy  and  a laudabit  Facidty  to  bolfter  up  the  Ugcrdimanc  of  a Cbcate . And
belides  having  now  growne  famous  by  the  true  Prcdiflions  of  forne  of  her
ablc  and  honeit  tfOHJjfhall  grow  into  as  much  difgrace  and  infamy3by  the  un-
skilfull ^Prognofiiclisot ignorant  Illegitimate  Bafiards:  who  rather then they
will  accufi  themfelves  when  tbey  faile  of  truth  in  their  ^udgmaits3  will  not
flicktocondemne  Afirologie  it  felfeas  defedive  and  lame>  in  what  thein
flochfull  negligence  or  ignorant  blindnefle  vvas  not  able  to  finde  out.  And
therefore  Norr ori  here  fpeaks  truiy3  that  tAfirologie  (take  i:  wirh  ali  its  Com-
prehenfions)is  as  Sccrct  or  Mificrious  zsAlcbimy  3znd  as  difHcuk  to  be  throughly
and  pevfedly  uoderftood.

There  are  in  Afirologie  (T  confelfe)  fhallovv  Brcc^c/,  through  which  young
Tjrccs  ipay  wade;  but  withall,  1 here  are  deepe  Foards3f  over  which  even  the
Qyants  themfelves  mu &fmm.  Suchisthe  Dodrine  of  Nativitier3Vircftjcnsy
tAtinuaU  Revclutions  and  what  elfe  depends  tbereupon3  belonging  to  &tany  the
litle  IVorld : and  beyond  thcfe,  thofe  of Comcts,  Eclipfesy  Great  Ccnjunfiicns  and
Revtlutionjy  that  refer  cothe  great elVorld.  Thefe  are  fubjeds  of  Emimuy3  and
being  judicioufly  handled  Magnifie  th eArt.  Bur,

q^^aromfnfcocmisbfrt)  Dotljtbctnreahc,  q)  Ordin. cap.

ttjesDceunTJcrftan&e  tt?cm  fc>bcn  t^cp&onot  intvee^c*

«

Iknowfomefew  tArtifis  have  fatisfadorily  manifefled  what  excelli ncy  of
y^tbereisi^JudginganHow/  J^uefihn,  and  bow  much  ofrrw/^maybe

N n n 3 drawne


<M>

drawne  from  that  branch  of  Atl\  But  they  are  thofe  cbat  are  throughly  read  in
ali  other  parts  oPABrologie  > for  fuch  only  are  able  to'give  4 true  Rcfiluticn  to
th eJ^ucrm,  and  from  the  events  of their  conlidecate  'Frcdititwis,  bring  Honour
to  tbe  s/ir*,and  gaine  Rcputation  to  Tbenfilvcs.


rag.104.Ii. 20.  jD?fctine  ti)  wfojetofctci)  bjcatl)  from  pour  fntt.

IN  regard  of  the  violent  Nature  of  che  Medicine  whicb  is  dcadly  indeed,becaufe
its  Nature  is  fo  i nfifiitcly /frowgabove  Mans,  that  it  overcomes  his  S pirits
and  poy  fins  him  $ Ncmw  thereforc  lets  falla  hinte,  what  Parts  an  Operator
tmght  to  Arme,  and  whence  to  feteh  ‘Breatb : Meaning  thereby,  that  thofe
Crifices  of  the  ‘Body  be  dofely  ftopt  (through  vvhich  there  is  fo  operi  a palla ge,
that  a Strong  vapour  wouldfly  as  fpcedily  as  ligbttiing  into  the  inmofi  parts )
whilethe^Jettisripening.  But  bow  to  breatbe  the  while  is  the  2)  i fficulty.  We
have  Prafii/es  fomething  rieere  it,  as  of  thofe  who  attempt  co  lye  long  under
lPater,8cc.  *

And  therefore  let  this  be  a Caution  fufficient  to  yonngPrafiifcrs  in  this  Science,
thatwhenihey  workeupona^ne^  and  bringit  (as  they  fuppofe)  tofome
perfefiion , if  they  can  indure  the  opening  of  their  VefjtU  without  being  Armed,
they  may  reft  fatisfied  that  nothing  is  more  eertaine  then  that  their  Matter  is
not  the  Ubilofepbcrs  Mcrcury, and  their Prafiifi  erronious*


Pag*  ioj.li.17.  $ow  Ijate3i  tatigljtpoacberp  $amc.


r;  Hcr.


-r)  Hoc  tibi  di  fiunt


s)  Pnt/.in  &£-
nigPhilof.

t)  lrtfhA.

u)  1 TbcfS.S.
w)  7rov. 4.2,7.

y)  Pfa  i?.i.


Toliememor :

THis  Verfe  ought  to  be  heedfully  obferved  by  the  Student  in  this  Science ,
for  he  fpeaks  areali  truth,  Nibil  prttermiffumquod  d quovis  dici  po fit. No-
thing being  mnting , nor  nothing  Uft  eut  that  is  needfuU  to  be  knowne  to  com-
pleate  this  greate  IVorfie : wbich  many  have  not  the  happinefle  to  apprebend,
though  it  fhould  be  mor eplaincly  difeovereduntothem.  Mucb  alike  unfortu-
p nate  as  thofe  that  Sandivogitu  fpeaks  of,  (s)  to  whom  he  had  intimated  che
Artkommrdto  vpord , but  they  could  by  no  meanes  underftand  him,  yec
, would  beaceounted  Pbilofipbe/s „

Sceing  then  a &Un  may  be  in  the  true  Patb  and  not  know  it  to  be  fo,  it  be-
hoves  the  ferious  Stuient  earnellly  to  dcliie  oi  God  to  (*)  cc  remove  from  his
<cMind  al  thoughts  without  underflanding,to  make  hima(a)Child  of  the  iighc
. cc  as  of  tbe  Day,  that  his  (wj  Eyes  may  behold  the  right,  and  his  Eye-lids  di-
te re&  his  wayes.  That  his  Dayes  be  not  fpent  in  vanicy,  nor  his  Yeares  wafl
« doing  nothing  : but  that  (7)  one  Day.  may  reach  another,  and  one  Nighc
<c  add  knowledge  to  another.  And  then  he  Ihall  find  that  though  xhi$.  Autbor
has  opencd  his  Moutb  in  a T arablc3  yet  he  hatb  dedared[or  made  plain]  hard
Semenccs  of  Old.


r)  Ord.  pano  5.


z)  f o$  in fht'0 £>:hinall (bcfctfl  pouoatoffcoubt,)

3*0  fctS»joi\g,Tio?n0pointIeftowu

p*&


C+55)


Pag.  i orf.li.  i r . 3!n  tfcc  pcate  o£  €!>rttt  C C C C ll£  $

(€W  £>o?&etoa$  begtm.

IN  the  fcxrcb  I have  made  afrer  t Autbmique  Manufcripts  ro  compleate  this
/^or^aprivate^^fWjiHlentmea  very  faire  one  of  NorMfs  Ordinali,
which  I chicfly  followed  5 yet  not  admitting  to  compare  it  witb  fourccen  other
fofics.lt  was  vvritten  in  Vilamc  and  in  an  auncient  fett  Hand,ve ry  exadt  and  ex-
eeedirtg  neate.  The  F/gt/re? (whence  I caufed  thefe  herewith  princed  to  hzGrav-
ezf)  te ing  alfo  moft  neatly  Sc  exquiGtely  lym*d, and  better  work  then  that  which
was  Henry  tbc  feavemb's  own  Boc^e,(as  I am  informed  by  thofe  that  have  feene
botbj  It  had  placcdtn  the  midie  and  bottome  of  the  Comfmimms  of  Flovacrs,

Birds  and  Bajis  , the  Nevcll's  Coate  of  Armes , withothers'  which  that
Family  quarte red.  This  induced  meto  believeit  to  bethe  Originali  (orone
Ccpicd  from  itj  prefented  by  the  Autbor  to  Gcorgc  T{eveU  then  Arcb-
Bijhop  o/Torfowho  W3S  a moft  wealthy  and  Magnificent  Bifiop} as  appeares  not  * Tr  r
onely  by  the  ricb  (a)  levcell  he  offered  at  Bec^ens  Tombc,  but  for  the  greate  and  V Aj-aaC*Ciir.
ftarely  Emrtabmcnt  he  provided  at  More  ia  Hartfordjhirc  f 'ozEdvaardxbe  4th
tp  make  which  more  Magnificent  he  brought  forth  a ( b ) vaft  Trcafure  of  [,\  Stow.  Anm
'Flate,  that  he  had  hid  during  tbe  diftra&ions  of  former  yeares , ali  which  the fo,4i6
%ing  feifedupon  with  hisftloticy  and  Gocds  then  valued  at  zooool,  (a  farre^
more  confiderable  fum  of  AJoncy  in  thofe  dayes}  then  nova  5 ) and  made  of  the
Arcb-Bijbops  Miirc  (fet  with  precious  Stoncs)  a foowne  for  himfelf.

I have  becne  informed  that  there  W3g  greate  Correfpotidcncy  betweene  this
Areb-Bifliop  and  the  Hemctiquc  Thilojopbers  of  his  time5and  this  is  partly  con-
firmed  tome  from  RipUy'$  (z)  Dedicatm ofhis  Medulla  to  him,  Ann.1476.  a $c)  Sce  the  Pre-
alfo  the  prefentatiun  ofthis  of  Norton^  Ordinali}  for  though  I finde  thcfaid  foce*
Arcb-Bifacp  dyed  the  fame  yeare  this  Ordinali  was  begun  to  be  wricten,  yet
the  certaine  time  of  that  yeare  I C3nnot  yet  learneiBut  it  was  towards  the  latter
end  theteof,  when  his  Succedor  ( Lamcvcc  Bootb)  was  ConfccratCyViz.  (d)  zy.  d)  Godw.
^f.Befidesjinal!  probabiliry  he  lay  not  long/k^becaufe  he  dyzdfotBlitblow)  Succ.p.  487.
upon  a (e)  lourm  from  T crf(e  : So  that  the  Beoi^e  might  be  finifhed  and  pre-  e\  Godw.
fented , (or  if  not  prefented.  ytt  intended)  bciore  he  dyedj  though  begun  but  the pag  ibidem.
fame  yeere.


Pag.  107.  C!;c  Compomhcof  3lid)pmic,  Scc.

THis  Hror^c  (which  is  alfo  called  the  Tmlve  Gates)  was  penM  by  Sir  Gecrge

Riplcy , and  formerly(/) fet  forth  in  print  by  Ralpb  Rabbxrdsi I have  compa*/)  An.  J 591.
red  it  with  feverall  otber  Manufcript  Copics,  amongft  which  I fmppily  met  with
onewrittenneere  aboutthe  time  that  Riplcy  lived>  (and  in  thefe  Streamesof
Lcarnivg  the  more  cleareft  and  witbout  the  leaitof  M/xmrcistobe  found
ncere.ft  the  Spring*bead ,)  the  which  I moft  relyed  upon,  Yet  where  rh  7 difter,
the  Rcader  (if  this  Ccp/pleafe  not)  may  make  tife  of  the  former.

It  appeares  at  the  end  ofthis^Vf^r^that  itwaswritten  in  theyeare  747 1.~\  p)ff  t
whichltherathcrtakenotiee  of^bscaufel  haye  met  with  afcind  of  Rctrafiatiotr'
cfRipUys  beginning,

FrJix


Falix  quem  faciunt  alient  pericula  cautum.

Wherein  hc  befeechesallmeri,  wherefoever  they  fhall  meetewicb  any  of  his
Experimentt  written  by  Him,  orthatgo  under  his  ?iame,(bom  theyeare  1450..
totheyeare  1470.)  eithet  to  burne  themor  afFord  ehem  no  Credit,  beingwrit*
ten  accordingtohise/fcrw^;notpr(?o/(C5  and  tvhich  (afrerwardsupont^d//)  he
found  falfeand  vaine  : for  foelong  washe  feeking  rhetoefff,  but  in  the  truth
ofpriffz/ihadnot  foundit,tilItowards  the  end  of  that  yeare,and  then(faith
He)  Inveni  quem  diligit  anima  mea.

So  that  this  Treatife of  the  1 1. Gates  beingwrote  theyeare  after,is  unquefti-
onablvtobcrc/yedwpo»,  becaufepen’dfroma  gronndcd  expermentall  Praftifc} as'
himfelfeTeftifies  in  his  Admonitm,


_ . . A . ^ h)  3J  «cbctfafe  tooahc  tmlp  imttmc,

h)R/p/.Admo-  «Df mt&te  Crcatife  t Jje  trut^J  &abc  tolb.

mtion.


i)  Anno  1649;
k )Prcf.  ad  0-
fcr.G.Rip,


\)PmtedatTo

loufe.


In  which  (for  the  Students  fafeguard)  he  giyes  an  account  ofhis  own  Err$*
nictu  Expcriments,  therein  following  Cbaucer , Ricbardus  Anglicus,  Vicnipus,
Zacbarius  the  noble  Trevifan,  and  divers  other  honeft  and  Confciencious
Vbilofopbers.

Ludovicus  Combacbita  fwho  hath  (i)  lately  fet  forth divers  0 IRipltfs  Work t
in  tauri)  telis  us  (\()  thathethen  had  in  htshands  tbefe  Tmlve Gates  rendred
in  moft  pure  Elegiaque  ver (e,  byone  NicbolasMay  upon  the  Command  ofthe
Emperour  Rudclpb  the  fecond,  and  that  he  could  willingly  have  added  it  to  that
he  publijhcd,  f which  vtzstranflated  out  o (Evgli(J)  into  Latine  verfc  by  Sir  Edxo:
Kclky)  for  thebetter  underltanding  thereof,  butthat  the  Qopy  w as  noneof
his  owne.

Thelearned  Faber , (1 646.)  beftovved  muchPaines  and  Coftin  publifhing
to  thsworldf/)  BapliusCurrus  Triumphalis,  and  others,inone  Volume.  In  the
Argumcnt  of  which  Boolic  Qeorgm  Riplaus  Canonicus  Anglus  doftijfimus  &•
mirandus  in  quo  nihil  falp  & fupervacui  ad  metallorum  omnium  proprietates,  &
naturas  maiuf cftandus,  is  thus  Ingenioufly  acknowiedged.  He  furtheraflitresus
that  his  JVorfas  are  worthy  to  keep  pace  with  the  beft  Vbilofopbers  f;  and
knowes  that  Pol icie  in  Pr/nt/^isfureft,and  takes  well  with  the  Iudicicus,to
beginwitha  good  and  end  with  the  beft  j to  which  place  he  refers  ou
Ripley.  But  1 muft  needstell  the  Rcadcr  that  in  pag.  538.  and  fo  to  the  end,
he  is  by  miftake  called  Triplanus  inftead  of  Riplaus,  There  are  other  the  like
notorious  faults  which  thf  Printer  (moft  likclv)  isguilty  of,  as  giving  Ifaac
Holla?id  the  name  of  Ir facta,  Cornelius  Vrebble  he  prints  Tornelius,  (and
iometiracsForfle//w)  V rebelli  anus  i and  befides  thefc,  further  caufcs  of  £x-
ctpticn  to  other  parts  of  the  Wvt\e  ( too  many  to  be  mentioned  here)  amongtt
the  reft  whereFaiwfayesthey  were  all  rendred  into  Latin  out  ofZ ")utcb,  and
that  this  pcece  o{Ri(le/s,  which  he  tbere  cails  Triplanus  de  lapide  Philo fcphorum
(hut  isindeed  znEpitomy  ofthefe  11.  Gates ) was  by  one  hicbolatiarnarda
Vhilofopber  Trandated  out  ofVuttb  into  Latin,  intimating  withall  that  it  was
OriginiUy  written  in  the  Gtrmain  Tongne  5 which  is  very  fdfe,  injurious  to  our
Autbcri  and  diihonourable  to  our  Nation.

Thus  much  for  the  Worl{e,  and  now  to  fay  fomething  touching  our  Autbor,

Philemon  Holland  in  his  Tranflatm  of  Cambien' s Britinia  Printed


(+?7)


is  pleafcd  to  take  theliberty  to  tellus  chic  the  place  of  fais  Nitivity  was  fra)  m)foI.2py.
Ripley,  a FilUgc  in  the  County  of  Surrey > and  calls  him  a Ring-lcadcr  ofour
Alcbimifis,  and  a myfticall  Impoftor.  This  Imputacion  of MyUicall  Impoftor
fmelis  more  of  Envious  dijli^c  chen  faithfull  Account,  and  therefore  I’le
pafle  it  by.  But  as  to  the  place  ofhis  Birtb > lam  induced  co  believeit  to  be
about  Torlfirirc,  fnot  thac  he  was  a Foundling  at  Ripley  in  that  County,or  of
foobfcure  Pawtts,  chat  the  name  of  the  place  of  his  Nativity  muft  be  im-
pos’dupon  hiuiin  defe&  of  a berter)  No  certainly^  his  Nam,  Rclation,  and
t^iudrcd  difeover  him  to  be  theSonne  of  a Gcntlcmaii;  and  though  I cannot
exhibite  his  Fedigree , yet  ic  appeares  in  fpme  ancient  Mamfcript  Cepia  ofhis
(n)  Medulla  (which  I hive  feenc)  that  bis  Relacion  of  Rjndrcd  Iay  it}  the  n)tQwards  tbc
Nortberne  partt,  where  (he  faith)  cc  he  had  divers  Kindrcd,  Gentlemen  of  endtbcrcof*

“ Yorkfhirc  and  Lincolnihire^s  T cvarfall,  Ripley,  MedlayftVillougbbiCyBurbam,
cc  Wucrton,  Flemmingand  Talboycs,  who  fas  he  there  complaines  to  the  Ardi*
u Bifljop  Ncvell,  to  whom  he  dedicated  that  Worke)  were  by  ihe  Conquering
cc  Sword  of  Edrvard  the  fourtb , ( God  fo  permitting^  iamentably  deftroyed.

’Tis  alfo  confiderable  that  his  Ezcbfiafticali  Tromotion  hapned  to  be  ac  jBrid-

lington,  a (o)  Tcwnc  in  the  Eaft  Ridin £ of  Tortybirc,  oJCamb  jBrit

f)  aicec*t>tng  ta  mi?  profrifio  it,  plTrefto  hic

3Jn£)jticr  Ct;anOH  IfUgiilaj  of  2Srtalittgtoti,  G‘teu


And  probably  fuch  his  tAdvmemcnt,might  be  procured  rather  in  that  Coun -
try  where  his  Ffindrcd  and  Fricnds  lived^  and  himfeli  that  Coun:ry-mn>  then if
he  had  been  a Strangcr .

I determine  not  whether  Holland  has  done  the  lear nedAntijuary  or  profound
Ubilofopber  the  greatet  Injury,in  what  hepucsdovvne  concerning  the  place  of
hi s Birtb  5 for  I muft  let  the  rvorld  know5  ’tis  not  to  be  found  in  the  Originali
Latin  which  (fambdenpub\i(hed  zAuno  1607 . nor  can  I learne  that  there  was
any  other  Impreflion,  to  the  time  of  Tranfiation , nor  in  probabilicy  could  there-
be  when  Holland  (q)  feli  to  worke  immcdiately  upon  the  Corning  outof  the  q)Poftcript.to
fdddlmprcfim  in  1607.  and  fec  forth  his Tranfiation  within  foure  Yeares.  famb.Brit .

So  that  I cannot  but  wonder  at  the  BoldnefTe  of  this  Traufiator , not  oncly  in
addiitg  many  things  of  his  owne  fcore,  but  for  abufing  fo  learned  a P bdofopbcr
wich  the  Tearmeof  &tyfticall  Impoftor , and  pueting  it  upon  the  Account  of  an
Autker,  who  (hould  he  thus  vilifie  one  of  fo  cleere  a Rcputation,  ingenious
Scbollars  mighc  have  juft  caufe  to  queftionthe  Candidnejfc  ofhis  Peain  other
things.  But  this  kind  of  Iiberty  I finde  Holland  hathtaken  in  other  pares  of
that  worthy  roorfa,  The  cffe&s  whereof,  hath  rendred  Banbury  (amongfto-
thers)  much  beholding  to  him  for  an  eminent  Flout : For,  where  Cambden
fames  ic  for  (t)  Cbecfe  onelyj  he  addes  Ca\cs  and  Zcalc : Neicher  of  which  are  r )Nunc  confici *
to  be  found  in  the  Originali,  though  doubcleffe  both  in  the  Ttnnc>  and  for  cudo  Cafcono-  ‘
better  puipofe  then  to  be  boaftcd  of.  tiftimum  {0.266

But  toleave  this  Vigrcfiion  & returne  to  Ripley. Pitts  telis  us,cc  Hewas  a Man  s)  Pius  dc  illu-
,c  ofa  «!^«/c^,&(more  then  can  be  exprelled)  curious  IVit&nd  that  Totam  fere  ftr.zAvg.Scrip.
iC  fud  cetate  in  pc>  (crutandis  rcrii  Naturaliu  occultis  & abftrufts  Cati  fis  (p  effectibus  ^g.6yj.

Cc  confumpfit  $ He  wafted  almoft  his  whole  Life  in  fearching  out  the  occule  and
Cf  abftrnfe  Caufes  and  Bffeds  of  Naturali  things.  And  that  he  mighc  more

O 0 o “ copi-


(4-58)


t)  Eak  Ccnt.  8,
t 0.6  zi.

u)  casa  alata  G.
Ripley


* iropioufl/  and  olentifully  fludy  Pbilofcpby,* nd  accomplilli  whac  he  conceived
JJ^hifrmindy  heboldly  travailed  through  Francc,  Gernavy,  and  lialy,  where  he
<c  grew  ineo  familiarity  with  feverall  ofthe  moft  Lcxmei  men.

Lefand  faich  truly*  that  he  ( t ) laid  the  foundacipn  of  his  Studies  in  Italy,
for  therc  indeed  he  had  che  bkjjing  firft  to  fce  Projcftion.

(u)  In  Romanis  partibus  nuptiis  Mercurii,

lAccilit  poji  /ludium  femel  quod  interfui.


v))Pivs  $>677  'Tis  further  teilified >that  Hc  alwayes  either  (\y)  iVrit,  or  Leam , or  Taugbt
fomething ; He  was  perfc&ly  learvxi  in  ali  the  liberali  Arts,  and  well  red  in  ali
e , - manner  of  Ubilo/cpbji  3 moifc.famous  Matbematftian  y a RhetoritLn
^Pfdbct  anc*  VCX)  t6*  em  *tmm  3 71011  vulgaris,  eff edus.  Combacbixs  tiylcs
r \r*M  C^Cr  tirn  (y/  dMbor  procul  dubio  digma,  qui  ab  Amatoribus  Chemia  fdulo  evolvatur,
***•  ^TP‘!i  cum  in  fer  mone  apertus  fit , rotundus  (?  planus,  nec  ullis  ffint*  aliorum  more  ob fixus :

A worthy  without  excepcion,  who  is  diligenciy  ftudyed  Jby  the  lovers

of  Cbimejiry,  foraGnuch  as  he  is  open,  rvell  empad,  and  plaine  of  delivery,and  not
wraptin  any  Thornes,  afterthe  cuftome  of  others.  Habet  infuper  (fairh  the
fame  Autbor ) cum  Lulii  feripiis  magnam  affinitatem , ut  umes  alteium  explicet.&c.
Belides,  he  hath  great  Affinicy  with  the  YVritings  of  Luliy,  infomuch  thac  the
one  explaineth  theother.

Amongftother  parts,  abroad,  he  vilited  the  Ifle  of  Rbodcs , and  r elided  thete
for  fome  time  with  the  hj nigbts  of  the  Order  of  Sarnt  Iohnof  Icrufalem . An^c-
quiintance  of  mine  ha.h  in  his  cuEody  certaine  private  Obfcrvxtions  ofanEtf-
glijb  Gcntlmav.  ofgoodqualhy  and  credtt,  who  in  his  Travclls  abroade,  Ob -
ferves  (amongft  other  thingsj  thac  in  the  Ijle  of  CMalta  he  fiw  a Record , which
declares  that  this  Sir  Cjeo.geRipley  gave  yeately  to  thofe  I {nigbts  of  R bodes
icooool.  towards  maintaining  the  rvar  (chen  on  foot)  againft  the  Turii r.

Butae  length,  thatlhe  mighc  bid  his- farewell  to  the  World,  and  wfiolly
confeccate  himfelfe  to  God , and  betake  him  to  his  priyate  Studies y upon  his
z)  Bale  Ccnt  2»  (z)  rettirne  ineo  England  he  obtained  an  Indulgence  of  Popeltmocm  the  cigbtb3
•L - r L- — :~u-  be


that  fo:  the  future  he  might


aj  Tit.opcr •


a)  <£xempt  ftomdnauflrall^Dbfcrtancc,


and  alwaies  difcharged  and  frecd  from  the  burthen  ofthe  Ccremonics  and
Obfervancy  of  his  Otda\  6ut  in  regard  the  Cbancns  admic  no  fuch  things,  he
o q became  a (b)Cxrmclitc  in  the  Monajlcry  ot  Satnr2fafo/p^which(faith  Lclaud) is  a
Vftf  r , famous  (c)  Mm  Tonent  nigh  the  Baulis  ofthe  River  Lindus:  This  Riier  I
A\r  h°n^Z'  ta^e  t0  c^e  ^*ver  *n  Lincoln  [hi re  (anciently  called  { d)  Lindis ) which

dj Camb.Brtt,  pa^ng  from  Lincoln,  runs  towards  the  maine  Sex  by^Bofton,  moretru’y  called
'BuiolpbsTowtie,  (for  it  carried  that  name  from  Butolpb,  a moft  holy  and
tjIbul.tQAl ^vote  Saxoni)  And  if  you  obferve  Cambdens  Map  of  Lmolnjhirt,  you  fhall  fee
St.  Butolpb  ftands  necre  to  Bo/ion.  So  that  in  all  likelyhood  this  was  the  place  of
R ipkjys  Rctircmcnt,  where  he  continued  an  Anchoritc  untill  his  Veatb,  and  was
there  Buricd  Anno  1490,

The  probability  whereofjmay  be  further  confirmM  from  hhMcdulla, where  ic
f)  Seerhehtter  appeares  he  had  tben(f)  a great  defire  to  returnjnto  England,  and  to  that  end
crtdofthat  therein  became  a Suter  to  ch eArehbifhop  ofTbrfye,  that  by  his  meanes  he  mighc
worke,  obiainea nabiding  place  in  fome  Rcligiou*  boufe,  within  his  Vioces.  Which

Arcb^


(+5?)

Arcbbijbop  prefently  afcer  dyihg,  he  could  not  perfbrmc,  but  not  unlike  Ripley
having  ftill  an  earneft  longing  thereto,  (becaufc  it  w as  his  mi ve  CountxcJ>)
might  without  doubc  otherwifeefted.

And  whereas  Bile  faich  he  obceined  Pepe  Innocenti  Indulgence  upon  his
recurne  ineo E?igUnd}2nd thercupon  becamea  C armcUt^  An.i+8%.  Itis  mani-
feft  from  the  aforefaid  Medulla,  that  at  the  writeing  thercof,  whichwas  ia
1*76.  faeleaft  1 i.  ycares  before  the  time  Bole  makeshim  toenccr  imo  thac
Order ) hc  had  this  Vijpenfation,  for  fo  he  telis  the  Arcbbificp : And  if  fo,  then
ic  mtift  be  either  (g)  Sixtns  the  fourth,orTrf«/  the  fecond("his  Prcdcccjfor ) that  %)  Cbrov.
rauft  grant  it  unco  him.  fo .$66,


He  wrotc  divetsBw^mvorthy  of  perwfing,  but  amongft:  thofe  which
Bale  Regifters,!  fhall  onely  cuti  cut  thefe,  vi^.


i.  Compendium  Alcbimix 3 feu  £aflel-
lum  Duodecim  Fort  irum,
i.  Concordantia*  Gnidonis  (fRaymun-
■ di.

3.  Secreta  PbUofpborum.

4.  Alcu^ijUrum  Mi  fleri*'


?.  Artem  brevem  vel  Clangorem'

6.  PracUcam  Ccrcmonialm ,

7.  Dictata  &£gr  i.

8.  Ve  IMagia  Natur  ali,

9.  Vc  lipidc  Pbilofopbico > la tini  Tracta-
tum rytb\micumi


AH  *vhich  T ittt  recites,  and  to  them  adds  the  following  worftcs*
i o.  Medullam  cPdilofopbite.  13.  Experimenta  Philo  fophiea,

1 1 . Pupillam  Alcbimia . 1 4.  Ve  rerum  temperaturis ,

ii,  Terram  Terrarum ,


Whacfollowes  Ludov:  Ccmbachius  haslately  printed,  andaddedto
forne  of  the  aforementloned  P ceces.

1 Ve  Mercurio  (?  lapidePbilofopboru .

16.  Philorcium  Alcbimiflarum ,

17.  Clivis  Aur & Portx.

1 8.  Viaticum  feu  Varia  Vractiea,

An dlaftly  takc  ineo  the  Numbtr  the  fmall  P ecces  publifhed  in  this
Theatrum.  vi\.  His


19 • Accurtationes  practica  Raymtm*
diva.

:o.  Cantilena.


xi . Epiflle  to  Ed w ,tbc fourtb3pa*.  109
ii,  Vifion.  pag.  574.

23,  Verfcs  bclongmg  tobk  7 p
Scr  ovale - - ^ a&*


;-37f.


24.  Vref aceto  bis  Medulla,  389.

1$.  A JJ)ort  rvorkc  fuppofed  to  be  bk3
Pag.  393.


Pag.  1 7 7.1in.uir.  % ^QttfHtriTctlCC  tfjte  Cftatcr  «H,
3[n£9an,tol?!c^ijcIpEtb  JDtffeafetfalf.

PHjfick  is  a divine  Science,  even Gods  Tbeologic  \ for  the  Almigbty  wrote  his
Scripture  in  that  language,  before  hemade  Adam  to  reade  it.  The  Ten  F a*
tbers  before  the  F lcoi%  and  thofe  that  followed,  together  with  Mofes  and  Salo -
»/0«;Were  thegreac  Pbyfitiavs  in  former  Ages,  who  bequeathed  their  heavcnly

O 0 0 z knowkdges


C+*0

knowlcdgesofwifarjl/hclpestothofethey  judgec}  as  well  wortby  in  honefty
and  iirduitry,  as  capable  thereof : and  from  thcir  piercing  Beamet  al)  Nmons
cnlightned  thcir  Tapcrs . Abrabxm  brought  ic  out  of  Cbaliea,  and  beftowed
much  thereof  upon  Egypt^nd  thencea  refulgent  Bexme  glanced  into  (jrecce.
The  Cocleas  and  e/£fcu!apia?i  Family,  &c.  God  greatly  incouraged  to  ferve  that
i Age.  Democritus  and  Hypocratcs  fiipportedRu/wi  Man^inde,  with  their  T bifi-
call  adminiftrarions,  and  S cboUers  iucceflively  fupplyed  their  places  for  ac  lcaft
400.  yfeares,  unttll  Gakn  undertooke  by  his  fttong  Abtlities  and  inceflant
Faines  tovivifie  the  then  dying  Genius  of  Pbifick:  wbich  hach  fince  moft  no-
b!ytbecne  Augmented^  by  thc  ftupendious  paines  of  Arxbians  and  Eure -
peans.

And  in  the  xProgrefic  this  Science  has  made  into  feverall  parts  of  the
World,  we  may  finde*  that  God  hath  evermore  been  pleas*d  co  call  upon  the
flage  thereof  in  fundry  Ages*  fome  choyce  and  eminent  Mtn,  whom  (6y  the
lllumination  of  his  blejJedSpir  it)  he  hach  furnifhed  with  ability  to  reade  the
Cbarafters  of  his  blcifed  will*  wric  in  that  ample  and  facred  Vclwme  of  the  Crc •
men,  and  the  feverall  P ages  of  individuall  Natum.  And  further*  toteftifie  his
care  ofhisCrcatures,  hath  alfo  given  them  'Balmc  in  their  hands  co  ftoppe  the
over-fpreadingcontagioufnefle  of  bainefull  2 lifeafcs.  Buc  to  contrad  the
Jiayes  of  my  Profpe&ive  toour  owne  bomes,  the  P bifitiaxs  Collcdge  of  Lctidon
doth  at  tbis  day  nourifh  moft  noblc  and  able  Sons  of  Art,  no  way  wanting  in
thc  choyceft  of  Learning  3 And  though  we  doe  not,  yet  the  World  abroad  has
taken  notice  of  fundry  learned  Fellcrccs  of  that  S ocictie,  as  Linacres,  Gilbcrt,
'Ridly,  Dee,  Flood,  &c.  and  at  prefent  Voftor  Harvgr3yjho  deferves  for  his  ma-
ny  and  eminent  Pifcoieries,  tohwe  a Statue  ereded  rather  of  Gold  thenof
Marble .

NeverthelefTe*  ic  has  beene'obfei  ved  in  other  parts  that  we  Englifi  wtll  foc-
ner  abufe  and  detrad  from  the  wortb  of  any  of  our  owne  Nat  ion  (though  ne-
verfo  welideferving)  then render them  what  they  juftlv  mtric  by  a worrhy
Applaufe: And  rathercry  tip  a Frie  of  Illiterate  ^itac^s  (for  every  Galin  hath  bis
Plague*  [a  mounting  ig  lirant  Tbcfialus~\  tha:  chearethc  poore  and  {imple of
their  Money*  and  (I  wilh  cbey  did  not)  often  in  Conclufion  murder  their
h)Ecclcf$  S.  over-credulous  P atients  3 ) then  give  the  learned  P bifitixn  the  due  (b)  Honcur

God  has  appointed  u$  to  pay.  him,

Now  as  God  hath  formerly  Ihed  moft  eminent  Beam  es  of  the  firft  ligbt  up-
on a few  particular  CM.en  (as  it  wcrc  togratifie  the  deferving  Labourerj  ac  ali
rimes  cf  his  day^So  I am  confident  therc  arc  yet  moft  noble  feeds  of  that  ligbt
of  Nature  appointed  to  fpring  up  for  the  Benefit  of  P oftcrity,  The  Gloty
whereofwe  fee  hath  (hin*d  in  other  Hon^ons,  fhortlyic  will  draw  neeretomx  3
and  that  which  with  inceflant  Teylc  cznnot  yei  be  Difcovercd,  fhall  in  thofe
dayes  be  freely  Rtvtaled  toTomc  that  little  dreame  of  ic.  I am  more  then  Con-
fident Succefficn  will  meete  with  mzny  advantage:  and  bdpes,  wbich  this  cor-
rupt  and  ingratefnll  Age  deferves  nor*  nor  fhall  have^  becaufe  we  deride,  what
Vo/lerity  will  adore  with  a lafting  admiration : The  Circuit  of  that  great  and
SabbaibicaU  Conjun&ion  of  ihetwo  S iperiour  Vlaucts  which  began  An.  160$.
intheF/ay  Triplicity  ,v/i\[  lUuflrdte,  Enlarge , and  Rzfine  Arts  like  the  tryed
Qold,  Itfhall  produce  more  pregnant  and  famous  Vbilofopbers  by  Fire,  (I
meane  fuch  as  is  Etbcrixd)  then yec  the  mrld  ere  faw  3 and  fo  purifiefome

inge-


C4*0

r ingenious  Inquiptors,  as  to  make  tbem  fit  for  tAngells  to  Projcd  on.

Tbis  F/rr/  Tr/gon  fhall  not  paffe,  before  thac  god  make  manifefl  what  he  ccm-
manded  former  Ages  to  keepe  Serret , Whereold  Hermes  his  oAEtbcriall  T?bi-
fick  (vtX'  chis'  5&UmteflimtfaJi  £<Hatcr  which  Riptey  here  fpeakesof,  and
vvhich  is

fi)^uc^a^aunc(cnt^iacfetaufi!;t3  i)  SirE.^.to

g s.

fhall  be  Reftored ; whote  perfett  3nd  incormptible  ualities  of  Heatc,  Ccld,

Mciflure  and  Vrincfie  are  able  not  onely  to  Nouri/h , Fortipe,  and  Encrcafe  the
Vitali  SpintSy  bur  Vigejl,  Corrctt  and  Confumc  ali  Impedimms  and  Corruptioni,
thofe  hurtfull  and  Impure  Seeds  which  crept  in  with  the  Curfc,  (and  joyning
themfelves  with  the  Good ,)  haveever  finceflike  a growing  Tyde)  encroached
fo  far  upon  the  Body  of  Mau}  till  he  is  almoft  ovtmhclmd  and  ready  to
Penfh.

But  it  is  to  be  acknowledged  that  thofe  Cbcmifts  deferve  a confiderablc
Hiare  of  Homir, who,for  want  of  thiss /Etkcriall  and  Univerfall  Medicine  (which
Gfldhath  hitherto  grantedto  few)  xealoufly  apply  themfelves  to  finde  oti:  a
Particular  one,  (that  (cdulota  Iniujlry  may  affbrd  tomorej  andtoraife  upa
Body  ofT bifidi,  from  thofe  (l{)  Tbree  Pr/Wp/envhich  areto  be  found  in every  k ^Bo^.Pbif.
Body,  becaufe  compounded  of  them  5 (though  ftrongly  lockt  up)  namely  Sal,  l[  '
Sulphur , and  Mercury ; (to  which  T>c  Clave  of  late  adds  two  more,  vi%,  Eank
an dPbleagme)  and  focomfortably  relievcdecaying  Mortality , and  hea
eafes  by  the  meanes  they  are  Curcd.

In  the  painefull  and  curious fearcb  of  which  Expcrirncnts,  wherethereis  more
of  Nature  that  flill  lyes  hid,  (yeafheisas  Infinite  in  her  Troduftions , as  the
Jslinde  of  Maucan  be  Uufatiable,in  th  tfcanb)  let  the  farisfadion  the  Ingenious
Artiji  findes  in  one  Trutb,  leade  him  cheerfully  on  to  make  Inquiption  after  a
further,  perhaps  th eEvcnt  ofhis  Labours  may  difeover  a P erftftion  iu  the
ledgeht  hunts  after,  and  T?rovidcncc  may  be  as  kinde  to  fo  diligent  an  Itiquiptor ,
as  Nature  is  tothe  Ant>  who  beftows  IVings  onherin  her  dtclining  Age,  as  a
retvard  for  her  former  Labours.

‘And  albeit  I magnitie  Chemicali  Pbipque,  yet  Ido  not  leflen  the  due  com-
mendations  that  belong  to  galcnicaU : nor  dare  I,  when  fo  great  an  Hcrmeticfi
Pbilcfopber  as  Amoldki  de  villa  Nova  has  taken  fo  much  paines  to  Joyne  them
tegether.  And  befides  him,  it  has  been  the  worke  of  Maierua,  Faber,  and  mady
other  confciencious  Pbilcfopherj,xo  reconcile  them.  Who  laying  afide  (indeede
abhorring)  ali  thought  ofFaclion,  conceive  nothing  to  come  neerer  th eP/tiz-
tiiiy  of  Nature, or  be  any  way  more  gratefull  to  God  and  Goodmcn, then  to  he!p
the  Afflittcd,  and  relieve  the  S/c^  > nor  greater  Cbarity  then  to  beflow  bealtb ,
and  fupport  dcjcLled  Nature . Ner  is  Galer.icall  Pbipcfi  hard  to  come  by,ic
being  at  ali  times  eafy  to  be  met  with,  the  Superficies  of  the  Eanb  ne  ver  deny-
ing  us  fome  thing  or  other  for  «5 Medicine,  and  they,  Milde,  Gctitle,  and  Safc  for
weake  and  tender  N^«rer.Morcover,it  is  obferved  by  N ollius  and  others,  that
where  God  ftrikes  with  any  Bifufc,  in  thofe  parts  he  alfo  fends  forth  a Piant
that  he  endowes  with  ver  tue  to  cure  it.  And  ttuly  I cannotbut  admire  at  thofe
fnarling  who  make  it  their  7V//;;e  to  difparage  what  theyaffeft  nor,

(nay  ofeentimes.  wJiac  is  beyoncj  their  owne  worch)  and  rene  thofe  noble

Ooo  3^  pans


l)B4C.tfiv.pag.

17*


m)See  Davi-
foi^s  Curic.
Chemic.
7ijDc  occult.
Phi Icap  $.


q)tAimymu


C+6z)

parts  of/fr*  afunder,  which  Nitare  has  conjoyned  in  an  Innnonious  Agrcc-
mcnt, and  whofe  wide  breachcs,  honeft  hearted  Pbilofopbers  endeavour  to  make
up  by  afriendly  Reconciiiation,  it  being  nor  tobe  denyed,  but  thateachhatb
their  pcculiar  Eminende j for  which  they  deferve  both  Praife  8c  Honour . For  my
owne  partj  I am  none  of  thc  Vctrattors  from  Lcdrning,  but  beare  an  llniverfall
affe&ion  t oArts,  and  am  in  Freindiliip  with  each  of  their  particular  I 'Brancbes  j
Nayevenin  thofe  I underftand  not,  for  I am  peifwaded  byihe  fatisfa&ion
I have  received  in  things  which  before  time  I knew  not,  that  there  may
be  fomething  deferving  of  my  faire  Opinion , in  what  I am  yet  toknovv.

It  has  proved  a greac (I )Errour  in  fome  T^^./r/oncr^whoftumblingup  and
downe  their  owne  Speculationi)  feeke  out  for  Trutb  in  the  Littlc  rvorld , and
wichdiavving  thenafelves  too  much  from  the  Contemplatiotiof  ExperimctitdU
Naturali  Obfevations ,negled  to  lookc  for  it  in  the  gnate  and  common  IVorld:
When  certainly  fuch  may  far  fooner  arrive  at  that  Trutb  they  ferite  for  in  Many
if they  would  but  obferve  the  Beginnings,  Change,  deciinaeion,  and  death  of
ali  things,  in  and  upon  this  inferiour  Glibc,  and  compare  their  vertues  with
our  owne  internall  Maturescor  they  are  certainly  (m)united  by  a Noble,excel-
lent,and  fecret  Harmony  and  Relation.

And  havingfoundthetrueOng/wttand  Caufe  of  Difeafes,  then  furcher  to
fearch  after  aproper  remedy;  for  ali  Vifeafcs  are  no:  cured  by  onefortof
Pbypcf(  (fave  that  which  iso/Etberiall  and  Incorporcall) And  therefore  according
to  the  Dodrine  of  (n)  T aracelfus,  fuch  as  are  ircd  from  fo  light  a caufeas  thc
impure  Secds  otVegit  abies,  viz.  Meate  y Prmfc,  Fruits , Herbes,  and  the  like
Elemcntary  things,  may  be  very  eafily  cured  with  the  Secrets  ot  Hearbcs,Rootsy
and  fuch  like  mild  and  tender  Afci/c/nw,of  which  fort  Gilcnicall  Phypc^is
more  plentifully  furniilied  then  any  of  the  i«ft.  Thole  that  are  produced  from
the  more  rude  andPnotteer  ^ualities  of  Mineralis,  and  whatiscaft  withinche
Com  palle  of  that  Tribc,  the  Chemicali  Pbiptian  muft  expell  by  the  powcr  and
force  ofhis  uttctalline  S ulpburs,  &c.  Vegitabl:s  being  (in  this  Cafed  too  weake
to  Majler  and  T>tffolve  their  tenacious  and  coagulated  Spirits : Thofe  which
arederived  from  the  Influcncesot  Hcavcn,muft  be  removed  by  PUnts}&cc.  Mi -
gtcally  gathered  and  prepare d,or  by  Sigilli , &c.  framed  or  made  under  fucable
Poptions  and  Alpefts  of  the  Tlaucttyand  impregnated  with  the  rayes  of  Cr/r/l/-
all  Vertucs , for  without  opening  the  Bodyest  Infufing  fuperiour  Influences,  and
(by  an  additionall  Artifice)  fixitig  them  to  the  faid  Bodiei;  their  own  ordinary
vertite  (be  Eleftions  never  fo  propitious)  hath  not  fttength  enough  to  conquer
Z)ifeafcs  of  that  Nature:  and  feverall  of  thefe  choice  Secrets  (ot  Nature  and
An  united)  I my  felfe  have  prepared,  made  and  Experimentally  verified . FinaU
ly,  where  Vifcafes  happen  by  Supernaturall  meanes,  as  by  Iticbantmcntsy  &c.
none  of  the  other  ihree  are  able  toremedy  the  fame,  fave  onely  IMagicall  and
Supcrcclcftiall  meanes,  by  and  through  the  Vertues  of  particular  Jntelligmesy
Or  the  Red  Medii  hic  wrought  up  to  the  higheft  degree  of  T erfeftm.  And  in
fuch  cafcs  the  Hermeti^ue  Pbilofopber  muft  apppeare,  who

o)  i£wfani)at!)contut5C&

3 £>crfctt  fo;  'Bobics  tijat  bt  GcB

ali  in  fit  mttfc*  to  be  relctbcfc*

Cljtoijrlctl;  #*turc, ent>  prolonget  Ipfecfcc.

Therefore


C4*0

Therefore  let  ali  men  ceale  to  wondtr  why  fo  mi ny  Difcafcs  fecmc  imurablc,
when  many  times  being  Supcrnmrall  we  judge  them  Naturali , and  thc  true
Caufes  unknowne,  no  futable  Medicamen  i%  ad.mnifticd*.

And  vvheicas  I have toucht  upon  Sigilli,  I chinlcc  itwillnot  be  i emote  from
thlsdifccurfefit I give  a littlefatisfa&ion  to  my  Rcader  therein  5 Thoughp.r-
haps  ie  may  be  elteemed  as  a thing  of  too  daring  a Nature  for  my  Pai  Nol-
am I ignoi-ant  how  forne,  moli  lcarned  Men,  have  exrremlyfuftercd  under  che
heavy  and  fharp  Loadof  unworthy  and  ra;h  Calumny , for  manifcftin<*  or  de-
fending  this  Vofirrn  ; buc  ithath  only  beeneffuch  is  their  Glory Jby  thtle  chat
could  ne  ver  fufficiend  y Anfrver  their  *Argumms . \>)  Scc  R Mofes,

The  framing  of  Sigill sl  Lamis,  Talcfmes  (for  all  depend  upon  one  Radix)  b*  Ouclor  dubi -
is  a piece  of  Learnivg  as  (p)  Arcienc  as  the  B ab  i lotii  an' and  Caldcan  M agiyQ>m.

(who  fiill  found  ouc  theSecrcc  power  of  Figures)  achiefe  parcofcheirMjg/c^,

Andpradifed  by  the  greateli  *P  bilcfopbcrt  in  thc  Eaikrne  World;  Where  re-
maineto  this  day,  (as  evident  Teltimonies  of  their  firft  Immitti)  very  many
and  audent  Talcfmes,  the  miraculous  effe&s  whercof  were  adnured  and  ap-
pt-oved  throughout  all  @Atg;ptznd  Per  fu:  although  (E  confcilej  their  Nime
and  Ufe  be  yet  fcatce  knowne  in  thefe  paits  of  the  World  ; Or  if,  onely  co  fuch
vvhofe  Wifdome  thinkes  fit  to  conceale  and  preferve  the  Itfiowlcdg  ihereof,from
the  hands  of  the  fenflefie  and  profane.

Among  all  orherT bilofopbcrs  (fainous  for  this  kinde  of  knowledg)  Apcltb
nmTymtcs  wasthe  ( q ) mightieft,  and  his  Worlics  (in  my  OpinionJ  moii  qy'Greg  Obfciv .
Stupitidim  : Who  thoughthe  Envious  and  Ungratefull  World , has  throwne  p3g* 3
fomedirtupon  him,  to  blcmilh  the  Tnnocencyof  his  Operarictis,  yct  he  never
deferved  other  then  well  5 all  He  did  being  fi>r  the  (r ) goid'  thcieof,  and  not  r)hUycru*  Syra .
for  bm\ Hewas  no  lelle  a Pious  then  Illuftricus  Pbilojopb.r,  Hi . wh ole  Life  be-  AurMcnf  pag.
ing  ftiid  and  vertuous,  and  his  Vcatbn ot  blafied  with  any  fcandalous  Exit . 1 z7.

And  for  a juftificarion  of  his  TnuuV,take  this  Teliimony  of  J«/fe4,who,faith

(s)  that  he  was  a Man  skilifull  in  the cc  Diflcm  and  Qinfait  of  all  naturali  Po - s )Inqueft.  ad

i(  rvers  ; and  who  wrought  wonderfull  things  by  the  meanes  of  this  Science  ; Ortbod:quce[f.

“ (vvhich  were  only  Naturali  and  not  Miraculous:)  For  which  purpofe,  he
cc  madechoyceof  luch  fit  Subjccfs,  as  mighr  conduce  to  the  perfe&ion  of
“ whatheintended  to  EfFe&:  And  indeed  God  did  not  withfiand  thofe
cc  Wor\{es  of  his,  in  regard  they  were  done  by  the  knowledg  of  Naturali  tbiiigf>

(C  for  the  ufe  and  benefit  of  Mtffl.

What  I havefurther  to  fjy,lliall  onely  be  to  fiiew  what  Naturali  pomrs , Si-
gills,  &c.  ^raved  or  I mprcft  with  proper  CharaSIcrs  and  Figures , and  made  tm-
der  certaine  peculiar  Conftellatious  may  have.  Albuma^ar,  2abcl,  Haly , Alba -
ttgnus,  and  di vers other  Arabians,  giyeus  feverall  examples  offuch  as  have
been  cured  of  the  biting  of  Scr pmf,  S corpions>  Mad  dogs,  &c.  by  Talifmaticall  .

Figures:  And  in  other  Auibors  we  mcetewitha  world  of  (t)  Storia  vvhich  teli
what  Admirable  effeds  they  have  rvrought  being  rightly  prepared,  fwhich  Ofyav.
lliould  l here  mention,  vvould  fwell  beyond  the  limits  of  my  Difccvrfe)  But  Gajf.Curof
thispecce  of  is  ofextre  ne  difficulty,  3nd  not  tobe  performed  by  tvery
one  that  takes  it  in  hand.

As  for  the  ufeof  (uchCbaraftcn,  Ltttcr$>  Wcrds , Figures,  & c.  Formed  or
Infculped  upon  any  Mattcr  wc  make  ufe  of,  we  are  led  to  it  by  the  prefident  u )SceCrolius
of‘  H&tnTc>  who  Stampcs  moft  nonble  and  marveiou^F/^«re.f  upon  (u)  Plms,  de  fignat.inier .

R(o:es  rerum.


C4<-*'0

Rootcs,  Sccds,  Fruits,  nzy  even  uponrude  Stoncs , Flints , andcrther  inferiouc
Bodics.

Nor  are  thefe  remarkablc  Signatura  made  and  defcribed  by  Chaunce,  (for
there  is  a certame  Prcvidcnce  which  leades  on  ali  things  to  cheir  end,  and  whicb
imkes  nothing  buteo  forne  purpofej  but  are  the  Chxriftcrs  and  Figures  of
thofe  Starrt,  bywhomthey  areprincipallygoYerned,  and  with  thefe  particular
Stamps  , have  alfo  peculiar  and  diderent  ienu.es  beftowed  upon  them.
VVhat  Artijls  therefore  doe  in  point  of  Cbarafter,  is  onely  to  purfue  the
Track,  that  is  beatenout  by  Nature  > And  by  hovv  much  the  more  the  Miner
whereuponfuch  Imprejfions  are  made,  is  futable  to  rhe  ^udities  of  thofe  Stavs
whofe  t /vraftcrs  it  is  ftgned  vvith : by  fo  much  more  apt  and  incltneable  it
will  be  to  receivc  thofe  vertues  that  diali  impower  it  to  produce  an  Effeft,  in
things  whereuntoit’s  applyed,

Neverthelelfe,  this  is  notall,  for  this  Body  muft  have  as  itwerea  Soule  in-
fufed,  and  be  Impregnated  with  aCelefliallvitdity,oe  elfe  it  remaines  Inefjeftu -
allznADead»  In  which  refped  other  meanes  muft  be  found  out  before  we
can  obtaine  that  Efted.  And  therefore  we  are  toConfider,  that  the  Soule  of
the  IVorldisnot  confined,  nor  the  Celeftiall  Ivflnenccs  limhed,  but  doe  indi f-
ferently  emit  and  communicate  their  Vertues  alike,as  well  to  things  Artificia^
made,  as  to  thofe  that  are  Ndturdly  genera  tedythough  fonietimes  they  are  more,
at  othertimes  lefle  vigorousand  powerfull,according  to  the  diderent  A[pects
under  which  they  are  wrought : In  which  regard  a fit  Election  muflbe  buiit  up
from  the  Foundation  of  Aftrologic,  futable  to  th e Nature  of  the  Operation  pro-
pofed,  whicb  beingeflfe&ed,  and  the  S tars  finding  a figurc  aptly  difpofed  for<-
leceiYtng  them, they  forthwith/wprc/?ethetr  vertue , which  they  retaining  doe
afterwards  operate  in  that  they  finde  to  be  (emblable • And  this  is  not  ftrange
if  we  reflent  upon  the  Vulgarcxperiments  of  the  Loadcjlone , ftho  communi-
cating  irs  vertue  to  a peeee  of  Iron  (a  thing  made  fic  by  Nature  to  atrradt  ani
reteine)  thatP/ecethereby  becomes  of  ftrength  to  communicate  this  vertue
to  a tbird.  But  if  we  Ihould  confiderthe  Operations  of  this  Magna  throughly
f which  oroceeds  onely  from  a Naturali  P rinciple)  there  is  no  other  Myfitryfie*
le(Udl,E lemcntall, or  Eartbly,  which  can  be  too  hard,  forour  Belicfe.

Moreover, thefe  Cclettiall  vertues  and  peculiar  Gijts  are  notinfufed  into  Iff-
dividuaU  and  pirtkular  things , by  the  Idea,  and  by  meanes  of  the  Soule  of  the
JVorld  alone,  But  alfo  are  inviced  thither,  through  the  Obedientiality  of  their
Maner,  and  a certaine  aptitude  and  likeneffe  that  thefe  Injeriours  beare  to
their  Supcriours  $ which  beingoncetaken  in,  they  thereupon  contraft  and  re-
teine (befides  fucb  as  they  receive  from  their  owne  Species)  thofe  naturali
Vertues  and  Roots  ofthe  S tarrs,  wherevvith  they  fufeitate  and  ftir  up  the  Influ-
ente* of  the  Celelliall  Bodies  5 who  are  (as  it  were  by  compad  when  United )
Obliged  to  Operate  in  and  for  that  purpofe,  which  the  Artifl  appoints  them.
And  more  efpeciallyif  the  ofthe  Operior  be  vehemently  ioclined  to-
vyards  the  Ume.  For  that  through  the  ftrength  and  Efficacy  of  the  Imginaiion
' and  Vafiion,  (beiivg  ferioufly  intent  upon  any  Opentioit)  is  joyned  with  the
Minie  of  the  $txrrs  and  IntcUigcnces,  and  asfodainly  fitted  mth  Vertues,  asif
it  were  the  proper  Recepracle  of  their  Influcnces, and  confcquently  helpes  more
efFedually  to  infufe  their  Vertues  into  our  iVor^cs : And  the  reafon  isj  becaufc
there  is  an  apprcbtvfm  and porver  ofall  tbings  in  the  SUnde:  Whereupon  all  things

haying


(4<*0

having  a naturali  Obeiienct  to  it^have  alio  of  ncceflhy  an  E$acy ; and  moreto
that  which  delires  tbem3  vvich  a ftrong  and  intcnt  Defire.

Notwiihlhnding,  all  tbefe  IVwdcrs  are  not  wrought  but  by  the  Coopera-
tion  of  feconi  (^w/crdifpofung  of  rhe  Coiporall  Hanct,  (jod  (the  firft  caufe  of
allrhings)  having  varioufly  diftribured  tbefe  vertucs  to  every  oncasheplca-
feth,  wbo  by  his  Command  and  appointmcnt  are  neccflitated  to  produce
their  EffcHs.)  Which  Mane/  (by  realon  of  its  Purity  or  Inequality  may  aufe
the  CelcfUall  vertucs  to  erre  in  their  Aflittgs,  (for  certainly  Infiuences  maybe
hindred,  and  prove  inefte&uall  through  the  indifpolition  oc  infufficiency  of
tbe  MatterJ  And  therefore  ic  is  no  ordinary  Speculati  cn  to  awaken  the  Jleeping
Spirit  wbich  lyes  bound  up  in  the  ftraighc  Prifon  of  the  BoJy,  to  invite  and
allure  that  propicious  Spirit  to  defcend  from  Heaven,  and  unite  it  felfe  with
that  which  is  Intemxll j and  there  witball  to  convey  a Vetulum  tbereintOj  thac
Is  of  povver  to  hold  faft  and  fix  the  Cclcjlull  Ivflucttcs,  from  recoyling  back  in-
to  their  uttited  Centers.

This  is  the  Series  ancLOrier  of  Sature  conjoynM  with  Art : and  this3  and
all  this  muft  be  effe&ed,before  one  erue  Magicall  Operatiori  can  be  performed.


Pag.  r iUber  patris  jfcaptentic.

THough  I cannot  yet  fadsfie  the  Rexder  who  W3$  the  Authour  hereofj  and
therefore  muft  Regifler  it, (together  with  «JEjcprrtcnce  anD
the  l^crmcts  iEale)  amongft  the  Anonjmi : yet  I can  aflure  him  He  gives  ex-
ceeding  good  advice  to  the  Student  in  this  Science > where  he  bidshim  be  Secrtt
in  the  Carriageon  ofhis  Studiis  and  Operatioris,  and  not  to  let  any  one  knovv
of  his  Under tx^ings,  but  his  good  Augei  and  Himjclfe : and  fuch  a dofe  and
retyred  Breji  had  Norton* s Mafier , who

w;  c<Iil)cnI^ctit)ifpttt?D  of&olouts  cf  tljelRofe,  vt)Ordin.^i  i*

I£etoetti&notfpea&c  bttt  feccpc  iftmfcifefall  elofe.

Privacy  will  (queftionlefle)  provean  unimaginable  benefit  to  him,  whereas
on  the  contrary  Apermjfe  expofeth  a true  Pbilofepber  to  a multitudo  of  Misfor-
tunes.  Witncfte  Sir  #E4-  Kcllcy,  whofe  immoderate  Ambition  of  fpreading  his
Namc>  lifted  him  up  even  to  a Madne jfe  of  publique  Carriage;  which  not  cor-
refting  in  Time,  he  moft  miferably /e/ij  through  tbe  fatali  Virtcgo  of  impru-
dent Ghry.  To  fuch  therefore  I rtiall  only  adde  Qbxmu  Councell  which  may
pro  ve  of  no  litle  adrantage  if  they  remember  ic.

x)  3l£a!sc  jpvib?  to  pour  OeaUng  os  feto  as  j?oti  mafe,  x)Tcn  CemmM}
jfojt^rcc  mapfccepc  ConnceiUf  ttoaine  bcatoaie.  of£$v&


THcF/gKrecue  in  Braffc  and  placed  in  Page  110.  is  an  Hierogliphicall
device  of  Cremer  fomtime  Abbot  of  iVefiminftcr,  and  Scboller  (in  this  Sct-
tnce)  to  RtymoniLutty,  wbich  bc  caufed  to  be  painted  upoa  an  Arcbei  iVdl

Ppp  ' ^ in


in  Wcftminjler  tAbbcy > where  now  the  Statues  of out  K^is  and  ^uecrn  are  fec
in  their  refpe&ivc  Habits.

I met  with  it  Limned  in  a very  Anciezt  Manufcript,  beforc  the  old  Vcrfcs  thac
vjfeco 3^ili  (W follow,  which  tbere  feemed  to  ferve  as  a Triface  to  thac  IVorb^e  which
' beares  the  Tytle  ofl^Ctme#  HUirD.  Init  is  conteynM  the  Grand  Miftericsof
the  Pkilofopkers  Stone,  and  not  more  Pcpi(h  or  Superftitiovs  then  Flamell' $
Hicroglipbicf{s  portraidupon  an  tArcb  in  St.  Innoccnts  Church-yard  in  T aru;
Notwithftanding  it  has  pleafed  fome,  to  wafh  the  Originali  over  with  a Tli-
fieret  s whited  Brufh . Asalfo  (of  late)  to  breake  in  Pieces  the  (jlaffc  IVtndorv
behinde  the  Pulpit  in  St.  Margsrets  Churcb  a:  Weftminftcr,  wherem  was  fairely
Painted  (bivt  unhappily  mifhken  for  a Topijh  Story ) the  whole  Proccfje  of  the
\Vor\ey  in  this  manner.

The  JF/wi<mus  di vided  into  thre e In  the  Outermofl  vvhereofupon

the  right  hand  was  drawne  a Man  holding  a Bcy  in  his  hand , and  a IVoman
with  a Girlc  in  hers,  all  ftanding  in  uprigbt,  nalyd pofiuresy  upon  a grcene  foliate
tirtb  : The  Man  and  IVoman  had  Fctters,  whertwith  their  Feet  feemed  to  be
cbaintd  to  the groimdy  which  Petters  wer e prefented%as  falling  from  off  their
Legs.  Over  the  beads  of  thefe  per  fons  vvere  the  Sun  and  Moone  placed,  and  pain-
ted  of  a fad  darke  red  Colour.

Within  the  Lcft  fide  of  the  Windorc  was  a Beautifull  7 oung  man3  clad  in  a
'Garmenco {varicus  Coloursy  bearing  a T dloxc  Crofit  upon  his  Sboulicrsy  his
BodyEvcirclcd  with  a Brighi  Glorjy  which  fent  forth  Bcames  of  divers  Colours>
He  ftood  upon  an  Einb  intimating  Oculus  Vifcium.

AttbeFocreof  ihe  Midle  Partof  the  Windorv  was  afaire  large  Red  Rcjc
fuli  fpread,  which  iffued  Raycs  upward,  and  in  theMiddle  anexeeding  bright
7 cllow  Glory . A bove  the  Rofe  was  the  Figure  of  a Man  tifing  with  Bcames  of
Light  fpread  about  his  Hcai  (famwhar  like  the  Pollure  ufed  to  expreife  Cbriftfi
riling  from  his  Sepi  l fere)  He  had  a Garmcnt  of  a Reddi fb Colour y deepned  with
Rei  and  heightned  with  T dlorv  *y  lnhisleft  Handy  a iVhite  Store , which  he
held  towards  the  Perfons  arifing  in  that  partof  the  PVindorv  on  the  Right  Hand\
and  in  bis  Right  Hand  he  held  forrh  a Rei  S tone  towards  Him,  who [eGarments
was  of  variovA  Colour  s.

In  the  uppermoft  part  of  this  Windcw  over  the  Figures  was  Travfverfdy
writtenas  followeth:

In  th efirfi  partof  the  Lcft  Hand ,

£)mnc0  gentes*  aticpti  plaufcite  ciutatioromus  frater  fcefrer.


i)  In  this  place
risprobable
the  word  to  be
fupplyed  is
Serram.

* Elements  of
Armor.p,??.


In  the  Middle  Part.

j§> ....  at  mfttrn0 fpt rf tum faatn,ecce  tioba  facto  omnia  ceiunt  $ (z)  t • . .
In  the  Tbird  on  the  Right  Hand .

JFnctu0  quafl  unus  eje j . fa  . . . . angclio  tibf

Under  thefe  Figures  in  ihe  Lcft  fide  of  the  VVindoxp  were  the  Suwels  and  the
Mdrtyns  Coates  of  Armes  quartered  y And  at  the  bottome  of  the  Right  fide
thereof,  was  this  Coate  of tArm s placed^  {yi\>)Argm3  a Chevoron  * Embattelledy
y w/e/,  & Fert  ; which  for  the  rarenefle  of  Bearing  I thought  fit  to  Blay>n3  and
withall  (becaufe  upon  very  diligent  fearch  among  the  RecordsofEvglifb  Coats
of  Armes  it  is  not  to  be  foundj  in  hope  ic  miy  come  to  the  view  of  fuch,  who
(if  not  at  honie)  may  from  abroad  produce  the  Bearer confequently  bring

to


(4-<*7  )

to  ligfit  the  T erfon  thac  defignM  thefe  Hkroglipbkbj,  and  caufed  them  thus  co
bc  Paintcd.


Pag.213.  I^crme0l5itD.

WHich  Piece  (as  *tis  thoughtj  vtas  writcen  Origmlly  by  Raymund  Lully
(or  acleail  made  Englifi)  by  the  afore  mentioned  Cremer ) and  that
upon  this  Occafion.

Cremer  traveliing  into  Italiy  feil  imo  the  acquaintanceof  LuVy,  and  focx-
cccdingly  wrought  upon  him  by  his  perfwafions  that  he  broughtf)»  ic*e  ieita-
him  over  into  EiigUnd>xv here  within  twoyearcs(but  afeer  tbirtyycares  erroniqus  ™ent*  % ^
Experimenti)  hc  obtcyncd  the  Stcret  from  him.  And  afterwards  bringing  L.remeri,,
Lully  to  the  iight  and  knowledge  of  Edrvurd  the  ibird,  upon  forne  deepe  Ingage-
menti  and  *Promifes  that  the  i\ing  entred  into  to  profecute  1 Wirre  agiinjl  tbc
Turbes  inpcrfon,:o  beftow  formabit  en  tbc  Houfc  ofGod , but  noibing  in  Pridc  or
Warring  againft  CbrijliansJ  hewas  coment  permifime  Divina  Regem  fua  Arte
divitem  pccre.  Which  when  the  H\ing  had  obtaincd,he  brakehis  Promifc,iut-
ned  his  Pe/ignc  againft  Frjncc  (the  firft  Expedition  being  (b)  Anno  r$}7.)  b) Ssow.Ann.
and  finding  that  Lully  (afterhe  had  feene  him  violate  his  faitb  in  deftroying  fot 234»
CbrifUans  in  flead  of  Mahumetuns)  refufed  to  further  his  Ambition  with  new
fupply  of  Goliy  He  dapt  him  up  in  the  Torvcr, where  he  lay  a long  time,  and  fee-
ing  no  poflTibility  ofRc/w/^,begun  to  ftudy  his  Frecdm, and  to  that  end  made
himfelfe  a Lcaper,  by  which  meanes  he  gained  more  Liberty,  and  at  lengch  an
Advancage  of  efcaping  into  Prancc , where  in  all  probability  he  pen’d  this
T/cfc.

The  wholcj^or^is  P4rib$liull,andAUulive'}  yet  truly  Philo fcpbicall : and  tbc
Bird  (that  intitlesit)  the  McrcwyofihePbilofopberi^whofevertues  an dpreperties
are  therein  largely  defecibed,)  By  the  word  Cbcrlc}  is  meant  the  Covetousand
Ignorant  Artift^htGarden  is  the  VeJJeU  or  Qlajfc,  and  the  Hedgc  the  Furnace.


Pag.2$3.  . , ^^c^aic  of  t!;c  CI;anon’0  pcoman.

ONeReafonwhy  I fele&ed  out  of  Cbmer'%  Cavtcrtury  Tdes>  that  ofthe
Cbivon*s  Peoman  was,  to  letthe  World fee  what  notoiious  Cbcslhtg  therc
has  beeneever  ufed,  under  prctence  of  this  true  (thosgh  Injur*d)  Science  5
Ancther  is,  to  fhew  that  Cbaucer  himfelfe  was  a Miftcr  therein.

For,  in  this  TalcCbauccr  fets  forth  thedeceipts  in  Alchimy  to  tbelife,  and  no*
tablydeclaimes  againft  all  fuch  villanous  Prctenden,  who  being  wholly  igno-
rant of  Art}  have  notwithftanding  learnttheC«ww/n^,toabufethe  \V0rld5  And
this  paines  hc  :ooke  (as  himfelfe  profeflahj  mceriy

x ^ * . c)Cbxu.Tctin.

c)  ®o  tljc  mtentt^at  nsen  niaic  bcluarc  tfjcrcbp,  tale.

%w  b fo?  no  otber  caufc  ttulf .

Hercin  foilowing  theT refidait  ofallfincereand  confcicnuousPbilofopbcrr>
thenwhom,thc  Inju^drvorld  cannot  morecondemne  the  abufesof  thefe  Im-

Pppi  pojiort


C+<58)

pftors  that  difgrace  the  Arty  in  that  tbey  are  continually  ddvifing  to  fhun  them
asfyteidingltifeftm  y and  fetting  out  Ligbts  and  Dircftionr,  that  mayfetve
as  fo  many  Land  marlisy  (if  we  will  buc  take  notice  of  them)  to  make  us  a-
vcryd  the  Rcc^s  of  their  FraudandVeceipty  which  will  otherwife  fplit  us.

The  famous  Ari  of  P byficl{  is  noc  more  abufed,  with  d^uaefang  Mcunte -
ban\sy  nor  that  other  ofAjlrohgy  more  injur*d  by  forne  nibling  Sciolifhmd
ignorant  luglers  : then  this  Divine  Science  hath  fuffered  by  the  Lcgcrdemaint
offom  cTrcwidcrs.  What  though  fome  Moderne  Cbemifis  rove  beyond  the
Latitude  oftheir  Trofeffion , (being  hurried  on  by  a Covetous  thirfi,  toobteyne
this  Arcanum  T>ei,ih\sTbefturu3  incomparabilis;)  and  by  operauqg  inftrange
ZMatten>8t  torturing  of  various  Bcdiesy  bring  Difparagcmau  upon  this  worthy
Science $ yet  wcoughtnct;  tbereforetoconfound  praife-worchy  Artit  wuhthe
Abufcs  which  Itrpcjiers  fhuffle  ineo  them  * or  for  the  f.ilfeneife  or  corruption
of  the  bad,  condemne  the  pure  and  good  : If  fo,  R eligion  it  felfe  (as  well  as
other  Learning,  and  ProfeJJicns')  would  fcarce  be  exempt  from  thelike  blemi-
ih<$,  and  wourids,  if  not  deftioycd  and  buried  in  fcornfull  Igno*auce.

This  is  the  Mifcryy( and  tis  not  ultra  Caduceum  for  me  toTpeake  it)  ihat  therc
are  a Generat  ion  ofFccple  thatrufh  hcadlong  into  the  acquaintance  of  iWch
Meny  there*s  nor  ftaviug  them  off,muchlike  the  doting  Idiotis  which  io  eager-
ly  couiced  Cbuucer's  C bauony  after  whom

d)  Chan*  d)  $$ en  ribcnant)  &oi?t fui!  manp  a $$ ple

Yeom.  Tafo  to  ftc&eanb i?abe  acquatntancr,

/j2ot  fcno5»ing  of  \)ip  falfc  go betnance.

* * ' . X

Let  P bilcfopbers  fay  what  thev  can,  and  ivi  femen  give  never  fo  good  CounfelJ,
no  warningrwili  ferve,they  muft  be  Couzened,  nay  they  have  a gieedy  ap-
petite thereunto  > but  it  has  beene  ever  fo,  and  we  are  told  of  old,  thac

t)  Ocdin.  pag.  7 e)  fcabe  bpne  ober  ftmft,

aittbijaftpCmettceto  fume  aroapti)rtrt$rift>

fo  fttong  and  powerfull  a mifleader  is  Covetoufneffe.

f ) Ord.p^.17.  f ) Norton  deferibes  thefe  Chcats  exa&ly,  and  give  as  fui  an  account  of  their

Subtilties  ashe  dare,  for  feare  of  incouraging  fuch  as  bend  their  Witts  ihat

g) Chap.of  Pu-  way.  (g)  Kiplcy  diifeds  them  to  the£o»fi,and  fcourgeth  them  naked  ro  the

trefac,  viewof  a//j  the  Jike  doth  many  other  P hilofopkers : Bloomcficld gives  us  a Cata-

logueol  the  chetfe  of  this  Tribe  in  his  time,  and  I may  fately  teli  the  Rcadcr  he
fliall  gainc  much  benefit  by  this  Wor\ f,  ifhe  pick  buc  out  what  is  faid  concer-
ningthem,  and  ftudy  that  Firft .

In  fome  darke  P affages  tis  as  greare  a Curtefie  to  be  taughc  to  knpw  Blo(\sy
as  to  be  direfted  which  wavto  avoyd  and  gec  beyond  them,  and  being  foc
thanke  R iphy  for  this  his  following  Cautionary  advice.

h)  USefcairc  tfycrtfo^c  fo?  3I)cfu0  fahe,

. 3nt>  mcopll  Sx>irl)  notbfng  of  greate  Cofl:  ^

0?  am>  i#  but  loft.


f;)Chap,ofPu*


(+6?>

AsalTo  Norton,

i ) Crafc  3Uvmtn  tcaft,  b«  not  fti  letotmcflfc  ebcr,  i ) Ord.  1. 1 16

Jle&jbmffetohabcJsbetttrlatctljjn  ttebcr.  r


I wifli  I could  fay  this  Age,  this  Sttiion,  thc  World,  were  not  alurcd  nnd  in-
fe&ed  with  the  Cyrtm  notes  of  forne  grand  , and  notablc  Impoftors , or  tbat>
the  too  too  Crcdulout  had  not  met  witb  the  fame  misfortune  wbich  Story
telis  us  otbers  have  undergone,  even  to  Rww.Yet  to  thofe  that  have  been  De-
coy’d  imo  the  ftiare,  and  would  gladly  for  the  future  purfuc  a more  hopefull
£W/e,  let  them  heare  Kichard  (farpenter.

£)See  Carpent*

k)  aibpfe  tl)C  fc>cil  ere  tboft)  brgi n,  worke.

J2Dr  dfe  Iptei  fc^alt frpnnc.


IAnd  with  him  Cbxmr ,

l)  3Rf  tl;at  t?aar  (Spue  cafmotfeeneticfrt,
3lobct!)tl)at  t>our  ^ Inue  lacb  not  %

And  againe,

JLct  no  mait  bufle  hf  n ti)i&  %x\z  to  fccljc,

10at  be  tynt  tfce  entention  ana  ^peectye
iDftbc^Wofo^er^unTjerftimb  can,
3nbiCbc^cc!)et0aieiDt)etMan.r.  ;

■$  oj  tbisf j&cfenee  am)  Cotmgng  cittoDfm,)  Ijty
30  of  t!;e  ^ecre  of £>mcz$  pam.  ’


/)Chan  Yeom.
Tale.


w')  Arnold.de.
villa  nova.


Let  me  teli  them  they  may  become  bappier  and  expeft  a 'Blefiing  in  what  thcy
feekej  Ifwith  $ob  they  can  thus  throughly  purge  themfelves  and  fay,  7/7
bdvt-mxde  (Jold  my  Hope,  orfine  Gold  my  (^onfidqice,  &c.  that  is,  if  they  can
ftudy  this  Science  and  not  purfue  it  for  Tranfmutaubn  of  . Metals
fake  onely,

n)  foi  Cobttou*  mentbatfinbetijflebcc  MPe?rce  ®llCK

t^cffeUc  it  ouceanb  tber,  Wonke*

and  certainly  the  luere  of  that  will  fix  a Curfe  upon  their  Endexvours,  and
plunge  them  beadlong  into  an  unfathomM  depth  of  Misfortune ,

If  what  hath  been  delirered  be  not  of  force  to  make  men  watcb  over  /their
undcrtxfiingsy  and  heedfully  avoid  the  Springs  and  Ginns  that  are  ordinarily
laid  to  intrap  them  into  Ruite ; but  that  on  the  concrary  they  carelefly  flide
imo  a Venture  upon  any  Tarms , Ile  leave  them  with  this  incouragement.


o)  t&bo  foc  that  ip&et!)  to  utter Mc  foifp,
&cfbtni  come  fojtb  ano  Jcnrneto  ^ulttpltc  $
% nO  cherp  man  that  fcatb  ouoftt  m hte  C of  cr,
%tt  l)im  appeareano  tofjcea^Wofophc^


n ) Chan.
Yeom.  Tale.


ppp  s


Nov»


0f7°)

Now  as  Concerning  Cbaucer  (the  Autbor  of  this  Tale)  he  is  ranked  amongft
the  Hcrmeticb,  Pbilofopbers,  and  his  Maftcr  in  this  Science  was  Sir  Jobn  Gower,
wbofe  familiat  and  neei  e acquaintance  began  at  the  Inner  Tcmple  upon  Cbau -
rrr'freturne  ineo  England,  for  che  Troubles  of  the  Times  towards  the  latter
end  oiRicbitbc  feco7ict'  s R&igri  had  caufed  him  to  retire  out  of  their  Vavger  into
Holland,  2 ela?id,  and  F rance.

He  is  cited  by  Norton  for  an  Autbcntijuc  Autbor,  in  thefe  words  j

p)  Ord pigAi*  ' p)^nb  Cb.mer  vcbcatfctb bofc>  ®ptanst0  tbefamc*

Befides  he  that  Reads  the  latter  part  of  the  Cbxnotfs  Teomarts  r,*/c,wil  eafily
pcrceive  him  to  be  a ludicious  Hbtiofopber , and  one  that  fully  knew  the
Mifiery.

hlaftzr Spcgbt  ('inthat  commendable  Account  he  gives  of Cbauccr's  life,^
isperfwaded  be  was  borne  in  Lcndon y from  fomething  intimated  in  his  Tefta-
Bale  Cent.  mnt  oflm.  But  Bale  faithj  He  was  ( q ) Nobili  loco  natus,  and  that  neere  unto
j.fol.  J25.  Oxford,  for  ( faith  he)  LeUnd  had  tArgumms  wbich  made  him  believe  he  was
borne  either  in  Oxford ■ fbire  or  Barii • fljjrc.  But  what  thofe  Arguments  were  vve
now  know  notj  yet  may  believe  them  to  be  of  conliderable  wugbt,  becaufe
they  were  doubtlefie  fuch  as  he  gathered  in  his  6.ycares  laborious  fearch  into
the  Libraries  of  our  EngliJJ)  Monaftcries  and  Colleges,  being  furthered  by  the
liberali  Encouragement  and  Commifiion  of  Hen . 8 And  had  itnot  been  for  his

r)  See  his  indefatigable paines,  AU  that  was  notable  in  this  Natim  (r)  bad  in  ali  lifielybood

Newyeares  bcctie pcrpetually, obftvrcd,  or  at  befl -but  ligbtly  remcmbrcd^asamcertaine  (baddorccs.
oift  to  H,8.  Neverthelefle  the  jruits  of  this  (zmous  Antiquarics  iabours,  are  no  where  now

intirely  to  be  feene3  unleffe  difperfed  through  the  worfas  of  forne  other  men*
who  havemoft  arrogantly  and  unworthily  made  them  their  owne  ; amongfl
the  reft  I perceive  T!olid.  Virgil  Bole  m\xzXiTymbct  from  this  worthy  $truflure3
with  part  whereof  he  built  up  his  IVerb^  the  reft  be  enyioufly  burnt*  for
thus^finde  LdandsGhoft  Complaining.

s)  Lelands  0 ^tu 5 ^ccetb^t)  i ojbotb  not  JUlanb0

<3hoft.  Complaine  fcaitb  d&bofts  of  dEngUty  J]3otarte0  5

CiKbom  f5olibo*c  SUtr  gtU  r obb’  D of  merit,

UBereftof  Jj2amc,anb  faebt  of  ^tftojieo,

<iOI?BcfxD'rctcWl)etabia)t  <£ngii{b:iUb*arfe0.

^b^nebeb  113ooItectb£cfc  xobofoeberbib  it : .

onc  btumcelbtQ  gettone  tmgtcCtebitt.

3tu31  becctbb  ? oj  beti)  not  3Lclanb0 &vittt
^abcl^meanbCrMo* fonte  USoobe  'Crefurc  tfcltbs

/j^smeanb  periti

eabctchp  arc  fmotbcrcb  a }£>?incc*gtbcn  Health,

31  icarncb  cntfters^rabaiic,  itaft0,  anb  i^ealtb :

911  tbcfc  l)Z  fpent  to  boe  i;t0  Conntrp  pieafurc,

4D  b fabe  I;f0  $ame,  tl;c  tfcoilb  map  HtioSo  i [ig  ^mfurc.


(+70


Buc  begging  Far  ion  for  this  Vigrcpion^  being  on  the  bchalf  of  fo  defer  ving
a Scbollar ) I return  to  Cbauccr.Ditts  Pofitively  faies  he  was  born  in  lVoodjloc^7
of  voblc  VanntSy  and  that  Patre  habuit  Equcftris  OrdinU  Vir u t his  Faibcr  was  a
t&igbt.  And  this  may  not  be  wnlikeiy  if  \ve  Confider,  that  noc  oneiy  the
Nameis  zsAuncicm  as  (i)}Villiam  the  Conqueror'*  time,  but  that  fomecfthet)  R0H.0fB3t-
F&mily  have  beene  both  of  large  fortunes  and  good  quality.  For  we  finde  (uj  t^\[  Abby.
that Edwthe  i.heardthe  Complmt  of  Iotn  Chauccr  in  the  Zter<jgeof  rooo  1.  H\  Record  iu
And  alfo,  that  there  was  in  the  Rai gn  e o(H.  and  Ed.  1.  one  Elias  Cbauccr3  -fura  Loncj.

of  whom  (w)  . Edmrdus  dei  gratia > &c.  liberate  de  Thefauro  nojtro  Elia  Rccord 'in

Cbaufecir'  decem  Solid:  With  which(x)£teffcr/  our  GcffrcyClmccr  is  vvritcen  sCacc;
in  the  Rccords  o(Ed.}.and  Richjbe  fecond.  v)  *


V ) i n


%)  Court  of
Lw.Cbaf**


i)  £>f  Cambjibge  Cterfec,—  . u
He  quickly  became  a Witty  Logitiarty  a fweet  Rhetor  it  a plcafant  Poct>  2


grave  Vhilofifhcr ,a  holy  Divine, a skilful  Matbcmatitianjbis  Tucors  therein  were
jfrcrc3l°b*^£inJan&  $ ver  e ♦iLctinrJ  (a)  /Friers  Carmelites
remembred  wich  honour  in  his  Trcatife  -of  the  A[irolabe)  and  moreoveM  -
fafely  adde)  an  able  Aftrologian,  for  alnioft  in  every  Worke  he  inter-wcavcs
moft  found  and  perfed  Aftrologie . In  Brief,  he  was  Univcrfally  Icar  11  ed,  and
fo  affirmes  his  Scbolar  Tho.Occlevc.


b)  B iSSniberfail  ;fFatye  ef  Snicnec*


b)  Prolog.to

U e4  in  Ii  1 1 a


atatem  attigi ffet3  erat  Poeta  Elegans , Et  qui  Pocfim  Anglicam  ita illufiravity  ut
Anglicui  Homerus  merito  haberetur : For  ere  he  came  to  Mans  Eftate}  he  was  an
Elegant  Poct3  and  one^vho  illuftrated  Englijh  Poefyy  tbae  he  mighc  have  beene
defervedly  accounted  the  Cnglifl)  i)ottter.  Lidgate  the  Mov^e  of  Bury  calls


bim  the  (d)  Load  ftar  of  our  Language , and  telis  us  that  it  was  he,that

e)  ^abefirfttobidillanD^aine

Cbc  <B  olo  nm  b?opp0  of  i&peccb  ant>  Cio  quencej


d)Prefto  Bo-


chas.

• cj  Jo.Lidgate
de  Nativ.Mar.


3lnto  our  ^ongue  tbrougb  bi&  Cjceellencc.

3lnbfount>tbe  ;fflourc0  firft  ef  IHbctcriebc,
*Durtubcfpcce!je  orc!£  to  tnlumtne,

' ^atinour  Congc  tuas  neber  nonltfm  tthe.

Forindeed  in  his  time  all  good  Letterswere  laid  aflecp  inmofl  parts  of  the
Wotldy  and  in  Eitgland  our  Tovguc  was  exceeding  wild  and  rude,  yet  (through
his  rejjKingandpoHJbing)  h became  more  fweet  and  pleafant^  in  whichrcgard
he  is  itiled


He


0 ^cfirttfinter  of  onrfefrcjanguagc*


fJOcd.de
Reg.  Prine:
cap,de  ConcM.


g f)  Pat.llot.
firft  parte  of
fo .Ed  j.lM.  f,
b)  In  Pellis
Ex:;tus  Scncc.
i)  Anno  8,R.


ff)  OccLde  Re
gem.  Prine;
tap.de  Concilio
Upon  thefi-
gure  of  Cbau*

tCTe


l ) Cent.  io.


C471)

Hc  fpent  many  of  his  ycares  in  and  Flandert : fcrcrall  Trcfcrmatu  be
had  at  Coun>  f°r  hc  wa s (z)  Armiger  Rcgk  to  Ed.  3.  (a  place  of  very  gond  Rc-
puiatim)  (h)  Fdlcfltu  Ho[pitiitv\z.  Groomc  oftheP allace,  and  aftci*  inR.  a.
time  (i)  'Comrouler  of  the  C uflome-boujc  London  j With  thefc  he  bad  fcverail
tAnmiallpcnfms  during  his  Life  granted  fiom  R.  %,  and  H.  4.  His  Abilities
for  F orratgnc  Imploymcnts  wcre  fo  fjrrc  taken  noticeof,  that  hc  was  twiceor
, thrice  fent  abroad  ineo  other  Centuries y and  thought  fit  to  be  one  of  the  Era-
bafjadors  imo  F rance  10  move  a Marriage  betwecne  Richaid  the  fecond  (while
Vrincc  oi  V Vales)  and  the  Lady  CHary  , Vaugbter  to  the  Frencb  ttfng.  His  Rcvc*
nue  was  1000I,  per  annum,  a very  pSentifull  Effate,  the  times  conhdercd.

He  dyed  at  London  x$.  Oftob.  Anu.  1400.  as  appeares  by  the  Ivfcriptionup -
on  his  Tombe  at  Sainc  P cters  in  WejlminficrtAbby,  in  an  Jfie  ontbe  South
fideof  th^C  bunb.

Mr.  Nicbolas  Brigbam  built  this  ZMarble  Monument  to  his  Mera  cry,  thetrue
P ourtraifturc  whereof  I havecaufed  to  be  exa&ly  graved  in  Brafje, and  placed
in  page  116.  There  was  formerly  round  the  ledge  of  the  Tombe  thefe  follovving
Verfes,  buc  now  no  remainderof  them  left.

Si  rogites  quis  er  m,  for  [an  te  fami  docebit:

*$>uod  fi  fama  negat,  mundi  quia  glorii  tranfit,

H*c  monumenta  lege .

The  Pi#«reof  Chauccr  is  now  fomwhat  dccay’d,  but  the  graver  has  rcco-
vered  it  after  a Vrmipall  Ieft  to  pofierity  by  hi$  worthy  Schollar  Tbo • Occkvc>
\vho  hath  alfo  thefe  Vcrfcs  upon  it.

k)  tljoncft  !tfc  bc  qaernte  t^c  r efcmblatwce,

fofrc0(I)C  itffncCfe,

- to  pnttc  otijer  tnen  in  tcmcroHatmce

.*Df  ^tsperfonc,  1!  fcabe  ljerc  tbc  litraeffe
IDomabCjtot^iscnbe  (nfotbfaftncfTe,

t^at  $abc  of  %tm  loft  tboute  am>  ttfynU,

Wv  tljfs  f^cintoie,  ma?  asctnetymfrnbe.

Beforc  Mr.  Brigbam  built  the  aforefaid  Menument  it  feemes  Cbaucer  had  x
Stone  layd  over  his  Grave  upon  which  was  ingraved  this  follomng  Epitapb*
Galfridus  Cbaucer  Vates  & fama  Pocfis ,

Materna  bacfacr a fum  tumulatus  humo-


Pag  257.  IDaftin’0  SDvcame.

IAmpcrfwaded  this  Wor^ecalled  bythe  Name  0 £\Daflin's  Vreamc ; has
beene  turned  into  Englifb  Vcrfe  by  fome  later  Vbilofopber^for  in  his  dayes  we
meete  with  no  fuch  refined  Englifb , and  in  Latht  wc  have  his  Vifion  with  which
(ineffeft)  this  agrees.

The  Time  he  ltv’d  in  is  noc  certainely  knowne  3 1 finde  none  that  mention
it$  bu;  tis  beleevcd  ic  was  long  fince.  Our  Coumry»man(/)24/cfpeaks  of  him

~ yet,


(475)

ytc  th.owes  at  him  and  this  Science  Come  uncomcly  abufes ; Ne/crthclcflchc
calls  him  i Alcumi [licet  artit  at  at  e fua  primus  & in  Analia  CMagijUr  unicus ; tbc
Prime  Alcbymill  ofhis  Age,  and the  on{yA/a/lcr  thcrco £\ti  Englindi  \ Prt*
ducer  and  ForcteUer  of  things  which  (it  fcemcs  in  his  apprehenhon)  hc  could
not  attainc  to  by  Nature,  Hc  made  a diligent  fearch  into  ali  thinjjl  thac  might
pofiibly  be  found  out  in  Cbcmiflry , infomuch  rhit  he  boldly  mote  and  publi -
jlxd  fcvcrall  Experimenti .

And  though  (w)  Pitts  retuiers  him  avery  Poorc  man,  and  laycs  tbc  blame  r.

upon  his  ownc  Artifice  > (being  fo  much  addi&ed  to  ycr  qucllion-  b'

lelie  (ifhc  wcrc  Ma/Jcr  of  fuch  Icarning  as they  condii  e him  to  bc,  and  his
Povcrty  werc  noc  voluntary  \)  hcmighchavc  advanccd  himfdfcto  riches  when
hcplcafed.  Hc  wrocc  thcfc  tollowingB^^f/,

1.  Super  Arte  ALumifticx.  7 C 4.  Speculum  Pbilofopbcrum.

i.  1'tfioncs  adhucalixt.  W 7.  Sapient  um  A urinum.

5 . Sccrcu  Sccrctof  um . 3 £

(n)  xiefui  faith  hc  left  bdiind  him  a confidcrablc  C^micaU  TraR,  which  n )Symb.Aur.
Janus  Lacinius  hath  pur  in  his  ColleSUons.  Not  unlikc  but  this  may  bc  in  Lici-  Meust  pag.4fV
pius  his  Pretiofa  Margarita  novella  dc  Tbefaurot  ac  precioftjjtmo  Pbilofopborii  lapide  >
hut  the2?oe(*e  I have  noc  yet  fccne,  and  therefore  cannot  teli  whether  whatis
therepublilhcdof  Pa/i/Vs,  bc  any  ofthebcforc  mentioncd  Ifor^ci.


Pag .169.  of  Crtfc,  ©rtfyo^olet.

LUdovicus  Cotnbiebm  in  his  \xt.eCoUcftions  of  forne  of  Ripley*s  iVorl^ei,  pue
this  of  Pcarcc  the2/.icfc  Afow^Vamong  tbem  under  the  Title  of  Terra  Terree
Pbilofopbica ; and  publifhcs  it  as  Ripley*s : and  wirhallthat  Tytle  [Terra  Ter-
TiTum~\  which  (o)  Vitts  alfo  gives  to  onc  ofhis  IPor^jes  nuy  iccmc  to  infinu*  °)
atethis,  Butlconceiveall  aic  not  Riplcy'$  which  walk  under  hisName,  for
queftionleffe,  many  Piccti  arc  (of  hteTymcs)  Tathered  on  him  which  henever
wrote;  Bole  has  noc  this  at  ali  among  the  Catilogue  he  ddivcrsofwhac  was
Ripley'$.  And  I haye  met  with  it  infoolda  Manufcript  under  the  tytle  of
Tcxrcc  the  Blacfi  Monfa,  tb3&  the  Hand  (as  I Judge)  fpcakes  It  co  be  antiemer
then  Riplcy's  Time.


Pag.  17I.  £)f  Cftan^asnc(5atabcft«clccre  itg^r,

Cijc  18  chh  <25  urnmc  tljat  tss  fo  bjt  gbt :

Somc  Anclent  Copies  have  it  alfo  thus,

£>f  £>painc  mbc  t\)i  eletre  Ugtyt,

15  cD  llton  tljat  (0  fo

WHo  to  picch  upon  for  the  Autbor,  Iwisa  long  time  ignorant  of,  yet
at  length  I hnppily  met  with  an  old  Manufcript  (and  it  was  the  anci-
enteft  Hand-wjtivgle.vtth\v  this  T/ecc  mitten  in)  to  which  was  affixt  the

Qcjq  Tiatnc


(+740

Ntme  o( Rubitrd  Ctrfmtfi  and  chereupon  I have  Intitltd  it,  Carpente*1#
C2to;ke.

p)  Ijftcc.Cbren.  I finde  that  inAr.no  1447.  -fobn  cdrpmer  tben  'Bifncp  of  iVorcrtler  (p)  foun-

{•0.467.  ded  the  Collige  ac  JVejibury  neere  Bntfoll ^(memioncd  (q)  beforc  to  be  Aug-

q)  Pag. 4 41.  mented  b/  Williim  Camingr : (r)  by  f<  pulling  downe  the  old  C°^ici  and  in
t)Cjodw  p.$67*<c  thencw  Building  inlirged  it  very  much,compaffing  it  abouc  with  a ftrong

tclVall3  Embattaled  $ adding  a fairc  with  divcrs Tomr s,  (more  iike  un-

“to  a Caftle  then  a CoUcdge*)  and  laftly  beftovved  much  good  Land  for  augmen-
tingthe  Revenue  ihereof.  Belides  this  he  built  the  Gateboufe  atHmleborougb,
$)C amb.Brit.  zCaflle  neere  and  (j)belonging  tothe  Bijbcp  oj  VVorceftcr  5 and  did  feverall  0-
fo,574*  ther  Worlies ofT icty  ana  Cbxrity*

ThisBiJhop  Carpcnter  is  fuppofed  to  be  Broiber3  or  neere  lyinfman  to Ri-
cbard  CarpeKtcrouYtAuthoryznd  accotfnted  an  Hermetiquc  Pbilofopher . He  vvas
Contemporary  with  Horton32nl  Cmiingsi  and  for  the  moft  part  lived  neere
unto  them^  at  the  aforementioned  VPeftbAfy j my  he  had  fo  great  Affedion  to
that  'Place  (not  unlike  for  the  Societics  fake  of  Norton  and  Qammgs  or  for
tj  0 .p.44i*  fomefpeciall  Blefling  he  met  wuhthere,)  ihat(t)  heintendedco  haveit  honou-

redwtthapartofhis%/r)  and  tohave  taken  upon  him  theNawie  cfBifhop
of  Worcefter  and  VVe$bivy3  which  though  he  couid  nor  effe&j  yet  chofe  tc  for
his  Buridll  phcc  where  he  Jyes  Inter' d.

In  another  cldpanbmnt  Manufcript  (and  that  avery  faire  one)  I met  this
VVorYxe3  Vttjdud  with  what  folio w es*

Clcrfces  t^at!)0lhen  fo  fcife^at  iS  t\)t
ca^tet^at  moft  he fotccn  iti  t%z  Cttf),  anb  toTjcbetc  itis  no^ea
fo?th  bet  ot  coit),  fo}  ititxvctcm\)trtc,  ttfc^olhe  neber  tote
otrt  colh  anbmopflttrc.  ^Ufo  fep  to  tyem  aifc,  ai  that  eber  *oa0  cornei»
of  coibat  it  is  tJtfTebctcb  in  ttyj?,  00  Jrabcrc,  ant)  &one,  ant>l^ol£
(Btyoft,  *0ne  S»ap  tfcetc  is,  anb.no  meo.  Jliio  lofce  wtyty  is  tlje
Jfabctanb^ooerc  oeaile^etallc*,  rffo>tftt)ou  b?a&)so*tafcecne  0*
t^ermannett^ns^t^n^to  0imiefetnT>C;tl)0ttIefcftaUtb2  totxbt  ifo?
looUefebennp0l)e  comet!',  ano  in  l)is  o«me  $$omcsMvt\ow*l)im
fc*tb,fmo« )tn  be  is  of  agenojlb  x»«^i0oi»ne  SpotM#

mclhc,  anbgtf  bfmteofcnc  ^oscrs  mrl&e.


Pag.  178.  d)eI|ttntingoft!)e  ©rcencJL^on.


u)  Bloomf#
\j\cfjirjl  part «


1 N the  Campe  of  Ybilofopby,  Blomefeld  reckonsop  a tfVfc  thit  beares  the
J Title  of  the  Grccne  tytm,  and  amongftother  Impo/tert  (o(  his  Tyme)  calls
the  Vicur  cf  Maldon,  fbitt  in  fome  Ctfies  Victr  ot  Wildai)  the  Amor  ■>  and
confequently  efteemes  the  IVor^e  fpurious,

u)  «hea  btcusfittljeptMtbeaitcat  ofs^aitian,

Ctiiitl;  b>0  3Lpon  ©rccne,  t^at  meft  ropall«)ecvct  j


But v/hat  Prece foever that  Yfis I know  not:  I am  confident  this,  that I
here  prefent  my  Rf-aJer  with  under  that  Tjtle , isaperfeit  Wotkc,  and  truly


(+70

PbllcJbphicaU  i befides  fomeCopksownet4kiJ<w  Andrews  for  thcir  Autbor,
and  is  fo  confirm’d  to  mc  by  the  Tcftimotiy  of  a credible  Philo fopbcr.


pjg.z93.L10.  d?oT>fabcmp  Itfc^ —

THcmi  Cbxmocli  (the  Autbor  of  the  Breviary  of  {Nmrdll  P bilofopby)  had
the  happinelTe  to  have  Trvo  Mafters  that  made  him  inheritor  of  chis  Sc-
cret  5 The  firft  was  he,  whom  here  he  Mcntions,  and  itfeemes

w)  CIla0apt‘ietttnt^CIofcof5)alt^bttdc.  »)$£'nigm.de

Alch.

This  hc  futther  confirmes  in  his  Breviary,chus:

x) ^)after3l  ^.!jffifnamr?«tru!p,  x)  Brev.of

jfrtg!not!;c  Cittpof  jg>ali0barp  jjisf  brocUmflis,  Phil.c^.*,

^ <&pititaallmanfo?footty!;ct0.

t

It  feemes  he  had  fome  xcqiahtme  with  chss  PWc/f , and  in  that  time  bene
his  Stttdiesthfe  way,  Infomuch  that  the  P rieft  falling  fici c (wbilft  his  Worlrt
was  agoingj  thoughc  Cb<wwiyefeiving  ofit  > for  Hc

— y ) 3X>tjcn!jt*tl)0Ugf't  totJfe,  y)  Chap  3.

<5  abe  l)iw\  &o*fee  anb  rnabe  fyttt  ^10

This  VVot\t  Cb*rtcrf[  continucd  going,  ti  II  unb.ippily  it  pdriflicth  by  Firc
upon  a Hcvjcirtt  day  at  Hootc  ; probably  ir  might  be  Ah.  1 J Jf . for  that  feli
ovLtinthtfirflandfecendcf^fbil.  andWir.  and  in  thofe  yeares  of  their  Raigne
(which  was  parte  in  the  -yeare  t f $4.  and  parte  in  1 fSSj  he  (^)  received  the  Chap.  ibid'

S ccrct  from  the  aforefaid  Priefi,  as  himfclfe  Teflifies.  At  which  time  he  was  Chap,  5.

about  30.  or  31.  yeares  of  Age  (though  he  intimates  he  was  about  1$.  yeares
old  when  he  firft  met  with  the  Prz>  of  Bilh)  for  Ann.  1 j74.  be  was  jo,  yearei
old,  as  appeares  at  the  end  of  his  (b)  Fr&gmcnu,  which I Coppied from  bis  See/tfg.416
owne  Hand,


Pag.2;90lini3.iDnI?a  Sfyonkc  oft^om^iefpea&canort.


THis  \Moti\e  was  Cbjrnccfir  other  Mtfter, into  whofe  Compiny  he  (i)  acci-  ,

dentally  happened,  his/Sfcftc  was  iViUiam  Bini, and  by  his  F imflion,  Tri-  / n j^’c  V
or  ofBttb , at  the  DifTolurion  of  that  Abbcy  5 . £ Oodw  *UCC’

This  £/Vi  ^ while  Prior)  expended  much'  Money  by  fe)  cnicAicutwg  rchit  * j ,
bemigbt  tofinifb  tbi  Abby  fcburcb  of  Bath  (rhe  (/)  foundatien  of  which''  '
fumptuous  Buildiug  wasjbcgun  by  Oliver  I£/wg,btit  be  dying  lefc  it  unpetfed:)  rlt*  -34«
and  bJti  brcugbt  it  to  cl  perfeftion,  rvbentkc  ViJJolntm  ofibc  Abbcy ,bid  oncc  over-
tbrcwvc  rvbat  bifore  tpm  fet  up.

It  feemes  this  Prior  had  the  Elixir  upon  the  Supprefiicn  of  the  tAbby:  he  hid
it  in  a VFaII,


s


gJTfnti


i)  Chap.  f.


b)  Chap.ibid.


i)  Chap.  f.


Jfe^His  Mafttr
Birde.


(+7<0

g ) $nt>  Cc  i aapc#  aftc  r l )t  rcent  to  fetch  tt  ottf,

3hifctbcrchc  founfc  b«ttl)cftopIcofaCIoate.

For  it  was  taken  avvay  j Tt  made  their  Hearts  ligbt  wbo  found  it*  but  his  fer
hcavfj  and  thelolfe  fo  difconcented  and  affli&ed  him,

b)  C fcat  tmnp  pcnre  af  t cr  Ijc  fas  «o  fctling  place.

and  (lofing  his  Eyes  foone  af ter  his  EcclcpuHicaU  preferments ) was  quite  dc-
prived  of  attemptingto  makethe  Elixtr  againe.  Whereupon  he  Iiv’d  obfcurtly,
andgrew  very poore;  and  not  able  togive  Chamoc £ entertainement*  but  his
owne  Purfe  paid  for  it5  both  times  he  was  wich  him.


Pag.25>8.1in  Charnocfete  hfc  name,of  ®cnet  that  Jflc.

TEtiet  or  Tainct  is  an  Tjle  that  lies  in  the  Eaft  pare  of  and  the  Tirtb-
place  of  ('barnocli } howevcr  thougb^he  might  be  born  there*  yet  he  dwelt
about(i)  Saliibury,  when  hefirflmet  with  bis  MaJUr  B/rd.He  cals  himfelftbe
UTiltncrid$cboUar3  and  byfeverall  Fragments  and  Hetes  thatl  have  fceneof
his  owne  VFriting,  it  does  not  appeare,  thac  he  underftood  much  Latin,  or
knew  how  to  write  true  Englijh  j yet  though  he  wantedthe  ShcU  he  obteyned
the  b^erneU,  and  had  the  good  fortune  to  meete  with  that  in  plaine  Engltfb,
tvhich  many  (wbo  have  the  afliftance  o(oihecLanguaget)  goewithout  $ Thus
we  fee  by  him, thac  Gcd hath  not  exduded  ali  who  are  h/laftei's  ofnoother  then
their  own  Language  j from  the  happinelfe  of  underjianding  many  Abftrufe
and  fubtill  Secrets  j I could  inftance  feverallin  this  Science:  andtbis  very  Gon^
fideration  invited  that  nobJe  Fraternity  of  theR.C.  to  publifti  their  Fame  and
Cenfcfiion  in  Five  feverall£<*7/g«**gc/,  to  the  end  the  unlcarned  might  not  be
deprived  and  defrauded  of  the  tyiowlcdge  thereof.  Nor  was  the  Proceffe  ( whkh
ali  Students  may  take  notice  of)  tedious  or  longin  delivering  to  Cbarnocfi*
For  thus  be  faith,

oj  foure  Soojao  (k)he  tebtalcotoiti?  ♦

£>f  ^tnerall  ?dwfcence  the  fiteate

HelivedintheR^eof  an  Ordinary  man,  elfel  prefumebis  ^uality  mighc
have  priviledged  him  from  being  T reji  tor  a Qommen  Souldier . And  from  a
Memorandum  of  his  owne  hand,  it  may  be  gatbered,  thac  he  pra&ifed  Cbirur-
gery  5 for  thcrebyit  appearts  He  bargained  to  have  Five  Marces  for  healing
the  Leg  ofone  Kiebard  T>eane>  for  the  paymcnt  of  whichoneZcfcflZtorfftfand
VfiUim  Lawly  became  Surctyes.


Pag^


Of-77)

Pag.500.li  t3.- iBcmemwng  mp  ££aftct  rfjo.

P3g.301.li.5- ^pj^aftcr  ftall  Hnofo?  ali  tljto.

Ii  8.«Cbenft>ouiO  3 tojiteto  rop  ^aftcr-

Pag.joi,  lui. ®^cn  3 rcmcmbjcb  mpgttD  ^afrcr  agame.

11T  is  j&.J.  the  Vricft  otSaliibury  ivbomCtajw^  me3ns  in  thefe  fcverall
places,  and  vvhofe  C briftian  Same  was  31amc0  rfor  in  another  private  Mc-
m orandum  >wrkien  by  Cburnoc^t\  finde  thus  much  5

^emoiant)*  tfeat  £>(rlBobart  Satyrt)  t)iti  confer  Switf;  rap  Vu*
ta>|  3>fr  3!amc0,fn  £fng  aEbroarb0oape0,bi»eHetb  noro  in
tl) c j&abopc  in  aionOon,  ano  batb  it  a tt)o*bfng  t\ icrc,  00
Ifarrpl^amonotoiOmeat&amt  3ameo  JFairc.

SJnnoJDotnf:  1 566.


Page  3oi.li,u!t.^Fo^foetf)  it  S»as  ISipIcp  t%t  Cljanoa  \)i&  JB 0£.

SOme  will  have  this  to  beare  a double  C onftruftion  (either  chat  Ripley  ‘was
By  or  Servant  to  a C banon,  as  being  bred  up  under  a tyanon  whiie  3 Boy  3
orthatit  wasone  who  wa $ Ripley s Servant,  and  brought  up  with  him  when
youngi  to  wbom  Ripley  (finding  him.  faitbfull)  might  commi:  tbe  Seerct)
and  (b  leave  it  uncertaine  whetber Ripley  or  his  Scbellcr  was  Mafter  to  tbe  afore-
faid  Willium  Bird.  But  I rather  conceive  the  lacter  moft  probable  5 for,  Ripley
(l)  dyed  abouctheyeare  1590.  and  the  time  thac  tbis  jB/ricommunicated  this  \)  Bile  C em  8
Secret  to  Cbamcfawas  at  leaft  64-yearsafter.So  that  queftionlefle  tbis Bird  was  {0,62.2
too  young  to  be  acquainted  With  fo  weighty  a YAyflery  at  the  time  of  Ripley 'g  p;m  ~

death.  However  VPilliamBitd  had  a fflajier,  tbougb  j£)tr  3tames  the  Pricfi
0 fSMbury  had  none  $ but  received  itfrom  Gods  hands  by  infpiration  / for
Cbarimk  fayes  he  tould  him


m)  tyt  t>tt>  itnetattainc,

iDfno  maner  of  $J)an  bot  of  dfrorbbepntitiiuo  fjio  Jjcab
3f*  f>e  fcjitroa0  t^fttfeing^ing  inljte  bct.


w)Cap.^.  ,*


Pag.302.lin.13.  ^fttbedBTent!e?nanO(bniemo?efpigbtt^ertt!)crc(f,

ZfS  a^cn  fcc  maoe  «c  f r om  mp  to  o?bc  1 0 bc  f?>  reft.


CHamoc Jfe  was  much  hindred  in  tbe  Courftofhis  VraHifc  by  the  Malice
ofthis  Gentleman,  who  it  feems  was  fome  ili  Scigbbezr,  that  borc  him  a
Grudge,  andexeeuted  it  in  as  bad  a time  for  the  honeft  Philo  fopber  as  poflible
mighc  be  5 [even  then  when  he  was  neere  finilhing  his  woike,


n)  2«tt&fna  39onc#0rccKomng.]

Qjjb  1


cau.W*


^0  Cap.^,

~ .-s  -


c)  Stow»An,
63  z.


Ar?:  0 ' v


c+78)

caufing  him  to  be  p;efl  for  a Souldier, upon  the  Defigite  0 f relieving  ofO/fc,
(which  was  the  (0)  beginoingof  lannary-Atmo  1558-  and  almo tthx Mweifri
afrer  he  bad  finilhed  tbe  Brcviary  of  VbUofo[by,)~i^h-:feupon  in  a Difeoittmhe
dcftroyed  «<4//.^


Pag.jo3.1i.6,  Zrtoit  ©oMpare  ntelpfc  3 fcriUmenS  ttysranotljcr  fcap.

TH cBrevkry  of  Naturali  PbiLofophy  was  began  to  be  written  withintwo
or  th;ee  yeares  after^^was  Maficr  of  the  Secret,  and  thongh  he  feeme
to  promife  fome  other  V^crl^c,  y et  I could  neverlcarne  that  he  wroteany  thing
afterwards , fave  onely  His  two  &£nigmaes,( the  which  I have  Marlhald  after
his  Breviary)  and  the  Frtgmentf  incerted,  Pjg.4i4.  VV7hac  time  he  dyed,  is
uncercaine,  but  after  rhe  yeate  r y 77- I meete  with  nothing  under  his  ownc
Uand,  alchough  fiverall  yeares  before  that,  his  P cn  Iay  not  ftill  * for  in  divers
fpare  places  of  his  Bootes  he  inlerted  fundry  Notes,  to  the  which  moft  com-
monly  he  affix:  a Vate  j fome  whereof  I have  publiflied  in  this  Theatrum .


Pag.^oy.  ^loomcfielfc’0  ® ioffomesr.

THe  Autbor  himfelfealfo  calls  this  VVor\ c the  Camp  of  Pbilofopby,  and  the
Praflicfi  thereof  he  ft/les  by  the  Nsme  of  bis  laf  WilX  and  Tcftmctit.
was  written  by  VPittiam  Bloomepcld (fome  Copies  have  cailed  him  Sir  Wittim
Bloomtfidd ) a Bfabcllor  of  P byficfa  admitted  by  H.8.

I havefeene  afake  Manufcript  of  Norton' s Ordinali,  wherein  (at  thetoppe
ofthtLeafe,  that  begins  every  Cbaptcr  andfome  other  Eminent  places,)  is  a
Scrowle,  and  in  the  firft  fold  thereof  is  written  \_Mylet~\  in  the  midle  of  it,  the
Nuiuber  ofthe  Cbapter,  and  in  the  third  fold  [Bloomeficld]  which  Mylts  Bloom •
feli  1 take  to  be  the  Owner  of  the2?oofc  (and  perhaps  fome  Broibcr  or  f( wfman
to  our  Willim  Bicome fteld:)  Nevertbelelle  by  A Note  inthar  Boc^c  (of  an
in  di  flerent  antient  hand)  I afcetwards  found  this  Myle\  is  cailed  the^n-
tbor  of

UBIoomcfietoflf  UBIottotnc  0.


pJg.  324.  Sbit  €litoat^itclle’0Cao^e.

ICannotglve  my  Rcadcr  an  Account  of  Sir  Edward  lftllcy,  but  I muft  alfo
mention  that  famous  Artijl,  Dodor  tfobnTtee,  ( whofe  U(l  VVilland  TcfU-
wm  followeth  Sir  Edw.  %tllc*s  Worke)  He  bcing  fomerime  his  Intimate
P)icnd,  and  long  Compinm  in  T bilvfopbicatl  St  udi  es,  and  (fbcmlcall  Experi-
nmi' f : Till  ac  leRgth  the  wor.thy  Deflor  (leaving  him  mGcrmany)  returned
foi  England,  and  fo  by  Provida.ee , efcapedfrom  bdnghis  furthei  CCmpimon  j
inthai  ftraigh*  Ccvfinmciirvttikh  Sir  Edvt.  t^ellcy  fuftered,  (by  command  of
Radulpb  the  2.  EnpetouT  of  Gcrmary)  at  P ragtic,

Teuching


C+7P)

Touching  Sir  Edwdrd  I( ellej,  hc  was  bornc  at  WcnefUr*  the  Stbeimt  of
whofe  Sitivit)  (graved  frotn  thc  Originali  GaUulatm  of  Do  flor  Dee,  and  ux>
der  his  I here  Exhibite.


Which  may  be  gratefull  and  acceptablc  unto  fuch  that  ean  rcad  tbe  LtW-
guage  of  the  Hcavm : Infomuch^  that  therein  theyfliall  finde  oucmorecon-
ccrninghim,then5i0ryhasiefcu$.  For,  whereas  he  byfome  iscalledTfo-
lofcpbu*  Dubius,  b omewhatn  better  Opinion  might  bebence  CollcSled,  and  thsc
from  the  P cfition  of  Mcrcurj  Lord  of  the  Nirnb,  (the  Houfe  of  J^novclcdge,  Wif-
dtweand  Science f)  and  who  is  placed  upon  the  Cu[pc  thereof  in  Virgo,  where
he  is  exceeding  Strong,  and  Fortunate  >in  Digtiitier,  Efjentiall  and  Accidentali ,
[viz.  in  his  owne  HMfc,and  Exaltstion,  Dirctt,  and  Srnft  of  Courfc,  free  frotn
Cmbuflton,3nd  in  the  Tcarme , and  Faceo f Ventu  $ to  whom  he  applies  b/  a
f&tile  $(Xtilc.~]  Vutui  2K0  is  lAngular,  and  beholdingthe  Cw/fcof  the  Nintb
Houfc,by  a Sextile ; A 11  which  (with  Confiderarion  ihat  the  DegrccAfecv.ding  is
in  the  Tearmes  o(i!Mcrcury,)  doe  tru’y  render  him  a ZMan  of  cleere  Jindcrftan-
dittg , quick  Appnktnfm , an  excellent  W it,  andof  great  prcpenfiry  co  Pbi-
lofopbtcdlStudies.  And  indeede,  byali  Reportshs  was  very  Jugationi,  and  a
continuall  S earcber,  in  the  abftrufe  and  difficult  Scocts  of  P bilcfopby  aod  Cbc-
miflry.

Yet  for  all  this,  he  could  not  efcape  the  hard  Ceifures  and  Scandalis  of  thofe
that  upderftood  not  w hat  he  did s which  the  Drtgm  Tt)'!t  in  the  /dfundaiih

was.


C4S0;

was  at  a!l  linib  ready  to  further’  and  promere,  and  from  whofe  Pofifionthc
N iture  of  thofe  abuftve  Afperjicns  may  be  (Gcncrally)  gathered : and  pjrtly
from  a floty  vvhich  Weverin  bis  Funerali  Monumcnts  inferis,  wheie,  though  he
make  hiin  an  Affer  in  the  worft  part  of  Conjaratiou , » and  backs  his  R eUtion
wich  fome  Formali  Circumffancesi  Yet  thac  nothing  was  done  in  the  Nature  be
ReUies,  good  and  found  Keafons  (ceo  cedious  to  be  touched  here)  induce  me
to  behevc.  »

Astouching  VofforVcc,  hechiefly  bene  his  S tudies  to  the  CMatbcmucfi* ;
in  2!!  pirfs  of  which  he  was  ^an  abfolute  and  perfeft  Mijfer.  'Witneffebis
MatbcmaticaU  Pre  faceto  Eucids  Elcments,  wherein  are  enumerated  many  Arts
of  him  w h ol 1 y invemed  (byNawc,  Vcfinition,  Propriet) , and  Ufe)  more  then
either  the  Cjreeian  or  Romane  Ma:bematitians  have  lefc  to  our  knowledge  ; wich
divers  anJ  many  Annomicns,  aad  Invetitioris  , Maxbemxticall , added  in  fun-
dry  places  of  the  faid  Bo^e : Togetber  wich  .fevexali  Piecet  of  Navi -
gatltnt,  Perfpcffive , and  other  rare  CMatbematicall r works'  of  hts  in  IManu-
feript . :

His  Epiftle  prefixed  to  TobnFieWs  Ephemerides  1 5 tj.Vcufa  Globi  CeelcfUs
to  Ed»6',  Vc  Nubium  (olis  luna  ac  reliquorum  Tlrnta^im,  &c.  Viftontiis,  &c.  to
Ed.6.  lAfirenomicall  and  Logiftkall  Qanm  to  Qacnlate  the  Ephemerides  by  5
7)c  fella  admiranda  ivCaficpea  Aftcrifmo.  An  Advife  and  ^Difcourfe  abouc
the  Refcrmation  of  the  Vulgar  Tftirc/fpeake  bima  Icarned  AftYonpmer.

And  laftiy,  thac  he  was  2 g^d  Ajirologian;ar)d  aftndious  Pbilofopbcr y his
300.  lAjlrolcgicall  Apho< ifncs > His  1 10.  Apborifmcy  T>e  praflantioribus  qui*
bufdrn  nmravlmtibut.&toiidf  Hiercglipbic*.  Spesulttm  .imitatis,  (being  an  Apo-
logi e for  our  famous  Frier  %tcon)  His  Cabala  Hebraica  compcndiofa  Tabula,  with
many  ochers,  afford  no  fmall  Evidetiee  to  the  World.

Ali  vvhich  and  many  moie  (infeverall  other  kincteof  learning)  as  Hiflory ,
Hcraldiy,&cAviitten  by  him  before  the  year  1 Somc  time  He  beftowed  in
p \ vulgar  £bcmiftr),and  was  thereinAfd/frr  of  divers  $ecrer.f,amongft  others  he(pj

/ _ * * re  ve.tled  to  orte  Roger  Coc^c,  the  Great  Seerct  of  the  Elixirf  as  he  called  it)of  the

Salt  of  MctallSy  ehe  Prcjcffion  whereof  was  One  upon  a Hundred.

His  gceat  Ability  [niAftrologk,and  the  more  fecrec  parts  of  Lcarnitig  ( to
which  he  had  a ftrong  propenficy  and  unwearyed  Fancy,)  drew  from  the  Envi - >
cuc  and  Vulgar,  many  rafby  lewd,  and  lying  Scandalis,  upon  his  moft  boneft  and
ju/lificablePbtlofipbicall  Studicr,  and  many  times  forced  him  outof  the  bitter -
rcjje  of  his  foule  (whtch  was  even  Crucifiei  with  the  malice  of  Impuient
Tovgues)  moft  feiioufly  and  fervently  to  Apologi\e . Nor  could  he  enjoy
Trarquility  in  his  Studies,  but  was  oftentimes  difquieted  and  vexed  wich  the
fower  difpofiticns  of  fuch  as  moft  Injurioufly  Scindd//^  both  him  and  tbem>

V 1 Infomuch  thac  the  (q)  yeare  he  went  beyond  Sea  his  Library  was  feizedon,
Wherein  was  4000.  Boo^s,  and  zoo.of  them  Manufcripts  (aCaveac  for  ali  lngc:
tiious  and  eminent  Pbilofopbcrs  to  be  more  mfe  then  to  keep  any  dear  or  Excellent
Books  in  their  own  Houfes .)  And  tis  moft  probable  that  ac  this  time  his  before
^ mentioncd  tyculu  unitatis ,might  fall  into  thofe  banis y that  would  never  fincc
fuffer  it  to  fee  the  Ligbt>\\ hich  might  occalion  the  Learned  S elden  to  fay,  this
0 Seld.Pief.to  (r)Apotogie  was  long  iince  promifed  by  him;but  intimating  it  was  never  Writ.

H ;pt.  Concor.  tAn-  \ 59^.  (s)MafterS ccrctary  Walpngbam,  and  Sir  Tbo:  Gecrgcmrc  fent  to
s)  Nov,?,  his  then  dwclling  houfe  a;  Mortcladi  by  vertuc  ofa  C ommifiion,  to  underftand

the


■


(4-8 1)

tbc  Matior  and  Cauftsi or  which  his  Studics  were  Scandali^cd.  And  for  fomc
othcr  thing  in  the  likc  Nature,  vvas  he  neceflttated  to  fcnd  his  (s)  ApologeticaU  s)  Tan  6
Icttcr  to  thc  Arcbbijbop  of  Canter burj.  9

Thefckind  of  P crfceutms  were  ilii  Multiplycd  upon  him, and  hefometimes
Pcrfonally  agreeved  by  them : for  aboucthe  ycarc  i 594.  he  was  under  a
kinde  of  R eftraint,  which  occafioned  him  to  (r)  write  to  the  LaJy  S cydmort  to  t\  , g
more  the  ^ueene  that  eithec  he  might  declare  his  Cafe  to  the  Body  of  the  Coim-  ‘ 1

colly  or  elfe  under  the  Bmdc-fcalc  have  Liberty  to  goe  frccly  where  he  pleafcd.  5
And  thus  much  concerning  thcfc  two  famous  men  in  fevrrall  5 now
ihall  I give  the  Reader  an  Account  of  their  joynt  Aftions  abtoad,  as  alfo  what
relates  to  J>oftor  Dee  after  his  returne  into  England  : which  I fhall  doc
frorn  an  unqueftionable^M/&w,/>/,  even  Voftor  Dcc's  Dury,z\l  written  with  his
owne  handj  where  1 fhall  take  the  larger  Field  to  walke  in,  becaufc  I move
upon  fo  certaine  ground:  fome  of  which  paifages  may  pleafe  (if  not  concerne)
the  Reader. t Fori  think  it  not  fit  to  fufter  fuch  Eminent  Ligbts  longer  to  lie  in
Obfcurityy  without  bringing  them  forth  to  the  view  of  the  World.

’Tis  eenerally  reported  that  Voftor  7)ec3  and  Sir  Edward  Rclly  were  fo
ftangely  fortunate,  as  to  finde  a very  large  quantity  of  the  Elixir  in  fome  p*rc
of  the  Ruina  c( Qlaflenburj-Abbcy}v*hict\  was  fo  incredibly  Ridf  inver*we(be-

iing  one  upon  271^0.)  that  they  loft  much  in  making  Projcftion, by  way  of
Triilli  before  they  found  out  tbc  true  beigbt  ofthe  Medicine.

And  no  fooner  were  they  Majters of  this  Trexfure , then  they  refolved  to  Tri •
vtU  into  V orraigtte  Par*/,  where  falling  into  acquaintance  with^one  Albam
Ltsltq  a *Polonian  Trince  (which  came  into  England  the  beginning  of  {May ,

An.i  5 83.)  on  the  21.  ofSept.  following,  They,  their  VViva > CbildreVy  and
Families,  went  bcyond  Sex  with  the  faid  Ttmc,

And  wbether  they  found  it  at  Glaftetibury  (as  is  aforefaid)  or  howfoever  elfc
they  came  by  it,  'tis  certain  they  had  it:  for  at  Trebonx  in  Bobemia  (vtbithet  they
were  come  toj(n)  dvoeli)  Sir  Edward  l^clley  made  (w)  P rojeSfion  with  one  KjScpt.'4*z?86
fmall Cjrainc  thereof  (in  proportion  nobigger  thenthe  leaftgraineof  Sand)
upon  one  Ounce  and  a Quarter  of  Commoti  Mercurjy  and  it  produced  altnoft  an
OunctolmoR  pure  Gold . This  was  doneto  gratifie  Majicr  Edward  G Atiani
and  his  Brother  Francis , and  in  their  prefencej  which  Edward  was  lately  comc
to  TrtbonAy  being  fent  thitber  to  Vcfcer  Z)ce,  ftoih  the  Em perour  of  M ufievia,
according  to  fome  Articlet  before  brought3  by  one  Tbomas  Sym^infotu  Ialfo
(inde  this  Noteoi  Voffor  Vec'r,  Jan.f.i  fo  6.  Donum  Dei  i.ounces.E.  More-
over,  for  neerer  and  later  Teftimwjyl  haye  receivcdit  from  a crcuible  T crfon,
that  oneBroonrfield  and  Alexander  Ka&rr*/,told  him  they  had  often  fcen  S/r  E d:

Kelly  make  Prcjeftictt , and  inparticular  upon  a picce  of  M ctall  cut  out  of  a
JVarming  pany  and  without  S/r  Edwards  touching  or  bandling  it,  or  melting
the  M culi  (onely  warming  it  in  the  Firc)  the  Elixir  being  put  thercon,!  ic
was  Travfmttud  into  pure  b/7z*r:The  Warmng-pxn  and  this  picce  of  it,wac  fene
Eli^abetbby  her  Embajfador  who  then  layat  PrdgHc/hat  by  fittifg  the
P/ecc  into  the  place  whence  it  wascut  out,  ic  might  exa&ly  appeare  to  be  once
part  of  that  VVarming-pan. The  aforefaid  P erfon  hath  likewife  fecn  in  the  hands
of  one  Mdffer  Frye  and  Scrdope,  Rings  of  Sir  E dward  KeUytt  Gold3  the  fafliion
of  which  was  onely  Qold  n7rc,twiftcd  thrice  about  the  F/wgcr:  and  of  thefc
falhioned  Rwgs}  hp  gaye  away,to  the  valuc  of  4000I.  at  the  Marriagc  of  one  of

Rrr  his


(4-80

hfs  SttVint  M jides.  This  was  highly  Gcntrotes,  but  to  fay  truch  he  vras  openly
P rofufcy  beyond  the  modeft  Limitis  of  a Sober  Pbilofopber,

Duiing  their  abode  at  Treboni,  tfcey  tricd  many  Cbmicall  Experimettt  sfto  fec
whether  they  could  make  that  lexceli  theypofieft,  (tbe  parcicular  account  o£
thciro/>erit//o«j-In?edenothcrerelace)yeLlcannoc  beare  that  evettbey  accom-
plifhed  any  thing jonely  I finde  the  17. o/^pri// noced  b>  Doftor  Dee  with  fe-

verall  expreffionsof /07  and  GUdneffe, as ~H$c  cftdies  quam  fccjt  Domi -

m.  Againe M jfaccordia  Dei  magna, and  laftly, Omne  quod  vivit

laudet  Dominum . And  to  teftifie  what  they  meant,  he  writes  upon  the  30.  day
follbwmg,*  infler  Edmrd  i^elicy  did  epen  tbe  Greit  fecret  to  me.  God  bc
thar\cd.

Whilts  they  lived  at  Trebovi^ir  Edmrd  }$elley  went  dives  times  to  P rigue,
and  the  i^.oflan.i  587 . he  went  into  Volmi,  but  returned  the  5?  ofFe&r.afcer,
And  'tis  probable  thefe  lourmys  wcre  made  in  queft  afier  forne  /amous  Cbe~
mijis  Things  were  not  carried  here  To  privately,  but  d^ecne  E li\abetb  had  no-
licegiven  her  of theic  AHions,  whereupon  Ihe  ufed  feverall  meanes  by  Letten
and  Mrjfagcs  to  invite  them  back  into  E ngUnd,  where  it  was  believed  fiie  had
fo  far  prevailed  that  M afier  Sim^infon  and  M afier  Francis  Garltnd'  s Brotber.
x)8.Dec«i  587  j^obert, coming  from  E nglitid  to  (xS  Treboni  fuppofed  they  had  beene  ready  to
come  over  to  Ergland  upon  the  jQucctiei  Lettcrs  formerl/  fent  tbem.  And
/)iMay  1*8 though  S ir  Edmrd  RtUiyfaid  bchinde,yet  Doffor  Dee  (7)  Ieft  Treboni  and
and  came  for  England.  But  whether  occafioned  by  fome  unkindnefic  received
from  Sir  Edmrd  ffyticyov  'falli ng  out  of  tbeir  Wiw,  or  the  Solicitation  of
J$usmElr{abcib  (orali  thefe  concurring)  I am  not  yet  certaine,  not  unlike
but  each  of  thera  might  contribute  to  their  Seperation.

For  that  th ere  was  fome  Grciic  and  Wonderfull  unkindnefle  paft  from  S/r
Edmrd  l^clley,  appeares,by  his  fendingfot  Doctor  Dee,  the  begioning  of  hn,
158  8.  under  (hew  of  Reconciliat  ion,  and  difeovering  more  then  an  Ordinary
)ntimacy  and  Complimy  about  that  time,  which  fiire  (berres  the  good  Doctor
notes  with  this  prayer.  God.  leade  bU  be&rtto  allCbarity  and  Brotber ly  love:
Asalfo  by  Lettcrs  fent  from  Doctor  Dee  to  SirEdmrdi^dlcy  and  his  Wife
theend  ofMrcHollowing,requiringattbeir  hands  ^Yutuall  Cbarity , which
May  9.  (\)  after  upon  M/flrw  IfaUcyt  receiving  the  S arment  ihe  gave  her  hand  to

Doctor  Dee  and  his  Wijc  in  Tof^cn  of  Cbirity.  But  it  feemes  thefe  things  werc
notcordiall  but  onely  outvvard  > for  9.  S ept.  following,  (the  Lord  Cbivcellor
coming  to  Treboni)  the  Rancour  & Difiimulaticn  was  more  evident  to  him,and
it  feemes  grew  up  to  a greaterheight  thenhe  could  beare.  And  thereupon  he
thoughtvvifely  to  avoid  thefurther  D aliger  by  leaving  Germany  which  occafi-
n)4.Jan.i  5 85*/  oned  bim  to  (a)  deliver  to  Sir  Edmrd  f^elUytbc  zTowder,ibe  Bootes ytbcGlaf} e,

* mib  forne  otber  things,  and  thereupon  received  his  Difibarge  in  wriiing  under
his  Havd  andS cale.

While  ih< kDifcontcnts  continued,  feverall  Letters  paft  betwecen  ^uem
Eli\ibcib  and  Doctor  DeeJ  wherebyperhaps  he  might  promife  to  leturne  5 At
b^i.Mar.  * 5&£lcngth  it  fo  feli  our,  tbat  he  (b)  left  Treboni  and  took  his  Iourney.  for
E tiglind»

The  ninth  of  ^pr/7/  he  came  to  Breame  and  had  not  flayed  there  three  dayes,
but  the  Laidtgrave  of  Hcjfe  fent  Letters  otCiviU  Qompltmznts  to  him,  and  with-
in  three  dayes  after,  Dodor  Dee  prcfcnced  khim  with  his  Twdvc  Htwgtrisn

Horfes


W


Horfcf,  that  he  bought  at  Prague  for  his  fourncy.  (c ) Here  that  famous  Her-  c)  17  Junc

mctiqucTbilofopber , [Doftor  Htttric  J^unraib  of  HaviburgbJ  came  to  vific  xeSo.

him:The  1 6.  of  Nov.he  went  thcncc  to  Saie,  where  he  met  wich Mr.Edxvard

Vycr  going  Embijjador  for  Vcnmarlie,  who  the  yearc  before  had  becne  at  7Y<s

bona , and  cariied  back  Lctters  from  the  DoSlor  to  Qijecne  Eli^ababi  He  was  a

^reat  Corefpondent  of  Do&or  Decfs  and  a>  earneft  a 6'cxrcbcr  after  the

SfMC.

The  13.  of  Hovcmb.  following,  he  nrrived  at  graves  end  havingb:ene  out
ofEvgUnd  6.jca  es  1.  Moncibs  and  1 .Vayes,  and  the  £th  of  IDcccwb.  prefenced
himfclfeto  the  d^ecneac  Kicbmoni , where  hcwas  favoured  VYtth  akinde  Re*
ccption.

Being  fetled  againe  at  Mortclic\, the  ^ueene  ufed  to  callat  his  Houfe  to  vifit
him,  and  lliewed  her  felf  yery  Curteous  to  him,  upon  ali  Occafions  Againft
CbrijlmM  iy?o4(he  fent  him  Trvobundrcd Angeli  wherevvith  to  keep  hlsffbrijf-
mat,  and  a bundred  Ma  againft  CbrijimM  1 y$i,  flic  ii’  ewife  fent  him  word
by  Mr.  T bomtf.  Candijb,  to  doe  whac  he  would  in  AUbymie  and  Pbilofopby , and
none  fhotild  controule  or  moieft  him  : and  not  unl;ke  by  the  J^uccttcs  cxamplc,
divers  Pcrfonaga-of  Honour  ac  Ccurt,  frequented  his  Ccmpiny^nd  fent  him
many  Guifts ,from  time  to  time.  Amongft  others  Sir  Tbomtftfones  moft  nobly
offercd  him  his  CaftleofEmlin  in  JfWc/,  to  dwell  in,  free  vvith  ali  %Acccm*
datiour.

Hi sFavcur  was  faire  at  Cotirt>  ^ecnc  her  felfe  bad  him  finde  out
fomethingfor  her  to  beftow  i yetali  the  prefermenc  hegaitfd  wasthe  (d)  d)  8,Dec.
Qrant  of  the  CbxnccUorfl?ip  of  St.  jPaulr,  and  the  17  of  May  1 $9  y.  his  patent  1^4.
paft  the  great S ealc,  for  the  JVardetifhip  of  Mmfcflcr,  whither  Hc , his  IVife,

Ckildrat,  andF amily  came  the  14.  of  Fcb  and  the  20.  day  following
was  Inftillcdy  and  in  this  Wardcnflnp  (wherein  he  had  the  unluppinefle  to  be
often  Yext  with  the  Tur  bulcntF  ellowts  of  that  Cc//edgc)dyed,deferving  theCom-
mendatms  of  ali  Learncd  and  Ingetiiom  Sibollers,ind  to  be  reaiembredfor  his
remarkable  Abilitict ,

After  Do&or  2)cz  came  into  Englund  fas  is  before  remembredj  Corrcfpond
dettey  was  ftill  maintained  bstwcene  binvand  Sir  Edveiri  f^ellcy,  in  Letters  fent
by  Mr.  Francu  Garland  and  others.r(and  forne  expe&ancy  of  Sir  Edwards
comming  orer  .•  (e)  Mr.  Tbomas  \^clley  (his  BroherJ  purting  the  Doftor  in  e)  aj.Dec.
bopes  thereof  likcwife,)  but  at  length  Sir  Edtvard  was  cfapt  up  clofe  Prifoner  tf8pt
by  the  Emperour  (for  he  had  fo  unwarily  and  openly  managed  the  Sccrct>  that
it  had  giventheEm/^rw/roccaGon  to  carryaftrid  Eye  over  ali  hi  s AcUovsy
outof  a defire  to  be  fharer,  with  him  in  hisgood  fortune)  yet  i:  feemes  the
Emperour  fet  him  at  (f)  Liberty,  and  Doftor  Z)cehad  notice  of  it  the  y.  0
T^ecemb.  after.  And  though  he  began  to  grow  into  the  Empcrours  favour,  i*n
hopesto  be  entertained  into  histtrv/ce  (for  io  he  certi  fi  d Dodor  Dee  by  Let-
ters in  Augttft  159  yj  Nevertheleife  he  was  ciapr  up  againe  into  Prifcti,  and
attempting  to  makehis  E fcape  out  ofa  high  iVindcr»,  by  theteering  of  his
SfeecfCJjWhich  were  tyed  together  to  Ict  him  downe,  he  (being  a weighcy  Man)
feli  and  broke  his  teggy  and  thereofdyei  : (The  sAfcendcnt  thencomiogby  ^ a .
Diredionto  the  place  of  the  (g)  Mom  wi:h  Latitudc , ihe  being  Lady  of  the  8ch.£/ 1 2 f
houfe  in  the  Radix  and  pofited  in  Aquarrn.)  And  this  is  one  repor:  of  his  bcheme  oftuc
Vtxtb)  others  there  arc,  b'Jt  DodorZ>ee  mencions  none  at  ali  of  the  m anner  Nauvity*

R r r 2 thereof


(48+)

Anno  thercof > oncly  this,  (h)  Ncvemb.  af.  Newes that  Sir  E.  I£.  was  flafae.


Pag.  $6U  % EMatogtiefeetafct  t!;e^fatl)ctant>  fyz&onne,

THis  7)idoguc  isthere  placed  among  the  Aimymiy  in  tegard  Ith  en  k ne  w
not  the  Autbory  but  afterwards  I met  wich  the  intire  (i)  )Vorfiey  and
found  it  to  be  that  of  R/p/e/s,  which  is  called  the  Miftcry  of  Alchymifts^nd  that
tbis  Frtgment  was  but  drawne  out  ofit,  only  dreft  up  with  anothcr Tjtlty
which  if  the  Keadcr  compare  he  fliall  readily  finde.

For  the  want  ofScnfc  infome  parts  thereof  ,a$  dfo  in  other  E Ider  Piccesyl
hope  the  Virnnes  of  the  Taper  wili  be  excitfed  where  there  was  no  cUercr  ligbt
tobe found.  ForthoughfJike  the  $«•)  theymay  feeme  to  have  fome  Spots >
yet  thecandid  Perufer  muft  confcfle  they  are  not  vvithout  their  pecuiiar
Glorics.  Theitruth  is,  fome  PalTages  through  them  were  foobfcure  and  dark>
and  the  *Fdtbs  I folio wed  fo  rugged  and  uneven,  that  I could  neither  ftay  in
them  withouc  manifeft  difparagcment ,or  goe  out  of  them  without  fome  Vanger:
andfrom  my  difcovcrics  fraughc  tbence,  I am  well  aflured  I mighthave  more
contented  the  Rcader , could  I haye  fatisfied  my  Self  better.  However,  I durfl
not  adventure  to  Rcftific  what  I found  miffc,  but  thought  it  better  to  leave  it
to  the  Judgmcnt  ofeach  thattakes  the  painesto  ftudy  them,  then  obtrude  my
owne/ftf/e,left  what  I judge  zri<Enjcndxtionyothevi  may  fenfure  as  a GroJJe  fiult:
and  withall  ever  remembriog  the  ftridfc  the  generality  of  PbilG(ophert

have  eontinuafly  given  to  fucceflion3  not  to  meddle  or  alter  any  of  their  iVor^cs  >
I3feYen  in  what  I feare  are  minifeft  ImperfeSUons)  dare  not  bucmoft  invio-
lably  obferve  them, and  amongft  them  all  tbis  Q rtdibleznd  Trufty  Pbilofopber  is
not  unworthy  ofour  taking  notice  of,  who  thus  requires  the  fame.

fAHunt.  *rcen.  k)  ^fjercfo?c fn  Cljarttc  anh  fo* %3Lojrt0fa&c,

Ljon*  D ictnomanfrommpfonrftfngta&e

£>n t o^afcb  ttyreto,

$01  ccrfatnelptf  tl)atbot)b,

^ea)aH$e&  maItccfrofi»btclj31  amfrec,
jfl^eamng  Urutij  anb  not  ftibtiS?.


Pag.368.Iin,*.  ^nbalfoMt&grete  biligence*  '

l)lib  4.fo?6.  *"|“*His  P/eceisthe  Wor\cotSit  $QbnGomryand  Colle&ed  out  of  his  Boc\e
X fl)  VcCcnftflim  Ammls.  He  is  placed  in  the  of  our  Hermetiquc

Pbilofopbers : and  one  that  adopted  into  the  Inberitanc^  of  tbis  A iiftcry,  our
famous  Fnglifh  Poct,Gcvffry  cbarnr.  lmhislhltPragmetit  it  apjpeares  he  fully
underflood  the  Secrer,  for  he  gives  you  a faithfull  a[ccount  ofthe  Propertic s
of  the  Minerali,  Vtgiuhlty  and  AnjmaU  Sma,  and  affirmes  the  Art  to  be
~ true*


(480


C&teCrafeteSmugltf:  bp  tocpafbinbf,
£>otyatt\)txtUrno fallace  in .

And  againe,

<&})t  jS>cpenceof  lifmCllfe  M tnlo,

^fpon  t$efo;meas  it  10  foanhcfc*


Hewas  an  eminent  Hoet,  and  hath  (rr£)  written  the  ftoryof  the  g*Uen
flecte,  iikc  an  Hcrmetiquc  Pbilofopber:  which  Ubihfephicall  veine  is  to  be  iraced
through  feverall  other  parts  ofhis  tVorfy.  Tbe  firft  acquaintance  berwcene  Him
and  Cbxnccr  began  at  the  Inner  Templc,whcve  Sir  $chtiCjomr  Audied  ihe  Ldwes,
and  whither  Cbaucer  came  to  follow  the  Iilce  courfe  ot  ftudies  upon  his  returne
out  of  f rance.  He  was  ffaith  T ilis  a (a)  noble  and  Jearned  Man,  galfrido  ,
fere  per  omnia  fimilem  , quique  eundem  prorfus  habuit  omnium  /ludiorum  fuorum
propofitum finem,  refembling  Geoffry  almoft  in  every  thing,  and  wbo  had  furely
the  fame  propofed  end  ofall  theit  Studics > they  foone  perceived  the  fimilitude
oftheir  manners3  quickly  joyned  in  Friendflrip  and  Labours;  they  had  dayly
meetings  and  famiiiaricyjand  ali  their  endeavour  was  to  reline  and  polifh  their
Motbcr  Tongue,  thac  there  might  appeare  the  expreffe  footefteps  01  the  R omtn
Eloqucnce  in  our  E ngli(b  Spcuh .

This  appeares  by  Cbmtr’s  Ctndiag  to  Gorctr  his  Trtylus  and  Crefiiia  afccr
he  had  finimed  it^  for  his  perufall  and  amendmems.


0)  O £^ejali  t©oS»cr,  25oofic3H>ftcct
ti;c,  anhtothcpbilofopbtcail
boncbfafr,  tijer  nccbe  t&y  toco^cct,
Ofpotu  ,25cntjjrdtcc0anb^cie0  3oot).


*)Seetheend
of  Troylus  and

Crcf.


And  furely  thefe  two  added  fo  much  of  fplendourand  ornament  to  our  E »•
glifl)  ldeowc,2s  never  any  tbe  Iikebeforethem  : for  they  fec  foote  to  foote,  and
lovingly  cont ended,  whether  fhould  bring  moft  bononr  tohis  Country  both  en-
deavouring  to  overcpme3and  to  be  overcome  each  of  other,  they  being  not  on-
l^the  fLemembranctrs  but  Imitatori  ofhim,

uod  lingua  Catonis  (p  Enni,

Sermonem  patrium  ditaverit,  ($*  nova  rerum
Nomina  protulerit,

p)  SYcw  Margens  it,  that  he  was  no  fftngbt}  yet  we  have  it  (q)  from  Bole  P)Surv «/0.4  f°«
that  h£  was  Vir  E queftru  Ordinis,  of  the  Order  ofifyigktbood,  and  Lcland  fayes  tf)Cent*7.S  M*
that  Abillu/iri (iemmate  originem  duxit 3 that  he  had  his  Originali f rom  an  It -
luftrioui  Pedigre.

He(r)b  iilt  agreatpartof  St.  Mary  Oicries  C burchin  Soutbvpa^e and  r>  ^tow*  Ann.
when  deatb  had  fnatcht  out  of  his  befome  his  deare  Companion^Vt^v  Cbiu - PrS
eer,  hcthenprepared  a r fting  place  for  his  owne  Body  in  the  Qbdp^UoI  Saint
lobn  in  the  faid  Qbwtb  wh  e he  founded  a Cbauntry.He  was  vej y oli  and  blind
when  b tdyed  and  Uved  but  two  yeares  after  Cbaucer.  He  had  a ftately  Monu-
mm  ere&ed,  vrherein  was  hisifvhoK  P Oftraittm  cuc  in  S/we  in  the  Wall  on  ihc

R r r 3 North


Nortb  fide  of  th e faid  CbafclL  The  Hiirc  of  his  Hcii  Aburne  longto  his
Shoulders,  but  curlingupjandaimaliforked Beard \ on  his  Hcni  a Cbtplet)  iike
a Coronet  of  foure  Rofes, a habic  of  P urpley  ^Mr.  Spcgbt  fayes  QrceniJbJ  Vamasf^e
downe  to  his  fcctc 3 a C oller  of  Efles  of  Gold  abouc  his  Nec/{,  the  Ornmcnts  o£
Isjiigbtbocdy  under  his  head  the  likenefle  of  three  Boebes  which  (amogfeverall
others)  he  compiled,  the  firfl  Speculum Meditatttk> written  inFrentb, the  fecond
Vvx  CUmmk  wriuen  in  L&tin , the  third  C onfcfiio  AmmU , pen‘d  in  EngliJJ),
which  laft  was  printed  the  i z.of  Mmb  An.  i f ^4.  His  tArmes  were  thefe,  At-
gm3  a C bevoran  A^urc,  three  Leopirds  h e&ds  thereon  Or,  their  TonguesGuks ,
two  Angcls  Supporter  s,  and  on  the  C rejl  a Talbot,

His  Epitaph

3trffligerij&eatumntbii  amobo  fertflbi  tutam,

18et>t>it>it  immolutum  morti  generale  tributum,

£>ptritu0  ^rutuiu  fe  gaubcat  ctte  folatum,

Ctffilbibirtutum  IRcguam One  tabe Oatutum.


Dem  nobis  hac  Otia  jecit.


* * * '*  * * * * * X * * x r*  * * * * X * X*  *"#  * 1

* * * * * * ***•****!*******  ^ K ^


T A B L E O I

T be  feverall  Trcatifes ,
vvith  cheir  Authors  Names,contained


o


inibis  WO  RK E.

Rdinall  of  Alchcmie.  'Thomas  Norton,  pag.i.
Compoundof  Alchemic.  George  Ripley.y.ioy.

pag.194.
pag.211.
pag.227.
pag*357«

pag.25p.
pag.275.


Pater  Sapientia?.  Anonymtts.

Hermes’s  Bird.  Anonymtu.

Chanon’s  Yeoman’s  Tale.  Geojfry  Chaueer .

Daftin’s  Dreame.  Iohn  Da(lin.

Pearce  ithe  Black  Monke)  upon  tbe  Elixir.

Richard  Carpenter’s  Workc.

Huntingof  thc  Grcenc  Lyon.  Abrabam  Andrems. p.278
Breviary  of  Naturali  Philofophy.  Tbt.Cbarnock.^.291
^nigmaes.  Thomas  Charnock.  Pag-3°3*

Bloomefields  Bloffomcs.  William  Bloomefeld,  pa.305.
Sir  Edward  Kelley's  JVorke.  pag.334.

^/VEdward  Kelley  to  G.  S.  Gent.  Pag-333*

Do&or  John  Dec’s  Tettament.  Pag-334*

Thomas  Robinfon  ofthc  Philofopbers  Stone.  pag.335.
Experience  and  Philofophy.  Anonymm.  pag.336.
ThcMagiftcry.  W.B.  pag.^.


Sts


Anonymi


Anonymi,  er  [everrit  Workes  of  unknome  Autbors.pag.

334  .&  404.

John  Gower  upen  tbe  Pbilofopbers  Stone.  pag. 368.

George  Ripicys  Vifion.  . Pag*374*

Verfcsbelonging  xoRipleysScrowle.  Pag*375*

Myftcry  of  Alchemijls.  pag. 3 80.

Prefaceto  the  Medulla.  Geo.Ripley.  pag -389.

A ihort  Worke.  George  Ripley.  pag.  393.

Secreta  Secretorum.  Iohn  Lydgatc.  Pag*397*

Hermit’s  Tale.  Anonymuu  Pag-4i5*

Difcription  of  the  Stone.  Anonymus.  pag.420.

The  Standingof  the  Glaffc.&c.  Anenymue,  pag.421.

.£nigma  Philofophicum.  W.Redman.  pag. 423.

Fr  agtnent  s,  pag.  43  4,


V


A


ATable  explaining  the  Obfcurefibfelete ,
and  mif-fpell’d  ivords  ufed  througlv.
out  this  VV  o R K E.


A

A2i5ofc)Cn  above.

3lbjapt)C>  arofe,iecovered-,  up-
flare.

Sgotte,  gone,  fled.

^ieonotnte,  Alchemie,  Chemiftrie.
SlgategjNocwichllanding,  ever,for-
footb,even  noWjakogecher.
^Ilcbtatc,  Elevate,  lift  up.

3H1e,  ali.

3U0,  alfo,  as  well.

%m>  of  each,  a like  quantity,
SUnoticrjanother.

«flimueilere,  fecular.

3ppalc,  decay.

SpptatagC,  appearing,

SJppettbiC,  dcfireable.
3l0&auttcc,as  chougb,  as  if,  afide,

2 dsfepg,  alhes.

3tUCtO^0,  Autbors.

B

215afneg,  Bathes.

00  a ie,  forrow.

215alnc,  Balnea  Maria,

215rt)tte,or  2i5er$00tc,  promife,

215  elute,  anon.

215cn,  bpn,  be.

2i5cpct,  begocten.

215icnt,  blind,  turned  back.
215iibe,quickly,gladly.

215  lof,  blew.

2i5!rnnr;  ceafe.

2©0Otc,  helpe.

215atonc,ready;


213rafl:,  breake.

2]5rCDe,  bredih.

15rcbc,  bjebelp,  briefe,  fliort.
215rennmg,burmng.

215  robe  t,  brother.
ligrSrjt,  broughc.
l^urbekp,  bubling.
^urgeon^bud.

U5pfotne,  before.

00  bY-

i&vtfc be-

c

Certes,  undoubtedly*

Cbccfe,  chufe.

Cbeepps,  iheepes.

CbCbe,  thrive.

Cb02le,  flave,  ciowne.

Cbrpflt/5  Chtift  bis.

Cbprc,  chiteth.

Clattfr , brable.

Ciapp,  prate.

C loricate,  Bardana,  ergreate  Bur-
dock  leafe.

ClppfCS,  tclipfes.

Coatt,  inforce.

Cotlbenabic,  Convenient.

CoubCj  couid
Coutljc  pcifc&ly*  know.

Co«)lp0,  Monkcs  hoods.
j Crop,  copp
I Crolletc,  Crucibles.

i'  D

IDcbOnair,  Humane,  civil, meeke,
$ f f i bumble


humble,  gentle.

2Delctt3  deale.

JDcmjpts  aerocti?  JuJged.
JDcnigtatc,  make  black.

©tSUtCvb  clenfed.

5Derfer,darke.

5Dlftcfcer,fpend.

5Dtg^t,madeready,  handledj  ufed.
JDoit^grievej  forrow.

SDGflC*  dqtb.

3Doudc>$ciue>fweet.

3D?aff.  HUh.

E

CttipScffc,  interp;ife3  fafhion>  ordcr,
Cngiuting,  ftopping,

<EngtttC3  wkr3  device.

(Er > untill.

(Etbc,  Hearbe,

Crft,  carneit.

CffcU,  Viniger»

Cbcrp  ecf)C3CYcry  one«

CptCj  ivrath.

r

;ffa&tr>  Fathcr.

JFagg  anT>  fainr,  giofe  and  flatter*
jfa\0  falfe.

^aHade,DeceIpt.

$ ancis  3 fanes.

JFafttCl]?*  firmly.

^FautC^  want3  lack.

cruth.

jfapnc5glad.

Arebis,  Pbsbus.

$ «tS)  dreggs.
feteris,  fethers.

-i Fct,  fetchcd.

JFenfcCj,  Devii,
ifcrlc,  ftrange.

Jre£Hem3faineth,

^FiCtPtnCj  phlegme*

JFocmctlj  Enimies.

fully.

fooles.

$ 0pf3n,plemy.

9Frape^  Company;  a rabie,
^rig^fruue.


JFjtift,  firft*

Jf  rOK>  frozen.

iFructnonjsf,fruufuII.

Fiflus.

G

(0  afc>  gave..

<0apcr3  Gaudier,  Braver.

©caCon,  ihange^rare.

<25out)C,  good.

(|poS»nt)0,gownes.
d0L;(rCj  whiic.

d5cot)lceCl)3‘kinde,  refpe&ive,
(SnXDptty,  grcvveih.

<5nerdon>  rcward*

<E>£fC3  manner.  '

© t>nn£,  fnares.

H

l^alfC,  Neclc.  ' ” «
l^alloto,  hollow.
l£at*nt3  ufe.
i^attfe,  imbrace.
l^aubctseon,  a Coate  of  Ma!e.
fettgbk  called.
lieiu>  them.

Sj  cnDc,  gentle.
i^eming,  catchfng.

tieeT),  ftout  ad
i^crwefi,  vallies,  corners.
i^ert,  Havt.

li^cftps; willsj  promifes, commande-
menes,

l^Cpic,  heahh.

iabourer^drudgc.

!§mg3  hang  together.
i^O’C,  whole.;

OS)  who  fo.
ifpt3  iheir.

$ %t>  i;.

I.

31 1 ipt,  Jeft3  yct  by  abufe  drawne  into
a more  wanton  fenfe.

3 ClC|>et>3  called.

m,  i.

3 Dealc,  meddle.


2ette>  device*

3IIIIC,  fame.

3 D l£Cl)e,alike.

Engine,  wit,  devife.

31  tlOfo,  cnough.

3!  ItOt, 1 know  not.
3Intrcate,  handlc.
3flnterfcttc,  prohibited.
31ren,  Iron.

3jta&C,  taken.

3 X»P0>  verily,

3gfe,  if.


AotTei?0>  Crafiy  fellowcs.*
liofcn,  kfptt},  lofab.

ilo;c,  16ft.

& ore,  Do&rine,  lcarning,  knowlcdae.
3l0jf,  love,
iloate,kneeIe,  honour.
iLpc^e,  like.
lye.

Ilpftcn,  liketh,pleafcih.

JLfkclO&Cj  livelyhood*

M.


K.

&eeU,  coole,

&cepc,  care.

&cn,  know.
j&fo,  madeknoyvne.

&jblc$f,  fctnbles,  i e.  factus,  young
ones.

ttpttyc,  madeknown,(hew.acquaint.

L.

i«tt,  let,  hinder.
iaubc,  ptaife.
iaber,  rather.
iaarer.lawrell.
iap.  law,  fong.

Ceafe  your  Lay,  hold  your  Tongue.
iapflr,  leafute.
itate,  learne.

JlenQngfljlyej.
icefe,  loofe.
icat),  Ghirurgeoa.  —
ieft,  lefc.
itifc,  deare.
iema».  Concubine,
irate,  gentle.

icttrurc,  a Booke  oflearniag.
ic&Jbc,  ignoraot.

3»ciD  pe,  1 cares.

Leter,  Elixir.
ipben,  affeft.
i ttt,  little.
itp,  fofe,  plyable.

belongetb.


^lJJabcn,  made.

^nllfOlt,  curfe.
fauste,  defpite.
ilDJ  aber,  a broad  drinkng-  bowle.
fl^ebe,  mete,reward,help.
4)j)cbleb,  mingle-
$j)eger,  leane.
meddle.

iUi)  ense,  mingle.

!$)erC0,  Turds.

£^cre,  merry.

^cbett;,  moveth.

£\S)  (de,  much.

^o,  more,
glober,  Mother.
fl^otloeb,  Earth,  Dung.
Styott,  muft  goe.

<11$  oosl?t,tnotOtc, migte.

N

$af3,wa$  not.

J»att)le(te,  nerertheleffc.

&t>  ««•

/•* crt,  avere  not.
ijieme«e,name,;
J3e6je,Tender.

Wilde  /ftepe, Carmine.
JR<Cf,isnor.

/£one0,  condition,  purpofe.
J3oalb,nolbe,  could  nor.
jjj  oStbtlfon,  Roft  nebit.
ifto8Jtl)cr,neither.
jftvc,  « n0'

0V  rt)C,  neere.

Sff  3


na><  </>.
-rV


o


o

£>D?r>  OfotljcrjOther.

£Dft  fptl)C0>ougbce{h
£>npc*;pn  , Onix.

£>?  atc>  decked.

deparc,  feperace,
iDi»rt;tp0,oughteft.

P

Canter,  pitfall.
truly.

^drfuc,perfe&.
i^aultncr^  purfes.

*2>lefaunce,  delight.
fMpte,  condition,

curned*  catched.
^omebgrpfe,  daple-grey.
43>O2p!3Cne0,Marble_minglcd  with
33opctc0>Poets.  (red.

pjeafe>  fubjedion.
i*>jcfc,p>cbe,  proofe.

^rfecfc,  ridden  faft.
fecrec.

pjo!Ir5  to  prole  afeer  a thing.
$2>iOtt>C,  profit,  honour ,
^^S^t3caft,fetled,  propped.


&UtiXitZ,  ftrange.
iHtlcH,  dafh,  deftroy.
iHuptC,  requite.

R

23arf),  a litle  cur  Dog.

IKatJ,  reade.

13  ag-ounCM  kindeof  precious  ftone.

Hftatl^quickly.

OcCoztcii,  recordctb,
laecnrf)  recovei\

HcM,  meaning.

13  help,  advice,  fpecche^  arte.

By  Bctoc,  in  order.

13tbaub;p,  biudry.

IS  pgljtfuit,  Juft.
i3oi£C5ug!y,blodiIy.

ISoamc,  whilper.

13  Ufc3  red*


IRltmMtfe*  made  a noyfc,

13  Ut]),  lamentation.

13  yft,  frequent.

13  pbC,  rende.

S

j&alex»,  honour.
j£>ample0,  fores.

.feans  pccrc,  without  Fcliovv.
j£>auter>  Pfalcer.
iS>CO!t>0,  fchooles.

Cl;ait.  lhalt ,

£)t\)Z,  flie.

fhould  •
jSci)rcbp>  Hireve,
g>Z\Xtl)C,  fuch.

5>eccWcefcen>feeke.

G&CtttC,  fecrec.
ja>ciltb  feldome.

J&cmbJeabpl,  like»

&ctDenb,  followes.

^t)CRC,fcbtnc,  fhining.

§&  tjent,  harmed>  infe&ed;
j£>breu?e3>Infommes.

S>ljrap,  fc. ape.
i&ltl),  by  and  by,
ja>  OtlpcljC,  flovenly.
j&lppeb,  burnifhed.
j&omctJde,  fomewhat;  fomethingi
j§)QOtc,fweete.

truly,trutb.

jsboUt0/pring.

fprigjbough,

SptttVCb,  enquire.
5>q«a,flC0,ftales.

Atabuli,  ftable.

S)tantc,  ftand.

^)trbcn,jS>tefen,  found,alfo  time:
^ttllato^ir,  Alembick.

time,moment3dumpe;
^tranbe,  a banke.

S)tp  t,  ceafe,  fhcke.
j&ubftrap,fubftra&.

^ifCrcnceT),  inflamed;
j^uffren,  fu  der.
gvuftsr,  fifter.

fweetc.

;g>&mi3fome.


S>£»pckfuch.
jS>ft)rnbe5  bbou*.
j&S»ptbc,fwif[ly.

£>1?fecr  tmofa),  furecnough,
£H’&Ctlcp3  afluredly3  ftedy.
js^b:n>cert3in.

T

^allagr^  paymentsjcuftomesjtaxes.
®a»ntc,  a reprochfull  Chccke..
<&tnipi53  times.

KtCj.heede.

an  Ingct  of  Mettal*

«IcO,  a device  to  try  Gold  vvith.
HbO  ,altbougb  forne,
affirme.

«itle^intuled.  /
fiJTo&er*  the  other.

^CorojCj  het-ecofore.

together«

Crcnctc,  Trinity.

^rtftp,  fad.
fiEroxnc,  truft.

®toS»p0,  fuppofe.

Cruttcn*  confidence.
two,

A <Cx»tib  in  two  feperatedj  parted.
<Cwcnt&  Tunes.

/SfoKfoibe,  double.
^ptCjhandfome.

V

Sfta&C,  fade/

^cre3  fpring;

'C&JnbOutUb  delivered.  *

^SncouT)j  «RCOttt^jftrange.
$3n&ctfongCtty>  taketb  in  hand.
fflim  etfc,  fcarce,
ainfeff^unooftting,  unknowne.
SSfcVtfpelfr  carneftly  hearuly.


W

CStilfceit,  walke.

£&arbcj  worke.

fiUaftle  b^cabj  libclltu  fine  CimnelJ.
raar,cac*increafe.

COeerifl^  waterilli.

U>CCll?,  thought,doubr.
ttJecntng,  thinking.
tutelift),  rifetbj  fpringeth.

CCten^Cj  goc.

CCfitj  underftanding.

Carrum  were.

££il)tiotuc,  ete  wbilc,  fomctimcs.
C&ile,  deceipr.
fOiVty  knowne.
caeli,  wiii.

CCIome,  wombe;
tPOIinc,  dwe!l,plenty.

CclOOtJC,  mad.

UD00^cbc3^»0O>cb«t>  worke.
3X?0ling>  thinkingjudging.

Woftf,  was.

CCIouloen  jwould,—  %-

C&teadj,  sojcake,  revenge^vratb.
CCtrencbe0^  trapos.

CStngijten,  written.

XOtty>  which,

Y

Yb0je,  borne.

Ybo,  ftayed.

Ycf,YcabC,  gpfjgivc,

Ycfet^fctcbed.

Yettt,  Iron.

; Yiiutmne,enKgbtcn.
Yno^CC,fufikient*

Ynbc,  Indie.

Ycbe,t?et)e,wenu

Yt^erewbile.

YttjC,  thrive.

Ybd,  apaid.


FINIS.,


It  will  concerne  the  Studious  Rea-

der  to  Corrctt  the  faults  efcaped  in  this
Worke,  The  moft  materiali  whcrcof
follow.

PAg.i.Li9.r.  nolM  Pag.2i.l.4#r.  lifa  a Lf.r . did  l.if.T.WMa  pag.n.l,
pag.$o.l.22.r. pxrte  pag.32.L7  i.thcMction  pag.37.L11  Troy
t.iric  pag.45«Li7.r.fc»  pag.46.1. 7 7. 1. j 3 r.  ultimum  pag.^.l.7,r.
mtde  pag*^3*l.i9.r. tyiow  png.66.1.*  4«r.  fc  pag.74./.^?  r.unfiuoxs  pag.77*
1. 1 3 VVkcn  r.  TiU  p.  1 03 .1. 1.  dde  [coli]  p.  \ 40.1. 1 6. r.  mwing  p.  146.1,$,  r cer -
txinctj  l.i3.r.  vitb  p«i*o  l.r.r.  prinuple  1.6.r.  noe.p.f  5 1 1. 1 ^.r.andour  redp.
i68.l,i.8.&  i7.r.  Imbibitions  p.170.1.16  r top.200.L1  f.r.T&z/fl/cipfyp.
2or.  L 2. r .Coytie  p.213.1  io.r.  Judicum  ‘p. 21  $.l.i4,r.  amcrcus  p.220.1.8.30.
r.  K4gewftce.pag.2  2},l29.r.ramc ytkc  pag  2 24.I.1  i.r.Tbrce  p.  126. 1 r.r.re-
comauvd  p. 227. l.i 6 .r.tmetbmtght  p.ii8.1.i2.r .VVere  I.24 .r*fritnd  p.
zip.Li.r.cotttfec  p.rjo.l.  io.r  w/  p 134.1.1 8.r.  pipere  1.28.r .crude  pag.
zi1.l.i,t.Afccntiin  1.2,rjfce  p.  140  I.i7.r.r4ve  p.140. I.3  i.r.  Tbcugbit
at grmwtre  m Ninive  p.24i.l.7.r.a>w2mnnc  h^s  fetnde  Lio.v.begiled  p«
^42.1.16.1%  Une  1. 1 8.r .lenetb  p.24^1. 2 r.  fallen  J.14T  ceutbe  p.245*Lf,
tjbree  l.if.r.  Cbrift  ».267.Li4,r.  Afttr  Lif.r.  To  p,3o8.1.3.r. mrdes
9.309  l.i.T.rfccr*  p.3 1 2.I.3 4.r.  an  p.$  17.L16  r.otbers  p.m.\A7.r.txiguuM,
p.j 60.1.33.1*. Ifmcn  p.j67.1.i6.r.  Fier  * p. $83.1.24^.  iyfe  9.416,1.2*. not
1.3.r SFalace  l.j.r.wm*  p»4i8.I.26.r./o/«ni;e  p.42$.1.2C.r.Rafrwtfn  p.  432. 1.
2 3.  r.  miner dibut  p.448»l.ip.r.£r*w&  p.  4 49.1.17.^0*  p*45  S,Ll<r.cmit-
ting  p.4j8.l.2.r  in  bis  p.4*9d.i  8.r.  rytbmicum  P*4^7d-39*r*  dcjcfted  p#
465,1.1 3 uVmculum,  p.^787.7.  r.^/w  CbtLrmk  I.i$.4fr.tf«  p^o.l^.
onniutlu


t


Courtcous  Readcr,  thou  art  dcfired  to  reftifie  thcfc  fol-
lowing  tniftakes,  in  forne  Copics,  (commictcd  by
thc  Princer)  in  thc  Tablc  of  Obfolctc  ivords.

B!eut,r.l5lent  Donc{e,r,iD3uIc0  Erw.Ctrbc  Leah,r.fccel?  Mavcr,r,
Quali, r.i&Kll  UbeUxitv.  LibzllM  Wex,c.'2 YVeude,r.I8en&®
VV^ll,  r.  C&all  VVaoie,  c.  ZZtmz  Wannc,r.&U:<wne  Wauldeiv,£&ot*U>en.
